
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02588ArticleHydrophilic Fluorescent Nanoprodrug of Paclitaxel
for Glioblastoma Chemotherapy Daniel Jonathan †Montaleytang Maeva ‡§∥Nagarajan Sounderya ‡∥Picard Sébastien †Clermont Guillaume †Lazar Adina N. †Dumas Noé ‡Correard Florian ‡§Braguer Diane ‡§Blanchard-Desce Mireille *†Estève Marie-Anne *‡§Vaultier Michel †† Univ.
Bordeaux, Institut des Sciences Moléculaires (CNRS UMR 5255), Bâtiment A12, 351 Cours de
la Libération, 33405 Talence Cedex, France‡ Aix
Marseille Univ, CNRS, INP, Inst Neurophysiopathol, Faculté
de Pharmacie, 27 Boulevard
Jean Moulin - CS 30064, 13385 Marseille Cedex 05, Marseille, France§ AP-HM,
Hôpital Timone, 264 Rue Saint Pierre, 13385 Marseille Cedex 05, France* E-mail: mireille.blanchard-desce@u-bordeaux.fr (M.B.-D.).* E-mail: marie-anne.esteve@univ-amu.fr (M.-A.E.).24 10 2019 05 11 2019 4 19 18342 18354 12 08 2019 10 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Highly
water-soluble, nontoxic organic nanoparticles on which paclitaxel
(PTX), a hydrophobic anticancer drug, has been covalently bound via
an ester linkage (4.5% of total weight) have been prepared for the
treatment of glioblastoma. These soft fluorescent organic nanoparticles
(FONPs), obtained from citric acid and diethylenetriamine by microwave-assisted
condensation, show suitable size (Ø = 17–30 nm), remarkable
solubility in water, softness as well as strong blue fluorescence
in an aqueous environment that are fully retained in cell culture
medium. Moreover, these FONPs were demonstrated to show in vitro safety
and preferential internalization in glioblastoma cells through caveolin/lipid
raft-mediated endocytosis. The PTX-conjugated FONPs retain excellent
solubility in water and remain stable in water (no leaching), while
they showed anticancer activity against glioblastoma cells in two-dimensional
and three-dimensional culture. PTX-specific effects on microtubules
reveal that PTX is intracellularly released from the nanocarriers
in its active form, in relation with an intracellular-promoted lysis
of the ester linkage. As such, these hydrophilic prodrug formulations
hold major promise as biocompatible nanotools for drug delivery.

document-id-old-9ao9b02588document-id-new-14ao9b02588ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Vectorization of anticancer
agents is a recent therapeutic strategy
to improve their targeting and delivery. It is an important field
of research to overcome disadvantages inherent to the low cancer cell
targeting of conventional chemotherapy, unfavorable pharmacokinetic
drug profile, low aqueous solubility, and severe systemic toxicity.1,2 In this context, several kinds of nanoparticles (e.g., polymeric
nanoparticles, liposomes, solid lipid nanoparticles, and so forth)
have been explored in recent years as nanocarriers for anticancer
drugs (chemical agents, peptides, antibodies...).2−4 Nowadays, two
main strategies to improve the pharmacokinetic profile of anticancer
drugs using nanoparticles are used: the encapsulation of the drug
in the nanoparticles or its covalent bonding, leading to a prodrug.
In the first case, a spontaneous drug diffusion called burst release
is often observed, resulting in adverse events in clinical use.5 Conversely, the covalent strategy may solve the
drug burst release problem and offers a delayed effect.6−9 Indeed, covalent nanoprodrugs show a higher stability with lower
drug clearance than encapsulated drugs5 and a smaller batch-to-batch variation than free drug-loaded liposomes,
micelles, biodegradable polymers, and hydrogels.10

Paclitaxel (PTX), which belongs to the family of
microtubule-targeting
agents, is one of the most useful and effective antineoplastic drugs
for the treatment of many solid cancers and their metastasis.11 However, because of its poor water solubility
(less than 0.01 mg/mL), PTX is commonly formulated with Cremophor
EL (polyoxyethylated castor oil) or other cosolvents before being
administered, resulting in dose-limiting toxicity and hypersensitivity
in some patients.12 In addition, PTX is
a substrate of P-glycoprotein, an efflux pump responsible for the
acquisition of multidrug resistance of cancer cells13 and able to prevent PTX crossing of the blood–brain
barrier (BBB).14 Thus, PTX is often considered
as a model for any delivery system, and a variety of PTX formulations
have been developed, which generally allow an increase of the maximum
tolerated dose of PTX with a decrease of adverse effects. Since the
approval of Abraxane, the albumin-bound PTX, that has shown clinical
efficacy without the side effects associated with Cremophor EL, many
innovative PTX formulations are still undergoing preclinical and clinical
trials.10,15

However, few of these formulations
have been developed for the
treatment of malignant brain tumors (primary brain tumors or metastases
of solid tumors), although they display a high mortality rate. The
presence of the BBB that protects the brain from foreign elements
complicates tumor drug delivery.16 Among
primary brain tumors, glioblastoma is characterized by an aggressive
growth and a highly invasive behavior. Current standard therapy consists
of maximal safe surgery following concomitant radiochemotherapy. Despite
such a regimen, the median survival period is only 15 months because
of unavoidable recurrences.17 In that context,
novel therapeutic approaches are required, and nanoparticles covalently
bound to PTX, which would release PTX preferentially when internalized
in cancer cells, could offer a perspective to use PTX in brain tumor
treatment.16,18,19 PTX poliglumex (PTX bound to poly-l-glutamic acid) has
reached clinical trials in glioblastoma but induced substantial myelosuppression
(grade 4 hematologic toxicity) in combination with temozolomide and
concurrent radiation20 and failed to demonstrate
an improvement of progression free survival or overall survival when
used as a single agent in combination with radiation therapy as compared
to temozolomide with radiation therapy.21 Other prodrugs of PTX have been the subject of preclinical studies.
PTX conjugated to linoleic acid (CLA-PTX) has demonstrated promising
results as it showed cytotoxicity and higher cellular uptake efficiency
in C6 glioma cells in vitro and antitumor efficacy in brain tumor-bearing
rats.22 Yet, it is poorly soluble in water,
thus requiring the preparation of a microemulsion containing Cremophor
EL among other excipients.23 The solubility
in water of other PTX nanoprodrugs which have been assayed in vitro
or in vivo against glioma was not determined. This questions their
utilization without the use of Cremophor EL, which represents a major
shortcoming for clinical use.24−26

In this context, we have
prepared soft fluorescent organic nanoparticles
(FONPs) which combine remarkable solubility and bright blue fluorescence
properties in aqueous media and which present a high number of surface
groups for further conjugation of hydrophobic drugs such as PTX. More
specifically, we have synthesized intrinsically FONPs which are highly
water-soluble, nontoxic, and internalized preferentially in glioblastoma
cells. A subsequent efficient two-step (chemical activation, followed
by covalent functionalization) optimized protocol leads to PTX-conjugated
FONPs, where PTX is bound to the nanoparticles via an ester linkage
which masks the biological activity of PTX. FONPs–PTX retain
excellent solubility in water and stability of the bond in biological
conditions, thus potentially decreasing side effects.

Results and Discussion
Synthesis
of Soft Nanoparticles
FONPs are prepared
via a bottom-up synthesis by condensation of a mixture of citric acid
and diethylenetriamine (DETA). This is reminiscent to the preparation
of carbon dots (CDs) from basic polyamine and carboxylic acid molecules
by the microwave-assisted hydrothermal process.27,28 The experimental protocol involves flash heating of a mixture of
citric acid and DETA using microwave activation (Scheme 1, step 1). This simple and
easily scalable procedure leads to a brownish solid material that
contains both FONPs and residual oligomers/small polymers which can
be removed by washing with ethanol. The FONPs possess numerous chemically
accessible carboxylic acids and amine functions (ca. 1000 amines per
nanoparticle). These amino surface groups ensure the water solubility
of the nanoparticles (i.e., over 250 g/L), while the carboxylic acids
are of major interest for further functionalization and grafting of
an hydrophobic drug via an intracellular-cleavable ester linkage.

Scheme 1 Synthesis Steps of the FONP–PTX Prodrug
Step
1: Synthesis of FONP platforms.
Citric acid, diethylenetriamine, water, microwave (600 W), 2 min;
step 2: Activation of FONP platforms. Succinic anhydride, Na2CO3, DMSO, rt, 2 h; step 3: Grafting of PTX. EDC·HCl,
DMAP, PTX, DMF, rt, 60 h.

Characterization of the
Nanoparticles and Optical Properties
Despite numerous advantages
of the synthesis of such nanoparticles
by the microwave-assisted hydrothermal process, the nature of fluorescence
emitters has been the subject of much debate.29−33 In the case of FONPs prepared from citric acid and
α,β-diamino derivatives, the bright fluorescence was attributed
to the formation during the hydrothermal process of pyridone derivatives
caged in a complex polymeric matrix.27,34−37 It should be stressed that a precise control of the experimental
conditions is crucial to guarantee the reproducibility of the nature,
properties, and characteristics of the obtained nanoparticles. In
particular, slight changes and harsher experimental conditions induce
carbonization processes (i.e., formation of graphitic- or graphene-like
domains)27,38,39 and lead to
so-called fluorescent CDs or CDs. These CDs are sometimes also named
quantum CDs (QCDs) in relation with their small size (<10 nm).
The fluorescent CDs—although having the same denomination in
the literature—encompass a wide range of nanoparticles. This
fuzzy denomination generates major misperception, in particular with
respect to the origin of their fluorescence properties. The so-called
CDs can be prepared from diverse starting materials using varying
experimental conditions.27,29,33,40,41 A crucial issue is then the varying (and sometimes undefined) degree
of carbonization. In many cases when carbonization actually occurs,
the luminescence of the CDs is attributed to the presence of graphene
sheets (or “carbogenic” centers or domains) within the
nanoparticles. Such luminescence is characterized by excitation-dependent
emission and often results in lower fluorescence quantum yields, unless
passivation of the surface is realized.

Having this in mind,
we thoroughly investigated the properties and chemical composition
of our FONPs using complementary techniques ranging from material
science to spectroscopy. It is well known that the carbonization process
is strongly influenced by temperature and that the experimental conditions
of the hydrothermal process are critical in terms of ensuing optical
properties.39 Indeed, temperatures above
200 °C lead to the formation of smaller nanoparticles (≪10
nm) containing graphitic carbon domains. These carbon dots (CDs or
QCDs) show excitation-dependent luminescence (reminiscent of quantum
confinement) and smaller fluorescence quantum yields. In contrast,
lower temperatures (typically below 180 °C) lead to strongly
fluorescent nanoparticles in water, which result from multiple condensation
and dehydration reactions. We chose to use these gentle hydrothermal
conditions to avoid the carbonization process. As shown in Figures 1A–C and S1, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and
atomic force microscopy (AFM) conducted on our FONPs evidenced the
presence of small nanoparticles with a dry diameter in the range of
10–30 nm (TEM and AFM) and a typical height of 2.2 nm (AFM).
The difference between the diameter and height suggests that these
nanoparticles are soft enough to flatten when dry, yielding pancake-shaped
nanoparticles. Thanks to AFM, we measured the Young modulus of the
nanoparticles and found values in the range 1–4 GPa which are
typical of polymer derivatives. The slightly negative surface potential
of our nanoparticles (ζ = – 7 mV) suggests a slight excess
of carboxylic acid groups compared to primary or secondary amines
at their surface. Elemental analysis data (Table S1) evidence that the carbonization of the citric acid and
diethylene triamine mixture remains low. Indeed, the FONPs were found
to contain a significant amount of nitrogen and oxygen (17 and 29%,
respectively) as well as hydrogen (7%). These data indicate that they
are close to organic nanomaterials (i.e., polymer dots).

Figure 1 (A) TEM images
of FONPs with size distribution fitted with a log
normal in caption; (B) TEM images of FONPs–PTX with size distribution
fitted with a log normal in caption; (C) AFM images of FONPs; (D) 1H NMR spectrum in DMSO-d6 of FONPs–PTX;
(E) IR spectrum of FONPs; and (F) carbon XPS spectrum of FONPs.

1H NMR experiments in D2O
(Figure S2) revealed the presence of a
high number of aliphatic
protons and only a few peaks in the (hetero)aromatic region corresponding
to pyridone derivatives.37 Despite the
broadening of the peaks, it is clear that no traces of unreacted citric
acid or diethylene triamine were observed. Because of the complexity
of the NMR spectrum, infrared (IR) spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron
spectrometry (XPS) were used to get additional information on the
nature of the chemical bonds in the nanoparticles. As shown in Figure 1E, the IR spectrum
reveals the presence of amine (δN–H), aliphatic
C–C (δC–C), and aromatic C–H
(δC–H) bonds in the low energy range (σ
< 1100 cm–1). The spectrum also indicates the
presence of tertiary alcohol (δO–H and νC–O), amine (νC–N), and ester
(νC–O) in the 1100–1400 cm–1 range. Secondary and tertiary amides are also present in the nanoparticles
as indicated by peaks at 1560 and 1658 cm–1 (νC–N and νC=O, respectively).
Finally, the IR spectrum reveals strong intramolecular interactions
through hydrogen bonding, as evidenced by the broad band in the 3000–3500
cm–1 spectral range. Stretching modes from O–H
bonds of alcohol and carboxylic groups are also observed (3086 and
3285 cm–1, respectively). The presence of numerous
amines and carboxylic groups explains the very high solubility of
FONPs in water (>250 g/L).

XPS measurements (Figures 1F and S3 and Table S2) corroborate the
low amount of aromatic moieties
within FONPs. We stress that Raman spectroscopy demonstrates that
the nanoparticles do not contain graphene-like structures (Figure S4). In summary, the complementary experimental
characterization techniques indicate that our FONPs are made of organic
polymeric chains (made from ester and amide linkages) in which (hetero)aromatic
moieties are embedded. We also stress that the size of FONPs is larger
than those usually reported for the carbogenic nanoparticles (CDs)
whose size is typically smaller than 10 nm.27

Thanks to the presence of the embedded heteroaromatic moieties,
such as previously reported pyridone derivatives in CDs originating
from the pyrolysis of citric acid and diamines,37 FONPs show an intense absorption band in the near UV region
with a maximum at 360 nm, as well as bright blue fluorescence in water
when excited in the near UV region (Figure 2). The emission spectrum shows a maximum
at 455 nm (Figure 2A). Interestingly, no dependence of the emission on the excitation
wavelength was noticed (Figure 2B), contrarily to what was reported for quantum-sized fluorescent
CDs.42 This behavior is typical of molecular
emitting dyes. Moreover, FONPs are excellent absorbers having a high
excitation coefficient (εmax) value (∼30 ×
106 mol–1·cm–1) and good emitters in water (quantum yield Φf =
0.14) (Table S3). As a result, FONPs show
large brightness (εmaxΦf = 4 ×
106 mol–1·cm–1) in water.

Figure 2 (A) Normalized absorption (purple) and emission (cyan)
spectra
of nanoparticles in water; (B) normalized three-dimensional (3D) excitation
and emission spectra of nanoparticles in water; and (C) 2PA spectrum
(black) compared to rescaled one-photon absorption spectrum (red)
of FONPs in water.

Thanks to their fluorescence
properties, the two-photon absorption
(2PA) properties of FONPs in the near-IR region could be investigated
by performing two-photon excited fluorescence (TPEF) experiments in
solution. As shown in Figure 2C, FONPs show large 2PA cross section (σ2) in the 700–770 nm region, originating from a two-photon
transition to the same excited state as the one reached by one-photon
absorption in the near UV region (Figure 2C). A maximum 2PA cross section of 7700 GM
was determined at 730 nm, leading to large two-photon brightness (σ2maxΦf = 1080 GM). We stress that the photophysical properties of FONPs,
which include a fluorescence lifetime of 1.5 ns, are consistent with
photoluminescence properties originating from isolated heteroaromatic
emitters (typically 2-pyridones) embedded in the FONP matrix. In contrast,
QCDs show different behavior because of the different origin of luminescence
properties (i.e., extended π-electron conjugation in graphitic/graphene
domains). These domains explain the larger 2PA values reported for
QCDs (typically 40 000 GM)42 compared
to our FONPs whose 2PA properties originate from the additive contribution
of a number of small dyes (typically pyridones) embedded in the FONP
polymeric matrix. Yet, QCDs require surface passivation for maintaining
large fluorescence quantum yields, otherwise quenching of fluorescence
being observed. In contrast, FONPs combine remarkable solubility in
aqueous media as well as steady fluorescence in various aqueous media
(vide infra). Their easy/efficient surface functionalization (vide
infra) and large one- and two-photon brightness made them of major
interest as intrinsically luminescent nanocarriers whose cellular
uptake can be tracked by in vitro fluorescence imaging.

Safety and
Uptake of FONPs in Human Cell Lines
Before
assessing the safety and cell uptake of our FONPs, we studied the
evolution of their fluorescence properties under varying conditions
of pH, medium, temperature, and concentration to check that FONPs
retain fluorescence in different biological conditions. The nanoparticles
dispersed in water (25 μg/mL), at room temperature, show steady
fluorescence in the 4–11 pH range, while only a slight decrease
(less than 10%) in the fluorescence emission was observed at highly
acidic pH (pH = 2–3, Figure S5A(i)). This can be related to the change of protonation state of the
CO2H surface. When dispersed in complete cell culture medium
[i.e., Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) without
phenol red, with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)] at 37 °C, to mimic
physiological conditions, FONPs (25 μg/mL) did not show changes
in fluorescence emission for 72 h (Figure S5B(ii)). The fluorescence emission of FONPs was also found to remain unaffected
at a higher concentration (100 μg/mL) in various media at 37
and 4 °C for 72 h (Figure S6).

The FONP safety was then investigated in three human cell lines.
One cancerous cell line (U-87 MG human glioblastoma cell line) and
two noncancerous cell lines [human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMEC-1) and normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF)] were used to
compare and evaluate the potential of FONPs as drug delivery vehicles
for glioblastoma treatment. Three colorimetric cell survival assays
based on the metabolic activity of mitochondria or the protein biomass
were used for this purpose. A label-free, impedance-based real-time
assay was also used, which reflects variation of impedance as a function
of cell adhesion to the surface. All these methods allow the determination
of the number of living cells. Cell viability was measured after incubation
of cells with FONPs at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 μg/mL
for 72 h. U-87 MG cells showed no reduction in cell viability up to
the concentration of 100 μg/mL (Figure 3A) regardless of the test used. Inhibition
of HMEC-1 cell and NHDF cell survival of less than 20% was observed
whatever the employed colorimetric test (Figure 3B,C). Real-time continuous monitoring of
impedance for 72 h confirmed these results (Figure 3D–F), suggesting a good safety profile
of FONPs in the human cell lines.

Figure 3 Colorimetric cell survival assays performed
after 72 h of incubation
of FONPs (1–100 μg/mL) with U-87 MG cells (A), HMEC-1
(B), and NHDF (C) and the real-time impedance-based survival assay
performed over a period of 72 h after treatment with FONPs (5–100
μg/mL) for U-87 MG cells (D), HMEC-1 (E), and NHDF (F). MTT:
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide.

FONPs hence show excellent biocompatibility and
do not require
surface passivation in contrast with common CDs.43 The existing literature on the cytotoxicity of CDs demonstrates
differential effects or lack of toxicity depending on various factors
such as the nature and synthesis process, type of cells, duration
of treatment, and range of concentrations and often solely relies
on a single colorimetric assay.44−46 A few studies demonstrated the
safety of CDs in both cancerous and noncancerous cell lines, but the
concentration of CDs which was used for imaging was higher than the
concentration range in which the cytotoxicity assays were performed.47−49 Here, we demonstrated the safety of our FONPs using multiple assays
(colorimetric and noncolorimetric) to eliminate potential over estimation
or underestimation of cell survival because of the interference of
nanoparticles with test reagents.50 Along
with their safety, it was necessary to ensure that FONPs are internalized
in glioblastoma cells for future applications in therapy. Internalization
of FONPs was studied at varying concentrations in U-87 MG, HMEC-1,
and NHDF cell lines using two-photon fluorescence imaging (excitation
at 740 nm and emission detection from 480 to 550 nm). Because of the
autofluorescence of control cells (not treated with nanoparticles)
at these excitation and emission wavelengths, the cells treated with
nanoparticles were corrected for autofluorescence using control cell
images obtained under the same conditions. Transmission images were
also obtained along with the fluorescence images to locate the cells.
At 4 h of incubation with FONPs, there was a qualitatively high uptake
at 1 and 5 μg/mL concentrations in U-87 MG cells (Figure 4, upper panel) with negligible
uptake in HMEC-1 and NHDF cell lines (Figure 4, lower panel). Images obtained at the FONP
concentration of 25 μg/mL for U-87 MG cells, HMEC-1, and NHDF
are shown in Figure S7, and a slight increase
in uptake was observed in HMEC-1 cells at this concentration but was
not uniform in all cells. The localization of nanoparticles in U-87
MG cells was also demonstrated by obtaining Z stack
images along the thickness of the cell (Figure 4). The XY fluorescence images
with corresponding XZ and YZ orthogonal
views show uniform distribution of fluorescence along the Z. An additional human glioblastoma cell line (U-251 MG)
also showed considerable uptake of nanoparticles compared to HMEC-1
and NHDF cell lines at 4 h incubation (Figure S8).

Figure 4 Two-photon fluorescence images of U-87 MG cells (upper panel) and
HMEC-1 and NHDF (lower panel) after incubation for 4 h with FONPs
(1 or 5 μg/mL), upon excitation at 740 nm and emission detection
in the 480–550 nm range, after autofluorescence correction.
Orthogonal views showing the distribution of FONPs in the thickness
of the cells are presented for U-87 MG cells (middle panel). Transmission
images are provided to locate the cells. Scale bar: 35 μm.

The two-photon imaging of carbon nanodots has not
been commonly
used for in vitro internalization studies46,51,52 but mostly for Förster resonance
energy transfer -based imaging and photodynamic therapy,53 for tracking drug delivery,54 or for in vivo imaging.46 The
existing studies on in vitro internalization of fluorescent CDs using
two-photon microscopy predominantly use one cell type, and there is
also lack of information on autofluorescence background in control
cells not treated with CDs. Herein, we have demonstrated the variation
in the internalization of our FONPs with respect to concentration
across four different cell lines (two cancerous and two noncancerous),
with preferential uptake in glioblastoma cells. This major finding
is of importance with respect to chemotherapy issues. This remarkable
preferential internalization could be related to differences in the
cell membrane structure and function depending on the cell type. For
example, αVβIII integrin and SPARC or gp60 are overexpressed
in glioblastoma cells and have been mentioned to be responsible for
preferential uptake of nanoparticles in U-87 MG or C6 glioma cells.49,55

To decipher the mechanism of cell uptake, U-87 MG cells were
incubated
with FONPs at 4 °C. Negligible internalization was observed at
reduced temperature, which suggests an energy-dependent uptake (Figure S9). The U-87 MG cells were also treated
with clathrin inhibitor (chlorpromazine), caveolin inhibitor (genistein),
and lipid raft inhibitor (methyl beta cyclodextrin). It was observed
that blocking clathrin did not have a pronounced effect on the uptake
of nanoparticles, while blocking caveolin or lipid rafts reduced the
uptake drastically when compared to control cells (Figure S9). These observations suggest that the uptake mechanism
is predominantly mediated by caveolin-based and lipid raft-based endocytosis.
It has been previously demonstrated that the protein corona influenced
gold nanoparticle uptake: indeed, gold nanoparticles of 20 nm were
predominantly internalized by a caveolin route, while a clathrin-mediated
pathway was promoted by the presence of protein corona for larger
(50 nm) gold nanoparticles in murine macrophage and human liver cancer
cells.56 Hence, we infer that the protein
corona that would form when FONPs are diluted in complete cell culture
medium, in combination with their size, promote preferential internalization
by glioblastoma cells, predominantly through caveolin-based and lipid-raft-based
uptake. Understanding the mechanism of these soft hydrophilic organic
nanoparticles’ uptake is significant to design better drug
vehicles for glioblastoma therapy. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first time that this is described for such nanoparticles in
glioblastoma cells. The safety and internalization of our FONPs have
been demonstrated on different human cell lines, making them suitable
candidates for use as drug delivery systems. We thus took advantage
of the high solubility of FONPs in water and the presence of amines
on their surface to synthesize water-soluble nanoparticles linked
to PTX (FONPs–PTX).

Synthesis of FONPs–PTX
As
the nanoparticles
possess chemically accessible amine and carboxylic acid groups, our
strategy was to use a spacer between the FONPs and PTX; the spacer
must be (i) long enough to favor the bioavailability of the drug and
(ii) short enough to protect the drug from degradation until the nanoparticles
reached the cancer cells. Keeping this in mind, we chose the succinic
acid as a linker. This linker can be easily covalently bonded to the
nanoparticles by a ring-opening reaction of the amines of the FONPs
onto the succinic anhydride molecule, leading to the formation of
a stable amide bond (Scheme 1, step 2). Once the nanoparticles were functionalized with
succinic acid, PTX was bonded to the terminal CO2H groups
via an ester bond on the position C2′ of the side chain of
PTX (Scheme 1 step
3), where the most reactive alcohol function is located. This free
alcohol is mandatory to the bioactivity of PTX and can be esterified.57 It is thus a suitable functional group for attaching
PTX to nanoparticles while masking its toxicity. The resulting prodrug
is expected to be nontoxic until intracellular lysis of the ester
linkage, diminishing systemic toxicity. Furthermore, the drug release
will occur faster than the hydrolysis of acetate or the side-chain
cleavage, which would destroy the anticancer activity.

Characterization
of FONPs–PTX
The amount of
PTX grafted on the nanoparticles was determined by NMR dosing. The
final amount of PTX is about 4.5% of the total weight of the nanoparticles.
Despite the significant amount of PTX per nanoparticle, the dry size
of FONPs–PTX remains close to 20 nm (Figure 1B), which suggests that PTX is mainly located
inside the nanoparticles, which provides a better environment compared
to the charged surface. The presence of the hydrophobic drug within
the nanoparticle is in good agreement with the excellent water solubility
of FONPs–PTX which is higher than 9 mg/mL (higher concentrations
could not be tested because of the available amount of FONPs–PTX),
therefore its solubility is much higher than the solubility of free
PTX in water (less than 0.01 mg/mL). Such confinement of the cytotoxic
drug within FONPs is a further asset with regard to reduced systemic
toxicity. The stability of the bond between PTX and FONPs has been
verified in storage conditions (FONPs–PTX dispersed in ultrapure
water at 10 mg/mL and stored at 4 °C) up to 8 weeks.

In Vitro Antitumor
Activity of FONPs–PTX
Before
assessing the antitumor activity of FONPs–PTX against glioblastoma
cells, we first studied the stability of the bond between FONPs and
PTX in biological conditions (complete cell culture medium, 37 °C,
final PTX-equivalent concentration 10 μM) over 2 weeks. High-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to quantitatively determine
the presence of free PTX that could be released from FONPs–PTX
(Figure S10).58 No specific peak of PTX was detected above the limit of quantification
(10 nM) up to 2 weeks, revealing the absence of burst release and
the stability of the covalent bond between PTX and nanoparticles.
These results suggest that a premature drug release in blood by the
action of hydrolytic enzymes could be avoided with our system, which
would lead to lower systemic toxicity than that of free PTX in vivo.

As FONPs–PTX proved to be stable and bare nanoparticles
proved to be safe, we then investigated whether the binding of PTX
to nanoparticles would alter the drug properties and whether PTX could
be released intracellularly. In two-dimensional (2D) cell culture,
a classical MTT assay was performed on U-87 MG (glioblastoma cell
line) for 72 h, demonstrating a dose-dependent anticancer activity
of FONPs–PTX, which reached a maximal effect at 80% of cell
survival inhibition at the highest doses (Figure 5A). In U-87 MG cells, FONPs–PTX showed
a lower inhibition of cell survival (concentration that inhibits 50%
of cell survival IC50 = 2.5 ± 0.1 μM) than PTX
alone (IC50 = 10.8 ± 1.6 nM), suggesting a delayed
effect of the conjugate because of the time needed for intracellular
enzymes to cleave PTX from nanoparticles, as previously observed.7−9 Gomez et al. have recently shown that PTX-coupled nitrogen-doped
carbon nanodots by an ester bond exhibit a better anticancer activity
compared to free PTX in several cell lines.59 In our work, we demonstrated that PTX is not released from the prodrug
in biological medium at 37 °C. We thus expected that the observed
cytotoxicity might be the result of a cleavage of the bond between
PTX and the FONPs after cell uptake. Importantly, the binding of PTX
to nanoparticles and its further release did not alter the drug properties,
as the PTX-specific pharmacological effects on the microtubular network
were visualized after U-87 MG cell treatment for 24 h.60 Indeed, the control cells displayed a fine network
of microtubules irradiating from the centrosomes, whereas bundles
of microtubules, pseudo-asters, and mitotic block were observed in
FONPs–PTX-treated cells (Figure 5B). These data indicate that FONPs–PTX can be
considered as a prodrug of PTX.

Figure 5 Inhibition of cell viability by FONPs–PTX
in 2D glioblastoma
cell culture. (A) MTT assay on U-87 MG cells treated with FONPs–PTX
for 72 h. (B) Immunofluorescence imaging of the microtubular network
and nuclei (40×) in U-87 MG cells untreated (control) or incubated
with FONPs–PTX (5 or 10 μM) for 24 h. Bundles (full arrow),
pseudo-asters (dotted arrow), and mitotic block are typical of the
PTX pharmacological effect.

Finally, we investigated the anticancer activity of the prodrug
FONPs–PTX in 3D culture systems which have more realistic morphology,
phenotype, and cellular heterogeneity of cancer cells than in 2D culture.61 The independence from culture plastic substrates
in 3D culture facilitates a cellular architecture more similar to
cell organization in vivo than in 2D culture. In addition, spheroids
have limited transport capacity for drugs, nutrients, and other factors
comparable to in vivo tissues. It is now admitted that spheroids allow
a better in vitro anticancer evaluation of a prodrug before a full
development program of the efficacy and safety evaluation required
for new chemical entities.62 We first confirmed
the safety of FONPs (181 or 362 μg/mL) in 3D culture for 13
days. Spheroids treated with FONPs did not present evident morphological
alterations (Figure 6A), nor was there a statistically significant difference with untreated
control spheroids in spheroid cross-sectional area (Figure 6B) or cell viability (Figure 6C). We then studied
the anticancer activity of FONPs–PTX at the same concentrations
as bare nanoparticles, corresponding to 5 or 10 μM PTX-equivalent
concentration. Spheroids treated with FONPs–PTX from 5 μM
exhibited irregular shapes as compared to untreated control spheroids
or spheroids treated with bare nanoparticles (Figure 6A). We observed a statistically significant
smaller cross-sectional area of spheroids treated for 13 days with
FONPs–PTX as compared to controls by 37 ± 9% (p < 0.01) and 80 ± 6% (p < 0.001)
for 5 and 10 μM, respectively (Figure 6B), showing that the FONP–PTX anticancer
activity was dose-dependent. Furthermore, the dose-dependent effect
increases with time because the difference in cross-sectional area
between spheroids treated with 5 and 10 μM was 29 ± 12%
(p < 0.05) at day 3 and 68 ± 10% (p < 0.01) at day 13. The viability assay performed on
spheroids after 13 days’ exposure to 10 μM confirms the
anticancer activity of FONPs–PTX (Figure 6C), as it results in a decrease in cell survival
of 69 ± 11% (p < 0.001). Therefore, the decrease
in area of the treated spheroids can be related to an inhibition of
cell viability. Importantly, because the PTX bond to nanoparticles
is stable in complete cell culture medium at 37 °C for 2 weeks,
the observed anticancer effect is likely due to the intracellular
release of PTX from FONPs–PTX. Finally, our study confirms
the interest of a formulation consisting of a covalent binding of
PTX to our soft hydrophilic organic nanoparticles. This covalent bond
ensures satisfactory biological stability and a cytotoxic effect against
glioblastoma cells, thus opening the way to in vivo studies of efficacy
and safety of FONPs–PTX.

Figure 6 Safety of FONPs and anticancer activity
of FONPs–PTX in
3D cell culture. (A) Phase-contrast microscopy (4×) of U-87 MG
spheroid control and treated with FONPs or FONPs–PTX for 13
days (scale bar = 500 μm, D = day). (B) Time- and dose-dependent
effect of FONPs–PTX and absence of activity of FONPs on the
area of spheroids (normalized area to untreated control spheroids)
until 13 days. (C) Alamar blue assay on spheroids after 13 days of
treatment with FONPs (362 μg/mL) or FONPs–PTX (10 μM)
compared to untreated control spheroids.

Conclusions
Thanks to their unique combination of high solubility
in water,
innocuousness, large one- and two-photon brightness, and high covalent
loading ability, FONPs obtained from citric acid and DETA appear as
highly promising nanocarriers for hydrophobic drugs. In addition,
two-photon fluorescence imaging experiments revealed that these nanoparticles
show preferential internalization in glioblastoma cancer cells, making
them a suitable candidate for use as drug delivery systems. Considering
these advantages, PTX was covalently linked to the nanoparticles,
leading to FONPs–PTX with excellent solubility and reasonable
stability in water. The antitumor activity of FONPs–PTX was
demonstrated in vitro on both 2D and 3D culture. PTX is released from
the nanoparticles in its active form only after cell internalization,
thanks to the nature of covalent bond (ester linkage). These results
demonstrate that FONPs are promising nanotools for formulating PTX
as a prodrug to improve its benefit/risk ratio, in particular in glioblastoma
treatment. Thanks to their versatile surface functionalization, additional
grafting of targeting units and clinically approved fluorescent tags
would be of major interest to extend their use in image-guided surgery
and adjuvant therapy of glioblastoma. We are currently exploring this
route.

Experimental Section
Synthesis
Synthesis of the FONP Platform
In a 25 mL round flask,
monohydrate citric acid (1.05 g, 5.0 mmol) was dissolved in water
(1 mL), and then diethylene triamine (1.0 mL, 9.2 mmol) was added.
The resulting solution was heated using a standard microwave oven
for 2 min at 600 W. As the residue cooled down, 95% ethanol (5 mL)
was added, and the suspension was scratched with a spatula until the
formation of a thin slightly brown powder. After sonication for 2
min, the homogeneous suspension was centrifuged at 10 800 rpm
for 10 min. The brownish powder at the bottom of the centrifuge cylinder
was collected and washed with isopropanol and then with diethyl ether
to yield 1.2 g of FONPs after complete drying (under vacuum). The
amount of chemically accessible amine per milligram of FONPs was 0.7
μmol (Kaiser test, see below).

Synthesis of the Activated
FONPs
In a 10 mL cylindrical
flask, the FONP platform (200 mg, 0.14 mmol of amine) was dissolved
in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (2 mL), and then Na2CO3 (850 mg, 8.0 mmol) was added, followed by succinic anhydride
(400 mg, 4 mmol). The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature
overnight. Following neutralization of the excess of Na2CO3 by HCl (1 N), the pH was adjusted at 4. The resulting
solution was frozen and lyophilized. The residue was dissolved in
ethanol and then centrifuged to remove insoluble inorganic salts.
The supernatant was collected, and the solvent was evaporated under
reduced pressure to yield 125 mg of activated FONPs as a brownish
powder.

Synthesis of FONPs–PTX
In a 25 mL round flask,
activated FONPs (90.0 mg) were dissolved in dry dimethylformamide
(DMF) (5.0 mL), followed by the addition of a crystal of dimethylaminopyridine
and PTX (13.5 mg, 15.8 μmol). Then, N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (13.9 mg, 72.6
μmol) was added, and the solution was stirred at room temperature
for 60 h. At the end of the reaction, water was added to the solution,
and the solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue
was suspended in acetone, the suspension was centrifuged, and then
the powder was collected. The washing step with acetone was repeated
four times, and the resulting powder was dissolved in water and purified
on Sephadex LH20 eluting with water. The fractions containing the
good product were collected, and then the resulting solution was frozen
and lyophilized to yield 78.7 mg of FONPs–PTX as a brownish
powder.

Characterization of FONPs and FONPs–PTX
Elemental
Analysis
The elemental concentrations of
the FONPs were determined on a CNH analyzer at ICSN-CNRS at Gif-sur-Yvette
(France).

Transmission Electron Microscopy
The size of the FONPs
was determined by TEM imaging which was carried out on a HITACHI H7650
at 80 kV. Copper grids coated with a carbon membrane were pretreated
using the glow discharge technique to get positively charged surface,
thus helping the interaction between the FONPs and the grid. One droplet
of the aqueous FONP solution was deposited on the grid; the excess
of liquid was gently drawn off with paper, and the sample was further
stained with uranyl acetate. The FONPs were randomly and manually
counted using ImageJ program (using a circle selection); the diameter
of each FONP was measured, and the results were given as a medium
size (diameter) of the overall counted FONPs. For the statistics,
415 FONPs were counted.

Atomic Force Microscopy
The morphology
of the FONPs
was analyzed by AFM using the following procedure. A volume of 5 μL
of the solution in water was deposited onto freshly cleaved mica disks
and left at room temperature until dryness. AFM was carried out with
a Dimension Icon, operated in peak force mode. The probes used were
ScanAsyst-Air (Bruker). The set point in peak force mode was 500 pN,
and the scan rate was 0.250 Hz. The images were processed with NanoScope
Analysis 1.5 program.

Zeta Potential (ζ)
Zeta potential
analysis was
performed with a SZ-100Z HORIBA instrument. Ten measurements were
realized for each sample according to a predefined operating procedure,
and the final values were calculated as an average of the overall
measurements.

IR and Raman Spectroscopies
Fourier
transform IR spectra
of FONPs were recorded from the KBr pellet on a PerkinElmer Spectrum
100 Optica spectrometer. Raman spectra were recorded on powders of
the FONPs using an Explora Raman microscope (HORIBA) working at 785
nm with an air objective ×50.

X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometry
XPS measurements were
performed at PLACAMAT in Bordeaux (France) using a K-Alpha spectrometer
(ThermoFisher).

UV–Visible Absorption and Fluorescence
Spectroscopies
All photophysical properties were analyzed
with freshly prepared
air-equilibrated solutions at room temperature (293 K). UV/vis absorption
spectra were recorded using a Jasco V-570 spectrophotometer. Steady-state
fluorescence measurements were performed on diluted solutions (optical
density < 0.1) contained in standard 1 cm quartz cuvettes using
a HORIBA FluoroMax spectrometer in photon-counting mode. Fully corrected
emission spectra were obtained for each compound at λex = λabsmax with an optical density at λex ≤ 0.1 to
minimize internal absorption. Fluorescence quantum yields were measured
according to literature procedures using fluorescein in 0.1 M NaOH
(Φf = 0.9) or quinine bisulfate in 1 N H2SO4 (Φf = 0.546).

Two-Photon
Absorption
2PA cross sections (σ2) were
determined from the TPEF cross sections (σ2Φf) and the fluorescence emission quantum
yield (Φf). TPEF cross sections were measured relative
to fluorescein in 0.01 M aqueous NaOH at 680–900 nm63 for FONPs using the well-established method
described by Xu and Webb64 and the appropriate
solvent-related refractive index corrections.65 The quadratic dependence of the fluorescence intensity on the excitation
power was checked for each sample and all wavelengths. Measurements
were conducted using an excitation source delivering femtosecond pulses,
thus avoiding excited-state absorption during the pulse duration,
a phenomenon which has been shown to overestimate TPA cross-sectional
values. The laser beam was focused into the cuvette through a microscope
objective (10×, NA 0.25). The fluorescence emission was detected
in epifluorescence mode via a dichroic mirror (Chroma 675dcxru) and
a barrier filter (Chroma e650sp-2p) by using a compact CCD spectrometer
module BWTek BTC112E. Total fluorescence intensities were obtained
by integrating the corrected emission. The experimental uncertainty
of the action cross-sectional values determined by this method has
been estimated to be ±10%.

Dosing of the Chemically
Surface Reactive Amine Groups
The amount of chemically available
amines per weight of FONPs was
determined using the Kaiser test. In a test tube, 20 μL of a
solution of the FONPs in water (typical concentration 20 mg/mL) were
mixed with 100 μL of a solution of ninhydrin in ethanol (6%,
Kaiser test Sigma-Aldrich), 100 μL of a solution of phenol in
ethanol (80%, Kaiser test Sigma-Aldrich), and 100 μL of a solution
of potassium cyanide in pyridine (Kaiser test Sigma-Aldrich). The
solution was heated at 120 °C for 5 min in a sand bath previously
warmed. The resulting solution was left for cooling 1 min, and 20
μL of the cooled solution were dissolved in 2.0 mL of ethanol.
The absorption spectrum of the diluted solution was recorded, and
the value of the absorbance of the solution at 590 nm was compared
to a calibrated value to determine the concentration of amine in the
sample. The calibrated value was obtained by the same procedure (Kaiser
test) except that the known concentration of β-alanine was used
instead of the FONPs.

Dosing of PTX
In an NMR tube, FONPs–PTX
(14.5
mg) were dissolved in a solution of vanillin in DMSO-d6 (600 μL, 5 mmol/L). The NMR spectrum was recorded,
and the proton of the aldehyde of the vanillin (δ = 9.8 ppm,
s, 1H) was used as an internal reference. The integral of this proton
was then compared to the integral of the proton of the secondary amine
of the PTX (δ = 8.8 ppm, d, 1H). A concentration of PTX of 4.5%
in weight was found for FONPs–PTX.

Influence of External Parameters
on FONP Fluorescence
Fluorescence evolution studies were
conducted using a PerkinElmer
lambda800 spectrophotometer and a HORIBA Jobin Yvon FluoroMax 3 fluorimeter.

Fluorescence Variation as a Function of pH
FONPs were
dispersed in deionized water at a concentration of 25 μg/mL,
and solutions of specific pH were obtained using a capillary pH meter
by the addition of concentrated NaOH or HCl solutions without notable
change in the volume of FONP solution. Blank samples of deionized
water without FONPs with adjusted pH were also prepared. The fluorescence
emission of the pH-adjusted samples was measured on the fluorimeter
with excitation at 360 nm and emission from 380 to 600 nm and corrected
for the blank emission. The experiment was repeated twice, and the
average spectra were plotted with wavelength. The maximum fluorescence
intensity normalized with respect to the maximum fluorescence intensity
at pH = 6 was plotted against pH, and the standard deviation was calculated
for the maximum fluorescence intensity at each pH across the two experiments.

Fluorescence Variation in Different Dispersion Media and with
Varying Temperature
FONPs were dispersed in complete cell
culture medium (DMEM without phenol red + 10% FBS) at concentrations
of 25 and 100 μg/mL or in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at
pH 7.4 or MilliQ water at a concentration of 100 μg/mL. The
fluorescence of the FONPs dispersed in complete cell culture medium
and PBS was measured immediately after dispersion and over time by
maintaining the sample at 37 or 4 °C. The variation of fluorescence
over time was also tested under storage conditions (dispersed in water,
4 °C). To correct for systemic variability at different time
points, a standard solution of quinine sulfate was measured at each
measurement. Experiments at 37 °C were repeated twice, and mean/standard
deviations were calculated across these experiments. Experiments were
confirmed at 4 °C. FONPs dispersed in water were stored at 4
°C at a 20 mg/mL stock concentration. No aggregation or decrease
of fluorescence was observed at time point 0 when independent samples
were prepared for experiments at 37 °C.

Stability of
the Bond between PTX and FONPs
Standard Solutions and
Validation of the Method of Free PTX
Quantification
PTX was obtained from Chemieliva and quantified
by HPLC.58 Docetaxel (DTX) was obtained
from Sigma-Aldrich. Stock solution of PTX was prepared in DMSO and
stored at −20 °C. Chromatographic separation was performed
on a Phenomenex Kinetex XD-C18 column (2.1 × 100 mm, 2.6 μm)
with an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC system. Isocratic elution was performed
with mobile phase composed of LC–MS grade acetonitrile 50%,
1 mM ammonium acetate, and 0.05% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.3
mL/min. Column effluent was detected at 229 nm with a diode array
detector. The acquisition data were processed with OpenLab CDS ChemStation
Edition. A wash vial containing initial mobile phase was injected
between samples to avoid sample carryover. Calibration standards of
PTX (retention time = 3.3 ± 0.2 min) were prepared in the mobile
phase to final concentrations of 10, 20, 40, 50, 75, 100, 250, 500,
and 1000 nM (Figure S10). The limit of
quantification was determined at 10 nM. To validate the method, quality
control (QC) samples were prepared in the mobile phase to final concentrations
of 20, 130, and 900 nM. Weighted least squares linear regression analysis
was used for the construction of calibration curves from the peak
area.

Stability of the Bond between PTX and FONPs in Stock Solution
The FONPs–PTX powder was dispersed in ultrapure water (concentration
of FONPs–PTX = 10 mg/mL). To remove free residual PTX, the
aqueous phase was washed three times with dichloromethane until the
absence of free PTX in the organic phase was confirmed by HPLC. The
amount of bound PTX was determined at 27.6 nmol per milligram of FONPs.
HPLC for the quantification of free PTX was then repeated at different
times from 5 min to 8 weeks after dispersion to assess the absence
of PTX release from FONPs–PTX in storage conditions (4 °C).
No peak specific to PTX was found, evidencing the chemical stability
of ester bond between PTX and nanoparticles in stock solution for
long time.

Stability of the Bond between PTX and FONPs
in Cell Culture
Medium
FONPs–PTX were diluted in complete cell culture
medium (Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) +10% FBS) to
a final concentration of 10 μM equivalent-PTX and stored at
37 °C. At different times (15 min, 4 h, 24 h, 48 h, 1 week, 2
weeks), 100 μL of this solution were collected. Briefly, 1 μL
of internal standard (DTX) at 1 mg/mL was added and mixed with 200
μL of SDS 5% and then 200 μL of dichloromethane. After
centrifugation, free PTX was recovered in organic phase, and extraction
was repeated twice on the aqueous phase. After evaporation, the solid
residue was solubilized in 300 μL of mobile phase before HPLC
dosing as described above. The extraction yield of PTX is suitable
corresponding to 88.5 ± 2.8% (n = 4). No specific
peak of PTX was detected above the limit of quantification (10 nM)
up to 2 weeks, revealing the stability of the covalent bond between
PTX and nanoparticles in biological conditions.

Cell Culture
2D Culture
U-87 MG glioblastoma cell line (cancerous),
HMEC-1 (noncancerous endothelial cells), and NHDF (noncancerous fibroblasts)
were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and
Lonza, respectively. U-87 MG cells were cultured in EMEM with 10%
FBS, 2 mM glutamine, and 1% (100 U/mL) penicillin–streptomycin;
HMEC-1 cells were cultured in MCDB 131 with 10% heat-inactivated FBS,
2 mM glutamine, 1% penicillin–streptomycin, and 10 ng/mL epidermal
growth factor (EGF human protein) and NHDF in fibroblast growth medium
supplemented with fibroblast growth kit (Lonza), respectively. U-251
MG glioblastoma cells transfected with dsRed66 were kindly provided by Manon Carré and cultured in DMEM
with phenol red, 2 mM glutamine, 10% FBS, and 1% penicillin–streptomycin.
All cells were routinely maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2.

3D Culture
To obtain U-87 MG 3D cell culture in the
form of spheroids, cells obtained from the regular 2D culture were
pelleted, resuspended in complete cell culture medium containing 0.25%
of methylcellulose, and placed on a 96-well round-bottom plate. Cells
were seeded at 1000 cells per well in 100 μL of medium as described
previously.67 After 72 h of growth at 37
°C under 5% CO2, spheroids were formed.

Cell Survival
Assays
Cell Survival Colorimetric Tests in 2D Culture
Cells
(12 500 cells/cm2 for U-87 MG, 9400 cells/cm2 for HMEC-1, and 3500 cells/cm2 for NHDF) were
directly seeded in 96-well plates and allowed to grow for 24 h (U-87
MG and HMEC-1 cells) or 48 h (NHDF cells) before treatment. Then,
adherent cells were treated for 72 h with a range of concentrations
of FONPs (1, 5, 25, 50, 75, and 100 μg/mL) or FONPs–PTX
(3.62 to 362 μg/mL of FONPs–PTX corresponding to 0.1–10
μM PTX-equivalent concentration) dispersed in the respective
cell culture media of cells. The number of viable cells was quantified
by using three colorimetric assays: MTT assay and resazurin-based
(Alamar blue) assay, both based on the metabolic activity of mitochondria,
and a protein-biomass-based (sulforhodamine B) assay according to
our previous work.68−70 All these tests were based on the measurement of
absorbance which is proportional to the number of living cells. Cell
survival was expressed as a percentage as compared to control cells.
At least three independent experiments (in triplicates) were performed,
and data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation.

Real-Time,
Label-Free, Impedance-Based Assay
The impedance-meter
(xCELLigence, ACEA Biosciences) uses 96-well plates fitted with gold
electrodes to monitor variation in impedance of the cell monolayer
upon cell proliferation, morphology changes, and attachment of cells
(or detachment in the case of cell death). Cells were seeded and treated
at exact time points as for colorimetric assays at selected concentrations
of FONPs (5, 25, 50, and 100 μg/mL). Impedance was measured
every 15 min for 72 additional hours. The percentage of cell viability
was obtained by comparing treated samples with respect to the control
at the given time point. Each condition was done in quadruplicate.
Mean and standard error were calculated from two independent experiments
except for NHDF cells for which the experiment was run only once.

Antitumor Activity of FONPs–PTX on 3D Cell Culture
One hundred microliters of complete cell culture medium without
methylcellulose (control and negative control), 100 μL of FONPs
(final concentration in well after dilution 100/200: 181 or 362 μg/mL),
or 100 μL of FONPs–PTX (final concentration in well after
dilution 100/200: 181 or 362 μg/mL of FONPs–PTX corresponding
to 5 or 10 μM PTX-equivalent concentration) were added to the
spheroids. Then, 10 μL of complete cell culture medium without
methylcellulose were added every 48 h for 13 days. Spheroid growth
was monitored daily by measuring the spheroid area on bright-field
photomicrographs (Eclipse Ts2-FL, coupled to a digital camera Ds-Fi3,
Nikon) with 4× objective lens. All images were segmented using
a custom macro script, written for ImageJ software. Areas of spheroids
were normalized to untreated control spheroids. The number of viable
cells was quantified by using the fluorometric Alamar blue assay after
a 13 day treatment as previously described.67 Negative control well values are subtracted to all other wells.
The percentage of viable cells was obtained by comparing the fluorescence
of treated cells with respect to the control nontreated cells as reference
for 100% viability. The standard deviation was calculated from three
independent experiments.

Cellular Internalization
Cell
Seeding and Treatment
U-87 MG, HMEC-1, NHDF, and
U-251 MG cells were seeded for imaging in an eight-well chambered
cover glass (Lab-Tek) as for colorimetric assays. After 24 h, cells
were treated with FONPs (1, 5, and 25 μg/mL) for 4 h at 37 °C
and then washed multiple times with PBS, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
in PBS (15 min at room temperature), and rinsed twice with PBS. The
fixed and washed cells were stored with PBS in the chambers at 4 °C
until observation with a two-photon microscope. For blocking of energy-dependent
uptake, cells were incubated with 1 and 5 μg/mL of FONPs for
4 h at 4 °C before two photon-microscopy analysis. Inhibition
of different endocytosis pathways was assessed by using chlorpromazine
(clathrin inhibitor) at 5 μg/mL, genistein (caveolin inhibitor)
at 200 μM, or methyl beta cyclodextrin (lipid raft inhibitor)
at 1 mM. After 30 min of incubation at 37 °C with the inhibitor,
the cells were washed with cold PBS and incubated with FONPs at 1
and 5 μg/mL during 4 h at 37 °C. The cells were then rinsed
with PBS and fixed for two-photon microscopy.

Two-Photon
Microscopy
The cells were imaged using a
Zeiss two-photon microscope equipped with a MAI-TAI pulsed laser.
Two-photon excitation was performed at 740 nm, and the emission in
the 480–550 nm range was collected using a photomultiplier
tube. A dry 20× objective was used for imaging. The mean intensity
and standard deviation of control cells were used to determine the
autofluorescence threshold. Autofluorescence contribution in cells
treated with FONPs was thresholded with the autofluorescence value
of control cells using MATLAB. Only the intensities that were higher
by at least one standard deviation from the control mean intensity
were plotted in cells treated with FONPs using MATLAB. All these experiments
were repeated at least twice.

Immunofluorescence Staining
of the Microtubular Network
U-87 MG cells were seeded (10 000
cells per well, 300 μL)
on eight-well chamber slides (Lab-Tek). After 24 h, the medium was
removed, and the cells were treated with FONPs–PTX (181 or
362 μg/mL of FONPs–PTX corresponding to 5 or 10 μM
PTX-equivalent concentration in FONPs–PTX) for 24 h. After
drug treatment, immunofluorescence staining of the microtubular network
was performed using anti-β-tubulin primary antibody (1:200,
mouse monoclonal, Sigma-Aldrich) and FITC-conjugated secondary antibody
(1:200, Sigma-Aldrich) as previously described.9 To double-label nuclei, cells were further stained with
4,6-diamino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (0.25 μg/mL). Cells were observed
with an epifluorescence microscope (Leica DM-IRBE), 40× objective
lens, coupled to a digital camera (Coolsnap FX, Princeton Instruments).

Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as mean ±
SEM. Cellular viability data were analyzed by Student’s t-test. Reported p-values are two-sided,
and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Asterisks indicate significant level versus control *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02588.Chemical contents
and characteristics of the FONPs;
binding energy of the FONPs; photophysical properties of the FONPs
in water; distribution of the height of FONPs measured by AFM; 1H NMR spectra of the FONPs; oxygen and nitrogen XPS spectra
of FONPs; Raman spectrum of the FONPs; evolution of the FONP fluorescence
in varying conditions; two-photon fluorescence images of cells incubated
with FONPs; and HPLC calibration curve of PTX (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02588_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
∥ M.M. and
S.N. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
has been carried out within the framework
of the Cancer Plan thanks to the financial support from ITMO Cancer
AVIESAN (Alliance Nationale pour les Sciences de la Vie et de la Santé,
National Alliance for Life Sciences & Health) of “LASERNANOCANCER”
(no. PC201420) project. We also acknowledge the support from the French
State, managed by the French National Research Agency (ANR) in the
frame of the “Investments
for the future” Programme IdEx Bordeaux—LAPHIA (ANR-10-IDEX-03-02),
and from the PACA Canceropôle and INCa in “NanoTax”
project (no. 2018-08). TEM was performed at the Bordeaux Imaging Center
(UMS 3420 CNRS—University of Bordeaux/Inserm US4), while two-photon
imaging was performed on PiCSL-FBI core facility (IBDM, AMU-Marseille),
both being members of France Bioimaging, an infrastructure supported
by the ANR (ANR-10-INSB-04, “Investments for the future”).
The help of Sabrina Lacomme and Melina Petrel (TEM) and Florence Chaspoul
(HPLC dosing) is acknowledged.
==== Refs
References
Jain V. ; Jain S. ; Mahajan S. C. 
Nanomedicines
Based Drug Delivery
Systems for Anti-Cancer Targeting and Treatment . Curr. Drug Deliv. 
2015 , 12 , 177 –191 . 10.2174/1567201811666140822112516 .25146439 
Sun T. ; Zhang Y. S. ; Pang B. ; Hyun D. C. ; Yang M. ; Xia Y. 
Engineered Nanoparticles
for Drug Delivery in Cancer Therapy . Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 
2014 , 53 , 12320 –12364 . 10.1002/anie.201403036 .25294565 
Pérez-Herrero E. ; Fernández-Medarde A. 
Advanced Targeted
Therapies in Cancer:
Drug Nanocarriers, the Future of Chemotherapy . Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 
2015 , 93 , 52 –79 . 10.1016/j.ejpb.2015.03.018 .25813885 
Nabil G. ; Bhise K. ; Sau S. ; Atef M. ; El-Banna H. A. ; Iyer A. K. 
Nano-Engineered
Delivery Systems for Cancer Imaging
and Therapy: Recent Advances, Future Direction and Patent Evaluation . Drug Discov. Today 
2019 , 24 , 462 –491 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2018.08.009 .30121330 
Kim S.-W. ; Lee Y. K. ; Kim S.-H. ; Park J.-Y. ; Lee D. U. ; Choi J. ; Hong J. H. ; Kim S. ; Khang D. 
Covalent,
Non-Covalent, Encapsulated Nanodrug Regulate the Fate of Intra- and
Extracellular Trafficking: Impact on Cancer and Normal Cells . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 6454 10.1038/s41598-017-06796-7 .28743942 
Gingras M. ; Raimundo J.-M. ; Chabre Y. M. 
Cleavable
Dendrimers . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 
2007 , 46 , 1010 –1017 . 10.1002/anie.200601962 .17195264 
Yang D. ; Van S. ; Liu J. ; Wang J. ; Jiang X. ; Wang Y. ; Yu L. 
Physicochemical Properties
and Biocompatibility of a Polymer-Paclitaxel
Conjugate for Cancer Treatment . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2011 , 6 , 2557 –2566 . 10.2147/IJN.S25044 .
Zhang S. ; Zou J. ; Elsabahy M. ; Karwa A. ; Li A. ; Moore D. A. ; Dorshow R. B. ; Wooley K. L. 
Poly(Ethylene Oxide)-Block-Polyphosphester-Based
Paclitaxel Conjugates as a Platform for Ultra-High Paclitaxel-Loaded
Multifunctional Nanoparticles . Chem. Sci. 
2013 , 4 , 2122 –2126 . 10.1039/c3sc50252j .25152808 
Correard F. ; Roy M. ; Terrasson V. ; Braguer D. ; Estève M. A. ; Gingras M. 
Delaying Anticancer Drug Delivery by Self-Assembly
and Branching Effects of Minimalist Dendron-Drug Conjugates . Chemistry 
2019 , 25 , 9586 –9591 . 10.1002/chem.201801092 .29952096 
Wang F. ; Porter M. ; Konstantopoulos A. ; Zhang P. ; Cui H. 
Preclinical
Development of Drug Delivery Systems for Paclitaxel-Based Cancer Chemotherapy . J. Control. Release 
2017 , 267 , 100 –118 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.09.026 .28958854 
Jordan M. A. ; Wilson L. 
Microtubules as a Target
for Anticancer Drugs . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2004 , 4 , 253 –265 . 10.1038/nrc1317 .15057285 
Gelderblom H. ; Verweij J. ; Nooter K. ; Sparreboom A. 
Cremophor
EL . Eur. J. Cancer 
2001 , 37 , 1590 –1598 . 10.1016/s0959-8049(01)00171-x .11527683 
Yusuf R. ; Duan Z. ; Lamendola D. ; Penson R. ; Seiden M. 
Paclitaxel
Resistance: Molecular Mechanisms and Pharmacologic Manipulation . Curr. Cancer Drug Targets 
2003 , 3 , 1 –19 . 10.2174/1568009033333754 .12570657 
Cardoso F. L. ; Brites D. ; Brito M. A. 
Looking at the Blood-Brain Barrier:
Molecular Anatomy and Possible Investigation Approaches . Brain Res. Rev. 
2010 , 64 , 328 –363 . 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2010.05.003 .20685221 
Sofias A. M. ; Dunne M. ; Storm G. ; Allen C. 
The Battle of “Nano”
Paclitaxel . Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 
2017 , 122 , 20 –30 . 10.1016/j.addr.2017.02.003 .28257998 
Azad T. D. ; Pan J. ; Connolly I. D. ; Remington A. ; Wilson C. M. ; Grant G. A. 
Therapeutic
Strategies to Improve Drug Delivery across the Blood-Brain Barrier . Neurosurg. Focus 
2015 , 38 , E910.3171/2014.12.FOCUS14758 .
Stupp R. ; Mason W. P. ; van den
Bent M. J. ; Weller M. ; Fisher B. ; Taphoorn M. J. B. ; Belanger K. ; Brandes A. A. ; Marosi C. ; Bogdahn U. ; et al. Radiotherapy plus Concomitant and Adjuvant Temozolomide
for Glioblastoma . N. Engl. J. Med. 
2005 , 352 , 987 –996 . 10.1056/nejmoa043330 .15758009 
Garg T. ; Bhandari S. ; Rath G. ; Goyal A. K. 
Current
Strategies
for Targeted Delivery of Bio-Active Drug Molecules in the Treatment
of Brain Tumor . J. Drug Target. 
2015 , 23 , 865 –887 . 10.3109/1061186x.2015.1029930 .25835469 
Pinto M. P. ; Arce M. ; Yameen B. ; Vilos C. 
Targeted Brain
Delivery
Nanoparticles for Malignant Gliomas . Nanomedicine 
2017 , 12 , 59 –72 . 10.2217/nnm-2016-0307 .27876436 
Jeyapalan S. ; Boxerman J. ; Donahue J. ; Goldman M. ; Kinsella T. ; Dipetrillo T. ; Evans D. ; Elinzano H. ; Constantinou M. ; Stopa E. ; et al. Paclitaxel Poliglumex,
Temozolomide, and Radiation
for Newly Diagnosed High-Grade Glioma: A Brown University Oncology
Group Study . Am. J. Clin. Oncol. 
2014 , 37 , 444 –449 . 10.1097/coc.0b013e31827de92b .23388562 
Elinzano H. ; Glantz M. ; Mrugala M. ; Kesari S. ; Piccioni D. E. ; Kim L. ; Pan E. ; Yunus S. ; Coyle T. ; Timothy K. ; et al. PPX and Concurrent Radiation
for Newly Diagnosed Glioblastoma Without
MGMT Methylation: A Randomized Phase II Study: BrUOG 244 . Am. J. Clin. Oncol. 
2018 , 41 , 159 –162 . 10.1097/COC.0000000000000247 .26658237 
Ke X.-Y. ; Zhao B.-J. ; Zhao X. ; Wang Y. ; Huang Y. ; Chen X.-M. ; Zhao B.-X. ; Zhao S.-S. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang Q. 
The Therapeutic Efficacy
of Conjugated Linoleic Acid - Paclitaxel
on Glioma in the Rat . Biomaterials 
2010 , 31 , 5855 –5864 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.03.079 .20430438 
Li D. ; Yang K. ; Li J.-S. ; Ke X.-Y. ; Duan Y. ; Du R. ; Song P. ; Yu K.-F. ; Ren W. ; Huang D. ; et al. Antitumor
Efficacy of a Novel CLA-PTX Microemulsion against Brain
Tumors: In Vitro and in Vivo Findings . Int.
J. Nanomed. 
2012 , 7 , 6105 –6114 . 10.2147/IJN.S38927 .
Wang J. ; Liu W. ; Tu Q. ; Wang J. ; Song N. ; Zhang Y. ; Nie N. ; Wang J. 
Folate-Decorated Hybrid Polymeric Nanoparticles for
Chemically and Physically Combined Paclitaxel Loading and Targeted
Delivery . Biomacromolecules 
2011 , 12 , 228 –234 . 10.1021/bm101206g .21158381 
Jiang Y. ; Wang X. ; Liu X. ; Lv W. ; Zhang H. ; Zhang M. ; Li X. ; Xin H. ; Xu Q. 
Enhanced Antiglioma
Efficacy of Ultrahigh Loading Capacity Paclitaxel Prodrug Conjugate
Self-Assembled Targeted Nanoparticles . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 211 –217 . 10.1021/acsami.6b13805 .27976583 
Eldar-Boock A. ; Miller K. ; Sanchis J. ; Lupu R. ; Vicent M. J. ; Satchi-Fainaro R. 
Integrin-Assisted
Drug Delivery of Nano-Scaled Polymer
Therapeutics Bearing Paclitaxel . Biomaterials 
2011 , 32 , 3862 –3874 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.01.073 .21376390 
Wang Y. ; Hu A. 
Carbon Quantum Dots:
Synthesis, Properties and Applications . J. Mater.
Chem. C 
2014 , 2 , 6921 –6939 . 10.1039/c4tc00988f .
So R. C. ; Sanggo J. E. ; Jin L. ; Diaz J. M. A. ; Guerrero R. A. ; He J. 
Gram-Scale Synthesis
and Kinetic Study of Bright Carbon Dots from
Citric Acid and Citrus Japonica via a Microwave-Assisted Method . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 5196 –5208 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b00551 .30023742 
Cayuela A. ; Soriano M. L. ; Carrillo-Carrión C. ; Valcárcel M. 
Semiconductor
and Carbon-Based Fluorescent Nanodots: The Need for Consistency . Chem. Commun. 
2016 , 52 , 1311 –1326 . 10.1039/c5cc07754k .
Zhang M. ; Hu L. ; Wang H. ; Song Y. ; Liu Y. ; Li H. ; Shao M. ; Huang H. ; Kang Z. 
One-Step Hydrothermal
Synthesis of Chiral Carbon Dots and Their Effects on Mung Bean Plant
Growth . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 12734 –12742 . 10.1039/c8nr01644e .29946587 
Sciortino A. ; Marino E. ; van Dam B. ; Schall P. ; Cannas M. ; Messina F. 
Solvatochromism Unravels the Emission Mechanism of
Carbon Nanodots . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 3419 –3423 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b01590 .27525451 
Shangguan J. ; He D. ; He X. ; Wang K. ; Xu F. ; Liu J. ; Tang J. ; Yang X. ; Huang J. 
Label-Free Carbon-Dots-Based
Ratiometric Fluorescence PH Nanoprobes for Intracellular PH Sensing . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 7837 –7843 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b01932 .27334762 
Zhang J. ; Yu S.-H. 
Carbon Dots: Large-Scale
Synthesis, Sensing and Bioimaging . Mater. Today 
2016 , 19 , 382 –393 . 10.1016/j.mattod.2015.11.008 .
Zhu S. ; Song Y. ; Zhao X. ; Shao J. ; Zhang J. ; Yang B. 
The Photoluminescence
Mechanism in Carbon Dots (Graphene Quantum
Dots, Carbon Nanodots, and Polymer Dots): Current State and Future
Perspective . Nano Res. 
2015 , 8 , 355 –381 . 10.1007/s12274-014-0644-3 .
Song Y. ; Zhu S. ; Zhang S. ; Fu Y. ; Wang L. ; Zhao X. ; Yang B. 
Investigation from
Chemical Structure to Photoluminescent Mechanism:
A Type of Carbon Dots from the Pyrolysis of Citric Acid and an Amine . J. Mater. Chem. C 
2015 , 3 , 5976 –5984 . 10.1039/c5tc00813a .
Zhu S. ; Zhao X. ; Song Y. ; Lu S. ; Yang B. 
Beyond Bottom-up
Carbon Nanodots: Citric-Acid Derived Organic Molecules . Nano Today 
2016 , 11 , 128 –132 . 10.1016/j.nantod.2015.09.002 .
Kasprzyk W. ; Bednarz S. ; Żmudzki P. ; Galica M. ; Bogdał D. 
Novel Efficient
Fluorophores Synthesized from Citric Acid . RSC
Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 34795 –34799 . 10.1039/c5ra03226a .
Xu Y. ; Wu M. ; Liu Y. ; Feng X.-Z. ; Yin X.-B. ; He X.-W. ; Zhang Y.-K. 
Nitrogen-Doped
Carbon Dots: A Facile and General Preparation
Method, Photoluminescence Investigation, and Imaging Applications . Chemistry 
2013 , 19 , 2276 –2283 . 10.1002/chem.201203641 .23322649 
Krysmann M. J. ; Kelarakis A. ; Dallas P. ; Giannelis E. P. 
Formation
Mechanism of Carbogenic Nanoparticles with Dual Photoluminescence
Emission . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 747 –750 . 10.1021/ja204661r .22201260 
Song Y. ; Zhu S. ; Yang B. 
Bioimaging Based on Fluorescent Carbon Dots . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 27184 –27200 . 10.1039/c3ra47994c .
Schneider J. ; Reckmeier C. J. ; Xiong Y. ; von Seckendorff M. ; Susha A. S. ; Kasák P. ; Rogach A. L. 
Molecular Fluorescence
in Citric Acid-Based Carbon Dots . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2017 , 121 , 2014 –2022 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b12519 .
Sun Y.-P. ; Zhou B. ; Lin Y. ; Wang W. ; Fernando K. A. S. ; Pathak P. ; Meziani M. J. ; Harruff B. A. ; Wang X. ; Wang H. ; et al. Quantum-Sized
Carbon Dots for Bright and Colorful Photoluminescence . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 7756 –7757 . 10.1021/ja062677d .16771487 
Chakrabarti M. ; Kiseleva R. ; Vertegel A. ; Ray S. K. 
Carbon Nanomaterials
for Drug Delivery and Cancer Therapy . J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 15 , 5501 –5511 . 10.1166/jnn.2015.10614 .26369109 
Ruan S. ; Qian J. ; Shen S. ; Zhu J. ; Jiang X. ; He Q. ; Gao H. 
A Simple One-Step Method
to Prepare Fluorescent Carbon
Dots and Their Potential Application in Non-Invasive Glioma Imaging . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 10040 –10047 . 10.1039/c4nr02657h .25031208 
Zakrzewska K. E. ; Samluk A. ; Wierzbicki M. ; Jaworski S. ; Kutwin M. ; Sawosz E. ; Chwalibog A. ; Pijanowska D. G. ; Pluta K. D. 
Analysis of the Cytotoxicity of Carbon-Based
Nanoparticles,
Diamond and Graphite, in Human Glioblastoma and Hepatoma Cell Lines . PLoS One 
2015 , 10 , e012257910.1371/journal.pone.0122579 .25816103 
Ostadhossein F. ; Pan D. 
Functional Carbon Nanodots for Multiscale Imaging and Therapy . Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 
2017 , 9 , e143610.1002/wnan.1436 .
Lee C. ; Kwon W. ; Beack S. ; Lee D. ; Park Y. ; Kim H. ; Hahn S. K. ; Rhee S.-W. ; Kim C. 
Biodegradable Nitrogen-Doped
Carbon Nanodots for Non-Invasive Photoacoustic Imaging and Photothermal
Therapy . Theranostics 
2016 , 6 , 2196 –2208 . 10.7150/thno.16923 .27924157 
Wu Y.-F. ; Wu H.-C. ; Kuan C.-H. ; Lin C.-J. ; Wang L.-W. ; Chang C.-W. ; Wang T.-W. 
Multi-Functionalized Carbon Dots
as Theranostic Nanoagent for Gene Delivery in Lung Cancer Therapy . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 21170 10.1038/srep21170 .26880047 
Zheng M. ; Ruan S. ; Liu S. ; Sun T. ; Qu D. ; Zhao H. ; Xie Z. ; Gao H. ; Jing X. ; Sun Z. 
Self-Targeting Fluorescent Carbon
Dots for Diagnosis of Brain Cancer
Cells . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 11455 –11461 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b05575 .26458137 
Ong K. J. ; MacCormack T. J. ; Clark R. J. ; Ede J. D. ; Ortega V. A. ; Felix L. C. ; Dang M. K. M. ; Ma G. ; Fenniri H. ; Veinot J. G. C. ; et al. Widespread Nanoparticle-Assay Interference:
Implications for Nanotoxicity Testing . PLoS
One 
2014 , 9 , e9065010.1371/journal.pone.0090650 .24618833 
Wang J. ; Liu J. 
PEI–Folic Acid
Modified Carbon Nanodots for Cancer Cell-Targeted
Delivery and Two-Photon Excitation Imaging . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 19662 –19668 . 10.1039/c5ra27249a .
Lan M. ; Zhao S. ; Zhang Z. ; Yan L. ; Guo L. ; Niu G. ; Zhang J. ; Zhao J. ; Zhang H. ; Wang P. ; et al. Two-Photon-Excited near-Infrared
Emissive Carbon Dots as Multifunctional
Agents for Fluorescence Imaging and Photothermal Therapy . Nano Res. 
2017 , 10 , 3113 –3123 . 10.1007/s12274-017-1528-0 .
Wang J. ; Zhang Z. ; Zha S. ; Zhu Y. ; Wu P. ; Ehrenberg B. ; Chen J.-Y. 
Carbon Nanodots
Featuring Efficient
FRET for Two-Photon Photodynamic Cancer Therapy with a Low Fs Laser
Power Density . Biomaterials 
2014 , 35 , 9372 –9381 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.07.063 .25132603 
Tang J. ; Kong B. ; Wu H. ; Xu M. ; Wang Y. ; Wang Y. ; Zhao D. ; Zheng G. 
Carbon Nanodots
Featuring
Efficient FRET for Real-Time Monitoring of Drug Delivery and Two-Photon
Imaging . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 6569 –6574 . 10.1002/adma.201303124 .23996326 
Lin T. ; Zhao P. ; Jiang Y. ; Tang Y. ; Jin H. ; Pan Z. ; He H. ; Yang V. C. ; Huang Y. 
Blood-Brain-Barrier-Penetrating
Albumin Nanoparticles for Biomimetic Drug Delivery via Albumin-Binding
Protein Pathways for Antiglioma Therapy . ACS
Nano 
2016 , 10 , 9999 –10012 . 10.1021/acsnano.6b04268 .27934069 
Cheng X. ; Tian X. ; Wu A. ; Li J. ; Tian J. ; Chong Y. ; Chai Z. ; Zhao Y. ; Chen C. ; Ge C. 
Protein Corona Influences Cellular
Uptake of Gold Nanoparticles by
Phagocytic and Nonphagocytic Cells in a Size-Dependent Manner . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 20568 –20575 . 10.1021/acsami.5b04290 .26364560 
Kingston D. G. I. 
Taxol:
The Chemistry and Structure-Activity Relationships of a Novel Anticancer
Agent . Trends Biotechnol. 
1994 , 12 , 222 –227 . 10.1016/0167-7799(94)90120-1 .7765351 
Xia X. J. ; Peng J. ; Zhang P. X. ; Jin D. J. ; Liu Y. L. 
Validated
HPLC Method for the Determination of Paclitaxel-Related Substances
in an Intravenous Emulsion Loaded with a Paclitaxel–Cholesterol
Complex . Indian J. Pharm. Sci. 
2013 , 75 , 672 –679 . 10.4103/0250-474X.124762 .24591742 
Gomez I. J. ; Arnaiz B. ; Cacioppo M. ; Arcudi F. ; Prato M. 
Nitrogen-Doped
Carbon Nanodots for Bioimaging and Delivery of Paclitaxel . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2018 , 6 , 5540 –5548 . 10.1039/c8tb01796d .
Pagano A. ; Sté N. A. ; Honoré p. ; Estè M. A. ; ve N. A. ; Braguer D. 
Nanodrug Potential
in Cancer Therapy:
Efficacy/Toxicity Studies in Cancer Cells . Int.
J. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 9 , 502 –516 . 10.1504/ijnt.2012.045352 .
Leong D. T. ; Ng K. W. 
Probing the Relevance
of 3D Cancer Models in Nanomedicine Research . Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 
2014 , 79–80 , 95 –106 . 10.1016/j.addr.2014.06.007 .
Wang D.-D. ; Liu W. ; Chang J.-J. ; Cheng X. ; Zhang X.-Z. ; Xu H. ; Feng D. ; Yu L.-J. ; Wang X.-L. 
Bioengineering Three-Dimensional
Culture Model of Human Lung Cancer Cells: An Improved Tool for Screening
EGFR Targeted Inhibitors . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 24083 –24090 . 10.1039/c6ra00229c .
Xu C. ; Webb W. W. 
Measurement of Two-Photon Excitation Cross Sections
of Molecular Fluorophores with Data from 690 to 1050 Nm . J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 
1996 , 13 , 481 –491 . 10.1364/josab.13.000481 .
Albota M. A. ; Xu C. ; Webb W. W. 
Two-Photon
Fluorescence Excitation Cross Sections of
Biomolecular Probes from 690 to 960 Nm . Appl.
Opt. 
1998 , 37 , 7352 –7356 . 10.1364/ao.37.007352 .18301569 
Werts M. H. V. ; Nerambourg N. ; Pélégry D. ; Grand Y. L. ; Blanchard-Desce M. 
Action Cross
Sections of Two-Photon Excited Luminescence
of Some Eu(III) and Tb(III) Complexes . Photochem.
Photobiol. Sci. 
2005 , 4 , 531 –538 . 10.1039/b504495b .15986061 
Alves I. D. ; Carré M. ; Montero M.-P. ; Castano S. ; Lecomte S. ; Marquant R. ; Lecorché P. ; Burlina F. ; Schatz C. ; Sagan S. ; et al. A Proapoptotic Peptide Conjugated to Penetratin Selectively
Inhibits Tumor Cell Growth . Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 
2014 , 1838 , 2087 –2098 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2014.04.025 .24796502 
Berges R. ; Denicolai E. ; Tchoghandjian A. ; Baeza-Kallee N. ; Honore S. ; Figarella-Branger D. ; Braguer D. 
Proscillaridin A Exerts
Anti-Tumor Effects through GSK3β Activation and Alteration of
Microtubule Dynamics in Glioblastoma . Cell Death
Dis. 
2018 , 9 , 984 10.1038/s41419-018-1018-7 .30250248 
Correard F. ; Maximova K. ; Estève M.-A. ; Villard C. ; Roy M. ; Al-Kattan A. ; Sentis M. ; Gingras M. ; Kabashin A. V. ; Braguer D. 
Gold Nanoparticles
Prepared by Laser Ablation in Aqueous
Biocompatible Solutions: Assessment of Safety and Biological Identity
for Nanomedicine Applications . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2014 , 9 , 5415 –5430 . 10.2147/IJN.S65817 .
Pasquier E. ; Tuset M.-P. ; Street J. ; Sinnappan S. ; MacKenzie K. L. ; Braguer D. ; Andre N. ; Kavallaris M. 
Concentration-
and Schedule-Dependent Effects of Chemotherapy on the Angiogenic Potential
and Drug Sensitivity of Vascular Endothelial Cells . Angiogenesis 
2013 , 16 , 373 –386 . 10.1007/s10456-012-9321-x .23143659 
Berges R. ; Tchoghandjian A. ; Honore S. ; Esteve M.-A. ; Figarella-Branger D. ; Bachmann F. ; Lane H. A. ; Braguer D. 
The Novel Tubulin-Binding
Checkpoint Activator BAL101553 Inhibits EB1-Dependent Migration and
Invasion and Promotes Differentiation of Glioblastoma Stem-like Cells . Mol. Cancer Ther. 
2016 , 15 , 2740 –2749 . 10.1158/1535-7163.mct-16-0252 .27540016

