
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145940910.1021/acsomega.8b03103ArticleCharacterization of Shock-Sensitive Deposits from
the Hydrolysis of Hexachlorodisilane Lin Yu-Jhen †Liu Chien-Ho †Chin Mo-Geng †Wang Cheng-Chieh †Wang Sheng-Hsun †Tsai Hsiao-Yun †Chen Jenq-Renn *†Ngai Eugene Y. ‡Ramachandran Ram §† Department
of Safety, Health and Environmental Engineering, National Kaohsiung University of Science and Technology, Kaohsiung, 824, Taiwan‡ Chemically
Speaking LLC, Whitehouse Station, New Jersey 08889, United States§ Air
Liquide Advanced Materials, Branchburg, New Jersey 08876, United States* E-mail: jrc@nkust.edu.tw.16 01 2019 31 01 2019 4 1 1416 1424 06 11 2018 08 01 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In
this work, the shock sensitivity of hexachlorodisilane (HCDS)
hydrolysis products was studied. The hydrolysis conditions included
vapor and liquid HCDS hydrolysis in moist air. Shock sensitivity was
determined by using a Fall hammer apparatus. Extensive infrared studies
were done for the hydrolysis products. It was found that the Si–Si
bond in HCDS during hydrolysis is preserved and can be cleaved by
shock, leading to intramolecular oxidation of the neighboring silanol
(Si–OH) groups to form a networked Si–O–Si structure
and hydrogen gas. The limiting impact energy for shock sensitivity
was also found proportional to the oxygen/silicon ratio in the deposit.
Finally, recommendations are given for controlling the shock sensitivity
of the hydrolyzed deposit.

document-id-old-9ao8b03103document-id-new-14ao-2018-03103accc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Hexachlorodisilane (HCDS,
Si2Cl6) is an important
specialty chemical used in semiconductor manufacturing and related
industries. It is one of the chlorosilanes and bears similar hazardous
properties such as flammability and water reactivity in which the
hydrolysis reactions produce silicon oxides and hydrogen chloride.
The major difference between HCDS and other smaller chlorosilanes
such as monochlorosilane, dichlorosilane, and trichlorosilane (TCS)
is that HCDS has a much lower volatility with a boiling point of 144–145
°C and a higher flash point of 84.5 °C. Also, the hydrolysis
product or the hydrolyzed deposit contains complex mixtures of silicon
oxides and is known to be shock-sensitive, that is, it ignites upon
mechanical impact.

Recently in 2014, a deadly explosion occurred
in the high-purity
polycrystalline silicon manufacturing facility at the Yokkaichi Plant
of Mitsubishi Materials Corporation (MMC), Japan, resulting in 5 fatalities
and 13 injuries.1 The incident occurred
during the cleaning of one of the heat exchangers in the hydrogen
recycling system during routine maintenance. The investigation report
concluded that the direct cause of the incident was that higher molecular
weight chlorosilanes, including HCDS, were condensed in the heat exchanger
and were hydrolyzed in an attempt to remove them.2 The hydrolysis took place at a low temperature of approximately
10 °C or lower, which increased the sensitivity and power of
ignition and explosion when the hydrolyzed deposit was dried. It also
concluded that the explosion occurred as a result of physical impact
when the heat exchanger cover was opened. Although details on the
mechanism of how shock impact of the hydrolysis products lead to ignition
and explosion were not given, thermodynamic calculations were performed
and oxygen insertion into the Si–Si bond was considered to
be effective for stabilization.

Hydrolysis of typical chlorosilanes
such as dichlorosilane, TCS,
and silicon tetrachloride have been well-studied.3 The Si–Cl bonds are known to react readily with
water-forming silanol (Si–OH) and hydrogen chloride. The silanols
are in general unstable, rapidly condensing to form siloxanes, that
is, compounds with a structure of −Si–O–Si–.
The hydrolysis and condensation may occur simultaneously giving complex
cyclic or linear polysiloxanes. There are, however, very few studies
concerning the stability or hazard of the higher molecular weight
chlorodisilane-hydrolyzed products.

High-resolution FT-ICR has
been used to determine the exact mass
of various polysiloxane species present in the exhaust flow from a
high-temperature oxide deposition process utilizing dichlorosilane.4 It was found that the preferred reaction pathway
of ion-molecule of the dichlorosilyl cation with water and DCS was
the disiloxane formation through HCl loss. Disiloxane was a precursor
to the highly flammable polysiloxanes that were identified in the
exhaust gas and deposits. There are, however, no studies on the hazardous
properties of these polysiloxane deposits.

The hazards of high-boiling
residue from the TCS-direct process
have been studied.5 This residue contained
a mixture of chlorodisilanes and chlorosiloxanes. In particular, it
was confirmed that the residue might produce shock-sensitive hydrolysis
products or “popping gels”. However, the detailed conditions
and variables that influenced shock sensitivity of the hydrolysis
products were not disclosed. One notable feature from this work is
that the analysis of the residue revealed that it contained 72% HCDS
along with 9% Cl5HSi2O and 19% Cl6Si2O siloxanes. Therefore, it is likely that HCDS was
a major contributing factor in generating shock-sensitivity products.

In the investigation report of the 2014 explosion in the Yokkaichi
Plant of MMC, pure chlorosilane samples of silicon tetrachloride,
TCS, HCDS, Si3Cl8, and Si4Cl10 were used to simulate the chlorosilane polymer and were
hydrolyzed at temperatures between 5 and 15 °C and dried.2 The report concluded that the explosion power
and impact sensitivity increased as a function of dryness after hydrolysis.
The impact sensitivity disappeared regardless of the hydrolysis temperature
if it was wet with liquid water. Thus, the report confirmed that HCDS
might form hydrolysis products that were rendered shock-sensitive
upon drying. Nevertheless, details of the tests were not given in
the report. It is worthwhile to note that these studies described
the hydrolyzed deposits of HCDS to be shock-sensitive only after an
extended period of 24 h to 1 month.2,5

Recently,
a model structure of Si8H10O14 for
intramolecular oxidation involving HO–Si–Si–H
bonds has been proposed theoretically in an attempt to find the cause
of the MMC explosion.6 Nevertheless, there
was no experimental verification of the model compound. However, the
importance of Si–Si bonds was pointed out in the formation
of intramolecular oxidation.

More recently, Zhou et al. performed
a detailed study on the shock
and heat sensitivity of the hydrolysis products of HCDS.7 Synthetic methods were developed to consistently
prepare the hydrolysis products with high shock sensitivity. The shock
sensitivity was determined by placing a sample between the jaws of
a plier that was quickly squeezed to crush it. The sample was classified
as shock sensitive if smoke, spark, or flame was observed. Such a
classification of shock sensitivity is biased to the extreme end of
high shock sensitivity. Thus, the hydrolysis products prepared by
directly adding HCDS to water were found to be heat-sensitive but
not shock-sensitive. Instead, molecular sieves were used as substrates,
and shock-sensitive hydrolysis products from HCDS were formed as solid
coatings on the substrates. The hydrogen atoms in the silanol groups
or absorbed water are said to be the oxidant, and the silicon atoms
in the Si–Si bonds were the reductant. When the materials are
disturbed by a thermal or mechanical impact, fast redox reactions
happen to form molecular hydrogen. A sequence of free radical reactions
was proposed to explain the shock sensitivity and shock-induced chemical
transformation. Clearly, this work aimed at the extreme end of high
shock-sensitivity hydrolysis products which is possible but might
not be as common as typical HCDS direct hydrolysis without any special
substrate.

Earlier literature concerning the Si–Si linkages
has been
presented in an extensive summary by Hengge.8 The Si–Si bonds are said to be very sensitive to oxidation
as the Si–O–Si bonding is thermodynamically strongly
favored. Acid hydrolysis occurs to give polymeric compounds retaining
Si–Si bonds; alkaline hydrolysis yields silicic acid with the
disruption of the Si–Si bonding. The polymeric compounds with
small Si–Si units are white amorphous powders, insoluble in
all solvents except by decomposition. With aqueous ammonia or caustic
alkalis, hydrogen is evolved. With abrupt mechanical or thermal shock,
explosive reactions may occur, in which the enthalpy of oxidation
of the Si–Si bonds to Si–O bonds is released. All of
these reactions occur rapidly and quantitatively. There is no hindrance
because of diffusion in the solid state. This is perhaps the earliest
description of shock-sensitive nature of the hydrolyzed deposit from
chlorosilanes with Si–Si bonds. Nevertheless, the exact mechanism
and conditions that may affect the shock sensitivity remain unknown.

It is clear from the above literature that there remains no systematic
study on the shock sensitivity of direct hydrolysis products of HCDS.
In particular, the mechanism and parameters affecting shock sensitivity
of the hydrolyzed deposit and more importantly the conditions or methods
that may prevent or suppress the shock sensitivity of the deposit
are crucial for safe handling/utilizing HCDS or other higher molecular
weight chlorosilanes. These are the primary objectives of this work.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 General Observation of
Shock-Sensitive Deposit
Contrary to the previous studies,2,5 shock-sensitive
deposits with a limiting impact energy (LIE) of 5 J or more were found
to be extremely easy to form, whether the HCDS is hydrolyzed as a
liquid or vapor with ambient air or a controlled environment. The
formation was found to be rapid, for example, less than 1 h of hydrolysis. Figure 1 shows the typical
shock ignition of the hydrolyzed deposit in the Fall hammer test.
The sample was a deposit from liquid HCDS hydrolyzed in air with a
dew point of 15 °C for 1 h. The shock-impact energy of 30 J resulted
in an ignition of the deposit after which the combustion propagated
throughout the powder cloud resulting in a fire ball. Some of the
particles released sparked. It should be noted that 30 J of impact
energy is far larger than the impact energy of a quickly squeezed
plier and thus may be classified as nonshock-sensitive by Zhou et
al.7 However, such an impact energy is
still within the reachable range of a mechanical impact during maintenance
work, as highlighted in the 2014 incident and thus merits further
study.

Figure 1 Typical shock ignition of a deposit by a Fall hammer impact. Each
frame is differed by 1 ms.

2.2 Liquid HCDS Hydrolysis in Moist Air
2.2.1 Ambient Hydrolysis
The first and
simplest way of hydrolyzing HCDS is the ambient hydrolysis in which
HCDS liquid was placed in a steel pan and hydrolyzed in ambient air
(dew point 25 ± 1 °C) for 10 min. The hydrolysis reaction
produced a fume, and the clear transparent liquid turned into a white
deposit in less than 10 min. The deposit was collected and tested
by Fall hammer. The LIE was found to be 20 J.

2.2.2 Effects of Air Humidity
Under a
controlled environment with precise moisture concentration, the hydrolysis
rate is strongly dependent on the moisture content. Figure 2 shows the weight loss history
for HCDS liquid filled in a new Fall hammer lower roller/collar combination
and placed inside a balance that was purged with controlled air. The
amount placed in the roller was 70 ± 10 mg. Five samples were
placed in five different balances, all purged with the same source
of controlled air. The dew point, however, was measured in each balance
and was controlled within ±1 °C. The sample weight loss
reached a maximum of approximately 50% at dew points of 15 and 10
°C. The hydrolysis was clearly incomplete in tests using air
with a dew point of −5 °C as the sample was still partially
transparent. The LIE for dew points of 15, 10, 5, 0, and −5
°C was found to be 30, 12.5, 10, 15, and 50 J, respectively.

Figure 2 Comparison
of weight loss history for liquid HCDS hydrolysis using
controlled air with different moisture contents.

2.2.3 Effects of Hydrolysis Time
The
effects from the degree of hydrolysis were further studied using five
sets of samples hydrolyzed using air with a dew point of 0 °C
but for different hydrolysis times of 5, 10, 15, 20, and 30 min. Fall-hammer
testing was carried out with a fixed energy of 50 J immediately after
the target time was reached. Shock sensitivity only appeared after
the sample was hydrolyzed for 30 min with a weight loss of only 28%,
well before the peak weight loss (i.e., complete hydrolysis) was reached
and well before a white powder was formed. For all other samples with
shorter hydrolysis time, fumes were generated in the Fall hammer test.
The shorter hydrolysis time generated the largest amount of fumes,
as shown in Figure 3. Clearly, it is not necessary for HCDS to be completely hydrolyzed
to be shock-sensitive.

Figure 3 Comparison of shock impact results from different hydrolysis
times.
From left to right: hydrolysis times of 5, 10, 20, and 30 min.

In another series of tests, the
hydrolysis time was extended to
80–100 min using air with a dew point of 0 °C. LIE has
been known to be 15 J for 60 min hydrolysis under the same condition.
The longer hydrolysis resulted in an LIE decreasing to 8 J at 81 min
and then 6 J at 91 min. Note that 6 J was the lowest recorded LIE
in liquid HCDS hydrolysis. This is comparable to RDX explosives which
highlight the potential hazards of HCDS-hydrolyzed deposits.

Clearly, the shock sensitivity of HCDS liquid-hydrolyzed deposits
not only depends on the degree of hydrolysis but is also influenced
by the moisture and internal reactions once the hydrolysis is initiated.
Excess moisture from humid air may not necessarily help to increase
the shock sensitivity.

2.3 Vapor HCDS Hydrolysis in
Moist Air
Liquid HCDS hydrolyzed by moist air suffers the
disadvantage in that
the moisture primarily reacts only with the surface of the HCDS liquid.
Once it is hydrolyzed, it forms a crust which the water molecule must
diffuse through to react with the remaining HCDS liquid. Vapor-phase
hydrolysis offers no such mass-transfer limitation. An additional
advantage of vapor-phase hydrolysis is that the molar ratio of HCDS
and water can be controlled accurately. In the present work, tests
were carried out for water/HCDS molar ratios of 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and
12. The molar ratio of 6 is the stoichiometric ratio of HCDS that
theoretically will react all Si–Cl bonds with water into silanol
(Si–OH) 1  

In reality, the
silanol is unstable,
and in most cases, condensation may occur leading to linear or cyclic
siloxanes 2  

In each test, the reaction
was continued for a period of 1–2
h. It was apparent that the deposit forms rapidly on the tube wall
with the higher water/HCDS ratios providing the faster deposit formation.
The corresponding LIE for water/HCDS molar ratios of 1, 2, 3, 4, 6,
and 12 was determined to be 5, 10, 12.5, 12.5, 11, and 15 J, respectively.
Clearly, shock sensitivity increases with decreasing water/HCDS molar
ratio.

2.4 Characterization of Hydrolyzed Deposit
2.4.1 Structure Characterization of the Deposit
Extensive
infrared (IR) spectra analyses were performed for both
liquid and vapor HCDS-hydrolyzed deposits. In addition, the spectra
of Fall-hammer-ignited deposits were also collected. Figure 4 is an overlap of the typical
spectra of liquid and vapor-hydrolyzed deposits and their shock-ignited
deposits. The vapor-phase hydrolysis was done for a water/HCDS molar
ratio of 6, whereas the liquid-phase hydrolysis was done at 0 °C
dew point for 1 h. It should be noted that the attenuated total reflection
(ATR)–Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) scans only the sample
surface with a penetration depth of 0.5–2 μm. Repeat
analysis of the same sample showed a slight variation in peak locations
and intensity, which is attributed to the nonhomogeneity of the sample.
However, the shift in peak wavenumber variation was usually limited
to ±10 cm–1.

Figure 4 Overlap of typical spectra of liquid-
and vapor-hydrolyzed deposits
and their shock-ignited deposits.

The ignited deposit can be readily identified as a mixture
of silicon
dioxide (SiO2) and silicon sesquioxide (Si2O3) in which the 1045 and 800 cm–1 bands are
the stretching and bending modes of Si–O–Si structure
in SiO2, respectively, whereas 875 cm–1 is known for Si2O3.9,10 The
identification of a shock-sensitive deposit is, however, not trivial.
Comparison of the spectra for unignited and ignited deposit showed
two new bands at 3230 and 720 cm–1. The former is
attributed to the hydrogen-bonded silanol (Si–OH), and not
the absorbed water, because the absorbed water also showed at 1630
cm–1.11

For the
remaining two peaks, the 1000 cm–1 band
is still attributed to the asymmetric stretching mode of the Si–O–Si
structure in the deposit, originated from the condensation of two
silanol groups, and the 850 cm–1 peak is still attributed
to Si2O3 or Si–Si bond. The missing of
the bending counterpart of Si–O–Si structure at 800
cm–1 suggested that SiO2 is not present.
A notable feature of the two peaks is that their peak locations shifted
simultaneously, as shown in Figure 5 in which all measured spectra were collected and compiled.
The stretching mode of Si–O–Si has been known to shift
nearly linearly with the oxygen content from 978 cm–1 ([O] = 15 at. %) to 1048 cm–1 ([O] = 52 at. %).12 The observed upper and lower bonds for peak
1 in Figure 5 are 1047.6
and 960 cm–1, respectively, which is in agreement
with the above shifting range. In addition, the relative intensities
of 1000–850 cm–1 bands also increase with
the increasing wavenumber of 1000 cm–1 band. Thus,
it was concluded that the variation of 1000 cm–1 band location and intensity is an indication of the oxygen/silicon
ratio in the deposit. Furthermore, the 1000 cm–1 band location is also directly related to shock sensitivity, as
shown in Figure 6,
in which LIE is found to be roughly proportional to the increasing
wavenumber of Si–O–Si stretching mode, regardless of
whether the deposits were vapor or liquid HCDS-hydrolyzed.

Figure 5 Compilation
of shift in the peak location and the relative intensity
of peak 1 (∼1000 cm–1) to peak 2 (850 cm–1) for all hydrolyzed deposit.

Figure 6 Correlation between shock sensitivity, expressed by LIE, and the
peak location of Si–O–Si stretching mode.

The relative small band of 875 cm–1 in the ignited
deposit, as shown in Figure 4, suggests that nearly all of the Si–Si bonds in the
deposit were oxidized upon shock ignition. A comparison between the
spectra for a shock-sensitive HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit and a nonshock-sensitive
deposit from silicon tetrachloride hydrolysis of Chen et al.13 confirms the importance of the 850 cm–1 band and the Si–Si bonds in the appearance of shock sensitivity.

2.4.2 Morphology Studies
Figure 7 shows scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) of a liquid HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit. The sample has an uneven
surface with interlaced large and small spherical particles. The smallest
particle has a diameter slightly less than 1 μm. Figure 8 shows the SEM image of a vapor
HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit. The transparent flake sample has a smooth
surface which is composed of layers of spherical particles with roughly
the same size stacked together. The particles have an average diameter
of 1 μm. The morphology suggests that liquid HCDS hydrolysis
is nonuniform, possibly caused by simultaneous reactions from the
liquid surface and the vapor phase, where HCDS vapor reacts with moisture
and deposits the byproducts on the liquid surface. Vapor HCDS hydrolysis,
however, is homogeneous, depositing uniformly on the tube surface.
Chemical elements detected by energy-dispersive spectrometry (EDS)
indicated only silicon and oxygen with an oxygen atomic ratio of 53.85
and 23.57% for liquid and vapor hydrolysis, respectively. According
to Section 2.4.1, hydrolysis using different moisture contents leads to different
shifting of the Si–O–Si stretching model in the IR spectra,
which in turn implies different oxygen/silicon ratio of the hydrolyzed
deposit. The low oxygen/silicon atomic ratio measured by EDS in the
vapor-phase hydrolysis is consistent with the low molar ratio of water/HCDS
in the feed. It is also consistent with shifting of the Si–O–Si
stretching model in the IR spectra of vapor HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit.

Figure 7 SEM of
liquid HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit. Sample prepared from liquid
HCDS placed on a glass substrate and hydrolyzed in ambient air.

Figure 8 SEM of vapor HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit. Sample
prepared from water
to HCDS molar ratio of 1.

2.4.3 Heat of Combustion
The heat of
combustion was measured for deposits from liquid HCDS hydrolysis (ambient
air-hydrolyzed) and vapor HCDS hydrolysis (water to HCDS molar ratio
of 6). Despite the difference in morphology and O–Si ratio,
the measured heat of combustion was 4439 and 4550 kJ/kg for liquid
and vapor HCDS-hydrolyzed deposits, respectively. It is likely that
the combustion takes place mainly with the oxidation of Si–Si
bonds that are preserved during hydrolysis. It should be noted that
the measured heat of combustion is comparable to the explosion energy
of TNT, which confirms the potential hazards of the deposits.

2.4.4 Shock Ignition under Inert Gases
To uncover the mechanism
of shock ignition, it is necessary to know
if the ignition is initiated with free oxygen from the air or from
the deposit itself. The Fall hammer impact area was enclosed with
a clear plexiglass box that was continuously purged with nitrogen
or argon to reduce the oxygen concentration to less than 6%. Deposits
from liquid HCDS-hydrolyzed with air at a dew point of 0 °C for
200 min were tested. Upon impact, the deposit ignited producing sparks
but the overall fire ball was smaller than those in air, as shown
in Figure 9. The measured
IR spectra were nearly identical to other ignited deposits under air,
which suggests that all Si–Si bonds are oxidized by oxygen
from within the molecule. The oxygen will most likely come from the
silanols.

Figure 9 Typical result of shock ignition under argon.

The results suggest that shock ignition is a self-oxidation
rather
than a decomposition reaction or combustion with free oxygen as evident
by the flaming particles. The fire ball that was not present in the
inert environment suggests that there is a flammable gas/vapor release
upon ignition. The most likely source of the gas is hydrogen, as indicated
by Hengge, which is evolved from the hydrolyzed deposit with caustic
alkalis.8 In fact, the alkaline attack
has been used as a mean for determining Si–Si contents based
on the volume of the hydrogen gas evolved. The corresponding mechanism
is proposed as follows9 3   4  

Another mechanism was proposed by Schmeisser and Schwarzmann to
generate −Si–H from silanols without the presence of
water14 5  

It is said that this rearrangement may proceed explosively under
excessive temperature rise. However, this mechanism did not include
the evolution of hydrogen, which is also crucial in shock ignition.

Kudo et al. proposed a model molecule and a mechanism for intramolecular
oxidation which includes oxidation of a Si–Si bond and formation
of a H2 molecule.6 The model
molecule consists of four Si–Si bonds, seven Si–O–Si
bonds, and one open ring in a partial hexahedral cage. Four Si–Si
bonds are schematically in a parallel configuration. Three H atoms
and seven OH groups are attached to eight Si atoms on each corner
of the hexahedron. The first step starting from a model molecule includes
1,2-transfer of OH group and dissociation of Si–Si bond. Elimination
of a H2 molecule occurs in the second step. The third and
the last step consists of 1,2-transfer of H atom and closure of the
open ring. The mechanism can be summarized as 6  

Again, this
mechanism suffers from the fact that the silicon–hydrogen
bonds has a known Si–H band at 2260 cm–1 which
is missing from the recorded IR spectra in all of our HCDS-hydrolyzed
deposits.15 A similar mechanism for hydrolyzed
deposit from a mixture of HCDS and pentachlorodisilane (HSi2Cl5) has also been proposed.16 However, the model molecule also contains silicon hydride bonds.
Clearly, the Si–OH silanol bonds play a crucial role alone
in the shock ignition and evolution of hydrogen gas from of HCDS-hydrolyzed
deposits.

2.4.5 Effect of Heating on
Shock Sensitivity
To further resolve the role of silanol
functional groups in shock
sensitivity, direct heating was performed for known shock-sensitive
deposits. The gases evolved from heating silicon sesquioxide gel prepared
from HCDS hydrolysis have been studied by Belot et al.9 The gases evolved were mainly water until about 350 °C
and hydrogen when heated above 200 °C. Between 200 and 350 °C,
both water and hydrogen evolved simultaneously. The loss of water
is attributed to condensation of silanols. In the present work, vapor
HCDS-hydrolyzed deposits from a water/HCDS ratio of 12 were heated
at temperatures from 100 to 400 °C for the same duration of 10
min. The results are shown in Figure 10.

Figure 10 FTIR spectra for heated hydrolyzed deposit.

An interesting finding was that heating at 100
°C for 10 min
actually reduces the LIE to 5 J from the original 15 J, as noted in Section 2.3. Its IR spectrum
is nearly identical to the spectrum of unheated deposit. It is likely
that absorbed water is removed because of heating and hence reduces
its LIE. Heating at 200 °C for 10 min, the deposit was nonshock-sensitive.
The IR spectrum showed a diminished and shifted Si–OH band
near 3300 cm–1. Clearly, the condensation from two
neighboring silanols takes place forming a cyclic Si–O–Si
structure with Si–Si bond retained according to Innocenzi11 7  

Heating at 300 °C
and above showed similar spectra except
that the silanol band disappeared completely. Innocenzi also suggested
that an isolated silanol will condense with more difficulty with other
silanols in comparison with hydrogen bonded neighboring silanols.11 Also, an isolated silanol bond has a sharp,
narrow peak at 3740 cm–1 which is not observed in
all of the IR spectra in the present work. This result implies that
all of the silanols that contribute to shock ignition are paired hydrogen-bonded
neighboring silanols.

It should be noted that silanol (Si–OH)
stretching vibrations
also appear at 950 cm–1 in addition to the 3230
cm–1 band.17 Although
such a distinct peak was not observed in the present work, the Si–O–Si
band in the vapor HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit in Figure 4 did show an asymmetric shape with a peak
at 969 cm–1 and may include the contribution from
the silanol band. Heating to 200 °C for 10 min also gave shifted,
asymmetric Si–O–Si band, as shown in Figure 10, which is similar to the
vapor HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit, although the 3300 cm–1 band was already diminished. Thus, it is recommended that the 3300
cm–1 band be used as the primary indicator for the
presence of silanol groups in a hydrolyzed deposit.

2.4.6 Proposed Mechanism of Shock Sensitivity
On the basis
of the above results, the following mechanism of shock
sensitivity is proposed. The intramolecular oxidation of paired silanols
attached on Si–Si bonds is initiated by shock, followed by
the rearrangement and elimination of hydrogen gas and forming a networked
silicon oxide 8  

The above mechanism
is a direct extension
of Schmeisser and Schwarzmann14 to generate
−Si–H from silanols except that paired silanols are
needed and a networked silicon oxide is formed. The above simplified
mechanism explains all of the above studies on structure/shock interaction.
Further work is still necessary to better characterize the exact structure
of HCDS-hydrolyzed deposit.

Another implication from the above
studies is that shock sensitivity
of the deposit can be simply controlled by heating at elevated temperature
to condense the silanol groups, according to Innocenzi.11 The remaining deposit is still flammable but
not shock-sensitive and can be handled safely.

2.4.7 Effects of Excess Water
Although
heating to condense the silanol groups of the hydrolyzed deposit can
provide a simple means for eliminating shock sensitivity, it may not
be practical to apply in real cases where the deposit is formed in
an exhaust duct or liquid spills on the open ground. Results from Section 2.4.5 demonstrated
that heating to remove absorbed water may reduce the LIE, whereas Section 2.2.2 demonstrated
that hydrolysis with excess moisture in the air may increase the LIE.
Thus, it is likely that excess water alone may provide a simple method
to suppress the shock sensitivity of the hydrolyzed deposit. A series
of tests were carried out to find the effects of excess water on shock
sensitivity.

For simplicity, 50 J of impact energy is used as
the criterion for shock sensitivity. A deposit from liquid HCDS hydrolyzed
at ambient air was collected and dried in an oven at 100 °C for
1 h to remove all water absorbed on the deposit. Excess liquid water
was then added to the dried deposit, placed in dry glovebox (dew point
−15 °C) for drying until the desired deposit/excess water
ratio is achieved. The wet deposit was then placed in collar/roller
and shock impact tested.

The deposits with excess water weight
ratios of 5:1, 3:1, 2:1,
and 1:1 were tested. Only the ratio of 1:1 resulted in no ignition
even with a repeated test, whereas the remaining ratios resulted in
ignition. Thus, the shock sensitivity of the deposit can be suppressed
by simply adding liquid water to 50 wt % and higher. Such a simple
result is consistent with a wet RDX explosive (RDX/water = 74/26)
that has a higher LIE of 30 J in comparison with the LIE of 5 J of
dried RDX.18 It may also explain the variations
in shock sensitivity from previous literature.2,5,7 For example, hydrolysis products prepared
by directly adding HCDS to water were not shock-sensitive simply because
of excessive water.7 Whereas a dried deposit
from hydrolysis at a low temperature of approximately 10 °C or
lower had an increased sensitivity owing to no excess water present.2 The later result is also consistent with the
results in Section 2.2.2, where hydrolysis at a lower dew point gave a lower LIE.

To further verify the shock sensitivity of liquid HCDS hydrolyzed
in water, similar tests were carried out by quickly adding 3 mL of
HCDS liquid into a water bath using a plastic pipette. A white, spongy
solid was formed instantly in water as the HCDS was injected. It was
not a violent reaction. The wet solid was collected, oven dried, and
tested for shock sensitivity. With 100 °C oven drying for 18
min, there is no ignition with a 50 J impact. With a 100 °C oven
drying for 60 min, ignition was observed with a 50 J impact. The results
confirm again that all HCDS hydrolyzed can be shock-sensitive as long
as all of the excess water is removed.

3 Conclusions
In this work, the mechanism of shock sensitivity
from HCDS-hydrolyzed
deposits has been determined through extensive hydrolysis tests and
IR studies. The hydrolysis processes include vapor HCDS hydrolysis
in moist air and liquid HCDS hydrolysis in moist air. A BAM Fall hammer
test apparatus was used to characterize the shock sensitivity of the
hydrolyzed deposits. A simplified mechanism of shock sensitivity is
proposed. Finally, recommendations are given for controlling the shock
sensitivity of the hydrolyzed deposits by heating or adding excess
water.

4 Experimental Setups
4.1 Determination
of Shock Sensitivity
Shock sensitivity leading to an explosion
is the major hazard of
a hydrolyzed HCDS deposit. As the deposit may be formed in a process
pump, process foreline, or exhaust line, any routine maintenance activities
involving mechanical cleaning may trigger a shock reaction, causing
an energetic event such as fire or explosion. It is important to properly
characterize the mechanical energy from shock impact. A BAM Fall hammer
impact test apparatus from Reichel & Partner GmbH, Germany, which
meets the UN Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods test
requirements, was used for determining the shock sensitivity of the
deposits formed.18 The sample of the substance
under test is enclosed in an impact device consisting of two coaxial
steel rollers, one above the other in a hollow cylindrical steel guide
collar. Rollers and collars are made of hardened, polished steel and
are not recycled after the impact. Maximum sample volume is 40 μL.
It was found that a sample mass less than 10 mg may produce false
results as the sample is insufficient to cover the roller surface
completely. Thus, a sample mass of 17 ± 1 mg was used in most
of the tests whenever sufficient sample was available.

The results
of the test are based on an explosion sound, flame, or color change
of the sample. Distinction is made between “no reaction”,
“decomposition” (without flame or explosion) recognizable
by change of color or odor, and “explosion” (with weak
to strong flame). The impact energy is determined from the mass of
the drop weight and the height, for example, 1 kg × 0.5 m ×
10 m/s2 = 5 J. The UN Recommendations define LIE as the
impact energy when at least 1 in the 6 test samples results in an
explosion.18 A substance with an LIE of
2 J or less is said to be too dangerous to transport. RDX, a typical
explosive, has an LIE of 5 J. Japanese Standard JIS K 4810 classifies
the sensitivity of explosives into eight classes with class 1 being
<2.5 J and class 8 being >25 J.19 In
the present work, 50 J was used as the maximum impact energy above
which the sample was classified as nonshock-sensitive. High-speed
video camera with a rate of 5000 frames/s was used to record the reaction
from the impact.

4.2 Setup of HCDS Hydrolysis
HCDS has
six Si–Cl bonds and thus offers the largest possibility of
polysiloxanes network among other disilanes and monosilanes. It is
expected that the process of hydrolysis strongly affects the rate
of hydrolysis as well as the structure of the hydrolyzed products.
Thus, careful control of the hydrolysis process is crucial for a reproducible
result. HCDS is a liquid under ambient conditions. The HCDS hydrolysis
can take place in four different processes:HCDS vapor hydrolyzing with water vapor (moisture)

HCDS liquid hydrolyzing with liquid water

HCDS liquid hydrolyzing with water vapor
(moisture)

HCDS vapor hydrolyzing with
liquid water.



It is desired to study
liquid HCDS hydrolyzed by moisture
in air to simulate a liquid-spill scenario. The HCDS is, however,
utilized in vapor form in the semiconductor manufacturing process.
Thus, vapor HCDS hydrolysis in moist air is also important in simulating
HCDS hydrolysis in a vapor exhaust line. These two hydrolysis processes
will be the focus of this study.

4.2.1 Setup of Liquid HCDS
Hydrolysis in Moist
Air
HCDS is strongly moisture-sensitive; therefore, it is
critical to control the environment to have a reproducible result.
An analytical balance AUX220 from Shimadzu was used to record the
weight loss during hydrolysis while controlling the environment. To
avoid sample transfer of a shock-sensitive material, the roller/collar
combination was used directly as the sample container. The HCDS liquid
was filled into a lower roller/collar combination in a dry glovebox
and was immediately placed onto the weighing pan. A small plexiglass
chamber was placed inside a balance over the weighing pan to create
better air flow and moisture control over the sample. Moisture-controlled
air was prepared by mixing humid air and dry air (zero grade with
a dew point less than −55 °C). This air mixture was directed
upward in the balance through a tube ring with holes surrounding the
pan. The balance enclosure acted as a secondary containment chamber,
minimizing the interference from ambient air. When a desired hydrolysis
time was reached, the top roller was placed on top of the sample and
brought immediately to the Fall hammer apparatus. Tests were carried
out for air with a dew point between −5 and 15 °C, and
hydrolysis times between 5 min and 2 h.

4.2.2 Setup
of Vapor HCDS Hydrolysis in Moist
Air
The vapor pressure of HCDS is low; therefore, it is necessary
to use a carrier gas to entrain the vapor. A mass-flow-controlled
nitrogen stream is bubbled though the HCDS liquid to saturate it with
HCDS vapor. This stream is flowed downward cocurrently with a controlled
stream of moist air in a vertical tube with an internal diameter of
4.3 mm and 1.5 m long. A clear, transparent deposit (vs the white
opaque powder in liquid phase hydrolysis) formed on tube wall was
collected by tapping the tube wall at the bottom in a glass flask.
Precise control of HCDS to water molar ratio was achieved by controlling
the nitrogen flow rate, air flow rate, and moisture concentration
in air. Tests were carried out for water/HCDS molar ratio = 1–12.

4.3 Characterization
To further characterize
the hydrolyzed deposit, chemical functional groups, morphology, and
heat of combustion were analyzed for selected samples. Chemical functional
groups were determined by a Smiths IdentifyIR which is a compact ATR–FTIR
spectrometer with a scan range of 650–4000 cm–1. The spectrometer was placed directly inside a glovebox for sample
preparation and analysis under controlled environment. An FEI Quanta
200 scanning electron microscope with EDS was used for morphology
and chemical composition analyses. The heat of combustion was measured
by an oxygen bomb calorimeter from Parr Inc., model 6100.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by Air
Liquide Advanced Materials,
USA. H.-Y.T. also thanks the support from the Ministry of Science
and Technology, Taiwan, through contract no. MOST 107-2637-E-992-006.
All supports are gratefully acknowledged.
==== Refs
References
Wilson M.  Explosion and
Fire at Yokkaichi Plant—Explanation, consequences and action
items from the incident that had five fatalities .
In Silicon for the Chemical and Solar Industry XIII ; Nygård L. , Pachaly B. , Page I. G. , Rong H. , Tangstad M. , Tveit H.  , Eds.; NTNU : Kristiansand, Norway , 2016 ; pp 179 –188 .
Mitsubishi Materials Corporatio  . Investigative Report by the Accident
Investigation Committee for the Explosion & Fire Accident occurred
in the High-Purity Polycrystalline Silicon Manufacturing Facility
at Yokkaichi Plant of Mitsubishi Materials Corporation . http://www.mmc.co.jp/corporate/en/news/2014/news20140612.html (accessed June 12, 2014 ).
Sprung M.  Recent progress
in silicone chemistry. I. Hydrolysis of reactive silane intermediates . Fortschritte Der Hochpolymeren-Forschung ; Springer , 1961 ; pp 442 –464 .
Jarek R. L. ; Thornberg S. M. 
Hazards
of dichlorosilane exhaust deposits from the
high-temperature oxide process as determined by FT-ICR mass spectrometry . IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf. 
2001 , 14 , 20 –25 . 10.1109/66.909651 .
Harder P. J. ; Tselepis A. J.  Characterization
of Trichlorosilane Direct Process Residue . In Organosilicon Chemistry VI ; Auner N. , Weis J.  , Eds.; WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH
& Co. KGaA : Weinheim , 2005 ; pp 126 –130 .
Kudo T. ; Hanaue Y. ; Komada N.  Quantum
chemical
approach toward the identification of hydrolyzed chlorosilane oligomer . In Silicon for the Chemical and Solar Industry XIII ; Nygård L. , Pachaly B. , Page I. G. , Rong H. , Tangstad M. , Tveit H.  , Eds.; NTNU : Kristiansand, Norway , 2016 ; pp 189 –208 .
Zhou X. ; Wanous M. A. ; Wang X. ; Eldred D. V. ; Sanders T. L. 
Study on
the Shock Sensitivity of the Hydrolysis Products of Hexachlorodisilane . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2018 , 57 , 10354 –10364 . 10.1021/acs.iecr.8b01241 .
Hengge E.  Properties and
preparations of Si-Si linkages . Silicon Chemistry
II ; Springer , 1974 ; pp 1 –127 .
Belot V. ; Corriu R. J. P. ; Leclercq D. ; Lefèvre P. ; Mutin P. H. ; Vioux A. ; Flank A. M. 
Sol-gel route to
silicon suboxides. Preparation and characterization of silicon sesquioxide . J. Non-Cryst. Solids 
1991 , 127 , 207 –214 . 10.1016/0022-3093(91)90144-u .
Ritter E. 
Zur Kenntnis
der SiO- und Si 2 O 3 -Phase in Dünnen Schichten . Opt. Acta: Int. J. Optic. 
1962 , 9 , 197 –202 . 10.1080/713826414 .
Innocenzi P. 
Infrared spectroscopy
of sol-gel derived silica-based films: a spectra-microstructure overview . J. Non-Cryst. Solids 
2003 , 316 , 309 –319 . 10.1016/s0022-3093(02)01637-x .
Zacharias M. ; Dlmova-malinovska D. ; Stutzmann M. 
Properties of hydrogenated amorphous
silicon suboxide alloys with visible room-temperature photoluminescence . Phil. Mag. B 
1996 , 73 , 799 –816 . 10.1080/13642819608239154 .
Chen X. ; Jiang J. ; Yan F. ; Tian S. ; Li K. 
A novel low
temperature vapor phase hydrolysis method for the production of nano-structured
silica materials using silicon tetrachloride . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 8703 –8710 . 10.1039/c3ra47018k .
Schmeisser M. ; Schwarzmann M. 
Das Siliciuin-dibromid
[SiBr2]x und seine Derivate . Z. Naturforsch.
B Chem. Sci. 
1956 , 11 , 278 –282 . 10.1515/znb-1956-0509 .
Pauthe M. ; Phalippou J. ; Corriu R. ; Leclercq D. ; Vioux A. 
Silica xerogels
containing a functional group at silicon . J.
Non-Cryst. Solids 
1989 , 113 , 21 –30 . 10.1016/0022-3093(89)90313-x .
Katz M. ; Kroke E. ; Schley M. ; Schaaff F.  Hazardousness
of Products Formed
by the Hydrolysis of Chlorosilanes . Poster
Presentation, 8th European Silicon Days, Poznań, Poland, August
28–31 , 2016 .
El
Rassy H. ; Pierre A. C. 
NMR and IR spectroscopy of silica
aerogels with different hydrophobic characteristics . J. Non-Cryst. Solids 
2005 , 351 , 1603 –1610 . 10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2005.03.048 .
United
Nations, UN Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous
Goods—Manual of Tests and Criteria , 6 th ed., 2015 .
Japan Standard Associations,
JIS K 4810:2003: Testing Methods of
Explosives , Tokyo, Japan , 2003 .

