
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145811910.1021/acsomega.8b02093ArticleElucidating the Crystallite Size Dependence of the
Thermochromic Properties of Nanocomposite VO2 Thin Films Fleer Nathan
A. †‡#Pelcher Kate E. †‡#Nieto Kelly †‡Braham Erick J. †‡Zou Jian §Horrocks Gregory A. †‡Naoi Yuki ∥Depner Sean W. ⊥Schultz Brian J. ⊥Amano Jun ∥Sellers Diane G. *†‡Banerjee Sarbajit *†‡† Department
of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77842-3012, United States‡ Department
of Materials Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843-3003, United States§ School
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Southwest
University, Bayi Road, Beibei Qu, Chongqing Shi 400716, China∥ Konica
Minolta Laboratory USA, 2855 Campus Drive, Suite 100, San Mateo, California 94403, United States⊥ Dimien
LLC, 1576 Sweet Home
Road, Suite 231, Amherst, New York 14228, United
States* E-mail: dsellers@tamu.edu (D.G.S.).* E-mail: banerjee@chem.tamu.edu (S.B.).29 10 2018 31 10 2018 3 10 14280 14293 18 08 2018 16 10 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Fenestration
elements that enable spectrally selective dynamic
modulation of the near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum
are of great interest as a means of decreasing the energy consumption
of buildings by adjusting solar heat gain in response to external
temperature. The binary vanadium oxide VO2 exhibits a near-room-temperature
insulator–metal electronic transition accompanied by a dramatic
modulation of the near-infrared transmittance. The low-temperature
insulating phase is infrared transparent but blocks infrared transmission
upon metallization. There is considerable interest in harnessing the
thermochromic modulation afforded by VO2 in nanocomposite
thin films. However, to prepare a viable thermochromic film, the visible-light
transmittance must be maintained as high as possible while maximizing
thermochromic modulation in the near-infrared region of the electromagnetic
spectrum, which necessitates the development of high-crystalline-quality
VO2 nanocrystals of the optimal particle size embedded
within the appropriate host matrix and refractive index matched to
the host medium. Here, we demonstrate the preparation of acrylate-based
nanocomposite thin films with varying sizes of embedded VO2 nanoparticles. The observed strong size dependence of visible-light
transmittance and near-infrared modulation is explicable on the basis
of optical simulations. In this article, we elucidate multiple scattering
and absorption mechanisms, including Mie scattering, temperature-/phase-variant
refractive-index mismatch between VO2 nanocrystals and
the encapsulating matrix, and the appearance of a surface plasmon
resonance using temperature-variant absorptance and diffuse transmittance
spectroscopy measurements performed as a function of particle loading
for the different sizes of VO2 nanocrystals. Nanocrystals
with dimensions of 44 ± 30 nm show up to >32% near-infrared
energy
modulation across the near-infrared region of the electromagnetic
spectrum while maintaining high visible-light transmission. The results
presented here, providing mechanistic elucidation of the size dependence
of the different scattering mechanisms, underscore the importance
of nanocrystallite dimensions, refractive-index matching, and individualized
dispersion of particles within the host matrix for the preparation
of viable thermochromic thin films mitigating Mie scattering and differential
refractive-index scattering.

document-id-old-9ao8b02093document-id-new-14ao-2018-020934ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Buildings account for
an inordinately large amount of energy consumption
across the planet and are often static structures that remain unchanging
in the face of changing seasons and diurnal temperature variations.1 A recent report from the United Nations estimates
that 30–40% of primary energy usage across the world occurs
within buildings.1 In the United States,
the Department of Energy estimates that 41% of the total energy consumption
can be attributed to buildings.2,3 Much of the energy consumed
within buildings goes toward space cooling, space heating, lighting,
and ventilation. Incorporating responsive elements that can adapt
to external stimuli (e.g., external temperature and humidity) within
structural elements has been proposed as a potential means of reducing
the energy footprint of buildings.4,5 Fenestration
elements, such as windows, doors, and skylights, play an important
role in determining the solar heat gain of a building. Such elements
must balance the competing needs of enabling interiors to be lighted
using natural daylight while modulating solar heat gain to acceptable
levels. Consequently, there is great interest in the development of
spectrally selective thin films that allow for transmission of visible
light while enabling dynamical modulation of infrared transmittance
in response to the external temperature.4−10 Such thin films are expected to bring about substantial energy savings
by blocking infrared light during periods of high ambient temperature
(thereby reducing the need for space cooling) but permitting transmittance
of infrared light during periods of low ambient temperature when the
solar heat gain can be harnessed to reduce heating costs. Nearly 45%
of the total solar energy in the range between 400 and 2500 nm corresponds
to near-infrared radiation (780–2500 nm); consequently, a reduction
in the solar flux in the near-infrared region would drastically reduce
the transmitted energy associated with solar heat gain.11

Dynamically tunable glazing requires stimuli-responsive
modulation
of optical transmittance, which can be achieved variously by means
of thermotropic or lyotropic phase transitions in polymers or hydrogels,
electric-field-induced ion intercalation in redox-active host materials,
reversible amorphous-to-crystalline transitions in phase-change materials,
electric-field-induced change of polarization of liquid crystals,
or electronic solid–solid phase transitions.5,10,12−16 Thermochromic transitions are particularly important
as a facile means of developing dynamically switchable glazing that
does not require external voltage control.17 Compounds that exhibit pronounced modulations of optical transmittance
as a result of electronic transitions wherein the intrinsic electronic
conductivity (carrier concentration and/or mobility) is dramatically
altered are particularly attractive.14,18−20 However, there exists only a relatively sparse set of compounds
characterized by large thermally induced modulations of electrical
conductance; such electronic phase transitions are underpinned typically
by either electron correlation or electron–phonon coupling.14,18,19,21−24 The binary vanadium dioxide (VO2) is notable in having
an electronic phase transition that occurs in close proximity to room
temperature.19,25 In the bulk, the metal–insulator
transition of VO2 is observed at ca. 67 °C but can
be depressed through size control or the incorporation of substitutional/interstitial
dopants.17,26−32 The underlying origin of the transition remains hotly contested
given that the transition has both electronic (Mott–Hubbard)
and structural (Peierls’) attributes.19,28,33−35 Regardless of the fundamental
origin of the transition, the dramatic modulation of optical transmittance
and electrical conductivity observed at the phase transition makes
VO2 a useful material for practical applications.

For deployment of VO2 within thermochromic thin films,
wherein it can be integrated within various parts of the building
envelope,9,10,36 three compelling
requirements must be addressed: (a) the luminous transmittance (a
quantitative measure of light in the region visible to the human eye)
must be maintained as high as possible while maximizing thermochromic
modulation in the near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum;
this requires mitigation of various light scattering mechanisms (vide
infra); (b) the thin film must be thermally cyclable without strain-induced
cracking; the substantial lattice strain accompanying the structural
phase transformation renders the deployment of continuous thin films
rather difficult and instead nanostructures embedded within suitable
matrices are better able to accommodate such strain;37−39 (c) the nanocrystallites need to be well dispersed within the host
matrix to prevent light scattering and to ensure retention of mechanical
integrity of the film across multiple thermal cycles. It is thus expected
that a viable thermochromic thin film will comprise high-crystalline-quality
VO2 nanocrystals of the optimal particle size embedded
within the appropriate host matrix.40−43 Some notable efforts in the literature,
such as by Chen et al., have resulted in ΔTsol, the modulation in transmittance from 400 to 2500
nm, reaching as high as 19.1% when VO2 is encapsulated
in ZnO.44 Values of Tlum, luminous transmittance in the 400–780 nm range,
as high as 62.1% have been demonstrated by Zhang et al.45 through grinding of VO2 particles.
However, fundamental mechanistic understanding of the influence of
different scattering mechanisms on the thermochromic performance of
nanocomposite films remains to be elucidated.

Previous work
has shown that high-crystalline-quality VO2 nanocrystals
are accessible through low-temperature hydrothermal
methods.26,27,46,47 Such methods provide substantial control over particle
size and dopant incorporation; the obtained nanostructures can be
extensively thermally cycled without cracking. In past work, we have
incorporated hydrothermally grown VO2 nanowires within
an amorphous silica matrix utilizing a modified Stöber method.48 The silica matrix permits adhesion to glass
substrates and provides protection against oxidation. VO2 particles have further been used in other studies to prepare nanocomposite
thin films using polymer-assisted deposition and through mixing with
an acrylic resin.49,50 However, the first and third
of the problems noted above, optimal particle size and good dispersion,
remain to be adequately resolved. Here, we contrast the visible-light
transmittance and infrared modulation obtained for different particle
sizes of VO2 embedded within a commercially available methacrylic
acid/ethyl acrylate (MAA/EA) copolymer, Acrysol ASE-60. The rheology
of this matrix enables the use of draw-down coating for the preparation
of nanocomposite VO2 thin films. Films formulated with
four different sizes of VO2 nanocrystals at various mass
loadings have been examined; a detailed evaluation of light scattering
mechanisms occurring within the nanocomposite thin films underscores
that a combination of both nanometer-sized dimensions and excellent
dispersion at the crystallite level (without agglomeration as particles)
is imperative to obtain the desired high degrees of visible-light
transmittance and thermochromic modulation.

Results and Discussion
The use of nanocrystals instead of continuous thin films provides
several key advantages. First, as noted above, strain-induced delamination
and cracking of continuous thin films resulting from the lattice mismatch
at the monoclinic–tetragonal structural phase transition can
be mitigated.16,26 Second, nanocrystals embedded
within flexible polymeric thin films serve as retrofittable solutions,
providing a means of readily modifying existing solar control films,
and thus can be deployed onto existing buildings without requiring
replacement of insulating glass units in their entirety. Finally,
nanocrystals can be prepared in a highly crystalline form by scalable
solution-phase methods and do not require high-vacuum deposition chambers
necessary for physical vapor deposition of VO2.46 However, the utilization of nanocrystals within
optical quality thin films brings its own set of challenges associated
with determining the optimal crystallite size and ensuring good dispersion
of VO2 nanocrystals within matrices so as to mitigate light
scattering arising from the agglomeration of crystallites.

Li
et al. have suggested a pronounced size dependence for the optical
transmittance and near-infrared modulation of VO2 nanocrystals
embedded within a dielectric matrix.51 These
authors have found that nanocomposite films constituted by dispersing
spherical- and elliptical-shaped VO2 nanocrystals present
several advantages over continuous thin films of VO2. First,
the spectral transmittance of the insulating phase of VO2 is predicted to be much higher for films with VO2 nanocrystals
dispersed within a matrix as compared to that of continuous thin films.
In addition, the near-infrared modulation for the particulate thin
films was further found to be substantially greater than that of the
continuous thin films. To elucidate the crystallite size dependence
of the optical properties, simulations have been performed using effective
medium approximation (EMA) and finite element analysis + geometrical
optics (FEA + GO) models (Figure 1). The simple EMA approach assumes that the nanoparticle
has a single refractive index (n) and extinction
ratio (k) and assumes that the particles are homogeneously
distributed throughout a low-n medium (Figure 1A). The simulated spectrum
(Figure 1B) predicts
a dramatic modulation at a maximum of ca. 40% in the near-IR region
of the electromagnetic spectrum when using the optical constants of
bulk VO2 in the monoclinic (M1) and tetragonal phases.51,52 The simulation assumes a constant n of ca. 1.5
for the host matrix, which is typical of polymeric media.53,54 The FEA + GO simulations allow for a more detailed elucidation of
particle-size-dependent optical properties. Spectra have been simulated
for a composite with a fill factor of 3.7 wt % of spherical VO2 nanoparticles of varying diameters again assuming a temperature-independent n of 1.5 for the polymeric media and the bulk optical constants
for the insulating and metallic phases.53,54 As the diameter
increases from 20 to 100 nm, the near-infrared modulation is observed
to remain constant at ca. 40% (Figure 1C). However, the maximum visible-light transmittance
(at 680 nm) decreases from 80 to 68% for the low-temperature phase.
When considering a composite of 100 nm long VO2 nanowires
with varying diameters, the 50 and 100 nm diameter nanowires show
a maximum modulation of ca. 45% in the near-infrared region of the
electromagnetic spectrum, whereas the 20 nm nanowires are predicted
to exhibit a maximum modulation of ca. 40% (Figure 1D). Although the NIR modulation is slightly
diminished for the 20 nm diameter nanowires, they retain superior
visible-light transmittance. The substantial diminution in visible-light
transmittance with increasing particle size is derived from the scattering
background contributed by larger particles. Agglomeration of particles
will to first order mimic the effects of having larger particles.
A reduction in n from 3.0 to 2.2 at 700 nm when transitioning
from an insulator (M1) to metal (R) is also responsible for an increase
in visible transmission in the metal phase, but this change is constant
between films and has little impact on variations in film performance.55,56 These simulations indicate that the viability of utilizing VO2 nanocrystals for effective thermochromic modulation will
depend sensitively on their dimensions and extent of dispersion within
the host matrix.

Figure 1 (A) Schematic depiction of configuration used to model
optical
spectra of nanocomposite thin films comprising VO2 nanocrystals
embedded within a 5 μm thick polymer film cast onto a 1 mm thick
glass substrate. Effective medium approximation (EMA) and FEA + GO
methods are used to model the optical response for insulating and
metallic phases of VO2. I1 is
the incident radiation, I2 is the transmitted
intensity at the first plane, and I4 is
the reflected intensity at the first (coated) surface. I3 and I5 are the transmitted
and reflected intensities at the second
(uncoated) glass surface, respectively. Bulk optical constants for
the insulating and metallic phases of VO2 are used as described
in the text. A fill factor of 3.7 wt % is assumed for all films. A
temperature-invariant refractive index of 1.5 is assumed for the host
polymeric matrix.53 (B) Transmittance spectra
simulated on the basis of the effective medium approximation model
for spherical nanoparticles of insulating and metallic VO2. (C) Transmittance spectra simulated based on the FEA + GO approach
for a nanocomposite thin film with spherical VO2 nanoparticles
of varying diameters (as labeled in the plot) in the insulating and
metallic phase. (D) Transmittance spectra simulated on the basis of
the FEA + GO approach for a nanocomposite thin film with 100 nm length
VO2 nanowires of varying diameters (as labeled in the plot)
in the insulating and metallic phase.

To experimentally study the effects of particle size on the
optical
spectra of the nanocomposite films, VO2 nanocrystals have
been synthesized using different hydrothermal methods, as detailed
in the experimental section.26,57,58 Four different particle sizes are examined here: sample I consists
of nanowires prepared by the hydrothermal reduction of V2O5 by 2-propanol, spanning 210 ± 70 nm in diameter
and ranging tens of microns in length, as shown in Figure 2A.46 The use of acetone as a reducing agent yields nanowires that again
span several micrometers in length but with reduced diameters of 180
± 70 nm (Figure 2B). These samples are referred to as sample A. To reduce the longitudinal
dimensions, the nanowires of sample I have been dry-milled with methacrylate
polymer beads to obtain sample I-BM (Figure 2C). Ball-milling greatly diminishes the particle
width to 110 ± 90 nm, but the nanocrystals are observed to be
highly agglomerated and some amorphization of the crystallites is
discernible. Histograms of size distributions obtained from statistical
analysis of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images have been
documented in our previous work.29 Finally,
to achieve VO2 nanospheres with an approximate size distribution
of 44 ± 30 nm, VO(OH)2 is first precipitated using
sol–gel techniques, followed by hydrothermal crystallization
(referred to as sample NS, Figure 2D).57,58 The synthesis of VO2 NS by hydrothermal methods from reduction of pentavalent vanadium
precursors has been reported in a previous work by Zhou, Jin, and
co-workers.58 Size heating- and cooling-phase
transitions for each of these samples is shown in Figure S1 (Supporting Information). Heating transition temperatures
for I, A, and I-BM samples are between 66 and 70 °C, comparable
to those of bulk VO2, whereas the NS sample transitions
slightly lower at 57 °C likely due to surface effects, as delineated
in previous works.46,59,60 Scaling to finite size diminishes the transition temperature of
both the heating and cooling transitions of VO2; surface-nucleation
mechanisms allow for the monoclinic → tetragonal transformation
to be initiated at lower temperatures upon heating; in contrast, the
cooling transition is mediated by point defects and is suppressed
as a result of the lower density of nucleation sites.60 Nucleation restrictions for smaller particle volumes (smaller
nanocrystals allow for more facile migration of oxygen vacancies to
surfaces, thereby diminishing the density of putative nucleation sites)
bring about an increase in hysteresis, as observed in Figure S1.58−61 Notably, the large hysteresis resulting from a reduced
concentration of nucleation sites renders crystalline particles with
much smaller dimensions of limited practical utility for thermochromic
applications. Figures S2 and S3 (Supporting
Information) exhibit powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and selected
area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns acquired for the nanoparticles
used in this study, respectively, confirming that they crystallize
in the monoclinic M1 phase.46,62 The SAED patterns attest
to the single-crystalline nature of the VO2 nanowires (Figure S3); a combination of discrete diffraction
spots and diffuse rings are observed for the NS samples as a result
of their agglomeration within polycrystalline agglomerates (Figure S3D). Extensive Raman spectroscopy characterization
of hydrothermally prepared VO2 nanowires has been published
in our previous work.46 The hydrothermal
methods are documented to yield high-crystalline quality VO2 nanocrystals exhibiting abrupt 4 orders of magnitude changes in
conductance in single-nanowire electrical transport measurements.46 The four samples examined here provide an effective
means for elucidating particle size effects on visible-light transmittance
and near-infrared modulation of nanocomposite thin films. Notably,
the focus of this article is the elucidation of crystallite size effects
on thermochromic performance for well-characterized nanostructures
with varying dimensions with a particular emphasis on examination
of the size dependence of light scattering mechanisms; consequently,
parameters pertaining to the encapsulating matrix (dielectric shell
thickness, surface functionalization of shells, and choice of polymeric
matrix, as will be discussed below) have been held constant while
varying particle size. All of these parameters can undoubtedly be
further improved to enhance functional performance.43

Figure 2 TEM images of VO2 nanocrystals grown via the following:
(A) hydrothermal reduction of V2O5 by 2-propanol
(sample I), (B) hydrothermal reduction of V2O5 by acetone (sample A), (C) hydrothermal reduction of V2O5 by 2-propanol followed by dry-milling with methacrylate
polymer beads (sample I-BM), and (D) precipitation of VO(OH)2 followed by hydrothermal crystallization (sample NS). TEM images
of VO2 nanocrystals coated with an amorphous SiO2 shell for (E) sample I and (F) sample NS.

Our previous work has illustrated the importance of protecting
the VO2 nanocrystals from oxidative degradation by deposition
of amorphous silica shells.48 The silica
shells do not alter the magnitude or phase transition temperature
but passivate the surfaces of VO2, endow stability up to
temperatures of 300 °C, allow for much improved dispersion in
aqueous media, and facilitate refractive-index matching (the refractive
index of SiO2 is 1.8 for amorphous SiO2 thin
films,63,64 intermediate between that of the embedded
VO2 nanocrystals and the host polymer matrix (ca. 1.5)).
In the absence of a SiO2 coating, VO2 nanocrystals
dispersed in aqueous media are rapidly degraded to green substoichiometric
vanadium oxides (such as V6O13) and orange V2O5. All four samples noted above have been coated
with SiO2 using a modified Stöber approach.48 In previous work, we have demonstrated the functionalization
of SiO2 shells with perfluorinated silanes, which further
renders the nanocrystals superhydrophobic and ensures their long-term
preservation at high relative humidities.59 However, this additional treatment has not been performed here to
maintain well-defined interfaces with gradation of refractive indices
(VO2/SiO2/polymeric medium). Figure 2E,F depicts representative
TEM images of silica-coated VO2 nanocrystals, indicating
an average shell thickness of 4.0 ± 0.6 nm following the procedure
described in the Methods section.

To
devise a scalable process for casting thin films of VO2 nanocrystals, a methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate (MAA/EA) copolymer
is used as a dispersant and thickener. The polymeric matrix is typically
stored under acidic conditions; upon titration of a base, methacrylic
acid groups within the copolymer become deprotonated and take on an
anionic charge.65 Charge repulsion between
anionic groups induces swelling of the copolymer, substantially modifying
the rheology of the dispersion and allowing for stabilization of solution-castable
dispersions of VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals. Figure S4A (Supporting Information) illustrates
MAA/EA copolymer dispersions of VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals
allowed to stand for up to 7 days after mixing. Figure S4B contrasts the stability of the VO2@SiO2 colloidal dispersions in deionized water, with and without
the addition of the MAA/EA copolymer, as a function of time clearly
illustrating the decreased sedimentation obtained for the dispersion
where the polymer is present. The viscous acrylic dispersions have
been used to cast VO2 nanocomposite coatings using a facile
straight-edge knife casting process. Figure 3 shows a process flow diagram for the preparation
of the nanocomposite thermochromic elements. The obtained films are
visually transparent and smooth, as depicted in Figure S4C–F of the Supporting Information. As expected
and discussed in greater detail below, the nanocomposite films embedded
with the smallest particles show the least amount of haze and the
highest optical transmittance in the visible region of the electromagnetic
spectrum owing to the most effective mitigation of light scattering.
For the same VO2 nanocrystal loading (0.6 mg VO2@SiO2/mL solution), it is clear that the nanowire samples
with larger dimensions (samples I, A, and I-BM) show considerably
greater haze as compared with the NS nanocrystals, indicating different
absorption/scattering wavelength profiles.

Figure 3 Schematic illustration
of the process used to prepare nanocomposite
thermochromic elements. (A) (1) V2O5 powder
is placed in a hydrothermal vessel with deionized water and the reducing
agent of choice (either acetone to yield sample A or 2-propanol to
obtain sample I). The solution is heated at 210 °C for 18–72
h. (2) Vacuum filtering and washing of the retrieved VO2 (B) followed by (3) annealing of retrieved VO2 under
argon to obtain nanowires in the M1 phase. (4) Retrieval of M1 VO2 nanowires followed by (5) dry-milling with methacrylate polymer
beads to reduce size (sample I-BM) followed by (6, 7) coating with
a SiO2 shell to minimize aggregation, providing gradation
of refractive indices, and obtaining VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals. Panel (B) shows the process for synthesis of VO2 NS. (1) Reaction that results in precipitation of amorphous
VO2. (2) Hydrothermal treatment of amorphous VO2 to obtain NS crystallized in the M1 phase. (3) Filtering and washing
of M1 VO2 NS followed by (4) coating with a SiO2 shell to obtain VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals. Panel
(C) outlines the film casting process beginning with VO2 dispersion in an aqueous solution methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate
copolymer followed by (1) casting of films by depositing the dispersion
on a borosilicate glass substrate and drawing a casting knife down
along the surface to create an even film. (2) Curing for 12 h to obtain
a homogeneous nanocomposite film.

Visible–NIR transmission spectra of nanocomposite
films
prepared using the four VO2@SiO2 samples are
shown in Figure 4.
The corresponding transmittance and NIR modulation values are listed
in Table 1. Three different
nanocrystal loadings have been contrasted in each instance. The visible-light
transmittance is diminished in each case with increasing loading indicating
higher absorption and scattering events within the nanocomposite matrix,
the former as a result of the higher optical density resulting from
the increased fill factor and the latter as a result of increasing
agglomeration of crystallites or primary articles (vide infra). All
spectra show a clear divergence of the high-temperature (dotted line)
spectrum from the low-temperature (solid line) spectrum in the NIR
region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The insulating phase of bulk
VO2 has a band gap estimated to be ca. 0.6 eV, whereas
with closing of the band gap and sharp increase in carrier density
upon metallization, the transmittance is greatly diminished in the
NIR region of the electromagnetic spectrum. For samples I and A, with
the largest dimensions of nanocrystals under consideration, four correlated
observations point the operation of multiple scattering mechanisms:
(a) the intriguing observation of higher visible-light transmittance
(Tlum) at high temperatures for both sets
of films at all loadings, (b) decreased transmission for sample A
compared to that of I for any given loading, (c) relatively greater
near-infrared modulation (ΔTNIR)
for A as compared to that of I for any given loading, (d) a pronounced
blue-shift in onset wavelength of ΔTNIR for sample A in comparison with sample I.

Figure 4 Vis–NIR transmission
spectra acquired for nanocomposite
VO2@SiO2/methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer
thin films prepared from dispersions with nanocrystal loadings of
4 mg/10 mL (blue lines), 6 mg/10 mL (red lines), and 8 mg/10 mL (green
lines). In each case, the solid lines represent spectra acquired at
35 °C, whereas the dotted lines represent spectra acquired at
85 °C after equilibration for 10 min. (A) Sample I at different
nanocrystal loadings, (B) sample A at different nanocrystal loadings,
(C) sample I-BM at different nanocrystal loadings, and (D) sample
NS at different nanocrystal loadings.

Table 1 Collated Data Summarizing ΔTsol (%), ΔTNIR (%), Tlum (%), and Onset of NIR Modulation
for the Four Different Size Distributions of VO2 Nanocrystals
Encapsulated within SiO2 Shells for Various Particle Loadings
Dispersed in an Acrylate Matrixa
 	ΔTsol (%)	ΔTNIR (%)	Tlum (%) (ΔTlum (%))	onset
of NIR modulation (nm)	
sample (size in nm)	4 mg/10 mL	6 mg/10 mL	8 mg/10 mL	4 mg/10 mL	6 mg/10 mL	8 mg/10 mL	4 mg/10 mL	6 mg/10 mL	8 mg/10 mL	4 mg/10 mL	6 mg/10 mL	8 mg/10 mL	
I (210 ± 70)	–2.60	–2.00	–1.60	–0.90	–0.30	–0.20	51.9 (−3.5)	34.8 (−2.8)	29.4 (−2.00)	1730	1660	1660	
A (180 ± 70)	–0.90	–1.30	–1.00	1.00	0.80	1.30	44.6 (−1.8)	32.4 (−2.8)	22.2 (−2.5)	1380	1380	1380	
I-BM (110 ± 90)	–1.54	–0.83	0.25	6.13	7.52	9.08	44.48 (−8.30)	27.42 (−7.42)	17.30 (−7.49)	1208	1184	1150	
NS (44 ± 30)	10.28	13.52	16.62	23.18	30.34	32.18	61.44 (−3.43)	44.44 (−4.60)	33.47 (−4.04)	749	746	741	
a Tlum (%) is shown for films at 25 °C.

The first and most notable
observation is the significant increase
in Tlum at higher temperatures and is
explicable considering the change in n of the VO2 nanocrystals as a result of the insulator–metal phase
transition. The value of n at 700 nm for VO2 is 3.0 for the M1 phase and 2.2 for the R phase,55,56 which results in a greater n mismatch between VO2 and the MAA/EA copolymer host matrix at low temperatures.
The SiO2 shell with an intermediate n value
of 1.8 facilitates refractive-index matching between the embedded
nanocrystals and the host matrix,63,64 thereby serving
as an antireflective coating and minimizing light scattering at the
VO2/MAA–EA copolymer interface depending on shell
thickness. In this study, the shell thicknesses have been held constant
for all of the four nanocrystal sizes. The differential in refractive
indices of the two phases gives rise to an increased scattering component
for the low-temperature phase that is reflected as a negative ΔTlum value in Table 1; accordingly, there is no significant change
in magnitude as a result of nanocrystal loading for either of these
two samples. From a practical perspective, the negative term strongly
effects the overall full-spectrum Tsol performance values (Table 1), effectively negating any gains in energy efficiency derived
from ΔTNIR given the higher weighting
of the visible region in the AM1.5 spectrum. The second and third
observations related to a decrease in overall transmission and increase
in NIR modulation between samples A and I go hand-in-hand and return
to the intrinsic trade-off of VO2-based thermochromic fenestration
elements: increasing the loading of VO2 increases the NIR
modulation but also decreases visible transmission. In this comparison,
the amount of VO2 within a given loading is constant but
owing to the substantial change in morphology (thick nanowires as
compared with thin ribbons) between samples, the absorption cross
section is much higher for the ribbonlike sample A (note the lack
of additional light scattering, as delineated by similar ΔTlum values in Table 1). Although this effect is not drastic from
a numerical performance standpoint, the observation does highlight
an additional morphology effect not accounted for in the above theoretical
models. The final observation is the 280–350 nm blue-shift
of the NIR modulation onset wavelength between samples A and I (Table 1). The inflections
between high- and low-temperature spectra for samples I and A are
observed at ca. 1660 and 1380 nm, respectively. The shift to shorter
wavelengths is a result of smaller Mie scattering contributions as
a result of the reduced size of the nanowires in sample A. These modulation
onsets are clearly unviable for fenestration applications since the
solar flux beyond this wavelength is minimal.

The rather poor
performance metrics of samples I and A is explicable
on the basis of the simulations in Figure 1. The low Tlum and ΔTNIR values, coupled with
long-wavelength NIR modulation onsets, clearly indicate a size-dependent
light scattering mechanism. Mie scattering in the visible–NIR
region becomes significant when the diameter of the particle is comparable
to or greater than the wavelength of the interacting photon, resulting
in a scattering in the forward direction. With this in mind, we have
examined I-BM and NS samples that have particle dimensions well below
the 400–2500 nm range of the visible–NIR spectrum (Figure 4C,D). Notably, the
I-BM sample displays a substantial improvement in ΔTNIR; however, the ΔTsol values are still offset by a significant negative ΔTlum component (Table 1). Interestingly, the amount of light scattering
in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum, characterized
by ΔTlum, is significantly larger
than that of the I and A samples. In contrast, the NS samples do not
exhibit a scattering background. A significant increase in Tlum along with a substantial enhancement of
ΔTNIR is deduced from the spectra
of the NS nanocrystals (Figure 4D) and is clearly manifested in the performance metrics enumerated
in Table 1. These samples
exhibit ΔTNIR values as high as
32.18% with ΔTsol values greater
than 16% at high loadings. The improved visible-light transmittance
can be attributed to the reduction of Mie scattering, whereas the
improved ΔTNIR performance can be
traced to the formation of a localized-surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)
with a maximum absorbance between 1200 and 1400 nm for particles sub
100 nm in size. The LSPR wavelength is advantageous for thermochromic
fenestration purposes as the onset of the resonance begins close to
the visible–NIR crossover point in the solar spectrum. A fraction
of the I-BM nanocrystals is also expected to be within the size regime
wherein LSPR formation is expected.66 However,
the NIR onset for I-BM samples is deep in the NIR region of the electromagnetic
spectrum, which in conjunction with low Tlum values comparable to those of I and A samples and a significantly
increased ΔTlum suggests an “effective”
particle-size-dependent scattering mechanism is manifested owing to
the agglomeration of the I-BM nanocrystals to form larger particles.

Specular transmission data shown in Figure 4 provide vital optical performance metrics
but provide limited mechanistic insight into optical processes such
as scattering, reflection, and absorption within the nanocomposite
films that underpin these metrics since all of these parameters are
incorporated within the measurement of a singular intensity value
at each wavelength. To derive deeper mechanistic understanding of
the optical processes within nanocomposite thin films, absorptance
(A) and diffuse transmission (Tdiff) spectra have been acquired for I-BM and NS samples and
are depicted in Figure 5 where A is defined as 1  and 2  where Ttot is
the total transmission and Rtot is the
total reflection collected using an integrating-sphere-based spectrometer.

Figure 5 Vis–NIR
absorptance (A, B) and diffuse transmission (C,
D) spectra for nanocomposite VO2@SiO2/MAA–EA
nanocomposite films prepared from dispersions at nanocrystal loadings
of 4 mg/10 mL (blue lines), 6 mg/10 mL (red lines), and 8 mg/10 mL
VO2 (green lines). In each case, the solid lines represent
acquired at 35 °C, whereas dotted lines represent spectra acquired
at 85 °C after equilibration for 10 min. (A, C) Sample I-BM and
(B, D) sample NS. The inset in (D) magnifies the 300–750 nm
region highlighting the systematic red-shift of the band maximum with
VO2 loading of the displayed spectra.

Absorptance of the films increases with higher loadings for
both
I-BM and NS samples but with very different spectral shapes. In the
low-temperature phase, absorptance of I-BM is broad and featureless
throughout the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum before
decreasing beyond 1500 nm, whereas in contrast, the NS sample has
two defined absorption bands. The high-energy absorption is assigned
to the O 2p π → π* interband transition, whereas
the weaker low-energy absorption is assigned to the d∥ → π* band gap transition, as described by Goodenough’s
simplified model of the band structure of VO2.67 In the high-temperature phase, when the band
gap is closed, the absorption across the O 2p transition is still
observed but a pronounced LSPR dominates the NIR region of the electromagnetic
spectrum. For NS samples, the modulation in NIR absorptance between
low- and high-temperature films is clearly centered at the inflection
point between the two absorption bands. Such is not the case for I-BM
samples.

Interpretation of the absorptance spectra for NS samples
is straightforward
with the NIR modulation derived from the appearance of the LSPR absorption
upon closing of the band gap. For I-BM samples, spectra for low-temperature
films deviate between 600 and 1000 nm, absorbing broadly across the
inflection point between O 2p π → π* interband
and d∥ → π* band gap transitions. We
can conclude that in the low-temperature phase, significant internal
light scattering within the film, arising from clustering of crystallites
within larger agglomerates, facilitates a broad absorption in 600–1000
nm region. This broad absorption accounts for the NIR modulation onset
beyond 1000 nm and further diminishes any LSPR-related ΔTNIR.

We investigate light scattering profiles
in the I-BM and NS samples
further with diffuse transmission (Figure 5C,D). Interestingly, for both samples, the
intensity of the scattering bands is not significantly different (<5%);
however, clear differences are observed in the spectral line shapes
and change in Tdiff with temperature.
For NS samples, which are homogeneous in terms of their dimensions
and nature of encapsulation by a SiO2 shell, clear spectrally
resolved bands appear in the visible region and are diminished in
the NIR region of the electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 5D). In fact, the observed scattering bands
are remarkably close to those theoretically predicted for homogeneous
spherical particles.66,68,69 Scattering intensity in the low-temperature phase is greater and
slightly red-shifted than that in the high-temperature phase; both
attributes are explicable considering the differential in n between the MAA/EA copolymer host matrix and the M1 VO2 phase as compared with the R phase. Tdiff measurements exhibit a clear red-shift of the scattering
bands with increasing VO2@SiO2 loading concordant
with predictions of size-dependent shifts (inset to Figure 5D).69 Since the crystallite size remains constant as a function of nanocrystal
loading, the observed red-shift is attributed to an increasing “effective”
particle size as a result of the agglomeration of nanocrystals to
form larger particles within the MAA/EA matrix. In contrast, no discernible
red-shift is observed for low-temperature I-BM samples; instead, the
scattering is broader and less defined in the visible and extends
well into the NIR. The magnitude of scattering between 600 and 1000
nm is in good agreement with the associated absorptance spectra (Figures 5A and 4C), signifying that the internal scattering is derived largely
from the mismatch in the refractive index. Given the extensive agglomeration
of I-BM VO2 particles during encapsulation with SiO2, multiple VO2 nanocrystals are likely incorporated
in close proximity within a heterogeneous SiO2 shell. Such
heterogeneous agglomeration likely accounts for the large gradient
of n scattering in these samples and gives rise to
the broad scattering signal.

Comparison of the absorptance and
diffuse transmission spectra
of the two samples highlights the significant impact that relatively
subtle changes in disparate light scattering mechanisms (correlated
directly or indirectly to size and size heterogeneity) can have on
the optical performance of nanocomposite films. Consequently, mitigating
the disparate light scattering mechanisms within these nanocomposite
films requires not just control of particle size to avoid Mie scattering
but also homogeneity of the refractive-index matching layer and individual
dispersion of VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals within the
host matrix.70Figure 6 provides a visualization of the onset of
NIR modulation, visible-light transmittance, and NIR modulation for
the four nanocrystal dimensions at the same loading.

Figure 6 Three-dimensional visualization
of NIR modulation and visible-light
transmittance plotted as a function of wavelength for the four sets
of samples; I (purple spheres), A (blue squares), I-BM (black triangles),
and NS (red diamonds). All samples shown here correspond to a concentration
of 0.8 mg of VO2@SiO2/10 mL dispersion. The
maximum visible transmittance is the maxima in the visible region
from each 8 mg/10 mL 85 °C plot in Figure 4 and is constant for each plot (represented
by an arrow across the maximum visible transmittance/wavelength plane).

As discussed above, the NS samples
have the smallest dimensions
(44 ± 30 nm) and clearly show much greater visible-light transmittance
as compared with the I, I-BM, and A samples as a result of a reduced
scattering background. The NS samples with the smallest nanocrystal
dimensions exhibit the best combination of high NIR modulation and
visible-light transmittance (see also Table 1). The onset of NIR modulation at relatively
shorter wavelengths implies the ability to dynamically adjust transmittance
for a relatively greater region of the solar spectrum.71 For the three samples I, I-BM, and A, the onset
of NIR modulation does not begin until further into the NIR, ca. 1660
nm for sample I, 1380 nm for sample A, and ca. 1150–1200 nm
for I-BM. In contrast, for the NS samples, the onset of the drop is
blue-shifted to ca. 740–750 nm, partly due to the appearance
of LSPR band. Notably, NIR modulation below 700 nm is not desirable
since that will bring about a pronounced change of the visible appearance
of the film. Figure 6 thus clearly indicates the vastly greater visible-light transmittance
and higher NIR modulation observed for the NS sample wherein light
scattering is considerably mitigated as a result of the optimal nanocrystal
dimensions, refractive-index matching, and dispersion. An NIR modulation
of as much as 32.18% is accessible within these nanocomposite films,
which results in a total dynamical modulation of transmitted light
approaching 16.62%. The optical performance of our NS samples is indeed
comparable to other recently reported values for VO2 composite
films where considerable effort has been made to reduce light scattering.44,45,66,72−74 Zhang et al.45 and Miao
et al.66 reduced Mie scattering by decreasing
the as-synthesized VO2 particle size through grinding or
ball-milling treatments and achieved a Tlum of 62.1% with ΔTsol of 12.4% and
a Tlum of 38.5% with ΔTsol of 16.9%, respectively. Guo et al. have prepared ultrafine
VO2 nanoparticles using a unique one-step hydrothermal
reaction in a self-released oxidizing atmosphere at relatively low
temperatures and reported a Tlum of 54.26%
and a ΔTsol of 12.34%.72 As one of the best-in-class examples, Chen et
al. have reported a 31.1% increase (from 38.9 to 51.0%) in Tlum and an 11.0% increase (from 17.2 to 19.1%)
in ΔTsol upon encapsulation of VO2 nanospheres within a ZnO shell.44 Clear understanding and subsequent mitigation of light scattering
mechanisms is of paramount importance to approach the limits of theoretically
predicted performance.

To examine the dynamical behavior of
the nanocomposite thin films,
a time-dependent transmission experiment has been performed for nanocomposite
thin films incorporating VO2 NS and is shown in Figure 7. The temperature
of the film has been ramped from room temperature to 73 °C, and
spectra have been acquired from 1250 to 1430 nm as a function of time.
The temperature values have been selected on the basis of the differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) trace shown in Figure S1. At each time interval, the temperature of the film is read
using an internal temperature sensor, as shown in the inset to Figure 7. The transmission
data shows that the transmission of the sample decreases drastically
between 104 and 287 s (corresponding to film temperatures of 40 and
73 °C, respectively) and is constant thereafter. The maximum
decrease in transmission at an elapsed time of 287 s is within 25
s of the internal film temperature reaching 73 °C (marked with
a dotted line in the inset). This indicates that the switching response
time of the NS VO2@SiO2 nanocomposite films
is well captured by the equilibration steps.75Video S1 shows the discernible change
in the NIR transmittance of a NS nanocomposite VO2@SiO2 methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer thin film being
heated from room temperature with a heat gun acquired using a NIR-enabled
camera under solar irradiation. The substantial NIR opacity observed
stands in stark contrast to the high visible-light transmittance observed
in Figure S4F. An 850 nm long-pass filter
has been mounted on the camera to exclude shorter wavelengths. The
sensitivity range of the camera is between 850 and 1000 nm owing to
the combination of long-pass filter and spectral response of the complementary
metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) sensor of the camera. The speed of Video S1 has been digitally increased by a factor
of ca. 11; upon reaching the transition temperature, the film is observed
to transform within a few seconds. These measurements suggest that
the films entirely transform within a few seconds of reaching the
transition temperatures with the elapsed time likely reflecting the
time taken for the nanocrystals to reach the transition temperature
given the poor thermal conductivity of the polymeric matrix. The measurements
suggest a transformation timescale well equipped to handle diurnal
variations when embedded as fenestration elements in the built environment.

Figure 7 Vis–NIR
transmission spectra acquired as a function of time
during heating for a VO2@SiO2 methacrylic acid/ethyl
acrylate copolymer thin film prepared from dispersions of VO2 NS at loadings of 5 mg/10 mL. Full spectra are acquired before heating
at 25 °C (black line) and after heating at 85 °C (red line)
upon temperature equilibration for 10 min. The inset plots the temperature
of the film as a function of elapsed time. The temperature is increased
at a rate of 0.2 °C/s.

Conclusions
In conclusion, thermochromic modulation of near-infrared
solar
flux represents an attractive route for controlling solar heat gain
based on the ambient temperature without deleteriously impacting the
visible-light transmittance of fenestration units. The pronounced
near-room-temperature metal–insulator transition of VO2 provides a means to modulate solar heat gain in a spectrally
selective manner. Nanocrystals provide distinct advantages over continuous
thin films in being able to better accommodate strains arising from
thermal cycling and in affording a higher visible-light transmittance,
mitigating the thermal-cycling-induced pulverization of large crystals.76,77 However, the use of nanocrystals requires elucidation of optimal
crystallite dimensions, refractive-index matching, and the appropriate
dispersion of the nanocrystals within a low-refractive-index medium.
EMA and FEA + GO optical simulations indicate a pronounced size dependence
of the visible-light transmittance for VO2 nanocomposite
thin films. Four different sizes of VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals have been synthesized and contrasted for thermochromic
modulation and visible-light transmittance after dispersion in an
aqueous acrylate system and solution-casting onto glass substrates.
For larger nanocrystal sizes as well as agglomerations of smaller
particles, dynamical modulation is diminished as a result of Mie scattering
from both large individual crystallites and their agglomerations,
refractive-index mismatch between the low-and high-temperature phases
of VO2 and the host polymer matrix, and the appearance
of a LSPR band. The interplay between the fundamental scattering mechanisms
has been examined in detail using temperature-variant absorptance
and diffuse transmittance measurements of the different particles
sizes performed as a function of nanocrystal loading in the polymeric
medium. The smallest particle dimensions (44 ± 30 nm, sample
NS) appear to provide the best combination of visible-light transmittance
and NIR modulation (blocking up to ca. 16.62% of total solar energy
and 32.18% of energy in the NIR) with an onset of NIR modulation in
the range of 740–750 nm. This latter system provides a pathway
toward the preparation of viable thermochromic elements, founded on
detailed mechanistic elucidation of the multiple scattering mechanisms
that need to be mitigated for deployment at scale. Future work will
focus on optimization of the shell used for refractive-index matching,
surface functionalization to facilitate dispersion in the polymeric
medium and enhance longevity of the nanocrystals, and selection of
a high-visible-light transparency dispersion medium. The inclusion
of substitutional and interstitial dopants will furthermore be utilized
through modification of hydrothermal synthetic methods or postsynthetic
modification to prepare nanocomposite thin films with transition temperatures
designed to match the requirements of specific climate zones.29,60

Materials and Methods
Optical Simulations
To simulate
the light scattering
properties of a single VO2 nanowire, finite element analysis
(FEA) was used. Scattering cross sections, absorption cross sections,
and angular distributions of scattered light intensity were obtained
on the basis of the FEA simulation. To evaluate the optical properties
of nanowire composite films using the computed cross section and angular
distribution, a conventional geometrical optics calculation (GO) was
used. To simplify the calculation, the following assumptions were
applied: (1) low fill factor of nanowires with no interactions between
the nanowires, (2) nanowires aligned along the composite surface plane
(which corresponds to the worst case for optical transmission), and
(3) perpendicular incidence of light on the composite surface. A more
comprehensive description of the simulation method and geometrical
calculation has been published elsewhere.78

Synthesis of VO2 Nanowires
VO2 nanowires
were synthesized through a variation of the one-step hydrothermal
method reported in our previous work.26 The process from synthesis of VO2 nanocrystals to casting
of nanocomposite thin films is schematically outlined in Figure 3. Briefly, stoichiometric
amounts of micron-sized V2O5 powder (Sigma-Aldrich,
98%) were placed in a poly(tetrafluoroethylene) receptacle with deionized
water (ρ = 18.2 MΩ·cm, Barnstead Water Purification
System) and a reducing agent (either 2-propanol or acetone). The cup
was then sealed in an autoclave and heated at 210 °C for 18–72
h. The synthesized VO2 (B) powder was then vacuum filtered
and washed with 2-propanol, acetone, and/or water. The powders were
subsequently annealed at 550 °C under inert Ar atmosphere for
several hours to obtain phase-pure VO2 nanocrystals crystallized
in the M1 phase upon cooling.47

Milling
of VO2 Nanowires
M1 VO2 nanowires synthesized
hydrothermally via reduction with 2-propanol
were dry-milled milled using methacrylate polymer beads. Samples were
milled in 100 mg quantities for a total of 150 min at 30 min intervals
using three polymer beads per tube in a SPEX SamplePrep 510 Mixer
Mill.

Synthesis of VO2 NS
VO2 NS were
synthesized via a two-step reaction based on the modification of a
method reported in the literature.57−59 The first step involved
the precipitation of VO(OH)2 from the reaction of NH4VO3 and H2NNH2 at 80 °C
in deionized water (ρ = 18.2 MΩ/cm, Barnstead Water Purification
System). The VO(OH)2 precipitate was then placed within
a hydrothermal vessel and heated at 210 °C for 24–72 h.
The product was finally isolated through centrifugation and used without
further annealing or milling.

Deposition of a SiO2 Shell and Preparation of VO2@SiO2 Nanocrystals
An amorphous silica
shell was deposited onto nanoparticles using a modified Stöber
method.48,59 Briefly, VO2 nanocrystals (in
quantities ranging from 24 to 240 mg) were ultrasonicated in a 4:1
(99.5% alcohol content. 100% nondenatured ethanol) ethanol/deionized
water solution to obtain stable colloidal dispersions. For every 24
mg of VO2 nanocrystals utilized, 400 μL of NH4OH (0.25 M aqueous solution) was added as a catalyst followed
by addition of 200 μL of tetraethylorthosilicate (yielding a
final concentration of 0.02 M). The reaction was allowed to proceed
for 25 min, and the VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals were
collected by centrifugation. The solid collected via centrifugation
was subsequently washed with copious amounts of 99.5% ethanol recovered
by centrifugation. Three such cycles were performed prior to incorporation
of the nanocrystals within the polymer matrices.

Dispersion
within Copolymer Matrix
Polymer dispersion
was carried out as reported in a previous work and is schematically
outlined in Figure 3.59 VO2@SiO2 core–shell
nanocrystals was dispersed in 10 mL of an alkaline aqueous solution
(pH of ca. 11.3 prepared by addition of 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
containing 5% added water (Amresco) to deionized water) in a glass
vial by ultrasonication. The dispersion was then gently stirred, and
methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer, Acrysol ASE-60 (Dow Chemical
Company) was introduced at 1 wt % relative to water (adjusted to account
for Acrysol ASE-60’s solid content being around 28 wt %). The
solution was stirred more vigorously as the solution thickened to
further homogeneously disperse the nanocrystals within the polymeric
matrix. Upon dissolution of the methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer
in the alkaline solution (ca. 20 min), the dispersion was allowed
to stand and used for casting thin films.

Film Casting
Films
were cast from the polymer dispersions
in a manner previously reported.59 Nanocomposite
thin films of VO2@SiO2 were cast onto borosilicate
glass substrates using 1.25 mL of the methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate
copolymer/VO2 dispersion with various loadings of VO2 nanocrystals (4–8 mg of VO2@SiO2 dispersed in 10 mL of the acrylate aqueous solution). The dispersion
was placed on the glass slide and drawn down using a BYK film casting
knife set to a wet thickness of 1 mm. The films were then allowed
to dry overnight in an air ambient. The dry thickness of the films
was on the order of ca. 1–2 μm.

Characterization
High-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HR-TEM) images of VO2 and VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals were obtained using a JEOL JEM-2010 instrument
operated at 200 kV with a beam current of 100 mA, and SAED patterns
were acquired using an FEI Tecnai G2 F20 ST field-emission TEM at
a 200 kV operating voltage. Samples for HR-TEM were prepared by dispersing
the VO2 and VO nanoparticles in 2-propanol or ethanol and
dropping the dispersion onto 300 mesh copper grids coated with amorphous
carbon. The grid was then allowed to dry under ambient conditions.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was performed using a Q2000
TA Instrument calorimeter with Al sample pans and lids. A scan rate
of 10 °C/min was used in the temperature range between 0 and
100 °C.

Film thicknesses were determined using a Bruker
Dimension Icon
atomic force microscope operating in tapping mode. The AFM tip was
a Mikromasch USA HQ:NSC35/Al BS three cantilever tapping mode n-type
silicon tip with a radius of 8 nm, height of 12–18 μm,
and a full tip cone angle of 40°. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD)
patterns were obtained using a Bruker D8 Advance Eco X-ray powder
diffractometer utilizing Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å).

Transmission spectra of nanocomposite films were obtained using
a multiwavelength Bruker Vertex-70 Fourier transform infrared spectrometer
utilizing a Pike Technologies temperature stage and allowed to equilibrate
for 10 min at each temperature. A PerkinElmer Lambda 950 UV/vis/NIR
spectrophotometer with a 150 mm integrating sphere equipped with a
custom designed and calibrated heating stage was also used for acquisition
of transmission and absorptance spectra. Films were allowed to equilibrate
for 5 min at each temperature. All transmission spectra were corrected
for the transmission of the methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer
and glass by taking a blank spectra of glass and polymer and adding
the reduction in optical transmittance attributed to the glass and
copolymer alone; consequently, the measured values correspond to the
optical properties of the embedded VO2 nanocrystals.

To standardize film performance, the solar (Tsol: 400–2500 nm), luminous (Tlum: 400–780 nm), and NIR (TNIR: 780–2500 nm) transmittance were determined according to
the following equations79−81 3   4  where T(λ) is the recorded
film transmittance and φx(λ)
is the solar irradiance spectrum distribution for air mass 1.5 (corresponding
to the sun at 37° above the horizon) over the wavelength range
specified.11 The wavelength ranges for
the sol, lum, and NIR ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum denoted
as subscripts in eq 1 are defined as 400–2500, 400–780, and 780–2500
nm, respectively.

An iPhone 5s was acquired from Eigen Imaging
Inc. and was used
to image the transition in the NIR region of electromagnetic spectrum.
Removal of the factory-installed 650 nm short-pass filter and utilization
of an 850 nm long-pass filter acquired from Thorlabs Inc. allowed
for exclusion of shorter wavelengths. The sensitivity range of the
camera is between 850 and 1000 nm owing to the combination of long-pass
filter and spectral response of the CMOS sensor of the camera. During
the imaging experiment shown in Video S1, a 5 mg/10 mL loading NS nanocomposite VO2@SiO2/methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer thin film was heated from
35 to 90 °C with a heat gun. Postprocessing of the video was
done using Avidemux and Windows Movie Maker.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b02093.DSC traces, XRD
patterns, and SAED patterns for four different size distributions
of VO2 nanocrystals; digital photographs of aqueous dispersions
of VO2@SiO2 nanocrystals dispersed in methacrylic
acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer; digital photographs illustrating the
visible-light transparency of nanocomposite VO2@SiO2 thin films (PDF)

The change in NIR transmittance of a NS nanocomposite
VO2@SiO2 methacrylic acid/ethyl acrylate copolymer film
is captured using a NIR-enabled camera (Video S1) (AVI).



Supplementary Material
ao8b02093_si_001.pdf

 ao8b02093_si_002.avi

 Author Contributions
# N.A.F. and K.E.P. contributed equally to this work.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was initially supported by Quanex Building Products.
The TAMU Microscopy Imaging Center (MIC) is acknowledged for work
done with the TEM.
==== Refs
References
Houvilla P.  Buildings and Climate
Change: Status, Challenges and Opportunities ; United Nation Environment Programme , 2007 ; pp 1 –88 .
Energy
Efficiency Trends in Residential and Commercial Buildings ; U.S. Department of Energy , 2008 ; pp 1 –31 .
U.S. Energy Information Administration  . How Much Energy Is Consumed in U.S.
Residential and Commercial Buildings? , 2018 . https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=86&t=1 (accessed
Sept 9, 2018).
Kanu S. S. ; Binions R. 
Thin Films for Solar
Control Applications . Proc. R. Soc. A 
2010 , 466 , 19 –44 . 10.1098/rspa.2009.0259 .
Granqvist C. G. 
Electrochromic
Materials: Out of a Niche . Nat. Mater. 
2006 , 5 , 89 –90 . 10.1038/nmat1577 .16449991 
Shehabi A. ; DeForest N. ; McNeil A. ; Masanet E. ; Greenblatt J. ; Lee E. S. ; Masson G. ; Helms B. A. ; Milliron D. J. 
U.S. Energy
Savings Potential from Dynamic Daylighting Control Glazings . Energy Build. 
2013 , 66 , 415 –423 . 10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.07.013 .
Llordés A. ; Garcia G. ; Gazquez J. ; Milliron D. J. 
Tunable Near-Infrared
and Visible-Light Transmittance in Nanocrystal-in-Glass Composites . Nature 
2013 , 500 , 323 –326 . 10.1038/nature12398 .23955232 
Manning T. D. ; Parkin I. P. ; Pemble M. E. ; Sheel D. ; Vernardou D. 
Intelligent
Window Coatings: Atmospheric Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition of
Tungsten-Doped Vanadium Dioxide . Chem. Mater. 
2004 , 16 , 744 –749 . 10.1021/cm034905y .
Parkin I. P. ; Manning T. D. 
Intelligent Thermochromic Windows . J. Chem. Educ. 
2006 , 83 , 393 –400 . 10.1021/ed083p393 .
Costanzo V. ; Evola G. ; Marletta L. 
Thermal and
Visual Performance of
Real and Theoretical Thermochromic Glazing Solutions for Office Buildings . Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2016 , 149 , 110 –120 . 10.1016/j.solmat.2016.01.008 .
ASTM  . Standard Tables for Reference Solar Spectral Irradiances:
Direct Normal and Hemispherical on 37° Tilted Surface ; ASTM : West Conshohocken,
PA , 2013 ; Vol. 3 , pp 1 –21 .
Chernova N. A. ; Roppolo M. ; Dillon A. C. ; Whittingham M. S. 
Layered
Vanadium and Molybdenum Oxides: Batteries and Electrochromics . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 2526 10.1039/b819629j .
Deb S. K. 
Physical
Properties of a Transition Metal Oxide: Optical and Photoelectric
Properties of Single Crystal and Thin Film Molybdenum Trioxide . Proc. R. Soc. A 
1968 , 304 , 211 –231 . 10.1098/rspa.1968.0082 .
Marley P. M. ; Horrocks G. A. ; Pelcher K. E. ; Banerjee S. 
Transformers: The Changing
Phases of Low-Dimensional Vanadium Oxide Bronzes . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 5181 –5198 . 10.1039/C4CC08673B .
Zhou Y. ; Ramanathan S. 
Correlated
Electron Materials and Field Effect Transistors
for Logic: A Review . Crit. Rev. Solid State
Mater. Sci. 
2013 , 38 , 286 –317 . 10.1080/10408436.2012.719131 .
Hudak B. M. ; Depner S. W. ; Waetzig G. R. ; Talapatra A. ; Arroyave R. ; Banerjee S. ; Guiton B. S. 
Real-Time
Atomistic
Observation of Structural Phase Transformations in Individual Hafnia
Nanorods . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 1531610.1038/ncomms15316 .28497788 
Wu C. ; Feng F. ; Xie Y. 
Design of Vanadium Oxide Structures
with Controllable Electrical Properties for Energy Applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 5157 –5183 . 10.1039/c3cs35508j .23482986 
Monceau P. 
Electronic
Crystals: An Experimental Overview . Adv. Phys. 
2012 , 61 , 325 –581 . 10.1080/00018732.2012.719674 .
Imada M. ; Fujimori A. ; Tokura Y. 
Metal-Insulator
Transitions . Rev. Mod. Phys. 
1998 , 70 , 1039 –1263 . 10.1103/RevModPhys.70.1039 .
Yang Z. ; Ko C. ; Ramanathan S. 
Oxide Electronics
Utilizing Ultrafast Metal-Insulator
Transitions . Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 
2011 , 41 , 337 –367 . 10.1146/annurev-matsci-062910-100347 .
Patridge C. J. ; Wu T.-L. ; Sambandamurthy G. ; Banerjee S. 
Colossal Above-Room-Temperature
Metal–insulator Switching of a Wadsley-Type Tunnel Bronze . Chem. Commun. 
2011 , 47 , 4484 10.1039/c0cc05709f .
Edwards P. P. ; Sienko M. J. 
Universality Aspects
of the Metal-Nonmetal Transition
in Condensed Media . Phys. Rev. B 
1978 , 17 , 2575 –2581 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.17.2575 .
Edwards P. P. ; Ramakrishnan T. V. ; Rao C. N. R. 
The Metal-Nonmetal
Transition: A
Global Perspective . J. Phys. Chem. 
1995 , 99 , 5228 –5239 . 10.1021/j100015a002 .
Patridge C. J. ; Wu T. L. ; Jaye C. ; Ravel B. ; Takeuchi E. S. ; Fischer D. A. ; Sambandamurthy G. ; Banerjee S. 
Synthesis, Spectroscopic
Characterization, and Observation of Massive Metal-Insulator Transitions
in Nanowires of a Nonstoichiometric Vanadium Oxide Bronze . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 2448 –2453 . 10.1021/nl100642b .20509685 
Adler D. 
Mechanisms
for Metal-Nonmental Transitions in Transition-Metal Oxides and Sulfides . Rev. Mod. Phys. 
1968 , 40 , 714 –736 . 10.1103/RevModPhys.40.714 .
Whittaker L. ; Patridge C. J. ; Banerjee S. 
Microscopic
and Nanoscale Perspective
of the Metal–Insulator Phase Transitions of VO2:
Some New Twists to an Old Tale . J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 
2011 , 2 , 745 –758 . 10.1021/jz101640n .
Whittaker L. ; Wu T.-L. ; Patridge C. J. ; Sambandamurthy G. ; Banerjee S. 
Distinctive Finite Size Effects on
the Phase Diagram
and Metal–insulator Transitions of Tungsten-Doped Vanadium(IV)
Oxide . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 5580 10.1039/c0jm03833d .
Morin F. J. 
Oxides
Which Show a Metal-to-Insulator Transition at the Neel Temperature . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1959 , 3 , 34 –36 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.3.34 .
Alivio T. E. G. ; Sellers D. G. ; Asayesh-Ardakani H. ; Braham E. J. ; Horrocks G. A. ; Pelcher K. E. ; Villareal R. ; Zuin L. ; Shamberger P. J. ; Arróyave R. ; Shahbazian-Yassar R. ; Banerjee S. 
Postsynthetic Route
for Modifying the Metal–Insulator Transition of VO2 by Interstitial Dopant Incorporation . Chem.
Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 5401 –5412 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b02029 .
Wei J. ; Ji H. ; Guo W. ; Nevidomskyy A. H. ; Natelson D. 
Hydrogen Stabilization
of Metallic Vanadium Dioxide in Single-Crystal Nanobeams . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 357 –362 . 10.1038/nnano.2012.70 .
Chen Z. ; Gao Y. ; Kang L. ; Cao C. ; Chen S. ; Luo H. 
Fine Crystalline
VO2 Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Abnormal Phase Transition
Temperatures and Excellent Optical Properties of a Derived VO2 Nanocomposite Foil . J. Mater. Chem.
A. 
2014 , 2 , 2718 –2727 . 10.1039/c3ta14612j .
Ji S. ; Zhang F. ; Jin P. 
Preparation
of High Performance Pure
Single Phase VO2 Nanopowder by Hydrothermally Reducing
the V2O5 Gel . Sol. Energy
Mater. Sol. Cells 
2011 , 95 , 3520 –3526 . 10.1016/j.solmat.2011.08.015 .
Batista C. ; Ribeiro R. M. ; Teixeira V. 
Synthesis
and Characterization of
VO2-Based Thermochromic Thin Films for Energy-Efficient
Windows . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2011 , 6 , 301 10.1186/1556-276X-6-301 .21711813 
Liu W.-T. ; Cao J. ; Fan W. ; Hao Z. ; Martin M. C. ; Shen Y. R. ; Wu J. ; Wang F. 
Intrinsic Optical Properties of Vanadium Dioxide near
the Insulator-Metal Transition . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 466 –470 . 10.1021/nl1032205 .21166443 
Jones A. C. ; Berweger S. ; Wei J. ; Cobden D. ; Raschke M. B. 
Nano-Optical
Investigations of the Metal-Insulator Phase Behavior of Individual
VO2 Microcrystals . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 1574 –1581 . 10.1021/nl903765h .20377237 
Chen X. ; Lv Q. ; Yi X. 
Smart Window Coating Based on Nanostructured VO2 Thin Film . Optik 
2012 , 123 , 1187 –1189 . 10.1016/j.ijleo.2011.07.048 .
Zhang P. ; Li M. ; Deng Q. ; Zhang J. ; Wu J. ; Hu Z. ; Chu J. 
Spectral Assignments in the Infrared
Absorption Region and Anomalous
Thermal Hysteresis in the Interband Electronic Transition of Vanadium
Dioxide Films . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 6239 –6246 . 10.1039/C5CP07416A .26853967 
Charipar N. A. ; Kim H. ; Breckenfeld E. ; Charipar K. M. ; Mathews S. A. ; Piqué A. 
Polycrystalline
VO2 Thin Films via Femtosecond Laser Processing of Amorphous
VOX . Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process. 
2016 , 122 , 512 10.1007/s00339-016-0034-7 .
Louloudakis D. ; Vernardou D. ; Spanakis E. ; Katsarakis N. ; Koudoumas E. 
Thermochromic Vanadium Oxide Coatings Grown by APCVD
at Low Temperatures . Phys. Procedia 
2013 , 46 , 137 –141 . 10.1016/j.phpro.2013.07.055 .
Zhou J. ; Gao Y. ; Zhang Z. ; Luo H. ; Cao C. ; Chen Z. ; Dai L. ; Liu X. 
VO2 Thermochromic
Smart Window for Energy
Savings and Generation . Sci. Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 302910.1038/srep03029 .24157625 
Clavero C. ; Slack J. L. ; Anders A. 
Size and Composition-Controlled Fabrication
of Thermochromic Metal Oxide Nanocrystals . J.
Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2013 , 46 , 36200110.1088/0022-3727/46/36/362001 .
Li W. ; Ji S. ; Li Y. ; Huang A. ; Luo H. ; Jin P. 
Synthesis
of VO2 Nanoparticles by Hydrothermal-Assisted Homogeneous
Precipitation Approach for Thermochromic Applications . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 13026 –13033 . 10.1039/C3RA47666A .
Madida I. G. ; Simo A. ; Sone B. ; Maity A. ; Kana J. B. K. ; Gibaud A. ; Merad G. ; Thema F. T. ; Maaza M. 
Submicronic
VO2-PVP Composites Coatings for Smart Windows Applications
and Solar Heat Management . Sol. Energy. 
2014 , 107 , 758 –769 . 10.1016/j.solener.2014.06.025 .
Chen Y. ; Zeng X. ; Zhu J. ; Li R. ; Yao H. ; Cao X. ; Ji S. ; Jin P. 
High Performance
and Enhanced Durability
of Thermochromic Films Using VO2@ZnO Core-Shell Nanoparticles . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 27784 –27791 . 10.1021/acsami.7b08889 .28758388 
Zhang H. ; Xiao X. ; Lu X. ; Chai G. ; Sun Y. ; Zhan Y. ; Xu G. 
A Cost-Effective Method to Fabricate
VO2(M) Nanoparticles and Films with Excellent Thermochromic
Properties . J. Alloys Compd. 
2015 , 636 , 106 –112 . 10.1016/j.jallcom.2015.01.277 .
Horrocks G. A. ; Singh S. ; Likely M. F. ; Sambandamurthy G. ; Banerjee S. 
Scalable Hydrothermal Synthesis of Free-Standing VO2 Nanowires in the M1 Phase . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 15726 –15732 . 10.1021/am504372t .25153653 
Whittaker L. ; Zhang H. ; Banerjee S. 
VO2 Nanosheets Exhibiting
a Well-Defined Metal–insulator Phase Transition . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 2968 –2974 . 10.1039/b823332b .
Pelcher K.
E. ; Crawley M. R. ; Banerjee S. 
Silica-Shell Encapsulation and Adhesion
of VO2 Nanowires to Glass Substrates: Integrating Solution-Derived
VO2 Nanowires within Thermally Responsive Coatings . Mater. Res. Express 
2014 , 1 , 03501410.1088/2053-1591/1/3/035014 .
Xiao X. ; Zhang H. ; Chai G. ; Sun Y. ; Yang T. ; Cheng H. ; Chen L. ; Miao L. ; Xu G. 
A Cost-Effective
Process to Prepare VO2 (M) Powder and Films with Superior
Thermochromic Properties . Mater. Res. Bull. 
2014 , 51 , 6 –12 . 10.1016/j.materresbull.2013.11.051 .
Yue F. ; Huang W. ; Shi Q. ; Li D. ; Hu Y. ; Xiao Y. ; Deng X. ; Wang C. 
Phase Transition
Properties
of Vanadium Oxide Films Deposited by Polymer-Assisted Deposition . J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 72 , 565 –570 . 10.1007/s10971-014-3474-6 .
Li S. Y. ; Niklasson G. A. ; Granqvist C. G. 
Nanothermochromics:
Calculations
for VO2 Nanoparticles in Dielectric Hosts Show Much Improved
Luminous Transmittance and Solar Energy Transmittance Modulation . J. Appl. Phys. 
2010 , 108 , 06352510.1063/1.3487980 .
Qazilbash M. M. ; Brehm M. ; Chae B.-G. ; Ho P.-C. ; Andreev G. O. ; Kim B.-J. ; Yun S. J. ; Balatsky A. V. ; Maple M. B. ; Keilmann F. ; Kim H. T. ; Basov D. N. 
Mott Transition
in VO2 Revealed by Infrared Spectroscopy and Nano-Imaging . Science 
2007 , 318 , 1750 –1753 . 10.1126/science.1150124 .18079396 
Kango S. ; Kalia S. ; Celli A. ; Njuguna J. ; Habibi Y. ; Kumar R. 
Surface Modification
of Inorganic Nanoparticles for Development of
Organic-Inorganic Nanocomposites - A Review . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2013 , 38 , 1232 –1261 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2013.02.003 .
Physical Constants of Organic Constants . In CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics , 93 rd ed.; Haynes W. M. ; Lide D. R. ; Bruno T. J.  , Eds.; Taylor & Francis Group : Boca
Raton, FL , 2011 ; pp 1 –523 .
Kana
Kana J. B. ; Ndjaka J. M. ; Vignaud G. ; Gibaud A. ; Maaza M. 
Thermally Tunable Optical Constants of Vanadium Dioxide Thin Films
Measured by Spectroscopic Ellipsometry . Opt.
Commun. 
2011 , 284 , 807 –812 . 10.1016/j.optcom.2010.10.009 .
Kakiuchida H. ; Jin P. ; Nakao S. ; Tazawa M. 
Optical Properties of Vanadium Dioxide
Film during Semiconductive–Metallic Phase Transition . Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
2007 , 46 , L113 –L116 . 10.1143/JJAP.46.L113 .
Li W. ; Ji S. ; Qian K. ; Jin P. 
Preparation and Characterization
of VO2-BaSO4 Composite Films with Enhanced Optical
Properties in Thermochromic Field . Ceram. Int. 
2015 , 41 , 5049 –5056 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2014.12.073 .
Zhu J. ; Zhou Y. ; Wang B. ; Zheng J. ; Ji S. ; Yao H. ; Luo H. ; Jin P. 
Vanadium Dioxide Nanoparticle-Based
Thermochromic Smart Coating: High Luminous Transmittance, Excellent
Solar Regulation Efficiency, and Near Room Temperature Phase Transition . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 27796 –27803 . 10.1021/acsami.5b09011 .26618391 
Fleer N. A. ; Pelcher K. E. ; Zou J. ; Nieto K. ; Douglas L. D. ; Sellers D. G. ; Banerjee S. 
Hybrid Nanocomposite Films Comprising
Dispersed VO2 Nanocrystals: A Scalable Aqueous-Phase Route
to Thermochromic Fenestration . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 38887 –38900 . 10.1021/acsami.7b09779 .29039916 
Braham E. J. ; Sellers D. ; Emmons E. ; Villarreal R. ; Asayesh-Ardakani H. ; Fleer N. A. ; Farley K. E. ; Shahbazian-Yassar R. ; Arròyave R. ; Shamberger P. J. ; Banerjee S. 
Modulating the Hysteresis
of an Electronic Transition: Launching Alternative Transformation
Pathways in the Metal–Insulator Transition of Vanadium(IV)
Oxide . Chem. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 214 –224 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b04203 .
Whittaker L. ; Jaye C. ; Fu Z. ; Fischer D. A. ; Banerjee S. 
Depressed
Phase Transition in Solution-Grown VO2 Nanostructures . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 8884 –8894 . 10.1021/ja902054w .19505072 
Li M. ; Magdassi S. ; Gao Y. ; Long Y. 
Hydrothermal Synthesis
of VO2 Polymorphs: Advantages, Challenges and Prospects
for the Application of Energy Efficient Smart Windows . Small 
2017 , 170114710.1002/smll.201701147 .
Maaza M. ; Nemraoui O. ; Sella C. ; Beye A. C. 
Surface
Plasmon
Resonance Thermochromic Nano-Composites . Gold
Bull. 
2005 , 38 , 100 –106 . 10.1007/BF03215243 .
Hebert K. J. ; Zafar S. ; Irene E. A. ; Kuehn R. ; McCarthy T. E. ; Demirlioglu E. K. 
Measurement
of the Refractive Index of Thin SiO2 Films Using Tunneling
Current Oscillations and Ellipsometry . Appl.
Phys. Lett. 
1996 , 68 , 266 –268 . 10.1063/1.115658 .
Sharma A. ; Smith J. D. ; Walters K. B. ; Rick S. W. 
Constant pH Simulations
of pH Responsive Polymers . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 145 , 23490610.1063/1.4972062 .28010101 
Miao L. ; Chen R. ; Zhou J. ; Liu C. ; Peng Y. ; Gao J. ; Sun L. ; Tanemura S. 
Depressed Haze and Enhanced Solar
Modulation Capability for VO2-Based Composite Films with
Distinct Size Effects . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 90813 –90823 . 10.1039/C6RA16667A .
Goodenough J. B. 
The Two
Components of the Crystallographic Transition in VO2 . J. Solid State Chem. 
1971 , 3 , 490 –500 . 10.1016/0022-4596(71)90091-0 .
Lopez R. ; Feldman L. C. ; Haglund R. F. 
Size-Dependent
Optical Properties
of VO2 Nanoparticle Arrays . Phys.
Rev. Lett. 
2004 , 93 , 17740310.1103/PhysRevLett.93.177403 .15525126 
Montero J. ; Ji Y.-X. ; Granqvist C. G. ; Niklasson G. A. 
Thermochromic
Light Scattering from Particulate VO2 Layers . J. Appl. Phys. 
2016 , 119 , 08530210.1063/1.4942211 .
Dennis R. V. ; Patil V. ; Andrews J. L. ; Aldinger J. P. ; Yadav G. D. ; Banerjee S. 
Hybrid Nanostructured
Coatings for Corrosion Protection
of Base Metals: A Sustainability Perspective . Mater. Res. Express 
2015 , 2 , 03200110.1088/2053-1591/2/3/032001 .
Bird R. E. ; Hulstrom R. L. ; Lewis L. J. 
Terrestrial
Solar Spectral Data Sets . Sol. Energy 
1983 , 30 , 563 –573 . 10.1016/0038-092X(83)90068-3 .
Guo D. ; Ling C. ; Wang C. ; Wang D. ; Li J. ; Zhao Z. ; Wang Z. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhang J. ; Jin H. 
Hydrothermal One-Step
Synthesis of Highly-Dispersed M-Phase VO2 Nanocrystals
and Application to Flexible Thermochromic Film . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 28627 –28634 . 10.1021/acsami.8b08908 .30062879 
Cao Z. ; Xiao X. ; Lu X. ; Zhan Y. ; Cheng H. ; Xu G. 
A Simple and Low-Cost
Combustion Method to Prepare Monoclinic VO2 with Superior
Thermochromic Properties . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 3915410.1038/srep39154 .27976748 
Wang M. ; Tian J. ; Zhang H. ; Shi X. ; Chen Z. ; Wang Y. ; Ji A. ; Gao Y. 
Novel Synthesis of
Pure VO2@SiO2 Core@shell Nanoparticles to Improve
the Optical and Anti-Oxidant Properties of a VO2 Film . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 10828610.1039/C6RA20636K .
Rini M. ; Cavalleri A. ; Schoenlein R. W. ; López R. ; Feldman L. C. ; Haglund R. F. ; Boatner L. A. ; Haynes T. E. 
Photoinduced
Phase Transition in VO2 Nanocrystals: Ultrafast Control
of Surface-Plasmon Resonance . Opt. Lett. 
2005 , 30 , 558 10.1364/OL.30.000558 .15789735 
Fisher B. ; Patlagan L. 
Switching VO2 Single Crystals and Related
Phenomena: Sliding Domains and Crack Formation . Materials 
2017 , 10 , 554 10.3390/ma10050554 .
Abreu E. ; Liu M. ; Lu J. ; West K. G. ; Kittiwatanakul S. ; Yin W. ; Wolf S. A. ; Averitt R. D. 
THz Spectroscopy of VO2 Epitaxial Films: Controlling the Anisotropic Properties through
Strain Engineering . New J. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 08301610.1088/1367-2630/14/8/083026 .
Naoi Y. ; Amano J. 
Optimization of VO2 Nanowire
Polymer Composite Thermochromic
Films by Optical Simulation . J. Appl. Phys. 
2016 , 120 , 23530110.1063/1.4972025 .
Liu C. ; Balin I. ; Magdassi S. ; Abdulhalim I. ; Long Y. 
Vanadium Dioxide Nanogrid Films for High Transparency Smart Architectural
Window Applications . Opt. Express. 
2015 , 23 , A124 10.1364/OE.23.00A124 .25836239 
Li S.-Y. ; Niklasson G. A. ; Granqvist C. G. 
Nanothermochromics with VO2-Based Core-Shell Structures: Calculated Luminous and Solar Optical
Properties . J. Appl. Phys. 
2011 , 109 , 11351510.1063/1.3592350 .
Kang L. ; Gao Y. ; Luo H. ; Chen Z. ; Du J. ; Zhang Z. 
Nanoporous
Thermochromic VO2 Films with Low Optical Constants, Enhanced
Luminous Transmittance and Thermochromic Properties . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2011 , 3 , 135 –138 . 10.1021/am1011172 .21268632

