
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3155236810.1021/acsomega.9b02095ArticleInfluences of the Geometry of the Scavenge
Pipe on the Air–Oil Two-Phase Flow and Heat Transfer in an
Aero-Engine Bearing Chamber Lu Peng *Fang Lulu Wang Xiangyang Ye Qihang Zhang Jingzhou *Key Laboratory of Thermal
Environment and Structure of Ministry of Industry and Information,
Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory of Aerospace Power System, College
of Energy and Power Engineering, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China* E-mail: plu@nuaa.edu.cn (P.L.).* E-mail: zhangjz@nuaa.edu.cn (J.Z.).06 09 2019 17 09 2019 4 12 15226 15233 08 07 2019 26 08 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In order
to improve the characteristics of the air–oil two-phase flow
and heat transfer in the scavenge pipe of an aero-engine bearing chamber,
this paper presents several scavenge pipes with different cross-sectional
geometries, by numerically investigating the processes of the air–oil
two-phase flow and heat transfer, in comparison to a circular pipe.
The findings indicate that the tripetal cross-section shows the best
heat-transfer effect, while the four-petal cross-section has the lowest
flow resistance. Under the same working condition and the equal wetted
perimeter, the tripetal cross-section has an 8.8% higher heat-transfer
effect than the circular section, while the four-petal cross-section
has a 28.6% lower flow resistance than the circular; under the equal
cross-sectional area, the tripetal cross-section has a 9.1% higher
heat-transfer effect than the circular section, while the four-petal
cross-section has a 23.6% lower flow resistance than the circular;
under the equal hydraulic diameter, the tripetal cross-section has
a 9.2% higher heat-transfer effect than the circular section, while
the four-petal cross-section has a 21.9% lower flow resistance than
the circular. Taking both the heat transfer and flow resistance into
consideration, the four-petal cross-section exhibits the best comprehensive
performance, with the comprehensive performance coefficient decreasing
with the increase of oil inlet velocity and rising with the increase
of air inlet velocity.

document-id-old-9ao9b02095document-id-new-14ao-2019-02095eccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The lubrication
system plays an important role in modern engines,
where the lubricating oil lubricates and cools the bearings, gears,
and seals. However, the continuously rising temperature of the oil
may lead to spontaneous ignition and coking, which negatively affects
the reliability and safety to aero engines. Generally, bearing chambers
have a vent pipe at the top of the chamber and a scavenge pipe at
the bottom. The vent pipe releases most of the sealing air to prevent
overpressure in the chamber, while the scavenge pipe discharges most
of the oil and is attached to a scavenge pump so as to recirculate
the lubricating oil in the bearing chamber.1

The air–oil annular flow in the vent or scavenge pipe
is affected by a series of factors, such as the flow rate, the inlet
temperature, and the inlet velocity of lubricating oil and air.2 Therefore, the evaluation on the distributions
of the flow rate, temperature, velocity, and pressure at key locations
along the oil-supply pipe and the scavenge pipe is critical to the
design of bearing chambers and piping systems in aero engines.3 The division of oil exiting the chamber through
the vent and scavenge ports depends on the shaft speeds. Increase
in the shaft speed leads to an increased amount of oil exiting from
the vent port.4

Improvements on the
configurations of bearing chambers may increase the scavenge rate
(the proportion through the scavenge port), by optimizing the vent
port, adding scavenge ports, and improving their structures,5−11 and so forth. Porous screens introduced around the
bearing would reduce the power loss considerably, by reducing droplet–droplet
interactions and droplet-bearing chamber wall interactions.12 A further research indicates that although the
screens reduce the parasitic losses and vent protrusion reduces the
oil flow to the air–oil separator, the high-temperature problems
caused by the oil flow distribution may lead to malfunctions in the
engine’s lube system.13 In addition,
sealing has an impact on the air–oil two-phase flow and heat-transfer
performance.14−16 Compared
to the vent pipe, the scavenge pipe carries away most of the oil from
the bearing chamber. The high-temperature oil inevitably involves
a small amount of high-pressure sealing air and forms a complex air–oil
two phase flow, which may lead to oil coking and oil fires.17,18

The abovementioned literatures demonstrate that the air–oil
two-phase flow and heat-transfer performance can be improved by modifying
the bearing chamber’s configuration, sealing, and pipe structures.
However, how the cross-sectional geometry of the scavenge pipe will
impact on the two-phase flow and heat transfer is scarcely reported.
For this reason, this paper presents several scavenge pipes with different
cross-sectional geometries, and numerically investigates the characteristics
of the air–oil two-phase flow and heat transfer inside the
scavenge pipe. The results will lead to a better understanding of
the underlying mechanism of the two-phase flow in aero-engine-bearing
chambers.

2 Model &
Numerical Method
2.1 Modeling
Four different cross-sectional geometries are shown in Figure 1, with the same pipe
length of L = 200 mm taking into account of the total
mass of the aero engine and of the space requirement. Under the equal
wetted perimeter, the equal cross-sectional area and the equal hydraulic
diameter, respectively (Table 1), the characteristics of the air–oil two-phase flow
and heat transfer inside the vertical scavenge pipe (marked in red
in Figure 1a) will
be discussed in detail.

Figure 1 Scavenge pipe model:
(a) schematic diagram of the scavenge system, and scavenge pipes with
different cross-sectional geometries [(b1) circular, (b2) double-petal,
(b3) tripetal, and (b4) four-petal].

Table 1 Geometric Parameters
of the Cross-Sections
conditions	r1 (mm)	r2 (mm)	r3 (mm)	r4 (mm)	
equal wetted perimeter	6	3.7	2.4	3	
equal cross-sectional area	6	4	3.8	3.3	
equal
hydraulic diameter	6	4.3	4.9	3.7	
Structured meshing on the abovementioned
scavenge pipes is conducted by ICEM, depicted in Figure 2. The grids close to the pipe
wall are refined so as to compute the local two-phase flow and heat
transfer accurately. In order to test and verify the grids independence,
Nusselt number on the circular pipe wall was computed under the conditions
of inlet air speed vg = 10 m/s, inlet
oil speed vl = 0.5 m/s, inlet temperature T = 373 K, heat flux on the pipe wall q = 2000 J/(m2·s), with the grid number ranging from
4 × 105 to 20 × 105 (Figure 3). It can be inferred that
the optimal grid number is 12 × 105, both to save
the calculation time and to ensure the simulation accuracy.

Figure 2 Grids of the
scavenge
pipes with different cross-sectional geometries: (a) circular, (b)
double-petal, (c) tripetal, and (d) four-petal.

Figure 3 Grid independence
test
and verification.

According to Kanarachos’ research16 experiences on the complex air–oil two-phase flow inside
the scavenge pipe, the mixture model with an interphase velocity slip
can simulate the flow and heat transfer in the scavenge pipe accurately,
by selecting the RNG k–ε two-equation
turbulent model and the second-order upwind difference scheme for
discretization, with the residual error of 10–5.
The mixture multiphase flow model is a simplified two-phase flow model
in commercial CFD software. This model allows each fluid to move at
a different velocity by setting the interphase slip velocity. The
standard k–ε model is difficult to solve
anisotropic flows in the near-wall region, for example, the boundary
layer flow on the curved wall. The RNG k–ε
two-equation turbulence model is developed from the standard k–ε model and can be expressed as follows.19 1   2  

The main difference
between the RNG and standard k–ε models
lies in the additional term in the ε equation given by 3  where C1ε = 1.42, C2ε = 1.68, Cμ = 0.085. , η0 = 4.38, β = 0.012.

Pressure drops along a vertical circular
pipe at inlet oil speeds of vl = 0.2 m/s
and vl = 0.6 m/s are experimentally acquired
in the reference,20 with the inlet air
velocity ranging from 4 to 18 m/s. The numerical method in the present
paper was then applied to the experiment mentioned above. The numerical
results were in good agreement and showed consistent trends with the
experiments, which confirmed the reliability of the numerical method
in the present work
(see Figure 4).

Figure 4 Comparisons of numerical and experimental results:
(a) vl = 0.2 m/s and (b) vl = 0.6 m/s.

2.2 Physical Properties and Boundary
Conditions
The physical properties of the two fluids are
listed in Table 2.21 The velocity-inlet boundary conditions are applied,
with the inlet air velocity ranging from 5 to 20 m/s, and the inlet
oil velocity ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 m/s. The initial temperatures
of the inlet air and oil are both 373 K. The heat flux on the pipe
wall is q = 2000 J/(m2·s).22 The nonslip boundary condition is selected on
the pipe wall, with the wall roughness at 5 × 10–5 m.

Table 2 Physical Properties of the Two Fluids21
 	ρ (kg/m3)	ν (kg/m·s)	Cp (J/kg·K)	k (W/m·K)	
Air	2.92	1.84 × 10–5	1005	0.026	
oil	900	0.062	2060	0.1436	
3 Results and
Discussion
3.1 Analysis
on the Flow and Heat-Transfer Parameters
Pressure drop is
recognized as the pressure reduction due to the energy loss when the
fluid is flowing inside the pipeline. The energy loss is caused by
the friction between the flowing fluid and pipe walls, and by the
collisions and momentum exchange among the fluid particles. Besides,
it is also associated with the roughness and geometries of the pipe.

The total flowing pressure drop consists of the frictional pressure
drop ΔPf, the local pressure drop
ΔPc, the gravitational pressure
drop ΔPg, and the accelerated pressure
drop ΔPa, which can be expressed
below 4  

The local pressure drop ΔPc is negligible as there is no sudden shape change inside the pipeline
in the present paper. In addition, the gravitational conditions of
the pipes with four different cross-sectional geometries are equivalent.
Moreover, the accelerated pressure drop ΔPa arises from the great variation in the fluid velocity; yet, Figure 5 illustrates that
the outlet velocities of pipes with different cross-sectional geometries
are almost the same. Therefore, the impacts of the cross-sectional
geometry on ΔPg and ΔPa can also be neglected.

Figure 5 Outlet velocities of
pipes with different cross-sectional
geometries (equal hydraulic diameter).

As a result,
the frictional pressure drop ΔPf will be the main contributor that leads to the different pressure
drops for pipes with different cross-sectional geometries. ΔPf can be generally calculated by 5   6  where L is the pipe length; D is the equivalent diameter; ρ is the fluid’s
density; ub is the fluid’s average
velocity; λ is the friction factor; f is the
Fanning friction factor which can be simply used to describe the flow
resistance inside different pipes.

Nusselt number Nu on the pipe wall is defined as 7   8  where h, q, and Tw is the mean convective
heat transfer coefficient, the heat flux and temperature on the pipe
wall, respectively; T1 is the inlet temperature; koil is the heat conductivity coefficient of
the oil; thus, Nu can be simply used to describe
the heat-transfer characteristics inside different pipes.

3.2 Effects of the Cross-Sectional
Geometries on the Two-Phase Flow and Heat Transfer
In order
to examine the air–oil two-phase flow and heat-transfer characteristics
in pipes with different cross-sectional geometries, the following
discussions are based on the conditions of equal wetted perimeter,
equal cross-sectional area, and equal hydraulic diameter, respectively.
Under the equal hydraulic diameter, Figure 6 depicts the temperature distribution across
the outlet section for different geometries. It can be noticed that
the temperatures of “circular” and “double-petal”
are relatively higher, whereas the temperature of “tripetal”
is the lowest. Because of the complex cross-sectional geometries which
enhance the heat-transfer performance like “ribs”, the
temperatures of “tripetal” and “four-petal”
are both comparatively lower.

Figure 6 Temperature
distribution
across the outlet section for different geometries: (a) “circular”,
(b) “double-petal”, (c) “tripetal”, and
(d) “four-petal” (equal hydraulic diameter).

Figure 7 illustrates the pressure distributions at
different locations along the flow direction for pipes with different
cross-sectional geometries. It can be noticed that the pressure drop
of “tripetal” is the highest, whereas the pressure drop
of “four-petal” is the lowest. The result indicates
that the scavenge pipe with the “four-petal” cross-sectional
shape is beneficial to the air–oil two-phase flowing.

Figure 7 Cross-sectional
pressure distributions for different geometries: (a) “circular”,
(b) “double-petal”, (c) “tripetal”, and
(d) “four-petal” (equal hydraulic diameter).

It has been mentioned in Section 3.1 that Nu and f can
be simply used to describe the heat-transfer characteristics and flow
resistance inside different pipes, respectively. Nu and f for different geometries at different benchmarks
are presented in Figure 8. Under the equal wetted perimeter, the tripetal cross-section has
an 8.8% higher heat-transfer effect than the circular section, while
the four-petal cross-section has a 28.6% lower flow resistance than
the circular (Figure 8a); under the equal cross-sectional area, the tripetal cross-section
has a 9.1% higher heat-transfer effect than the circular section,
while the four-petal cross-section has a 23.6% lower flow resistance
than the circular (Figure 8b); under the equal hydraulic diameter, the tripetal cross-section
has a 9.2% higher heat-transfer effect than the circular section,
while the four-petal cross-section has a 21.9% lower flow resistance
than the circular (Figure 8c).

Figure 8 Nu and f for different geometries
at different benchmarks:
(a) equal wetted perimeter, (b) equal cross-sectional area, and (c)
equal hydraulic diameter.

The design of the scavenge system for aero engines
requires higher heat transfer and lower resistance performance. The
comprehensive performance indicator η can be employed to take
into consideration of both the heat transfer and flow resistance,
which is defined as follows.23 9  where
“0” denotes the circular cross-section. It can be noticed
from Figure 9 that
the comprehensive performance indicators of “double-petal”,
“tripetal”, and “four-petal” are all higher
than that of “circular”, with “four-petal”
the best in the comprehensive performance, which provides a way to
improve the flow and heat-transfer characteristics by selecting the
pipes with noncircular cross-sections.

Figure 9 Impacts of cross-sectional
geometries on η
at different benchmarks.

3.3 Effects of the Inlet Oil Velocity on the Two-Phase
Flow and Heat Transfer
Under the working conditions of the
inlet air velocity at 10 m/s, inlet temperature at 373 K, and heat
flux on the wall at 2000 J/(m2·s), the effects of
the inlet oil velocity on the two-phase flow and heat transfer for
pipes with different geometries (equal hydraulic diameter) are presented
in Figure 10. Because
of the higher viscosity of the lubrication oil than air, raising the
inlet oil velocity means the corresponding increase in the viscosity
of the air–oil two-phase flow, which results in a higher fanning
friction factor f for all pipes with different cross-sectional
geometries, as depicted in Figure 10a. It should be further noticed that, the flow resistance
of the pipe with “tripetal” cross-section is significantly
higher than the others, while the flow resistance of the pipe with
“four-petal” cross-section is the lowest. In addition,
it is shown in Figure 10b that the higher oil inlet velocity will reduce the heat-transfer
performance for all pipes. Because of the much higher viscosity of
the oil than that of the air, increase of the oil will lead to a higher
viscosity of the two-phase flow, which increases the flow resistance
of the two-phase flow and curbs the convective heat transfer. In addition,
as the inlet velocity of the oil is much lower than that of the air,
the increased inlet velocity of the oil in a small range will not
raise the velocity of the two-phase flow significantly. As a result,
increasing the inlet velocity of the lubricating oil has a negative
impact on Nu. Figure 10b also indicates that the heat-transfer
performance of the pipe with “tripetal” cross-section
is the best, although this geometry exhibits the highest flow resistance
in Figure 10a. Taking
into account of both the flow resistance and heat transfer, Figure 10c illustrates the
comprehensive performance indicator η for pipes with different
geometries at the oil inlet velocity ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 m/s.
The comprehensive performance indicator η declines with the
increasing oil inlet velocity for all the pipes with petals, which
suggests that increasing the oil inlet velocity plays a negative role
in the overall air–oil two-phase flow characteristics. More
importantly, the pipe with “four-petal” cross-section
shows the best comprehensive performance.

Figure 10 Effects of the oil inlet
velocity on
(a) Fanning friction factor f, (b) Nusselt number Nu, and (c) comprehensive performance indicator η
(equal hydraulic diameter).

3.4 Effects of the Inlet Air Velocity on the Two-Phase
Flow and Heat Transfer
Under the working conditions of the
inlet oil velocity at 0.5 m/s, inlet temperature at 373 K, and heat
flux on the wall at 2000 J/(m2·s), the effects of
the inlet air velocity on the two-phase flow and heat transfer for
pipes with different geometries (equal hydraulic diameter) are presented
in Figure 11. Because
of the far lower viscosity of air than the oil, increasing the air
inlet velocity will, on the one hand, reduce the viscosity of the
two-phase flow, and on the other hand, increase the two-phase flow
velocity. The former effect is more significant when the air velocity
is relatively low (<10 m/s), which reduces the Fanning friction
factor f. However, the continued rise in the air–oil
two-phase flow velocity will increase the friction between the pipe
wall and fluids, which consequently causes the curves to level off
for all the pipes with different geometries, as depicted in Figure 11a. Moreover, Figure 11b indicates that
the rising air inlet velocity will elevate the heat-transfer performance
for all the pipes with different cross-sectional geometries. The increased
two-phase velocity helps to improve the convective heat transfer.
However, it should be pointed out that the amount of lubrication oil
which acts as the cooling medium remains constant. As a result, the
curves level off at relatively higher air inlet velocity. Taking into
account both the flow resistance and heat transfer, Figure 11c illustrates the comprehensive
performance indicator η for pipes with different geometries
at the air inlet velocity ranging from 5 to 20 m/s. The comprehensive
performance indicator η grows with the increasing air inlet
velocity for all the pipes with petals, which suggests that increasing
the air inlet velocity plays a positive role in the overall air–oil
two-phase flow characteristics. Again, the pipe with the “four-petal”
cross-section has the best comprehensive performance.

Figure 11 Effects
of the air inlet velocity on
(a) Fanning friction factor f, (b) Nusselt number Nu, and (c) comprehensive performance indicator η
(equal hydraulic diameter).

4 Conclusions
This article
presents 3 types of scavenge pipes with 3 different cross-sectional
geometries, that is “double-petal”, “tripetal”,
and “four-petal”, aiming to improve the characteristics
of the air–oil two-phase flow and heat transfer in the scavenge
pipe of an aero-engine bearing chamber, in comparison to a circular
pipe. The conclusions are as follows(1) Under the same working conditions, the tripetal cross-section
shows the best heat-transfer performance, while the four-petal cross-section
has the lowest flow resistance, at all the benchmarks of “equal
wetted perimeter”, “equal cross-sectional area”,
and “equal hydraulic diameter”, as shown in Table 3.

(2) Taking both the heat transfer and
flow resistance into consideration, all the 3 types of scavenge pipes
with petals have a better compressive performance than the circular
pipe. The pipe with four-petal cross-section exhibits the best comprehensive
performance.

(3) Raising
the oil inlet velocity will increase the flow resistance, and reduce
the heat-transfer performance and comprehensive performance indicator
η. In comparison, raising the air inlet velocity will reduce
the flow resistance, and improve the heat-transfer performance and
comprehensive performance indicator η.



Table 3 Nu and f of “Tripetal” and
“Four-Petal” Compared to “Circular”
conditions	Nu3 – Nu0/Nu0 (%)	f4 – f0/f0 (%)	
equal wetted perimeter	+8.8	–28.6	
equal cross-sectional area	+9.1	–23.6	
equal hydraulic diameter	+9.2	–21.9	
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by “National
Natural Science Foundation of China”, nos. 51506087 & 51876090;
“the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities”,
no. NT2019006; “National key research and development program”,
no. 2018YFB1900602; and “Excellent Scientific and Technological
Innovation Team of Jiangsu Universities”.

Nomenclature
r1circular
pipe radius (mm)

r2double-petal cross-section pipe radius
(mm)

r3tripetal cross-section pipe radius (mm)

r4four-petal cross-section pipe radius (mm)

vginlet
air speed (m·s–1)

vlinlet oil speed
(m·s–1)

T1inlet temperature (K)

qheat flux density (J·m–2·s–1)

ΔPtotal flowing pressure drop (Pa)

ΔPffrictional
pressure drop (Pa)

ΔPclocal pressure drop (Pa)

ΔPgthe gravitational pressure drop (Pa)

ΔPaaccelerated pressure drop (Pa)

Llength of the pipes (m)

Dthe equivalent
diameter (m)

ubfluid’s average velocity (m·s–1)

fFanning friction factor

hmean convective heat transfer
coefficient (W·m–2·K–1)

Twmean temperature on the pipe wall (K)

koilheat conductivity coefficient of the oil (W·m–1·K–1)

NuNusselt number

μeffeffective turbulent
viscosity (kg·m–1·s–1)

Gkturbulence kinetic energy due to the mean velocity
gradients (J)

Gbturbulence kinetic energy due to buoyancy
(J)

YMthe fluctuating dilatation in compressible turbulence

αkthe inverse effective Prandtl numbers for k

αεthe inverse effective Prandtl numbers for ε

ηcomprehensive performance indicator

EWPequal wetted perimeter

ECSAequal cross-sectional
area

EHDequal hydraulic
diameter
==== Refs
References
Li G. Q. 
Present and future
of aeroengin oil system . Aeroengine 
2011 , 6 , 49 –52 .
Busam S. ; Ebner J. ; Wittig S.  An
Experimental Study of Liquid Film Thickness in Annular Air/Oil Flow
in a Vertical Pipe Using a Laser Focus Displacement Meter . Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo, Louisiana, USA , 2001 .
Yan X. H. ; Guo Y. Q. ; Yin K. ; Liu G. J. 
Modeling simulation and optimization of oil system
based on MATLAB/Simullink . J. Aerosp. Power 
2017 , 32 , 740 –748 . 10.13224/j.cnki.jasp.2017.03.028 .
Sun H. C. ; Chen G. D. ; Chen B. 
Physical fields of oil/air two phase
in aeroengine bearing chamber in front of turbine . J. Northwest. Polytech. Univ. 
2013 , 31 , 71 –76 .
Flouros M. ; Kanarachos A. ; Yakinthos K. ; Salpingidou C. ; Cottier F. 
Two-Phase Flow Pressure Drop in Corrugated Tubes Used
in an Aero-engine Oil System . J. Eng. Gas Turbines
Power 
2015 , 138 , 062603 10.1115/1.4031627 .
Robinson A. ; Hervé M. ; Eastwick A. C.  Computational
Investigations into Aero-Engine Bearing Chamber Off-Take Flows . ASME Turbo Expo, Glasgow, UK , 2010 .
Chandra B. ; Simmons K. ; Pickering S.  Factors Affecting Oil Removal from an Aero Engine
Bearing Chamber . Proceedings of ASME Turbo
Expo, Glasgow, UK , 2010 .
Chandra B. ; Simmons K. ; Pickering S.  Liquid and gas
flow behavior in highly rotating environment . Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada , 2011 .
Chandra B. ; Simmons K. ; Pickering S. ; Collicott S. H. ; Wiedemann N. 
Study of gas/liquid behavior within
an aero engine bearing chamber . J. Eng. Gas
Turbines Power 
2013 , 135 , 051201 10.1115/1.4007753 .
Ren G. Z.  Study on Flow and
Heat Transfer and Optimization of Scavenge Structure in Bearing Chamber
Based on Oil/Air Two-Phase flow ; Northwestern
Polytechnical University , 2016 .
Chandra B. ; Collicott S. H. ; Munson J. H. 
Scavenge flow in
a bearing chamber with tangential sump off-take . J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 
2013 , 135 , 032503 10.1115/1.4007869 .
Flouros M. 
Reduction
of power losses in bearing chambers using porous screens surrounding
a ball bearing . J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 
2006 , 128 , 178 –182 . 10.1115/1.1995769 .
Flouros M. ; Cottier F. 
Impact of screens around bearings on the flow and heat
transfer in the vent and scavenge oil pipes in bearing chambers . J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 
2011 , 133 , 032503 10.1115/1.4002153 .
Flouros M. ; Hendrick P. ; Outirba B. ; Cottier F. ; Proestler S. 
Thermal and Flow Phenomena Associated
With the Behavior of Brush Seals in Aero Engine Bearing Chambers . J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 
2015 , 137 , 092503 10.1115/1.4029711 .
Flouros M. ; Cottier F. ; Hirschmann M. ; Salpingidou C. 
Numerical Investigation on Windback Seals Used in Aero
Engines . Aerospace 
2018 , 5 , 12 10.3390/aerospace5010012 .
Kanarachos S.  The impact of flow inlet conditions on the two phase
flow pattern and the heat transfer in a scavenge pipe of an Aero Engine
bearing chamber sealed with brush seals . International
Gas Turbine Conference , 2010 .
Flouros M. ; Iatrou G. ; Yakinthos K. ; Cottier F. ; Hirschmann M. 
Two-Phase
Flow Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop in Horizontal Scavenge Pipes
in an Aero-engine . J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power 
2015 , 137 , 081901 10.1115/1.4029389 .
Flouros M. 
Analytical and Numerical Simulations
of the Two-Phase Flow Heat Transfer in the Vent and Scavenge Pipes
of the CLEAN Engine Demonstrator . J. Turbomach. 
2010 , 132 , 011008 –011022 . 10.1115/1.3068331 .
ANSYS Inc.  ANSYS 15.0 Fluent Users Guide , 2015 .
Ma Z. R.  Study on Experimental Loop for Oil, Gas and Water Multiphase Flow ; Southwest Petroleum University , 2015 .
Chen B. ; Chen G. D. ; Wang T. 
Analysis of
Homogeneous Fluid/wall Oil Film Two-phase Stratified Flow in an Aeroengine
Bearing Chamber . J. Mech. Eng. 
2014 , 50 , 164 –173 . 10.3901/jme.2014.21.164 .
Feng Y.  Development of Software
and Numerical Simulation of Gas–Liquid Flow in the Oil-Return
Pipes ; Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics , 2008 .
Chai L. ; Xia G. D. ; Wang H. S. 
Parametric study on thermal and hydraulic
characteristics of laminar flow in microchannel heat sink with fan-shaped
ribs on sidewalls – Part 3: Performance evaluation . Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 
2016 , 97 , 1081 –1090 . 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016.02.076 .

