
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145858610.1021/acsomega.8b00169PerspectiveUltrathin Metallic Nanowire-Based Architectures as
High-Performing Electrocatalysts Li Luyao Wong Stanislaus S. *Department of Chemistry, State
University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-3400, United States* E-mail: stanislaus.wong@stonybrook.edu. sswong@bnl.gov.19 03 2018 31 03 2018 3 3 3294 3313 25 01 2018 07 02 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Fuel
cells (FCs) convert chemical energy into electricity through
electrochemical reactions. They maintain desirable functional advantages
that render them as attractive candidates for renewable energy alternatives.
However, the high cost and general scarcity of conventional FC catalysts
largely limit the ubiquitous application of this device configuration.
For example, under current consumption requirements, there is an insufficient
global reserve of Pt to provide for the needs of an effective FC for
every car produced. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary in the future
to replace Pt either completely or in part with far more plentiful,
abundant, cheaper, and potentially less toxic first row transition
metals, because the high cost-to-benefit ratio of conventional catalysts
is and will continue to be a major limiting factor preventing mass
commercialization. We and other groups have explored a number of nanowire-based
catalytic architectures, which are either Pt-free or with reduced
Pt content, as an energy efficient solution with improved performance
metrics versus conventional, currently commercially available Pt nanoparticles
that are already well established in the community. Specifically,
in this Perspective, we highlight strategies aimed at the rational
modification of not only the physical structure but also the chemical
composition as a means of developing superior electrocatalysts for
a number of small-molecule-based anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction
reactions, which underlie the overall FC behavior. In particular,
we focus on efforts to precisely, synergistically, and simultaneously
tune not only the size, morphology, architectural motif, surface chemistry,
and chemical composition of the as-generated catalysts but also the
nature of the underlying support so as to controllably improve performance
metrics of the hydrogen oxidation reaction, the methanol oxidation
reaction, the ethanol oxidation reaction, and the formic acid oxidation
reaction, in addition to the oxygen reduction reaction.

document-id-old-9ao8b00169document-id-new-14ao-2018-00169hccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
A number of innovative
technologies are currently being considered
as potentially efficient, low-cost renewable energy alternatives to
conventional, combustion energy-based sources. At the forefront of
many of these efforts are fuel cell (FC) configurations, which convert
chemical energy, via an oxidation process (at the anode) with a corresponding
reduction (at the cathode) of that fuel source, into electrical energy.
A variety of FCs exist, including solid-oxide FCs, molten carbonate
FCs, and proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), with each configuration
possessing specific advantages and disadvantages.1−3

In terms
of how these specialized FCs typically work, in a conventional
PEMFC membrane electrode assembly, hydrogen gas is supplied to the
anode, wherein protons are generated that subsequently migrate to
the cathode through the mediation of the proton exchange membrane.
Electrons are produced and migrate to the cathode, whereas the analogous
protons combine with the incoming O2 molecules to yield
H2O, electrical energy, and heat. These processes are summarized
in eqs 1 and 2. 1   2  

Given the conceptual simplicity of this device, PEMFCs are viewed
as a key technology moving forward4,5 because of
their rapid “start-up” capabilities, “low-temperature”
operation, low “weight-to-power production” ratio, and
effective responsiveness to changes in demands for power, all of which
are highly advantageous attributes for both transportation and portable
applications.2 However, PEMFCs also have
a number of practical drawbacks in terms of their instability, high
cost, decreased proton conductivity at high temperatures, fairly low
relative humidity values, and relatively poor constituent component
durability.6 Specifically, PEMFCs are prone
to air starvation, membrane degradation, and catalyst aggregation,
which are detrimental to normal operation.7

Alkaline fuel cells (AFCs) utilize a basic solution as the
electrolyte,
such as potassium hydroxide. Under similar operating conditions, AFCs
produce current densities that are comparable to those of their acidic
counterparts, consisting of conventional PEMFCs that run in media
such as sulfuric acid or perchloric acid, for instance.8 Moreover, in terms of overall costs, AFCs are
competitive with PEMFCs for low-power applications, such as hybrid
vehicles.8 An AFC generates electricity
through the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and the corresponding
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).

It should be noted that apart
from utilizing hydrogen as the fuel
source, other liquid reagents such as alcohols have also been utilized
as potentially viable energy sources, because liquid fuels tend to
maintain a relatively high solubility in an aqueous electrolyte, and
moreover, they can be easily stored and transported.9 Direct alcohol fuel cell (DAFC) technology, therefore,
represents a potential FC option for future applications in the automotive,10 portable power,11,12 and electronics
industries.13 In spite of this tremendous
promise, today’s DAFCs, such as direct methanol fuel cells
(DMFCs) and direct ethanol fuel cells, powered by methanol and ethanol,
respectively, suffer from high production costs and relatively low
efficiencies.14 These shortfalls can be
traced in large part to the metal-based catalysts that are employed
at both the anode15−17 and the cathode.18,19 In effect,
state-of-the-art DAFC electrocatalysts primarily consist of nanostructured
precious metals (i.e., Pt) and metal-based alloys supported onto carbon
supports; these metals tend to be both scarce and expensive. Moreover,
these electrocatalysts possess slow kinetics and preferentially form
partially oxidized products, such as formate and formic acid, as opposed
to CO2. In addition, typical electrocatalysts lack the
stability and durability required for long-term FC applications, because
of CO poisoning, metal dissolution, and surface oxidation.16,19 To address these deficiencies, high precious metal loadings (i.e.,
2 to 4 mg/cm2) are often needed, rendering the DAFCs less
cost-effective,20 because Pt is both expensive
(>$1000 per ounce) and scarce.

Hence, approaches toward creating
a novel, highly stable, and well-performing
catalyst have relied on either maximizing Pt loading or minimizing
overall Pt content.21 Nonetheless, achieving
ground-breaking, paradigm-changing progress in practical FCs requires
more than just moving forward with small, incremental improvements
on past electrocatalyst designs. As such, a compelling strategy we
have closely followed has been to probe the individual components
of the entire “catalyst-support” system not only independently but also holistically, wherein the physical
size, morphology, structure, surface chemistry, and chemical composition
of the catalyst coupled with the nature of the underlying support
can be precisely, synergistically, and simultaneously tuned.

Therefore, the key question that we and many others have tried
to address can be formulated, as follows. What structural and chemical
parameters make a difference and why? On the basis of a large body
of relevant literature, we believe that precise control over variables,
such as (a) size (i.e., nanoscale), (b) morphology (i.e., anisotropic
motifs), (c) chemical composition (i.e., alloys), (d) the presence
of a core–shell architecture, and (e) the nature of the underlying
support, is relevant and important. Hence, in a number of complementary
and intertwined studies, we explore the nature and significance of
every single one of these key reaction parameters acting not only
separately but also in close, intimate coordination with each other.
In particular, we analyze their importance in the context of (i) a
representative cathodic reaction such as ORR and (ii) model anodic
reactions such as the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR), the ethanol
oxidation reaction (EOR), the formic acid oxidation reaction (FAOR),
and HOR.

2 Importance of Size and Morphology
2.1 Why an Ultrathin One-dimensional (1D) Morphology?
Conventional
Pt nanoparticles (NPs) tend to (i) decompose by oxidation,
(ii) dissolve and undergo subsequent Ostwald ripening, (iii) passivate
by the formation of either a surface oxide layer or partially oxidized
carbon species including CO as an example, and (iv) experience slow
kinetics, thereby resulting in an undesirable overpotential.22 To account for their electrochemical behavior
in terms of their relatively poor durability and low activity, Pt
NPs (a) may possess additional potentially deleterious lattice boundaries,
(b) are often characterized by a higher amount of defects, and (c)
are furthermore prone to aggregation.22

By contrast, crystalline 1D nanostructures evince both enhanced
activity and stability. In terms of activity, they (i) preferentially
display long segments of highly active, smooth, low-energy crystal
planes,23,24 (ii) maintain improved electronic transport
characteristics, minimizing the need for conductive carbon additives,
and (iii) possess advantageous surface properties when their diameters
are decreased to ultrathin sizes. In terms of stability, they often
(i) possess fewer atoms in defect sites, delaying oxidation of the
active surface area to higher potentials, (ii) suppress dissolution
and ripening, leading to improved stability under operating conditions,
and (iii) minimize lattice boundaries and defect sites, thereby lowering
susceptibility to permanent oxidation and catalyst degradation. All
of these are desirable attributes for FC catalysts.25−29 Moreover, ultrathin nanowires (NWs) are expected
to maintain slightly contracted surfaces, which can weaken the interaction
with O2 and prevent passivation of the catalyst by O2. In addition, ultrathin NWs may also be more chemically homogeneous
and structurally monodisperse, and maintain fewer defect sites. In
particular, ultrathin Pt NWs maximize the surface area-to-volume ratio,
minimize noble metal catalyst loading, and decrease the amount of
catalytically inaccessible material within the interior of the wire,
all of which in turn can generate superior activity as compared with
both Pt nanotubes (NTs) and NPs.30

In our group, we have employed and adapted a facile synthesis protocol
to fabricate monometallic (in addition to more complex alloys) Pt
NWs with ultrathin diameters (1–2 nm).31−35 In effect, we have previously shown that we are able
to routinely achieve pure, crystalline, and dispersed ultrathin NWs
of arbitrary chemical composition with average diameters of ∼2.02
± 0.25 nm using modified “surfactant-mediated”
protocols. As typical surfactants, our group and others have successfully
utilized various long-chain organic fatty acid molecules, such as
cetyltrimethlammonium bromide (CTAB)36 and
dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB),37 under ambient, solution-based conditions to create noble metal-based
NWs possessing tunable chemical compositions, dictated by the concentrations
of metal precursors used.

In a typical CTAB-based method, a
“soft” template
consisting of wormlike micellar networks is generated in the presence
of CTAB within a two-phase water-chloroform system, as an example.
The relevant metal precursor ions are subsequently trapped within
the “micellar pores.” Hence, porous, high surface area
networks of interconnected, “wormlike,” and homogeneous
metallic NWs, possessing average diameters as small as 1.9 nm, can
be formed upon reduction of these metal precursors with a conventional
reducing agent, such as sodium borohydride. In a representative DTAB-based
protocol, the relevant inorganic metal precursors are initially transferred
under an inert gas (such as Ar) into a mixture of octadecylamine and
toluene using DTAB as a phase-transfer agent. The metal-based precursors
are then reduced in the presence of an excess of reducing agent, such
as NaBH4, to form elongated primary nanostructures (PNs).
Secondary growth and elongation of these PNs take place in preferred
directions (along the [111] axis, for instance), leading to the formation
of threadlike, wispy NWs of a tailorable chemical composition, dictated
by the relative molar ratios of metal precursor concentrations used.
We should note that variations on this theme of modulating growth
through surfactant self-assembly, using molecules such as dioctadecyldimethylammonium
chloride,38 also exist.

2.2 MOR and ORR Examples
In the case
of methanol oxidation, our group and several others have extensively
studied the morphology-dependent performance in the context of Pt-based
catalysts for MOR.39 In nearly all cases,
1D structures maintain increased MOR kinetics by comparison with commercial
nanoparticulate analogues, owing to their beneficial anisotropic structure.
In Figure 1C, for example,
we provide a direct comparison of the MOR kinetics associated with
our Pt NWs (diameter = 50 nm) with commercial Pt NP/C. These Pt NWs
maintain a nearly 3-fold higher current density after onset (Figure 1C inset) as compared
with Pt NP/C. This can readily be attributed to their improved CO
stripping performance (Figure 1A), as compared with Pt NP/C (Figure 1B), an assertion, which is demonstrated by
the significant shift of the primary CO stripping peak to lower potentials
by 80 mV. In addition, we have seen essentially identical results
in the case of ultrathin 2 nm Pt NWs with respect to commercial Pt
NP/C. In both cases, the enhanced CO stripping performance and MOR
kinetics can be readily ascribed to the beneficial structural and
electronic effects associated with anisotropic nanostructures.

Figure 1 Representative
CO stripping voltammograms obtained for (A) Pt NWs
and (B) commercial Pt NP/C for MOR-based experiments. The dashed line
highlights the potential of the CO stripping peak in the Pt NWs. (C)
The morphology-dependent methanol oxidation performance is characterized
by LSVs obtained in 0.1 M methanol, with the onset region of the LSV
highlighted in the inset. Reprinted with permission from ACS
Catal. 2013,3, 2031–2040.
Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.

The net consequence of these structure-induced “advantages”
in terms of MOR activity is that, with respect to Pt NPs alone, for
example, ultrathin FePtPd NWs with diameters of 2.5 nm and lengths
<100 nm evinced a higher mass current density of 489 mA/mgPt and a favorably lower oxidation peak potential of 0.614
V.40 PtRh and PtRu NWs show better stability
and 30% higher mass activity (MA) than the corresponding highly dispersed
NPs on carbon.41 Moreover, three-dimensional
(3D) screw thread-like PtCu alloy NWs42 yielded greater stability and larger mass current densities for
both MOR (i.e., 1.56 A/mg) and EOR (i.e., 1.02 A/mg) versus Pt NPs
alone.

In addition to enhanced MOR kinetics, anisotropic nanostructures
have also been widely demonstrated to be more stable toward degradation
under realistic FC conditions. For instance, the rate of undesirable
dissolution and ripening processes has been demonstrated to be measurably
and significantly slower in the case of 1D nanostructures by comparison
with that noted for commercial Pt NP/C. In fact, we have shown that
the ultrathin Pt monolayer (ML) shell–Pd NW core (diameter
= 2 nm) motif undergoes essentially no loss in MA over the course
of an extended durability protocol of up to 30 000 electrochemical
cycles (0.6–1.0 V) when employed as ORR electrocatalysts.43 However, the corresponding activity of analogous
Pt NP/C declines by as much as 40–50% over the same durability
test. Similar improvements in durability have also recently been observed
by our group39 in the context of Pt-modified
Ru NWs, when compared with analogous Pt-modified Ru NPs. These results
confirm that 1D motifs are promising structural paradigms as high-performance
electrocatalytic platforms.

2.3 EOR and FAOR Examples
In terms of
morphology-dependent EOR electrochemical performance,44 a comparison of the relevant activity and durability of
the as-synthesized ultrathin Pt NWs and commercial Pt NP/C counterparts
highlights a clear effect. Figures 2A and 2B present some preliminary
cyclic voltammetry (CV) scans related to the initial CO ML stripping
of the as-prepared Pt NWs and NPs. A significant negative onset potential
shift was observed for Pt NWs with respect to Pt NPs, indicative of
a more effective elimination of surface CO species. Because the removal
of absorbed surface intermediates had been reported to be the rate-limiting
step at low potentials for EOR on polycrystalline Pt surfaces,45 the efficient oxidation of surface CO adsorbates
at these relatively low potentials presumably benefited Pt NW EOR
performance.

Figure 2 Representative CO stripping voltammograms for (A) Pt NWs
and (B)
Pt NPs associated with EOR-based experiments. Typical images have
been inserted individually. We compare curves obtained for (C) the
first scan and (D) the second scan in the positive direction (solid
line) and negative direction (dashed line) for Pt NWs (black) and
NPs (red). Onset regions are highlighted by arrows in the inset images.
(E) A comparison of current-line plots for ethanol oxidation activity
on Pt NWs (black) and NPs (red) in 0.2 M ethanol in 0.1 M HClO4 solution at 0.65 V for 3600 s reaction time is presented.
The inset shows a comparison of current densities measured at three
different potentials (0.55, 0.60, and 0.65 V) at 500 s reaction time.
Currents have been normalized to the measured Pt surface area. Reprinted
with permission from Electrochimica Acta2011,56, 9824–9830.

To determine the corresponding EOR activity and durability,
CV
curves and stability-relevant chronoamperometric (CA) data were collected
in ethanol within an acidic electrolyte and are plotted in Figure 2C,D, and E. With
respect to their CV curves, Pt NWs displayed a much lower onset potential
and a significantly higher activity at the peak potential as compared
with Pt NPs alone. Regarding the CA curves, the Pt NWs yielded a 2-fold
higher activity as compared with Pt NPs after 3600 s of reaction time.
The performance enhancement of 1D Pt NWs with respect to Pt NPs may
be indicative of not only the preferential exposure of active terrace-step
sites for ethanol adsorption but also the helpful surface removal
of potentially poisoning CO species.

High-quality ultrathin
Pd NWs have been synthesized by a number
of methods, including hydrothermal-based and polyol-centric syntheses.46,47 The as-obtained NWs evinced not only a decrease in the onset potential
but also a 1.5 times higher peak current in addition to a 2.5-fold
improvement in the current density as compared with conventional Pd/C
toward FAOR.38,47,48

3 Importance of Chemical Composition
3.1 Rationale
By analogy with DMFC cathodes,
the MOR electrocatalysts are based upon carbon-supported Pt metal
and Pt alloy NPs.15−17 However, the state-of-the-art Pt-based DMFC anode
electrocatalysts suffer from poor reaction kinetics, and are easily
contaminated by oxygen-containing carbon species, such as CO.

We and others have found that 1D alloys are a much better option.
For example, bimetallic PtAu3 NTs are considered to be
superior to both Pt black and Pt/C on the basis of their low onset
potential, high catalytic activity, and tolerance to CO poisoning.49 Similarly, due in part to their enhanced CO
removal ability and high density of active surface sites, Pt–Cu3 wavy NWs, Pt–Ni bimetallic nanobundles, 3D porous
Pt–Rh nanoassemblies, and Pt–Co alloy NW assemblies
are often more durable and more highly active than Pt NPs alone for
alcohol electro-oxidations, such as MOR and EOR.50−53 Moreover, the selectivity with
respect to the complete oxidation of ethanol to CO2 improved
by as much as a factor of 3, when using ultrathin Rh/Pt bimetallic
NWs as compared with commercial Pt black.54 As additional illustrative examples, ultrathin PtxPb “nervelike” NWs with diameters of ∼3.6
nm exhibited very high specific activity (SA) values of 2.78 mA/cm2 in acidic media and 6.51 mA/cm2 in alkaline media
toward MOR, denoting performance enhancements of ∼5.24 and
4.12 times over those of commercial Pt/C catalysts,55 whereas ultrathin veinlike Ir67Sn33 NWs displayed a very high MA of 95.6 mA/mgIr for EOR
at a low potential of 0.4 V, representing improvements of ∼4.1-
and 20-fold over those of Ir/C and commercial Pt/C, respectively.56

By analogy, ultrathin Pt–Fe alloy
NWs, ultrathin Pd–Ir
NWs, and Pt–Al/Pt–Y-based NW networks are clearly superior
ORR catalysts as compared with Pt NPs alone in both activity and stability,
because of a larger accessible reactive area and the deliberate introduction
of the extra metal.57−59 Furthermore, Pt84Pb16 bimetallic
alloy nanoflowers60 yielded FAOR MAs that
were ∼17 times higher than that of commercial Pt black; nanoporous
Pd–M catalysts (wherein “M” = Cd, Pb, Ir, and
Pt) with an atomic elemental ratio of 90:10 showed improved stability
coupled with equal if not improved FAOR activity.61

To fully explore the benefits of a tailored chemical
composition,
we can consider MOR in the context of a Pt–Ru system in greater
detail. Specifically, significant efforts have focused on the synthesis
of nanostructured alloys of Pt with Ru, so as to improve their CO
tolerance.17,33,62−67 It has been theoretically postulated68 that the MOR enhancement of PtRu alloys is due to not only the enablement
of the direct conversion of methanol to CO2 (without any
intermediate CO, i.e., non-CO pathway) but also the promotion of CH3OH adsorption and formation of active OH species from H2O, which oxidizes intermediate (and poisoning)69 CO bound to Pt sites. Moreover, the strain effect70 resulting from the lattice mismatch between
Pt and Ru decreases the binding energy of reaction intermediates,
thereby favoring high CO tolerance.

Both theory and experiment71 imply that
a judicious variation of the Pt to Ru ratio within Pt–Ru alloys
can yield MOR catalysts that outperform commercial Pt NPs in terms
of activity, selectivity, and stability. As such, optimization of
these alloys has shown that maximum efficiency can be obtained when
Ru concentrations are in the range of “x”
= 0.07–0.33 within Pt1–xRux systems.33 Specifically, when alloyed at low-to-moderate Ru concentrations
(χRu = 0–0.6), the PtRu alloy forms a solid
solution, with Ru atoms occupying sites within the face-centered cubic
lattice of Pt.72 As implied, surface Ru
sites can catalyze the oxidation of CO and other C-containing intermediates
to CO2 at lower potentials, thereby decreasing the amount
of irreversible binding of CO to active Pt sites73 and consequentially promoting stability.

Indeed,
a promising solution to addressing the challenge associated
with CO oxidation has come from purposefully incorporating 3d transition
metals into existing Pt alloys. For example, the role of Pd within
PtxRuyPdz is thought to promote favorable C–O
and C–H bond scission.74 In general,
the introduction of 3d transition metals into bimetallic PtRu alloys
to create ternary PtRuM alloys can improve upon the activity of Pt
by increasing the amount of oxygenated species at lower potentials
to enable more facile CO oxidation, while also rendering the catalysts
more cost efficient and less susceptible to poisoning.15,17,75 Furthermore, ternary PtRuM alloys
(with “M” = Co, Ni, and W) generated by chemical vapor
deposition76 yielded area-specific current
densities of 0.016 mA/cm2, which were ∼8 times higher
than that of PtRu alloys and more than 14 times greater than that
of Pt alloys. Moreover, in PtRuNi systems,77 electron transfer from Ni to Pt can enhance the oxidation of CO
species on Pt. Specifically, Pt–RuNi pair sites were found
to be the most active, because they possessed the lowest overpotential
to dissociate water, the highest MOR activity, and the strongest CO
tolerance within the potential window of operation.78−80

A review15 of the experimental work
on Co and Ni alloyed with Pt concluded that the addition of non-noble
metals at moderate concentrations (i.e., Pt1–xRuMx where 0 < “x” < 0.33 M for Co/Ni) results in both enhanced
MOR activity and improved CH3OH tolerance as compared with
pure Pt alone. Analogous studies have found up to 200 mV lower onset
potentials for MOR, upon addition of Fe81 and Sn,82 within ternary nanostructured
alloys of PtRuM with “M” = Fe or Sn.83 Moreover, Pt–Ru–Co–W quartenary anode
catalysts84 yielded MOR activities that
are 40 to 70% higher as compared with commercial binary Pt50Ru50 species.

3.2 Pt–M Ultrathin NW
Alloys
In
our 2016 ACS Catalysis publication,85 we examined different Pt–M ultrathin NW alloys for
use in HOR in an alkaline medium. The shift from standard acidic electrolytes
to alkaline environments is highly beneficial and desirable, because
acidic solutions are corrosive, a fact which limits the extent to
which less robust metals can be realistically used. Therefore, switching
to alkaline environments broadens the number of elements that can
be potentially incorporated and alloyed with Pt within novel catalyst
materials. Hence, the project sought to address the theoretical premise
that in alkaline media, the hydrogen binding energy (HBE) plays a
major role during the HOR process. The idea was that significant improvements
in electrochemical activity and reaction kinetics could be achieved
by alloying Pt with transition metals, thereby resulting in weaker
HBE values; in particular, a weaker HBE should effectively lower the
barrier to desorption from the catalyst surface following product
formation, which often has a significant impact on activity.

Experimentally, we prepared families of Pt7M3 (M = Cu, Au, Co, and Ru) binary ultrathin NWs with consistent composition,
morphology, and dimensions. Specifically, representative high-angle
annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy
(STEM) images and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) measurements
(Figure 3A–J)
corroborated the expected anisotropic 1D morphology as well as the
chemical homogeneity of all binary samples. Specifically, we found
each NW to be composed of multiple crystalline segments associated
with single-crystalline planes. It is noteworthy that although d-spacing data for our Pt-based binary alloys were within
experimental error of the reported d-spacing for
the Pt (111) plane (i.e., 2.26 Å), all of the binary NWs generated,
with the exception of PtAu, exhibited a minor decrease in their measured d-spacing values relative to that of pure monometallic Pt
NW controls.

Figure 3 (A,C,E,G,I) HAADF images and (B,D,F,H,J) the corresponding
EELS
line-scan profiles of the NW catalysts: (A,B) Pt7Ru3 NWs, (C,D) Pt7Fe3 NWs, (E,F) Pt7Co3 NWs, (G,H) Pt7Cu3 NWs,
and (I,J) Pt7Au3 NWs. HOR CVs for (K) Pt7Ru3 NWs, Pt7Fe3 NWs, and
Pt7Co3 NWs as well as for (L) Pt7Cu3 NWs and Pt7Au3 NWs. (M) Bar
graph summarizing the measured activity values as a function of the
binary NW composition for the HOR in alkaline media. Reproduced from
ref (85).

The HOR kinetics (Figure 3K,L) data were collected in a H2-saturated solution
within 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. The observed current of each sample
was normalized to the geometric surface area of the electrode. As Figure 3M demonstrates, our
electrochemical measurements correlated well with the theoretical
HBE calculations, with the exception of the Cu alloy, a finding which
was attributed to Cu dissolution at higher positive potentials.85 In fact, we found that the Pt7Ru3 NW catalyst exhibited the highest HOR activity and notably
a favorable exchange current density of 0.493 mA/cm2, a
value even better than that of pure Pt NWs alone. In terms of the
performance of the other metal alloys, we found that Pt7Fe3 NW (0.459 mA/cm2) > Pt7Co3 NW (0.394 mA/cm2) > Pt NW (0.229 mA/cm2) > Pt7Cu3 NW (0.191 mA/cm2) > Pt7Au3 NW (0.162 mA/cm2).
The order of
experimental activities for the binary alloys does not necessarily
correspond entirely with the theoretical, calculated HBE values. We
believe that the different HOR catalytic activities observed for our
PtM binary NWs can be rationalized according to two key factors: (1)
First, the addition of a second metal to Pt modifies the d-band structure
and electron density of Pt, a phenomenon which is known as the “ligand
effect.” (2) Pt–Pt bond distances as well as the intrinsic
electronic properties of the underlying Pt lattice are altered to
some degree by the presence of the second metal, manifesting themselves
as a “lattice strain effect.” Hence, our data demonstrated
the composition-dependent behavior of PtM binary NWs toward HOR, because
we confirmed the presence of desirable electronic interactions (and
enhanced activity) with the introduction of the second metal with
Pt.

These critically relevant ligand and lattice strain effects
manifested
themselves in not only perceptible shifts in the Pt 4f region associated
with chemically specific X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy spectra
for each binary catalyst tested but also corresponding shifts in both
the hydrogen adsorption and oxide regions with respect to Pt. In the
case of PtRu, PtFe, PtCo, and PtCu NW alloyed systems, these phenomena
collectively explained the expected decrease in HBE values (vs Pt)
because of the lowering and transitioning of the d-band center away
from the Pt Fermi level through electron withdrawal induced by alloying
of Pt with other metals. The net result was a weakening of the metal–adsorbed
hydrogen (i.e., M–Had) interaction and an improvement
in the desorption kinetics.

3.3 PtRuFe NWs
We
also synthesized ultrathin,
ternary PtRuFe NWs,31 possessing different
chemical compositions, to probe their CO tolerance as well as electrochemical
activity as a function of composition for both (i) MOR and (ii) FAOR.
The as-prepared “multifunctional” ternary NW catalysts
exhibited both higher MOR and FAOR activities as compared with binary
Pt7Ru3 NW controls, monometallic Pt NWs, and
commercial catalyst samples. In terms of synthetic novelty, we utilized
a sustainably mild, ambient, wet-synthesis method, never previously
applied to the fabrication of crystalline, pure ternary systems, to
generate ultrathin, homogeneous alloy PtRuFe NWs with a range of controlled
compositions. These NWs were subsequently characterized using a suite
of techniques including X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), selected area diffraction pattern (SAED), and energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy to verify not only the incorporation of Ru and
Fe into the Pt lattice but also their chemical homogeneity in addition
to their physical structure, morphology, and integrity. Representative
images (Figure 4A–D)
indicate that the ternary motifs with various metal compositions possessed
an average diameter ranging from 1.9 to 2.2 nm.

Figure 4 Representative higher
magnification HRTEM images for (A) Pt7Ru2Fe
NWs, (B) Pt7Ru1.5Fe1.5 NWs, (C) Pt7RuFe2 NWs, and (D) Pt7Ru0.5Fe2.5 NWs. (E) Magnification of
the MOR onset region. (F) Bar graph highlighting the MOR activity
measured at E (V) vs RHE = 0.65 V for Pt NWs, Pt7Ru3 NWs, Pt7Ru2Fe NWs, Pt7Ru1.5Fe1.5 NWs, Pt7RuFe2 NWs, Pt7Ru0.5Fe2.5 NWs,
and Pt7Fe3 NWs. (G) Magnification of the FAOR
onset region. (H) Bar graph demonstrating FAOR activity at E (V) vs RHE = 0.65 V for Pt NWs, Pt7Ru3 NWs, Pt7Ru2Fe NWs, Pt7Ru1.5Fe1.5 NWs, Pt7RuFe2 NWs, Pt7Ru0.5Fe2.5 NWs, and Pt7Fe3NWs. Reproduced from Energy Environ. Sci., 2015,8, 350–363, with permission
from The Royal Society of Chemistry.

Last, these NWs were electrochemically tested for their MOR
(Figure 4E,F) and FAOR
(Figure 4G,H) activities.
Relevant MOR data were measured in a deoxygenated 0.5 M methanol solution
supported in an acidic electrolyte, whereas analogous FAOR kinetic
results were collected in the same acidic electrolyte but in the presence
of 0.5 M formic acid. Specifically, at a potential of 0.8 V (vs reversible
hydrogen electrode (RHE)), PtRuFe ternary NWs and binary NW controls
evinced an MOR activity trend of Pt7Ru2Fe1 NWs (2.27 mA/cm2) > Pt7Ru1.5Fe1.5 NWs (1.86 mA/cm2) > Pt7Ru1Fe2 NWs (1.46 mA/cm2) = Pt7Ru3 NWs (1.46 mA/cm2) > Pt7Ru0.5Fe2.5 NWs (1.35 mA/cm2) >
Pt7Fe3 NWs (0.67 mA/cm2). A similar
pattern of
behavior was noted at a lower potential of 0.65 V (vs RHE). Analogous
FAOR activities measured at 0.65 V (vs RHE) also reinforced the importance
of tailoring the chemical composition to yield a desired electrochemical
performance. In effect, the analogous trend was deemed to be Pt7Ru1.5Fe1.5 NWs (2.15 mA/cm2) > Pt7Ru2Fe1 NWs (1.90 mA/cm2) > Pt7Ru1Fe2 NWs (1.83
mA/cm2) > Pt7Ru3 NWs (1.50 mA/cm2) > Pt7Ru0.5Fe2.5 NWs
(1.22 mA/cm2) > Pt7Fe3 NWs (0.55
mA/cm2).

It turned out that the optimal chemical
composition for FAOR was
Pt7Ru1.5Fe1.5, which is different
from that for MOR (i.e., Pt7Ru2Fe1). Specifically, MOR appeared to be mainly influenced by the Ru content,
whereas FAOR was primarily impacted by the corresponding Fe content
within the ternary metal alloy catalyst itself. To explain our MOR
observations, it is known that in the case of Pt1–xRux alloys, the presence
of Pt–Ru pair sites increases the MOR catalytic performance
by facilitating the oxidation of adsorbed CO species at potentials
lower than those observed on elemental Pt as a result of a process
referred to as “carbonyl-spillover”;86,87 in particular, in the presence of Ru, adsorbed CO species generated
by the rapid dehydrogenation of methanol at Pt active sites can functionally
“spill over” and react with RuOH species, thereby forming
CO2. Thus, the CV results suggested that the Fe-doped PtRu
NWs may actually benefit from the complementary beneficial effects
of (i) the bifunctional mechanism, wherein the −OH
species dissociated from water and adsorbed onto the Ru surface catalyzes
the removal of CO adsorbed onto Pt active sites at lower potentials,
thereby increasing the overall activity of Pt1–xRux-based alloys, as
well as (ii) the favorable electronic effects associated with PtFe
alloys, in which the presence of the Fe “ligand” lowers the d-band center of Pt, thereby resulting in more
d-band vacancies and an overall lower susceptibility to poisoning
of active sites by CO species formed as intermediates in the indirect
oxidation of methanol.83,88−90 Additional
CA tests were performed on both the optimized ternary sample (i.e.,
Pt7Ru2Fe1 NWs) and the commercial
PtRu/C NP in the presence of methanol. Not surprisingly, our ternary
NWs outperformed the PtRu/C standard sample in terms of MOR stability.

3.4 PdCu
PdCu alloys with various morphologies
have previously been reported as promising catalysts toward FAOR.
Specifically, nanoporous PdCu alloys were found to exhibit enhanced
activity and excellent durability toward FAOR,91 whereas 3D PdCu motifs gave rise to a 30% enhancement in
the MA value with respect to commercial Pd NPs.92 High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images in Figure 5A–D confirm the 1D morphology
of our as-generated PdxCu1–x NWs,93 all of which possessed
diameters less than 3 nm. The SAED pattern implied not only the overall
polycrystalline nature but also a crystallographically well-defined
face-centered cubic structure for all Pd-based binary NWs.

Figure 5 Representative
higher magnification HRTEM images for (A) Pd NWs,
(B) Pd9Cu NWs, (C) Pd8Cu2 NWs, and
(D) Pd7Cu3 NWs. (E) Cyclic voltammograms for
the FAOR with the current normalized to the electrochemically active
surface area (ECSA). (F) Bar graph highlighting the FAOR activity
at the respective peak potential values for commercial Pt NPs, commercial
Pd NPs, Pd NWs, Pd9Cu NWs, Pd8Cu2 NWs, and Pd7Cu3 NWs. (G) CA measurements collected
in an argon-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.5 M HCOOH solution,
obtained at a potential of 0.4 V vs RHE for a period of 60 min. Reproduced
from ref (93).

To examine the electrocatalytic
performance of our as-prepared,
ultrathin PdCu NWs toward FAOR, CV and CA curves were collected in
the presence of formic acid, supported in an acidic electrolyte. The
as-collected FAOR results of a series of PdxCu1–x binary systems are
presented in Figure 5E–G. On the basis of these data, we observed a volcano-type
trend for FAOR activities as a function of the metal alloy composition.
Our best sample, Pd9Cu NWs, gave rise to an activity of
9.52 mA/cm2, a value which was approximately twice greater
than that of analogous ultrathin Pd NWs (5.55 mA/cm2) and
3 times larger than that of commercial Pd NPs (3.44 mA/cm2). It was postulated that because the activity of commercial Pt NPs
toward FAOR was considerably lower than that of our PdCu alloys, it
was plausible that Pd-based alloys may in fact have been governed
by a completely different FAOR mechanistic pathway. Additionally,
our optimized composition (i.e., Pd9Cu) not only exhibited
the highest activity measured but also the best long-term stability
within the overall series of ultrathin PdxCu1–x NWs analyzed.

3.5 PdNi
With respect to ORR, our group
has developed a number of binary Pd-based NW systems focused on PdAu30 and PdPt,94 as examples
highlighting the significance of carefully tailoring the chemical
composition as a means of enhanced observed performance. Because Pt
and Au are relatively expensive and scarce metals, we sought to create
practical alloy-based alternatives, incorporating cheaper, more plentiful,
and relatively nontoxic elements such as Ni, Cu, and Fe, as implied
by the case studies featured within this Perspective.

Within
any Pd-based alloy, the presence of an additional element can result
in “ligand” and “strain” effects, meaning
that Pd is not only electronically modified but also structurally
altered by the lattice mismatch created by the “dopant”
atoms. Not surprisingly, within a PdNi alloy,95 theory has suggested that a perceptible 1.00 eV downshift in the
Pd d-band to lower energies30 can be achieved
by incorporating Ni within the lattice, which manifests itself in
terms of weakened d-π* interactions between the surface-adsorbed
oxygen species and the underlying Pd.96 What we found experimentally was that the positions of the oxide
reduction peak, which are correlated with the material’s oxygen-binding
abilities, could be deliberately altered by controlling the amount
of Ni dopant within a series of ultrathin, segmented NW structures
(i.e., PdxNi1–x with “x” = 0.9, 0.8, and 0.7),
possessing a homogeneous distribution of elements, as verified by
a combination of TEM (Figure 6A–D) and energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) data.

Figure 6 Representative
TEM images of the as-prepared (A) Pd, (B) Pd0.90Ni0.10, (C) Pd0.83Ni0.17, and (D) Pd0.75Ni0.25 free-standing ultrathin
NWs. (E) Experimentally calculated area-normalized kinetic current
densities obtained from a series of butylamine-treated Pd–Ni
NWs by comparison with elemental Pd NWs. (F) Representative polarization
curves from Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs with analogous
Pd NWs, serving as a comparison. (G) Data on specific activities of
Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs, Pd NWs, and commercial Pd
NPs. Reprinted with permission from ACS Catal., 2014,4, 2544–2555. Copyright (2014)
American Chemical Society.

In effect, Pd0.90Ni0.10 NW samples
possessed
the highest potential for the oxide reduction peak, corresponding
to the highest ORR activity (i.e., 1.96 mA/cm2 at 0.8 V)
observed among the series of NWs tested with improved performance
as compared with both commercial Pd NPs and analogous ultrathin Pd
NWs. These data presented in Figure 6E confirm our theme of a clear and tunable (i.e., “volcano”-type
in this case) dependence between the chemical composition and the
corresponding ORR performance. Moreover, our purified Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs maintained 85% of their initial activity in
the presence of a potential passivating species under realistic operating
conditions, such as 4 mM methanol. Our data (Figure 6F,G) designated a tangible improvement as
compared with both commercial elemental zero-dimensional Pt NP/C (79%)
and 1D Pt NWs (43%). Furthermore, even under a set of more challenging
conditions, the main defining features of Pd0.90Ni0.10 CVs were still preserved, even after the addition of 100
mM methanol, indicative not only of the absence of a CO-poisoning
effect but also of the intrinsically high tolerance of our NW systems
to deleterious catalytic poisoning and deactivation.

4 Core–Shell Motif of the Catalyst
4.1 Rationale
Within a core–shell
configuration, studies have suggested that excellent electrochemical
activity and durability can be achieved through favorable synergistic
interactions between the core and the shell, including taking advantage
of a combination of ligand and strain effects.97 As such, core–shell motifs have been reported in
the form of more unusual morphologies such as dendrites, cubes, raspberries,
porous hierarchical motifs, and flowers.95,98 In particular, an “M” (where “M” = transition
metal) core–Pt-based shell motif has four primary benefits
toward enhancing the intrinsic activity of electrocatalysts. First, it maximizes the use of Pt so that such a structure
will not only minimize Pt loading but also allow for every Pt atom
to be catalytically accessible. Second, the addition
of the transition metal “M” lowers the energy of the
Pt d-band and creates d-band vacancies. Third, it
increases the stability of Pt toward CO poisoning by lowering the
affinity of Pt for irreversibly binding CO.

As a promising case
study (i.e., Pt < 30%),99 it was found
that the current density and the output power density of DMFCs were
doubled by using a NiO–Pt core–shell system as compared
with a conventional PtRu alloy at the anode. Moreover, substrate-induced
lateral strain in a Pt ML yielded a nearly 7-fold increase in MOR
activity on a Pt/Au(111) single-crystal surface relative to Pt(111)
itself.100 Another relevant example consists
of ultrathin Pd–Pt core–shell Pd NWs with controllable
shell thickness, which not only could be produced on a relatively
large scale but also yielded dramatically enhanced activity and stability
toward ORR as compared with a Pt control sample;101 in addition, Pt-coated Ni NWs proffer 3 times greater ORR
MA than Pt NPs.102 Pt-coated Cu NWs exceeded
the area and mass exchange current densities of carbon-supported Pt
by 3.5 and 1.9 times, respectively, for HOR in base.103

Within our group, we have produced core–shell
Pt@metal NWs
by depositing ML quantities of Pt on our core NW surfaces by utilizing
an under-potential deposition (UPD)/galvanostatic deposition (GD)
protocol, developed by our close collaborators (i.e., the team of
Radoslav R. Adzic at Brookhaven National Laboratory).19,104 Experimentally, the Pt “shells” are formed by first
electrodepositing a conformal Cu ML utilizing an initial UPD process
and subsequently displacing the Cu ad-atoms with Pt via simple galvanic
displacement. The initial Pt ML coverage can be systematically increased
and appropriately varied by repeating, as needed, the UPD/GD step
so as to provide for a thicker, more uniform, and homogeneous protective
“Pt coat.”

4.2 Pt@Ru Core–Shell
NWs
We examined
the morphology-dependent performance of the Ru NWs by comparison with
commercial Ru NP/C after decorating the surfaces of these structures
with Pt as a core–shell motif. Though these core–shell
motifs were not necessarily ultrathin in size, given our previous
emphasis on Pt–Ru systems, they represent excellent conceptual
model systems. Indeed, we and others have demonstrated that the performance
of PtRu alloy-type architectures can be further enhanced by employing
a Pt ML shell–Ru NW core (Pt@Ru NW/C) structural motif.19,105−108 Thus, this unique architecture localizes the Pt content at the catalytic
interface while preserving the beneficial Pt–Ru pair sites
required for the so-called “bifunctional mechanism,”
wherein the oxidation of CO is facilitated by more oxophilic Ru surface
sites.

The localization of the Pt atoms at the interface contributes
to an enhancement in the mass-normalized MOR activity of the Pt@Ru
core–shell NWs (0.36 A/mg of Pt) as compared with the corresponding
performance of PtRu alloy-type NPs (PtRu NP/C, 0.24 A/mg of Pt) as
well as of supported elemental Pt (Pt NP/C, 0.09 A/mg of Pt) serving
as commercial standards. In essence, MOR linear sweep voltammetries
(LSVs) (Figure 7A,B)
revealed that the Pt@Ru NWs possessed more than double the peak current
density and yielded an MOR onset potential that was 100 mV lower than
that of commercial Pt NP/C, thereby confirming the excellent performance
of these hierarchical NWs. The corresponding MAs of Pt@Ru NWs and
control samples, measured at 0.65 V, are summarized in a representative
bar graph (Figure 7C). Catalytic durability (Figure 7D) was seen in that even after 2000 cycles of a rigorous
testing protocol, the activity of our Pt@Ru core–shell NWs
still outperformed Pt NP/C.

Figure 7 (A) Mass-normalized LSVs obtained in 0.5 M methanol
in 0.1 M HClO4 at 20 mV/s with the onset region for MOR
highlighted in (B).
(C) MAs measured at 0.65 V are shown for the commercial Pt NP/C and
PtRu NP/C and for our corresponding as-prepared core–shell
Pt–Ru NP/C (i.e., one UPD/GD cycle) and Pt–Ru NW (i.e.,
six UPD/GD cycles) electrocatalysts. (D) Analogous plots of the mass-normalized
current density, measured at 0.64 V as a function of the cycle number
in a durability test, are also shown. Reprinted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013,5, 5518–5530. Copyright (2013) American Chemical
Society.

Indeed, the main benefit of the
Pt–Ru core shell motif we
have generated is that the structural and electronic interactions
between the Pt shell and the Ru core promotes more facile MOR kinetics,
as predicted by Nørskov and co-workers.73,76,105 Specifically, in this core–shell
motif, the Pt atoms of the shell lie atop the Ru core, occupying the
three- and four-fold interstitial sites of the Ru. The inherent lattice
mismatch between the Pt shell and the Ru core forces a compression
strain upon the Pt lattice, because of the shorter interatomic distance
of the surface Ru sites as compared with Pt. In particular, the d-orbital
overlap is increased, thereby resulting in an increased d-band width.109 As such, the occupied band states are shifted
down in energy to conserve the net occupancy of the d-band, and therefore,
the weighted center of the band is lowered in energy. Furthermore,
it is expected that the Ru core should promote a noteworthy “ligand”
effect, wherein the electron density is withdrawn from the Pt d-band
toward the Ru core.

In terms of catalysis, the lower weighted
center of the d-band
contributes to a lowered CO affinity as a result of a weakening of
the overlap between the Pt d-orbitals and the CO π*-orbitals.
Indeed, the fundamental problem of CO oxidation in Pt@Ru core–shell
catalyst architectures has been studied from both theoretical and
experimental perspectives to establish the basis for a new generation
of materials and architectures for use as DMFC anode electrocatalysts.76,110−112 Specifically, the theoretical work performed
by Nørskov et al. on mixed metal Pt MLs atop an Ru substrate
revealed that Pt MLs containing non-noble metals such as Fe, Co, Rh,
Sn, and Ni should maintain an improved catalytic performance as compared
with PtRu alloys alone.76 Moreover, the
presence of the added transition metal not only is expected to measurably
increase the electronic and structural effects imparted by the Ru
core on the Pt ML shell, thereby further increasing the CO kinetics
beyond that of Pt–Ru architectures alone, but also could lead
to a change in the mechanistic pathway of MOR itself.79

4.3 Pt-Coated Pd1–xCux NWs
For
this system,
we demonstrated93 a concerted effort to
couple and combine the benefits of small size, anisotropic morphology,
and tunable chemical composition to devise a novel “family”
of functional architectures. In particular, we fabricated ultrathin
1D Pt-coated Pd1–xCux (i.e., Pt∼Pd1–xCux) core–shell hierarchical
nanostructures with readily tunable chemical compositions by utilizing
a facile, surfactant-based, wet chemical synthesis coupled with the
Cu UPD technique.

Our group of Pt∼Pd1–xCux NWs consistently
outperformed not only commercial Pt NPs but also ultrathin Pt NWs
by several fold orders of magnitude for both MOR and EOR in alkaline
media. The variation of the MOR (Figure 8A,B) and EOR (Figure 8C,D) performance with the chemical composition
of our ultrathin Pt∼Pd1–xCux NWs was also discussed; the values
of measured catalytic activities appeared to rise with increasing
Cu content.

Figure 8 (A) CVs for the MOR with the current normalized to ECSA. (B) Bar
graph highlighting the MOR activity obtained at respective peak potential
values for commercial Pt NPs, ultrathin Pt NWs, Pt∼Pd NWs,
Pt∼Pd9Cu NWs, Pt∼Pd8Cu2 NWs, and Pt∼Pd7Cu3 NWs. (C) CVs for
the EOR with the current normalized to ECSA. (D) Bar graph highlighting
the EOR activity at the respective peak potential values for commercial
Pt NPs, ultrathin Pt NWs, Pt∼Pd NWs, Pt∼Pd9Cu NWs, Pt∼Pd8Cu2 NWs, and Pt∼Pd7Cu3 NWs. (E) CA measurements collected in an argon-saturated
1 M CH3OH + 1 M NaOH solution, obtained at a potential
of 0.65 V vs RHE for a period of 60 min. (F) CA measurements collected
in an argon-saturated 1 M CH3CH2OH + 1 M NaOH
solution, obtained at a potential of 0.65 V vs RHE for a period of
60 min. Reproduced from ref (93).

The “optimal”
chemical composition for MOR was deduced
to be Pt∼Pd7Cu3, which is in excellent
agreement with CO stripping results, as CO is the intermediate species
for MOR on Pt sites. Pt∼Pd7Cu3 exhibited
a surface area activity of 23.2 mA/cm2, which is over 3-fold
higher than that of commercial Pt NPs (i.e., 6.94 mA/cm2) and analogous Pt ultrathin NWs (i.e., 7.45 mA/cm2).
Though there was no clear discernible composition trend, analogous
EOR activities of all as-prepared Pt∼Pd1–xCux core–shell
NWs yielded a notable and perceptible improvement with respect to
both pure Pt ultrathin NWs and commercial Pt NPs. In particular, the
SA of our core–shell nanostructured samples was measured to
be ∼10–12 mA/cm2, denoting a quasi-3-fold
higher enhancement with respect to reported values for our controls.
Interestingly, the corresponding CA measurements (Figure 8E,F) for both reactions also
confirmed that the optimized Pt∼Pd7Cu3 composition outperformed all of the other chemical compositions
tested. Specifically, this carefully tailored system yielded not only
the maximum peak current density but also the best long-term stability
measured.

4.4 Pt-Coated Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs
Because ultrathin Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs proved to be a promising catalyst for ORR, we subsequently investigated
the ORR performance of analogous ultrathin Pt-shell Pd0.90Ni0.10-core NW motifs.95Figure 9A shows the CV results
of Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs and Pt–Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs. Presumably, after the Cu UPD process, a ML
of Pt atoms was deposited onto the surface of the Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs. We found that the CVs of Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs exhibited Pt-like features, whereas
on the basis of the polarization curves (Figure 9B), their ORR kinetics measured at 0.9 V
were noticeably enhanced (Figure 9C). In effect, the Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs yielded a SA and a corresponding MA of 0.62 mA/cm2 and 1.44 A/mgPt, respectively. Figures 9D and E highlight the cycling
data associated with ascertaining the durability of our optimized
Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 NW sample. To summarize,
when comparing both activity and durability trends of our series of
tested samples, the “best” performance was clearly observed
with Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs, as compared
with PdNi NWs, PdNi NPs, and commercial Pt NP controls.

Figure 9 (A) CVs obtained
for Pd0.90Ni0.10 NWs and
Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 core–shell NWs.
(B) Polarization curves for both of these NW composites. (C) ECSA
activity and MA at 0.9 V for Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 are shown by comparison with commercial carbon-supported Pt NPs,
analogous Pt∼Pd NPs, and ultrathin Pt∼Pd NWs. (D) CVs
obtained in a deoxygenated 0.1 M HClO4 solution after every
5000 cycles for Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 core–shell
composites. In the inset, the measured electrochemically accessible
surface area (ESA) loss is also shown as a function of durability
cycling for the Pt∼Pd0.90Ni0.10 architecture.
(E) Polarization curves obtained in a deoxygenated 0.1 M HClO4 solution after every 5000 cycles. Area-specific activities
measured at 0.9 V are plotted as a function of durability in the insets.
Reprinted with permission from ACS Catal., 2014,4, 2544–2555. Copyright (2014)
American Chemical Society.

4.5 Pt-Coated Pd9Au NWs
In
prior studies,30,113 we have shown that (i) the as-prepared
Pd9Au NWs maintain significantly enhanced ORR activity
(0.40 mA/cm2) as compared with not only elemental Pd NW/C
(0.12 mA/cm2) but also Pt NP/C (0.20 mA/cm2)
and (ii) upon deposition of a Pt ML, the Pt∼Pd1–xAux NWs maintained an
optimal surface area and mass-normalized activities of 0.98 mA/cm2 and 2.54 A/mgPt, respectively. Whereas it was
obvious that the chemical composition played a major role in the observed
trends, the precise spatial distributions of Pt, Au, and Pd elements
within the core–shell motif (Figure 10C,D) were important but unknown variables.
For example, we could not effectively differentiate between Pt and
Au atoms using data from the EDS spectra alone.

Figure 10 (A) Hexagonal 2.2 nm-diameter
[(111)4, (200)2] NW models with various Au distributions.
(a) Pd9Au@Pt
NWs, (b) Pd8Au2@Pt NWs, and (c) Pd7Au3@Pt NWs. Upper panel: (i) Pd(1–x)Aux@Pt NWs. Middle panel:
(ii) Pd(1–x)Au(x–y)Ptz@AuyPt(1–z) NWs. Lower panel: (iii) Pd(1–x)Ptz@AuxPt(1–z) NWs. For clarity, eight supercells
along the axis and bases at both ends are displayed. (B) Theoretical
ESA activity (black) and MA (red) for various chemical compositions
in a range of Pd(1–x)Ptz@AuxPt(1–z) NWs. (C) High-resolution STEM imaging and (D) cross-sectional
EELS analysis for the as-synthesized Pt∼Pd9Au ultrathin
NWs. (E) Experimental results of ORR activities for a series of as-prepared
Pt∼Pd1–xAux NWs. Reproduced from ref (114).

We sought to address these issues experimentally and theoretically.
Using density functional theory (DFT), for Pt∼Pd1–xAux NWs incorporating
various Pd-to-Au ratios, we simulated three possible geometric (Figure 10A) variations to
obtain a precise picture, concerning the spatial elemental distribution
of Au atoms within these ultrathin NWs. Scenario 1 had all of the
Au atoms concentrated within the core; scenario 2 highlighted a portion
of Au atoms segregated at the edge of the Pt shell. By contrast, scenario
3 confined and localized all of Au atoms within the Pt shell.114 It turned out that the binding energy of oxygen
on these metal surfaces could be used as a proxy for electrochemical
performance, and could be directly correlated with the corresponding
ORR kinetics and activities. Out of all three models analyzed, the
model advocating complete Au surface segregation (i.e., scenario 3)
yielded a theoretical ORR activity trend that matched well with the
experimental results (Figure 10B,E).

In effect, combining complementary and supportive
results from
(a) in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (namely Pt and Au L edge
data), (b) DFT calculations, and (c) electrochemical data into a comprehensive
and substantive analysis enabled a more thorough understanding of
the physicochemical structure of functionally relevant and active
catalytic nanostructures. The overall analysis114 supported the idea that the catalytically active structure
of our ternary NWs could actually be attributed to a PtAu∼Pd
motif, consisting of a PtAu binary shell coupled with a pure inner
Pd core. Moreover, the plausible origin of the observed Au surface
segregation could likely be ascribed to the external potential used
(i.e., potential range of 0.5–0.8 V) during the Cu UPD process
used to create the core−shell motif in the first place.

5 Choice of Catalyst Support
5.1 Rationale
Carbon-based materials
have usually been used as substrates for electrocatalysts, including
carbon nanotubes (CNTs),115 carbon black
(CB),95 graphene,116 carbon nanofibers,117 and fullerenes.118 In effect, carbon motifs possess the singularly
favorable advantages of ubiquity, low price, high surface area, and
excellent conductivity,119 all of which
can contribute to the enhanced activity of the as-prepared catalysts.120

Nevertheless, catalysts can sometimes
aggregate and/or otherwise detach from the substrate, especially during
reactions, an observation which may lead to decreased activity. One
strategy for addressing this issue would be through chemical functionalization
of the support, which would enable not only a more uniform dispersion
of metallic catalysts but also protection from both dissolution and/or
degradation.121,122 As an example, theoretical DFT
calculations123 have predicted that the
presence of SH groups on CNTs can not only restrict particle migration
but also enhance the oxidative resistance of Pt clusters attached
onto these derivatized CNTs. Experimentally, the measured specific
ORR activities of Pt NPs supported onto multiwalled CNTs (MWNTs) spanned
a range from 0.3 to 0.6 mA/cm2, depending upon the specific
surface modifications of the supports, which were characterized by
pendant −NH2, −COOH, −OH, and −SH
functional moieties, respectively.124−126

5.2 Functionalized
CNTs
We chose to analyze
ultrathin Pt NWs deposited onto a series of variously derivatized
MWNT supports as well. However, a key difference in our studies, as
compared with the previous work, was that we explored the impact of
modifying not only the terminal ligand moiety but also the attachment
approach. With respect to the latter issue, the problem with covalent
functionalization is that robust treatment protocols, usually involving
strong, destructive acids (such as HNO3 and H2SO4 as illustrative examples), can lead to a loss of not
only the structural integrity but also, consequentially, the favorable
electronic properties of the CNTs,127 all
of which could dramatically reduce both activity and long-term stability.128 Hence, our preference revolved around a less
intrusive and less damaging noncovalent, physical sonication-mediated
approach. To highlight that both types of attachment methodologies
are functionally equivalent, it is interesting to observe that the
CVs of Pt NWs supported onto not only covalently functionalized COOH-terminated
MWNTs (Figure 11A)
but also analogous noncovalently functionalized COOH-derivatized MWNTs
(Figure 11B) were
essentially identical in nature. Specifically, a peak was observed
at around 0.6–0.7 V, thereby confirming the redox activity
of pendant surface carboxylic acid groups.

Figure 11 Cyclic voltammograms
of Pt NWs supported onto various different
types of functionalized MWNTs prepared by (A) a “covalent reflux”
method and (B) a “noncovalent” sonication-mediated method.
(C) Bar graph highlighting the surface area activity of Pt NWs attached
onto differentially functionalized CNTs. ORR activities have been
normalized to their respective electrochemically active surface area
values.

Indeed, our Pt NW@COOH-MWNT sample
(Figure 11C) synthesized
using the noncovalent method
yielded the highest activity measured of 1.54 mA/cm2, which
denoted not only a nearly 2.5-fold improvement as compared with Pt
NW@raw-MWNTs (i.e., 0.60 mA/cm2) but also a 5-fold increase
as compared with 0D@1D nanostructures, such as Pt NP@raw-MWNTs (i.e.,
0.30 mA/cm2). To the best of our knowledge, our Pt NW@COOH-MWNT
sample gave rise to the highest surface specific activity
value measured, to date, using any carbon-based support,
because it possessed a normalized Pt MA value of 0.68 A/mgPt, more than 4-fold higher than comparable data (i.e., 0.16 A/mgPt), measured for state-of-the-art commercial Pt/C systems.
What made the key difference in our view was the favorable and synergistic
metal-support combination of (1) using ultrathin Pt NWs instead of
NPs, (2) employing a noncovalent derivatization method as opposed
to a covalent-based approach, and finally (3) exposing pendant carboxylic
acid groups on the underlying CNT support surface, all of which designated
strategies that effectively enhanced charge mobility and transfer
and therefore yielded a positive collective impact upon the observed
electrochemical performance.

6 Summary
and Outlook
To be effective and economically viable, catalysts
should possess
not only a high active surface area and correspondingly favorable
activity but also low cost and reasonable stability. Currently, Pt-based
catalysts still represent the most widely used catalysts for applications
in FCs mainly because of their high activity. Nevertheless, we and
others have initiated a number of efforts toward optimizing (1) the
intrinsic particle size of Pt nanostructures, (2) the production of
novel morphological motifs, such as ultrathin NWs, and (3) the spatial
distribution and dispersion of these nanoscale catalysts onto their
underlying supports so as to transcend the traditional view of elemental
Pt itself as the most important and best performing FC catalyst. As
we have seen in this Perspective, Pt is scarce and expensive, and
is moreover performance-limited in terms of both activity and stability.

Diverse strategies for replacing Pt have revolved around the idea
of not only minimizing Pt loading within unusual architectural configurations
but also replacing Pt with more plentiful, less expensive, and potentially
less hazardous alternatives such as Ni, Fe, and Cu through careful
chemical manipulation. Therefore, with the goal of developing and
understanding the behavior of novel electrocatalysts in the context
of small-molecule reactions such as ORR, HOR, EOR, MOR, and FAOR,
we and others have specifically emphasized the importance of synergistically
tailoring, on a holistic level, tunable reaction parameters such as
(a) size (i.e., nanoscale), (b) morphology (i.e., anisotropic motifs),
(c) chemical composition (i.e., alloys), (d) the presence of a core–shell
architecture (i.e., an outer Pt ML conformally coating a non-Pt containing
core), and (e) the nature (i.e., chemically functionalized) of the
underlying support, so as to maximize catalyst performance and minimize
catalyst deactivation.

Specifically, some of the highest electrochemical
activities reported
to date have been obtained by deliberately tuning the morphologies
(i.e., generation of core–shell motifs) and chemical compositions
of Pt-based bimetallic nanostructures onto rationally tailored substrates.
In doing so, improved durability metrics coupled with measured activities
of over a magnitude higher than the state-of-the-art commercial Pt
catalyst have been achieved. We and others have developed ambient
synthetic methods to prepare morphology- and composition-tunable Pt-based
1D nanostructures possessing high structural uniformity and a homogeneous
distribution of elements. In optimizing both the morphology and chemical
composition, we have exploited the advantages of phenomena such as,
but not limited to, the bifunctional mechanism, the ligand effect,
and the lattice strain effect. Overall, these advances have been of
relevance in terms of creating a cheaper, more stable, and more efficient
family of novel catalytic materials that will also be inherently less
susceptible to poisoning and degradation.

It should be noted
that even though our laboratory has focused
on 1D NW-based motifs, significant complementary efforts from a number
of different groups on equally effective, Pt-free 2D-based structures
are also worth mentioning. Theoretically, metal-free, heteroatom-doped
graphene-based nanomaterials were predicted to evince highly favorable
electrocatalytic performance toward ORR, denoting results which were
ascribed to their achievable active surface area, their beneficial
exposure of reaction sites for either oxygen adsorption or reduction,
and their excellent thermal and electronic properties.129,130 Experimentally, Fe–N–C-based materials characterized
by a graphitic-layered structure produced a current density of 44
mA/cm2 at 0.85 V and a maximum power density of 490 mW/cm–2 at 1 bar O2 when incorporated into FCs.131 In addition, porous boron carbon nitride nanosheets
with a surface area of 817 m2/g yielded comparable ORR
activity, better stability, and improved methanol durability as compared
with their Pt/C (20% Pt loading) counterparts in both alkaline and
acidic media.132

Nonetheless, apart
from the experimental design of new and improved
catalyst materials, a number of daunting challenges remain. Though
initial efforts are promising, theoretical calculations still have
not been able to fully correlate the nuances of the catalyst structure
with the measured performance activity. Experimentally, it is still
nontrivial (i) to probe the spatial and temporal evolution of the
physical structure and chemical composition of these novel nanoscale
architectures (whether they are ultrathin NWs or core–shell
motifs) in an interpretable, routine, and/or convincing manner and
(ii) to analyze these various electrocatalytic processes under realistic
in situ conditions, using dynamic in situ characterization techniques.

The hope and expectation is that the strengths and attributes of
these novel probes can be used to analyze and correlate local and
subtle changes in factors such as (i) the chemical composition and
physical structure, as manifested by variations in the atomic arrangement,
degree of oxidation, defect concentration, and crystallinity, as illustrative
examples, and (ii) electronic properties. These parameters strongly
influence and ultimately dictate the nature of catalyst-support interactions
during an evolving electrochemical reaction under a realistic operating
environment, all of which have tangible consequences for the observed
catalytic mechanism, activity, and performance. A number of recent
and interesting studies have focused not only on in situ, synchrotron-based
techniques such as, but not limited to, X-ray absorption spectroscopy,
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, soft X-ray ptychography, and XRD133−136 but also single-molecule imaging approaches.137 All of these advances denote positive and forward looking
steps in the right direction toward eventually achieving these important
goals of clearly elucidating critical structure-property correlations.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Research funding for the work
performed by the Stony
Brook authors has been provided by the U.S. Department of Energy,
Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division.
This funding enabled our studies, writing, and analyses conducted
at the Brookhaven National Laboratory, supported by the U.S. Department
of Energy under Contract no. DE-SC-00112704. We also thank the prior
inspiration, contributions, and work of Radoslav R. Adzic in particular,
Miomir B. Vukmirovic, Haiqing Liu, Megan Scofield, and Christopher
Koenigsmann, which were instrumental in preparing this paper.
==== Refs
References
Rao Z. ; Wang S. 
A review of
power battery thermal energy management . Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev. 
2011 , 15 , 4554 –4571 . 10.1016/j.rser.2011.07.096 .
Darrow K. ; Tidball R. ; Wang J. ; Hampson A.  Catalog of CHP Technologies ; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ; Combined Heat and Power Partnership, Sept 2014, 2014 .
Song C. 
Fuel processing
for low-temperature and high-temperature fuel cells: Challenges, and
opportunities for sustainable development in the 21st century . Catal. Today 
2002 , 77 , 17 –49 . 10.1016/s0920-5861(02)00231-6 .
Shao M. 
Palladium-based
electrocatalysts for hydrogen oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions . J. Power Sources 
2011 , 196 , 2433 –2444 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.10.093 .
Vandichel M. ; Moscu A. ; Grönbeck H. 
Catalysis at the Rim: A Mechanism
for Low Temperature CO Oxidation over Pt3Sn . ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 7431 –7441 . 10.1021/acscatal.7b02094 .
Gabbasa M. ; Sopian K. ; Fudholi A. ; Asim N. 
A review of unitized
regenerative fuel cell stack: Material, design and research achievements . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2014 , 39 , 17765 –17778 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.08.121 .
Qin C. ; Wang J. ; Yang D. ; Li B. ; Zhang C. 
Proton Exchange
Membrane Fuel Cell Reversal: A Review . Catalysts 
2016 , 6 , 197 10.3390/catal6120197 .
McLean G. F. ; Niet T. ; Prince-Richard S. ; Djilali N. 
An assessment of alkaline
fuel cell technology . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2002 , 27 , 507 –526 . 10.1016/s0360-3199(01)00181-1 .
Wen Z. ; Liu J. ; Li J. 
Core/Shell
Pt/C Nanoparticles Embedded in Mesoporous
Carbon as a Methanol-Tolerant Cathode Catalyst in Direct Methanol
Fuel Cells . Adv. Mater. 
2008 , 20 , 743 –747 . 10.1002/adma.200701578 .
Shukla A. K. ; Ravikumar M. K. ; Gandhi K. S. 
Direct Methanol Fuel Cells for Vehicular
Applications . J. Solid State Electrochem. 
1998 , 2 , 117 –122 . 10.1007/s100080050075 .
Aricò A. S. ; Srinivasan S. ; Antonucci V. 
DMFCs: from
Fundamental Aspects to
Technology Development . Fuel Cells 
2001 , 1 , 133 –161 . 10.1002/1615-6854(200107)1:2<133::aid-fuce133>3.3.co;2-x .
Chen C. Y. ; Liu D. H. ; Huang C. L. ; Chang C. L. 
Portable DMFC System
with Methanol Sensor-Less Control . J. Power
Sources 
2007 , 167 , 442 –449 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.02.056 .
Renock D. ; Lei H. ; Zhang P. ; Ma J. ; Peiter C.  ; Samuel, Suzanne; Litt, Morton Direct Methanol Fuel cells
for Portable Electronics , 41st Power Sources Conference; National Technical Information Service , 2004 .
Joo S. H. ; Choi S. J. ; Oh I. ; Kwak J. ; Liu Z. ; Terasaki O. ; Ryoo R. 
Ordered Nanoporous
Arrays of Carbon
Supporting High Dispersions of Platinum Nanoparticles . Nature 
2001 , 412 , 169 –172 . 10.1038/35084046 .11449269 
Antolini E. ; Salgado J. R. C. ; Gonzalez E. R. 
The Methanol
Oxidation Reaction on
Platinum Alloys with the First Row Transition Metals: The Case of
Pt-Co and -Ni Alloy Electrocatalysts for DMFCs: A Short Review . Appl. Catal., B 
2006 , 63 , 137 –149 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2005.09.014 .
Shao Y. ; Yin G. ; Gao Y. 
Understanding
and Approaches for the Durability Issues
of Pt-Based Catalysts for PEM Fuel Cell. . J.
Power Sources 
2007 , 171 , 558 –566 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.07.004 .
Liu H. ; Song C. ; Zhang L. ; Zhang J. ; Wang H. ; Wilkinson D. P. 
A Review
of Anode Catalysis in the Direct Methanol
Fuel Cell . J. Power Sources 
2006 , 155 , 95 –110 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.01.030 .
Zhang J. ; Vukmirovic M. B. ; Xu Y. ; Mavrikakis M. ; Adzic R. R. 
Controlling the Catalytic Activity
of Platinum-Monolayer
Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Reduction with Different Substrates . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 44 , 2132 –2135 . 10.1002/anie.200462335 .
Zhang J. ; Sasaki K. ; Sutter E. ; Adzic R. R. 
Stabilization of
Platinum Oxygen-Reduction Electrocatalysts Using Gold Clusters . Science 
2007 , 315 , 220 –222 . 10.1126/science.1134569 .17218522 
He C. ; Desai S. ; Brown G. ; Bollepalli S. 
PEM Fuel Cell
Catalysts: Cost, Performance, and Durability . Electrochem. Soc. Interface 
2005 , 14 , 41 –44 . 10.1007/978-1-4614-5785-5_9 .
Swette L. ; Kackley N. 
Oxygen electrodes for rechargeable
alkaline fuel cells
- II . J. Power Sources 
1990 , 29 , 423 –436 . 10.1016/0378-7753(90)85015-5 .
Wang W. ; Lv F. ; Lei B. ; Wan S. ; Luo M. ; Guo S. 
Tuning Nanowires
and Nanotubes for Efficient Fuel-Cell Electrocatalysis . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 10117 –10141 . 10.1002/adma.201601909 .27690335 
Zhang X. N. ; Li C. R. ; Zhang Z. 
Controlling
the Growth Direction
of One-Dimensional ZnO Nanostructures by Changing the Oxygen Content
in the Reaction Atmosphere . Appl. Phys. A: Mater.
Sci. Process. 
2006 , 82 , 33 –37 . 10.1007/s00339-005-3377-z .
Tomioka K. ; Motohisa J. ; Hara S. ; Fukui T. 
Control of InAs Nanowire
Growth Directions on Si . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 3475 –3480 . 10.1021/nl802398j .18783279 
Weber J. ; Singhal R. ; Zekri S. ; Kumar A. 
One-Dimensional Nanostructures:
Fabrication, Characterization and Applications . Int. Mater. Rev. 
2008 , 53 , 235 –255 . 10.1179/174328008x348183 .
Wang N. ; Cai Y. ; Zhang R. Q. 
Growth
of Nanowires . Mater. Sci.
Eng., R 
2008 , 60 , 1 –51 . 10.1016/j.mser.2008.01.001 .
Cademartiri L. ; Ozin G. A. 
Ultrathin Nanowires
- A Materials Chemistry Perspective . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 1013 –1020 . 10.1002/adma.200801836 .
Xia Y. ; Yang P. ; Sun Y. ; Wu Y. ; Mayers B. ; Gates G. ; Yin Y. ; Kim F. ; Yan H. 
One-Dimensional
Nanostructures: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications . Adv. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 353 –389 . 10.1002/adma.200390087 .
Lim B. ; Jiang M. ; Camargo P. H. C. ; Cho E. C. ; Tao J. ; Lu X. ; Zhu Y. ; Xia Y. 
Pd-Pt Bimetallic Nanodendrites with
High Activity for Oxygen Reduction . Science 
2009 , 324 , 1302 –1305 . 10.1126/science.1170377 .19443738 
Koenigsmann C. ; Scofield M. E. ; Liu H. ; Wong S. S. 
Designing
Enhanced
One-Dimensional Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction:
Probing Size- and Composition-Dependent Electrocatalytic Behavior
in Noble Metal Nanowires . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 3385 –3398 . 10.1021/jz301457h .
Scofield M. E. ; Koenigsmann C. ; Wang L. ; Liu H. ; Wong S. S. 
Tailoring
the composition of ultrathin, ternary alloy PtRuFe nanowires for the
methanol oxidation reaction and formic acid oxidation reaction . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2015 , 8 , 350 –363 . 10.1039/c4ee02162b .
Shen Z. ; Yamada M. ; Miyake M. 
Preparation
of Single-Crystalline
Platinum Nanowires with Small Diameters Under Mild Conditions . Chem. Commun. 
2007 , 245 –247 . 10.1039/b613895k .
Basnayake R. ; Li Z. ; Katar S. ; Zhou W. ; Rivera H. ; Smotkin E. S. ; Casadonte D. J. ; Korzeniewski C. 
PtRu Nanoparticle Electrocatalyst
with Bulk Alloy Properties Prepared Through a Sonochemical Method . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 10446 –10450 . 10.1021/la061274o .17129014 
Jha N. ; Reddy A. L. M. ; Shaijumon M. ; Rajalakshmi N. ; Ramaprabhu S. 
Pt-Ru/multi-walled Carbon Nanotubes
as Electrocatalysts
for Direct Methanol Fuel Cell . Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 
2008 , 33 , 427 –433 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2007.07.064 .
Yang S. ; Hong F. ; Wang L. ; Guo S. ; Song X. ; Ding B. ; Yang Z. 
Ultrathin Pt-Based
Alloy Nanowire
Networks: Synthesized by CTAB Assistant Two-Phase Water–Chloroform
Micelles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 203 –207 . 10.1021/jp908784g .
Song Y. ; Garcia R. M. ; Dorin R. M. ; Wang H. ; Qiu Y. ; Coker E. N. ; Steen W. A. ; Miller J. E. ; Shelnutt J. A. 
Synthesis
of Platinum Nanowire Networks Using a Soft Template . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 3650 –3655 . 10.1021/nl0719123 .17999549 
Teng X. ; Han W.-Q. ; Ku W. ; Hücker M. 
Synthesis
of ultrathin palladium and platinum nanowires and a study of their
magnetic properties . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
Engl. 
2008 , 47 , 2055 –2058 . 10.1002/anie.200704707 .18266242 
Xu D. ; Liu X. ; Han M. ; Bao J. 
Facile synthesis of ultrathin single-crystalline
palladium nanowires with enhanced electrocatalytic activities . Chem. Commun. 
2016 , 52 , 12996 –12999 . 10.1039/c6cc06711e .
Koenigsmann C. ; Wong S. S. 
Tailoring
Chemical Composition to Achieve Enhanced
Methanol Oxidation Reaction and Methanol-Tolerant Oxygen Reduction
Reaction Performance in Palladium-Based Nanowire Systems . ACS Catal. 
2013 , 3 , 2031 –2040 . 10.1021/cs400380t .
Guo S. ; Zhang S. ; Sun X. ; Sun S. 
Synthesis of ultrathin
FePtPd nanowires and their use as catalysts for methanol oxidation
reaction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 15354 –15357 . 10.1021/ja207308b .21894999 
Kim Y. S. ; Nam S. H. ; Shim H.-S. ; Ahn H.-J. ; Anand M. ; Kim W. B. 
Electrospun bimetallic nanowires of PtRh and PtRu with
compositional variation for methanol electrooxidation . Electrochem. Commun. 
2008 , 10 , 1016 –1019 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2008.05.003 .
Zhang N. ; Bu L. ; Guo S. ; Guo J. ; Huang X. 
Screw thread-like platinum-copper
nanowires bounded with high-index facets for efficient electrocatalysts . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 5037 –5043 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01825 .27347609 
Koenigsmann C. ; Wong S. S. 
One-Dimensional
Noble Metal Electrocatalysts: A Promising
Structural Paradigm for Direct Methanol Fuel Cells . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2011 , 4 , 1161 –1176 . 10.1039/c0ee00197j .
Zhou W.-P. ; Li M. ; Koenigsmann C. ; Ma C. ; Wong S. S. ; Adzic R. R. 
Morphology-dependent
activity of Pt nanocatalysts for ethanol oxidation in acidic media:
Nanowires versus nanoparticles . Electrochim.
Acta 
2011 , 56 , 9824 –9830 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2011.08.055 .
Heinen M. ; Jusys Z. ; Behm R. J. 
Ethanol,
Acetaldehyde and Acetic
Acid Adsorption/Electrooxidation on a Pt Thin Film Electrode under
Continuous Electrolyte Flow: An in Situ ATR-FTIRS Flow Cell Study . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 9850 –9864 . 10.1021/jp101441q .
Huang X. ; Zheng N. 
One-pot, high-yield
synthesis of 5-fold twinned Pd nanowires and
nanorods . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 4602 –4603 . 10.1021/ja9009343 .19292441 
Wang Y. ; Choi S.-I. ; Zhao X. ; Xie S. ; Peng H.-C. ; Chi M. ; Huang C. Z. ; Xia Y. 
Polyol synthesis of ultrathin Pd
nanowires via attachment-based growth and their enhanced activity
towards formic acid oxidation . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2014 , 24 , 131 –139 . 10.1002/adfm.201302339 .
Hong W. ; Wang J. ; Wang E. 
Bromide ion mediated
synthesif of
carbon supported ultrathin palladium nanowires with enhanced catalytic
activity toward formic acid/ethanol electrooxidation . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2014 , 39 , 3226 –3230 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.12.096 .
Kim Y. ; Kim H. J. ; Kim Y. S. ; Choi S. M. ; Seo M. H. ; Kim W. B. 
Shape-
and composition-sensitive activity of Pt and
PtAu catalysts for formic acid electrooxidation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 18093 –18100 . 10.1021/jp3054795 .
Niu Z. ; Wang D. ; Yu R. ; Peng Q. ; Li Y. 
Highly branched
Pt-Ni nanocrystals encloased by stepped surface for methanol oxidation . Chem. Sci. 
2012 , 3 , 1925 –1929 . 10.1039/c2sc00004k .
Xia B. Y. ; Wu H. B. ; Li N. ; Yan Y. ; Lou X. W. D. ; Wang X. 
One-pot synthesis of Pt-Co alloy
nanowire assemblies
with tunable composition and enhanced electrocatalytic properties . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 
2015 , 54 , 3797 –3801 . 10.1002/anie.201411544 .25630856 
Dai L. ; Mo S. ; Qin Q. ; Zhao X. ; Zheng N. 
Carbon monoxide-assisted
synthesis of ultrathin PtCu3 alloy wavy nanowires and their
enhanced electrocatalysis . Small 
2016 , 12 , 1572 –1577 . 10.1002/smll.201502741 .26808784 
Zhang Y. ; Janyasupab M. ; Liu C.-W. ; Li X. ; Xu J. ; Liu C.-C. 
Three dimensional PtRh alloy porous nanostructures:
tuning the atomic composition and controlling the morphology for the
application of direct methanol fuel cells . Adv.
Mater. 
2012 , 22 , 3570 –3575 . 10.1002/adfm.201200678 .
Yuan Q. ; Zhou Z. ; Zhuang J. ; Wang X. 
Seed displacement,
epitaxial synthesis of Rh/Pt bimetallic ultrathin nanowires for highly
selective oxidizing ethanol to CO2 . Chem. Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 2395 –2402 . 10.1021/cm903844t .
Huang L. ; Han Y. ; Zhang X. ; Fang Y. ; Dong S. 
One-step synthesis
of ultrathin PtxPb nerve-like nanowires as robust catalysts
for enhanced methanol electrooxidation . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 201 –207 . 10.1039/c6nr07036a .27906402 
Zhu M. ; Shao Q. ; Pi Y. ; Guo J. ; Huang B. ; Qian Y. ; Huang X. 
Ultrathin Vein-Like Iridium–Tin
Nanowires with Abundant Oxidized Tin as High-Performance Ethanol Oxidation
Electrocatalysts . Small 
2017 , 13 , 1701295 10.1002/smll.201701295 .
Shui J.-I. ; Chen C. ; Li J. C. M. 
Evolution of nanoporous Pt-Fe alloy
nanowires by dealloying and their catalytic property for oxygen reduction
reaction . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2011 , 21 , 3357 –3362 . 10.1002/adfm.201100723 .
Yang T. ; Ma Y. ; Huang Q. ; Cao G. ; Wan S. ; Li N. ; Zhao H. ; Sun X. ; Yin F. 
Palladium-iridium nanowires
for the enhancement of electro-catalytic activity toward oxygen reduction
reaction . Electrochem. Commun. 
2015 , 59 , 95 –99 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2015.07.016 .
Galinski H. ; Ryll T. ; Lin Y. ; Scherrer B. ; Evans A. ; Gauckler L. J. ; Döbeli M. 
Platinum-based
nanowire networks
with enhanced oxygen-reduction activity . Phys.
Rev. Appl. 
2014 , 2 , 054015 10.1103/physrevapplied.2.054015 .
Gong M. ; Li F. ; Yao Z. ; Zhang S. ; Dong J. ; Chen Y. ; Tang Y. 
Highly active
and durable platinum-lead bimetallic alloy nanoflowers
for formic acid electro-oxidation . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 4894 –4899 . 10.1039/c4nr07375d .25706304 
Adams B. D. ; Asmussen R. M. ; Ostrom C. K. ; Chen A. 
Synthesis and comparative
study of nanoporous palladium-based bimetallic catalysts for formic
acid oxidation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 29903 –29910 . 10.1021/jp5095273 .
Wee J.-H. ; Lee K.-Y. 
Overview of the Development of CO-Tolerant Anode Electrocatalysts
for Proton-Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells . J.
Power Sources 
2006 , 157 , 128 –135 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2005.08.010 .
Zhang X. ; Chan K.-Y. 
Water-in-Oil Microemulsion
Synthesis of Platinum Ruthenium
Nanoparticles, Their Characterization and Electrocatalytic Properties . Chem. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 451 –459 . 10.1021/cm0203868 .
Sun S. ; Xu H. ; Tang S. ; Guo J. ; Li H. ; Cao L. ; Zhou B. ; Xin Q. ; Sun G. 
Synthesis of PtRu Nanowires
and Their Catalytic Activity in the Anode of Direct Methanol Fuel
Cells . Chin. J. Catal. 
2006 , 27 , 932 –936 . 10.1016/s1872-2067(06)60049-1 .
Zhao G.-Y. ; Xu C.-L. ; Guo D.-J. ; Li H. ; Li H.-L. 
Template
Preparation of Pt-Ru and Pt Nanowire Array Electrodes on a Ti/Si Substrate
for Methanol Electro-Oxidation . J. Power Sources 
2006 , 162 , 492 –496 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2006.06.082 .
Steele B. C. H. ; Heinzel A. 
Materials for Fuel-Cell
Technologies . Nature 
2001 , 414 , 345 –352 . 10.1038/35104620 .11713541 
Garbarino S. ; Ponrouch A. ; Pronovost S. ; Guay D. 
Enhanced Stability
and Activity of PtRu Nanotubes for Methanol Electrooxidation . Electrochem. Commun. 
2009 , 11 , 1449 –1452 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2009.05.028 .
Zhao L. ; Wang S. ; Ding Q. ; Xu W. ; Sang P. ; Chi Y. ; Lu X. ; Guo W. 
The Oxidation of Methanol on PtRu(111):
A Periodic Density Functional Theory Investigation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 20389 –20400 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b03951 .
Hu Y. ; Zhu A. ; Zhang Q. ; Liu Q. 
Preparation of PtRu/C core-shell
catalyst with polyol method for alcohol oxidation . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2016 , 41 , 11359 –11368 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.04.133 .
Lu S. ; Eid K. ; Ge D. ; Guo J. ; Wang L. ; Wang H. ; Gu H. 
One-pot synthesis
of PtRu nanodendrites as efficient catalysts for
methanol oxidation reaction . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 1033 –1039 . 10.1039/c6nr08895c .28009900 
Moura A. ; Fajín J. ; Mandado M. ; Cordeiro M. 
Ruthenium–Platinum
Catalysts and Direct Methanol Fuel Cells (DMFC): A Review of Theoretical
and Experimental Breakthroughs . Catalysts 
2017 , 7 , 47 10.3390/catal7020047 .
Gasteiger H. A. ; Markovic N. ; Ross P. N. ; Cairns E. J. 
Methanol Electrooxidation
on Well-Characterized Platinum-Ruthenium Bulk Alloys . J. Phys. Chem. 
1993 , 97 , 12020 –12029 . 10.1021/j100148a030 .
Liu P. ; Nørskov J. K. 
Kinetics
of the Anode Processes in PEM Fuel Cells -
The Promoting Effect of Ru in PtRu Anodes . Fuel
Cells 
2001 , 1 , 192 –201 . 10.1002/1615-6854(200112)1:3/4<192::aid-fuce192>3.0.co;2-m .
Xu H. ; Zhang K. ; Yan B. ; Zhong J. ; Li S. ; Du Y. 
Facile synthesis of
Pd-decorated Pt/Ru networks with highly improved
activity for methanol electrooxidation in alkaline media . New J. Chem. 
2017 , 41 , 3048 –3054 . 10.1039/c6nj03773a .
Chai G. S. ; Yu J.-S. 
Highly efficient
Pt-Ru-Co-W quarternary anode catalysts for methanol
electrooxidation discovered by combinatorial analysis . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 6842 –6848 . 10.1039/b823053f .
Strasser P. ; Fan Q. ; Devenney M. ; Weinberg W. H. ; Liu P. ; Nørskov J. K. 
High Throughput
Experimental and Theoretical Predictive Screening of Materials a Comparative
Study of Search Strategies for New Fuel Cell Anode Catalysts . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 11013 –11021 . 10.1021/jp030508z .
Ribeiro V.
A. ; Correa O. V. ; Neto A. O. ; Linardi M. ; Spinacé E. V. 
Preparation
of PtRuNi/C electrocatalysts by an alcohol-reduction process for electro-oxidation
of methanol . Appl. Catal., A 
2010 , 372 , 162 –166 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2009.10.028 .
Liu F. ; Lee J. Y. ; Zhou W. 
Multi-segment Pt-RuNi nanorods for
methanol electro-oxidation at room temperature . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2006 , 153 , A2133 –A2138 . 10.1149/1.2349282 .
Wang Z. B. ; Yin G. P. ; Shi P. F. ; Sun Y. C. 
Novel Pt-Ru-Ni/C
catalysts for methanol electro-oxidation in acid medium . Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 
2006 , 9 , A13 –A15 . 10.1149/1.2133722 .
Liu F. ; Lee J. Y. ; Zhou W. J. 
Segmented Pt/Ru, Pt/Ni, and Pt/RuNi
nanorods as model bifunctional catalysts for methanol oxidation . Small 
2006 , 2 , 121 –128 . 10.1002/smll.200500253 .17193567 
Toda T. ; Igarashi H. ; Uchida H. ; Watanabe M. 
Enhancement of the
Electroreduction of Oxygen on Pt Alloys with Fe, Ni, and Co . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1999 , 146 , 3750 –3756 . 10.1149/1.1392544 .
Honma I. ; Toda T. 
Temperature Dependence
of Kinetics of Methanol Electro-Oxidation
on PtSn Alloys . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2003 , 150 , A1689 –A1692 . 10.1149/1.1623493 .
Huang T. ; Liu J. ; Li R. ; Cai W. ; Yu A. 
A Novel Route for Preparation
of PtRuMe (Me = Fe, Co, Ni) and Their Catalytic Performance for Methanol
Electrooxidation . Electrochem. Commun. 
2009 , 11 , 643 –646 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2009.01.008 .
Chai G. S. ; Yu J.-S. 
Highly efficient
Pt-Ru-Co-W quaternary anode catalysts for methanol
electrooxidation discovered by combinatorial analysis . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 6842 –6848 . 10.1039/b823053f .
Scofield M.
E. ; Zhou Y. ; Yue S. ; Wang L. ; Su D. ; Tong X. ; Vukmirovic M. B. ; Adzic R. R. ; Wong S. S. 
Role of
Chemical Composition in the Enhanced Catalytic Activity of Pt-Based
Alloyed Ultrathin Nanowires for the Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction under
Alkaline Conditions . ACS Catal. 
2016 , 6 , 3895 –3908 . 10.1021/acscatal.6b00350 .
Stolbov S. ; Ortigoza M. A. ; Adzic R. ; Rahman T. S. 
High CO
tolerance
of Pt/Ru nanocatalyst: Insight from first principles calculations . J. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 130 , 124714 10.1063/1.3088843 .19334879 
Sasaki K. ; Wang J. X. ; Balasubramanian M. ; McBreen J. ; Uribe F. ; Adzic R. R. 
Ultra-low platinum
content fuel cell anode electrocatalyst
with a long-term performance stability . Electrochim.
Acta 
2004 , 49 , 3873 –3877 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2004.01.086 .
Zhang X. ; Zhang F. ; Guan R.-F. ; Chan K.-Y. 
Preparation of Pt-Ru-Ni
ternary nanoparticles by microemulsion and electrocatalytic activity
for methanol oxidation . Mater. Res. Bull. 
2007 , 42 , 327 –333 . 10.1016/j.materresbull.2006.05.021 .
Ehteshami S. M. M. ; Jia Q. ; Halder A. ; Chan S. H. ; Mukerjee S. 
The role of
electronic properties of Pt and Pt alloys for enhanced reformate electro-oxidation
in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells . Electrochim. Acta 
2013 , 107 , 155 –163 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2013.06.026 .
Kang D. K. ; Noh C. S. ; Kim N. H. ; Cho S.-H. ; Sohn J. M. ; Kim T. J. ; Park Y.-K. 
Effect
of transition metals (Ni,
Sn and Mo) in Pt5Ru4M alloy ternary electrocatalyst
on methanol electro-oxidation . J. Ind. Eng.
Chem. 
2010 , 16 , 385 –389 . 10.1016/j.jiec.2009.09.067 .
Xu C. ; Liu A. ; Qiu H. ; Liu Y. 
Nanoporous PdCu alloy with enhanced
electrocatalytic performance . Electrochem. Commun. 
2011 , 13 , 766 –769 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2011.04.007 .
Ojani R. ; Abkar Z. ; Hasheminejad E. ; Raoof J.-B. 
Rapid fabrication
of Cu/Pd nano/micro-particles porous-structured catalyst using hydrogen
bubbles dynamic template and their enhanced catalytic performance
for formic acid electrooxidation . Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 
2014 , 39 , 7788 –7797 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.03.081 .
Liu H. ; Adzic R. R. ; Wong S. S. 
Multifunctional
Ultrathin PdxCu(1-x) and Pt ∼
PdxCu(1-x) One-Dimensional Nanowire Motifs
for Various Small
Molecule Oxidation Reactions . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 26145 –26157 . 10.1021/acsami.5b07964 .26580482 
Koenigsmann C. ; Sutter E. ; Chiesa T. A. ; Adzic R. R. ; Wong S. S. 
Highly
enhanced electrocatalytic oxygen reduction performance observed in
bimetallic palladium-based nanowires prepared under ambient, surfactantless
conditions . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 2013 –2020 . 10.1021/nl300033e .22452593 
Liu X. ; Xu G. ; Chen Y. ; Lu T. ; Tang Y. ; Xing W. 
A strategy
for fabricating porous PdNi@Pt core-shell nanostructures and their
enhanced activity and durability for the methanol electrooxidation . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 5 , 7619 10.1038/srep07619 .
Greeley J. ; Nørskov J. K. 
A general
scheme for the estimation of oxygen binding
energies on binary transition metal surface alloys . Surf. Sci. 
2005 , 592 , 104 –111 . 10.1016/j.susc.2005.07.018 .
Wang X. ; Orikasa Y. ; Takesue Y. ; Inoue H. ; Nakamura M. ; Minato T. ; Hoshi N. ; Uchimoto Y. 
Quantitating the lattice
strain dependence of monolayer Pt shell activity toward oxygen reduction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 5938 –5941 . 10.1021/ja312382h .23560913 
Yang H. 
Platinum-based
electrocatalysts with core-shell nanostructures . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 
2011 , 50 , 2674 –2676 . 10.1002/anie.201005868 .21341347 
Chen T.-Y. ; Huang P.-C. ; Liao Y.-F. ; Liu Y.-T. ; Yeh T.-K. ; Lin T.-L. 
Shell thickness effects on reconfiguration of NiOcore–Ptshell anodic catalysts in a high current
density direct methanol fuel cell . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 72607 –72615 . 10.1039/c6ra17013g .
Li M. ; Liu P. ; Adzic R. R. 
Platinum monolayer electrocatalysts
for anodic oxidation of alcohols . J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 3480 –3485 . 10.1021/jz3016155 .26290976 
Li H.-H. ; Ma S.-Y. ; Fu Q.-Q. ; Liu X.-J. ; Wu L. ; Yu S.-H. 
Scalable Bromide-Triggered
Synthesis of Pd@Pt Core-Shell
Ultrathin Nanowires with Enhanced Electrocatalytic Performance toward
Oxygen Reduction Reaction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 7862 –7868 . 10.1021/jacs.5b03877 .26011682 
Alia S. M. ; Larsen B. A. ; Pylypenko S. ; Cullen D. A. ; Diercks D. R. ; Neyerlin K. C. ; Kocha S. S. ; Pivovar B. S. 
Platnium-coated nickel nanowires as oxygen-reducing
electrocatalysts . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 1114 –1119 . 10.1021/cs401081w .
Alia S. M. ; Pivovar B. S. ; Yan Y. 
Platinum-coated copper
nanowires with high activity for hydrogen oxidation reaction in base . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 13473 –13478 . 10.1021/ja405598a .23952885 
Vukmirovic M. B. ; Bliznakov S. T. ; Sasaki K. ; Wang J. X. ; Adzic R. R. 
Electrodeposition
of Metals in Catalyst Synthesis:
The Case of Platinum Monolayer Electrocatalysts . Electrochem. Soc. Interface 
2011 , 20 , 33 –40 . 10.1149/2.f04112if .
Sasaki K. ; Adzic R. R. 
Monolayer-Level
Ru- and NbO2-Supported Platinum Electrocatalysts for Methanol
Oxidation . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2008 , 155 , B180 –B186 . 10.1149/1.2816238 .
Du B. ; Rabb S. A. ; Zangmeister C. ; Tong Y. 
A Volcano Curve: Optimizing
Methanol Electro-Oxidation on Pt-Decorated Ru Nanoparticles . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 11 , 8231 –8239 . 10.1039/b816531a .19756279 
Kuk S. ; Wieckowski A. 
Methanol Electrooxidation
on Platinum Spontaneously
Deposited on Unsupported and Carbon-Supported Ruthenium Nanoparticles . J. Power Sources 
2005 , 141 , 1 –7 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2004.08.050 .
Chen W. ; Xu L.-P. ; Chen S. 
Enhanced Electrocatalytic
Oxidation of Formic Acid by Platinum Deposition on Ruthenium Nanoparticle
Surfaces . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2009 , 631 , 36 –42 . 10.1016/j.jelechem.2009.03.007 .
Mavrikakis M. ; Hammer B. ; Nørskov J. K. 
Effect
of Strain on the Reactivity of Metal Surfaces . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1998 , 81 , 2819 –2822 . 10.1103/physrevlett.81.2819 .
Feibelman P. J. ; Hammer B. ; Nørskov J. K. ; Wagner F. ; Scheffler M. ; Stumpf R. ; Watwe R. ; Dumesic J. 
The CO/Pt(111) Puzzle . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2000 , 105 , 4018 –4025 . 10.1021/jp002302t .
Liu P. ; Logadottir A. ; Nørskov J. K. 
Modeling the Electro-Oxidation of
CO and H2/CO on Pt, Ru, PtRu and Pt3Sn . Electrochim. Acta 
2003 , 48 , 3731 –3742 . 10.1016/s0013-4686(03)00538-3 .
Christoffersen E. ; Liu P. ; Ruban A. ; Skriver H. L. ; Nørskov J. K. 
Anode Materials
for Low-Temperature Fuel Cells: A Density
Functional Theory Study . J. Catal. 
2001 , 199 , 123 –131 . 10.1006/jcat.2000.3136 .
Koenigsmann C. ; Sutter E. ; Adzic R. R. ; Wong S. S. 
Size- and
Composition-Dependent Enhancement of Electrocatalytic Oxygen Reduction
Performance in Ultrathin Palladium–Gold (Pd1–xAux) Nanowires . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 15297 –15306 . 10.1021/jp306034d .
Liu H. ; An W. ; Li Y. ; Frenkel A. I. ; Sasaki K. ; Koenigsmann C. ; Su D. ; Anderson R. M. ; Crooks R. M. ; Adzic R. R. ; Liu P. ; Wong S. S. 
In Situ Probing
of the Active Site Geometry of Ultrathin Nanowires for the Oxygen
Reduction Reaction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 12597 –12609 . 10.1021/jacs.5b07093 .26402364 
Geraldes A. N. ; da Silva D. F. ; da Silva J. C. M. ; de
Sá O. A. ; Spinacé E. V. ; Neto A. O. ; dos Santos M. C. 
Palladium
and palladium–tin supported on multi wall carbon nanotubes
or carbon for alkaline direct ethanol fuel cell . J. Power Sources 
2015 , 275 , 189 –199 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.11.024 .
Zhao J. ; Zhang L. ; Chen T. ; Yu H. ; Zhang L. ; Xue H. ; Hu H. 
Supercritical Carbon-Dioxide-Assisted
Deposition of Pt Nanoparticles on Graphene Sheets and Their Application
as an Electrocatalyst for Direct Methanol Fuel Cells . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 21374 –21381 . 10.1021/jp3061976 .
Li M. ; Wu X. ; Zeng J. ; Hou Z. ; Liao S. 
Heteroatom
Doped Carbon Nanofibers Synthesized by Chemical Vapor Deposition as
Platinum Electrocatalyst Supports for Polymer Electrolyte Membrane
Fuel Cells . Electrochim. Acta 
2015 , 182 , 351 –360 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2015.09.122 .
Coro J. ; Suárez M. ; Silva L. S. R. ; Eguiluz K. I. B. ; Salazar-Banda G. R. 
Fullerene
applications in fuel cells:
A review . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2016 , 41 , 17944 –17959 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.08.043 .
Jung N. ; Chung D. Y. ; Ryu J. ; Yoo S. J. ; Sung Y.-E. 
Pt-based nanoarchitecture and catalyst
design for fuel
cell applications . Nano Today 
2014 , 9 , 433 –456 . 10.1016/j.nantod.2014.06.006 .
Huang H. ; Wang X. 
Recent progress on carbon-based support
materials for electrocatalysts of direct methanol fuel cells . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 6266 –6291 . 10.1039/c3ta14754a .
Manesh K. M. ; Santhosh P. ; Gopalan A. I. ; Lee K.-P. 
Electrocatalytic
Dioxygen Reduction at Glassy Carbon Electrode Modified with Polyaniline
Grafted Multiwall Carbon Nanotube Film . Electroanalysis 
2006 , 18 , 1564 –1571 . 10.1002/elan.200603567 .
Choudhury A. ; Kar P. 
Doping effect of carboxylic acid
group functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotube on polyaniline . Composites, Part B 
2011 , 42 , 1641 –1647 . 10.1016/j.compositesb.2011.04.005 .
Li L. ; Chen S. G. ; Wei Z. D. ; Qi X. Q. ; Xia M. R. ; Wang Y. Q. 
Experimental and DFT study of thiol-stabilized Pt/CNTs
catalysts . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 16581 –16587 . 10.1039/c2cp41346a .22864279 
Sheng W. ; Lee S. W. ; Crumlin E. J. ; Chen S. ; Shao-Horn Y. 
Synthesis, Activity and Durability of Pt Nanoparticles
Supported on Multi-walled Carbon Nanotubes for Oxygen Reduction . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2011 , 158 , B1398 –B1404 . 10.1149/2.066111jes .
Kim J. ; Lee S. W. ; Carlton C. ; Shao-Horn Y. 
Pt-Covered
Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes for Oxygen Reduction in Fuel Cell Applications . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2011 , 2 , 1332 –1336 . 10.1021/jz200531z .26295431 
Kim J. ; Lee S. W. ; Carlton C. ; Shao-Horn Y. 
Oxygen Reduction
Activity of PtxNi1-x Alloy Nanoparticles on
Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes . Electrochem. Solid-State
Lett. 
2011 , 14 , B110 –B113 . 10.1149/1.3612270 .
Neves J. C. ; de Castro V. G. ; Assis A. L. S. ; Veiga A. G. ; Rocco M. L. M. ; Silva G. G. 
In-situ
determination of amine/epoxy
and carboxylic/epoxy exothermic heat of reaction on surface of modified
carbon nanotubes and structural verification of covalent bond formation . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2018 , 436 , 495 –504 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.12.031 .
Zhang S. ; Hou L. ; Hou M. ; Liang H. 
Hydrothermal
synthesis of spindle-like Zn2SiO4 nanoparticles
and its application in lithium-ion battery . Mater. Lett. 
2015 , 156 , 82 –85 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2015.05.004 .
Zhao Z. ; Li M. ; Zhang L. ; Dai L. ; Xia Z. 
Design Principles for Heteroatom-Doped Carbon Nanomaterials
as Highly
Efficient Catalysts for Fuel Cells and Metal-Air Batteries . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 6834 –6840 . 10.1002/adma.201503211 .26418520 
Jiao Y. ; Zheng Y. ; Jaroniec M. ; Qiao S. Z. 
Origin
of the electrocatalytic oxygen reduction activity of graphene-based
catalysts: a roadmap to achieve the best performance . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 4394 –4403 . 10.1021/ja500432h .24580116 
Workman M.
J. ; Serov A. ; Tsui L.-k. ; Atanassov P. ; Artyushkova K. 
Fe–N–C
Catalyst Graphitic Layer Structure
and Fuel Cell Performance . ACS Energy Lett. 
2017 , 2 , 1489 –1493 . 10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00391 .
Wang J. ; Hao J. ; Liu D. ; Qin S. ; Portehault D. ; Li Y. ; Chen Y. ; Lei W. 
Porous Boron
Carbon Nitride Nanosheets as Efficient Metal-Free Catalysts for the
Oxygen Reduction Reaction in Both Alkaline and Acidic Solutions . ACS Energy Lett. 
2017 , 2 , 306 –312 . 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00602 .
Sasaki K. ; Marinkovic N. ; Isaacs H. S. ; Adzic R. R. 
Synchrotron-Based
In Situ Characterization of Carbon-Supported Platinum and Platinum
Monolayer Electrocatalysts . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 6 , 69 –76 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b01862 .
Saveleva V. A. ; Daletou M. K. ; Savinova E. R. 
The influence of
methanol on the chemical state of PtRu anodes in a high-temperature
direct methanol fuel cell studied in situ by synchtrotron-based near-ambient
pressure x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy . J.
Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2017 , 50 , 014001 10.1088/1361-6463/50/1/014001 .
Wise A. M. ; Weker J. N. ; Kalirai S. ; Farmand M. ; Shapiro D. A. ; Meirer F. ; Weckhuysen B. M. 
Nanoscale
Chemical Imaging of an Individual Catalyst Particle with Soft X-ray
Ptychography . ACS Catal. 
2016 , 6 , 2178 –2181 . 10.1021/acscatal.6b00221 .27076990 
Wu J. ; Shan S. ; Petkov V. ; Prasai B. ; Cronk H. ; Joseph P. ; Luo J. ; Zhong C.-J. 
Composition–Structure–Activity
Relationships for Palladium-Alloyed Nanocatalysts in Oxygen Reduction
Reaction: An Ex-Situ/In-Situ High Energy X-ray Diffraction Study . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5 , 5317 –5327 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b01608 .
Chen G. ; Zou N. ; Chen B. ; Sambur J. B. ; Choudhary E. ; Chen P. 
Bimetallic effect of
single nanocatalysts
visualized by super-resolution catalysis imaging . ACS Cent. Sci. 
2017 , 3 , 1189 –1197 . 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00377 .29202021

