
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02419ArticleGood Manufacturing
Practice Strategy for Antibody–Drug
Conjugate Synthesis Using Site-Specific Chemical Conjugation: First-Generation
AJICAP Matsuda Yutaka Clancy Colin Tawfiq Zhala Robles Veronica Mendelsohn Brian A. *Ajinomoto Bio-Pharma Services, 11040 Roselle Street, San Diego, California 92121, United States* E-mail: Brian.Mendelsohn@US.AjiBio-Pharma.com.26 11 2019 10 12 2019 4 24 20564 20570 30 07 2019 30 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The development of antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs)
is in
great demand in the oncology field. With the goal of maximizing the
therapeutic index, the conjugation technology to produce ADCs has
been shifted to a site-specific manner; however, it is still challenging
to establish robust and scalable synthetic processes. We have developed
a chemical conjugation platform termed AJICAP for site-specific ADC
synthesis using IgG Fc-affinity peptides. Here, we report the preparation
of site-specific ADCs based on first-generation AJICAP technology
for use in good laboratory practice studies. Analysis of the final
ADC product was conducted using validated systems and good manufacturing
practice. This work may not only prompt further biological studies
of AJICAP-ADC but also establish a strategy to provide well-documented
manufacturing data to enable new drug application filings (e.g., investigational
new drug applications) for site-specific ADCs.

document-id-old-9ao9b02419document-id-new-14ao9b02419ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Industrial research and development activity
for antibody–drug
conjugates (ADCs) has rapidly increased in recent years. Five ADCs
have been approved for clinical use by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA): brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris), trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1,
Kadcyla),1−3 gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg), inotuzumab ozogamicin
(Besponsa), and very recently, polatuzumab vedotin (Polivy).4 To date, more than 80 ADCs are in clinical development.5,6 Current ADCs on the market have a stochastic distribution of cytotoxic
drugs linked across several different sites of the antibody.7−9 This heterogeneous conjugation manner can cause diminished efficacy
and/or increased toxicity compared to a homogeneous ADC. Hence, the
therapeutic index of heterogeneous ADCs is limited.10

The development of site-specific conjugation has
become a useful
technology in the ADC field to overcome the limitations of traditional
ADCs.11 However, to date, no site-specific
ADCs have been commercially approved by the FDA. Thus, the development
of scalable and robust ADC processes is still a highly challenging
task for drug developers and contract development and manufacturing
organizations (CDMOs).12

We have
developed direct chemical site-specific conjugation technology
for intact native antibody modification using Fc-affinity compounds
(Scheme 1).13,14 The first-generation iteration of this technology, termed AJICAP,
has already undergone initial process development, including the gram-scale
synthesis of site-specific ADCs,15 biological
evaluations,14,15 and the establishment of appropriate
analytical methods.16 These promising results,
showing the scalability and high cytotoxic efficacy of site-specific
ADCs produced by AJICAP technology, prompted our group to attempt
the application of AJICAP technology to relevant manufacturing production
scales. Herein, we report our recent efforts to produce AJICAP-ADCs
appropriate for the specific research or preclinical phase for use
in good laboratory practice (GLP) studies. The ADC synthetic approach
described herein is modeled as a technical transfer from the research
and process development stages to clinical and commercial manufacturing
scales and methods. To begin, a foundational approach based on a good
manufacturing practice (GMP) strategy was used to adapt traditional
ADC GMP production for site-specific ADC production. Using this strategy,
site-specific ADCs were produced on a gram scale synthesized using
AJICAP technology. Analysis of the resulting ADCs was conducted by
qualified analysts using validated equipment.

Scheme 1 AJICAP Technology
Overview
These studies demonstrate the reproducibility
and robustness of
the AJICAP technology to produce next-generation ADCs, and we believe
that our approach to producing site-specific ADCs suitable for use
in GLP studies, based on a strategic assessment of appropriate regulatory
frameworks, can serve as a model for others as they develop their
own approaches to the manufacture of materials for use in studies
that support clinical regulatory filings.

Results and Discussion
Approaches to the implementation
of Current Good Manufacturing
Practice (cGMP) principles in early development activities vary widely
across the entities conducting these studies. While mature quality
systems are in place for larger, established pharmaceutical companies,
the majority of the smaller, independent, and research-oriented organizations
currently lack these controls. What follows is the development of
a process for the production of materials suitable for use in early
development and GLP preclinical studies used to support regulatory
filings for pharmaceutical products. This process was developed using
guidance from multiple regulatory agencies to develop a phase-appropriate
cGMP process, which will help ensure acceptance of these filings with
regulatory agencies.

Regulations regarding the manufacture of
pharmaceutical products
for late-phase clinical and commercial use are well established by
regulatory agencies, including the FDA cGMP Regulations17 and European Union GMP Annex 1.18 Guidance for the manufacture of preclinical materials to
support GLP studies,19 however, is less
well defined, which can lead to complications when entities move into
early- and late-phase manufacturing where the regulatory requirements
ramp up to full cGMP. All activities associated with development of
pharmaceutical products are ultimately included in any submission
for commercial approval by regulatory agencies, and a lack of early
application of a GMP strategy in early product development can be
an area of weakness in these filings.

As outlined in the International
Conference on Harmonisation of
Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human
Use (ICH), “The aim of pharmaceutical development is to design
a quality product and its manufacturing process to consistently deliver
the intended performance of the product”,20 and “The goal of manufacturing process development
for the drug substance is to establish a commercial manufacturing
process capable of consistently producing drug substance of the intended
quality.”21 It is critical that
the early development work is documented to ensure that the required
data is able to be included in submissions to support regulatory approval.

This does not mean that all early development work must be completed
according to cGMP standards; as explained by the FDA Guidance Documents
for Process Validation, “Generally, early process design experiments
do not need to be performed under the cGMP conditions required for
drugs intended for commercial distribution. They should, however,
be conducted in accordance with sound scientific methods and principles,
including good documentation practices.”22 Implementation of cGMP requirements can be resource-prohibitive
for early development activities. One of the areas where early development
is lacking is in the presence of an independent Quality Management
System (QMS) to provide oversight of the project. Per the ICH, “The
elements of [a Pharmaceutical Quality Management System] should be
applied in a manner that is appropriate and proportionate to each
of the product lifecycle stages, recognizing the differences among,
and the different goals of each stage.”23 The inclusion of a QMS should be gradually applied to product
development to ensure greater efficiency and a seamless transition
from early development to late-phase clinical and commercial operations.

Our intent is to use phase-appropriate cGMP processes to produce
a material that is suitable for use in GLP studies. Producing these
GLP-ready materials with solid documentation packages will enable
the filing of investigational new drug applications (INDs) and eventually
new drug applications (NDAs). Documentation of early-phase development
work is key to the success of any development project.

An emerging
area of focus in the current regulatory environment
is data integrity, which refers to the completeness, consistency,
and accuracy of data. The minimum requirements for data integrity
include the fact that all data documented for cGMP activities should
be attributable, legible, contemporaneously recorded, original, and
accurate (ALCOA).24 Early implementation
of systems to comply with data integrity standards ensures any information
included in regulatory submission meets data integrity requirements
and will not result in deficiencies in the submitted data.

FDA
regulations for GLP studies provide guidance for conducting
nonclinical laboratory studies to support new pharmaceutical product
applications, such as an IND or NDA.19 The
majority of the guidance is focused on execution of the study itself
and does not elaborate on the methods or processes needed to produce
the test articles that supply the study. The requirements stated in
the regulations for test article characterization require identity,
strength, purity, compositions, or other characteristics to be documented
and the methods of production to be documented.19

Ajinomoto Bio-Pharma Services (Aji Bio-Pharma) has
developed an
internal procedure to ensure that product development of a client/sponsor
material is included within the overall QMS and in a regulatory framework
to allow for appropriate data integrity. The requirements of this
procedure were developed from regulatory guidance documents and represent
the implementation of a regulatory framework to support early product
and process development. Materials produced using this approach are
acceptable for use in GLP preclinical studies used to support pharmaceutical
development efforts.

Facility and Equipment
All activities related to development
formulations are conducted in the Process Development (PD) laboratory.
The PD laboratory is located in a segregated area of a GMP manufacturing
facility to ensure no cross-contamination of test articles with other
GMP materials. Segregation of the PD laboratory is achieved using
dedicated utilities, including heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC); deionized water; required gases; separate access-controlled
entry; and personal protective equipment.

Equipment used in
the production of development formulations is not subject to the full
requirements of GMP qualification and validation; however, all equipment
undergoes routine preventive maintenance (PM) and calibration to ensure
adequate operation. Analytical equipment used for the analysis of
development formulations is maintained as GMP equipment with supporting
qualifications, including installation and operational qualification
(IOQ), documented PM and calibration schedules and written procedures
for operation and maintenance.

Laboratory manufacturing equipment
and materials are single use
and disposable wherever possible to eliminate the risk of cross-contamination.
Where single use is not possible, materials are product-dedicated.

Control of Raw Materials
All raw materials (RMs) and
excipients used in the manufacture of development formulations are
classified as GMP materials. GMP materials follow a quarantine, sampling,
testing, and quality unit release process to ensure compliance with
approved product specifications, which define identity, strength,
purity, and quality characteristics.17 Lot
release packets are maintained by the quality unit for a designated
record retention timeframe after release. Test articles often do not
have pre-established criteria to allow for the creation of product
specification to support the GMP RM process described above. Qualification
and release of such test articles are at the discretion of the product
sponsor, who assumes responsibility for ensuring that the materials
meet the requirements of the desired study. At a minimum, an identity
test is performed upon receipt of the test article to ensure that
it is the correct material for the protocol.

Manufacturing Controls
All activities, including manufacturing
data, equipment use, processing steps, and deviations, are documented
in an electronic laboratory notebook (ELN) system. All manufacturing-related
studies to be executed require a protocol that is subject to pre-approval
by the PD owner and quality unit. This protocol describes the intent
and purpose of the study and includes a detailed batch record to define
the process steps necessary to complete the manufacturing activity.
The batch record includes supporting information, including a bill of materials, list of equipment, in-process control
testing, and required sampling steps. During execution of the protocol
batch record, each step is signed off by the operator performing the
activity and verified by a second operator in accordance with GMP
principles.17 Any deviation from the pre-approved
batch record is recorded and justified to ensure that it does not
have an adverse impact on the formulation.17 Once execution is complete, the batch record is subject to review
by the PD owner and quality unit to address any documentation deficiencies
or deviations. Operations and documentation related to these manufacturing
processes are subject to an internal audit program administered by
the quality unit.

Laboratory Controls
The testing and analysis of the
developmental material are executed using analytical methods demonstrated
to be suitable for their intended use. Method qualification and validation
are generally required for the analysis of GMP material to ensure
that the performance of the test method is appropriate for the test
article.25 Analytical methods used to support
developmental formulations do not require method qualification or
validation; however, the test method should be proceduralized prior
to use to ensure that the test execution is as intended.

Samples
are taken at defined steps in the process and are entered into a laboratory
information management system to track the lifecycle of the sample.
All analyses of test materials are performed using GMP-compliant equipment
and reagents. Data generated during analysis is reviewed by the laboratory
personnel and quality unit to ensure adherence to the study protocols.
Given the developmental nature of these studies, most materials do
not have predefined acceptance criteria to compare with the analytical
results. Data is then assembled into a certificate of testing (COT),
which is reviewed by the PD owner and quality unit, and used to document
acceptance of the material produced in the study and release of the
material to the project sponsor.

Packaging, Labeling, and Distribution
Packaging and
labeling, including sample aliquoting, container closure, and secondary
packaging of the test material, are at the discretion of the sponsor.
The minimal labeling requirements include a product description, batch
number, date of manufacture, storage conditions, and a “Not
for Human Use” statement. Release of the material is documented
on the COT, which accompanies the shipment to the sponsor.

Record Keeping
All documentation, including the pre-approved
protocol, executed batch record, analytical raw data, and reports
and COT associated with the manufacture of the test material, is maintained
in the ELN system indefinitely. This system is compliant with 21 CFR
Part 11 requirements for electronic records to ensure that the documents
are available for further review.26

Antibody–Drug Conjugate Synthesis Using Site-Specific
Chemical Conjugation
Next, we applied this GMP strategy for
AJICAP-ADC synthesis (Scheme 2). From a previous gram-scale ADC synthesis,15 we optimized several processes aimed at future manufacturing.
First, to check the completion of each reaction, characteristic IPC
analysis was completed. All reactions, including peptide conjugation,
were conducted in glass reactor vessels. This stirring system is a
well-known technique, which enables the later application of this
synthesis to the larger batch vessels that are often used for kilogram-scale
ADC preparation in a manufacturing facility.27

Scheme 2 Gram-Scale Synthesis of Trastuzumab-AJICAP-MMAE (5)
To the best of our knowledge, the chemical modification
of proteins
by an affinity reagent using a glass reactor vial and stirrer has
not been reported, and there was concern that this mixing methodology
may trigger undesired nonspecific conjugation or reduce the quality
of the proteinaceous material produced.

Peptide reagent 1 was added to a trastuzumab solution,
and this reaction mixture was stirred using the Chemglass system.
IPC analysis of this reaction was conducted using several analytical
techniques. Hydrophobic interaction chromatography HPLC (HIC-HPLC),
which is well known as the gold-standard method for the analysis of
antibody-related products, provided clear visual results (Figure 1a,b). The retention
time of the trastuzumab–peptide conjugate (2, Figure 1b) was longer compared
with that of trastuzumab (Figure 1a), indicating that the peptide conjugation was almost
complete within 1 h and trastuzumab modified by two peptides was the
major product. However, two additional peaks were also observed in
the HIC chromatogram. The smallest peak (retention time, 8.0 min)
was attributed to trastuzumab conjugated with one extra peptide, implying
that an undesired side reaction had occurred. The other peak, with
a retention time of 6.3 min, was assigned as trastuzumab conjugated
with only one peptide. This HIC result was identical to the previous
results,14 and quadrupole time-of-flight
mass spectrometry (Q-TOF MS) analysis of compound 2 after
purification also supported this observation (Figure S16, Supporting Information).

Figure 1 HIC analysis for IPC:
(a) trastuzumab; (b) trastuzumab conjugated
to peptides (2); (c) linker cleavage compounds (3); (d) site-specific, thiol-modified product (4); and (e) trastuzumab-AJICAP-MMAE (5).

Reverse-phase HPLC (RP-HPLC) is also commonly used
for IPC analysis;
in particular, the site selectivity of AJICAP conjugation was previously
confirmed by this methodology (Figure 2).16 The RP-HPLC chromatograms
of reduced 2 showed three peaks (Figure 2b). The highest peak (retention time, 12.0
min) corresponded to the heavy chain conjugated with one thiol-containing
group, which was derived from the peptide reagent. For RP-HPLC, all
samples were pretreated with dl-dithiothreitol (DTT) to cleave
the disulfide bonds. This reduction also caused cleavage of the linkage
between the peptide moiety and trastuzumab in compound 2. As a result of this cleavage, the heavy chain modified by the newly
formed thiol was observed in the chromatogram. Additionally, two peaks
(retention times, 8.3 and 11.7 min) matched the retention time for
reduced trastuzumab. From these results, the heavy-chain selectivity
of the conjugation of peptide 1 to trastuzumab was confirmed,
showing the compatibility of this synthesis with the reactor vessel
system with stirring.

Figure 2 RP-HPLC analysis for IPC: (a) trastuzumab; (b) trastuzumab
conjugated
to peptides (2); (c) linker cleavage compounds (3); (d) site-specific, thiol-modified product
(4); and (e) trastuzumab-AJICAP-MMAE (5).

After tangential flow filtration (TFF) purification,
compound 2 was treated with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
hydrochloride
(TCEP) under previously optimized conditions using slightly acidic
buffer.15 Compound 3 was eluted
with a retention time close to that of the naked antibody in the HIC
chromatogram, indicating that the peptide moieties had been removed
from compound 2 (Figure 1c). Theoretically, compound 3 should retain
the internal noncovalent interactions holding the complex together,
even if all the covalent interchain disulfide bonds are cleaved; therefore,
the overall surface hydrophobicity of compound 3 should
not change significantly, and this is indeed reflected in the retention
time in the HIC chromatogram. RP-HPLC was not useful for the IPC analysis
of this reaction because the RP-HPLC chromatogram of compound 3 was identical to that of compound 2 (Figure 2c). Therefore, we
tested another IPC analytical method to support the HIC result. Ellman’s
assay of compound 3 showed an average of 10.2 free sulfhydryl
groups per antibody, indicating that all the interchain disulfide
bonds and the linkage between the peptide and antibody were cleaved
to form free thiol groups (Table S2, Supporting
Information). Purification by the TFF system gave purified 3, which was converted to compound 4 by exposure to mild
oxidative conditions. For the monitoring of this reaction, Ellman’s
assay was a useful method of analysis, showing that there was an average
of 1.87 free sulfhydryl groups per antibody (Table S3, Supporting Information). HIC and RP-HPLC were not viable
options to analyze this reaction step because the retention time of
compound 4 did not shift from that of compound 3 in either chromatogram.

Conjugation of MC-VC-MMAE
with compound 3 was easily
monitored by both HIC and RP-HPLC due to the hydrophobicity of this
drug linker. Both chromatograms matched with previous studies [drug
antibody ratio (DAR) = 1.6], and 1.7 g of trastuzumab-AJICAP-MMAE
(5) was obtained after TFF purification.28,29

In addition to reaction monitoring, the RP-HPLC results described
in Figure 2 indicate
the heavy-chain specificity of AJICAP conjugation as no light-chain
conjugates were observed in the RP-HPLC chromatogram. In our previous
report, a peptide mapping analysis of intermediate 4 (that
is corresponding to the precursor of final ADC 5) indicated
that AJICAP technology can perform in a site-specific manner to functionalize
a single lysine in the Fc region of an antibody.14 These results support the conclusion that trastuzumab-AJICAP-MMAE
(5) retains site-specific conjugation. Further analytical
investigations including peptide mapping of 5 are now
underway.

Conclusions
A GMP strategy, including the regulatory
framework and guidance,
was established for use in GLP preclinical supply of a material. For
the demonstration, AJICAP-ADC synthesis was achieved. All reactions
were conducted in appropriate scalable glass reactor vessels, enabling
future scale-up in a manufacturing facility. Several IPC analytical
methods based on the compound or intermediate characteristics were
also conducted. The total product yield for the four steps was increased
to 90% from a previous study, and finally, 1.72 g of trastuzumab-AJICAP-MMAE
was obtained. These results demonstrated the reproducibility and robustness
of AJICAP synthesis, enabling its application for future manufacturing.30 The establishment of our strategy to produce
materials suitable for GLP studies and incorporation in relevant regulatory
filings is based on a carefully considered review of relevant regulatory
guidance and manufacturing logic and can serve as a model for future
biomolecular pharmaceutical development.

Experimental Section
Materials
Human IgG1 trastuzumab (Herceptin) was purchased
from Roche Pharmaceutical Company (Switzerland). Maleimide-C6-valine-citrulline-monomethyl
auristatin E (CAS#: 646502-53-6; MC-VC-MMAE) was purchased from NJ
Biopharmaceuticals LLC (USA). Peptide reagent 1 was provided
from Ajinomoto Co., Inc. All other chemical reagents were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (USA).

Experimental Procedure for Peptide Conjugation (Step 1 of AJICAP
Technology)
To a solution of trastuzumab (10 mg/mL, 1.90
g) in 10 mM AcONa buffer (pH 5.5) was added a 22 mM dimethylformamide
(DMF) solution of peptide reagent 1 (9 equiv, 5.15 mL)
and stirred at 25 °C using the Chemglass system. After 1 h, a
small amount of reaction mixture (0.5 mL) was sampled for IPC analysis.
After checking the IPC analysis, the reaction mixture was purified
by a TFF system using a Sartocon Slice 200 ECO Hydrosart membrane
(30 kDa; Sartorius) and 10 mM AcONa buffer (pH 5.5) as diafiltration
(DF) buffer at an antibody concentration of 20 mg/mL. Next, the buffer
exchange of this solution was conducted by a TFF system using a Sartocon
Slice 200 ECO Hydrosart membrane (30 kDa; Sartorius) and formulation
buffer (20 mM histidine containing 5% trehalose, pH 5.2) as DF buffer
at an antibody concentration of 6.9 mg/mL to afford trastuzumab–peptide
conjugate 2 (1.92 g, 98% yield) in formulation buffer.

Experimental Procedure for Linker Cleavage (Step 2 of AJICAP
Technology)
To a solution of trastuzumab-peptide conjugate 2 (6.9 mg/mL, 1.92 g) in formulation buffer was added 0.25
M aqueous solution of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (12 equiv,
0.572 mL, pH 7.4), 100 mg/mL polysorbate 20 (0.0265 mL), and 0.5 M
aqueous solution of TCEP (20 equiv, 0.476 mL) at 37 °C. The resulting
mixture was measured by a pH meter, showing that the final pH was
5.2. After 1 h at 37 °C, a small amount of reaction mixture (0.5
mL) was sampled for IPC analysis. After checking the IPC analysis,
the reaction mixture was purified by a TFF system using a Sartocon
Slice 200 ECO Hydrosart membrane (30 kDa; Sartorius) and 10 mM AcONa
buffer (pH 5.5) as DF buffer at an antibody concentration of 20 mg/mL.
Next, the buffer exchange of this solution was conducted by a TFF
system using a Sartocon Slice 200 ECO Hydrosart membrane (30 kDa;
Sartorius) and conjugation buffer (50 mM PBS, 10 mM EDTA, pH 7.4)
as DF buffer at an antibody concentration of 6.6 mg/mL to afford linker
cleavage product 3 (1.79 g, 96% yield) in conjugation
buffer.

Experimental Procedure for Reoxidation (Step 3 of AJICAP Technology)
To a solution of linker cleavage product 3 (6.6 mg/mL,
1.79 g) in conjugation buffer was added a 50 mM dimethyl sulfoxide
solution of DHAA (40 equiv, 8.60 mL), and the mixture was incubated
at room temperature. After 3 h, a small amount of reaction mixture
(0.5 mL) was sampled for IPC analysis. After checking the IPC analysis,
the reaction mixture was purified by a TFF system using a Sartocon
Slice 200 ECO Hydrosart membrane (30 kDa; Sartorius) and conjugation
buffer as DF buffer at an antibody concentration of 6.8 mg/mL to afford
linker reoxidation product 4 (1.78 g, 100% yield) in
conjugation buffer.

Experimental Procedure for Payload Conjugation (Step 4 of AJICAP
Technology)
To a solution of reoxidation product 4 (6.8 mg/mL, 1.78 g) in conjugation buffer were added dimethylacetamide
(DMA) (11.5 mL) and a 10 mM DMA solution of MC-VC-MMAE (10 equiv,
13.3 mL), and the mixture was incubated at 20 °C. After 2 h,
a small amount of the reaction mixture (0.5 mL) was sampled for IPC
analysis. After checking the IPC analysis, the reaction mixture was
quenched by an excess amount of a 50 mM aqueous solution of N-acetyl cysteine and incubated at 25 °C for 15 min.
This reaction mixture was purified by a TFF system using a Sartocon
Slice 200 ECO Hydrosart membrane (30 kDa; Sartorius) and conjugation
buffer as DF buffer at an antibody concentration of 20 mg/mL. Next,
the buffer exchange of this solution was conducted by a TFF system
using a Sartocon Slice 200 ECO Hydrosart membrane (30 kDa; Sartorius)
and formulation buffer as DF buffer at an antibody concentration of
6.8 mg/mL to afford trastuzumab-AJICAP-MMAE 5 (1.73 g,
95% yield) in formulation buffer.

General Procedure for IPC
Gel filtration of several
reaction mixtures was conducted for removal of impurities to obtain
a purified protein, which was used for several analyses.

Instruments/Analytical Method
The concentration of
proteins was determined by the Slope Spectroscopy method with a Solo-VPE
system.14

HIC-HPLC and RP-HPLC analysis
were performed as previously reported.16

Q-TOF MS analysis was performed as previously reported.14

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b02419.Tables comparing research and development, GMP, and
our approach; chromatographic figures; and DAR calculation and Ellman’s
assay results, as described in the text (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02419_si_001.pdf

 The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank our colleagues from Ajinomoto
Bio-Pharma Services, Inc., and Ajinomoto Co., Inc., as follows: Monica
Leung, Shawn Littrell, and William Wittbold for technical assistance
for the GLP study; Melody Batuyong for reviewing batch records; Samuel
Janssen, Wen Chen, and Keenan Moi for technical assistance with the
ADC analysis; Steve Folio, Darwin Richardson, Bert Barbosa, Michiya
Kanzaki, and Tatsuya Okuzumi for many helpful discussion and suggestions
in this study; and Kei Yamada for peptide reagent supply and many
helpful initial studies on AJICAP technology.
==== Refs
References
Thomas A. ; Teicher B. A. ; Hassan R. 
Antibody–drug conjugates for
cancer therapy . Lancet Oncol. 
2016 , 17 , 254 –262 . 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30030-4 .
Beck A. ; Goetsch L. ; Dumontet C. ; Corvaia N. 
Strategies
and challenges
for the next generation of antibody–drug conjugates . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2017 , 16 , 315 –337 . 10.1038/nrd.2016.268 .28303026 
Polakis P. 
Antibody Drug
Conjugates for Cancer Therapy . Pharmacol. Rev. 
2016 , 68 , 3 –19 . 10.1124/pr.114.009373 .26589413 
Tilly H. ; Morschhauser F. ; Bartlett N. L. ; Mehta A. ; Salles G. ; Haioun C. ; Munoz J. ; Chen A. I. ; Kolibaba K. ; Lu D. ; Yan M. ; Penuel E. ; Hirata J. ; Lee C. ; Sharman J. P. 
Polatuzumab vedotin
in combination with immunochemotherapy
in patients with previously untreated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma:
an open-label, non-randomised, phase 1b–2 study . Lancet Oncol. 
2019 , 20 , 998 –1010 . 10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30091-9 .31101489 
Lambert J. M. ; Berkenblit A. 
Antibody–Drug Conjugates for Cancer Treatment . Annu. Rev. Med. 
2018 , 69 , 191 –207 . 10.1146/annurev-med-061516-121357 .29414262 
Lyon R. 
Drawing lessons
from the clinical development of antibody-drug conjugates . Drug Discovery Today: Technol. 
2018 , 30 , 105 –109 . 10.1016/j.ddtec.2018.10.001 .
LoRusso P. M. ; Weiss D. ; Guardino E. ; Girish S. ; Sliwkowski M. X. 
Trastuzumab
Emtansine: A Unique Antibody-Drug Conjugate in Development for Human
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2–Positive Cancer . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2011 , 17 , 6437 –6447 . 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0762 .22003071 
Katz J. ; Janik J. E. ; Younes A. 
Brentuximab Vedotin (SGN-35) . Clin. Cancer Res. 
2011 , 17 , 6428 –6436 . 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0488 .22003070 
Senter P. D. ; Sievers E. L. 
The discovery and
development of brentuximab vedotin
for use in relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma and systemic anaplastic large
cell lymphoma . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 30 , 631 –637 . 10.1038/nbt.2289 .22781692 
Junutula J. R. ; Raab H. ; Clark S. ; Bhakta S. ; Leipold D. D. ; Weir S. ; Chen Y. ; Simpson M. ; Tsai S. P. ; Dennis M. S. ; Lu Y. ; Meng Y. G. ; Ng C. ; Yang J. ; Lee C. C. ; Duenas E. ; Gorrell J. ; Katta V. ; Kim A. ; McDorman K. ; Flagella K. ; Venook R. ; Ross S. ; Spencer S. D. ; Wong W. L. ; Lowman H. B. ; Vandlen R. ; Sliwkowski M. X. ; Scheller R. H. ; Polakis P. ; Mallet M. 
Site-specific conjugation
of a cytotoxic drug to an antibody improves the therapeutic index . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2008 , 26 , 925 –932 . 10.1038/nbt.1480 .18641636 
Tsuchikama K. ; An Z. 
Antibody-drug conjugates:
recent advances in conjugation and linker
chemistries . Protein Cell 
2018 , 9 , 33 –46 . 10.1007/s13238-016-0323-0 .27743348 
Jackson D. Y. 
Processes
for Constructing Homogeneous Antibody Drug Conjugates . Org. Process Res. Dev. 
2016 , 20 , 852 –866 . 10.1021/acs.oprd.6b00067 .
Our research group has
completed optimization
studies to streamline the conjugation reaction sequence, and these
advancements will be discussed in the future literature. For this
reason, we termed the site-specific conjugation technology described
in this manuscript as “first-generation AJICAP”.


Yamada K. ; Shikida N. ; Shimbo K. ; Ito Y. ; Khedri Z. ; Matsuda Y. ; Mendelsohn B. A. 
AJICAP:
Affinity Peptide Mediated
Regiodivergent Functionalization of Native Antibodies . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2019 , 58 , 5592 –5597 . 10.1002/anie.201814215 .
Matsuda Y. ; Yamada K. ; Okuzumi T. ; Mendelsohn B. A.  Gram-Scale
Antibody-Drug Conjugate Synthesis by Site-Specific Chemical Conjugation:
AJICAP 1st Generation . Org. Process
Res. Dev. 2019 , 10.1021/acs.oprd.9b00316 .
Matsuda Y. ; Robles V. ; Malinao M. C. ; Song J. ; Mendelsohn B. A. 
Comparison
of Analytical Methods for Antibody–Drug Conjugates Produced
by Chemical Site-Specific Conjugation: First-Generation AJICAP . Anal Chem. 
2019 , 91 , 12724 –12732 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b02192 .31478640 
Title 21 CFR Parts 210 and 211—cGMP in Manufacturing,
Process,
Packing, or Holding of Drugs and Finished Pharmaceuticals . http://academy.gmp-compliance.org/guidemgr/files/1-1-1.PDF.
Annex 1 Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products. EudraLex
The Rules
Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union Volume 4 EU Guidelines
to Good Manufacturing Practice Medicinal Products for Human and Veterinary
Use . 25 November 2008 , https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-4/2008_11_25_gmp-an1_en.pdf.
Title 21 CFR Part 58—Good Laboratory Practice
for Nonclinical
Laboratory Studies . 18 February 2004 , http://academy.gmp-compliance.org/guidemgr/files/CFR_2019/CFR-2019-TITLE21-VOL1-PART58.PDF.
ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guideline. Pharmaceutical
Development.
Q8 (R2) . Current Step 4 version, August 2009 , https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/Q8_R2_Guideline.pdf.
ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guideline. Development
and Manufacture
of Drug Substances (Chemical Entities and Biotechnological/Biological
Entities). Q11 . Current Step 4 version, 1 May 2012 , https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/Q11_Guideline.pdf.
FDA  Guidance for Industry Process Validation:
General Principles
and Practices . Current Good Manufacturing Practices (CGMP).
Revision 1, January 2011 , https://www.fda.gov/media/71021/download.
ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guideline. Pharmaceutical
Quality System.
Q10 . Current Step 4 version, 4 June 2008 , https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/Q10_Guideline.pdf.
FDA  Guidance for Industry Data Integrity and
Compliance with
Drug CGMP Questions and Answers . Pharmaceutical Quality/Manufacturing
Standards (CGMP). December 2018 , https://www.fda.gov/media/119267/download.
ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guideline. Validation
of Analytical Procedures:
Text and Methodology. Q2 (R1) . Current Step 4 version, November 2005 , https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/Q2_R1__Guideline.pdf.
Title 21 CFR Part 11—Electronic Records;
Electronic Signatures . https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=11&amp;showFR=1.
Stump B. ; Steinmann J. 
Conjugation
process development and scale-up . Methods Mol.
Biol. 
2013 , 1045 , 235 –248 .23913151 
In the
case of conjugation with maytansinoid-type
drug linker, DAR = 1.9 ADC was obtained (see ref (14)). This DAR difference
between MMAE and maytansinoid was rationalized by their reactivity
and hydrophobicity. Typically, conjugation with higher hydrophobic
drug linkers gives lower DAR ADCs. See representative example:

Xu Y. ; Jiang G. ; Tran C. ; Li X. ; Heibeck T. H. ; Masikat M. R. ; Cai Q. ; Steiner A. R. ; Sato A. K. ; Hallam T. J. ; Yin G. 
RP-HPLC DAR Characterization of Site-Specific
Antibody Drug Conjugates Produced in a Cell-Free Expression System . Org. Process Res. Dev. 
2016 , 20 , 1034 –1043 . 10.1021/acs.oprd.6b00072 .
Our research group has completed optimization
studies to improve DAR, and these advancements will be discussed in
the future literature.


Our
research group has reported an initial
study of peptide conjugation and labeling for a variety of IgGs including
IgG1, IgG2, and IgG4 (see ref (14)). ADC synthesis from these intermediates is a current focus
of work in our group.

