
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3155232010.1021/acsomega.9b01392ArticleInhibition of Glycation-Induced Aggregation of Human
Serum Albumin by Organic–Inorganic Hybrid Nanocomposites of
Iron Oxide-Functionalized Nanocellulose Singla Rubbel †‡§Abidi Syed M. S. †‡§Dar Aqib Iqbal †Acharya Amitabha *†‡†Biotechnology
Division and ‡Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh 176061, India* E-mail: amitabhachem@gmail.com, amitabha@ihbt.res.in. Phone: +91-1894-233339
ext. 397. Fax: +91-1894-230433.05 09 2019 17 09 2019 4 12 14805 14819 14 05 2019 31 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Protein aggregation
leads to the transformation of proteins from
their soluble form to the insoluble amyloid fibrils and these aggregates
get deposited in the specific body tissues, accounting for various
diseases. To prevent such an aggregation, organic–inorganic
hybrid nanocomposites of iron oxide nanoparticle (NP, ∼6.5–7.0
nm)-conjugated cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) isolated from Syzygium cumini (SC) and Pinus roxburghii (PR) were chemically synthesized. Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) images of the nanocomposites suggested that the in situ-synthesized
iron oxide NPs were bound to the CNC surface in a uniform and regular
fashion. The ThT fluorescence assay together with 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonic
acid, Congo Red, and CD studies suggested that short fiber-based SC
nanocomposites showed better inhibition as well as dissociation of
human serum albumin aggregates. The TEM and fluorescence microscopy
studies supported similar observations. Native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis results documented dissociation of higher protein
aggregates in the presence of the developed nanocomposite. Interestingly,
the dissociated proteins retained their biological function by maintaining
a high amount of α-helix content. The in vitro studies with
HEK-293 cells suggested that the developed nanocomposite reduces aggregation-induced
cytotoxicity by intracellular reactive oxygen species scavenging and
maintaining the Ca2+ ion-channel. These results indicated
that the hybrid organic–inorganic nanocomposite, with simultaneous
sites for hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions, tends to provide
a larger surface area for nanocomposite–protein interactions,
which ultimately disfavors the nucleation step for fibrillation for
protein aggregates.

document-id-old-9ao9b01392document-id-new-14ao-2019-01392dccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Amyloid-like
aggregation of proteins is a general feature of their
polypeptide chains, which is mainly responsible for various pathological
conditions or diseases like Parkinson’s, Huntington’s,
Alzheimer’s diseases, and type II diabetes mellitus.1,2 These amyloid-related diseases lead to transformation of proteins
from their soluble form to the insoluble amyloid fibrils. Because
of protein aggregation, fibrillar aggregates get deposited in the
specific body tissues.3 Amyloid fibers
formed from different proteins share some common features as these
are rich in β structures where β-sheets are perpendicularly
arranged to the fibrillar axis.4 The organization
of fibrils, kinetics, and their overall stability is highly governed
by the amino acid sequence of proteins and the surrounding environmental
conditions.5

Human serum albumin
(HSA) is a globular protein present most abundantly
(∼60%) in human plasma, which serves well as a model protein
for studying aggregation behavior of proteins.6 HSA is primarily a α-helical (∼67%) globular protein
consisting of 585 amino acid residues with three homologous domains
(I, II, and III); each domain is further composed of two subdomains.7 HSA contains a single tryptophan residue along
with 17 disulfide bridges in total, which impart flexibility to protein
to undergo aggregation under certain in vitro conditions.8,9 Albumin proteins such as HSA and bovine serum albumin play important
roles as carrier proteins and bind with endogenous and exogenous ligands
including fatty acids, hormones, metal ions, small molecules, drugs,
and so on.10,11 Destabilization of the native
structure of proteins is responsible for many diseases and can be
favored by a change in pH, high temperature, electrostatic interactions,
presence of salts, surfactants, and metal ions, change in osmolyte
concentration, high pressure, ionic strength, and so on, which may
result in the formation of misfolded intermediates, which are otherwise
inaccessible under normal physiological conditions.12−15 The formation of partially unfolded
or destabilized structures ultimately results in the formation of
aggregated proteins. As the protein aggregation is associated with
several human diseases, it has attracted the interest of material
scientists and biotechnologists to look for fibrillation inhibitory
measures from a biomedical perspective.

Considerable research
efforts have been made in the past literature
to develop antiamyloidogenic agents to attenuate the fibrillation
process. Formation of HSA fibrillar structures has been investigated
in the presence of aqueous ethanol because of its solvation effect.16 HSA glycation in the presence of glucose has
also been reported to induce protein fibrillation/aggregation.17,18 Nanoparticles (NPs), because of their small size and large surface
area, have also been known to influence protein folding and aggregation.
NP interactions with proteins or peptides may promote or inhibit fibrillogenesis.
NPs may offer a large surface area for adsorption of proteins onto
their surface and might help to retain the native structure of proteins,
though contradictory results are available for such claims.19 The large surface of NPs also provides an opportunity
for surface modifications and covalent attachments, but the toxicity
concern always remains in mind before the use of NPs for biomedical
applications. Dihydrolipoic acid-capped quantum dots have been reported
to promote the fibrillation process of HSA, whereas fluorinated NPs
and hydrophobic Teflon NPs induced inhibition of Aβ amyloid
polymerization.20 In other studies, magnetic
Fe3O4 NPs and MnFe2O4 NPs
have been shown to inhibit the aggregation of lysozyme and HSA, respectively.21,22

In this context, the present study aimed to develop a new
class
of nanocomposites constituted of plant cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs)
and iron oxide NPs for studying their effect on inhibition as well
as dissociation of HSA aggregation. Plant CNCs offer a large surface
area and are biocompatible and renewable for use in biomedical applications.11,23−33 The developed nanocomposite showed promising results against HSA
protein aggregation. It has previously been reported that the complex
structural backbone of the cellulose is degraded by the hydrolytic
action of enzymes (β-d-glucosidase and, β-d-glucuronidase) present in the macrophages, which finally convert
the substrate to glucose and glucuronic acid.34 These degradation products do not accumulate in blood or urine which
is consistent with the cellular elimination mechanism. The developed
nanocomposite showed promising results against the HSA aggregation.
These studies were further supported by in vitro results, where using
HEK-293 cells it was concluded that the developed nanocomposites reduce
aggregation-induced toxicity by intracellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS) scavenging and maintaining the balance of Ca2+ ion-channel
opening. It is expected that the present study will provide a new
avenue for designing artificial chaperones for amyloidogenic diseases.

2 Materials
and Methods
2.1 Materials
Plant leaves of Syzygium cumini (SC) and Pinus roxburghii (PR) needles were collected from CSIR-IHBT, Palampur campus (located
at geographical coordinates 36°08′16″ N and 76°33′22″
E) and at a height of ∼1260 m above main sea level. Sodium
chlorite (NaClO2), potassium hydroxide (KOH), Tris-HCl,
sodium bicarbonate, ammonium carbonate, potassium chloride (KCl),
Congo Red, and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) were purchased from HiMedia (India); sulfuric acid (H2SO4), HSA, glucose, Thioflavin-T, ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA), 8-anilino-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid (ANS), FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl2·4H2O, 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, dithiothreitol,
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, Nonyl phenoxypolyethoxylethanol (NP-40),
EDTA, diethyl ether, dimethylformamide, acetonitrile (ACN), α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic
acid (α-CHCA) matrix, p-nitrophenyl acetate,
propidium iodide (PI), trypsin, 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin
diacetate, bis(2-ethylhexyl) 3,4,5,6-tetrabromophthalate were procured
from Merck, Sigma-Aldrich. Hydrochloric acid (HCl), trifluoroacetic
acid, 30% ammonia solution, ascorbic acid, ethanol, acetic anhydride,
and pyridine were obtained from SD-Fine Chemicals India Ltd. Protein
molecular weight marker of 10–250 kDa, Fluo-3AM was purchased
from Thermo Fisher Scientific (U.S.A). Human embryonic kidney (HEK
293) cell line was obtained from NCCS, Pune, India. All these abovementioned
reagents were of analytical grade and used without any further purification.
Double-distilled water (DDW) was used in all the experiments.

2.2 Isolation of CNCs
CNCs were isolated
from the leaves of S. cumini (SC) and
needles of P. roxburghii (PR) by a
chemomechanical approach following our already published literature
report.35 The process has been described
in detail in the Supporting Information (Methods).

2.3 Surface Modifications of
CNCs by EDTA Dianhydride
For the preparation of EDTA dianhydride
(ED) and CNC-ED, a method
already published in literature was followed with minor modifications
as described in the Supporting Information (Methods).36,37

2.4 Preparation
of Nanocomposites Containing CNC-ED/Iron
Oxide NPs
An in situ approach was adopted for the incorporation
of iron oxide NPs (IONPs) onto the surface of both SC-CNC-ED and PR-CNC-ED.
For this, 50 mg of SC-CNC-ED and PR-CNC-ED were dispersed individually
in 20 mL of DDW and sonicated for 2 min to prepare a homogenous suspension.
The suspension was then sparged with N2 at 65 °C under
stirring for 10 min. Then, 2 mL each of FeCl3·6H2O (0.138 M) and FeCl2·4H2O (0.069
M) were added to the suspension and bubbled with N2 at
65 °C for 10 min. Aqueous ammonia (1 mL) was added to the reaction
mixture to bring it to pH-10. Immediately, a characteristic black
precipitate appeared and the reaction mixture was stirred under the
same conditions for 4 h. After 4 h, the reaction mixture was allowed
to cool down and then the product (black precipitate) was separated
by centrifugation. The recovered material was washed with DDW to achieve
neutral pH. After that, the material was oven-dried at a temperature
of 50 °C. The nanocomposites prepared after binding of iron oxide
NPs onto the surface of SC-CNC-ED and PR-CNC-ED were abbreviated as
SC-NCs and PR-NCs, respectively. Bare IONPs were also prepared without
the use of CNC-ED following the same methodology.

All the developed
nanocomposites were characterized by different microscopic and spectroscopic
techniques and the details are given in the Supporting Information (Methods).

2.5 Optimization
of the Protein Aggregation Process
The stock solution of
200 μM HSA was freshly prepared by
dissolving in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH-7.0). In case of aggregation
experiments, HSA aggregates were formed by diluting the stock solution
with an equal volume of 50% (v/v) ethanol and incubating at 37 °C
for 24 h under shaking at 200 rpm in the absence (abbreviated as HSA
Fibril) or presence (abbreviated as HSA + G-fibril) of 0.1 M d-glucose with a final protein concentration of 40 μM.38 As the aggregation was found to be higher in
case of 0.1 M d-glucose, the nanocomposite-treated studies
were conducted with HSA + G-fibril only.

2.6 Inhibition
and/or Dissociation of Protein
Aggregation in the Presence of Nanocomposites
The aggregation-inhibiting
activity of nanocomposites was investigated by adding 100 μL
of SC-NCs and PR-NCs (1, 2, 5, and 8 mg/mL in Tris-HCl, pH-7.0) separately
to the HSA + G-fibril during the aggregation process. The respective
nanocomposites with different concentrations were abbreviated as SC-NC-100,
SC-NC-200, SC-NC-500, SC-NC-800, PR-NC-100, PR-NC-200, PR-NC-500,
and PR-NC-800. For dilution of samples, Tris-HCl buffer (20 mM; pH-7.0)
was used. For dissociation studies, 100 μL of both the nanocomposites
(at the same concentrations) were added to the protein solution after
24 h and the solutions were further incubated for 24 h under similar
conditions.

Both the inhibition and dissociation process was
monitored by different spectroscopy and microscopy techniques, viz.,
Thioflavin T (ThT),39 Congo Red,40 transmission electron microscopy (TEM),41 Fluorescence microscopy imaging,42 protein intrinsic fluorescence,43 ANS fluorescence assay,44 and
CD spectroscopy.11 Native polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (native PAGE) of nanocomposite-treated protein
aggregates and the supernatant obtained after the magnetic separation
of protein–nanocomposite complexes was also carried out.45 All these methods are explained in detail in
the Supporting Information (Methods).

2.7 MALDI-TOF and Other Biochemical Assays
The MALDI-TOF analysis,46−48 esterase bioactivity assay,49 DPPH scavenging activity, and hemocompatibility
assay of the nanocomposite-treated samples were carried out according
to the procedure mentioned in the Supporting Information (Methods).50−53

2.8 In Vitro Studies
2.8.1 Animal
Cell Culture
HEK-293 cells
were grown in minimum essential medium supplemented with 10% FBS and
1% antibiotic (penicillin/streptomycin) at 37 °C in a humidified
incubator with 95% air and 5% CO2.

2.8.2 Intracellular Scavenging of ROS by the Nanocomposites
The ROS level, induced by the glycated aggregates of protein on
the cells, was monitored with a DCFH-DA probe. HEK-293 cells were
seeded in a 96-well plate (2 × 104 cells/well) and
kept overnight in a CO2 incubator. Then, the cells were
incubated with DCFH-DA (100 μM) for 2 h and washed thrice with
PBS (10 mM, pH-7.4). Next, the cells were incubated with HSA + G-fibril
for 1 h followed by treatment with different nanocomposites for 4
h. The corresponding fluoresce intensity, representing the ROS level
in the samples, was recorded using a microplate reader of excitation/emission
at 435/530 nm (Synergy H1 hybrid multimode microplate Reader, BioTek
Instruments). Appropriate controls were taken for the study.

2.8.3 Cell Viability Assay
For this,
HEK-293 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate (1.5 × 104 cells/well) and incubated for 24 h. After removing the media, the
cells were treated with HSA + G-fibril along with different nanocomposites
and incubated for 12 and 24 h. After the incubation, the cells were
washed twice with PBS followed by the addition of fresh medium and
again incubated for 1 h. Next, 10 μL of 5 mg/mL MTT was added
to each of the wells and incubated for 4 h. Finally, the medium was
removed and 150 μL of DMSO was added. The cell viability was
determined by recording the absorbance values at 490 nm using a microplate
reader. The studies were compared with appropriate controls.

2.8.4 ThT Fluorescence Microscopy of Nanocomposite-Treated
HEK-293 Cells
For ThT fluorescence studies, HEK-293 cells
were cultured in a 12-well plate (5 × 104 cells/well)
and incubated for 24 h. The cells were treated with HSA + G-fibril
for 4 h followed by incubation with different nanocomposites for 24
h and then fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde for 15 min. The cells were
washed thrice with PBS (10 mM, pH-7.4). After that, the cells were
incubated with ThT (2 mM) for 15 min and washed with PBS (10 mM, pH-7.4).
The cells were observed using a Axio-Zeiss Imager M1 microscope equipped
with a fluorescence attachment using a GFP filter. All the studies
were compared with the respective controls.

2.8.5 Intracellular
Ca2+ Hemostasis
Assay
For the intracellular Ca2+ hemostasis assay,
the HEK-293 cells were plated in a 12-well plate at a density of 5
× 104 cells/well and incubated for 24 h. The cells
were treated with HSA + G-fibril for 4 h followed by incubation with
the nanocomposites for 24 h along with respective controls. Next,
the cells were washed with PBS and incubated with Fluo-3AM (5 μM)
and PI (20 μM) for 1 h. Finally, the cells were imaged with
a confocal laser scanning microscope at different magnifications (Carl
Zeiss LSM 510 META). Different excitation and emission band pass,
viz., PI channel (PI, Ex. 477 nm, band pass: 560–615 nm, red
emission), Fluo-3AM channel (Ex. 506 nm, band pass: 505–550
nm, green emission) were selected for the study.

2.8.6 Isolation of Cytoplasmic Protein from Nanocomposite-Treated
Cells
For this, HEK-293 cells were seeded at a density of
2 × 105 cells/well in a 12-well plate and incubated
for 24 h. These were then treated with different nanocomposites and
again incubated for 24 h. The cells were then harvested using a cell
scrapper and centrifuged at 400g for 10 min in 2
mL centrifuge tubes. The cells were washed twice with PBS (10 mM,
pH-7.4). To these cells, 150 μL of cytoplasmic extraction buffer
(pH-7.6) was added and vortexed for 5 min. The tubes were kept on
ice for 10 min and partially sonicated in a bath sonicator for ∼3
min. The cells were then centrifuged at 11 000g for ∼2 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected carefully
in fresh centrifuge tubes and Bradford assay was performed to determine
their protein concentration. The samples were stored at −20
°C for further use.

2.8.7 Native PAGE Analysis
of Isolated Cytoplasmic
Proteins
The native PAGE studies were carried out for cytoplasmic
proteins isolated from nanocomposite-treated cells. For this, each
of the samples (4 μg) was mixed with 2× loading buffer
(50% glycerol, 0.1% bromophenol blue, and Tris-HCl at pH-6.8). All
these samples along with the marker were loaded in 10% resolving gel
and run at a constant voltage of 70 V for 4 h. The gel was stained
with 0.2% CBB for 2 h followed by overnight destaining. Finally, the
gel was imaged using Bio-Rad GS-800 Calibrated Imaging Densitometer.45 Appropriate controls were taken for the study.

2.8.8 Esterase-like Bioactivity Assay for Isolated
Cytoplasmic Protein
To check the retention of biological
activity of nanocomposite-treated cytoplasmic proteins, esterase activity
assay was carried out. For this, the isolated proteins (∼20
μg) from each of the samples were incubated with p-nitrophenyl acetate (50 μM) in PBS (100 mM, pH-7.4) at 37
°C for 1 h. The formation of p-nitrophenol was
monitored via absorbance at 405 nm using a UV–vis spectrophotometer.
The esterase activity of the native HSA solution was taken as 100%,
and activities of the corresponding nanocomposite-treated protein
aggregates were compared accordingly.

3 Results and Discussions
As protein aggregation results from
both hydrophobic and hydrophilic
interactions, a successful inhibitor for the process should be able
to interact with both the domains. Our approach was to use CNCs as
a matrix for IONP immobilization, keeping in mind the fact that it
may also provide hydrophobic regions which may interact with the corresponding
nonpolar regions of the protein aggregates. Further, IONPs being charged
species can easily interact with the hydrophilic part of the aggregates.
Hence, we designed these hybrid organic–inorganic nanocomposites
of CNCs and IONP (Scheme 1).

Scheme 1 Schematic Representation of the Synthesis of Organic–Inorganic
Hybrid Nanocomposites, viz., SC-NC and PR-NC, Used for the Present
Study
3.1 Isolation of CNCs and Formation
of Nanocomposites
CNCs were isolated from two different species,
viz., leaves of S. cumini (SC) and P. roxburghii (PR) needles to compare their morphology
and other structural attributes.
A combined chemical and mechanical approach was followed where bleaching
and alkali treatments were known to solubilize the noncellulosic components
like lignin, hemicelluloses, and pectin to obtain pure cellulose.53 Further, acid hydrolysis results in breakdown
of amorphous regions of cellulose from crystalline parts and also
imparts defibrillation to yield nanocellulose.54 Mechanical treatment leads to individualization of CNCs.
CNCs were further surface-modified with ED as SC-CNC-ED and PR-CNC-ED
as it has the anhydride group, which can form a covalent bond with
surface hydroxyl groups present on CNCs. For this, a simple method
was first followed for the conversion of EDTA to ED and the product
characterization was done by 1H NMR and 13C
NMR (Figures S1 & S2). ED is a strong
chelating agent for metal binding,55 thereby
CNCs modified with ED were used as a template for surface functionalization
with biocompatible iron oxide NPs to form nanocomposites by following
an in situ approach and these nanocomposites were abbreviated as SC-NCs
and PR-NCs for respective cases (Scheme 1). The in situ approach was followed as this
is advantageous over other approaches, because under this approach,
the metal NPs are simultaneously formed and stabilized onto the matrix
of CNCs.

3.2 Characterization of CNCs and Nanocomposites
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs clearly showed the
effect of chemical treatment (bleaching and alkali) on the morphology
of the fibers at each step of isolation (Figure S3). The presence of rough bundles of several micrometers was
noticed in SEM images of crushed untreated leaves of SC and PR, whereas
bundles started to disintegrate into individualized thick fibers after
bleaching treatment because of dissolution of lignin that acts as
a cementing material.54 Short and thin
ribbon-shaped fibrils of SC were observed after alkali treatment but
in the case of PR, the bundles of thick fibers were still found at
this treatment stage. This could be because the given chemical treatments
for this particular time period might not be able to properly solubilize
the noncellulosic components of P. roxburghii. Acid hydrolysis resulted in the formation of rod-shaped, individualized
short SC-CNCs whereas PR-CNCs were quite large in size (Figure S4). The surface topography of SC-CNCs
and PR-CNCs was observed to be similar even after surface modifications
with ED or with iron oxides.

The morphology of CNCs and nanocomposites
was also examined under TEM and the images are presented in Figure 1. SC-CNCs were individualized
small, rod-shaped structures of diameter 16 ± 2 nm and length
180 ± 20 nm, whereas PR-CNCs were present in a network-like form
with long thread-like fibrils of several micrometers length but the
diameter was 23 ± 3 nm. After surface modifications with ED,
no change in morphology of both the CNCs was observed compared to
their respective shape and size. The mean diameter of spherical-shaped
iron oxide NPs in SC-NC and PR-NC nanocomposites was observed to be
6.5 ± 1.4 and 7 ± 1.7 nm, respectively. From TEM images
of nanocomposites, it was clearly noticed that iron oxide NPs formed
during in situ synthesis were bound to the CNC surface. Similarly,
in a past report, iron oxide NPs of 30–40 nm size attached
on the outer walls of cotton CNCs has also been documented for sensing
applications.56,57 It was observed that iron oxide
NPs were present on the surface of CNCs in a uniform and regular fashion.
As the size of SC-CNCs was small, iron oxide NPs were found to be
compactly arranged, occupying the full surface, whereas PR-CNCs provided
a large space to bind iron oxide NPs where these NPs were dispersed
individually over a large surface. Histograms show the size distribution
of iron oxide NPs in nanocomposites. Both SEM-EDX and TEM-EDX represented
the peaks of elemental iron in the spectra of nanocomposites that
confirmed the presence of iron oxide NPs in the respective nanocomposites
(Figure S5). TEM image of bare IONPs depicted
that NPs were of spherical to hexagonal shape with an average diameter
of 10 ± 1.9 nm (Figure S6). The higher
size of bare IONPs suggested that both SC-CNC-ED and PR-CNC-ED act
as a better capping agent for IONP synthesis.

Figure 1 TEM images showing the
morphology of (a) SC-CNCs, (b) SC-CNC-ED,
(c) SC-NCs, (e) PR-CNCs, (f) PR-CNC-ED, and (g) PR-NCs. The size distribution
histograms of (d) SC-NCs and (h) PR-NCs representing the size of iron
oxide NPs present in NCs as calculated by ImageJ software has been
presented. Insets of images (c,g) represent the magnified TEM image
of NCs showing a clear indication of binding of iron oxide NPs on
the CNC surface. The scale bar for (a,b,e–g) is 200 nm, whereas
for (c) it is 100 nm. The inset scale bar for (c,g) is 50 nm.

The maximum water absorption (%) of SC-CNCs and
PR-CNCs was 303
± 15 and 212 ± 10%, respectively, in the first 60 min, followed
by equilibrium. The water absorption capacity might be due to the
porous nature of CNCs. The porous nature of SC-CNC and PR-CNC films
was further confirmed by SEM images (Figure S7). The average pore diameter of SC-CNCs and PR-CNCs was 40 ±
11 and 23 ± 3.5 μm, respectively. The lesser water uptake
capacity of PR-CNCs might be due to their small-sized pores compared
to SC-CNCs. Pore diameter seems to be reduced after binding of iron
oxide NPs onto the CNC surface during nanocomposite formation. The
average pore size was 9.8 ± 3.6 and 18 ± 5 μm in the
case of SC-NC and PR-NC, respectively. This might be due to the filling
of microvoids of nanocellulose with the small-sized iron oxide NPs.
The fact that SC-NCs showed greater reduction in pore size suggested
the better binding of IONPs on the SC-CNC-ED surface as compared to
the PR-CNC-ED surface. A similar case has been observed after binding
of silver NPs to bacterial cellulose.58 These structural pores present in nanocomposites might be responsible
for absorption of some biomolecules.

Zeta potential is a benchmark
of stability of samples in aqueous
dispersion. As shown in Figure S8, the
high negative zeta potential values of SC-CNCs (−33 ±
5 mV) and PR-CNCs (−32 ± 4 mV) depicted the presence of
negatively charged surface moieties such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, and
sulfate groups on the CNC surface.35 The
high value of negative zeta potential imparts more dispersion stability.
After surface modification of CNCs with ED, the negative surface charge
decreased to a certain extent in both the cases. A further decrease
in zeta potential value of SC-NC (−24 mV) and PR-NC (−19
mV) was observed after iron oxide conjugation on the surface of CNCs.
The lesser negative value of nanocomposites might represent their
tendency to settle down in aqueous suspensions.59 The more negative zeta potential value of SC-NC designates
its better aqueous stability as compared to PR-NC. The zeta potential
value of bare iron oxide NPs was found to be −17.8 mV (Figure S5).

Further, the binding and formation
of iron oxide NPs onto the CNC
template was confirmed by the magnetic nature of iron oxide NPs. The
stability of aqueous dispersion of nanocomposites was also studied
(Figure S9). The nanocomposites dispersed
in DDW and also the dried form of nanocomposites possessed a tendency
to be attracted toward a magnet. In the case of PR-NCs, the material
was strongly attracted by the magnet, leaving behind a clear solution
in just 30 min when dispersed in DDW. However, in the case of SC-NCs,
the material got separated by a magnet but a clear solution was not
obtained even after 4–6 h. This could be due to the small size
of SC-CNCs which remain in the dispersed phase for a quite long time
as compared to PR-CNCs. Another possibility for this fact might be
based on the higher negative zeta potential value of SC-NCs that confirmed
their better aqueous dispersion stability as compared to PR-NCs.

Another important characterization technique, that is, Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was used to confirm the synthesis
of nanocomposites. The peaks at 1100, 2900, and 3400 cm–1 are ascribed to the stretching vibrations of C–O–C,
C–H, and O–H bonds, respectively in both SC-CNCs and
PR-CNCs (Figure S10). A new band at 1726
cm–1 corresponding to the stretching mode of the
carbonyl group of the newly formed ester linkage between cellulose
and ED provided evidence that the grafting had successfully occurred
in SC-CNC-ED and PR-CNC-ED. The two absorption bands at 1591 and 1421
cm–1 are characteristic of the asymmetric and symmetric
O–C–O stretching modes of the carboxylate groups, respectively,
giving additional evidence for the successful incorporation of ED
in the cellulose backbone. In particular, the reinforcement of the
ester carbonyl band at 1742 cm–1 and the weakening
of the carboxy carbonyl band at 1600 cm–1 further
proved the structure of the active ester. The sharp absorption peak
located at 450 cm–1 is attributed to Fe–O
bond vibration.

The AAS studies suggested that the iron concentration
in freeze-dried
SC-NC and PR-NC nanocomposites was ∼3.79 ± 0.8 and 3.59
± 0.68 wt %, respectively.

3.3 Effect
of Nanocomposites on Protein Aggregation
As the HSA fibrillation
was found to be higher in the presence
of 0.1 M d-glucose (abbreviated as HSA + G-fibril) as compared
to native HSA aggregation (abbreviated as HSA fibril), the nanocomposite-treated
studies were conducted with HSA + G-fibril only (Figure S11). It has been previously reported that metal chelation
may inhibit protein aggregation;60 thus,
the developed nanocomposites were tested for their ability to inhibit
protein aggregation. For this, HSA was selected as a model amyloidogenic
protein because the ability of amyloid formation is a generic property
of albumin proteins. To study the inhibition or dissociation effect
of HSA, four different concentrations of each of the nanocomposites,
viz., SC-NC-100, SC-NC-200, SC-NC-500, SC-NC-800, PR-NC-100, PR-NC-200,
PR-NC-500, and PR-NC-800 were selected against HSA + G-fibril.

3.3.1 ThT Binding Assay
ThT is a very
sensitive fluorescent dye, which has a low fluorescence quantum yield
in solution but its fluorescence intensity increases when it binds
to amyloid fibers. This technique enables us to quantitatively detect
the existence of amyloid aggregation of HSA in the presence and absence
of nanocomposites.61 ThT binding with native
protein does not show any marked fluorescent intensity with emission
at ∼485 nm under the described experimental conditions.62 The fluorescence intensity of ThT with and without
nanocomposites was also checked (Figure 2a,b). ThT intensity of overnight-incubated
HSA protein for an aggregation inhibition experiment was investigated
in the presence of nanocomposites, used at different final concentrations,
viz., 1, 2, 5, and 8 mg/mL, respectively. Different concentrations
of nanocomposites were used in order to decide the optimum concentration
of nanocomposites required for inhibition or dissociation of aggregation.
The fluorescence intensity of native HSA was considered 100% and set
as the control. It was observed that HSA + G-fibril increases the
ThT fluorescence intensity by ∼27% whereas both the SC-NC-500
and PR-NC-500 used for the inhibition and dissociation studies were
found to reduce ThT intensity, compared to other controls. Bare IONPs
used at this concentration caused a minimal decrease in the ThT intensity
whereas bare CNCs (SC-CNCs and PR-CNCs) showed increased fluorescence
intensity. This might have resulted because of the presence of complex
linear structure and strong hydrogen bonding of −OH, between
the adjacent chains of cellulose, which closely packed them into fibers,
and make these unable to interact with water and other solvents. The
results suggested that the addition of nanocomposites, viz., SC-NC-500
and PR-NC-500, showed better inhibition and dissociation ability.

Figure 2 ThT assay
of native, aggregated, and nanocomposite-treated HSA
for (a) inhibition and (b) dissociation studies. The corresponding
Congo Red assay is given in (c,d), respectively. The abbreviations
used are (i) HSA native, (ii) HSA Fibril, (iii) HSA + G-fibril, (iv)
HSA + G + IONP, (v) HSA + G + PR-CNC, (vi) HSA + G + SC-CNC, (vii)
HSA + G + PR NC-100, (viii) HSA + G + PR-NC-200, (ix) HSA + G + PR-NC-500,
(x) HSA + G + PR-NC-800, (xi) HSA + G + SC-NC-100, (xii) HSA + G +
SC-NC-200 (xiii) HSA + G + SC-NC-500, (xiv) HSA + G + SC-NC-800, and
(xv) ThT dye. TEM images of HSA native (e), HSA + G-fibril, (f) HSA
+ G + PR-NC-500 (g), and HSA + G + SC-NC-500 (h) suggested disintegrated
fibrils for nanocomposite-treated samples. The corresponding fluorescence
images are given in (i–l), respectively. The scale bar for
TEM was 200 nm for all the cases, whereas the scale was 20 μm
for fluorescence microscope images.

3.3.2 Congo Red Binding Assay
Congo Red
binding assay was used to investigate the effect of nanocomposites
on protein fibrillation (Figure 2c,d). It is a histological dye which was used to probe
the existence of protein aggregation. In the presence of aggregated
protein, Congo Red showed reduced absorbance and red shift of absorption
peak from 490 to 515 nm in the absorption spectrum, whereas the nanocomposite-incubated
samples showed a blue shift in the peak position (∼490 nm).
Overall, it was found that SC-NC-500 showed better inhibition or dissociation
efficacy against protein aggregation, compared to all other controls.

3.3.3 Microscopy Studies to Visualize Inhibition
and Dissociation of Protein Aggregation
TEM studies were
performed to visualize the effect of nanocomposites on protein aggregation
(Figures 2e–h
& S12). As can be seen from the micrographs,
HSA, being a globular protein, exhibited a spherical-shaped morphology
in its native stage. Under the aggregated conditions, the spherical
nature of the protein changed to a long, interconnected fibril network-like
structure. However, when incubated with SC-NC-500, this long fibril
network-like morphology was found to dissociate to small fragments.
Interestingly, all the control molecules reflected a less amount of
protein inhibition. Similar results were also obtained with protein
dissociation studies. Fluorescence microscopy is a common technique
to characterize and image the morphology of ThT-stained protein aggregates.
The fluorescence microscopy images of the effect of SC-NC-500 and
PR-NC-500 toward the HSA protein aggregation are depicted in (Figure 2i–l). Control
studies with IONPs and SC-CNCs were also performed. Native HSA stained
with ThT showed spots of fluorescence response throughout the sample,
whereas HSA + G-fibril showed the fibril nature of the samples. When
compared with control molecules, it was found that SC-NC-500 showed
maximum dissolution of the fibril architecture. These results indicated
that there is a significant direct correlation of the microscopy studies
with the fluorescence studies. Similar results were also obtained
with protein dissociation studies. Thus, both these techniques helped
to monitor the change in the growth of protein aggregation upon addition
of nanocomposites.

3.4 Insights into the Binding
of Nanocomposites
to Protein Aggregates
To find out how the developed nanocomposites
bind to the protein aggregates, which finally lead to the dissolution
of the protein aggregates, we performed ANS and protein intrinsic
fluorescence assay along with CD studies.

3.4.1 ANS
Binding Assay
ANS is a specific
optical probe that binds to the hydrophobic region present in the
protein. The increase in hydrophilicity plays a crucial role in protein
aggregation or fibrillation. As can be seen from the data, the fluorescence
intensity of ANS increased by ∼5% with protein aggregation
(Figure 3a,b). When
nanocomposites were incubated with the proteins, the ANS fluorescence
intensity was found to decrease, where SC-NC-500 showed an ∼48–50%
decrease in the fluorescence intensity of the aggregated protein.
Control studies also suggested that compared to SC-CNC, PR-CNC, and
IONPs, the developed nanocomposites, viz., SC-NCs and PR-NCs, showed
better inhibition as well as dissociation efficacy. It was also observed
that amongst all the concentrations, SC-NC-500 showed maximum inhibition
or dissociation capabilities.

Figure 3 ANS assay of native, aggregated, and nanocomposite-treated
HSA
for (a) inhibition and (b) dissociation studies. The corresponding
intrinsic fluorescence assay and CD spectra are given in (c–f),
respectively. The abbreviations used are (i) HSA native, (ii) HSA
Fibril, (iii) HSA + G-fibril, (iv) HSA + G + IONP, (v) HSA + G + PR-CNC,
(vi) HSA + G + SC-CNC, (vii) HSA + G + PR-NC-100, (viii) HSA + G +
PR-NC-200, (ix) HSA + G + PR-NC-500, (x) HSA + G + PR-NC-800, (xi)
HSA + G + SC-NC-100, (xii) HSA + G + SC-NC-200, (xiii) HSA + G + SC-NC-500,
(xiv) HSA + G + SC-NC-800, and (xv) ANS dye.

3.4.2 HSA Intrinsic Fluorescence Studies
Fibrillation
of proteins may bring changes in the microenvironment
of the Trp residues, which are ultimately responsible for changes
in structural conformation of protein. Glycated HSA solutions incubated
in the presence or absence of nanocomposites were subjected to Trp
fluorescence measurements after excitation at 295 nm. It was found
that Trp fluorescence intensity increased after protein aggregation,
suggesting the exposure of Trp residue, which may have occurred because
of the unfolding of protein aggregates. However, incubation with the
nanocomposites resulted in the decrease of Trp fluorescence intensity
(Figure 3c,d). It should
be mentioned here that both SC-NC-500 and PR-NC-500 showed maximum
decrease in the fluorescence intensity, though the former showed better
results.

3.4.3 Circular Dichroism Studies
to Assess the
Change in Protein Secondary and Tertiary Structure
The protein
fibrillation process involves changes in protein secondary conformation
and this phenomenon can be monitored via CD studies. DICHROWEB online
software was used to assess the secondary structure content of the
protein.6 CD studies suggested that native
HSA (after 24 h under a similar experiment condition) contains ∼28%
of α-helix and ∼4% of β-sheet content (Figures 3e,f & S13, Table S1). During
the aggregation process, a decrease in α-helix content (∼3%)
was observed, whereas the corresponding β-sheet percentage increased
(∼80%). The data further illustrated that IONPs, SC-CNCs, and
PR-CNCs produced minimal changes in the α-helix content (∼6–15%),
whereas SC-NC-500 and PR-NC-500 increased the α-helix content
to ∼25%. Interestingly, at the same concentration, the β-sheet
content was decreased to ∼5%. A similar trend was also observed
for protein dissociation studies (Figure S13, Table S2). These observations reflected
that the developed nanocomposites can successfully inhibit or dissociate
the protein aggregates by reducing the β-sheet content. The
CD spectra between 250 and 350 nm (near-UV range) are studied for
tertiary conformational changes of the protein. As no changes were
observed in this region for native, aggregated, and nanocomposite-treated
proteins, it may be speculated that the tertiary structure of HSA
was retained throughout the experimental conditions.

3.4.4 Time-Dependent Inhibition and Dissociation
Studies of Protein Aggregates
Protein aggregation is a time-dependent
process where a misfolded protein in the lag phase is converted into
fibrillated protein in the steady state. As all the studies suggested
that SC-NC-500 and PR-NC-500 showed better inhibition as well as dissociation
efficacy, time-dependent kinetic studies were performed at 0, 6, 12,
18, and 24 h using the same nanocomposites. The role of the nanocomposites
in the suppression of protein aggregates was characterized by ThT
and Congo Red assay. The decrease in the ThT fluorescence intensity
at different time intervals suggested that a higher incubation time
resulted in better inhibition or dissociation efficacy (Figures S14 and 15). The Congo Red assay suggested
that at 0 h of incubation, the nanocomposites stimulate to interact
with the protein fibrils and with the increase in the duration of
time, that is, 24 h, both the nanocomposites started to exhibit a
strong multivalent interaction with protein aggregates and changed
it to short fragments (Figures S16 and 17). Both the ThT and Congo Red assay suggested that SC-NC-500 acted
as a better inhibitor or dissociating agent against HSA + G-fibril.

3.4.5 Analysis of Interaction of Protein Aggregates
with Nanocomposites
The interaction forces, that is, hydrophobic,
electrostatic, van der Waals, as well as hydrogen bonding play a major
role in protein aggregation and the strong multivalent interaction
of the nanocomposites exhibit inhibition and dissociation of protein
aggregates. Time-dependent fluorescence studies with ANS suggested
that at a higher incubation period, the fluorescence intensity of
ANS decreased considerably, suggesting that the nanocomposites reduced
the hydrophobic interactions amongst protein aggregates. The fact
that SC-NCs and PR-NCs showed better inhibition and dissociation efficacy
suggested that the IONPs present in the form of a filler in the matrix
of CNCs may act as a chaperone which binds efficiently with the unfolded
state of the protein and inhibit or dissociate the aggregation of
protein (Figures S18 and S19). Protein
intrinsic fluorescence data suggested that, with increase in incubation
time, for both inhibition and dissociation studies, SC-NC-500 was
able to decrease the fluorescence intensity of Trp, which showed almost
a similar intensity and no change in peak position when compared with
native HSA (Figures S20 and S21). CD studies
further suggested that on increasing the incubation time with SC-NC-500,
% α-helicity increased ∼8 times, whereas ∼16 times
decrease in the corresponding β-sheet content was observed as
compared to HSA + G-fibril (Figures S22 and S23, Tables S3 and S4). Further, it was observed
that SC-NC-500 showed a higher increase in % α-helicity content
compared to PR-NC-500. Hence, all these studies proposed that both
inhibition and dissociation of fibrils is a kinetic process and SC-NC-500
can act as an effective inhibiting or dissociating agent.

3.4.6 Native PAGE and MALDI Studies to Confirm
Dissociation of the Protein Aggregates
The native PAGE together
with MALDI studies were performed to find out the effect of the developed
nanocomposites on protein aggregation (Figures 4a,b & S24, Tables S5 and S6). Protein bands of higher molecular
weight aggregates were obtained for both HSA Fibril (∼71–223
kDa) and HSA + G-fibril (∼72–205 kDa), though the latter
showed stronger bands. When SC-NC-500 was incubated with the protein
aggregates, no such higher molecular weight bands were observed (∼67–115
kDa) for both inhibition and dissociation studies. Interestingly,
none of the other controls showed such dissociation of the protein
aggregates as these showed the presence of higher molecular weight
bands in the gel. These results suggested that both the nanocomposites
can effectively dissociate or inhibit protein aggregation. Further,
the native PAGE and MALDI studies were also extended to the released
proteins isolated from the nanocomposite–protein complex after
magnetic separation (Figures 4c,d and S24, Table S7). In this case, a protein band at ∼67 kDa
was observed for all the cases, suggesting that the dissociated proteins
were having a strong resemblance with native HSA.63

Figure 4 Native PAGE analysis of (a) inhibition and (b) dissociation for
native, aggregated, and nanocomposite-treated HSA samples. The released
proteins present in the supernatant after the magnetic separation
of protein–nanocomposite samples were given in (c) inhibition
and (d) dissociation, respectively. The corresponding molecular weights
(kDa) of the bands are highlighted by a red rectangular box as calculated
by MALDI-TOF MS/MS studies. The abbreviations used are (1) native
HSA, (2) HSA Fibril, (3) HSA + G-fibril, (4) HSA + G-IONP, (5) HSA
+ G + PR-CNC, (6) HSA + G + SC-CNC, (7) HSA + G + PR-NC-500, and (8)
HSA + G + SC-NC-500. The corresponding esterase activity of the magnetically
separated proteins are shown for (e) inhibition and (f) dissociation.

3.4.7 Esterase Activity Assay
to Confirm the Bioactivity
of Free HSA Present in the Supernatant
Albumins catalyze
the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl acetate to p-nitrophenol and this activity is associated with the III
A subdomain present in the protein where Lys199, His242, and Arg257
play the major role.64 Esterase activity
was carried out to determine the retention of the bioactivity for
the magnetically separated HSA in the nanocomposite-treated protein
samples. When compared with the native protein (100%), HSA + G-fibril
showed a decrease in the esterase activity to ∼41–48%
(Figure 4e,f). It was
interesting to note that for both inhibition and dissociation studies,
the SC-NC-500-treated sample showed a marked increase in the esterase
activity to ∼80–87%, whereas the same was ∼66–71%
for the PR-NC-500-treated sample. These results indicated that though
bands of similar molecular weight proteins were obtained in native
PAGE, functionally these are different from one another. The fact
that maximum esterase activity was obtained for SC-NC-500-treated
samples may possibly have resulted from the fact that the released
protein in this sample retains its structural integrity by preserving
their α-helix content to a better extent compared to any other
control.

3.4.8 Antioxidant Activity
Assay
Oxidative
stress has been previously reported to be one of the major causes
of proteinopathy and proteotoxicity, which finally leads to aggregation
of proteins.65−68 It has been previously reported that antioxidants can inhibit protein
aggregation.69−71 To find out whether the developed nanocomposites
can act as effective antioxidants, DPPH assay was carried out (Figure S25a). Results suggested that when compared
with the other control systems, both SC-NC-500 and PR-NC-500 showed
∼50–64% increase in the antioxidant potential. Moreover,
it was also noticed that both the nanocomposite showed enhanced scavenging
activity at higher concentrations, though maximum activity was observed
for SC-NC-500 and PR-NC-500. Further, the ROS scavenging efficacy
of the developed nanocomposite was studied under the protein aggregation
condition (Figure S25b). It was observed
that both PR-NC-500 and SC-NC-500 showed ∼74–82% of
ROS scavenging activity when compared with native HSA (taken as 100%),
though maximum efficacy (∼82%) was observed for SC-NC-500.
Other controls showed only ∼41–63% ROS scavenging activity
of that of native HSA. Thus, it may be speculated that the developed
nanocomposites may simultaneously act against protein aggregation-induced
oxidative stress and this may play an important role in disintegration
of protein aggregates.

3.4.9 Assessment of the Nanocomposite
Treatment
on the Protein Aggregation-Induced Intracellular ROS Generation
As previously described, the protein aggregation also leads to
an increased amount of ROS generation, which has been reported as
a possible pathway for cell death.72 To
monitor the effect of the prepared nanocomposites on protein aggregation-induced
intracellular ROS generation, the HEK-293 cells were initially treated
with HSA + G-fibril and then the corresponding nanocomposites along
with other controls were treated to the medium. As can be seen from
(Figure 5a), ∼2.4
times increase to the oxidative stress was observed for HSA + G-fibril-treated
cells as compared to the untreated or HSA native-treated cells. Addition
to the different controls reduced the ROS level in the cells, though
the maximum reduction was observed for SC-NC-500, where the ROS level
was found to be approximately comparable to HSA native-treated cells.
Thus, it can be commented that the developed nanocomposites markedly
reduce the aggregation-induced oxidative stress under in vitro condition.

Figure 5 Histograms
showing percentages of (a) intracellular ROS scavenging
activity and (b) cell viability assay of nanocomposite-treated HEK-293
cells. The bright-field and ThT fluorescence micrographs for different
samples are given in (c–f,g–j) respectively where (c)
[blank untreated cells, (d) HSA native, (e) HSA + G-fibril, (f) SC-NC-500
treated cells].*, ***, **** represent significant values of p < 0.0111, p < 0.0002, p < 0.0001 (ordinary ANOVA).

3.4.10 Nanocomposite Treatment Increases HEK-293
Cell Viability
To further cross-check the effect of the nanocomposite
on the aggregation-induced cellular toxicity, MTT assay was carried
out at two different time intervals, viz. 12 and 24 h (Figure 5b). The result suggested a
marked decrease in the cell viability (∼30–35%) after
HSA + G-fibril treatment to HEK-293 cells. Interestingly, all the
controls showed enhanced cell viability in a time-dependent manner.
It should be mentioned here that the maximum cell viability was observed
for SC-NC-500 (∼75–81%), suggesting that this nanocomposite
can reduce the aggregation-induced cytotoxicity in a better way as
compared to other controls.

3.4.11 ThT
Fluorescence Microscopy Studies with
Nanocomposite-Treated Cells
The intracellular presence of
aggregated proteins and their fate after nanocomposite treatment was
monitored using ThT fluorescence microscopy studies (Figure 5e–i).73 Increased fluorescence response was observed when the cells
were treated with HSA + G-fibril. This fluorescence response decreased
drastically once these treated cells were incubated with SC-NC-500
(Figure 5j). None of
the other controls showed such a decrease in the fluorescence intensity
(Figure S26). Interestingly, SC-NC-500
treatment also allowed revival of regular cell morphology for HEK-293
cells, which was mostly observed to be in a deformed shape after HSA
+ G-fibril treatment. Hence, the ThT fluorescence microscopy study
suggested the presence of a decreased amount of protein aggregates
after SC-NC-500 treatment, which is in line with the data obtained
from the cell viability studies.

3.4.12 Confocal
Microscope Studies to Monitor
the Effect of Nanocomposites on Intracellular Ca2+ Dysregulation
Activity
It has been previously reported that protein oligomer
species may lead to calcium dysregulation, which finally leads to
a wide range of neurotoxic events.72,74 To check the
effect of the developed nanocomposites on intracellular Ca2+ dysregulation activity, Fluo-3AM dye was used. As can be seen from Figure 6 (Figure S27), strong fluorescence response of Fluo-3AM was
observed for HSA + G-fibril-treated HEK-293 cells, suggesting Ca2+ dysregulation under protein aggregation condition. The PI
staining suggested that most of the cells were dead after HSA + G-fibril
treatment. However, after incubating the cells with SC-NC-500, no
Fluo-3AM response was observed, suggesting that the nanocomposite
was able to decrease the Ca2+ dysregulation, for the HEK-293
cells. Further, no response was observed for PI staining, reflecting
increased cell viability for the SC-NC-500-treated cells.

Figure 6 Confocal microscopy
images of different nanocomposite-treated samples
to monitor intracellular Ca2+ dysregulation for HEK-293
cells (b,c) represent native PAGE and esterase activity of nanocomposite-treated
cytoplasmic protein of HEK-293 cells.

3.4.13 Native PAGE Analysis of Isolated Cytoplasmic
Proteins from the Nanocomposite-Treated HEK-293 Cells
To
further confirm the disintegration of protein aggregates in the presence
of SC-NC-500, native PAGE analysis was carried out with the isolated
cytoplasmic proteins from the HEK-293 cells (Figure 6b). Both the untreated cells and the HSA
native-treated cells did not show the presence of any higher aggregate
protein in the gel band, whereas two bands close to ∼55 and
∼67 kDa were observed in these cases. Interestingly, HSA +
G-fibril-treated samples showed the presence of higher molecular weight
proteins at ∼100 kDa, apart from having band at ∼55
kDa. Further, it was also observed that in the case of the SC-NC-500-treated
sample, no higher protein molecular bands were observed. None of the
controls showed such disappearance of higher molecular weight bands.
Moreover, to confirm the retention of biological activity of the isolated
cytoplasmic protein, all the samples were tested for esterase activity
assay (Figure 6c).
It was observed that SC-NC-500-treated samples showed ∼91%
esterase activity of the isolated proteins, which was the highest
amongst all the other controls. All these results suggested that SC-NC-500
effectively disintegrates the protein aggregates.

3.4.14 Hemocompatibility Assay
Biomedical
applications of nanocomposites involve contact with the blood at the
targeted site; so, we focused our attention to find out the hemocompatible
nature of the developed nanocomposites. Hemocompatibility of the NCs
was evaluated by studying two important factors, viz., hemolysis and
RBCs morphology study. The chemical composition, size, shape, and
charge of NCs can be a reason for hemolysis. It was observed that
none of the developed nanocomposites showed any hemolysis (<5%)
even at 800 μg of concentration, whereas the positive control,
Triton X, showed 100% hemolysis (Figure S28). The SEM studies of treated and untreated RBCs showed an intact
and biconcave morphology of RBCs, which further supported the fact
that the developed nanocomposites are hemocompatible in nature and
thus can be used for in vivo applications (Figure S29).

3.4.15 Plausible Mechanism
of Action
The origin of protein aggregation appears to be
related to the way
protein molecules interact with each other in the presence of the
external environment. The structural and surface properties of proteins,
viz., surface topology and the distribution of hydrophobic regions,
indeed play a major role in the amyloid aggregate formation. Previously,
it has been reported that HSA secondary and tertiary structures are
grossly affected and lead to aggregate formation, under high carbohydrate
concentration via the formation of advanced glycation end products.57 Meanwhile, it should be remembered that the
core toxicity of the amyloidal proteins comes from their oligomeric
states and not fibrils. As can be seen from Scheme 2, the glycation-induced protein oligomeric
units initially form protofibrils, which gradually develop into mature
fibrils. The present organic–inorganic hybrid nanocomposites
were developed with the aim of providing simultaneous hydrophilic
(via attached IONPs) and hydrophobic (via CNCs) binding centers, which
can inhibit or dissociate the HSA + G-fibril formation. The developed
nanocomposites act on the protein oligomeric units by both hydrophobic
and hydrophilic interaction involving two synchronized pathways, viz.,
IONPs attached on the CNC surface binds strongly with the hydrophilic
part of the HSA, whereas the associated CNCs in the meantime interact
with the hydrophobic surface (Scheme 2). Additionally, ROS scavenging reduces the toxicity
associated with protein aggregation. These factors contribute to both
the inhibition and dissociation of protein aggregates. Such a mechanistic
pathway was supported by TEM (Figure 2f) and fluorescence microscopy studies (Figure 2j), where we have observed
predominant oligomeric units of HSA. Further, it should be noted that
both after inhibition and dissociation, HSA regains its α-helicity,
which seems difficult if HSA would have formed matured fibrils. Thus,
we propose that the developed nanocomposite acts on HSA oligomeric
units. The fact that none of the other controls, along with the bare
IONPs and CNCs alone, can show such strong activity suggested that
the presence of simultaneous hydrophobic and hydrophilic sites in
these nanochaperones is absolutely essential for such behavior. Further,
it may be possible that multivalent interaction sites provided by
the nanoplatform also played an important role in this mechanism,
by providing a stage for the interaction of a large number of IONPs
with the aggregated proteins. This phenomenon can be compared with
the common “Chelate effect”, which is both enthalpically
and entropically favored. The large number of hydrophilic interactions
by SC-NC/PR-NC makes the developed nanocomposites better inhibitors
compared to their respective counterparts. The fact that SC-NC acted
as better inhibitor or dissociating agent compared to PR-NC suggested
that small fibers can be easily accommodated between protein aggregates
by minimizing the steric hindrance. The results from the in vitro
studies also suggested that the developed nanocomposites remarkably
reduce intracellular aggregation-induced oxidative stress and Ca2+ dysregulation. Both these factors contribute significantly
in reducing the aggregation-induced toxicity and increase cell viability.

Scheme 2 Schematic Representation of the Plausible Mechanism of Action for
the Developed Nanocomposites against Protein Aggregation
4 Conclusions
Protein
aggregation leading to amyloid formation has been the main
cause of a whole range of neurodegenerative disorders. Although many
antiamyloidogenic systems have been reported in the literature, a
proper understanding of different intra- and intermolecular forces
responsible for such activity of the developed artificial chaperones
is still unknown. In the present study, hybrid nanocomposites of CNCs
and IONPs have been developed with an idea of providing simultaneous
hydrophobic and hydrophilic interacting centers to the aggregated
proteins. The nanochaperones when used against HSA aggregation showed
strong inhibiting as well as dissociating effects. Both the inhibition
and dissociation of protein aggregation was monitored by various spectroscopic
and microscopic techniques. It is hypothesized that nanocomposites
tend to provide a surface for nanocomposite–protein interactions,
ultimately disfavoring the nucleation step for fibrillation. These
studies also demonstrated the fact that an effective chemical chaperone
should have both hydrophilic and hydrophobic sites, thus providing
a new dimension in the designing of artificial chaperones. Such nanocomposites
containing CNCs and iron oxide NPs may find increased utility in biomedical
applications because of their nontoxic nature and also because these
can be easily removed from the blood circulation by applying an external
magnetic field. However, more elaborate studies are required in future
to use these nanocomposites as therapeutic agents.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01392.Comparative studies
done on 1H NMR spectra, 13C NMR spectra, SEM
images, SEM-EDX and TEM-EDX spectra, characterization
images of bare iron oxide NPs, aqueous dispersion of nanocomposites,
zeta potential graphs, FTIR spectra, comparison studies of protein
aggregates in the presence and absence of glucose, native PAGE, DPPH
assay, confocal studies, and detailed fluorescence and absorbance
studies for inhibition and dissociation of protein aggregates at different
time intervals, viz. 0, 6, 12, 18, and 24 h, along with microscopy
(TEM and fluorescence microscopy) and CD studies (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01392_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
§ R.S. and
S.M.S.A. Contributed equally.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful to the Director,
CSIR-IHBT
for infrastructural facilities. A.A. acknowledges the financial support
from CSIR (MLP0201) and DST (GAP0214, EMR/2016/003027). R.S. and S.M.S.A.
acknowledge UGC and DBT for their respective fellowships. A.I.D. acknowledges
GAP0214 for a project fellowship. The CSIR-IHBT communication number
of this manuscript is 4406.
==== Refs
References
Espay A. J. ; Vizcarra J. A. ; Marsili L. ; Lang A. E. ; Simon D. K. ; Merola A. ; Josephs K. A. ; Fasano F. ; Savica R. ; Greenamyre J. T. ; Cambi F. ; Yamasaki T. R. ; Tanner C. M. ; Gan-Or Z. ; Litvan I. ; Mata I. F. ; Zabetian C. P. ; Brundin P. ; Fernandez H. H. ; Standaert D. G. ; Kauffman M. A. ; Schwarzschild M. A. ; Sardi S. P. ; Sherer T. ; Perry G. ; Leverenz J. B. 
Revisiting
protein aggregation as
pathogenic in sporadic Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases . Neurology 
2019 , 92 , 329 –337 . 10.1212/wnl.0000000000006926 .30745444 
Ma L. ; Yang C. ; Huang L. ; Chen Y. ; Li Y. ; Cheng C. ; Cheng B. ; Zheng K. 
Glycated insulin exacerbates
the cytotoxicity of human islet amyloid polypeptides: a vicious cycle
in type 2 diabetes . ACS Chem. Biol. 
2019 , 14 , 486 –496 . 10.1021/acschembio.8b01128 .30715843 
Annamalai K. ; Liberta F. ; Vielberg M.-T. ; Close W. ; Lilie H. ; Gührs K.-H. ; Schierhorn A. ; Koehler A. ; Haupt C. ; Hegenbart U. ; Schönland S. ; Schmidt M. ; Groll M. ; Fändrich M. 
Common fibril
structures imply systemically conserved
protein misfolding pathways in vivo . Angew.
Chem. 
2017 , 129 , 7618 –7622 . 10.1002/ange.201701761 .
Ono K. ; Condron M. M. ; Teplow D. B. 
Structure–neurotoxicity
relationships
of amyloid β-protein oligomers . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2009 , 106 , 14745 –14750 . 10.1073/pnas.0905127106 .19706468 
Tanokashira D. ; Mamada N. ; Yamamoto F. ; Taniguchi K. ; Tamaoka A. ; Lakshmana M. K. ; Araki W. 
The neurotoxicity of
amyloid β-protein oligomers is reversible in a primary neuron
model . Mol. Brain 
2017 , 10 , 4 10.1186/s13041-016-0284-5 .28137266 
Bag S. ; Mitra R. ; DasGupta S. ; Dasgupta S. 
Inhibition of human
serum albumin fibrillation by two-dimensional nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2017 , 121 , 5474 –5482 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b01289 .28505459 
He X. M. ; Carter D. C. 
Atomic
structure and chemistry of human serum albumin . Nature 
1992 , 358 , 209 –215 . 10.1038/358209a0 .1630489 
Sen P. ; Fatima S. ; Ahmad B. ; Khan R. H. 
Interactions of
thioflavin T with serum albumins: spectroscopic analyses . Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 
2009 , 74 , 94 –99 . 10.1016/j.saa.2009.05.010 .
Vannoy C. H. ; Leblanc R. M. 
Effects of DHLA-capped CdSe/ZnS quantum
dots on the
fibrillation of human serum albumin . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 10881 –10888 . 10.1021/jp1045904 .20681557 
Sun Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Teng S. ; Hao F. ; Zhang H. ; Meng F. ; Lee R. J. 
Folic acid receptor-targeted
human
serum albumin nanoparticle formulation of cabazitaxel for tumor therapy . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2018 , 14 , 135 –148 . 10.2147/ijn.s181296 .
Singla R. ; Soni S. ; Padwad Y. S. ; Acharya A. ; Yadav S. K. 
Sustained
delivery of BSA/HSA from biocompatible plant cellulose nanocrystals
for in vitro cholesterol release from endothelial cells . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2017 , 104 , 748 –757 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.06.068 .28629862 
Palmal S. ; Jana N. R. ; Jana N. R. 
Inhibition
of amyloid fibril growth
by nanoparticle coated with histidine-based polymer . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 21630 –21638 . 10.1021/jp505613g .
Pradhan N. ; Jana N. R. ; Jana N. R. 
Inhibition
of Protein Aggregation
by Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Conjugated with Glutamine-and Proline-Based
Osmolytes . ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 1094 –1103 . 10.1021/acsanm.7b00245 .
Debnath K. ; Jana N. R. ; Jana N. R. 
Designed Polymer
Micelle for Clearing
Amyloid Protein Aggregates via Up-Regulated Autophagy . ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 
2018 , 5 , 390 –401 . 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b01196 .
Konar M. ; Mathew A. ; Dasgupta S. 
Effect of
Silica Nanoparticles on
the Amyloid Fibrillation of Lysozyme . ACS Omega 
2019 , 4 , 1015 –1026 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b03169 .31459377 
Pandey N. ; Ghosh S. ; Tripathy D. ; Dasgupta S. 
Effect of
temperature
and solvent on fibrillation of human serum albumin . Protein Pept. Lett. 
2015 , 22 , 112 –118 . 10.2174/0929866521666140320104409 .24654852 
Barzegar A. ; Moosavi-Movahedi A. ; Sattarahmady N. ; Hosseinpour-Faizi M. ; Aminbakhsh M. ; Ahmad F. ; Saboury A. ; Ganjali P. 
Spectroscopic
studies of the effects of glycation of human serum albumin on L-Trp
binding . Protein Pept. Lett. 
2007 , 14 , 13 –18 . 10.2174/092986607779117191 .17266645 
Khan T. A. ; Saleemuddin M. ; Naeem A. 
Partially folded glycated
state of
human serum albumin tends to aggregate . Int.
J. Pept. Res. Ther. 
2011 , 17 , 271 –279 . 10.1007/s10989-011-9267-7 .
Fei L. ; Perrett S. 
Effect of nanoparticles
on protein folding and fibrillogenesis . Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 
2009 , 10 , 646 –655 . 10.3390/ijms10020646 .19333426 
Rocha S. ; Thünemann A. F. ; Pereira M. d. C. ; Coelho M. ; Möhwald H. ; Brezesinski G. 
Influence of fluorinated and hydrogenated nanoparticles
on the structure and fibrillogenesis of amyloid beta-peptide . Biophys. Chem. 
2008 , 137 , 35 –42 . 10.1016/j.bpc.2008.06.010 .18625543 
Bellova A. ; Bystrenova E. ; Koneracka M. ; Kopcansky P. ; Valle F. ; Tomasovicova N. ; Timko M. ; Bagelova F. ; Gazova Z. 
Effect of Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles
on lysozyme amyloid aggregation . Nanotechnology 
2010 , 21 , 065103 –065109 . 10.1088/0957-4484/21/6/065103 .20061598 
Sen S. ; Konar S. ; Pathak A. ; Dasgupta S. ; DasGupta S. 
Effect of
functionalized magnetic MnFe2O4 nanoparticles
on fibrillation of human serum albumin . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 11667 –11676 . 10.1021/jp507902y .25247718 
Yanamala N. ; Kisin E. R. ; Menas A. L. ; Farcas M. T. ; Khaliullin T. O. ; Vogel U. B. ; Shurin G. V. ; Schwegler-Berry D. ; Fournier P. M. ; Star A. ; Shvedova A. A. 
In vitro
toxicity
evaluation of lignin-(un) coated cellulose based nanomaterials on
human A549 and THP-1 cells . Biomacromolecules 
2016 , 17 , 3464 –3473 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.6b00756 .27709894 
Yanamala N. ; Farcas M. T. ; Hatfield M. K. ; Kisin E. R. ; Kagan V. E. ; Geraci C. L. ; Shvedova A. A. 
In vivo
evaluation of the pulmonary
toxicity of cellulose nanocrystals: a renewable and sustainable nanomaterial
of the future . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2014 , 2 , 1691 –1698 . 10.1021/sc500153k .26753107 
Li J. ; Wang Y. ; Zhang L. ; Xu Z. ; Dai H. ; Wu W. 
Nanocellulose/gelatin composite cryogels for controlled drug release . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2019 , 7 , 6381 –6389 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b00161 .
Domingues R. M. A. ; Silva M. ; Gershovich P. ; Betta S. ; Babo P. ; Caridade S. G. ; Mano J. F. ; Motta A. ; Reis R. L. ; Gomes M. E. 
Development of injectable
hyaluronic acid/cellulose
nanocrystals bionanocomposite hydrogels for tissue engineering applications . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2015 , 26 , 1571 –1581 . 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5b00209 .
Ntoutoume G. M. A. N. ; Grassot V. ; Brégier F. ; Chabanais J. ; Petit J.-M. ; Granet R. ; Sol V. 
PEI-cellulose nanocrystal
hybrids as efficient siRNA delivery agents—Synthesis, physicochemical
characterization and in vitro evaluation . Carbohydr.
Polym. 
2017 , 164 , 258 –267 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.02.004 .28325325 
Guo J. ; Liu D. ; Filpponen I. ; Johansson L.-S. ; Jani J.-M. ; Quraishi S. ; Liebner F. ; Santos H. A. ; Rojas O. J. 
Photoluminescent
hybrids of cellulose nanocrystals and carbon quantum dots as cytocompatible
probes for in vitro bioimaging . Biomacromolecules 
2017 , 18 , 2045 –2055 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.7b00306 .28530806 
You J. ; Cao J. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhang L. ; Zhou J. ; Chen Y. 
Improved Mechanical
Properties and Sustained Release Behavior of Cationic Cellulose Nanocrystals
Reinforeced Cationic Cellulose Injectable Hydrogels . Biomacromolecules 
2016 , 17 , 2839 –2848 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.6b00646 .27519472 
Endes C. ; Mueller S. ; Kinnear C. ; Vanhecke D. ; Foster E. J. ; Petri-Fink A. ; Weder C. ; Clift M. J. D. ; Rothen-Rutishauser B. 
Fate of cellulose
nanocrystal aerosols deposited on the lung cell surface in vitro . Biomacromolecules 
2015 , 16 , 1267 –1275 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.5b00055 .25789784 
Wang F. ; Yang Y. ; Ling Y. ; Liu J. ; Cai X. ; Zhou X. ; Tang B. ; Chen Y. ; Chen H. ; Chen D. ; Li C. ; Wang Z. ; Hu B. ; Zheng Y. 
Injectable and thermally contractible hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose/Fe3O4 for magnetic hyperthermia ablation of tumors . Biomaterials 
2017 , 128 , 84 –93 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2017.03.004 .28301803 
Singla R. ; Abidi S. M. S. ; Dar A. I. ; Acharya A. 
Nanomaterials as potential
and versatile platform for next generation tissue engineering applications . J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B 
2019 , 9999 , 1 –17 . 10.1002/jbm.b.34327 .
Shukla A. K. ; Sharma C. ; Abidi S.
M. S. ; Acharya A.  Spectroscopy and
Microscopy of Eco-friendly Polymer Composites . In Sustainable Polymer Composites and Nanocomposites ; Inamuddin , Thomas S. , Mishra R. K. , Asiri A. M.  , Eds.; Springer : U.K. , 2018 ; pp 105 –141 .
Hutchinson R. W. ; George K. ; Johns D. ; Craven L. ; Zhang G. ; Shnoda P. 
Hemostatic efficacy
and tissue reaction of oxidized
regenerated cellulose hemostats . Cellulose 
2013 , 20 , 537 –545 . 10.1007/s10570-012-9828-8 .
Singla R. ; Soni S. ; Kulurkar P. M. ; Kumari A. ; S M. ; Patial V. ; Padwad Y. S. ; Yadav S. K. 
In situ functionalized
nanobiocomposites dressings of bamboo cellulose nanocrystals and silver
nanoparticles for accelerated wound healing . Carbohydr. Polym. 
2017 , 155 , 152 –162 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.08.065 .27702499 
Zhuang C. ; Tao F. ; Cui Y. 
Anti-degradation
gelatin films crosslinked by active
ester based on cellulose . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 52183 –52193 . 10.1039/c5ra04808g .
Senna A. M. ; Novack K. M. ; Botaro V. R. 
Synthesis and characterization of
hydrogels from cellulose acetate by esterification crosslinking with
EDTA dianhydride . Carbohydr. Polym. 
2014 , 114 , 260 –268 . 10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.08.017 .25263890 
Pandey N. K. ; Ghosh S. ; Dasgupta S. 
Fructose restrains
fibrillogenesis
in human serum albumin . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2013 , 61 , 424 –432 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2013.08.006 .23954680 
Campioni S. ; Mannini B. ; Zampagni M. ; Pensalfini A. ; Parrini C. ; Evangelisti E. ; Relini A. ; Stefani C. M. ; Cecchi C. ; Chiti F. 
A causative
link between the structure
of aberrant protein oligomers and their toxicity . Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2010 , 6 , 140 –147 . 10.1038/nchembio.283 .20081829 
Siddiqui G. A. ; Naeem A. 
Aggregation of globular
protein as a consequences of macromolecular
crowding: A time and concentration dependent study . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2018 , 108 , 360 –366 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.001 .29208558 
Berardi A. ; Bombelli F. B. ; Thuenemann E. C. ; Lomonossoff G. P. 
Viral nanoparticles
can elude protein barriers: exploiting rather than imitating nature . Nanoscale 
2019 , 11 , 2306 –2316 . 10.1039/c8nr09067j .30662985 
De S. ; Klenerman D. 
Imaging individual
protein aggregates to follow aggregation
and determine the role of aggregates in neurodegenerative disease . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Proteins Proteomics 
2019 , 1867 , 870 –878 . 10.1016/j.bbapap.2018.12.010 .30611780 
Bhattacharya A. ; Bhowmik S. ; Singh A. K. ; Kodgire P. ; Das A. K. ; Mukherjee T. K. 
Direct
evidence of intrinsic blue fluorescence from
oligomeric interfaces of human serum albumin . Langmuir 
2017 , 33 , 10606 –10615 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b02463 .28930631 
Jha N. N. ; Kumar R. ; Panigrahi R. ; Navalkar A. ; Ghosh D. ; Sahay S. ; Mondal M. ; Kumar A. ; Maji S. K. 
Comparison
of α-synuclein fibril inhibition by four different amyloid inhibitors . ACS Chem. Neurosci. 
2017 , 8 , 2722 –2733 . 10.1021/acschemneuro.7b00261 .28872299 
Ma J. ; Xia D. 
The use of
blue native PAGE in the evaluation of membrane protein
aggregation states for crystallization . J. Appl.
Crystallogr. 
2008 , 41 , 1150 –1160 . 10.1107/s0021889808033797 .19529836 
Kislinger T. ; Humeny A. ; Pischetsrieder M. 
Analysis of
protein glycation products
by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 11 , 2185 –2193 . 10.2174/0929867043364649 .15279557 
Dave K. A. ; Headlam M. J. ; Wallis T. P. ; Gorman J. J. 
Preparation
and
analysis of proteins and peptides using MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometry . Curr. Protoc. Protein Sci. 
2011 , 63 , 16.13.1 –16.13.21 . 10.1002/0471140864.ps1613s63 .
Falkner J. A. ; Kachman M. ; Veine D. M. ; Walker A. ; Strahler J. R. ; Andrews P. C. 
Validated MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectra
for protein standards . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2007 , 18 , 850 –855 . 10.1016/j.jasms.2007.01.010 .17329120 
Monasterio O. ; Nova E. ; Diaz-Espinoza R. 
Development
of a novel catalytic
amyloid displaying a metal-dependent ATPase-like activity . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2017 , 482 , 1194 –1200 . 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.12.011 .27923655 
Ebada S. S. ; Edrada R. A. ; Lin W. ; Proksch P. 
Methods for
isolation,
purification and structural elucidation of bioactive secondary metabolites
from marine invertebrates . Nat. Protoc. 
2008 , 3 , 1820 –1831 . 10.1038/nprot.2008.182 .18989260 
Kasote D. M. ; Jayaprakasha G. K. ; Patil B. S. 
Leaf disc assays
for rapid measurement
of antioxidant activity . Sci. Rep. 
2019 , 9 , 1884 10.1038/s41598-018-38036-x .30760761 
Seyfert U. T. ; Biehl V. ; Schenk J. 
In vitro hemocompatibility
testing
of biomaterials according to the ISO 10993-4 . Biomol. Eng. 
2002 , 19 , 91 –96 . 10.1016/s1389-0344(02)00015-1 .12202168 
Chen L. ; Glass J. J. ; De Rose R. ; Sperling C. ; Kent S. J. ; Houston Z. H. ; Fletcher N. L. ; Rolfe K. J. 
Influence of Charge
on Hemocompatibility and Immunoreactivity of Polymeric Nanoparticles . ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 756 –767 . 10.1021/acsabm.8b00220 .
Nguyen H. D. ; Mai T. T. T. ; Nguyen N. B. ; Dang T. D. ; Le M. L. P. ; Dang T. T. 
A novel method for
preparing microfibrillated cellulose
from bamboo fibers . Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci.
Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 4 , 015016 10.1088/2043-6262/4/1/015016 .
Kargarzadeh H. ; Ahmad I. ; Abdullah I. ; Dufresne A. ; Zainudin S. Y. ; Sheltami R. M. 
Effects of hydrolysis
conditions on the morphology,
crystallinity, and thermal stability of cellulose nanocrystals extracted
from kenaf bast fibers . Cellulose 
2012 , 19 , 855 –866 . 10.1007/s10570-012-9684-6 .
d’Halluin M. ; Rull-Barrull J. ; Bretel G. ; Labrugere C. ; Le Grognec E. ; Felpin F. X. 
Chemically modified cellulose filter
paper for heavy metal remediation in water . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2017 , 5 , 1965 –1973 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b02768 .
Sadasivuni K. K. ; Ponnamma D. ; Ko H.-U. ; Kim H. C. ; Zhai L. ; Kim J. 
Flexible NO2 sensors from renewable cellulose nanocrystals/iron
oxide composites . Sens. Actuators, B 
2016 , 233 , 633 –638 . 10.1016/j.snb.2016.04.134 .
Barud H. S. ; Regiani T. ; Marques R. F. C. ; Lustri W. R. ; Messaddeq Y. ; Ribeiro S. J. L. 
Antimicrobial
bacterial cellulose-silver nanoparticles
composite membranes . J. Nanomater. 
2011 , 2011 , 1 –8 . 10.1155/2011/721631 .21808638 
Choudhary R. ; Khurana D. ; Kumar A. ; Subudhi S. 
Stability analysis
of Al2O3/water nanofluids . J. Exp. Nanosci. 
2017 , 12 , 140 –151 . 10.1080/17458080.2017.1285445 .
Alam P. ; Siddiqi M. K. ; Chaturvedi S. K. ; Zaman M. ; Khan R. H. 
Vitamin
B12 offers neuronal cell protection by inhibiting Aβ-42 amyloid
fibrillation . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2017 , 99 , 477 –482 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.03.001 .28267610 
LeVine H. III
Thioflavine T
interaction with synthetic Alzheimer’s
disease beta amyloid peptides: detection of amyloid aggregation in
solution . Protein Sci. 
1993 , 2 , 404 –410 . 10.1002/pro.5560020312 .8453378 
Sen S. ; Konar S. ; Das B. ; Pathak A. ; Dhara S. ; Dasgupta S. ; DasGupta S. 
Inhibition of fibrillation of human
serum albumin through interaction with chitosan-based biocompatible
silver nanoparticles . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 43104 –43115 . 10.1039/c6ra05129d .
Guo J. ; Filpponen I. ; Johansson L.-S. ; Mohammadi P. ; Latikka M. ; Linder M. B. ; Ras R. H. A. 
Complexes of
magnetic nanoparticles with cellulose nanocrystals as regenerable,
highly efficient, and selective platform for protein separation . Biomacromolecules 
2017 , 18 , 898 –905 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.6b01778 .28199100 
Rojas O. ; Hannongbua S. ; Gleeson M. P. 
Elucidating the origin of the esterase
activity of human serum albumin using QM/MM calculations . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 11886 –11894 . 10.1021/jp506629y .25222879 
Carija A. ; Navarro S. ; de Groot N. S. ; Ventura S. 
Protein aggregation
into insoluble deposits protects from oxidative stress . Redox Biol. 
2017 , 12 , 699 –711 . 10.1016/j.redox.2017.03.027 .28410533 
Ganguly G. ; Chakrabarti S. ; Chatterjee U. ; Saso L. 
Proteinopathy, oxidative
stress and mitochondrial dysfunction: cross talk in Alzheimer’s
disease and Parkinson’s disease . Drug
Des., Dev. Ther. 
2017 , 11 , 797 –810 . 10.2147/dddt.s130514 .
Stadtman E. R. ; Berlett B. S. 
Reactive oxygen-mediated
protein oxidation in aging
and disease . Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
1997 , 10 , 485 –494 . 10.1021/tx960133r .9168245 
Sayre L. M. ; Perry G. ; Smith M. A. 
Oxidative stress and neurotoxicity . Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
2008 , 21 , 172 –188 . 10.1021/tx700210j .18052107 
Zhang J. ; Zhou X. ; Yu Q. ; Yang L. ; Sun D. ; Zhou Y. ; Liu J. 
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate
(EGCG)-stabilized
selenium nanoparticles coated with Tet-1 peptide to reduce amyloid-β
aggregation and cytotoxicity . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 8475 –8487 . 10.1021/am501341u .24758520 
Sun J. ; Xie W. ; Zhu X. ; Xu M. ; Liu J. 
Sulfur Nanoparticles
with Novel Morphologies Coupled with Brain-Targeting Peptides RVG
as a New Type of Inhibitor Against Metal-Induced Aβ Aggregation . ACS Chem. Neurosci. 
2017 , 9 , 749 –761 . 10.1021/acschemneuro.7b00312 .29192759 
Zaman A. ; Arif Z. ; Moinuddin K. 
Fructose-human
serum albumin interaction
undergoes numerous biophysical and biochemical changes before forming
AGEs and aggregates . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2018 , 109 , 896 –906 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.11.069 .29133088 
De S. ; Wirthensohn D. C. ; Flagmeier P. ; Hughes C. ; Aprile F. A. ; Ruggeri F. S. ; Sormanni P. 
Different soluble aggregates of Aβ42
can give rise to cellular toxicity through different mechanisms . Nat. Commun. 
2019 , 10 , 1541 10.1038/s41467-019-09477-3 .30948723 
Sze C. I. ; Kuo Y. M. ; Hsu L. J. ; Fu T. F. ; Chiang M. F. ; Chang J. Y. ; Chang N. S. 
A cascade
of protein aggregation
bombards mitochondria for neurodegeneration and apoptosis under WWOX
deficiency . Cell Death Dis. 
2015 , 6 , e188110.1038/cddis.2015.251 .26355344 
Mahmoudi M. ; Kalhor H. R. ; Laurent S. ; Lynch I. 
Protein fibrillation
and nanoparticle interactions: opportunities and challenges . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 2570 –2588 . 10.1039/c3nr33193h .23463168

