
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 3145973710.1021/acsomega.9b00133PerspectiveChemical Systems Involving Two Competitive Self-Catalytic
Reactions Sawato Tsukasa Saito Nozomi Yamaguchi Masahiko *Department of Organic Chemistry, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku
University, Aoba, Sendai 980-8578, Japan* E-mail: yama@m.tohoku.ac.jp. Fax: (+81) 22-795-6811.26 03 2019 31 03 2019 4 3 5879 5899 15 01 2019 13 03 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Self-catalytic
reactions are chemical phenomena, in which a product
catalyzes the reactions of substrates further to yield products. A
significant amplification of product concentration occurs during the
reactions in a dilute solution, which exhibit notable properties such
as sigmoidal kinetics, seeding effects, and thermal hysteresis. Chemical
systems involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions can be
considered, in which the competitive formation of two products occurs,
which is affected by environmental changes, subtle perturbations,
and fluctuations, and notable chemical phenomena appear such as formation
of different structures in response to slow/fast temperature changes,
chiral symmetry breaking, shortcut in reaction time, homogeneous–heterogeneous
transitions, and mechanical responses. Studies on such chemical systems
provide understanding on biological systems and can also be extended
to the development of novel functional materials.

document-id-old-9ao9b00133document-id-new-14ao-2019-001333ccc-price
==== Body
1 Chemical
Systems Involving Two Competitive Self-Catalytic
Reactions
1.1 Self-Catalytic Reactions in Chemical Network
systems
Biological processes employ chemical network systems
composed of a set of molecules and a set of regulatory interactions,
through which chemical information flows forward/backward and in multiple
directions, as observed in gene expression, cell development, signal
transduction, and cell differentiation.1,2 Cell responses
in terms of timing, sensitivity, dynamic range, and persistence are
controlled by chemical reactions involving both covalent and noncovalent
bond formation and cleavage, and the regulated interactions involve
positive and negative feedbacks. The chemical network systems provide
various chemical outcomes, depending on the environmental conditions
such as concentration, temperature, and substances added.

Positive
and negative feedbacks, through which a reaction is, respectively,
promoted and retarded by products and intermediates in a chemical
network system, are an essential feature in biological processes.
A positive feedback provides switchlike network responses, which generate
bistability and multistability, amplifies signals, converts analog
inputs into digital outputs, and generates persistent memory.3−9 A negative feedback provides robustness against noise, adaption
to perturbations, tuning of range and transition rate, maintenance
of homeostasis, and time delay. To understand and control biological
systems, studies of synthetic chemical network systems are critical,
in which chemical phenomena can be systematically examined, and such
studies can be extended to the development of novel functional materials.

Self-catalysis (autocatalysis) is an important positive feedback
mechanism in biological processes, through which a product catalyzes
reactions to convert substrates into products.10−16 A set of chemical reactions involving self-catalysis plays pivotal
roles, for example, by mutual catalysis, cross-catalysis, and collective
autocatalysis.17−22 Therefore, it is interesting to study synthetic chemical systems
involving self-catalysis, although such systems are rare.23,24 Self-replication reactions of nucleic acids and related compounds
have been examined, which involve the catalysis phenomenon byproducts.25−30 The reactions, however, often suffer from product inhibition and
become slow at an early stage. The Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction
is characterized by chemical oscillation, in which an inorganic species
periodically changes its concentration in a stirred solution during
the oxidation of malonate to carbon dioxide.31−33 Under unstirred
conditions, homogeneous–heterogeneous transitions occur, giving
the appearance of travelling waves. Complex reaction mechanisms involving
self-catalysis were clarified in the formation of HBrO2, the concentration of which oscillates. Self-catalysis is also involved
in organometallic reactions.34−37 The Soai reaction is an interesting example of a
self-catalytic reaction producing enantiomers,38−40 which exhibit
chiral symmetry breaking caused by a subtle chiral perturbation.41,42

Synthetic chemical network systems involving competition between
two self-catalytic reactions exhibit further notable phenomena, in
which two positive feedbacks compete. In this article, we discuss
examples of such systems with helicene oligomers developed by our
group.43−47 We previously discussed chemical systems involving a single self-catalytic
reaction.48−50 Here, we extended the discussion to chemical systems
involving two self-catalytic reactions. In Section 1, we present on outline of the chemical systems
involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions. In the subsequent
sections, we discuss experimental examples of chemical systems involving
two competitive self-catalytic reactions by aminomethylene and oxymethylene
helicene oligomers.

1.2 Competitive Chemical Reaction
systems
Consider a chemical system of competitive bimolecular
reactions of
substrate 2A yielding different products B and C (Figure 1a). Chemical kinetics51−53 of the competitive reactions
provide the rate laws −d[A]/dt = (k1 + k2)[A]2, d[B]/dt = k1[A]2, and
d[C]/dt = k2[A]2, where [A], [B], and [C] are the concentrations of A, B, and C, respectively, k1 is the rate constant to form B, and k2 is the rate constant to form C. The product distribution [B]/[C] is then
determined by the relative rate constant k1/k2, which does not significantly change
during the reaction. Thus, high selectivity requires large differences
between the rate constants; for example, a 99:1 ratio is derived from k1/k2 = 102.

Figure 1 Chemical systems involving competitive chemical reactions (a) and
competitive self-catalytic reactions (b) between substrate 2A and products B and C. Green arrows
indicate self-catalysis.

In the transition-state theory,51−53 [B]/[C] is defined by the activation energies Ea(B⧧) and Ea(C⧧) at the
transition
states B⧧ and C⧧, where k1 = A1 exp(−Ea(B⧧)/RT) and k2 = A2 exp(−Ea(C⧧)/RT), and A1 and A2 are the
frequency factors (Figure 2a). For the case when B and C are
similar in structure and are formed via similar reaction pathways,
the frequency factor is A1 ≈ A2, and [B]/[C] = exp{(Ea(C⧧) – Ea(B⧧))/RT} is provided at the initial state of the reaction, where
[A] ≈ [A]0. Then, [B]/[C] is determined by the difference in activation
energy. Equilibrium between A and B⧧ or C⧧ is assumed to
be the Boltzmann distribution, which may be applicable to reactions
with high activation energies Ea(B⧧) and Ea(C⧧) (Figure 2a), where very small numbers of molecules visit the
transition states B⧧ and C⧧ during each time period. In this discussion,
the 2A-to-B and 2A-to-C reactions are each approximated as an elementary reaction
with a single transition state.

Figure 2 Chemical systems involving competitive
chemical reactions with
high different energy barriers (a), low different energy barriers
(b), and same energy barriers (c). The chemical system of chiral symmetry
breaking is shown by (c).

Chemical kinetics and transition-state theory, also termed
deterministic
kinetics, have limitations. The concepts in principle are applicable
only to an elemental reaction with a single transition state. In addition,
equilibrium was assumed between substrate 2A and transition
states B⧧ and C⧧ in the Boltzmann distribution. A chemical reaction can involve many
intermediates and transition states as well as various pathways, which
are termed microscopic multiple pathways in this article, and analysis
of such pathways is quite complex. It should also be noted that mechanisms
to depict numbers of molecules to visit the microscopic multiple pathways,
which are termed macroscopic pathways, have not yet been established.
For example, consider a competitive chemical reaction system, in which
the rate-determining step appears with small activation energy at
an early stage, which is followed by low-activation-energy processes
to provide B and C (Figure 2b). Then, the product distribution [B]/[C] cannot be explained by the activation
energy of the rate-determining step because [B]/[C] is determined at a later stage. The Boltzmann distribution
is not applicable because the reaction is not at equilibrium. Another
example is chiral symmetry breaking, in which both paths are energetically
identical, but [B]/[ent-B] is not 1 (Figure 2c).

Another
limitation is that deterministic kinetics are applicable
to systems with huge numbers of molecules, for example, on the order
of the Avogadro’s number, and may not be applicable to a system
with a small number of molecules.54−58 For example, consider a biological cell containing
104 molecules of a protein. Then, the standard deviation
(10–N)1/2 = 10–2 indicates that a statistically exceptional chemical reaction occurs
for every 100 molecules, which is not small when considering the huge
number of chemical reactions in a cell.

Stochastic kinetics
has been developed to depict such systems (Figure 3).59−64 This model is based on the concept that molecules undergo chemical
reactions in a dissipative manner, not continuously, and is described
by the chemical master equation with probability  where Pi(t) is the
probability for the system to be
in the state i at the time t; qij(t) is the
transition probability of molecule j. P(t) is formally the concentrations of molecules,
and q(t) is the rate constant, which
are both time-dependent. Numerical analysis methods to solve the equation
have been developed. Stochastic kinetics qualitatively depict chemical
reaction phenomena, for example, oscillation and chiral symmetry breaking.65,66 It is, however, not easy experimentally to determine q(t) for each reaction, and qualitative analysis
of chemical reactions based on stochastic kinetics awaits future development.

Figure 3 Chemical
reaction network system, in which reactions occur from
2A to B and C, as described
by the chemical master equation. P1, P2,... are the probabilities for the system to
be in the state i, and q12, q13,... are the transition probabilities,
which are functions of time t.

To depict the mechanism of the chemical systems involving
two competitive
reactions, microscopic multiple pathways, which is the subject of
the quantum mechanics, and macroscopic multiple pathways, which is
subject studied in statistical mechanics, must be considered.43−46,67−70

1.3 Chemical
Systems Involving Two Competitive
Self-Catalytic Reactions
Consider a chemical system involving
two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions,
where B catalyzes the 2A-to-B reaction, and C catalyzes the 2A-to-C reaction (Figure 1b). In such systems, the product distribution [B]/[C] can vary substantially even under fixed environmental
conditions because of the amplification of subtle perturbations and
fluctuations by the self-catalytic reactions, in which the concentration
of product B or C significantly increases
once a certain concentration of B or C is
reached. In addition, changes in environmental conditions during the
reactions significantly affect [B]/[C].
Then, the macroscopic pathways become complex, that is, how many molecules
visit microscopic pathways to form B and C. Such experimental examples of chemical network systems are described
in the following sections.

The thermodynamics allow a single
equilibrium state under a single environmental condition. Then, when A is thermodynamically the most stable at equilibrium, B and C are metastable; when the relative thermodynamic
stabilities inverted between A and B by
a change in environmental conditions, B can be at equilibrium,
and A and C can be metastable.

The
macroscopic multiple pathways are complex in a chemical system
of two competitive self-catalytic reactions. In the systems involving
two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions,
three structures A, B, and C are available, and then the concentration changes are complex in
terms of the concentrations [A], [B], and
[C]. The following macroscopic multiple pathways, for
example, can occur (Figure 4): one-directional three-state systems, A-to-B-to-C-to-A and A-to-C-to-B-to-A; competitive systems, A-to-B/A-to-C and A-to-B/A-to-ent-B,
where ent-B is the enantiomer of B; and
selective A-to-B without A-to-C and A-to-C without A-to-B.

Figure 4 Macroscopic multiple pathways between three states A, B, and C involving a system of
two competitive
self-catalytic reactions (green arrows).

1.4 Kinetic Aspects of Chemical Systems Involving
Two Competitive Self-Catalytic Reactions
On the basis of
previous considerations, the mechanism underlying chemical systems
involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions is discussed. The
mechanism of a self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction is provided by a two-path model involving the bimolecular
2A-to-B reaction, which is applied to the
competitive system of two self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions (Figure 5). Initially, the bimolecular 2A-to-B and 2A-to-C reactions are slow because
of the high barriers to the formation of either B or C. Once B is formed in a certain amount, the
low-barrier self-catalytic path is opened, which is amplified by the
self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction to provide large amounts of B. Thus, switching
the pathway is a critical aspect in a competitive system.

Figure 5 Energy diagrams
of a chemical system involving two competitive
self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions
over time. Red arrows indicate macroscopic pathways, andthe blue bold
lines indicate the number of molecules. The green arrow indicates
self-catalytic reaction. Molecules do not visit dashed pathways because
of the lack of B or C.

Deterministic chemical kinetics provide the rate law  where k3 and k4 are the self-catalytic rate constants for
the formation of B and C, respectively.
With a small difference between k1 and k3, assuming the same initial concentrations
[B]0 and [C]0 of B and C, respectively, and the initial state
of the reaction with [A] ≑ [A]0, the selectivity is expressed by  

A numerical analysis with [A]0 = 10–3 M, [B]0 =
[C]0 = 10–6 M, k3 = 1 × 106 M–2 s–1, and k4 = 0.9 ×
106 M–2 s–1, and [B]/[C] = 2.7 at t = 10 s yields
[B]/[C] = 150 at t = 50
s. The analysis
indicates significant selectivity enhancement by 10% difference between
the rate constants. Note that the rate d[B]/dt = k1[A]2[B] is dependent on the concentration of the product
[B], and accordingly [B]/[C] can exhibit a complex nature.

The chemical system involving
two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions
shows some similarity with
a chemical system with a small number of molecules, despite the involvement
of huge numbers of molecules. A chemical reaction of a molecule is
considered to be completed on the order of picosecond. For example,
consider a reaction involving 1020 molecules (0.15 mmol),
that is completed in 104 s (approximately 3 h). Then, 104 molecules react every picosecond, which is not a large number.
The standard deviation (10–N)1/2 = (10–4)1/2 = 10–2 indicates that a statistically exceptional reaction can occur for
every 100 A molecules. In general, such fluctuations
can be time-averaged in 1016 picoseconds (approximately
3 h), and deterministic kinetics are applicable, in which fluctuations
become negligible. However, in the case that a statistically exceptional
reaction to form B or C is amplified by
self-catalysis, a large number of either B or C molecules can form. Then, chaotic phenomena appear, in which subtle
differences in the concentration of B or C significantly change [B]/[C]. This can
formally be regarded as a system with a small number of molecules,
and stochastic kinetics may be applied.

1.5 Environment
Changes, Subtle Perturbations,
and Fluctuations
The origins of imbalance in the product
distribution [B]/[C], which is generated
by a statistically exceptional reaction, may be classified as follows:
(1) the initial imbalance in [B]/[C] is
generated by the initial reaction conditions (Figure 6a); (2) the imbalance is generated by subtle
perturbations in conditions during the reaction (Figure 6b); and (3) the imbalance is
generated by fluctuations during the reaction (Figure 6c).

Figure 6 Models showing the origin of imbalances, which
are amplified by
self-catalysis. (a) Initial imbalance in the reaction conditions,
in which green shading indicates different environments to form B and C; (b) imbalance generated by subtle perturbations
during the reaction, in which blue shading indicates small changes
in reaction conditions; (c) imbalance generated by fluctuations F
and F′ during the reaction.

As shown in the following sections, changes in environmental
conditions
can significantly affect [B]/[C] in the
systems involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions, which
involve not only the temperature high/low but also temperature increases/decreases,
fast/slow temperature changes, and concentration changes as well as
history of temperature changes. Such changes can also be induced by
contact with materials such as crystals, vessel surfaces, and seeds
of exogenous substances, and alternatively by physical perturbations
such as surface contact and mechanical stirring. The systems involving
two competitive self-catalytic reactions are highly sensitive to subtle
perturbations. This sensitivity is in contrast to usual competitive
reaction systems, in which [B]/[C] is relatively
insensitive to the environmental changes, and subtle perturbations
do not have a serious effect on [B]/[C].

It may be appropriate to define perturbation and fluctuation in
this article. Perturbation refers to small changes in the environment
and is deterministic, for which repeated experiments provide the same
product distribution. Fluctuation is defined here as a disturbance
of motion, course, arrangement, or state, and is stochastic, for which
repeated experiments provide different product distributions. The
mechanistic difference between these two is that perturbation changes
thermodynamic states, whereas fluctuation changes concentrations without
changing thermodynamic states.

Subtle perturbations and fluctuations
are often below the limit
of detection, and generally negligible and eliminated by averaging,
particularly when huge numbers of molecules are involved over a long
reaction time. However, when the number of molecules is small, the
reaction time is short, or amplification is involved, subtle perturbations
or fluctuations become detectable. Amplification of such statistically
exceptional events exerts chemically interesting phenomena. Biological
cells involving small numbers of molecules and amplification mechanisms
appear to possess mechanisms to control such subtle perturbations
and fluctuations.71−73

1.6 Amplification of Subtle
Perturbations and
Fluctuations by a Chemical System of Two Competitive Self-Catalytic
Reactions
Subtle perturbations and fluctuations play important
roles in nature.74−80 The Brownian motion is the fluctuation of small particles in solution,
which are driven by the collisions with water molecules. Crystallization
from a supercooled solution and explosion close to critical points
exhibit fluctuations in concentration.81−83 Chemical reactions are
affected by the temperature perturbation, as well as photo-, mechanical,
electronic, and information perturbations.84,85

Temporal and spatial amplifications, respectively, indicate
when and where the amplifications of subtle perturbations and fluctuations
occur, which is discussed here with regard to the system involving
two competitive 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C self-catalytic
reactions. When the concentration of B exceeds a threshold
owing to subtle perturbations or fluctuations, the subsequent amplification
results in the predominant formation of B. When the amplification
is sufficiently effective, subtle perturbations and fluctuations become
detectable. Experimentally, an induction period arises, during which B is accumulated to a threshold concentration, and self-catalytic
2A + B-to-2B reaction amplifies B, which provide sigmoidal kinetics. The effect of seeding
is also significant, and addition of B, which is the
catalyst, during the induction period accelerates the self-catalytic
2A + B-to-2B reaction.

In a chemical system involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions,
subtle perturbations and fluctuations can be experimentally discriminated
by repeated experiments (Figure 7). The predominant formation of B over C by repeated experiments is referred to as product deterministic
in this article, which is derived from subtle perturbations. The formation
of B or C with comparable probability by
repeated experiments is referred to as product stochastic, which is
derived from fluctuations. When amplification occurs at a specific
domain in space over a certain period of time, such a phenomenon is
referred to as space/time deterministic. When amplification occurs
at variable domains and times, such a phenomenon is referred to as
space/time stochastic. As an example of a space/time deterministic
phenomenon, amplification occurs at a certain domain in a solution,
on the vessel surface, or even in a homogeneous solution, and examples
are described in Section 6.

Figure 7 Amplification of subtle perturbations or fluctuations in a chemical
reaction to form product B or C in stochastic
and deterministic modes. Different arrow colors indicate different
trials of experiment.

Amplifications of chemical reactions derived from subtle
perturbations
and fluctuations are described in the following sections. Thermal
hysteresis in Section 2 involves the product deterministic and time/space deterministic
phenomena. The stochastic chiral symmetry breaking described in Section 3 involves the product
stochastic and space/time deterministic phenomena. The deterministic
chiral symmetry breaking described in Section 3 and the shortcut in reaction in Section 4 involve the product
deterministic and space/time deterministic phenomena. Homogeneous–heterogeneous
transition described in the Section 6 involves the space/time stochastic phenomena.

In this article, chemical reactions are defined for both covalent
and noncovalent bond cleavage and formation with structural changes
of molecules. The approach is reasonable because both are described
by the same principles of thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, and transition-state
theory. In addition, biological systems employ a diversity of chemical
reactions involving the cleavage and formation of noncovalent bonds,
including those between proteins and those between proteins and small
molecules. The reaction energies for both processes can be comparable,
as previously described for the dissociation of the homo-double-helix
of a sulfonamide helicene oligomer: ΔH = +267
kJ/mol, ΔS = +0.75 kJ/mol, which are comparable
to those of the dissociation of methyl iodide: ΔH = +237 kJ/mol, ΔS = +0.12 kJ/mol.43 Therefore, it may not be unreasonable to treat
the cleavage and formation of covalent and noncovalent bonds as chemical
reactions.

2 Chemical Systems Involving
Two Competitive Self-Catalytic
Reactions with Aminomethylene Helicene Oligomers
2.1 Pseudoenantiomer
Mixture of Aminomethylenehelicene
Oligomers
In our studies on the synthesis and function of
chiral helicene derivatives of 1,12-dimethylbenzo[c]phenanthrene, their oligomers were developed, in which the helicene
is connected by m-phenylene spacers and two-atom
linking groups.43−46,86 Many such oligomers above a certain
number of helicene unit formed dimeric aggregates, most likely double
helices. In the series of oligomers, the number of helicenes, spacer,
linking group, and side chain can be systematically varied, which
provided a versatile method to develop synthetic double-helix forming
compounds. A notable feature is that double helices can be formed
in a dilute solution, in which molecular properties explicitly appear.
In this article, we treat aminomethylenehelicene oligomers and oxymethylenehelicene
oligomers, as two groups of two-atom-linked helicene oligomers (Figure 8a). It was also noted
that the chemical systems involving the helicene oligomers provided
chemical systems involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions
(Figure 8b).

Figure 8 (a) Chemical
structures of helicene oligomers. (b) Chemical systems
of two competitive self-catalytic reactions, which form (pseudo)enantiomeric
hetero-double-helices B and C/ent-B. Green arrows indicate self-catalysis.

In this section, we describe the chemical systems involving
two
competitive self-catalytic reactions with a pseudoenantiomer mixture
of aminomethylene helicene oligomers, which is a 1:1 mixture of the
oligomers with the enantiomeric helicene groups but different numbers
of helicene units. The mixture is very close to racemic, but the only
difference is the number of helicene units in the oligomers. The aminomethylene
helicene oligomers themselves form homo-double-helices in dilute solution,
and a mixture of pseudoenantiomers forms hetero-double-helices, which
predominate homo-double-helix formation (Figure 8b). A pseudoenantiomer mixture of aminomethylene
helicene oligomers exhibit thermal hysteresis, which provide a chemical
system involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions. Double-helix
formation by foldamers has attracted much interest,87 and the above dynamic properties appear to be a characteristic
feature of helicene oligomers.

A 1:1 mixture of pseudoenantiomer
aminomethylene helicene (P)-tetramer (P)-1 and (M)-pentamer (M)-2 formed three
structures, namely, the random-coil 2A, the hetero-double-helix B, and the hetero-double-helix C (Figure 9a).88,89B and C showed enantiomeric circular dichroism
(CD) spectra, which indicated the pseudoenantiomeric three-dimensional
structures of B and C ascribed to the hetero-double-helix
structure with right- and left-handed helical senses, which are analogous
to the structures of B-DNA and Z-DNA. B can be depicted
as the (M*)-[(P)-1/(M)-2] complex and C as the (P*)-[(P)-1/(M)-2] complex, where the (P*) and (M*) configurations are derived from the helical senses,
the absolute configurations of which are tentative. The pseudoenantiomers
in random-coils are referred to as 2A in the following
discussion, although they are not identical molecules, because the
structures of the pseudoenantiomers are very similar and the use of
such a term simplifies discussion.

Figure 9 (a) One-direction three-state change of
2A-to-B-to-C-to-2A by (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture. (b)
Relative thermodynamic stabilities of 2A, B, and C are shown with microscopic pathways. Red lines
show self-catalytic pathways.

At high temperatures, dissociated 2A is thermodynamically
the most stable, and, at low temperatures, associated C is thermodynamically the most stable (Figure 9b). Then, B is metastable over
the entire temperature range. The chemical system of two competitive
self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions
is involved, where B and C catalyze the
reactions to form B and C from A, respectively.

2.2 Three-State One-Directional
Structural Changes
in Chemical Systems Involving Two Competitive Self-Catalytic Reactions
The (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture exhibits one-directional three-state structural
changes in solution between 2A, B, and C, which is induced by a single cooling and heating procedure
(Figure 9a). The structural
changes exhibit the nonequilibrium nature of the reaction, which occurs
in one direction. This behavior is in contrast to the chemical equilibrium
between three structures, in which the interconversion occurs in both
directions.

At 70 °C, a 1:1 mixture of (P)-1 and (M)-2 (5 mM) in
fluorobenzene formed dissociated 2A (Figure 10a). When the solution was
cooled to 25 °C at the rate of 2 K/min and allowed to stand for
20 min, associated B was formed, which showed a very
strong negative Cotton effect at 315 nm. Slow inversion of the CD
spectra occurred after allowing the B solution to stand
at 25 °C for 70 h, and C was formed (Figure 10b). The B-to-C reaction involved the inversion of the helix sense, for
which a kinetic study indicated the monomolecular nature of the reaction.
Then, the C solution was converted to the 2A solution by heating at 70 °C (Figure 10c). The overall process provided a one-directional
three-state change, 2A-to-B-to-C-to-2A, exerted by a single cooling/heating operation
(Figure 9a), where
essentially all the molecules changed structures between 2A, B, and C.

Figure 10 (a–c) CD spectra
(5 mM) in fluorobenzene and structure change
modes of the (P)-1(M)-2 mixture in the 2A-to-B-to-C-to-2A reaction. (d) Δε
(315 nm)/temperature profiles and structural change modes of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture
at a heating/cooling rate of 2 K/min. Temperature was increased from
5 to 70 °C and then decreased from 70 to 5 °C. The Δε
at equilibrium is indicated by the purple line. This is reproduced
from ref (89) with
permission from American Chemical Society.

A constant-rate temperature change experiment was conducted
by
determining Δε at 315 nm, and the Δε/temperature
profiles obtained are shown (Figure 10d). The C-to-2A-to-B reaction occurred when the temperature was increased from
5 to 70 °C and then decreased from 70 to 5 °C at a rate
of 2 K/min. The heating curve was close to the equilibrium curve.
On cooling from 70 to 5 °C, Δε decreased indicating
the formation of B, which departed from the equilibrium
curve. When the B solution was allowed to stand at 25
°C, the C solution was formed. The Δε/temperature
profiles showed thermal hysteresis, which showed different curves
during heating and cooling.

A mechanism of the thermal hysteresis
in the systems involving
two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions
is provided (Figure 11). At high temperatures, 2A is thermodynamically the
most stable, and all the molecules remain as 2A (state
I). As temperature is decreased, the thermodynamic stability changes
to C > B > 2A, but the
molecules
remain as 2A (state II) because of the presence of a
high-energy barrier against the formation of B and C from 2A. When the competition between two self-catalytic
reactions favors the formation of B rather than C, the reaction starts to form B (state II),
and a low-energy pathway opens involving self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction after an induction
period, which causes all the molecules to convert to B (state III). A slow change from the metastable B to C follows (state IV). Then, heating converts all the C molecules to 2A induced by the change in thermodynamic
stability to 2A > C > B (state
I). The 2A-to-B-to-C-to-2A reaction then occurs in one direction by single heating
and cooling. Nonequilibrium thermodynamics of the phenomenon imply
the inconsistency of relative energy levels and the Boltzmann distribution.

Figure 11 Mechanistic
model of three-state one-directional structural changes
of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture involving two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions, which shows microscopic and
macroscopic pathways. Red arrows indicate the macroscopic mechanism,
and green arrows indicate self-catalytic reactions. Solid arrows indicate
major reactions and dotted arrows indicate minor reactions.

2.3 Competition
of Two Self-Catalytic Reactions
The chemical systems involving
two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions
at different temperature change
rates provided different thermal hysteresis curves. The 2A solution was cooled from 70 to 5 °C and then heated to 70 °C
at a rate of 1.5 or 2 K/min. On cooling the 2A solution,
the solution spontaneously departed from the equilibrium curve and
produced a metastable B solution (Figure 12a). The process did not show any sign of C formation, despite the C solution being thermodynamically
the most stable at lower temperatures, and the self-catalytic competition
favored B formation. The thermal hysteresis phenomenon
supports the involvement of self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction.

Figure 12 Δε (315
nm)/temperature profiles and structural change
modes of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture in fluorobenzene (0.5 mM) with cooling and
heating. Equilibrium curves are also shown. (a) Constant rate of 1.5
and 2 K/min between 70 and 5 °C; (b) cooling rate of 2 K/min
and heating rate of 0.1 K/min between 60 and 5 °C; (c) cooling
from 70 to 42 °C at the rate of 1 K/min, cooling to 5 °C
at a rate of 0.067 K/min, and heating from 5 to 70 °C at a rate
of 1 K/min. This is reproduced from ref (89) with permission from American Chemical Society.

The absence of C formation
under the above conditions
is due to fast cooling, and slow cooling provided the C solution. The 2A solution at 70 °C was cooled
in a stepwise manner, that is, cooled to 50 °C over 630 min,
40 °C over 250 min, and 25 °C over 250 min, until Δε
reached steady states at these temperatures (Figure 12a). The overall process was calculated to
proceed at a low average cooling rate of 0.043 K/min. Then, the cooling
curve was close to the equilibrium curve, where C was
formed from 2A without forming the metastable B solution.

Comparison of the 2 and 0.043 K/min cooling experiments
indicates
that different cooling rates can provide different products in the
chemical systems involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions:
fast cooling provides the B solution and slow cooling
provides the C solution, and essentially all the molecules
in the solutions are converted into B or C. That is, the cooling rate, being a time-dependent phenomenon, is
translated in terms of the molecular structure, which exerts a memory
effect on the past event, being either fast or slow cooling.

A C solution was also formed during heating of the B solution at a low rate (Figure 12b). A B solution was obtained
by cooling the 2A solution from 70 to 5 °C at 1
K/min, and heating the solution at 0.1 K/min provided an inflated
upward curve, which indicated the formation of C; the
heating curve approached the equilibrium curve. The phenomenon is
derived from the self-catalytic 2A + C-to-2C reaction.

Another temperature-change experiment was
conducted (Figure 12c). Cooling the
2A solution to 40 °C at 1 K/min provided a small
amount of B. Then, the B solution was cooled
to 5 °C at a rate of 0.067 K/min, resulting in the formation
of equilibrium C solution at 5 °C. Then, the solution
was heated at 1 K/min, and the 2A solution was formed
via a curve close to the equilibrium curve. This slow cooling experiment
showed minimal formation of B, and thermal hysteresis
appeared as a result of the interconversion between 2A and C, which is consistent with the involvement of
self-catalytic 2A + C-to-2C reaction. Information on environmental changes in rate and mode
was translated to molecular structures.

As discussed in Section 1, stochastic and
deterministic phenomena can appear in a nonequilibrium
phenomenon in response to environmental changes. The experiments on
the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture are reproducible in terms of thermal hysteresis
curves and illustrate a product deterministic and space/time deterministic
phenomenon (Figure 7).

The chemical systems involving two competitive self-catalytic
reactions
exhibit high sensitivity to cooling and heating modes and cooling
rates and provide different product distributions [B]/[C] with high selectivity. The high sensitivity is in contrast
to the responses of usual chemical reactions to high or low temperatures,
in which relatively small changes in the product distribution occur.
For example, consider the competitive reactions to form B and C from 2A: the relative rate constant kB/kC = exp(−ΔEa/RT), assuming the same frequency
factor is provided, where ΔEa is
the difference in the activation energy. In the case of ΔEa = −2.5 kJ/mol, the temperature change
from 300 to 350 K in steps of 50 K changes kB/kC only from 2.7 to 2.3. In the
systems involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions, environmental
changes in conditions or subtle perturbations are amplified in the
product distribution in a highly sensitive manner (Figure 7).

The macroscopic multiple
pathways42−45 are shown in the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture by various
curves of the temperature/concentration profiles beyond the equilibrium
curve in a chemical reaction from 2A at a high temperature
to the C at a low temperature, where the 2A and C solutions are in the equilibrium state at such
temperatures. The system involves three structures 2A, B, and C, and the complex nature of temperature
dependence is derived from the relative concentration of the structures,
and is enhanced by the reversible nature of the chemical systems involving
two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions
(Figure 4).

Microscopic
pathways (Figures 5 and 11) describe the relative
thermodynamic stabilities of 2A, B, and C. It is emphasized here that macroscopic pathways (Figure 11), which is the
numbers of molecules to visit the microscopic pathways, are significantly
affected by perturbations, fluctuations, and thermal history (Figures 6 and 7).

3 Chiral Symmetry Breaking
3.1 Chiral Symmetry Breaking in Chemical System
Involving Two Competitive Self-Catalytic Reactions
Chiral
symmetry breaking is a phenomenon, in which the achiral symmetric
state is transformed into a chiral asymmetric state.41,42 The phenomenon has been observed in the crystallization of a single
enantiomer formed from achiral molecules: NaClO3 itself
is achiral, but it crystallizes in the chiral form, in which either d- or l-crystals are predominantly produced. Chiral
symmetry breaking appears also during the self-assembly of achiral
molecules to form fibers, liquid crystals, and colloids. Racemic organic
substances, which are 1:1 mixtures of enantiomers, can exhibit chiral
symmetry breaking during crystallization under racemization conditions.
In general, chiral symmetry breaking of molecules occurs during the
formation of solid materials, in which strong intermolecular interactions
can stabilize the chiral structures. Chiral symmetry breaking by racemic
organic substances in solution, which do not racemize, is also possible,
in which various mixing experiments can be employed to control the
phenomenon. Such a system is described in this section using the pseudoenantiomer
(P)-1/(M)-2 mixture.90

A chemical reaction
of an achiral substrate to form a chiral product generally provides
a 1:1 mixture of two enantiomeric molecules that form a racemic mixture
in the absence of an external chiral source. This is because no difference
in the energetic state is involved in the microscopic pathways to
form the enantiomers because 2A-to-B and
2A-to-C (=ent-B) reactions
are symmetric. Deterministic kinetics involve the formation of the
enantiomers B and ent-B as follows: Ea(B⧧) = Ea(ent-B⧧), k1 = k3, and then
[B]/[ent-B] = 1, which forms racemic mixtures.
Strictly speaking, a chemical reaction involving huge numbers of molecules,
for example, 1020 molecules, fluctuates and does not provide
a mixture of exactly 0.50000000 × 1020:0.50000000
× 1020. This is, however, generally not a serious
issue, because the deviation is considered extremely small; the standard
deviation (10–20)1/2 = 10–10 is far below the limit of detection.

The situation changes
in chemical systems involving two competitive
self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + (ent-B)-to-2(ent-B) reactions because of the strong tendency of amplification nature.
It is an interesting chemical system, in which two powerful amplification
reactions compete. When subtle perturbations or fluctuations in terms
of time and space are amplified by self-catalysis, chiral symmetry
breaking occurs providing predominantly B or ent-B.

The origin of chiral symmetry breaking can be subtle
asymmetric
perturbations, which include very small amounts of external chiral
substances, biological contamination, polarized light, the Coriolis
force, and mechanical stirring, which are collectively termed the
cryptochiral environment (Figure 6a,b). Stochastic fluctuations in this environment can
also be considered (Figure 6c). Another origin is the asymmetric nature of our world,
such as parity violations in quantum physics, which is generally thought
to be too subtle to affect chemical reactions.

The nature of
chiral symmetry breaking can be clarified by the
repeated experiments based on product stochastic and deterministic
phenomena (Figure 7). It is generally thought that repeated experiments provide B or ent-B in an equal probability because of
the symmetric nature of the formation of B and ent-B, and such a product stochastic phenomenon involving the
product ratio B/ent-B is referred to as
stochastic chiral symmetry breaking in this article. For example,
100 experiments provide 50 and 50 experiments to form the enantiomers.
Alternatively, repeated experiments can predominantly provide B, and such a product deterministic phenomenon of the product
ratio B/ent-B is termed deterministic chiral
symmetry breaking: for example, 100 experiments provide an enantiomer B in 90 experiments and ent-B in 10 experiments.

The chemical systems involving two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A +
(ent-B)-to-2(ent-B) reactions can exhibit
chiral symmetry breaking to form B or ent-B. Chiral symmetry breaking predominantly provides one enantiomer B, or ent-B, by subtle chiral perturbations or
fluctuations, and the product distribution [B]/[ent-B] is amplified. To depict chiral symmetry breaking phenomena
by deterministic kinetics, a model with a small difference in the
rate constant k1 = 0.9k3 is considered in Section 1. Alternatively, stochastic kinetics is also considered
on the basis of the chemical master equation.65,66 Numerical analyses can provide enantiomers with comparable probability
in the bimodal distribution, which is referred to as stochastic chiral
symmetry breaking.

The system with a predominant enantiomer
is in a metastable state,
and in principle, the racemic mixture is considered thermodynamically
the most stable by the entropic reasons. Then, after a sufficiently
long time, the chemical system with a predominant enantiomer will
be converted into the racemic mixture, but not the reverse.

3.2 Chemical Systems Involving Two Competitive
Self-Catalytic Chemical Reactions Using Racemic Aminomethylene Helicene
Oligomers
A 1:1 mixture of pseudoenantiomer aminomethylene
helicene (P)-tetramer (P)-1 and (M)-pentamer (M)-2 was discussed in Section 2, in which the oligomers possess different numbers
of enantiomeric helicene units, and the mixtures are close to racemic
(Figures 8a and 13b). In this section, a 1:1 mixture of (P)-pentamer (P)-2 and (M)-pentamer (M)-2, which is
racemic, is examined. The racemic mixture exhibited chiral symmetry
breaking during the formation of hetero-double-helix B and ent-B from random-coil 2A (Figure 13a).89 Compared with the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture, the only difference
from the (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture is the number of helicene unit in the (P)-isomer; accordingly, it is reasonable to consider the involvement
of similar structures and properties in both mixtures. Specifically,
the hetero-double-helices with the enantiomeric helical sense of B or the (M*)-[(P)-2/(M)-2] complex and ent-B or the (P*)-[(P)-2/(M)-2] complex is formed;
the tentatively assigned (M*) and (P*) configurations indicate the three-dimensional chiral structures,
or the helical sense of the hetero-double-helices. The self-catalytic
2A + B-to-2B and 2A + ent-B-to-2(ent-B) reactions are enantiomeric
and are energetically identical, with the only difference being the
mirror-image structures of the products B and ent-B, and a subtle imbalance of the reaction to form B or ent-B is amplified. It should be noted that the
system of the (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture is a special case of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture in the
previous section: the former is energetically symmetric (vide infra, Figure 28), which can be
considered by stochastic kinetics (Figure 2); the latter is slightly asymmetric (Figures 2 and 5).

Figure 13 (a) Schematic presentation of chiral symmetry breaking
of a racemic
mixture, pentamers (P)-2 and (M)-2. The structures of the hetero-double-helices
are indicated as (P*)-[(P)-2·(M)-2] and (M*)-[(P)-2·(M)-2], in which (P*) and (M*) are tentatively assigned helical sense hetero-double-helices.
(b) Comparison with three-state thermal hysteresis of pseudoenantiomer
pentamer (M)-1 and tetramer (P)-2.

Note that (P)-2 and (M)-2 do not interconvert or racemize, which
can be used
to examine materials and experimental conditions in chiral symmetry
breaking, which is in contrast to the racemizing system previously
noted. Experiments can be conducted systematically by changing the
ratio, mixing mode, or procedure in the mixing of enantiomers. Deterministic
and stochastic chiral symmetry breaking appeared during the hetero-double-helix
formation and the self-assembly of the racemic (P)-2/(M)-2 system.

3.3 Deterministic Chiral Symmetry Breaking
Equal amounts
of (P)-2 and (M)-2 were weighed using a microbalance and
dissolved in toluene (1 mM). The solution was heated to 90 °C
for 30 min to obtain a 2A solution, which was optically
inactive (Figure 14a). Then, the solution was cooled to 70 °C, at which the negative
Cotton effect appeared at 315 nm. VPO analysis and the Job plot experiment
showed 1:1 hetero-aggregation. Chiral symmetry breaking appeared during
the formation of enantiomeric structures of hetero-double-helices
(heating/cooling experiment).

Figure 14 (a) Deterministic chiral symmetry breaking
in the heating/cooling
experiment examined by CD analyses of (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture in toluene (1 mM) at
90, 70, and 25 °C. (b) Deterministic chiral symmetry breaking
in ambient-temperature-mixing experiments and different-ratio-mixing
experiments shown by Δε (315 nm)/ratio profiles of the
(P)-2/(M)-2 mixture in toluene (total concentration, 1 mM) at 25 °C. The
toluene solutions of the (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture at the mixing ratios of 40:60,
45:55, 50:50, 55:45, and 60:40 were analyzed by CD. The green diamonds
indicate Δε of 50:50 mixtures. The red and blue diamonds
indicate Δε of 60:40/55:45 mixtures and 40:60/45:55 mixtures,
respectively. The structural change mode is also shown. This is reproduced
from ref (90) with
permission from John Wiley and Sons.

The solution was cooled from 70 to 25 °C, at which the
Cotton
effect became stronger. The mixture at 25 °C was viscous, and
atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis showed fibrils 80–150
nm width and 2–5 nm height, which were formed from particles
80–150 nm diameter.90 The heating/cooling
experiment was repeated 4 times using different lots of samples, and
the negative Cotton effect at 315 nm was observed in all samples.
Thus, deterministic chiral symmetry breaking appeared during hetero-double-helix
formation and self-assembly of molecules in a racemic mixture.

Cooling and heating between 90 and 25 °C at a rate of 1 K/min
provided Δε/temperature profiles showing thermal hysteresis;
different cooling and heating curves were obtained.90 The result indicates the involvement of self-catalysis:
the hetero-double-helix B and ent-B catalyze
the reaction of two random-coils 2A to become the hetero-double-helix B and ent-B, respectively. The kinetics of constant-temperature
experiments yielded sigmoidal curves, in which the formation of hetero-double-helix
and self-assembly were initially slow and then accelerated, which
can also be explained by self-catalysis. Thus, chiral symmetry breaking
appeared during the formation of hetero-double-helix and self-assembly
of the (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture, which involved self-catalysis.

Experiments
at ambient temperatures and different mixing ratios
(ambient-temperature-mixing experiments and different-ratio-mixing
experiments) were conducted using the racemic (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture (Figure 14b). Equal amounts of the enantiomers
were weighed and mixed in the solid state, to which toluene was added
at 25 °C. Then, the mixture was dissolved by sonication. The B solution with the negative Cotton effect at 315 nm was obtained
in 18 out of 20 experiments using the same and different lots of samples,
which confirmed deterministic chiral symmetry breaking.

The
mixing ratio (enantiomeric excess) of (P)-2 to (M)-2 was changed between
40:60 and 60:40, by taking advantage of the racemic nature of this
system without racemization (different-mixing-ratio experiment). All
16 experiments at 40:60, 45:55, 55:45, and 60:40 ratios exhibited
the negative Cotton effect at 315 nm, which is in contrast to general
thought that mixtures of enantiomers exhibit symmetric nature with
regard to the mixing ratio. The phenomenon was consistent with deterministic
chiral symmetry breaking (Figure 14b). The driving force of chiral symmetry breaking should
be strong enough to override the imbalances between the 40:60 and
45:55 ratios, and the chiral symmetry breaking is not due to the slight
imbalances between the numbers of (P)-2 and (M)-2 molecules in the racemic
mixture. These are product deterministic and space/time deterministic
phenomena (Figure 7).

3.4 Stochastic Chiral Symmetry Breaking
Another experimental procedure, in which the homo-double-helices
and random-coils of (P)-2 and (M)-2 in solutions were mixed to obtain a racemic
(P)-2/(M)-2 mixture (homo-double-helix/random-coil mixing experiment), showed
stochastic chiral symmetry breaking (Figure 15). A solution of (P)-2 in toluene (1 mM) at 70 °C, which contained random
coils, was mixed with an equal amount of (M)-2 (1 mM) in toluene at 25 °C, which contained homo-double-helices.
The mixture at 25 °C provided the B solution with
the negative Cotton effect at 315 nm (Figure 15, state X). The reverse of
these combinations was examined, that is, a solution of (M)-2 in toluene (1 mM) at 70 °C was mixed with an
equal amount of (P)-2 in toluene (1
mM) at 25 °C. The mixture at 25 °C provided the ent-B solution with the positive Cotton effect (Figure 15, state Y).

Figure 15 Stochastic
and deterministic chiral symmetry breaking. Procedure
and structure change mode of homo-double-helix/random-coil mixing
experiment using the (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture in toluene (1 mM) at 25 °C,
which stochastically provided B and ent-B. Heating and cooling of the states X and Y deterministically provided B. This is reproduced from
ref (90) with permission
from John Wiley and Sons.

The asymmetric mixing modes in the preparation of the (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture
exhibited stochastic chiral symmetric breaking giving an enantiomeric B (state X) or ent-B (state Y), in which the homo-double-helix component appeared to determine
the chirality of the hetero-double-helix B/ent-B and self-assembly. This is a product stochastic and space/time
deterministic phenomenon (Figure 7). It is notable that such subtle perturbations between
the mixing modes provide different macroscopic pathways to the enantiomeric
products.

Notably, when the B or ent-B solutions
were heated and cooled, deterministic chiral symmetric breaking appeared,
providing B (Figure 15). Stochastic chiral symmetry breaking in the homo-double-helix/random-coil
mixing experiment was switched to the deterministic chiral symmetry
breaking by heating and cooling, in which ent-B was switched
to B. The phenomenon is derived from the competition
between the enantiomeric self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions, which is induced by subtle perturbations or fluctuations.

3.5 Mechanistic Aspects of Chiral Symmetry Breaking
Chiral symmetry breaking during hetero-double-helix B/ent-B formation in the racemic (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture occurs. Depending
on the changes in the environmental conditions and the presence of
subtle perturbations and fluctuations, (P*)-hetero-double-helix B and (M*)-hetero-double-helix ent-B form in the racemic (P)-2/(M)-2 mixture by deterministic or stochastic
chiral symmetry breaking.

The deterministic chiral symmetry
breaking with predominant B formation appeared in the
heating/cooling experiment, ambient-temperature-mixing experiment
in the solid state, and different-mixing-ratio experiment. Stochastic
chiral symmetry breaking was observed in the homo-double-helix/random-coil
mixing experiment. Homo-double-helices appear to govern the reaction
to form B or ent-B. It was also observed
that the stochastic mode was switched to the deterministic mode by
heating and cooling.

The chiral symmetry breaking phenomenon
was governed by subtle
chiral perturbations, the origin of which may be below the limit of
detection, and their subsequent amplification to form an enantiomeric
self-assembly occurred (Figure 6). The presence of either synthetic or biological chiral substances
in our laboratory atmosphere could be the origin of the perturbation
(cryptochiral environment). Such sensitivity may be used to sense
subtle changes in the environment, and biological events of the cell
fate such as gene expression, metabolism, and growth are considered
to involve stochasticity, in which the events occur at a certain probability.

4 Shortcut in Reaction Time by the Thermal History
4.1 Change of Macroscopic Pathways due to Thermal
History: Memory Effect
Molecules dispersed in a solution
are considered to possess no memory because the solution quickly reaches
thermal equilibrium, which is thermodynamically the most stable state,
and then loses memory of its past. In the solid or liquid state, molecules
can retain their memory because molecules cannot readily reach thermal
equilibrium because of strong intermolecular interactions. Thermal
history can thus affect the formation of a metastable state, which
is far from equilibrium. Molecular memory is derived not from the
molecular structure but from the relative concentrations of certain
structures of molecules in the metastable state, which is a non-Boltzmann
distribution.43−46 A single molecule does not memorize, but ensembles of molecules
do, which is the subject of statistical mechanics.

As described
in Section 2, a product
deterministic phenomenon appeared in the pseudoenantiomeric the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture
because the competitive self-catalytic reactions were not energetically
symmetric (Figure 5). It is described in this section that the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture responds to
thermal history to provide B and C in an
extremely sensitive manner, which is the memory effect in a product
deterministic manner (Figures 6b and 7).91 It should be noted that the phenomenon is derived from molecules
dispersed in solution.

4.2 Effect of Thermal History
on Hetero-Double-Helix
Formation of Pseudoenantiomer Oxymethylenehelicene Oligomers
In the chemical system involving two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions, the product distribution [B]/[C] is significantly affected by subtle perturbations
derived from thermal history: snap cooling of the 2A solution
of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture to −25 °C followed by heating to 25
°C provided C in 3 h (frozen–defrost experiment);
cooling of the 2A solution to 25 °C provided C in 60 h (simple-cooling experiment). The only difference
between the two procedures is the cooling to −25 °C before
the initiation of the reaction to form C from 2A, which significantly changed the macroscopic pathways (Figure 16).

Figure 16 Shortcut in reaction
time of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture because of thermal history
and the structural change mode: (a) 2A-to-C reaction at 25 °C completes in 3 h in the frozen–defrost
(70 to −25 to 25 °C) experiment and in 60 h in the simple-cooling
(70–25 °C) experiment; (b) experiments are shown by concentration/temperature
profiles.

A frozen–defrost experiment
was conducted. A 1:1 mixture
of (P)-1 and (M)-2 in fluorobenzene (0.5 mM) was heated to 70 °C to prepare
a 2A solution, which was snap cooled to −25 °C
(frozen). The solution was transferred to a CD cell precooled to −25
°C and allowed to stand for 15 min, during which no change was
observed in the spectra with a weak Cotton effect (Figure 17a). Then, the 2A solution was heated to 25 °C (defrost), and Δε
at 315 nm slightly decreased and then significantly increased giving
a C solution.

Figure 17 CD spectra of (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture in fluorobenzene (0.5
mM) showing structural
changes from 2A at 70 °C to C at 25
°C (a) in a frozen–defrost experiment and (b) simple-cooling
experiment. (c) Δε (315 nm)/time profiles showing structural
changes from 2A at 70 °C to C at 25
°C in a frozen–defrost experiment (green circles) and
simple-cooling experiment (blue circles).

The structural change was monitored on the basis of Δε
(Figure 17c). Δε
0 cm–1 M–1 was obtained immediately
after allowing the solution to stand at 25 °C, which was precooled
at −25 °C. Then, Δε decreased to −105
cm–1 M–1, increased, and reached
+390 cm–1 M–1 after 240 min. The
result indicated the initial formation of a small amount of B, which was then converted to C.

For comparison,
a simple-cooling experiment was conducted. When
a 2A solution at 70 °C was immediately cooled to
25 °C, Δε decreased to −420 cm–1 M–1 after 20 min, providing a B solution.
The B solution was allowed to stand at 25 °C for
60 h, and a C solution with Δε +420 cm–1 M–1 was formed, which is in equilibrium
(Figure 17b,c).

A notable difference in the reaction rate was shown between the
two reactions from the A solution at 70 °C to C at 25 °C: snap cooling of the A solution
from 70 to −25 °C and warming to 25 °C followed by
standing at 25 °C for 3 h gave the C solution (frozen–defrost
experiment); cooling of the A solution from 70 to 25
°C followed by settling at 25 °C for 60 h gave the C solution (simple-cooling experiment). This is a shortcut
in reaction time induced by thermal history. The only difference between
the two reactions is the frozen pretreatment to reach 25 °C from
70 °C. No heating was provided, no concentrations were changed,
and no catalyst was added for the shortcut phenomenon, and then thermodynamic
stability of 2A, B, and C did
not change at 25 °C. This behavior does not appear in usual chemical
reactions.

The metastable 2A solutions formed in
the initial
25 °C state were compared in the frozen–defrost and simple-cooling
experiments, which provided essentially the same CD, UV–vis,
and 1H NMR spectra. Thus, spectroscopically, the same 2A solutions were obtained at 25 °C in both experiments,
which, however, exhibited quite different macroscopic pathways (Figure 16b). The initial
imbalances were below the limit of detection, and the slight difference
in the relative concentrations of B and C was significantly amplified at the later stage, which appears to
be a memory effect in a chemical reaction. These are product deterministic
and space/time deterministic phenomena (Figures 6c and 7).

4.3 Temperature Effect in the Frozen–Defrost
and Simple-Cooling Experiments
The effect of reaction temperature
to form a C solution from a 2A solution
was compared between two experiments. The frozen–defrost experiment
was conducted at different temperatures between −10 and 50
°C, and Δε was obtained after 20–30 min of
heating to each target temperature and was plotted against temperature
(Figure 18, red circles).
Δε consistently appeared in the positive region, indicating
the occurrence of the self-catalytic 2A + C-to-2C reaction. For comparison, the plots were obtained
in equilibrium states between 10 and 50 °C attained by holding
the reaction mixtures for a sufficiently long time (blue circles).

Figure 18 Δε
(315 nm)/temperature profiles of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture in fluorobenzene
(0.5 mM) obtained by plotting Δε reached after 20–30
min in the frozen–defrost experiment (red circles) and the
simple-cooling experiment (red diamonds). The equilibrium states are
also shown (blue circles).

The simple cooling experiment was conducted between −20
and 50 °C, and Δε at 20–30 min on cooling
to each target temperature was plotted against temperature (Figure 18, red diamonds).
Between −20 and 40 °C, negative Δε indicated
the predominant formation of B. A positive Δε
was obtained at 50 °C, which indicated the predominant formation
of C over B. The results showed high sensitivity
of the chemical systems involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions
to form B and C. The tendency to form the C solution in the frozen–defrost experiment and the B solution in the simple cooling experiment appears over a
broad temperature range, in which the formation of the B and C solutions is determined by their thermal history.
A substantial competition occurs at 40 °C, at which both reactions
appear to be strongly amplified. It is shown that the chemical systems
involving two competitive 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C self-catalytic
reactions significantly affect the product distribution [B]/[C], which is derived from the amplification of subtle
perturbations.

4.4 Mechanistic Aspects of
Shortcut in Reaction
Time
Small differences in thermal history provide shortcut
pathways allowing shorter reaction times via the amplification involving
two competitive self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + C-to-2C reactions
in the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture. The phenomenon is derived from the initial slightly
predominant formation of B or C by subtle
perturbation (Figures 5 and 6b). The frozen–defrost experiment
provides a frozen 2A solution at −25 °C,
which on warming to 25 °C slight predominantly forms C; C is amplified by self-catalysis reaching equilibrium
within 3 h. The simple cooling experiment of a 2A solution
from 70 to 25 °C provides slight predominantly B, which is amplified by self-catalysis; a slow reaction follows to
form C in the equilibrium state, which takes 60 h. Subtle
initial imbalances between two competitive self-catalytic reactions
are significantly amplified and change the macroscopic pathways. The
phenomenon is repeatable and is a product deterministic chaotic phenomenon,
in which subtle perturbations in the initial conditions provide quite
different results (Figure 7).

It should be emphasized again that the memory effect
of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture is not derived from the molecular structure but
from the relative concentration: the relative concentrations of 2A, B, and C, being in the non-Boltzmann
distribution, were memorized. The memory effect in the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixtures originated
from subtle differences in the concentrations of the products at a
fixed temperature T, which provides different macroscopic
pathways resulting in the different concentrations of the products B and C.

5 Spatial
Heterogeneity in the Self-Catalytic
Chemical Reactions
5.1 Fluctuation and Amplification
in Space
A chemical reaction in a dispersed solution of molecules
is thought
to occur equally in all domains. Thermodynamically, the free energy
is minimum and the entropy maximum in the homogeneous state. Kinetically,
the reaction rate is identical in all domains. Homogeneous chemical
reactions in dilute solutions generally do not spontaneously form
spatially heterogeneous structures, and a chemical reaction from the
metastable state to equilibrium homogeneously and monotonically occurs.

A chemical reaction in principle is a dissipative and stochastic
phenomenon because molecules react one by one, and concentration fluctuates
at different times and spaces. In general, such fluctuations are minimal
because fluctuations are averaged by a huge number of molecules and
in a large space compared with the very small volume of a single molecule.

As have been discussed in the previous sections, subtle perturbations
or fluctuations in concentration are amplified by chemical systems
involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions. It is noted in
this section that spatial fluctuation can be amplified at a certain
domain in a solution, and then a homogeneous solution can be converted
to a heterogeneous solution, a process termed homogeneous–heterogeneous
transition (Figure 19). The self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction of the pseudoenantiomer aminomethylenehelicene
oligomer (M)-1/(P)-2 mixture exhibits such transition.92

Figure 19 Spatially homogeneous–heterogeneous transition in a self-catalytic
chemical reaction in dilute solution. Light yellow and red circles
are substrate molecules before and after the self-catalytic reactions,
respectively. Light blue circles are solvent molecules. The structural
change mode is also shown, in which the green arrow indicates self-catalysis.
This is reproduced from ref (92) with permission from John Wiley and Sons.

When a 2A solution was heated and
cooled, 2A was converted to B by the self-catalytic
2A + B-to-2B reaction, in which
the homogeneous–heterogeneous transition appeared (Figure 19). A metastable
homogeneous 2A solution was converted to a metastable
heterogeneous state by self-catalytic amplification, and eventually
homogeneous B solution at equilibrium was formed.

5.2 Heterogeneous Nature of Self-Catalytic Reaction
The
process of the self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction was monitored for the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture by UV–vis/CD
imaging at 320 nm in an area of 7.7 mm2 and 1 mm thickness.
A solution of a 1:1 mixture of (P)-1 and (M)-2 (0.5 mM) was heated to 70
°C to form 2A. The UV–vis imaging analysis
showed homogeneously bright areas (Figure 20a). Then, the solution was allowed to cool
to 30 °C, which took approximately 15 min. Dark domains with
1 mm in size started to appear at 38 °C, which showed a weaker
UV–vis absorption at 320 nm than the bright domains (Figure 20b). The emergence
of the dark domains indicates the formation of B, which
exhibits a weaker absorption at 320 nm than 2A. The dark
domains changed their shapes approximately at a rate of 1 mm/min,
as they moved and rotated. A meteor-like shape of 1 mm diameter also
appeared from the bottom to the top, which moved at a rate of 1 mm/min
(Figure 20b). The
homogeneous–heterogeneous transition appeared in different
shapes and positions, showing a space/time-stochastic nature derived
from spatial fluctuation (Figure 7).

Figure 20 (a) UV–vis images (320 nm) of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture in fluorobenzene
(0.5 mM) during a cooling experiment from 70 to 30 °C in 15 min
and (b) when allowed to settle at 30 °C for 20 min. The imaging
area is 7.7 mm2. Dark areas indicate weak UV–vis
absorption and bright areas stronger UV–vis absorption. CD
images (320 nm) of the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture in fluorobenzene (0.5 mM) during
a cooling experiment from 70 to 30 °C and standing for 20 min.
The imaging area is 7.7 mm2. An encircled blue area moves
upward, which corresponds to the dark meteor-like travelling patterns
in Figure 20b. Blue
indicates a negative Δε. This is reproduced from ref (92) with permission from John
Wiley and Sons.

CD imaging at 320 nm
provided additional information on the homogeneous–heterogeneous
transition. The tip of the meteor-like pattern (Figure 20c) is shown in blue, which
has negative Δε, indicating the formation of B. This is a space/time-deterministic phenomenon (Figure 7).

Regarding the energetic
aspect, the homogeneous–heterogeneous
transition is a downhill chemical reaction from the 2A solution to the B solution, during which the metastable
heterogeneous state emerges. The reaction occurs locally because of
the strong amplification of the self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction, and B domains
expand. Eventually, B predominates in the entire solution,
which becomes homogeneous. Biological processes appear to utilize
such spatially stochastic phenomena in homogeneous-to-heterogeneous
transitions in cell differentiation and in the physiological patterns
of animals and insects.84,85

The homogeneous–heterogeneous
transition exhibits the space/time
stochastic nature (Figure 7), that is, the transition occurs at the different domains
by molecules dispersed in the solution.

6 Surface-Induced
Phenomena Derived from Chemical
Systems Involving Two Competitive Self-Catalytic Reactions Using Oxymethylenehelicene
Oligomers
6.1 Self-Catalytic Reactions and Self-Assembly
of Hetero-Double-Helix
In the previous sections, the hetero-double-helix
formation of aminomethylenehelicene oligomers in solution was described,
which is a chemical system involving two competitive self-catalytic
reactions. Hetero-double-helix B and C catalyzes
the reaction of random-coils 2A to become B and C, respectively. Microscopic pathways of a self-catalytic
reaction are considered based on the interactions between B and A molecules to form A-B complex, which reacts with another A molecule to form
the B–B complex (Figure 21). Then, B–B dissociates to form 2B, which completes the
self-catalytic cycle.

Figure 21 Microscopic pathways of self-catalytic reaction and self-assembly
involving double-helix B formation from random-coils
2A. Also, see Figure 8b.

When the dissociation
of the B–B complex is slow, the B–B complex
interacts with another A molecule to form the A–B–B complex, which react
with still another A molecule to form the B–B–B complex. Subsequent
reactions provide B–B–B–B and higher homologs, which self-assemble
to form fibrils (Figure 21).93−96 Then, the self-assembly of hetero-double-helix B can
also be considered to involve self-catalysis. The difference between
the mechanisms of self-catalytic reaction and self-assembly is derived
from the difference in the nature of interactions in the B–B complex: rapid dissociation provides 2B in solution, which induces self-catalytic reaction; slow
dissociation and rapid A–B–B formation provide self-assemblies. The latter example is
described in this section.

Chemical reactions, conformation
changes, and aggregations of organic
molecules at the liquid–solid interfaces are important phenomena
in nature and exhibit different properties from those in solution.
The differences can be ascribed to the interactions of molecules with
a surface, higher concentrations of molecules on a surface, and confined
conformation of molecules on a surface. When self-assembly occurs
at a liquid–solid interface, fibril films are formed, which
extend along the interface. Important biological events are induced
by such fibril film formation on membranes, cells, and solid surfaces
as exemplified by amyloid fibrils.

The process of fibril film
formation at the liquid–solid
interface is another interesting subject. Heterogeneous nucleation-growth
mechanisms may be involved in such a process, where the initially
slow formation of cluster aggregates of a certain size (nucleation)
is followed by rapid polymerization (growth).81−83,97 Experimentally, sigmoidal kinetics with an initial
lag time are obtained. In seeding experiments, in which the solution
comes in contact with fibrils, the process is accelerated with the
disappearance of lag time. The chemical properties of self-assembly
are similar to those of self-catalytic reactions.

6.2 Chemical Reactions of Pseudoenantimer Oxymethylene
Helicene Oligomers on a Solid Surface
Oxymethylenehelicene
oligomers are the oxygen analogs of aminomethylene helicene oligomers,
described in previous sections (Figure 8a). A pseudoenantiomer mixture of oxymethylenehelicene
(P)-pentamer (P)-3 and
(M)-hexamer (M)-4 formed
hetero-double-helix, which self-assembled to form fibril films98 and aggregates.99 The (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture, analogous to the (P)-1/(M)-2 mixture, provided (P*)-[(M)-4/(P)-3], hetero-double-helix B, and (M*)-[(M)-4/(P)-3], hetero-double-helix C, in which the tentatively
assigned (P*) and (M*) configurations
are those of the helical senses. The (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture provides metastable
random-coil 2A in solution by simple heating and cooling
procedures. The resulted solution responds to subtle physical perturbations
of vessel surface contact and mechanical stirring and forms B or C, which are pseudoenantiomers as shown
by CD: fibril films derived from B was formed at the
liquid–solid interface; aggregates derived from C was formed in solution by mechanical stirring (Figure 22). Slight differences in the
subtle physical perturbations induced by surface contact and mechanical
stirring provided B and C, respectively
(Figures 5 and 6b), which self-assembled to different forms. The
(P)-3/(M)-4 mixture provides a chemical system involving two competitive self-catalytic
reactions (Figure 22), which is described in this section.

Figure 22 Formation of pseudoenantiomer
hetero-double-helices B and C by self-catalytic
reaction and their self-assembly
(green arrows). The (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture provide fibril films derived from B on a solid surface at 5 °C and aggregates derived from C induced by mechanical stirring at 25 °C.

6.3 Formation of Hetero-Double-Helix
B and Fibril
Films
A 1:1 mixture of (P)-3 and (M)-4 in trifluoromethylbenzene
(0.5 mM) was heated in a quartz cell to 60 °C, at which point
dissociated 2A solution was formed. The solution was
cooled to 25 °C and allowed to stand for 9 h, when no change
was observed by CD (Figure 23a). The 2A solution was then cooled to 5 °C
and allowed to stand for 3 h, after which a strong negative Cotton
effect appeared at 316 nm, which indicated the formation of hetero-double-helix B (Figure 23a). It was observed that thin films were formed on the surface of
the quartz cell. The Job plot experiment on the films showed formation
of the 1:1 complex, and AFM analysis indicated the formation of fibril
films on the surface. Thus, on cooling the solution of the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture, B was formed on the quartz cell surface, which self-assembled
to form fibril films. In contrast, the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture remained dissociated
in the 2A in the solution phase.

Figure 23 (a) CD spectra of the
(P)-3/(M)-4 mixture in trifluoromethylbenzene (0.5
mM) for fibril films on the quartz surface and solution phase. (b)
CD (316 nm)/time profiles of the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture in trifluoromethylbenzene
(0.5 mM) at 5 °C. (c) AFM images of the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture at 5 min (left
and center) and 15 min (right) on the solid surfaces. This is reproduced
from ref (98) with
permission from John Wiley and Sons.

The process of self-assembly on the solid surface was a discontinuous
phenomenon. CD (316 nm)/time profiles showed a sigmoidal curve with
a lag time of 30 min (Figure 23b). AFM images at 5 min showed a number of flat and round
particles, which were uniformly 50 nm in diameter and 2–3 nm
in height (Figure 23c). The particles are critical for the start of fibril formation,
and short fibrils were formed from some particles. At 10 and 15 min,
many longer fibrils of 50 nm width appeared. This is a space/time
stochastic phenomenon (Figure 7).

Seeding experiments revealed the disappearance of
lag time in the
fibril film formation.98 A 2A solution of (P)-3/(M)-4 at 60 °C was cooled to 25 °C, allowed
to stand for 1 h, and then added to dry fibril films in a quartz cell.
The CD of the mixture at 25 °C showed an immediate decrease in
intensity. The 2A solution at 25 °C was metastable,
and seeding by contact with the fibril films initiated self-assembly.
These observations are consistent with the involvement of self-catalysis
in fibril film formation.

Fibril film formation was affected
by the surface materials used.
Larger amounts of fibril films were formed on poly(ethylene terephthalate),
polypropylene, cellulose, and gold-coated plates, and smaller amounts
were formed on Teflon, glass, quartz, poly(lactate), and aluminum.98 The amounts of fibril films differed 20-fold
between poly(ethylene terephthalate) and aluminum. These results indicated
the involvement of physical perturbation derived from the contact
of molecules on the solid surface in the self-catalytic formation
of B.

6.4 Mechanistic Aspects of
Surface-Induced Hetero-Double-Helix
B Formation and Self-Assembly
A probable mechanism of the
fibril film formation is as follows (Figure 24). At 60 °C, the 2A solution
in the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture is at equilibrium, and cooling to 25 °C produces
a metastable 2A solution, which does not change for at
least several hours. On cooling to 5 °C, B forms
on the solid surface, which self-assembles to form particles with
50 nm diameter. It is likely that the particles have a certain regular
structure with higher thermodynamic stability than those with diameters
smaller and larger than 50 nm. Then, the particles cease to grow,
and fibrils with 50 nm width start to form. The initiation of the
formation of B on the solid–liquid interface is
catalyzed by the solid surface, and a process occurs at any domain
on the surface in a spatially stochastic manner, which is a space/time
stochastic phenomenon (Figure 7). The sigmoidal kinetic curves and seeding experiments are
consistent with the self-catalytic nature of the hetero-double-helix
formation and self-assembly. The discontinuous nucleation is programmed
in the molecular structures of (P)-3 and (M)-4.

Figure 24 Mechanistic model for
the fibril film formation by the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture
on a solid surface with molecular structural change from random-coil
2A to hetero-double-helix B via a discontinuous
heterogeneous nucleation-growth mechanism. This is reproduced from
ref (98) with permission
from John Wiley and Sons.

6.5 Formation of Hetero-Double-Helix C and Self-Assembly
Induced by Mechanical Stirring
Biological cells sense and
respond to mechanical stimulations, which control growth, motility,
and differentiation. In materials science, mechanical stimulation
responding materials are critical for applications requiring mechanical
switching and mechanical endurance. Mechanical stimulations and responses
of synthetic and biological macromolecules in solution are well documented.
In contrast, small organic molecules dispersed in a solution are generally
not responsive to mechanical stimulations because hydrodynamic flow
usually does not dominate Brownian motion. The (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture responds
to mechanical stirring of a solution (Figure 25a).99

Figure 25 (a) CD spectra
of the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture in trifluoromethylbenzene (0.5
mM) in a glass vial during stirring at 2000 rpm. (b) AFM images of
self-assembly materials after stirring for 9 h. This is reproduced
from ref (99) with
permission from John Wiley and Sons.

A 1:1 mixture of (P)-3 and
(M)-4 in trifluoromethylbenzene (0.5
mM) was
heated to 80 °C for 3 min in a cylindrical glass vial (21 mm
in diameter), and the resulting 2A solution was cooled
to 25 °C, providing a metastable 2A solution, which
was mechanically stirred in a clockwise direction with an oval-shaped
Teflon magnetic stirring bar (0.4 g weight) at a rate of 2000 rpm.
The solution became turbid after 9 h, and CD spectra with a positive
Cotton effect at 298 nm were observed (Figure 25b). When mechanical stirring was continued,
the positive Cotton effect shifted to 322 nm: the intensity increased
considerably after 179 h, which was ascribed to the formation of hetero-double-helix C. It was noted that the CD spectra of C were
enantiomeric to those of B, as shown in the experiment
at 5 °C (cf. Figure 23a). The process was monitored on basis of Δε at
322 nm, which provided a sigmoidal curve.

The structure of self-assembly
materials was determined by AFM
analysis. At 9 h, when Δε started to decrease, bundles
of 0.3 μm average width and 20 nm height appeared; they contained
twisted fibers 50 nm diameter with a right-handed helical structure
(Figure 25c). It is
shown thereby that the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture formed C, which self-assembled
to form fibers and bundles.

The mechanical stirring rate affected
the formation of C and self-assembly. Without mechanical
stirring, no self-assembly
occurred at 25 °C after 150 h.99 When
the rate was reduced from 2000 to 1500 rpm, the process was retarded.
Inversion of the stirring direction to counterclockwise provided the
same CD spectra as those in the clockwise direction. The addition
of glass beads considerably promoted the formation of C and self-assembly. The results indicated an important role of the
surface area of contact between the vessel, the stirring bar, and
beads. When the solution of (P)-3/(M)-4 was alternately mechanically stirred and
not stirred (stop-stirring experiments), the formation of C occurred only during mechanical stirring.99

6.6 Mechanistic Aspects of Formation of Hetero-Double-Helix
C and Self-Assembly by Mechanical Stirring
The experimental
results are consistent with the generation of local and temporal high-temperature
domains induced by friction derived from mechanical stirring (Figure 26). Friction induced
by mechanical stimulation generates heat, electrons, and plasma, during
which local and temporal temperatures can reach several thousand kelvins.
The mechanical response observed herein originated from the generation
of local and temporal high-temperature domains, which provided sufficient
energy to overcome the barrier to form C from metastable
2A.

Figure 26 Proposed mechanisms of the formation of C and self-assembly
of the (P)-3/(M)-4 mixture by mechanical stirring. This is reproduced from
ref (99) with permission
from John Wiley and Sons.

A question is then raised regarding why hetero-double-helix C formation was induced during heating, which is in contrast
to the general phenomenon that molecular aggregates dissociate upon
heating. The behavior may be ascribed to the balance between the kinetic
promotion of C formation and its thermodynamically unfavorable
formation. The barrier between 2A and C is
relatively high, and mechanical stirring generates local and temporal
high-temperature domains, which provide the energy to form C. Rapid relaxation of the high-temperature domains occurs, and C diffuses from the surface to the solution phase to self-assembly.
This may be an interesting heterogeneous system generated in a homogeneous
solution, and such phenomena can occur in nonequilibrium states. Mechanical
stirring can provide an interesting reaction medium, in which local
high-temperature domains are temporally generated, which is a space/time
stochastic phenomenon (Figure 7).

The mixture of the pseudoenantiomer oxymethylenehelicene
oligomers
(P)-3/(M)-4 mixture provided a chemical system of two competitive self-catalytic
reactions to form hetero-double-helix B and C, which are pseudoenantiomers with regard to the helical sense. Simple
heating and cooling provided metastable 2A solution,
and the responses to subtle physical perturbations such as surface
contact and mechanical stirring provide different structures of hetero-double-helix
which self-assembles to form fibril films (Figures 5 and 6). It may be
noted that the dynamic phenomena have some similarity with crystallization.82,83 Crystallization in some cases is referred to involve self-catalytic
nature, in which molecules change their structure on crystal surfaces.

7 Conclusions
7.1 Macroscopic Multiple Pathways
in Chemical
Reactions
Chemical reactions are complex phenomena.43−46,65,66 In this article, we have described the macroscopic multiple pathways
of reversible nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium chemical reactions under
fixed and variable temperature conditions. Pseudoenantiomer mixtures
of aminomethylene and oxymethylenehelicene oligomers undergo reversible
chemical reactions between hetero-double-helices and random coils,
which are chemical systems involving two competitive self-catalytic
reactions. As a result, various unusual chemical phenomena occur,
which were derived from the amplification of subtle perturbations
and fluctuations.

Microscopic pathways determine the structures
of intermediates and transition states in a chemical reaction, which
are subject to quantum mechanics, and do not change at a fixed temperature.
Macroscopic mechanisms determine how many molecules visit the microscopic
pathways connecting the intermediates and transition states, which
are the subject of statistical mechanics, and vary at a fixed temperature.
A nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium chemical reaction, which occurs from
a metastable state to a thermodynamically stable equilibrium state,
proceeds via macroscopic multiple pathways depending on the number
of molecules or concentration.43−46 Macroscopic pathways are affected by multiple factors
such as the extent of progress of the reaction, temperature change,
reversibility, deterministic/stochastic nature, subtle perturbations,
fluctuations, and even thermal history.

The macroscopic pathways
increase when a nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium
chemical reaction involves reversibility. Reversibility in a chemical
reaction is derived from small differences in the thermodynamic stability
of substrates and products; that is, temperature changes can significantly
affect relative thermodynamic stability. Various macroscopic multiple
pathways can emerge, particularly when temperature changes during
the reaction. For example, consider the 2A-to-B reaction from metastable state I, which is far from the equilibrium
curve, to equilibrium II, during which the temperature changed from T1 to T2, as indicated
by the concentration/temperature profiles (Figure 27). The relative thermodynamic stability
at states I and II inverts between 2A and B, as shown by the equilibrium curve. The reaction starts from metastable
state I at T1 and reaches equilibrium
II at T2. In the case of the irreversible
nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium chemical reaction, [B]
changes in the domain between [B]start and
[B]equil (Figure 27a). In contrast, in the case of the reversible
nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium chemical reaction, [B]
can change in the domain between [B] = 0 and 1/2[A]0 (Figure 27b). Temperature changes largely enhance the macroscopic
multiple pathways of the reversible nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium
chemical reaction.

Figure 27 Macroscopic multiple pathways of nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium
chemical reaction, during which temperature changed, as depicted by
concentration/temperature profiles. Chemical reactions with the irreversible
system (a) and reversible system (b) are shown.

7.2 Macroscopic Multiple Pathways in Chemical
Systems Involving Two Competitive Self-Catalytic Reactions
Catalysis is an important concept in chemical reactions, in which
structural changes of molecules are affected by their interactions
with other substances, by either the formation of covalent or noncovalent
bonds. A catalyst can be externally added or incorporated in the chemical
reaction system itself. Self-catalysis is a notable example of the
latter, in which a product catalyzes the substrates to become products,
exhibiting a substantial increase in the reaction rate. The involvement
of the self-catalytic 2A + B-to-2B reaction increases the macroscopic multiple pathways of nonequilibrium-to-equilibrium
chemical reactions, as described in this article.43−46 Biological systems employ such
complex chemical reaction networks involving the positive feedback
of self-catalysis.

When two self-catalytic reactions compete,
the macroscopic multiple pathways still increase. At a fixed temperature,
subtle perturbations and fluctuations are significantly amplified,
and one of the self-catalytic reactions predominates. When the temperature
is changed during the reactions, unusual chemical phenomena occur.

General features of chemical systems involving two competitive
self-catalytic reactions are summarized in Section 1. Then, this section summarizes chiral symmetry
breaking phenomenon involving 2A + B-to-2B and 2A + ent-B-to-2(ent-B) self-catalytic reactions, in which an enantiomer B or ent-B is predominantly formed. Because the
microscopic pathways involved in the formation of the enantiomers B or ent-B are energetically identical, a reaction
generally forms B and ent-B in equal amounts
to provide a racemic mixture in a symmetric state. In chiral symmetry
breaking, the predominant formation of enantiomer B or
ent-B occurs via different macroscopic pathways, which
is asymmetric (Figures 5 and 6), and is derived from self-catalytic
amplifications of subtle perturbations and fluctuations often below
the limit of detection (Figure 28).

Figure 28 Energy diagrams of chiral
symmetry breaking in a chemical system
involving two competitive self-catalytic reactions. Subtle perturbations
or fluctuations (blue arrow) convert a symmetric state to an asymmetric
state, which is amplified by self-catalysis (green arrow) to increase
the number of molecules that visit a single pathway (red solid arrow).
A model shows two cars with powerful engines pulling in opposite directions.

The phenomenon can be discussed
in terms of energy. Note that the
microscopic pathways are fixed at a fixed temperature, which does
not change during the reaction. Via macroscopic pathways, a small
perturbation of fluctuation (blue arrow) induces the predominant formation
of B or ent-B, owing to the preference in
the number of molecules that visit one of the microscopic pathways.
Self-catalysis (green arrow) opens a new microscopic pathway, and
the number of molecules that visit the pathways significantly increases
(red arrow), resulting in an asymmetric state. Such chemical kinetics
of chiral symmetry breaking is discussed by stochastic kinetics (Figure 3). A model system
is shown, in which two cars with powerful engines are pulling in opposite
directions (Figure 28), and a small fluctuation can be amplified because of mutual tense,
and a car starts to move rapidly on one side.

Stochastic and
deterministic chiral symmetry breaking appears in
repeated experiments (Figure 29). Stochastic chiral symmetry breaking implies that chemical
reactions stochastically form B and ent-B at a comparable ratio in repeated experiments, which is also referred
as product stochastic (Figures 6c and 7). Deterministic chiral symmetry
breaking implies that a chemical reaction deterministically forms
a single enantiomer B in repeated experiments, which
is also referred to as product deterministic (Figure 6a,b).

Figure 29 Product and space/time stochastic/deterministic
phenomena in chiral
symmetry breaking in chemical reactions, derived from subtle perturbations
or fluctuations.

Chemical systems involving
two competitive self-catalytic reactions
exhibit extremely high sensitivity toward environmental changes and
various notable phenomena. Subtle perturbations and fluctuations can
trigger chemical reactions at various domains and times, thereby amplifying
the chemical reactions. Triggers include the range and rate of temperature
changes, surface contact, and mechanical stirring. Chemical reactions
are extremely complex and interesting phenomena.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by Grants-in-Aid
for Scientific Research (nos. 17H03050 and 17H08203) from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). T.S. thanks the JSPS
for a Fellowship for Young Japanese Scientists.
==== Refs
References
Alberts B. ; Johnson A. ; Lewis J. ; Morgan D. ; Raff M. ; Robert K. ; Walter P.  . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 6 th ed.; Garland Science : New York , 2014 .
Lodish H. ; Berk A. ; Kaiser C. A. ; Krieger M. ; Scott M. P. ; Bretscher A. ; Ploegh H. ; Matsudaira P.  Molecular Cell Biology , 6 th ed.; W. H. Freeman and Company : New York , 2008 .
Nguyen L. K. ; Kholodenko B. N. 
Feedback regulation in cell signalling:
Lessons for
cancer therapeutics . Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 
2016 , 50 , 85 –94 . 10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.09.024 .26481970 
Gordus A. ; Pokala N. ; Levy S. ; Flavell S. W. ; Bargmann C. I. 
Feedback
from network states generates variability in a probabilistic olfactory
circuit . Cell 
2015 , 161 , 215 –227 . 10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.018 .25772698 
Avendaño M. S. ; Leidy C. ; Pedraza J. M. 
Tuning the range
and stability of
multiple phenotypic states with coupled positive-negative feedback
loops . Nat. Commun. 
2013 , 4 , 2605 10.1038/ncomms3605 .24189549 
Pfeuty B. ; Kaneko K. 
The combination of
positive and negative feedback loops
confers exquisite flexibility to biochemical switches . Phys. Biol. 
2009 , 6 , 046013 10.1088/1478-3975/6/4/046013 .19910671 
Pomerening J. R. 
Positive-feedback
loops in cell cycle progression . FEBS Lett. 
2009 , 583 , 3388 –3396 . 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.10.001 .19818353 
Mitrophanov A. Y. ; Groisman E. A. 
Positive feedback
in cellular control systems . BioEssays 
2008 , 30 , 542 –555 . 10.1002/bies.20769 .18478531 
Smits W. K. ; Kuipers O. P. ; Veening J.-W. 
Phenotypic variation in bacteria:
the role of feedback regulation . Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 
2006 , 4 , 259 –271 . 10.1038/nrmicro1381 .16541134 
Brandman O. ; Ferrell J. E. Jr.; Li R. ; Meyer T. 
Interlinked
fast and slow positive feedback loops drive reliable cell decisions . Science 
2005 , 310 , 496 –498 . 10.1126/science.1113834 .16239477 
Bissette A. J. ; Fletcher S. P. 
Mechanisms of autocatalysis . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 12800 –12826 . 10.1002/anie.201303822 .
Meyer A. J. ; Ellefson J. W. ; Ellington A. D. 
Abiotic self-replication . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2012 , 45 , 2097 –2105 . 10.1021/ar200325v .22891822 
Plasson R. ; Brandenburg A. ; Jullien L. ; Bersini H. 
Autocatalysis: at the
root of self-replication . Artif. Life 
2011 , 17 , 219 –236 . 10.1162/artl_a_00033 .21554116 
Vidonne A. ; Philp D. 
Making Molecules Make Themselves
- the Chemistry of Artificial Replicators . Eur.
J. Org. Chem. 
2009 , 2009 , 593 –610 . 10.1002/ejoc.200800827 .
Kondepudi D. K. ; Asakura K. 
Chiral autocatalysis,
spontaneous symmetry breaking,
and stochastic behavior . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2001 , 34 , 946 –954 . 10.1021/ar010089t .11747412 
Orgel L. E. 
Unnatural
selection in chemical systems . Acc. Chem. Res. 
1995 , 28 , 109 –118 . 10.1021/ar00051a004 .11542502 
Higgs P. G. ; Lehman N. 
The RNA World: molecular cooperation
at the origins
of life . Nat. Rev. Genet. 
2015 , 16 , 7 –17 . 10.1038/nrg3841 .25385129 
Singhal A. ; Nielsen P. E. 
Cross-catalytic peptide nucleic acid (PNA) replication
based on templated ligation . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2014 , 12 , 6901 –6907 . 10.1039/c4ob01158a .25057801 
Markovitch O. ; Lancet D. 
Excess mutual catalysis is required for effective evolvability . Artif. Life 
2012 , 18 , 243 –266 . 10.1162/artl_a_00064 .22662913 
Hayden E. J. ; von Kiedrowski G. ; Lehman N. 
Systems chemistry on ribozyme self-construction:
evidence for anabolic autocatalysis in a recombination network . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 8424 –8428 . 10.1002/anie.200802177 .
Deacon T. W. 
Reciprocal
linkage between self-organizing processes is sufficient for self-reproduction
and evolvability . Biol. Theor. 
2006 , 1 , 136 –149 . 10.1162/biot.2006.1.2.136 .
Pieters R. J. ; Huc I. ; Rebek J. Jr.
Reciprocal template effects in a
replication cycle . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
1994 , 33 , 1579 –1581 . 10.1002/anie.199415791 .
Blackmond D. G. 
An examination
of the role of autocatalytic cycles in the chemistry of proposed primordial
reactions . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 386 –390 . 10.1002/anie.200804565 .
Arimitsu K. ; Ichimura K. 
Nonlinear organic reaction of 9-fluorenylmethyl carbamates
as base amplifiers to proliferate aliphatic amines and their application
to a novel photopolymer system . J. Mater. Chem. 
2004 , 14 , 336 –343 . 10.1039/b311358b .
Kindermann M. ; Stahl I. ; Reimold M. ; Pankau W. M. ; von Kiedrowski G. 
Systems chemistry:
Kinetic and computational analysis of a nearly exponential organic
replicator . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 44 , 6750 –6755 . 10.1002/anie.200501527 .
Isaac R. ; Chmielewski J. 
Approaching exponential growth with
a self replicating
peptide . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2002 , 124 , 6808 –6809 . 10.1021/ja026024i .12059185 
Saghatellan A. ; Yokobayashi Y. ; Soltani K. ; Ghadiri M. R. 
A chiroselective
peptide replicator . Nature 
2001 , 409 , 797 –801 . 10.1038/35057238 .11236988 
Wintner E. A. ; Conn M. M. ; Rebek J. Jr.
Studies in Molecular
Replication . Acc. Chem. Res. 
1994 , 27 , 198 –203 . 10.1021/ar00043a003 .
Chung J. M. ; Peacock-López E. 
Cross-diffusion in the templator model of chemical
self-replication . Phys. Lett. A 
2007 , 371 , 41 –47 . 10.1016/j.physleta.2007.04.114 .
Ashkenasy G. ; Hermans T. M. ; Otto S. ; Taylor A. F. 
Systems chemistry . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2017 , 46 , 2543 –2554 . 10.1039/c7cs00117g .28418049 
Demirel Y.  Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics:
Transport and Rate Processes in Physical, Chemical and Biological
Systems , 2 nd ed.; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2007 .
Epstein I. R. ; Pojman J. A.  An Introduction to
Nonlinear Chemical Dynamics ; Oxford University
Press : Oxford , 1998 .
de Groot S. R. ; Mazur P.  Non-Equilibrium Thermodynamics ; Dover Publication : New York , 1984 .
Miloserdov F. M. ; McKay D. ; Muñoz B. K. ; Samouei H. ; Macgregor S. A. ; Grushin V. V. 
Exceedingly facile Ph-X activation
(X = Cl, Br, I) with ruthenium(II): Arresting kinetics, autocatalysis,
and mechanisms . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 8466 –8470 . 10.1002/anie.201501996 .
Hoepker A. C. ; Gupta L. ; Ma Y. ; Faggin M. F. ; Collum D. B. 
Regioselective
lithium diisopropylamide-mediated ortholithiation of 1-chloro-3-(trifluoromethyl)benzene:
Role of autocatalysis, lithium chloride catalysis, and reversibility . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 7135 –7151 . 10.1021/ja200906z .21500823 
Barrios-Landeros F. ; Carrow B. P. ; Hartwig J. F. 
Autocatalytic oxidative addition
of PhBr to Pd(PtBu3)2 via Pd(PtBu3)2(H)(Br) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 5842 –5843 . 10.1021/ja711159y .18402444 
Singh K. J. ; Hoepker A. C. ; Collum D. B. 
Autocatalysis in lithium diisopropylamide-mediated
ortholithiations . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 18008 –18017 . 10.1021/ja807331k .19053473 
Suzuki K. ; Hatase K. ; Nishiyama D. ; Kawasaki T. ; Soai K. 
Spontaneous
absolute asymmetric synthesis promoted by achiral amines in conjunction
with asymmetric autocatalysis . J. Syst. Chem. 
2010 , 1 , 5 10.1186/1759-2208-1-5 .
Schiaffino L. ; Ercolani G. 
Unraveling the Mechanism of the Soai Asymmetric Autocatalytic
Reaction by First-Principles Calculations: Induction and Amplification
of Chirality by Self-Assembly of Hexamolecular Complexes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 6832 –6835 . 10.1002/anie.200802450 .
Kawasaki T. ; Suzuki K. ; Shimizu M. ; Ishikawa K. ; Soai K. 
Spontaneous
absolute asymmetric synthesis in the presence of achiral silica gel
in conjunction with asymmetric autocatalysis . Chirality 
2006 , 18 , 479 –482 . 10.1002/chir.20273 .16612805 
Barabás B. ; Tóth J. ; Pályi G. 
Stochastic aspects of asymmetric
autocatalysis and absolute asymmetric synthesis . J. Math. Chem. 
2010 , 48 , 457 –489 . 10.1007/s10910-010-9680-8 .
Kafri R. ; Markovitch O. ; Lancet D. 
Spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking
in early molecular networks . Biol. Direct 
2010 , 5 , 38 10.1186/1745-6150-5-38 .20507625 
Yamaguchi M. ; Arisawa M. ; Shigeno M. ; Saito N. 
Equilibrum and nonequilibrium
chemical reactions of helicene oligomers in the noncovalent bond formation . Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 
2016 , 89 , 1145 –1169 . 10.1246/bcsj.20160133 .
Shigeno M. ; Kushida Y. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Molecular switching involving metastable
states: molecular thermal hysteresis and sensing of environmental
changes by chiral helicene oligomeric foldamers . Chem. Commun. 
2016 , 52 , 4955 –4970 . 10.1039/c5cc10379g .
Shigeno M. ; Kushida Y. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Energy Aspects
of thermal molecular
switching: Molecular thermal hysteresis of helicene oligomers . ChemPhysChem 
2015 , 16 , 2076 –2083 . 10.1002/cphc.201500210 .25990788 
Yamaguchi M. ; Shigeno M. ; Saito N. ; Yamamoto K. 
Synthesis, double-helix
formation, and higher-assembly formation of chiral polycyclic aromatic
compounds: conceptual development of polyketide aldol synthesis . Chem. Rec. 
2014 , 14 , 15 –27 . 10.1002/tcr.201300014 .24343866 
Shigeno M. ; Kushida Y. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Self-catalysis
in thermal hysteresis
during random-coil to helix-dimer transition of the sulfonamidohelicene
tetramer . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 4040 –4043 . 10.1039/c4cc10418h .
Kushida Y. ; Shigeno M. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Concentration Threshold and Amplification
Exhibited by a Helicene Oligomer during Helix-Dimer Formation: A Proposal
on How a Cell Senses Concentration Changes of a Chemical . Chem.—Eur. J. 
2015 , 21 , 13788 –13792 . 10.1002/chem.201501474 .26239385 
Shigeno M. ; Kushida Y. ; Kobayashi Y. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Molecular
function of counting the numbers 1 and 2 exhibited by a sulfoneamidohelicene
tetramer . Chem.—Eur. J. 
2014 , 20 , 12759 –12762 . 10.1002/chem.201403358 .25146700 
Shigeno M. ; Kushida Y. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Molecular
Thermal Hysteresis in Helix-Dimer
Formation of Sulfonamidohelicene Oligomers in Solution . Chem.—Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 10226 –10234 . 10.1002/chem.201204556 .23775763 
Levine R. D. ; Bernstein R. B.  Molecular Reaction
Dynamics ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 2009 .
Wright M. R.  Fundamental Chemical
Kinetics ; Horwood Publishing Limited : Woodgate , 1999 .
Steinfeld J. I. ; Francisco J. S. ; Hase W. L.  Chemical Kinetics
and Dynamics ; Prentice-Hall, Inc. : New Jersey , 1989 .
Ritort F. 
The physics
of small systems: From energy to information . Contrib. Sci. 
2015 , 11 , 137 –146 . 10.2436/20.7010.01.224 .
Moffitt J. R. ; Bustamante C. 
Extracting
signal from noise: kinetic mechanisms from
a Michaelis-Menten-like expression for enzymatic fluctuations . FEBS J. 
2014 , 281 , 498 –517 . 10.1111/febs.12545 .24428386 
Neuman K. C. ; Nagy A. 
Single-molecule force
spectroscopy: optical tweezers, magnetic tweezers
and atomic force microscopy . Nat. Methods 
2008 , 5 , 491 –505 . 10.1038/nmeth.1218 .18511917 
Hummer G. ; Szabo A. 
Free energy surfaces from single-molecule force spectroscopy . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2005 , 38 , 504 –513 . 10.1021/ar040148d .16028884 
Bustamante C. ; Liphardt J. ; Ritort F. 
The nonequilibrium
thermodynamics
of small systems . Phys. Today 
2005 , 58 , 43 –48 . 10.1063/1.2012462 .
Qian H. ; Bishop L. M. 
The chemical master equation approach to nonequilibrium
steady-state of open biochemical systems: Linear single-molecule enzyme
kinetics and nonlinear biochemical reaction networks . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2010 , 11 , 3472 –3500 . 10.3390/ijms11093472 .20957107 
For example, Gillespie D. T. 
Stochastic simulation of chemical
kinetics . Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2007 , 58 , 35 –55 . 10.1146/annurev.physchem.58.032806.104637 .17037977 
Kolomeisky A. B. ; Fisher M. E. 
Molecular motors:
a theorist’s perspective . Annu. Rev.
Phys. Chem. 
2007 , 58 , 675 –695 . 10.1146/annurev.physchem.58.032806.104532 .17163836 
Chatterjee A. ; Vlachos D. G. 
An overview of spatial
microscopic and accelerated
kinetic Monte Carlo methods . J. Comput.-Aided
Mater. Des. 
2007 , 14 , 253 –308 . 10.1007/s10820-006-9042-9 .
Samoilov M. S. ; Arkin A. P. 
Deviant effects
in molecular reaction pathways . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2006 , 24 , 1235 –1240 . 10.1038/nbt1253 .17033664 
Kærn M. ; Elston T. C. ; Brake W. J. ; Colins J. J. 
Stochasticity in
gene expression: from theories to phenotypes . Nat. Rev. Genet. 
2005 , 6 , 451 –464 . 10.1038/nrg1615 .15883588 
Lente G. 
The role of
stochastic models in interpreting the origins of biological chirality . Symmetry 
2010 , 2 , 767 –798 . 10.3390/sym2020767 .
Samoilov M. ; Plyasunov S. ; Arkin A. P. 
Stochastic amplification and signaling
in enzymatic futile cycles through noise-induced bistability with
oscillations . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2005 , 102 , 2310 –2315 . 10.1073/pnas.0406841102 .15701703 
Coulon A. ; Chow C. C. ; Singer R. H. ; Larson D. R. 
Eukaryotic
transcriptional
dynamics: from single molecules to cell populations . Nat. Rev. Genet. 
2013 , 14 , 572 –584 . 10.1038/nrg3484 .23835438 
Kozuch S. ; Shaik S. 
How to conceptualize
catalytic cycles? The energetic span model . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 44 , 101 –110 . 10.1021/ar1000956 .21067215 
Nagahata Y. ; Maeda S. ; Teramoto H. ; Horiyama T. ; Taketsugu T. ; Komatsuzaki T. 
Deciphering
time scale hierarchy in reaction networks . J.
Phys. Chem. B 
2016 , 120 , 1961 –1971 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b09941 .26641663 
Sumiya Y. ; Nagahata Y. ; Komatsuzaki T. ; Taketsugu T. ; Maeda S. 
Kinetic analysis for the multistep
profiles of organic reactions:
Significance of the conformational entropy on the rate constants of
the claisen rearrangement . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2015 , 119 , 11641 –11649 . 10.1021/acs.jpca.5b09447 .26567633 
Kiviet D. J. ; Nghe P. ; Walker N. ; Boulineau S. ; Sunderlikova V. ; Tans S. J. 
Stochasticity of metabolism and growth
at the single-cell level . Nature 
2014 , 514 , 376 –379 . 10.1038/nature13582 .25186725 
Hillenbrand P. ; Fritz G. ; Gerland U. 
Biological signal processing
with
a genetic toggle switch . PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e6834510.1371/journal.pone.0068345 .23874595 
Karlebach G. ; Shamir R. 
Modelling and analysis of gene regulatory
networks . Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
2008 , 9 , 770 –780 . 10.1038/nrm2503 .18797474 
Sekimoto K.  Stochastic Energetics ; Lecture Notes in Physics ; Springer : Berlin, Heidelberg , 2010 ; Vol. 799 , pp 93 –131 . Doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-05411-2.
Mishin Y. 
Thermodynamic
theory of equilibrium fluctuations . Ann. Phys. 
2015 , 363 , 48 –97 . 10.1016/j.aop.2015.09.015 .
Toyabe S. ; Sano M. 
Nonequilibrium fluctuations
in biological strands, machines, and
cells . J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 
2015 , 84 , 102001 10.7566/jpsj.84.102001 .
Bertini L. ; De Sole A. ; Gabrielli D. ; Jona-Lasinio G. ; Landim C. 
Macroscopic fluctuation theory . Rev. Mod. Phys. 
2015 , 87 , 593 –636 . 10.1103/revmodphys.87.593 .
Ross J. ; Villaverde A. F. 
Thermodynamics
and fluctuations far from equilibrium . Entropy 
2010 , 12 , 2199 –2243 . 10.3390/e12102199 .
Sengers J. V. ; de Zárate J. M. O. 
Thermal fluctuations in non-equilibrium
thermodynamics . J. Non-Equilib. Thermodyn. 
2007 , 32 , 319 –329 . 10.1515/jnetdy.2007.024 .
Nagypál I. ; Epstein I. R. 
Stochastic behavior and stirring
rate effects in the
chlorite-iodide reaction . J. Chem. Phys. 
1988 , 89 , 6925 –6928 . 10.1063/1.455316 .
Thanh N. T. K. ; Maclean N. ; Mahiddine S. 
Mechanisms of nucleation and growth
of nanoparticles in solution . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 7610 –7630 . 10.1021/cr400544s .25003956 
De
Yoreo J. J. ; Vekilov P. G. 
Principles of crystal nucleation
and growth . Rev. Mineral. Geochem. 
2003 , 54 , 57 –93 . 10.2113/0540057 .
Mullin J. W.  Crystallization , 4 th ed.; Elsevier , 2001 .
Kondo S. ; Miura T. 
Reaction-diffusion
model as a framework for understanding biological
pattern formation . Science 
2010 , 329 , 1616 –1620 . 10.1126/science.1179047 .20929839 
Turing A. M. 
The Chemical
basis of morphogenesis . Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B 
1952 , 237 , 37 –72 . 10.1098/rstb.1952.0012 .Turing A. M. 
The Chemical
basis of morphogenesis: Reprinted . Bull. Math.
Biol. 
1990 , 52 , 153 –197 . 10.1016/s0092-8240(05)80008-4 .2185858 
Saito N. ; Shigeno M. ; Yamaguchi M.  Structure
and
property diversity of chiral helicene oligomers . Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. , 2015 .
Doi: 10.1002/0471440264.pst643.
Yashima E. ; Ousaka N. ; Taura D. ; Shimomura K. ; Ikai T. ; Maeda K. 
Supramolecular helical systems: Helical
assemblies of small molecules, foldamers, and polymers with chiral
amplification and their functions . Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 116 , 13752 –13990 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00354 .27754649 
Shigeno M. ; Sato M. ; Kushida Y. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Aminomethylenehelicene
Oligomers Possessing Flexible Two-Atom Linker Form a Stimuli-Responsive
Double-Helix in Solution . Asian J. Org. Chem. 
2014 , 3 , 797 –804 . 10.1002/ajoc.201402065 .
Shigeno M. ; Kushida Y. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Heating/cooling
stimulus induces
three-state molecular switching of pseudoenantiomeric aminomethylenehelicene
oligomers: reversible nonequilibrium thermodynamic processes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 7972 –7980 . 10.1021/ja502009f .24821116 
Kushida Y. ; Sawato T. ; Shigeno M. ; Saito N. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Deterministic
and stochastic chiral symmetry breaking exhibited by racemic aminomethylenehelicene
oligomers . Chem.—Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 327 –333 . 10.1002/chem.201601792 .27440722 
Kushida Y. ; Saito N. ; Shigeno M. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Multiple competing
pathways for chemical reaction: drastic reaction shortcut for the
self-catalytic double-helix formation of helicene oligomers . Chem. Sci. 
2017 , 8 , 1414 –1421 . 10.1039/c6sc01893a .28451281 
Kushida Y. ; Sawato T. ; Saito N. ; Shigeno M. ; Satozono H. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Spatially
heterogeneous nature of self-catalytic reaction
in hetero-double helix formation of helicene oligomers . ChemPhysChem 
2016 , 17 , 3283 –3288 . 10.1002/cphc.201600627 .27529616 
Saito N. ; Kanie K. ; Matsubara M. ; Muramatsu A. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Dynamic and reversible polymorphism
of self-assembled
lyotropic liquid crystalline systems derived from cyclic bis(ethynylhelicene)
oligomers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 6594 –6601 . 10.1021/jacs.5b02003 .25939825 
Ichinose W. ; Ito J. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Tetrameric ααββ Aggregate Formation
by Stereoisomeric Bidomain Helicene Oligomers . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 5290 –5294 . 10.1002/anie.201301463 .
Yamamoto K. ; Oyamada N. ; Mizutani M. ; An Z. ; Saito N. ; Yamaguchi M. ; Kasuya M. ; Kurihara K. 
Two types of two-component
gels formed from pseudoenantiomeric ethynylhelicene oligomers . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 11939 –11947 . 10.1021/la302759k .22816794 
Saito N. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Synthesis
and self-Assembly of chiral cylindrical Molecular
complexes: Functional heterogeneous liquid-solid materials formed
by helicene oligomers . Molecules 
2018 , 23 , 277 10.3390/molecules23020277 .
Foldamer
at interface. van Esch J. ; Valkenier H. ; Hartwig S. ; Hecht S.   In Foldamers: Structure, Properties, and Applications ; Hecht S. , Huc I.  , Ed.; Wiley-VCH & Co.
KGaA : Weinheim , 2007 ; pp 403 –425 .
Shigeno M. ; Sawato T. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Fibril Film
Formation of Pseudoenantiomeric
Oxymethylenehelicene Oligomers at the Liquid-Solid Interface: Structural
Changes, Aggregation, and Discontinuous Heterogeneous Nucleation . Chem.—Eur. J. 
2015 , 21 , 17676 –17682 . 10.1002/chem.201503224 .26477675 
Sawato T. ; Saito N. ; Shigeno M. ; Yamaguchi M. 
Mechanical
stirring induces heteroaggregate formation and self-assembly of pseudoenantiomeric
oxymethylene helicene oligomers in solution . ChemistrySelect 
2017 , 2 , 2205 –2211 . 10.1002/slct.201700303 .

