
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145991310.1021/acsomega.8b03576ArticleFormation of Surface Deposits on Steel and Titanium
Aviation Fuel Tubes under Real Operating Conditions Velkavrh Igor *‡Palamarciuc Ion §Galuşcă Dan Gelu §Diem Alexander ‡Brenner Josef ∥Gabler Christoph ∥†Mellor Brian ⊥Ratoi Monica ⊥‡ V-Research
GmbH, Stadtstrasse 33, 6850 Dornbirn, Austria§ Faculty
of Materials Science and Engineering, Gheorghe
Asachi Technical University of Iaşi, Bulevardul Profesor Dimitrie Mangeron 67, Iaşi 700050, Romania∥ AC2T
research GmbH, Viktor Kaplan-Straße 2, 2700 Wiener Neustadt, Austria⊥ National
Centre for Advanced Tribology (nCATS), University
of Southampton, Highfield Campus, Southampton SO17 1BJ, U.K.* E-mail: igor.velkavrh@v-research.at. Phone: +43 5572 394 159 28.08 05 2019 31 05 2019 4 5 8255 8273 20 12 2018 28 03 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In this study, stainless steel and
titanium (Ti) tubes obtained
from a turbofan engine after the end of its lifetime were analyzed
in order to compare the amount of pyrolytic coke present and its influence
on the parent, base material. Various analytical techniques including
microhardness and topographical evaluations, optical emission spectrometry
(OES), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (EDX), Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) were applied. On steel surfaces, a thick pyrolytic coke deposition
layer consisting of carbon and oxygen and also containing elements
from the tube material, fuel, and fuel additives was found. The concentration
of elements from the pyrolytic coke continuously decreased with distance
from the surface of the deposit, while the concentrations of elements
from the tube material continuously increased, with the concentrations
of elements from the fuel and the fuel additives being relatively
constant. With ultrasonic cleaning in distilled water, most of the
deposits could be removed. Only carbon-rich patches with a thickness
of more than 300 nm remained adhered to the surface and/or had diffused
into the original material. On Ti surfaces, the thickness of the C-rich
fuel deposit layer was significantly thinner as compared to that on
the stainless steel; however, the surface was covered with an ∼3
μm-thick oxide layer, which consisted of elements from the fuel
additives. It is believed that the beneficial properties of Ti covered
with a thin layer of TiO2, such as low adhesion and/or
surface energy, have promoted different deposition mechanisms compared
to those of stainless steel and thus prevented pyrolytic coke deposition
and the related material deterioration observed on stainless steel.

document-id-old-9ao8b03576document-id-new-14ao-2018-03576accc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The inner surface of aviation
fuel tubes can be damaged by the
diffusion of fuel species that takes place at elevated temperatures.
On the inner surfaces of the tubes, solid pyrolytic coke deposits
from kerosene can form, which can degrade the tube material properties
due to intergranular corrosion. In combination with thermal fatigue,
this can lead to a reduced lifetime or even catastrophic failure of
the tubes.

Pyrolytic carbon (C) deposition due to the thermal
degradation
of hydrocarbon fuels has been studied extensively.1−4 Several influences of the environment
have already been recognized. Temperature is considered to be the
primary decisive factor affecting thermal oxidation and pyrolytic
coke deposition originating from the thermal decomposition of hydrocarbons.5,6

The type of fuel or its composition can markedly affect the
type
and amount of pyrolytic carbon deposition. DeWitt et al. reported
that synthetic paraffinic kerosene is more reactive and provides higher
coke deposition rates than petroleum-derived fuels due to a lack of
efficient hydrogen donors that act to terminate chain reactions (higher
net propagation rate).7 Sulfur (S) is an
undesirable component present in all fossil fuels and has a high corrosion
activity. Generally, the detrimental effect of S compounds can be
related to their thermal decomposition, leading to hydrogen sulfide,
which corrosively attacks nickel–chromium–iron (Ni–Cr–Fe)
alloys leading to grain boundary embrittlement.8 S has also been correlated with the increase of the deposition
of carbonaceous materials onto metallic surfaces.7−10 However, the interaction of S
compounds with metal surfaces is very complex. It has been suggested
that S compounds in jet fuel can activate the metal surface for C
deposition by forming metal sulfides under pyrolytic conditions and
thus increase the surface area available for C deposition.9 On the other hand, it was suggested that they
can passivate the metal surface by forming sulfides and blocking the
active sites.11 Namely, Venkataraman and
Eser showed that reducing the S content of the Jet A fuel from 0.10
to 0.01 wt % inhibited the formation of metal sulfide on the SS316
surface.9 This consequently inhibited the
growth of C film deposits. The amount of heterogeneous phase deposits
formed was found to be directly dependent on the surface area of metal
sulfides available. Furthermore, it was reported that metal–S
interactions may hinder the formation of some types of carbonaceous
deposits, especially of the filamentous type.11,12 On catalytically active substrates, Jet A fuel was less susceptible
to producing carbon deposits than JP-8 fuel: the substantially lower
amounts of carbon deposition obtained from Jet A fuel under the same
thermal stressing conditions were ascribed to the higher concentrations
of sulfur and heavy (long-chain) alkane concentrations in Jet A fuel
compared to JP-8 fuel.11 According to the
authors, these could have passivated the active sites on metal substrates
during thermal stressing through the excessive formation of metal
sulfides or encapsulation by thermally produced solid carbons.11

The chemical and structural properties
of materials are considered
important in determining the amount and the rate of pyrolytic coke
deposit formation. It has been reported that the highest catalytic
activity for carbon deposition is exhibited by iron (Fe), cobalt (Co),
nickel (Ni), and alloys containing these elements.12 The effect of Ni on increasing carbon deposition was observed
also by comparing SS316 steel and Inconel 600, where Inconel 600 showed
significantly higher deposition.9 Coating
of the SS316 steel surface with alumina (Al2O3) further reduced C deposition. Altin and Eser conducted thermal
stressing of JP-8 fuel in an isothermal flow reactor.13 They reported that the activity of the tube surfaces toward
carbon deposition decreased in the order Ni > SS316 > SS304
> Silcosteel
> glass-lined stainless steel. Mohan and Eser investigated the
effect
of various metal alloys on carbon deposition from Jet A at a wall
temperature of 350 °C and a reactor pressure of 3.5 MPa.4 They related the differences in the activity
of the metal substrates observed to their varying reaction with reactive
sulfur compounds in the fuel and interaction of oxygenated intermediates
formed by autoxidation during thermal stressing. The amount of carbon
deposited on the alloys increased in the order: AISI316 < AISI
321 ≈ AISI 304 < Inconel 600 < AISI 347 < Inconel
718 < Fecralloy < Inconel 750-X. The presence of molybdenum,
titanium, and niobium in smaller amounts did not appear to affect
C deposition under the experimental conditions. C deposition on Fecralloy,
Inconel 600, Inconel 718, and Inconel 750-X indicated that the formation
of metal sulfides does not necessarily passivate the surface and reduce
C deposition as was presumed in previously mentioned studies.11,12

Hydrocarbons have been found to promote corrosion activity
in aviation
tubes; for example, López León et al. analyzed the corrosion
behavior of AISI 1018 steel in a buffered solution of chlorides with
and without hydrocarbon in a continuous flow rate system.14 They observed that the presence of hydrocarbons
in the system promotes corrosion in comparison to the system in the
absence of hydrocarbons (the interaction of chlorides with metal is
more favored). In another study, López León et al. investigated
the electrochemical behavior of a pyridinic compound, as a corrosion
inhibitor, on a system of AISI 1018 carbon steel in a synthetic corrosive
medium, in the absence and presence of hydrocarbons (kerosene).15 They reported that the inhibitor efficiency
decreased with the presence of hydrocarbons in the system. In the
presence of hydrocarbons, steel showed higher activity; that is, the
interactions between the chlorides in the solution and metal were
favored by the presence of hydrocarbons.

Although various published
studies have investigated the properties
of pyrolytic coke deposits formed on different materials, fuels, and
thermal stressing conditions, these coke deposits were formed under
narrowly defined laboratory conditions, often by applying experimental
parameters that accelerated their formation and over relatively short
time intervals (typically in the range of 10 to 20 h). In the available
literature, very few case studies and studies focused on the analysis
of deposits from a real mechanical system can be found. Furthermore,
T-1 and TS-1 jet fuels, which have unique components and characteristics
as compared to other jet fuels, have been seldom investigated. The
objective of this study is to analyze the effect of tube material
on pyrolytic coke deposit formation in a real system using T-1 and
TS-1 jet fuels. For this purpose, stainless steel and titanium tubes
were taken from an Ivchenko AI-25 twin-shaft medium bypass turbofan
engine after the end of its lifetime, and the formation of thermal
deposition products and their effect on material degradation on their
surfaces were compared.

2 Results
2.1 Structural
Analyses
The inner surface
of the stainless steel tube was uniformly covered with a black fuel
deposit layer as shown by the SEM micrographs (Figure 1). The thickness of the surface deposit layer
varied between 4 and 17 μm, and the average thickness was ∼9
μm. On the titanium surface, no visible deposit from the fuel
could be observed.

Figure 1 SEM micrographs of the pyrolytic coke deposit layer on
the bore
of the as-received stainless steel sample showing the thickness of
the deposited layer.

Figure 2 shows
that
the fuel deposit had penetrated the tube intergranularly up to a depth
of ∼10 μm. In the intergranular penetration area, corrosion
pits with a depth of 3–4 μm were identified (Figure 3). Topographic analyses
on the outer and inner surfaces of the as-received and ultrasonically
cleaned stainless steel showed that the surface roughness of the degraded
surfaces had an Rz value of ∼10
μm and was significantly higher compared to the external surface
of the tubes, which had an Rz value of
∼4 μm (Figure 4).

Figure 2 Optical micrograph of the interface between the deposit and the
stainless steel tube showing intergranular penetration to a depth
of 10 μm.

Figure 3 Surface of the ultrasonically
cleaned stainless steel sample: (a)
corrosion pits on the surface are marked with yellow circles; (b)
roughness profile along the red dotted line through a corrosion pit.

Figure 4 Surface roughness parameters Rz, Ra, and Rq measured
on the outer and inner surfaces of the as-received (S1) and ultrasonically
cleaned (S2) stainless steel samples.

From Figure 5, it
can be seen that the microhardness values along the wall thickness
of the stainless steel tube were slightly different in transversal
and longitudinal sections. In the transverse section, the microhardness
values along the tube wall thickness were more or less constant, that
is, within experimental error, while in the longitudinal section,
they were linearly increasing from the outer toward the inner tube
surface, most probably due to the residual stresses induced by the
seamless tube manufacturing process. However; in both sections, similar
microhardness values were measured in the end points, that is, near
the outer surface (point 1) and the inner surface (point 12, bore)
of the tube. Near the outer surface, microhardness was ∼150
HV1, while near the inner surface (bore), a step increase in microhardness
to ∼250 HV1 was observed. The increase of hardness is an effect
induced by the intergranular corrosion, which typically results in
a local increase of microhardness and brittleness of the affected
area.

Figure 5 Microhardness values through the thickness of the stainless steel
tube for transverse and longitudinal cross sections of the stainless
steel tube; (1) measured at the outer surface and (12) measured at
the inner surface.

In Figure 6, SEM
micrographs of the inner surfaces of the ultrasonically cleaned stainless
steel sample are presented. In Figure 6a, the damaged surface at the point of deposit removal
is shown, and in Figure 6b, a detail from Figure 6a is presented at higher magnification. Figure 6b reveals that after the removal of the deposit
from the inner surface of the stainless steel sample, a high density
of microcavities (diameters between 1 and 3 μm) was observed.

Figure 6 SEM images
of inner surfaces of the ultrasonically cleaned stainless
steel sample: (a) damaged surface at the point of deposit removal
and (b) higher magnification of a detail from (a).

In Figure 7, an
SEM image of the inner surface of the titanium sample is presented.
The surface was covered with a layer of fine particles. EDX analyses
on the inner surface of the titanium sample (Table 1) revealed that the surface was covered with
an oxide layer and had a Ti concentration of ∼65 wt % and O
concentration of ∼24 wt %.

Figure 7 SEM image of the inner surface of the
titanium sample.

Table 1 Elemental
Concentrations from EDX
Analyses on the Inner Surface of the Titanium Samplea
element	wt %	
C	1.75 ± 0.91	
O	24.43 ± 10.88	
Na	0.23 ± 0.40	
Mg	0.30 ± 0.32	
Al	1.32 ± 1.16	
Si	4.32 ± 2.78	
P	0.39 ± 0.34	
S	0.38 ± 0.44	
K	0.37 ± 0.34	
Ca	0.41 ± 0.43	
Ti	64.83 ± 16.86	
Fe	1.27 ± 1.12	
a Average values
and standard deviations
from three measuring points are presented.

2.2 Chemical Analyses
2.2.1 Outer
Surface of Sample S1
Figure 8 shows the survey
XPS spectra on the outer surface of sample S1 before and after sputtering
with Ar+ ions for 6110 s, and in Table 2, the quantified values derived from these
spectra are presented. Before sputtering, a high concentration of
C (∼80 wt %) was detected. Additionally, ∼12 wt % O
and low concentrations of Si and Ca (∼4 and 3 wt %, respectively)
were detected. Obviously, the surface was covered with a layer consisting
primarily of C and O. After sputtering to a depth of ∼300 nm
(see Table 12 for
the approximate depths of material removed during the XPS analyses
of the tube samples), the concentrations of all elements, which were
detected before sputtering, decreased: the C concentration decreased
significantly to ∼8 wt %, O concentration decreased to ∼4
wt %, and Si and Ca concentrations decreased to ∼2.5 and 1
wt %, respectively. After sputtering, the following elements, which
were not detected before sputtering, were additionally detected: Ar
from sputtering with Ar+ ions (1.4 wt %) and Fe, Cr, Ni,
and Ti from the tube material (at concentrations of ∼60, 13,
8, and 1%, respectively).

Figure 8 XPS spectra from the outer surface of sample
S1 (a) before and
(b) after sputtering with Ar+ ions for 6110 s (sputtering
depth of ∼300 nm).

Table 2 Quantification of XPS Spectra from
the Outer Surface of Sample S1 before and after Sputtering with Ar+ Ions for 6110 sa
element	wt % before sputtering	wt % after sputtering	
C	80.4	8.3	
O	12.4	4.4	
Si	4.0	2.5	
Ar	 	1.4	
Ca	3.4	1.4	
Ti	 	1.3	
Cr	 	12.9	
Fe	 	60.1	
Ni	 	7.6	
a Deviations from 100% are due to
rounding.

From the depth
profiles (Figure 9),
a gradual decrease of C concentration and a simultaneous
increase of Fe and Cr concentrations can be seen, which indicate that
the tube material composition was gradually approached. At the final
sputtering depth of ∼300 nm, the C concentration was reduced
significantly to ∼8 wt %, which indicates that at this depth,
the majority of the layer of organic impurities from the oil from
the fuel-oil heat exchanger had been removed. With high probability,
at this point, the tube material had been reached, and the C detected
was due to the so-called “shading effect”, which typically
occurs with sputtering of rough surfaces or surfaces covered with
layers having inhomogeneous thicknesses where at some point, parts
of the surface are already “clean”, while valleys and
sputter shadows are still covered and therefore still detected by
the detector. Thus, from the depth profiles, it could be concluded
that the thickness of the C-based layer on the outer surface of sample
S1 was at most 300 nm.

Figure 9 Depth profiles from the outer surface of sample S1. The y axis maximum is set at (a) 100 and (b) 20 wt %.

2.2.2 Deposit
Layer on the Inner Surface of Sample
S1
Figure 10 shows the XPS spectra on the deposit layer on the inner surface
(bore) of sample S1 before and after sputtering with Ar+ ions for 10610 s, and in Table 3, the quantified values from these spectra are presented.
Before sputtering, ∼66 wt % of C and ∼17 wt % of O were
detected. A low concentration of Fe (4.5 wt %) was also detected.
Additionally, N, Al, P, and S were detected in concentrations from
∼2 to 6 wt %. Detailed analyses of the composition of chemical
species (Table 4) showed
that 31.3 wt % of the C had a binding energy of 283.57 eV where C–C
and carbidic C are typically found, 27.9 wt % of the C had a binding
energy of 284.66 eV, which is typical for organic aliphatic carbon
of C–C or C–H type, and 3.6 wt % of the C had a binding
energy of 287.68 eV, which is typical for C–O and C=O
bonds. Al was present as Al oxide, P as phosphate, and S as sulfate.

Figure 10 XPS
spectra from the inner surface of sample S1 (a) before and
(b) after sputtering with Ar+ ions for 10610 s (sputtering
depth of ∼530 nm).

Table 3 Quantification of XPS Spectra from
the Inner Surface of Sample S1 before and after Sputtering with Ar+ Ions for 10610 sa
element	wt % before sputtering	wt % after sputtering	
C	65.6	51.8	
N	1.7	0.5	
O	17.1	4.9	
Al	5.6	4.6	
P	3.2	2.4	
S	2.4	1.7	
Ar	 	2.2	
Ca	 	2.8	
Cr	 	4.7	
Fe	4.5	20.7	
Ni	 	1.6	
Cu	 	2.3	
a Deviations from
100% are due to
rounding.

Table 4 Detailed
Composition of Chemical Species
on the Inner Surface of Sample S1 before Sputtering Based on the Binding
Energies (BE) from XPS Spectra
element	chemical
bond	BE (eV)	wt %	
Al	Al oxides	73.8	4.06	
P	phosphates	132.44	3.28	
C	C–C/carbidic C	283.57	31.28	
C–C/C–H	284.66	27.86	
C–O	287.68	3.62	
N	organic bounded	399.33	2.90	
O	metallic oxide	530.49	12.10	
organic/hydroxide	532.04	10.03	
Fe	Fe	706.95	0.88	
FeOOH and III+	710.16 and 712.15	4.00	
N is an element found in various
fuel additives,16,17 which explains its presence in
the surface deposit. By far, the
greatest proportion of any fuel additive consists of C, H, O, and
often also N. N can be found in deposit control additives, often referred
to by the generic term detergents, which consist of molecules such
as amides, amines, polybutene succinimides, polyether amines, polyolefin
amines, and Mannich amines. N is also found in combustion improvers,
which include both ashless and metal-containing additives. Furthermore,
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) “scavengers” can also
be based on N polymers that react with H2S to form low
hazard compounds. The origin of Al, more precisely Al oxides, in the
surface deposit is most probably also due to the jet fuel. Al nanoparticles
have been shown to have the ability to increase the volumetric energy
density, decrease ignition delay, increase heat of combustion, and
catalyze fuel decomposition of kerosene.18 It was also reported that the addition of Al2O3 nanoparticles to diesel fuel improved its ignition probability,19 while in biodiesel, it increased the flash point
and the calorific value and decreased CO, HC, and NOx emissions.20 P may also originate
from the fuel additive. Generally, phosphorus-based compounds (and
metals such as potassium, sodium, iron, or manganese) can be found
in additives used to reduce wear in spark ignition engines.16 The combusted metal salts act as a protective
lubricant and prevent the direct metal-to-metal contact that would
otherwise cause high wear.17 The S concentration
in jet fuel T-1 is lower than 0.1 wt % (Table 11). S is an inevitable component present
in all mineral oil and/or fossil fuel products since they are derived
from decayed animal/organic remains.21 The
total sulfur content in petroleum products is an important variable,
as sulfur compounds are associated with problems involved in the storage,
processing, transportation, and final quality of fuel products.22 Typical problems caused by sulfur compounds
are catalyst poisoning and deactivation in processing, corrosion of
equipment, and the oxidation of sulfur compounds to SOx when the fuel is combusted, which causes serious
environmental pollution.23 S is also the
element, which might cause intergranular corrosion. As metal sulfides
are very different from the corresponding oxides, corrosion by sulfur
is generally much more rapid.24 Specifically,
as the sulfide ion is much larger than the oxide, the cation/anion
radius ratios in metal oxides are smaller than in the corresponding
sulfides. The difference in anion size leads also to M–S bond
lengths longer than the corresponding M–O distances. In ionic
crystals, this leads to smaller lattice energies for the sulfides,
which is reflected in the lower free energies for the sulfide formation
and in the generally lower melting points of sulfides.

After
sputtering, to a depth of ∼530 nm (Figure 10b and Table 3), the C concentration has slightly decreased
to ∼52 wt %, the O concentration decreased to ∼5 wt
%, and the Fe concentration increased to ∼21 wt %. The Al concentration
remained similar, while P and S concentrations slightly decreased
to 2.4 and 1.7 wt %, respectively. Apart from the elements detected
already before sputtering, the following elements were additionally
detected: Ar from sputtering with Ar+ ions (2.2 wt %),
Cr from the tube material (4.7 wt %), Ni from the alloying elements
in the tube material (1.6 wt %), and Ca and Cu (2.8 and 2.3 wt %,
respectively). Ca and Cu most probably originate from the fuel additives.
Metal-based additives are used as combustion catalysts to help the
combustion and to reduce emissions and fuel consumption for hydrocarbon
fuels. These metal-based additives include Mn, Ba, Ce, Pt, Fe, Cu,
and Ca.16,25−27 Furthermore, Ca is typically
also found in antistatic additives.17

From the depth profiles (Figure 11), it is clear that the concentrations of C and O continuously
decreased throughout the entire sputtering depth, while concentrations
of Fe and Cr continuously increased. Obviously, the deposit layer
was composed primarily of the main pyrolytic product C but contained
also a significant amount of Fe from the tube material possibly originating
from the steel wear particles embedded in the deposit layer. Other
elements, which were present in relatively low concentrations, originate
either from the pyrolytic process (O), the tube material (Cr and Ni)
or the jet fuel (S), and the jet fuel additives (N, Al, P, Ca, and
Cu).

Figure 11 Depth profiles from the inner surface of sample S1. The y axis maximum is set at (a) 100 and (b) 20 wt %.

2.2.3 Dark Area on the Inner Surface of Sample
S2
Figure 12 shows the XPS spectra from the dark area on the inner surface of
sample S2 before and after sputtering with Ar+ ions for
6110 s, while in Table 5, the quantified values from these spectra are presented. Before
sputtering, high concentrations of C and O (∼74 and 21 wt %,
respectively) and low concentrations of N and Fe (∼2.6 and
2.5 wt %, respectively) were detected. After sputtering, to a depth
of ∼300 nm, C and O concentrations decreased to 21 and 1.8
wt %, respectively; N concentration decreased to 0.8 wt %, while Fe
concentration increased to 56 wt %. The following elements, which
were not detected before sputtering, were additionally detected: Ar
from sputtering with Ar+ ions (1.9 wt %), Cr from the tube
material (12.2 wt %), and Ti and Ni from the alloying elements in
the tube material (1.4 and 4.8 wt %, respectively). It is interesting
to note that no elements from the fuel additives, which were found
in the deposit layer, were detected.

Figure 12 XPS spectra from the dark surface on
the inner surface of sample
S2 (a) before and (b) after sputtering with Ar+ ions for
6110 s (sputtering depth of ∼300 nm).

Table 5 Quantification of XPS Spectra from
the Dark Area on the Inner Surface of Sample S2 before and after Sputtering
with Ar+ Ions for 6110 s
element	wt % before sputtering	wt % after sputtering	
C	73.8	21.0	
N	2.6	0.8	
O	21.1	1.8	
Ar	 	1.9	
Ti	 	1.4	
Cr	 	12.2	
Fe	2.5	56.0	
Ni	 	4.8	
From the depth profiles (Figure 13), a gradual decrease of C and O concentrations
and
a simultaneous increase of Fe and Cr concentrations could be observed
throughout the entire sputtering depth of ∼300 nm. It is clear
that at the final sputtering depth, the tube material had still not
been reached (the C had a concentration of ∼21 wt %, while
the Fe concentration was only ∼56 wt %). Thus, it could be
concluded that due to the intergranular penetration, the steel surface
was either chemically modified through C enrichment or patches of
the deposit (with a thickness of more than 300 nm) remained anchored
to the steel surface even after ultrasonic cleaning.

Figure 13 Depth profiles from
the dark area on the inner surface of sample
S2. The y axis maximum is set at (a) 100 and (b)
20 wt %.

2.2.4 Bright
Area on the Inner Surface of Sample
S2
Figure 14 shows the XPS spectra from the bright area on the inner surface
of sample S2 before and after sputtering with Ar+ ions
for 6110 s, and in Table 6, the quantified values from these spectra are presented.
Before sputtering, the bright area showed a very similar composition
to the dark area, while after sputtering to a depth of ∼300
nm, especially C and O concentrations were significantly lower as
compared to those in the dark area (∼1.7 and 0.3 wt %, respectively).
Correspondingly, Fe concentration was higher (∼70 wt %) as
compared to the dark area (56 wt %).

Figure 14 XPS spectra from the bright area on the
inner surface of sample
S2 (a) before and (b) after sputtering with Ar+ ions for
6110 s (sputtering depth of ∼300 nm).

Table 6 Quantification of XPS Spectra from
the Bright Area on the Inner Surface of Sample S2 before and after
Sputtering with Ar+ Ions for 6110 s
element	wt % before sputtering	wt % after sputtering	
C	69.4	1.7	
N	5.0	0.4	
O	23.4	0.3	
Ar	 	2.2	
Ti	 	1.7	
Cr	 	14.8	
Fe	2.3	70.4	
Ni	 	8.4	
From the depth profiles (Figure 15), it is clear that the tube material had
already been
reached at a depth of ∼100 nm as with a further increase in
sputtering, the Fe, Cr, Ti, and Ni concentrations remained more or
less constant, while the concentrations of C and O gradually approached
zero (remains of elements due to the so-called “shading effect”,
see Section 2.2.1). This indicates that the chemically modified area was significantly
thinner as compared to the dark area and had a depth of ∼100
nm.

Figure 15 Depth profiles from the bright area on the inner surface of sample
S2. The y axis maximum is set at (a) 100 and (b)
20 wt %.

2.2.5 Outer
Surface of Sample T1
Figure 16 shows the XPS
spectra from the outer surface of sample T1 before and after sputtering
with Ar+ ions for 9412 s, and in Table 7, the quantified values from these spectra
are presented. Before sputtering, high concentrations of C and O (∼60
and 25 wt %, respectively) and relatively low concentrations of N,
Si, Na, and Ca (∼4, 8, 1, and 3 wt %, respectively) were observed.
It is interesting to note that Si and Ca were also detected on the
outer surface of sample S1 (Table 2). Since according to the GOST 19807–91 standard
(Table 10), OT4-1
titanium can contain up to 0.12 wt % Si, the detected Si could originate
from the tube. On the other hand, the presence of N, Na, and Ca, which
are typically present in jet fuel and oil additives,16,17 confirms that the outer surface of the titanium tubes has been in
contact with the surrounding engine oil used for cooling the tubes
in the injection system.

Figure 16 XPS spectra from the outer surface of sample
T1 (a) before and
(b) after sputtering with Ar+ ions for 9412 s (sputtering
depth of ∼470 nm).

Table 7 Quantification of XPS Spectra from
the Outer Surface of Sample T1 before and after Sputtering with Ar+ Ions for 9412 s
element	wt % before sputtering	wt % after
sputtering	
C	59.4	3.1	
N	4.2	0.0	
O	25.0	6.0	
Na	1.0	0.0	
Al	0.0	1.9	
Si	7.6	3.7	
Ar	0.0	2.7	
Ca	3.0	1.3	
Ti	0.0	81.3	
After sputtering to
a sputtering depth of ∼470 nm, the C
and O concentrations significantly decreased (to ∼3 and 6 wt
%, respectively), Si and Ca concentrations slightly decreased (to
∼3.5 and 1.5 wt %, respectively), and N and Na were not detected
anymore. At the same time, Ti, which was not detected before sputtering,
had a very high concentration of ∼81 wt %. After sputtering,
the following elements, which also were not detected before sputtering,
were additionally detected: Ar from sputtering with Ar+ ions (∼3 wt %) and Al (∼2 wt %) possibly from the
jet fuel and/or jet oil additives.

From the depth profiles (Figure 17), a gradual decrease
of C, O, and Si and a simultaneous
increase of Ti concentration can be observed. It is interesting to
note that within the first 50 nm of sputtering depth, O, Na, Mg, Al,
Si, Ca, and Fe concentrations initially increased and then started
to decrease. Na, Mg, and Fe were detected after the initial sputtering
step of 10 s, and their concentrations decreased to zero at sputtering
depths of ∼100, 420, and 280 nm, respectively. The maximum
concentrations were 2, 3.1, and 5.5 wt % for Na, Mg, and Fe, respectively.
It is interesting to note that Na and Mg were not detected on samples
S1 and S2. Most probably, they originate from the lubricant additives
in the surrounding engine oil since both are typically found in lubricant
detergents,28 while Na is found also in
oil thickeners (soap-based) and soap-type greases.29 According to the GOST 19807–91 standard, up to 0.3
wt % Fe can be found in OT4-1 titanium (Table 10). Most interesting are the distributions
of C and O: Namely, the concentration of O throughout the entire sputtering
depth is approximately twice that of C. Obviously, the composition
of the deposition layer on the outer surface of the titanium tube
was different from that observed on the stainless steel tube where
the concentration of C was always higher than that of O. At the final
sputtering depth of ∼470 nm, O and C concentrations were still
relatively high (∼3 and 6 wt %, respectively) and still decreasing,
while the Ti concentration was still increasing slightly, indicating
that the unaffected base material had still not been reached.

Figure 17 Depth profiles
from the outer surface of sample T1. The y axis maximum
is set at (a) 100 and (b) 20 wt %.

2.2.6 Inner Surface of Sample T1
Figure 18 shows the XPS
spectra from the inner surface of sample T1 before and after sputtering
with Ar+ ions for 20671 s, and in Table 8, the quantified values from these spectra
are presented. Before sputtering, the C concentration was significantly
lower than on the outer surface (27 wt %), while the O concentration
was significantly higher (41 wt %). A relatively high concentration
of Si (∼21 wt %) and low concentrations of Al (∼5 wt
%), Ca (∼2 wt %), and Fe (∼2 wt %) were also detected.
After sputtering to a sputtering depth of ∼1 μm, the
O concentration slightly decreased but was still relatively high (∼17
wt %), while the C concentration significantly decreased (to ∼1
wt %). After sputtering, Ti, which was not detected before sputtering,
was now present at ∼52 wt %. At the same time, Al concentration
increased to ∼11 wt %, Si concentration decreased to ∼9
wt %, and Ca and Fe concentrations slightly increased to 3.5 and ∼4
wt %, respectively. After sputtering, the following elements, which
were not detected before sputtering, were additionally detected: 1.8
wt % Ar from sputtering with Ar+ ions and 0.4 wt % Mg.

Figure 18 XPS
spectra from the inner surface of sample T1 (a) before and
(b) after sputtering with Ar+ ions for 20671 s (sputtering
depth of ∼1030 nm).

Table 8 Quantification of XPS Spectra from
the Inner Surface of Sample T1 before and after Sputtering with Ar+ Ions for 20671 s
element	wt % before sputtering	wt % after sputtering	
C	27.4	1.2	
O	41.1	16.6	
Mg	 	0.4	
Al	5.4	11.0	
Si	21.4	9.3	
Ar	 	1.8	
Ca	2.4	3.5	
Ti	 	51.9	
Fe	2.3	4.3	
From the depth profiles (Figure 19), it is clear
that the concentrations of O, C, and
Si were constantly decreasing throughout the entire sputtering depth,
while the concentrations of Ti, Al, and Ar were constantly increasing.
The concentrations of Mg, Fe, and Ca were more or less constant throughout
the entire sputtering depth. At a sputtering depth of ∼200
nm, the C concentration was already lower than 4 wt %, and it decreased
at a slightly lower rate with further sputtering. This indicates that
sputtering to a depth of ∼200 nm removed most of the C-containing
deposit layer from the surface.

Figure 19 Depth profiles from the inner surface
of sample T1. The y axis maximum is set at (a) 100
and (b) 20 wt %.

It is interesting to
note that Mg, which was not detected on samples
S1 and S2, was detected on both the outer and the inner surface of
sample T1. It has a more or less constant distribution throughout
the entire sputtering depth on the inner surface, which indicates
that Mg could originate from the tube material as an alloying element
or an impurity considering that Mg is not specified for OT4-1 titanium
by the GOST 19807–91 standard (Table 10). Also interesting is the presence of Fe,
which increased with sputtering depth and was also detected on the
outer surface of the sample indicating that Fe most likely is a constitutive
element of the titanium tube material (Table 10).

Compared to the outer surface,
on the inner surface of sample T1,
significantly less C and more O were detected, which indicates that
on the inner surface, oxidation was more pronounced than C deposit
formation. Until a depth of ∼200 nm, the C concentration was
between 20 and 4 wt %; this indicates that a very thin pyrolytic deposition
layer was present on the surface. Furthermore, since the O concentration
remained almost constant throughout the entire sputtering depth of
∼1 μm, this indicates that a relatively thick oxide layer
had formed on the inner tube surface.

Detailed analysis of the
survey spectra at different sputtering
depths showed that on the inner surface of the Ti tube, Ti oxides
(TiO2) were present in a relatively small amount and only
within the first 100 nm of depth, while other oxides were present
throughout the entire depth profile and consisted predominantly of
Al and Si oxides. At a depth of ∼50 nm, the ratio between the
oxidized and the non-oxidized Ti was ∼1:1 (binding energy for
Ti is ∼454 eV, while for TiO2, it is >458 eV,
which
is well visible in the survey spectra), while after 100 nm, predominantly
metallic Ti (Ti0) was present. It should be noted that
within the first 100 nm of depth, the maximum Ti concentration was
∼15 wt %, which indicates that the amount of TiO2 was relatively low. On the other hand, Al, Si, Ca, and Mg were fully
oxidized throughout the entire depth profile. The Al peak showed no
plasmon structure, which indicates that it was in an oxidized state
(on a metallic Al peak, typically, a pronounced plasmon structure
is observed). Al oxide was most probably present as Al2O3 since the binding energy of Al 2p was at ∼76
eV. The Si peak showed no plasmon structure, which indicates that
it was in an oxidized state. Si oxide was most probably present as
SiO2 since the binding energy of Si 2p was at ∼104
eV. Ca and Mg did not show any pronounced shifts; however, they were
oxidized as differential charging appeared (leading to shifted binding
energy of ∼354 eV for Ca 2p, normally visible at ∼348
eV).

3 Discussion
3.1 Stainless Steel Tube
By means of
XPS, it has been possible to define very accurately the concentration
of specific elements in the deposit layer on the bore of the tube
and to attribute them to their most likely sources of origin. In Table 9, the chemical composition
of the pyrolytic deposit layer on the bore of stainless steel tube
is summarized together with the possible origins of each detected
component. From Table 9, it can be concluded that the origin of the detected elements in
the surface deposit can be attributed to (i) pyrolytic coke (C and
O together accounting for 82.7 and 57.9 wt % before and after sputtering,
respectively), (ii) tube material (Fe, Cr, and Ni together accounting
for 4.5 and 27.6 wt % before and after sputtering, respectively),
(iii) fuel (S with 2.4 and 1.7 wt % before and after sputtering, respectively)
and (iv) fuel additives (N, Al, P, Ca, and Cu together accounting
for 10.5 and 12.9 wt % before and after sputtering, respectively).
From Table 9, it is
clear that with increasing the sputtering depth, the concentration
of pyrolytic products (C and O) decreased, while the concentrations
of elements from the tube material (Fe, Cr, and Ni) increased. Some
elements from the fuel (S) and the fuel additives (N, Al, and P) showed
a slight decrease in concentration with sputtering depth, while with
others (Ca and Cu), an increase in concentration was observed. However,
it should be pointed out that the described changes in elemental concentrations
occurred within the first 150 nm of sputtering depth, while afterward,
the elemental concentrations remained more or less constant, as can
be seen from Figure 11. This indicates that after 150 nm of sputtering depth, the deposit
layer had a homogeneous chemical composition, which most probably
did not significantly change throughout further thickness of the deposit.

Table 9 Constitutive Chemical Elements of
the Surface Deposit Layer on the Bore of Stainless Steel Tube and
Their Origina
origin	element	wt % before sputtering	wt % after sputtering	description	
pyrolytic coke	C	65.6	52.9	C–C and carbidic C, organic aliphatic
carbon of C–C or C–H-type, and C–O compounds	
O	17.1	5.0	C–O compounds	
tube
material	Fe	4.5	21.1	stainless steel	
Cr	 	4.8	stainless steel (alloying
element)	
Ni	 	1.6	stainless steel (alloying
element)	
fuel	S	2.4	1.7	inevitable component present
in all mineral oil products	
fuel additives	N	1.7	0.5	present in
deposit control
additives (detergents), conductivity improvers (antistatic additives),
H2S “scavengers”, combustion improvers and
ignition improvers	
Al	5.6	4.7	present in the form of Al
or Al2O3—possibly as nanoparticle additives
for improvement of the ignition probability of jet fuel	
P	3.2	2.4	possibly anti-valve seat
recession additives used to reduce the recession of exhaust valve
seats in spark ignition engines	
Ca	 	2.9	metal-based additives used
as combustion catalysts—Ca is typically also found in antistatic
additives	
Cu	 	2.3	Metal-based additives used
as combustion catalysts	
a Weight concentrations
after sputtering
are recalculated by omitting Ar from the total summary of concentrations
(100 wt % = without Ar).

After ultrasonically cleaning with distilled water, apart from
N, no elements from the fuel or the fuel additives (S, Al, P, Ca,
or Cu) were detected on the stainless steel surface (sample S2). This
shows that these elements did not adsorb or diffuse into the tube
material at a significant amount. However, on the dark area on sample
S2, at a depth of 300 nm, the C concentration was still quite high
(21 wt %), which shows that either the pyrolytic decomposition products
have diffused into the base material and chemically modified it or
that due to intergranular penetration, parts of the deposit have remained
anchored to the steel surface even after ultrasonic cleaning.

It is interesting to note that the thickness of the C-rich layer
on the bright area on the inner surface of sample S2 (∼100
nm) was lower than on the outer surface of sample S1 (∼200
nm), which is most probably because sample S2 was ultrasonically cleaned
in distilled water. Furthermore, on the outer surface of sample S1,
Si and Ca were detected, which were not found on the bright area on
sample S2. This indicates that the deposition layer on the outer surface
of sample S1 had a high thickness and was chemically complex. This
layer was formed due to the interactions with the oil from the fuel-oil
heat exchanger in contact with the outside of the tubes. Obviously,
a bidirectional contamination occurs on the fuel tubes: from the inside
to the core due to the jet fuel and from the outside to the core due
to oil. On the other hand, on the bright area of sample S2, N was
detected, which was not found on the outer surface of sample S1.

It is generally accepted that the formation of carbon deposits
is mainly assigned to three paths: thermal oxidation, condensation
of aromatic compounds, and metal catalytic coking, wherein metal catalytic
coking is the main cause of the large amount of surface deposits.1,30 On stainless steel surfaces, deposition is typically initiated by
chemical reactions of fuel species (particularly S species) and decomposition/dehydrogenation
of hydrocarbons by transition-metal catalysis (e.g., of Fe and Ni)—this
is known as filamentous carbon formation. These mechanisms are discussed
in detail in the publications of Altin, Eser, and Venkataraman.3,9−11

The surface damage observed on the stainless
steel surface after
removal of deposits (Figure 6b) is consistent with metal (Fe and/or Ni) sulfide formation
that would roughen the metal surface even at temperatures as low as
150 °C and activate the surface for catalytic deposition. In Figure 20, SEM images of
the pyrolytic carbon deposit are shown. At lower magnifications, the
deposit shows an amorphous structure (Figure 20a,b), as is typically found at these magnifications
(5000:1 and 10,000:1).31 However, at higher
magnifications (20,000:1 and 50,000:1), a porous structure resembling
filaments 100–200 nm in diameter, which have grown together,
can be seen (Figure 20c,d). It is possible that subsequent pyrolytic deposition on incipient
filaments may have obscured the observation of the original filaments
underneath the pyrolytic deposit. A similar carbon deposit morphology
was observed for pyrolytic ethylene, n-dodecane,
and RP-2 fuel on a Cr–Zr copper alloy.32

Figure 20 SEM micrographs of the deposit layer on the inner surface of sample
S1 at different magnifications: (a) 5000:1, (b) 10,000:1, (c) 20,000:1,
and (d) 50,000:1.

Raman spectra on sample
S1 (Figure 21) show
similar characteristics as already
observed in a study of structural and textural properties of catalytic
filamentous carbon.31 Bands at ∼1340
and 1580 cm–1 correspond to the so-called D and
G modes of the carbon spectrum, respectively. The G mode is assigned
to the in-plane displacement of carbon atoms in the hexagonal (graphite)
sheets, while the D mode is related to the breathing modes of sp2 atoms in rings and occurs when disorder is introduced into
the graphite structure. The shoulder at 1615 cm–1 and a strong band at ∼2690 cm–1 could be
correlated with the D′ and 2D mode of the carbon spectrum,
respectively, both indicating a disordered nature of the graphitic
structure. The band at ∼2690 cm–1 could alternatively
be correlated to aldehydes, organic compounds containing a functional
group with the structure −CHO, while the additional band at
∼680 cm–1 could be correlated to C–S
bonds and/or C–C aliphatic chains.

Figure 21 Typical Raman spectrum
of the deposit layer on the inner surface
of sample S1.

The relative intensity
ratio of the D band to the G band (ID/IG) can be used
as an indication of the degree of graphitization of coke.31,33 For sample S1, the value of ID/IG was 0.81 (<1), which indicates relatively
low disorder of the graphitic structure. For filamentous coke synthesized
under laboratory conditions on a 310S substrate, the value of ID/IG was significantly
higher, 3.43, indicating higher disorder of the graphitic structure.31

3.2 Titanium Tube
On the Ti tube, no
surface deposits were observed; however, at high temperature and pressure
(450 °C at 90 bar) due to the interactions with the subcritical
kerosene, thermal oxidation at the titanium surface occurred. On the
inner surface of sample T1, a very low C concentration was detected,
indicating that the deposition rate of pyrolytic products from the
fuel was significantly lower than on the stainless steel. At a sputtering
depth of 200 nm, the C concentration had decreased to a value of ∼4
wt %, which indicates that the pyrolytic deposition layer was completely
removed from the surface. The very high O concentration indicates
that the surface was covered with an oxide layer thicker than 1 μm.
The presence of Al and Ca indicates that diffusion of elements from
the fuel additives into the tube material occurred.

In Figure 22, an estimated
atomic distribution of the oxides on the inner side of the Ti tube—based
on a detailed analysis of the survey spectra at different sputtering
depths—is presented. The majority of the observed oxides are
most probably products from the fuel oxidation that were deposited
on and/or have diffused into the tube walls, while a small amount
could also represent the oxidized constitutive elements from the Ti
tube. As the jet fuel is exposed to air, oxygen in air is dissolved
in it. Accordingly, autoxidation reactions occur in the fuel temperature
range of 150–400 °C.34 The
jet fuel reacts with dissolved oxygen to produce oxidized products,
and deposits form on the inner wall surface. Various studies have
already been performed on the thermal oxidation stability of jet fuels,
where a short overview is provided in the work by Pei et al.35 Although detailed elemental compositions of
jet fuels are publicly unavailable, the oxide-forming elements, which
were detected by XPS (Al, Si, Ca, and Mg), can be traced back to fuel
additives as already described in Table 9. Additionally, it should be noted that Si
and Al can enter the fuel during the manufacturing process (Al2O3 and SiO2 are used as catalysts in
the thermal cracking of kerosene36) or
during engine operation in the form of chemical and/or mechanical
wear particles. Zabarnick et al.37 investigated
the use of silylation additives for reducing oxidative deposition
of jet fuels and reported that their disadvantage lies in the fact
that silylating reagents and silylated products could be rapidly oxidized
to SiO2 within the combustion chamber. Furthermore, in
characterization of jet aircraft engine particulates by XPS, Vander
Wal and Byrg38 showed that the presence
and concentration of any particular elements appear to be very dependent
upon the specific aircraft engine as well as its maintenance.

Figure 22 Estimated
atomic distribution of oxides on the inner surface of
sample T1.

From EDX measurements
on the cross section of sample T1 (Figure 23), the thickness
of the oxide layer on the inner side of the Ti tube can be estimated
as ∼3 μm, the same depth to which the oxide building
elements (Al, Si, Ca, and Mg) were detected. After ∼3 μm
depth, their concentrations (it should be noted that predominantly,
Al and Si were detected in higher concentrations) decreased to 0 atom
%, and only Ti (from the tube material) and O (from the oxidation
of the cross section in air) remained on the surface of the tube cross
section. In the present study, on the cross-sectional surfaces of
the Ti-tube, ∼20 atom % O was always detected due to oxidation
of the nascent Ti surface.

Figure 23 EDX elemental concentration depth profiles
measured on the cross
section of sample T1.

Titanium has a particularly high reactivity, and therefore
a short
contact with the environment results in a passive oxide layer only
a few nanometers thick.39,40 The spontaneously forming
passive layer is compact and morphologically uniform, has good adhesion
to the substrate, and gives titanium excellent corrosion resistance
and also ensures the chemical inertness of titanium in many environments.
The corrosion resistance of titanium is strictly related to the quality
of the protective passive layer, consisting mainly of titanium dioxide
TiO2.41 This layer consists
of an internal and an external part. The internal part consists of
nonstoichiometric oxides, and the external part consists of amorphous
TiO2.42 Due to the above described
mechanisms, it is obvious that the original Ti tube was covered with
a layer of TiO2, which was (in combination with the underlying
Ti) most probably responsible for the reduced pyrolytic coke deposition
as compared to stainless steel. It is however not clear why on the
inner surface of the Ti tube, only a very small amount of TiO2 has remained. Possibly, this was largely removed during kerosene
transport or replaced by other oxides, which have eventually deposited
on the surfaces.

Using inert coatings, including Ti and Al oxides,
for the reduction
of carbon deposition from the cracking of fuels is a widely applied
method. Altin et al.43 have reported that
∼1 μm of Al and Ti oxide coatings on Inconel 718 coupons
reduced carbon deposition by eliminating the catalytic activity of
the metal alloy surface. Yang et al.44 reported
that the anticoking performance increased from 37 to 69% as the thickness
of the Al2O3 coatings changed from 318 to 1280
nm. Tang et al.31 reported that the inhibition
effect of the TiN coating on coke growth is superior to that of other
coatings such as Al2O3. The authors attribute
this to the fact that the TiN coating not only creates a barrier between
the hydrocarbon fuels and metal surface to inhibit related catalytic
coke formation but also minimizes C deposits by absorbing C atoms.

4 Summary
From the structural and chemical
analyses of the stainless steel
and titanium tube samples obtained from a turbofan engine after the
end of its lifetime, the following conclusions on the pyrolytic deposition
and its effects on the analyzed material samples can be drawn:1 On the inner stainless
steel tube surfaces,
a carbon-based pyrolytic layer having a thickness of between 4 and
17 μm (average thickness of ∼9 μm) was observed.
It was composed primarily of C and O; however, other elements such
as N, Al, P, S, Ca, Cr, Fe, Ni, and Cu were also present in low quantities.

2 After the removal of the
pyrolytic deposit
layer on the bore of the tube, corrosion pits with a depth of 3–4
μm were identified in the contaminated area, and the surface
roughness of the degraded surfaces was more than 2 times higher than
that of the exterior surface of the tube. The fuel deposit had penetrated
the tube surface intergranularly to a depth of ∼10 μm.

3 The origin of elements detected
in the
deposit layer on the inner surface of the stainless steel tube can
be attributed to (i) pyrolytic coke (C and O together accounting for
82.7 and 57.9 wt % before and after sputtering, respectively), (ii)
tube material (Fe, Cr, and Ni together accounting for 4.5 and 27.6
wt % before and after sputtering, respectively), (iii) fuel (S with
2.4 and 1.7 wt % before and after sputtering, respectively), and (iv)
fuel additives (N, Al, P, Ca, and Cu together accounting for 10.5
and 12.9 wt % before and after sputtering, respectively).

4 After ultrasonically cleaning
the stainless
steel surface, apart from N, no elements from the fuel or the fuel
additives (S, Al, P, Ca, or Cu) were detected, which shows that these
elements did not adsorb or diffuse into the base material. However,
the surface was covered with dark patches with a high C concentration
and a thickness of more than 300 nm, showing that either the pyrolytic
decomposition products have diffused into the base material and chemically
modified it or that due to intergranular penetration parts of the
deposit have remained anchored to the steel surface even after ultrasonic
cleaning.

5 On the inner
surface of the titanium
tube, the thickness of the C-rich fuel deposition layer was significantly
thinner (∼200 nm) as compared to the stainless steel surface
(∼9 μm). However, the surface was covered with an ∼3
μm-thick layer of oxides containing elements from the fuel additives,
which were identified as Al, Si, Ca, and Mg oxides.

6 It is believed that the beneficial properties
of Ti covered with a thin layer of TiO2, such as low adhesion
and/or surface energy, have promoted different deposition mechanisms
compared to stainless steel and thus prevented pyrolytic coke deposition
and the related material deterioration observed on the stainless steel.



5 Experimental Section
5.1 Fuel Tubes and Sample Preparation
For the present investigation,
two types of fuel tubes were analyzed:
AISI 321 austenitic stainless steel fuel tube and OT4-1 titanium (Russian
standard GOST 19807–91) equivalent to the Grade 4 unalloyed
titanium 80 A. In Table 10, the chemical composition of both materials
according to SAE international and GOST 19807–91 standards
is presented.

Table 10 Standard-Specified Values for AISI
321 Stainless Steel (SAE International) and OT4–1 Titanium
(GOST 19807–91)a
 	standard	
element	AISI 321 stainless
steel (SAE International) (wt %)	OT4-1 (GOST 19807–91) (wt %)	
H	N/A	≤0.012	
C	<0.12	≤0.1	
N	N/A	≤0.05	
O	N/A	≤ 0.15	
Al	N/A	1.5–2.5	
Si	<0.8	≤0.12	
P	<0.035	N/A	
S	<0.02	N/A	
Ti	0.4–1	94.33–97.5	
V	N/A	N/A	
Cr	17–19	N/A	
Mn	<2	0.7–2	
Fe	∼67	≤0.3	
Co	N/A	N/A	
Ni	9–11	N/A	
Cu	<0.3	≤0.3	
Zr	N/A	N/A	
Nb	N/A	N/A	
Mo	N/A	N/A	
W	N/A	N/A	
impurities	N/A	≤0.3	
a N/A stands for “not available”.

Both tube samples were collected
from an Ivchenko AI-25 twin-shaft
medium bypass turbofan engine after the end of its service life, that
is, after the engine reached its cycle limit. The tubes were used
in the same engine but in different parts of the fuel circuit. The
stainless steel tube was part of the fuel-oil heat exchanger circuit
used to cool the oil to temperatures below 150 °C at a maximum
of 64 bar, while the titanium tube was used in the injection system
where the temperature can reach 450 °C at a maximum of 90 bar.
Since the titanium tube was connected to the fuel injector, its diameter
was smaller than that of the stainless steel tube. The external diameters
of the stainless steel and titanium tube were 16 and 8 mm, respectively.

In the engine, T-1 and TS-1 jet fuels were used. TS-1 is the main
jet fuel grade available in Russian and CIS states. It is a kerosene-type
fuel with slightly higher volatility (flash point is 28 °C minimum)
and lower freeze point (<−50 °C) compared to Jet A-1
fuel. The exact chemical composition of the fuels used is not known
since it can vary slightly depending on the manufacturer. The Russian
standard GOST 10227–86 (Table 11) only specifies
the components that affect fuel performance. The maximum working fuel
pressure was 90 bar, that is, above the supercritical pressure of
the fuel, and the maximum exhaust gas temperature was 1198 °C,
which was maintained with the help of air-fuel and oil-fuel coolers.

Table 11 T-1 Jet Fuel (First Grade OKP 02
5121 0202) Specifications According to GOST 10227–86 Standard
parameter	value	
density
at 20 °C, kg/m3, at least	800	
kinematic viscosity, mm2/s (cSt)	 	
at 20 °C, not
less than	1.5	
at –40 °C, not more than	16	
lower calorific value, kJ/kg, not less than	42,900	
height of the
smoke point,
mm, not less than	20	
acidity, mg KOH per 100 cm3 of fuel, not more than	0.7	
iodine number, 100 g of iodine per g of fuel, not more than	2	
flash point in closed crucible
(°C), not lower	30	
onset
of crystallization
temperature (°C), max	60	
thermal stability under
static conditions at 150 °C, not
more than	 	
sludge concentration
in mg per 100 cm3 of fuel	35	
mass fraction of aromatic
hydrocarbons (%), not more than	20	
actual resin concentration
in mg per 100 cm3 of fuel, not more than	6	
mass fraction
of total sulfur
(%), not more than	0.1	
mass
fraction of mercaptan
sulfur (%), not more than	 	
mass fraction of hydrogen
sulfide	absent	
ash content (%),
not more
than	0.003	
content of water-soluble
acids and alkalis	absent	
content of naphthenic acid
soaps	absent	
content of mechanical
impurities
and water	absent	
mass fraction
of naphthalene
hydrocarbons (%), not more	 	
Samples for the analyses were cut from the stainless steel and
titanium aviation tubes in the form of 10 to 20 mm-long tubular segments
that were longitudinally cut into half-tubular, that is, U-shaped
segments. Since the tubes were seamless, manufactured by cold drawing,
it was assumed that the topographical properties were initially the
same on the internal and the external tube walls. The outer surface
of the stainless steel tube was in contact with the oil from the fuel-oil
heat exchanger, while the outer surface of the titanium tubes was
in contact with the surrounding engine oil used for cooling the tubes.
On the inner side of the stainless steel tubes, a thick black layer
of jet fuel deposit was observed, while on titanium tubes, no visible
deposit from the fuel was present. Therefore, titanium samples were
analyzed only in their as-received state, while stainless steel samples
were analyzed in their as-received state, that is, covered with the
surface deposit layer, and after the removal of the deposited layers
by ultrasonically cleaning in distilled water. In Figure 24, the analyzed samples S1,
S2, and T1 are shown. Samples S1 and S2 were cut from the stainless
steel tube, and sample T1 was cut from the titanium tube. Samples
S1 (Figure 24a) and
T1 (Figure 24c) were
analyzed in their as-received state, while sample S2 (Figure 24b) was ultrasonically cleaned
in distilled water. After ultrasonic cleaning, two distinct areas
could be observed on the inner surface of sample S2: (i) bright regions
where the deposited layer had most probably been fully removed and
(ii) dark regions/patches where possibly the deposit had not fully
detached from the surface; that is, it remained partially adhered
to the surface, or the material surface had been chemically modified
due to the diffusion of species from the deposit.

Figure 24 Inner surfaces and side
views of the tube samples: (a) sample S1,
the as-received stainless steel sample covered with a thick black
layer of deposits from the jet fuel; (b) sample S2, the stainless
steel sample ultrasonically cleaned in distilled water; and (c) sample
T1, the as-received titanium sample.

For surface characterization and metallographic analyses,
tube
sections were prepared by hot mounting using an Opal 410 mounting
process (ATM GmbH, Germany). Both longitudinal and transverse tube
sections were metallographically prepared. In order to avoid melting
of the deposited layer on the inner surface of the as-received stainless
steel sample, these samples were cold mounted in resin. Polishing
of the resin-embedded samples having a diameter of 30 mm was performed
on a Struers Tegrapol-15 polishing machine (Struers ApS, Denmark).
For grinding, Struers SiC grinding paper with grades from 120 to 1200
was used. Polishing was done mechanically on velvet-coated disks using
6 and 1 μm diamond pastes.

To reveal the microstructure
of the samples, the resin-embedded
sample cross sections were electrolytically etched in 10% oxalic acid
solution at 12 V for 60 s.

5.2 Structural and Chemical
Analyses
The microstructure of the sample cross sections
and the deposit layer
thickness were investigated by using an Olympus BX 51 polarized light
microscope (Olympus Co., Japan).

On the cross section of the
stainless steel samples, microhardness measurements were performed
in order to evaluate the influence of surface deposits on the mechanical
properties of the tube material. Measurements were carried out along
the tube wall in longitudinal and perpendicular directions—from
the outer to the inner surface of the tubes. Vickers hardness was
measured by using a Matsuzawa MHT-1 microhardness tester calibrated
with a test block at 211.6 HV1 according to EP14173575. On each sample,
a force of 500/1000 gf was applied for 15 s. The diagonals of the
indents were measured by using the Olympus BX 51 polarized light microscope.

Roughness parameters of the samples were acquired on the inner
and outer tube surfaces by using a Taylor-Hobson Talysurf 120 L profilometer
(AMETEK Taylor Hobson, UK). For detailed surface characterization,
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDX) analyses were performed with a Vega LMH II scanning electron
microscope (TESCAN Brno, s.r.o., Czech Republic), a QuantaTM 450 FEG-SEM
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), a Supra VP40 high resolution scanning
electron microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Germany), and a JSM-7100F
field emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL Ltd., Japan).

For a detailed chemical analysis of the deposited layer and the
contaminated surfaces, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses
were performed. XPS analyses were carried out with a Theta Probe (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, East Grinstead, UK) equipped with a monochromatic
Al Kα X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV) and
an Ar+ ion gun. During the measurements, the base pressure
in the analysis chamber was constantly in the low 10–7 Pa range.

Initially, for every measuring location, a survey
scan was performed
with a pass energy of 200 eV, and the resolution of the measurement
spot was 400 μm. Afterward, depth profiles of the respective
surfaces were acquired by sequentially measuring and sputtering the
surface. After each sputtering step, the composition of the surface
was determined from a survey scan. The area sputtered was 2 mm ×
2 mm, with a sputter current of 1 μA at 3 kV. These parameters
resulted in an estimated sputter yield of ∼0.05 nm/s. In Table 12, sputtering times and sputtering depths, that is, the approximate
depths of material removed, during the XPS analyses of the tube samples
are listed. The outer surface of sample S1 and both positions of interest
on sample S2 (bright and dark areas on the inner surface of the tube)
were sputtered for 6110 s (102 min), which corresponds to ∼300
nm of sputtering depth. The inner surface of sample S1 was sputtered
for 10610 s (177 min), which corresponds to ∼530 nm of sputtering
depth. The outer surface of sample T1 was sputtered for 9412 s (157
min), which corresponds to ∼470 nm of sputtering depth, while
the inner surface of sample T1 was sputtered for 20671 s (345 min),
which corresponds to ∼1000 nm of sputtering depth. Thirty-five
to fifty sputtering steps were applied by using increasing sputtering
times of 10 to 600 s. The sputtering times were sequentially increased
and were shorter at lower sputtering depths, being increased at higher
sputtering depths.

Table 12 Sputtering Times
and Sputtering Depths
(Approximate Depths of Material Removed) during the XPS Analyses of
the Tube Samples
sample	position	sputtering
time (s)	sputtering
depth (nm)	
S1	outer surface	6110 (102 min)	300	
inner
surface (deposit)	10610 (177 min)	530	
S2	bright area	6110 (102 min)	300	
dark
area	6110 (102 min)	300	
T1	outer surface	9412 (157 min)	470	
inner
surface	20671 (345 min)	1000	
All acquired
XPS spectra were processed with the software package
Avantage version 5.945 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, East Grinstead,
UK) using Gaussian/ Lorentzian peak fitting for the narrow (high resolution)
scans. The elemental analysis signal-to-noise threshold was set to
1.5 and a moving average was used for smoothing the depth profile
curves.

Raman spectra of the deposit on sample S1 were acquired
using an
alpha 300R confocal Raman microscope (WITec GmbH, Germany) with 532
nm radiation from a Nd:YAG laser as the excitation source. The system
was operated with an output power of 25 mW and a focal spot of the
order of a few micrometers (1–2 μm2). The
back-scattered Raman signals in the region from 100 to 4000 cm–1 were collected and recorded.

Author Present Address
† Metadynea Austria GmbH, Hafenstrasse 77, 3500
Krems, Austria.

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. Regarding the experimental
work, I.P. acquired the aviation tube samples and performed optical
microscopy, SEM/EDX, and hardness and surface topography measurements
on the steel tubes under the supervision of D.G.G., B.M., and M.R.
J.B. and C.G. conducted XPS measurements on steel and titanium tubes
and SEM/EDX measurements on titanium tubes. I.V. performed SEM/EDX
and Raman measurements and conducted comparative analyses of all results
under the supervision of A.D.. All authors have given approval to
the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Austrian COMET Programme
(Project XTribology, no. 849109) and carried out at the “Excellence
Centre of Tribology” (AC2T research GmbH) in cooperation with
V-Research GmbH, University of Southampton and George Asachi Technical
University of Iaşi.
==== Refs
References
Edwards T. ; Zabarnick S. 
Supercritical
fuel deposition mechanisms . Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 
1993 , 32 , 3117 –3122 . 10.1021/ie00024a022 .
Towfighi J. ; Sadrameli M. ; Niaei A. 
Coke Formation Mechanisms and Coke
Inhibiting Methods in Pyrolysis Furnaces . J.
Chem. Eng. Jpn. 
2002 , 35 , 923 –937 . 10.1252/jcej.35.923 .
Altin O. ; Eser S. 
Carbon deposit formation
from thermal stressing of petroleum fuels . Prepr.
Pap. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem. 
2004 , 49 , 764 –766 .
Mohan A. R. ; Eser S. 
Analysis of carbonaceous solid deposits from thermal oxidative stressing
of Jet-A fuel on Iron- and nickel-based alloy surfaces . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2010 , 49 , 2722 –2730 . 10.1021/ie901283r .
Albright L.
F. ; Marek J. C. 
Mechanistic
model for formation of coke in pyrolysis
units producing ethylene . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
1988 , 27 , 755 –759 . 10.1021/ie00077a006 .
Balster W. J. ; Jones E. G.  Effects of
temperature on formation of insolubles in aviation fuels . In ASME 1997 International Gas Turbine and Aeroengine Congress
and Exhibition Volume 2: Coal, Biomass and Alternative Fuels; Combustion
and Fuels; Oil and Gas Applications; Cycle Innovations ; The American Society of Mechanical Engineers : New York , 1997 ; pp. V002T06A028 –V002T06A028 .
DeWitt M. J. ; Edwards T. ; Shafer L. ; Brooks D. ; Striebich R. ; Bagley S. P. ; Wornat M. J. 
Effect of Aviation Fuel Type on Pyrolytic
Reactivity and Deposition Propensity under Supercritical Conditions . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2011 , 50 , 10434 –10451 . 10.1021/ie200257b .
Reyniers M.-F.
S. G. ; Froment G. F. 
Influence
of metal surface and sulfur addition on coke
deposition in the thermal cracking of hydrocarbons . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
1995 , 34 , 773 –785 . 10.1021/ie00042a009 .
Venkataraman R. ; Eser S. 
Characterization of
Solid Deposits Formed from Short Durations of
Jet Fuel Degradation: Carbonaceous Solids . Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res. 
2008 , 47 , 9337 –9350 . 10.1021/ie8010066 .
Venkataraman R. ; Eser S. 
Characterization of
Solid Deposits Formed from Jet Fuel Degradation
under Pyrolytic Conditions: Metal Sulfides . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2008 , 47 , 9351 –9360 . 10.1021/ie801007r .
Eser S. ; Venkataraman R. ; Altin O. 
Deposition of Carbonaceous Solids
on Different Substrates from Thermal Stressing of JP-8 and Jet A Fuels . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2006 , 45 , 8946 –8955 . 10.1021/ie060968p .
Tan C. D. ; Baker R. T. K. 
The effect of
various sulfides on carbon deposition
on nickel–iron particles . Catal. Today 
2000 , 63 , 3 –20 . 10.1016/S0920-5861(00)00441-7 .
Altin O. ; Eser S. 
Analysis of Solid Deposits
from Thermal Stressing of a JP-8 Fuel
on Different Tube Surfaces in a Flow Reactor . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2001 , 40 , 596 –603 . 10.1021/ie0004491 .
López
León L. D. ; Olguín Coca F.
J. ; López
León A. L. ; Márquez Casasola M. ; Baltazar
Zamora M. A. ; Santiago Hurtado G. ; Volpi León V. 
Corrosion
of Carbon Steel in a Synthetic Environment and Kerosene on a System
with Continuous Flow . Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
2015 , 10 , 7582 –7595 .
López
León L. D. ; Veloz Rodríguez M. A. ; Reyes
Cruz V. E. ; Pérez García S. A. ; Olguín
Coca F. J. 
Behaviour of Carbon Steel in the Presence of Hydrocarbon
and a Pyridinic Compound . Int. J. Electrochem.
Sci. 
2014 , 9 , 1488 –1496 .
Technical Committee of Petroleum
Additive Manufacturers in Europe  . Fuel Additives: Use and Benefits ; ATC  Document 113; 2013 ; pp. 23 –56 .
Groysman A  . Fuel Additives . In Corrosion in Systems for Storage and Transportation
of Petroleum Products and Biofuels ; Springer
Netherlands : Dordrecht , 2014 ; pp. 23 –41 .
Guerieri P. M. ; DeLisio J. B. ; Zachariah M. R. 
Nanoaluminum/Nitrocellulose
microparticle
additive for burn enhancement of liquid fuels . Combust. Flame 
2017 , 176 , 220 –228 . 10.1016/j.combustflame.2016.10.011 .
Tyagi H. ; Phelan P. E. ; Prasher R. ; Peck R. ; Lee T. ; Pacheco J. R. ; Arentzen P. 
Increased
Hot-Plate Ignition Probability
for Nanoparticle-Laden Diesel Fuel . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 1410 –1416 . 10.1021/nl080277d .18429638 
Karthikeyan S. ; Elango A. ; Silaimani S. N. ; Prathima A. 
Role of Al2O3 nano additive in GSO Biodiesel on the working characteristics
of a CI engine . Indian J. Chem. Technol. 
2014 , 21 , 285 –289 .
Waters C. E.  Sulphur in petroleum
oils. Technologic Papers of the Bureau of Standards ; Washington Government Printing Office : Washington, D.C. , 1920 .
Santelli R. E. ; Oliveira E. P. ; de Carvalho M. D. F.
B. ; Bezerra M. A. ; Freire A. S. 
Total sulfur determination in gasoline, kerosene and
diesel fuel using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
after direct sample introduction as detergent emulsions . Spectrochim. Acta B 
2008 , 63 , 800 –804 . 10.1016/j.sab.2008.04.020 .
Yin C. ; Xia D. 
A study of the distribution
of sulfur compounds in gasoline produced
in China. Part 1. A method for the determination of the distribution
of sulfur compounds in light petroleum fractions and gasoline . Fuel 
2001 , 80 , 607 –610 . 10.1016/S0016-2361(00)00122-8 .
Young D. J.  Corrosion by
Sulphur . In High Temperature Oxidation and
Corrosion of Metals ; Elsevier Science : Amsterdam, Netherlands , 2016 ; pp. 393 –430 .
May W. R. ; Hirs E. A.  Catalyst for
Improving the Combustion Efficiency of Petroleum Fuels in Diesel Engines . Presented at the 11th Diesel Engine Emissions Reduction
Conference , Chicago, IL , 2005 ; 16  pages.
Kumar M. V. ; Babu A. V. ; Kumar P. R. 
The impacts on combustion, performance
and emissions of biodiesel by using additives in direct injection
diesel engine . Alexandria Eng. J. 
2018 , 57 , 509 –516 . 10.1016/j.aej.2016.12.016 .
Vasquez J. M. G.  Fuel additive . U.S. Patent US 20,130,283,674 A1 , October 31, 2012 .
Rizvi S. Q. A.  , Detergents . In Lubricant Additives - Chemistry and Applications , Second  Edition; Rudnick L. R.  , Ed.; CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group : Boca Raton, FL , 2009 ; pp. 123 –141 .
Ruge I. W  . Lubricating
greases – characteristics and selection . In CRC handbook of lubrication: theory and practice of tribology. Vol.
2: Theory and design ; Booser E. R.  , Ed.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, FL , 1983 ; pp. 255 –267 .
Albright L. F. ; Marek J. C. 
Coke Formation during Pyrolysis: Roles of Residence
Time, Reactor Geometry, and Time of Operation . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
1988 , 27 , 743 –751 . 10.1021/ie00077a004 .
Tang S. ; Gao S. ; Wang S. ; Wang J. ; Zhu Q. ; Chen Y. ; Li X. 
Characterization
of CVD TiN coating at different deposition temperatures
and its application in hydrocarbon pyrolysis . Surf. Coat. Technol. 
2014 , 258 , 1060 –1067 . 10.1016/j.surfcoat.2014.07.029 .
Gokulakrishnan P. ; Joklik J. ; Fuller C.  Experimental
and Modeling Investigation of Pyrolytic Carbon Deposition Relevant
to Fuel Film Cooling in Rocket Engines . In 55th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting , 9–13 January 2017 , Grapevine : Texas , 16  pp.
Reshetenko T. V. ; Avdeeva L. B. ; Ismagilov Z. R. ; Pushkarev V. V. ; Cherepanova S. V. ; Chuvilin A. L. ; Likholobov V. A. 
Catalytic
filamentous carbon Structural and textural properties . Carbon 
2003 , 41 , 1605 –1615 . 10.1016/S0008-6223(03)00115-5 .
Roan M. A. ; Boehman A. L. 
The effect of fuel
composition and dissolved oxygen
on deposit formation from potential JP-900 basestocks . Energy Fuel 
2004 , 18 , 835 –843 . 10.1021/ef034050b .
Pei X.-y. ; Hou L.-y. 
Effect of dissolved
oxygen concentration on coke deposition
of kerosene . Fuel Process. Technol. 
2016 , 142 , 86 –91 . 10.1016/j.fuproc.2015.09.029 .
Hagen J.  Heterogeneously
Catalyzed Processes in Industry . In Industrial
Catalysis: A Practical Approach , 2 nd ed.; Willey-VCH Verlag GmbH&Co. KGaA ; Weinheim, Germany , 2006 ; pp. 264 .
Zabarnick S. ; Mick M. S. ; Striebich R. C. ; Grinstead R. R. 
Model Studies
of Silylation Agents as Thermal-Oxidative Jet Fuel Additives . Energy Fuel 
1999 , 13 , 154 –159 . 10.1021/ef980149k .
Vander Wal R. L. ; Byrg V. M.  Chemistry
Characterization of Jet Aircraft Engine Particulate by XPS: Results
From APEX III . NASA/CR—2014–218293.
Park Y.-J. ; Song H.-J. ; Kim I. ; Yang H.-S. 
Surface
characteristics
and bioactivity of oxide film on titanium metal formed by thermal
oxidation . J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 
2007 , 18 , 565 –575 . 10.1007/s10856-007-2303-7 .17546415 
Zhang B. B. ; Wang B. L. ; Li L. ; Zheng Y. F. 
Corrosion behavior
of Ti–5Ag alloy with and without thermal oxidation in artificial
saliva solution . Dent. Mater. 
2011 , 27 , 214 –220 . 10.1016/j.dental.2010.10.005 .21093901 
Güleryüz H. ; Ċimenoğlu H. 
Effect of
thermal oxidation on corrosion
and corrosion–wear behaviour of a Ti–6Al–4V alloy . Biomaterials 
2004 , 25 , 3325 –3333 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2003.10.009 .14980427 
Wen M. ; Wen C. ; Hodgson P. ; Li Y. 
Improvement of the biomedical properties
of titanium using SMAT and thermal oxidation . Colloids Surf., B 
2014 , 116 , 658 –665 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.10.039 .
Altin O. ; Eser S. ; James A. R. ; Xi X. 
Ti and Al oxide coatings
on Inconel 718 against metal sulfide formation and carbon deposition
from heated JP-8 fuel . Prepr. Pap.-Am. Chem.
Soc., Div. Fuel Chem. 
2004 , 49 , 778 –780 .
Yang C. ; Liu G. ; Wang X. ; Jiang R. ; Wang L. ; Zhang X. 
Preparation
and Anticoking Performance of MOCVD Alumina Coatings for Thermal Cracking
of Hydrocarbon Fuels under Supercritical Conditions . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2012 , 51 , 1256 –1263 . 10.1021/ie201978c .

