
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b01934ArticleCombining Charge Density Analysis with Machine Learning
Tools To Investigate the Cruzain Inhibition Mechanism Luchi Adriano
M. Villafañe Roxana N. Gómez Chávez J. Leonardo Bogado M. Lucrecia Angelina Emilio L. *Peruchena Nelida M. *Lab. Estructura
Molecular y Propiedades,
IQUIBA-NEA, Universidad Nacional del Nordeste, CONICET, FACENA, Av. Libertad 5470, Corrientes 3400, Argentina* E-mail: emilioluisangelina@hotmail.com (E.L.A.).* E-mail: arabeshai@yahoo.com.ar (N.M.P.).12 11 2019 26 11 2019 4 22 19582 19594 27 06 2019 18 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Trypanosoma cruzi, a flagellate
protozoan parasite, is responsible for Chagas disease. The parasite
major cysteine protease, cruzain (Cz), plays a vital role at every
stage of its life cycle and the active-site region of the enzyme,
similar to those of other members of the papain superfamily, is well
characterized. Taking advantage of structural information available
in public databases about Cz bound to known covalent inhibitors, along
with their corresponding activity annotations, in this work, we performed
a deep analysis of the molecular interactions at the Cz binding cleft,
in order to investigate the enzyme inhibition mechanism. Our toolbox
for performing this study consisted of the charge density topological
analysis of the complexes to extract the molecular interactions and
machine learning classification models to relate the interactions
with biological activity. More precisely, such a combination was useful
for the classification of molecular interactions as “active-like”
or “inactive-like” according to whether they are prevalent
in the most active or less active complexes, respectively. Further
analysis of interactions with the help of unsupervised learning tools
also allowed the understanding of how these interactions come into
play together to trigger the enzyme into a particular conformational
state. Most active inhibitors induce some conformational changes within
the enzyme that lead to an overall better fit of the inhibitor into
the binding cleft. Curiously, some of these conformational changes
can be considered as a hallmark of the substrate recognition event,
which means that most active inhibitors are likely recognized by the
enzyme as if they were its own substrate so that the catalytic machinery
is arranged as if it is about to break the substrate scissile bond.
Overall, these results contribute to a better understanding of the
enzyme inhibition mechanism. Moreover, the information about main
interactions extracted through this work is already being used in
our lab to guide docking solutions in ongoing prospective virtual
screening campaigns to search for novel noncovalent cruzain inhibitors.

document-id-old-9ao9b01934document-id-new-14ao9b01934ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Chagas
disease (CD), a major health issue in Latin America, is
a neglected tropical disease caused by the flagellate protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. According to estimates by the
World Health Organization, seven million people are chronically infected
with the parasite and 7000 deaths per year are caused by CD. Because
of massive migration, the disease has spread around the globe reaching
nonendemic areas, where health service awareness of the condition
is limited.1,2

Available chemotherapy for CD includes
ineffective drugs for the
chronic stage of the disease, leaving patients with only two palliative
drugs, benznidazole and nifurtimox, introduced over 40 years ago.
Furthermore, such drugs involve severe side effects, and drug resistance
has been observed in some trypanosome strains. Thus, the discovery
of new, safer, and more effective drugs to treat CD is required.3

Cruzain (Cz), the major cysteine protease
of T.
cruzi is a viable target for developing new drugs
against CD because it is essential for parasite survival in the human
stage of infection.4

Currently, 27
inputs are associated to this molecular target in
the Protein Data Bank (rcsb.org) where Cz has been cocrystallized with reversible and irreversible
inhibitors.5 Thereby, Cz presents itself
as an attractive target for the development of potential therapeutics
for the treatment of the disease by employing a structure-based approach.6,7

Among Cz inhibitors, those containing a vinyl sulfone warhead
can
exhibit good selectivity and a favorable prospective development despite
the irreversible nature of inhibition. Jaishankar8 synthesized and determined the inhibition constants against
Cz of a series of vinyl sulfone analogues closely related to K-777,
a Cz inhibitor. They investigated how substitutions at P2 and P3 fragments
of K-777 modify the activities against Cz.

In this work, we
exploited the structure–activity relationship
among the vinyl sulfone analogues described by Jaishankar8 but from a structure-based perspective, that
is, through the study of the molecular interactions at the enzyme
binding site, in order to get some clues about the enzyme inhibition
mechanism.

As a descriptor for molecular interactions in complexes
of vinyl
sulfones with Cz, the charge density value at the interaction critical
point was employed. In the context of the quantum theory of atoms
in molecules (QTAIM),9 the mapping of the
gradient vector field onto the complex electron charge density distribution
gave rise to the topological elements of charge density. Among the
topological elements, an interaction bond critical point (BCP) and
the bond paths (BPs), which connect it to the interacting atoms, are
unequivocal indicators of the existence of bonding interaction.

We have previously applied this theory to understand the action
mechanism of human dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors,10,11 BACE1 inhibitors,12,13 D2 dopamine receptor ligands,14−18 sphingosine kinase 1 (Sphk1) inhibitors,19 and HIV-1 protease flap fragments,20 among
others.

QTAIM methodology allows detecting nondirectional interactions,
for example, those involving π electrons in aromatic rings,
among other weak and unusual contacts that otherwise would be missed
in a merely geometrical analysis of the interactions.16

On the other hand, QTAIM analysis in biomolecular
complexes (unlike
small complexes in the gas phase) often gives rise to very dense and
complex networks of interactions. The task of analyzing such intricate
network of interactions becomes even more difficult when more than
one of these networks must be analyzed simultaneously, for example,
to extract structure–activity relationships from a set of Cz
complexes with several inhibitors.

Therefore, the processing
of such massive amount of data should
not be done “by hand”, that is, by visual inspection
of the molecular graphs by a human operator. If so, a lot of information
“hidden” under the charge density data would be overlooked.

Accordingly, in this work we employed machine learning tools to
automate the process of extracting information from charge density
molecular graphs and to exhaustively exploit the charge density data.

We trained a support vector machine model with recursive feature
elimination (SVM-RFE) that was able to discriminate between interactions
present in complexes of the most active inhibitors (active-like interactions)
and those that occur in the less active ones (inactive-like interactions).

Subsequently, the charge density-based correlation matrix describing
how interactions are related to each other among the complexes was
computed. This matrix, together with analysis of the molecular dynamic
(MD) trajectories, revealed how interactions come into play together
to trigger the enzyme into a particular conformational state. Most
active inhibitors induce some conformational changes within the enzyme
that lead to an overall better fit of the inhibitor into the binding
cleft.

Analysis of intermolecular interactions revealed that
backbone–backbone
hydrogen bonds between the peptide-like inhibitor and enzyme and interactions
with the Leu67 residue play a key role in proper anchoring of the
inhibitor to the Cz binding cleft. However, a quantitative structure–activity
relationship could not be derived by considering only the intermolecular
interactions between Cz residues and inhibitor atoms.

On the
other hand, if intramolecular contacts involving protein
residues are also analyzed with the help of the SVM-RFE model, it
becomes clear that a more indirect mechanism of enzyme inhibition
involving extensive conformational changes within the protein structure
operates under the hood. Interactions at the S2 subpocket seem to
be behind conformational changes occurring on the right wall of the
binding cleft, while interactions at the S3 subsite mostly drive conformational
changes on the left wall. Both conformational changes ultimately lead
to rearrangements of residues at the S1′ subsite that allows
the proper positioning of the vinyl sulfone warhead, which in turn
allows the formation of key backbone–backbone interactions
between the inhibitor and binding cleft wall residues.

Moreover,
residue rearrangements at the S1′ subsite in complexes
of most active inhibitors involve the formation of hydrogen bonds
among residues of the catalytic triad that are considered as a hallmark
of the substrate recognition event. This means that these high-affinity
inhibitors are likely recognized by the enzyme as if they were its
own substrate so that the catalytic machinery is arranged as if it
is about to break the substrate scissile bond.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Compilation of a Structural
Library of Cz–Inh
Complexes with Activity Annotations
Table 1 shows the inhibition constants against Cz
of P2/P3-modified vinyl sulfones reported by Jaishankar,8 while Scheme 1 shows substitution sites in vinyl sulfone analogues.

Scheme 1 Vinyl Sulfone with Its Substitution Sites Named Ar, R, and X
Inhibitor parts that bind to
S1, S1′, S2, and S3 enzyme subpockets are named P1, P1′,
P2, and P3, respectively.

Table 1 Cz Inhibition
by Vinyl Sulfone Analogues
Reported by Jaishankara8
compoundb	R	X	Ar	Ki (nM)	
9d	4-Me	CH	DHBD	19	
7d	4-Me	CH	4-CF3Ph	45	
6b	3-Me	CH	3,5-DiFPh	50	
9b	3-Me	CH	DHBD	71	
9a	H	CH	DHBD	80	
7b	3-Me	CH	4-CF3Ph	92	
7a	H	CH	4-CF3Ph	97	
8c	3-CF3	CH	2-pyridyl	150	
4c	3-CF3	CH	N-MePip	170	
4a (K-777)	H	CH	N-MePip	220	
8a	H	CH	2-pyridyl	250	
8b	3-Me	CH	2-pyridyl	280	
6d	4-Me	CH	3,5-DiFPh	350	
6a	H	CH	3,5-DiFPh	980	
8d	4-Me	CH	2-pyridyl	1700	
4b	3-Me	CH	N-MePip	3300	
4e	H	N	N-MePip	3600	
a N-MePip: N-methyl piperazine; DHBD:
2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxin-6-yl;
and 3,5-DiFPh: 3,5-diFluorophenyl.

b Compound naming was extracted from
Jaishankar.8

The crystal structure of Cz bound to the vinyl sulfone
inhibitor
K-777 (PDB ID 2OZ2) provides the structural basis for understanding inhibition of cruzain
by vinyl sulfone inhibitors.21 Taking that
structure as a template, complexes of Cz with the 17 vinyl sulfone
analogues listed in Table 1 were built manually and then refined by performing MD simulations,
as described in computational methods.

Naming letters (a, b,
c, d, and e) and numbers (4, 6, 7, 8, and
9) represent compound series obtained by varying P2 and P3, respectively.

2.2 Local Electron Charge Density As the Descriptor
of Molecular Interactions in Cz–Inh Complexes
To describe
the molecular interactions in the modeled Cz–inhibitor complexes,
the charge density topological analysis in the framework of the QTAIM
was performed over the refined complexes.

Briefly, this analysis
basically consists of the mapping of the gradient vector field onto
the precomputed charge density of the complex, ∇ρ. From
this mapping, the charge density topological element arises. Among
the topological elements, an interaction BCP and the BPs, which connect
it to the interacting atoms, are unequivocal indicators of the existence
of a bonding interaction.

As an example, Figure 1 depicts the BPs and BCPs associated to the
noncovalent interactions
(Cz–Inh as well as Cz–Cz and Inh–Inh interactions)
in one of the complexes studied here.

Figure 1 View of the intricate networks of interactions
on the structure
of the Cz–9d complex. Charge density topological
elements describing the noncovalent interactions are depicted with
small red circles (BCPs) and yellow lines connecting each BCP to both
interacting atoms (BPs). Both intermolecular (Cz–Inh) and intramolecular
(Cz–Cz and Inh–Inh) interactions are considered. The
protein structure is depicted in the cartoon representation (A) and
surface representation (B), where each surface color represents a
different subpocket within the Cz binding cleft.

2.3 Training an Interaction Classifier Based on
the Charge Density Data
At this point, we have at our disposal,
the topological elements of the charge density describing the interactions
in the Cz–Inh complexes and the activity data associated to
the corresponding inhibitors.

Our goal is to take advantage
of these data to find out favorable interactions (to stabilize the
complex), which might explain the greater binding affinity of the
more active inhibitors and the unfavorable (or less favorable) interactions
that dominate the binding of the less active ones.

QTAIM analysis
on biomolecular complexes often gives rise to very
dense and complex networks of interactions. By inspecting Figure 1, it becomes evident
that a comparative analysis of such intricate network of interactions
for a set of Cz–Inh complexes cannot be performed by visual
inspection of the molecular graphs by a human operator. If so, a lot
of the information “hidden” under the charge density
data would be overlooked.

Instead, in this work, we have applied
machine learning tools to
automate the process of extracting information from charge density
molecular graphs and to exhaustively exploit the charge density data.

As explained by Fujita,22 depending
on the particular type of scientific question that needs to be answered,
the predictive model can be more or less complex. Relatively simple
linear models are more easily interpretable in terms of molecular
interactions although their predictive power is limited. More complex
nonlinear models have greater predictive power but are more obscure
or less interpretable.

In our case, our main interest was to
shed light on the interactions
implicated in the enzyme action mechanism by using a linear supervised
model based on the complex interactions and their corresponding inhibitory
activities.

Moreover, data sets where there are fewer observed
entities than
variables are becoming increasingly frequent, thanks to the growing
ease of observing variables, together with the high cost of repeating
observations in some contexts (e.g., DNA microarrays).23 For example, Guyon24 has built an SVM classifier to select a subset of genes biologically
relevant to cancer from broad patterns of gene expression data, recorded
on DNA microarrays. They used a relatively small number of training
examples from cancer and normal patients.

It is well known that
when the number of features is large and
the number of training examples is comparatively small (as in the
case of ref (24) and
in our case), the risk of overfitting arises.

The overfitting
problem can be reduced by measuring the feature
importance and selecting the most discriminative feature subset. Elimination
of redundant or irrelevant features can improve the model accuracy,
the generalization capacity, and even the computational cost in some
cases.25

SVM is a classification
technique that uses support vectors to
maximize the distance between the two classes. The coefficients of
the model represent the vector coordinates which are orthogonal to
the hyperplane, and their direction indicates the predicted class.
The absolute size of the coefficients (weights) can then be used to
determine the feature importance for the data separation task.24

On the other hand, SVM-RFE is a backward
feature selection algorithm
based on SVM. SVM-RFE has been widely applied in many fields including
genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and other situations, where the
data present a large number of features, and the samples are scarce.26

RFE begins with the entire set of features,
creates the SVM model,
and evaluates the accuracy. The least important predictors are erased,
and the model is computed again.27

In this work, an SVM-RFE model was trained with the QTAIM-derived
charge density information about molecular interactions from the 17
Cz–Inh complexes to select relevant features for the classification
task, which might help to understand the enzyme action mechanism.
Inhibitors were labeled as actives or inactives according to a decision
threshold value of 170 nM of inhibitory activity, which ensures balanced
classes.

SVM-RFE was built with a data set containing 319 interactions
at
the beginning, and then, the less relevant features were iteratively
eliminated by a backward selection procedure.

The analysis of
features that contribute to predictions only makes
sense if the model reaches a reasonably high-performance level. Therefore,
to monitor the accuracy of the model during the backward elimination
of features, stratified two fold cross-validation was performed. In
stratified cross-validation, the class distribution of each fold is
preserved for the entire data set.28

Figure 2 shows the
cross-validation mean accuracy of the model as a function of the number
of features selected by the SVM-RFE procedure. Also, the variance
of the accuracy among the folds is depicted.

Figure 2 Iterative process of
backward feature elimination and SVM model
training with the remaining features. The mean accuracy of the SVM
model is depicted as a function of the number of features. Error bars
represent the variances of accuracy values among the folds.

As can be seen in the figure, the mean accuracy
of the model rises
as the number of features drops up to 87, when the maximum performance
is reached (87.75%). Also, note that the variance of the accuracy
among the two folds decreases to a minimum value on the plateau region
between ∼20 and 87 features.

Below ∼20 features,
the mean accuracy starts decreasing
again, thus indicating that the classification model becomes too simple
as to discriminate between compounds from active and inactive classes.

Therefore, for subsequent analysis of relevant features, we selected
the SVM model trained with a subset of the best 87 features because
further reduction of the number of features does not imply an increase
in model performance.

The bar plot in Figure 3 shows the top interactions (features) that
were used by the
final model to make the classifications. Only feature coefficients
with absolute values greater than 2.0 are depicted in the figure.

Figure 3 Top interactions
(features) selected by the SVM model to make the
class classifications. The numbers in red indicate the interactions
discussed in the text.

The total height of stacked
bars in Figure 3 represents
the interaction importance for
the classification task while each category within the bar represents
the charge density contribution of the two classes (active and inactive
in orange and light blue, respectively) to the overall feature importance.

As can be seen in the figure, interactions with positive coefficients
have overall greater contributions from compounds labeled as actives
while the opposite is true for interactions with negative model coefficients,
namely, their most important contributions come from compounds labeled
as inactives.

Therefore, by using a simple and interpretable
linear SVM classification
model coupled with an RFE procedure, it is possible to extract useful
information about what are the most important interactions to discriminate
between active and inactive (or less active) compounds against Cz.

2.4 Interaction-Based Correlation Matrix from
Charge Density Data
Although the trained classification model
helps recovering the relevant interactions from charge density molecular
graphs of Cz–Inh complexes, it does not necessarily provide
information about how these interactions come into play together,
namely, how they correlate to each other to bring the enzyme into
a particular conformational state.

Different inhibitors might
form different interactions which in turn might stabilize different
conformational states of the enzyme. We wanted to know whether there
could be a relationship between compound activity against Cz and the
enzyme conformation stabilized. This information could be very useful
to choose the appropriate target structure in future structure-based
virtual screening campaigns.

Accordingly, the correlation matrix
describing how interactions
are related to each other among the Cz–Inh complexes was computed
from charge density data (Figure 4). Only interactions with importance greater than 2.0
in the SVM classifier were considered for the correlation analysis.

Figure 4 Correlation
matrix based on charge density data from interactions
in Cz–Inh complexes.

Figure 4 shows that
there is a clear anticorrelation (i.e., negative value) between active-like
and inactive-like interactions, namely, between interactions that
prevail in complexes of compounds labeled as actives and inactives,
respectively. This means that as the first interactions become stronger,
the last ones become weaker. This finding suggests that active and
inactive (less active) compounds stabilize different conformations
of Cz.

2.5 Charge Density Molecular Graphs
Figure 5 shows the structural
superposition of complexes Cz–6b and Cz–8d corresponding to compounds from active and inactive classes,
respectively. Interactions that are either formed/broken (or just
strengthened/weakened) in the comparison between both complexes are
depicted through their corresponding charge density topological elements
(i.e., the BCPs and BPs). Charge density values for the discussed
interactions are shown in Table S1 in the Supporting Information.

Figure 5 Structural superposition of Cz–6b (orange)
and Cz–8d (light blue) complexes. Charge density
topological elements for atomic interactions are also depicted: BPs
connecting the nuclei are depicted in orange and light blue for Cz–6b and Cz–8d, respectively. BCPs are shown
in small red spheres. Numbers in red indicate the most significant
interactions (the same as Figure 3). Arrows indicate protein backbone displacement between
Cz–8d and Cz–6b complexes.

Among interactions that are prevalent in the most
active group
of Cz inhibitors, H-bond N–H···O=C between
side chains of protonated His162 and Asn182 at the S1′ enzyme
subsite is the most relevant one for the classification task, according
to the bar plot in Figure 3. This interaction can be identified as interaction 1 in the
molecular graph of Figure 5 and in the Figure 3 bar plot.

As it is well known, interaction 1 facilitates
the formation of
the thiolate–imidazolium ion pair (Cys25)S–···+H–N(His162) necessary for catalysis.29,30 Therefore, it is remarkable that this interaction is formed by compounds
from the active class, such as compound 6b, but not by
compounds in the inactive class, such as compound 8d.
This means that compounds labeled as actives better mimic the enzyme
substrate because they are able to accommodate the catalytic machinery
as if it were about to cleave the substrate scissile bond.

In
complexes of compounds from the inactive class, the His162 side
chain is displaced away from Asn182 and twisted toward the inhibitor
vinyl sulfone P1′ moiety forming a strong (P1′)S=O···+H–N(His162)
interaction which is one of the main features of the machine learning
(ML) model among compounds labeled as inactives (interaction 2 in Figures 3 and 5). In these complexes, a nearby indole ring from Trp184 occupies
the space where residues His162 and Asn182 are going to interact in
the active complexes.

Conversely, in complexes of compounds
from the active class, opposite
changes are observed: interaction 2 is weakened and His162 moves somewhat
toward Asn182 to form interaction 1.

However, before interaction
1 can be established, the Trp184 ring
must first vacate the region between residues His162 and Asn182. In
doing so, Trp moves away from Asn182 and ends up right on top of the
His162 ring where the Trp electron cloud forms a C–H···π
stacking interaction with an His nonpolar hydrogen atom. This interaction,
labeled as 3 in Figures 3 and 5, is also regarded by the SVM-RFE model
as one of the main interactions among the active class of inhibitors.

We believe that these findings recovered with the help of an ML
model are meaningful because Trp184 is a highly conserved residue
among lysosomal cysteine proteases belonging to papain superfamily,
and it was previously regarded as the “orchestrator”
of the catalytic triad Cys25-His162-Asn182 because it is believed
that it plays a critical role in the cleavage of the substrate by
orienting the enzyme catalytic machinery.30 Accordingly, based on our results and previous findings, we propose
that Trp184 might act as a “switch” for interaction
1 formation.

Continuing with analysis of relevant interactions
at the S1′
subsite, it can be seen in Figure 5 that the inhibitor sulfonic group is held in place
at the entrance of the S1′ subsite by two strong O···H
interactions between both sulfonic O atoms and H atoms from the His162
imidazolium ring (interaction 2) and Gln19 side chain amide group
(interaction 4). Both interactions are relevant features among the
inactive class of inhibitors as evidenced in Figure 3. This means that these interactions are
stronger in complexes of compounds from the inactive class and either
are broken or become weaker in complexes of the active class.

It seems like when vinyl sulfones are strongly attached through
interactions 2 and 4 as in the case of compounds labeled as inactives,
the remaining inhibitor parts do not fit well within the binding cleft,
and so, they cannot establish other important interactions that help
to properly attach the peptide-like backbone of the inhibitor. More
concretely the backbone of residues P1 and P2 from the inhibitor do
not fit properly into the narrow part of the binding cleft formed
by backbone atoms from the enzyme S1 subsite (see below).

For
the inhibitor to fit well into the enzyme binding cleft, it
must be able to disturb the arrangement of residues within the S1′
subsite. In other words, it must be able to either break or weaken
interactions 2 and 4 that hold firmly the vinyl sulfone P1′
moiety at the entrance of the S1′ subpocket.

These rearrangements
involve shifting of His162 toward Ans182 and
subsequent interaction 1 formation as explained above (Figure 5). It also involves retraction
of the Gln19 side chain as discussed below. Rearrangements of the
Gln19 side chain can be more clearly seen in Figure 6 which shows the structural superposition
of complexes of compounds 9d and 4b from
the active and inactive class, respectively.

Figure 6 Structural superposition
of Cz–9d (orange)
and Cz–4b (light blue) complexes. Charge density
topological elements for atomic interactions are also depicted: BPs
connecting the nuclei are depicted in orange and light blue for Cz–9d and Cz–4b, respectively. BCPs are shown
with small red spheres. Arrows indicate protein backbone displacement
between Cz–4b and Cz–9d complexes.
Interactions of the P3 residue with Leu67 are highlighted in the bottom
right snapshot.

Depending on the complexes analyzed,
some inhibitors from the active
class seem to push forward residues Gln19 and His162 so that the vinyl
sulfone P1′ moiety can penetrate a little more deeply into
the S1′ subsite (Figure 6). Thus, Gln19 and His162 might act as gatekeepers by selectively
allowing the entrance to the P1′ subsite to only the most active
inhibitors.

After this rearrangement at the S1′ subsite,
the backbone
of inhibitor residues P1 and P2 now fits well into the narrow region
of the binding cleft. This is evidenced by the backbone–backbone
interactions (P1)N–H···O=C(Asp161), (P2)C=O···H–N(Gly66),
and (P2)N–H···O=C(Gly66) which are formed
or enhanced in complexes of compounds labeled as actives and are some
of the most relevant features among the active class, according to
the SVM-RFE model (interactions 5, 6 and 7, respectively in Figures 3, 5, and 6). These interactions are also
considered as a hallmark of the substrate recognition event in cysteine
proteases.31 Also, interaction (Cys25)S···H–N(Gly163)
formation (interaction 8) helps to pull the inhibitor backbone (which
is covalently bound to Cys25) toward the bottom of the narrow region
of the enzyme binding cleft, thus contributing to the overall better
fit of the inhibitor which is observed in complexes of the most active
compounds.

Because vinyl sulfone analogues reported by Jaishankar8 differ only in P2 and P3 residues, the explanation
about why some inhibitors are able to induce the required residue
rearrangements within the P1′ subsite and some other do not
must be related in some way to interactions they establish at the
S2/S3 subsites.

2.5.1 Interactions at the S3
SubSite
The P3 ring from compounds labeled as actives and
inactives interacts
in different ways with the key residue Leu67 at the S3 subsite (see Figures 5 and 6). Compounds from the active class have electron-rich groups
at P3, and so, they tend to act as H-bond acceptors against the side
chain of Leu67. This is evidenced, for example, by interactions such
as Leu(67)C–H···π(P3) and Leu(67)C–H···F(P3)
in which the electron cloud or fluorine lone pairs from the 3,5-difluorophenyl
ring (compound 6b) act as acceptors (Figure 5). In the other case, oxygen
lone pairs from the 2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxin ring (compound 9d) act as the H-bond acceptor in interaction Leu(67)C–H···O(P3)
(Figure 6). Unfortunately,
these interactions are not recovered by the SVM-RFE model (if so,
the model would be overfitting the charge density data) because there
is no unique H-bond pattern to Leu67 (i.e., there are different H-bond
acceptors).

On the other hand, compounds from the inactive class
have electron-deficient P3 rings (2-pyridinium and N-methyl piperazine in series 8 and 4, respectively, see Table 1), and so, they only
can form dihydrogen contacts with the Leu67 side chain, which are
recovered by the ML model as one of the most important features among
complexes of compounds labeled as inactives (interaction 9 in Figure 3).

From the
mechanistic point of view, strong anchoring of the P3
ring to the Leu67 side chain in complexes of active compounds might
pull the inhibitor toward the bottom of the binding cleft, thus allowing
formation of backbone–backbone interaction 7 between the inhibitor
P2 residue and Gly66, (P2)N–H···O=C(Gly66)
(Figures 3, 5, and 6). As argued above,
interaction 7 formation, together with interactions 5, 6, and 8, is
an indicative of a good fit of the inhibitor backbone within the enzyme
binding cleft.

Besides this direct effect of P3 interaction
with Leu67 on the
anchoring of the inhibitor backbone, there seems to be also an indirect
mechanism by which P3 interactions at the S3 subsite influence the
inhibitor binding mode.

In complexes of compounds labeled as
actives, residues Ser61 and
Ser64 from the same loop as Leu67 (i.e., loop56–68) form a C=O···H–N H–bond which
stabilizes a closed turn between both residues. This (Ser61)C=O···H–N(Ser64)
interaction (labeled as interaction 10 in Figures 3, 5, and 6) is recovered by the SVM-RFE model as the second
most important feature among active-like interactions for the classification
of compounds labeled as actives/inactives based on Ki values. It is likely that stability
of interaction 10 is related at least in part with the type of interactions
that the inhibitor P3 ring forms with the Leu67 side chain. An unstable
dihydrogen bond pattern between P3 and Leu67 (i.e., through interaction
9) as in complexes of compounds labeled as inactives might perturb
conformation of the loop56–68, thus leading to the
observed breakage of interaction 10. Conversely, stable H-bonds between
P3 and Leu67 like in complexes of compounds from the active class
might help to hold more firmly the loop, thus contributing to preserve
the Ser61 → Ser64 turn in its closed form.

Moreover,
conformation of the Ser61 → Ser64 turn seems to
define how the loop56–68 is going to interact with
the surrounding protein structural elements like the nearby loop11–23. In complexes of compounds from the inactive class,
there are several interactions recovered by the SVM-RFE model as inactive-like
interactions that might help to maintain loops 56–68 and 11–23
close together (i.e., (Cys63)H···N(Gly23), (Cys63)H···H(Gly23),
and (Cys63)O···H(Gly23), labeled as interactions 11,
12, and 13, respectively). On the other hand, upon interaction 10
formation in complexes of compounds from the active class, there is
a conformational rearrangement in the loop56–68 that
somehow causes the breaking of interactions 11, 12, and 13 that were
holding both loops together. As the loop11–23 moves
away from the loop56–68, the first loop drags side
chain of Gln19 through an interaction with the backbone of that loop
(interaction 14, Figures 3, 5, and 6).
While Gln19 is dragged backward, its side chain acquires a twisted
conformation in which Gln19 gets further apart from the inhibitor.
As a consequence, interaction 4 between the Gln19 side chain and inhibitor
sulfonyl oxygen atom gets weakened. As discussed previously, rearrangement
of the Gln19 side chain seems to be critical for proper positioning
of the substrate within the Cz binding cleft and formation of backbone
interactions 5, 6, 7, and 8.

2.5.2 Interactions
at the S2 SubPocket
Among all the subsites that encompass
the Cz binding cleft, the only
one which is deep enough to deserve the name of the subpocket is S2.
At the S2 subpocket, the anchoring of compounds from the active class
is mostly driven by π···H interactions between
the P2 ring electron cloud and nonpolar hydrogens donated by Leu67
and Ala138 residues at both sides of the subpocket. These interactions,
named 15 and 16, respectively, have been selected by the SVM-RFE model
as important features among compounds labeled as actives (see Figures 3, 5, and 6). On the other hand, compounds
from the inactive class either do not form interactions 15 and 16
or they are much weaker. Instead, the P2 ring from these compounds
forms dihydrogen contacts with Leu67 (interaction 17) which highlights
the misplacement of the P2 ring within the S2 subpocket.

Bringing
together interactions analyzed for P2 and P3 residues, it is evident
that Leu67 plays a key role in proper anchoring of both residues to
the Cz binding cleft.

Figure 7 shows the
structural superposition of complexes of compounds 6b and 6a from active and inactive classes, respectively.
These compounds only differ in the substituent at the P2 residue,
and so, they are suitable for studying differences in interaction
patterns that can be directly attributed to the P2 structure.

Figure 7 Structural
superposition of Cz–6b (orange)
and Cz–6a (light blue) complexes. Charge density
topological elements for atomic interactions are also depicted: BPs
connecting the nuclei are depicted in orange and light blue for Cz–6b and Cz–6a, respectively. BCPs are shown
with small red spheres. Arrows indicate protein backbone displacement
between Cz–6b and Cz–6a complexes.

Besides driving interactions with Leu67 and Ala138,
most active
compounds also form other interactions that it is worth noting. Thus,
for example, interaction (P2)H···H(Glu208) between
two nonpolar H atoms from P2 and Glu208 side chains, respectively,
was selected by the SVM-RFE model as a relevant feature among inhibitors
from the active class (interaction 18 in Figures 3 and 7). Glu208 lies
at the bottom of the S2 subpocket; hence, interaction of inhibitors
from the active class with that residue indicates that they are able
to reach such a distal region of the S2 subsite while inhibitors from
the inactive class, in general, are not.

Close to Glu208, there
is another residue, Leu160, which is also
targeted by most active inhibitors through dihydrogen interactions
(P2)H···H(Leu160) which are also recovered by the ML
model as a relevant feature among complexes of compounds labeled as
actives (interaction 19 in Figures 3 and 7).

It is unlikely
that attractive forces would be behind formation
of these dihydrogen interactions as they are more suggestive of steric
crashes between hydrophobic atoms from the ligand and enzyme. These
subtle dihydrogen crashes usually are the footprints left by stronger
repulsive forces that have been alleviated by displacements of the
involved residues. Therefore, by inspecting these dihydrogen interactions,
one can track back residue translocations or conformation changes
that might have happened as a consequence of a former stronger steric
crash. In particular, dihydrogen interactions 18 and 19 are the footprints
of Glu208 and Leu160 side chain displacements, respectively, induced
by substituents at the 3 or 4 position of the inhibitor P2 ring (see Table 1). In contrast, compounds
that do not bear a substituent on the P2 ring, most of them belonging
to the inactive class, do not reach the distal wall/bottom of the
S2 subsite, and so, they do not form interactions 18 and 19. These
interactions and in particular interaction 19 seem to be related with
residue rearrangements at the S1 and S1′ subsites. As the substituent
at the P2 ring pushes away the side chain of Leu160, it also perturbs
backbone interactions between the nearby β-sheet161–170 and β-sheet135–139 that are interacting
in a hairpin-like motif. As a consequence, the backbone of the β-sheet161–170 is partially “released” and residues
at the end of that sheet, that is, Asp161, His162, and Gly163 experience
a concerted backward movement that place them in a proper position
as to form interactions 5 and 8 at the S1 subsite and triggers rearrangements
at the S1′ subsite involving His162 that ultimately leads to
formation of interaction 1, as discussed previously.

Taking
together the inhibitor interactions at the S2 subpocket
and S3 subsite, the first ones seem to govern the conformational changes
occurring on the right wall of the binding cleft (i.e., those involving
the β-sheet161–170), while P3 residue interactions
at the S3 subsite mostly drive the conformational changes on the left
wall (i.e., those related to the loop56–68). Both
conformational changes ultimately lead to rearrangements of residues
His162 and Gln19 at the S1′ site that allows the proper positioning
of the vinyl sulfone warhead which in turn promotes formation of backbone–backbone
interactions between the inhibitor and the binding cleft wall that
are critical for inhibition.

Nevertheless, it should be kept
in mind that the dissection of
the inhibition mechanism problem by protein subsites might be an oversimplification
because interactions at different subsites might be related to each
other, namely, the conformational changes observed might depend not
only on the substituents at P2 and P3 but also on the combination
of both.

2.6 Two End-State Conformational
Model for Cz
Supported by MD Simulations
In Section 2.3, we separated interactions that are more
prevalent in complexes of most active inhibitors (i.e., active-like
interactions) from those that are more common in complexes of compounds
from the inactive class (i.e., inactive-like interactions). Then,
in Section 2.4, through
the correlation analysis, we took a step further to conclude that
active-like and inactive-like interactions stabilize two opposite
conformations of the enzyme.

To further support this hypothesis,
we looked at some active-like and inactive-like interactions along
the MD trajectories of Cz–Inh complexes.

Figure 8 depicts
distance histograms from MD simulations of complexes Cz–6b and Cz–8d corresponding to several
interactions regarded by the SVM-RFE model as important features for
stabilization of either active or inactive end-state enzyme conformations.
Also, a histogram for the Gln19 side chain torsional angle is depicted.

Figure 8 Distance
histograms for selected interactions from complexes Cz–6b (orange) and Cz–8d (cyan). Also, the
histogram for the Gln19 side chain torsional angle is depicted. Distances
corresponding to interaction 1 were measured between the center of
mass of the involved residues.

As evidenced in Figure 8, several interactions show a bimodal distribution of frequencies
in which they are either formed or broken, which is in agreement with
the two end-state conformational model proposed based on charge density
analysis of selected structures from different MD simulations.

Distance distribution of interaction 1 in complex Cz–8d makes evident the two conformational states of residue
His162. In that complex, His162 is roughly half of the time far away
from Asn182 as in Cz conformation stabilized by less active inhibitors.
On the other hand, in complex Cz–6b, His162 is
close to Asn182 during the entire simulation time, thus favoring interaction
1 formation as in the conformation stabilized by most active Cz inhibitors.

Moreover, interaction 10 which is involved in loop56–68 conformation is formed most of the time of the simulation in complex
Cz–6b, thus stabilizing the closed form of the
loop, whereas, the same interactions are mainly broken during the
simulation of the Cz–8d complex.

As discussed
previously, as a consequence of the loop56–68 re-organization
on going from complex of less active to most active
Cz inhibitors, the loop11–23 is also displaced upward
and drags with it the Gln19 side chain through interaction 14 (not
shown). Concretely, the dragging motion involves the twisting of the
Gln19 side chain which is evidenced by the bimodal population of the
χ3 torsion angle where the twisted conformation is
represented by the distribution around 40°. It can be seen in Figure 8 that the Gln19 side
chain remains more time twisted in complex Cz–6b than in Cz–8d. Regarding interaction 4 between
the Gln19 side chain amide and inhibitor sulfonyl oxygen atom, it
remains formed all the time of simulations. However, the distance
distribution is slightly displaced toward largest interaction distances
in complex Cz–6b, which is likely a consequence
of the lasting Gln19 side chain twisting that place it further apart
from sulfonyl oxygens. As discussed previously, the weakening of interaction
4 might contribute to the overall better fit of the inhibitor within
the Cz binding cleft.

Finally, distance distributions corresponding
to backbone–backbone
interactions 7 and 5 show that 6b is more firmly attached
than 8d to the backbone of Gly66 and Asp161, respectively,
which is also in line with the previous charge density analysis on
selected structures from different MD simulations.

2.7 SubPocket Decomposition of the Binding Affinity
Because
charge density, as measured at the interaction critical
point, is a local topological property, we can compute the contribution
of a subset of such charge density values to the inhibitor total anchoring
strength. In that way, we could know on which of the enzyme subpockets,
the interactions with the inhibitor need to be improved.

Figure 9 shows the decomposition
of the charge density values at the BCPs in Cz–Inh complexes
by subpockets.

Figure 9 Sum of the charge density values at the BCPs due to intra–intermolecular
interactions in Cz–inhibitor complexes. Values are partitioned
into four contributions corresponding to subpockets S1 (blue), S1′
(green), S2 (orange), and S3 (red). From left to right, complexes
are ordered in increasing values of Ki. Complexes are divided, with a dotted line, into
two groups according to the decision threshold value (Ki 170 nM) used in the SVM section. The
compound nomenclature was extracted from Jaishankar.8

As can be seen in Figure 9, on going from the less active
inhibitors to the most active
ones, the inhibitor anchoring strength gets improved not in a particular
subpocket but on all the enzyme subpockets. This finding is in line
with our previous results. We have seen that substitution at P2 and
P3 positions of the inhibitor not only induce changes in the S3 and
S2 enzyme subpockets but also the entire enzyme binding cleft is aware
of such substitutions. This strong communication between the different
enzyme subpockets anticipates that the optimization of interactions
separately on each of the enzyme subpockets might be difficult to
achieve. Similarly, a fragment-based approach for drug design would
also be challenging for the same reason. In a fragment-based pipeline,
for discovery of novel Cz inhibitors, one would presumably start with
a small fragment able to bind to the S2 subpocket (i.e., the easiest
subpocket to target) and from there it would have to be enlarged toward
the neighbor subpockets either by the fragment-growing or fragment-linking
approach. Because of the strong inter-relationship between subpockets
that we have shown throughout this work, there is no guarantee that
on growing the S2 fragment toward S3, for example, the former interactions
at S2 would be maintained.

3 Conclusions
In this work, we have calculated, analyzed, and summarized molecular
interactions that arise from quantum calculations on complexes of
Cz with 17 known inhibitors at the Cz binding site where the analysis
of activity differences in terms of molecular interactions at the
Cz binding cleft has not been described yet.

QTAIM provided
topological elements of the charge density that
describe the interactions in the Cz–Inh complexes. At this
point, with more than three hundred interactions per complex, we trained
a supervised learning classification model with RFE that discriminates
between interactions present in complexes of the most-active inhibitors
(active-like interactions) and those that occur in the less-active
ones (inactive-like interactions). Moreover, the model also provided
information about the interaction importances, namely, which are the
most important interactions to discriminate between complexes of active
and inactive (or less active) compounds against Cz.

Our model
allowed us to point out 19 inter-/intramolecular main
interactions that could explain the principal changes in the complexes
under analysis.

Among the intermolecular interactions, backbone–backbone
interactions 5, 6, 7, and 8 as well as interactions of inhibitor residues
P2 and P3 with the Leu67 side chain play a key role in proper anchoring
of most active inhibitors into the enzyme binding cleft. Unfortunately,
no quantitative relationship was found between the structure and activity
data when considering only intermolecular interactions.

By taking
into account also intramolecular interactions and with
the help of the SVM-RFE model to separate active-like from inactive-like
interactions, a more indirect mechanism of enzyme inhibition involving
extensive conformational changes within protein structure arises.

These protein conformational changes occur on both “walls”
of the binding cleft promoted by intermolecular interactions at the
S2 and S3 sites. Inhibitor interactions at the S2 subpocket trigger
conformational changes on the β-sheet161–170 (right wall), while interactions at the S3 subsite mostly drive
conformational changes on the loop56–68 (left wall).
Both conformational changes ultimately lead to re-arrangements of
residues His162 and Gln19 at the S1′ site that allows proper
positioning of the vinyl sulfone warhead and formation of key backbone–backbone
interactions between the peptide-like inhibitor and binding cleft
wall residues.

On the other hand, our study also allowed us
to understand how
important the role of the highly-conserved Trp184 is, enabling interaction
1 formation that leads to activation of the catalytic histidine. The
“switching activity” of Trp184 is crucial for accommodation
of the catalytic triad. Different interactions “orchestrated”
by this residue determine activation/inactivation of the protein machinery.

In this regard, we have found that most active Cz inhibitors induce
a conformation in which interactions considered as a hallmark of the
substrate recognition event are present. Having isolated this “activated”
Cz structure, we can use it in rigid docking experiments in the context
of prospective virtual screening campaigns to “fish”
highly active Cz inhibitors from compound databases.

Moreover,
among relevant interactions that stabilize the “activated”
Cz conformation, intermolecular interactions such as 5, 6, and 7 could
be plugged into the docking algorithms to customize the scoring function
and guide the docking predictions.

Finally, throughout this
study, we also got a sense of the strong
communication that exists between the enzyme binding cleft subpockets,
the property that might help us to choose the best approach to follow
in prospective screening campaigns. Probably a fragment-based approach
is not the best choice in this case because of this property of high
inter-relationship between subpockets.

All the collected information
would be taken into account in the
following prospective studies aimed to search novel Cz inhibitors.

4 Computational Details
4.1 Simulation Protocol
Jaishankar8 synthesized and determined
the inhibition constants
against Cz of a series of vinyl sulfone analogues closely related
to K-777.

Although the experimental structure of these vinyl
sulfone analogues in the complex with Cz has not been determined yet
(except for K-777, pdb id = 2OZ2), for peptide-like Cz inhibitors, a reasonably accurate
initial guess of the inhibitor binding mode can be constructed “by
hand” by placing each residue in the inhibitor sequence P1′, P1, P2, and P3 into
its own enzyme subpockets S1′, S1, S2, and S3.

Initial
coordinates of the complex were taken from the structure
of Cz bound to K-777 (pdb id = 2OZ2).21 By performing
substitutions at P2 and P3 residues of K-777 to get the analogues
reported by Jaishankar,8 17 closely related
complexes were constructed and then refined by MD simulations.

All the Cz–inhibitor complex simulations were carried out
with Amber14 software package32,33 at 300 K temperature
and extended up to 50 ns overall simulation time in a truncated octahedral
periodic box of TIP3P water molecules. Amber ff14SB force field was
used for proteins residues.34 The antechamber
software in the Amber-Tools package was used to generate ligand inhibitor
parameters with GAFF force field and RESP charges.35

4.2 Quantum Theory of Atoms
in Molecules
The structure of the potential energy minimum
was selected from the
MD trajectories of Cz–Inh complexes as a single representative
structure upon which the charge density analysis was done.

Because
accurate quantum mechanical calculations are still forbidden for full
biomolecular complexes, reduced models were constructed from the potential
energy minimum structures. A total of 28 residues (∼570 atoms)
were included in the reduced models: the vinyl sulfone inhibitor and
the surrounding residues in a spherical volume of about 5 Å centered
on the inhibitor atoms (Figure S1 in the Supporting Information shows the residues included in the reduced models).

The charge density was computed by density functional theory methodology
with the M06-2x dispersion corrected hybrid functional and 6-31G(d)
as the basis set, as implemented in Gaussian 09 package.36 The topological analysis of charge density was
then performed with Multiwfn software.37

4.3 Support Vector Machines−Recursive Feature
Elimination
Charge density values associated to 319 noncovalent
interactions per complex were used as features to train a linear SVM
classifier. SVMs are supervised learning models with associated learning
algorithms that analyze data used for classification and regression
analysis.38

If the data are not separable
by a hyperplane, they can be mapped into feature spaces of higher
dimensionality where linear separation of positive and negative examples
might be possible (i.e., the so-called kernel trick). However, unlike
linear models, SVM models trained on high-dimensional kernel spaces
have black box character, and it is generally difficult to rationalize
model performance.39 Therefore, in this
article, we restricted ourselves to linear SVM because our main interest
was in uncovering relationships between the features (i.e., molecular
interactions) and the biological activities to understand, ultimately,
the enzyme inhibition mechanism. Nevertheless, it is important to
bear in mind that the analysis of features that contribute to predictions
only makes sense if the model reaches a reasonably high-performance
level.

It is well known that when the number of features is
large and
the number of training examples is comparatively small, the risk of
overfitting arises. Therefore, to overcome the problem of high dimensionality
and scarce samples of our data set, SVM was coupled with the RFE algorithm
during model training.

SVM-RFE is a feature selection algorithm
based on backward elimination
of features with lowest weights. In each iteration, the SVM model
is trained with the current subset of features, the weight (|w|) of each feature is calculated according to the SVM classifier,
the features are ranked according to |w|, and then,
the bottom-ranked features are eliminated.26

SVM-RFE and stratified twofold cross-validation were implemented
with the help of the scikit-learn module of Python.40

4.4 Dynamic Cross-Correlation
Analysis
The correlation matrix describing how interactions
are related to
each other among the Cz–Inh complexes was computed from charge
density data obtained from QTAIM calculations. Only interactions with
importances greater than 2.0 in the SVM-RFE classifier were considered
for the correlation analysis.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01934.Residues that
conform subpockets S1, S1′, S2,
and S3 from the cruzain binding cleft and local charge density values
corresponding to interactions discussed in the main text (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01934_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all the authors. All the authors
have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. All the
authors contributed equally.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge SECyT-UNNE and CONICET for financial
support. Geforce GTX Titan X GPU partially used for this research
was donated by NVIDIA Corporation. The authors also acknowledge the
computer resources at MareNostrum and the technical support provided
by Barcelona Supercomputing Center (RES-BCV-2019-3-0015). The authors
acknowledge the reviewers whose critical reading and suggestions helped
to improve and clarify this manuscript.
==== Refs
References
World Health Organization  . Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis) . https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/chagas-disease-(american-trypanosomiasis) (accessed Aug 6, 2019 ).
de
Souza A. S. ; de Oliveira M. T. ; Andricopulo A. D. 
Development
of a Pharmacophore for Cruzain Using Oxadiazoles as Virtual Molecular
Probes: Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship Studies . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2017 , 31 , 801 –816 . 10.1007/s10822-017-0039-0 .28795372 
Wiggers H. J. ; Rocha J. R. ; Fernandes W. B. ; Sesti-Costa R. ; Carneiro Z. A. ; Cheleski J. ; da Silva A. B. F. ; Juliano L. ; Cezari M. H. S. ; Silva J. S. ; McKerrow J. H. ; Montanari C. A. 
Non-Peptidic
Cruzain Inhibitors with Trypanocidal Activity Discovered by Virtual
Screening and In Vitro Assay . PLoS Neglected
Trop. Dis. 
2013 , 7 , e237010.1371/journal.pntd.0002370 .
McGrath M. E. ; Eakin A. E. ; Engel J. C. ; McKerrow J. H. ; Craik C. S. ; Fletterick R. J. 
The Crystal
Structure of Cruzain: A Therapeutic Target
for Chagas’ Disease . J. Mol. Biol. 
1995 , 247 , 251 –259 . 10.1006/jmbi.1994.0137 .7707373 
Bank R. P. D.  RCSB PDB:
Homepage . https://www.rcsb.org/ (accessed Aug 6, 2019 ).
Barbosa
da Silva E. ; Dall E. ; Briza P. ; Brandstetter H. ; Ferreira R. S. 
Cruzain Structures: Apocruzain and Cruzain Bound to
S-Methyl Thiomethanesulfonate and Implications for Drug Design . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. F: Struct. Biol. Commun. 
2019 , 75 , 419 –427 . 10.1107/s2053230x19006320 .31204688 
Herrera-Mayorga V. ; Lara-Ramírez E. ; Chacón-Vargas K. ; Aguirre-Alvarado C. ; Rodríguez-Páez L. ; Alcántara-Farfán V. ; Cordero-Martínez J. ; Nogueda-Torres B. ; Reyes-Espinosa F. ; Bocanegra-García V. ; Rivera G. 
Structure-Based
Virtual Screening and In Vitro Evaluation of New Trypanosoma Cruzi
Cruzain Inhibitors . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2019 , 20 , 1742 10.3390/ijms20071742 .
Jaishankar P. ; Hansell E. ; Zhao D.-M. ; Doyle P. S. ; McKerrow J. H. ; Renslo A. R. 
Potency and Selectivity of P2/P3-Modified Inhibitors
of Cysteine Proteases from Trypanosomes . Bioorg.
Med. Chem. Lett. 
2008 , 18 , 624 –628 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.11.070 .18055204 
Bader R. F. W.  Atoms in Molecules:
A Quantum Theory ; Oxford University Press , 1990 .
Tosso R. D. ; Andujar S. A. ; Gutierrez L. ; Angelina E. ; Rodríguez R. ; Nogueras M. ; Baldoni H. ; Suvire F. D. ; Cobo J. ; Enriz R. D. 
Molecular Modeling
Study of Dihydrofolate Reductase
Inhibitors. Molecular Dynamics Simulations, Quantum Mechanical Calculations,
and Experimental Corroboration . J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 
2013 , 53 , 2018 –2032 . 10.1021/ci400178h .23834278 
Tosso R. D. ; Vettorazzi M. ; Andujar S. A. ; Gutierrez L. J. ; Garro J. C. ; Angelina E. ; Rodríguez R. ; Suvire F. D. ; Nogueras M. ; Cobo J. ; Enriz R. D. 
The Electronic
Density Obtained from a QTAIM Analysis Used as Molecular Descriptor.
A Study Performed in a New Series of DHFR Inhibitors . J. Mol. Struct. 
2017 , 1134 , 464 –474 . 10.1016/j.molstruc.2016.12.060 .
Gutierrez L. J. ; Angelina E. ; Gyebrovszki A. ; Fülöp L. ; Peruchena N. ; Baldoni H. A. ; Penke B. ; Enriz R. D. 
New Small-Size
Peptides Modulators of the Exosite of BACE1 Obtained from a Structure-Based
Design . J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 
2017 , 35 , 413 –426 . 10.1080/07391102.2016.1145143 .26813690 
Barrera
Guisasola E. E. ; Gutierrez L. J. ; Andujar S. A. ; Angelina E. ; Rodríguez A. M. ; Enriz R. D. 
Pentameric Models as Alternative
Molecular Targets for the Design of New Antiaggregant Agents . Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 
2016 , 17 , 156 –168 . 10.2174/1389203716666151102104926 .26521954 
Párraga J. ; Cabedo N. ; Andujar S. ; Piqueras L. ; Moreno L. ; Galán A. ; Angelina E. ; Enriz R. D. ; Ivorra M. D. ; Sanz M. J. ; Cortes D. 
2,3,9- and 2,3,11-Trisubstituted
Tetrahydroprotoberberines as D2 Dopaminergic Ligands . Eur. J. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 68 , 150 –166 . 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.07.036 .23974015 
Angelina E. ; Andujar S. ; Moreno L. ; Garibotto F. ; Párraga J. ; Peruchena N. ; Cabedo N. ; Villecco M. ; Cortes D. ; Enriz R. D. 
3-Chlorotyramine
Acting as Ligand
of the D2 Dopamine Receptor. Molecular Modeling, Synthesis and D2
Receptor Affinity . Mol. Inf. 
2015 , 34 , 28 –43 . 10.1002/minf.201400093 .
Angelina E. L. ; Andujar S. A. ; Tosso R. D. ; Enriz R. D. ; Peruchena N. M. 
Non-Covalent
Interactions in Receptor–Ligand Complexes. A Study Based on
the Electron Charge Density . J. Phys. Org. Chem. 
2014 , 27 , 128 –134 . 10.1002/poc.3250 .
Luchi A. M. ; Angelina E. L. ; Andujar S. A. ; Enriz R. D. ; Peruchena N. M. 
Halogen
Bonding in Biological Context: A Computational Study of D2 Dopamine
Receptor . J. Phys. Org. Chem. 
2016 , 29 , 645 –655 . 10.1002/poc.3586 .
Parravicini O. ; Bogado M. L. ; Rojas S. ; Angelina E. L. ; Andujar S. A. ; Gutierrez L. J. ; Cabedo N. ; Sanz M. J. ; López-Gresa M. P. ; Cortes D. ; Enriz R. D. 
Tetrahydroisoquinolines Functionalized
with Carbamates as Selective Ligands of D2 Dopamine Receptor . J. Mol. Model. 
2017 , 23 , 273 10.1007/s00894-017-3441-6 .28866777 
Vettorazzi M. ; Angelina E. ; Lima S. ; Gonec T. ; Otevrel J. ; Marvanova P. ; Padrtova T. ; Mokry P. ; Bobal P. ; Acosta L. M. ; Palma A. ; Cobo J. ; Bobalova J. ; Csollei J. ; Malik I. ; Alvarez S. ; Spiegel S. ; Jampilek J. ; Enriz R. D. 
An Integrative Study to Identify
Novel Scaffolds for Sphingosine Kinase 1 Inhibitors . Eur. J. Med. Chem. 
2017 , 139 , 461 –481 . 10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.08.017 .28822281 
Luchi A. ; Angelina E. ; Bogado L. ; Forli S. ; Olson A. ; Peruchena N. 
Flap-Site
Fragment Restores Back Wild-Type Behaviour
in Resistant Form of HIV Protease . Mol. Inf. 
2018 , 37 , 1800053 10.1002/minf.201800053 .
Kerr I. D. ; Lee J. H. ; Farady C. J. ; Marion R. ; Rickert M. ; Sajid M. ; Pandey K. C. ; Caffrey C. R. ; Legac J. ; Hansell E. ; McKerrow J. H. ; Craik C. S. ; Rosenthal P. J. ; Brinen L. S. 
Vinyl Sulfones as Antiparasitic Agents and a Structural
Basis for Drug Design . J. Biol. Chem. 
2009 , 284 , 25697 –25703 . 10.1074/jbc.m109.014340 .19620707 
Fujita T. ; Winkler D. A. 
Understanding the roles of the “Two
QSARs” . J. Chem. Inf. 
2016 , 56 , 269 –274 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00229 .
Jolliffe I. T. ; Cadima J. 
Principal Component Analysis: A Review
and Recent Developments . Philos. Trans. R. Soc.,
A 
2016 , 374 , 20150202 10.1098/rsta.2015.0202 .
Guyon I. ; Weston J. ; Barnhill S. ; Vapnik V. 
Gene Selection
for
Cancer Classification Using Support Vector Machines . Mach. Learn. 
2002 , 46 , 389 –422 . 10.1023/a:1012487302797 .
Bolón-Canedo V. ; Alonso-Betanzos A. 
Ensembles
for feature selection: A review and future
trends . Inf. Fusion 
2019 , 52 , 1 –12 . 10.1016/j.inffus.2018.11.008 .
Lin X. ; Li C. ; Zhang Y. ; Su B. ; Fan M. ; Wei H. 
Selecting
Feature subsets based on SVM-RFE and the overlapping ratio with applications
in bioinformatics . Molecules 
2017 , 23 , 52 10.3390/molecules23010052 .
Kuhn M. ; Johnson K.  Feature Engineering
and
Selection: A Practical Approach for Predictive Models , 1 st ed.; CRC Press : Boca Raton, Florida , 2019 ; pp 250 –270 .
Zhou X. ; Tuck D. P. 
MSVM-RFE: extensions of SVM-RFE for multiclass gene
selection on DNA microarray data . Bioinformatics 
2007 , 23 , 1106 –1114 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm036 .17494773 
Brinen L. S. ; Hansell E. ; Cheng J. ; Roush W. R. ; McKerrow J. H. ; Fletterick R. J. 
A Target
within the Target: Probing Cruzain’s
P1′ Site to Define Structural Determinants for the Chagas’
Disease Protease . Structure 
2000 , 8 , 831 –840 . 10.1016/s0969-2126(00)00173-8 .10997902 
Arafet K. ; Świderek K. ; Moliner V. 
Computational Study
of the Michaelis
Complex Formation and the Effect on the Reaction Mechanism of Cruzain
Cysteine Protease . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 18613 –18622 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b03010 .
Turk D. ; Gunčar G. ; Podobnik M. ; Turk B. 
Revised Definition
of Substrate Binding Sites of Papain-like Cysteine Proteases . Biol. Chem. 
1998 , 379 , 137 –147 . 10.1515/bchm.1998.379.2.137 .9524065 
Case D. A. ; Cheatham T. E. ; Darden T. ; Gohlke H. ; Luo R. ; Merz K. M. ; Onufriev A. ; Simmerling C. ; Wang B. ; Woods R. J. 
The Amber Biomolecular
Simulation
Programs . J. Comput. Chem. 
2005 , 26 , 1668 –1688 . 10.1002/jcc.20290 .16200636 
Case D. A. ; Babin V. ; Berryman J. T. ; Betz R. M. , Cai Q. ; Cerrutti D. S. ; Cheatham T. E. ; Darden T. A. ; Duke R. E. ; Gohlke H. , Goetz A.
W. ; Gusarov S. ; Homeyer N. ; Janowski P. ; Kaus J. ; Kolossváry I. ; Kovalenko A. , Lee T. S. ; LeGrand S. ; Luchko T. , Luo R. ; Madej B. ; Merz K. M. ; Paesani F. ; Roe D. R. ; Roitberg A. ; Sagui C. ; Salomon-Ferrer R. ; Seabra G. ; Simmerling C. L. ; Smith W. ; Swails J. ; Walker R. C. ; Wang J. ; Wolf R. M. ; Wu X. ; Kollman P. A.  Amber 14 , 2014 .
Maier J. A. ; Martinez C. ; Kasavajhala K. ; Wickstrom L. ; Hauser K. E. ; Simmerling C. 
Ff14SB: Improving
the Accuracy of
Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from Ff99SB . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2015 , 11 , 3696 –3713 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00255 .26574453 
Wang J. ; Wolf R. M. ; Caldwell J. W. ; Kollman P. A. ; Case D. A. 
Development
and Testing of a General Amber Force Field . J. Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 1157 –1174 . 10.1002/jcc.20035 .15116359 
Frisch M. J. ; Trucks G. W. ; Schlegel H. B. ; Scuseria G. E. ; Robb M. A. ; Cheeseman J. R. ; Scalmani G. ; Barone V. ; Petersson G. A. ; Nakatsuji H. ; Li X. ; Caricato M. ; Marenich A. ; Bloino J. ; Janesko B. G. ; Gomperts R. ; Mennucci B. ; Hratchian H. P. ; Ortiz J. V. ; Izmaylov A. F. ; Sonnenberg J. L. ; Williams-Young D. ; Ding F. ; Lipparini F. ; Egidi F. ; Goings J. ; Peng B. ; Petrone A. ; Henderson T. ; Ranasinghe D. ; Zakrzewski V. G. ; Gao J. ; Rega N. ; Zheng G. ; Liang W. ; Hada M. ; Ehara M. ; Toyota K. ; Fukuda R. ; Hasegawa J. ; Ishida M. ; Nakajima T. ; Honda Y. ; Kitao O. ; Nakai H. ; Vreven T. ; Throssell K. ; Montgomery J. A. Jr.; Peralta J. E. ; Ogliaro F. ; Bearpark M. ; Heyd J. J. ; Brothers E. ; Kudin K. N. ; Staroverov V. N. ; Keith T. ; Kobayashi R. ; Normand J. ; Raghavachari K. ; Rendell A. ; Burant J. C. ; Iyengar S. S. ; Tomasi J. ; Cossi M. ; Millam J. M. ; Klene M. ; Adamo C. ; Cammi R. ; Ochterski J. W. ; Martin R. L. ; Morokuma K. ; Farkas O. ; Foresman J. B. ; Fox D. J.  Gaussian 09 , Revision A.02; Gaussian, Inc. , 2016 .
Lu T. ; Chen F. 
Multiwfn: A Multifunctional Wavefunction Analyzer . J. Comput. Chem. 
2012 , 33 , 580 –592 . 10.1002/jcc.22885 .22162017 
Li H. ; Liang Y. ; Xu Q. 
Support Vector
Machines and Its Applications
in Chemistry . Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 
2009 , 95 , 188 –198 . 10.1016/j.chemolab.2008.10.007 .
Rodríguez-Pérez R. ; Vogt M. ; Bajorath J. 
Support Vector Machine Classification
and Regression Prioritize Different Structural Features for Binary
Compound Activity and Potency Value Prediction . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 6371 –6379 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b01079 .30023518 
Pedregosa F. ; Varoquaux G. ; Gramfort A. ; Michel V. ; Thirion B. ; Grisel O. ; Blondel M. ; Prettenhofer P. ; Weiss R. ; Dubourg V. ; Passos A. ; Cournapeau D. ; Brucher M. ; Perrot M. ; Duchesnay E. 
Scikit-Learn:
Machine Learning in Python . J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 
2011 , 12 , 2825 –2830 .

