
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03209ArticleArtificial Lift and Mobility Enhancement of Heavy
Oil Reservoirs Utilizing a Renewable Energy-Powered Heating Element Aljawad Murtada Saleh *Alafnan Saad *Abu-Khamsin Sidqi College of Petroleum Engineering
& Geosciences, King Fahd University
of Petroleum & Minerals, Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia* E-mail: mjawad@kfupm.edu.sa. (M.S.A.).* E-mail: safnan@kfupm.edu.sa. (S.A.).12 11 2019 26 11 2019 4 22 20048 20058 30 09 2019 01 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The improvement of
heavy oil recovery by steam injection or electric
heating has been investigated extensively. However, the potential
benefit of placing a permanent heating element around the pay zone
has not received significant attention. Previously, numerical models
were mainly used to investigate improvements in reservoir fluid mobility
but rarely when considering the impact of downhole heating on a wellbore’s
vertical lift performance. In this study, a coupled mass and heat
transfer model was developed and applied to a reservoir/wellbore system
to investigate the impact of a heating element on recovery improvement.
The numerical simulations showed that heat propagation due to the
heating element did not exceed 10–15 ft while the reservoir’s
fluids were being produced. However, much longer distances could be
reached through heat conduction under shut-in conditions. It was determined
that more than a 40% improvement in the productivity index could be
achieved at low production rates. However, no productivity improvement
was noticed under convection-dominated heat transfer, which occurs
at relatively high production rates. A heating element could also
reduce the flowing bottomhole pressure required in a wellbore by more
than 200 psi, a result caused by a continuous temperature increase
as the fluids flowed into the heated wellbore section.

document-id-old-9ao9b03209document-id-new-14ao9b03209ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Heavy
oil, which is comprised of highly viscous hydrocarbons that
cannot be produced commercially under normal reservoir conditions,
makes up a large portion of the world’s current reserves. Thermal
alteration of the physical properties of heavy crudes could aid in
the exploitation of significant oil resources and thus in supplying
the increasing global demand for energy.

Traditional thermally
enhanced oil recovery (EOR), which includes
steam injection, in situ oil combustion, and mining, are widely used
for heavy crudes, supplying 3% of the world’s oil demand.1 When thermally stimulated, hydrocarbon properties
such as density and viscosity change significantly, facilitating reservoir
flow and increasing oil recovery.2−4 Increasing the temperature
of heavy crudes from the typical reservoir temperature to 200–300
°F can reduce the oil’s viscosity by a few orders of magnitude,
significantly enhancing inflow performance.5 Thermal EOR is an active area of research and development. Thermal
methods currently in use and proven successful for the past few decades
include hot water flooding, steam and immiscible CO2 injection,
and in situ combustion. High porosity sand formations containing heavy
and extra heavy crudes of API values less than 20 are the most suitable
candidates for thermal EOR processes.6−8 The aforementioned techniques
rely on heat transfer by injected or in situ partial burning of hydrocarbons.
They require large capital investments, and applications are restricted
by factors such as the target formation’s depth and thickness
and other logistics.

Another family of thermal EOR utilizes
electric current to directly
heat a formation. This group includes resistive, radiofrequency, and
inductive heating.9 Their impact on incremental
recovery is not as significant as that of traditional methods, but
they provide a means of enhancing productivity in situations where
capital investments are unattainable or technical implementation of
typical thermal EOR is impractical (e.g., offshore wells). Resistive
heating employs a potential difference between two wells that occurs
when one is acting as an electrode and the other, a cathode, with
some water injected to improve heat conduction. A formation enclosed
by two adjacent wells is subject to increases in temperature, and
hence oil production can be enhanced.10 A similar principle can be applied when a downhole electrical heater
is placed to heat hydrocarbons in close proximity to a well; compared
with the steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD) process, this has
shown some reasonable efficiency with a lower water-to-oil production
ratio.11−14 Reservoir models and simulation studies have established the feasibility
of downhole electrical heating.15,16 Laboratory work has
also been conducted to experimentally study resistive heating.17 The radiofrequency heating approach involves
converting electromagnetic waves into thermal energy in reservoirs
assisted by organic solvent injection. This approach has the advantage
of reducing water injection and carbon dioxide emissions. Downhole
equipment design and high pressure/high temperature conditions are
some of the limitations.18−23

Downhole electric heating accomplished by increasing the temperature
of a permanently installed element can enhance hydrocarbon flow from
the reservoir to the wellbore. Moreover, heated hydrocarbons have
shown improved outflow performance from the wellbore to the surface,
as both viscosity and density are reduced at elevated temperatures.
The objective of the present research is to study the recovery enhancement
obtained through continuous downhole heating of heavy and extra heavy
oils by combining energy and mass balance simulations within the reservoir
and from the wellbore to the surface.

Element Design
Subsurface heating of reservoir hydrocarbons for enhanced production
can be achieved through an injected hot fluid (i.e., steam), focused
electromagnetic radiations, or in situ conversion process ICP where
the resistive element is supplied with electric current to raise its
temperature. The element is in direct contact with the formation,
and hence the fluids stored in the pores are subject to thermal gradient.
Renewable energy can be utilized as the source of electric current
for the sustainable and environmentally friendly process.24 Desired downhole temperature of the heating
element can be used to quantify the required energy, which, in turn,
can be translated into the surface design of the renewable system
(i.e., number of windmills or surface area of solar panels). For modeling
the conversion of solar radiation into electric current, several approaches
are discussed in the literature. In general, the photovoltaic cell
(PV) is used, which can be presented as shown in Figure 1.25 The heating element should be perforated to allow the fluid to flow
from the reservoir to the wellbore. It also should be made of a material
that can withstand harsh conditions (i.e., high pressure and temperature).

Figure 1 Solar
cell model to convert solar radiations into electric current
that feeds the heating element.

Mathematical
Models
The model assumed a section of homogenous and isotropic
reservoir
that contained a single-phase high viscosity oil. A vertical wellbore
was placed in the formation and a perforated heating element was positioned
around the pay zone. The upper section of the wellbore contained a
cemented casing, as shown in Figure 2. It was assumed that the reservoir rock and fluids’
thermal properties (e.g., heat capacity and thermal conductivity)
were constants. Also, the oil could flow at initial reservoir conditions;
nevertheless, the heated element was applied to improve productivity.
The mathematical formulas for the mass and heat transfer model for
the wellbore and reservoir system are discussed below.

Figure 2 Schematic of the heating
element’s placement within the
wellbore/reservoir system.

Wellbore
Model
A wellbore model was used to investigate
the impact of placing a permanent downhole heat source on the bottomhole
pressure required to support a certain flow rate for a given flowing
surface tubing pressure. The model solved for the velocity, fluid
properties, temperature, and pressure profiles along the wellbore’s
length.

The velocity profile was obtained from the mass balance
over a section of the wellbore, as shown in Figure 2. The wellbore continuity equation is written
as 1  where ρf is the fluid density, Rw is the
inner casing or tubing radius, t is time, γ
is the wellbore open ratio, vL,p is the
produced fluids velocity, and z is the direction
along the wellbore length. The first term in the
continuity equation accounts for the fluid density change, the second
indicates the fluid convection from the reservoir to the wellbore,
and the last is the fluid convection inside the wellbore. After obtaining
the velocity profile, the temperature profile was obtained by solving
the thermal energy balance equation, which is written as 2  where Ĉpf is the fluid’s specific heat capacity, Twb is the wellbore temperature, U is
the overall heat transfer coefficient between the wellbore and formation
in the nonheated section, and Tr|B is
the temperature at the wellbore/formation boundary. The overall heat
transfer coefficient was estimated through the Hasan and Kabir approach.26 The first term in the thermal energy balance
equation represents the heat accumulation, the second is the heat
convection along the wellbore’s length, the third denotes heat
convection from the formation’s produced fluids, and the last
represents the heat conducted from the formation. The final term in
the above equation was modified for the heated section of the wellbore
where the element was placed (see Figure 2). The equation is written as 3  where h is the heat
transfer
coefficient and Te is the heated element
temperature.

Solving the above equation required knowledge of
the formation
temperatures. An iterative procedure was used to solve the complete
system. Geothermal temperature was employed to initialize the model
(i.e., the initial condition), and the fluid temperature leaving the
reservoir served as the boundary condition for the wellbore model.
The wellbore temperature model was then coupled with the radial reservoir
temperature conduction model, which is written as 4  where 5   6  And Tr is reservoir
temperature,  is the effective average reservoir
rock
and fluid property,  is the effective average thermal conductivity, r is the radial direction away from the wellbore, φ
is the formation porosity, and the subscripts f and r represent fluid
and rock, respectively. The reservoir and wellbore (i.e., inner boundary
conditions) were coupled through the following boundary condition 7  where the first term represents the heat condition
at the reservoir/wellbore boundary and the second is the heat flux
from the wellbore. Convergence of the two models was declared when
the difference between the heat fluxes of the wellbore and reservoir
models at the boundary was small. The initial reservoir temperature
was used as the outer boundary condition. The pressure along the wellbore
was obtained by solving the momentum balance, written as 8  where pwb is the
wellbore pressure, fm is the Moody friction
factor, g is the gravitational acceleration, and
θ is the inclination of the wellbore. The Moody friction factor
for laminar flow (NRe < 2000) is 9  where NRe is the
Reynold number, which is defined as 10  where μ is the fluid
viscosity and d is the inner casing or tubing diameter.
For unstable and
turbulent flow (NRe ≥ 2000), Jain
and Swamee’s method was used to calculate the friction factor,
as follows 11  

Reservoir Model
A reservoir model was implemented to
investigate the impact of the heat source on improving the reservoir
fluids’ mobility and eventual productivity. The model consisted
of the diffusivity equation to solve for the pressure profile and
energy balance to obtain the reservoir’s temperature profile.

Since both fluids’ viscosity and density are functions of
the temperature (which varies due to the heat source), the following
diffusivity equation, which assumes variable fluid properties, was
solved 12  where p is the reservoir
pressure and k is the permeability. To solve the
partial differential equation, the pressure was equated to the initial
reservoir pressure before production began. A constant flow rate was
assumed at the inner boundary condition, generating a Neumann boundary 13  where qsc is the
production rate at standard conditions, Bo is the oil formation volume factor, rw is the wellbore radius, and hpay is
the pay zone thickness. No flow outer boundary condition at the reservoir
perimeter was implemented, which is written as 14  where n is the normal
vector
to the boundary.

The temperature profile could be solved after
obtaining the pressure
and velocity distributions. This was done by solving the energy balance
equation, assuming 1D radial heat transfer27 15  where βT is the thermal expansion
factor. The first two terms of the above equation represent heat accumulation,
the third represents heat convection, the fourth indicates heat conduction,
and the last one is the effect of fluid expansion. Since heavy oil
is incompressible fluid, the expansion terms (i.e., second and last
term) can be neglected. The differential equation was solved by applying
initial and boundary conditions. Initially, the temperature everywhere
was considered to be equal to the reservoir temperature. For the outer
boundary, the temperature was assumed to be constant at the reservoir
temperature. The inner boundary condition could be specified as 16  where
w stands for the wellbore and U1 is the
overall heat transfer coefficient in
the heated section.

Heavy Oil Fluid Properties
Different
correlations were
developed for the heavy oil fluid density and viscosity, which varies
based on the reservoir type. In this work, the heavy oil viscosity
was estimated using Beggs and Robinson’s method.28 This method was used to estimate the viscosity
of dead and live oil at different temperatures and american petroleum
institute (API) gravity. In the context of this work, the dissolved
gas ratio was assumed to be negligible (Rs = 0) and low API gravity was used to represent heavy oil. The density
was projected using the Alomair et al.’s approach.29 The method assumes dead oil density, which is
also a function of temperature and API gravity.

Comparison
with Analytical Solutions
This section discusses
the accuracy of the model’s numerical approach; however, it
was not compared against field data. The integrated heat and mass
transfer numerical model was validated against analytical solutions.30 The model was first simplified to match the
explanation of the analytical solutions. This is to verify that the
numerical approach was correct and could deliver decent precision.
Input data used for validating the temperature models are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Input Data for the Integrated Heat
and Mass Transfer Model
input data	SI unit	field unit	
Wellbore
Properties	
wellbore radius, rw	0.104 m	0.34 ft	
inner casing radius, Rw	0.0628 m	2.475 in.	
overall heat transfer
coefficient, U	0.1 KJ/(s m2 °C)	0.00488 Btu/(h ft2 °F)	
heat transfer coefficient, h	60 × 10–3 KJ/(s m2 °C)	2.93 × 10–3 Btu/(h ft2 °F)	
ambient temperature, Tb	25 °C	77 °F	
flow surface pressure, Ptf	0.69 MPa	100 psi	
wellbore
length, L	1220 m	4000 ft	
Reservoir/Formation Properties	
reservoir initial pressure, PR	34.5 MPa	5000 psi	
API gravity	10	 	
reservoir temperature, TR	80 °C	176 °F	
formation rock density, ρma	2700 kg/m3	168.48 lbm/ft3	
formation specific heat capacity, cpr	0.879 KJ/(kg °C)	0.2099 Btu/(lbm °F)	
formation
thermal conductivity, kr	1.57 × 10–3 KJ/(s m °C)	0.907 Btu/(h ft °F)	
reservoir permeability, k	4.93 × 10–14 m2	50 mD	
pay zone thickness, hpay	30.5 m	100 ft	
drainage radius	30 m	98.4 ft	
formation porosity	0.1	 	
initial water saturation	0.1	 	
General Reservoir
Fluid Properties	
heat capacity, cpf	2.2 KJ/(kg °C)	0.525 Btu/(lbm °F)	
thermal conductivity, kf	1.2 × 10–4 KJ/(s m °C)	0.069 Btu/(hr ft °F)	
viscosity
at room temperature, μ	15.5 Pa s	2100 cp	
Analytical
solutions were used to evaluate the numerical model
accuracy, assuming a steady-state condition. It was assumed that the
initial temperature in the wellbore was equal to the geothermal one.
The wellbore analytical solution was obtained by integrating the wellbore
ordinary differential equation (see eq 2). The wellbore temperature analytical solution can
be formulated as 17  where 18  and where gG is
the geothermal temperature, Tb is the
ambient temperature, and TI,s is the injected
fluid temperature at the surface. The long-term transient numerical
solution matched the analytical one perfectly, as Figure 3a indicates.

Figure 3 (a) Wellbore temperature
numerical model comparison with analytical
solution, and (b) reservoir temperature numerical model comparison
with analytical solution.

A transient temperature solution for a reservoir was provided by
Whitsitt and Dysart.31 The solution assumes
linear heat transfer where the reservoir is exposed to a colder fluid
injection. The solution assumed that heat transfer occurs only through
the rock; nevertheless, a correction for the assumption was applied
such that the transfer occurs through both the formation’s
rock and fluids. Thus, it was modified using the effective thermal
properties. The modified analytical solution can be shown as 19  

where 20  and where TR is
the initial reservoir temperature, TI,r is the injected cold fluid temperature to the reservoir, and vc is the velocity of cold fluid. Figure 3b shows that there is a perfect
match between the numerical and analytical reservoir temperature solutions.

Solution Methodology
Figure 4 shows the flow of the model, starting with
reading the input data. Then, the reservoir model is applied by solving
the reservoir’s fluid properties, pressure, and temperature
until convergence. Convergence is declared when the change between
two consecutive pressure and temperature profiles is negligible. The
reservoir model provides the temperature of the reservoir fluids entering
the wellbore. Then, the wellbore model is applied by solving the wellbore’s
fluid properties, velocity, temperature, and pressure until convergence.
This is done at each time step until reaching the final production
time.

Figure 4 Flow chart of the wellbore/reservoir mass and heat transfer model.

Results and Discussion
The introduction
of a heating element can improve reservoir fluid
mobility, as well as assist with fluid lifting in the wellbore. Hence,
this study focused on the temperature and pressure responses of the
reservoir/wellbore system before and after placement of the element.
The wellbore, formation, and fluid properties used in this research
are shown in Table 1.

Reservoir
The reservoir temperature evolved because
of heat conduction, which acted against the flow direction. Typical
pressure and temperature profiles of a reservoir under production
after placement of a heating element are shown in Figure 5. In this case, the simulation
was for a 50 STB/day production rate and element temperature of 536
°F. A moderate element temperature was selected because coke
precipitates when heavy crude oil encounters the element at high temperatures.
Only a small section of the reservoir is shown, as the temperature
propagation was limited to the near-wellbore region (see Figure 5b). The temperature
profile presented was at a steady state, while the pressure was at
a pseudo-steady state. As production continued, the pressure profile
kept changing; however, no change was observed with regard to temperature.
It is of note that the temperature reaches a steady-state condition
within 1 or 2 days under normal production rates (i.e., 50–200
STB/day). Nevertheless, it could take years to reach a steady state
under a shut-in condition depending on the reservoir size and thermal
properties.

Figure 5 (a) Reservoir pressure, and (b) reservoir temperature profiles
after 2 days of placing the heating element.

Heat propagation from the heating element was a strong function
of the production rate. In all cases presented in Figure 6a, no heat propagation was
observed beyond 10–15 ft from the wellbore. It is also of note
that the higher the flow rate, the lower are the heat propagation
and temperature magnitudes; this was the result of the convection-dominated
heat transfer. It is interesting that the reservoir fluids entering
the wellbore did not reach the element temperature of 536 °F.
When the production rate was 1000 STB/day, no gain in reservoir fluid
temperature was observed; hence, heating elements are not applicable
for such high production rates. This production was assumed to be
generated from a 100 ft thick pay zone. If 1000 STB/day was produced
from a 1000 ft pay zone, as could occur in a horizontal wellbore,
the temperature profile might behave similar to that of the 100 STB/day
case. Figure 6b shows
the corresponding viscosity profiles at different production rates.
Although the viscosity is moderate at reservoir conditions, it is
estimated to be 2100 cp at room temperature using Beggs and Robinson’s
approach. It is of note that the lower the production rate, the better
is the mobility achieved, due to the greater reduction in viscosity.

Figure 6 (a) Reservoir
temperature profiles at different production rates,
and (b) the corresponding reservoir fluid viscosities.

Heating element viability was assessed by studying the reservoir
productivity index at a pseudo-steady state, J, defined
as 21  where q is the production
rate, P̅ is the average reservoir pressure,
and Pwf is the bottomhole flowing pressure. Figure 7 shows the pseudo-steady
state productivity index as a function of the production rate at different
heating element temperatures. When no heating was considered (176
°F), the productivity index did not change with an increase in
the production rate. Once the element was placed, the productivity
index declined with an increase in the production rate because the
heat did not propagate as efficiently inside the reservoir. Notice
that the improvement in the productivity index could be as large as
42% at 50 STB/day, as low as 8% at 200 STB/day, and diminished to
zero at 1000 STB/day.

Figure 7 Reservoir productivity index at different element temperatures
and flow rates.

For reservoirs that may not produce
naturally due to the fluid’s
high viscosity, cycles of shut in and production may be viable. Theoretically
speaking, heat propagation can reach to the drainage area’s
boundary through heat conduction if enough time is given, assuming
no flow condition. Figure 8a shows the final temperature profile after 80 days of shut
in, where heat propagation reached more than 30 ft. Figure 8b shows the temperature evolution
at different locations inside the reservoir during those 80 days.
It is of note that the closer the reservoir location to the heating
element, the faster and sharper is the increase in the temperature
profile. For instance, heating at a 3 ft radius from the wellbore
was efficient during the first 10 days but the subsequent increase
in temperature was much slower.

Figure 8 (a) Contour map of the temperature profiles
after 80 days of shut
in, and (b) temperature increase with shut-in times at different distances
from the wellbore.

Figure 9 shows 80
days of production after a similar period of shut in, and a second
case in which no shut-in period preceded production. The productivity
of the former scenario was almost 4 times greater than that of the
latter at the initial time; however, productivity declined to reach
that of the second case after 80 days of production, as the temperature
dropped to the initial geothermal value. In both cases, the element
temperature was assumed to be around 536 °F and the production
rate was 200 STB/day. The case presented below may not be ideal for
cyclic production if the reservoir flows naturally. Nevertheless,
it might be suitable for extra heavy reservoirs that require heat
to flow. It is of note that cyclic periods can be optimized to reach
maximum recovery.

Figure 9 Reservoir productivity index when the reservoir was shut
in for
80 days vs a no shut-in case.

Wellbore
The heating element not only improved reservoir
fluid mobility but also assisted with fluid lifting in the wellbore.
The model assumed that the initial formation temperature was equal
to the geothermal temperature (see Figure 10a). Figure 10b shows the formation temperature adjacent to the wellbore
after 10 days of production at 50 STB/day. Most of the temperature
increase occurred within a 1 ft radius around the wellbore; however,
the heat flux reached much longer distances due to the no convection
condition above the productive zone. It is of note that the temperature
contour range and colors in Figure 10a,b are different. This is due to the high element
temperature of 536 °F, as compared with the 176 °F initial
reservoir temperature. Also, it was assumed that the 4000 ft represented
the section above the heated pay zone.

Figure 10 (a) Initial geothermal
profile, and (b) temperature after placing
the heated element, with production at 50 STB/day for 10 days.

The temperature profile in the wellbore also depended
on the production
rate. Figure 11 is
a continuation of Figure 6a, where the temperature was investigated in the wellbore.
Notice that the temperatures at 4000 ft in Figure 11 are not similar to those at the downhole
production location in Figure 6a (i.e., zero). The reason is that the fluids produced from
the reservoir were heated again by the element when they flowed vertically
in the 100 ft heated section. For instance, at 50 STB/day, the fluids
produced from the reservoir were at 390 °F (see Figure 6a) and were heated to 510 °F
during the vertical flow around the pay zone (see Figure 11). Note that the heating element
temperature was assumed to be constant at 536 °F. As seen in Figure 11, the fluids were
heated to higher temperatures at lower flow rates; nevertheless, they
tended to lose heat to the adjacent formation at a faster rate when
flowing to the surface. For the 1000 STB/day case, the fluids did
not increase in temperature as they left the reservoir but rather
were heated to 234 °F within the wellbore. Hence, the heating
element may not have improved the reservoir fluid’s mobility
but did still improve the outflow performance by reducing density
and viscosity. It is advisable to have insulated tubing, especially
at low production rates, to keep the heat within the wellbore.

Figure 11 Wellbore
temperature profiles at different flow rates after 10
days.

The impact of the heating element
on the wellbore temperature and
fluid properties is shown in Figure 12. It was assumed in this simulation that the heating
element temperature was 536 °F and the production rate was 200
STB/day. Figure 12a shows the shift in wellbore temperature due to the heating element. Figure 12b,c shows the reduction
in fluid density and viscosity attributable to the temperature increase.
The reduction in fluid viscosity decreased the pressure drop in the
wellbore due to frictional losses, while the reduction in fluid density
diminished the pressure drop due to the weight of the oil column.
This resulted in a lower bottomhole pressure at a steady state condition
for a given production rate.

Figure 12 Two hundred STB/day after 10 days of heating:
(a) temperature profiles
before and after placing the heating element, (b) viscosity profiles
before and after placing the heating element, and (c) density profiles
before and after placing the heating element.

Figure 13 shows
the outflow performance relationship (OPR) at different element temperatures.
The OPR associates the production rate with the flowing bottomhole
pressure in the wellbore. The general trend was a lower flowing bottomhole
pressure as the element temperature increased (see Figure 13). The blue curve in Figure 13a represents the
original case with no heating element. Initially, as the production
rate increased, the bottomhole pressure dropped because the average
wellbore fluid temperature was higher. For instance, at 100 STB/day,
the fluid’s average temperature in the wellbore was higher
than at 50 STB/day (see Figure 11). However, at higher flow rates, the pressure increased
again as the heating element became less efficient and frictional
losses increased. The flow rate range (see Figure 13) did not exceed 260 STB/day as heating
became less efficient; hence, a sharp increase in bottomhole pressure
was likely at higher rates. It was noted that the heating element
was more efficient at improving oil lifting when the wellbore was
longer. For instance, the heating element could reduce the bottomhole
pressure by 120 psi when production was 150 STB/day (see Figure 13a) for the 4000
ft wellbore. For the 8000 ft case, a reduction of around 200 psi was
achieved (see Figure 13b), indicating better lift performance. Also, placing the heating
element within a smaller diameter wellbore resulted in better wellbore
performance, as compared to wellbores of a larger diameter. The reason
is that the temperature increase due to the heating element significantly
reduced the frictional losses, which tend to be more severe in smaller
diameter wellbores. Also, the lower the API gravity, the more efficient
the heating element in reducing the flowing bottomhole pressure.

Figure 13 (a)
OPR curves at different temperatures in a 4000 ft wellbore,
and (b) OPR curves at different temperatures in a 7900 ft wellbore.

Placing the heating element provided a synergic
effect in terms
of improving the reservoir fluid mobility and assisting with fluid
lifting in the wellbore. This was investigated by studying the reservoir
inflow performance relationship (IPR) and wellbore OPR. Figure 14 shows the OPR
as a dotted line before (OPR1) and after (OPR2) heating, as well as
the IPR in a solid line before (IPR1) and after (IPR2) heating. The
black arrow indicates the IPR/OPR intersection before heating; the
red line is after heating. The intersection represents the actual
reservoir/wellbore system’s performance. Figure 14a shows that the production
increased from 80–96 STB/day, representing a 20% productivity
improvement attributable to the heating element. Figure 14b shows that the production
rate increased from 162–180 STB/day, representing only a 10%
increase in production. Notice that even though the production was
higher for the shorter wellbore at a given flowing surface pressure,
the increase in production was lower. In fact, the longer the wellbore,
the more viable the placement of a heating element. Notice that if
the vertical left performance in the wellbore is ignored, only half
of the production increase will be observed.

Figure 14 (a) Reservoir/wellbore
performance assuming a 7900 ft wellbore,
and (b) reservoir/wellbore performance assuming a 4000 ft wellbore.

Finally, it is important to estimate the amount
of energy required
to keep the heating element temperature constant during production.
The energy required at a steady state condition was calculated using
the following formula 22  where Ė is the required
energy, ṁ is the mass flow rate, and ΔT is the difference between the temperature of the fluids
leaving the heated section of the wellbore and the initial fluid temperature
in the reservoir. As discussed, fluids were heated in the reservoir
as they flowed to the wellbore and again as they vertically flowed
within the heated wellbore section. Assuming a heating element temperature
of 536 °F, Figure 15 shows the temperature of the fluid leaving the reservoir,
as well as leaving the heated wellbore section. Also, the figure indicates
the energy needed to keep the element temperature constant, which
increases with the increase in the production rate. This is logical,
since more energy is needed to keep a material’s temperature
constant when colder fluid is flowing against it. When the production
rate was 200 STB/day, 84 kW was needed to heat the fluids. However,
the energy requirement could be as much as 10 times greater for a
horizontal wellbore. Even though the heating element approach is not
as effective as SAGD, it requires much lower capital and operational
investments. For instance, SAGD requires on average between 15 and
30 MW of energy, which is at least 20 times the energy required for
a heated element in a 1000 ft horizontal section.9

Figure 15 Temperature increase due to the heating element and energy
requirements.

Downhole energy requirements are
dependent on the desired downhole
temperature, pay zone thickness, production rate, and thermal properties
of the reservoir. That energy is used as an input parameter to design
the solar panels when renewable energy sources are considered. Here,
we consider a case of fixed element temperature, variable production
rate (see Figure 16). Notice that the required surface area of the solar panels depends
strongly on the production rate as more energy is consumed to sustain
the element temperature.

Figure 16 Surface area of a photovoltaic cell needed
for the element temperature
of 572 °F as a function of the production rate.

Conclusions
A numerical study was conducted on the
impact of placing a heating
element around the pay zone of a heavy oil reservoir. It was determined
that heat propagation in the reservoir did not exceed 10–15
ft, and was inversely related to the production rate. In the cases
studied, the heating element did not improve the productivity index
of the reservoir when production was around 1000 STB/day; however,
the productivity index improved by more than 40% when the production
rate was 50 STB/day. Nevertheless, heat propagation in a reservoir
can reach longer distances if the production stops for extended periods
of time.

The heating element can also provide a means of improving
the vertical
lift performance in the wellbore by reducing fluid viscosity and density.
The cases studied showed that the heating element was more efficient
when the production rate was between 150 and 200 STB/day, as the average
wellbore temperature was higher. This resulted in around 200 psi less
flowing bottomhole pressure needed to achieve a certain production
rate. The energy required for the 200 STB/day production rate did
not exceed 84 kW, which is considered moderate.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Nomenclature
Booil formation
volume factor, reservoir bbl/ STB

Ĉfluid’s
specific heat capacity, Btu/(lbm °F)

dinner
casing or tubing
diameter, in.

Ėenergy required,
kW

fmMoody
friction factor, unitless

ggravitational acceleration,
m/s2

hheat transfer coefficient,
ft

hpaypay
zone thickness, ft

Jproductivity index,
STB/day/psi

kpermeability, md

effective average thermal
conductivity, Btu/(h ft °F)

ṁmass flow
rate, lbm/min

preservoir pressure,
psi

P̅average
reservoir pressure,
psi

pwbwellbore
pressure, psi

Pwfbottomhole
flowing pressure, psi

qscproduction
rate at standard conditions, STB/day

rradial direction
away from the wellbore, ft

Rwinner
casing or tubing radius, inch

rwwellbore
radius, in.

ttime, s

Teheated
element temperature, °F

Twbwellbore
temperature, °F

Uoverall heat transfer
coefficient between, Btu/(h ft2 °F)

vL,pproduced
fluids velocity, ft/min

zdirection along the
wellbore length, ft

ΔTfluids temperature
increase, °F

φformation porosity, unitless

θinclination of the wellbore,
degree

ρffluid density, lbm/ft3

γwellbore open ratio,
unitless

μfluid viscosity, cp
==== Refs
References
Kokal S. ; Al-Kaabi A.  World Petroleum Council:
Official Publication ; World Petroleum Council: Official Publication, 2010 ; pp 64 –69 .
Sarapardeh A. ; Kiasari H. H. ; Alizadeh N. ; Mighani S. ; Kamari A.   In Application
of Fast-SAGD in Naturally Fractured Heavy Oil Reservoirs: A Case Study , SPE Middle East Oil and Gas Show and Conference; Manama, Bahrain , 2013 ; pp 10 –13 .
Hemmati-Sarapardeh A. ; Shokrollahi A. ; Tatar A. ; Gharagheizi F. ; Mohammadi A. H. ; Naseri A. 
Reservoir Oil Viscosity Determination
Using a Rigorous Approach . Fuel 
2014 , 116 , 39 –48 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2013.07.072 .
Bera A. ; Babadagli T. 
Status of Electromagnetic Heating
for Enhanced Heavy
Oil/Bitumen Recovery and Future Prospects: A Review . Appl. Energy 
2015 , 151 , 206 –226 . 10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.04.031 .
Prats M.  Thermal Recovery ; SPE of AIME : New
York , 1982 ; Vol. 7 .
Conaway C. F.  The Petroleum Industry:
A Nontechnical Guide ; PennWell Books : Tulsa , 1999 ; pp 85 –86 .
Alvarado V. ; Manrique E. 
Enhanced Oil Recovery: An Update Review . Energies 
2010 , 3 , 1529 –1575 . 10.3390/en3091529 .
Santos R. ; Loh W. ; Bannwart A. ; Trevisan O. 
An Overview of Heavy Oil Properties
and Its Recovery and Transportation Methods . Braz. J. Chem. Eng. 
2014 , 31 , 571 –590 . 10.1590/0104-6632.20140313s00001853 .
Ali S. M. ; Bayestehparvin B.   In Electrical Heating—Doing
the Same Thing Over and Over Again , SPE Canada Heavy Oil
Technical Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers , 2018 .
Yuan J.-Y. ; Isaacs E. E. ; Huang H. ; Vandenhoff D. G.  Wet Electric
Heating Process . U.S. Patent US6631761 2003 .
Maggard J. B. ; Wattenbarger R. A.   In Factors Affecting
the Efficiency of Electrical Resistance Heating Patterns ,
Proc., UNITAR/ UNDP 5th International Conference on Heavy Oil and
Tar Sands; Caracas , Aug 4–9, 1991 ; pp 519 –530 .
Vinsome K. ; McGee B.C.W. ; Vermeulen F. E. ; Chute F. S.  Electrical Heating ; Petroleum Society of Canada , 1994 .
Faradonbeh M. R. ; Hassanzadeh H. ; Harding T. 
Numerical Simulations
of Bitumen
Recovery Using Solvent and Water Assisted Electrical Heating . Fuel 
2016 , 186 , 68 –81 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2016.08.077 .
Bottazzi F. ; Repetto C. ; Tita E. ; Maugeri G.   In Downhole
Electrical Heating for
Heavy Oil Enhanced Recovery: A Successful Application in Offshore
Congo , International Petroleum Technology Conference, 2013 .
Rangel-German E. R. ; Schembre J. ; Sandberg C. ; Kovscek A. R. 
Electrical-Heating-Assisted
Recovery for Heavy Oil . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2004 , 45 , 213 –231 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2004.06.005 .
Sierra R. ; Tripathy B. ; Bridges J. E. ; Farouq Ali S. M.   In Promising Progress
in Field Application of Reservoir Electrical Heating Methods , Paper SPE 69709 presented at the SPE International Thermal Operations
and Heavy Oil Symposium, Porlamar, Margarita Island,
Venezuela , 12–14 March, 2001 .
Newbold F. R. ; Perkins T. K. 
Wellbore Transmission of Electrical
Power . J. Can. Pet. Technol. 
1978 , 17 , 39 –53 . 10.2118/78-03-03 .
Amba S. ; Chilingar G. ; Beeson C. 
Use of Direct Electrical Current
for Increasing the Flow Rate of Reservoir Fluids During Petroleum
Recovery . J. Can. Pet. Technol. 
1964 , 3 , 8 –14 . 10.2118/64-01-02 .
Jha K. N. ; Chakma A. 
Heavy-Oil Recovery from Thin Pay Zones by Electromagnetic
Heating . Energy Sources 
1999 , 21 , 63 –73 . 10.1080/00908319950014966 .
Sahni A. ; Kumar M. ; Knapp R.
B.   In Electromagnetic Heating
Methods
for Heavy Oil Reservoirs , SPE/AAPG Western Regional Meeting, Long Beach, CA , June 19–22, 2000 ; pp 19 –22 .
Acar C. ; Hascakir B. ; Demiral B. ; Akin S. ; Karaca H. ; Kartal O. E.   In Microwave Heating of Heavy Oil
Reservoirs: Effect of Wettability , Proc. 150 Years of the
Romanian Petroleum Industry: Tradition and Challenges, Bucharest, Romania , 14–17 October, 2007 .
Hascakir B. ; Acar C. ; Akin S. 
Microwave-Assisted
Heavy Oil Production:
An Experimental Approach . Energy Fuels 
2009 , 23 , 6033 –6039 . 10.1021/ef9007517 .
Kovaleva L. ; Davletbaev A. ; Babadagli T. ; Stepanova Z. 
Effects of
Electrical and Radio-Frequency Electromagnetic Heating on the Mass-Transfer
Process During Miscible Injection for Heavy-Oil Recovery . Energy Fuels 
2011 , 25 , 482 –486 . 10.1021/ef1009428 .
Alafnan S. ; Aljawad M. ; Alismail F. ; Almajed A. 
Enhanced Recovery from
Gas Condensate Reservoirs through Renewable Energy Sources . Energy Fuels 
2019 , 33 , 10115 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b01761 .
Villalva M. G. ; Gazoli J. R. ; Filho E. R. 
Comprehensive
approach to modeling
and simulation of photovoltaic arrays . IEEE
Trans. Power Electron. 
2009 , 24 , 1198 –1208 . 10.1109/TPEL.2009.2013862 .
Hasan A. R. ; Kabir C. S. 
Wellbore Heat-Transfer Modeling and Applications . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2012 , 86–87 , 127 –136 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2012.03.021 .
Li X. ; Zhu D. 
Temperature Behavior
During Multistage Fracture Treatments in Horizontal
Wells . SPE Prod. Oper. 
2018 , 33 , 522 –538 . 10.2118/181876-PA .
Beggs H. D. ; Robinson J. 
Estimating the Viscosity of Crude Oil Systems . J. Pet. Technol. 
1975 , 27 , 1140 –1141 . 10.2118/5434-PA .
Alomair O. ; Jumaa M. ; Alkoriem A. ; Hamed M. 
Heavy Oil Viscosity
and Density Prediction at Normal and Elevated Temperatures . J. Pet. Explor. Prod. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 253 –263 . 10.1007/s13202-015-0184-8 .
Whitsitt N. F. ; Dysart G. R.   In Effect
of Temperature
on Stimulation Design , Paper SPE 2497 presented at the Annual
Fall Meeting of the Society of Petroleum Engineers of AIME, Denver, Colorado , Sept 28–Oct 1. SPE-2497-MS, 1969 .
Aljawad M. S.   In Identifying Formation
Mineralogy Composition in Acid Fracturing From Distributed Temperature
Measurements , SPE Reservoir Evaluation & Engineering, 2019 .

