
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145794610.1021/acsomega.7b01715ArticleRotating Motion of an Oil Droplet in a Circular Channel
Subjected to a Transverse Alternating Electric Field Mochizuki Takaaki *Department of Technology
Education, Tokyo Gakugei University, 4-1-1 Nukuikitamachi, Koganei-shi, Tokyo 184-8501, Japan* E-mail: motizuki@u-gakugei.ac.jp.25 01 2018 31 01 2018 3 1 1031 1040 03 11 2017 10 01 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
transient behavior of a silicone oil droplet passing through
a circular channel in which castor oil passes as a surrounding fluid
is investigated in both a periodically intermittent alternating electric
field and a sinusoidal alternating electric field. When a periodically
intermittent electric field with a low frequency and medium strength
is applied, the droplet first undergoes ellipsoidal deformation where
the major axis is oriented in the direction between the electric field
direction and the direction normal to the electric field and electrorotation
occurs. The inclined major axis tilts away from the electric field
direction and then approaches it. For the case where a sinusoidal
alternating electric field with medium strength is applied, electrorotation
occurs when the frequency of the alternating sinusoidal electric field
is low, whereas the droplet periodically deforms between a prolate
and an oblate ellipsoid at certain frequencies. When the frequency
of the electric field applied is high, the droplet remains spherical
or undergoes deformation to a quasi-steady prolate ellipsoid with
an aspect ratio of almost unity.

document-id-old-9ao7b01715document-id-new-14ao-2017-01715accc-price
==== Body
Introduction
When a steady and uniform
electric field (abbreviated a direct
current (dc) field) of weak strengtha is applied
to a liquid droplet with no net charge that is suspended in another
immiscible dielectric liquid, the droplet deforms to two different
shapes, depending on the electrical properties of the liquids.1 The droplet deforms to a prolate ellipsoid with
the symmetric axis parallel to the applied electric field when the
charge relaxation time of the surrounding liquid is longer than that
of the droplet liquid, whereas the droplet deforms to an oblate ellipsoid
when the charge relaxation time of the surrounding liquid is shorter
than that of the droplet liquid.2 Note
that prolate and oblate, descriptions that are used in most of the
preceding literature on the deformation of droplets in an electric
field (dc field and alternating current (ac) field noted later) and
in this study, are defined with respect to the direction of the electric
field, not to the gravitational direction nor to the translational
directions of the droplet.

When a uniform or nonuniform electric
field, that periodically
changes its direction and strength, is applied to a liquid droplet
with no net charge that is suspended in another dielectric liquid
and when the maximum magnitude of the electric field strength is weak,
the droplet undergoes periodic deformation in which the droplet deforms
to a prolate (oblate) ellipsoid (electric field becomes of a certain
strength) from a spheroid (electric field strength approximately zero)
and then to a spheroid from a prolate (oblate) ellipsoid. There have
been many studies on the behavior of water droplets that deform to
prolate ellipsoids in a dc field, in a weak sinusoidal electric field
with alternating direction that is spatially uniform (e.g., refs (3−7); the field is abbreviated an ac field hereafter). In those studies,
variations of the deformation of a droplet with time are discussed
in detail. In contrast, there have been few previous reports regarding
the deformation of a droplet that deforms to an oblate ellipsoid under
a weak dc field under an applied weak ac field.7,8 Vizika
and Saville8 studied the deformation of
a silicone oil droplet in castor oil under weak ac fields with frequencies
in the range from 20 to 400 Hz; however, they did not discuss the
variation of deformation with time. A silicone oil droplet in castor
oil deforms to an oblate ellipsoid when a weak dc field is applied
and hence the droplet undergoes a periodic deformation between an
oblate ellipsoid and a spheroid under a weak ac field when the transient
deformation of the droplet can mechanically follow the variation of
the ac field strength with time, i.e., when the frequency of an ac
field is generally low. In addition, it is considered that when the
frequency of the applied ac field is high, the transient shape of
the droplet converges to a quasi-steady oblate ellipsoid with a certain
aspect ratio because the variation of deformation with time cannot
mechanically follow the variation of the ac field strength with time.
In most of the results obtained by Vizika and Saville,8 the converged deformation of a silicone oil droplet showed
an oblate ellipsoid under weak ac fields ranging from 20 to 400 Hz.

A liquid droplet that undergoes a steady oblate deformation under
a weak dc field over time undergoes behavior referred to as electrorotation
or Quincke rotation (hereafter termed electrorotation) under a moderate
dc field. In typical electrorotation, the major axis of an ellipsoidal
deformed droplet orients between the direction of the electric field
and the direction normal to the electric field and the liquid in the
deformed droplet circulates in a particular direction.2,9,10 Furthermore, depending on the
experimental conditions, under such a moderate dc field, a deformed
droplet rigidly rotates with its major axis in a plane that involves
the major axis of the deformed droplet and is parallel to the dc field
direction11 or the droplet exhibits periodic
deformation.10,12 There have been many studies
on steady-state electrorotation under a moderate dc field;2,9−15 however, there is little information on how electrorotation develops
under a moderate ac field.11 Krause and
Chandratreya11 studied electrorotation
under a moderate ac field; however, in the study, the droplet underwent
rotational motion similar to that observed under a moderate dc field,
and they measured only the angular velocity of the rotation. Except
for the study by Krause and Chandratreya,11 there is little information on electrorotation under a moderate
ac field.

The use of a spatially uniform or nonuniform sinusoidal
electric
field with alternating direction for systems in which droplets are
present in bulk oil has many practical applications.16−21 One of the promising applications is considered to be a droplet-based
microfluidic device,19−21 in which microsize droplets pass through a channel
where the hydraulic diameter is of micrometer order. If the hydraulic
diameter of the channel in a droplet-based microfluidic device is
larger than the diameter of droplets passing through the channel,
then it is expected that liquids inside/outside the droplets are mixed
well by periodic deformation of the droplets induced under an applied
ac field, i.e., deformation between a prolate (oblate) ellipsoid and
a spheroid. Although there have been some studies on the behavior
of water droplets passing through a channel subjected to an ac field
(e.g., ref (21)), we
have little information on the behavior of oil droplets in a channel
subjected to an ac field. In this study, the behavior of a silicone
oil droplet (ca. 0.3 mm diameter) in a circular channel (Pyrex glass
tube with an inner diameter of 1.0 mm) is studied under a periodic
intermittent alternating electric field and under a sinusoidal alternating
electric field; almost all droplets migrate along the axis of the
channel (in some conditions, accompanying lateral shuttle migrating
motion) with surrounding liquid (castor oil) that also flows in the
channel. The channel passes through a space confined by a pair of
parallel-plate electrodes with the distance set at 2.1 mm and hence
the direction of the applied electric field is normal to the axis
of the channel. Details of the experimental setup employed in this
work are given in the Supporting Information.

Results and Discussion
Behavior of a Silicone Oil Droplet in a Moderate
Periodically
Intermittent Alternating Electric Field
The waveform of the
applied intermittent alternating electric field is shown at the top
of Figure 1. One cycle
consists of Ea, no electric field, −Ea, and no electric field, each for tc/4, where tc is the period.
In this study, the instantaneous nominal electric field strength at
instance t = t, E(t), is given by 1  where εc is the relative
permittivity of the surrounding liquid, εt is the
relative permittivity of the main tube material (εt = 4.5 at 8.6 kHz for Pyrex glass22),
ϕ(t) is the electric potential difference between
the electrodes at time t, l is the
distance between electrodes, and lt is
the main tube wall thickness (0.3 mm). Note that E(t) in eq 1 is not the electric field in the Pyrex glass tube (hereafter
called the main tube) but is the nominal electric field in a medium
sandwiched between a pair of parallel-plate electrodes having an infinite
surface area. The medium consists of two different platelike media,
which are piled up in the direction normal to the electrode surfaces,
one with thickness 2lt and permittivity
εt and the other with thickness l – 2lt and permittivity
εc. E(t) corresponds
to the field in the latter of these two media. Ea is evaluated in the same manner.

Figure 1 Trajectory and transient
images of a silicone oil droplet in castor
oil under a periodically intermittent alternating electric field at Ea = 1.4 MV/m, tc = 4 s, and D0 = 0.33 mm. D0 is the volume equivalent spherical diameter of a droplet. Ea is the magnitude of the electric field strength,
and tc is the period of the electric field.
The waveform of the electric field is shown in the upper panel. θ
is the angle of the major axis of a droplet. Time t shown in each image corresponds to the abscissa in Figure 2i. The arrows shown in images
d and k indicate the directions of the rotational motion of a droplet.
Open circles a–n on the trajectory line drawn in the center
of the figure correspond to images a–n in the figure and open
circles a–n in Figure 2i. Images have been changed to grayscale and enhanced by a
computer program. The peripheries around the images of droplets have
been trimmed away.

Figure 1 shows the
trajectory and corresponding images of a silicone oil droplet subjected
to an electric field of Ea = 1.4 MV/m
with tc = 4 s. Figure 2 shows the time evolution of the droplet aspect ratio a/b and orientation θ, where a and b are the lengths of the major and
minor axes of the droplet, respectively, and θ is the angle
between the major axis and the longitudinal axis of the tube. Here,
counterclockwise rotation is considered to be positive (Figure 1). The prolate and oblate ellipsoids
are defined with respect to the electric field direction, i.e., a/b > 1 at θ = ±90°
describes
a prolate ellipsoid, whereas a/b > 1 at θ = 0° describes an oblate ellipsoid.b The open circles labeled a–n along the trajectory
presented in Figure 1 correspond to the open circles a–n in Figure 2i, which shows θ and a/b versus time for Ea = 1.4 MV/m and tc = 4 s. Under no electric
field, a/b = 1.02 ± 0.02 and
θ = −7.3 ± 4.8° for a droplet with an equivalent
spherical diameter D0 of 0.33 ± 0.02
mm (mean value for 28 different drops ± 2 standard deviations).
Although it is possible that the inner wall of the main tube (Pyrex
glass tube with an inner diameter of 1.0 mm) and hydrodynamic shear
stress exerted on a droplet due to the flow of the surrounding liquid
can affect the behavior of a droplet, such as that shown in Figures 1 and 2, it is considered that the effects are negligibly small in
this study (see the Supporting Information).

Figure 2 Transient behavior of a droplet under a periodically intermittent
alternating electric field at Ea = 1.4
MV/m for tc = (i) 4, (ii) 2.86, (iii)
2, (iv) 1.33, (v) 1, and (vi) 0.4 s. a is the length
of the major axis of the deformed droplet, and b is
the length of the minor axis of the deformed droplet. Open circles
a–n in (i) correspond to images a–n in Figure 1. Label F in (ii)–(vi)
indicates the first deformation of a droplet, whereas label S in (ii)–(iv)
indicates the second deformation. Period T in (i) has the same length
as that shown in (iii). The time origin, i.e., t =
0 s, was arbitrarily chosen as 10 s or more after application of the
electric field.

Figure 2i shows
that although θ exhibits a clear maximum and minimum at points
b and i, respectively, no corresponding peaks for a/b are observed, whereas the initially ellipsoidal
droplet with an aspect ratio a/b of 1.02 ± 0.01 and |θ| of 6.9 ± 8.0° (computed
from six different droplets) instantly deforms into an ellipsoidal
droplet with a/b = 1.03 ± 0.01
and |θ| = 59.1 ± 5.0° (from a to b and again from
h to i). Note that although a/b at
a (or h) is almost the same as that at b (or i), |θ| at a (or
h) largely differs from that at b (or i). Although it is possible
to consider that ellipsoidal droplets change their orientation from
a to b and from h to i, the droplets are considered to be instantaneously
elongated in a certain direction because 0.04 s (from a to b) or 0.06
s (from h to i) is required for respective changes in |θ| of
37.4 and 56.8° (see Figures 1 and 2i and Supporting Information Movie S1). It is noted later whether the behavior
from a to b and from h to i is deformation, i.e., elongation of a
droplet, or rotational motion of a droplet. Aspect ratio a/b gradually increases from b to c and from i to
j with a corresponding decrease in |θ|. a/b and |θ| then increase from c to e and from j to
k. At e and k, a/b and |θ|
are 1.19 ± 0.02 and 69.8 ± 6.8°, respectively, and a/b gradually decreases from e to f and
from k to l with constant θ. It is possible that these decreases
in a/b are due to periodic oscillatory
motion, which was previously observed for a silicon oil droplet (D0 = 4.5 mm) in castor oil.10 In that study, a/D0 changed from approximately unity to 1.8 in a period of 0.82
s when a moderate dc electric field was applied.

Figures 1 and 2i show that the deformed droplet rapidly returns
to its original spherical shape from f to g and from l to n. On the
basis of the plateaus of the θ versus t and a/b versus t curves (regions
where θ and a/b are constant
at ca. 0° and unity, respectively), the first peak in |θ|
is considered to be the first deformation after the electric field
is applied, and the apparent peak in a/b (points e and k), at which time |θ| peaks again, is considered
to be the second deformation.

To precisely examine the droplet
behavior, silicone-rubber particles
coated with silicone resin (KMP-600; Shin-Etu Chemical Co. Ltd., Tokyo,
Japan, mean particle diameter = 5 μm) were added to the silicone
oil at 0.1 mass%. Note that the added particles are not dispersed
within the droplets but instead settle at the droplet/castor oil interface.
Although particles at a droplet/surrounding oil interface may affect
electric-field-induced droplet deformation,23 this did not appear to be the case in this study. Some of the particles
began to move along the droplet/castor oil interface after the first
rapid deformation (see Supporting Information Movie S2). The major axis of the droplet is oriented between
the electric field direction and the direction normal to the electric
field, and the liquid in the droplet rotates in a particular direction;
therefore, the droplet shows electrorotation at the second deformation.
This electrorotation also alternated direction with the sign of the
electric field, as shown in images d and k of Figure 1, and this began after the first deformation.

Figure 2ii shows
similar behavior of θ and a/b versus time for tc = 2.86 s, except
that the maximum value of a/b at
the first deformation (labeled F) (a/b)first,max, which denotes the maximum value of a/b at the first deformation, is larger
than that in Figure 2i and a/b decreases rapidly after
the second deformation (labeled S). Figure 3 shows (a/b)first,max and (a/b)second,max versus tc, and |θ|
corresponding to (a/b)first,max, |θ|first,max, and |θ| corresponding to (a/b)second,max, |θ|second,max, versus tc at Ea = 1.4 MV/m. (a/b)second,max denotes the maximum value of a/b at the second deformation. Note that when the
apparent (a/b)first,max cannot be observed, a/b corresponding
to the first peak of |θ| is shown as (a/b)first,max. Figure 3 shows the mean values and two standard deviations
computed from 3 to 6 different droplets. (a/b)first,max increases with a decrease in tc at tc ≥
2 s, whereas |θ|first,max remains almost constant
at tc ≥ 2.86 s. At tc ≥ 2.86 s, (a/b)second,max and |θ|second,max reach certain
constant magnitudes; therefore, the second deformation is considered
to be fully developed at tc ≥ 2.86
s.

Figure 3 (a/b)first,max, (a/b)second,max, |θ|first,max, and |θ|second,max as a function
of tc under a periodically intermittent
alternating electric field Ea = 1.4 MV/m.
(a/b)first,max and (a/b)second,max show the maximum
magnitude of a/b at first deformation
and at second deformation, respectively. |θ|first,max and |θ|second,max represent |θ| that corresponds
to (a/b)first,max and
(a/b)second,max, respectively.
When (a/b)first,max does
not have a clear peak, a/b corresponding
to the first peak of |θ| is plotted as (a/b)first,max. The open circles denote (a/b)first,max and |θ|first,max, whereas the closed circles denote (a/b)second,max and |θ|second,max. The open squares denote (a/b)first,max and |θ|first,max for a droplet without
a second deformation. Error bars for each data point indicate two
standard deviations. If the range of the error bar is smaller than
the size of the plots, then the error bar is not shown. The solid
lines indicate a/b under no electric
field, and the shaded bands show the range of two standard deviations.

Figure 2iii,iv,
which shows θ and a/b versus
time for tc = 2 and 1.33 s, respectively,
has two clear peaks for a/b within
a span of tc/4. The plateaus for θ
and a/b are observed before and
after the two successive peaks in a/b; therefore, the first a/b peak
(labeled F), where |θ| is ca. 90°, is considered to be
the first deformation after the electric field is applied. The second a/b peak (labeled S), where θ is
ca. 0°, is considered to be the second deformation. Figure 3 shows that (a/b)first,max for tc = 2 s is almost the same as that for tc = 1.33 s, whereas (a/b)second,max is larger for tc = 2 s than for tc = 1.33 s. In addition, Figure 2iii,iv shows that
the droplet returns to almost a spherical shape between the first
and second deformations, i.e., the droplet undergoes prolate deformation
after the electric field is applied, and then oblate deformation after
returning to a spherical shape. In contrast, for tc ≥ 2.86 s (see Figure 2i,ii), the droplet undergoes consecutive
ellipsoidal deformations without returning to the spherical shape
in between deformations. The first and second deformations will be
discussed in further detail later. Figure 2v,vi shows θ and a/b versus time for tc = 1 and 0.4 s, respectively, where only a single peak of a/b is observed when tc ≤ 1 s. |θ| becomes ca. 90° at the
peak of a/b, so that the deformations
shown in Figure 2v,vi
are considered to be due to the same type of force as that which causes
the first deformation observed in Figure 2iii,iv. At tc ≤ 1.33 s, (a/b)first,max and |θ|first,max decrease with tc, as shown in Figure 3.

Figure 4 shows the
droplet behavior for Ea = (i) 1.1, (ii)
0.92, and (iii) 0.70 MV/m with tc = 2.86
s. Two peaks of a/b and corresponding
peaks of |θ| were observed for Ea = 1.1 MV/m, whereas two peaks of a/b and a single peak of |θ| were observed for Ea = 0.7 and 0.92 MV/m. From observations with tc = 10 s (data not shown), the droplet at Ea ≤ 0.70 MV/m did not exhibit electrorotation
and underwent only oblate deformation. The plateaus of θ and a/b were observed before and after the
two successive a/b peaks; therefore,
the first a/b peak (labeled F) is
considered to be the first deformation after the electric field is
applied and the a/b peak following
the first deformation is considered to be the second deformation (labeled
S). Figure 4 shows
that (a/b)first,max and
(a/b)second,max decrease
with Ea. At small Ea, the second deformation is clear, even though the first deformation
is not. Therefore, the first deformation is considered to be more
strongly affected by the electric field strength than the second deformation.

Figure 4 Transient
behavior of a droplet under a periodically intermittent
alternating electric field at tc = 2.86
s and Ea = (i) 1.1, (ii) 0.92, and (iii)
0.70 MV/m. Label F indicates the first deformation of a droplet, whereas
label S indicates the second deformation. The time origin was arbitrarily
chosen as 10 s or more after application of the electric field.

Lanauze et al.24 experimentally and
theoretically studied the transient deformation behavior of a silicone
oil droplet in castor oil under conditions for which the droplet is
oblate during the time course. They reported that the droplet initially
undergoes a spherical-to-prolate deformation after sudden application
of a weak dc electric field and that the prolate droplet subsequently
undergoes oblate deformation after first returning to the spherical
shape. They theoretically showed that the prolate deformation is due
to the long charge relaxation time of the droplet/surrounding liquid
system, whereas the oblate deformation is caused by electrohydrodynamic
flow induced after convecting charges reach the droplet/castor oil
interface. The second deformation noted in this study is accompanied
by rotational motion along the droplet/castor oil interface and is
induced after the first deformation; therefore, the first and second
deformations observed in this study are considered to be caused by
the same mechanisms as those described by Lanauze et al.,24 i.e., the droplet behavior from a to b and from
h to i shown in Figure 2i is considered to be deformation of a droplet and is not the rotational
motion of a droplet.

Here, we discuss the first and the second
deformations observed
in Figure 2i–vi.
The only intended difference in the experimental conditions between
the data sets shown in Figure 2i–vi was tc. Consistent
behavior is observed in Figure 2iii–vi, i.e., the first deformation is considered to
require a certain period to develop (this period is denoted tf), and when tc/4
≥ tf (see Figures 2iii,iv and 3), the
first deformation is fully developed, and (a/b)first,max and |θ| reach a certain magnitude
and ca. 90°, respectively. In contrast, when tc/4 < tf (as in Figures 2v,vi and 3), the first deformation does not have time to develop
fully and (a/b)first,max decreases with tc. Thus, the second
peak is not observed when tc/4 ≤ tf, whereas when tc/4 > tf, (a/b)second,max increases with tc/4 – tf, which may
be proportional to the degree of development of the second deformation.
As shown in Figures 2iii–vi and 3, tf may exist between 0.25 s (tc =
1 s) and ca. 0.33 s (tc = 1.33 s) when Ea = 1.4 MV/m. In this study, this tf value does not have any direct relation with the Maxwell–Wagner
relaxation time scale (ca. 2.6 s for a silicone oil droplet/castor
oil medium system) or the charge relaxation time scale (ca. 1.1 ×
104 s for a silicone oil droplet and ca. 2.0 s for castor
oil).c Note that these time scales are computed
with the physical properties of the liquids listed in Table S1 of the Supporting Information. On the
other hand, there is an inconsistency between this noted behavior
and that observed in Figure 2i,ii. Specifically, the maximum value of a/b at the first deformation decreases with an increase
in tc and the maximum values of a/b and |θ| are smaller than those
at tc = 2 s (see Figures 2iii and 3). In addition,
the magnitude of a/b does not return
to unity between the first and second deformations when tc ≥ 2.86 s, whereas it does when tc ≤ 2 s. Period T shown in Figure 2i,iii is a certain period after the droplet
begins to deform and has the same length as tc/4 at tc = 2 s, i.e., 0.5 s. The
only difference in the experimental conditions between Figure 2i and iii is tc; therefore, the profiles of a/b and |θ| during period T should be similar between
the two data sets; however, they are not. The same behavior is observed
in Figure 2i,ii as
that in Figure 4i.
Thus, when Ea and tc are large, the magnitude of a/b does not return to unity between the first and second deformations
and the major axis of the droplet changes direction, whereas the magnitude
of a/b is either maintained or gradually
increases. In addition, |θ| becomes ca. 65° at the a/b peak of the second deformation (see Figures 3 and 4i). Although there is no obvious explanation regarding this
inconsistency, one possible reason concerns the development of the
second deformation. The common behavior observed between Figures 2i,ii and 4i and between Figure 2iii and iv is that during the second deformation, (a/b)second,max is large and
|θ| becomes ca. 65° for the former, whereas (a/b)second,max is small and |θ|
is ca. 0° for the latter (see Figure 3). That is, the degree of development of
the second deformation observed in Figure 2i,ii is considered to be higher than that
observed in Figure 2iii,iv. The behavior observed in Figures 2i,ii and 4i is considered
to be affected by the preceding deformations of the same droplet.
Therefore, this inconsistency is considered to be caused by the application
of the periodic electric field. From this consideration, electrorotation
after sudden application of a dc electric field, i.e., electrorotation
when the preceding second deformation does not affect the first deformation
at the next cycle under the intermittent electric field, is considered
to be developed by the following process. As shown in Figures 2iii,iv and 3, at 1.33 s ≤ tc ≤
2 s, i.e., when the preceding second deformation does not affect the
first deformation at the next cycle under the intermittent electric
field, the droplet deforms to a prolate ellipsoid at the first deformation;
the droplet then deforms to an oblate ellipsoid at the second deformation
instead of developing electrorotation, and the maximum a/b of the second deformation, i.e., oblate deformation,
increases with tc. Thus, it is supposed
that if the preceding second deformation does not affect the first
deformation at the next cycle, the droplet first undergoes spherical-to-prolate
deformation and then oblate deformation via a spherical shape after
sudden application of a dc field. These processes are similar to those
observed by Lanauze et al.24 In contrast,
even though the preceding second deformation affects the first deformation
at the next cycle, as shown in Figure 2i,ii, electrorotation is induced at Ea = 1.4 MV/m. That is, after this successive deformation
(i.e., from a spheroid to a prolate ellipsoid and then from a prolate
ellipsoid to an oblate ellipsoid via a spheroid), it is expected that
electrorotation begins to develop with increasing |θ|. The behavior
in which electrorotation begins to develop after the droplet deforms
into an oblate ellipsoid is similar to that observed by Ha and Yang.9 In their study, the droplet initially underwent
only spherical-to-oblate deformation after application of a dc electric
field and then the symmetric axis of the oblate droplet began to tilt.
In contrast, when an alternating electric field is applied, where tc is longer than a certain magnitude (e.g., tc ≥ 2.86 s in this study), the preceding
second deformation affects the first deformation at the next cycle.
That is, as shown in Figure 2i,ii, the spherical droplet first undergoes ellipsoidal deformation
with |θ| ca. 60° and then changes its major axis direction
so that |θ| is decreased while maintaining or gradually increasing
the magnitude of a/b. The magnitudes
of |θ| and a/b subsequently
begin to increase again with the development of electrorotation.

Behavior of a Silicone Oil Droplet in a Moderate Sinusoidal
Alternating Electric Field
In this subsection, the development
of electrorotation under a sinusoidal alternating electric field is
reported. The waveform of the applied alternating electric field is
shown at the top of Figure 5. Note that Ea shown in this subsection
represents the amplitude of the applied sinusoidal alternating electric
field.

Figure 5 Trajectory and transient images of a silicone oil droplet in castor
oil under an alternating sinusoidal electric field at Ea = 1.5 MV/m, tc = 4 s, and D0 = 0.33 mm. Ea is
the amplitude of the electric field strength. The waveform of the
electric field is shown in the upper panel. Time t shown in each image corresponds to the abscissa in Figure 6i. Open circles a–l
on the trajectory line correspond to images a–l in the figure
and open circles a–l in Figure 6i. Images have been changed to grayscale and enhanced
by a computer program. The peripheries around the images of droplets
have been trimmed away.

Figure 5 shows
the
trajectory and corresponding images of a silicone oil droplet subjected
to an electric field of Ea = 1.5 MV/m
with tc = 4 s. Figure 6 shows the time evolution of droplet aspect ratio a/b and orientation θ. Open circles
a–l along the trajectory presented in Figure 5 correspond to open circles a–l in Figure 6i, which shows θ
and a/b versus time for Ea = 1.5 MV/m and tc = 4 s. The behavior is also presented as Supporting Information Movie S3.

Figure 6 Transient behavior of a droplet under
an alternating sinusoidal
electric field at Ea = 1.5 MV/m and tc = (i) 4, (ii) 2, (iii) 1.33, (iv) 1, and (v)
0.4 s. Open circles a–l in (i) correspond to images a–l
in Figure 5. Label
F in (ii)–(v) indicates the first deformation of a droplet,
whereas label S in (ii)–(iv) indicates the second deformation.
The time origin was arbitrarily chosen as 10 s or more after application
of the electric field.

The behavior of the silicone oil droplet shown in Figures 5 and 6i is similar to that shown in Figures 1 and 2i, in which
the behavior
of a silicone oil droplet under an intermittent electric field with Ea = 1.4 MV/m and tc = 4 s is shown, except for the first rapid change of θ and
the sharp decrease of a/b after
the peak of the second deformation. Figure 6i shows that |θ| gradually increases
from a to b and from g to h and then exhibits a clear maximum at points
b and h, respectively. No corresponding peaks for a/b are observed at points b and h under the sinusoidal
field. Although rapid deformation of the droplet was observed under
the intermittent electric field (see from a to b and from h to i in Figure 2i and Supporting
Information Movie S1), such rapid deformation
of a droplet was not observed under the sinusoidal field (see from
a to b and from g to h in Figure 6i). It is possible that the droplet gradually rotates
while maintaining a magnitude of a/b from a to b and from g to h in Figure 6i; however, the behavior of the droplet is
considered to be deformation, which is induced by the same mechanism
as that shown in Figure 2i. This difference between the behavior observed from a to b and
from h to i in Figure 2i and that from a to b and from g to h in Figure 6i is considered to be related to the rate
of increase in the electric field strength with time. That is, an
electric field with strength Ea is suddenly
applied to the droplet under the intermittent electric field, whereas
the strength of the electric field gradually increases under the sinusoidal
field. The magnitudes of the first peaks of |θ| and a/b that correspond to the first peak of
|θ| are 43.8 ± 5.2° and 1.03 ± 0.01, respectively
(computed from four different droplets). Aspect ratio a/b gradually increases from b to c and from h to
i in Figure 6i with
a corresponding decrease in |θ|. a/b and |θ| later increase from c to d and from i to
j in Figure 6i. At
d and j in Figure 6i, a/b and |θ| are 1.20 ±
0.02 and 70.3 ± 5.6°, respectively, and a/b gradually decreases from d to e and from j to
k in Figure 6i with
an increase in |θ|, i.e., the instant at which a/b reaches a peak does not coincide with the instant
at which |θ| reaches a peak. a/b and |θ| then gradually decrease from e to f and from k to
l in Figure 6i, although a/b and |θ| rapidly decrease under
the intermittent field (see from f to g and from l to n in Figure 2i). The orientations
of the droplet are largely tilted from the direction at which θ
= 0°, so that the droplet undergoes electrorotation at d and
j. The deformation at d and j corresponds to the second deformation
noted in the previous subsection, whereas the deformations at b and
h correspond to the first deformation noted in the previous subsection.
Although the direction of the applied electric field is not known
in this study, the direction of lateral migration (sinusoidal trajectory)
and the behavior (a/b and θ)
of the droplet alternate with a period that equals that of the electric
field, as shown in Figures 5 and 6i. Krause and Chandratreya11 reported that some but not all droplets changed
their rotational direction with the direction of the applied ac electric
field. In contrast, the alternating behavior was always observed in
this study. There is no clear reason for this difference, but it is
important to note that the droplets were more densely formed and analyzed
simultaneously in their study, whereas the droplets in the present
study were presumed to be quasi-isolated. It is possible that interactions
between droplets were induced in the study of Krause and Chandratreya,11 and these affected the rotation. As noted here
and in the next paragraph, well-developed electrorotation is observed
at tc = 4 s (Figures 6i and 7, which show
(a/b)first,max, (a/b)second,max, |θ|first,max, and |θ|second,max vs tc at Ea = 1.5 MV/m), and the
initial development of electrorotation is observed at tc = 2 s (Figures 6ii and 7). On the other hand, electrorotation
is not observed at tc ≤ 1.33 s
(Figures 6iii–v
and 7). Turcu25 theoretically
studied electrorotation of a rigid sphere under an ac field. From
this theory, a rigid sphere with the same electrical properties as
those of silicone oil in a surrounding medium with the same electrical
and hydrodynamic properties as those of castor oil will undergo electrorotation
under an ac field at tc ≥ 3.3 s.
Note that the electrical and hydrodynamic properties of the liquids
used are listed in Table S1 of the Supporting
Information. The results for tc obtained
in the present study are in reasonably good agreement with those obtained
by Turcu’s theory.

Figure 7 (a/b)first,max, (a/b)second,max, |θ|first,max, and |θ|second,max as a function
of tc under an alternating sinusoidal
electric field at Ea = 1.5 MV/m. The open
circles denote (a/b)first,max and |θ|first,max, whereas the closed circles denote
(a/b)second,max and |θ|second,max. The open squares denote (a/b)first,max and |θ|first,max for a droplet without the second deformation. The error bars for
each data point indicate two standard deviations. If the range of
the error bar is smaller than the size of the plots, then the error
bar is not shown. The solid lines indicate a/b under no electric field, and the shaded bands show the
range of two standard deviations.

In Figures 6ii–iv,
which shows θ and a/b versus
time for tc = 2, 1.33, and 1 s, respectively,
two clear peaks are observed for a/b within a span of tc/2. For tc = 1.33 and 1 s, at one of the two peaks of a/b, |θ| becomes ca. 90°, and at the other
peak, |θ| becomes ca. 0°, whereas for tc = 2 s, at one of the two peaks of a/b, |θ| becomes ca. 90°, and at the other
peak, |θ| becomes ca. 17° (Figure 7). In addition, a/b does not become unity between the two peaks at tc = 2 s (Figure 6ii). The deformation with the former peak (labeled
F) is considered to be the first deformation noted in the previous
subsection because at the a/b peak
(labeled F), |θ| becomes ca. 90°; therefore, the deformation
with the latter peak (labeled S) is considered to be the second deformation
noted in the previous subsection. As shown in Figures 6ii and 7, it is concluded
that a droplet begins to develop electrorotation at tc = 2 s because the droplet does not return to a spheroidal
shape between the first and second deformations (Figure 6ii) and |θ| is larger
than ca. 0° for the second deformation (Figure 7). Figure 6iii,iv shows that a droplet deforms between an oblate
ellipsoid and a prolate ellipsoid at 1 s ≤ tc ≤ 1.33 s. As shown in Figure 7, (a/b)first,max and |θ|first,max increase with a
decrease in tc at tc ≥ 1.33 s, whereas (a/b)first,max and |θ|first,max decrease
with tc at tc < 1.33 s. In addition, (a/b)second,max and |θ|second,max decrease
with tc at tc ≥ 1 s. The first peak of |θ| is not accompanied by
an a/b peak when the second deformation
of the droplet is well developed (Figure 6i), whereas two successive a/b peaks are observed when the second deformation
is not developed well. It is also considered that under a sinusoidal
alternating electric field with long tc, the behavior of a droplet is affected by the preceding behavior
of the same droplet.

In Figure 6v, which
shows θ and a/b versus time
for tc = 0.4 s, and Figure 7, peaks of a/b are observed at which θ reaches ca. 90°. The deformation
associated with these peaks is considered to be the first deformation
noted in the previous subsection. Thus, when the period of the applied
sinusoidal alternating electric field is short, the droplet deforms
between a prolate ellipsoid and a spheroid. At tc < 0.4 s, the minimum |θ| approaches 90° with
a decrease in tc and the maximum a/b decreases with tc (see Figure S4 in the Supporting
Information). Thus, a droplet remains spherical or undergoes deformation
to a quasi-steady prolate ellipsoid with a/b close to unity. The reason for this may be that the deformation
cannot mechanically follow changes of electric field strength and
its direction.

Lanauze et al.24 observed
and predicted
that a droplet that deforms to an oblate ellipsoid over the course
of time first deforms to a prolate ellipsoid from a spheroid, then
to a spheroid from a prolate ellipsoid, and then to an oblate ellipsoid
from a spheroid after sudden application of a weak dc electric field.
It is considered that if application of a dc field is suddenly stopped
before such droplet deformation to an oblate ellipsoid from a spheroid,
then the droplet will show deformation only between a prolate ellipsoid
and a spheroid. In contrast, if application of a dc field is stopped
after droplet deformation to an oblate ellipsoid from a prolate ellipsoid
via a spheroid, then the droplet will show deformation from a spheroid
to a prolate ellipsoid and then from a prolate ellipsoid to an oblate
ellipsoid via a spheroid. Thus, if a periodic intermittent electric
field is applied to the droplet, then periodic deformation between
a prolate ellipsoid and a spheroid or between a prolate ellipsoid
and an oblate ellipsoid may be observed, depending on its period.
If so, it is expected that the droplet would deform only between a
prolate ellipsoid and a spheroid under a weak ac field with a short
period, whereas it is expected that the droplet would deform between
a prolate ellipsoid and an oblate ellipsoid under a weak ac field
with a long period. In this case, when the transient deformation of
the droplet cannot mechanically follow the variation of the applied
ac field strength with time, deformation of the droplet is expected
to converge to a prolate ellipsoid. Figures 6iii–v and S4 in the Supporting Information show the droplet behavior deduced
from the study by Lanauze et al.24

Figure 8 shows the
droplet behavior for Ea = (i) 1.2, (ii)
1.1, (iii) 0.97, and (iv) 0.74 MV/m with tc = 4 s. Two peaks for |θ| and a single peak for a/b were observed for Ea = 1.1 and 1.2 MV/m, whereas single peaks of a/b and |θ| were observed for Ea = 0.97 and 0.74 MV/m. Comparing Figures 8 with 4 reveals the
first peak of a/b at Ea ≥ 0.70 MV/m in Figure 4, whereas there is no apparent first peak
of a/b in Figure 8. It is reasonable to infer that the difference
of the first peaks between those shown in Figures 4 and 8 is caused by
the difference in the waveforms, i.e., square and sinusoidal waveforms
of the applied electric field. When an ac field with large tc is applied, the first deformation of the droplet
becomes too small to detect because the electric field strength applied
at an instant at which a droplet may display the first deformation
is weak.

Figure 8 Transient behavior of a droplet under an alternating sinusoidal
electric field tc = 4 s at Ea = (i) 1.2, (ii) 1.1, (iii) 0.97, and (iv) 0.74 MV/m.
Label F indicates the first deformation of a droplet, whereas label
S indicates the second deformation. The time origin was arbitrarily
chosen as 10 s or more after application of the electric field.

Oblate Deformation of a
Silicone Oil Droplet in a Weak Sinusoidal
Alternating Electric Field
In this subsection, the prolate-spherical
deformation of a droplet, which is deduced from the study by Lanauze
et al.24 (noted in the preceding subsection),
is observed under a weak ac field. In the Supporting Information, the experimentally obtained development of oblate
deformation under a sinusoidal electric field is compared with that
predicted by the theory presented by Torza et al.7 The waveform of the applied electric field is the same
as that shown at the top of Figure 5.

Figure 9 shows the time evolution of droplet aspect ratio a/b and orientation θ at Ea = 0.44 MV/m and 0.4 s ≤ tc ≤ 10 s. θ is kept at ca. 0°; therefore,
droplets in Figure 9i–v show periodic deformation between an oblate shape and
a quasi-spherical shape. The peak magnitude of a/b increases with tc. Only a
single peak is observed for a/b at Ea = 0.44 MV/m and 1 s ≤ tc ≤ 10 s, whereas two peaks are observed for a/b at Ea =
1.5 MV/m and 1 s ≤ tc ≤
2 s, as shown in Figures 6ii–iv, 7, and 9. θ is ca. 0° at the peak of a/b; therefore, the deformations shown in Figure 9i–v correspond
to the second deformation noted in the previous subsections. a/b at the first deformation is assumed
to be too small to detect in this study. a/b and θ are measured until tc = 0.05 s (frequency = 20 Hz, which was the lowest frequency
applied by Vizika and Saville8). The profiles
of a/b and θ against time
at 0.05 s ≤ tc ≤ 0.2 s (see Figure S5 in the Supporting Information) are
similar to those at tc = 0.4 s (Figure 9vi), i.e., a/b and θ converge to certain values
that are almost equal to those under no electric field. With the results
noted in this subsection, it is not clear whether a droplet that undergoes
oblate deformation under a weak dc field over the course of time undergoes
prolate-spherical deformation under an ac field or undergoes quasi-steady
oblate deformation with a converged a/b value under an ac field.

Figure 9 Transient behavior of a droplet under an alternating
sinusoidal
electric field at Ea = 0.44 MV/m and tc = (i) 10, (ii) 4, (iii) 2, (iv) 1.3, (v) 1,
and (vi) 0.4 s. The time origin was arbitrarily chosen as 10 s or
more after application of the electric field.

Here, we discuss the critical electric field strength over
which
electrorotation develops. Jones26 noted
a critical dc electric field strength above which electrorotation
of a rigid sphere develops. From this theory, a rigid sphere with
the same electrical properties as those of silicone oil in a surrounding
medium with the same electrical and hydrodynamic properties as those
of castor oil will undergo electrorotation under a dc electric field
strength of ca. 0.2 MV/m. On the other hand, in this study, electrorotation
is not observed under a sinusoidal electric field for Ea = 0.44 MV/m and tc ≤
10 s. Note that for Ea = 0.44 MV/m, the
effective value of the electric field strength is ca. 0.31 MV/m. As
shown in Figures 6 and 8, electrorotation is observed under a sinusoidal
electric field for Ea = 1.5 MV/m (the
effective value is ca. 1.1 MV/m) and tc ≥ 2 s and at Ea ≥ 1.1
MV/m (the effective value is ca. 0.78 MV/m) and tc = 4 s. Therefore, the critical dc electric field strength
for the development of electrorotation of a rigid sphere estimated
by the theory is lower than that experimentally observed under an
ac field.

Deformation of a castor oil droplet in silicone oil
medium under
an ac field (Ea = 0.44 MV/m) is shown
in Figure S6 of the Supporting Information.
A castor oil droplet in silicone oil undergoes prolate deformation
over the course of time under a weak dc field and hence the droplet
undergoes periodic prolate-spherical deformation in an ac field when
the variation of deformation with time can follow the variation of
the field strength with time. Figures 9 and S6 in the Supporting
Information show that oblate deformation and prolate deformation at Ea = 0.44 MV/m do not fully develop at tc ≤ 10 s. It is considered that electrical
deformation in the silicone-oil/castor-oil system requires a long
time (at least tc > 10 s) to fully
develop
at Ea = 0.44 MV/m. This means that charge
convection in the silicone-oil/castor-oil system requires a long time
to develop well. A comparison of the experimentally obtained variation
of deformation for a silicone oil droplet in castor oil with time
at Ea = 0.44 MV/m and tc = 10 s and that obtained with the prediction scheme
presented by Torza et al.7 is shown in Figure S7 of the Supporting Information. The
prediction underestimates the experimental results, which is the same
tendency as that observed for the deformation of a droplet of aqueous
solution in oil under a weak ac field.4

Conclusions
In this study, the development of electrorotation
in a circular
channel subjected to an intermittent alternating electric field and
that subjected to a sinusoidal alternating electric field was studied.
Although the behavior is observed in a channel, the effects of the
wall and flow rate on the results are negligibly small under the experimental
conditions used in this study (see the Supporting Information).

Although we cannot identify the deformation
of a droplet between
a prolate ellipsoid and a spheroid or between a prolate ellipsoid
and a oblate ellipsoid, as deduced from the study by Lanauze et al.,24 such deformation under a weak ac electric field
(Ea = 0.44 MV/m in this study) is observed
under a moderate ac electric field with a certain tc. The development of electrorotation under an ac field
is observed only when tc is long. Under
an ac field with long tc, |θ| gradually
increases to its first peak without a corresponding a/b peak and then a/b gradually increases with a corresponding decrease in |θ|. a/b then later increases to its apparent
peak with an increase in |θ|.

It is considered that the
first deformation indicated in this study
is affected by the preceding second deformation when tc is long. There is no clear reason for this; however,
one possible reason could be related to the charge profile around
the droplet that is developed during the development of the second
deformation. Is it possible that the charge profile around a droplet
that is developed until electrorotation becomes highly developed can
return to the charge profile when no electric field was applied, i.e.,
the initial charge profile, during changes of the ac field strength
from its peak value to around zero? To confirm this, further theoretical
work is required.

Experimental Section
The experimental
setup used (Figure S1 in the Supporting
Information) is almost the same as that in a previous
study.21 The setup is briefly described
here and in more detail in the Supporting Information. Silicone oil (KF96-300cS; Shin-Etu Chemical Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan)
droplets are successively dropped in castor oil (extra pure grade;
Kanto Chemical Co., Tokyo, Japan), which flows down a cylindrical
glass tube at a superficial velocity of ca. 0.11 mm/s. The tube, of
which the longitudinal axis is parallel to the direction of gravity,
is placed between a pair of parallel-plate electrodes (length: 94
mm in the direction parallel to the tube longitudinal axis, distance
between electrodes: 2.1 mm), one of which is always grounded and the
other of which is connected to a high-voltage power supply. The spacing
between the electrodes is filled with the same castor oil that flows
through the tube. Observations were made at room temperature approximately
47 mm below the top of the electrodes using a high-speed video camera
with the optical axis set to be normal to the electric field direction
and to the tube axis.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01715.Experimental setup,
physical properties of liquids used,
effect of the inner channel wall on behavior of droplet passing through
the channel, time evolution of silicone oil droplet aspect ratio a/b and orientation θ under sinusoidal
alternating electric field at Ea = 1.5
MV/m and 0.05 s ≤ tc ≤ 0.2
s, time evolution of silicone oil droplet aspect ratio a/b and orientation θ under sinusoidal alternating
electric field at Ea = 0.44 MV/m and 0.05
s ≤ tc ≤ 0.2 s, prolate
deformation of castor oil droplet in silicone oil medium under sinusoidal
alternating electric field, comparison of experimentally obtained
time-dependent variation of oblate deformation of silicone oil droplet
in castor oil under ac field and prediction by Torza et al.7 (PDF)

Behavior of a silicone oil droplet in castor oil medium
under an intermittent alternating electric field at Ea = 1.4 MV/m and tc = 4 s
(Movie S1); behavior of particles settled at the droplet/castor oil
interface under an intermittent alternating electric field at Ea = 1.4 MV/m and tc = 4 s (Movie S2); and behavior of a silicone oil droplet in castor
oil medium under a sinusoidal alternating electric field at Ea = 1.5 MV/m and tc = 4 s (Movie S3) (AVI)(AVI)(AVI)



Supplementary Material
ao7b01715_si_001.pdf

 ao7b01715_si_002.avi

 ao7b01715_si_003.avi

 ao7b01715_si_004.avi

 The author
declares no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The relative
permittivity of castor oil and the resistivities
of silicone oil and castor oil listed in Table S1 of the Supporting Information were measured by Hitachi Chemical
Techno Service Co. Ltd., Ibaraki, Japan, at the author’s request.
Interfacial tension between castor oil and silicone oil listed in Table S1 of the Supporting Information was measured
by Kyowa Interface Science Co. Ltd., Saitama, Japan, at the author’s
request.

a When the strength of electrostatic
and/or electrohydrodynamic forces that act on the interface between
a droplet and a surrounding liquid becomes larger than the strength
of capillary forces that act on the interface, the droplet will burst
under an electric field (dc field and ac field). Here, the term “strong”
is used for an electric field under which droplet burst is induced,
whereas the term “weak” is used for an electric field
under which a droplet maintains steady ellipsoidal deformation with
the symmetric axis parallel to the applied electric field. When an
electric field intermediate between weak and strong is applied to
a droplet, then, depending on the physical properties of the droplet
liquid and the surrounding liquid, some droplet/surrounding liquid
systems show steady ellipsoidal deformation of a droplet with the
major axis oriented in the direction between the electric field direction
and the direction normal to the electric field. Here, such a field
strength is termed “moderate.”

b In this study, when θ is not
near 0 or ±90°, the shape of the droplet whose a/b is larger than unity is called ellipsoidal.

c As shown in Figures 2 and 3,
electrorotation
develops at tc/4 ≥ 0.72 s, i.e., tc ≥ 2.86 s, when Ea = 1.4 MV/m. In this study, no direct relation was found between
the Maxwell–Wagner relaxation time scale or the charge relaxation
time scale with the development of electrorotation under an intermittent
electric field.
==== Refs
References
Allan R. S. ; Mason S. G. 
Particle Behaviour
in Shear and Electric Fields I.
Deformation and Burst of Fluid Drops . Proc.
R. Soc. A 
1962 , 267 , 45 –61 . 10.1098/rspa.1962.0082 .
Salipante P. F. ; Vlahovska P. M. 
Electrohydrodynamics
of Drops in Strong Uniform DC
Electric Fields . Phys. Fluids 
2010 , 22 , 11211010.1063/1.3507919 .
Kaji N. ; Mori Y. H. ; Tochitani Y. 
Electrically Induced Shape Oscillation
of Drops as a Means of Direct-Contact Heat Transfer Enhancement: Part
1—Drop Dynamics . J. Heat Transfer 
1988 , 110 , 695 –699 . 10.1115/1.3250547 .
Bentenitis N. ; Krause S. ; Benghanem K. 
Droplet Deformation of a Low-Molecular-Weight
System in an Alternating Current Electric Field . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 790 –792 . 10.1021/la048495j .15641857 
Guo C. ; He L. ; Xin Y. 
Deformation
and Breakup of Aqueous Drops in Viscous
Oil under a Uniform AC Electric Field . J. Electrost. 
2015 , 77 , 27 –34 . 10.1016/j.elstat.2015.07.003 .
Yan H. ; He L. ; Luo X. ; Wang J. ; Huang X. ; Lü Y. ; Yang D. 
Investigation on Transient Oscillation of Droplet Deformation before
Conical Breakup under Alternating Current Electric Field . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 8275 –8283 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b01642 .26138311 
Torza S. ; Cox R. G. ; Mason S. G. 
Electrohydrodynamic
Deformation and
Burst of Liquid Drops . Philos. Trans. R. Soc.,
A 
1971 , 269 , 295 –319 . 10.1098/rsta.1971.0032 .
Vizika O. ; Saville D. A. 
The Electrohydrodynamic
Deformation of Drops Suspended
in Liquids in Steady and Oscillatory Electric Fields . J. Fluid Mech. 
1992 , 239 , 1 –21 . 10.1017/S0022112092004294 .
Ha J.-W. ; Yang S.-M. 
Electrohydrodynamics
and Electrorotation of a Drop
with Fluid less Conductive than that of the Ambient Fluid . Phys. Fluids 
2000 , 12 , 764 –772 . 10.1063/1.870333 .
Sato H. ; Kaji N. ; Mochizuki T. ; Mori Y. H. 
Behavior of Oblately
Deformed Droplets in an Immiscible Dielectric Liquid under a Steady
and Uniform Electric Field . Phys. Fluids 
2006 , 18 , 12710110.1063/1.2399753 .
Krause S. ; Chandratreya P. 
Electrorotation of Deformable Fluid Droplets . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1998 , 206 , 10 –18 . 10.1006/jcis.1998.5716 .9761622 
Ghazian O. ; Adamiak K. ; Castle G. S. P. 
Numerical Simulation of Electrically
Deformed Droplets less Conductive than Ambient Fluid . Colloids Surf., A 
2013 , 423 , 27 –34 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2013.01.048 .
Feng J. Q. 
A 2D Electrohydrodynamic
Model for Electrorotation of Fluid Drops . J.
Colloid Interface Sci. 
2002 , 246 , 112 –121 . 10.1006/jcis.2001.8037 .16290391 
He H. ; Salipante P. F. ; Vlahovska P. M. 
Electrorotation of a Viscous Droplet
in a Uniform Direct Current Electric Field . Phys. Fluids 
2013 , 25 , 03210610.1063/1.4795021 .
Yariv E. ; Frankel I. 
Electrohydrodynamic
Rotation of Drops at Large Electric
Reynolds Number . J. Fluid Mech. 
2016 , 788 , R2 10.1017/jfm.2015.748 .
Kim B.-Y. ; Moon J. H. ; Sung T.-H. ; Yang S.-M. ; Kim J.-D. 
Demulsification
of Water-in-Crude Oil Emulsions by a Continuous Electrostatic Dehydrator . Sep. Sci. Technol. 
2002 , 37 , 1307 –1320 . 10.1081/SS-120002613 .
Kaji N. ; Mori Y. H. ; Tochitani Y. 
Electrically Induced Shape Oscillation
of Drops as a Means of Direct-Contact Heat Transfer Enhancement: Part
2—Heat Transfer . J. Heat Transfer 
1988 , 110 , 700 –704 . 10.1115/1.3250548 .
Elperin T. ; Fominykh A. 
Mass Transfer during Solute Extraction from a Fluid
Sphere with Internal Circulation in the Presence of Alternating Electric
Field . Chem. Eng. Process. 
2006 , 45 , 578 –585 . 10.1016/j.cep.2006.01.002 .
Chabert M. ; Dorfman K. D. ; Viovy J.-L. 
Droplet Fusion by
Alternating Current
(AC) Field Electrocoalescence in Microchannels . Electrophoresis 
2005 , 26 , 3706 –3715 . 10.1002/elps.200500109 .16136526 
Chen X. ; Song Y. ; Li D. ; Hu G. 
Deformation and Interaction
of Droplet Pairs in a Microchannel Under AC Electric Fields . Phys. Rev. Appl. 
2015 , 4 , 02400510.1103/PhysRevApplied.4.024005 .
Mochizuki T. 
Periodic Deformation
of Microsize Droplets in a Microchannel Induced by a Transverse Alternating
Electric Field . Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 12879 –12890 . 10.1021/la4011696 .24090269 
Annaka
Special Glass Factory Co. Ltd. Home Page . http://www.annaka-tg.com/dl/pdf/pyrex.pdf (accessed July 31, 2017 ).
Ouriemi M. ; Vlahovska P. M. 
Electrohydrodynamic Deformation and Rotation of a Particle-Coated
Drop . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 6298 –6305 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b00774 .26011225 
Lanauze J. A. ; Walker L. M. ; Khair A. S. 
Nonlinear Electrohydrodynamics
of
Slightly Deformed Oblate Drops . J. Fluid Mech. 
2015 , 774 , 245 –266 . 10.1017/jfm.2015.264 .
Turcu I. 
Electric Field
Induced Rotation of Spheres . J. Phys. A: Math.
Gen. 
1987 , 20 , 3301 –3307 . 10.1088/0305-4470/20/11/033 .
Jones T. B. 
Quincke
Rotation of Sphere . IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 
1984 , IA-20 , 845 –849 . 10.1109/TIA.1984.4504495 .

