
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145950110.1021/acsomega.8b03156ArticleEvaluating Large-Scale STEM Outreach Efficacy with
a Consistent Theme: Thermodynamics for Elementary School Students DeWilde Joseph
F. †Rangnekar Esha P. ‡∥Ting Jeffrey M. †∥⊥Franek Joseph E. §Bates Frank S. †Hillmyer Marc A. §Blank David A. *§†Department
of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, ‡Carlson School of
Management, and §Department of Chemistry, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, United States* E-mail: blank@umn.edu. Phone: (612) 624-0571.05 02 2019 28 02 2019 4 2 2661 2668 12 11 2018 18 01 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A biannual
chemistry demonstration-based show named “Energy
and U” was created to extend the general outreach themes of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields and
a college education with a specific goal: to teach the first law of
thermodynamics to elementary school students. The effectiveness of
the program was analyzed using a clicker survey system for over 12 000
visiting students. The fraction of the students that correctly answered
the question “Is it possible to create energy?” increased
from 14% immediately before the show to 89% immediately after the
show. Students who had seen the show at least 5 months prior were
twice as likely to correctly answer at the beginning of the show,
demonstrating longer-term lesson retention. Interestingly, similar
trends were observed for the adult chaperones that accompanied the
students and participated in the clicker survey. A statistically significant
difference (>99% confidence interval) was noted between the students’
responses to the questions “Can you create energy?”
and “Can you destroy energy?”, revealing a potential
effect of word choice on the interpretation of the first law of thermodynamics
despite the two questions representing complementary concepts. Student
performance, measured interest in science, and desire to attend college
were not correlated with standard economic indicators. This measurement
is consistent with the postulate that economic biases surrounding
interest in STEM fields are less pronounced in elementary school than
later in high school.

document-id-old-9ao8b03156document-id-new-14ao-2018-031569ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Science outreach programs
aimed at pre-college students have become
more common as both academic and industrial scientists have increasingly
come to acknowledge and understand the importance and impact of such
efforts.1−3 From our general observations on university outreach
efforts, a student or professor performs a variety of scientific demonstrations
with the goal to promote pursuit of learning big ideas in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), such as nanotechnology,4 polymers,5 or energy.6 These shows have become common in communities
proximal to colleges and universities, with many of the presenters
able to trace their inspiration back to being an audience member themselves.
One example is the renowned show developed and presented by the former
ACS President, Professor Bassam Shakhashiri at the University of Wisconsin.7 With a near inexhaustible library of attention-grabbing
demonstrations,8−12 chemistry provides a uniquely effective playground for this format
of scientific community engagement. From the seemingly endless expansion
of the elephant’s toothpaste13 to
the unexpected baritone after a breath from an invisible sea of SF6 supporting an aluminum foil sailboat,14 chemical demonstrations are a common entertainment method
to attempt to foster curiosity about the natural world and a passion
to understand it.

In this report, we describe and evaluate a
chemistry-based outreach
show designed to extend the concept of promoting general interest
in science to include a well-defined lesson. Evaluating the impact
of this form of outreach in informal science education is uncommon,
leaving most statements of impact to a simple assumption or open-ended.
In certain examples that do consider this,15−18 a variety of methods are used
to perform this analysis. DeKorver et al. used individual interviews
with more detailed information.15 Here,
we focus on targeting a larger number of students with surveys via
outreach. With a consistent and specific theme, the show is designed
to teach one of the most important and poorly understood scientific
principles, the first law of thermodynamics.19 Energy is a central concept in chemical education among most STEM
disciplines, and it is the concept at the foundation of many of the
greatest challenges faced by society today. The notion of energy and
its conservation is identified as a cross-cutting concept for Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS; with contributions from the National
Science Teachers’ Association (NSTA), National Research Council,
and the American Association for the Advancement of Science).20 From climate change to producing sufficient
food and potable water, energy is the critical concept required to
understand the sustainability of our future. At the same time, misconceptions
about energy are common among all ages and education levels.21−25 At the heart of the first law is the conversion and conservation
of energy. In the context of an energy demonstration show, the examples
converting between forms of energy take center stage, and chemistry
is a well-suited platform for this. A common and convenient form of
energy introduced in educational settings is the potential energy
in molecules. Chemical transformations are excellent examples of the
first law, converting chemical potential energy directly into a range
of other forms of energy including heat, electrical, potential, work,
and light.25 The transformation of potential
energy also provides a temporally and spatially controllable starting
point for access to many forms and subsequent transformations of energy.
This makes chemistry a natural toolkit when attempting to educate
a K-12 audience about the first law while simultaneously building
excitement and interest in science.

Despite its familiarity
from the common use of the term “energy,”
the concept of energy differs connotatively in meaning through everyday
dialogue: we may panic at the depletion of energy in our mobile phones,
schedule regular payments for energy utilities at home during frigid
winters, or consume energy drinks that are marketed to increase mental
alertness and physical performance. Moreover, media publications that
discuss “creating” sustainable or alternative energy
sources further obfuscate the general public’s perception of
energy.26 For educators, this ambiguity
complicates the instruction of a concrete definition of energy that
reconciles competing meanings derived from everyday usage.

At
first, teaching the first law of thermodynamics to elementary
school students may seem to be a mismatch between content and student
grade level. However, as we will demonstrate below, even students
in the third grade can understand and retain a simplified version
of the first law that omits the underlying mathematical formulation
but retains the foundational concept of energy conservation conveyed
through examples. In fact, qualitative descriptions of energy transfer
from one form to another have been identified as a disciplinary core
idea for elementary school students in the NGSS.20 The “Energy and U” show was designed to be
a demonstration-oriented performance with a continuous running theme
built around the first law. During this show, several demonstrations
were performed, each showing a conversion between different forms
of energy such as heat, electrical, and chemical. Examples are presented
in Figure 1a. We deconstructed
the first law into two main questions, referred to throughout this
report as question A and question B:Question A: can you create energy?

Question B: can you destroy energy?



Figure 1 (a) Representative
photographs of the University of Minnesota Energy
and U show, which presents conversion between different forms of energy
with explosive experiments and interactive demonstrations. Photographs
courtesy of Eileen Harvala. Copyright 2016. (b) Timeline of the development
and growth of the Energy and U program.

Figure 1b
shows
the progression of the Energy and U show, which was originally conceived
in late 2006 and performed at the University of Minnesota for the
first time in the summer of 2007 to a group of visiting K-12 students.
After this initial success, continuous development of the show followed,
and in May 2015, it was expanded and improved in collaboration with
the Theater Arts and Dance Department at the University of Minnesota
to include many of the trappings of a professional theater, such as
professional stage management, sound, visual effects, and lights.
The show has been performed for over 60 000 students and currently
serves ∼12 000 students per year. From January of 2014
to January of 2015, audience participation using clicker devices was
incorporated to both enhance student engagement and allow the collection
of real-time student feedback. This report presents an analysis of
the data collected during that time.

We present here the results
of a comprehensive study aimed at not
only teaching the conservation of energy to elementary school students
but also evaluating the effectiveness of an outreach program in a
quantitative manner. The student audience was surveyed before and
after the show. Responses demonstrate that the show positively affected
both short- (immediately after the show) and long-term (>5 months)
understanding of the first law of thermodynamics. We further identify
a disparity between student retention of the inability to create energy
compared to that of the inability to destroy energy. This may be linked
to the presentation of these lessons or a result of preconceptions
about the creation of energy. While the focus of the show is the first
law and general promotion of STEM education, the survey data were
also analyzed for correlations with student socioeconomic status indicators
based on access to free and reduced cost lunch.

Methods
Student Population
Students attending the Energy and
U show from all schools attended as a class unless they were excused.
The school officials volunteered to participate in the show with the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Minnesota. The authors
have contacted and worked with the University of Minnesota IRB office
to verify that this activity does not fall under human research according
to DHHS regulations. Survey responses collected according to this
protocol were not classified as identifiable information.

Survey
data were collected over a 2 year period of performances from the
Minneapolis–Saint Paul metropolitan area; 8605 and 4059 students
attended the 2014 and 2015 shows, respectively. The elementary schools
represented a diverse range of student populations. The racial and
socioeconomic makeup of the survey population was estimated from the
data collected by the state of Minnesota for each of the schools that
attended the show and was not assessed directly at the show. On the
basis of these data, the survey population was made up of 56% students
of color and 56% economically disadvantaged as defined by the percentage
of students eligible for reduced cost or free lunch.

Safety Considerations
Best safety practice principles
were adopted to the show from the Joint Safety Team at the University
of Minnesota.27 All students and demonstrators
wore safety glasses for personal protection equipment at all times
during the show. Long hair was tied back, and selected participants
wore long pants and closed-toe shoes. In addition, participating student
volunteers wore a lab safety coat as precaution during the demonstrations
that involved methane-filled balloons (i.e., the hydrogen
Ba-BOOM and the laser balloon showdown).
This served as a brief safety moment for the audience. As an additional
precaution, graduate student volunteers were trained with fire extinguishers
and ready backstage during all performances. All on-stage demonstrations
were prepared by the Department of Chemistry Lecture Demonstration
Director Joseph Franek ahead of time. Additional details about the
design and preparation of the demonstrations can be provided upon
request.

Show Description
The show was held twice a year for
a week each time (January and May in 2014 and January in 2015) in
a classroom outfitted for chemical demonstrations on the University
of Minnesota–Twin Cities campus. A condensed version of this
show can be viewed online at the Public Broadcasting Service Hands-On
Science website.28 There were 3 shows each
day for a total of 15 shows per week. Three to five local elementary
schools were invited to each show with a typical total attendance
of 300 students and chaperones. At the beginning of each show, demographic
information such as grade level and school and a pre-evaluation of
the students’ understanding of the first law of thermodynamics
were collected and assessed using clickers provided to every audience
member. The first question asked was unrelated to the topic of energy, “Who
is the better singer? (A) Justin Timberlake, (B) Taylor Swift.”
This was used to help orient students to the use of the feedback device. Figure 2 shows representative
slides from the show.

Figure 2 Representative slides shown during the Energy and U show.
The students
were familiarized with clickers at the beginning of each show and
were surveyed in their understanding of the first law of thermodynamics.
Understanding of the first law was evaluated at the end of the show.

Following initial assessments,
the show followed a consistent,
connected, and running theme of the conversion of energy from one
form to another. As one illustrative example, we describe the content
related to combustion. A more comprehensive description of the show
is provided in the Supporting Information. The students were introduced to the oxidation of organic molecules
with a live demonstration of the combustion of a gummy bear, including
real-time monitoring of the temperature. The chemistry is shown on
a slide graphically and symbolically, with conversion of stored chemical
energy to energy in the form of heat. When each new form of energy
is introduced (heat in this case), the students are invited to stand
up and dance to excerpts of popular songs. This is designed to engage
the students as they identify with each form of energy. Next, the
students are told that cars run on energy in the form of heat. As
one might expect, they are a bit confused because this is not their
natural response when confronted with the question, “What do
cars run on?” It leads directly to the questions, “If
cars run on heat and you cannot create or destroy energy, where did
the heat come from? What do cars run on?” The audience routinely
shouts “Gas!”, and then, the connection can be made
to the full energy conversion of hydrocarbon combustion to heat to
work to motion (kinetic energy). Later in the show, the question is
raised, “Where did the energy stored in the gas come from?”
With the audience helping, the energy conversions are walked back
to light from the sun.

The first half of the show is focused
on energy in the form of
work, heat, and potential energy while the second half of the show
describes converting energy between electricity, chemical energy,
and light. For each demonstration, emphasis is placed on showing the
conversion of energy from one form to another. Student volunteers
from the audience are involved in many of the onstage demonstrations.
The first law of thermodynamics is introduced to the students during
the show as the statement, “you can't create energy and
you
can't destroy energy.” This concept of energy conservation
is stated twice during the show, near the beginning and then about
half way through. Student retention of the concepts is then measured
at the end of the show.

Student Evaluation and Analysis
All students were surveyed
using i>clicker 2 response devices29 (clickers),
and collective responses were compiled in the i>Grader (TenTal
Software30) program. Table 1 presents the questions asked at the beginning
and
end of the show and a set of representative student response. After
familiarizing students with using the clickers by asking them question
1, we collected demographic information, including school location,
grade, and previous attendance of the show with questions 2–4.
In this manner, student responses could be separated from chaperone
responses and retention from a prior experience with the show can
be assessed. At the beginning of the show, we asked question 5, “Is
it possible to create energy?” to assess students’ prior
knowledge about the first law of thermodynamics. At the conclusion
of the show, we asked both questions A and B to evaluate the immediate
impact of the show. Students were instructed to remain silent during
this time. We switched the ordering of the last two questions for
1593 of the 12 664 students to identify any potential bias
created by one preceding the other.

Table 1 Energy and U Clicker
Questions and
Rationale
no.	question	purpose	answers	responses	
1	“who is the better singer?”	to
acclimate students towards using the clicker devices	(A) Justin Timberlake	(A) 1525	
 	 	 	(B) Taylor Swift	(B) 2442	
 	 	 	 	 	
2	“what
school are you from?”	to associate responses
with specific school groups and demographics	(A) school 1	44 schools were surveyed
over the course of the show	
 	 	 	(B) school 2	 	
 	 	 	(C) school 3	 	
 	 	 	(D) school 4	 	
 	 	 	(E) school 5	 	
 	 	 	 	 	
3	“what grade are you in?”	to categorize the students’ grade and separate student
and chaperone responses	(A) 3rd	(A) 759	
 	 	 	(B) 4th	(B) 713	
 	 	 	(C) 5th	(C) 1606	
 	 	 	(D) 6th	(D) 404	
 	 	 	(E) teacher, chaperone, other	(E) 284	
 	 	 	 	 	
4	“have you been to the show before?”	to monitor the retention of students who are returning to the
show	(A) yes	(A) 920	
 	 	 	(B) no	(B) 2923	
 	 	 	 	 	
5	“is it possible
to create energy?”	to assess the understanding
of the conservation of energy before
the show	(A) yes	(A) 3496	
 	 	 	(B) no	(B) 563	
 	 	 	 	 	
A	“can you create
energy?”	to assess the understanding of the conservation
of energy after
the show	(A) yes	(A) 213	
 	 	 	(B) no	(B) 3477	
 	 	 	 	 	
B	“can you destroy
energy?”	to assess the understanding of the conservation
of energy after
the show	(A) yes	(A) 406	
 	 	 	(B) no	(B) 3565	
Student responses are from
a representative show. Questions 1–5
were asked at the beginning of the show, and questions A and B were
asked at the end of the show, with the order of questions A and B
reversed in some of the shows.

In addition to the assessment
associated with the conservation
of energy, 3300 of the students were surveyed regarding their overall
interest in college and science. The results are presented in Table 2. A five-point Likert-type
scale was initially chosen and used with 1561 students with responses
ranging from “very untrue” to “very true.”
For the design of future shows, substituting the term “true”
with “accurate” may be a more scientifically concise
term. As a comparison, a simplified three-point Likert-type scale
with options of “Yes,” “No,” or “Maybe”
was used for a different 1739 students.

Table 2 Likert
Scale and Multiple Choice Survey
Questions (January 2015 Show)a
 	 	 	Likert-type scale	simplified Likert-type scale	
no.	question	purpose	answers	responses	answers	responses	
1	“I want to
go to college”	to gauge general interest in attending
college	(A) very untrue	(A) 111	(A) yes	(A) 1599	
 	 	 	(B) somewhat untrue	(B) 35	(B) no	(B) 64	
 	 	 	(C) neither true nor untrue	(C) 102	(C) maybe	(C) 342	
 	 	 	(D) somewhat true	(D) 190	 	 	
 	 	 	(E) very true	(E) 1568	 	 	
2	“I want to take more science classes”	to assess general interest in science	(A) very untrue	(A) 279	(A) yes	(A) 1063	
 	 	 	(B) somewhat untrue	(B) 89	(B) no	(B) 404	
 	 	 	(C) neither true nor untrue	(C) 243	(C) maybe	(C) 563	
 	 	 	(D) somewhat true	(D) 395	 	 	
 	 	 	(E) very true	(E) 927	 	 	
a Answer choices
were switched mid-way
through shows.

Statistical
significance of the differences between the students
who have or have not seen the show previously for their responses
to the Likert-type scale questions was evaluated using t-tests of
independent means. Reported 95% confidence intervals for Likert-type
scales indicate certainty evaluated from a Student’s-t analysis. For all other reported analyses, Z-tests of proportions were used to determine the statistical significance
of measured differences between two populations (e.g., those who have
or have not seen the show). Unless otherwise mentioned, all results
using Z-tests of proportions were observed to be
statistically significant with over 99% confidence and with effect
sizes31 greater than 2.3 because of the
large sample size of over 4000 students for each session.

Results
and Discussion
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Teaching
Conservation of Energy
Principles
The results of the evaluations are presented in Figure 3. There is substantial
contrast between the perception of energy before and after the show.
The percentage of the audience (12 664 students) who gave correct
responses to question A increased dramatically from the beginning
of the show to the end of the show, from 15 to 91% (Figure 3a). The faction of students
that correctly answered question B was 94%. These results provide
two important conclusions. First, the percentage of students that
know the concept of energy conversion prior to the show is very low.
Second, the show has very high efficacy in delivering the lesson of
energy conversion when evaluated for short-term retention.

Figure 3 Comparison
of responses when asked. “Is it possible to create
energy?” (pre-show, question 5), “Can you create energy?”
(post-show, question A), or “Can you destroy energy?”
(post-show, question B) for (a) total students and (b) January 2015
chaperones. All differences between correct (green solid bars) and
incorrect (red dashed bars) answers were statistically significant
to over 99% confidence.

Although elementary school students are the primary targets
of
the show, it is interesting to note that a similar trend was observed
for the responses of 178 adult chaperones. The correct response to
question A increased from 30 to 90%. This large increase reveals that
(i) the misconception that energy can be created is still present
in adult populations and (ii) the immediate effect of the show on
lesson retention also upholds for chaperones. Additionally, this may
yield a secondary impact on the students through education of the
primary set of adults that have the opportunity influence their understanding
over a much longer contact period.

By examining the data between
two sets of shows after 5 months,
we examined the longer-term retention of understanding the first law
before the show. We emphasize that this is limited to this short time-frame
and students were not surveyed afterward. Longer-term retention of
the primary concept was assessed by comparing the performance of 2135
first-time and 701 returning students (the minimum time between shows
was 5 months) on question 5 asked the beginning of the show. The fraction
of students who correctly answered question 5 was a factor of 2.5
larger for those who have seen the show previously than those who
have not (24 and 9%, respectively), providing direct evidence of longer-term
retention. The observed increase in retention of those who have previously
seen the show is upheld even when the students are separated into
two age groups with similar population sizes: 3rd/4th graders, consisting
of 1090 students, and 5th graders or older, comprising 1746 students
(Figure 4). The similar
increase in both age groups suggests that the measured retention is
an effect of the show and not simply increasing age (59% of returning
students are 5th graders or older). Additionally, 26% of the chaperones
present who have not seen the show previously answered question 5
correctly at the beginning of the show while 39% of the chaperones
who have seen the show previously answered correctly, demonstrating
that the show is effective even among adults (Figure 4).

Figure 4 Pre-show assessment of correct responses to
question 5 for the
3rd/4th grade students, 5th/6th grade students, and chaperones that
have not (brown dashed bars) and have (green solid bars) seen the
show previously. All differences between responders that have and
have not seen the show were statistically significant with greater
than 99% confidence.

Wording Effect and Comprehension
Given the ongoing
cognitive development in logic, interpretation, and communication
skills for children, questions that are intended to be standardized
can elicit biased responses or compromise reliability (stability or
repeatability over time) in the question–answer process. Item
order effects have been studied extensively in the literature.32,33 Borgers et al. discussed how cognitive factors can affect objectivity
in responding to survey questions for children from ages 8 to 16 years
old.34 They report that the number of answer
choices has a particularly strong effect on response reliability,
while negatively worded question interpretation was not a key factor
in response consistency. The ordering of multiple questions targeting
the same learning outcome, such as comprehension of the conservation
of energy, may influence the question’s responses. For example,
questions A and B at the end of the presentation address conservation
from the complementary perspectives of the inability to create and
the inability to destroy energy. There are two issues to consider:
(1) Does the first question bias response to the second question?
(2) Do the students interpret the ideas of create and destroy differently
in this context?

To study the effect of question order, we reversed
the order of the post-show questions A and B for different sessions
of the show: 2289 students were asked question A first and 1476 students
were asked question B first (Figure 5). For question A, 88.2% of students responded
correctly when this question was asked first. After the ordering switch,
this increased slightly to 90.3% correct responses. In comparison,
for question B, 95.4% of students responded correctly when asked first
and 95.9% of students responded correctly when asked this second.
These differences were statistically different from each other to
a 99% confidence level. However, there does appear to be modest differences
in how the students interpreted the concepts of create and destroy in the context of energy conservation.
The larger residual population that did not change their answer to
question A from the beginning to the end of the show suggests a larger
barrier to acceptance of the idea that you cannot create energy compared
to the idea that you cannot destroy energy. We postulate that the
observed discrepancy may have its roots in ubiquitous usage of phrases
such as “creating new sources of energy” found in a
wide variety of common media.

Figure 5 Comparison of correct and incorrect student
responses when asked
questions A and B at the end of the show before and after switching
the question ordering. All differences between correct responses before
the switch (blue dashed bars) and after the switch (green solid bars)
were statistically significant with greater than 99% confidence.

Factors Affected by Socioeconomic
Diversity
Aschbacher,
Li, and Roth reported that only 20% of the surveyed students that
the authors categorized as having a low socioeconomic status were
interested in STEM fields at the end of high school, compared to 62%
of those of a higher socioeconomic status.35 With the ability to correlate our survey data with socioeconomic
indicators, we decided to examine the potential for correlation between
socioeconomic status and exposure to a fundamental scientific concept,
energy conservation, in elementary school students. We compared the
percent of students at each school that were eligible for free and
reduced lunch (% F&RL) to the performance on question 5 at the
beginning of the show. No correlation was observed, as shown in Figure 6 (R2 = 0.0594). Similarly, when measuring the correlations
between % F&RL and interest in attending college and in taking
more science classes, as measured using the Likert-type scales (see Table 2 for questions), the R2 values were 0.0014 and 0.0022, respectively, Figure 7.

Figure 6 Percentage of the students
of each school that correctly answered
“Is it possible to create energy?” as a function of
% F&RL for that school for the January 2015 show. Error bars represent
the 95% confidence intervals as determined using a Students-t analysis. The dashed line shows a linear regression of
the plotted data. The correlation modeled by the line is not statistically
significant and is only plotted as visual aid.

Figure 7 Students’ Likert-type responses to (a) “I want to
go to college” and (b) “I want to take more science
classes” as a function of % F&RL for each school for the
January 2015 show (the Y-axis shows an average of
all responses measured using the following: very untrue/no = 1, somewhat
untrue = 2, neither true nor untrue/maybe = 3, somewhat true = 4,
and very true/yes = 5).  The dashed line shows a linear
regression of the plotted data. The correlation modeled by the line
is not statistically significant and is only plotted as visual aid.

Conclusions
Energy
and U, a demonstration-based show with a consistent theme
based on the first law of thermodynamics, was developed and then evaluated
using direct audience feedback collected from over 12 000 elementary
school students. Survey data collected at the start and end of the
show demonstrated a low level of understanding when the students (and
chaperones) arrived and a high level of efficacy imparting the correct
understanding of the conservation of energy. The percentage of students
that correctly answered question 5 at the start of the show, 14%,
increased to 90% correct answers on question A. Students across both
analyzed age groups (3rd/4th and 5th grade and older) who had previously
seen the show were twice as likely to correctly answer question 5
at the beginning of the show than students who had not seen the show
before. These measurements demonstrate the effectiveness of the show
to promote both short- and long-term retention of the first law of
thermodynamics among elementary school students. The increased lesson
retention was also observed for adults/teachers/chaperones who attended
the show. Reports of quantitative evaluation of the impact of this
type of community outreach are scarce,1 but this quantitative approach for Energy and U can be extended
to other themes in science and engineering. Recent innovative reports
on informal science education can supplement simple takeaway messages
with more details and specialized topics.3−6,36−38 This study demonstrates that positive learning outcomes
for the targeted scientific content can successfully accompany a more
general theme promoting pursuit of learning and careers in STEM-based
disciplines.

At the end of the show, more students correctly
answered question
B than question A, irrespective of the order the questions were posed.
This observation demonstrates an inherent bias among elementary school
students for the ability to create energy compared with destroying
energy. This bias may reflect common usage of terminology that often
incorrectly states or infers the creation of energy. No correlation
was observed between the percent of the student population eligible
for free and reduced cost school lunches (% F&RL) and the propensity
for the students of each school to correctly answer question A. Student
interest in science and future pursuit of a college education, measured
using a Likert-type scale, were independent of % F&RL, revealing
that elementary school students are less affected by economic biases
than has been demonstrated for older students. This study provides
one of the first examples of incorporating real-time feedback into
large-scale chemistry-based outreach events for elementary school
students to quantify and better understand the broader impact and
learning outcomes.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03156.The Energy and
U presentation, demonstration descriptions,
Likert-type scale analysis, and supplemental photographs from the
show (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b03156_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
⊥ Institute for Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois 60637, United States.

Author Contributions
∥ E.P.R.
and J.M.T. contributed equally to the work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
David Sittenfeld, manager of the Forum
program at the Museum of Science, for helpful discussions. We acknowledge
the financial support of The National Science Foundation Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center at the University of Minnesota
(MRSEC under award DMR-1420013), The National Science Foundation Center
for Sustainable Polymers at the University of Minnesota (CSP under
award CHE-1413862), The College of Science and Engineering at the
University of Minnesota, Medtronic Corporation, Schlumberger, and
John Deere. J. M. T. acknowledges support from the National Science
Foundation (NSF) Graduate Research Fellowship under grant no. 00006595
and the University of Minnesota Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship. We
gratefully thank Professors Aditya Bhan, Cari Dutcher, Renee Frontiera,
Christy Haynes, Theresa Reineke, Aaron Massari, Kevin Dorfman, and
Connie Lu for leading numerous performances. We also thank Eileen
Harvala, Laura Seifert, Jennifer Henderson, Kelsi Klaers, Kelly Horn,
and Courtney Meeker for coordinating the organization, transportation,
and logistics of the shows.
==== Refs
References
Pratt J. M. ; Yezierski E. J. 
Characterizing
the Landscape: Collegiate Organizations’
Chemistry Outreach Practices . J. Chem. Educ. 
2017 , 95 , 7 –16 . 10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00627 .
Graham M. J. ; Frederick J. ; Byars-Winston A. ; Hunter A.-B. ; Handelsman J. 
Increasing
Persistence of College Students in STEM . Science 
2013 , 341 , 1455 –1456 . 10.1126/science.1240487 .24072909 
Pratt J. M. ; Yezierski E. J. 
A Novel Qualitative Method to Improve
Access, Elicitation,
and Sample Diversification for Enhanced Transferability Applied to
Studying Chemistry Outreach . Chem. Educ. Res.
Pract. 
2018 , 19 , 410 –430 . 10.1039/c7rp00200a .
Rushton G. T. ; Criswell B. A. 
Cutting-Edge and
Cross-Cutting: Connecting the Dots
Between Nanotechnology and High School Chemistry . J. Chem. Educ. 
2012 , 89 , 1217 –1219 . 10.1021/ed300531k .
Ting J. M. ; Ricarte R. G. ; Schneiderman D. K. ; Saba S. A. ; Jiang Y. ; Hillmyer M. A. ; Bates F. S. ; Reineke T. M. ; Macosko C. W. ; Lodge T. P. 
Polymer Day: Outreach
Experiments for High School Students . J. Chem.
Educ. 
2017 , 94 , 1629 –1638 . 10.1021/acs.jchemed.6b00767 .
Kate the Chemist; 2018 . https://www.katethechemist.com/ (accessed Jan 7, 2019 ).
University
of Wisconsin professor wins ACS’ Grady-Stack award
for science communication, 2017 . https://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/pressroom/newsreleases/2017/august/university-of-wisconsin-professor-wins-acs-grady-stack-award-for-science-communication.html (accessed Jan 7, 2019 ).
Shakhashiri B. Z.  Chemical
Demonstrations: A Handbook for Teachers of Chemistry ; University of Wisconsin Press : Madison,
WI , 1983 ; Vol 1 .
Shakhashiri B. Z.  Chemical
Demonstrations: A Handbook for Teachers of Chemistry ; University of Wisconsin Press : Madison,
WI , 1985 ; Vol 2 .
Shakhashiri B. Z.  Chemical
Demonstrations: A Handbook for Teachers of Chemistry Vol 3 ; University of Wisconsin Press : Madison, WI , 1989 .
Shakhashiri B. Z.  Chemical
Demonstrations: A Handbook for Teachers of Chemistry Vol 4 ; University of Wisconsin Press : Madison, WI , 1992 .
Shakhashiri B. Z.  Chemical
Demonstrations: A Handbook for Teachers of Chemistry Vol 5 ; University of Wisconsin Press : Madison, WI , 2011 .
Eldridge D. S. 
Using Elephant’s
Toothpaste as an Engaging and Flexible Curriculum Alignment Project . J. Chem. Educ. 
2015 , 92 , 1406 –1408 . 10.1021/acs.jchemed.5b00037 .
Science
is Fun and the Joy of Learning; MIT Chemistry Behind the
Magic . https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YrgrcBxcBiw (accessed Jan 7, 2019 ).
DeKorver B. K. ; Choi M. ; Towns M. 
Exploration of a Method To Assess
Children’s Understandings of a Phenomenon after Viewing a Demonstration
Show . J. Chem. Educ. 
2016 , 94 , 149 –156 . 10.1021/acs.jchemed.6b00506 .
Kerby H. W. ; Cantor J. ; Weiland M. ; Babiarz C. ; Kerby A. W. 
Fusion
Science Theater PresentsThe Amazing Chemical Circus:A New Model of
Outreach That Uses Theater To Engage Children in Learning . J. Chem. Educ. 
2010 , 87 , 1024 –1030 . 10.1021/ed100143j .
Kerby H. W. ; DeKorver B. K. ; Cantor J. ; Weiland M. J. ; Babiarz C. L. 
Demonstration
Show That Promotes and Assesses Conceptual Understanding Using the
Structure of Drama . J. Chem. Educ. 
2016 , 93 , 613 –618 . 10.1021/acs.jchemed.5b00490 .
Kerby H. W. ; DeKorver B. K. ; Cantor J. 
Fusion Story Form:
a Novel, Hybrid
Form of Story That Promotes and Assesses Concept Learning . Int. J. Sci. Educ. 
2018 , 40 , 1774 –1794 . 10.1080/09500693.2018.1512172 .
Rumford B. 
An inquiry
concerning the source of the heat which is excited by friction . Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 
1798 , 88 , 80 –102 . 10.1098/rstl.1798.0006 .
Next Generation Science Standards https://www.nextgenscience.org/topic-arrangement/4energy (accessed Jan 7, 2019 ).
Lewis E. L. ; Linn M. C. 
Heat Energy and Temperature Concepts of Adolescents,
Adults, and Experts: Implications for Curricular Improvements . J. Res. Sci. Teach. 
1994 , 31 , 657 –677 . 10.1002/tea.3660310607 .
Bain K. ; Moon A. ; Mack M. R. ; Towns M. H. 
A review of research
on the teaching and learning of thermodynamics at the university level . Chem. Educ. Res. Pract. 
2014 , 15 , 320 –335 . 10.1039/c4rp00011k .
Cheong I. P.-A. ; Johari M. ; Said H. ; Treagust D. F. 
What Do You Know
about Alternative Energy? Development and Use of a Diagnostic Instrument
for Upper Secondary School Science . Int. J.
Sci. Educ. 
2014 , 37 , 210 –236 . 10.1080/09500693.2014.976295 .
DeWaters J. ; Qaqish B. ; Graham M. ; Powers S. 
Designing an Energy
Literacy Questionnaire for Middle and High School Youth . J. Environ. Educ. 
2013 , 44 , 56 –78 . 10.1080/00958964.2012.682615 .
Wink D. J. 
The Conversion
of Chemical Energy: Part 1. Technological Examples . J. Chem. Educ. 
1992 , 69 , 108 –111 . 10.1021/ed069p108 .
Ridgway A.  Windows Soak Up
the Sun’s Power to Create Energy . http://www.newsweek.com/2014/09/26/windows-soak-suns-power-create-energy-271741.html (accessed Jan 7, 2019 ).
McGarry K. A. ; Hurley K. R. ; Volp K. A. ; Hill I. M. ; Merritt B. A. ; Peterson K. L. ; Rudd P. A. ; Erickson N. C. ; Seiler L. A. ; Gupta P. ; Bates F. S. ; Tolman W. B. 
Student Involvement
in Improving the Culture of Safety in Academic Laboratories . J. Chem. Educ. 
2013 , 90 , 1414 –1417 . 10.1021/ed400305e .
Public Broadcasting
Service Hands-On Science, Energy and U . https://www.pbs.org/video/hands-on-science-102-hk63yb/ (accessed
Jan 7, 2019 ).
i>clicker  . https://www1.iclicker.com/products/iclicker-2/ (accessed Jan 7, 2019 ).
TenTal Software Ltd.  http://www.tental.net/ (accessed Jan 7, 2019 ).
Coe R.  Itʼs the
Effect Size, Stupid: What Effect Size Is and Why It Is Important . Annual Conference of the British Educational Research Association , Exeter, UK , 2002 .
Schroeder J. ; Murphy K. L. ; Holme T. A. 
Investigating Factors
That Influence
Item Performance on ACS Exams . J. Chem. Educ. 
2011 , 89 , 346 –350 . 10.1021/ed101175f .
Krosnick J. A. ; Presser S.  Handbook of Survey Research , 2 nd ed.; Emerald Group Publishing , 2010 .
Borgers N. ; Hox J. ; Sikkel D. 
Response Effects
in Surveys on Children and Adolescents:
the Effect of Number of Response Options, Negative Wording, and Neutral
Mid-Point . Qual. Quantity 
2004 , 38 , 17 –33 . 10.1023/b:ququ.0000013236.29205.a6 .
Aschbacher P. R. ; Li E. ; Roth E. J. 
Is Science
Me? High School Students’ Identities,
Participation and Aspirations in Science, Engineering, and Medicine . J. Res. Sci. Teach. 
2010 , 50 , 564 –582 . 10.1002/tea.20353 .
Katz P. ; McGinnis J. R. ; Hestness E. ; Riedinger K. ; Marbach-Ad G. ; Dai A. ; Pease R. 
Professional
Identity
Development of Teacher Candidates Participating in an Informal Science
Education Internship: a Focus on Drawings as Evidence . Int. J. Sci. Educ. 
2010 , 33 , 1169 –1197 . 10.1080/09500693.2010.489928 .
Finkenstaedt-Quinn S. A. ; Hudson-Smith N. V. ; Styles M. J. ; Maudal M. K. ; Juelfs A. R. ; Haynes C. L. 
Expanding the Educational Toolset for Chemistry Outreach:
Providing a Chemical View of Climate Change Through Hands-on Activities
and Demonstrations Supplemented with TED-Ed Videos . J. Chem. Educ. 
2018 , 95 , 985 –990 . 10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00948 .
National Institute for STEM Education . https://nise.institute/ (accessed
Jan 7, 2019 ).

