
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146020110.1021/acsomega.9b01188ArticleEquilibrium in the Catalytic Condensation of Carboxylic
Acids with Methyl Ketones to 1,3-Diketones and the Origin of the Reketonization
Effect Ignatchenko Alexey V. *DiProspero Thomas J. Patel Heni LaPenna Joseph R. Chemistry Department, St. John Fisher College, 3690 East Avenue, Rochester, New York 14618, United
States* E-mail: alexey.ignatchenko@gmail.com. Phone: (585) 385-8385.25 06 2019 30 06 2019 4 6 11032 11043 25 04 2019 11 06 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Acetone is the expected ketone product
of an acetic acid decarboxylative
ketonization reaction with metal oxide catalysts used in the industrial
production of ketones and for biofuel upgrade. Decarboxylative cross-ketonization
of a mixture of acetic and isobutyric acids yields highly valued unsymmetrical
methyl isopropyl ketone (MIPK) along with two less valuable symmetrical
ketones, acetone and diisopropyl ketone (DIPK). We describe a side
reaction of isobutyric acid with acetone yielding the cross-ketone
MIPK with monoclinic zirconia and anatase titania catalysts in the
absence of acetic acid. We call it a reketonization reaction because
acetone is deconstructed and used for the construction of MIPK. Isotopic
labeling of the isobutyric acid’s carboxyl group shows that
it is the exclusive supplier of the carbonyl group of MIPK, while
acetone provides only methyl group for MIPK construction. More branched
ketones, MIPK or DIPK, are less reactive in their reketonization with
carboxylic acids. The proposed mechanism of reketonization supported
by density functional theory (DFT) computations starts with acetone
enolization and proceeds via its condensation with surface isobutyrate
to a β-diketone similar to β-keto acid formation in the
decarboxylative ketonization of acids. Decomposition of unsymmetrical
β-diketones with water (or methanol) by the retrocondensation
reaction under the same conditions over metal oxides yields two pairs
of ketones and acids (or esters in the case of methanol) and proceeds
much faster compared to their formation. The major direction yields
thermodynamically more stable products—more substituted ketones.
DFT calculations predict even a larger fraction of the thermodynamically
preferred pair of products. The difference is explained by some degree
of a kinetic control in the opposite direction. Reketonization has
lower reaction rates compared to regular ketonization. Still, a high
extent of reketonization occurs unnoticeably during the decarboxylative
ketonization of acetic acid as the result of the acetone reaction
with acetic acid. This degenerate reaction is the major cause of the
inhibition by acetone of its own rate of formation from acetic acid
at high conversions.

document-id-old-9ao9b01188document-id-new-14ao-2019-011887ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Catalytic
conversion of carboxylic acids into methyl ketones is
an important industrial process for the preparation of fine chemicals
and intermediates.1−5 The first industrial scale production of acetone was already operating
more than a century ago, before World War I, utilizing acetic acid
derived from pyrolysis of wood.6 In recent
years, decarboxylative ketonization of carboxylic acids has been also
viewed as a promising step for the development of biofuel technology,
which has a purpose of reducing the amount of various carboxylic acids
in otherwise chemically unstable pyrolysis oil.7

The mechanism for the catalytic formation of a ketone
molecule
from two molecules of a carboxylic acid involves a Claisen-like condensation
between α-carbon of the enolized carboxylate and the carboxyl
group of the second molecule followed by dehydration to the unstable
β-keto carboxylate and its subsequent decarboxylation (Scheme 1). The use of acids
rather than esters in the heterogeneous catalytic version of the Claisen
condensation is made possible because of the trapping of carboxylic
protons on the metal oxide surface.8

Scheme 1 Mechanism of the Catalytic Decarboxylative Ketonization of Carboxylic
Acids on Zirconia
Despite being studied for over a century, catalytic decarboxylative
ketonization is a more complicated reaction relative to how it has
been described in the literature so far.9−11 What has still to be
understood is a considerable degree of side reactions going unnoticed
and the fact that the major pathway is reversible. First, the reversibility
of all of the steps of the reaction mechanism has been only recently
proposed in the computational study on a zirconium oxide catalyst.8 Subsequently, experimental evidence was found
supporting the idea that the formation and decomposition of the β-keto
acid intermediate in Scheme 1 are reversible. That is to say, ketones can enolize and condense
with carbon dioxide back to β-keto acids—unstable intermediates.12

The present work extends the above chemistry
by adding starting
carboxylic acids to the list of electrophiles participating in the
condensation with the enolized ketone products. We hope that the current
study will draw attention to the kinetic consequences of many side
reactions taking place during the catalytic decarboxylative ketonization
of carboxylic acids on metal oxides.

Condensation between the
enolized molecule of a ketone and a molecule
of carboxylic acid catalyzed by metal oxides should lead to 1,3-diketones,
called β-diketones, but it has not been well documented in the
literature.13 Similarly to the fate of
β-keto acids, the reaction does not stop at the formation of
the β-diketone on the surface of metal oxides because of the
two competing retrocondensation reactions going in opposite directions
(Scheme 2).

Scheme 2 Methyl
Ketone Reketonization via Their Enolization and Claisen-like
Condensation with Carboxylic Acids Followed by Retrocondensation to
a Different Pair of Acid/Ketone
A similar behavior is known for a noncatalytic condensation
in
solutions between ketones and esters of trifluoroacetic acid when
using a stoichiometric amount of NaH base. The initial condensation
transforms an ester function to one of the two keto groups of the
1,3-diketone intermediate. Then, it is followed by a retrocondensation
on the other keto group converting it to another ester and yielding
trifluoromethyl ketones (Scheme 3).14,15 The product mixture contains
exclusively the ester of the aromatic acid and trifluoromethyl ketone
without starting materials, which makes it a highly selective synthetic
method.

Scheme 3 Preparation of Trifluoromethyl Ketones Similar to Reketonization
In a separate experiment, when
the intermediate β-diketone
is treated by OH– or CH3O–, it decomposes into two pairs of a ketone–acid (or a ketone–ester)
via the retrocondensation reaction involving either one of the two
keto groups.15

The equilibrium in Scheme 3 is shifted to the
right, but in view of the results of the
above decomposition, it is not because one of the carbonyl groups
of the β-diketone is more susceptible to the nucleophilic attack.
The observed selectivity is explained by a low nucleophilicity of
the α-carbon on the enolate of the trifluoromethyl ketone, which
slows down its conversion back to the diketone. Acylation of the trifluoromethyl-substituted
enolate proceeds on oxygen rather than on carbon, and the reesterification
of the O-acylated enol by R2O– under
the reaction conditions brings back the trifluoromethyl ketone. Such
asymmetry of the ketone reactivity is responsible for the selective
formation of trifluoromethyl ketones.

In the current work, we
describe the results of our study of a
similar asymmetric effect for the catalytic version of the Claisen-like
condensation on metal oxides between methyl ketones and carboxylic
acids when two simple alkyl groups with a different degree of branching
are used in place of −Ar and −CF3. The resulting
unsymmetrical β-diketone intermediate decomposes in the opposite
direction and yields a coupled pair of an acid and a ketone, which
is formally described as the methyl group transfer. We call it the
reketonization reaction that occurs when an alkyl group of a ketone
prepared from one carboxylic acid is replaced by an alkyl group from
another carboxylic acid through a series of condensation and retrocondensation
reactions.

Recognizing the reketonization reaction and understanding
its mechanism
will have a significant impact on the industrial technology of asymmetric
ketone preparation and on the complete understanding of the mechanism
and kinetics of the related reaction, the decarboxylative ketonization
of carboxylic acids.

2 Experimental Section
2.1 Abbreviations
Catalysts are abbreviated
as follows: ZR, untreated zirconia; ZK, KOH-treated zirconia; TK,
KOH-treated titania.

Acids, ketones, and 1,3-diketones are numbered
by letters according to the type and number of alkyl groups found
in them: A for methyl, B for isopropyl,
and C for ethyl (Chart 1).

Chart 1 Compounds Numbering
2.2 Catalysts and Reagents
Monoclinic
zirconium oxide and the anatase form of titanium oxide, in a shape
of cylinders, 3–5 mm in length and 3 mm in diameter, were purchased
from Alfa Aesar. Acetone (AA), 3-methylbutan-2-one (AB), MIPK, 2,4-dimethyl-3-pentanone (BB), DIPK,
2-butanone (AC) (MEK), acetylacetone (AAA), 3,3-dimethyl-2,4-pentanedione (ABA), acetic A and isobutyric B acids with natural isotopes,
and isotopically labeled isobutyric acid, (CH3)2CH13CO2H, were purchased from Aldrich. 2,6-Dimethyl-3,5-heptanedione, BAB, was purchased from Acros Organics.

2.3 Preparation of 5-Methylhexane-2,4-dione (AAB)
The synthesis and purification were based on
a patented procedure.16 Toluene (150 mL),
ethyl acetate (36.2 g, 0.41 mol), and NaH (15.7 g, 0.39 mol; 60% oil
dispersion) were placed in a 1 L three-necked flask and heated to
70 °C. 3-Methyl-2-butanone (20.1 g, 0.23 mol) was added dropwise
over 1 h under stirring while maintaining the temperature at 70 °C.
After addition was complete, the reaction mixture was stirred at 70°
C for 1.5 h and chilled to room temperature. A portion of ethanol
(5 mL) was added under stirring to decompose unreacted NaH. The precipitated
solid was dissolved by adding 100 mL of water, and the reaction mixture
was stirred overnight at ambient temperature to complete hydrolysis
of esters at a pH value of 12.5. The top organic layer containing
impurities of a low acidity was removed, and the remaining aqueous
layer was extracted twice with 30 mL portions of hexane. The aqueous
layer was acidified by carefully adding HCl (15%) to a pH value of
8.0. The organic layer was separated and saved. The aqueous layer
was extracted twice with 30 mL portions of hexane. The combined organic
phases were dried over CaSO4 and concentrated under vacuum in a rotary
evaporator, and the residue was distilled. Fraction boiling at 81–85
°C/27 mm Hg (lit. bp 70–74 °C/20 mm Hg17), 13.8 g (46.1% yield), was collected and analyzed
by GC. The GC-estimated purity of the product was 98.8%.

2.4 Catalyst Preparation and Characterization
KOH-treated
catalysts were used from the same batches that were
used in the previous study.4 Pellets were
crushed and sieved to obtain different fractions for the kinetic fit
experiment in the continuous flow reactor. A fraction of 0.2–0.75
mm was used for all studies. Monoclinic zirconia had a median pore
diameter of 160/600 Å, bimodal total pore volume of 0.30 mL/g,
and BET surface area of 48 m2/g for the untreated catalyst
and 45 m2/g for the KOH-treated catalyst determined by
nitrogen adsorption at 77 K. Anatase titania had a median pore diameter
of 270 Å, total pore volume of 0.29 mL/g, and BET surface area
of 42 m2/g for the KOH-treated catalyst.

2.5 Continuous Flow Reactor
A tubular
reactor, 3.0 mm in internal diameter, 200 mm in length equipped with
a thermocouple positioned in the center of the heated zone, was used
as previously described.4 The bottom and
the top of the catalyst bed were each filled with PRO-PAK metal-packing
chips. The catalyst was supported between two pieces of quartz wool.
The diketone solution in methanol or water or a mixture of ketones
and carboxylic acids at the specified molar ratios, feed rates, and
temperatures (Tables S1–S3 in the
Supporting Information) was continuously pumped by a New Era syringe
pump, model NE-1000, through a preheating line, 1.6 mm in diameter,
to the top of the reactor. All experiments were conducted at atmospheric
pressure. Deionized water or methanol was pumped through the reactor
between switching feeds. Liquid products were collected from the outlet
of the condenser and analyzed by GC/MS.

Average turnover frequencies
(TOF, s–1) were calculated from the number of moles
consumed or produced per second on a catalyst with a known weight
and BET surface area assuming four Zr or Ti metal surface atoms in
one catalytic site and average densities of 8.4 nm–2 on monoclinic zirconia8,18 and 5.7 nm–2 on anatase titania11,18 determined by DFT studies.

Residence times were calculated by dividing the volume of the catalyst
bed by the volume of the ideal gas produced from vaporization of a
known number of moles of all liquid components in the feed pumped
per unit of time.

2.6 Identification of the Products
Products
were analyzed by a Thermo Scientific TRACE 1300 gas chromatograph
equipped with a Restek XTI-5 capillary column (30 m in length, 0.25
mm in diameter, 0.25 μm in phase thickness), an FID detector
for quantitative analysis and with an HP-5 MS UI capillary column
(30 m in length, 0.25 mm in diameter, 0.25 μm phase thickness),
and a Thermo Scientific ISQ single quadrupole mass selective detector
for identification analysis. Ketones AA, AB, and BB and acids and methyl esters of A and B were identified by matching GC retention times
and MS spectra with authentic samples.

2.7 GC Quantitative
Analysis Method
Helium
carrier gas with a constant column flow (0.9 mL/min), a split mode
of injection with a split ratio of 100:1, and an oven temperature
of 50 °C holding for 5 min and then rising 15 °C/min were
used for the quantitative analysis method. The amounts of all products
and unreacted reagents were calculated using the integration of the
corresponding peaks relative to the area of the internal standard
added to the collected product samples, methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) for β-diketones decomposition, and methanol
for the reaction of isobutyric acid with acetone. Preliminary calibration
of carboxylic acids, methyl esters, and ketones included three levels
of their concentration.

2.8 “Inside GC/MS”
Pulse Microreactor
A GC/MS pulse microreactor was built and
used as previously described.18,19

2.9 Multilevel
Factorial Design of Experiments
(DOE) Model
The DOE model for the isobutyric acid reaction
with acetone included three experimental factors, temperature (°C),
molar fraction of acid B (%), and liquid hourly space velocity (LHSV,
h–1), with three levels of each factor and two blocks.
The amounts of ketone products, AB and BB, were measured, and their
rates of formation (mmol/g-cat/h) were calculated and used as response
variables in the regression analysis. The selected design included
16 runs, using the same portion of the catalyst for all 16 runs and
collecting one product sample for each run (Table S1). Prior to DOE experiments, each catalyst was aged by running
the reaction at 375–400 °C for at least 2 h. A quadratic
model of the process factors with five coefficients was used (Table S2 in the Supporting Information). Insignificant
process factors and their interactions were eliminated during regression
analysis to achieve the p value less than 5%. R2 values were ranged from 65% to 99%.

DOE models for β-diketone decomposition included two experimental
factors, temperature (°C) and molar fraction of β-diketone
(%) with three levels of each factor and two blocks. The amounts of
ketones and ester products were measured, and their rates of formation
(TOF s–1) were calculated and used as response variables
in the regression analysis. The selected design had six runs, using
the same catalyst loading for all six runs and collecting two product
samples for each run (Table S4 in the Supporting
Information). Regressions coefficients are shown in Table S5 of the Supporting Information.

2.10 Computational Method
Density functional
theory (DFT) calculations for periodic structures were performed with
the DMol3 program from Dassault Systèmes Biovia
Corp.20 previously used in our study of
the decarboxylative ketonization mechanism8,21 and
water interaction with zirconia and titania surfaces.18 Graphical displays were generated with Materials Studio.
Electron exchange and correlation were described by the generalized
gradient approximation (GGA) based on the work of Perdew et al. using
the PBE functional22 with a Tkatchenko–Scheffler
(TS) exchange correlation23 to address
intermolecular dispersive interactions.

Periodic slab geometry
was used to model zirconia surfaces adopting previously used models.8,18,21 A (111) surface was cleaved to
a depth of ∼12 Å, and a vacuum slab of 20 Å in thickness
was built above the surface. A supercell was constructed of 16 zirconium
atoms and 32 oxygen atoms. The top three surface layers, consisting
of twelve ZrO2 units, were allowed to relax, while the bottom layer
of four ZrO2 units was constrained. Energy minimization and frequency
calculations were performed for the obtained supercell with and without
adsorbed molecules by density functional calculations using the double
numerical plus polarization basis set. Core electron treatment included
all electron relativistic options. All calculations were performed
spin restricted. A real space cutoff of 4.6 Å and a k-point sampling
spacing of 0.05 Å-1 were used. SCF density
convergence, optimization energy convergence, and gradient convergence
were set to 1 × 10–5, 2 × 10–5, and 4 × 10–3 a.u., respectively. Molecule
geometry in the gas phase was optimized, and frequencies were calculated
using the same method. Thermodynamic quantities were computed from
vibrational frequency calculations.

Transition states were found
using the improved tangent algorithm
for the nudged elastic band method,24 and
their geometry was subsequently refined, that is, each TS structure
was optimized to its minimum according to all the coordinates (positive
frequencies) and to its maximum with respect to the reaction coordinate
(negative frequency). Frequency calculations were used to characterize
each TS as a first-order saddle point with only one imaginary frequency.

3 Results
3.1 Catalytic Condensation
of Acetone with Isobutyric
Acid
Mixtures of acetone and isobutyric acid in molar ratios
from 1:9 to 9:1 were converted to a mixture of MIPK and DIPK within
the temperature range from 250 to 450 °C in the hot tube reactor
filled with anatase titania or zirconia catalysts. The amount of products
was measured by GC/FID analysis and used to calculate reaction rates
averaged over the conversion range. Data points in a set of 16 statistically
designed experiments were used in the regression analysis to obtain
average reaction rates as a continuous function of the temperature
and molar fraction of isobutyric acid with three different catalysts
for the formation of MIPK (Figure 1) and DIPK (Figure 2).

Figure 1 Dependence of the MIPK (AB) rate of formation
on temperature
and on the molar fraction of isobutyric acid (B) in the
mixture with acetone (AA) for ZR, ZK, and TK catalysts
at a residence time of 1.7 s and LHSV of 7 h–1.

Figure 2 Comparison of the reaction rates for MIPK (AB) and
DIPK (BB) formation with (a) Zr, (b) ZK, and (c) TK catalysts
depending on temperature and molar fraction of isobutyric acid (B) in the mixture with acetone at a residence time of 1.7
s and LHSV of 7 h–1.

Traces of acetic acid were found in some of the experiments.
Because
of the small amount of acetic acid formed and only at some conditions,
it was not included in the regression analysis. Conversion of acetic
acid to acetone proceeds much faster under the same conditions and
with the same catalysts4 compared to its
formation in the above reaction.

KOH-treated catalysts, ZK and
TK, had slightly higher activity
for the production of MIPK from acetone and isobutyric acid compared
to the untreated catalyst, ZR. The highest activity for MIPK production
was found with the TK catalyst. Surface charts (Figure 1) have a similar shape for all three catalysts.
The MIPK rate with all three catalysts had a linear dependence on
the fraction of isobutyric acid and a second degree polynomial dependence
on temperature (Table S2 in the Supporting
Information).

Formation of DIPK from two molecules of isobutyric
acid was favored
at high temperatures and at high molar fraction of isobutyric acid,
while MIPK formation from acetone and isobutyric acid was favored
at high molar fraction of acetone and started at lower temperatures
(Figure 2). The selectivity
to MIPK defined as the ratio of the MIPK rate to the sum of MIPK and
DIPK rates was the highest with the TK catalyst among all studied
catalysts under most conditions.

The above data demonstrated
that acetone can be used instead of
acetic acid to produce the cross-ketone, MIPK, in the reaction with
isobutyric acid. Rates of MIPK formation have been also measured for
the regular cross-ketonization reaction between acetic and isobutyric
acids under the same conditions. When two methods are compared directly
(Figure 3), it can
be seen that rates of MIPK formation are faster for the isobutyric
acid condensation with acetic acid rather than with acetone. The difference
between the rates in two methods becomes smaller at higher temperature
and at lower concentration of isobutyric acid.

Figure 3 Comparison of MIPK (AB) rates of formation in the
reaction of isobutyric acid (B) with acetone (AA + B) vs that with acetic acid (A + B) depending on temperature and molar fraction of isobutyric
acid (B) at LHSV of 7 h–1 using (a)
ZR, (b) ZK, and (c) TK catalysts.

3.2 Condensation of Branched Ketones with Carboxylic
Acids
Attempts to produce a similar reketonization effect
in the reaction of branched ketones, MIPK or DIPK, with acetic or
isobutyric acids were less successful. In the attempted reaction of
MIPK with acetic acid under the same conditions, only traces of isobutyric
acid and DIPK were detected in addition to a large amount of acetone
coming from the condensation between two molecules of acetic acid.

Theoretically, reketonization could proceed in two directions depending
on the side of the MIPK molecule, AB, which is enolized.
In one direction, enolization through the deprotonation of the isopropyl
group followed by condensation could lead to the symmetrical 1,3-diketone ABA formation (Scheme 4). Because of its symmetry, there is only one way to decompose ABA, that is, back to AB and A.
If it does take place, condensation of MIPK (AB) with
acetic acid (A) would be a degenerate reaction that remained
unnoticed.

Scheme 4 Possible AB Ketone Condensation with
Acetic Acid A through Enolization on Isopropyl Group
Side, a Degenerate
Reaction
For the second direction,
if the methyl group of MIPK is enolized,
condensation could lead to the unsymmetrical 1,3-diketone AAB, which would decompose to a mixture of acetone (AA)
and isobutyric acid (B) according to Scheme 5.

Scheme 5 Possible AB Ketone Condensation with Acetic Acid A through Enolization
on Methyl Group Side
As shown in Section 3.1, the reaction in reverse to the equation in Scheme 5—acetone condensation
with isobutyric acid—does take place. For this reason, even
if the reaction A + AB does proceed leading
either to AAB or to AA + B,
more readily, it may go back to the mixture of A and AB. In such a case, condensation of the methyl side of MIPK
with acetic acid will be unnoticed again. In addition, the reketonization
of AB to AA is masked by a competing and
much faster reaction—the regular condensation of acetic acid
with itself followed by decarboxylative ketonization to acetone (Scheme 6).

Scheme 6 Decarboxylative Ketonization
of Acetic Acid A
Similarly, in the attempted reketonization of DIPK (BB) with acetic acid (A), acetone was produced
as the
major product of acetic acid self-condensation (Scheme 7). Traces of MIPK (AB) and isobutyric
acid (B) were detected only at high temperatures, 450
°C, and at a high concentration of DIPK.

Scheme 7 Attempted Reketonization
of DIPK with Acetic Acid Provided Only Traces
of AB and B
Reketonization was more successful for the reaction between
isobutyric
acid B and MEK (CA), which is only slightly
less sterically hindered compared to MIPK. The reaction between B + CA proceeded in two directions from the entry
point in the middle of Scheme 8.

Scheme 8 Successful Reketonization of CA Ketone
with Isobutyric
Acid B into Ketones BC and AB
Two products of the reketonization, BC and AB, along with the product of isobutyric
acid self-condensation, BB, were obtained with the ZK
catalyst (Figure S4). Identification of
products was done by using GC/MS
analysis and spiking with authentic samples. Reketonization of MEK
with isobutyric acid was about tenfold slower compared to that with
acetone (Figure 4).
The relative amounts of BC versus AB were
close to each other within the error of the experiment.

Figure 4 Average rates
for the formation of products in the reketonization
of methyl ethyl ketone AC with isobutyric acid: BB, BC, AB, and the combined rate
of AB and BC at LHSV = 1 h–1 with ZK catalyst depending on temperature.

A common nature of the reketonization reaction was also confirmed
by using a long-chain linear acid. A mixture of acetone and stearic
(octadecanoic) acid in a 99:1 molar ratio was converted to nonadecan-2-one
(Figure S5) at a temperature of 475 °C
and LHSV of 2 h–1 with the ZK catalyst. Under those
conditions, a full conversion of stearic acid was achieved. The calculated
average rate of the reaction, 3.5 mkmol/min/g-cat, was lower than
for isobutyric acid, but a direct comparison cannot be done in view
of the full conversion. After all stearic acid had been consumed,
products of acetone dimerization and trimerization started to form,
such as mesityl oxide, isophorone, and 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene, typical
for ketone condensation on metal oxides in the absence of carboxylic
aicds.25 MEK and MIPK also formed a similar
type of product.

Activity of all catalysts has not declined
below at least 90% of
the initial value after approximately 80 h of testing time. Relative
stability of the catalysts was found in the order TK > ZK >
ZR, which
was assessed by a small but measurable, less than 2%, weight increase
at the end of the DOE set and also by a color change (Figure S6). There were no carbonaceous deposits
formed on catalysts.

3.3 Condensation of Acetone
with Isotopically
Labeled Isobutyric Acid
Reketonization of acetone with isobutyric
acid labeled on its carboxylic group by 13C was studied
with the ZK catalyst in the pulse microreactor inside GC/MS. The carbonyl
group in the MIPK product was monitored by a mass spectrometry detector,
and it was found to be composed of about 96% of 13C. It
was concluded based on the ratios of molecular ions m/z = 87 to m/z = 86 and isobutyryl ions m/z =
72 to m/z = 71. The fact that isobutyric
acid being the exclusive source of the carbonyl group in MIPK is consistent
with the reketonization mechanism outlined in Scheme 2.

The initial atomic percent of 13C on the carboxyl group of isobutyric acid was 99%. The reason
that it is decreased to 96% on the carbonyl group of the ketone product
is most likely because of the 12C/13C exchange
between labeled isobutyric acid and unlabeled CO2, which
we have recently described.12 The unlabeled
CO2 may result from the secondary decarboxylative ketonization
of acetic acid initially released in the reketonization of acetone.

3.4 Catalytic Decomposition of β-Diketones
by the Retrocondensation Reaction
Because 1,3-diketones are
proposed as the intermediates of the decarboxylative reketonization
reaction in Scheme 2 yet are not isolated, they must decompose faster than they form.
This assumption was verified in separate experiments by continuously
feeding 1,3-diketone solutions in water or methanol to the hot tube
reactor filled with a catalyst.

Decomposition of acetylacetone
in water should initially produce acetone and acetic acid in an equal
number of moles according to the reaction stoichiometry. However,
the observed amounts of acetic acid and acetone in moles were not
equal because part of acetic acid was immediately converted to acetone
by the decarboxylative ketonization reaction according to Scheme 6. The rate of acetic
acid conversion to acetone was calculated from the difference in apparent
rates of acetone and acetic acid formation (Figure 5).

Figure 5 Decomposition rate of acetylacetone AAA 2.2% M solution
in water, apparent rates of acetic acid A and acetone AA formation, and the calculated rate of acetic acid conversion
into acetone A + A = AA with
ZK catalyst at a residence time of 0.084 s.

To avoid complications due to the side reaction of acetic
acid
to acetone, decomposition of 1,3-diketones was studied in anhydrous
methanol solution. In that case, methyl esters were formed instead
of free acids together with ketones. Symmetrical 1,3-diketones, AAA, ABA, and BAB, produced only
one pair of methyl ester and ketone, while unsymmetrical AAB ketone produced two pairs, A + AB and AA + B (Scheme 9). Because anhydrous methanol was used, methyl esters
did not show any sign of hydrolysis, although some conversion to ketones
could have occurred to a minor degree as evidenced by the slight asymmetry
of the amount of ketones versus esters produced. Ketones were always
produced in methanol in a slightly larger amount compared to esters
(Table S4), but the difference was not
as large as in water (Table S3 and Figure 5).

Scheme 9 Retrocondensation
of Unsymmetrical 1,3-Diketone AAB with
Methanol into Two Pairs of Ester/Ketone
Decomposition of three symmetrical and one unsymmetrical
1,3-diketones
in methanol was studied under pseudo-first-order reaction conditions
with the same three catalysts using 1–3 mol % solutions at
the temperature range of 200–400 °C. Initial data points
(Table S4 in the Supporting Information)
were used in a regression analysis to find coefficients for the rate
dependence on concentration and temperature (Table S5). Reaction rates followed first-order dependence on the
concentration of 1,3-diketone and quadratic polynomial dependence
on the temperature (Figure S1).

The
untreated zirconia catalyst (ZR) showed a significantly higher
activity for the decomposition of 1,3-diketones in methanol compared
to KOH-treated catalysts ZK and TK (Figure 6). With the ZR catalyst, the most reactive
diketone was the least substituted diketone AAA, acetylacetone,
followed by ABA. With both KOH-treated catalysts, ABA becomes the most reactive diketone. Its high activity
is explained in the Discussion section. Activity
of all catalysts has not declined for the entire duration of the decomposition
tests. Neither color change nor measurable weight gain has been detected
at the end.

Figure 6 Decomposition rates of diketones 2% M solution in methanol with
ZR, ZK, TK catalysts at the temperature of 300 °C and the residence
time of 0.020 s (for compound abbreviations refer to Chart 1).

Decomposition of the unsymmetrical ketone AAB was
faster in the direction of making ketone AB (MIPK) versus AA (acetone, Scheme 9). The preference for MIPK over acetone formation varies slightly
with the temperature studied in the 250–350 °C range (Table S6) with the average being 70, 59, and
65% for ZR, ZK, and TK catalysts, respectively.

3.5 Adsorption of Ketones and Acids on Metal Oxides
The
difference in the adsorption of ketones versus carboxylic acids
was assessed by a pulse titration method using the “inside
GC/MS microreactor”. A small amount of a catalyst was placed
inside the injection port of the GC/MS instrument, and premeasured
pulses of organic molecules were added until a full saturation was
achieved. The adsorbed amount for each pulse was calculated as the
difference between amounts injected and coming out. Coverage was calculated
by using the BET surface area and assuming a bidentate bridging mode
of adsorption for carboxylic acids and a monodentate adsorption for
ketones. For ketones, some bleeding from the surface was noticed only
for the exposure time in flowing helium gas measured in hours. There
were no significant differences between the calculated adsorptions
of acetone when the time between pulses was set to 5, 10, and 30 min.
Data obtained at the 10 min interval were reported in all experiments.

As can be seen in Figure 7, adsorption of carboxylic acids on the surface is much stronger
compared to that of ketones. The difference between surface concentrations
of carboxylic acids and ketones can be one of the reasons explaining
the difference between the reaction rates of acetic acid versus acetone
in their reaction with isobutyric acid making MIPK (Figure 3b).

Figure 7 Adsorption of isobutyric
acid and acetone measured in a pulse microreactor
inside GC/MS at 200 °C by adding 0.1 μL pulses to 20 mg
sample of ZK catalyst.

3.6 DFT Modeling
The most important steps
for the synthesis of diketones from carboxylic acids and ketones and
for the decomposition of diketones in their reaction with water were
modeled by DFT computations on the (111) surface of monoclinic zirconia
using DMol3 for periodic structures (Figures 8 and 9 and Table 1).

Figure 8 Free energy profile of
the catalytic mechanism for three different
reketonization reactions, BA + A = AA + B (Figure 9), AA + A = A + AA (Figure S2), AB + A = A + BA (Figure S3), following elementary steps
of Scheme 10. Energies
are shown relative to the energy of the empty surface and AA + B in the gas phase, structure 12.

Figure 9 Elementary steps of the reaction mechanism on
(111) surface of
monoclinic zirconia for (a) BA + A = BAA reaction and (b) BAA = B + AA reaction according to Scheme 10.

Table 1 DFT-Calculated
Free Energy of Activation
and of Reaction (in Parenthesis), kcal/mol, for the Elementary Steps
of the Reaction Mechanism on (111) Surface of Monoclinic Zirconia
at 300 °C and the Equilibrium Fractions of Structures 2 and 11 Based on the Calculated Equilibrium Constant
ketone–acid pair, 1	fraction of 2 in the equilibrium
between 2 and 11	condensation, 2 → 4	retrocondensation, 4 → 2	dehydration, 4 → 6	hydration, 6 → 4	enolization, 6 → 13	diketone, 6	
BA + A	98.6%	20.1 (19.9)	0.2 (−19.9)	16.4 (−4.1)	20.5 (4.1)	–a (−21.3)	BAA	
AA + A	50%	20.7 (20.2)	0.5 (−20.2)	13.9 (−10.6)	24.5 (10.6)	–a (−19.2)	AAA	
AB + A	50%	16.0 (31.5)	–15.5 (−31.5)	11.0 (−15.4)	26.4 (15.4)	 	ABA	
diketone, 7	enolization, 7 → 14	hydration, 7 → 9	dehydration, 9 → 7	retrocondensation, 9 → 11	condensation, 11 → 9	fraction of 11 in the equilibrium between 2 and 11	ketone acid pair, 12	
AAB	–a (−24.2)	10.6 (−3.0)	13.5 (3.0)	6.1 (−14.5)	20.6 (14.5)	1.4%	AA + B	
AAA	–a (−19.2)	24.5 (10.6)	13.9 (−10.6)	0.5 (−20.2)	20.7 (20.2)	50%	A + AA	
ABA	 	26.4 (15.4)	11.0 (−15.4)	–15.5 (−31.5)	16.0 (31.5)	50%	A + BA	
a En dash (−)
indicates a barrierless
process.

The size of the
supercell was chosen to match experimentally determined
concentration of acids on the zirconia surface, which is less than
3 nm–2 (Figure 7). The selected model accurately represents a high
surface saturation, which seems to be an important factor in the decarboxylative
ketonization mechanism.11 Nonetheless,
there were no close contacts shorter than 0.35 nm, and the model has
been previously used to study a similar mechanism between two molecules
of acids.8

We took advantage of the
previous DFT study in which various options
for the condensation step between two surface carboxylates have been
already extensively studied. Accordingly, we have replaced the enolized
carboxylate in the previous model with the enolized ketone.

Condensation between the enolized ketone in a monodentate adsorption
mode and surface carboxylate in a bidentate bridging adsorption mode
(structures 2 and 11) is followed by dehydration
of the resulting intermediate (structures 4 and 9) and leads to diketones 6 and 7 (Figure 9a,b). Reverse
steps in the opposite direction, that is, hydration of β-diketones 6 or 7 and C–C bond cleavage in structures 4 or 9 by retrocondensation (Figure 9b), lead to the complementary
pair of the enolized ketone and carboxylic acid, 2 or 11, according to Scheme 10.

Scheme 10 Mechanism of the
Catalytic Reketonization Reaction between Mixture
of AA + B and BA + A via Formation of Unsymmetrical 1,3-Diketone AAB (the
Same as BAA) on Surface of ZrO2
Geometry was optimized, and
frequency calculations were performed
for all reactants, products, and transition states, as shown in Figure 9a,b and Figures S2 and S3. Thermodynamic quantities were
computed from vibrational frequency calculations within the canonical
transition state theory provided by the Materials Studio software
package.

The free energy profile for the interconversion of
structures 1–12 at 300 °C is shown in Figure 8. In the case of
the unsymmetrical diketone,
a universal graph is derived from a combination of red lines (AA + B and A + AB),
which can be used to describe decomposition of the unsymmetrical β-diketone
when entered from the middle of the catalytic cycle (structures 6 and 7) or the interconversion between two pairs
of acid/ketone represented by structures 1 or 12 according to Scheme 10. All energies are calculated relative to the empty surface with AA and B in the gas phase, 12. Structure 1 represents an empty surface with BA and A in the gas phase, and it is 5.1 kcal/mol lower in energy
compared to 12. The energy of the gas phase AAB and the empty surface (structure 15) is shown to characterize
desorption of AAB from 6 and 7. It is important to note that abstraction of the most acidic proton
from surface diketones 6 and 7 proceeds
with significant energy stabilization (21.3 and 24.2 kcal/mol) into
structures 13 and 14, respectively.

4 Discussion
The data presented above show that methyl
ketones, in general,
and acetone, in particular, can condense with carboxylic acids in
the vapor phase over metal oxide catalysts at temperatures above 300
°C. However, the immediate products of their condensation, β-diketones,
are not stable under the reaction condition and decompose by the retrocondensation
to a different pair of an acid and ketone. Formally, this reaction
results in the transfer of the methyl group from acetone to the acyl
group of the second carboxylic acid making methyl ketones.

Acetone
itself is made from acetic acid under similar conditions
by the decarboxylative ketonization reaction. Reusing acetone in the
cross-ketonization with another acid makes it possible to prepare
unsymmetrical ketones by the mechanism best described as reketonization.
This reaction is of considerable importance for the industrial production
of methyl ketones.5 If not utilized, acetone
would represent up to 50% loss of acetic acid together with a loss
of the second carboxylic acid to the other symmetrical ketone, dramatically
reducing cost-effectiveness of the cross-ketonization. On the other
hand, reketonization of the desired cross-product, methyl ketone AB, is unwanted, but the main question is whether such a reaction
does take place at all.

Experiments with isotopically labeled
isobutyric acid (Section 3.3) showed that
it is the exclusive source of the carbonyl group of MIPK and that
we are dealing with an acid/base-catalyzed condensation of carbonyl
compounds rather than with an alkyl group shift by some kind of concerted
mechanism.

The unsymmetrical ketone AB has α-hydrogens
on both sides of the carbonyl group, which allow its enolization and
condensation with acids similar to that of acetone AA. If AA can condense with B, similarly, AB may condense with A.

Control of the
forward reaction in Scheme 5 could be either of a thermodynamic or kinetic
nature or a mixed one. If reactions in Scheme 5 are reversible in both directions and allowed
to equilibrate, it might be shifted to the left, toward more stable
mixture, A + AB. Indeed, thermodynamic quantities
of the gas phase molecules obtained through vibrational frequency
calculations by using the same DFT method as for periodic structures
show that the mixture of A and AB is more
stable compared to the mixture of AA and B. The DFT-calculated free energy difference in the gas phase at 300
°C is 5.07 kcal/mol, which relates to an equilibrium constant
of 0.0118 and to the equilibrium fraction of A + AB equal to 98.8%. By itself, this is a sufficient reason
for shifting the equilibrium in Scheme 5 to the left hand side, providing that the reaction
conditions allow for the equilibrium to be established.

The
same preference in favor of A + AB versus AA + B remains for structures on
the surface (Figure 8). The DFT-calculated free energy for structure 2 representing A + AB, −30.5 kcal/mol, is 1.6 kcal/mol
lower compared to that for structure 11 (AA + B), −28.9 kcal/mol (Table 1). However, decomposition of the unsymmetrical diketone AAB from the two possible adsorption states 6 and 7 (Figure 9a,b) has the lower calculated free energy barrier of the hydration
step when going to the right hand side, that is, toward AA + B. Condensation steps are not a differentiating factor
because the free energy barriers for both directions of the condensation, AA + B or A + AB, are almost the
same, 20.6 kcal/mol or 20.1 kcal/mol, respectively (Table 1). Therefore, DFT computations
predict AA + B to be the major direction
for β-diketones decomposition under kinetic control, while A + AB will be favored under thermodynamic control.

Experimentally, we have found only a small but persistent preference
for the direction of the unsymmetrical diketone AAB decomposition
in methanol toward A + AB rather than the AA + B mixture in Scheme 4. The preference for the formation of a more
substituted ketone is about 70% with ZR or 60% with the ZK catalyst
(Table S6), that is, not as large as the
98.8% value expected under purely thermodynamic control. The use of
methanol as a nucleophile instead of water was necessary to reveal
the selectivity of the initial decomposition by the retrocondensation
reaction while avoiding further reactions between acids such as A + A = AA, which takes place in
water (Figure 5). Methyl
esters formed in methanol are generally much less reactive in the
decarboxylative ketonization reaction compared to acids.26

Thus, experimental results indicate that
β-diketone decomposition
is controlled kinetically, but the initial ratio of products changes
to some extent by the reverse reaction toward the thermodynamic equilibrium.
From the energy profile shown in Figure 8, it can be seen that both desorption steps, 2 → 1 and 11 → 12, have high energy barriers. Hence, surface species 2–11 located in the energy well become
involved in a thermodynamic equilibrium between important steps of
the reketonization mechanism, C–C bond breaking and formation.

However, the most important factor controlling the direction of
the reketonization equilibrium seems to be a higher reactivity of
acetic versus isobutyric acid in the decarboxylative self-ketonization
reaction,4 and both acids have much higher
rates in the decarboxylative ketonization relative to the reketonization
reaction (directly compared in Figures 2 and 3). A faster consumption
of acetic acid versus isobutyric leads to its selective removal from
the equilibrium in Scheme 5, shifting it to the left hand side. In addition, a self-condensation
of the released acetic acid back to acetone generates more feed for
the reketonization of acetone and isobutyric acid into MIPK, AB, so the overall process at its limit is described by Scheme 11.

Scheme 11 Balanced
Equation for the Reketonization of Acetone into MIPK with
Isobutyric Acid
The calculated equilibrium
constant for the reaction in Scheme 11 at the temperature
300 °C is 4.9 × 107 leading to the equilibrium
concentration of AA + B less than 2.0 ×
10–6%, which explains reketonization of acetone AA into MIPK AB.

In a similar fashion,
the reaction between ketone AC and acid B, going to the edges from the middle of the
equation in Scheme 8, is able to proceed because it releases two acids, A and C, both of which are consumed faster on metal oxide
surfaces compared to acid B and are removed from the
equilibrium. It is due to the well-known fact that less sterically
hindered acids are more reactive in the decarboxylative ketonization.

Interestingly, ketone AC (2-butanone) was believed
to be inert and used as a solvent for that reason in a number of decarboxylative
ketonization studies, for example, in a mixture with butyric, pentanoic,
and hexanoic acids using a ceria–zirconia catalyst.26 However, the temperature in those studies did
not exceed 350 °C, and products of reketonization were not noticed.

We may now conclude that the reaction between A and AB in Schemes 4 and 5, most likely, does take place, but
it is masked and hard to detect. The exact kinetic consequence of
all reketonization reactions has yet to be determined. It is clear
that a number of side reactions may inhibit the rate of the decarboxylative
ketonization of carboxylic acids. Conceivably, the major contributor
to such inhibition is the degenerate reaction in Scheme 12 between acetone and acetic
acid, a pair of the least substituted and sterically less hindered
ketone and acid.

Scheme 12 Degenerate Reaction between Acetone and Acetic Acid
As the conversion of acids
is increasing and more ketones are produced,
a larger portion of catalytic sites becomes occupied with the reketonization
reaction slowing down the overall rate of ketone production. The reason
for the inhibition of the rate of decarboxylative ketonization of
acetic acid by the acetone product was previously thought to be its
accumulation on the surface.27,28 However, acetone adsorption
on the surface is much weaker compared to that of acids (Figure 7). A comparable amount
of acetic and isobutyric acids adsorbed on zirconia at the temperature
range of 200–400 °C was found previously.4,19 Therefore, the most likely reason for the above inhibition is the
reketonization reaction according to Scheme 12, which is more prevalent compared to the
recently reported condensation between acetone and carbon dioxide.12

The apparent rate of MIPK formation was
found to be lower when
starting from acetone versus acetic acid in the reaction with isobutyric
acid (Figure 3a–b).
Because the ratio of surface concentrations of ketones to acids is
approximately equal to the ratio of their apparent rates in the reaction
with isobutyric acid (Figure 7), we may conclude that the rate constants of the rate limiting
step, condensation, in the decarboxylative ketonization versus reketonization
reaction are of a comparable order of magnitude.

The heterogeneous
version of the retrocondensation reaction of
diketones catalyzed by zirconium and titanium metal oxides in our
study is closely related to the two mechanisms of β-diketones
and β-keto esters decomposition known in the literature. The
first one is the retrocondensation through a preliminary chelate complexation
in the solution by many other transition metals, such as Co, Zn, Cu,
Ni, Pd, Mn, Pt, and Rh.29 The second one
is a direct attack by strong nucleophiles such as NaOH and NaOC2H5, both in the solution and in the solid state.30 Zirconium and titanium oxides in our study can
provide conditions for both types of the retrocondensation mechanism
through complexation of dicarbonyls on the surface and by hosting
water and methanol nucleophiles (Figure 9a,b). In that regard, the untreated zirconia
catalyst, ZR, showed higher activity for retrocondensation because
of its known ability to hold more of dissociatively adsorbed water
on the surface compared to KOH-treated catalysts,18 and a similar difference can be expected for methanol adsorption.
Both nucleophiles, hydroxy and methoxy groups, play a critical role
in the decomposition of diketones by attacking a carbonyl group of
β-diketones.

An important factor, which may slow down
the retrocondensation
step, is the enolization of β-diketones proceeding with a large
energy of stabilization according to the DFT calculations. The position
of the enolized diketone structures 13 and 14 on the energy diagram is the lowest among all intermediates on the
surface (Figure 8).
Quantitative enolization of the condensation product in the classic
Claisen reaction in solutions is an essential step, which makes that
reaction possible.31 Likewise, due to a
high C–H acidity, enolizable β-diketones are taken out
of the condensation equilibrium by reacting with basic centers on
the catalyst surface, which helps to advance the condensation step
forward. In contrast, non-enolizable β-diketones with alkylated
methylene groups, such as diketone ABA, are difficult
to synthesize using nucleophilic bases because the equilibrium of
the Claisen condensation may shift back as the result of the nucleophilic
attack by such bases on the keto form.32 It was the reason, for which we had to use a non-nucleophilic base,
NaH, for the preparation of AAB in our work to increase
its yield (Section 2.4).33 Because a higher activity was found
for the non-enolizable diketone ABA relative to enolizable
diketones in the retrocondensation reaction with all catalysts (Figure 6), enolization of
diketones and β-keto carboxylates may take place and be an important
part of the catalytic decarboxylative ketonization mechanism and for
all concomitant steps discussed in our study.

5 Conclusions
Decarboxylative cross-ketonization of carboxylic acids is surrounded
by rich chemistry driven by a sequence of condensation and retrocondensation
steps including decarboxylation. We have disclosed additional side
reactions in the decarboxylative ketonization mechanism in which not
only carboxylic acids but also ketones can enolize on the surface
of metal oxides and participate in the condensation reactions as nucleophiles.
Their electrophilic partners for condensations are surface carboxylates
and carbon dioxide molecules. Only in the absence of carboxylic acids
and carbon dioxide, ketones are able to go through a usual aldol condensation
with another ketone molecule.

All reactions are reversible and
affected to a various degree by
the thermodynamic stability of products. The equilibrium in the catalytic
condensation between ketones and carboxylic acids leading to β-diketone
intermediates is shifted away from the β-diketones. In the case
of unsymmetrical diketones, the preferred direction of their decomposition
is toward formation of a more reactive carboxylic acid due to its
faster disappearance in the decarboxylative homoketonization. The
reketonization effect is observed in the reaction between a less reactive
acid and a ketone derived from a more reactive acid, typically, acetone.

A catalyst activity in such chemistry depends on its acid–base
properties and the surface structure. Because there are no redox steps
involved in the reaction mechanism, possession of a redox function
by metal oxide catalysts is unnecessary for the decarboxylative ketonization
and for the reketonization reactions.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01188.Regression analysis
for the rates of isobutyric acid
condensation with acetone, decomposition of 1,3-diketones in water
and methanol, and figures for AA + A = AAA and AB + A = ABA DFT calculations of elementary steps (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01188_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
T.J.D., H.P.,
and J.R.L. are grateful for the support
by the Summer Science Research Programs at St. John Fisher College
in 2014 and 2015. We thank Dr. Evguenii Kozliak (University of North
Dakota) for useful comments and former SJFC undergraduate students
Laura Moore and Roberto M. Voica for their participation at the beginning
of this project.
==== Refs
References
Ignatchenko A. V. ; King M. M. ; Liu Z. ; Whiddon C. W.  Catalysts Selective for the Preparation of Mixed Ketones from a Mixture
of Carboxylic Acids . U.S. Patent 7,659,432 , 2010 .
Ignatchenko A. V. ; King M. M.  Catalyst for the Production of Methyl Isopropyl Ketone . U.S. Patent 7,501,379 , 2009 .
Ignatchenko A. V. ; King M. M. ; Liu Z. ; Whiddon C. W.  Catalysts Selective for the Preparation of Mixed Ketones from a Mixture
of Carboxylic Acids . U.S. Patent 7,452,841 , 2008 .
Ignatchenko A. V. ; DeRaddo J. S. ; Marino V. J. ; Mercado A. 
Cross-Selectivity in
the Catalytic Ketonization of Carboxylic Acids . Appl. Catal., A 
2015 , 498 , 10 –24 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2015.03.017 .
Schommer C. ; Ebel K. ; Dockner T. ; Irgang M. ; Hoelderich W.  Harald
Rust. Preparation of
Ketones . U.S. Patent 4,950,763 , 1990 .
Gorman M. 
The History
of Acetone, 1600-1850 . Chymia 
1962 , 8 , 97 –104 . 10.2307/27757220 .
Kumar R. ; Enjamuri N. ; Shah S. ; Al-Fatesh A. S. ; Bravo-Suárez J. J. ; Chowdhury B. 
Ketonization
of Oxygenated Hydrocarbons on Metal Oxide Based Catalysts . Catal. Today 
2018 , 302 , 16 –49 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2017.09.044 .
Ignatchenko A. V. ; McSally J. P. ; Bishop M. D. ; Zweigle J. 
Ab Initio Study of
the Mechanism of Carboxylic Acids Cross-Ketonization on Monoclinic
Zirconia via Condensation to Beta-Keto Acids Followed by Decarboxylation . Mol. Catal. 
2017 , 441 , 35 –62 . 10.1016/j.mcat.2017.07.019 .
Pham T. N. ; Sooknoi T. ; Crossley S. P. ; Resasco D. E. 
Ketonization of
Carboxylic Acids: Mechanisms, Catalysts, and Implications for Biomass
Conversion . ACS Catal. 
2013 , 3 , 2456 10.1021/cs400501h .
Pacchioni G. 
Ketonization
of Carboxylic Acids in Biomass Conversion over TiO2 and
ZrO2 Surfaces: A DFT Perspective . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 2874 –2888 . 10.1021/cs500791w .
Wang S. ; Iglesia E. 
Experimental and Theoretical
Assessment of the Mechanism
and Site Requirements for Ketonization of Carboxylic Acids on Oxides . J. Catal. 
2017 , 345 , 183 –206 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2016.11.006 .
Ignatchenko A. V. ; Cohen A. J. 
Reversibility of
the Catalytic Ketonization of Carboxylic
Acids and of Beta-Keto Acids Decarboxylation . Catal. Commun. 
2018 , 111 , 104 –107 . 10.1016/j.catcom.2018.04.002 .
DiProspero T. J. ; Patel H. ; Ignatchenko A. V.  Catalytic Condensation of Ketones with Carboxylic Acids . In 24th North American Catalysis Society Meeting ; St. John Fisher College : Pittsburgh, PA , 2015 ; Vol. 11885 .
Yang D. ; Zhou Y. ; Xue N. ; Qu J. 
Synthesis of Trifluoromethyl
Ketones via Tandem Claisen Condensation and Retro-Claisen C-C Bond-Cleavage
Reaction . J. Org. Chem. 
2013 , 78 , 4171 –4176 . 10.1021/jo400280p .23517488 
Barkley L. B. ; Levine R. 
The Synthesis of Certain Ketones and α-Substituted
β-Diketones Containing Perfluoroalkyl Groups . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1953 , 75 , 2059 –2063 . 10.1021/ja01105a011 .
Harada R. ; Shigetomi T. ; Miyazaki S. ; Saito M.  Method for Extracting Asymmetric
Beta-Diketone Compound from Beta-Diketone Compound . WO application 2014069240 , 2014 .
Perfett B.
M. ; Levine R. 
A Study of
Acid Catalysis in Ketone Acylations . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
1953 , 75 , 626 –628 . 10.1021/ja01099a031 .
Ignatchenko A. ; Nealon D. G. ; Dushane R. ; Humphries K. 
Interaction
of Water with Titania and Zirconia Surfaces . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2006 , 256 , 57 –74 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2006.04.031 .
Ignatchenko A. V. ; Kozliak E. I. 
Distinguishing Enolic
and Carbonyl Components in the
Mechanism of Carboxylic Acid Ketonization on Monoclinic Zirconia . ACS Catal. 
2012 , 2 , 1555 –1562 . 10.1021/cs3002989 .
Delley B. 
From Molecules
to Solids with the DMol3 Approach . J. Chem. Phys. 
2000 , 113 , 7756 –7764 . 10.1063/1.1316015 .
Ignatchenko A. V. 
Density
Functional Theory Study of Carboxylic Acids Adsorption and Enolization
on Monoclinic Zirconia Surfaces . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2011 , 115 , 16012 –16018 . 10.1021/jp203381h .
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Generalized
Gradient Approximation
Made Simple . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Tkatchenko A. ; Scheffler M. 
Accurate Molecular
Van Der Waals Interactions from
Ground-State Electron Density and Free-Atom Reference Data . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2009 , 102 , 07300510.1103/PhysRevLett.102.073005 .19257665 
Govind N. ; Petersen M. ; Fitzgerald G. ; King-Smith D. ; Andzelm J. 
A Generalized Synchronous Transit
Method for Transition
State Location . Comput. Mater. Sci. 
2003 , 28 , 250 –258 . 10.1016/S0927-0256(03)00111-3 .
Luo S. ; Falconer J. L. 
Acetone and Acetaldehyde Oligomerization on TiO2 Surfaces . J. Catal. 
1999 , 185 , 393 –407 . 10.1006/jcat.1999.2511 .
Gaertner C. A. ; Serrano-Ruiz J. C. ; Braden D. J. ; Dumesic J. A. 
Ketonization Reactions
of Carboxylic Acids and Esters over Ceria-Zirconia as Biomass-Upgrading
Processes . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2010 , 49 , 6027 –6033 . 10.1021/ie1004338 .
Rajadurai S. 
Pathways for
Carboxylic Acid Decomposition on Transition Metal Oxides . Catal. Rev. 
2006 , 36 , 385 –403 . 10.1080/01614949408009466 .
Kuriacose J. C. ; Jungers J. C. 
The Kinetics of
the Decarboxylation of Fatty Acids
on Thorium Oxide . Bull. des Soc. Chim. Belges 
1955 , 64 , 502 –534 .
Akhrem I. S. ; Vartanyan R. S. ; Afanas’eva L.
V. ; Vol’pin M. E. 
Splitting
of C-C Bonds in β-Dicarbonyl Compounds Catalyzed by Transition
Metal Complexes . Bull. Acad. Sci. USSR, Div.
Chem. Sci. 
1983 , 32 , 1217 –1220 . 10.1007/BF00953160 .
Smith M. B. ; March J.  Basic Cleavage
of Beta-Keto Esters and Beta-Diketones . In March’s Advanced Organic Chemistry ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc. : 2001 ;
pp 812 –813 .
Wade L. G.  Organic Chemistry ; 8 th ed.; Pearson : Boston , 2013 .
Hauser C. R. ; Renfrow W. B. Jr.
Certain Condensations
Brought about
by Bases. I. The Condensation of Ethyl Isobutyrate to Ethyl Isobutyryl-isobutyrate1 . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1937 , 59 , 1823 –1826 . 10.1021/ja01289a010 .
Swamer F. W. ; Hauser C. R. 
Claisen Acylations and Carbethoxylations of Ketones
and Esters by Means of Sodium Hydride1 . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1950 , 72 , 1352 –1356 . 10.1021/ja01159a074 .

