
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002387910.1021/acsomega.8b00344ArticleCombining Similarity Searching and Network Analysis
for the Identification of Active Compounds Kunimoto Ryo Bajorath Jürgen *Department of Life Science
Informatics, B-IT, LIMES Program Unit Chemical Biology and Medicinal
Chemistry, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Endenicher Allee 19c, D-53115 Bonn, Germany* E-mail: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de.
Phone: 49-228-73-69100.03 04 2018 30 04 2018 3 4 3768 3777 26 02 2018 22 03 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A variety of computational screening
methods generate similarity-based
compound rankings for hit identification. However, these rankings
are difficult to interpret. It is essentially impossible to determine
where novel active compounds might be found in database rankings.
Thus, compound selection largely depends on intuition and guesswork.
Herein, we show that molecular networks can substantially aid in the
analysis of similarity-based compound rankings. A series of networks
generated for rankings provides visual access to search results and
adds chemical neighborhood and context information for reference compounds
that are not available in rankings. Network structure is shown to
serve as a diagnostic criterion for the likelihood to successfully
select active compounds from rankings. In addition, comparison of
different networks makes it possible to prioritize alternative similarity
measures for search calculations and optimize the enrichment of active
compounds in rankings.

document-id-old-9ao8b00344document-id-new-14ao-2018-00344fccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Many computational (virtual) compound screening approaches yield
database rankings.1−4 These include most ligand-based screening methods that make use
of the concept of molecular similarity.4 Database compounds are then ranked in the order of decreasing similarity
to reference compounds used as search templates.3,4 Numerical
similarity measures, such as the well-known Tanimoto coefficient (Tc),4,5 a gold standard in the field, are applied to generate such compound
rankings. Not all ligand-based methods yield database rankings. Exceptions
include pharmacophore approaches6 that
detect local similarity between compounds and can be used as screens
to search for a pharmacophore match.6 In
addition, assessment of substructure-based similarity, i.e., detecting
the presence or absence of a given substructure in test compounds,
also yields binary (yes/no) similarity decisions.4 Similarity searching using molecular fingerprints (i.e.,
bit or feature set representations of molecular structure and properties),7 shape queries,8 or
sets of numerical descriptors is a primary approach to ligand-based
virtual screening that produces database rankings relative to reference
compounds.9,10 Although this approach is well established,
compound rankings have black box character. Simply put, it is essentially
impossible to predict or determine where novel active compounds might
occur in rankings. Of course, compounds that are structurally most
similar to search templates will be top ranked and if these compounds
are close structural analogues, there is a good chance that one or
the other might also be active. However, similarity searching always
yields a ranking even if only remotely similar database compounds
are available. Moreover, one typically does not look for analogues
in similarity searching, which are easily identified by a substructure
search, but new active compounds exhibiting at least some degree of
structural novelty. Importantly, on the basis of similarity-based
ranking, selection of such compounds is impossible to rationalize.4 This is the case because activity itself is not
used as a parameter in similarity searching (or other standard virtual
screening approaches), but indirectly inferred from calculated structural/property
similarity,4 following the fundamental
similarity property principle (i.e., similar compounds should have
similar properties).11 Accordingly, similarity
searching relies on the premise that there will be an enrichment of
active compounds among high database ranks. However, where such compounds
might be found can essentially only be guessed. Therefore, in practical
virtual screening applications, a variety of candidate compounds will
typically be tested on the basis of a database ranking to identify
one or the other new hit.

In light of this situation, any approach
that aids in the interpretation
of database rankings and compound selection is highly desirable. To
these ends, we have, for the first time, attempted to analyze similarity
search rankings in molecular network representations. We have reasoned
that similarity-based compound networks, in which nodes represent
molecules and edges pairwise similarity relationships,12 add chemical neighborhood13 and context information to similarity searching that is
not contained in database rankings. If applied in concert with similarity
searching, network analysis provides visual access to similarity search
results. This makes it possible to analyze chemical neighborhoods
of reference compounds and similarity relationships in detail and
should help to better understand where active compounds might preferentially
be found. In addition, network analysis of compound rankings can be
applied to distinguish between alternative similarity measures and
best enrich active compounds at higher rank positions. In the following,
we present our approach combining similarity searching and network
analysis and the results of a proof-of-concept investigation.

2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Similarity Searching
Similarity search
calculations were carried out using the extended connectivity fingerprint
with bond diameter 4 (ECFP4)14 and the
Tanimoto coefficient (Tc).5 For each reference
compound, a database ranking was generated and the 500 top-ranked
compounds were selected and divided into four overlapping subsets
comprising at rank 1–200, 101–300, 201–400, and
301–500, respectively. For each subset, similarity search hits
(i.e., correctly detected active compounds) were determined. Similarity
search performance was also evaluated using receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves. Rankings for the top 500 compounds were then recalculated
using the Tanimoto coefficient based on the maximum common substructure
(TcMCS) similarity measure (described in detail in Section 2.3.1 below).

2.2 Test Compounds
As reference compounds
for similarity searching, approved small molecule drugs with activity
against single or multiple human targets and a molecular mass of more
than 350 and less than 500 Da were selected from DrugBank version
5.15 Drugs were only selected if 30 or
more compounds with activity against the same target and high-confidence
activity data were available in ChEMBL version 23.16 These bioactive compounds served as hits for target-based
similarity searching using individual drugs as reference molecules.
On the basis of these criteria, 25 drugs were selected from DrugBank,
for which sets of other bioactive compounds were available for each
drug target. These 25 drugs were annotated with 44 unique targets,
yielding a total of 66 drug-target pairs. For each drug-target pair,
a set of similarity search hits was assembled, providing the basis
for an individual search trial. In addition to potential hits, background
database compounds were selected from ChEMBL, applying the same criteria
for high-confidence activity data. Accordingly, compounds with direct
interactions (type “D”) with human targets at the highest
assay confidence level (confidence score 9) were identified, and only
equilibrium constants (Ki values) or IC50 values were considered as potency measurements. Approximate
measurements (e.g., “>” or “∼”)
were discarded. On the basis of these criteria, a total of 244 625
ChEMBL compounds were selected as a screening database. All compounds
were standardized with the aid of the OEChem toolkit.17

2.3 Chemical Space Networks
2.3.1 Network Design and Comparison
In
chemical space networks (CSNs),12 originally
introduced for charting biologically relevant chemical space,12 nodes represent compounds and edges similarity
relationships. Two CSN variants were adopted for our analysis. In
the first, similarity relationships were established on the basis
of ECFP4 Tc values, representing a “Tc-CSN”.18 In the second, similarity relationships were
determined by calculating Tc values based on the maximum common substructure
(MCS) of pairs of compounds, yielding TcMCS values and resulting in
the “TcMCS-CSN”.19 The TcMCS
was calculated as follows:  where Ab and Bb are the number of
bonds present in molecules A and B, respectively, and MCS(A, B)b is the number of bonds
in the MCS of A and B.17 Using the number of bonds instead of heavy atoms
leads to an increase in TcMCS values for MCSs consisting of rings
over equally sized MCSs with rings and aliphatic substructures because
rings contain more bonds than aliphatic substructures. By design,
TcMCS is a hybrid similarity function combining numerical and substructure-based
similarity, emphasizing substructure relationships, if present.

Tc-CSNs and TcMCS-CSNs were generated by adjusting the similarity
threshold value to yield a constant network edge density of 0.05 (5%),
thus enabling direct comparison of these CSN variants.16,17 Edge density provides the fraction of all possible edges that are
present in a given network. Nodes were color coded by compound class
(i.e., reference drugs, similarity search hit, and database compound
with other activity) and scaled in size according to their degree
(see below). An exception was made for reference drugs whose nodes
were drawn in a constant size to highlight them in CSN representations.

CSNs were generated using in-house Python code and Gephi software.20 The layout of CSNs was calculated using the
Fruchterman–Reingold algorithm21 that organizes similar objects in clusters and separates disjoint
clusters in a force-directed manner for visualization.

2.3.2 Network
Comparison
CSNs were compared
using different statistical concepts and properties from network science:22(i) Node degree is defined as the number
of edges connecting it to its neighbors.

(ii) Clustering coefficient of a node
is defined as the likelihood that two neighboring nodes are connected
to each other. Thus, it is a measure of the degree of local connectivity
in a network. The global clustering coefficient of a network is calculated
as the mean of the clustering coefficients of all nodes.

(iii) Modularity is a measure of the cluster
structure of a network. High modularity is due to the presence of
dense connections between nodes within the same cluster and sparse
connections between nodes in different modules. Thus, modularity accounts
for the cluster structure of a network.



All network properties were calculated using the iGraph
R library.23

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Similarity Searching
Similarity search
calculations were conducted using 25 drugs as individual reference
compounds. Of course, other bioactive compounds could have also been
chosen as search templates. A subset of these drugs was annotated
with multiple human targets giving rise to 66 drug-target combinations.
For each combination, a compound data set was generated. Hence, a
total of 66 similarity search trials were carried out using ECFP4
as a molecular representation. The screening database contained more
than 240 000 ChEMBL compounds, originating from medicinal chemistry
sources. Compounds with different bioactivities are typically more
difficult to distinguish from each other in search calculations than
a given activity class from randomly selected organic molecules, which
motivated the assembly of our ChEMBL-based screening database. For
each search trial, a Tc-based ranking was generated and the top 500
compounds were selected and divided into four overlapping subsets
of 200 compounds each. Division into subsets provided a basis for
continuous visualization of similarity search results using CSNs,
as further discussed below. Figure 1 shows distributions of similarity search hits over
different subsets for all 66 search trials. These distributions yielded
median values of on average 8.5, 6.5, 5.0, and 5.0 hits in subsets
1–4, respectively. Thus, there was detectable enrichment of
hits among the 500 top-ranked database compounds.

Figure 1 Similarity search hits in subsets of compound rankings. Boxplots
show the distribution of hits in overlapping subsets representing
the 500 top-ranked compounds across all 66 search trials. Boxplots
report the smallest value (bottom), first quartile (lower boundary
of the box), median value (thick red line), third quartile (upper
boundary), and largest value (top).

3.2 Chemical Space Networks and Statistical Properties
For each subset resulting from a search trial, two CSN variants
were constructed; first, a Tc-CSN, in which similarity relationships
were accounted for using the same (Tc) similarity metric as in the
search calculations; second, a TcMCS-CSN, in which similarity relationships
between compounds from each subset were established using an alternative
similarity measure. For this purpose, pairwise TcMCS similarity relationships
between compounds comprising each subset were recalculated.

First, statistical properties of corresponding subset CSNs were determined. Figure 2a,b shows the distribution
of clustering coefficients and modularity of subset CSNs from all
search trials. Both clustering coefficients and modularity decreased
for networks containing progressively lower ranked compounds. These
findings indicated that database compounds were not only decreasingly
similar to the reference drug, as captured by the ranking, but also
decreasingly similar to each other. Overall, the distributions were
comparable for both Tc-CSNs and TcMCS-CSNs. This was in contrast to
distributions of the degrees of drug nodes reported in Figure 2c. In this case, node degrees
in subset TcMCS-CSNs were consistently larger than in Tc-CSNs, indicating
that application of the TcMCS similarity measure further increased
the number of structural neighbors of reference drugs relative to
the Tc metric. The latter observations suggested the presence of differences
in the distribution of similarity relationships and local network
structure, as further discussed in the following.

Figure 2 Network properties. Boxplots
report the distributions of different
network properties of Tc-CSNs (left) and TcMCS-CSNs (right) generated
for subsets of the 500 top-ranked compounds across all search trials.
Network properties include the (a) clustering coefficient, (b) modularity,
and (c) degree of drug nodes. The representation of boxplots is according
to Figure 1.

3.3 Network
Comparison
Going beyond statistical
evaluation, network analysis of rankings produced with alternative
similarity measures made it possible to further analyze neighborhoods
of reference drugs and differentiate between these measures. Subset
networks were compared graphically for four representative similarity
search sets with different reference drugs, as summarized in Table 1. The four drugs were
active against different receptors and the top-ranked 500 database
compounds contained varying number of hits distributed over the ranking,
ranging from 33 to 103. Figure 3a compares subsets Tc-CSNs and TcMCS-CSNs for similarity searching
using cabozantinib as a reference drug, which acts on hepatocyte growth
factor receptor. In this case, both CSN variants revealed a clear
cluster structure. However, cabozantinib was not connected to other
database compounds in Tc-CSNs, even in the network of the most similar
subset (1–200). Thus, at the given level of network edge density,
the reference drug had no structural neighbors in Tc-CSNs. By contrast,
at constant edge density, cabozantinib was extensively connected to
clusters of hits in TcMCS-CSNs, in particular, in the networks of
the first three subsets. Similar observations were made for search
calculations using iloperidone as a reference, shown in Figure 3b. In this case, Tc-CSNs had
a more extensive cluster structure than TcMCS-CSNs. However, in the
latter networks, limited but dense compound clustering was observed
and found to mostly involve hits and the reference drug; a favorable
scenario for compound selection and hit identification. By contrast,
for reference drug tolvaptan in Figure 3c, subset Tc-CSNs displayed essentially no cluster
structure but extensive formation of similarity relationships between
the drug and compounds having different activities (i.e., false-positives
in similarity searching). However, in TcMCS-CSNs, preferential clustering
of hits and compounds with other activities was observed and the reference
drug was connected to clusters of both hits and false-positives; a
more difficult scenario for hit identification. In this case, TcMCS-CSNs
of progressively lower ranked subsets clearly displayed decreasing
numbers of hits and the networks indicated that hit identification
was most likely for the first two subsets comprising 300 database
compounds. Furthermore, Figure 3d visualizes search results for sorafenib. In this case, limited
clustering was observed for both types of CSNs. However, clustering
of hits was much more extensive in TcMCS-CSNs, also involving the
reference drug, thus providing an improved basis for hit identification.
Taken together, the results in Figure 3 illustrate the utility of network-based analysis and
CSN comparisons for the evaluation of compound rankings.

Figure 3 Exemplary CSNs.
For four exemplary similarity search sets reported
in Table 1, Tc-CSNs
(top) and TcMCS-CSNs (bottom) of overlapping subsets representing
compound rankings are compared at a constant edge density of 5%. Nodes
are color coded as follows: red, reference drug; green, hits with
activity against the drug target; blue, database compounds with different
activities. Drug nodes have constant size whereas nodes of hits and
other database compounds are scaled in size according to their degrees.
CSNs are shown for similarity searching using (a) cabozantinib, (b)
iloperidone, (c) tolvaptan, and (d) sorafenib as reference drugs.

Table 1 Exemplary Similarity
Search Setsa
a The table summarizes
the composition
of four similarity search sets, for which subset CSNs are shown in Figure 3. In each case, the
structure of the reference drug is shown, the drug target is given,
and the number of similarity search hits (with activity against the
drug target) per subset is reported.

3.4 Implications for Similarity Searching
Compound rankings do neither provide neighborhood information for
reference compounds nor information about similarity relationships
between database compounds, both of which are of critical importance
for the outcome of similarity search calculations. For example, if
similarity relationships are evenly distributed among reference compounds,
hits, and false-positives, no preferential enrichment of hits over
other database compounds can be expected in rankings. However, such
information cannot be extracted from compound rankings. Rather, it
is provided by networks revealing neighborhoods of reference compounds
and distributions of similarity relationships among hits and other
database compounds. These characteristics make CSN analysis and similarity
searching complementary approaches. Importantly, CSNs do not need
to be constructed for entire compound rankings or very large selection
sets when the interpretability of network representations reaches
its limits. Instead, CSNs can be generated for compound subsets across
rankings to provide a progressive view of similarity relationships
and chemical neighborhoods when similarity to reference compounds
decreases.

The graphical analysis of CSNs showed that compound
clustering involving reference compounds in networks is a necessary
but insufficient condition for hit identification. It is not sufficient
because clustering might also include false-positives. However, if
no clustering is observed, similarity relationships are evenly distributed
among hits and false-positives and the likelihood of identifying hits,
which are much less frequent than other database compounds, is very
low. Hence, in the absence of clustering in subset CSNs, successful
hit identification cannot be expected. Thus, subset CSNs can be calculated
as a first-path diagnostic to evaluate local clustering in compound
rankings when potential hits are unknown.

The comparison of
subset CSNs in Figure 3 generated using the related yet distinct
Tc and TcMCS similarity metrics revealed that TcMCS calculations often
led to more extensive local clustering of hits involving reference
compounds. Such insights are not obtained by statistical network analysis
but require visual inspection.

The prevalence of local clustering
involving references and hits
in TcMCS-CSNs suggested the testable hypothesis that the similarity
search calculations reported here should be more successful when applying
the TcMCS instead of the Tc metric. Therefore, we regenerated the
ranking of the top 500 compounds for each of the Tc-based search calculation
for the four drugs in Table 1 by calculating pairwise TcMCS similarity values for reference
and database compounds. Figure 4 shows ROC curves comparing the Tc- and TcMCS-based rankings.
In each case, the area under the curve was substantially larger for
the TcMCS- than the Tc-based ranking. ROC curves for TcMCS-based rankings
also revealed a consistent early enrichment of hits at higher rank
positions. Taken together, these observations confirmed the hypothesis
formulated above.

Figure 4 Similarity search performance. Shown are receiver operating
characteristic
(ROC) curves for similarity search calculations using (a) cabozantinib,
(b) iloperidone, (c) tolvaptan, and (d) sorafenib as reference drugs.
ROC curves compare true-positive and false-positive rates over compound
rankings. In each case, the ROC curves were calculated for the 500
top-ranked compounds on the basis of ECFP4 Tc values (database search,
blue) and after reranking of the top 500 compounds on the basis of
TcMCS calculations (red).

Comparison of subset CSNs might also help to prioritize alternative
similarity measures for similarity searching, which has implications
for practical applications. For example, considering the similarity
functions used here, it would not be practical to screen a large compound
database applying the TcMCS similarity measure because MCS calculations
are computationally much more expensive than Tc-based fingerprint
comparisons. However, in light of subset CSN comparisons, an initial
database search using Tc calculations followed by reranking of top N compounds on the basis of TcMCS calculations would be
considered a promising search strategy. Thus, it is certainly meaningful
to explore alternative similarity measures aided by network analysis
to optimize compound rankings.

Figure 5 shows the
top three compounds from corresponding Tc and TcMCS rankings and illustrates
how differently calculated similarity relationships can substantially
change relative rank positions of compounds, even for related similarity
functions. Such effects contribute to the difficulty in deducing activity
information from similarity-based rankings, which can be compensated
for by complementary network analysis.

Figure 5 Top-ranked compounds.
Shown are the top three compounds for Tc-
(left) and TcMCS-based (right) rankings according to Figure 4 using (a) cabozantinib, (b)
iloperidone, (c) tolvaptan, and (d) sorafenib as reference drugs.
Compounds whose ranks are highlighted in green are active against
the drug target. For each of the top three compounds, the rank using
the alternative similarity measure (Tc, right; TcMCS, left) is also
reported (in italics).

Figure 6 shows
the
top three database compounds from the TcMCS-based rankings that are
most similar to hits having the same activity as the reference drug.
These structurally closely related database compounds were frequently
active against related targets or targets that have also been associated
with reference drugs. Thus, close structural relationships correspond
to similar compound activity profiles, as one would expect.

Figure 6 Other bioactive
compounds related to hits. Shown are the top three
database compounds with other activities that are closely connected
to correctly identified hits in TcMCS-CSNs. No. of connections report
the total number of relationships formed with hits in the 1–200
subsets. In each case, the most similar hit is shown and ChEMBL targets
are reported. Compounds are extracted from TcMCS-CSN of (a) cabozantinib,
(b) iloperidone, (c) tolvaptan, and (d) sorafenib in Figure 3.

4 Concluding Remarks
Selecting novel
active compounds from database rankings on the
basis similarity values has been and continues to be a conundrum in
ligand-based virtual screening. Given the compound class and molecular
representation dependence of search calculations, it is essentially
impossible to derive activity-relevant similarity threshold values
for practical applications.24,25 Hence, similarity-based
compound rankings have black box character and positions of active
compounds can only be guessed, regardless of the virtual screening
algorithms that are applied to generate rankings. Because a screening
database is expected to contain only relatively few, if any, compounds
having a desired biological activity, this problem is intensified
by a needles-in-haystacks scenario; simply put, most compounds in
rankings will be false-positives. Moreover, employing alternative
similarity measures often significantly changes relative rank positions
of active compounds, which further complicates hit selection. Accordingly,
any attempts to aid in the interpretation of database rankings and
compound selection are timely and of relevance to the field. However,
these issues have thus far only been little investigated. Herein,
we have made an attempt in this direction by combining similarity
searching with molecular network analysis of compound rankings. Tables
with compounds selected from rankings, their structures, and similarity
values can be generated to focus subsequent investigation of potential
hits on different subsets but network analysis adds another dimension
to the analysis of rankings. Network analysis of similarity relationships
provides visual access to similarity search results and, importantly,
reveals similarity relationships between reference molecules and potential
hits together with relationships between other database compounds.
This adds chemical neighborhood and context information to similarity
rankings and makes it possible to estimate the chances of success
of a search trial. A series of CSNs can be conveniently generated
from compound subsets across rankings, which limit network size, support
interpretability, and provide a continuous view of existing similarity
relationships, whereas the similarity of database compounds to reference
molecules gradually decreases.

CSN analysis with known active
compounds has shown that the emergence
of local compound clusters is a necessary, albeit insufficient, condition
for detecting active hits on the basis of molecular similarity. By
contrast, an even distribution of similarity relationships between
reference compounds, hits, and false-positives makes it essentially
impossible to successfully select novel active compounds. To explore
distributions of similarity relationships, subset CSNs can be generated
for rankings using alternative similarity measures and compared. On
the basis of such comparisons, similarity functions can be prioritized.
In our analysis, this was demonstrated by comparing Tc- and TcMCS-based
ranking. It was also shown that reference compounds in CSNs originating
from TcMCS calculations generally had larger node degrees than reference
compounds in CSNs from Tc-based rankings. Furthermore, although the
distributions of clustering coefficients and modularity of subset
CSNs from TcMCS- and Tc-based rankings were overall comparable, graphical
analysis revealed that TcMCS-based CSNs often displayed more extensive
local clustering of hits vs false-positives than Tc-based CSNs, resulting
in further improved enrichment of hits in rankings. Taken together,
the results of our analysis suggest that subset networks complement
the analysis of similarity search results and provide additional insights
that could not be obtained from database rankings alone. Moreover,
similarity-based compound rankings might also help to facilitate network
analysis of large compound data sets by replacing global network representations
with series of subset networks. In this case, rankings might be generated
for compounds of particular interest to select subsets at varying
similarity levels for network display. This also highlights the complementarity
of similarity searching and network analysis.

Author Contributions
The study
was carried out and the manuscript written with contributions of all
authors. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
the OpenEye Scientific Software, Inc., for providing
a free academic license of the OpenEye toolkit.
==== Refs
References
Lavecchia A. ; Di Giovanni C. 
Virtual Screening Strategies in Drug Discovery: A Critical
Review . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 20 , 2839 –2860 . 10.2174/09298673113209990001 .23651302 
Irwin J. J. ; Shoichet B. K. 
Docking Screens for Novel Ligands
Conferring New Biology . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 4103 –4120 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b02008 .26913380 
Eckert H. ; Bajorath J. 
Molecular Similarity
Analysis in Virtual Screening:
Foundations, Limitations and Novel Approaches . Drug Discovery Today 
2007 , 12 , 225 –233 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2007.01.011 .17331887 
Maggiora G. ; Vogt M. ; Stumpfe D. ; Bajorath J. 
Molecular Similarity
in Medicinal Chemistry . J. Med. Chem. 
2014 , 57 , 3186 –3204 . 10.1021/jm401411z .24151987 
Maggiora G. M. ; Shanmugasundaram V. 
Molecular Similarity Measures . Meth. Mol. Biol. 
2004 , 275 , 1 –50 . 10.1385/1-59259-802-1:001 .
Mason J. S. ; Good A. C. ; Martin E. J. 
3-D Pharmacophores
in Drug Discovery . Curr. Pharm. Des. 
2001 , 7 , 567 –597 . 10.2174/1381612013397843 .11375769 
Willett P. 
Similarity-based
Virtual Screening Using 2D Fingerprints . Drug
Discovery Today 
2006 , 11 , 1046 –1053 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2006.10.005 .17129822 
Rush T. S. ; Grant J. A. ; Mosyak L. ; Nicholls A. 
A Shape-Based 3-D Scaffold
Hopping Method and Its Application to a Bacterial Protein–Protein
Interaction . J. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 1489 –1495 . 10.1021/jm040163o .15743191 
Willett P. ; Barnard J. M. ; Downs G. M. 
Chemical Similarity Searching . J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 
1998 , 38 , 983 –996 . 10.1021/ci9800211 .
Stumpfe D. ; Bajorath J. 
Similarity Searching . Wiley Interdiscip.
Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci. 
2011 , 1 , 260 –282 . 10.1002/wcms.23 .
Johnson M. ; Maggiora G. M.  Concepts and Applications
of Molecular Similarity ; John Wiley &
Sons : New York , 1990 .
Maggiora G. ; Bajorath J. 
Chemical Space Networks
– A Powerful New Paradigm
for the Description of Chemical Space . J. Comput.-Aided
Mol. Des. 
2014 , 28 , 795 –802 . 10.1007/s10822-014-9760-0 .24925682 
Patterson D. E. ; Cramer R. D. ; Ferguson A. M. ; Clark R. D. ; Weinberger L. E. 
Neighborhood
Behavior – A Useful Concept for Validation of Molecular Diversity
Descriptors . J. Med. Chem. 
1996 , 39 , 3049 –3059 . 10.1021/jm960290n .8759626 
Rogers D. ; Hahn M. 
Extended-Connectivity Fingerprints . J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 
2010 , 50 , 742 –754 . 10.1021/ci100050t .20426451 
Wishart D. S. ; Feunang Y. D. ; Guo A. C. ; Lo E. J. ; Marcu A. ; Grant J. R. ; Sajed T. ; Johnson D. ; Li C. ; Sayeeda Z. ; Assempour N. ; Iynkkaran I. ; Liu Y. ; Maciejewski A. ; Gale N. ; Wilson A. ; Chin L. ; Cummings R. ; Le D. ; Pon A. ; Knox C. ; Wilson M. 
DrugBank 5.0: A Major
Update to the DrugBank Database
for 2018 . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2018 , 46 , D1074 –D1082 . 10.1093/nar/gkx1037 .29126136 
Gaulton A. ; Bellis L. J. ; Bento A. P. ; Chambers J. ; Davies M. ; Hersey A. ; Light Y. ; McGlinchey S. ; Michalovich D. ; Al-Lazikani B. ; Overington J. P. 
ChEMBL:
A Large-Scale Bioactivity Database for Drug Discovery . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , D1100 –D1107 . 10.1093/nar/gkr777 .21948594 
OEChem , version 1.7.7; OpenEye Scientific
Software, Inc. : Santa Fe, NM , 2012 .
Zwierzyna M. ; Vogt M. ; Maggiora G. ; Bajorath J. 
Design and Characterization
of Chemical Space Networks for Different Compound Datasets . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2015 , 29 , 113 –125 . 10.1007/s10822-014-9821-4 .25465052 
Zhang B. ; Vogt M. ; Maggiora G. ; Bajorath J. 
Design of
Chemical
Space Networks Using a Tanimoto similarity Variant Based upon Maximum
Common Substructures . J. Comput.-Aided Mol.
Des. 
2015 , 29 , 937 –950 . 10.1007/s10822-015-9872-1 .26419860 
Bastian M. ; Heymann S. ; Jacomy M.   In Gephi: An Open Source
Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks , International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2009 ; pp 361 –362 .
Fruchterman T. M. J. ; Reingold E. M. 
Graph Drawing by Force-Directed Placement . Software Pract. Exper. 
1991 , 21 , 1129 –1164 . 10.1002/spe.4380211102 .
Newman M.  Networks – An
Introduction ; Oxford University Press Inc : New York , 2010 .
Csardi G. ; Nepusz T. 
The iGraph Software Package for Complex
Network Research . InterJ. Complex Syst. 
2006 , 1695 , 1 –9 .
Vogt M. ; Stumpfe D. ; Geppert H. ; Bajorath J. 
Scaffold Hopping Using
Two-dimensional Fingerprints: True Potential, Black Magic, or a Hopeless
Endeavor? Guidelines for Virtual Screening . J. Med. Chem. 
2010 , 53 , 5707 –5715 . 10.1021/jm100492z .20684607 
Jasial S. ; Hu Y. ; Vogt M. ; Bajorath J. 
Activity-Relevant Similarity Values
for Fingerprints and Implications for Similarity Searching . F1000Research 
2016 , 5 , e591 10.12688/f1000research.8357.1 .

