
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145840410.1021/acsomega.8b02914ArticleFourier Transform Spectrometry with Fourier Analysis
of the Interferogram as Just an Optional Tool Lagos Miguel *†Paredes Rodrigo ‡Retamal César §†Departamento
de Tecnologías Industriales, Facultad de
Ingeniería, ‡Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación,
Facultad de Ingeniería, and §Departamento de Ciencias de la Construcción,
Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad
de Talca, Campus Los
Niches, Camino a Los Niches km 1, Curicó, Chile* E-mail: mlagos@utalca.cl.26 12 2018 31 12 2018 3 12 18258 18262 23 10 2018 12 12 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Fourier transform
spectrometers replace the traditional dispersive
frequency analyzer by a Michelson interferometer. The spectrum is
the Fourier transform of the interferogram constituting the raw output.
The method is a primary tool for chemical analysis because it has
decisive advantages over the dispersive one for analyzing infrared
electromagnetic radiation (Fourier transform infrared, FTIR). A new
procedure for dealing with the raw interferometric output of the instrument,
not needing Fourier transformation and having additional advantages,
is put forward here. It rests on recent advances in the theory of
the interaction of matter with electromagnetic radiation yielding
first principles analytic expressions for the Fourier transform of
the spectral lineshapes, which can be fitted directly to the experimentally
measured interferogram. The relevant physical information, as the
integrated intensities of the electronic transitions and their net
energy release, not affected by Stokes shifts, is readily obtained
in the fitting procedure. Ulterior analysis of the spectra, introducing
phenomenological standard interpolation functions to deconvolute and
integrate peaks, becomes unnecessary. Both methods, standard FTIR
and the one outlined here, demand little computer time and can be
used simultaneously with synergistic effects.

document-id-old-9ao8b02914document-id-new-14ao-2018-02914pccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The scientific basis for
an alternate way of processing the raw
data constituting the output of Fourier transform spectrometers is
expected to improve substantially the precision of both concentration
and energy measurements. Good frequency resolution is attained in
a standard traditional dispersive spectrometer at the cost of blocking
at the slit of the monochromator most of the photons that would otherwise
reach the detector. This reduces considerably the signal to noise
ratio. A Fourier transform spectrometer replaces the monochromator
by a Michelson interferometer, which yields the cosine Fourier transform
of the spectrum as the output. The procedure collects information
at all frequencies simultaneously, improving dramatically both speed
and the signal to noise ratio because the detector captures the full
intensity of the light coming from the sample. The output is an interferogram
consisting of a graph giving the radiation intensity as a function
of the difference in the optical path length of the two arms of the
interferometer, which is accurately measured from the interference
fringes of a reference laser. This is referred to as raw data and
usually exhibits a complex oscillating structure that must be Fourier
transformed to bring out the frequency spectrum in a conventional
way. The spectrometer then has to be associated with a numerical processor
to display the spectrum. Infrared (IR) absorption spectroscopy went
through a major advance when Fourier transform spectroscopy came to
the fore, and practically no dispersive IR equipment is in the market
today. However, the procedure is also practical in optical spectroscopy,
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and magnetic resonance spectroscopic
imaging.1−3 The new technique came on the scene associated with
the development of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm, a mathematical
method for the fast calculation of Fourier transforms of functions,
fast enough to process the highly structured interferograms with acceptable
precision. The discovery of the FFT algorithm by Cooley and Tukey
initiated a new generation of IR instruments and techniques.4

Hence, the mathematical processing of the
raw data for displaying
them as a standard spectrum in the frequency domain is adequately
solved by the FFT algorithm, together with the apodization techniques
that control spurious spectral features created by the truncation
of the interferogram constituting the raw data. Experimental scans
are necessarily finite, and sudden cutoffs at the boundaries have
broad unphysical Fourier representations that are discarded by apodization.
However, precise quantitative chemical analysis and the accurate determination
of the excitation energies of molecular bonds demand additional mathematical
processing of the spectra, further to the Fourier transformation of
the raw data. The concentration of a chemical species is determined
by the area under the peak identifying a characteristic bond of it,
whose evaluation demands curve fitting of the data, particularly in
the presence of heavy overlapping or structured background. Standard
Gauss, Lorentz, and Voigt distributions in practice are the analytical
expressions used for fitting the shape of the spectral peaks and determining
their areas by integration. However, these distributions are merely
interpolation functions because, in rigor, they do not follow from
solving a real physical model for the processes causing the peak broadenings.5 Gauss and Lorentz curves are analytically very
different, especially concerning the contribution of the tails to
the peak area, which is much more significant for the latter. Tails
immerse in the noisy background and their effect owns to the domain
of experimental uncertainty when using a tentative model for the lineshape.
It has been proven that the assigned peak intensities may show substantial
variations with the choice of the lineshape model.6 The symmetry of these standard distributions evidences
their limited ability to describe spectral profiles. It has been demonstrated
on a general basis that the lineshapes for photon absorption and emission
by atomic or molecular species in a condensed environment are always
asymmetric with respect to the net energy of the electronic transition.7,8 Hence, a significant source of error is the adoption of a standard
distribution not well grounded on the physics of the target to describe
the spectral features. The fit of the experimental data by the mathematical
curves given by a realistic model for the profiles of the spectral
features greatly improves precision. If the theoretical curve reproduces
well the physics of the radiation field interacting with the target,
then the error is given by the statistical dispersion of the experimental
points along the curve that bests the fit, instead of its whole breadth.7−11

2 Theory
2.1 Lineshape Functions of
Electromagnetic Spectra
Line broadenings and energy shifts
are produced mainly by multiphonon
processes involving the extended acoustic modes of vibration of the
condensed medium embedding the photosensitive orbital. They are activated
by the local distortion that follows the sudden excitation or de-excitation
of the electronic bonding orbitals and can be calculated analytically,
yielding a closed-form mathematical expression for the lineshape function.7,8 It is fortunate that this theoretical expression for the spectral
distribution in the standard frequency domain has the general form
of the Fourier transform of a function in the time domain. This way,
the theory gives directly what experimentalists call the raw data,
and there is no need in principle of calculating the Fourier transforms
of the theoretical and experimental results to compare them and make
them fit. Then, the theoretical analysis of the spectra is made in
the time domain, working directly with the raw data.

The lineshape
function has been proven in the recent literature to be given by the
integral expression7−9,11 1  where ℏck is the photon
energy, E is the energy difference of the two electronic
states involved in the transition, a is essentially
the bond length, and vs is the mean speed
of sound of the acoustic modes of vibration of the medium. The adimensional
constants α and β, and the adimensional dummy time τ
are given by 2  where ΔF is the bond
mean force variation upon excitation, ρ is the density, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. The auxiliary functions J(τ; T) and I(τ) are dependent on the
symmetry of the surroundings of the orbital undergoing the transition.
For the simplest case of octahedral coordination (OC) of the optically
active orbital, they read 3   4  with qD being
the Debye wavevector of the acoustic waves, aqD = (12π2)1/3, and 5  The second term on the right-hand side of eq 1 for F(ℏck; T), containing the
delta function, is the zero-phonon line, and the first one is the
phonon-broadened distribution. The lineshape function F(ℏck; T) is normalized as7−9 6  and hence the relative contribution of zero-phonon
processes to the total is IZPL = exp[−αJ(∞; T)].

Other symmetries
may give more complicated functional forms for J and I. For example, for tetrahedral coordination
(TC) of the optically active orbitals, one has 7   8  The output f(x, T) of the Michelson interferometer, where x is the
difference in the optical path lengths of the two
arms of the interferometer, is the cosine Fourier transform of the
spectrum given by the lineshape function 1,
i.e. 9  where k̅ = 1/λ
is the wave number and h is the Planck constant.
Substituting eq 1 and
solving the integral, this gives 10  where x, in fact, plays the
role of the virtual time t = x/c, conjugated to the angular frequency ω = E/ℏ. Function f(x; T) is actually the interferogram, which Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopists call the raw data. Therefore,
replacing in eq 10,
the pairs of auxiliary functions 3 and 4 for octahedral symmetry of the optically active
orbitals, or 7 and 8 for
tetrahedral coordination of them, one obtains explicit closed-form
mathematical expressions for the interferograms. Auxiliary functions
for other symmetries can be derived from the general expressions for
the electron–phonon coefficients, given in ref (8).

2.2 Proposed
Method
As both the experimental
technique and the general theory, which is well grounded on the physics
of the energy transfers between the radiation field and the charges
in a condensed system, arrive both to the interferogram expressed
in eq 10, in principle,
there is no need to perform any Fourier transform of the data to grasp
the physical information from the experimental results. Analytical
closed-form expression 10 depends on only a few parameters, α, β, and the net
transition energy E, per spectral line. Hence, the
most practical way to proceed is to find the constants α, β,
and E by means of a best-fit analysis of eq 10 to the experimental
interferograms. Fourier analysis then becomes just an optional alternative
for people who like to identify spectra in the conventional frequency
domain.

The method seems to be highly convenient because it
retains all the advantages of Fourier spectrometry avoiding the numerical
errors associated with the Fourier integration of rapidly oscillating
functions. An important example of this is given by the area under
the spectral line, which in agreement with eq 9 is given by half the intensity f(0, T)/2 of the central maximum of the interferogram.
This magnitude is unity under the hypothesis of a single emission
or absorption center of our theory, but in empirical grounds is proportional
to the number of optically active orbitals and gives the concentration
of them. However, the implementation of practical procedures for interpreting
the measured interferograms directly with eq 10 may be not immediate, particularly when
dealing with narrow spectral lines, precisely because their interferograms
oscillate strongly with x. In particular, the central
maximum may be very narrow and its intensity may be strongly affected
by the experimental uncertainty of x.

3 Results and Discussion
The general procedure can be
applied to both wide spectral features,
like those displayed by fluorescent compounds, or narrow ones, as
the sharp minima observed in the absorption spectra of infrared light
passing through many materials. The physical process is essentially
the same. Figures 1–3 show the mathematical steps of the
calculation of the spectrum of YAG:Ce3+ (yttrium aluminum
garnet, Y3Al5O12, doped with Ce3+), a phosphor having many technical applications. This system
is particularly interesting because its emission spectrum has been
measured at a temperature close to T = 0 with a resolution
large enough to clearly observe at λ = 489 nm (k̅ = 20 450 cm–1) the zero-phonon line corresponding
to the main of the two emission bands.12 The relative intensity of the zero-phonon line of YAG:Ce3+ at temperature T = 4 K is observed to be 0.27%
of the total intensity of the main emission band. The emission has
been attributed to competing transitions11,12 of the AlO6 groups of quasioctahedral coordination inside
the complex unit cell of YAG.13

Figure 1 Auxiliary functions J(x/c; T) and I(x/c) defined
in eqs 3 and 4 for octahedral symmetry
with τ = x/c.

Figure 1 shows the
auxiliary functions J(x/c; T) and I(x/c) for octahedral symmetry, as given by eqs 3 and 4. Figure 2 represents
the theoretically predicted interferogram 11  of two competing emissions with weights 2/3
and 1/3. The weighting factors follow from assuming that the quasioctahedrally
coordinated emission center has degenerated x and y lobes and slightly different z lobes.
Both f1 and f2 have the functional form 10 with constants
α, β, and E chosen to fit the measured
spectrum. The transition energies are E1 = 2.535 eV and E2 = 2.343 eV (corresponding
to the wavenumbers k̅1 = E1/(hc) = 20 450 cm–1 and k̅2 = E2/(hc) = 18 900 cm–1). The other constants are α1 = 10.00,
α2 = 12.25, and β = ∞ because T ≈ 0. The value of E1 is given by the zero-phonon line, and hence is not an adjustable
parameter; the other three constants were chosen to fit the experimental
data.

Figure 2 Filled black circles represent the function f(x; T), given by eq 11, where f1 and f2 have the general form 10 with slightly different parameters α and E. It is expected that f(x; T) will reproduce the experimentally registered Michelson
interferogram of two partially resolved spectral features emitted
by centers that have concentrations in the ratio of 2:1. The broken
line is only a guide to the eye.

Notice in Figure 2 that the number of calculated points in the interval of x, where f(x/c; T) is appreciable, seems insufficient to represent
properly the too-structured function. This is not really a problem
to construct the spectrum because the FFT algorithm is an analytical
procedure that finds out the function whose Fourier transform (or
anti-transform) passes by the given points. The main aspect is the
accuracy of these points, but care must be taken also to avoid aliasing
of the frequency by poor sampling of the data.

Figure 3 shows the cosine Fourier transform of the function 11, calculated by the FFT algorithm included as a
standard tool in the Excel spreadsheet. The agreement of the theoretical
curve with the experimental spectrum is quite impressive. As the Fourier
transform is unique, this indicates that function 11 with the assumed values for the constants should represent
with good accuracy the output of the Michelson interferometer. The
FFT algorithm was run with 1024 points for x, which
runs over an interval of optical path differences 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.02 mm.

Figure 3 Open circles represent the fluorescence emission
spectrum of YAG:Ce3+ at T = 4 K, as measured by Bachmann et al.12 The solid
line represents the Fourier transform of the function represented
in Figure 2 by the
discrete set of filled black circles.

Figure 4 shows
a
calculated interferogram of the general form 12  where both f1 and f2 are given by eq 10 with the auxiliary functions 7 and 8 for tetrahedral symmetry. The
weighting factors 3/4 and 1/4 assume a single distorted orbital in
the subgroup of coordination 4 inserted in the more complex unit cell.
The constants α1 = 18 and α2 = 22,
and the wavenumbers k̅1 = 20 510
cm–1 and k̅2 =
19 700 cm–1 (E1 = 2.543 eV and E1 = 2.442 eV) are chosen
to give the fit of the experimental spectrum of rhodamine 6G shown
in Figure 5.

Figure 4 Black dots
represent function f(x; T) given by eq 12, where f1 and f2 have the general form 10 with
parameters α and E chosen to fit the
Michelson interferogram of rhodamine 6G. The broken line is only a
guide to the eye.

Figure 5 Open circles represent
the fluorescence emission spectrum of rhodamine
6G (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Fluorescence SpectraViewer), and the
solid line corresponds to the theoretical lineshape function obtained
from the Fourier transform of the function passing by the black dots
in Figure 4.

4 Conclusions
In essence,
the method put forward in the previous sections replaces
the Fourier analysis of the interferogram ensuing as the output of
a Fourier transform spectroscope by best-fit analysis of eq 10 to it. Apodization becomes
unnecessary, and all the advantages of traditional Fourier transform
spectroscopy, Jacquinot, Fellgett, and Connes, are conserved. However,
the main result is the addition of three new advantages:(i) The procedure gives
directly the net
energy released or absorbed by the electronic transition, free of
Stokes shifts.

(ii) The
lineshapes are firmly grounded
on the physics of the interaction between the electromagnetic radiation
field and the target. Hence, the intensities are obtained with better
precision because no standard interpolation functions are necessary
to fit the data.

(iii) The theory holds equally well for
transitions between vibronic states, in the infrared region, and states
of molecular orbitals, associated with the much wider peaks of luminescence
spectra.



The situation described above
should be quite exact in the presence
of a single species. However, in the presence of multiple species,
the task should be considerably more computationally intensive and
error prone because of the overlap of multiple interferograms. This
is not a very important drawback because the difficulty can be solved
by combining the two methods. An initial Fourier transform can separate
the signal into spectral regions corresponding to the various species
present and provide numeric conditions for the subsequent fitting
task. The Fourier transform may be useful also to identify the contribution
of impurities and noise.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.
==== Refs
References
Griffiths P. R. ; Haseth J. A.  Fourier Transform
Infrared Spectrometry , 2 nd ed.; Wiley : New York , 1986 .
Stuart B.  Infrared Spectroscopy:
Fundamentals and Applications ; Wiley : New York , 2004 .
Hlivko B. ; Hong H. ; Williams R. R. 
Fourier Transform
Fluorescence Spectrometry . Appl. Spectrosc. 
1988 , 42 , 1563 –1566 . 10.1366/0003702884429706 .
Cooley J. W. ; Tukey J. W. 
An algorithm for machine calculation
of complex Fourier
series . Math. Comput. 
1965 , 19 , 297 –301 . 10.1090/S0025-5718-1965-0178586-1 .
Dodd J. G. ; DeNoyer L. K.   In Handbook of Vibrational
Spectroscopy ; Chalmers J. M. ; Griffiths P. R.  , Eds.; Wiley : Chichester , 2002 .
Marshall I. ; Bruce S. D. ; Higinbotham J. ; MacLullich A. ; Wardlaw J. M. ; Ferguson K. J. ; Seck J. 
Choice of
spectroscopic
lineshape model affects metabolite peak areas and area ratios . Magn. Reson. Med. 
2000 , 44 , 646 –649 . 10.1002/1522-2594(200010)44:4<646::AID-MRM20>3.0.CO;2-0 .11025522 
Lagos M. ; Asenjo F. ; Hauyón R. ; Pastén D. ; González H. ; Henríquez R. ; Troncoso R. 
Line shapes of narrow
optical bands. Infrared absorption by U–centers and heavier
impurities in alkali halides . Phys. Rev. B 
2008 , 77 , 10430510.1103/PhysRevB.77.104305 .
Lagos M. ; Asenjo F. ; Hauyón R. ; Pastén D. ; Moya P. S. 
Line shapes in the infrared absorption
by solids, and
by atomic or molecular species embedded in solids . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2010 , 114 , 7353 –7358 . 10.1021/jp103459p .20557057 
Lagos M. ; Paredes R. 
Shape of the Absorption
and Fluorescence Spectra of
Condensed Phases and Transition Energies . J.
Phys. Chem. A 
2014 , 118 , 10754 –10762 . 10.1021/jp508605c .25321927 
Lagos M. ; Paredes R. 
Thermal quenching of
fluorescence in condensed media . Solid State
Commun. 
2016 , 242 , 52 –56 . 10.1016/j.ssc.2016.04.029 .
Lagos M. ; Paredes R. ; Retamal C. 
High precision
energy measurements
from the analysis of wide spectral features. Application to the fluorescence
of YAG:Ce3+ . J. Photochem. Photobiol. 
2017 , 344 , 163 –167 . 10.1016/j.jphotochem.2017.05.005 .
Bachmann V. ; Ronda C. ; Meijerink A. 
Temperature
quenching of yellow Ce3+ luminiscence of YAG:Ce . Chem. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 2077 –2084 . 10.1021/cm8030768 .
Gracia J. ; Seijo L. ; Barandiarán Z. ; Curulla D. ; Niemansverdriet H. ; van Gennip W. 
Ab initio
calculations on the local structure and the
4f–5d absorption and emission spectra of Ce3+ doped YAG . J. Lumin. 
2008 , 128 , 1248 –1254 . 10.1016/j.jlumin.2007.12.027 .

