
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03560Mini-ReviewAggregation of
Metal-Nanoparticle-Induced Fluorescence
Enhancement and Its Application in Sensing Li Shuang †§He Jiangling ‡§Xu Qing-Hua *‡§† School
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China‡ National
University of Singapore (Suzhou) Research Institute, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China§ Department
of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117543* E-mail: chmxqh@nus.edu.sg.27 12 2019 14 01 2020 5 1 41 48 23 10 2019 11 12 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Fluorescence-based detection methods have been widely
utilized
in various applications. Materials that display aggregation-induced
emission (AIE) are excellent fluorescence probes to offer high contrast
ratio. Chromophore-conjugated plasmonic metal nanoparticles (NPs)
have been recently found to display significantly enhanced fluorescence
emission upon the formation of aggregates. This new type of AIE enhancement
has a totally different working mechanism. It is based on aggregation-induced
plasmon coupling of metal NPs to enhance the fluorescence intensity
of chromophores by increasing both the excitation efficiency and radiative
decay rates, instead of reducing nonradiative decay rates as in typical
AIE. AIE enhancement of chromophore-conjugated metal NPs results in
a dramatic change in fluorescence intensity from severely quenched
fluorescence to significantly enhanced fluorescence upon aggregate
formation. It offers excellent contrast ratio and is attractive for
developing platforms for highly sensitive sensing and imaging applications
with reduced background. This mini-review summarizes the basic working
principle and recent progress in fluorescence enhancement by coupled
metal NPs on the single-molecule level, aggregation-induced plasmon
coupling enhanced fluorescence of chromophore-conjugated metal NPs,
and their applications in sensing. Perspectives on further utilization
of this interesting phenomenon for various biomedical applications
have also been discussed.

document-id-old-9ao9b03560document-id-new-14ao9b03560ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Fluorescence-based detection methods have
been widely utilized
in various applications including sensing, imaging, and diagnosis
due to their high sensitivity, convenience, good repeatability, and
low cost. Integration of fluorescence-based detection with microscopy
has further extended the applications to chemical and biological imaging
with subwavelength resolution, allowing noninvasive visualization
of biological events at the subcellular level and detection on the
single molecular level. To achieve highly sensitive sensing and imaging
outcomes, the use of fluorescence probes with high brightness is required.
Tremendous research efforts have been devoted to developing robust
fluorescence probes with high brightness such as small organic and
inorganic molecules, polymers, and various nanoparticles (NPs). Compared to their molecular counterparts,
fluorescent NPs display unique advantages such as significantly improved
brightness as well as multifunctional capability through various nanoengineering
techniques, which allow them to be employed for various sophisticated
applications such as multiplexed sensing and imaging, targeted bioimaging,
and imaging-guided therapy.1

The
performance of fluorescence methods is largely determined by
the contrast ratio of signal strength over the noise level. In addition
to improved signal strength by increasing the brightness of fluorescence
probes, contrast ratio could also be improved by reducing the noise
level from the background fluorescence. A lot of efforts have been
devoted to developing assays with a dramatic change in fluorescence
responses. In particular, materials that display aggregation-induced
emission (AIE) offer high contrast ratio and have attracted vigorous
research since its discovery by Tang et al. in 2001, which provides
a new concept for lots of potential applications.2 It breaks the common belief that aggregation of chromophores
or nanoparticles will generally result in fluorescence quenching,
a long-standing problem for their biomedical applications, as molecules
and nanoparticles tend to form aggregates in the biological environments.
The mechanism of AIE of organic molecules is generally believed to
be due to improved emission quantum yield (QY) as a result of restricting
intramolecular motion to minimize the nonradiative decay process in
the aggregated state.2

Lots of new
chromophores with AIE properties have been developed,
mostly small molecules.2 Chromophore-conjugated
plasmonic metal NPs have been recently found to display significantly
enhanced fluorescence emission upon the formation of plasmonic aggregates,3−5 which could be considered as another type of AIE. This new type
of aggregation induced emission enhancement in chromophore-conjugated
metal NPs has a totally different working mechanism. It is based on
aggregation-induced plasmon coupling of metal NPs to enhance the fluorescence
intensity of chromophores by increasing both the excitation efficiency
and radiative decay rates, instead of reducing nonradiative decay
rates as in the case of typical AIE. Aggregation-induced emission
enhancement of chromophore-conjugated metal NPs can give an excellent
contrast ratio as a result of the dramatic change in fluorescence
intensity from severely quenched fluorescence to significantly enhanced
fluorescence in response to analyte-induced aggregate formation.4,5 This feature will allow the development of a lot of potential sensing
and imaging applications. In this mini-review, we will provide a brief
introduction on the mechanism of aggregation-induced plasmon-coupling-enhanced
fluorescence, summarize the recent progress, and end with a future
perspective on challenges and potential applications.

Principles of Metal-Enhanced Fluorescence (MEF)
Noble
metal NPs, such as Au, Ag, and Cu, have been known to display
unique phenomena of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) as
a result of collective oscillation of conduction band electrons induced
by interactions with light radiation (Figure 1).6 LSPR of noble
metal NPs results in a significantly enhanced local electric field
near the metal NPs, which is responsible for lots of interesting phenomena
such as surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS),7 surface-enhanced infrared absorption (SEIRA),8 and metal-enhanced fluorescence (MEF).9 The LSPR frequency depends on the size, shape,
and composition of metal NPs and their surrounding dielectric environment
as well as interactions between adjacent metal NPs (Figure 1b).10

Figure 1 (a)
Schematic illustration of localized surface plasmon resonance
of metal NPs. (b) Normalized extinction spectra of nanospheres (A),
nanocubes (B), and nanorods with different aspect ratios (C–E),
respectively. Electric fields of silver nanosphere monomer (c) and
dimer (d). Reprinted with kind permission from refs (6) and (10). Copyright 2007 by Annual
Reviews, 2008 American Chemical Society.

Plasmon coupling interaction between adjacent metal
NPs in nanoassembly
or aggregates will result in the appearance of a new SPR band at the
longer wavelength range. The formation of metal NP aggregates will
be accompanied by an obvious solution color change, which can be easily
visualized by the naked eyes. This phenomenon has been widely utilized
in the development of various detection schemes known as colorimetric
detection.11 In addition to the change
in the extinction spectra, more importantly, plasmon coupling interactions
will result in a giant local electric field in the gap region of metal
NPs, which has been known as a “hot spot”. Previous
studies revealed that local electric field enhancement (|E|2) for Ag NP dimers can reach up to ca. 105, much larger than that of isolated Ag NPs (102).12 The giant enhancement of local electric field
has been known to be responsible for a huge change in optical responses
such as SERS and two-photon photoluminescence.13,14 Various optical assays based on aggregation of metal NPs have been
developed for a wide range of applications to take advantage of the
aggregation-induced dramatic change in optical responses such as colorimetric
detection, SERS, two-photon photoluminescence, and hyper-Rayleigh
scattering.15

The photophysical processes
involved in fluorescence are illustrated
in Figure 2a. After
absorption of light (the excitation process, with its corresponding
rate denoted as γEX) to promote molecules from the
ground state (S0) to their singlet excited state (S1), the excited molecules will eventually relax back to the
S0 state through radiative decay (with the rate of kR) by dissipating the energy as fluorescence
emission or nonradiative decay (with the rate of kNR) by dissipating the energy as thermal energy. Fluorescence
quantum yield is determined by the competition between the radiative
and nonradiative decay processes, i.e., QY = kR/(kR + kNR). The overall fluorescence intensity is proportional to
the product of excitation rate and emission quantum yield. The corresponding
fluorescence lifetime (τ) is inversely proportional to the sum
of the radiative and nonradiative decay rates, i.e., τ = 1/(kR + kNR).

Figure 2 Working principle
of metal-enhanced fluorescence. (a,b) Effects
of metal–chromophore interactions on excitation and radiative
and nonradiative decay processes of chromophores and (c) separation
distance dependent metal-enhanced fluorescence. γEX, γEX′ are excitation rates in the absence
and presence of plasmonic metal NPs.

The principle of MEF is illustrated in Figure 2b. When a chromophore
is brought to the proximity
of plasmonic metal NPs, metal–chromophore interactions will
modify the rates of all three relevant photophysical processes: excitation,
radiative and nonradiative decay processes. First, the excitation
rate is proportional to the square of the electric field and will
increase significantly as a result of amplified local electric field.
Second, the radiative decay rate (kR′)
of the chromophore will be enhanced as a result of Purcell effects,
which is favorable for improving quantum yield.15 Third, energy transfer from the chromophore to metal NPs
(kET) will introduce an additional nonradiative
deactivation pathway (kNR′ = kNR + kET), which
is unfavorable for improving quantum yield as QY′ = kR′/[kR′
+ kNR + kET)]. As γEX′, kR′, and kET are all dependent on
the metal–chromophore distance, the overall fluorescence intensity
is strongly dependent on the metal–chromophore distance (Figure 2c). Direct contact
of chromophores with metal NPs will generally result in fluorescence
quenching. Au and Ag NPs have been demonstrated to exhibit superquenching
to fluorescence of various chromophores.16 As the metal–chromophore distance increases, a transition
from fluorescence quenching to enhancement could be obtained (Figure 2c).17 Even longer separation distance will result in no influence
of metal NPs on the fluorescence intensity of the chromophore. The
optimum fluorescence enhancement generally occurred at a separation
distance of 5–30 nm, depending on the nature of the chromophore
and metal NPs.9,18

Most of the previous MEF
studies focus on fluorescence enhancement
of chromophores by isolated metal NPs.15 As discussed above, coupled metal nanostructures give much stronger
local electric field than isolated metal NPs, which is responsible
for giant SERS signals and strong two-photon photoluminescence of
aggregated metal NPs.13,14 When chromophore molecules are
placed at the gap region with a giant local electric field, stronger
metal–chromophore interaction is expected to result in larger
fluorescence enhancement. It has been demonstrated on the substrate
and in the colloid solution19 as well as
on the single-particle level20−22 that coupled metal nanostructures
displayed much larger emission enhancement of chromophores compared
to the monodispersed metal NPs.

Enhanced Fluorescence of Single Molecules by Coupled Metal Nanostructures
Smart design of coupled metal nanostructures is of vital importance
for achieving large plasmon coupling enhanced fluorescence. The local
electric field amplification is highly sensitive to the interparticle
separation distance.23 Numerical simulation
showed that the electric field in the gap junction of an Au nanosphere
(NS) dimer increases with the reducing gap size with an optimal distance
of 0.5 nm. Further decrease in the interparticle distance will result
in electron tunneling between two nanoparticles, leading to reduced
surface charge densities and consequently decreased local electric
field. Therefore, it is crucial to control the gap size of coupled
metal nanostructures for the highest MEF enhancement. Various assembly
methods such as electrostatic interactions, molecular interactions,
DNA-assisted assembly, and lithography have been utilized to prepare
various coupled metal nanostructures to study plasmon coupling enhanced
fluorescence on the single particle level.20−22

In 2009,
Kinkhabwala et al. demonstrated large single-molecule
fluorescence enhancement by using lithographically fabricated bowtie
nanoantennas (Figure 3a).20 The Au bowtie nanoantenna was composed
of a pair of tip-to-tip Au nanotriangles with controllable gap size
ranging from 14 to 80 nm. Near-infrared emitting dyes (quantum yield
of ∼2.5%), TPQDI, were embedded in a thin layer of PMMA covering
the Au bowtie nanostructures. The fluorescence of single TPQDI molecules
was monitored by a confocal scan of the film. The fluorescence of
TPQDI at the gap region experienced giant enhancement as a result
of enhanced excitation efficiency and fluorescence quantum yield.
The enhancement increased with the decreasing gap size. Single-molecule
fluorescence enhancement of up to 1340-fold was observed at the smallest
gap of 14 nm. Fluorescence lifetime was observed to be as short as
10 ps.

Figure 3 (a) Finite-difference time-domain calculation of local electric
field enhancement in the Au nanobowtie and (b) fluorescence enhancement
of single dye molecules in the Au nanobowtie. Scale bar: 100 nm. Reprinted
with kind permission from ref (20). Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.

In 2014, Zhang et al. studied single-molecule fluorescence
enhancement
by Au nanorod (NR) dimers with a tip-to-tip orientation (Figure 4).21 The Au NR dimers with tip-to-tip orientation were prepared
by the DNA origami technique, which allows gap size of the Au NR dimer
to be precisely controlled down to 6.1 nm. A commercial dye, ATTO-655,
with a relatively high fluorescence QY of ∼30% was introduced
to the gap region of the Au NR dimer through a homemade flow cell.
The enhanced fluorescence of a single ATTO-655 molecule corresponded
to a series of temporally separated bursts over the background signals
in the time trace of fluorescence intensity. As the gap size of the
Au NR dimer decreased from 26 to 6.1 nm, the optimum fluorescence
enhancement of ATT-655 was found to increase steadily, consistent
with the trend of the numerical calculation. The highest fluorescence
enhancement of 470-fold was obtained with the smallest gap size of
6.1 nm. In contrast, only ∼120-fold enhancement in fluorescence
intensity of ATTO-655 was achieved by using Au NR monomers that display
no plasmon coupling effects.

Figure 4 (a–c) Plasmon coupling enhanced fluorescence
as a function
of gap distance by using the Au nanorod dimer using the DNA origami
method, and the average length of Au NRs is 43.5 nm. (d–f)
Schematic illustration of fluorescence enhancement by the Au nanosphere
dimer and trimer. (f) Fluorescence enhancement vs hot spot volume.
Reprinted with kind permission from refs (21) and (22). Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.

Later in 2015, Punj et al. utilized self-assembled
Au NPs to enhance
single-molecule fluorescence detection at high micromolar concentrations
(Figure 4d–f).22 A fluorescence enhancement of 600-fold was achieved
by using an 80 nm Au NP dimer with 6 nm gap as nanoantennas accompanied
by a detection volume isolated down to 70 zL. Integration of self-assembled
nanoantenna-induced fluorescence enhancement with fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy allows a wide range of applications for biosensing and
single-molecule detections.

In 2017, Vietz et al. demonstrated
broadband fluorescence enhancement
by self-assembled Au and Ag NPs throughout the visible spectrum (Figure 5).24 The optical antennas were fabricated by using the DNA origami
method to self-assemble two 80 nm Ag or Au NPs. Three different dyes
(Alexa488, Atto542, and Atto647N) were utilized as the model fluorophores,
covering the spectrum from the blue to red. The performance of these
optical antennas in fluorescence enhancement was experimentally characterized
with single-molecule fluorescence measurements. This work showed that
antennas consisting of Ag NPs displayed fluorescence enhancements
of more than 100 times throughout the visible spectral range for dyes
with high QY. In the case of the Au counterparts, high fluorescence
enhancements were observed in the red to near-infrared region. The
results indicate that Ag-based antennas strongly outperform their
Au counterparts in the blue and green regions.

Figure 5 (a) Schematic illustration
of optical antenna consisting of two
80 nm Ag or Au NPs attached to a DNA origami; (b–d) experimental
fluorescence enhancement (b), simulated electric-field enhancement
(c), and relative change in quantum yield (d) for different dyes by
Ag (gray) or Au (yellow) NP dimers. Reprinted with kind permission
from ref (24). Copyright
2017 American Chemical Society.

Aggregation-Induced Plasmon Coupling Enhanced Fluorescence
In addition to single-particle spectroscopy, large fluorescence
enhancement by coupled metal nanostructures has also been demonstrated
on the substrate and colloid solution.19 The enhancement factors are relatively smaller than those on the
single-particle level due to average results of the ensemble measurements.
Inspired by the observations of larger fluorescence enhancement by
coupled metal nanostructures compared to monodispersed metal NPs13 and fluorescence quenching of chromophores in
direct contact with metal NPs,16 Li et
al. designed a fluorescence turn-on scheme by utilizing silica-coated
Ag NPs to light-up the prequenched fluorescence of chromophores that
were directly linked to Au NPs (Figure 6a).3 Plasmon coupling interactions
between Au NPs and Ag NPs resulted in a transition from fluorescence
quenching to enhancement with emission intensity significantly higher
than that of unquenched free Rhodamine B isothiocyanate (RiTC). Here
RiTC was chosen as a model chromophore, which has reasonable fluorescence
quantum yield (70% in methanol and 13% in H2O). Upon directly
attaching to the surface of 13 nm Au NPs (with ∼600 RiTC molecules
attached to each Au NP), the fluorescence of RiTC was quenched by
about 23-fold compared to that of the same amount of free RiTC in
solution. SiO2-coated Ag NPs (80 nm) were utilized to light
up the quenched fluorescence of RiTC. SiO2-coated Ag NPs
were surface modified with thiol groups to allow coupling with Au
NPs via thiol–Au interactions to form coupled nanostructures
of Ag@SiO2–Au-RiTC NPs. The gap distance between
outside Au NPs and core Ag NPs was tuned from 4 to 50 nm by controlling
the thickness of the SiO2 shell to explore the optimal
distance for fluorescence enhancement. At the optimum SiO2 shell thickness of 13 nm, the coupled metal nanostructures displayed
up to 4.4 times enhancement in fluorescence intensity compared to
isolated free RiTC and 101 times enhancement compared to prequenched
RiTC in RiTC-Au NPs.

Figure 6 (a) Scheme of lighting up Au NPs quenched fluorescence
by using
Ag NPs; (b) fluorescence spectra of Au-RiTC NPs upon gradual addition
of Ag@SiO2; and (c) optimum emission enhancements by SiO2-coated Ag NPs with different SiO2 shell thicknesses.
Reproduced from ref (3) with permission. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.

Following the work by Li et al.,3 Zhu
et al. further investigated the influence of different factors on
plasmon coupling enhanced fluorescence by utilizing DNA-assembled
nanostructures (Figure 7).4 The effects of shape and size of metal
NPs, dye distribution, and separation distance have been investigated
by using Cyanine 5 (Cy5) as the model fluorescence probe. Similar
to the approach by Li et al.,3 the fluorescence
of Cy5 was prequenched by attaching DNA-linked Cy5 to the surface
of Au NSs. The quenched fluorescence of Cy5 was turned on by forming
assembled nanostructures with different NPs through DNA hybridization.
Among the three different morphologies studied (Au NSs, Au NRs, and
Au@Ag core–shell NSs), Au@Ag NSs gave the best performance
in plasmon coupling enhanced fluorescence. However, the absolute fluorescence
intensity is still far below that of the same amount of free Cy5 in
solution due to random distribution of Cy5 in the coupled nanostructures
of the initial scheme (Figure 7a). In the initial design, only a small fraction of Cy5 molecules
are located at the gap region to experience the fluorescence enhancement.
An improved scheme as shown in Figure 7d was proposed to optimize the distribution of dyes,
which resulted in performance improvement by 2.5 times (fluorescence
enhancement of 20-fold versus 7.9-fold). Between two different sizes
of Au@Ag NSs (65 and 30 nm), 65 nm Au@Ag NSs were found to display
five times better fluorescence enhancement factors compared to 30
nm ones (Figure 7c).
The separation distance between Au NSs and Au@Ag NSs was adjusted
by controlling the strand length of DNA. Optimum fluorescence enhancement
of 80-fold was obtained at 8.2 nm separation distance by using 65
nm Au@Ag NSs as the enhancing substrate.

Figure 7 (a) Schematic illustration
of coupled plasmonic structures. (b,
c) Fluorescence enhancement of Cy5-Au NPs by different nanostructures
(b) and Au@Ag NSs with two different diameters (c). (d) Improved scheme
to place more Cy5 in the gap region. (e) Separation distance dependent
fluorescence enhancement by 65 nm Au@Ag NSs. (f, g) Fluorescence enhancement
factor with various concentrations of fully complementary target DNA
(f) and 1 nM target DNA containing mismatched bases (g). Reprinted
with kind permission from ref (4). Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.

As prequenched fluorescence offers reduced background,
this plasmon
coupling-enhanced fluorescence phenomenon was further utilized to
develop a simple fluorescence turn-on platform for highly sensitive
and selective detection of the DNA sequence. Compared to conventional
fluorescence turn-on methods based on fluorescence recovery, the change
in fluorescence intensity as a result of plasmon coupling enhanced
fluorescence can go significantly beyond the extent of fluorescence
recovery, which is expected to give improved sensitivity. The detection
limit of this method was estimated to be 3.1 pM. Due to its high sensitivity
to the subtle change in the structures of nanoassembly, this method
also displayed exceptional selectivity to allow detection of single-base
mismatch at room temperature. The totally matched DNA displayed fluorescence
enhancement of 80-fold versus 8.1-, 3.2-, and 1.5-fold for one-, two-,
and three-base mismatched DNA sequences, respectively (Figure 7d).

The above approaches
by Li et al. and Zhu et al. rely on using
another metal NP to light up the fluorescence of chromophores that
was prequenched by Au NPs via forming a nanoassembly, which involved
the use of two different metal NPs. This method was recently further
simplified and improved by He et al.5 In
the new scheme as shown in Figure 8a, the same type of metal NPs were utilized to act
as both quencher and enhancing substrates. Au@Ag NPs were chosen as
they have been demonstrated to display good performance in fluorescence
enhancement in the previous work.3,4 RiTC was chosen
as the model chromophore. Conjugation of RiTC with Au@Ag NPs led to
fluorescence quenching. Cysteine was chosen as the coupling agent
to induce aggregation of Au@Ag NPs to light up the prequenched fluorescence.
Cysteine is an amino acid containing a thiol group (−SH), which
can bind to the surface of Au or Ag NPs. In an acidic environment,
the carboxyl and amino groups of cysteine are ionized to form a zwitterionic
structure. Addition of cysteine will lead to aggregation of Au@Ag-RiTC
NPs and consequently enhanced fluorescence. A series of Au@Ag NPs
with different Ag shell thickness were prepared to optimize the performance.
Upon attaching to the surface of metal NPs, the fluorescence of RiTC
was quenched by 4.6- to 8.1-fold by Au NPs and Au@Ag NPs, respectively.
The quenched fluorescence was subsequently enhanced upon addition
of cysteine to induce aggregation of metal-RiTC NPs. The optimum fluorescence
of coupled Au-RiTC NPs was 24.3 times that of uncoupled Au–RiTC
NPs. For Au@Ag-RiTC NPs, the enhancement factors increased with increasing
Ag shell thickness and became saturated as the Ag shell thickness
reached ∼5.6 nm. Coupled Au@Ag-RiTC NPs with the thickest Ag
shell thickness of 5.6 nm displayed optimum fluorescence enhancement:
44.8-fold versus prequenched RiTC and 7.6-fold versus free RiTC. As
cysteine is an important amino acid for many physiological processes,
cysteine-induced aggregation-enhanced fluorescence of metal-RiTC NPs
could be utilized to develop a platform for the detection of cysteine.
This method gave a detection limit of 3.8 pM in the tap water, which
is more sensitive than most other common methods. This method was
also highly selective. Among 21 common amino acids, only cysteine
and glutathione molecules displayed aggregation-induced fluorescence
enhancement.

Figure 8 (a) Scheme of aggregation-induced plasmon coupling enhanced
fluorescence
of prequenched fluorophores. (b) Emission intensity of coupled Au@Ag-RiTC
NPs (red), free RiTC (green), and isolated Au@Ag-RiTC NPs (black).
(c) Fluorescence enhancement factors of coupled Au@Ag-RiTC vs isolated
Au@Ag-RiTC (black) and free RiTC (green). (d) Emission spectra of
Au@Ag(5.6 nm)-RiTC NPs upon addition of various amounts of cysteine.
(e) Enhancement factors of coupled Au@Ag-RiTC NPs with various amino
acids (10 μM) in tap water. Reproduced with permission from
ref (5). 2019 The Royal
Society of Chemistry.

As many chemically and biologically important species
can cause
aggregation of metal NPs, this simple method can be extended for detection
of many other analytes. A wide range of analytes could be detected
based on this sensing strategy upon appropriate modification of metal
NPs with proper recognition moiety. Controlled assembly of plasmonic
metal NPs, resulting in red-shifted LSPR spectra in response of analytes,
has been utilized in developing colorimetric detection of a wide variety
of targets including amino acids, proteins, nucleic acids, DNA sequences,
small organic molecules, heavy metal ions, and cancer cells.11 Targets or analytes that induce assembly or
aggregation of plasmonic metal NPs to display colorimetric responses
could be similarly extended to develop sensing platforms that display
aggregation-induced plasmon coupling enhanced fluorescence by using
proper chromophores and careful nanoengineering. In this approach,
fluorescence was quenched first (OFF state) and subsequently lightened
up by aggregation-induced emission enhancement (ON state) to the level
many times stronger than that of original unquenched fluorescence.
Compared with the conventional fluorescence “turn-on”
platform in which the quenched fluorescence just recovers to the level
of original fluorescence intensity, this fluorescence “quenching
to enhancement” is expected to give much larger contrast ratio
and consequently better sensitivity.

This AIE enhancement of
chromophore-modified metal NPs is similar
to AIE of organic molecules. However, their working mechanisms are
totally different. The mechanism of typical AIE of organic molecules
generally arises from improved quantum yield due to restriction of
intramolecular motion to reduce nonradiative decay rates, which is
accompanied by longer fluorescence lifetime. Here AIE of chromophore-conjugated
metal NPs is based on aggregation-induced plasmon coupling of metal
NPs to simultaneously enhance the excitation efficiency and radiative
decay rate of chromophores. Consequently, fluorescence intensity enhancement
is accompanied by significantly shortened fluorescence lifetime, which
helps to improve the photostability of chromophores for long-term
applications.

Conclusions and Perspectives
Owing to unique LSPR properties
of metal NPs, profound metal–chromophore
interactions result in significant modulation in fluorescence intensity
of chromophores, which strongly depends on the nature of metal NPs
and chromophores as well as on the separation distance between them.
Aggregated metal NPs can give rise to a giant local electric field
at the gap region and are thus expected to display much larger fluorescence
enhancement compared to isolated metal NPs. Coupled metal nanostructures
prepared by different assembly methods have been demonstrated to display
fluorescence enhancement by thousands of times on the single-molecule
level and hundreds of times in the colloid solution. On the other
hand, direct contact of the chromophore generally resulted in severe
fluorescence quenching. The quenched fluorescence of chromophore-conjugated
metal NPs could be lightened up by interacting with another metal
NP or forming the aggregates to enable plasmon coupling to significantly
enhance their excitation efficiency. Aggregation of chromophore-conjugated
metal NP induced emission enhancement gives a large contrast ratio
from severely quenched fluorescence to significantly enhanced fluorescence
(much higher than the original fluorescence intensity), which is superior
to the conventional turn-on methods based on fluorescence recovery.
This method is therefore attractive for developing platforms with
reduced background for sensing and imaging applications. The design
concept of this fluorescence turn-on method is similar to the well-known
AIE phenomenon of organic molecules, but with a totally different
working mechanism.

This simple method can be easily extended
for detection of many
other analytes which can induce the aggregation of metal NPs through
various assembly methods. Surface modification of metal NPs with proper
recognition moiety and coupling agents is critical for selective interactions
and effective assembly to ensure strong plasmon coupling interactions
to achieve large fluorescence enhancement. This method involves a
transition from fluorescence quenching to enhancement by metal NPs
of the same type but different assembly states. Careful balance between
two is critical to achieve a large contrast ratio. Different coupling
interactions such as covalent bonding, π–π interactions,
and host–guest interactions will result in different separation
distances (metal–metal and metal–chromophore) and the
dielectric environment, which will affect plasmon coupling interactions
between metal NPs and metal–chromophore interactions. Lots
of further efforts are required to design proper metal–chromophore
pairs and proper nanostructures to achieve optimum performance. In
addition to fluorescence enhancement, aggregation of chromophore-conjugated
metal NPs will result in significantly enhanced photothermal effects
and 2PPL of metal NPs and two-photon excitation fluorescence, which
could be utilized for multimodal imaging as well as imaging-guided
phototherapy.14,25 Further surface modification
of the metal NPs with targeting groups or therapeutic agents will
allow development of a lot of biomedical applications based on aggregation
of chromophore-conjugated metal NPs.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.



Shuang Li is a postdoctoral fellow of the School of Chemistry
and
Chemical Engineering at South China University of Technology. She
received her BSc degree in chemistry from Zhejiang University and
her PhD degree in chemistry from National University of Singapore.
Her research focuses on plasmonic nanostructures, conjugated polymers,
metal-enhanced fluorescence, and two-photon photodynamic therapy.



Jiangling He is currently pursuing her PhD degree under
the supervision
of Prof. Qing-Hua Xu at National University of Singapore. Her research
focuses on optical materials, including the preparation of plasmonic
nanostructures, carbon quantum dots, quantum-dot-based complexes,
and upconversion photoluminescence materials.



Qing-Hua Xu is currently an associate professor of the
Department
of Chemistry, National University of Singapore (NUS). He received
his BS from Zhejiang University (1993), MS from Peking University
(1996) and University of Chicago (1997), and PhD from UC Berkeley
(2001), and conducted his postdoctoral research at Stanford University
and UC Santa Barbara. He joined NUS in 2005 and became tenured in
2011. His primary research interest is investigation of optical properties
of low-dimensional materials using various novel optical spectroscopy
and imaging techniques.

Acknowledgments
We thank the
financial support from National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 21673155), the Open Fund of the Key
Laboratory of Functional Molecular Engineering of Guangdong Province
(2018kf06, SCUT), and the Ministry of Education, Singapore (R-143-000-A41-114
and R-143-000-A68-112).
==== Refs
References
Wolfbeis O. S. 
An overview
of nanoparticles commonly used in fluorescent bioimaging . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 4743 –4768 . 10.1039/C4CS00392F .25620543 
Hong Y. ; Lam J. W. Y. ; Tang B. Z. 
Aggregation-induced emission . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 5361 –5388 . 10.1039/c1cs15113d .21799992 
Li S. ; Zhang T. S. ; Zhu Z. J. ; Gao N. Y. ; Xu Q.-H. 
Lighting
up the gold nanoparticles quenched fluorescence by silver nanoparticles:
a separation distance study . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 58566 –58572 . 10.1039/C6RA11265J .
Zhu Z. ; Yuan P. ; Li S. ; Garai M. ; Hong M. ; Xu Q.-H. 
Plasmon-Enhanced
Fluorescence in Coupled Nanostructures and Applications
in DNA Detection . ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 118 –124 . 10.1021/acsabm.8b00032 .
He J. ; Li S. ; Lyu D. ; Zhang D.-F. ; Wu X. ; Xu Q.-H. 
Aggregation
Induced Emission Enhancement by Plasmon Coupling of Noble Metal Nanoparticles . Mater. Chem. Front. 
2019 , 3 , 2421 –2427 . 10.1039/C9QM00455F .
Willets K. A. ; Van Duyne R. P. 
Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy and
Sensing . Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2007 , 58 , 267 –297 . 10.1146/annurev.physchem.58.032806.104607 .17067281 
Le R. E. C. ; Etchegoin P. G.  Principles of surface-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy: and related plasmonic effects , 1 st ed.; Elsevier : Amsterdam; Boston , 2009 ; pp 1 –663 .
Li N. ; Yin H. ; Zhuo X. ; Yang B. ; Zhu X.-M. ; Wang J. 
Infrared-Responsive
Colloidal Silver Nanorods for Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption . Adv. Opt. Mater. 
2018 , 6 , 1800436 10.1002/adom.201800436 .
Li J.-F. ; Li C.-Y. ; Aroca R. F. 
Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence spectroscopy . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2017 , 46 , 3962 –3979 . 10.1039/C7CS00169J .28639669 
Chen H. ; Kou X. ; Yang Z. ; Ni W. ; Wang J. 
Shape- and Size-Dependent
Refractive Index Sensitivity of Gold Nanoparticles . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 5233 –5237 . 10.1021/la800305j .18435552 
Zhao W. ; Brook M. A. ; Li Y. 
ChemBioChem 
2008 , 9 , 2363 –2371 . 10.1002/cbic.200800282 .18821551 
Zhang J. ; Fu Y. ; Chowdhury M. H. ; Lakowicz J. R. 
Metal-enhanced single-molecule fluorescence
on silver particle monomer and dimer: Coupling effect between metal
particles . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 2101 –2107 . 10.1021/nl071084d .17580926 
Xu H. ; Aizpurua J. ; Käll M. ; Apell P. 
Electromagnetic contributions
to single-molecule sensitivity in surface-enhanced Raman scattering . Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip.
Top. 
2000 , 62 , 4318 –4324 . 10.1103/PhysRevE.62.4318 .
Guan Z. ; Gao N. ; Jiang X.-F. ; Yuan P. ; Han F. ; Xu Q.-H. 
Huge enhancement
in two-photon photoluminescence of Au nanoparticle clusters revealed
by single-particle spectroscopy . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 7272 –7277 . 10.1021/ja400364f .23607514 
Giannini V. ; Fernández-Domínguez A. I. ; Heck S. C. ; Maier S. A. 
Plasmonic
Nanoantennas: Fundamentals and Their Use in Controlling the Radiative
Properties of Nanoemitters . Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 111 , 3888 –3912 . 10.1021/cr1002672 .21434605 
Fan C. ; Wang S. ; Hong J. W. ; Bazan G. C. ; Plaxco K. W. ; Heeger A. J. 
Beyond superquenching:
hyper-efficient energy transfer
from conjugated polymers to gold nanoparticles . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2003 , 100 , 6297 –6301 . 10.1073/pnas.1132025100 .12750470 
Zhang T. ; Yuan P. ; Zhao T. ; Xu Q.-H. 
Plasmon-Enhanced
Two-Photon Excitation Fluorescence and Biomedical Applications . Surface Plasmon Enhanced, Coupled and Controlled Fluorescence 
2017 , 211 –225 . 10.1002/9781119325161.ch13 .
Zong H. ; Mu X. ; Sun M. 
Physical principle
and advances in plasmon-enhanced
upconversion luminescence . Appl. Mater. Today 
2019 , 15 , 43 –57 . 10.1016/j.apmt.2018.12.015 .
Osorio-Roman I. O. ; Guerrero A. R. ; Albella P. ; Aroca R. F. 
Plasmon enhanced
fluorescence with aggregated shell-isolated nanoparticles . Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 10246 –10251 . 10.1021/ac502424g .25225956 
Kinkhabwala A. ; Yu Z. ; Fan S. ; Avlasevich Y. ; Muellen K. ; Moerner W. E. 
Large single-molecule
fluorescence enhancements produced by a bowtie nanoantenna . Nat. Photonics 
2009 , 3 , 654 –657 . 10.1038/nphoton.2009.187 .
Zhang T. ; Gao N. ; Li S. ; Lang M. J. ; Xu Q.-H. 
Single-Particle
Spectroscopic Study on Fluorescence Enhancement by Plasmon Coupled
Gold Nanorod Dimers Assembled on DNA Origami . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 2043 –2049 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b00747 .26266500 
Punj D. ; Regmi R. ; Devilez A. ; Plauchu R. ; Moparthi S. B. ; Stout B. ; Bonod N. ; Rigneault H. ; Wenger J. 
Self-Assembled Nanoparticle Dimer Antennas for Plasmonic-Enhanced
Single-Molecule Fluorescence Detection at Micromolar Concentrations . ACS Photonics 
2015 , 2 , 1099 –1107 . 10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00152 .
Marinica D. C. ; Kazansky A. K. ; Nordlander P. ; Aizpurua J. ; Borisov A. G. 
Quantum
Plasmonics: Nonlinear Effects in the Field Enhancement of a Plasmonic
Nanoparticle Dimer . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 1333 –1339 . 10.1021/nl300269c .22320125 
Vietz C. ; Kaminska I. ; Sanz Paz M. ; Tinnefeld P. ; Acuna G. P. 
Broadband Fluorescence Enhancement
with Self-Assembled
Silver Nanoparticle Optical Antennas . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 4969 –4975 . 10.1021/acsnano.7b01621 .28445644 
Guan Z. ; Zhang T. ; Zhu H. ; Lyu D. ; Sarangapani S. ; Xu Q.-H. ; Lang M. J. 
Simultaneous Imaging
and Selective
Photothermal Therapy through Aptamer-Driven Au Nanosphere Clustering . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2019 , 10 , 183 –188 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b03284 .30586995

