
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 3155236410.1021/acsomega.9b02079ArticleDiscovery of Inhibitors for Proliferating
Cell Nuclear Antigen Using a Computational-Based Linked-Multiple-Fragment
Screen Bartolowits Matthew D. †Gast Jonathon M. †Hasler Ashlee J. †Cirrincione Anthony M. †O’Connor Rachel J. †Mahmoud Amr H. †‡Lill Markus A. †Davisson Vincent Jo *†† Department of Medicinal
Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States‡ Department
of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, Cairo 11566, Egypt* E-mail: davisson@purdue.edu.06 09 2019 17 09 2019 4 12 15181 15196 06 07 2019 23 08 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is a central factor in DNA replication
and repair pathways that plays an essential role in genome stability.
The functional roles of PCNA are mediated through an extensive list
of protein–protein interactions, each of which transmits specific
information in protein assemblies. The flexibility at the PCNA–protein
interaction interfaces offers opportunities for the discovery of functionally
selective inhibitors of DNA repair pathways. Current fragment-based
drug design methodologies can be limited by the flexibility of protein
interfaces. These factors motivated an approach to defining compounds
that could leverage previously identified subpockets on PCNA that
are suitable for fragment-binding sites. Methodologies for screening
multiple connected fragment-binding events in distinct subpockets
are deployed to improve the selection of fragment combinations. A
flexible backbone based on N-alkyl-glycine amides
offers a scaffold to combinatorically link multiple fragments for
in silico screening libraries that explore the diversity of subpockets
at protein interfaces. This approach was applied to discover new potential
inhibitors of DNA replication and repair that target PCNA in a multiprotein
recognition site. The screens of the libraries were designed to computationally
filter ligands based upon the fragments and positions to <1%, which
were synthesized and tested for direct binding to PCNA. Molecular
dynamics simulations also revealed distinct features of these novel
molecules that block key PCNA–protein interactions. Furthermore,
a Bayesian classifier predicted 15 of the 16 new inhibitors to be
modulators of protein–protein interactions, demonstrating the
method’s utility as an effective screening filter. The cellular
activities of example ligands with similar affinity for PCNA demonstrate
unique properties for novel selective synergy with therapeutic DNA-damaging
agents in drug-resistant contexts.

document-id-old-9ao9b02079document-id-new-14ao-2019-02079rccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is a nuclear homotrimeric
protein that encircles DNA with classic attributes of a processivity
factor in DNA replication.1 However, PCNA
also mediates protein complex formation in base excision, mismatch,
nucleotide excision, homologous recombination (HR), Fanconi anemia
DNA repair, and translesion synthesis pathways.2−5 PCNA can also
participate as a regulator of cell cycle progression, chromatin remodeling,
and transcription.4 More than 200 proteins
are currently proposed to interact with PCNA with a major subset involved
in DNA damage repair.6 Multiple key proteins
share a binding motif for PCNA called the PCNA-interacting protein-like
motif (PIPM).7−12 PCNA is the central scaffold protein for DNA polymerase
association and elongation of repaired DNA strand, as well as necessary
for the final steps of ligation. Inhibition of PCNA association with
PIPM-containing proteins could ultimately impair the cell’s
ability to repair or replicate DNA. In support of this approach, the
deletion of the PIPM within c-Abl disrupts the nuclear c-Abl apoptotic
function in DNA-damaged cells.13 Although
various strategies currently exist for targeting DNA repair pathways,
antagonists of specific PCNA functions could serve uniquely to inhibit
specific DNA damage postreplication repair,14 specifically disrupting RAD6-dependent translesion synthesis, as
well as the “template switch” pathway.15 This function is relevant in the repair of DNA double-strand
breaks through HR, a pathway known to be overactivated in various
tumor types.16 The discovery of such an
inhibitor would provide a unique probe for functional analysis with
potential as a sensitizing or synergistic agent in the development
of new combination therapies.

Although a rationale to better
understand the functional roles of PCNA in normal and disease states
has emerged, PCNA–protein interactions do not provide a traditional
small-molecule target and motivate a new approach to modulate protein–protein
interactions (PPIs). Structure-based design of PCNA inhibitors could
benefit from structures of PIPM-containing peptides/proteins in complex
with PCNA. The information to date has revealed that the core PIPM
recognition sequence is involved in a 310-helix that binds
in a hydrophobic surface pocket on PCNA. Small-molecule mimics of
this topology are not always easily defined. Our previous studies
of PCNA features responsible for specificity of protein recruitment
implicate varied conformations of PCNA upon ligand engagement, which
impart functional differences.17 Finally,
a recent high-throughput biomolecular screening effort led to the
discovery of the thyroxine class (T3 or L-3,5,3′-triiodothyronine)
of inhibitors that target the surface pocket in which the PIPM’s
310-helix binds.18,19 The analog compound,
T2AA ((S)-4-(4-(2-amino-3-hydroxypropyl)-2,6-diiodophenoxy)phenol)
showed pharmacologic effects in combination with the DNA damaging
agent, cisplatin in the drug-sensitive cell line, U2OS.19,20

Fragment-based drug design (FBDD) is a generalized approach
commonly used in the discovery of small-molecule hit ligands for biological
targets.21 By screening low molecular-weight
chemical fragments, which individually bind to their intended target
sites, higher affinity drug-like molecules can be generated using
the combined information. FBDD can have inherent advantages when factors
such as commercial availability, ease of synthesis, and coverage of
chemical space are considered.22 Furthermore,
libraries consisting of larger molecular weight entities can be disadvantaged
by their “bulkiness”, which may preclude favorable binding
ligand interactions in protein subpockets due to steric exclusion.23 Screening single small fragments is useful in
situations where 3D structural information of a target site is readily
available. However, the methods and approaches in fragment-based screens
have demonstrated variable outcomes with similar targets.24 New and refined in silico approaches that utilize
the concepts of fragment-based screens offer increased applications
to a broader range of protein targets.

A challenge to the application
of FBDD methods for PPIs is the conformational flexibility of protein
docking sites, even in cases where localized “hot spots”
are defined.25,26 In cases where the fragment binding
at one subpocket can influence the conformation of a second subpocket,
a molecular screening system that maps multiple subpocket binding
sites, in tandem, would provide advantages for defining new probe
ligands.23 Such an approach would offer
opportunities to define prefiltered hit molecules with multiple fragment
features to be considered for subsequent optimization of drug properties.
Peptoids offer a chemical scaffold with conformational flexibility
and potential for high degrees of fragment diversity. Traditional
biomolecular screens using peptoid libraries have proven useful in
identifying ligands for many types of protein targets.27−33 Several of these efforts make use of trimeric peptoid
libraries, which are generally considered small molecules.34,35 A key attribute of these molecular types is that they effectively
“tie” three chemical fragments together into a single
backbone, enabling tandem multifragment screening. However, depending
on target systems, it may not be efficient to construct large and
diverse libraries of trimeric molecules for screening. An in silico
method to reduce the number of compounds while maximizing the diversity
of fragment features prior to a focused set of scalable syntheses
is desired. The objective here is to develop such an approach to target
the PIPM binding site in PCNA.

In this study, a chemical platform
based on moderate molecular weight peptoids (450–1000 Da) is
evaluated for application in the discovery of novel small-molecule
PPI inhibitors of PCNA. This system employs computational-based peptoid
library design and screening that accounts for the conformational
flexibility of the receptor and ligands. In this analysis, molecular
dynamics (MDs) simulations were used to identify potential key PCNA–ligand
interactions. Together with the flexibility of the PIPM binding site
of PCNA,17 the results indicate the predicted
adaptability of the protein toward multiple inhibitors. These inhibitors
are shown for the first time to have an unusual selective synergy
with doxorubicin in drug-resistant tumor cell lines. Ultimately, the
approaches tested here could have applications in systems where distinct
receptor–ligand conformations confer selective functional states
that modulate the biological responses.

Results
Tripeptoid
Library Creation
Using Computational Tools
The PIPM binding site on PCNA was
examined to gain basic information on favorable chemical features
of potential small molecule inhibitors. PCNA does not have any known
natural small-molecule modulators, nor does it have an obvious ligand-targeting
site. Even when compared to other protein–protein interfaces,
such as the contact surface between MDM2 and p53, there is not a clear
binding groove—instead there is a shallow, relatively small
surface pocket where PIPM-containing proteins interact. Our previous
work identified three key subpocket regions at the PIPM binding site
that are important for the recognition and binding of PIPM-containing
peptides/proteins.17 It was hypothesized
that tripeptoids would be sufficient in dimensionality to engage each
of these subpockets. The general mass range of such materials are
close to those for other known inhibitors of PPIs [e.g., Zhao, et
al. (2015).36 The size of these ligands
also enhances synthetic accessibility, time to completion, and cost
efficiency. More importantly, peptoids have more favorable properties
to penetrate cell membranes and are resistant to solvents, temperature,
chemical denaturants, and proteolysis.37−40

An initial set
of 20 primary amines was selected (Figure 1, fragments labeled in blue) that varied
in hydrophobicity, aromaticity, ability to form hydrogen bonds, and
substructures present in clinically available drugs. Many of these
amines are commercially available, although some require different
degrees of in-house synthesis. The CombiGlide application within Maestro
(Schrödinger)41 was used to generate
a virtual combinatorial library of trimeric peptoids that contained
each of the 20 primary amines, plus hydrogen as a potential substituent,
to give 9261 total compounds. The ligands were ionized (along with
desalting and tautomeric generation) using Epik to generate all possible
states within a pH range of 7.0 ± 2.0, and these were minimized
using the OPLS-2005 force field.

Figure 1 Fragments used for the creation of virtual
tripeptoid libraries. A list of 37 primary amines, along with T2AA,
was used to create a combinatorial virtual library of peptoid-based
compounds. N* indicates the location of the −NH2 group, which is the position of substitution into the tripeptoid
backbone. Blue labels indicate fragments that were used in the initial
screen of tripeptoids containing a combinatorial set of 20 primary
amines.

The use of a single rigid protein
structure for in silico docking can often produce skewed results due
to geometric constraints and functional group directionality at the
binding site. This is exacerbated when taking into account a protein
such as PCNA, which has a significant degree of plasticity at the
PIPM site,17 increasing the likelihood
of many false negatives using rigid docking. Although a flexible docking
method such as Schrödinger Maestro’s induced-fit42 can address this issue, the computational time
required to screen large numbers of highly flexible ligands such as
peptides and peptoids can make it less practical. As an alternative,
four crystal structures of PCNA bound to four different ligands were
selected for screening, each representing structural divergence at
the PIPM binding site. These structures included PCNA complexed to
the C-terminal tail of p21 (PDB ID: 1AXC), PCNA complexed to residues 331–350
of FEN1 (PDB ID: 1U7B), PCNA complexed with the T3 ligand (PDB ID: 3VKX), and PCNA complexed
with a fragment of DNA polymerase η (PDB ID: 2ZVK). Using this approach,
the enrichment of fragments in specific positions of the tripeptoid
are expected to reflect the features of all four PCNA structures.

Each protein structure was minimized in complex with its respective
ligand/peptide using the OPLS-2005 force field in Maestro. Cubic grid
boxes were created using either T3 (3VKX) or a PIPM peptide amino acid at the
hydrophobic site on PCNA, as the centroid, with a length of 30 Å.
The prepared ligands were flexibly docked into each form of PCNA using
the standard precision (SP) model in Glide,43 and the top 10% of the ligand hits from each docking run were flexibly
redocked into the respective form of PCNA using the extra precision
(XP) Glide algorithm, which places harsher penalties on desolvation
energy and ligand strain and has greater requirements for ligand–receptor
shape complementarity. Upon completion of each docking exercise, the
top 50 hits in each of the docking runs were manually analyzed. The
frequency with which a specific fragment was present at a particular
location along the tripeptoid backbone was tallied for each crystal
structure of PCNA, and the top 50 hits from each run were compiled
into a total list of 200 top hits.

The compiled screening results
indicated a different population of candidate hit ligands from each
crystal structure of PCNA. Most informative was the variation in fragment
enrichments observed at each of the three positions along the peptoid
backbone with an example summary in Figure 2. The 1st (N-terminal) position showed a
preference for a set of side chains, including NLys, NArg, NTyr, NGln,
NEba, and NBal. Two fragments that stood out most significantly were
NLys and NArg, each of which were present in over 20% of the top hit
list. The 2nd position showed less enrichment with nine fragments
appearing, but the top 5% hits contained NArg (15%) and NPip (14%).
In comparison to the first two positions, the 3rd position in the
peptoid backbone showed the highest enrichment of particular side
chains, notably aromatic groups that contained functionalities that
allow for hydrogen bonding with protein amino acids. NBal especially
stood out as a highly enriched fragment (43%) in the 3rd position
along with two additional aromatic fragments (NTyr 13% and NPip 20%).

Figure 2 Glide
docking-based frequency with which fragments
appeared
in the three substitution positions on a tripeptoid backbone. A set
of 20 fragments, in addition to hydrogen, were virtually combinatorially
incorporated into a tripeptoid backbone and were screened against
four different crystal structures of PCNA (PDB IDs: 1AXC, 3VKX, 1U7B, and 2ZVK) in silico using
the Glide SP and XP docking algorithms. The frequency that respective
fragments appeared in positions R1, R2 or R3 (lower right) were tallied for the top 50 hits from each
run involving a different crystal structure. The percentage of the
cumulative total of substitution frequency (out of a possible 200)
at a given position is shown above the stacked columns. Hydrogen as
a substituent is labeled as “Gly”.

A second screen evaluated how the use of pre-existing ligands in
combination with the associated crystal structure impart fragment
selection. In previous studies, the small molecules, T3 and T2AA,
as well as several synthetic variants, have demonstrated binding in
a hydrophobic subpocket of the PIPM binding site.18,19 Both
compounds were considered as monomers compatible with submonomer peptoid
synthesis conditions.44 Either fragment
could potentially serve as an anchor fragment, directing small peptoid
fragments to additional subpockets in the PIPM binding site on PCNA.
T2AA was selected as a better candidate for investigation based upon
physicochemical properties and the lack of thyroid hormone properties.18 A second extended virtual combinatorial library
was created using the same methodology as previously discussed, with
a set of 37 peptoid side chains along with NT2AA and CT2AA, which
differ in attachment points (Figure 1). As the hydrophobic subpocket on PCNA would be expected
to sterically accommodate potential binding of the T2AA fragment,
only the structure of PCNA bound to T3 was used (PDB ID: 3VKX). This constraint
introduced an intentional bias to increase the likelihood of T2AA
acting as an anchor. All ligands were prepared and screened as before,
this time using Maestro’s HTVS scoring function. The top 50%
of the hit compounds were screened again using Glide’s SP model,
and the top 30% of the hits from the SP screen were docked again using
Glide’s XP model. As before, the frequency that a particular
side chain was present at a given substitution location on the peptoid
backbone was tallied for the top 50 hits from the XP screen.

From the results (Figure S1), a significant
enrichment for a small set of possible side chains was observed with
NT2AA in the first position consistent with the ligand and structural
bias introduced into the screen. Interestingly, the second position
showed high enrichment of the ethanol amine side chain (NEal). In
contrast to the previous screen, the third position did not show significant
enrichment for any particular side chain. A review of the docking
poses further revealed that fragments in the third position adopted
multiple conformations taking on a variety of interactions in the
region proximal to the PIPM glutamine binding site. As a result, the
third position fragments did not offer any obvious stabilizing interactions
with PCNA in contrast to the results of the first screen. The high
frequency of NT2AA as a fragment in the first position reflects the
expected favorable docking at the unique hydrophobic pocket. There
is a reasonable likelihood that these interactions at the first position
significantly influenced the interactions allowed at the second position
which enriched primarily for NEal. A strategy for incorporation at
the N-terminus of resin-bound peptoid without the use of protecting
groups (Figure 3) offered
a pathway to synthesis of peptoids with T2AA at the first position.

Figure 3 Synthesis
of
T2AA- or
non-T2AA-containing tripeptoids. (a) C2H3BrO2 (1 M in DMF, 20 equiv), DIC (19 equiv), 1 h, 35 °C;
(b) H2N-R3 (1 M in DMF), 2 h, RT; (c) H2N-R2 (1 M in DMF), 2 h, RT; (d) H2N-R1 (1 M in DMF), 2 h, RT; (e) T2AA (19.5 equiv), DIEA (39 equiv),
DMF, 16 h, RT; and (f) TFA/TIS/H2O (95:2.5:2.5), 1 or 3
h, RT.

Synthesis and in Vitro
Screening of Tripeptoids
Fragments that appeared in ≥5%
of each position on the tripeptoid
backbone were assessed for incorporation and synthesis of select tripeptoids.
Among the top hit fragments were several not commercially available.
To streamline the process in these early steps, NEba and NGln were
not considered for synthesis to avoid a need for incorporation of
acid-labile protecting groups. The preparations of the remaining noncommercially
available fragments with appropriate protecting groups are outlined
in the Supporting Information. In all,
85 ligands were synthesized using the methodology shown in Figure 3. Most of the compounds
contained the fragments that enriched from the virtual combinatorial
screen; however, some ligands were also synthesized that were not
predicted to be among the hits for purposes of comparison (e.g., tripeptoids
containing NAem in the 1st position). The total list of synthesized
peptoids are shown in Table S1. In some
cases, chemical fragments that represented structural analogs were
selected for incorporation, although they did not appear with high
frequency in the virtual screen. This approach was deployed for comparisons
with fragments that were top virtual hits. Examples of these fragments
included NBza (substitute for NBal, NPip, or NTyr), NTrp (substitute
for NPip), and NMma [(4-methylphenyl)methylamine, substituted for
NBal, not shown in Figure 1].

After synthesis and purification, the candidate peptoids
were screened in a fluorescence polarization (FP) assay to identify
ligands that disrupted the interaction of His-tagged PCNA and fluorescein-labeled
16-mer Pogo Ligase peptide (FAM-PL). This synthetic peptide is a high-affinity
ligand previously used for a reporter in PCNA binding assays.45 In the design of the assay, conditions were
adopted from Pedley et al.17 to improve
the dynamic range between bound and unbound FAM-PL. Although an acceptable Z-score was determined using the original 10 nM peptide
and 100 nM PCNA (Figure S2),46 an improved dynamic range and reagent efficiency
was established by adjusting the ligand and receptor concentrations
(Figures S3 and S4). Using 5 nM FAM-PL
peptide with 1 μM PCNA, conditions were established for >80%
of the peptide binding sufficient for subsequent displacement assays
and calculations of Ki values.

The
compounds were initially screened in the FP assay at concentrations
of 1 mM and 250 μM to define hits (data not shown) using T2AA
as a positive control. From the screen at 250 μM, sixteen ligands
were selected and each further analyzed in two-fold dilutions series
to generate dose response curves (see Figure S14). Anisotropy was converted to fractional occupancy (FO), and IC50 values were determined for each peptoid by performing nonlinear
regression fits of each dose response curve using eq 4. Inhibition constants (Ki values) were calculated from the resultant
IC50 values using eq 5 (Table 1).
Additional control experiments in the FP screen used individual fragments
that composed the top hits including NGln, NLys, NPip, NTyr, NBal,
NBza, and NEal, none of which were found to bind to PCNA (Figure S5). Examples of dose response curves
for four of the top hits are shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Dose response curves of four of the top hit
peptoid-based
compounds from the fluorescent polarization screen. Peptoid-based
ligands were subjected to two-fold dose response analysis. Solutions
were plated in duplicates of four, and error bars represent the standard
error around the mean. T2AA (1 mM) in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) serves
as the positive control, and DMSO alone serves as the negative control.
Data for all remaining compounds in Table 1 can be found in the Supporting Information, Figure S7.

Table 1 Hit Compound IC50 and Ki Values Measured by FPc
compound name	IC50 (μM)a	Ki (μM)a,b	
T2AA	1.34 ± 0.33	0.128 ± 0.0318	
Gly-NPip-NBal	7.74 ± 3.41	0.745 ± 0.328	
NBal-NLys-NTyr	>600	>50	
NLys-NPip-NBal	1.94 ± 0.51	0.186 ± 0.0491	
NLys-NPip-NMma	12.93 ± 1.97	1.24 ± 0.190	
NLys-NTyr-NBal	∼165	∼16	
NMma-NPip-NBal	11.69 ± 2.55	1.12 ± 0.245	
T2AA-Asn	7.20 ± 2.74	0.693 ± 0.264	
T2AA-Gln	3.52 ± 1.65	0.339 ± 0.159	
T2AA-Gly	2.91 ± 0.91	0.280 ± 0.0876	
T2AA-Gly-NBal	5.66 ± 1.67	0.545 ± 0.161	
T2AA-Gly-NPip	16.17 ± 3.71	1.56 ± 0.357	
T2AA-NEal-Gly	1.17 ± 0.37	0.113 ± 0.0356	
T2AA-NEal-NMma	1.18 ± 0.24	0.114 ± 0.0231	
T2AA-NEal-NPip	1.82 ± 0.37	0.175 ± 0.0356	
T2AA-NEal-NTyr	0.482 ± 0.328	0.0464 ± 0.0316	
T2AA-NPip-NLys	6.13 ± 2.84	0.590 ± 0.273	
a Values
are represented as the 95% confidence interval around the mean.

b Calculated using eq 5.

c Structures of T2AA-containing ligands can be found in Figure S6.

Identification
of Molecular Recognition Features of PCNA for Peptoid Ligands
To understand the chemical features of the peptoids–PCNA interactions,
MDs simulations were performed with selected hits and compared with
T2AA in complex with PCNA. Our previous report established the utility
of this approach, especially with regard to the T3 binding site.17 As outlined in the experimental methods, each
ligand was first docked into the cocrystal structure of PCNA and PL–peptide
(PDB ID: 1VYJ), with the peptide removed, using the Glide induced-fit model in
Maestro. These structures provided starting points for the MDs simulations
and ensured that there were no conflicts on an atomic scale due to
steric clashes and/or unfavorable ionic contacts. Each simulation
was run for 5.0 ns, or until it converged, as judged by the change
in protein Cα and side-chain root-mean-square deviation (rmsd)
over time (Figures S8–S10). Upon
completion, simulation trajectories were aligned to the first frame
of their own simulation, and then the simulations were aligned to
one another based on the position of their Cα atoms using VMD.
The final fifty frames for each MD were averaged to give a final structure
for each PCNA–ligand complex with example results shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 Average structures
of
the final 50 frames of MDs simulations. The final 50 simulation trajectory
frames for each analyzed peptoid ligand were averaged using VMD, and
the resulting structures visualized using Pymol. The hydrophobic pocket
(orange) and PIPM glutamine binding site (blue) are highlighted in
each. The whole structure of the PCNA monomer (based on PDB ID: 1VYJ) is shown in the
bottom right for comparative purposes.

Our previous
studies highlighted how the PCNA PIPM domain can adopt a variety of
conformations to optimize ligand binding.17 The results in Figure 5 indicate significant differences in PCNA conformation with the peptoid
ligands when compared to the cocrystal structure of PCNA–PL.
These differences are amplified in the PIPM binding regions for each
protein complex. Regions on PCNA that appeared to drive the conformational
difference between each structure most substantially were between
residues 80–86, 93–97, 104–111, 117–136,
162–166, 172–177, 181–194, and 251–257
(Figure S11). Perhaps unsurprisingly, each
of these regions was found in either a β-turn or unordered loop
structure, given these motifs’ propensity to be flexible. The
PIPM binding site itself is surrounded by four distinct flexible regions
comprising β-turn residues 40–46, the disordered interdomain
connecting loop residues 117–136, β-turn residues 229–235,
and disordered loop residues 251–257. Of the protein residues
that looked to be the most important for direct interaction with the
peptoid ligands, His44, Pro129, Pro234, Ala252, Pro253, and Ile255,
each interacted with ligands to varied degrees in each of the MDs
(Figure S12). Many of the significant contacts
were shared with T2AA and the PL peptide, indicating that the inhibitors
occupy many of the “anchoring” contacts between PCNA
and PL.

To further evaluate the differences between each MD
output structure, a principal component analysis (PCA) of the trajectory
snapshots for the Cα atoms of each PCNA–ligand complex
was performed (Figure 6). The principle components are based upon orthogonal eigenvectors
to describe the axes of maximal variance in the distribution of structures.
The percentage of variance of fluctuation in protein atom positions
in each dimension is characterized by a corresponding eigenvalue.
In addition to the outputs from the MDs simulations performed here,
trajectories of PCNA bound to various known peptide ligands, as used
in the study by Pedley, et al.,17 were
included in the PCA for comparison. In this additional set were trajectories
of PCNA in complexes with the DNA polymerase δ, PL, p85-α,
p21, Apo, Akt, or Abl peptide. By clustering structures in principal
component space, the focus is on the relationships between different
structures in terms of their major structural displacements. In the
context of this work, clustering along principal components 1, 2,
and 3 allows for the comparison of the significant structural differences
between each conformation of PCNA which covers more than 50% of their
conformational variance (Figure 6, bottom right panel).

Figure 6 PCA of PCNA
topology
variance. The final 100 frames of each PCNA–ligand MD trajectory
were aligned based on the position of the PCNA Cα backbone atoms.
A PCA of the aligned trajectories shows differential clustering of
PCNA conformations (residues 1–257) when in complex with either
a peptoid-based ligand or a PIPM-containing peptide. Principal components
1–3 (PC1, PC2, and PC3) for each structure were clustered and
plotted along with the proportion of variance for each principal component.

The PCA indicated distinct
differences in the topology of the PCNA–ligand interaction
sites. Of all complexes, PCNA–T2AA and PCNA–NLys-NPip-NBal
displayed the most distinct principal component values. Of note, the
PCNA–T2AA complex is also well separated from the tripeptoid
PCNA–T2AA–NEal-NTyr, implicating the influence of the
second and third fragments outside of the hydrophobic T2AA binding
pocket. Interestingly, this same tripeptoid containing T2AA appears
to take on features like the PCNA–p21 complex. In contrast,
this cluster is more dissimilar from the PCNA–NLys-NPip-NBal
complex. Although the structures were separated from one another,
some similarities in the eigenvectors are also noteworthy. For example,
although PCNA–PL and PCNA–NLys-NPip-NBal were well separated
in the clustering space, they both had nearly equivalent second-principal
components. Likewise, the population distribution of PCNA–PL
and PCNA–T2AA had nearly equivalent first-principal components.
These results implicate similar conformations only in certain dimensions.
The potential utility for predicting inhibitory efficiency from this
PCA are not yet clear, but this information may be useful for classifying
ligand–receptor complexes with respect to the level of inhibition.

Further analysis of the MDs simulations indicates that the peptoid
inhibitors are able to disrupt key interactions between PCNA and the
PL peptide (Figures 7 and S13). Although these compounds provide
a geometric hindrance to PIPM binding, it is also significant that
they prevent PCNA from forming important anchoring contacts with PIPM
residues. Computational results from Pedley, et al.17 demonstrate that the conserved amino acids of the PIPM—glutamine
in position 1, a hydrophobic residue in position 4, and aromatic residues
in positions 7 and 8—act as anchoring residues that drive conformational
stability of the complex between PCNA and PIPM-containing peptides/proteins.
Disrupting these points of contact should substantially weaken their
interactions and prevent binding.

Figure 7 Peptoid
inhibitors disrupt key PCNA–PIPM interactions. (Top) Competitive
peptoid inhibitors, such as NLys-NPip-NBal (yellow sticks), are projected
to bind at the PIPM-binding site on PCNA (gray surface; PDB ID: 1VYJ), which overlaps
with the PL peptide (green cartoon and sticks). (Bottom left) NLys-NPip-NBal
overlays key contact points between the PL peptide’s PIPM and
PCNA. Spheres represent PIPM amino acid residues. Colors indicate
direct disruption of key (red) or nonkey (orange) residues and nondisruption
of key (yellow) or nonkey (white) residues. (Bottom right) Results
from Pedley, et al. (2014) demonstrating that residues 1, 4, 7, and
8 of the PL peptide’s PIPM act as anchoring residues. ** Changes
in surface accessible surface area were calculated with ANCHOR,50 measuring the differences between bound and
unbound forms of the PL peptide.

Classifying Peptoid-Based Molecules as Inhibitors of PPIs
Inhibitors of protein–protein interactions (iPPIs) have characteristics
that distinguish them from other traditional inhibitors in that they
display features such as higher molecular weight, higher hydrophobicity,
and a larger number of aromatic rings.47,48 iPPIs also
demonstrate higher degrees of globularity, lower distribution of hydrophilic
regions, smaller proportions of exposed hydrophilic regions, and stronger
capacities to bind hydrophobic patches at the core of protein–protein
interfaces as compared to inhibitors of classical targets such as
enzymes.49 Although peptoid-like molecules
have been demonstrated to disrupt PPIs,51,52 it was not
clear how the fragment compositions in the combinatorial libraries
influence the features that would be predicted to be classified as
iPPIs prima facie.

All fragments shown in Figure 1, including both variants of T2AA, were used
to create a virtual combinatorial set of tripeptoids as before. The
peptoids were characterized by implementing a Bayesian classifier
method analogous to the one used in Morelli et al. (2011).48 To perform the Bayesian classification, the
2P2I Hunter data set,48,53,54 which
is a library of molecules that contained (at the time) 40 known iPPIs
and 1018 small molecules that are not inhibitors of PPIs, was first
obtained. Next, four descriptors were calculated for each compound—globularity,
CW2, EDmin3, and IW4—using the same methodology as Kuenemann
et al. (2014).55−57 These
descriptors measure the following factors, respectively: (1) three-dimensional
shape globularity; (2) ratio between the surface of the hydrophilic
regions calculated at −0.5 kcal/mol and the total molecular
surface [it is proportional to the concentration of hydrophilic regions
(involved in weak potential polar interactions]) compared to the total
surface area]; (3) unbalance between the center of mass of a molecule
and the barycenter of its hydrophilic (IW) interacting regions (a
high integy moment is a clear concentration of hydrophilic interacting
regions at one extremity of the compound). (4) third lowest local
minimum of the interaction energy (in kcal/mol) of a dry probe (it
measures the potential interaction energy of the ligand with a hydrophobic
object). This final criterion was selected because it often shows
the greatest distinctions of iPPIs from other known classical inhibitors.

In calculating the Bayesian cutoff, each sample was left out one
at a time, and a model built using the results of the samples, with
that model used to predict the left-out sample. Once all samples had
predictions, a ROC plot was generated, and the area under the curve
(ROC AUC) calculated (Figure S14). The
best split was determined by picking the split that minimized the
sum of the percent misclassified for category members and for category
nonmembers, using the cross-validated score for each sample. A contingency
table was constructed, containing the number of true positives, false
negatives, false positives, and true negatives. Based on the resulting
calculated cutoff of −0.188, 38 out of the 40 iPPIs as well
as 244 out of the 1018 non-iPPIs were predicted to be true iPPIs.
Although the selected cutoff produced a false positive hit rate of
approximately 24%, this was considered acceptable given that fewer
false negatives would theoretically result, and the ROC score was
rated as good (Figure S14). It is expected
that increasing the number of compounds to more than those found in
the 2P2I Hunter set in the future could produce an even more robust
model.

Next, this same model was applied to the library of tripeptoid
ligands, and the same four descriptors were calculated for each molecule—globularity,
CW2, EDmin3, and IW4. The peptoids were prepared in the same way as
the compounds in the training set, with all possible ionization states
at a pH of 7. When considering the entire set of tripeptoids, both
those that are predicted to be iPPIs and those that are not, the statistics
for the distribution of descriptor scores (Tables S2–S4) indicate that those molecules are similar in
globularity to other known iPPIs than non-iPPIs. For CW2, the tripeptoids
had a higher score than either iPPIs or non-iPPIs, likely due to the
fact that these peptoids, on average, have more exposed hydrophilic
regions than what would be expected for classical drugs. Overall,
the full set of tripeptoids was not strongly associated with either
iPPIs or non-iPPIs, as there are ligands that strongly share features
with other iPPIs, and those that do not. When only the tripeptoids
that showed up as experimental hits were considered, 15 out of 16
peptoids (94%), along with T2AA, were predicted to be iPPIs, with
the lone exception being Gly-NPip-NBal. Separately, a random set of
31 tripeptoids that were synthesized, but did not show up as experimental
hits, were analyzed using the classification method as before. From
these, 22 ligands (71%) were predicted to be non-iPPIs, whereas 9
(29%) were predicted to be iPPIs. From the results, it appeared more
likely that tripeptoids that share traits with other known iPPIs would
bind to PCNA in a manner sufficient to disrupt the binding of the
PIPM-containing PL peptide.

In Vitro
Assessment of Peptoid-Based PCNA Ligands for Synergy with DNA-Damaging
Agents in Cancer Cell Lines
PCNA is involved with numerous
DNA damage repair pathways, including base excision repair, mismatch
repair, HR, and the Fanconi anemia pathway.2−5 Each of these
pathways involve different protein partners in complex with PCNA.
T2AA has been shown to synergize with cisplatin, which causes DNA
single-strand and double-strand breaks in a drug-sensitive cell line.19,20 Inhibiting PCNA appeared to increase the amount of DNA damage as
well as increase the length of time for repair in these studies. Further
in vitro cell assessments of the new multifragment ligands were pursued
to compare their effects with the PCNA inhibitor, T2AA.

Tumor
cells that are resistant to the well-established therapeutic DNA damaging
agents, cisplatin and doxorubicin show differences in their dependences
on DNA repair pathways.58 The high-affinity
tripeptoids NLys-NPip-NBal and one containing the T2AA fragment (T2AA-NEal-NTyr)
were resynthesized and tested for effects on tumor cell growth and
viability alone and in combinations with these DNA-damage agents.
When exposed to tumor cell lines as single agents, these compounds
had no meaningful effects on cell growth up to 50 μM in MDA-MB-231
(Figure S15). In combination with DNA-damaging
agents, cisplatin and doxorubicin, these two tripeptoids were able
to enhance the effects of both DNA-damaging agents at concentrations
as low as 3 μM in the drug-resistant A549 and MDA-MB-231 cell
lines (Figures S16 and S17). Although the
effects with cisplatin combinations are measurable using the tripeptoid
PCNA inhibitors, T2AA effects were not observed in these two cell
lines. However, all of the agents were able to elicit strikingly high
synergistic effects of doxorubicin on total growth inhibition (TGI)
over three doubling periods from 20 to 100-fold as summarized in Table 2. To test these effects
on cytotoxicity more robustly, clonogenic assays were executed using
24 h time points of drug incubation. These data confirmed the results
of the cell growth assays (Figures 8 and S18), which clearly
show the potencies of the doxorubicin–PCNA inhibitor combinations
on single cell viability over a 24 h period.

Figure 8 PCNA inhibitors
synergism with doxorubicin.
T2AA, T2AA-NEal-NTyr, and NLys-NPip-NBal synergized with doxorubicin
both in A549 and MDA-MB-231. These data used a clonogenic assay format
with cell counts normalized to the plating efficiency value as 100%.

Table 2 PCNA Inhibitor GI50 Values
in Combination
with DNA Damaging Agents
 	A549	MDA-MB 231	
treatment	GI50 (μM)	GI50 M/D	TGI (μM)	TGI M/D	GI50 (μM)	GI50 M/D	TGI (μM)	TGI M/D	
cisplatin	14.3	N/A	21.4	N/A	4.18	N/A	9.30	N/A	
cisplatin 3 μM T2AA	14.5	0.99	20.9	1.02	3.18	1.32	8.13	1.14	
cisplatin 10 μM T2AA	13.8	1.04	20.1	1.07	2.99	1.40	5.95	1.56	
cisplatin 30 μM T2AA	12.8	1.11	20.5	1.04	3.38	1.24	7.53	1.24	
cisplatin 3 μM NLys-NPip-NBal	11.0	1.29	12.6	1.70	1.94	2.15	3.16	2.47	
cisplatin 10 μM NLys-NPip-NBal	6.08	2.35	8.36	2.56	1.52	2.74	3.65	2.55	
cisplatin 30 μM NLys-NPip-NBal	4.63	3.08	6.23	3.44	1.18	3.54	2.51	3.71	
cisplatin 3 μM T2AA-NEal-NTyr	10.8	1.32	12.6	1.71	2.01	2.08	3.81	2.44	
cisplatin 10 μM T2AA-NEal-NTyr	5.71	2.50	6.88	3.11	1.65	2.53	3.08	3.02	
cisplatin 30 μM T2AA-NEal-NTyr	4.97	2.87	6.49	3.30	1.15	3.64	2.41	3.86	
doxorubicin	5.66	N/A	17.2	N/A	53.3 nM	N/A	123 nM	N/A	
doxorubicin 3 μM T2AA	2.75	2.06	3.78	4.55	0.87 nM	61.1	2.68 nM	45.9	
doxorubicin 10 μM T2AA	2.54	2.23	3.75	4.59	0.91 nM	58.7	2.27 nM	54.2	
doxorubicin 30 μM T2AA	0.50	11.1	0.59	29.1	0.62 nM	86.9	1.17 nM	105	
doxorubicin 3 μM NLys-NPip-NBal	3.58	1.58	8.84	1.95	5.26 nM	10.1	6.15 nM	20.0	
doxorubicin 10 μM NLys-NPip-NBal	3.19	1.78	5.64	3.05	6.74 nM	7.91	8.94 nM	13.8	
doxorubicin 30 μM NLys-NPip-NBal	0.48	11.9	0.85	20.3	1.76 nM	30.4	6.02 nM	20.4	
doxorubicin 3 μM T2AA-NEal-NTyr	4.24	1.34	8.83	1.95	4.31 nM	12.3	3.69 nM	33.3	
doxorubicin 10 μM T2AA-NEal-NTyr	2.43	2.33	2.76	6.24	1.34 nM	39.7	3.07 nM	40.1	
doxorubicin 30 μM T2AA-XEal-NTyr	0.43	13.3	0.67	25.5	0 56 nM	95.6	1.20 nM	103	
The
synergy observed
for the PCNA inhibitors compelled testing of the selectivity for the
cell context. The drug-resistant tumor cells would be expected to
exhibit a dependence on DNA repair processes due to the stress induced
by mutational status that promotes a reduced cell cycle regulation.
To validate the selectivity of these effects to the tumor cells, the
same combinations of PCNA inhibitors and DNA-damage agents were tested
for synergy in growth inhibitory effects using the noncancer human
derived cell line, HEK293. This cell line is not highly sensitive
to either doxorubicin or cisplatin, similar to the cancer cell lines
evaluated in Figure 8. The data in Figures 9 and S19 demonstrate that the PCNA inhibitors
were not able to sensitize these cells to either of these DNA damaging
agents.

Figure 9 PCNA inhibitors’
effect on noncancer cell growth in combination with DNA-damage agents.
None of the PCNA antagonists tested showed the ability to enhance
either doxorubicin (top) or cisplatin (bottom) effects on cell growth
in HEK293 cells. These studies used the (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) (MTT) proliferation assay with the standard dosing described
for each DNA-damaging agent.

T2AA, T2AA-NEal-NTyr, and NLys-NPip-NBal were used in
combinations with cisplatin and doxorubicin. Cisplatin and doxorubicin
were used at concentrations following a 3-fold dilution series over
10-steps starting at 1 mM and 200 μM, respectively. The dosing
of these second agents were 3, 10, and 30 μM in the MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cell line and A549 lung cancer cell line. The GI50 and TGI were assessed after 3 d growth. The M/D ratio is
the ratio of the effect of the DNA-damage agent alone versus in combination
with the PCNA inhibitors. Italicized values were not significantly
different from the effects of the DNA-damaging agent alone.

Discussion
FBDD is a contemporary
method for small-molecule hit discovery and/or chemical probe development
due to its distinct advantages over traditional higher molecular-weight
chemical libraries.22 There are challenges
to optimize this approach to achieve the theoretical outcome of an
exponential increase in binding affinities for two independent fragments
when linked into one molecule. Protein–protein interfaces often
present noncontinuous subpockets, each distinct in the chemical environments
for fragment recognition. The linked multiple-fragment screens approach
for simultaneous binding in distinct subpockets in a protein target
offers an advancement to current methodologies. The efforts to use
this approach were motivated by our prior analysis of peptide–PCNA
interactions.17,23 This process for ligand discovery
benefited from significant structural information regarding the PCNA-ligand
interaction sites. Using distinct receptor conformations as starting
points offered a minimally biased avenue for finding the novel inhibitors.
By linking multiple fragments in a single peptoid backbone for in
silico screening, efficiency in selection of synthetic targets for
in vitro testing to discover inhibitors of PCNA–protein interactions
has been demonstrated. In addition to increasing the throughput of
iterative screens, multifragment-binding approaches can enhance second
and/or third fragment effects in environments where induced-fit or
conformational selection are operative.23 This can be true when searching for novel fragment pairs demonstrated
by the de novo discovery of NLys-NPip-NBal. Previous studies were
able to identify the small-molecule T2AA as an inhibitor in cellular
systems.18,19 This study has also been able to leverage
the insights from the T2AA–PCNA binding pocket to identify
second-fragment binding sites and prepare variants with suitable affinity
to disrupt the binding between PCNA and a PIPM-containing peptide.
In this case, the use of a more biased starting point with the T2AA–PCNA
complex provided a pathway to modify the known inhibitor and reveal
distinct high-affinity ligands including T2AA-NEal-NTyr.

The
screening approach used here has the potential to be applied to numerous
protein targets where an ideal ligand would need a high globularity
and cover a relatively large surface area. Improvements in the approach
could be achieved using additional in silico methods that can account
for the level of receptor structure data available to define spatial
orientations of subpockets. Certain limitations will persist with
any scaffold for protein interaction modulators including the peptoid
backbone; restrictions on molecular geometry, degrees of freedom,
and C-terminal functional groups are all critical factors to consider.
Interestingly, the classification analysis of peptoids that were experimental
hits predicted almost all of them to be iPPIs, whereas the majority
of nonhits were predicted to be non-iPPIs. It is possible that this
could be used in the future as an additional computational filter
based on whether a compound is predicted to be an iPPI, and this could
further narrow the list of compounds to be synthesized once favorable
side chains are identified.

The flexibility of PCNA is likely
involved in distinct biological roles of protein partner recognition.
The MD simulations performed in this work demonstrate that PCNA can
adopt very unique conformations depending on the partner ligand. Our
previous efforts demonstrated a range of affinities among a series
of PIPM-containing peptides, and MD simulations implicated the selection
of distinct PCNA conformations in the bound states.17 These observations are substantiated by the recent report
of results from more extensive MD simulations to evaluate the role
of structurally disordered regions of PCNA–protein complexes.
The studies reveal that a PCNA conformation-selection process by the
protein or peptide ligands is consistent with the results to explain
the diversity of PCNA–ligand interactions.59 Another potential source of selective binding effects could
be produced by PCNA binding at one site of the trimer that negatively
modulates protein binding at other sites. This property is reflected
in the variable occupancy in the trimer, as we observed previously
with peptides,17 and again here with several
of the tripeptoids. Also, in the extended MD simulations, there was
additional evidence for cooperativity that resulted in asymmetry of
the PCNA trimer.59 These properties are
examples of features not revealed by any of the available protein
crystal structures. Equally important are the observations from the
recent structure–function evaluations of the naturally occurring
PCNA point mutants associated with DNA repair dysfunction.60,61 These mutant proteins demonstrated remarkable selectivity in their
functional losses. For the hypomorphic PCNA mutation, Ser288Ile, which
occurs at the PIPM-binding site, selective partner protein binding
was also supported by the protein crystal structure analysis of the
mutant protein.62,63 A prediction of how structural
features of ligand–PCNA interactions influence the efficacy
of a small molecule targeting the PIPM binding site represents a continued
challenge for structure-based design tools. The chemical information
gained from the tripeptoid ligands, and subsequent study of the molecular
contacts will provide useful insights for next generation PCNA inhibitors.

The hypothesis that a protein or ligand engagement with the PIPM
binding site can impart a functionally selective impact on PCNA is
one of importance and novelty. Although continued studies of the cellular
mechanisms are warranted, the results of the cell-based assays support
the feasibility that enhanced sensitivity is dependent upon the type
of DNA damage. The results demonstrate, for the first time, a strong
synergy with the novel PCNA inhibitors in highly drug resistant cellular
contexts, whereas on their own, the PCNA inhibitors display no meaningful
effects. The DNA-damage agents, cisplatin and doxorubicin produce
damage that exhibits dependence upon separate repair pathways.64−71 PCNA’s role in
these processes are distinct and implicate the synergy to be associated
with double-strand break repair.5 This
type of synergy is distinct from that discussed in previous reports
for PIPM-targeted agents, T2AA20 and AOH116072 where cell lines already sensitive to DNA-damage
agents also showed sensitivity to PCNA inhibitors alone. In addition,
the differential synergy effects with cisplatin observed here with
the tripeptoids suggests a role for PCNA–ligand complexes that
impart distinct effects from T2AA alone. These synergies in resistant
tumor cell contexts implicate extended usage of combinations in new
disease contexts for existing therapies. As a result, the potential
for the approach to date argues for the value in the continued discovery
and development of a family of PCNA ligands that bind in the PIPM
recognition region.

Experimental Procedures
Reagents
and solvents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich unless
otherwise noted. Materials were repurified via recrystallization or
distillation as necessary before use. NMR experiments were performed
on Bruker (Bruker Corp., Billerica, MA) ARX300 (300 MHz), ARX400 (400
MHz), or DRX500 (500 MHz) instruments. Low resolution electrospray
ionization (ESI) and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI)
studies were carried out on an Agilent 6320 Ion Trap (Agilent Labs,
Santa Clara, CA) mass spectrometer. High-resolution mass measurements
were obtained on a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific
Corp.), utilizing ESI. Molecular masses and sequences of peptides
or peptoids were validated on an Applied Biosystems (Framingham, MA)
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF)/TOF
4800 mass analyzer or Applied Biosystems Voyager DE PRO mass spectrometer
using either 2,5-dihydroxy benzoic acid or α-cyano-4-hydroxy
cinnamic acid matrices. Thin-layer chromatography analyses were performed
on Merck aluminum-backed F254 silica gel plates. Protein and peptide
concentrations were determined by UV absorbance at 280 nm. Fluorescent
peptide concentrations were determined by absorbance at 494 nm. Stock
solutions of each polypeptoid were made by measuring the dry mass
of each in predried, preweighed screw-cap vials and adding the volume
of DMSO necessary to give 10 mM solutions. Stock solutions of compounds
containing N-terminal 5-carboxyfluorescein were made by measuring
the absorbance at 494 nm, using an extinction coefficient of 79 000
L mol–1 cm–1 and Beer’s
law (A = εbc) to calculate
concentration. Data analyses and graphical representations were performed
in Microsoft Excel, GraphPad Prism 6, or OriginPro 2015.

General Method
for Synthesis of Peptoid Trimers
Trimeric peptoids were synthesized
using an adapted procedure for
submonomer peptoid synthesis.44 In summary,
0.05 mmol of Rink amide AM or MBHA resin (loading: 0.65 or 0.71 mmol/g,
respectively) was transferred to a 25 mL glass fritted peptide reaction
vessel and was swelled with dimethylformamide (DMF) for 30 minutes.
The resin was then deprotected using two 2.5 mL portions of 20% piperidine
in DMF with incubation times of 15 min for each addition at room temperature.
A solution of 1.5 mL of 1 M bromoacetic acid (30 equiv) in DMF and
230 μL (29.4 equiv) of N,N′-diisopropylcarbodiimide was added, and the resin was placed
on an orbital shaker for 1 h at 37 °C. At that time, the resin
was washed with DMF (6×) and DCM (3×), and a solution of
1 M respective primary amine (2 M for commercially available primary
amines) in DMF was added, with incubation on an orbital shaker for
2 h at 37 °C. These steps were repeated with washing steps in
between to produce the desired peptoid sequence. For the coupling
of T2AA, peptoids were first synthesized up to the final bromoacetic
acid addition. A solution of 500 mg (19.5 equiv) of T2AA and 34 μL
(39 equiv) of DIEA in 2.5 mL of DMF was added, and the resin was incubated
overnight at room temperature on an orbital shaker. Peptoids were
cleaved from resin using a solution of TFA/TIS/water (95:2.5:2.5),
incubating the resin at room temperature for either 1 or 3 h in the
case of peptoids containing NArg, Neal, or NBal side chains. TFA was
removed with a steady stream of blowing air, and the remaining residue
was dissolved in ACN/H2O (50:50) with 0.1% TFA, frozen
and lyophilized. The peptoids were purified via high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) (Beckman Coulter System Gold 166 or 168) using
an increasing gradient of ACN/H2O with 0.1% TFA (5:95)
to (100:0) over 30 min on an Agilent ZORBAX SB-C18 reverse-phase semi-preparative
column. Molecular masses were validated via low resolution ESI or
APCI experiments, and exact masses were obtained by high resolution
ESI or MALDI-TOF.

FP Z′-Factor Analysis
FAM-PL (10 μL, 20 nM) in
FP binding buffer [25 mM N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) at pH 7.4, 10% glycerol,
0.01% Triton X-100] was combined with either 10 μL of 200 nM
recombinant (His)6-PCNA protein in binding buffer or 10
μL of binding buffer in each of 48 wells on a ProxiPlate-384
F Plus low volume, black, opaque plate (24 replicates per set). The
plate was allowed to incubate at room temperature in the dark for
30 min prior to fluorescent measurement. FP and resultant anisotropy
were measured on a BioTek Synergy 4 multi-detection microplate reader
(BioTek Instruments Inc., Winooski, VT) using an excitation filter
of 485 nm and an emission filter of 530 nm, each with a 20 nm band-pass.
The average of each control set was calculated along with the standard
deviation. The Z′-factor was calculated using eq 1 1  where σ+ is the
standard deviation of the positive control (FAM–PL
peptide in the presence of PCNA protein), σ– is the standard deviation of the negative control (FAM–PL
peptide in the absence of PCNA protein), and μ+ and
μ– are the mean anisotropy values of the positive
and negative controls, respectively.

FP Binding Assay
Increasing amounts of recombinant (His)6-PCNA protein
were prepared in the FP binding buffer (25 mM
HEPES at pH 7.4, 10% glycerol, 0.01% Triton X-100), with an 11-step
2-fold dilution series, and a top concentration of 30 μM. Each
solution (10 μL) was combined with 10 μL of 20 nM FAM-PL
peptide formulated in the FP binding buffer in a single well of a
ProxiPlate-384 F Plus low volume, black, opaque plate (PerkinElmer).
Each concentration of protein was plated in a replicate of four, and
the plate was allowed to incubate at room temperature in the dark
for 30 min prior to fluorescent measurement. FP and resultant anisotropy
were measured on a BioTek Synergy 4 multi-detection microplate reader
using an excitation filter of 485 nm and an emission filter of 530
nm, each with a 20 nm band-pass. The parallel and perpendicular intensity
values for each sample (n = 4) were used to calculate
FO of the FAM–PL peptide bound to monomeric PCNA using eq 2. 2  where ,, , and fb is the fraction of FAM–PL bound to
PCNA, r is the observed anisotropy value, rf is the anisotropy of free unbound FAM–PL
peptide, rb is the anisotropy of FAM–PL
peptide saturated with PCNA protein, Q is the ratio
of quantum yield of bound (qb) to free
(qf) FAM–PL peptide, ∥f and ∥b are the parallel intensities of
free unbound and saturated FAM–PL peptides, respectively, and
⊥f and ⊥b are the perpendicular
intensities of free unbound and saturated FAM–PL peptides,
respectively.

FO values were analyzed using nonlinear regression
statistics in OriginPro 2015, representing them as the mean ±
standard error of the mean (Y) and plotting them
as a function of the monomeric PCNA protein concentration (X). From this, eq 3 was used to obtain a dissociation constant (Kd) for FAM–PL. 3  where n is the Hill slope.

FP Competition
Assay
Solutions of
the competitive ligand were formulated from DMSO stocks (10 mM for
tripeptoids, 20 mM for T2AA) into FP binding buffer (25 mM HEPES at
pH 7.4, 10% glycerol, 0.01% Triton X-100) at appropriate 2× (relative
to the desired effective screening concentration) concentrations.
Each competitive ligand (10 μL) was combined with 5 μL
of 4 μM recombinant (His)6-PCNA protein in binding
buffer and 5 μL of 40 nM FAM–PL in binding buffer into
each well of a ProxiPlate-384 F Plus low volume, black, opaque plate,
in replicates of four. DMSO at an equivalent concentration in binding
buffer to the concentration of DMSO in the competitive ligand sample
was used as a negative control; T2AA at 1 mM was used as a positive
control. The plate was allowed to incubate at room temperature in
the dark for 30 min prior to fluorescent measurement. FP and resultant
anisotropy were measured on a BioTek Synergy 4 multi-detection microplate
reader using an excitation filter of 485 nm and an emission filter
of 530 nm, each with a 20 nm band-pass. Anisotropy values were converted
to FO using eq 2, and
IC50 values were calculated by fitting the data to eq 4. 4  where n is the Hill slope.

Inhibition constants (Ki) for the competitive ligands were determined
using eq 5, which is
a modified form of the Cheng–Prusoff equation, previously reported
for FP assays.73 5  where [I]50 is the concentration of each competitive peptoid at 50%
inhibition, [L]50 is the concentration of the FITC-PL peptide
at 50% inhibition, [P]0 is the concentration of monomeric
PCNA protein at 0% inhibition, and Kd is
the dissociation constant obtained from eq 3.

Molecular
Dynamics Simulations
In preparation for MDs simulations,
selected hit peptoids were flexibly docked into the PIPM binding site
of the cocrystal structure of PCNA–Pogo Ligase (PL) peptide
(PDB ID: 1VYJ), with the peptide itself removed, using the Schrödinger
Glide’s induced-fit docking model. The PCNA crystal structure
was prepared using the Protein Preparation Wizard in Maestro, with
PCNA minimized in complex with the PL peptide using the OPLS-2005
force field and implicit solvation. PCNA–peptoid complexes
were then explicitly solvated in Schrödinger’s Desmond74 using the TI3P water model in the presence of
0.15 M sodium chloride buffer to generate orthorhombic water boxes
that contained a 10 Å buffer region. Each system was then minimized
with the OPLS-2005 force field.

The MDs simulations were performed
in the same way as described in Pedley, et al.,17 using Desmond and the OPLS-2005 force field. In summary,
long-range electrostatic interactions were determined using a smooth
particle mesh Ewald method with a grid spacing of 0.8 Å. For
nonbonded van der Waals interactions, a cut off of 9.0 Å was
set. All simulations were performed for 5.0 ns, except in cases where
simulations did not fully converge after 5.0 ns (simulations were
extended by 2.5 ns in those situations), using the Desmond NPT ensemble with a six-step slow relaxation protocol prior
to the MDs run: (i) 2000 step limited-memory Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno
(L-BFGS) minimization with a loose convergence restraint of 50 kcal/mol/Å;
(ii) 2000 step L-BFGS minimization with a convergence constraint of
5 kcal/mol/Å; (iii) a 12 ps Berendsen NVT simulation
at a temperature of 10 K with restraints on solute heavy atoms; (iv)
a 12 ps Berendsen NPT ensemble at a temperature of
10 K and pressure at 1.01325 bar with restraints on solute heavy atoms;
(v) a 24 ps Berendsen NPT ensemble at a temperature of 300 K and a
pressure at 1.01325 bar with restraints on solute heavy atoms; (vi)
a 24 ps Berendsen NPT ensemble at a temperature of
300 K and a pressure at 1.01325 bar with restraints on residues beyond
15 Å of the restrained ligand. The 5.0 ns MDs simulation run
was performed using the NPT ensemble. Temperature of the simulation
was kept at 300 K using a Nosé–Hoover thermostat. Pressure
was maintained at 1.01325 bar using the Martyna–Tobias–Klein
method. Energy and trajectory data were recorded at every 1.2 and
5.0 ps, respectively.

Upon completion of each simulation, PCNA
trajectory data were processed in VMD75 after removal of each peptoid ligand. For each trajectory, the protein
backbone Cα atoms were aligned to the first frame of the simulation
to generate rmsd and Cα fluctuations (RMSF) values. Simulations
were determined to be converged once rmsd values had stabilized (slope
of the rmsd curve leveled off horizontally over the period of the
final 0.5–1.0 ns). In preparation for PCA, trajectories for
each PCNA–peptoid system were overlaid using the alignment
tools in VMD. Additionally, trajectories previously generated from
Pedley, et al.,17 including the systems
where PCNA is in complex with the polymerase δ, PL, p85α,
p21, Apo, Akt, or Abl peptides, were overlaid with the PCNA–peptoid
trajectories for purposes of comparative analysis. PCA were performed
using the Bio3D package76 in R to analyze
the conformational differences between the aligned trajectories over
the period of the final 0.5 ns for each simulation (100 snapshots
per PCNA–ligand system). The first two orthogonal eigenvectors
(principal components—PC1 and PC2) were plotted. Average trajectory
coordinates for the final 50 frames of each simulation were performed
in VMD to generate average overall conformations of PCNA in complex
with each peptoid.

Bayesian Classifier
Method
The Bayesian classifier method was generated using
the 2P2I Hunter database containing a total of 1058 compounds, 40
of which are iPPIs (actives) and 1018 are non-iPPIs (decoys).48,53,54 All compounds in that set were
converted from 2D to 3D and minimized using the Accelrys Discovery
Studio 4.1 Visualizer (Accelrys, San Diego, CA).77 The tripeptoid ligands consisting the test set were prepared
using LigPrep in the Maestro Schrödinger software suite.41 Four descriptors (Glob, EDmin3, IW4, and CW2)
were calculated for each compound according to the method developed
by Kuenemann, et al.49 A Laplacian-corrected
Bayesian classifier model was generated using the Discovery Studio
visualizer.

MTT Proliferation Assay
MDA-MB-231
and A549 cell proliferation was measured using the MTT
cell proliferation reagent. Cells were grown in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (phenol-red free) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37
°C with 5% CO2. Cells were then plated on flat bottom
96-well plates at a density of 5 × 103 cells per 80
μL per well. Cells were attached for 4 h and then treated with
20 μL of each compound for 72 h. For each experiment involving
doxorubicin, we used 200 μM and then performed a 9-step dilution
series using a factor of 3 to produce 10 concentrations. For each
experiment involving cisplatin, a 1 mM stock was diluted in a 9-step
series using a factor of 3 to produce 10 concentrations. Ten microliters
of MTT (5 mg/mL in DMEM phenol-red free media) were added to each
well at a final concentration of (0.5 mg/mL). After 4 h incubation
at 37 °C, 50 μL of the solubilization solution [10% Triton-X
100, acidic isopropanol (0.1 N HCl)] was added and the plates were
sealed and stored from light for 3 d. Absorbance was read at 570 nm,
and the percent cell growth was normalized by comparison to a day
zero control plate with no drug for each respective cell line. The
day zero plate standardized 0 and 100% cell viability, with columns
plated in triplicates with either 100 μL of DMEM alone or 5
× 103 cells in 100 μL of DMEM. No inhibitors
were added; instead, 10 μL of MTT reagent was added to each
well after which cells were allowed to attach. After 4 h, 50 μL
of solubilization solution was added to the plate, before sealing
and storage in the dark for 3 d. Data were then analyzed in Prism
to calculate TGI and GI50. Synergy effects were validated utilizing
the Choy–Talalay method.78

Clonogenic
Assay
MDA-MB-231 and A549
long-term survival was studied using a clonogenic assay. Cells were
grown in DMEM (phenol-red free) supplemented with 10% FBS at 37 °C
with 5% CO2. They were then plated on flat bottom 6-well
plates at a density of 1 × 103 cells with 1 mL per
well. Cells were allowed to attach for 4 h before treatment with 5
concentrations of each DNA-damaging agent and incubation for 24 h.
For drug combination studies, cells were also exposed to a single
constant dosage of 3, 10, or 30 μM PCNA inhibitor. Cells were
then washed with PBS and incubated in 1 mL DMEM with 10% FBS at 37
°C under 5% CO2. When visible colonies could be identified
(typically 6–7 d), the cells were fixed in formaldehyde and
stained with DAPI solution for counting using a Cytation 3. The results
were normalized by comparison with the counts obtained using control
cells incubated in drug-free medium.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of
charge on the ACS Publications
website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02079.Glide docking-based
frequency with which fragments appeared in the three substitution
positions on a tripeptoid backbone containing T2AA as a fragment;
FP Z′-factor analysis; enhancement of the
FP dynamic range with increasing concentrations of PCNA; FP PCNA titration
for determining the affinity of FAM–PL; FP dose response curves
of individual peptoid fragments, used as a control; structures of
the peptoid-based compounds containing T2AA as a fragment; MDs simulation
outputs for PCNA with T2AA, NLys-NPip-NBal, and T2AA-Neal-NPip; MDs
simulation Cα atom rmsd fluctuation by PCNA residue number;
MDs simulation interaction diagrams showing the molecular contacts
between PCNA amino acid residues and each respective ligand; NLys-NPip-NBal
overlaid on the predicted electrostatic potential map of PCNA; specific
contacts between the inhibitor and PCNA amino acid residues; enrichment
plot for Bayesian model prediction of the 2P2I Hunter compound set;
dose response curves for each of the compounds listed in Table 1; list of each peptoid-based
ligand that was synthesized for this study; descriptor statistics
from the Bayesian classification method; and experimental procedures
(PDF)

HPLC
purity traces of 20 randomly selected tripeptoids in addition to DMSO
and water controls (ZIP)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02079_si_001.pdf

 ao9b02079_si_002.zip

 Author Contributions
M.D.B. designed and carried out the synthesis, purification, and
characterization of protected primary amines, T2AA and FAM–PL.
M.D.B. designed the tripeptoid library and assisted A.J.H. and R.J.O.
with tripeptoid synthesis, purification, and characterization. M.D.B.
performed all virtual docking, MDs simulations, and PCA, in addition
to designing and performing all FP experiments with subsequent data
analysis. A.M.C. expressed and purified His-tagged PCNA, and assisted
M.D.B. with FP experimentation. A.H.M. carried out the Bayesian classifier
analysis. M.D.B. and V.J.D. were involved in the overall design of
the study and data analysis, and co-authored the manuscript and Supporting Information with input from M.A.L.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Notes
All work for this study, including that
of each of the authors, was conducted in the Department of Medicinal
Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy at Purdue
University; 575 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, Indiana, 47907,
United States of America.

Acknowledgments
Support for this work is recognized for a Purdue Research
Foundation assistantship (M.D.B.), Bilsland Dissertation Fellowship
(M.D.B.), the Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program in
Breast Cancer for Award W81XWH-10-0105 (V.J.D.) and the Purdue Center
for Cancer Research, NIH grant P30 CA023168 and a Challenge Award.
We would like to thank Anthony M. Pedley for his input on PCNA expression/purification
and the PCA. We also wish to thank Kyle E. Harvey and Stephanie J.
Grebinoski for their assistance in the synthesis of protected primary
amines and T2AA.

Abbreviations
DDRDNA damage
response

FAM5-carboxyfluorescein

FBDDfragment-based
drug design

FPfluorescence
polarization

iPPIprotein–protein interaction
inhibitor

MDmolecular
dynamics [simulation]

PCNAproliferating cell nuclear antigen

PIPPCNA interacting protein (sequence
motif)

PLPOGO ligase
(peptide)

PPIprotein–protein
interaction
==== Refs
References
Kelman Z. ; O’Donnell M. 
Structural
and Functional Similarities of Prokaryotic
and Eukaryotic DNA Polymerase Sliding Clamps . Nucleic Acids Res. 
1995 , 23 , 3613 –3620 . 10.1093/nar/23.18.3613 .7478986 
Maga G. ; Hübscher U. 
Proliferating
Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA): A Dancer with Many Partners . J. Cell Sci. 
2003 , 116 , 3051 –3060 . 10.1242/jcs.00653 .12829735 
Moldovan G.-L. ; Pfander B. ; Jentsch S. 
PCNA, the
Maestro of the Replication Fork . Cell 
2007 , 129 , 665 –679 . 10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.003 .17512402 
Stoimenov I. ; Helleday T. 
PCNA on the Crossroad
of Cancer . Biochem. Soc. Trans. 
2009 , 37 , 605 –613 . 10.1042/bst0370605 .19442257 
Slade D. ; Slade D. 
Maneuvers on PCNA Rings
during DNA Replication and Repair . Genes 
2018 , 9 , 416 10.3390/genes9080416 .
Chatr-aryamontri A. ; Breitkreutz B.-J. ; Oughtred R. ; Boucher L. ; Heinicke S. ; Chen D. ; Stark C. ; Breitkreutz A. ; Kolas N. ; O’Donnell L. ; et al. The BioGRID Interaction
Database: 2015 Update . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2015 , 43 , D470 –D478 . 10.1093/nar/gku1204 .25428363 
Hishiki A. ; Hashimoto H. ; Hanafusa T. ; Kamei K. ; Ohashi E. ; Shimizu T. ; Ohmori H. ; Sato M. 
Structural
Basis for
Novel Interactions between Human Translesion Synthesis Polymerases
and Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2009 , 284 , 10552 –10560 . 10.1074/jbc.m809745200 .19208623 
Gulbis J. M. ; Kelman Z. ; Hurwitz J. ; O’Donnell M. ; Kuriyan J. 
Structure of the C-Terminal Region
of P21WAF1/CIP1 Complexed with Human PCNA . Cell 
1996 , 87 , 297 –306 . 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81347-1 .8861913 
Sakurai S. ; Kitano K. ; Yamaguchi H. ; Hamada K. ; Okada K. ; Fukuda K. ; Uchida M. ; Ohtsuka E. ; Morioka H. ; Hakoshima T. 
Structural
Basis for Recruitment of Human Flap Endonuclease 1 to PCNA . EMBO J. 
2005 , 24 , 683 –693 . 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600519 .15616578 
Warbrick E. 
PCNA Binding through a Conserved
Motif . BioEssays 
1998 , 20 , 195 –199 . 10.1002/(sici)1521-1878(199803)20:3<195::aid-bies2>3.0.co;2-r .9631646 
Bruning J. B. ; Shamoo Y. 
Structural and Thermodynamic
Analysis of Human PCNA with Peptides Derived from DNA Polymerase-Delta
P66 Subunit and Flap Endonuclease-1 . Structure 
2004 , 12 , 2209 –2219 . 10.1016/j.str.2004.09.018 .15576034 
Boehm E. M. ; Washington M. T. 
R.I.P.
to the PIP: PCNA-binding motif
no longer considered specific . BioEssays 
2016 , 38 , 1117 –1122 . 10.1002/bies.201600116 .27539869 
He X. ; Wei C. ; Song T. ; Yuan J. ; Zhang Y. ; Ma Q. ; Shi W. ; Zhong H. 
Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen
Destabilizes C-Abl
Tyrosine Kinase and Regulates Cell Apoptosis in Response to DNA Damage . Apoptosis 
2009 , 14 , 268 –275 . 10.1007/s10495-009-0313-2 .19156526 
Lehmann A. R. ; Fuchs R. P. 
Gaps and Forks in
DNA Replication: Rediscovering Old Models . DNA
Repair 
2006 , 5 , 1495 –1498 . 10.1016/j.dnarep.2006.07.002 .16956796 
Hoege C. ; Pfander B. ; Moldovan G.-L. ; Pyrowolakis G. ; Jentsch S. 
RAD6-Dependent DNA Repair Is Linked
to Modification of PCNA by Ubiquitin and SUMO . Nature 
2002 , 419 , 135 –141 . 10.1038/nature00991 .12226657 
Mao Z. ; Jiang Y. ; Liu X. ; Seluanov A. ; Gorbunova V. 
DNA Repair by Homologous Recombination,
But Not by Nonhomologous End Joining, Is Elevated in Breast Cancer
Cells . Neoplasia 
2009 , 11 , 683 –IN3 . 10.1593/neo.09312 .19568413 
Pedley A.
M. ; Lill M. A. ; Davisson V. J. 
Flexibility of PCNA-Protein Interface Accommodates
Differential Binding Partners . PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e10248110.1371/journal.pone.0102481 .25036435 
Punchihewa C. ; Inoue A. ; Hishiki A. ; Fujikawa Y. ; Connelly M. ; Evison B. ; Shao Y. ; Heath R. ; Kuraoka I. ; Rodrigues P. ; et al. Identification of a Small Molecule PCNA Inhibitor
That Disrupts Interactions with PIP-Box Proteins and Inhibits DNA
Replication . J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 14289 10.1074/jbc.m112.353201 .22383522 
Actis M. ; Inoue A. ; Evison B. ; Perry S. ; Punchihewa C. ; Fujii N. 
Small Molecule Inhibitors
of PCNA/PIP-Box Interaction Suppress Translesion DNA Synthesis . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 21 , 1972 10.1016/j.bmc.2013.01.022 .23395113 
Inoue A. ; Kikuchi S. ; Hishiki A. ; Shao Y. ; Heath R. ; Evison B. J. ; Actis M. ; Canman C. E. ; Hashimoto H. ; Fujii N. 
A Small Molecule Inhibitor
of Monoubiquitinated
Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen(PCNA) Inhibits Repair of Interstrand
DNA Cross-link, Enhances DNA Double Strand Break, and Sensitizes Cancer
Cells to Cisplatin . J. Biol. Chem. 
2014 , 289 , 7109 –7120 . 10.1074/jbc.m113.520429 .24474685 
Erlanson D. A.  Introduction
to fragment-based drug discovery . Topics in
Current Chemistry ; Springer , 2012 ; Vol. 317 , pp 1 –32 .21695633 
Erlanson D.
A. ; McDowell R. S. ; O’Brien T. 
Fragment-Based Drug Discovery . J. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 3463 –3482 . 10.1021/jm040031v .15214773 
Bartolowits M. ; Davisson V. J. 
Considerations of
Protein Subpockets in Fragment-Based Drug Design . Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 
2015 , 87 , 5 10.1111/cbdd.12631 .26307335 
Wielens J. ; Headey S. J. ; Rhodes D. I. ; Mulder R. J. ; Dolezal O. ; Deadman J. J. ; Newman J. ; Chalmers D. K. ; Parker M. W. ; Peat T. S. ; et al. Parallel
Screening of Low Molecular Weight Fragment
Libraries . J. Biomol. Screen 
2013 , 18 , 147 –159 . 10.1177/1087057112465979 .23139382 
Wells J. A. ; McClendon C. L. 
Reaching for high-hanging fruit in
drug discovery at
protein-protein interfaces . Nature 
2007 , 450 , 1001 –1009 . 10.1038/nature06526 .18075579 
Jubb H. ; Blundell T. L. ; Ascher D. B. 
Flexibility and
small pockets at
protein-protein interfaces: New insights into druggability . Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 119 , 2 –9 . 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2015.01.009 .25662442 
Zuckermann R. N. ; Martin E. J. ; Spellmeyer D. C. ; Stauber G. B. ; Shoemaker K. R. ; Kerr J. M. ; Figliozzi G. M. ; Goff D. A. ; Siani M. A. ; Simon R. J. ; Banville S. C. ; Brown E. G. ; Wang L. ; Richter L. S. ; Moos W. H. 
Discovery
of Nanomolar Ligands for
7-Transmembrane G-Protein-Coupled Receptors from a Diverse N-(Substituted)Glycine
Peptoid Library . J. Med. Chem. 
1994 , 37 , 2678 –2685 . 10.1021/jm00043a007 .8064796 
Ng S. ; Goodson B. ; Ehrhardt A. ; Moos W. H. ; Siani M. ; Winter J. 
Combinatorial Discovery Process Yields Antimicrobial
Peptoids . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
1999 , 7 , 1781 –1785 . 10.1016/s0968-0896(99)00132-7 .10530925 
Thompson D. A. ; Chai B.-X. ; Rood H. L. E. ; Siani M. A. ; Douglas N. R. ; Gantz I. ; Millhauser G. L. 
Peptoid
Mimics of Agouti Related
Protein . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2003 , 13 , 1409 –1413 . 10.1016/s0960-894x(03)00164-1 .12668001 
Garcia-Martinez C. ; Humet M. ; Planells-Cases R. ; Gomis A. ; Caprini M. ; Viana F. ; De la Pena E. ; Sanchez-Baeza F. ; Carbonell T. ; De Felipe C. ; et al. Attenuation of Thermal Nociception and Hyperalgesia by VR1 Blockers . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2002 , 99 , 2374 –2379 . 10.1073/pnas.022285899 .11854530 
Vendrell-Navarro G. ; Rúa F. ; Bujons J. ; Brockmeyer A. ; Janning P. ; Ziegler S. ; Messeguer A. ; Waldmann H. 
Positional Scanning Synthesis of a Peptoid Library
Yields New Inducers of Apoptosis that Target Karyopherins and Tubulin . ChemBioChem 
2015 , 16 , 1580 –1587 . 10.1002/cbic.201500169 .26010161 
Kleschick W. A. ; Davis N. L. ; Dick M. R. ; Garlich J. R. ; Martin E. J. ; Orr N. ; Ng S. C. ; Pernich D. J. ; Unger S. H. ; Watson G. B.  ; The Application of Combinatorial Chemistry in Agrochemical
Discovery . Agrochemical Discovery ; ACS Symposium Series ; American
Chemical Society , 2000 ; Vol. 774 , pp 205 –213 .
Heizmann G. ; Hildebrand P. ; Tanner H. ; Ketterer S. ; Pansky A. ; Froidevaux S. ; Beglinger C. ; Eberle A. N. 
A Combinatorial Peptoid Library for the Identification
of Novel MSH and GRP / Bombesin Receptor Ligands . J. Recept. Signal Transduct. Res. 
1999 , 19 , 449 –466 . 10.3109/10799899909036664 .10071777 
Qi X. ; Astle J. ; Kodadek T. 
Rapid Identification of Orexin Receptor
Binding Ligands
Using Cell-Based Screening Accelerated with Magnetic Beads . Mol. Biosyst. 
2010 , 6 , 102 –107 . 10.1039/b915611a .20024071 
Lee J. ; Reddy M. M. ; Kodadek T. 
Discovery
Of An Orexin Receptor Positive Potentiator . Chem. Sci. 
2010 , 1 , 48 10.1039/c0sc00197j .
Zhao Y. ; Aguilar A. ; Bernard D. ; Wang S. 
Small-Molecule Inhibitors
of the MDM2-p53 Protein-Protein Interaction (MDM2 Inhibitors) in Clinical
Trials for Cancer Treatment . J. Med. Chem. 
2015 , 58 , 1038 –1052 . 10.1021/jm501092z .25396320 
Miller S. M. ; Simon R. J. ; Ng S. ; Zuckermann R. N. ; Kerr J. M. ; Moos W. H. 
Proteolytic Studies of Homologous
Peptide and N-Substituted Glycine Peptoid Oligomers . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
1994 , 4 , 2657 –2662 . 10.1016/s0960-894x(01)80691-0 .
Sanborn T. J. ; Wu C. W. ; Zuckermann R. N. ; Barron A. E. 
Extreme stability
of helices formed by water-soluble poly-N-substituted glycines (polypeptoids)
with ?-chiral side chains . Biopolymers 
2002 , 63 , 12 –20 . 10.1002/bip.1058 .11754344 
Kwon Y.-U. ; Kodadek T. 
Quantitative Evaluation of the Relative Cell Permeability
of Peptoids and Peptides . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 1508 –1509 . 10.1021/ja0668623 .17283989 
Wender P. A. ; Mitchell D. J. ; Pattabiraman K. ; Pelkey E. T. ; Steinman L. ; Rothbard J. B. 
The Design, Synthesis, and Evaluation of Molecules
That Enable or Enhance Cellular Uptake: Peptoid Molecular Transporters . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2000 , 97 , 13003 –13008 . 10.1073/pnas.97.24.13003 .11087855 
Schrödinger
Release 2013-2: Maestro , version 9.5; Schrödinger,
LLC : New York, NY , 2013 .
Small-Molecule
Drug Discovery Suite 2013-3: Schrödinger Suite 2013-3 Induced
Fit Docking Protocol ; Glide Version 6.1, Schrödinger,
LLC, New York, NY, 2013; Prime , version 3.4; Schrödinger, LLC : New York,
NY , 2013 .
Small-Molecule
Drug Discovery Suite 2013-2: Glide , version 6.0; Schrödinger, LLC : New York,
NY , 2013 .
Zuckermann R. N. ; Kerr J. M. ; Kent S. B. H. ; Moos W. H. 
Efficient Method
for the Preparation of Peptoids [Oligo(N-Substituted Glycines)] by
Submonomer Solid-Phase Synthesis . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
1992 , 114 , 10646 –10647 . 10.1021/ja00052a076 .
Kontopidis G. ; Wu S.-Y. ; Zheleva D. I. ; Taylor P. ; McInnes C. ; Lane D. P. ; Fischer P. M. ; Walkinshaw M. D. 
Structural and Biochemical Studies of Human Proliferating
Cell Nuclear Antigen Complexes Provide a Rationale for Cyclin Association
and Inhibitor Design . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
2005 , 102 , 1871 –1876 . 10.1073/pnas.0406540102 .15681588 
Zhang J.-H. ; Chung T. D. Y. ; Oldenburg K. R. 
A Simple
Statistical Parameter for Use in Evaluation and Validation of High
Throughput Screening Assays . J. Biomol. Screen 
1999 , 4 , 67 –73 . 10.1177/108705719900400206 .10838414 
Sperandio O. ; Reynès C. H. ; Camproux A.-C. ; Villoutreix B. O. 
Rationalizing
the chemical space of protein-protein interaction inhibitors . Drug Discov. Today 
2010 , 15 , 220 –229 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2009.11.007 .19969101 
Morelli X. ; Bourgeas R. ; Roche P. 
Chemical and
structural lessons from
recent successes in protein-protein interaction inhibition (2P2I) . Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
2011 , 15 , 475 –481 . 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.05.024 .21684802 
Kuenemann M. A. ; Bourbon L. M. L. ; Labbé C. M. ; Villoutreix B. O. ; Sperandio O. 
Which Three-Dimensional Characteristics
Make Efficient Inhibitors of Protein-Protein Interactions? . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2014 , 54 , 3067 –3079 . 10.1021/ci500487q .25285479 
Meireles L.
M. C. ; Domling A. S. ; Camacho C. J. 
ANCHOR:
a web server and database for analysis of protein-protein interaction
binding pockets for drug discovery . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2010 , 38 , W407 –W411 . 10.1093/nar/gkq502 .20525787 
Vendrell-Navarro G. ; Rúa F. ; Bujons J. ; Brockmeyer A. ; Janning P. ; Ziegler S. ; Messeguer A. ; Waldmann H. 
Positional Scanning Synthesis of
a Peptoid Library
Yields New Inducers of Apoptosis that Target Karyopherins and Tubulin . ChemBioChem 
2015 , 16 , 1580 –1587 . 10.1002/cbic.201500169 .26010161 
Scheper J. ; Guerra-Rebollo M. ; Sanclimens G. ; Moure A. ; Masip I. ; González-Ruiz D. ; Rubio N. ; Crosas B. ; Meca-Cortés Ó. ; Loukili N. ; et al. Protein-Protein Interaction Antagonists
as Novel Inhibitors of Non-Canonical Polyubiquitylation . PLoS One 
2010 , 5 , e1140310.1371/journal.pone.0011403 .20613989 
Bourgeas R. ; Basse M.-J. ; Morelli X. ; Roche P. 
Atomic Analysis of Protein-Protein Interfaces with Known Inhibitors:
The 2P2I Database . PLoS One 
2010 , 5 , e959810.1371/journal.pone.0009598 .20231898 
Hamon V. ; Bourgeas R. ; Ducrot P. ; Theret I. ; Xuereb L. ; Basse M. J. ; Brunel J. M. ; Combes S. ; Morelli X. ; Roche P. 
2P2I HUNTER : a tool for filtering
orthosteric protein-protein interaction
modulators via a dedicated support vector machine . J. R. Soc. Interface 
2014 , 11 , 20130860 10.1098/rsif.2013.0860 .24196694 
Kuenemann M. A. ; Bourbon L. M. L. ; Labbé C. M. ; Villoutreix B. O. ; Sperandio O. 
Which Three-Dimensional Characteristics
Make Efficient Inhibitors of Protein–Protein Interactions? . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2014 , 54 , 3067 10.1021/ci500487q .25285479 
Kuenemann M. A. ; Sperandio O. ; Labbé C. M. ; Lagorce D. ; Miteva M. A. ; Villoutreix B. O. 
In Silico
Design of Low Molecular Weight Protein–Protein
Interaction Inhibitors: Overall Concept and Recent Advances . Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 119 , 20 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2015.02.006 .25748546 
Cruciani G. ; Pastor M. ; Guba W. 
VolSurf: A
New Tool for the Pharmacokinetic Optimization of Lead Compounds . Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2000 , 11 , S29 –S39 . 10.1016/s0928-0987(00)00162-7 .11033425 
Basu A. ; Krishnamurthy S. 
Cellular Responses
to Cisplatin-Induced DNA Damage . J. Nucleic
Acids 
2010 , 2010 , 201367 10.4061/2010/201367 .20811617 
Li H. ; Sandhu M. ; Malkas L. H. ; Hickey R. J. ; Vaidehi N. 
How Does the
Proliferating
Cell Nuclear Antigen Modulate Binding Specificity to Multiple Partner
Proteins? . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2017 , 57 , 3011 –3021 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00171 .29095607 
Green C. M. ; Baple E. L. ; Crosby A. H. 
PCNA Mutation Affects
DNA Repair Not Replication . Cell Cycle 
2014 , 13 , 3157 –3158 . 10.4161/15384101.2014.969994 .25485490 
Dieckman L. M. ; Boehm E. M. ; Hingorani M. M. ; Washington M. T. 
Distinct Structural Alterations in PCNA Block DNA Mismatch
Repair . Biochemistry 
2013 , 52 , 5611 10.1021/bi400378e .23869605 
Baple E. L. ; Chambers H. ; Cross H. E. ; Fawcett H. ; Nakazawa Y. ; Chioza B. A. ; Harlalka G. V. ; Mansour S. ; Sreekantan-Nair A. ; Patton M. A. ; et al. Hypomorphic
PCNA Mutation Underlies a Human DNA Repair Disorder . J. Clin. Invest. 
2014 , 124 , 3137 –3146 . 10.1172/jci74593 .24911150 
Duffy C. M. ; Hilbert B. J. ; Kelch B. A. 
A Disease-Causing
Variant in PCNA Disrupts a Promiscuous Protein Binding Site . J. Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 428 , 1023 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.11.029 .26688547 
Köberle B. ; Masters J. R. W. ; Hartley J. A. ; Wood R. D. 
Defective
Repair of Cisplatin-Induced DNA Damage Caused by Reduced XPA Protein
in Testicular Germ Cell Tumours . Curr. Biol. 
1999 , 9 , 273 –278 . 10.1016/s0960-9822(99)80118-3 .10074455 
Tewey K. ; Rowe T. ; Yang L. ; Halligan B. ; Liu L. 
Adriamycin-Induced DNA Damage Mediated
by Mammalian DNA Topoisomerase
II . Science 
1984 , 226 , 466 –468 . 10.1126/science.6093249 .6093249 
Wang S. ; Konorev E. A. ; Kotamraju S. ; Joseph J. ; Kalivendi S. ; Kalyanaraman B. 
Doxorubicin Induces Apoptosis in Normal and Tumor Cells
via Distinctly Different Mechanisms . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2004 , 279 , 25535 –25543 . 10.1074/jbc.m400944200 .15054096 
Yang F. ; Teves S. S. ; Kemp C. J. ; Henikoff S. 
Doxorubicin, DNA Torsion, and Chromatin Dynamics . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2014 , 1845 , 84 –89 . 10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.12.002 .24361676 
Welsh C. ; Day R. ; McGurk C. ; Masters J. R. W. ; Wood R. D. ; Köberle B. 
Reduced Levels
of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA Repair Proteins in Testis Tumor Cell Lines . Int. J. Cancer 
2004 , 110 , 352 –361 . 10.1002/ijc.20134 .15095299 
Jamieson E. R. ; Lippard S. J. 
Structure, Recognition,
and Processing of Cisplatin–DNA Adducts . Chem. Rev. 
1999 , 99 , 2467 10.1021/cr980421n .11749487 
Eastman A. 
The Formation,
Isolation and Characterization of DNA Adducts Produced by Anticancer
Platinum Complexes . Pharmacol. Ther. 
1987 , 34 , 155 –166 . 10.1016/0163-7258(87)90009-x .3317449 
Lyu Y. L. ; Kerrigan J. E. ; Lin C.-P. ; Azarova A. M. ; Tsai Y.-C. ; Ban Y. ; Liu L. F. 
Topoisomerase
II
Mediated DNA Double-Strand Breaks: Implications in Doxorubicin Cardiotoxicity
and Prevention by Dexrazoxane . Cancer Res. 
2007 , 67 , 8839 –8846 . 10.1158/0008-5472.can-07-1649 .17875725 
Gu L. ; Lingeman R. ; Yakushijin F. ; Sun E. ; Cui Q. ; Chao J. ; Hu W. ; Li H. ; Hickey R. J. ; Stark J. M. ; et al. The Anticancer Activity
of a First-in-Class
Small-Molecule Targeting PCNA . Clin. Cancer
Res. 
2018 , 24 , 6053 –6065 . 10.1158/1078-0432.ccr-18-0592 .29967249 
Nikolovska-Coleska Z. ; Wang R. ; Fang X. ; Pan H. ; Tomita Y. ; Li P. ; Roller P. P. ; Krajewski K. ; Saito N. G. ; Stuckey J. A. ; et al. Development and Optimization
of a Binding Assay for the XIAP BIR3 Domain Using Fluorescence Polarization . Anal. Biochem. 
2004 , 332 , 261 –273 . 10.1016/j.ab.2004.05.055 .15325294 
Bowers K. J. ; Chow E. ; Xu H. ; Dror R. O. ; Eastwood M. P. ; Gregersen B. A. ; Klepeis J. L. ; Kolossvary I. ; Moraes M. A. ; Sacerdoti F. D.  ; Scalable Algorithms for Molecular dynamicss Simulations on Commodity
Clusters . Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE SC 2006
Conference , 2006 ; pp 43 .
Humphrey W. ; Dalke A. ; Schulten K. 
VMD: Visual Molecular
dynamicss . J. Mol. Graph. 
1996 , 14 , 33 –38 . 10.1016/0263-7855(96)00018-5 .8744570 
Grant B. J. ; Rodrigues A. P. C. ; ElSawy K. M. ; McCammon J. A. ; Caves L. S. D. 
Bio3d:
An R Package for the Comparative Analysis of Protein Structures . Bioinformatics 
2006 , 22 , 2695 –2696 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl461 .16940322 
Accelrys Software Inc  . Discovery Studio Modeling Environment , Release 4.1; Accelrys Software Inc. : San Diego , 2007 .
Chou T.-C. 
Drug Combination Studies and Their Synergy Quantification
Using the Chou-Talalay Method . Cancer Res. 
2010 , 70 , 440 –446 . 10.1158/0008-5472.can-09-1947 .20068163

