
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3155231110.1021/acsomega.9b01146ArticleConstruction of a Z-Scheme Dictated WO3–X/Ag/ZnCr LDH Synergistically Visible
Light-Induced Photocatalyst towards Tetracycline Degradation and H2 Evolution Sahoo Dipti
Prava Patnaik Sulagna Parida Kulamani *Centre for Nano Science and
Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan (Deemed
to be University), Bhubaneswar 751030, India* E-mail: kulamaniparida@sauniversity.ac.in, paridakulamani@yahoo.com Phone: +91-674-2351777. Fax: +91-674-2350642.04 09 2019 17 09 2019 4 12 14721 14741 20 04 2019 08 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Herein,
we have designed nonstoichiometric WO3, coupled
with ZnCr layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanosheeet through Ag nanoparticle
as the solid-state electron mediator to form WO3–X/Ag/ZnCr LDH Z-scheme photocatalyst. The presence
of oxygen defect levels in as-synthesized materials was confirmed
by Raman, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and photoluminescence
(PL) analyses. The photocatalytic performance of the catalysts was
investigated by the tetracycline degradation and H2 energy
production under visible light irradiation. The WO3–X/Ag/ZnCr LDH ternary heterostructure exhibits superior
activity toward tetracycline degradation and hydrogen evolution. The
excellent photocatalytic performance of the catalyst was attributed
to the synergistic effects among three species (WO3–X, Ag, and ZnCr LDH) and the enhanced separation efficiency
of photoinduced charge carriers through the Z-scheme WO3–X/Ag/ZnCr LDH system. In addition, the created oxygen
deficiency on WO3–X could improve
the photocatalytic behavior of ZnCr LDH in heterostructure by delaying
the recombination efficiency of photoexcited electron–hole
pairs. Furthermore, the higher affinity of tetracycline at the oxygen
defect levels of the photocatalyst supports the high rate of tetracycline
degradation. The enhanced photocatlytic activity of the catalysts
was further supported by PL spectra and photoelectrochemical studies
(electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and linear sweep voltammetry
(LSV) plot). The present research opens up a new strategy for designing
highly efficient visible light-induced Z-scheme-based photocatalysts
with high population of active sites for energy and environmental
applications in a sustainable manner.

document-id-old-9ao9b01146document-id-new-14ao9b01146ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
With increasing energy
requirements and growing severity of environment
issues, semiconducting materials-based photocatalysts have been found
to draw intense attention as “green” and effective alternatives.
In this contest, hydrogen is believed to produce high energy yield
of about 141.9 mJ/kg and has been recognized as a cleaner, cheaper,
and sustainable energy source with no greenhouse gas emission compared
to conventional fuels.1−5

Moreover, environmental pollution associated with antibiotics
is
one of the most urgent issues to be solved. The most dangerous effect
of the antibiotics is their multiresistant antibacterial properties
and chemical stability. Tetracycline (TC) is one such widely used
antibiotic due to its low absorptivity, so it gets released easily
into the environment as unmetabolized compound. Occurrence of tetracycline
in water bodies is now a subject of great concern. Traditional biological
methods like biological filtration and conventional methods, including
physical adsorption with chemical oxidation, are found ineffective
for the elimination of antibiotic due to complexity and possible secondary
pollution, while the visible light-induced photodegradation owing
to its economic, energy-efficient strategy has been reported as suitable
to dominate the bioavailability and sequestration of tetracycline.6−10

In this regard, a heterojunction is found to be an efficient
photocatalyst
with greater electron–hole separation. However, increments
in charge separation take place while dampening the redox capability,
due to the accumulation of photogenerated charge carriers on the band,
resulting lower redox potentials, for which it is difficult to achieve
simultaneously efficient electron–hole separation and high
redox ability by designing a heterojunction composite photocatalyst.
However, integration of multisemiconductor hybrid Z-scheme systems
is found to be superior exhibiting efficient spatial separation of
charge carriers and also maintaining the redox ability. Through Z-scheme,
oxidation and reduction catalytic centers are more active to minimize
the undesirable backreaction.11,12 Inspired by the natural
photosynthesis and efficient charge separation through Z-scheme heterostructure
photocatalysts, considerable interest has been devoted by researchers
to introduce high redox capability. Z-scheme charge transfer started
from opposite direction in water splitting mimicking photosynthesis
of green plants, which was discovered by Bard in 1979.13 In a Z-scheme system, the photoexcited electron
shifts from the CB position of photosystem II (PS II) to VB position
of photosystem I (PS I), which gets trapped by the holes. As a result,
electrons and holes are freely available on the conduction and valence
bands of PS I and PS II, respectively, as they provide reacting sites
for reduction and oxidation reactions to take place.14 So, it has enormous potential to be applied for water splitting
reaction and environmental pollutant elimination. To date, a number
of Z-scheme-based visible light photocatalytic systems have been reported,
such as CeO2/BiOI,15 Cu/MoO3-g-C3N4,16 and LaFeO3/g-C3N417 possessing much better photocatalytic abilities than single
photocatalysts.

In general, Z-schemes can be classified into
two groups. One composed
of charge transfer between two individual photocatalysts through a
shuttle redox mediator [BiVO4/Ru–SrTiO3/Rh, with an electron shuttle [Co(bph)3]3+/[Co(bpy)3]2+]18 but its photocatalytic
activities become very poor due to its backward reaction.1 Another is all-solid-state Z-scheme photocatalytic
system; selection of a solid electron mediator plays an important
role in charge carrier transfer. According to energy band theory,
the Fermi level of the mediator should remain in between the Fermi
levels of PS I (photosystem I) and PS II (photosystem II). Otherwise,
charge transfer is inhibited due to the formation of energy band barriers
at the semiconductor–metal interfaces. Based on previously
reported studies, it was found that solid electron mediators such
as Au, Ag, and graphene are superior to other ionic redox shuttles.19 Moreover, these solid electron mediators are
able to avoid the backreaction and can be recovered easily. In this
respect, a solid-state metal semiconductor having low contact resistance
can be used as an electron mediator, which speeds up the desirable
specific carrier transfer process. Taking this into consideration,
many studies have been conducted (TiO2-Au-CdS,20 LAVO4-Ag-BiVO41).

Among the various reported photocatalytic materials, layered
materials
like ZnCr layered double hydroxide (LDH) are found to be one of the
best photocatalytic agents due to appropriate redox potential and
tremendous light-harvesting capabilities. The ability of ZnCr LDH
to absorb visible spectrum is associated with interelectronic excitation
like metal-to-metal charge transfer (MMCT) through oxo-bridged bimetallic
linkage.21−23 However, poor crystalline orientation, high recombination
rates of electron–hole pairs, and slow charge carrier mobility
greatly inhibit its application in practical photocatalysis. In this
direction, Wu et al. fabricated O-doped carbon nitride/CoAl LDH through
in situ growth method, which involves a direct Z-scheme charge transfer
mechanism.24 Recently, WO3 has
been regarded as a promising semiconducting material, with band gap
energy values between 2.4 and 2.8 eV. Furthermore, it was extensively
investigated for photocatalytic applications due to its intrinsic
properties like easy synthesis, nontoxicity, steady physicochemical
parameters, resistance to photocorrosiveness, and high oxidation potential
of valence band that can oxidize H2O and −OH groups
to obtain •OH.25,26 Moreover,
the existence of oxygen vacancy in the case of nonstoichiometric WO3 also affects the surface properties of materials, as well
as improves optical absorption, separation of photogenerated charge
carriers, and electrical conductivity to behave as an efficient photocatalyst.
Generally, the presence of oxygen defects not only delays the recombination
process of photogenerated excitons by temporarily capturing charge
carriers but also facilitates the adsorption of pollutant molecules
onto the surface.27 The more oxidized VB
potential of WO3 motivates the formation of Z-scheme-based
photocatalyst system. In this context, a large number of WO3-based Z-scheme photocatalytic systems have been studied in the field
of energy conversion and ecological cleanliness.26,28−30 For instance photocatalytic systems involving WO3 and LDH were also reported, such as WO3@NiFe-LDH
and WO3/ZnCuGa LDH, by Fan et al. and Morikawa et al. separately
for enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting and photocatalytic
conversion of carbon dioxide into methanol.31,32 Therefore, constructing the Z-scheme charge transfer heterogeneous
system by coupling ZnCr LDH with nonstoichiometric WO3 by
adjusting the electronic state is a promising way.

However,
no LDH/WO3-based Z-scheme photocatalytic systems
were reported. Therefore, WO3-LDH Z-scheme system is a
new approach in the field of photocatalysis. Additionally, for improving
the charge pair separation efficiency of WO3-coupled LDH
heterostructure Z-scheme system, Ag has been inserted as a mediator
due to its excellent electron conductivity. Owing to the presence
of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect and induced electric field,
Ag also plays an important role in the absorption of visible light
and boosts the photogenerated charge transfer.4 In this periphery, many materials have been reported for phtocatalytic
application.33,34 In particular, Yuan et al. reported
Ag2CO3/Ag/WO3 photocatalysts toward
organic pollutant degradation.26

With these motivations, in the present study, we rationally applied
the SPR effect of metallic Ag as redox electron mediator in between
WO3–X-/ZnCr LDH heterostructure
to design a Z-scheme WO3–X-Ag-ZnCr
LDH photocatalyst. Among the photocatalysts, Ag nanoparticles (Ag
NPs) were loaded onto the WO3 surface via photodeposition
method, followed by the hybridization of Ag/WO3–X with LDH through simple facile in situ coprecipitation
method. The photocatalytic behavior of the as-fabricated WO3-Ag-ZnCr LDH ternary heterostructure was investigated for TC degradation
as a target recalcitrant pollutant and for H2 evolution.
Upon excitation, the photoexcited charge carrier transfers from the
CB band of WO3–X to Ag, which is
basically due to development of Schottky barrier within the metal–semiconductor
interface. The SPR effect and electric field will further transport
the electrons of Ag to VB of ZnCr LDH, where the excited electron
combines with holes. The defects created by surface oxygen vacancy
in WO3–X and the existence of Ag
as electron transfer conductor facilitate the charge pair separation
efficiency and enhance the photocatalytic activity of ZnCr LDH. Eventually,
based on the active species quenching experiment and H2 evolution results, Z-scheme photogenerated electron transfer mechanism
has been proposed.

Results and Discussion
The mechanism
of the formation of W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure
involves mainly three steps. In the first step, we have tried to synthesize
nonstoichimetric WO3 by hydrothermal effect followed by
the calcination method. Under heat treatment, a number of W–O
bonds break and oxygen atoms are removed from the surface to create
oxygen deficiency along with reduction of W6+ to W5+.27 In the second step, Ag NPs
get preferably attached to the oxygen deficiency sites. In the case
of stoichimetric WO3, the W atoms with 6+ oxidation
state possess d0 configuration with no electrons available
to reduce metal atoms. However, nonstoichimetric WO3 (WO3–X) makes available partially filled
d-orbitals and provide active sites for reduction–deposition
of Ag NPs. Due to the oxygen vacancy, the density of electrons around
the W atom increases. Upon light irradiation, WO3–X leads to generation of photoinduced electron–hole
pairs from 4f orbital of W atom near oxygen vacancy. At that same
time, methanol act as a hole scavenger, trapping the holes to produce
methoxy radicals, thus leaving the electrons to reduce the Ag NPs
from AgNO3 solution compensating the effect of oxygen vacancy.35 Thus, Ag NPs are preferentially localized at
defect sites. In the final step, the presence of Ag NPs in the WA5
served more active states, which are crucial to attach with LDH surface
during in situ designing process. Usually, the presence of abundant
hydroxyl groups on the surface of LDH materials is known to serve
as an ideal support to load noble-metal nanoparticles via Ag–OH
interfacial bond. Thus, hydroxyl groups provide a unique support for
stabilizing Ag NPs.36 The surface of LDH
built up a cooperative self-assembly between negatively charged −OH
groups and slightly positively charged Ag NPs of WA5 through covalent
interaction resulting in deposition of Ag NPs as an interparticulate
electron mediator. The WO3–X, Ag
NPs, and LDH contact interface favor easy flow of charge carriers
through the Z-scheme mechanism in the heterostructure.

The crystal
and phase purities of the as-synthesized material (LDH,
WO3–X, WA5, W5L1, and W5A5L1) were
analyzed by XRD study, as shown in Figure 1a. Bragg reflections of neat LDH can be indexed
as hexagonal lattice having R3m space group with rhombohedral symmetry. The intense diffraction
peaks represent basal reflection planes (003) and (006) centered at
2θ of 11.6 and 23.3°, respectively, and confirm the characteristic
stacked layered structures of LDH. The basal spacing value of d003 lattice plane represents the intergallery
spacing of LDH. Typically, the Zn-based LDHs relate to the three-layer
3R polytype. So, the lattice parameter c can be estimated
by utilizing the formula c = 3d003 (0.77
nm), which confirms CO32– intercalated
LDH.37,22 The other basal reflection planes (012),
(015), (018), (110), and (113) analogous to 2θ = 34.3, 38.8,
47.3, 59.6, and 61.1°, respectively, further confirm the existence
of LDH phase. The radii of metal cations in the brucite layers were
associated with the diffraction peaks corresponding to the (110) and
(113) planes. The lattice parameter a represents
the metal cation–cation distance and can be estimated from
d110 basal plane (a =
2d110= 0.23 nm). The XRD pattern of WO3–X indicates the hexagonal phase (JCPDS no. 75-2187).
The characteristic diffraction peaks observed at 2θ values of
14.0, 22.8, 24.4, 26.9, 28.2, 36.3, 50.0, and 55.3° were attributed
to the (100), (001), (110), (101), (200), (201), (220), and (202)
basal planes, respectively. Their lattice parameters were found to
be a = b = 0.73 nm and c = 0.39 nm.25,38 In addition, two less intense
peaks were observed at 2θ values of 17.7° (111) and 38.7°
(003) for orthorhombic phase of WO3–X crystals.39 Meanwhile, it is worth
noting that the diffraction peak intensity of the WO3–X was shrinked after the formation of heterostructure
between LDH and WO3–X, indicating
the synergistic effect between the two components. In W5L1 and W5A5L1
nanohybrids, due to low concentration of LDH, three peaks [(003),
(006), and (113)] of LDH were noted. In particular, the (006) plane
of LDH (23.3°) coincides with the (110) plane of WO3–X (22.8°) and a broad peak was observed nearer
2θ value. Interestingly, there was no shift in the diffraction
peak locations of WO3–X and LDH
suggesting that LDH simply gets attached onto the surface of WO3–X instead of covalently bonded into
the lattice crystal. Furthermore, it was found that the introduction
of metallic Ag NPs into W5L1 material (W5A5L1) had no remarkable impact
on their crystalline structure. This can be attributed to low doping
amount of Ag NPs in the W5L1 binary heterostructure, as well as overlapping
of the diffraction peak of WO3–X at 2θ = 38.7° with the characterization peak of metallic
Ag [(111), 38.1°].26 The XRD results
signify that the structure and crystallinity of WO3–X were maintained in both W5L1 and W5AL1 materials
resulting in superphotocatalytic performance. Conclusively, the above
technique endorses the coexistence of three species (WO3–X, LDH, and Ag) in the W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure
photocatalysts having polycrystalline structure.

Figure 1 (a) XRD patterns of LDH,
WO3−X, W5L1, W5A5L1 and (b) The
N2 sorption plot of WO3−X and W5A5L1 (inserted pore size
distribution curve).

The specific surface area and pore size distribution of as-prepared
photocatalysts (WO3–X, W5L1, and
W5A5L1) were analyzed by the N2 adsorption–desorption
technique. As depicted in Figure 1b, the entire isotherms curve can be classified as
type IV, suggesting the existence of mesopores in the materials with
a relative vapor pressure range of 0.1–0.9 P/P0. The adsorption at high P/P0 represents a feature of H3 loop type.40 The specific surface areas and the corresponding
pore sizes data of the catalysts estimated by the Brunauer, Emmett,
Teller (BET) and Barrett, Joyner, Halenda (BJH) methods are listed
in Table 1. The inserted
pore size distribution curve resulted from an analyzed desorption
branch of isotherm. According to our previous study, the neat LDH
showed the surface area of 28.7 m2/g with the pore size
and pore volumes of 1.64 nm and 0.04 cm3/g, respectively.41 The BET specific surface areas of the synthesized
WO3–X and W5A5L1 heterostructures
were found to be 32.6 and 36.4 m2/g, respectively. These
results reveal that the formation of heterostructure between WO3–X, Ag, and LDH increases the specific
surface area of the prepared ternary W5A5LA photocatalyst compared
to both the parent materials (LDH and WO3–X) and provided a large number of reaction sites for enhanced
photocatalytic activity.7

Table 1 Surface Area, Pore Size, and Pore
Volume Values of LDH, WO3–X, and
W5A5L1
samples	surface area (m2/g)	mean pore diameter (nm)	pore volume (cm3/g)	
LDH	28.7	1.64	0.04	
WO3–X	32.6	8.76	0.072	
W5A5L1	36.4	7.74	0.070	
The surface morphologies
of LDH, WO3–X, and W5A5L1 heterostructure
were investigated by the SEM technique.
The SEM image of LDH (Figure 2a) displayed huge clusters of flaky sheets.22 This material is composed of large crystal nanosheets,
which effortlessly gather in cohesive force. Additionally, the crystal
surface of the LDH was relatively smooth, suggesting no other particles
on it. As revealed in Figure 2b, some of the particles of WO3–X are capsule-like and many of them are spherical-shaped. The
capsule-like structures of WO3–X are found to have average length and diameter around 144 and 26
nm, respectively, whereas the spherical structure is found to be 90
nm in diameter. To further establish the emergence of LDH and Ag NPs
on the surface of WO3–X heterostructure,
TEM analyses of LDH and W5A5L1 were carried out. As shown in Figure 2c, the TEM micro
images evidently show the formation of LDH consisting of plate like
nanosheets of nanomateric range. After the construction of ternary
heterostructure, the Ag NPs and LDH nanoplates were coated on the
WO3–X surface (Figure 2d). Some capsule-like and spherical
particles were observed for WO3–X, which is in good agreement with SEM results. As a consequence of
Ag NPs and LDH loading, a few small spherical particles were assembled
and adhered on WO3–X surface without
aggregation, and LDH nanoplates were uniformly distributed on the
WA5 surface indicating the formation of hierarchical W5A5L1 ternary
heterostructure. Most of Ag NPs were not visible due to deposition
of LDHs on Ag NPs in WO3–X surface.
The absence of isolated Ag NPs and LDH nanoplates further disclosed
the strong interaction between LDH, Ag NPs, and WO3–X. Furthermore, the structural orientation of WO3–X and LDH particles was not changed
after the formation of ternary heterosrtructure. The bright- and dark-field
images of W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure are shown in Figure 2e,f. The bright and dark areas
in the micrographs indicate WO3–X and LDH, respectively, whereas the Ag NPs are assigned by more shining
particles. As a result, the dark- and bright-field images further
corroborate the presence of three types of components in W5A5L1 ternary
heterostructure. Moreover, High-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(HRTEM) image was taken to give more information regarding the internal
structure and interface of WO3–X, LDH, and Ag NPs in the heterostructure. Figure 2g signifies the well-resolved periodic lattice
fringes of hexagonal WO3–X with
interplanar distances of 0.389 and 0.33 nm, indexed as (001) and (200)
zone axes, respectively. Furthermore, remarkably circular nanoparticles
on the edge of the WO3–X appeared
with 0.23 nm interplanar spacing, representing the (111) basal plane
of cubic Ag NPs. The crystal lattice spacing of 0.14 nm fringe corresponding
to the (113) plane of rhombohedral LDH nanoplates were found near
Ag NPs. Notably, there exists well-defined heterointerfacial contact
between three components with Ag NPs present at the interface along
with its lattice fringes strongly connected to the lattice fringes
of WO3–X and LDH. The second fact
is probably due to the diffusion of photoinduced electron on the interface
of W5L1 during the photodeposition of Ag NPs.42 As a result, it can be said that Ag NPs serve as an electron conduction
mediator between WO3–X and LDH
in the heterostructure photocatalyst. Moreover the selected area electron
diffraction (SAED) patterns of ternary heterostructure (W5A5L1) confirmed
the polycrystalline nature of the material. As displayed in Figure 2h, the solid smooth
concentric ring patterns are analogous to the crystallographic planes
of WO3–X, Ag, and LDH in the W5A5L1.
In energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) image, Zn, Cr, W, Ag, C, and O elements
could be detected (Figure S1), which again
evidenced that W5A5L1 heterostructure was successfully synthesized
without any impurities. The HRTEM and SAED outcomes are well consistent
with XRD results, and the TEM morphological advantage of W5A5L1 supports
a “sandwich”-like heterostructured material having superior
efficiency for photocatalytic application owing to the synergistic
interaction and compatibility composite formation between LDH sheet
matrix, WO3–X, and Ag NPs.

Figure 2 SEM images
of (a) LDH and (b) WO3–X; TEM images
of (c) LDH and (d) W5A5L1; (e, f) bright- and
dark-field images of W5A5LA; (g) HRTEM images [selected area presenting
lattice fringes of LDH, WO3–X,
and Ag NPs]; and (h) SAED pattern of W5A5L1 heterostructure.

The FT-IR spectra were implemented
to determine the nature of the
grafted functional groups present in the materials. The structures
of LDH and WO3–X and the impact
of the coupling between three components were investigated and are
displayed in Figure 3a. In the case of LDH, a broad band was observed at around wavenumbers
of 3220–3600 cm–1 for −OH stretching
vibration mode. Mainly the −OH group was bonded with the metal
centers of brucite layers present in the intergallery space of LDH,
while the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibration modes of intercalated
CO32– anion centered at 1370 and 1493
cm–1, respectively. The characteristic peaks at
1590–1640 cm–1 can be attributed to H2O bonded through oxygen atoms (H–O–H bending
vibration) in all as-synthesized photocatalysts. These peaks imply
the subsistence of adsorbed H2O and −OH compounds
in the materials. In addition, the lattice metal vibrations (Zn/Cr–O,
Zn–O–Cr, Zn/Cr–OH) were found at lower wavenumber
of about 500–700 cm–1 for LDH, but in the
cases of W5L1 and W5A5L1, those bands were not clearly visible due
low concentration of LDH.43 For pure WO3–X, three distinctive absorption bands
at 754, 819, and 932 cm–1 can be observed, where
the first two were endorsed to the W–O–W/O–W–O
interbridging stretching vibration and the third peak corresponding
to W=O terminal stretching.44,45 Due to low
wt % loading of Ag NPs, no vibration modes appeared in WA5 and W5A5L1
photocatalysts. In comparison to bare WO3–X, the intensities of O–W–O stretching vibration
peaks in both binary (WA5 and W5L1) and ternary heterostructures (W5A5L1)
became weaker along with its position slightly shifted. In addition,
the broadness of −OH stretching band deceased in the cases
of W5L1 and W5A5L1 relative to LDH. Therefore, the FTIR results provide
additional proofs for successful coupling between LDH, WO3–X, and Ag NPs in W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure.

Figure 3 (a) FTIR
and (b) Raman images of as-synthesized materials.

Raman spectroscopy is found to be an effective, highly sensible,
and nondestructive characterization tool that has been carried out
to explore the phase transition, bond vibration, and presence of oxygen
defect sites. Figure 3b represents the Raman spectra of LDH (inserted), WO3,
WO3–X, and W5A5L1. It was observed
that WO3 exhibits four highly intense and one weak Raman
peaks encountered at wavenumbers of 265, 324, 717, 811, and 952 cm–1. The peaks positioned at 717 and 811 cm–1 were ascribed to the O–W–O stretching bonds, while
the O–W–O bending modes of bridging oxygen atom were
located in the lower-frequency region of 265–324 cm–1. Additionally, the less intense Raman peak centered at 952 cm–1 was related to terminal W=O stretching mode.46,47 In case the of pristine LDH (inserted), two characteristic Raman
bands appeared at 487 and 510–554 cm–1 signifying
the brucite sheets of LDH. In addition, other two strong bands at
1062 and 152 cm–1 were found corresponding to symmetric
stretching and translation vibration modes of intercalated CO32– anion.48 From
pictorial Raman graph, after annealing, in the cases of WO3–X and W5A5L1 ternary heterostructures, similar Raman
bands were detected with slight shifting toward lower frequency. The
peak intensities of polarized bands were found to be less intense
and broader compared to WO3, which confirms the existence
of oxygen vacancy in WO3–X. Furthermore,
in the case of W5A5L1 photocatalyst, a wider and less intense band
was observed in addition to WO3–X, suggesting the subsistence of lattice imperfections resulting in
more oxygen voids. The calcination process can effectively remove
surface-adsorbed water species and affects the lattice structure of
WO3 crystal, which results in the introduction of oxygen
defect sites. The dipole moment of the W–O bond is directly
proportional to the electronegativity difference of the W and O atoms.
When some oxygen atoms have been removed from WO3 lattice,
the instantaneous dipole moment of the W–O bond is weaker,
revealing the lower absorption peak intensity. The Raman bands for
LDH and Ag were not observed in W5A5L1 material due to the presence
of low concentration of Ag NPs and LDH. In particular, the terminal
W=O stretching band was prominently noted and shifted toward
more lower wavenumber (905 cm–1) than WO3 and WO3–X, which shows that the
W=O bond was strongly affected by different chemical environments
(LDH and Ag NPs) and resulted in higher oxygen vacancy in W5A5L1 heterostructure.49

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
analysis provides evidence
for elemental constitution, electronic environment, and chemical state
of the as-synthesized materials. The XPS images of W5A5L1 ternary
heterostructure are shown in Figure 4. The photoelectron peaks of C, O, Zn, Cr, W, and Ag
elements were noted in the survey spectrum of W5A5L1 (Figure 4g) endorsing the formation
of heterostructure. Using CASAXPS and Origin software, high-resolution
XPS images of the individual elements were successfully deconvoluted
and analyzed. According to our previous study, in pure ZnCr LDH (Figure S2), the XPS profiles of C 1s showed binding
energies of 284.9 and 288.8 eV. Moreover, Zn 2p and Cr 2p spectra
displayed four distinct peaks (Zn 2p3/2, Zn 2p1/2, Cr 2p3/2, and Cr 2p1/2) at binding energies
of 1022.0, 1045.0, 577.7, and 587.1 eV, respectively.41 But in the present study (W5A5L1), two peaks of C 1s spectrum
appeared at binding energies of 284.9 and 287.7 eV due to reference
carbon and the presence of intercalated carbonate ion of LDH in W5A5L1
heterostructure, respectively (Figure 4a).22 As shown in Figure 4b for the Zn 2p,
two fitted spin–orbit doublet (Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2) peaks were found at 1021.7 and 1044.8 eV, respectively,
indicating the typically high-spin Zn2+ state. The Cr 2p
(Figure 4c) displayed
three peaks at 573.88, 577.5, and 586.93 eV corresponding to metallic
traces Cr0, Cr 2p3/2, and Cr 2p1/2 spin state, due to Cr3+ oxidized state.50 The Zn2+ and Cr3+ species proved
the existence of Zn(OH)2 and Cr(OH)3 in W5A5L1.
In comparison to pure LDH, a blue shift in binding energy was observed
for C 1s, Zn 2p, and Cr 2p in the W5A5L1 heterostructure. According
to the reported value, the binding energies of W4f7/2 in
W5+ and W6+ were located at 34.22 and 35.43
eV, respectively, whereas the binding energies at 36.12 and 37.53
were ascribed to the W 4f5/2 spin orbits of W5+ and W6+ oxidation states, respectively.51 As shown in Figure 4d, the W 4f spectrum of W5A5L1 heterostructure showed a red
shift in comparison to the above-reported value. Moreover, two additional
peaks related to W5+ shifted a lower electron volt value
with small area, indicating the existence of surface defects and nonstoichiometric
oxygen vacancy in the heterostructure. The relative concentration
of W5+ to W6+ was approximately determined by
using the included area of every peak in the W 4f spectrum through
the above equation (eq 1) and was estimated to be 13.5%, which further support to establish
the presence of surface defects and oxygen deficiency of WO3–X in W5A5L1. These oxygen deficiencies present in
W5A5L1 participate and determine the photocatalytic activity of tungsten
oxide-based systems.52 The high-resolution
O 1s spectra of neat LDH (Figure S2) showed
two distinct peaks at binding energies of 531.5 and 532.3 eV, attributed
to the surface hydroxyl group of brucite layer and intercalated carbonated
anion, respectively. In contrast to W5A5L1, three peaks of O 1s spectra
(OI, OII, and OIII) appeared with slight positive shifting in binding
energy (Figure 4e)
Basically, the less intense peak located at 530.6 eV (OI) was due
to the lattice oxygen in the M–O–M bond (M=W,
Zn, and Cr). The intermediate binding energy peak (OII) at 532.0 eV
was assigned to the −OH group, and OIII with higher binding
energy (533.5 eV) revealed the carbonated oxygen and chemisorbed water
molecule.40 Furthermore, the most intense
OII peak was observed by the oxygen ions adsorbed in the oxygen lacking
area for maintaining the charge equilibrium or the −OH groups
caused by the surface activity.53 The upshifted
binding energy of the O 1s state further proved the chemical environment
of O atom associated with deformation mode of W–O and O–O
bonds due to oxygen vacancy in W5A5L1 heterostructure.54,16 As in Figure 4f,
the Ag 3d peaks (3d5/2 and 3d3/2) in W5A5L1
were located at 367.4 and 373.4 eV, respectively, suggesting Ag0, which remained unaltered as in previously reported bare
Ag/WO3–X.55 From the above XPS analysis, a negative shifting binding energy
of Zn, Cr, and C and a positive shifting binding energy of W were
observed in the case of W5A5L1. Generally, the upshift of binding
energies suggests lower electron clouds and the downshift reveals
to larger electron mass on the photocatalyst surface, which indicates
that the shift of electrons is from WO3–X to LDH surface. However, the binding energies of Ag as electron
mediator between WO3–X and LDH
remained unchanged in this system because the shifting of electron
from WO3–X to LDH surface through
metallic Ag results in charge equilibrium. It can be concluded that
the reduction in electron concentration around WO3–X demonstrates the migration of induced electrons
of WO3–X transferred through metallic
Ag and recombines with VB holes of LDH, to claim the prospect of Z-scheme
mechanism. 1  Taking into consideration the photoabsorptive
behavior, the UV–vis DRS technique was used to determine the
optical response of the as-synthesized materials (LDH, WO3, WO3–X, WA5, W5L1, and W5A5L1).
As shown in Figure 5a, the optical absorption shoulders of pure LDH were located in the
UV–visible range of light. An inherent optical band positioned
in the UV region due to the ligand–metal charge transfer (LMCT)
spectra arises from the transition between 2p orbital of O to 4s and
3d orbitals of the Zn and Cr, respectively. The metal–metal
charge transfer (MMCT) band appeared at 270–320 nm, due to
the transition between Cr 3d t2g and Zn 4s orbital. These
absorption spectra were mainly originated from the crystal field splitting
of the bimetallic oxo-bridged linkage in the LDH system.56 The 4A2g → 4T1g(F) and 4A2g → 4T2g(F) d–d transitions of Cr3+ ion (d3 configuration) were related to the absorption peaks at 410
and 570 nm, respectively, in the visible light region.37 As depicted in Figure 5d, the WO3 exhibits an absorption
edge at 470 nm, and there is considerably no absorption in longer
wavelength, i.e., visible light region from 460 to 800 nm, whereas
WO3–X displayed wide absorption spectrum from 440
nm to the NIR region with an absorption edge at 494 nm. This intrinsic
absorption suggests the presence of newly created energy levels due
to oxygen vacancy state between the conduction band (CB) and valence
band (VB) in the WO3–X band structure,57 which is in good agreement with Raman and XPS
results. The deficiency of surface oxygen promotes the charge pair
transfer and results in enhanced photoactivity. After the immobilization
of Ag NPs onto the surface of WO3–X, the resulted WA5 material possessed both a characteristic absorption
of WO3–X and the surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) band at 500–600 nm, which can be attributed
to the spatially confined electrons in Ag NPs.55 In contrast to pure WO3–X, the band gap absorption edge in the WA5 catalyst shifted toward
longer wavelength and exhibited a superior visible light absorption.
Additionally, the introduction of WO3–X into the LDH (W5L1) significantly increased photoresponse
behavior of both LDH and WO3–X.
In the case of W5A5L1, the d–d transition band of LDH positioned
at 570 nm, merged with SPR band of Ag NPs, and exhibited a notably
stronger spectrum, extending from the UV–visible to near-infrared
region compared to parent and binary heterostructure materials. It
may be due to the deposition of metallic Ag NPs on the crystal facet
WO3–X, resulting in the SPR effect.
The improved light absorption is consistent with the outcomes of photoactivity,
suggesting a synergetic effect in the ternary system (LDH, WO3–X, and Ag). The highest absorption
strength of W5A5L1 represents maximum production of electron–hole
pairs, which participate in the photocatalytic reaction.

Figure 4 High-resolution
deconvoluted XPS images of W5A5L1: (a) C 1s, (b)Zn
2p, (c) Cr 2p, (d) W 4f, (e) O 2p, (f) Ag 3d, and (g) survey spectra.

Figure 5 UV−vis diffuses reflectance spectra of
(a) LDH, (b) WO3, WO3−X, WA5, W5L1 and
W5A5L1.

To understand the origin of improved
photoactivity in the heterostructure
system, it is highly essential to find out the potential energy diagram
of the nanohybrids. To calculate the relative band edge potential
of each bare material in this W5A5L1 heterostructure, the optical
band gap energy and flat band potentials of LDH and WO3–X were estimated. As in Figure S3a,b, by extrapolation, the linear portion of curve to the
photoenergy axis gives the band gap energy based on the Tauc equation
(eq 2) 2  where α, h, υ, A, and Eg are the absorption
coefficients, Planck’s constant, light frequency, proportionality
constant, and band gap energy, respectively. The transition properties
of photocatalyst depend on n. The pure LDH showed
direct allowed transition having Eg of
2.5 eV, and similarly, a 2.7 eV band gap was obtained in the case
of WO3–X considering indirect allowed
transition. To determine the flat band (Vfb) potential, the following MS equation (eq 3) was used. The Vfb potential at electrode/electrolyte interface can be evaluated from
the MS plot.22,58 3  where € is the dielectric constant, Va is the applied potential, Nd is the electron donor density, Vfb is the flat band potential, €0 is the
permittivity of vacuum, C is the space charge layers
capacitance, e is the electron charge, T is the temperature, and k is the Boltzmann constant. Vfb was calculated by considering the x intercept
of a linear fit to the Mott–Schottky plot, whereas 1/C2 is the function of applied potential (Va). As shown in Figure S3c,d, both LDH and WO3–X electrodes
display positive slopes, suggesting n-type nature of the semiconductors,
where main charge carriers are electrons. The Vfb values of LDH and WO3–X were found to be −0.7 and 0.18 V versus Ag/AgCl, respectively.
According to the literature, the CB potential of n-type semiconductor-based
metal oxide was 0–0.1 V higher than its Vfb.59 Therefore, the CB potential
of WO3–X was calculated to be 0.7
V versus NHE, but in the case of LDH, it was assumed that the flat
band potential is equal to CB potential, i.e., −0.08 V versus
NHE. By taking the optical band gap energy and CB potential, the VB
positions of both LDH and WO3–X were calculated to be 2.42 and 3.2 V versus NHE, respectively.

To investigate the separation and transport effectiveness of photoinduced
charge carriers, photoluminescence (PL) spectra, EIS plot, and photocurrent
density over WO3–X, LDH, WA5, W5L1,
A5W5L1, and W5A5L1 photocatalysts were explored. Particularly, PL
spectroscopy is a very powerful technique to quantify the impurity
level and directly connected to the dynamic behavior of photoinduced
charge carriers like transfer, separation, and capture. The PL signal
is a consequence of free electron–hole pairs recombination.
Generally speaking, the lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers
is high for weaker PL spectra. Figure 6a represents the PL emission spectra of all of the
samples at an excited wavelength of 330 nm. A strong emission peak
at 420–450 nm in LDH was attributed to the radiative recombination
of localized surface trapped charge pairs, and the existence of weak
band at 470 nm was attributed to the band-to-band emission peak of
LDH. Additionally, a less intense band at around 500 nm was due to
the surface defect sites in the LDH material.60 In addition, the less intense emission peak at 468 nm in WO3–X material was ascribed to the localized
states of band gap along with the presence of oxygen vacancies and
due to indirect band-to-band transition.61 In the case of WA5, the photogenerated electrons get transferred
from the CB of WO3 to Ag NPs, which acts as electron trapping
center and helps to improve the charge separation due to matched energy
band structures. This also arises from the charge transfer between
the O 2p orbital of WO3–X and the
vacant d orbital of Ag NPs.62 This leads
to lower PL intensity compared to neat LDH and WO3–X. However, after the heterostructure formation between
LDH and WO3–X, the luminous peak
intensity of the W5L1 is lower than that of both parent and WA5 materials,
which confirm the delaying recombination rate of the photoinduced
charge pairs to some extent. Furthermore, in A5W5L1 and W5A5L1 ternary
heterostructures, the PL intensity significantly drops compared to
W5L1 photocatalyst demonstrating a lower fluorescence associated with
delayed annihilation rate of photoinduced electron–hole pairs.
Again, between the two ternary heterostructures, i.e., A5W5L1 and
W5A5L1, the Ag-mediated system (W5A5L1) displayed a reduced PL intensity.
It was earlier reported, while the noble-metal nanoparticle act as
mediators between two semiconductors, resulting in an interior direct
pathway, which efficiently transports the photogenerated charge pairs.63,64 Conclusively, the presence of Ag NPs as an electron conduction mediator
and oxygen vacancy in this W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure can efficiently
prolong the lifetime of the photoexcited electrons that can involve
in the photocatalytic reaction in place of emissive recombination.

Figure 6 (a) PL
spectra, (b) EIS images, (c) Bode plot, and (d) LSV plot.

Further, to investigate the charge transfer resistance,
diffusion,
conductivity, and separation capability of photogenerated charge pairs
in the electrode–electrolyte interfacial region, EIS measurements
were carried out. EIS analysis represents the Nyquist plots, which
basically consist of a semicircle in the high-frequency region (conductive
loop), suggesting the interfacial charge migration resistance and
diffusion of charge within the space charge layer. The other part
is a straight line in the low-frequency region (inductive loop) related
to the ion diffusion resistance called the Warburg resistance.15Figure 6b shows the Nyquist plots of WO3–X, LDH, WA5, W5L1, and W5A5L1 heterostructure under visible
light irradiation. The magnitudes of the resistance in the cases of
pure WO3–X, LDH, WA5, W5L1, and
W5A5L1 obtained from the X-intercepts of the semicircles are found
to be 79, 73, 69, 62, and 49 Ω, respectively. The smallest diameter
of arc was provided by W5L1 electrode than both parent and WA5 material
resulting in the minimum charge transfer resistance and more effective
separation of electron–hole pairs at the solid–solid
interfacial. Additionally, after the formation of heterostructure
between LDH and WO3–X, more number
of oxygen vacancies were introduced in the material, which increases
the electrical conductivity and retards the recombination of charge
pairs. Furthermore, compared to W5L1 binary heterostructure, W5A5L1
ternary heterostructure showed a remarkably reduced semicircle. This
implies that the existence of Ag NPs lowered the hurdle for the electron–hole
migration and favors the faster separation and transportation efficiency
of photogenerated charge pairs during the photocatalytic reaction
process, facilitating the enhancement of the photocatalytic behavior.
To determine the lifetime (τn) of photoinduced electron
or for how much time the excited electrons are accessible for participating
the photocatalytic reaction, a Bode phase plot is drawn. Figure 6c shows the Bode
phase plot of LDH, W5L1, and W5A5L1 photocatalysts. In the Bode phase
image, the peak shifting from the higher frequency area to the lower
frequency area indicates a quick transport process of light-induced
electrons. The life span of injected electron from the photoelectrode
to electrolyte solution is related to this frequency and it can be
easily calculated by using the following expression (eq 4):65 4  The fmax of the
W5A5L1 photoelectrode was calculated to be 96.26 μs, which is
greater than W5L1 binary hybrid (68 μs) and neat LDH material
(26.33 μs). The highest lifetime of W5A5L1 suggests lower recombination
and faster migration of photogenerated charge pairs, facilitating
enhanced photocatalytic activity.

In addition, photocurrent
densities of as-prepared photocatalysts
(LDH, WO3–X, WA5, W5L1, and W5A5L1)
were determined by LSV measurements under visible light illumination
(Figure 6d). It has
been demonstrated that photocurrent is initiated from the transfer
of photoexcited electrons under the circumstances of light irradiation,
whereas the holes move to the electrode–electrolyte interfacial
region, thus getting the separation and transportation of photogenerated
charge carriers. The order of photocurrent response over photocatalysts
is WO3–X (0.5 mA/cm2) < LDH (1.2 mA/cm2) < WA5 (1.5 mA/cm2) < W5L1 (3.1 mA/cm2) < W5A5L1 (4.7 mA/cm2). It was observed that W5L1 exhibits higher photocurrent density
than neat WO3–X, LDH, and WA5 materials.
Heterostructure between WO3–X and
LDH serves as a shallow electron donor to increase the photocurrent
generation. As reported earlier, the presence of oxygen vacancies
in WO3–X results in inter-band-gap
states below the CB minimum provides more charge carriers to enhance
the lifetime of photoelectron, by the trapping of electrons/hole within
shallow defected sites.66 This increase
in charge separation and transportation ability with the external
applied voltage is mainly due to expanded surface charge layer. The
increased lifetime would allow holes in the VB to migrate toward the
electrode/electrolyte interface to favor photocatalytic oxidation
reactions.67 Moreover, in comparison to
W5L1, W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure exhibits greater photocurrent
density and showed almost 9 and 4 times higher photocurrent than pure
WO3–X and LDH, respectively. Furthermore,
W5A5L1 also shows a significant cathodic shift in onset potential.
These results clearly indicate effective reduction in the rate of
recombination of charge carriers through Ag NPs as a mediator that
offers lowest resistance supporting excellent photocatalytic performance.
Furthermore, the transient photocurrent–time curves of LDH,
WO3–X, and W5A5L1 were plotted
by several light on–off runs. It is well known that the photocurrent
is produced primarily due to the diffusion of collective photogenerated
electrons to the back contact, and simultaneously the photoinduced
holes are consumed by the holes acceptor in the electrolyte. As displayed
in Figure S4, the photocurrent increased
quickly in the presence of light irradiation and remains constant
at a relatively high value. By contrast, when light illumination was
cut off, the current suddenly decreased to steady state. Moreover,
it is clearly seen that the photocurrent density of W5A5L1 was greater
than both pure materials (LDH and WO3–X). This implies that the ternary heterostructure has a lower
recombination rate of charge pairs under light irradiation conditions
and a more efficient electron–hole separation through the LDH,
Ag, and WO3–X interface. It should
be noted that the LSV and transient photocurrent results are well
consistent with PL and EIS data of different samples and supports
the synergistic interaction between WO3–X, LDH, and Ag NPs in W5A5L1 heterostructure contributing to
the significantly improved photocatalytic performances toward TC degradation
and H2 evolution.

Photocatalytic Activity
To examine
the photocatalytic
performance of the as-synthesized photocatalyst under visible light
illumination (λ ≥ 420), a typical antibiotic TC was selected
as the target pollutant. The weight ratio between WO3–X and LDH was varied followed by loading of different
wt % of Ag NPs. Figure S5a shows the photocatalytic
performance of as-prepared WO3–X, LDH, W1L1, W5L1, and W1L5 toward TC degradation. The pure WO3–X showed a higher TC degradation
efficiency (19%) than WO3 (12%). It suggests the surface
oxygen vacancy facilitates the separation efficiency of photon-induced
charge pairs. Meanwhile, it was observed that neat LDH shows just
51% of TC removal. Once the WO3–X was hybridized with LDH, the degradation efficiency was found to
increase with the maximum content of WO3–X compared to bare LDH. The subsistence of oxygen defect in
WO3–X not only suppresses the electron–hole
recombination by temporarily trapping the photogenerated charges in
binary heterostructure but also favors adsorption of reactant substrates
on the top surface of photocatalyst, resulting in enhanced TC degradation.68,16 The removal efficiencies of various binary heterostructures follow
the order: W1L1 (64%) < W5L1 (77%) > W1L5 (59%). This can be
demonstrated
by the following two reasons: (1) the optimized amount of WO3–X results utmost harvest of incident light and (2)
the created heterostructure formation between WO3–X and LDH and the presence of oxygen void promote
the charge carrier transfer efficiency at the surface of the photocatalyst.
But the increased LDH content (W1L5) acts as the recombination centers
of heterostructure and suppresses the electron–hole channelization.
Hence, we have considered the optimal binary system W5L1 for further
study.

To again develop the photocatalytic performance of the
WO3–X/LDH binary heterostructure,
metallic Ag NPs were introduced onto the most favorable W5L1 photocatalysts
to generate the ternary WO3–X/Ag/LDH
heterostructure. As displayed in Figure S5b when the study was carried out with varying wt % of Ag NPs (3, 5,
7, and 9 wt %), 5 wt % Ag NPs were found efficient. The Ag-based ternary
heterostructure follows the degradation order: W5A3L1 (86.5%) <
W5A5L1 (92%) > W5A7L1 (82.3%) > W5A9L1 (79%). This result suggests
that the optimum concentration of Ag NPs acts as an electron bridge
and passageway to promote the electron migration ability of LDH and
WO3–X. A surplus amount of metallic
Ag NP results agglomerated and acted as the recombination hub with
ensuing the reduction of TC degradation. The output of photocatalytic
experiment implies that both WO3–X and Ag NPs contents played key roles for the eventual photocatalytic
degradation activity.

More precisely, the photocatalytic TC
removals of the as-fabricated
materials (WO3, WO3–X, LDH, WA5, W5L1, and W5A5L1) are summarized in Figure 7a. A negligible removal of
TC concentration was found in the blank experiment, which was performed
in the absence of photocatalysts, demonstrating insignificant TC degradation
in self-photolysis reaction. The degradation rate of TC over the photocatalysts
was found to be in the order: W5A5L1 (92%) > W5L1 (77%) > WA5
(59.2%)
> LDH (51%) > WO3–X (19.7%)
> WO3 (12%). Compared to pure LDH and WO3–X, the WA5, W5L1, and W5A5L1 exhibit better TC degradation.
Importantly, W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure achieved the highest TC
degradation and reached 92% in 90 min. In addition, the concentration
of TC for 15 min time interval was also studied to predict the reaction
kinetics using the W5A5L1 photocatalyst. The UV–visible absorbance
spectra (Figure 7b)
of TC show two major peaks centered at 357 and 275 nm corresponding
to the E2 and B bands of the benzene ring. The aromatic B–D
rings are introduced for 357 peak (Figure S7c). In the presence of photocatalyst, with increase in illumination
time, the absorption bands of TC gradually decreased. The reduction
of 357 peak implied fragmentation of phenolic compound attached to
aromatic ring B into NH4+, H2O, and
CO2. The diminished 275 nm shoulder peak further confirmed
the creation of the hydroxyl and acylamino groups.69

Figure 7 (a, c) The rate of TC degradation over all catalysts, (b) time-dependent
UV−vis absorption spectra of the TC solution in the presence
of the W5A5L1 sample under visible light irradiation (λ ≥
420) and (d) kinetics plot of TC degradation over as prepared photocatalysts.

Further, it is essential to identify
the reactive intermediates
in the photocatalytic TC degradation pathway. The generated intermediates
during TC degradation process in the presence of W5A5L1 photocatalyst
were precisely investigated by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
(LC-MS), and the resulted spectra are displayed in Figure S6. During 90 min of visible light illumination, the
characteristic peak of TC was reduced and new intermediate peaks were
produced both in good quantities and number of species. Based on these
results, three possible degradation pathways of TC were proposed,
as demonstrated in Scheme 1 according to the m/z values
of the corresponding detected intermediate and the related previous
literature. First, the TC-HCl is deprotonated, to generate the fragmentation
molecular ion with 445.60 m/z value.
(i) In degradation pathway I, the hydrogenation occurred at the carbonyl
group of TC and generated a product TC1 (m/z = 446.89). In addition to the degradation of TC1, it leads
to the formation of TC2 (m/z = 279.49)
through the cleavage of carbon carbon single bond or dislodging of
hydroxyl group. In this pathway, the aromatic ring is broken and the
naphthol ring of TC remains unchanged during the degradation process.
Further by losing the water and methanol group, the TC2 is converted
to TC3 (m/z = 241.82). (ii) Pathway
II mainly involves the detachments of N-methyl group.
The loss of two N-methyl groups is followed by the
degradation of TC to TC4 (m/z =
433.31) and from TC4 to TC5 (m/z = 417.36), respectively. Then, the resulting molecular ion (TC5)
was fragmented to TC6 with m/z =
403.36 via cleavage of methyl group. (iii) In pathway III, the deamidation
reaction of TC generates to TC 7 (m/z = 405.1), followed by fragmentation of TC 7 into TC8 (m/z = 306.43) through the loss of dimethylamino group
followed by dehydroxylation, deethylation, addition reaction, and
breakage of benzene rings. Then, TC 8 was converted to TC 9 (m/z = 274.59) via carboxylation reaction.
Finally, TC3 and TC9 intermediate products were mineralized into small
inorganic materials like NH4+, NO3–, H2O, and CO2.6,70−72

Scheme 1 Proposed Photocatalytic TC Degradation Pathways in
the W5A5L1 Heterostructure
The mineralizing properties were found to be an important
factor
in analyzing the photocatalytic abilities of semiconductor-based photocatalyst.
The mineralization of tetracycline was evaluated by W5A5L1 photocatalyst
at regular interval by performing TOC measurement. The degree of mineralization
in terms of total organic carbon was estimated by the following equation: 5  where TOC0 and TOCt are
the total organic carbon of the test solution before and after irradiation
of light, respectively. Figure S7 demonstrates
the amount of mineralization with respect to time interval. From Figure S7, it was observed that the mineralization
efficiency reached about 69% in 120 min of reaction. The obtained
result suggests that TC has been oxidized to CO2, H2O, and other intermediate molecules, which have been verified
and well explained in LC-MS section.

According to the Langmuir–Hinshelwood
model, the kinetics
of TC degradation in the presence of photocatalysts was determined,
as shown in Figure 7d. TC decomposition over the synthesized parent, binary and ternary
materials ascertained the pseudo-first-order kinetics model and represented
as follows (eq 6): 6  where C0 is the
original concentration of the TC solution, the concentration of TC
solution after reaction is denoted as C, kaap (min–1) represents the
apparent rate constant of the reaction system, and t is time. The graph of ln(C0/C) versus time reveals a straight line with slope kapp calculated through linear fitting of the
regression curve. Additionally, by using the following equation (eq 7), t1/2 was estimated. Basically, t1/2 is the time required to decompose TC into half of its original concentration.43 7  Table S1 summarizes
the apparent rate constant (kaap), half-life
time (t1/2), and correlation coefficient
factor (R2) of TC degradation reaction.
The highest value of kaap (288.5 ×
10–4 min–1) with the lowest t1/2 (24 × 10–4 min) was
found in the case of W5L1A5, which is about 10.8, 3.4, and 1.6 times
higher compared to pure LDH, WO3–X, and W5L1 photocatalysts. This phenomenon explains that the introduction
of Ag NPs as the “carriers transport bridge” obviously
hampers the recombination efficiency of charge carriers in W5L1A5
ternary heterostructure.

In the photocatalytic degradation,
pH is an important parameter
for treatment of antibiotic in water bodies. Figure S8a displays the photocatalytic response of W5A5L1 toward TC
degradation at various pH values (2, 3, 4.5, 6.5, 8.5, and 10). It
was reported that TC is amphoteric in nature, and its three functional
groups represent the three pKa values of 9.69, 7.68, and 3.30 (Figure S8c). The photocatalytic stability of
TC in distilled water is considerably affected by the pH of the solution.73 Therefore, its molecular conformations are different
in various pH values: the protonated form of TC (TCH3+) exists at pH < 3.3, neutral form (TCH20) lies between pH 3.3 and 7.7, and the monoanionic form (TC–) is stable above pH 7.7.74 Meanwhile, the pH at zero point charge (PZC) of W5A5L1 photocatalyst
was calculated by drift method and found to be 7 (Figure S8b).43 As we know, at pH
< PZC value, the surface of W5A5L1 is positively charged and becomes
negative when pH > PZC value. The TC degradation efficiency (95.3%)
is highest at pH 4.5, shown in Figure S8a, which explains that in weak acidic environment, H+ could
easily react with •O2– active species to produce •OH, which was one of
the reactive species taking part in TC degradation process.75 However, in strong acidic medium, a repulsive
force was developed among the protonated forms of TC (TCH3+) and positive surface of photocatalyst, which results
in decrease of degradation activity (pH 2 = 71.5% and pH 3 = 88%).
Moreover, at higher pH (8.5 and 10), the H+ concentration
gets lowered and inhibits •OH formation. Additionally,
the adsorption of TC on W5A5L1 surface was obstructed in alkaline
medium because both the anionic form (TC–) and negatively
charged catalyst surface repel each other and lead to the reduced
photodegradation performance of TC, i.e., 55.1 and 39% at pH 8.5 and
10, respectively.

To give evidence in support of photodegradation
mechanism and to
examine the predominant active radical species, trapping experiments
were carried out under visible light illumination over LDH, WO3–X, and W5L1A5 photocatalysts. The
three typical sacrificial agents BQ, EDTA, and IPA were employed for
trapping the •O2–,
h+, and •OH radicals, respectively, as
the changes in photocatalytic efficiency could depend on the actions
of various active species in the TC degradation reaction. Figure 8a highlights the
major loss of TC degradation rate (29.3%) over W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure
by the addition of BQ and implies that •O2– is the main active species. However, when IPA
was introduced into the reaction system, a moderate concentration
(46.3%) of TC gets decomposed, which confirms the •OH radical playing a relatively important role in photodegradation
process. Moreover, TC removal efficiency slightly inhibited by the
quenching of h+, and degradation was found to be 69%, which
indicates that involvement of h+ in photocatalytic reaction
is partly significant. In the case of LDH, the same trend of active
species participation in TC degradation was observed as in W5A5L1.
With the addition of EDTA, the photocatalytic degradation process
over WO3–X material was almost
nil, which only resulted in 5.6% TC removal efficiency, suggesting
h+ as the chief reaction species. Furthermore, the degradation
process was moderately affected by the presence of IPA, signifying
that •OH has also some contribution in the TC removal
process. On the other hand, the presence of BQ does not change the
photocatalytic performance considerably for WO3–X system, which indicates that •O2– is an inactive radical species.
Accordingly, it can be preliminary concluded that, in the case of
pure LDH and W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure, the active species participate
in the order •O2– > •OH > h+, whereas h+ and •OH were dominant reactive species for WO3–X material. To further provide evidence for the formation
of •O2– and •OH, the NBT transformation and TAOH photoluminescence technique have
been performed, and the result is displayed in Figure 8b,c. The absence of peak at 259 eV in the
UV–vis absorption spectra of NBT transformation over LDH and
W5A5L1 suggests that the formation of •O2– contradicts with WO3–X because the CB edge of LDH (0.08 V vs NHE) is extra negative
than the oxygen reduction potential [E0 (O2/HO2 = −0.046 eV vs NHE )],76 whereas the CB potential of WO3–X (0.7 V vs NHE) is more positive, so it could not
produce •O2–. Moreover,
a less intense absorbance spectrum was observed for W5A5L1 and a larger
percentage of NBT transformation occurred, resulting in the formation
of maximum •O2– in
W5A5L1 heterostructure. After the construction of ternary heterostructure
(W5A5L1) with band coupling, the electrons move from higher CB of
LDH to lower CB of WO3–X, resulting
in more accumulation of electron on the CB of WO3–X but that electron could not react with O2 to generate •O2–.
Therefore, the maximum proportion of electrons is supposed to reside
at CB of LDH in W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure to produce more effective •O2– radicals. This fact
evidences a Z-scheme charge transfer pathway between them. On the
other hand, the increased TAOH photoluminescence spectra of W5A5L
suggest that heterostructure material produced more fluorescent product
(2-hydroxy terephthalic acid) revealing the generation of higher-concentration •OH radicals.

Figure 8 (a) Photocatalytic TC degradation experiment
by using different
scavengers, (b) UV−vis
absorption spectra of NBT and (c) Photoluminescence spectra of TAOH
in NaOH solution over LDH, WO3−X and W5A5L1photocatalyst.

To ascertain the charge transfer mechanism, photocatalytic
H2 evolution was also studied over as-fabricated LDH, WO3–X, W5L1, and W5A5L1 materials under
visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420) by using methanol
as the electron supplier. As shown in Figure 9a, the neat WO3–X showed no H2 evolution due to its positive CB potential.25 However, pristine LDH showed 717 μmol
H2 generation. Meanwhile, when WO3–X was coupled with LDH, it displayed enhanced H2 evolution (1002 μmol) compared to pure LDH. In addition,
Ag NPs (5 wt %) deposited on the surface of W5L1 material and the
ternary catalysts (A5W5L1) exhibited obviously improved photoactivity
toward H2 evolution (1103 μmol) compared to binary
and parent materials signifying the co-catalytic function of Ag NPs.
Furthermore, W5A5L1 displayed superior H2 evolution (1175
μmol) to A5W5L1 material and also 1.6 and 1.2 times that of
the pure LDH and W5L1 samples, respectively. It was previously reported
that when noble-metal nanoparticles work as mediators on the interface
of type II heterostructures, an interior direct pathway is produced
that efficiently separates and transports the charge carrier.63,64 PL spectra also support the above fact. This photoactivity ascertains
a Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism between LDH, WO3–X, and Ag NPs. Actually, sacrificial agents play a
decisive role in H2 evolution because they act as electron
donors and consume the photogenerated holes during photocatalytic
reaction. To study the effect of various sacrificial agents on the
rate of H2 evolution, water reduction reactions were carried
out under the same condition by using different scavengers (TEOA,
methanol, lactic acid, and Na2S with Na2SO3) (Figure 9b). The rate of H2 evolution is mainly dependent on oxidation
potential values of various sacrificial agents. However, along with
oxidation potential, permittivity and chain length of organic sacrificial
agents are also equally important. It has been found that methanol
acts as the most suitable sacrificial agent among all. It should be
noted that, by using 10% methanol solution as the sacrificial agent,
H2 is produced according to the following reactions (eqs 8–10) of methanol conversion 8   9   10  Moreover, methanol was oxidized to CO2 and
then transformed to CO. The existence of oxygen defects
in W5A5L1 heterostructure greatly enhances the interaction between
CO and catalyst surface through the electron backdonation from the
surface of W5+ to the π* molecular orbital of CO.77,78,16

Figure 9 (a) H2 evolution study of various
samples (b) H2 evolution study of W5A5L1 using various
scavenging agents.

Such remarkably improved
photocatalytic performance toward TC degradation
and H2 evolution over W5A5L1 was mainly ascribed to the
intimate contact and synergetic effect between WO3–X, LDH, and Ag NPs with the suitable band edge potentials.
The Ag NPs (act as the charge communication bridge) enhanced the separation
and transfer efficiencies of photoinduced charge carriers at the W5L1
interface. The loading amounts of Ag NPs and WO3–X in composites play a remarkable role in their photocatalytic
activity. Moreover, the lowest PL intensity, highest photocurrent
density, and reduced EIS Nyquist arc also supported the superior photocatalytic
performance in the case of W5A5L1 heterostructure. Comparison studies
of the photocatalytic H2 evolution and TC degradation activity
over various LDH- and WO3-based composites are tabulated
(Tables 2 and 3).

Table 2 Values of H2 Evolution
by Different LDH- and WO3-Modified Nanocomposites
photocatalyst	reaction
condition (visible light source and
sacrificial agents)	H2 evolution (μmol g–1 h–1)	ref	
CdSe/ZnCr LDH	300 W Xe lamp (λ ≥ 420), 0.1 M Na2S and 0.1 M Na2SO3	2196	(79)	
RGO/La2Ti2O7/ NiFe LDH	AM 1.5, 10 vol % TEOA	532	(80)	
g-C3N4/NiFe LDH	125 W Hg(λ ≥ 420), 10 vol % methanol	37 200	(81)	
CHLDH30	125 W Hg (λ ≥ 420), 10 vol % methanol	27 875	(22)	
Au/CaFe2O4/CoAl LDH	150 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 10 vol % methanol	1179	(82)	
WO3/g-C3N4	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 10 vol % TEOA	3120	(83)	
WO3/g-C3N4/Ni(OH)x	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 400), 15 vol % TEOA	576	(84)	
W5A5L1 (present research)	150 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 10 vol % methanol	29 375	 	
Table 3 Rate of TC Degradation by Different
LDH- and WO3-Modified Nanocomposites
photocatalysts	reaction
condition (visible light source, TC
concentration, catalyst dosage and time period)	TC degradation efficiency (%)	ref	
Cs0.33WO3/Ni Al LDH	500 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 50 mL of 30 mg/L TC solution, 50 mg, 270 min	92	(85)	
WO3/AgI	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 40 mL of 35 mg/L TC solution, 40 mg, 60 min	75	(6)	
WO3/Ag/g-C3N4	XG500 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 300 mL of 10 mg/L TC solution, 100 mg, 40 min	<95	(86)	
Ag3VO4/WO3	300 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 100 mL of 10 mg/L TC solution, 50 mg, 30 min	71	(87)	
NaTaO3@WO3	500 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 100 mL of 20 mg/L TC solution, 25 mg, 120 min	69	(88)	
W5A5L1 (present research)	250 W Xe (λ ≥ 420), 20 mL of 40 mg/L TC solution, 20 mg, 90 min	92	 	
Compiling
the results of two applications, a probable mechanistic
pathway over heterostructure-based photocatalytic reaction has been
proposed and is demonstrated in Scheme 2. In accordance with MS and Tauc plot, CB edge positions
of LDH and WO3–XWO3–XWO3–X were found
to be −0.08 and 0.7 V, respectively, and the corresponding
VB potentials were calculated to be 2.42 and 3.2 V vs NHE scale. Considering
the band alignments of LDH and WO3–X, there may exist two typical ways for migration and separation of
charge pairs, such as conventional type II heterojunction (double
charge transfer) and Z-scheme-type mechanism, shown in Scheme 1a,b, respectively. Zeng et
al. and Veldurthi et al. also predicted these two classes of charge
transport mechanism over LaVO4-Ag-BiVO4 and
BiVO4-Ag-CuO, respectively.1,7 In this regard,
if W5A5L1 belongs to conventional type II heterojunction (Scheme 2a), with illumination
of visible light, LDH would consume the utmost radiation and get excited
to generate electrons and hole. The journey of light-induced electrons
will start from the CB of LDH to CB of WO3–X, revealing the decrease of electron reduction ability. To
manage the electron neutrality, the holes jumped from more positive
VB to less positive VB potential, as a result of which maximum holes
are accumulated on the VB of LDH. This transport approach makes some
donation to the spatial segregation of the photogenerated charge pairs,
and the gathered electrons situated at the top of CB position of WO3–X are not capable of reducing O2 to •O2– owing
to the more positive CB potential than E0 [(O2/HO2= −0.046 eV vs NHE )].76 However, according to the scavenger experiments
and NBT analysis results, the •O2– radical was the predominant active species in TC photodegrdation
process and a high concentration of •O2– moieties was generated in the case of W5A5L1
heterostructure than neat LDH. Moreover, due the positive CB potential
of WO3–X (0.7 V vs NHE), the photoexcited
electrons in the CB of WO3–X were
also not able to reduce H2O for producing H2 gas. Nevertheless, the results of present photocatalytic performances
toward TC degradation and H2 evolution tests disagree with
the traditional heterojunction mechanism. For that reason, the photocatalytic
hydrogen evolution and •O2– generation for TC degradation can only be possible through the Z-scheme
mechanism. In addition, the interfacial charge migration of binary
heterostructure was further promoted by incorporating metallic Ag
NPs. The former metallic Ag NPs can consume a significant quantity
of radiation from the visible light source due to its SPR phenomenon,
which is helpful for enhancing absorption of visible light. Second,
the function of Ag NPs as an electron transport via duct plays a significant
role in the creation of Z-scheme charge conduction mechanism. After
the irradiation of visible light to the W5A5L1 photocatalyst, both
the LDH and WO3–X can be excited
and generate photoinduced electrons and holes in the CB and VB positions,
respectively. Then, weak reductive electrons in CB of WO3–X get transferred to metallic Ag through the Schottky
barrier [owing to the CB potential of WO3–X (0.7 V vs NHE) and a relatively negative potential with respect
to the Fermi level of metallic Ag (i.e., 0.8 eV)].7 Simultaneously, the weak oxidative holes in VB of LDH move
to metallic Ag as the VB of LDH (2.42 V vs NHE) is far positive in
comparison to the Fermi level of metallic Ag.26 Consequently, the energetic electrons with strong reducing ability
get accumulated on the CB of LDH, which have the potential to stride
above the energy barrier for reducing H2O into H2 gas and generation of •O2– used for TC degradation. At the same time, the strong oxidizability
photoinduced holes are gathered at the VB of WO3–X and funneled to be trapped by the scavenging reagent.
In addition, the most positive VB potential of WO3–X than E0 (OH–/•OH = 1.99) was found suitable for production
of •OH through reaction of H2O with the
powerful oxidized hole.43 According to
the quenching experiment, •OH radical was one of
the active species for photocatalytic TC degradation. Therefore, the •OH radical reacts with TC and produces some oxidizing
product. The detailed TC mechanism is illustrated by eqs 11–20. Hence, it can be said that the W5A5L1 heterostructure clearly establishes
a solid-state Z-scheme mechanism and supports the assurance for realizing
this photocatalytic process. It should be noted that this kind of
charge migration pathway can not only speed up the transfer and isolation
tendency of photogenerated charge carriers but also maintain strong
redox capacity for superior photocatalytic activities toward degradation
of antibiotic as TC and H2 evolution. Moreover, the large
electroconductivity of the metallic Ag NPs enhances the quenching
rate of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs consecutively
at the interfacial phase, which suppresses the annihilation of charge
carriers in LDH and WO3–X and finally
attains Z-scheme transfer pathway. 11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20  Recyclability
and reusability of semiconducting
materials are important in the field of photocatalytic application.
In the present study, reusability properties of the prepared W5A5L1
photocatalyst were reevaluated toward TC degradation and H2 evolution for at least four cycle runs, as depicted in Figure 10a,b. After each
reaction process, the photocatalysts were separated from the suspension
by centrifugation, cleaned with distilled water, and then dried in
an oven for further use. From Figure 10a, it was observed that TC degradation by the photocatalyst
was found to be constant up to two consecutive cycles and thereafter
slightly decreased in each photocatalytic run. The decrease in degradation
rate can be related to the loss of photocatalyst during recovery process.
A similar process was adapted to check the reusability and stability
of the photocatalyst toward H2 evolution. The figure describes
that hydrogen evolution by the photocatalyst was found to be regular
up to the third run and after that it decreases. So, it can be concluded
that the photocatalyst is steady enough for repeated use. Moreover,
to determine the structural and optical stabilities of the material,
XRD and UV–vis DRS studies of the W5A5L1 heterostructure was
carried out after the fourth run of TC degradation. As seen in Figure 10c, the XRD plot
of the used catalyst shows no considerable change in comparison to
fresh catalyst, where only a little less intense peak was observed
in the case of used W5A5L1 photocatalyst. Moreover, as shown in Figure 10d, the absorbance
peak intensity and visible light-harvesting capabilities were slightly
reduced after four consecutive cycles of TC degradation under visible
light illumination The recycling experiment results exemplify that
the W5A5L1 ternary heterostructure could maintain brilliant photocatalytic
performance even after four repetitive runs, which indicates its superior
photostability and reusability for the management of antibiotic decomposition
and H2 evolution.

Figure 10 Reusability study of (a) TC degradation 90
min, (b) H2 evolution in four consecutive cycles of run
in every 2 h over W5A5L1
heterostructure, (c) XRD plot and (d) UV−vis DRS plot of W5A5L1
after and before the photocatalytic reaction.

Scheme 2 Schematic Illustration of the Proposed Reaction Mechanism in
the
(a) Ag/WO3–X/LDH Heterostructure
and (b) WO3–X/Ag/LDH-Based Reaction
Systems toward TC Degradation and H2 Evolution under Visible
Light Irradiation
Conclusions
In conclusion, unique oxygen-deficient
Ag-deposited WO3–X nanocapsules
coupled with Zn/Cr LDH, a Z-scheme
photocatalyst, were synthesized by the hydrothermal method, followed
by photodeposition and in situ coprecipitation technique. The ternary
heterostructure shows excellent visible light-driven H2 evolution (29 375 μmol g–1 h–1) and TC removal (92% in 90 min) with high stability.
An interfacial internal electric field-induced direct Z-scheme charge
transfer mechanism under visible light, in the presence of Ag as an
electron mediator, strongly enhances the photocatalytic performance.
The EIS, photocurrent response, and PL intensity results support efficient
charge separation through Z-scheme with Ag NPs as an electron intermediary.
Ag NPs at the solid–solid interface function as an electron
conduction bridge and play an important work in the formation of Z-scheme
charge transfer mechanism. This strategy by the introduction of oxygen
vacancies of WO3–X not only contributes
to increase the adsorption of antibiotic on the surface of catalysts
but also increases the lifetime of photoinduced charge carriers through
Z-scheme mechanism on coupling with LDH. The results of this work
open up a new avenue in designing Z-scheme photocatalytic system for
challenging the desires of future energy and environmental issues.

Experimental
Section
Materials
Na2WO4·2H2O, NaCl, HCl, AgNO3, CH3OH, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, Cr(NO3)3·6H2O, NaOH, Na2CO3,
tetracycline, EDTA, benzoquinone, isopropyl alcohol, terephthalic
acid, NBT, TEOA, lactic acid, Na2S, and Na2SO3 were procured from Sigma-Aldrich and Merck. All chemicals
used in the current research work were of pure analytical grade and
directly used in the experimental method and analysis procedure.

Preparation of WO3–X
The nanoparticle of WO3 was synthesized by the hydrothermal
procedure.89 Before hydrothermal treatment,
1 g of Na2WO4·2H2O and 0.2 g
of NaCl were dissolved in 30 mL of deionized water and the mixture
solution was continuously stirred for 6 h. Then, the pH of the solution
was adjusted to 2 by dropwise addition of concentrated HCl and the
solution mixture was stirred for further 3 h. After completion of
the stirring period, the solution mixture was transferred to a Teflon-lined
stainless steel autoclave and heated at 180 °C for 24 h. After
hydrothermal treatment, the as-obtained product was washed with double-distilled
water and dried in a vacuum oven at room temperature. The product
was further annealed at 350 °C for 2 h.

Preparation of Binary WO3–X/Ag Heterostructure
A photodeposition
procedure was followed
to anchor metallic Ag nanoparticles (NPs) on the prepared WO3–X.90 In a typical experiment,
AgNO3 and methanol as an electron acceptor were used for
the deposition of noble-metal NPs. Initially, a known amount of WO3–X powder (0.5 g) was dispersed in
30 mL of distilled water followed by the addition of 3.7 mL of AgNO3 solution (10 g/L). Simultaneously, methanol (3 mL) was poured
into the above solution. Photodeposition of metallic Ag upon WO3–X surface was achieved by irradiating
the entire suspension under visible light with continuous stirring
for 3 h. A 250 W medium-pressure Hg lamp was used as visible light
source. After 3 h photodeposition reaction, the resultant suspension
was filtered, washed with deionized water for several times, and dried
overnight in a vacuum oven. The different WO3–X/Ag (x%) (x represents
the weight ratio of Ag to the samples, and x = 3,
5, 7, and 9% ) samples were prepared and labeled as WA3, WA5, WA7,
and WA9, respectively.

Preparation of Ternary WO3 Ag/ZnCr
LDH Heterostructure
In situ coprecipitation process has been
employed to prepare WO3–X/ZnCr
LDH or WO3–X/Ag/ZnCr LDH heterostructure.
In a typical experiment,
a known amount of WO3–XWO3–X or WO3–X/Ag heterostructure
was dispersed into 30 mL of double-distilled water. After well dispersion
of WO3–X or WO3–X/Ag heterostructure, an aqueous solution of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O (12 mM) and Cr (NO3)3·6H2O (6 mM) with 2:1 molar ratio
was slowly dropped to the above dispersed solution. The reaction was
allowed to reach pH 7–8 controlled by slow addition of 1 M
Na2CO3 and 1 M NaOH. The reaction system was
stirred for 24 h. After completion of reaction, the obtained precipitate
was filtered and washed several times using distilled water to eliminate
the additional dissolved ions. Finally, the product was dried at 80
°C in a vacuum oven. The nanocomposites were prepared by varying
the weight ratio between WO3–X and
ZnCr LDH, i.e., 1:1, 1:5, and 5:1, which are labeled as W1L1, W1L5,
and W5L1, respectively. After evaluation of photocatalytic activity,
the optimum weight ratio was obtained. Then, W5Ag (3%)L1 (W5A3L1),
W5Ag (5%)L1 (W5A5L1), W5Ag (7%)L1 (W5A7L1), and W5Ag (9%)L1 (W5A9L1)
were synthesized. Again the photocatalytic activities were tested
for as-synthesized materials (W5A3L1, W5A5L1, W5A7L1, and W5A9L1),
after which an optimum amount of Ag NPs was loaded on the surface
W5L1 binary heterostructure to construct the A5W5L1 material for comparison
study. Pure ZnCr LDH sample (LDH) was also prepared under the same
circumstances without support of WO3–X and WO3–X/Ag.

Photocatalytic
Experimental Procedure
The photocatalytic
capabilities of the prepared samples were evaluated by analyzing the
degradation of a colorless antibiotic like tetracycline (TC) under
visible light irradiation. In detail, 20 mL of TC (40 ppm) along with
20 mg of catalyst was taken in an irradiation chamber (BS-02, Germany)
equipped with a 250 W medium-pressure Hg lamp with a UV cutoff filter
(λ ≥ 420 nm). Before being exposed to light illumination
to establish the adsorption–desorption equilibrium between
catalyst and TC molecules, the above solution was stirred in the dark
for 30 min. Then, the sample solution was irradiated in visible light
for 60 min with steady-state stirring. Additionally, for an in-depth
understanding of the TC degradation pathway, kinetics study was performed.
During the photocatalytic reaction at 15 min interval of time, the
remaining TC concentration present in the supernatant of each sample
solution was measured by a UV–vis spectrophotometer at the
characteristic absorption peak of 357 nm. A control experiment was
performed following the same procedure without catalyst under visible
light illumination. Moreover, trapping experiment was performed to
determine the role of active species in photocatalytic antibiotic
degradation, which is produced during the reaction process. Various
scavenging agents like isopropyl alcohol (IPA), p-benzoquinone (BQ), and ethylene diaminetetraacetic acid disodium
(EDTA) were used to trap relative species like hydroxyl (OH•), super oxide (O2•–), and hole
(h+), respectively. All quenchers (1 mM) were dispersed
in the catalyst/TC mixture solution and exposed to visible light for
1 h. Furthermore, to confirm the generation of active species like
O2•– and OH• in the photodegradation process, nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT, 5 ×
10–5 mol L–1) and terephthalic
acid (TA, 5 × 10–4 M) in NaOH solution tests
were conducted, respectively. These experiments were conducted by
following the above-mentioned procedures. Here, instead of TC solution,
NBT and TA solutions were used and irradiated by visible light for
30 min. Then, the concentrations of NBT (200–350 nm) and TA
(at 330 nm of excitation wavelength) in the filtrate solutions were
recorded by using a spectrophotometer and spectrofluorometer, respectively.
The intermediates formation during the TC degradation was analyzed
by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) system (TSQ
Quantum Access MAX Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer, Thermo Fisher
Scientific). The photocatalytic TC degradation efficiency over all
photocatalysts was estimated by the following expression (eq 20): 21  where C0 is the
initial concentration of the TC solution, and after the photocatalytic
reaction, the TC concentration was denoted as C.

Along with TC degradation, the photocatalytic performance of the
as-prepared samples was also examined toward H2 evolution
under visible light illumination in a batch reactor at ambient temperature
and vacuum pressure. In a typical experiment, 0.02 g of catalyst was
dispersed in 20 mL of 10 vol % CH3OH aqueous solution as
a hole quencher and the suspension was magnetically stirred to avoid
the particle settlement at reactor bottom. Before the light illumination,
N2 gas was purged for 30 min to remove all dissolved gases
from the suspension and to create inert condition for the reaction
process. For visible light source, a 150 W xenon arc lamp was used.
The UV region present in the light was discarded by using 1 M NaNO2 solution as a UV filter (λ ≥ 420). The produced
gas was collected by downward displacement technique and analyzed
by a gas chromatograph (GC-17A) equipped with a 5 Å molecular
sieves column and a thermal conductivity detector (TCD). The experiments
were repeated thrice and then the mean value was calculated for consideration.
The apparent conversion efficiency for photocatalytic H2 evolution (1175 μmol/2h) was calculated to be 9.41% by using
the following formula (eq 21). 22  

Characterization Technique
The phase composition, purity,
and crystallographic characteristics of the materials were identified
by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, which were carried out by Rigaku
Miniflex instrument using Cu Kα radiation (where λ = 1.54178)
with a scan rate of 2°/min. Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)
were used to determine the internal morphology and microstructures
of the samples. Both TEM and HRTEM were executed by Philips TECNAI
G2 instrument with a high voltage of 200 kV. Similarly, the surface
morphology and topology of the samples were measured by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) using Hitachi S-3400N with a low voltage of 5 kV.
The presence of functional groups within the photocatalysts was confirmed
by using JASCO FTIR-4600 spectrometer with KBr pallet as reference
sample. To investigate the Raman polarization spectra, a Renishaw
InVia Raman spectrometer was used. More information about elemental
environment, oxidation states, and elemental composition were confirmed
by XPS measurements taken by a Kartos Axis Ultra X-ray photoelectron
spectrometer consisting of charge neutralizer and Al Kα monochromatized
X-ray source. The 1s peak of carbon atom was considered for reference
peak. The optical properties of the as-synthesized photocatalysts
were evaluated by a UV–vis JASCO 750 instrument using BaSO4 as reference. A JASCO-FP-8300 fluorescence spectrometer was
used to investigate the photoluminescence characteristics. All of
the photoelectrochemical characterizations were performed by IVIUMnSTAT
electrochemical workstation equipped with a 300 W xenon lamp as a
visible light source. The electrochemical workstation consists of
a conventional Pyrex electrochemical cell having a three-electrode
system such as reference electrode (Ag/AgCl electrode), counter electrode
(Pt electrode), and working electrode [prepared using fluorine-doped
tin oxide (FTO) by electrophoresis deposition method]. Na2SO4 (0.1 M, pH = 6.8) electrolyte solution was used for
measuring the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and linear
sweep voltammetry (LSV) plots and transient photocurrent response,
whereas to study the Mott–Schottky (MS) plot, 0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH = 7.2) solution was adopted as electrolyte.
The EIS analysis was executed from frequency of 106 to
101 Hz with applying 0 biases under visible light irradiation
at open-circuit potential. By applying the potential from 0 to 1.5
V with a scan rate of 10 mV/s, the LSV plots were performed and 0.2
V was implemented for measuring the transient photocurrent response
under visible light irradiation. The MS plot was measured at a frequency
of 500 Hz.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01146.EDS pattern of
W5A5L1; high-resolution deconvoluted
XPS images of LDH; Tauc and MS plots of LDH and WO3–X

; transient photocurrent response of photocatalyst;
TC degradation; LC-MS data of W5A5L1; TOC removal percentage of TC
over W5A5L1; kaap, R2, and t1/2 values of as-prepared
catalysts; photocatalytic degradation of TC with different pH values;
PZC plot of W5A5L1; and molecular structure of TC (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01146_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
acknowledge SOA (Deemed to be) University management
for their support with encouragement. The grant from SERB project
(EMR/2016/000606) is greatly acknowledged. Kundan Kumar Das is thanked
for his technical support (CNSNT, ITER, SOA Deemed to be University).
Asutosh Mohanty (IISC, Bangalore) is thanked for the Raman and SEM
analyses. Dr. Priyabrat Mohapatra (C.V. Raman College of Engineering,
Bhubaneswar) is thanked for analyzing the LCMS.
==== Refs
References
Veldurthi N. K. ; Eswar N. ; Singh K. R. ; S A.
P. ; Madras G. 
Cocatalyst
free Z-schematic enhanced H2 evolution over LaVO4/BiVO4 composite photocatalyst using Ag as an electron
mediator . Appl. Catal., B 
2018 , 220 , 512 –523 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.08.082 .
Wu Y. ; Wang H. ; Tu W. ; Liu Y. ; Wu S. ; Tan Y. Z. ; Chew J. W. 
Construction of hierarchical 2D-2D
Zn3In2S6/fluorinated polymeric carbon nitride nanosheets photocatalyst
for boosting photocatalytic degradation and hydrogen production performance . Appl. Catal., B 
2018 , 233 , 58 –69 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.03.105 .
Prasad C. ; Tang H. ; Bahadur I. 
Graphitic
carbon nitride based ternary
nanocomposites: From synthesis to their applications in photocatalysis:
A recent review . J. Mol. Liq. 
2019 , 281 , 634 –654 . 10.1016/j.molliq.2019.02.068 .
Meng X. ; Zhuang Y. ; Tang H. ; Lu C. 
Hierarchical structured
ZnFe2O4@SiO2@TiO2 composite
for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity . J. Alloys Compd. 
2018 , 761 , 15 –23 . 10.1016/j.jallcom.2018.05.150 .
Tang H. ; Chang S. ; Tang G. ; Liang W. 
AgBr and g-C3N4co-modified/Ag2CO3photocatalyst: A novelmulti
heterostructured photocatalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activity . Appl Surf. Sci. 
2017 , 391 , 440 –448 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.07.021 .
Wang T. ; Quan W. ; Jiang D. ; Chen L. ; Li D. ; Meng S. ; Chen M. 
Synthesis
of redox-mediator-free
direct Z-scheme AgI/WO3 nanocomposite photocatalysts for
the degradation of tetracycline with enhanced photocatalytic activity . Chem. Eng. J. 
2016 , 300 , 280 –290 . 10.1016/j.cej.2016.04.128 .
Deng Y. ; Tang L. ; Zeng G. ; Feng C. ; Dong H. ; Wang J. ; Feng H. ; Liu Y. ; Zhou Y. ; Pang Y. 
Plasmonic resonance excited dual
Z-scheme BiVO4/Ag/Cu2O nanocomposite: synthesis
and mechanism for enhanced photocatalytic
performance in recalcitrant antibiotic degradation . Environ. Sci.: Nano 
2017 , 4 , 1494 –1511 . 10.1039/C7EN00237H .
Wang H. ; Sun Y. ; Wu Y. ; Tu W. ; Wu S. ; Yuan X. ; Zeng G. ; Xu Z. J. ; Li S. ; Chew J. W. 
Electrical
promotion of spatially photoinduced charge separation via interfacial-built-in
quasi-alloying effect in hierarchical Zn2In2S5/Ti3C2(O,OH)x hybrids toward efficient
photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and environmental remediation . Appl. Catal., B 
2019 , 245 , 290 –301 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.12.051 .
Wang H. ; Wu Y. ; Feng M. ; Tu W. ; Xiao T. ; Xiong T. ; Ang H. ; Yuan X. ; Chew J. W. 
Visible-light-driven removal of tetracycline
antibiotics and reclamation of hydrogen energy from natural water
matrices and wastewater by polymeric carbon nitride foam . Water Res. 
2018 , 144 , 215 –225 . 10.1016/j.watres.2018.07.025 .30031366 
Zhang Y. ; Chen J. ; Tang H. ; Xiao Y. ; Qiu S. ; Lia S. ; Cao S. 
Hierarchically-structured
SiO2-Ag@TiO2 hollow spheres with excellent photocatalytic
activity and
recyclability . J. Hazard. Mater. 
2018 , 354 , 17 –26 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.04.047 .29723759 
Marschall R. 
Semiconductor
Composites: Strategies for Enhancing Charge Carrier Separation to
Improve Photocatalytic Activity . Adv. Funct.
Mater. 
2014 , 24 , 2421 –2440 . 10.1002/adfm.201303214 .
Zhou P. ; Yu J. ; Jaroniec M. 
All-Solid-State
Z-Scheme Photocatalytic Systems . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 4920 –4935 . 10.1002/adma.201400288 .24888530 
Bard A. J. 
Photoelectrochemistry
and heterogeneous photo-catalysis at semiconductors . J. Photochem. 
1979 , 10 , 59 –75 . 10.1016/0047-2670(79)80037-4 .
Zeng C. ; Hu Y. ; Zhang T. ; Dong F. ; Zhang Y. ; Huang H. 
A core–satellite
structured Z-scheme catalyst Cd0.5Zn0.5S/BiVO4 for highly efficient and stable photocatalytic water splitting . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2018 , 6 , 16932 10.1039/C8TA04258F .
Sultana S. ; Mansingh S. ; Parida K. M. 
Facile
Synthesis of CeO2 Nanosheets Decorated upon BiOI Microplate:
A Surface Oxygen Vacancy
Promoted Z-Scheme-Based 2D-2D Nanocomposite Photocatalyst with Enhanced
Photocatalytic Activity . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2018 , 122 , 808 –819 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b08534 .
Patnaik S. ; Swain G. ; Parida K. M. 
Highly efficient
charge transfer
through a double Z-scheme mechanism by a Cu-promoted MoO3/g-C3N4 hybrid nanocomposite with superior
electrochemical and photocatalytic performance . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 5950 –5964 . 10.1039/C7NR09049H .29542755 
Wu Y. ; Wanga H. ; Tua W. ; Liua Y. ; Tana Y. Z. ; Yuan X. ; Chewa J. W. 
Quasi-polymeric
construction of stable
perovskite-type LaFeO3/g-C3N4 heterostructured
photocatalyst for improved Z-scheme photocatalytic activity via solid
p-n heterojunction interfacial effect . J. Hazard.
Mater. 
2018 , 347 , 412 –422 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.01.025 .29335222 
Sasaki Y. ; Kudo K. H. ; et al. [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ and [Co(phen)3]3+/2+ Electron Mediators for Overall Water Splitting
under Sunlight Irradiation Using Z-Scheme Photocatalyst System . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 5441 –5449 . 10.1021/ja400238r .23458453 
Li H. ; Yu H. ; Quan X. ; Chen S. ; Zhang Y. 
Uncovering the key
role of Fermi level of electron mediator in Z-scheme photocatalyst
by detecting charge transfer process of WO3-metal-gC3N4 (metal = Cu, Ag, Au) . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 2111 –2119 . 10.1021/acsami.5b10613 .26728189 
Zhu H. ; Yang B. ; Xu J. ; Fu Z. ; Wen M. ; Guo T. ; Fu S. ; Zuo J. ; Zhang S. 
Construction of Z-scheme
type CdS–Au–TiO2 hollow nanorod arrays with
enhanced photocatalytic activity . Appl. Catal.,
B 
2009 , 90 , 463 –469 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2009.04.006 .
Mohapatra L. ; Parida K. M. 
A review on the
recent progress, challenges and perspective
of layered double hydroxides as promising photocatalysts . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016 , 4 , 10744 –10766 . 10.1039/C6TA01668E .
Sahoo D. P. ; Nayak S. ; Reddy K. H. ; Martha S. ; Parida K. M. 
Fabrication
of a Co(OH)2/ZnCr LDH “p–n” Heterojunction
Photocatalyst with Enhanced Separation of Charge Carriers for Efficient
Visible-Light-Driven H2 and O2 Evolution . Inorg. Chem. 
2018 , 57 , 3840 –3854 . 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.7b03213 .29528221 
Prasad C. ; Tang H. ; Liu W. 
Magnetic Fe3O4 based layered double hydroxides (LDHs) nanocomposites
(Fe3O4/LDHs): recent review of progress in synthesis,
properties
and applications . J Nanostruct. Chem. 
2018 , 8 , 393 –412 . 10.1007/s40097-018-0289-y .
Wu Y. ; Wang H. ; Sun Y. ; Xiao T. ; Tu W. ; Yuan X. ; Zeng G. ; Li S. ; Chew J. W. 
Photogenerated
Charge Transfer via Interfacial Internal Electric Field for Significantly
Improved Photocatalysis in Direct Z-scheme Oxygen-doped Carbon Nitrogen/CoAl-Layered
Double Hydroxide Heterojunction . Appl. Catal.,
B 
2018 , 227 , 530 –540 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.01.069 .
Zhang L. ; Li S. ; Liu B. ; Wang D. ; Xie T. 
Highly Efficient CdS/WO3 Photocatalysts: Z-Scheme Photocatalytic Mechanism for Their
Enhanced Photocatalytic H2 Evolution under Visible Light . ACS Catal. 
2014 , 4 , 3724 –3729 . 10.1021/cs500794j .
Yuan X. ; Jiang L. ; Chen X. ; Leng L. ; Wang H. ; Wu Z. ; Xiong T. ; Liang J. ; Zeng G. 
Highly efficient visible-light-induced
photoactivity of Z-scheme Ag2CO3/Ag/WO3 photocatalysts for organic pollutant degradation . Environ. Sci. Nano 
2017 , 4 , 2175 –2185 . 10.1039/C7EN00713B .
Liu Q. ; Wang F. ; Lin H. ; Xie Y. ; Tong N. ; Lin J. ; Zhang X. ; Zhan Z. ; Wang X. 
Surface oxygen vacancy
and defect engineering of WO3 for improved visible light
photocatalytic performance . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2018 , 8 , 4399 –4406 . 10.1039/C8CY00994E .
Yousaf A. B. ; Imran M. ; Zaidi S. J. ; Kasak P. 
Highly Efficient Photocatalytic
Z-Scheme Hydrogen Production over Oxygen-Deficient WO3–X Nanorods supported Zn0.3Cd0.7S Heterostructure . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 657410.1038/s41598-017-06808-6 .28747786 
Lu N. ; Wang P. ; Su Y. ; Yu H. ; Liu N. ; Quan X. 
Construction of Z-Scheme g-C3N4/RGO/WO3 with in situ photoreduced
grapheme oxide as electron mediator
for efficient photocatalytic degradation of ciprofloxacin . Chemosphere 
2019 , 215 , 444 –453 . 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.10.065 .30336321 
Zhou H. ; Wen Z. ; Liu J. ; Ke J. ; Duan X. ; Wang S. 
Z-scheme plasmonic
Ag decorated WO3/Bi2WO6 hybrids for
enhanced photocatalytic abatement of chlorinated-VOCs under solar
light irradiation . Appl. Catal., B 
2019 , 242 , 76 –84 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.09.090 .
Fan X. ; Gao B. ; Wang T. ; Huang X. ; Gong H. ; Xue H. ; Guo H. ; Song L. ; Xia W. ; He J. 
Layered double
hydroxide
modified WO3 nanorod arrays for enhanced photoelectrochemical
water splitting . Appl. Catal. A 
2016 , 528 , 52 –58 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2016.09.014 .
Morikawa M. ; Ogura Y. ; Ahmed N. ; Kawamura S. ; Mikami G. ; Okamoto S. ; Izumi Y. 
Photocatalytic conversion
of carbon
dioxide into methanol in reverse fuel cells with tungsten oxide and
layered double hydroxide photocatalysts for solar fuel generation . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 4 , 1644 –1651 . 10.1039/C3CY00959A .
Tian L. ; Xian X. ; Cui X. ; Tang H. ; Yang X. 
Fabrication
of modified g-C3N4 nanorod/Ag3PO4 nanocomposites for solar-driven photocatalytic oxygen evolution
from water splitting . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2018 , 430 , 301 –308 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.07.185 .
Liu W. ; Shen J. ; Yang X. ; Liu Q. ; Tang H. 
Dual Z-scheme
g-C3N4/Ag3PO4/Ag2MoO4 ternary composite photocatalyst for solar oxygen
evolution from water splitting . Appl. Surf.
Sci. 
2018 , 456 , 369 –378 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.06.156 .
Wang Y. ; Cui X. ; Yang Q. ; Liu J. ; Gao Y. ; Sun P. ; Lu G. 
Preparation of Ag-loaded
mesoporous WO3 and its enhanced
NO2 sensing performance . Sens. Actuators
B: Chem. 
2016 , 225 , 544 –552 . 10.1016/j.snb.2015.11.065 .
Jiang D. −E. ; Overbury S. H. ; Dai S. 
Interaction
of Gold Clusters with
a Hydroxylated Surface . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2011 , 2 , 1211 –1215 . 10.1021/jz200420t .26295328 
Jiang H. ; Katsumata K. −I. ; Hong J. −S. ; Yamaguchi A. ; Nakata K. ; Terashima C. ; Matsushita N. ; Miyauchi M. ; Fujishima A. 
Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 on Cu2O-loaded Zn-Cr layered double hydroxides . Appl. Catal., B 
2018 , 224 , 783 –790 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.11.011 .
Jiang K. -Y. ; Weng Y. -L. ; Guo S. -Y. ; Yu Y. ; Xiao F.-X. 
Self-assembly
of metal/semiconductor heterostructures via ligand
engineering: unravelling the synergistic dual roles of metal nanocrystals
toward plasmonic photoredox catalysis . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 16922 –16936 . 10.1039/C7NR04802E .29077121 
Rajagopal S. ; Nataraj D. ; Mangalaraj D. ; Djaoued Y. ; Robichaud J. ; Khyzhun O. Y. 
Controlled Growth of WO3Nanostructures with
Three Different Morphologies and Their Structural, Optical, and Photodecomposition
Studies . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2009 , 4 , 1335 –1342 . 10.1007/s11671-009-9402-y .20628456 
An X. ; Yu J. C. ; Wang Y. ; Hu Y. ; Yu X. ; Zhang G. 
WO3 nanorods/graphene
nanocomposites for high-efficiency
visible-light-driven photocatalysis and NO2 gas sensing . J. Mater. Chem. 
2012 , 22 , 8525 –8531 . 10.1039/c2jm16709c .
Sahoo D. P. ; Patnaik S. ; Rath D. ; Mohapatra P. ; Mohanty A. ; Parida K. 
Influence of Au/Pd
alloy on amine
functionalised ZnCr LDH–MCM-41 nanocomposite: A visible light
sensitive photocatalyst towards one-pot imine synthesis . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2019 , 9 , 2493 –2513 . 10.1039/C8CY02603C .
Fu J. ; Cao S. ; Yu J. 
Dual Z-scheme
charge transfer in TiO2–Ag–Cu2O composite for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen generation . J. Materiomics 
2015 , 1 , 124 –133 . 10.1016/j.jmat.2015.02.002 .
Sahoo D. P. ; Patnaik S. ; Rath D. ; Parida K. M. 
Synergistic effects
of plasmon induced Ag@Ag3VO4/ZnCr LDH ternary
heterostructures towards visible light responsive O2 evolution
and phenol oxidation reactions . Inorg. Chem.
Front. 
2018 , 5 , 879 –896 . 10.1039/C7QI00742F .
Nakka L. ; Molinari J. E. ; Wachs I. E. 
Surface
and Bulk Aspects of Mixed
Oxide Catalytic Nanoparticles: Oxidation and Dehydration of CH3OH by Polyoxometallates . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 15544 –15554 . 10.1021/ja904957d .19807071 
Nazarabad M. K. ; Goharshadi E. ; Entezari M. ; Nancarrow P. 
Numerical
simulation of the collision of two microdroplets with a pseudopotential
multiple-relaxation-time lattice Boltzmann model . Microfluid. Nanofluid. 
2015 , 19 , 1191 –1202 . 10.1007/s10404-013-1202-0 .
Elbohy H. ; Reza K. M. ; Abdulkarim S. ; Qiao Q. 
Creation of oxygen
vacancies to activate WO3 for higher efficiency dye-sensitized
solar cells . Sustainable Energy Fuels 
2018 , 2 , 403 –412 . 10.1039/C7SE00483D .
Akurati K. K. ; Vital A. ; Dellemann J.-P. ; Michalow K. ; Graule T. ; Ferri D. ; Baiker A. 
Flame-made WO3/TiO2 nanoparticles: Relation between surface acidity, structure
and photocatalytic activity . Appl. Catal., B 
2008 , 79 , 53 –62 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2007.09.036 .
Kim S. ; Fahel J. ; Durand P. ; Andre E. ; Cartere C. 
Ternary Layered
Double Hydroxides (LDHs) Based on Co-, Cu-Substituted ZnAl for the
Design of Efficient Photocatalysts . Eur. J.
Inorg. Chem. 
2017 , 2017 , 669 –678 . 10.1002/ejic.201601213 .
He J. ; Wu P. ; Wu Y. ; Li H. ; Jiang W. ; Xun S. ; Zhang M. ; Zhu W. ; Li H. 
Taming Interfacial
Oxygen Vacancies of Amphiphilic Tungsten Oxide for Enhanced Catalysis
in Oxidative Desulfurization . ACS Sustainable
Chem. Eng. 
2017 , 5 , 8930 –8938 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b01741 .
Surviliene S. ; Jasulaitiene V. ; Cesuniene A. ; Lisowska-Oleksiak A. 
The use of
XPS for study of the surface layers of Cr–Co alloyelectrodeposited
from Cr(III) formate–urea baths . Solid
State Ionics 
2008 , 179 , 222 –227 . 10.1016/j.ssi.2007.12.052 .
Saleem M. ; Al-Kuhaili M. F. ; Durrani S. M. A. ; Hendi A. H. Y. ; Bakhtiari I. A. ; Ali S. 
Influence of hydrogen annealing on the optoelectronic properties
of WO3 thin films . Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy 
2015 , 40 , 12343 –12351 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.06.078 .
Won S. ; Lee S. Y. ; Park J. ; Seo H. 
Forming-less and Non-Volatile
Resistive Switching in WOX by Oxygen Vacancy Control at
Interfaces . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 1018610.1038/s41598-017-10851-8 .28860572 
Liu Y. ; Li J. ; Tang H. ; Li W. ; Yang Y. ; Li Y. ; Chen Q. 
Enhanced photoelectrochemical performance of plate-like
WO3 induced by surface oxygen vacancies . Electrochem.
Commun. 
2016 , 68 , 81 –85 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2016.05.004 .
Mirfasih M. H. ; Li C. ; Tayyebi A. ; Cao Q. ; Yua J. ; Delaunay J. J. 
Oxygen-vacancy-induced
photoelectrochemical water oxidation by platelike tungsten oxide photoanodes
prepared under acid-mediated hydrothermal treatment conditions . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 26992 –27000 . 10.1039/C7RA03691D .
Ding J. ; Chai Y. ; Liu Q. ; Liu X. ; Ren J. ; Dai W.-L. 
Selective Deposition of Silver Nanoparticles
onto WO3 Nanorods with Different Facets: The Correlation
of Facet-Induced
Electron Transport Preference and Photocatalytic Activity . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 4345 –4353 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b10580 .
Nayak S. ; Pradhan A. C. ; Parida K. M. 
Topotactic Transformation of Solvated
MgCr-LDH Nanosheets to Highly Efficient Porous MgO/MgCr2O4 Nanocomposite for Photocatalytic H2 Evolution . Inorg. Chem. 
2018 , 57 , 8646 –8661 . 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b01517 .29949363 
Li Y. ; Wang C. ; Zheng H. ; Wan F. ; Yu F. ; Zhang X. ; Liu Y. 
Surface oxygen vacancies
on WO3 contributed to enhanced photothermo-synergistic
effect . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2017 , 391 , 654 –661 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.07.042 .
Hong S. J. ; Lee S. ; Jang J. S. ; Lee J. S. 
Heterojunction
BiVO4/WO3 electrodes for enhanced photoactivity
of water oxidation . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2011 , 4 , 1781 –1787 . 10.1039/c0ee00743a .
Ishikawa A. ; Takata T. ; Kondo J. N. ; Hara M. ; Kobayashi V. ; Domen K. 
Oxysulfide Sm2Ti2S2O5 as a Stable Photocatalyst for Water Oxidation and Reduction under
Visible Light Irradiation (λ ≤ 650 nm) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2002 , 124 , 13547 –13553 . 10.1021/ja0269643 .12418910 
Mohapatra L. ; Parida K. M. ; Satpathy M. 
Molybdate/Tungstate Intercalated
Oxo-Bridged Zn/Y LDH for Solar Light Induced Photodegradation of Organic
Pollutants . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 13063 –13070 . 10.1021/jp300066g .
Lee K. ; Seo W. S. ; Park J. T. 
Synthesis and Optical Properties
of Colloidal Tungsten Oxide Nanorods . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 3408 –3409 . 10.1021/ja034011e .12643684 
Liang Q. ; Shi Y. ; Ma W. ; Li Z. ; Yang X. 
Enhanced photocatalytic
activity and structural stability by hybridizing Ag3PO4 nanospheres with graphene oxide sheets . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 15657 –15665 . 10.1039/c2cp42465g .23080357 
Zhao M. ; Li H. ; Shen X. ; Ji Z. ; Xu K. 
Facile Electrochemical
Synthesis of CeO2@Ag@CdS Nanotube Arrays with Enhanced
Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting Performance . Dalton Trans. 
2015 , 44 , 19935 –19941 . 10.1039/C5DT03661E .26515189 
Yang X. ; Li H. ; Zhang W. ; Sun M. ; Li L. ; Xu N. ; Wu J. ; Sun J. 
High Visible
Photoelectrochemical Activity of Ag Nanoparticle-Sandwiched
CdS/Ag/ZnO Nanorods . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 658 –667 . 10.1021/acsami.6b12259 .27982560 
Sultana S. ; Mansingh S. ; Parida K. M. 
Rational design
of light induced
self healed Fe based oxygen vacancy rich CeO2 (CeO2NS–FeOOH/Fe2O3) nanostructure
materials for photocatalytic water oxidation and Cr(VI) reduction . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2018 , 6 , 11377 –11389 . 10.1039/C8TA02539H .
Yan J. ; Wang T. ; Wu G. ; Dai W. ; Guan N. ; Li L. ; Gong J. 
Tungsten Oxide Single
Crystal Nanosheets for Enhanced
Multichannel Solar Light Harvesting . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 1580 –1586 . 10.1002/adma.201404792 .25582656 
Kalanur S. S. ; Yoo I. H. ; Eom K. ; Seo H. 
Enhancement
of photoelectrochemical
water splitting response of WO3 by Means of Bi doping . J. Catal. 
2018 , 357 , 127 –137 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2017.11.012 .
Ye R. ; Fang H. B. ; Zheng Y. Z. ; Li N. ; Wang Y. ; Tao X. 
Fabrication of CoTiO3/g-C3N4 Hybrid
Photocatalysts with Enhanced H2 Evolution: Z-Scheme Photocatalytic
Mechanism Insight . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 13879 –13889 . 10.1021/acsami.6b01850 .27180943 
Chakraborty K. ; Pal T. ; Ghosh S. 
RGO-ZnTe: A Graphene
Based Composite for Tetracycline
Degradation and Their Synergistic Effect . ACS
Appl. Nano Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 3137 –3144 . 10.1021/acsanm.8b00295 .
Niu J. ; Ding S. ; Zhang L. ; Zhao J. ; Feng C. 
A Visible-light-mediated
Sr-Bi2O3 photocatalysis of tetracycline: Kinetics,
mechanisms and toxicity assessment . Chemosphere 
2013 , 93 , 1 –8 . 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.04.043 .23706401 
Yang Y. ; Zeng Z. ; Zhang C. ; Huang D. ; Zeng G. ; Xiao R. ; Lai C. ; Zhou C. ; Guo H. ; Xue W. ; Cheng M. ; Wang W. ; Wang J. 
Construction of iodine
vacancy-rich BiOI/Ag@AgI Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalysts for
visible-light-driven tetracycline degradation: Transformation pathways
and mechanism insight . Chem. Eng. J. 
2018 , 349 , 808 –821 . 10.1016/j.cej.2018.05.093 .
Wang W. ; Xiao K. ; Zhu L. ; Yin Y. ; Wang Z. 
Graphene oxide
supported titanium dioxide & ferroferric oxide hybrid, a magnetically
separable photocatalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activity for
tetracycline hydrochloride degradation . RSC
Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 21287 –21297 . 10.1039/C6RA28224E .
Thi V. H. T. ; Lee B. K. 
Great improvement
on tetracycline removal using ZnO
rod-activated carbon fiber composite prepared with a facile microwave
method . J. Hazard. Mater. 
2017 , 324 , 329 –339 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.10.066 .27810327 
Jiang X. ; Guo Y. ; Zhang L. ; Jiang W. ; Xie R. 
Catalytic degradation
of tetracycline hydrochloride by persulfate activated with nano Fe0 immobilized mesoporous carbon . Chem.
Eng. J. 
2018 , 341 , 392 –401 . 10.1016/j.cej.2018.02.034 .
Deng F. ; Zhao L. ; Luo X. ; Luo S. ; Dionysiou D. D. 
Highly
efficient visible-light photocatalytic performance of Ag/AgIn5S8 for degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride
and treatment of real pharmaceutical industry wastewater . Chem. Eng. J. 
2018 , 333 , 423 –433 . 10.1016/j.cej.2017.09.022 .
Naya Shin. ; Kimura K. ; Tada H. 
One-Step Selective
Aerobic Oxidation
of Amines to Imines by Gold Nanoparticle-Loaded Rutile Titanium (IV)
Oxide Plasmon Photocatalyst . ACS Catal. 
2013 , 3 , 10 –13 . 10.1021/cs300682d .
Wang M. ; Shen S. ; Li L. ; Tang Z. ; Yang J. 
The role of
hydrogen bonding on enhancement of photocatalytic activity of the
acidified graphitic carbon nitride for hydrogen evolution . J. Mater. Sci. 
2017 , 52 , 5155 –5164 . 10.1007/s10853-017-0752-z .
Galińska A. ; Walendziewski J. 
Photocatalytic Water Splitting over Pt–TiO2 in the Presence of Sacrificial Reagents . Energy Fuels 
2005 , 19 , 1143 –1147 . 10.1021/ef0400619 .
Zhang G. ; Lin B. ; Qiu Y. ; He L. ; Chen Y. ; Gao B. 
Highly efficient
visible-light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen generation by immobilizing
CdSe nanocrystals on ZnCr-layered double hydroxide nanosheets . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2015 , 40 , 4758 –4765 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.02.055 .
Boppella R. ; Choi C. H. ; Moon J. ; Kim D. H. 
Spatial charge separation
on strongly coupled 2D-hybrid of rGO/La2Ti2O7/NiFe-LDH heterostructures for highly efficient noble metal
free photocatalytic hydrogen generation . Appl.
Catal., B 
2018 , 239 , 178 –186 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.07.063 .
Nayak S. ; Mohapatra L. ; Parida K. M. 
Visible light-driven novel g-C3N4/NiFe-LDH composite photocatalyst with enhanced
photocatalytic activity towards water oxidation and reduction reaction . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 18622 –18635 . 10.1039/C5TA05002B .
Das S. ; Patnaik S. ; Parida K. M. 
Fabrication
of a Au-loaded CaFe2O4/CoAl LDH p–n junction
based architecture
with stoichiometric H2 & O2 generation and
Cr(VI) reduction under visible light . Inorg.
Chem. Front. 
2019 , 6 , 94 –109 . 10.1039/C8QI00952J .
Fu J. ; Xu Q. ; Low J. ; Jiang C. ; Yu J. 
Ultrathin 2D/2D WO3/g-C3N4 step-scheme H2-production
photocatalyst . Appl. Catal., B 
2019 , 243 , 556 –565 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2018.11.011 .
He K. ; Xie J. ; Luo X. ; Wen J. ; Ma S. ; Li X. ; Fang Y. ; Zhang X. 
Enhanced visible
light photocatalytic
H2 production over Z-scheme g-C3N4 nansheets/WO3 nanorods nanocomposites loaded with Ni(OH)x cocatalysts . Chin.
J. Catal. 
2017 , 38 , 240 –252 . 10.1016/S1872-2067(17)62759-1 .
Zhang D. ; Ji T. ; Yu J. ; Jiang X. ; Jiao F. 
Solvothermal Synthesis
of Cs0.33WO3/LDHs Composite as a Novel Visible-Light-Driven
Photocatalyst . Photochem. Photobiol. 
2018 , 94 , 219 –227 . 10.1111/php.12838 .28881470 
Chen J. ; Xiao X. ; Wang Y. ; Ye Z. 
Ag nanoparticles decorated
WO3/g-C3N4 2D/2D heterostructure
with enhanced photocatalytic activity for organic pollutants degradation . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2019 , 467–468 , 1000 –101 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.10.236 .
Yan M. ; Wu Y. ; Zhu F. ; Hua Y. ; Shi W. 
The fabrication of
a novel Ag3VO4/WO3heterojunction
with enhanced visible light efficiency in the photocatalytic degradation
of TC . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 3308 –3315 . 10.1039/C5CP05599G .26750333 
Qu L. ; Lang J. ; Wang S. ; Chai Z. ; Su Y. ; Wang X. 
Nanospherical composite of WO3 wrapped NaTaO3: Improved photodegradation of tetracycline under visible light irradiation . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2016 , 388 , 412 –419 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.12.095 .
An X. ; Yu J. C. ; Wang Y. ; Hu Y. ; Yu X. ; Zhangc G. J. 
WO3 nanorods/graphene
nanocomposites for
high-efficiency visible-light-driven photocatalysis and NO2 gas sensing . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2012 , 22 , 8525 –8531 . 10.1039/c2jm16709c .
Ding J. ; Chai Y. ; Liu Q. ; Liu X. ; Ren J. ; Dai W.-L. 
Selective Deposition of Silver Nanoparticles onto WO3 Nanorods with Different Facets: The Correlation of Facet-Induced
Electron Transport Preference and Photocatalytic Activity . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 4345 –4353 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b10580 .

