
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3053358210.1021/acsomega.8b02139ArticleIndole Alkaloid Derivative B, a Novel Bifunctional
Agent That Mitigates 5-Fluorouracil-Induced Cardiotoxicity Bi Wei *†Bi Yue †Li Pengfei †Hou Shanshan ‡Yan Xin ‡Hensley Connor ‡Bammert Catherine E. ‡Zhang Yanrong †Gibson K. Michael *§Ju Jingfang *∥Bi Lanrong *‡† Second
Hospital of HeBei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050000, P. R. China‡ Department
of Chemistry and Biological Sciences, Michigan
Technological University, Houghton, Michigan 49931, United States§ Department
of Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University, Spokane, Washington 99202, United States∥ Translational
Research Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, New York 11794, United States* E-mail: biwei@hebmu.edu.cn (W.B.).* E-mail: mike.gibson@wsu.edu (K.M.G.).* E-mail: jingfang.ju@stonybrookmedicine.edu (J.J.).* E-mail: lanrong@mtu.edu (L.B).21 11 2018 30 11 2018 3 11 15850 15864 22 08 2018 23 10 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Clinically approved therapeutics
that mitigate chemotherapy-induced
cardiotoxicity, a serious adverse effect of chemotherapy, are lacking.
The aim of this study was to determine the putative protective capacity
of a novel indole alkaloid derivative B (IADB) against
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-induced cardiotoxicity. To assess the free-radical
scavenging activities of IADB, the acetylcholine-induced
relaxation assay in rat thoracic aorta was used. Further, IADB was tested in normal and cancer cell lines with assays gauging autophagy
induction. We further examined whether IADB could attenuate
cardiotoxicity in 5-FU-treated male ICR mice. We found that IADB could serve as a novel bifunctional agent (displaying
both antioxidant and autophagy-modulating activities). Further, we
demonstrated that IADB induced production of cytosolic
autophagy-associated structures in both cancer and normal cell lines.
We observed that IADB cytotoxicity was much lower in
normal versus cancer cell lines, suggesting an enhanced potency toward
cancer cells. The cardiotoxicity induced by 5-FU was significantly
relieved in animals pretreated with IADB. Taken together, IADB treatment, in combination with chemotherapy, may lead
to reduced cardiotoxicity, as well as the reduction of anticancer
drug dosages that may further improve chemotherapeutic efficacy with
decreased off-target effects. Our data suggest that the use of IADB may be therapeutically beneficial in minimizing cardiotoxicity
associated with high-dose chemotherapy. On the basis of the redox
status difference between normal and tumor cells, IADB selectively induces autophagic cell death, mediated by reactive
oxygen species overproduction, in cancer cells. This novel mechanism
could reveal novel therapeutic targets in chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity.

document-id-old-9ao8b02139document-id-new-14ao-2018-02139uccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Chemotherapy-induced
cardiotoxicity is a serious adverse outcome
of several chemotherapeutics that severely impact therapeutic efficacy.1,2 For example, anthracycline intervention can lead to life-threatening
cardiomyopathy.3 One of the most widely
accepted mechanisms for chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity involves
the overproduction of free radicals associated with oxidative stress
and eventual apoptosis of cardiac cells.4,5 Unfortunately,
many (but not all) chemotherapeutics employ reactive oxygen species
(ROS)-dependent mechanisms to target cancer cells. These observations
underscore the challenges in defining the approaches to alleviate
the adverse outcome of cardiotoxicity from the intended mechanism
of action (MOA) of drugs targeting cancerous cells.

5-Fluorouracil
(5-FU), a cytotoxic thymidylate synthase inhibitor,
is widely used for the treatment of multiple cancers; yet, its use
is associated with cardiotoxicity, which can include myocardial ischemia,
cardiac arrhythmias, hyper- and hypotension, left ventricular dysfunction,
cardiac arrest, and sudden death.6,7 The heart is
susceptible to ROS damage and oxidative stress, as this organ exhibits
relatively low levels of antioxidant enzymes.8 For example, cardiac muscle contains 150 times less catalase (CAT)
and 4 times less superoxide dismutase (SOD) than liver.9 5-FU has been shown to induce apoptosis of rat
cardiac cells via generation of ROS.10 Additionally,
in rabbits, the antioxidant probucol protected against 5-FU-induced
endothelial damage.11 Accordingly, if ROS
is the main instigator of 5-FU-induced cardiotoxicity, the compounds
limiting free radical formation may have cardioprotective effects
when combined with 5-FU, although studies thus far examining this
approach have had only marginal success.12,13 Currently, there is no FDA-approved treatment that can ameliorate
5-FU-induced cardiotoxicity.

Cyclic nitroxides represent a diverse
group of stable free-radical
molecules with unique antioxidant properties.14 The antioxidant capacity of 4-hydroxyl-TEMPO (TEMPOL) is linked
to its stable nitroxide radical structure.15 TEMPOL has a low molecular weight, permeates biological membranes,
and scavenges both intra- and extracellular deleterious ROS. Moreover,
TEMPOL’s antioxidant capacity is enhanced by its SOD-mimicking
activity.16 TEMPOL can scavenge various
ROS species, including carbon-centered, •OH, peroxyl,
and thiyl radicals, as well as dinitrogen species .14 In addition to the reduction of ROS as a mechanism for
reducing chemotherapeutic toxicity, another approach involves the
alteration of autophagic mechanisms.17,18

Autophagy
is a catabolic process in which long-lived proteins,
damaged cell organelles, and other cellular particles are sequestered
and degraded. Autophagy contributes to the maintenance of cellular
energy homeostasis and survival in times of stress. Most anticancer
drugs have been reported to induce autophagy in tumor cells.17 However, there are conflicting results from
the ongoing clinical trials which target the inhibition of autophagy.
Currently, there is no consensus on how to manipulate autophagy to
improve the clinical course of cancer patients.

Alkaloids isolated
from the plants used in Chinese herbal medicines
are an important source for anticancer drug discovery, many of which
work via autophagic mechanisms.19,20 For example, the alkaloid
berberine produces its anticancer effects via the induction of autophagic
cell death and mitochondrial apoptosis in liver carcinoma.21 Conversely, tetrandrine acts as an autophagy
enhancer, inducing early G1 arrest in colon carcinoma cells.22 Additionally, camptothecin and vinblastine,
the FDA-approved chemotherapeutics, also work via autophagic processes.19

To develop effective and safe therapeutic
strategies to prevent
the adverse effects of 5-FU on cardiac tissues without compromising
its antitumor activity, we synthesized a series of novel compounds
that conjoined indole alkaloid and nitroxide scaffolds (the latter
based on our successful work with TEMPOL). Our objective was the development
of new compounds whose cardioprotective actions would involve both
ROS-scavenging and autophagic processes, with a minimal impact on
the anticancer effect of 5-FU. Among these newly synthesized indole
alkaloid derivatives (the detailed synthesis of the series compounds
will be reported elsewhere), we discovered an indole alkaloid derivative
B (IADB) that serves as a novel bifunctional agent (antioxidant
and autophagy-modulating activity). The present study was designed
to examine the hypothesis that cardiotoxicity induced by chemotherapy
could be attenuated by IADB when administrated in conjunction
with chemotherapeutical agents.

Results
Synthesis of IADB
The preparation of IADB followed
the synthetic route outlined in Figure 1. l-Tryptophan was
first reacted with formaldehyde which affords compound 1 via a Pictet–Spengler intramolecular
cyclization. N-Boc-protected compound 2 was subjected to a coupling reaction with l-leucine
benzyl ester to afford compound 3. To avoid the possible aminolysis, the deprotected compound 3 was then directly converted to compound 4 through the intramolecular cyclization
with a ketone. After deprotection, compound 5 was subjected to a coupling reaction with l-theanine-OBzl·HCl
to afford compound 6. Finally, compound 6 was readily converted to the target compound, IADB,
after deprotection and coupling reactions with 4-amino-TEMPO. The
chemical structure of IADB was confirmed by proton and
carbon nuclear magnetic resonance studies and high-resolution mass
spectrometry. The observed paramagnetic broadening was due to the
existence of the nitroxide radical. IADB was further
analyzed by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to confirm
the intact nitroxide moiety. IADB was stable and was
stored at room temperature in sealed bottles until use.

Figure 1 Synthetic scheme
of an IADB. Reagents and conditions:
(i) H2SO4, HCHO; (ii) Boc2O; (iii)
EDC, HOBt, L-Leu-OBzl·HCl; (iv) EtOAc·HCl (4N), Et3N; acetone; (v) Pd/C, H2; (vi) EDC, HOBt, l-theanine-OBzl·HCl,
(vii) H2, Pd/C, and (viii) EDC, HOBt, 4-amino-TEMPO.

Acetylcholine-Induced Relaxation
Could be Significantly Reversed
by IADB in a Dose-Dependent Manner
The free-radical
scavenging potential of IADB was evaluated in the acetylcholine
(Ach)-induced relaxation of the rat thoracic aorta assay. In this
assay, the isolated aortic rings were contracted with norepinephrine
(NE). Upon stabilization, Ach was added to induce vasorelaxation.
Exposure of the aortic rings to TEMPOL (10–6 mol/L)
and IADB (10–6, 10–7, and 10–8 mol/L) was performed, and then the percentage
inhibition of Ach-induced vasorelaxation was determined. As shown
in Figure S1, the treatment of the aortic
rings with the free-radical scavenger TEMPOL (10–6 mol/L) reduced the Ach-induced relaxation of the aortic rings to
some degree (35.8 ± 4.2% inhibition). Compared to TEMPOL (10–6 mol/L), the treatment with IADB (10–6 mol/L) could substantially inhibit Ach-induced vasorelaxation
(95.6 ± 5.7% inhibition, in comparison with TEMPOL, p < 0.001). Even at a lower concentration (10–7 mol/L), IADB still could reverse the Ach-induced vasorelaxation
to a significant degree (inhibition percentage: 72.5 ± 3.8% inhibition,
in comparison with TEMPOL, p < 0.01) (Figure S1).

IADB Induces
GFP-LC3 Puncta Formation in Cancer
and Normal Cells
During preliminary cellular assays, we observed
that IADB intervention induced the presence of cytoplasmic
structures, indicative of autophagy. Thus, to verify the potential
role of IADB in autophagy induction, we evaluated IADB in both cancer and normal cell lines. Initially, HeLa
cells were transiently transfected with a green fluorescent protein
(GFP)-light chain 3 (LC3) followed by incubation with IADB for 24 h. Under nutrient-rich conditions, less than 5% of HeLa cells
displayed GFP-LC3 puncta. Nutrient starvation conditions increased
the percent of cells showing punctuation of GFP-LC3 to 35% in HeLa
cells, and low numbers of disk-shaped small GFP-LC3 puncta in individual
cells were detected (Figure S2). However,
the addition of IADB dramatically increased the percent
of cells containing fluorescent puncta and the number of GFP-LC3 puncta
per cell. One GFP-LC3 fluorescent puncta was regarded as equivalent
to one autophagosome. To examine whether IADB-mediated
formation of autophagosome could occur in other cell types, several
cancer cell lines (colon cancer HT-29, lung cancer A549, and breast
cancer MDA-MB-231) and normal H9C2 rat cardiomyoblasts were also examined.
A significant increase in fluorescent GFP-LC3 puncta per cell and
the intensified green fluorescence (puncta) induced by IADB were observed in both the cancer and normal cells tested (Figure S2).

Dose-Responsive and Time-Dependent
Effects of IADB on Autophagy
In GFP-LC3 transiently
transfected cells,
LC3 overexpression may result in protein aggregation. It is important
to distinguish protein aggregates from true autophagosomes. In a stably
transfected system, the levels of GFP-LC3 could be controlled at an
appropriate level to avoid artificial aggregation. With this in mind,
we next analyzed the IADB-induced changes in the level
and distribution of microtubule-associated protein 1 LC3 (an autophagosomal
marker) in HeLa cells that had been transfected with LC3 fused to
GFP. Under nutrient-rich conditions, small GFP-LC3 puncta (weakly
fluorescent) were homogeneously distributed throughout the cytoplasm
of the majority of transfected cells. Under nutrient starvation, the
number of GFP-LC3 puncta per cell increased. Nutrient starvation again
served as a positive control for the induction of autophagy. Under IADB treatment, the number of GFP-LC3 puncta per cell was
significantly increased. As shown in Figure S3 (Supporting Information), IADB intervention resulted
in significant increases in the number of GFP-LC3 puncta per cell
in a dose-and time-dependent manner (Figure S3). With these findings, we next sought to verify that the increased
number of GFP-LC3 puncta was not the result of large protein aggregation.

IADB Enhances Autophagic Flux in GFP-LC3 Stably
Transfected HeLa Cells
As autophagy is a dynamic process,
the accumulation of GFP-LC3 puncta may indicate enhanced autophagosome
formation or impaired autophagic degradation. Monitoring autophagic
flux is generally utilized as a measure of autophagic degradation
activity.28 Previously, we developed a
new assay for monitoring the autophagic flux. In this assay, we utilized
(i) GFP-LC3 levels to monitor autophagosome formation (Figure 3B); (ii) LysoProbe26,27,37 as an estimate of changes in
lysosomal activities (Figure 3C; LysoProbe stains acidic vesicular organelles, including
lysosomes and autolysosomes); and (iii) colocalization of these two
probes to estimate the autophagic flux via monitoring of autolysosome
formation (i.e., the fusion of autophagosome and lysosome) and turnover/degradation
(Figure 3D).

As shown in Figure 3A, untreated sham control cells demonstrated a diffuse cytoplasmic
staining of GFP-LC3 with very few punctate autophagosomes and lysosomes
(first row, Figure 3A): GFP-LC3, green; LysoProbe, red; merged (autophagy flux), yellow.
Induction of autophagosome formation was observed following IADB treatment (10 μM, 1 h) in complete medium (second
row, Figure 3A). Selected
GFP-LC3 patches appeared following 6 h of IADB treatment
(third row, Figure 3A). Representative GFP-LC3 puncta appeared in numerous rings (solid
arrow), disks (double arrows), and cup-shaped structures (dashed arrow)
(Figure 2). GFP-labeled
rings (arrow, Figure 2) and GFP-LC3-labeled cups (dashed arrow, Figure 2) may represent optical sections traversing
the center of autophagosomes, whereas GFP-labeled solid disks (double-headed
arrow, Figure 2) likely
represent optical sections that include the edges of autophagosomes
extending from lateral to lateral edge. We refer to these disks, cups,
and ring-shaped structures as GFP puncta. After 12 h of treatment
with IADB, the number of GFP-LC3 patches decreased, whereas
GFP-labeled rings, GFP-labeled cups, and GFP-labeled solid disks increased
with IADB (fourth row, Figure 3A). A prolonged treatment
with IADB (24 h) resulted in an extensive production
of GFP-LC3 puncta (fifth row, Figure 3A). To validate the enhanced autophagic flux, IADB-induced autophagic activity was validated using 3-methyladenine
(3-MA). The class III PI3K inhibitor 3-MA is an inhibitor of the early
steps of autophagy, which blocks autophagosome formation.28 The addition of 3-MA prior to IADB treatment abrogated IADB-mediated autophagy (decreased
GFP-LC3 puncta; seventh row, Figure 3A). Next, we treated the HeLa cells stably expressing
GFP-LC3 with IADB in the absence or presence of chloroquine
(CQ) (80 μM). CQ, a known inhibitor of the later steps of autophagy,
has the capacity to prevent the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes
with a concomitant inhibition of the lysosomal degradation of proteins
late in autophagy.28 We found that increases
in the number of GFP-LC3 puncta per cell induced by IADB were further elevated in the presence of CQ. Combinatorial treatment
(IADB + CQ) significantly increased the number of GFP-LC3
puncta and a higher colocalization index (monitoring autolysosomes
formation and degradation) in comparison to either compound alone
(eighth and sixth rows, Figure 3A), suggesting that the autophagic degradation was inhibited
in the presence of CQ. These results further confirmed that the increased
number of GFP-LC3 puncta was due to enhanced autophagosome formation
rather than impaired autophagic degradation.

Figure 2 Representative autophagic
structures induced by IADB incubation (10 μM) for
12 h. GFP-LC3 fluorescence appeared
in numerous rings (solid arrow), disks (double arrows), and cup-shaped
structures (dashed arrow).

Figure 3 IADB enhances autophagic flux in GFP-LC3 stably transfected
HeLa cells. (A) Representative confocal fluorescence images of HeLa
cells subjected to different treatment protocols (first row: control
cells; second row: IADB (10 μM) for 1 h; third
row: IADB (10 μM) for 6 h; fourth row: IADB (10 μM) for 12 h; fifth row: IADB (10 μM)
for 24 h; sixth row: IADB (10 μM) + CQ (80 μM)
for 24 h; seventh row: IADB (10 μM) + 3-MA (2 mM)
for 12 h; and eighth row: CQ (80 μM) alone for 24 h), counterstained
with LysoProbe (red fluorescence), GFP-LC3 (green fluorescence), Hoechst
33342 (blue fluorescence). (B) By measuring the mean fluorescence
intensity (MFI) of GFP-LC3 changes, the total autophagosome number
was determined; (C) by measuring the MFI of LysoProbe changes, lysosomal
formation was estimated; and (D) by measuring the MFI of GFP-LC3+/LysoProbe+ double positive, the colocalization
index was produced, estimating the autophagic flux (N = 6 independent experiments).

IADB Exhibits Specific Cytotoxic Effects toward
Cancer Cells
To explore whether IADB could act
as an autophagy-promoting compound with anticancer activity, we examined
a panel of cancer cell types (HeLa, HT29, A-549, and MDA-MB-231 cells),
employing a cytotoxicity assay. Normal H9C2 rat cardiomyoblasts were
employed as control. IADB demonstrated differential toxicity
in cancer cells (mean IC50 of IADB in MDA-MB-231
cells, 30.4 ± 1.9–45.7 ± 2.8 μM; mean IC50 in HT-29 cells, 25.3 ± 1.5–37.5 ± 2.2 μM;
and mean IC50 in HeLa cells, 46.4 ± 2.3–61.8
± 1.7 μM). The cytotoxicity of IADB was considerably
lower in H9C2 rat cardiomyoblasts (mean IC50 greater than
100 μM), suggesting enhanced potency in cancer cells.

Combined IADB/5-FU Treatment Induces Significant
Mitochondrial Oxidative Damage in Colon Cancer HT-29 Cells, Not in
Normal H9C2 Cardiac Cells
Previous studies suggested that
ROS-mediated cardiotoxicity is induced by various chemotherapeutic
agents, suggesting that a concomitant administration of antioxidants
may provide some mitigation of cardiotoxicity.1 Accordingly, we examined the in vitro effects of IADB and 5-FU in a combinatorial paradigm. Initially, we evaluated the
antioxidant effects of IADB, alone or in combination
with 5-FU, in the control H9C2 rat cardiomyoblasts and the colon cancer
cell line HT-29. We employed MitoProbe,32−36 a sensitive fluorogenic reporter, for real-time monitoring
of mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) generation. The MFI of MitoProbe was
quantified as a gauge of mtROS production.

The HT-29 sham control
cells (untreated) contained primarily long tubular mitochondria, evenly
distributed throughout the cell (first row, Figure 4A). The 5-FU exposure resulted in the formation
of intermediate/fragmented mitochondria. Conversely, the 5-FU-treated
cells displayed a more dispersed and irregular staining pattern associated
with increased MitoProbe fluorescence (second row, Figure 4A). Pretreatment (12 h) of IADB to HT-29 cells resulted in a proportion of cells exhibiting
a slight increase in MitoProbe fluorescence (Figure 4B) associated with a dispersed network of
tubular structures surrounding the nucleus (third row, Figure 4A). Increasing the exposure
time to IADB + 5-FU treatment led to progressive cellular
changes in HT-29 cells: (a) initially, the mitochondria randomly aggregated
in small groups throughout the cytoplasm, with a higher concentration
near the nucleus (fourth row, Figure 4A); (b) this progressed to further aggregation of mitochondrial
clusters around the nucleus in a concentric appearance (fifth row, Figure 4A); (c) subsequently,
the aggregated mitochondria appeared as large round clumps 24 h after
the combinatorial treatment (sixth row, Figure 4A), potentially associated with cell death;
and (d) after 48 h of combinatorial exposure, cells with fragmented
nuclei were obvious, indicating apoptosis (seventh row, Figure 4A). Furthermore, the combinatorial
treatment enhanced mtROS levels (Figure 4B), indicative of oxidative stress and mitochondrial
damage in HT-29 cells.

Figure 4 Combined IADB/5-FU treatment induces significant
mitochondrial
oxidative damage in colon cancer HT-29 cells; detection of mitochondrial
oxidative damage in HT-29 cells before and after exposure to 5-FU
(5 μM) without or with IADB (10 μM) treatment:
(A) representative confocal fluorescence images of HT-29 cells subjected
to different treatment protocols––counter-stained with
MitoProbe (red fluorescence), MitoTracker (green fluorescence), and
Hoechst 33342 (blue fluorescence); (B) MFI of MitoProbe changes, estimating
total mtROS generation.

Untreated H9C2 cardiomyoblasts (first row, Figure 5A) presented normal cell morphology
with
well-defined, filamentous mitochondrial networks and low levels of
mtROS. H9C2 cardiomyoblasts treated with 5-FU revealed more fragmented
mitochondrial networks and extensive accumulation of mitochondria
(second row, Figure 5A) associated with significantly increased levels of mtROS (48 h
treatment; Figure 5B). As shown in Figure 5B, pretreatment of H9C2 cardiomyoblasts with IADB (10
μM) for 12 h, followed by combinatorial treatment [IADB (10 μM) + 5-FU (5 μM)] for 48 h, normalized mtROS at
all time points measured (4, 12, 24 and 48 h).

Figure 5 Combined IADB/5-FU treatment induces significant mitochondrial
oxidative damage in colon cancer HT-29 cells, but not in normal H9C2
cardiac cells. Detection of mitochondrial oxidative stress in H9C2
cardiac cells pre-/post-5-FU (5 μM) exposure with/without IADB (10 μM) treatment: (A) representative confocal
fluorescence images of H9C2 cardiomyoblasts subjected to different
drug interventions––counterstained with MitoProbe (red
fluorescence), MitoTracker (green fluorescence), and Hoechst 33342
(blue fluorescence); (B) total mtROS generation in H9C2 cardiomyoblasts
as determined by MFI of MitoProbe; and (C) mitochondrial morphological
changes during different treatment regimens (percent of cells with
≥100 cells per experiment). N = 6 independent
experiments.

Interestingly, we observed
that the combinatorial treatment [IADB (10 μM)
+ 5-FU (5 μM)] resulted in a return
of mitochondrial morphology to the expected tubular structure in H9C2
cardiomyoblasts (fourth to seventh row, Figure 5A). The mitochondrial morphology was scored
as follows: fragmented, mainly small and round; intermediate, mixture of round and shorter tabulated; and tabulated, long with higher interconnectivity. The method
for quantification involved determining the percentage of cells with
abnormal mitochondrial morphologies as a surrogate measure for the
proportion of cells with fragmented mitochondria. The nontreated cells
employed as the control contained predominantly long and evenly distributed
tubular mitochondria throughout the cell, and the cells with intermediate
or fragmented mitochondria were expressed as a percentage of the total
cells counted (100 cells were counted per experiment, and the data
were averaged over four independent experiments per treatment).

The mitochondria of H9C2 cardiac cells remained elongated with
entangled tubules at 24 h (sixth row, Figure 5A) after combinatorial intervention (IADB + 5-FU), whereas the HT-29 colon cancer cells continued
to manifest significant mitochondrial damage under identical treatment
conditions. The combinatorial intervention [IADB (10
μM) + 5-FU (5 μM)] appeared to only transiently alter
mitochondrial morphology. As shown in Figure 5A,C, the combinatorial therapy for 48 h resulted
in a complete correction of mitochondrial structure in the majority
of H9C2 myoblasts to their expected tubular structure. Interestingly,
cell-specific recovery was observed only in the H9C2 cardiac cells
(seventh row, Figure 5A) but not in the colon cancer HT-29 cells (seventh row, Figure 4A). Our results suggest
that IADB provides greater protection to normal cardiac
cells (H9C2) as opposed to tumor cells (HT-29). These findings implied
that unbalanced mitochondrial fusion/fission, or possibly failure
of autophagy in HT-29 cells, may have induced the accumulation of
damaged mitochondria.

Combinatorial IADB/5-FU Intervention
Induces Autophagic
Cell Death in Colon Cancer HT-29 Cells
The combinatorial
application of autophagy inhibitors coupled with chemotherapeutic
agents is a common strategy for cancer cell sensitization;29−31 yet, it remains to be determined whether cancer chemotherapy would
benefit from up- or downregulation of autophagy. Thus, we next evaluated
the autophagic responses in HT-29 cells undergoing combinatorial intervention.
The treatment of HT-29 cells with 5-FU (5 μM) alone (48 h) resulted
in an increased GFP-LC3 fluorescence puncta formation (second row, Figure 6A, compared to control,
first row, Figure 6A). The GFP-LC3 puncta formation was dramatically increased by IADB pretreatment (third row, Figure 6A) or combinatorial treatment (fourth to
seventh row, Figure 6A) as compared to the 5-FU treatment alone. The combinatorially treated
HT-29 cells revealed the presence of autophagic vesicles as early
as 4 h (fourth row, Figure 6A), which progressively increased with time. The number of
GFP-LC3 fluorescence puncta increased steadily over 24 h of combinatorial
treatment, indicative of autophagosome accumulation (Figure 6B). The HT-29 cells showed
similar results, with the appearance of LysoProbe-labeled organelles
(red fluorescence images) (Figure 6C) that correlated with the appearance of GFP-labeled
autophagosomes (green fluorescence images), the combined occurrence
of which can be labeled as autophagy process-related vesicular organelles (AVOs). After 24 h of combinatorial intervention, the
clustering of AVOs was obvious. Simultaneously, an extensive lysosomal
accumulation was also observed (Figure 6C). The cumulative data indicate that IADB pretreatment activated autophagy, as the combinatorial treatment
resulted in a continuous activation of autophagy and a concomitant
imbalance between the rate of AVO formation and degradation (Figure 6D). The lysosomal
findings support this, suggesting that “autophagic stress”
occurred and preceded both apoptosis and necrosis. Normally, autophagy
and apoptosis remain in balance and control the organelle numbers.
However, our observation of continuous autophagy induced by the combinatorial
treatment eventually activated apoptosis and cell death.

Figure 6 Confirmation
of “autophagic stress” induced by combined IADB + 5-FU treatment using confocal laser scanning microscopy.
(A) Representative confocal fluorescence images of HT-29 cells subjected
to different treatment protocols––counterstained with
LysoProbe (red fluorescence), GFP-LC3 (green fluorescence) transfected
cells, and Hoechst 33342 (blue fluorescence) (control cells (first
row); 5-FU (5 μM) alone for 48 h (second row); pretreatment IADB (10 μM) for 12 h (third row); IADB-pretreated cells at 4 h (fourth row), 12 h (fifth row), 24 h (sixth
row), and 48 h (seventh row) after exposure to 5-FU, respectively.
(B) Total autophagosome number in HT-29 cells determined by measuring
the MFI of GFP-LC3 changes. (C) Lysosomal activities evaluated in
HT-29 cells by quantitation of MFI of LysoProbe changes. (D) Colocalization
index determined as a measure of autolysosome formation (i.e., the
fusion of autophagosome and lysosome) and degradation events (autophagic
flux) by measuring the MFI of GFP-LC3+/LysoProbe+ double-positive HT-29 cells. N = 6 independent
experiments.

Combinatorial Treatment
(IADB + 5-FU vs 5-FU Alone)
Potentiated Growth Inhibition of Colon Cancer HT-29 Cells
The treatment with 5-FU (5 μM; 48 h) inhibited the growth of
colon cancer HT-29 cells by one-third in comparison to the vehicle-treated
cells. The pretreatment with IADB (10 μM; 12 h)
prior to that with 5-FU doubled the inhibitory effect, as measured
by trypan blue exclusion (Figure S4).

Confirmation of “Autophagic Stress” Induced by
Combined IADB + 5-FU Treatment Using Transmission Electron
Microscopy
The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images
of HT-29 cells treated with 5-FU (5 μM) for 24 h revealed minimal
autophagic vesicles, with the mitochondria that were slightly swollen
with a faint double-membrane structure (Figure 7A). Conversely, the IADB pretreatment
followed by the IADB + 5-FU combined treatment for 24
h revealed the presence of numerous AVOs with cellular material that
appeared degenerated (Figure 7B). The AVOs resembled autophagosomes and autolysosomes, and
several of them showed entrapped intracellular organelles such as
mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum, as well as digested residual
material. The overproduction of AVOs in combinatorially treated cells
(Figure 7B) correlated
with the accumulation of LysoProbe-/GFP-LC3-labeled AVOs (Figure 6). The data suggest
“autophagic stress” associated with the dysregulation
of autophagic responses, or perhaps a situation in which “excessive”
autophagic demand goes unbalanced by the consumption of cellular reserves.
Whichever the exact mechanism, it would seem reasonable that the overproduction
or impaired clearance of AVO degradation eventually leads to cell
death.

Figure 7 Confirmation of “autophagic stress” induced by combined IADB + 5-FU treatment using TEM: (A) TEM images of HT-29 cells
treated with 5-FU (5 μM) for 24 h, revealing minimal autophagic
vesicles accompanied by modestly swollen mitochondria with a relatively
indistinct double-membrane structure. (B) TEM images of HT-29 cells
co-treated with 5-FU (5 μM) + IADB (10 μM)
for 24 h, revealing numerous autophagosomes and autolysosomes (electron-dense
organelles engulfing double-membraned vesicles). These structures
appeared to contain degraded cellular material, and the mitochondria
were swollen with crista fragmentation.

Mitigation of 5-FU-Induced Cardiac Structural Damage by Combined IADB + 5-FU Treatment
We next investigated the potential
of the IADB pretreatment to alleviate 5-FU-induced cardiac
structural damage. The myocardial cells and the interstitium of IADB-treated animals did not reveal evidence of obvious pathological
alterations, comparable to the vehicle-treated tissues. In contrast,
major histopathological alterations (myocardial fiber disarrangement,
extracellular edema, leukocyte infiltration, and enlarged intercellular
spaces) were observed in 5-FU-treated tissues (Figure 8).

Figure 8 Mitigation of 5-FU-induced cardiac structural
damage by combined IADB + 5-FU treatment. Representative
photomicrographs of
myocardial sections from IADB/5-FU alone and IADB + 5-FU combined treatments groups: (A) hematoxylin–eosin
(H & E) staining; (B) modified trichrome staining; and (C) NADH
staining (N = 6).

Further, modified Gomori trichrome staining of the 5-FU cohort
revealed loose collagen fibers surrounding individual myocardial tracts
and clear evidence of edema between the wavy muscle fibers. These
features suggest the disruption of the collagen fibers in the interstitial
region and the interstitial fluid separating the lateral myocyte arrangement.
The myocardium samples taken from the combinatorially treated cohort
revealed a significantly less disruption of myocardial fibers, although
a mild degree of swelling around the nuclei and congestion of capillaries
was still observed (Figure 8B).

The NADH-stained sections of myocardial samples
derived from the
5-FU-treated cohort revealed an extensive interstitial edema between
the damaged cardiomyocytes. Striated cardiac muscle disarray, local
myocardial swelling, necrosis, and intercellular space expansion were
frequently observed. Conversely, the tissues derived from the combinatorially
treated animals revealed only a slight myocardial edema associated
with the partially ruptured cardiac muscle fibers (Figure 8C).

Attenuation of 5-FU-Induced
Cardiac Oxidative Damage by IADB + 5-FU Treatment Confirmed
with the Oxidative Stress
Biomarkers
To examine the potential protective effect of IADB on cardiomyocytes, lipid peroxidation (malondialdehyde,
MDA) was estimated in heart extracts. Increased MDA was observed in
5-FU-treated cohorts. Conversely, no significant difference was observed
between the sham controls and IADB alone or IADB + 5-FU groups (Figure S5), consistent
with the protective capacity of IADB against lipid peroxidation.
The SOD, CAT, and thiol glutathione (GSH) systems in heart detoxify
ROS to nontoxic forms.30 Accordingly, we
examined the effects of 5-FU and IADB on GSH, SOD, and
CAT activities. 5-FU alone significantly decreased GSH; conversely,
the IADB + 5-FU treatment essentially normalized the
GSH levels, raising them significantly above the 5-FU treatment groups
(Figure S5). 5-FU and 5-FU + IADB significantly increased SOD in comparison to control (Figure S5). For the IADB + 5-FU
groups, CAT activities were significantly higher than that in the
5-FU-treated groups (Figure S5).

Alleviation
of 5-FU-Induced Mitochondrial Oxidative Damage by IADB + 5-FU Treatment Confirmed by Direct Visualization of
Tissue Oxidative Status
To assess tissue protection associated
with reduced ROS production, mtROS production was determined in myocardial
tissues using MitoProbe.36 The fluorescence
intensity of MitoProbe was higher in the tissues of the 5-FU cohort
(Figure 9A,C,D). Conversely,
the fluorescence intensity in the combinatorially treated tissues
was significantly reduced (Figure 9B–D), further underscoring the potential of IADB to alleviate mitochondrial oxidative stress.

Figure 9 Alleviation
of 5-FU-induced mitochondrial oxidative damage by IADB + 5-FU treatment confirmed by direct visualization of
the tissue oxidative status: mitochondrial oxidative status was evaluated
in myocardial tissues using mtROS fluorescent probe (MitoProbe). Representative
fluorescent stained images of myocardium derived from the 5-FU-treated
rat cohort (A) and IADB + 5-FU rat cohort (red: MitoProbe
fluorescence; blue: Hoechst 33342 fluorescence) (B). (C) Interactive
3D surface plots of merged images and (D) Interactive 3D surface plots
of merged images (fire LUT images).

Attenuation of 5-FU-Induced Cardiac Ultrastructural Damage by IADB + 5-FU Treatment Confirmed with TEM
We used
TEM to further explore the structure/function correlates in myocardial
organelles under various interventions. We found that the IADB-treated cohorts (Figure 10B) revealed the evidence of relatively normal mitochondria
with intact cristae density (Figure 10A). On the other hand, we noted marked ultrastructural
myocardial damage (myofibril disorganization, vacuolation, mitochondrial
swelling, and cell lysis) in the samples of 5-FU-treated animals (Figure 10C). In addition,
mitochondria became sparse at the remote regions of the nucleus (Figure 10D). Pretreatment
with IADB, followed by 5-FU + IADB treatment,
provided significant protection from these ultrastructural abnormalities
(elongated and transverse cristae (indicated as “EM”);
larger, rounded to ovular mitochondria with vacuolation (indicated
as “M”); Figure 10E,F). At the perinuclear region, the majority of mitochondria
showed relatively normal morphology, although mild edema was still
noted (Figure 10F)
(Figure S6). Moreover, we observed autophagosomes
with double-membrane structures, and a number of these autophagic
vacuoles contained identifiable organelles, whereas some late autophagosomes
contained lamellar and vesicular structures [magnified autophagic
vesicles are shown in the red box (Figure 10F)]. Cumulatively, more autophagosomes were
observed with combinatorial intervention versus 5-FU alone (Figure S7). Taken together, our data suggest
that under “mild” stress, the mitochondrial elongation
response can be induced in cardiomyocytes [indicated as “EM”
(elongated mitochondria) in Figure 10E]. Severely damaged cardiomyocyte mitochondria are
unable to fuse into the mitochondrial network, making them susceptible
to degradation. We therefore suggest that mitochondrial elongation
can protect the mitochondria from mitophagy, coupled to autophagic
degradation of cytosolic material (red box; Figure 10E), all of which will enhance energy production
and the production of macromolecular precursors to promote cardiomyocyte
survival during cellular stress.

Figure 10 Attenuation of 5-FU-induced cardiac ultrastructural
damage by IADB + 5-FU treatment confirmed by TEM. Representative
TEM
of myocardium derived from the sham control and different drug-treated
animal groups: (A) sham cardiomyocytes revealed typical myofibrillar
arrangements and intact mitochondria (M); (B) IADB-treated
cardiomyocytes were comparable to sham treatment, but with a small
number of autophagosomes; (C,D) 5-FU-treated cardiomyocytes revealed
lesions with myofibrillar disorganization and swollen mitochondria
with lower density structures; (E,F) combinatorially treated myocardium
revealed typical mitochondrial structures combined with a small number
of autophagosomes surrounded by double membranes (red box), in addition
to autophagic vacuoles containing identifiable organellar material,
as well as late autophagosomes containing lamellar and vesicular structures.

Discussion
Conventional
anticancer drugs induce oxidative stress in cancer
patients being treated with chemotherapy.9−13 Previous studies suggest that the MOA of some of
these chemotherapeutic agents for triggering apoptosis in cancer cells
involves ROS-dependent pathways.17,18 The present
study was designed to answer one question: “is it possible
to induce apoptosis only in cancer cells while sparing normal cells/tissues?”

Most anticancer drugs activate autophagy in tumor cells. Therefore,
a common strategy in several clinical trials is to inhibit the autophagic
activity to enhance the potency of conventional chemotherapy.29,30 However, some of these clinical trials have been terminated because
the research findings are contradictory.29,30 So far, no conclusive results have been published. The contrasting
results for autophagy in cancer cells remain difficult to understand
because the process itself can be either protective or detrimental
during tumorigenesis and treatment.17 Whether
the role of autophagy is positive or negative for the growth of the
tumor depends upon the tissue, the stage and type of tumor, and the
extent of active autophagic processes. Additionally, autophagy can
be affected by cellular stress such as ROS levels.17 Many anticancer drugs have been reported to activate ROS-induced
autophagy, which can either lead to the induction of apoptosis or
the development of drug resistance, or both.17−19 Currently,
there is no consensus as to whether inhibition or promotion of autophagy
is beneficial in cancer treatment. Because of the complex interplay
between ROS signaling and autophagy, identification of the optimal
combination of autophagy modulators and antioxidants that can be combined
with anticancer drugs to improve the efficacy of treatment remains
a challenge. Our data indicate that IADB, a novel agent
that simultaneously serves as an antioxidant and autophagy-modulating
bifunctional agent, may well represent a novel breakthrough in the
approach to cancer therapy.

As antioxidant activity plays a
role in the protection against
5-FU-induced cardiotoxicity, we first evaluated IADB for
the antioxidant activity, employing the Ach-induced relaxation of
the rat thoracic aorta assay.23 In the
Ach-induced relaxation assay, injury of the arterial wall triggers
the production of ROS and alterations in the vascular redox equilibrium.24 The increase in the vascular ROS levels and
oxidative stress induces endothelial cell layer damage. NO• is the primary driver for the vasorelaxation of a smooth muscle.24 Endothelial cells in the proximity to a smooth
muscle also generate O2•– during
vascular oxidative damage, and the production of one free radical
can result in a cascade of further radical production (e.g., O2•– overproduction, coupled with NO•, can lead to ONOO– generation, the
latter a physiologically active toxic metabolite of NO• that induces vascular and myocardial dysfunction).24,25 As shown in Figure S1 (Supporting Information), we observed that Ach-induced relaxation could be significantly
reversed by IADB in a dose-dependent manner.

As
autophagy is a complex process, we felt it important to accurately
quantify the autophagic effects of IADB. Although immunoblotting
for endogenous LC3 is commonly used to monitor autophagosome formation
or degradation, we found the results from Western blotting inconsistent
(data not shown) because of the high background, precluding the accurate
measurement of small changes in LC3 protein levels. Moreover, Western
blotting does not measure the autophagic flux which represents the
rate of autophagic degradation. Therefore, we employed fluorescent
imaging technology and TEM to accurately determine the impact of IADB treatment on autophagy. Compared to fluorescence microscopy,
the resolution of TEM is superior. TEM remains one of the most accurate
methods for the detection of autophagy. However, TEM does not facilitate
the quantitative measurement of autophagic flux in real time, nor
is it particularly suited for routine visualization in all steps involved
in the entire autophagic process. A careful and rigorous evaluation
of autophagy with a translational focus is critical if we are to improve
the clinical outcomes in cancer patients, and thus we next pursued
a series of dynamic imaging studies to confirm the autophagy-modulating
capacity of IADB.

Earlier reports indicated that
autophagy induced by chemotherapy
(i.e. 5-FU) could limit the effects of drug efficacy, and thus inhibition
of autophagy may augment efficiency. However, our data indicated that IADB pretreatment, followed by combinatorial intervention
(IADB + 5-FU), induced continuous autophagy activation
in colon cancer HT-29 cells. We speculate that “excessive”
autophagy culminates in cancer cell death, and in this scenario, autophagy
inhibition would result in depressed therapeutic efficacy and enhanced
tumor progression. Additionally, cytotoxic stimuli could activate
autophagic cell death in tumor cells that are resistant to apoptosis.20−22 Our data suggested that autophagic cell death could be induced by
the IADB + 5-FU combined treatment, and this may spur
further investigation for sensitizing apoptosis-resistant
cancer cells to cell death.

Pretreatment of colon cancer HT-29
cells with IADB prior to 5-FU exposure activated autophagy,
which leads to alterations
in ROS generation; however, upon exposure to 5-FU + IADB, significant levels of ROS were produced in tumor cells. We suspect
that the overproduction of ROS, coupled to continuous stimulation
of autophagy, eventually would lead to “excessive” autophagic
activation, and finally apoptosis, as shown with confocal imaging
analysis and TEM. As shown in Figure 7B, it appears that the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles
directly promotes cancer cell death. Surprisingly, the IADB-pretreated H9C2 cardiac cells subsequently exposed to IADB + 5-FU showed evidence of only minimal oxidative stress (Figure 5B). Our data suggested
that the anticancer effect of IADB may be mediated through
autophagy induction. However, the anticancer properties and molecular
mechanisms of IADB seem to be cell-specific, and thus
its beneficial effects in different cell types remain to be further
investigated.

Autophagic cell death is characterized by extensive
sequestration
of cytoplasm leading to cell death and the formation of autophagosomes
or autolysosomes. Autophagic cell death is autophagy-dependent cell
death, which can be triggered by starvation or autophagy-promoting
compounds that may result in excessive autophagy induction and cell
death.31 Here, we demonstrated that an
“exhausted” autophagic response induced by combined
treatment (IADB and 5-FU) could eventually destroy cancer
cells and lead to autophagic cell death. However, the exact mechanism
of autophagic cell death induced by the combined treatment is still
not mechanistically clear.

On the other hand, 5-FU treatment
alone was associated with an
increased mtROS level in myocardium (Figure 9A). The elevated mtROS levels induced by
chemotherapy could severely compromise the cellular nucleus of energy
production, for example, mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.1 Here, the histological analysis of myocardial
sections revealed 5-FU-induced cardiotoxicity, as expected, and this
was alleviated with IADB pretreatment. Subcellularly,
5-FU-driven mtROS overproduction correlated with mitochondrial oxidative
damage. Surprisingly, the combinatorial intervention (IADB + 5-FU) could significantly prevent mtROS overproduction (Figure 9B). In support of
these findings, TEM revealed evidence of mitochondrial damage (swollen
mitochondria accompanied with lower density structures) with 5-FU
treatment (Figure 10C,D). In contrast to this, the combinatorial treatment (IADB + 5-FU) significantly attenuated mitochondrial swelling with the
maintenance of normal cristae (Figure 10E,F).

Although TEMPOL can scavenge
O2•–, its t1/2 in blood is only 15 s,15 which
is likely associated with the rapid reduction
of nitroxide radical. Unlike TEMPOL, the antioxidant activity of IADB may not only result from the nitroxide moiety but also
from amino acid residues of IADB, which would coordinately
enhance the radical-scavenging capacity of nitroxide. The indole ring
of Trp as a hydrogen donor and the hydrophobic microenvironments induced
by Trp and theanine residues, in addition to the hydrophilic nature
of theanine, are likely to contribute to the enhanced overall antioxidant-scavenging
property of IADB. From the predicted lowest energy conformation
of IADB (Figure 11A), we speculate that a nitroxide radical surrounded by hydrophobic
and resonance-stabilized amino acid side chains may result in enhanced
bioavailability that correlates to improved scavenging of O2•– or NO• and associated
cardioprotection.

Figure 11 Proposed mechanism(s) of action of IADB:
(A) predicted
lowest energy conformation of TEMPOL and IADB; (B) schematic
representation of the redox transformations of nitroxide, hydroxylamine,
and the oxoammonium cation of IADB; (C) distinct action
mechanisms of IADB involved in normal and tumor cells.
In oxygen-rich normal cells (i.e., cardiomyocytes), the nitroxide
moiety of IADB remains in the oxidized form (IADB-NO•). In hypoxic tumor cells, the nitroxide moiety
of IADB is rapidly reduced to the corresponding hydroxylamine
form (IADB-NOH). (D) HOMO/LUMO plots for nitroxide IADB (IADB-NO•) and its hydroxylamine
(IADB-NOH), in which ΔE determines
the chemical reactivity. The higher EHOMO combined with the lower ΔE of the nitroxide
form of IADB (IADB-NO•) confers a substantively higher radical-scavenging potential than
the corresponding hydroxylamine form (IADB-NOH). These
data provide a rationale and explanation as to why IADB confers greater protection to normal (i.e., heart) vs tumor tissues.
(E) Schematic diagram of our conclusion that cardioprotection with IADB during chemotherapy is likely associated with the upregulation
of autophagy and its ensuing antioxidant activity.

In biological systems, nitroxide metabolism occurs
predominantly
via the reduction of the nitroxide to a hydroxylamine. IADB-NO•, having a single unpaired electron, can undergo
redox transformations between the one-electron oxidized state, the
oxoammonium cation, and the one-electron reduced IADB-NOH. When IADB-NO• is incubated with
cells or administered in vivo, a dynamic equilibrium is established
between the three forms. The equilibrium levels of these forms are
dependent on tissue oxygenation and the levels of reducing equivalents
or the tissue “redox status”. The reduction rates of IADB-NO• in tumor and normal tissues are
different because the tissue redox status is quantitatively different.
In the tumor microenvironment, the reduction rate of IADB-NO• can be accelerated because of high oxidative
activity. Compared to normal cells (i.e. cardiomyocytes), the oxidative
activity of cancer cells is higher, which is due to the overproduction
of hydroxyl radical and superoxide generated under hypoxic conditions.
In hypoxic tumor cells, the nitroxide form of IADB (IADB-NO•) is rapidly reduced to the corresponding
hydroxylamine form (IADB-NOH) (Figure 11C). However, the hydroxylamine (IADB-NOH) and nitroxide forms (IADB-NO•) do not constitute an effective redox couple and therefore are incapable
of supporting cellular processes involving oxidation/reduction. In
oxygen-rich normal cells (i.e. cardiomyocytes), the nitroxide moiety
of IADB remains in the oxidized form (IADB-NO•) (Figure 11C). The nitroxide (IADB-NO•) and oxoammonium pair  act as an efficient redox couple, which
can balance the cellular redox processes via reversible one-electron
transfer reactions. Thus, under “mild” oxidative stress,
the mitochondria may undergo constant damage repair, whereas severely
damaged mitochondria/organelles will be degraded and recycled by IADB-triggered autophagy. This may serve to explain why IADB would confer greater protection to normal tissue than
tumor tissue. To evaluate our hypothesis, we further examined the
ionization potential of the two forms of IADB. HOMO and
LUMO orbital energy levels for the two forms of IADB are
listed in Figure 11. From a calculation perspective, an electronic system with a larger
HOMO–LUMO gap is predicted to be less reactive than the one
having a smaller difference. As well, a small differential in the
HOMO and LUMO energy gap would shed light on the intramolecular charge
transfers.23 As predicted, the small energy
gap for IADB-NO• suggests that this
molecule possesses low ionization energies, revealing that it readily
donates electron, underscoring the favorable free-radical scavenging
activity. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that the higher EHOMO-combined coupling with the lower ΔE of the nitroxide form of IADB (IADB-NO•) would confer a considerably higher radical-scavenging
potential than the corresponding hydroxylamine form (IADB-NOH) (Figure 11D).
The computational analysis further supported our hypothesis that the
nitroxide radical of IADB (IADB-NO•) serves as an effective cellular antioxidant, whereas its corresponding
hydroxylamine form (IADB-NOH) only yields minimal antioxidant
effects. Taken together, the combined effects of our novel antioxidant
and autophagy-inducing agent, IADB, on 5-FU-induced cardiotoxicity
in vivo may form the platform for new approaches in cancer treatment
that combine antioxidants with autophagy modulators to manipulate
ROS-induced autophagy during chemotherapy.

Conclusions
Taken
together, our data present the first evidence that IADB is not toxic to cardiac cells and demonstrates toxicity
toward only tumor cells. This unique feature is likely achieved by
its dual function (a combined modulation of autophagy and ROS production).
Because of the redox status difference between normal and tumor cells,
it selectively induces autophagic cell death, mediated by ROS overproduction,
in cancer cells. Furthermore, in vivo studies provide evidence that
cardioprotection associated with IADB may correlate with
its unique antioxidant activity, which originates from the unique
kinetic equilibrium profiles of its three forms (IADB-NO•, , and IADB-NOH), based on the
differences in the tumor redox status versus that in normal tissues.
Therefore, the IADB treatment in combination with chemotherapy
may lead to reduced cardiotoxicity, as well as the reduction of anticancer
drug dosages that may further improve chemotherapeutic efficacy with
decreased off-target effects. Overall, our data suggest that the use
of IADB may be of benefit in minimizing cardiotoxicity
associated with high-dose chemotherapy. These cellular studies pave
the way for future animal studies with IADB, the studies
currently underway in our laboratories.

Materials and Methods
Cell Culture
All cell lines were obtained from American
Type Cell Culture collection (ATCC). HeLa cells were grown in Eagle’s
minimal essential medium and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich,
heat inactivated). Human colonic adenocarcinoma HT-29, lung cancer
A549, and breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB231 were routinely maintained
in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco). H9C2 cardiac myoblasts
were obtained from ATCC and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10%
FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. All cells were grown at
37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere.

Rat Aortic
Strip Assay To Measure Free-Radical Scavenging Capacity
The
free-radical scavenging activity of IADB and TEMPOL
in the rat aortic strip was determined as described.23 Briefly, after sacrifice, rat aortic strips were obtained
and then immediately placed into a perfusion solution (5 mL oxygenated
(95% O2, 5% CO2) Krebs solution, 37 °C).
The aortic strips were then mounted to tension transducers, and an
NE (final concentration 10–9 mol/L) solution was
added to induce contraction. The relaxation contraction curves were
recorded. When the hypertonic contraction reached a maximum, NE was
flushed, and the vessel strips were stabilized for 30 min. Subsequently,
the NE (final concentration 10–9 mol/L) solution
was reintroduced. When the hypertonic contraction value of the aortic
strips reached the previously defined maximum, 15 μL of NE or
a solution of the test compounds in 15 μL of water were added,
respectively. Upon stabilization, 1.5 μL of Ach (final concentration
of 10–6 mol/L) was added, and the percent inhibition
of Ach-induced vasorelaxation was determined.

Drug Treatment in HT-29
Cells
HT-29 cells were grown
until they reached ∼50% subconfluence, and then the cells were
subjected to drug treatment. To assess the effects of the co-treatment
with 5-FU and IADB, the cells were pretreated with IADB (10 μM) for 12 h followed by treatment with 5-FU
(5 μM) for another 48 h.

Cell Proliferation Assay
The drug-treated HT-29 cells
and untreated control cells were cultured in 96-well plates at a density
of 5 × 103 cells per cell in a 100 μL complete
medium. The CellTiter96 cell proliferation assay kit was used following
the manufacturer’s protocol, and the cell growth was evaluated
using trypan blue exclusion. All experiments were performed in triplicate,
and the proliferation of HT-29 cells was calculated as the ratio of
each experimental condition to that of untreated control cells.

Expression of GFP LC3
The GFP human LC3 fusion protein
expressing plasmid pEGFP LC3 was purchased from Life Technologies.
The cells (5 × 104 per well) were seeded in six-well
plates the day before transfection, and the cells were transfected
with FuGENER HD Transfection Reagent (Roche, 04709691001). The GFP
fusion proteins were observed under a laser scanning microscope system.
The percentage of GFP LC3-positive cells with GFP LC3 punctate patterning
was determined from three independent experiments and the means derived.

Live Cell Imaging
The cells were grown in 35 mm glass-bottom
dishes for 24 h. The media were removed and the cells were washed
three times with 1× Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline
(DPBS) without Ca2+ or Mg2+ (Hyclone, Fisher
Sci.). The fluorescent probes were incubated with cells in the media
without FBS. After each step, the cells were washed with DPBS buffer.
The cells were imaged using an Olympus confocal laser scanning microscope.

Animal Test
All animal tests were performed in compliance
with the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals”
published by the US National Institutes of Health. The male ICR mice
(20 ± 2 g) were housed in a 12/12 light/dark cycle at 21 ±
2 °C for 24 h before use. The mice were randomly divided into
four groups: (i) Sham control group: the mice were
intraperitoneally injected with saline for 14 consecutive days; (ii) 5-FU alone group: the mice were intraperitoneally injected
with 5-FU (10 mg/kg) once over 3 consecutive days; (iii) IADBalone group: the mice were
intraperitoneally injected with IADB (30 mg/kg) for 14
consecutive days; (iv) IADB+ 5-FU group: the mice were intraperitoneally injected with IADB (30 mg/kg) for 11 consecutive days, and then intraperitoneally
administered 5-FU (10 mg/kg) + IADB (30 mg/kg) once over
3 consecutive days. Upon the conclusion of experiments, the mice were
euthanized via sodium pentobarbital overdose. The heart tissue samples
were immediately separated, and blood was rapidly obtained from the
ascending aorta. The tissue samples were divided into two sections,
one for the determination of lipid peroxidation and the other used
for histological examination (Leica CM 1850 UV clinical cryostat)
at −30 °C.

Histological Analysis
The tissues
were mounted in gum
tragacanth in an appropriate orientation and snap-frozen in isopentane
chilled in liquid nitrogen. The frozen tissue sections (4–5
μm) were cut as previously described and stained with H &
E, modified trichrome, or NADH followed by light microscopic examination.

Statistical Analysis
A two-way analysis of variance
followed by Scheffé’s test was employed using the Origin
program. If differences were observed, the values were then analyzed
using Student’s t test for paired data. All
values were expressed as mean ± SE, and significance was set
at the 95th centile.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b02139.Detailed synthetic
procedure of preparation of IADB; cell culture; cell
proliferation assay; expression of
GFP LC3; percent inhibition of Ach-induced vasorelaxation by TEMPOL
and IADB; IADB-induced GFP-LC3 puncta formation
in cancer and rat normal H9C2 cardiac cells; IADB-induced
autophagic vesicle accumulation and the appearance of punctate GFP-LC3
staining in a time- and dose-dependent manner; and effect of IADB on proliferation assay of HT-29 colon cancer cells (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b02139_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
L.B., W.B.,
K.M.G., and J.J. designed the study. L.B., W.B., Y.B., P.L., and S.H.
performed the synthesis, characterization, and cell assays. Y.B.,
P.L., and Y.Z. did the animal tests. L.B., W.B., C.H., K.M.G., J.J.,
and C.B., performed data analysis, wrote, and edited the manuscript.
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All
authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the support of NIH (GM088795-01),
NSF (no. 1048655), NASA (# MSGC R85197), MIIE (#1204010), VPR-SI fund
(#R01386), and the Research Excellence Fund (#R01121 and #R01323),
Portage Health Foundation (#R01552), National Science Foundation of
China (no. 81370419), Natural Science Foundation of HeBei, China (grant
062761266), Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine of HeBei
Province (grant 2007134).

Abbreviations
IADBindole alkaloid derivative
B

5-FU5-fluorouracil

ROSreactive oxygen
species

TEMPOL4-hydroxyl-TEMPO

SODsuperoxide dismutase

NEnorepinephrine

Achacetylcholine

LC3microtubule-associated
protein 1 light chain 3

mtROSmitochondrial reactive oxygen species

MFImean fluorescence intensity

3-MA3-methyladenine

AVOsautophagy process-related
vesicular organelles

MDAmalondialdehyde

CATcatalase

GSHthiol glutathione
==== Refs
References
Angsutararux P. ; Luanpitpong S. ; Issaragrisil S. 
Chemotherapy-Induced Cardiotoxicity:
Overview of the Roles of Oxidative Stress . Oxid.
Med. Cell Longev. 
2015 , 2015 , 1 –13 . 10.1155/2015/795602 .
Moudgil R. ; Haddad H. 
Chemotherapy-related
cardiac dysfunction: grey area
in type I and type II classification . Curr.
Opin. Cardiol. 
2017 , 32 , 181 –188 . 10.1097/HCO.0000000000000361 .27926539 
McGowan J. V. ; Chung R. ; Maulik A. ; Piotrowska I. ; Walker J. M. ; Yellon D. M. 
Anthracycline Chemotherapy
and Cardiotoxicity . Cardiovasc. Drugs Ther. 
2017 , 31 , 63 –75 . 10.1007/s10557-016-6711-0 .28185035 
Deidda M. ; Madonna R. ; Mango R. ; Pagliaro P. ; Bassareo P. P. ; Cugusi L. ; Romano S. ; Penco M. ; Romeo F. ; Mercuro G. 
Novel insights in pathophysiology
of antiblastic drugs-induced
cardiotoxicity and cardioprotection . J. Cardiovasc.
Med. 
2016 , 17 , e76 –e83 . 10.2459/jcm.0000000000000373 .
Cadeddu C. ; Mercurio V. ; Spallarossa P. ; Nodari S. ; Triggiani M. ; Monte I. ; Piras R. ; Madonna R. ; Pagliaro P. ; Tocchetti C. G. ; Mercuro G. 
Preventing antiblastic drug-related
cardiomyopathy . J. Cardiovasc. Med. 
2016 , 17 , e64 –e75 . 10.2459/jcm.0000000000000382 .
Layoun M. E. ; Wickramasinghe C. D. ; Peralta M. V. ; Yang E. H. 
Fluoropyrimidine-Induced
Cardiotoxicity: Manifestations, Mechanisms, and Management . Curr. Oncol. Rep. 
2016 , 18 , 35 10.1007/s11912-016-0521-1 .27113369 
Papanastasopoulos P. ; Stebbing J. 
Molecular basis of
5-fluorouracil-related toxicity:
lessons from clinical practice . Anticancer Res. 
2014 , 34 , 1531 –1535 .24692679 
Paneni F. ; Diaz Cañestro C. ; Libby P. ; Lüscher T. F. ; Camici G. G. ; Camici G. G. 
The Aging
Cardiovascular System . J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 
2017 , 69 , 1952 –1967 . 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.01.064 .28408026 
Doroshow J. H. ; Locker G. Y. ; Myers C. E. 
Enzymatic
Defenses of the Mouse Heart
Against Reactive Oxygen Metabolites . J. Clin.
Invest. 
1980 , 65 , 128 –135 . 10.1172/jci109642 .7350193 
Lamberti M. ; Porto S. ; Marra M. ; Zappavigna S. ; Grimaldi A. ; Feola D. ; Spina A. ; Naviglio S. ; Sannolo N. ; Caraglia M. ; Pesce D. 
5-Fluorouracil
induces
apoptosis in rat cardiocytes through intracellular oxidative stress . J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 
2012 , 31 , 60 10.1186/1756-9966-31-60 .22812382 
Kinhult S. ; Albertsson M. ; Eskilsson J. ; Cwikiel M. 
Effects of probucol
on endothelial damage by 5-fluorouracil . Acta
Oncol. 
2003 , 42 , 304 –308 . 10.1080/02841860310004409 .12899501 
Vincent D. T. ; Ibrahim Y. F. ; Espey M. G. ; Suzuki Y. J. 
The role of antioxidants
in the era of cardio-oncology . Cancer Chemother.
Pharmacol. 
2013 , 72 , 1157 –1168 . 10.1007/s00280-013-2260-4 .23959462 
Wouters K. A. ; Kremer L. C. M. ; Miller T. L. ; Herman E. H. ; Lipshultz S. E. 
Protecting
against anthracycline-induced myocardial damage: a review of the most
promising strategies . Br. J. Haematol. 
2005 , 131 , 561 –578 . 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2005.05759.x .16351632 
Soule B. P. ; Hyodo F. ; Matsumoto K. ; Simone N. L. ; Cook J. A. ; Krishna M. C. ; Mitchell J. B. 
The chemistry
and biology of nitroxide
compounds . Free Radic. Biol. Med. 
2007 , 42 , 1632 –1650 . 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2007.02.030 .17462532 
Prescott C. ; Bottle S. E. 
Biological Relevance
of Free Radicals and Nitroxides . Cell Biochem.
Biophys. 
2016 , 75 , 227 –240 . 10.1007/s12013-016-0759-0 .27709467 
Wilcox C. S. 
Effects
of tempol and redox-cycling nitroxides in models of oxidative stress . Pharmacol. Ther. 
2010 , 126 , 119 –145 . 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.01.003 .20153367 
Walton E. L. 
The dual
role of ROS, antioxidants and autophagy in cancer . Biomed J. 
2016 , 39 , 89 –92 . 10.1016/j.bj.2016.05.001 .27372163 
Zhao Y. ; Qu T. ; Wang P. ; Li X. ; Qiang J. ; Xia Z. ; Duan H. ; Huang J. ; Zhu L. 
Unravelling the relationship
between macroautophagy and mitochondrial ROS in cancer therapy . Apoptosis 
2016 , 21 , 517 –531 . 10.1007/s10495-016-1236-3 .27007273 
Hua F. ; Shang S. ; Hu Z.-W. 
Seeking
new anti-cancer agents from
autophagy-regulating natural products . J. Asian
Nat. Prod. Res. 
2017 , 19 , 305 –313 . 10.1080/10286020.2017.1304385 .28347180 
Law B. Y. ; Chan W. K. ; Xu S. W. ; Wang J. R. ; Bai L. P. ; Liu L. ; Wong V. K. 
Natural
small-molecule enhancers of autophagy induce
autophagic cell death in apoptosis-defective cells . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 5510 10.1038/srep05510 .24981420 
Tillhon M. ; Guamán Ortiz L. M. ; Lombardi P. ; Scovassi A. I. 
Berberine:
new perspectives for old remedies . Biochem.
Pharmacol. 
2012 , 84 , 1260 –1267 . 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.07.018 .22842630 
Liu T. ; Liu X. ; Li W. 
Tetrandrine,
a Chinese plant-derived alkaloid, is a
potential candidate for cancer chemotherapy . Oncotarget 
2016 , 7 , 40800 –40815 . 10.18632/oncotarget.8315 .27027348 
Bi W. ; Li X. ; Bi Y. ; Xue P. ; Zhang Y. ; Gao X. ; Wang Z. ; Li M. ; Itagaki Y. ; Bi L. 
Novel TEMPO-PEG-RGDs
conjugates remediate tissue damage induced by acute limb ischemia/reperfusion . J. Med. Chem. 
2012 , 55 , 4501 –4505 . 10.1021/jm201381w .22439897 
Guzik T. J. ; West N. E. J. ; Pillai R. ; Taggart D. P. ; Channon K. M. 
Nitric
oxide modulates superoxide release and peroxynitrite formation in
human blood vessels . Hypertension 
2002 , 39 , 1088 –1094 . 10.1161/01.hyp.0000018041.48432.b5 .12052847 
Dröge W. 
Free radicals
in the physiological control of cell function . Physiol. Rev. 
2002 , 82 , 47 –95 . 10.1152/physrev.00018.2001 .11773609 
Chen X. ; Bi Y. ; Wang T. ; Li P. ; Yan X. ; Hou S. ; Bammert C. E. ; Ju J. ; Gibson K. M. ; Pavan W. J. ; Bi L. 
Lysosomal targeting
with stable and sensitive fluorescent probes
(Superior LysoProbes): applications for lysosome labeling and tracking
during apoptosis . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 9004 10.1038/srep09004 .25758662 
Yapici N.
B. ; Bi Y. ; Li P. ; Chen X. ; Yan X. ; Mandalapu S. R. ; Faucett M. ; Jockusch S. ; Ju J. ; Gibson K. M. ; Pavan W. J. ; Bi L. 
Highly stable and sensitive fluorescent
probes (LysoProbes) for lysosomal labeling and tracking . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 8576 10.1038/srep08576 .25715948 
Klionsky D. J. ; Abdelmohsen K. ; Abe A. ; Abedin M. J. ; Abeliovich H. ; Acevedo Arozena A. ; Adachi H. ; Adams C. M. 
Guidelines for the
use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy (3rd edition) . Autophagy 
2016 , 12 , 1 –222 . 10.1080/15548627.2015.1100356 .26799652 
Shi T.-T. ; Yu X.-X. ; Yan L.-J. ; Xiao H.-T. 
Research progress
of hydroxychloroquine and autophagy inhibitors on cancer . Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 
2017 , 79 , 287 –294 . 10.1007/s00280-016-3197-1 .27889812 
Gewirtz D. A. 
The Challenge
of Developing Autophagy Inhibition as a Therapeutic Strategy . Cancer Res. 
2016 , 76 , 5610 –5614 . 10.1158/0008-5472.can-16-0722 .27634767 
Galluzzi L. ; Bravo-San Pedro J. M. ; Demaria S. ; Formenti S. C. ; Kroemer G. 
Activating
autophagy to potentiate immunogenic chemotherapy and radiation therapy . Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 
2017 , 14 , 247 –258 . 10.1038/nrclinonc.2016.183 .27845767 
Yapici N. B. ; Mandalapu S. ; Michael Gibson K. ; Bi L. 
Targeted fluorescent
probes for detection of oxidative stress in the mitochondria . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 25 , 3476 –3480 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.07.011 .26189896 
Bi W. ; Bi Y. ; Gao X. ; Li P. ; Hou S. ; Zhang Y. ; Bammert C. ; Jockusch S. ; Legalley T. D. ; Michael
Gibson K. ; Bi L. 
Indole-TEMPO conjugates alleviate
ischemia-reperfusion injury via attenuation of oxidative stress and
preservation of mitochondrial function . Bioorg.
Med. Chem. 
2017 , 25 , 2545 –2568 . 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.03.033 .28359673 
Bi W. ; Bi Y. ; Gao X. ; Yan X. ; Zhang Y. ; Harris J. ; Legalley T. D. ; Gibson K. M. ; Bi L. 
Pharmacological protection
of mitochondrial function mitigates acute limb ischemia/reperfusion
injury . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 26 , 4042 –4051 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.06.079 .27390069 
Bi W. ; Bi Y. ; Gao X. ; Yan X. ; Zhang Y. ; Xue P. ; Bammert C. E. ; Legalley T. D. ; Michael Gibson K. ; Bi L. ; Wang J.-X. 
Anti-inflammatory,
analgesic and antioxidant activities
of novel kyotorphin-nitroxide hybrid molecules . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 26 , 2005 –2013 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.02.086 .26961795 
Bi L.  Novel probes and
targeting compounds for mitochondria . Patent PCT/US2013/065649
(2013), WO2014/063033A2  (2014).
Bi L.  Lysosomal targeting
probes . Patent PCT/US2013/055578 (2013), WO2014/058535A1  (2014).

