
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02105ArticleElectrorheological
Effects of Synthesized Octa-cyanopropylsilsesquioxane
Cage Structure Omambala Joshua R. *McIntyre Ernest C. Gallo August A. *Departments of
Chemical Engineering
and Chemistry, University of Louisiana at
Lafayette, Lafayette, Louisiana 70503, United States* E-mail: joshuaraymond2000@yahoo.co.uk (J.R.O.).* E-mail: gallo@louisiana.edu (A.A.G.).02 12 2019 17 12 2019 4 25 20955 20963 09 07 2019 30 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

This article introduces a new electrorheological (ER)
fluid. A
molecular cage structure for electrorheological applications has been
synthesized, and the ER behavior of the octa-functionalized polyhedral
oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) variant in silicone oil (PDMS) has
been shown. The hydrolyzation route has been used in the synthesis,
the microstructure has been displayed using scanning electron microscopy,
the yield has been ascertained, and the compound has been characterized.
The rheological properties are demonstrated on the ER fluid through
steady flow and oscillatory tests to investigate the effects of change
in concentration on the functional group attached to the inorganic
silicon–oxygen core structure of the POSS compound. The electrorheological
efficiency was analyzed, and dielectric characterization was done.
The flow curve was described by the Herschel–Bulkley model,
and yield stress values were derived from the model. The octa-cyanoPOSS/PDMS
electrorheological fluid has been shown to have ER activity.

document-id-old-9ao9b02105document-id-new-14ao9b02105ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS)
compounds are silicon–oxygen
compounds that have a (SiO1.5)n nucleus
in a perfect geometrical arrangement with organic fragments attached
at some or all of the apex Si atoms. POSS compounds are also called
spherosiloxanes because of their geometry. Geometries of the Si–O
arrangement have n ranging from 6 to 8, 10, 12, 14,
and 16. The spherical core of these POSS cages is assigned the symbol
Tn (i.e., the (SiO1.5)n nucleus).2 Each
of the Si center is bonded to three oxo groups in all the cases, which,
in turn, is linked to other Si centers. The fourth group that is linked
to the Si center is usually an alkyl, halide, hydride, or alkoxide
group.

Depending on the reaction conditions, which includes
temperature,
pH, type of catalyst used, and concentration of starting material
or monomer, different silsesquioxane structures are formed, which
include random polymeric networks without long-range order; ladder-shaped,
incompletely condensed polyhedral species; and fully condensed polyhedral
species. Having high symmetry and multiple functionalities is one
of the attractions of POSS compounds,18 especially the octameric group. High symmetrical components can
realign easily with adjacent assembled components if there are misalignments,
while multiple functionalities enable formation of multiple bonds
with other components to form new materials.

The most important
group of POSS compounds is the octa-functionalized
group of T8R8 with a core of 12 O atoms and
8 apical Si atoms.1,2 Most of the industrial interest
and research in POSS are concentrated on the octameric variants such
as octavinylsilsesquioxanes, because of their applicational properties
and use in dielectric films for integrated circuits and as a resist
for electron lithographic manufacture of semiconductor microreliefs,
and octaphenylsilsesquioxanes, which have thermal stability and application
as binders for ceramic materials. Octahydridosilsesquioxanes have
been identified as a precursor and starting material to many other
octasilsesquioxane structures and elaborate derivatives.4,6

There are several distinct routes for the synthesis of octameric
POSS structures, but the most commonly used routes are (i) hydrolytic
condensation of organotrihalosilanes or trialkoxysilanes in the presence
of amberlite and FeCl3 catalysts and (ii) hydrosilylation
of octahydridosilsesquioxanes with functionalized allyl compounds
in the presence of a Karstedt or Speier’s catalyst.2,4,6 In the latter route, the hydridoT8 will have to be synthesized first before the target octameric
derivative is synthesized.

Route 1 involves the hydrolysis and
condensation of trifunctional
silanes of the type RSiX3, where X is normally a halide
or alkoxide group, and R is a chemically stable substituent group.8 Most commonly used silanes are trialkoxysilanes
(where R = H) as in [HSi(OR)3] or trichlorosilanes (HSiCl3) in the presence of an acid or base catalyst and organic
solvents.1    Route 2 involves the hydrosilylation of octahydridosilsesquioxane
with functionalized allyl compounds2,11 in the form
of the reaction  where X = −SiMe3, −Ph,
or −C6F5 for the weak electron-withdrawing
group.  where X = −OPh or −CN for the
electron-withdrawing group.

When X is a weak electron-withdrawing
group, the reaction undergoes
full condensation, and there are no side products when using a hexachloroplatinic
acid catalyst (Speier’s catalyst). However, when facing an
electron-withdrawing group, such as −CN or −OPh, as
shown in the reaction above, the use of H2PtCl6 yields a large amount of polymer side products, and the reaction
has no significant yield. To prevent these side reactions, the use
of large amounts of an allylic compound along with a very small amount
of platinum catalyst Pt(COD)Cl2 is reported to give yields
as high as 95% at 70 °C.2,11

The aforementioned
routes of octasilsesquioxane synthesis can be
tuned, and the experimental factors are selectively adjusted to generate
a high-yield procedure. Some of these factors include the pH, type
of catalyst used (acid or base), nature of the solvent, rate of water
addition, temperature of reaction, initial monomer concentration,
and identity of the X and R constituents (in the hydrolytic condensation).2,4 For the purposes of this work, we will lay emphasis on the hydrolytic
condensation method.

Dare et al.6 modified already established
hydrolytic condensation procedures for improved synthesis of octavinylsilsesquioxane,
octaphenylsilsesquioxane, and octabenzylsilsesquioxane structures.
For example, the octavinylsilsesquioxane (octavinylT8)
structure was synthesized by the hydrolytic condensation of vinyltrichlorosilane
in methanol using an acid amberlite catalyst. This reaction yielded
23.9% of octavinylT8 in the first cycle of acid amberlite
use. This was an improvement in the 6% yield earlier derived by Andrianov
et al.12 Repetitive use of the solid acid
amberlite was done for eight cycles by having it regenerated with
HCl and methanol. The yield increased until the third cycle (41%)
and started dropping from the fourth cycle onward with some xerogel
side product formation. It is worthy to note that the yield profile,
however, changes for the same octavinylT8 when the chloro
group (X-group in the hydrolytic condensation reaction) is replaced
with a methoxy or ethoxy group. The substitution of the −Cl
group with −OMe and −OEt yielded maximum values of 26.12
and 22.93% of octavinylT8, respectively, in the third cycle
of amberlite reuse. This helps explain the earlier point made where
the identity of the X-group in the cage structure can affect the yield
derived from the synthesis.6

It was
also reported by Dare et al.6 that the
octaphenylT8 synthesized (74% yield) was done
with solid base amberlite instead of solid acid amberlite that was
used for octavinylT8. The reason is because the reaction
failed in the presence of an acid amberlite. The reaction was done
with phenyltrichlorosilane in the presence of ethanol as a solvent
and stabilizer of the large percentage of completely condensed octaphenylT8. OctabenzylT8 was also synthesized following the
same reaction conditions of octaphenylT8 with a 68% yield.6

Thus, the acid and base types of the amberlite
ion exchange resin
create the optimum pH condition for different silsesquioxane end products.
The amberlites are chemically modified gel-type polystyrene beads
stored in Na+ form (acid amberlite) and Cl– form (base amberlite). The acid and base forms are converted to
the active H+ and OH– versions by treating
with a homogeneous acid or base, which are used for the complete condensation
of the reaction to yield the silsesquioxane.6

Several base-catalyzed reactions produce nearly quantitative
yields
of a single polyhedral framework, although in most cases, product
mixtures resulting from base-catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of
RSiX3 are complex and time-consuming to separate on a multigram
scale. Precipitation of a very poorly soluble or insoluble product
is usually the driving force for these base-catalyzed reactions.4

Intermediates are formed during the hydrolytic
condensation of
RSiX3 monomers to fully condensed POSS structures. These
intermediates can be present in small or large amounts and are unstable
under the reaction conditions. It is therefore imperative to select
the reaction conditions that will yield an optimal amount of the end
product and a minimal amount of side products or intermediates. These
intermediate compounds, however, are useful and have a wide range
of applications. For example, the hydrolytic condensation of PhSiCl3 in aqueous acetone gives a good yield of tetrasilanol, which
has many applications as a precursor to a more elaborate framework
and is highly prone to self-condensation and decomposition. Incompletely
condensed silsesquioxanes can also be produced through controlled
partial hydrolysis of POSS.4

Rheological
properties such as viscosity and shear modulus of electrorheological
(ER) fluids undergo instantaneous and reversible change when an electric
field is applied. Previous research on the electrorheology of POSS
structures is limited.13

One of the
main drawbacks in ER application is particle sedimentation.
It is important to identify and design a particle–fluid combination
that would exhibit a large ER effect and overcome sedimentation problems.
POSS structures have been used by Li et al.19 to adjust the hydrophilicity of graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets so
that it can be compatible with silicone oil and overcome phase separation
or sedimentation. This has been achieved by decorating the active
amine groups of octameric aminopropylisobutyl POSS with the oxygen-containing
groups of GO, thereby preventing the reaggregation of GO and reducing
the total thickness of the final POSS-GO structure.

McIntyre
et al.3 discovered that less
than 10 wt % (7%) sulfonated polyhedral silsesquioxane cage structures
(s-POSS or TSAE-POSS, which means the tri-sulfonic acid ethyl POSS)
in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) gave an increase in viscosity by a
factor of 1 × 102 for an electric field strength of
2 kV/mm. This was in contrast to another POSS particle known as isotropic
octa-isobutyl POSS, which exhibited virtually no electrorheological
behavior at that weight percentage. Even when increased to 10 wt %,
the octa-isobutyl POSS particles still showed no ER effect. Upon investigating
the dielectric properties, it was discovered that the octa-isobutyl
POSS/PDMS system is not dielectrically active, while that of TSAE-POSS
is, and it was concluded that the presence of the sulfonated groups
is responsible for the dipolar behavior.

Another study was done
by McIntyre et al.,5 which was an improvement
on the previous work. The study showed
that, when mixed with a small (1 wt %) amount of nanocage sulfonated
POSS (s-POSS), 10 wt % micrometer-sized polystyrene (PS) particles
in PDMS (89 wt %) liquid gave a significant ER effect. They associated
this improved behavior to the formation of a thin adsorbed layer of
s-POSS onto the PS surfaces to give a new core/shell particle with
improved dielectric and conductive properties. The s-POSS/PS/PDMS
suspension exhibited an increase in ER activity by an order of magnitude
beyond that of s-POSS/PDMS suspension.

In this work, the aim
is to octa-functionalize the POSS cage structure
by introducing the cyano functional group and investigate the electrorheology.
ER suspensions containing high concentrations of particles that possess
permanent dipoles show larger ER effects in suspensions than conventional
ER fluids.3,5 It has been stated that the octameric variant
of POSS offers a high 3D symmetry, low density, and multiple functionalities.18 This allows for a relatively easier application
compared to other POSS structures for addition of a cyanopropyl functional
group on the POSS framework to generate a structure with more dipoles
that show an appreciable ER effect. We synthesized the cyanopropylT8, investigated its shape and size by SEM, characterized it
using Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) studies, prepared
the suspensions, and then carried out rheological and dielectric tests
with the application of an electric field.

Results and Discussion
Dielectric Properties
The dielectric test was done
to determine the polarizability of the compound synthesized. Systems
that possess high dielectric constants give enhanced particle polarization,
and this results in strong and stable mesostructure formation within
the suspension spanning the electrodes.3 The mechanism of the ER effect had earlier been investigated and
understood to be governed by slow polarization processes. The interfacial
polarization rather than the debye polarization was found to be the
determinant to the ER effect.15 Interfacial
polarization is defined by the dielectric constants and conductivities
of the components of the ER fluid.

In Figure 1, as the electric field-induced charge separation
occurs in the material, the relative permittivity ascends in the low-frequency
region, while the dielectric loss show a descent from its maximum
value in the low-frequency region. This is an unusual occurrence.
There is no obvious dielectric relaxation observed between the 1 ×
102 Hz and 1 × 105 Hz frequency regions
at the concentration tested, as recommended in the work done by Hao
et al.25 The height of the ε′
curve reflects the size of the induced dipole moment, which indicates
the presence of polarization and that the synthesized compound is
dielectrically active. The introduction of the cyano group to the
POSS cage structure is believed to have provided particles with higher
polarity, polarizability, and dielectric activity.

Figure 1 Frequency dependence
of relative permittivity and dielectric loss
for 2 wt % cyanopropylT8 in PDMS suspension.

Shear Thinning
The shear thinning or thickening behavior
of the suspension was investigated for the microstructural changes
that occur during shearing. In Figure 2, it is shown that the cyanopropylT8 suspension
undergo shear thinning even without the application of the electric
field. The broken chains of the solid network continuously reform
at low shear rate regions, and it is unable to match up the speed
of rotation at higher shear rates. At low shear rates, the particles
are loosely held and form a porous particle network by van der Waals
interactions, and this results in a solid-like behavior for the flocculated
suspension.

Figure 2 Apparent viscosity flow curves for 8 wt % cyanopropylT8 in PDMS suspension at 0 kV/mm and varying temperatures.

This can be understood better on a macroscopic
scale by considering
the fact that, at lower shear rates, the upper plate spins slowly
and the liquid between the plates flows slowly. As the shear rate
increases, the plate spins faster and the liquid between the plates
flows quickly and therefore increases the hydrodynamic drag on the
solid cyanopropylT8 particles. On a microscopic scale,
the resistance to flow is controlled by the solid particle network.
At low shear rates, the loosely held porous structures span the plate,
remain intact, and are not affected by the slowly flowing liquid around
it. As the shear rate increases, the hydrodynamic forces become stronger
and break apart the solid network of particles and the resistance
to flow is transferred from the solid network to the fluid containing
the particles. It is this breakup of the solid network and transfer
of stress from the solid network to the fluid that lead to shear thinning.7

To investigate the temperature effect on
the suspension of cyanopropylT8, the temperature was ramped
up at increments of 20 °C
from 25 to 85 °C. The increase in temperature affects both the
particle–particle interactions and the Brownian motion of the
particles. As the temperature increases, the viscosity of the suspension
drops in order of the temperature values. For systems where an electric
field has been applied with temperature changes, it has been reported
that the Brownian motion is intensified at higher temperatures and
becomes strong enough to compete and weaken the ER effect.9

Electrorheological Analysis
The steady-state flow curves
were measured with and without applying an electric field to show
the ER activity of cyanopropylT8. At the off state, the
data can be seen as noisy, and the stress profiles of all concentrations
are lumped together and are hard to differentiate. The non-Newtonian
behavior of the concentrations with no applied electric field in Figure 3a is unusual, especially
for the lowest concentration of 1%. A previous work of Liu et al.23 showed a Newtonian behavior for silica microspheres
and for a particle concentration that was as high as 10% by volume.
Conversely, an optically transparent ER fluid of urea-modified silica
nanoparticles, which has been fabricated by Liu et al.,24 has been found to behave like a non-Newtonian
fluid but at a higher concentration of 10% by volume with no electric
field applied. They attributed this behavior to the dispersion state
of the particles and their wettability to the dispersing oil medium.

Figure 3 (a) Shear
rate versus shear stress for all concentrations at 0
kV/mm. (b) Shear rate versus shear stress for all concentrations at
4 kV/mm.

The electric field was applied in increments of
1 kV/mm, but for
representation, an increment of 4 kV/mm was shown. At 4 kV/mm shown
on Figure 3b, the ER
effect was evident in the increase in shear stress and ultimately
yield stress. The higher particle concentration in the suspensions
led to a significant increase in the ER effect of these suspensions.
The higher particle concentrations were able to form a stiffer and
stronger chain-like structure than the suspensions with lower particle
loading. Thus, the increased amount of polarizable particles in the
suspension leads to the formation of a stiffer solid network and a
higher ER effect. The 8 wt % concentration showed a greater ER response
at the 4 kV/mm electric field strength at higher shear rates.

It is worthy to note the sharp decrease in the stress of the higher
concentrations especially the 8 wt % concentration in the lower shear
rate region of <2 (1/s). This can be seen on Figure 3b and is also shown in Figure 4. This occurrence may be associated to electric
saturation of the suspension. The dielectric particles within the
suspension break down as the electric field is increased beyond its
breakdown voltage, and it acts as an electrical conductor with electrostatic
discharge. This happens mainly in the lower shear rate region where
the hydrodynamic forces are weak and there is sufficient particle–particle
interaction and contact for electrostatic discharge to occur. Thus,
the yield stresses for the suspensions go through a maximum at 3 kV/mm
and show a breakdown at 4 kV/mm.

Figure 4 Shear stress versus shear rate for varying
electric fields for
8 wt % cyanopropylT8.

The dynamic yield stresses of 4, 6, and 8% concentrations
are shown
for 1 to 3 kV/mm electric fields in Figure 5a. The yield stress is the stress required
to initiate flow, and it typically depicts the strength of the solid
network of particles in the suspension. The yield stress has been
calculated from the flow curves of the cyanopropylT8 suspensions
of different concentrations and electric field strengths. The 1 wt
% concentration was flat and displayed no apparent ER effect as the
electric field increased, as shown in Figure 3, and was therefore excluded from the Herschel–Bulkley
yield stress plot in Figure 5a. The yield stress was calculated using the Herschel–Bulkley
model. Higher yield stress values are obtained as the particle volume
fraction goes up. As shown in Figure 5a, the Herschel–Bulkley model fits the data
for all concentrations and the electric fields of up to 3 kV/mm except
for the 4 kV/mm electric field (not shown in Figure 5a).

Figure 5 (a) Increase in Herschel–Bulkley yield
stress for 4, 6,
and 8% concentrations as the electric field strength increases from
1 to 3 kV/mm. (b) ER efficiency of cyanopropylT8 suspensions
at shear rates of 10 (1/s) and 100 (1/s).

The log–log dependence of the yield stress
on the electric
field strength obeys the power law from the conduction and polarization
models. 1  where q is
the rigidity of the internal structures formed when the electric field
is applied, and the value α should be within the range of 1.5–2
for well-developed structures for the conduction model and 2 for the
polarization model.10,20 The polarization model relates
the material parameters such as the dielectric constants of the liquid
and solid particles to the rheological properties using an idealized
ER system of uniform, hard dielectric spheres dispersed in a Newtonian
fluid medium, and the yield stress is found to be proportional to
the square of the applied electric field (i.e., α = 2). The
conduction model, on the other hand, considers particle interaction
only as the factor for the ER effect when the gap between the conducting
particles in the fluid decreases and the α value approaches
1.5.20 In Figure 5a, τy scales
as ∼E0.7 for both 6 and 8% concentrations
and E0.35 for 4% concentration.

As previously discussed, at 4 kV/mm, the electric field applied
exceeds the breakdown voltage of the dielectric particles, and this
causes a drop in the shear stress values at lower shear rates. The
yield stress, which is an extrapolation of the shear stress using
applicable yield stress models, ultimately drops with this phenomenon.
This occurrence is visible at increasing concentrations and becomes
more pronounced at the highest concentration of 8%. The yield stress
values at 4 kV/mm are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Yield Stress Values of the Herschel–Bulkley
Model at 4 kV/mm for Concentrations of 4, 6, and 8%
concentration (%)	yield stress (Pa)	
4	10.6	
6	22.4	
8	24.2	
The ER efficiency measures the electroviscosity difference
between
the off state with no electric field applied and the on state with
an electric field applied. It is given as efficiency 2  

This parameter is of
high importance because it gives vital information
of how well the ER fluid performed across the shear rate band.10,14Figure 5b shows the
ER efficiency dependence on concentration at shear rates of 10 (1/s)
and 100 (1/s). In this case, the data presented is the difference
in viscosity at 0 kV/mm when no field was applied and at 4 kV/mm.
The ER efficiency is lowest for the lowest concentration of 1% and
highest for the highest concentration of 8%. The efficiency is higher
at shear rates in the mid-region of 1 (1/s) and 10 (1/s) than the
higher shear rates. The increase in viscosity at high shear rates
of, for instance, 100 (1/s) when the electric field is on is not as
great as the lower shear rates because the structures at high shear
rates have been broken apart. The difference between the 10 (1/s)
and 100 (1/s) ER efficiency values increases as the concentration
increases from 1 to 8%.

Oscillatory measurements were carried
out to determine the viscoelastic
properties of the ER suspensions. This gives a better understanding
of the microstructural changes in the linear and nonlinear viscoelastic
regions. Applying the electric field creates a transition in the fluid
from viscous behavior to linear viscoelastic (LVE) behavior to nonlinear
viscoplastic behavior. This means that increasing the electric field
not only increases the viscosity but also changes the rheological
mechanism by which we can model the materials.7

The complex shear moduli G′ and G″ were measured with and without the electric field,
as seen in Figure 6 (top and bottom). These measurements allow for comparisons of the
structure within the suspension with and without the electric field.
At 0 kV/mm, the G′ values for all concentrations
appear to be similar and are all clustered together like the flow
curves in Figure 3a.
Upon application of an electric field at 4 kV/mm, the 1% concentration
remained the same, while the higher concentrations showed a marked
increase in the modulus, with 8% concentration being the highest.
It can be seen from the 4 kV/mm plot for G′
that, as the concentration increases, the plateau that represents
the LVE region shrinks.16

Figure 6 (Top) Storage modulus
versus strain at 0 and 4 kV/mm. (Bottom)
Loss modulus versus strain at 0 and 4 kV/mm.

The critical strain where the storage modulus crosses
the loss
modulus17 is shown in Table 2. The critical strain varied
with concentration but showed no trend with increasing concentration.

Table 2 Critical Strain Amplitude for Different
CyanopropylT8 Concentrations at All Electric Fields
concentration (%)	1 kV/mm	2 kV/mm	3 kV/mm	4 kV/mm	
1	5.01	5.01	5.01	6.31	
4	7.94	6.31	6.31	6.31	
6	7.94	7.94	7.94	6.31	
8	6.31	6.31	5.01	3.98	
Figure 7 shows the
increasing trend of G′ and G″ as the electric field strength is increased on the suspension.
The highest modulus can be seen to be at the highest electric field
of 4 kV/mm.

Figure 7 (a) Storage modulus versus strain at all electric fields for 8
wt % concentration. (b) Loss modulus versus strain at all electric
fields for 8 wt % concentration.

Figure 8 shows the
frequency sweep of the ER fluid with both the storage and loss moduli
at 1% fixed strain. The frequency sweep was used to investigate the
time-dependent deformation behavior of the suspension in the linear
viscoelastic region. Both the storage and loss moduli showed an increase
as the strength of the applied electric field is increased, indicating
that the ER fluids show a solid behavior.21 There is an increase in storage modulus at higher frequencies. At
higher frequencies, the structures in the suspension exhibit less
flexibility and higher rigidity at a faster motion, and the storage
modulus values could increase up to 5 to 10 times higher than the
plateau region at a low frequency.22

Figure 8 Frequency sweep
of 8 wt % concentration under different electric
field strengths for (a) storage modulus and (b) loss modulus at a
fixed strain amplitude of 1%.

Conclusions
A new ER particle has been synthesized
using the hydrolyzation
route and characterized. The addition of the cyano group into the
inorganic POSS structure has been found to respond to an applied electric
field. The yield can be improved by exploring the possibility of using
other catalysts, changing reaction conditions, or using other routes.
An ER fluid of cyanopropylT8/PDMS suspension was prepared
and characterized dielectrically and electrorheologically. These suspensions
have been found to be dielectrically active and show a shear thinning
behavior. The change in the rheological properties of the ER fluid
upon application of an electric field has been demonstrated through
steady flow and oscillatory tests. The flow curves have been used
to show the effects of increasing viscosity and shear stress as the
concentration and electric field are increased. The yield stress has
been derived by using the Herschel–Bulkley model to fit the
flow curves, and the yield stress has been found to increase up to
3 kV/mm and drops at 4 kV/mm due to dielectric breakdown. The power
law with respect to conduction and polarization models has been used
to describe the ER effect. The electrorheological efficiency was also
analyzed. The viscoelastic analysis for amplitude and frequency sweeps
suggests that the strength and formation of the cyanopropylT8 structures in PDMS are augmented by increasing the magnitude of
the electric field. The 1% concentration showed no apparent ER response
in both flow and oscillatory tests.

Experimental Section
Synthesis of Octa-cyanopropylsilsesquioxane
The hydrolyzation
route used in ref (6) was adopted. The RSiX3 was replaced with a trihalosilane
(cyanopropyltrichlorosilane, CH2CH2CH2-CNSiCl3) purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

The reaction
was carried out in an inert atmosphere. The acid amberlite (strongly
acidic and hydrogen form, IR-120) was weighed (40 g) into a small
beaker. Concentrated HCl (25 mL) was measured with a graduated cylinder
and used to wash the acid amberlite twice. Each washing period lasted
10 min on top of a magnetic stirrer. The acid was decanted after the
two-time washing of 20 min. Deionized water (50 mL) was used to wash
the amberlite with the same procedure and timing. The water was decanted,
and methanol (25 mL) was also used to wash the amberlite with the
same procedure and timing. The methanol was decanted, and the acid
amberlite was ready for use. The amberlite was charged into a 500
mL flat-bottom flask, which has 150 mL of methanol in it, and this
was stirred at 30 °C. The temperature was monitored by a thermometer.
Cyanopropyltrichlorosilane (0.04 mol or 6.23 mL) was added dropwise
and stirred into the amberlite methanolic solution at 30 °C.
Stirring was carried out at room temperature for 10 h, after which
the methanol was decanted and dichloromethane was added to dissolve
the microcrystals that formed. The amberlite was filtered out for
reuse. The resulting solvent was poured into a round-bottom flask
and concentrated with a rotary evaporator, and the resulting residues
are the cyanopropylT8 crystals (Figure 9). The crystals were removed from the walls
and bottom of the flask, and the resultant yield (2.03%) was calculated
and ready for characterization.

Figure 9 Octa-functionalized cyanopropyl POSS structure.

Characterization of Prepared CyanopropylT8
The microstructure and morphology of the synthesized cyanopropylT8 particles were observed by SEM.

SEM images in Figure 10 show that particles
are micrometer-sized. They are well dispersed in size and ranges from
1 to 200 μm.

Figure 10 SEM images of cyanopropylT8 particles in increasing
order of magnification.

The attenuated total reflectance FTIR method via
a Cary 630 instrument
was used to identify the absorption bands and assign them to the bonds
within the compound. In accordance with the literature,6,11 the typical FTIR characteristic data obtained include stretching
vibrations at 2245.8 cm–1 for the −CN group,
stretching vibration at 2939.8 cm–1 (C–H),
and bending vibration at 1406.0 cm–1 (C–H).
Also, vibration at 747.4 cm–1 corresponds to Si–C,
while that at 1096 cm–1 corresponds to Si–O
stretch.

Preparation of Electrorheological Suspensions
The required
quantities of cyanopropylT8 and silicone oil of 500 cSt
viscosity that were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich were weighed out
and vacuum-dried at 130 °C for 24 h to ensure that traces of
moisture, which could influence the outcome of the results, were eliminated.
After drying, the POSS compound was crushed to ensure a uniform particle
size distribution. Contact with air was minimized by capping the containers,
and concentrations of 1, 4, 6, and 8 wt % were prepared in separate
vials. A homogeneous mixture between the particles and the silicone
oil was obtained by using a vortex mixer.

Electrorheological Measurements
Rheological properties
were measured using a strain-controlled Anton Paar MCR 302 parallel
plate rheometer with a plate size of 25 mm and 0.3 mm spacing between
plates in such a way that, to get a 1 kV/mm electric field strength,
a setting of 0.3 kV will have to be entered. An electric field was
applied using the FuG DC power supply HCP 14-12500. The sample from
the vial is slowly and uniformly dispersed on the top of the bottom
plate, and the required experimental settings are entered in the PC
Rheoplus software before the start of each test is activated. Each
test (rotational and oscillatory tests) were carried out with fresh
samples because, once a sample is used, the structure is broken down
and takes time to rebuild; therefore, the chances of having an accurate
result with the same sample reduces. A shear rate sweep of 0.1 to
100 s–1 was done at fields of 0 to 4 kV/mm in 1
kV/mm incremental steps for all four concentrations prepared. This
was done at a constant temperature (25 °C) to measure the flow
curves. The yield stress of the suspensions was ascertained by using
the Herschel–Bulkley model. Oscillatory tests for strain amplitude
were conducted at variable strain from a low to higher strain while
the frequency is held constant. Amplitude sweep was done from 0.01
to 1000% at a constant frequency of 10 rad/s at electric fields ranging
from 0 to 4 kV/mm in steps of 1 kV/mm. The storage and loss moduli
were derived from this experiment.

Dielectric Spectroscopy of Suspension
This test was
conducted at 25 °C over a range of 20 Hz to 1 MHz frequency measured
by an IET 1920 Precision LCR meter equipped with a liquid measurement
cell, which has two metal electrodes separated by a Teflon spacer.
The test was carried out with a 2% concentration of cyanopropylT8 in the PDMS oil. The aluminum measuring cell was filled with
the suspension, and the terminals from the LCR meter were connected
to the ends of the cell. The capacitance and dissipation factor were
recorded remotely on the PC. The parallel plate capacitor equation 3  was used to calculate the
dielectric constant, and the dielectric loss was also calculated.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b02105.Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared
spectra (FTIR) for cyanopropylT8 (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02105_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge support
from Louisiana Board
of Regents through the Board of Regents Support Fund (contract no.
LEQSF(2013-16)-RD-A-14).
==== Refs
References
Handke B. ; Jastrzębski W. ; Kwaśny M. ; Klita L. 
Structural Studies
of OctahydridoOctaSilsesquioxane – H8Si8O12 . J. Mol. Struct. 
2012 , 1028 , 68 –72 . 10.1016/j.molstruc.2012.06.033 .
Luca O.  Frameworks based
on Polyhedral Oligomeric Silsesquioxanes . Thesis,
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 24 April 2008 .
McIntyre E. C. ; Oh H. J. ; Green P. F. 
Electrorheological
Phenomena in Polyhedral
Silsesquioxane Cage Structure/PDMS Systems . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2010 , 2 , 965 –968 . 10.1021/am1000745 .20384359 
Frank J. F.  Polyhedral
Oligosilsesquioxanes and Heterosilsesquioxanes . In Gelest Catalog of Si, Ge, and Sn Compounds and Survey of Properties
and Chemistry ; Gelest, Inc. : 1998 , 43 –59 .
McIntyre E. C. ; Yang H. ; Green P. F. 
Electrorheology
of Polystyrene Filler/Polyhedral
Silsesquioxane Suspensions . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 2148 –2153 . 10.1021/am300149u .22428800 
Dare E. O. ; Liu L.-K. ; Peng J. 
Modified procedure
for improved synthesis
of some octameric silsesquioxanes via hydrolytic polycondenzation
in the presence of Amberlite ion-exchange resins . Dalton Trans. 
2006 , 3668 –3671 . 10.1039/B603325C .16865178 
Pereira A. ; McIntyre C. 
Electrorheology of
Diamond/PDMS Nanofluids in Steady
and Oscillatory Shear . Appl. Rheol. 
2014 , 24 , 11 –19 . 10.3933/applrheol-24-63471 .
Lickiss P. D. ; Rataboul F. 
Fully Condensed Polyhedral Oligosilsesquioxanes
(POSS):
From Synthesis to Application . Adv. Organomet.
Chem. 
2008 , 57 , 1 –116 . 10.1016/S0065-3055(08)00001-4 .
Hao T.  Electrorheological Fluids:
The Non-aqueous Suspensions ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2005 .
Plachy T. ; Mrlik M. ; Kozakova Z. ; Suly P. ; Sedlacik M. ; Pavlinek V. ; Kuritka I. 
The Electrorheological
Behavior of
Suspensions Based on Molten-Salt Synthesized Lithium Titanate Nanoparticles
and Their Core-Shell Titanate/Urea Analogues . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 3725 –3731 . 10.1021/am508471f .25633327 
Dittmar U. ; Hendan B. J. ; Flörke U. ; Marsmann H. C. 
Funktionalisierte
octa-(propylsilsesquioxane) (3-XC3H6)8(Si8O12) modellverbindungen für oberflächenmodifizierte
kieselgele . J. Organomet. Chem. 
1995 , 489 , 185 –194 . 10.1016/0022-328X(94)05100-P .
Andrianov K. A. ; Petrovnina N. M. ; Vasil’eva T. V. ; Shklover V. E. ; D’yachenko B. I. 
Zh. Obshch. Khim. 
1978 , 48 , 2692 –2695 .
McIntyre C. ; Yang H. ; Green P. F. 
Electrorheology
of suspensions containing
interfacially active constituents . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 8925 –8931 . 10.1021/am4017544 .23977824 
Lengalova A. ; Pavlinek V. ; Saha P. ; Quadrat O. ; Stejskal J. 
The effect
of dispersed particle size and shape on the electrorheological behaviour
of suspensions . Colloids Surf., A 
2003 , 227 , 1 –8 . 10.1016/S0927-7757(03)00348-0 .
Hao T. ; Kawai A. ; Ikazaki F. 
Mechanism of the Electrorheological
Effect: Evidence from the Conductive, Dielectric, and Surface Characteristics
of Water-Free Electrorheological Fluids . Langmuir 
1998 , 14 , 1256 –1262 . 10.1021/la971062e .
Omambala J.  The Electrorheological
Effect of Polyhedral Silsesquioxane Cage Structures with Cyanopropyl
Functional Groups . Master’s Thesis, University
of Louisiana at Lafayette, 2016 .
Omambala J. ; McIntyre C.  Rheological characterization of tack
and viscoelasticity of compositions of crepe coating used in the Yankee
dryer . Tappi J 2019 ,
accepted for publication. 10.32964/TJ18.11.641 .
Sulaiman S.  Synthesis
and
Characterization of Polyfunctional Polyhedral Silsesquioxane Cages . Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Michigan, 2011 .
Li Y. ; Guan Y. ; Liu Y. ; Yin J. ; Zhao X. 
Highly stable
nanofluid based on polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane-decorated
graphene oxide nanosheets and its enhanced electro-responsive behavior . Nanotechnology 
2016 , 27 , 195702 10.1088/0957-4484/27/19/195702 .27041243 
Kim S. G. ; Lim J. Y. ; Sung J. H. ; Choi H. J. ; Seo Y. 
Emulsion polymerized
polyaniline synthesized with dodecylbenzene-sulfonic acid and its
electrorheological characteristics: Temperature effect . Polymer 
2007 , 48 , 6622 –6631 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2007.09.013 .
Kim H. Y. ; Choi H. J. 
Core-Shell structured
poly(2-ethylaniline) coated crosslinked
poly(methyl methacrylate) nanoparticles by graft polymerization and
their electrorheology . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 28511 –28518 . 10.1039/c4ra04799k .
Mezger T. G.  The Rheology Handbook ; 2 nd Ed.; Vincentz Network : Hannover , 2006 , pp 131 –137 .
Liu Y. D. ; Quan X.-M. ; Lee B. M. ; Kim I. G. ; Choi H. J. 
Fabrication
of ammonium persulfate coated silica microsphere via chemical grafting
and its electrorheology . J. Mater. Sci. 
2014 , 49 , 2618 –2623 . 10.1007/s10853-013-7961-x .
Liu Y. D. ; Lee B. M. ; Park T.-S. ; Kim J. E. ; Choi H. J. ; Booh S. W. 
Optically transparent
electrorheological fluid with
urea-modified silica nanoparticles and its haptic display application . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2013 , 404 , 56 –61 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2013.05.012 .23743046 
Hao T. ; Kawai A. ; Ikazaki F. 
The Yield Stress Equation for the
Electrorheological Fluids . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 3058 –3066 . 10.1021/la990881r .

