
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145925810.1021/acsomega.8b01699ArticleInfrared Spectroscopy of Polybenzimidazole in the
Dry and Hydrate Forms: A Combined Experimental and Computational Study Musto Pellegrino *†La Manna Pietro †Moon Joshua D. ‡§Galizia Michele ∥Freeman Benny D. ‡§† Institute
on Polymers, Composites and Biomaterials, National Research Council of Italy, Via Campi Flegrei 34, 80078 Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy‡ John
J. McKetta Jr. Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, 200 E. Dean Keeton Street, Austin, Texas 78712, United States§ Center
for Energy and Environmental Resources (CEER), 10100 Burnet Rd., Building 133, Austin, Texas 78758, United States∥ School
of Chemical, Biological and Materials Engineering Gallogly College
of Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, 100 E. Boyd Street, Norman, Oklahoma 73019, United States* E-mail: pellegrino.musto@ipcb.cnr.it (P.M.).21 09 2018 30 09 2018 3 9 11592 11607 18 07 2018 10 09 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In the present article, the infrared
spectrum of polybenzimidazole
(PBI) in the dry and hydrate forms has been studied both experimentally
and theoretically to improve the interpretation of its complex features,
especially in the ν(NH)/ν(OH) range, which is extensively
affected by sorbed water and temperature. Time-resolved Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy measurements were performed
to monitor H2O sorption, whereas the temperature behavior
was investigated by in situ measurements in the 100–450 °C
range. Density functional theory calculations on simplified models
of dry and hydrated PBI showed good agreement with experimental results
and allowed a reliable interpretation of the observed effects. The
combined experimental/computational analysis provided relevant structural
information which suggested the possibility of modifying the diffusion
properties of PBI and motivated further experimental activities.

document-id-old-9ao8b01699document-id-new-14ao-2018-016998ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Polybenzimidazole
[poly(2,2′(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole,
PBI] is a high-performance technopolymer well-known for its outstanding
properties. It exhibits the highest Tg among organic polymers (425–436 °C), good resistance
to solvents and corrosive chemicals, flame resistance, and an exceptional
thermal and thermo-oxidative stability (decomposition temperature
approaching 600 °C).1−3 PBI has been successfully employed
in numerous applications requiring exposure to extreme conditions,
such as in aerospace and in the fabrication of protective apparel
such as firefighters’ gear and astronauts’ suits. However,
more recent applications for PBI have focused on its usability for
membrane separations. Initially, it was employed as a semipermeable
membrane for electrodialysis, reverse osmosis, and ultrafiltration.2 More recently, usage in gas separations has emerged.4,5 Specifically, membranes based on PBIs appear suitable for H2 separation from CO2 at high temperatures.6−8

The high rigidity and resistance to aggressive environments
exhibited
by PBIs originate from the close chain-packing imposed by strong,
interchain hydrogen-bonding interactions9,10 as well as
from the presence of rigid aromatic rings which frustrate chain rotation.
A further, very promising application of PBI is as a proton-exchange
membrane for fuel cells (PEMFC). There is a need to introduce new
materials capable of operating above 100 °C, thereby eliminating
most of the severe limitations of conventional Nafion membranes. In
fact, in the range of 150–200 °C, these high-temperature
PEMFCs exhibit such features as increased CO tolerance, increased
electrocatalytic activity, simplified water management, and relaxed
requirements for temperature control. PBI is the most widely used
material for HT-PEMFC owing to its thermal and mechanical stability,
low gas permeability, and tolerance to strong acids and CO. To improve
proton conductivity, PBI is used in the doped form with appropriate
levels of phosphoric acid.2,11,12

PBI absorbs conspicuous amounts of water (around 15% by weight
in ambient conditions1,13). In such amounts, water can
swell the polymer, perturb its H-bonding network, and bind preferentially
onto interaction and/or free-volume sites that would be otherwise
available for gas sorption and diffusion.1,14 Furthermore,
plasticization by absorbed water adversely affects mechanical performance:
both the compressive strength and dynamic modulus of wet PBI are approximately
halved compared to the fully dried material, which may cause the premature
failure of items exposed to humid environments.14 For example, these effects are to be carefully considered
in applications involving membranes that operate with humidified gas
streams. Despite the numerous studies already published on the subject,
the molecular mechanism of water diffusion in PBI is still poorly
understood. Thus, issues such as preferential interaction sites on
the polymer substrate, type, and strength of probe/substrate H bonding;
influence of PBI/H2O interactions on PBI self-interactions;
and structural effects remain to be elucidated. In fact, conflicting
and/or incomplete accounts on these and related matters have been
reported.

Numerous experimental approaches have been employed
to investigate
water/polymer systems [solid-state NMR, Raman, Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR), neutron scattering, and light scattering] with
varying degrees of success.15−18 To date, FTIR spectroscopy is considered among the
most powerful and reliable techniques. This is due to its sensitivity
toward H bonding and to its sampling flexibility, which allows one
to implement in situ, time-resolved experiments in a rather straightforward
way.16,19−21 However, problems are
encountered even for this type of spectroscopy, mainly related to
the considerable band broadening in the analytical range, which limits
and often prevents the resolution of the multicomponent profiles.
This effect is a direct consequence of H-bonding interactions and
their wide distribution of geometrical parameters. Another limitation
of the infrared technique results from intensity enhancement of ν(OH)
bands upon the establishment of an interaction, which is directly
related to H-bonding strength. This effect is difficult to predict
and poses serious problems to the quantitative analysis.16,19,20

Earlier contributions on
FTIR spectroscopy of PBI tentatively identified
spectroscopic signatures of free- and self-associated NH groups,22−24 which were later employed to investigate H bonding in the polymer
as a function of doping,13,25−27 blend composition,3,23,28,29 and temperature.3,24,26 Bouchet and Siebert25 examined the FTIR spectrum of pristine and partially deuterated
PBI. They confirmed previous assignments and, on this basis, attempted
a quantitative interpretation of the very complex bandshape observed
in samples doped with HBr, H2SO4, and H3PO4. Because of the lack of resolution and the
multiplicity of components, their attempts achieved limited success.
Combining FTIR and solid-state NMR measurements, Brooks and co-workers14 concluded that FTIR results were unable to demonstrate
conclusively the occurrence of strong intermolecular H bonding in
the dry state being disrupted in the wet state. On the other hand,
based on NMR results, they claimed that the majority of water in PBI
is effectively mobile (in the time scale of the experiment) and therefore
not bonded to the polymer. These authors attributed the loss in mechanical
properties in wet PBI to the reduction in van der Waals forces and/or
hydrogen bonding interactions between chains as a consequence of the
swelling of the wet material. Leal and co-workers30 examined by FTIR spectroscopy the H-bonding formation in
hydroxylated PBI fibers as a function of heat treatment. They identified
bands associated with H bonding, measured their molar absorptivities,
and quantified the concentration of N–H groups H-bonded to
water and to adjacent polymer chains in the fiber. The above authors
concluded that sorbed water strongly interacts with polymer N–H
groups. More recently, Christensen and Jones31 investigated undoped PBI films as a function of humidity using both
H2O and D2O in an attempt to deepen the interpretation
of the vibrational spectrum. These authors, in contrast with the conclusions
of Brooks et al., claimed that H2O uptake by PBI results
in the formation of regions of “free” water as well
as the disruption of N–H···N interactions because
of the insertion of water between PBI chains, which tightly bind to
the active sites of the polymer.

In the present contribution, time-resolved FTIR
measurements have been performed at two different relative pressures
of water vapor to monitor H2O sorption in PBI. The evolution
of the spectrum in the ν(NH)/ν(OH) range provided information
about the molecular mechanism of diffusion and, together with in situ
temperature measurements in the range 50–450 °C, contributed
to clarify aspects of the vibrational interpretation which needed
to be consolidated.

The spectral data have been analyzed by
different and complementary
approaches, namely, difference spectroscopy, two-dimensional correlation
spectroscopy (2D-COS), and least-squares curve fitting (LSCF) analysis,
which improved the resolution of the complex band profiles. The interpretation
of the observed spectroscopic effects was made possible by comparison
with the results of quantum chemistry (QC)/normal coordinate analysis
(NCA). The first-principles simulation of the infrared
spectra of simplified molecular models of PBI in the dry and hydrate
forms was found in good agreement with the experimental results, confirming
the predictive capabilities of the chosen model chemistry. Relevant
structural information was also derived and discussed, which prompted
future experimental activities.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 FTIR Spectroscopy
2.1.1 Spectroscopic Monitoring of Sorption Kinetics
In Figure 1, the
spectrum of a PBI film equilibrated under ambient conditions (i.e.,
25 °C, 50% rh) is compared with the spectrum of the same film
dried under vacuum at 150 °C for 4 h. The contribution of sorbed
water is pronounced and complex: the main features because of fundamental
vibrations, occur in the 3700–2500 cm–1 range
(OH stretching), around 1670 cm–1 (HOH bending),
and in the 900–500 cm–1 range (libration
mode of the H-bonded molecules). A fourth band of lesser intensity
is observed in the frequency range 2440–1870 cm–1. Its vibrational origin is still debated, having been assigned either
to a δ(HOH) + Lib(HOH) combination or to the third overtone
of the libration fundamental.32,33 Despite its weakness,
it occurs in a range free of interference from the polymer spectrum,
whereas other H2O bands may be influenced by changes in
the polymer spectrum induced by the penetrant. This effect is best
appreciated by difference spectroscopy. In Figure 2, the time evolution of the difference spectrum
relative to the sorption experiment at p/p0 = 0.1 is reported.

Figure 1 FTIR spectrum of PBI
equilibrated at ambient conditions (red trace)
and dried at 150 °C for 4 h (blue trace).

Figure 2 Evolution of the difference spectra as a function of time for the
H2O sorption experiment at 35 °C and p/p0 = 0.1.

The ν(OH) region displays both positive features because
of the growing concentration of molecular species and a negative component
(with respect to the local baseline, see Figure 2) related to an intensity reduction or a
shift/widening of a PBI peak. Similar effects are observed in the
bending and libration regions. Here, the PBI peaks are significantly
sharper than the water bands and produce a series of derivative-type
features characteristic of peak shifts. Overall, the sequence of difference
spectra in Figure 2 demonstrates the sensitivity of the vibrational behavior of PBI
to the presence of water. Because of the high sensitivity of difference
spectra to peak shifts, these are difficult to interpret and use reliably
for quantitative analysis.

However, one exception is found for
the libration overtone at 2105
cm–1, which, as anticipated, is interference-free.
A linear and reproducible baseline can be identified in all difference
spectra (see inset of Figure 2), making it well-suited for concentration monitoring. The
results gathered in this manner for two water sorption experiments
carried out at 35 °C and at p/p0 = 0.1 and 0.5 (red and blue symbols, respectively) are
represented in Figure 3A.

Figure 3 (A) Water vapor sorption kinetics as monitored by the H2O band at 2105 cm–1. H2O relative pressures
as indicated. (B) Normalized absorbance vs square root of time at p/p0 = 0.1. (C) Normalized absorbance
vs square root of time at p/p0 = 0.5. Continuous black curves represent the regression of
the data with eq 3.

In Figure 3B,C,
normalized absorbance is plotted against the square root of time.
In the simplest case of water diffusion into a plane sheet exposed
to constant vapor activity on both sides, Fick’s model can
describe absorbance kinetics as34 1  where A(t) and A∞ are the absorbance areas
of the analytical band at time t and at equilibrium,
respectively; M is the mass of sorbed penetrant; D is the mutual diffusivity; and L is the
sample thickness. If the polymer undergoes additional relaxation during
mass uptake, the Berens–Hopfenberg35 model can provide a more accurate fit 2  where A∞,F is the absorbance associated with the unrelaxed
polymer, A∞,1 is the absorbance
associated with
relaxation (A∞,1 = A∞ – A∞,F) and k1 is a relaxation rate constant
(s–1). This model can be adjusted to control the
changing water vapor concentrations at the film surface when initially
exposed to vapor36 3  where β is a rate constant describing
the initial change in surface vapor concentration upon water vapor
exposure (s–1). The continuous lines in Figure 3B,C represent the
least-squares regression of data points to the modified form of the
Berens–Hopfenberg model (eq 3), where A∞,F,D, k1, and β are used
as fitting parameters.

A deviation of the experimental data
from Fickian behavior is observed
at p/p0 = 0.1 at longer
times, and this behavior becomes more apparent at p/p0 = 0.5. This behavior appears to originate
from a slowly increasing regime, following the initial steep water
uptake, which prevents equilibrium attainment in the explored time
range. Measurements at longer sorption times (≥50 000 s) indicated
that, at p/p0 = 0.5,
the water uptake still continues at a barely detectable rate. This
effect could be associated to slow relaxation processes in the polymer
and is able to be adequately described by the modified Berens–Hopfenberg
model. From least-squares regression, the diffusion coefficients of
water at p/p0 = 0.1 and
0.5 were determined to be 1.9 × 10–9 and 2.7
× 10–9 cm2/s, respectively.

To avoid
the complicating factors affecting the difference spectra,
we turned our attention to the absorbance spectra. Their evolution
during the sorption experiment at p/p0 = 0.1 is depicted in Figure 4, showing a gradual increase of the main
band at 3170 cm–1 and the occurrence of an absorption
at 3620 cm–1, which is absent in the spectrum of
the dry sample. The latter has already been mentioned in previous
literature studies.13,14

Figure 4 Absorbance spectra at increasing sorption
times for the experiment
at 35 °C and p/p0 = 0.1. From bottom to top, the traces refer to the following collection
times: 0, 20, 42, 66, 86, 110, 162, 240, and 435 s.

To provide a deeper analysis of this complex bandshape,
we used
2D-COS, an approach that was found very effective for studying H-bonding
systems.21,37−39 This method enhances
spectral resolution and is valuable in cases of broad, highly overlapped
profiles. The resolution enhancement originates from the spectral
data spreading over a second frequency axis, coupled with the asynchronous
correlation intensity vanishing for signals evolving at the same rate.37,38 The analysis produces two correlation maps: a synchronous spectrum
that represents the simultaneous or coincidental changes of two separate
signals and an asynchronous spectrum that highlights features evolving
at significantly different rates. A feature specifically relevant
in the present context is the synchronous spectrum along the main
diagonal, often referred to as the power spectrum. It represents the
autocorrelation function: the magnitude of the peaks in this pattern
(autopeaks) is representative of the overall extent of intensity change
occurring at the respective frequency. Thus, any region of a spectrum
changing to a great extent will show strong autocorrelation peaks,
whereas the regions remaining nearly constant will display weak or
no autopeaks. The synchronous map relative to the sorption experiment
at p/p0 = 0.1 is reported
in Figure 5A, whereas Figure 5B depicts the power
spectrum in comparison with the frequency spectrum collected at 435
s.

Figure 5 (A) Synchronous map in the 2400–4000 cm–1 range for the sequence of spectra collected in the sorption experiment
at 35 °C and p/p0 = 0.1. (B) Comparison between the autocorrelation spectrum from
the synchronous map of (A) (red trace) and the frequency spectrum
collected at t = 435 s (blue trace).

Three maxima are identified in the synchronous
map, which resolves
the region between 3750 and 3480 cm–1 in two separate
components at 3626 and 3505 cm–1. Below 3450 cm–1, the power spectrum displays a single feature centered
at 3194 cm–1, whereas in correspondence to the peak
observed at 3418 cm–1 in the frequency spectrum
and to the shoulder at around 2800 cm–1, the autocorrelation
intensity goes to zero. This is an indication that the above features
remain essentially constant during the sorption process, their apparent
changes being due to the influence of the intense, unresolved component
at 3194 cm–1 which increases to a large extent (see Figure 4). The asynchronous
spectrum is more complex and more difficult to interpret possibly
because of its higher sensitivity to complicating factors such as
peak shifts (vide infra). It is reported in Figure S2 of the Supporting Information. The main additional information
it conveys is related to the resolution of two components evolving
at different rates, centered, respectively, at 3110 and 3305 cm–1. These correspond to the maximum and the shoulder
observed in the main band of the power spectrum.

In light of
the 2D-COS results, it is possible to attempt a LSCF
analysis of the experimental profiles. These can be suitably simulated
by a model comprising five components (three, in the case of the dry
sample) whose position can be identified by visual inspection (abrupt
change of slope in the bandshape) as well as by the second-derivative
analysis. Details on the adopted LSCF method are reported in the Supporting Information. The band at 3062 cm–1 is not considered in the analysis, being associated
to the aromatic ν(CH) modes that are invariant and unrelated
to the interacting moieties. Typical LSCF results, relative to the
spectra collected at 0 and 435 s, are represented in Figure 6A,B. The model reproduces satisfactorily
the complex experimental profile, and the quality of the fit is consistent
throughout the whole sequence of spectra (correlation coefficient, R2, ≥0.996). In Figure 7A,B are reported the band intensities of
the five resolved components as a function of the sorption time, that
is, as a function of water concentration in the sample. The intensity
parameter in Figure 7A is expressed in terms of percentage increase [i.e., as 100·(At – A0)/A0] to remove the molar absorptivity differences
between the components. The two peaks at higher frequency for which A0 = 0 are monitored in terms of absolute absorbance
(Figure 7B). The band
originally centered at 3167 cm–1 (in the following,
band positions refer to the dry sample) is the component growing to
the larger extent (around 160%), suggesting that the most penetrant
molecules absorb strongly at this frequency. The band at 2860 cm–1 remains essentially constant, whereas the peak at
3424 cm–1 decreases slightly (less than 10%), nearly
within the uncertainty limits of the LSCF analysis. The above findings
are in full agreement with the 2D-COS results.

Figure 6 (A) LSCF analysis of
the spectrum collected at time = 0 s. The
red trace is the experimental profile, the blue trace is the regression
result, and the black traces are the three resolved components. (B)
Same as (A) for the spectrum collected at 435 s. The experimental
band is represented after the removal of the 3062 cm–1 component to demonstrate the actual simulated profile.

Figure 7 (A) Absorbance increase (%) for the components at 3167,
2860, and
3424 cm–1 as a function of sorption time. Frequency
values are relative to the spectrum at 0 s. (B) Absorbance area of
the components at 3628 and 3550 cm–1 as a function
of sorption time. Frequency values are relative to the spectrum collected
at 435 s. (C) Peak position of the component at 3424 cm–1 as a function of sorption time. All data refer to the experiment
at 35 °C and p/p0 = 0.1. Continuous lines are for eye guidance.

Both components at 3628 and 3550 cm–1 increase
gradually, with the high-frequency band growing at a faster rate and
to a slightly larger extent. This result suggests that the two signals
originate from distinct H2O species rather than from splitting
of a single stretching mode induced by mechanical coupling.

Figure 7C presents
the position of the PBI peak, originally centered at 3424 cm–1, as a function of sorption time. The gradual red shift exactly matching the kinetics of the sorption process is to be interpreted,
taking into account the invariance of the integrated intensity, that
is, the concentration of the vibrating group. The shift is likely
associated with a mean-field effect, that is, a change of the dielectric
constant of the medium as a consequence of water uptake, which is
described by the Kirkwood–Bauer–Magat (KBM) relationship.40 The observed red shift also
accounts for the sharp relative minimum in the difference spectra
(see Figure 2), to
be associated predominantly to a first-derivative feature which resembles
a negative peak because it is convoluted with a much broader and complex
band profile. Band broadening may also play a role.

The significant
perturbation of the PBI spectrum below 2000 cm–1 in the presence of H2O, evident in the
form of multiple first-derivative features in the difference spectra
(see Figure 2), is
to be at least partially ascribed to the KBM effect rather than to
the influence of specific molecular interactions on the vibrational
behavior of the polymer.

2.1.2 Temperature Measurements
Further
details on the complex interactional scenario were gained by performing
in situ temperature measurement. In Figure 8A is reported the band profile in the 4000–2470
cm–1 range (the interval where the spectrum changes
most) at different temperatures from 50 to 450 °C. The experiment
was carried out on a film equilibrated at ambient conditions containing
15 wt % of sorbed water. Sorbed water is still present up to 100 °C,
indicated by the peak at 3620 cm–1. At 150 °C
and above, no spectral features related to sorbed H2O are
apparent. The total absorbance area is reported as a function of temperature
in Figure 8B. The initial
steep decrease is related to the loss of residual water. At 150 °C
and above, the absorbance decrease becomes highly linear (R2 = 0.9965), resembling the typical behavior
of IR band intensities as a function of temperature.

Figure 8 (A) FTIR spectra of PBI
collected at increasing temperatures in
the frequency range 4000–2470 cm–1. From
top to bottom traces, T = 100, 150, 200, 275, 350,
400, and 450 °C. The arrow indicates the direction of temperature
increase. (B) Total absorbance area (3800–2470 cm–1) as a function of temperature. The inset highlights the 150–450
°C range.

The spectra of Figure 8A collected in the
range 200–450 °C were subjected
to the LSCF analysis. A model comprising three Gaussian components
was adopted, analogous to that used for the dry spectrum at room temperature,
and the peak positions were allowed to vary in a narrow, predefined
range to account for a possible frequency-to-temperature dependence.
As for the case of water absorption, all experimental profiles were
satisfactorily simulated, with R2 values
always exceeding 0.996. Typical examples of the LSCF results for spectra
collected at different temperatures are reported in Figure S3 of the Supporting Information. The absorbance area of
the three resolved components are plotted as a function of temperature
in Figure 9A–C.
Although the two bands at 3177 and 2860 cm–1 display
a pronounced linear decrease, the peak at 3424 cm–1 remains constant. This result resembles that obtained for the same
peak at the increasing water content (see Figure 7A). Interestingly, all of the three components
exhibit a departure from the respective linear behavior at temperatures
above 400 °C. In particular, the band 3177 cm–1 deviates below the extrapolated values, whereas the 3424 cm–1 peak shows an opposite trend; the band at 2860 cm–1 seems to remain constant above 400 °C. The region
where the departures from linearity are observed exactly coincides
with the glass transition temperature of PBI, reported in the literature
(425 °C).1,2

Figure 9 Absorbance areas vs temperature for the
three components obtained
by LSCF analysis of the PBI spectrum in the 3800–2470 cm–1 range. (A) Peak at 3424 cm–1; (B)
band at 3177 cm–1; and (C) band at 2860 cm–1. Peak positions relative to the spectrum at 50 °C.

2.2 Interpretation of Spectra
via QC/NC Analysis
2.2.1 Dry Model
The
theoretical calculation
of the PBI vibrational spectrum requires a molecular model capable
of capturing both the geometry (G matrix) and the electron
density distribution (F matrix) of the system under scrutiny.
At the same time, there is a need to restrict the problem to a manageable
size, especially when dealing with computationally intensive calculations
such as those required for evaluating infrared intensities. An additional
problem arises when the investigated polymer is capable of self-association
via H bonding. This kind of molecular interaction is known to influence
the vibrational spectrum extensively and, therefore, needs to be properly
simulated.41,42 On these premises, we selected N-phenyl benzimidazole (Ph-BZI) as a model compound for
the polymer chain. We were particularly interested in interpreting
the ν(NH)/ν(OH) region, and the selected structural unit
is believed to mimic accurately the behavior of the proton-donor/proton-acceptor
system and its neighboring environment both in terms of steric hindrance
and electronic distribution. The Ph-BZI molecule optimized by the
adopted MM force field is planar with C1h symmetry; however, frequency analysis demonstrates
that, at the density functional theory (DFT) level, the planar configuration
is a saddle point, which can be crossed by inspection of the relevant
degree of freedom. A slightly tilted geometry is a true stationary
state (the angle between the phenyl and the benzimidazole ring, θ,
is 6.4°, which removes any symmetry). A conformational analysis
along the relevant dihedral (results reported in Figure S4, Supporting Information) reveals the presence
of a rather flat minimum at coplanarity (θ = 0°) encompassing
a ±10° range, followed by a deep potential energy barrier
(ΔE = 3.2 kcal/mol). This indicates that, on
forming supramolecular aggregates, the two ring system can be distorted
only slightly from coplanarity to accommodate steric and/or interaction
requirements.

From the vibrational standpoint, as expected,
a single Ph-BZI molecule is an unrealistic model because it does not
account for H bonding. A preliminary frequency calculation on the
DFT-relaxed structure evidenced a reasonable agreement in the range
below 1700 cm–1 but inadequate correlation in the
region between 4000 and 3000 cm–1. The basic model
compound was therefore made of two Ph-BZI units interacting via a
N–H•···N H bonding, as depicted
in Scheme 1:

Scheme 1 DFT-Optimized
Geometry of Two Ph-BZI Molecules Interacting via NH···N
H Bonding
Supramolecular structure optimized
at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. The numbering of the N atoms
and the protons bound to them is reported. For complete numbering
of the structure, refer to Figure S7 of the Supporting Information.

A critical problem for
structure optimization at the DFT level,
particularly relevant for supramolecular aggregates, is the choice
of the starting-point geometry because the optimizing algorithm will
invariably localize the minimum that is closer to the initial input.
To address this issue, a preliminary MM analysis was performed, based
on a Metropolis-Monte Carlo method specifically developed to investigate
H-bonding complexes.43,44 Details on the adopted computational
approach are reported in the Supporting Information (see Figure S5). The minimum identified by the MM analysis was employed
as the initial input for the structure relaxation at the DFT level,
with no geometric constraints to the planarity of the single Ph-BZI
substructures. The resulting supramolecular aggregate, represented
in Scheme 1, was subjected
to frequency analysis. Positive values for the whole set of calculated
frequencies demonstrated the identified structure to be a true energy
minimum, which is a prerequisite for the subsequent NCA.45

The formation of a N–H···N
interaction is
witnessed by the geometrical parameters, force constant values, and
vibrational frequencies of the groups involved (collected in Table 1), which conform to
the general H-bonding formation criteria. In particular, a comparison
between the values of the unperturbed proton donor [N34–H41,
(NH)f] and the bound NH group [N9–H16, (NH)b] affords an estimation of the interaction strength. Thus,
the N9–H16 bond length increases by 1.60% as a consequence
of the proton-acceptor attraction, whereas the N–H force constant
decreases by 9.92% as a result of the redistribution of the electron
density. The H-bonding length is less than 2 Å, and the estimated
binding energy (Eb) is 7.9 kcal/mol. All
of the above parameters are characteristics of a strong interaction.41,46,47

Table 1 Relevant
Parameters for the Bound
and Free N–H Groups in the Dimeric Structure Optimized at the
B3LYP/6-31G(d) Level of Theory
 	length (Å)	H-bond length
(Å)	Fc (mdyne/Å)	νcalc (cm–1)	IR intensity (km/mol)	Eb (kcal/mol)	
(N–H)b	1.025	1.988	6.685	3248	921.9	7.9	
(N–H)f	1.009	 	7.420	3525	47.8	 	
The
conformational analysis and the geometry of the relaxed structure
show that the two bulky Ph-BZI groups pose strict constraints on the
spatial arrangements that the two substructures can assume for letting
the molecular interaction to occur. In fact, to avoid close contacts,
the two molecular planes are placed almost perpendicular to each other.

A comparison between the calculated and experimental spectra in
the frequency range 4000–2200 cm–1 is presented
in Figure 10, where
the insets represent the forms of the two ν(NH) normal modes.
The ν(NH)f vibration occurs at 3525 cm–1, whereas the mode relative to the (NH)b group is located
at 3248 cm–1, that is, it is red-shifted by 277
cm–1. Shifts toward lower frequencies are a common
place for proton donors, and the shift magnitude is a sensitive measure
of the H-bonding strength.41,48 The present Δν
value is indicative of a relatively strong interaction,48,49 in line with the previously discussed results. For the ν(NH)b vibration, the frequency deviation (fd = |νexp – νcalc|) is 98 cm–1 and
the percent relative error  is 3.1%. This figure is higher
than the
predictive capability of the chosen model chemistry (around 1%50), albeit, in the present case, the complicating
effect of self-association is to be taken into account. The breadth
of the observed ν(NH) absorption is related to the fact that
the supramolecular complex assumes a distribution of geometries, governed
not only by the energy requirements, but also (and, possibly, to a
larger extent) by kinetic constraints, that is, the rate at which
the solvent evaporates and the molecular mobility is suppressed. A
relationship of the full width at half-height (FWHH) with the variation
in the H bonding chain length has also been suggested.31

Figure 10 Comparison between the experimental spectrum of dry PBI
(150 °C,
5 h) in the ν(NH) region and the calculated spectrum of the
dimeric structure represented in Scheme 1. The insets are the displacement-vector
representations of the two calculated ν(NH) modes.

The intense and well-resolved absorption observed
at 3420 cm–1 (3424 cm–1 after
deconvolution)
has been traditionally associated with ν(NH)f vibration,13,14,22,31 and it would therefore be related to the mode calculated at 3525
cm–1. The present study discloses several arguments
against this assignment. (i) The fd would be 108 cm–1 (re = 3.1%), which is larger than expected for an isolated, noninteracting
vibration. (ii) The calculated IR intensity, I, would
be unreasonably low: the calculated Iν(NH)b/Iν(NH)f is 21, whereas the observed
value, taken from the curve-fitting analysis [i.e., (A3165 + A2865)/A3424], is 5.4. (iii) A free NH group would be the most
interactive moiety toward sorbed water. The relative H-bonding complex
would absorb at much lower frequencies and, on penetrant sorption,
the intensity of the 3420 cm–1 peak would decrease
to a large extent, following the sorption kinetics, rather than remaining
constant (Figure 7A).
(iv) The spectrum of pure benzimidazole in an argon matrix at 87 K
displays a sharp peak at 3509 cm–1,51 which, because of the extreme dilution, corresponds to
the ν(NH) vibration in isolated, gaslike molecules. The calculated
frequency has an fd of 16 cm–1 with respect to the
above value (a remarkable 0.4%), thus suggesting that, in the experimental
PBI spectrum, the ν(NH)f vibration is not the prominent
component at 3420 cm–1 but occurs with a barely
detectable intensity just above 3500 cm–1. It is
possibly associated with the bump observed in the 3800–3520
cm–1 range.

To conclude the analysis of the
X–H range, the aromatic
CH stretchings produce a set of 18 closely lying frequencies which
merge, upon correcting for finite bandwidth, in a single peak at 3089
cm–1. Both the position and the relative intensity
of this feature compare well with the observed absorption at 3062
cm–1 (fd = 24 cm–1, re = 0.8%),
thus confirming its purely ν(CH) character.

The correspondence
between the calculated and the experimental
spectrum is satisfactory also in the 1800–500 cm–1 interval (data reported in Figure S6, Supporting Information). A detailed interpretation of the whole spectrum
is beyond the scope of the present investigation and will be the subject
of a forthcoming study. An overall discussion of the main features,
along with the most significant assignments, is reported in the Supporting Information.

2.2.2 Hydrate
Models
The next step of
our analysis is the simulation of the PBI spectrum upon H2O sorption. A first hydrate model was constructed by adding two water
molecules to the DFT-relaxed structure of the dimer, interacting with
the available H-bonding sites (respectively, N7 as a proton acceptor
and N34–H41 as a proton donor; see atom numbering in Scheme 1). This arrangement
corresponds to a situation, whereby the network of self-associated
PBI units is not perturbed by the incoming H2O molecules,
which bind preferentially to the terminals of the H-bonding chains.
Furthermore, the hydration process is limited to the saturation of
interacting sites of the polymer substrate, neglecting the possible
self-association of penetrant molecules (which will be considered
afterward).

The starting-point geometry to be optimized by the
chosen model chemistry was obtained by positioning the two H2O probes in the regions of maximum likelihood occurrence for the
specific donor–acceptor pairs, as identified by the IsoStar
structural database (Cambridge Structural Database and PDB).52−54 Details of the procedure are reported in the Supporting Information. Figure 11 shows the calculated spectrum in the ν(NH)/ν(OH)
range for the supramolecular aggregate of Scheme 2, along with the experimental spectrum of
dry PBI. The insets represent the form of the three prominent normal
modes.

Figure 11 Comparison between the experimental spectrum of dry PBI in the
ν(NH) region and the calculated spectrum of the hydrate model
represented in Scheme 2. The insets are the displacement-vector representations of the prominent
normal modes.

Scheme 2 DFT-Optimized Geometry
of the Dimeric Structure Interacting with
Two H2O Molecules
Numbering identifies
the two
probe molecules. The relevant internal coordinates are also labeled.
Supramolecular structure optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of
theory.

The simulated spectrum resembles more
closely the observed features
in comparison with the dry model. Although the components at 3090
and 3192 cm–1 are only marginally affected, a doublet
occurs at 3371 and 3366 cm–1 that merges to a single
peak at 3370 cm–1 on correcting for a finite bandwidth.
The position of this feature nicely correlates with the peak observed
at 3420 cm–1 (fd = 50 cm–1, re
= 1.5%), and the intensity is also reasonably reproduced. The two
components at 3371 and 3366 cm–1 correspond, respectively,
to the ν(OH) of the water molecule interacting with the N7 nitrogen
and to the N34–H41 stretching (see insets of Figure 11 and Tables 2 and 3). In this light,
it is tempting to assign the 3420 cm–1 peak to a
first-shell hydration layer, whereby the observed feature is originated
by water molecules tightly bound to the available H-bonding sites
on the polymer substrate, which cannot be eliminated at the drying
temperature (150 °C). In this hypothesis, water sorption would
occur by self-association of the incoming penetrant in successive
hydration layers, which would produce signals similar to those of
the liquid water, as it is actually observed. This interpretation,
although reasonable, is ruled out by the high-temperature measurements
previously discussed. It is unrealistic to assume that this first-shell
layer may persist at temperatures up to 400 °C, where the intensity
of the 3420 cm–1 peak remains invariant (see Figure 9A).

Table 2 H-Bonding Parameters (Proton-Donor
Length, H-Bonding Length, Force Constant, and Calculated Frequency)
for the Three Interactions Formed in the First Hydrate Model (Scheme 2) Optimized at the
B3LYP/6-31G(d) Level of Theorya
a The relevant proton donor is highlighted
in column 1. Numbers in parenthesis represent the percent increase
with respect to the unperturbed bond length.

Table 3 Calculated IR Parameters [Frequency,
Intensity, and Potential Energy Distribution (PED)] and Description
of the X–H (OH/NH) Normal Modes for the First Hydrate Model
(Scheme 2) Optimized
at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) Level of Theory
frequency
(cm–1)	IR intensity (km/mol)	PEDa (%)	description	
3716	62.8	–49 Q1, 51 Q2	νas(H2O)1	
3645	48.4	97 R2	νf(H2O)2	
3605	26.4	51 Q1, 49 Q2	νs(H2O)1	
3371	550.9	98 U	νb(H2O)2	
3366	570.4	95 R1	ν(N34–H41)	
3192	1229	96
W	ν(N9–H16)	
a Q1 = str(O52–H51);
Q2 = str(O52–H53); R1 = str(O55–H54);
R2 = str(O55–H56); U = str(N34–H41); and
W = str(N9–H16). The above internal coordinates are identified
in Scheme 2. For complete
atom numbering, refer to Figure S8 of the Supporting Information. Subscript meaning: as = antisymmetric; s = symmetric;
f = free; and b = bound.

As a second hydrate model, we considered the case of water self-association,
that is, when a second hydration shell adds on after (or concurrently
with) the saturation of the H-bonding sites of the polymer substrate.
To simulate this aggregate, we started with the relaxed structure
of the hydrated dimer (Scheme 2), adding two water molecules in a position suitable for self-association
to occur. Consideration was made of the preferential role that the
two PBI-bound probes would play in self-association (i.e., proton
donors are more likely to act as acceptors in a further H bonding
and vice-versa), although the opposite mechanism cannot be entirely
ruled out. Scheme 3 is to be considered as a likely structure within a complex distribution
of geometries, which reflects itself in the breath of the corresponding
band. Once again, the starting position of the two H2O
molecules was set on the basis of the maximum likelihood occurrence,
as per the IsoStar structural database (details in the Supporting Information).

Scheme 3 DFT-Optimized Geometry
of the Dimeric Structure Interacting with
Four H2O molecules
In this model, self-association
of the two H2O molecules directly bound to Ph-BZI is considered.
Numbering identifies four probe molecules. The relevant internal coordinates
are also labeled. Supramolecular structure optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
level of theory.

The DFT-relaxed structure
is reported in Scheme 3. Also, in this case, no imaginary values
were found in the set of computed vibrational frequencies, confirming
the nature of true energy minimum for the identified stationary point.
It is found that all of the interactions retain a significant degree
of directionality, especially those formed between N7 and the H2O molecules denoted 1 and 3. The geometric parameters characteristic
of the H-bonding interactions are reported in Table 4 along with force constants and calculated
frequencies of the proton-donor bonds. In Table 5 are collected the vibrational parameters
for the NH/OH normal modes. It is found that the N–H···N
interaction is scarcely affected by self-association, as the NH length,
the H-bonding length, and the frequency remain essentially constant
and the IR intensity decreases by a factor of 0.7, whereas more pronounced
effects are observed on the ν(OH) modes. In particular, the
vibration denoted νbN(H2O)2, corresponding to the OH stretching of the water molecule bound
to the N7 atom, displays a red shift of −219
cm–1 and a 3.6-fold increase in intensity with respect
to the same mode in the absence of self-association. This conspicuous
effect is essentially electronic, resulting from the lowering of the
OH force constant when the oxygen atom gets involved in a second interaction
(Fc goes from 7.28 to 6.97 mdyne/Å,
−4.3%, in passing from the isolated to the self-associated
situation). The νbN(H2O)2 mode
becomes the prominent peak in the explored frequency range and nicely
correlates with the experimental observation that water sorption produces
a principal component centered at around 3170 cm–1 (see Figures 6 and 7A). Overall, the correspondence between the calculated
and the experimental spectra, reproduced in Figure 12, is very satisfactory and significantly
better than that achieved with the first hydrate model (compare Figures 11 and 12). The fd between the
main calculated component and the observed maximum is 6 cm–1 (re = 0.2%), whereas a closely lying relative-maximum observed at
3175 cm–1 might be associated with the two ν(NH)
modes (see Table 5),
providing an fd value of 15 cm–1 and an re of 0.5%.
In this light, the band at 3175 cm–1 which increases
strongly on water sorption is to be mainly associated to the first
hydration layer and, in particular, to the H2O molecules
interacting with the N proton acceptors. However, the position and
the intensity of the band are characteristic of a self-associated
species, which confirms the extensive clustering of the penetrant
molecules. The doublet calculated at 3374–3344 cm–1 originates, respectively, from the (H2O)3 and
(H2O)1 molecules (see Table 5), hence from both the first and second hydration
layers. This doublet cannot be associated to the peak observed at
3420 cm–1 because the latter persists in the dry
sample and is insensitive to water content (see Figure 7A). Thus, the two calculated components likely
merge in the broad H2O band observed at 3170 cm–1. The five components calculated at above 3500 cm–1, upon correcting for finite bandwidth, merge in two well-resolved
bands centered at 3670 and 3545 cm–1, respectively.
These correlate satisfactorily with the features observed at 3628
cm–1 (fd = 42 cm–1, re = 1.1%)
and 3536 cm–1 (fd = 6 cm–1, re
= 0.3%) which, according to the above assignments, appear only upon
water sorption. Thus, the 3670 cm–1 band has a multicomponent
character and originates from the whole set of H2O molecules
(see Table 4). It is
not specific of a distinct hydration layer and/or an interaction site.

Figure 12 Comparison
between the experimental spectrum of PBI exposed to
H2O vapor for 435 s (p/p0 = 0.1) and the calculated spectrum of the hydrate model
represented in Scheme 3.

Table 4 H-Bonding Parameters
(Proton-Donor
Length, H-Bonding Length, Force Constant, and Calculated Frequency)
for the Five Interactions Formed in the Second Hydrate Model (Scheme 3) Optimized at the
B3LYP/6-31g(d) Level of Theorya
a The relevant proton donor is highlighted
in column 1.

Table 5 Calculated IR Parameters (Frequency,
Intensity, and PED) and Description of the X–H (OH/NH) Normal
Modes for the Second Hydrate Model (Scheme 3) Optimized at the B3LYP/6-31g(d) Level of
Theory
frequency (cm–1)	IR intensity (km/mol)	PEDa (%)	description	
3672	99.1	80 T1, −20
T2	νas(H2O)4	
3669	60.2	98 Q1	νf(H2O)1	
3653	33.5	95 S2	νf(H2O)3	
3641	47.4	98 R2	νf(H2O)2	
3545	140.4	80 T2, 19 T1	νs(H2O)4	
3374	362.8	92 S1	νb(H2O)3	
3344	479.1	91 Q2	νbO(H2O)1	
3213	302.6	88 U	ν(N34–H41)	
3191	861.7	86 W	ν(N9–H16)	
3153	1974.5	87 R1	νbN(H2O)2	
a Q1 = str(O52–H51);
Q2 = str(O52–H53); R1 = str(O55–H54);
R2 = str(O55–H56); S1 = str(O61–H60);
S2 = str(O61–H62); T1 = str(O58–H57);
T2 = str(O58–H59); U = str(N34–H41); and
W = str(N9–H16). The above internal coordinates are identified
in Scheme 3. For complete
atom numbering, refer to Figure S9 of the Supporting Information. Subscript meaning: as
= antisymmetric; s = symmetric; f = free; b = bound; bO = bound to
oxygen; and bN = bound to nitrogen.

Conversely, the 3536 cm–1 band is
associated
with a single vibration [νs(H2O)4]; the diverse nature of the two bands (multicomponent vs single
vibrational mode) accounts for their different kinetic behavior observed
in the sorption experiment, whereby the multicomponent band increases
at a faster rate and to a larger extent (see Figure 7B).

The vibrational analysis discussed
above also affords an insight
into the analytical potential of FTIR spectroscopy and, in particular,
in the possibility of quantifying the different water species present
in the system besides the overall amount of sorbed water. In fact,
the development of predictive models for simulating diffusion behavior
relies heavily on the knowledge of first-shell and second-shell population.55−57 Quantification in the
ν(NH)/ν(OH) range is to be performed by LSCF resolution,
which has been demonstrated to be highly reliable. Of the five resolved
components, the main band at around 3170 cm–1 comprises
contributions from first-shell water [νbN(H2O)2, νbO(H2O)1] and from a second-shell species
[νb(H2O)3]. In the absence
of interference, considering that νbO(H2O)1 and νb(H2O)3 vibrations display close intensity values (calculated I3344/I3374 = 1.3 ≅
1, see Table 5) and
that the νbN(H2O)2 mode is
largely prevalent with respect to νbO(H2O)1 (calculated I3153/I3344 = 4.1 ≅ 4, see Table 5), the absorbance–concentration
relationship would read 4  

In eq 4, εbN refers to
the molar absorptivity of the νbN(H2O)2 mode. Thus, the thickness-normalized
absorbance of the 3170 cm–1 band, A̅3170, would be proportional to C2 with minor contributions from C1 and C3; these contributions cannot be
separated. A further problem in this frequency range is the occurrence
of the two ν(NH) modes and, particularly, the ν(N9–H16)
vibration, whose intensity is comparable to that of the νbN(H2O)2 mode (calculated intensity ratio
= 0.44). ν(NH) intensity cannot be considered a constant contribution
of the polymer substrate to be subtracted out; in fact, the vibrational
analysis demonstrates that I for the two above modes
changes to a large extent upon the establishment of the molecular
interaction with water (compare respective values in Tables 1 and 5). In summary, the 3170 cm–1 band, despite its
intensity, does not possess the required specificity to be used for
concentration monitoring.

As already noted, the band at 3670
cm–1 includes
all four H2O species. The components at 3641 cm–1 [νf(H2O)2], 3653
cm–1 [νf(H2O)3], and 3669 cm–1 [νf(H2O)1] have comparable intensities (average value, I̅, = 47.0 km/mol; std = 13.3 km/mol), whereas the
component at 3672 cm–1 [νas(H2O)4] is significantly stronger (I3672/I̅ = 2.1 ≈ 2). The
monocomponent peak at 3545 cm–1 is slightly more
intense than its counterpart at 3672 cm–1 (I3545/I3672 = 1.4, I3545/I̅ = 3). Rearranging
the relevant absorbance–concentration relationships and making
use of the mass balance, we can write 5  

Equation 5 (details
of derivation in Supporting Information, p. 21–22) affords the evaluation of ε̅ by coupling
spectroscopic observables (A̅3670, A̅3545) with gravimetric data
(Ctot) collected in the same conditions.
In turn, ε̅ provides an estimate of the different water
species according to Ctot = (A̅3670 – 0.33·A̅3545)/ε̅; C4 = A̅3545/3ε̅ ; C1 + C2 + C3 = Ctot – C4. Thus, at the present level of analysis, only
the concentration of one of the two second-shell species
(C4) is available as the disaggregated
value.

Returning to the predictive performances of the various
models,
it is concluded that the hydration model accounting for self-association
is largely improved with respect to the model with only PBI/H2O interactions and provides reliable assignments for most
of the features observed in the IR spectrum. The only peak yet to
be assigned is the one at 3420 cm–1, for which none
of the explored models is capable of providing a calculated frequency
with which it can be associated.

Combining the experimental
and computational evidence gathered
herein, we conclude that the above feature is due to a paracrystalline
domain present in the polymer bulk and developed during the film-forming
process from the N,N-dimethylacetamide
(DMAc) solution. PBI is generally regarded as a fully amorphous material
on the basis of its wide-angle x-ray scattering (WAXS) pattern (see Figure 13). It displays
a complex amorphous-like halo which can be resolved with at least
two main components at 2θ = 15° and 23°.58 A third, low-intensity peak, much sharper than
the main components is identified at 2θ = 18°. Some authors
interpreted this feature in terms of an incipient-ordered structure;
they note that its intensity depends on the preparation protocol and
can be enhanced by appropriate high-temperature treatments.59 A patent has been issued in which the authors
describe a process for increasing the crystallinity of PBI fibers
by contacting them at elevated temperature with suitable solvents.60

Figure 13 WAXS spectrum of PBI at room temperature. To simplify
the curve-fitting
analysis, the experimental baseline was offset to zero intensity.

The concept of PBI crystallinity
is, therefore, not new, but no
specific signatures in the infrared spectrum have been associated
so far with an ordered phase.

The WAXS pattern of amorphous
polymers displaying two distinct
components has been associated to the occurrence of two characteristic
interchain spacings in the disordered phase. The considerably larger
breadth of these components with respect to those of a crystalline
phase is related to the wider distribution of spacing in the amorphous
domains. An analogous situation is realized in the infrared spectrum.
Here, the interchain spacing manifests itself in the position and
breadth of the ν(NH) bands; in fact, shorter interchain distances
correspond to closer donor–acceptor positions which, in turn,
are reflected in stronger H-bonding interactions and lower absorption
frequencies. The FWHH is related to the distance distribution. Following
the same line of reasoning, the peak at 3420 cm–1 is ascribed to a distinct phase characterized by a sharper distribution
of chain distances and hence a greater degree of order with respect
to the amorphous phase. In this intermediate mesophase, the interchain
distance is constant and larger than that in the amorphous domains,
as suggested by the higher frequency maximum (3420 vs 3165/2862 cm–1). This interpretation also accounts for the trend
of the band intensities as a function of temperature (Figure 9A–C). For the two amorphous
components, the absorbance area decreases linearly up to 400 °C.
This behavior is generally a combination of two effects, namely, the
dependence of molar absorptivity with temperature (linear decrease)
and the lowering concentration of H-bonded species as temperature
increases. In the present case, the first effect is likely prevailing
because we do not observe a concurrent absorbance enhancement due
to newly formed, free NH groups. The change of slope at around 420
°C is related to the Tg of the material.
Because of the increased molecular mobility, H-bonding interactions
in the amorphous phase start to dissociate, and the intensity of the
band decreases below the value predicted by a pure absorptivity-temperature
effect. Concurrently, we observe an increase in band intensity at
3420 cm–1 which remained constant up to the Tg, suggesting that a fraction of the amorphous
phase is transformed into the partially ordered mesophase by an annealing
process. The present results suggest that heat treatments above 450
°C in inert atmosphere may impact on the permselectivity properties
of PBI membranes. In situ experiments in this temperature range and
selective deuteration experiments at low D2O activities
are currently underway to confirm the above conclusions and obtain
further structural information.

3 Concluding
Remarks
In this article, the infrared spectrum of PBI in
the dry and hydrate
forms has been investigated to gain a deeper interpretation of its
complex features. In particular, the object of study was the ν(NH)/ν(OH)
range which is extensively affected by sorbed water. Coupling experimental
measurements (isothermal H2O sorption and in situ temperature
measurements) with first-principles theoretical calculations
allowed us to obtain satisfactory assignment of the main spectral
features and relevant structural information.

The principal
conclusions of the present study can be summarized
as follows:In the dry form,
the complex ν(NH) bandshape originates
from the extensive NH···N self-association, coupled
with the presence of distinct structural features. In particular,
the two-component character of the main ν(NH) band parallels
the previously reported WAXS pattern and has been attributed to the
occurrence of two distinct amorphous regions with characteristic average
spacing.

A further, much sharper component
at higher frequency
has been tentatively assigned to a partially ordered mesophase, whose
amount is found to increase at the expense of the amorphous content
at temperatures higher than 400 °C, that is, above the Tg of PBI. The latter assignment disproves previous
literature interpretation.

Sorbed water
displays a principal component at 3175
cm–1 and two bands at higher frequency which were
assigned on the basis of QC/NC analysis. The first-principle calculations provided good agreement with the experimental data
and represented an essential tool for interpreting the vibrational
behavior of this complex system.

Theoretical
evaluation of absolute intensities for the
various ν(OH) components allowed us to identify bands that can
be directly correlated with gravimetric data for calibration purposes,
providing a means to measure the absolute concentration of specific
H2O species.



4 Experimental
Section
4.1 Materials
Celazole S26 solution was
purchased from PBI Performance Products Inc. This solution contains
26% of solid PBI dissolved in DMAc with 1.5 wt % LiCl added to enhance
the polymer solubility. The molecular formula of PBI is reported in
Figure S1 of the Supporting Information. DMAc was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further
purification. Celazole films were cast after diluting the PBI solution
to 2 wt % polymer by adding DMAc and stirring overnight. The solution
was filtered using a 0.45 μm PTFE filter and sonicated for 30
min to remove any bubbles. The solution was poured onto a glass plate
and placed in a vacuum oven on a level surface. The solvent was removed
by drying for at least 24 h under vacuum at room temperature, followed
by 4 h at 80 °C and 1 h at 100 °C. After the film was removed
from the glass plate, it was boiled in deionized (DI) water for 4
h to remove residual DMAc. The film was then soaked in DI water at
room temperature for at least 24 h to ensure complete removal of LiCl.
Finally, the film (thickness = 10.8 μm) was dried under vacuum
at 140 °C for 24 h. Thermogravimetric analysis and FTIR confirmed
complete solvent removal.

4.2 FTIR Spectroscopy
A custom-designed,
vacuum-tight FTIR cell was used to acquire time-resolved FTIR spectra during sorption experiments. Spectral data were collected
in the transmission mode on the polymer film exposed to water vapor
at a constant relative pressure (i.e., ratio of the pressure of pure
water to the vapor pressure of water at the test temperature, p/p0). The cell, equipped with
ZnSe windows, was accommodated in the sample compartment of a suitably
modified FTIR spectrometer. It was directly connected through service
lines to a water reservoir, a turbo-molecular vacuum pump, a pressure
transducer [MKS Baratron 121 (Andover, MA); full scale, 100 Torr;
resolution, 0.01 Torr; accuracy, ±0.5% of the reading], and a
Pirani vacuometer. Full details of the experimental setup are reported
elsewhere.17 Before each sorption measurement,
the sample was dried under vacuum at 150 °C for 4 h in the same
apparatus used for the test. Drying in situ is essential in the present
experimental procedure because the thin PBI film absorbs water almost
instantaneously when exposed to the atmosphere. The FTIR spectrometer
was a Spectrum 100 from PerkinElmer (Norwalk, CT) equipped with a
Ge/KBr beam splitter and a wide-band deuterated triglycine sulfate
detector. The transmission spectra were collected with the following
instrumental parameters: resolution = 2 cm–1; optical
path difference velocity = 0.5 cm/s; and spectral range = 4000–500
cm–1. Spectra were acquired in the single-beam mode
using a dedicated software package for time-resolved spectroscopy
(Timebase from PerkinElmer).

Absorbance spectra were obtained
using a background collected on the cell with no sample inside at
the test conditions (i.e., at the same relative pressure of water
vapor used for the sorption measurement). Difference spectra were
obtained as Ad = As – k·Ar, where A is the absorbance, and the subscripts d, s, and r denote, respectively,
the difference spectrum, the sample spectrum (“wet”
specimen), and the reference spectrum (“dry” specimen). k is an adjustable parameter which allows compensation for
thickness differences (if any) between the sample and the reference
spectra. It was experimentally verified that negligible changes in
thickness take place during the sorption measurement at p/p0 = 0.1; therefore, the k values were consistently taken as unity. FTIR transmission spectra
in the temperature range 35–450 °C were collected in a
HT/HP cell (GS05850 from Specac Ltd., Orpington, UK) coupled to a
GX spectrometer (PerkinElmer). The cell operates in the 30–450
°C range at up to 10 000 psi. The measurements were performed
in an inert atmosphere (a continuous flux of dry N2) on
a PBI film equilibrated under atmospheric conditions. Resolution of
multicomponent bands into individual peaks was achieved by an LSCF
algorithm based on the Levenberg–Marquardt method.61 Details on the adopted models and the regression
method are reported in the Supporting Information. 2D-COS analysis was performed on preprocessed spectra to avoid
baseline artefacts and other nonselective effects.62 The frequency region of interest (4000–2400 cm–1) was truncated and subjected to a linear baseline
correction, followed by offset to zero absorbance. Generalized 2D-IR
analysis was performed by a MATLAB script written in-house (Mathworks,
Natick, MA), which also provided the tools for graphic representation
of the correlation spectra. The algorithm proposed by Noda relying
on the Hilbert transform37 was employed,
which offers a robust and efficient method for the numerical evaluation
of the correlation intensities. The 2D correlation analysis was performed
on the initial, evenly sampled sequence of 400 spectra.

4.3 Computational Methods
All of the
molecular mechanics (MM) calculations were performed using the MMFF92
force field (Merck Molecular Force Field, from Merck Co, Kenilworth,
NJ, USA), optimized for organic compounds.63 The potential energy surface of the model compounds was explored
by a Metropolis-Monte Carlo method44 for
systematic variations of the distances/angles in a predefined supramolecular
assembly. Details of the adopted approach are reported in the Supporting Information.

QC calculations
were performed using unrestricted DFT.64 In particular, the hybrid method referred to as B3LYP was used,
in combination with the standard 6-31G(d) basis set. This method includes
the Becke’s three-parameter exchange functional coupled with
the Lee–Yang–Parr correlation functional.

The
binding energy of the dry model, Eb, was
calculated in the frame of the supermolecule method,65 as the energy difference between the complex
and the sum of the isolated monomers, each relaxed to their minimum
energy configuration. By adopting this definition, negative energies
favor the aggregate formation. Eb was
corrected for the basis set superposition errors (BSSE), which is
generally non-negligible for H-bonding complexes. BSSE was calculated
using the counterpoise method of Boys and Bernardi.66 For complexes with multiple interactions, Eb was not evaluated because of the ambiguity introduced
when separating different contributions.

After geometry optimization,
a NCA at the same level of theory
was performed, comprising the calculation of the Hessian matrix (F) by analytical evaluation of the first and second derivatives
of the potential energy with respect to the Cartesian displacement
coordinates. The F matrix was then transformed in terms
of mass-weighed coordinates and diagonalized to obtain the corresponding
eigenvalues (normal frequencies) and eigenvectors (displacement vectors, L matrix). Finally, transformation into a set of nonredundant
internal coordinates of both the F and L matrices was accomplished to express the force constants in structurally
meaningful terms and for characterizing the normal modes in terms
of their PED, which is expressed, in the normalized form, as45 6  

In eq 6, PED is the
percent contribution of the jth internal coordinate
to the kth normal mode, Fjj is the jth diagonal Force constant,
and Ljk is the corresponding
element of the L matrix. Only the diagonal terms of the F matrix were considered. DFT and NCA calculations were performed
by the Gaussian 03 program package67 (Gaussian
Inc., Pittsburgh, PA), and the results were visualized with the associated
GaussView graphic interface. PED calculations were carried out with
the aid of the VEDA program.68,69

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01699.PBI molecular
formula; 2D-COS asynchronous spectrum;
LSCF analysis of spectra at different temperatures; details on MM
and QC/NC analysis; geometry parameters for the PBI molecular models;
details on the identification of starting-point geometries via the
IsoStar database; and remarks on quantitative analysis (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01699_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Dr. Steve Swinnea, University of Texas at Austin, is gratefully acknowledged
for having performed the WAXS experiments and Giustino Orefice, Institute
for Polymers, Composites and Biomaterials, CNR, is acknowledged for
assistance in performing the FTIR measurements.
==== Refs
References
Chung T.-S. 
A Critical
Review of Polybenzimidazoles . J. Macromol. Sci.,
Rev. Macromol. Chem. 
1997 , 37 , 277 –301 . 10.1080/15321799708018367 .
Li Q. ; Jensen J. O. ; Savinell R. F. ; Bjerrum N. J. 
High temperature
proton exchange membranes based on polybenzimidazoles for fuel cells . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2009 , 34 , 449 –477 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2008.12.003 .
Aili D. ; Cleemann L. N. ; Li Q. ; Jensen J. O. ; Christensen E. ; Bjerrum N. J. 
Thermal curing of
PBI membranes for high temperature
PEM fuel cells . J. Mater. Chem. 
2012 , 22 , 5444 –5453 . 10.1039/c2jm14774b .
Borjigin H. ; Stevens K. A. ; Liu R. ; Moon J. D. ; Shaver A. T. ; Swinnea S. ; Freeman B. D. ; Riffle J. S. ; McGrath J. E. 
Synthesis
and characterization of polybenzimidazoles derived from tetraaminodiphenylsulfone
for high temperature gas separation membranes . Polymer 
2015 , 71 , 135 –142 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2015.06.021 .
Galizia M. ; Chi W. S. ; Smith Z. P. ; Merkel T. C. ; Baker R. W. ; Freeman B. D. 
50th Anniversary
Perspective: Polymers and Mixed Matrix
Membranes for Gas and Vapor Separation: A Review and Prospective Opportunities . Macromolecules 
2017 , 50 , 7809 –7843 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.7b01718 .
Pesiri D. R. ; Jorgensen B. ; Dye R. C. 
Thermal optimization of polybenzimidazole
meniscus membranes for the separation of hydrogen, methane, and carbon
dioxide . J. Membr. Sci. 
2003 , 218 , 11 –18 . 10.1016/s0376-7388(03)00129-7 .
Berchtold K. A. ; Singh R. P. ; Young J. S. ; Dudeck K. W. 
Polybenzimidazole
composite membranes for high temperature synthesis gas separations . J. Membr. Sci. 
2012 , 415–416 , 265 –270 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2012.05.005 .
Li X. ; Singh R. P. ; Dudeck K. W. ; Berchtold K. A. ; Benicewicz B. C. 
Influence of polybenzimidazole main
chain structure
on H2/CO2 separation at elevated temperatures . Journal of Membrane Science 
2014 , 461 , 59 –68 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2014.03.008 .
Kumbharkar S. C. ; Li K. 
Structurally modified
polybenzimidazole hollow fibre membranes with
enhanced gas permeation properties . J. Membr.
Sci. 
2012 , 415–416 , 793 –800 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2012.05.071 .
Li X. ; Singh R. P. ; Dudeck K. W. ; Berchtold K. A. ; Benicewicz B. C. 
Influence of polybenzimidazole main
chain structure
on H2/CO2 separation at elevated temperatures . J. Membr. Sci. 
2014 , 461 , 59 –68 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2014.03.008 .
Wainright J. S. ; Wang J. T. ; Weng D. ; Savinell R. F. ; Litt M. 
Acid-Doped
Polybenzimidazoles: A New Polymer Electrolyte . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1995 , 142 , L121 –L123 . 10.1149/1.2044337 .
Li Q. ; He R. ; Jensen J. O. ; Bjerrum N. J. 
PBI-Based Polymer Membranes for High
Temperature Fuel Cells- Preparation, Characterization and Fuel Cell
Demonstration . Fuel Cells 
2004 , 4 , 147 –159 . 10.1002/fuce.200400020 .
Li Q. ; He R. H. ; Berg R. W. ; Hjuler H. A. ; Bjerrum N. J. 
Water uptake
and acid doping of polybenzimidazoles as electrolyte membranes for
fuel cells . Solid State Ionics 
2004 , 168 , 177 –185 . 10.1016/j.ssi.2004.02.013 .
Brooks N. W. ; Duckett R. A. ; Rose J. ; Ward I. M. ; Clements J. 
An n.m.r.
study of absorbed water in polybenzimidazole . Polymer 
1993 , 34 , 4038 –4042 . 10.1016/0032-3861(93)90664-v .
Taylor L. S. ; Langkilde F. W. ; Zografi G. 
Fourier transform Raman spectroscopic
study of the interaction of water vapor with amorphous polymers . J. Pharm. Sci. 
2001 , 90 , 888 –901 . 10.1002/jps.1041 .11458337 
Iwamoto R. ; Matsuda T. 
Interaction of water
in polymers: Poly(ethylene-co-vinyl
acetate) and poly(vinyl acetate) . J. Polym.
Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2005 , 43 , 777 –785 . 10.1002/polb.20368 .
Cotugno S. ; Larobina D. ; Mensitieri G. ; Musto P. ; Ragosta G. 
A novel spectroscopic
approach to investigate transport processes in polymers: the case
of water-epoxy system . Polymer 
2001 , 42 , 6431 –6438 . 10.1016/s0032-3861(01)00096-9 .
Mensitieri G. ; Lavorgna M. ; Musto P. ; Ragosta G. 
Water transport in
densely crosslinked networks: A comparison between epoxy systems having
different interactive characters . Polymer 
2006 , 47 , 8326 –8336 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2006.09.066 .
Musto P. ; Galizia M. ; Pannico M. ; Scherillo G. ; Mensitieri G. 
Time-Resolved Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopy,
Gravimetry, and Thermodynamic Modeling for a Molecular Level Description
of Water Sorption in Poly(ε-caprolactone) . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 7414 –7429 . 10.1021/jp502270h .24893310 
Fieldson G. T. ; Barbari T. A. 
The use of FTi.r.-a.t.r.
spectroscopy to characterize
penetrant diffusion in polymers . Polymer 
1993 , 34 , 1146 –1153 . 10.1016/0032-3861(93)90765-3 .
de
Nicola A. ; Correa A. ; Milano G. ; La Manna P. ; Musto P. ; Mensitieri G. ; Scherillo G. 
Local Structure
and Dynamics of Water Absorbed in Poly(ether imide): A Hydrogen Bonding
Anatomy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2017 , 121 , 3162 –3176 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b00992 .28335602 
Musto P. ; Karasz F. E. ; MacKnight W. J. 
Hydrogen
bonding in polybenzimidazole/polyimide
systems: a Fourier-transform infra-red investigation using low-molecular-weight
monofunctional probes . Polymer 
1989 , 30 , 1012 –1021 . 10.1016/0032-3861(89)90072-4 .
Musto P. ; Karasz F. E. ; MacKnight W. J. 
Hydrogen
bonding in polybenzimidazole/poly(ether
imide) blends: a spectroscopic study . Macromolecules 
1991 , 24 , 4762 –4769 . 10.1021/ma00017a006 .
Musto P. ; Karasz F. E. ; MacKnight W. J. 
Fourier
transform infra-red spectroscopy
on the thermo-oxidative degradation of polybenzimidazole and of a
polybenzimidazole/polyetherimide blend . Polymer 
1993 , 34 , 2934 –2945 . 10.1016/0032-3861(93)90618-k .
Bouchet R. ; Siebert E. 
Proton conduction in
acid doped polybenzimidazole . Solid State Ionics 
1999 , 118 , 287 –299 . 10.1016/s0167-2738(98)00466-4 .
Glipa X. ; Bonnet B. ; Mula B. ; Jones D. J. ; Rozière J. 
Investigation
of the conduction properties of phosphoric and sulfuric acid doped
polybenzimidazole . J. Mater. Chem. 
1999 , 9 , 3045 –3049 . 10.1039/a906060j .
Pu H. ; Liu Q. ; Qiao L. ; Yang Z. 
Studies on proton conductivity of
acid doped polybenzimidazole/polyimide and polybenzimidazole/polyvinylpyrrolidone
blends . Polym. Eng. Sci. 
2005 , 45 , 1395 –1400 . 10.1002/pen.20394 .
Guerra G. ; Choe S. ; Williams D. J. ; Karasz F. E. ; MacKnight W. J. 
Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy of some miscible polybenzimidazole/polyimide
blends . Macromolecules 
1988 , 21 , 231 –234 . 10.1021/ma00179a044 .
Musto P. ; Wu L. ; Karasz F. E. ; MacKnight W. J. 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
investigations of polybenzimidazole/poly(bisphenol-A carbonate) blends . Polymer 
1991 , 32 , 3 –11 . 10.1016/0032-3861(91)90554-v .
Leal A. A. ; Deitzel J. M. ; McKnight S. H. ; Gillespie J. W. 
Spectroscopic
analysis and kinetics of intermolecular hydrogen bond formation in
poly-pyridobisimidazole (M5) fiber . J. Polym.
Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2009 , 47 , 1809 –1824 . 10.1002/polb.21767 .
Christensen P. A. ; Jones S. W. M. 
An in
situ FTIR study of undoped PolyBenzoImadazole
as a function of relative humidity . Polym. Degrad.
Stab. 
2014 , 105 , 211 –217 . 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2014.04.020 .
Millo A. ; Raichlin Y. ; Katzir A. 
Mid-Infrared
Fiber-Optic Attenuated
Total Reflection Spectroscopy of the Solid-Liquid Phase Transition
of Water . Appl. Spectrosc. 
2005 , 59 , 460 –466 . 10.1366/0003702053641469 .15901331 
Max J.-J. ; Chapados C. 
Isotope effects in liquid water by
infrared spectroscopy.
V. A sea of OH4 of C2v symmetry . J. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 134 , 164502 10.1063/1.3581035 .21528968 
Crank J.  The Mathematics of Diffusion ; Oxford University Press : Oxford, U.K. , 1975 .
Berens A. R. ; Hopfenberg H. B. 
Diffusion and relaxation in glassy polymer powders:
2. Separation of diffusion and relaxation parameters . Polymer 
1978 , 19 , 489 –496 . 10.1016/0032-3861(78)90269-0 .
Long F. A. ; Richman D. 
Concentration Gradients
for Diffusion of Vapors in
Glassy Polymers and their Relation to Time Dependent Diffusion Phenomena . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1960 , 82 , 513 –519 . 10.1021/ja01488a002 .
Noda I. ; Ozaki Y.  Two-Dimensional
Correlation Spectroscopy:
Applications in Vibrational and Optical Spectroscopy ; John Wiley and Sons : New York , 2004 .
Galizia M. ; La Manna P. ; Mensitieri G. ; Pannico M. ; Musto P. 
Diffusion
in polymers as investigated by two-dimensional correlation spectroscopy:
The H2O/PCL system . J. Mol. Struct. 
2014 , 1069 , 290 –298 . 10.1016/j.molstruc.2014.02.045 .
Musto P. ; Galizia M. ; La Manna P. ; Pannico M. ; Mensitieri G. 
Diffusion
and molecular interactions in a methanol/polyimide system probed by
coupling time-resolved FTIR spectroscopy with gravimetric measurements . Front. Chem. 
2014 , 2 , 1 –9 . 10.3389/fchem.2014.00002 .
Kirkwood J. G. 
On the
Theory of Dielectric Polarization . J. Chem.
Phys. 
1936 , 4 , 592 –601 . 10.1063/1.1749911 .
Pimentel G. C. ; McClellan L.  The Hydrogen Bond ; Freeman and
Co. : San Francisco, CA , 1960 .
Maréchal Y. 
Observing
the water molecule in macromolecules and aqueous media using infrared
spectrometry . J. Mol. Struct. 
2003 , 648 , 27 –47 . 10.1016/s0022-2860(02)00493-3 .
Hermans J.  Hydrogen Bonds
In Molecular Mechanics Force Fields . Advances
in Protein Chemistry ; Academic Press , 2005 ; Vol. 72 , pp 105 –119 .16581374 
Rappè A. K. ; Casewit C. J.  Molecular
Mechanics across Chemistry ; University Science
Books : Sausalito, CA , 1997 .
Wilson E. B. ; Decius J. C. ; Cross P. C.  Molecular Vibrations ; McGraw-Hill : New
York , 1955 .
Gilli G. ; Gilli P.  The Nature of the Hydrogen Bond: Outline
of a Comprehensive Hydrogen Bond Theory ; Oxford University Press : Oxford , 2013 .
Lee H. M. ; Kim K. S.  Weak to strong
Hydrogen Bonding . InHydrogen Bonding—New
Insights ; Grabowski S. J.  , Ed.; Springer , 2006 ; Vol. 3 , pp 149 –192 .
Murthy A. S. N. ; Rao C. N. R. 
Spectroscopic
Studies of the Hydrogen Bond . Appl. Spectrosc.
Rev. 
1968 , 2 , 69 –191 . 10.1080/05704926808050887 .
Musto P. ; Ragosta G. ; Mensitieri G. ; Lavorgna M. 
On the molecular mechanism
of H2O diffusion into polyimides: a vibrational spectroscopy investigation . Macromolecules 
2007 , 40 , 9614 –9627 . 10.1021/ma071385+ .
Sousa S. F. ; Fernandes P. A. ; Ramos M. J. 
General Performance of Density Functionals . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2007 , 111 , 10439 –10452 . 10.1021/jp0734474 .17718548 
Morsy M. A. ; Al-Khaldi M. A. ; Suwaiyan A. 
Normal Vibrational Mode Analysis
and Assignment of Benzimidazole by ab Initio and Density Functional
Calculations and Polarized Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2002 , 106 , 9196 –9203 . 10.1021/jp0256948 .
Groom C. R. ; Bruno I. J. ; Lightfoot M. P. ; Ward S. C. 
The Cambridge Structural
Database . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct.
Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater. 
2016 , 72 , 171 –179 . 10.1107/s2052520616003954 .
Battle G. M. ; Allen F. H. 
Learning about Intermolecular
Interactions from the
Cambridge Structural Database . J. Chem. Educ. 
2012 , 89 , 38 –44 . 10.1021/ed200139t .
Bruno I. J. ; Cole J. C. ; Lommerse J. P. M. ; Rowland R. S. ; Taylor R. ; Verdonk M. L. 
IsoStar: A library of information about nonbonded interactions . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
1997 , 11 , 525 –537 . 10.1023/a:1007934413448 .9491345 
Scherillo G. ; Carbone M. G. P. ; Petretta M. ; La Manna P. ; Panayiotou C. ; Bikiaris D. N. ; Musto P. ; Mensitieri G. 
Water sorption
thermodynamics in poly(propylene sebacate) . Polymer 
2016 , 97 , 346 –361 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2016.05.047 .
Scherillo G. ; Sanguigno L. ; Galizia M. ; Lavorgna M. ; Musto P. ; Mensitieri G. 
Non-equilibrium
compressible lattice theories accounting
for hydrogen bonding interactions: Modelling water sorption thermodynamics
in fluorinated polyimides . Fluid Phase Equilib. 
2012 , 334 , 166 –188 . 10.1016/j.fluid.2012.06.030 .
Scherillo G. ; Galizia M. ; Musto P. ; Mensitieri G. 
Water Sorption
Thermodynamics in Glassy and Rubbery Polymers: Modeling the Interactional
Issues Emerging from FTIR Spectroscopy . Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 52 , 8674 –8691 . 10.1021/ie302350w .
Staiti P. ; Lufrano F. ; Aricò A. S. ; Passalacqua E. ; Antonucci V. 
Sulfonated polybenzimidazole membranes
- preparation
and physico-chemical characterization . J. Membr.
Sci. 
2001 , 188 , 71 –78 . 10.1016/s0376-7388(01)00359-3 .
Heinzl C. ; Ossiander T. ; Gleich S. ; Scheu C. 
Transmission electron
microscopy study of silica reinforced polybenzimidazole membranes . J. Membr. Sci. 
2015 , 478 , 65 –74 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2014.12.051 .
Conciatori A. B. ; Chenevey E. C. ; Noether H. D. ; Dunay M.  Process
for crystallizing polybenzimidazoles . U.S. Patent 3,495,931 A , 1970 .
Marquardt D. W. 
An Algorithm
for Least-Squares Estimation of Nonlinear Parameters . J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math. 
1963 , 11 , 431 –441 . 10.1137/0111030 .
Czarnecki M. A. 
Two-dimensional
correlation spectroscopy: Effect of normalization of the dynamic spectra . Appl. Spectrosc. 
1999 , 53 , 1392 –1397 . 10.1366/0003702991945731 .
Halgren T. A. 
Merck molecular
force field. I. Basis, form, scope, parameterization, and performance
of MMFF94 . J. Comput. Chem. 
1996 , 17 , 490 –519 . 10.1002/(sici)1096-987x(199604)17:5/6<490::aid-jcc1>3.0.co;2-p .
Becke A. D. 
Density-functional
thermochemistry. III. The role of exact exchange . J. Chem. Phys. 
1993 , 98 , 5648 –5652 . 10.1063/1.464913 .
Morokuma K. ; Kitaura K.  Molecular Interactions ; Wiley : New York , 1980 ; Vol. 1 .
Boys S. F. ; Bernardi F. 
The Calculation of
Small Molecular Interactions by
the Differences of Separate Total Energies. Some Procedures with Reduced
Errors . Mol. Phys. 
1970 , 19 , 553 –566 . 10.1080/00268977000101561 .
Frisch M. J. ; Trucks G. W. ; Schlegel H. B. ; Scuseria G. E. ; Robb M. A. ; Cheeseman J. R. ; Scalmani G. ; Barone V. ; Mennucci B. ; Petersson G. A.  ; Gaussian 03 , Revision C.02; Gaussian
Inc. : Wallingford CT , 2004 .
Jamróz M. H.  Vibrational
Energy Distribution Analysis ; VEDA : 4, Warsaw , 2010 .
Jamróz M. H. 
Vibrational
Energy Distribution Analysis (Veda): Scopes and Limitations . Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 
2013 , 114 , 220 –230 . 10.1016/j.saa.2013.05.096 .

