
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b01897ArticleTailored Engineering of Bimetallic Plasmonic Au@Ag
Core@Shell Nanoparticles Mahmud Samira †Satter Shazia Sharmin †Singh Ajaya Kumar ‡Rahman M. Muhibur †Mollah M. Yousuf A. †Susan Md. Abu Bin Hasan *†† Department
of Chemistry, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh‡ Department
of Chemistry, Govt. V. Y. T. PG. Autonomous
College Durg, Chhattisagarh 491001, India* E-mail: susan@du.ac.bd. Phone: (+880-2) 9661920-73 Ext: 7162, 4344. Fax: (+880-2)-9667222.22 10 2019 05 11 2019 4 19 18061 18075 25 06 2019 08 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A distinctive synthetic
method for the efficient synthesis of multifunctional
bimetallic plasmonic Au@Ag core@shell nanoparticles (NPs) with tunable
size, morphology, and localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) using
Triton X-100/hexanol-1/deionized water/cyclohexane-based water-in-oil
(W/O) microemulsion (ME) is described. The W/O ME acted as a “true
nanoreactor” for the synthesis of Au@Ag core@shell NPs by providing
a confined and controlled environment and suppressing the nucleation,
growth, agglomeration, and aggregation of the NPs. High-resolution
transmission electron microscopic analysis of the synthesized Au@Ag
core@shell NPs revealed an “unusual core@shell” contrast,
and the selected area electron diffraction and Moiré patterns
showed that Au layers are paralleled to Ag layers, thus indicating
the formation of Au@Ag core@shell NPs. Interestingly, the UV–visible
spectrum of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs exhibited enthralling plasmonic
properties by introducing a high-frequency quadrupolar LSPR mode originated
from the isolated Au@Ag NPs along with a low-frequency dipolar LSPR
mode originated from the coupled Au@Ag NPs. The effective plasmonic
enhancement of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs is attributed to the extreme
enhancement of the localized electromagnetic field by coupling of
the localized surface plasmons of the Au core and Ag shell. The mechanisms
for the nucleation and growth of Au@Ag core@shell NPs in W/O ME have
been proposed. A unique electron transfer phenomenon between the Au
core and Ag shell is elucidated for better understanding and manipulation
of the electronic properties, which evinced the development of Au@Ag
core@shell NPs through suppression of the galvanic replacement reaction.

document-id-old-9ao9b01897document-id-new-14ao9b01897ccc-priceThis paper was originally published
ASAP on October 22, 2019. Due to a production error, the second half
of Scheme 1 was omitted from the paper. The corrected version was
reposted on October 23, 2019.
==== Body
Introduction
The emergence of plasmonics
in nanoscale materials has renewed
interests in the fundamental understanding of localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR).1 Novel metal plasmonic
nanoparticles (NPs) have been the subject of painstaking research
owing to their captivating plasmonic, electronic, and optical properties,
including LSPR, surface-enhanced Mie scattering, metal-enhanced photoluminescence,
and surface-enhanced Raman scattering.1−3 Among all of the novel
metal NPs, gold (Au) and silver (Ag) NPs received the utmost attention
in terms of their synthetic refinement and highly fascinating plasmonic
properties.4 Moreover, Au NPs possess a
very high molar extinction coefficient and also a very high resistance
to oxidation. On the other hand, Ag NPs possess the highest molar
extinction coefficient of any metal but show severe susceptibility
to oxidation.5 In recent years, new bimetallic
heteronanostructured core@shell-type nanomaterials were prepared by
combining Au and Ag. They possess higher plasmonic efficiency, superior
electromagnetic enhancement, ideal optical properties, and very high
molar coefficient of Ag and high biocompatibility, chemical stability
and reactivity, and easy surface modification of Au. In view of the
multifunctional properties, they can be used in advanced applications.5,6 In addition to contribution of the properties from the individual
components, a highly intriguing synergistic phenomenon was also observed.6

Numerous attempts were made to synthesize
highly monodisperse Ag@Au
core@shell NPs as well as Au@Ag core@shell NPs where the expectation
was that the Ag will contribute enhanced plasmonic properties (high
molar extinction coefficient), while the Au will impart biomolecular
reactivity as well as chemical stability against aggregation and oxidation.6−13 Synthesis of a Ag@Au core@shell-type structure is associated with
the problem that while depositing Au on a Ag core by reduction of
Au3+ ions, Ag from the core is oxidized by the Au3+ ions, which is also known as the galvanic replacement reaction.14−17 The end result is typically quasi-core@shell NPs or hollow-structured
core@shell NPs that have deformities such as gaps or holes in the
Au shell, formation of homonanostructured alloy, or even complete
removal of the Ag core.7,14−19 Such particles exhibit high suppression of the optical and electronic
properties of Ag by the Au shell; further, they are inherently unstable
to the outside environment, which makes them nonideal for any applications.5 To synthesize highly monodispersed Ag@Au core@shell
NPs, the galvanic replacement reaction should be restrained or eradicated,
which is an immense challenge.7,20,21

A promising alternative is the creation of an inverse core@shell
structure, Au@Ag, where Au is used as the core and Ag as the shell,
which is the key to harness the unique electronic interaction between
Au and Ag. The Au core serves as a platform for regulating the overall
particle size and also modifies the electronic characteristics of
the deposited Ag shell to increase the stability against oxidation
and galvanic replacement reaction.5,20,22 Such a Au@Ag core@shell-type structure has several
advantages such as particle dispersity is higher23 and the LSPR features of the Ag are not likely to be suppressed
by an outer Au shell.20 It has been demonstrated
that the Ag shell in the Au@Ag core@shell-type structure shows both
an enhanced resistance to oxidation and the galvanic replacement reaction
by the Au core.5,20

To date, there have been
numerous reports on the synthesis of Au@Ag
core@shell NPs,1−4,24−35 but to the best of our knowledge, the appropriate mechanism of the
formation of core and shell is yet to be clearly understood. In our
laboratory, we developed a method by using water-in-oil (W/O) microemulsion
(ME) as a template for the synthesis of NPs including core@shell NPs.34,36 ZnO@Ag NPs prepared in this method were found to exhibit interesting
properties.36a−36e

The reverse micelles stabilized by surfactant and cosurfactant
species at the water/oil interface of a microemulsion provide a confined
aqueous medium and constitute a nanoreactor, the size of which can
be controlled by appropriate choice of the W/O ratio. Nanoparticles
of desired sizes can be synthesized by choosing the appropriate size
of the nanoreactor.34−36 Such nanoreactors offer interesting opportunities
not only for forming core@shell NPs with a controllable size and shape
but also for stabilizing the resulting NPs by forming steric barriers
using the surfactants and cosurfactant species around the NPs in the
system.

Herein, an efficacious and versatile W/O ME technique
for the successful
synthesis of highly stable Au@Ag core@shell NPs has been demonstrated,
using a W/O ME system containing reverse micelles as “nanoreactors”.
Fascinating plasmonic and optical properties of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs are reported. Hydrodynamic diameter from dynamic light scattering
(DLS) measurements at different time intervals in association with
high-resolution transmission electron microscopic (HRTEM) images and
elemental analyses were critically analyzed to establish the mechanism
of the formation of Au@Ag core@shell NPs. An attempt has been made
to elucidate the mechanism of the formation of the Au core and Ag
shell during the formulation process via the electron transfer phenomenon,
which is the key to create high stability and optical activity.

Results
and Discussion
Triton X-100-Based Water-in-Oil Microemulsion
as Versatile Nanoreactors
The composition of W/O ME is shown
in Table S1. As depicted in Figure 1, the Z-average hydrodynamic diameter
(Dh) of the synthesized reverse micelles
containing W/O ME was around 14 nm, and these were highly uniform
and stable.

Figure 1 Size distribution plot of W/O ME of Triton X-100 synthesized at Wo = 7.21. The insert shows the pictorial representation
of the Dh of the nanoreactors.

The surfactant- and cosurfactant-stabilized nanosized reverse
micelles
containing W/O ME rendered a unique and controlled microheterogeneous
environment for the formation of NPs. The reverse micelles containing
W/O ME also restrained the particles from agglomeration and aggregation
during the exchange of their contents by the fusion-redispersion process35,37−40 and thus the reverse micelles containing W/O ME were regarded as
“nanoreactors”.

The formation of W/O ME depends
on some formulation variables,40 and these
are also salient features for the
synthesis of NPs. Among various ionic (cationic and anionic) surfactants,
a nonionic surfactant, Triton X-100 was used for the formulation of
W/O ME since the headgroup of the surfactant is uncharged.40 For the reason that there are no electrostatic
charges from the headgroups, the interactions between these nonionic
headgroups are dominated by steric and osmotic forces, which make
the W/O ME more uniform, stable, and highly relevant for the use as
nanoreactors for the synthesis of NPs.40 The headgroup of the nonionic surfactant (Triton X-100) does not
interact with the synthesized NPs since they are uncharged and thus
able to stabilize the synthesized NPs by controlling the growth process.
However, Triton X-100 is a single-chain surfactant and it is not able
to diminish the surface tension to the ultralow levels required for
the formulation of W/O ME. Thus, further, the short-chain alcohol,
hexanol-1 was used as a cosurfactant, which helped to further reduce
the surface tension between the oily and aqueous phases and also fluidize
the surfactant film.40 As a result, the
entropy of the W/O ME system increased, leading to its thermodynamic
stability, which further assisted to enhance the stability of the
reverse micelles.40 A comparatively short-chain
hydrocarbon, cyclohexane was used as oil phase since oils with shorter
hydrocarbon chains easily form W/O ME as compared to oils with long
hydrocarbon chains. Moreover, the solubilizing potential of cyclohexane
for Triton X-100 and hexanol-1 is distinctly precise and the W/O ME
forming region is also enriched by cyclohexane.40 Thus, Triton X-100/hexanol-1/deionized (DI) water/cyclohexane-based
W/O ME as shown in Figure 1 is highly convenient for exploiting as a nanoreactor for
the synthesis of NPs.

Synthesis of Heteronanostructured Au@Ag Core@shell
Nanoparticles
Using Triton X-100-Based Water-in-Oil Microemulsion as Nanoreactors
Noble plasmonic metal Au and Ag have the identical face-centered
cubic (fcc) crystal structure. Their lattice constants, Au (0.408)
and Ag (0.409), and atomic radii, Au (1.74) and Ag (1.65), are very
analogous.25,33 Considering these factors, it
is pertinent to point out that the major advantage of using Au and
Ag is that they will unequivocally initiate the formation of an Au@Ag
core@shell-type structure at the initial stage with a nonuniform shell.
However, by virtue of their similar crystal structure, lattice constant,
and atomic radius, they are quite in favor to initiate the galvanic
replacement reaction between the metallic Au and aqueous Ag interface
after some period, and consequently at the final stage, they may form
Au/Ag alloy-type or Au@Ag hollow nanostructured NPs.4,41−45 Nonetheless, in this study, this predicament was skillfully unraveled
by the technique using nanosized reverse micelles containing Triton
X-100-based W/O ME for the synthesis of Au@Ag core@shell NPs since
the nanosized reverse micelles provided a stable, controlled, and
confined environment that favored the formation of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs by controlling the nucleation and growth process and precluded
the formation of Au/Ag alloy or Au@Ag hollow-structured NPs by suppressing
the galvanic replacement reaction.

The single ME reactant addition
scheme was employed for the synthesis of Au@Ag core@shell NPs because
it promotes more intramicellar reduction, nucleation, and growth and
lowered the possibilities of the galvanic replacement reaction between
the metallic gold atoms and aqueous silver ions and also controlled
the size of the particles. The composition of W/O and the composition
of the components used for the synthesis of Au@Ag core@shell NPs are
shown in Tables S1 and S2.

The synthesized
Au@Ag NPs were characterized using high-resolution
transmission electron microscopic (HRTEM) and selected area electron
diffraction (SAED) pattern analyses, which unveiled a distinct core
and shell contrast and also an exceptional feature known as Moiré
pattern. The HRTEM images of the synthesized Au@Ag core@shell NPs
taken at different magnifications for demonstrating better contrast
are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 HRTEM micrographs of Au@Ag core@shell NPs synthesized in W/O ME
by selecting different zones.

Fairly uniform spherical particles are identified. The HRTEM images
as depicted in Figure 2 revealed an “unusual core@shell” contrast in which
a dark Au core is located in the central portion and the bright Ag
shell is on the outer portion occupying the periphery of the core.

The bottom middle image is of one particle, showing a darker central
zone and a lighter outer zone, with a diameter around 20 nm. A clear
boundary between the Au core and Ag shell has been distinguished by
the outer brighter, denser layer and the central darker, sparser contrast
in the HRTEM images. Additionally, the boundary between the Au core
and Ag shell is sharp; this suggests that the Ag shell is pure Ag.
The difference in atomic number and thus attenuation of electrons
of Au and Ag atoms are the main factors that provided sufficient contrast
to distinguish the Au core and Ag shell.3,24,25 The plasmon excitation efficiency of Ag NPs is more
pronounced than that of Au NPs, which is also responsible for the
unusual core@shell contrast. It is evident from the images that a
majority of the core@shell NPs are almost uniform and spherical in
morphology.

To further support the core@shell structure of Au@Ag
bimetallic
NPs, field emission scanning electron microscopy–energy dispersive
X-ray spectroscopic (FESEM–EDS) analysis was performed (Figure S1). FESEM–EDS measurements showed
that the core is made up of elemental gold and the peripheral region
is made up of silver atoms, thus indicating the Au@Ag core@shell structure.
From selecting a zone or an area of FESEM image of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs, it was clearly seen that the Au atoms were mostly concentrated
in the center of the NPs, whereas the Ag atoms were situated on the
circumference of the NPs. This clearly indicates the formation of
an almost homogeneous core@shell structure of the synthesized Au@Ag
heteronanostructures (Table S3).

Interestingly, the HRTEM images of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs as
shown in Figure S2 exhibited variable contrasts
within each NP, which is attributed to the Moiré pattern that
allowed us to characterize in more detail the crystal interface between
the core and shell lattices in Au@Ag NPs.46 The core@shell structure of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs was vividly
revealed by the Moiré pattern of the core region of the particle
formed by overlap of the core and the shell.47

In general, Moiré patterns originate from translational
or rotational interference. The formation of the Moiré pattern
in the Au@Ag core@shell NPs as shown in Figure S2 also indicates that the core and the shell are two highly
crystalline materials with slightly different lattice constants that
are rotated relative to each other by a small angle. The formation
of these patterns is also attributable to the difference in the plane
interval between the Au core and Ag shell.48 However, most of the Au@Ag NPs were characterized by a stripe-like
Moiré pattern. Stripe-like patterns are generally associated
with the superposition of two lattices with the same cell parameter
in one direction and a slight difference in another and there is a
slight rotation of the NPs from the exact zone axis.46,49

The SAED pattern of Au@Ag core@shell NPs as shown in Figure S3 illustrated the appearance of the Debye–Scherrer
ring pattern in the SAED pattern that clearly indicated the polycrystalline
nature of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs. The SAED pattern exhibited Debye–Scherrer
rings corresponding to the fcc structure originated from the Au core
and the Ag shell including the 110 and 111 planes. Au and Ag lattices
are irresolvable because of the close lattice constants of Au and
Ag (0.408 and 0.409 Å for Au and Ag, respectively).49 The SAED pattern is crucial in resolving the
structure of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs. The thick Debye–Scherrer
rings from the SAED pattern come from the core and shell structure
of the NPs, which indicated the formation of Au@Ag core@shell NPs.50 Thus, the Ag shell is grown on the Au core.

The Z-average Dh of
Au NPs was around 82 nm and of Ag NPs was around 105 nm as shown in Figure 3. Moreover, the Z-average Dh of synthesized
Au@Ag core@shell NPs was around 115 nm. The increase in the Z-average Dh of the synthesized
Au@Ag core@shell NPs with respect to the Au NPs indicated the formation
of a Ag shell on the Au core. The correlogram of the synthesized Au@Ag
core@shell NPs is shown in Figure S4a.
The baseline of the correlogram is smooth and straight, which indicates
the absence of larger particles and sedimentation in the solution
of the Au@Ag NPs. The sharp decay of the correlation functions also
indicates that the particles are smaller in size and nearly monodisperse.
The size distribution by volume of the synthesized Au@Ag NPs is given
in Figure S4b. The polydispersity index
(PdI) and standard deviation of Au@Ag core@shell NPs are shown in Table S4. The PdI value was 0.497, which suggested
nearly monodispersity of the synthesized Au@Ag core@shell NPs.

Figure 3 Size distribution
plot of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs synthesized
in W/O ME. The insert shows a pictorial representation of the Z-average Dh of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs.

It may be noted that the Z-average Dh of the synthesized
Au@Ag core@shell NPs is the diameter
of the reverse micellar nanoreactor in which it is formed. The diameter
determined by HRTEM is the actual diameter of the metallic NPs because
the small molecular size organic compounds, such as Triton X-100,
hexanol-1, and cyclohexane, are electron-transparent and therefore
they did not show up in the HRTEM micrographs and thus only provided
the average true diameter of the NPs. However, dynamic light scattering
(DLS) provided the average Dh of the NPs
and so the average particle size was found to be smaller in HRTEM
compared to that by DLS (Scheme S1).51a

Another factor behind the larger particle
size in the case of DLS
measurements compared to HRTEM is that the DLS principle emphasizes
more on the interactions during the dynamic condition. The particle
size explicated by using DLS theory emphasized the aspect that the
particles underwent random interparticle attraction due to the van
der Waals and plasmonic interactions and also through interparticle
repulsion due to the electrostatic and steric interactions as illustrated
in Scheme S1.51a The HRTEM images provide the “true diameter” of the
particles though determined on statistically small samples.

The synthesized Au@Ag core@shell NPs were analyzed using powder
X-ray diffraction (PXRD) to study the distribution of elements within
the Au@Ag NPs and to analyze the crystalline nature of the synthesized
Au@Ag NPs. The PXRD pattern and the deconvoluted PXRD pattern of the
synthesized Au@Ag NPs are shown in Figure 4a,b.

Figure 4 (a) PXRD pattern and (b) deconvoluted PXRD pattern
of the synthesized
powdered Au@Ag core@shell NPs.

The deconvoluted PXRD pattern of the synthesized Au@Ag core@shell
NPs as depicted in Figure 4b shows sharp peaks at 2θ = 27.85, 32.25, 38.16, 44.31,
46.23, 54.85, 57.46, 64.59, 76.86, 77.55, 81.74, and 85.71°,
and these peaks correspond to the lattice planes (111), (200), (111),
(200), (220), (311), (222), (220), (300), (311), (222), and (422)
respectively, consistent with the characteristic of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs.51b−51j The diffraction peaks at 27.85, 32.25, 38.16, 44.31, 46.23, 54.85,
57.46, 64.59, 76.86, 77.55, 81.74, and 85.71° are indexed with
the (111), (200), (111), (200), (220), (311), (222), (220), (300),
(311), (222), and (422) planes, respectively, of metallic fcc Au (JCPDS
No. 04-0784) and Ag (JCPDS No. 04-0783).51b−51j Interestingly, the Au@Ag core@shell NPs showed significant peaks
at 32.25 and 38.16° for Au and Ag. Some weak peaks were also
observed for the fcc Au and Ag. Metallic Au and Ag have similar fcc
crystal structures, lattice constants, and atomic radii. Thus, the
PXRD diffraction peak positions of Au and Ag are similar, and Au could
not be distinguished from Ag by this PXRD characterization, which
is in good agreement with the literature data.51b−51j

The PXRD pattern confirmed the existence of fcc Au and Ag
in the
Au@Ag core@shell NPs. In the PXRD pattern of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs, the Au and Ag reflections were quite similar to the standard
reflections of the monometallic NPs of Au and Ag. However, some Au
and Ag reflections were slightly blue-shifted with respect to the
standard reflections of the monometallic NPs of Au and Ag. It was
considered that the Ag shell was formed on the Au core, which was
the reason behind the slight shift of some of the Au and Ag reflections
with respect to the standard values. Thus, it also confirmed the formation
of Au@Ag core@shell NPs.

The crystalline behavior of the synthesized
Au@Ag core@shell NPs
can be analyzed by the PXRD pattern. An intrinsic limitation of PXRD
is the fact that amorphous phases cannot be detected but the crystalline
phases provide sharp reflection peaks.51b−51h The sharp PXRD pattern of both Au and Ag thus clearly showed that
the synthesized Au@Ag core@shell NPs were polycrystalline in nature.
The results are totally in agreement with the SAED pattern.

Enticing
Plasmonic Properties of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag Core@Shell
Nanoparticles
The absorption spectrum of Triton X-100-based
W/O ME at Wo = 7.21 is shown in Figure S5. The absorption spectrum clearly elucidated
that the components of the W/O ME exhibited no peak in the 300–800
nm range of the absorption spectrum. The absorption spectrum of Au,
Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs after synthesis in W/O ME at Wo = 7.21 is shown in Figure 5. It elucidates the plasmonic properties
of the NPs. The unique plasmonic properties of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs are their ability to absorb incident electromagnetic radiation
due to localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), which is caused
by the collective oscillation of conduction electrons at the surface
(or more accurately, at the interface between metal nanoparticles
and their dielectric surrounding) upon excitation by the incident
light.26,27,52 The LSPR effect
can lead to strong confinement of the electromagnetic field and thus
great enhancement of the local electric field near the metal surface
within a subwavelength distance.52 One
of the key advantages of plasmonic Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs
is their ability to produce engineered multipolar LSPR modes such
as dipolar, quadrupolar, octupolar, and hexadecapolar modes.53 The sensitivity of the multipolar LSPR modes
is highly dependent on the effect of size, shape, and composition.

Figure 5 Absorption
spectra of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs synthesized
in W/O ME.

The Au NPs with Z-average Dh of around 82 nm exhibited
a dipolar LSPR mode at 541 nm as
depicted in Figure 5. The Au NPs also generated a higher-order quadrupolar LSPR mode
at 324 nm. This is in agreement with previous works.1,26,28,54 The peaks below 400 nm (216 and 320 nm) were also assigned to the
ligand-to-metal charge transfer (π → σ*) Cl pπ
→ 5dx2–y2 band.55 Importantly,
the appearance of the quadrupolar and dipolar LSPR modes indicated
the formation of Au NPs. Furthermore, the Ag NPs with a Z-average Dh of around 105 nm exhibited
a dipolar LSPR mode at 406 nm and a quadrupolar LSPR mode at 295 nm
and thus confirmed the formation of Ag NPs. Subsequently, the Au@Ag
core@shell NPs with a Z-average Dh of around 115 nm exhibited two bands at 322 and 527
nm as depicted in Figure 5.

This dipolar and quadrupolar LSPR modes are a distinct
feature
of the dimerlike structure with a nanogap. For a dimerlike system
with a nanogap, which is not in physical contact with neighboring
NPs, no charge can be completely separated, leading to high-frequency
quadrupolar LSPR mode. When the particle contact is made in the overlapping
interparticles, at a point that leads to a low-frequency dipolar LSPR
mode which gave rise to the charge transfer in the conductive junction
of interparticles.1,56−60 The band at 527 nm for Au@Ag core@shell NPs in the
absorption spectrum is attributed to dipolar LSPR mode where the particles
are coupled with each other through plasmon coupling and the band
at 322 nm is also attributed to quadrupolar LSPR mode originating
from the dipole oscillation of the isolated Au@Ag core@shell NPs.1,56−60

The appearance of the quadrupole mode in the absorption spectrum
of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs is due to the size effect of the
NPs and the retardation effects. Spherical plasmonic NPs with an average
diameter of around 10–65 nm exhibited only a single dipolar
LSPR band, but above this size regime, the phase retardation effects
gained more relevance and the higher-order modes became non-negligible
and thus started to appear.53,61,62 In accordance with the results for Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell
NPs, the Z-average Dh’s were around 82, 105, and 115 nm, respectively, and thus
the phase retardation effects became more and more significant and
the quadrupolar LSPR mode started to develop at shorter wavelengths.
The general resonance conditions for multipolar modes in the “quasi-static”
regime occur for ε = −εmedium(l + 1)/l; thus, the resonance condition
for a quadrupolar mode is ε = −(2/3)εmedium.61 When the condition for quadrupolar
LSPR mode is fulfilled, a smaller shoulder of the dipolar LSPR mode
at a lower wavelength started to manifest. This phenomenon was observed
in the case of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs as shown in Figure 5. As the size of
the NPs increases, the contribution from the quadrupolar mode increases.
In the case of dipolar LSPR mode for plasmonic Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell
NPs, the metal surface is in contact with the dielectric medium of
dielectric function, εmedium. Moreover, in the case
of quadrupolar LSPR mode, short charge waves prevent the interactions
between distant charges of the dielectric medium; therefore, each
small region on the surface of the metal behaves as in a planar bulk
metal.61 This fact can be understood more
precisely by perceiving the electric field and charge distribution
condition at the surface of plasmonic NPs62 as shown in Figure S6.

The higher-order
modes, however, need to be considered precisely
since in size range larger than 60 nm where these modes are active
for plasmonic metallic Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs, the optical
properties are additionally influenced by phase retardation effects.
One of this retardation effects, the “energy-shifting”
effect, arises when the particle size is no longer negligible compared
to the wavelength of the incident radiation.61 When the dimensions of the particles are much smaller than the wavelength
of the incident light, such as in the range of 10–67 nm, all
electrons in the entire particle experience a roughly uniform electric
field, leading to the excitation of the dipolar LSPR mode. As the
size increases above 60 nm, the wavelength of the incoming radiation
cannot be considered as infinite, thus, the light cannot polarize
homogeneously and the field is no longer uniform throughout the NPs,
which results in phase retardation effects and starts to develop quadrupolar
mode.53 More precisely, these effects appear
when the diameter 2R of the particle is around 1/10
of the mode wavelength λm = λ/(εmedium)1/2 of the radiation in the medium surrounding the particle.61

When a dipolar LSPR mode is excited in
spherical plasmonic NPs,
the distance between opposite charges can be approximated by the diameter
of the NPs. Thus, one side of the particle will experience any charge
occurring at the opposite side of the particle with phase retardation
equal to 4πR/λm.61,62 The oscillation period of the dipolar LSPR mode increases to take
such retardation into account. When quadrupolar LSPR mode is involved,
the distance between the opposite charges on the surface of the NPs
is smaller than the diameter of the NPs and thus the phase retardation
is smaller than in the dipolar LSPR mode.61,62 This phenomenon is clearly indicated in Figure S6. Indeed, the phase retardation effect in spherical metallic
plasmonic Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs scales roughly as 4πR/(l × λm) with l = 1, 2, 3, ... for dipole, quadrupole, octupole modes,
and so on.

Another phenomenon that is consequential for the
emergence of dipolar
and quadrupolar LSPR modes is known as the radiation scattering effect.61 For particles with an average diameter greater
than 60 nm, increase in the radiation scattering is observed, as the
resonant scattering of the multipole resonance becomes a dominating
spectral component. In this size regime, the scattering cross section
exceeds their geometric cross section.53 Indeed, the electrons are accelerated as a consequence of the electromagnetic
field of the incident radiation.

During irradiation, NPs also
start radiating, and this causes them
to lose energy.61 Part of the energy of
the plasmonic oscillation is converted into photons. This phenomenon
leads to a broadening of the dipolar LSPR band in the absorption spectrum
and thus to an apparent decrease in its intensity with respect to
the background (mostly given, at the lowest wavelengths, by nonresonant
scattering).61 Thus, in large particles,
as opposed to small particles, the interaction with the incoming light
is dominated by radiative processes (meaning the photons are scattered).

In pursuance of precisely interpreting a dipolar and quadrupolar
LSPR mode phenomenon and the formation of Au@Ag core@shell NPs, deconvolution
of the absorption spectrum of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs is
executed. The deconvoluted absorption spectra of Au and Ag NPs are
exhibited in Figures S7 and S8. The broad
dipolar LSPR mode consisted of bands at 550, 542, and 701 nm, and
the broad quadrupolar LSPR mode consisted of bands at 307, 320, 335,
and 341 nm. The deconvoluted absorption spectrum of Ag NPs depicted
that the broad dipolar LSPR mode consisted of bands at 403, 441, and
603 nm and the broad quadrupolar LSPR mode consisted of bands at 295
and 299 nm.

More interestingly, the deconvoluted absorption
spectrum of Au@Ag
core@shell NPs as shown in Figure 6 interpreted that the deconvoluted broad dipolar LSPR
mode of Au@Ag NPs consisted of bands at 526 and 560 nm, which are
blue-shifted with respect to the deconvoluted broad dipolar LSPR mode
of Au NPs consisted of bands at 542 and 701 nm. Furthermore, the deconvoluted
broad quadrupolar LSPR mode of Au@Ag NPs consisted of bands at 306,
315, 329, and 337 nm, which are also slightly blue-shifted with respect
to the deconvoluted broad quadrupolar LSPR mode of Au NPs consisted
of bands at 307, 320, 335, and 341 nm. The deconvoluted broad quadrupolar
LSPR mode of Au@Ag NPs consisted of bands at 297 and 302 nm, which
are slightly red-shifted with respect to the deconvoluted broad quadrupolar
LSPR mode of Ag NPs consisted of bands at 295 and 299 nm. The parameters
of the deconvoluted spectra of Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs in Figures S7, S8, and 6 are
given in Table S5.

Figure 6 Deconvoluted absorption
spectrum of Au@Ag core@shell NPs synthesized
in W/O ME at Wo = 7.21 as shown in Figure 5 (fitted using the
Gaussian function).

Importantly, the deconvoluted
absorption spectra of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs as shown in Figure 6 exhibited a band at 406 nm, which is characteristic of Ag and clearly
provided the evidence for the formation of a Ag shell on the Au core.
Additionally, upon formation of the Ag shell on top of Au NPs, the
original dipolar LSPR band of Au NPs at 541 nm gradually blue-shifted
toward 527 nm, which was the original dipolar LSPR mode of Au@Ag NPs
as shown in Figure 5, and also the deconvoluted broad dipolar LSPR mode of Au NPs consisted
of bands at 542 and 701 nm, which were blue-shifted toward 526 and
560 nm that were the bands of the deconvoluted broad dipolar LSPR
mode of Au@Ag NPs as shown in Figures S7 and 6. This further indicated the formation
of Au@Ag NPs.1,3,25,28−30 This spectral feature
is due to Ag interband transitions in this spectral region and is
inherent to the Ag dielectric properties.4,24 Ag
coating on the Au surface, which resulted in a strong blue shift of
the main LSPR, showed not only the deposition of a different metal
but also a drastic change in the morphology of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs.24 The gradual blue shift of the LSPR
band of Au@Ag core@shell NPs has also been interpreted due to the
damping of Au LSPR by the surface of silver atoms.4,26

The size of the Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell NPs has a dramatic
effect on the LSPR and the optical properties of the NPs.62 The broadening of the dipolar LSPR band and
an apparent decrease in its intensity for Au, Ag, and Au@Ag core@shell
NPs were observed along with the appearance of quadrupolar mode, as
a consequence of the presence of particles with Z-average Dh greater than around 60 nm.
The deconvoluted absorption spectra of Au@Ag core@shell NPs as shown
in Figure 6 also correlated
well with the fact that due to the presence of particles of average
diameter greater than 60 nm, the dipolar LSPR mode becomes broader
and further weakens in intensity. During the plasmonic oscillation
of these particles, some part of the energy is converted into photons
and the interaction with light is dominated by the scattering of photons,
which results in the broadening of the dipolar LSPR mode. Moreover,
the quadrupolar LSPR mode becomes stronger in intensity and narrower
in width as the size of the NPs increases.61 Therefore, as the size of the NPs increases, the contribution from
the quadrupolar LSPR mode increases and as a result the dipolar LSPR
mode becomes more influenced by the size of the particles. The dipolar
LSPR modes are, therefore, influenced more by the particle size due
to retardation effects compared to the quadrupolar LSPR mode.61

Probable Mechanism for the Formation of Au@Ag
Core@Shell Nanoparticles
via Single Reactant Microemulsion Addition Scheme
The formation
of Au@Ag core@shell NPs in reverse micelles containing W/O ME is a
complex process, and the formation mechanism is still not clear. The
size distribution at different stages of the formation of Au@Ag nanoparticles
via the single reactant ME addition scheme has been thoroughly investigated;
moreover, the distribution profiles were critically examined, correlated
with HRTEM results in applicable cases, and compared with the available
literature to understand the mechanism of nucleation and growth for
the synthesis of Au and Au@Ag core@shell NPs in W/O ME-based nanoreactors.

The mechanism of formation of Au NPs in reverse micelles containing
W/O ME-based nanoreactors is illustrated in Scheme S2, which involves a three-step process. The first step is
considered to involve the reduction and nucleation steps as shown
in Scheme S2a. Primarily, the NaAuCl4 precursor solution was incorporated into the reverse micelles
containing W/O ME system and the reactants were directly moved and
dissolved into the water pools of the reverse micelles. Thereafter,
the NaBH4 precursor solution was added as the reducing
agent into the same W/O ME system containing the NaAuCl4 precursor solution, which further directly moved into the water
pools of the reverse micelles, and both the reactants collided, reacted
with each other, and additionally produced Au atoms.

The reverse
micelles containing Au atoms were in random Brownian
motion that resulted in collision with sufficient energy to lead to
the opening of the surfactant and cosurfactant bilayer through which
rapid exchange of the Au atoms occurred. The exchange of the Au atoms
was too fast and thus the atoms underwent simultaneous nucleation
within 1–5 min, which initiated the formation of Au NPs. The
size distribution plot as shown in Scheme S3a exhibited one strong size distribution at around 67.93 nm and a
weak size distribution at around 8.79 nm.

Consequently, the
growth process took place. The second step is
the growth of the Au NPs through Ostwald ripening within 6–15
min as illustrated in Scheme S2b. During
the random collision and exchange process of the reverse micelles
containing Au NPs in the W/O ME system, some Au atoms on the surface
of the Au NPs preferentially detach and diffuse in the water core
of the nanoreactors in the W/O ME system within 6–10 min as
shown in Scheme S2b. This is the first
stage of the Ostwald ripening phenomenon. The size distribution plot
of the first stage of the Ostwald ripening process within 6–10
min as depicted in Scheme S2b exhibited
new size distributions at around 1.31 and 104.77 nm, and the strong
size distribution at 67.93 nm was shifted to 33.70 nm from the reduction–nucleation
step to the first stage of the Ostwald ripening process. This indicated
that due to the random collision and exchange process some Au atoms
on the surface of the Au NPs were detached and diffused in the water
core of the nanoreactors. Thus, the new size distribution at 1.31
nm appeared because of the diffused Au atoms, the new size distribution
at 104.77 nm appeared via aggregation of some of the Au NPs from which
the Au atoms were diffused, and the strong size distribution at 67.93
nm was decreased to 33.70 nm via the detachment and diffusion of the
Au atoms from the surface of the Au NPs from the reduction–nucleation
step to the first stage of the Ostwald ripening process.

The
water core of the nanoreactors of the W/O ME system has a larger
saturated solubility due to the free Au atoms, and the free Au atoms
tend to acquire lower surface energies. Thus, the free Au atoms are
redeposited on the surface of the Au NPs to reach a more thermodynamically
stable state, which eventually leads to the growth of Au NPs within
11–15 min as shown in Scheme S2b. This is the second stage of the Ostwald ripening phenomenon. The
size distribution plot of the second stage of the Ostwald ripening
process within 11–15 min as depicted in Scheme S2b showed that the weak size distribution at 1.31
nm disappeared, new size distribution at 5.09 nm appeared, and the
strong distribution at 33.70 nm was shifted to 70.52 nm from the first
stage to the second stage of the Ostwald ripening process. This indicated
that the free Au atoms were redeposited on the surface of the Au NPs,
which led to the growth of Au NPs. Thus, the weak size distribution
at 1.31 nm due to diffused Au atoms disappeared, the new size distributions
at 5.09 nm appeared via the aggregation of the diffused Au atoms,
and the strong size distribution at 33.70 nm increased to 70.52 nm
via the redeposition of the Au atoms on the surface Au NPs from the
first stage to the second stage of the Ostwald ripening process.

The third step is the growth of the particles by the diffusion-controlled
growth process as illustrated in Scheme S2c. The size distribution plot exhibited two different types of particles
of average Dh’s of around 6.58
and 80.39 nm. The growth of the particles from 5.09 to 6.58 nm and
70.52 to 80.39 nm was considered to occur through self-sharpening
growth by diffusion. However, diffusion-controlled growth usually
only occurred over a longer period, in this case during 16–20
min, due to the constant reduction of gold that occurs within the
solution where the limiting factor is the concentration of gold metal
within the solution itself.63

After
the synthesis of Au NPs, the Au NPs were used as a core to
further synthesize the Au@Ag core@shell NPs as shown in Scheme 1. The first step of the process
is considered as a reduction–nucleation process as illustrated
in Scheme 1a. At the
initial stage, the nucleation process commenced within 1–5
min when the AgNO3 precursor solution was added into the
W/O ME solution containing Au NPs. As evident from the color change
and spectroscopic measurements, the Ag+ ions reduced into
Ag atoms via the galvanic replacement reaction and a Ag shell started
to form around the Au NPs. Nevertheless, some major drawbacks are
that the rate of nucleation is very slow and if the process is continued
further, it will have higher possibilities to form Au/Ag alloy NPs
or hollow nanostructured Au@Ag core@shell NPs. To solve the issues,
NaBH4 solution was added into the same W/O ME system. After
the addition of NaBH4 solution, the Ag+ ions
underwent a fast reduction process and there was a rapid increase
in the formation of Ag atoms in the W/O ME system. Afterward the Ag
atoms readily underwent “burst nucleation”, which significantly
reduced the concentration of free Ag atoms in the W/O ME system and
simultaneously increased the rate of formation of a thin Ag shell
around the Au core. At this point, the rate of nucleation is described
as “effectively infinite” and the nucleation process
follows the “LaMer mechanism”.63−65 The size distribution
plot for the nucleation process as shown in Scheme 1a exhibited one weak size distribution at
around 2.58 nm and one strong size distribution at around 81.69 nm.
This indicated that two different types of particles existed in the
ME system. The nonuniformity of the second peak also suggested that
at that instant the particles underwent continuous and fast reduction
and then rapid nucleation.

Scheme 1 Schematic Illustration of the Formation
of Au@Ag Core@Shell NPs in
W/O ME via the Single ME Reactant Addition Scheme along with the Time-Dependent
Size Distribution Plot
(a) Reduction and nucleation
process (1–5 min), (b) growth by the autocatalysis process
(6–10 min), (c) growth by the Oswald ripening process (11–20
min), (d) growth by the intraparticle coupling process (30–35
min), and (e) growth and stabilization via the steric stabilization
process (3 h).

Most of the major reactions
for the synthesis of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs proceeded at the nucleation process. As depicted in Scheme 1a, a thin and nonuniform Ag
shell was formed on the surface of Au NPs after the nucleation process.
Then, the second step of the process proceeded through autocatalysis
as depicted in Scheme 1b. The free Ag atoms in the same W/O ME solution which did not undergo
the nucleation process diffuse to the surface of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs with a nonuniform shell. The energy of these free Ag atoms within
the solution is lower than that of the synthesized Au@Ag core@shell
NPs with nonuniform shell thickness, and that is why they slowly diffuse
on the particle surface and change the shape and size of the particles.63 As shown in the size distribution in Scheme 1b, there was a slight
increase in the average Dh of the particles
from around 81.69 to 94.96 nm, which indicated that the free Ag atoms
diffused to the surface of the particles via diffusion and a uniform
and highly stable spherical Ag shell formed on the surface of the
Au NPs.

The third step of the process is denoted as “Ostwald
ripening”,
which is a two-step process as shown in Scheme 1c. In the reverse micelles of the W/O ME
system containing Au@Ag core@shell NPs, there are some Au@Ag NPs in
which smaller Au@Ag NPs particles are agglomerated on the surface
of the larger Au@Ag NPs particles. These Au@Ag NPs have higher size
distribution, and these are energetically more unstable than the smaller,
nonagglomerated particles. The smaller, nonagglomerated particles
are well ordered and packed in the interior since smaller particles
have a lower surface area-to-volume ratio, resulting in a lower-energy
state (and a lower surface energy).

Therefore, the W/O ME system
containing Au@Ag NPs attempts to lower
its overall energy via random collision and exchange of the reverse
micelles containing Au@Ag NPs and the smaller Au@Ag NPs that are agglomerated
on the surface of larger Au@Ag NPs often tend to detach and diffuse
in the water core of the nanoreactors of the W/O ME system. This is
induced by low thermodynamic stability of the smaller Au@Ag NPs that
are agglomerated on the surface of larger Au@Ag NPs. Thus, the number
of free smaller Au@Ag NPs is increased in the W/O ME system. This
is the first stage of the Ostwald ripening phenomenon as shown in Scheme S1c. When the W/O ME system is supersaturated
with the free smaller Au@Ag NPs, the free smaller Au@Ag NPs possess
overarching desire to acquire lower surface energies. Thus, the free
smaller Au@Ag NPs are aggregated on the surface of the larger Au@Ag
NPs and also aggregated with each other in the reverse micelles of
the W/O ME system to reach a more thermodynamically stable state.
Thus, the number of smaller Au@Ag NPs is started to decrease until
they disappeared and the larger Au@Ag NPs grow even larger in the
W/O ME system.63 This is the second stage
of the Ostwald ripening phenomenonon shown in Scheme S1c.

The size distribution plots of the Ostwald
ripening process that
occurred within 11–20 min are depicted in Scheme 1c. The size distribution plot
of the first stage of the Ostwald ripening process from 11 to 15 min
as shown in Scheme 1c exhibited one new size distribution at 12.08 nm, and the strong
size distribution at 94.96 nm was shifted to 89.18 nm from the autocatalysis
step to the first stage of the Ostwald ripening process. This indicated
that due to random collision and exchange of the reverse micelles
containing Au@Ag NPs of the W/O ME system, some smaller Au@Ag NPs
that were agglomerated on the surface of larger Au@Ag NPs detached
and diffused in the water core of the nanoreactors, which was induced
by low thermodynamic stability of the smaller Au@Ag NPs that were
agglomerated on the surface of larger Au@Ag NPs. Thus, the new size
distribution at 12.08 nm appeared because of the free diffused smaller
Au@Ag NPs and the strong size distribution at 94.96 nm decreased to
89.18 nm via the diffusion of the smaller Au@Ag NPs that are agglomerated
on the surface of larger Au@Ag NPs from the autocatalysis step to
the first stage of the Ostwald ripening process.

The size distribution
plot of the second stage of the Ostwald ripening
process from 16 to 20 min as shown in Scheme 1c exhibited that the size distribution at
12.08 nm disappeared, one new size distribution at 6.53 nm appeared,
and the strong size distribution at 89.18 nm shifted to 96.08 nm from
the first stage to the second stage of the Ostwald ripening process.
This indicated that the W/O ME system was supersaturated with free
smaller Au@Ag NPs and thus tended to acquire lower surface energies.
Thus, the free smaller Au@Ag NPs were aggregated on the surface of
the larger Au@Ag NPs, also aggregated with each other in the W/O ME
system, and further reached a more thermodynamically stable state.
Thus, the size distribution at 12.08 nm due to free diffused smaller
Au@Ag NPs disappeared, new size distribution at 6.53 nm appeared via
the aggregation of the free smaller Au@Ag NPs with each other, and
the strong size distribution at 89.18 nm increased to 96.08 nm via
the aggregation of the free smaller Au@Ag NPs on the surface of the
larger Au@Ag NPs from the first stage to the second stage of the Ostwald
ripening process.

The fourth step of the process is denoted
as intraparticle coupling
growth as shown in Scheme 1d. In the intraparticle coupling growth process within 30–35
min, there was a narrow size distribution with a slight increase in
the average Dh of the particles with respect
to the Oswald ripening process from 6.53 to 8.79 nm and 96.08 to 102.34
nm as shown in Scheme 1d. This slight increase in the average Dh indicated that the particles underwent intraparticle coupling. It
also corroborated that the single ME reactant addition scheme favored
the intraparticle coupling growth and thus escalated the formation
of stable and uniform Au@Ag core@shell NPs.

The fifth and last
step is denoted as the steric stabilization
as shown in Scheme 1e. The growth and stabilization of the synthesized Au@Ag core@shell
NPs were observed within 3 h. After 3 h of the growth reaction, there
was only one strong size distribution at around 130.94 nm as shown
in Scheme 1e. The disappearance
of the smaller particles and the increase in the average Dh of the larger particles from 102.34 to 130.94 nm indicate
that the smaller particles aggregate with the larger particles. When
the smaller and larger particles along with the reverse micelles approached
each other, the particles underwent random collision, exchange, and
interaction. Using the concept of entropic stabilization theory, it
is assumed that the second surface of the smaller particles approaching
the surface of the larger particles is impenetrable. Thus, the particles
present in the interaction lose configurational entropy. This reduction
in entropy increases the change in the Gibbs free energy ΔG by producing the net effect of repulsion between the particles.
If the change in the Gibbs free energy is positive, stabilization
results, and if the change is negative, aggregation and precipitation
take place. The size distribution plot as depicted in Scheme 1e indicated that the W/O ME
favored the reduction in entropy and increased the change in the Gibbs
free energy and thus prevented the particles from further reaction
through the coagulation process. This integration is termed as steric
stabilization of the particles.38,63

Probable Mechanism for
the Formation of Au@Ag Core@Shell NPs
via Electron Transition Phenomenon
The reaction mechanism
for the reduction process of the [AuCl4]− species to metallic Au NPs is investigated in some previous reports,
but the appropriate formation mechanism is little understood.55,66−76 An attempt has been made here to illustrate the chemical stability
of Au@Ag NPs using the unique electron transition phenomenon between
the Au core and Ag shell.55

Au NPs
were generated from [AuCl4]− {Au3+} precursor reduction through a stepwise mechanism.66,67,70,72 The formulation mechanism of metallic Au NPs is divided into three
representative stages: reduction–nucleation, disproportion,
and association as illustrated in Scheme S3. The initial stage was the reduction of [AuCl4]− {Au3+} species to [AuCl3]− {Au2+} species as a means of the one-electron reduction–nucleation
process. After that, nucleation-dominant surface growth of the [AuCl3]− {Au2+} species took place.  In the second stage, a disproportionation
of [AuCl3]− {Au2+} species
was eventuated to produce [AuCl2]− {Au+} species. The reduction of [AuCl3]− {Au2+} species to [AuCl2]− {Au+} species is a slower step than that of [AuCl4]− {Au3+} species to [AuCl3]− {Au2+}. Therefore, the disproportionation
reaction is the rate-determining process in the formation of Au NPs.  The [AuCl2]− {Au1+} species are more stable
than [AuCl4]− {Au3+} species.
For this reason, [AuCl2]− {Au+} species were promptly reduced to
Au0 atoms.  In the subsequent third stage, the Au0 atoms started to
nucleate and after the autocatalytic surface
growth and aggregative particle growth process, Au NPs were produced.
The process including nucleation, autocatalytic surface growth, and
aggregative growth of the Au0 atoms is delineated as the
association process. In this stage, the growth of aggregative particles
dominantly occurred. The reduction of [AuCl2]− {Au1+} species to Au0 atoms is a slower process
than that of [AuCl4]− to [AuCl2]−, and the reduction of [AuCl2]− species to Au0 atoms and the association
of Au0 atoms to form Au NPs proceed concurrently. After
the association process, Au NPs are formed.

When the AgNO3 precursor solution was introduced into
the W/O ME system containing Au NPs, an intriguing electron transition
phenomenon occurred at the interface of the Au atoms and Ag ions as
depicted in Scheme 2.5,6,20 The Au atoms started
to form Au3+ ions by releasing three electrons stepwise,
and then the Ag+ ions accepted the electrons that were
released by Au atoms and form Ag atoms, which furthermore diffuse
to the surface of the Au NPs. This phenomenon is known as the galvanic
replacement reaction.

Scheme 2 Schematic Illustration of the Morphological
and Structural Changes
at Different Stages during the Formation of Au@Ag Core@Shell NPs
It is feasible to synthesize Au@Ag core@shell
NPs via the galvanic
replacement reaction, but there are some drawbacks of this process:
it is a very slow process, the formation of uniform Ag shell on the
Au surface is quite difficult, and this process has higher possibilities
to form a hollow nanostructured Au@Ag core@shell-type structure or
Au/Ag alloy-type structure rather than a Au@Ag core@shell-type structure.
Hence, to avoid the formation of hollow nanostructured NPs or alloy-type
NPs, NaBH4 was introduced into the Au NPs containing W/O
ME solution after addition of the AgNO3 precursor solution
so that the Ag+ reduced rapidly to Ag atoms and suppressed
the galvanic replacement reaction. Then, two reactions proceeded simultaneously.
One is, the  Ag+ ions reduced by NaBH4 into
Ag atoms and then the Ag atoms diffused on the surface of the Au NPs.
Moreover, the other one is the nonreacted Ag+ ions that
underwent galvanic replacement reaction and formed Ag atoms also diffused
on  the surface of the Au NPs, but this was a slow process. The
two reactions proceeded concurrently, and the Ag shell started to
form around the Au NPs.

The electronic and chemical properties
of the Ag shell are highly
enhanced by coupling of the Ag shell to the Au core due to a unique
charge transfer that increased the electron density within the Ag
shell, yielding a negative Ag oxidation state, Agδ−, which suppressed the galvanic replacement reaction at the Ag shell
surface and further increased the stability of the Ag shell against
oxidation.20 The Au core served as a platform
for regulating the overall particle size and also modified the electronic
characteristics of the deposited Ag shell.5,20 The
electron-rich Ag shell increased the stability of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs and restricted the formation of the Au–Ag alloy.6 The electronic interaction between Au and Ag
is counterintuitive since Au is traditionally thought of as “highly
electronegative”, which implies that Au will, in general, withdraw
electrons from Ag.5 However, realistically,
the electronic interaction between Au and Ag is quite complex. When
Au is the core material, Au gains the non-d orbital charge and loses
the d orbital charge, and this d orbital charge, that is lost by Au,
is gained by Ag and thus increases the electron density of the Ag
shell. This charge redistribution is essentially what causes the Ag
to gain enhanced stability properties in the Au@Ag core@shell NPs
system.5,20,22

Conclusions
In summary, the study demonstrates a facile and efficient approach
for the successful synthesis and stabilization of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs using the W/O ME technique via the single ME reactant addition
scheme. Detailed HRTEM and DLS analyses corroborated the uniform growth
of the Ag shell on the Au core inside the confined region of the reverse
micelles. Consequently, successful synthesis of the Au@Ag core@shell
NPs showed that the reverse micelles containing W/O ME system acted
as “true nanoreactors” for the synthesis of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs, as they provided a controlled and confined medium and controlled
the size of the synthesized particles. More importantly, the Au@Ag
core@shell NPs exhibited remarkably engrossing plasmonic properties.
Two resonance absorption bands were found existing in the absorption
spectrum of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs. The mode at lower wavelength
that is ascribed to the quadrupolar LSPR mode is a characteristic
of isolated Au@Ag core@shell NPs where the electric field energy is
concentrated at the interface between the core and shell metals. Additionally,
the mode at higher wavelength that is ascribed to the dipolar LSPR
mode is a characteristic of coupled Au@Ag core@shell NPs where the
electric field energy is concentrated at the outer surface of the
NPs.46 Likewise, the LSPR of the core and
shell can affect the overall LSPR of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs with
respect to electromagnetic field enhancement, which is also evident
from the deconvoluted spectrum of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs. The deconvoluted
absorption spectra impart a strong evidence of the formation of a
uniform Ag shell on the Au core and also provide a perspective of
how the size of the NPs can dominate the plasmonic properties. The
formation mechanism of Au@Ag core@shell NPs in W/O ME via the single
ME reactant addition scheme also contributes a better perspicacity
of the stepwise reduction, nucleation, and growth process. The unique
electron transfer phenomenon provides an intuitive understanding about
the electronic transition properties and the enhanced stability of
the particles. Bimetallic plasmonic Au@Ag core@shell NPs exhibit remarkably
engrossing plasmonic properties and thus it is still a challenging
as well as an enthralling field for the nanoscientists. These NPs
are expected to have applications in biosensors, photonics, biomedical
fields, optics, bioimaging, drug delivery systems, and optoelectronic
devices.1−4,24−33

Experimental Details
Materials
Triton X-100 (polyoxyethylene
octyl phenyl
ether), cyclohexane, hexanol-1, and sodium tetrachloroaurate(III)
dehydrate, (NaAuCl4·2H2O, >99%) were
purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich, Germany. Silver nitrate (AgNO3) was
obtained from Merck, and sodium borohydride (NaBH4, >98%)
was obtained from Acros Organics, Germany. All of the chemicals were
of analytical grade and were used as received without further purification.
All solutions were prepared using deionized (DI) water (conductivity:
>0.055 μS m–1 at 25.0 °C) from an
HPLC-grade
water purification system (BOECO, Germany).

Preparation of Water-in-Oil
Microemulsion
W/O ME was
prepared by mixing Triton X-100 (surfactant), cyclohexane (oil), hexanol-1
(cosurfactant), and DI water in the mass ratio of 1.5012:0.9929:0.3116:12.2305,
resulting in a molar W/O ratio of 7.21. The mixture was sonicated
for 30 min at ambient temperature to obtain a clear, thermodynamically
stable, isotropic liquid mixture as illustrated in Scheme S4. The composition of the prepared W/O ME is shown
in Table S1.

Synthesis of Au NPs
The W/O ME was prepared using the
composition as shown in Table S1. W/O ME
solution (4.00 mL) was taken in a glass vial. Furthermore, 10.40 μL
of the prepared aqueous solution of 53.8 × 10–3 M NaAuCl4 was injected into the W/O ME solution using
a micropipette. Then, the solution was vigorously stirred for 2 min
using the sonicator, and a light yellow solution was obtained, which
indicated the incorporation of NaAuCl4 solution into the
W/O ME. Then, 6.40 μL of 278.9 × 10–3 M NaBH4 solution was added into the same W/O ME using
a micropipette to reduce the Au3+ ions. The solution was
further vigorously stirred for 15 min using the sonicator. The color
of the solution changed from light yellow to flamingo pink, which
implied the formation of Au NPs.

Synthesis of Au@Ag Core@Shell
NPs
After preparation
of Au NPs, 5.30 μL of the prepared aqueous solution of 105 ×
10–3 M AgNO3 was injected into the same
W/O ME solution containing the Au NPs and vigorously stirred for 2
min using the sonicator. Subsequently, 4.20 μL of the 278.9
× 10–3 M NaBH4 solution was added
to this W/O ME solution as a reducing agent and the solution was further
vigorously stirred for 15 min. The color of the solution changed from
flamingo pink to violet, which indicated the formation of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs. The composition of the components used for the synthesis of Au@Ag
core@shell NPs is given in the Table S2.

Synthesis of Ag NPs
First, 5.30 μL of the prepared
aqueous solution of 105 × 10–3 M AgNO3 was injected into 4.00 mL of the W/O ME solution using a micropipette
and mixed together for 2 min using a sonicator. After that, 4.20 μL
of the 278.9 × 10–3 M NaBH4 solution
was added to the same W/O ME solution as a reducing agent and the
solution was further vigorously stirred for 10 min. The color of the
solution changed from transparent to bright yellow, which was indicative
of the formation of Ag NPs.

Characterization
The morphology,
size, and the core–shell
contrast of the synthesized Au@Ag core@shell NPs were investigated
using high-resolution transmission electron microscopic analysis (model:
JEOL JEM 2100 HRTEM). The HRTEM analysis of the sample was performed
by drop and dry method using a drop of the ME containing the NPs some
days after the synthesis. A few drops of the W/O ME solution containing
Au@Ag core@shell NPs were cast on a copper-coated grid to form a thin
layer and allowed to dry for a few minutes. HRTEM micrographs were
taken at different magnifications at 200 kV. The selected area electron
diffraction (SAED) patterns of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs were also
analyzed along with HRTEM analysis.

The energy dispersive X-ray
spectroscopic (EDS) analysis was carried out using the spectrometer
attached with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM,
model: JSM-7600F). A copper stab was used to cast the sample. The
EDS spectrum was taken by selecting several spots or a zone of a specific
particle. The accelerating voltage was 10 keV, and the counting rate
was varied from 1375 to 3343 cps.

The hydrodynamic diameter
(Dh) of the
synthesized NPs was determined using Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (ZEN3690,
Malvern instruments Ltd., U.K.) by employing the dynamic light scattering
technique. A He–Ne laser beam of wavelength 632.8 nm was used,
and the measurements were made at a fixed scattering angle of 90°.
A measuring glass cell of 10 mm diameter was used throughout the experiment.
The accuracy of the Dh determined by DLS
measurements was approximately ±2%.

The synthesized Au@Ag
core@shell NPs had been examined using X-ray
powder diffraction (model: D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) to study the
distribution of the elements. To prepare the sample for analysis,
ethanol was added into the Au@Ag core@shell NPs that were synthesized
using W/O ME as nanoreactors so that the samples can be easily separated
from the nanoreactors. The sample was washed using ethanol several
times so that the surfactant molecules can be totally removed from
the Au@Ag core@shell NPs. Then, these washed Au@Ag NPs were dried
at 80 °C for 30 min in an oven, and we got the powdered Au@Ag
NPs. The dried powdered Au@Ag NPs were analyzed using Cu Kα1 radiation (λ = 1.5406). The phase composition was analyzed
with a wide range of Bragg angles, 2θ ranging from 0 to 90°,
to determine the crystalline structure of the Au@Ag core@shell NPs.

UV–visible spectra of the synthesized NPs were measured
using a Spectro UV–visible double beam spectrophotometer (model:
UVD-500, Labomed) in the range of 200–900 nm to study the plasmonic
properties. Triton X-100-based microemulsion was used as the reference.

Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01897.Table S1, composition
and water-to-surfactant molar
ratio of TX-100; Table S2, composition of the components used for
the synthesis of Au@Ag core@shell NPs; Table S3, summary of FESEM–EDS
results; Table S4, parameters of Au@Ag core@shell NPs from size distribution
plot of Figure 2; Table S5, parameters of the deconvoluted absorption
spectrum of Au, Ag and Au@Ag core@shell NPs; Figure S1, EDS spectrum
of Au@Ag core@shell NPs; Figure S2, HRTEM images of Au@Ag core@shell
NPs indicating the stripe-like Moiré pattern; Figure S3,
SAED patterns of Au@Ag core@shell NPs; Figure S4, correlogram and
size distribution by volume of Au@Ag core@shell NPs; Figure S5, absorption
spectra of Triton X-100-based W/O ME; Figure S6, electric field and
charge distribution at the surface of NPs; Figure S7, deconvoluted
absorption spectrum of Au NPs; Figure S8, deconvoluted absorption
spectrum of Ag NPs and Scheme S1, representation of two Au@Ag core@shell
NPs into the reverse micelle system and their major interactions;
Scheme S2, schematic illustration of the formation of Au NPs in W/O
ME via single ME reactant addition scheme along with size distribution
plot; Scheme S3, morphological and structural changes at different
stages during the formation of Au NPs; Scheme S4, schematic illustration
of the formation of TX-100/cyclohexane/hexanol-1/deionized water-based
water-in-oil ME (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01897_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
All authors
have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the support under the subproject CPSF
231 of the Higher Education Quality Enhancement Project of the University
Grants Commission of Bangladesh under the Ministry of Education, Government
of Bangladesh.

Abbreviations
W/Owater-in-oil

MEmicroemulsion

NPsnanoparticles

HRTEMhigh-resolution transmission electron
microscope

SAEDselected area electron diffraction

LSPRlocalized surface plasmon resonance
==== Refs
References
Seo E. ; Ko S. J. ; Min S. H. ; Kim J. Y. ; Kim B. S. 
Plasmonic
Transition via Interparticle Coupling of Au@Ag Core-Shell Nanostructures
Sheathed in Double Hydrophilic Block Copolymer for High-Performance
Polymer Solar Cell . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 4789 –4798 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b01591 .
Chang T.-H. ; Chang Y. ; Ko F. ; Liu F. 
Electroless Plating
Growth Au-Ag Core-Shell Nanoparticles for Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering . Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
2013 , 8 , 6889 –6899 .
Ma Y. ; Li W. ; Cho E. C. ; Li Z. ; Yu T. ; Zeng J. ; Xie Z. ; Xia Y. 
Au@Ag Core-Shell Nanocubes with Finely Tuned and Well-Controlled
Sizes, Shell Thicknesses, and Optical Properties . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 6725 –6734 . 10.1021/nn102237c .20964400 
Shore M. S. ; Wang J. ; Johnston-Peck A. C. ; Oldenburg A. L. ; Tracy J. B. 
Synthesis of Au(core)/Ag(shell) Nanoparticles
and Their
Conversion to AuAg Alloy Nanoparticles . Small 
2011 , 7 , 230 –234 . 10.1002/smll.201001138 .21213387 
Shankar C. ; Dao A. T. N. ; Singh P. ; Higashimine K. ; Mott D. M. ; Maenosono S. 
Chemical Stabilization of Gold Coated
by Silver Core–shell Nanoparticles via Electron Transfer . Nanotechnology 
2012 , 23 , 24570410.1088/0957-4484/23/24/245704 .22641370 
Mott D. M. ; Anh D. T. N. ; Singh P. ; Shankar C. ; Maenosono S. 
Electronic
Transfer as a Route to Increase the Chemical Stability in Gold and
Silver Core-Shell Nanoparticles . Adv. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
2012 , 185–186 , 14 –33 . 10.1016/j.cis.2012.08.007 .
Mott D. ; Thuy N. T. B. ; Aoki Y. ; Maenosono S. 
Aqueous Synthesis
and Characterization of Ag and Ag-Au Nanoparticles: Addressing Challenges
in Size, Monodispersity and Structure . Philos.
Trans. R. Soc., A 
2010 , 368 , 4275 –4292 . 10.1098/rsta.2010.0120 .
Cao Y. ; Jin R. ; Mirkin C. A. 
DNA-Modified
Core-Shell Ag/Au Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2001 , 123 , 7961 –7962 . 10.1021/ja011342n .11493092 
Taton T. A. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Letsinger R. L. 
Scanometric
DNA Array Detection with
Nanoparticle Probes . Science 
2000 , 289 , 1757 –1760 . 10.1126/science.289.5485.1757 .10976070 
Rosi N. L. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Nanostrucutres in Biodiagnostics . Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 105 , 1547 –1562 . 10.1021/cr030067f .15826019 
Mirkin C. A. ; Letsinger R. L. ; Mucic R. C. ; Storhoff J. J. 
A DNA-Based Method
for Rationally Assembling Nanoparticles into Macroscopic Materials . Nature 
1996 , 382 , 607 –609 . 10.1038/382607a0 .8757129 
Cui Y. ; Ren B. ; Yao J. L. ; Gu R. A. ; Tian Z. Q. 
Synthesis of AgcoreAushell Bimetallic Nanoparticles for Immunoassay
Based on Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 4002 –4006 . 10.1021/jp056203x .16509689 
Srnová-Šloufová I. ; Vlčková B. ; Bastl Z. ; Hasslett T. L. 
Bimetallic
(Ag)Au Nanoparticles Prepared by the Seed Growth Method: Two-Dimensional
Assembling, Characterization by Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis,
X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, and Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy,
and Proposed Mechanism of Growth . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 3407 –3415 . 10.1021/la0302605 .15875875 
Sun Y. ; Xia Y. 
Mechanistic Study on the Replacement Reaction between Silver Nanostructures
and Chloroauric Acid in Aqueous Medium . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 3892 –3901 . 10.1021/ja039734c .15038743 
Sun Y. ; Xia Y. 
Increased Sensitivity
of Surface Plasmon Resonance of Gold Nanoshells
Compared to that of Gold Solid Colloids in Response to Environmental
Changes . Anal. Chem. 
2002 , 74 , 5297 –5305 . 10.1021/ac0258352 .12403584 
Sun Y. ; Xia Y. 
Shape-Controlled Synthesis of Gold and Silver Nanoparticles . Science 
2002 , 298 , 2176 –2179 . 10.1126/science.1077229 .12481134 
Sun Y. ; Mayers B. T. ; Xia Y. 
Template-Engaged
Replacement Reaction:
A One Step Approach to the Large Scale Synthesis of Metal Nanostructures
with Hollow Interiors . Nano Lett. 
2002 , 2 , 481 –485 . 10.1021/nl025531v .
Bi Y. ; Hu H. ; Lu G. 
Highly Ordered Rectangular Silvernanowire Monolayers:
Water-Assisted Synthesis and Galvanic Replacement Reaction with HAuCl4 . Chem. Commun. 
2010 , 46 , 598 –600 . 10.1039/B911777F .
Pearson A. ; O’Mullane A. P. ; Bansal V. ; Bhargava S. K. 
Galvanic Replacement
Mediated Transformation of Ag Nanospheres into Dendritic Au–Ag
Nanostructures in the Ionic Liquid [BMIM][BF 4] . Chem. Commun. 
2010 , 46 , 731 –733 . 10.1039/B918866E .
Anh D. T. N. ; Singh P. ; Shankar C. ; Mott D. ; Maenosono S. 
Charge-Transfer-Induced
Suppression of Galvanic Replacement and Synthesis of (Au@Ag)@Au Double
Shell Nanoparticles for Highly Uniform, Robust and Sensitive Bioprobes . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2011 , 99 , 07310710.1063/1.3626031 .
Singh P. ; Thuy N. T. B. ; Aoki Y. ; Mott D. ; Maenosono S. 
Intensification
of Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering of Thiol-Containing Molecules
Using Ag@Au Core@shell Nanoparticles . J. Appl.
Phys. 
2011 , 109 , 09430110.1063/1.3579445 .
Tyson C. C. ; Bzowski A. ; Kristof P. ; Kuhn M. ; Sammynaiken R. ; Sham T. K. 
Charge Redistribution in Au-Ag Alloys from a Local
Perspective . Phys. Rev. B 
1992 , 45 , 8924 –8928 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.45.8924 .
Yang Y. ; Gong X. ; Zeng H. ; Zhang L. ; Zhang X. ; Zou C. ; Huang S. 
Combination of Digestive
Ripening and Seeding Growth
as a Generalized Route for Precisely Controlling Size of Monodispersed
Noble Monometallic, Shell Thickness of Core-Shell and Composition
of Alloy Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 256 –264 . 10.1021/jp909065y .
Samal A. K. ; Polavarapu L. ; Rodal-Cedeira S. ; Liz-Marzán L. M. ; Pérez-Juste J. ; Pastoriza-Santos I. 
Size Tunable Au@Ag Core-Shell Nanoparticles:
Synthesis and Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Properties . Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 15076 –15082 . 10.1021/la403707j .24261458 
Guha S. ; Roy S. ; Banerjee A. 
Fluorescent
Au@Ag Core-Shell Nanoparticles with Controlled
Shell Thickness and HgII Sensing . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 13198 –13205 . 10.1021/la203077z .21913719 
Pyne S. ; Sarkar P. ; Basu S. ; Sahoo G. P. ; Bhui D. K. ; Bar H. ; Misra A. 
Synthesis
and Photo Physical Properties of Au @ Ag
(Core @ Shell) Nanoparticles Disperse in Poly Vinyl Alcohol Matrix . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2011 , 13 , 1759 –1767 . 10.1007/s11051-010-9955-9 .
Rodríguez-González B. ; Burrows A. ; Watanabe M. ; Kiely C. J. ; Liz Marzán L. M. 
Multishell
Bimetallic AuAg Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Structure and Optical Properties . J. Mater. Chem. 
2005 , 15 , 1755 –1759 . 10.1039/b500556f .
Tsao Y. ; Rej S. ; Chiu C. ; Huang M. H. 
Aqueous Phase Synthesis of Au –
Ag Core – Shell Nanocrystals with Tunable Shapes and Their
Optical and Catalytic Properties . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 396 –404 . 10.1021/ja410663g .24341355 
Haldar K. K. ; Kundu S. ; Patra A. 
Core-Size-Dependent
Catalytic Properties
of Bimetallic Au/Ag Core-Shell Nanoparticles . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 21946 –21953 . 10.1021/am507391d .25456348 
Lee H. ; Hong S. ; Lee J. ; Suh Y. D. ; Kwon J. ; Moon H. ; Kim H. ; Yeo J. ; Ko S. H. 
Highly
Stretchable and Transparent Supercapacitor by Ag-Au Core-Shell Nanowire
Network with High Electrochemical Stability . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 15449 –15458 . 10.1021/acsami.6b04364 .27285849 
Li Y. ; Qi W. ; Huang B. ; Ji W. ; Wang M. 
Size- and Composition-Dependent
Structural Stability of Core – Shell and Alloy Pd –
Pt and Au – Ag Nanoparticles . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 15394 –15401 . 10.1021/jp404422y .
Park G. ; Lee C. ; Seo D. ; Song H. 
Full-Color Tuning of Surface Plasmon
Resonance by Compositional Variation of Au@Ag Core-Shell Nanocubes
with Sulfides . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 9003 –9009 . 10.1021/la300154x .22304325 
Cha S. K. ; Mun J. H. ; Chang T. ; Kim S. Y. ; Kim J. Y. ; Jin H. M. ; Lee J. Y. ; Shin J. ; Kim K. H. ; Kim S. O. 
Au-Ag Core-Shell Nanoparticle Array by Block Copolymer
Lithography for Synergistic Broadband Plasmonic Properties . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 5536 –5543 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b01641 .25893844 
a Rahman A. ; Rahman M. M. ; Mollah M. Y. A. ; Susan M. A. B. H. 
Dynamic Percolation and Swollen Behavior
of Nanodroplets in 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium Trifluoromethanesulfonate/Triton
X-100/ Cyclohexane Microemulsions . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2016 , 120 , 6995 –7002 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b04763 .27355977  b Haque M. A. ; Rahman M. M. ; Susan M. A. B. H. 
Electrochemical
Behavior of Anthraquinone in Reverse Micelles and Microemulsions of
Cetyltrimethylammonium Bromide . J. Solution
Chem. 
2012 , 41 , 447 –457 . 10.1007/s10953-012-9810-y . c Sultana S. ; Saha S. ; Islam M. M. ; Rahman M. M. ; Mollah M. Y. A. ; Susan M. A. B. H. 
Electrodeposition of Nickel from
Reverse Micellar Solutions of Cetyltrimethylammonium Bromide . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2013 , 160 , D524 –D529 . 10.1149/2.039311jes .
Sanchez-Dominguez M. ; Aubery C. ; Solans C.  New
Trends on the Synthesis of Inorganic Nanoparticles Using Microemulsions
as Confined Reaction Media . In Smart Nanoparticles
Technology ; Hashim A.  , Ed.; InTech : Rijeka,
Croatia , 2012 .
a Satter S. S. ; Hoque M. ; Rahman M. M. ; Mollah M. Y. A. ; Susan M. A. B. H. 
An approach towards the synthesis
and characterization of ZnO@Ag core@shell nanoparticles in water-in-oil
microemulsion . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 20612 –20615 . 10.1039/C4RA01046A . b Jahan S. A. ; Mollah M. Y. A. ; Ahmed S. ; Susan M. A. B. H. 
Nano-Hydroxyapatite
Prepared from Eggshell-Derived Calcium-Precursor using Reverse Microemulsions
as Nanoreactor . Mater. Today: Proc. 
2017 , 4 , 5497 –5506 . 10.1016/j.matpr.2017.06.005 . c Hossain S. ; Fatema U. K. ; Mollah M. Y. A. ; Rahman M. M. ; Susan M. A. B. H. 
Microemulsions as Nanoreactors for Preparation of Nanoparticles
with Antibacterial Activity . J. Bangladesh Chem.
Soc. 
2012 , 25 , 71 –79 . 10.3329/jbcs.v25i1.11777 . d Fatema U. K. ; Rahman M. M. ; Islam M. R. ; Mollah M. Y. A. ; Susan M. A. B. H. 
Silver/poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposite
film prepared using water in oil microemulsion for antibacterial applications . J Colloid Interface Sci. 
2018 , 514 , 648 –655 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2017.12.084 .29310094 e Satter S. S. ; Hoque M. ; Rahman M. M. ; Mollah M. Y. A. ; Susan M. A. B. H.  Microemulsions
as Template for Synthesizing Nanoparticles with Tunable Antibacterial
and Optical Properties . In Innovations in
Nanomaterials ; Chowdhury A. N. , Shapter J. , Imran A. B.  , Eds.; Nova Science Publishers : New York , 2015 ; pp 195 –228 .
Capek I. 
Preparation
of Metal Nanoparticles in Water-in-Oil (W/O) Microemulsions . Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2004 , 110 , 49 –74 . 10.1016/j.cis.2004.02.003 .15142823 
Husein M. M. ; Nassar N. N. 
Nanoparticle Preparation Using the
Single Microemulsions
Scheme . Curr. Nanosci. 
2008 , 4 , 370 –380 . 10.2174/157341308786306116 .
Eastoe J. 
Microemulsions . Surfactant Chem. 
2009 , 59 –95 .
Synthesis of Nanoparticles:
Microemulsion Method . 2010 , 98 –117 .
Kuladeep R. ; Jyothi L. ; Alee K. S. ; Deepak K. L. N. ; Rao D. N. 
Laser-Assisted
Synthesis of Au-Ag Alloy Nanoparticles with Tunable Surface Plasmon
Resonance Frequency . Opt. Mater. Express 
2012 , 2 , 161 10.1364/OME.2.000161 .
Link S. ; Wang Z. L. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Alloy Formation of Gold–Silver
Nanoparticles and the Dependence of the Plasmon Absorption on Their
Composition . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 3529 –3533 . 10.1021/jp990387w .
Tang X. ; Tsuji M. 
Synthesis of Au Core Au/Ag Alloy Shell Nanoparticles Using Branched
Au Nanoparticles as Seeds . CrystEngComm 
2011 , 13 , 72 –76 . 10.1039/C0CE00018C .
Xu W. ; Niu J. ; Shang H. ; Shen H. ; Ma L. ; Li L. S. 
Facile
Synthesis of AgAu Alloy and Core/shell Nanocrystals by Using Ag Nanocrystals
as Seeds . Gold Bull. 
2013 , 46 , 19 –23 . 10.1007/s13404-012-0077-2 .
Csapó E. ; Oszkó A. ; Varga E. ; Juhász Á. ; Buzás N. ; Korösi L. ; Majzik A. ; Dékány I. 
Synthesis
and Characterization of Ag/Au Alloy and core(Ag)-shell(Au) Nanoparticles . Colloids Surf., A 
2012 , 415 , 281 –287 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2012.09.005 .
Ibáñez M. ; Zamani R. ; Gorsse S. ; Fan J. ; Ortega S. ; Cadavid D. ; Morante J. R. ; Arbiol J. ; Cabot A. 
Core-Shell
Nanoparticles As Building Blocks for the Bottom-Up Production of Functional
Nanocomposites: PbTe-PbS Thermoelectric Properties . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 2573 –2586 . 10.1021/nn305971v .23448184 
Wang L. ; Wang X. ; Luo J. ; Wanjala B. N. ; Wang C. ; Chernova N. A. ; Engelhard M. H. ; Liu Y. ; Bae I. ; Zhong C. 
Core - Shell-Structured Magnetic
Ternary Nanocubes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 17686 –17689 . 10.1021/ja1091084 .21121606 
Tsuji M. ; Yamaguchi D. ; Matsunaga M. ; Alam M. J. 
Epitaxial Growth
of Au@Cu Core-Shell Nanocrystals Prepared Using the PVP-Assisted Polyol
Reduction Method . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2010 , 10 , 5129 –5135 . 10.1021/cg100860d .
Srnová-Šloufová I. ; Lednický F. ; Gemperle A. A. ; Gemperlová J. ; Srnova-Sloufova I. ; Lednicky F. ; Gemperlova J. 
Core-Shell
(Ag)Au Bimetallic Nanoparticles: Analysis of Transmission Electron
Microscopy Images . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 9928 –9935 . 10.1021/la0009588 .
Bonifacio C. S. ; Carenco S. ; Wu C. H. ; House S. D. ; Bluhm H. ; Yang J. C. 
Thermal Stability of Core-Shell Nanoparticles: A Combined
in Situ Study by XPS and TEM . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 6960 –6968 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b01862 .
a Lim J. ; Yeap S. ; Che H. ; Low S. 
Characterization of Magnetic Nanoparticle by Dynamic Light Scattering . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2013 , 8 , 381 10.1186/1556-276X-8-381 .24011350  b Jose D. ; Jagirdar B. R. 
Ag @ Pd Core-Shell Nanoparticles . Indian J. Chem. 
2011 , 50A , 1308 –1317 . c Godipurge S. S. ; Yallappa S. ; Biradar N. J. ; Biradar J. S. ; Dhananjaya B. L. ; Hegde G. ; Jagadish K. ; Hegde G. 
Green Strategy for
the Facile Synthesis of Biocompatible Au, Ag and Au–Ag Alloy
Nanoparticles Using Aerial Parts of R. Hypocrateriformis Extract and
Their Biological Evaluation . Enzyme Microb.
Technol. 
2016 , 95 , 174 –184 . 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2016.08.006 .27866613  d Csapó E. ; Oszkó A. ; Varga E. ; Juhász Á. ; Buzás N. ; Korösi L. ; Majzik A. ; Dékány I. 
Synthesis
and Characterization of Ag/Au Alloy and core(Ag)-shell(Au) Nanoparticles . Colloids Surf., A 
2012 , 415 , 281 –287 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2012.09.005 . e Sun D. ; Zhang G. ; Huang J. ; Wang H. ; Li Q. 
Plant-Mediated Fabrication and Surface Enhanced Raman Property of
Flower-like Au@Pd Nanoparticles . Materials 
2014 , 7 , 1360 –1369 . 10.3390/ma7021360 .28788518  f Zhang G. ; Du M. ; Li Q. ; Li X. ; Huang J. ; Jiang X. ; Sun D. 
Green Synthesis of
Au–Ag Alloy Nanoparticles Using Cacumen Platycladi Extract . RSC Adv. 
2013 , 3 , 1878 –1884 . 10.1039/C2RA22442A . g Rahim M. A. ; Nam B. ; Choi W. S. ; Lee H. J. ; Jeon I. C. 
Polyelectrolyte Complex Particle-Based Multifunctional
Freestanding Films Containing Highly Loaded Bimetallic Particles . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 11831 10.1039/c1jm11818h . h Westsson E. ; Koper G. J. M. 
How to Determine the Core-Shell Nature
in Bimetallic Catalyst Particles? . Catalysts 
2014 , 4 , 375 –396 . 10.3390/catal4040375 . i Sapkota K. ; Han S. S. 
Novel Environmentally Sustainable
Synthesis of Au-Ag@AgCl Nanocomposites and Their Application as an
Efficient and Recyclable Catalyst for Quinoline Synthesis . New J. Chem. 
2017 , 41 , 5395 –5402 . 10.1039/C7NJ00764G . j Liu J. ; Wu Z. ; He Q. ; Tian Q. ; Wu W. ; Xiao X. 
Catalytic Application and Mechanism Studies of Argentic
Chloride Coupled Ag / Au Hollow Heterostructures: Considering the
Interface Between Ag / Au Bimetals . Nanoscale
Res Lett. 
2019 , 14 , 35 10.1186/s11671-019-2862-9 .30684022 
Zhang C. ; Chen B. Q. ; Li Z. Y. ; Xia Y. ; Chen Y. G. 
Surface
Plasmon Resonance in Bimetallic Core–Shell Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 16836 –16845 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b04232 .
Bastús N. G. ; Piella J. ; Puntes V. 
Quantifying the Sensitivity of Multipolar
(Dipolar, Quadrupolar, and Octupolar) Surface Plasmon Resonances in
Silver Nanoparticles: The Effect of Size, Composition, and Surface
Coating . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 290 –300 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b03859 .26649600 
Yuan P. ; Ma R. ; Gao N. ; Garai M. ; Xu Q. 
Plasmon Coupling Enhanced
Two-Photon Photoluminescence of Au@Ag Core-shell Nanoparticles and
Applications in Nuclease Assay . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 10233 –10239 . 10.1039/C5NR01409C .25990464 
Harada M. ; Kizaki S. 
Formation Mechanism of Gold Nanoparticles Synthesized
by Photoreduction in Aqueous Ethanol Solutions of Polymers Using In
Situ Quick Scanning X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure and Small-Angle
X-Ray Scattering . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2016 , 16 , 1200 –1212 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b01168 .
Lee J. H. ; You M. H. ; Kim G. H. ; Nam J. M. 
Plasmonic
Nanosnowmen
with a Conductive Junction as Highly Tunable Nanoantenna Structures
and Sensitive, Quantitative and Multiplexable Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Probes . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 6217 –6225 . 10.1021/nl502541u .25275930 
Romero I. ; Aizpurua J. ; Bryant G. W. ; García De Abajo F. J. 
Plasmons
in Nearly Touching Metallic Nanoparticles: Singular Response in the
Limit of Touching Dimers . Opt. Express 
2006 , 14 , 9988 –9999 . 10.1364/OE.14.009988 .19529393 
Lee H. ; Lee J. ; Jin S. M. ; Suh Y. D. ; Nam J. 
Single-Molecule
and
Single-Particle-Based Correlation Studies between Localized Surface
Plasmons of Dimeric Nanostructures with ∼1-Nm Gap and Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 6113 –6121 . 10.1021/nl4034297 .24256433 
Lassiter J. B. ; Aizpurua J. ; Hernandez L. I. ; Brandl D. W. ; Romero I. ; Lal S. ; Hafner J. H. ; Nordlander P. ; Hales N. R. 
Close Encounters
between Two Nanoshells . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 1212 –1218 . 10.1021/nl080271o .18345644 
Atay T. ; Song J. H. ; Nurmikko A. V. 
Strongly Interacting Plasmon Nanoparticle
Pairs: From Dipole-Dipole Interaction to Conductively Coupled Regime . Nano Lett. 
2004 , 4 , 1627 –1631 . 10.1021/nl049215n .
Voliani V.  Behaviour of Gold
Nanoparticles . In Update on Gold Nanoparticles ; Smithers Rapra Publishing : Shrewsbury, United Kingdom , 2013 .
Garcia M. A. 
Surface
plasmons in metallic nanoparticles: fundamentals and applications . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2011 , 44 , 28300110.1088/0022-3727/44/28/283001 .
Thanh N. T. K. ; Maclean N. ; Mahiddine S. 
Mechanisms
of Nucleation and Growth
of Nanoparticles in Solution . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 7610 –7630 . 10.1021/cr400544s .25003956 
Mer V. K. L. 
Nucleation
in Phase Transitions . Ind. Eng. Chem. 
1952 , 44 , 1270 –1277 . 10.1021/ie50510a027 .
LaMer V. K. ; Dinegar R. H. 
Theory, Production and Mechanism
of Formation of Monodispersed
Hydrosols . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1950 , 72 , 4847 –4854 . 10.1021/ja01167a001 .
Quinn M. ; Mills G. 
Surface-Mediated Formation of Gold Particles in Basic Methanol . J. Phys. Chem. A 
1994 , 98 , 9840 –9844 . 10.1021/j100090a018 .
Gachard E. ; Remita H. ; Khatouri J. ; Keita B. ; Nadjo L. ; Belloni J. 
Radiation-Induced and Chemical Formation of Gold Clusters . New J. Chem. 
1998 , 22 , 1257 –1265 . 10.1039/a804445g .
Harada M. ; Einaga H. 
In Situ XAFS Studies
of Au Particle Formation by Photoreduction
in Polymer Solutions.Gold Nanoparticle Formation from Photochemical
Reduction of Au3+ by Continuous Excitation in Colloidal
Solutions.A Proposed Molecular Mechanism . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 6536 –6543 . 10.1021/la0701071 .17497903 
Eustis S. ; Hsu H. Y. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Gold Nanoparticle Formation from
Photochemical Reduction of Au3+ by Continuous Excitation
in Colloidal Solutions.A Proposed Molecular Mechanism . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 4811 –4815 . 10.1021/jp0441588 .16863133 
Dey G. R. ; El Omar A. K. ; Jacob J. A. ; Mostafavi M. ; Belloni J. 
Mechanism of Trivalent Gold Reduction
and Reactivity
of Transient Divalent and Monovalent Gold Ions Studied by Gamma and
Pulse Radiolysis . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2011 , 115 , 383 –391 . 10.1021/jp1096597 .21174474 
McGilvray K. L. ; Granger J. ; Correia M. ; Banks J. T. ; Scaiano J. C. 
Opportunistic
Use of Tetrachloroaurate Photolysis in the Generation of Reductive
Species for the Production of Gold Nanostructures . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 11914 –11918 . 10.1039/c1cp20308h .21625686 
Fong Y. Y. ; Visser B. R. ; Gascooke J. R. ; Cowie B. C. C. ; Thomsen L. ; Metha G. F. ; Buntine M. A. ; Harris H. H. 
Photoreduction Kinetics
of Sodium Tetrachloroaurate under Synchrotron Soft X-Ray Exposure . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 8099 –8104 . 10.1021/la200463k .21650198 
Watzky M. A. ; Finke R. G. 
Transition Metal
Nanocluster Formation Kinetic and
Mechanistic Studies. A New Mechanism When Hydrogen Is the Reductant:
Slow, Continuous Nucleation and Fast Autocatalytic Surface Growth . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 10382 –10400 . 10.1021/ja9705102 .
Watzky M.
A. ; Finney E. E. ; Finke R. G. 
Transition-Metal Nanocluster Size
vs Formation Time and the Catalytically Effective Nucleus Number:
A Mechanism-Based Treatment . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 11959 –11969 . 10.1021/ja8017412 .18707099 
Malone K. ; Weaver S. ; Taylor D. ; Cheng H. ; Sarathy K. P. ; Mills G. 
Formation Kinetics of Small Gold Crystallites in Photoresponsive
Polymer Gels . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 7422 –7431 . 10.1021/jp020176i .
Kwolek P. ; Wojnicki M. 
The Kinetic Study of Photoreduction of Tetrachloroaurate
Acid by Methanol in Acidic Media . J. Photochem.
Photobiol., A 
2014 , 286 , 47 –54 . 10.1016/j.jphotochem.2014.04.018 .

