
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002353410.1021/acsomega.7b01463EditorialThe Chemical Sciences and Health: Strengthening Synergies
at a Vital Interface Matlin Stephen A. *†‡Mehta Goverdhan ‡§Krief Alain ‡‡∥⊥Hopf Henning ‡#† Institute
of Global Health Innovation, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K.‡ International
Organization for Chemical Sciences in Development, 61 rue de Bruxelles, B-5000 Namur, Belgium§ School
of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India∥ Chemistry
Department, Namur University, B-5000 Namur, Belgium⊥ HEJ
Research Institute, University of Karachi, Karachi 75270, Pakistan# Institute
of Organic Chemistry, Technische Universität
Braunschweig, D-38106 Braunschweig, Germany* E-mail: s.matlin@imperial.ac.uk.17 10 2017 31 10 2017 2 10 6819 6821 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.The indispensable
contributions to health made by the chemical
sciences have become increasingly constrained by three systemic factors.
These involve fragmentations: in the way that the chemicals sciences
are structured, practiced, and inter-related to aspects of health;
in the combination of public and private efforts delivering medicinal
products; and in the regulatory systems which oversee health-related
issues across health, food, and the environment. Interlinked systemic
reforms are advocated, involving (1) recontextualization of the chemistry/health
interface through creating a recognized field of “the chemical
sciences and health”; (2) determined and comprehensive efforts,
by countries wishing to retain or strengthen their pharmaceutical
development capacities, to reinforce their education, research, and
innovation eco-systems; and (3) adoption of an integrated approach
to the regulation of pharmaceuticals, food, and the environment.

document-id-old-9ao7b01463document-id-new-14ao-2017-01463fccc-price
==== Body
Meeting 21st Century Health Challenges Requires the Chemical
Sciences to Do Even More
The chemical sciences and health
have long shared a productive
and coevolutionary partnership. This has accelerated in the last two
centuries, through creative synergy between the chemical and biological
sciences, to dramatically enhance life expectancy and quality. For
example, chemistry has been central to developing safe, effective
medicines for communicable diseases and noncommunicable diseases (NCDs),
as well as agents for diagnostics and medical imaging and materials
for prosthetics and medical devices.

The contributions that
the chemical sciences can make to better
health are not limited to their medically related roles. They also
encompass helping to meet all the UN Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs),1 many of which have an impact directly
or indirectly on health.2 Beyond the specific
targets embodied in the SDGs, there are a number of current and emerging
global threats to health, and effective synergistic responses from
the chemical and biological sciences will be central to overcoming
them. These include meeting the challenges of emerging and re-emerging
communicable diseases and the growing incidences of NCDs and age-related
physical and mental degenerative disorders; mitigation of and adaptation
to climate change; and finding new approaches to filling the needs
of an expanding global population, including requirements for improved
agricultural production, clean water, and sanitation and better methods
of family planning for women and men.

The chemical sciences
underpin health through multiple channels
(Figure 1): contributing
education, research, and practice in “the chemical sciences
for health”; supporting pharmaceutical and other health science
industries and also food, agriculture, and fisheries; and providing
the basis for monitoring, protection, preservation, and cleaning of
the environment. There are regulatory systems overseeing these vital
areas for our overall health.

Figure 1 Chemical sciences support health through multiple
channels.

Recognizing and Overcoming Systemic Barriers
The oncoming health and sustainable development challenges demand
that the chemical sciences continue and increase their capacity to
contribute to solutions. However, despite the history of outstanding
successes, in the future chemistry’s role in delivering solutions
is likely to be significantly less than optimal. In particular, there
are three critical fragmentations that, as indicated in Figure 1, in our view necessitate systemic
responses.

1 Compartmentation in the Science
There
are disconnections in the chemical sciences that need to be bridged,
at both intra- and interdisciplinary levels.

Historically, the
subdivision of chemistry into analytical, inorganic, organic, and
physical branches has created internal silos of organizational structuring,
teaching, and funding, with limited dialogue between them. Furthermore,
new subdisciplines have been emerging at the interfaces with adjacent
sciences, resulting in organizational units, modules, and degrees
related to areas such as medicinal/pharmaceutical chemistry, clinical
chemistry, biopharmaceutical analysis, biomaterials, nutrition, medical
imaging, and environmental analytical chemistry. While focus can be
justified by the need for selectivity within an ever-expanding academic
discipline, it has disadvantageous implications for teaching, research,
and application which need to be overcome.3,4

A unifying framework is needed, an overall vision of the multitudinous
roles and capacities of the chemical sciences in achieving better
health, as represented in the system overview presented in Figure 1. A solution is to
create a recognized subject of “the chemical sciences and health”,
based on new, integrated education programs. These will provide the
intellectual underpinning for trained graduates and researchers with
a solid, broad platform of knowledge and skills to engage in cross-disciplinary
work applied to health. They will promote convergence of diverse knowledge
streams in the chemical sciences and harness these convergences to
enhance the innovative contributions of the chemical sciences.

2 Disintegration in the Pharmaceutical Industry
Since
the 19th century, industry has played the central role in
bringing new pharmaceuticals into clinical use, picking up initial
leads from basic research conducted either in-house or in academia
and taking candidate compounds forward through lead optimization,
development, toxicology, formulation, and preclinical testing into
clinical trials, registration, production, and distribution. However,
the pharmaceutical industry in high-income countries has undergone
a profound metamorphosis during the last 2–3 decades, paradoxically
involving a combination of condensation and fragmentation. Mergers
and acquisitions have enabled very large companies to acquire the
high-earning in-patent drugs of smaller ones to sustain their profitable
portfolios, while leading to a substantial reduction in the number
of large players. Moreover, these have increasingly dismantled their
traditional vertical integration, divesting themselves of R&D
functions in favor of purchasing existing, in-patent products or highly
promising candidates for late-stage development as “blockbuster”
drugs. In the new, horizontal disintegrated model, it has been left
to others (often “biotech” start-ups originating from
university groups) to do the early stage lead discovery and development
to create the promising candidates.5 Often,
the start-up is “absorbed” along with its promising
invention.

Simultaneously, there has been major growth of the
pharmaceutical industry in India and China. While this was initially
focused on low-cost generics, in both emerging economies there are
increasing efforts to develop innovation and create new intellectual
property.6,7

Some analysts have argued that metamorphosis
in the pharmaceutical
industry has had mixed results,8 while
others consider that it has not been to the advantage of people’s
health,9 since it led to a decline in the
numbers of new drug entities coming into use annually and a narrowing
of focus on blockbuster drugs while middle-sized markets, “orphan
diseases” and “diseases of the poor”, were neglected.
Furthermore, the shift in job opportunities in the relevant sciences
that will accompany the geographic relocation of pharmaceutical R&D
to South and East Asia10,11 may decrease the popularity of
these sciences in Europe and North America, weakening their traditionally
strong capacities and intellectual leadership in research for health.

The solution to this challenge will not be straightforward, as
it is driven by the way that economic reward and innovation systems
function at national and global levels. If the high-income countries
with traditionally strong pharmaceutical development capacities wish
to retain their industries and leadership roles in the field, they
will need to bolster the critical systemic elements that are weak
or declining. This must include ensuring well-designed education programs
relating to the chemical sciences that create a pool of talent with
skills honed in conducting interdisciplinary and trans-disciplinary
research; well-funded academic centers that can create new leads to
health products; innovation hubs that foster early stage drug development;
and national innovation systems and innovation financing that encourage
the growth of independent middle-size companies that have options
beyond buy out when they create promising candidate products and high-value
new licensed drugs. A focus on developing “the chemical sciences
and health” can help provide the guiding light for such a movement.

3 Disconnections in the Regulatory Sector
There
is no global, comprehensive approach to the regulation of drugs,
food, and the environment, although they represent three overlapping
systems with many shared issues and problems. The need for more integrated
approaches12 has been demonstrated by many
recent concerns over problems such as the widespread contamination
of land and water with pharmaceuticals13 and the emergence of antimicrobial resistance to antibiotics.14

One way forward could be to bring together
the regulation of drugs, food, and the environment under a comprehensive
and integrated umbrella—a World Organization for the Regulation
of Food, Environment and Drugs (WORFED)—taking an integrated,
comprehensive global approach to the regulation of the three sectors.
The chemical sciences would play central roles in enabling such an
organization to carry out its functions, informing the standards set
and their legally enforceable basis, and providing the tools to undertake
the inspections necessary to underpin global regulations.

Conclusion
The chemical sciences have a central role to play in ensuring better
health for everyone. To achieve this role optimally, it is argued
that three critical fragmentations need to be addressed. First, greater
integration is needed within the relevant science disciplines, with
the development of a recognized field of “the chemical sciences
and health”. Second, a systemic effort by countries is needed
to counter the negative effects of disintegration in the industrial
pharmaceutical sector, through attention to the structural and financial
incentives for innovation. Third, a new approach is needed to integration
in the regulatory systems governing food, agriculture, and drugs.
The most effective approach will be one that simultaneously tackles
all three areas.

Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the authors and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.

Acknowledgments
We thank the International
Organization for Chemical Sciences
in Development for supporting a workshop hosted in the school of Chemistry,
University of Hyderabad, India during which this article was prepared.
We thank the German Chemical Society and Syngenta for financial support.
==== Refs
References
UN . Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development . Resolution
adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015. New York: UN
document A/70/L.1.
Matlin S. A. ; Mehta G. ; Hopf H. ; Krief A. 
The role of chemistry
in inventing a sustainable future . Nat. Chem. 
2015 , 7 , 941 –943 . 10.1038/nchem.2389 .26587703 
Brazil R.  Disciplinary measures . Chemistry World ; February 2017 , pp 58 –59 .
Colón W. ; Chitnis P. ; Collins J. P. ; Hicks J. ; Chan T. ; Tornow J. S. 
Chemical biology
at the US National Science Foundation . Nat.
Chem. Biol. 
2008 , 4 , 511 –514 . 10.1038/nchembio0908-511 .18711373 
Cockburn I. M. 
The Changing
Structure Of The Pharmaceutical Industry . Health
Affairs 
2004 , 23 , 10 –22 . 10.1377/hlthaff.23.1.10 .
Zhang J. J.  China and India
in Global Drug R&D Outsourcing . Genetic
Eng. Biotechnol. News , published online 6 November 2012 .
2015
Global life sciences outlook: Adapting in an era of transformation ; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited , 2014 .
Grabowski H. ; Kyle M.  Mergers and alliances in pharmaceuticals:
effects on innovation and R&D productivity . In The Economics of Corporate Governance and Mergers ; Gugler K. , Yurtoglu B. B.  , Eds.; Edward Elgar : Cheltenham UK , 2008 ; pp 262 –287 .
Comanor W. S. ; Scherer F. M.  Mergers and Innovation
in the Pharmaceutical Industry ; Harvard University
John F Kennedy School of Government : Cambridge MA, USA . Regulatory Policy Program Woking
Paper RPP-2011–09, 2011 .
Brower V. 
Going global
in R&D . EMBO Rep. 
2004 , 5  (4 ), 333 –335 . 10.1038/sj.embor.7400135 .15060565 
Philippidis A.  Top
Eight Asia Biopharma Clusters 2016: Which Countries Are the East’s
Most Promising for Research and Development? Genet. Eng. Biotechnol. News , published online 30 May 2016 , 36 , 30 .
Lawrence M. 
Reflections
on Public Health Policy in the Food Regulatory System: Challenges,
and Opportunities for Nutrition and Food Law Experts to Collaborate . Deakin Law Rev. 
2014 , 14 , 397 –413 . 10.21153/dlr2009vol14no2art148 .
Gilbert N. 
Drug waste
harms fish: Discharges from pharmaceutical factories contaminate rivers
on three continents . Nature 
2011 , 476 , 265 10.1038/476265a .21850080 
Davies J. ; Davies D. 
Origins and Evolution of Antibiotic Resistance . Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 
2010 , 74 , 417 –433 . 10.1128/MMBR.00016-10 .20805405

