
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146022210.1021/acsomega.9b00736ArticleRevised Formulation of Fick’s,
Fourier’s,
and Newton’s Laws for Spatially Varying Linear Transport Coefficients Won You-Yeon *Ramkrishna Doraiswami Davidson School of Chemical
Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States* E-mail: yywon@ecn.purdue.edu.27 06 2019 30 06 2019 4 6 11215 11222 16 03 2019 17 06 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We argue that for situations involving
spatially varying linear
transport coefficients (diffusivities, thermal conductivities, and
viscosities), the original Fick’s, Fourier’s, and Newton’s
law equations should be modified to place the diffusivity, thermal
conductivity, and viscosity inside the derivative operator, that is,
in one-dimensional rectilinear situations, , , and . We present
simple derivations of these
formulas in which diffusive mass transfer, conductive heat transfer,
and molecular momentum transfer processes are described using lattice
random walk models. We also present simple examples demonstrating
how these modifications affect calculations.

document-id-old-9ao9b00736document-id-new-14ao-2019-007364ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Adolph Fick proposed in
18551 that in
a simple one-dimensional situation, the diffusive flux, say of species
A, is proportional to the concentration gradient of the species along
the system axis (the x-axis) (“Fick’s
first law”) 1  The proportionality factor D is what is called the
diffusion coefficient or diffusivity. From
this relationship, Fick also computed the rate of change of the concentration
of A by diffusion (“Fick’s second law” or “equation
of continuity for A”) 2  where D is assumed
to be
spatially “constant” and “dependent (only) upon
the nature of the substances”. In general situations, however,
the diffusivity is position-dependent because of the spatial variation
of, for instance, concentration or temperature and the dependence
of the diffusivity on these variables. A common approach to deal with
spatially varying diffusivity is to use the following modification
of eq 2 above 3  where use is still made of Fick’s first
law equation in its original form (eq 1); the only modification is that D is not factored out of the outer derivative.2 Recently, we proposed an argument that to exactly track spatial
changes in D, Fick’s first law equation must
also be generalized to the form3 4  which thus also gives a different equation
for Fick’s second law 5  When mass flows have components in all directions, eqs 4 and 5 should be expressed in the vectorial form, respectively, as 6  and 7  The correctness of eq 4 (or eq 6) is intuitively
obvious; eq 4 predicts
that even in the absence of a concentration
gradient, a diffusive flux of A arises if there exists a gradient
of diffusivity and also that in the absence of a net material flux
(j = 0), a spatial gradient of diffusivity results
in a spontaneous buildup of nonuniform concentrations of A (note that
these phenomena are not describable within the original Fick’s
law framework).3

As discussed in
ref (3), the above eq 4 can
be obtained using the lattice model description of diffusion.4 For the purpose of setting the basis for the
discussion to be presented in the present article, this derivation
is briefly repeated here. In this derivation, we consider a steady-state
situation described in Figure 1A, where a suspension of Brownian particles (molecules) (species
A) is contained in a tube. The concentration of this species varies
only along the tube axis (x-direction). For simplicity,
the three-dimensional (3D) space within the tube is pictured as being
divided into square lattice sites; each site of the lattice can hold
at most one molecule at a time and has a characteristic dimension
of λ. Under this setting, we model the diffusive motion of the
molecules to be a 3D random walk process.4 Specifically, we assume that each molecule steps to an adjacent
lattice site with a jump frequency of ν. As illustrated in Figure 1A, let us now consider
a plane of constant x between two adjacent lattice
layers. The magnitude of the flux of the molecules from lesser x to greater x across the plane (located
at x) and that of the flux from greater x to lesser x across the same plane can be calculated,
respectively, as 8  and 9  where c is the concentration
of A (e.g., in units of mass of molecules per unit volume), and the
one-sixth factor is introduced because in 3D space, a molecule can
move to one of the six nearest-neighbor sites with the equal probability
of 1/6. Therefore, the net mass flux of the molecules across the plane
located at x is given by 10  where the product  is the
diffusion coefficient (in lattice
units) for that location, i.e., . The resulting equation (eq 10) is the steady-state version of eq 4. This derivation has been
given in an earlier publication (in the Supporting Information of
ref (3)).

Figure 1 Molecular transport
of (A) mass, internal energy, and (B) y momentum
due to gradients of Dc, kT, and
μvy along the x-direction, respectively.

The realization of this generalized form of Fick’s
first
law equation raises two important questions. First, can (or even should)
this same argument be applied to Fourier’s law of heat conduction
and Newton’s law of viscosity, respectively, for situations
involving spatially varying thermal conductivities and viscosities?
The answer is intuitively obvious (yes) because as stated in Bird,
Stewart, Lightfoot, and Klingenberg (BSLK),2 “the molecular mechanisms responsible for the transport of
chemical species, energy and momentum are closely related (the same
molecular motions and interactions are responsible for diffusivity,
thermal conductivity and viscosity)”. The second question is:
In reality, how much difference would using, for instance, eq 5 instead of eq 3 (for solving mass transfer problems
involving position-dependent diffusivities) make to the result? Or,
alternatively put, what is the range in which the commonly used approximation
(eq 3, as opposed to
the more accurate equation, eq 5) is valid? In the context of these questions, the present
paper attempts to serve two purposes. It first presents simplistic
arguments that justify the generalization of Fourier’s thermal
conductivity and Newton’s viscosity equations, respectively,
for spatially varying thermal conductivities and viscosities; these
arguments are similar to those used above for generalizing Fick’s
first law equation for spatially varying diffusivities. It then discusses
simple (but realistic) examples demonstrating how these modifications
impact the calculations and predictions of the equations of change
for mass, energy, and momentum.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Derivations
Fick
deduced his first
law of diffusion (eq 1) by analogy with Fourier’s law of heat conduction (and Ohm’s
law of electrical conduction).1 Likewise,
it is reasonable to expect that the same generalization as in eq 4 is applicable to Fourier’s
law. To actually show such a derivation, let us first consider heat
conduction in a gaseous system. We use the same lattice model description
of diffusion as in Section 1; see Figure 1A for the geometry of the system. Assuming that the lattice dimension
(λ) is comparable to the mean free path of the molecules, the
magnitude of the heat flux (i.e., the molecular transport of the internal
energy due to collision of the molecules) from lesser x to greater x across the plane located at x and that of the heat flux from greater x to lesser x across the same plane can be calculated,
respectively, as 11  and 12  where C̅ is the heat
capacity per molecule (at a constant volume) and Tref is the reference temperature; C̅(T – Tref) thus
gives the internal energy per molecule. All other parameters are the
same as in eqs 8 and 9. The net heat flux across the plane located at x is, therefore, given by 13  where  is the thermal conductivity; Tref is
set to 0. Note that the exactly same argument can
also be applied to heat conduction in a solid body, simply by replacing c with the phonon concentration, νλ with the
mean phonon velocity, and C̅ with the phonon
heat capacity.5 Therefore, when the thermal
conductivity varies with position, the original Fourier’s law
equation 14  should be generalized to the form 15  which yields a different expression, for instance,
for the equation of temperature for a solid 16  see eqs (11.2–10)
of ref (2) for the
original version
of the equation. When heat flows have components in all directions, eq 15 should be expressed
in the vectorial form as 17  where a bold
character is used to denote a
vector.

It is trivial to show the same derivation for momentum
transfer in a lattice gas (flowing in the y-direction
with a velocity gradient dvy/dx). Again assuming that the lattice dimension
(λ) is comparable to the mean free path of the molecules, the
magnitude of the y momentum flux (i.e., the molecular
transport of the y momentum due to collision of the
molecules) across the plane of constant x located
at x in the positive x-direction
and that of the y momentum flux across the same plane
in the negative x-direction (Figure 1B) can be calculated, respectively, as 18  and 19  where m is the
mass of the
molecule and vy is the
velocity of the gas along the y-direction; mvy thus gives the y momentum of the molecule. The net y momentum flux
across the plane of constant x located at x is, therefore, given by 20  where  is the (shear) viscosity of the
gas. Sir
Isaac Newton proposed in “Principia” that “the
resistance (τxy) arising from the
lack of slipperiness (μ) in a fluid is proportional to the velocity
with which the parts of the fluid are separated from one another (∂vy/∂x)”,6 which has been formulated
later by scientists into the equation 21  For spatially varying viscosities, this original
Newton’s viscosity equation is generalized to the form 22  Logic suggests that for flows involving position-dependent
viscosities the full vector–tensor expression for the viscous
stress (momentum flux) tensor should also be generalized to the form 23  where [∇(μv)]† is the
transpose of the ∇(μv) tensor, κ is
the dilatational viscosity, δ is the unit tensor,
and bold characters denote vector and tensor
quantities; further study is needed to prove this generalization rigorously.
Accordingly, the equation of motion2 becomes 24  where ρ
is the density, p is the pressure, g is the gravitational acceleration,
and D/Dt is the substantial time
derivative operator. Note that now even for an incompressible fluid
(∇·v = 0) the third and fourth terms on the
right-hand side above do not vanish in general, which will make computation
more difficult.

2.2 Implications
To
our knowledge, the
generalized expressions of Fick’s law of diffusion, Fourier’s
law of heat conduction, and Newton’s law of viscosity proposed
in the present work (eqs 6, 17, and 23, respectively)
have not been demonstrated in the transport phenomena/continuum mechanics
literature previously (although such formalisms have been implied
in statistical mechanics as briefly discussed in the next subsection).
For instance, in COMSOL (a commercial finite element method simulator
that is widely used for solving fluid mechanics problems), nonisothermal
flow problems (involving spatially varying μ and k) are typically solved using the modified equations of motion and
temperature, in which (analogously to the diffusive flux term in eq 3, that is, −∇·j = ∇·(D∇c) in full vector notation) the viscous momentum flux term (−∇·τ) and the conductive heat flux term (−∇·q) are calculated, respectively, using the original forms
of Newton’s law of viscosity and Fourier’s law of heat
conduction7 25  where
the simplicity of the latter expression
is due to the assumption of constant ρ (∇·v = 0), and 26  We now argue that these conventional
expressions
(eqs 25 and 26) are only approximations for the general expressions
given in eqs 24 and 17, respectively. It will require extensive investigations
to establish the ranges of conditions under which the use of the generalized
formulas that we propose (eqs 24 and 17) is required rather than the
standard “approximations” (eqs 25 and 26). In the present
paper, we do not intend to offer a full analysis of this question.
Instead, we will present simple examples that demonstrate a need for
further research in this direction. Ordinary examples are well suited
for this purpose. For this reason, examples have been taken from one
of the most popular textbooks of transport phenomena, BSLK.

The first example concerns the heating of electric wire (Figure 2A) with temperature-dependent
thermal and electrical conductivities, k and ke, respectively (Problem #10C.1 of BSLK) 27   28  where k0 and ke0 are, respectively, the thermal and electrical
conductivities at a reference temperature T0, Θ(=(T – T0)/T0) is a dimensionless temperature,
and the coefficients αi and βi (i = 1, 2,...) are material-dependent
constants. The steady-state energy balance in cylindrical coordinates
gives2 29  where E is the voltage
drop
and L is the wire length; note that the quantity
on the right-hand side of the equation represents the rate of heat
generation per unit length of the wire due to electrical energy dissipation,
and the final expression is obtained by substituting the original
Fourier’s law equation (similarly to eq 14,  in cylindrical coordinates) for q. When this equation
is solved using a perturbation method
with the boundary conditions that T is finite at r = 0 and T = T0 at r = R, one obtains a solution
for the radial temperature profile in the electrically heated wire
in a dimensionless form 30  where B = (ke0R2E2)/(k0L2T0), ξ = r/R, and O(B2) means terms of the order of B2 and
higher.2 If we use the generalized form
of Fourier’s law (eq 15, that is,  in cylindrical coordinates), the energy
balance equation (eq 29) changes to 31  Now, it can be shown that
this modification
leads to a (slightly) different solution 32  By
way of example, for a copper wire of radius R = 2
mm and length L = 5 m across a voltage
drop of E = 40 V at T0 = 20 °C (k0 = 385 W/(m K), α1 = 0.0508 (estimated from Tables 9.5–4 of BSLK), ke0 = 5.99 × 105 Ω–1 cm–1, β1 = 0.872
(estimated from Tables 9.5–4 and eqs 9.9–1 of BSLK),
which gives a value of B = 0.136 for the dimensionless
heat source strength),2 the temperature
distributions were calculated using the two equations above, eqs 30 and 32. These results are displayed in Figure 2B. As shown in the figure, for these mild
parameter values used, the generalized Fourier’s law produces
predictions for electrical heating of the wire that are practically
indistinguishable from those of the original Fourier’s law;
the differences are less than 0.2%, although this small difference
increases as the rate of electrical energy dissipation (B) is increased. This result is due to the fact that, as shown in Figure 2C, the heat flux
due to the thermal conductivity gradient  is negligible relative to the heat flux
due to the temperature gradient .

Figure 2 (A) Electrically heated wire. (B) Dimensionless temperature
profiles
predicted using eqs 30 vs 32. Difference (%) is defined as (Θ(eq 30) – Θ(eq 32))/Θ(eq 32) × 100. (C) Dimensionless
deviation factor  as a function
of r/R; absolute magnitudes are
compared because the  and  terms have opposite
signs.

Next, let us consider a nonisothermal
momentum transfer process
that involves a (Newtonian) liquid flowing downward (in the positive y-direction) along the surface of a vertical plane in a
steady laminar flow (Figure 3A); this example is again taken from BSLK (examples 11.4–3
and 2.2–2). The temperature of the free liquid surface (x = 0) is kept at a constant T0 and that of the solid surface (x = δ) is
kept at Tδ. At these temperatures,
the liquid has viscosities of μ0 and μδ, respectively. For simplicity, we assume that within
this given range of temperature, the density (ρ) and thermal
conductivity (k) of the liquid are constant. Due
to the Arrhenius-type dependence of viscosity on temperature (that
is, μ/μ0 = exp[B(1/T – 1/T0)], where B is a constant), the spatial variation of viscosity also
has an exponential character2 33  Substitution of the original Newton’s
viscosity law (eq 21) with variable viscosity (eq 33) into the steady-state y momentum balance
gives 34  which upon integration
with the no-slip boundary
condition (that is, vy = 0 at x = δ) gives2 35  If we use the generalized
Newton’s
law of viscosity (eq 22), the above momentum balance equation (eq 34) is changed to 36  This equation
yields a different velocity
profile under the same no-slip boundary condition 37  Note that in the constant viscosity
limit
(that is, when α = 0), both eqs 35 and 37 reduce to an identical
form 38  which supports consistency between the two
equations. For demonstration of the difference between the predictions
based on the original vs generalized Newton’s law equations,
we now assume that the liquid is an oil whose viscosity is μ0 = 0.16 Pa s and density is ρ = 0.8 × 103 kg/m3 at temperature T0 =
20 °C and that the falling film has a thickness of δ =
2.5 mm, the vertical wall is kept at a temperature of Tδ = 10 °C, and the Arrhenius activation energy
for viscosity has a value of B = 1.04 × 103 K (for n-heptane8) (which gives a value of −0.125 for the dimensionless constant
α). For these parameter values, the velocity profiles were calculated
using the two different versions of the velocity equation shown above.
As shown in Figure 3B, eqs 35 and 37 predict significantly different velocity profiles.
This difference further increases as the temperature gradient (α)
is increased. As shown in Figure 3C, near the free liquid surface (at small x), the y momentum flux due to the viscosity gradient  is, in fact, comparable in magnitude to
the y momentum flux due to the velocity gradient .

Figure 3 (A) Nonisothermal falling liquid film. (B) Velocity profiles predicted
using eqs 35 vs 37. Difference (%) is defined as (vy(eq 35) – vy(eq 37))/vy(eq 37) × 100. (C) Dimensionless deviation
factor  as a function
of x/δ;
absolute magnitudes are compared because the  and  terms have opposite signs.

Finally, let us discuss a mass
transfer example (discussed in Section
18.3 of BSLK). As shown in Figure 4A, a solid sphere of potassium permanganate (KMnO4) is placed in a stationary reservoir of water. KMnO4 is only slightly soluble in water; the solubility of KMnO4 in water is about 0.0758 g cm3 at 25 °C.9 Therefore, the outward flux of the dissolved
MnO4– ions (away from the sphere surface)
is predominantly diffusive (the convective flux is negligible). Also,
the slowness of the dissolution process allows us to make a quasi-steady-state
approximation; the mass transfer process can be approximated as occurring
at a steady state. The steady-state mass balance for dissolved MnO4–1 ions in spherical coordinates can be
written as 39  where the total mass flux of MnO4–1 (n (=cv + j))
is equated to the diffusive mass flux of MnO4– (j) in the absence of convection
(v = 0), and then, j is replaced
by , as related by the original Fick’s
first law equation in spherical coordinates (similarly to eq 1). The diffusivity for
binary liquid mixtures is typically non-negligibly dependent on species
concentration. By substituting an approximate expression for the concentration
dependence of the diffusivity10 40  in which D0 is
the diffusion coefficient in infinite dilution (=1.632 × 10–5 cm2/s for MnO4– in water at 25 °C9) and v̲ is the specific volume of the MnO4–1 ion (estimated to be about 0.3699 cm3/g)
into eq 39, we obtain 41  Integration of this equation with the boundary
conditions that c = cR (which we assume to be equal to the solubility of KMnO4 in water, that is, 0.0758 g cm3 at 25 °C) at r = R (assumed to be 1 μm) and c = 0 at r → ∞ gives the
concentration profile of MnO4– at the
(quasi)-steady state 42  Alternatively, we can use
the generalized
Fick’s first law (eq 4) to obtain 43  Upon integration of this equation with the
same boundary conditions, we get 44  The
two expressions for  (eqs 42 and 44) are plotted
as a function
of  in Figure 4B. The two curves are supposed to have common asymptotes
for small and large  (as required by the boundary conditions),
but in fact, they are found to be practically identical to each other
at all distances. This result justifies the use of the original Fick’s
law to model the mass transfer associated with dissolution and diffusion
of slightly soluble material in a solvent. In this case, the mass
flux due to the diffusivity gradient  is negligible in magnitude compared to
the mass flux due to the concentration gradient  (Figure 4C).

Figure 4 (A) Diffusion from a slightly soluble sphere. (B) Concentration
profiles predicted using eqs 42 vs 44. Difference (%) is defined as
(c(eq 42) – c(eq 44))/c(eq 44) × 100. Note that all  points and curves overlap with
one another.
(C) Dimensionless deviation factor  as a function
of r/R; absolute magnitudes are
compared because the  and  terms have opposite
signs.

2.3 Consistency
We would like to add
a few remarks regarding whether the proposed correction to Fick’s,
Fourier’s, and Newton’s laws fits within (or violates
any of) the established principles of thermodynamics and statistical
physics. First, we note that eq 17 (or eq 15) suggests an interesting possibility that the net conductive heat
flow may occur even in the direction of increasing temperature if
the magnitude of the T∇k term
is greater than the magnitude of the k∇T term (e.g., at very high temperature); this is possible,
for instance, in solids because (as can be seen from eq 27) the thermal conductivity of a
solid typically decreases with increasing temperature, and thus ∇T and ∇k have opposite signs. We
note that this prediction, though somewhat counterintuitive, does
not violate the second law of thermodynamics (“no process is
possible, which consists solely in the transfer of heat from one temperature
level to a higher one”11). The second
law of thermodynamics concerns processes that start and end with equilibrium
states within globally isolated systems (e.g., heat exchange between
two heat reservoirs), whereas Fourier’s law is an energy balance
equation for a local differential control volume, which is, by definition,
a non-isolated (e.g., open) system. Therefore, it is generally impertinent
to discuss whether predictions of Fourier’s law are consistent
with the second law of thermodynamics.

As noted in Section 1 (also discussed
in ref (3)), eq 6 (or eq 4) implies that even in the absence of a concentration
gradient (∇c = 0), the net material flow occurs
when the diffusivity gradient is nonzero (j = −c∇D). This situation is not unphysical.
It is the chemical potential gradient that actually drives diffusion
(not the concentration gradient), and a uniform concentration does
not necessarily mean that the chemical potential (μ) is uniform.
Note that 45  where μo and γ
are
the standard state chemical potential and activity coefficient of
the solute, respectively, and R is the universal
gas constant. Therefore, even under constant μo, T and c, a nonzero ∇μ may develop if γ
varies spatially (due to spatially varying D); it
is known that γ and D are related by the following
equation12 46  where kB is Boltzmann’s
constant and f is the friction factor of the the
solute molecule. Note that this argument is relevant to non-dilute
situations. However, even in the dilute limit, a non-zero ∇μ
may develop if μo varies spatially, for instance,
because of spatially varying solvation states of a solute molecule
as in the pH-phoretic situation discussed in ref (3).

Finally, we would
like to point out that the proposed correction
to Fick’s first law is implied in the form of the Fokker–Planck
equation derived using Ito’s stochastic calculus (also known
as the Kolmogorov forward equation) for the probability density of
a stochastic process;13 in one-dimensional
situations 47  where p is the probability
density, v is the average (convection) velocity,
and D is the diffusion coefficient. Similarly to eq 2, a probability continuity
equation can be written in terms of the probability flux (jp) 48  Comparing eq 48 with eq 47 gives 49  In the absence of convection
(v = 0), eq 49 reduces
to a form analogous to eq 4 (generalized Fick’s first law) 50  Interestingly, if we assume that
the system
obeys the principle of detailed balance (microscopic reversibility
(jp = 0 at all x), which
is a sufficient condition for equilibrium), we obtain13 51  where pe is the
probability density at equilibrium. Assuming that pe is a weak function of x, we get 52  Substitution of this equation into eq 47 gives 53  which coincides
with the conventional form
of Fick’s second law equation for position-dependent diffusivity
(eq 3); thus, the original
Fick’s second law can be considered a restricted form of the
Fokker–Planck equation. We note that detailed balance is a
sufficient condition for entropy maximization in an isolated system.14 Therefore, detailed balance is not generally
necessary for the continuity (Fokker–Planck) equation to be
consistent with the second law of thermodynamics.

3 Conclusions
The diffusion(-like) equations representing
Fick’s, Fourier’s,
and Newton’s laws were originally derived for constant diffusivity,
thermal conductivity, and viscosity, respectively. However, even when
dealing with problems involving spatially varying diffusivity, thermal
conductivity, and viscosity, the original Fick’s, Fourier’s,
and Newton’s laws have always been used (i.e., in their original
forms) without questioning the validity of such uses. We here argue
that for position-dependent diffusivity, thermal conductivity, and
viscosity, Fick’s, Fourier’s, and Newton’s law
formulas should, in principle, be changed such that the viscosity,
thermal conductivity, and viscosity are moved inside the derivative
(gradient) operator; that is, in one-dimensional situations, for instance, , , and , respectively. Our examples demonstrate
that even with moderate spatial variations of diffusivity, thermal
conductivity, or viscosity, the proposed modifications of Fick’s,
Fourier’s, and Newton’s law equations might lead to
predictions that are discernibly different from those of the original
formulas under certain circumstances. This issue is expected to become
more important, for instance, for highly nonisothermal processes,
particularly, those that involve viscous dissipation of energy that
induces large spatial temperature gradients such as in fluids around
rapidly moving objects. In a previous publication, we have shown that
there exists a special situation in which a spontaneous build-up of
non-uniform concentrations of a solute occurs in the absence of net
material flux  because of a spatial gradient
of diffusivity, that is, ;3 such a phenomenon
(“pH phoresis” discussed in ref (3)) cannot be described using
the original Fick’s first law equation. Further study on this
general topic is desirable.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Y.-Y.W.
is grateful for funding from NSF (CBET-1803968). The
authors would also like to thank the anonymous Reviewer #2 for very
helpful comments.
==== Refs
References
Fick A. 
On liquid
diffusion . London Edinburgh Dublin Phil. Mag.
J. Sci. 
1855 , 10 , 30 –39 . 10.1080/14786445508641925 .
Bird R. B. ; Stewart W. E. ; Lightfoot E. N. ; Klingenberg D. J.  Introductory Transport
Phenomena ; John Wiley & Sons , 2015 .
Won Y. Y. ; Lee H. 
“pH phoresis”:
A new concept that can be used for improving
drug delivery to tumor cells . J. Controlled
Release 
2013 , 170 , 396 –400 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.06.016 .
Philibert J.  Atom Movements: Diffusion
and Mass Transport in Solids ; Les Editions
de Physique , 1991 .
Kittel C.  Introduction to Solid
State Physics , 7 th ed.; John Wiley & Sons , 1996 .
Newton I.  Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica , 1 st english ed., 1687 .
COMSOL Metaphysics
5.4, Buoyancy Flow in Free
Fluids (Application ID: 665).


Viswanath D. S. ; Ghosh T. K. ; Prasad G. H. L. ; Dutt N. V. K. ; Rani K. Y.  Viscosity of Liquids:
Theory, Estimation, Experiment, and Data ; Springer : Dordrecht, The Netherlands , 2007 .
CRC
Handbook of Chemistry and Physics , 84 th
ed.; CRC Press , 2003 .
Han C. C. 
Concentration
dependence of the diffusion coefficient of polystyrene at theta condition . Polymer 
1979 , 20 , 259 –261 . 10.1016/0032-3861(79)90232-5 .
Smith J. M. ; Van Ness H. C. ; Abbott M. M.  Introduction to Chemical
Engineering Thermodynamics , 7 th ed.; McGraw-Hill , 2005 .
Hiemenz P. C. ; Lodge T. P.  Polymer Chemistry , 2 nd ed.; CRC Press Taylor &
Francis Group , 2007 .
Van Kampen N. G.  Stochastic
Processes in Physics & Chemistry , 3 rd ed.; Elsevier , 2007 .
Boltzmann L.  Lectures on Gas Theory
(English Translation of “Vorlesungen über Gastheorie”) ; University of California Press , 1964 .

