
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145892810.1021/acsomega.8b00463ArticleThermomechanical Response
of a Representative Porin
for Biomimetics Lopes-Rodrigues Maximilien †‡§∥Puiggalí-Jou Anna †‡∥Martí-Balleste Didac †‡del Valle Luis J. †‡Michaux Catherine §Perpète Eric A. §Alemán Carlos *†‡† Departament
d’Enginyeria Química, EEBE, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, C/ Eduard Maristany, 10-14, Ed.
I2, 08019 Barcelona, Spain‡ Barcelona
Research Center for Multiscale Science and Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Eduard Maristany, 10-14, 08019 Barcelona, Spain§ Laboratoire
de Chimie Physique des Biomolécules, Unité de Chimie
Physique Théorique et Structurale (UCPTS), University of Namur, Rue de Bruxelles, 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium* E-mail: carlos.aleman@upc.edu (C.A.).13 07 2018 31 07 2018 3 7 7856 7867 12 03 2018 02 07 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
thermomechanical response of Omp2a, a representative porin
used for the fabrication of smart biomimetic nanomembranes, has been
characterized using microcantilever technology and compared with standard
proteins. For this purpose, thermally induced transitions involving
the conversion of stable trimers to bigger aggregates, local reorganizations
based on the strengthening or weakening of intermolecular interactions,
and protein denaturation have been detected by the microcantilever
resonance frequency and deflection as a function of the temperature.
Measurements have been carried out on arrays of 8-microcantilevers
functionalized with proteins (Omp2a, lysozyme and bovine serum albumin).
To interpret the measured nanofeatures, the response of proteins to
temperature has been also examined using other characterization techniques,
including real time wide angle X-ray diffraction. Results not only
demonstrate the complex behavior of porins, which exhibit multiple
local thermal transitions before undergoing denaturation at temperatures
higher than 105 °C, but also suggest a posttreatment to control
the orientation of immobilized Omp2a molecules in functionalized biomimetic
nanomembranes and, thus, increase their efficacy in ion transport.

document-id-old-9ao8b00463document-id-new-14ao-2018-00463jccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Recently, there has
been a paradigmatic shift in the experimental
study of materials with applications in biomedicine: new methods have
been developed to study phenomena associated to single molecules and
their small supramolecular/nanostructured aggregates when embedded
within complex platforms with functional interfaces for clinical applications.
In particular, micro- and nanosized mechanical techniques, based on
the principle that variations in electrostatic, van der Waals, and
steric intermolecular interactions on the surface of functionalized
cantilever cause bending (deflection) of a few nanometers, are playing
a fundamental role.1 The combination of
these miniaturized mechanical systems with electrical and, especially,
optical displacement sensors has been applied for, among others, chemisorption
measurements in air at room temperature with up to yoctogram (10–24 g) resolution,2,3 drug screening,4,5 characterization of the thermomechanical response and the glass
transition temperatures of macromolecular ultrathin films,6,7 detection of DNA strands,8 observation
of the hydration–dehydration (swelling–deswelling) of
molecular systems,9−11 and identification of biological species through
their molecular mass and stiffness, improving the capabilities of
conventional mass spectrometers.12,13

Porins
are β-barrel outer membrane proteins (OMPs) that form
water-filled open channels and allow the passive penetration of hydrophilic
molecules. Because of their capacity in exchange ions and small nutrients
(i.e., typically <667 Da) over the outer membrane, porins have
been used to fabricate smart biomimetic nanomembranes (NMs) that could
incorporate biological functions, such as controlled ion transport.14 For this purpose, OMPs are immobilized onto
supported organic or inorganic NMs,15−18 or even confined inside synthetic
pores.19−21 Apparently, in all cases, the nanostructured porin
aggregates formed in the resulting biointerfaces play a crucial role
in the selective ion permeability. However, the size and shape of
these structures are drastically influenced by the chemical environment,
being usually different from those found in the natural state. For
example, the individual trimeric units found in natural environments
for Omp2a,22,23 a β-barrel OMP from Brucella melitensis, self-associate into hierarchical
structures with around 6–8 trimeric units when the protein
incorporates onto the surface of supported NMs or inside the synthetic
pores of polymeric free-standing NMs for biosensing, nanofluidics,
and ion-rectifying for energy conversion.17,21

In this study, we investigated the organization of β-barrel
OMPs in synthetic environments as a function of the temperature, thereby
applying microcantilever deflection technologies to hierarchical structured
Omp2a (367 residues, 39 kDa). The interpretation of these measurements
has been carried out with the aid of the results obtained using other
techniques, such as Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy,
circular dichroism (CD), dynamic light scattering (DLS), wide angle
X-ray diffraction (WAXD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The distinctive thermal transitions
identified for Omp2a, which compare with those observed for conventional
proteins such as lysozyme (LYS; 129 residues, 14.4 kDa) and bovine
serum albumin (BSA; 583 residues, 66.5 kDa), have been unraveled and
their consequences and effects analyzed.

Methods
Materials
Octosensis microcantilever arrays (chips
with eight monocrystalline Si cantilevers, 500 μm in length)
were obtained from Micromotive GmbH (Mainz, Germany). The following
chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received without
further purification: isopropanol, (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane
(98%); toluene (99.8%); Nα,Nα-bis(carboxymethyl)-l-lysine
hydrate (NTA–NH2) (97%); 1-[(3-dimethylamino)propyl]-3-ethylcarbodiimide
methiodide (EDC); N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES); 2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol
(Tris base); carbonate/bicarbonate buffer; and phosphate buffered
saline (PBS, pH 7.4). Sodium chloride was purchased from Panreac (Spain).
BSA (fraction V) and LYS were purchased from BioLabs (England) and
Fluka, respectively. The Omp2a protein was expressed, purified, and
refolded using a previously reported procedure.22,23

FTIR Spectroscopy
FTIR spectra of BSA, LYS, and Omp2a
were recorded on a FTIR 4100 Jasco spectrophotometer. The samples
were placed in an attenuated total reflection accessory with thermal
control and a diamond crystal (Specac model MKII Golden Gate Heated
Single Reflection Diamond ATR). For each sample, 46 scans were performed
with a resolution of 4 cm–1. Spectra were recorded
at 30 and 100 °C.

FTIR spectroscopy was used to examine
the secondary structure of the proteins. Specifically, the number
and position of the peaks in the amide I region, which were derived
from the second derivative and deconvoluted spectra, provided information
about the protein conformation. Fourier self-deconvolution was performed
with the software PeakFit 4 (Jandel Scientific Software, AISN Software
Inc.), the resulting profiles being fitted to Gaussian functions through
the OriginPro 7.5 software.

Circular Dichroism
CD measurements
of BSA and LYS were
performed using 1× commercial Dulbecco’s PBS from Gibco
with a protein concentration of 0.01 mg/mL, whereas a sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS)–2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol (MPD) buffer (60 mM
SDS, 1.5 M MPD, 400 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8) with a protein concentration
of 0.005 mg/mL was used for Omp2a. It should be noted that the different
buffer selection is due to the fact that the Omp2a structure is protected
by amphiphilic SDS–MPD detergents.22,23 Spectra were recorded between 190 and 250 nm using a Chirascan-plus qCD spectrometer (Applied Photophysics, APL; UK) equipped
with a temperature-controlled cell. Spectra were obtained using heating
(from 5 to 90 °C) and cooling (from 90 to 5 °C) runs stopping
every 5 °C for 5 min with a heating rate of 5 °C/min. Machine
settings were as follows: 1 nm bandwidth, 1 s response, 0.5 nm data
pitch, 100 nm/min scan speed, and cell length of 10 mm. All CD spectra
presented in this work correspond to the average from three different
runs. Spectra were deconvoluted using the CDSSTR method of the DichroWeb
server.24

Dynamic Light Scattering
The influence of the temperature
on the shape and aggregation of BSA, LYS, and Omp2a was studied by
DLS, following the variation of the particle effective diameter (Deff) when the temperature increases from 20
to 60 °C. Proteins were dissolved in the buffers described above
for CD measurement using the same concentrations. Measurements were
performed using a NanoBrook Omni Zeta Potential Analyzer from Brookheaven
Instruments Corporation. Deff values correspond
to average values of the corresponding particle size distributions,
which were determined in steps of 10 °C (heating/cooling rate
10 °C/min) stopping for 2 min before the measurement.

Wide-Angle
X-ray Diffraction
Time-resolved WAXD experiments
were carried out at the NCD beamline (BL-11) of the Alba synchrotron
radiation light facility of Cerdanyola del Vallès (Catalunya).
The beam was monochromatized to a wavelength of 1.5406 Å. Samples
were confined between Kapton films and then held in a Linkam hot stage
with temperature control within ±0.1 °C. WAXD profiles were
acquired during heating and cooling runs in time-frames of 7.5 s and
a rate of 4 °C/min. The WAXD detector was calibrated with diffractions
of a standard of a Cr2O3 sample. The diffraction
profiles were normalized to the beam intensity and corrected considering
the empty sample background. Deconvolution of WAXD peaks was performed
with the PeakFit v4 program by Jandel Scientific Software using a
mathematical function known as “Gaussian area”.

Functionalization
of Silicon Microcantilever Chips
The functionalization protocol,
which was applied to silicon microcantilever
chips previously hydroxylated at the surface with a H2O2/H2SO4 (3:1 v/v) mixture, consisted
of four steps(i) Silanization: Hydroxylated microcantilevers
were silanized with 0.2% of (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane
in dry toluene overnight at room temperature under a nitrogen atmosphere.
Afterward, samples were washed with toluene and Milli-Q water.

(ii) Carboxylation: Silanized
microcantilevers
were incubated into 100 mM Nα,Nα-bis(carboxymethyl)-l-lysine
hydrate (NTA–NH2) solution in 50 mM carbonate buffer
(pH 9.5) overnight, at room temperature, and under gentle agitation.
After this, carboxylated substrates were washed with 50 mM carbonate
buffer (pH 9.5) and Milli-Q water.

(iii) Activation: The carboxyl groups
arising from NTA–NH2 at the microcantilever surface
were activated for direct reaction with primary amines via amide bond
formation with a mixture of 100 mM EDC and 150 mM NHS, both dissolved
in 10 mM MES (pH 5.5). Samples were incubated for 30 min at 37 °C
under gentle agitation and, then, extensively rinsed with 10 mM MES
(pH 5.5).

(iv) Protein
immobilization: A solution
of 0.1 mg/mL of protein (BSA, LYS or Omp2a) was prepared in 10 mM
MES (pH 5.5). The cantilevers were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C.
After that, the samples were washed with 10 mM MES (pH 5.5) and incubated
for 45 min at 37 °C with 1× PBS with 0.3 M NaCl to desorb
proteins not covalently bonded to the surface.



X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
XPS was used to analyze
the chemical composition at the surface of silicon substrates. The
system (SPECS Surface Nano Analysis GmbH, Berlin, Germany) was equipped
with a nonmonochromatic twin anode X-ray source XR50 of Mg/Al (1253
eV/1487 eV). Specifically, the Al anode was operated at 150 W. Detector
pass energy was set at 25 and 0.1 eV for the survey and the narrow
scans (high resolution spectra), respectively, at a pressure below
7.5 × 10–9 mbar. Casa XPS software (Version
2.3.16, Casa Software Ltd., Teignmouth, UK) was used to fit and perform
peak integration of spectra. The C 1s peak was used as an internal
reference (284.8 eV). High resolution XPS spectra were acquired by
Gaussian–Lorentzian curve fitting after S-shape background
subtraction.

Wettability
Contact angle measurements
were conducted
using the water drop method. Milli-Q water drops (0.5 μL) were
deposited onto the surface of the substrate and recorded after stabilization
with the equipment OCA 15EC (DataPhysics Instruments GmbH, Filderstadt).
The SCA20 software was used to measure the contact angle, which is
shown in this work as the average of at least 10 measures for each
sample.

Atomic Force Microscopy
AFM was conducted to obtain
topographic images of the nonfunctionalized and functionalized surfaces
using Si TAP 150-G probes (Budget Sensors, Bulgaria) with a frequency
of 150 kHz and a force constant of 5 N/m. Images were obtained with
an AFM Veeco Multimode under ambient conditions in tapping mode. The
row scanning frequency was set between 0.6 and 0.8 Hz. The root-mean-square
roughness was determined using the statistical application of the
NanoScope Analysis software (1.20, Veeco).

Resonance Frequency Measurements
and Cantilever Displacement
Cantilever resonance frequency
and displacement measurements were
carried out by means of the SCALA equipment (Scanning Laser Analyzer,
from MecWins), a recently developed technology for the optical readout
of cantilevers.7,25,26 The readout technique combines the optical beam deflection method
and the automated two-dimensional scanning of a single layer beam
by voice-coil actuators. The equipment has been implemented with a
thermal chamber containing a thermoelectric cooler and a cartridge
heater. These elements are capable of sweeping the chamber’s
temperature from −50 °C up to 220 °C by flowing thermostatized
N2 to the sample. A holder containing multiple thermometer
probes is placed inside the chamber for a better mapping of the temperature.
All measurements were performed in a nitrogen environment. The temperature
control was regulated by software created by the MecWins Company.

Monocrystalline Si microcantilever chips containing arrays of eight
cantilevers (Micromotive GmbH) were used for the nanomechanical measurements
(Supporting Figure 4A). Specifically, the
nominal length, width, and thickness of the cantilevers were 500,
90 ± 2, and 1 μm, respectively. Resonance frequency measurements
were conducted in a nitrogen atmosphere at 25 °C. The experimental
setup is based on the shift induced in the resonance frequency by
the added mass onto the cantilever through functionalization. The
used platform consists in the automated two-dimensional scanning with
a single laser (1 mW) beam by voice-coil actuators perpendicularly
located. Displacements over a range of several millimeters at speeds
up to 10 mm/s and with an accuracy of 100 nm are achieved. Once the
laser beam is reflected by the cantilever array, the exact position
and intensity of the reflected spot are collected by a two-dimensional
linear position detector. Moreover, TRACKER, which is an algorithm
that recognizes reflected intensity patterns, locates cantilever sensors
in a fully automated process.

Results
The response
of Omp2a to thermal stress has been compared with
those of BSA and LYS. The latter exhibits an ellipsoidal shape in
which both ordered (30% α-helix, 27% β-turn and 13% β-sheet
secondary structures) and unordered (30%) regions coexist,27 while the BSA structure is predominantly α-helical
with the remaining polypeptide occurring in turns and extended or
flexible regions (i.e., with no β-sheets).28 Before nanomechanical measurements, the effects of the
heat shift on the secondary structure and aggregation tendency of
such three proteins have been examined.

Secondary Structure and
Diameter
Temperature-induced
protein denaturation is frequently detected using FTIR spectroscopy
and CD in various wavelength regimes. The vibrational spectrum is
selective in the absorption band frequency position, widths, and intensities
in response to protein structural changes.29 Specifically, the amide I band (1700–1600 cm–1), which convolutes the major structural domain elements of proteins,
including α-helix, β-sheet, β-turn, and random coil
(unstructured), has been used to visualize the response of BSA, LYS,
and Omp2a to heating (Figure S1 displays
the FTIR spectra recorded at 30 and 100 °C). At high temperatures,
both BSA and LYS underwent a drastic unfolding, as is reflected by
the apparition of an intense deconvoluted peak at ∼1640 cm–1 that has been associated to the unstructured protein.
In contrast, the resemblance between all spectra recorded for Omp2a
suggests that the β-barrel structure is preserved at the highest
temperature.

FTIR observations are fully consistent with the
CD spectra (Figure 1) recorded in heating runs from 5 to 90 °C, which reflect an
increment of the disordered motifs at temperatures higher than ∼55
°C for both BSA and LYS while the content of ordered secondary
structures, especially α-helix, decreases. The unfolding temperature
estimated from CD results is 67 and 65 °C for BSA and LYS, respectively.
These results are fully consistent with those reported earlier by
different authors for LYS in aqueous solution.30,31 Specifically, it was concluded that the protein loses a small part
of helical structures in the α-domain below 64 °C, undergoing
irreversible (unless cooling start just after reaching ∼80
°C) thermal unfolding of the secondary structures at a temperature
close to 75 °C. Instead, Omp2a only exhibits slight variations
(i.e., thermal stress) in the secondary structures, the amount of
unstructured protein remaining practically constant from 5 to 90 °C.
Moreover, the thermal behavior of the three proteins is reversible,
as is evidenced from the analyses of the CD spectra recorded in cooling
runs (Figure S2).

Figure 1 CD spectra (left) recorded
for (a) BSA, (b) LYS, and (c) Omp2a
proteins at temperatures ranging from 5 to 90 °C (heating runs).
Measurements for BSA and LYS were performed using a carbonate buffer,
whereas a SDS–MPD buffer was used for Omp2a (Supporting Information). The variation of amount of secondary
structures (in %) against the temperature is also represented (middle).
Effective diameter (right) derived from DLS measurements at temperatures
ranging from 20 to 60 °C (measures for heating and cooling runs
are displayed) for (a) BSA, (b) LYS, and (c) Omp2a proteins. Two profiles
are displayed for BSA because a bimodal distribution was found for
all examined temperatures, while a unimodal histogram was observed
for both LYS and Omp2a.

The influence of the temperature on the shape and aggregation
of
the proteins was assessed by DLS. Profiles displaying the variation
of the particle effective diameter (Deff) with the temperature are included in Figure 1 (both heating and cooling runs). Bimodal
distributions were found for BSA at all examined temperatures, and
therefore, two Deff profiles are displayed
in Figure 1a. In the
first one, which corresponds to individual BSA molecules, Deff grows from 8.1 ± 1.4 nm at 20 °C
to 10.7 ± 1.4 nm at 60 °C, evidencing that the unfolding
process is accompanied by an increment of the molecular dimension.
The Deff values of the second profile
are approximately 3 times the values of the first one, indicating
that BSA also forms trimers. In this case, Deff increases from 23 ± 4 nm at 20 °C to 46 ±
2 nm at 60 °C. In contrast, LYS presents unimodal distributions,
independently of the temperature, with similar Deff values (i.e., 4.3 ± 0.2 nm and 4.3 ± 0.5 nm at
20 and 60 °C, respectively). Although these results suggest that
LYS volume is not affected by the unfolding, what actually occurs
is that unfolding is accompanied by a reduction in the hydration.
The latter was proved in early X-ray scattering studies at 20 and
80 °C,30 which showed that the electron
density of water in LYS crystals decreases with the crystallization
temperature, and consequently, the radius of gyration remained practically
invariant. Thus, we hypothesize that changes in protein hydration
offset the thermally induced protein motion. Similar observations
have been found for other proteins,32 negative
volume changes being detected in some cases.33

Finally, Omp2a also presents a unimodal distribution, even
though Deff increases when the 6.1 ±
0.2 nm at
20 °C to 12.6 ± 2.4 nm at 60 °C. The former value has
been associated to the trimeric state, while the latter corresponds
to bigger aggregates.21 The thermal stability
observed for Omp2a combined with this significant variation, which
is even higher in the cooling run (i.e., from 21.6 ± 5.1 nm at
60 °C to 6.9 ± 0.4 nm at 20 °C), indicates that the
reversible aggregation of this OMP is notably enhanced by the temperature.
Thermomechanical assays combined with these DLS results have been
used to explain the aggregation phenomena of Omp2a in the Discussion section.

Time-Resolved WAXD Data
on Heating and Cooling of Lyophilized
Omp2a
Real-time WAXD experiments were performed using synchrotron
radiation to examine the evolution of the β-sheets motifs in
dried Omp2a during heating and cooling processes. Analyses were performed
considering both Omp2a and blank samples, which were obtained by freeze-drying
the detergent buffer solution in the presence and absence of protein,
respectively. The one-dimensional WAXD profile acquired for Omp2a
at room temperature exhibits a sharp and intense peak at q = 15.64 nm–1 (Figure 2a), which corresponds to an interstrand spacing
of d = 4.02 Å.34,35 This peak
is absent in the spectra recorded for blank samples, the broad peak
centered at q = 15.40 nm–1 being
attributed to the salts from the buffer (Figure 2a, magnification). The presence and absence
of the reflection associated to the β-sheet in the Omp2a and
blank samples, respectively, is clarified in the representative diffraction
patterns showed in Figure 2b.

Figure 2 (a) 1D scattering patterns of blank (salts from the buffer solution)
and Omp2a samples as dry powder at room temperature. (b) 2D scattering
patterns of the blank and Omp2a dried samples at room temperature.
(c) 1D scattering pattern of Omp2a when a temperature ramp (heating)
is applied. (d) Intensity of the peak profile for the blank and the
Omp2a samples at q = 15.6 nm–1 during
the temperature ramp.

Figure 2c
displays
a three-dimensional representation of the freeze dried Omp2a WAXD
profiles in the β-sheet region (q = 15–16
nm–1) obtained by heating at a rate of 5 °C/min
from 25 to 110 °C, whereas Figure 2d represents the variation in intensity of the peak
at q = 15.6 nm–1 that occurs when
heating both for Omp2a and blank samples. The variation with temperature
of this narrow and intense peak has been used to monitor the effect
of the different thermally induced structural processes in interstrand
interactions. First, the intensity experiences a small increment at
50–55 °C, which has been attributed to the reinforcement
of neighboring intermolecular connections. According to DLS observations,
which evidenced the transition from the trimeric form to bigger aggregates
(Figure 1c), this result
has been interpreted as the formation of new β-sheets between
neighboring protein molecules. After this, from ∼55 to ∼75
°C the intensity decreases slowly and, suddenly, grows again
at ∼80 °C. These changes suggest the restructuration of
the newly formed aggregates during the heating process. Finally, the
peak progressively broadened and becomes less intense at higher temperatures,
evidencing that temperature has some effects in the local stability
of the β-sheets. In spite of this, the peak maintains 47% of
its initial intensity at 100 °C, which is consistent with the
overall stability of the β-barrel structure observed above by
FTIR (Figure S1c).

Protein Immobilization
onto the Surface of Silicon Microcantilevers
The microcantilever-based
biosensing technology has been applied
in this work to monitor the response of OMPs in synthetic environments
against the temperature change. Analysis of the results has been carried
out by comparing their thermal behavior with conventional proteins.
Among other features, this nanomechanical platform is characterized
by the high sensitivity, label-free detection, and small sample consumption
because of the size of the microcantilevers (ca. 1000 μm2).36 For successful characterization,
the first step is the functionalization of silicon microcantilevers
to achieve a stable and irreversible protein–surface binding.

In this work, a recently developed procedure to covalently bind
small peptides to silicon has been extrapolated and adapted to BSA,
LYS, and Omp2a proteins (Figure 3a).37 This four-step protocol
can be summarized as follows: (i) the microcantilever surface, previously
hydroxylated with acids, is silanized with (3-glycodyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane;
(ii) epoxy groups are opened with Nα,Nα-bis(carboxymethyl)-l-lysine hydrate (NTA–NH2) at basic pH; (iii) the
carboxylated surface derived from (ii) is activated with a mixture
of EDC and NHS; and (iv) proteins are immobilized by incubating the
activated surface in the corresponding protein solution. Before conducting
any measurement, proteins not covalently bonded to the substrate were
desorbed by washing with a phosphate buffer solution. Because the
three proteins investigated contain a relatively large number of amine
groups, corresponding to multiple lysine residues, in addition to
the N-terminal amine, the study of protein-overhang
interactions is limited by this immobilization procedure.

Figure 3 (a) Protein
functionalization protocol for silicon substrates.
(b) N 1s, C 1s, and O 1s high-resolution XPS spectra for nonfunctionalized
(hydroxylated; Si–OH) and protein-functionalized (LYS, BSA,
or Omp2a) silicon substrates. Peaks from deconvolution are also displayed.

Comparison of the characteristic
XPS spectra in the N 1s, C 1s,
and O 1s regions of hydroxylated (nonfunctionalized) silicon and protein-functionalized
substrates (Figure 3b) chemically proves the success of the immobilization protocol.
The presence of a peak in the C 1s region of the nonfunctionalized
silicon spectrum has been attributed to the presence of organic contaminants
from the environment. While the latter makes more difficult the corroboration
of the protein incorporation, the carbon content is significantly
higher when silicon was functionalized with BSA, LYS, and Omp2 (Table S1), showing a 4.5, 3.0, and 3.2 fold increase,
respectively. Moreover, the apparition of the N 1s peak, which was
not detected for nonfunctionalized substrates, is an unequivocal chemical
evidence of the protein immobilization (Table S1). Changes in surface properties, as for example the wettability
(Figure 4a) and the
surface topography (Figure 4b), provide indirect evidence of the binding between the substrate
and the protein. Thus, contact angle (θ) measurements using
milli-Q water showed that the hydrophilic character of silicon (θ
= 30° ± 5°) decreased considerably upon the incorporation
of protein (θ = 70° ± 3°, 47° ± 2°,
and 49° ± 6° for BSA, LYS, and Omp2a, respectively).
Similarly, 3D topographic AFM images reveal significant differences
between the bare silicon substrate and the functionalized ones, which
affect the root-mean-square roughness (Figure S3). Moreover, inspection of the cross-sectional profiles (Figure 4c) is consistent
with the immobilization not only of individual protein molecules but
also of aggregates, diameter sizes ranging from 40 to 98 nm.

Figure 4 (a) Average
contact angle of nonfunctionalized and functionalized
silicon substrates. Greek letters on the columns refer to significant
differences when 1-way ANOVA and Tukey’s multiple comparison
tests are applied: α vs Si–OH (p <
0.0001) and β vs BSA (p < 0.0001). (b) Topographic
AFM images of nonfunctionalized and functionalized substrates (500
× 500 nm2). (c) Representative cross-sectional profiles
for AFM images.

Thermomechanical Response
of Protein-Functionalized Microcantilevers
Protein-functionalized
silicon chips with arrays of eight cantilevers
(i.e., using such number of sensors in parallel) were operated in
dynamic mode (Figure S4a). Piezoelectric
excitation (i.e., an actuator is positioned below the chip base) and
their first vibration mode were monitored by using a scanning laser.
After cleaning with isopropanol and hydroxylation with a H2O2/H2SO4 (3:1 v/v) mixture, hydroxylated
chips (100 μm wide, 500 μm long and 1 μm thick)
displayed a resonance frequency of 5206 ± 162 Hz (n = 16) measured in a N2 atmosphere at 25 °C.

Figure 5a shows the
resonance frequency shift of at least 16 LYS-, BSA-, and Omp2a-functionalized
cantilevers. As it can be seen, the frequency shift value is significantly
higher for Omp2a than for BSA and LYS. Provided the molecular weight
of Omp2a is smaller than that of BSA (i.e., 39 kDa vs 66.5 kDa), the
formation of relatively big supramolecular aggregates is clearly evidenced.
This feature is corroborated by comparing nanomechanical first mode
resonances of hydroxylated and functionalized cantilevers (Figure S5), which provides a shift of 92, 182,
and 313 Hz for LYS, BSA, and Omp2a, respectively. On the other hand,
the standard error of the mean calculated for Omp2a is significantly
higher than for LYS and BSA. This has been attributed to the variability
in the size of the Omp2a supramolecular aggregates, which induces
fluctuations in the measured frequency shift values. However, it should
be remarked that differences among LYS, BSA, and Omp2a are large enough
to be independent of such uncertainty.

Figure 5 (a) Nanomechanical response,
expressed as resonance frequency shift
(|Δf|/f), of functionalized
cantilevers (mean values and standard error of the mean calculated
with the data of at least 16 different cantilevers). (b) Relative
displacement as a function of the temperature of a representative
hydroxylated (nonfunctionalized) cantilever. Thermomechanical response
of cantilevers functionalized with (c) LYS, (d) BSA, and (e) Omp2a
proteins. Right: mean relative displacement as a function of the temperature
(blue, red, and green dots in c, d, and e, respectively) and the corresponding
standard error of the mean (thick light-gray lines), both calculated
with the data of at least seven different cantilevers, are displayed
at the right. Left: cartoons schematizing the folded → unfolded
transitions in c and d, and the trimer → large aggregate and
β-barrel → unfolded transitions in e. The four regions
described in the text are labeled in e.

The thermal response of proteins have been analyzed by plotting
the displacement (S) of the reflected laser spot
on the position sensitive detector (PSD), which originates from the
variation of the local slope at the cantilever surface with the temperature
and depends on the distance (D) between the cantilever
and the PSD (Figure S4b). It is worth noting
that the variation of S with the temperature is analogous
to the thermally induced cantilever deflection (Δz). As it was expected, the displacement of nonfunctionalized cantilevers
increases slowly and progressively with the temperature (Figure 5b), as the deflection
of rectangular bare cantilevers of length L grows
linearly with the change of temperature (ΔT), that is, Δz α L2ΔT.38

The average displacement curve obtained for LYS (Figure 5c), which was obtained using
16 different microcantilever sensors, reflects a behavior very different
from that obtained for nonfunctionalized cantilevers. The slope of
the displacement curve in the region comprised from room temperature
to ∼50 °C is related to the deflection produced by the
different thermal response of the two materials contained in the system
(i.e. the silicon substrate and the attached protein). More specifically,
protein-functionalized cantilevers undergo a differential stress due
to the thermal expansion coefficient difference between the protein
and the microcantilever itself, giving rise to the cantilever deflection.
After this, at ∼50 °C the protein starts to unfold, causing
a redistribution of the molecular mass and altering the contact between
the protein and the substrate. This situation enhances the cantilever
deflection, as it is reflected by the sustained increasing displacement
of the profile displayed in Figure 5c. Thus, the melting temperature of LYS, as determined
thermomechanically, is approximately 60 °C, which is consistent
with the CD data (Figure 1). At ∼70 °C the slope of the displacement curve
changes and the curve is similar to that observed for the hydroxylated
silicon cantilevers (Figure 5b). Thus, once LYS completes the conversion toward the unfolding
state, the changes induced by the thermal dynamics of the random coil
are not reflected in the deflection. At this stage the effects associated
to the mass redistribution and the variation of the protein···surface
interactions are negligible in average. Overall, the profile displayed
in Figure 5c should
be considered as the fingerprint to recognize the thermomechanical
response of conventional proteins, in which the folded → unfolded
is the only occurring thermal transition.

Figure 5d displays
the average displacement curve achieved for BSA. From a qualitative
point of view, the behavior of the curve is similar to that described
above for LYS until ∼100 °C, even though the cantilever
deflection is smaller for BSA. This has been attributed to the higher
molecular weight of BSA and its tendency to aggregate, both reducing
the differences in the stress distribution and the stress gradient
between the protein and the substrate. Consequently, the impact of
the bimetallic effects in the bending of the cantilever is relatively
small before the protein denaturation at ∼60 °C. Moreover,
the effect of the redistribution of the molecular mass during the
unfolding process is also smaller than for LYS. As the effect of the
unfolding on the cantilever displacement is expected to be directly
proportional to the amount of protein molecules, these results suggest
that such amount is lower for cantilevers functionalized with BSA
than with LYS. Although this could be in apparent contradiction with
the nanomechanical first mode resonance shift, which is 90 Hz lower
for the latter (Figure S5), it is worth
noting that the molecular weight of BSA is 4 times higher than that
of LYS.

In spite of this, the dynamics of the random coil causes
a change
in the sense of the cantilever deflection. Thus, deflection downward
or upward of the cantilever is mainly defined by the response of the
protein within the studied temperature range, and as mentioned above,
the deflection was relatively low before the unfolding. After this,
the upward profile experiences an abrupt change at ∼110 °C,
which is not detected for LYS. Although this sudden drop in the displacement
could be hypothesized as a disaggregation of the protein molecules,
a simple thermogravimetric analysis (not shown) evidenced that it
corresponds to the evaporation of water molecules that were strongly
interacting with the protein. Accordingly, in addition to the molecular
unfolding, thermomechanical characterization of BSA reveals a sharp
dehydration process that, suddenly, produces a change of sign in the
stress gradient.

The displacement profile recorded for Omp2a
(Figure 5e) exhibits
unusual complexity. Although
bimetallic effect initially affects the cantilever deflection, as
in LYS and BSA, four regions with distinctive regimes can be distinguished
above 40 °C for Omp2a. In the first one, which extends from 40
to 60 °C, the variation of the displacement is practically null,
suggesting that the redistribution of the molecular masses and the
changes in the protein···substrate interactions are
minimum (region I in Figure 5e). From a microscopic point of view, this region has been
associated with the alteration of intermolecular interactions before
the transition from trimers to bigger aggregates, which is also consistent
with WAXD observations (Figure 2d). While initially they seem to become more intense, the
step prior to the conversion into bigger aggregate is characterized
by a weakening of interactions among neighboring Omp2a molecules in
trimers. This phase transition is evidenced by the increasing displacement
(region II in Figure 5e), which occurs in a relatively wide interval of temperatures (i.e.,
between ∼60 and ∼77 °C). After this (region III
in Figure 5e), the
displacement experiences small fluctuations, the average deflection
increment along the whole region being very small. These fluctuations
have been associated with local re-organizations in the newly formed
aggregates. Above 105 °C, the displacement drops sharply (region
IV in Figure 5e), suggesting
that at such high temperatures the thermal stability of the β-barrel
is finally lost. Therefore, the downward deflection of the cantilevers
is a consequence of the folded → unfolded transition that alters
both the mass distribution and the Omp2a···substrate
interactions. These observations are fully consistent with the WAXD
results displayed in Figure 2d.

Discussion
Although the secondary
structure of bacterial OMPs are known to
be very sensitive to the polarity of the environment, they exhibit
an increased thermal stability that has been typically attributed
not only to the abundant β-strands barrel but also to their
oligomeric architectures.39−42 However, complete understanding of the thermal response
of their supramolecular oligomeric architectures in synthetic environments,
which is essential for the utilization of OMPs in the fabrication
of bioinspired nanodevices, is an unresolved question.43

Our FTIR and CD results on Omp2a prove
that the efficient interstrand
hydrogen bond network preserves the protein secondary structure from
thermal unfolding even outside lipid environments similar to those
found in nature. Besides, the heat-induced CD response of secondary
structural elements in Omp2a has also been compared with that of conventional
proteins. In folded proteins, the α-helix is recognized by minima
at ∼220 and ∼210 nm, while the β-sheet has a minimum
at 218 nm and a maximum at ∼195 nm.44 These two structural motifs are detected in the spectra recorded
for LYS and Omp2a at room temperature, whereas the spectrum of BSA
mainly involves the helical motif. However, the structural signatures
of BSA and LYS significantly change beyond ∼55 °C, evidencing
the loss of secondary structure,45 while
the CD spectrum of Omp2a remains practically unaltered until 90 °C.

On the other hand, DLS data reflect that Omp2a self-associates
into the typical trimeric state found in the outer membranes of bacteria
in the detergent buffer at room temperature. Thus, the Deff measured by transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
for Omp2a trimers in dried samples was recently found to be 9.3 ±
3.0 nm,21 which is consistent with DLS
value at 20 °C (6.1 ± 0.2 nm). However, the formation of
bigger aggregates is detected by DLS when the temperature increases
above 50 °C, even though they are significantly smaller (Deff = 12.6 ± 2.4 nm) than those also observed
in dried samples at room temperature (Deff = 25.9 ± 4.8 nm) by TEM.21 Thus,
the van der Waals interactions between the side groups at the external
side of the β-barrel are promoted through both drying and heating.
This feature points out the importance of improving the understanding
of Omp2a self-association processes in non-native environments, as
for example those used to fabricate bioinspired NMs for ion transport.

WAXD experiments indicate that temperature affects the β-sheet
structure of Omp2a. This effect is focused in intermolecular interactions
at temperatures lower than ∼80 °C and in both inter- and
intramolecular interactions at higher temperatures. However, the amount
of β-sheets preserved at 110 °C is still high enough to
preserve the β-barrel structure, which supports FTIR and CD
results. Thus, WAXD results corroborate the conversion of trimers
into bigger aggregates at 50–55 °C, which after equilibration
through local reorganizations remain relatively stable until ∼80
°C. At higher temperatures, intermolecular and, probably, intramolecular
β-strands are affected by the thermal stress, these interactions
being roughly halved. This interpretation is consistent with the well-known
increased thermal stability of bacterial porins, which exhibit temperature
induced unfolding above 100 °C.39,46 This unusual
stability is consequence of their β-barrel structural architecture
composed of antiparallel β-sheets, in which strands are connected
by long loops. Thus, the energy required to breakdown the secondary
and quaternary structure of bacterial porins is significantly higher
than that necessary to unfold BSA and LYS. Also, yet porin aggregates
are stable, a variety of transitions associated to changes in their
size (i.e., to dimers, trimers, or bigger aggregates) has been detected
at temperatures significantly lower than their unfolding temperatures
but comparable to the typical unfolding temperatures of conventional
proteins,46−48 which is in agreement with the opposite behaviors
of Omp2a and BSA.

The Deff of LYS,
which remains at 4.3
± 0.2 nm for both 20 and 60 °C, corresponds to the monomer
diameter.49,50 Thus, the mass contribution of aggregates,
which are extremely difficult to avoid completely even with dilute
samples, was null in the case of LYS. These features combined with
CD and FTIR data indicate that the unfolding is the only thermally
induced transition for LYS. Finally, BSA displays an intermediate
situation with two Deff values originated
by the bimodal distribution observed at each temperature. The lowest
value, 8.1 ± 1.4 nm at 20 °C, which is consistent with the
dimensions of the prolate ellipsoid shape proposed for the protein
monomer (14 × 4 nm),49 increases by
30% with the temperature, because of the unfolding. However, the highest
value, 23 ± 4 nm at 20 °C, grows more than twice when the
temperature reaches 60 °C. In this case, small aggregates (dimers
or trimers) not only experience unfolding processes but also incorporate
more protein molecules. Accordingly, BSA self-association is promoted
by the temperature when already formed aggregates act as nuclei. Overall,
FTIR, CD, and DLS results probe that LYS and BSA are suitable controls
for the present microcantilever deflection studies because of their
different behavior not only with respect to Omp2a but also among them.

Proteins have been covalently linked via an epoxysilane-based protocol
to silicon microcantilevers that had been efficiently activated by
a hydroxylation treatment with a H2O2/H2SO4 mixture. The results derived from the different
chemical and physical characterization techniques performed at each
functionalized substrate have confirmed directly and indirectly, respectively,
the suitability of the protocol to tether biomacromolecules onto the
silicon surfaces. Moreover, topographic images of protein-functionalized
surfaces, once biomacromolecules noncovalently bonded to the surface
were eliminated, evidence heights and widths of 2–4 and 40–100
nm, respectively, demonstrating the immobilization of aggregates.
As expected, the latter aggregates are much smaller and less abundant
for LYS than for BSA and Omp2a, the former showing the flatter profile
(root-mean-square roughness of nonfunctionalized, LYS-, BSA-, and
Omp2a-functionalized substrates is 4.9 ± 2.1, 6.1 ± 2.6,
10.5 ± 5.9, and 10.7 ± 3.0 Å, respectively).

The resonance frequency of nonfunctionalized cantilevers (ω),
which depends on their spring rigidity (k) and effective
mass (M), is obtained by the elasticity theory as 1  

The constant k is obtained using cantilever
Young
modulus (E) and dimensions, length (L), width (W), and thickness (T)51 2  

Upon protein functionalization, the
resonance frequency changes
from ω to ν 3  where Δω is
the resonance frequency
contribution due to the tethering of the protein, m is the mass of the protein, and Γ is a function that depends
on k and the surface stress (η) induced by
protein···silicon surface interactions.52 Particularly, the difference in frequency shift
(Δω/ω × 103) for LYS, BSA, and Omp2a
was 13.2 ± 4.1, 20.2 ± 1.4, and 43.6 ± 15.6, respectively.
These resonance frequency shifts suggest that protein···surface
interactions predominate over m because the shift
is 2 times higher for Omp2a than for BSA, whereas the molecular weight
is 1.7 times higher for the latter than for the former. Accordingly,
protein···surface interactions can be considered as
a nanomechanical signature sensitive not only to the existence of
protein aggregation phenomena but also to the distribution of the
molecules in such aggregates.

In addition to the mass redistribution
onto the cantilever surface,
which causes changes in the resonance frequency, and to the bimetallic
effect, the main mechanical effect in microcantilevers is the surfaces
stress (σ) that induces a nanoscale bending.1 This effect, which occurs if only one of both cantilever
sides are coated or, as in this work, functionalized, is quantified
using the Stoney’s equation53 4  where L is the microcantilever
effective length (450 μm), T is the microcantilever
thickness (1 μm), E is the Young modulus of
silicon (150 GPa), ν is the Poisson ratio of silicon (0.17),
and Δz is the deflection of the cantilever.
The surface stress is frequently associated to intermolecular interactions
between molecules anchored onto the cantilever surface, such as van
der Waals forces, hydrogen bonds, electrostatic interactions, steric
repulsions, and so on. Ideally, protein-functionalized cantilevers
should not exhibit any static surface stress if the functionalization
was identical for both sides. However, in practice, the experimental
setups used during the functionalization process do not result in
two identical cantilever sides. As a consequence, the surface stress
is not negligible for protein-functionalized cantilevers (e.g., at
120 °C, σ = 0.46 ± 0.12, 0.31 ± 0.05, and 0.30
± 0.15 mN/m for LYS, BSA, and Omp2a, respectively; Figure S6) and significantly higher than that
measured for hydroxylated nonfunctionalized ones (e.g. at 120 °C,
σ = 0.08 ± 0.012 mN/m). Moreover, the surface stress experiences
a significant increment when the temperature is higher than ∼50
°C for all functionalized cantilevers (Figure S7).

Analyses of the displacement curves obtained for
protein-functionalized
cantilevers allowed distinguishing folded → unfolded conformational
transitions from phase changes related with protein aggregates. Thus,
the thermally induced increment in the deflection of protein-functionalized
cantilevers is not constant, as occurs for nonfunctionalized cantilevers.
Proteins are much more sensitive than silicon to the temperature,
and therefore, the general evolution of the displacement observed
at relatively low temperatures (<50 °C) is mainly due to the
differences in both stress distribution and stress gradient between
the protein and the silicon substrate (i.e., the bimetallic effect).
In such conditions, the bending of protein-functionalized cantilevers
depends on the molecular weight and the presence of aggregates.

After this, conventional proteins exhibit an abrupt change in the
evolution of the curve, which is ascribed to their denaturalization
process. This folded → unfolded transition occurs at temperatures
close to ∼50 and ∼60 °C for LYS and BSA, respectively,
which are lower than those observed in water (60–70 °C).
Consequently, in solution, the folded structure of these soluble proteins
is stabilized by intermolecular hydrogen bonds with surrounding water
molecules, which are loss upon removal of the solvent. This instability
induces a lower unfolding temperature.

Once the denatured protein
reaches a stable random coil, the dynamics
of this state should not affect the thermomechanical response of the
cantilever. This is true for LYS- and BSA-functionalized substrates,
which show a behavior similar to that of nonfunctionalized cantilevers
when the temperature exceeds ∼55 and ∼60 °C, respectively.
However, BSA-functionalized cantilevers display another transition
at 110 °C that has been ascribed to the evaporation of water
molecules strongly interacting with protein molecules.

The thermomechanical
response of Omp2a is more complex than those
of LYS and BSA because of both its intrinsic thermal stability and
the tendency to form not only trimers but also larger aggregates.
The thermal behavior of this porin is characterized by local re-organizations,
which affect the strength of intermolecular interactions among neighboring
Omp2a molecules, inducing the transition from trimers to larger aggregates.
The formation of such larger aggregates is consistent not only with
DLS results but also with previous TEM investigations,21 as mentioned in the Results section. The latter phase transition is poorly defined, as reflects
the continuous increase of the displacement in the temperature interval
comprised between ∼60 and ∼77 °C. This feature
should be attributed to the fact that the size and shape of the aggregates
formed at such temperatures are constrained by the functionalization
of the cantilever, which defines the tethering position of the protein
molecules and gives variability to the transition. Such heterogeneity
explains the undefined character of the transition that, in spite
of the monodisperse and precise chemical nature of Omp2a molecules,
occurs within a wide interval of temperatures rather than at a precise
temperature. On the other hand, the thermal unfolding of Omp2a is
detected at ∼105 °C, this temperature representing the
upper threshold in relation to the manipulation of stable protein
aggregates.

Conclusions
In summary, thermomechanical measurements
at the microscopic level
on functionalized cantilevers have provided molecular insights that
complement the information obtained from conventional characterization
techniques on ensembles formed by a very large number of molecules.
A serious limitation of conventional techniques is that they provide
only a sample average response and are unable to give information
on specific local features on or within the sample. Within this context,
the unique thermomechanical response of Omp2a-functionalized cantilevers,
which exhibits four well-defined regimes above 40 °C (Figure 5E), suggests practical
approaches to improve the efficacy of smart biomimetic NMs with porins
immobilized onto the surface15−18 or confined inside synthetic pores.19−21 Specifically, although the effectiveness of NMs is regulated by
the amount of porin molecules active for the ion transport, controlling
their orientation once immobilized onto the surface or inside nanopores
is a challenge that has not been achieved yet. However, the identification
of temperature intervals, in which protein molecules experience local
structural re-arrangements with an enhancement of intermolecular β-sheets,
suggests that soft postthermal treatments could be very advantageous
to improve the efficacy of the NMs. Thus, this could be achieved by
heating the proteins from their initial assembly state to denaturalization
and, subsequently, cooling under controlled conditions to maximize
favorable interactions. The amount of protein molecules contributing
to the selective ion transport substrate could be substantially increased
by enhancing the intermolecular β-sheets, which requires local
orientation of the immobilized biomolecules.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00463.Materials, experimental
methods, and characterization
data; additional FTIR and CD spectra; roughness data; and resonance
and surface stress parameters (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00463_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
∥ M.L.-R.
and A.P.-J contributed equally to this study.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by MINECO (MAT2015-69367-R)
and AGAUR (2017 SGR 359). M.L.-R. acknowledges the FI grant to the
Generalitat of Catalunya. Support for the research of C.A. was received
through the prize “ICREA Academia” for excellence in
research funded by the Generalitat de Catalunya. C.M. and E.A.P. thank
the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research for their research
associate and senior research associate positions, respectively. Diffraction
experiments (ID-2016091886) were performed at NCD beamline (BL11-NCD)
at ALBA Synchrotron (Barcelona, Spain). The authors are indebted to
Prof. Jordi Puiggalí for his assistance in synchrotron experiments.
==== Refs
References
Tamayo J. ; Kosaka P. M. ; Ruz J. J. ; San Paulo Á. ; Calleja M. 
Biosensors based on nanomechanical systems . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 1287 –1311 . 10.1039/c2cs35293a .23152052 
Li M. ; Tang H. X. ; Roukes M. L. 
Ultra-sensitive
NEMS-based cantilevers
for sensing, scanned probe and very high-frequency applications . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 114 –120 . 10.1038/nnano.2006.208 .18654230 
Chaste J. ; Eichler A. ; Moser J. ; Ceballos G. ; Rurali R. ; Bachtold A. 
A nanomechanical mass
sensor with yoctogram resolution . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 301 –304 . 10.1038/nnano.2012.42 .22466856 
Ndieyira J. W. ; Watari M. ; Barrera A. D. ; Zhou D. ; Vögtli M. ; Batchelor M. ; Cooper M. A. ; Strunz T. ; Horton M. A. ; Abell C. ; Rayment T. ; Aeppli G. ; McKendry R. A. 
Nanomechanical
detection of antibiotic-mucopeptide binding in a model for superbug
drug resistance . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2008 , 3 , 691 –696 . 10.1038/nnano.2008.275 .18989336 
Kosaka P. M. ; Tamayo J. ; Ruz J. J. ; Puertas S. ; Polo E. ; Grazu V. ; de la Fuente J. M. ; Calleja M. 
Tackling reproducibility
in microcantilever biosensors: A statistical approach for sensitive
and specific end-point detection of immunoreactions . Analyst 
2013 , 138 , 863 –872 . 10.1039/c2an36192b .23223515 
Soccio M. ; Luongo G. ; Esteves C. ; Salvador-Matar A. ; Ahumada O. ; Rueda D. R. ; García-Gutiérrez M. C. ; Lotti N. ; Munari A. ; Ezquerra T. A. 
Thermomechanical
response of a semicrystalline polymer in the vicinity of the melting
by using microcantilever technology . Appl. Phys.
Lett. 
2014 , 104 , 251904 10.1063/1.4884949 .
Ahumada O. ; Pérez-Madrigal M. M. ; Ramirez J. ; Curcó D. ; Esteves C. ; Salvador-Matar A. ; Luongo G. ; Armelin E. ; Puiggalí J. ; Alemán C. 
Sensitive thermal transitions of
nanoscale polymer samples using the bimetallic effect: application
to ultra-thin polythiophene . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2013 , 84 , 053904 10.1063/1.4804395 .23742563 
Rebollar E. ; Sanz M. ; Esteves C. ; Martínez N. F. ; Ahumada O. ; Castillejo M. 
Gold coating of micromechanical DNA
biosensors by pulsed laser deposition . J. Appl.
Phys. 
2013 , 112 , 084330 10.1063/1.4761986 .
Bumbu G.-G. ; Wolkenhauer M. ; Kircher G. ; Gutmann J. S. ; Berger R. 
Micromechanical
cantilever technique: A tool for investigating the swelling of polymer
brushes . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 2203 –2207 . 10.1021/la062137u .17279715 
del
Rey M. ; da Silva R. A. ; Meneses D. ; Petri D. F. S. ; Tamayo J. ; Calleja M. ; Kosaka P. M. 
Monitoring swelling and deswelling
of thin polymer films by microcantilever sensors . Sens. Actuators, B 
2014 , 204 , 602 –610 . 10.1016/j.snb.2014.08.021 .
Dominguez C. M. ; Ramos D. ; Mendieta-Moreno J. I. ; Fierro J. L. G. ; Mendieta J. ; Tamayo J. ; Calleja M. 
Effect of
water-DNA interactions
on elastic properties of DNA self-assembled monolayers . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 536 10.1038/s41598-017-00605-x .28373707 
Malvar O. ; Ruz J. J. ; Kosaka P. M. ; Domínguez C. M. ; Gil-Santos E. ; Calleja M. ; Tamayo J. 
Mass and stiffness
spectrometry of nanoparticles and whole intact bacteria by multimode
nanomechanical resonators . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 13452 10.1038/ncomms13452 .27834379 
Naik A. K. ; Hanay M. S. ; Hiebert W. K. ; Feng X. L. ; Roukes M. L. 
Towards
single-molecule nanomechanical mass spectrometry . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2009 , 4 , 445 –450 . 10.1038/nnano.2009.152 .19581898 
Shen Y.-X. ; Saboe P. O. ; Sines I. T. ; Erbakan M. ; Kumar M. 
Biomimetic
membranes: A review . J. Membr. Sci. 
2014 , 454 , 359 –381 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2013.12.019 .
Ali M. ; Nasir S. ; Nguyen Q. H. ; Sahoo J. K. ; Tahir M. N. ; Tremel W. ; Ensinger W. 
Metal Ion
Affinity-based Biomolecular
Recognition and Conjugation inside Synthetic Polymer Nanopores Modified
with Iron-Terpyridine Complexes . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 17307 –17314 . 10.1021/ja205042t .21928814 
Hou X. ; Guo W. ; Jiang L. 
Biomimetic
smart nanopores and nanochannels . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 2385 –2401 . 10.1039/c0cs00053a .21308139 
Pérez-Madrigal M. M. ; del Valle L. J. ; Armelin E. ; Michaux C. ; Roussel G. ; Perpète E. A. ; Alemán C. 
Polypyrrole-supported membrane proteins
for bio-inspired ion channels . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 1632 –1643 . 10.1021/am507142f .25585165 
Zhang X. ; Fu W. ; Palivan C. G. ; Meier W. 
Natural channel protein inserts and
functions in a completely artificial, solid-supported bilayer membrane . Sci. Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 2196 10.1038/srep02196 .23846807 
Hall A. R. ; Scott A. ; Rotem D. ; Mehta K. K. ; Bayley H. ; Dekker C. 
Hybrid pore formation
by directed insertion of α-haemolysin
into solid-state nanopores . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 , 874 –877 . 10.1038/nnano.2010.237 .21113160 
Balme S. ; Janot J.-M. ; Berardo L. ; Henn F. ; Bonhenry D. ; Kraszewski S. ; Picaud F. ; Ramseyer C. 
New bioinspired
membrane
made of a biological ion channel confined into the cylindrical nanopore
of a solid-state polymer . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 712 –716 . 10.1021/nl103841m .21174453 
Puiggalí-Jou A. ; Pérez-Madrigal M. M. ; del Valle L. J. ; Armelin E. ; Casas M. T. ; Michaux C. ; Perpète E. A. ; Estrany F. ; Alemán C. 
Confinement of a β-barrel protein
in nanoperforated free-standing nanomembranes for ion transport . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 16922 –16935 . 10.1039/c6nr04948f .27714137 
Roussel G. ; Matagne A. ; De Bolle X. ; Perpète E. A. ; Michaux C. 
Purification, refolding and characterization
of the
trimeric Omp2a outer membrane porin from Brucella Melitensis . Protein Expression Purif. 
2012 , 83 , 198 –204 . 10.1016/j.pep.2012.04.003 .
Roussel G. ; Perpète E. A. ; Matagne A. ; Tinti E. ; Michaux C. 
Towards a
universal method for protein refolding: The trimeric beta barrel membrane
Omp2a as a test case . Biotechnol. Bioeng. 
2013 , 110 , 417 –423 . 10.1002/bit.24722 .22949228 
Whitmore L. ; Wallace B. A. 
Protein secondary structure analyses from circular
dichroism spectroscopy: methods and reference databases . Biopolymers 
2008 , 89 , 392 –400 . 10.1002/bip.20853 .17896349 
Lechuga Gómez L. ; Álvarez-Sanchéz V. ; Tamayo De Miguel F.
J.   U.S. Patent 7,646,494 B2 , 2010 .
Tamayo De Miguel F. J. ; Mertens J. ; Calleja-Gómez M.   U.S. Patent 7,978,344 B2 , 2011 .
Weiss M. S. ; Palm G. J. ; Hilgenfeld R. 
Crystallization,
structure solution
and refinement of hen egg-white lysozyme at pH 8.0 in the presence
of MPD . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
2000 , 56 , 952 –958 . 10.1107/s0907444900006685 .10944331 
Majorek K. A. ; Porebski P. J. ; Dayal A. ; Zimmerman M. D. ; Jablonska K. ; Stewart A. J. ; Chruszcz M. ; Minor W. 
Structural
and immunologic characterization of bovine, horse, and rabbit serum
albumins . Mol. Immunol. 
2012 , 52 , 174 –182 . 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.05.011 .22677715 
Murayama K. ; Tomida M. 
Heat-Induced secondary structure
and conformation change
of bovine serum albumin investigated by fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy . Biochemistry 
2004 , 43 , 11526 –11532 . 10.1021/bi0489154 .15350138 
Meermans F. ; Atilgan C. ; Miles A. J. ; Bader R. ; Shang W. ; Matagne A. ; Wallace B. A. ; Koch M. H. J. 
Consistent picture
of the reversible thermal unfolding of hen egg-white lysozyme from
experiment and molecular dynamics . Biophys.
J. 
2010 , 99 , 2255 –2263 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.07.060 .20923660 
Knubovets T. ; Osterhout J. J. ; Connolly P. J. ; Klibanov A. M. 
Structure, thermostability,
and conformational flexibility of hen egg-white lysozyme dissolved
in glycerol . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1999 , 96 , 1262 –1267 . 10.1073/pnas.96.4.1262 .9990012 
Chen C. R. ; Makhatadze G. I. 
Molecular determinants of temperature
dependence of
protein volume change upon unfolding . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2017 , 121 , 8300 –8310 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b05831 .28795561 
Chalikian T. V. ; Bresalauer K. J. 
On volume
changes accompanying conformational transitions
of biopolymers . Biopolymers 
1996 , 39 , 619 –626 . 10.1002/(sici)1097-0282(199611)39:5<619::aid-bip1>3.0.co;2-z .8875817 
Maji S. K. ; Wang L. ; Greenwald J. ; Riek R. 
Structure-activity
relationship of amyloid fibrils . FEBS Lett. 
2009 , 583 , 2610 –2617 . 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.07.003 .19596006 
Eisenberg D. 
The discovery
of the -helix and -sheet, the principal structural features of proteins . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2003 , 100 , 11207 –11210 . 10.1073/pnas.2034522100 .12966187 
Martínez N. F. ; Kosaka P. M. ; Tamayo J. ; Ramírez J. ; Ahumada O. ; Mertens J. ; Hien T. D. ; Rijn C. V. ; Calleja M. 
High throughput optical readout of dense arrays of
nanomechanical systems for sensing applications . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2010 , 81 , 125109 10.1063/1.3525090 .21198053 
Puiggalí-Jou A. ; del Valle L. J. ; Alemán C. ; Pérez-Madrigal M. M. 
Weighing
biointeractions between fibrin(ogen) and clot-binding peptides using
microcantilever sensors . J. Pept. Sci. 
2017 , 23 , 162 –171 . 10.1002/psc.2938 .27862637 
Barnes J. R. ; Stephenson R. J. ; Woodburn C. N. ; O’Shea S. J. ; Welland M. E. ; Rayment T. ; Gimzewski J. K. ; Gerber C. 
A femtojoule calorimeter using micromechanical sensors . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
1994 , 65 , 3793 –3798 . 10.1063/1.1144509 .
Zeth K. ; Thein M. 
Porins in prokaryotes
and eukaryotes: Common themes and variations . Biochem. J. 
2010 , 431 , 13 –22 . 10.1042/bj20100371 .20836765 
Tamm L. K. ; Hong H. ; Liang B. 
Folding and
assembly of β-barrel
membrane proteins . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2004 , 1666 , 250 –263 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2004.06.011 .15519319 
Moon C. P. ; Zaccai N. R. ; Fleming P. J. ; Gessmann D. ; Fleming K. G. 
Membrane
protein thermodynamic stability may serve as the energy sink for sorting
in the periplasm . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 4285 –4290 . 10.1073/pnas.1212527110 .23440211 
Kleinschmidt J. H.  Folding and stability of monomeric β-barrel membrane proteins . Protein-Lipid Interactions , 1 st ed.; Tamm L. K.  , Ed.; Wiley VCH : Weinheim , 2006 ; pp 27 –56 .
Fioroni M. ; Dworeck T. ; Rodríguez-Ropero F.  β-Channels
in proteins as tools in Nanotechnology . Advances
in Experimental Medicine and Biology ; Springer , 2014 ; Vol. 794 .
Greenfield N. J. 
Using circular
dichroism collected as a function of temperature to determine the
thermodynamics of protein unfolding and binding interactions . Nat. Protoc. 
2007 , 1 , 2527 –2535 . 10.1038/nprot.2006.204 .
Saha P. ; Manna C. ; Chakrabarti J. ; Ghosh M. 
Reversible thermal
unfolding of a yfdX protein with chaperone-like activity . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 29541 10.1038/srep29541 .27404435 
Sukumaran S. ; Hauser K. ; Maier E. ; Benz R. ; Mäntele W. 
Structure-function
correlation of outer membrane protein porin fromParacoccus denitrificans . Biopolymers 
2006 , 82 , 344 –348 . 10.1002/bip.20422 .16345000 
Sukumaran S. ; Zscherp C. ; Mäntele W. 
Investigation
of the thermal stability
of porin fromParacoccus denitrificansby site-directed mutagenesis
and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy . Biopolymers 
2004 , 74 , 82 –86 . 10.1002/bip.20049 .15137100 
Solov’eva T. F. ; Likhatskaya G. N. ; Khomenko V. A. ; Stenkova A. M. ; Kim N. Y. ; Portnyagina O. Y. ; Novikova O. D. ; Trifonov E. D. ; Nurminski E. A. ; Isaeva M. P. 
A Novel OmpY Porin From Yersinia Pseudotuberculosis:
Structure, Channel-Forming Activity and Trimer Thermal Stability . J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 
2011 , 28 , 517 –533 . 10.1080/07391102.2011.10508592 .21142221 
Stoppel W. L. ; White J. C. ; Horava S. D. ; Bhatia S. R. ; Roberts S. C. 
Transport
of biological molecules in surfactant-alginate composite hydrogels . Acta Biomater. 
2011 , 7 , 3988 –3998 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2011.07.009 .21798381 
Hill S. E. ; Miti T. ; Richmond T. ; Muschol M. 
Spatial extent of charge
repulsion regulates assembly pathways for lysozyme amyloid fibrils . PLoS One 
2011 , 6 , e18171 10.1371/journal.pone.0018171 .21483680 
Alvarez M. ; Lechuga L. M. 
Microcantilever-based
platforms as biosensing tools . Analyst 
2010 , 135 , 827 –836 . 10.1039/b908503n .20419229 
Hwang K. S. ; Eom K. ; Lee J. H. ; Chun D. W. ; Cha B. H. ; Yoon D. S. ; Kim T. S. ; Park J. H. 
Dominant surface stress driven by
biomolecular interactions in the dynamical response of nanomechanical
microcantilevers . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2006 , 89 , 173905 10.1063/1.2372700 .
Thakur G. ; Jiang K. ; Lee D. ; Prashanthi K. ; Kim S. ; Thundat T. 
Investigation of pH-induced protein conformation changes
by nanomechanical deflection . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 2109 –2116 . 10.1021/la403981t .24512545

