
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3008794610.1021/acsomega.8b00884PerspectiveChallenges of Connecting Chemistry to Pharmacology: Perspectives
from Curating the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY Southan Christopher *Sharman Joanna L. Faccenda Elena Pawson Adam J. Harding Simon D. Davies Jamie A. IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY, Centre
for Discovery Brain Sciences, Deanery of Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh EH8 9XD, Edinburgh, U.K.* E-mail: cdsouthan@hotmail.com.31 07 2018 31 07 2018 3 7 8408 8420 02 05 2018 12 07 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Connecting chemistry
to pharmacology has been an objective of Guide to PHARMACOLOGY (GtoPdb)
and its precursor the International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology
Database (IUPHAR-DB) since 2003. This has been achieved by populating
our database with expert-curated relationships between documents,
assays, quantitative results, chemical structures, their locations
within the documents, and the protein targets in the assays (D-A-R-C-P).
A wide range of challenges associated with this are described in this
perspective, using illustrative examples from GtoPdb entries. Our
selection process begins with judgments of pharmacological relevance
and scientific quality. Even though we have a stringent focus for
our small-data extraction, we note that assessing the quality of papers
has become more difficult over the last 15 years. We discuss ambiguity
issues with the resolution of authors’ descriptions of A-R-C-P
entities to standardized identifiers. We also describe developments
that have made this somewhat easier over the same period both in the
publication ecosystem and recent enhancements of our internal processes.
This perspective concludes with a look at challenges for the future,
including the wider capture of mechanistic nuances and possible impacts
of text mining on automated entity extraction.

document-id-old-9ao8b00884document-id-new-14ao-2018-00884pccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Connecting chemistry to pharmacology (c2p) can be understood intuitively
as the effects of exogenous substances on the systems of living organisms,
generally associated with exploring a human therapeutic application.
However, it is necessary to limit our coverage of this extensive topic
in this perspective. First, as implied from the title, this will focus
on the c2p subset encompassed in the International Union of Basic
and Clinical Pharmacology/British Pharmacological Society (IUPHAR/BPS)
Guide to PHARMACOLOGY (GtoPdb, http://www.guidetopharmacology.org). This includes the addition of the new IUPHAR Guide to IMMUNOPHARMACOLOGY
(http://www.guidetoimmunopharmacology.org). Second, it will concern mostly small molecules but also extends
to moderate-size peptides and therapeutic nucleotides. Third, while
it is not the only provenance option, we will restrict ourselves to
scientific publications for the primary reports of pharmacology. Fourth,
the focus is on effects that can be plausibly explained based on experimental
results as a molecular mechanism of action (mmoa). The area to cover
thus becomes more circumscribed as approximating to the document corpus
covering pharmacology (i.e., largely journal papers and patents).
We will also cover aspects of drug discovery and chemical biology,
since these domains are not usefully separable from pharmacology.
The same argument applies to metabolomics, but we leave this domain
mainly to other resources such as the Human Metabolome Database.1

GtoPdb is a moderate-scale knowledgebase
of c2p relationships, curated manually since 2003 from the pharmacological
literature. Detailed content statistics and feature descriptions are
available in our Nucleic Acids Research (NAR) Database issue article2 and via our website and blog. GtoPdb has accumulated
a matrix of 1700 targets and 15 500 activity values for 7000
ligands, guided by expert members of the IUPHAR Committee on Receptor
Nomenclature and Drug Classification (NC-IUPHAR) and its 96 subcommittees.
This de facto “super-curator network” encompasses over
500 individual scientists (http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/nciuphar.jsp).

Our aim is to provide quantitative data on compounds suitable
to use in the laboratory as recommended by experts. Consequently,
GtoPdb has a high level of selectivity (including being mainly focused
on human data). Our quality selection criteria were described for
our first publication back in 2009.3 We
use several indicators to demonstrate the value impact of this approach
across our broad user community. These include our user counts (via
Google Analytics) of 19 000 per month from 200 countries, web
services accesses, data downloads, good citation rates for all six
of our NAR Database issue papers, cross-linking from over 20 other
sources, and our 2016 inclusion in the ELIXIR UK Node resources for
Human Health and Disease (http://www.elixiruknode.org/human-health-and-disease/).

2 Describing Chemistry to Pharmacology (c2p) Connections
2.1 D-A-R-C-P Concept
We can conceptualize c2p as core
relationships (i.e., chain of links) between a document, an assay,
its quantitative result, a chemical structure, and a protein target.4 A useful shorthand for this is D-A-R-C-P (note
the order is not crucial but will be adhered to here for simplicity).
A topical example is illustrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1 Example of a D-A-R-C-P relationship chain. Taken
from http://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/LigandDisplayForward?ligandId=9001.

In this case “C”,
as BIA 10-2474, is the code number of the BIAL Portugal, Phase I compound
that caused a fatality during a French clinical trial in January 2016.5 The following c2p relationships can be extracted:“D” is a 2017 paper
entitled “Activity-based protein profiling reveals off-target
proteins of the FAAH inhibitor BIA 10-2474” (although not from
BIAL). Thus, “D” can be specified as PMID 28596366,
or by its DOI: 10.1126/science.aaf7497.

From this document, we can extract “A” as an IC50 measurement on purified protein in vitro, which records
a (low) potency result “R” of 7500 nM. R can also be
expressed as 7.5 μM or a pIC50 of 5.12.

We can specify “C” by an IUPAC name N-cyclohexyl-N-methyl-4-(1-oxidopyridin-1-ium-3-yl)imidazole-1-carboxamide.
Alternatively, we could use the PubChem Compound ID CID 66554294,5 the GtoPdb Ligand ID (LID) 9001, or an InChIKey
DWCWWJONKWHPDD-UHFFFAOYSA-N (full InChI strings or SMILES can also
be used).

The entity “P”
could use the HGNC-approved gene name for the enzyme,6 as “fatty acid amide hydrolase”, its symbol, FAAH, or the Swiss-Prot human protein accession O00519.



While such D-A-R-C-P mappings may seem highly
specific, there are other useful relationships that can be extracted.
For example, while the publication is “about” BIA 10-2474
and the inhibition of the FAAH enzyme, it also includes the putative
off-targets and extrapolates to the paralogue FAAH2 (by homology).
We can also determine that CID 66554294 has 1199 nearest neighbors
by chemical similarity within PubChem, thereby inferring that FAAH
inhibitors are (or at least have been) an active area of research.
Typically, in structure–activity relationship (SAR) papers,
there are multiple “R-C”s for the same “D-A”
and P. Thus, within PMID 28596366, we can identify two additional
C’s as the metabolite BIA 10-2639 (CID 66554294) and a reference
inhibitor PF-04457845 (CID 24771824), where R is 4100 and 10 nM, respectively.

Figure 2 illustrates
additional c2p inferences from powerful features of the PubMed/NCBI
Entrez system.7 From the available “D-D”
links, we can find useful further references, including a primary
reference for the first declaration of in vitro activity measurements
against PF-04457845.

Figure 2 Relationships within the Entrez system available as links
from the right-hand facets of a PubMed entry. “Similar articles”
is essentially a heuristic clustering of “aboutness”,
while “cited by” provides forward connectivity within
the same knowledge domain. “Related information” links
to NCBI database cross-references including PubChem Substance (SID),
Compound (CID), and BioAssay, MeSH keyword matches, and protein structures
in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). In this case, the three “PubChem
substance” links have entered the system via the PubChem submissions
from GtoPdb (see section below on PubChem links). The “MeSH
keyword” look-up brings back three CIDs for BIA 10-2474, PF-04457845,
and the less relevant urea (n.b. MeSH annotators did not select the
metabolite BIA 10-2639 as a keyword but could do if this becomes a
main theme of a future paper).

2.2 c2p Curation in GtoPdb
GtoPdb utilizes
expert curation to identify, extract, and convert unstructured knowledge
from the published article (as text, chemical images and result tables)
into structured database entries. This can be illustrated for the
example above by looking at the table of entries GtoPdb has selected
for FAAH inhibitors shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3 GtoPdb entry for FAAH (GtoPdb Target ID (TID) 1440) with
inhibitors mapped to it from the database release 2018.1. The record
for PF-04457845 is expanded to show the activity and references. Descriptions
of the icons and rows are given in the GtoPdb Help documentation and
FAQs.

This includes the three D-A-R-C-Ps
already mentioned for BIA 10-2474, BIA 10-2639, and PF-04457845, with
the latter having two Dʼs and two Rʼs indicated as a range.
In the FAAH table, we have 15 unique Cʼs (as ligands), 23 Rʼs
(as affinities), and 13 Dʼs (as references). We also have four
instances of rat data. In these cases, D-A will be the same, R values
will be different, and P will be P97612 for the rat enzyme. If we
inspect the analogous records for human FAAH2 (i.e., where P = Q6GMR7,
GtoPdb TID 1401), we can find inhibition data for four of the compounds.
Importantly, in this case, there is no rodent orthologue for FAAH2.

Over the years, we have extended our data model to support additional
relationships. One of these was a sixth attribute in the link, “L”,
as a reference to the explicit location(s) of C within the document
D. Our shorthand was thus extended to D-A-R-C-L-P. The utility is
that from a series of compounds specified in a typical medicinal chemistry
paper, we specify the intradocument named leads, most often as listed
compound names from an analogue series and/or the code number of the
declared lead compound. Users can thus quickly see both what the paper
is about and how C has been provenanced in terms of curatorial choice.
This innovation was helpful as we began to include patents as Dʼs
(which often extend into 100s of IC50s), as a consequence
of expanded patent-extraction content in PubChem.5 An example from Figure 3 is ligand ID 9077, showing the location as “example
13 [WO2009109743]” (i.e., example 13 is L for its exact location
in the document), which was selected as a representative potent inhibitor
from a patent filed by the company Vernalis.

We informally refer
to the citations we associate with our ligands as primary, secondary,
or tertiary publications. “Primary citation” has already
been described above as A-R-C-L-P where the data are obtained with
purified protein in vitro. We use the term “secondary citation”,
where the publication D is about in vivo testing in animal models
and typically cites back to a primary paper. “Tertiary citation”
is applied to clinical reports that typically cite both primary and
secondary studies. These divisions are somewhat arbitrary and not
without limitations, but in practice, we find that this classification
offers users a small set of core linked references, anchored to the
same “C-P”, as starting points for data mining and further
exploration of the literature.

Another important aspect of citations
associated with our curated references for ligands is the dissemination
of these in PubChem. GtoPdb has been a submitter to PubChem since
2008, but in the last few years, as a consequence of the reference
curation expansion described above, we are now one of the major expert
annotation sources of “C-D” (see Table 1 in ref (5)). In addition, essentially
via the processes above, we are also one of the most stringent in
terms of key compounds. All of these are in D-A-R-C-P chains and many
are full D-A-R-C-L-P. The statistics are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Statistics
Associated with GtoPdb Relationship Extractions
unique PubMed
IDs linked to target–ligand pairs (C-P)	6466	
unique PubMed IDs for primary D with quantitative “A-R”	6078	
primary D with quantitative A-R, where C has a CID	5246	
references linked to our substance identifiers (SIDs) in PubChem	9253	
average compounds-per-document for A-R	1.1	
3 Challenges of c2p Curation
One of the
challenges for GtoPdb is to cover c2p with modest biocurator resources,
supported by the work of NC-IUPHAR subcommittees. We address this
by exercising judgment on what to include and, equally importantly,
what to leave out. We also may not pick up early development leads
or even new phase 1 compounds for popular targets toward the top end
of our ligand distribution (e.g., the dopamine D2 receptor
TID 215 with 105 ligands in the download list). However, we try to
capture all approved drugs and phase III candidates. As further examples
of selectivity judgments, our BACE1 entry (TID 2330) has 21 inhibitors
listed compared to 8545 for the ChEMBL (release 24) entry. For another
historically popular target, F2 (thrombin), the GtoPdb/ChEMBL mapped
compounds ratio is 10:8264. However, since we are not constrained
by coverage mandates, we can introduce committee-recommended positive
biases. Examples here include the recent crop of G-protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR)-biased agonists and allosteric modulators, where we
have curated those with PDB structures of ligand binding pockets.
In addition, we have introduced a new tool, SynPharm, to allow synthetic
biologists to exploit PDB ligand binding sequences.8 We also use our judgment in the opposite direction (i.e.,
lowering the bar) in that we pick up low-potency compounds directed
against novel targets or orphan GPCRs while maintaining a potency
cutoff of ∼10 μM. This is because these papers represent
new pharmacological starting points and thus extend the druggable
proteome coverage. More potent compounds may eventually be curated
against the same target, but we generally do not purge data-supported
first-generation ligands.

A second crucial challenge for c2p
is to ensure (as far as possible) that the reported experimental results
we choose to curate are correct. This has become harder as GtoPdb
domain coverage expands into new areas (especially enzymes and other
nonreceptor or channel proteins, which were our original focus prior
to 2012), journals have proliferated, and there is a lower proportion
of NC-IUPHAR subcommittee coverage within newer areas. These combined
factors have made quality judgments more difficult. This challenge
is now compounded (and thrusted into the foreground) by the “reproducibility
crisis” affecting the experimental biosciences in general and
rising rates of translational failure for pharmacology in particular.9 Major concerns began surfacing in 2010 with a
report indicating that mislabeled or misidentified cell lines had
affected thousands of papers.10 This was
followed in 2011 by the company Bayer declaring that their in-house
experimental findings failed to match up with 65% of published target
validation claims,11 and in 2013 by a study
pointing out dispensing errors in assays.12 By 2015, poor antibody specificity was also coming under the spotlight.13 At about the same time, concerns were being
raised about the inappropriate use of statistics and other aspects
of experimental design, which prompted revisions of the author guidelines
for the Br. J. Pharmacol.14 These cautionary
tales were compounded by a 2017 report that 29% of over 8500 vendor
drug compounds failed purity quality control.15 As if all this was not enough (while not directly an experimental
reproducibility issue per se), the increasingly documented shortcomings
of rodent models for human diseases (e.g., those most often used in
our secondary citations) are being blamed for unsustainable rates
of translational failure across all therapeutic areas.16

So, what can GtoPdb do in the face of
all this? The first thing is to maintain curatorial vigilance and
stringency, backed up by both NC-IUPHAR subcommittee oversight and
direct user feedback. This is helped by NC-IUPHAR’s familiarity
with the global research teams working in these areas over many years.
They can thus provide quality judgments of both the literature and
our database records curated from it. An example of this is the subcommittee
that recommends criteria for the interaction reported for an orphan
receptor with new cognate ligand(s) and continues to update confirmed
pairings.17 Also, our database team (past
and present) are scientists who have published in their own right
and are also members of the International Society for Biocuration.18

We have taken other strategic options
that, while certainly not eliminating the problems, go some way to
ameliorating them. One of these is that we now enter the curatorial
cycle more often via publications that give explicit support to primary
experimental reports (i.e., we increasingly initially pick up ligands
and/or targets via a secondary publication, meaning they are supported
by at least two papers). In the interests of reproducibility, we also
try to find at least partially overlapping confirmations from independent
teams. We also routinely exploit the PubMed features of both similar
articles and cited by (Figure 2). This gives us a convenient “360° walk”
of any publication as an adjunct QC. The former should pick up publications
on the same target and the latter may provide corroboration of that
activity modulation approach. However, perhaps the dominant factor
is that we do not aim for total c2p coverage. This means we can be
highly selective for small-data coverage of pharmacology.

Two
specific examples illustrate the importance of our c2p quality judgments.
The first concerns article retractions where there is evidence of
research misconduct or error.19 As a cross-check,
we have recently selected the 5801 retracted entries in PubMed and
checked which sources had added the 226 linked SIDs (although this
seems a reassuringly low proportion of the total PubMed linkage count
of 260 754). Of these, 225 turned out to be derived from the
automated IBM pipeline for patent extraction that also operates on
PubMed abstract texts. However, the 226th was our own entry for lysophosphatidylcholine
(LID 2508). It turns out that this had been initially associated with
a deorphanization report suggesting GPR4 activation by lysophosphatidylcholine
and sphingosylphosphorylcholine (LID 4032) but which was later retracted.20 Rather than simply breaking the link that would
lead to a loss of contextual information, we have explained the retraction
in the comment fields for both ligands. While such retractions will
only pick up a small proportion of irreproducible c2p, they have been
increasing due to enhanced detection methods, so we will continue
to regularly intersect our reference lists.

The second cautionary
example is an exclusion judgment. During the updating of dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 (DPP4) inhibitors (TID 1612), we picked up a reported
low-potency interaction between this enzyme as a successful diabetes
target and atorvastatin, recorded in several databases.21 The original paper declares an IC50 of 175 μM and Ki of 58 μM
for atorvastatin against pig DPP4 in vitro. However, this exceeds
our usual inclusion threshold of ∼10 μM (although not
applied as an absolute rule) by nearly an order of magnitude, even
for off-target cross-reactivity. By comparison, we had curated the
human DPP4 drug omarigliptin (LID 8402) with an IC50 of
1.6 nM and Ki of 0.8 nM, and atorvastatin
(LID 2949) as having an 8 nM IC50 against human hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA
reductase. To be clear, we are not questioning the authenticity of
the atorvastatin versus DPP4 result from ref (21) and we do take other primary
ligand reports from this journal. Notwithstanding, we not only remain
unconvinced as to the in vivo pharmacological relevance but also note
the absence of any subsequent in vitro confirmatory reports. While
our own judgment was therefore to exclude it, we noted that this interaction
had been captured by other sources. The first of these was in DrugBank,22 where the interaction (although not classified
as pharmacologically significant) is included, with human DPP4 listed
as one of the targets of atorvastatin (DB01076) but without activity
values. This contrasts with ChEMBL23 in
which the same paper was extracted but the database record maps the
atorvastatin IC50 against the correct pig enzyme (CHEMBL3813).
The ChEMBL entry was then transitively propagated to both BindingDB
(atorvastatin as BDB 22164) and PubChem BioAssay (as AID 313843).

3.1 Challenges Associated with D
The challenge of document
curation (D) is that of scale and selectivity. Estimating the total
extractable D-A-R-C-P from the entire document corpus relevant to
pharmacology, drug discovery, and chemical biology is difficult, to
say the least. However, one commercial source of such mappings, Excelra
(previously GVK BIO), has declared 1.34 million compounds from 112 000
curated papers in 2016, thus recording an average of ∼12 Cʼs
per paper.24 We can also compare with public
resources, such as ChEMBL,23 where release
24 declares 1.25 million structures extracted from just under 70 000
documents (including 62 205 PubMed IDs according to European
PubMed Central (EPMC) indexing). This gives an average of ∼18
Cʼs per paper in this case. The figures from BindingDB25 (for papers not overlapping with ChEMBL) are
3385 PubMed IDs and 43 397 compounds, with a slightly lower
average of ∼14 Cʼs per paper (Gilson, personal communication).

Compared to these other sources, GtoPdb Cʼs per paper average
of 1:1 reflects our typical selection of a single lead from each primary
paper (Table 1). One
way to monitor our selectivity is by the distribution of journal papers
we curate associated with ligands (Figure 4).

Figure 4 Distribution of papers curated for ligand interactions
in GtoPdb (release 2018.1). Numbers of papers are shown on the horizontal
axis. The vertical axis of journal titles shows the top-20 journals
from a total of 920.

The distribution is long-tailed (i.e., 43% are singleton
journals), but we can detect the splits between our empirical classifications.
Thus, J. Med. Chem. tops the list of primary reports.
As we have defined them above, secondary papers are widely distributed
with Br. J. Pharmacol. being a good example (although
it includes some primary reports). As expected, tertiary reports are
fewer since only a minority of lead compounds from the primary and
secondary papers make it through to clinical publications such as N. Eng. J. Med. or Br. J. Clin. Pharm.

Other negative trends we have become aware of (besides the reproducibility
crisis outlined above) include proliferation (i.e., c2p being spread
over 920 journal layouts with which we must individually grapple with
for curation), “salami-slicing” (i.e., data from essentially
the same study being divided between smaller publishable units), and
“me-too” papers. These ostensibly disclose new data
but for low-potency compounds unlikely to ever be optimized. Another
disappointing aspect is the relatively slow penetration of Gold Open
Access (GOA) into the medicinal chemistry literature. Advantages of
GOA include that full-text HTML facilitates faster and more accurate
curation (e.g., reducing formatting errors associated with pasting
IUPAC names out of PDFs). In addition, both PubMed Central (PMC) and
EPMC not only index full text for searching but also for different
types of automated entity indexing (e.g., gene names). As a domain,
pharmacology has done somewhat better in open access (OA) statistics
than medicinal chemistry. For example, the Br. J. Pharmacol. achieved 77% PubMed Central (PMC) free full-text conversion for
their 2001 PubMed IDs over the last 5 years (i.e., with a 6-month
embargo period). The recently launched sister journal, Pharmacol.
Res. Perspect., was conceived as GOA from the outset and
thus has a PMC full-house for its 356 PubMed entries.

3.2 Challenges Associated with A
We made an early decision
to not add assay details to our database records because we defer
to the papers that we select to describe A (for those subsets of R
that we also select). There were two main reasons for this. First,
we had neither the curatorial capacity to add detailed assay descriptions
nor (until the BioAssay Ontology becomes widely adopted) would we
have a classification for them.26 Second,
while we do add brief notes for unusual or new types of assays, it
is difficult to make short summaries that experimentalists could use
without missing essential details, which means they would have to
consult the paper anyway. In addition, even in the papers, descriptions
often turn out to be incomplete (e.g., missing precise buffer conditions).
We feel journals could do more here to mandate reproducible descriptions
since guidelines have been made available for many years. These include
Standards for Reporting Enzyme Data27 and
Minimum Information about a Bioactive Entity.28 However, it has to be accepted that across the major target classes
(GPCRs and ion channels in particular), assays are becoming more complex
and thus making editorial oversight more difficult.29

3.3 Challenges Associated with
R
We curate R as a standard activity modulation parameter,
where IC50, EC50, Ki, and Kd are in the majority. We typically
report these as specified by authors, but we normalize concentrations
to nanomolars and then log these to pAct. We do not always accept
the primacy of what is in the paper but will correct in our database
records that which we judge as clearly erroneous. In practice, such
corrections are rare since, if we find that the frequency of probable
mistakes in any paper is high (due to questionable quality or lack
of editorial stringency), it is not selected for curation. What we
occasionally do fix are obvious unit mix-ups between micromolars and
nanomolars. A more common issue is the quoting of significant figures
way beyond those appropriate to the error ranges of the assay. An
example is SID 103716988 from PubChem BioAssay (AID 566893) with a
BACE1 IC50 value of 1.38995 μM. Since the error of
such protease substrate turnover assays typically exceeds 10%, we
would have rounded this to three significant figures (but we did not
select this particular paper).

We also come across activity
units that we may not typically include but will mention in a comments
field. For example, covalent enzyme inhibition can be expressed as
K (inact) in a paper, but we will use the IC50 at fixed
preincubation time.30 If bioactivity is
only reported as percentage inhibition at fixed concentrations, then
we take the absence of dose response data to indicate that the work
is more of a preliminary investigation. While we would not usually
curate such paper, we make exceptions for what we judge as significant
pharmacology from difficult assays. We also do not normally add reported
error ranges to database records. This is because of lack of standardization
in different authors’ statistical treatment of variance ranges
as well as often a lack of clarity as to whether the variation for
technical or biological replicates was being measured. As part of
our procedure, we inspect PubChem BioAssay31 records (i.e., A-R) that may already be linked to C. We suspect
few authors perform this cross-check (or at least do not mention it).
Sometimes this indicates to us that their compound (or a close analogue)
is in fact more potent against a target that was not cross-screened
in their paper. In such cases, we mention this in curators notes.

3.4 Challenges Associated with C
Since curating
the C in D-A-R-C-P is arguably the most critical link for c2p, we
employ a series of curatorial steps. First and foremost, we must discern
if the authors have unequivocally specified a defined structure for
C that is either novel (as defined by its absence in GtoPdb or other
databases) or already exists in some other provenanced source. We
call this process a structure-to-structure mapping (s2s). Second,
we resolve any names (semantic, common, nonproprietary, code names,
and synonyms) against that structure. We term this name-to-structure
(n2s), which includes Google checking. We may also have to resort
to a third process of image-to-structure (i2s) if this is the only
explicit description of C in the paper. We note that these processes
are reciprocal and that users may need to perform them in different
searching contexts (e.g., “what name does this structure search
retrieve from GtoPdb” is essentially a structure-to-name query).
The standard specifications we use for chemical curation are shown
below.

We have previously outlined reasons why we have chosen
PubChem as our primary source of C.32 Our
s2s process is thus centered on mapping key structures in papers to
Compound Identifiers (CIDs) and we subsequently submit our own records
to PubChem as Substance Identifiers (SIDs). The GtoPdb release 2018.1
thus includes 6969 CIDs we have resolved by curation, but in 95 cases,
we are the sole source. These are usually associated with novel structures
but, as discussed below, some may be alternative representations of
pre-existing structures. So why are our CID s2s mostly successfully
mapped? The main reason is that PubChem has now expanded to 95 million
CIDs from 598 sources, thereby (from the alternative databases of
comparative size) becoming the de facto global chemistry and bioactivity
hub of choice.33 Our largest source type
overlap within PubChem of 80% comes from patents, reflecting the fact
that most structures in drug discovery reports have already surfaced
in PubChem via automated patent extraction.34

The spectrum of equivocality and even frank errors we regularly
encounter in resolving C during s2s operations is frustratingly broad
and some of them have been reviewed elsewhere.35,36 This can be largely attributed to the reluctance of journals to
mandate the use of public database identifiers for chemical structures.
By this omission, they lag several decades behind molecular biology
and bioinformatics, where editors have long insisted on accession
numbers for protein and nucleic acid sequences to be reciprocally
linked to PubMed records (although even here, no journal actually
had complete compliance when surveyed in 2006).37 Since PubChem has had stable chemical identifiers for well
over a decade, it is unclear why such journal requirements have not
appeared. One exception is Nat. Chem. Biol., where
author-specified SID structures are submitted by the journal. The
current metrics are 7949 SIDs from 2444 papers (but some are on-hold
pending publication). We have cross-referenced 51 of these papers
and linked 81 ligands. As a primary source journal, it lies just outside
the top-20 in Figure 4, since this is less mainstream for pharmacology. However, the pre-established
s2s is valuable and makes it usually straightforward to link up the
other entities. As our largest primary source of compound extractions, J. Med. Chem. has moved some way toward s2s with the introduction
in 2014 of author-specified SMILES strings as open CSV tables (Figure 5).38 For example, during curation, we cross-checked the BACE1
inhibitor clinical compound for Alzheimer’s disease, verubecestat
(LID 8699), against the data sheet in Figure 6.

Figure 5 Six principal types of chemical representation
or routes of interconversion encountered and/or used during the curation
of structures from papers. Most cheminformatic tool-kits can execute
the interconversions indicated by the arrows and major chemistry databases
will also precompute links between them. However, the round-tripping
may not be perfect. Note also that the InChIKey cannot be converted
to a structure but has key utilities, including as a look-up string
in Google.

Figure 6 Supplementary data from ref (39) with verubecestat as “compound
3”.

The inclusion of SMILES and their
associated bioactivities expedites GtoPdb curation. In the absence
of this, in most other journals, we have to pull out IUPAC text and
convert this to SMILES, InChI string, and InChIKey using either the
OPSIN40 or Chemicalize.org web tools.41 However, we find that names used by authors
may need editing to remove formatting quirks or typographical errors.
In the absence of IUPAC names (e.g., Markush enumerations for an SAR
series), we may have to resort to i2s (as SMILES) with OSRA.42 Raw i2s outputs from this often need correcting
but usually have a close enough similarity match from a PubChem search.
For poor images, we resort to a chemical sketcher that outputs SMILES.
We then search PubChem via either SMILES, InChI string, InChIKey,
SDF, or MOL file (i.e., the standardized formats from Figure 5), where we can usually resolve
s2s via a CID exact match. We also cross-check against what is in
the paper to clarify the specification of either enantiomeric mixtures
and/or the resolved stereoisomer forms as R/S and E/Z. Our last operation
on the compound entries is analogous to what we do for the papers
in PubMed: a 360° walk of the structural neighborhood within
PubChem. This includes the precomputed relationships with similar
compounds (analogues), same connectivity (i.e., different isomers
or tautomers of the same skeleton), and mixtures, which can have bioactivity
data that may not be recorded for parent compounds. In terms of deciding
correctness (including isomerism), our empirical judgment is if many
PubChem submitters agree on the structure (i.e., for a clear majority
of substances merged in the CID) and the names in multiple sources
also match, minimum parsimony would indicate both s2s and n2s be correct.

Pharmacologically active peptides as C entities present different
s2s and n2s problems to small molecules. They require options of representation
as three-letter code or FASTA sequence strings. Endogenous, unmodified
peptides specifically cleaved from precursors are usually specified
in the UniProtKB feature lines. Many are also specified as SMILES
in PubChem CIDs. Complications arise from author-declared names that
may not be IUPAC standard and/or include post-translational modifications,
such as N-acetylation or C-amidation. Exogenous, synthetic peptides
have the same issues and, moreover, are often not found in sequence
databases. Radioactively labeled analogues (for small molecules as
well as peptides) also feature prominently in the pharmacological
literature. However, sometimes the molecular position of the label
is unspecified, so we must duplicate the structure record to point
to distinct references where data are generated with the labeled compound.

One negative aspect that has not changed in the last decade is
that approximately 40% of all declared drug development candidates
(i.e., where basic pharmacology and therapeutic indications are partially
outlined on company portfolio websites and press releases) still have
no associated structure (Lloyd, personal communication). The unappreciated
numerical scale of the problem is reflected in the total of 7855 small-molecule
drug projects declared globally in 2017.43 Thus, the 40% would represent over 3000 blinded compounds. What
makes matters worse is that many of these have entered their clinical
phases, even up to and beyond phase II, without explicit n2s in the
literature (so we make the judgment not to capture these in GtoPdb).
It is likely most of these structures are already in PubChem, having
been extracted from patents, but these C entries do not specify which
are the full leads or development candidates (and the patents claiming
the structure series are often filed before these were chosen). This
problem was highlighted in 2012 in the context of stalled industry
clinical candidates offered as repurposing proposals, but where n2s
could not be found for many of the code numbers.44 This pernicious and pervasive practice of c2p “blinding”
(practiced by academic drug discovery operations as well as commercial
ones) is based on the fear of competitive fast-following. Notwithstanding,
such blinding remains the single biggest obstacle to capturing recent
development compounds (i.e., by definition, the cream of the pharmacological
crop). It should be noted that there is no statistical evidence that
has established that delaying open publication (or not publishing
at all) reduces commercial risk. One possible hope for amelioration
is the growing pressure on companies to increase the completeness
and transparency of clinical trial data.45

3.5 Challenges Associated with P
The use of
standardized names and accession numbers to enable the resolution
of P is more common than for C entities in papers. Nevertheless, ambiguity
can still be a problem. In GtoPdb, we cross-refer commonly used protein
or gene identifiers, including our own NC-IUPHAR nomenclature. For
many reasons, we use the UniProtKB accession number as an unequivocal,
species-specific, primary identifier, which, for human proteins, is
the Swiss-Prot curated entry. We also cross-refer the approved HGNC
gene symbol as part of our HGNC/NC-IUPHAR collaboration. For those
more familiar with NCBI annotation, a RefSeq NM or NP can also be
used, but a gene ID is preferable. Where the paper specifies a protein
complex, we need to resolve this to the constituent subunit IDs. Notwithstanding
our efforts to resolve sequence identifiers, we are aware that in
vitro activity studies are often done with forms of the protein target,
where either the primary sequences are not identical to the Swiss-Prot
canonical entry or various kinds of post-translational modifications
have been introduced that could plausibly affect activity. For example,
the protein could have a mutation used in a resistance screen, have
a His tag left over from purification, Methionines may have been substituted
to reduce oxidation sensitivity, the N-glycosylation could be variable
according to the expression system, or, as in the cases of some proteases,
both the signal and propeptide may be omitted from the expression
construct. Here again, if notable deviations from wild-type are specified
by authors, these are mentioned in curators’ notes and the
reference is linked to the entry for further details.

4 Illustration of Current c2p Challenges
We can translate the general c2p challenges
above into a specific example different to the BIA 10-2474. In this
case, we selected “AZD9668: pharmacological characterization
of a novel oral inhibitor of neutrophil elastase” as the primary
citation D46 for the lead compound alvelestat
(LID 6476). Our c2p authenticity judgment was high for the following
reasons: (a) the journal is the fifth-ranking for our citations, (b)
the authors are from an established medicinal chemistry team in a
major pharmaceutical company, (c) it is open access (OA), (d) as an
older paper, the pharmacology has been corroboratively reproduced
in other articles as well as AstraZeneca published patents, and (e)
the level of detail in the paper allowed unequivocal D-A-R-C-P assignments.
For example, A-R was covered by the quote “AZD9668 had a high
binding affinity for human NE (Kd = 9.5
nM) and potently inhibited NE activity” (Table 1 from PMID 21791628). The calculated pIC50 (IC50) and Ki values
for AZD9668 for human NE were 7.9 (12 nM) and 9.4 nM, respectively”.
In addition, Table 2 (from PMID 21791628) includes a log-transformed
standard error of the mean as a pIC50 of 7.9 ± 0.12.
For P, “neutrophil elastase” can be resolved to UniProtKB
accession P08246 and can also be identified as HGNC symbol ELANE, NCBI gene ID 1991,
and GtoPdb TID 2358. However, we noted, as for other enzyme families
with a history of alternative names, ELANE can potentially be confused
with five members of the chymotrypsin-like elastase family (CELA1,
CELA2A, CELA2B, CELA3A, and CELA3B). This includes what used to be
called pancreatic elastase that now splits into the last three gene
names in the list.

The assignment of n2s in this case had caveats
that illustrate an important c2p issue.

The information in the
paper was consistent with the proposed INN: list 104 WHO drug information,
Vol. 24, No. 4, 2010, where alvelestat was first declared as n2s,
as shown in Figure 7.

Figure 7 Image for alvelestat from the INN proposal document. This included
the IUPAC name: N-{[5-(methanesulfonyl)pyridin-2-yl]methyl}-6-methyl-5-(1-methyl-1H-pyrazol-5-yl)-2-oxo-1-[3-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-1,2-dihydropyridine-3-carboxamide.

Importantly, OPSIN converted the
IUPAC name into SMILES and InChIs that in turn allowed an unequivocal
s2s match with CID 46861623. During curation, we also noted that this
CID has clear submitter “majority vote” at 45 SIDs,
thus supporting the parsimonious assumption that this n2s (i.e., for
AZD9668 and the alvelestat INN) is correct. As a cross-check, using
the highest stringency query of “alvelestat”[Completesynonym]
in PubChem compound search (as a complete string match) returns only
CID 46861623. However, a simple name search (that includes partial
string matches) returned a surprising result (Figure 8).

Figure 8 CIDs retrieved from PubChem with the term “alvelestat”.
The SID counts for each of these in descending order are 3, 5, 45,
and 7.

The INN name query returns four
distinct CIDs (each differing by molecular weight and InChIKey), which,
from the PubChem chemistry rules, must have at least one submitter
each with different n2s. Inspection shows that seven submitters for
CID 172650821 chose the tosylate salt with the correct parent structure
(albeit with two spellings of the counterion). It is unclear where
this mixture originated, since this is not an official USAN salt name.
However, we can establish that ChemIDplus was the first to assign
it in 2013 against a patent extraction by Thomson from 2010. Notwithstanding,
it is neither clear how the three SIDs for CID 71587812 (ChemIDplus,
DrugBank, and EPA DSSTox) omitted the trifluoride nor how the five
submitters for CID 75731913 (including four vendors) dropped a methyl
group. Statistics on the frequency of this type of n2s error in open
sources (i.e., not just stereochemistry ambiguities) are difficult
to come by. However, surveys of nonsystematic identifiers (such as
INNs) matching more than one structure indicated a within-databases
median of 2.5%, levels that, while not catastrophic, are still confounding
for c2p.47

4.1 D-A-R-C-P
Limitations
Although we find D-A-R-C-P mapping a useful summary
of our curation process, we are aware of its limitations. The most
important of these is the incomplete capacity (in terms of edge cases)
to capture the full range of mechanistic nuances of c2p. We can exemplify
some of these limitations as follows:(1) There are many examples of pharmacologically
significant compounds with system perturbation read-outs but where
the mmoa has not yet been elucidated (i.e., C may have a phenotypic
A without a P). While lithium remains the classic case (LID 5212),
we can also use the example of CCG-1423 (LID 6761). This inhibits
RhoA transcriptional signaling via an unknown target but is a useful
tool compound for disrupting this pathway in cancer.

(2) The conversion of prodrugs to drugs
is a well-established medicinal chemistry strategy but presents a
curatorial dilemma. In some cases, we can record inhibitory activity
for what is named as the approved drug in regulatory documentation
(i.e., C has an INN), but the metabolite is more active by orders
of magnitude (i.e., a “C-to-C” conversion relationship).
Our entry for ACE (TID 1613) has 32 ligands including 13 prodrug/drug
(lil/lat) pairs. There are other cases that, while not designed as
prodrugs per se, generate active metabolites. Here, we provide cross-pointers,
as for the two hydroxyatorvastatins from our atorvastatin entry (LID
2949).

(3) Some important
medicines are molecularly undefined substances and thus difficult
to consistently map to database identifiers (i.e., “C”
is not pure). In the classic case of heparin, we use a work around
in the form of a defined structure (LID 4214) to represent the use
of heterogeneous purified heparins in vivo. As a compromise, this
allows us to add a useful “C-A-P” mapping.

(4) Indirect mechanisms (i.e., where P
is not the primary efficacy target). Heparin is also a good example
in this case, where “C-P” is antithrombin III, but it
indirectly acts as a thrombin inhibitor (although such cases are rare).

(5) Imaging reagents. By definition,
these are not therapeutic but are very important diagnostically. We
can often find a reported “A-R-P” result but not always.
Flortaucipir binding to tau is an example (LID 9100).

(6) Single-target mapping has an obvious
shortcoming where evidence supports the binding of C is to a constitutive
heteromeric protein complex (i.e., consisting of one A-R to multiple
Pʼs). While NC-IUPHAR has defined a set of complex targets for
GtoPdb, there are exceptions where, based on reported data, we assign
a single protein from the complex as the main binding partner. An
example here is presenilin (PSEN1, TID 2402) against which nine γ
secretase inhibitors are mapped. We made this choice to constrain
our relationship matrix, which would otherwise be complicated with
the additional four proteins in the γ secretase complex.

(7) The other equally obvious
shortcoming of single-target mapping is broadly termed polypharmacology.
This (as one C against multiple A-R-P) can be divided into multiple
efficacy-related targets and off-targets as liability-associated.
Here again we veer toward stringency of only including quantitatively
defined (multiple binding) targets and designating a data-supported
primary efficacy target. The drug verubecestat (LID 8699) is an interesting
example where we record that it is more potent against the paralogue
BACE2 than its primary target in Alzheimer’s disease of BACE1.

(8) Different physical forms
of chemically identical active compounds. These are very important
therapeutically (e.g., different crystallization polymorphs giving
fast or slow release), but we do not index formulations.

(9) New therapeutic modalities are on
the horizon that will present data model challenges. We already have
recently approved nucleic acid drug entries (i.e., where A and P are
missing) as exemplified by Nusinersen (LID 9416). We also expect to
see small molecules optimized for direct binding against defined nucleic
RNA sequences where we will have to replace P with a defined RNA accession
number.48 Another area of development is
large molecule–small-molecule covalent conjugates (hybrids),
which are antibodies with cytotoxic payloads. Some are already approved,
such as ado-trastuzumab (LID 6928), where, pending future options,
we cross-point to the “warhead” as a separate entity.
This type of problem has inspired global efforts directed toward the
technicalities of database registration of complex biological reagents
in general, including for regulatory requirements (e.g., the idea
of macromolecular InChIs is being developed).



5 Future Outlook
5.1 Overcoming
Challenges
After focusing primarily on challenges, we can
move on to consider opportunities for c2p enhancements, in the sense
of at least overcoming some of the challenges. However, we need to
prelude this with an obvious question; has our task of D-A-R-C-P curation
become any easier over the last 15 years? Stepping back to take our
own perspective we would have to answer—not that much. Those
easing effects that we have noted include the following: (1) We make
a concerted effort to pass on curatorial problem-solving experience
internally through changes of team personnel. This takes many forms
but has an extent of formalization in our own FAQ, our team publications,
extensive support from NC-IUPHAR committees, and the development of
a sophisticated curation tool that encodes accumulated guidelines
for filling in new database entries (i.e., we get better at what we
do). (2) Since the completion of the human genome and the annotation
efforts of resources such as HGNC and UniProt, protein target ambiguity
from author descriptions has diminished (but by no means disappeared).
Improved journal editorial guidelines have also helped. (3) The three
tools mentioned above, OPSIN, Chemicalize, and OSRA, all appearing
relatively recently, have proved very useful. (4) The expansion of
PubChem (via the curated sources contributing to it, including our
own) now provides a 95 million chemical structure substrate for cross-checking
C from papers and patents.

5.2 Emerging Opportunities
for Connecting c2p
The most significant of these would be
large-scale, open disinterring of A-R-C-L-P relationships from pharmacology
literature. However, there seems no immediate prospect of these five
entities and attributes being surfaced and connected to the level
of precision that GtoPdb is known for. We should also point out that,
in general, selecting papers has not been rate limiting for GtoPdb
expansion, but curator time certainly is. So, while GtoPdb will remain
small and stringent as a strategic choice, it does raise the question
of just how large the c2p corpus could be, with the crucial caveat
of quality filtration if possible. As the figures above show, ChEMBL
has the largest manual extraction capacity of any public source. However,
even with these resources, the combination of curatorial lead time
and long release cycles gives a backlog of up to 2 years. With GtoPdb’s
smaller in-house curation team, new lead compounds and targets can
be added within our 2 month release cycle.

Consideration of
extraction scale leads naturally to the subject of text mining and
its more advanced form as natural language processing. This has now
developed to the point where it is certainly capable of recognizing
and extracting D, A, R, C, and P from full text.49 However, joining them up as D-A-R-C-P automatically is
still challenging. In this context, it should be noted that professional
biocurators can make such joins from a clearly laid out manuscript
in a matter of minutes (but somewhat longer if the entities are confusingly
arranged, including Markush-only structures, or results are partitioned
into multiple supplementary data files). However, even as progress
is being made in the precision of automated entity extraction from
text, the position regarding publishers permissioning for text mining
of the 4.3 million full text articles in PubMed Central and EPMC (recently
expanded by ∼2 million via the “unpaywall” initiative)
remains unclear. This presents a paradox in that, since patents are
free of licensing restrictions, SureChEMBL not only generates an open
database of 19.2 million chemical structures automatically extracted
from documents but also performs an extended bioentity mark-up within
selected documents.50

So what future
developments could drive the availability of D-A-R-C-P? We suggest,
logically, a process needs to be widely adopted whereby authors specify
both the entities and the key data relationships from their own papers.
Since they carried out the scientific work, they are de facto the
best stakeholder group to do this. There are three corollaries. First,
iteration between authors and journals and biocurators would be necessary
to formalize the output (including some level of ontology mapping),
and second, collaboration with open databases is necessary to accept
the input. Arguably, there is no fundamental technical impediment
to something along these lines being introduced, so resistance to
this seems more of a social problem.

So why has progress toward
this been slow and what could accelerate it? There are many possible
factors of which only a few salient ones can be considered here. The
first to mention is that from a journal pilot study in 2008 for protein
interactions, authors proved unenthusiastic about filling in even
a relatively simple data sheet.51 Thus,
if even just “P-to-P” data seemed onerous to comply
with, then full D-A-R-C-P mark-up would seem to present an even greater
adoption barrier (especially where C could expand out to dozens of
structures from SAR sets). Nonetheless, we have seen some progress
in this direction, including our own experience of working with Br. J. Pharmacol. and Br. J. Clin. Pharm. to update guidelines for authors on reporting c2p. They are now
required to provide GtoPdb identifiers and nomenclature for the targets
and ligands which their article is about. More recently, we have introduced
a system whereby novel key entities (i.e., not already in GtoPdb)
are communicated to the team for consideration before publication.
Consequently, those within our remit are added and the new identifiers
provided.

Journals have a fundamental role to play in c2p by
providing clear guidance to authors on the database identifiers and
submission formats to use. This also ideally extends to supporting
live-links to external database entries from within articles to help
readers to find further information and context for the C and Pʼs
as described. However, the four journals mentioned above constitute
a relatively small proportion of the total coverage for GtoPdb and,
beyond these, there are neither declarations nor even word on the
grapevine suggesting that many more journals (e.g., from our Figure 4 list) are planning
to formally introduce author mark-up of D-A-R-C-P. A comparative paradox
here is that authors complying with sequence accession numbers as
a condition of publication (as mentioned above) have now reached a
submission rate of ∼3500 per day. Nonetheless, there are simple
steps authors can take, even when there is no specific journal mandate.
As we have shown, providing public database identifiers for C and
P is a basic requirement, and if C is novel, then providing structural
information in a standard format recognized by open chemistry tools
is crucial. Authors and journals will see the benefits of enhanced
connectivity within the whole knowledge domain, increasing impact,
and, ultimately, citations.

To conclude, while this perspective
has focused on GtoPdb, it covers key points regarding the curatorial
conversion of unstructured, or semistructured c2p data into structured
database records. These can not only justifiably be termed “knowledge
bases” but are also being merged into “big data”
aggregations for data mining, including artificial intelligence approaches.
The prospective advantages for the pharmacology, chemical biology,
and drug discovery fields are thus huge.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
C.S., E.F., and S.D.H. were supported by Wellcome Trust grants
099156/Z/12/Z from 2012-2015 and 108420/Z/15/Z from 2015-2018. J.L.S.
and A.J.P. were supported by the British Pharmacological Society and
the University of Edinburgh. The authors thank all past and present
members of NC-IUPHAR and its subcommittees for their guidance and
support. They also thank our curator alumni, in particular Helen Benson
and Chido Mpamhanga.

Abbreviations
GtoPdbIUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY

c2pchemistry-to-pharmacology

mmoamolecular mechanism
of action

D-A-R-C-Pdocument-assay-result-compound-protein target

D-A-R-C-L-Pdocument-assay-result-compound-location
(within D)-protein target

i2simage-to-structure

n2sname-to-structure

s2sstructure-to-structure
==== Refs
References
Wishart D. S. ; Feunang Y. D. ; Marcu A. ; Guo A. C. ; Liang K. ; Vázquez-Fresno R. ; Sajed T. ; Johnson D. ; Li C. ; Karu N. ; et al. HMDB 4.0: The Human Metabolome Database for
2018 . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2018 , 46 , D608 –D617 . 10.1093/nar/gkx1089 .29140435 
Harding S. D. ; Sharman J. L. ; Faccenda E. ; Southan C. ; Pawson A. J. ; Ireland S. ; Gray A. J. G. ; Bruce L. ; Alexander S. P. H. ; Anderton S. ; et al. The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY in
2018: Updates and Expansion to Encompass the New Guide to IMMUNOPHARMACOLOGY . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2018 , 46 , D1091 –D1106 . 10.1093/nar/gkx1121 .29149325 
Harmar A. J. ; Hills R. A. ; Rosser E. M. ; Jones M. ; Buneman O. P. ; Dunbar D. R. ; Greenhill S. D. ; Hale V. A. ; Sharman J. L. ; Bonner T. I. ; et al. IUPHAR-DB:
The IUPHAR Database of G Protein-Coupled Receptors and Ion Channels . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2009 , 37 , D680 –D685 . 10.1093/nar/gkn728 .18948278 
Southan C. ; Boppana K. ; Jagarlapudi S. A. A. ; Muresan S. 
Analysis of in Vitro Bioactivity Data Extracted from
Drug Discovery Literature and Patents: Ranking 1654 Human Protein
Targets by Assayed Compounds and Molecular Scaffolds . J. Cheminf. 
2011 , 3 , 14 10.1186/1758-2946-3-14 .
Butler D. ; Callaway E. 
Scientists in the Dark
after French Clinical Trial Proves Fatal . Nature 
2016 , 529 , 263 –264 . 10.1038/nature.2016.19189 .26791697 
Yates B. ; Braschi B. ; Gray K. A. ; Seal R. L. ; Tweedie S. ; Bruford E. A. 
Genenames.Org: The
HGNC and VGNC Resources in 2017 . Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2017 , 45 , D619 –D625 . 10.1093/nar/gkw1033 .27799471 
NCBI Resource Coordinators ; Agarwala R. ; Barrett T. ; Beck J. ; Benson D. A. ; Bollin C. ; Bolton E. ; Bourexis D. ; Brister J. R. ; Bryant S. H. ; et al. Database
Resources of the National Center for Biotechnology Information . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2018 , 46 , D8 –D13 . 10.1093/nar/gkx1095 .29140470 
Ireland S. M. ; Southan C. ; Dominguez-Monedero A. ; Harding S. D. ; Sharman J. L. ; Davies J. A. 
SynPharm: A Guide
to PHARMACOLOGY Database Tool for Designing Drug Control into Engineered
Proteins . ACS Omega 
2018 , 7993 –8002 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b00659 .30087931 
Schulz J. B. ; Cookson M. R. ; Hausmann L. 
The Impact of Fraudulent and Irreproducible
Data to the Translational Research Crisis - Solutions and Implementation . J. Neurochem. 
2016 , 139 , 253 –270 . 10.1111/jnc.13844 .27797406 
Cell Line Misidentification: The Beginning of the End . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2010 , 10 , 441 –448 . 10.1038/nrc2852 .20448633 
Mullard A. 
Reliability of “new Drug Target”
Claims Called into Question . Nat. Rev. Drug
Discovery 
2011 , 10 , 643 –644 . 10.1038/nrd3545 .21878966 
Ekins S. ; Olechno J. ; Williams A. J. 
Dispensing
Processes Impact Apparent Biological Activity as Determined by Computational
and Statistical Analyses . PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e6232510.1371/journal.pone.0062325 .23658723 
Baker M. 
Reproducibility Crisis: Blame It on the Antibodies . Nature 
2015 , 521 , 274 –276 . 10.1038/521274a .25993940 
Curtis M. J. ; Bond R. A. ; Spina D. ; Ahluwalia A. ; Alexander S. P. A. ; Giembycz M. A. ; Gilchrist A. ; Hoyer D. ; Insel P. A. ; Izzo A. A. ; et al. Experimental
Design and Analysis and Their Reporting: New Guidance for Publication
in BJP . Br. J. Pharmacol. 
2015 , 172 , 3461 –3471 . 10.1111/bph.12856 .26114403 
Corsello S. M. ; Bittker J. A. ; Liu Z. ; Gould J. ; McCarren P. ; Hirschman J. E. ; Johnston S. E. ; Vrcic A. ; Wong B. ; Khan M. ; et al. The Drug Repurposing Hub: A next-Generation Drug Library
and Information Resource . Nat. Med. 
2017 , 23 , 405 –408 . 10.1038/nm.4306 .28388612 
Perlman R. L. 
Mouse Models
of Human Disease: An Evolutionary Perspective . Evol. Med. Public Health 
2016 , 2016 , eow01410.1093/emph/eow014 .
Davenport A. P. ; Alexander S. P. H. ; Sharman J. L. ; Pawson A. J. ; Benson H. E. ; Monaghan A. E. ; Liew W. C. ; Mpamhanga C. P. ; Bonner T. I. ; Neubig R. R. ; et al. International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. LXXXVIII.
G Protein-Coupled Receptor List: Recommendations for New Pairings
with Cognate Ligands . Pharmacol. Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 967 –986 . 10.1124/pr.112.007179 .23686350 
Biocuration: Distilling Data into Knowledge . PLoS Biol. 
2018 , 16 , e200284610.1371/journal.pbio.2002846 .29659566 
Li G. ; Kamel M. ; Jin Y. ; Xu M. K. ; Mbuagbaw L. ; Samaan Z. ; Levine M. A. ; Thabane L. 
Exploring the Characteristics, Global Distribution
and Reasons for Retraction of Published Articles Involving Human Research
Participants: A Literature Survey . J. Multidiscip.
Healthc. 
2018 , 11 , 39 –47 . 10.2147/JMDH.S151745 .29403283 
Zhu K. ; et al. Sphingosylphosphorylcholine
and Lysophosphatidylcholine Are Ligands for the G Protein-Coupled
Receptor GPR4 . J. Biol. Chem. 
2005 , 276 , 41325 –41335 . (Retraction, 2005, 280, 43280) 10.1074/jbc.m008057200 .
Taldone T. ; Zito S. W. ; Talele T. T. 
Inhibition of Dipeptidyl Peptidase-IV
(DPP-IV) by Atorvastatin . Bioorg. Med. Chem.
Lett. 
2008 , 18 , 479 –484 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.11.107 .18068977 
Wishart D. S. ; Feunang Y. D. ; Guo A. C. ; Lo E. J. ; Marcu A. ; Grant J. R. ; Sajed T. ; Johnson D. ; Li C. ; Sayeeda Z. ; et al. DrugBank
5.0: A Major Update to the DrugBank Database for 2018 . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2018 , 46 , D1074 –D1082 . 10.1093/nar/gkx1037 .29126136 
Gaulton A. ; Hersey A. ; Nowotka M. ; Bento A. P. ; Chambers J. ; Mendez D. ; Mutowo P. ; Atkinson F. ; Bellis L. J. ; Cibrián-Uhalte E. ; et al. The ChEMBL Database
in 2017 . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2017 , 45 , D945 –D954 . 10.1093/nar/gkw1074 .27899562 
Southan C. ; Manchala A. K. ; Devidas S.  Large-Scale Curation
of Bioactive Chemistry from Patents and Papers: Excelra GOSTAR ; 2017 , https://www.slideshare.net/cdsouthan/largescale-curation-of-bioactive-chemistry-from-patents-and-papers (accessed July 2018).
Gilson M.
K. ; Liu T. ; Baitaluk M. ; Nicola G. ; Hwang L. ; Chong J. 
BindingDB
in 2015: A Public Database for Medicinal Chemistry, Computational
Chemistry and Systems Pharmacology . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2016 , 44 , D1045 –D1053 . 10.1093/nar/gkv1072 .26481362 
Clark A. M. ; Bunin B. A. ; Litterman N. K. ; Schürer S. C. ; Visser U. 
Fast and Accurate Semantic Annotation
of Bioassays Exploiting a Hybrid of Machine Learning and User Confirmation . PeerJ 
2014 , 2 , e52410.7717/peerj.524 .25165633 
Gardossi L. ; Poulsen P. B. ; Ballesteros A. ; Hult K. ; Švedas V. K. ; Vasić-Rački Đ. ; Carrea G. ; Magnusson A. ; Schmid A. ; Wohlgemuth R. ; et al. Guidelines for Reporting of Biocatalytic Reactions . Trends Biotechnol. 
2010 , 28 , 171 –180 . 10.1016/j.tibtech.2010.01.001 .20149467 
Orchard S. ; Al-Lazikani B. ; Bryant S. ; Clark D. ; Calder E. ; Dix I. ; Engkvist O. ; Forster M. ; Gaulton A. ; Gilson M. ; et al. Minimum Information about a Bioactive Entity (MIABE) . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2011 , 10 , 661 –669 . 10.1038/nrd3503 .21878981 
Lane J. R. ; May L. T. ; Parton R. G. ; Sexton P. M. ; Christopoulos A. 
A Kinetic
View of GPCR Allostery and Biased Agonism . Nat.
Chem. Biol. 
2017 , 13 , 929 –937 . 10.1038/nchembio.2431 .28820879 
Krippendorff B.-F. ; Neuhaus R. ; Lienau P. ; Reichel A. ; Huisinga W. 
Mechanism-Based Inhibition: Deriving
KIand and kInact Directly from Time-Dependent
IC50 Values . J. Biomol. Screening 
2009 , 14 , 913 –923 . 10.1177/1087057109336751 .
Wang Y. ; Cheng T. ; Bryant S. H. 
PubChem BioAssay:
A Decade’s Development toward Open High-Throughput Screening
Data Sharing . SLAS Discovery 
2017 , 22 , 655 –666 . 10.1177/2472555216685069 .28346087 
Southan C. ; Sharman J. L. ; Benson H. E. ; Faccenda E. ; Pawson A. J. ; Alexander S. P. H. ; Buneman O. P. ; Davenport A. P. ; McGrath J. C. ; Peters J. A. ; et al. The IUPHAR/BPS Guide
to PHARMACOLOGY in 2016: Towards Curated Quantitative Interactions
between 1300 Protein Targets and 6000 Ligands . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2016 , 44 , D1054 –D1068 . 10.1093/nar/gkv1037 .26464438 
Southan C. 
Caveat Usor: Assessing Differences
between Major Chemistry Databases . ChemMedChem 
2018 , 13 , 470 –481 . 10.1002/cmdc.201700724 .29451740 
Southan C. 
Expanding Opportunities for Mining Bioactive Chemistry
from Patents . Drug Discovery Today Technol. 
2015 , 14 , 3 –9 . 10.1016/j.ddtec.2014.12.001 .
Clark A. M. ; Williams A. J. ; Ekins S. 
Machines First,
Humans Second: On the Importance of Algorithmic Interpretation of
Open Chemistry Data . J. Cheminf. 
2015 , 7 , 9 10.1186/s13321-015-0057-7 .
Hersey A. ; Chambers J. ; Bellis L. ; Bento A. P. ; Gaulton A. ; Overington J. P. 
Chemical Databases: Curation or Integration
by User-Defined Equivalence? . Drug Discovery
Today Technol. 
2015 , 14 , 17 –24 . 10.1016/j.ddtec.2015.01.005 .
Noor M. A. F. ; Zimmerman K. J. ; Teeter K. C. 
Data Sharing: How Much Doesn’t Get Submitted
to GenBank? . PLoS Biol. 
2006 , 4 , e22810.1371/journal.pbio.0040228 .16822095 
Gilson M. K. ; Georg G. ; Wang S. 
Digital Chemistry in
the Journal of Medicinal Chemistry . J. Med. Chem. 
2014 , 57 , 1137 10.1021/jm5002056 .24521446 
Scott J. D. ; Li S. W. ; Brunskill A. P. J. ; Chen X. ; Cox K. ; Cumming J. N. ; Forman M. ; Gilbert E. J. ; Hodgson R. A. ; Hyde L. A. ; et al. Discovery
of the 3-Imino-1,2,4-Thiadiazinane 1,1-Dioxide Derivative Verubecestat
(MK-8931)–A β-Site Amyloid Precursor Protein Cleaving
Enzyme 1 Inhibitor for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 10435 –10450 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00307 .27933948 
Lowe D. M. ; Corbett P. T. ; Murray-Rust P. ; Glen R. C. 
Chemical Name to
Structure: OPSIN, an Open Source Solution . J.
Chem. Inf. Model. 
2011 , 51 , 739 –753 . 10.1021/ci100384d .21384929 
Southan C. ; Stracz A. 
Extracting and Connecting
Chemical Structures from Text Sources Using Chemicalize.Org . J. Cheminf. 
2013 , 5 , 20 10.1186/1758-2946-5-20 .
Filippov I. V. ; Nicklaus M. C. 
Optical Structure
Recognition Software To Recover Chemical Information: OSRA, An Open
Source Solution . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2009 , 49 , 740 –743 . 10.1021/ci800067r .19434905 
Lloyd I.  Pharma Projects Pharma
R&D Annual Review ; Citeline , 2018 .
Southan C. ; Williams A. J. ; Ekins S. 
Challenges
and Recommendations for Obtaining Chemical Structures of Industry-Provided
Repurposing Candidates . Drug Discovery Today 
2013 , 18 , 58 –70 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2012.11.005 .23159359 
Goldacre B. ; Lane S. ; Mahtani K. R. ; Heneghan C. ; Onakpoya I. ; Bushfield I. ; Smeeth L. 
Pharmaceutical Companies’ Policies on Access
to Trial Data, Results, and Methods: Audit Study . BMJ 
2017 , 358 , j3334 10.1136/bmj.j3334 .28747301 
Stevens T. ; Ekholm K. ; Granse M. ; Lindahl M. ; Kozma V. ; Jungar C. ; Ottosson T. ; Falk-Hakansson H. ; Churg A. ; Wright J. L. ; et al. AZD9668: Pharmacological
Characterization of a Novel Oral Inhibitor of Neutrophil Elastase . J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
2011 , 339 , 313 –320 . 10.1124/jpet.111.182139 .21791628 
Akhondi S. A. ; Muresan S. ; Williams A. J. ; Kors J. A. 
Ambiguity of Non-Systematic
Chemical Identifiers within and between Small-Molecule Databases . J. Cheminf. 
2015 , 7 , 54 10.1186/s13321-015-0102-6 .
Rizvi N. F. ; Howe J. A. ; Nahvi A. ; Klein D. J. ; Fischmann T. O. ; Kim H.-Y. ; McCoy M. A. ; Walker S. S. ; Hruza A. ; Richards M. P. ; et al. Discovery
of Selective RNA-Binding Small Molecules by Affinity-Selection Mass
Spectrometry . ACS Chem. Biol. 
2018 , 13 , 820 –831 . 10.1021/acschembio.7b01013 .29412640 
Krallinger M. ; Rabal O. ; Lourenço A. ; Oyarzabal J. ; Valencia A. 
Information Retrieval and Text Mining
Technologies for Chemistry . Chem. Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 7673 –7761 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00851 .28475312 
Papadatos G. ; Davies M. ; Dedman N. ; Chambers J. ; Gaulton A. ; Siddle J. ; Koks R. ; Irvine S. A. ; Pettersson J. ; Goncharoff N. ; et al. SureChEMBL: A Large-Scale, Chemically Annotated Patent Document Database . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2016 , 44 , D1220 –D1228 . 10.1093/nar/gkv1253 .26582922 
Orchard S. ; Hermjakob H. 
Shared Resources, Shared Costs—Leveraging Biocuration
Resources . Database 
2015 , 2015 , bav00910.1093/database/bav009 .25776020

