
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3164622110.1021/acsomega.9b01305ArticleReal-Time Measurement of Ammonia (NH3)
in Artillery Smoke Using a Passive FT-IR Remote Sensor Kim Jong-Seon *Nam Hyunwoo Kim Hyeon Jeong Lee Jae Hwan Park Byeong Hwang CBR Technology Directorate,
Agency for Defense Development, Daejeon 34186, Korea* E-mail: kjs2636@add.re.kr.01 10 2019 15 10 2019 4 16 16768 16773 21 05 2019 19 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Early alerts for
avoiding exposure to toxic chemical threats are
critical applications of sensors to protect both military troops and
civilian populations. Among the various sensing techniques developed,
the passive Fourier transform-infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy method
has been demonstrated to work well as a remote (kilometer-scale) sensor
for such early-alert systems. The passive type FT-IR detector is capable
of mobile detection of toxic gas clouds because of its small-scale
interferometer and optical instruments. In this article, real-time
FT-IR measurements of ammonia (NH3) in 76 mm artillery
smoke are reported using a commercial remote sensor and scored by
a real-time analysis conducted using a custom algorithm based on the
generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT). Using these methods, we
measured the real-time change in the ammonia spectrum and GLRT scores
against concrete and forest backgrounds following artillery propellant
detonation. We confirmed that the GLRT score characteristics depend
on the background and found that the effect of rapid heat transfer
from the propellant detonation to the ammonia was detected in the
accumulated ammonia FT-IR spectra.

document-id-old-9ao9b01305document-id-new-14ao9b01305ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Early detection of
chemical warfare agents, toxic industrial chemicals,
and leaked chemical threats is important for providing effective protection
and improving the survival rates of military personnel and civilians
in the chemical industry,1,2 environmental monitoring,3 and military field operations.4 When chemicals are released outdoors, they are typically
in the gaseous phase, and as such are colorless and odorless. Therefore,
a remote and early detection of chemical exposure is essential to
prevent causalities. Several early detection techniques have been
suggested and developed for the early detection of chemical exposure,
including gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS),5,6 ion mobility spectrometry (IMS),7 chemi-electronic
chip,8 active/passive Fourier transform-infrared
(FT-IR) spectroscopy,9,10 and colorimetric11 approaches. Among the various techniques, the passive FT-IR
sensor system is particularly promising because it provides rapid
and highly sensitive remote detection. Furthermore, with the development
of a rugged and minimized interferometer, FT-IR has become more portable,
and thus more useful in field applications. Indeed, the U.S. Army
has utilized passive FT-IR systems to protect troops from chemical
warfare agent attacks since the 1990s.12

Theoretically, the passive FT-IR technique directly measures
mixed
IR radiance from three layers: target chemical plumes, the atmosphere,
and the background. Indeed, the application of the IR radiance principle
in this technique can be explained using this three-layer model under
ideal conditions,13 in which the detection
limit of a passive FT-IR detector for a gas is defined as 1  where ε is the gas absorption
coefficient, c is the concentration of gas in the
target chemical plume, d is the optical path length
through the atmosphere, and
ΔT is the temperature difference between the
gas and the background.

In passive FT-IR remote-sensing research,
the detection limit,
or minimum temperature difference that can be resolved by the spectrometer,
of an FT-IR detector is described by the NEΔT (noise-equivalent
delta temperature).13 As described in eq 1, the detection limit of
a passive FT-IR detector is predominantly determined by three variables
(c, d, and ΔT). In real applications, because chemical toxicity is related only
to the concentration of a leaked gas (c), the effect
of the optical path length (d) and temperature difference
(ΔT) should be separately evaluated to reduce
the likelihood of false alerts during the development of passive FT-IR
systems. However, though much research has succeeded in improving
the FT-IR, it remains difficult to distinguish between the effects
of the three variables measured in the IR spectrum. For example, even
when the concentration of the toxic gas is higher than ECt50 or LD50, if the temperature difference is imperceptible, cdΔT will be a zero. Therefore, all
parameters should be considered together during an FT-IR measurement,
and the system should be prepared to recognize false alerts that were
triggered by parameters (d and ΔT) and not the toxic gas concentration (c).

Previously, most FT-IR research has been focused on the development
of a compact detector for portable sensors,4 improvement in the detection limit,14 signal processing methods,15 or installation
of FT-IR interferometers.12 However, as
the FT-IR technology is intended to operate outdoors, much indoor-based
sensor development research tends to require the development of a
functional outdoor spectrum before commercialization and systemization
can be achieved during the final production stages. Therefore, research
into the real-world field interference is very important in the development
and optimization of passive FT-IR remote sensor operation techniques.
Field interferences, if unaddressed, could trigger false alerts, negating
the usefulness of the entire sensor system. Ideally, to determine
such interference effects, outdoor tests should be conducted to analyze
the combined effects of outdoor conditions. However, outdoor testing
has many limitations, including cost, national security, and chemical
safety regulations. For these reasons, previous interference measurement
data have only been obtained through indoor chamber experiments. Though
this interference data are very convenient to obtain and can be helpful
in predicting inference effects, these experiments have clear limitations
in replicating realistic-usage scenarios.

Fortunately, for this
study, we obtained permission to observe
firing tests of 76 mm artillery shells at our outdoor facility. These
detonations produced unique data illustrating how propellant detonation
can hinder accurate measurement in the IR spectrum under realistic
conditions. Accordingly, we collected outdoor measurements and analyzed
the interference effect due to artillery smoke and the thermal effect
due to detonation. We confirmed that among the toxic chemicals detected
in the smoke, characteristic ammonia peaks were observed. Ammonia
(NH3) is widely used in industrial systems and has been
identified as a high-priority toxic industrial chemical by International
Task Force ITF-25 and ITF-40.1 Therefore,
we analyzed the ammonia spectra and evaluated a detection algorithm
to score the change in ammonia concentration during artillery firing.

Results
and Discussion
In this study, the IR spectrum (brightness
temperature) of artillery
smoke with different background conditions was measured using a passive
FT-IR detector.16Table 1 and Figure 1 provide an overview of the real-time procedure used
to obtain the IR spectrum measurements.

Figure 1 Schematic of artillery
smoke measurements using the passive FT-IR
detector for (a) a concrete background and (b) a forest background.

Table 1 Experimental Conditions for Each Background
Condition
background condition	atmospheric temperature (°C)	background temperature (°C)	distance from FT-IR detector (m)	
concrete	27	27–30	87	
forest	20–22	200	
As shown schematically in Figure 1, the artillery was set up on a concrete road and an
FT-IR detector was installed on a hill 87 m from the artillery. When
the FT-IR detector was aimed at the muzzle of the artillery barrel
from the hill, the main detection background was the concrete road.
The surface temperature of the concrete was measured using an IR thermal
camera (FLIR), with the results described in Table 1, along with the temperature of another background
condition, a forest 200 m away, selected for comparison. As described
in Figure 1, gunsmoke
was generated at the muzzle of the artillery and continuously moved
toward the forest region. When we measured the IR spectrum against
the forest background, the smoke coverage was found to be relatively
larger than the initial smoke coverage due to gas diffusion. The commercial
FT-IR detector (Block engineering, PORTHOS) used in this study had
a field of view of 1.5°. This means that it could measure a 2.55
m diameter circular region at a distance of 100 m, so its measurement
area was ∼3.86 m2 for the concrete background and 20.4 m2 for
the forest background. All measured spectra were taken from the artillery
smoke without other interferences, considering these measurement diameters.

The commercial FT-IR system consisted of an FT-IR detector mounted
on a tripod and linked to a laptop to provide real-time monitoring.
Before the commencement of artillery fire, blackbody calibration was
conducted to ensure accurate IR spectrum measurements. A total of
20 rounds of artillery munitions were then fired within 1 h under
almost identical conditions. For the first 10 rounds, we measured
the muzzle of the artillery (Figure 1a) against the concrete background, and for the second
10 rounds, we measured the diffused artillery smoke against the forest
background (Figure 1b). Each measurement began 10 s before the artillery was fired and
finished 10 s afterward. Most of the resulting smoke diffused in the
direction shown in Figure 1 (right to left).

For measurement and analysis, we converted
the observed FT-IR spectra
into a detection algorithm score based on the generalized likelihood
ratio test (GLRT). The GLRT is a widely known statistical detection
algorithm typically used to analyze various chemical gases by comparison
against a Z matrix, which consists of the FT-IR radiance information
of various backgrounds, interferences, and target gases as follows 2  where each background spectrum is
included
in the BG column and information describing the target gas spectrum
is included in the S column. Among the various gas detection algorithms,
the GLRT has the advantage of minimizing the effect of spectrum distortion
due to interference and background FT-IR signals. This is accomplished
by reverse-tracing the spectrum of the target gas through comparison
with every background and interference spectrum in the Z matrix (see Supporting Informationeq S1 for further details). Prior to the outdoor tests, the alarm
threshold value (γ) for the ammonia GLRT algorithm was set to
γ = 3.0. Using our customized signal processing program, we
were then able to compare all of the GLRT scores included in the library
(see Supporting Information eq S1 for further
details).

Results and Discussion
Prior to the commencement of
artillery fire, we measured the background
IR spectrum for comparison with the IR spectrum of the artillery smoke.
There were no ammonia interference signals in the IR spectra measured
against backgrounds such as the sky, concrete, forest, or the seashore.
Detailed information describing the background data is provided in Figure S1 of the Supporting Information. As shown
in Figure 2a,b, the
measured IR spectra showed no specific chemical peaks for the concrete
or forest backgrounds, respectively, as confirmed by the expanded
IR spectrum data from 900 to 1000 cm–1 in Figure 2c,d. Additionally,
we calculated the GLRT detection algorithm scores, shown in Figure 2e,f, which were all
found to be less than 1.0.

Figure 2 Brightness temperature spectra of concrete and
forest backgrounds,
in which the brightness temperature spectra (a) and (b), respectively,
show no characteristic peaks for ammonia within 900–1000 cm–1 in enlarged images (c) and (d), respectively, and
the gas detection algorithm (GLRT) score remains less than 1.0 over
the 10 s period in (e) and (f), respectively.

During the field tests, 20 rounds were fired in 1 h, but a change
in the wind direction meant that only 19 instances of artillery smoke
were measured as described in the Supporting Information (Figure S2). From the first instance of artillery
fire to the last, there were no observed changes in temperature and
humidity. After firing, every measurement of artillery smoke immediately
triggered an ammonia alert. As shown in Figure 3a, a pure ammonia cloud produces two characteristic
IR absorption peaks at 930 and 967 cm–1, representing
the N–H band. In Figure 3b, an artillery smoke IR spectrum is plotted against the prefiring
IR spectrum for a concrete background. Comparing these data, significant
ammonia peaks are clear at 930 and 967 cm–1. For
the forest background, the passive FT-IR measurements in Figure 3c also showed the
same ammonia peaks after firing.

Figure 3 (a) Representative ammonia FT-IR absorption
coefficient graph from
NIST and (b, c) actual peaks from the artillery smoke measured by
the passive FT-IR detector against concrete and forest backgrounds,
respectively. Characteristic ammonia peaks at 933 and 967 cm–1 can be observed in the artillery smoke (red and green lines).

All artillery smoke caused an ammonia alert to
be issued from both
the PORTHOS FT-IR system and our customized GLRT-based analysis system.
Note that the two characteristic peaks observed in the spectra are
too clearly manifested to be false alerts. To confirm whether these
ammonia detection behaviors are temporary, we analyzed the full IR
spectrum of the artillery smoke. As shown in Figure 4a,b, the artillery smoke definitely has ammonia
peaks in its accumulated FT-IR spectrum. Comparing Figure 4a,b, the significantly greater
maximum intensity in Figure 4a is due to the initial temperature of the artillery smoke,
which can be as high as 3000 °C depending on the gunpowder type
and load. However, neglecting this single maximum intensity peak,
the intensities of the other detected ammonia peaks are nearly the
same.

Figure 4 Continuous spectrum data for artillery smoke against (a) a concrete
background, where the smoke rapidly dissipated or moved away, but
had a maximum brightness temperature of 60 and (b) a forest background,
in which the spectra are longer than those against the concrete background,
but the maximum intensity is relatively smaller.

Analyzing the change in the GLRT score offers another way to identify
the existence of chemical gases. To demonstrate, we ran our customized
GLRT detection algorithm analysis on every artillery smoke measurement,
and the results indicated clear differences in detection scores against
the concrete background and the forest background due to the diffusion
of the smoke. The results are shown in Figure 5, in which the instance of artillery fire
is marked as a dotted line. Against the concrete background, as shown
in Figure 5a, the GLRT
score sharply increases up to 5.44, then decreases rapidly within
a few seconds. After this spike-shaped behavior, the remaining artillery
smoke was dispersed as described by each graph. On average, ammonia
peaks were observed for 5 s during which the GLRT score remained about
1.0. Although later changes in GLRT scores were dependent on wind
velocity and direction, the observed initial spike-shaped GLRT score
change was consistent for the concrete background. Because the detonation
of the gunpowder rapidly transferred thermal energy into smoke, the
temperature difference between the smoke and the background drastically
increased at the artillery muzzle. As previously mentioned, the intensity
of IR radiance detected by a passive FT-IR detector is highly dependent
on the gas concentration, optical path length, and temperature difference.
Therefore, we can reasonably assume that the spike-shaped GLRT score
behavior is the result of a transfer of thermal energy from the detonated
gunpowder.

Figure 5 GLRT score vs time against the (a) concrete background and the
(b) forest background. Artillery smoke continuously moved from the
concrete to the forest background because of the wind. The GLRT score
of ammonia is clearly manifested as a spike when measured against
the concrete background, while against the forest background, the
GLRT ammonia score peak is relatively smooth, indicating long-term
detection.

We were also able to measure the
IR spectrum of the diffused artillery
smoke against the forest background. As shown in Figure 5b, the diffused ammonia GLRT
score measured against the forest background is relatively smaller
than against the concrete background. The GLRT score also varies widely
between 0.54 and 5.23, and the detection time exhibits significant
variation from 7 to 20 s, depending on the wind intensity and direction.
Compared to observations against a concrete background, the GLRT score
against the forest background did not show a spiked shape, instead
exhibited mostly step-shaped responses.

We also plotted the
measured FT-IR spectra against duration in Figure 6. The data were measured
at a frequency of 3 Hz, meaning that each data point covers a time
period of 0.33 s. When the propellant was detonated, the flat IR spectrum
(bottom) suddenly changed and ammonia peaks were clearly developed
(red dotted box). For a few seconds following detonation, relatively
weak ammonia peaks remained before the IR spectrum recovered to the
flat baseline (top). This indicates that a momentary transfer of thermal
energy from the propellant to the ammonia in the artillery smoke enhanced
its spectral intensity, as described in eq 1.

Figure 6 Accumulated FT-IR spectrum of artillery firing
plotted with firing
time. From bottom to top, intensive ammonia peaks were observed shortly
after the measurement began (red dotted box) and then gradually decreased.

To accurately determine the actual ammonia concentration
in the
air without the influence of the heat transfer, we would need to collect
samples from the artillery smoke, but unfortunately access to the
artillery equipment was not permitted during these experiments. Theoretically,
the total amount of ammonia generated by artillery firing is dependent
on the loaded propellant amount and type, as a TNT-based propellant
could easily produce such ammonia during detonation (see Supporting Information eq S2) However, the various
FT-IR measurements and analyses in this study verified that considerable
ammonia was produced by artillery fire, indicating that protection
protocols and the interference effect of artillery smoke and various
backgrounds should be considered during artillery operations.

Conclusions
In this study, we successfully measured and analyzed a series of
FT-IR spectra in the vicinity of field artillery firing exercises
considering various experimental conditions such as background, presence
of artillery smoke, and different measurement distances. We found
that a significant transfer of heat from propellant detonation could
be a reason for the strong ammonia detection alert from the passive
FT-IR detector immediately following firing, even though the total
released ammonia was found to be relatively rare; then the smoke moved
away and dissipated. By analyzing the ammonia peaks detected using
a real-time GLRT statistical algorithm score, we confirmed that the
GLRT score shape is related to the background condition. Even though
the thermal energy transfer from detonation is the most dominant factor
determining the detection of ammonia in artillery smoke, it is obvious
that this is not a false alarm: ammonia is indeed generated by a propellant
detonation. Though in these experiments air sampling was not allowed,
using the FT-IR detector and the results of the GLRT scoring, we successfully
demonstrated that ammonia is produced from propellant detonation and
that it is necessary to separate the effects of ammonia concentration
from the effects of thermal energy transfer in interpreting the data
gathered by FT-IR sensor systems.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01305.Detail GLRT algorithm
derivation, basic background spectrum,
and whole measurement data of artillery gunfire; GLRT algorithm equation
(Equation S1); combined measured spectrums according to each background
(Figure S1); GLRT score measurement of 19 rounds artillery fire (Figure
S2); expected reaction equation of ammonia from artillery fire (Equation
S2) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01305_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Agency for Defense Development
(ADD), Republic of Korea.
==== Refs
References
Armour S. J.  International Task
Force 40: Toxic Industrial Chemicals (TICs)-Operational and Medical
Concerns ; US GPO : Washington, DC , 2001 .
Steumpfle A. K. ; Howells D. J. ; Armour S. J. ; Boulet C. A.  Final Report of International
Task Force-25: Hazard from Toxic Industrial Chemicals ; US GPO : Washington, DC , 1996 .
Sharpe S. W. ; Johnson T. J. ; Sams R. L. ; Chu P. M. ; Rhoderick G. C. ; Johnson P. A. 
Gas-Phase Database
for Quantitative Infrared Spectroscopy . Appl.
Spectrosc. 
2004 , 58 , 1452 –1461 . 10.1366/0003702042641281 .15606959 
Lee J. H. ; Kim H. J. ; Kim J.-S. ; Nam H. ; Kang Y. I. ; Park B. H. 
Development of compact stand-off
hazardous chemical
detector based on Michelson interferometer . Opt. Eng. 
2018 , 57 , 1 –7 . 10.1117/1.OE.57.12.123104 .
Kozole J. ; Stairs J. R. ; Cho I. ; Harper J. D. ; Lukow S. R. ; Lareau R. T. ; DeBono R. ; Kuja F. 
Interfacing an Ion
Mobility Spectrometry Based Explosive Trace Detector to a Triple Quadrupole
Mass Spectrometer . Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 8596 –8603 . 10.1021/ac201999a .22017332 
Kew W. ; Goodall I. ; Clarke D. ; Uhrín D. 
Chemical Diversity
and Complexity of Scotch Whisky as Revealed by High-Resolution Mass
Spectrometry . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2017 , 28 , 200 –213 . 10.1007/s13361-016-1513-y .27752914 
Liu X. ; Nacson S. ; Grigoriev A. ; Lynds P. ; Pawliszyn J. 
A new thermal
desorption solid-phase microextraction system for hand-held ion mobility
spectrometry . Anal. Chim. Acta 
2006 , 559 , 159 –165 . 10.1016/j.aca.2005.12.006 .
Kim J.-S. ; Yoo H.-W. ; Choi H. O. ; Jung H.-T. 
Tunable Volatile
Organic Compounds Sensor by Using Thiolated Ligand Conjugation on
MoS2 . Nano Lett. 
2014 , 14 , 5941 –5947 . 10.1021/nl502906a .25191976 
Sieger M. ; Kos G. ; Sulyok M. ; Godejohann M. ; Krska R. ; Mizaikoff B. 
Portable Infrared
Laser Spectroscopy for On-site Mycotoxin Analysis . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 4402810.1038/srep44028 .28276454 
Tütüncü E. ; Kokoric V. ; Wilk A. ; Seichter F. ; Schmid M. ; Hunt W. E. ; Manuel A. M. ; Mirkarimi P. ; Alameda J. B. ; Carter J. C. ; Mizaikoff B. 
Fiber-Coupled
Substrate-Integrated Hollow Waveguides: An Innovative Approach to
Mid-infrared Remote Gas Sensors . ACS Sens. 
2017 , 2 , 1287 –1293 . 10.1021/acssensors.7b00253 .28792208 
Li Z. ; Suslick K. S. 
A Hand-Held Optoelectronic
Nose for the Identification
of Liquors . ACS Sens. 
2018 , 3 , 121 –127 . 10.1021/acssensors.7b00709 .29232111 
Hammond B. ; Popa M. 
Overview of the joint services lightweight
standoff chemical agent
detector (JSLSCAD) . Proc. SPIE 
2005 , 5795 , 86 –95 . 10.1117/12.609913 .
Beil A. ; Baum R. ; Johnson T. J. 
Detection of chemical agents in the
atmosphere by passive IR remote sensing . Proc.
SPIE 
1999 , 3856 , 44 –56 . 10.1117/12.371307 .
Zhang Z. ; Clewes R. J. ; Howle C. R. ; Reid D. T. 
Active FTIR-based
stand-off spectroscopy using a femtosecond optical parametric oscillator . Opt. Lett. 
2014 , 39 , 6005 –6008 . 10.1364/OL.39.006005 .25361141 
Gautam R. ; Vanga S. ; Ariese F. ; Umapathy S. 
Review of multidimensional
data processing approaches for Raman and infrared spectroscopy . EPJ Tech. Instrum. 
2015 , 2 , 1 –38 . 10.1140/epjti/s40485-015-0018-6 .26146600 
Deutsch E. R. ; Kotidis P. ; Zhu N. ; Goyal A. K. ; Ye J. ; Mazurenko A. ; Norman M. ; Zafiriou K. ; Baier M. ; Connors R. 
Active and
passive infrared spectroscopy for the detection
of environmental threats . Proc. SPIE 
2014 , 9106 , 1 –10 . 10.1117/12.2058544 .

