
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03229ArticleOil Recovery Efficiency and Mechanism of Low Salinity-Enhanced
Oil Recovery for Light Crude Oil with a Low Acid Number Kakati Abhijit Kumar Ganesh Sangwai Jitendra S. *Enhanced Oil Recovery Laboratory, Petroleum
Engineering Program, Department of Ocean Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600 036, India* E-mail: jitendrasangwai@iitm.ac.in. Phone: +91-44-2257-4825. Fax: +91-44-2257-4802.10 01 2020 28 01 2020 5 3 1506 1518 01 10 2019 27 12 2019 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Low
salinity waterflooding (low salinity-EOR) has attracted great
interest from many giant oil producers and is currently under trial
in some of the oil fields of the United States, Middle Eastern countries,
and North Sea reservoirs. Most of the reported studies on this process
were carried out for medium to relatively heavy oil with significant
polar contents. In this work, we have investigated low salinity waterflooding
performance for light paraffinic crude oil with a low acid number.
This study has been performed using crude oil from an Indian offshore
oilfield and Indian offshore seawater. Oil recovery efficiencies of
seawater and its diluted versions (low salinity seawater) were evaluated
through core-flooding experiments performed on a silica sand pack
containing small amounts (2 wt %) of bentonite clay saturated with
crude oil. Interfacial tension and wettability studies were performed
to understand the associated low salinity effects on the crude oil/brine/rock
properties. Effluent brine produced during the flooding experiments
was also analyzed to obtain a clearer insight into the low salinity-enhanced
oil recovery (EOR) mechanism. The results showed that injection of
low salinity seawater can significantly increase the waterflood recovery
in comparison with high salinity seawater injection. Interfacial tension
and contact angle studies revealed that there is an optimum dilution
level at which the interfacial tension and wettability are the most
favorable for enhanced oil recovery even in the case of light paraffinic
crude. These results are in line with the results obtained from the
core-flooding experiments. The possible reason behind recovery improvement
based on the interfacial tension and wettability studies in conjugation
with the effluent brine analysis has been discussed in detail. In
this study, we have observed that the enhanced oil recovery efficiency
could be achieved by applying low salinity seawater flooding even
in the case of light paraffinic oil with a low acid number.

document-id-old-9ao9b03229document-id-new-14ao9b03229ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Waterflooding
is the most common and widely used oil recovery method
practiced by the oil industry since 1930s. Conventionally, waterflooding
was considered as a physical oil recovery process that serves two
primary functions: (1) to maintain reservoir pressure and (2) to displace
oil from the reservoir pore space toward the producing well by viscous
forces. However, the residual oil saturation left after waterflooding
is always found to be high. The fact is that the researchers have
not yet understood the waterflooding process well enough from the
physicochemical point of view.1 The research
work by the Petrophysics and Surface Chemistry Research Group at the
University of Wyoming has pointed out that the injection-water salinity
can play a vital role in the oil recovery performance by the waterflooding
process.2−5 In recent years, extensive research work carried out by different
groups has indicated that injecting low salinity water can result
in a higher oil recovery as compared to conventional high salinity
waterflooding. This method is currently under extensive research and
has drawn attention of major oil-producing industries in recent times.
The outcome of rigorous laboratory investigations has convinced various
oil majors (e.g., BP, Total, Statoil, Shell, and Saudi Aramco) to
implement low salinity-enhanced oil recovery (low salinity-EOR) trial
at the field scale.6−12 As per the data reported in the available literature, low salinity
water can reduce the residual oil saturation significantly, even up
to 15% in most cases.11

A lot of
effort has been devoted in the past two decades to understand
the mechanism behind the improved oil recovery performance of the
low salinity-EOR, viz., (1) formation of fine migration, (2) interfacial
tension (IFT) reduction as a result of in-situ saponification, (3)
wettability alteration by multi-ion exchange, (4) pH-induced wettability
alteration, (5) double-layer expansion, (6) formation of microemulsion,
and so forth. Despite several hypotheses presented in the literature,
many questions still remain unanswered. Without a clear understanding
of the physicochemical pore-level mechanism, the key parameters or
the screening criterion for low salinity-EOR are difficult to identify.
In general, the reservoir mineralogy and crude oil composition are
considered to be the important parameters for this process as proposed
by various investigators. For example, in some studies, reservoir
rock mineralogy has been investigated in detail to understand its
importance in low salinity-EOR performance.1,13−16 Some researchers claimed that the low salinity-EOR can only be applicable
for sandstone reservoirs. Low salinity water can change the wettability
of sandstone or silicate surfaces toward water-wet conditions and
subsequently takes part in crude oil recovery enhancement. On the
other hand, according to some other groups, wettability alteration
could also be a possible event in carbonate reservoirs by modifying
the injection-brine chemistry.12,17−21

Apart from the reservoir rock type, the nature of the crude
oil
present in the reservoir is an important factor affecting the performance
of the low salinity-EOR process and needs to be examined carefully.
Almost 90% of the low salinity core-flood experiments were performed
using medium to slightly heavy crude oil samples.15,22,23 Moreover, the crude oil used in these studies
possesses a high acid number and many of them have not even reported
the acid number of the oil they used in their studies.24−27 Usually, a high acid or base number is found with heavy crude oil
which contains fewer lighter components. Tang and Morrow2 investigated the low salinity waterflooding process
for crude oil of 27°API and acid number of 0.33. The study of
low salinity by Pu et al.15 used crude
oil ranging from 25 to 31°API with an acid and a base number
ranging up to 0.56 and 2.29, respectively. Winoto et al.23 tested low salinity waterflooding performance
using crude oil of API gravity 24° with an acid number of 1.46.
Lashkarbolooki et al.19 have reported a
mechanistic investigation of low salinity waterflooding using crude
oil of 22°API and an acid number of 1.5. Aslan et al.17 reported studies on wettability alteration during
low salinity waterflooding for crude oil ranging from 21 to 30°API.
Researchers have also investigated the effect of asphaltene and resin
which is present in the crude oil in varying amounts on the performance
of low salinity waterflooding.28 Therefore,
the outcome of various laboratory tests leads to the interpretation
that the low salinity-EOR works only for the reservoirs that contain
medium gravity oil with a significant polar content such as fatty
acids or naphthenic acids. Very limited studies were performed until
now using light crude oil and crude with a low acid number.21,25 Many of the world’s large oil reserves are producing crude
oil which is light and paraffinic in nature with a low acid and base
number. Therefore, it is equally important to understand the applicability
and mechanism of the novel low salinity waterflooding process for
such light paraffinic low acid number crude oil reservoirs, which
might have been different from the high acid number heavy crude oil
reservoirs.

The present work investigates the EOR performance
of the emerging
low salinity-EOR technique for reservoirs containing light paraffinic
crude oil with a low acid number. The study has been performed to
address the question that whether a high acid number or the presence
of polar components in crude oil is an indispensable condition to
increase the crude oil recovery using low salinity-EOR. The recovery
efficiency was evaluated at high temperature via laboratory flooding
experiments using sand packs saturated with seawater as connate brine
and crude oil from an offshore oilfield of India. High salinity seawater
was injected in each case to replicate the secondary recovery process
in order to obtain residual oil saturation as a target for low salinity-EOR.
Subsequently, low salinity waterflooding (with 50, 25, and 10% seawater
dilution) was applied as a tertiary recovery method. Indeed, the evaluation
of oil recovery efficiency is not the only aspect that is being investigated
in this work. Additional investigations
include the study on the IFT of crude oil–low salinity water,
wettability studies through contact angle measurements, and chemical
analysis of the effluent brine produced during the oil recovery process.
The study also aims to understand the underlying mechanism responsible
for possible physicochemical changes that lead to EOR during low salinity-EOR.
Possible mechanisms such as in-situ soap generation and electrical
double-layer expansion are explained during interpretation of the
obtained results.

2 Results and Discussion
The oil recovery performance of diluted seawater or low salinity
waterflooding, also referred to as low salinity-EOR, over high salinity
seawater has been evaluated through laboratory flooding experiments.
The results of IFT and wettability studies (via contact angle measurement)
have been discussed to understand more insights into the underlying
mechanism of the low salinity-EOR process. The effluent brine produced
during waterflooding experiments is analyzed to know useful information
on the mechanism.

2.1 Effect of Injection-Water
Salinity on EOR
Performance
In this study, three different low salinity waterflooding
experiments have been performed, the detail of which is explained
in Experimental Section. The petrophysical
properties of the sand packs used for these experiments are reported
in Table 1. Table 2 reports the summary
on residual oil saturation after secondary and low salinity-EOR, oil
recovery efficiencies, and total cumulative oil recovery [% of original
oil in place (OOIP)]. Figure 1a–c depicts the cumulative oil recovery percentage
(oil recovery efficiency in terms of OOIP) and the pressure drop as
a function of the amount of the pore volume (PV) injected. The water
cut profiles during the core-flooding experiments have been portrayed
in Figure 2a–c.

Figure 1 Oil recovery
efficiency and pressure drop profile of high and low
salinity waterflooding plotted as a function of injected fluid volume
in multiples of PV: (a) seawater flooding followed by 50% seawater
flooding; (b) seawater flooding followed by 25% seawater flooding;
and (c) seawater flooding followed by 10% seawater flooding (each
1 PV on the abscissa contains 10 data points).

Figure 2 Water
cut or the percentage of water in the production stream as
a function of PV. (a) Seawater flooding followed by 50% seawater flooding;
(b) seawater followed by 25% seawater flooding; and (c) seawater followed
by 10% seawater flooding (each 1 PV on the abscissa contains 10 data
points).

Table 1 Properties of the
Sand Packs Used
for Different Low Salinity-EOR Experiments
 	 	saturation
(%)	 	 	
sand-pack number	porosity
(%)	Swi	Soi	kw in mD (at Sw = 1)	ko in mD (at Swi)	
1	27.85	29.5	70.48	93.52	13.00	
2	28.91	32.11	67.89	71.62	11.39	
3	27.32	30.09	69.99	86.31	11.09	
Table 2 Results
of Seawater and Diluted Seawater
Flooding Experiments
 	 	 	seawater
flooding or secondary recovery	low salinity-EOR or tertiary recovery	 	
sand-pack number	experiment	Soi (% of PV)	Sor (% of PV)	recovery
efficiency (% OOIP)	Sor (% of PV)	recovery
efficiency (% OOIP)	cumulative
oil recovery (% OOIP)	
1	seawater-50% seawater	70.48	39.86	43.45	38.43	2.03	45.48	
2	seawater-25% seawater	67.89	36.60	46.08	31.47	7.57	53.65	
3	seawater-10% seawater	69.99	38.20	45.35	35.70	3.58	48.93	
Figure 1a portrays
the recovery factor as a function of the volume of the fluid injected
for 50% seawater flood, which is trailed behind a high salinity seawater
flood (secondary waterflood). During the high salinity seawater flood
(secondary recovery), the crude oil recovery efficiency increases
sharply until the first 0.3 PV of injection; thereafter, the oil recovery
increases gradually. After 1.5 PV of high salinity seawater injection,
the oil production ceased and the recovery efficiency profile (% OOIP)
reached a flat plateau. An additional 3.5 PV of seawater is injected
to ensure that the oil recovery from high salinity secondary waterflood
comes to an end and no mobile oil remains trapped because of the capillary
end effect. After a total 5 PV of seawater injection, the flood scheme
was switched to 50% seawater (diluted to 50% salinity of original
seawater). During 50% seawater injection, no significant oil production
or increase in recovery efficiency has been observed. During the first
1.5 PV of 50% seawater injection, the recovery efficiency slightly
increases by an additional of 2.03% OOIP as compared to the secondary
recovery (Table 2).
The oil recovery at the end of high salinity seawater flood was 43.45%
OOIP, which increased to only 45.48% even after the injection of 5
PV of 50% seawater (Table 2). It can also be observed that the injection of 50% seawater
has reduced the residual oil saturation only by 1.43%. The water cut
during high salinity waterflooding sharply increased to 83% of the
total production rate (oil + water) immediately after 0.4 PV of seawater
flood (Figure 2a).
At the end of 1.6 PV of seawater injection, the water cut has reached
to 100% and remained the same until 5 PV of seawater injection. During
the last 3.4 PV of seawater injection, the water cut reached to 100%,
that is, the production stream contained only water and there were
no traces of oil in it. When the injection water was changed to 50%
seawater, the water cut dropped to 98% at the beginning but again
increased to 100% immediately after 1.4 PV of 50% seawater flooding.

The oil recovery profile during 25% seawater flooding is plotted
in Figure 1b. During
the secondary recovery or high salinity seawater flooding, the oil
recovery has increased sharply to 37% OOIP during first 0.3 PV of
seawater injection. After that, the recovery has gradually increased
to 46.08% until 1.4 PV of seawater flood. After 1.4 PV, the recovery
profile reached a flat plateau and no more oil production was observed
until the end of 4 PV seawater injection. The injection rate was bumped
between 4 and 5 PV, but no further oil production was observed during
the rate bumping. After 5 PV of high salinity seawater flooding, the
injection water was changed to 25% seawater injection. As a result
of 25% seawater flooding, the oil production was started again and
the oil recovery has shown a continuous upraise. The recovery efficiency
at the end of 6.5 PV of cumulative water injection was 53.65% OOIP.
No further increase in recovery was observed after 6.5 PV of cumulative
injection. From Table 2, it can be observed that an additional oil recovery of 7.57% was
obtained from 25% seawater flooding over high salinity seawater flood.
It can also be noticed from Table 2 that 25% seawater flooding has reduced the residual
oil saturation from 36.60 to 31.47% OOIP. Compared to 50% seawater,
injection of 25% seawater has significantly improved the oil recovery
efficiency and reduces the residual oil saturation that is left after
high salinity seawater flooding or secondary recovery. The water cut
has followed a similar trend as previously discussed. Figure 2b shows that the water cut
increased sharply in the beginning and reached almost 97% after 0.5
PV of seawater injection. Subsequently, it was reduced continuously
to 91% at the end of 0.9 PV of seawater injection; however, it again
increased to 100% and remained the same until the end of secondary
recovery or high salinity seawater injection (until the end of 5 PV
cumulative water injection). When 25% seawater was injected, the water
cut decreased and showed a fluctuating trend with a minimum value
of 89% at 5.8 PV. After that, the water production increased and reached
to 100% after 6.6 PV of water injection and remained the same until
the end of 10 PV.

Figure 1c shows
the oil recovery during 10% seawater flooding following a high salinity
seawater flood. The oil recovery percentage has increased rapidly
in the beginning up to 0.4 PV and increased further with a gradual
trend until 1.7 PV of seawater injection. After that, no oil was recovered
from the secondary waterflood. The oil recovery percentage at the
end of high salinity seawater flood was 45.35% OOIP (Table 2). Injection of 10% seawater
has increased the oil recovery only by 3.58% as compared to high salinity
seawater flood (secondary recovery). Figure 2c shows that the water cut rapidly increased
in the beginning of high salinity seawater flooding and reached to
98% after approximately 1 PV of seawater injection. Subsequently,
during 10% seawater injection, the water cut was reduced to 96% at
the beginning but again increased with further injection and reached
to 100%. From Table 2, it can be observed that secondary recovery values are almost equal
in all three experiments, which represent that the secondary recovery
experiments were considerably repeatable. This provides uniform starting
conditions (e.g., Sor and Sw) for all three low salinity waterflooding experiments,
which is a very crucial condition for evaluating or comparing results
of any EOR experiment.

Apart from oil recovery and water cut
profiles, Figure 1a–c
also depicts the
pressure drop profiles across the sand pack during seawater and diluted
seawater injection. From Figure 1a, it can be observed that the pressure drop across
the sand pack during high salinity seawater flooding at a rate of
0.2 mL/min got stabilized at 19 psi. The injection of high salinity
water was continued until a stabilized recovery and a stabilized pressure
drop profile were obtained. As the flow rate has been increased after
4 PV of seawater injection, the pressure drop profile showed a sharp
increase up to 42 psi at about 5 PV. After that, when the injection
water was switch to 50% seawater (0.2 mL/min), the pressure drop was
observed to be stabilized at a lower value (17.5 psi) as compared
to the high salinity seawater flooding (19 psi). The lower stabilized
pressure drop during 50% seawater flooding was probably because of
the continuous flow of water through the channels that bypassed through
the oil zone after breakthrough. During 50% seawater, not much significant
oil was displaced from the pores and water moved unrestricted through
the channels. This resulted in a lower pressure drop during 50% seawater
injection. From Figure 1b, we can observe that during high salinity seawater flooding, the
pressure drop profile was stabilized at 20 psi. During the rate bumping,
the pressure drop profile showed an upraise and reached 43.5 psi.
During 25% seawater injection, the pressure drop was stabilized at
24.6 psi. The stabilized pressure drop during 25% seawater injection
was higher than the high salinity seawater injection. The lower salinity
of injection water probably resulted in swelling of the clay present
in the sand pack and caused a reduction in permeability. This is one
of the reasons why we have observed a higher pressure drop during
25% seawater injection. Another possible reason that resulted in a
higher pressure drop is the redistribution or mobilization of trapped
oil because of low salinity water injection. Similarly, from Figure 1c, in the case of
10% seawater flooding, a higher stabilized pressure drop (27.5 psi)
was observed as compared to high salinity seawater flood (23 psi).
During 10% seawater injection, although additional oil was produced,
the additional recovery was not as high as that in the case of 25%
seawater injection. The higher pressure drop during 10% seawater injection
as compared to its secondary high salinity waterflood was probably
attributed to clay swelling than redistribution or mobilization of
trapped oil. There might be a possibility that the increased pressure
drop results in a better displacement of crude oil through the pore
network of reservoir rock during low salinity waterflooding.

Low salinity waterflooding experiments using both sand packs and
cores have been reported previously in the literature by various authors.15,29−31 The incremental recoveries from low salinity laboratory
core-flooding experiments are observed to be different by different
investigators. Fu31 evaluated the efficiency
of low salinity waterflooding using sand packs and found an additional
15% oil recovery in comparison with high salinity waterflooding. The
low salinity waterflood recovery observed by Tang and Morrow2 was ranged between 1.4 and 5.8%, whereas Pu et
al.15 obtained 5.2–7.2% additional
oil recovery by injecting low salinity coal bed methane water in Tensleep
and Minneluas sandstone cores. Nasralla et al.32 reported 14–22% additional oil recovery by injecting
deionized water and low salinity aquifer water into Berea sandstone
cores. Zhang et al.33 observed 10–30%
incremental oil recovery from low salinity water injection into core
samples from the Shengli oilfield. These observations imply that the
recovery efficiency of low salinity experiments could be different
depending on the type of materials (particularly the core and crude
oil) used. However, the additional oil recovery observed in this study
using 25% seawater (7.57%) injection is certainly an encouraging result
of the low salinity effect.

2.2 Effect of Salinity on IFT
Figure 3 shows different
IFT measurements of crude oil with seawater and with different diluted
versions of seawater. It can be observed from the results that the
IFT between the crude oil used in this study and high salinity seawater
is 15.72 mN/m. Because of the low specific gravity of the crude oil,
the IFT is lower than the typical black oil–water IFT. In the
case of 50% seawater, the IFT value did not undergo any significant
change, as it increased only by 0.34 mN/m. For 25% seawater, the IFT
value was decreased to 8.92 mN/m. In the case of 10% seawater, the
resulting IFT value was higher than in 25% seawater. The increase
in oil recovery with brine dilutions (50, 25, and 10% seawater) is
observed to be in line with the IFT results (Figures 1 and 3). The lower
IFT at 25 and 10% seawater has probably improved the displacement
of crude oil and played a role in enhancing the oil recovery. The
trends in IFT values observed in this study are similar to the one
observed for a pure alkane–brine system in our previous study.34 Al-Attar et al.35,36 have reported
crude oil–seawater IFT values for crude oil from the Bu Hasa
oilfield and seawater from Arabian Gulf (40 980 ppm). They
have observed a continuous increase in IFT with brine dilution. However,
there are studies on IFT between crude and diluted formation of water
reporting minima in IFT at a particular low salinity concentration.37,38 Again, some studies also reported IFT minima for crude oil and a
single salt brine system.19,39,40 Although the low salinity concentration corresponding to the minimum
IFT is different in our study from the above cited studies, the trends
in the reduction of IFT are in line with the reported studies and
reflect the implication of low salinity waterflooding. In our previous
study34 on the effect of salt on the IFT
of the pure alkane–brine system, we have proposed a mechanism
of IFT reduction at low salt concentrations. The reason behind the
minimum IFT was explained with the Gibbs adsorption isotherm. Initially,
when the salt concentration is low, the dissociated ions in water
are preferentially located at or around the hydrocarbon–water
interface, even if the bulk concentration is low. The cations get
adsorbed at the interface because of the interaction with the hydrocarbon
phase either through cation-induced dipole interaction with the nonpolar
molecules or interaction with different polar groups in the oil phase.
As the ions migrate to the interface, the surface excess turns positive
and leads to a reduction in IFT. Therefore, we have observed a decrease
in IFT at low salt concentrations. After a certain concentration of
the salt, the interface becomes saturated with cations and subsequent
addition of salt increases the bulk concentration. As a result, the
surface excess decreases and causes an increase in IFT with a minimum
IFT value.

Figure 3 Results of IFT measurements between crude oil and different injection
water at 70 °C (IFT values reported are the average of three
independent measurements).

2.3 Effect of Salinity on the Contact Angle
Contact angle measurements were performed to address the impact
of injection-brine dilution on the wettability of the rock-forming
mineral surface. It is considered as one of the most common methods
in petroleum research to quantify reservoir rock wettability.41,42 To interpret wettability regimes from contact angle results, Anderson’s43 classification of wettability is used: from
0 to 75° as water-wet, from 75 to 115° as intermediate-wet,
and from 115 to 180° as oil-wet. Figure 4 shows the photographs of the oil droplets
in deionized water and seawater at varying temperatures in the range
from 25 to 70 °C. It could be observed that the contact angle
increases with the increase in the temperature. However, the increase
in the contact angle or wettability transition was much more significant
when the oil droplet was in a high salinity (seawater) environment.
High salinity and high temperature can transform the silicate surface
into the oil-wet state. The reason behind such behavior is that with
the increase in temperature, the thickness of embedding water film
between the oil and silicate surface decreases dramatically.44 The reduction in the thickness of the embedding
water film on the silica surface decreases because of the breaking
of hydrogen bonds. This in turn causes the silicate surface to shift
toward a oil-wet regime because of the thinning of water film.45 Again, as salinity increases, the amount of
the divalent ion also increases which helps in binding the negative
charge-bearing molecules of crude oil to the negatively charged silicate
surface via the ion-binding mechanism.46Figure 5 shows images
of the oil droplets in different brine environments (high/low salinity).
The droplet in the first row represents the initial wetting conditions
for each experiment. It can be observed that the initial wetting conditions
are reasonably identical for all the experiments. Figure 6 shows the change in contact
angle values and the respective wetting regime with varying brine
salinities. From the results, it has been observed that the contact
angle with high salinity seawater is 138°, indicating an oil-wet
state. When the 50% seawater was used, the contact angle has slightly
decreased to 119° but remained in the oil-wet regime. We have
observed a significant change in the contact angle with 25% seawater.
The contact angle has reduced to 51°, which indicate that the
silicate surface is in a water-wet regime in 25% seawater. When 10%
seawater was used, the contact angle was observed to be greater than
that of 25% seawater (85°), making the silicate surface intermediate-wet.
The results indicate that dilution of injection brine or reduction
in injection-brine salinity can significantly change the wettability
of the rock-forming mineral surface. The highest shift in wettability
toward the water-wet state was observed in the case of 25% seawater
which is in line with the waterflooding experiments, which also results
in the highest additional oil recovery as compared to other low salinity
seawater injections. The shift of the wetting state of reservoir rock
with altering brine salinity was reported previously in the literature
by few authors.10,47−51 However, contact angle studies using quartz and seawater
were not reported previously, instead these were reported for mica
surfaces.32 Alotaibi et al.47 observed a larger contact angle in the case
of high salinity seawater as compared to low salinity aquifer water
and deionized water. Aslan et al.17 observed
a nonmonotonous wetting behavior of the quartz surface with varying
NaCl and CaCl2 concentrations. For NaCl brine, they observed
the most water-wet state within an optimum concentration range of
0.1 and 1 M, and for CaCl2, the optimum concentration range
was reported to be within 0.001–0.1 M. The optimum brine concentration
range corresponding to the most water-wet state of the silicate surface
was found to be different from different studies depending on the
type of the crude oil and substrate used. However, one common observation
is that the reduction in brine salinity can make the silicate or sandstone
surface more water-wet, which is favorable for enhanced waterflood
recovery. The explanation for the salinity-dependent contact angle
was described in our recent study.52 The
reason behind a minimum contact angle could be related to the IFT
through the Young’s equation. According to this relation, the
reduction in oil–water IFT can result in a lower oil–water–solid
contact angle. The reduction in IFT up to an optimum salt concentration
has led to a reduction in the contact angle. The reason is also applicable
for the uprising trend of the contact angle after the optimum salt
concentration. Apart from that, the reduction in brine salinity also
helps in detaching the polar oil components bridged to the mineral
surface via ions in the aqueous phase.

Figure 4 Photographs of the oil
droplet in deionized water and high salinity
water (seawater) at varying temperatures (25, 50, and 70 °C).
The contact angles reported are the average of the right and left
contact angle analyzed with ImageJ using DropSnake Plugin. Photograph
courtesy of “Ganesh Kumar”. Copyright 2019. This image
is free domain.

Figure 5 Photographs of the oil droplet in high and low
salinity environments
at 70 °C. The first row of images represents initial wettability
of the substrates measured in deionized water at the same temperature.
The contact angles reported are the average of the right and left
contact angle analyzed with ImageJ using DropSnake Plugin. Photograph
courtesy of “Ganesh Kumar”. Copyright 2019. This image
is free domain.

Figure 6 Contact angle values of the oil droplet placed
on a quartz substrate
surrounded by different injection water at 70 °C (Contact angle
values reported are the average of three independent measurements).

2.4 Results of Effluent Brine
Analysis
Figure 7 shows variation
in pH of the effluent water that is produced during the waterflooding
experiments and is plotted as a function of injected fluid volume
for all the flooding experiments carried out in this study. We observe
from Figure 7 that
the effluent brine during low salinity water injection has a higher
pH value as compared to the effluent produced during high salinity
seawater flooding in all three core-flooding experiments. Although
the increase in pH was observed and is in line with the observation
by other researchers,6,14,53−55 the actual cause behind pH elevation during low salinity
water injection is not known. According to Austad et al.53 the divalent ions that help in binding polar
crude oil components to the clay or silicate surface remain in chemical
equilibrium during high salinity seawater injection. Injection of
low salinity seawater disturbs this chemical equilibrium, and the
divalent ions tend to free themselves in order to re-establish the
chemical equilibrium. The surrounding water molecules help to facilitate
this process by dissociating them into H+ and OH– ions. H+ ions from the water molecules adsorb onto the
clay surface because of their high affinity to the clay surface, and
the OH– ions remain in solution resulting in an
increase in pH. H+ ions also adsorb to the clay minerals
as a substitute for the divalent ions. This alters the wettability
of the rock surface by dissociation of the organo–metallic
complexes formed by the crude oil components onto the rock surface
via cation-bridging. The elevated pH probably also results in expansion
of the electrical double layer which increases water wetness of the
reservoir rock surface. In addition, the elevated pH also promotes
saponification of the natural surface-active compounds in the crude
oil to generate in-situ surfactants. This contributes to the reduction
of oil–water IFT. However, in the case of crude oil with a
higher acid number, the IFT reduction would have been more prominent
as it contains a higher amount of surface-active compounds. Figure 8 shows the total
dissolved solids (TDS) of the effluent water produced during waterflooding
experiments plotted as a function of the volume of water injected.
TDS of the effluent water is an important parameter to evaluate, which
gives an insight into the mechanism of low salinity waterflooding.
The results show that during low salinity or diluted seawater flooding,
TDS of the produced effluent water is higher than the injection-water
TDS. For example, in the case of 50% seawater injection, the TDS of
the injection water is ∼16 000 ppm, but the produced
effluent water was found to have a minimum TDS of ∼19 000
ppm. Similarly, in the case of 25% seawater, a difference of ∼3000
ppm was observed between effluent brine and injection brine. During
high salinity seawater injection, the crude oil binds with the pore
walls via attractive interaction and bridges by the ions present in
the interstitial water. The interstitial water therefore contains
a high amount of ions. Low salinity water injection disturbs this
association, thereby helping in the release of ions and the attached
organic molecules of the crude oil. These ions are released because
of the breakdown of the organo–metallic complexes and come
out with the effluent water.14,17,19 This results in a difference in TDS between the effluent and low
salinity injection water. The breakdown of the organo–metallic
complexes caused by the intrusion of low salinity water is one of
the main reasons behind recovery enhancement in low salinity waterflooding.

Figure 7 pH of
the effluent or produced water during waterflooding plotted
as a function of the volume of water injected (measured at intervals
of ∼0.3 PV).

Figure 8 TDS of the effluent or
produced water during waterflooding plotted
as a function of the volume of water injected (measured at intervals
of ∼0.3 PV).

2.5 Efficiency,
Environmental, and Economic Benefits
of Low Salinity-EOR
Laboratory core-flooding studies on low
salinity waterflooding by various researchers reported varying oil
recovery efficiencies depending on the type of the core, crude oil,
and brine chemistry employed. The lab-scale additional oil recovery
of low salinity-EOR is found to be in the range between 5 and 21%
OOIP.56−58 For example, Austad et al.53 evaluated low salinity-EOR performance using a sandstone core and
obtained an additional oil recovery of 15%. Similarly, Tang and Morrow22 have obtained 5.8% additional oil recovery from
core-flooding experiments using Berea sandstone. Putervold et al.56 observed an additional oil recovery up to 6%
OOIP from low salinity waterflooding for chalk cores. Fathi et al.57 observed 8–18% additional oil recovery
from their laboratory experiments using chalk cores. Gupta et al.58 from their low salinity-EOR experiments reported
an additional oil recovery of 5.1–21.3% for limestone and dolomite
cores. Data available in the literature indicate that the pilot-scale
low salinity-EOR operation in some fields reported reduction in the
residual oil saturation by 10–24%.6,8,10,11 This represents
that the oil recovery obtained from the lab-scale and pilot-scale
low salinity test is in line. In the case of chemical EOR, most laboratory
studies show an additional oil recovery of 20–30% OOIP, whereas
the field applications show an additional oil recovery of 12–30%
OOIP.59,60 This shows that the efficiency of low salinity-EOR
is comparable to that of chemical EOR methods.

There are immense
environmental impacts associated with chemical EOR operations. Some
of these environmental impacts are as follows: (1) deterioration of
the surface water quality due to chemical contamination, (2) contamination
of shallow water aquifers, (3) production of toxic and carcinogenic
substances from synergistic interactions among chemicals during chemical
EOR processes, and (4) loss of biota.61 The contamination may occur as a result of the spill of chemicals
during preparation, transportation through surface lines and storage
facilities, failure of injection and the production well, migration
through fractures in reservoirs, and so forth. As low salinity waterflooding
does not involve the injection of any chemicals and it completely
relies on tuning or modification of injection-brine chemistry, there
are no or little impacts on the environment. In comparison with chemical
EOR, the environmental impact of low salinity-EOR is insignificant,
as in the case of waterflooding. As the injection water has a lower
salinity, it may not cause significant environmental and ecological
imbalance, if in case it gets mixed with groundwater sources.

The economic feasibility of any EOR method is a crucial factor
for its successful implementation. Only having a technical ability
to increase oil recovery cannot establish it to be an efficient EOR
method. The cost of reservoir development using low salinity-EOR primarily
depends on the desalination cost. Because a low salinity water source
may not be available at all locations, desalination of the formation
water or seawater is required in such cases. The cost of desalination
cannot be exactly determined because it depends on the time and location.
According to an economic evaluation of low salinity-EOR by Althani,62 the desalination cost could be only 14% of the
profit gained from low salinity-EOR. As most of today’s oil
fields are under waterflooding operations, low salinity-EOR does not
require any additional facility for the injection purpose. Although
in this study, 5 PV of low salinity water was injected in each case,
the incremental oil recovery was observed only during the first 1
PV of low salinity water injection for all the experiments. The additional
4 PV water was injected only to ascertain that no capillary-trapped
oil is left in the core. From a field perspective, if we inject low
salinity water to recover the residual oil which is left after high
salinity waterflooding (rather than applying low salinity waterflooding
in a secondary mode), then this will reduce the desalination cost
by reducing the amount of low salinity water required. In comparison
with chemical EOR methods, low salinity-EOR is much economical as
the cost of chemicals in chemical EOR methods is very high. For example,
in the case of alkaline-surfactant-polymer flooding, the cost of the
chemical could be 10 USD/bbl of incremental oil.60

Apart from the low-operating cost, another most important
benefit
from low salinity-EOR is the reduced risk of corrosion of production
facility. The chance of inorganic-scale formation in production installations
and also in the reservoir is minimum in low salinity-EOR.

3 Conclusions
The oil recovery efficiency of the emerging
low salinity-EOR method
has been tested for light crude oil with a low acid number. Diluted
seawater in different proportions was injected in core-flooding experiments
to find out the impact of injection-water salinity on oil recovery.
In addition, IFT, contact angle measurements, and effluent brine analysis
were performed to investigate the mechanism of oil recovery enhancement.
Based on the results gathered from this study, the following conclusions
can be drawn:1. The results of waterflooding experiments
using a crude oil with a low acid number show that injection of diluted
seawater has a significant potential for improving oil recovery as
compared to high salinity seawater injection.

2. The highest additional oil recovery
is obtained in the case of 25% seawater injection. The impact of 50%
seawater injection was negligible, and with 10% seawater injection,
the oil recovery has improved but not as significant as the 25% seawater
injection case.

3. Low
salinity water injection results
in a higher pressure drop as compared to the pressure drop during
high salinity water injection.

4. Recovery mechanism studies show that
dilution of injection water has an obvious impact on oil–water
IFT and significantly influences the reservoir rock wettability. At
an optimum dilution, a minimum IFT and strongly water-wet condition
can be achieved, which results in additional oil recovery from low
salinity-EOR.

5. Although
pH-induced soap generation
could slightly contribute to the low salinity effect in every crude
oil type, the primary mechanism of IFT reduction and associated wettability
alteration in a low acid number crude oil is attributed to the preferential
movement of cations to the oil–water interface.



4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
The crude oil used for
this study was provided by Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited (CPCL)
produced from an offshore oilfield of India. The crude oil properties
are listed in Table 3. Figure 9 shows the
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the crude oil used in
this study. The FTIR report shows that the crude oil contains alkanes,
carboxylic functionalities along with a small amount of phenols, and
amines. The wide band between 2500 and 3300 cm–1 corresponds to carboxylic acid. The band 1400–1500 cm–1 shows that the crude oil also contains some aromatic
compounds.63 The sand used to prepare the
sand pack for core-flood experiments is sieved through a mesh of 0.3–0.6
mm. XRD analysis showed that it is composed primarily of silica. Bentonite
clay (2 wt %) had been mixed with the sand while preparing the sand
pack. This was done in order to simulate more accurate reservoir mineralogy,
as actual sandstone reservoirs always contain some amounts of clay,
deposited in the geological past along with sediments. The quartz
plate for contact angle measurements is purchased from a local vendor
in Chennai, India. Deionized water having a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ
cm (at 25 °C) from a Milli-Q system (Millipore, U.S.) was used
to prepare diluted versions of the high salinity seawater (50, 25,
and 10% seawater) which were used as low salinity water. The concentration
of the major ions in seawater and their different diluted versions
used for injection is reported in Table 4. The ionic concentrations were determined
as per the standard procedure given in the “standard methods
for the examination of water and wastewater”.64

Figure 9 FTIR spectra of the Indian crude oil used in this study.

Table 3 Properties of the Crude Oil Used
properties	values	
specific
gravity	0.8286	
API gravity	39.30	
viscosity @40 °C (cSt)	2.70	
pour point (°C)	30	
sulphur (wt %)	0.12	
acid number (mg KOH)	0.12	
Table 4 Ionic Composition of the Different
Injection Water Used in This Study
 	concentration
(ppm)	
ions	seawater	50% seawater	25% seawater	10% seawater	
Na+	11 806	5903	2952	295	
Ca2+	1200	600	300	120	
Mg2+	3960	1980	990	396	
Cl–	18 197	9099	4549	1820	
SO42–	2086	1043	522	20	
salinity	32 754	16 378	8188	3276	
pH	7.23	7.19	7.25	7.15	
4.2 Low Salinity-EOR Experiments
Figure 10 shows the experimental
setup used for low salinity waterflooding experiments. The setup consists
of a sand-pack reactor which has a uniform diameter stainless steel
cylindrical tube (diameter: 4 cm and length: 30 cm) surrounded by
an integrated water jacket. The reactor was custom-designed and fabricated
by D-Cam Engineering, Ahmedabad, India. The flooding experiments were
conducted at a high temperature (70 °C) by circulating hot water
into the water jacket from a water bath (TC-650, Brookfield, USA)
which has an operating temperature range of −20 to +200 °C.
The crude oil and injection water (seawater) are stored in two different
accumulator bottles of 500 mL capacity and are made up of stainless
steel. A syringe pump (Teledyne ISCO, 500D, USA) with a maximum capacity
of 507.3 mL was used to inject various fluids from the accumulators
into the sand pack. The oil saturation was achieved by displacing
the oil from the accumulator into the sand pack with the help of water
from the syringe pump. Water was used in the syringe pump to displace
crude oil because it is immiscible with crude oil. Similarly, during
waterflooding, the injection water was injected into the sand pack
with the help of a hydrocarbon solvent filled in the syringe pump.
This procedure was used to ensure the safe operation of the syringe
pump. It is to be noted here that the height of the accumulator bottles
(Figure 10) is sufficiently
high enough as compared to its cross-sectional area, which ensures
that the interface of two injection fluids remains stable. Moreover,
extreme care has been taken to ensure that the accumulators are sufficiently
filled with the injection fluid so that the interface does not go
down significantly. Again, the flow rate is very low, which keeps
the interface stable and therefore there is no chance of turbulence
that can cause mixing of the two fluids. This prevents the pump fluid
from entering into the sand pack. The pressure difference across the
sand pack was monitored with a digital pressure gauge attached at
the inlet of the sand-pack reactor. Because the outlet of the sand
pack was at atmospheric pressure, the gauge reading was considered
as the pressure drop across the sand pack and the same is used to
determine the permeability of the sand pack.

Figure 10 Schematic diagram of
the experimental setup used for waterflooding
experiments. Photograph courtesy of “Ganesh Kumar”.
Copyright 2019. This image is free domain.

The sand pack was prepared by filling the reactor with silica sand
mixed with bentonite clay (2 wt %). The sand used in these experiments
was in the size range of 0.3–0.6 mm mesh size. Bentonite clay
was mixed with sand to simulate reservoir mineralogy as sandstone
reservoirs also contain a small amount of clay. Although the clay
content in reservoirs varies over a wide range, in most sandstone
reservoirs, it occurs between 2 and 8 wt %.65 The lowest value in this range (2 wt %) has been taken to avoid
permeability damage that could be induced by low salinity water. During
its filling, the sand was simultaneously saturated with seawater.
The total amount of water required to saturate the sand pack fully
was considered as the pore volume (PV) of the sand pack. The bulk
volume (BV) of the sand pack is equal to the volume of the reactor
cylinder into which sand was filled, which was known from the reactor
dimensions. The porosity is determined as the ratio of PV to BV. After
the sand pack was ready, it was flooded with seawater to measure the
absolute permeability (k) of the sand pack using
Darcy’s equation. Five measurement points were recorded at
an interval of 0.1 PV for permeability measurement after a stabilized
pressure was achieved. The reported permeability is the average of
five permeability values. The flow rate was set at 0.5 mL/min during
permeability measurements. Once the absolute permeability has been
measured, crude oil was injected into the sand pack. As crude oil
was injected into the sand pack, the saturated water from the sand
pack started to get displaced and is produced at the outlet. A sufficient
amount of crude oil was injected even after the water cut or water
production stopped from the outlet of the pack. The oil injection
rate was varied in order to displace any mobile water that could have
been trapped at the outlet because of the capillary end effect. The
production stream at this point contains almost only crude oil and
further injection of the crude oil into the sand pack could not displace
any more water out of the sand pack. At this stage, the water left
in the pores of the sand pack is called connate water saturation or
irreducible water saturation or initial water saturation. The amount
of oil left inside the sand pack was calculated with a simple material
balance method. The oil volume remaining inside the sand pack is equal
to the amount of water that has come out of the sand pack and is called
OOIP. The initial oil saturation (Soi)
and initial water saturation (Swi) were
calculated as 1   2  

Once initial crude oil and
connate water saturations were achieved,
the sand pack was aged at 70 °C for more than 48 h to establish
equilibrium between sand grains, crude oil, and water. Like any other
EOR method, low salinity waterflooding also targets the residual oil
left after secondary oil recovery. Therefore, the aged sand pack was
first flooded with high salinity seawater until the oil production
becomes zero or insignificant. In all the flooding experiments performed
in this work, approximately 5 PV of high salinity seawater was injected
initially in a secondary mode to establish minimum residual oil saturation
(Sor). The injection scheme during the
waterflooding experiments is depicted in Figure 11. The high salinity seawater was injected
at a constant rate of 0.2 mL/min, which is equivalent to 2 ft/day
for the sand-pack dimension used in this study. In order to mimic
the flow rate inside the reservoir during waterflooding operation,
a standard flow rate of 2 ft/day is used for our flooding experiments.
After 4 PV of the seawater injection, the rate was increased to 0.5,
1, and 2 mL/min during the last 1 PV seawater injection (from 4 to
5 PV). This rate bumping was performed in order to recover any mobile
oil that is trapped because of the capillary end effect.

Figure 11 Injection
scheme of the low salinity waterflooding experiments.

The produced mixture of oil and water was collected in graduated
cylinders at an interval of ∼0.1 PV (approximately 10 sampling
points in 1 PV) and later heated for a sufficiently long time in a
water bath for thorough separation of the two phases. The separated
volumes of oil and water are noted for the calculation of the oil
recovery factor. The sand-pack holder is designed to have a very minimal
dead volume for accurate measurement of the produced fluids and to
avoid any production delay. The residual oil saturation was calculated
as 3  

Once it has been observed
that the production stream contains no
traces of crude oil or no further oil production was possible from
high salinity seawater flood, the injection scheme was switched to
diluted seawater (low salinity water). The low salinity waterflooding
has been performed in this work using 50% seawater, 25% seawater,
and 10% seawater (low salinity water). The number represents the percentage
of seawater in the prepared low salinity injection water. As shown
in Figure 11, almost
5 PV of diluted seawater or low salinity water was injected at a rate
of 0.2 mL/min (the same as of high salinity seawater injection) in
each case of the low salinity waterflooding experiments performed
in this work. The oil recovery efficiency after each low salinity-EOR
experiments has been calculated using eq 4 4  

The details are discussed
in Results and Discussion.

4.3 IFT Measurements
The IFT between
crude oil and different diluted versions of seawater was measured
by the Wilhelmy plate method. A dynamic contact angle tensiometer
(DCAT 11 EC, Dataphysics, Germany) was employed to perform the IFT
measurements using a PT 11 Wilhelmy plate (Dataphysics, Germany).
Figure S1 (in the Supporting Information) shows the experimental setup used for IFT measurements. The instrument
offers an accuracy of approximately ±0.01 mN/m. The temperature
of the fluids under investigation was maintained by circulating hot
water from a water bath (IC 201, Escy Enterprises, Pune, India) into
the water jacket integrated with the sample holder in the tensiometer.
However, the sample temperature was measured and confirmed with a
built-in temperature sensor which has an accuracy of ±0.1 K.
More detailed information on the experimental procedure is reported
in our previous work.34,52

4.4 Contact
Angle Measurements
The contact
angle measurements were performed in order to assess if there is any
wettability change associated with seawater dilution or salinity reduction.
A quartz substrate with a smooth surface was used for these studies
as a representative of the sandstone or silicate mineralogy. To measure
the contact angle, the inverted sessile drop technique was utilized
with a custom-made setup, as shown in Figure S2 (in the Supporting Information). The setup comprises
a double-walled cylindrical glass cell with an annular space through
which water from a water bath (IC 201, Escy Enterprises, Pune, India)
was circulated to maintain the experimental temperature (70 °C).
The glass cell has a planer quartz window glass in order to capture
images of the droplets. The experimental setup and procedures used
for cleaning the quartz substrate were reported in our previous work.66 The substrate has been aged in the high salinity
brine first. After that, the substrate was placed in the respective
low salinity brine and subsequently the oil droplet was placed below
the substrate. Once the oil droplet was placed, the entire system
was left undisturbed for 48 h to attain equilibrium. A crude oil droplet
(approximately 50 μL) is injected below the substrate with the
help of a J-shape needle fitted with a syringe. The droplet moves
from the needle tip to the substrate because of the difference in
the density of oil from that of the aqueous phase. The images of the
droplets were taken with a high-resolution camera (Canon 600D) through
a quartz window. The analysis of the drop images is then performed
using a Java-based program called ImageJ with a plugin that utilizes
the DropSnake method developed by Biomedical Imaging Group at EPFL,
Switzerland.67,68 The average of the left and right
contact angle was considered to interpret wettability regimes. More
detailed information on contact angle measurements is reported in
our previous publication.66 Identical wetting
conditions are important for comparing results of wettability studies.
In this study, the initial wetting conditions of the quartz substrates
are the same as they are prepared from the same specimen and an identical
cleaning procedure and similar aging conditions were applied. To confirm
the initial wetting conditions, the substrate wettability is assessed
first with deionized water.

4.5 Effluent Brine Analysis
The pH and
TDS of the effluent brine produced during waterflooding were analyzed
to get more insight of the physicochemical changes that could happen
during low salinity water injection. These measurements were done
using a Eutech PC 2700 pH/conductivity meter (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Singapore). For pH measurements, the instrument has an operating range
of −2.00–20.00 pH and an accuracy of ±0.002 pH.
It can measure TDS in the range of 0.050 to 5 00 000
ppm with an accuracy of ±1%.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b03229.Photograph of the experimental
setup used for IFT measurements
and schematic of the experimental setup used for contact angle measurements
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b03229_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the Science
and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science &
Technology, Government of India (project no. EMR/2016/005360) for
their financial support. The Centre for Industrial Consultancy and
Sponsored Research (IC&SR) of the Indian Institute of Technology
(IIT) Madras is also acknowledged for providing partial funding for
this work (project no. ICS/16-17/831/RFIE/MAHS). The authors acknowledge
Chennai Petroleum Corp. Ltd. (CPCL) for providing the crude oil sample.
The authors also acknowledge the laboratory of Civil Engineering,
IIT Madras, for help in determining the ionic composition of seawater.
==== Refs
References
Austad T.  Water-based EOR
in Carbonates and Sandstones: New Chemical Understanding of the EOR
Potential Using Smart Water . In EOR Field
Case Studies ; Sheng J. J.  , Ed.; Elsevier : Waltham, MA, USA , 2013 ; Chapter 13,
pp 301 –335 .
Tang G. Q. ; Morrow N. R. 
Influence of Brine Composition and Fines Migration
on Crude Oil/Brine/Rock Interactions and Oil Recovery . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
1999 , 24 , 99 –111 . 10.1016/s0920-4105(99)00034-0 .
Jadhunandan P. P. ; Morrow N. R. 
Effect of Wettability
on Waterflood Recovery for Crude-Oil/Brine/Rock
Systems . SPE Reservoir Eng. 
1995 , 10 , 40 –46 . 10.2118/22597-pa .
Morrow N. R. ; Tang G. Q. ; Valat M. ; Xie X. 
Prospects of Improved
Oil Recovery Related to Wettability and Brine Composition . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
1998 , 20 , 267 –276 . 10.1016/s0920-4105(98)00030-8 .
Tang G. Q. ; Morrow N. R. 
Salinity, Temperature,
Oil Composition, and Oil Recovery
by Waterflooding . SPE Reservoir Eng. 
1997 , 12 , 269 –276 . 10.2118/36680-pa .
McGuire P. L. ; Chatham J. R. ; Paskvan F. K. ; Sommer D. M. ; Carini F. H.  Low Salinity
Oil Recovery: An Exciting New EOR Opportunity for Alaska’s
North Slope . Presented at SPE Western Regional
Meeting : Irvine, California , 30 March–1 April, 2005 .
Robertson E.  Low-salinity Waterflooding
to Improve oil recovery—Historical Field Evidence . Presented at SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition : Anaheim, California, U.S.A. , 11–14
Nov, 2007 .
Seccombe J. C. ; Lager A. ; Webb K.
J. ; Jerauld G. ; Fueg E.  Improving Waterflood Recovery:
LoSaltm EOR Field Evaluation . Presented at SPE Symposium on Improved Oil Recovery : Tulsa,
Oklahoma, USA , 20–23 April, 2008 .
Skrettingland K. ; Holt T. ; Tweheyo M. T. ; Skjevrak I. 
Snorre Low-Salinity-Water
injection—Core Flooding Experiments and Single-Well Field Pilot . SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 
2011 , 14 , 182 –192 . 10.2118/129877-pa .
Vledder P. ; Gonzalez I. E. ; Fonseca J. C. ; Wells T. ; Ligthelm D. J.  Low Salinity
Waterflooding: Proof of Wettability Alteration on a Field Wide Scale . Presented at SPE Improved Oil Recovery Symposium : Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA , 24–28
April, 2010 .
Webb K. J. ; Black C. J. J. ; Al-Ajeel H.  Low Salinity Oil
Recovery—Log-Inject-Log . Presented at SPE Middle East Oil Show : Bahrain , 9–12 June, 2003 .
Yousef A. A. ; Liu J. ; Blanchard G. ; Al-saleh S. ; Al-zahrani T. ; Al-zahrani R. ; Al-Tammar H.  Smart Waterflooding:
Industry’s First Field Test in Carbonate Reservoirs . Presented at SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition : San Antonio, Texas, USA , 8–10
October, 2012 .
Boussour S. ; Cissokho M. ; Cordier P. ; Bertin H. ; Hamon G.  Oil Recovery by Low Salinity
Brine Injection: Laboratory Results Outcrop and Reservoir Cores . Presented at SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition : New Orleans, Louisiana , 4–7
October, 2009 .
Lager A. ; Webb K. J. ; Black C. J. J. ; Singleton M. ; Sorbie K. S. 
Low Salinity Oil Recovery—An
Experimental Investigation . Petrophysics 
2008 , 49 , 28 –35 .
Pu H. ; Xie X. ; Yin P. ; Morrow N. R.  Low Salinity
Waterflooding and Mineral
Dissolution . Presented at SPE Annual Technical
Conference and Exhibition : Florence, Italy , 19–22 September, 2010 .
Tang G. ; Morrow N. M.  Oil Recovery
by Waterflooding and Imbibition—Invading Brine Cation Valency
and Salinity . Proceedings of the International
Symposium of the Society of Core Analysts : Golden, CO , August 1999 .
Aslan S. ; Najafabadi N. F. ; Firoozabadi A. 
Non-Monotonicity of the Contact Angle
from NaCl And MgCl2 Concentrations in Two Petroleum Fluids
on Atomistically Smooth Surfaces . Energy Fuels 
2016 , 30 , 2858 –2864 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b00175 .
Hognesen E. J. ; Strand S. ; Austad T.  Waterflooding
of Preferential Oil-Wet Carbonates: Oil Recovery Related to Reservoir
Temperature and Brine Composition . Presented at SPE Europec/EAGE Annual Conference : Madrid,
Spain , 13–16 June, 2005 .
Lashkarbolooki M. ; Ayatollahi S. ; Riazi M. 
The Impacts of Aqueous
Ions on Interfacial
Tension and Wettability of an Asphaltenic—Acidic Crude Oil
Reservoir during Smart Water Injection . J. Chem.
Eng. Data 
2014 , 59 , 3624 –3634 . 10.1021/je500730e .
Sharma G.  Wettability Alteration
in High Temperature and High Salinity Carbonate Reservoirs . Presented at SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition : Denver, Colorado, USA , 30 October–2
November, 2011 .
Romanuka J. ; Hofman J. ; Ligthelm D. J. ; Suijkerbuijk B. ; Marcelis F. ; Oedai S. ; Brussee N. ; van der Linde H. ; Aksulu H. ; Austad T.  Low salinity EOR in Carbonates . Presented at SPE Improved Oil Recovery Symposium : Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA , 14–18
April, 2012 .
Suleimanov B. A. ; Latifov Y. A. ; Veliyev E. F. ; Frampton H. 
Comparative Analysis
of the EOR Mechanisms by Using Low Salinity and Low Hardness Alkaline
Water . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2018 , 162 , 35 –43 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2017.12.005 .
Winoto W. ; Loahardjo N. ; Morrow N. R.  Assessment
of Oil Recovery by Low Salinity Waterflooding from Laboratory Tests . Presented at SPE Improved Oil Recovery Symposium : Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA , 12–16
April, 2014 .
AlQuraishi A. A. ; Alhussinan S. N. ; Alyami H. Q. ; Abdulaziz K.  Efficiency
and Recovery Mechanisms of Low Salinity Waterflooding in Sandstone
and Carbonate Reservoirs . Presented at 12th
Offshore Mediterranean Conference and Exhibition : Ravenna, Italy , 25–27 March, 2015 .
Cissokho M. ; Boussour S. ; Cordier P. ; Bertin H. ; Hamon G. 
Low Salinity
Oil Recovery on Clayey Sandstone: Experimental Study . Petrophysics 
2010 , 51 , 305 –313 .
Liu Y. ; Jiang T. ; Zhou D. ; Zhao J. ; Xie Q. ; Saeedi A.  Evaluation of the Potential of Low Salinity Waterflooding in the
High Temperature and High Salinity Dong-He-Tang Reservoir in the Tarim
Oilfeild, China: Experimental and Reservoir Simulation Results . Presented at SPE Asia Pacific Oil & Gas Conference
and Exhibition : Perth, Australia , 25–27 October, 2016 .
Mohsenzadeh A. ; Pourafshary P. ; Al-Wahaibi Y.  Oil
Recovery Enhancement in Carbonate Reservoirs via Low Saline Waterflooding
in Presence of Low Concentration Active Ions; A Case Study . Presented at SPE EOR Conference at Oil and Gas West Asia : Muscat, Oman , 21–23 March, 2016 .
Garcia-Olvera G. ; Reilly T. M. ; Lehmann T. E. ; Alvarado V. 
Effects of Asphaltenes
and Organic Acids on Crude Oil-Brine Interfacial Visco-Elasticity
and Oil Recovery in Low-Salinity Waterflooding . Fuel 
2016 , 185 , 151 –163 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2016.07.104 .
Ebrahim T. ; Mohsen V. S. ; Mahdi S. M. ; Esmaeel K. T. ; Saeb A. 
Performance
of Low-Salinity Water Flooding for Enhanced Oil Recovery Improved
by SiO2 nanoparticles . Pet. Sci. 
2019 , 16 , 357 –365 . 10.1007/s12182-018-0295-1 .
Ding Y. ; Zheng S. ; Meng X. ; Yang D. 
Low Salinity hot Water
Injection with Addition of Nanoparticles for Enhancing Heavy Oil Recovery
under Reservoir Conditions . J. Energy Resour.
Technol. 
2019 , 141 , 072904 10.1115/1.4042238 .
Fu J. Y.  A study of
low salinity water flooding in 1D and 2D . MS Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin , 2011 .
Nasralla R. A. ; Bataweel M. A. ; Nasr-El-Din H. A. 
Investigation
of Wettability Alteration
and Oil-Recovery Improvement by Low-Salinity Water in Sandstone Rock . J. Can. Pet. Technol. 
2013 , 52 , 144 –154 . 10.2118/146322-pa .
Zhang L. ; Zhang J. ; Wang Y. ; Yang R. ; Zhang Y. ; Gu J. ; Zhang M. ; Ren S. 
Experimental Investigation of Low-Salinity
Waterflooding in a Low-Permeability Oil Reservoir . Energy Fuels 
2018 , 32 , 3108 –3118 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b03704 .
Kakati A. ; Sangwai J. S. 
Effect of Monovalent
and Divalent Salts on the Interfacial
Tension of Pure Hydrocarbon-Brine Systems Relevant For Low Salinity
Waterflooding . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2017 , 157 , 1106 –1114 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2017.08.017 .
Al-Attar H. H. ; Mahmoud M. Y. ; Zekri A. Y. ; Almehaideb R. ; Ghannam M. 
Low-Salinity Flooding in a Selected
Carbonate Reservoir:
Experimental Approach . J. Pet. Explor. Prod.
Technol. 
2013 , 3 , 139 –149 . 10.1007/s13202-013-0052-3 .
Al-Attar H. H. ; Mahmoud M. Y. ; Zekri A. Y. ; Almehaideb R. A. ; Ghannam M. T.  The Impact
of Losal on Oil Recovery from a Selected Carbonate Reservoir in Abu
Dhabi—An Experimental Approach . Presented at SPE Middle East Oil and Gas Show and Conference : Manama, Bahrain , 10–13 March, 2013 .
Vijapurapu C. S. ; Rao D. N. 
Compositional Effects
of Fluids on Spreading, Adhesion
and Wettability in Porous Media . Colloids Surf.,
A 
2004 , 241 , 335 –342 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2004.04.024 .
Okasha T. M. ; Al-Shiwaish A. J.  Effect of Brine
Salinity on Interfacial Tension in Arab-D Carbonate Reservoir, Saudi
Arabia . Presented at SPE Middle East Oil &
Gas Show and Conference : Bahrain , 15–18 March, 2009 .
Moeini F. ; Hemmati-Sarapardeh A. ; Ghazanfari M.-H. ; Masihi M. ; Ayatollahi S. 
Towards Mechanistic
Understanding of Heavy Crude Oil/Brine Interfacial Tension: The Role
of Salinity, Temperature and Pressure . Fluid
Phase Equilib. 
2014 , 375 , 191 –200 . 10.1016/j.fluid.2014.04.017 .
Manshad A. K. ; Olad M. ; Taghipour A. S. ; Nowrouzi I. ; Mohammadi A. H. 
Effects
of Water Soluble Ions on Interfacial Tension (IFT) Between oil and
Brine in Smart and Carbonated Smart Water Injection Process in Oil
Reservoirs . J. Mol. Liq. 
2016 , 223 , 987 –993 . 10.1016/j.molliq.2016.08.089 .
Pal N. ; Vajpayee M. ; Mandal A. 
Cationic/Nonionic Mixed Surfactants
as Enhanced Oil Recovery Fluids: Influence of Mixed Micellization
and Polymer Association on Interfacial, Rheological, and Rock-Wetting
Characteristics . Energy Fuels 
2019 , 33 , 6048 –6059 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b00671 .
Kumar A. ; Mandal A. 
Critical Investigation
of Zwitterionic Surfactant for
Enhanced Oil Recovery from both Sandstone and Carbonate Reservoirs:
Adsorption, Wettability Alteration and Imbibition Studies . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2019 , 209 , 115222 10.1016/j.ces.2019.115222 .
Anderson W. G. 
Wettability
Literature Survey- Part 1: Rock/Oil/Brine Interactions and the Effects
of Core Handling on Wettability . J. Pet. Technol. 
1986 , 38 , 1125 –1144 . 10.2118/13932-pa .
Derjaguin B. V. ; Churaev N. V. 
On the Question of Determining the Concept of Disjoining
Pressure and Its Role in the Equilibrium and Flow of Thin Films . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1978 , 66 , 389 –398 . 10.1016/0021-9797(78)90056-5 .
Punase A. ; Zou A. ; Elputranto R. 
How Do Thermal
Recovery Methods Affect Wettability
Alteration? . J. Pet. Eng. 
2014 , 2014 , 538021 10.1155/2014/538021 .
Buckley J. S. ; Liu Y. ; Monsterleet S. 
Mechanism of Wetting Alteration by Crude oils . SPE J. 
1998 , 3 , 54 –61 . 10.2118/37230-pa .
Alotaibi M. ; Nasralla R. ; Nasr-El-Din H. 
Wettability
Studies Using Low-Salinity
Water in Sandstone Reservoirs . SPE Reservoir
Eval. Eng. 
2011 , 14 , 713 10.2118/149942-pa .
Agbalaka C. C. ; Dandekar A. Y. ; Patil S. L. ; Khataniar S. ; Hemsath J. R. 
Core Flooding Studies to Evaluate the Impact of Salinity
and Wettability on Oil Recovery Efficiency . Transp. Porous Media 
2009 , 76 , 77 –94 . 10.1007/s11242-008-9235-7 .
Strand S. ; Puntervold T. ; Austad T. 
Effect of Temperature on Enhanced
Oil Recovery from Mixed-Wet Chalk Cores by Spontaneous Imbibition
and Forced Displacement Using Seawater . Energy
Fuels 
2008 , 22 , 3222 –3225 . 10.1021/ef800244v .
RezaeiDoust A. ; Puntervold T. ; Strand S. ; Austad T. 
Smart Water as Wettability
Modifier in Carbonate and Sandstone: A Discussion of Similarities/Differences
in the Chemical Mechanisms . Energy Fuels 
2009 , 23 , 4479 –4485 . 10.1021/ef900185q .
Myint P. C. ; Firoozabadi A. 
Thin Liquid Films in Improved Oil Recovery from Low-Salinity
Brine . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2015 , 20 , 105 –114 . 10.1016/j.cocis.2015.03.002 .
Kakati A. ; Sangwai J. S. 
Wettability Alteration
of Mineral Surface During Low-Salinity
Waterflooding: Role of Salt Type, Pure Alkanes, and Model Oils Containing
Polar Components . Energy Fuels 
2018 , 32 , 3127 –3137 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b03727 .
Austad T. ; Rezaeidoust A. ; Puntervold T.  Chemical Mechanism
of Low Salinity Waterflooding in Sandstone Reservoirs . Presented at SPE Improved Oil Recovery Symposium : Tulsa, Oklahoma, USA , 24–28
April, 2010 .
Almeida A. ; Patel R. ; Arambula C. ; Trivedi J. ; Soares J. ; Costa G. ; Embiruçu M.  Low Salinity Water Injection
in a Clastic Reservoir in Northeast Brazil: An Experimental Case Study . Presented at SPE Trinidad and Tobago Section Energy Resources
Conference, Port of Spain : Trinidad and Tobago , 25–26 June, 2018 .
Almeida da Costa A. ; Jaeger P. ; Santos J. ; Soares J. ; Trivedi J. ; Embiruçu M. ; Meyberg G.  The
Influence of Rock Composition and pH on Reservoir Wettability for
Low Salinity Water-CO EOR Applications in Brazilian Reservoirs . Presented at SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition : Calgary, Alberta, Canada , 30 September–2
October, 2019 .
Puntervold T. ; Strand S. ; Austad T. 
Coinjection of Seawater and Produced
Water to Improve Oil Recovery from Fractured North Sea Chalk Oil Reservoirs . Energy Fuels 
2009 , 23 , 2527 –2536 . 10.1021/ef801023u .
Fathi S. J. ; Austad T. ; Strand S. 
Water-Based
Enhanced Oil Recovery
(EOR) by “Smart Water”: Optimal Ionic Composition for
EOR in Carbonates . Energy Fuels 
2011 , 25 , 5173 –5179 . 10.1021/ef201019k .
Gupta R. ; Smith G.
G. ; Hu L. ; Willingham T. ; Cascio M. L. ; Shyeh J. J. ; Harris C. R.  Enhanced Waterflood for Carbonate
Reservoirs—Impact of Injection Water Composition . Presented at SPE Middle East Oil and Gas Show and Conference : Manama, Bahrain , 25–28 Sept, 2011 .
Kamal M. S. ; Hussein I. A. ; Sultan A. S. 
Review
on Surfactant Flooding: Phase
Behaviour, Retention, IFT, and Field Applications . Energy Fuels 
2017 , 31 , 7701 –7720 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b00353 .
Pope G. A. 
Recent
Developments and Remaining Challenges of Enhanced Oil Recovery . J. Pet. Technol. 
2011 , 63 , 65 –68 . 10.2118/0711-0065-jpt .
Zoveidavianpoor M. ; Jalilavi M.  Qualitative
Analysis of Enhanced Oil Recovery: Impacts on Air, Surface Water and
Groundwater . Presented at International Conference
on Chemical, Environment & Biological Sciences (CEBS-2014) : Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia , 17–18,
September, 2014 .
Altani M.  An Evaluation
of Low Salinity Waterflooding in Carbonates Using Simulation and Economics . MS Thesis, Colorado school of Mines , 2007 .
Segneanu A. E. ; Gozescu I. ; Dabici A. ; Sfirloaga P. ; Szabadai Z.  Organic Compounds
FT-IR Spectroscopy . In Macro to Nano Spectroscopy ; Uddin J.  , Ed.; Intech Open : London , 2012 ; Chapter 9, pp 145 –164 .
Rice E. W. ; Baird R. B. ; Eaton A. D.  Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Waste Water , 22 nd ed.; American Public Health Association, American
Water Works Association, Water Environment Federation , 2017 .
Sayyouh M.
H. ; Dahab A. S. ; Omar A. E. 
Effect of Clay Content on Wettability
of Sandstone Reservoirs . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
1990 , 4 , 119 –125 . 10.1016/0920-4105(90)90020-4 .
Kakati A. ; Sangwai J. S. 
Wettability Alteration
of Mineral Surface During Low-Salinity
Waterflooding: Role of Salt Type, Pure Alkanes, and Model Oils Containing
Polar Components . Energy Fuels 
2018 , 32 , 3127 –3137 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b03727 .
Stalder A. F. ; Kulik G. ; Sage D. ; Barbieri L. ; Hoffmann P. 
A Snake-Based
Approach to Accurate Determination of both Contact Points and Contact
Angles . Colloids Surf., A 
2006 , 286 , 92 –103 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2006.03.008 .
Williams D. L. ; Kuhn A. T. ; Amann M. A. ; Hausinger M. B. ; Konarik M. M. ; Nesselrode E. I. 
Computerised
Measurement of Contact
Angles . Galvanotechnik 
2010 , 101 , 2502 –2512 .

