
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145825710.1021/acsomega.8b02081ArticleInsights into the ZIKV NS1
Virology from Different
Strains through a Fine Analysis of Physicochemical Properties Poveda-Cuevas Sergio
A. †‡∇Etchebest Catherine §∥⊥∇Barroso da Silva Fernando L. *†‡∇#† Programa
Interunidades em Bioinformática, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo 05508-090, Brazil‡ Departamento
de Física e Química, Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas
de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de
São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo 14040-903, Brazil§ Institut
National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris 75015, France∥ Biologie
Intégrée du Globule Rouge, Equipe 2, Dynamique des Structures
et des Interactions Moléculaires, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
UMR_S 1134, Paris 75015, France⊥ Université
Sorbonne Paris Cité and Université Paris Diderot, 75013 Paris, France∇ University
of São Paulo and Université Sorbonne Paris Cité
Joint International Laboratory in Structural Bioinformatics# Department
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, United States* E-mail: flbarroso@usp.br and flbarros@ncsu.edu.29 11 2018 30 11 2018 3 11 16212 16229 17 08 2018 14 11 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The flavivirus genus has several organisms responsible
for generating various diseases in humans. Recently, especially in
tropical regions, Zika virus (ZIKV) has raised great health concerns
due to the high number of cases affecting the area during the last
years that has been accompanied by a rise in the cases of the Guillain–Barré
syndrome and fetal and neonatal microcephaly. Diagnosis is still difficult
since the clinical symptoms between ZIKV and other flaviviruses (e.g.,
dengue and yellow fever) are highly similar. The understanding of
their common physicochemical properties that are pH-dependent and
biomolecular interaction features and their differences sheds light
on the relation strain-virulence and might suggest alternative strategies
toward differential serological diagnostics and therapeutic intervention.
Due to their immunogenicity, the primary focus of this study was on
the ZIKV nonstructural proteins 1 (NS1). By means of computational
studies and semiquantitative theoretical analyses, we calculated the
main physicochemical properties of this protein from different strains
that are directly responsible for the biomolecular interactions and,
therefore, can be related to the differential infectivity of the strains.
We also mapped the electrostatic differences at both the sequence
and structural levels for the strains from Uganda to Brazil, which
could suggest possible molecular mechanisms for the increase of the
virulence of ZIKV in Brazil. Exploring the interfaces used by NS1
to self-associate in some different oligomeric states and interact
with membranes and the antibody, we could map the strategy used by
the ZIKV during its evolutionary process. This indicates possible
molecular mechanisms that can be correlated with the different immunological
responses. By comparing with the known antibody structure available
for the West Nile virus, we demonstrated that this antibody would
have difficulties to neutralize the NS1 from the Brazilian strain.
The present study also opens up perspectives to computationally design
high-specificity antibodies.

document-id-old-9ao8b02081document-id-new-14ao-2018-02081gccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The flavivirus genus has several organisms responsible
for generating diseases in humans, which often cause global health
concerns [e.g., dengue virus (DENV), West Nile virus (WNV), and yellow
fever virus (YFV)].1−3 During the last years, the worldwide attention has
moved to Zika virus (ZIKV) due to the large increase of infected people
and affected areas, which has been accompanied by a rise in the cases
of the Guillain–Barré syndrome and microcephaly.4,5 A practical critical issue is that, in many cases, the ZIKV symptoms
can be confused with other viruses, resulting in misdiagnoses and,
posteriorly, inadequate treatments.6,7 Consequently,
the outbreak of ZIKV has produced a race to better diagnose it, as
well as to treat and stop its epidemic growth. Yet, to date, there
is no totally effective medication, easy and cheap diagnosis, or even
treatment.

The complex life cycle of ZIKV and its capacity to
be transported
by several mosquito vectors aggravate the health issues.8 Its spread is followed by an evolution of the
strains together with distinct aggressive effects. The first isolation
of the ZIKV occurred in Uganda (UG) in 1947, where the reported cases
did not indicate the severe neurological disorders that the ZIKV can
produce. Later, cases were found in Africa, Southeastern Asia, Oceania,
and Americas.9,10 From this, it has been established
that there are two lineages of ZIKV, one Asian and another African,11,12 as well as that the latter might be divided into two.13 However, how each mutation directly contributes
to the change in virulence remains unknown. As indicated in a recent
review by Simonin and collaborators,14 the
high number of microcephaly cases observed for the Brazilian strain
(Asian lineage) might be a result of a mild infection in contradiction
to the common sense. The African lineage causes a much more severe
infection inducing an early termination of pregnancy (higher mortality)
without giving a chance to the development of congenital malformations.15 Unfortunately, no molecular mechanisms have
been proved to be responsible for these different pathogenicities.
Therefore, the understanding of their common physicochemical properties
and biomolecular interaction features sheds light on the relation
strain-infectivity and might suggest alternative strategies toward
an efficient serological diagnostics and possible therapeutic interventions.

ZIKV is a single-stranded RNA virus that encodes one polyprotein,
which is later processed to generate three structural proteins (C,
prM, and Env) and seven nonstructural (NS) proteins (NS1, NS2a, NS2b,
NS3, NS4a, NS4b, and NS5). Several of these proteins are directly
involved in various molecular processes that define the structure
or replication of the virus.1−3 Here, we will focus on the NS1
protein due to its high biological relevance. Among other features,
this protein is able to self-associate into a symmetric head-to-head
homodimer, which increases its hydrophobic character in the early
viral stages. The formed NS1 dimer interacts with the membrane of
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).2,16−19 Later, the NS1 can have three possible destinations:2,20 (1) it can function as a cofactor in the replication complex, (2)
it can go toward the membrane surface to interact with different membrane
receptors, or (3) it can go toward the extracellular space to interact
with proteins of the immune system. Such versatile behavior of NS1
is exploited by the virus to carry out its development since this
protein has the ability to evade the immune response of the host,21,22 acting on several pathways of the complement system (e.g., see ref (23)). It is known that all
this diversity of interactions leads to a cascade of signaling, preventing
the good metabolic functioning of the host.2 Due to its involvement in the viral RNA replication, NS1 may also
be an attractive target for drug developments.

pH is a trigger
physicochemical parameter in several viral processes.3,24−26 It is directly related to the macromolecular electrostatic
properties and the molecular interactions.27 In a previous study,28 Song and coauthors
compared electrostatic maps on the molecular surfaces of NS1 proteins
from ZIKV, DENV, and WNV. They showed diverse electrostatic features
among them at host interaction interfaces and suggested the possibility
to relate the pathogenesis with the electrostatic behavior. Another
study has shown that the dissociation of NS1 dimers occurs in acidic
pH regimes, and more stable dimers prevail under physiological pH
conditions.29 All of these studies imply
that the interactions of NS1 with any other charged molecule (including
its self-association) and membranes of the host might be different
for each flavivirus and even for each strain, producing a diverse
of clinical manifestations. This also indicates the possibility to
put NS1 as a potential candidate for the design of vaccines and as
a biomarker for the detection of the virus in seropositive patients.30−32

All of these facts have motivated the present work where we
extended
the preliminary study of Song and collaborators28 to explore the electrostatic properties of several ZIKV
strains at several solution pH regimes. We propose that analyzing
these properties at three key biological functional interfaces [(i)
the self-association interface (homodimer interface), (ii) the predicted
NS1 molecular region that interacts with the membranes, and (iii)
a putative epitope region] could provide a way in the understanding
of the differential infectious behavior of the ZIKV. This was achieved
by means of numerical simulations and structural bioinformatics tools.
Moreover, the quantification of biomolecular interactions is essential
for understanding the molecular biology. In this direction, we performed
semiquantitative estimations of the free energies of interactions
of the ZIKV NS1 in some different oligomeric states at these biointerfaces.
These thermodynamic measurements provide practical insights into some
possible molecular mechanisms that can be related with the virology.
Although the NS1 undergoes a complex maturation process and can be
found in several oligomeric states from monomers that exist briefly
(in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen) to hexamers (in late infection),19,33−37 only the monomeric and dimeric forms are discussed here for several
reasons. First, the monomer is the beginning of all processes and
the only state where all biological interfaces can be compared on
a common basis. Second, the idea that the high-molecular-weight form
of NS1 is a homodimer as introduced by Winkler et al.37 seems to be a consensus of a general feature of flavivirus
infection. The subject has also been recently reviewed in different
papers (e.g., ref (36)), which puts the dimer in a central position. The homodimerization
is a fundamental step to provide to NS1 the necessary characteristics
to associate with membranes, which is central for the viral replication.34 Third, the homodimer is the predominant form
of intracellular NS1.35 Fourth, the glycosylation
of NS1 is not required for both the dimerization and the NS1–membrane
association, which allows the use of a simpler theoretical approach.38 Finally, the hexamer state is more obscure in
the experiments where it has been discussed that they might even require
the presence of stabilizing elements to maintain the three NS1 dimers
complexed to form the hexameric state of NS1.34 Tetrameric intermediates have also been reported.33 The present analyses are carried out exploring global titration
features as well as more local effects at the biofunctional interfaces
at both the sequence and structural levels. It is also interesting
to note that despite the small changes in the sequence due to the
high sequence identity among the studied strains, the electrostatic
properties are strongly affected by the pH, which also affects their
biomolecular interactions with partners and, consequently, the molecular
viral biology.

This paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we present
the theoretical methods used in this work starting with the comparative
modeling of the NS1 structures for each ZIKV strain, the molecular
model, and numerical simulation details. This section describes the
main physicochemical properties calculated, how the studied biointerfaces
were defined based on either bioinformatical tools or crystallographic
data, and how some relevant biomolecular interactions invoking simple
colloidal-like ideas were estimated. A key concept is the pKa that is computed for all titratable residues
and represented in different color-coded maps for a comparison among
the strains especially at the biointerfaces. In the subsequent Results and Discussion section, two groups of data
are given. First, we focus on the global protein properties related
to charges and dipoles and on the corresponded estimated free energies
of interactions. Then, we present and discuss pKa’s and their maps comparing the strains. This allows
us to cover from a more basic physicochemical description in the first
part to a more biochemical meaningful discussion in the second part.
Finally, the main results of this paper are discussed and summarized.

Theoretical
Methods
Computational approaches play an important role in
modern virology
contributing from studies of the virus assembly to insights into the
dynamical and interactive properties of the structures of viruses
and their components.32,39 In this scenario, numerical simulations
based on statistical mechanics methods allow to explore many thermodynamical
properties and also the main features of the interaction of macromolecules
providing free-energy derivatives as a function of the macromolecules
separation at different environmental conditions. Here, we combine
a fast constant-pH Monte Carlo (MC) scheme with canonical bioinformatic
tools to investigate the ZIKV NS1 from different strains.

Three-Dimensional
(3D) Modeling
Initially, we defined
the most interesting ZIKV strains for this investigation based on
previous phylogenetic studies, the history of ZIKV outbreaks, and
the rise in the cases of microcephaly and the Guillain–Barré
syndrome. The Uganda (African lineage) and Brazilian (Asian lineage)
strains were assumed to be the two extreme and most important cases
supported by the literature.9,11,12 The sequences of Uganda (UG), Senegal (SE), Central African Republic
(CAR), Malaysia (MA), Thailand (TH), Yap Island (YAP), and Brazil
(BR) were selected from the study of Kochakarn and collaborators,12 where phylogenetic reconstructions were carried
out from ZIKV genomes from different regions of the world. These sequences
are identified, respectively, with accession numbers AY632535, KF383117, KF268949, HQ234499, KU681081, EU545988, and KU365777, provided
by the National Center for Biotechnology Information. Conceptual translations
were made with the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool, using “blastx”
with default parameters.40 Crystal structure
coordinates are available for the strains from Brazil and Uganda only.
They were provided by the RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB)41 with PDB ids 5GS6 (resolution 2.85 Å) and 5K6K (resolution 1.89
Å).17,18 These two structures are quite similar except
for a few structural differences that are observed in some loop regions
(1.9 Å root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) across all 352 pairs
and 0.706 Å RMSD between 310 pruned atom pairs). The PDB files
were edited before the calculations. All water molecules and heteroatoms
were removed. Missing residues were added in the structures with the
“UCSF Chimera 1.11.2” interface of the program “Modeller”
for building all missing segments.42 We
will refer to these completed three-dimensional structures with the
label “X-ray” in this text. The original PDB structures
with chains A and B were used as templates in all comparative modeling
reported here. There are no crystal structures available for the ZIKV
NS1 proteins from the other strains (SE, CAR, MA, TH, and YAP). Their
three-dimensional models in both oligomeric states (monomer and dimer)
were built from the known structures using Modeller version 9.18.43 For each variant and oligomeric state, we generated
two different models using the completed structures of the PDB ids 5GS6 and 5K6K as templates. Accordingly,
the use of two comparative models makes it possible to evaluate the
impact of the structural fluctuations in all outcomes. For the same
reason, comparative models for the UG and BR strains were also produced
with the crossing structures (e.g., the BR sequence and the UG template
were used together to generate the BR three-dimensional model). We
shall refer to the resulting models obtained with the completed structures
(the templates) from PDB ids 5GS6 and 5K6K, respectively, as 1 (for the BR strain) and 2 (for the UG strain).
The subscripts “mod1” and “mod2” are used
to label them in the next sections. Monomers were produced by the
simple deletion of one given chain.

Finally, as suggested by
Wang and coauthors,19 we used the structure
of the complex between the antibody Fab fragment 22NS1 and the incomplete
structure of WNV (PDB id 4OII with a resolution of 3.0 Å)37 to estimate the location of possible residues of ZIKV NS1
that have a chance to be part of epitopes and be responsible for the
protein–antibody interaction. The residues 1–175 that
correspond to the N-terminal domain of the NS1 protein were missing
in this X-ray structure. By comparison at the sequence level of the
NS1 proteins given by the PDB ids 4OII (WNV NS1), 5GS6 (ZIKV NS1BR), and 5K6K (ZIKV NS1UG), we removed from the PDB files 5GS6 and 5K6K the 175 residues from the N-terminal
domain that were missing in the PDB file 4OII. The generated models were used only
for the calculations related to the antibody analysis. We assumed
that the absence of the N-terminal domain was not necessary for the
interaction of NS1 with the antibody. This is reasonable since the
structure without the N-terminal domain was found bound with the antibody
at the crystal, indicating that the missing part is not essential
for the complexation. The used antibody (available in the PDB id 4OII) is the Fab fragment
22NS1 as reported by Edeling et al.44 The
structures of the NS1 proteins without the antibody are superimposed
and shown in Figure 1. It is interesting to point out that 13 residues on the WNV epitope
out of the 21 residues are identical to the corresponding residues
in ZIKV.19

Figure 1 Comparison of different crystallographic
NS1176–352 structures from two flaviviruses. Superimposed
structures in ribbon
representation are the NS1 from WNV (blue), ZIKVUG (red),
and ZIKVBR (green). The PDB ids are 4OII, 5K6K, and 5GS6, respectively.

Coarse-Grained (CG) Modeling
Coarse-grained models
are very convenient and appropriate to be applied in the present study
because they offer the possibility to explore the main physical features
of a system with a reduced number of parameters and lower computational
costs, which allows us to repeat the calculations on several different
experimental conditions. Therefore, the proteins were modeled here
as rigid bodies (i.e., bond lengths, angles, and dihedral angles are
kept fixed) in an amino acid coarse-grained (CG) level of details
according to the three-dimensional structures provided by the comparative
modeling as described above. Following previously successful studies,45,57 each protein atomistic coordinate is transformed into a collection
of charged Lennard-Jones (LJ) spheres of radii (Ri) and valence zi mimicking amino acids. Amino acids sizes
were taken from ref (45). For the sake of convenience, these values are also reported in Table S1. The valences of all ionizable residues
were assigned by the fast proton titration scheme (FPTS)46,47 according to the solution pH. Details of this titration scheme,
its pKa benchmarks, and the discussions
related to its approximations can be found elsewhere.47 We note that this CG model focuses on the electrostatic
features of the biomolecular system and has been predicting pKa’s with good accuracy at low computational
costs.27 This is highly important in the
present study due to the elevated number of ionizable residues in
the NS1 proteins, which increases the electrostatic coupling between
them. As in the original FPTS paper,46 the
intrinsic acid dissociation constants (pK0) were taken from the experimental work of Nozaki and Tanford.48 These values together with the number of each
amino acid in the ZIKV NS1 structures and their charge numbers in
the deprotonated and protonated states are listed in Table S1.

Figure 2 gives a scheme of the CG model. Each protein is placed inside
an electroneutral open cylindrical cell of radius rcyl and height lcyl with a
static dielectric constant of 78.7 (assuming a temperature of 298
K). The shape of the simulation box is chosen only for convenience
and has no effect on the outcomes as soon as the box is bigger than
the protein size. Counterions and added salt particles were represented
implicitly using a screening term, i.e., for two titratable residues i and j, the screening is given by [exp(−κrij)], where κ is the modified inverse
Debye length length (as suggested in ref (81)) and rij is the interparticle separation distance. Therefore, the electrostatic
interactions [uel(rij)] between any two charged amino acids of
valences zi and zj are given by 1  where ϵ0 is the dielectric
constant of the vacuum (ϵ0 = 8.854 × 10–12 C2 N–1 m–2), ϵs is the dielectric constant of the medium (78.7
here), and e = 1.602 × 10–19 C is the elementary charge. See refs (27 and 47) for more details.

Figure 2 Schematic representation
of model cell used in this study. For
each titration, one protein was built up by a collection of charged
LJ spheres of radii (Rai), and valence zai is placed in an electroneutral open cylindrical
cell of radius rcyl and height lcyl. The solvent is represented by its static
dielectric constant ϵ. Counterions and added salt particles
are represented by Debye’s term κ. Positively and negatively
charged, neutral, and hydrophobic amino acids are represented in blue,
red, white, and green, respectively.

Constant-pH Monte Carlo Simulations
Monte Carlo (MC)
methods are numerical integration tools that have become a useful
procedure to compute thermodynamic averages in theoretical biochemistry
and contribute to rationalize complex molecular mechanisms.45,49,50 The CG model was solved via MC
simulations using the Metropolis criteria in an NVT ensemble. Calculations
were performed with a personalized version of the Faunus biomolecular
simulation package,49 where the FPTS is
implemented to study pH-dependent processes.46,47 In the first part of the work, to illustrate that the differences
observed in the simulated pKa’s
do influence the biomolecular interactions, three physicochemical
properties [the protein net charge number (Zp), the charge regulation parameter (Cp), and the dipole moment number (μp)] were
evaluated during the Monte Carlo runs for each ZIKV strain (UG, SE,
CAR, MA, TH, YAP, and BR) using each structure model (X-ray, mod1,
and mod2) and oligomeric state (monomer and dimer). They are averaged
quantities calculated from all molecular charges spatially distributed
in the system sampled during the MC runs. Zp, Cp, and μp were also
computed for the antibody, the incomplete structure of WNV NS1 protein,
and the corresponding truncated structures for NS1ZIKV BR and NS1ZIKV UG. These quantities are equivalent
to the ones obtained by the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation
with the local electrostatic potential used by Podgornik and coauthors51 and represent the lower multipoles moments and
the charge fluctuations based on the details of charge distributions
in these proteins and their acid–base equilibria. Their magnitudes
will be used here to estimate different free energies of interactions
within a simple colloidal-like framework. Cp is the variance of the mean net protein charge, , which
is an example of a linear response.
Note that zi (a given
charge in a titratable group i) is based on the total
electrical potential at the coordinates of the titratable site i, and ⟨Z⟩ = ∑1N⟨zi⟩ is
measured after all zi values for the N titratable sites were obtained
during the MC runs. Salt concentration was kept constant at physiological
conditions (150 mM) in all calculations. It was assumed that this
is the ionic strength where the most important metabolic processes
of the virus occur. A vast number of simulations were performed as
a consequence of the numbers of strains, structural models, and oligomeric
states. For each system (i.e., a given strain, structural model, and
oligomeric state), a series of MC simulations with pH varying from
0 to 14 using a 0.1 interval were run to produce the theoretical titration
plots and similar ones for the other pH-related properties. It was
from this series of 140 independent simulations that the pKa’s were computed as the pH where the
residue is half-protonated as it is done in wet laboratory experiments.52,53 For each pH condition, at least two production runs with 108 MC steps were carried out after an equilibration phase of
106 MC runs.

Maps of the Electrostatic Properties
Computed pKa’s were converted
into color-coded maps
using the completed structure of the ZIKV NS1UG (seemingly
older strain) as reference. For the comparisons at the monomeric state,
chain A of the NS1UG was adopted as the reference. The
pKa shifts were mapped at both the proteins
sequences and their molecular surfaces. For the mapping at the sequence
level, the alignments were done using the high-speed multiple sequence
alignment web tool “MUSCLE” (Multiple Sequences Alignment
by Log-Expectation).54 Default parameters
and the sequence conservation criteria were used. Positive shifts
are represented in dark blue, whereas red is used for the negative
ones. The pKa shifts can be due to the
sequence (strain), structure, and mixed effects. To differentiate
them, three pKa shifts were calculated
for each case depending on the molecular model (1 or 2) used as input
in the MC runs: (a) ΔpKa1 = pKa_strain_mod1 – pKa_UG_xray, (b) ΔpKa2 = pKa_strain_mod2 – pKa_UG_xray, and (c) ΔΔpKa = ΔpKa1 – ΔpKa2. ΔpKa values other than zero are
candidates for interesting cases. However, to discriminate pKa shifts related to the sequence from those
shifts due to the comparative modeling process, we analyzed the ΔΔpKa’s too. Only the cases where the signs
of the pKa for the two models are the
same (i.e., the variation of the pKa occurs
in the same direction, which happens when ΔpKa1 × ΔpKa2 > 0) are the relevant ones for the present analysis.
These are the cases that can be used to quantify the effects from
the evolutionary mutations. By simultaneously observing these two
sets of pKa values (for models 1 and 2),
we can find the five possible situations listed in Table 1. There are clear situations
where the pKa shifts are due to the different
sequences. For instance, this can be seen for condition 1 in this
table. When ΔΔpKa is equal
to 0 and the product of the pKa shifts
between the two models is greater than 0 (condition 1 in Table 1), there is a pKa shift and both models give the same shifts.
So, there are no artifacts that were produced by the comparative modeling
process. This is one of the most important cases. Conversely, we can
find situations where there can be a mixture of the effects produced
by the structure and by the primary sequence. These two features are
contributing together and are indistinguishable. This is what happens
for condition 4. There are shifts (ΔΔpKa ≠ 0), but each model predicts the shift in the
opposite direction (ΔpKa1 × ΔpKa2 ≤
0). In this situation, the shifts are most likely due to the structural
differences. Finally, since NS1UG is used as a reference,
we have distinguished those amino acids where some mutation occurs
in NS1BR (condition 5 in Table 1). For our purposes, the most interesting
situations are given by conditions 1, 3, and 5. Additional colored
geometric figures were included at the top of the alignments to guide
the reader to the most interesting pKa shifts from the biological perspective. They were based on the shifts
between the BR and UG strains. Table 1 summarizes all of these issues and lists the adopted
criterion, the relevant cases, and the corresponding colored geometric
figures. Alignments were also made from the sequences of the incomplete
structures of the NS1 of WNV and the corresponding one from the ZIKV
(UG and BR strains). For these comparisons, we have used the NS1 of
WNV as reference. This analysis was simpler because all of the computed
pKa’s were done using the crystallographic
structures in this case.

Table 1 Criteria To Find
the Biologically
Relevant Cases with pKa Shiftsa
condition	biological relevance	graphical representation	
1	ΔΔpKa = 0 and ΔpKa1 × ΔpKa2 > 0	relevant	circle	
2	ΔΔpKa = 0 and ΔpKa1 × ΔpKa2 = 0	not relevant	triangle	
3	ΔΔpKa ≠ 0 and ΔpKa1 × ΔpKa2 > 0	relevant	square	
4	ΔΔpKa ≠ 0 and ΔpKa1 × ΔpKa2 ≤ 0	not relevant	inverted
triangle	
5	mutation	relevant	diamond	
a ΔΔpKa is calculated between the pKa shifts values from models 1 (ΔpKa1 = pKa_strain_mod1 –
pKa_UG_xray) and 2 (ΔpKa2 = pKa_strain_mod2 – pKa_UG_xray) of NS1BR, where pKa_strain_mod1, pKa_strain_mod2, and pKa_UG_xray refer to the computed pKa’s obtained
using the modeled protein structures, respectively, from the template
from the BR strain, from the template from the UG strain, and from
the completed UG crystallographic structure.

Complementarily, the pKa shifts were
also projected at the three-dimensional structures. For the sake of
consistency, the color-coded map was obtained by the ΔpKa’s between the UG and BR strains. These
two strains represent the oldest and the newest mutations acquired
during the ZIKV evolution. They also belong to different lineages,
which makes them appealing for this comparison. We used the available
crystallographic coordinates for this analysis, from where we also
extracted the B-factors. For the estimation of the
conserved regions, the “CONSURF” server55 was employed with default parameters and 90 sequences as
suggested by the server.

Analytical Estimates
Semiquantitative
theoretical estimates
of the free energy of interactions provided a practical way to rationalize
the molecular processes and are often obtained from analytical equations
based on simple Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek
(DLVO) theory arguments.45,56,57 Following a previous work,45 the electrostatic
free energy for the self-association of the ZIKV NS1 proteins [ADVLO(rij)] can be approximately described in terms of electrostatically
screened contributions as 2  where, for
the two macromolecules immersed
in an electrolyte solution, these terms can approximately be written
as 3   4   5   6  The screened factors for
the dipolar interactions
are  and  The size of the proteins in different oligomeric
states was estimated from their full atomistic coordinates using the
completed structures. The “ProteinVolume” server58 was employed for this purpose. For the sake
of convenience, on the basis of the calculated sizes, we assumed a
separation distance rij equal to 50 Å for the monomeric state and 100 Å for the
dimeric state. The theoretical framework behind this set of equations
is the Phillies model,59−61 where anomalous properties of the screening environment
are not considered. The limitations of this approximation are discussed
in the literature.51,62,63 A related point to consider here is that although more elaborated
theoretical approaches might be important for protein–protein
complexation in some cases, there is still an interest in general
mechanisms such as the used free-energy equations using these simpler
colloidal-like frameworks usually in good agreement with numerical
simulations and that can contribute to rationalize more complex systems.45,57,64,82 The variable d was seen as an adjustable parameter
here65 and assumed to be equal to rij.45 For the NS1–antibody association, only the charge–charge
contribution was taken into account due to the severe screening from
the other terms.66 All results were expressed
in kT units, where k is the Boltzmann
constant (1.3807 × 10–23 J mol–1 K–1) and T is the temperature
(in kelvin).

A similar approach was used by Lund, Åkesson,
and Jönsson to estimate the free energy of interaction [ΔA(R)] between a protein (hisactophilin)
and a charged surface mimicking a lipid membrane67 7  where ϕ is
the electrostatic surface
potential generated by the charged membrane groups and β is
equal to 1/kT. We have adopted ϕ = −95
mV, which roughly corresponds to the potential calculated for ER membranes
in neurons.68

Biological Interfaces
As already mentioned, we have
focused on three selected biological interfaces of interactions: (1)
dimeric (or self-association), (2) membrane, (3) and a putative epitope.
They were determined by canonical structural bioinformatics tools.
For the dimeric interface, the online server “PDBePISa”69 was used, providing the residues directly involved
in the NS1–NS1 interaction. In a similar way, the interface
NS1–antibody as given by the PDB id 4OII was dissected by “PDBePISa”.
The choice of an experimental crystallographic structure to determine
the epitopes as done here avoids all of the uncertainties commonly
seen in epitope predictions by different theoretical methods.32 The embedded residues in the membrane were estimated
by the “PPM” server.70 As
the outputs from the “PPM” can be slightly dependent
on the rotation, we have submitted rotated coordinates of the same
structural model to have an inclusive protocol taking into account
all amino acids that most likely interact with the membrane as given
by each coordinate submitted to the “PPM” server. A
few differences were observed between the rotated models. Depending
on the coordinates, about one to three neighbor amino acids can be
included or removed from the obtained prediction. Therefore, we have
included all returned list from the server for the different runs
with a set of rotated coordinates. The percentage of the exposure
of the titratable amino acids was determined by the “PROPKA”
program (version 3.1).71 The outcomes were
used to create a grayish color scale that is included in the alignment
figures. The most exposed ionizable amino acids are represented in
black in this scale, whereas white is used for buried residues. All
programs were run with default parameters.

Results and Discussion
Physicochemical
Properties of the Proteins
Electrostatic
interactions are described as very important for virus in general25,26,72,73 and also specifically for the NS1 protein.17,28 The high number of titratable groups in NS1 (e.g., there are 34
GLUs in the monomeric structure) does indicate that these interactions
should contribute to the molecular mechanisms. For this reason, we
started the present study, quantifying the main physicochemical properties
of the proteins that are directly responsible for the molecular interactions
and, therefore, can be related to the virus molecular basis and, as
such, contribute to the understanding of the differential infectivity
of the strains. In this context, within a simple colloidal-like framework,
the total charge (Zp) of the system, the
charge regulation parameter [or capacitance, (Cp)], and the dipole moment number (μp) are
key physical quantities that provide an important initial insight
into the biomolecular interactions between the NS1 proteins and their
partners. They directly affect the different physical forces responsible
for protein associations (e.g., coulombic attraction for oppositely
charged proteins,57 dipolar attraction
for macromolecules with high dipole moments,45 and macromolecular attraction due to a charge regulation mechanism50,64,66,74,82). The global similarities and especially
the differences among these physicochemical properties of the NS1
proteins from all of the studied strains might have a direct biological
implication as discussed above. Charge–charge interactions
are expected to be the most important one.66 Hence, the values of Zp, Cp, and μp at the physiological concentration
of salt (150 mM) and different solution pH values were obtained from
the numerical simulations with a single protein in the electrolyte
solution. Calculations were carried out for each NS1 genetic variant
of ZIKV, i.e., from Uganda (UG), Senegal (SE), Central African Republic
(CAR), Malaysia (MA), Thailand (TH), Yap Island (YAP), and Brazil
(BR), for the two oligomeric states (monomer and dimer). Three-dimensional
(3D) structures were obtained directly from X-ray atomistic data when
available or were built using homology modeling methods (see Theoretical Methods for details of the procedure).
The high sequence identity (the smallest sequence identity between
these strains is 96.9%; see Table 2) makes the procedure robust and the models reliable.
Nevertheless, to evaluate the impact of the structural fluctuations
brought by the building procedure, as already mentioned, we used two
different models (noted models 1 and 2), based on two different templates
(5GS6 and 5K6K), for each variant
and oligomeric state.

Table 2 Percentages (%) of
Identity of Sequences
for Different NS1 ZIKV Strains
identity	
 	UG	SE	CAR	MA	TH	YAP	BR	
UG	100.0	 	 	 	 	 	 	
SE	98.3	100.0	 	 	 	 	 	
CAR	98.0	98.0	100.0	 	 	 	 	
MA	97.4	97.4	97.7	100.0	 	 	 	
TH	96.9	96.9	97.4	99.4	100.0	 	 	
YAP	96.9	97.4	97.4	98.9	98.9	100.0	 	
BR	97.4	97.4	98.0	99.4	99.4	99.4	100.0	
Figure 3 shows the
computed average net charges and their charge regulation parameters
as a function of pH at physiological ionic strength from pH 5 to 7.5.
This is the pH range of important cell compartments.75 The observed titration pattern of each strain is well characterized.
Despite the small changes in the sequence, the total protein charge
of each strain is differently affected by the pH. The NS1UG and NS1CAR strains are predicted to be two extreme cases,
the NS1UG being the more negatively charged protein and
the NS1CAR the more positively charged one. Three different
groups of strains can be identified for the ZIKV NS1 proteins in terms
of their titration behavior and isoelectric points (pI). For the monomeric
state, (a) the UG strain with pI = 6.7 is apart from the other groups,
(b) the SE, MA, TH, YAP, and BR strains with an intermediated value
of pI (7.1) form a group with similar titration properties (the curves
for MA, TH, YAP, and BR are seen on top of each other), and (c) the
CAR with a pI shifted to the basic regime (pI = 7.4) defines another
extreme case (see also Table S2). For the
dimeric state, a similar behavior is observed (pIUG <
pISE,MA,TH,YAP,BR < pICAR). In this case,
the corresponding pIs are 6.6, 7.1, and 7.3 (see also Table S3). Note that the pI values are all around
physiological pH (∼7.0) for both the monomeric and dimeric
states. This facilitates, for instance, the NS1 self-association around
the pI due to the relatively small protein net charges that result
in weaker or almost null repulsive electrostatic interactions between
the protein pairs. Since this pH condition is found in several cellular
environments, it indicates that all ZIKV strains are able to take
advantage of it. It is interesting to note that the intermediated
group contains strains mostly from the Asian lineage (MA, TH, YAP,
and BR strains). This is particularly more evident for the pH window
between 5 and 6.5, where the SE strain (African lineage) is a bit
outside the intermediated group. From the monomeric to the dimeric
state, the difference between the UG strain and the others tends to
increase. This means that the UG strain dimer tends to be less positively
charged at the acid regime (pH < pI) and more negatively charged
at the basic regime (pH > pI). Henceforth, it is expected that
the
NS1UG will interact differently from other charged molecules
in the cell (e.g., for pH < 6.7, the monomeric form of NS1UG will be less attracted by a negatively charged membrane,
whereas NS1CAR will be strongly attracted). This leads
us to think that the electrostatic properties have an important evolutionary
role defining different functionalities in highly conserved proteins
such as NS1. Full titration plots obtained in our simulations are
provided in the Supporting Information (Figure S1). From the very acidic to the basic pH conditions, the charge Zp approximately varies from +57 to −55
(for the monomeric state) and from +116 to −109 (for the dimeric
state). In both high and low pH regimes, the dimers present a higher
total protein charge than the monomers (see Figure S1). Structural differences due to the manner that the protein
models were built are shown to be small.

Figure 3 Physicochemical properties
of different ZIKV NS1 strains (using
model 1). (a, b) Simulated protein net charge number as a function
of pH. (c, d) Simulated charge regulation parameter as a function
of pH. Plots on the left- and right-hand sides are, respectively,
for the monomers and the dimers. The estimated deviations calculated
based on the averaged values for models 1 and 2 are also shown. Data
from MC simulations at 150 mM of salt concentration. We note that
some curves are on top of each other.

Considering a pair of macromolecules, the second most relevant
contribution in the interaction energy between them is often the charge
regulation mechanism.66 This induction
interaction is especially important for the interaction of an approximately
neutral protein with another (highly) charged macromolecule. Plots
of the charge regulation parameter as a function of pH at physiological
salt concentration are also shown in Figure 3. In the pH window of 5–7.5, it decreases
from ca. 5 to 1.7, for the monomeric state, and from ca. 10 to 3.5,
for the dimeric state. Since the attractive charge regulation mechanism
depends on the product (CpZp2), this indicates that the charge regulation
mechanism also decreases its importance for the homoassociation of
the NS1 proteins as pH becomes closer to pI. Full plots of Cp as a function of pH at 150 mM of NaCl are
shown in Figure S1c,d. For the monomers,
we observe that the highest peaks occur around pH values 3.6 (Cp ≈ 8.7) and 10.8 (Cp ≈ 6.0) (see Figure S1c). For the dimers, high peaks around pH values 3.6 (Cp ≈ 16.6) and 12.5 (Cp ≈ 11.8) are obtained as shown in Figure S1d. Between pH 5.5 and 7.0, we can observe that Cp values are somewhat different for NS1UG and
NS1SE compared to the other strains for both monomers and
dimers. They tend to be smaller in this pH regime. Unlike what was
seen for Zp, we cannot clusterize the
strains based on their values. There seem to be no strong differences
between those of Africa and Asiatic origins in terms of their capacitance.
Therefore, we can hypothesize that during the evolutionary process,
this property has been conserved probably because it might be so significant
for the biomolecular associations of NS1 and even would play no role
in the differential virulence of ZIKV strains.

The other physicochemical
property that can play a role in the
molecular association is the dipole moment. However, the contribution
of the charge–dipole term often vanishes for biomolecules at
physiological salt condition. The dipole–dipole interactions
also tend to be smaller than those of the other contributions.66 Higher other moments would have a negligible
contribution. For the sake of completeness, we evaluated μp for all of the strains. Results are presented in Figure S2 for both the monomeric and dimeric
states at 150 mM of salt. There are significant differences depending
on structural models because dipole moments are quite sensitive to
the structural coordinates. Despite these, we can observe that each
strain exhibits a specific curve pattern. This might indicate that
although the total net charge is relatively maintained, there are
local differences probably at the biointeractive interfaces. NS1UG has higher μp at all pH regimes. This can
be explored in more detail in the future when theoretical methods
that couple titration and conformational changes became feasible for
larger proteins.

NS1 Associations
We have limited
the present study
on the investigation of the impact of each ZIKV strain in the interactions
of NS1 with its three main partners: (a) itself in a dimerization
process, (b) a membrane represented by a negative surface potential,
and (c) an antibody. Following ref (66), we estimated the corresponding electrostatic
free energy of interactions [βw(r)], applying the simulated Zp, Cp, and μp values obtained at
pH values in eqs 2–6. In this semiquantitative analytical approach,56 we have used the values of Zp, Cp, and μp obtained from the MC simulations with model 1 at 150 mM of salt.
On the basis of a simple thermodynamical criterion,76 negative values of βw(r) indicate an attractive regime, whereas w(r) > 1 corresponds to repulsion. Despite the intrinsic
approximations,
the central aspect here is to verify possible differences in the interactions
between the NS1 protein for each strain and its different targets.

NS1–NS1
Homooligomers
We first examined the
pH effects on the homoassociation process of the NS1 proteins for
all of the strains to form the homodimers from the monomeric units
(NS1 + NS1 → NS1 dimer) as this is a very fundamental step
to give NS1 the capacity to associate with membranes.34 Another important association is the formation of hexamers
from three homodimers (NS1 dimer + NS1 dimer + NS1 dimer →
NS1 hexamer). For the sake of convenience, this last process was only
partially investigated here in a simplified manner by means of a dimer–dimer
interaction (NS1 dimer + NS1 dimer → NS1 tetramer) that might
be relevant to the hexamer formation. The transition between the membrane-bound
dimer (NS1 dimerbound) to form a soluble trimer of dimers
and then a hexamer is still unclear in the literature. Moreover, since
tetrameric intermediates have also been reported,33 it might be useful to have more information about this
eventually intermediate step in the hexamer formation observed in
late infection. Figure 4 shows the calculated electrostatic free energy of the interactions
as given by eq 2 at physiological
ionic strength, assuming r = 50 Å. This corresponds
to roughly the NS1 diameter (i.e., the center–center separation
distance of two NS1 proteins at the contact). For the sake of convenience,
all plots were shifted down by an arbitrary value of −9 kT to mimic the addition of an estimated attractive van
der Waals (vdW) contribution. In a typical Hamaker description often
used in colloidal science, attractive numbers are usually in the range
of 3–10 kT.77 With
this assumption, negative values of βw(r) are observed at pH values between ca. 5 and 10, indicating
that a homoassociation can happen at this relatively large pH window.
Despite the simplicity of the model, this result agrees with the experimental
data.29 A smaller attractive vdW contribution
will narrow this pH window without affecting the qualitative comparison
between the strains, which is the central aspect of the present study.
The picture is largely dominated by the charge–charge (coulombic)
contributions. Both the charge regulation and dipolar interactions
contribute with negligible numbers (less than 0.1kT at maximum). As expected, the behavior of βw(r) for each strain follows what was shown before
for Zp. The NS1UG is shifted
to the acid pH regime, which permits the complexation to both start
and be over at smaller pH values. All of the other strains have a
similar profile with the NS1CAR being the farther case.
The differences between the strains become clearer for the tetramerization
process (Figure 4b).
Thus, the observed differences between the NS1UG and the
other strains in the self-association process might be related to
their distinct biological responses as it is known that the formation
of NS1 oligomers is very important for the ZIKV functionality.2,28

Figure 4 Homodimerization
in two different types of oligomers for different
NS1 of ZIKV. The electrostatic free energies of interactions are calculated
as a function of pH. (a) Monomer state. (b) Dimer state. Data from
the analytical equations using the parameters obtained from the MC
simulations at 150 mM of salt concentration.

NS1–Membrane Interaction
We next investigated
the pH effects on the interactions of the ZIKV NS1 protein from each
strain with a general membrane model. Assuming that a surface membrane
electrical potential equals −95 mV68 and using in eq 7 the
values of Zp obtained from the MC simulations,
we estimated the electrostatic free energy of interactions for the
protein–membrane association [βΔA(R)]. The results at 150 mM salt are shown in Figure 5 for both oligomeric
states. The monomer–membrane case is included here for comparisons
and the sake of completeness since the only biologically relevant
system is the dimer–membrane. The same tendency for the NS1UG and NS1CAR to be extreme cases as observed for
the NS1 dimer–dimer association is seen here too for both cases.
The transition from monomer to dimer is reported to increase the hydrophobicity
of NS1. Electrostatic attraction might contribute to this process
as well. For instance, comparing the monomeric and dimeric cases,
we can see that the discrepancy in βw(r) between the different strains is increased for the dimers,
i.e., the dimerization amplifies the biomolecular interactions in
comparison with the monomers. The dimerization also slightly decreased
the pH where a transition between an electrostatic attraction and
a repulsive regime is observed [pH where βw(r) = 0]. For the monomeric case, the NS1UG is attracted by the membrane until pH 7.4, whereas the NS1CAR is attracted by pH values up to 9.5. Conversely, for the dimer case,
these pH values suffer a small decrease to 7.3 and 9.4 for, respectively,
UG and CAR. Most of the NS1 proteins from the other strains (NS1SE, NS1MA, NS1TH, NS1YAP,
and NS1BR) can be grouped together in terms of their estimated
interactive behavior. This group of proteins can be attracted by the
membrane until an intermediate pH value (∼8.0). At the pH of
the ER lumen (pH 7.2), all proteins have an attractive behavior. CAR
is the system where the strongest electrostatic attraction is analytically
estimated at this pH value, followed by the group of strains mentioned
above (SE, MA, TH, YAP, and BR), and finally by the UG strain.

Figure 5 Protein–membrane
interactions in two different types of
oligomers for different NS1 of ZIKV. (a) Monomer state. (b) Dimer
state. The electrostatic free energies of interactions between the
complexes are calculated as a function of pH. Data from the analytical
equations using the parameters obtained from the MC simulations at
150 mM of salt concentration.

Overall, we can see that the NS1 proteins from different
strains
do not have the same βw(r)
profile. Each strain produces an NS1 protein with specific molecular
interactive properties, i.e., the magnitude of the attraction NS1
dimer–membrane is specific for each strain. It is legitimate
to suppose that such differences on how NS1 interacts with the membrane
should have an impact on the differential virulence of each strain
among other factors. There should be a direct relation between the
biomolecular interactions and the biological effects. The NS1–membrane
association is a critical step to the assembly and release of the
viral lipoprotein particle.34 Akey and
coauthors previously suggested the relation between the observed phenotype
and the loss of effective interactions with transmembrane proteins
of the replication complex.35 On the basis
of such arguments, a stronger affinity between the NS1 dimer and the
membrane would promote a better association of this protein with intracellular
membranes and consequently would favor the viral replication. Indeed,
it has already been reported that African strains have a more aggressive
effect on human neural stem cells compared to strains of Asian origin.15 Moreover, it has been hypothesized that the
strains from an African lineage ZIKV have a deadly effect on the early
stages of the fetus, whereas the Asian lineage is less destructive,
allowing the fetal development to continue, but then congenital malformations
can appear at a later stage.15,67 If these processes
are related to the viral genome replication as it seems to be the
case, it could be assumed that there is some kind of relationship
between that and the results found here. As seen in Figure 5, for both the monomer and
dimeric cases, it might be that African NS1 proteins (as NS1CAR) have a higher affinity for negatively charged membranes since the
residues involved in the interaction are positively charged. On the
contrary, a less attractive effect at pH 7.2 should occur in the NS1
strains of Asiatic origin, due to the presence of more negative residues
that prevent a strong affinity with the intracellular membranes. The
hydrophobic characteristic of the NS1 homodimer might contribute to
further enhance the NS1–membrane attraction.

West Nile
Virus NS1
To go further and better understand
the impact of sequence differences on the main physicochemical properties
of NS1, we decided to examine a primary sequence, which has a sequence
identity much lower than that found between the ZIKV strains. In this
regard, the West Nile virus sequence (denoted WNV), for which a crystallographic
structure of the NS1 complexed with an antibody is available, is a
convenient case. Considering that the sequence identity between the
available regions of the NS1 of WNV and ZIKV in the crystallographic
structure is around 59%, we can examine how the amino acid composition
affects these physicochemical properties in these proteins along the
pH scale. Furthermore, the NS1–antibody complex can also be
used as a “template” to estimate the interactions between
the antibody and the NS1 from ZIKV. This does not necessarily mean
that the WNV NS1–antibody can have a promiscuous behavior and
also be able to bind the ZIKV NS1 in vivo. To our
knowledge, there is no information about the possibility of polyspecificity
or cross-reactions for the WNV–antibody. The theoretical calculations
done here are simply to illustrate that each ZIKV strain would have
a different electrostatic response for a given antibody molecule.
This will be true even if the real ZIKV–antibody will be different
from the WNV one as common sense suggests. In addition, it is interesting
to point out that Wang and coauthors suggested that the WNV NS1 could
be used in the development of antibodies against ZIKV.19 Moreover, Rocha and coauthors78 identified NS1–dengue epitopes that are recognized
by two monoclonal antibodies (2H5 and 4H1BC) that also cross-reacted
with NS1 ZIKV protein. In some cases, the sequence identity between
the dengue epitope and the corresponding epitope in Zika can be less
than 77% (see the Supporting Information of ref (78)). Since our main goal
was to evaluate the interaction properties of an epitope region with
an antibody, in the absence of 3D structure of ZIKV with Rocha’s
antibodies, we turned out to the sole 3D complex that was indubitably
characterized, namely, the evolutionary closely related WNV NS1 protein
interacting with 22NS1. The crystallographic NS1WNV structure
was missing the 1–175 N-terminal region. We have assumed that
the missing amino acids would not affect the complexation because,
even when absent in the known experimental structure, the oligomer
could be formed in the crystal conditions. For comparison purpose,
we reevaluated the electrostatic properties of NS1ZIKV restricting
to the same region. The first procedure is to compute these properties
for both the antibody and the NS1WNV and to compare them
with the results for ZIKV. This can be seen in Figure 6. The pI for NS1WNV (5.7) is smaller
than what was previously computed for all NS1ZIKV strains.
From pH 7.5 to the acid regime, the NS1WNV is always less
charged than the ZIKV strains. The strain from the UG is the intermediate
case, whereas the BR strain is the most positively charged molecule
within this pH range. The same order is observed for the charge regulation
parameter. The pI for the antibody is 8.7. From these titration data,
it can be anticipated that the NS1WNV will form the strongest
complex with the antibody, and the NS1BR the weaker complex.
Due to its negligible contribution, μp was not reported
here.

Figure 6 Physicochemical properties for different NS1176–352 from two flaviviruses [WNV PDB id 4OII and ZIKV PDB id 5GS6 (BR) and 5K6K (UG)] and the Fab
fragment 22NS1 (derived from 4OII). (a) Net protein charge number as a function of pH.
(b) Charge regulation parameter as a function of pH. Plots have specifically
focused on the typical physiological pH conditions for the virus stability
and infectivity. Data from MC simulations at 150 mM of salt concentration.

NS1–Antibody
Finally, using the C-terminus NS1
of WNV and ZIKV, we calculate the βw(r) as a function of pH for these proteins with the antibody
found in the crystallographic structure of WNV (see Figure 7). For NS1ZIKV,
we assumed that the epitope region is the same as that for NS1WNV. We built the NS1 ZIKV–antibody complex by superimposing
the common regions between NS1WNV and NS1ZIKV. As expected, βw(r) starts
to be negative at a smaller pH for the WNV–antibody complex,
confirming that this is the system with the stronger affinity followed
by the NS1ZIKV UG and then the NS1ZIKV BR. This result confirms that the ZIKV BR strain is less attracted
by this specific antibody for WNV, which should imply a different
immunological response. As expected based on the common sense for
specificity for antibody–antigen interactions, an immune system
that produces this antibody for WNV would have difficulties to neutralize
the ZIKV NS1BR. Our result clearly demonstrated that the
electrostatics properties of the 22NS1 antibody have to be modified
first before any other fine subtle residue changes. This result is
of utmost importance as it significantly limits the number of residues
combination to design a synthetic antibody.

Figure 7 Protein–antibody
interactions for different NS1176–352 of two flaviviruses.
The electrostatic free energies of interactions
between the complexes are calculated as a function of pH. Data from
the analytical equations using the parameters obtained from the MC
simulations at 150 mM of salt concentration. The antibody Fab fragment
22NS1 used in these calculations is from the WNV as given by the PDB
id 4OII.

Mapping the Electrostatic
Properties at the Sequence Level
We described above the detected
differences at the main global
protein physicochemical properties. To refine this analysis, we also
evaluated the differences in the electrostatic properties at the amino
acid level due to the small variation on the sequence identity. This
allows us to map the protein regions largely affected by the evolutionary
mutations that could be related to the self-association of NS1 and
the interactions with the membrane and the antibody. Consequently,
these regions have different interaction affinities with their molecular
partners and could be directly related to the patterns of differential
infectivity found in different strains of ZIKV. In addition, regions
where variations do not occur must be fundamental for the virus, and,
as a consequence, their electrostatic conservation must be maintained.
Computed pKa values of all titratable
groups were employed in this mapping process. The pKa calculations were carried out for all available structures,
i.e., the experimental ones as well as the 3D models. Thus, we can
differentiate the shifts from the sequence itself from those that
are due to the tertiary structure. For both the UG and BR strains,
we performed the calculations with the two chains (A and B) that were
accessible at the PDB. They are referred to as UG_chA_X-ray, UG_chB_X-ray,
BR_chA_X-ray, and BR_chB_X-ray. For the other strains, the same notation
was followed, replacing the “_X-ray” by the correspondent
comparative structural models labels (“_mod1” and “_mod2”
for the structures obtained from the templates from the BR and UG
strains, respectively).

In fact, the interesting properties
are the pKa shifts from a chosen reference
system. The pKa shifts can be due to the
sequence (strain), structure, and mixed effects. To distinguish impact
from sequences to structures, three pKa shifts were calculated for each case depending on the molecular
model, i.e., 1 or 2. In this study, we used the NS1UG as
such reference. Accordingly, ΔpKa1 (or 2) stands for the difference between pKa of a given amino acid in model 1 (or 2) of a given strain
(pKa_strain) compared to the same amino
acid in X-ray structure of UG (pKa_UG).
We also evaluated ΔΔpKa =
ΔpKa1 – ΔpKa2, which reflects the fine influence
of the structural building procedure. The ionic strength was kept
constant at 150 mM during all simulation runs. Figure 8 presents the sequence alignments for all
studied NS1 strains. At the bottom line, both the degree of conservation
and the exposition to the solvent of the titratable amino acids are
represented by the usual stars and the grayish little squares (where
black means a very exposed amino acid, and white, a buried one). The
results for the ΔpKa’s are
displayed as a color-coded ΔpKa scale,
with blue being the positive shifts (ΔpKa > 0), and red the negative ones (ΔpKa < 0). The numerical data used to build up this color-coded
ΔpKa scale are reported in Table S4. Amino acids’ one-letter codes
highlighted in bold indicate those that are found at the NS1 self-association
interfaces. The other important interfaces are indicated at the top
line (above the amino acid numbering) by the letters “m”
(for the interaction with the membrane) and “a” (for
the NS1–antibody interface defined here based on the NS1 antigenic
molecule known from the WNV NS1–Fab fragment 22NS1 from the
PDB id 4OII).
For the sake of convenience, we also introduced another notation at
the third top line with a colored geometric figure. This is done to
guide the reader to the most interesting pKa shifts from the biological perspective. Colored circles, triangles,
squares, inverted triangles, and diamonds correspond to conditions
1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, as given in Table 1. This symbol comparison is done between
the UG and BR strains. Sequence positions labeled with triangles indicate
the pKa shifts that come from the differences
in the three-dimensional structure. The most relevant cases to determine
the shifts associated with the strains are both the ones where there
was a mutation on a specific sequence position (see the diamonds in Figure 8) and the cases where
the pKa shifts for models 1 and 2 are
in the same direction (ΔpKa1 × ΔpKa2 >
0; see the circles and squares in Figure 8). For instance, the diamond at position
52 means that there is a mutation from the UG sequence (our reference
in this study) to the BR strain. In this example, we can observe the
effect of mutation E52D for the BR strain (and also for MA, TH, and
YAP strains). At position 51, we can see the circle. In this case,
E51 is conserved in the BR sequence (and all of the others), but in
some strains, this residue experiences a different electrostatic environment,
and positive pKa shifts were measured.
From Table S4, we can see that both models
(1 and 2) give exactly the same pKa shift
(pKa1 mod1_br = 0.1 and pKa2 mod2_br = 0.1; see Table S4), indicating that the observed shifts
are not an artifact from the structure. Similar cases where the pKa shifts are not exactly the same but keep the
same signal can also be found. See the green square at position 14
in Figure 8, where
pKa1 mod1_br = −0.4
and pKa2 mod2_br = −0.2
(values from Table S4). Actually, there
are other cases like this one closer to the NS1 self-association interface
(e.g., R29, E156, and E192). There are pKa shifts at the biological functional interfaces and also at other
sequence positions with apparently no specific relation with them.
A detailed description of each amino acid behavior with a description
of the involved biofunctional interface is provided in Table S5. We can summarize the main observations
from these analyses with the numerical quantification of all possible
cases. These statistical data are given in Table 3. Interesting comments can be made using
the data presented in this table. For instance, it becomes clear that
TYR maintains a high degree of conservation in terms of the pKa shifts. There are seven TYRs that are not
affected by the changes in the sequences from each strain, including
the TYRs present at the functional interfaces (there is one TYR at
each interface). The only TYR affected is not at these interfaces.
The other titratable amino acids have situations where pKa shifts were observed in two functional interfaces. The
total number of GLUs is 34, being the highest number of ionizable
amino acids in the NS1 protein followed by 25 ARGs, 22 LYSs, 16 ASPs,
and 12 HISs. From the 34 GLUs, 13 were affected by the mutations from
the UG to the BR strains. Considering the total number of GLUs, this
corresponds to a ratio equal to 0.38. It is also the highest relation
between the number of affected cases of a given amino acid divided
by its total number. Nevertheless, only parts of the affected GLUs
are at the functional interfaces. There is one at the dimeric interface
and three at the epitope. This amino acid is not presented at the
membrane interface. HISs that are located at the functional interfaces
have a high tendency to be sensitive to the mutations. We found three
HISs at the dimeric interface, the membrane interface, and the epitope.
HISs experienced pKa shifts at both the
self-association and the epitope interfaces due to the evolutionary
mutations: one out of three at the self-association interface and
one out of one at the epitope. In short, we can say that (a) ARG (1),
GLU (1), HIS (1), and LYS (2) are affected at the dimeric interface;
(b) ARG (1), ASP (1), and LYS (1) at the membrane interface; and (c)
GLU (3) and HIS (1) at the epitope. The number of occurrences of each
amino acid at these interfaces was given between parentheses. It seems
that these residues are essential for the functionality and survival
of the virus since they are engaged in regions of crucial interactions.

Figure 8 Alignment
from different NS1 (monomers) of several geographic regions.
When the amino acid suffers pKa variation,
it is shaded with blue or red indicating, respectively, that it is
more positive or more negative with regard to the reference (NS1UG). Residues are shaded with yellow or green when a substitution
per acidic or basic residue occurs with respect to the reference.
Explanations about the symbols above the alignment are given in the
text (see also Table 1, where the numerical criterion is provided to guide the use of these
symbols). The letters “m” and “a” above
the alignment are residues embedded in the membrane and epitope regions
(this last region was defined based on the crystallographic structure
of the complex WNV-Fab fragment 22NS1). Residues that belong to the
dimeric interface are shown in bold. The bars below the alignment
indicate exposure of charged residues on the protein surface, with
darker areas indicating more exposure. The last line indicates the
grade of conservation between proteins.

Table 3 Number of Ionizable Residues with
pKa Shifts in Some Important Regions of
NS1BR of ZIKV and Their Relationsa
 	total	dimer
interface	membrane
interface	epitope	
residue	NT	N′T	N′T/NT	N′V/N′T	ND	N′D	N′D/ND	N′D/N′T	NM	N′M	N′M/NM	N′M/N′T	NE	N′E	N′E/NE	N′E/N′T	
ARG	25	4	0.16	0.50	1	1	1.00	0.25	2	1	0.50	0.25	3	0	0.00	0.00	
ASP	16	3	0.19	0.33	5	0	0.00	0.00	1	1	1.00	0.33	3	0	0.00	0.00	
GLU	34	13	0.38	0.31	2	1	0.50	0.08	0	0	0.00	0.00	5	3	0.60	0.60	
HIS	12	2	0.17	1.00	3	1	0.33	0.50	1	0	0.00	0.00	1	1	1.00	1.00	
LYS	22	6	0.27	0.50	5	2	0.40	0.33	2	1	0.50	0.17	0	0	0.00	0.00	
TYR	8	1	0.13	0.00	1	0	0.00	0.00	1	0	0.00	0.00	1	0	0.00	0.00	
a NT =
total number of residues, N′T =
number of residues with pKa shifts, N′V = N′D + N′M + N′E, ND = total number of residues
in the dimeric interface, N′D =
number of residues with pKa shifts in
the dimeric interface, NM = total number
of residues embedded in the membrane, N′M = number of residues with pKa shifts embedded in the membrane, NE =
total number of residues in the antibody interface of NS1 WNV, N′E = number of residues with pKa shifts in the antibody interface of NS1 WNV.

Mapping the Electrostatic
Properties at the Structural Level
The analysis at the sequence
level can be seen as a rough estimation
since the three-dimensional distribution of the amino acids charges
has a clear effect on the strength of the molecular interactions that
are distance-dependent properties. Even homologous proteins might
have regions with different folds,79 which
have a direct effect on the protonation states of the titratable groups.
Therefore, the pKa shifts reported above
were also mapped at the protein surface following a similar color
code. Exploring possible relations with other relevant properties, Figure 9 shows the pKa shifts regarding the same reference (NS1UG) as a molecular surface color mapping. The threshold of
ΔpKa = 0.2 defined this color mapping
to better highlight all affected molecular regions. In the same figure,
we included a map for the degree of conservation and the B-factor of each residue. Because the B-factor is
a thermodynamic measure of the structural flexibility and provides
important information about the averaged protein dynamics properties,
a comparison between this variable and pKa shifts is interesting to be investigated. Comparing the maps for
the ΔpKa’s and B-factors, we can conclude that there is no clear relation between
the protein flexibility and the ΔpKa’s for the NS1BR. Conversely, there seem to be
more pKa shifts at conserved regions of
the protein. This makes sense in evolutionary terms since viruses
can have some regions where the mutation rate is higher “to
counter” the attacks from the hosts they infect.73 However, we must emphasize that it is also interesting
that independent of that degree of conservation, the variation of
pKa can be seen between strains with a
high sequence identity. In this way, each particular NS1 strain of
ZIKV would have the ability to interact differently from their possible
different partners to which they can be associated.

Figure 9 Tridimensional structures
of the NS1BR monomer. Models
from the left to the right show the degree of conservation, B-factor of each residue, and pKa variation regarding the reference (NS1UG). See the text
for details.

In Figure 10, the
focus is on the comparison between the pKa shifts and the biological functional interfaces. For the sake of
convenience, the same molecular map of the ΔpKa’s previously seen in Figure 9 is reproduced again in this figure. From
the left to right in this figure, we start with the pKa shifts color mapping, followed by the molecular surface
representation of the dimeric interface and the residues that are
embedded in the membrane. The last image on the right-hand side described
the three distinct domains (β-roll, wing domain, and β-ladder
domain) that are structurally important for NS1 together with the
molecular regions that interact with the antibody. There are pKa shifts in all of these domains. In general,
most of the pKa shifts occur at the dimeric
interfaces and epitope. There are only a few amino acids affected
at the region that directly interacts with the membrane: two with
negative shifts, D30 (ΔpKa ≅
−0.3) and K116 (ΔpKa ≅
−0.3), and one with positive shift, R29 (ΔpKa ≅ 0.3). It might be not surprising since it has
been put forward that the interaction with the membrane would be driven
by a hydrophobic mechanism at least for the WNV.80 Nevertheless, such shifts explain the reduction in the
free energy of interaction between NS1 and the membrane, as discussed
in Figure 5. We have
to bear in mind that electrostatic interactions are long-range interactions,
and even charges at larger separation distances can contribute with
the attraction between NS1 and the membrane. Thus, the presence of
some titratable groups at the interface reinforces the evidence that
electrostatic interactions are important to favor the approach of
NS1 and the membrane, while the hydrophobic ones guide the final step
of the anchoring of the NS1 into the membrane. The two mechanisms
might work together for this biointerface. From the UG to the BR strain,
most titratable residues experienced negative shifts both at the functionally
important regions of the protein and in others without an apparent
direct functional relation. We can hypothesize that these residues
either contribute to the structural stability of NS1 or indirectly
help the titration mechanisms of the other ionizable groups due to
their high electrostatic coupling. Residues D52, K146, K191, and H286
seem to be affected by the neighborhood (see also Figure 8). It is clear that even the
small different compositions of amino acids affect the electrostatics
properties of NS1, therefore allowing it to interact in multiple ways
depending on the strains.

Figure 10 Tridimensional structures of the NS1BR monomer. Models
from the left to right show pKa variation
regarding the reference (NS1UG), residues of the dimeric
interface, residues embedded in the membrane, and domains of the NS1.
Epitope region from NS1 of WNV (PDB id 4OII) is colored violet in the last image.

Some earlier studies reported
more negative electrostatic potential
profiles at the loop surface on NS1UG of ZIKV compared
to those on other flaviviruses.17,28 This result is in agreement
with our present outcomes. Furthermore, it seems as if the natural
tendency of the future strains is to maintain more negatively charged
interfaces while new geographical areas are conquered by the virus.
It might be a strategy used by the ZIKV to trick the immune system.
Focusing on the NS1BR, we have listed the number of ionizable
residues and the distribution of these residues in the three main
functional interfaces in Table 3, with or without showing pKa shifts,
as commented above. Among the titratable residues (117 in total),
roughly a third is found in biological functional interface regions.
Interestingly, more than 40% of residues with pKa shifts are found in these regions, which underlines the fine
role of electrostatic features in key interactions. By the abundant
number of GLUs present in the structure, it seems reasonable that
the ZIKV has explored this feature. Although most GLU residues fall
outside of the biological functional interfaces regions, we can observe
how the presence of this amino acid is directly related to an electrostatically
negative charges pattern in ZIKV reported by other studies.17,28 It is important to point out that we have limited our analysis to
known functional regions. This does not preclude the impact of these
changes on interactions with putative other partners that still need
to be identified. It should also be noted that some ΔpKa’s were positive as seen in residues
E26 (ΔpKa = 0.1), R29 (ΔpKa ≅ 0.3), E51 (ΔpKa = 0.1), and K189 (ΔpKa = 0.2), and mutations R69K (ΔpKa = 1.7) and E146K (ΔpKa = 6.9),
as given in Table S4. In the antigenic
region, the mutation Y286H exhibits a relatively high negative pKa shift (ΔpKa = −3.2). The highest positive shifts are observed for the
mutations to LYS.

The results obtained to date suggest that
the difference in the
virulence is related to the pKa shifts
in the three biological functional interfaces. For possible therapeutic
interventions, the molecular interface between NS1 and the antibody
is highly interesting to be explored. Using the epitope region crystallographically
known for WNV (only 185 residues from amino acids 176 to 352), we
compared the ΔpKa for WNV, ZIKVUG, and ZIKVBR in Figure 11 (note that this alignment has a pKa shift scale from −1.2 to 1.2). The
missing portion of the structure in the WNV–antibody complex
was removed from the ZIKV strains structures too. All of these calculations
were done in the apo form. Several pKa shifts are observed specific at the antigenic region (see cases
with the “a”s at the top line of Figure 11). We can see that even conservative amino
acids between the ZIKV and the WNV experienced pKa shifts (e.g., E178 and D180). There are cases where
the shifts are larger for the ZIKVBR than for ZIKVUG and vice versa (e.g., E178). Nevertheless, the effective
result of these mutations is to make the ZIKVBR more positively
charged, as seen in Figure 6 and, consequently, less recognized by the antibody (see Figure 7). These regions
affected by the protein sequence indicate a potential candidate for
the development of vaccines.

Figure 11 Alignment from different NS1 of two different
flaviviruses. Calculations
were done using the incomplete dimeric structure of WNV (PDB id 4OII) that interacts
with the antibody (but removing this part). Incomplete structures
for NS1 of ZIKV were used as well. Conventions are the same as in Figure 8.

Conclusions
We have explored here
the electrostatic properties of different
strains of the ZIKV NS1 protein that are structurally conserved (in
terms of the scaffold) but could have differential infectivities despite
the small variations in the sequence level. This small variation in
the sequences can have a considerable impact on the main physicochemical
properties that are pH-dependent. This has been observed for global
properties, such as the net protein charge numbers, and for more refined
analyses based on pKa’s and electrostatic
maps. The mutations can affect neighboring amino acids and others
that are spatially far but still electrostatically connected due to
the long range of electrostatic interactions and the complex coupling
between the titratable groups. Three different groups of strains could
be identified in terms of their titration behavior and isoelectric
points, the Uganda and the Central Africa Republic being the two extreme
opposite cases. Most of the Asian strains tend to have a similar behavior.

The biomolecular interactions of the NS1 protein related to the
three most important biological interfaces were investigated and demonstrated
the differences between the strains that can be related to their distinct
biological responses. For the self-association interaction, the UG
strain is able to start its complexation at more acid pH regimes,
whereas most of the studied strains need higher pH values. The differences
between the strains increased from the monomeric to the dimeric states.
Charge–charge interactions were confirmed as the main electrostatic-driven
force for the complexation. Using the available structural data of
the West Nile virus, we could demonstrate the difficulties that the
same antibody would have to neutralize the NS1 from the Brazilian
strain of the ZIKV. Another interesting observation is that it would
have less difficulty to neutralize the strain from Uganda. In terms
of the interaction with membranes, excluding the Uganda strain, most
of the others have a similar behavior and can be attracted by the
charged membrane until an intermediate pH value of ca. 8. All of these
differences can be related to the differential clinical observed virulence.
In fact, several pKa shifts were observed
specifically at the three main studied biological interfaces reinforcing
the idea that the NS1 electrostatic properties have a relation with
the differential infectivity seen for this virus. It remains to be
investigated how these observations are related to the hexamer transition,
which was left for a future work. We have detected an important role
for GLU residues and highlighted that several of its pKa shifts are found at the epitope. Furthermore, the antigenic
region exhibits a negative pKa variation
compared to the most ancestral strains. Since the NS1 protein has
been proposed as a biomarker for flaviviruses and also as a potential
vaccine target, the observed differences in these electrostatic properties
maps indicate key issues for the development of antibody-based technologies
and/or for the design of new medicines. The present study also opens
up perspectives to computationally design high-specificity antibodies.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b02081.Main physicochemical
properties of different NS1 strains
of ZIKV; dipole moment number of different NS1 strains of ZIKV (Figures
S1 and S2); properties of coarse-grained amino acids; physicochemical
properties of different ZIKV NS1 strains (monomeric state); physicochemical
properties of different ZIKV NS1 strains (dimeric state); ΔΔpKa calculated for two models of NS1BR; and classification
of the residues based on NS1BR (Tables S1–S5) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b02081_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported in part by
the “Fundação
de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo”
[Fapesp 2015/16116-3 (F.L.B.d.S.)] and the “Coordenação
de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior”—CAPES
(S.A.P.-C.). F.L.B.d.S. and S.A.P.-C. acknowledge the support of the
University of São Paulo (USP) through the NAP-CatSinQ (Research
Core in Catalysis and Chemical Synthesis) and the computing hours
at Rice University through the international collaboration program
with USP. F.L.B.d.S. and C.E. acknowledge the mobility support from
the joint Universitè Sorbonne Paris Citè-USP Research
program.

Abbreviations
ZIKVZika virus

WNVWest Nile virus

NS1nonstructural protein 1

FPTSfast proton titration
scheme

CGcoarse-grained

DVLODerjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek
==== Refs
References
Cox B. D. ; Stanton R. A. ; Schinazi R. F. 
Predicting
Zika Virus: Structural
Biology Challenges and Opportunities for Intervention . Antiviral Chem. Chemother. 
2015 , 24 , 118 –126 . 10.1177/2040206616653873 .
Muller D. A. ; Young P. R. 
The Flavivirus NS1 Protein Molecular
and Structural
Biology, Immunology, Role in Pathogenesis and Application as a Diagnostic
Biomarker . Antiviral Res. 
2013 , 98 , 192 –208 . 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.008 .23523765 
Lindenbach B. D. ; Thiel H. J. ; Rice C. M.  Fields
Virology , 5 th ed.; LR
Publishers : Philadelphia , 2007 .
Mlakar J. ; Korva M. ; Tul N. ; Popović M. ; Poljšak-Prijatelj M. ; Mraz J. ; Kolenc M. ; Rus K. R. ; Vipotnik T. V. ; Vodušek V. F. ; et al. Zika Virus Associated with Microcephaly . N.
Engl. J. Med. 
2016 , 374 , 951 –958 . 10.1056/NEJMoa1600651 .26862926 
Petersen E. ; Wilson M. E. ; Touch S. ; McCloskey B. ; Mwaba P. ; Bates M. ; Dar O. ; Mattes F. ; Kidd M. ; Ippolito G. ; et al. Rapid
Spread of Zika
Virus in the Americas-Implications for Public Health Preparedness
for Mass Gatherings at the 2016 Brazil Olympic Games . Int. J. Infect. Dis. 
2016 , 44 , 11 –15 . 10.1016/j.ijid.2016.02.001 .26854199 
Paixão E. S. ; Teixeira M. G. ; Rodrigues L. C. 
Zika, Chikungunya
and Dengue the
Causes and Threats of New and Re-Emerging Arboviral Diseases . BMJ Global Health 
2018 , 3 , e00053010.1136/bmjgh-2017-000530 .
Patterson J. ; Sammon M. ; Garg M. 
Dengue, Zika
and Chikungunya Emerging
Arboviruses in the New World . West. J. Emerg.
Med. 
2016 , 17 , 671 10.5811/westjem.2016.9.30904 .27833670 
Vasilakis N. ; Weaver S. C. 
Flavivirus Transmission Focusing
on Zika . Curr. Opin. Virol. 
2017 , 22 , 30 –35 . 10.1016/j.coviro.2016.11.007 .27936448 
Talero-Gutiérrez C. ; Rivera-Molina A. ; Pérez-Pavajeau C. ; Ossa-Ospina I. ; Santos-García C. ; Rojas-Anaya M. C. ; de-la-Torre A. 
Zika Virus
Epidemiology from Uganda to World Pandemic, an Update . Epidemiol. Infect. 
2018 , 146 , 673 –679 . 10.1017/S0950268818000419 .29536828 
Beckham J. D. ; Pastula D. M. ; Massey A. ; Tyler K. L. 
Zika Virus as an
Emerging Global Pathogen Neurological Complications of Zika Virus . JAMA Neurol. 
2016 , 73 , 875 –879 . 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.0800 .27183312 
Faye O. ; Freire C. C. M. ; Iamarino A. ; Faye O. ; de Oliveira J. V. C. ; Diallo M. ; Zanotto P. M. A. 
Molecular
Evolution of Zika Virus
during Its Emergence in the 20th Century . PLoS Neglected Trop. Dis. 
2014 , 8 , e263610.1371/journal.pntd.0002636 .
Kochakarn T. ; Kotanan N. ; Kümpornsin K. ; Loesbanluechai D. ; Thammasatta M. ; Auewarakul P. ; Wilairat P. ; Chookajorn T. 
Comparative
Genome Analysis between Southeast Asian and South American Zika Viruses . Asian Pac. J. Trop. Med. 
2016 , 9 , 1048 –1054 . 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.10.002 .27890363 
Shen S. ; Shi J. ; Wang J. ; Tang S. ; Wang H. ; Hu Z. ; Deng F. 
Phylogenetic Analysis
Revealed the Central Roles of Two African Countries
in the Evolution and Worldwide Spread of Zika Virus . Virol. Sin. 
2016 , 31 , 118 –130 . 10.1007/s12250-016-3774-9 .27129451 
Simonin Y. ; van Riel D. ; de Perre P. ; Rockx B. ; Salinas S. 
Differential
Virulence between Asian and African Lineages of Zika Virus . PLoS Neglected Trop. Dis. 
2017 , 11 , e000582110.1371/journal.pntd.0005821 .
Simonin Y. ; Loustalot F. ; Desmetz C. ; Foulongne V. ; Constant O. ; Fournier-Wirth C. ; Leon F. ; Molès J.-P. ; Goubaud A. ; Lemaitre J.-M. ; et al. Zika Virus Strains Potentially
Display Different Infectious Profiles in Human Neural Cells . EBioMedicine 
2016 , 12 , 161 –169 . 10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.09.020 .27688094 
Winkler G. ; Maxwell S. E. ; Ruemmler C. ; Stollar V. 
Newly Synthesized Dengue-2
Virus Nonstructural Protein NS1 Is a Soluble Protein but Becomes Partially
Hydrophobic and Membrane-Associated after Dimerization . Virology 
1989 , 171 , 302 –305 . 10.1016/0042-6822(89)90544-8 .2525840 
Brown W. C. ; Akey D. L. ; Konwerski J. R. ; Tarrasch J. T. ; Skiniotis G. ; Kuhn R. J. ; Smith J. L. 
Extended
Surface for Membrane Association
in Zika Virus NS1 Structure . Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 
2016 , 23 , 865 –867 . 10.1038/nsmb.3268 .27455458 
Xu X. ; Song H. ; Qi J. ; Liu Y. ; Wang H. ; Su C. ; Shi Y. ; Gao G. F. 
Contribution
of Intertwined Loop
to Membrane Association Revealed by Zika Virus Full-Length NS1 Structure . EMBO J. 
2016 , 35 , 2170 –2178 . 10.15252/embj.201695290 .27578809 
Wang D. ; Chen C. ; Liu S. ; Zhou H. ; Yang K. ; Zhao Q. ; Ji X. ; Chen C. ; Xie W. ; Wang Z. ; et al. A Mutation
Identified in Neonatal Microcephaly Destabilizes
Zika Virus NS1 Assembly in Vitro . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 4258010.1038/srep42580 .28198446 
Lindenbach B. D. ; Rice C. M. 
Trans-Complementation of Yellow Fever Virus NS1 Reveals
a Role in Early RNA Replication . J. Virol. 
1997 , 71 , 9608 –9617 .9371625 
Rastogi M. ; Sharma N. ; Singh S. K. 
Flavivirus
NS1 a Multifaceted Enigmatic
Viral Protein . Virol. J. 
2016 , 13 , 131 10.1186/s12985-016-0590-7 .27473856 
Chen S. ; Wu Z. ; Wang M. ; Cheng A. 
Innate Immune Evasion Mediated by
Flaviviridae Non-Structural Proteins . Viruses 
2017 , 9 , 291 10.3390/v9100291 .
Conde J. N. ; Silva E. M. ; Barbosa A. S. ; Mohana-Borges R. 
The Complement
System in Flavivirus Infections . Front. Microbiol. 
2017 , 8 , 213 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00213 .28261172 
Lefkowitz E. J. ; Dempsey D. M. ; Hendrickson R. C. ; Orton R. J. ; Siddell S. G. ; Smith D. B. 
Virus Taxonomy:
The Database of the International Committee
on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) . Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2018 , 46 , D708 –D717 . 10.1093/nar/gkx932 .29040670 
Chaudhury S. ; Ripoll D. R. ; Wallqvist A. 
Structure-Based
pKa Prediction Provides
a Thermodynamic Basis for the Role of Histidines in pH-Induced Conformational
Transitions in Dengue Virus . Biochem. Biophys.
Rep. 
2015 , 4 , 375 –385 . 10.1016/j.bbrep.2015.10.014 .29124227 
Prakash M. K. ; Barducci A. ; Parrinello M. 
Probing the
Mechanism of pH-Induced
Large-Scale Conformational Changes in Dengue Virus Envelope Protein
Using Atomistic Simulations . Biophys. J. 
2010 , 99 , 588 –594 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.04.024 .20643078 
Barroso
da Silva F. L. ; Dias L. G. 
Development of Constant-pH Simulation
Methods in Implicit Solvent and Applications in Biomolecular Systems . Biophys. Rev. 
2017 , 9 , 699 –728 . 10.1007/s12551-017-0311-5 .28921104 
Song H. ; Qi J. ; Haywood J. ; Shi Y. ; Gao G. F. 
Zika Virus NS1 Structure
Reveals Diversity of Electrostatic Surfaces among Flaviviruses . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2016 , 23 , 456 –458 . 10.1038/nsmb.3213 .27088990 
Falconar A. K. I. ; Young P. R. 
Immunoaffinity Purification
of Native Dimer Forms of
the Flavivirus Non-Structural Glycoprotein, NS1 . J. Virol. Methods 
1990 , 30 , 323 –332 . 10.1016/0166-0934(90)90075-Q .2150838 
Figueiredo A. ; Vieira N. C. S. ; Dos
Santos J. F. ; Janegitz B. C. ; Aoki S. M. ; Junior P. P. ; Lovato R. L. ; Nogueira M. L. ; Zucolotto V. ; Guimaraes F. E. G. 
Electrical Detection of Dengue Biomarker Using Egg
Yolk Immunoglobulin as the Biological Recognition Element . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 786510.1038/srep07865 .25597820 
Cecchetto J. ; Fernandes F. C. B. ; Lopes R. ; Bueno P. R. 
The Capacitive Sensing
of NS1 Flavivirus Biomarker . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2017 , 87 , 949 –956 . 10.1016/j.bios.2016.08.097 .27665517 
Freire M. C. L. C. ; Pol-Fachin L. ; Coêlho D. F. ; Viana I. F. T. ; Magalhães T. ; Cordeiro M. T. ; Fischer N. ; Loeffler F. F. ; Jaenisch T. ; Franca R. F. ; et al. Mapping Putative B-Cell Zika Virus NS1 Epitopes
Provides Molecular Basis for Anti-NS1 Antibody Discrimination between
Zika and Dengue Viruses . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 3913 –3920 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b00608 .30023708 
Flamand M. ; Megret F. ; Mathieu M. ; Lepault J. ; Rey F. A. ; Deubel V. 
Dengue Virus Type 1 Nonstructural
Glycoprotein NS1
Is Secreted from Mammalian Cells as a Soluble Hexamer in a Glycosylation-Dependent
Fashion . J. Virol. 
1999 , 73 , 6104 –6110 .10364366 
Gutsche I. ; Coulibaly F. ; Voss J. E. ; Salmon J. ; d’Alayer J. ; Ermonval M. ; Larquet E. ; Charneau P. ; Krey T. ; Mégret F. ; et al. Secreted Dengue Virus
Nonstructural Protein
NS1 Is an Atypical Barrel-Shaped High-Density Lipoprotein . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2011 , 108 , 8003 –8008 . 10.1073/pnas.1017338108 .21518917 
Akey D. L. ; Brown W. C. ; Dutta S. ; Konwerski J. ; Jose J. ; Jurkiw T. J. ; DelProposto J. ; Ogata C. M. ; Skiniotis G. ; Kuhn R. J. ; et al. Flavivirus NS1 Structures Reveal Surfaces for Associations
with Membranes and the Immune System . Science 
2014 , 343 , 881 –885 . 10.1126/science.1247749 .24505133 
Zeidler J. D. ; Fernandes-Siqueira L.
O. ; Barbosa G. M. ; Da Poian A. T. 
Non-Canonical
Roles of Dengue Virus Non-Structural Proteins . Viruses 
2017 , 9 , 42 10.3390/v9030042 .
Winkler G. ; Randolph V. B. ; Cleaves G. R. ; Ryan T. E. ; Stollar V. 
Evidence That
the Mature Form of the Flavivirus Nonstructural Protein
NS1 Is a Dimer . Virology 
1988 , 162 , 187 –196 . 10.1016/0042-6822(88)90408-4 .2827377 
Winkler G. ; Maxwell S. E. ; Ruemmler C. ; Stollar V. 
Newly Synthesized
Dengue-2
Virus Nonstructural Protein NS1 Is a Soluble Protein but Becomes Partially
Hydrophobic and Membrane-Associated after Dimerization . Virology 
1989 , 171 , 302 –305 . 10.1016/0042-6822(89)90544-8 .2525840 
Darré L. ; Machado M. R. ; Brandner A. F. ; González H. C. ; Ferreira S. ; Pantano S. 
SIRAH a Structurally
Unbiased Coarse-Grained
Force Field for Proteins with Aqueous Solvation and Long-Range Electrostatics . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2015 , 11 , 723 –739 . 10.1021/ct5007746 .26575407 
Johnson M. ; Zaretskaya I. ; Raytselis Y. ; Merezhuk Y. ; McGinnis S. ; Madden T. L. 
NCBI BLAST
a Better Web Interface . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2008 , 36 , W5 –W9 . 10.1093/nar/gkn201 .18440982 
Berman H. M. ; Westbrook J. ; Feng Z. ; Gilliland G. ; Bhat T. N. ; Weissig H. ; Shindyalov I. N. ; Bourne P. E. 
The Protein Data Bank . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , 235 –242 . 10.1093/nar/28.1.235 .10592235 
Pettersen E. F. ; Goddard T. D. ; Huang C. C. ; Couch G. S. ; Greenblatt D. M. ; Meng E. C. ; Ferrin T. E. 
UCSF Chimera
a Visualization System
for Exploratory Research and Analysis . J. Comput.
Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 1605 –1612 . 10.1002/jcc.20084 .15264254 
Eswar N. ; Webb B. ; Marti-Renom M. A. ; Madhusudhan M. S. ; Eramian D. ; Shen M. ; Pieper U. ; Sali A. 
Comparative
Protein Structure Modeling Using Modeller . Curr.
Protoc. Bioinf. 
2006 , 15 , 5.6.1 –5.6.30 . 10.1002/0471250953.bi0506s15 .
Edeling M. A. ; Diamond M. S. ; Fremont D. H. 
Structural
Basis of Flavivirus NS1
Assembly and Antibody Recognition . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2014 , 111 , 4285 –4290 . 10.1073/pnas.1322036111 .24594604 
Barroso
da Silva F. L. ; Pasquali S. ; Derreumaux P. ; Dias L. G. 
Electrostatics Analysis of the Mutational and pH Effects
of the N-Terminal Domain Self-Association of the Major Ampullate Spidroin . Soft Matter 
2016 , 12 , 5600 –5612 . 10.1039/C6SM00860G .27250106 
Teixeira A. A. R. ; Lund M. ; Barroso
da Silva F. L. 
Fast Proton Titration Scheme for
Multiscale Modeling of Protein Solutions . J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 
2010 , 6 , 3259 –3266 . 10.1021/ct1003093 .26616787 
Barroso
da Silva F. L. ; MacKernan D. 
Benchmarking a Fast Proton Titration
Scheme in Implicit Solvent for Biomolecular Simulations . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2017 , 13 , 2915 –2929 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b01114 .28376614 
Nozaki Y. ; Tanford C. 
[84] Examination of Titration Behavior . Methods Enzymol. 
1967 , 11 , 715 –734 . 10.1016/s0076-6879(67)11088-4 .
Lund M. ; Trulsson M. ; Persson B. 
Faunus An
Object Oriented Framework
for Molecular Simulation . Source Code Biol.
Med. 
2008 , 3 , 1 10.1186/1751-0473-3-1 .18241331 
Barroso
da Silva F. L. ; Derreumaux P. ; Pasquali S. 
Fast Coarse-Grained
Model for RNA Titration . J. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 146 , 03510110.1063/1.4972986 .28109220 
Božič A. L. ; Podgornik R. 
pH Dependence of Charge Multipole Moments in Proteins . Biophys. J. 
2017 , 113 , 1454 –1465 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2017.08.017 .28978439 
Assadi-Porter F. M. ; Fillingame R. H. 
Proton-Translocating
Carboxyl of Subunit c of F1Fo H+-ATP Synthase the Unique
Environment Suggested by the pKa Determined by 1H NMR . Biochemistry 
1995 , 34 , 16186 –16193 . 10.1021/bi00049a034 .8519776 
Kaplan H. ; Stevenson K. J. ; Hartley B. S. 
Competitive Labelling, a Method for
Determining the Reactivity of Individual Groups in Proteins. The Amino
Groups of Porcine Elastase . Biochem. J. 
1971 , 124 , 289 –299 . 10.1042/bj1240289 .5158490 
Edgar R. C. 
MUSCLE
a Multiple Sequence Alignment Method with Reduced Time and Space Complexity . BMC Bioinf. 
2004 , 5 , 113 10.1186/1471-2105-5-113 .
Ashkenazy H. ; Abadi S. ; Martz E. ; Chay O. ; Mayrose I. ; Pupko T. ; Ben-Tal N. 
ConSurf 2016
an Improved Methodology
to Estimate and Visualize Evolutionary Conservation in Macromolecules . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2016 , 44 , W344 –W350 . 10.1093/nar/gkw408 .27166375 
Barroso
da Silva F. L. ; Boström M. ; Persson C. 
Effect of Charge Regulation
and Ion–Dipole Interactions on the Selectivity of Protein–Nanoparticle
Binding . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 4078 –4083 . 10.1021/la500027f .24580378 
Delboni L. A. ; Barroso da Silva F. L. 
On the Complexation of Whey Proteins . Food Hydrocolloids 
2016 , 55 , 89 –99 . 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2015.11.010 .
Chen C. R. ; Makhatadze G. I. 
ProteinVolume:
Calculating Molecular van der Waals
and Void Volumes in Proteins . BMC Bioinf. 
2015 , 16 , 101 10.1186/s12859-015-0531-2 .
Phillies G. D. J. 
Excess
Chemical Potential of Dilute Solutions of Spherical Polyelectrolytes . J. Chem. Phys. 
1974 , 60 , 2721 –2731 . 10.1063/1.1681434 .
Striolo A. ; Bratko D. ; Wu J. Z. ; Elvassore N. ; Blanch H. W. ; Prausnitz J. M. 
Forces
between Aqueous Nonuniformly
Charged Colloids from Molecular Simulation . J. Chem. Phys. 
2002 , 116 , 7733 –7743 . 10.1063/1.1467343 .
Tavares F. W. ; Bratko D. ; Striolo A. ; Blanch H. W. ; Prausnitz J. M. 
Phase Behavior
of Aqueous Solutions Containing Dipolar Proteins from Second-Order
Perturbation Theory . J. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 120 , 9859 –9869 . 10.1063/1.1697387 .15268003 
Kjellander R. ; Ramirez R. 
Yukawa Multipole Electrostatics and Nontrivial Coupling
between Electrostatic and Dispersion Interactions in Electrolytes . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2008 , 20 , 49420910.1088/0953-8984/20/49/494209 .
Božič A.
L. ; Podgornik R. 
Anomalous
Multipole Expansion: Charge Regulation of
Patchy Inhomogeneously Charged Spherical Particles . J. Chem. Phys. 
2018 , 149 , 16330710.1063/1.5037044 .30384687 
Srivastava D. ; Santiso E. ; Gubbins K. ; Barroso da Silva F. L. 
Computationally
Mapping pKa Shifts Due to the Presence of a Polyelectrolyte Chain
around Whey Proteins . Langmuir 
2017 , 33 , 11417 –11428 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b02271 .28859478 
Lund M.  Electrostatic Interactions
In and Between Biomolecules ; University of
Lund , 2006 .
Jönsson B. ; Lund M. ; Barroso da Silva F. L.   In Electrostatics
in Macromolecular Solutions , Conference on Food Colloids
2006; 2007 ; Vol. 302 , pp 129 –154 .
Lund M. ; Åkesson T. ; Jönsson B. 
Enhanced Protein Adsorption Due to
Charge Regulation . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 8385 –8388 . 10.1021/la050607z .16114946 
Burdakov D. ; Petersen O. H. ; Verkhratsky A. 
Intraluminal Calcium as a Primary
Regulator of Endoplasmic Reticulum Function . Cell Calcium 
2005 , 38 , 303 –310 . 10.1016/j.ceca.2005.06.010 .16076486 
Krissinel E. ; Henrick K. 
Inference of Macromolecular
Assemblies from Crystalline
State . J. Mol. Biol. 
2007 , 372 , 774 –797 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.05.022 .17681537 
Lomize M. A. ; Pogozheva I. D. ; Joo H. ; Mosberg H. I. ; Lomize A. L. 
OPM Database
and PPM Web Server Resources for Positioning of Proteins in Membranes . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , D370 –D376 . 10.1093/nar/gkr703 .21890895 
Rostkowski M. ; Olsson M. H. M. ; Søndergaard C. R. ; Jensen J. H. 
Graphical Analysis
of PH-Dependent Properties of Proteins Predicted Using PROPKA . BMC Struct. Biol. 
2011 , 11 , 6 10.1186/1472-6807-11-6 .21269479 
Hernando-Pérez M. ; Cartagena-Rivera A. X. ; Božič A.
L. ; Carrillo P. J. P. ; Martín C. S. ; Mateu M. G. ; Raman A. ; Podgornik R. ; de Pablo P. J. 
Quantitative Nanoscale Electrostatics
of Viruses . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 17289 –17298 . 10.1039/C5NR04274G .26228582 
Knipe D. M. ; Howley P.  Fields Virology , 6 th ed.; Lippincott Williams
and Wilkins , 2014 .
Barroso
da Silva F. L. ; Jönsson B. 
Polyelectrolyte–Protein Complexation
Driven by Charge Regulation . Soft Matter 
2009 , 5 , 2862 –2868 . 10.1039/b902039j .
Yu I.-M. ; Zhang W. ; Holdaway H. A. ; Li L. ; Kostyuchenko V. A. ; Chipman P. R. ; Kuhn R. J. ; Rossmann M. G. ; Chen J. 
Structure
of the Immature Dengue Virus at Low PH Primes Proteolytic Maturation . Science 
2008 , 319 , 1834 –1837 . 10.1126/science.1153264 .18369148 
McQuarrie D.  Statistical Mechanics ; Harper and
Row , 1976 .
Lund M. ; Jönsson B. 
A Mesoscopic Model for Protein-Protein Interactions
in Solution . Biophys. J. 
2003 , 85 , 2940 –2947 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(03)74714-6 .14581196 
Rocha L. B. ; dos Santos Alves R. P. ; Caetano B. A. ; Pereira L. R. ; Mitsunari T. ; Amorim J. H. ; Polatto J. M. ; Botosso V. F. ; Gallina N. M. F. ; Palacios R. ; et al. Epitope Sequences in
Dengue Virus NS1
Protein Identified by Monoclonal Antibodies . Antibodies 
2017 , 6 , 14 10.3390/antib6040014 .
Chothia C. ; Lesk A. M. 
The Relation between the Divergence
of Sequence and
Structure in Proteins . EMBO J. 
1986 , 5 , 823 –826 . 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1986.tb04288.x .3709526 
Youn S. ; Li T. ; McCune B. T. ; Edeling M. A. ; Fremont D. H. ; Cristea I. M. ; Diamond M. S. 
Evidence
for a Genetic and Physical Interaction between
Nonstructural Proteins NS1 and NS4B That Modulates Replication of
West Nile Virus . J. Virol. 
2012 , 86 , 7360 –7371 . 10.1128/JVI.00157-12 .22553322 
De
Carvalho S. J. ; Ghiotto R. C. T. ; Barroso da Silva F. L. 
Monte Carlo
and Modified Tanford−Kirkwood Results for Macromolecular Electrostatics
Calculations . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110  (17 ), 8832 –8839 . 10.1021/jp054891e .16640442 
Duran N. M. ; Spelzini D. ; Wayllace N. ; Boeris V. ; Barroso
da Silva F. L. 
A combined experimental and molecular simulation study
of factors influencing interaction of quinoa proteins–carrageenan . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2018 , 107 , 949 –956 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.09.076 .28943441

