
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03763Mini-ReviewSingle-Molecule
Fluorescence Microscopy for Probing
the Electrochemical Interface Hao Rui Peng Zhuoyu Zhang Bo *Department of Chemistry, University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, United States* E-mail: zhangb@uw.edu.24 12 2019 14 01 2020 5 1 89 97 06 11 2019 10 12 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The electrochemical interface is an ultrathin interfacial
region
between the electrode and solution where electrochemical reactions
occur. The study of the electrochemical interface continues to be
one of the most exciting directions in modern electrochemistry research.
Much of our existing knowledge about the electrochemical interface
comes from ensemble measurements and ex situ imaging
of the electrode surface. Due to its enormous complexity and highly
dynamic nature, however, new imaging tools that can probe the interface in situ with ultrahigh spatial and temporal resolution and
single-molecule sensitivity are apparently needed. Single-molecule
fluorescence microscopy (SMFM) has emerged as a powerful tool that
is uniquely suited for studying the electrochemical interface. In
this mini-review, we first give a brief overview of various existing
SMFM methods for studying electrochemical problems. We then discuss
several exciting research topics involving the use of SMFM methods
for studying surface-immobilized molecules, single freely diffusing
molecules, single molecules as catalytic reaction indicators, and
single-molecule labeling and imaging of interfacial nanobubbles. We
anticipate that we will continue to see a rapid increase in publications
on stochastic electrochemistry of single molecules and nanoparticles.
The increased use of SMFM will likely bring new information to our
study of the electrochemical interface.

document-id-old-9ao9b03763document-id-new-14ao9b03763ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
As a basic science for
studying electrical charge and chemical
reactions, electrochemistry has numerous applications in diverse research
fields, including fuel cells, batteries, (bio)chemical sensing, metal
corrosion, organic synthesis, and so on. The electrochemical interface,
where redox reactions take place, plays an essential role in nearly
all aspects of electrochemistry. Rapid advances in electron microscopy
make it possible to image surface features of a solid electrode down
to nanometers or even atomic scale under proper conditions, e.g.,
ultrahigh vacuum, clean electrode, etc. However, how the surface heterogeneity
of an electrode may affect its electrochemical property remains largely
unclear for numerous Faradaic processes. As such, developing a more
complete understanding of the electrochemical interface is pivotal
to the advancement of modern electrochemistry. Understanding the structure
and function relationship can help design new and more efficient electrochemical
systems and materials.1,2

It is challenging to probe
the electrochemical interface at high
spatial and temporal resolution when the electrode is used in actual
reaction conditions, e.g., ambient and fluid environment. Scanning
electrochemical microscopy (SECM) is an effective imaging tool to
characterize the spatial heterogeneity of the electrode surface.3 Using a nanoelectrode probe, SECM can achieve
very high spatial resolution down to ∼10 nm. Despite its high
spatial resolution, however, SECM could be limited in its temporal
resolution due to the need to scan the probe tip across the surface
at a finite speed. For example, it may take several seconds to minutes
to acquire an SECM image if nanometer resolution is desired. Other
challenges may include the fast and inevitable surface contamination
and electrode fouling when a nanoelectrode probe is exposed to an
electrolyte solution. Thus, it is demanding to develop new imaging
methods, which can allow one to obtain both real-time and high-resolution
information at the interface.

Among various imaging methods,
single-molecule fluorescence microscopy
(SMFM) provides a number of unique features.4 It enables real-time probing of the electrochemical interface with
both high temporal resolution and high detection sensitivity (single
molecules!).5 Using super-resolution microscopy,
one can achieve both millisecond temporal resolution and nanometer
spatial resolution in electrochemical imaging. Moreover, optical microscopy
allows one to monitor electrochemical processes under ambient conditions.6 Single photons can be detected with EMCCD (electron
multiplying charge-coupled device) and sCMOS (scientific complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor) camera devices.7 Considering a single fluorescent molecule can generate 105–107 photons in its lifetime,8 SMFM can have exceedingly high sensitivity and has been
increasingly used as a unique analytical technique to probe the electrochemical
interface with applications ranging from studying basic electron-transfer
kinetics and imaging catalytic heterogeneities to studying interfacial
nanobubble generation.

In this mini-review, we will focus on
the electrochemical application
of SMFM. We will discuss the advantages and challenges of various
SMFM methods, including confocal laser scanning microscopy, total
internal reflection microscopy, optical confinement, and super-resolution
microscopy. We will then summarize research topics in four areas:
(1) electrode surface-immobilized single molecules; (2) single freely
diffusing molecules; (3) single molecules as catalytic reaction indicators;
and (4) single-molecule labeling and imaging of interfacial nanobubbles.

2 Single-Molecule Fluorescence Microscopy
2.1 Basics
Single-molecule fluorescence
microscopy is based on conventional fluorescence microscopy with its
own unique characteristics. A key factor of SMFM is its ability to
distinguish and resolve single fluorescent molecules from the background
signal. Traditional epi-fluorescence microscopy illuminates the whole
sample volume at the same time without selection, yielding a higher
fluorescence background. Therefore, it could be challenging to observe
single fluorescent molecules with epi-fluorescence. Some of the most
common strategies for detecting single molecules, especially in the
electrochemistry systems, involve minimizing the illumination/sampling
volume. The emission from the target fluorophores can be detected
more easily with reduced background.4,9 Two major approaches
can be adapted for achieving higher signal/noise ratio in the optical
microscopy: (1) selectively collecting the emission from the molecules
on the focal plane, such as confocal microscopy, and (2) selectively
exciting molecules on the focal plane, such as total-internal reflection
(TIRF) microscopy. Alternatively, one can reduce the background signal
by creating a spatially confined structure, allowing molecules of
interest to be detected.

2.2 Confocal Microscopy
Confocal laser
scanning microscopy (or confocal microscopy) is a widely used far-field
approach in SMFM and is one of the first methods used for imaging
single molecules both immobilized and freely diffusing in solution.9 Confocal, which means “having the same
foci”, indicates the use of two conjugated pinholes (light
source pinhole and detection pinhole, 50–200 μm (in diameter))
in the same image plane. The light source pinhole is placed at a focused
position of the excitation laser as a spatial filter that only permits
the main lobe of the light. The detection pinhole on the detection
side is used to reject the out-of-focus stray light. The resulting
“in-focus” volume is only in femtoliter scale, and the
background noise can thus be greatly reduced, enabling detection of
single molecules (Figure 1A).

Figure 1 Schematic illustration of confocal microscopy (A) and total-internal
reflection fluorescence microscopy (B).

Confocal microscopy has been used in several reports
for studying
electron-transfer kinetics of single immobilized molecules, which
are among the first few examples of probing the electrochemical interface
with SMFM. The method has also been used to detect electrochemically
generated molecules on the electrode surface. Despite its high sensitivity,
however, the scanning mechanism limits its temporal resolution when
a large sample is imaged. Moreover, the spatial resolution of the
confocal microscopy is still limited by the diffraction limit of conventional
light microscopy.

2.3 TIRFM
TIRF microscopy remains as
one of the most useful imaging methods for SMFM.9 The key concept of TIRFM is based on illuminating the sample
with an ultrathin evanescent field (<200 nm) on the interface generated
from the total internal reflection phenomenon. When light is incident
on an interface from a medium with a higher refractive index (e.g.,
glass, 1.5, n1) into another medium with
a lower refractive index (e.g., water, 1.33, n2) with an incident angle greater than a certain angle (critical
angle, θ = arcsin(n2/n1)), no transmission light can be seen, and the incident
light will be totally reflected, i.e., the total internal reflection
phenomenon. The electromagnetic field extends across the interface
into the medium with a lower refractive index with its intensity exponentially
decaying with distance from the interface. The extended electromagnetic
field, called the “evanescent field”, can be used to
selectively illuminate molecules near the electrode/solution interface,
allowing detection of single molecules.

Although TIRFM can be
achieved with both prism-based and objective-based setups, objective-based
TIRFM (Figure 1B) has
been used more frequently for single-molecule studies. Since no scanning
is needed, the entire field of view can be imaged simultaneously at
a high acquisition speed. Combined with the super-resolution localization
techniques, the spatial resolution of TIRFM can be as high as ∼10
nm. All those unique features allow TIRFM to image the electrochemical
interface in real time with high spatiotemporal resolution. It is
now possible to correlate morphological and structural information
obtained from electron microscopy with the electrochemical properties
from optical microscopy and reveal the heterogeneity of the electrode
surface.10−12

2.4 Nanoconfinement
The confinement method
in this context refers to physically limiting the sample volume by
creating an extremely small and finite space to exclude irrelevant
fluorescent molecules for enhanced signal-to-noise ratio. Thus, compared
to confocal microscopy and TIRFM, this method relies more on the unique
geometry of the detecting structure than the microscope. Zero-mode
waveguides13 and bipolar nanocells14 are two excellent examples of nanoconfinement
for probing single molecules generated at the electrochemical interface.
At least two dimensions of the confinement device must be within the
submicron scale, which could be challenging to fabricate. A simple
device that could meet various demands has not been developed.

2.5 Super-Resolution Microscopy
Super-resolution
microscopy is a powerful optical approach that circumvents the diffraction
limit of conventional optical microscopy to achieve nanometer resolution.
Several super-resolution microscopy methods have been developed for
imaging ultrafine biological features; these include near-field scanning
optical microscopy (NSOM), stimulated emission depletion microscopy
(STED), photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM), stochastic
optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM), and structured illumination
microscopy (SIM).6 In this mini-review,
we specifically focus on the use of single-molecule localization microscopy
in electrochemistry related research.

A key concept of the approach
is that an isolated fluorescent emitter can be precisely located (down
to 1 nm precision) by finding the center of the point-spread function,
and the precision is mainly dependent on the number of photons collected
by the CCD detector. The point-spread function of the fluorescent
puncta can be easily obtained through a simple 2D Gaussian fitting
of the measured photon signal.15 It could
be challenging to use the principle to image complex biological structures,
and activation/deactivation (PLAM or STORM) of the fluorophores is
required to reduce the number of fluorophores (temperately) to single
emitter levels.6 On the other hand, single
fluorophore molecules are seen as discrete puncta on an electrochemical
interface, which perfectly meet the single emitter requirement. This
allows one to locate the molecules with high precision and to image
surface heterogeneity at high spatial resolution.5

3 Surface Immobilization
Although SMFM
offers some unique opportunities for fluorescent
labeling, imaging, and analyzing individual redox molecules, the freely
diffusing small molecules can often diffuse too rapidly in solution,
making the single-molecule detection very challenging. Therefore,
immobilization of single molecules on the electrode surface is a useful
method. This section discusses three excellent examples of immobilizing
single small molecules onto the electrode surface with polymer embedding,
covalent modification, and clay adsorption methods. The use of single
redox proteins and polymers is also discussed.

3.1 Single Small Molecules
A redox chromophore
4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIPY)
has been used to probe the interfacial charge transfer events.18 BODIPY can have temporary fluorescence losses
as a result of discrete electron transfer events. Electron injection
from BODIPY into to the electrode can lead to a nonfluorescent “off”
state, and the fluorescence can be regained by charge recombination.
The observation of “on” and “off” events
represents single ET events. The average time duration can be analyzed
by fitting the distribution with a single exponential decay function,
and the rate of electron transfer of single molecules can be determined.
In Pan’s work, BODIPY with polystyrene was spin-casted on prepared
substrates. The purpose of this inert polystyrene film was to reserve
the stability of individual BODIPY molecules. The fluorescence of
BODIPY was turned “off” upon electrochemical oxidation,
and observations of difference in fluorescence stability and intensity
were explained by different charge transfer activities from the chromophore
to metal oxide surface. Electron transfer rates were also calculated
for further understanding on distinct observations of BODIPY on different
substrates.

Zhang et al. studied electrochemical responses of
covalently bonded single methylene blue molecules on an electrode.17 Methylene blue (MB), a blue-colored fluorescent
dye, can be reduced to a nonfluorescent colorless dye, leuco-methylene
blue, by a two-electron process. Unlike BODIPY which is highly fluorescent,
MB has a relatively low quantum yield (∼4%). It thus requires
an additional fluorescence enhancement for single-molecule detection.
They demonstrated that by using gold nanorods (AuNRs) along with longitudinal
surface plasmon resonance MB fluorescence could be significantly enhanced
(Figure 2A). This 1000-fold
enhancement is the result of the overlap between the emission spectrum
of MB and the plasmon spectrum. MB concentration was low to allow
only one molecule in the electromagnetic near field of a AuNR. Under
varied redox potential, fluorescence blinking of MB detections was
observed with a confocal microscope, suggesting the dynamic equilibrium
of the redox reaction. They also used the Nernst equation as a model
to determine the midpoint potential (E0) and found that E0 was higher than that
in ensemble-averaged measurement (Figure 2B).

Figure 2 Detection of surface-immobilized single molecules
on an electrode.
(A) Schematic illustration of the combined electrochemical–confocal
setup with immobilized AuNRs (not to scale) and MB molecules on the
modified glass surface. (B) Ensemble fluorescence response of around
260 unenhanced MB molecules versus electrochemical potential. The
black curve is Nernst fit, and the dashed line indicates the obtained
midpoint potential. (A), (B) Reproduced from Zhang, W.; Caldarola,
M.; Pradhan, B.; Orrit, M. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 3566–3569 (ref (17)). Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.
(C) Schematic illustration of the detection of single azurin-Cy5 molecules
immobilized on a modified glass surface using confocal microscopy.
(D) A confocal fluorescence image of immobilized azurin-Cy5 molecules
on glass. (C), (D) Reproduced from Akkilic, N.; Van Der Grient, F.;
Kamran, M.; Sanghamitra, N. J. M. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50, 14523–14526 (ref (16)). Copyright 2014 Royal
Society of Chemistry.

Sodium montmorillonite (SM), a member in the smectite
group of
clays, is a good binding material for single molecules because of
its high chemical stability and high surface area.19 SM colloid, the dispersions of nanoscale SM particles in
water, was deposited on an ITO coverslip, followed by the formation
of a thin transparent film. This transparent clay-modified surface
not only allowed single-molecule immobilization but also enabled electrochemical
measurements coupled with optical detection. The Ackerman group used
this clay-modified ITO electrode to study single redox events of cresyl
violet: a nonfluorescent cresyl violet can be oxidized to a fluorescent
cresyl violet+ by a one-electron oxidation process. The
fluorescent and nonfluorescent responses were observed and correlated
to cyclic voltammetry scans, corresponding to the oxidized and reduced
states of cresyl violet. Intensity fluctuations and blinking represented
for the intermittency of the interfacial electron-transfer processes
modulated by a potential scan. Meanwhile, the duration time of “on”
and “off” states could be used to determine electron-transfer
rates of reduction and oxidation, which was comparable to their ensemble-averaged
measurements.

3.2 Single Redox Proteins
SMFM can also
be applied to larger molecules, such as proteins. A notable mechanism
called Förster (fluorescence) resonance energy transfer (FRET)
is widely used in studying single proteins. FRET, developed by Theodor
Förster, is a process in which an excited donor transfers energy
to an acceptor via a nonradiative pathway.20 The Aartsma group developed a FRET-based method to probe the immobilized
redox proteins on a gold surface. Probing a fluorophore near the metal
surface can be challenging because both the enhancement and quenching
effect may be present from the fluorophore–metal interaction.
This interaction is highly dependent on distance, and its true effect
can be quite complicated to interpret. The Aartsma group focused on
the short distance regime (<2 nm), where fluorescence enhancement
and quenching coexisted and used azurin, a 14K Da redox protein, in
their study.21 Originated from Pseudomonas aeruginosa, azurin is a blue copper protein
with a single copper atom (nonfluorescent site) in the center. The
oxidized state of azurin shows an intense absorption at ∼600
nm, while it is absent in the reduced state. Voltage can be applied
to manipulate the redox state of individual azurin molecules (Figure 2C,D).16 Their FRET-based method was used in an electrochemical
cell: after immobilization on a glass substrate, the redox state of
azurin was regulated by the reducing and oxidizing reagents, with
varying concentrations of the reagents through altering electrode
potential. Fluorescence–time traces were obtained with confocal
microscopy at different redox potentials, which show discrete “on”
and “off” behavior. The authors studied reaction kinetics
and thermodynamics by examining fluorescence traces of individual
azurin molecules.

Akkilic et al. further developed their method
into a direct voltage control experiment such that the redox state
of azurin was regulated by varying the chemical potential of the surrounding
buffer solution (100 mM K3(PO4) at pH 7.0).
Azurin, tagged with an organic fluorophore Cy5, was immobilized on
a transparent gold electrode.22 By utilizing
the FRET mechanism, fluorescence response was “off”
in the oxidized states (Cu2+) because the absorption band
of azurin (excited donor) overlaps with the emission band of Cy5 (fluorophore
acceptor), leading to fluorescence quenching, whereas fluorescence
response was recovered in the reduced state (Cu+) caused
by the absence of the absorption band. After surface immobilization
on a gold-coated slide, the authors performed optical recordings on
single Cy5-labeled azurins while scanning the electrode potential.
This allowed them to observe “on” and “off”
fluorescence behaviors in real time at varying potentials. This study
demonstrated thermodynamic dispersion in midpoint potentials of single
azurin molecules.

3.3 Single Redox Polymers
Larger molecules
and organic polymers could also be examined at a single-molecule level.
Barbara, Bard, and co-workers studied the oxidation of polymer poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) on an ITO electrode.23 F8BT, generally used in solar cells, is intrinsically
fluorescent. Individual F8BT molecules were dispersed in a polystyrene
film deposited onto an ITO surface. Their oxidation was induced by
a potential scan on the ITO, resulting in a nonfluorescent state.
Aggregation of F8BT was suppressed by the use of the polystyrene layer.
Using a wide-field TIRF microscopy, fluorescence traces were recorded
in correspondence with the applied potential. Their results statistically
revealed the dynamics of oxidation and reduction events of single
large polymer molecules.

4 Freely Diffusing Single Molecules
Developing
imaging strategies for the study of single freely diffusing
molecules could allow us to correlate molecular motion and collision
with heterogeneous electron transfer. The ability to directly probe
single freely diffusing redox molecules on an electrode may also enable
the development of ultrasensitive electroanalytical sensors. This
section will discuss several interesting approaches, which are categorized
by detection methods.

4.1 Confocal Microscopy
Single molecules
diffuse in and out of the laser excitation volume rapidly and randomly.9 A fluorescent burst would be recorded as a fluorophore
enters the excitation volume in a confocal recording. The Ackerman
group employed a conventional three-electrode cell to monitor the
redox behavior of cresyl violet in aqueous solutions using confocal
microscopy coupled with potential scan.25 A low cresyl violet concentration (1.2 nM) was used to ensure that
less than one molecule on average was in the laser focal volume at
a given moment, so single-molecule detection could be achieved. Nonfluorescent
cresyl violet could be oxidized to enter in a fluorescence state,
and changes of fluorescence intensity were recorded during a potential
scan. A strong correlation between fluorescence intensity and potential
was illustrated for the reversible redox reaction of single cresyl
violet molecules.

Godin et al. reported the usage of confocal
microscopy to probe single fluorogenic molecules in organic solvents.26 A redox-active and antioxidant fluorogenic molecule
H2B–PMHC was developed by Cosa and co-workers. The
fluorescence of this molecule can be activated by direct electrochemical
oxidation of H2B–PMHC or electroreduction of O2 to produce superoxide radical anion O2•–, which could initiate chemical oxidation of H2B–PMHC
in the presence of O2. Both pathways were confirmed by
an observation of the increased fluorescence intensity along with
the potential scan.

4.2 TIRFM
TIRF microscopy is another
elegant technique to reduce fluorescence background using the evanescent
wave. Only molecules within ∼200 nm above a transparent electrode
can be excited. To detect freely diffusing excited molecules, however,
their motions must be restricted near the electrode surface. Our group
used a modified ITO electrode to confine motions of single molecules
in solutions, allowing us to explore single redox events using TIRF
microscopy.24 An ultrathin mesoporous silica
film (∼70 nm in thickness) containing highly ordered parallel
nanochannels (∼3 nm in diameter), was electrochemically deposited
onto a transparent ITO electrode (Figure 3A,B). Such narrow channels allowed access
of redox molecules while restricting their diffusional motions. Only
when single molecules were transiently trapped in a nanochannel could
they be fluorescently detected.

Figure 3 Detections of single freely diffusing
molecules at the electrochemical
interface. (A) Schematic illustration of SME on a mesoporous silica-modified
ITO electrode using TIRF microscopy. Single resorufin molecules are
detected when they are temporally trapped in small silica nanochannels.
(B) TEM image of mesoporous silica film (top view) deposited on a
carbon-coated TEM grid. Inset: high-magnification top view. (A), (B)
Reproduced from Lu, J.; Fan, Y.; Howard, M. D.; Vaughan, J. C.; Zhang,
B. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 2964–2971 (ref (24)). Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic
illustration of the TIRFM setup to image single resorufin molecules
in a Pt nanocell. Resazurin reduction at the inner Pt surface is coupled
to FcMeOH oxidation at the outer Pt surface. (D) A series of fluorescence
images of the nanocell at different voltages. (C), (D) Reproduced
from Fan, Y.; Hao, R.; Han, C.; Zhang, B. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 13837–13841 (ref (14)). Copyright 2018 American
Chemical Society.

Herein, adsorption, desorption, and redox dynamics
of transiently
immobilized molecules could be studied on one electrode platform.
It is known that weakly fluorescent resazurin (S) can be irreversibly
reduced to form strongly fluorescent resorufin (P), which can be further
reduced reversibly to nonfluorescent dihydroresorufin (PH2). First, to examine the fluorescence response during a potential
scan, a high concentration (e.g., μM) of resazurin was used
on a carbon film electrode. A nice correlation was observed between
the fluorophore’s optical response and its Faradaic current
response, confirming that resorufin can be used for single-molecule
electrochemistry study using fluorescence microscopy. The reversible
reaction of P to PH2 was chosen for subsequent study owing
to its distinct on–off responses. On the silica-modified ITO
electrode, single resorufin molecules could be easily detected, yielding
a burst of fluorescent trajectory. The residence time (τon) was defined as the time of a single fluorescent burst lasted
in a fluorescence trace. There were three pathways that contributed
to the length of the “on state”: photobleaching, blinking,
and desorption. It was demonstrated that only desorption contributed
significantly to the transition from the “on state”
to the “off state”. In this case, adsorption and desorption
kinetics could be extracted from fitting the distribution of τon using a single-exponential decay function.

Spectroelectrochemical
studies of single adsorbed resorufin molecules
were also performed. Predicted from the Nernst equation, P would be
reduced to the nonfluorescent PH2 with decreased applied
potential, and expectedly, it was found that the number of detected
fluorescent spots was strongly dependent on potential. A triangular
potential waveform, 0 to −1 V, was applied at 50 mV/s, and
the results illustrated a reversible fluorescence response with potential
scan, as expected from the reversible redox reaction between P and
PH2. Furthermore, dN/dt was defined as the time derivative of the detected number of single
P molecules to study the Faradaic current response during the redox
process, and it was evidenced that dN/dt was linearly correlated to the current signal. The peak values [dN/dt] were found to be proportional to
the scan rate, implying surface-controlled electrochemical kinetics.

4.3 Nanoconfinement
Our group has recently
developed a diffusion-confined device, a Pt nanocell, to study freely
diffusing single redox molecules in solutions.14 To make a nanocell, a Pt nanoparticle was deposited at
the orifice of a laser-pulled nanopipette.27 We originally employed this nanocell to study transient collision
and oxidation of single silver nanoparticles.28 In the SMFM application, similarly, using an ∼100 nm diameter
tip, diffusional motions were constrained, and the probability of
transient molecular adsorption on pipet walls was increased (Figure 3C,D). Those adsorbed
single molecules, herein, can be more easily detected when they collide
and react on the Pt nanoparticle electrode, which functions as a closed
bipolar nanoelectrode.

In this study, FcMeOH oxidation and resazurin
reduction were coupled on the Pt nanoelectrode. Fluorescence intensity
traces were monitored with potential scanning across Pt from +2 V
to −2 V and then back to +2 V. By scanning to a negative direction
from +2 V, nonfluorescent resazurin started to be reduced to fluorescent
resorufin at onset potential of +0.9 V and then reached a fluorescence
emission maximum at +0.2 V. Fewer resorufin molecules were detected
at more negative potentials due to the occurrence of the second reduction
from resorufin to nonfluorescent dihydroresorufin. Also, individual
resorufin molecules were observed to be randomly distributed inside
the Pt nanocell. Counting individual resorufin molecules at various
concentrations and redox potentials offered new insights on detection
efficiency. This study could be an excellent demonstration for a future
single-molecule, single-site catalytic study in a bipolar electrochemical
cell.

Electrochemically active zero-mode waveguides (E-ZMWs)
were developed
and used by the Bohn group to study single molecules owing to their
small volumes (zeptoliters) and excellent optical confinement.13 Their recent work used a fluorogenic redox-active
molecule flavin mononucleotide (FMN). FMN exhibits a strong fluorescent
emission in the oxidized state, while it is nonfluorescent in the
reduced state. E-ZMWs are featured for their recessed dual ring electrode
(RDRE). The small volume in each nanowell isolated individual molecules
and provided an effective optical confinement, enabling a simultaneous
measurement of the optical and electrochemical signal. This confined
zeptoliter-volume near the bottom electrode was excited. A freely
diffusing FMN molecule entering the nanowell can be repeatedly reduced
and oxidized at RDRE, leading to an observation of the molecule’s
on–off fluorescence signal, allowing single electron-transfer
events to be observed.

5 Single Molecules as Catalytic Reaction Indicators
Nanomaterials are key catalytic materials in electrocatalysis and
photoelectrochemistry. To better use such materials, their catalytic
property must be thoroughly investigated at both high spatial and
high temporal resolution, considering their surface and structural
heterogeneity. With SMFM, one can directly image the reactants and/or
products of a catalytic reaction one molecule at a time and locate
the surface reaction hot spots with nanometer precision. Such information
can be used to further understand the structure–property relationship
of the catalysts, which could be beneficial for developing more efficient
catalysts.

5.1 Electrocatalysis on Individual Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) attract
tremendous attention and are widely used in electrochemistry and electrocatalysis
owing to their good conductivity, chemical stability, and catalytic
activity.29 Due to their structural heterogeneity,
catalytic property on a single nanotube can vary at different locations.
The Chen group reported the use of wide-field SMFM to study electrocatalysis
on SWNTs with single-reaction resolution. The aforementioned two-step
electro-reduction of the nonfluorescent molecule, resazurin, was used
in their study. To study electrocatalysis of SWNTs at a single-molecule
level, they deposited individual SWNTs onto an ITO working electrode.
Under a constant reductive potential, fluorescence bursts were observed
due to electrochemical reduction of resazurin to resorufin. The fact
that reactions occurred at discrete locations instead of on the entire
SWNTs was visually confirmed. They later discussed rate constants
for possible corresponding reduction and oxidation processes, and
the results suggested that interfacial electron-transfer kinetics
between SWNTs and adsorbed molecules are dependent on applied potential.

5.2 Photoelectrocatalysis on Single TiO2 Nanorods
By utilizing wide-field SMFM coupled with the
super-resolution technique, the Chen group recently reported an innovative
work for optimization of the catalyst-modified photoanode for the
water-splitting process.11 Due to the limited
efficiency of water splitting of photogenerated holes, oxygen evolution
catalysts (OECs) are necessarily modified to achieve higher photocatalytic
efficiency. Chen and co-workers mapped both hole- and electron-based
active sites, with 30 nm and 15 ms spatial and temporal resolutions,
respectively, of water splitting on single TiO2 nanorods
with selective laser irradiation.

To achieve their goal, the
authors used a microfluidic photoelectrochemical cell, with rutile
TiO2 nanorods deposited on an ITO electrode. A solution
with two fluorogenic subtractrates, photogenerated hole- and photogenerated
electron-induced amplex red (AR) and resazurin, respectively, was
loaded and flowed through the cell. When the applied potential was
higher than −0.3 V, hole-induced reaction occurred nonuniformly
on individual nanorods. Specifically, most reactions appeared at the
“hot spots”, sites with relatively high hole activity.
A similar phenomenon was observed for applied potential less than
−0.4 V, where electron-induced reactions took place nonhomogeneously.
Both observations suggested the heterogeneous distribution of the
active sites, where surface structural defects were more active than
the {100} facet sites. Notably, hole-induced activity was strongly
correlated to electron-induced activity spatially.

5.3 Probing Nonfluorescent Reactions via Competition
Chen and co-workers proposed a new method called the competition-enabled
imaging technique with super-resolution (COMPEITS) to study nonfluorescent
reactions.12 COMPEITS could be described
as a competition process of two catalytic reactions at the same particle:
one is a fluorescent auxiliary reaction, and the other is a nonfluorescent
target reaction. The occurrence of the nonfluorogenic reaction would
suppress the fluorogenic reaction, resulting in change of fluorescence
intensity. Chen and co-workers used bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) as the photocatalyst for target oxidation of hydroquinone (HQ),
generating nonfluorescent quinone. The auxiliary fluorogenic oxidation
of AR, on the other hand, would generate fluorescent resorufin molecules.
They first demonstrated the competitive inhibition behavior of HQ
and AR at the same catalyst surface sites, where at a fixed AR concentration
and increased quinone concentration, the rate of quinone formation
increased, while the formation rate of resorufin decreased.

To visualize these competitive behaviors, BiVO4 particles
were deposited on an ITO electrode in a microfluidic photoelectrochemical
cell. BiVO4 particles were tunable with L and a shape parameter ξ (= S/L). AR and HQ were oxidized on the surface of BiVO4 followed
by a wide-field laser (405 nm) illumination at BiVO4 to
generate charge carriers. Super-resolution fluorescence images of
resorufin were taken with an excitation laser (532 nm). Quantitative
super-resolution images confirmed that detected resorufin decreased
with increasing HQ concentration. Moreover, HQ binding affinity could
be determined from detected resorufin, and it was found that HQ had
stronger adsorption on the basal {010} facet than the lateral {110}
facet of BiVO4 particles. The rates were represented using KHQ{010} and KHQ{110}, with KHQ{010} greater than KHQ{110}. Moreover,
it was found that both KHQ{010} and KHQ{110} were negatively
proportional to L at fixed ξ. Also, the two
adsorption equilibrium constants decreased with increasing ξ.
The authors further studied two kinds of edge regions, type I and
type II, where type I edges were featured for the surrounding basal
and lateral facets while type II edges only focused on lateral effects.
The results demonstrated that KHQ was
greater for type I edges on average. The particle morphology also
affected HQ adsorption equilibrium, and to further examine its ability,
ωHQ was used to define the particle’s overall
capability of adsorbing HQ on its entire surface at the per-unit-mass
level. Overall, ωHQ depended on three types of particle
shape. For particles within an intermediate size regime (∼2.3
μm < L < ∼9 μm), ωHQ showed a biphasic behavior, offering insights for designing
optimal photocatalysts.

6 Single-Molecule Imaging of Nanobubbles
In water electrolysis, hydrogen and oxygen gases are generated
on the cathode and anode, respectively. Insulating gas bubbles generated
from these reactions can cover the electrode surface, causing electrode
deactivation. Understanding the bubble nucleation and growth therefore
may provide valuable information for designing new electrochemical
interfaces for improved energy efficiency. At their nucleation stage,
interfacial bubbles are small (nanobubble), transparent, and elusive,
making it challenging to image.

Ohl and co-workers used a TIRFM-based
fluorescence method to study
surface bubbles generated by a solvent exchange method. The affinity
of the dye molecules to the gas/water interface and the ultrathin
evanescent field illumination enabled bubble visualization on the
interface.30 Due to the diffraction limit,
however, nanobubbles smaller than ∼230 nm in diameter (lateral
dimension) could not be resolved. The Wang group used a similar method
to monitor photoelectrochemically generated bubbles on single nanocatalysts.31

Our group used single fluorophore molecules
to label and detect
nanobubbles electrochemically generated on an electrode.10 By optimizing the fluorophore concentration,
single-molecule occupancy of the nanobubble was achieved. The single-molecule
occupancy on the bubble can also be confirmed by the abrupt on/off
behavior of the fluorescent puncta. The nanobubble detection was performed
with a potential scan from 0 to −2 V vs Pt QRE on an ITO electrode
using TIRFM, with rhodamine 6G (R6G) as the labeling molecule (Figure 4A). As seen in Figure 4B, initially, there
were no R6G molecules detected due to the absence of nanobubbles.
At intermediate potentials, several molecules can be seen, which had
the highest fluorescence intensities indicating formation of very
small nanobubbles. The number of fluorescence spots increased when
the potential was further decreased, indicating more nanobubbles were
generated at higher negative potentials. The detection puncta can
be located via super-resolution localization. Our results show that
nanobubbles could appear 500 mV prior to reaching the thermodynamic
potential for water reduction. The intensity of each labeling R6G
molecule can also be extracted, from which one can estimate the nanobubble
size (assuming a hemispherical shape). The negative correlation between
the puncta intensity and the applied potential indicated the growth
of the nanobubble at more negative potentials.

Figure 4 Single-molecule imaging
of electrochemically generated nanobubbles.
(A) Schematic illustration of rhodamine 6G-labeled H2 nanobubbles
at an ITO electrode surface in the TIRFM setup. (B) A series of TIRF
images taken from a potential scan from 0 V to −2.0 V at 100
mV/s vs a Pt QRE in water containing 1 M Na2SO4 and 10 nM R6G (scale bar, 5 μm). Reproduced from Hao, R.;
Fan, Y.; Howard, M. D.; Vaughan, J. C.; Zhang, B. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 2018, 115, 5878–5883
(ref (10)). Copyright
2018 the US National Academy of Sciences.

Furthermore, we used the single-molecule labeling
method to probe
the catalytic activity of single gold nanoplates supported on an ITO
electrode. The electrode potential was scanned from +0.5 to −1.8
V vs Pt QRE to reduce protons to molecular hydrogen. Nanobubbles were
observed on both ITO and gold at more positive potentials. When the
potential reached ∼−1.6 V, however, significantly more
nanobubbles were generated on the gold and its surrounding area. Interestingly,
the areas around the gold also had more nanobubble detections, which
was likely due to the “hydrogen spillover” effect: the
electrochemically generated hydrogen atoms can rapidly diffuse from
the gold catalyst to the surrounding area where they form H2 molecules.

7 Perspective
Single-molecule fluorescence
microscopy has ultrahigh spatial and
temporal resolution and single-molecule sensitivity, making it uniquely
suitable for probing the electrochemical interface under in
situ ambient conditions. Recent years have seen numerous
exciting research applications of SMFM including fundamental single-molecule
electrochemistry, photoelectrocatalysis, and imaging of single nanobubbles.
Despite these exciting progresses, there are several challenges to
be addressed. For example, the fast motion of small fluorophore molecules
and the strong quenching effect of the electrode surface make it difficult
to observe single freely diffusing redox molecules near the electrode.
A second challenge is the somewhat limited number of suitable redox
active fluorophores, whose fluorescence property can undergo a drastic
change upon oxidation or reduction on the electrode. A few excellent
attempts have been made toward probing nonfluorescent reactions, including
Chen’s COMPEITS method and single-molecule labeling for nanobubble
detection. However, it is still quite challenging to find a more general
method to probe many other redox processes. Fluorescence-enabled electrochemical
microscopy (FEEM),27,32,33 a method proposed by our group, can be used to couple a conventional
redox reaction, e.g., oxidation of ferrocene or dopamine, with a fluorogenic
reaction on a bipolar electrode, enabling one to use fluorescence
to study any redox reactions. The combination of FEEM and SMFM may
thus be a more general approach for studying the electrochemical interface
with single-molecule sensitivity and nanometer spatial resolution.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.



Rui Hao is an Assistant Professor in the Chemistry Department
at
Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech) of China.
He received his B.S. in Chemistry from Tsinghua University and Ph.D.
in Materials Science from Peking University. He worked as a postdoctoral
associate in Bo Zhang’s lab prior to joining SUSTech in September,
2019. His research interests include developing new electrochemical
and microscopic techniques for studying single molecules and nanobubbles.



Zhuoyu Peng received her B.S. in chemistry from University
of Michigan
in 2015. She is currently a Ph.D. student in Professor Bo Zhang’s
lab at the University of Washington and is investigating the formation
of single nanobubbles at the electrochemical interface using single-molecule,
super-resolution fluorescence microscopy.



Bo Zhang is a Professor of Chemistry at the University
of Washington.
He finished his Ph.D. training with Henry White at the University
of Utah in 2006 followed by a postdoctoral work with Andrew Ewing
at Penn State before joining the UW in 2008. His research interest
includes the development and use of new electrochemical and microscopy
tools to better understand the electrode/solution interface.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation (CHE-1904426).
==== Refs
References
Oja S. M. ; Wood M. ; Zhang B. 
Nanoscale Electrochemistry . Anal. Chem. 
2013 , 85 , 473 –486 . 10.1021/ac3031702 .23121243 
Oja S. M. ; Fan Y. ; Armstrong C. M. ; Defnet P. ; Zhang B. 
Nanoscale Electrochemistry
Revisited . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 414 –430 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b04542 .26630546 
Liang Y. ; Pfisterer J. H. K. ; McLaughlin D. ; Csoklich C. ; Seidl L. ; Bandarenka A. S. ; Schneider O. 
Electrochemical Scanning Probe Microscopies
in Electrocatalysis . Small Methods 
2019 , 3 , 1800387 10.1002/smtd.201800387 .
Shashkova S. ; Leake M. C. 
Single-Molecule
Fluorescence Microscopy Review: Shedding
New Light on Old Problems . Biosci. Rep. 
2017 , 37 , BSR20170031 10.1042/BSR20170031 .28694303 
Chen P. ; Zhou X. ; Shen H. ; Andoy N. M. ; Choudhary E. ; Han K.-S. ; Liu G. ; Meng W. 
Single-Molecule Fluorescence
Imaging of Nanocatalytic Processes . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2010 , 39 , 4560 –4570 . 10.1039/b909052p .20886166 
Sydor A. M. ; Czymmek K. J. ; Puchner E. M. ; Mennella V. 
Super-Resolution Microscopy:
From Single Molecules to Supramolecular Assemblies . Trends Cell Biol. 
2015 , 25 , 730 –748 . 10.1016/j.tcb.2015.10.004 .26546293 
Von
Diezmann A. ; Shechtman Y. ; Moerner W. E. 
Three-Dimensional
Localization of Single Molecules for Super-Resolution Imaging and
Single-Particle Tracking . Chem. Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 7244 –7275 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00629 .28151646 
Mathwig K. ; Aartsma T. J. ; Canters G. W. ; Lemay S. G. 
Nanoscale Methods
for Single-Molecule Electrochemistry . Annu.
Rev. Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 7 , 383 –404 . 10.1146/annurev-anchem-062012-092557 .
Moerner W. E. ; Fromm D. P. 
Methods of Single-Molecule
Fluorescence Spectroscopy
and Microscopy . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2003 , 74 , 3597 –3619 . 10.1063/1.1589587 .
Hao R. ; Fan Y. ; Howard M. D. ; Vaughan J. C. ; Zhang B. 
Imaging Nanobubble
Nucleation and Hydrogen Spillover during Electrocatalytic Water Splitting . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2018 , 115 , 5878 –5883 . 10.1073/pnas.1800945115 .29784824 
Sambur J. B. ; Chen T. Y. ; Choudhary E. ; Chen G. ; Nissen E. J. ; Thomas E. M. ; Zou N. ; Chen P. 
Sub-Particle Reaction
and Photocurrent Mapping to Optimize Catalyst-Modified Photoanodes . Nature 
2016 , 530 , 77 –80 . 10.1038/nature16534 .26842056 
Mao X. ; Liu C. ; Hesari M. ; Zou N. ; Chen P. 
Super-Resolution Imaging
of Non-Fluorescent Reactions via Competition . Nat. Chem. 
2019 , 11 , 687 10.1038/s41557-019-0288-8 .31285541 
Zhao J. ; Zaino L. P. III; Bohn P. W. 
Potential-Dependent
Single Molecule Blinking Dynamics for Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide
Covalently Immobilized in Zero-Mode Waveguide Array of Working Electrodes . Faraday Discuss. 
2013 , 164 , 57 –69 . 10.1039/c3fd00013c .24466658 
Fan Y. ; Hao R. ; Han C. ; Zhang B. 
Counting Single Redox Molecules in
a Nanoscale Electrochemical Cell . Anal. Chem. 
2018 , 90 , 13837 –13841 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b04659 .30426745 
Huang B. ; Wang W. ; Bates M. ; Zhuang X. 
Three-Dimensional Super-Resolution
Reconstruction Microscopy . Science 
2008 , 319 , 810 –813 . 10.1126/science.1153529 .18174397 
Akkilic N. ; Van Der Grient F. ; Kamran M. ; Sanghamitra N. J. M. 
Chemically-Induced
Redox Switching of a Metalloprotein Reveals Thermodynamic and Kinetic
Heterogeneity, One Molecule at a Time . Chem.
Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 14523 –14526 . 10.1039/C4CC06334A .
Zhang W. ; Caldarola M. ; Pradhan B. ; Orrit M. 
Gold Nanorod Enhanced
Fluorescence Enables Single-Molecule Electrochemistry of Methylene
Blue . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 3566 –3569 . 10.1002/anie.201612389 .
Liu J. ; Hill C. M. ; Pan S. ; Liu H. 
Interfacial Charge
Transfer Events of BODIPY Molecules: Single Molecule Spectroelectrochemistry
and Substrate Effects . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 23150 –23156 . 10.1039/C4CP02950J .25252244 
Lei C. ; Hu D. ; Ackerman E. 
Clay Nanoparticle-Supported
Single-Molecule Fluorescence
Spectroelectrochemistry . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 655 –658 . 10.1021/nl802998e .19140768 
Jares-Erijman E. A. ; Jovin T. M. 
FRET Imaging . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2003 , 21 , 1387 –1395 . 10.1038/nbt896 .14595367 
Elmalk A. T. ; Salverda J. M. ; Tabares L. C. ; Canters G. W. ; Aartsma T. J. 
Probing
Redox Proteins on a Gold Surface by Single Molecule Fluorescence Spectroscopy . J. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 136 , 235101 10.1063/1.4728107 .22779620 
Akkilic N. ; Kamran M. ; Stan R. ; Sanghamitra N. J. M. M. 
Voltage-Controlled
Fluorescence Switching of a Single Redox Protein . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2015 , 67 , 747 –751 . 10.1016/j.bios.2014.07.051 .25103339 
Palacios R. E. ; Fan F.-R. F. ; Bard A. J. ; Barbara P. F. 
Single-Molecule
Spectroelectrochemistry (SMS-EC) . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 9028 –9029 . 10.1021/ja062848e .16834364 
Lu J. ; Fan Y. ; Howard M. D. ; Vaughan J. C. ; Zhang B. 
Single-Molecule Electrochemistry
on a Porous Silica-Coated Electrode . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 2964 –2971 . 10.1021/jacs.6b10191 .28132499 
Lei C. ; Hu D. ; Ackerman E. J. 
Single-Molecule Fluorescence Spectroelectrochemistry
of Cresyl Violet . Chem. Commun. 
2008 , (43 ), 5490 –5492 . 10.1039/b812161c .
Godin R. ; Cosa G. 
Counting Single Redox
Turnovers: Fluorogenic Antioxidant Conversion
and Mass Transport Visualization via Single Molecule Spectroelectrochemistry . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 15349 –15353 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b06183 .
Hao R. ; Zhang B. 
Nanopipette-Based Electroplated Nanoelectrodes . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 614 –620 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b03548 .26615999 
Hao R. ; Fan Y. ; Zhang B. 
Imaging Dynamic Collision and Oxidation
of Single Silver
Nanoparticles at the Electrode/Solution Interface . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 12274 –12282 . 10.1021/jacs.7b06431 .28799330 
Xu W. ; Shen H. ; Kim Y. J. ; Zhou X. ; Liu G. ; Park J. ; Chen P. 
Single-Molecule Electrocatalysis
by Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . Nano Lett. 
2009 , 9 , 3968 –3973 . 10.1021/nl900988f .19366213 
Chan C. U. ; Ohl C.-D. D. 
Total-Internal-Reflection-Fluorescence
Microscopy for
the Study of Nanobubble Dynamics . Phys. Rev.
Lett. 
2012 , 109 , 174501 10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.174501 .23215193 
Su H. ; Fang Y. ; Chen F. ; Wang W. 
Monitoring the dynamic
photocatalytic activity of single CdS nanoparticles by lighting up
H2 nanobubbles with fluorescent dyes . Chem.
Sci. 
2018 , 9 , 1448 –1453 . 10.1039/C7SC04684G .29719679 
Oja S. M. ; Guerrette J. P. ; David M. R. ; Zhang B. 
Fluorescence-Enabled
Electrochemical Microscopy with Dihydroresorufin as a Fluorogenic
Indicator . Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 6040 –6048 . 10.1021/ac501194j .24870955 
Oja S. M. ; Zhang B. 
Imaging Transient Formation
of Diffusion Layers with Fluorescence-Enabled
Electrochemical Microscopy . Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 12299 –12307 . 10.1021/ac5035715 .25398201

