
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02244ArticleToward a Universal μ-Agonist Template for Template-Based
Alignment Modeling of Opioid Ligands Wu Zhijun *†Hruby Victor J. ‡† ABC Resource, Plainsboro, New Jersey 08536, United States‡ Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85716, United States* E-mail: abc_resource@yahoo.com.09 10 2019 22 10 2019 4 17 17457 17476 19 07 2019 25 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Opioid
ligands are a large group of G-protein-coupled receptor ligands possessing
high structural diversity, along with complicated structure–activity
relationships (SARs). To better understand their structural correlations
as well as the related SARs, we developed the innovative template-based
alignment modeling in our recent studies on a variety of opioid ligands.
As previously reported, this approach showed promise but also with
limitations, which was mainly attributed to the small size of morphine
as a template. With this study, we set out to construct an artificial μ-agonist
template to overcome this limitation. The newly constructed template
contained a largely extended scaffold, along with a few special μ-features
relevant to the μ-selectivity of opioid ligands. As demonstrated
in this paper, the new template showed significantly improved efficacy
in facilitating the alignment modeling of a wide variety of opioid
ligands. This report comprises of two main parts. Part 1 discusses
the general construction process and the structural features as well
as a few typical examples of the template applications and Part 2
focuses on the template refinement and validation.

document-id-old-9ao9b02244document-id-new-14ao9b02244ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Opioid ligands are
an exceedingly large group of G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) ligands
that interact with opioid receptors and possess high structural diversity,
ranging from alkaloids, peptides, terpenoids, peptidomimetics, and
synthetic small molecules of random scaffolds.1,2 Amazingly,
all of the highly diverse ligands can effectively bind in the same
pockets of opioid receptors. As is well known, opioid ligands often
interact specifically with the receptors; sometimes, even one minor
structural alternation can lead to a totally changed bioactivity for
the ligand. So how can all of these diverse ligands bind at the same
pockets? And how are these ligands structurally correlated? These
kinds of questions are difficult to answer but are important for examining
the medicinal chemistry of opioid ligands.

Particularly, the
structural correlation between morphine (an alkaloid) and Leu-enkephalin
(a peptide), two well-known prototypes of opioid ligands, the former
from the plants, the latter the natural endogenous ligand, both interacting
with the μ-opioid receptor, has been a focus. Understanding
their structural correlation will not only help for the elucidation
of the structure–activity relationships (SARs) of opioid ligands
but can also greatly aid the discovery of new opioid drugs. Numerous
models have been proposed in the literature for their correlation,
but the majority of them seem to have only focused on matches between
the scaffold of morphine and the side chains of opioid peptides.3−7

Based on a unique X-ray crystal structure of Leu-enkephalin,
we recently proposed a new model for the structural correlation of
morphine and Leu-enkephalin, featuring matches between morphine’s
scaffold and the backbones of the peptides, instead of the side-chain
groups (Figure 1).8 This new approach, referred to as the backbone
alignment modeling (or now called the template-based alignment modeling
(TAM)) seemed to be the first to tackle the backbone elements for
structural correlations of opioid ligands.

Figure 1 Match of morphine’s
scaffold to the backbone of Leu-enkephalin.

Applying this innovative approach, we examined a large number of
opioid ligands with respect to their possible structural correlations,
with which, we proposed three new backbone-conformational models,
corresponding to the three types of opioid ligands, μ, δ,
and κ,8 (refer to Figure 10A below). These new models
have significantly improved our understanding of the complicated SARs
of opioid ligands.

However, the original modeling displayed
only limited capacity in interpreting the SARs of opioid ligands,
mostly because the small-sized scaffold of morphine was used as the
key template. Many opioid ligands with bulky or novel scaffolds were
not able to align well with the morphine scaffold. Thus, how to upgrade
to a large-sized template has been a critical issue in our ongoing
studies to further explore the innovative backbone alignment modeling.

Ideally, we anticipated an inclusive template that would have a
large and versatile scaffold to fully represent the structural features
of diverse opioid ligands (or speaking differently, to fully cover
the ligand-binding space of opioid receptors). To that end, it seemed
best for us to build an artificial template using a wide variety of
μ-ligands as the building blocks (to use μ-agonists for
the template construction was mainly because of the abundance in structural
diversity and SAR data as well as the importance and significance
of this subtype for opioid ligand studies.). In fact, with a similar
strategy, we had already built an artificial template for the Hsp90
ligands,9 which was of great help for us
with this study.

Herein, we wish to report the results of our
recent efforts in establishing an artificial μ-agonist template
for opioid ligand modeling.

Results and Discussion
This section,
relatively long in size, is organized into two main parts. Part 1
discusses the general construction process as well as the structural
features of the template and Part 2 focuses on the template refinement
and validation.

Part 1. Template Construction
Strategies for Template
Construction
With the construction of an artificial template
of N-terminal Hsp90 ligands,9 we gained
substantial experience. Similar to opioid ligands, the structures
of N-terminal Hsp90 ligands were highly diversified. So how to recognize
their correlations was a challenge for us. Thus, we started by first
examining a cluster of the crystal structures of a group of Hsp90
ligands, which, on quick examination, were much like a bundle of randomly
tangled structures (Figure 2). With the backbone alignment concept as a guideline to closely
examine the cluster, however, we were able to see high structural
correlations among the ligands. It was observed that regardless of
the size and the rigidity, all of the ligands in the cluster were
confined within a unique three-dimensional (3D)-space and with many
structures overlapping through similar-to-similar patterns (e.g.,
aromatic ring to aromatic ring and hetero-atoms to hetero-atoms, etc.).
In particular, most of the overlapping structures were also in bond-to-bond
correlation, a scenario much resembling what we observed in our alignment
modeling. And the entire situation strongly suggested that all of
the ligands were not randomly bound at the pocket, but their bindings
were strictly following certain patterns. Consequently, through proper
structural processes, it was possible for us to create a core structure
(namely, an artificial template) out of the cluster to characterize
all of the ligands at the binding site.

Figure 2 Construction of an artificial
template for the N-terminal Hsp90 ligands. The crystal structure cluster
of Hsp90 ligands was converted into a rigid artificial template through
bond merging and bond connecting.

Accordingly, we set out to process the structures of the ligands
by merging and connecting the individual bonds, followed by refining
the scaffold as a whole, so as to give rise to a rigid and bulky artificial
template, which, by size and 3D shape as well as many other structural
features, much resembled the original crystal structure cluster of
the Hsp90 ligands (Figure 2).

Although Hsp90 and opioid receptor are totally different
proteins with respect to their sequences and structures, presumably
the fundamental ways they interact with the ligands are the same.
For example, the special bond-to-bond correlation pattern seen with
the Hsp90 ligands should be present with opioid ligands as well. In
fact, the same patterns were well observed with many other types of
protein–ligand complexes, such as protein kinase inhibitors
and tubulin-binding agents (unpublished results). Hence, by following
a similar process for the construction of the Hsp90-ligand template,
we should be able to build an artificial template for opioid ligands
as well.

For the template construction, it was essential for
us to know the binding conformations of the ligands, which, for the
Hsp90 ligands, were mainly derived from the crystal structures of
their ligand–protein complexes (see a list of the collection
at ChEMBL database).10 For opioid ligands,
however, there were only a handful of crystal structures of ligand–receptor
complexes available, too few to support our project. Hence, as an
alternative way, we exploited template-based alignment modeling (TAM)
again to deduce the ligand-binding conformations.

The principle
of TAM states that different ligands that bind at the same binding
site are structurally highly correlated, that we are able to align
the backbones/scaffolds of the ligands with a template, with which
the binding conformations of the individual ligands relevant to the
template can be realized, a practice that was already illustrated
in our previous publication.8

Thus,
here we would first need to assemble a ligand cluster by using a group
of selected μ-agonists as the building blocks (particularly
those with rigid and bulky scaffolds). And then, we would convert
the cluster into a preliminary template through structural processing,
and then we would align a variety of μ-agonists with the template
to further refine it (see Figure 3).

Figure 3 Basic strategy for the μ-agonist template construction.
Through TAM, a group of selected μ-agonists are assembled and
converted into a universal template.

From the literature, we were able to obtain the structural information
of a large number of μ-agonists, many of them with bulky and
rigid (or semirigid) scaffolds,10,11 including a variety
of bulky morphinan derivatives as well as a series of semirigid Tyr1-attached cyclic peptides, which would be exploited as efficient
building blocks for the template construction.

Construction
Process
In the practical process, the ligand cluster was
stepwise assembled and processed (see Figure 4). First, a small group of special μ-agonists
were selected as the basic building blocks based on their structural
features (i.e., rigid and diversified, able to be aligned with morphine’s
scaffold) (note: here EM1 was not a rigid ligand and it was selected
mainly because of its large AA3 and AA4 moieties
helpful for the construction of a special region of the template).
And then, each of the selected ligands was subject to individual alignment
with morphine (as an initial template), followed by structural processing
(i.e., bond merging and bond connecting), with which a preliminary
template was formed (see the stepwise additions and processes of ligands
(b)–(e) in Figure 4).

Figure 4 Stepwise construction of the template. (a) morphine; (b) norbuprenorphine;
(c) Le Bourdonnec 2006;12 (d) fentanyl;
(e) EM1; (f) cyclic peptides; (g) many other μ-ligands.

In the subsequent process, we further extended
and refined the scaffold of the preliminary template by iterative
alignments of a wide variety of μ-agonists onto it. Thereby,
we were able to closely examine each of the ligands for its special
matching pattern with the template so as to modify and improve the
main scaffold as well as all of the substructures of the template
accordingly (the detailed refinement will be discussed below in Part
2 of this report).

Along with the refining process, the template
validation was concomitantly undertaken through assessing the alignments
of many structurally diversified μ-ligands. As shown in Figure 5, the majority of
ligands were aligned well with the template with respect to their
various match patterns, e.g., the 3D-shape, the stereochemistry, the
structural and conformational features, etc., suggesting that the
template was able to well represent the diverse ligands (see Figure 5).

Figure 5 Template validation.
A wide variety of μ-agonists were aligned to examine their match
patterns with the template.

In particular, it was observed that many of the μ-ligands coincidently
aligned their binding-selectivity-related moieties to the special
μ-features of the template, such as N-PhEt
and Ph/Ind (see Figure 6) (for discussion of the special μ-features, see General Features of the Template below). And
due to the scaffold diversity of the ligands, the co-alignments of
their key moieties would, therefore, be an excellent validation to
the special μ-features of the template. Moreover, it was seen
that a few nonclassical μ-ligands tended to align their unique
scaffolds beyond or exclusively out of the morphinan core, the classical
“message” of opioid ligands, (such as Salvinorin A and CJ-15 208, see Case Discussion below). And
this scenario provided us with a new vision about the diverse binding
modes of opioid ligands for receptor interactions.

Figure 6 Co-alignments to the
special μ-features of the template. Many μ-ligands co-aligned
their selectivity-related moieties (blue or red circled) to the special
μ-features of the template, which would help also for the structural
validation of the template.

Crystal
Structures for Validation
The crystal structures of μ-ligands
as extracted from their receptor complexes are highly valuable information
for the template validation, because they can directly provide the
binding conformations of ligands. However, the biggest issue was still
the lack of enough crystal structures for use in this study. And there
were only two μ-receptor–ligand complexes available at
the time of this study: one with μ-antagonist β-FNA bound
(PDB ID: 4dkl) and the other with μ-agonist Bu72 bound (PDB ID: 5clm). Additionally,
there existed a δ-receptor complex with DIPP-NH2 bound
(PDB ID: 4rwa), where DIPP-NH2 happened to be a mixed μ-agonist/δ-antagonist.13 Since close similarities in sequence and 3D-structure
were seen between μ-and δ-receptors,14 presumably DIPP-NH2 would take the binding pose
at μ-receptor similar to that at δ-receptor, so that it
would be possible for us to exploit it for the template validation.
Thus, we set out to cluster the three ligand–receptor complexes
as a bundle to examine the binding behaviors of their bound ligands
(Figure 7).

Figure 7 Comparison
between the binding poses of the experimentally determined and the
modeling predicted of the three ligands (stereoview). (A) The three
crystal structures of DIPP-NH2, Bu72, and β-FNA overlap
at the morphinan core; (B) the similar binding poses are seen, as
the three ligands are co-aligned with the template.

Figure 7 shows
the superimposed crystal structures of the three receptor complexes
(left panel) as well as of the three ligands as extracted out (Figure 7A). As we can see,
the major scaffolds of the three ligands appear to be aligned around
the morphinan core, which is consistent with the predicted binding
poses in our modeling (Figure 7B). The good agreement in binding conformations between the
crystal structures and the modeling results would, therefore, strongly
support the template validation.

For validation purpose, we
also managed to dock the template into the binding pocket of a μ-receptor
complex (PDB ID: 5clm), where the template was superimposed with Bu72 (the bound ligand)
at the morphinan moieties (Figure 8). For this match, the whole scaffold of the template
appeared to fit by size and 3D-shape into the binding pocket pretty
well, which helped further for the template validation.

Figure 8 Docking the
template at the binding site of μ-receptor. (A) On docking,
the scaffold of the template (in green) appeared to fit well by size
and 3D-shape to the binding pocket. (B) The alignment of EM1 shows
the downward orientation of the N-terminal.

The template docking helped to reveal the binding conformations of
linear μ-opioid peptides, where the N-terminal of the peptides
was oriented toward the bottom of the binding site, while the C-terminal
toward the opening (see the alignment of EM1, a μ-agonistic
peptide, Figure 8B)
(note: prior to the docking modeling, our modeling was only able to
show the relative conformation of the peptide in reference to the
template). Indeed, the binding conformation was shown to be correct
with the cryo-electron microscopy structure of DAMGO recently15 (PDB ID: 6dde).

In addition, the docking pose
of the template was also able to help for the understanding of some
classical SARs of opioid ligands. For example, the N-PhEt moiety of the template at the docking is inserted deeply into
the bottom of the binding pocket (see Figure 8A), which helps to account for the significantly
enhanced binding affinities often associated with the N-PhEt-bearing ligands.16 Thus, the template’s
docking modeling was supporting the template validation.

General
Features of the Template
Morphinan Core and the Extended Scaffold
The template consists of a morphinan core along with a largely
extended scaffold. Overall, the template appears to be a rigid structure
embodying a number of fused rings, along with many other structural
features, such as aromatic zones, hetero-atoms, and μ-selectivity-related
moieties (see Figure 9).

Figure 9 Structural features of the template. The template possesses a unique
scaffold consisting of a morphinan core along with a largely extended
scaffold, where identified are several μ-selectivity-related
features as noted with letters a–d as well as a few special
loops in different colors: the inner (red), the in-middle (blue),
and the up-middle (green).

Designated Loops and Special μ-Features
We have designated
several special loops of the template (Figure 9): the inner (red), the in-middle (blue),
and the up-middle (green). Meanwhile, we have also identified a few
structural features of the template relevant to the μ-selectivity
of the ligands: (a) Ph/Ind; (b) N-PhEt; (c) up-middle
loop; (d) front benzoyl (see Figure 9). In addition, there are also some other features
of the template, such as the embedded backbones of the peptide ligands,
which will be discussed in Part 2 of this report. All of these features
will be of help to facilitate the discussions below.

In our
previous study, by aligning a variety of opioid ligands with morphine,
we proposed three backbone-conformational models, corresponding to
the three types of opioid peptides8 (Figure 10A). In this study,
the three conformational models are correlated, respectively, to three
special loops of the template: the up-middle (green), the inner (red),
and the in-middle loops (blue) (Figure 10B). As shown in
the figure, the previous backbones models and the three special loops
are pretty consistent with each other in terms of their relative positions
and orientations. This comparison helps to reveal the intrinsic correlations
of the template with the backbones/scaffolds of opioid ligands relative
to the binding selectivity. And the correlations would, thus, allow
us to exploit this μ-agonist-specialized template for δ-
and κ-ligands’ modeling, as well (see related discussions
in Examples of Applications below).

Figure 10 Correlations
between the three backbone-conformational models of opioid peptides
and the three special loops of the template (stereoview). (A) The
three backbone-conformational models (μ: green, δ: red,
and κ: blue); (B) the corresponding loops (the up-middle: green,
the inner: red, and the in-middle: blue).

Examples of Application
As anticipated initially, the
new template worked indeed much better in facilitating our alignment
modeling of a wide variety of opioid ligands. And the extended scaffold
of the template was able to help for us to improve the alignments
of several special μ-ligands as proposed in our previous study
(e.g., Em-Mm,17 etonitazene, salvinorin
A, and CJ-15 208), and the updated alignments were shown to
account well for the related SARs (see examples in Case Studies below).

With the new template, many potential
applications in medicinal chemistry studies can be expected, such
as ligand–structure correlations, binding-pose predictions,
SAR interpretations, recognition of the structural features of antagonists
vs agonists, and so on.

General Guidelines for
the Alignment Modeling
For an aligning process, we will need
first to examine the whole scaffold of a ligand so as to recognize
and match the key moieties to the corresponding parts of the template,
followed by matching the rest of the molecule. Meanwhile, we will
need to observe a number of match patterns in the aligning process
(see a list of the match patterns in “Supporting Information” at the end of this article). However, the
rule of thumb for the ligand aligning is straightforward, just “SIMILAR
to SIMILAR”. In addition, as discussed in our previous study,8 the alignment modeling requires only the approximate
conformational fit of a ligand with the template, while taking into
account most of the special structural match patterns between them.

Due to the structural complexity of the template, it is not always
straightforward to determine a meaningful alignment of ligands. In
fact, we need to handle the confusing cases pretty often, such as
with ligands having unique scaffolds or possessing more than one potential
alignment. In many cases, however, the special μ-features as
well as some other characters of the template can be utilized to assist
the matching process.

There are three major approaches we take
to verify the putative alignments of ligands: to match with the μ-features,
to fit with SAR data, and to compare with the structures of well-verified
ligands. Although largely empirical in nature, these approaches, when
applied in combination, have proven to be effective in verifying the
ligand alignments.

Case Studies
Interpretation of Salvinorin
A as a κ-Agonist and Herkinorin as a μ-Agonist
Salvinorin A is a naturally occurring κ-agonist, while Herkinorin
and Kurkinorin, the two close analogs, are pure μ-agonists18 (Figure 11).

Figure 11 Structures of Salvinorin A, Herkinorin, and Kurkinorin.

Salvinorin A has a unique neoclerodane scaffold,
which does not contain a prototypic amino group that many opioid ligands
have. And also, Salvinorin A’s scaffold is rather symmetric,
allowing for multiple alignments. So how to properly align Salvinorin
A as well as its analogs was a complicated case in our previous modeling.

The originally proposed alignment matched Salvinorin A’s
A/B rings to the morphine’s D/C rings, respectively.8 With the same alignment, Herkinorin’s
2O-benzoyl group was matched to the μ-featured N-PhEt to account for the special μ-selectivity of
this ligand (see the blue-circled area in Figure 12A). However, that alignment did not seem
to be a smooth one because Herkinorin’s A-ring without an amino
group was not really a good match to the nitrogen-containing D-ring
of morphine. And also, the 2O-benzoyl ester of Herkinorin
and the N-PhEt of the template were structurally
not a good match. In addition, the alignment did not seem to make
sense in interpreting the enhanced μ-affinity of Kurkinorin
with a double bond at the A-ring19 (Figure 11).

Figure 12 Alignment of Herkinorin.
(A) The 2O-benzyl moiety was matched to the μ-featured N-PhEt in the previous alignment (blue circled). (B) With
the current alignment, the 2O-benzyl is aligned to
the front area (red circled) as a new μ-feature to account for
the high μ-binding selectivity of this ligand.

Aided with the extended scaffold of the new template, we
realigned Salvinorin A as well as the two analogs. And the updated
alignments appeared to be much better for understanding the special
SARs of these ligands (see Figure 12B).(i) With the new alignment, Salvinorin A’s κ-binding is
well explained. As shown in Figure 12B, the central area of Salvinorin A along with the
furan ring is aligned smoothly to the in-middle loop (indicated with
blue ball–sticker rendering), which is the κ-specific
area of the template corresponding to the κ-backbone-conformational
model (Figure 10).
So, this alignment can well account for the κ-activity of this
ligand (this is a typical example to show how the μ-agonist
template can be applicable for the alignment of δ-/κ-ligands.
Another case can be seen below with the interpretation of the δ-antagonism
of DIPP-NH2).

(ii) At the new alignment, Herkinorin’s 2O-benzoyl
moiety responsible for the μ-binding is aligned to the front
area of the template, a new μ-feature hence being proposed and
being verified later on with the alignments of several other special
μ-agonists (see discussions below and in Part 2 of this report).
Presumably, the 2O-benzoyl can also work to block
Herkinorin from binding to the κ-receptor so as to account for
the exclusive μ-binding of this ligand (EC50: μ/κ
= 3.0/>10 000 nM). For Kurkinorin, on the other hand, its
A-ring has a double bond in conjugation with the neighboring carbonyl
group, which can make a better match with the local aromatic ring
of the template (see Figure 12B), so as to account for the enhanced μ-affinity of
this ligand (Ki = 1.2 nM) vs Herkinorin
(Ki = 40 nM).19



Further Refinement of the Front Benzoyl
Herkinorin’s new alignment helped to reveal the front benzoyl
of the template as a new μ-feature. Upon the recognition, we
looked further at several other special μ-ligands able to align
their key moieties with the front benzoyl (such as JOM-5 Mm20 and Em-Mm17), which
greatly helped for validation of the front benzoyl as a new μ-feature
(see the detailed discussions in Part 2 of this report).

Alignment
of the Crystal Structure of DIPP-NH2
DIPP-NH2 (H-Dmt-Tic-Phe-Phe-NH2, Dmt = 2,6-dimethyltyrosine),
as mentioned above, is a mixed δ-antagonist/μ-agonist,13 and its binding conformation at the μ-receptor
is considered to be the same as at the δ-receptor. Thus, by
aligning the crystal structure of DIPP-NH2 (PDB ID: 4rwa)21 with the template, we are set up to assess the SARs of
this ligand.

As μ-Agonist
Figure 13 shows the alignment of the
crystal structure of DIPP-NH2 with the template, where
Dmt1 is aligned around the morphinan core, similarly to
the Tyr1 of many other μ-peptides, while the rigid
bicyclic moiety of Tic2 is aligned to the inner loop, a
pattern commonly seen with δ-ligands (refer to Figure 15). Upon the alignments, the
backbones of Phe3 and Phe4 are consequently
matched to the up-middle loop of the template (the green lines). Since
the up-middle loop is the important μ-feature of the template
as mentioned previously, this close match can quickly account for
the μ-agonist activity of DIPP-NH2.

Figure 13 Alignment of the crystal
structure of DIPP-NH2 (stereoview). The backbone segments
between Phe3 and Phe4 of DIPP-NH2 are matched to the up-middle loop (green lines) of the template
so as to account for the μ-agonist activity of this ligand.

As δ-Antagonist
Backbone/Scaffold Mismatch
as a Structural Basis for Opioid Antagonism
As frequently
observed in our modeling, although the majority of μ-agonists
display bond-to-bond match of their key backbones/scaffolds to the
template, μ-antagonists often show mismatches (typically mismatched
by one or more bonds). Presumably, this type of backbone/scaffold
mismatch is one of the important structural bases for opioid antagonism.

Built up with μ-agonists, the template is considered to be
μ-agonistic in nature, namely, the template, if placed at the
binding site, would behave just like a large μ-agonist so as
to keep the receptor in activated conformation. However, if some key
structures of the template are altered by inserting/deleting a bond
or shifting a key moiety to a nearby location of the scaffold, the
original agonistic nature of the template would be disrupted, so as
to result in failure in activating the receptor, a prospective mechanism
for μ-antagonists associated with the backbone/scaffold mismatch.

As an example, Figure 14 shows the co-alignments with the template of both μ-antagonist
Alvimopan (in red) and μ-agonist EM1 (in green). As we can see,
although the backbone of EM1 is in a bond-to-bond match with the template,
there is a one-bond-less mismatch with Alvimopan’s as compared
to EM1’s (see the right panel, Figure 14).

Figure 14 Co-alignments of Alvimopan and EM1. Both Alvimopan
and EM1 are aligned with the template to reveal an apparent one-bond-less
mismatch of Alvimopan’s key moiety vs EM1’s, (right
panel: the dashed arrows indicate the correlated atoms between the
two ligands).

Accounting for the δ-Antagonism
of DIPP-NH2
With the bond-mismatch notion discussed
above, the structural basis for DIPP-NH2’s δ-antagonism
is understood. As mentioned previously, the inner loop of the template
is δ-specific (see Figures 10 and 15). So δ-ligands that are bond-to-bond aligned with the loop
would be agonists (such as TAN-67,22Figure 15B) or would be
the antagonists if mismatched (such as the N-CH3 analog of NTI,23Figure 15C).

Figure 15 δ-ligands aligned
at the δ-specific area. (A) Top view of the template to show
the δ-specific area (green lines); (B) δ-Agonist TAN-67
aligned bond-to-bond to the δ-specific area; (C) δ-antagonist
(N-CH3)-analog of NTI aligned in one-bond-less
mismatch to the δ-specific area; (D) alignment of the crystal
structure of δ-antagonist DIPP-NH2 with the Tic moiety
in one-bond-less mismatch.

When the crystal structure of DIPP-NH2 is aligned to the
template, a one-bond-less mismatch of its key moiety between Dmt1 and Tic2 with the inner loop (Figure 15D) is seen, with which, the
structural basis for the δ-antagonism of DIPP-NH2 is accounted.

The structural basis for opioid antagonism is
an often discussed topic in opioid studies.24−26 Here, our backbone/scaffold
mismatch-related modeling on DIPP-NH2 and the other opioid
ligands offers a new way to look at the potential structural relationships
between the agonists and the antagonists (for more examples of opioid
antagonism due to the backbone/scaffold mismatch, see CJ-15 208
discussion below as well as some others in the Supporting Information).

Interpretation of the SARs of CJ-15 208
CJ-15 208 [c(Phe1-d-Pro2-Phe3-Trp4)] is a cyclic opioid peptide with both κ-
and μ-antagonistic activities27,28 (see Figure 16A) (note: although trans-configuration is set for the amide bond between Phe1 and d-Pro2 in Figure 16A–C, a minor population of the cis-configuration
can co-exist, as indicated in conformational studies with EMs29−31).

Figure 16 Alignment of CJ-15 208 as μ-antagonist with the template.
(A) CJ-15 208, a naturally occurring cyclic opioid peptide;
(B) CJ-15 208 is aligned as a μ-antagonist with the template;
(C) at the alignment, the backbone of CJ-15 208 shows two-bond-less
mismatch with the template (green lines).

To understand the structural basis for CJ-15 208’s
μ-antagonism, we need first to align the structure with the
template properly. Different from many other cyclic opioid peptides,
CJ-15 208 did not have an exo-ring Tyr1 to guide
the aligning process, adding difficulties in the initial match process.
After rigorous searching, we eventually identified an alignment as
the best one (shown in Figure 16B). With this alignment, the backbone segment between d-Pro2 to Trp4 was aligned bond-to-bond
to the up-middle loop as the μ-specific area, where the Phe3 side chain was matched to the Ph/Ind moiety of the template.

Here, we decided to align Phe3 but not Trp4 with Ph/Ind mainly because of the relevant SAR data. The Ph/Ind
moiety of the template, as observed in our modeling, was stereospecific
in most cases, only aligning to l-AA-related structures.
However, the SAR studies showed that replacement of the l-Trp4 of CJ-15 208 with d-Trp4 was tolerated, and the d-Trp4 analog was even
more potent than l-Trp4 at μ-binding.27 On the other hand, Phe3 of CJ-15 208
was l-specific. So, it was suitable to match Phe3 with Ph/Ind, while Trp4 was aligned accordingly to the
end of the up-middle loop, where the steric demanding as well as substituent
effects were relatively low (note: most of the edge areas of the template,
as observed in our modeling, were associated with relatively low steric/substituent
effects). And at this setting, the less significant residue Phe1 was aligned to the front edge of the template to agree with
the SAR (to be discussed below). Thus, the overall alignment seemed
to well account for the μ-binding of CJ-15 208, (but
not yet the μ-antagonism).

With the ligand’s alignment
determined, we can now examine further the SARs of CJ-15 208.

Difference between Phe1 and Phe3 on Binding
Affinities
An alanine scan in SAR studies indicated that
Phe3 was necessary for high μ-affinity, while Phe1 was not,27 data for which can
be interpreted readily with the current alignment. As shown in Figure 16B, Phe3 is matched to the Ph/Ind moiety with the μ-featured up-middle
loop so as to account for its significant effect on μ-binding,
whereas Phe1 is aligned to the front of template as an
edge area, which is considered to be relatively low in sensitivity
to steric or substituent effects (as mentioned above). Thus, the front
area alignment can account for the less significant effect of Phe1 on the μ-affinities.

μ-Antagonism of CJ-15 208
As shown in Figure 16C, although the backbone between Phe3 and Trp4 of CJ-15 208 is bond-to-bond matched to the up-middle loop,
an apparent two-bond-less mismatch exists around where Phe1 is aligned (see the red circle in Figure 16C). Although the front area is a less significant
zone for μ-binding as compared to the up-middle loop, presumably
the two-bond-less mismatch occurring at the front area will significantly
shorten the distance between Phe1 and Trp4,
so as to disturb the bond-to-bond alignment at the up-middle loop.
Thus, the μ-antagonism of CJ-15 208 is interpreted.

Conversion of CJ-15 208 into a μ-Agonist
Based
on the above understanding, it appears to be possible to transform
CJ-15 208 from a μ-antagonist into a μ-agonist
through extending its backbone segments around Phe1 to
match with the template. Interestingly enough, this idea was examined
already by a group in Italy recently.32 The authors used β-Ala1 to replace Phe1 so as to prolong the backbone by one bond (Figure 17A), a modification for which indeed gave
rise to a full μ-agonist analog, along with high μ-selectivity
and affinity.

Figure 17 Conversion of CJ-15 208 from μ-antagonist
to μ-agonist. (A) One-bond extension of CJ-15 208’s
backbone resulted in a μ-agonistic β-Ala analog; (B) the
one-bond-less alignment of the β-Ala analog (thick lines) appears
to fit smoothly to the template (green lines), as compared to that
of CJ-15 208 (gray lines).

It should be noted, however, that the one-bond extension here does
not really make the β-Ala analog in bond-to-bond match with
the template. Instead, a one-bond-less mismatch still exists, which
otherwise would suggest it to be an antagonist (Figure 17B). For this issue, we seek
a possible explanation by looking into the alignment itself.

As mentioned above, the two-bone-less mismatch of CJ-15 208
significantly shortens the distance between Phe1 and Trp4 so as to cause the μ-antagonism of CJ-15 208.
On the other hand, the alignment of β-Ala analog at the front
area appears to be pretty smooth, and the distance between β-Ala
and Trp4 looks rather close to that of the bond-to-bond
match (Figure 17B).
So presumably, this one-bond-less mismatch does not cause much disturbance
to the backbone aligned at the μ-featured up-middle loop, so
that this ligand can still act as a μ-agonist.

In addition,
the above-discussed alignments/SAR interpretations for CJ-15 208
and the analog may be applicable as well in accounting for the potent
μ-binding and agonistic activities of a class of special cyclic
EM1 analogs, since they are also the atypical cyclic peptides with
the similar sequences.33,34

Part 2. Template Refinement
This part is focused on the template refinement and validation,
an important process in the template construction. After construction
of the preliminary template (see Figure 4 in Part 1), we have made great efforts into
refining the scaffold, process for which is still ongoing. Herein,
we will illustrate how the template is stepwise refined and validated,
how it will help us understand the SARs of individual ligands, and
also how we can contemplate further improvements.

As mentioned
in Part 1, template refinement is an iterative process. Upon alignment
of the various μ-ligands with the template, we carefully analyzed
the aligning patterns of the backbone/scaffolds of ligands so as to
identify their common structural features for improvement of the template
scaffold. This refinement and validation process has been carried
out repetitively for all parts of the template scaffold. Therefore,
almost every portion of the template is derived from multiple ligands,
even though only a handful of them will be discussed herein.

To facilitate the discussions below, we divide the template scaffold
into six regions: A–E and the back region (differently colored
in Figure 18), each
having special structural features for the ligand alignment.

Figure 18 Six regions
of the template. The scaffold of the template is divided into six
differently colored regions: A–E and the back region, each
with special structural features for the ligand alignment.

Region A (the Green Zone)
Region A is basically constituted
with the core of morphine as well as many other classical morphinan
derivatives. Conventionally, the morphinan core is considered as the
message to achieve the opioid activity, while a special “address”
is needed for opioid ligands to confer their receptor selectivity.
For the peptide ligands, the address is usually related to AA2 and
the residues beyond8,35 (see also discussions of Region C (the Blue Zone) below). However, there
can also be other address moieties for opioid ligands, e.g., the μ-features
of the template for μ-ligands (see Part 1 of this report). Typical
examples of μ-ligands, which can be aligned at Region A, include
both the morphinan and the nonmorphinan derivatives, such as 1–416,36 and 5–637 (Figure 19). Thus, the μ-featured N-phenethyl moiety is the address component of the ligands (see Figure 19A).

Figure 19 Ligand alignment
at Region A (the green zone). Several μ-selective morphinan
derivatives are aligned in this region (e.g., 1–6), where their morphinan core is considered as the message
and the N-PhEt as the address. (A) The alignment
of 1 at Region A indicates the N-PhEt
group as an address for the μ-binding selectivity; (B) the steric
match of the 9S-OH of 5 with the template’s
oxygen atom at Region A ensures the high μ-binding of this ligand;
(C) the low μ-affinity of 6 is attributed to the
sterically mismatched 9R-OH group.

Nature has uniquely structured the morphinan core. It seems
that appropriate alignment with the core is essential for an opioid
ligand to achieve good affinity and activity, whereas a misalignment
as caused by a substituent, a steric, or other factors would potentially
result in significant changes in binding behaviors of the ligands. 5, for example, is a potent μ-agonist [Ki(μ/δ/κ) = 0.19/13/184 nM].37 As shown in Figure 19B, 5 has a 9S-OH in its scaffold, which can make a heteroatom match with the oxygen
atom at Region A of the template (see Figure 19B), so that it displays high binding. However, 6, the epimer, is a weak binder [Ki(μ/δ/κ) = 59/1570/245 nM],37 because the 9R-OH of 6 sterically
does not fit (Figure 19C).

For many opioid peptides, Region A is where their first
two residues at the N-terminal are aligned (often Tyr1 and
Pro2 for the μ-selective peptides38). The Pro2 of μ-peptides, as proposed
in the previous study, plays a critical role in keeping the AA2 backbone
oriented perpendicularly to the C-ring of morphine,8 so as to promote the successive backbones to align with
Region C to achieve the μ-selectivity (see Region C (the Blue Zone) discussion in the following section).

In addition, we proposed two possible backbone conformations in
our previous study for the two N-terminal residues aligned at this
region, the μ- and the δ-alignments.8 However, we now drop the “μ-alignment”
and only keep the “δ alignment”, since the δ
alignment appears to work well with all of the cases in our modeling.

Region A does not retain the 4,5-epoxy ring (the E-ring) of morphine,
because this moiety does not seem to be a necessary component, while
its presence would rather interfere with the template refinement.
However, awareness of a potential five-membered ring existing at this
position would be of help for the alignment of related ligands (e.g.,
the five-membered ring of EMs’ Pro2 or of CJ-15 208’s d-Pro2; see the related alignment in Part 1).

Region
B (the Pink Zone)
This region contains a phenyl moiety at
top of the scaffold, which is considered as one of the special μ-features
(see discussions in Part 1). However, this phenyl moiety for high
μ-selectivity appears to be mostly associated with special ligand
types, i.e., those with rigid scaffolds and aligned at Regions A and
B (such as 8 and 10 in Figure 20).

Figure 20 Ligand alignment at
Region B (the pink zone). 7 and 8 are two
rigid μ-agonists and their alignments contribute to the construction
of Region B; 10, on the other hand, is a naturally occurring
μ-agonist with a bulky and rigid scaffold, alignment for which
helps for validation of the structures of Regions A and B.

7 [Norbuprenophine, Ki(μ/δ/κ) = 0.07/3.14/0.91 nM]39 and 8 [Ki(μ/δ/κ)
= 0.90/2.1/65 nM]12 were the two major
building blocks for the construction of Region B (see their alignments
in Figure 20).

10 (Cebranopadol) is a naturally occurring opioid ligand
with potent μ-binding activity ([Ki(μ/δ/κ) = 0.7/18/2.6 nM]40), rigid and bulky scaffold for which can be aligned to Regions A
and B (Figure 20)
to provide a good validation of these two regions. Although 10’s scaffold contains a spiro-ring, which conformationally
does not fit the template, the major scaffold with the top phenyl
as well as the dimethylamine substituent matches well with the template.
And because of the overall balanced alignment, this ligand can still
bind effectively to the μ-receptor (see Figure 20). Thus, this case can serve as a good example
to showcase the importance of an overall structural and conformational
match of a ligand in the alignment modeling.

Region C (the Blue Zone)
There are a large number of opioid peptides reported in the literature,
including the linear and the cyclic peptides, many of which are excellent
μ-agonists with high selectivity and affinity.38,41,42 Yet, most of the linear μ-peptides
were not selected as building blocks for the template construction
because of the high conformational flexibility associated with their
structures. However, after the template was basically constructed,
the linear μ-peptides were efficiently used for the refinement
and validation (see examples in the discussion below).

Our modeling
has revealed that the majority of the linear μ-peptides, naturally
occurring or synthetic (e.g., endomorphins, morphiceptin, dermorphin,
DAMGO, DALDA, PL017, etc.), can all be aligned with the template in
a similar pattern. As shown in Figure 21A, the embedded ball–stick rendering
(with nitrogen atoms labeled in blue) is the common backbone alignment
of AA1 through AA4 of the linear μ-peptides.

Figure 21 Embedded backbones of
μ-peptides and Region C. (A) The backbones of AA1 through AA4
of the μ-binding peptides are embedded in the template (in stereoview,
with the peptide-bond nitrogens labeled), while Region C still retains
some of the peptide-bond features; (B) aligned to Region C as well
as the whole embedded backbones are the binding conformations of DIPP-NH2 and DAMGO.

Region C, mainly built
with the backbones (AA2–AA4) of μ-peptides, still retains
some of the peptide-bond features, such as the α-carbon and
the carbonyl group, as well as the nitrogen atoms (see Figure 21A). The structures and conformations
of Region C were well refined with the alignments of many peptide/peptidomimetic
μ-ligands and were also validated with the experimentally derived
binding conformations of two well-known peptide ligands: DIPP-NH221 and DAMGO15 (see Figure 21B).

Region C has been identified as one of the most
important μ-features of the template, as almost all of the μ-peptides/peptidomimetics
are shown to align their backbone segments to this region. On the
other hand, the side-chain effects at this region do not seem to be
very significant. For instance, the AA4 can be Phe4, Sar4, or β-Ala4 (see ref (38)). In addition, Phe3, often as an important residue, does not seem to be special
with μ-peptides, as many δ-peptides also possess Phe3 in their structures.38

It
seems that keeping the backbones aligned with Region C is a key factor
for the high μ-binding of many opioid peptides. And the side
chains (or some other structural factors) are considered mostly to
play assisting roles for the backbones to be properly aligned, which
can be illustrated with the following examples.

Pro2 is known to be an important feature of many μ-selective peptides.8,38 However, a few well-known μ-peptides without Pro2 still show high μ-selectivity, which would be attributed to
some special factors involved in their structures to keep the backbones
aligned to Region C. For example, DAMGO (H-Tyr-d-Ala-Gly-N-MePhe-Gly-ol) without Pro2 displays high μ-selectivity
[Ki(μ/δ) = 1.22/1280 nM].43 Presumably, here the N-methylation
of its Phe4 (Figure 22A) is partly responsible for the high μ-selectivity44 and its presence reinforces DAMGO’s backbone
to align at Region C. The similar effect of the N-methylation to enhance μ-selectivity is seen with DAS-DER
(H-Tyr-d-Arg-Phe-Sar-OH; Sar = N-MeGly).45 In addition, DAMGO’s terminal Gly5-ol moiety may also contribute to the alignment to Region
C, since this moiety can be bond-to-bond matched to Region D to stabilize
the backbone alignment at Region C (see Figure 22A). DALDA [H-Tyr-d-Arg-Phe-Lys-NH2; Ki(μ/δ) = 1.69/192000
nM]43 is another example of μ-peptide
without Pro2. And here the d-Arg2 is
considered as the special factor for the backbone to be aligned at
Region C, as the side chain of d-Arg2 including
the terminal guanidino group can be well aligned to Region D as well
as Region E (Figure 22B), so as to facilitate the backbones aligned at Region C. In addition,
the Lys4 side chain of this ligand, similar to DAMGO’s
Gly-ol, can also be bond-to-bond aligned to Region D, so as to further
stabilize the backbone alignment at Region C. Likewise, 11 (H-Dmt- d -Aba-Gly-NH-Bn), a μ-selective peptidomimetic
[Ki(μ/δ) = 0.46/11.0 nM],46 has a special d-Aba2 to
keep its Gly3-NH-Bn aligned at Region C (Figure 22C).

Figure 22 Ligand alignment at
Region C (the blue zone). Region C is one of the most important μ-features
of the template, as the majority of μ-peptides/peptidomimetics
align their backbone moieties at this region to assume μ-selectivity,
such as DAMGO (A) and DALDA (B) as the μ-peptides, and 11 (C) as the μ-peptidomimetic; (D) a key moiety of 12 (Alvimopan) is aligned at Region C as a μ-antagonist.

In addition to μ-agonists, μ-antagonists
can also be aligned to contribute to the template refinement and validation.
For example, 12 (Alvimopan) is a peptidomimetic μ-antagonist,47,48 and its peptide-mimicking moiety at top of the scaffold can be aligned
to Region C, where an apparent one-bond-short backbone mismatch is
accountable for the μ-antagonistic activity of this ligand (Figure 22D; see also Figure 14 in Part 1). Thus,
the alignment of 12 as a μ-antagonist can help
for the refinement and validation, as well.

Region D (the Purple Zone)
Region D is a relatively complex zone, and a wide variety of μ-ligands
were involved for its construction. As shown in our modeling, many
of the μ-ligands align their μ-selectivity-related moieties
there, indicating that Region D would be of rich μ-features.

Region D was mainly constructed based on a number of μ-selective
cyclic peptides that contained an exo-Tyr1 attached to
their macrocyclic rings.38,49,50 The Tyr1 moiety can be quickly matched to Region A, so
as to facilitate the alignment of the rest of the molecules.

Most of the macrocyclic rings of the cyclic peptides are formed with
3–5 residues by connecting the side chain of AA2 to another
residue at the C-terminal of the sequences. Therefore, the two opposite
rims of the macrocycles are structurally distinct, with one featuring
the peptide backbone, and the other featuring the side chains. Initially,
it was difficult to determine the orientations of the macrocyclic
rings because both Regions C and D were not formed at that point (refer
to Figure 4 in Part
1). And hence, there seemed to be multiple ways for the two rims of
the macrocyclic rings to be arranged: to the back region, to Region
C, or to Region D.

Nevertheless, it was later found that the
backbone rim would be best aligned to Region C, which would be in
accordance with the μ-backbone orientation as roughly set with
the preliminary template (see Figure 4), so as to leave the back region for the δ-
and the κ-backbone alignment (refer to Figure 10 in Part 1). Meanwhile, the side-chain rim,
often variable in length and structure, appeared appropriate to be
matched with Region D. Region D was found to be an area with greater
structural variety according to the alignment patterns of many μ-ligands.
Thus, the backbone and the side-chain rims of the cyclic peptides
were aligned to Region C and Region D, respectively, to help define
the two regions.

The literature data indicated that both the
μ-selectivity and affinities of the cyclic peptides were affected
by the ring sizes as well as the nature of substituents,49,51 which information was of help for the refinement of Region D. For
example, shown in Table 1 are four cyclic enkephalin analogs (13–16) along with their related SAR data. As we can see, all
four analogs have the similar sequences (different only with AA2),
featuring the variable lengths of the side chains of AA2s, thus the
resulting macrocycles in different sizes. And also, all of the cyclic
analogs display lower binding affinities than their linear counterparts
(see Table 1; data
for the linear peptides are shown in the blanket), but their μ-selectivity
is more or less enhanced, especially with the 14-membered analog,
which shows the highest μ-selectivity among the others.51

Table 1 Ring-Size Effects
on the μ-Binding Affinity and Selectivity of the Cyclic Peptidesa
 	 	IC50 (nM)	 	
cyclic peptide	ring size	μ	δ	δ/μ	
13 = Tyr-c[D-A2pr-Gly-Phe-Leu]	13	95.8 (3.97)	118 (5.51)	1.23 (1.13)	
14 = Tyr-c[D-A2bu-Gly-Phe-Leu]	14	24.9 (10.1)	253
(8.94)	10.16 (0.72)	
15 = Tyr-c[D-Orn-Gly-Phe-Leu]	15	56.6 (5.89)	221 (6.81)	3.90 (0.95)	
16 = Tyr-c[D-Lys-Gly-Phe-Leu]	16	22.4 (4.08)	32.2 (9.57)	1.44 (1.92)	
a All of the cyclic
analogs display lower binding affinities than their linear counterparts,
but their μ-selectivity is more or less enhanced, especially
with the 14-membered analog (data in parentheses are for the linear
counterparts).

These SAR
data can be understood with the alignments of the analogs. For example,
the linear peptides display high binding affinities but little binding
selectivity, which is because their backbones can be equally aligned
either at the μ-specific Region C or at the δ-specific
area in the back region. For the cyclic analogs, however, although
their backbone rims of rings are aligned to Region C, the side-chain
rims are aligned at Region D, which would help to stabilize the backbone
alignment at Region C, thus to enhance the μ-selectivity.

In addition, 14 (the 14-membered cyclic analog) can
be bond-to-bond aligned at Region D (see Figure 23A). Note that the existing bond-to-bond
match pattern may not be seen clearly in the figure, while 13 and 15, the d-A2pr and the d-Orn analogs, are aligned by one-bond shorter and one-bond
longer, respectively. Therefore, the difference in the aligning pattern
of the ligands can account for the higher μ-selectivity of 14. On the other hand, the 16-membered analog can also be
bond-to-bond aligned, but via a different pattern (see Figure 23B), with which, the altered
activity profile of 16 can be interpreted (i.e., with
the higher μ-affinity but reduced δ/μ-ratio). Coincidently,
the similar ring-size effects were reported also in a recent study,
in which the 14-/16-/17-membered derivatives were displaying high
μ-affinities, while the 15-membered showed only low μ-binding.
And also, the 14 membered was associated with the highest μ-selectivity
among all.52

Figure 23 Alignment and SAR interpretation
of cyclic peptides with different ring sizes at Region D (the purple
zone). Depending on their ring sizes, μ-selective cyclic peptides
can be aligned at Region D in different patterns, with which, their
different binding profiles can be accounted for. (A) The 14-membered
cyclic analog can be bond-to-bond aligned at Region D to account for
its higher μ-binding affinity and selectivity; (B) the 16-membered
analog can also be bond-to-bond aligned but in a different pattern,
which can account for the higher μ-affinity but reduced δ/μ-ratio
of this ligand; (C) the 18-membered analog can be aligned bond-to-bond
around the edges of Region D, which can probably interpret the extremely
high μ-affinity and selectivity of this ligand.

However, it should be noted that the above ring-size-related
pattern may not be critical to some special cyclic peptides. For instance,
the β-Ala analog of cyclic peptide CJ-15 208 as discussed
in Part 1 does not appear to follow this pattern, which having a 13-membered
ring instead of the best-sized 14 membered was shown to be a potent
μ-agonist.32 In addition, also reported
in the same article was a γ-Ala analog (14-membered), which
turned out to be a δ-agonist.32 The
special structural factors for those seemingly contradicted SARs of
the ligands will be discussed elsewhere.

Moreover, as compared
to the linear peptides, the lower affinities associated with the cyclic
analogs (Table 1) can
be partly attributed to the distorted conformations of the side chains
of AA2 as well as the backbones of Leu5 due to their involvement
in the ring formation. These two moieties would be best aligned along
the left and the right edges of Region D to achieve high μ-affinities,
a pattern that we have observed from the alignment modeling on a number
of μ-ligands. (Below we can see such an example with 17, an 18-membered macrocyclic peptide).

Another example of a
cyclic peptide for the refinement is 17 (Tyr-c[d-Lys-Trp-Phe-Glu]-Gly-NH2), which showed extremely high
μ-affinity and selectivity [Ki(μ/δ/κ)
= 0.68/127/5119 nM].53 As we can see, this
ligand has an extra-large macrocyclic ring (18 memberred) that can
be bond-to-bond aligned along the left and the right as well as the
front edges of Region D (Figure 23C) to account for its potent μ-affinity and selectivity.
In addition, its C-terminal residue (Gly-NH2) appears to
critically contribute to the high μ-selectivity, as one of its
analogs without the Gly residue showed high affinity but reduced μ-selectivity.53

Besides the peptide ligands, the nonpeptide
ligands also contributed to the refinement of Region D. Many of the
nonpeptide μ-ligands with their μ-selectivity-related
moieties were aligned at this region, which helped further for the
refinement and validation. For example, 18 (fentanyl)
is a well-known opioid drug with potent μ-agonistic activity.
This ligand as well as many of its analogs has a relatively simple
piperidine scaffold,54 which can be aligned
to Region A, where the N-phenethyl group presumably
plays a major role for the μ-selectivity. Meanwhile, the N-phenyl and N-propionyl on the other side
of the scaffold are matched to Region D and the back region, respectively
(see Figure 24A).
And the aligning pattern suggests that both the moieties would also
contribute to the μ-selectivity of this ligand and is consistent
with the SARs as observed with many fentanyl analogs.54

Figure 24 Alignment of nonpeptide ligands at Region D (the purple
zone). Many of the nonpeptide ligands align their μ-selectivity-related
moieties at Region D. (A) Fentanyl’s N-phenyl
is aligned to Region D; (B) the diethylaminoethyl group as well as
part of the benzimidazole moiety of Etonitazene is matched to Region
D; (C) although the DMT moiety of JOM-5 Mm is matched to Region A,
its THQ scaffold is aligned to Region D; (D) Em-Mm’s scaffold
is aligned at Region D as well as the back region.

19 (Etonitazene) is a well-documented μ-agonist
displaying high μ-binding affinity and selectivity.55,56 A previous alignment of 19 matched the main benzimidazole
scaffold with Region A.8 However, that
alignment was questionable, because some of the match patterns did
not fit well. With the current alignment, the p-ethoxybenzyl
is matched to the aromatic zone in the back region, and the diethylaminoethyl
is aligned at Region D, while the benzimidazole scaffold including
the nitro substituent is matched to the aromatic zones in both Region
D and Region E (Figure 24B) (region E is another important μ-featured area to
be discussed below). And all of the match patterns seem to be smooth
and meaningful, which would well account for this ligand’s
high μ-selectivity and affinity.

20 (JOM-5
Mm) is a peptidomimetic ligand with mixed μ-agonist/δ-antagonist
activity.20 This ligand’s THQ scaffold
along with the substituents can be aligned across three regions of
the template: Regions A, D, and E (see Figure 24C). The alignment can account for the SAR
data. For example, its DMT moiety, just like the Tyr1 of
the μ-cyclic peptides discussed above, is aligned to Region
A, which subsequently places the THQ scaffold in Region D. The 6-benzyl
shown to be important for the μ-activity of this ligand57 is aligned to Region E. The N1-benzoyl is positioned to overlap with the aromatic zone in Region
D to account for its μ-affinity enhancing effect.

21 (Em-Mm), designed as the β-turn mimetic of endomorphin,
was found to be a potent μ-agonist.17 Its structure, featuring a rigid bicyclic scaffold with three large
substituents, is similar to that of 20. But the alignments
of the two scaffolds are quite different because of their distinct
substitution patterns. Although 20’s scaffold
is aligned to Region D, part of 21’s is aligned
to the back region. And the whole structure of 21 is
aligned across three regions: Regions A, D, and E (see Figure 24D). In this alignment, the Ni-p-OH-phenethyloxyacyl, resembling the
Tyr1 of a μ-peptide, is bond-to-bond matched but
along the inner edge of Region A, which is different from the alignment
of 20. In addition, the bicyclic scaffold of 21 involving three amide bonds is a large conjugated system, so that
it can be better matched with the aromatic zone in the back region.

As we can see, there appears no significant μ-feature involved
in the areas where both the scaffold and the N-p-OH-phenethyloxyacyl of 21 are aligned. So,
although these two moieties seem to work merely as the message, the
“μ-selectivity address” for this ligand would
be found with the other two substituents. Indeed, the phenethyl substituent
at “i + 2” position is aligned to Region
E and the benzyl at “i + 3” is aligned
to Region D, both in the μ-feature-rich zones. And the SARs
data also supports the alignment: the μ-affinity of the ligand
was significantly reduced when both the i + 2 and i + 3 substituents were replaced with Bn and nBu, respectively.17

Region D appears to be a special zone
with rich μ-features but it still is not fully defined at this
time. As shown above, several of the nonpeptide ligands align their
μ-selectivity-related moieties into this region, but there seems
no clear pattern seen to help further defining the regional μ-features.
Therefore, continued refinement of this region is warranted.

Region
E (the red zone)
Region E proves to be an important μ-feature
of the template. This region was not initially recognized until the
later stage of the template construction, when Herkinorin’s
2O-benzoyl moiety was found to be best aligned at
this region to convey the ligand’s unique μ-selectivity
(see the related discussions in Part 1 of this report).

It was
found that some other μ-ligands were also best aligned when
their key moieties were matched to this region, such as the above-discussed 19–21 as well
as 25 and 26 (see Figure 25).

Figure 25 Ligand alignment in Region E (the red zone).
Many μ-ligands are best aligned when their key moieties are
matched to this region. (A) The phenylpyrazol moiety of IQMF-4 is
matched to Region E as well as Region D; (B) With the diazabicyclo-nonane
scaffold matched to Region C, the 9-arylpropenyl substituent of DBN-2
is well aligned at Regions E; (C) In the alignment similar to DBN-2’s,
the phenyl derivative of DBN-2 matches the phenyl group to the new
linker area (see Figure 26C).

25 (IQMF-4) with
a fentanyl-related scaffold is a relatively new μ-agonist.58 When aligned similarly to fentanyl, its phenylpyrazol
moiety is matched to Regions D and E, which is in accordance with
its μ-selectivity (Figure 25A).

26 (DBN-2) is a highly μ-selective
agonist, and it has a unique diazabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane scaffold with
two N-substituents attached.59 In our previous
modeling, many different ways had been tried for the appropriate alignment
of this ligand, but none of them seemed optimal. For instance, although
the diazabicyclo-nonane scaffold could be matched to Region A by its
structural features, the substituent-related SARs were hard to interpret.
Now with the μ-featured Region E revealed, the new alignment
of this ligand turned out to be rather meaningful to account for the
related SARs. By the current alignment, the rigid scaffold along with
the propionyl substituent is smoothly aligned in Region C (Figure 25B), in which one
significant heteroatom match exists: N3 of the scaffold is matched
to the backbone nitrogen at this region. Meanwhile, the 9-arylpropenyl
substituent, with the double bond and the aryl in conjugation, is
well aligned to Regions D and E. All of the alignment patterns can
account for the high μ-selectivity and potency of this ligand.
Particularly interesting to note is that this alignment can also account
for the SARs of the phenyl derivative of 26. As shown
in Figure 25C, the
additional phenyl group (blue circled) is matched into a conjugated
area between Region A and Region E, where a linker structure has been
identified (see the discussion below) to account for the enhanced
μ-affinity of this derivative (Ki = 5 nM) as compared to 26’s (Ki = 13 nM).59

Linker
The template refinement has been undertaken throughout the study,
and in the latest process, a linker was added between Region A and
Region E (see Figure 26C). This construction was mainly based on
the alignment of a series of aryl-containing N-monosubstituted
analogs of 8-carboxamidocyclazocine (8-CAC).60 Among them, N-BPE-8-CAC (27) displayed
partial μ-agonist activity but with very high μ-binding
affinities [Ki(μ/δ/κ)
= 0.3/0.74/1.8 nM],61 while the 4′-OH
analog of N-BPE-8-CAC (28) showed even
higher μ-affinity and selectivity [Ki(μ/δ/κ) = 0.0056/0.81/0.49 nM]. SAR studies indicated
that an ethylene spacer between the aryl and the amide nitrogen of
the 8-N-arylethyl (Figure 26A) was the best for high potency.60

Figure 26 Ligand alignment for the linker construction. (A) 8-CAC
and the derivatives; (B) Alignment of 28 shows good structural
as well as conformational match to both Region A (the green zone)
and Region E (the red zone); (C) A linker between Regions A and E,
as well as an additional p-OH-Ph moiety, is generated
accordingly.

The 8-CAC scaffold of the ligands
can be well matched to Region A, which, in turn, orients the N-BPE (N-bis-phenylethyl) moiety toward
Region E (Figure 26B). Because of the close disposition of the two regions as well as
their apparent structural correlations with the ligands, we thought
that a linker construction between the two regions would be an interesting
idea to facilitate the ligand alignment, with which the current linker
structure was generated (Figure 26C).

As we can see, the linker formation between
Region A and Region E extends each of the regions for the ligand alignment.
Although it somewhat distorts the regional structures, overall the
linker construction is pretty smooth, well incorporating both the
structural and conformational features of the 8-CAC derivatives.

The linker structure was supported by docking modeling (Figure 27), where the whole
template was docked at the binding pocket of the μ-receptor
(PDB ID: 5c1m), and the morphinan core of the template was superimposed to that
of Bu72 (the bound ligand). On the pose, the extended Region E of
the template was found existing between the TM4 and TM5 of the receptor,
with no significant steric constraints against the boundary of the
binding pocket (see Figure 27) [it should be noted that for that docking, there was indeed
a steric constraint of the top portion of the template against a short
sequence at the N-terminal of the receptor (G1SHSLX6). However, this
constraint was not considered to be significant, as this short N-terminal
sequence located at the opening of the receptor’s binding pocket
is thought to be highly flexible and would, therefore, undergo an
induced conformational adaptation readily upon the binding of differently
structured ligands (e.g., the template in this case) to avoid an unfavorable
steric constraint].

Figure 27 Docking the template at the binding site of the μ-receptor.
The extended p-OH-Ph moiety of the template is found
between the TM4 and TM5 of the receptor without any steric constraint
(note: α-helices colored in red, β-sheets in blue).

The linker construction is of significance not
only because it facilitates the alignments of both 27 and 28 as well as the phenyl derivative of 26 as mentioned above but also because it helps to reveal more inclusive
ligand-binding space of the receptor’s binding pocket, which
is beneficial for our continued efforts in construction of a universal
μ-agonist template that will cover all of the ligand-binding
space at the pocket.

Summary and Concluding Remarks
The
template-based alignment modeling developed in our recent studies
is an innovative approach for SAR studies of opioid ligands. As we
previously reported, this approach showed promise but also with the
limitation, which was mainly attributed to the small size of morphine
as a template. To overcome the limitation, we set out to construct
an alternative μ-agonist template with this study. The newly
constructed template contained a largely extended scaffold, along
with a few special μ-features relevant to the μ-selectivity
of opioid ligands. As demonstrated in this paper, the new template
showed significantly improved efficacy in facilitating the alignment
modeling of a wide variety of opioid ligands, in terms of understanding
the structural correlations as well as interpreting the related SARs.

As illustrated in Part 2, refinement is a very important process
for the template construction, which has greatly contributed to the
validation and improvement of the template. And the refinement process
is still ongoing currently.

Besides the further validation and
improvement, another major goal for the template refinement is to
reveal additional μ-features on the scaffold so as to better
construe the SARs of various μ-ligands. As demonstrated in Part
2, although Regions C and E appear to be the major μ-featured
areas of this template, μ-features can also exist anywhere around
the template. And apparently, there are still unsolved SAR problems
around Regions A and D as well as at the back region. So we will continue
to look into these areas for the additional μ-featured structures
or patterns.

How to understand the structural diversity and
specificity of GPCR ligands is a major topic in the studies of ligand–receptor
interactions. As we know well, the single binding pocket of a GPCR
receptor can accommodate a wide variety of structurally diverse ligands,
while on the other hand, each of the individual ligands appears to
be bound very specifically. As we can understand better now, this
scenario is simply because all of the structures of ligands are highly
correlated so that they can be superimposed and merged to form a large
artificial template to represent the ligand-binding space of the receptor.
And according to the template-based alignment modeling, for a ligand
to bind effectively at the receptor’s binding pocket, high
structural specificity has to be met, namely, the major scaffold as
well as the key moieties of the ligand has to be adequately aligned
with the template.

With this vision in mind, we are able to
interpret many of the well-known SARs associated with the GPCR ligands,
such as the structural diversity and mutual correlations, the binding
specificity and selectivity, and agonism vs antagonism, etc. Hopefully,
by continued exploration with the innovative template-based alignment
modeling, we will be able to learn further the deep nature of GPCR–ligand
interactions.

Modeling Method and General Process
Information about the ligands and the related SARs was collected
from the literature. The structure drawings and aligning were carried
out with Accelrys DS Visualizer, a molecular modeling software available
from the Accelrys Software Inc.62 However,
the modeling study was essentially based on the visual examination
of the 3D structures of various opioid ligands along with the analysis
of their SAR data, a typical means in conventional medicinal chemistry
research, rather than by any computational process.

Template Docking
Preparation
of the Protein Chains of an Agonist-Bound μ-Receptor
The file of 5c1m in pdb format was downloaded from PDB (http://www.rcsb.org/). At the interface
of Accelrys DS Visualizer, by unchecking “Side chain”
at “Protein Groups”, all of the side chains of the receptor’s
protein chains were hidden from view with only the backbone shown,
so as to increase the visibility of the bound ligand and to facilitate
the subsequent docking process.

Docking the Template
With the bound ligand (Bu72) as a position reference, the template
was manually docked into the binding pocket of the receptor, where
the template and the bound ligand were superimposed at their common
morphinan core (note: the superimposition was carried out in such
a way that the orientation of the template was able to be adjusted
slightly to avoid any steric constraints against the receptor).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at
DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02244.Match patterns
frequently observed in the template-based alignment modeling; additional
examples of opioid antagonists due to the backbone/scaffold mismatch
(PDF)

3D-model
of the μ-agonist template (PDB)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02244_si_001.pdf

 ao9b02244_si_002.pdb

 The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank all our colleagues
who have helped for the review and evaluation of the manuscript. Z.W.
wishes to give special thanks to his mentors friends and family for
their constant supports.

Abbreviations
GPCRG-protein-coupled receptor

SARstructure–activity
relationship

TAMtemplate-based alignment modeling
==== Refs
References
Ghodse A. H. ; Bown P. J. ; Aronson J. K.  Opioid Analgesics
and Narcotic Antagonists . In Side Effects
of Drugs Annual ; Elsevier , 2000 ; Vol. 23 , pp 96 –113 .
Pasternak G.
W. ; Pan Y. X. 
Mu opioids
and their receptors: evolution of a concept . Pharmacol. Rev. 
2013 , 65 , 1257 –1317 . 10.1124/pr.112.007138 .24076545 
Bradbury A. F. ; Smyth D. G. ; Snell C. R. 
Biosynthetic
origin and receptor conformation of methionine enkephalin . Nature 
1976 , 260 , 165 –166 . 10.1038/260165a0 .1256559 
Schiller P. W. ; Yam C. F. ; Lis M. 
Evidence for
topographical analogy between methionine-enkephalin and morphine derivatives . Biochemistry 
1977 , 16 , 1831 –1838 . 10.1021/bi00628a011 .870028 
Balodis Y. Y. ; Nikiforovich G. V. ; Grinsteine I. V. ; Vegner R. E. ; Chipens G. I. 
Enkephalin: structure--function
relationships . FEBS Lett. 
1978 , 86 , 239 –242 . 10.1016/0014-5793(78)80570-5 .203486 
Aubry A. ; Birlirakis N. ; Sakarellos-Daitsiotis M. ; Sakarellos C. ; Marraud M. 
A crystal molecular conformation
of leucine-enkephalin related to the morphine molecule . Biopolymers 
1989 , 28 , 27 –40 . 10.1002/bip.360280106 .2720108 
Zhorov B. S. ; Ananthanarayanan V. S. 
Similarity
of Ca(2+)-bound conformations of morphine and Met-enkephalin: a computational
study . FEBS Lett. 
1994 , 354 , 131 –134 . 10.1016/0014-5793(94)01071-4 .7957911 
Wu Z. ; Hruby V. J. 
Backbone Alignment Modeling of the Structure-Activity
Relationships of Opioid Ligands . J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 
2011 , 51 , 1151 –1164 . 10.1021/ci2000852 .21488692 
Wu Z.   In Construction Validation and Application of an Artificial Template
for the Template-based Alignment Modeling on the N-Terminal Inhibitors
of Hsp90 , 246th ACS National Meeting, Indianapolis,
IN , Sept 8–12, 2013 .
ChEMBL Database . https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembldb/, 2012 .
IUPHAR  . Opioid Receptors ; IUPHAR/BPS , 2017 .
Le Bourdonnec B. ; Goodman A. J. ; Michaut M. ; Ye H. F. ; Graczyk T. M. ; Belanger S. ; Herbertz T. ; Yap G. P. ; DeHaven R. N. ; Dolle R. E. 
Elucidation
of the bioactive conformation of the N-substituted trans-3,4-dimethyl-4-(3-hydroxyphenyl)piperidine
class of mu-opioid receptor antagonists . J.
Med. Chem. 
2006 , 49 , 7278 –7289 . 10.1021/jm060486f .17149858 
Schiller P. W. ; Fundytus M. E. ; Merovitz L. ; Weltrowska G. ; Nguyen T. M. ; Lemieux C. ; Chung N. N. ; Coderre T. J. 
The opioid mu agonist/delta antagonist DIPP-NH(2)[Psi]
produces a potent analgesic effect, no physical dependence, and less
tolerance than morphine in rats . J. Med. Chem. 
1999 , 42 , 3520 –3526 . 10.1021/jm980724+ .10479285 
Filizola M. ; Devi L. A. 
Grand opening of structure-guided design for novel
opioids . Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 
2013 , 34 , 6 –12 . 10.1016/j.tips.2012.10.002 .23127545 
Koehl A. ; Hu H. ; Maeda S. ; Zhang Y. ; Qu Q. ; Paggi J. M. ; Latorraca N. R. ; Hilger D. ; Dawson R. ; Matile H. ; Schertler G. F. X. ; Granier S. ; Weis W. I. ; Dror R. O. ; Manglik A. ; Skiniotis G. ; Kobilka B. K. 
Structure of the μ-opioid receptor-Gi protein
complex . Nature 
2018 , 558 , 547 –552 . 10.1038/s41586-018-0219-7 .29899455 
Ben Haddou T. ; Beni S. ; Hosztafi S. ; Malfacini D. ; Calo G. ; Schmidhammer H. ; Spetea M. 
Pharmacological investigations
of N-substituent variation in morphine and oxymorphone: opioid receptor
binding, signaling and antinociceptive activity . PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e9923110.1371/journal.pone.0099231 .24919067 
Eguchi M. ; Shen R. Y. ; Shea J. P. ; Lee M. S. ; Kahn M. 
Design, synthesis, and evaluation
of opioid analogues with non-peptidic beta-turn scaffold: enkephalin
and endomorphin mimetics . J. Med. Chem. 
2002 , 45 , 1395 –1398 . 10.1021/jm0155897 .11906279 
Harding W. W. ; Tidgewell K. ; Byrd N. ; Cobb H. ; Dersch C. M. ; Butelman E. R. ; Rothman R. B. ; Prisinzano T. E. 
Neoclerodane
diterpenes as a novel scaffold for mu opioid receptor ligands . J. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 4765 –4771 . 10.1021/jm048963m .16033256 
Crowley R.
S. ; Riley A. P. ; Sherwood A. M. ; Groer C. E. ; Shivaperumal N. ; Biscaia M. ; Paton K. ; Schneider S. ; Provasi D. ; Kivell B. M. ; Filizola M. ; Prisinzano T. E. 
Synthetic
Studies of Neoclerodane Diterpenes from Salvia divinorum: Identification
of a Potent and Centrally Acting mu Opioid Analgesic with Reduced
Abuse Liability . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 11027 –11038 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01235 .27958743 
Harland A. A. ; Bender A. M. ; Griggs N. W. ; Gao C. ; Anand J. P. ; Pogozheva I. D. ; Traynor J. R. ; Jutkiewicz E. M. ; Mosberg H. I. 
Effects of N-Substitutions on the Tetrahydroquinoline
(THQ) Core of Mixed-Efficacy mu-Opioid Receptor (MOR)/delta-Opioid
Receptor (DOR) Ligands . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 4985 –4998 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00308 .27148755 
Fenalti G. ; Zatsepin N. A. ; Betti C. ; Giguere P. ; Han G. W. ; Ishchenko A. ; Liu W. ; Guillemyn K. ; Zhang H. ; James D. ; Wang D. ; Weierstall U. ; Spence J. C. ; Boutet S. ; Messerschmidt M. ; Williams G. J. ; Gati C. ; Yefanov O. M. ; White T. A. ; Oberthuer D. ; Metz M. ; Yoon C. H. ; Barty A. ; Chapman H. N. ; Basu S. ; Coe J. ; Conrad C. E. ; Fromme R. ; Fromme P. ; Tourwe D. ; Schiller P. W. ; Roth B. L. ; Ballet S. ; Katritch V. ; Stevens R. C. ; Cherezov V. 
Structural basis for bifunctional peptide recognition
at human delta-opioid receptor . Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 22 , 265 –268 . 10.1038/nsmb.2965 .25686086 
Knapp R. J. ; Landsman R. ; Waite S. ; Malatynska E. ; Varga E. ; Haq W. ; Hruby V. J. ; Roeske W. R. ; Nagase H. ; Yamamura H. I. 
Properties of TAN-67,
a nonpeptidic delta-opioid receptor agonist, at cloned human delta-
and mu-opioid receptors . Eur. J. Pharmacol.,
Mol. Pharmacol. 
1995 , 291 , 129 –134 . 10.1016/0922-4106(95)90134-5 .
Peng Y. ; Keenan S. M. ; Zhang Q. ; Kholodovych V. ; Welsh W. J. 
3D-QSAR Comparative Molecular Field
Analysis on Opioid Receptor Antagonists: Pooling Data from Different
Studies . J. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 1620 –1629 . 10.1021/jm049117e .15743203 
Collins N. ; Flippen-Anderson J. L. ; Haaseth R. C. ; Deschamps J. R. ; George C. ; Kover K. ; Hruby V. J. 
Conformational Determinants
of Agonist versus Antagonist Properties of [d-Pen2,d-Pen5]Enkephalin (DPDPE) Analogs at Opioid Receptors. Comparison
of X-ray Crystallographic Structure, Solution 1H NMR Data, and Molecular
Dynamic Simulations of [l-Ala3]DPDPE and [d-Ala3]DPDPE . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1996 , 118 , 2143 –2152 . 10.1021/ja9531081 .
Schiller P.
W. ; Weltrowska G. ; Schmidt R. ; Berezowska I. ; Nguyen T. M. ; Lemieux C. ; Chung N. N. ; Carpenter K. A. ; Wilkes B. C. 
Subtleties of structure-agonist
versus antagonist relationships of opioid peptides and peptidomimetics . J. Recept. Signal Transduction 
1999 , 19 , 573 –588 . 10.3109/10799899909036673 .
Goodman A. J. ; Le Bourdonnec B. ; Dolle R. E. 
Mu opioid receptor
antagonists: recent developments . ChemMedChem 
2007 , 2 , 1552 –1570 . 10.1002/cmdc.200700143 .17918759 
Dolle R. E. ; Michaut M. ; Martinez-Teipel B. ; Seida P. R. ; Ajello C. W. ; Muller A. L. ; DeHaven R. N. ; Carroll P. J. 
Nascent structure-activity relationship study of a
diastereomeric series of kappa opioid receptor antagonists derived
from CJ-15 208 . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2009 , 19 , 3647 –3650 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.04.105 .19464172 
Aldrich J. V. ; Kulkarni S. S. ; Senadheera S. N. ; Ross N. C. ; Reilley K. J. ; Eans S. O. ; Ganno M. L. ; Murray T. F. ; McLaughlin J. P. 
Unexpected opioid activity profiles
of analogues of the novel peptide kappa opioid receptor ligand CJ-15 208 . ChemMedChem 
2011 , 6 , 1739 –1745 . 10.1002/cmdc.201100113 .21761566 
Podlogar B. L. ; Paterlini M. G. ; Ferguson D. M. ; Leo G. C. ; Demeter D. A. ; Brown F. K. ; Reitz A. B. 
Conformational analysis of the endogenous mu-opioid
agonist endomorphin-1 using NMR spectroscopy and molecular modeling . FEBS Lett. 
1998 , 439 , 13 –20 . 10.1016/S0014-5793(98)01202-2 .9849868 
Keller M. ; Boissard C. ; Patiny L. ; Chung N. N. ; Lemieux C. ; Mutter M. ; Schiller P. W. 
Pseudoproline-Containing
Analogues of Morphiceptin and Endomorphin-2: Evidence for a Cis Tyr-Pro
Amide Bond in the Bioactive Conformation . J.
Med. Chem. 
2001 , 44 , 3896 –3903 . 10.1021/jm000332e .11689075 
Leitgeb B. 
Structural investigation of endomorphins
by experimental and theoretical methods: hunting for the bioactive
conformation . Chem. Biodiversity 
2007 , 4 , 2703 –2724 . 10.1002/cbdv.200790221 .
De Marco R. ; Bedini A. ; Spampinato S. M. ; Cavina L. ; Pirazzoli E. ; Gentilucci L. 
Versatile
Picklocks to Access All Opioid Receptors: Tuning the Selectivity and
Functional Profile of the Cyclotetrapeptide c[Phe-D-Pro-Phe-Trp] (CJ-15 208) . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 9255 –9261 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b00420 .27607020 
Cardillo G. ; Gentilucci L. ; Tolomelli A. ; Spinosa R. ; Calienni M. ; Qasem A. R. ; Spampinato S. 
Synthesis and evaluation of the affinity
toward mu-opioid receptors of atypical, lipophilic ligands based on
the sequence c[-Tyr-Pro-Trp-Phe-Gly-] . J. Med.
Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 5198 –5203 . 10.1021/jm0498811 .15456262 
Gentilucci L. ; Tolomelli A. ; De Marco R. ; Spampinato S. ; Bedini A. ; Artali R. 
The inverse
type II beta-turn on D-Trp-Phe, a pharmacophoric motif for MOR agonists . ChemMedChem 
2011 , 6 , 1640 –1653 . 10.1002/cmdc.201100169 .21721130 
Lipkowski A. W. ; Tam S. W. ; Portoghese P. S. 
Peptides
as receptor selectivity modulators of opiate pharmacophores . J. Med. Chem. 
1986 , 29 , 1222 –1225 . 10.1021/jm00157a018 .2879914 
Wentland M. P. ; Lou R. ; Lu Q. ; Bu Y. ; VanAlstine M. A. ; Cohen D. J. ; Bidlack J. M. 
Syntheses and opioid receptor binding
properties of carboxamido-substituted opioids . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2009 , 19 , 203 –208 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.10.134 .19027293 
Hiebel A. C. ; Lee Y. S. ; Bilsky E. ; Giuvelis D. ; Deschamps J. R. ; Parrish D. A. ; Aceto M. D. ; May E. L. ; Harris L. S. ; Coop A. ; Dersch C. M. ; Partilla J. S. ; Rothman R. B. ; Cheng K. ; Jacobson A. E. ; Rice K. C. 
Probes for narcotic receptor mediated phenomena. 34.
Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of a potent mu-agonist
delta-antagonist and an exceedingly potent antinociceptive in the
enantiomeric C9-substituted 5-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-N-phenylethylmorphan
series . J. Med. Chem. 
2007 , 50 , 3765 –3776 . 10.1021/jm061325e .17625813 
Janecka A. ; Fichna J. ; Janecki T. 
Opioid receptors and their ligands . Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 4 , 1 –17 . 10.2174/1568026043451618 .14754373 
Huang P. ; Kehner G. B. ; Cowan A. ; Liu-Chen L.-Y. 
Comparison of Pharmacological Activities of Buprenorphine
and Norbuprenorphine: Norbuprenorphine Is a Potent Opioid Agonist . J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
2001 , 297 , 688 –695 .11303059 
Linz K. ; Christoph T. ; Tzschentke T. M. ; Koch T. ; Schiene K. ; Gautrois M. ; Schroder W. ; Kogel B. Y. ; Beier H. ; Englberger W. ; Schunk S. ; De Vry J. ; Jahnel U. ; Frosch S. 
Cebranopadol: a novel potent analgesic nociceptin/orphanin
FQ peptide and opioid receptor agonist . J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 
2014 , 349 , 535 –548 . 10.1124/jpet.114.213694 .24713140 
Hruby V. J. ; Agnes R. S. 
Conformation-activity
relationships of opioid peptides with selective activities at opioid
receptors . Biopolymers 
1999 , 51 , 391 –410 . 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0282(1999)51:6<391::AID-BIP3>3.0.CO;2-X .10797229 
Gentilucci L. ; Tolomelli A. 
Recent advances
in the investigation of the bioactive conformation of peptides active
at the micro-opioid receptor. conformational analysis of endomorphins . Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 4 , 105 –121 . 10.2174/1568026043451627 .14754379 
Schiller P. W. ; Nguyen T. M. ; Chung N. N. ; Lemieux C. 
Dermorphin analogues carrying an increased positive
net charge in their “message” domain display extremely
high mu opioid receptor selectivity . J. Med.
Chem. 
1989 , 32 , 698 –703 . 10.1021/jm00123a035 .2537427 
Handa B. K. ; Land A. C. ; Lord J. A. ; Morgan B. A. ; Rance M. J. ; Smith C. F. 
Analogues of beta-LPH61-64
possessing selective agonist activity at mu-opiate receptors . Eur. J. Pharmacol. 
1981 , 70 , 531 –540 . 10.1016/0014-2999(81)90364-2 .6263640 
Sasaki Y. ; Matsui M. ; Taguchi M. ; Suzuki K. ; Sakurada S. ; Sato T. ; Sakurada T. ; Kisara K. 
d-Arg2-dermorphin Tetrapeptide Analogs: A
Potent and Long-lasting Analgesic Activity after Subcutaneous Administration . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
1984 , 120 , 214 –218 . 10.1016/0006-291X(84)91435-9 .6712689 
Ballet S. ; Feytens D. ; Wachter R. D. ; Vlaeminck M. D. ; Marczak E. D. ; Salvadori S. ; Graaf C. ; Rognan D. ; Negri L. ; Lattanzi R. ; Lazarus L. H. ; Tourwe D. ; Balboni G. 
Conformationally constrained
opioid ligands: the Dmt-Aba and Dmt-Aia versus Dmt-Tic scaffold . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2009 , 19 , 433 –437 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.11.051 .19062273 
Zimmerman D. M. ; Gidda J. S. ; Cantrell B. E. ; Schoepp D. D. ; Johnson B. G. ; Leander J. D. 
Discovery of a potent, peripherally
selective trans-3,4-dimethyl-4-(3-hydroxyphenyl)piperidine opioid
antagonist for the treatment of gastrointestinal motility disorders . J. Med. Chem. 
1994 , 37 , 2262 –2265 . 10.1021/jm00041a003 .8057274 
Neary P. ; Delaney C. P. 
Alvimopan . Expert Opin. Invest.
Drugs 
2005 , 14 , 479 –488 . 10.1517/13543784.14.4.479 .
Janecka A. ; Kruszynski R. 
Conformationally
restricted peptides as tools in opioid receptor studies . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 12 , 471 –481 . 10.2174/0929867053362983 .15720255 
Remesic M. ; Lee Y. S. ; Hruby V. J. 
Cyclic
Opioid Peptides . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 23 , 1288 –1303 . 10.2174/0929867323666160427123005 .27117332 
DiMaio J. ; Nguyen T. M. ; Lemieux C. ; Schiller P. W. 
Synthesis and pharmacological characterization in vitro
of cyclic enkephalin analogues: effect of conformational constraints
on opiate receptor selectivity . J. Med. Chem. 
1982 , 25 , 1432 –1438 . 10.1021/jm00354a008 .6296388 
Piekielna J. ; Kluczyk A. ; Gentilucci L. ; Cerlesi M. C. ; Calo G. ; Tomboly C. ; Lapinski K. ; Janecki T. ; Janecka A. 
Ring size in cyclic endomorphin-2
analogs modulates receptor binding affinity and selectivity . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2015 , 13 , 6039 –6046 . 10.1039/C5OB00565E .25948019 
Zadina J.
E. ; Nilges M. R. ; Morgenweck J. ; Zhang X. ; Hackler L. ; Fasold M. B. 
Endomorphin
analog analgesics with reduced abuse liability, respiratory depression,
motor impairment, tolerance, and glial activation relative to morphine . Neuropharmacology 
2016 , 105 , 215 –227 . 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.024 .26748051 
Vardanyan R. S. ; Hruby V. J. 
Fentanyl-related
compounds and derivatives: current status and future prospects for
pharmaceutical applications . Future Med. Chem. 
2014 , 6 , 385 –412 . 10.4155/fmc.13.215 .24635521 
Moolten M. S. ; Fishman J. B. ; Chen J. C. ; Carlson K. R. 
Etonitazene: an
opioid selective for the mu receptor types . Life Sci. 
1993 , 52 , PL199 –203 . 10.1016/0024-3205(93)90118-M .8097861 
Toll L. ; Berzetei-Gurske I. P. ; Polgar W. E. ; Brandt S. R. ; Adapa I. D. ; Rodriguez L. ; Schwartz R. W. ; Haggart D. ; O’Brien A. ; White A. ; Kennedy J. M. ; Craymer K. ; Farrington L. ; Auh J. S. 
Standard binding and functional assays related to medications
development division testing for potential cocaine and opiate narcotic
treatment medications . NIDA Res. Monogr. 
1998 , 178 , 440 –466 .9686407 
Mosberg H. I. ; Yeomans L. ; Harland A. A. ; Bender A. M. ; Sobczyk-Kojiro K. ; Anand J. P. ; Clark M. J. ; Jutkiewicz E. M. ; Traynor J. R. 
Opioid Peptidomimetics: Leads for the Design of Bioavailable
Mixed Efficacy mu-Opioid Receptor (MOR) Agonist/delta-Opioid Receptor
(DOR) Antagonist Ligands . J. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 56 , 2139 –2149 . 10.1021/jm400050y .23419026 
Goicoechea C. ; Sánchez E. ; Cano C. ; Jagerovic N. ; MartÃn M. I. 
Analgesic activity and pharmacological characterization
of N-[1-phenylpyrazol-3-yl]-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-piperidyl] propenamide,
a new opioid agonist acting peripherally . Eur.
J. Pharmacol. 
2008 , 595 , 22 –29 . 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.07.052 .18706410 
Pinna G. A. ; Cignarella G. ; Loriga G. ; Murineddu G. ; Mussinu J. M. ; Ruiu S. ; Fadda P. ; Fratta W. 
N-3(9)-arylpropenyl-N-9(3)-propionyl-3,9-diazabicyclo[3.3.1]nonanes
as mu-opioid receptor agonists. Effects on mu-affinity of arylalkenyl
chain modifications . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2002 , 10 , 1929 –1937 . 10.1016/S0968-0896(01)00436-9 .11937351 
Wentland M. P. ; VanAlstine M. ; Kucejko R. ; Lou R. ; Cohen D. J. ; Parkhill A. L. ; Bidlack J. M. 
Redefining the structure-activity relationships of
2,6-methano-3-benzazocines. 4. Opioid receptor binding properties
of 8-[N-(4′-phenyl)-phenethyl)carboxamido] analogues of cyclazocine
and ethylketocycalzocine . J. Med. Chem. 
2006 , 49 , 5635 –5639 . 10.1021/jm060278n .16942039 
Wentland M. P. ; Jo S. ; Gargano J. M. ; VanAlstine M. A. ; Cohen D. J. ; Bidlack J. M. 
Redefining
the structure-activity relationships of 2,6-methano-3-benzazocines.
Part 8. High affinity ligands for opioid receptors in the picomolar
Ki range: oxygenated N-(2-[1,1′-biphenyl]-4-ylethyl) analogues
of 8-CAC . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2012 , 22 , 7340 –7344 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.10.081 .23142613 
Accelrys . Accelrys Discovery
Studio Visualizer . http://accelrys.com/products/discovery-studio/visualization.html.

