
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146043610.1021/acsomega.9b00505ArticleComparison of α-Helix and β-Sheet
Structure Adaptation to a Quantum Dot Geometry: Toward the Identification
of an Optimal Motif for a Protein Nanoparticle Cover Kopeć Katarzyna †Pędziwiatr Marta †Gront Dominik ‡Sztatelman Olga §Sławski Jakub ∥Łazicka Magdalena ⊥Worch Remigiusz †Zawada Katarzyna #Makarova Katerina #Nyk Marcin ∇Grzyb Joanna *∥† Institute
of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Aleja Lotników 32/46, PL02668 Warsaw, Poland‡ Faculty
of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, PL02093 Warsaw, Poland§ Institute
of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawińskiego 5a, PL02106 Warsaw, Poland∥ Department
of Biophysics, Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Wrocław, F. Joliot-Curie Street 14a, PL50383 Wrocław, Poland⊥ Department
of Metabolic Regulation, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, PL02096 Warsaw, Poland# Department
of Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy with the Laboratory Medicine
Division, The Medical University of Warsaw, Banacha 1 Street, PL02097 Warsaw, Poland∇ Advanced
Materials Engineering and Modelling Group, Faculty of Chemistry, Wrocław University of Science and Technology, Wybrzeże Wyspiańskiego
27, PL50370 Wrocław, Poland* E-mail: joanna.grzyb@uwr.edu.pl.05 08 2019 20 08 2019 4 8 13086 13099 05 04 2019 23 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

While
quantum dots (QDs) are useful as fluorescent labels, their
application in biosciences is limited due to the stability and hydrophobicity
of their surface. In this study, we tested two types of proteins for
use as a cover for spherical QDs, composed of cadmium selenide. Pumilio
homology domain (Puf), which is mostly α-helical, and leucine-rich
repeat (LRR) domain, which is rich in β-sheets, were selected
to determine if there is a preference for one of these secondary structure
types for nanoparticle covers. The protein sequences were optimized
to improve their interaction with the surface of QDs. The solubilization
of the apoproteins and their assembly with nanoparticles required
the application of a detergent, which was removed in subsequent steps.
Finally, only the Puf-based cover was successful enough as a QD hydrophilic
cover. We showed that a single polypeptide dimer of Puf, PufPuf, can
form a cover. We characterized the size and fluorescent properties
of the obtained QD:protein assemblies. We showed that the secondary
structure of the Puf proteins was not destroyed upon contact with
the QDs. We demonstrated that these assemblies do not promote the
formation of reactive oxygen species during illumination of the nanoparticles.
The data represent advances in the effort to obtain a stable biocompatible
cover for QDs.

document-id-old-9ao9b00505document-id-new-14ao-2019-00505yccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Colloidal quantum dots
(QDs) are quasi-spherical nanoparticles
with unique fluorescent properties. Currently, they are widely used
in several scientific areas, such as medical and life sciences. They
are composed of a semiconductor core [e.g., cadmium selenide (CdSe),
cadmium telluride (CdTe), or cadmium sulfide (CdS)], an optional semiconductor
shell [e.g., zinc sulfide (ZnS)], and an organic passivating crystal
surface cover. Although QDs were first identified in materials sciences
and electronics,1 they are now broadly
known in life sciences.2,3 While many potential applications
in medicine have been identified, none have yet been commercially
successful.4−7 For medicine and life science applications, QDs may be covered with
antibodies or proteins. These additional surface layers may be added
to direct QDs to their potential target/therapeutic sites, such as
specific organs of the body, the interior of cells, and specific organelles.
For this type of application, a QD cover built from long protein chains,
as discussed in this paper, may provide additional advantages.

Although QDs are potent fluorophores with a high fluorescence quantum
yield, large Stokes shift, and size-tunable emission maximum, their
application in a water environment is restricted by their stability
and potential toxicity.8−13 The toxicity of QDs is related mainly to the stability of their
organic cover, which protects the core from the removal of Cd ions
(or other ions). The ion loss causes defects in the formation of the
QD surface and fluorescence bleaching. An organic cover is added to
QDs during synthesis, and it is necessary to protect nanoparticles
from aggregation.1 Often, the first cover
is composed of hydrophobic hydrocarbons with a functional group (e.g.,
phosphine, thiol) on one end of the chain. For example, trioctylphosphine
(TOP) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) are used to obtain CdSe and
CdSe/ZnS QDs. A phosphine group allows an organic molecule to bind
to the nanoparticle atoms. For QDs intended for use in a water environment,
the cover must be hydrophilic; this can be realized by oxidation of
the hydrophobic cover of hydrocarbons to carboxylic acids or by the
substitution of hydrophobic molecules with hydrophilic molecules,
such as mercaptopropionic acid or l-cysteine.14 In most cases, the final cover consists of multiple
small molecules. The hydrophilic groups should be charged to prevent
aggregation. A carboxylic group or an amine group is also used to
enhance the functionalization of the QD, for example, its attachment
to antibodies.3,15

However, a cover composed
of dozens of small molecules can result
in the easy loss of individual molecules, followed by the formation
of defects on the QD surface. New types of covers may broaden the
applications of QDs. In most strategies, there is only one type of
functional group available on a QD surface (e.g., a carboxylic group),
which reduces the number of groups that can be coupled to it [here,
e.g., amino groups by a reaction using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC)]. While this is sufficient for most applications,
it may be beneficial to have multiple options. When a protein is used
as a QD cover, carboxylic and amine groups are available, but it is
also possible to introduce a more complex binding site (e.g., targeting
a tetracysteine motif with biarsenical probes or addressing HisTag
by Cy3NTA19). With one protein working
as a QD cover, it is also possible to add a second protein domain
that has a different function, for example, being an epitope that
can be recognized by specific cell receptors. This may not allow us
to simplify the preparation and lead to the ability to control the
stoichiometry of nanohybrids.

Recently, we showed the successful
use of membrane scaffold proteins
(MSPs) when substituting a hydrophobic cover for a hydrophilic cover
in CdSe QDs.20 These nanocrystals, with
a diameter of a few nanometers, were made from CdSe, and they were
covered with an organic shell composed of TOPO and its derivatives.
In the present study, we used CdSe QDs with a diameter of about 3
nm and an emission maximum of 553 nm. The entire procedure, briefly
summarized in Figure 1, required a step with detergent to ensure the transient solubilization
of the QDs and the stabilization of the MSPs. Several detergents were
suitable for that function; however, n-octylglucoside
was considered to be the most effective one. In the final steps, the
detergents were removed by dialysis and gel filtration. The obtained
QD:MSP conjugates were monomers (one QD and two to three MSP chains),
which were stable for several days. The fluorescent properties of
QDs, namely, their emission and extinction spectra, were preserved.
However, their quantum yield was decreased; this could be the result
of a simple change in a QD surface neighborhood or just the partial
lack of a cover. MSPs are derivatives of apolipoprotein A (Figure 1B), and they were
first elaborated to support the formation of lipid nanodiscs in vitro.21,22 Based on the known organization of these proteins in nanodiscs,
we proposed that the MSPs encircled the QD sphere, forming a belt.
Consequently, they might not be optimal for forming an effective coat
on a spherical nanoparticle.

Figure 1 Crystal structures (colored by Kyte and Doolittle16 hydrophobicity scale: red, basic; brown, acidic;
green,
polar-noncharged; blue, hydrophobic) of the template proteins considered
in the present study: (A) Puf domain (PDB: 3k5q),17 (B) apolipoprotein
A1 (PDB: 2a01),18 and (C) LRR domain (PDB: 4fmz). (D) Schematic
representation of the experiment. Solubilization of hydrophobic QD
(CdSe in TOPO) leads to QD in detergent (SDS) micelles or a mixed
SDS/TOPO cover. For simplicity, TOPO and SDS were only presented circumferentially;
in reality, they cover a sphere. After mixing with Puf, MSP, or LRR, respectively, the QD:protein assemblies were formed.
Partial or complete coverage is possible for both Puf and LRR, here
presented in two possible projections with two Puf/LRR chains colored
in red and violet. The orientation of the protein chains over a sphere are hypothetical
based on the crystal structures of Puf/LRR and the known organization
of the MSPs in the nanodiscs.

In this study, we addressed whether it is possible to obtain a
protein that better adapts to a spherical surface. To the best of
our knowledge, there are no natural proteins that are directly able
to form a cover for this type of structure that has a sphere with
a diameter of a few nanometers. There are basket-like proteins, for
example, lipocalins,23 but these domains
bind ligands that are less than 1 nm in diameter. Thus, the type of
protein we are looking for must be designed, but designing it from
scratch and then improving it, for example, by the random mutation
of such a huge structure, are difficult, if not impossible. Therefore,
we need more clues for optimal protein elaboration. Toward that end,
we addressed the first crucial question: is there a preference for
an α-helix motif or a β-sheet motif for proteins that
form QD covers? We applied a protein de novo design strategy, namely,
in silico mutation, to improve two proteins—a protein with
an α-helical structure and a protein with a β-sheet layer—which
are similar in shape, size, and hydrophobic pattern but differ in
the composition of their secondary structure.

A protein design
is a process, which, at first, allowed us to obtain
a protein with the desired structure and function.24−28 Ideally, the design might be created from scratch,
with no homology to existing structures. In our approach, due to the
computational restraints caused by large structures, we had to base
the design of known templates. We selected two motifs, the Puf domain
and LRR domain, and then we introduced a mutation to improve their
fit to the surface of the QDs. Figure 1A,C presents the crystal structures of the selected
representatives of the Puf and LRR families. Both protein templates
are broad ribbon-like structures known, at least from their crystal
structures, to form a shape that might resemble a basket with an internal
diameter suitable for accommodating QDs. It is also important to note
that the selected proteins are already structural repeats, and it
is highly probable that further extension of the motifs will also
work. The Puf domain (Figure 1D) is typical for RNA- and DNA-binding proteins, and in nature,
it adapts (e.g., to a cleft in the DNA double helix). This motif contains
two layers of α-helices. Some proteins have several Puf domain
repeats. The LRR domain (Figure 1C) is found in many proteins; it is responsible for
forming protein–protein contacts between immunoglobulins and
their targets and proteins that are involved in cell adhesion and
cytoskeleton formation.29−31 The LRR domain also consists
of two layers; however, one layer is a row of β-sheets (internal),
and the other layer is a row of α-helices.

One may intuitively
expect that the β-sheet layer would be
better for building the desired sphere-wrapped shape since there are
many β-barrel proteins, including lipocalins, which bind a ligand
inside a protein basket,23 or toxins, which
form pores in the plasma membrane.32 A
β-sheet is flatter, thinner, and generally more flexible than
an α-helix.33,34 However, an α-helix motif
is much easier to design, and it has much higher environmental stability
than a β-sheet motif.35,36 Our results suggest
that an α-helix structure may be used in future QD covers, and
their stability indicates that it will be more useful than β-sheet-based
designs. Since the QD geometry suggests that two to three Puf molecules
are needed for proper coverage, we also tested the single-chain duplication
of a Puf protein, PufPuf. However, we found that such a simple duplication
does not improve the stability of the QD:protein assemblies.

Results
Purification
Optimization and QD:Protein Assembly Formation
The proteins
used in the present study were expressed in Escherichia
coli. Upon expression in bacteria, both
the Puf and LRR proteins were found mainly in the inclusion bodies
in all the tested expression conditions. Thus, we decided to purify
the proteins under denaturing conditions. The proteins were solubilized
completely in 6 M guanidine chloride. We tested refolding by dilution,
also in the presence of arginine, but only a small portion of the
initial amount of protein was soluble. Finally, we found that, to
keep the Puf proteins in the solution, we needed to add a detergent,
preferably sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Consequently, we decided
to use SDS to solubilize the QDs. This detergent is not easily removed
by dialysis, and it is highly probable that some molecules remained
in the final QD:protein assembly but in an amount that is not detectable
by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and that does not
influence the secondary structure of proteins. In the present study,
pH 8.0 was used because it was more convenient and it corresponded
to the pH condition required for possible future applications in in
vitro and cell studies. However, QD:protein assemblies could be obtained
using a broad pH range (at least 6–9.5; see the description
provided in Figure S1, Supporting Information).
Hydrophobic CdSe QDs, with TOPO and its derivatives as a cover and
an emission maximum at 553 nm, were used in the study. The QD:Puf
and QD:PufPuf assemblies were stable for at least 3 months when stored
at 4 °C. The stability was estimated from the absorption and
emission spectra, which did not change significantly. The QD:LRR preparation
was much less stable, as demonstrated by the appearance of a reddish
precipitate during storage at the same conditions.

In general,
we observed that efficient assembly requires at least 40 μM
of protein (and a QD:protein ratio of at least 1:5) when starting
the QD:protein mixture. At a higher concentration, the preparation
had the same quality. In a lower concentration (not shown), after
dialysis, we observed a lower ratio between the QD and the protein
absorption and emission. While it was still possible to obtain QD:protein
assemblies during the gel filtration, more free protein was observed,
and more QD was lost as a precipitate. However, because the assembly
process is not a simple binding–unbinding event, it was not
possible to analyze the changes in the reaction equilibrium based
on the protein concentration. When the QD:Puf assembly or QD:PufPuf
assembly was formed, it could be diluted several times; moreover,
rechromatography of the fraction caused no changes except for dilution
(data not shown). Thus, although binding may occur with a low on-rate
constant, the off-rate constant may be close to zero.

Size of the
QD:Protein Assemblies
We performed gel
filtration to estimate the size of the QD:protein assemblies. As a
control, the same experiment was done on the refolded apoproteins
that were dialyzed from urea and SDS. As shown in the example chromatograms
presented in Figure 2, in all cases, assemblies were formed between the QDs and proteins.
The QDs used in the study have radii of 1.43 nm, and theoretically,
they should be detectable on the column at elution volumes at about
18–19 mL. However, an elution of QDs alone is not shown because
they manifest as a smear over a column, or even as a stack to a column,
as very large aggregates. The formation of QD:protein assemblies was
characterized by the disappearance of the free protein elution maximum
and the appearance of peaks with a shorter elution volume, corresponding
to higher Stokes radii: For the QD:Puf assembly, the approximate radii
were about 9.7 nm versus 6.4 nm for the apoproteins. For the QD:PufPuf
assembly, the apoprotein radii were 10.3 nm versus 6.8 nm, and for
the QD:LRR assembly, the apoprotein radii were 8.6 nm versus 3.4 nm.
Those species have aligned 280 and 540 nm absorption maxima, which
are expected for species containing QDs and proteins. The Stokes radii
were calculated on the basis of control run of standards (see the Experimental Section). For the preparation with
a higher amount of protein, some peaks of the free proteins, not bound
with QDs, were also found (not shown). In some preparations (see Figure 2B,C), higher-mass
species corresponding to higher-mass aggregates, eluting at the column
void volume (about 7 mL), were present. The number of aggregates was
higher for the LRR domain. For QD:Puf and QD:PufPuf, the amount varied
between the preparations. We also observed that longer dialysis resulted
in a decrease in the amount of aggregates (data not shown), which
suggests that some reorganization occurs during that process. We also
tested this procedure with the P1D1 protein from the MSP group, for
which we already described the formation of the QD:protein conjugates.
The results obtained for the QD solubilized with SDS (data not shown)
were similar to those shown for the other detergents.

Figure 2 Examples of the elution
profiles (gel filtration on Superose 6)
of the QD:protein assemblies (followed at 280 and 540 nm) and of the
dialyzed apoproteins (followed at 280 nm). (A) QD:Puf, (B) QD:PufPuf,
and (C) QD:LRR.

We also analyzed the size of the
QD:protein assemblies using fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy (FCS). This method shows an average radius
of fluorescent molecules in the solution, but it is free of the gel
filtration artifacts induced by the interaction with beads. Table 1 presents the hydrodynamic
radii of the species obtained during preparation of the QD:protein
assemblies, calculated on the basis of the Einstein–Stokes
equation. After dialysis, the calculated radii were longer than the
radii of the QDs in SDS. Aggregates were also present, which, for
the QD:LRR assemblies, render precise calculation impossible. After
gel filtration, QD:LRR fractions were immeasurable. For other proteins,
the monomer-related fractions were free from aggregates, and the calculated
radii were shorter than the radii measured directly after dialysis.
The QD:P1D1 radius was even shorter than the radius of the QD in SDS.
This finding corresponds to the results obtained in the previous study,20 and it is most probably caused by the large
micelles of the QD:SDS or the partial aggregation of the QDs in SDS.

Table 1 Hydrodynamic Radii Calculated from
the FCS Measurement of the QDs Solubilized in SDS and QD:Protein Assemblies
after Dialysis and after Gel Filtration (Monomer-Related Fraction)
sample	radius (nm)	
theoretical
radius37	1.43	
QD in SDS	5.8 ± 0.2	
after dialysis	 	
QD:P1D1	6.1 ± 0.4	
QD:Puf	11.3 ± 0.7	
QD:PufPuf	11.8 ± 0.9	
QD:LRR	26.8 ± 7.1 (large aggregates)	
after gel filtration	 	
QD:P1D1	4.2 ± 0.2	
QD:Puf	7.0 ± 0.6	
QD:PufPuf	6.7 ± 0.5	
QD:LRR	n.d.	
Similar results were obtained for preliminary
tests using CdSe/ZnS
QDs (data not shown). However, the main problem was the initial solubilization
of the CdSe/ZnS QDs, which resulted in a much lower yield of final
preparation. Therefore, in subsequent procedures, only CdSe QDs were
used.

Electrophoretic Behavior of the QD:Protein Assemblies: An Indication
of Size and Stability
The behavior and stability of the QD:protein
assemblies were tested using agarose electrophoresis. Figure 3 presents the separation, visualized
by the fluorescence of the QDs. The QDs without protein moved faster
due to their shorter radius and, possibly, the higher charge provided
by the negatively charged SDS molecules. Some of the QDs were stacked
in a well, possibly because of losing their SDS micelles. When the
protein was present in the assembly, the electrophoretic mobility
was lower than that of the free QDs. QD:Puf and QD:PufPuf moved by
comparable distances, while P1D1 was faster than QD:Puf but slower
than the free QDs. QD:LRR was mostly stacked in a well. Only a small
amount of QD:LRR was moving through the gel.

Figure 3 Separation of the QD:protein
assemblies on agarose gel with fluorescence
visualization. Excitation with a 305 nm transilluminator; detection
using a CCD camera protected by an EtBr-type broadband filter.

The difference in electrophoretic mobility corresponded
(although
not directly proportionally) to the zeta (ζ) potential measured
for the QDs solubilized in SDS and the QD:protein assemblies (see Figure S2, Supporting Information). The ζ
value for the QDs in SDS was at least twice that for the QD:protein
assemblies. The specific values of the QD:protein assemblies differed
depending on the protein that was used. The value was higher for QD:Puf
than for QD:PufPuf, which indicates that the organization of those
two proteins on the nanoparticle surface was different. The potential
of SDS:QDs (−44.4 mV) was higher than that measured before
for SDS-modified CdSe (−57.6 mV8). However, in that studies, QDs were much bigger (178 nm) and measured
in different buffer conditions, which may influence the measurement.
The protein cover of QDs results in an increase in ζ to values
corresponding to CdSe QDs with nonionic organic ligands.8

Fluorescence Properties: Steady-State Spectra
and Fluorescence
Lifetime
The maximum emission of the QDs solubilized in SDS
was slightly left-shifted in comparison to the organic solvent, from
562 nm in chloroform to 560 nm in SDS-water (Figure 4A). Additionally, the emission intensity
decreased, which corresponded to a fluorescence quantum yield that
was about four times lower. For the QD:protein assemblies after dialysis
(Figure 4B), the fluorescence
emission spectra showed that there were two maxima: at about 330–320
nm (strong emission of the tryptophan residues of Puf and PufPuf and
a weak emission of one tryptophan residue and several tyrosine residues
of LRR) and at 555 nm for the QDs. After gel filtration, the emission
maximum of the QDs was even more left-shifted: to 552 nm for the Puf:PufPuf
assembly and to 546 nm for LRR. The protein emission maximum results
were the same after dialysis.

Figure 4 (A, B) Fluorescence spectra (excitation at 280
nm) of the QDs in
chloroform and after solubilization in SDS after dialysis in assemblies
with proteins (A) and after gel filtration (B) and (C) spectra of
monomer-related fractions. The QDs in chloroform and SDS-water in
a concentration of 1.5 μM; the other spectra were normalized
at the QD emission maximum for easier analysis.

During the assembly process, the initial quantum yields of the
CdSe QDs (about 9%) were decreased to about 2% for QD:Puf and QD:PufPuf
and to about 0.8% for QD:LRR.

The QD fluorescence lifetime was
also altered in the QD:protein
assemblies (Table 2). Basically, in conjunction with helical proteins, the average fluorescence
lifetime was longer by about 2 ns; in contrast, no significant change
in the fluorescence lifetime was observed with LRR. Examples of the
individual fluorescence decay of QD:SDS and QD:Puf are shown in Figure S3A (Supporting Information).

Table 2 Average Fluorescence Lifetime (τav) Measured for the QDs Solubilized in SDS and the QD:Protein
Assemblies
sample	τav (ns)	
QD in SDS	10.2 ± 0.1	
QD:P1D1	13.0 ± 0.1	
QD:Puf	12.6 ± 0.2	
QD:PufPuf	12.8 ± 0.3	
QD:LRR	10.0 ± 0.3	
Because the fluorescence decay of QDs is usually multiexponential,38 we also analyzed the length of the individual
components and the relative ratio of their amplitudes. The best fit
was obtained with three components. After assembly with proteins,
the lengths of the components and their amplitudes ratio changed (Figure S3B, Supporting Information). In all cases,
including LRR, the length of the longest component was increased by
at least 2 ns. In all cases, the shortest τ was 0.5–0.6
ns, but its relative contribution increased from about 52% in the
QD:SDS assembly to 57% in the assembly with PufPuf, 70% in the LRR
and Puf assemblies, and 74% for P1D1.

ATR-FTIR Analysis of the
Composition of the QD:Protein Assemblies
Attenuated total
reflection FTIR experiment (ATR-FTIR) of the samples
was performed to determine the overall composition of the QD:protein
assemblies and to evaluate the secondary structure of the proteins.
For the overall composition analysis, the main question was as follows:
are molecules from the original hydrophobic cover (namely, TOPO and
its derivatives39) or detergent (SDS) molecules
still present in the QD:protein assemblies? All of the analyzed spectra
contained a region with absorption due to symmetric and asymmetric
stretching of the CH2 and CH3 groups and the
aliphatic C–H mode (Figure 5A). In a sample containing a protein (shown in the
example of the apoPuf and QD:Puf assemblies), there is also an aromatic
C–H vibrational mode. We were most interested in determining
if there was a change in the relative ratio between the particular
vibrational mode intensities when comparing the QD with TOPO on a
surface to the apoPuf and QD:Puf. The QD:Puf spectrum was different
from the apoPuf spectrum, but the difference was not due to the simple
superposition of the QD spectrum and apoPuf spectrum. Especially,
the C–H aromatic vibrations and CH3 symmetric vibrations
were relatively intensified. This suggests that the interaction between
the QD and protein changes the probability of observing specific vibrations.
Moreover, similar changes were found for the QD:PufPuf assembly (data
not shown). The analysis of the recorded spectra of QD:protein assemblies
did not rule out the possibility that residual TOPO molecules were
still present in the assemblies.

Figure 5 Examples of FTIR spectra in the region
of CH3 and CH2 symmetric (νs) and asymmetric (νas) stretching vibrations (A)
and other fingerprint vibrations
and (B) of selected steps in the QD:PufPuf assembly preparation. Spectra
were arbitrarily scaled (independently for both regions) to allow
for comparison.

The most useful spectral region
for examining the presence of TOPO
molecules in the assemblies is the 1500–800 cm–1 range. Although this region is crowded, some characteristic signals
can be observed. Figure 5B presents a comparison of this region for the representative samples
obtained from various preparations. In the spectrum of the QD with
a hydrophobic cover (original QD preparation, dried from chloroform),
we might see the dominant band at 1085 cm–1, which
is attributed to the stretching vibration of the P=O group
bound to the CdSe surface.40 There was
also a minor signal from a free P=O group (at 1150 cm–1 and in the 1500–1350 cm–1 region), most
likely from the TOPO or TOPO derivatives, as n-octyl
phosphonic acid39 molecules are released
from the QD during storage. After solubilization with SDS, the mode
corresponding to the bound P=O group disappeared, most probably
due to masking by the SDS vibrations. There was an absorption in the
QD:protein assembly sample at 1134 cm–1 and a broad
arm at 1085 cm–1, which may be attributed to the
free and bound P=O vibrational modes. This suggests that the
original hydrophobic cover molecules were still present in the QD:protein
assembly sample. However, in the apoPufPuf sample, minor absorption
bands were also observed at those wavelengths. There was no free P=O
signature in the QD:protein spectrum in the 1500–1350 cm–1 region. Absorption was also seen in this region in the QD:protein
sample but with a pattern corresponding more to amide II and amide
III modes (in comparison to a free protein) than to the P=O
vibrational mode. The comparison of the SDS spectrum and QD:protein
assembly spectrum also suggests that all the free SDS molecules were
removed during preparation as the S=O stretching mode is missing
in this sample. Interestingly, when comparing the apoprotein and QD:protein
assembly spectra, a change in the ratio between C–O stretching
mode intensity and amide III intensity was observed. It is important
to note that the position of the C–O mode was shifted by about
20 cm–1 (QD:Puf) or 50 cm–1 (QD:PufPuf)
in comparison to the apoproteins. These observations do not allow
us to draw strict conclusions about the organization of proteins on
the QD surface; however, they do prove that a significant amount of
protein amino acids was involved in the interaction with the QD surface
and energy of the appropriate vibrations was changed.

The secondary
structure of the proteins was analyzed from the amide
I band in the ATR-FTIR spectra. Figure 6 presents a comparison of amide I for the apoproteins
and QD:protein assemblies for Puf, PufPuf, and LRR. The maximum amide
I vibration of apoPuf and apoPufPuf were centered at 1650–1660
cm–1, which is the signature of helical structures.41,42 ApoLRR showed maximum amide I vibration between 1640 and 1650 cm–1, which might suggest the presence of β-structures
and an unordered chain. After interacting with the QDs, the maximum
for LRR shifted to 1640 cm–1, corresponding to an
unordered protein. The Puf and PufPuf assemblies with QDs again showed
the amide I maximum corresponding to structures rich in helices; however,
the spectrum shape changes, suggesting a reorganization of minor structural
features. For QD:Puf and QD:PufPuf, we confirmed the high number of
α-helices using circular dichroism measurements (see Figure S4, Supporting Information). For apoPufPuf,
the CD spectrum also indicates a mostly helical structure. The main
difference between QD:Puf and QD:PufPuf could be due to the higher
degree of unordered structure in QD:Puf in comparison to QD:PufPuf.
This may be explained by the presence of partially unfolded regions
in the terminal parts of the Puf amino acid chain, while in PufPuf
(which is simply two Puf molecules on one polypeptide), the average
terminus content per amino acid was lower. For the preparation of
apoPuf, apoLRR, and QD:LRR, circular dichroism spectra were not reliable
to properly assess the secondary structure elements. Detailed analysis
of the secondary structure was then possible after the amide I band
deconvolution, when the percentage of the area corresponding to the
appropriate secondary structure elements may be ascribed to the relative
content of this element in a protein structure.42 The example of a deconvoluted amide I band of apoPufPuf
is shown in Figure S5, Supporting Information.

Figure 6 Comparison
of the amide I FTIR spectra of the apoproteins and QD:protein
assemblies: (A) apoPuf and QD:Puf, (B) apoPufPuf and QD:PufPuf, and
(C) apoLRR and QD:LRR. For easier comparison, the area is normalized
to 1.

The secondary structure compositions
of the studied cases, compared
to the values predicted from the design, are summarized in Table 3. Details of the deconvolution
of the amide I bands are provided in Table S1, Supporting Information. The secondary structure of the LRR apoprotein
corresponds to the design; there is a high amount of β-structure
(43%). While α-helix (50%) was found in an amount significantly
higher than predicted, that outcome might be easily explained by comparing
it to other LRR domains, which also contain a significant amount of
helices (for example, in comparison to the NOD-like receptor family43). However, after assembly with QDs, we primarily
observed an unordered structure with only a small contribution of
β-sheets. The opposite behavior was found for Puf and PufPuf.
The amount of α-helix in Puf was lower than in the design (45%),
with an unexpectedly high number of β-sheets (15%). β-Sheets
should not be present in Puf or PufPuf; therefore, this frequency
may be attributed to the structures induced by incorrect folding or
interaction with the ATR crystal. The β-sheet-like signal should
be partially interpreted as arising indirectly from the helices because
the interaction between the neighboring helices forms aggregates,
which gives a signal in that range (intermolecular β-sheets41). After assembly with the QDs, the contribution
of the α-helix slightly decreases in Puf (to 39%); it increases
to 59% for PufPuf, and the intensity of the bands assigned to the
β-sheets/aggregates and unordered structure decreases. This
simply means that both Puf and PufPuf are structuralized in the presence
of QDs.

Table 3 Comparison of the Relative Content
(%) of the Secondary Structure Elements of the Analyzed Proteins and
Their Assemblies with QDs, as Deduced from Amide I Deconvolutiona
 	% of total	
protein	α-helix	β-sheet	other	
LRR	 	 	 	
designed	12	28	60	
apoprotein	50	43	7	
QD:protein assembly	0	14	86	
Puf	 	 	 	
designed	66	1	33	
apoprotein	45	0	55	
QD:protein assembly	39	0	61	
PufPuf	 	 	 	
designed	66	1	33	
apoprotein	37	25	48	
QD:protein assembly	59	3	38	
a The secondary structure element
content in designed proteins was calculated from in silico models.

Photogenerated Electron
Transfer to Oxygen
Generation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by QDs is usually a simple test to
determine the accessibility of oxygen to the surface of QDs and then
the quality of the surface cover. CdSe with the mercaptosuccinic acid
cover was shown to generate an ROS, superoxide, and hydroxyl radical.44 Passivation of the CdSe surface (e.g., by ZnSe)
protects it against electron leakage to oxygen.45 We tested SDS-solubilized QDs and QD:protein assemblies
for ROS generation after illumination in the presence of ROS-sensitive
spin probe 4-hydroxy-5,5-dimethyl-2-trifluoromethylpyrroline-1-oxide
(FDMPO). In a preliminary experiment, performed on water-soluble CdTe
QDs, we selected the FDMPO spin probe as the best technique for this
application (see the Supporting Information). In that experiment, we observed the spectrum of an FDMPO with
an OH radical adduct signal (Figure S6,
Supporting Information).46 When applying
the same methodology to the CdSe QDs used in this study, we detected
no FDMPO-adduct signal either in the QD:SDS or QD:protein assemblies.
This suggests that a QD surface may be protected by a protein coat.
A weak, almost isotropic signal with g ≈ 2.06 (Figure S7, Supporting Information) was
present in all the samples without FDMPO. While the signal, most probably
resulting from CdSe defects,47 was almost
unchanged during prolonged illumination, it disappeared after the
addition of the spin probe.

We also checked the photoinduced
electron transfer from the QD to oxygen, directly monitoring the oxygen
concentration in a solution using an oxygen electrode. This method
does not allow for the identification of which ROS is formed, but
it may be more sensitive and allows for monitoring the kinetics of
the process. Figure S8 shows the traces
recorded during this type of an experiment. Basically, for the same
concentration of water-soluble CdTe QDs (control) and CdSe QD:SDS,
the oxygen consumption was faster in the QD:SDS suspension. However,
for QD:SDS, after about 40 s of illumination, the oxygen consumption
stopped; in the CdTe QDs solution, the oxygen consumption was observed
for at least 500 s. Additionally, in the CdSe QD:SDS suspension, the
occurrence of the second process was noted, leading to the partial
recovery of some of the oxygen concentration. The same recovery was
detected in the CdTe QDs solution but only when the light was switched
off.

For the QD:Puf assembly, no oxygen consumption was observed.
For
the QD:PufPuf assembly, the oxygen consumption was measurable but
at least twice as slow (and two times less efficient in total consumption)
than in the QD:SDS solution. Thus, the Puf and PufPuf covers protected
the CdSe QDs surface from oxygen. The difference between Puf and PufPuf
noted here may provide evidence that independent domains of Puf adapt
better to the surface of QDs than the double-domain protein PufPuf.
This suggests that, in future designs, there should be longer links
between the domains to allow for better surface coverage.

Discussion
QDs have a significant potential in biomedical and life sciences
as fluorescent labels, as elements of biosensors, and as a source
of therapeutic ROS. For researchers working with QDs, one of the serious
challenges is ensuring the stability and compatibility of their covers.
Compatibility refers to the ability to function in a given environment.
In most cases, it also means water solubility (more correctly, water
dispersibility). Even if QDs are going to be a source of ROS, the
formation of such radicals should be restricted only to the target
site. Recently, we proposed a cover based on protein chains composed
of MSPs.20 In the present study, we addressed
the issue of the secondary structure composition of proteins dedicated
to forming a QD cover. Using a protein as a QD cover, we take advantage
of multiple possible reactive groups (carboxyl and amine groups as
well as more complex groups, such as tetracysteine or HisTag) as well
as the simpler addition of a function to a hybrid by having a second
functional protein domain. We wanted to determine if there is any
preference between an α-helix and a β-sheet during protein
adaptation to the shape of a QD surface. While there are several spherical
nanoparticles in living organisms (e.g., blood lipoproteins), there
are no structures that have the same size as QDs, with a single peptide
cover in vivo, to serve as actual templates. Identifying the answer
to our question will enhance our understanding and will be a significant
advantage when creating designs for more stable covers in the future.
The actual in vitro process of the formation of QD:protein assemblies
does not enable high-throughput testing without protein purification.
Thus, the random mutation strategy had to be excluded. Thus, as many
suggestions as possible are needed from individual studies to design
a better protein cover for QDs.

In a previous study, we have
shown that α-helical MSPs may
work as a cover for QDs, providing reasonable stability in a water
solution.20 The features of MSPs, namely,
their length and the amphipathicity of their helices, are ideal for
encircling a spherical QD. However, due to geometrical constraints,
that type of coating would be composed of a few elements, and it would
not equally cover the entire surface of a sphere. This is much better
than a coating composed of dozens of tiny thiolic acid molecules,
although it may still be an improvement. In this paper, we present
another α-helical protein, Puf, that is capable of forming a
cover for QDs but with a different spatial arrangement of its helices.
We also showed that its duplication, PufPuf, a single-chain version
of two Puf proteins, can cover the entire QD surface. We expected
the size and other properties of both the QD:Puf and QD:PufPuf assemblies
to be virtually the same, which, in most of the tests, was found to
be true. We also proved that β-sheet proteins, represented here
by LRR, may form a QD cover, but they are much less functional than
Puf assemblies.

In this study, we aimed to determine if there
were any differences
in the way in which Puf or LRR bonded to nanoparticles due to their
amino acid composition. Table S2 summarizes
the composition of the amino acids on the internal surface of Puf
or LRR, in which the side chains may be in contact with the QD surface.
To select these residues, we inspected the structures manually, and
we selected the residues of the side chains that point to the interior
created by the structure curvature. The percentage of the content
of the hydrophobic, amphipathic, polar-noncharged, and polar-charged
amino acids is similar in both proteins. However, the content of individual
amino acids is different. The Puf surface contains 10 Gln residues
(19.4%); there is no Gln residue in the putative LRR contact surface.
There is more Asn and Thr in the LRR surface. All those amino acids
(Gln, Asn, and Thr) are polar-neutral. Gln is a bulkier residue, and
intuition dictates that such residues would be a handicap in adapting
to a QD surface. LRR is also richer in Tyr (13.4% vs 5.5% in Puf).
Residues are found on the edge of the protein structure, and in nature,
they are responsible for stabilization of the interaction with RNA
and DNA, as well as stabilization of the protein structure. We did
not remove the residues; such a motif is present in both Puf and LRR.
We also expected that they may help in forming the cover of a QD because
aromatic amino acids can form hydrophobic interactions with nanoparticles.48 No previous experimental or theoretical studies
have described specific amino acid interactions with a CdSe surface.
However, a molecular dynamic study of amino acids binding to chemically
close ZnS is available. Nawrocki and Cieplak49 calculated the binding energies of natural amino acids placed near
the (110) surface of ZnS. These energies are also added to Table S2 for easier comparison. In summary, the
total binding energy is 1.7 times higher for Puf than for LRR. Moreover,
the average amount of amino acid is 1.6 times higher. Cysteine (Cys)
residue is the only amino acid responsible for that difference. Of
the initial six Cys residues in Puf, that Cys residue is the only
one that cannot be removed in silico without disturbing the stability
of the structure. The side chain of this Cys does not point directly
to contact with the QD surface; however, with protein flexibility,
it can still make contact. Since cysteine is important for Puf structural
integrity, and the Puf structure is not destroyed during assembly,
we assumed that it is not involved in the binding. If cysteine is
not considered, the average binding energy is even higher for LRR.

When the binding energies are analyzed for α-helix- or β-sheet-forming
amino acids, the energies vary within the groups, with a general tendency
for higher energies for the β-sheet-forming residues and more
“surface-neutral” amino acids within the α-helix-forming
amino acids. Consequently, we may postulate that a specific amino
acid composition is not crucial for binding. The important factor
may be the overall surface distribution of the charged residues, as
well as the presence of hydrophobic patches. Since the shape, surface,
and charge distribution are actually similar for both Puf and LRR,
we may assume that the crucial feature is the structural stability
of the protein that is in contact with the nanoparticle. We may even
postulate that the higher binding energies of the β-sheet-forming
amino acids may be a handicap; too strong binding may promote unfolding
in the presence of the nanoparticle and then promote aggregation and
other unwanted events. While this hypothesis requires additional research
to be confirmed, molecular dynamic simulation conducted by Cieplak
and co-workers showed a list of small deformations of various proteins
near the surfaces of mika,50 ZnO,51 ZnS,49 and gold.52 The authors did not recognize the differences
between α-helical or β-sheet proteins, but they showed
the importance of longer contact with the surface, which is mostly
formed by the charged residues. Since β-sheet amino acids are
more likely to form contacts than α-helix-forming amino acids,
a structure composed of them may be also more likely to be unfolded.

When MSP wraps a QD, it has to form several threads, such as the
way MSPs encircle lipids when forming nanodiscs.21 Attempting to wrap a QD is the same as trying to use a
narrow ribbon to cover a surface of a large ball. The obvious solution
is to use a broader ribbon. This cannot be obtained by broadening
the α-helix, but it may be created from properly organizing
the α-helices or β-sheets. One may imagine that a flat
β-sheet would be easier to adapt to the nanoparticle curvature.
However, α-helices are more stable than β-sheets. This,
with the addition of a suitable amino acid pattern, increases the
amphipathicity of the helices, which may overpower the flatness and
flexibility advantages of β-sheets. Our research proved the
second hypothesis to be true.

Overall, the shapes of LRR and
Puf proteins are similar. They have
a ribbon-like structure, organized as part of a circle with a broad
opening with a 3–4 nm diameter. Moreover, the distribution
of the electrostatic charge is similar in both proteins. This may
be important when they interact with nanoparticles and other proteins
when more than one is necessary to form a cover (compare Figure S9). When comparing the surface area of
the proteins, calculated directly from the amino acid distances in
the crystal structures, the surface area of PUF is 1331 Å2, and the surface area of LRR is 918 Å2. Puf is about 17.2 Å high, and LRR is about 17.9 Å
high. The difference in the surface area results from the length of
the tape or ribbon formed by the protein structure. The surface area
of the QDs used in the present study may be estimated to be 3215 Å2, which suggests that 2.5 Puf molecules/3.5 LRR molecules
are necessary for a complete compact cover. However, due to the side
chain of amino acids at the edge of the ribbon, as well as the flexibility
of the proteins in the solution, we may assume that two Puf molecules
and three LRR molecules are necessary to fully cover a QD sphere.
It is known that peptides may help in forming cages for cargo delivery
because the flexibility of peptides has been found to help in comprising
geometry restrictions.53,54

Both the Puf and PufPuf
assemblies with QD resulted in nanoparticles
with 6.7–7 nm radii. Thus, a protein part adds about 5.5 nm
to the dimension of an effective CdSe core, as calculated theoretically.
For MSP, as P1D1, the radius was 2.8 nm. A similar value was found
previously.20 This means that, while the
cover formed by P1D1 is composed of one layer of helices, Puf and
PufPuf have two such layers. This fact is in strong agreement with
the initial design. A different organization, namely, protein binding
to the QD surface as a coiled coil without an encircling formation,
would result in at least a 13 nm difference from the core, as based
on the Stokes radii calculated for the apoproteins using gel filtration.
Although the average α-helix diameter, measured from crystal
structures, is about 0.5 nm (1.5 nm with side chains), the actual
value may be a result of a large hydration sphere. Previously, we
hypothesized that the difference may be a result of the still present
shell of TOPO/phosphonic acid ligand or the detergent molecules. In
the present study, we had to use SDS, and it is known that this detergent
is difficult to remove completely. One may imagine that SDS molecules
will remain between the QD surface and protein. However, both the
hydrophobic cover (TOPO or its derivatives) and SDS shell would result
in an increase of about 0.8 nm in the radius. Here, the difference
in size would demand at least two layers of SDS/TOPO molecules. It
would also be detectable by FTIR spectra in a region corresponding
to the S=O vibrations of SDS or the P=O vibrations of
TOPO. SDS vibrations were not present in the final QD:protein assemblies.
Some P=O vibrations may be present but not in the amount corresponding
to a shell of molecules.

Our research proves that it is possible
to obtain a ribbon-like
protein to form a cover of a nanoparticle surface. The design of such
a nanoparticle coat has not been addressed until now. In previous
studies, some proteins were used only to show the controlled aggregation
of nanoparticles.55,56 Those studies reported on a peptide
tag and a tag recognizing protein55 as
well as Zn-mediated homodimeric helix associations.56 In the present study, a complete protein was not designed
from scratch; rather, the adaptation of a protein template served
our purpose. The main reason for such a strategy is the lack of force
fields to properly describe the interactions between the nonbiological
surface of a QD and proteins. Moreover, when designing large proteins,
high computing power is required. That is why we decided, at first,
to adapt the structures that are already known and that have the probability
of forming the desired cover. The Puf proteins bind to a cleft of
the DNA double helix. LRR domains also form complexes but with other
proteins working as immunoglobulins, hormone receptors, and factors
of cell adhesion or cellular trafficking.29,30 A cover of a QD-like sphere using Puf/LRR requires two molecules
to form a basket. While this type of basket is still open, most likely,
less of the surface is exposed in comparison to an MSP cover. It is
also possible that two to four molecules are needed to create a closed
cage, as schematically shown in Figure 1. Our results do not provide enough data to distinguish
between hypothetical situations, that is, a basket with a small opening
or a closed cage without any opening. The overall stability of the
QD:protein assembly, with an extended fluorescence lifetime, suggests
that the QD surface is protected from a water environment. The data
obtained from the EPR FDMPO spin probe experiment and direct measurement
of the photogenerated oxygen consumption by the QDs or the QD:protein
assemblies provide additional evidence to support this theory.

LRR motifs are actually known to form a basket-like structure,
with an inner diameter of up to 30 Å.31 More open crystal structures of Puf and LRR are also known. Such
proteins, combined in twos or threes, would result in structures with
more internal space needed for fitting even larger QDs. The Puf and
LRR domains are already multiple repeats of structural motifs, which
means that further multiplication would also work. Indeed, the duplication
of Puf shown in this paper, resulting in the formation of PufPuf,
proves this hypothesis.

Theoretical simulations suggest that,
although the CdSe QD shape
may be simplified by a sphere, the wurtzite structure of CdSe results
in the top, bottom, and side surfaces not being equivalent, with different
ligand affinities toward them.57,58 It has also been shown
that affinities of the amino acids varied with different ZnO surfaces.51 One may then suppose that this influences the
binding and orientation of the proteins over the QD surface. While
that is possible, this problem demands full atomistic modeling, and
it is beyond the current resolution capabilities. Until now, only
the behavior of very small proteins near the crystal surface has been
successfully modeled.49 However, the strategy
we applied addresses the shape. Moreover, although the phosphine group
has a higher affinity toward the polar Se-terminated (0001̅)
surface, the phosphine derivatives (phosphine oxide and phosphonic
acid) are more likely to target a nonpolar (1120) and Cd-terminated
polar (0001) surface, and all of them can bind to the less-preferred
surface. In all the considered cases, the hydrocarbon tails point
out, and in subsequent steps, SDS may be uniformly distributed over
the surface, obliterating the surface differences. It is still possible
that, after removing the detergent, various surfaces will tune protein
orientation; however, because several groups may bind to different
surfaces with slightly different affinities, it is very unlikely that
significant reorganization will occur.

Since there is no amino
acid sequence specificity in our proteins
toward the CdSe surface, it is also possible that the same proteins
might be used as a cover for several other types of nanoparticles,
not limited only to semiconductor QDs. Aside from further structural
optimization, the next step would be to obtain two-domain proteins,
the first domain being a cover, for example, Puf, and the second domain
bearing a function, for example, porphyrin (heme, chlorophyll) or
an iron–sulfur protein. This will improve the application of
QDs and other nanoparticles in several concepts, for example, merging
QDs into artificial photosynthesis systems via attachment to photosystems
in a mode comparable to platinum ions59 or visualization of ferredoxin-binding dynamics without impacting
its redox state.38

Conclusions
This
paper addressed the question of the possibility of forming
a QD cover from proteins that differ in the composition of their secondary
structures. We used proteins with an α-helix motif (Puf and
PufPuf) and a protein with a β-sheet motif (LRR). We found that
the α-helices are better than the β-sheets in wrapping
QDs, and they may provide a better cover for nanoparticles. The quality
of the cover was examined by the oxygen electrode-monitored photogenerated
oxygen consumption and the FDMPO spin probe EPR experiment, showing
no or much lower ROS generation upon illumination of the samples.
We showed that the formed QD:protein assemblies were monomeric, meaning
one nanoparticle wrapped by two to three protein chains. We also checked
that the Puf/PufPuf secondary structure was not destroyed during the
assembly over the QD, but some structuralization occurred. The obtained
results provide a set of suggestions for further designs of protein
covers for nanoparticles.

Experimental Section
Protein Template Selection
and in Silico Mutagenesis
Selection of the Structural Scaffold from
Deposits of Puf and
LRR Family Members
Experimental structures from both families
were obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) website by searching the website using the PFAM database of60 protein families, keywords, etc. All the deposits
structurally similar to these hits were also selected. In addition,
PSI-BLAST searches were performed. More than 200 hits were collected
for the LRR domain, and about 50 hits were collected for the Puf family.
All these structures were then manually screened to determine their
suitability for this project. First, false positives were excluded
after careful inspection. After this stage, 35 deposits for the Puf
domain and 137 for the LRR domain were recorded. These were further
inspected based on the geometry of the inner surface, for example,
the area, the radius of curvature, and the number of repeats. Finally,
chain A of 4fmz (an internalin from Listeria monocytogenes) deposit was selected as the model structure of the LRR domain;
chain A of 3k5q (Caenorhabditis elegans fem-3 binding factor17) was selected
as the model structure of the Puf domain.

Mutation Design
For each of the two selected proteins,
multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was computed from sequences found
by PSI-BLAST using MUSCLE.61 Moreover,
maps of the structural interactions (e.g., contacts, hydrogen bonds)
were calculated using the BioShell62,63 toolkit. These
two sources of data were used to plan the mutations to be placed on
the inner side of the protein, so it would more likely accommodate
a QD. The structures of a mutated protein were calculated using the
RosettaScripts64 application of the Rosetta65 suite. During the modeling process, each mutated
side chain was subjected to energy minimization, together with its
8 Å spherical neighborhood, using the Talaris 2014 force field.
All the residues (both the backbone and their side chains) that were
located further than 8 Å from any mutated position remained fixed
during the modeling to prevent the protein from changing its global
shape (e.g., its curvature radius).

The following mutations
were introduced to 3k5q (Puf domain): K163A, K124A, R121V, R197V,
K163V, K124V, R121A, R197A, C136S, C37S, C114A, C190S, C238V, and
C266A.

The following mutations were introduced to 4fmz (LRR domain): E66A,
K90A, G93A, L112A, T115C, T160C, L223G, T243V, and L310A.

Protein Genes, Expression, and Purification
Genes corresponding
to the designed amino acid sequences of Puf and LRR were ordered from
Invitrogen Ltd. Sequences were optimized for expression in E. coli and cloned into the NcoI/XhoI restriction sites of the pet28 vector. The C-terminal
HisTag present in a vector was also preserved for future purification
processes. The PufPuf gene was constructed from the Puf gene by duplication. To create a construct coding for the double PUF, the PUF sequence was amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with
primers PP_for and PP_rev containing additional restriction sites
(XhoI and BamHI), using Phusion
polymerase (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s
instruction, and 25 cycles (98 °C for 10 s, 50 °C for 15
s, and 72 °C for 30 s). The following primer sequences were used:
TACGGGATCCCTGCCGACGTGGTCCCTGGATTCTA (PP_for) and TCAGCTCGAGTTACGAACGCAGGTTTGCCAGGGTTT
(PP_rev).

The PCR product was inserted into a pJET2.1 vector
using T4 ligase (Thermo Scientific) and the protocol for blunt end
ligation. pET-PUF and pJET2.1-PUF were digested with Fast Digest BamHI and XhoI enzymes (Thermo Scientific).
The enzymes were inactivated by heating at 85 °C for 15 min; Puf was separated from the vector using agarose electrophoresis,
followed by band excision and DNA purification using GeneJET Gel Extraction
and DNA Cleanup Micro Kit (Thermo Scientific). The digested pET-Puf
and Puf were ligated together using T4 ligase (Thermo Scientific).
Bacterial colonies containing ligated vectors were selected using
rapid disruption of bacterial colonies followed by agarose electrophoresis
to test the size of the plasmids. The identity of the plasmids was
verified using restriction analysis and confirmed by sequencing.

Vectors were transformed into BL21(DE3) E. coli under kanamycin selection. Bacteria were grown in lysogeny broth
(LB) with 50 μg/mL kanamycin at 37 °C until OD = 0.6–0.8
was reached. Protein production was induced by 1 mM IPTG (isopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside) and grown for an
additional 3 h at 37 °C. The proteins were then purified from
the inclusion bodies. Basically, a bacterial pellet was resuspended
in 25 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8.0) containing 100 mM NaCl and DNase
I (10 μg/mL), disrupted by sonication (5 min of 10 s on/off
pulses), and centrifuged again. The resulting pellet was washed with
the buffer containing 1% Triton X-100 and then with the buffer without
additions. Finally, the pure inclusion bodies were dissolved in 8
M guanidinium chloride (GuaHCl). Complete dissolving required at least
8 h of incubation with gentle heating (36–42 °C). The
dissolved proteins were stored frozen in aliquots for further use.
Prior to assembly, GuaHCl was removed by dialysis for 48 h. It was
also necessary to add 1% SDS (final concentration) to the GuaHCl-solubilized
protein solution prior to dialysis. If no detergent was present, most
of the preparation precipitated. Several detergents were tested, and
SDS was found to be optimal for this experiment. The pure proteins
were about 46 and 38 kDa, with a 280 nm theoretical extinction coefficient
of 33,640 and 20,400 M–1 cm–1 for
Puf and LRR, respectively.

Preparation of the QDs
The synthesis
of the TOPO-capped
CdSe hydrophobic QDs was conducted as described recently.20 The morphology of the raw QDs was studied using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on an FEI Tecnai G2 20 X-TWIN microscope. The absorbance was recorded with a JASCO V670
spectrometer. Figure S10A shows the representative
TEM/high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) micrographs of the CdSe QDs, proving
their spherical shapes and the uniformity of their morphology. The
CdSe particle size analysis (Figure S10B) of 50 particles using several low-resolution TEM micrographs indicated
that the average particle size was 3.2 nm, with a standard deviation
of 0.4 nm. Analysis of the HRTEM micrographs of the QDs clearly indicates
that the sample contains crystalline particles. The 3.51 Å lattice
fringes observed in the HRTEM micrograph (inset in Figure S10A) correspond to (002) lattice planes of hexagonal
CdSe. The selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the
particles (Figure S10C) could be indexed
to the (002) corresponding (hkl) planes of the standard
hexagonal CdSe structure. Figure S10D presents
the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrum of the as-prepared CdSe
QDs. The characteristic peaks of Cd and Se indicate that the obtained
particles are indeed the CdSe compound. Additional peaks marked as
O, P, and Cu are due to oxide, phosphor, and copper, respectively,
which come from the copper grid used in the TEM sampling and the TOPO
surfactant used during the synthesis of CdSe QDs. The average size
of the QDs was calculated from the position of the absorption maximum
using expressions derived by Yu et al.37 The absorption spectra of the raw CdSe QDs dissolved in chloroform
with the first exciton absorption maximum at 553 nm are shown in Figure S1. This allows us to estimate the average
diameter of the particles as about 3.1 ± 0.2 nm.

Preparation
of the QD:Protein Assemblies
The QDs were
solubilized in SDS, as described previously.20 The QD:protein assemblies were formed by mixing the solubilized
QDs with proteins (prepared as described above) in a QD:protein ratio
of 1:5 or higher. This preparation was dialyzed against 25 mM Tris/HCl
with 100 mM NaCl for at least 36 h, with several buffer changes. Finally,
the QD:protein assemblies were separated from the aggregates and the
excess of protein or the free SDS molecules using gel filtration on
Superose 6 (GE Healthcare) column.

Steady-State Spectral Analysis
The ultraviolet/visible
(UV/VIS) absorption spectra were recorded with the Cary 50Bio spectrophotometer
in the 250–800 nm range, with 1 nm resolution. Quartz cuvettes
with an optical pathway of 1 cm or 4 mm were used, depending on the
sample concentration.

Steady-state fluorescence spectra were
recorded with the Cary Eclipse spectrofluorometer. In most of the
presented results, a 280 nm λ excitation wavelength was used.
Slits and sensitivity were adjusted to optimize the signal-to-noise
ratio. Usually, 5 nm emission and 5 nm excitation slits and medium
sensitivity were used.

The fluorescence quantum yield was calculated
using a comparative
method,66 with AlexaFluor488 (Qy = 0.9267) as a reference.

Gel Filtration
For size exclusion columns, Superdex
200 5/150 (GE Healthcare) for small-volume samples or Superose 6 10/300
(GE Healthcare) for larger sample volumes was connected to the Akta
Purifier (GE Healthcare) chromatographic system. Elution was performed
using the parameters recommended for each column. Samples were loaded
with a 100 μL or 1 mL loop. Elution was analyzed spectrophotometrically,
simultaneously at two wavelengths (280 and 540 nm). For purification
purposes and further analysis, fractions of 0.5–1 mL were collected
with an automatic fraction collector. Stokes radii were calculated
based on the calibration curve, which was obtained by a separate run
of protein standards of known radii (HMW calibration kit, GE Healthcare).

Agarose Electrophoresis
Agarose gels (0.8% ClearView
Agarose, BioS&T, Canada) were prepared and run with 25 mM Tris/HCl
(pH 8.0) buffer in a typical horizontal electrophoretic system. The
samples were mixed with glycerol to a final concentration of 20% prior
to loading on the gel. The fluorescent signal of the QDs was used
for visualization with ChemiDoc (BioRad). The gels were placed directly
on the transilluminator, and fluorescence was excited with 302 nm
wavelength. A signal was recorded using a CCD camera, protected by
an EtBr-type broadband filter.

Zeta Potential Determination
Zeta potential was measured
using ZetaSizer Nano ZS, Malvern. Data were analyzed using Malvern
software.

Fluorescence Lifetime Measurements
Fluorescence lifetime
measurements were performed using the Zeiss LSM710 microscope with
an LSM upgrade kit (PicoQuant, Berlin, Germany), as previously described,68 with the detection range optimized for currently
used QDs.

Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS)
FCS measurements
were performed on a Zeiss 780 ConfoCor 3 microscope with a C-Apochromat
40×, numerical aperture (NA) 1.2 water immersion objective at
room temperature (24.0 ± 0.3 °C), with Alexa Fluor 488 (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, USA) as a standard. Experimental details were previously
described in ref (69), with the detection range optimized to cover the emission range
of the QDs. Hydrodynamic radii were calculated based on the Stoke–Einstein
equation, as described in ref (69).

Attenuated Total Reflection (ATR) Fourier-Transformed
Infrared
Spectroscopy (FTIR)
For the ATR-FTIR analysis, the apoproteins
and QD:protein assemblies were deposited (10–15 μL drop)
and partially dried on a clean gold surface to obtain a hydrated film.
Prior to analysis, the protein samples were subjected to a buffer
exchange to D2O on PD SpinTrap G-25 columns (GE Healthcare).
The spectra were recorded with a Nicolet iS10 FT-IR spectrometer (Thermo
Fisher) working in ATR mode in the range of 4000–750 cm–1 and 1 cm–1 resolution, and 30 spectra
were averaged. Amide I analysis was performed using OriginPro 9 software
(OriginLab Corporation, USA).

Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy
Electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy experiments were performed
both in the presence and in the absence of an FDMPO spin trap. The
EPR spectra were registered with a MiniScope200 X-band spectrometer
(Magnettech) at room temperature using a flat quartz cell. The following
parameters were used: central field, 331 mT; sweep range, 10 mT; sweep
time, 30 s; four scans; microwave power, 6.3 mW; modulation amplitude,
0.1 mT. Simulations were performed using the “garlic”
function in the EasySpin toolbox in MATLAB.70 The QD or QD:protein samples were mixed prior to the experiment
with a small aliquot of 10 mM ethanol stock solution FDMPO to obtain
a final concentration of 50 μM. The illumination experiment
was performed by placing samples in an EPR quartz cuvette, placed
1 cm next to an 8 W UV bulb (305 nm maximum emission), protected additionally
by a UG-11 bandpass filter (Schott, Germany).

Photoinduced Oxygen Consumption
Photoinduced oxygen
consumption by the QD solution was measured with an oxygen electrode
(Oxygraph+ apparatus, Hansatech Ltd., UK) connected to a computer.
The measurement chamber was stabilized at 22 °C by a 1 cm-thick
water jacket connected to a circulating water bath. A sample was illuminated
by a KL 1500 white light source (Zeiss GmbH) using its fiber light
guide arm placed at the water jacket wall. The estimated light intensity
inside the measuring chamber was 2000 μE.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00505.Results of zeta
potential measurements, examples of
the fluorescence decays, comparison of amide I of ATR-FTIR spectra
deconvolution results, circular dichroism spectra of the apoproteins
and the QD:protein assemblies, example of the amide I band deconvolution,
CW-EPR spectra for the illuminated CdTe QD in the presence of FDMPO
and QD:Puf without FDMPO, example traces illustrating the light-induced
oxygen consumption by the QDs and QD:protein assemblies, and detailed
characteristics of the raw QDs (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00505_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
K.K. and M.P.
optimized the protein expression and purification, optimized the preparation
of the QD:protein assemblies, performed the gel filtration experiments,
agarose electrophoresis, UV/VIS, and fluorescence steady-state measurements,
and prepared the samples for the other techniques. D.G. designed the
Puf and LRR. O.S. prepared the PufPuf gene. J.S.
performed the CD measurement. R.W. performed the FCS and fluorescence
lifetime measurements and analyzed the data. M.Ł. performed
the FTIR experiment and participated in the FTIR data analysis. M.N.
prepared the initial QDs. K.Z. and K.K. performed the EPR measurement.
K.M. performed the EPR data simulation. J.G. designed the study, participated
in the data analysis, and wrote the manuscript draft. All the authors
participated in the final manuscript preparation and revision.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research study was financially supported
by
a grant from the National Centre for Research and Development (Lider/012/445/L-4/12/NCBR/2013)
and a Sonata Bis grant from the National Science Centre, Poland (UMO-2016/22/E/NZ1/00673).
Protein preparation, gel filtration, FCS, and fluorescence lifetime
measurements were partially performed in the laboratories of NanoFun
(POIG.02.02.00-00-025/09). The authors are grateful to Paweł
Osewski (CENT, UW, Warsaw) for his assistance in the FTIR measurement
and to Anna Dąbrowska (Institute of Physics, PAS, Warsaw) for
her participation in initial phases of the Puf purification and LRR
design. Prof. Jerzy Gubernator and Mr. Adam Markowski (Department
of Lipid and Liposomes, University of Wrocław) are acknowledged
for access to Zetasizer and assistance in measurements.
==== Refs
References
Pu Y. ; Cai F. ; Wang D. ; Wang J.-X. ; Chen J.-F. 
Colloidal Synthesis
of Semiconductor Quantum Dots toward Large-Scale Production: A Review . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2018 , 57 , 1790 –1802 . 10.1021/acs.iecr.7b04836 .
Ghasemi Y. ; Peymani P. ; Afifi S. 
Quantum dot: magic nanoparticle for
imaging, detection and targeting . Acta Biomed. 
2009 , 80 , 156 –165 .19848055 
Schiffman J. D. ; Balakrishna R. G. 
Quantum
Dots as Fluorescent Probes: Synthesis, Surface
Chemistry, Energy Transfer Mechanisms, and Applications . Sens. Actuators, B 
2018 , 258 , 1191 –1214 . 10.1016/j.snb.2017.11.189 .
Kowalik P. ; Elbaum D. ; Mikulski J. ; Fronc K. ; Kamińska I. ; Morais P. C. ; De Souza P. E. ; Nunes R. B. ; Veiga-Souza F. H. ; Gruzeł G. 
Upconversion fluorescence imaging of HeLa cells using
ROS generating SiO 2-coated lanthanide-doped NaYF 4 nanoconstructs . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 30262 –30273 . 10.1039/C6RA25383K .
Park Y. ; Ryu Y. M. ; Wang T. ; Jung Y. ; Kim S. ; Hwang S. ; Park J. ; Bae D. J. ; Kim J. ; Moon H. 
Tumor Imaging: Colorectal
Cancer Diagnosis Using Enzyme-Sensitive
Ratiometric Fluorescence Dye and Antibody–Quantum Dot Conjugates
for Multiplexed Detection (Adv. Funct. Mater. 4/2018) . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2018 , 28 , 1870026 10.1002/adfm.201870026 .
Hassan M. ; Gomes V. G. ; Dehghani A. ; Ardekani S. M. 
Engineering carbon
quantum dots for photomediated theranostics . Nano Res. 
2018 , 11 , 1 –41 . 10.1007/s12274-017-1616-1 .
Lee J. S. ; Youn Y. H. ; Kwon I. K. ; Ko N. R. 
Recent advances
in quantum dots for biomedical applications . J. Pharm. Invest. 
2018 , 48 , 209 –214 . 10.1007/s40005-018-0387-3 .
Guo G. ; Liu W. ; Liang J. ; He Z. ; Xu H. ; Yang X. 
Probing the
cytotoxicity of CdSe quantum dots with surface modification . Mater. Lett. 
2007 , 61 , 1641 –1644 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2006.07.105 .
Hardman R. 
A Toxicologic
Review of Quantum Dots: Toxicity Depends on Physicochemical and Environmental
Factors . Environ. Health Perspect. 
2006 , 114 , 165 –172 . 10.1289/ehp.8284 .16451849 
Lovrić J. ; Cho S. J. ; Winnik F. M. ; Maysinger D. 
Unmodified
cadmium telluride quantum dots induce reactive oxygen species formation
leading to multiple organelle damage and cell death . Chem. Biol. 
2005 , 12 , 1227 –34 . 10.1016/j.chembiol.2005.09.008 .16298302 
Zhang L. W. ; Monteiro-Riviere N. A. 
Mechanisms
of quantum dot nanoparticle cellular uptake . Toxicol. Sci. 
2009 , 110 , 138 –155 . 10.1093/toxsci/kfp087 .19414515 
Modlitbová P. ; Novotný K. ; Pořízka P. ; Klus J. ; Lubal P. ; Zlámalová-Gargošová H. ; Kaiser J. 
Comparative
investigation of toxicity and bioaccumulation
of Cd-based quantum dots and Cd salt in freshwater plant Lemna minor
L . Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 
2018 , 147 , 334 –341 . 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2017.08.053 .28858706 
Modlitbová P. ; Pořízka P. ; Novotný K. ; Drbohlavová J. ; Chamradová I. ; Farka Z. ; Zlámalová-Gargošová H. ; Romih T. ; Kaiser J. 
Short-term assessment of cadmium
toxicity and uptake from different types of Cd-based Quantum Dots
in the model plant Allium cepa L . Ecotoxicol.
Environ. Saf. 
2018 , 153 , 23 –31 . 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.01.044 .29407734 
Sajwan R. K. ; Bagbi Y. ; Sharma P. ; Solanki P. R. 
L-cysteine and 3-mercaptopropionic
acid capped cadmium selenide quantum dots based metal ion probes . J. Lumin. 
2017 , 187 , 126 –132 . 10.1016/j.jlumin.2017.02.061 .
Tsuboi S. ; Sasaki A. ; Sakata T. ; Yasuda H. ; Jin T. 
Immunoglobulin
binding (B1) domain mediated antibody conjugation to quantum dots
for in vitro and in vivo molecular imaging . Chem. Commun. 
2017 , 53 , 9450 –9453 . 10.1039/C7CC04966H .
Kyte J. ; Doolittle R. F. 
A simple
method for displaying the hydropathic character
of a protein . J. Mol. Biol. 
1982 , 157 , 105 –132 . 10.1016/0022-2836(82)90515-0 .7108955 
Wang Y. ; Opperman L. ; Wickens M. ; Hall T. M. T. 
Structural
basis
for specific recognition of multiple mRNA targets by a PUF regulatory
protein . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2009 , 106 , 20186 –20191 . 10.1073/pnas.0812076106 .19901328 
Ajees A. A. ; Anantharamaiah G. M. ; Mishra V. K. ; Hussain M. M. ; Murthy H. K. 
Crystal
structure of human apolipoprotein A-I: insights into its protective
effect against cardiovascular diseases . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2006 , 103 , 2126 –2131 . 10.1073/pnas.0506877103 .16452169 
Fessenden J. D. ; Mahalingam M. 
Site-specific labeling of the type 1 ryanodine receptor
using biarsenical fluorophores targeted to engineered tetracysteine
motifs . PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e6468610.1371/journal.pone.0064686 .23724080 
Dąbrowska A. ; Nyk M. ; Worch R. ; Grzyb J. 
Hydrophilic
colloidal quantum dots
with long peptide chain coats . Colloids Surf.,
B 
2016 , 145 , 662 –670 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2016.05.081 .
Bayburt T. H. ; Grinkova Y. V. ; Sligar S. G. 
Self-assembly
of discoidal phospholipid
bilayer nanoparticles with membrane scaffold proteins . Nano Lett. 
2002 , 2 , 853 –856 . 10.1021/nl025623k .
Bayburt T. H. ; Sligar S. G. 
Membrane protein
assembly into Nanodiscs . FEBS Lett. 
2010 , 584 , 1721 –1727 . 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.10.024 .19836392 
Grzyb J. ; Latowski D. ; Strzałka K. 
Lipocalins–a
family portrait . J. Plant Physiol. 
2006 , 163 , 895 –915 . 10.1016/j.jplph.2005.12.007 .16504339 
Bryson J. W. ; Betz S. F. ; Lu H. S. ; Suich D. J. ; Zhou H. X. ; O’neil K. T. ; DeGrado W. F. 
Protein design: a hierarchic approach . Science 
1995 , 270 , 935 –941 . 10.1126/science.270.5238.935 .7481798 
Calhoun J. R. ; Kono H. ; Lahr S. ; Wang W. ; DeGrado W. F. ; Saven J. G. 
Computational design
and characterization of a monomeric
helical dinuclear metalloprotein . J. Mol. Biol. 
2003 , 334 , 1101 –1115 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.10.004 .14643669 
Chevalier A. ; Silva D.-A. ; Rocklin G. J. ; Hicks D. R. ; Vergara R. ; Murapa P. ; Bernard S. M. ; Zhang L. ; Lam K.-H. ; Yao G. ; Bahl C. D. 
Massively
parallel de novo protein design for targeted
therapeutics . Nature 
2017 , 550 , 74 10.1038/nature23912 .28953867 
Khoury G. A. ; Smadbeck J. ; Kieslich C. A. ; Floudas C. A. 
Protein folding
and de novo protein design for biotechnological applications . Trends Biotechnol. 
2014 , 32 , 99 –109 . 10.1016/j.tibtech.2013.10.008 .24268901 
Grzyb J. ; Xu F. ; Nanda V. ; Łuczkowska R. ; Reijerse E. ; Lubitz W. ; Noy D. 
Empirical
and computational design of iron-sulfur cluster proteins . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg. 
2012 , 1817 , 1256 –1262 . 10.1016/j.bbabio.2012.02.001 .
Kobe B. ; Kajava A. V. 
The leucine-rich repeat as a protein
recognition motif . Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
2001 , 11 , 725 –732 . 10.1016/S0959-440X(01)00266-4 .11751054 
Kobe B. ; Deisenhofer J. 
A structural
basis of the interactions between leucine-rich
repeats and protein ligands . Nature 
1995 , 374 , 183 10.1038/374183a0 .7877692 
Hothorn M. ; Belkhadir Y. ; Dreux M. ; Dabi T. ; Noel J. P. ; Wilson I. A. ; Chory J. 
Structural basis of steroid hormone
perception by the receptor kinase BRI1 . Nature 
2011 , 474 , 467 –471 . 10.1038/nature10153 .21666665 
Delcour A. H. 
Structure
and function of pore-forming b-barrels from bacteria . J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2002 , 4 , 1 –10 .11763966 
Emberly E. G. ; Mukhopadhyay R. ; Tang C. ; Wingreen N. S. 
Flexibility of β-sheets:
Principal component analysis of database protein structures . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2004 , 55 , 91 –98 . 10.1002/prot.10618 .
Emberly E. G. ; Mukhopadhyay R. ; Wingreen N. S. ; Tang C. 
Flexibility of α-helices:
Results of a statistical analysis of database protein structures . J. Mol. Biol. 
2003 , 327 , 229 –237 . 10.1016/S0022-2836(03)00097-4 .12614621 
Vijayakumar S. ; Vishveshwara S. ; Ravishanker G. ; Beveridge D. 
Differential
stability of beta-sheets and alpha-helices in beta-lactamase: a high
temperature molecular dynamics study of unfolding intermediates . Biophys. J. 
1993 , 65 , 2304 –2312 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(93)81288-8 .8312470 
Guo J. ; Harn N. ; Robbins A. ; Dougherty R. ; Middaugh C. R. 
Stability of helix-rich proteins
at high concentrations . Biochemistry 
2006 , 45 , 8686 –8696 . 10.1021/bi060525p .16834343 
Yu W. W. ; Qu L. ; Guo W. ; Peng X. 
Experimental determination of the
extinction coefficient of CdTe, CdSe, and CdS nanocrystals . Chem. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 2854 –2860 . 10.1021/cm034081k .
Darżynkiewicz Z. M. ; Pędziwiatr M. ; Grzyb J. 
Quantum dots use both LUMO and surface
trap electrons in photoreduction process . J.
Lumin. 
2017 , 183 , 401 –409 . 10.1016/j.jlumin.2016.11.070 .
Kopping J. T. ; Patten T. E. 
Identification of
acidic phosphorus-containing ligands
involved in the surface chemistry of CdSe nanoparticles prepared in
tri-N-octylphosphine oxide solvents . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 5689 –5698 . 10.1021/ja077414d .18393427 
von
Holt B. ; Kudera S. ; Weiss A. ; Schrader T. E. ; Manna L. ; Parak W. J. ; Braun M. 
Ligand exchange of CdSe nanocrystals
probed by optical spectroscopy in the visible and mid-IR . J. Mater. Chem. 
2008 , 18 , 2728 –2732 . 10.1039/b720009a .
Vonhoff S. ; Condliffe J. ; Schiffter H. 
Implementation of an FTIR calibration
curve for fast and objective determination of changes in protein secondary
structure during formulation development . J.
Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 
2010 , 51 , 39 –45 . 10.1016/j.jpba.2009.07.031 .19726151 
Goormaghtigh E. ; Cabiaux V. ; Ruysschaert J. M. 
Secondary
structure and dosage of
soluble and membrane proteins by attenuated total reflection Fourier-transform
infrared spectroscopy on hydrated films . Rev.
Geophys. 
1990 , 193 , 409 –420 . 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1990.tb19354.x .
Mótyán J. A. ; Bagossi P. ; Benkő S. ; Tőzsér J. 
A molecular
model of the full-length human NOD-like receptor family CARD domain
containing 5 (NLRC5) protein . BMC Bioinf. 
2013 , 14 , 275 10.1186/1471-2105-14-275 .
Kauffer F.-A. ; Merlin C. ; Balan L. ; Schneider R. 
Incidence
of the core composition on the stability, the ROS production and the
toxicity of CdSe quantum dots . J. Hazard. Mater. 
2014 , 268 , 246 –255 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2014.01.029 .24509095 
Tsay J. M. ; Trzoss M. ; Shi L. ; Kong X. ; Selke M. ; Jung M. E. ; Weiss S. 
Singlet Oxygen
Production by Peptide-Coated
Quantum Dot–Photosensitizer Conjugates . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 6865 –6871 . 10.1021/ja070713i .17477530 
Rokhina E. V. ; Makarova K. ; Lahtinen M. ; Golovina E. A. ; Van As H. ; Virkutyte J. 
Ultrasound-assisted
MnO2 catalyzed homolysis
of peracetic acid for phenol degradation: The assessment of process
chemistry and kinetics . Chem. Eng. J. 
2013 , 221 , 476 –486 . 10.1016/j.cej.2013.02.018 .
Almeida A. J. ; Sahu A. ; Riedinger A. ; Norris D. J. ; Brandt M. S. ; Stutzmann M. ; Pereira R. N. 
Charge Trapping Defects in CdSe Nanocrystal
Quantum Dots . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 13763 –13770 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b00910 .
Bhunia A. K. ; Samanta P. K. ; Saha S. ; Kamilya T. 
ZnO nanoparticle-protein
interaction: Corona formation with associated unfolding . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2013 , 103 , 143701 10.1063/1.4824021 .
Nawrocki G. ; Cieplak M. 
Interactions of aqueous
amino acids and proteins with
the (110) surface of ZnS in molecular dynamics simulations . J. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 140 , 095101 10.1063/1.4866763 .24606380 
Starzyk A. ; Cieplak M. 
Denaturation of proteins
near polar surfaces . J. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 135 , 235103 10.1063/1.3665930 .22191903 
Nawrocki G. ; Cieplak M. 
Amino acids and proteins at ZnO-water interfaces in
molecular dynamics simulations . Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 13628 –13636 . 10.1039/c3cp52198b .23836065 
Nawrocki G. ; Cieplak M. 
Aqueous amino acids
and proteins near the surface of
gold in hydrophilic and hydrophobic force fields . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 12929 –12943 . 10.1021/jp5030558 .
Malay A. D. ; Miyazaki N. ; Biela A. ; Chakraborti S. ; Majsterkiewicz K. ; Stupka I. ; Kaplan C. S. ; Kowalczyk A. ; Piette B. M. ; Hochberg G. K. ; Wu D. 
An ultra-stable
gold-coordinated
protein cage displaying reversible assembly . Nature 
2019 , 438 10.1038/s41586-019-1185-4 .
Malay A. D. ; Heddle J. G. ; Tomita S. ; Iwasaki K. ; Miyazaki N. ; Sumitomo K. ; Yanagi H. ; Yamashita I. ; Uraoka Y. 
Gold nanoparticle-induced formation of artificial protein
capsids . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 2056 –2059 . 10.1021/nl3002155 .22414047 
Obana M. ; Silverman B. R. ; Tirrell D. A. 
Protein-Mediated Colloidal Assembly . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 14251 –14256 . 10.1021/jacs.7b07798 .28898068 
Eibling M. J. ; MacDermaid C. M. ; Qian Z. ; Lanci C. J. ; Park S.-J. ; Saven J. G. 
Controlling association and separation of gold nanoparticles
with computationally designed zinc-coordinating proteins . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 17811 –17823 . 10.1021/jacs.7b04786 .29148741 
Rempel J. Y. ; Trout B. L. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Jensen K. F. 
Density functional
theory study of ligand binding on CdSe (0001), (0001̅), and
(112̅0) single crystal relaxed and reconstructed Surfaces: Implications
for nanocrystalline growth . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 18007 –18016 . 10.1021/jp064051f .16956292 
Rempel J. Y. ; Trout B. L. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Jensen K. F. 
Properties of the
CdSe(0001), (0001̅), and (112̅0) single crystal Surfaces:
Relaxation, reconstruction, and adatom and admolecule adsorption . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 19320 –19328 . 10.1021/jp053560z .16853495 
Millsaps J.
F. ; Bruce B. D. ; Lee J. W. ; Greenbaum E. 
Nanoscale
Photosynthesis: Photocatalytic Production of Hydrogen by Platinized
Photosystem I Reaction Centers . Photochem. Photobiol. 
2001 , 73 , 630 –635 . 10.1562/0031-8655(2001)073<0630:NPPPOH>2.0.CO;2 .11421068 
Finn R. D. ; Coggill P. ; Eberhardt R. Y. ; Eddy S. R. ; Mistry J. ; Mitchell A. L. ; Potter S. C. ; Punta M. ; Qureshi M. ; Sangrador-Vegas A. 
The Pfam protein
families database: towards a more
sustainable future . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2015 , 44 , D279 –D285 . 10.1093/nar/gkv1344 .26673716 
Edgar R. C. 
MUSCLE:
multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high throughput . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2004 , 32 , 1792 –1797 . 10.1093/nar/gkh340 .15034147 
Gront D. ; Kolinski A. 
BioShell—a package
of tools for structural biology
computations . Bioinformatics 
2006 , 22 , 621 –622 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btk037 .16407320 
Gront D. ; Kolinski A. 
Utility library for structural bioinformatics . Bioinformatics 
2008 , 24 , 584 –585 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm627 .18227118 
Fleishman S. J. ; Leaver-Fay A. ; Corn J. E. ; Strauch E.-M. ; Khare S. D. ; Koga N. ; Ashworth J. ; Murphy P. ; Richter F. ; Lemmon G. 
RosettaScripts:
a scripting language interface to the
Rosetta macromolecular modeling suite . PLoS
One 
2011 , 6 , e2016110.1371/journal.pone.0020161 .21731610 
Leaver-Fay A. ; Tyka M. ; Lewis S.
M. ; Lange O.
F. ; Thompson J. ; Jacak R. ; Kaufman K. W. ; Renfrew P. D. ; Smith C. A. ; Sheffler W.  ROSETTA3: an object-oriented
software suite for the simulation and design of macromolecules . In Methods Enzymol. ; Elsevier , 2011 ; Vol. 487 , pp 545 –574 .21187238 
Williams A. T. R. ; Winfield S. A. ; Miller J. N. 
Relative fluorescence quantum yields
using a computer-controlled luminescence spectrometer . Analyst 
1983 , 108 , 1067 –1071 . 10.1039/an9830801067 .
Fluorophores and Their Amine-Reactive Derivatives . In Molecular ProbesTM Handbook. A Guide to Fluorescent
Probes and Labeling Technologies ; 11 th
ed.; ThermoFisher , 2010 ; pp 11 –97 .
Grzyb J. ; Kalwarczyk E. ; Worch R. 
Photoreduction of natural redox proteins
by CdTe quantum dots is size-tunable and conjugation-independent . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 61973 –61982 . 10.1039/C5RA02900G .
Szczepaniak K. ; Worch R. ; Grzyb J. 
Ferredoxin:
NADP+ oxidoreductase
in junction with CdSe/ZnS quantum dots: characteristics of an enzymatically
active nanohybrid . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2013 , 25 , 194102 10.1088/0953-8984/25/19/194102 .23611948 
Stoll S. ; Schweiger A. 
EasySpin,
a comprehensive software package for spectral
simulation and analysis in EPR . J. Magn. Reson. 
2006 , 178 , 42 –55 . 10.1016/j.jmr.2005.08.013 .16188474

