
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02956ArticleDynamics of Monolayer
Physisorption in Homogeneous
Mesoporous Media Papatzacos Paul *Department of Mathematics and Physics, University of Stavanger, 4036 Stavanger, Norway* E-mail: paul.papatzacos@uis.no.24 12 2019 14 01 2020 5 1 430 447 11 09 2019 27 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A model for monolayer physisorption of a one-component
gas on the
pore surface of a homogeneous macroporous or mesoporous porous medium
is presented. It originates from an averaging over many pores of a
macroporous medium filled with a one-component fluid. The resulting
model does not assume anything about pore shape, but assumes that
the pores are so large that capillary condensation does not occur.
Mathematically, the model gives coverage as the solution of an ordinary,
first-order, differential equation, where the time derivative of coverage
is proportional to the difference between the chemical potential of
the adsorbate and the chemical potential of the ambient gas. Coverage
is determined by the ambient gas density, with temperature, adsorbate
critical temperature, and the Henry adsorption constant as parameters.
The rest of this abstract describes what is deduced from the equations
of the model. Adsorbate phase transitions are built into the model
by the use of van der Waals equations of state. Equilibrium isotherms
are derived from the equality of the chemical potentials. The differential
equation for coverage makes it possible to determine the mathematical
stability of the equilibrium isotherms, and a number of properties
of the isotherms are derived, the most important being as follows:
(i) an adsorbate phase transition is always accompanied by a well-defined
hysteresis loop, although “loop” is somewhat misleading
as its vertical boundaries do not consist of equilibrium states; (ii)
the vertical boundaries are exactly located; (iii) the upper and lower
boundaries consist of states that are mathematically stable, while
being either physically stable or metastable, and if physical metastability
is the case, then the actual state of the adsorbate (mono- or bi-phasic)
will not be visible on the equilibrium isotherm. The shapes of the
equilibrium isotherms are largely determined by the value of the Henry
constant, whether the isotherms are subcritical or supercritical.
Expressions for the location of an equilibrium isotherm’s region
of fastest variation and for the locations of the vertical boundaries
of its hysteresis loop are found that also show the importance of
Henry’s constant. Dynamical, that is, time-dependent isotherms
are presented for the case describing the variation of coverage resulting
from forcing the ambient gas to undergo a compression–decompression
loop. Two subcases are considered: the subcritical and the supercritical
adsorbate. It is shown that coverage in terms of ambient pressure
exhibits closed loops, even in supercritical isotherms. However, supercritical
loops shrink when the cycle time increases, reminiscent of rate-dependent
hysteresis observed in piezoelectricity. The model is used to interpret
two experiments on the sorption of CO2 and CH4 on coal that showed hysteresis loops in isotherms of supercritical
adsorbates and that were originally interpreted as leading to different
Henry constants for adsorption and for desorption. The interpretation
set forth here uses the inherent dynamics of the model and looks at
the loop as just one isotherm evolving in time, thus leading to a
unique Henry constant.

document-id-old-9ao9b02956document-id-new-14ao9b02956ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
In experiments on gas
physisorption, one often observes a discontinuity
in the equilibrium isotherms and a hysteresis loop. See Morishige
and Shikimi1 and references given there.
The step and the loop occur at temperatures well below the critical
temperature of the ambient gas, and at pressures well below its saturation
pressure.

It has been shown by Hill, in an article published
in 1947,2 that hysteresis can be explained
by assuming
the existence of metastable adsorbed states in monolayer physisorption,
no assumptions about the pores being necessary. Hill’s result
is generalized in the present article, where monolayer physisorption
is used to the exclusion of other processes. It must be mentioned
that monolayer physisorption in a mesoporous or macroporous medium
is, in a certain sense, in a class by itself, possibly together with
multilayer physisorption if the number of layers is on the order of
two or three. It has indeed been shown3 that the size of the pore surface per unit volume of a mesoporous
or macroporous medium is such that the amount adsorbed by monolayer
physisorption is negligibly small when compared to the amount that
flows in the pores. On the other hand, physisorption by capillary
condensation and/or chemisorption deal with adsorbed amounts that
differ by orders of magnitude from those occurring in monolayer physisorption
and are essential to describe such processes as industrial hydrocarbon
recovery. Capillary condensation and chemisorption are not considered
in any detail in this article.

The generalization of Hill’s
result is done in the framework
of a sorption model, called M′ for convenience here. M′,
a special case of a model M to be described presently, expresses the rate of change of coverage in terms of the coverage itself,
of the ambient gas density, of temperature, of the critical temperatures
of adsorbate and ambient gas, and of Henry’s adsorption constant.
This is not the first appearance of an equation for the rate of change
of coverage (see Alfé and Gillan4), but it is, to the author’s knowledge, the first time such
an equation leads to an understanding of hysteresis loops in adsorption,
and to a reinterpretation of experimental results. The three paragraphs
below are short presentations of results that are described in more
detail in Sections 2, 3, and 4.

The first result concerns the placement of the vertical boundaries
of the hysteresis loop (Section 2.5). Ball and Evans,5 in their
article on the mechanism for hysteresis, noted that the existence
of physically metastable states will bring about a transition to a
physically stable state at some ambient pressure and thus produce
a vertical boundary for the hysteresis loop at that pressure in adsorption
as well as in desorption. They also remarked that determining the
transition pressure is beyond the scope of an equilibrium theory,
given that there are infinitely many physically metastable states.
Now M′ describes the evolution of isotherms with time, and
it also determines the equilibrium isotherms. This implies that the
mathematical stability of any point on an equilibrium isotherm can
be found, and it turns out that physically metastable states are mathematically
stable, except for just two such points, one for adsorption and one
for desorption: these are mathematically unstable and determine the
transition pressures.

The second result concerns the new possibility
implied by the ability
of M′ to describe time-dependent isotherms. This has a direct
relevance to measurements where adsorption and desorption follow different
paths that join at a low and a high coverage, thus exhibiting a loop7,6 with no vertical boundaries. The explanation given by M′
is the one given by other workers: a genuine hysteresis loop must
have two vertical boundaries, so their absence is explained by appealing
to an insufficient equilibration time6 or
waiting time.8 There is, however, a new
possibility implied by the ability of M′ to describe time-dependent
isotherms: that of considering the noncoinciding adsorption and desorption
paths as being just one isotherm evolving in time under the application
of a pressure-cycle consisting of compression followed by decompression
of the ambient gas. The isotherms resulting from such a cycle are
shown in Section 3,
for the two cases of a supercritical and a subcritical isotherm.

The third result concerns the interpretation of experiments on
sorption of methane (important as a source of energy) and on sorption
of carbon dioxide (an important product to sequestrate). These two
cases of sorption are exceptional in that they cannot be described
in the framework of capillary condensation: the critical temperatures
of the substances are low compared to storage temperatures, so that
capillary condensation cannot occur. Wang et al.9 enumerate, and give references for, the hypotheses that
have been made to explain the mechanism of methane and carbon dioxide
sorption hysteresis: residual moisture in coal samples, surface geometry
heterogeneity, chemical interaction, structural deformation, experimental
inaccuracies, and insufficient waiting time. They conclude that the
mechanism remains an open question. The most straightforward way to
describe CH4 and CO2 sorption has been to use
the Langmuir model: see Jessen et al.7 See
also Wang et al.9 who look at two additional
isotherms, one from the Dubinin–Radushkevich model and one
from the dual sorption model, the latter allowing the inclusion of
the effect of coal swelling. Section 4 of the present article gives an alternative description,
based on the second result above, that leads to a unique value for
the Henry constant instead of the two obtained by fitting separate
equilibrium isotherms, one for adsorption and another for desorption.7

It is also worth mentioning that the mathematical
expression of
M′ is simple enough to allow approximate expressions for a
number of useful quantities, such as the pressure at which the isotherm
is steepest and the width of the hysteresis loop.

A short description
of model M′ and of the underlying model
M, follows.

M is a model for multiphase flow in a porous medium,
based on the
diffuse interface assumption.10 It is the
result of an averaging over many pores of the equations describing
Navier–Stokes flow in the pores. The averaging leads to a new
set of equations involving averaged quantities such as density, velocity
components, temperature, internal energy, and entropy. M, and thereby
M′, are based on the following assumptions: (a1) the fluid-containing
pores are connected; (a2) the smallest pore-throat diameter is large
when compared to the average distance between fluid molecules, and
also when compared to their mean free path; (a3) adsorption occurs
by physisorption; (a4) adsorption is monolayer; (a5) the heat generally
released by adsorption does not appreciably change the temperature;
(a6) the averaged fluid quantities obey the same thermodynamical laws
as the quantities of the original fluid and, in particular, the averaged
fluid has a well-defined pressure obeying an equation of state that
can be chosen among the known ones.

M′ contains three
additional assumptions: (a7) the averaged
adsorbed fluid is assumed to have the thermodynamics of a two-dimensional
fluid with, in particular, a spreading pressure (the negative of the
surface tension)11 obeying a van der Waals
equation of state; (a8) the ambient fluid is monophasic; (a9) any
externally applied changes, such as compressions or decompressions,
are done so slowly that the ambient fluid velocity is negligibly small.

The consequences of these assumptions are discussed presently,
after the introduction of the basic equations of M′. These
are obtained directly from M (see eq 17 in Papatzacos10), with
a slight modification in notation 1   2  

The dot in the first equation denotes
partial differentiation with
respect to time. A space dependence can also be included for cΣ, but is ignored here, as it is shown
below that the assumptions of model M′ make it redundant. At
the level of model M, μf is the chemical potential
of the ambient fluid, modified by the addition of two terms: a term
proportional to the Laplacian of the ambient fluid density and a term
proportional to the squared modulus of the ambient fluid velocity.
The Laplacian originates in the diffuse interface framework, where
large gradients of density exist in the interfaces between phases,
if two phases coexist. The squared velocity accounts for the kinetic
energy exchanged between ambient and adsorbed fluids. The two equations
above are the core of model M′. They lead, after some preliminaries
presented as background material in Section 5, to a differential equation for the coverage,
presented in Section 5.4.

The consequences of assumptions (a1) to (a9) are as
follows.

As a result of the averaging process, the individual
characteristics
of the pores are lost, leaving only two parameters to characterize
the medium as a whole, which are porosity and pore surface per unit
volume.10

Assumptions (a1), (a2),
and (a4) imply that adsorption does not
affect the basic description of the ambient fluid by the equations
of fluid mechanics expressing balance of mass, momentum, energy, and
entropy. They also imply that adsorption induces negligible changes
in the values of porosity and pore surface per unit volume. In fact,
assumption (a4) implies, as stated above, that inside an arbitrary
volume of porous medium, the total mass adsorbed is negligibly small
when compared to the mass of fluid that can flow freely in the pores.3 Assumption (a5) implies that the quantities characterizing
the ambient fluid, such as its density and temperature and consequently
its pressure and chemical potential, are not modified by sorption.
(On the other hand, the quantities characterizing the adsorbed fluid
are determined by the ambient fluid.) Assumption (a7) implies that
phase transitions can occur in the adsorbate. Assumption (a8) implies
that no interfaces exist in the ambient fluid, so that the Laplacian
of the ambient density that modifies the chemical potential is negligible.
Assumption (a9) implies that the other term modifying the chemical
potential of the ambient fluid is negligibly small. With these last
two assumptions, μf is the usual chemical potential
of the ambient fluid. Another consequence of (a8) and (a9) is that eqs 1 and 2 are space independent.

It is here emphasized that, as already
mentioned, isotherm properties
deduced in M′, like adsorbate phase transitions or hysteresis
loops, do not depend on assumptions about the shape of the pores and,
in particular, occur without the occurrence of capillary condensation.

The thermodynamical description of the fluids is given as background
material in Section 5, where explicit expressions for the pressure, spreading pressure,
and chemical potentials are given, and where Henry’s adsorption
constant is introduced. As already mentioned, the adsorbate is a van
der Waals fluid, whereas three alternatives are considered for the
ambient fluid: ideal with zero volume particles (called ideal type
0), ideal with nonzero volume particles (called ideal type 1), and
van der Waals. The Δμ of eqs 1 and 2 above is then derived
as a function of coverage, ambient density, and some parameters that
include temperature and Henry’s constant. The concepts of physical
stability, metastability, and instability, known to occur in connection
with the van der Waals equation of state, are illustrated in figures
in the same section, for easy reference in the rest of the article.

The derivation of the basic differential equation defining M′
is given as background material in Section 5.4. Other basic properties of M′,
specifically the definitions of equilibrium isotherms and of mathematical
stability are given in Section 2.

2 Result and Discussion 1: Theory of Equilibrium
Isotherms
Equilibrium isotherms are defined in Section 2.1. Mathematical
stability is defined in Section 2.2, and is followed
by a section on equilibrium isotherms given by analytical expressions,
then by two sections on equilibrium isotherms given by numerical solutions.

2.1 Definition of an Equilibrium Isotherm
It is here referred to Section 5.4, where the differential equation giving the time rate
of change of coverage is deduced, that is, eq 59. The equilibrium isotherms follow from this
equation: they are the solutions that have zero rate of change. There
are additional requirements concerning stability and unicity: see
the last paragraph but one of this section.

An equilibrium solution
is defined as follows. Given T̃, T̃Σc, and ψ, an equilibrium solution of eq 59 is a set of points (re, θe) in a Cartesian plane,
satisfying 0 < re ≤ rg, 0 < θe < 1, and 3  

An equivalent form of eq 3 is found as follows. The equation
is first rewritten as μ̃Σ,red – T̃ ln K̃H = μ̃f,red, by using eqs 56 and 57. Dividing both sides by T̃, exponentiating,
and referring to eq 45, one finds 4  

This equation, with another definition
for the proportionality
constant, is identical with eq 4 in the article by Hoory and Prausnitz.12

Equations 3 and/or 4 give equilibrium isotherms
provided that (i) points
that represent mathematically and/or physically unstable states are
discarded, and that (ii) non-unicity of θe for any re agrees with observations of hysteresis.

Physical stability is considered in Section 5.1; mathematical stability is defined in Section 2.2.

2.2 Mathematical Stability of Equilibrium Isotherms
Mathematical stability, or m-stability, of equilibrium
isotherms, is defined as follows.13

For any given set {re, T̃, T̃Σc, ψ}, a solution
θe of eq 3 or 4 is said to be (asymptotically) m-stable
if there is a neighborhood of θe such that any θ
inside this neighborhood approaches θe as time increases.

It follows from the definition that a very simple criterion for
deciding whether any point on an equilibrium isotherm is m-stable
is as follows:

θe is an m-stable equilibrium
solution if and
only if Δμ̃ changes from negative to positive values
when θ – θe does so.

Indeed, referring
to Figure 1, and keeping eq 59 in mind, one sees that,
if the condition is satisfied, then
any perturbation of θe that takes place during time
dt̃ > 0, and that brings θ in the
interval
(θe, θe + a), gives
rise to Δμ̃ > 0. It follows that dθ = −Δμ̃
dt̃ < 0, so that θ is drawn back to
θe. A similar reasoning can be made for a perturbation
that brings θ to the left of θe, with the same
conclusion that θ is drawn back to θe. Necessity
is also easily proven.

Figure 1 Figure used in defining m-stability in Section 2.2. If Δμ̃
vs θ behaves as shown in the vicinity of θe, then θe is m-stable.

2.3 Analytical Equilibrium Isotherms and Their
Stability
Analytical solutions of eq 4 are considered here. More precisely, one
seeks to express θe as a known function of re or vice versa. Obviously, this is only possible
if one knows how to invert either f̃Σ or f̃f. No inverse of f̃Σ, given by eq 46 (right), is known. Inverting f̃f, however, may be possible as shown below. There are
three acceptable approximations for the ambient fluid fugacity, and
two of them are invertible: the ones obtained by assuming that the
ambient fluid is ideal, either of type zero (zero volume particles)
or of type 1 (nonzero volume particles). The relevant expressions
for f̃f are given in eq 47 (right) and 48 (right). In fact, most analytical isotherms are expressions giving pressure as a function of coverage, see for example, Table
I-1 in the book by Ross and Olivier.14 This
can easily be done in the present case by writing each invertible
fugacity in terms of the corresponding pressure. Referring to the
left and center equations of the set (36), it
is easily seen that  

Table 1 Values of T̃Σc for the Indicated Adsorbates, on Graphitea
N2	Ar	C6H6	CHCl3	CFCl3	
0.36	0.46	0.14	0.39	0.43	
a From Hoory and Prausnitz.12

Assuming that the ambient gas can be approximated
by an ideal gas
of type 0, eq 4 gives
the known expression 5  

Assuming that the ambient gas can be
approximated by an ideal gas
of type 1, eq 4 gives  

This equation is of the type Z exp Z = g and, g being positive, is
equivalent to Z = Wp(g), where Wp
is the principal part of the Lambert W-function.15 One thus obtains 6  

To the author’s knowledge, this
equation has not previously
appeared in the adsorption literature. A plot of θe versus P̃id 0 is usually
quite close to a plot of θe versus P̃id 1, except for ψ-values less than 1 and for
θe-values close to 1.

One
now turns to the restrictions mentioned in Section 2.1, so as to establish whether
the expressions above are acceptable.

Plots of eq 6, say,
show continuous curves, monotonic increasing when T̃ > T̃Σc (Figure 2, left-hand plot), but with
a region of three-valuedness when T̃ < T̃Σc (Figure 2, right plot).a

Figure 2 Plots of eq 6, for
a supercritical (left) or subcritical (right) adsorbate for values
of T̃, T̃Σc, and ψ, as indicated. The right plot uses the notations of Figure 14 for the subscripted
θ′s, as well as for the meanings of the colors. Concerning
the vertical dashed lines in the right plot, see Section 2.3.

The m-stability of the supercritical isotherm (left
plot of Figure 2) is
established
as follows. Letting θ move on a vertical line, say upward from
a low value, then θ – θe and Δμ̃
both go from negative to positive values when the isotherm is crossed.
The necessary and sufficient condition stated in Section 2.2 is satisfied, so that the
supercritical isotherm is m-stable. It is also physically stable (p-stable)
because ambient gas and the adsorbate behave nearly ideally. One thus
recovers the known result that the supercritical isotherms given by eq 5 are physically correct.

Turning to the subcritical case (right plot of Figure 2), one sees that the isotherm
has three parts: a central part, whose states are p-unstable (orange
line), connecting a lower to an upper part. The lower is here called
the adsorption branch, and the upper is called the desorption branch.
Each of these branches contains a set of p-stable states (black line)
and a set of p-metastable states (green line). The m-stabilities of
the three parts are established by the same argument as used in the
supercritical case. One easily finds that the central part (orange
line) consists of m-unstable states, so that there is no doubt in
discarding these points that already are p-unstable. However, all
points on the adsorption and desorption branches are, with the exception
of one point for each branch, m-stable, regardless of the quality
of their physical stability: the whole set of p-stable points and
almost the whole set of p-metastable points are m-stable. The exception
is, for each branch, the p-metastable point having a vertical tangent,
that is, the point on the isotherm where θ = θm (desorption branch) or θ = θM (adsorption
branch): indeed, repeating the m-stability argument, and letting θ
move on a vertical tangent, then Δμ̃ does not change
sign when  does. The m-instability of these points
is important in interpreting the region of two-valuedness as a hysteresis
loop with the following boundaries: its upper and lower boundaries
coincide with the desorption and adsorption branches over a pressure
interval [P̃1, P̃2]. P̃2 is the abscissa
of the point on the adsorption branch whose ordinate is the left spinodal
coverage, θM, whereas P̃1 is the abscissa of the point on the desorption branch whose
ordinate is the right spinodal coverage, θm. Note
that the left and right boundaries of the hysteresis loop can only
be the vertical lines at P̃ = P̃1 and P̃ = P̃2 because (P̃1, θm) and (P̃2, θM) are the only m-unstable points on the desorption and the
adsorption branches: the transition to a mathematically and physically
stable state can only take place from (P̃2, θM) during adsorption, and from (P̃1, θm) during desorption.
See Figure 2, right
plot. Note also that the vertical boundaries of the hysteresis loop
are not places of equilibrium, as these are in regions where Δμ̃
≠ 0. They are drawn as dashed lines in Figure 2 to emphasize this fact.

A further
remark on the p-metastable states follows: by definition,
a p-metastable adsorbate state will, if perturbed, transit to a p-stable
state of lower energy. Referring to Figure 14 (right), such a transition brings the adsorbate
from a point on one of the green lines to the reconstructed dash-dotted
line at the same value of coverage. This implies that it is not possible
to say whether an equilibrium state represented by a point situated
on one of the green lines of Figure 2 (right plot) is in a two-phase or in a one-phase adsorbate
state: the two states have the same coverage and also the same ambient
pressure. The equality of pressures is approximative and is due to
the assumptions that characterize M′, implying that changes
in the adsorbate are not “visible” in the ambient gas.
As a consequence, p-stable and p-metastable adsorbate states are treated
in the same way in Section 2.5 below.

Thus, for equilibrium isotherms that can be
obtained from analytical
expressions, model M′ defines a subcritical equilibrium isotherm
plotted against pressure as follows: it has an adsorption branch that
spans all pressures up to a pressure P̃2 at which the adsorbate is at its left spinodal coverage,
θM. It has a desorption branch that spans pressures
down to a pressure P̃1 at which
the adsorbate is at its right spinodal coverage θm. P̃1 < P̃2, hence, the interval (P̃1, P̃2) defines the pressure
range of the hysteresis loop. The vertical boundaries of the loop
at pressures P̃1 and P̃2 do not consist of equilibrium points.

Sections 2.4 and 2.5 look at supercritical and at subcritical isotherms
in cases where no analytical solution is available, that is, when
μ̃f,red is given by eq 49 (left).

2.4 Numerical Equilibrium Isotherms for Supercritical
Adsorbates and Their Stability
Model M′ is now considered
for the general case of numerically solving eq 3 for T̃ ≥ T̃Σc.

According to eq 56, the Δμ̃
versus θ curve, at given re, T̃, T̃Σc,
and ψ, is the μ̃Σ,red versus θ
curve with a vertical translation induced by μ̃f,red(re,T̃) and by
ψ(T̃). The μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve has the shape of the monotonically increasing
curve shown in Figure 15 (right). One can immediately conclude that there will always be
a solution (as the curve spans the vertical axis from −∞
to +∞), and that it is unique. Using mathematical stability,
as defined in Section 2.2, together with the plots of Δμ̃ versus
θ, one concludes that θe(re) is m-stable in addition to being p-stable. For later
reference, this equilibrium solution is written as 7  

Its general shape is given in Figure 2 (left).

The
interpretation of eq 3 as the intersection with the θ-axis of a vertically
translated μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve
has some useful consequences concerning the general shape of an equilibrium
supercritical isotherm, especially the location of its point of inflection.

Knowing the set {T̃, T̃Σc, ψ}, it is possible to roughly predict
the position of the region where the isotherm is steepest, assuming
that the parameters in the set above are such that the isotherm flattens
out. This follows from the observation that the μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve can be translated upward by
an arbitrary amount by letting re go arbitrarily
close to 0. Letting re increase from such
a value, the μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve
is translated downward, and its intersection with the θ axis
gives values of θe that increase, the fastest increase
taking place when the inflection point of the μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve is close to the θ-axis. This can only
happen if ψ (the other quantity that is subtracted from μ̃Σ,red in the expression of Δμ̃) is
large enough. It is then useful to define a function Ψu(T̃,T̃Σc) as follows: if ψ = Ψu, then the inflection
point of the Δμ̃ versus θ curve, at given T̃, T̃Σc,
and at r = rg(T̃), is on the θ-axis. The inflection point,
easily found by equating to zero the second derivative of μ̃Σ,red with respect to θ, occurs at θ = 1/3,
independently of T̃ and of T̃Σc, so that 8  

See Figure 4 for
the general behavior of Ψu. Note that Ψu does not depend on the values in the set .

Figure 3, shows how the shape
of the equilibrium isotherm changes
for values of ψ in the neighborhood of Ψu.
Note that the tendency toward flattening occurs when ψ >
Ψu.

Figure 3 Equilibrium supercritical isotherms, θe vs P̃/P̃0, where T̃Σc = 0.5 and T̃ = 0.6. Curves originate from eq 7. The value of ψ is indicated for each
curve
(Ψu = 1.2188). The horizontal dashed line is at θe = 1/3. Concerning the vertical segments, see the end of Section 2.4.

On an equilibrium isotherm plotted as θe versus re, one can find the approximate
position of
its point of inflection. It is the value of re, here denoted ri, that corresponds to θe = 1/3. According to eq 4, it is given by 9  

One can obtain a good approximation
for this ri if one can
assume that it is sufficiently
close to 0 that f̃f ≈ T̃ri (see eq 47 (right)). Then, using eq 46 (right), one gets 10  

In Figure 3, the
values of T̃ri/P̃0 given by this expression for ψ
= 1.5Ψu and 2.0Ψu are indicated
by the vertical segments.

2.5 Numerical Equilibrium Isotherms for Subcritical
Adsorbates and Their Stability
Returning to the interpretation
of eq 3 as the intersection
with the θ-axis of a vertically translated μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve, one now assumes T̃ < T̃Σc, so that the μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve has a local maximum and a
local minimum as shown in Figure 15 (right). There can now be one, two, or three values
of θe, depending on the position of the Δμ̃
versus θ curve in relation to the θ-axis. This position
depends, in turn, on the values of μ̃f,red and
ψ.

The use of mathematical stability in this case leads
to the following. If there is just one value of θe, then it occurs as the intersection with the θ-axis of that
part of the translated μ̃Σ,red versus
θ curve that is either to the left of the local maximum or to
the right of the local minimum and is therefore m-stable. If there
are two distinct values of θe, then one of them is
m-stable, the other (being the abscissa of the local maximum or minimum)
is m-unstable and discarded. If there are three values of θe, then: (i) the smallest and largest are m-stable, whereas
the middle one is m-unstable and discarded; (ii) the smallest is in
the interval (0, θM), and the largest is in the interval
(θm, 1).

For later reference, the m-stable
equilibrium solutions are written 11   12  

Because θM < θm, there are
two separate branches as in Section 2.3, an adsorption branch, θea, and a desorption branch, θed, creating a double-valuedness
for certain pressures. As in the right plot of Figure 2, this is interpreted to mean that there
is a hysteresis loop and a phase transition for the adsorbate.

The sizes of ψ and of rg being
important, one is led to define the following two functions of T̃ and T̃Σc 13   14  where θm and θM are as defined in Figures 14 and 15, and by eq 37. It is easily seen that Ψm < ΨM. Both functions depend on T̃ and T̃Σc and not on the set . Figure 4 shows the behavior of Ψm, ΨM, and Ψu versus T̃ for T̃Σc = 0.5.

Figure 4 Special ψ′s versus dimensionless temperature, T̃. The upper thick line is ΨM defined
by eq 14, the lower
thick line is Ψm defined by eq 13, and the thin line is Ψu, defined by eq 8. The
first two are defined for 0 < T̃ < T̃Σc, whereas the last is defined
for T̃ > 0. All curves are drawn with T̃Σc = 0.5.

It is now clear that the shape of an isotherm critically
depends
on the value of ψ. To make a more detailed description, plots
of Δμ̃(θ,r,T̃,T̃Σc,ψ) versus θ
are shown in the third row of Figure 5, where the parameters
are chosen as follows: T̃ = 0.4, T̃Σc = 0.5; r is given its maximum
value, rg(T̃),
consistent with the assumption that the ambient fluid is a gas; finally,
ψ < Ψm (left-hand plot), Ψm < ψ < ΨM (center plot), and ψ
> ΨM (right-hand plot). Obviously, the value of
ψ
determines the position of the curve relative to the θ-axis,
given that r = rg.

Figure 5 Illustrating
the numerical calculation of equilibrium isotherms
for subcritical temperatures. All plots are done with T̃ = 0.4 and T̃Σc = 0.5. The
values of ψ are, column-wise: ψ < Ψm (left), Ψm < ψ < ΨM (center), and ψ > ΨM (right). For the
plots
of the third row, it is reminded that . See text in Section 2.5, after eq 14.

One can now draw θe versus re for the three ψ-cases given above by
gradually reducing re from rg to 0 and
getting the corresponding value(s) of θe. Graphically,
this means translating the curves shown in the third row vertically
upward, and noting the values of θe at which the
black lines cross the θ-axis: the intersection of the black
line to the left gives θea, whereas the black line
to the right gives θed. Numerically, by using eqs 11 and 12. Functions θea and θed plotted
against re or, equivalently against the
pressure, are shown as solid lines in the fourth row of Figure 5. It is graphically obvious
that θed does not exist for the case 0 < ψ
< Ψm, and that both θea and θed exist for larger ψ-values, albeit for a limited range
for r or P̃ values. The dotted
lines that connect the desorption and the adsorption branches are
the isotherms given by eq 6. See, for comparison, the right plot in Figure 2, and note, in particular that P̃(r1,T̃) = P̃1 and that P̃(r2,T̃) = P̃2.

One sees that the adsorption branches, shown
in the fourth row,
only reach the value r = r2 < rg, if ψ is large enough
that the local maximum of the Δμ̃ versus θ
curve is below the θ-axis when r = rg, so that lifting the curve by reducing r brings the local maximum on the θ-axis when r = r2: see the third column
of the fourth row. Note also that, when this occurs, the adsorption
branch stops being defined and that it seems to have a vertical tangent
at r = r2. Similar statements
hold for the desorption branch.

The statements that the adsorption
branch stops at r2, whereas the desorption
branch stops at r1, both with vertical
tangents, are correct because
an equilibrium isotherm is a curve satisfying μ̃Σ,red(θe,T̃,T̃Σc) – μ̃f,red(re,T̃) – ψ
= 0, whose tangents are given by  

Thus, the local extrema of the μ̃Σ,red versus θ curve produce vertical tangents
on the isotherms,
and there is agreement with the case of the analytical equilibrium
isotherms, Section 2.3. The agreement goes, in fact, deeper because it is possible to repeat
the stability analysis of Section 2.3 for the isotherms, and also for the points with vertical
tangents, with the same conclusions.

It is now possible to interpret
the multivaluedness in the equilibrium
isotherms, by introducing a hysteresis loop.

Referring first
to the plots of the third column, fourth and fifth
rows of Figure 5, one
interprets the two-valuedness of coverage as in Section 2.3: there is an adsorption
curve abcdβα, and a desorption curve αβγδba.
As pointed out in Section 2.3, no solution of eq 11 or of eq 12 will be situated on one of the vertical boundaries of the hysteresis
loop bcdβγδ.

The ambient densities r1 and r2, identifying
the left and right boundaries
of the hysteresis loop (see the fourth row in Figure 5) are functions of T̃, T̃Σc, and ψ, easily
calculable by the following expressions 15   16  

Turning now to the plots of the second
column, fourth and fifth
rows of Figure 5, it
is seen that the upper solid line of the plot in the fourth row must
be discarded as a possible equilibrium isotherm, at least if one assumes
that desorption occurs after adsorption, because adsorption stops
before the mathematically unstable point (where θ = θM) is reached, and the adsorbate has not transited to the desorption
branch. Adsorption occurs along abc, stops at c because of the P̃ < P̃0 condition,
and then desorption follows the adsorption branch but in the reverse
direction, that is, along cba.

An important conclusion follows:
there are two main classes for
the values of ψ: the class ψ ≤ ΨM in which the isotherms show low coverage and are structureless (fifth
row, left-hand and center plots in Figure 5) and the class ψ > ΨM in which the isotherms show an adsorbate phase transition
and a
hysteresis loop (fifth row, right-hand plot).

When ψ >
ΨM, it is of some interest to predict
the approximate pressure of the center of the loop, and also the pressures
of its left and right vertical boundaries. The pressure in the approximate
middle of the loop is P̃(ri,T̃) where ri is the previously found density
at which the ambient chemical potential has an inflection point, see eq 10. The pressures approximating
the left and right vertical boundaries are P̃(r1,T̃) and P̃(r2,T̃) where approximate expressions can be found for r1 and r2 in a manner similar to the one that led to eq 10. Equations 15, and 16 are equivalent
to  and assuming that r1 and r2 are small, one finds 17  where 18  (EM being obtained
from above by substituting M to m) and where θm and
θM are the functions of τ given by eq 37.

In the same approximation
for which the above expressions are valid
(low values of r), one can write the width of the
hysteresis loop, in units of pressure, as w = 8PcT̃(r2 – r1) (see eq 33, right), that is 19  

EM – Em versus τ is shown in Figure 6. The three pressures P̃(ri,T̃), P̃(r1,T̃), and P̃(r2,T̃) are indicated
by vertical
lines on the plot of the fifth row and third column in Figure 5.

Figure 6 For τ = T̃/T̃Σc <
1, the width of the hysteresis loop is proportional
to EM – Em (see eq 19),
a function of τ that vanishes at τ = 0 and τ = 1.
Its maximum, 0.03281 is attained when τ = 0.5917.

3 Result and Discussion 2: Theory of Time-Dependent
Isotherms
Time-dependent solutions of eq 59 are now considered, that simulate the thought
experiment
described in the next paragraph below, leading to a description of
dynamical isotherms, and to their behavior in relation to equilibrium
isotherms and to hysteresis loops. Two subcases are considered: the
supercritical and the subcritical adsorbate. It is believed that the
actual values of T̃ and T̃Σc are of secondary importance as compared to their
relative sizes. T̃Σc = 0.5
has been used repeatedly above, and is also used in what follows,
whereas T̃ = 0.6 and T̃ = 0.4 are used for the two cases.

The thought-experiment considered
is as follows. An amount of mesoporous
or macroporous medium is placed in a container filled with a one-component
gas at low pressure P and at uniform constant temperature T, which is less that the critical temperature. After the
gas in the pores has settled into a state of zero velocity and uniform
pressure Pi, which is
less than the saturation pressure P0,
the pressure in the gas is slowly increased to a pressure Pf ≤ P0, then
slowly decreased back to Pi. Recordings of the amounts adsorbed, and of the corresponding
ambient densities or pressures are assumed to occur continuously.
The duration of the cycle Pi → Pf → Pi is assumed to be large enough for the
ambient density to remain nearly uniform, and for the ambient velocity
to be nearly zero, in the macroporous medium at all times. (See the
description of model M′ in the Introduction.)

The cycle of applied pressure forces the ambient density
to follow
a similar cycle. In M′, r(t̃) is needed as extra
input to solve eq 59. Mathematically, one can introduce a function P̃(t̃) and find the resulting r(t̃) by solving the equation of state. A simplification
is described in what follows, that avoids time-consuming calculations
by starting directly with a function r(t̃) that goes through a cycle, starting from a low-value rϵ, increasing to a high-value rt ≤ rg, then decreasing
back to rϵ. Such a function is shown
in Figure 7, where the increasing and decreasing parts are linear.
The minimum rϵ is introduced so
as to avoid the singularity of the chemical potential at r = 0, and a value rϵ = rt/103 is in general sufficient. The
figure defines , where  is the set of three parameters {rϵ, rt, t̃d}. The time parameter, t̃d will be called the cycle duration.

Figure 7 Function , where  is the set of three parameters {rϵ, rt, t̃d}. The function simulates a compression–decompression
cycle.

Equation 59 is solvedb with an initial condition, . Concerning the arguments of Δμ̃,  is substituted to r and, as already mentioned, T̃Σc = 0.5 and two values are considered
for T̃, that is 0.4 and 0.6. The central purpose
of the calculations is to determine the influence of the values of
ψ and of the cycle duration t̃d on the shapes of the time-dependent isotherms.

The supercritical
case is examined first, and T̃ = 0.6 is used.

Figure 8 shows the
results obtained as three plots, with four curves in each plot, and
increasing values of ψ from left to right (based on the case
of the equilibrium isotherms of Section 2.4). In each plot, the thick-lined curve
is the equilibrium isotherm, and the other curves are dynamic isotherms
with increasing cycle times, t̃d as indicated in the caption. The vertical thin lines are at the
approximate positions of the inflection points of the equilibrium
isotherms, given by eq 10. The most noticeable feature is exhibited by the dotted-line isotherms
(short cycle duration), where adsorption increases long after the
start of decompression. Also remarkable is the tendency of the isotherms
to exhibit loops that resemble hysteresis loops found in magnetism,
but that shrink when the cycle duration increases. This type of hysteresis
was apparently first observed in piezoelectric measurements in 2003
and denoted then as rate-dependent hysteresis.16

Figure 8 Isotherms for a supercritical adsorbate: T̃Σc = 0.5, T̃ = 0.6. The values
of ψ are, from the left to the right plot, equal to Ψu = 1.22, 1.5Ψu = 1.83, and 2.0Ψu = 2.44. The thick solid line is the equilibrium isotherm
in each plot. For all plots, the values of the loop duration t̃d are: 1 for the dotted lines, 5 for
the dashed lines, and 100 for the solid lines. The vertical thin lines
are at P(ri,T̃).

Both features above are experimentally observed
in adsorption,
as shown in the review article by Wang et al.9 For further discussion, see Section 4.

The subcritical case is now examined, and T̃ = 0.4 is used, with T̃Σc = 0.5.

According to the conclusion drawn in Section 2.5, one can concentrate
on cases where the
equilibrium isotherms show phase transition and hysteresis, that is,
the cases ψ > ΨM. The three plots in Figure 9 show equilibrium
isotherms, vertical hysteresis boundaries, and dynamic isotherms resulting
from various cycle durations, as indicated in the caption.

Figure 9 Isotherms for
a subcritical adsorbate. For all three plots, T̃Σc = 0.5, T̃ = 0.4, the thick
solid lines are the equilibrium isotherms, and
the thick dashed lines are the hysteresis boundaries. Left plot: ψ
= 1.1ΨM = 1.595; dynamic isotherms calculated with rϵ = 0.01rg, rt = rg, t̃d = 1 (thin dotted), 5 (thin
dashed), 100 (thin solid). Center plot: ψ = 1.1ΨM = 1.595; rϵ = 0.01rg, rt = rg, t̃d = 100 (thin dotted),
300 (thin dashed), 600 (thin solid). Right plot: ψ = 5; dynamic
isotherm calculated with rϵ = 0.75r1, rt = 1.25r2, t̃d = 600
(thin solid). In the center and right plots, the vertical thin lines
are placed at r = r1, ri, r2.

The dynamical isotherms in the left plot are calculated
with the
same cycle durations, t̃d, used
for the dynamical isotherms in Figure 8. They show, for small cycle durations, the same increase
in adsorption even after the start of decompression. The center plot
shows the tendency of the dynamical isotherms to approach the equilibrium
isotherms when the cycle duration increases. In particular, the left
and right boundaries of the hysteresis loop seem to attract the parts
of the time-dependent isotherms that join low to high (or, for decompression,
high to low) density adsorbate. However, the vertical hysteresis boundaries
are not places of equilibrium, and the reason for the behavior of
the time-dependent isotherms is that they are forced toward a vertical
direction by being attracted to the parts of the upper and lower boundaries
that rapidly curve from the near horizontal to the vertical.

The right plot, with ψ = 5, simulates conditions of high
adsorption (see Figure 16). The notable fact here is that the phase transition and
accompanying hysteresis loop happen at very low pressures, the width
of the loop also being quite small. The center and right plots show
that the placement and width of the loop are well described by ri, r1, and r2, given by eqs 10 and 17.

4 Result and Discussion 3: Reinterpreting the
Sorption of CO2 and CH4 on Coal
A number
of publications (Zhao et al.6 and refs
15–28 given there) report experiments of methane
and carbon dioxide sorption, showing isotherms with hysteresis loops
at temperatures where capillary condensation cannot explain the hysteresis.6,9 In fact, these isotherms have loops that bear a strong resemblance
to the one presented in Section 3, especially in Figure 8. One of these experiments is examined below in the
framework of model M′.

The experiment in question is
the one reported by Jessen et al.7 It is
here interpreted in a way that differs
from the one given by the authors. Shortly stated, the authors fit
one static isotherm to the adsorption data and another to the desorption
data (both are Langmuir isotherms), thus obtaining two separate values
for the Henry adsorption constant, one for adsorption and one for
desorption. In model M′, however, it is possible to fit just
one time-dependent isotherm to the set of data consisting of adsorption
and desorption, and thus obtain a unique Henry constant. More precisely,
M′ has two internal parameters, T̃Σc and ψ. However, fitting an isotherm to the data
requires, as shown below, the introduction of three additional parameters.
The least squares principle is applied, whereby the best values of
the parameters are the ones that minimize the sum of the squared differences
between the measured and calculated values.

The raw data reported
by Jessen et al.7 concerning the adsorption–desorption
at Texp = 295.15 K of CO2 by
Wyoming coal, are
shown plotted in Figure 10. Points are numbered in increasing order
for increasing (adsorption), and then decreasing (desorption) coverage.
The coordinates of point i are denoted (Pexp,i, Aexp,i) where, for the adsorption points, i = 1, ..., Na and for the desorption
points, i = Na + 1, ..., Na + Nd, and Na = Nd = 9. The
amounts adsorbed are given in SCF per ton of coal.

Figure 10 Adsorption (circles)
and desorption (squares) of CO2 by Wyoming coal at 295.15
K, as reported by Jessen et al.7 The horizontal
axis gives pressure in PSI. The
vertical axis gives the amounts adsorbed, A, in SCF
per ton of coal. For the numbering of the points, see the text.

According to the NIST database, the critical temperature
and pressure
for CO2 are 20  

The dimensionless temperature attached
to the raw data of Figure 10 is thus T̃exp = Texp/Tfc = 295.2/304.2
= 0.9704.

The ambient CO2 is thus slightly subcritical.
Assuming
an adsorbate critical temperature of about a half or less of the above Tfc, one concludes that the adsorbate is supercritical.
According to model M′, if hysteresis is observed, it must be
of one of the types drawn with a thin dashed or thin solid line on
the right-hand plot in Figure 8. In other words, it can only be a rate-dependent hysteretic
isotherm with a large value of tr so that
its shrinking to the unique curve representing the equilibrium isotherm
is difficult to observe.

The experiment7 is described as follows.
Adsorption is driven by a series of compressions and relaxations,
starting from an initial low pressure Pexp,1 and leading to a maximum pressure Pexp,9, which is less than saturation pressure (about 950 PSI at 295.15
K); desorption then follows, as a series of decompressions and relaxations
leading back to a low pressure approximately equal to Pexp,18. The compression and decompression times are not
given explicitly, but it is indicated that relaxation times are of
at least 24 h.

In the framework of model M′, a simplified
simulation of
the experiment consists of solving eq 59, with a function r(t̃) that is not the simple compression–decompression cycle of Figure 7 but a cycle that
includes a series of compressions and relaxations followed by a series
of decompressions and relaxations, as shown in Figure 11. One then obtains theoretical coverage
θ, as a dimensionless number between 0 and 1, in terms of dimensionless
time t̃. Parametric plots of θ versus r, with parameter t̃, can then be
obtained. Recordings of theoretical coverage and ambient density are
made immediately after compression (in adsorption) or decompression
(in desorption), with the purpose of comparing them to the experimental
points (Pexp,i, Aexp,i). Two subsidiary problems
must obviously be solved: the first one is the same as mentioned in
the third paragraph of Section 3, of going from pressure to density and back, and is solved
by creating an array, rexp,i, (i = 1, ..., Na + Nd), with elements satisfying P̃(rexp,i,T̃exp) = P̃exp,i. The second is writing the experimental
adsorptions Aexp,i as
dimensionless numbers θexp,i between
0 and 1. To solve this second problem, one introduces a constant C, defined as 21  

Figure 11 Function r(t̃) that simulates
a series of compressions (the nearly vertical segments) and relaxations
(the horizontal segments) followed by a series of decompressions and
relaxations that lead to the measurement of the amounts of CO2 adsorbed in the experiment by Jessen et al.7 (their Figure 2). See the text in Section 4 for the construction of this function.

For the determination of C, see
item 3 in the
algorithm below.

The simulation consists of several parts that
are now described
in more detail.

The first part is the construction of the function r(t̃) shown in Figure 11. It is done as follows.

It is assumed that a recording of (Pexp,i, Aexp,i) for some value of i is followed by a relaxation
time that is large enough for the adsorbate coverage to reach its
equilibrium value. Relaxation is followed by a compression (or a decompression)
that brings pressure Pexp,i to Pexp,i+1 (equivalently, rexp,i to rexp,i+1) and to the recording of Aexp,i+1.

To minimize
the number of parameters to be determined, it is assumed
that the same relaxation time is used for all i,
so that one relaxation time, , is introduced as a parameter to determine.
Note, incidentally, that in theory, it takes infinite time to reach
equilibrium so that  must be such that equilibrium is reached
within a certain acceptable tolerance. See item 4 in the algorithm
below.

Another parameter to determine is introduced: a time
variable, , used to quantize the rate of compression/decompression.
Let  be the estimated time that is necessary
to carry out the compression of the ambient gas from the lowest pressure, Pexp,1, to the highest adsorption pressure, Pexp,9, at a constant rate. Then, the rate of
compression can be obtained as 22  and the assumption is made that this rate
is used to compress or decompress from any density to the next.

An array t̅i is
then constructed, where the first value, t̅1, is taken as the origin, assumed to be the time of the
first data registration (labeled 1 in Figure 10); t̅2 is then the time at the end of the first relaxation. Then, t̅k, where k = 3, ..., 18 are the successive times at the ends of the compressions
and relaxations leading to the last adsorbed value (labeled 9 in Figure 10)  

Times t̅k where k runs from 11 to
14 are shown in Figure 11. Also shown is the time of the first desorption, t̅19, at the end of the first decompression.
The last registered desorption (labeled 18 in Figure 10) is at t̅36  

It is then useful to construct an array r̅  so that the function r(t̃) of Figure 11 is the function that joins point (t̅i, r̅i) to point (t̅i+1, r̅i+1) by a straight line, for i = 1, ..., 2Na + 2Nd –
1.

According to the description given above of the simplified
simulation
of the experiment, the amounts adsorbed are recorded after compression
(for adsorption) or after decompression (for desorption), that is,
at times t̅2k–1 with k = 1, ..., Na + Nd.

The second important part
of the simulation is to find a solution
of eq 59, where r(t̃) is the function shown in Figure 11. It is advantageous for accuracy to find
the solution of eq 59 as a succession of solutions, where the different rectilinear parts
of function r(t̃) are considered
in turn. For each of the 2Na + 2Nb – 1 rectilinear parts, one thus defines
a time variable, τn and a linear
density function, ρn of τn, as follows  

For each rectilinear part, a coverage,
θn(τn) is then defined iteratively
as the solution of eq 59, rewritten in terms of the new quantities just introduced 23   24  

This is done for n = 1, ..., 2Na + 2Nd – 1, where,
for n = 1, one defines θ1(0) = θexp,1. This last is not an extra assumption because one can
replace θexp,1 by any other value in its vicinity,
if one, simultaneously, agrees not to include the first deviation
when minimizing the sum of the squared deviations (see item 5 in the
algorithm below).

The final part of the simulation consists
of finding the solution
of eqs 23 and 24 that best fits the data. It involves the determination
of the following set of parameters  in a way that minimizes the averaged sum of
the squared deviations (θ(t̅2n–1) – θexp,n)2. This is done by the following algorithm.1 Values are chosen for T̃Σc and ψ, say 0.3 and 4, respectively.

2 Using eq 7, the equilibrium isotherm θe(re,T̃exp,T̃Σc,ψ) is drawn.
See the smooth
curve in black in the left-hand plot in Figure 12.

3 The value of C (see eq 21) is calculated, that
gives θe(rexp,9,T̃exp,T̃Σc,ψ) = Aexp,9/C, and the data are replotted with ordinates θexpi = Aexpi/C.

4 Values are chosen for  and , say 1 and 0.1, and eqs 23 and 24 are solved
for all n, as indicated. The value chosen for  is increased if relaxation, at any experimental
point, ends before the equilibrium isotherm is reached (seen graphically
as two lines touching, see the left-hand plot of Figure 12.), and the solutions are
recalculated. The isotherm is plotted as a blue sawtoothed curve for
adsorption, a red sawtoothed curve for desorption: see the left-hand
plot on Figure 12.
The coverage calculated by the model at the end of each compression
is plotted as an asterisk, and the value calculated at the end of
each decompression is plotted as a diagonal cross. (Not all asterisks
and crosses are shown in the left-hand plot of Figure 12.)

5 The averaged sum of the squared deviations

  is calculated.6 The values of the parameters are those
that minimize D2.



Figure 12 Interpretation of the experimental data shown in Figure 10. In both plots, the vertical
axis gives dimensionless coverage; the horizontal axis gives ambient
pressure in PSI. Left-hand plot: The smooth black curve is the theoretical
equilibrium isotherm given by eq 7. The blue and red sawtooth curves, joined as shown in the
inset, constitute the solution of eqs 23 and 24, the two colors referring
to the colors in Figure 11. Asterisks and crosses indicate values to be compared to
the measurements, see the right-hand plot. Right-hand plot: Circles
and squares are the experimental data of Figure 10 for adsorption (circles) and desorption
(squares) of CO2 by Wyoming coal at 295.15 K.7 Blue asterisks (adsorption) and red crosses (desorption)
result from model calculations as indicated by the left-hand plot.

Comments: (i) The value of C determined
at the
third step above has been taken as the final one with the justification
that the experimental point number 9 is on the flat portion of the
isotherm and therefore very close to the equilibrium isotherm. (ii)
The value of , determined at the fourth step, need not
be increased: any larger value will serve the same purpose because
reducing the distance to the equilibrium isotherm below a certain
small value has no interest. (iii) The value of  turns out to have little influence on the
final result:  must be small compared to , and small values (0.1, say) give almost
horizontal compression or decompression isotherm segments: a smaller
value (0.01, say) might be unrealistic (depending on the value of tr) without noticeably changing the shape of
the isotherm segments.

The sawtoothed curves of the left-hand
plot of Figure 12 are
joined at rexp,9 as shown by the inset,
and can thus be seen as just
one isotherm, “anchored” to the experimental points
at the last adsorption measurement.

The minimum value of D2 is 0.00512, and is obtained
with , , and  

The right-hand plot of Figure 12 shows theoretical coverage
(asterisks and crosses)
at pressure values where experimental coverage is given (circles and
squares).

Comments: (i) The smallness of T̃Σc indicates that an adsorbate of CO2 on coal acts like
an ideal gas of finite volume molecules. (ii) Model M′, used
as described in this section, predicts unique values for T̃Σc and ψ. In Jessen et al.7 (see their Table 2 and Figure 2), adsorption and desorption
are assumed to evolve along different equilibrium isotherms, so that
two values of ψ result: 3.66 for adsorption and 4.73 for desorption.

Turning now to the data reported7 concerning
the adsorption–desorption at 295.15 K of CH4 by
Wyoming coal, one notes first that, according to the NIST database,
the critical temperature for CH4 is Tfc = 190.6 K, so that the ambient CH4 is supercritical.
The adsorbate critical temperature being most likely less than the
above Tfc, the adsorbate is also supercritical.
The experiment is then inside the framework of M′ because a
phase transition for the ambient fluid is excluded, and uniformity
of density can be assumed. (See the description of model M′
in the Introduction.) The situation is thus
similar to that of the CO2 experiment just gone through,
that is, that of a rate-dependent hysteresis isotherm. Following the
same procedure, one finds a minimum value of D2 equal
to 0.0067, obtained with , , and  

Figure 13 shows
experimental coverage (circles and squares) and theoretical coverage
(asterisks and crosses) calculated at the same pressures. Using data
from Table 2,7 one finds that the two Langmuir
curves that fit the adsorption and desorption CH4 curves
of Figure 27 yield two values for ψ:
4.61 for adsorption and 8.92 for desorption.

Figure 13 Circles and squares
are the experimental data for adsorption (circles)
and desorption (squares) of CH4 by Wyoming coal at 295.15
K.7 Blue asterisks (adsorption) and red
crosses (desorption) result from model calculations. The horizontal
axis gives pressure in PSI. The vertical axis gives dimensionless
coverage.

5 Background Material
Material given
here includes the explicit calculation of the thermodynamic
functions of the ambient and adsorbed fluids, that is, pressure and
spreading pressure (Section 5.1) and chemical potentials and fugacities (Section 5.2); a subsection
is devoted to the introduction of Henry’s constant (Section 5.3). A final section
(Section 5.4) contains
the derivation of the differential equation giving the rate of change
of the coverage originating from eq 1.

5.1 Pressure and Spreading Pressure
As
stated in the Introduction, it is assumed
that the adsorbed fluid obeys a van der Waals equation of state. The
two-dimensional van der Waals equation, used, for example, by Hoory
and Prausnitz,12 is used here 25  

What follows is consistent when a monolayer
is assumed. The maximum value of NΣ is Σ/β so that the coverage is NΣβ/Σ. The particle concentration and coverage
are thus 26   27  

The critical values, identified by
a subscript c, are expressed
in terms of the constants α and β 28  

Concerning the ambient fluid, three
equations of state are considered:
that of an ideal gas of type 0 (noninteracting zero-volume particles),
that of an ideal gas of type 1 (noninteracting nonzero-volume particles),
and a plain van der Waals equation 29  

Note that, in the type 0 and type 1
cases, one assumes that V is so large that Pid 0 and Pid 1 are valid approximations
inside some pressure range, but that the van der Waals constants are
different from zero, so that it makes sense to speak of critical pressure
and temperature.

Ambient and adsorbed fluids are assumed to
be at the same temperature T. Similar to the two-dimensional
case above, one defines 30   31  

The critical values, identified by
a subscript c, are expressed
in terms of the constants a and b 32  

The critical temperatures of the ambient
and adsorbed fluids have
different notations because they are known to be different.

One now introduces a dimensionless temperature T̃, a dimensionless spreading pressure Π̃, and a dimensionless
ambient pressure P̃, by 33  

Consistently with the definition of T̃,
one defines dimensionless critical temperatures for the ambient and
adsorbed fluids 34  

It follows that 35  

Similarly, the dimensionless versions
of eq 29, are 36  

The adsorbed and ambient molecules
being chemically identical,
α and β are related to a and b. If the gas molecules are spherical and isotropic before
and after being adsorbed, then formulas giving α and β
in terms of a and b exist14 and result in T̃Σc = 1/2. Otherwise α and β, and thereby T̃Σc, are often determined by fitting
theoretical results to experiments. Some examples of experimentally
determined values for T̃Σc are given in Table 1. It is assumed in the sequel that T̃Σc < 1. Figure 14 defines the symbols used in this article concerning the ambient
fluid (left) and the adsorbed fluid (right). In particular, θm and θM, which often occur, are easily obtainable
as solutions of a cubic 37  with 38  

Figure 14 Left: Pressure P̃(r,T̃), eq 36 (right), for two values of T̃, one above
and one below the critical value, T̃fc = 1, vs r. Right: Spreading pressure Π̃(θ,T̃,1/2), eq 35, for two values of T̃, one above and
one below the critical value 1/2 vs θ. Concerning the similarity
of the curves and also concerning the color and style of lines, see
the text at the end of Section 5.1.

They are only defined when τ ≤ 1,
that is, for a subcritical
adsorbate. They satisfy θM ≤ θm (the equality occurring when τ = 1) and are the abscissas
of the intersections of the Π̃(θ,T̃,T̃Σc) versus θ curve
with its spinodal curve: elsewhere in this article, θM and θm are referred to as the left and right spinodal
coverages.

Figure 14 includes
the known concepts of physical stability (black lines), physical metastability
(green lines), and physical instability (orange lines). Equations
of state represented by the black lines joined by the dash-dotted
lines are called reconstructed.17 A one-phase
p-metastable state will eventually transit, at constant r (or constant θ for the adsorbate), to a two-phase p-stable
state of lower energy on the reconstructed straight line.

The
figure also illustrates the functional relationship implied
by eq 35 and by the
third of eq 36, namely:
Π̃(x,T̃Σcy,T̃Σc)
= T̃ΣcP̃(x,y).

5.2 Chemical Potentials and Fugacities
The chemical potentials can now be calculated, up to functions of
temperature. The starting point is  

One first obtains F by integrating at constant T and Nf; one then obtains μf by differentiating F with respect to Nf  

The limit when V*
→ ∞ of the first
term inside the parenthesis on the right-hand side is the derivative
with respect to Nf of the Helmholtz free
energy of the ideal gas.18 Using its expression,
one gets 39  where  has the dimension of molar volume. It can
be obtained by the methods of statistical mechanics,18 provided one has specific information about the properties
of the molecules of the ambient fluid,19 such as moments of inertia and vibrational frequencies. It is treated
here as a function of T, referring to Section 5.3 for a further
determination that involves Henry’s adsorption constant. Performing
the integration in eq 39, one finds that terms that diverge when V* →
∞ cancel, and one gets 40  

The second term on the right-hand side,
here named reduced chemical
potential, has three alternative expressions, corresponding to the
three alternative expressions for the pressure in eq 29  

The chemical potential of the adsorbed
fluid is obtained by a similar
method, μΣ being then given by a suitably modified
right-hand side of eq 39: V, , P, and Nf being changed to A, , Π, and NΣ. One gets 41   42  

The fugacities ff and fΣ of the ambient and
adsorbed fluids are now introduced,
using the definition given by Hoory and Prausnitz,12 written below in a form that is equivalent but slightly
different from theirs  

A similar formula applies for fΣ where, in the right-hand side above, V, P, and Nf are changed to A, Π, and NΣ. It
is then easily shown that  

Comparing these equations with 40 and 41, one obtains 43  

It is possible to show that one gets
the expected result that Π
and fΣ become equal at the vanishing
spreading pressure: according to eqs 26 and 27, Σ = βNΣ/θ and letting Σ →
∞ in eq 25, one
gets Π ≈ RTθ/β. On the other
hand, when θ → 0, then eq 42 shows that μΣ,red ≈ RT ln θ which, combined with eq 43, gives fΣ ≈ RTθ/β ≈ Π. It
is similarly easy to show that P ≈ ff when V → ∞.

It is convenient to introduce dimensionless chemical potentials
and dimensionless fugacities to accompany the dimensionless pressures
introduced in Section 5.1. The definitions are suggested by eqs 40–42 for the
chemical potentials and by eq 43 for the fugacities 44  

Equation 43 becomes 45  

One obtains, for the adsorbed fluid, 46  

Similar expressions for the ambient
fluid follow, where the particular
cases of an ideal gas of type 0 or 1 are included: 47   48   49  

Functions 46 and 49 are shown in Figure 15.

Figure 15 Left: Chemical potential μ̃f,red(r,T̃), eq 49 (left), for two values of T̃, one above and one below the critical value, T̃fc = 1 vs r. Right: Chemical potential
μ̃Σ,red(θ,T̃,1/2), eq 46 (left),
for two values of T̃, one above and one below
the critical value, T̃Σc =
0.5 vs θ. For both plots, the symbols on the axes and the colors
of the lines are as defined in Figure 14. The dash-dotted lines are the reconstructed
parts of the chemical potentials, see Figure 14.

The following remarks refer to Figures 14 and 15.1. Comparing eq 46 and the van der Waals version in eq 49, one sees that T̃Σcμ̃f,red(x,y) = μ̃Σ,red(x,T̃Σcy,T̃Σc) and Figure 15 illustrates this
equality for T̃Σc = 1/2.

2. Figures 14 and 15 illustrate
the following easily provable equalities:

  

These show that the chemical potentials
and the pressures, when
plotted against their first argument, have local extrema at the same
values of that argument. Also, the chemical potentials can be reconstructed
by localizing the points with abscissas rg and rl (alternatively θg and θl), then replacing the loop between them by
the horizontal straight line segment joining them. See Figure 15 where the lines have been
drawn in the manner of Figure 14, with the same meanings.

It is assumed that
the ambient fluid is constrained to always be
in the same phase. There are no constraints on the adsorbed fluid,
however, so that it can undergo a phase transition.

5.3 Henry’s Adsorption Constant
Using eqs 40 and 41, an expression for the Δμ of eq 2 can now be written as 50  

The unknown function of T on the right-hand side is found by using the method used by Hoory
and Prausnitz.12 Using eq 43, eq 50 can be written as  

This formula remains valid when ambient
gas and adsorbate are at
equilibrium with each other at very low pressure: then, Δμ
= 0 and, according to the paragraph following eq 43, fΣ =
Π = RTcΣ and ff = P = RTcf. As the function of T does not depend on the physical
situation, one obtains 51  

The pressure being low, the concentrations
are small and cΣ/cf is Henry’s
adsorption constant, KH. It is actually
a function of temperature and of molecular properties, as defined
in the literature that is used in this article.20 It is convenient to introduce a dimensionless Henry constant, K̃H, and the following expressions define
the notation: 52  

Then eq 51 gives 53  where  is a set of constants that determine the
interaction between adsorbent and adsorbate, and thereby the sorption
properties.20 Note that, with the notation
introduced in eqs 31 and 27, 54  when the pressure goes to zero.

Using eq 53 in eq 50 one obtains an expression
for Δμ where the unknown function of temperature is replaced
by Henry’s “constant”  

Introducing dimensionless chemical
potentials by using the two
first equations in the set 44, one obtains 55   56  where 57  

The dependence of ψ on a number
of constants gathered in
the set  implies that ψ can be seen as an
experimental quantity that determines, at a given temperature, the
adsorption properties of the combination of the fluid and adsorbing
surface. See Section 4.

Experimental and theoretical results are cited below so as
to establish
an order of magnitude for the interval in which values of ψ
are found.

KH is usually written
as KH = A0 exp(T0/T), where RT0 is called the adsorption potential,14 and A0 is a function
of T. An explicit expression for A0(T), in terms of a set of constants,
is given in the framework
of a model described by Dolgonosov.20 The
set  of constants is given by Dolgonosov20 for 40 adsorbate molecules on a graphite adsorbent,
and curves of KH versus T are shown, together with experimental values, for selected temperature
intervals. A selection of seven such curves is shown in Figure 16 (thin solid lines),
covering a wide range of ψ-values. In addition, the five curves
drawn with thick solid lines originate from data given in Ross and
Olivier,14 Finally, the broken line curve
originates from data given by Saha et al.,21 and the long thick solid line is the plot of Ψu defined by eq 8.

Figure 16 indicates that for temperatures and for adsorbate/adsorbent
pairs that are industrially interesting, ψ is an approximately
linear, slowly decreasing function of temperature, with numerical
values roughly inside the interval 3 to 8. Values lower than 3 probably
exist but characterize industrially uninteresting low adsorbers.

Figure 16 ψ
vs T, from the sources indicated by the
numbers in parentheses. (1) are from Dolgonosov;20 (2) from Ross and Olivier,14 where P-33 refers to graphitized carbon and BN to boron nitride;
(3) from Saha et al.;21 and (4) is eq 8.

5.4 Differential Equation for the Coverage
A differential equation for the coverage θ is here written
by using eq 27 on the
left-hand side of eq 1, eq 55 on its right-hand
side, and then by introducing dimensionless time, t̃, by 58  

One obtains 59  where the dot on the left-hand side now denotes
derivation with respect to t̃. In Δμ̃
(see eq 56), μ̃f,red is one of the three alternative equations given on the
left-hand column of the set 47 to 49. The medium being homogeneous, and density being uniform,
there is no space dependence, and eq 59 is to be solved in time, with an initial condition
giving θ at time zero. The solution is sought for t̃ > 0, and the coverage θ is in the interval (0, 1).

Most of this article is concerned with the equilibrium and the
nonequilibrium solutions of eq 59, with the aim of determining their general characteristics.
One is thus led to look at the solutions for different values of the
parameters, so that it is important to know the intervals in which,
in particular, tr, T̃Σc, and ψ are likely to be in actual applications.
Concerning T̃Σc and ψ,
see Sections 5.1 and 5.3, respectively.

Reference time tr is unknown because
of its dependence on L, a constant that, by definition,
must be determined by dedicated experiments. As time-dependent results
presented in this article are expressed in terms of dimensionless
time, it is useful to have an order of magnitude for tr. According to an article by Gleysteen and Deitz22 published in 1945 on the sorption of nitrogen
on carbon adsorbents, steady state is attained in about 20 min, meaning
that sorption does not measurably change for larger time values. More
recently (1984), in Ruthven’s book on adsorption,23,24 sorption experiments of ethane on Linde 4A zeolite are cited, showing
about the same time to steady state. Somewhat more extensive measurements
were reported in 2010 by Battistutta et al.8 on the sorption of methane, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide on dry
coal. These showed that, to measure an equilibrium isotherm, the waiting
time between pressure changes can vary between a day and 10 days,
depending on the gas adsorbed and on temperature. It thus seems that
values of tr should be expected to be
anything between a half hour and a week.

The author declares no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The author thanks Professor Aksel Hiorth for a number
of clarifying discussions.

a MAPLE’s implicitplot has been
used.

b Maple has been used,
and the method
of solution is rfk45, described as “Fehlberg fourth–fifth
order Runge–Kutta”.
==== Refs
References
Morishige K. ; Shikimi M. 
Adsorption hysteresis and pore critical temperature
in a single cylindrical pore . J. Chem. Phys. 
1998 , 108 , 7821 –7824 . 10.1063/1.476218 .
Hill T. L. 
Statistical
Mechanics of Multimolecular Adsorption. III. Introductory Treatment
of Horizontal Interactions. Capillary Condensation and Hysteresis . J. Chem. Phys. 
1947 , 15 , 767 –777 . 10.1063/1.1746330 .
Papatzacos P. ; Skjæveland S. M. 
Relative
Permeability From Thermodynamics . SPE J. 
2004 , 9 , 47 –56 . 10.2118/87674-pa .
Alfè D. ; Gillan M. J. 
Ab initio statistical mechanics of
surface adsorption and desorption. I. H2O on MgO (001)
at low covrrage . J. Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 127 , 114709 10.1063/1.2772258 .17887872 
Ball P. C. ; Evans R. 
On the Mechanism for Hysteresis of Gas Adsorption on Mesoporous Substrates . Europhys. Lett. 
1987 , 4 , 715 –721 . 10.1209/0295-5075/4/6/013 .
Zhao H. ; Lai Z. ; Firoozabadi A. 
Sorption Hysteresis
of Light Hydrocarbons and Carbon
Dioxide in Shale and Kerogen . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 16209 10.1038/s41598-017-13123-7 .29176718 
Jessen K. ; Tang G.-Q. ; Kovscek A. R. 
Laboratory and Simulation
Investigation
of Enhanced Coalbed Methane Recovery by Gas Injection . Transp. Porous Media 
2008 , 73 , 141 –159 . 10.1007/s11242-007-9165-9 .
Battistutta E. ; van Hemert P. ; Lutynski M. ; Bruining H. ; Wolf K.-H. 
Swelling
and sorption experiments on methane, nitrogen and carbone dioxide
on dry Selar Cornish coal . Int. J. Coal Geol. 
2010 , 84 , 39 –48 . 10.1016/j.coal.2010.08.002 .
Wang K. ; Wang G. ; Ren T. ; Cheng Y. 
Methane and Carbon
Dioxide sorption hysteresis on coal: A critical review . Int. J. Coal Geol. 
2014 , 132 , 60 –80 . 10.1016/j.coal.2014.08.004 .
Papatzacos P. 
Macroscopic
Two-phase Flow in Porous Media Assuming the Diffuse-interface Model
at Pore Level . Transp. Porous Media 
2002 , 49 , 139 –174 . 10.1023/a:1016091821189 .
Myers A. L. ; Prausnitz J. M. 
Thermodynamics of Mixed-Gas Adsorption . AIChE J. 
1965 , 11 , 121 –127 . 10.1002/aic.690110125 .
Hoory S. E. ; Prausnitz J. M. 
Monolayer
adsorption of gas mixtures on homogeneous
and heterogeneous solids . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
1967 , 22 , 1025 –1033 . 10.1016/0009-2509(67)80166-0 .
Arrowsmith D. K. ; Pace C. M.  Ordinary
Differential Equations ; Chapman and Hall , 1982 .
Ross J. P. ; Olivier S.  On Physical Adsorption ; Interscience Publishers , 1964 .
Olver F. W. J. ; Lozier D. W. ; Boisvert R. F. ; Clark C. W.  NIST Handbook of Mathematical
Functions ; National Institute of Standards
and Technology and Cambridge University Press , 2010 .
Ang W. T. ; Garmón F. A. ; Khosla P. K. ; Riviere C. N.  Modeling Rate-Dependent
Hysteresis in Piezo-Electric Actuators . Proceedings
of the 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems , 2003 .
Rowlinson J. S. ; Widom B.  Molecular Theory of Capillarity ; Oxford University Press , 1982 .
Hill T. L.  An Introduction to
Statistical Thermodynamics ; Dover Publications , 1986 .
Papatzacos P.  The
Helmholtz free energy of pure fluid substances and fluid mixtures . Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Heat
Transfer, Fluid Mechanics and Thermodynamics , 2011 ; pp 845 –852 .
Dolgonosov A. M. 
Calculation
of Adsorption Energy and Henry Law Constant for Nonpolar Molecules
on a Nonpolar Uniform Adsorbent . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
1998 , 102 , 4715 –4730 . 10.1021/jp973218p .
Saha B. B. ; Jribi S. ; Koyama S. ; El-Sharkawy I. I. 
Carbon
Dioxide Adsorption Isotherms on Activated Carbons . J. Chem. Eng. Data 
2011 , 56 , 1974 –1981 . 10.1021/je100973t .
Gleysteen L. F. ; Deitz V. R. 
Hysteresis
in the physical adsorption of nitrogen on
bone char and other adsorbents . J. Res. Natl.
Bur. Stand. 
1945 , 35 , 285 –307 . 10.6028/jres.035.013 .
Ruthven D. M.  Principles of Adsorption
and Adsorption Processes ; Wiley-Interscience
Publications , 1984 .
Reference (23), Figure 6.5.

