
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145726010.1021/acsomega.7b00675ArticleRose Bengal Binding to Collagen and Tissue Photobonding Alarcon Emilio I. *†‡Poblete Horacio §∥Roh HeeGwang ⊥#Couture Jean-François ‡Comer Jeffrey *∥Kochevar Irene E. ⊥† Division
of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa
Heart Institute, 40 Ruskin
Street, K1Y 4W7 Ottawa, ON, Canada‡ Department
of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, K1H 8M5 Ottawa, ON, Canada§ Center
for Bioinformatics and Molecular Simulation, Universidad de Talca, 2 Norte 685, Casilla 721, Talca 3460000, Chile∥ Institute
of Computational Comparative Medicine, Nanotechnology Innovation Center
of Kansas State, and Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66503, United States⊥ Wellman
Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 40 Blossom Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, United States* E-mail: ealarcon@ottawaheart.ca (E.I.A.).* E-mail: jeffcomer@ksu.edu (J.C.).11 10 2017 31 10 2017 2 10 6646 6657 25 05 2017 11 09 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We investigated two critical aspects
of rose Bengal (RB) photosensitized
protein cross-linking that may underlie recently developed medical
applications. Our studies focused on the binding of RB to collagen
by physical interaction and the effect of this binding and certain
amino acids on RB photochemistry. Molecular dynamics simulations and
free-energy calculation techniques, complemented with isothermal titration
calorimetry, provided insight into the binding between RB and a collagen-like
peptide (CLP) at the atomic level. Electrostatic interactions dominated,
which is consistent with the finding that RB bound equally well to
triple helical and single chain collagen. The binding free energy
ranged from −5.7 to −3 kcal/mol and was strongest near
the positively charged amino groups at the N-terminus and on lysine
side chains. At high RB concentration, a maximum of 16 ± 3 bound
dye molecules per peptide was found, which is consistent with spectroscopic
evidence for aggregated RB bound to collagen or the CLP. Within a
tissue-mimetic collagen matrix, RB photobleached rapidly, probably
due to electron transfer to certain protein amino acids, as was demonstrated
in solutions of free RB and arginine. In the presence of arginine
and low oxygen concentrations, a product absorbing at 510 nm formed,
presumably due to dehalogenation after electron transfer to RB. In
the collagen matrix without arginine, the dye generated singlet oxygen
as well as the 510 nm product. These results provide the first evidence
of the effects of a tissue-like environment on the photochemical mechanisms
of rose Bengal.

document-id-old-9ao7b00675document-id-new-14ao-2017-00675eccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Novel
medical treatments are currently being developed based on
the photosensitized formation of protein–protein cross-links
using rose Bengal (RB), a member of the xanthene family of dyes. For
example, sutureless wound sealing is achieved by applying RB to the
wound surfaces, followed by a short green light irradiation. This
application is known as photochemical tissue bonding or PTB. A major
advantage of PTB is the minimal scarring and fibrosis produced compared
to that from suturing.1−7 Photosensitized protein cross-linking also prevents deleterious
changes to tissue in response to physiological pressures.8−11 Rose Bengal photosensitization also makes tissue less prone to inflammation,
known as photochemical tissue passivation.12 Despite the increasing number of medical uses of RB-mediated protein
cross-linking, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely
unknown.

The photochemistry and photophysics of rose Bengal
have been investigated
extensively in aqueous solution.13,14 At pH 7.0,
RB has an absorption maximum of 550 nm with a shoulder at 525 nm,
a fluorescence quantum yield of 0.02, and a triplet quantum yield
of 0.75.14,15 Rose Bengal is often used to generate singlet
oxygen (1O2), which has been suggested to mediate
formation of protein–protein bonds.16,17 In addition, both reductive and oxidative quenching of the RB triplet
state are favorable with many electron donors and acceptors. In aqueous
solution at pH 7.0, the one electron reduction potential is 1.09 V
(vs standard calomel electrode (SCE)) and the oxidation potential
is −0.78 V (vs SCE).18 The rose
Bengal anion radical forms dehalogenated and/or dihydro products.14,18−20 However, RB forms dimers and higher multimers in
aqueous solution that show substantially reduced photochemical reactivity.21−24

The in vivo molecular environment in tissues is expected to
strongly
influence the photochemical reactions of rose Bengal because the dye
binds to proteins including collagen, human serum albumin, and silk
fibroin.22,25,26 Our previous
studies using a combination of changes in absorption spectra of RB
and molecular dynamics revealed the formation of rose Bengal–collagen
ground state complexes.22 The dye–collagen
complexes show a red-shifted absorption maximum at 560 nm, a lower
fluorescence yield, and a reduced rate of photodegradation. Interestingly,
similar spectral changes are observed when rose Bengal is applied
to tissues.7,8 Ground state association between RB and
proteins within the tissue limits the dye mobility, which might reduce
triplet excited state quenching. In addition, in tissue, the oxygen
supply is lower than that in air, thus reducing 1O2 formation and potentially favoring electron transfer processes
for protein cross-linking.

Our long-range goal is to increase
the efficiency of PTB to extend
its range of medical applications. As steps to reach this goal, we
have carried out studies on two fundamental aspects of rose Bengal
photosensitized protein cross-linking, namely, (1) the binding of
rose Bengal to collagen and collagen matrices, and (2) the influence
of collagen, certain amino acids, and oxygen on rose Bengal photochemistry.

We used absorption spectroscopy and isothermal calorimetry to characterize
the association of RB as a monomer and as aggregates to collagen,
to a small collagen-like peptide (CLP), and to a three-dimensional
(3D) tissue-mimetic collagen matrix. Molecular dynamics simulations
were used to identify energetically favorable molecular and atomic
level interactions involved in the binding. The influence of certain
amino acids and collagen on RB photodecomposition was examined in
solution and in the collagen matrices using absorption spectroscopy
and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy.

2 Results
2.1 Association of Rose Bengal with Collagen and
a Collagen-Like Peptide
Collagen (type I) is the major structural
protein in the connective tissues, for example, the skin, cornea,
and tendon, and tissue repair using PTB is believed to result from
cross-links between collagens. To begin to understand the association
of RB with collagen, we examined whether the normal triple helical
collagen conformation was required, investigated the interaction of
RB with a tissue-mimetic collagen matrix, and also measured the exothermicity
of the association. A more detailed molecular level picture of the
RB–collagen association complexes was then gained from molecular
dynamics simulations.

2.1.1 RB–Collagen Association
in Solution:
Absorption Spectroscopy and Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
In a previous study of the association of rose Bengal with type I
collagen in solution, we observed a shift in the RB absorption spectrum
that, along with molecular dynamics simulation calculations, indicated
the presence of RB aggregates bound to triple helical collagen.22 To determine whether the triple helical structure
is required for association with RB, absorption spectra of 10 μM
RB in the presence of varying concentrations of either native (triple
helical) or thermally denatured, that is, single-stranded, type I
collagen were measured. The RB spectra with 2.5 μM native or
denatured collagen (Figure S1a,b) showed
no statistical difference, see Figure S1c. Although association of RB with denatured collagen produced an
approximately 2 nm greater red shift in the absorption maximum, Figure S1d,e. Circular dichroism experiments
for rose Bengal measured at a ratio of 4:1 (rose Bengal/collagen)
showed optically active features in the 520–600 nm region (Figure S2a), which is a further indication of
the ground state association.

Experiments carried out at a lower
dye concentration, 1.25 μM, and decreasing collagen concentrations
showed that the initial shift in the absorption spectrum is present
at a low ratio of 1:2 RB/collagen and becomes more distinct at higher
dye loading with a broadening of the absorption spectra (Figure S2b). Over this concentration range, RB
fluorescence decreased with a 50% lower fluorescence for the rose
Bengal/collagen ratio of 0.5 (Figure S2c).

To examine the association between RB and single chain collagen
in a simpler system, absorption spectra were recorded in the presence
of varying concentrations of a collagen-like peptide (CLP) that contains
high proportions of glycine (G), proline (P), and hydroxyproline (O),
similar to the composition of collagen (≈81% homology; CG(PKG)4(POG)4(DOG)4), and was also used for
the simulations described below. As the concentration of CLP increased,
the RB absorption maximum at 550 nm shifted to longer wavelengths
(≈570 nm) and decreased in amplitude to an even greater degree
than that observed in the presence of collagen (Figure 1a). Higher concentrations of CLP (230 μM,
see Figure 1b) were
required to produce the maximal change in RB absorption maximum compared
to that of collagen (≈1.25 μM, see Figure S1c).

Figure 1 Effect of collagen-like peptide on 10 μM rose Bengal
absorption.
(a) Spectral changes and (b) changes in the absorption at RB monomer
maximum 550 nm and at 570 nm, the maximum of the red-shifted peak
for aggregated RB bound to CLP, plotted as a function of CLP concentration.
All measurements were carried out in 10 mM MES buffer (pH 5.0).

We then studied the calorimetry
for the binding of rose Bengal
to the CLP. Figure S3a shows the enthalpy
changes resulting from addition of increasing concentrations of CLP
to a dye solution. At peptide concentrations larger than 200 μM,
there was a plateau in the enthalpy, which can be interpreted as the
endothermic assembling of the single unit peptide into a triple helix
supramolecular structure. Next, we evaluated the changes in enthalpy
for the binding of rose Bengal to CLP at concentrations at which the
peptide is assembled (450 μM, Figure S3b). The enthalpy of formation for the RB–CLP complex is exothermic,
in the range of −10 ± 2 kcal/mol, which roughly agrees
with the free energies estimated by molecular simulations, vide infra.

We had initially attempted to measure heat changes for the association
of RB to type I collagen by adding RB to collagen solutions. However,
even adding even small quantities of the dye led to precipitation
of collagen (not shown). Independent experiments measuring the protein
surface charge, ζ potential measurements, for solutions of collagen
showed a 50% decrease of the protein charge upon association of the
dye Figure S4.

2.1.2 Rose
Bengal Association with Collagen Matrices
To investigate
the binding of RB to collagen in a more tissue-like
environment, we generated 3D collagen hydrogel matrices and evaluated
the RB absorption spectra for three different RB concentrations (5,
10, and 40 μM; Figure S5). Control
experiments indicated that the denaturation temperature of the matrices
with and without the dye (54 ± 2 °C, not shown) did not
show a statistical difference. Rose Bengal within the collagen matrix
has a maximum absorption centered at 555 nm, similar to that for collagen
in solution (Figure 2). The relative absorptions at 525 and 550 nm for 40 μM RB
in collagen hydrogels (right panel) were comparable to that seen for
1000 μM RB in solution (left panel), indicating that the RB
concentration for aggregation was lower in the collagen hydrogels.

Figure 2 Right:
Normalized absorption spectra for RB prepared at different
dye concentrations incorporated within collagen matrices. Left: Normalized
absorption spectra for RB measured in buffer solutions. All measurements
were carried out in phosphate buffer pH 7.4 at room temperature.

2.1.3 Molecular
Dynamics Simulations of RB–Collagen
Association
To determine the nature of RB binding to the
CLP at the atomic level that might provide information for modeling
RB protein photo-cross-linking in tissue, we carried out molecular
dynamics simulations. The structure of the CLP triple helix was modeled
based on an experimentally derived collagen structure.27 RB was modeled with the predominant protonation
state for pH > 4.3,22 with −2
charges
(Figure 3a). The simulation
system is illustrated in Figure 3b. The resulting affinity free-energy map is shown
in Figure 3c. Owing
to electrostatic interactions, the RB molecule appears to be attracted
to the positively charged N-terminus (including three NH3+ groups) and the 12 Lys residues containing NH3+ on their side chain in the N-terminal region of the
CLP. It is repelled from the negatively charged C-terminus (including
three carboxylate groups) and the 12 carboxylate-containing Asp residues
present near this terminus. A minimum of free energy of −5.7
kcal/mol appears at the N-terminus. A prominent local minimum with
a free energy of −5.5 kcal/mol occurs about 7 Å further
along the CLP axis, in the region of the CLP containing Lys residues.
Another local minimum occurs nearer to the center of the peptide,
at the interface between the region containing Lys residues and that
containing Hyp residues, having a depth of −3.4 kcal/mol.

Figure 3 Molecular
simulation of RB binding to the CLP. (a) Molecular model
of RB in the charge state used in the simulations. The carboxylate
and phenolate moieties each have charges of −1. Atom color
code: H, white; C, cyan; O, red; Cl, green; I, purple. (b) Snapshot
of a simulation of the CLP triple helix with one molecule of RB. The
CLP is shown as a green tube, Na+ and Cl– ions are shown as yellow and cyan spheres. For clarity, the explicit
water molecules are shown as a transparent surface. (c) Free-energy
landscape for RB in the vicinity of the CLP triple helix at low RB
concentration, calculated by the adaptive biasing force method. The
potential of mean force is mapped as a function of the position of
the RB molecule along the CLP axis (disZ) and distance from this axis
(disXY). The geometric contribution to the free energy along disXY
has been removed. (d) Free-energy landscape at a higher RB concentration
calculated from a set of equilibrium simulations including a CLP triple
helix and 20 RB molecules. (e) Snapshot from the simulation with 20
RB molecules.

The free-energy landscape
shown in Figure 3c
was calculated with only a single RB molecule
in the system and, therefore, estimates the free energy in the limit
of low RB concentration. To better understand the affinity of RB for
the CLP at the higher RB concentrations that are used in vivo for
PTB, we performed five independent equilibrium simulations in systems
containing 20 RB molecules. Averaging over the last 200 ns of the
five independent simulations (1000 ns in length), we found 16 ±
3 (mean ± SD) molecules within 6 Å of the center of mass
of the CLP. The free-energy landscape is shown in Figure 3d along with a snapshot from
one of the simulations in Figure 3e. Despite its negative charge, RB formed aggregates
both in contact with the CLP and in free solution. Note that in Figure 3d, the electrostatic
shielding due to the presence of many RB molecules reduces the affinity
at the N-terminus, leading to relatively uniform strong binding over
the N-terminal half of the CLP.

We then sought to determine
the atomic-scale interactions that
underlie the RB affinity of different regions of the peptide model.
The highest affinity was seen at the N-terminus where the N-terminal
NH3+ groups and NH3+-containing
Lys side chains make contact with the negatively charged groups of
RB. Figure 4a shows
an exemplary snapshot including an ionic interaction and H-bond between
an N-terminus and the carboxylate moiety of RB. Although a majority
of configurations associated with the global free-energy minimum included
ionic contacts, a few, such as that in Figure 4b, exhibited no close contact between charged
groups. We find no water molecules between the three-ring motif of
RB and the Pro side chains, indicating that hydrophobic collapse may
drive RB binding, in addition to longer-range electrostatic interactions.
Farther from the N-terminus, binding of RB was dominated by ionic
contacts with the NH3+ of Lys residues, an example
of which is shown in Figure 4c. It might be noted that considerable nonplanarity of the
three-ring motif of RB is sometimes observed when the phenolate O– atom of RB makes contact with NH3+ groups, as in Figure 4c. A local free-energy minimum at (disXY, disZ) = (10.1, −17.9
Å) appears to correspond to contact between the phenolate O– atom of RB and NH3+ of Lys residues
of the collagen-like peptide, as well as H-bonding between the carboxylate
of RB and OH groups of Hyp (Figure 4d). The locations of the configurations in Figure 4a–d on the
free-energy landscape are indicated in Figure 4e, along with the approximate locations of
CLP side chains relevant for binding RB.

Figure 4 Molecular interactions
between RB and CLP. (a) Electrostatic contact
and H-bonding between the N-terminus of the CLP and the carboxylate
group of RB. In these images, the phenolate (O–)
group is highlighted by a red sphere to distinguish it from the carbonyl
oxygen. Atoms are colored as in Figure 3, except that CLP carbons are colored dark green. H-bonds
are indicated by dotted black lines. (b) Hydrophobic contact between
the three-ring moiety of RB and a Pro residue of the CLP. (c) H-bonding
between the O– group of RB and the backbone NH of
the CLP, coupled with ionic contact between the O– group and a Lys side chain. (d) H-bonding between the OH group of
hydroxyproline (Hyp) and the carboxylate group of RB. An ionic Lys–O– contact is also apparent. (e) The free-energy landscape
of RB near the CLP with labels (a–d) indicating the location
of RB in the corresponding panels of this figure. The ranges of disZ
values occupied by the N-terminus and Asp, Hyp, and Lys side chains
are also indicated. (f) The prevalence of H-bonding between RB and
different groups of the CLP as a function of position along the CLP
axis. Plotted are the number of H-bonds involving all CLP groups (CLP),
backbone amide nitrogens (BB), N-terminal NH3+ groups (Nter), Hyp side chain OH groups, and Lys side chain NH3+ groups. (g) The prevalence of H-bonding between
the CLP and different groups of RB as a function of position along
the CLP axis.

The prevalence of H-bonds
between RB and various groups of the
collagen-like peptide are quantified in Figure 4f,g. The most H-bonding occurs at and near
the N-terminus, with the dominant contribution from N-terminal and
Lys NH3+ donors (Figure 4f). Comparison to Figure 4g demonstrates that these N-terminal H-bonds
predominantly involve the carboxylate and phenolate oxygens of RB.
Near disZ = −40 Å, H-bonds involving the backbone of the
CLP or the carbonyl oxygen of RB are also present. In the region of
the CLP for disZ > 10 Å, few H-bonds are observed, and instead
it is dominated by contacts between the carboxylate group of RB and
the OH groups of the Hyp residues of CLP (exemplified in Figure 4d).

In the
experiments, it was noted that a small fraction of the peptide
did not form the conventional collagen triple helix, but remained
free in solution. This motivated us to simulate a single collagen-like
peptide chain together with a high concentration of the dye (20 molecules)
to understand the binding mode of RB when the peptide does not form
a triple helix. We found that the peptide adopted an ensemble of disordered
compact structures, which contrasted with the well-defined linear
arrangement of the triple helix. However, formation of RB aggregates
both close to the peptide and in solution was observed. Averaging
over the last 10 ns of an independent simulation (100 ns in length),
we found 8 ± 1 (mean ± SD) molecules within 5 Å of
the peptide (not shown).

2.2 Photochemical
and Photophysical Behavior of
Rose Bengal in Solution and 3D Collagen Matrix
In our previous
study, the RB photodegradation rate was lower in collagen-containing
solutions,22 indicating that the dye photoreactivity
in tissue might be influenced by its association with collagen. To
begin to understand the RB photochemistry that initiates collagen
cross-linking, we studied the dye photodegradation at high concentrations
in aqueous solution where aggregates dominate, roughly mimicking the
aggregrates formed with collagen. These results were compared to RB
photodegradation at low concentrations, where mainly monomeric species
are present, in solutions containing collagen, and in the 3D collagen
hydrogels. We also evaluated the effects of certain amino acids on
RB excited triplet state lifetime and photodegradation in solutions
and hydrogels to further characterize potential pathways initiating
protein cross-linking.

2.2.1 Photodecomposition of
Rose Bengal Alone
in Solution
The absorption spectrum of 125 μM RB in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) showed the typical absorption maximum
at 550 nm with a ratio of absorption at 550–520 nm as approximately
2, an indication that rose Bengal exists as dimers and aggregates
at this concentration.28,29 Monomeric RB shows a ratio of
approximately 3. In O2 and air, the absorbance at 550 nm
decreased without a change in the spectral shape and product(s) absorbing
at approximately 450 nm formed (Figure S6a,b). In a N2 atmosphere, the RB absorption decreased with
a slight broadening of the 550 nm peak to longer wavelengths and without
formation of a 450 nm absorbing product (Figure S6b). Photodecomposition was less efficient in N2, as shown by the greater RB absorption at the end of the irradiation
period.

2.2.2 Influence of Arginine, Lysine, and Ascorbic
Acid on Rose Bengal Photodegradation in Solution
Arginine
and lysine are potential electron donors to the rose Bengal triplet
state and, because they are positively charged at pH 7, are present
in collagen chains at reasonable levels; they are also likely to be
association sites for RB with collagen, as indicated by the simulations
described above. Irradiations carried out on 125 μM RB solutions
containing 25 mM Arg showed that the dye photodegraded more rapidly
in N2-saturated compared to O2-saturated solutions.
Significantly, the absorption maximum under N2 blue-shifted
to 510 nm (Figure 5a), which is consistent with the formation of a deiodinated fluorescein
product that would be formed after initial electron transfer to the
RB excited triplet state.19,20 In an air atmosphere,
only a 10 nm red shift was observed, and in O2-saturated
solutions, total photobleaching occurred without an absorption maximum
shift (Figure 5b).

Figure 5 Photodecomposition
of rose Bengal (125 μM) in the presence
of arginine (25 mM). (a) Irradiation of rose Bengal in nitrogen saturated
solution. (b) Absorption spectra (expanded scale) of rose Bengal samples
irradiated for 7 min in the presence of 25 mM Arg in solutions saturated
with oxygen, air, and nitrogen. All data collected in PBS buffer pH
7.4 at room temperature. Solutions irradiated at 532 nm, irradiance
= 0.3 W/cm2. Results shown are from single irradiations
in triplicate independent experiments.

A similar set of irradiations carried out using 25 mM Lys
had little
effect on RB photodecomposition, except under N2 where
it decreased the degradation rate by about 3.5 fold. Ascorbate (1.25
mM), another biological electron donor, increased the RB photodegradation
rate in air and N2 atmospheres compared to the dye alone,
and the absorption maximum shifted toward a 510 nm absorbing product
(Figure S7).

The photobleaching rate
for monomeric rose Bengal (10 μM)
was greater under N2 than in an air-saturated solution
(Figure 6a), the opposite
of that found for RB aggregates. However, similar to what is seen
for the rose Bengal aggregates, Arg enhanced the dye photodegradation.
Azide blocked the RB photodegradation in air, which suggests singlet
oxygen mediated dye degradation, and carrying out the irradiation
in deuterium oxide buffer had little effect initially but appeared
to increase the RB photodecomposition after 15 min irradiation, which
may suggest participation of singlet oxygen in the photodecomposition
mechanism.

Figure 6 Photodegradation of 10 μM RB in the presence of different
additives: (a) without and (b) with 2.5 μM collagen at RB/collagen
(4:1). Left: Absorption spectra for RB measured in solution at different
irradiation times. Right: Changes in absorption intensities measured
at 550 nm, plotted as A/A0, for RB solutions recorded in the presence of different additives.
All data collected in 10 mM MES buffer pH 5.0 at room temperature.
Data correspond to the average calculated from three independent experiments
each repeated in triplicate (n = 9).

2.2.2.1 Transient Absorption
Measurements in Solution
Because we have now shown that arginine
enhances the rate of rose
Bengal photodecomposition, we asked whether this might result from
direct interaction of the RB excited triplet state with Arg. The triplet
decays for rose Bengal at 620 nm in the absence and presence of 0.5
mM Arg showed quenching with a rate constant of 0.17 × 108 M–1 s–1. The tryptophan
quenching rate constant for rose Bengal triplet was considerably higher
than that for Arg (3.0 × 108 M–1 s–1) in the same buffer system, see Figure S8, which is consistent with our previous
report.18 No RB triplet state was observed
when the solutions contained 2.5 μM collagen, the conditions
under which RB appears to be entirely bound as aggregates to collagen.

2.2.3 Photodegradation of Rose Bengal in Collagen
Solutions
To examine the effect of binding to collagen on
RB photodegradation, we irradiated solutions containing 2.5 μM
native type I collagen and 10 μM RB. As shown in Figure 6b, the absorption spectrum
indicated that the dye was aggregated in association with collagen
as previously reported.22 Photodegradation
was enhanced by Arg (18%), D2O as solvent (17%), and by
changing the atmosphere to N2 (15%). Percentages were calculated
from following the changes in absorption intensity.

2.2.4 Photodegradation of Rose Bengal in Collagen
Hydrogel Matrices
In the tissue-like environment of hydrogels
prepared from native type I porcine collagen, RB was irradiated at
pH 7.4 with a green LED centered at 525 nm. As shown in Figure 7(left), the RB absorption maximum
is ≈556 nm as found for solutions of dye and collagen. Irradiation
in an air atmosphere decreased the dye absorption and shifted the
absorption maximum to the blue, which is similar to the changes observed
during irradiation of aggregated RB in the presence of Arg (Figure 5), and indicates
formation of deiodinated products. Figure 7 (right panel) shows the relative absorption
at 556 nm as a function of irradiation time. Arginine (10 mM) enhanced
the rate of RB degradation in a similar manner to the result obtained
for the dye without collagen. Azide and tryptophan inhibited dye photodegradation.

Figure 7 Photodegradation
of 40 μM RB incorporated within collagen
hydrogels prepared using type I collagen containing different additives.
Left: Absorption spectra for the RB–collagen hydrogel composite
measured at different irradiation times in an air atmosphere. Right:
Changes in absorption intensities measured at 556 nm for RB solutions
recorded in the presence of different additives [Azide: 10 mM, Trp:
2 mM, Arg: 10 mM]. All data collected in PBS buffer pH 7.4 at room
temperature. Data correspond to the average calculated from three
independent experiments each repeated in triplicate (n = 9).

2.2.5 Transient
Absorption Measurements in Collagen
Matrices
An investigation of the RB-derived transient species
in the hydrogels showed the presence of a short-lived dye triplet
(620 nm absorption maximum; lifetime = 3.5–4.0 μs; Figure 8a), which is significantly
shorter than that in the collagen-free solutions (∼100 μs,
see Figure S8). Thus, in the matrices,
the triplet lifetime appears to be limited by competitive processes
such as electron transfer to the protein or intra-aggregate excitation
decay routes. The rose Bengal triplet lifetime was not influenced
by tryptophan although Arg and azide both significantly quenched the
RB triplet (Figure 8b). The RB anion radical was detected at 420 nm, which is consistent
with electron transfer from collagen or ground state RB. It was quenched
by O2 and partially quenched by Arg, Trp, and azide (Figure 8c). Interestingly, 1O2 luminescence at 1270 nm was detected for oxygenated
samples, and this emission was readily quenched by sodium azide (Figure 8d), a well-known
charge transfer deactivator for singlet oxygen.30

Figure 8 Triplet transient lifetime and quenching of RB embedded in collagen
hydrogels in the presence of different quenchers. (a) RB triplet decay
monitored at 620 nm measured in air (black circles) or nitrogen (blue
circles) saturated solutions. Insets correspond to decay residuals
obtained from the exponential fit for the decays shown in the figure.
Measured lifetimes for: (b) RB triplet, (c) RB anion radical, and
(d) singlet oxygen under different conditions or additives. Concentrations
of additives were: tryptophan: 2.0 mM, Arg: 10 mM, and sodium azide:
10 mM. Effect of additives for laser flash photolysis experiments
were carried out in nitrogen saturated solutions. For singlet oxygen
measurements, samples were equilibrated with air prior to laser excitation.
Measurements for triplet and anion radical were carried out in 10
mM pH 5.0 MES buffer. For singlet oxygen phosphorescence, a 10 mM
MES buffer was prepared with a pD of 5.0. In all cases, photodegradation
was kept lower than 10%. Time traces correspond to the average of
12 separate decays from 3 independent samples.

2.2.6 Tryptophan-Mediated Photodegradation in
Rose Bengal Containing Collagen Matrices
To further assess
the photoreactivity of RB in collagen matrices, we studied its ability
to promote degradation of tryptophan. Collagen matrices containing
RB were incubated with 2.0 mM Trp and then exposed to the green LED.
Changes in Trp fluorescence intensity at 370 nm upon excitation at
295 nm are shown in Figure S9. In the absence
of Trp, no emission was detected. Figure S9a shows a fast decrease for the Trp emission intensity within the
first 5 min of irradiation, which then remains largely unchanged (see Figure S9b). To assess the contribution of rose
Bengal photoproducts toward the generation of photochemically active
species, we pre-irradiated a set of samples of RB–collagen
matrices for 30 min and we then incubated those samples with Trp followed
by green light irradiation, see Figure S9b. For those samples, the emission values remained within experimental
error, and practically unchanged when compared to time 0.

3 Discussion
The results of these investigations
suggest a first approximation
of the processes involved in PTB for tissue healing. In this model,
aggregates of rose Bengal bind to tissue collagen at positively charged
amino acids and less avidly by hydrophobic forces at other sites.
Triplet excited state RB accepts an electron from arginine side chains
and possibly other sources when the O2 level is low. Subsequent
reactions of the RB anion radical or arginine cation radical may initiate
protein cross-linking. At higher O2 levels, cross-linking
may be initiated by reactions of 1O2.

The two-dimensional free-energy landscapes as a function of distance
along the triple helix and the distance from this axis shown in Figure 3, revealed two strong
electrostatic interactions with energies from −5.7 to −3
kcal/mol between the two negative charges of rose Bengal and positively
charged amino groups of the three N-termini and of the 12 Lys amino
acids, visible in the lower half of Figure 4e. These electrostatic interactions are possible
for both single chain and triple helical collagen, and explain our
observation that RB binding to native and denatured collagen was nearly
identical (Figure S1). In addition to the
electrostatic binding modes for the association, hydrophobic interactions
between the three-ring portion of the dye structure and Pro side chains
were seen (Figure 4c). Notably, a nonplanarity of the three-ring motif was also observed.
This distortion in the ring planarity can be linked to changes in
electronic density and uniformity of the dye molecular orbitals, which
leads to perturbations in the dye absorption spectrum fingerprinting
at 525 nm.

Multioccupation or cooperative binding of rose Bengal
to collagen
is a plausible explanation for the formation of rose Bengal aggregates
with collagen.31 In fact, the multioccupation/cooperative
binding of rose Bengal to the collagen structure, which results in
a net change of protein surface charge, explains our unsuccessful
attempts to carry out ITC by adding dye to collagen that resulted
in precipitation of the protein due to changes in the protein charge
(Figure S4). ITC measurements carried out
for the CLP indicate that assembly of the peptide into a triplet helix
occurs at >200 μM, see Figure S3,
which is in good agreement with the data collected for binding of
rose Bengal to CLP, see Figure 1. Consistent with the molecular dynamics simulations, association
of rose Bengal to the peptide showed exothermic behavior, with values
close to the calculated values (Figures 3 and 4). Similarly,
for the experiments embedding rose Bengal within the collagen matrix,
the presence of molecular aggregates was evident at 40 μM of
dye, a concentration that does not show the presence of aggregates
in aqueous solutions, see Figure 2.

The binding of rose Bengal to collagen differs
from its previously
reported association with other proteins. For example, binding in
pockets on human serum albumin produced a similar red shift in the
RB absorption spectrum. However, a 7-fold increase in the RB fluorescence
emission was observed,25,31 whereas collagen binding produced
a decrease in the dye fluorescence, see Figure S2c. For albumin–RB, the increase in emission was attributed
to the transfer of the dye to a confined environment, wherein hydrogen
bonding with water was no longer favored. For rose Bengal and collagen,
the binding modes described for the CLP might lead to a more effective
nonradiative deactivation, that is, intracomplex electron transfer,
and consequently decreased fluorescence intensity. The collagen structure
differs substantially from that for albumin. The triple helices are
closely packed into fibrils that do not allow RB molecules to enter
the fibril. Consequently, binding of rose Bengal to collagen in tissues
occurs on the outer collagen fibril surfaces and involves the associations
described by the molecular dynamics simulations.

Although almost
all previous studies of RB photochemistry in aqueous
solution have focused on monomeric RB, we investigated aggregated
as well as monomeric rose Bengal because an ∼1.0 mM solution
is used for medical applications and, at this high concentration,
the dye exists as aggregates. In fact, the absorption spectrum of
rose Bengal applied to cornea showed the red-shifted absorption spectrum
and the <2 ratio of absorbance at 560–525 nm characteristic
of aggregates bound to collagen.8,22

Rose Bengal photochemistry
in aggregates has differences and similarities
with that for monomeric RB. For example, although both aggregated
and monomeric RB photobleach in O2 without a spectral shift,
only aggregated RB forms product(s) absorbing around 450 nm (Figure S6). These products may involve adjacent
RB molecules in the aggregate, although their identity awaits further
investigation. The mechanism for RB photobleaching in O2 also appears to differ. Irradiation of monomeric rose Bengal generates 1O2, which then oxidizes the xanthone ring to colorless
products, a process supported by the enhancement by D2O
and quenching by azide of RB photobleaching (Figure 6). In contrast, in a previous report, RB
triplets were not detected in RB aggregates bound to collagen thus
precluding a role for 1O2.22

Electron transfer from Arg to RB triplet may initiate
collagen–collagen
cross-linking because arginine enhanced the RB photodegradation rates
of both aggregated and monomeric dye (Figures 5 and 6) and quenched
the RB triplet (Figures S8 and 8). Early studies of photoreduction of monomeric
RB by amines identified dehalogenation products, especially the 510
nm absorbing 2,7-diiodotetrachloro-fluorescein.20 Our results show the appearance of this product clearly
for aggregated RB in the presence of Arg under N2, considerably
less formed in air, and practically none in oxygen-saturated solutions
(Figure 5). Significantly,
this result suggests that triplet quenching within the aggregates
does not preclude reactions with external electron donors. Dehalogenation
results from initial electron transfer from Arg to the dye triplet
producing the RB anion radical and the amine cation radical. Subsequent
deprotonation of the amine cation radical and rearrangement steps
produce radical intermediates that could lead to protein–protein
cross-linking. However, substantial yields of colorless products also
form because the amount of dehalogenated product (based on the absorption
coefficient for fluorescein) is much smaller than the amount of rose
Bengal destroyed. These products may be the dihydro dye formed by
initial electron transfer from ground state RB to RB triplet.19,32

Rose Bengal photodegradation, when associated with native
type
1 collagen in hydrogels (Figure 7), may mimic the photoreactions occurring in tissues
during photo-cross-linking. The decrease in RB absorption was accompanied
by a blue shift of the peak (Figure 7) indicating dehalogenation, which is similar to the
result obtained for RB aggregates in the presence of Arg and ascorbate
(Figures S7 and 5). If so, it would suggest that the electron-donating amino acids
in native collagen are able to act as reaction partners of aggregated
rose Bengal triplet excited state to initiate a radical pathway potentially
involved in collagen cross-linking. Because Arg but not Lys increased
RB photobleaching, the electron donor may be arginine. Side chains
of both amino acids are positively charged and capable of participating
in binding RB through ionic interactions, as shown for lysine in the
CLP (Figures 3 and 4). In fact, in a recent study by part of our team,
we used a polymeric form of lysine (poly-l-lysine), in the
rose Bengal cross-linking of acrylate-modified collagen, which resulted
in an enhancement of the composite elasticity along with preventing
the dye photodegradation.33 Those findings
point toward possible intramolecular reactions between a rose Bengal
reactive intermediate and the Lys residues, which resulted in the
regeneration of the dye.

Arginine also effectively enhanced
photobleaching of RB aggregates
bound to collagen both in solution (Figure 6) and in collagen hydrogels (Figure 7). In hydrogels, triplet rose
Bengal was readily quenched by Arg (Figure 8), and a further shift of the absorption
spectrum toward the 510 nm deiodinated product was observed, see Figure 7. Thus, it appears
that Arg reacts even more efficiently with triplet excited state rose
Bengal in aggregates than the reducing amino acids in native collagen.
If this observation is substantiated in tissues, it would suggest
that Arg might be used to enhance the efficiency of rose Bengal photosensitized
medical treatments, assuming that electron transfer processes initiate
protein–protein cross-linking. Interestingly, rose Bengal triplet
lifetime was not influenced by tryptophan when bound to the collagen
matrix, which suggests limited diffusion/accessibility of the quencher
within the 3D matrix (Figure 8b).

Oxygen may play different roles in photosensitized
protein cross-linking
depending on the tissue being treated and the treatment conditions.
The normal O2 level in tissues decreases during photosensitization
because O2 is removed by reactions of 1O2 with proteins and lipids.34 Depending
on the depth in tissue and the irradiance, O2 may not be
replenished sufficiently rapidly by diffusion, and energy transfer
from rose Bengal triplet to form 1O2 becomes
inefficient. In this case, initial electron transfer to triplet state
RB is favored and dehalogenation would be predicted as observed for
the dye in collagen hydrogels (Figure 8). In the collagen hydrogels, 1O2 was observed but RB triplet lifetime was unchanged, suggesting that
a process such as electron transfer dominates. Possibly, an initial
electron transfer pathway for protein cross-linking could still show
enhancement in O2 if intermediates trapped by O2 lead to cross-linking. Further studies to evaluate these possibilities
are planned.

4 Summary and Conclusions
Binding of rose Bengal to collagen is a complex process that includes
competitive binding of dye monomer and aggregate to the protein chains.
Molecular dynamics simulation of RB binding to a collagen-like peptide
indicated that up to 16 ± 3 rose Bengal molecules can bind to
an assembled peptide triple helix, with many bound as aggregates.
Ionic interactions between negatively charged RB and protonated amino
groups dominated contributions to the global free-energy minimum.
In solution at low oxygen level, Rose Bengal photodegradation produced
a 510 nm species, likely a dehalogenation product in the presence
of arginine. Within a tissue-mimetic collagen matrix, irradiation
yielded the 510 nm product suggesting that amino acids in the collagen
chains are able to donate electrons to RB triplet and potentially
initiate a protein cross-linking mechanism. Surprisingly, nonquenchable
RB triplets and singlet oxygen were detected in the collagen matrix,
suggesting an alternative oxidative mechanism for protein cross-linking
in tissue. Although additional work is still needed, our work presents
a comprehensive study on the role of rose Bengal–collagen interactions
that may allow the design and engineering of novel dyes and materials
for tissue photobonding.

5 Materials and Methods
5.1 Materials
Rose Bengal (4,5,6,7-tetrachloro-2′,4′,5′,7′-tetra-iodofluorescein)
sodium salt (≥99%), l-lysine, and l-ascorbic
acid were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Type I medical grade porcine
collagen (TheraCol) was purchased from Sewon Cellontech Co. Ltd. (Seoul,
South Korea). Unless otherwise indicated, all solutions were prepared
using Milli-Q water.

5.2 Effect of Collagen and
Collagen-Like Peptides
on Rose Bengal Spectroscopic Properties
The effect of macromolecule
addition on the absorption spectrum of rose Bengal was studied in
a manner similar to that previously described by part of our team.22 All measurements in solution were carried out
in 10 mM MES buffer (pH 5.0) in which collagen remains soluble and
assembled. Rose Bengal solutions (20 μM) prepared in MES buffer
were mixed in a 1:1 ratio with collagen solutions with concentrations
up to 5.0 μM. The absorption spectra were measured in 1.0 cm
cuvettes (Luzchem Inc.) using a Cary-100-Bio UV–visible spectrophotometer
at room temperature (300–700 nm). Measurements were carried
out using either native or thermally denatured collagen (95 °C
for 5 min). Data shown correspond to the average from three independent
experiments, each one carried out in quadruplicate. A similar protocol
was used for the collagen-like peptide (CLP), where a higher concentration
(up to 460 μM) was required to observe spectral changes similar
to those observed for type I collagen.

5.3 Changes
in Collagen Surface Charge
Changes in ζ potential for
type I porcine collagen upon addition
of the increasing concentrations of rose Bengal were carried out in
a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS at 20 °C in 1.0 cm pathlength disposable
ζ potential cuvettes. Reported values correspond to the average
of three independent batches, each measured in triplicate.

5.4 Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC)
ITC titrations
were performed on a VP-ITC MicroCalorimeter from Malvern
at 22 °C by using 10 μL injection with a total of up to
10 injections. Measurements were carried out in 10 mM MES buffer at
pH 5.0. Data were processed using the Microcal Origin software. Two
different sets of experiments were carried out using ITC. In the first
set of experiments, increasing concentrations of CLP were added from
a 10 mM concentrated solution up to 600 μM. In the second set
of experiments, RB was added to a 450 μM CLP solution prepared
in 10 mM, pH 5.0 MES buffer.

5.5 Collagen Matrix Preparation
and Characterization
Briefly, type I medical grade porcine
collagen was mixed with phosphate
buffer saline pH 7.4, and cross-linked with 1.5% glutaraldehyde in
ice. Unreacted aldehydes were deactivated with glycine. Rose Bengal
was added to the mixture at a final concentration of 40 μM.
The resulting viscous matrix, which cross-links in ≤30 min
at 37 °C, has pore sizes in the range of 60 ± 10 μm
as indicated by CRYO-SEM measurements for the collagen matrices.

The micromorphology of the collagen matrices was assessed using low
temperature scanning electron microscopy (Cryo-SEM) in a Tescan (model:
Vega II–XMU) equipped with a cold stage sample holder at −50
°C using a backscattered electron detector (BSE) and a secondary
electron detector (SED). Pore sizes were measured from at least 400
individual pores using ImageJ software, similar to that described
for other collagen matrices.35

Differential
scanning calorimetry measurements were carried out
for the hydrogels with and without the different concentrations of
RB. Once chemically cross-linked, the hydrogels were thoroughly washed
with PBS buffer pH 7.4 for 12 h prior to measuring their glass-transition
temperature (Tg) in a Q2000 differential
scanning calorimeter (TA Instruments). Heating scans were recorded
within the range of 8–80°C at a scan rate of 10°C/min. Tg is defined as the onset of the endothermic
peak.

5.6 Computer Simulations
5.6.1 Generation
of Molecular Models
As a first step, the SWISS-model server36 was used to generate the homology model of the
collagen-like peptide
(CLP) from the sequence CG(PKG)4(POG)4(DOG)4 (where O represents the amino acid hydroxyproline). On the
basis of the sequence identity of 81.48% between collagen and this
collagen-like peptide, we used an experimentally derived collagen
structure (PDB ID: 1NAY)27 as a template. As the percentage of
coverage of the target sequence with respect to the template structure
was 81%, the structure generated for the sequence DOG was replicated
manually to build the final model of CLP. The homology model was generated
in the multimeric triple helix structure based on the template. The
model was solvated with the standard TIP3P water model of CHARMM in
a periodic box of 52 × 52 × 154 Å3. Na+ and Cl– ions were added to neutralize the
systems and obtain NaCl concentrations of 150 mM. The atomic interactions
of RB were described by the CHARMM General Force Field37 and parameters assigned by the ParamChem webserver38,39 based on RB in the −2 charge state22 (with one carboxylate– and one phenolate–). All systems were assembled using VMD 1.9.2 software.40

5.6.2 Classical Molecular Dynamics
Simulation
All simulations were performed in the molecular
dynamics software
NAMD 2.1241 and the all-atom CHARMM36 force
field.40,42 Using the Langevin thermostat and Langevin
piston method,43 we maintained the temperature
and pressure at 300 K and 101.325 kPa (1.0 atm), respectively. A smooth
8–9 Å cutoff of van der Waals forces was employed. The
particle-mesh Ewald algorithm44 was used
to compute the electrostatic interactions with a mesh spacing of <1.2
Å. The length of covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms was
constrained45,46 to the values prescribed by the
CHARMM force field. The masses of nonwater hydrogen atoms were increased
by a factor of 3 (to 3.0240 Da) by transferring mass from the heavy
atom to which they were attached, allowing us to integrate the equation
of motion with a time step of 4 fs with no appreciable loss of accuracy
in thermodynamic quantities.47 All systems
were relaxed for 25 000 steps of energy minimization followed
by 20.0 ns of equilibration before beginning 250 ns of data production
or free-energy calculations. For convenience, orientational restraints
were applied to keep the long axis of the collagen-like peptide triple
helix aligned along the Z axis using the Colvars
module.48 As these restraints were applied
as a torque to the entire triple helix, they do not lead to any bias
in the protein conformation nor in its interaction with RB. H-bonds
were identified using the criteria of donor acceptor distances <3.5
Å and donor–H–acceptor angles > 120°.

5.6.3 Free-Energy Calculations
Beginning
with the equilibrated systems, the adaptive biasing force49−51 method was applied to calculate the free energy as a function of
two transition coordinates: disZ, the position of RB along the Z axis with respect to the center of mass of the peptide,
and disXY, the distance between the dye and the Z axis (passing through the center of mass of the peptide), that is,
disXY = ρ = (X2 + Y2)1/2. This produced a two-dimensional potential
of mean force as a function of position along the axis of the triple
helix and in the plane orthogonal to this axis. The adaptive biasing
force method was implemented through the Colvars module48 of NAMD 2.12.41 The
first collective variable was sampled using a multiple window scheme,
with a total of 7 windows on the interval −70 ≤ disZ
≥ 70 Å. The second collective variable was sampled in
a single window on the interval 0 ≤ disXY ≥ 25 Å
for each window in disZ. Each window was simulated for at least 340
ns, for a total of 2400 ns over all windows.

For systems with
higher concentrations of RB, the free energy was estimated through
straightforward equilibrium sampling, rather than by the adaptive
biasing force method. Five systems containing the collagen-like peptide
and 20 randomly placed RB molecules were created and simulated for
250 ns each with no biases. The free energy as a function of disZ
and disXY was inferred from the average position distribution of RB
molecules in the five systems during the last 200 ns of simulation
(after 50 ns of equilibration). Because disXY is a cylindrical radial
coordinate, it possesses a nonuniform geometric (Jacobian) contribution
to the potential of mean force. The plots of the two-dimensional potentials
of mean force in this work are shown with this geometric contribution
removed, that is, the free energy far from the peptide axis is uniform
rather than decreasing as −kBT ln ρ, due to the increasing amount
of phase space for larger radii, 2πρ dρ.

5.7 Light-Mediated Degradation of Rose Bengal
in Homogenous Solution and 3D Collagen Matrix
Sample solutions
(570 μL) were irradiated in a plastic well (circular area =
1.9 cm2, pathlength = 3 mm) in a cylindrical chamber (height
= 2 cm, inner diameter = 4.5 cm) with removable poly(methyl methacrylate)
windows and gas inlet and exit ports on the sides. Laser light (532
nm; CW KTP frequency-doubled laser, Oculight OR, IRIDEX Corporation,
Mountain View, CA) was delivered via an optical fiber through the
upper window and centered on the sample well with an irradiance of
approximately 0.3 W/cm2 at the sample surface.

The
gas composition within the irradiation chamber was changed between
N2, O2, and air (20% O2). Before
an irradiation, the chamber was purged with N2 or O2, then the flow was stopped for 5 min to allow diffusion into
the solution. This process was repeated three times. During the irradiation,
a moderate flow of gas was allowed. For experiments in an air atmosphere,
the top chamber window was removed, and the power of laser was lowered
by 8.0% to compensate for the loss of light when the window is used.

Prior to irradiation and periodically during the irradiation, spectra
of the samples were recorded without opening the irradiation chamber.
A polychromatic halogen lamp was placed above the chamber and the
transmitted light was collected with an integrating sphere (model
FOIS, Ocean Optics) and analyzed with an Ocean Optics QEPro spectrometer.
The laser light delivery fiber was moved from the irradiation position
during each transmission measurement. Changes in transmission at the
selected wavelength as a function of irradiation time were analyzed.
Absorbance at 550 nm was used unless the absorbance of the initial
spectrum of the 125 μM RB solution was higher than 2 when absorbance
at 515 nm was also analyzed. The absorbance was calculated by taking
the average of values of three adjacent data points to minimize the
effect of noise in signals.

Irradiation of collagen solutions
and hydrogels was carried out
using a custom-made irradiation system equipped with a 523 ±
5 nm LED (LZ4-00G110 LED unit, LedEngin, Inc.) mounted on a PAR25
LED Cooler 32 W Synjet that dissipates the heating produced by the
light source. The light source was collimated with an aluminum tube
(ø 10 mm) into a 1.0 cm optical pathlength cuvette holder (CUV-UV,
Ocean optics). Total light fluence was matched to the amount delivered
in the experiments using the continuous wave laser detailed above,
but using half of the light irradiance, ≈0.15 W/cm2.

5.8 Rose Bengal Laser Flash Photolysis
RB triplet transient absorption measurements were carried out in
a LFP 111 laser flash photolysis system (Luzchem Inc., Ottawa, Canada)
equipped with a Surlite OPO Plus (pump with a Nd-YAG 355 nm) operating
at 550 nm and 10 mJ/pulse in 1.0 cm pathlength fused silica cuvettes
(Luzchem Inc.). Triplet absorption of RB was measured at 620 nm under
conditions of minimal dye bleaching (less than 5%). Two different
sets of experiments were carried out using time-resolved techniques:
(1) Effect of amino acids on the triplet lifetime of RB in solution:
Measurements were carried out in 10 mM MES buffer pH 5.0 using a 10
μM dye concentration. Samples were degassed using 99.99% pure
N2 for 1.0 h and increasing concentrations of l-arginine (Arg) and l-tryptophan (Trp) were added and the
lifetime of RB triplet excited state was measured. Bimolecular rate
constants were calculated from plotting kobs = k0 + kqx[Q], where kobs, k0, and kq correspond
to the observed rate constant, rate constant in the absence of the
quencher, and the bimolecular rate constant, respectively. (2) Effect
of quenchers on RB reactive intermediates incorporated within collagen
hydrogels: Collagen matrices were prepared as described above and
the dye was incorporated within the 3D structure before solidification.
The RB concentration was kept at 40 μM. Hydrogels were equilibrated
for 3 h prior to measurements in solutions of the quenchers (Arg [5.0
mM], Trp [1.0 mM], and sodium azide (NaN3) [10 mM]) prepared
in phosphate buffer with pH 7.4. Samples were degassed using 99.99%
pure N2 for 2 h prior to measurements. In addition to the
measurements for the triplet absorption at 620 nm, we monitored the
bleaching of the ground state at 550 nm, and cation and anion radicals
at 480 and 420 nm, respectively. Additional measurements for 1O2 emission upon excitation of the dye incorporated
within the collagen matrix were also carried out. Singlet oxygen generation
was quantified by following its phosphorescence decay at 1270 nm with
a Hamamatsu NIR detector (peltier cooled at −62.8 °C operating
at 800 V) after 550 nm laser excitation Surlite OPO Plus (pump with
a Nd-YAG 355 nm), 10 mJ/pulse. Data were acquired and processed with
customized Luzchem Research software. Measurements were carried out
in deuterated PBS buffer pD 7.0.

5.9 Statistical
Analyses
Student’s t-test (unpaired
data with unequal variance) using a confidence
interval of p < 0.05 was considered to identify
statistically significant differences. Analyses were carried out in
Kaleida Graph 4.5.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00675.Effect of type
I porcine collagen, up to 2.5 μM,
on the absorption spectra of 10 μM RB; representative circular
dichroism spectra for a 1.25 μM rose Bengal solution with or
without 5.0 μM type I collagen; isothermal titration calorimetry
measurements for binding of rose Bengal to a collagen-like peptide
(CLP); ζ potential measurements for 2.5 μM type I collagen
in 10 mM pH 5.0 MES buffer in the presence of different rose Bengal
concentrations; schematic representation for the preparation of RB
containing collagen hydrogels; photodecomposition of rose Bengal (125
μM) under oxygen, air, and nitrogen saturated solutions; photodecomposition
of RB (125 μM) in the presence of 1.25 mM sodium ascorbate in
oxygen, air, and nitrogen saturated solutions; triplet transient lifetime
and quenching of RB excited state in the presence of different quenchers;
tryptophan degradation mediated by green light exposure in the RB
containing collagen matrix (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00675_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
# Department
of Chemistry, Korean Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST), Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea (H.G.R.).

Author Contributions
The
manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors.

This work was
made possible by funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC, RGPIN- 2015-0632) and from the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR) to E.I.A. E.I.A. also thanks UOHI start-up
grant 1255. E.I.A. and I.E.K. thank the Burroughs Wellcome Fund for
a Travel Grant. H.P. thanks Núcleo Científico Multidisciplinario
de la Universidad de Talca, Chile, and grant no. 1171155 from Fondecyt,
Chile. J.C. was partially supported by the Kansas Bioscience Authority
funds to the Institute of Computational Comparative Medicine (ICCM)
at Kansas State University and to the Nanotechnology Innovation Center
of Kansas State University (NICKS). Computing for this project was
performed on the Beocat Research Cluster at Kansas State University,
which is funded in part by NSF grants CNS-1006860, EPS-1006860, and
EPS-0919443. This work also used the Extreme Science and Engineering
Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is supported by National Science
Foundation grant number ACI-1053575. H.G.R. was supported by the Harvard-MIT
Summer Institute at MGH, National Science Foundation Grant EEC-1358296.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
would like to thank Professor Tito Scaiano for
the time-resolved measurements. E.I.A. thanks Michel Grenier from
University of Ottawa for his assistance with the laser flash photolysis
experiments. The authors would like also to express their gratitude
to Dr. May Griffith from University of Montreal for providing a sample
of the CLP peptide. I.E.K. and H.G.R. would like to thank Dr. Walfre
Franco and Antonio Ortega-Martinez for technical support.

Abbreviations
Argl-arginine

CLPcollagen-like
peptide

PTBphotochemical
tissue
bonding

RBrose
Bengal

Trpl-tryptophan
==== Refs
References
Chan B. P. ; Amann C. ; Yaroslavsky A. N. ; Title C. ; Smink D. ; Zarins B. ; Kochevar I. E. ; Redmond R. W. 
Photochemical repair
of Achilles tendon rupture in a rat model . J.
Surg. Res. 
2005 , 124 , 274 –279 . 10.1016/j.jss.2004.09.019 .15820258 
Fairbairn N. G. ; Ng-Glazier J. ; Meppelink A. M. ; Randolph M. A. ; Valerio I. L. ; Fleming M. E. ; Kochevar I. E. ; Winograd J. M. ; Redmond R. W. 
Light-Activated
Sealing of Acellular Nerve Allografts following Nerve Gap Injury . J. Reconstr. Microsurg. 
2016 , 32 , 421 –430 . 10.1055/s-0035-1571247 .26878685 
Mulroy L. ; Kim J. ; Wu I. ; Scharper P. ; Melki S. A. ; Azar D. T. ; Redmond R. W. ; Kochevar I. E. 
Photochemical keratodesmos for repair
of lamellar corneal incisions . Invest. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 
2000 , 41 , 3335 –3340 .11006222 
O’Neill A. C. ; Winograd J. M. ; Zeballos J. L. ; Johnson T. S. ; Randolph M. A. ; Bujold K. E. ; Kochevar I. E. ; Redmond R. W. 
Microvascular anastomosis
using a photochemical tissue bonding technique . Lasers Surg. Med. 
2007 , 39 , 716 –722 . 10.1002/lsm.20548 .17960755 
Senthil-Kumar P. ; Ni T. ; Randolph M. A. ; Velmahos G. C. ; Kochevar I. E. ; Redmond R. W. 
A light-activated
amnion wrap strengthens colonic anastomosis and reduces peri-anastomotic
adhesions . Lasers Surg. Med. 
2016 , 48 , 530 –537 . 10.1002/lsm.22507 .26996284 
Tsao S. ; Yao M. ; Tsao H. ; Henry F. P. ; Zhao Y. ; Kochevar J. J. ; Redmond R. W. ; Kochevar I. E. 
Light-activated tissue bonding for
excisional wound closure: a split-lesion clinical trial . Br. J. Dermatol. 
2012 , 166 , 555 –563 . 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10710.x .22032650 
Verter E. E. ; Gisel T. E. ; Yang P. ; Johnson A. J. ; Redmond R. W. ; Kochevar I. E. 
Light-initiated
bonding of amniotic membrane to cornea . Invest.
Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 
2011 , 52 , 9470 –9477 . 10.1167/iovs.11-7248 .22058339 
Cherfan D. ; Verter E. E. ; Melki S. ; Gisel T. E. ; Doyle F. J. Jr.; Scarcelli G. ; Yun S. H. ; Redmond R. W. ; Kochevar I. E. 
Collagen cross-linking using rose bengal and green
light to increase corneal stiffness . Invest.
Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 
2013 , 54 , 3426 –3433 . 10.1167/iovs.12-11509 .23599326 
Zhu H. ; Alt C. ; Webb R. H. ; Melki S. ; Kochevar I. E. 
Corneal Crosslinking
With Rose Bengal and Green Light: Efficacy and Safety Evaluation . Cornea 
2016 , 35 , 1234 –1241 . 10.1097/ICO.0000000000000916 .27362877 
Goldstone R. N. ; McCormack M. C. ; Goldstein R. L. ; Mallidi S. ; Randolph M. A. ; Watkins M. T. ; Redmond R. W. ; Austen W. G. Jr. Photochemical Tissue Passivation Attenuates AV Fistula Intimal Hyperplasia Ann. Surg. 2016 , 10.1097/SLA.0000000000002046 .
Goldstone R. N. ; McCormack M. C. ; Khan S. I. ; Salinas H. M. ; Meppelink A. ; Randolph M. A. ; Watkins M. T. ; Redmond R. W. ; Austen W. G. Jr.
Photochemical Tissue Passivation Reduces Vein Graft
Intimal Hyperplasia in a Swine Model of Arteriovenous Bypass Grafting . J. Am. Heart Assoc. 
2016 , 5 , e00385610.1161/JAHA.116.003856 .27464790 
Fernandes J. R. ; Salinas H. M. ; Broelsch G. F. ; McCormack M. C. ; Meppelink A. M. ; Randolph M. A. ; Redmond R. W. ; Austen W. G. Jr.
Prevention of capsular contracture
with photochemical
tissue passivation . Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 
2014 , 133 , 571 –577 . 10.1097/01.prs.0000438063.31043.79 .24263392 
Ludvikova L. ; Fris P. ; Heger D. ; Sebej P. ; Wirz J. ; Klan P. 
Photochemistry of rose
bengal in water and acetonitrile: a comprehensive
kinetic analysis . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 16266 –16273 . 10.1039/C6CP01710J .27253480 
Neckers D. C. 
Rose Bengal . J. Photochem. Photobiol. A 
1989 , 47 , 1 –29 . 10.1016/1010-6030(89)85002-6 .
Fleming G. R. ; Morris J. M. ; Morrison R. J. S. ; Robinson G. W. ; et al. Picosecond
fluorescence studies of xanthene dyes . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
1977 , 99 , 4306 –4311 . 10.1021/ja00455a017 .
Kochevar I. E. ; Redmond R. W. 
Photosensitized
production of singlet oxygen . Methods Enzymol. 
2000 , 319 , 20 –28 . 10.1016/s0076-6879(00)19004-4 .10907495 
Shen H. R. ; Spikes J. D. ; Kopeckova P. ; Kopecek J. 
Photodynamic crosslinking
of proteins. II. Photocrosslinking of a model protein-ribonuclease
A . J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 
1996 , 35 , 213 –219 . 10.1016/S1011-1344(96)07300-9 .8933727 
Lambert C. R. ; Kochevar I. E. 
Electron transfer quenching of the
rose bengal triplet
state . Photochem. Photobiol. 
1997 , 66 , 15 –25 . 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1997.tb03133.x .9230700 
Zakrzewski A. ; Neckers D. C. 
Bleaching products
of rose bengal under reducing conditions . Tetrahedron 
1987 , 43 , 4507 –4512 . 10.1016/S0040-4020(01)86891-5 .
Oster G. ; Oster G. K. ; Karg G. 
Extremely
long-lived intermediates
in photochemical reactions of dyes in non-visous media . J. Phys. Chem. 
1962 , 66 , 2514 –2517 . 10.1021/j100818a045 .
Luttrull D. K. ; Valdes-Aguilera O. ; Linden S. M. ; Paczkowski J. ; Neckers D. C. 
Rose Bengal aggregation in rationally synthesized dimeric
systems . Photochem. Photobiol. 
1988 , 47 , 551 –557 . 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1988.tb08843.x .3406116 
Simpson M. J. ; Poblete H. ; Griffith M. ; Alarcon E. I. ; Scaiano J. C. 
Impact
of dye-protein interaction and silver nanoparticles on rose bengal
photophysical behavior and protein photocrosslinking . Photochem. Photobiol. 
2013 , 89 , 1433 –1441 . 10.1111/php.12119 .23799987 
Valdes-Aguilera O. ; Neckers D. C. 
Aggregation
phenomena in xanthene dyes . Acc. Chem. Res. 
1989 , 22 , 171 –177 . 10.1021/ar00161a002 .
Xu D. ; Neckers D. C. 
Aggregation of rose bengal molecules in solution . J. Photochem. Photobiol. A 
1987 , 40 , 361 –370 . 10.1016/1010-6030(87)85013-X .
Alarcón E. ; Edwards A. M. ; Aspee A. ; Borsarelli C. D. ; Lissi E. A. 
Photophysics and photochemistry of rose bengal bound
to human serum albumin . Photochem. Photobiol.
Sci. 
2009 , 8 , 933 –943 . 10.1039/b901056d .19582268 
Ni T. ; Senthil-Kumar P. ; Dubbin K. ; Aznar-Cervantes S. D. ; Datta N. ; Randolph M. A. ; Cenis J. L. ; Rutledge G. C. ; Kochevar I. E. ; Redmond R. W. 
A photoactivated
nanofiber graft
material for augmented Achilles tendon repair . Lasers Surg. Med. 
2012 , 44 , 645 –652 . 10.1002/lsm.22066 .22911554 
Stetefeld J. ; Frank S. ; Jenny M. ; Schulthess T. ; Kammerer R. A. ; Boudko S. ; Landwehr R. ; Okuyama K. ; Engel J. 
Collagen stabilization at atomic
level: crystal structure of designed
(GlyProPro)10foldon . Structure 
2003 , 11 , 339 –346 . 10.1016/S0969-2126(03)00025-X .12623021 
Mirenda M. ; Dicelio L. E. ; San Roman E. 
Effect of
molecular interactions
on the photophysics of Rose Bengal in polyelectrolyte solutions and
self-assembled thin films . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2008 , 112 , 12201 –12207 . 10.1021/jp803892g .18774851 
Rodríguez H. B. ; Lagorio M. G. ; San Roman E. 
Rose Bengal adsorbed on microgranular
cellulose: evidence on fluorescent dimers . Photochem.
Photobiol. Sci. 
2004 , 3 , 674 –680 . 10.1039/B402484B .15239003 
Lissi E. A. ; Encinas M. V. ; Lemp E. ; Rubio M. A. 
Singlet oxygen O2(1.DELTA.g)
bimolecular processes. Solvent and compartmentalization effects . Chem. Rev. 
1993 , 93 , 699 –723 . 10.1021/cr00018a004 .
Alarcón E. ; Edwards A. M. ; Aspee A. ; Moran F. E. ; Borsarelli C. D. ; Lissi E. A. ; Gonzalez-Nilo D. ; Poblete H. ; Scaiano J. C. 
Photophysics
and photochemistry of dyes bound to human serum albumin are determined
by the dye localization . Photochem. Photobiol.
Sci. 
2010 , 9 , 93 –102 . 10.1039/B9PP00091G .20062849 
Mills A. ; Lawrence C. ; Douglas P. 
Photoreduction
of Water sensitised
by Rose Bengal . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans.
2 
1986 , 82 , 2291 –2303 . 10.1039/f29868202291 .
Pupkaite J. ; Ahumada M. ; McLaughlin S. ; Temkit M. ; Alaziz S. ; Seymour R. ; Ruel M. ; Kochevar I. ; Griffith M. ; Suuronen E. J. ; Alarcon E. I. 
Collagen-Based
Photoactive Agent
for Tissue Bonding . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 9265 –9270 . 10.1021/acsami.7b01984 .28282110 
Henderson B. W. ; Busch T. M. ; Vaughan L. A. ; Frawley N. P. ; Babich D. ; Sosa T. A. ; Zollo J. D. ; Dee A. S. ; Cooper M. T. ; Bellnier D. A. ; Greco W. R. ; Oseroff A. R. 
Photofrin
photodynamic therapy can significantly deplete
or preserve oxygenation in human basal cell carcinomas during treatment,
depending on fluence rate . Cancer Res. 
2000 , 60 , 525 –529 .10676629 
Ravichandran R. ; Islam M. M. ; Alarcon E. I. ; Samanta A. ; Wang S. ; Lundstrom P. ; Hilborn J. ; Griffith M. ; Phopase J. 
Functionalised
type-I collagen as a hydrogel building block for bio-orthogonal tissue
engineering applications . J. Mater. Chem. B. 
2016 , 4 , 318 –326 . 10.1039/C5TB02035B .
Biasini M. ; Bienert S. ; Waterhouse A. ; Arnold K. ; Studer G. ; Schmidt T. ; Kiefer F. ; Gallo Cassarino T. ; Bertoni M. ; Bordoli L. ; Schwede T. 
SWISS-MODEL: modelling
protein tertiary and quaternary structure using evolutionary information . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , W252 –W258 . 10.1093/nar/gku340 .24782522 
Vanommeslaeghe K. ; Hatcher E. ; Acharya C. ; Kundu S. ; Zhong S. ; Shim J. ; Darian E. ; Guvench O. ; Lopes P. ; Vorobyov I. ; Mackerell A. D. Jr.
CHARMM general
force field: A force field for drug-like molecules compatible with
the CHARMM all-atom additive biological force fields . J. Comput. Chem. 
2010 , 31 , 671 –690 . 10.1002/jcc.21367 .19575467 
Vanommeslaeghe K. ; MacKerell A. D. Jr.
Automation of the CHARMM General
Force Field (CGenFF) I: bond perception and atom typing . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 3144 –3154 . 10.1021/ci300363c .23146088 
Vanommeslaeghe K. ; Raman E. P. ; MacKerell A. D. Jr.
Automation of
the CHARMM General Force Field (CGenFF) II: assignment of bonded parameters
and partial atomic charges . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 3155 –3168 . 10.1021/ci3003649 .23145473 
Best R. B. ; Zhu X. ; Shim J. ; Lopes P. E. ; Mittal J. ; Feig M. ; Mackerell A. D. Jr.
Optimization of the additive CHARMM
all-atom protein force field targeting improved sampling of the backbone
phi, psi and side-chain chi(1) and chi(2) dihedral angles . J. Chem. Theory. Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 3257 –3273 . 10.1021/ct300400x .23341755 
Phillips J. C. ; Braun R. ; Wang W. ; Gumbart J. ; Tajkhorshid E. ; Villa E. ; Chipot C. ; Skeel R. D. ; Kale L. ; Schulten K. 
Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD . J. Comput. Chem. 
2005 , 26 , 1781 –1802 . 10.1002/jcc.20289 .16222654 
MacKerell A. D. ; Bashford D. ; Bellott M. ; Dunbrack R. L. ; Evanseck J. D. ; Field M. J. ; Fischer S. ; Gao J. ; Guo H. ; Ha S. ; Joseph-McCarthy D. ; Kuchnir L. ; Kuczera K. ; Lau F. T. ; Mattos C. ; Michnick S. ; Ngo T. ; Nguyen D. T. ; Prodhom B. ; Reiher W. E. ; Roux B. ; Schlenkrich M. ; Smith J. C. ; Stote R. ; Straub J. ; Watanabe M. ; Wiorkiewicz-Kuczera J. ; Yin D. ; Karplus M. 
All-atom empirical
potential for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1998 , 102 , 3586 –3616 . 10.1021/jp973084f .24889800 
Feller S.
E. ; Zhang Y. ; Pastor R. W. ; Brooks B. R. 
Constant pressure
molecular dynamics simulation: The Langevin piston method . J. Chem. Phys. 
1995 , 103 , 4613 –4621 . 10.1063/1.470648 .
Darden T. ; York D. ; Pedersen L. 
Particle mesh
Ewald: An N·log(N)
method for Ewald sums in large systems . J. Chem.
Phys. 
1993 , 98 , 10089 –10092 . 10.1063/1.464397 .
Andersen H. C. 
Rattle:
A “velocity” version of the shake algorithm for molecular
dynamics calculations . J. Comput. Phys. 
1983 , 52 , 24 –34 . 10.1016/0021-9991(83)90014-1 .
Miyamoto S. ; Kollman P. A. 
Settle: An analytical
version of the SHAKE and RATTLE
algorithm for rigid water models . J. Comput.
Phys. 
1992 , 13 , 952 –962 . 10.1002/jcc.540130805 .
Hopkins C. W. ; Le Grand S. ; Walker R. C. ; Roitberg A. E. 
Long-Time-Step Molecular
Dynamics through Hydrogen Mass Repartitioning . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2015 , 11 , 1864 –1874 . 10.1021/ct5010406 .26574392 
Fiorin G. ; Klein M. L. ; Hénin J. 
Using collective
variables to drive
molecular dynamics simulations . Mol. Phys. 
2013 , 111 , 3345 –3362 . 10.1080/00268976.2013.813594 .
Comer J. ; Gumbart J. C. ; Hénin J. ; Lelièvre T. ; Pohorille A. ; Chipot C. 
The Adaptive Biasing
Force Method:
Everything You Always Wanted To Know but Were Afraid To Ask . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2015 , 119 , 1129 –1151 . 10.1021/jp506633n .25247823 
Darve E. ; Rodriguez-Gomez D. ; Pohorille A. 
Adaptive biasing force method for
scalar and vector free energy calculations . J. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 128 , 14412010.1063/1.2829861 .18412436 
Hénin J. ; Chipot C. 
Overcoming free energy
barriers using unconstrained
molecular dynamics simulations . J. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 121 , 2904 –2914 . 10.1063/1.1773132 .15291601

