
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3161681710.1021/acsomega.9b01939ArticleSurface-Induced in Situ Sonothermodynamically
Controlled Functionalized Graphene Oxide for in Vitro Cytotoxicity
and Antioxidant Evaluations Avashthi Gopal †Maktedar Shrikant S. ‡Singh Man *†† School of Chemical
Sciences, Central University of Gujarat, Gandhinagar 382030, India‡ Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Srinagar 190006, Jammu
and Kashmir, India* E-mail: mansingh50@hotmail.com. Tel: +91-079-23260210. Fax: +91-079-23260076.25 09 2019 08 10 2019 4 15 16385 16401 28 06 2019 04 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Graphene
oxide-based advanced functional materials offer an ultimate solution
for wider biomedical applications. In situ thermodynamically ultrasound-assisted
direct covalent functionalization of graphene oxide (GO) with sulfanilamide
(SA) has synthesized f-(SA)GO. Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction,
high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, selected area electron
diffraction pattern, scanning electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy,
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, ultraviolet–visible
spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) have analyzed the f-(SA)GO structure for functional
activities, expressed through synergistic impact of heteroatomic domains
(SIHAD). The TGA of GO and f-(SA)GO demonstrates their total weight
losses of 82.0 and 61.1%, respectively. Enhanced thermal stability
of f-(SA)GO infers an exothermic behavior obtained with DSC. The surface-induced
in situ thermodynamically controlled nonspontaneous reaction for f-(SA)GO
has facilitated calculations for activation energy (Ea) = – 2.65 × 103 kJ mol–1 and Gibbs free energy (ΔG) = 8.3741 kJ mol–1, energetics for biological activities with sulforhodamine
B assay on MCF-7 and Vero cell lines and antioxidant potential by
free radical scavenging activity with DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl).
Cell viabilities are >89.8% for Vero and >90.1% for MCF-7 with
f-(SA)GO over 10 to 80 μg mL–1. Its cytocompatibility
infers establishment of a new material. The morphological effect on
MCF-7 and Vero cell lines confirm its structurally stable biocompatibility.
The SIHAD of f-(SA)GO scavenges radical activity, and its heteroatomic
structure causes valuable physiochemical activities. f-(SA)GO could
emerge as an advanced functional biomaterial for structurally and
thermally stable biocompatible nanocoatings.

document-id-old-9ao9b01939document-id-new-14ao-2019-01939sccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Functionalization models of graphene oxide (GO)
to derive functional nanomaterials have attracted scientists, industrialists,
and researchers globally for biomedical and biochemical applications.
Despite several potential properties,1−7 the
graphene alone could not significantly contribute toward biomedical
applications due to its structural stability and poor processability
in its native form.5,6 The graphene-based functional
materials are proven to be safer and potential for performing the
biomedical applications of processed graphene.8−21 The enhanced dispersibility of functional graphene-based materials
facilitates smooth processability in various organic solvents.5,6,20 The surface modification of graphene
could induce a larger surface area with stronger surface activities
for biomedical applications.22−29 Therefore, for transforming the graphene to structurally
competent express interacting activities, functionalization becomes
a most needed science.

The wet chemical functionalization (f) of GO is widely reported
for surface modification30−32 as graphite (Gt) is used as a starting material in the present study
for its chemical alteration. Gt also has the same problem of high
thermal stability and poor solvent processability.20 So, Gt was converted into graphite oxide (GtO), which was
subjected to ultrasound irradiation for exfoliation into thermally
active GO. The surplus oxygen-containing GO functionalities are used
as a precursor for chemical functionalization in absolute alcohol.33−35 The GO covalent functionalization
without using acylating and coupling reagents is a challenge despite
innumerable efforts put in using several substances.13 Several attempts are successfully documented to engineer
for biomedical applications of routine functionalized GO (f-GO) based
materials including in vitro biocompatibility and cytotoxicity.36−46 The
researchers have functionalized the GO with various molecules like
amino acid,2,23 but no studies about GO functionalization
with a sulfa drug molecule are reported yet, which has a larger surface
area with highest surface activities. We have chosen SA, which has
π conjugation in its benzene ring that makes the ring an active
surface for its chemical activities.
The π-conjugated stable sulfamoyl functional group (H2NSO2−) is bonded to aniline. Apart from its active
delocalization, its headgroup (NH2SO2−)
keeps exchanging the electron developing temporary (+) and (−)
poles, which induce the Coulombic interactions. The GO functionalization
with SA develops a unique class of smart GO-derived functional molecules,
which become an extraordinary sensitive thermal sensor due to highly
active and receptive surfaces. The chemical energy is conserved in
a chemical bond made on sharing or transfer of an electron from one
C to another C atom in GO, which has sp2 and sp3 hybridization along with −C–O–C–, −C–OH,
OH—C=O, and —C=O groups with a lone pair
of electrons. Hence, subjecting GO to 30 kHz sonication for 15 min
caused cavitation that induce surface stability in GO by inducing
atomic oscillations, which lead to disrupt the bond in an alcoholic
medium. An initiation of bond disruption generates enthalpy for phase
changes, which is used in any secondary chemical process. It is shown
that the resultant product with a less energy state causes an exothermic
reaction with enthalpy (ΔH) = – ve and raises the temperature of GO solution, which controls
all thermodynamic parameters. Thus, by the sonication process, the
heat holding capacity (q) generates robust ΔH and ΔS (entropy), which
make this process thermodynamically robust. Since autogenerated Δq, ΔS, and ΔH represent a chemical process itself, the activity is in situ. The
in situ controlled raising temperature enhances kinetic energy and
lowers Ea, which cause nonspontaneous
functionalization of GO with SA to change ΔG. The explored thermodynamic parameters ΔG, ΔS, and ΔH indicate
that the surface-induced sonothermodynamically controlled functionalization
is exothermic and a nonspontaneous process. f-(SA)GO due to having
highly active surfaces needs less amount of energy for expressing
vibrant and visible effects, making it a green science.
The present studies successfully reported about f-(SA)GO formation
through the robust in situ thermodynamically controlled sonochemical
approach. f-(SA)GO is subjected to biomedical applications through
cytotoxicity profile and free radical scavenging activity. The higher
cell viabilities with f-(SA)GO confirm its excellent biocompatibility.
The thermal studies confirm instability of GO accountable for labile
surplus oxygen-containing functionality as compared to f-(SA)GO. f-(SA)GO
shows an enhanced thermal stability due to covalently attached SA
with a GO surface through an amide bond. The new bond formation causes
electronic delocalization in ethanolic medium to enhance q of f-(SA)GO due to synergistic impact of heteroatomic domains (SIHAD)
of various functionalities. The higher thermally stable sonochemically
controlled thermodynamically favored f-(SA)GO activities acts against
higher temperature resist thermophilic bacteria and microorganism,
which can be applicable for biological applications to kill thermally
stable bacterial cysts. The f-(SA)GO suitability is for thermally
stable biocompatible nanocoatings and allied applications like antirusting.
The f-(SA)GO surfaces are accountable to the dipolar head of SA chemically
bonded to GO through the −NH2 of SA at its para
position and mechanistically confirmed through the SIHAD. f-(SA)GO
truly emerges as a superb functional bionanomaterial for biomedical
applications, which could even puncture cysts at a higher temperature.

2 Results and Discussion
The feasible greener sonochemical method is applied for GO functionalization
with SA to form f-(SA)GO without using hazardous and acylating reagents
starting with Gt flakes as a precursor. The eco-friendly route of
ultrasound energy maintains the sustainability of the environment
globally. For designing various graphene-based materials, ultrasound
cavitation develops the metal-free GO functionalized product to explore
exfoliated GO functionalization with an amine-substituted organic
frame (ASOF), that is, SA in EtOH medium. In fact, the released ΔH has been further used to monodisperse GO for better
activation. This has been the reason that a specific self-explanatory
surface-induced thermodynamic simulation was made. All the developed
GO-based metal-free ASOFs may not necessarily show their exceptional
functionality for various applications due to a mismatch in interacting
structural units. Therefore, the selection of an ASOF is significant
for functionalization with not only homogeneously dispersed GO but
also their activities. The sole motto of GO functionalization with
SA has been to widen the functionality of GO through −CONH–
linkage between GO and SA. In many applications, GO is not that spontaneous
in inducing the desired activity. To remove such restrictions, GO
was functionalized with the most interactive molecule, that is, SA.
The SA has π conjugation, enough lone pair of an electron (LPE)
on the sulfamoyl functional group (H2NSO2−),
and free amino group at the para position. These electronic moieties
additionally enhance the interacting ability of the SA with GO. Thus,
GO functionalization enhances the thermal stability, nanocoating capability,
and dispersibility in wider solvents at varying polarities. During
functionalization, the labile oxygen functionality of O=C—OH
of GO surfaces is replaced by a more conjugated —NH—C=O
of f-(SA)GO with other conjugated electronic constituents of SA like
delocalized benzene ring with conjugated −SO2NH2 and thermally stabilizes f-(SA)GO for activities. Thus, f-(SA)GO
acts as a whole π-electron-rich conjugated center and synergizes
the stability of f-(SA)GO, which has been confirmed by TGA/DSC (thermogravimetric
analysis/differential scanning calorimetry) as compared to GO and
SA individually. The functionality of f-(SA)GO depends on the structure–activity
relationship due to SIHAD impact, which may be dissimilar for other
functionalized products. Recently, a lot of ultrasound-assisted GO
functionalizations are reported for various applications, and the
functionalized structure is confirmed by various sophisticated analytical
methods like Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, TGA/DSC, scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(HRTEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and UV–visible spectroscopy.32,47−49 Therefore,
the GO functionalization with SA and thermodynamic parameters thereof
are initiated first, and hence its detailed structural studies are
made and analyzed for biological assay. In cytotoxic assay, f-(SA)GO
is the most balanced molecule manifold localized active site in coordination
with other closely placed functional moieties. Therefore, closely
placed units with different electronic configurations modulate and
tune the optimization of f-(SA)GO for creating residual force or the
van der Waals forces (VWF). Therefore, MCF-7 and Vero cell lines are
the most sensitive structures. Their responses are to be studied without
their major breakdown. Thus, this was the most potent point to choose
f-(SA)GO to allow study on MCF-7 and Vero cell lines. f-(SA)GO without
destroying them and study of these balanced responses as the SA unit
attached to GO through functionalization have further modulated the
interacting activities of the GO. Thus, this has a most biocompatible
combination of f-(SA)GO with MCF-7 and Vero cell lines to analyze
their responses vis-á-vis. For the past few decades, the prevalence
of breast tumor has amplified speedily. GO and its derivatives have
been used for several curative researches, particularly in cytotoxicological
evaluations. These studies have been found to offer some positive
gestures that can be used in breast tumorous cell treatment predominantly.
However, several types of research regarding the applications for
graphene-based materials have been investigated for the breast malignant
cell line treatment, but no study has been yet examined for the cytotoxic
properties and their influences on f-(SA)GO on MCF-7 and Vero cell
lines. Hence, in these studies, GO and f-(SA)GO was confirmed on MCF-7
and Vero cell lines as positive cell viable nanomaterials for cytotoxicity
effects. Also, GO and f-(SA)GO were undertaken in accordance to noticeable
morphological changes against Vero cell lines, which was also a positive
viable effect on the cellular uptake relating to its therapeutic exposure.
The monkey normal kidney cell line, Vero, is a convenient tool to
evaluate the precise toxic influence. It can be promptly altered for
higher growth during cytotoxicity assessments. However, kidney is
made up by several complex cell types having diverse morphologies
and functions, which shows highly sensitive responses to toxic chemicals.
Therefore, the selection of Vero and MCF-7 cell lines for in vitro
study is primarily feasible for toxic chemical responses to evaluate
cytotoxicity and breast malignant cell line treatment, respectively.

2.1 Structural Investigation
Symmetric structures of GO and f-(SA)GO in Figure 1 were confirmed by Raman spectroscopy, with
characteristic D and G bands for GO observed at 1359 and 1593 cm–1,respectively (Figure 1a). The two less intense bands of 2D and D+G were also
analyzed at 2674 and 2931 cm–1, respectively. The
D band corresponds to structural defects and A1g symmetry,
while the G band corresponds to the graphitic domain of E2g symmetry. The D band depicts a formation of sp3 from
sp2 carbon due to the covalent attachment of SA with GO.
D and G bands for f-(SA)GO were detected at 1359 and 1585 cm –1 along with the single broad merged D+G bands at 2845–2937
cm –1 (Figure 1b). The investigated D/G ratios of GO and f-(SA)GO
are 0.85 and 0.86, respectively. The 2D band of GO is redundant in
f-(SA)GO in the form of single D+G broadened bands from 2845 to 2937
cm–1. Thus, f-(SA)GO has the larger structural defects
in crystal lattices as compared to GO due to direct covalent functionalization
(DCF) of GO into f-(SA)GO. This has least −ve entropy with a higher stability as confirmed by TGA.
To break up this stability, f-(SA)GO should have higher enthalpy,
and it was ensured by DSC. The sp2 hybridization of the
benzene ring of SA along with LPE could also contribute the fundamental
shift between sp2 ⇌ sp3.

Figure 1 Raman spectrum of (a) GO and (b) f-(SA)GO.

The powder
XRD spectra were obtained with MiniFlex Rigaku Cu Kα radiation
λ = 1.54 Å operating at 40 kV and 15 mA cathodic current
and recorded in the 5–80° range at a 0.1 degrees/s scan
rate. The hexagonal GO (Figure 2a; PDF 03-065-1528) was used as a starting material showing
a sharp 2θ peak at 9.70° of 100% relative intensities corresponding
to the (002) plane having a d spacing of 9.10 Å.
Similarly, a second peak is observed of 4% relative intensities at
2θ of 19.55° with a d spacing of 4.53
Å. f-(SA)GO shows two peaks; out of these, one sharp and 100%
relative intense peak at 10.42° (Figure 2b) is observed with a d spacing
of 8.48 Å as compared to GO. The second peak is detected at a
2θ value of 20.80° with a d spacing of
4.26 Å. Reduction in the spacing of f-(SA)GO as compared to GO
could be attributed to the π conjugation and dipole (−O–S+=O– or –O–S+=O–) of SA. The powder
X-ray diffraction pattern of GO and f-(SA)GO (Figure 2a,b) demonstrates intense diffraction peaks
at 9.70° and 10.42°, respectively. The shift in the position
of the diffraction peak and variation in interlayer spacings as compared
to the starting material infer f-(SA)GO formation. FWHM (full width
at half-maximum) values of GO and f-(SA)GO are 1.21 and 1.07, respectively,
and their 91.6 and 94.3 Å crystalline size respectively infer
functionalization. The enhanced crystalline size of f-(SA)GO confirms
the direct covalent GO functionalization with SA. The calculated strain
values are 3.50% for GO and 2.80% for f-(SA)GO and infer more stability
in f-(SA)GO. The less strain % in f-(SA)GO supports more stabilization
due to SA additional conjugation onto GO. The −ΔS was also verified for SA-bonded GO with a high-intensity sharp peak,
which find an additional stability for f-(SA)GO, was confirmed by
TGA, and also favored the reduction in strain.
This is due to the polar structure of SA and electron delocalization
in the amide functionality of f-(SA)GO.

Figure 2 Powder
X-ray diffraction pattern of (a) GO and (b) f-(SA)GO.

The surplus oxygen-containing
epoxy, hydroxyl, carbonyl, and carboxyl functionalities are observed
over the GO surface (Figure 3a). The broad peak of −OH appears at 3406 cm–1 and the carbonyl carbon at 1736 cm–1. The 1066
cm–1 characteristic peak infers an epoxy group (C–O–C).
The peak at 1626 cm–1 supports the presence of conjugated
unsaturated C=C. The peak is observed at 1375 cm–1 and assigned to the C–H bending vibration. Both peaks at
1736 and 1626 cm–1 have nearly equal intensity with
84% transmittance (16% absorbance). The FTIR spectrum of f-(SA)GO
comprises a peak for amide at 1629 cm–1, but this
peak is absent in GO (Figure 3b). Also, the amide peak is more intense with 25% of transmittance
(75% absorbance). The scattered electronic effect (Scheme 1) causes Lennard-Jones repulsion
supported by Born–Oppenheimer approximation noted as 1  In general, the reduction in one lone pair
of an electron (LPE) of the O atom of −COOH, which is replaced
by −CONH, has activated the structure, which has higher ϑ
and absorbance (A).

Figure 3 FTIR spectrum
of (a) GO and (b) f-(SA)GO.

Scheme 1 Electronic Structural
Representation of Active Functionalities in FTIR spectra of (a) −COOH
of GO and (b) −CONH of f-(SA)GO.
Hence, from Scheme 1 2  The electron–electron
repulsion caused by −COOH in GO is higher than −CONH
of f-(SA)GO due to scattering the IR electron cloud of shared as well
as LPE. These effects have influenced the stretching frequency (ϑ)
of —C=O and −OH in COOH than HN—C=O,
where its amide ϑ gives higher absorbance (75%) with CONH–
contrary to 16% for the −COOH group. The analyzed % of transmittance
has been also verified with the UV spectra (Figure 8) and shows a higher absorbance for f-(SA)GO,
where the peaks of GO along with the amide peak ensures the covalent
attachment of SA over the GO surface.

The thermal response profiles
of SA, GO, and f-(SA)GO were studied in combination with TGA and DSC
(Figure 4a,b) because
of their dissimilar electronic structures with various constituents.
These structural features establish the structure–activity
relationship and generate a scientific ground to compare the structural
response of thermal behavior by TGA and DSC.
The fundamental concept of q for SA, GO, and f-(SA)GO
is different as they have a separate mechanism to hold the heat. The
heating of SA, GO, and f-(SA)GO for TGA provide the valid ground to
compare their structural behavior or activities toward thermal response.
The monitoring of total % weight loss (TWL) as a function of temperature
confirms the thermal decomposition. Dynamic nitrogen (industrial grade)
at a rate of 100 mL/min was used for the measurements with a slow
ramp rate of 10 °C/min of more than 5 mg mass (m) of GO and f-(SA)GO over 50–600 °C. TGA comparison of
SA, GO, and f-(SA)GO is depicted in Figure 4a. The melting point of SA is (165.2 °C)
lower than its decomposition temperature and indicates its thermal
stability with a total % weight loss of 45.8% at nearly 318.4 and
336.9 °C due to the loss of the −SO2NH2 group of SA (Figure 4a,b). For a single-stage GO decomposition, the TGA curve indicates
rapid mass loss just above room temperature (RT) (Figure 4a). The total ∼82.0%
mass loss for GO is at ∼197.9 °C due to the removal of
thermally labile oxygen-containing functionality. The prominent exothermic
peak of DSC for f-(SA)GO controlled the SA behavior and inferred very
disordered and highly ordered sp2- and sp3-hybridized
functional units, which ongoing thermal energy (TE) initiates uncontrolled
collision in the said domains at 225.3 °C and 28.98 mW.
However, contrary to f-(SA)GO, the GO induces the exothermic reaction
at the active structural state at 197.9 °C and 16.28 mW, which
demarcates GO from f-(SA)GO via a covalent bond. The TE on disrupting
the binding forces allows the SA molecules to optimize in an ordered
form. Initially, SA liberates energy as a heat where its attached
hydrogen bonds are broken but their energy is not used but later on;
this energy is used to further rearrange a structure, which acquires
energy from itself on stabilizing the temperature and shifts from
one to another phase. A close look at Figure 4b and the analysis of DSC for SA, GO and
f-(SA)GO infer with various structural responses to heat, probably
forming separate structures with different T-driven behaviors. The
functionalization process is structurally active and inhibits the
original T-response or T-driven structural activities of both SA and
GO.

Figure 4 (a) Thermogravimetric
and (b) differential scanning
calorimetry analysis.

The functionalization of GO with SA could act as the temperature
sensor and authentically reflects a synergistic effect on both of
these. An exothermic peak for f-(SA)GO is shifted from 197.9 to 225.3
°C as the q of the functionalized product is
higher than GO and widens temperature-based applications of f-(SA)GO.
The pure SA DSC had produced an exothermic curve at 318.4 °C
and endothermic at 336.9 °C due to the −SO2NH2 loss. It confirms a para −NH2 of
SA attached at GO, which affects delocalization by shifts in electron
clouds of −SO2NH2. Such delocalization
effects are finished when the −NH2 is used in covalent
bond formation for f-(SA)GO stabilization. Hence, f-(SA)GO shows a
weight loss at 225.3 °C that indicates the decomposition of oxygen-containing
functionalities over the GO surface (Figure 4a). The total % wt loss of f-(SA)GO is 61.1%,
which infers its higher thermal stability than GO with a formation
of enhanced stabilized residues due to electronic delocalization.
A broad exothermic peak of GO at 197.9 °C depicts thermodynamic
feasibility. However, f-(SA)GO shows an intense exothermic peak at
225.3 °C (Figure 4b), indicating high thermal stability of graphitic materials. The
DSC describes exothermic performance with a lower q of GO with thermal instability, contrary to greater q of f-(SA)GO thermal stability. The increased T of
f-(SA)GO as compared to GO (ΔT = 27.4 °C)
reveals a strong confinement effect of SA on GO sheets and involves
covalent bonding via amide bond formation. Therefore, a quantitative
equivalence between f-(SA)GO and GO is developed for a better understanding
of the confinement effect.

HRTEM data (Figure 5) was collected by using FEI Model Tecnai
G2 S Twin operated at 200 kV. The dispersions of GO and f-(SA)GO were
prepared in ethanol and sonicated for 5 min. The 10 μL dispersions
of each were uniformly spread over 200 mesh holey carbon-coated copper
grid and dried in a closed Petri dish for 3 h. The TEM and high-resolution
images reveal the surface morphology and phase-contrast investigation
for GO and f-(SA)GO, respectively (Figure 5a–d). A sheet-like GO surface (Figure 5a) and the formation
of wrinkled several small rod-like structure in f-(SA)GO (Figure 5b) infer dissimilar
edge morphology. The scrolled edge morphology of f-(SA)GO was evidently
investigated and signified the substantial restacking of f-(SA)GO.
This significant edge morphological distortions in f-(SA)GO may be
due to the chemical functionalization of SA on the GO surface. HRTEM
images conclude the inference that f-(SA)GO has more physical consistency
(Figure 5d) than GO
lattice fringes (Figure 5c). It is because of sonochemically in situ thermally controlled
covalent functionalization of GO sheet by SA. The phase-contrast HRTEM
imaging based on the higher electronic density of f-(SA)GO and the
broad peak in UV spectra at 315 nm was observed for its structural
confirmation due to the restoration of π conjugation along with
an enhancing electronic delocalization capability (Figure 8).
The crystalline behavior of GO and f-(SA)GO are further supported
by the corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns (Figure 5e,f). The ordered
arrangements and well-resolved concentric rings with intense spots
in the GO electron diffraction pattern confirmed a crystalline GO
with a lesser number of layers. The sixfold pattern in selected area
electron diffraction (SAED) of GO is consistent with its hexagonal
lattice (parameters a = b ≠ c, α = β = 90° and γ = 120°, a = 2.4500, b = 2.4500, c = 9.1100, and volume = 47.357) and confirmed the graphitic AB stacking
order in the lattice even after a higher degree of oxidation. The
intense spots in the first ring of GO correspond to the ordered graphitic
lattice, and a relatively low-intensity spot in the second ring corresponds
to the disordered domain. The interlayer spacing value (d = 1/R) of the first ring in the SAED pattern of
GO is 0.19 nm. In the second ring, the interplanar distance is reduced
to 0.11 nm, and the intensity of spots is lowered. It verifies the
orientation of oxygen functionalities over the GO surface (Figure 5e). The GO surface
consists of sp2- and sp3-hybridized carbon atoms.
The SAED pattern of f-(SA)GO reveals the SA signature onto the GO
surface. The calculated interlayer spacings for the first and second
ring in the SAED pattern of f-(SA)GO are 0.20 and 0.12 nm, respectively
(Figure 5f). The enhanced
calculated value of interlayer spacing confirms the covalent attachment
of SA onto the GO surface. In addition to d spacing
values of GO, f-(SA)GO exhibits a 0.60 nm interplanar distance, attributed
to SA (PDF 00-005-0346). The existence of two different crystalline
domains in f-(SA)GO rings may be due to GO functionalization with
SA.

Figure 5 TEM morphological investigation
of (a) GO and
(b) f-(SA)GO with high-resolution images of (c) GO and (d) f-(SA)GO
and corresponding SAED pattern of (e) GO and (g) f-(SA)GO.

A chemically active species on the GO surface creates a
new material of different electronic configurations that generates
new lattice arrangements. These observations are supported by SEM
as slightly ordering is seen in planes with higher ordered structure.
The higher ordering of f-(SA)GO is further supported by negative values
of entropies. The sample was mounted on carbon tape, which was fixed
on the stub and exposed for plasma sputtering inside the coating chamber.
The target-containing Au and Pd in 80:20 act as a source for coating.
After coating, 5 kV for Gt and 7 kV beam voltages were applied to
excite the secondary electrons from the sample’s surfaces of
synthesized materials. The comparative SEM is observed for pure Gt
(Figure 6a), unexfoliated
GtO (Figure 6b), exfoliated
GO (Figure 6c), and
functionalized f-(SA)GO (Figure 6d). The pure Gt shows larger stacked black flakes with
highly dense furrows due to a natural alignment. The exfoliated GO
surface morphology is investigated with 20 μm scanning area
(Figure 6c) with unrestricted
threads like crumpled, rippled, and parallel multiple layers as a
result of strong hydrogen bonding between two successive layers due
to oxygen-enriched carbon functionality at the GO surface in EtOH
medium. The exfoliated sheets, which are bound with comparatively
least VWF, are not able to hold them firmly (Figure 6c) and have the ability to unobstructed activities
for GO functionalization with SA. Unexfoliated GtO (oxygenated Gt)
SEM (Figure 6b) shows
less dense surface morphology with no loose multiple sheets but strongly
bound with strong VWF as compared to the highly dense packet of Gt
flakes (Figure 6a),
which infer successful oxidation and exfoliation after removing the
impurities. The organized loose GO sheet is functionalized with SA,
which has enhanced the ordered structure for f-(SA)GO (Figure 6d). The hydrogen bonding network
controls all the large-scale GO properties in which functional groups
of single GO layer and water molecule between the interlayer cavities
play a contributory role. The ultrasound mechanical energy enhanced
the GO dispersion in EtOH and distilled water to break weak van der
Waals forces between layers. The dispersed GO is deformed upon exfoliation
and restacking process with more rough surfaces than f-(SA)GO and
parallel arrangements of successive layers. SEM elucidates f-(SA)GO
sheet formation with smooth surfaces (Figure 6d) than the rough texture of GO (Figure 6c). SEM of the f-(SA)GO
structure as condense sheets is credited to π conjugation and
−SO2NH2 interaction. These are active
and develop stronger intermolecular forces with a stronger covalent
bond. The morphological investigation for GO and f-(SA)GO also confirms
roughness depicted in AFM.

Figure 6 Morphological
investigation with SEM (a) Gt, (b) GtO, (c) GO, and (d) f-(SA)GO.

AFM analysis for GO and f (SA)GO
was conducted in a noncontact mode by preparing samples on a cleaved
mica sheet, which was cleaned with ethanol and dried with hairdryer,
and samples were sonicated for 5 min in ethanol. The dispersions were
filtered and poured onto the surface of the mica sheet with a micropipette.
Again, the mica sheet was washed with a small amount of ethanol and
dried at RT. The surface of each mounted samples was scanned for a
topographical view and 3D image (Figure 7). The scanned areas are 6 μm for the
GO sheet to generate a 3D topographical view (Figure 7b) and 12.5 μm for f-(SA)GO (Figure 7d). Prominent sheets
are haphazardly distributed in GO. The ordered sheet structure with
more density is visible in f-(SA)GO and supported by HRTEM (Figure 5d) and UV (Figure 8). It proves GO functionalization with SA into f-(SA)GO. The
topographical views and their data of GO and f-(SA)GO are depicted
in Figure 7 and Table 1, respectively.
The surface roughness (Ra) for GO and f-(SA)GO are 8.916 and 2.497
nm, respectively. The 3D images of GO and f-(SA)GO cross-confirms
the dissimilar electronic functionalities and rough nature of the
surface. The values regarding the height, size, and total surface
roughness for GO and f-(SA)GO are shown in Table 1. It shows a smaller Ra value for f-(SA)GO
due to functionalization of homogeneously dispersed GO sheets.

Figure 7 AFM investigation
of (a) GO topology, (b) 3D GO view, (c) f-(SA)GO topology, and (d)
3D f-(SA)GO view.

Figure 8 Comparative
UV–vis spectrum of GO and f-(SA)GO.

Table 1 AFM Analysis of GO
and f-(SA)GO
sample	ΔX (μm)	ΔY (nm)	Rpv (nm)	Rq (nm)	Ra (nm)	angle (°)	
GO	0.075	0.054	26.762	9.634	8.916	0.042	
f-(SA)GO	0.083	0.027	13.466	3.486	2.497	0.019	
UV–vis absorbance spectra for GO and f-(SA)GO are depicted
in Figure 8, where
the GO shows a transition at 235 nm. An absorption peak at 235 nm
is attributed to π → π* transition of the C=C
bond and a broad peak at 295 nm due to n →
π* transition of carbonyl functionality. These observations
infer surplus oxygen-containing functionalities over the graphene
surface, which endorses a higher degree of oxidation. Consequently,
the π conjugation of the GO sheet decreases and the absorbance
at a larger wavelength for f-(SA)GO is observed with two sharp absorption
peaks at 205 and 265 nm with hyperchromic shift and one small broad
peak at 315 nm. This bathochromic shift and broad peak at 265 and
315 nm, respectively, indicate restoration of π conjugation
along with an expansion of new functionalities due to covalent GO
functionalization with dipolar SA as it expresses activities of π
conjugation and dipolar nature. Hence, the UV–vis spectrum
of f-(SA)GO infers covalently attached SA on the GO surface.

2.2 Antioxidant Potential (AP)
Both GO and f-(SA)GO are active to scavenge free radicals for antioxidant
therapy. It has been assessed with DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl)
assay (Figure 9a,b).
A 0.1 mM DPPH stock solution in ethanol was made with 2.16 mg/50 mL
and UV light absorbed at 520 nm. GO and f-(SA)GO (40, 60, 80, and
100 μg mL–1) are separately prepared to analyze
their antioxidant potential. A 100 μg mL–1 solution of l-ascorbic acid (AA) as a standard solution
is made to use as a positive control. The 1:1 ratio of sample and
DPPH stock solutions are mixed and kept for 1 h. The GO (100 μg
mL–1) slightly expresses more scavenging activity
(SV) contrary to f-(SA)GO probably because the GO–GO interaction
might have catalyzed H+ liberation, but f-(SA)GO decreases
SV at 100 μg mL–1.

Figure 9 DPPH assay
of a (GO)
and (b) f-(SA)GO. (c) % AP at varying concentrations.

Comparatively, it
infers more f-(SA)GO-f-(SA)GO engagement interactions rather than
H+ liberation. It happens due to the dipolar π –
π interaction between the benzene rings of f-(SA)GO successive
layers, which is absent in GO. The HO—C=O, −OH,
—C=O, C–O–C groups are unengaged in the
case of GO and easily liberate H+ from HO—C=O
in EtOH medium during intermolecular in situ ester bond formation
as an intermediate between GO and EtOH (Scheme 2a) and scavenges more the DPPH. In f-(SA)GO,
all its H+ liberating functional groups (FGs) are engaged
in functionalization with SA as an amide bond toward highly stable
intramolecular conjugation instead of liberating H+ (Scheme 2b).

Scheme 2 (a) H+ Liberation by Unengaged
HO—C=O of GO in Intermolecular in Situ Ester Formation
and (b) Engaged RHN—C=O in Intramolecular Conjugation
Hindered the H+ Liberation
Thereby,
the GO scavenges by 50.5%, contrary to 43.5% of f-(SA)GO. It also
proves the engagement of SA in functionalization with GO.

The
percentage scavenging activity (PSA) was calculated by putting AD and AS values
in eq 25. The relative
UV–vis graph for PSA of GO and f-(SA)GO (Figure 9a,b) for their % antioxidant potential is
from 40.40 to 43.56% and that for GO is evaluated from 45.8 to 50.57%
(Figure 9c).

Figure 9c clearly
shows a maximum antioxidant potential at 40 μg mL–1 GO and f-(SA)GO. The highly reactive oxygen of O=C—OH
is accountable for more antioxidant potential of GO due to H+ liberation as the mentioned mechanism, but GO is thermally labile
than thermally stable f-(SA)GO, confirmed by TGA (Figure 4a). The intramolecular conjugation
in f-(SA)GO hindered to liberate H+ but enhanced the thermal
stability. Hence, the AP of f-(SA)GO has more potency for thermally
stable antioxidant activity.

2.3 In Vitro Biological Evaluation
The different electronic
structures of various constituents of the functionalized product make
a dissimilar structural response to the biological fauna and flora
along with their thermal behaviors because of varying divergent properties
of functionalities in f-GO. The biological activities of GO and f-(SA)GO
are different because of their dissimilar functionalized surfaces.
The in vitro cytotoxicity screening was performed on human breast
cancer cell line MCF-7 and monkey normal kidney cell line Vero (Figure 10). The sulforhodamine
B (SRB) assay was used for cell growth. In both experiments, 10, 20,
40, and 80 μg mL–1 doses were used in DMSO
using adriamycin (ADR) as a positive control. Each experiment was
repeated thrice, and a mean reading was considered to plot a graph
between % control growth and concentration. The GI50 (drug
inhibits 50% of cells), TGI (drug produces total inhibition of cells),
and LC50 (drug that kills 50% of cells) were calculated
from a mean graph. The GO and f-(SA)GO were screened against MCF-7
and Vero cell lines in Figure 10a,b, respectively. The >90.1 GI50 value
for MCF-7 confirms the least toxicity and excellent cytocompatibility.
The low cytotoxicity of f-(SA)GO probes its biocompatibility with
the normal cell line. Their studies were continued to screen against
normal Vero cell lines (Figure 10b). The GO and f-(SA)GO both show compatibility >89.8
GI50 as compared to ADR. The morphological effect of f-(SA)GO
on the cellular surface of Vero cell lines indicates its biocompatibility
(Figure 11). The images
were taken under a Nikon-Ti-S inverted research microscope with a
magnification of 20× at a 200 pixel scale bar by Eclipse Image
processing software NIS-Elements. Figure 11a–c images have shown control, ADR,
and GO influences on the morphology of Vero cell lines.50Figure 11a shows a continuous aneuploid fibroblast-like morphology
of Vero cells, which is damaged after applying the ADR, and looks
like some typical aberrant morphological cells (Figure 11b). ADR-tested dead Vero cells
show discontinued cell division and grew as defected multilayer cellular
aggregates, signifying a loss of interacting obstacle or anchorage-self-regulating
growth. Figure 11c
infers the least damage to Vero cell morphology. The cells also retained
their morphology with f-(SA)GO due to their biocompatibility (Figure 11d). In GO and f-(SA)GO,
both induce partial aberrations and did not detach the fibroblast-like
morphology, not like defected cellular aggregates. The GO and f-(SA)GO
both infer no loss of contact inhibition and can possess self-regulatory
division.

Figure 10 In vitro
SRB assay for biological evaluation of (a) MCF-7 and (b) Vero cell
lines.

Figure 11 Morphological impact on Vero cell at
a magnification of
20×: (a) control, (b) ADR, (c) GO, and (d) f-(SA)GO.

The GO shows more % of cytocompatibility than f-(SA)GO
due to highly reactive oxygen, but due to its thermal instability,
it has limited applications. Thus, f-(SA)GO is proven as a biocompatible
material with least toxicity and high thermal stability, and it could
be used as a biomaterial for thermally stable biocompatible coatings
and other biomedical applications.

2.4 Synergistic Impact of Heteroatomic Domains (SIHAD)
The q of biologically active compounds acts against
the high-temperature resisting thermophilic bacteria or microorganism.
Basically, GO has less thermal stability due to the presence of labile
oxygen functionality, but after its functionalization, the labile
O=C–OH functionalities transform into O=C–NH
of f-(SA)GO with dissimilar q. The new amide bond
formation enhances intramolecular conjugation in f-(SA)GO with higher
thermal stability. The heteroatomic domains like O, N, and S of f-(SA)GO
stabilize the whole structural integrations as a q with more biological activity against the high-temperature resisting
thermophilic microorganism. Different forms of heteroatoms as carbon
functionalities have synergistically contributed for the f-(SA)GO
cytocompatibility behavior. f-(SA)GO may be a boon for developing
a thermally stable biocompatible coating. The SIHAD in the amide form
along with the SA benzene domain has stronger f-(SA)GO structural
activities for biomedical applications. In vitro cytocompatibility
profiles on MCF-7 and Vero cell lines are >90.1 and > 89.8%
cell viabilities, respectively. The enhanced cytocompatibility with
MCF-7 and Vero cell lines have the least cytotoxicity with higher
biocompatibility. The uniqueness of this research work is that the
higher q of the f-(SA)GO product contrasts that of
GO. f-(SA)GO has SA addition with π-conjugated dipole and GO
that engage more and more q for oscillating activities.
The structural units on getting q initially undergo
oscillatory, translatory localized molecular motions, where higher q is held by f-(SA)GO but no such motion causing moieties
are with GO, so it could not hold or engage its higher q. GO shows a transition at 197.9 °C contrary to 225.3 °C
for f-(SA)GO due to its higher q of f-(SA)GO with
additional heat capacity (C). If 1 mol (N) of GO undergoes functionalization with SA into f-(SA)GO at a specific
heat (C) of mass (m = 7.726 mg during
TGA/DSC analysis) to raise the temperature ΔT (225.3 – 197.9 = 27.4 ° C), then the total heat capacity
for most of solid crystalline materials is equal to 3R according to Dulong–Petit law noted as 3  where N = 1, for 1 mol = 6.022 × 1023 atoms.

The heat added (q) during the phase
change is noted as 4  q = 5.280 J/mol infers the added TE from its surroundings
acting as a remarkable q sensor for higher temperature
application aims to kill thermophilic cysts, which resist at a higher
temperature. The contribution of various atomic domains of f-(SA)GO
is significant for a biocompatible behavior.

3 Conclusions
The Gt →
GtO → GO → f – (SA)GO link has been accurately
materialized by avoiding hazardous acylating and coupling reagents
for GO surface modification. This method shortened the reaction duration
to 15 min by ultrasound induced in situ thermodynamically controlled
mechanism. The GO functionalization is initially connected to a thermodynamically
controlled nonspontaneous reaction with ΔG =
8.3741 kJ mol–1 and Ea = – 2.65 × 103 kJ mol–1. The high-end analytical techniques is inferred an f-(SA)GO formation.
A peak of 1629 cm–1 in the FTIR spectrum confirms
the f-(SA)GO synthesis through an amide bond. The XRD spectrum with
shifting in the 2θ peak and a change in the interlayer distance
of 8.48 Å establish covalent functionalization of GO. The Raman
spectrum of 0.86 D/G validates a larger defect within the crystal
lattice due to covalent bonding. The HRTEM and AFM analysis have confirmed
f-(SA)GO formation with a smooth surface as compared to GO. An impact
of f-(SA)GO is revealed with the thermal and cytocompatibility profile.
Total % wt loss of f-(SA)GO is 61.1% with its higher thermal stability
than GO. f-(SA)GO with ∼90 μg mL–1 GI50 value for MCF-7 and Vero cell lines is found to have an
excellent cytocompatibility. These results authenticate the morphological
effect. f-(SA)GO has emerged as an advanced functional material for
thermally stable biocompatible coatings.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
Graphite flakes, concentrated
H2SO4 (98%), HCl (37%), H3PO4 (85%), sulfanilamide (SA; systematic IUPAC name, 4-aminobenzenesulfonamide
(≥99)) were procured from Sigma-Aldrich Co. Analytical grade
(AR) potassium permanganate (≥99) was supplied by Rankem. Petroleum
ether (40–60) and H2O2 (AR, 30%) were
purchased from S.D. Fine. Absolute alcohol (≥99%) was obtained
from Scvuksmandli Ltd. India. All the chemicals were utilized without
further purification.

4.2 Synthesis of GO
GtO was prepared by oxidizing Gt flakes
with H2SO4/H3PO4 in a
9:1 ratio (180:20 mL).33 A mixture of graphite
flakes (1.5 g, 1 equiv weight) and KMnO4 (9.0 g, 6 equiv
weight) was taken into a 500 mL RB flask, and the H2SO4 + H3PO4 mixture was added dropwise
with mild shaking at the raised temperature of 35–40 °C.
The reaction was thermodynamically controlled with the enthalpy of
formation at a moderate level. This infers Gt → GtO, an exothermic
reaction with enthalpy (ΔH) = – ve. Thus, this step naturally invites thermodynamic treatment
to ensure the mechanism. Therefore, the success of the reaction depends
purely on ΔH as many bonds of oxidizing agents/reagents
are broken that released ΔH, and new bonds
are also formed along with converting Gt to GtO. Naturally, the thermodynamic
process becomes inevitable because chemically bonded impurities (salts)
of Gt are detached chemically from Gt during GtO formation. Therefore,
several localized chemical activities are initiated in the GtO redox
process (GRP) with the number of microstates, which undergo with distinct ΔG, ΔS, ΔH, energy (ΔE), and chemical potential (Δμ).
These orders develop an anisotropic situation, which substantially
influenced binding of nascent O with Gt and converted into GtO (Scheme 3).

Scheme 3 Reaction Pathway
for Gt to GtO by Reactive
Nascent Oxygen
Also, bond
energy, which depicted by ΔH, becomes an essential
factor along with the potential energy denoted by ΔG. The abovesaid intricacies of Gt → GtO naturally connected
to eq 5. 5  The Gt bonds
are broken, which have released ΔH = −ve, because the temperature reached up to 40 °C by
detaching intersheet bonds of Gt, which move independently. The surface
force attracts the [O] to form −C–O–C–,
−C–OH, OH—C=O, and —C=O
functional groups. So, eq 5 is modified as 6  Substantial GtO redox is controlled
by ΔH and ΔS, and naturally,
a vacancy is generated to use the universal thermodynamic equation ΔG. Since the reaction was conducted at atmospheric
pressure, that is, constant pressure, heat content released in redox
is noted as ΔH, no heat was made from the outside,
and T is raised by the reaction only.
So, the ΔS activities also become favorable
for the nascent O atom to activate the Gt site to form GtO. According
to Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics (W), the unobservable
ways of acting a sequential pathway for one thermodynamic state from
various states of systems follows the equation 7   8   9  where N is the total number of microstates,
and Ni is the distinguishable microstates
in the observable set of free energy associated with Gt → GtO
{i = KMnO4 (a), H2SO4 (b), H3PO4 (c), and Gt (d)}. Putting the value
in eq 8, we get 10  The GtO synthesis depends on its interacting activities
of KMnO4, H2SO4, H3PO4, and Gt, and their distribution pattern could generate the
favorable orientation and reorientation to activate the Gt for initially
removing the impurities followed by oxidation with the nascent O atom.
Hence, ΔS plays a key role for higher yield
of GtO. Since sp2 hybridization exists due to the availability
of partial charge holding the few mineral and other impurities. These
impurities during GRP are detached from Gt skeleton, which generates
vacant forces on the Gt structure. These sites interact with nascent
O atoms. The oxidizing medium generates a variety of active chemical
species, and their potential unfolds Gt to monodisperse as Gt nanosheets
(NS). In this process, the Gt NS gain higher ΔS. The abovesaid mechanism infers increment in ΔS on breaking the cohesive force of sheets that also partially released ΔH. Since the reaction was conducted, the Gibbs–Helmholtz
equation is fitted as in eq 6.

ΔG is positive, which infer
robust Gt functionalization as per general norms +ΔG predicts the successful reaction. Fundamentally, the Gt →
GtO → GO involves sequential steps before the GO functionalization.
After reacting the nascent O atoms with Gt, GO is an only reactive
material, which play a key role in the functionalization. The generated
chemical active sites of Gt were also occupied by impurities due to
partially charge states with sp2 hybridization on subjecting
Gt to redox mixture (RM), and the occupied sites become free by detaching
the impurities as the chemical species of RM are highly active and
have higher chemical affinities toward the cationic impurities to
form their salts and get separated from the Gt structure-based cationic
π-interactions and oxidized into GtO followed by GO exfoliation.
Here, the generation of active sites on the Gt surface converted into
GtO to exfoliated GO followed by robust functionalization with SA
via a sonochemical assisted in situ thermodynamically favorable mechanism.

The exotherm produced was cooled to RT to avoid an excess release
of heat to avoid an explosion. The oil bath was heated over a magnetic
stirrer with a hot plate for 50 °C. The RB flask holding the
reaction mixture was kept inside an oil bath heated to 50 °C
with constant stirring and reflux for 12 h. After completing the reaction,
for workup, the reaction was cooled to RT and poured onto ice-cold
water (∼200 mL) containing 30% H2O2 (1.5
mL) and smoothly shaken to homogenize with a precautionary measure
to avoid O2 escape. The reaction mixture was centrifuged
at 6000 rpm for 0.5 h to separate larger aggregates, and the supernatant
containing inorganic salts was decanted away from the sediment. The
complete washing of the remaining solid was made several times, in
succession of 200 mL of water, 150 mL of 30% HCl, and 100 mL of ethanol.
For each wash, the filtrate was centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 0.5 h,
and the supernatant was decanted. After multiple washing, the remaining
material was coagulated with 100 mL of petroleum ether as an antisolvent.
The brownish colored solid sediment was obtained, which was vacuum-dried
overnight at 1.05 bar and 50 °C. A generally brown colored GtO
is reported for well-oxidized Gt.33−35 A complete Gt oxidation to brownish GtO is inferred
by a presence of OH—C=O, —C=O, C–O–C,
−C–OH. The GtO synthesis method is slightly modified
to obtain highly oxidized GtO, a precursor for surface modification.
Since a sequential method from Gt to GtO is applied by a wet oxidation
method, it converts into homogeneously dispersed GO by applying ultrasound
energy at 30 kHz for 3 h.

4.3 GtO: Precursor in the Synthesis of GO
GtO was exfoliated
through an intense ultrasonication for 180 min into homogeneously
dispersed GO as a precursor for chemical functionalization. The sound
waves play a major role in eco-friendly routes for a GO-based covalent
bonded nanostructure without any side product except inducing oscillation
of wanted atoms. The ultrasound generated mechanochemical energy to
break the weaker van der Waals forces and active between layered GtO.
Thus, uniformly dispersed GO in ethanol is used as a precursor for
covalent functionalization with an amine-substituted organic molecule
as SA. The process of GtO sheet unfolding is seen to be controlled
in ethanol. The GtO sheets are bound by weak van der Waals forces
due to differently localized electrons in the form of sp2 and sp3 hybridization. The ethanol with two lone pair
of electrons can have a delocalized a potential energy of GtO to assist
functionalization.

These GtO chemical activities vis-á-vis
ethanol activities had to exfoliate GtO intersheet arrangements. Considering
the potential of the ethanolic medium versus GtO, the study with solvents
other than ethanol is being pursued in the laboratory. The science
that generates GtO combinatorial activities versus medium constitute
functional rheology, so functionalization could act as the remarkable
industrial fluid with unique heat dissipation, holding O2 activities to be used in diamond or metal cutting industries along
with integrated chips.

4.4 Thermodynamically Controlled Nonspontaneous Functionalized GO
Ultrasound assists GO nanosheets formation by exfoliation of multilayered
GtO through an oscillatory mechanism. A 0.04 g of GtO and 40 mL of
absolute ethanol solution in 100 mL of RB was subjected to ultrasonic
energy (USE) by using Oscar ultrasonic (Microclean-103) at 30 kHz
for 3 h. The USE enhances the rate of kinetics and lowered Ea to form GO nanosheets. The light brown colored
dispersion was observed on an abovesaid sonochemical treatment. A
reactive nucleophile, SA (0.2 g), was added directly into high in
situ kinetically energetic GO in an ethanolic medium. The in situ
GtO → GO process at a fixed rate is controlled by cavitation
energy. Simultaneously, the GO forms into f-(SA)GO and seems to follow
the Lindemann reaction mechanism via the RRKM (Rice–Ramsperger–Kassel–Marcus)
theory noted as in eq 15. Since the model of active mass of reacting species vis-á-vis,
their Ea becomes a foundational mechanism
for an initial success of reaction. So, Gt, which initially holds
the highest potential energy, does not undergo in the reacting mode.
Hence, its few molecules gain Ea and take
part in the reaction, and hence this kinetic model of Gt →
GtO → GO → f – (SA)GO becomes most relevant and
self-explanatory. Gt → GtO is a slow reaction, which infers
the activation of the Gt molecule with time and initiates the reaction
with a specific reaction rate. Thus, there is a very complex change
in the methods of Gt → GtO and GtO → GO, where, for
the latter, the chemical energy is used, while in the former case,
the sonochemical energy is applied. Therefore, Ea acquiring the ability of Gt, GtO, GO, and f-(SA)GO is not
the same, and hence they get activated with different times and reaction
rates. Therefore, k1, k2, and k3 are most relevant
for applying the RRKM theory (eq 15). For Gt → GtO, the conversion chemical potential
is applied as 11   12   13  For GO → f – (SA)GO, functionalization is accomplished
by sonochemical energy as 14  

Hence, 15  where k1,k2, and k3 are rate constants for each step of reactions
noted as 16  where r1, r2, and r3 are rates
of reactions. If the process is in equilibrium (r1 = r2 = r3), then 17  k1 = k2 = k3 connected
to free energy due to bond breaking, making the mechanism 18  R is the gas constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and k is
the equilibrium constant. The yield of f-(SA)GO at standardized reaction
conditions is 38 mg in 15 min (900 s) at 45 °C (45 + 273.15 =
318.15 K). Hence, a calculated rate of reaction is noted as 19  By putting the k value in eq 18 gives ΔG= 8.3741 kJ/mol. The positive ΔG value infers
GO functionalization and is a nonspontaneous process. The Arrhenius
equation is applied for the calculation of Ea as 20  where Keq is the rate constant at equilibrium,
and A is the frequency factor. By applying eq 20, a further calculation
is noted as  and connects the reaction mechanism to
constitutionally make up of GtO → GO → f – (SA)GO
by surface-induced oscillation, which raises the temperature to 45
°C. However, a reaction was conducted by inducing the USE at
30 kHz, which directly connects to constitutional makeup and nature
of the arrangement and linkage in Gt → GtO → GO →
f – (SA)GO.  is the most operative tool or mechanism
to modulate an output or yield of products. The sequential steps k1, k2, and k3 are defined and modulated through the distribution
of average thermal energy (, where k is the Boltzmann
constant) and the cavitation caused by USE of 30 kHz, which are equilibrated
to induce atomic oscillations supported by causing a favorable bond
twisting to break them to facilitate the sequence of the modular reaction
mechanism. The USE at 30 kHz was calculated with the equation E = hϑ, where h is
Planck’s constant, ϑ is the frequency, and E = 1.24 × 10–10 eV. Elaborating eq 20 for calculation of Ea, hence 21  and
the slope has been formulated as . The graphical representation of the Arrhenius equation for f-(SA)GO
is shown in Figure 12. The intercept lnA is obtained by plotting a slope
between ln k versus 1/T (K–1) or (1/318.15 = 0.0031431 K–1). From eq 19, calculated k = 0.04222; therefore, ln k = −0.31648.
Putting all the values in eq 21 gives Ea = – 2.65 ×
106 J mol–1 or −2.65 × 103 kJ mol–1.Therefore, 22  and 23  

Figure 12 Representation
of Arrhenius constant (ln A).

Hence 24  Ea for GO functionalization infers a thermodynamically
controlled reaction as a rate of reaction on increasing the temperature
by ultrasound methods. The sp2 and sp3 GO functionalization
with SA generates so many suborders, which could also neutralize intermotion
actively, leading to more order to have more −ve entropy. This is supported by the least value of ΔS = – 8.372 × 103 J K–1.
However, the sp2 and sp3 GO functionalization
with SA confirmed was by Raman spectroscopy (Figure 1) with variation in their D/G ratio because
of the Raman shift of characteristic D band for sp3 and
G band for sp2. The intramolecular entropy partitioned
in pseudo-canonical boxes and cost of energy utilization to each other
for making systems highly ordered. Such a tentropically active system,
where the surroundings are constituted in intramolecular activities
partitioning, becomes the most significant property of functionalization
and most suitable for a biological system for anchoring activities,
making GO and f-(SA)GO as an ideal nanomaterial.

The balance
out of a complementary support model of two different energies [TE
(average thermal energy + SE (sound energy)] evolved to sonicate the
molecular sheets of GtO bound with stronger van der Waals forces (VWF).
The unexfoliated solid form of GtO has stronger VWF between stacked
multilayered GO. When it allows the ultrasound treatment in EtOH,
VWF are weakened, and GtO is homogeneously dispersed into GO in ethanol
medium. The high SE strikes the electron cloud of the C–C bond
and the intersheet temporary pseudo-secondary bond. The C–C
bond could be shaken so easily as compared to intersheet force (ISF),
and the localized resistance of the C–C electron partially
causes heat generation, but ISF uses an SE of 1.24 × 10–10eV as well as the in situ TE of 0.014 eV as the in situ temperature
raises to ∼45 °C. These changes probably equilibrate the
reaction steps where k1 = k2 = k3, which acts as an active
reaction chain.

The optimized reaction occurs at 30 kHz for
15 min after SA addition to GO due to effective acoustic cavitation
by ultrasound energy in ethanol, which was proven with ΔG= +8.3741 kJ/mol. The observed intense dark brown colored coagulates
infers the ultrasound-assisted synthesis, contrary in distilled water
at a 30 kHz condition. The stronger hydrogen bond between inter-H2O molecules with low percolation strength to attack VWF operative
between intersheet is weak as compared to CH3CH2OH, as it does not have stronger dipolar interactions, while contrary
in H2O. The dipole moment of H2O molecules is
1.85 D, greater than that of 1.66 D of EtOH molecules, which support
for high percolation ability of EtOH. The dipolar solvents do not
destabilize ISF to form an intermediate, so ethanol efficiently exfoliated
GtO into GO and the carboxylic group (O=C—OH) of GO
to form an ester as an intermediate through in situ condensation mechanism
(Scheme 4), which is
most feasible for nucleophilic substitution with free −NH2 group of the SA and functionalized with GO as stable amide
bond (Scheme 5). In
set exfoliation occurs as the H2O is in situ generated,
which was verified by Karl Fischer testing. Ethanol was used to make
the solvent as its higher percolation power and in situ ester formation
as an intermediate, which is proven by its boiling point of ∼78
° C and surface tension of ∼22 N/m, respectively, than
H2O, having stronger cohesive force. The value of 30 kHz
seems adequate to activate ethanol in the monodisperse form, which
easily enter or interact with intersheet forces. The solvent, which
has the highest friccohesity, could yield good exfoliation and ester
formation as an intermediate due to robust percolating ability. The
reaction mixture was centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 10 min, the supernatant
was decanted away to remove the unreacted SA, and the solid coagulates
were washed and centrifuged twice with absolute ethanol (10 mL each
time). f-(SA)GO was dried at RT then under vacuum for 48 h at RT at
1.05 bar. The GO covalent functionalization with SA is analyzed with
various analytical techniques. The functionalized nanosheets are to
be reported yet, and hence we initiated this process with the dipolar
SA molecule.

Scheme 4 EtOH-Assisted in Situ Ester Formation as
an Intermediate
Scheme 5 Graphical
Representation for Direct Functionalization of GO
4.5 Analysis
and Characterization
Synthesis of GO and f-(SA)GO were made
by using an REMI 1MLH magnetic stirrer with the hot plate and Oscar
ultrasonic (Microclean-103). GtO was purified by using an Eltek centrifuge
(MP 400). The functional activities over GO and f-(SA)GO surfaces
are analyzed with a Perkin Elmer spectrometer (version 10.00.00) and
FTIR. The hyperchromic and bathochromic shifts for f-(SA)GO have appeared
using a Spectro 2060 plus model UV/Vis spectrophotometer. Thermal
properties and sensitivity are measured with an EXSTAR TG/DTA 7300
analyzer in N2 liquid. The X-ray diffraction spectra are
recorded with MiniFlex Rigaku. The topographical and morphological
analysis is carried out by using Park System XE-70 AFM and Carl Zeiss
Evo-18 SEM, respectively. HRTEM data along with SAED patterns are
collected with FEI Model Tecnai G2 S Twin (200 kV). Structural defects
are recorded with Horiba HR 800 Raman spectra at a 488 nm Ar laser.

4.6 Sulforhodamine B (SRB)
Assay
Cell lines were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium with 10%
fetal bovine serum and 2 mM l-glutamine.
The cells were inoculated into microtiter plates of 96 well in 100
μL at plating densities as depending on the doubling time of
individual cell lines followed by incubation at 37 °C, 5% CO2, 95% air, and 100% comparative humidity for 24 h prior to
adding of testing drugs. Testing drugs (100 mg/mL) were initially
solubilized in DMSO and were diluted up to 1 mg/mL using water and
stored in frozen prior to use. At a time of drug addition, an aliquot
of frozen concentrate (1 mg/mL) was thawed and diluted to 100, 200,
400, and 800 μg/mL with a medium containing the test article.
An aliquot of 10 μL of the various diluted drugs was supplied
to microtiter wells, which were already filled with 90 μL of
medium, resulting in the required doses of 10, 20, 40, and 80 μg/mL
drug. On GO and f-(SA)GO, the plates were incubated for 48 h, and
the test was finished by the addition of cold trichloroacetic acid
(TCA). Cell lines were static in situ with TCA by slow addition of
50 μL of cold 30% (w/v) TCA (10%) and incubated for 60 min at
4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and plates were washed five
times with tap water followed by air drying. SRB (50 μL) at
0.4% (w/v) in 1% acetic acid was added in each well and incubated
for 20 min at RT. After staining, an unbound dye was recovered and
removed five times by washing with 1% acetic acid followed by air
drying. The staining was subsequently eluted with 10 mM trizma base,
and the absorbance was read on a plate reader at 540 nm with 690 nm
reference. Percentage of growth was calculated on a successively plate-by-plate
basis for testing wells relative to standardized control wells. Percent
growth was expressed as the ratio of the average absorbance of a test
well to the average absorbance of the control wells × 100. The
standard procedure follows six successive absorbance measurements
[time zero (Tz), control growth (C), and test growth (Tg) in the presence
of testing drug at four concentrations doses (Ti)], and percentage
growth (PG) was calculated at each drug concentration dose. PG inhibition
was calculated as  

4.7 Analysis of Antioxidant
Potential
GO and f-(SA)GO was dispersed in EtOH of 40, 60,
80, and 100 μg/mL to evaluate their free radical scavenging
activities with DPPH by using a UV spectrophotometer. The 0.1 mM DPPH
solution was prepared in absolute ethanol. For evaluation of scavenging
activity, pure DPPH solution was mix with various concentrations of
GO and f-(SA)GO solution in a 1:1 ratio. Now, these samples were kept
in the dark after vigorous shaking to incubate for 1 h. The scavenging
activity was measured as comparatively % decrease of absorbance of
pure DPPH at λ = 520 nm with a 1:1 ratio of DPPH and samples
mixtures at a similar wavelength. The respective scavenging activities
were determined with the following equation: 25  AD and AS are absorbances of DPPH and samples, respectively, which
were measured at 520 nm.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Authors are thankful to the Central University of Gujarat, India
for infrastructural support. Dr. Vasant Sathe, UGC-DAE CSR Indore,
India is acknowledged for providing the Raman facility. Dr. Jyoti
A. Kode, ACTREC, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India is acknowledged
for providing the in vitro cytotoxicity screening facility.
==== Refs
References
Geim A. K. ; Novoselov K. S. 
The rise
of graphene . Nat. Mater. 
2007 , 6 , 183 –191 . 10.1038/nmat1849 .17330084 
Georgakilas V. ; Otyepka M. ; Bourlinos A. B. ; Chandra V. ; Kim N. ; Kemp K. C. ; Hobza P. ; Zboril R. ; Kim K. S. 
Functionalization of graphene: covalent
and non-covalent approaches, derivatives and applications . Chem. Rev. 
2012 , 112 , 6156 –6214 . 10.1021/cr3000412 .23009634 
Dai L. 
Functionalization of graphene for
efficient energy conversion and storage . Acc.
Chem. Res. 
2013 , 31 –42 . 10.1021/ar300122m .
Park J. ; Yan M. 
Covalent functionalization of graphene with reactive intermediates . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 181 –189 . 10.1021/ar300172h .23116448 
Chng E. L. K. ; Pumera M. 
The toxicity of graphene
oxides: dependence on the oxidative methods Used . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2013 , 19 , 8227 –8235 . 10.1002/chem.201300824 .23630053 
Yin S. ; Chen P. ; Sun H. ; Sun K. ; Wu Y. ; Shi C. ; He Y. ; Fu Y. ; Guo X. 
Fabrication of the graphene honeycomb structure as a scaffold for
the study of cell growth . New J. Chem. 
2018 , 42 , 6299 –6304 . 10.1039/C8NJ00477C .
Pinto A. M. ; Gonçalves C. ; Sousa D. M. ; Ferreira A. R. ; Moreira J. A. ; Gonçalves I. C. ; Magalhães F. D. 
Smaller particle size and higher
oxidation improves biocompatibility of graphene-based materials . Carbon 
2016 , 99 , 318 –329 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2015.11.076 .
Kumar A. M. ; Suresh B. ; Ramakrishna S. ; Kim K.-S. 
Biocompatible responsive polypyrrole/GO nanocomposite
coatings for biomedical applications . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 99866 –99874 . 10.1039/C5RA14464G .
Hasanzadeh M. ; Mokhtari F. ; Shadjou N. ; Eftekhari A. ; Mokhtarzadeh A. ; Jouyban-Gharamaleki V. ; Mahboob S. 
Poly arginine-graphene
quantum dots as a biocompatible and non-toxic nanocomposite: layer-by-layer
electrochemical preparation characterization and non-invasive malondialdehyde
sensory application in exhaled breath condensate . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2017 , 75 , 247 –258 . 10.1016/j.msec.2017.02.025 .
Barua S. ; Chattopadhyay P. ; Phukan M. M. ; Konwar B. K. ; Islam J. ; Karak N. 
Biocompatible
hyperbranched epoxy/silver–reduced graphene oxide-curcumin
nanocomposite as an advanced antimicrobial material . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 47797 –47805 . 10.1039/C4RA07802K .
Barahuie F. ; Saifullah B. ; Dorniani D. ; Fakurazi S. ; Karthivashan G. ; Hussein M. Z. ; Elfghi F. M. 
Graphene oxide as a nanocarrier for
controlled release and targeted delivery of an anticancer active agent
chlorogenic acid . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2017 , 74 , 177 –185 . 10.1016/j.msec.2016.11.114 .
Zhang H. ; Grüner G. ; Zhao Y. 
Recent advancements of graphene in
biomedicine . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2013 , 1 , 2542 –2567 . 10.1039/c3tb20405g .
Shi S. ; Chen F. ; Ehlerding E. B. ; Cai W. 
Surface engineering of graphene-based
nanomaterials for biomedical applications . Bioconjugate
Chem. 
2014 , 25 , 1609 –1619 . 10.1021/bc500332c .
Pattnaik S. ; Swain K. ; Lin Z. 
Graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites:
biomedical applications and biosafety . J. Mater.
Chem. B 
2016 , 4 , 7813 –7831 . 10.1039/C6TB02086K .
Gulzar A. ; Xu J. ; Yang D. ; Xu L. ; He F. ; Gai S. ; Yang P. 
Nano-graphene oxide-UCNP-Ce6 covalently constructed nanocomposites
for NIR-mediated bioimaging and PTT/PDT combinatorial therapy . Dalton Trans. 
2018 , 47 , 3931 –3939 . 10.1039/C7DT04141A .29459928 
Zhang W. ; Zhao K. ; Banks C. E. ; Zhang Y. 
Antibody-modified hydroxyapatite surfaces for the efficient capture
of bladder cancer cells in a patient’s urine without recourse
to any sample pre-treatment . J. Mater. Chem.
B 
2017 , 5 , 8125 –8132 . 10.1039/C7TB01854A .
Kostarelos K. ; Novoselov K. S. 
Materials science. exploring the interface of graphene
and biology . Science 
2014 , 344 , 261 10.1126/science.1246736 .24744363 
Kavitha T. ; Abdi S. I. H. ; Park S.-Y. 
pH-Sensitive
nanocargo based on smart polymer functionalized graphene oxide for
site-specific drug delivery . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 5176 –5185 . 10.1039/c3cp00008g .23454895 
Kenry K. ; Lim Y. B. ; Nai M. H. ; Cao J. ; Loh K. P. ; Lim C. T. 
Graphene oxide inhibits malaria parasite invasion and
delays parasitic growth in vitro . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 14065 –14073 . 10.1039/C7NR06007F .28901366 
Zhang H. ; Cheng J. ; Li W. ; Tan G. ; Wang Z. ; Jin Y. 
Facile synthesis of a highly water-soluble graphene conjugated chlorophyll-a
photosensitizer composite for improved photodynamic therapy in vitro . New J. Chem. 
2017 , 41 , 10069 –10082 . 10.1039/C7NJ01696D .
Yang Y. ; Zhang Y.-M. ; Chen Y. ; Zhao D. ; Chen J.-T. ; Liu Y. 
Construction of a graphene oxide based noncovalent multiple nanosupramolecular
assembly as a scaffold for drug delivery . Chem.
– Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 4208 –4215 . 10.1002/chem.201103445 .22374621 
Li Y. ; Feng L. ; Shi X. ; Wang X. ; Yang Y. ; Yang K. ; Liu T. ; Yang G. ; Liu Z. 
Surface coating-dependent cytotoxicity
and degradation of graphene derivatives: towards the design of non-toxic,
degradable nano-graphene . Small 
2014 , 10 , 1544 –1554 . 10.1002/smll.201303234 .24376215 
Du Z. ; Dou R. ; Zu M. ; Liu X. ; Yin W. ; Zhao Y. ; Chen J. ; Yan L. ; Gu Z. 
Nitric oxide-generating L-cysteine-grafted graphene
film as a blood-contacting biomaterial . Biomater.
Sci. 
2016 , 4 , 938 –942 . 10.1039/C6BM00074F .27111404 
Teo W. Z. ; Chng E. L. K. ; Sofer Z. ; Pumera M. 
Cytotoxicity of halogenated
graphenes . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 1173 –1180 . 10.1039/C3NR05275C .24296830 
Dong H. ; Li Y. ; Yu J. ; Song Y. ; Cai X. ; Liu J. ; Zhang J. ; Ewing R. C. ; Shi D. 
A versatile multicomponent assembly
via β-cyclodextrin host-guest chemistry on graphene for biomedical
applications . Small 
2013 , 9 , 446 –456 . 10.1002/smll.201201003 .23047287 
Chen J. ; Shi X. ; Ren L. ; Wang Y. 
Graphene oxide/PVA inorganic/organic interpenetrating hydrogels with
excellent mechanical properties and biocompatibility . Carbon 
2017 , 111 , 18 –27 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2016.07.038 .
Duan G. ; Kang S.-g. ; Tian X. ; Garate J. A. ; Zhao L. ; Ge C. ; Zhou R. 
Protein corona
mitigates the cytotoxicity of graphene oxide by reducing its physical
interaction with cell membrane . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 15214 –15224 . 10.1039/C5NR01839K .26315610 
Zhang P. ; Wang H. ; Zhang X. ; Xu W. ; Li Y. ; Li Q. ; Wei G. ; Su Z. 
Graphene film doped with silver nanoparticles:
self-assembly formation, structural characterizations, antibacterial
ability, and biocompatibility . Biomater. Sci. 
2015 , 3 , 852 –860 . 10.1039/C5BM00058K .26221845 
Sayyar S. ; Murray E. ; Thompson B. C. ; Gambhir S. ; Officer D. L. ; Wallace G. G. 
Covalently linked biocompatible graphene/polycaprolactone
composites for tissue engineering . Carbon 
2013 , 52 , 296 –304 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2012.09.031 .
Hirsch A. ; Englert J. M. ; Hauke F. 
Wet chemical functionalization of
graphene . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 87 –96 . 10.1021/ar300116q .22946482 
Johns J. E. ; Hersam M. C. 
Atomic covalent
functionalization of graphene . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2012 , 46 , 77 –86 . 10.1021/ar300143e .23030800 
Xu H. ; Suslick K. S. 
Sonochemical
preparation of functionalized graphenes . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 9148 –9151 . 10.1021/ja200883z .21604712 
Marcano D. C. ; Kosynkin D. V. ; Berlin J. M. ; Sinitskii A. ; Sun Z. ; Slesarev A. ; Alemany L. B. ; Lu W. ; Tour J. M. 
Improved synthesis of graphene oxide . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 4806 –4814 . 10.1021/nn1006368 .20731455 
Clause A. ; Plass R. ; Boehm H.-P. ; Hofmann U. 
Untersuchungen zur Struktur des graphitoxyds . Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1957 , 291 , 205 –220 . 10.1002/zaac.19572910502 .
Scholz W. ; Boehm H. P. 
Untersuchungen am
graphitoxid. VI. betrachtungen zur struktur des graphitoxids . Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1969 , 369 , 327 –340 . 10.1002/zaac.19693690322 .
Kenry ; Lim C. T. 
Biocompatibility and nanotoxicity
of layered two-dimensional nanomaterials . ChemNanoMat 
2017 , 3 , 5 –16 . 10.1002/cnma.201600290 .
Majeed W. ; Bourdo S. ; Petibone D. M. ; Saini V. ; Vang K. B. ; Nima Z. A. ; Alghazali K. M. ; Darrigues E. ; Ghosh A. ; Watanabe F. ; Casciano D. ; Ali S. F. ; Biris A. S. 
The role of surface chemistry in the cytotoxicity profile
of graphene . J. Appl. Toxicol. 
2017 , 37 , 462 –470 . 10.1002/jat.3379 .27593524 
Crisan L. ; Crisan B. ; Soritau O. ; Baciut M. ; Biris A. R. ; Baciut G. ; Lucaciu O. 
In vitro study
of biocompatibility of a graphene composite with gold nanoparticles
and hydroxyapatite on human osteoblasts . J.
Appl. Toxicol. 
2015 , 35 , 1200 –1210 . 10.1002/jat.3152 .25900356 
Bitounis D. ; Ali-Boucetta H. ; Hong B. H. ; Min D.-H. ; Kostarelos K. 
Prospects and challenges of graphene in biomedical
applications . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 2258 –2268 . 10.1002/adma.201203700 .23494834 
Farshid B. ; Lalwani G. ; Sitharaman B. 
In vitro cytocompatibility
of one-dimensional and two-dimensional nanostructure-reinforced biodegradable
polymeric nanocomposites . J. Biomed. Mater.
Res., Part A 
2015 , 103 , 2309 –2321 . 10.1002/jbm.a.35363 .
Zhang H. ; Peng C. ; Yang J. ; Lv M. ; Liu R. ; He D. ; Fan C. ; Huang Q. 
Uniform ultrasmall graphene oxide
nanosheets with low cytotoxicity and high cellular uptake . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 1761 –1767 . 10.1021/am303005j .23402618 
Liu X. ; Ma D. ; Tang H. ; Tan L. ; Xie Q. ; Zhang Y. ; Ma M. ; Yao S. 
Polyamidoamine
dendrimer and oleic acid-functionalized graphene as biocompatible
and efficient gene delivery vectors . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 8173 –8183 . 10.1021/am500812h .24836601 
Li D. ; Deng M. ; Yu Z. ; Liu W. ; Zhou G. ; Li W. ; Wang X. ; Yang D.-P. ; Zhang W. 
Biocompatible and stable GO-coated Fe3O4 nanocomposite:
A robust drug delivery carrier for simultaneous tumor MR imaging and
targeted therapy . ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 
2018 , 4 , 2143 –2154 . 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b00029 .
Zhuang W. ; He L. ; Wang K. ; Ma B. ; Ge L. ; Wang Z. ; Huang J. ; Wu J. ; Zhang Q. ; Ying H. 
Combined adsorption
and covalent linking of paclitaxel on functionalized nano-graphene
oxide for inhibiting cancer cells . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 2396 –2405 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b02022 .30221218 
de Sousa M. ; Visani de Luna L. A. ; Fonseca L. C. ; Giorgio S. ; Alves O. L. 
Folic acid-functionalized
graphene oxide nanocarrier: synthetic approaches, characterization,
drug delivery study and anti-tumor screening . ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 922 –932 . 10.1021/acsanm.7b00324 .
Xu L. Q. ; Yang W. J. ; Neoh K.-G. ; Kang E.-T. ; Fu G. D. 
Dopamine-induced reduction and functionalization
of graphene oxide nanosheets . Macromolecules 
2010 , 43 , 8336 –8339 . 10.1021/ma101526k .
Hashemi H. ; Namazi H. 
Sonochemically synthesized blue fluorescent functionalized
graphene oxide as a drug delivery system . Ultrason.
Sonochem. 
2018 , 42 , 124 –133 . 10.1016/j.ultsonch.2017.11.010 .29429653 
Shen B. ; Zhai W. ; Lu D. ; Wang J. ; Zheng W. 
Ultrasonication-assisted direct functionalization of graphene with
macromolecules . RSC Adv. 
2012 , 2 , 4713 –4719 . 10.1039/c2ra01098d .
Rubio N. ; Au H. ; Leese H. S. ; Hu S. ; Clancy A. J. ; Shaffer M. S. P. 
Grafting from versus grafting to
approaches for the functionalization of graphene nanoplatelets with
poly (methyl methacrylate) . Macromolecules 
2017 , 50 , 7070 –7079 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.7b01047 .
Maktedar S. S. ; Avashthi G. ; Singh M. 
Understanding the significance of
O-doped graphene towards biomedical applications . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 114264 –114275 . 10.1039/C6RA23416J .

