
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002379910.1021/acsomega.7b01522ArticleMechanistic Insight into Size-Dependent Enhanced Cytotoxicity
of Industrial Antibacterial Titanium Oxide Nanoparticles on Colon
Cells Because of Reactive Oxygen Species Quenching and Neutral Lipid
Alteration Verma Suresh
K. †Jha Ealisha ‡Panda Pritam Kumar †Thirumurugan Arun §Parashar S. K. S. ∥Patro Shubhransu ⊥Suar Mrutyunjay *††School
of Biotechnology, ∥School of Applied Sciences, and ⊥Kalinga School of Medical Sciences, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, Orissa 751024, India‡ Department
of Physics and Physical Oceanography, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador NL A1C 5S7, Canada§ Advanced
Materials Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty
of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, University
of Chile, Av. Beauchef 851, piso 5, Santiago, Chile* E-mail: msbiotek@yahoo.com, msuar@kiitbiotech.ac.in (M.S.).30 01 2018 31 01 2018 3 1 1244 1262 09 10 2017 15 01 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

This
study evaluates the impact of industrially prepared TiO2 nanoparticles on the biological system by using an in vitro
model of colon cancer cell lines (HCT116). Industrial synthesis of
titanium oxide nanoparticles was mimicked on the lab scale by the
high-energy ball milling method by milling bulk titanium oxide particles
for 5, 10, and 15 h in an ambient environment. The physiochemical
characterization by field emission scanning electron microscopy, dynamic
light scattering, and UV–visible spectroscopy revealed alteration
in the size and surface charge with respect to increase in the milling
time. The size was found to be reduced to 82 ± 14, 66 ±
12, and 42 ± 10 nm in 5, 10, and 15 h milled nano TiO2 from 105 ± 12 nm of bulk TiO2, whereas the zeta
potential increased along with the milling time in all biological
media. Cytotoxicity and genotoxicity assays performed with HCT116
cell lines by MTT assay, oxidative stress, intracellular lipid analysis,
apoptosis, and cell cycle estimation depicted cytotoxicity as a consequence
of reactive oxygen species quenching and lipid accumulation, inducing
significant apoptosis and genotoxic cytotoxicity. In silico analysis
depicted the role of Sod1, Sod2, p53, and VLDR proteins–TiO2 hydrogen bond interaction having a key role in determining
the cytotoxicity. The particles exhibited significant antibacterial
activities against Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium.

document-id-old-9ao7b01522document-id-new-14ao-2017-015228ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Titanium
oxide nanoparticles and their bulk counterpart have gained
a lot of attention in research and industry in the last few decades.
They have been widely engineered and used in sunscreen and cosmetics
because of their absorptive properties.1 A lot of food products such as candies, sweets, and chewing gums
use TiO2 as one of its contents. Other TiO2 applications
include antimicrobial application, medical application, and energy
storage.2 TiO2 with food-grade
pigment has been used as a whitening agent in many foods and drugs3 and as a digestion marker.4 Many food safety agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration
and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) have approved TiO2 and its nanocrystalline form as a food additive and for drug
dosage up to a level.3 Moreover, it has
been listed in the EU Annex II of Regulation 1333/2008 as a permitted
color additive in foods at Good Manufacturing Practices levels.

With the increase in demand for TiO2 and its nanoparticles,
their production has increased in large quantities, with different
properties according to the need. The production is expected to increase
exponentially in the coming decade. Researchers and industries are
using a variety of methods to synthesize them. Some of the common
procedures include synthesis by using hydrolysis of titanium salts
(Ti) acidic solution.5 Controlled synthesis
in respect of shape, size, and structure has been carried out by using
chemical vapor condensation or nucleation from sol–gel.6 Though these methods are successful in synthesizing
TiO2 nanoparticles, there is a limitation of bulk production.
It also raises a question about the purity because of the use of different
chemicals. Physical methods such as high-energy ball milling (HEBM)
have been proved as a potential solution for this problem. Indris
et al. and many other groups have successfully reported the synthesis
of the impurity-free and pure form of TiO2 by the high-energy
milling method.7 These mechanically synthesized
TiO2 nanoparticles have been explored for their worldwide
physical as well as chemical applications. TiO2 nanoparticles
have also been recognized for use in many biological applications
owing to their antibacterial properties.8 Though the biological application and effects of TiO2 nanoparticles prepared by other methods have been studied a lot,
there is no report on the effect of industrially prepared and commonly
used mechanically milled TiO2 nanoparticles till date.
Previous literature has defined the biological activities of TiO2 nanoparticles and tested them, but has reported that the
nanoparticles have been synthesized on the lab scale.8 The reported
results are debatable while considering the effects of TiO2 nanoparticles in the real world because most of the used TiO2 nanoparticles are prepared on the industrial scale. Keeping
in view the importance of the demands and potential of preparation
of TiO2 nanoparticles on the industrial scale by the high-energy
milling process, it is essential to understand the effect of these
particles on a biological system. This study investigates and reports
this aspect of TiO2 nanoparticle effects on the biological
system.

Preparation and consumption of TiO2 nanoparticles
have
been a matter of concern over their effect on human society. The nanoparticles
can interact with human body through three basic entry points: (a)
skin cells directly, (b) lung cells through inhalation, and (c) digestive
tract epithelial cells after oral ingestion. However, lung cell interaction
and digestive tract interaction are the major concerns. Recent reports
have mentioned the regular oral intake of TiO2 nanoparticles
inside the human body as an additive with food products and toothpaste.9 With increasing concern over the extensive use
of these nanoparticles in food additives and drugs nowadays, their
cytotoxic effect requires extensive study. Several studies over the
last decades have reported the in vitro and in vivo toxicological
effect of TiO2 nanoparticles on different cell lines and
live models. TiO2 nanoparticles prepared by chemical methods
have been checked for their cytotoxic behavior with various cell models
such as fibroblasts, macrophages, keratinocytes, epithelial cells,
and liver cells.10 Previous studies have
reported the nature and mechanism of cytotoxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles with human lung cancer cell lines.11 Thevenot et al.12 and Krüger
group13 have recently demonstrated the
mechanism of cytotoxicity effect on different colon cancer cell lines.
Many colon carcinogenic cell lines such as Ls174-t and HT-29 have
been used for understanding the cytotoxic effect of nanoparticles
on colon cells.12,13 Human colon carcinogenic cell
line HCT116 has been recognized as one of the most important types
of colon cancer cell lines for different molecular as well as cancer
studies because of its wild-type specificity.14 However, the knowledge regarding the cytotoxic effect of TiO2 nanoparticles on this cell line is still lacking. This article
addresses this issue by reporting the cytotoxic effect and the probable
mechanism of TiO2 nanoparticle interaction with HCT116
colon carcinogenic cell lines.

A limited number of pathological
outcomes are integrated from multiple
pathways of toxicity by biological systems including apoptosis, inflammation,
fibrosis, hypertrophy, metaplasia, and carcinogenesis.15 Till date, the various factors that have been
reported to determine the cytotoxic effect of nanoparticles are (1)
internalization of nanoparticles into cells,16 (2) production of reactive oxygen species (ROS),17 and (3) DNA damage.18 Effect
of TiO2 nanoparticles as a function of ROS production and
cell damage has been well-reported by Gurr et al.19 and Long group20 on human bronchial
epithelial cells and brain microglia. A number of groups have also
reported the size and shape of the nanoparticle as an important factor
for their cytotoxic effects on cell lines.21 In addition to this, the charge of the nanoparticles has also been
found to play an important role in deciding the extent of cytotoxicity
of nanoparticles.22 These studies emphasized
the effect of particle charge and zeta potential on the surface of
the cell, whereas their effect on the surface charge of cells is still
undiscovered. Oxidative stress and genotypic alteration have been
reported as a mechanism of cytotoxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles,23 however, the effect on lipid production in cells
on interaction with the nanoparticles is still
to be understood. This article investigates and reports these cytotoxic
effects in relation with TiO2 nanoparticles, synthesized
by the HEBM technique as an industrial prototype. The surface charge
of cells was reported to be significantly changed with a reasonable
change in the lipid metabolism and apoptosis inside colon cells treated
by TiO2 nanoparticles. Moreover, the most interesting finding
was the ROS quenching by TiO2 nanoparticles playing an
important role in the mechanism of cytotoxicity and the in silico
investigation, which revealed the interaction of TiO2 nanoparticles
with Sod1, tp53, and VLDLR amino acid residues as a probable cause
of cellular metabolism processes.

In addition to this, the antibacterial
effect of TiO2 nanoparticles has been a matter of long
discussion for decades.8 We have also determined
the antibacterial effect
of industrially synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles with bacterial
strains Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium. A significant difference
in bacteria death was found after treatment with TiO2 nanoparticles.
The effect of the surface charge of nanoparticles has been reported
as an important factor in the antibacterial properties of the nanoparticles.24,25 The mechanism of ROS production in bacteria exposed to nanoparticles
has been a well-discovered phenomenon.26 This report enlightens the effect of TiO2 nanoparticle
interaction on the surface charge of bacteria as well as their consequences
on the ROS production.

2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Chemicals and Instruments
TiO2 powder was
purchased from Merck. Milling was performed in
a horizontal oscillatory mill (Retsch, PM400) operating at 25 Hz.
Particles were sonicated using a probe sonicator (Vibra-Cell, VCX130,
Sonics, USA) in Milli-Q water medium. TiO2 dispersions
were characterized by the hydrodynamic diameter and zeta potential
by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Zetasizer Nano system (Malvern
Instruments, UK). 3-(4,5-Dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide (MTT) cell culture reagent was purchased from Himedia (India).
2,7-Dichlorofluorescein diacetate (H2DCFDA) was purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. LipidTOX Deep Red neutral, Alexa Fluor, phalloidin,
Hoechst, and Syto 9 were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA).
Flow cytometry experiments were performed on an Attune acoustic focusing
cytometer (Thermo Scientific, USA).

2.2 Synthesis
of TiO2 Nanoparticles
TiO2 nanoparticles
were synthesized by the HEBM method
by milling titanium oxide powder (Merck) in tungsten carbide cells
(250 mL) using hardened tungsten carbide (10 mm) balls at 300 rpm
in an ambient atmosphere for 5, 10, and 15 h. The mechanical milling
was performed in a horizontal oscillatory mill (Retsch, PM400) operating
at 25 Hz. The mixture ratio of tungsten balls and TiO2 powders
was 10:1 by weight percent.

2.3 Physiochemical Characterization
of Bulk and
Nano TiO2
The synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles
were characterized for size, size distribution, and charge. Nanoparticle
suspensions were prepared by suspending TiO2 nanoparticles,
synthesized by milling at different time durations, in Milli-Q water,
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and Dulbecco’s modified Eagle
medium (DMEM) cell culture complete medium and sonicating for 15 min
at 50 amplitude and 100 W. Measurement of size was carried out by
a Zetasizer Nano system (Malvern Instruments) by DLS techniques. Zeta
potential was also measured by the Zetasizer with the different medium
suspensions of TiO2 nanoparticles. Ultraviolet–visible
(UV–vis) spectrum was obtained by taking the spectrum of the
suspension in a range of 200–800 nm in UV–vis near-infrared
spectrophotometer (Cary 60, Agilent).

2.4 Cell
Culture and TiO2 Nanoparticles
Treatment
All nanoparticle solutions used for experimentation
were freshly prepared and sonicated before treatment. Nanoparticles
were sterilized with UV exposure prior to the treatment. HCT116 (colon
cancer cell lines) were procured from NCCS Pune, India. Cells were
cultured in DMEM (PAN Biotech) consisting of 10% fetal bovine serum
(Himedia), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and
2 mM l-glutamine (complete medium). Cells were maintained
in a 25 cm2 flask and were passaged at 70–80% confluency
every 2–4 days.

2.5 Bacterial Culture and Strains
For
each microbiological experiment, all glassware were sterilized by
autoclaving at 120 °C for 15 min. The culture of S. typhimurium SL4522 and E. coli ATCC25922 strains were grown on lysogeny broth (LB) media by incubating
overnight at 150 rpm and 37 °C and then subcultured for 4 h in
5 mL of LB media. They were harvested for experiments when the optical
density (OD600) reached 0.4 (logarithmic phase) by centrifuging
and washing with PBS to have a final bacterial concentration of approximately
∼106 to 107 cfu/mL.

2.6 Zeta Potential Measurement of HCT116 Cell
Lines
The surface charge corresponding to the zeta potential
of HCT116 cell lines was determined by the Zetasizer Nano system in
DMEM complete medium. Prior to coincubation, the cells were seeded
in a 24-well plate at a cell density of 1 × 105 cells/well
in DMEM complete medium for 24 h. Different TiO2 nanoparticles
with a concentration of 50 and 250 μg/mL were coincubated with
seeded cells after 24 h and incubated for next 24 and 48 h in a fully
humidified atmosphere at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Following
incubation, the zeta potential was measured in a dip cell cuvette
(Malvern Instruments) after gentle scraping of cells and washing with
DMEM complete media to remove the debris.

2.7 Surface
Charge Analysis of Bacterial Strains
Effect on the surface
charge of the bacterial membrane after treatment
with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles was analyzed
by the Zetasizer (Malvern) in PBS medium. A simple methodology was
followed as the harvested bacterial culture with 0.4 OD600 was treated with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles
with different concentrations for 4 h at 37 °C. Followed by incubation,
they were washed with PBS and analyzed for their zeta potential.

2.8 MTT Assay for Cell Viability
HCT116
cell viability was determined by the MTT assay, which is a colorimetric
assay depicted by measuring the intensity of the purple color of the
buffer (11 g of sodium dodecyl sulfate in 50 mL of 0.02 M HCl and
50 mL of isopropanol), which dissolves the formazan crystals produced
by the reduction of MTT. The absorbance was taken at 570 nm in an
ELISA plate reader (Epoch, BioTek, Germany). The amount of color product
formed was proportional to the number of viable cells. Mean absorbance
of nontreated cells was taken as a reference value for calculating
100% cellular survivability.

2.9 Flow Cytometry Analysis
2.9.1 Cellular Uptake of Nanoparticles in Cell
Lines
Cellular uptake of nanoparticles was determined by
flow cytometry using the method described by Zucker et al.27 In brief, HCT116 cells were seeded in a 24-well
plate at a cell density of 1 × 105 cells/well and
incubated for 24 h. After incubation, 50 and 250 μg/mL of TiO2 nanoparticles (bulk, 5, 10, and 15 h) were coincubated for
24 and 48 h. Following coincubation, the cells were trypsinized, centrifuged
at 135g for 10 min, resuspended in 500 μL of
medium, and kept on ice. Internalization was accessed in three independent
experiments. The data were processed in FCS Express 5 (Denovo, Los
Angeles, CA).

The flow cytometer used was Attune acoustic focusing
cytometer (Applied Biosystems, Life technologies) equipped with a
488 nm argon laser. The cytometer was set up to measure forward scatter
(FSC) linearly and side scatter (SSC) logarithmically. The nanoparticles
(1 mg/mL) were run first to set the maximum SSC and minimum FSC signals.

2.9.2 Analysis of ROS Production in Cell Lines
and Bacterial Strain
The ROS was qualitatively and quantitatively
analyzed by the detection of the green signal of 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein
(DCF) in a BL1 filter (530/30) of the flow cytometer. The green signal
corresponds to the number of DCF molecules produced
by oxidation of the DCFDA dye by the ROS produced by cells (Kumar
et al. 2011). Forward and side-scatter dot plots were used to gate
out cellular fragments. For cell lines, trypsinized cells after treatment
were washed with PBS and stained with DCFDA. For the bacterial cell
analysis, the cells were washed with cold PBS after treatment for
4 h and then resuspended in cold PBS (pH 7.4). The suspension was
then stained by DCFDA for flow cytometry analysis.

2.9.3 Analysis of Lipid Metabolism in Cell Lines
Intracellular
accumulations of lipid droplets (LDs) triggered by
the TiO2 nanoparticles were analyzed with LipidTOX Deep
Red neutral stain (H34477) in the BL2 filter (574/26) of the flow
cytometer. The dye binds to the triggered neutral LDs accumulated
intracellularly by the action of TiO2 nanoparticles on
HCT116 cells.

2.9.4 Cell Cycle Analysis in
Cell Lines
For the cell cycle analysis of HCT116 cell lines,
the cells were
treated with different types of TiO2 nanoparticles for
24 and 48 h after overnight incubation of the seeded cells with a
density of 1 × 105 cells/well in a 24-well plate.
Following this, trypsinization was done, and the cells were kept in
ice. For the flow cytometry analysis, the cells were incubated with
1:2 dilution in 0.5% NP-40 nonionic detergent made up with PBS without
Ca2+ and Mg2+. Then, staining was done with
propidium iodide (PI, 20 μg/mL, MP Biomedical, USA). Nuclei
measurement was performed by the BL3 filter (640LP) of the flow cytometer.
Nuclei subpopulations were analyzed by FCS Express 5 analysis software
(De novo, Los Angeles, CA), and the cells with different phases were
calculated from the histogram using the area parameter. Two independent
experiments were performed and presented as mean ± standard deviation
(SD).

2.9.5 Dead/Live Assay
Live/dead assessment
of the TiO2 bulk- and TiO2 nanoparticle-treated
bacterial cells was done as per the protocol by Jung et al.28 The treated bacterial culture was washed with
PBS and incubated with PI (30 μM) and Syto 9 (20 μM) stains
for 15 min at room temperature. The red fluorescence of PI was collected
in the BL3 filter (647/10 band pass) of the cytometer, whereas the
green fluorescence of Syto 9 was collected in the BL1 filter (530/30).
The data were processed in FCS Express 5 software (Denovo, Los Angeles,
CA), and the dead/live ratio was calculated and plotted as a graph
by Graphpad Prism 5.

2.10 Microscopy
2.10.1 Bright-Field Image Microscopy
Bright-field microscopy
was performed to analyze the morphological
changes and other effects in HCT116 cells after treatment with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles at different concentrations
for 24 and 48 h. The cells were seeded in a 24-well plate at a density
of 1 × 105 cells/well and incubated at 37 °C
and 5% CO2 for 24 h. Following this, treatment was done,
and the observation was taken as a picture with the help of an EVOS
fluorescent microscope (AMG, Mill Creek, Washington). The microscope
was attached with a Canon EOS 5D camera and the fluorescent filter
of fluorescein isothiocyanate (green), PI (red), and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(blue) excitation and emission range.

2.10.2 Fluorescence
Microscopy
Fluorescence
microscopy was done with the same microscope. For ROS determination
in HCT116 cells, the cells were seeded and treated with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles on coverslips in a 24-well
plate. Then, the cells were washed with chilled PBS and stained with
DCFDA with incubation in the dark for 20 min. The images were observed
and captured in the green channel of the microscope.

For the
neutral lipid metabolism analysis in HCT116 cells, the treated cells
were processed with a slight modification in the protocol, as described
by Nioi et al.29 Briefly, the cells were
stained after fixation with 2% paraformaldehyde and permeabilization
with 0.1% Triton X (Himedia, India). LipidTOX Deep Red neutral (Invitrogen)
was used to stain the neutral lipid present inside the cells. The
nuclei were stained with the Hoechst 33258 dye (blue).

Apoptosis
assay in HCT116 cells was performed by fluorescent microscopy
using the standard protocol of acridine orange (AO) staining.30 TiO2 bulk- and TiO2 nanoparticle-treated
cells were washed two times with PBS buffer and stained with 2 μg/mL
AO/EtBr dissolved in PBS for 20 min. After staining, they were again
washed two times to remove the extra stain. The images of the stained
cells were then taken in the green and red channels of the microscope.
The images were merged and presented.

2.10.3 In
Silico Molecular Docking for TiO2 Interaction
In silico investigation was carried
out by molecular docking studies to determine the interaction of TiO2 with different proteins involved in cellular metabolism.
Molecular docking analysis was carried out by using AutoDock 4.231 using TiO2 as the ligand and Sod1,
p53, and VLDLR as receptor proteins. Chimera32 was used to draw the structure of TiO2, and the geometry
was optimized by Gaussian 03 program. Energy minimization of the receptor
proteins was done by using the Chimera program. The parameters for
Ti were set for AutoDock 4.2. Grid dimensions were set to 40 ×
40 × 40, with a spacing of 1 Å for all protein receptors
with the help of Lamarckian genetic algorithms. Docking runs were
performed by a genetic algorithm using a population size of 150 with
the maximum number of evaluations set to 2 500 000 and
maximal generations. The postdocking analysis was visualized by using
Discovery Studio Visualizer. Two-dimensional interaction plots were
derived from the receptor complexes having TiO2 as a ligand
by using LigPlot+.33

3 Results
3.1 Synthesis and Physiochemical
Characterization
of TiO2 Nanoparticles
Industrial synthesis of
TiO2 nanoparticles was mimicked on the lab scale by synthesizing
them using the HEBM method.34,35 Bulk TiO2 particles, which were in the anatase phase, were milled, and 5,
10, and 15 h milled particles were collected. The collected nanoparticles
were characterized for their physiochemical properties. No change
in phase was observed after milling. As shown in Figure 1, field emission scanning electron
microscopy (FESEM) was used to determine the size of nanoparticles,
which confirmed the reduction of 105 ± 12 nm-sized bulk nanoparticles
to 82 ± 14, 66 ± 12,, 42 ± 10 nm of 5, 10, and 15 h
milled nano TiO2 (Table 1). The hydrodynamic size of the synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles was determined by DLS in all media (aqueous,
PBS, and DMEM complete medium) used for the biological analysis, as
mentioned in Table 1. It was found that increase in the milling time of the TiO2 particles decreases the hydrodynamic size, as shown in Figure 2a. The size of the
bulk TiO2 particles was 268 nm (diameter), 269 nm, and
435 nm in aqueous, PBS, and DMEM medium, respectively, which was significantly
reduced with milling time in all media (Table 1). Figure 2b showed that the zeta potential of bulk TiO2 particles was −46, −67, and −32 mV in aqueous,
PBS, and DMEM medium, respectively, which significantly increased
with the milling time and was according to the standard value of dispersion
of a suspension. The optical properties of the synthesized nanoparticles
were determined by UV–vis spectroscopy. The band gap energy
was also calculated as per the literature36 report to confirm the change in the size of the synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles. Figure 2c shows the blue shift in the absorption peak with the increase
in the milling time of the TiO2 particles. While calculating
the band gap energy (Figure 2d), 15 h nanoparticles were found to be having the highest
band gap (4.6 eV) in comparison to the 10, 5 h, and bulk particles,
the band gap of which were 4.2, 3.8, and 3.4 eV (Table 1), respectively, and statistically
significant.

Figure 1 Characterization of TiO2 nanoparticles prepared
by the
HEBM method. FESEM and transmission electron microscopy image of TiO2 nanoparticles prepared by the HEBM method. (A) Bulk TiO2, (B) 5 h nano TiO2, (C) 10 h nano TiO2, and (D) 15 h nano TiO2. The scale bar denotes 100 nm.

Figure 2 Characterization of TiO2 nanoparticles
prepared by the
HEBM method. (a) Hydrodynamic diameter, (b) zeta potential, (c) UV–vis
spectrum, and (d) band energy gap derived from the UV–vis spectrum.
All parameters were determined for all four types of nanoparticles
suspended in aqueous medium. Hydrodynamic diameter and zeta potential
data are represented as mean ± SD of three independent measurements.

Table 1 Physiochemical Characterization
of
Titanium Oxide Nanoparticles; Table Shows the Size Determined by FESEM
and the Hydrodynamic Diameter and Zeta Potential of TiO2 Nanoparticles in Different Mediaa
 	 	hydrodynamic
diameter (nm)	zeta
potential (mV)	 	
nanoparticles	size (nm) by FESEM	aq	PBS	DMEM (complete)	aq	PBS	DMEM (complete)	band gap (eV)	
bulk TiO2 particles	100 ± 10	268.2 ± 68	269.3 ± 20	435.9 ± 36	–46.6 ± 7.7	–67.6 ± 4.3	–32.9 ± 2.3	3.4	
5 h nano TiO2 particles	80 ± 10	239.2 ± 29	199.9 ± 12	321.8 ± 24	–38.2 ± 7.1	–56.4 ± 5.7	–28.2 ± 1.5	3.8	
10 h nano
TiO2 particles	60 ± 10	185.5 ± 28	167.8 ± 30	256.8 ± 14	–26.4 ± 6.8	–45.4 ± 3.9	–18.6 ± 5.7	4.2	
15 h nano TiO2 particles	40 ± 10	132.4 ± 20	146.6 ± 18	152.8 ± 32	–21.2 ± 6.6	–35.2 ± 4.9	–14.5 ± 4.6	4.6	
a Band gap was determined by the surface
plasmon resonance peak of the UV–vis spectrum.

3.2 In Vitro Cytotoxicity of
Synthesized TiO2 Nanoparticles
3.2.1 Cellular
Interaction of TiO2 Nanoparticles
with Mammalian Cell Lines
Interaction of TiO2 nanoparticles
with HCT116 colon cells was investigated by determining the changes
occurring at the cell membrane and cytoplasm because of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles. The effects were studied
with the help of flow cytometry27 by measuring
the cellular uptake of nanoparticles and determining their surface
charge potential.37Figure 3 shows the change in the zeta potential of
HCT116 cells on interaction with TiO2 nanoparticles at
a concentration of 50 and 250 μg/mL for 24 and 48 h. Untreated
cells were taken as the control. It was found that at a low concentration
(50 μg/mL), the change in the zeta potential of HCT116 cell
lines treated with 5, 10, and 15 h TiO2 nanoparticles was
less in comparison to the bulk TiO2 particles. The same
trends were observed at a high concentration (250 μg/mL), however,
the change was −3.12 mV, much lesser than the low concentration
in the case of bulk TiO2 particles. Supporting Information Figure S1 reveals the measurement of
zeta potential of HCT116 cell lines at 24 and 48 h at 50 and 250 μg/mL,
where it was interesting to note that after 24 and 48 h of treatment,
the zeta potentials of HCT116 cells were less or in line with those
of the untreated cells in 5, 10, and 15 h TiO2 nanoparticles,
even though the cells treated with bulk particles have a higher zeta
potential. To determine the uptake of nanoparticles by cells, the
flow cytometry experimental procedure was followed, as described by
Zucker et al.27 The results shown in Figure 4a–d is in
the form of a histogram representation of the side-scatter distribution
of cells treated with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles
at a concentration of 50 and 250 μg/mL for 24 and 48 h. These
values were quantified by taking the mean side-scatter in the histogram
(Figure 4e,f). The
bulk particles were found to be showing the highest scattering in
comparison to others with a decreasing trend with 5, 10, and 15 h
milling time, respectively. Data showed that the side-scatter, representing
the granularity of cells increases with the concentration,
however, the interesting note to be taken is the decrease in the side-scatter
of light with a decrease in the milling time and incubation period
(24–48 h).

Figure 3 Change in the zeta potential of HCT116 colon carcinoma
cell lines
in the interval of 24–48 h exposed to bulk TiO2 and
nanoparticles, as determined by DLS. A significant gain in the zeta
potential was observed in accordance with the milling time of TiO2 nanoparticles both at low (50 μg/mL) and high (250
μg/mL) concentrations. Control cells were taken without any
nanoparticle treatment.

Figure 4 Granularity revealing the cellular interaction of TiO2 nanoparticles by HCT116 cells treated for 24 and 48 h at low (50
μg/mL) and high (250 μg/mL) concentrations, as determined
by flow cytometry. Side-scatter histogram of cells shifted toward
left in accordance with the milling time; (a,b) present SSC of the
exposed HCT116 cells for 24 h at 50 and 250 μg/mL; (c,d) present
SSC for 48 h at 50 and 250 μg/mL; (e,f) represent the comparative
view of the mean side-scatter of exposed HCT116 cells treated with
TiO2 nanoparticles with respect to cells with no exposure
(control). The values present mean ± SD of three independent
experiments. *P < 0.05 denotes the significant
change from bulk particles and number of * presents the degree of
significance.

3.2.2 Cytotoxicity
Evaluation of TiO2 Nanoparticles
To study the
cytotoxicity of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles,
the viability of HCT116
cells treated with TiO2 bulk particles and TiO2 nanoparticles was first assessed in standard cell culture conditions
by the MTT assay. Morphological change investigation by microscopy
and depiction of the mechanism of cytotoxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles
by flow cytometry were done by ROS determination and apoptosis assays.
As shown in Figure 5, it was clearly observed that the viability of cells remains unaffected
in bulk particles at a low concentration (20 μg/mL), however,
the viability decreases significantly with a decrease in the size
of particles obtained at different milling times. The survivability
decreased up to 50% [lowest concentration of 50% viability (LC50)] in 15 h nanoparticles at 500 μg/mL, whereas it was
higher in the case of 10, 5 h, and bulk particles. Bright-field imaging
of HCT116 cell lines exposed to TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles for 24 and 48 h was done keeping in view the LC50 of these particles to check the morphological differences
in cells after treatment. Untreated colon cell lines HCT116 adhered
to the cell culture plate surface uniformly in a spindle shape (Figure 6). Deformation of
the cell membrane and nucleus was clearly observed to be enhanced
at 48 h than 24 h exposure with adsorption of particulates of bulk,
5, 10, and 15 h TiO2 nanoparticles to the outer membrane
of the cells both at low (50 μg/mL) and high (250 μg/mL)
concentrations, as shown in Figure 6. Moreover, the cells were found to have morphological
changes and loss of attachment to the culture plate in exposed 5,
10, and 15 h TiO2 nanoparticles at higher concentrations.

Figure 5 MTT viability
assay for TiO2 nanoparticle-treated HCT116
colon carcinoma cell lines. Data represented as the viability of cells.
The y-axis presents the percentage viability as compared
to the control. The x-axis denotes the concentration
of nanoparticles. The different patterns of the bars represent the
different types of TiO2 nanoparticles obtained after collecting
at different milling times. LC50 was obtained for each
nanoparticle, which was found to be increasing with increase in the
milling time. All experiments were done in triplicates and data were
presented as mean ± SD of three independent experiments. *P < 0.05 denotes the significant change from bulk particles
and number of * presents the degree of significance.

Figure 6 Optical micrographs of HCT116 cells treated with TiO2 nanoparticles at 50 and 250 μg/mL exposed at 24 and
48 h.

3.2.3 Evaluation
of Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress was analyzed by evaluation
of ROS qualitatively
and quantitatively by flow cytometry and fluorescent microscopy with
the help of DCFDA in HCT116 cells treated with TiO2 nanoparticles
for 24 and 48 h. The analysis showed a significant decrease in the
ROS production in cells treated with 50 and 250 μg/mL for 24
h (Figure 7a,b,e),
however, it was found to be slightly increased when exposure was done
for 48 h (Figure 7c,d,f).
Interestingly, the ROS scavenging capacity of the nanoparticles was
found to decrease with an increase in the milling time. Microscopic
analysis of colon cells exposed to 50 μg/mL TiO2 bulk
and TiO2 nanoparticles validated the flow cytometric analysis,
as shown in Figure 8.

Figure 7 ROS measurement of HCT116 cells treated for 24 and 48 h at low
(50 μg/mL) and high (250 μg/mL) concentrations, as determined
by flow cytometry. Fluorescent intensity histogram of cells shifted
toward left at 24 h and right at 48 h exposure in accordance with
the milling time. (a,b) present the DCF fluorescent intensity of exposed
HCT116 cells for 24 h at 50 and 250 μg/mL; (c,d) present the
DCF fluorescent intensity of cells treated for 48 h at 50 and 250
μg/mL; (e,f) represent the comparative view of the fold change
DCF signal intensity of the exposed HCT116 cells treated with TiO2 nanoparticles with respect to cells with no exposure (control);
the cells were stained with DCFHDA dye to measure ROS, which fluoresces
green when reacting with ROS. The values represent mean ± SD
of three independent experiments. *P < 0.05 denotes
the significant change from bulk particles and number of * presents
the degree of significance.

Figure 8 ROS determination of HCT116 cells treated for 24 and 48 h at 50
μg/mL concentration by fluorescent microscopy. Untreated and
treated cells were stained with DCFDA after exposure for 24 and 48
h.

3.2.4 Evaluation
of Steatosis Triggered by TiO2 Nanoparticles
The
accumulation of neutral lipids
in HCT116 cell lines being exposed to bulk TiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles (50 and 250 μg/mL) was evaluated by staining
them with HCS LipidTOX Red neutral lipid stain and analyzing with
the help of flow cytometry and microscopy. As shown in Figure 9, the fluorescent intensity
was found to be the highest in cells treated with bulk particles and
diminished with the increase in the milling time of particles both
at 24 and 48 h exposure. Interestingly, 15 h TiO2 nanoparticles
showed half-fold increase in the fluorescent intensity at 48 h exposure.
These data are well-supported by the microscopic images (Figure 10), where 15 h TiO2 nanoparticles are found to possess lipids in a more clustered
fashion than the untreated cells and the cells exposed to bulk, 5,
and 10 h TiO2 nanoparticles.

Figure 9 Neutral lipid measurement
of HCT116 cells treated for 24 and 48
h at low (50 μg/mL) and high (250 μg/mL) concentrations,
as determined by flow cytometry. Fluorescent intensity histogram of
cells shifted toward left at 24 and 48 h exposure in accordance with
the milling time. (a,b) present the LipidTOX fluorescent intensity
of exposed HCT116 cells for 24 h at 50 and 250 μg/mL; (c,d)
present the LipidTOX fluorescent intensity of cells treated for 48
h at 50 and 250 μg/mL; (e,f) represent the comparative view
of the fold change LipidTOX signal intensity of the exposed HCT116
cells treated with TiO2 nanoparticles with respect to cells
with no exposure (control); the cells were stained with the Red neutral
LipidTOX dye to measure lipid, which fluoresces red when combined
with neutral lipids. The values present mean ± SD of three independent
experiments. *P < 0.05 denotes the significant
change from control cells and •P < 0.05
denotes the significant change from bulk particle-treated cells; number
of * and • represent the degree of significance.

Figure 10 Fluorescent images of HCT116 cells stained with LipidTOX
treated
with TiO2 nanoparticles at 50 μg/mL concentration.
(a) Untreated cells. Images shown are HCT116 cell morphology treated
with (b) bulk particles; (c) 5 h particles; (d) 10 h particles; and
(e) 15 h particles. The cells were fixed, permeabilized, and stained
with the Red neutral LipidTOX dye to measure lipid, which fluoresces
red when combined with neutral lipids after treatment for 24 h.

3.2.5 In
Silico Analysis of TiO2 Nanoparticle
Interaction
To unveil the cytotoxic effect of TiO2 nanoparticles in human colon cell metabolism on the molecular level,
the computational approach was taken by performing molecular docking
of proteins involved in oxidative stress (Sod1), lipid metabolism
(VLDLR), and apoptosis (p53) regulation. As shown in Figure 11, AutoDock predicted TiO2 nanoparticles hydrogen bond interaction with arginine (Arg),
asparagine (Asn), and isoleucine (Ile) residues with Sod1 with bond
lengths of 2.87, 3.27, and 3.13 Å, respectively. Hydrogen bond
interaction of TiO2 with p53 was also predicted with arginine
(Arg), glycine (Gly), and serine (Ser) with bond lengths, whereas
with VLDR, it was predicted with serine (Ser), threonine (Thr), and
isoleucine (Ile). Pathway investigation through STITCH indicated the
influence of TiO2 on Sod1, p53, and VLDR by means of different
catalysts and enzymes (Figure 12).

Figure 11 Molecular docking analyses of proteins with TiO2 nanoparticles
showing interacting residues using LigPlot+ and Discovery Studio Visualizer.
(A) Sod1 with TiO2, (B) p53 with TiO2, and (C)
VLDLR with TiO2.

Figure 12 Pathway showing TiO2 cytotoxicity mechanism involving
interaction with Sod1, p53, and VLDLR proteins derived from STITCH
and analyzed using Cytoscape.

3.2.6 Genotoxic Effect of TiO2 Bulk
and TiO2 Nanoparticles on HCT116 Cells
Genotoxicity
of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles on HCT116
cells was determined by the analysis of cell cycle and apoptosis of
treated HCT116 cells. For the cell cycle analysis, statistical data
from raw histograms (Figure S2) were extracted
using FACS express 5 software, and the percentage of each phase was
compared with the untreated cells and bulk TiO2 particle-treated
cells. The cell cycle nanoparticle-treated cells were found to be
arrested at the G0/G1 phase with the increase
in the TiO2 nanoparticle concentration, however, bulk TiO2 particles were arresting the cells at the S-phase (Figure 13). At a low concentration
(50 μg/mL) and 24 h exposure, all nanoparticles were arresting
cells at the G0/G1 phase. Interestingly, there
was an increase in the S-phase cells exposed to 10 h milled nanoparticles
from 10.36% at 24 h exposure to 14.56% at 48 h exposure, as compared
to 8.28% in untreated cells. Moreover, the arrest was observed in
the S-phase significantly along with the G0/G1 phase population increase at 48 h of exposure in 15 h milled TiO2 nanoparticle-treated cells.

Figure 13 Histogram representation of the cell
cycle of HCT116 cells treated with TiO2 nanoparticles at
(a) 50 and (b) 250 μg/mL concentrations.
Cell cycle analysis showed that nanoparticles of 5, 10, and 15 h arrest
the cell cycle at G0/G1 in contrast to the bulk
particles, which arrests them at the S-phase. Phase arresting was
dependent on concentration and time of exposure. The values represent
mean ± SD of three independent experiments. *P < 0.05 denotes the significant change from control cells and
•P < 0.05 denotes the significant change
from bulk particle-treated cells; number of * and • represent
the degree of significance.

Further, apoptosis in TiO2 bulk- and TiO2 nanoparticle-treated HCT116 cells was analyzed by AO/EtBr staining.
As shown in Figure 14, bulk TiO2-treated cells were found to be in the late
apoptotic phase, whereas the population of dead cells with lost membrane
integrity was enhanced in 5, 10, and 15 h milled TiO2 nanoparticle-treated
cells.

Figure 14 Fluorescent images of HCT116 cells stained with AO/EtBr treated
with TiO2 nanoparticles at 50 μg/mL concentration.

3.3 Antibacterial
Activity of TiO2 Bulk
and TiO2 Nanoparticles
3.3.1 Bacterial
Viability with TiO2 Bulk and TiO2 Nanoparticles
Determination of
antibacterial activity of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles was done by studying their interaction and effects
with S. typhimurium and E. coli. The viability of bacterial strains was checked
by live/dead staining with Syto 9/PI by flow cytometry. Live/dead
assay results showed concentration- and size-dependent increase in
the death of bacterial population after 4 h with negligible death
in the control population in both the bacterial strains (Figure 15). At 50 μg/mL,
bulk TiO2 particles induced a 3.05% cell death in E. coli, which gradually increased to 3.96, 4.45,
and 7.15% in 5, 10, and 15 h milled TiO2 nanoparticles,
respectively (Figure 15A). A similar trend was found with an increase in the concentration
to 250 μg/mL with 10% increase, where the death of S. typhimurium population on the treatment of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles was similar to that
of E. coli, however, the killing percentage
was nearly 3% at 50 μg/mL concentration and varied only to 2
decimal places. The dead cell percentage got increased to 2 and 3
times, respectively, in 10 and 15 h milled nanoparticles at 250 μg/mL
concentration (Figure 15B). The results revealed the increase in the antibacterial potency
of TiO2 nanoparticles with a decrease in the size.

Figure 15 Live/dead
assay of bacteria in the presence of TiO2 bulk
and TiO2 nanoparticles for 0 and 4 h, as obtained from
flow cytometry. (A) Dot plot of E. coli live/dead assay: (a,f) represent untreated cells at 0 and 4 h. Nanoparticle-treated
cells are presented as (b,g) bulk; (c,h) 5 h; (d,i) 10 h; and (e,j)
15 h treated at 0 and 4 h, respectively. (B) Dot plot of S. typhimurium live/dead assay: (a,f) represent untreated
cells at 0 and 4 h. Nanoparticle-treated cells are presented as (b,g)
bulk; (c,h) 5 h; (d,i) 10 h; and (e,j) 15 h treated at 0 and 4 h,
respectively. Analysis showed that the death of bacterial cells increased
in accordance with time and increase in the milling time of the bulk
particles.

3.3.2 Effect
of TiO2 Bulk and TiO2 Nanoparticles on the Cell
Membrane and the Oxidative Stress
in Bacteria
The effect of TiO2 nanoparticles on
the cell membrane was investigated by determining the surface zeta
potential of bacterial strains after treatment for 4 and 12 h with
50 and 250 μg/mL concentration. As shown in Figure 16, the magnitude of the zeta
potential was found to be significantly enhanced from −15 mV
to a range of −22 to −15 mV after immediate exposure
of particles, which progressed in a decreasing manner with exposure
time at both lower (50 μg/mL) and higher (250 μg/mL) concentrations.
Moreover, the reduction was also observed to be dependent on the milling
time of particles. Interestingly, the bacterial population exposed
to 15 h nanoparticles was found to possess zeta potential close to
that of the control population. Similar trends were observed in both
the bacterial strains, however, the extent of reduction was drastically
5 times higher in the case of E. coli for bulk particles and 2–4 times greater for 5 and 10 h milled
nanoparticles. Effect of ROS has been recognized to play an important
role in the antibacterial properties of nanoparticles. Therefore,
evaluation of ROS induction in both the bacterial strains S. typhimurium and E. coli was done on treatment with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles for 4 h. The evaluation was performed with the help
of the flow cytometry technique using the fluorescent activity of
the DCFDA dye. Data are represented in the form of a histogram, and
the fold change in the DCF signal was calculated with respect to the
control bacterial population (Figure 17). It was observed that the TiO2 bulk and
TiO2 nanoparticles were behaving as a ROS scavenger; additionally,
the left shift of the DCF fluorescent intensity from the control was
the highest in 15 h milled nanoparticles. The trends were similar
for both S. typhimurium and E. coli in 0 and 4 h incubation times. The findings
were in line with the experimental results obtained from ROS evaluation
in the HCT116 colon cancer cell line.

Figure 16 Zeta potential of S. typhimurium (a,b) and E. coli (c,d) treated with
TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles at 0, 4, and
12 h, as determined by DLS. A significant gain in the zeta potential
was observed in accordance with the milling time of TiO2 nanoparticles both at low (50 μg/mL) (a,c) and high (250 μg/mL)
(b,d) concentrations. The untreated cells were taken without any nanoparticle
treatment. All data represent mean ± SD of three independent
experiments. *P < 0.05 denotes the significant
change from untreated cells and •P < 0.05
denotes the significant change from bulk particles-treated cells;
number of * and • represent the degree of significance.

Figure 17 ROS measurement of bacterial strains
treated with TiO2 nanoparticles. (A) S.
typhimurium and (B) E. coli treated for 0 and
4 h at low (50 μg/mL) and high (250 μg/mL) concentrations,
as determined by flow cytometry. Fluorescent intensity of cells shifted
toward left at immediate exposure, that is, 0 h as well as at 4 h
exposure in accordance with the milling time. (a,b) represent the
DCF fluorescent intensity and fold change DCF signal intensity of
exposed bacterial cells at 50 μg/mL; (c,d) present the DCF fluorescent
intensity and fold change DCF signal intensity of exposed bacterial
cells at 250 μg/mL. DCF fold change was calculated with respect
to cells with no exposure (control); the cells were stained with the
DCFHDA dye to measure ROS, which fluoresce green when reacting with
ROS. The value represents mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
*P < 0.05 denotes the significant change from
bulk particles and number of * represents the extent of significance.

4 Discussion
This study investigates the in vitro cytotoxicity of antibacterial
TiO2 nanoparticles synthesized as an industrial prototype.
Cytotoxicity evaluation was done for TiO2 nanoparticles
synthesized by the ball milling technique with the HCT116 mammalian
colon cell line.

4.1 Synthesis and Physiochemical
Characterization
of TiO2 Nanoparticles
The TiO2 nanoparticles
were synthesized by the HEBM method by milling powdered bulk TiO2 particles. HEBM is considered to be one of the standard methods
for synthesizing nanoparticles both on the lab scale and on the industrial
level.35,38 The high energy produced by the mechanical
force grinds the bulk particles, gradually reducing the size to nano
level with an increase in the milling time.39 Change in the physiochemical properties can be easily visualized
and confirmed by different characterization techniques. In this study,
synthesis of TiO2 nanoparticles was done on the lab scale
by using high-energy milling for different hours (5, 10, and 15 h).
The particles were characterized by their physiochemical properties
such as the size and zeta potential. FESEM analysis confirmed the
reduction of bulk TiO2 size up to 40 nm on 15 h milling.
The experiments for the evaluation of cytotoxicity and antibacterial
efficacy of the nanoparticles were performed in a specific medium
(PBS and complete DMEM), so it was important to determine the physiochemical
properties of the TiO2 nanoparticles such as the size and
charge in the corresponding medium.40 Reduction
of the hydrodynamic diameter of the TiO2 particles was
found with an increase in the milling time, as shown in Figure 2a, in all media. The data demonstrated
that the agglomeration tendency of the TiO2 nanoparticles
decreases with an increase in the milling time and varied according
to the medium. The agglomeration of the nanoparticles also depends
on the degree of repulsion between the particles inside the medium.41 To estimate this, the zeta potential of each
nanoparticle was determined, which is a measure of the electrokinetic
potential to depict the degree of repulsion. Previous reports have
defined zeta potential as a function of the nanoparticle size in different
media by means of an effect of interaction between the particle surface
and medium molecules affecting the surface ionization and henceforth
the dispersion stability of particles.41,42Figure 2b shows that the zeta potential
significantly increases with the milling time and is according to
the standard value of dispersion of a suspension.43 The probable explanation of the observed results can be
attributed to the decrease in the surface area due to a decrease in
the size with constant pKa of the medium.41 The alteration in the shape and size of the
nanoparticles because of milling causes an increase in surface structure
imperfections, especially oxygen vacancies, leading to a change in
the electronic structure of the particle. These vacancies are then
occupied by the adsorption of the −OH group of water molecules,
producing a positive charge. The intensity of adsorption enhances
with an increase in the oxygen vacancies, thereby increasing the positivity
in the zeta potential.44,45 These results indicated that
the nanoparticles were in dispersed suspension in all media, however,
the variation in the hydrodynamic size and zeta potential in different
media can be attributed to the presence of salts and other molecules
in different media.43 It has been reported
that the presence of different salts and molecules defines the physiochemical
nature of the nanoparticles, which plays an effective role in the
cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of nanoparticles in different biological
studies.46 The optical property of the
synthesized nanoparticles was estimated by UV–vis spectroscopy,
which is a strong technique to characterize nanoparticles with respect
to their light absorption properties. Figure 2c shows the blue shift in the absorption
peak with increase in the milling time of the TiO2 particles.
Band gap energy was found to increase with an increase in the milling
time depicting their reduction with a decrease in the size. Smaller
particle size refers to a larger band gap because fewer molecular
orbitals are being added to the possible energy states of the particle.
Hence, absorption will occur at higher energies, so a shift toward
shorter wavelengths will be apparent. Synthesis of metallic oxide
nanoparticles such as ZnO has been reported by HEBM in previous studies.47 Similar changes in physiochemical properties
of ZnO nanoparticles have been reported in the case of zinc oxide
in the previous literature reported by our group and other groups.47−50 These results have revealed the change in physiochemical properties
of TiO2 nanoparticles with milling time and speculated
their change in the biological effect accordingly.

4.2 In Vitro Cytotoxicity of Synthesized TiO2 Nanoparticles
Cytotoxicity is the primary biological
end point in evaluating the toxicity of environmental contaminants.
In vitro cytotoxicity of nanoparticles relies upon their interaction
and its consequences on physiological and genetic metabolic processes.
Nature of interaction of nanoparticles with the cells decides the
toxicological behavior of the nanoparticles. The nanoparticle interacts
with cells, resulting in a change in their cytoplasm27,51 as well as on their surface.52 These
effects can be studied by flow cytometry27 by measuring the cellular uptake of nanoparticles and determining
their surface charge potential.46Figure 2 shows the milling
time-dependent change in the zeta potential of HCT116 cells on interaction
with TiO2 nanoparticles at a concentration of 50 and 250
μg/mL for 24 and 48 h. The zeta potentials of HCT116 cells were
less or in line with the untreated cells in 5, 10, and 15 h milled
TiO2 nanoparticles after 24 and 48 h exposure. These results
suggest that the surface charge of HCT116 cell lines are affected
because of the size and intensity of accumulation of the bulk and
nanoparticles on the surface. The zeta potential of the particle adds
to the surface charge of cells, leading to an increase in the total
zeta potential at 24 and 48 h. However, it can be speculated that
at 48 h exposure, the uptake of nanoparticles inside the cells plays
an important role in the decreasing behavior of the surface zeta potential
of HCT116 cells, which have to be determined experimentally. These
findings are in correlation with the studies done by Zhang et al.53 Uptake analysis by flow cytometry revealed an
increase in the side-scatter (90° direction) of the cells after
treatment of cells with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles.
Side-scatter is regarded as the indicator of granularity and mass
of cells.54 Previous reports have described
the side-scatter change in relation with electron microscopy (high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy)55 and
fluorescent microscopy56 as an effective
tool to determine the uptake of nanoparticles inside cells.57 In this study, the signal appeared to be a result
of both internalized and surface-adsorbed particles, which causes
the variation in the side-scattering of light. The bulk particles
were found to be showing the highest scattering in comparison to others
with a decreasing trend with 5, 10, and 15 h milling time, respectively.
The relationship of concentration of nanoparticles with their uptake
has been described by many groups.58 The
results are in correlation with those descriptions emphasized with
the milling time and incubation period.

The findings indicate
that the size and agglomeration vary with the milling time of the
TiO2 particles and play an important role in their cellular
interaction. The bulk particles having the highest hydrodynamic diameter
and lowest zeta potential when milled for 5, 10, and 15 h lead to
a decrease in the size as well as an increase in the zeta potential.
There is a consequent increase in the zeta potential and a decrease
in the granularity of HCT116 cell lines treated with these particles.
A study by Zhang et al.53 showed the modulation
of the zeta potential of the mammalian cell via nanoparticle incubation
and explained the uptake of nanoparticles by cells as a function of
the zeta potential. Our studies were following the same trends with
TiO2 nanoparticles and HCT116 cells. Consequently, nanoparticle
uptake can be explained with a two-step process: binding with the
plasma membrane followed by internalization. The attachment of negatively
charged bulk TiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles on
the cell plasma membrane causes the increase in the zeta potential.
The internalization process, however, results in a change in the zeta
potential in a reverse way because of vesicular transport-based cell
endocytosis. The zeta potential of cells that interacted with the
bulk particles was less at 24 h than at 48 h, which can be due to
more attachment with the cell plasma membrane with time. However,
the change in the zeta potential by 5, 10, and 15 h as compared to
that of the bulk particles was following the same increasing trend
both at low and high concentrations (50 and 250 μg/mL). This
defines the zeta potential as a factor of nanoparticle attachment
to the cell membrane. Further attachment leads to the trends in the
variation of the side-scatter intensity in flow cytometry. The possible
nature of the trend of increase and decrease in side-scatter with
the size (milling time) of the nanoparticles and the incubation period
(Figure 4a,b) could
be explained by the following reasons: First, the bulk and nanoparticle
attachment to the cell surface plasma membrane changes the zeta potential
value of the cells, thereby causing accumulation on the surface because
of charge interaction.59,60 This surface adsorption leads
to an increase in the scattering of light. As the size and zeta potential
of the bulk particles were the highest among others, the interaction
was the highest, leading to more scattering. The properties decreased
with the size of the particle and hence there was lowest scattering
by 15 h nanoparticles. Second, the granularity change of the cell
cytoplasm, as indicated by the change of light scattering because
of the nanoparticle internalization, could be attributed to the vesicular
transport-based cell endocytosis. During endocytosis, the uptake of
particles attached to the cell surface takes place by invagination
and formation of the new intracellular vesicle,61 thus losing a small portion of the cell membrane and leading
to a decrease in the negative charge. The extent of internalized nanoparticles
depends on the accumulation of particles on the surface of the cell
plasma membrane. Because 15 h nanoparticles have the least accumulation,
lowest scattering and granularity was found. The phenomenon was consistent
and directly proportional to the time of incubation and concentration
of nanoparticles. Studies by Prasad et al.43 showed that the cellular interaction of nanoparticles is a function
of agglomeration of nanoparticles in the medium. Our results were
in line with those reports and additionally show their effect on the
uptake and granularity of HCT116 cells.

As analyzed by the MTT
assay and morphological change determination,
the viability of cells was found to be dependent on the milling time
and concentration of the TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles.
The results were in correlation with the flow cytometry uptake experiment
results, suggesting a reduction in cell activity and even cell death
after 24 and 48 h exposure with TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles. These results were in agreement with some reports62 and in disagreement with others63 on the cytotoxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles. The
conflict in idea may be due to the difference in specificity of the
mechanism of assays by which cytotoxicity is evaluated, such as mitochondrial
function (MTT assay) versus membrane permeability (live/dead, trypan
blue assay). Recently Wang et al.61 explained
the cause of cytotoxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles as the
hindrance of ion exchange leading to a disruption of exocytosis processes
due to the accumulation of excess TiO2 nanoparticles on
the cell surface. Our results were in agreement with them explaining
the cytotoxic behavior of TiO2 bulk and TiO2nanoparticles because of their cell surface attachment.

Many
reports have suggested the role of ROS as an important factor
for the cytotoxicity of TiO2 nanoparticles.64 ROS evaluation with bulk and synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles with HCT116 indicated toward their milling
time-dependent ROS scavenging property. It was revealed that the particles
were scavenging the peroxide molecules, which were produced intensively
during 24 h exposure. However, the generation of ROS was there even
after 48 h exposure. This observation can be attributed to the complete
consumption of the internalized TiO2 nanoparticles for
scavenging of ROS molecules during 48 h exposure. This effect may
be due to the interaction between the unpaired electrons of free radicals
and the conduction band electrons of the metal nanoparticles. These
results are in contrast with the existing studies about TiO2 nanoparticles cytotoxicity studies.65 Literature has defined TiO2 nanoparticles as an oxidative
stress-inducing agent by ROS generation and damaging of their scavenger
molecules inside the cytoplasm, leading toward influence on the respiratory
chain and cell death.66 By contrast, our
results revealed that TiO2 bulk and TiO2nanoparticles
act as the ROS scavenger inside the cytoplasm. One possible explanation
for this intriguing fact is the presence of oxygen vacancy.67 Metal oxide nanoparticles prepared by the ball
milling method and other techniques have been reported to possess
oxygen vacancy as their intrinsic defects by many researchers.7 These oxygen vacancies are the points in the
lattice where an electron is missing from the oxygen shell. Such oxygen
vacancies react with the free electrons of free radicals leading to
an antioxidant property similar to that of the reported oxide nanoparticles
such as cerium oxide and zirconium oxide.68 In silico investigation, as shown in Figure 11, showed the interaction of the oxygen atom
of TiO2 with amino acid residues. Discrepancy of fact can
be reasoned as the inability of synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles
to interact with Sod1 because of the lack of the oxygen atom.

Steatosis refers to the intracellular abnormal retention of neutral
lipids inside the cells, which are often triggered by factors that
affect the metabolism of fatty acid and/or neutral lipids. The accumulated
neutral lipids follow the toxic side effects of the drugs.69 Nanoparticles have been found to trigger steatosis
leading to the toxicological effect such as induction of hypoxia-inducible
transcription factor 1α (HIF-1α). The HIF family regulates
the adaptation to hypoxic condition critical for cell survival.70 Estimation of neutral lipids in HCT116 cells
triggered by TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles
revealed diminished steatosis with increasing milling time. The accumulation
of lipids in cytoplasmic LDs in HCT116 cells lines has not been reported
previously, however, the phenomenon has been reported in PC12 glial
cells on exposure to CoCl2 nanoparticles.71 LDs have been described reliably as a dynamic organelle,
which participates in the important function of cells, such as transport
and communication, by communicating with other cellular compartments
inside the cell.72 Accumulation of lipids
has been found as a consequence of disturbance of the cellular membrane
on the cell surface as well as cellular malfunction inside the cells.71 With reference to these reports and our experimental
observation, a possible explanation of accumulation of the neutral
lipids on exposure to TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles
could be the release of free (unesterified) fatty acids as a result
of distortion of the cellular membrane, which forms triacylglycerol
(the main components of LDs). Moreover, the abnormalities in the functionality
of VLDR proteins because of an oxygen vacancy in TiO2 can
also be accused of the reason, as revealed by the computational investigation
(Figure 11). These
accumulated LDs could influence the mitochondrial function, which
might cause oxidative stress, leading to a probable cause of cytotoxicity.

Studies on the ROS analysis and lipid analysis indicated the effect
of bulk TiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles in the cytoplasm,
however, their genotoxicity effect is an important aspect to be studied.
TiO2 nanoparticles have been reported to induce an alteration
in the cell cycle in different mammalian cell lines.73 The cell cycle is a series of events that lead to cell
division and replication. It commences with the G1 phase,
in which the cell increases its size, followed by S, G2, and M phases, where the synthesis of DNA, preparation for division,
and division take place, respectively. Cells with damaged DNA will
be arrested in any of these phases depending on the intensity of damage,
however, cells with irreversible damage will undergo apoptosis and
accumulate in the sub-G1 phase.74 The effect of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles
on the cell cycle of HCT116, as analyzed by flow cytometry, revealed
the milling time- and concentration-dependent arresting of the cell
cycle at S and G0/G1 phases. These findings
referred the influence of TiO2 nanoparticles on the synthesis
of DNA as well as a delay in the progress of the cell cycle to the
next stage. It may be speculated that there may be the role of interaction
of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles with proteins
taking part in the process of synthesis, which needs to be investigated
in detail. Apoptosis analysis showed (Figure 12) the consequent effect of the cell cycle
arrest in treated cells. Cells exposed to bulk TiO2 particles
were found to be in the late apoptotic phase, whereas the number of
membrane distorted and dead cells increases with milling time and
exposure to TiO2 nanoparticles. The observation can be
attributed to the increase in the cell cycle arrest as a result of
cytotoxicity. Moreover interaction of TiO2 particles with
the protein responsible for apoptosis can also be reasoned for the
phenomenon. p53 has been reported to play a key role in apoptosis.75 Computational results, as shown in Figure 11, show the interaction
of TiO2 with amino acid residues of p53, which can be attributed
to the abnormal functionality of p53 leading to apoptotic results.
The overall corridor of cytotoxicity exhibited by TiO2 bulk
and TiO2 nanoparticles can be interpreted by the pathway
shown in Figure 12 displaying the role of catalysts and proteins. These results may
mimic a real world exposure of commercially prepared TiO2 nanoparticles to intestinal cells more than the standard in vitro
studies because of the intake of TiO2 nanoparticles through
food or water.

4.3 Antibacterial Activity
of TiO2 Bulk
and TiO2 Nanoparticles
TiO2 nanoparticles
have been recognized widely as an antibacterial agent. Many researchers
have studied their effect on different pathogenic as well as nonpathogenic
bacterial strains.76 TiO2 nanoparticles
used in day-to-day life products such as cosmetics, sunscreen, food
products, paints, and so forth are industrially prepared by the ball
milling method; hence, the antibacterial properties of these nanoparticles
need to be studied. In this study, the interaction of TiO2 nanoparticles prepared by the mechanical milling of bulk TiO2 particles as an industrial prototype method was investigated
with commonly occurring bacterial strains such as S.
typhimurium and E. coli. Live/dead assay results showed concentration- and size-dependent
increase in the death of bacterial population after 4 h treatment,
with negligible death in the control population of both the bacterial
strains (Figure 13). The results revealed the increase in the antibacterial potency
of TiO2 nanoparticles with the decrease in the size. Dependence
of antibacterial activity on the size and charge of nanoparticles
has been described recently by many groups.77 Our results were in line with these studies and provided a concrete
evidence of the described phenomenon with respect to TiO2 nanoparticles prepared by the HEBM method. Conferring to the effect
of TiO2 nanoparticles on the surface charge of the mammalian
cell line, we presumed that the effect of TiO2 nanoparticles
on the surface charge of bacterial strains would have been playing
an important role in their killing. To evaluate our assumption, the
zeta potential of S. typhimurium and E. coli was checked after 4 and 12 h of treatment
with 50 and 250 μg/mL of TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles. Zeta potential was found to be elevated with decreasing
size and increasing exposure time of TiO2 nanoparticles
(Figure 14). These
data validated the speculated presumption of nanoparticles exposure
effect on the surface of the bacterial cell. Though there are reports
on the toxic effect of TiO2 nanoparticles in bacteria and
their possible cause, there is a gap of information regarding the
role of effect on the membrane. Recently Arakha et al.24 had explained the vitality of nano–biointerface
for the antibacterial propensity of iron oxide nanoparticles and suggested
the role of surface zeta potential in determining the antibacterial
activity. Moreover, studies reported by Tang et al.25,78 have mentioned the effect of bacterial killing as a consequence
of attachment of titanium oxide nanoparticles and its composites to
the bacterial surface, leading to protein denaturation and cell death.
The data presented in this study substantiate those findings with
regard to prepared TiO2 nanoparticles. With reference to
the findings of the previous literature and the results obtained,
it can be argued that the difference in the magnitude of prepared
TiO2 and bacterial surface zeta potential forming a gradient
leads to attachment of nanoparticles to the bacterial surface. Rise
in the gradient zeta potential with the milling time of TiO2 nanoparticles enhances the attachment, leading to higher antibacterial
efficiency in 5, 10, and 15 h nanoparticles. Investigation of the
mechanism of antibacterial activity was further carried by the oxidative
stress analysis in TiO2 bulk- and TiO2 nanoparticle-exposed
bacterial cells. Figure 15 shows the exposure- and milling time-dependent ROS scavenging
activity of bulk TiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles.
Previous reports have mentioned ROS as the key role of the mechanism
of bacterial killing due to exposure of nanoparticles.79 The findings were similar to experimental results
obtained from ROS evaluation in the HCT116 colon cancer cell line
and provided concrete evidence for the explanation of the presence
of oxygen vacancy in TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles
leading to their ROS scavenging property in living cells. Many literature
reports have suggested other reasons for the antibacterial property
of nanoparticles such as disruption of the cell membrane,78,80 dysfunction of cell organelles,81 and
DNA damage82 in bacterial cells. The actual
cause is still undiscovered and needs detail investigation.

In reference to the above studies, mechanically synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles were found to have antibacterial effects against S. typhimurium and E. coli with a contradiction of the ROS scavenging antibacterial mechanism.

5 Conclusions
In summary, we have elucidated
the impact of industrially synthesized
TiO2 bulk and TiO2 nanoparticles used in daily
market products on the cytotoxicity of the colon cancer cell line
(HCT116). We also demonstrated their antibacterial activities on E. coli and S. typhimurium. TiO2 nanoparticles prepared by the HEBM method as the
industrial prototype synthesis were characterized by their physiochemical
properties by DLS, FESEM, and UV–vis spectroscopy. These experiments
confirmed the nanosize nature of TiO2 nanoparticles as
well as determined the surface charge modification with respect to
a change in the size. Determination of the zeta potential and nanoparticle
uptake in HCT116 cells illustrated the size- and charge-dependent
interaction, followed by internalization of these nanoparticles. As
demonstrated by the flow cytometry analysis and microscopy, TiO2 nanoparticles were found to express the scavenging of ROS
and eliciting the induction of LD cluster inside the cells. These
results depicted the mechanism of cytotoxic effect of industrially
prepared TiO2 nanoparticles in the colon cell as a consequence
of the ROS quenching and a probable role of lipid accumulation, leading
to apoptosis and cell death. Cell cycle analysis revealed the arrest
at the G0/G1 phase, suggesting the delay in
DNA synthesis because of the TiO2 nanoparticle exposure.
In silico investigation revealed the crucial role of TiO2 nanoparticle interactions with Sod, p53, and VLDLR proteins responsible
for cytotoxicity. Additionally, synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles
were exhibiting the antibacterial activity against E. coli and S. typhimurium. Live/dead flow cytometry assay described the size-dependent cell
death of bacteria, however, the ROS analysis figured out the similar
scavenging property by TiO2 nanoparticles, as found in
the case of mammalian cells. The zeta potential of the bacterial cells
was also found to be altered with respect to the size and charge of
the TiO2 nanoparticles. The present study concludes that
though TiO2 nanoparticles are antibacterial, they are cytotoxic
at higher concentrations and on prolonged exposure for mammalian cells.
It also affects on the genomic level by influencing the DNA synthesis,
which might be due to its nuclear deposition. Hence, it is imperative
that their application in day-to-day life should be given special
attention besides embracing the antibacterial potential.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01522.Change in the
zeta potential and cell cycle arrest in
HCT116 cells treated with different concentrations of HEBM synthesized
TiO2 nanoparticles (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b01522_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
==== Refs
References
Weir A. ; Westerhoff P. ; Fabricius L. ; Hristovski K. ; von Goetz N. 
Titanium Dioxide
Nanoparticles in Food and Personal
Care Products . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2012 , 46 , 2242 –2250 . 10.1021/es204168d .22260395 
ICIS  . Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) Uses and Market Data .
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/titanium.htm. Titanium Dioxide.


Van
Bussel W. ; Kerkhof F. ; Van Kessel T. ; Lamers H. ; Nous D. ; Verdonk H. ; Verhoeven B. ; Boer N. ; Toonen H. 
Accurate Determination of Titanium
as Titanium Dioxide for Limited Sample Size Digestibility Studies
of Feed and Food Matrices by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission
Spectrometry with Real-Time Simultaneous Internal Standardization . At. Spectrosc. 
2010 , 31 , 81 –88 .
Mahata S. ; Mahato S. S. ; Nandi M. M. ; Mondal B. 
Synthesis of TiO2 Nanoparticles
by Hydrolysis and Peptization of Titanium Isopropoxide Solution . Funct. Mater. 
2012 , 1461 , 225 –228 . 10.1063/1.4736892 .
Zhou X. ; Ni S. ; Zhang X. ; Wang X. ; Hu X. ; Zhou Y. 
Controlling
Shape and Size of TiO2 Nanoparticles with Sodium Acetate . Curr. Nanosci. 
2008 , 4 , 397 –401 . 10.2174/157341308786306125 .
Indris S. ; Amade R. ; Heitjans P. ; Finger M. ; Haeger A. ; Hesse D. ; Grünert W. ; Börger A. ; Becker K. D. 
Preparation by High-Energy Milling,
Characterization,
and Catalytic Properties of Nanocrystalline TiO2 . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 23274 –23278 . 10.1021/jp054586t .16375293 
Jesline A. ; John N. P. ; Narayanan P. M. ; Vani C. ; Murugan S. 
Antimicrobial
Activity of Zinc and Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles against Biofilm-Producing
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus . Appl. Nanosci. 
2015 , 5 , 157 –162 . 10.1007/s13204-014-0301-x .
Rompelberg C. ; Heringa M. B. ; van Donkersgoed G. ; Drijvers J. ; Roos A. ; Westenbrink S. ; Peters R. ; van Bemmel G. ; Brand W. ; Oomen A. G. 
Oral Intake
of Added Titanium Dioxide
and Its Nanofraction from Food Products, Food Supplements and Toothpaste
by the Dutch Population . Nanotoxicology 
2016 , 10 , 1404 –1414 . 10.1080/17435390.2016.1222457 .27619007 
Sohaebuddin S. K. ; Thevenot P. T. ; Baker D. ; Eaton J. W. ; Tang L. 
Nanomaterial
Cytotoxicity Is Composition, Size, and Cell Type Dependent . Part. Fibre Toxicol. 
2010 , 7 , 22 10.1186/1743-8977-7-22 .20727197 
Tedja R. ; Lim M. ; Amal R. ; Marquis C. 
Effects of Serum Adsorption on Cellular
Uptake Profile and Consequent Impact of Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles
on Human Lung Cell Lines . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 4083 –4093 . 10.1021/nn3004845 .22515565 
Thevenot P. ; Cho J. ; Wavhal D. ; Timmons R. B. ; Tang L. 
Surface Chemistry Influences
Cancer Killing Effect of TiO2 Nanoparticles . Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 
2008 , 4 , 226 –236 . 10.1016/j.nano.2008.04.001 .
Krüger K. ; Cossais F. ; Neve H. ; Klempt M. 
Titanium Dioxide
Nanoparticles
Activate IL8-Related Inflammatory Pathways in Human Colonic Epithelial
Caco-2 Cells . J. Nanoparticle Res. 
2014 , 16 , 2402 10.1007/s11051-014-2402-6 .
Ahmed D. ; Eide P. W. ; Eilertsen I. A. ; Danielsen S. A. ; Eknæs M. ; Hektoen M. ; Lind G. E. ; Lothe R. A. 
Epigenetic
and Genetic Features of 24 Colon Cancer Cell Lines . Oncogenesis 
2013 , 2 , e7110.1038/oncsis.2013.35 .24042735 
Nel A. 
Toxic Potential
of Materials . Science 
2007 , 311 , 622 –627 . 10.1126/science.1114397 .
Saha K. ; Kim S. T. ; Yan B. ; Miranda O. R. ; Alfonso F. S. ; Shlosman D. ; Rotello V. M. 
Surface Functionality of Nanoparticles
Determines Cellular Uptake Mechanisms in Mammalian Cells . Small 
2013 , 9 , 300 –305 . 10.1002/smll.201201129 .22972519 
Li Y. ; Zhang W. ; Niu J. ; Chen Y. 
Mechanism of Photogenerated
Reactive Oxygen Species and Correlation with the Antibacterial Properties
of Engineered Metal-Oxide Nanoparticles . ACS
Nano 
2012 , 6 , 5164 –5173 . 10.1021/nn300934k .22587225 
Hackenberg S. ; Friehs G. ; Kessler M. ; Froelich K. ; Ginzkey C. ; Koehler C. ; Scherzed A. ; Burghartz M. ; Kleinsasser N. 
Nanosized Titanium Dioxide Particles
Do Not Induce
DNA Damage in Human Peripheral Blood Lymphocytes . J. Nanoparticle Res. 
2011 , 52 , 264 –268 . 10.1002/em.20615 .
Gurr J.-R. ; Wang A. S. S. ; Chen C.-H. ; Jan K.-Y. 
Ultrafine Titanium
Dioxide Particles in the Absence of Photoactivation Can Induce Oxidative
Damage to Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells . Toxicology 
2005 , 213 , 66 –73 . 10.1016/j.tox.2005.05.007 .15970370 
Long T. C. ; Saleh N. ; Tilton R. D. ; Lowry G. V. ; Veronesi B. 
Titanium Dioxide
(P25) Produces Reactive Oxygen Species in Immortalized Brain Microglia
(BV2): Implications for Nanoparticle Neurotoxicity . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2006 , 40 , 4346 –4352 . 10.1021/es060589n .16903269 
Ghosh M. 
Cytotoxic,
Genotoxic and the Hemolytic Effect of Titanium Dioxide (TiO2) Nanoparticles
on Human Erythrocyte and Lymphocyte Cells in Vitro . J. Appl. Toxicol. 
2013 , 33 , 1097 10.1002/jat.2863 .23616399 
Zaki S. S. O. ; Ibrahim M. N. ; Katas H. 
Particle Size
Affects Concentration-Dependent
Cytotoxicity of Chitosan Nanoparticles towards Mouse Hematopoietic
Stem Cells . J. Nanotechnol. 
2015 , 2015 , 1 10.1155/2015/919658 .
Guichard Y. ; Schmit J. ; Darne C. ; Gaté L. ; Goutet M. ; Rousset D. ; Rastoix O. ; Wrobel R. ; Witschger O. ; Martin A. ; et al. Cytotoxicity and Genotoxicity
of Nanosized and Microsized Titanium Dioxide and Iron Oxide Particles
in Syrian Hamster Embryo Cells . Ann. Occup.
Hyg. 
2012 , 56 , 631 –644 . 10.1093/annhyg/mes006 .22449629 
Arakha M. ; Pal S. ; Samantarrai D. ; Panigrahi T. K. ; Mallick B. C. ; Pramanik K. ; Mallick B. ; Jha S. 
Antimicrobial Activity of Iron Oxide
Nanoparticle upon Modulation of Nanoparticle-Bacteria Interface . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 14813 10.1038/srep14813 .26437582 
Chen S. ; Guo Y. ; Chen S. ; Ge Z. ; Yang H. ; Tang J. 
Fabrication
of Cu/TiO2 Nanocomposite: Toward an Enhanced Antibacterial Performance
in the Absence of Light . Mater. Lett. 
2012 , 83 , 154 –157 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2012.06.007 .
Kubacka A. ; Diez M. S. ; Rojo D. ; Bargiela R. ; Ciordia S. ; Zapico I. ; Albar J. P. ; Barbas C. ; Martins
dos Santos V. a. P. ; Fernández-García M. ; et al. Understanding the Antimicrobial Mechanism of TiO2-Based Nanocomposite
Films in a Pathogenic Bacterium . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 4134 10.1038/srep04134 .24549289 
Zucker R. M. ; Massaro E. J. ; Sanders K. M. ; Degn L. L. ; Boyes W. K. 
Detection
of TiO2 Nanoparticles in Cells by Flow Cytometry . Cytometry, Part A 
2010 , 77 , 677 –685 . 10.1002/cyto.a.20927 .
Jung W. K. ; Koo H. C. ; Kim K. W. ; Shin S. ; Kim S. H. ; Park Y. H. 
Antibacterial Activity
and Mechanism of Action of the
Silver Ion in Staphylococcus Aureus and Escherichia Coli . Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
2008 , 74 , 2171 –2178 . 10.1128/aem.02001-07 .18245232 
Nioi P. ; Perry B. K. ; Wang E.-J. ; Gu Y.-Z. ; Snyder R. D. 
In Vitro
Detection of Drug-Induced Phospholipidosis Using Gene Expression and
Fluorescent Phospholipid-Based Methodologies . Toxicol. Sci. 
2007 , 99 , 162 –173 . 10.1093/toxsci/kfm157 .17567588 
Kasibhatla S. 
Acridine Orange/Ethidium
Bromide (AO/EB) Staining to Detect Apoptosis . Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 
2006 , 2006 , pdb.prot4493 10.1101/pdb.prot4493 .
Trott O. ; Olson A. J. 
AutoDock Vina: Improving
the Speed and Accuracy of
Docking with a New Scoring Function, Efficient Optimization and Multithreading . J. Comput. Chem. 
2010 , 31 , 455 –461 . 10.1002/jcc.21334 .19499576 
Pettersen E. F. ; Goddard T. D. ; Huang C. C. ; Couch G. S. ; Greenblatt D. M. ; Meng E. C. ; Ferrin T. E. 
UCSF Chimera—A
Visualization
System for Exploratory Research and Analysis . J. Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 1605 –1612 . 10.1002/jcc.20084 .15264254 
Wallace A. C. ; Laskowski R. A. ; Thornton J. M. 
Ligplot—a Program To Generate
Schematic Diagrams of Protein Ligand Interactions . Protein Eng. 
1995 , 8 , 127 –134 . 10.1093/protein/8.2.127 .7630882 
Cao W.  Synthesis of Nanomaterials
by High Energy Ball Milling . http://www.understandingnano.com/nanomaterial-synthesis-ball-milling.html.
Sopicka-Lizer M.  High-Energy
Ball Milling ; Woodhead Publishing , 2010 .
Dharma J. ; Pisal A. ; Shelton C. 
Simple Method
of Measuring the Band
Gap Energy Value of TiO2 in the Powder Form Using a UV/Vis/NIR Spectrometer . Appl. Note 
2009 , 3 –6 .
Zhang Y. ; Yang M. ; Park J.-H. ; Singelyn J. ; Ma H. ; Sailor M. J. ; Ruoslahti E. ; Ozkan M. ; Ozkan C. 
A Surface-Charge
Study on Cellular-Uptake Behavior of F3-Peptide-Conjugated Iron Oxide
Nanoparticles . Small 
2009 , 5 , 1990 –1996 . 10.1002/smll.200900520 .19554564 
Tobergte D. R. ; Curtis S.  Synthesis of Nanomaterials
by High Energy Ball Milling . http://www.understandingnano.com/nanomaterial-synthesis-ball-milling.html.
Anuradha T. V. ; Ranganathan S. 
Nanocrystalline
TiO2 by Three Different Synthetic Approaches:
A Comparison . Bull. Mater. Sci. 
2007 , 30 , 263 –269 . 10.1007/s12034-007-0046-1 .
Johnston H. J. ; Hutchison G. R. ; Christensen F. M. ; Peters S. ; Hankin S. ; Stone V. 
Identification of the
Mechanisms That Drive the Toxicity of TiO(2
)Particulates: The Contribution of Physicochemical Characteristics . Part. Fibre Toxicol. 
2009 , 6 , 33 10.1186/1743-8977-6-33 .20017923 
Xu R. ; Wu C. ; Xu H. 
Particle Size
and Zeta Potential of Carbon Black in
Liquid Media . Carbon 
2007 , 45 , 2806 –2809 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2007.09.010 .
Vasconcellos S. R. ; Kosman J. J. ; Rowell R. L. ; Medalia A. I. 
The Relationship
Between Zeta Potential and Particle Size in Non-Aqueous Carbon-Black
Dispersions . J. Dispersion Sci. Technol. 
1983 , 4 , 409 –413 . 10.1080/01932698308943380 .
Prasad R. Y. ; Wallace K. ; Daniel K. M. ; Tennant A. H. ; Zucker R. M. ; Strickland J. ; Dreher K. ; Kligerman A. D. ; Blackman C. F. ; Demarini D. M. 
Effect
of Treatment Media on the
Agglomeration of Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles: Impact on Genotoxicity,
Cellular Interaction, and Cell Cycle . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 1929 –1942 . 10.1021/nn302280n .23387956 
Liao D. L. ; Wu G. S. ; Liao B. Q. 
Zeta Potential of Shape-Controlled
TiO2 Nanoparticles with Surfactants . Colloids
Surf., A 
2009 , 348 , 270 –275 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2009.07.036 .
Berg J. M. ; Romoser A. ; Banerjee N. ; Zebda R. ; Sayes C. M. 
The Relationship
between pH and Zeta Potential of ∼30 Nm Metal Oxide Nanoparticle
Suspensions Relevant to in Vitro Toxicological Evaluations . Nanotoxicology 
2009 , 3 , 276 –283 . 10.3109/17435390903276941 .
Fröhlich E. 
The Role of
Surface Charge in Cellular Uptake and Cytotoxicity of Medical Nanoparticles . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2012 , 7 , 5577 –5591 . 10.2147/ijn.s36111 .
Verma S. K. ; Jha E. ; Panda P. K. ; Das J. K. ; Thirumurugan A. ; Suar M. ; Parashar S. 
Molecular
Aspects of Core-Shell Intrinsic
Defect Induced Enhanced Antibacterial Activity of ZnO Nanocrystals . Nanomedicine 
2018 , 13 , 43 10.2217/nnm-2017-0237 .29173091 
Verma S. K. ; Panda P. K. ; Jha E. ; Suar M. ; Parashar S. K. S. 
Altered
Physiochemical Properties in Industrially Synthesized ZnO Nanoparticles
Regulate Oxidative Stress; Induce in Vivo Cytotoxicity in Embryonic
Zebrafish by Apoptosis . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 13909 10.1038/s41598-017-14039-y .29066782 
Damonte L. C. ; Zélis L. A. M. ; Soucase B. M. ; Fenollosa M. A. H. 
Nanoparticles
of ZnO Obtained by Mechanical Milling . Powder
Technol. 
2004 , 148 , 15 –19 . 10.1016/j.powtec.2004.09.014 .
Mishra Y. K. ; Adelung R. 
ZnO Tetrapod Materials
for Functional Applications . Mater. Today 
2017 , 10.1016/j.mattod.2017.11.003 ., In Press


Duggal N. ; Jaishankar D. ; Yadavalli T. ; Hadigal S. ; Mishra Y. K. ; Adelung R. ; Shukla D. 
Zinc Oxide Tetrapods Inhibit Herpes
Simplex Virus Infection of Cultured Corneas . Mol. Vision 
2017 , 23 , 26 –38 .
Park J. H. ; Oh N. 
Endocytosis and Exocytosis
of Nanoparticles in Mammalian Cells . Int. J.
Nanomed. 
2014 , 9 , 51 –63 . 10.2147/ijn.s26592 .
Zhang Y. ; Yang M. ; Portney N. G. ; Cui D. ; Budak G. ; Ozbay E. ; Ozkan M. ; Ozkan C. S. 
Zeta Potential:
A Surface Electrical Characteristic to Probe the Interaction of Nanoparticles
with Normal and Cancer Human Breast Epithelial Cells . Biomed. Microdevices 
2008 , 10 , 321 –328 . 10.1007/s10544-007-9139-2 .18165903 
Shapiro H. M. 
Optical
Measurements in Cytometry: Light Scattering, Extinction, Absorption,
and Fluorescence . Methods Cell Biol. 
2001 , 63 , 107 –129 . 10.1016/s0091-679x(01)63009-7 .11060838 
Kim J. A. ; Åberg C. ; Salvati A. ; Dawson K. A. 
Role of Cell Cycle
on the Cellular Uptake and Dilution of Nanoparticles in a Cell Population . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 7 , 62 –68 . 10.1038/nnano.2011.191 .22056728 
Suzuki H. ; Toyooka T. ; Ibuki Y. 
Simple and
Easy Method to Evaluate
Uptake Potential of Nanoparticles in Mammalian Cells Using a Flow
Cytometric Light Scatter Analysis . Environ.
Sci. Technol. 
2007 , 41 , 3018 –3024 . 10.1021/es0625632 .17533873 
Vranic S. ; Boggetto N. ; Contremoulins V. ; Mornet S. ; Reinhardt N. ; Marano F. ; Baeza-Squiban A. ; Boland S. 
Deciphering the Mechanisms
of Cellular Uptake of Engineered Nanoparticles by Accurate Evaluation
of Internalization Using Imaging Flow Cytometry . Part. Fibre Toxicol. 
2013 , 10 , 2 10.1186/1743-8977-10-2 .23388071 
Fenoglio I. ; et al. Singlet Oxygen Plays
a Key Role in the Toxicity and DNA Damage Caused
by Nanometric TiO2 in Human Keratinocytes . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 6567 10.1039/c3nr01191g .23760471 
Cooper G. M.  The Cell: A Molecular
Approach , 2 nd ed.; Sinauer
Associates , 2000 .
Antoine T. E. ; Hadigal S. R. ; Yakoub A. M. ; Mishra Y. K. ; Bhattacharya P. ; Haddad C. ; Valyi-Nagy T. ; Adelung R. ; Prabhakar B. S. ; Shukla D. 
Intravaginal Zinc Oxide Tetrapod Nanoparticles as Novel
Immunoprotective Agents against Genital Herpes . J. Immunol. 
2016 , 196 , 4566 –4575 . 10.4049/jimmunol.1502373 .27183601 
Wang Y. ; Yao C. ; Li C. ; Ding L. ; Liu J. ; Dong P. ; Fang H. ; Lei Z. ; Shi G. ; Wu M. 
Excess Titanium
Dioxide Nanoparticles on the Cell Surface Induce Cytotoxicity by Hindering
Ion Exchange and Disrupting Exocytosis Processes . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 13105 –13115 . 10.1039/c5nr03269e .26176908 
Falck G. C. M. ; Lindberg H. K. ; Suhonen S. ; Vippola M. ; Vanhala E. ; Catalán J. ; Savolainen K. ; Norppa H. 
Genotoxic Effects of
Nanosized and Fine TiO2 . Hum. Exp. Toxicol. 
2009 , 28 , 339 –352 . 10.1177/0960327109105163 .19755445 
Kang S. J. ; Kim B. M. ; Lee Y. J. ; Chung H. W. 
Titanium
Dioxide
Nanoparticles Trigger p53-Mediated Damage Response in Peripheral Blood
Lymphocytes . Cell 
2008 , 49 , 399 –405 . 10.1002/em.20399 .
Dubey A. ; Goswami M. ; Yadav K. ; Chaudhary D. 
Oxidative
Stress and Nano-Toxicity Induced by TiO2 and ZnO on WAG Cell Line . PLoS One 
2015 , 10 , e012749310.1371/journal.pone.0127493 .26011447 
Bhattacharya K. ; Davoren M. ; Boertz J. ; Schins R. P. F. ; Hoffmann E. ; Dopp E. 
Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles Induce Oxidative Stress and DNA-Adduct
Formation but Not DNA-Breakage in Human Lung Cells . Part. Fibre Toxicol. 
2009 , 6 , 17 10.1186/1743-8977-6-17 .19545397 
Wang J. ; Fan Y. 
Lung Injury Induced
by TiO2 Nanoparticles Depends on Their Structural
Features: Size, Shape, Crystal Phases, and Surface Coating . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2014 , 15 , 22258 –22278 . 10.3390/ijms151222258 .25479073 
Jelinek R.  Science ; Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. , 2015 .
Yadav T. P. ; Yadav R. M. ; Singh D. P. 
Mechanical
Milling: A Top Down Approach
for the Synthesis of Nanomaterials and Nanocomposites . Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 2 , 22 –48 . 10.5923/j.nn.20120203.01 .
Vankoningsloo S. ; Piens M. ; Lecocq C. ; Gilson A. ; De Pauw A. ; Renard P. ; Demazy C. ; Houbion A. ; Raes M. ; Arnould T. 
Mitochondrial Dysfunction
Induces Triglyceride Accumulation
in 3T3-L1 Cells: Role of Fatty Acid Beta-Oxidation and Glucose . J. Lipid Res. 
2005 , 46 , 1133 –1149 . 10.1194/jlr.m400464-jlr200 .15741651 
Semenza G. L. 
Oxygen-Dependent
Regulation of Mitochondrial Respiration by Hypoxia-Inducible Factor
1 . Biochem. J. 
2007 , 405 , 1 –9 . 10.1042/bj20070389 .17555402 
Przybytkowski E. ; Behrendt M. ; Dubois D. ; Maysinger D. 
Nanoparticles
Can Induce Changes in the Intracellular Metabolism of Lipids without
Compromising Cellular Viability . FEBS J. 
2009 , 276 , 6204 –6217 . 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07324.x .19780838 
Martin S. ; Parton R. G. 
Lipid Droplets:
A Unified View of a Dynamic Organelle . Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
2006 , 7 , 373 –378 . 10.1038/nrm1912 .16550215 
Saquib Q. ; Al-Khedhairy A. A. ; Siddiqui M. A. ; Abou-Tarboush F. M. ; Azam A. ; Musarrat J. 
Titanium Dioxide
Nanoparticles Induced
Cytotoxicity, Oxidative Stress and DNA Damage in Human Amnion Epithelial
(WISH) Cells . Toxicol. In Vitro 
2012 , 26 , 351 –361 . 10.1016/j.tiv.2011.12.011 .22210200 
Ishikawa K. ; Ishii H. ; Saito T. 
DNA Damage-Dependent
Cell Cycle Checkpoints
and Genomic Stability . DNA Cell Biol. 
2006 , 25 , 406 –411 . 10.1089/dna.2006.25.406 .16848682 
Benchimol S. 
p53-Dependent
Pathways of Apoptosis . Cell Death Differ. 
2001 , 8 , 1049 –1051 . 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400918 .11687883 
Landsiedel R. ; Ma-Hock L. ; Van Ravenzwaay B. ; Schulz M. ; Wiench K. ; Champ S. ; Schulte S. ; Wohlleben W. ; Oesch F. 
Gene Toxicity Studies on Titanium
Dioxide and Zinc Oxide Nanomaterials
Used for UV-Protection in Cosmetic Formulations . Nanotoxicology 
2010 , 4 , 364 –381 . 10.3109/17435390.2010.506694 .20925445 
El
Badawy A. M. ; Silva R. G. ; Morris B. ; Scheckel K. G. ; Suidan M. T. ; Tolaymat T. M. 
Surface Charge-Dependent Toxicity
of Silver Nanoparticles . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2011 , 45 , 283 –287 . 10.1021/es1034188 .21133412 
Chen S. ; Guo Y. ; Chen S. ; Yu H. ; Ge Z. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang P. ; Tang J. 
Facile Preparation and Synergistic
Antibacterial Effect of Three-Component Cu/TiO2/CS Nanoparticles . J. Mater. Chem. 
2012 , 22 , 9092 –9099 . 10.1039/c2jm00063f .
Chen S. ; Guo Y. ; Zhong H. ; Chen S. ; Li J. ; Ge Z. ; Tang J. 
Synergistic
Antibacterial Mechanism and Coating Application of Copper/titanium
Dioxide Nanoparticles . Chem. Eng. J. 
2014 , 256 , 238 –246 . 10.1016/j.cej.2014.07.006 .
Su H.-L. ; Chou C.-C. ; Hung D.-J. ; Lin S.-H. ; Pao I.-C. ; Lin J.-H. ; Huang F.-L. ; Dong R.-X. ; Lin J.-J. 
The Disruption
of Bacterial Membrane Integrity through ROS Generation Induced by
Nanohybrids of Silver and Clay . Biomaterials 
2009 , 30 , 5979 –5987 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.07.030 .19656561 
Brayner R. ; Ferrari-Iliou R. ; Brivois N. ; Djediat S. ; Benedetti M. F. ; Fiévet F. 
Toxicological Impact Studies Based on Escherichi Coli
Bacteria in Ultrafine ZnO Nanoparticles Colloidal Medium . Nano Lett. 
2006 , 6 , 866 –870 . 10.1021/nl052326h .16608300 
Kumar A. ; Pandey A. K. ; Singh S. S. ; Shanker R. ; Dhawan A. 
Engineered
ZnO and TiO(2) Nanoparticles Induce Oxidative Stress and DNA Damage
Leading to Reduced Viability of Escherichia Coli . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
2011 , 51 , 1872 –1881 . 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.08.025 .21920432

