
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145784910.1021/acsomega.7b00919ArticleMethanol Synthesis and Decomposition Reactions Catalyzed
by a Model Catalyst Developed from Bis(1,5-diphenyl-1,3,5-pentanetrionato)dicopper(II)/Silica Ranaweera Samantha A. *†Henry William P. ‡White Mark G. *§† Department
of Chemistry, University of Ruhuna, Wellamadama, Matara 81000, Sri Lanka‡Department of Chemistry and §Dave C. Swalm School of Chemical
Engineering, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, Mississippi 39762, United States* E-mail: samantharan@chem.ruh.ac.lk (S.A.R.).* E-mail: white@che.msstate.edu (M.G.W.).19 09 2017 30 09 2017 2 9 5949 5961 04 07 2017 31 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Silica-supported model copper catalysts were prepared
by supporting bis(1,5-diphenyl-1,3,5-pentanetrionato)dicopper(II),
Cu2(dba)2, on Cab-O-Sil by a batch impregnation
technique. This metal complex showed a strong affinity for the silica
support, developing monolayer coverages near the value predicted from
a consideration of the size and shape of the planar metal complex
(2.6 wt % Cu). The supported catalysts were subsequently activated
by decomposing the organic ligands at 400 °C in air followed
by reduction with 2% H2/He at 250 °C. One sample was
prepared having a loading of 3.70 wt % Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst, and it was examined for the methanol synthesis
reaction under the following conditions: 250 °C with an equimolar
gas mixture of CO and H2 in a high-pressure batch reactor.
Kinetic data over the model catalyst were fit to a rate equation,
second order in the limiting reactant (H2), with a pseudo-second-order rate constant k2[CO]o[H2]o = 0.0957 [h-g
total Cu]−1. A control experiment using a commercial
catalyst, Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 with a copper loading
of 41.20 wt %, showed a value of k2[CO]o[H2]o = 0.793 [h-g total Cu]−1. A fresh sample of Cu2(dba)2/silica was examined
for methanol decomposition reaction at 220 °C. The model catalyst
shows a methanol decomposition first-order rate constant greater than
that of the commercial Cu/ZnO/Al2O3catalyst:
1.59 × 10–1 [min-g total Cu]−1 versus 9.6 × 10–3 [min-g total Cu]−1. X-ray diffraction analyzes confirm the presence of CuO particles
in both catalysts after calcinations. Copper metal particles were
found in both catalysts (fractional Cu dispersions were 0.11 and 0.16
on commercial and model catalysts, respectively) after the reduced
catalysts were used in both the methanol synthesis and decomposition
reactions. Using the values of copper dispersion found in these samples,
we recalculated the rate constants for the two reactions per unit
surface copper. These refined rate constants showed the same trends
as those reported per total amount of Cu. One role of the promoter(s)
in the commercial catalyst is the inhibition of the
methanol decomposition reaction, thus allowing higher MeOH synthesis
reaction rates in those regimes not controlled by thermodynamics.

document-id-old-9ao7b00919document-id-new-14ao-2017-00919wccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The
methanol synthesis reaction has been studied extensively over
the last few decades as an important industrial process.1,2 Methanol is used as a fuel for automobiles because of its high octane
number, easy handling and storage, wide availability, low boiling
point, limited coke formation due to the absence of carbon–carbon
bonds, and the ability to be synthesized using a variety of feed stocks.3−5 In most industrial processes, synthesis gas (CO2, H2, and CO) or purified syngas (CO and H2) is catalytically
converted to methanol.6−8 In addition to its use as a fuel in automobiles,
methanol has widely served as a hydrogen carrier in fuel cells and
thereby resolves the difficulties of hydrogen storage onboard.9 In fuel cells, methanol is directly converted
to CO and H2 by the methanol decomposition reaction or
to CO2 and H2 by methanol-steam-reforming reactions.5,10,11 Copper is one of the most active
metals available to catalyze both methanol synthesis and decomposition
reactions. The copper-based catalyst, Cu/ZnO/Al2O3, is widely employed in industries for the production of methanol
on a large scale. Other copper-based catalysts, such as copper single-crystal
model catalysts and copper catalysts supported on CeO2,
Al2O3, ZnO, and ZrO2, also have attracted
considerable interest in methanol synthesis from syngas.2,12−20 Few studies have addressed the use of silica as a catalytic support.21,22 Therefore, some authors have concluded that Cu/SiO2 catalysts
may not be as active as the other copper-supported catalysts for methanol
synthesis.1 However, the use of Cab-O-Sil
as a support, which has surface silanol groups, with copper has shown
to be an effective method for the conversion of syngas to methanol.23,24 The silica support is not reducible under methanol synthesis reaction
conditions and thus prevents the crystallization of the oxide support.25 This property minimizes the dissolution of the
active copper site into the support and hence can be used as a good
model system to study these reactions.26,27 The active
site of the methanol synthesis catalyst is still a matter of debate
as to the active oxidation state: Cu0, Cu+,
or Cu2+.2,18,28 Very few reports show Cu2+ as the active site, but many
reports show Cu+ and Cu0 as the active site
for the catalytic reaction. It is now widely accepted that metallic
copper is the main active site in commercial methanol synthesis catalysts.29−31 However, it is an open question as to the minimum Cu ensemble size
required for the MeOH synthesis and decomposition reactions. In this
work, we attempt to produce a model catalyst having small Cu ensembles
using dinuclear Cu metal complexes as the initial approach. Earlier
work showed the promise of making highly dispersed Cu/silica starting
with mononuclear and multinuclear Cu metal complexes.34a−34d,36,45,46,48−50

A variety of different methods have been used to prepare Cu/SiO2 catalysts for both methanol synthesis and methanol decomposition
reactions, including the urea-assisted decomposition of aqueous nitrate;
impregnations of copper acetate, nitrates, and amines; and precipitation
of copper nitrate onto silica surfaces.6,23−25,32 These supported copper catalysts
show higher activity and selectivity than the unsupported metal catalysts
in catalytic reactions due to several reasons.2 Interactions of the support with the catalyst active site may create
special coordination and activity for the reaction. Further, support–metal
interactions may lead to the creation of new active sites for the
reaction. In addition, the support facilitates the migration of copper
atoms during the reduction process to aid in developing a highly dispersed
catalyst (e.g., ZnO in Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst).13,14 Moreover, the activity of the supported catalyst depends on the
degree of dispersion.32,33 Highly dispersed, nanosized particles
show a dramatic increase in the catalytic activity in methanol synthesis
due to the presence of large Cu surface area.

The current study
is directed toward the preparation of highly
dispersed copper catalysts on Cab-O-Sil to study the structure/selectivity
of Cu/SiO2 in methanol synthesis and methanol decomposition
reactions. In this work, we draw upon our prior experience in decorating
oxide surfaces with polynuclear metal complexes.34a,34b These and other references therein describe a method to affix metal
complexes having a known structure to the surface of silica and other
supports without destroying the metal complex. The coordinating ligands
can be removed to permit access of substrates to the reactive metal
(ion) ensembles and thus create an active catalyst. In this way, we
explored the effect of metal ensemble size upon the reactivity of
the model catalysts for methanol synthesis and decomposition reactions.35

The procedure described here is based
on the previously described
approach for supporting dinuclear copper complexes on Cab-O-Sil.36 The batch impregnation technique was used to
affix bis(1,5-diphenyl-1,3,5-pentanetrionato)dicopper(II) (Cu2(dba)2) on Cab-O-Sil. We speculated that the four
benzene rings and the quasi-π electron systems of the triketonate
ligands in the Cu2(dba)2 complex interact strongly
with the silanol groups present on the surface.36 Such interactions have been shown to facilitate the deposition
of similar metal complexes (e.g., as [M(acac)2]2+) as a monolayer film.34b,35 The acetylacetonate
ligands (acac) and other anionic ligands described in these references
are known to react with the protons in the surface silanols to deprotonate
this surface.37 Furthermore, copper atoms
can accept an axial coordination from the deprotonated siloxides of
the surface and form −Cu–O–Si≡ when heated
at higher temperatures with the removal of organic ligands. From the
results of other studies, it is expected that the Si–O–Cu
bonds in copper silicates are stable at high temperatures and therefore
the deactivation of the copper catalyst by sintering is minimized
during the methanol decomposition reaction.1 Evaluation of the catalyst for methanol synthesis and methanol decomposition
reactions and a comparison of reaction data with a commercial methanol
synthesis catalyst will be discussed in this article.

2 Results
The Cu2(dba)2/silica precatalyst
was first
characterized by UV–vis spectroscopy, diffuse reflectance infrared
Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS), powder X-ray diffraction
(PXRD), electron spin resonance spectroscopy, and thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA) and compared with the unsupported and previously characterized
Cu2(dba)2/silica samples.36 Here, we use some of our previously reported data in the Supporting Information (SI) for the sake of reader’s
convenience.36 The main objective of these
characterizations and comparisons was to examine the morphology and
to investigate the catalyst–support interactions of the Cu2(dba)2/silica precatalyst. Before and after the
methanol (MeOH) synthesis and decomposition reactions, the model and
commercial catalysts were examined by a battery of tests so as to
describe the bulk and surface properties.

2.1 Elemental
Analysis of Silica-Supported Cu2(dba)2
The progress of the deposition
of the metal complex onto Cab-O-Sil was examined by recording the
UV–vis absorption spectra of the solution (a) before adding
Cab-O-Sil and (b) after collecting the filtrate after 24 h of stirring
with Cab-O-Sil. As shown in Figure 1, the Cu2(dba)2 complex solution
has similar absorption spectra before and after deposition onto the
Cab-O-Sil support. This observation confirms the stability of the
metal complex during the deposition process.36

Figure 1 UV–vis
spectra of (a) 1.53 × 10–5 M Cu2(dba)2 in CH2Cl2 and (b) collected
filtrate after stirring the solution with 0.5
g of Cab-O-Sil for 24 h.

The variation in the absorbance values before and after decorating
the silica was used to calculate the complex wt % on the Cab-O-Sil.
The absorbance peak at 444 nm was used for the calculation of the
concentration of complex remaining in solution. With samples showing
high metal loadings, UV–vis absorption spectra were recorded
after 24 h of stirring and then the amount of metal complex left in
the solution was calculated. This remaining mass was subtracted from
the initial mass of the metal complex and the copper wt % on silica
was calculated. Given this copper wt % and the stoichiometry of the
Cu2(dba)2 complex, we calculated wt % of carbon.
This predicted carbon and copper compositions are shown in Table S-1 and Figure S-1. Elemental analyzes
for Cu and C were performed to see whether metal complex keeps intact
on the surface, and those results are combined with the UV–vis
results in Table S-1. All of these elemental
analysis data for various copper loadings are shown in Figure S-1, in which the predicted and observed
values are nearly same at each loading. The slopes of these lines
give the moles of C/moles of Cu estimated for the supported complexes.
This C/Cu slope was determined using the wt % Cu determined by UV–vis,
and the C/Cu slope was determined using the elemental analysis data.
From all of these data, we concluded that the metal complexes did
not decompose upon decorating the silica. Knowing this fact permitted
us to calculate the Cu loading at monolayer loading of the Cu2(dba)2 on silica.

2.2 PXRD
of Silica-Supported Cu2(dba)2
The Cu2(dba)2/silica samples
showed XRD peaks at 2θ values of 6.52, 9.56, 10.30, 12.80, 14.44,
17.40, 20.16, 22.02, 22.64, 25.48, 27.54, and 29.26° (Figure 2b) and Cu loadings
>3.91 wt % (Figure S-2e,f). These peaks
are the same as those observed for the parent metal complex (Figure 2a). In the PXRD spectra
of 2.64 wt % Cu sample (Figure S-2d), strong
peaks were observed at 2θ values of 6.58, 9.68, 14.51, 22.12,
and 27.60° and weak reflections were apparent as well. The PXRD
spectra (Figure S-2a–c) showed new
sharp peaks, but we did observe two broad peaks at 2θ = 6 and
12°. These peaks have also been observed in the PXRD spectra
of Cab-O-Sil.

Figure 2 XRD spectra of (a) unsupported Cu2(dba)2 and
(b) supported Cu2(dba)2/silica precatalyst.

We interpret these results in
a manner that we used earlier to
interpret the PXRD results of silica-supported Cu(acac)2. Beginning with the data at higher loadings of metal complex, we
see that these PXRD peaks are observed at values of 2θ not much
different from the positions of the peaks in the bulk, polycrystalline
metal complex. The appearance of these peaks in the supported samples
as well as in polycrystalline sample indicates that the surface contains
more than one layer of the metal complex having the same structure
as the polycrystalline metal complex. The sample (Figure S-2d)36 at 2.64 wt % Cu
shows very small diffraction lines at positions characteristic of
the bulk metal complex. The sample (Figure S-2c) at 1.36 wt % does not show these sharp peaks, but only the broad
peaks, characteristic of Cab-O-Sil. From these results, we conclude
that the monolayer of complex/silica is concluded at a weight loading
between 1.36 and 2.64 wt % Cu. The precatalyst belongs to a multilayer
according to the XRD reflections shown in Figure 2b.

2.3 DRIFTS of Silica-Supported
Cu2(dba)2
Figure 3 shows the DRIFTS images of unsupported and
Cab-O-Sil-supported
Cu2(dba)2 precatalyst. Neither the Cu2(dba)2 metal complex nor the supported samples show IR
peaks in the region of 4000–1600 cm–1. By
comparing the spectra of Cu2(dba)2 with silica-supported
samples with various Cu loadings (Figure S-3),36 there were two noteworthy features
to discuss. First, spectra of the supported samples were similar to
those of the parent metal complex of Cu2(dba)2 for Cu loadings ≥2.64 wt %. Second, the peak at 1440 cm–1 in the ≤1.36 wt % copper sample was missing
and started to reappear in the spectra of sample with copper loadings
of 2.64 wt % and above.36 On the basis
of the findings of Kenvin et al.,45 when
the supported metal complex exists as more than one layer, the layers
on the top do not have a strong interaction with the surface and hence
behave similar to that of the metal complexes in polycrystalline Cu2(dba)2. Because DRIFTS is a surface-sensitive technique,
the spectrum is dominated by the features of the Cu2(dba)2 in the topmost layer(s). Because the IR spectra of the samples
of 2.64 wt % copper and higher loadings are very similar to the spectrum
of the Cu2(dba)2 complex, it was concluded that
for samples with ≥2.64 wt % (Figure S-3) copper loadings, a monolayer (or greater) coverage has been achieved.36 By comparing DRIFTS images of multilayer films
with the precatalyst, it is clear that the precatalyst has developed
into a multilayer film on the support surface.

Figure 3 DRIFTS images of (a)
unsupported Cu2(dba)2 and (b) supported Cu2(dba)2/silica precatalyst.

Kenvin45 discussed the use of
IR to
identify the monolayer Cu loading of Cu(acac)2/silica.
He showed that an overtone vibration of the ring C–H, out-of-plane
motion, was sensitive to the environment. In the polycrystalline solid,
this vibration is present, whereas, it is absent when the metal complex
is placed on silica. Thus, the overtone vibration served to identify
the Cu metal loading in the sample, where the monolayer of metal complexes
has been achieved.

2.4 Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
(EPR) of Silica-Supported
Cu2(dba)2
Electron paramagnetic resonance
spectra were recorded for pure Cu2(dba)2 complex
and the precatalyst in solid state (Figure 4) and compared to those of two different
samples prepared to have 0.73 wt % Cu and 4.34 wt % Cu on silica (Figure S-4).36 The
sample having a Cu loading of 0.73 wt % was selected to represent
a submonolayer film, and the 4.34 wt % Cu sample was chosen to represent
a multilayer sample. All of the recorded spectra are given in Figure S-4. The hyperfine structure of the unsupported
sample shows four spectral lines in the g parallel region
and two spectral lines in the g perpendicular region,
indicating that the two copper atoms are electronically not coupled.36,47 Low symmetry of the submonolayer sample makes the lines to be broadened
due to strong interactions with the surface.47 The intensity of the submonolayer spectrum is higher than that of
the spectra of metal complex and the multilayer film. An additional
spectral line in the g parallel region was observed for
submonolayer sample showing strong interaction with surface along
the Z axis.36 This spectral
line feature could be explained by the Cu atom forming a coordination
bond with the surface siloxide: Cu:O–Si≡. Copper is
known to accept a fifth coordination bond under certain conditions.35 Identical spectral lines were observed for parent
metal complex, multilayer film, and the precatalyst. However, intensities
are different in all three samples.

Figure 4 EPR spectra of (a) unsupported Cu2(dba)2 and
(b) supported Cu2(dba)2/silica precatalyst.

2.5 Temperature-Programmed
Decomposition of Silica-Supported
Cu2(dba)2
TGA experiments were carried
for the supported Cu2(dba)2/silica precatalyst
and unsupported Cu2(dba)2 samples to determine
their temperature-dependent decomposition kinetics, as shown in Figure 5. The expected overall
weight changes were calculated using eq 1 and compared with the experimental weight loses. The final structure of the decomposed
sample is assumed to be due to the formation of Cu2O (with
two O–Si also coordinated, see Figure 7, starting structure) on the surface (Table S-2).36 1  The general agreement between predicted and
observed weight losses upon thermolysis supports the other data we
have presented to the claim that the metal complexes decorate the
silica surface intact. Samples having copper loading <2.64 wt %
Cu show very slow decomposition kinetics above 235 °C (Figure S-5). The other two samples, with 3.91
and 4.34 wt % Cu, exhibit a rapid weight change from 235 to 290 °C
and a slow weight change above 290 °C (Figure S-5e–f).36 We speculate that
the rapid weight change comes from the second layer of metal complex,
which would be less strongly held by the surface.

Figure 5 Thermal decomposition
of (a) Cu2(dba)2/silica
precatalyst and (b) unsupported Cu2(dba)2.

These data suggest that the metal
complexes at low loadings experience
one type of environment, which is different from the metal complexes
in the high loading samples. This environment influences the thermal
decomposition kinetics. Interaction of the metal complexes with the
silica could influence these kinetics through H-bonding and coordination
bonding. Accordingly, we suggest that the spectra in Figure S-5a–c are those of samples containing monolayer
films of Cu2(dba)2 before calcination.36 Accordingly, the spectra in Figure S-5d–f describe samples having some of the metal
complexes in the overlayers.

The Supporting Information shows the
predicted and observed weight losses for these supported samples (Table S-2). Although the data show a large standard
deviation, ∼11%, they support the earlier conclusions regarding
the integrity of the supported metal complexes before calcinations.
Moreover, the thermolysis kinetics for the monolayer samples (Figure S-5a–c) are different from those
observed for the multilayer samples (Figure S-5d–f).36 Thus, we estimate the monolayer completion
to occur at loadings between 1.36 and 2.64 wt % Cu. The precatalyst
also showed similar decomposition kinetics to the multilayer films
(rapid weight change from 235 to 290 °C and a slow weight change
above 290 °C); hence, we concluded that the precatalyst organized
as a multilayer film on the support surface.

2.6 Atomic
Absorption Spectroscopy of Cu2(dba)2/Silica
and Commercial Cu MeOH Catalyst
Atomic absorption spectroscopy
analyzes for copper in the Cu2(dba)2/silica
and commercial catalyst showed results
of 3.70 and 41.20 wt % Cu, respectively. The amount of copper in the
commercial catalyst is approximately 13 times higher than that in
the model Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst. The metal
loading of 3.70 wt % copper in the Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst is greater than that required for a theoretical
monolayer coverage of Cu2(dba)2 on the silica,
2.64 wt % copper.36 For this study, the
3.70 wt % copper-loaded sample was used to ensure that the silica
surface was completely covered with Cu2(dba)2 complex.

A previous study36 showed
that the organic ligands of the Cu2(dba)2/silica
are completely decomposed below 400 °C; therefore, the model
catalyst was heated to 400 °C to remove these organic ligands.
After calcination, the model catalyst and the commercially available
methanol synthesis catalyst were characterized by XRD. The XRD patterns
of the calcined catalysts are depicted in Figure 6. These data are to be compared to the literature
data (JCPDS) so as to interpret the results. The diffraction lines
of CuO (JCPDS 44-0706) appear at 2θ of 32.6, 35.6, 38.8, and
48.9°. The diffraction lines of the ZnO phase (JCPDS 36-1451)
are observed at 2θ of 31.8, 34.5, and 36.3°. For the model
catalyst, the peaks corresponding to low indexes of CuO are clearly
apparent at 2θ values of 35 and 38°.38,39 Moreover, XRD peaks attributed to the silica-supported Cu2(dba)2 (2θ = 6.58, 9.68, 14.51, 22.12, and 27.60°)
are absent in the thermally decomposed sample. These results and the
presence of CuO peaks confirm the complete decomposition of Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst as well as the presence
of copper atoms with a bulk oxidation state of +2.
The commercial catalyst showed peaks at 2θ = 32, 35–36,
38, 43, 51, and 57°. The peaks at 32, 35, and 38° may be
attributed to ZnO, whereas the Cu peaks were assigned to 35°
for CuO and the peaks at 43 and 51° are attributed to Cu0.40,41 We did not see any XRD peak attributed to
crystalline Al species in the commercial catalyst. The small peak
at 57° could not be indexed to either a Cu or Zn species.

Figure 6 XRD patterns
of (a) supported 3.70 wt % Cu2(dba)2/silica
catalyst and (b) commercial catalyst after calcinations
in air at 400 °C.

After calcinations, the model catalyst was reduced with hydrogen.
The proposed structure of the model catalyst after reduction with
hydrogen is shown in Figure 7 if the Cu species form strong coordination
bonds with the surface Si species via the oxygen in the OH group,
as was discussed in earlier work.34a−34c That is, Kenvin34c suggested that the reduced Cu/silica derived
from Cu(acac)2 was bonded to the siloxide oxygen and the
terminal structure was −O–Cu–H for the reduced
catalyst. This structural assignment finessed the problem of a dangling
bond on the Cu’s. We show here a structure for Figure 7, where the oxidized coppers
are terminating with −H groups. The temperature-programmed
reduction data can be used to establish the complete reduction of
CuO’s in the model and commercial catalysts. The previously
reported catalyst precursors have shown onset reduction temperatures
between 150 and 180 °C. The commercial catalyst with 61.7 wt
% Cu shows a maximum reduction peak in the range of 210–250°C,
which we used to confirm the complete reduction of the model catalyst
and the commercial catalysts.34e

Figure 7 Proposed surface
structure of the Cu2(dba)2/silica catalysts
after reduction.

All of the catalysts
were characterized by XRD after methanol synthesis
and decomposition reactions. The observed XRD patterns are shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8 XRD patterns of (a) 3.70
wt % Cu2(dba)2/silica
catalyst after methanol synthesis reaction, (b) 3.70 wt % Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst after methanol decomposition reaction,
and (c) commercial catalyst after methanol decomposition and synthesis
reactions.

The Cu2(dba)2/silica model catalysts show
identical XRD patterns after methanol synthesis and decomposition
reactions (Figure 8a,b). Two peaks at 43 and 51° were visible corresponding to
Cu(111) and Cu(200),42 and a smaller peak
was observed at 38°.38,39 It is quite clear that
the Cu’s species were not highly dispersed in these samples.
The sintering of Cu observed mimicked the results observed by Kenvin
for the calcinations/reduction of Cu(acac)2 multilayers
on silica.34c For the commercial catalyst,
these two copper metal peaks were observed at the same positions in
the XRD spectrum, but more intense than the peaks of the model catalysts,
reflecting the higher copper content (41 vs 3.7 wt % Cu). In addition,
the commercial catalyst showed a peak at 33 and 35°, which may
be attributed to ZnO and the peak at 38° is attributed to a Cu
species. Appearance of peaks for copper metal particles after methanol
synthesis and decomposition reactions confirms the further reduction
of bulk Cu ions to copper metal. Especially, in methanol
synthesis, it has been shown that Cu+ and Cu0 are catalytically active phases. During the catalytic reactions,
copper(II) species in Cu2(dba)2/silica model
catalysts are reduced to copper metal.

The PXRD patterns are
given in the Supporting Information (Section 7; Figures S-9 and S-10). One citation of the literature confirms the major peak
locations in the commercial catalyst.34eTables S-4 and S-5 show the manipulations
of these PXRD peak positions and peak width data along with the determination
of the Cu dispersions and crystallite sizes for the model catalyst
and the commercial catalyst. Our calculations of Cu metal surface
area per gram of supported catalyst are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Calculation
of Cu Metal Surface Area/Mass
of Total Catalyst
assume
that particles are cubes with a characteristic size L	
 	Cu2(dba)2/silica	commercial catalyst	
L, nm	3.64	5.25	
surface area, 5/L, nm2/nm3	1.37 × 109	9.52 × 108	
density of copper, ρ, gCu/cm3	8.96	8.96	
specific surface area, 5/ρL, m2/gCu	37.7	18.1	
Cu weight loading in catalyst, wt %	3.7%	41.2%	
Cu surface area, m2/g catalyst	1.40	7.47	
The beginning of the calculation of copper
metal surface area is
the assumption that the crystallites on the catalyst surface are cubes
(see Figure S-11). This assumption has
been supported by literature data showing high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy of supported Cu catalysts and by the transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) images in the Supporting Information. The next assumption is that only five of the six
faces of the cube are accessible by gaseous reactants; thus, the surface/volume
ratio of these crystallites is given by 5/L, where L is the crystallite size determined by using the Scherrer
equation to process the PXRD peaks (see above for references to Supporting Information). The next assumption
is that the density of the Cu crystallites can be estimated using
the value of the bulk density for copper (8.96 g/cm3).
Finally, model and commercial catalysts (3.7 and 41.2 wt % Cu, respectively)
were employed to determine the Cu metal surface area per gram of catalyst
for the two catalysts as 1.4 and 7.47 m2 Cu/g catalyst.

2.7 Methanol Synthesis Reaction
Activated
catalysts were evaluated for the methanol synthesis reaction at 250
°C in a stirred batch autoclave. Isothermal batch reactor data
were obtained for the commercial catalyst and for the model catalyst
derived from Cu2(dba)2. The purpose of these
reaction studies was to characterize the surface sites in these catalysts
for the methanol synthesis reaction.

The synthesis of methanol
obeys the following stoichiometric equation  with a rate expression43 as follows 2  Besides this synthesis reaction, methanol
can decompose and form other products, such as dimethyl ether, methyl
formate, methane, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen. 3   4   5   6  The batch reactor was used to attain high
conversions; however, data at low conversions were used to determine
the rate constants of the synthesis reaction (eq 2). Using this rate equation and limiting the
analysis to low conversion data (<15%), for which the other reactions
will be appearing at low reaction rates, the total pressure in the
reactor can be related as a function of time to the fractional conversion
of the limiting reactant, hydrogen, when the initial reactant mixture
is equimolar in CO and H2. A derivation of this equation
can be found in the Supporting Information. 7  Therefore,
the raw data of PT versus time can be
processed according to eq 7 to extract the fractional conversion
of hydrogen, f, versus time for the two catalysts.
First, we consider the total pressure versus time data for the two
catalysts (Figure 9).

Figure 9 Ratio of total pressure to initial pressure (PT/PT°) vs time. Each catalyst (5 g) was prereduced at
240 °C in 2 mol % H2 in He at a total pressure of
500 psig. Catalyst pellets were 3–4 mm; stirrer rotational
speed is 200 min–1. (a) Model catalyst (3.70 wt
% Cu); (b) commercial catalyst (41.20 wt % Cu).

These raw data show that the commercial catalyst is more
reactive,
on a total catalyst weight basis, than the model catalyst; however,
the Cu metal loadings (3.70 and 41.2 wt % Cu) were different as well
as the specific surface areas of the support (200 m2/g
for Cab-O-Sil and 119 m2/g for a similar commercial catalyst,
vide supra). The data can be examined in more detail, accounting for
the differences in the two catalysts. These data of pressure were
converted to fractional conversion of H2, using eq 7, and plotted against the
product of mass of Cu in catalyst × time [g Cu-min] for two Cu
metal loadings: 3.70 wt % (model catalyst) and 41.20 wt % (commercial
catalyst). These data are shown in Figure S-6a.

2.7.1 Integral Method of Analysis
The
data in Figure S-6a show that the initial
conversion rates are different when expressed specific to the mass
of Cu in the two samples. For a quantitative evaluation of the specific
activities between the two catalysts, a rate law must be chosen. One
rate law40 that recognizes the orders of
reaction and the reversibility is given in eq 2. The rate of formation of methanol is proportional
to the partial pressures of CO and H2 for the forward reaction
and to the MeOH partial pressure for the reverse reaction. At low
conversion, the reverse reaction will be negligible, and the dependence
upon CO will be small at low H2 conversions (<0.3) such
that the kinetics can be approximated by irreversible kinetics. These
data of fractional conversion versus time were examined by the integral
method of analysis for first-order (see Figure S-6b, Supporting Information) and second-order kinetics. The
integrated rate equation for an isothermal batch reactor using a pseudo-second-order irreversible kinetics is (see Supporting Information for derivation). 8  When the data are plotted as f/(1 – f) versus time × MCu, the slope will be k[CO]o[H2]o. Figure 10 shows the data plotted assuming that second-order
irreversible
kinetics can be used to model the reaction dynamics at low fractional
conversion of hydrogen (<0.3). We notice that both of the data
sets show negative intercepts on the y axis, which
is characteristic of data from a batch reactor, where it is difficult
to assign a value of zero time for the initiation of the reaction.44

Figure 10 Integrated rate plots: (a) 3.70 wt % Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst, filled squares; (b) commercial catalyst,
filled
circles.

The slopes of these two lines
are as follows: 0.0957 [h-g total
Cu]−1 for the model catalyst, and 0.793 [h-g total
Cu]−1 for the commercial catalyst. These slopes
are related to the pseudo-second-order rate constants as follows: k = slope/[CO]o[H2]o [=]
[molarity2-h-g total Cu]−1.

2.7.2 Differential Method of Analysis
The same pressure versus
time data can be reexamined by the differential
method of analysis to extract the rate constants characterizing the
model and commercial catalysts. The starting point for this development
is the forward rate expression of eq 2, thus neglecting the reverse reaction, the MeOH decomposition
reaction. We can express this equation in terms of the conversion
of hydrogen, f, as follows 9  where the value 2 is the
stoichiometry number
for H2.

This result suggests that we plot estimates
of the hydrogen conversion rate, (df/dt)/MCu, against (1 – (1/2)f)(1
– f)2 so as to establish the slope,
(2)k[CO]o[H2]o (Table S-3). These processed data
are shown in Figure 11 to give the following values for the slopes of the lines describing
the commercial catalyst and the model catalyst: 4.58 and 0.552 [h-g
total Cu]−1, respectively. We notice that these
two methods for examining the same data produce ratios of slopes,
commercial to model catalysts, which are very similar: 8.29 versus
8.30.

Figure 11 Differential method of analysis of isothermal batch reactor data
for MeOH synthesis.

From these data, we
conclude that the commercial catalyst is about
8 times more active than the model catalyst when one accounts for
the amount of total Cu present in the sample. We summarize the kinetic
characterizations of the two catalysts in Table 2. Even though the rate expression, eq 2, shows an order of reaction
of at least 2 in [H2], the data at low conversion could
also be fitted by a rate equation that is first order in hydrogen.
The ratio of rate constants for this fit of the data, commercial/model
catalysts, was 7.8, not much different from the ratios obtained by
fitting the data to pseudo-second-order and third-order kinetics.
This result is not unexpected when the range of conversion data is
low.44

Table 2 Summary of Kinetic
Rate Constants
Determined for the MeOH Synthesis Reaction
 	integral
method	differential method	
slope	k	k[CO]o[H2]o	2k[CO]o[H2]o	
commercial catalysts	0.645	0.793	4.58	
model catalysts	0.0832	0.0957	0.552	
order of reaction	first	second	third	
units	[h-g-Cu]−1	[h-g-Cu]−1	[h-g-Cu]−1	
2.7.3 Gas Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry
(GC–MS) Analysis of MeOH Synthesis Reaction
After
each catalytic reaction, catalysts were washed with 5 mL of CH2Cl2 and analyzed by GC–MS. The GC–MS
results are shown in Figures S-7 and S-8. The commercial catalyst gave a comparatively sharp peak at a retention
time of ∼5 min. The model catalyst produced a small peak at
the same position. This peak was identified as MeOH by injecting an
authentic sample of MeOH and observing a single peak to elute at 5
min.

2.8 Methanol Decomposition
Reaction
The
two catalysts were characterized further by the MeOH decomposition
reaction, which is just the reverse reaction to the MeOH synthesis
reaction, eq 2. This
reverse reaction is an important tool to characterize the supported
copper catalyst, as one would design a catalyst that showed a high
synthesis rate constant and a low decomposition rate constant for
the conditions under which kinetics control the reaction. The reaction
progress was monitored by measuring the total pressure in the reactor
as a function of time.

Using the ideal gas law, we can relate
fractional conversion of MeOH to the total pressure as follows (Supporting Information) 10  Fractional
conversion versus time data (Figure 12) can be fit to
an irreversible rate law, reverse of eq 2, by an integral method of analysis to obtain a slope
related to the first-order rate constant: k = [h-g-Cu]−1. We now look at the MeOH fractional conversion data
when plotted as ln(1 – f) versus the reaction
time × mass of Cu in the sample (Figure 13). If we now restrict these data to fractional
MeOH conversions data of <0.15, it appears that the initial conversion
rates are much different between the two catalysts, with the model
catalyst showing the higher conversion rate per unit total mass of
Cu.

Figure 12 Fractional conversion vs time for a commercial catalyst: 10 g catalyst,
41.20 wt % Cu, initial pressure = 10 psig, rapid heating to reaction
temperature = 220 °C, initial methanol = 15 g, final methanol
= 9 g; for the model catalyst: 5 g catalyst, 3.70 wt % Cu, initial
methanol = 15 g, final methanol = 12 g, initial pressure = 10 psig,
initial temperature = 220 °C.

Figure 13 Integrated rate plot for the conversion of methanol × time
mass of Cu: (a) Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst and
(b) commercial catalyst.

From the slope, it was found that the rate constants for
the commercial
catalyst and the 3.70 wt % Cu model catalyst were 0.96 × 10–2 and 1.59 × 10–1 [h-g-Cu]−1, respectively. Here, we report that the commercial
catalyst shows a lower rate constant than the model catalyst by a
factor of ∼16, per unit mass of Cu, for the MeOH decomposition.
This striking result shows the importance of the additional components
added to the Cu so as to inhibit the reverse reaction
that destroys the MeOH product.

2.8.1 GC–MS Analysis
of Products
The commercial catalyst produced carbon monoxide
as the only carbon
product in GC–MS analysis, whereas the 3.70 wt % Cu/silica,
[Cu2(dba)2], catalyst gave 29% carbon monoxide
and 1.8% carbon dioxide by volume. The formation of carbon dioxide
suggests that the water gas shift reaction has occurred during the
methanol decomposition reaction and/or CO reacted with some of the
O atoms in the copper oxide to form CO2 and reduce the
catalyst. These results suggest that the 3.70 wt % Cu/silica[Cu2(dba)2] catalyst has a slightly different product
selectivity in the methanol decomposition reaction.

3 Discussion
Our earlier study36 characterizing the
Cu2(dba)2/silica catalysts showed that the samples
have an initial loading of complex greater than a monolayer loading
(∼2.6 wt % Cu) and these excess complexes would organize into
an overlayer that developed an XRD pattern similar to that of the
polycrystalline unsupported metal complex. When this sample was calcined
(Figure 6), an XRD
spectrum showed only crystals of CuO. This result
was not unexpected based upon the work of Kenvin34c,45 who demonstrated the same result for supported multiple layers of
Cu(acac)2/silica. Accordingly, we were able to prepare
supported CuO/silica to test as a model catalyst for the MeOH synthesis
and decomposition reactions having a low loading of Cu (∼3.7
wt %). The commercial catalyst, when calcined under the same conditions,
showed both CuO and Cu0 crystallites. Apparently, some
of the Cu in the commercial catalyst could not be fully oxidized to
CuO at the 400 °C calcination temperature, whereas all of the
Cu in the model catalyst could be fully oxidized. Indeed, some literature
data report that the commercial catalysts were calcined at a higher
temperature, 450 °C, than what was used here, 400 °C. These
same materials, when subjected to reduction in H2, followed
by reaction in CO and H2 and then used to catalyze the
MeOH decomposition, showed only Cu0 species.

The
appearance of Cu0 and CuO crystallites in the reduced
and calcined model catalysts arising from the decomposition of the
Cu2(dba)2 metal complexes shows that the Cu
species are mobile on the silica surface. This result is different
from that reported by Kenvin for the Cu/silica catalysts developed
from the decomposition of a monolayer film of Cu(acac)2/silica.45,46 On the other hand, samples showing multiple
layers of Cu(acac)2/silica (approximately two to three
layers) formed crystallites upon calcining and reduction. The mononuclear
Cu(acac)2 complexes Kenvin used were free to associate
with −Si–OH centers and thus form a collection of metal
complexes in the monolayer film that could be individually secured
to the surface siloxide by a strong coordination bond between the
siloxide and the Cu2+.

One indirect characterization
method, N2O decomposition,
suggested that these Cu centers could be separated by as much as 0.4
nm. This separation distance could reflect the separation distance
between surface silanols in the Cab-O-Sil support, vide infra. The
dinuclear metal complex used in this study47 showed a Cu–Cu distance of 0.3058 nm, about 1 nm shorter
than the minimum distance identified by Kenvin between Cu’s
derived from a monolayer film of Cu(acac)2. The actual
distance between silanols on the Cab-O-Sil cannot be known for certainty
owing to its amorphous nature. However, bounds for this silanol–silanol
distance may be inferred from Si–Si distances in α-cristobalite.
Using the c unit cell value of 0.69278 nm for α-cristobalite
and recognizing that the Si–Si projected distance is ∼1/2
of this value, we estimate the distance between Si’s in α-cristobalite
as 0.346 nm. The β-form of cristobalite shows a Si–Si
spacing of 0.3584 nm. It is likely that the Si–Si distance
in Cab-O-Sil may be larger than these values owing to the lower density
of the amorphous phase. Considering these data, one might opine that
the mismatch is at least (1/2)–1 nm between the Cu–Cu
distance in Cu2(dba)2 and the siloxides in Cab-O-Sil
so that upon ligand destruction by heating it is unlikely that the
Cu’s in the metal complex will form strong coordination bonds
with the surface siloxides. We speculate that this lack of strong
coordination bonding between the Cu’s and the surface siloxides
leads to their mobility to form Cu crystallites on the surface. This
result was not what we had anticipated in planning this line of research,
but very early work suggested that the formation of crystallites could
occur from a submonolayer film of a metal complex, where some of the
Cu ions in the metal complexes were not in registry with the siloxides
prior to calcination.48

The model
Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst contains
more than one layer of adsorbed Cu2(dba)2 on
the silica. We speculate that the top layer interacts less strongly
with the silica surface than the layer in contact with the silica.
Therefore, the Cu ions developed in this top layer during calcination
may agglomerate to form comparatively big CuO particles. During the
chemical reactions, MeOH synthesis and decomposition, these particles
were further reduced to copper metal as shown in the XRD pattern.
One could estimate the average size of the Cu crystals from a consideration
of the PXRD line-broadening data (Figures S-9 and S-10) and TEM data (Figures S-11–S-14 and Table S-5). The average Cu metal crystallite sizes can
be estimated using the Scherrer equation, which relates the broadening
of the two Cu reflections, (111) and (200), to the average metal crystallite
size in the model and commercial catalysts, 3.6 and 5.3 nm, respectively.
One can relate these average crystallite sizes to the fractional dispersion
of Cu atoms by assuming a shape for the crystals, cubic, and an average
surface atom density characterized by the (111) index plane. Here,
we estimated the fractional Cu dispersions to be 0.11 and 0.16, respectively,
for the commercial and model catalysts (Table S-4). We speculate further that the larger copper particles
participate in the MeOH synthesis reaction, which demands large Cu
ensembles.49

We compared our results
to those reported in the literature for
the same catalysts. Literature data for Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalysts show Cu crystallite sizes of 30.7 and 37.1 nm (ref 3 in SI), for which we estimate the fractional
Cu dispersion to be 0.032 and 0.026, respectively. Smaller Cu crystallites,
2–10 nm, were observed in another study (ref 4 in SI) for a Cu/ZnO catalyst. In yet another study,
a commercial Cu/ZnO/alumina catalyst showed Cu crystallites of ∼9
nm in size, for which the dispersion would be 0.064 (ref 5 in SI). Our results of 3–5 nm estimated from
the PXRD data appear to be similar to some of the results reported
in the literature.

The ratios of the rate constants multiplied
by the initial concentrations
of CO and H2 ([CO]o[H2]o) reported for the methanol synthesis reaction over the commercial
and model catalysts (4.58 and 0.552 [h-g total Cu]−1, respectively) do not account for the dispersion of the Cu crystallites
in each catalyst. The apparent rate constant, k,
is related to the intrinsic rate constant, ki, as follows 11  where the ratio of the number surface Cu atoms
to the total number of Cu atoms is the fractional dispersion.

Using the estimates of fractional Cu dispersions derived from XRD line-broadening
data for the commercial and model catalysts (0.11 and 0.16, respectively),
their intrinsic rate constants × [CO]o[H2]o are as follows: 41.6 and 3.47 [h-g surface Cu]−1, respectively. These rate constants suggest that
the intrinsic surface rate constants for the reaction on the model
and commercial catalysts differ by a factor of ∼12. One could
interpret these results by ensemble theory, which suggests that a
minimum ensemble size of Cu atoms is necessary for the MeOH synthesis
reaction to occur. Thus, the catalyst that shows the greater number
of these minimum Cu ensembles will demonstrate a larger intrinsic
rate constant. In the present case, this catalyst would be the commercial
catalyst. This intrinsic rate constant reflects the effects of catalyst
structure on chemisorptions of CO and H2 to the surface
and the activations of the reactant molecules. In particular, it is
clear that the Cu/Cab-O-Sil is active for the MeOH synthesis reaction
and that the addition of ZnO and the alumina support serve to increase
the intrinsic reactivity in the MeOH synthesis and/or the promoter inhibits the MeOH decomposition when the system experiences
kinetic control.

These same catalysts were characterized for
reactivity using the
MeOH decomposition reaction to show the following apparent first-order
rate constants: 0.0096 [h-g total Cu]−1 for the
commercial catalyst and 0.159 [h-g total Cu]−1 for
the 3.70 wt % Cu model catalysts. Now, applying the fractional Cu
dispersions calculated before, the intrinsic rate constants for the
MeOH decomposition reaction over the commercial and model catalysts
were as follows: 4.98 and 60.0 [h-g surface Cu]−1.

It is interesting to compare the rate constants for the two
catalysts
between the two reactions: MeOH synthesis and MeOH decomposition (Table 3).

Table 3 Comparison of Intrinsic Rate Constants
between Model and Commercial Catalystsa
catalyst	MeOH synthesis reaction at 250 °C	MeOH decomposition
reaction at 220 °C	
model Cu2(dba)2	3.47	60.0	
commercial
catalyst	41.6	4.98	
a Units of rate constants: [h-g surface
Cu]−1 for MeOH synthesis, rate constant × [CO]o[H2]o, whereas the decomposition rate
constants are first-order rate constants, [h-g surface Cu]−1.

These data show that
the MeOH synthesis reaction is faster than
the MeOH decomposition reaction over the commercial catalyst (41.6
vs 4.98 [h-g surface Cu]−1); however, the opposite
is true for the model catalyst (3.47 vs 60 [h-g surface Cu]−1). It must be remembered that the decomposition reaction was completed
at a temperature of 220 °C, whereas the synthesis reaction was
completed at 250 °C, thus emphasizing the difference in the reactivity
of these catalysts between the synthesis and decomposition reactions.
In developing our argument, we are using the characterizations of
the Cu species only, thus begging the question of the direct role of ZnO in the catalysis. Some authors55 suggest that the ZnO facilitates the heterolytic hydrogen chemisorptions (Hδ+-Hδ−) and thus ZnO plays an indirect role in the catalysis.

Considering
the reactivity of the two catalysts for the MeOH synthesis
reaction, the commercial catalyst is more reactive by an order of
magnitude when compared on the basis of the number of exposed Cu atoms.
This large difference in reactivity between the synthesis reactions
observed over these catalysts may be due in part to the ensemble size
required by the synthesis reaction. The average Cu ensemble size in
the commercial catalyst may be larger than the average ensemble size
in the model catalyst. Thus, the commercial catalyst shows a greater
number of Cu ensembles having the minimum size to initiate the synthesis
reaction. Another consideration is the lower reactivity of the commercial
catalyst for the MeOH decomposition reaction vis-à-vis the
model catalyst. This lower reactivity of the MeOH decomposition reaction
than the commercial reaction may result in fewer of the MeOH molecules
decomposing to CO and H2 and thus giving the appearance
of higher reactivity for the disappearance of reactants CO and H2. These differences in the catalytic properties may be attributed
to the different oxidation states of Cu present in the two catalysts
and the presence of the other oxide(s) in contact with these copper
species. It is clear that copper species in the model catalyst show
different catalytic properties from the copper species in contact
with ZnO and alumina residing in the commercial catalyst. In particular,
the role of ZnO/alumina may be to “break up” the copper
surface into islands, which are not very reactive to the MeOH decomposition
reaction. These discontinuities in the Cu surface would not be observed
by the PXRD, which is a “volume”-sensitive tool rather
than a “surface”-sensitive tool.

Now turning to
the observed Cu dispersion in the model sample,
our attempts, reported here, to prepare well-dispersed Cu/silica catalyst
using dinuclear metal complexes were not successful as we reported
earlier,34a,34b where we did achieve an atomically
dispersed and stable Cu/silica catalyst using mononuclear Cu complexes
as the copper precursor. We speculate that the Cu–Cu distance
(∼0.3 nm) of the copper ions in the dinuclear metal complex
did not allow these ions to realize a strong interaction between the
Cu ions and the surface siloxides, as was reported by Kenvin.34c Choksi et al. reported the synthesis and characterization
of a silica-supported Cu catalyst (2.27 wt % Cu) prepared from a monolayer
film of copper 2,2′-bipyridine dimer on Cab-O-Sil.50 After calcination of this sample, they reported
that all of the Cu ions in the sample were surface Cu’s as
confirmed by the NO chemisorption and that this catalyst when reduced
in H2 at 300 °C reacted with N2O to suggest
that all of the Cu atoms were separated by a distance of <0.4 nm.

The Cu–Cu distance in this Cu(bipy) dimer complex is 0.289
nm.51a This distance is shorter than the
Cu–Cu distance reported for the Cu2(dba)2 complex of this study. Thus, we would not expect to see high dispersion
of the Cu ions developed from Cu 2,2′-biyridine unless the
complex were to dissociate upon contacting the silica surface. The
EPR spectrum reported by Choksi et al. for the monolayer film of Cu
2,2′-bipyridine/silica (Figure S-15) shows a striking resemblance to the EPR spectra reported for monomeric
Cu 2,2′-dipyridine (OH)n, where n = 0, 1, or 2 complexes in solution.52 Moreover, the EPR parameters obtained by Choksi et al.50 (Table S-6) are not
too different from the EPR parameters reported by the same authors.51b The EPR spectrum of the solid Cu 2,2′-bipyridine
dimer was completely different from that of the supported metal complex
(Figure S-16). Data of the system of Cu
2,2′-bipyridine species in aqueous solutions show that the
dimer is favored only when pH > 7. For values of pH < 7, the
monomeric
Cu 2,2′-bipyridine is the favored species.53 One could interpret these data to show that the dimer complex
was converted to the monomeric complex [Cu 2,2′-bipyridine]2+ upon contacting the slightly acidic surface of the Cab-O-Sil.
This mononuclear Cu complex would be free to form a strong interaction
with the surface siloxides, which have been produced by the action
of triethylamine cosolvent.49 In a similar
manner, we have54 showed that bis(heptane-2,4,6-trionato)dicopper(II),
Cu2(daa)2, decomposed into monomeric Cu species
when we attempted to decorate silica with the parent complex. This
dinuclear metal complex is isomorphous to the Cu2(dba)2, except the triketonate (daa) ligands terminated in methyl
groups rather than phenyl groups observed in the (dba) ligands. We
suggest that the match between the Cu–Cu distance in the metal
complex and the Si–OH–Si–OH distance of the support
plays an important role in forming a strong interaction between the
surface and the metal ions in the multinuclear metal ion complex decorating
the surface when the metal complex remains intact.

4 Conclusions
Cu2(dba)2/silica catalysts
were prepared
to have 3.70 wt % copper and evaluated for methanol synthesis and
decomposition reactions. Control experiments were completed with a
commercial Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst (Katalco 51-8PPT,
41.2 wt % Cu). The model catalyst was less active than the commercial
catalyst for the methanol synthesis reaction. On the other hand, the
commercial catalyst was less active than the model catalyst for the
methanol decomposition reactions after accounting for the amounts
of Cu in the sample. Even when accounting for the differences in Cu
metal dispersion between the two catalysts (0.11 and 0.16 for commercial
and model catalysts, respectively), the model catalyst showed lower
intrinsic rate constant than the control catalyst for the MeOH synthesis
reaction, by a factor of 12. On the other hand, the commercial catalyst
showed a lower reactivity for the MeOH decomposition reaction by a
factor of 12. The role of promoters in these commercial catalysts
may be related to the lower reaction activity toward the MeOH decomposition
as well as increasing the rate of the MeOH synthesis reaction. The
combination of higher activity for the forward reaction and lower
reactivity for the reverse reaction makes the overall activity toward
MeOH synthesis of the commercial catalyst particularly attractive.

The low reactivity of the model catalyst for methanol synthesis
was not unexpected given that the model was designed to show only
the effects of copper alone on a nonreducible oxide surface, silica.
The catalytic properties of the model catalyst are characteristic
of an unpromoted Cu, which was initially decorating the silica in
a highly controlled environment. The effect of calcining was to (1)
partially destroy the order of these catalyst precursors on the surface
and (2) promote the growth of small Cu crystallites from the monolayer
of CuO arising from the decomposition of the Cu(II) dinuclear metal
complexes.

5 Experimental Section
5.1 Chemicals
and Reagents
Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O was purchased from Strem
Chemicals (7 Mulliken Way, Newburyport, MA) and used without further
purification. The Cab-O-Sil (M-5 scintillation grade, 200 m2/g) was purchased from Acros Organics (Fisher Scientific). CH2Cl2 was obtained from VWR Chemicals (Matsonford
Road, Radnor, PA 19087-8660). The methanol synthesis catalyst, Cu-ZnO-Al2O3, F-51-8PPT (60–100 mesh, calcined, not
activated), was purchased from Katalco (Suite 230, 2 Transam Plaza
Drive, Oak Brook Terrace, IL 60181-4296). The surface area38 of a similar commercial catalyst was reported
to be 119 m2/g. All of the other chemicals and reagents
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Company.

5.2 Reactor
A Parr 4560 Mini Bench Top
reactor (Parr Instrument Co., Moline, IL) was used for the current
study. The reactor has a volume of 400 mL and is equipped with a stirring
shaft, pressure gauge, thermocouple, heating jacket, and catalyst
basket, which holds 5–10 g of pelletized catalyst.

5.3 Synthesis of the Ligand
1,5-Diphenyl-1,3,5-pentanetrione
was synthesized by the Claisen condensation of acetone with methyl
benzoate in Ar atmosphere using monoglyme as the solvent.36

5.4 Synthesis of the Metal
Complex
The
synthesis of bis(1,5-diphenyl-1,3,5-pentanetrionato)dicopper(II),
Cu2(dba)2, was performed by the reaction of
Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O with 1,5-diphenyl-1,3,5-pentanetrione
in ethanol–water solvents.36

5.5 Preparation of the Catalyst
5.5.1 Selection
of Solvent
Several solvents
were tested for obtaining the largest amount of metal complex deposited
on the support, such as: (1) water, (2) ethanol, (3) methanol, and
(4) methylene chloride. These tests were completed earlier using Co2(dba)2, another metal complex that is isostructural
to the copper dinuclear metal complex. The results of these tests
showed that the order of solubility of the metal complexes in the
solvents was: CH2Cl2 > MeOH > EtOH ≫
water.

5.5.2 Methodology Used To Obtain Supported Catalyst
Cu2(dba)2 (1 g) was dissolved in 400 mL of
CH2Cl2 and was added to 5 g of the previously
dried Cab-O-Sil. The solution was then stirred for 24 h, filtered,
washed with fresh aliquots of 1.00 mL of CH2Cl2, and dried under vacuum for 6 h at room temperature.

5.6 Characterization Techniques
UV–vis
spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrometer over the
250–700 nm wavelength range. The supported catalyst was characterized
by X-ray diffraction (Siemens D5000 powder X-ray diffractometer),
diffuse reflectance Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS), and thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA) as described previously.36 Metal analyses were performed using an atomic absorption spectrometer
(AA-7000 series; Schimadzu Corporation). A copper hollow cathode lamp
was used with 6 mA current and a 324.8 nm wavelength. The burner height
was set to 7 mm, and the slit width was set to 0.7 nm. The flame composition
was acetylene (flow rate, 1.8 L min–1) and air (flow
rate, 1.8 L min–1). EPR spectra were recorded on
a Bruker EMX EPR spectrometer equipped with a 100 kHz field modulator.
Diphenylpicrylhydrazyl (DPPH) (g = 2.007) was used to
calibrate the spectra.

5.7 Activation of the Catalyst
5.7.1 Calcinations
The supported Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst was heated in air using
a furnace at 400 °C for 6 h to remove organic ligands.

5.7.2 Reduction with H2
We
use here a technique to reduce the catalyst with H2 reported
in the patent literature.39 The calcined
catalyst was placed in a catalytic basket and transferred into the
stirred batch autoclave. The reactor was flushed with 2% of H2 gas (10 psi H2 + 490 psi Ar) and heated to 100
°C. This temperature was maintained for 1 h before increasing
the temperature at a rate of 10 °C/h to 240 °C. After allowing
the catalyst to thermally equilibrate at 240 °C for 1 h, the
H2 and Ar mixture was purged from the autoclave.

5.8 Methanol Synthesis Reactions
The
activated catalyst (5 g) was transferred into the catalytic basket
contained in a stainless steel reactor vessel. Syngas (CO + H2, 1:1 molar ratio) was introduced into the autoclave, and
the temperature of the reactor was raised to 250 °C, where the
observed pressure at the beginning of the reaction was 860 psig. The
course of the reaction was followed by recording the total pressure
as a function of time. The same procedure was repeated using 5 g of
the commercially available methanol synthesis catalyst. Throughout
each reaction, the rotational speed of the stirrer was held constant
at 200 rpm. No solvent was used for the methanol synthesis reaction
because the reaction is a heterogeneous gas–solid phase reaction.

5.9 Methanol Decomposition Reactions
The methanol
decomposition reaction was carried out using a thermally
activated Cu2(dba)2/silica catalyst. The catalyst
(5 g) was activated by reducing with 2% H2 using the same
procedure reported above before allowing the reactor to cool to room
temperature and purging the remaining gases. Methanol (15 mL) was
then deposited inside the reactor vessel. The temperature of the reactor
was increased from room temperature to 220 °C and held constant
to start the methanol decomposition reaction. The pressure of the
reactor was monitored as a function of time. This reaction was repeated
using 10 g of the commercially available methanol synthesis catalyst
and 15 mL of methanol.

5.10 GC–MS Analysis
of Reaction Products
After the reactions, gas samples were
collected from the batch
reactor and analyzed by GC–MS affixed with FID and TCD. Without
cooling the reactor, all of the products were vented into 50 mL of
dichloromethane solution maintained at 0 °C, to trap the condensable
products. The effluent gases were then directed to a gas sampling
bomb. Samples from the dichloromethane solution and from the gas sampling
bomb were examined separately in the GC–MS.

5.11 Characterizations of the Catalysts by Powder
X-ray Diffraction (PXRD)
All of the catalysts reported in
the current study were characterized by XRD after calcinations, methanol
synthesis, and decomposition reactions.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00919.Elemental analysis
and temperature-programmed decomposition
of silica-supported Cu2(dba)2 catalysts, derivation
of equations to extract rate constants from isothermal batch reactor
data, integral method of analysis, differential method of analysis,
calculation of crystallite size from the Scherrer equation, estimation
of the crystallite size from TEM data, EPR data for Cu 2,2′-bipyridine
dimer and monomers (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00919_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This study
is based upon work performed by the Sustainable
Energy Research Center at Mississippi State University and was supported
by the Department of Energy under Award Number DE-FG3606GO86025. Special
thanks go to Dr. W. P. Henry, an author and principal investigator,
for his lifetime dedication to inorganic chemistry. Dr. Henry suddenly
died of lung cancer in February 2014.
==== Refs
References
Liu X. M. ; Lu G. Q. ; Yan Z. F. ; Beltramini J. 
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2003 , 42 , 6518 –6530 . 10.1021/ie020979s .
Szanyi J. N. ; Goodman D. W. 
Catal. Lett. 
1991 , 10 , 383 –390 . 10.1007/BF00769173 .
Lindstram B. ; Agrell J. ; Pettersson L. J. 
Chem. Eng. J. 
2003 , 93 , 91 –101 . 10.1016/S1385-8947(02)00112-2 .
Geissler K. ; Newson E. ; Vogel F. ; Truong T.-B. ; Hottinger P. ; Wokaun A. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2001 , 3 , 289 –293 . 10.1039/b004881j .
Agrell J. ; Birgersson H. ; Boutonnet M. 
J. Power Sources 
2002 , 106 , 249 –257 . 10.1016/S0378-7753(01)01027-8 .
Toyir J. ; De la Piscina P. R. I. ; Fierro J. L. G. ; Homs N. Ì. 
Appl. Catal.,
B 
2001 , 29 , 207 –215 . 10.1016/S0926-3373(00)00205-8 .
Wu J. ; Saito M. ; Takeuchi M. ; Watanabe T. 
Appl. Catal., A 
2001 , 218 , 235 –240 . 10.1016/S0926-860X(01)00650-0 .
Baltes C. ; Vukojevia S. ; Schath F. 
J. Catal. 
2008 , 258 , 334 –344 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2008.07.004 .
Shukla A. K. ; Christensen P. A. ; Dickinson A. J. ; Hamnett A. 
J. Power Sources 
1998 , 76 , 54 –59 . 10.1016/S0378-7753(98)00140-2 .
Wu H. S. ; Chung S. C. 
J. Comb. Chem. 
2007 , 9 , 990 –997 . 10.1021/cc070066r .17900166 
Lindstram B. R. ; Pettersson L. J. 
Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2001 , 26 , 923 –933 . 10.1016/S0360-3199(01)00034-9 .
Hu J. ; Wang Y. ; Cao C. ; Elliott D. C. ; Stevens D. J. ; White J. F. 
Catal. Today 
2007 , 120 , 90 –95 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2006.07.006 .
Tanaka Y. ; Kawamura C. ; Ueno A. ; Kotera Y. ; Takeuchi K. ; Sugi Y. 
Appl.
Catal. 
1983 , 8 , 325 –333 . 10.1016/0166-9834(83)85003-9 .
King D. S. ; Nix R. M. 
J. Catal. 
1996 , 160 , 76 –83 . 10.1006/jcat.1996.0125 .
Nitta Y. ; Suwata O. ; Ikeda Y. ; Okamoto Y. ; Imanaka T. 
Catal. Lett. 
1994 , 26 , 345 –354 . 10.1007/BF00810608 .
Cheng W.-H. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 
1999 , 32 , 685 –691 . 10.1021/ar980088+ .
Cheng W.-H. ; Shiau C.-Y. ; Liu T. H. ; Tung H. L. ; Lu J.-F. ; Hsu C. C. 
Appl. Catal., A 
1998 , 170 , 215 –224 . 10.1016/S0926-860X(98)00055-6 .
Wu-Hsun C. 
Appl. Catal., A 
1995 , 130 , 13 –30 . 10.1016/0926-860X(95)00102-6 .
Koeppel R. A. ; Baiker A. ; Schild C. ; Wokaun A. 
Stud. Surf. Sci.
Catal. 
1991 , 63 , 59 –68 . 10.1016/S0167-2991(08)64572-3 .
Choi Y. ; Stenger H. G. 
Appl. Catal., B. 
2002 , 38 , 259 –269 . 10.1016/S0926-3373(02)00054-1 .
Yang Y. ; Mims C. ; Disselkamp R. ; Mei D. ; Kwak J.-H. ; Szanyi J. ; Peden C. ; Campbell C. 
Catal. Lett. 
2008 , 125 , 201 –208 . 10.1007/s10562-008-9592-4 .
Yatsu T. ; Nishimura H. ; Fujitani T. ; Nakamura J. 
J. Catal. 
2000 , 191 , 423 –429 . 10.1006/jcat.2000.2810 .
Bailie J. E. ; Rochester C. H. ; Millar G. J. 
Catal. Lett. 
1995 , 31 , 333 –340 . 10.1007/BF00808597 .
Millar G. J. ; Rochester C. H. 
Catal. Lett. 
1992 , 14 , 289 –295 . 10.1007/BF00769666 .
Meitzner G. ; Enrique I. 
Catal. Today 
1999 , 53 , 433 –441 . 10.1016/S0920-5861(99)00135-2 .
Robbins J. L. ; Iglesia E. ; Kelkar C. P. ; DeRites B. 
Catal. Lett. 
1991 , 10 , 1 –10 .
Breen J. P. ; Ross J. R. H. 
Catal. Today 
1999 , 51 , 521 –533 . 10.1016/S0920-5861(99)00038-3 .
Klier K. ; Chatikavanij V. ; Herman R. G. ; Simmons G. W. 
J. Catal. 
1982 , 74 , 343 –360 . 10.1016/0021-9517(82)90040-9 .
Grandjean D. ; Pelipenko V. ; Batyrev E. D. ; Van den
Heuvel J. C. ; Khassin A. A. ; Yurieva T. M. ; Weckhuysen B. M. 
J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2011 , 115 , 20175 –20191 . 10.1021/jp201839s .
Nakamura J. ; Choi Y. ; Fujitani T. 
Top. Catal. 
2003 , 22 , 277 –285 . 10.1023/A:1023588322846 .
Klier K.   In Advances in Catalysis ; Eley D. D. , Pines H. , Weisz P. B.  , Eds.; Academic
Press : New York , 1982 ; Vol. 31 , pp 243 -313 .
Shen W. ; Ichihashi Y. ; Matsumura Y. 
Catal. Lett. 
2002 , 79 , 125 –127 . 10.1023/A:1015334914620 .
Sakurai H. ; Haruta M. 
Catal. Today 
1996 , 29 , 361 –365 . 10.1016/0920-5861(95)00305-3 .
a Bruce D. A. ; Bertrand J. A. ; White M. G. 
AIChE J. 
1993 , 39 , 1966 10.1002/aic.690391207 . b Beckler R. K. ; White M. G. 
J. Catal. 
1986 , 102 , 252 –256 . 10.1016/0021-9517(86)90160-0 . c Kenvin J. C. ; White M. G. ; Mitchell M. B. 
Langmuir 
1991 , 7 , 1198 –1205 . 10.1021/la00054a030 . d Mitchell M. B. ; Vasumathi R. C. ; White M. G. 
Langmuir 
1994 , 10 , 4523 –4529 . 10.1021/la00024a023 . e Kurra P. ; Kasatkina I. ; Girgsdiesa F. ; Trunschkea A. ; Schlögla R. ; Resslerb T. 
Appl. Catal., A 
2008 , 348 , 153 –164 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2008.06.020 .
Spivey J. J. ; White M. G. 
Catalysis 
2005 , 18 , 72 –115 . 10.1039/9781847553300-00072 .
Ranaweera S. A. ; Henry W. P. ; Rowe M. D. ; Walters K. B. ; White M. G. ; Rodriguez J. M. 
Inorg. Chim. Acta 
2014 , 423 , 281 –289 . 10.1016/j.ica.2014.07.078 .
Pike J. ; Chan S. W. ; Zhang F. ; Wang X. Q. ; Hanson J. 
Appl. Catal., A 
2006 , 303 , 273 –277 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2006.02.008 .
Flores J. H. ; Peixoto D. P. B. ; Appel L. G. ; De Avillez R. R. ; Pais Da Silva M. I. 
Catal. Today 
2011 , 172 , 218 –225 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2011.02.063 .
Brown D. M. ; Hsiung T. H. ; Rao P. ; Roberts G. W.   U.S. Patent 4,801,574 , Jan 31, 1989 .
Yurieva T. M. ; et al. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 6 , 4522 –4526 . 10.1039/b407728h .
Lei H. ; Nie R.-F. ; Fei J.-H. ; Hou Z.-Y. 
J. Zhejiang Univ., Sci.,
A 
2012 , 13 , 395 –406 . 10.1631/jzus.A1100345 .
Theivasanthi T. ; Algar M. 
Arch.
Phys. Res. 
2010 , 1 , 112 –117 .
Choi Y. ; Stenger H.  Fuel Chemistry
Division Preprints ; American Chemical Society , 2002 ; Vol. 47 , pp 723 –724 .
White M. G.  Heterogeneous Catalysis ; Prentice-Hall : Englewood Cliffs, NJ , 1990 ; pp 3 –13 .
Kenvin J. C. ; White M. G. 
J. Catal. 
1992 , 135 , 81 –91 . 10.1016/0021-9517(92)90270-R .
Kenvin J. C. ; White M. G. 
J. Catal. 
1991 , 130 , 447 –458 . 10.1016/0021-9517(91)90127-P .
a Maki A. H. ; McGarvey B. R. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1958 , 29 , 31 –34 . 10.1063/1.1744456 . b Dyrek K. ; Che M. 
Chem.
Rev. 
1997 , 97 , 305 –331 . 10.1021/cr950259d .11848871 
Beckler R. K. ; White M. G. 
J. Catal. 
1998 , 112 , 157 –167 . 10.1016/0021-9517(88)90129-7 .
a White M. G. 
Catal. Today 
1993 , 18 , 73 –109 . 10.1016/0920-5861(93)80102-7 . b Van Der Voort P. ; Baltes M. ; Vansant E. F. ; White M. G. 
Interface Sci. 
1997 , 5 , 209 –216 .
Choksi H. N. ; Zippert A. ; Berdahl P. ; Bertrand J. A. ; Perry D. L. ; Mitchell M. B. ; White M. G. 
J. Mol. Catal.
A: Chem. 
1995 , 97 , 85 –89 . 10.1016/1381-1169(94)00065-4 .
a Casey A. T. ; Hoskins B. F. ; Whillans F. D. 
J. Chem. Soc.
D 
1970 , 0 , 904 –905 . 10.1039/C29700000904 . b Casey A. T. 
Aust. J. Chem. 
1972 , 25 , 2311 –2318 . 10.1071/CH9722311 . c Hoskins B.
F. ; Whillans F. D. 
J. Chem. Soc.,
Dalton Trans. 
1975 , 1267 –1272 . 10.1039/dt9750001267 .
Garribba E. ; Micera G. ; Sanna D. ; Strinna-Erre L. 
Inorg. Chim. Acta 
2000 , 299 , 253 –261 . 10.1016/S0020-1693(99)00508-3 .
Fabian I. 
Inorg. Chem. 
1989 , 28 , 3805 –3807 . 10.1021/ic00319a011 .
Ranaweera S.   Ph.D. Thesis, Mississippi State University , MS , 2012 .
Herman R.
G. ; Klier K. ; Simmons G. W. ; Finn B. P. ; Bulko J. B. ; Kobylinski T. P. 
J. Catal. 
1979 , 56 , 407 –429 . 10.1016/0021-9517(79)90132-5 .

