
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145940610.1021/acsomega.8b02574ArticlepH-Induced Switch between Different Modes of Cytochrome c Binding to Cardiolipin-Containing Liposomes Milorey Bridget Schweitzer-Stenner Reinhard *Kurbaj Raghed Malyshka Dmitry †Department of Chemistry, Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States* E-mail: rschweitzer-stenner@drexel.edu. Phone: 215-895-2268.16 01 2019 31 01 2019 4 1 1386 1400 28 09 2018 02 01 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Fluorescence, visible circular dichroism
(CD), absorption, and
resonance Raman spectroscopy techniques were combined to explore structural
changes of ferricytochrome c upon its binding to
cardiolipin-containing liposomes (20% 1,1′,1,2′-tetraoleyolcardiolipin
and 1,2-deoleyol-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) at
acidic pH (6.5). According to the earlier work of Kawai   [J. Biol. Chem. 2005 , 280 , 34709 –347171 ],16012169 cytochrome c binding at this pH is governed by interactions between
the phosphate head groups of cardiolipin and amino acid side chains
of the so-called L-site, which contains the charged residues K22,
K25, K27, and potentially H26 and H33. We found that L-site binding
causes a conformational transition that involves a change of the protein’s
ligation and spin state. In this paper, we report spectroscopic responses
to an increasing number of cardiolipin-containing liposomes at pH
6.5 in the absence and presence of NaCl. The latter was found to mostly
inhibit protein binding already with 50 mM concentration. The inhibition
effect can be quantitatively reproduced by applying the electrostatic
theory of Heimburg   [Biophys. J. 1995 , 68 , 536 –546 ].7696507  A comparison with corresponding spectroscopic
response data obtained at pH 7.4 reveals major differences in that
the latter indicates hydrophobic binding, followed by an electrostatically
driven conformational change. Visible CD data suggest that structural
changes in the heme pocket of liposome-bound ferricytochrome c resemble to some extent those in the denatured protein
in urea at neutral and acidic pH. The measured noncoincidence between
absorption and CD Soret band of cytochrome c in the
presence of a large access of cardiolipin is caused by the electric
field at the membrane surface. The very fact that its contribution
to the internal electric field in the heme pocket is detectable by
spectroscopic means suggests some penetration of the protein into
membrane surface.

document-id-old-9ao8b02574document-id-new-14ao-2018-025747ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Cytochrome c is a multifunctional heme protein
found primarily in the mitochondria of cells, where it carries out
an electron-transfer process that drives cellular respiration.1,2 The multifunctionality of this protein is due to its conformational
flexibility in its oxidized state3,4 and native
folded state. Its primary function of electron transfer between cytochrome c reductase and oxidase is carried out via the slightly
solvent-exposed heme group. The heme iron has a high reduction potential
owing to its methionine (M80) axial ligand.5 An alternative biological function of cytochrome c is its role in initiating apoptosis after it is released into the
cytosol.6 The release from the intermembrane
space of mitochondria is facilitated by a complex biochemical cascade
during which the protein acts as a lipid peroxidase. It oxidizes an
increasing number of anionic phospholipid cardiolipin (CL) that makes
up about 20% of the lipids constituting the resting state of the inner
mitochondrial membrane (IMM).7

The
heme environments of native cytochrome c and
classical peroxidases are significantly different. While cytochrome c contains a hexacoordinate low-spin heme iron with histidine
and methionine as axial ligands, classical peroxidases like horseradish
peroxidase generally adopt a pentacoordinate high-spin or quantum-mixed
spin state of the heme iron.8,9 The distal environment
is configured in a way that amino acid side chains of, e.g., a histidine
and an arginine can stabilize intermediates like compound I via hydrogen
bonding. In cytochrome c, covalent linkages of the
heme to two cysteins via thioether bridges cause substantial ruffling
of the heme group, which reduces the protein’s redox potential.10,11 In classical peroxidases, interactions between the heme macrocycle
and the protein are solely noncovalent, which produces a mixing of
macrocycle saddling and ruffling.12,13 These structural
differences make it apparent that cytochrome c has
to adopt a non-native structure for acquiring peroxidase activity.
Multiple lines of evidence do indeed suggest that the interaction
of ferricytochrome c with anionic lipid surfaces
indeed induces structural changes.14−21 The anionic phospholipid CL has a high binding affinity for cytochrome c, thus making CL-containing vesicles excellent tools for
studying the thermodynamic and structural aspects of cytochrome c–IMM interactions.21−24

Several binding sites on
the protein have been proposed thus far
in the literature involving the interaction between cytochrome c and negatively charged phospholipids. Unfortunately, the
multitude of binding studies reported over the last 25 years does
not provide a consistent picture regarding the physical determinants
of binding processes and their dependence on external parameters such
as pH and ionic strength. A detailed discussion of unresolved issues
has been given in a recent review.4 Here,
we confine ourselves to a brief summary of existing contradictions.
Generally, the two-site binding model of Rytömaa and Kinnunen
is still considered as a kind of ultima ratio for the interpretation
of binding studies.25,26 On the basis of fluorescence
quenching studies of ferricytochrome c binding to
liposomes composed of different mixtures of anionic and zwitterionic
lipids, these researchers proposed two types of binding sites termed
A- and C-site. A-site binding occurs at a patch of positively charged
lysine residues (K72 and K73) (Figure 1). Although the authors originally determined the binding
mechanism to be electrostatic, they later reported experimental findings
that suggested an irreversibility of the process. They tried to explain
this discrepancy by a two-step binding process where electrostatic
binding is followed by a lipid insertion into a hydrophobic pocket
in the protein.25 It does not depend significantly
on pH above 5. C-site binding was proposed to involve hydrogen bonding
between the N52 residue (as acceptor) and a protonated phosphate head
group of CL. For liposomes with physiological CL content (20% and
lower), this binding process requires a pH value below 5 but data
reported by Rytömaa and Kinnunen suggest that the pH threshold
moves into the physiological pH region with increasing CL content
of liposomes.26 Thus, it could become biologically
relevant since the CL contents of the inner and outer membranes of
mitochondria increase during the initial phase of the apoptotic process.7 C-site binding is not electrostatic in nature.
Therefore, it cannot be inhibited by the addition of NaCl or other
salts.

Figure 1 Proposed binding sites A, C, and L involved in cytochrome c–cardiolipin interactions. Taken from Soffer.27

The binding model of Rytömaa and Kinnunen has been
recently
augmented by a third so-called L-site proposed by Kawai et al., which
is active only at pH below 7.0.24 The existence
of this binding site was first deduced from the observation of pH-dependent
turbidity after allowing ferricytochrome c to interact
with liposomes containing 20% CL. The turbidity was related to vesicle
fusion caused by the simultaneous interactions of cytochrome c with two different liposomes via its A- and L- binding
sites. According to this model, the protein operates like a bidentate
ligand (Figure 1).
A combination of carbethoxylation (histidine) and alkylation (lysine)
modifications with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight
experiments enabled the authors to identify the involved protein residues
as K22, K25, K27, H33, and H26 (cf. Figure 1). This result led the authors to conclude
that L-site binding is electrostatic in nature. The pH range of L-site
binding for which experimental data indicate an effective pK value of seven overlaps with the reported pH values of
the IMM (6.8–7),28 thus giving it
a high physiological relevance. The latter has been corroborated by
a follow-up study of Kawai et al., who observed that the respiration
of cytochrome c-depleted mitoplasts can be restored
by the addition of cytochrome c in a pH-dependent
manner that resembles the observed L-site binding.29 While the experiments of Kawai et al. provide compelling
evidence for the existence and biological relevance of L-site binding,
its very existence is actually at variance with the results of Rytömaa
and Kinnunen in that L-site binding was shown to increase the apparent
binding constant for cytochrome c from ca. 7.5 ×
106 at pH 7.4 to ca. 2.5 × 107 M–1 at pH 6.2. This variation would lead to a much more pronounced variation
of binding isotherms in this pH range than those reported by the Kinnunen
group.24,26 Further contradiction to the A/C-site binding
model arose from conflicting observations regarding cytochrome c binding to CL-containing liposomes at neutral pH, which
generally reflect binding affinities well below those reported in
the above-cited studies (in the 104–105 M–1 range).20,21,30 Work of the Santucci group on liposomes with 100% CL content seems
to suggest a mixture of A- and C-site binding,20 while Pandisica and Schweitzer-Stenner proposed a model
that combines a nonelectrostatic first binding step with a subsequent
conformational change that establishes an equilibrium between native-like
and non-native-like states. This equilibrium was found to depend on
the protein occupation of liposomes.21 According
to their results, the addition of NaCl solely shifts the equilibrium
between the two populations toward native-like state. Although their
binding model is fully consistent with the results of very comprehensive
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based structural studies
of Pletneva and co-workers,19,30 the derived binding
affinities and the proposed mechanism do not seem to be in agreement
with the A/C-site binding model. In addition, the very possibility
of the C-site binding mechanism has recently been questioned based
on the observation that both phosphate groups of CL are deprotonated
above pH 3.0 even for liposomes with 100% CL content.31−33

Another binding site option has been reported by O’Brien
et al.34 These authors carried out a very
detailed solid-state NMR investigation of interactions between encapsulated
ferricytochrome c and CL that was titrated to the
protein solution. Besides A- and L-site binding, they observed a mostly
hydrophobic binding site termed N-site, which involves the residues
F36, G37, T58, Y59, and K60.

The current study focuses on a
further characterization of L-site
binding. Recently, we have reported results of a spectroscopic study
demonstrating that structural changes caused by this mode of binding
involve the population of non-native states, where ferricytochrome c adopts a mixture of penta- and hexacoordinate high-spin
states. They are clearly distinct from the non-native hexacoordinate
low-spin conformations adopted at more neutral pH (7.4).35 We attributed these differences to the protonation
of a second histidine ligand that replaces the native M80 at neutral
pH in the non-native states. To clarify whether the L-site binding
is indeed electrostatic in nature, we measured the spectroscopic response
of W59 fluorescence, Soret band circular dichroism (CD), and charge-transfer
band absorption as a function of CL concentration in the absence and
presence of NaCl at pH 6.5. Conformational changes induced by the
addition of salt are further verified by resonance Raman spectroscopy.
A global analysis of the current and earlier spectroscopic response
data21,36 for cytochrome c–CL
interactions obtained at neutral pH is being carried out, which considers
two mechanisms of how the presence of sodium cations can affect the
binding processes. Model 1 just assumes that the conversion of native-like
to non-native-like conformations of CL-bound ferricytochrome c is inhibited by the direct interactions of sodium cations
with negatively charged CL head groups in a Langmuir-type manner.21,37 For model 2, we assume that the initial binding step is electrostatic
in nature, which we describe by utilizing the electrostatic binding
theory of Heimburg and Marsh.38 This theory
takes into account the electrostatic contributions to the binding
constant dependent on the electrostatic free-energy change upon cytochrome c binding to the anionic surface. The addition of positively
charged salt ions reduces the electrostatic double-layer potential,
thus decreasing the binding free energy and the number of bound proteins
at high lipid concentrations.

2 Results
2.1 Spectroscopic
Response Probing Cytochrome c L-Site Binding to CL-Containing
Liposomes
2.1.1 W59 Fluorescence
Figure 2 (left) shows the background-corrected
W59 fluorescence of horse heart ferricytochrome c in the absence of NaCl observed with the indicated effective CL
concentrations at pH 6.5. Since W59 is the only tryptophan residue
in horse heart cytochrome c, the protein’s
fluorescence in the near-UV region is very weak in its folded state
owing to fluorescence resonance energy transfer to the nearby heme
group. Conformational changes that lead to a partial unfolding of
the protein’s tertiary structure causes the W59 fluorescence
to increase. The dominant band in the region between 320 and 380 nm
(termed F-band in our earlier studies)21,36 steadily increases
in intensity with CL concentration, suggesting tertiary structure
changes upon binding. As also shown in Figure 2 (right), the addition of NaCl results in
a significant decrease of fluorescence at high CL concentration (200
μM), which is by far more pronounced than the corresponding
fluorescence quenching observed at neutral pH (7.4).21 At lower CL concentration, the residual W59 fluorescence
only slightly exceeds the background scattering at the employed liposomes
so that a background subtraction leads to very noisy spectra. This
observation is qualitatively consistent with the expectation that
L-site binding is electrostatic in nature.

Figure 2 Left) Background-corrected
fluorescence spectra of horse heart
ferricytochrome c–liposome mixture recorded
as a function of the indicated CL concentration (liposome concentration).
The arrow highlights the spectral changes in the direction of increasing
CL concentration. Starting from the solid black line, the CL concentrations
are 0, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 175, 200, 225, and 250 μM. (Right)
Background-corrected fluorescence spectra of a mixture of 5 μM
ferricytochrome c with 200 μM cardiolipin in
the absence of NaCl (black line) as well as in the presence of 50
mM (blue line) and 100 mM (teal line) NaCl. Experimental details are
given in the Section 4 of this paper.

2.1.2 Soret
Band Circular Dichroism
Figure 3 displays the changes
in the Soret band CD spectra of cytochrome c upon
binding to CL-containing liposomes. The indicated CL concentrations
correspond to the same CL/protein ratios as the above CL concentrations
used for the fluorescence measurements. Generally, the circular dichroism
associated with this band is indicative of electronic interactions
between the heme chromophore and the surrounding protein.39 In an ideal D4h symmetry of the porphyrin macrocycle of the heme,
the underlying electronic transition of the Soret band would be 2-fold
degenerate with transition dipole moments along the FeN lines. The
electric field produced by the protein and vibronic perturbations
lifts the degeneracy.39−41 Owing to their perpendicular orientation, the two
dipole moments interact differently with the heme environment. In
the case of native horse heart ferricytochrome c,
this leads to a negative couplet, i.e., two overlapping signals with
rotational strengths of different sign. The rotational strength of
the negative signal is generally believed to be predominantly caused
by interactions between transition dipole moments of the heme and
the nearby F82 residue.42 Upon addition
of CL-containing liposomes, the Soret band CD changes from a couplet
to a positive Cotton band, indicating that the electronic environment
around the heme is changing due to structural changes in the protein.20,43,44 The very pronounced positive
Cotton band observed at high CL concentrations in the absence of salt
is indicative of a large population of partially unfolded proteins.
The addition of NaCl causes a return of the couplet, which is diagnostic
of a repopulation of the native unfolded state. In line with the above
fluorescence data, this observation is qualitatively consistent with
the notion that L-site binding is electrostatic in nature.

Figure 3 Soret band
circular dichroism spectra of horse heart ferricytochrome c–liposome mixture recorded as a function of CL concentration
(liposome concentration) in the absence (left) of NaCl as well as
in the presence of 50 mM (middle) and 100 mM (right) NaCl. The arrows
highlight the spectral changes in the direction of increasing CL concentration.
The corresponding CL concentrations are 0, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300,
350, 400, 450, and 500 μM. Experimental details are given in
the Section 4 of this
paper.

The Soret band CD spectrum measured
at high CL concentration exhibits
a very pronounced Cotton band with a peak value of ca. 40 M–1 cm–1. The corresponding spectrum measured at pH
7.4 depicts a very similar intensity.21 At room temperature, the Soret bands in the CD spectrum of the partially
unfolded alkaline states IV and V of ferricytochrome c are by far less intense (<20 M–1 cm–1).45 Upon further thermal unfolding, only
the state V band reaches the level of the peak dichroism that we observed
for the binding of the protein to CL-containing liposomes. This led
us to conjecture that the latter represents a nearly denatured state
of the protein. To check for this possibility, we measured the absorption
and visible CD spectra of ferricytochrome c in neutral
(pH 7.4) and acidic (pH 5.5) solutions at denaturing conditions (8
M urea). The choice of the two pH values was guided by the results
of Elöve et al.,46 who showed that
the refolding kinetics of cytochrome denatured by the addition of
a large amount of either urea or guanidinium chloride depends on pH
in the region between 4.5 and 7. They attributed this to denatured
states with different heme ligands at neutral and acidic pH. At the
former, the heme group is axially ligated with two histidines that
produce a hexacoordinate low-spin state. At pH below 5.7, the non-native
histidine ligand is replaced by water to produce a hexacoordinate
high-spin state. Hence, the pH-induced conformational transition of
denatured ferricytochrome c resembles very much the
transition between the f and f+ states of the membrane-bound
protein.

Figure 4 compares
the Soret CD and absorption spectra of denatured ferricytochrome c at pH 5.5 (vide supra) with the spectra measured in the
presence of 500 μM accessible CL at pH 6.5. Both absorption
spectra are very similar; the Soret bands peak at the same wavelength
and the total intensities are comparable if one considers the different
baselines that originate from higher-lying transitions. The CD spectra,
however, look slightly different. At both conditions, we observed
a very intense positive Cotton band, but the respective band positions
are clearly different, i.e., at 403.5 (chemically denatured) and 410
nm (CL-bound). The red shift of the latter reveals a noncoincidence
between the position of the CD Cotton band and the respective absorption
band, which indicates excited-state splitting between the Bx and By states and
significantly different rotational strengths of the underlying transitions.39 This splitting and/or the asymmetry between
rotational strengths must be much smaller in the denatured protein
as they are in partially unfolded states of the protein. A similar
noncoincidence was earlier observed for cytochrome–CL mixtures
at pH 7.4 and was assigned to an additional electric field component
produced by the phosphate groups.21 This
addition to the internal electric field of the protein can change
its strength at the heme group as well as its direction. We argued
that a change of the latter flips the position of Bx and By. The different total
intensities of the two Cotton bands also suggest that the underlying
structures are slightly different in that the lower-lying transition
carries some more rotational strength in the membrane-bound protein.47 This can easily be caused by slight differences
between the positions of aromatic residues in the heme pocket or by
different degrees of heme nonplanarity.48,49 The relationship
between protein unfolding on the membrane surface and noncoincidence
is demonstrated in Figures S1 and S2. The
noncoincidence values are positive at low lipid concentrations (the
positive maximum of the CD spectrum is blue-shifted relative to the
absorption spectrum) and negative at high lipid concentrations (the
positive maximum is now on the red side of the absorption spectrum).
The response curve clearly displays two phases. We also measured the
visible CD and absorption spectra of denatured ferricytochrome c at pH 7.4 (Figure S3). They
appear slightly blue-shifted with respect to the corresponding spectra
measured at acidic pH, which reflects the low-spin state of the heme
iron. The noncoincidence between CD and absorption is again small.
The amplitude of the Cotton band is still rather large (26 M–1 cm–1) compared to the corresponding peak values
of alkaline states at room temperature,45 but lower than the corresponding value of liposome-bound ferricytochrome c at pH 7.4 (36 M–1 cm–1).36 Altogether, these results suggest
that the corresponding denatured states in solution and on the surface
of CL-containing membranes are very similar and that spectroscopic
differences between the CD spectra reflect specific forces that membrane
surface groups exert on the heme pocket.

Figure 4 Visible CD and absorption
spectra of ferricytochrome c in the presence of 8
M urea at pH 5.5 (black) and 500 μM cardiolipin
20% 1,1′,1,2′-tetraoleyolcardiolipin (TOCL)/80% 1,2-deoleyol-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC) liposomes (red).

2.1.3 Charge-Transfer
Absorption Bands
Figure 5 shows the
visible absorption of ferricytochrome c in the region
between 13 000 and 17 000 cm–1 (770–590
nm) measured as a function of CL concentration. Higher protein and
CL concentrations were used for these measurements to ensure a good
signal-to-noise ratio. The recorded spectra depict two weak absorption
bands that are assignable to charge-transfer transitions. The first
(CT1) appears at 14 389 cm–1 (695 nm). It
is an indicator of M80 coordination of the heme iron and therefore
assigned to an M80 → Fe(III) transition.50 However, the underlying changes of the electronic configurations
have not yet been identified. The decrease in CT1 intensity is therefore
indicative of a ligand exchange involved in the conformational change
from a native-like into a partially unfolded structure, in agreement
with the above fluorescence and CD data. On a qualitative level, all
of these spectroscopic changes are reminiscent of the results that
Pandiscia and Schweitzer-Stenner reported for cytochrome–CL
binding at pH 7.4.21 The most important
difference between the spectral responses obtained at pH 6.5 and 7.4
is the appearance of a second charge-transfer band (CT2) at 16 000
cm–1 (625 nm) under acidic conditions. This band
is indicative of a population of high-spin cytochrome c, which could either be a pentacoordinate with an exposed heme group
or a hexacoordinate with a water ligand. As reported earlier, the
corresponding resonance Raman spectra reveal a mixture of both ligation
states at high CL concentration, where CT2 is most intense.35 In the presence of 50 mM NaCl, the CT1 band
reappears at even very high CL concentrations, while the CT2 band
is no longer present in the spectrum. This observation is clearly
indicative of a recovery of native-state-like conformations.

Figure 5 Optical absorption
spectra of horse heart ferricytochrome c–liposome
mixture between 13 000 and 17 000
cm–1 recorded as a function of cardiolipin concentration
(liposome concentration) in the absence (left) of NaCl as well as
in the presence of 50 mM (middle) and 100 mM (right) NaCl. Note that
in the presence of NaCl, the baseline first increases and subsequently
decreases with cardiolipin concentration. Experimental details are
given in the Section 4 of this paper.

2.1.4 Resonance
Raman Spectroscopy
Figure 6 compares the resonance
Raman spectra of horse heart cytochrome c–liposome–potassium
ferrocyanide mixtures without and with NaCl (150 mM) taken with 442
nm excitation at pH 6.5. The CL concentration of 2 mM corresponds
to a CL/protein ratio of 40. The presence of potassium ferrocyanide
ensures that cytochrome molecules in the native state (i.e., with
M80 as axial ligand) become photoreduced,51 while non-native proteins remain in their oxidized state. The spectrum
recorded in the absence of NaCl is indicative of the earlier reported
mixture of penta- and hexacoordinate high-spin species,35 whereas the spectrum taken in the presence of
NaCl is that of a totally reduced sample. This observation suggests
that the addition of NaCl practically eliminates the f+-state population.

Figure 6 Resonance Raman spectrum of 50 μM horse heart cytochrome c and 20% TOCL/80% DOPC–liposome mixtures with 2
mM accessible cardiolipin measured in the absence (black) and presence
of 150 mM NaCl (red).

2.2 Analysis of Spectral Response Data
Our data analysis can be represented by the following general reaction
scheme R1  which is based on the assumption that protein
binding to CL-containing liposomes produces an equilibrium between
native-like and non-native partially unfolded protein populations.21,30 The former is termed nf+ (nonfluorescing) because the
quantum yield of the W59 fluorescence is considered to be zero or
very small. The non-native state is termed f+ (fluorescing)
because one observes W59 fluorescence. The f states populated at pH
7.4 and 6.5 are different in that the corresponding heme iron adopts
a hexacoordinate, low-spin state at the former51 and a mixture of penta- and hexacoordinate high-spin states
at the latter.35 We can also expect some
differences between the respective nf states. Therefore, we term the
states populated at pH 6.5 nf+ and f+ to indicate
that they become populated due to the protonation of amino acid side
chains.24 Mechanistic details are being
dealt with in the Section 3 below.

The spectral response curves in Figure 7 were produced after measured
spectra were subjected to data analysis described in detail in the Supporting Information. We represent the manifold
of the spectroscopic response data displayed in Figure 7 by a Langmuir-type function s([CL]) 1  where [CL] is the concentration
of free CL
(not bound to cytochrome c), s0 is the spectroscopic parameter for the fully folded native
protein in solution, snf+ and sf+ are the spectroscopic parameters
of the membrane-bound nf+ and f+ states, respectively, K+ denotes the apparent equilibrium binding (association)
constant, and Kc+ reflects
the apparent equilibrium between nf+ and f+ states.
It should be noted that symbols nf+ and f+ represent
heterogenous ensembles of subconformations similarly to the C- and
E-state distributions reported by Hong et al.19 It is very likely that there is a close correspondence between nf
and C states as well as between f and E states at neutral pH. Equation 1 resembles the formalism
that we used to describe cytochrome c binding at
neutral pH in terms of an nf ⇆ f equilibrium, where we denoted
the corresponding equilibrium constants without the superscript.21

Figure 7 Spectral response data of visible circular dichroism (top
left),
the integrated intensities of CT1 (top middle), and CT2 (top right);
integrated fluorescence (bottom left), polarized fluorescence Ivv (bottom middle), and Ivh (bottom right) measured as a function of cardiolipin CL
concentration at pH 6.5 in the absence and presence of NaCl. The NaCl
concentrations employed are indicated. The solid lines result from
fits and simulations described in the manuscript. Note that the corresponding
data points in the different figures were obtained over the same range
of CL-to-protein ratio. The error bars of the CT1 data points at the
two highest cardiolipin concentrations are asymmetric and indicate
rather large errors due to uncertainties with regard to the choice
of the baseline.

Equation 1 describes
a classical Langmuir-type binding process followed by a conformational
change, if the binding affinity K+ was
independent of the protein concentration. However, as shown earlier,
this cannot be assumed. The consideration of mixing entropies, protein–protein
interactions, and electrostatic effects leads to CL dependence of
the apparent binding affinity.38 Moreover,
the equilibrium between nf+ and f+ shifts toward
the latter with increasing CL concentration owing to the decrease
of molecular crowding on the liposome surface. Details of how all
of these effects contribute to K+ and Kc+ are described in the Section 4 of this paper.

In principle, there
are two mechanisms by which the addition of
sodium ions can affect cytochrome c–CL interactions.
First, Na+ ions can bind to the ionic and functional groups
of TOCL/DOPC liposomes, form a so-called Stern layer, and shield electric
charges.37 Second, the positive charges
of CL cause the sodium ions to accumulate in a layer at the membrane–water
interface.37 This leads to a reduction
of the membrane’s surface potential and thus of the Gibbs energy
of cytochrome c binding. In an earlier paper, we
provided evidence for the notion that shielding due to sodium binding
reduces Kc rather than K at neutral pH. We invoked such an effect (model 1) to explain why
the addition of NaCl at pH 7.4 reduces the spectroscopic amplitudes
more than the midpoint positions of spectral response curves.36 However, if the initial binding is electrostatic
in nature, the reduction of the membrane surface potential has to
be taken into consideration (model 2).38 The algorithms used for both models are described in detail in the Section 4 of this paper to
which the reader is referred for a complete overview over the free
parameters used in the fits to the data in Figure 7 described below. They are also listed in Table 1.

Table 1 List of Fitting Parameters Obtained
from a Global Analysis of Spectroscopic Response Data Indicating Ferricytochrome c–Cardiolipin Interactions at pH 6.5 and Various
NaCl Concentrations
fitting parameters	obtained values	
K0+ (M–1)	5 × 10–9 ± 3 × 10–9 a	
Kc,high+	20 ± 14b	
ΔΔεnf+ (M–1 cm–1)	–8 ± 19b	
ΔΔεf+ (M–1 cm–1)	21 ± 80b	
fnf+ (M–1 cm–2)	2.2 × 105 ± 0.3 × 105 b	
If+	5.94 × 103 ± 103 b	
IVV+·f+	37 ± 68b	
IVH,f+	23 ± 68b	
Kmod	0.018 ± 0.006b	
N	3.1 ± 0.3b	
KNa (M–1)	60 ± 10a	
a Errors obtained manually.

b Errors of fitting parameters. Note
that the spectroscopic parameters for fluorescence and circular dichroism
cannot be directly compared to the corresponding values for pH 7.4
because they were obtained differently.

In a first step of our analysis, however, we employed
model 1 to
this set of spectral response data. The spectroscopic response data
measured without NaCl were subjected to a nonlinear least-squares
fitting (cf. Section 4). Except for K0+, we allowed
all parameters listed in Table 1 to vary. For K0+,
we initially used the value reported in the earlier study of pH 7.4
binding.21 Next, we simulated the spectroscopic
response data for the three employed NaCl concentrations (50, 100,
and 150 mM). Differences between predicted and experimentally obtained
responses were then minimized by solely varying K0+ and KNa (cf. eqs 7a and 7b in the Section 4). While we could reproduce the response data obtained in the absence
of NaCl, none of the data set representing cytochrome c binding to liposomes in the presence of salt could be reproduced.
Results did not improve after we allowed K0+, Kc+, and all
of the spectroscopic parameters to vary. All spectroscopic response
curves predicted for NaCl concentrations of 50 and 100 mM drastically
underestimated the observed spectroscopic changes even for very large
and physically unreasonable KNa values
(up to 200 M–1). The failure of model 1, which works
well for the pH 7.4 data, is not surprising since a comparison of
corresponding response plots in Figures 7 (pH 6.5) and S6 (pH 7.4) clearly suggests that the addition of NaCl is by far a
more efficient inhibitor at pH 6.5.

These negative results led
us to conclude that model 1 alone does
not account for the observed NaCl-induced changes of spectroscopic
response data at pH 6.5. Therefore, we combined models 1 and 2 to
reproduce the spectral response data in Figure 7. We opted for an integration of model 1
in our analysis because it makes no sense to assume that the underlying
effect, namely, the stabilization of the nf state by the binding of
sodium ions to the membrane surface, is suddenly absent at acidic
pH. We used a KNa value of 60 M–1, which accounts well for the NaCl-induced spectral changes at pH
7.4 (cf. Supporting Information). Again,
we subjected only the response data obtained in the absence of NaCl
to a global nonlinear fitting procedure. To this end, we had to keep K0+ constant again. We obtained good
fits to all spectroscopic response data obtained without NaCl, including
the observed changes of the integrated intensity of the CT2 band.
Next, we simulated the spectroscopic response data for the three employed
NaCl concentrations (50, 100, and 150 mM). Differences between predicted
and experimentally obtained responses were then minimized by solely
varying K0+. As shown in Figure 7, this procedure
yielded a very satisfactory reproduction of most of the experimental
data. To fine-tune the fits to the CT1 and CT2 data, the Kmod constant obtained from the fits to the fluorescence
and CD response data had to be multiplied by a factor of 1.2. This
small change lies still within the statistical error of Kmod. The spectral responses predicted for the investigated
NaCl concentrations of 50 and 100 mM (obtained by solely varying the
common K0+ value) reproduce
the respective integrated fluorescence, CD, IVV, and IVH quite well. It should
be noted that the integrated CT1 intensity of the unbound protein
depends on the NaCl concentration. The CT1 recovery at 50 mM NaCl
is underestimated, while the agreement between prediction and experiment
is satisfactory for 100 mM NaCl. The model still predicts some CT2
intensity at 50 mM NaCl and high CL concentration, which we did not
observe, but it does reproduce its absence at 100 mM NaCl. In view
of the limitations of the Heimburg–Marsh model discussed below,
we find its capability to reproduce the influence of NaCl on spectroscopic
response data very satisfactory. All parameters used for this global
analysis are listed in Table 1.

One would expect that the ionic concentration in eq 10 is the sum of the NaCl
concentration
and the concentration of the zwitterionic N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer (25 mM). However,
we show in the Supporting Information (Figure S5) that the zwitterionic buffer is not contributing to the
ionic strength in the same concentration-dependent manner that NaCl
does. The concentration of HEPES buffer did influence the initial
binding of cytochrome c to CL-containing liposomes,
but the addition of NaCl affected both the initial binding and the
amplitude of spectroscopic response. We found that assuming an effective
ionic strength contribution of 8 mM for the buffer yields the best
global fit and the most reasonable parameter values for Kc,high+. A full consideration of the ionic
strength of the buffer produced very high Kc,high+ values in the range of 100. As shown in the Section 3, such values would
be physically unreasonable.

To allow for a full comparison of
cytochrome c–CL interactions at pH 6.5 and
7.4, we reanalyzed the pH 7.4
response data first with model 1 and subsequently with a combination
of models 1 and 2. In our earlier paper, we used a more heuristic
version of model 1 for our analysis, where we inferred KNa indirectly from changes of Kc,high.21 As shown in the Supporting Information, model 1 yields a very good reproduction
of the pH 7.4 data set (Figure S6; the
corresponding parameters are listed in Table S1). In contrast, attempts to fit these data with a combination of
models 1 and 2 failed completely (Figure S7). In all cases, where we could fit the response data obtained without
salt, we overestimate the inhibition of spectroscopic changes. Our
analysis of the pH 7.4 and 6.5 data sets therefore led us to conclude
that the underlying binding mechanisms must indeed be different, as
suspected.

3 Discussion
3.1 Summary of Results
As reported earlier,
a combination of fluorescence, visible circular dichroism, and absorption
data suggests that the binding of ferricytochrome c to liposomes prepared with a mixture of 20% TOCL and 80% DOPC at
pH 6.5 involves a conformational change of the protein in that native-like
structures with a hexacoordinate low-spin heme iron are converted
into non-native ones. The subensemble of non-native proteins is a
mixture of conformations with penta- and hexacoordinate high-spin
heme irons.35 The analysis of the data
presented in this study reveal that that the binding process must
be electrostatic in nature, where the initial binding step is affected
by the reduction of the liposomes’ surface potential by accumulation
of Na+ ions. The obtained electrostatic character of the
binding process is consistent with the results of Kawai et al., who
provided strong experimental evidence for the notion that the so-called
L-site of the protein (Figure 1) is involved in binding processes below pH 7.24 This site encompasses the positively charged
residues K22 and K27 as well as H33 in the blue foldon region of the
protein. The L-site binding is clearly distinct from the binding process
at neutral pH (7.4), where we found the initial binding step to be
unaffected by the addition of NaCl, which instead stabilizes native-
over non-native-like conformations of membrane-bound proteins. The
heme iron of the latter is still hexacoordinate with a low-spin heme
iron.51 An error analysis of our fit to
the L-site data set is given in the Supporting Information.

3.2 Interpretation of Fitting
Parameters
The effective binding affinity K+(1 + Kc+) (eqs 1, 3, and 4) depends on the CL concentration. Figure S7 shows K as a function of the CL concentration
for [NaCl] = 0 and 100 mM. The displayed curves were calculated with
the parameters obtained from the fits to the spectroscopic response
data measured at pH 7.4 and 6.5. In the absence of NaCl, the binding
affinity values are very similar at low CL concentrations (around
106 M–1), while they diverge at high
CL concentrations, where the binding affinity of L-site binding becomes
significantly larger (7.3 × 106 vs 1.8 × 106 M–1). The L-site values cannot directly
be compared to the binding affinities reported by Kawai et al.24 because the experimental conditions are too
different. For the binding of ferricytochrome c to
the inner mitochondrial membrane, the observed binding affinities
vary between 1.5 × 107 M–1 at pH
6.5 and 7.5 × 106 M–1 at pH 7.4.29 These values are somewhat larger than ours,
while the affinity increase at acidic pH is less pronounced. In view
of the different systems used in our study and from Kawai et al.,
we can consider the qualitative agreement between the respective binding
affinities as mutually corroborating. It should be mentioned that
the fitting procedure carried out in the current study yields K values for pH 7.4, which are ca. 50 times larger than
those reported in our earlier paper.21

With regard to the intrinsic binding constant K0+, reference points in the literature are rare.
Heimburg and Marsh obtained a value of 1.9 × 10–5 M–1 from their analysis of isotherms reflecting
the binding of ferricytochrome c to dioleoyl-phosphatidylglycerol
(DOPG) liposomes.38 This value is by 4
orders of magnitude larger than the value listed in Table 1. However, a closer inspection
of their text led us to the conclusion that their K0 value already contained van der Waals and entropy corrections.
Our earlier calculation revealed that for liposomes with 20% TOCL,
these contributions increase the binding constant by nearly 3 orders
of magnitude at low CL concentration. That leads us very close to
the value reported by Heimburg and Marsh. The difference becomes even
smaller if one considers the fact that these authors used liposomes
with 100% protein binding DOPG, which can be expected to increase
the entropic contributions to the effective binding free energy at
low and intermediate CL concentrations.

The plots in Figure S8 clearly reveal
the different influence of ions on cytochrome c binding
at pH 6.5 and 7.4. At acidic pH, the addition of 100 mM NaCl decreases
the effective binding constants by nearly 4 orders of magnitude. The
same amount of salt has practically no effect on K at low CL concentration and neutral pH, while it decreases the affinity
by a factor of 2 at high CL concentration, which reflects the decrease
of the equilibrium constant Kc,high+. Thus, the present analysis confirms the rather limited influence
of the ionic strength on the overall binding affinity at pH 7.4.21

The Kc,high+ value of 20
obtained for pH 6.5 is considerably larger than the corresponding
value of 2.7 observed for the conformational change at 7.4. These
values imply that the f state is predominantly populated at high CL
concentration and acidic pH, while it accounts only for 2/3 of the
bound proteins at pH 7.4. This difference is illustrated by the plots
in Figure S9, which depicts the molar fractions
of nf+ and f+ as a function of CL concentration
as derived from the above analysis of the pH 6.5 response data.

The difference between the two Kc,high+ values can be rationalized as follows. The binding
models used to fit the spectral response data clearly separate the
different f states populated at the investigated pH (cf. Section 4). A reaction scheme
that takes into account the coexistence of protonated and deprotonated
state can be written as follows R2  The binding polynomial f[CL]
for this scheme reads as follows 2  where KnfH+ = 10pKnf and KfH+ =
10pKf are the apparent association
constants associated with the effective pK value
representing protonatable residues in the nf/nf+ and f/f+ states, respectively. Note that we used K and Kc without the superscript + in
R2 and eq 2 because the
binding occurs in the deprotonated state. Since the effective binding
affinity K is very similar for both binding processes
at low CL concentration (Figure S8), we
can assume that the effective increase of Kc solely reflects the difference between the Gibbs energies of nf-
and f-state protonation. In this case 3  where Kc = [f]/[nf].
If one now represents the set of m protonatable groups
by an effective pK value and if one further assumes
an apparent pK value of 6.9 for the f state,24 one obtains an effective pKnf value of 6.1. This difference between the two pK values could be reasonably well explained by assigning
them to the imidazole group of a distal histidine ligand (in the f
state) and the corresponding unbound histidine in the nf state. It
should be noted that both pK values reflect to some
extent the higher hydronium-ion concentration close to the surface
of the membrane. Alternatively, one could consider the possibility
that two or more protonation processes are involved in the nf →
nf+ and f → f+ transitions, which would
reduce the apparent pK shift between the two conformations.
Overall, this estimation reveals that the obtained difference between
the Kc,high values at pH 6.5 and 7.4 makes
sense from a thermodynamic point of view.

In Section 2, we
emphasize that we adjusted the value for the effective ionic strength
of the buffer solution (no NaCl) for the fits to spectroscopic response
data in Figure 7 to
avoid very large Kc values (Kc,high >100). Based on the rational presented in the
preceding
paragraphs, such values would be unreasonable from a thermodynamic
point of view.

Some parameters which entered our calculation
of the electrostatic
energy should be briefly discussed. Following Heimburg and Marsh,
we assumed an effective protein charge of Z = 3.8
(eqs 10 and 11d). Changes of this value in the upper or lower direction
led to increasing discrepancies between simulated and experimental
spectroscopic responses for nearly all NaCl concentrations investigated.
Regarding the number α of CL molecules attached to membrane-bound
cytochrome c, we assumed αnf+ = 2 and af+ = 4.38 A larger number for the latter makes sense since
experimental evidence suggests that the terminal helices of the protein
are interacting with the membrane surface in the adopted extended
structure of the protein. Since our lipid mixture contains only 20%
CL, both numbers implicitly require some lipid–lipid demixing
to occur upon protein binding.52 The current
literature does not provide a clear picture of the effective stoichiometry
of cytochrome c–CL interaction; generally
reported numbers vary between 1 and 4.20,38,44 The number certainly depends on the protein conformation
and on the lipid/protein ratio. Interestingly, variations of αnf+ led to a substantial deterioration of the fits
to the response data obtained in the presence of NaCl, which could
not be compensated for by changes of K0. On the contrary, changes of αf+ between
2 and 6 did affect the simulations only mildly. Heimburg and Marsh
used different α values for low (4.9) and high (11.9) NaCl concentrations
for their analysis of cytochrome c binding to liposomes
formed with DOPG.38

It should be
finally mentioned that the electrostatic theory employed
should be considered as an approximation to a more complex reality.
The theory of Heimburg and Marsh assumes a homogeneous distribution
of charges on the membrane surface.38 This
scenario would certainly not apply to the employed TOCL/DOPC mixture
if the lipids were ideally mixed. However, multiple lines of evidence
suggest that cytochrome c binding causes lipid demixing
and thus a clustering of CL around cytochrome c binding
sites. Heimburg et al. considered lipid demixing in an extension of
the theory utilized in this study.52 These
authors showed that in the case of total demixing, the employed approach
can still be utilized if one considers the real charge density by
modifying the n value in eq 10 to account for the number of available lipids.

The simplifications embedded in our theoretical approach are also
reflected by the rather large KNa value
of 60 M–1, which emerged from our analysis. Literature
values for sodium binding to anionic lipids are generally more than
an order of magnitude lower.37 This discrepancy
does certainly reflect the fact that we used the bulk concentration
of sodium in eq 7b.
For a more exact modeling of Na+ binding to CL, we would
have to use the actual concentration in double layer of the membrane,
which is certainly higher than the bulk concentration.

3.3 Comparing Proposed Binding Models and Binding
Affinities
Although there is a constantly growing number
of cytochrome c binding studies in the literature,
a comprehensive and consistent picture of cytochrome c–anionic lipid interactions that includes the identified binding
sites has still to be developed. In the following paragraphs, we compare
the properties of proposed binding sites and delineate possible relationships
and discrepancies. Since C-site binding is thought to be only active
at very low pH for the CL content used in this study,26 we omit it from our discussion, which focuses on binding
processes at mildly acidic and neutral conditions.

We first
consider the classical A-site binding, which is thought to be completely
electrostatic in nature. A large number of studies employing horse
heart and yeast cytochrome c mutants have led to
the identification of the lysine residues K72, 73, 86, and 87 as the
involved amino acid residues.44,53,54 Depending on solution conditions, these residues can become involved
to a different extent.54 Kinnunen and co-workers
did not analyze their binding isotherms in their earlier studies,
but the reported data indicate binding affinities in the range of
ca. 5 × 106 M–1.26 Gorbenko et al. employed a sophisticated theoretical approach
based on scaled particle theory to subject fluorescence binding isotherms
to a global analysis.23 The authors assumed
that the phosphate head group of CL is only single-protonated at neutral
pH and becomes double-protonated below pH 6.5 for liposomes with 40%
CL. For the former, they derived binding constants varying between
7.9 × 105 M–1 at high protein concentration
and 4 × 107 M–1 at low protein concentration,
while the double-protonated state exhibits a lower affinity (104 and 4.5 × 105 M–1). This
result, while properly reflecting molecular crowding effects at high
protein concentration, is counterintuitive because one would certainly
expect a higher affinity for completely ionized phosphate groups if
the binding was solely electrostatic in nature.

The binding
constants inferred from the Kinnunen data for single-protonated
CL molecules are in the same order of magnitude as the affinities
obtained for L-site binding by Kawai et al.24 and in this study, but substantially larger than apparent binding
constants observed from studies at neutral pH. The latter were mostly
obtained by measuring spectroscopic responses caused by the addition
of CL-containing liposomes (large (LUV) and small unilamellar vesicles
(SUVs)) to a fixed concentration of ferricytochrome c and lie consistently in the 104–105 M–1 range.20,21,30,44,54 The reason for this discrepancy remains unclear. We wonder, however,
whether it might be related to the different protocols. The binding
isotherms observed by Rytömaa and Kinnunen were measured by
adding an increasing number of cytochrome c to a
fixed amount of liposomes.22,26 The lower binding constant,
however, emerged from studies where the CL rather than the protein
concentration was changed. If this explanation has some merits, it
would point toward some nonequilibrium, metastable situation produced
by at least one of these protocols. An alternative explanation of
the above discrepancy could be that the spectroscopic studies from
which the lower binding affinities were derived probe the population
of f(E) states rather than the initial binding process.
Such a notion is in fact supported by the results of our new global
analysis of the pH 7.4 response data, which yielded effective equilibrium
constant values between 106 and 2 × 106 M–1. These values exceed our earlier ones by a
factor of 20.21 This issue deserves further
consideration in the future.

Several lines of evidence and the
very nature of the involved amino
acid residues strongly suggest that binding should be electrostatic
even at neutral pH. The analysis of our binding data presented in
this and earlier papers are at odds with this notion. Only the equilibrium
between nf and f seems to be governed by electrostatic forces. The
latter notion is consistent with the results of FRET studies by Hanske
et al., which revealed an ionic strength-dependent equilibrium between
compact and extended states.30 The influence
of salt on the amplitude of a fluorescence anisotropy change of Zn-substituted
cytochrome c caused by its interaction with CL-containing
liposomes is rather limited and comparable to our observations. Earlier
resonance Raman studies of cytochrome c binding to
DOPG liposomes by Oellerich et al. also strongly suggests that cytochrome c binding becomes nonelectrostatic at low lipid/protein
ratios.17 The only way to reconcile these
results with the composition and the undeniable involvement of A-site
binding is actually a combination of interaction with N- and A-sites.
The former was observed by O’Brien et al., and it involves
the residues F36, G37, T58, W59, and K60.34 We propose that the initial binding process is governed by N-site
binding, which could not be inhibited by NaCl addition. In agreement
with the structural result of O’Brien et al., this binding
process would cause only limited structural changes and maintain a
native-like conformation with M80 as the sixth heme ligand. With increasing
CL concentration, the protein unfolds due to electrostatic interactions
between the protein and the lipid surface. This is in line with the
mechanism proposed by Muenzner et al.55 An inhibition of the latter by screening effects (Na+ binding) or selective mutation would reduce the overall binding
constant at high CL concentrations. Interestingly, the model is at
least qualitatively consistent with the binding data of Rytömaa
and Kinnunen,26 who showed that even in
the presence of 150 mM NaCl, cytochrome c binding
to CL-containing liposomes is not totally inhibited, which one would
expect if the binding was entirely electrostatic.

The rather
complex picture outlined above is complicated further
by the fact that the above-cited studies were performed with different
types of liposomes (SUVs and LUVs) and with liposomes containing different
contents of anionic lipids. The influence of the latter on cytochrome c binding has been studied only sporadically. The early
binding studies of Rytöman and Kinnunen indicate that the effective
binding increases with CL content at pH 7, where both A- and L-site
binding might overlap.26 Their data also
seem to indicate that C-site binding becomes relevant in the physiological
pH region for cytochrome c binding to liposomes with
very high CL content. This view was modified later by Gorbenko et
al., who, based on the results of their analysis of FRET binding isotherms,
proposed a model that predicted a switch from binding to totally deprotonated
phosphate groups for very low CL content to interactions with single-protonated
phosphate groups for CL contents above 20 mol %.23 Hong et al. showed that the mole fraction of their unfolded
E conformation increases with increasing CL content of liposomes until
it reaches a maximum of 60% at 50 mol % CL.19 We showed in an earlier paper that at neutral pH, the intrinsic
affinity Ko for liposomes with 100 mol
% CL is slightly larger than the respective values obtained for 20
and 50 mol %.21 Interestingly, both K0 and Kc,high were
found to decrease with increasing salt concentration for 100 mol %
CL liposomes, which suggests that the first binding step has become
at least to some extent electrostatic. This observation and the appearance
of a CT2 band at high CL concentration seems to suggest an involvement
of L-site binding. Such a scenario is indeed reasonable because it
is very likely that the effective pH at the liposome surface decreases
with increasing CL content. To avoid any interference from L-site
binding, Elmer-Dixon and Bowler have recently used visible CD and
W59 fluorescence to probe the binding of yeast iso-1-cytochrome c (wild type and mutants) to liposomes with 100 CL content
at pH 8.54 They obtained effective binding
affinities in the 105 M–1 range, which
is somewhat lower than the corresponding range of effective binding
affinities obtained at pH 7.4 with horse heart cytochrome c (3 × 105–4 × 105 M–1).21 If one assumes
similar binding properties of horse heart and yeast cytochrome c at neutral and mildly alkaline pH, this difference could
indeed be indicative of an L-site influence at pH 7.4. Further investigations
of the influence of the CL content on cytochrome c binding and structural conversion are certainly necessary for a
development of a model that accounts for all available experimental
data.

Our results suggest that at the pH where L-site binding
becomes
active, the electrostatic driving forces involved overcome other binding
mechanisms. This is why, we are able to invoke a comprehensive electrostatic
binding analysis at pH 6.5.24 At this point,
one may ask the question why electrostatic binding could be so pH-dependent.
The answer could lie in the findings of Kawai et al., who showed that
at least some lysine residues of the L binding site as well as the
two histidines 26 and 33 are protonated below pH 7. This would increase
the effective charge of the protein. In an attempt to simulate such
an effect, we reduced the effective charge number from 3.8 to 2 and
calculated the spectral response curves. This leads to a nearly total
breakdown of the binding process. The apparent affinity was lowered
by nearly 2 orders of magnitude. Hence, the proposed protonation surface
residues at the L-site can explain the onset of electrostatic binding,
in particular if one takes into consideration that the A-site residues
do not directly contribute to the first binding step.

While
the above reasoning explains the onset of L-site binding,
it does not account for another observation. One would expect that,
in principle, both L- and N/A-site bindings were operative at acidic
pH, with a dominance of the former. This was also assumed by Kawai
et al., who suggested that the protein might act like a gigantic bidentate
ligand by interacting with two vesicles simultaneously, thus triggering
vesicle fusion, giving rise to an increased turbidity.24 This binding model is actually at variance with
two observations. While we also observed an increased turbidity at
low CL concentration, this effect is absent at high lipid-to-protein
ratios. If the bidentate binding was operative, it should be the other
way around since an increasing number of liposomes would just offer
more opportunities for this type of interaction. Moreover, a functioning
N/A-site binding would still allow for substantial binding at high
NaCl concentrations. This would have led to spectral responses very
similar to those obtained at neutral pH, contrary to our observation.
Therefore we conclude that for yet unknown reasons, the N/A-site binding
becomes less effective at acidic pH.

Kawai et al. used the bidentate
binding model to explain the onset
of vesicle fusion, but we have observed the same phenomenon at neutral
pH and very low CL concentration.36 In
line with Oellerich et al.,17 we consider
the surface pressure exerted by the high density of surface-bound
proteins, which significantly destabilize the membrane. Some lines
of evidence suggest that this could lead to a protein penetration
into the membrane or even to the transfer into the interior space
of the employed liposomes.56 Such an effect
has been clearly established for cytochrome binding to gigantic unilamellar
vesicles, but regarding its occurrence on LUVs and SUVs, experimental
results are somewhat contradictory.55,57,58

Taken together, we propose the following reaction
sequence for
cytochrome c binding to 20% TOCL/80% DOPC SUVs. At
neutral pH, cytochrome binds hydrophobically via the proposed N-site.
With increasing CL concentration and decreasing liposome occupation
by proteins, this facilitates a conformational change in which an
unfolded state resembling the denatured state of ferricytochrome c is stabilized via A-site binding to the surface. This
interaction is inhibited in the presence of sodium ions. With decreasing
pH, the effective protein surface charge increases and allows L-site
binding to become dominant. The unfolded state populated at high CL
concentrations becomes stabilized by the protonation of the distal
histidine ligand and its concomitant dissociation, while for yet unidentified
reasons, N/A-site binding becomes less effective. Obviously, this
conformational change stabilizes the unfolded/denatured state of the
protein to a significant extent. The similarity between structural
changes induced by the protonation of second histidine ligand of liposome-bound
and denatured ferricytochrome deserves particular attention. In view
of the slightly acidic environment of the inner membrane of mitochondria,
the L-site binding and its inhibition by salt might be the processes
that prevent conformational changes of the protein and the acquisition
of peroxidase activity at normal conditions. Experiments exploring
the peroxidase activity of membrane-bound cytochrome c at various conditions are underway in our laboratory.

3.4 Structural Aspects
Multiple lines
of evidence suggest that upon binding, the native M80 ligand is replaced
by a histidine residue,59 but it is then
displaced at mildly acidic pH owing to the protonation of its imidazole
group. This process is very much reminiscent of what Roder, Rousseau,
and their respective co-workers observed for ferricytochrome c under denaturing conditions.46,60−62 One is therefore tempted to suggest that the acidic
and neutral denatured states obtained in the presence of, e.g., urea
should be very similar to the f+ and f states inferred
from our data. This notion is strongly corroborated by the observation
that the rotational strengths of the respective CD Soret band spectra
are of comparable magnitude, which suggest very similar heme environments.
The differences between the CD bands of denatured ferricytochrome c in solution and on the membrane surface can be related
to a modified Stark effect caused by the electric field on the latter.

The observed noncoincidence between CD and absorption band positions
deserves some further consideration. As outlined above, the noncoincidence
value changes by ca. 800 cm–1 upon cytochrome c binding to the liposome surface (Figure S2). A comparison of the lipid concentration dependence of
the noncoincidence effect and of the molar fractions of nf+ and f+ reveals that the change of the spectroscopic noncoincidence
occurs in a CL concentration region, where f+ becomes mostly
populated. Hence, the switch of the former can be clearly related
to the conformational change on the membrane surface. As shown earlier,
the electrical charges on the membrane surface have to produce an
electric field of ca. 2 MV cm–1 to produce the change
of the noncoincidence at pH 7.4.21 The
noncoincidence shift obtained at pH 6.5 is slightly larger, but since
the electric field change scales with the square root of the noncoincidence
change, the difference does not matter. The estimated value of the
electric field seems to be large compared to what one would infer
from the reported electrostatic profiles (ca. 0.5–0.7 MV cm–1).63 However, if the protein
penetrates the membrane in its nf/nf+ state, then it would
move the heme group in close proximity to the surface charges. This
interpretation is corroborated by the results of Domanov et al.,64 who analyzed fluorescence quenching experiments
with a donor fluorophore in the membrane and the heme group as acceptor.
They found that the protein increases its penetration into the membrane
with a decreasing surface density of proteins (high CL concentrations
in our case) by ca. 10 Å. This substantial change would increase
the electric field in the heme pocket. If the heme group becomes positioned
close to the membrane–solvent interface, then it might be subjected
to electrostatic potentials of several hundred millivolts, which decay
on a length scale of a few angstroms. The corresponding electric field
strengths would lie in the range of several tens of MV cm–1, comparable to the intrinsic electric field of the protein.65 Therefore, the observed noncoincidence effect
can be considered as reflecting the electric field probed by the heme
group of a denatured protein that has somewhat penetrated into the
outer membrane.

4 Materials and Methods
The methods used are the same as in the Supporting Information of our most recent publication, but are presented
again here with any minor changes for the convenience of the reader.

4.1 Experimental Methods
4.1.1 Protein Preparation
Horse heart
cytochrome c (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO) was
dissolved in 25 mM N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer. Potassium
ferricyanide was added to the solution in minimal amounts as an oxidizing
agent, the protein was allowed to oxidize at 5 °C for 1 h, and
then the pH was adjusted to 7.0 before running the solution over a
Sephades G15 column (GE Healthcare). The sample was collected and
readjusted to pH 7.0. The sample was collected and readjusted to pH
7.0. The concentration and oxidation state were confirmed by scanning
the Soret and Q band regions with UV/visible absorption.

4.1.2 Liposome Preparation and Dynamic Light Scattering
Experiments
1,1′,1,2′-Tetraoleyolcardiolipin
(TOCL) and 1,2-deoleyol-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DOPC) (Avanti Polar Lipids, Birmingham, AL) were dissolved in a 2:1
mixture of chloroform and methanol. A protocol for liposome preparation
by Hanske et al. was followed.30 Rotary
evaporation was used to remove the solvent at room temperature. This
was followed by further drying overnight in a vacuum desiccator. The
lipid film was rehydrated in a sufficient amount of 25 mM HEPES buffer
to reach the desired liposome concentration. The lipid mixture was
then sonicated in an ice bath at 100 W for 1 h 30 min before being
centrifuged at 12 000 rpm for 50 min to remove any ultrasonicator
tip contamination. The supernatant was decanted and stored overnight
in a refrigerator to equilibrate. Liposomes were always stored in
the refrigerator under nitrogen gas to avoid oxidation. After equilibrating,
the size distribution of the liposomes was measured at room temperature
in a 0.2 cm path length quartz cuvette using a Horiba Lb-500 dynamic
light scattering particle size analyzer (Edison, NJ).

4.1.3 Sample Preparation
Solutions for
cytochrome c–CL binding studies were made
to span a series of total lipid-to-protein ratios from 0 (no liposomes
added) to 200. The corresponding CL-to-protein ratios are 0–40.
Samples for fluorescence measurements had a protein concentration
of 5 μM; samples for CD measurements had a protein concentration
of 10 μM; and samples for charge-transfer measurements had a
protein concentration of 25 μM. Samples were stored in a refrigerator
for about 25 min to allow equilibration before taking spectroscopic
measurements. All CL concentration values refer to the outer leaflet
of the membrane. We assumed that CL is equally distributed among the
inner and outer leaflets of the produced liposomes.

For experiments
involving the chemical denaturing of cytochrome c, ferricytochrome c was diluted in a solution of
25 mM HEPES buffer and 8 M urea to the desired concentration. The
pH of these solutions was adjusted to 5.5 to ensure that the denatured
protein adopts a conformation with a hexacoordinate, high-spin heme
iron.

4.1.4 Circular Dichroism Measurements
Spectra were measured with a JASCO J810 spectropolarimeter purged
with nitrogen gas. The quartz cell (Crystal Laboratories, Garfield,
NJ) had a 0.2 cm path length. The spectra spanned 350–600 nm
at a scan speed of 500 nm min–1, a data pitch of
0.5 nm, a bandwidth of 5 nm, and a response time of 1 s. A Peltier
solid-state heating and cooling module held the cell at 20 °C
while five spectra were collected and averaged. The spectra were all
background-corrected using the JASCO spectral analysis program.

4.1.5 Fluorescence Measurements
Emission
spectra were measured at room temperature in an ICL quartz cell with
a path length of 1 cm using a PerkinElmer LS55 Luminescence Spectrometer.
The spectra were recorded from 300 to 550 nm with an excitation wavelength
of 293 nm and a scan speed of 200 nm min–1. Excitation
and emission slit widths of 5 and 2.5 nm, respectively, were used.

4.1.6 UV/visible Absorption Measurements
Spectra
were measured at room temperature using a 1 cm quartz cuvettes
with a PerkinElmer Lambda 35 UV/visible spectrometer. Spectra were
measured between 350–700 and 600–700 nm for charge-transfer
measurements with an excitation slit width of 2.5 nm. Charge-transfer
bands were decomposed using our fitting program Multifit with sub-bands
positioned at 14 020, 14 400, and 14 700 cm–1 for CT1 and 15 467, 16 001, and 16 285
cm–1 for CT2, in agreement with previous results.66−68

4.1.7 Resonance Raman Spectroscopy
The
Raman spectrum was obtained by using a Renishaw RM-1000 Ramascope
with a BH-2 confocal Raman microscope and the 442 nm excitation of
a HeCd laser (Kimmon) with a final laser power of approximately 7.6
mW at the sample. The spectrometer was calibrated using a silicon
wafer by setting the silicon peak to 520.0 cm–1.
Multiple spectra for each sample were taken (and later averaged in
Multifit)16 after relocating the focal
point in between subsequent spectra to reduce any effects from prolonged
laser exposure.

4.2 Theoretical Background
4.2.1 CL Dependence of Equilibrium Constants
The theory presented
below combines several approaches, which have
been presented by different authors in earlier papers.21,52 We think that presenting them briefly in this paper serves its readability.

As indicated in Section 3, several physical effects can lead to a CL dependence of
the equilibrium constants K+ and Kc+ in eq 2. First, we take into account that molecular
crowding at low lipid/protein ratios (i.e., high occupancy of liposomes
with proteins) and mixing entropy contributions can affect the apparent
binding affinity. The van der Waals gas approach of Heimburg and Marsh
takes these effects into account and leads to the following equation
for K+(38) 4  where K0+ is the intrinsic
binding constant for the protonated state, σp is
the number of occupied CL/liposome, NL is the number of CL lipids per liposome, and Kagg+ is an aggregation constant accounting
for the aggregation of proteins at surface crowding. In the limit
of high CL/protein ratios, CLb is small compared to NL and approaches K0+NL

Second, we assumed
that Kc+ depends on the density
of bound cytochromes and thus on the CL concentration.
The rationale behind that approach is that molecular crowding effects
prevent the protein from unfolding at high occupancy. Hints in that
direction can be inferred from the work of the Pletneva group and
recent papers of Bowler and associates.19,30,44 Following our earlier approach,21 we describe the CL dependence of Kc by a sigmoidal function 5  where f([CL]) is the phase
transition between two states of the membrane shown by a Hill-type
equation 6  where χb is the mole fraction
of bound cytochrome c, Kmod denotes a thermodynamic constant that reflects the free energy of
the transition between the two phases of the membrane, and n is the Hill coefficient.

4.2.2 Electrostatic
Screening
The spectral
response curves measured at pH 7.4 and 6.5 are both significantly
affected by the addition of NaCl. One might therefore be tempted to
conclude that cytochrome c binding to CL-containing
liposome interactions is governed by attractive electrostatic interactions.
However, a closer look at the data does not corroborate this notion.
At pH 7.4, the addition of NaCl caused the amplitudes of spectroscopic
changes to decrease without being accompanied by a drastic change
of the midpoint. However, at pH 6.5, the addition of salt decreases
the amplitude and shifts the midpoint out of the concentration range
used for our experiments.

In our earlier paper, we rationalized
the influence of NaCl on the spectroscopic response curves with a
screening model, where we assumed that sodium cations bind to CL-containing
liposomes in Langmuir-type manner.21 Sodium
ions not only bind to the phosphate groups of CL, but they can also
interact with carbonyl groups and with the zwitterionic head groups
of DOPC.38 Hong et al. suggested that unfolded,
extended states of cytochrome c on CL-containing
liposomes are stabilized by electrostatic interactions between the
decoupled, terminal helices and the liposome surface.19 Cation binding can screen the surface charges and thus
destabilize the unfolded states. Heuristically, we account for this
effect by the following formalism 7a   7b  Equations 7a and 7b describe a decrease of
the equilibrium constant Kc,high+ with increasing sodium concentration.
The binding of sodium to the liposome surface is accounted for by
a Langmuir-type equation with an apparent binding constant KNa. This screening model is termed model 1 throughout
this paper.

In the second step, we consider the possibility
that the initial
binding step is driven by electrostatic forces (model 2), in line
with the characteristics of the L-site identified by Kawai et al.
To this end, we utilize the purely electrostatic double-layer theory
of Heimburg and Marsh.38 In this theory,
the surface potential produced by negatively charged head groups is
reduced upon addition of salt owing to the accumulation of cations
in layers above the membrane surface. This leads to a reduction of
the electrostatic contribution to the binding free energy. The theory
assumes that head group charges are continuously distributed over
the membrane surface. The electrostatic contribution to the apparent
binding constant is written as 8  where fvdW is
the van der Waals gas term in eq 4, kB is the Boltzmann constant,
and T is the temperature (in Kelvin). The electrostatic
binding energy function ΔFel(σp) is shown below 9  where the first term
is the surface energy
with σp number of ligands, the second term is the
surface energy with no ligands, and the last term is the energy of
the ligand in solution. By invoking the high potential limit approximation
of Jähnig,69 Heimburg and Marsh38 showed that the first derivative of the free-energy
function in eq 8 can
be written as follows 10  where Z is
the ligand charge, α is the number of CL per bound cytochrome c, n is the number of binding sites, and c0 is the effective ionic strength of the buffer
solution. The parameters Λi are
written as 11a   11b   11c   11d  where ε
denotes the dielectric constant
of the solution, NA is the Avogardo constant, e is the elementary charge, r0 is the radius of the ligand, and κ is the Debye length, which
can be calculated with 12  To utilize the above formalism for fitting
experimentally obtained response data, the concentrations of unoccupied
CL and unbound cytochrome c have to be calculated
for each CL concentration with an iterative procedure described in
the Supporting Information of our earlier paper.21

4.2.3 Fitting Procedure
For all nonlinear
fits to experimentally obtained spectroscopic response data, we used
the module Nlinfit of the Matlab 2018 program package. Generally,
we subjected only the response data measured in the absence of NaCl
to the fitting procedure and used the obtained parameter values to
predict the spectral response for different NaCl concentrations. Predictions
were optimized by varying the equilibrium constant K0+ (models
1 and 2) and KNa (model 1). Generally, Kc,high+, Kmod, n, and the snf/sf parameters
(eq 1) If,nf+, IVV,nf+, IVH,nf+, ΔΔεnf+, ΔΔεf+, εCT1,nf+, and εCT2,f+ were used as free parameters for models 1 and 2. For
the fluorescence parameters of the nf state, we assumed If,nf+ = If,0, IVV,nf+ = IVV,0 and IVH,nf+ = IVH,0. All s0 values were determined
experimentally. Furthermore, we assumed that εCT1,f+ and εCT2,nf+ are zero.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b02574.Error analysis
of our fits, reanalysis of spectroscopic
response data reflecting the binding of ferricytochrome c to liposomes with 20% TOCL/80% DOPC, plots of effective equilibrium
constants and mole fractions of cytochrome c conformations
as a function of cardiolipin concentration, visualization of liposome
binding-induced changes of the noncoincidence between absorption and
CD spectra in the Soret band region, and the cardiolipin concentration
dependence of CD difference spectra (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b02574_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
† College
of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 370 W 9th Avenue,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, United States (D.M.).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
R.K. acknowledges the
receipt of a Maryanoff fellowship for
summer research at the Department of Chemistry, Drexel University.
==== Refs
References
Alvarez-Paggi D. ; Hannibal L. ; Castro M. A. ; Oviedo-Rouco S. ; Demicheli V. ; Tórtora V. ; Tomasina F. ; Radi R. ; Murgida D. H. 
Multifunctional
Cytochrome c Learning New Tricks from
an Old Dog . Chem. Rev. 
2017 , 117 , 13382 –13460 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00257 .29027792 
Adman E. T. 
A Comparison
of the Structures of Electron Transfer Proteins . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Bioenerg. 
1979 , 549 , 107 –144 . 10.1016/0304-4173(79)90012-0 .
Hannibal L. ; Tomasina F. ; Capdevila D. A. ; Demicheli V. ; Tórtora V. ; Alvarez-Paggi D. ; Jemmerson R. ; Murgida D. H. ; Radi R. 
Alternative Conformations
of Cytochrome
c: Structure, Function and Detection . Biochemistry 
2016 , 55 , 407 –428 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01385 .26720007 
Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Relating the
Multi-Functionality of Cytochrome to Membrane Binding and Structural
Conversion . Biophys. Rev. 
2018 , 10 , 1151 –1185 . 10.1007/s12551-018-0409-4 .29574621 
Silkstone G. G. ; Cooper C. E. ; Svistunenko D. A. ; Wilson M. T. 
EPR and Optical
Spectroscopy Studies of Met80X Mutants of Yeast Ferricytochrome c.
Models for Intermediates in the Alkaline Transition . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 92 –99 . 10.1021/ja045719b .15631458 
Jiang X. ; Wang X. 
Cytochrome C-Mediated
Apoptosis . Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 
2004 , 73 , 87 –106 . 10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.011303.073706 .15189137 
Kagan V. E. ; Bayir H. A. ; Belikova N. A. ; Kapralov O. ; Tyurina Y. Y. ; Tyurin V. A. ; Jian J. ; Stoyanovsky D. A. ; Wipf P. M. ; Kochanek P. M. ; et al. Cytochrome
c/Cardiolipin
Relations in Mitochondria: A Kiss of Death . Free Radicals Biol. Med. 
2009 , 46 , 1439 –1453 . 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.03.004 .
Gajhede M. ; Schuller D. J. ; Heriksen A. ; Smith A. T. ; Poulos T. L. 
Crystal
Structure Determination of Classical Horseradish Peroxidase at 2.15
Å Resolution . Nat. Struct. Biol. 
1997 , 4 , 1032 –1038 . 10.1038/nsb1297-1032 .9406554 
Huang Q. ; Szigeti V. ; Fidy J. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Structural
Disorder of Native Horseradish Peroxidase Probed by Resonance Raman
and Low Temperature Optical Absorption Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2003 , 107 , 2822 –2830 . 10.1021/jp026935e .
Jentzen W. ; Ma M.-G. ; Shelnutt J. A. 
Conservation
of the Conformation
of the Porphyrin Macrocycle in Hemoproteins . Biophys. J. 
1998 , 74 , 753 –763 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(98)74000-7 .9533688 
Michel L. V. ; Ye T. ; Bowman S. E. J. ; Levin B. D. ; Hahn M. A. ; Russell B. S. ; Elliott S. J. ; Bren K. L. 
Heme Attachment Motif Mobility Tunes
Cytochrome c Redox Potential . Biochemistry 
2007 , 46 , 11753 –11760 . 10.1021/bi701177j .17900177 
Huang Q. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Non-Planar Heme Deformations and Excited State Displacements
in Horseradish Peroxidase Detected by Resonance Raman Spectroscopy
at Soret Excitation . J. Raman Spectrosc. 
2005 , 36 , 363 –375 . 10.1002/jrs.1326 .
Howes B. D. ; Schiødt C. B. ; Welinder K. G. ; Marzocchi M. P. ; Ma J.-G. ; Zhang J. ; Shelnutt J. A. ; Smulevich G. 
The Quantum
Mixed-Spin Heme State of Bareley Peroxidase C: A Paradigm for Class
III Peroxidases . Biophys. J. 
1999 , 77 , 478 –492 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(99)76905-5 .10388773 
Vincent J. S. ; Kon H. ; Levin I. W. 
Low-Temperature
Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Study
of the Ferricytochrome c-Cardiolipin Complex . Biochemistry 
1987 , 26 , 2312 –2314 . 10.1021/bi00382a036 .3040088 
Heimburg T. ; Hildebrandt P. ; Marsh D. 
Cytochrome c-Lipid Interactions Studied
by Resonance Raman and 31P NMR Spectroscopy. Correlation between the
Conformational Change of the Protein and the Lipid Bilayer . Biochemistry 
1991 , 30 , 9084 –9089 . 10.1021/bi00101a025 .1654089 
Hildebrandt P. ; Stockburger M. 
Cytochrome
c at Charged Interfaces: 1. Conformational
and Redox Equilibria at the Electrode/Electrolyte Interface Probed
by Surface Enhanced Resonance Raman Spectroscopy . Biochemistry 
1989 , 28 , 6710 –6721 . 10.1021/bi00442a026 .2551378 
Oellerich S. ; Lecomte S. ; Paternostre M. ; Heimburg T. ; Hildebrandt P. 
Peripheral
and Integral Binding of Cytochrome c to Phospholipids Vesicles . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 3871 –3878 . 10.1021/jp036799t .
Kapralov A.
A. ; Kurnikov I. V. ; Vlasova I. I. ; Belikova N. A. ; Tyurin V. A. ; Basova L. V. ; Zhao Q. ; Tyurina Y. Y. ; Jiang J. ; Bayir H. ; et al. The Hierachy of Structural Transitions Induced in Cytochrome
c by Anionic Phospholipids Determines Its Peroxidase Activation and
Selective Peroxidation during Apoptosis in Cells . Biochemistry 
2007 , 46 , 14232 –14244 . 10.1021/bi701237b .18004876 
Hong Y. ; Muenzner J. ; Grimm S. K. ; Pletneva E. V. 
Origin of the Conformational
Heterogeneity of Cardiolipin-Bound Cytochrome C . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 18713 –18723 . 10.1021/ja307426k .23066867 
Sinibaldi F. ; Fiorucci L. ; Patriarca A. ; Lauceri R. ; Ferri T. ; Coletta M. ; Santucci R. 
Insights into
Cytochrome C-Cardiolipin
Interaction. Role Played by Ionic Strength . Biochemistry 
2008 , 47 , 6928 –6935 . 10.1021/bi800048v .18540683 
Pandiscia L. A. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Coexistence
of Native-Like and Non-Native Cytochrome
c on Anionic Lipsomes with Different Cardiolipin Content . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2015 , 119 , 12846 –12859 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b07328 .26369421 
Rytömaa M. ; Mustonen P. ; Kinnunen P. K. J. 
Reversible, Nonionic and pH-Dependent
Association of Cytochrome c with Cardiolipin- Phosphatidylcholine
Liposomes . J. Biol. Chem. 
1992 , 267 , 22243 –22248 .1331048 
Gorbenko G. P. ; Molotkovsky J. G. ; Kinnunen P. K. J. 
Cytochrome c Interaction with Cardiolipin/Phosphatidylcholine
Model Membranes: Effect of Cardiolipin Protonation . Biophys. J. 
2006 , 90 , 4093 –4103 . 10.1529/biophysj.105.080150 .16565064 
Kawai C. ; Prado F. M. ; Nunes G. L. C. ; Di Mascio P. ; Carmona-Ribeiro A. M. ; Nantes I. L. 
pH-Dependent Interaction
of Cytochrome
c with Mitochondrial Mimetic Membranes: The Role of an Array of Positively
Charged Amino Acid Residues . J. Biol. Chem. 
2005 , 280 , 34709 –34717 . 10.1074/jbc.M412532200 .16012169 
Rytömaa M. ; Kinnunen P. K. J. 
Reversibility of the Binding of Cytochrome
c to Liposomes . J. Biol. Chem. 
1995 , 270 , 3197 –3202 . 10.1074/jbc.270.7.3197 .7852404 
Rytömaa M. ; Kinnunen P. K. J. 
Evidence for Two Distinct Acidic
Phospholipid-Binding
Sites in Cytochrome C . J. Biol. Chem. 
1994 , 269 , 1770 –1774 .8294426 
Soffer J.  The Folded, Partially
Folded Misfolded, and Unfolded Conformations of Cytochrome c Probed
by Optical Spectroscopy ; Drexel University , 2013 .
Porcellli A. M. ; Ghelli A. ; Zanna C. ; Pinto P. ; Rizzulo R. ; Rugollo M. 
pH Difference
across the Outer Mitochondrial Membrane
Measured with a Green Fluorescent Protein Mutant . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2005 , 326 , 799 –804 . 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.11.105 .15607740 
Kawai C. ; Pessoto F. S. ; Rodrigues T. ; Mugnol K. C. U. ; Tórtora V. ; Castro L. ; Milícchio V. A. ; Tersariol I. L. S. ; Di Mascio P. ; Radi R. ; et al. pH-Sensitive
Binding
of Cytochrome c to the Inner Mitochondrial Membrane. Implications
for the Participation of the Protein in Cell Respiration and Apoptosis . Biochemistry 
2009 , 48 , 8335 –8342 . 10.1021/bi9006463 .19650668 
Hanske J. ; Toffey J. R. ; Morenz A. M. ; Bonilla A. J. ; Schiavoni K. H. ; Pletneva E. V. 
Conformational Properties
of Cardiolipin-Bound Cytochrome
C . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 125 –130 . 10.1073/pnas.1112312108 .22190488 
Malyshka D. ; Pandiscia L. A. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Cardiolipin
Containing Liposomes
Are Fully Ionized at Physiological pH. An FT-IR Study of Phosphate
Group Ionization . Vib. Sprectrosc. 
2014 , 75 , 86 –92 . 10.1016/j.vibspec.2014.10.003 .
Sathappa M. ; Alder N. N. 
The Ionization Properties of Cardiolipin
and Its Variants
in Model Bilayers . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2016 , 1858 , 1362 –1372 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2016.03.007 .
Kooijman E. E. ; Swim L. A. ; Garber Z. T. ; Tyurina Y. Y. ; Bayir H. ; Kagan V. R. 
Magic Angle Spinning 31NMR Spectroscopy
Reveals Two Essentially Identical Ionization States for the Cardiolipin
Phosphates in Phospholipid Liposomes . Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2017 , 1859 , 61 –68 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2016.10.013 .27984017 
O’Brien E. S. ; Nucci N. V. ; Fuglestad B. ; Tommos C. ; Wand A. J. 
Defining
the Apoptopic Trigger: The Interaction of Cytochrome c and Cardiolipin . J. Biol. Chem. 
2015 , 290 , 30879 –30887 . 10.1074/jbc.m115.689406 .26487716 
Milorey B. ; Malyshka D. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
pH Dependence of Ferricytochrome
c Conformational Transitions during Binding to Cardiolipin Membranes:
Evidence for Histidine as the Distal Ligand at Neutral pH . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 1993 –1998 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b00597 .28418677 
Pandiscia L. A. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Coexistence of Native-like and Non-Native Partially
Unfolded Ferricytochrome c on the Surface of Cardiolipin-Containing
Liposomes . J. Phys. Chem. B. 
2015 , 119 , 1334 –1349 . 10.1021/jp5104752 .25469712 
Khomich D. A. ; Nesterenko A. M. ; Kostritskii A. Y. ; Kondinskaia D. A. ; Ermakov Y. ; Gurtovenko A. A. 
Independent Adsorption of Monovaletn
Cations and Cationic Polymers at PE/PG Lipid Membranes . J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 
2017 , 794 , 01201010.1088/1742-6596/794/1/012010 .
Heimburg T. ; Marsh D. 
Protein Surface-Distribution
and Protein-Protein Interactions in
the Binding of Peripheral Proteins to Charged Lipid Membranes . Biophys. J. 
1995 , 68 , 536 –546 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(95)80215-8 .7696507 
Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
The Internal
Electric Field in Cytochrome C Explored by Visible Electronic Circular
Dichroism Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2008 , 112 , 10358 –10366 . 10.1021/jp802495q .18665633 
Manas E. S. ; Wright W. W. ; Sharp K. A. ; Friedrich J. ; Vanderkooi J. M. 
The Influence of Protein Environment on the Low Temperature
Electronic Spectroscopy of Zn-Substituted Cytochrome C . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2000 , 104 , 6932 –6941 . 10.1021/jp0005975 .
Rasnik I. ; Sharp K. A. ; Fee J. A. ; Vanderkooi J. M. 
Spectral
Analysis of Cytochrome c: Effect of Heme Conformation, Axial Ligand,
Peripheral Substituents, and Local Electric Fields . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 282 –286 . 10.1021/jp002656k .
Pielak G. J. ; Oikawa K. ; Mauk A. G. ; Smith M. ; Kay C. M. 
Elimination
of the Negative Soret Cotton Effect of Cytochrome c by Replacement
of the Invariant Phenylalanine Using Site-Directed Mutagenesis . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1986 , 108 , 2724 –2727 . 10.1021/ja00270a035 .
Pandiscia L. A. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Salt as a Catalyst in the Mitochondria: Returning Cytochrome
c to Its Native State after It Misfolds on the Surface of Cardiolipin
Containing Membranes . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 3674 –3676 . 10.1039/C3CC48709A .
Elmer-Dixon M. M. ; Bowler B. E. 
Site A-Dediated Partial Unfolding of Cytochrome c on
Cardiolipin Vesicles Os Species-Dependent and Does Not Require Lys72 . Biochemistry 
2017 , 56 , 4830 –4839 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00694 .28813137 
Hagarman A. ; Duitch L. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
The Conformational
Manifold of Ferricytochromec
Explored by Visible and Far-UV Electronic Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy . Biochemistry 
2008 , 47 , 9667 –9677 . 10.1021/bi800729w .18702508 
Elöve G. A. ; Bhuyan A. K. ; Roder H. 
Kinetic Mechanism
of Cytochrome c
Folding: Involvement of the Heme and Its Ligands . Biochemistry 
1994 , 33 , 6925 –6935 . 10.1021/bi00188a023 .8204626 
Hsu M. C. ; Woody R. W. 
The Origin of the
Heme Cotton Effects in Myoglobin
and Hemoglobin . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1971 , 93 , 3515 –3525 . 10.1021/ja00743a036 .5560471 
Kiefl C. ; Sreerama N. ; Haddad R. ; Sun L. ; Jentzen W. ; Lu Y. ; Qiu Y. ; Shelnutt J. A. ; Woody R. W. 
Heme Distortions
in Sperm-Whale Carbonmonoxy Myoglobin: Correlations between Rotational
Strengths and Heme Distortions in MD-Generated Structures . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2002 , 124 , 3385 –3394 . 10.1021/ja011961w .11916424 
Woody R. W. ; Pescitelli G. 
The Role of
Heme Chirality in the Circular Dichroism
of Heme Proteins . Z. Naturforsch. 
2014 , 69 , 313 –325 . 10.5560/zna.2014-0004 .
McKnight J. ; Cheesman M. R. ; Thomson A. J. ; Miles J. S. ; Munro A. W. 
Identification
of Charge Transfer Transitions in the Optical Spectrum of Low-Spin
Ferrocytochrome P-450 Bacillus Megaterium . Eur.
J. Biochem. 
1993 , 213 , 683 –687 . 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1993.tb17808.x .8386633 
Malyshka D. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Ferrocyanide-Mediated
Photoreduction of Ferricytochrome
C Utilized to Selectively Probe Non-Native Conformations Induced by
Binding to Cardiolipin-Containing Liposomes . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 1151 –1156 . 10.1002/chem.201604992 .27859757 
Heimburg T. ; Angerstein A. ; Marsh D. 
Binding of Peripheral Proteins to
Mixed Lipid Membranes: Effect of Lipid Demixing upon Binding . Biophys. J. 
1999 , 76 , 2575 –2586 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(99)77410-2 .10233072 
Sinibaldi F. ; Howes B. D. ; Droghetti E. ; Polticelli F. ; Piro M. C. ; Di Pierro D. ; Fiorucci L. ; Coletta M. ; Smulevich G. ; Santucci R. 
Role of Lysines in the Cytochrome
c - Cardiolipin Interactions . Biochemistry 
2013 , 52 , 4578 –4588 . 10.1021/bi400324c .23738909 
Elmer-Dixon M. M. ; Bowler B. E. 
Electrostatic Constituents of the Interaction of Cardiolipin
with Site A of Cytochrome C . Biochemistry 
2018 , 57 , 5683 –5695 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00704 .30182710 
Muenzner J. ; Toffey J. R. ; Hong Y. ; Pletneva E. V. 
Becoming a Peroxidase:
Cardiolipin-Induced Unfolding of Cytochrome C . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2013 , 117 , 12878 –12886 . 10.1021/jp402104r .23713573 
Beales P. A. ; Bergstrom C. L. ; Geerts N. ; Groves J. T. ; Vanderlick T. K. 
Single
Vesicle Observations of the Cardiolipin-Cytochrome c Interaction:
Introduction of Membrane Morphology Changes . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 6107 –6115 . 10.1021/la104924c .21504165 
Mandal A. ; Hoop C. L. ; DeLucia M. ; Kodali R. ; Kagan V. E. ; Ahn J. ; van der
Wei P. C. A. 
Structural Changes and Proapoptopic
Peroxidase Activity of Cardiolipin-Bound Mitochondrial Cytochrome
C . Biophys. J. 
2015 , 109 , 1873 –1884 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.09.016 .26536264 
Trusova V. M. ; Gorbenko G. P. ; Molotkovsky J. G. ; Kinnunen P. K. J. 
Cytochrome c-Lipid
Interactions: New Insight from Resonance Energy Transfer . Biophys. J. 
2010 , 99 , 1754 –1763 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.06.017 .20858419 
Sinibaldi F. ; Milazzo L. ; Howes B. D. ; Piro M. C. ; Florucci L. ; Polticelli F. ; Ascenzi P. ; Coletta M. ; Smulevich G. ; Santucci R. 
The Key Role Played by Charge in the Interaction of
Cytochrome c with Cardiolipin . J. Biol. Inorg.
Chem. 
2017 , 22 , 19 –29 . 10.1007/s00775-016-1404-5 .27826772 
Colón W. ; Elöve G. A. ; Walken L. P. ; Sherman F. ; Roder H. 
Side Chain
Packing of the N- and C-Terminal Helices Plays a Critical Role in
the Kinetics of Cytochrome c Folding . Biochemistry 
1996 , 35 , 5538 –5549 . 10.1021/bi960052u .8611545 
Colón W. ; Roder H. 
Kinetic Intermediates in the Formation of the Cytochrome c Molten
Globule . Nat. Struct. Biol. 
1996 , 3 , 1019 –1025 . 10.1038/nsb1296-1019 .8946855 
Yeh S.-R. ; Takahashi S. ; Fan B. ; Rousseau D. L. 
Ligand Exchange
during Cytochrome c Folding . Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 
1997 , 4 , 51 –56 . 10.1038/nsb0197-51 .
Cevc G. 
Membrane Electrostatics . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Biomembr. 
1990 , 1031 , 311 –382 . 10.1016/0304-4157(90)90015-5 .
Domanov Y. A. ; Molotkovsky J. G. ; Gorbenko G. P. 
Coverage-Dependent Changes of Cytochrome
c Transverse Location in Phospholipid Membranes Revealed by FRET . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2005 , 1716 , 49 –58 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2005.09.002 .
Manas E. S. ; Vaderkooi J. M. ; Sharp K. A. 
The Effects of Protein
Environment
on the Low Temperature Electronic Spectroscopy of Cytochrome c and
Microperoxidase-11 . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 6334 –6348 . 10.1021/jp9908552 .
Dragomir I. ; Hagarman A. ; Wallace C. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Optical Band
Splitting and Electronic Perturbations of the Heme Chromophore in
Cytochrome c at Room Temperature Probed by Visible Electronic Circular
Dichroism Spectroscopy . Biophys. J. 
2007 , 92 , 989 –998 . 10.1529/biophysj.106.095976 .17098790 
Verbaro D. ; Hagarman A. ; Soffer J. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
The pH Dependence
of the 695 nm Charge Transfer Band Reveals the Population of an Intermediate
State of the Alkaline Transition of Ferricytochrome c at Low Ion Concentrations . Biochemistry 
2009 , 48 , 2990 –2996 . 10.1021/bi802208f .19222214 
Verbaro D. ; Hagarman A. ; Kohli A. ; Schweitzer-Stenner R. 
Microperoxidase
11: A Model System for Porphyrin Networks and Heme-Protein Interactions . J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 
2009 , 14 , 1289 –1300 . 10.1007/s00775-009-0574-9 .19639347 
Jähnig F. 
Electrostatic
Free Energy and Shift of the Phase Transition from Charged Lipid Membranes . Biophys. Chem. 
1976 , 4 , 309 –318 . 10.1016/0301-4622(76)80012-9 .953150

