
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002363710.1021/acsomega.7b00045ArticleBiosynthesized Protein-Capped Silver Nanoparticles
Induce ROS-Dependent Proapoptotic Signals and Prosurvival Autophagy
in Cancer Cells Fageria Leena †§Pareek Vikram †§Dilip R. Venkataramana †Bhargava Arpit †Pasha Sheik Saleem ‡Laskar Inamur Rahaman ‡Saini Heena †Dash Subhra †Chowdhury Rajdeep *†Panwar Jitendra *††Department
of Biological Sciences and ‡Department of Chemistry, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani 333031, India* E-mail: rajdeep.chowdhury@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in. Tel: +91 1596 515608. Fax: +91 1596 244183 (R.C.).* E-mail: drjitendrapanwar@yahoo.co.in. Tel: +91 1596 515728, Fax: +91 1596 244183 (J.P.).17 04 2017 30 04 2017 2 4 1489 1504 26 01 2017 17 03 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In
recent years, the use of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) in biomedical
applications has shown an unprecedented boost along with simultaneous
expansion of rapid, high-yielding, and sustainable AgNP synthesis
methods that can deliver particles with well-defined characteristics.
The present study demonstrates the potential of metal-tolerant soil
fungal isolate Penicillium shearii AJP05
for the synthesis of protein-capped AgNPs. The particles were characterized
using standard techniques, namely, UV–visible spectroscopy,
transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy. The anticancer activity of the biosynthesized
AgNPs was analyzed in two different cell types with varied origin,
for example, epithelial (hepatoma) and mesenchymal (osteosarcoma).
The biological NPs (bAgNPs) with fungal-derived outer protein coat
were found to be more cytotoxic than bare bAgNPs or chemically synthesized
AgNPs (cAgNPs). Elucidation of the molecular mechanism revealed that
bAgNPs induce cytotoxicity through elevation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) levels and induction of apoptosis. Upregulation of autophagy
and activation of JNK signaling were found to act as a prosurvival
strategy upon bAgNP treatment, whereas ERK signaling served as a prodeath
signal. Interestingly, inhibition of autophagy increased the production
of ROS, resulting in enhanced cell death. Finally, bAgNPs were also
found to sensitize cells with acquired resistance to cisplatin, providing
valuable insights into the therapeutic potential of bAgNPs. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first study that provides a holistic
idea about the molecular mechanisms behind the cytotoxic activity
of protein-capped AgNPs synthesized using a metal-tolerant soil fungus.

document-id-old-9ao7b00045document-id-new-14ao-2017-00045fccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
In recent years, nanoparticles
(NPs) have emerged as a novel class
of materials with potential for a wide range of biomedical applications.1 The intrinsic nature of NPs, such as their ability
to absorb or carry other compounds and their ease of cell penetration
has made them potentially useful, especially, in the biomedical field.
In spite of tremendous advances in the use of nanomaterials in diagnostics,
therapy, and healthcare, the key challenges involve determining how
to get these advances to the clinic.2 Among
various nanomaterials, silver NPs (AgNPs) have received considerable
attention due to their unique properties such as conductivity, chemical
stability, relatively lower toxicity, and outstanding therapeutic
potential, such as anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, and anticancerous
activities.3−5 Today AgNPs have widespread biological applications
and the highest level of commercialization among nanomaterials.6 Silver has been known to be used since ancient
time as an antimicrobial agent, as a component of dental alloys, and
for preservation and decoration of sweets and other food materials.
It has been demonstrated that at low concentrations, AgNPs are nontoxic
to human cells.7 However, the associated
potential toxicity in therapeutic applications has always been a cause
of concern for their long-term use.8

Cancer has become one of the most dreadful diseases with ever increasing
mortality rate worldwide. Traditionally practiced therapy with cytotoxic
drugs alone or in combination with radiation is mostly ineffective
in eradicating the disease. Tumor cells bypass the effect of chemotherapeutic
insult by developing intrinsic or acquired resistance to the drugs.
Additionally, there is a trauma of development of postchemotherapy
side effects, which is very distressing to the patient and at times
is fatal enough, enforcing mortality.9 In
this regard, NPs offer an attractive alternative to conventional chemotherapeutics.
NPs have unique ability to home specifically into tumor tissues by
utilizing their leaky vasculature by enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR) effect.10 This can enhance the anticancerous
effect of the NPs if they are inherently cytotoxic or used as drug
delivery vectors; also, simultaneously, this reduces systemic toxicity.

In recent years, the applications of AgNPs have risen up in cancer
diagnosis and treatment.5,11,12 Various reports demonstrated the cytotoxic effect of AgNPs against
different cancer cells.13−15 Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
generation and DNA damage leading to mitochondria-dependent apoptosis
have been considered as the possible mechanisms of AgNP-mediated cytotoxicity.3,16 In general, the toxicity of AgNPs appears to be driven by the release
of Ag+ ions, which depends on the dissolution rate of AgNPs
inside the cells.5,17 Thus, a strict control over the
release of Ag+ ions is a prerequisite for the anticancerous
efficacy of AgNPs. Surface coating or functionalization of NPs serves
as the most important factor in this regard.18 It has been reported that modification in surface properties can
improve the cellular internalization of NPs while decreasing their
possible side effects.19,20 Furthermore, surface properties
can affect the dispersibility of NPs in culture media and subsequently
their cellular uptake and cytotoxicity profile. Thus, to understand
the actual cytotoxic mechanism of NPs, it is necessary to have NPs
together with reasonable controls of those key physicochemical properties.21

In recent years, extensive research has
been carried out for the
controlled synthesis of NPs. Most of the chemical and physical methods
used are energy- and capital-intensive, employ toxic chemicals, and
often yield particles in nonpolar organic solutions, thus, precluding
their biomedical applications.22 Microbial
synthesis of NPs has recently emerged as a widely used approach for
the production of biogenic NPs.23 Among
microorganisms, fungi are proven to be one of the most potential candidates
for the extracellular synthesis of NPs due to their easy handling,
inexpensive maintenance, and ease of downstream processing because
of enormous extracellular secretary compounds. These biomolecules
act as reductants and are found to have a significant advantage over
their counterparts as protecting/capping agents.24 Also, the extracellular protein secretions by fungi can
be easily scaled up, leading to the development of so-called NP synthesis
reactors.25,26

In the present study, opting the nature’s
own sustainable
way of interacting with metal ions, indigenous metal-tolerant soil
fungal isolates were utilized to develop an ecofriendly and low-cost
protocol for the extracellular synthesis of AgNPs. The biosynthesized
protein-capped silver NPs (bAgNPs) were further opted for investigating
their biological functions, particularly anticancer effects, in comparison
to those of bare bAgNPs and commercially available chemically synthesized
silver NPs (cAgNPs). Cancer cells of two different origins, that is,
epithelial (human hepatocellular carcinoma, HCC) and mesenchymal (human
osteosarcoma, OS), were selected for the present study. It is well
known that the response of cytotoxic drugs may vary according to the
cell types. Hence, it is essential to confirm whether the cell-sensitizing
potential of prospective compounds is true for cell types of varied
origin. HCC is one of the most complex and aggressive cancer types.
Around 80% of HCC patients worldwide are diagnosed at an advanced
stage of the disease; the median survival of these patients is only
6–8 months. For the large number of patients, the choice of
curative resection or ablation therapy remains practically nil and
palliative treatment is the only preferred alternative.27,28 OS, on the other hand, is the most prevalent primary malignant bone
tumor that is very aggressive, which when untreated shows rapid local
and systemic progression, leading to severe mortality. The 5-year
survival rate of high-grade OS is as low as 20%. Despite exceptional
local control through surgery, patients with even localized OS ultimately
develop metastasis and die.29,30 The surgical failure
and associated necessity to find a cure led to the development of
various multimodular chemotherapeutic regimes for the treatment of
OS. However, in majority of cases, for both HCC and OS, the complex
etiology of the tumor, highly variable biological behavior, and acquired
resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs complicate the treatment, leading
to eventual failure. This signifies the pressing need to identify
a repertoire of novel drugs that can be effective against such dreadful
disease outcomes. Hence, the present study investigated the cytotoxic
potential of the mycogenic AgNPs against HCC and OS cells in vitro.
Results show that the fungal-derived protein-capped AgNPs have shown
more cytotoxic effect than that of chemically synthesized or bared
bAgNPs. This signifies the role of fungal-secreted materials in enhancing
the cytotoxicity of the bAgNPs. The detailed mechanism of action of
these mycogenic bAgNPs has also been investigated. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first report on the anticancerous effect
of mycogenic protein-capped AgNPs and their detailed mechanism of
action.

Results and Discussion
Metal Tolerance Assay and Screening of Fungal
Isolates
All of the fungal isolates were screened for their
metal-tolerance
ability against silver ions, and the results were expressed in terms
of MTC (Figure 1).
All fungal isolates were able to survive up to 250 μg mL–1 silver concentration. Aspergillus
tamarii AJP10 (MTC: 1250 μg Ag mL–1) was found to be the most tolerant fungus among all of the isolates
followed by Penicillium shearii AJP05
(MTC: 1000 μg Ag mL–1). A high proportion
(>70%) of fungal isolates depicts significant silver-tolerance
ability.
All of the fungal isolates were screened to check their potential
for extracellular synthesis of AgNPs. On the basis of the promising
results for quick and efficient extracellular synthesis of AgNPs, P. shearii AJP05 was chosen for further studies.

Figure 1 Silver
metal tolerance profile of fungal isolates.

Characterization of bAgNPs
The extracellular synthesis
of AgNPs using the cell filtrate of P. shearii isolate AJP05 was monitored by the progressive change in color of
the reaction medium. Figure 2 shows Erlenmeyer flasks containing the fungal cell-free filtrate
without and with silver nitrate after completion of reaction at 50
min. The flask containing silver nitrate solution and fungal cell-free
filtrate showed change in color of reaction mixture from colorless
to brown during the incubation period. In contrast, no change in color
was observed in the flask containing only the fungal cell-free filtrate.
Moreover, the negative control (pure silver nitrate solution without
cell-free filtrate) did not show any characteristic change in color,
suggesting the importance of fungal cell-free filtrate in NP synthesis.

Figure 2 Erlenmeyer
flasks containing cell-free filtrate of P. shearii isolate AJP05 without (a) and with (b)
silver nitrate solution (1 mM) after 50 min of reaction.

The rate of NP synthesis was monitored using UV–visible
spectroscopy, which has been considered as the most commonly employed
technique for characterization of silver NPs. The absorption spectra
showed a gradual increase in the absorption maximum peak at 446 nm
with respect to time without any shift in the peak (Figure 3a). It was due to the excitation
of surface plasmon, which is a typical phenomenon of noble NPs and
indicates the presence of silver NPs.39 No drastic increase in absorbance at 446 nm was observed after 50
min of incubation, indicating nearly complete reduction of precursor
silver ions. The stability of NP solution was regularly determined
by UV–visible spectroscopy up to 3 months, and the solution
was found to be stable at room temperature with no flocculation. However,
after removal of protein coating, agglomeration was observed in the
bare NP solution. Hence, the bare NP solution was sonicated each time
before use using a high-energy probe (100 W, 40 kHz) for 30 min to
prevent agglomeration.

Figure 3 (a) UV–visible spectrum showing gradual synthesis
of silver
NPs with time. (b) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrographs
showing uniformly distributed silver NPs. (c) Particle size distribution
histogram of silver NPs as determined using transmission electron
micrographs.

The morphology and shape
of NPs were determined by TEM micrographs
(Figure 3b), which
revealed that the as-synthesized NPs were somewhat spherical in shape
and uniformly distributed without significant agglomeration. The particle
size histogram (Figure 3c) of AgNPs shows that the particle size ranges from 3 to 20 nm with
an average size of 8.0 ± 2.7 nm. The frequency distribution suggests
that almost 80% of the particles were in the 6–15 nm range.

The diffraction pattern of the drop-coated film of as-synthesized
NPs showed well-defined peaks at 2θ values of 38.26, 64.71,
and 77.38°, which correspond to the (111), (220), and (311) planes
of silver, respectively (Figure 4a). These values were in accordance with the face-centered
cubic (fcc) lattice structure of crystalline silver (JCPDS file no.
04-0783). A similar pattern of X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum has
been previously reported by our group for silver NPs synthesized by Aspergillus sp.18

Figure 4 (a) XRD pattern showing
crystalline nature of silver NPs. (b) UV–visible
absorption spectra showing the presence of proteins (amino acids)
in the supernatant, bAgNPs, and their absence in the resuspended NP
solution. (c) Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy spectrum
of liquid samples showing the presence of proteins on the surface
of silver NPs. (d) sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) analysis of the purified extracellular proteins of P. shearii AJP05. Lane 1, molecular weight marker
(SM-0431); lane 2, purified extracellular protein; and lane 3, capping
proteins.

Characterization of Capping
Materials of bAgNPs
The
UV–visible absorption spectrum of the bare bAgNPs and supernatant
of the SDS-treated bAgNPs showed absorbance peaks at 446 and 280 nm,
respectively (Figure 4b). Noticeably, the bAgNP absorption spectrum also shows a peak around
280 nm, confirming the presence of proteins as the capping material
on the NP’s surface.

FTIR measurements of the bAgNPs
were carried out to characterize the capping materials present on
the surface of NPs. FTIR spectrum exhibited characteristic bands at
wave numbers 1637 and 3268 cm–1 that correspond
to the bending and stretching vibrations of the amide I bond, respectively
(Figure 4c). This supports
the UV–visible spectroscopy results, representing the presence
of proteins on bAgNPs’ surface as a capping material.

The capping materials isolated after treatment with 1% SDS solution
in boiling water bath for 15 min were further resolved on SDS-PAGE
using a 12% resolving gel (Figure 4d). Interestingly, the SDS-treated sample showing the
presence of three bands of ca. 65, 55, and 50 kDa was observed (lane
3). These proteins were also present in the extracellular cell-free
filtrate of P. shearii isolate AJP05,
as shown in lane 2. Therefore, it can be proposed that the observed
proteins act as a capping material and confer stability to silver
NPs.

Biologically Synthesized AgNPs Induce Cytotoxicity in Cancer
Cells
Because of unique physicochemical properties, nanomaterials
have been widely utilized in biomedical applications, among which
AgNPs are one of the most promising ones.23,40−42 In this study, the cytotoxic efficacy of AgNPs was
analyzed in two different kinds of human cancer cells: human OS (HOS)
and HCC (Huh7) by MTT assay. The cell lines each of mesenchymal origin
and epithelial origin were chosen. The AgNPs were selected over free
metal silver for exploration of their anticancerous effects because
of the enhanced permeability of NPs into tumors, attributable to the
EPR effect.10 Initially, the extracellularly
as-synthesized bAgNPs were analyzed for their cytotoxic potential.
Interestingly, Huh7 cells were found to be more sensitive (IC50: <5 μg mL–1) to the NPs compared
to OS cells (IC50:10 μg mL–1) (Figure 5a). Upon obtaining
cytotoxicity with As-syn-bAgNPs, silver NPs were
separated from the fungal cell-free filtrate by freeze-drying and
suspended in water to obtain the bAgNPs, which were used in subsequent
experiments. Simultaneously, bare AgNPs were prepared following methods
described in Materials and Methods. The cytotoxic
potentials of bAgNPs, bare AgNPs, and chemically synthesized AgNPs
[cAgNPs, <100 nm, 99.5% metals basis (MKBC1763); Sigma-Aldrich]
were compared. The cells were exposed to various concentrations of
AgNPs for 24 h and then assessed for their cytotoxicity by the MTT
assay. A clear dose-dependent cytotoxicity was observed in the case
of protein-capped bAgNPs as compared to that for bare or cAgNPs (Figure 5b,c). Huh7 cells
were found to be more sensitive than OS cells to all the tested AgNPs
(Figure 5b,c). It can
be further inferred that the presence of fungal-derived components
coating and stabilizing bAgNPs probably provide added cytotoxic advantage
to them, as bAgNPs were found to be more cytotoxic than bare bAgNPs
or cAgNPs. Hence, bAgNPs were subsequently used for further studies.

Figure 5 Effect
of AgNP treatment on the viability of OS and Huh7 cells.
(a) Cells were treated with AgNPs for 24 h, and the cell viability
was analyzed through the MTT assay. The cytotoxic effect of As-syn
bAgNPs on OS and Huh7 cells is represented through a bar diagram.
The symbols (* and #) represent a significant difference (p < 0.05) as compared to that in untreated control cells
in OS and Huh7 cells, respectively. (b, c) Effect of bAgNP or bare
or cAgNP treatment at different concentrations on Huh7 and OS cells,
respectively. Here, * represents a significant difference (p < 0.05) as compared to that in bare and cAgNP-treated
cells. (d, e) Effect of the treatment of a combination of cisplatin
(cis) and bAgNP on OS and Huh7 cells, respectively. Here, * represents
a significant difference (p < 0.05) as compared
to that in bAgNP-treated cells.

bAgNPs Enhance Cytotoxicity of Chemotherapeutic Drug Cisplatin
(CDDP)
Cisplatin, a widely used therapeutic drug is part
of the treatment regime for both OS and HCC. However, almost 30 years
after the introduction of CDDP into clinical settings, we are still
in an effort to understand how to refine the therapeutic potential
of cisplatin. Despite its proven benefits, CDDP-based treatment is
often associated with life-threatening toxicity, limiting its clinical
application.43 This perpetually demands
for identification of novel, biological molecules that can act as
a complement to the potent drug CDDP. Keeping these facts in mind,
we analyzed whether the protein-capped bAgNPs that showed cytotoxicity
against OS and Huh7 cells have prospective potential to increase CDDP-induced
cytotoxicity. Our result shows that bAgNPs can efficiently increase
the cytotoxic ability of the potent drug, CDDP. The IC50 of CDDP was found to be 35 μM in OS cells and 60 μM
in Huh7 cells. However, when these cells were exposed to CDDP along
with bAgNPs, increased cell cytotoxicity was obtained (Figure 5d,e). This proves that bAgNPs
can potentially be used with conventional drugs, such as CDDP, to
effectively sensitize both Huh7 and OS cells.

Analysis of bAgNP Internalization
Before investigating
the molecular mechanism of cell death upon bAgNP exposure, efforts
were made to confirm the internalization of the NPs. The bAgNPs (1)
were tagged with the reported luminescent platinum (II) complex.34 The resulting composite (2) was observed to
emit green light under exposure to UV light (λext ∼ 365 nm) in suspended medium. As the luminescent platinum
(II) complex emits green light in water solution, we presumed that
the dye has adhered to the surface of NPs (Figure S1a). To support the above proposition, the AgNP–platinum
composites were characterized by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Figure S1b). The measured particle sizes for
1 and 2 were 220 and 249 nm, respectively. The relatively larger size
obtained of 2 in comparison to that of 1 implies the stacking of the
luminescent platinum (II) complex on the surface of 1.44 Absorption spectra of the luminescent platinum
(II) complex and 1 show λmax at 358 and 450 nm, respectively,
whereas 2 results both peaks at λmax 358 and 450
nm. Definitely, each peak obtained for 2 is characteristic of the
individual components for the luminescent platinum (II) complex and
1, respectively. Interestingly, the characteristic absorption peak
for the luminescent platinum (II) complex in 2 is enhanced in comparison
to that in bare luminescent platinum (II) complex and the other characteristic
surface plasmon band for bAgNP became shallow as compared to the pristine
one (Figure S1c). The recorded excitation
spectra (Figure S1d) of the luminescent
platinum (II) complex and 2 show the maxima at 369 and 398 nm, respectively,
but emission spectra (Figure S1d) remain
same. On the basis of above observations, we propose that the luminescent
platinum (II) complex adheres on the surface of bAgNPs (1). Furthermore,
OS cells were treated with the AgNP–Pt(II) complex (2) composite
and visualized under a fluorescence microscope. A representative figure
of the same demonstrates the presence of green fluorescence inside
the cells, indicating efficient internalization of bAgNPs (Figure S2).

AgNP-Induced Cell Cytotoxicity
Is ROS-Dependent
Following
observances of the cytotoxic potential of bAgNPs, their mechanism
of action was investigated. NP-induced ROS generation and oxidative
stress have been proposed as mediators of apoptotic cell death previously.45−47 Furthermore, levels of ROS-scavenging enzymes like peroxidase are
also known to be aberrantly regulated in cancer cells.48,49 However, the ROS inducing potential of the capped-AgNPs is least
explored. Hence, the effect of fungal-synthesized AgNPs on intracellular
ROS generation was determined in OS and Huh7 cells. The intracellular
ROS concentration as measured through 2,7-dichlorofluorescein diacetate
(DCFH-DA) was significantly higher in OS and Huh7 cells treated with
bAgNPs (Figure 6a).
A decrease in ROS levels was observed when the cells were treated
with the widely used ROS scavenger (N-acetyl cysteine;
NAC) (Figure 6a). Increased
ROS production following bAgNP treatment could be one of the reasons
for the cytotoxicity of bAgNP in OS and Huh7 cells. To prove the same,
we inhibited ROS production by NAC prior to bAgNP treatment and monitored
the change in cytotoxicity. Interestingly, ROS inhibition resulted
in reduced cytotoxicity in both the cell types but more significantly
in Huh7 (Figure 6b).
This proved that bAgNP-induced cytotoxicity was ROS-dependent. In
addition to ROS, treatment of AgNPs increased the levels of the antioxidant
enzyme, peroxidase, in OS and Huh7 cells (Figure 6c). An increased level of antioxidant enzyme
might be a compensatory mechanism to cope with high level of oxidative
stress due to ROS generated by bAgNP treatment.

Figure 6 Estimation of ROS levels
upon bAgNP treatment. (a) OS and Huh7
cells were exposed to bAgNPs at different concentrations for 24 h.
NAC (5 mM) was applied 2 h prior to NP treatment wherever mentioned.
Fold change in ROS levels as measured by DCFH-DA is represented with
bAgNPs untreated control taken as arbitrary unit “1”.
(b) MTT assay was performed to check cell viability following exposure
of OS and Huh7 cells to bAgNPs with and without NAC (5 mM) treatment.
NAC was added 1 h before NP treatment. The * and # symbols represent
a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05)
as compared to that in cells treated with NAC in OS and Huh7 cells,
respectively. (c) Fold change in peroxidase enzyme activity with bAgNP
treatment in OS and Huh7 cells was measured after 24 h. The untreated
control was taken as arbitrary unit “1”. The * symbol
represents a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05) as compared to that in untreated cells.

Induction of Apoptotic Cell Death by bAgNPs
through Activation
of Caspases
Morphological variations observed upon bAgNP
treatment in both the cell types were captured through bright-field
imaging (Figure 7a).
Clear indication of rounding up of cells along with some cells showing
a stretched phenotype, characteristic of stressed cells, was observed.
Furthermore, nuclear staining with 4′-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) showed a fragmented nucleus upon bAgNP exposure (Figure 7b). Morphological alterations
provide hints towards the induction of the cell death phenomenon,
such as apoptosis, following bAgNP treatment. For further molecular
studies, we selected OS cells as they are known to possess inherently
resistant characteristics.50 We investigated
the activation of apoptotic markers in OS cells. Caspase-3 has been
identified as a major effector of programmed cell death.49,51 Thus, to investigate the effect of bAgNPs on the apoptotic pathway,
the caspase-3 enzyme activity was examined in OS cells through an
ELISA-based method. The enzyme activity increased in a dose-dependent
manner in bAgNP-treated cells, and an increase of about 1.5 fold was
observed at IC50 concentration (Figure 7c). An increase in the caspase activity was
further confirmed by the detection of cleaved caspase-3, an indicator
of apoptosis, by immunoblot (Figure 7d). The cleavage of the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase-1
(PARP-1, 116 kDa) molecule by caspases following DNA damage is also
considered as a characteristic marker of apoptosis.48 Hence, the protein expression of PARP-1 was determined
by immunoblot. An increase in the level of cleaved PARP-1 (89 kDa)
with simultaneous decrease in total PARP-1 was observed with increasing
concentrations of bAgNP exposure (Figure 7e). Furthermore, DNA content analysis with
propidium iodide (PI) staining showed an enrichment of fragmented
nondiploid cellular DNA and cells representing the G1-phase
of the cell cycle following bAgNP treatment (Figure 7f). An increase in the number of cells at
the subG1-phase of the cell cycle indicates the presence
of apoptotic cells and a probable growth arrest at the G1/S checkpoint of the cell cycle.46,52 The above
results provide a clear indication toward the induction of DNA damage-mediated
apoptotic cascade upon bAgNP treatment.

Figure 7 bAgNPs induce apoptosis
in OS cells. (a) Phase-contrast images
of OS and Huh7 cells after bAgNP treatment (IC50 and high
dose, i.e., 40 μg mL–1 for OS cells and 15
μg mL–1 for Huh7 cells) for 24 h. Control
(Ctrl) represents untreated cells. The scale bar represents 50 μm.
(b) OS and Huh7 cells were seeded on coverslips and treated for 24
h with bAgNPs (IC50). Nuclear fragmentation post-exposure
was observed by DAPI staining followed by fluorescence microscopy.
The scale bar represents 100 μm. (c) Fold change in the caspase-3
enzyme activity was measured following bAgNP and cAgNP treatment for
24 h. The level of caspase-3 activity in untreated control was taken
as arbitrary unit “1”. (d, e) Protein levels of cleaved
caspase-3, total PARP-1, and cleaved PARP-1 were analyzed by immunoblotting
after AgNP exposure in OS cells. β-Actin served as a loading
control. Densitometric scanning of blots was performed by ImageJ software
and is represented in the bar diagram. [The * symbol represents a
significant difference (p < 0.05) as compared
to that in the control.] (f) Number of cells in each phase of the
cell cycle was analyzed by PI staining of OS cells exposed to bAgNPs
for 24 h. A representative image of flow cytometric analysis is provided.
The percentage of cells in each phase of cell cycle is represented
by a bar diagram.

Autophagy Induction Following
bAgNP Treatment Acts as a Survival
Strategy
Autophagy is an important intracellular pathway
in eukaryotic cells involved in the recycling of cellular materials.
It occurs at a basal level in most cells; however, under certain physiological
conditions, such as nutrient deprivation, depletion of growth factor,
or metabolic stress, autophagy is activated. Activated autophagy can
have a dual role depending on the context or cell type; it can act
as a cell-death-inducing mechanism, having crosstalk with apoptotic
machinery, or may act as a survival strategy to cope with the cellular
stress.51,53 Therefore, efforts were made to investigate
whether autophagy is activated upon bAgNP exposure and its role, if
any. The OS cells showed a stark increase in the protein concentration
of microtubule-associated protein light chain 3-II (LC3B-II), indicative
of the autophagic activity with increasing doses of bAgNPs (Figure 8a). Detection of
LC3B-II by immunoblotting is considered as a reliable method for monitoring
autophagy. It has been previously reported that monodansylcadaverine
(MDC) is a specific marker for autolysosomes.35 We observed the incorporation of MDC in OS cells upon autophagy
stimulation by bAgNPs. As depicted in Figure 8b, bAgNP-treated cells showed a stark increase
in the number of autophagic vesicles, indicating that bAgNPs induced
the formation of MDC-labeled vacuoles. MDC was found to be concentrated
as spherical structures or punctate bodies distributed in the cytoplasm
of the cells. A fluorimetric measurement of the same provided further
evidence for the induction of autophagy upon bAgNP treatment (Figure 8c). Interestingly,
prior inhibition of autophagy by the autophagy inhibitor, CQDP, resulted
in an increased cell death in OS cells upon bAgNP treatment, suggesting
a prosurvival role of autophagy (Figure 8d). Morphological alterations of cells depicting
increased cell death upon CQDP and bAgNP treatment are represented
in Figure 8e. Furthermore,
we observed a stark increase in the levels of ROS post-autophagy inhibition
in bAgNP-treated cells (Figure 8f). This indicates that autophagy probably acts as a prosurvival
mechanism by suppressing ROS levels upon bAgNP treatment. An inhibition
of autophagy, in turn, triggers increased ROS and subsequently more
cell death.54 Therefore, the use of autophagy
inhibitor and protein-capped bAgNPs can be an appropriate strategy
to treat these cancer cells efficiently. Previously, Jeong et al.
reported that autophagy mediated by hypoxia may be a mechanism for
resistance to AgNPs-induced apoptosis.55 However, we report that bAgNPs can itself induce autophagy as a
cytoprotective strategy to combat apoptotic cell death. Also, the
ability of AgNPs to induce intracellular ROS production is well reported;
an elevated ROS is known to exert its effect by lipid, protein, and/or
DNA damage, leading to cell death.49 However,
a simultaneous activation of autophagy can limit ROS production through
exclusion of damaged mitochondria by mitoautophagy, leading to decreased
cell death.54 In corroboration to above
studies, we also observed that an inhibition of autophagy in OS cells
elevated bAgNP-induced ROS levels, resulting in enhanced cell death.
Here, autophagy thus plays a protective role mainly by preventing
enhanced ROS accumulation, probably through the elimination of damaged
mitochondria, which are known to be the major generators of ROS.

Figure 8 bAgNPs
induce autophagy as a survival strategy. (a) Protein expression
of autophagy marker LC3B-II was studied by immunoblotting after bAgNP
treatment. Densitometric analysis of scanned immunoblots was performed
by ImageJ software. β-actin served as a loading control. [The
* symbol represents a significant difference (p <
0.05) as compared to that in untreated cells.] (b) For further confirmation
of autophagy, MDC fluorescence staining was performed after 6 and
24 h of bAgNP treatment in OS cells and green punctate bodies indicative
of autophagosomes were monitored by fluorescence microscopy. The scale
bar represents 100 μm. (c) Fluorimetric estimation of MDC activity
was performed following bAgNP treatment (IC50 and high
dose, 40 μg mL–1) for 24 h in OS cells. [The
* symbol represents a significant difference (p <
0.05) as compared to that in untreated cells.] (d) The cytotoxic effect
of bAgNPs in OS cells was measured by the MTT assay after 24 h of
bAgNP treatment in the presence or absence of the autophagy inhibitor
(10 μM CQDP). The inhibitor was added 2 h before the treatment.
[The (*) symbol represents a significant difference (p < 0.05) as compared to that in bAgNP-treated cells.] (e) Morphological
changes observed in OS cells after bAgNP treatment in the presence
or absence of the autophagy inhibitor are analyzed by phase contrast
microscopy. The scale bar represents 20 μm. (f) ROS levels were
measured after autophagy inhibition by CQDP in bAgNP-treated cells
by DCFH-DA. ROS levels in untreated cells were taken as arbitrary
unit “1”. [The * symbol represents a statistically significant
difference (p < 0.05) as compared to that in only
bAgNp treatment.]

bAgNP-Induced Activation
of Jun N-Terminal Kinase (JNK) and
Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinase (ERK) Mitogen-Activated Protein
Kinase (MAPK) Signaling Act Antagonistically
MAPK pathways
can regulate several important cellular processes extending from cell
survival, metabolism, and differentiation to apoptosis. In this regard,
the role of MAPKs, such as ERK and JNK, has been extensively studied
in cancer cells; however, their role following AgNP exposure is poorly
understood.47,56,57 The biologically synthesized AgNPs induced the activation of ERK
and JNK signaling, as evident by their increased phosphorylation in
OS cells after AgNP treatment (Figure 9a,b). More pronounced phosphorylation of ERK and JNK
was observed in cells receiving the bAgNP treatment compared to that
in cAgNPs (Figure 9a,b). Interestingly, an inhibition of ERK pathway by U0126, a selective
inhibitor of the upstream MAP kinases, resulted in decreased cell
death after AgNP exposure; however, a pharmacological inhibition of
JNK with SP600125 increased the level of AgNP-induced cell death in
OS cells, as evaluated by the MTT assay (Figure 9c). Morphological alterations of cells depicting
increased cell death upon JNK inhibitor and bAgNP treatment are depicted
in Figure 9d. Our results
provide strong evidence for selective activation of MAPK pathways
following AgNP exposure, where JNK signaling acts as a prosurvival
strategy, whereas ERK plays an antagonistic role, inducing prodeath
pathways in OS cells. The ultimate cell fate is probably the outcome
of disruption of this balance.

Figure 9 bAgNP causes activation of JNK and ERK
signaling in OS cells. (a,
b) Protein phosphorylation levels of p-JNK and p-ERK were examined
by immunoblotting after bAgNP treatment for 24 h in OS cells. Densitometric
analysis of scanned immunoblots was performed by ImageJ software and
normalized to β-actin. [The * symbol represents a significant
difference (p < 0.05) as compared to that in untreated
cells.] (c) Cell viability was analyzed by the MTT assay after inhibiting
JNK and ERK signaling by SP600125 (25 μM) and U0126 (10 μM),
respectively, followed by bAgNP treatment for 24 h. The inhibitors
were added 2 h before the NP treatment. [The * symbol represents a
statistically significant difference (p < 0.05)
with respect to the bAgNP treatment.] (d) Morphological changes observed
in OS cells after bAgNP treatment in the presence or absence of JNK
and ERK inhibitors are analyzed by phase contrast microscopy. The
scale bar represents 50 μm.

bAgNPs Induce Cell Death in Drug-Resistant OS Cells
Acquisition of resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs often hinders
the therapy of most cancers, OS is no exception. Therefore, we derived
a cisplatin-resistant in vitro model from the parental OS cells and
tested for the cytotoxic efficacy of bAgNPs. The OS cells were initially
exposed to a high dose of cisplatin followed by clonal selection of
surviving cells post-shock, following similar methods described elsewhere.
This process was repeated several times to derive OS cells that showed
approximately 2-fold decreased sensitivity to cisplatin. These cells
are termed as OS-R, representing cells resistant to cisplatin. The
concentration of cisplatin at which 50% of OS cells died was 35 μM,
whereas an increased viability (80%) was obtained in OS-R at similar
concentration of cisplatin. The bAgNPs successfully sensitized the
cisplatin-resistant OS cells too; however, as obtained with parental
cells, cytotoxicity with as-synthesized NPs was found to be more than
that with bAgNPs (Figure 10a). There was an increased production of ROS in OS-R cells
too; percentage cytotoxicity of cells decreased with NAC treatment,
suggesting a ROS-dependent cell death mechanism (Figure 10b,c). The cytotoxic effects
were less pronounced in resistant cells as compared to those in the
parental cells. The synergistic effect of cisplatin with bAgNPs was
also checked in OS-R similar to what was studied in parental cells.
A combination of drugs with NPs was more effective in sensitizing
the resistant cells too as compared to that of only bAgNPs (Figure 10d). The obtained
result provides strong evidence for the potential of bAgNPs in sensitizing
both parental and drug-refractory cancer cells.

Figure 10 Effect of bAgNPs on
the viability of drug-resistant cancer cells.
(a) Cell viability was analyzed by the MTT assay after 24 h of bAgNP
and As-syn-AgNP treatment to resistant OS cells (OS-R).
[The * symbol represents a significant difference (p < 0.05) as compared to that in untreated cells.] (b) DCFH-DA
assay was performed to measure ROS levels in OS-R cells after bAgNP
treatment. The cells were exposed to NAC (5 mM) for 1 h before NP
treatment. (c) Cell viability after inhibition of ROS by NAC followed
by bAgNP treatment for 24 h was measured by the MTT assay. [The *
symbol in (b) and (c) represents a statistical significant difference
(p < 0.05) as compared to that in the cells treated
with NAC]. (d) Effect of a combination of cisplatin and bAgNPs on
the viability of OS-R cells as measured by the MTT assay after 24
h of exposure. [The (*) symbol represents a significant difference
(p < 0.05) as compared to that in bAgNP-treated
cells.]

Conclusions
The
use of biogenic-NPs in therapeutic applications, as an ideal
alternative to negate toxicity issues associated with chemically synthesized
NPs, is currently an exciting area of research.40,58 Here, we have synthesized biogenic-AgNPs using a silver-tolerant
soil fungal isolate and analyzed their cytotoxic efficacy against
aggressive cancer cell types. The protein-capped NPs were found to
be way more cytotoxic than bare or chemically synthesized NPs. This
might be attributed to the enhanced internalization facilitated by
the presence of protein coat or due to controlled release of Ag ions.
Further studies characterizing the capping components and their precise
function are presently investigated and are excluded from the scope
of this study. Detailed investigation of the molecular mechanism leading
to cytotoxicity revealed that the mycosynthesized protein-capped bAgNPs
induce ROS-dependent apoptosis in OS cells. However, simultaneous
induction of autophagy tends to inhibit apoptosis by restricting enhanced
ROS production. Furthermore, exploration of the signaling pathway
revealed that JNK activation acts as a prosurvival response whereas
ERK a proapoptotic one, upon AgNp exposure in OS cells. Furthermore,
the protein-capped bAgNPs were found to enhance the cytotoxicity of
the widely used chemotherapeutic agent, like CDDP, and also were able
to effectively sensitize drug-resistant cells. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study with biologically synthesized AgNPs
from P. shearii isolate AJP05, which
not only describes the cytotoxic potential of the protein-capped bAgNPs
but also holistically characterizes the molecular signaling involved.
The implications from this study can be exploited for future potential
therapeutic benefits against aggressive-type cancers given that NPs
have this unique ability to home specifically into tumor tissues by
utilizing their leaky vasculature by the EPR effect.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
All chemicals (analytical grade) used in
the present study were procured from Sigma-Aldrich or Merck unless
otherwise stated. The culture media were obtained from HiMedia and
Invitrogen. Protein molecular weight marker (SM-0431) was purchased
from MBI Fermentas.

Metal Tolerance Profile and Screening of
Fungal Isolates
A maximum tolerable concentration (MTC) assay
was performed to determine
the silver metal tolerance ability of fungi isolated from metal-rich
rhizospheric soil. The complete details of isolation and molecular
characterization of fungal isolates can be obtained from our recent
report.31 To determine the silver metal
tolerance ability, experimental plates were prepared by supplementing
Czapek dox agar medium (pH 7.3) with varying amounts of silver nitrate
(AgNO3) to obtain a final concentrations of silver ions
in the ranges of 250, 500, 750, 1000, 1250, 1500, and 2000 μg
mL–1. Plates without silver ions were used as control.
Each plate was inoculated with the test fungal isolate (106 cfu mL–1) followed by incubation for 4 days at
28 °C under dark conditions. The experiment was performed in
triplicate. The maximum concentration of silver ions that allowed
the growth of a fungus in all three replicates was considered as the
MTC. All the fungal isolates were screened to check their ability
for extracellular synthesis of silver NPs based on the visual inspection
and UV–visible spectroscopic analysis. The fungal isolate showing
significant metal tolerance as well as quick and efficient extracellular
synthesis of AgNPs was chosen for further studies.

Extracellular
Synthesis of Silver NPs
The protocol
followed for extracellular synthesis of silver NPs was adopted from
our previous report.26 Briefly, the selected
fungal isolate was fermented in 80 mL of MGYP medium (0.3% malt extract,
1.0% glucose, 0.3% yeast extract, 0.5% peptone; pH 7.0) at 28 °C
for 72 h on a rotary shaker (150 rpm) under dark conditions. The fungal
biomass was separated by centrifugation (8000 rpm, 10 min, and 4 °C)
and washed thrice using sterile distilled water to remove all traces
of culture media. Biomass (10 g; fresh weight) was resuspended in
50 mL of sterile double-distilled water and further incubated for
72 h under similar conditions as described above. The fungal cell-free
filtrate containing extracellular metabolites was collected by separating
the biomass by vacuum filtration. Aqueous silver nitrate solution
was added to the flasks containing 100 mL of fungal cell-free filtrate
at a final concentration of 1.0 mM and incubated until the color of
the solution changed to brown under the similar conditions as described
above. Controls containing the fungal cell-free filtrate (without
silver nitrate) and pure silver nitrate solution (without fungal cell-free
filtrate) were also incubated simultaneously along with experimental
flasks in three replicates.

Preparation of Bare bAgNPs
The protocol
for the preparation
of bare bAgNPs was adopted from our previous report18 with minor modifications as detailed below. All the steps
including centrifugation (12 000 rpm; 30 min) were carried
out at 4 °C. The as-synthesized protein-capped silver NP solution
was centrifuged, and the pellet was washed thrice with water, keeping
intermittent vortexing and centrifugation to remove unbounded protein
molecules. The obtained pellet was suspended in 1% (w/v) SDS and boiled
in a water bath for 15 min followed by centrifugation. SDS is a widely
used denaturing agent, and its treatment results in the detachment
of the surface-bounded proteins from NPs.18 The supernatant containing the unreacted SDS and SDS–protein
complex was analyzed for the presence of proteins by measuring the
UV–visible absorption spectrum. The resulting pellet was boiled
in 1 mL of Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) in a water bath for 10 min to eliminate
the possibility of SDS binding to the NPs, if any. To ensure the complete
removal of SDS, dialysis was carried out against milli-Q water with
four changes followed by centrifugation. The obtained bare silver
NPs were characterized using UV–visible spectroscopy measurement.

Characterization of NPs
Visual Observation
The color change
of the cell-free
filtrate from pale yellow to brown after addition of silver nitrate
was routinely monitored visually, which would signify the bioreduction
of silver ions and formation of AgNPs.

UV–Visible Spectroscopy
The gradual synthesis
of AgNPs was monitored using UV–visible spectroscopy by sampling
of aliquots (1 mL) at different time intervals. The absorption spectra
were measured on a Jasco V-630 UV–visible spectrophotometer
(Jasco Corporation, Japan) operated within the range of 200–700
nm at a resolution of 1 nm.

TEM
Samples for
TEM were prepared by drop-coating the
as-synthesized NP solution onto carbon-coated copper grids. The extra
solution was removed using a lint-free blotting paper after a minute,
and the grids were kept in a vacuum desiccator overnight. TEM micrographs
were taken on a Hitachi H-7650 TEM instrument (Hitachi High-Technologies
Corporation, Japan) at an acceleration voltage of 100 kV.

XRD
XRD measurements of the freeze-dried samples were
carried out using a Rigaku MiniFlex II Bench top XRD System (Rigaku
Company) operated at a voltage of 20 kV and current of 15 mA with
Cu Kα radiation. The crystal phase was analyzed by comparing
the calculated values of interplanar spacing and the corresponding
intensities of diffraction peaks with the standard theoretical values
of the Powder Diffraction File database (PCPDFWIN; JCPDS-ICDD 2008).

Characterization of Capping Molecules
FTIR Spectroscopy
The freeze-dried as-synthesized NPs
were mixed with potassium bromide in a ratio of 1:100, and the FTIR
analysis was performed on a Perkin Elmer Frontier FTIR spectrometer
(Perkin Elmer) in the range of 400–4000 cm–1 at a resolution of 4 cm–1.

SDS-PAGE
To investigate the proteins present on the
surface of bAgNPs, the as-synthesized NPs were boiled with 1% SDS
solution for 15 min followed by centrifugation at 120 00 rpm
for 30 min to collect the capping proteins in the supernatant. SDS-PAGE
was carried out to determine the molecular weight of capping molecules
as described by Laemmli, 1970.32 The sample
containing capping proteins was mixed in a 1:1 ratio with the Laemmli
sample buffer [0.5 M Tris–HCl (pH 6.8), 0.5% bromophenol blue,
10% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, and 2% SDS] and incubated
for 5 min at 100 °C in a boiling water bath. The preparations
were centrifuged (12 000 rpm, 5 min, and 4 °C), and the
supernatant was used for electrophoresis on a Mini Protean gel system
(Bio-Rad) at a constant voltage of 120 V at room temperature. After
electrophoresis, the gel was stained with 0.25% Coomassie brilliant
blue (CBB) R-250 in the 45% methanol–10% acetic acid solution
for 3 h followed by overnight destaining in the 45% methanol–10%
acetic acid solution. The molecular mass of the protein bands was
determined by interpolation from a semilogarithmic plot of relative
molecular mass versus the Rf value (relative
mobility).

Cell Culture and Pharmacological Inhibitors
Human cancer
cell lines, HOS CRL-1543 (OS) (obtained from NCCS, Pune, India) and
Huh7 (kind gift from Dr. Soma Banerjee), were cultured at 37 °C,
5% CO2, in minimum essential medium (MEM; HiMedia) and
Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM; Invitrogen) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Invitrogen), respectively. Penicillin
(100 U mL–1) and streptomycin (100 μg mL–1; Invitrogen) were added to the culture medium. The
cells were typically grown to 60–70% confluency, rinsed in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Invitrogen), and placed into fresh
medium prior to treatments. Primary and secondary antibodies used
for immunoblotting, the MEK inhibitor (U0126), and the autophagy inhibitor
(chloroquine diphosphate, CQDP) were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology. The JNK inhibitor (SP600125) was purchased from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology. The ROS scavenger, NAC, was procured from SRL.

In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assay
In vitro cytotoxicity assay
was performed as described previously by Chowdhury et al.33 Briefly, the cells were cultured in 96-well
plates. After 24 h, the cells were treated with drugs or NPs or compounds
for specific period of time. Thereafter, MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) (SRL) was added to each treated and control well and the
cells were incubated for 4 h. Formazan crystals were solubilized in
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and readings were obtained at 570 nm with
a differential filter of 630 nm using a multiskan microplate spectrophotometer
(Thermo Scientific). The percentage of viable cells was calculated
using the following formula: viability (%) = (mean absorbance value
of drug-treated cells)/(mean absorbance value of control) × 100.
A concentration of 0.2% DMSO was found to be nontoxic and was used
for dissolving CDDP and used as a control in cytotoxicity experiments.

Microscopic Imaging and NP Internalization
For bright-field
microscopic imaging, the cells were cultured at a desired density
in 6 cm culture dishes, treated with AgNPs, and then images were captured
using Olympus (CKX41) microscope at 20× magnification. For detection
of nuclear fragmentation, the cells were grown overnight on coverslips
in 6 cm culture dishes and were treated with AgNPs for 24 h. Coverslip-cultured
cells were washed with 0.1 M PBS and fixed in methanol at −20
°C for 10 min. The coverslips were mounted with an antifade mountant
containing DAPI (Thermo Scientific) on a glass slide. Nuclear morphology
was observed by fluorescence microscopy (Olympus, BX41). For the analysis
of internalization of AgNPs, we prepared AgNP-luminescent platinum
(II) composites. Briefly, 3 mg of the luminescent platinum (II) complex
was added into a suspension of 10 mg of bAgNPs taken in distilled
H2O (2 mL). It was stirred overnight at room temperature.
Then, the reaction mixture was filtered with 55 mm Whatman qualitative
filter paper #2 and the filtrate was characterized using DLS on a
Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS spectrometer (Malvern Instruments, U.K.).
Measurements were recorded at 25 °C ± 1 °C, in triplicates;
each measurement was the average of 20 data sets acquired for 10 s
each.34 Thereafter, following confirmation
of composite formation, AgNP internalization was confirmed by the
exposure of platinum–AgNP composite on OS cells for 1 h and
its subsequent visualization by a fluorescence microscope using FITC
(λex/em 490/520) and DAPI (λex/em 372/456) filters.

Staining with MDC
Drug MDC, a specific
autophagolysosomal
marker, was used to analyze the autophagic process. For visualization
of autophagic vacuoles by microscopy, OS cells were plated on coverslips
overnight. Following bAgNP treatment, the cells were incubated for
10 min with 0.05 mM MDC in PBS at 37 °C.35 After incubation, the coverslips containing the cells were washed
with PBS and mounted with the antifade mountant (containing DAPI).
Intracellular MDC in the form of punctate dots were analyzed by fluorescence
microscopy. For fluorimetric measurement, after incubation of cells
with bAgNP and labeling with MDC for 10 min, the cells were washed
with PBS and collected in 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8) containing
0.1% TritonX-100. Intracellular MDC was measured by fluorescence photometry
(excitation 380 nm and emission 525 nm) in a microplate reader (Fluoroskan
Ascent).36 An increase in MDC fluorescence
upon bAgNP treatment was expressed as a fold change with respect to
control.

Measurement of Intracellular ROS and Antioxidant Enzyme Activity
ROS levels were estimated using DCFH-DA (Sigma), which measures
intracellular generation of hydrogen peroxide, a procedure for estimating
ROS. DCFH-DA passively enters the cell, where it reacts with ROS to
form the highly fluorescent compound, dichlorofluorescein (DCF). Approximately,
0.3 × 104 cells were seeded and treated with AgNPs
at different concentrations for 24 h and 5 mM NAC was added 2 h prior
AgNP treatment wherever mentioned to inhibit ROS. Following exposure
to AgNPs, the cells were washed with PBS and then incubated in 100
μL of working solution of DCFH-DA (2 mM DCFH-DA stock solution
was diluted to yield a 20 μM working solution) at 37 °C
for 30 min. The fluorescence was measured at 485 nm excitation and
530 nm emission using a microplate reader (Fluoroskan Ascent).37

To measure peroxidase enzyme activity,18 0.05 M pyrogallol was added to 100 μL
of the protein lysate. The reaction was started by adding 1% H2O2. Change in absorbance after every 30 s interval
for 3 min was observed in Multiskan Microplate Spectrophotometer at
420 nm. The enzyme activity was measured as a change in absorbance/min/mg
of protein. Pyragallol in the presence of H2O2 is oxidized to purpurogallin, a colored derivative, by the peroxidase
enzyme. The values were expressed as a fold change with respect to
control.

Caspase Assay
The cells (1 × 104/well)
were seeded and exposed to different concentrations of AgNPs for 24
h. The activity of caspase-3 was measured using the caspase-3 colorimetric
protease assay kit (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, the cell lysate was collected in RIPA buffer, and
the concentration of protein was determined using the Bradford assay.
Equal amount (60 μg) of protein mixed with the reaction buffer
was added to microtiter plates following incubation with the caspase-3
substrate (acetyl-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp p-nitroanilide,
Ac-DEVD-pNA) for 1 h, and the absorbance was read at 405 nm using
a microplate reader (Start-fax 2100, Awareness Tech. Ltd). The colorimetric
assay is based on the hydrolysis of the caspase-3 substrate by the
caspase-3 enzyme, resulting in the release of the p-nitroaniline (pNA) moiety. The concentration of the pNA released
from the substrate was calculated from the absorbance values at 405
nm.

Cell Cycle Analysis
For the detection of cells at different
phases of the cell cycle, they were seeded at a density of 1 ×
106, grown overnight, and exposed to bAgNPs for 24 h. Following
incubation, the cells were harvested and fixed in 70% ethanol for
24 h at −20 °C. Thereafter, the cells were centrifuged
at 1500 rpm and the cell pellet obtained was resuspended in PBS. Then,
PI (20 μg mL–1) was added and the dye-added
mixture was incubated in dark for 30 min before events were acquired
in a flow cytometer (CytoFLEX, Beckman Coulter).33 The percentage of cells in each phase of cell cycle was
calculated and plotted in a bar diagram.

Immunoblotting
Immunoblotting was performed as described
previously.33 The cells were lysed in a
modified RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich), and the protein content was
measured using the Bradford reagent. Then, the loading buffer was
added to the lysates followed by heat denaturation (100 °C for
10 min) and cooling on ice. Equal concentrations of protein lysates
were loaded in denaturing polyacrylamide gels and thereafter transferred
to the PVDF membrane (Millipore) for blocking with 5% skimmed milk
(HiMedia). The blots were probed with a specific primary antibody
(dilution 1:1000). β-Actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; dilution
1:2000) was used as a loading control. The secondary antibodies used
were horseradish peroxide-conjugated goat antirabbit IgG. The protein
intensity was detected using the enhanced chemiluminescence detection
system (Thermo Scientific). The expression was densitometrically quantified
using ImageJ software and normalized to control.

Creation of
Drug-Resistant Cell Line
The OS cell line
resistant to cisplatin (CDDP; OS-R) was created following similar
methods described before.38 Briefly, OS
cells were exposed to repeated doses of very high concentration of
CDDP (1 mg mL–1); the surviving cells were selected
and further subcultured. OS-R cells were periodically checked for
their resistance property by the MTT assay.

Statistical Analysis
The obtained data were analyzed
using the Prism software (Version 5.01; GraphPad Software Inc.). The
effect of various treatments was statistically analyzed using one-way
ANOVA or Student’s t-test, and the level of p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.
All data points represent the mean of independent measurements. Uncertainties
were represented as standard deviations in the form of bars.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00045.Representation
of luminescent platinum (II) complex
on bAgNPs (Figure S1a); particle size distribution obtained by DLS
(Figure S1b); absorption spectra for luminescent platinum (II) complex
(Figure S1c); excitation and emission spectra for luminescent platinum
(II) complex and bAgNP-Pt(II) complex composite (Figure S1d); internalization
of bAgNPs (Figure S2) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00045_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
§ L.F. and
V.P. contribute equally to this work.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research work was financially supported
by the Department
of Science and Technology, Government of India, New Delhi, under the
SERB (SB/FT/LS-233/2012) and Nano Mission Scheme (SR/NM/NS-1132/2011).
The authors are grateful to the Advanced Instrumentation Research
Facility, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India, for TEM and
XRD analyses and Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani,
for providing lab facilities. L.F. thanks UGC-CSIR, Government of
India, for providing research scholarship.
==== Refs
References
Heiligtag F. J. ; Niederberger M. 
The fascinating
world of nanoparticle research . Mater. Today 
2013 , 16 , 262 –271 . 10.1016/j.mattod.2013.07.004 .
Parak W. J. ; Nel A. E. ; Weiss P. S. 
Grand challenges
for nanoscience
and nanotechnology . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 6637 –6640 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b04386 .26192457 
Asharani P. ; Hande M. P. ; Valiyaveettil S. 
Anti-proliferative activity of silver
nanoparticles . BMC Cell Biol. 
2009 , 10 , 65 10.1186/1471-2121-10-65 .19761582 
Austin L. A. ; Mackey M. A. ; Dreaden E. C. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
The optical, photothermal,
and facile surface chemical properties of gold and silver nanoparticles
in biodiagnostics, therapy, and drug delivery . Arch. Toxicol. 
2014 , 88 , 1391 –1417 . 10.1007/s00204-014-1245-3 .24894431 
He Y. ; Du Z. ; Ma S. ; Liu Y. ; Li D. ; Huang H. ; Jiang S. ; Cheng S. ; Wu W. ; Zhang K. 
Effects of
green-synthesized silver nanoparticles on lung cancer cells in vitro
and grown as xenograft tumors in vivo . Int.
J. Nanomed. 
2016 , 11 , 1879 –1887 . 10.2147/IJN.S103695 .
Roco M. C. 
International
perspective on government nanotechnology funding in 2005 . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2005 , 7 , 707 –712 . 10.1007/s11051-005-3141-5 .
Marambio-Jones C. ; Hoek E. M. 
A review of the
antibacterial effects of silver nanomaterials
and potential implications for human health and the environment . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2010 , 12 , 1531 –1551 . 10.1007/s11051-010-9900-y .
Prabhu S. ; Poulose E. K. 
Silver nanoparticles: mechanism of antimicrobial action,
synthesis, medical applications, and toxicity effects . Int. Nano Lett. 
2012 , 2 , 32 10.1186/2228-5326-2-32 .
Holohan C. ; Van Schaeybroeck S. ; Longley D. B. ; Johnston P. G. 
Cancer drug resistance:
an evolving paradigm . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2013 , 13 , 714 –726 . 10.1038/nrc3599 .24060863 
Prabhakar U. ; Maeda H. ; Jain R. K. ; Sevick-Muraca E. M. ; Zamboni W. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Barry S. T. ; Gabizon A. ; Grodzinski P. ; Blakey D. C. 
Challenges and key considerations
of the enhanced permeability and retention effect for nanomedicine
drug delivery in oncology . Cancer Res. 
2013 , 73 , 2412 –2417 . 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4561 .23423979 
Ong C. ; Lim J. ; Ng C. ; Li J. ; Yung L. ; Bay B. 
Silver nanoparticles
in cancer: therapeutic efficacy and toxicity . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 20 , 772 –781 . 10.2174/0929867311320060003 .23298139 
Locatelli E. ; Naddaka M. ; Uboldi C. ; Loudos G. ; Fragogeorgi E. ; Molinari V. ; Pucci A. ; Tsotakos T. ; Psimadas D. ; Ponti J. 
Targeted delivery of
silver nanoparticles and alisertib: in vitro
and in vivo synergistic effect against glioblastoma . Nanomedicine 
2014 , 9 , 839 –849 . 10.2217/nnm.14.1 .24433240 
Sanpui P. ; Chattopadhyay A. ; Ghosh S. S. 
Induction of apoptosis in cancer
cells at low silver nanoparticle concentrations using chitosan nanocarrier . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2011 , 3 , 218 –228 . 10.1021/am100840c .21280584 
Gengan R. M. ; Anand K. ; Phulukdaree A. ; Chuturgoon A. 
A549 lung
cell line activity of biosynthesized silver nanoparticles using Albizia
adianthifolia leaf . Colloids Surf., B 
2013 , 105 , 87 –91 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.12.044 .
Jeyaraj M. ; Sathishkumar G. ; Sivanandhan G. ; MubarakAli D. ; Rajesh M. ; Arun R. ; Kapildev G. ; Manickavasagam M. ; Thajuddin N. ; Premkumar K. 
Biogenic silver nanoparticles for
cancer treatment: an experimental report . Colloids
Surf., B 
2013 , 106 , 86 –92 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.01.027 .
Jeyaraj M. ; Rajesh M. ; Arun R. ; MubarakAli D. ; Sathishkumar G. ; Sivanandhan G. ; Dev G. K. ; Manickavasagam M. ; Premkumar K. ; Thajuddin N. 
An investigation on the cytotoxicity
and caspase-mediated apoptotic effect of biologically synthesized
silver nanoparticles using Podophyllum hexandrum on human cervical carcinoma cells . Colloids
Surf., B 
2013 , 102 , 708 –717 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.09.042 .
Xiu Z.-m. ; Zhang Q.-b. ; Puppala H. L. ; Colvin V. L. ; Alvarez P. J. 
Negligible
particle-specific antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 4271 –4275 . 10.1021/nl301934w .22765771 
Jain N. ; Bhargava A. ; Rathi M. ; Dilip R. V. ; Panwar J. 
Removal of
Protein Capping Enhances the Antibacterial Efficiency of Biosynthesized
Silver Nanoparticles . PLoS One 
2015 , 10 , e013433710.1371/journal.pone.0134337 .26226385 
Harper S. ; Usenko C. ; Hutchison J. ; Maddux B. ; Tanguay R. 
In vivo biodistribution
and toxicity depends on nanomaterial composition, size, surface functionalisation
and route of exposure . J. Exp. Nanosci. 
2008 , 3 , 195 –206 . 10.1080/17458080802378953 .
Kennedy D. C. ; Orts-Gil G. ; Lai C.-H. ; Müller L. ; Haase A. ; Luch A. ; Seeberger P. H. 
Carbohydrate
functionalization of silver nanoparticles modulates cytotoxicity and
cellular uptake . J. Nanobiotechnol. 
2014 , 12 , 59 10.1186/s12951-014-0059-z .
Yoo K.-C. ; Yoon C.-H. ; Kwon D. ; Hyun K.-H. ; Woo S. J. ; Kim R.-K. ; Lim E.-J. ; Suh Y. ; Kim M.-J. ; Yoon T. H. 
Titanium dioxide induces apoptotic
cell death through
reactive oxygen species-mediated Fas upregulation and Bax activation . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2012 , 7 , 1203 –1214 . 10.2147/IJN.S28647 .
Jain N. ; Bhargava A. ; Majumdar S. ; Tarafdar J. ; Panwar J. 
Extracellular
biosynthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles using Aspergillus flavus NJP08: a mechanism perspective . Nanoscale 
2011 , 3 , 635 –641 . 10.1039/C0NR00656D .21088776 
Thakkar K. N. ; Mhatre S. S. ; Parikh R. Y. 
Biological
synthesis of metallic
nanoparticles . Nanomedicine 
2010 , 6 , 257 –262 . 10.1016/j.nano.2009.07.002 .19616126 
Bhargava A. ; Jain N. ; Barathi M. ; Akhtar M. S. ; Yun Y.-S. ; Panwar J. 
Synthesis, characterization and mechanistic
insights
of mycogenic iron oxide nanoparticles . J. Nanopart.
Res. 
2013 , 15 , 2031 10.1007/s11051-013-2031-5 .
Durán N. ; Marcato P. D. ; Durán M. ; Yadav A. ; Gade A. ; Rai M. 
Mechanistic aspects
in the biogenic synthesis of extracellular metal
nanoparticles by peptides, bacteria, fungi, and plants . Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2011 , 90 , 1609 –1624 . 10.1007/s00253-011-3249-8 .21484205 
Jain N. ; Bhargava A. ; Tarafdar J. C. ; Singh S. K. ; Panwar J. 
A biomimetic
approach towards synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles . Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2013 , 97 , 859 –869 . 10.1007/s00253-012-3934-2 .22382164 
Nagao T. ; Inoue S. ; Yoshimi F. ; Sodeyama M. ; Omori Y. ; Mizuta T. ; Kawano N. ; Morioka Y. 
Postoperative
recurrence
of hepatocellular carcinoma . Ann. Surg. 
1990 , 211 , 28 –33 . 10.1097/00000658-199001000-00005 .1688488 
Nagasue N. ; Uchida M. ; Makino Y. ; Takemoto Y. ; Yamanoi A. ; Hayashi T. ; Chang Y.-C. ; Kohno H. ; Nakamura T. ; Yukaya H. 
Incidence and factors
associated with intrahepatic
recurrence following resection of hepatocellular carcinoma . Gastroenterology 
1993 , 105 , 488 –488 . 10.1016/0016-5085(93)90724-Q .8392955 
Bielack S. S. ; Carrle D. ; Hardes J. ; Schuck A. ; Paulussen M. 
Bone tumors
in adolescents and young adults . Curr. Treat.
Options Oncol. 
2008 , 9 , 67 –80 . 10.1007/s11864-008-0057-1 .18449804 
Hughes D. P. 
Strategies
for the targeted delivery of therapeutics for osteosarcoma . Expert Opin. Drug Delivery 
2009 , 6 , 1311 –1321 . 10.1517/17425240903280422 .
Bhargava A. ; Jain N. ; Khan M. A. ; Pareek V. ; Dilip R. V. ; Panwar J. 
Utilizing metal tolerance potential
of soil fungus
for efficient synthesis of gold nanoparticles with superior catalytic
activity for degradation of rhodamine B . J.
Environ. Manage. 
2016 , 183 , 22 –32 . 10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.08.021 .27567934 
Laemmli U. K. 
Cleavage
of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage
T4 . Nature 
1970 , 227 , 680 –685 . 10.1038/227680a0 .5432063 
Chowdhury R. ; Chowdhury S. ; Roychoudhury P. ; Mandal C. ; Chaudhuri K. 
Arsenic induced
apoptosis in malignant melanoma cells is enhanced by menadione through
ROS generation, p38 signaling and p53 activation . Apoptosis 
2009 , 14 , 108 –123 . 10.1007/s10495-008-0284-8 .19082730 
Pasha S. S. ; Das P. ; Rath N. P. ; Bandyopadhyay D. ; Jana N. R. ; Laskar I. R. 
Water soluble
luminescent cyclometalated platinum (II) complex—A suitable
probe for bio-imaging applications . Inorg. Chem.
Commun. 
2016 , 67 , 107 –111 . 10.1016/j.inoche.2016.03.017 .
Biederbick A. ; Kern H. ; Elsässer H. 
Monodansylcadaverine
(MDC) is a specific
in vivo marker for autophagic vacuoles . Eur.
J. Cell Biol. 
1995 , 66 , 3 –14 .7750517 
Munafó D. B. ; Colombo M. I. 
A novel
assay to study autophagy: regulation of autophagosome
vacuole size by amino acid deprivation . J. Cell
Sci. 
2001 , 114 , 3619 –3629 .11707514 
Gurunathan S. ; Han J. W. ; Eppakayala V. ; Jeyaraj M. ; Kim J.-H. 
Cytotoxicity
of biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles in MDA-MB-231 human
breast cancer cells . BioMed Res. Int. 
2013 , 2013 , 53579610.1155/2013/535796 .23936814 
Palvai S. ; Nagraj J. ; Mapara N. ; Chowdhury R. ; Basu S. 
Dual drug loaded vitamin D3 nanoparticle to target drug resistance
in cancer . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 57271 –57281 . 10.1039/C4RA06475E .
Gurunathan S. ; Kalishwaralal K. ; Vaidyanathan R. ; Venkataraman D. ; Pandian S. R. K. ; Muniyandi J. ; Hariharan N. ; Eom S. H. 
Biosynthesis, purification and characterization of
silver nanoparticles using Escherichia coli . Colloids Surf., B 
2009 , 74 , 328 –335 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2009.07.048 .
Ge L. ; Li Q. ; Wang M. ; Ouyang J. ; Li X. ; Xing M. M. 
Nanosilver
particles in medical applications: synthesis, performance, and toxicity . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2014 , 9 , 2399 –2407 . 10.2147/IJN.S55015 .
Ingale A.
G. ; Chaudhari A. 
Biogenic synthesis
of nanoparticles and potential applications:
An eco-friendly approach . J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 4 , 1 –7 . 10.4172/2157-7439.1000165 .
Satyavani K. ; Gurudeeban S. ; Ramanathan T. ; Balasubramanian T. 
Biomedical
potential of silver nanoparticles synthesized from calli cells of Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schad . J. Nanobiotechnol. 
2011 , 9 , 1 –8 . 10.1186/1477-3155-9-43 .
Babu A. ; Amreddy N. ; Ramesh R. 
Nanoparticle-based
cisplatin therapy
for cancer . Ther. Delivery 
2015 , 6 , 115 –119 . 10.4155/tde.14.109 .
Wang X. ; Song P. ; Peng L. ; Tong A. ; Xiang Y. 
Aggregation-Induced
Emission Luminogen-Embedded Silica Nanoparticles Containing DNA Aptamers
for Targeted Cell Imaging . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 609 –616 . 10.1021/acsami.5b09644 .26653325 
Sharma V. ; Anderson D. ; Dhawan A. 
Zinc oxide
nanoparticles induce oxidative
DNA damage and ROS-triggered mitochondria mediated apoptosis in human
liver cells (HepG2) . Apoptosis 
2012 , 17 , 852 –870 . 10.1007/s10495-012-0705-6 .22395444 
Zhu B. ; Li Y. ; Lin Z. ; Zhao M. ; Xu T. ; Wang C. ; Deng N. 
Silver nanoparticles induce HePG-2
cells apoptosis through ROS-mediated
signaling pathways . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2016 , 11 , 198 –206 . 10.1186/s11671-016-1419-4 .27075340 
Wang J. ; Deng X. ; Zhang F. ; Chen D. ; Ding W. 
ZnO nanoparticle-induced
oxidative stress triggers apoptosis by activating JNK signaling pathway
in cultured primary astrocytes . Nanoscale Res.
Lett. 
2014 , 9 , 117 10.1186/1556-276X-9-117 .24624962 
Akhtar M. J. ; Alhadlaq H. A. ; Kumar S. ; Alrokayan S. A. ; Ahamed M. 
Selective cancer-killing ability of metal-based nanoparticles:
implications for cancer therapy . Arch. Toxicol. 
2015 , 89 , 1895 –1907 . 10.1007/s00204-015-1570-1 .26223318 
Manke A. ; Wang L. ; Rojanasakul Y. 
Mechanisms
of nanoparticle-induced
oxidative stress and toxicity . BioMed. Res.
Int. 
2013 , 2013 , 94291610.1155/2013/942916 .24027766 
Chou A. J. ; Gorlick R. 
Chemotherapy resistance in osteosarcoma:
current challenges
and future directions . Expert Rev. Anticancer
Ther. 
2006 , 6 , 1075 –1085 . 10.1586/14737140.6.7.1075 .16831079 
Marano F. ; Hussain S. ; Rodrigues-Lima F. ; Baeza-Squiban A. ; Boland S. 
Nanoparticles: molecular targets
and cell signalling . Arch. Toxicol. 
2011 , 85 , 733 –741 . 10.1007/s00204-010-0546-4 .20502881 
Satapathy S. R. ; Mohapatra P. ; Das D. ; Siddharth S. ; Kundu C. N. 
The apoptotic effect of plant based nanosilver in colon
cancer cells is a p53 dependent process involving ROS and JNK cascade . Pathol. Oncol. Res. 
2015 , 21 , 405 –411 . 10.1007/s12253-014-9835-1 .25359126 
Mao B.-H. ; Tsai J.-C. ; Chen C.-W. ; Yan S.-J. ; Wang Y.-J. 
Mechanisms
of silver nanoparticle-induced toxicity and important role of autophagy . Nanotoxicology 
2016 , 10 , 1021 –1040 . 10.1080/17435390.2016.1189614 .27240148 
Zhang Z. ; Zhou L. ; Zhou Y. ; Liu J. ; Xing X. ; Zhong J. ; Xu G. ; Kang Z. ; Liu J. 
Mitophagy
induced by nanoparticle–peptide conjugates enabling an alternative
intracellular trafficking route . Biomaterials 
2015 , 65 , 56 –65 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.06.029 .26142776 
Jeong J.-K. ; Gurunathan S. ; Kang M.-H. ; Han J. W. ; Das J. ; Choi Y.-J. ; Kwon D.-N. ; Cho S.-G. ; Park C. ; Seo H. G. 
Hypoxia-mediated
autophagic flux inhibits silver nanoparticle-triggered
apoptosis in human lung cancer cells . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 2168810.1038/srep21688 .26867977 
Castiglioni S. ; Cazzaniga A. ; Perrotta C. ; Maier J. A. 
Silver nanoparticles-induced
cytotoxicity requires ERK activation in human bladder carcinoma cells . Toxicol. Lett. 
2015 , 237 , 237 –243 . 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.06.1707 .26149761 
Rinna A. ; Magdolenova Z. ; Hudecova A. ; Kruszewski M. ; Refsnes M. ; Dusinska M. 
Effect of
silver nanoparticles on
mitogen-activated protein kinases activation: role of reactive oxygen
species and implication in DNA damage . Mutagenesis 
2015 , 30 , 59 –66 . 10.1093/mutage/geu057 .25527729 
Duan H. ; Wang D. ; Li Y. 
Green chemistry for
nanoparticle
synthesis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 5778 –5792 . 10.1039/C4CS00363B .25615873

