
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145753610.1021/acsomega.7b00111ArticleTemperature-Induced, Selective Assembly of Supramolecular
Colloids in Water van Ravensteijn Bas G. P. *†⊥Vilanova Neus ‡§de Feijter Isja ‡§Kegel Willem K. †Voets Ilja K. *‡§∥† Van
’t Hoff Laboratory for Physical and Colloid Chemistry, Debye
Institute for NanoMaterials Science, Utrecht
University, Padualaan
8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands‡Institute for Complex
Molecular Systems, §Laboratory of Macromolecular Organic
Chemistry, and ∥Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, Eindhoven
University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands* E-mail: bas.van.ravensteijn@gmail.com (B.G.P.v.R.).* E-mail: i.voets@tue.nl (I.K.V.).28 04 2017 30 04 2017 2 4 1720 1730 30 01 2017 05 04 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In
this article, we report the synthesis and physical characterization
of colloidal polystyrene particles that carry water-soluble supramolecular N,N′,N″,-trialkyl-benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxamides
(BTAs) on their surface. These molecules are known to assemble into
one-dimensional supramolecular polymers via noncovalent interactions.
By tethering the BTAs to charge-stabilized particles, the clustering
behavior of the resulting colloids was dictated by a balance between
interparticle electrostatic repulsion and the BTA-mediated attractions.
Through careful tuning of the dispersing medium’s ionic strength,
a regime was found in which particle aggregation could be reversibly
induced upon heating the dispersion. These findings clearly indicate
that hydrophobic interactions, which become stronger upon heating,
play an important role during the clustering process. Besides the
thermoreversible nature of the generated hydrophobic interparticle
attractions, we found the clustering to be selective, that is, the
BTA-functionalized colloids do not interact with nonfunctionalized
hydrophobic polystyrene particles. This selectivity in the association
process can be rationalized by the preferred stacking of the surface-tethered
BTAs. These selective intermolecular/particle bonds are likely stabilized
by the formation of hydrogen bonds, as previously observed for analogous
molecular BTA assemblies. The resulting driving force responsible
for particle clustering is therefore dual in nature and depends on
both hydrophobic attractions and hydrogen bonding.

document-id-old-9ao7b00111document-id-new-14ao-2017-00111sccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Self-assembly
of colloidal building blocks into well-defined, predesigned
superstructures with tailored functionality is a powerful concept
for the preparation of complex materials.1−3 By inverse engineering
of the desired structures, generally applicable design criteria for
the individual building blocks may be formulated. Evidently, one of
the difficulties of this bottom-up approach lies in the synthesis
of the individual building blocks because colloids with elaborate
geometries and/or directional interaction potentials are generally
required.1−3 The demand for sophisticated building blocks sparked
the field of synthetic colloid chemistry to develop new systems with
tunable (directional) interactions in terms of their strength and
range. This already yielded refined colloids that rely on site-specific
DNA hybridization,4 magnetic patches,5 directional depletion forces,6,7 and
partial steric stabilization.8

Recently,
de Feijter et al. expanded the available chemistries
to tune interparticle interactions by making use of surface-tethered
supramolecular motifs.9 Controlling intercolloidal
interactions by exploiting supramolecular entities holds potential
as a powerful route toward the fabrication of dynamic and responsive
mesoscopic materials. Interactions between supramolecular entities
are inherently dynamic because they involve noncovalent forces, such
as π–π stacking, hydrophobic interactions, electrostatics,
and hydrogen bonding.10 To exploit these
dynamic features in the colloidal domain, de Feijter et al. immobilized N,N′,N″-trialkyl-benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxamide
(BTA) derivatives on hydrophobized silica particles, which were subsequently
dispersed in organic solvents. The surface-tethered molecules form
interparticle hydrogen bonds making the particles attractive at low
temperatures. The aggregation process was thermoresponsive because
the formed hydrogen bonds were easily and reversibly broken by heating
the particle dispersion.9

In this
article, we expand the scope of molecular control over
colloidal assembly to aqueous systems. Using water as a continuous
phase opens the way for exploiting an additional class of noncovalent
forces, namely, hydrophobic interactions. Although perfected in nature
and crucial for the correct folding of proteins11−13 and formation
of virus capsids,14,15 controlling self-assembly in
synthetic systems mediated by hydrophobic forces remains a challenge.
A limited fundamental insight into hydrophobic forces and the accompanied
lack of design criteria for (responsive) hydrophobic materials and
molecules are underlying this challenge.

The supramolecular
polymerization of water-soluble BTA derivatives
was recently studied extensively.16−18 These water-soluble
derivatives consist of a central benzylic domain, which carries three
carboxamide substituents, having hydrophilic oligo(ethylene glycol)
and hydrophobic alkyl domains. The amide functionalities are capable
of forming intermolecular hydrogen bonds because water is partially
“shielded” from this active binding site by the alkyl
chains. The terminal oligo(ethylene glycol) fragments ensure water-solubility
of the entire building block. Both experiments and simulations elucidated
an intricate interplay between hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic forces
during the assembly process. It was suggested that supramolecular
polymers initially form as a consequence of hydrophobic attractions
and are subsequently further stabilized by the formation of intermolecular
hydrogen bonds.17−19

By tethering water-soluble BTA molecules to
colloidal particles,
we envisioned a thermoreversible clustering system that relies on
a dual driving force generated by a combination of hydrogen-bonding
and hydrophobic interactions between the immobilized BTAs. By studying
the temperature-dependent colloidal stability of these supramolecular
particles, a regime was found in which effective attractions between
the colloids were generated upon heating. This observation strongly
implies that hydrophobic interactions dominate over hydrogen bonding
at high temperatures (Scheme 1). Reversibility of the aggregation process was evident from
spontaneous redispersion of the clusters upon cooling. Although it
is generally accepted that hydrophobic interactions are temperature-dependent,
using this feature to generate responsive colloidal materials is new
to the field. Previous implementations of hydrophobic forces to assemble
colloidal objects by, for example, exploiting host–guest complexation
or addition of a nonsolvent to polymer-stabilized particles, lack
any significant variation in the attraction strength as a function
of temperature, limiting the practical use of this attractive force
to prepare dynamic materials.20−24

Scheme 1 Schematic Representation of the Hypothesized Aggregation Processes
Accessible with the BTA-Functionalized Colloidal Particles
Attraction between colloids that
carry water-soluble supramolecular entities on their surface can either
be dominated by hydrogen bonds between the amide moieties present
in the BTA molecules (blue box; right side of scheme) or by a hydrophobic
contribution originating from the dodecyl spacer/aromatic center of
the BTA molecules and the temperature-dependent solvation of the oligo(ethylene
glycol) fragments (red box; left side of scheme). The strength of
both hydrogen-bonding driven and hydrophobically dominated attractions
depends on temperature. However, the trends in temperature dependence
are reversed. Hydrogen bonds are disrupted at elevated temperatures,
whereas hydrophobic attractions generally become stronger upon increasing
temperature. Vice versa, at low temperatures, hydrogen bonds should
provide stronger attractions between the particles, whereas the hydrophobic
contributions are expected to be (significantly) less important.

In addition to the responsiveness of the hydrophobic
attraction,
we show that the clustering is also selective. Mixing BTA-functionalized
colloids with nonfunctional hydrophobic particles yields clusters
solely comprised of supramolecular colloids. This selectivity most
probably originates from the hydrogen-bonding capability of the surface-tethered
BTAs, providing an additional stabilizing contribution to the interparticle
bonds.17−19

The combined bond reversibility and selectivity
of the BTA supramolecular
particles provides a significant advancement in using modular hydrophobic
forces to control colloidal aggregation, expanding the toolkit for
generating engineered interparticle potentials even further.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Synthesis of BTA-Functionalized
Colloidal
Particles
To expand the scope of molecular control over colloidal
assembly to aqueous systems and exploit the dual driving forces generated
by an interplay between the hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic interactions
between the immobilized BTAs, we hypothesized that the employed particles
should fulfill the following requirements: First, the colloidal surfaces
should be as clean as possible. The presence of adsorbed surfactants
or polymeric stabilizers might interfere with the attractive surface-grafted
BTA entities. Second, the particles should be easily observable with
optical microscopy to probe their clustering behavior in situ. Finally,
the particles need to contain a high density of functional groups
that can be exploited to tether the BTA supramolecular motifs to the
particles.

Large colloidal particles (1–5 μm) are
typically prepared by conventional dispersion polymerizations, which
rely on adsorbed (polymeric) stabilizers to safeguard colloidal stability.25 Although easy to observe, the presence of the
stabilizers most likely interferes with stacking of the BTA motifs.
Dispersions of purely charge-stabilized particles are cleaner in this
respect and hence an attractive alternative. These particles are stable
due to the presence of charges located directly on the surface of
the colloids. Attaching the BTA moieties to these charged surfaces
ensures that the molecules protrude from the surface and are free
to interact if the colloids can approach closely. The distance upto
which colloidal particles can approach each other is easily modulated
by electrolyte addition.26 Therefore, we
speculate that at sufficiently high ionic strengths the envisioned
supramolecular charged colloids should become attractive via mutual
interaction between the surface-tethered BTA molecules (see next section).

Routinely, charge-stabilized particles are prepared by employing
emulsion polymerization-based techniques.25 A minor disadvantage of emulsion polymerizations is the practical
limit to particles with radii of roughly 250 nm. Pushing experimental
conditions to exceed this maximum size generally results in unstable
and/or polydisperse colloids. To overcome this size limitation and
enhance the observability of our colloidal particles with optical
microscopy, we employed a seeded emulsion polymerization procedure
(Scheme 2, step a).
This strategy relies on the step-wise growth of monodispersed cross-linked
polystyrene particles (CPs). Starting from CPs with a radius of 225
nm and employing two subsequent growth steps yielded stable and monodispersed
particles with a radius of approximately 400 nm. These particles are
readily observable with optical microscopy, making these polystyrene
particles ideal candidates to proceed to the next step in which chemical
functionality was added to the particles (Scheme 2, step b).

Scheme 2 Schematic Representation
of the Synthesis Procedure toward BTA-Functionalized
Colloidal Particles
Step (a): seeded emulsion polymerization
of styrene (St) and divinylbenzene (DVB) in the presence of cross-linked
polystyrene particles (CPs). Step (b): seeded emulsion polymerization
of 4-vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC) and DVB in the presence of the previously
obtained larger CPs. Step (c): coupling of amino-functionalized BTA-NH2 molecules to the surface of the chlorinated particles via
a nucleophilic substitution reaction. The employed BTAs consist of
a central benzylic domain, which carries three carboxamide substituents
(yellow), having hydrophilic oligo(ethylene glycol) (blue) and hydrophobic
dodecyl (gray) segments. All carboxamide arms are functionalized with
terminal amines, which are exploited for the coupling reactions with
the colloidal surface. The chemical surface entities for each type
of colloid are depicted in the top row of the scheme.

By using an analogous seeded emulsion polymerization as
used to
grow the CPs, a cross-linked chlorinated shell was deposited onto
these particles. 4-Vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC) was employed as the
shell monomer, yielding colloids with pending surface benzyl chlorides
(Scheme 2, step b,
top of the figure). These moieties are versatile chemical handles
and open the way to a variety of functionalization chemistries.27,28 We chose to couple the BTAs via a simple nucleophilic aliphatic
substitution reaction, exploiting the terminal amine functionality
present on the carboxamide substituents of the BTA molecules (BTA-NH2, Scheme 2,
step c). Because all arms on the BTA molecules carry an amine, it
is possible, in principle, that the BTAs are tethered to the colloidal
surface with multiple covalent bonds. We expect that this has no major
influence on the eventual aggregation behavior. On the basis of the
number of BTAs added during the coupling reaction, the surface density
of BTA motifs was estimated to be equal to 1 BTA molecule/35 nm2.

This relatively high density ensures easy contact
of the BTAs upon
approach of other supramolecular colloids.

To prove that the
BTA moieties were successfully tethered to the
particles, infrared (IR) spectroscopy was used as the analytic tool
of choice. For this particular experiment, small colloids (sCPs, particle
radius = 31 nm) were used to enhance the intensity of the BTA-related
signals with respect to those of polystyrene originating from the
bulk of the particles (for synthetic details, see Section S1). The IR spectrum obtained for sCPs is typical
for polystyrene colloids with aliphatic vibrations located between
2900 and 3200 cm–1 and strong aromatic-related signals
at 1450 and 600–700 cm–1 (Figure 1, bottom black spectrum). After
employing these particles as seeds in a seeded emulsion polymerization
of VBC (sCPs-Cl), the IR spectrum showed the appearance of a characteristic
—CH2-Cl vibration located at 1266 cm–1 (Figure 1, middle
red spectrum). Subsequently, BTA-NH2 was coupled to the
surface of the chlorinated particles. To maximize the intensity of
BTA-related signals, a large molar excess of BTAs compared with the
number of chlorine groups was added. After washing the resulting particles
repeatedly to remove any free BTA-NH2, IR spectroscopy
revealed the appearance of several new signals. Most notable are the
additional vibrations observed at approximately 3300 and 1600 cm–1, corresponding to the amide N—H and C=O
bonds of the attached BTA entities (Figure 1, top blue spectrum). Furthermore, we observed
the appearance of a strong signal located at 1100 cm–1, corresponding to the C—O vibrations in the oligo(ethylene
glycol) segments of the BTA’s pending arms. The dodecyl spacer
of these arms is reflected by an increase of the methylene vibration
located at 2900 cm–1.

Figure 1 IR spectra of nonfunctionalized
polystyrene particles (sCPs, hydrodynamic
radius = 31 nm) (bottom, black), chlorinated core–shell particles
obtained after seeded emulsion polymerization of VBC using sCPs as
seeds (sCPs-Cl, middle, red), and the final BTA-functionalized colloids
after coupling BTA-NH2 to the chlorinated surface (sCPs-BTA).
All characteristic signals are labeled with their corresponding bond/functional
group.

For these small polystyrene particles,
IR spectroscopy clearly
delivers proof of successful coupling of the BTA entities to the colloidal
surface. Because of the analogous synthesis conducted for the larger
polystyrene particles, we can safely extrapolate these results to
the larger CPs and assume that these colloids are also decorated with
BTA moieties.

2.2 Thermoresponsive Behavior
of BTA-Functionalized
Colloids (CPs-BTA)
With the desired BTA-functionalized colloids
in hand, we proceeded with investigating their aggregation behavior
as a function of temperature and ionic strength. These two experimental
variables are the most natural to tune if the effective interaction
potential, which acts between the BTA-functionalized colloids, is
considered. This effective potential is the sum of an electrostatic
repulsion caused by the surface charges on the colloids and an attractive
contribution, composed of van der Waals forces and the mutual interaction
between the surface-tethered supramolecular entities. From these three
interaction terms, the van der Waals forces are hardly tunable. Therefore,
we focus on regulating the electrostatics and BTA-mediated interactions
to steer the physical behavior of our supramolecular colloidal particles.
Naturally, attractions generated by the BTA molecules are only active
at small interparticle separations, that is, for a BTA-mediated attraction
to be generated, a “supramolecular bond” should be formed.
Therefore, it is essential that the particles can approach each other
as closely as possible. The average minimal distance between individual
colloids is determined by the electrostatic repulsion between the
particles. The magnitude of the electrostatic repulsion can be controlled
by the addition of salt to the dispersion.26 Additional ions will screen the surface charges resulting in a diminished
interparticle repulsion, enabling closer contact of the colloids.
On the basis of this reasoning we hypothesize that there exists an
experimental window of salt concentrations where the (aggregation)
behavior of the supramolecular colloids is determined by the presence
of the BTA molecules on the surface, rather than by other specific
colloidal forces.

As explained in the Introduction, similar BTA molecules, as immobilized on the presented colloidal
system, form one-dimensional aggregates in aqueous environments due
to an interplay between hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic attractions.16,18 Both these attractive contributions are temperature-dependent, however,
the trend in bonding strength with temperature is generally reversed.
Hydrogen bonds form at lower temperatures and vanish if the system
is heated. On the contrary, hydrophobic interactions gain in strength
with increasing temperature. This trend originates from the fact that
interfacial tensions between hydrophobic materials and water (γ(T)) depend on temperature and can be written as a Taylor
expansion around a reference temperature (T0) 1  where s0 is the
surface excess entropy (eq 1).14 This entropy term is negative
for most hydrophobic materials, leading to increased surface tensions
upon heating. A higher surface tension translates into larger attractions
between hydrophobic objects because the energy associated with the
formation of a bond between two surfaces scales with the product of
the surface tension and the binding area.14 The hydrophobic contributions associated with the BTA aggregations
originate from the hydrocarbon spacer (highlighted in gray, top of Scheme 2) present in each
arm of the BTAs.16,18 Additionally, the oligo(ethylene
glycol) segments (highlighted in blue, top of Scheme 2) are less hydrated at elevated temperatures.
As a consequence, they are less water-soluble and also promote aggregation.29

To assay the relative importance of hydrophobic-
and hydrogen-bonding
contributions to the BTA-mediated interactions between colloids, we
performed variable-temperature light scattering experiments on the
presented colloidal system, which are extremely sensitive toward clustering.
Scattering experiments yield first-order correlation functions (G1), of which their decay rate depends on the
dimensions of the measured objects. G1 describes the relation between the average scattering intensity
at time t (It) and the intensity measured after a certain delay time τ
(It+τ).30 For very short delay times, the correlation
is strong (G1 ∼ 1), whereas it
reduces with increasing delay time until It and It+τ are completely uncorrelated (G1 = 0).
The obtained correlation functions are effectively a measure of the
probability of an object moving a given distance during the period
τ. Therefore, the decay rate of a correlation function provides
information on the diffusive properties of the particles and hence
their hydrodynamic dimensions.30 Therefore,
a shift of G1 toward longer decay times
corresponds to slower translational diffusion due to, for example,
aggregation of primary particles into clusters.

With this interpretation
of the scattering correlation functions
in mind, we performed dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments on
highly diluted dispersions of BTA-functionalized particles in aqueous
environments containing 0, 2.5, and 10 mM of NaCl (Figure 2). For each salt concentration,
the samples were first measured at 20 °C and subsequently at
60 °C. As for the molecular studies conducted on these BTA derivatives,
60 °C was chosen as the upper temperature limit to stay well
below the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of the BTAs (≈70
°C).17,18 Heating above the LCST makes the BTAs completely
water insoluble, causing uncontrolled hydrophobically mediated aggregation.
Furthermore, heating to 60 °C is sufficient to disrupt (a large
fraction of) potentially formed hydrogen bonds. After the heat treatment,
the samples were cooled and remeasured at 20 °C to probe the
reversibility of any changes observed in colloidal stability.

Figure 2 Temperature-dependent
first-order correlation functions (G1)
for aqueous dispersions of BTA-functionalized
colloidal particles obtained using DLS. The dispersions contained
electrolyte (NaCl) concentrations equal to (a) 0 mM, (d) 2.5 mM, and
(g) 10 mM. Bright field microscopy images of BTA-functionalized particle
dispersions at 20 °C and subsequent heating to 60 °C. The
dispersions contained NaCl concentrations equal to (b, c) 0 mM, (e,
f) 2.5 mM, and (h, i) 10 mM. Scale bar = 10 μm for panels b,
c, e, f, h, and i.

In pure water (Figure 2a), smooth, single
exponential correlation functions were
obtained regardless of the temperature. Measuring a single well-defined
characteristic decay time indicates that all colloids effectively
diffuse in an equivalent fashion, implying monodispersed and stable
particles. As previously mentioned, the lack of aggregation at both
low and higher temperatures signifies that the immobilized BTAs cannot
interact with each other due to strong electrostatic repulsion between
the charged colloids in the absence of any additional salt.26 Also, on the microscopic level, temperature-independent
colloidal stability was evident as was concluded from Figure 2b,c. These figures show typical
optical microscopy images of the dispersion at 20 °C and after
subsequent heating to 60 °C, respectively.

Increasing the
salt concentration to 2.5 mM and measuring at 20
°C did not significantly alter the shape of the correlation function
(Figure 2d, dark blue
curve), indicating that the particles were still stable under these
conditions. An exemplary light microscopy image shown in Figure 2e confirms this,
although the appearance of small clusters suggests that the dispersion
is on the edge of colloidal stability. Upon repeating the DLS measurement
at 60 °C, a significant tail in the correlation function was
observed, implying the formation of aggregates (Figure 2d, red curve). Aggregates are by definition
larger than individual particles and therefore diffuse more slowly
compared with monomeric colloids. This slower movement translates
into a slower decay of the correlation function, as explained before.
Because the observed aggregation is purely diffusive, the formed clusters
are of random size and geometry, each having their own characteristic
decay time. This translates into a noisy tail of the correlogram.
The erratic data at long delay times is enhanced even further by the
fact that the aggregates grow during data acquisition. Colloidal clustering
was also evident from optical microscopy as shown in Figure 2f.

Remeasuring the dispersion
after cooling resulted in disappearance
of the tail, and the obtained correlogram (Figure 2d, light blue curve) overlaps with the one
previously measured for the fresh dispersion at 20 °C.

These temperature-dependent DLS measurements suggest that mutual
attractions are introduced between BTA-functionalized colloids upon
raising the temperature. Furthermore, the aggregation process is reversible
because redispersion of the colloids occurs if the heated dispersion
is cooled. Thus, at a salt concentration equal to 2.5 mM, the electrostatic
repulsion is apparently just dominant at low temperatures, whereas
the increased hydrophobic-mediated attraction generated by heating
the particles drives the aggregation at higher temperatures.

The key role of the surface-tethered BTA molecules in the temperature-dependent
aggregation process was validated by DLS measurements on the bare
chlorinated colloids (Figure 2d, striped curves). The smooth single decaying correlation
functions obtained at both temperatures prove that a salt concentration
of 2.5 mM is insufficient to overcome the electrostatic repulsion
between the chlorinated particles. The attractions generated between
the CPs-BTA particles must therefore be mediated by the immobilized
BTA molecules. Furthermore, the correlograms measured for the chlorinated
particles overlapped perfectly with the curves obtained for the BTA-functionalized
colloids at room temperature. This implies that eventhough the BTA
molecules are, in principle, able to interact, the supramolecular
colloids behave as repulsive, charge-stabilized particles at low temperatures.

Diminishing the electrostatic repulsion even further by increasing
the salt concentration to 10 mM yields colloidal aggregates regardless
of the temperature (Figure 2g–i). Evidently, the hydrophobic contributions and
possibly hydrogen-bonding interactions are already strong enough to
dominate over the screened electrostatic repulsion at room temperature.
In agreement with the DLS experiments performed at 2.5 mM, aggregation
is more pronounced at elevated temperatures and macroscopic flocculates
are observed after heating (Figure 2i).

Additional evidence for a modest contribution
of hydrogen bonding
in the aggregation process was provided by remeasuring a fresh DLS
sample containing 10 mM of NaCl at room temperature in the presence
of 100 mM of hexafluorisopropanol (HFIP). HFIP is known for its high
efficiency in disrupting hydrogen bonds.31 Only if hydrogen bonding would be responsible for the observed aggregation
of BTA-covered colloids, the addition of HFIP should result in (partial)
recovery of colloidal stability. However, this decreased tendency
toward aggregation was not observed (see Section S2, Figure S1), further underlining that the hydrophobic term
is the dominant attractive contribution driving colloidal clustering
under the described experimental conditions.

2.3 Selective
Aggregation of BTA-Functionalized
Colloids (CPs-BTA)
The results presented in the previous
section provided clear experimental evidence that the BTA-mediated
aggregation is largely driven by hydrophobic attractions. Nevertheless,
we expect the generated attractions between the supramolecular colloids
to be selective. Recently, experimental and simulation studies on
analogous molecular BTA systems revealed the importance of hydrogen
bonding in stabilizing the formed supramolecular polymers.19 Despite the fact that hydrogen bonds were not
an absolute necessity for clustering, the ability of forming intermolecular
hydrogen bonds strongly enhances the stability and structural integrity
of the formed assembly. Extrapolating these findings to the supramolecular
colloids, we hypothesize that the selectivity imprinted by the surface-immobilized
BTA motifs translates into a preference to cluster with themselves
instead of with other hydrophobic objects.

To verify this hypothesis,
we prepared a mixed dispersion containing CPs-BTA colloids and significantly
larger, micron-sized particles, which were not functionalized with
the supramolecular moieties (MPs-Cl). The surfaces of both the CPs-BTA
and MPs-Cl particles are chemically equivalent on the basis of their
(surface) composition and comparable ζ potentials, except for
one key difference, which is the presence or absence of the BTA moieties.
Synthetic details of the procedure followed to prepare MPs-Cl and
a comparison with the smaller CPs-BTA particles can be found in Section S3.

Mixing particles with similar
surface characteristics and therefore
physical properties is key to probing any preferential aggregation.
The use of particles that can be distinguished from each other on
the basis of exclusively their size is also beneficial in this respect
because we do not need to tag the particles with additional markers,
for example, hydrophobic fluorescent dyes that could influence the
interparticle interactions.

The aggregation behavior of particle
dispersions containing CPs-BTA
and MPs-Cl as a function of the background electrolyte concentration
is summarized in Figure 3. Figures 3a and b
show typical optical microscopy images of the mixed dispersion without
the addition of any salt. We found a globally stable dispersion without
any clustering, as was expected, on the basis of the relatively high
ζ potentials of both types of particles. Both CPs-BTA and MPs-Cl
are repulsive toward themselves and the other species.

Figure 3 Aggregation behavior
of a mixed dispersion containing BTA-functionalized
colloids and larger nonfunctionalized polystyrene microspheres as
a function of the ionic strength of the dispersing medium. As schematically
depicted on the left of the figure, both types of colloids are chlorinated
and charged. The only significant difference, apart from their size,
is the presence or absence of surface BTA entities. Microscopy images
of the mixed dispersion (a) without the addition of salt, (c) in a
dispersing medium containing approximately 10 mM and (e) 100 mM NaCl.
Panels (b), (d), and (f) contain enlarged images of the dispersions
shown in panel (a), (c), and (e), respectively. Scale bar = 10 μm
for panels (a), (c), and (e) and 4 μm for panels (b), (d), and
(f).

The situation changes if the ionic
strength is raised to approximately
10 mM. In agreement with the DLS data presented in Figure 2g, BTA-functionalized particles
become mutually attractive and start to form colloidal clusters (Figure 3c,d). On the contrary,
the MPs-Cl colloids remain well-dispersed and do not participate in
the cluster formation. Despite the fact that the attractions between
CPs-BTA particles are largely being driven by hydrophobic interactions
(see previous section), contacts between hydrophobic bare polystyrene
surfaces and BTAs are not generated or at least not stable enough
to form mixed aggregates with an observable lifetime. The observed
selectivity implies that the clustering of CPs-BTA is driven by mutual
interactions between the surface-tethered BTAs.

Upon further
increase of the salt concentration to 100 mM, the
selectivity in cluster formation was lost. At these high ionic strengths,
the electrostatic repulsion between all species was diminished to
such an extent that all particles became unstable. In this situation
mixed aggregates are formed, which consist of both MPs-Cl and CPs-BTA
particles (Figure 3e,f).

In the previous section, temperature-induced aggregation
was demonstrated
for salt concentrations at which electrostatic repulsion only dominates
at room temperature. In principle, it should therefore also be possible
to induce selective aggregation in a mixed dispersion of CPs-BTA and
MPs-Cl by simply increasing the temperature. Conducting an in situ
heating experiment, where a thin capillary containing the mixed dispersion
was heated while being observed with optical microscopy, revealed
that this selective, temperature-induced aggregation was indeed achievable.
The salt concentration of the used dispersion was equal to 2.5 mM,
which was previously identified as the critical salt concentration
to induce thermoreversible clustering of CPs-BTA. Figure 4a shows the globally stable
mixed dispersion before it was subjected to the heat treatment. Upon
heating the capillary, the formation of small clusters was observed,
which again consisted of solely the smaller BTA-functionalized particles
(Figure 4c, highlighted
with the red circles). Upon cooling the dispersion back to room temperature,
the majority of the clusters disappeared. Complete reversibility was
not observed, probably caused by the fact that the BTA-functionalized
particles were on the edge of colloidal instability when dispersed
in a continuous phase containing 2.5 mM of NaCl (Figure 2f). Nevertheless, this seemingly
thermoreversible clustering is in agreement with the DLS measurements
of CPs-BTA conducted under similar conditions (Figure 2d).

Figure 4 In situ observation of the temperature-dependent
colloidal stability
of a dispersion containing both BTA-functionalized colloids and larger
nonfunctionalized polystyrene microspheres. The dispersion medium
contained 2.5 mM of NaCl. (a) Bright field microscopy image of the
mixed dispersion at 20 °C. (b) An equivalent sample as shown
in panel (a), after equilibration for roughly 10 h at 20 °C.
(c) Microscopy image of the dispersion shown in panel (a), after heating
to approximately 60 °C. Monomeric BTA-functionalized particles
(CPs-BTA) are highlighted by the white arrows. Clusters of the smaller
BTA-functionalized colloids are highlighted with the red circles.
(d) Typical appearance of the dispersion obtained after subsequent
cooling of the dispersion shown in panel (c). Scale bar = 10 μm
for all panels.

Storing the mixed dispersion
in a capillary without subjecting
it to any heat treatment did not induce clustering (Figure 4b). This corroborates that
aggregation is indeed caused by a temperature-controlled hydrophobic
interaction between the supramolecular colloidal particles.

3 Conclusions
In this article, we showed the successful
synthesis of charge-stabilized
colloidal particles surface-functionalized with water-soluble supramolecular
BTA moieties. On the basis of molecular studies performed on equivalent
BTAs, we expected these molecules to provide an attractive force between
the particles, driven by a combination of hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic
interactions. By studying the temperature-dependent clustering behavior
of the BTA-functionalized particles, the dominant driving force for
aggregation at elevated temperatures was identified. Tuning the electrostatic
repulsion by varying the salt concentration of the dispersing medium,
led to a situation in which the surface-tethered BTA moieties generated
an attractive mutual interaction between the particles. However, clustering
was only induced upon heating the dispersion. Evidently, this temperature
dependence of the colloidal stability strongly points toward hydrophobically
mediated attractive forces because these interactions tend to increase
in strength upon raising the temperature. Nevertheless, the hydrogen-bonding
capability of the surface-immobilized BTAs seems important in the
formation of colloidal aggregates. We showed that under appropriate
conditions the interactions generated between the BTA molecules are
not only thermoreversible but also selective. The supramolecular colloids
preferentially cluster with identical particles rather than with other
non-BTA containing hydrophobic objects. This selectivity in bond formation
cannot be explained on the basis of solely hydrophobic interactions
and is most probably caused by the formation of stabilizing intermolecular/particle
hydrogen bonds between surface-grafted BTAs. In analogy with advanced
biological self-assembled systems, for example, virus capsids, this
colloidal system relies on a delicate balance between noncovalent
forces to steer the assembly process. The combined bond reversibility
and selectivity of our supramolecular colloids therefore provides
a significant advancement in using modular hydrophobic forces to control
and manipulate colloidal aggregation.

Evidently, the novel BTA-mediated
interactions are not limited
to spherical particles only. By extending the presented results to
more elaborate colloidal systems, for example, patchy particles, a
synthetic pathway to design colloids that can form directional, hydrophobic-mediated
bonds is anticipated. In contrast to the random aggregates formed
by spherical particles, these patchy particles potentially form well-defined,
thermoreversible supracolloidal superstructures that resemble biological
assemblies not only in their interplay between a variety of noncovalent
forces but also in their degree of structural ordering.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
Styrene
(St, 99%), divinylbenzene
(DVB, 55% mixture of isomers, tech. grade), and 4-vinylbenzyl chloride
(VBC, (≥90%, tech. grade) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) from BDH was used. Potassium persulfate
(KPS, >99% for analysis), sodium bisulfite (NaHSO3,
ACS
reagent), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.7%) were purchased from
Acros Organics. 1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP, ≥99%,
for (peptide) synthesis) from Carl Roth was used. Finally, sodium
chloride (NaCl, ACS reagent ≥99.5%) was purchased from Merck.
All chemicals were used as received. The water used throughout all
syntheses was purified using a Milli-Q water purification system.

4.2 Synthesis of Chlorinated Particles (CPs-Cl)
Cross-linked polystyrene (CPs) core particles were synthesized
based on of a standard emulsion polymerization method.27,32 Slight modifications to the reported procedure were applied to yield
CPs colloids with larger dimensions. A 500 mL round-bottom flask equipped
with a magnetic stir bar was placed in an oil bath at 80 °C.
Water (200 mL) was charged into the reactor and allowed to reach the
bath temperature. Styrene (23 mL, 0.2 mol), DVB (0.7 mL, 5 mmol),
and SDS (0.125 g, 0.43 mmol) dissolved in water (50 mL) were added.
The mixture was allowed to heat up to the temperature of the bath.
Finally, the addition of KPS (0.39 g, 1.4 mmol) dissolved in water
(37.5 mL) initiated polymerization. The reaction was allowed to continue
for 24 h at 80 °C. The resulting dispersion had a solid content
of 7% (measured gravimetrically). The resulting particles had a radius
of 225 nm with a polydispersity of 3.8%, as determined with transmission
electron microscopy (TEM).

Subsequently, the prepared particles
were used as seeds in a seeded emulsion polymerization of styrene
and DVB. To this end, crude CPs dispersion (12.5 mL, solid content
= 7%) and water (5 mL) were introduced into a 50 mL round-bottom flask
equipped with a magnetic stir bar. The mixture was degassed with nitrogen
for 30 min. Styrene (1.25 mL, 0.01 mol) premixed with DVB (25 μL,
0.17 mmol) was injected under inert atmosphere. The seeds were swollen
for 1.5 h at 30 °C, after which the temperature was raised to
60 °C. When this temperature was reached, KPS (20 mg, 0.07 mmol)
and sodium bisulfite (15 mg, 0.14 mmol) dissolved in water (1.25 mL)
were added. The reaction was allowed to run for 12 h. The resulting
particles were washed by centrifugation and redispersion in water.
The solid content of the dispersion was adjusted to 5%. Particles
with a hydrodynamic radius of 340 nm and polydispersity index (PDI)
of 0.09 were obtained as measured with DLS. The described seeded emulsion
polymerization was repeated once more using the dispersion obtained
after the first seeded polymerization (12.5 mL, solid content = 5%).
In this second growth step, added quantities and reaction times were
equal to those described for the first growth step. Growing the polystyrene
particles for the second time yielded colloids with a hydrodynamic
radius of 395 nm and PDI of 0.1.

In the final reaction step,
benzyl chloride moieties were introduced
at the surface of the synthesized particles.25 The washed dispersion obtained after the second seeded emulsion
polymerization (10 mL, solid content = 5%) and water (4 mL) were introduced
into a 25 mL round-bottom flask equipped with a magnetic stir bar.
The mixture was degassed with nitrogen for 30 min. VBC (0.4 mL, 2.8
mmol) premixed with DVB (8 μL, 0.06 mmol) was injected under
inert atmosphere. The seeds were swollen for 1 h at 30 °C, after
which the temperature was raised to 60 °C. When this temperature
was reached, KPS (16 mg, 0.06 mmol) and sodium bisulfite (12 mg, 0.11
mmol) dissolved in water (1 mL) were added. The reaction was allowed
to run for 4 h. The resulting particles were washed by centrifugation
and redispersion in water. The solid content of the dispersion was
adjusted to 5%. A hydrodynamic particle radius of 470 nm and PDI of
0.08 were measured using DLS. The relatively large size enabled visualization
of the colloids with optical microscopy. Stable dispersions, without
any signs of aggregation were obtained. Furthermore, the presence
of the chlorine groups was confirmed using Fourier transform infrared
(FT-IR) spectroscopy (1266 cm–1).

4.3 Synthesis of BTA-NH2
N,N′,N″-Tris(1-amino-3,6,9,12-tetraoxatetracosan-24-yl)
benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxamide (BTA-NH2, chemical structure
see Scheme 2) was synthesized,
as previously reported by Albertazzi et al.33 and Baker et al.16 The molecule comprises
a benzylic group with three carboxamide substituents linked to an
alkyl spacer of 12 carbons, which in turn is linked to a hydrophilic
segment consisting of 4 oligo(ethylene glycol) groups. These hydrophilic
segments are end-capped with primary amines.

4.4 Functionalization
of CPs-Cl with BTA-NH2 (CPs-BTA)
A dispersion
containing CPs-Cl particles
(0.5 mL, solid content = 5%) was transferred from water to DMSO (0.4
mL) by centrifugation and redispersion. The DMSO dispersion was introduced
into a Schlenk flask and degassed by evacuation and refilled with
nitrogen multiple times. In a separate Schlenk flask, a stock solution
of BTA-NH2 (1 mg, 0.8 μmol) in DMSO (10 mL) was introduced
and subsequently degassed by evacuation and refilled with nitrogen
multiple times. To start the coupling reaction between the surface
benzyl chloride moieties and the pending amine functionalities of
the BTA molecules, BTA stock solution (0.1 mL) was injected into the
DMSO CPs-Cl dispersion under inert atmosphere. The obtained reaction
mixture was stirred for 24 h at 70 °C. After this period, the
particles were washed with ethanol and water. Introduction of the
BTA moieties onto the particle surface did not influence the colloidal
stability or hydrodynamic dimensions of the particles compared to
those of the bare chlorinated CPs-Cl particles as determined with
DLS.

4.5 Characterization
IR spectra were
obtained using a PerkinElmer Frontier FT-IR/FIR spectrometer operating
in the attenuated total reflectance (ATR) mode. All measurements were
performed on powders obtained by drying the corresponding colloidal
dispersion.

TEM pictures were taken with a Philips Technai10
electron microscope typically operating at 100 kV. Bright field images
were recorded using a SIS Megaview II CCD camera. The samples were
prepared by drying a drop of diluted aqueous particle dispersion on
top of Formvar (R1202 Agar Scientific)-coated copper grids (square
300 mesh, G2300C Agar Scientific).

DLS was performed using a
Malvern Zetasizer Nano equipped with
a 633 nm wavelength laser. Highly diluted aqueous dispersions were
measured in glass cuvettes at temperatures of 20 and 60 °C in
the backscattering mode (173°). An equilibration time of 5 min
was applied before starting each experiment to ensure that the dispersions
were at the set temperature. DLS measurements included 15 acquisitions
conducted 7 times to determine the hydrodynamic radius of the colloids
throughout the described synthesis procedure. The correlation functions
were averaged and analyzed according to the method of cumulants to
obtain a harmonic Z-average radius and the corresponding
PDI.34

For the DLS experiments conducted
to probe the thermoreversible
aggregation of BTA-functionalized colloids, the number of runs was
adjusted according to the aggregation or stabilization kinetics of
the sample. However, physically meaningful values for the harmonic Z-average diameter and PDI could not be obtained for aggregated
dispersions, which is why we reported the first-order correlation
functions for these experiments instead. The autocorrelation functions
(G1(τ)) decay from 1 at short delay
times (τ) to 0 at long delay times. To facilitate a comparison
between the individual DLS experiments performed at different temperatures, G1(τ) is plotted as a function of the reduced
delay time t′, which is the delay time τ
multiplied by the temperature (T) and divided by
the viscosity (η) of the dispersing medium (eq 2).35 2  Electrophoretic mobility measurements were
conducted on the same Malvern Zetasizer Nano instrument as utilized
for DLS. Measurements were performed in disposable folded capillary
cells at 20 °C. Seven runs of at least 50 individual measurements
were conducted to obtain a statistically reliable zeta (ζ) potential.
Electrophoretic mobilities were measured in Milli-Q water. Because
the product of the particle radius and the inverse Debye screening
length (κR) >1 for the measured samples,
the
Smoluchowski limit of the Henry equation was used to convert the measured
electrophoretic mobilities to ζ potentials.36

To probe the effect of heating on the BTA-functionalized
colloids
in situ, a diluted particle dispersion was introduced into a capillary
(0.05 × 1.00 mm2 (CM Scientific)), which was subsequently
sealed with chemical resistant two-component glue. The capillary was
mounted on the heating element of a Linkam THMS 600 heating stage,
which was placed on the table of a Nikon Eclipse Ti-U inverted optical microscope equipped with an InfinitiX scout camera.
The heating stage was connected to a Linkam TP 93 controller, which
enabled to heat and cool the capillary while monitoring the sample.
A 40× objective with a relatively long working distance (2.7–3.7
mm) was used to prevent heating up of the objective during these experiments.

For the optical microscopy images shown throughout the article,
which did not require in situ observation of colloidal aggregation,
samples were prepared by placing a drop of diluted dispersion on a
microscopy glass. A 40× or 60× magnification objective was
used.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00111.Synthetic procedures
to prepare significantly smaller
chlorinated polystyrene colloids and their functionalization with
BTA-NH2, the effect of HFIP on the stability of the formed
supramolecular clusters as probed with DLS and optical microscopy
and the synthesis of micron-sized, chlorinated polystyrene colloids
(MPs-Cl) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00111_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
⊥ Department of Chemical Engineering, University
of California at
Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California 93105, United States (B.G.P.v.R.).

Author Contributions
The
manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

This work was
financially supported by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO ECHO-STP Grant 717.013.005, NWO VIDI Grant 723.014.006).

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
thank Fuqiang Chang for synthesizing the micron-sized,
charge-stabilized chlorinated particles (MPs-Cl) and Laura Neumann
for the synthesis of the BTA derivative (BTA-NH2).
==== Refs
References
Glotzer S. C. ; Solomon M. J. 
Anisotropy of building blocks and their assembly into
complex structures . Nat. Mater. 
2007 , 6 , 557 –562 . 10.1038/nmat1949 .17667968 
Yi G.-R. ; Pine D. J. ; Sacanna S. J. 
Recent progress on patchy colloids
and their self-assembly . J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 
2013 , 25 , 19310110.1088/0953-8984/25/19/193101 .23611897 
Pawar A. B. ; Kretzschmar I. 
Fabrication,
assembly, and application of patchy particles . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2010 , 31 , 150 –168 . 10.1002/marc.200900614 .21590887 
Wang Y. ; Wang Y. ; Breed D. R. ; Manoharan V. N. ; Feng L. ; Hollingsworth A. D. ; Weck M. ; Pine D. J. 
Colloids
with valence and specific directional bonding . Nature 
2012 , 491 , 51 –56 . 10.1038/nature11564 .23128225 
Sacanna S. ; Rossi L. ; Pine D. J. 
Magnetic
click colloidal assembly . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 6112 –6115 . 10.1021/ja301344n .22449143 
Kraft D. J. ; Ni R. ; Smallenburg F. ; Hermes M. ; Yoon K. ; Weitz D. A. ; van Blaaderen A. ; Groenewold J. ; Dijkstra M. ; Kegel W. K. 
Surface
roughness directed self-assembly of patchy particles into colloidal
micelles . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 10787 –10792 . 10.1073/pnas.1116820109 .22715288 
Wolters J. R. ; Avvisati G. ; Hagemans F. ; Vissers T. ; Kraft D. J. ; Dijkstra M. ; Kegel W. K. 
Self-assembly of
“Mickey Mouse”
shaped colloids into tube-like structures: Experiments and simulations . Soft Matter 
2015 , 11 , 1067 –1077 . 10.1039/C4SM02375G .25523360 
van
Ravensteijn B. G. P. ; Kegel W. K. 
Versatile procedure for site-specific
grafting of polymer brushes on patchy particles via atom transfer
radical polymerization (ATRP) . Polym. Chem. 
2016 , 7 , 2858 –2869 . 10.1039/C6PY00450D .
de
Feijter I. ; Albertazzi L. ; Palmans A. R. A. ; Voets I. K. 
Stimuli-responsive
colloidal assembly driven by surface-grafted supramolecular moieties . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 57 –64 . 10.1021/la5031872 .25489659 
Brunsveld L. ; Folmer B. J. B. ; Meijer E. W. ; Sijbesma R. P. 
Supramolecular polymers . Chem.
Rev. 
2001 , 101 , 4071 –4098 . 10.1021/cr990125q .11740927 
Dyson H. J. ; Wright P. E. ; Scheraga H. A. 
The role
of hydrophobic interactions
in initiation and propagation of protein folding . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2006 , 103 , 13057 –13061 . 10.1073/pnas.0605504103 .16916929 
Dill K. A. 
Dominant
forces in protein folding . Biochemistry 
1990 , 29 , 7133 –7155 . 10.1021/bi00483a001 .2207096 
Tanford C. 
The hydrophobic
effect and the organization of living matter . Science 
1978 , 200 , 1012 –1018 . 10.1126/science.653353 .653353 
Kegel W. K. ; van der Schoot P. 
Competing
hydrophobic and screened-coulomb interactions
in Hepatitis B virus capsid assembly . Biophys.
J. 
2004 , 86 , 3905 –3913 . 10.1529/biophysj.104.040055 .15189887 
Kegel W. K. ; van der Schoot P. 
Physical regulation
of the self-assembly of tobacco
mosaic virus coat protein . Biophys. J. 
2006 , 91 , 1501 –1512 . 10.1529/biophysj.105.072603 .16731551 
Baker M. B. ; Albertazzi L. ; Voets I. K. ; Leenders C. M. A. ; Palmans A. R. A. ; Pavan G. M. ; Meijer E. W. 
Consequences of chirality on the
dynamics of a water-soluble supramolecular polymer . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 623410.1038/ncomms7234 .25698667 
Leenders C. M. A. ; Albertazzi L. ; Mes T. ; Koenigs M. M. E. ; Palmans A. R. A. ; Meijer E. W. 
Supramolecular
polymerization in water harnessing both
hydrophobic effects and hydrogen bond formation . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49 , 1963 –1965 . 10.1039/c3cc38949a .
Leenders C. M. A. ; Baker M. B. ; Pijpers I. A. B. ; Lafleur R. P. M. ; Albertazzi L. ; Palmans A. R. A. ; Meijer E. W. 
Supramolecular polymerisation in
water; Elucidating the role of hydrophobic and hydrogen-bond interactions . Soft Matter 
2016 , 12 , 2887 –2893 . 10.1039/C5SM02843D .26892482 
Garzoni M. ; Baker M. B. ; Leenders C. M. A. ; Voets I. K. ; Albertazzi L. ; Palmans A. R. A. ; Meijer E. W. ; Pavan G. M. 
Effect of H-bonding
on order amplification in the growth of a supramolecular polymer in
water . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 13985 –13995 . 10.1021/jacs.6b07530 .27696835 
Liu J. ; Mendoza S. ; Romàn E. ; Lynn M. J. ; Xu R. ; Kaifer A. E. 
Cyclodextrin-modified gold nanospheres. Host-guest
interactions at work to control colloidal properties . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1999 , 121 , 4304 –4305 . 10.1021/ja990330n .
Sánchez-Iglesias A. ; Grzelczak M. ; Altantzis T. ; Goris B. ; Pérez-Juste J. ; Bals S. ; Van Tendeloo G. ; Donaldson S. H. Jr.; Chmelka B. F. ; Israelachvili J. N. ; Liz-Marzán L. M. 
Hydrophobic interactions modulate self-assembly of
nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 11059 –11065 . 10.1021/nn3047605 .23186074 
Grzelczak M. ; Liz-Marzán L. M. 
Exploiting hydrophobic interactions at the nanoscale . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 2455 –2463 . 10.1021/jz500984w .26277815 
Choueiri R.
M. ; Klinkova A. ; Thérien-Aubin H. ; Rubinstein M. ; Kumacheva E. 
Structural
transitions in nanoparticle assemblies governed
by competing nanoscale forces . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 10262 –10265 . 10.1021/ja404341r .23806016 
Chandler D. 
Interfaces
and the driving force of hydrophobic assembly . Nature 
2005 , 437 , 640 –647 . 10.1038/nature04162 .16193038 
Arshady R. 
Suspension,
emulsion, and dispersion polymerization: A methodological survey . Colloid Polym. Sci. 
1992 , 270 , 717 –732 . 10.1007/BF00776142 .
Verwey E. J. W. ; Overbeek J. T. G.  Theory of the Stability
of Lyophobic Colloids , 2 nd ed.; Dover Publications : Mineola, New
York , 1999 .
van
Ravensteijn B. G. P. ; Kamp M. ; van Blaaderen A. ; Kegel W. K. 
General route toward chemically anisotropic colloids . Chem. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 4348 –4353 . 10.1021/cm4025606 .
Monthéard J. P. ; Jegat C. ; Camps M. 
Vinylbenzyl
chloride (chloromethylstyrene),
polymers, and copolymers. Recent reactions and applications . J. Macromol. Sci., Polym. Rev. 
1999 , 135 –174 . 10.1081/MC-100101418 .
Dormidontova E. E. 
Role of
competitive PEO–water and water–water hydrogen bonding
in aqueous solution PEO behavior . Macromolecules 
2002 , 35 , 987 –1001 . 10.1021/ma010804e .
Berne B. J. ; Pecora R.  Dynamic Light Scattering:
With Applications to Chemistry, Biology, and Physics , 1 st ed.; Dover Publications : Mineola, New York , 2000 .
van
Houtem M. H. C. J. ; Benaskar F. ; Fitié C. F. C. ; Martín-Rapún R. ; Vekemans J. A. J. M. ; Meijer E. W. 
Helical self-assembly and co-assembly of fluorinated,
preorganized discotics . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2012 , 10 , 5898 –5908 . 10.1039/c2ob25385b .22592967 
Kraft D. J. ; Vlug W. S. ; van Kats C. M. ; van Blaaderen A. ; Imhof A. ; Kegel W. K. 
Self-assembly of colloids with liquid
protrusions . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 1182 –1186 . 10.1021/ja8079803 .19105699 
Albertazzi L. ; Martinez-Veracoechea F. J. ; Leenders C. M. A. ; Voets I. K. ; Frenkel D. ; Meijer E. W. 
Spatiotemporal control and superselectivity
in supramolecular polymers using multivalency . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 12203 –12208 . 10.1073/pnas.1303109110 .23836666 
Thomas J. C. 
The determination
of log normal particle size distributions by dynamic light scattering . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1987 , 117 , 187 –192 . 10.1016/0021-9797(87)90182-2 .
Wang J. ; Wu C. 
Reexamination of the origin of slow
relaxation in semi dilute polymer
solutions – reptation related or not? . Macromolecules 
2016 , 49 , 3184 –3191 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.6b00298 .
Ohshima H. 
A simple expression
for Henry’s function for the retardation effect in electrophoresis
of spherical colloidal particles . J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
1994 , 168 , 269 –271 . 10.1006/jcis.1994.1419 .

