
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145883210.1021/acsomega.8b00730ArticleContinuous Fabrication of Monodisperse Ceria–Zirconia–Yttria
Composite Oxide Nanoparticles Using a Novel High-Shear Agitation Reactor Suda Akihiko *Kumatani Naoki Sato Kimitoshi †Inagaki Masahide Yamamura Kae Hatanaka Miho Morikawa Akira Sustainable Division 2, Toyota Central
R&D Labs. Inc., 41-1
Yokomichi, Nagakute-Shi, Aichi 480-1192, Japan* E-mail: a-suda@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp. Phone: +81-561-71-7538. Fax: +81-561-63-6125.19 06 2018 30 06 2018 3 6 6560 6565 16 04 2018 30 05 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Monodisperse ceria–zirconia
nanoparticles have attracted
much attention as potential high-performance catalysts. Acidic aqueous
solutions are generally used for peptizing aggregated precipitates
during the fabrication of disperse nanoparticles. However, the peptization
process requires multiple hours of aging, which significantly decreases
the production efficiency. Hence, various researchers have attempted
to eliminate this stage altogether by performing a coprecipitation
process under ambient conditions using common salts as the starting
materials. In this work, we report a continuous and direct technique
for the fabrication of monodisperse composite oxide nanoparticles
via coprecipitation inside a novel high-shear agitation reactor without
aging. Using this method, monodisperse ceria–zirconia–yttria
composite oxide nanoparticles with diameters of 3 nm were successfully
synthesized.

document-id-old-9ao8b00730document-id-new-14ao-2018-00730jccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Ceria–zirconia
composite oxide is an essential component
of the three-way catalysts utilized in automotive exhaust systems.1−3 It can be also used as a catalyst in hydrogen synthesis,4 methane combustion,5 and methane reforming.6 Typically, ceria–zirconia
composite oxides are synthesized by coprecipitation; however, coprecipitated
nanoparticles exhibit strong aggregation properties, which promote
sintering and reduce specific surface areas during calcination. In
previous studies, peptization has been successfully used for synthesizing
disperse particles or colloids from the aggregated precipitates formed
by the neutralization reaction of acidic salts. Thus, Deshpande et
al.7 synthesized nanoparticle-containing
sols of crystalline Ce1–xZrxO2 from a coprecipitated metal
hydroxide prepared by the neutralization reaction of cerium and zirconium
nitrates. After coprecipitation, they peptized the obtained precipitate
by sonication with nitric acid to obtain transparent sols. Shcherbakov
et al.8 synthesized transparent ceria sols
through the hydrolysis of ceric ammonium nitrate during heating to
form dispersed colloidal particles with sizes of 10–20 nm.
Park et al.9 produced a size-controlled
boehmite sol by the peptization of crystallized boehmite gels, which
were prepared from aluminum isopropoxide solutions with various concentrations.
However, the peptization method has the serious disadvantage of an
uncertain yield rate, which leads to low production efficiency and,
therefore, makes it unsuitable for large-scale nanoparticle fabrication.
On the other hand, monodisperse metal10,11 and inorganic12,13 nanoparticles can be continuously synthesized using a microreactor.
However, this reactor has not yet been used for neutralization-based
nanoparticle synthesis via precipitation (including coprecipitation),
although such a process does not require the use of expensive salts
as starting materials and can be performed in water under atmospheric
conditions (the precipitation reaction based on the neutralization
of an acidic salt with a basic aqueous solution proceeds too fast
to produce nanosized particles with controlled diameters). Takagi
et al.13 synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles
using a reactor that consisted of identical dual axle pipes to ensure
steady laminar flow of two immiscible liquids. Titanium isopropoxide,
which is easily decomposed by a relatively slow hydrolysis reaction,
was utilized as the starting material. Generally, as the hydrolysis
of alkoxides progresses slowly, making the controlled nucleation and
growth of crystals possible, this approach is potentially suitable
for the controlled synthesis of nanoparticles. However, as of today,
no studies on the use of microreactors and aqueous solutions for producing
composite oxide nanoparticles with a size of approximately 1 nm have
been reported. Moreover, the blocking of flow channels, which often
occurs during the synthesis of solids in microreactors, represents
a serious problem that makes their utilization very difficult for
the synthesis of solid nanoparticles.

However, several excellent
synthesis routes that do not require
a microreactor have been proposed in the literature. For example,
Park et al.14 suggested a method for the
large-scale synthesis of monodisperse nanocrystals through the solvothermal
treatment of a metal–oleate complex. Similarly, Sato et al.15 selectively produced tetragonal or monoclinic
monodisperse zirconia nanoparticles. Imagawa et al.16 synthesized pure CeO2 nanoparticles with sizes
of 4 and 6 nm by the thermal decomposition of (NH4)2Ce(NO3)6 in organic solvents containing
oleic acid or oleylamine, whereas Masui et al.17 prepared maximally ultrafine CeO2 particles
via a water/oil microemulsion synthesis procedure. In all these studies,
the interface between two immiscible liquids was considered a reaction
field for producing monodisperse nanoparticles; however, they also
involved either a solvothermal treatment step or the addition of substantial
amounts of a flammable organic solvent. To the best of our knowledge,
a large-scale continuous synthesis of monodisperse ceria–zirconia
composite nanoparticles with sizes of 3 nm has not been reported yet.
Moreover, we were unable to locate any studies describing a continuous
synthesis method using aqueous solutions of inexpensive salts as the
starting materials. In this work, we report a continuous and direct
technique for the fabrication of monodisperse nanoparticles of a composite
oxide via coprecipitation from a mixed aqueous solution of inorganic
salts and a basic aqueous solution using a high-shear agitation reactor
(hereafter denoted as the “SA reactor”). This new type
of reactor has a high-speed rotating agitator, which provides a high
shear rate in the gap between the rotor and the nozzle (where the
nucleation of nanoparticles occurs), which in turn results in a high
mixing rate of the acidic salt and basic neutralizer solutions. Furthermore,
the addition of an appropriate amount of polyethylene imine (PEI)
dispersant helped to maintain the produced ceria–zirconia–yttria
(CZY) nanoparticles in a highly dispersed state.

2 High-Shear
Agitation Reactor (SA Reactor)
Figure 1 shows a
schematic diagram of the cross-sectional view of the proposed SA reactor,18 whereas Figure 2 displays detailed schematics observed from the bird’s
eye and the cross-sectional views. The rotor shaft, outer shaft, and
stator of the reactor were taken from a commercially available homogenizer
(T 25 digital ULTRA-TURRAX, IKA), whereas the rotor, nozzle, nozzle
base, inlet pipes, and fixation block were specially designed. The
inner diameter of the stator was 18.8 mm, and the outer diameter of
the nozzle was 12.0 mm. The gaps between the rotor and the stator
and between the nozzle and the rotor were 0.5 mm. Generally, high-shear
mixing technology maximizes the shear rate and minimizes the gap between
the rotor and the stator. Such a narrow-gap mixer can potentially
be used to break up and disperse strongly agglomerated powders. However,
the goal of this work was to quickly mix two different liquids, thus
achieving the highest degree of supersaturation within the shortest
time and completing a uniform nucleation reaction without initiating
particle growth or aggregation. Moreover, the dispersant (here, PEI
was selected) adsorbs on the surfaces of nuclei before particle growth
or aggregation begins. As a result, a narrow gap tends to restrict
the flow, which becomes laminar. Turbulent flow would be better for
effective mixing. The turbulent flow caused by a high shear rate (whose
index corresponds to the Reynolds number) was found to be suitable
for this purpose. At a rotational speed of 3600 rpm and gap widths
between the nozzle and the rotor of 0.14, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.00
mm, the corresponding Reynolds numbers were 130, 236, 490, 763, and
1018, respectively, indicating that these values increased with increasing
gap width. On the other hand, the outer diameter of the rotor was
set to 18.8 mm in this study; hence, as the gap between the nozzle
and the rotor increased, the thickness of the rotor decreased to 2.76,
2.65, 2.4, 2.15, and 1.9 mm. Another advantage of this reactor is
the existence of a recirculating flow in the dipping container that
is caused by the centrifugal force generated in the apertures between
the rotor teeth. The reduction in the rotor thickness decreases the
amount of the liquid between the rotor teeth, thus decreasing its
mixing efficiency (especially at high rotational speeds). The optimal
gap size between the nozzle and the rotor can be determined via computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. In the present study, a value of
0.5 mm was selected, although the corresponding Reynolds number was
not sufficient for generating a turbulent flow because of the correlation
between the Reynolds number and the rotor thickness. Theoretically,
flow conditions can be improved by varying the rotational speed; however,
the utilized PEI dispersant was unable to sustain its large magnitudes,
and the PEI dispersant deteriorated at high rotational speeds, as
indicated by the results of a preliminary study (Figure S1, Supporting Information). Figure S2 shows that PEI with a molecular weight of 10 000
is the best dispersant as compared to other PEI materials with lower
molecular weights.

Figure 1 Schematic diagram of the cross-sectional view of the SA
reactor.8 11—rotor, 12—stator,
13—nozzle,
14—rotor shaft, 15—connector for the high-speed rotating
motor, 16A and B—spaces for liquids A and B, 17A and B—inlet
pipes, 18—outer shaft, 19—nozzle base, 20—dipping
container, 21—fixation block, and A and B—pipe connecting
ports. A 100 mL glass or plastic beaker is used as the dipping container.
All assembled parts are connected to the motor. Both the motor and
dipping container are firmly attached to a stand. The acidic salt
and basic neutralizer solutions are supplied by a cassette tube pump.
The overflowing colloid solution is collected in a 1 L beaker, which
is located below the dipping container.

Figure 2 Detailed schematics of the SA reactor observed from the (a) bird’s
eye and (b) cross-sectional views. The reactor contains a 100 mL dipping
beaker with a pH-controlled aqueous solution for wetting the nozzle,
rotor, stator, and plain bearing of the rotor shaft. It also has two
inlets for two different solutions (A,B).

Figure 3 shows
a
cross-sectional schematic describing the design of the nozzle ejection
holes. The nozzle has two empty spaces: one with a greater height
located at the center (for liquid A) and another one (with a smaller
height) placed along the inner circumference (for liquid B). Forty-eight
ejection holes are located in the middle between the top positions
of these central spaces. The top area of the central space and half
(24) of the ejection holes are connected by a channel, whereas the
top area of the inner circumference space is connected to the remaining
(24) ejection holes. The ejection holes transporting the liquids A
and B are located alternately. Liquid A flows downstream from the
central space to the ejection holes, whereas liquid B flows upstream
from the inner circumference space to the ejection holes. A 100 mL
glass beaker was used as a dipping container filled with 50 mL of
a start-up liquid with pH = 2.4 before starting the reactor. This
start-up liquid served two purposes: lubricating the plain bearing
of the rotor shaft and (more importantly) wetting the nozzle, rotor,
and stator. During operation, liquids A and B were supplied by a cassette
tube pump (SMP-23AS, ASONE) using silicone rubber tubing. The rotational
speed of the rotor shaft was 3600 rpm. After a short period, the dipping
container was completely filled with a mixture of the start-up liquid
and the colloidal solution formed by the reaction of liquids A and
B, which was ultimately collected in a special container placed underneath
the dipping container. When the collecting container was full, it
was replaced with an empty one. In this manner, the synthesis process
can be run continuously.

Figure 3 Schematic describing the cross-sectional view
of the nozzle ejection
holes. The nozzle has two empty spaces: at the center (for liquid
A) and along the inner circumference (for liquid B). The height of
the central space is greater than that of the space situated along
the inner circumference. The ejection holes are located in the middle
between the top position of the central space and the top position
of the inner circumference space. Liquid A flows downward to the ejection
holes, and liquid B flows upward to the ejection holes.

3 Results and Discussion
Figure 4 shows the
particle size distributions of the obtained nanoparticles (a), (b),
(c), and (d) normalized with respect to their volumes. Sample (a),
synthesized in the SA reactor using PEI, exhibits a monodisperse size
distribution with a peak centered at 2.7 nm. Sample (c), formed in
the SA reactor using ammonia solution as a neutralizer, also shows
a monodisperse size distribution with a peak centered at 10.1 nm.
Thus, both samples (a) and (c) are characterized by monodispersity,
and the average particle size of sample (a) is smaller than that of
sample (c) by a factor of 4. By contrast, sample (b) exhibits a bimodal
distribution, whereas sample (d) is characterized by a monodisperse
distribution. Figure 5, which shows the particle size distributions normalized with respect
to the scattered light intensity (SLI), indicates that the intensity
of the light scattered by the larger particles is significantly larger
than that scattered by the smaller particles. Thus, SLI can serve
as an indicator of the existence of large particle aggregates. The
normalized size distributions of samples (a) and (c) also suggest
that the particles in these samples are monodisperse. On the other
hand, samples (b) and (d) contain a significant number of aggregated
particles, whose sizes vary over a relatively wide range. According
to Figure 4, the amount
of aggregated particles in sample (d) is small; however, although
the particle size distributions obtained for samples (c) and (d) are
similar, sample (c) synthesized in the SA reactor exhibits a higher
degree of monodispersity, as indicated by the data presented in Figure 5.

Figure 4 Size distributions of
nanoparticles synthesized by different methods,
as determined by dynamic light scattering: (a) SA reactor with PEI
solution, (b) conventional coprecipitation with PEI solution, (c)
SA reactor without PEI (using NH3 solution), and (d) conventional
coprecipitation using NH3 solution.

Figure 5 Size distributions of nanoparticles synthesized by different methods,
as determined by dynamic light scattering: (a) SA reactor with PEI
solution, (b) conventional coprecipitation with PEI solution, (c)
SA reactor without PEI (using NH3 solution), and (d) conventional
coprecipitation using NH3 solution. The vertical axis represents
the SLI.

High-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM; HF-2000,
Hitachi)/energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) observations were
performed to confirm the size, shape, and composition of the nanoparticles
in sample (a). Before measurements, the sample was diluted with ethanol,
dropped on a carbon-coated copper grid, and dried. Figure 6 shows the HRTEM images of
the nanoparticles, which contain irregular, similar-sized, single
crystals with sizes of 2–3 nm, consistent with the size distribution
for sample (a). The lattice fringes in the high-magnification image
inset in the bottom right panel of Figure 6 confirm that the observed particles consist
of single crystals [for wider area HRTEM images and inverse Fourier
transform analysis of sample (a), see Figures S3–S5]. The white circles in the micrographs of Figure 6 denote the areas
where EDS analysis was performed, and the numerals located next to
the circles identify the areas. The table at the bottom of Figure 6 lists the average
compositions of the particles (corresponding to the amount of cations
present within the encircled areas). According to the obtained EDS
data, the average concentrations of Zr, Ce, and Y cations were 76,
21, and 3 mol %, whereas those in the starting salt solution were
67, 28, and 5 mol %, respectively. Thus, the concentration of Zr measured
by EDS was higher than that in the starting salt solution (the reason
for this compositional variance has not been clarified yet). On the
other hand, the compositions of different sample areas were similar,
suggesting that the related nanoparticle compositions varied only
slightly. Figure 7 displays
the HRTEM image of sample (c), which contains aggregated particles
with sizes of around 10 nm (consistent with the size distribution
data presented in Figure 4). Moreover, it shows that the aggregated particles consist
of crystallites with diameters of about 3 nm. Hence, it can be concluded
that the nanoparticles in sample (c) were first uniformly nucleated
and then aggregated to reach a size of 10 nm, which is likely a stable
particle size in this acidic solution [as compared to the size of
nanoparticles in sample (d) without PEI]. In the case of sample (a),
PEI plays the role of an excellent dispersant that maintains the dispersed
state of each nucleus (likely via a steric hindrance mechanism because
the size of 3 nm is too small for electrostatic repulsion to maintain
the dispersed state). In the case of sample (b), the nuclei with sizes
of 3 nm are partially dispersed [similar to those in sample (a)],
and the other portion of nuclei produces aggregated particles with
diameters of 7 nm. A comparison of samples (a) and (b) implies that
PEI can adsorb on the surface of each nuclei in sample (a). By contrast,
weak agitation (without the SA reactor) delays the adsorption of PEI
for a portion of the nuclei, resulting in incomplete adsorption of
PEI on the surface of the nuclei in sample (b), suggesting that PEI
species adsorb on the particle surfaces before aggregation. The powder
X-ray diffraction pattern of sample (a) dried at a temperature of
80 °C (Figure 8) consists of prominent broad peaks corresponding to a cubic lattice
structure. The average crystallite size determined using Scherrer’s
equation was 2 nm.

Figure 6 TEM micrographs and EDS analysis results for sample (a)
in Figure 4. The micrographs
were recorded at different fields of view. The inset in the bottom
right panel shows a high-magnification image, and the white circles
denote the areas analyzed by EDS. The number beside each circle corresponds
to the position number in the table at the bottom of the figure. The
concentrations of the elements are expressed in mol %.

Figure 7 TEM micrograph of sample (c) in Figure 4. The image shows the presence of several
aggregated particles with sizes of around 10 nm consisting of crystallites
with diameters of around 3 nm. These data are consistent with the
size distributions in Figure 4 and the TEM observations in Figure 6.

Figure 8 Powder X-ray diffraction pattern of the sample (a) dried at 80
°C. The observed peaks correspond to a cubic lattice structure
with a crystallite size of 2 nm (determined using Scherrer’s
equation).

Figure 9 shows the
widths of the lattice fringes determined by drawing green lines across
the obtained transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrograph. The
average width of the fringes was 0.303 nm, which is close to the lattice
spacing of the (111) plane in the fluoritelike structure of a CeO2–ZrO2–YO1.5 solid solution
with Zr, Ce, and Y concentrations of 65, 28, and 7 mol %, respectively.19 Therefore, it can be concluded that the nanocrystals
synthesized in the SA reactor using the PEI dispersant were composite
oxides with a fluoritelike structure.

Figure 9 Width measurements for the lattice fringes
of the nanoparticles
in sample (a). The width of each lattice fringe was determined by
drawing ordered green lines at regular intervals. As the interval
number of 16.5 corresponds to 5 nm, the calculated fringe width was
0.303 nm.

4 Conclusions
In this
work, we proposed a continuous and direct technique for
synthesizing truly nanometer-sized particles in an aqueous solution
using a high-shear agitation reactor. This technique can be used for
the continuous synthesis of CZY composite nanoparticles from common
and inexpensive nitrate and chloride salts and a water-soluble base
through a neutralization reaction. When PEI was used as the base,
particles with an average size of 2.7 nm were produced.

The
following two factors must be taken into account. The first
factor is related to the pump connected to the SA reactor, as currently
utilized microfluidic reactors are very sensitive to the pulse beat
of the supply pump. However, in the proposed setup, a conventional
cassette tube pump without any special attachments was used. Second,
the reactor can be safely run without clogging its nozzle or channel,
likely because the high shear prevents the deposition of the formed
nuclei on the reactor surface (which does not have to be subjected
to a special surface treatment for preventing nonuniform nucleation).

Future studies in this area will be focused on the determination
of the most suitable dispersant for higher shear rates and realization
of continuous nanoparticle synthesis in a turbulent flow.

5 Methods
To prepare liquid A, zirconium(IV) oxide chloride
octahydrate (97%,
Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.), cerium(IV) ammonium nitrate
(95%, Wako), and yttrium nitrate hexahydrate (99.99%, Kanto Chemical
Co., Inc.) were dissolved in ion-exchanged water. The total cation
concentration in the obtained solution was 0.2 mol/L; the molar contents
of Zr, Ce, and Y were 67, 28, and 5%, respectively; and the pH of
prepared liquid A was 1.27. Liquid B was produced as follows. PEI
(70% solution; average molar weight: 10 000; Wako) was diluted
with ion-exchanged water in a step-by-step manner. The utilized aqueous
solution was acidic, and very few polymer dispersants (including PEI,
which may also serve as a neutralizer) can be ionized under acidic
conditions. In this work, ammonia solution was used as a reference
neutralizer without dispersing properties. To determine the optimal
concentration of liquid B, solutions A and B were mixed using disposable
droppers while monitoring the pH of the resulting mixture in a 10
mL plastic cup. At a pH of 2.4, a whitish precipitate started to form,
indicating the beginning of the nucleation process. Therefore, this
pH value was used during the reactor operation. The PEI concentration
in liquid B was set to a level corresponding to a pH of 10.08. Next,
liquids A and B were supplied to the SA reactor at a feeding rate
of 2.5 mL/min. Using the described procedure, 1000 mL of a transparent
colloidal solution with a total cation concentration of 0.1 mol/L
was obtained, suggesting that the formed nanoparticles consisted of
composite oxide or hydroxide species. Sample (b) was prepared from
the same liquids A and B without using the SA reactor. Instead, they
were mixed with a magnetic stirrer in a 1 L beaker containing the
same start-up liquid [both liquids were dropped in the beaker at the
same feeding rate using the cassette tube pump utilized for the preparation
of sample (a)]. For samples (c) and (d), ammonia solution was used
as a neutralizer instead of PEI during the preparation of liquid B
[the remaining fabrication steps of samples (c) and (d) were identical
to those utilized for samples (a) and (b), respectively].

The
particle size distributions of the obtained colloidal solution
were determined by dynamic light scattering (Zetasizer Nano ZSP, Malvern
Corp). Each measurement was performed more than 100 times, and the
obtained data were normalized. The utilized measurement times were
automatically selected by the instrument (Zetasizer Nano ZSP). TEM
observations were conducted using Hitachi HF-2000 [sample (a)] and
H-9500 [sample (c)] transmission electron microscopes (the HF-2000
instrument was equipped with an EDS analyzer). X-ray powder diffraction
patterns were recorded for sample (a) using a RINT-2100 diffractometer
(Rigaku).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00730.Effect of SA reactor
rotating speed and PEI molecular
weight on CZY particle size distributions and wide-area TEM micrographs
of sample (a) with inverse Fourier transform analysis (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00730_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
† Admatechs Co. Ltd., 1099-20 Marune, Kurozasa, Miyoshi-Shi, Aichi
470-0201, Japan.

Author Contributions
A.S. proposed
the basic configuration of the reactor. K.S. proposed the use of PEI
as the dispersant and neutralizer. M.I. performed the CFD simulations.
M.I. and A.S. proposed using a turbulent flow for the microreaction
field. K.S., N.K., K.Y., M.H., and A.S. performed the synthesis. A.M.,
N.K., and A.S. performed the TEM analysis. All authors contributed
to the data analysis, discussed the results, and wrote and commented
on the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This study was stimulated
by the Microreactor Project
of Toyota Motor Corp. through discussions with Drs. Hirohito Hirata
and Satoshi Nagao. The authors thank Tadao Ozawa, Yumie Furuhashi,
Hiroyuki Narita, Makoto Kusakabe, Hideaki Sato, Naoki Katayama, and
Katsuharu Okuda for their help with the design and fabrication of
the SA reactor. The authors also thank Madoka Hasegawa and Dr. Tomiko
M. Suzuki for experimental assistance. Finally, the authors acknowledge
Teruho Shimotsu and Yoshihiro Otsu of Hitachi Power Solutions Co.,
Ltd. for their assistance in conducting the TEM observations. We would
like to thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for English language editing.
==== Refs
References
Di
Monte R. ; Kašpar J. 
Nanostructured CeO2–ZrO2 mixed oxides . J. Mater. Chem. 
2005 , 15 , 633 –648 . 10.1039/b414244f .
Ozawa M. ; Kimura M. ; Isogai A. 
The application of Ce-Zr oxide solid
solution to oxygen storage promoters in automotive catalysts . J. Alloys Compd. 
1993 , 193 , 73 –75 . 10.1016/0925-8388(93)90314-d .
Morikawa A. ; Suzuki T. ; Kanazawa T. ; Kikuta K. ; Suda A. ; Shinjo H. 
A new concept in high
performance ceria–zirconia
oxygen storage capacity material with Al2O3 as
a diffusion barrier . Appl. Catal., B 
2008 , 78 , 210 –221 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2007.09.013 .
Karthikeyan D. ; Atchudan R. ; Selvakumar P. ; Sivakumar R. ; Shanmugam M. 
Effect of preparation methods on
structure and catalytic
activity of Ni loaded CexZr1–xO2 catalysts for hydrogen production via
autothermal reforming of ethane . Res. Chem.
Intermed. 
2017 , 43 , 2817 –2837 . 10.1007/s11164-016-2796-0 .
Monai M. ; Montini T. ; Melchionna M. ; Duchoň T. ; Kúš P. ; Chen C. ; Tsud N. ; Nasi L. ; Prince K. C. ; Veltruská K. ; Matolín V. 
The effect
of sulfur dioxide on the activity of hierarchical Pd-based catalysts
in methane combustion . Appl. Catal., B 
2017 , 202 , 72 –83 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.09.016 .
Wolfbeisser A. ; Sophiphun O. ; Bernardi J. ; Wittayakun J. ; Föttinger K. ; Rupprechter G. 
Methane dry reforming over ceria-zirconia
supported Ni catalysts . Catal. Today 
2016 , 277 , 234 –245 . 10.1016/j.cattod.2016.04.025 .
Deshpande A. S. ; Pinna N. ; Beato P. ; Antonietti M. ; Niederberger M. 
Synthesis and characterization of
stable and crystalline
Ce1-xZrxO2 nanoparticle sols . Chem. Mater. 
2004 , 16 , 2599 –2604 . 10.1021/cm040155w .
Shcherbakov A. B. ; Teplonogova M. A. ; Ivanova O. S. ; Shekunova T. O. ; Ivonin I. V. ; Baranchikov A. Y. ; Ivanov V. K. 
Facile method for
fabrication of surfactant-free concentrated CeO2 sols . Mater. Res. Express 
2017 , 4 , 055008 10.1088/2053-1591/aa6e9a .
Park M.-C. ; Lee S.-R. ; Kim H. ; Park I. ; Choy J.-H. 
Tailoring
porosity of colloidal boehmite sol by controlling crystallite size . Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 33 , 1962 –1966 . 10.5012/bkcs.2012.33.6.1962 .
Lin X. Z. ; Terepka A. D. ; Yang H. 
Synthesis of silver nanoparticles
in a continuous flow tubular microreactor . Nano
Lett. 
2004 , 4 , 2227 –2232 . 10.1021/nl0485859 .
Wagner J. ; Köhler J. M. 
Continuous
synthesis of gold nanoparticles in a microreactor . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 685 –691 . 10.1021/nl050097t .15826109 
Zhang L. ; Nakamura H. ; Lee C.-G. ; Maeda H. 
An investigation of
heating rate effects on particle size and concentration: Instruction
for scale-up . RSC Adv. 
2012 , 2 , 3708 –3713 . 10.1039/c2ra01232d .
Takagi M. ; Maki T. ; Miyahara M. ; Mae K. 
Production of titania
nanoparticles by using a new microreactor assembled with same axle
dual pipe . Chem. Eng. J. 
2004 , 101 , 269 –276 . 10.1016/j.cej.2003.11.011 .
Park J. ; An K. ; Hwang Y. ; Park J.-G. ; Noh H.-J. ; Kim J.-Y. ; Park J.-H. ; Hwang N.-M. ; Hyeon T. 
Ultra-large-scale syntheses
of monodisperse nanocrystals . Nat. Mater. 
2004 , 3 , 891 –895 . 10.1038/nmat1251 .15568032 
Sato K. ; Abe H. ; Ohara S. 
Selective growth of monoclinic and tetragonal zirconia
nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 2538 –2539 . 10.1021/ja910712r .20128607 
Imagawa H. ; Suda A. ; Yamamura K. ; Sun S. 
Monodisperse CeO2 nanoparticles and their oxygen storage and release properties . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 1740 –1745 . 10.1021/jp109878j .
Masui T. ; Fujiwara K. ; Machida K.-i. ; Adachi G.-y. ; Sakata T. ; Mori H. 
Characterization of
cerium(IV) oxide ultrafine particles prepared
using reversed micelles . Chem. Mater. 
1997 , 9 , 2197 –2204 . 10.1021/cm970359v .
Suda A. ; Yamamura K. ; Morikawa A. ; Ozawa T.    Manufacturing method and apparatus
of ultrafine particles . Japanese Patent, 2011 , No. 4784623 .
Suda A. ; Ukyo Y. ; Yamamura K. ; Sobukawa H. ; Sasaki T. ; Nagai Y. ; Tanabe T. ; Sugiura M. 
Effect of
ordered arrangement
of Ce and Zr ions on oxygen storage capacity of ceria–zirconia
solid solution . J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn. 
2004 , 112 , 586 –589 . 10.2109/jcersj.112.586 .

