
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145924210.1021/acsomega.8b01393ArticleElectrostatics of Nanoparticle–Wall Interactions
within Nanochannels: Role of Double-Layer Structure and Ion–Ion
Correlations Sidhu Inderbir
S. †Frischknecht Amalie L. ‡Atzberger Paul J. *†† Department
of Mathematics and Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California 93106, United States‡ Center
for Integrated Nanotechnologies, Sandia
National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, United States* E-mail: atzberg@gmail.com.18 09 2018 30 09 2018 3 9 11340 11353 20 06 2018 06 09 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We
perform computational investigations of the electrolyte-mediated interactions of charged
nanoparticles with the walls of nanochannels. We investigate the role
of discrete ion effects, valence, and electrolyte strength on nanoparticle–wall
interactions. We find for some of the multivalent charge regimes that
the like-charged nanoparticles and walls can have attractive interactions.
We study in detail these interactions and the free-energy profile
for the nanoparticle–wall separation. We find there are energy
barriers and energy minima giving preferred nanoparticle locations
in the channel near the center and at a distance near to but separated
from the channel walls. We characterize contributions from surface
overcharging, condensed layers, and overlap of ion double layers.
We perform our investigations using coarse-grained particle-level
simulations with Brownian dynamics, classical density functional theory,
and the mean-field Poisson–Boltzmann theory. We discuss the
implications of our results for phenomena in nanoscale devices.

document-id-old-9ao8b01393document-id-new-14ao-2018-013939ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
In
many microscale and nanoscale systems, electrolytes play a central
role in collective interactions, equilibrium phase behaviors, and
kinetics.1−3 This includes transitions in the stability of colloidal
suspensions,4−6 electrophoretic separation and detection in fluidic
devices,1−3,7−9 and biomolecular interactions.10−12 Confinement of electrolytes
and charged objects between charged walls presents additional effects
often resulting in rich phenomena that are particularly important
in nanoscale devices.1,7 This owes in part to such features
as the thickness of ionic layers becoming comparable to other length
scales in the system.2,13−15

For sufficiently
charged multivalent systems, additional phenomena
can arise, as observed in experiments and predicted by theory.16−20 This includes the formation of condensed ion layers on surfaces,
overcharging of walls and particles, and attractions between like-charged
objects.17,21,22 These effects
have formed the basis for understanding phenomena such as DNA condensation,23−27 colloidal stability,6,17,28 and attraction of like-charged plates.16,18,19

There has been significant related
experimental work done to address
for applications the important problem of characterizing the size
and charge features of nanoparticles and their interactions within
nanoscale systems and devices.8,29,30 In the work of Krishnan et al.,30 detailed
experimental investigations were made of a nanoscale device with a
geometry that generates electrostatically local energy wells that
transiently trap nanoparticles, allowing for characterizations of
particle size and charge. In Tagliazucchi et al.,29 further investigations are discussed concerning the importance
of charged nanoparticle interactions with nanopores and nanochannels
going beyond effects captured by the Poisson–Nernst–Planck
and Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) theory.

Here, we investigate
the behavior of charged nanoparticles confined
within nanochannels filled with electrolyte, using coarse-grained
molecular-level simulations using Brownian dynamics (BD) and classical
density functional theory (cDFT). We also make comparisons with predictions
from the mean-field Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) theory. We investigate
the interactions between a charged nanoparticle and the nanochannel
wall as the electrolyte concentration and particle charge are varied.
We focus particularly on the case of divalent counterions and strongly
charged surfaces. There have been relatively few detailed studies
of charged nanoparticles within charged nanochannels going beyond
mean-field PB theory to take into account effects of discrete ions,
ion sterics, ion–ion correlations, and the role of particle-channel
geometry. Some notable previous work going beyond PB includes31 who developed cDFT approaches to investigate
charged spherical nanoparticles in nanochannels with weakly charged
walls. To our knowledge, our work is the first to investigate in detail
the strongly charged regime in this geometry and to investigate comparisons
between the predictions of a particle-based model, cDFT, and mean-field
PB theory for nanochannels.

In our investigations, we find that
in some charge regimes, the
free energy of the particle as a function of its position within the
channel can develop significant energy minima in preferred locations
near the channel center and near to, but separated from, the channel
wall. In some regimes, we find these preferred locations (energy minima)
can become separated by significant energy barriers. Motivated by
nanofludic devices, our results indicate that nanoparticles could
exhibit interesting bimodalities switching from long dwell times in
locations near the channel wall to locations near the channel center.
The ways this affects transport could have implications for experimental
protocols and design of devices for processes such as capillary electrophoresis
used in fluidics for separations and detection.1,2,7,32−34

We investigate the origin of the free-energy profile for the location of the nanoparticle
within the channel by using BD simulations. We characterize at the
coarse-grained molecular level the ion–ion correlations and
the surface overcharging and condensed ionic layers that form near
the nanoparticle surface and channel wall. We further make comparisons
with results from classical density functional theory (cDFT). We find
the cDFT make predictions consistent with our molecular-level results
but in the most strongly charged regimes with significant underestimation
of the strength of effects such as the free-energy well depth. For
the free-energy profile of the confined particle, the combined simulation
and cDFT results demonstrate the significant roles played by ion–ion
correlations and overcharging at both the charged walls and nanoparticle
surface. We also show for the strongly charged regimes considered
that a mean-field theory such as the Poisson–Boltzmann theory
is not adequate in predicting system behaviors, highlighting the importance
of accounting for ion–ion correlations and other discrete effects.

We introduce our BD simulations for the electrolyte and nanoparticle
in Section 2.1. We
introduce our cDFT description of the nanochannel system in Section 2.2. We present
the results of our calculations, including the counterion and coion
densities, nanoparticle free energy, and ion–ion correlation
functions in Section 3. We discuss our findings and related phenomena observed within nanochannels
in Section 4. Additional
information on the computational methods developed and simulation
protocols are discussed in the Supporting Information.

2 Methods
2.1 Brownian Dynamics Simulations
We
consider nanoparticles confined within a nanochannel having a slit-like
geometry. The walls of the channel are two like-charged parallel plates.
We consider electrolytes consisting of both counterions and coions,
using a coarse-grained model related to the restricted primitive model.35−37 The discrete ion–ion interactions are taken into account
within a continuous dielectric medium. A snapshot of the system is
shown in Figure 1.
Additional details on the electrostatics of channels are presented
in Section S.1.

Figure 1 Shown is a cut-away view
of the electrolyte and nanoparticle corresponding
to counterions with +2 charge (orange) and coions with −1 charge
(blue). Strong correlations are exhibited, where counterions and coions
form clusters and chains throughout the electrolyte and condensed
layers near the walls and nanoparticle surface. For clarity, the channel
walls are not shown. The shown configuration of ions and colloid corresponds
to the parameters σ = −6 and Cm = 8 defined in Section 2.1.1.

We model the finite size
of the ions and the excluded volume of
the nanoparticle using the Weeks–Chandler–Andersen interaction
potential38 1  r is the distance between
the center of mass of the two particles. For a particle with steric
radius b, we have rc =
21/6·b. This ensures a purely repulsive
interaction between particles.38 We also
include for the particle and wall a steric interaction that enforces
no penetration of ions through the walls. We treat the walls as a
smooth continuum and use a Lennard-Jones (LJ) 9-3 potential truncated
at rc[w] to only retain the repulsive part 2  Here, r denotes the nearest
distance between a particle and the wall. Given the frequency of ion–wall
interactions, we found the 9-3 LJ potential offers some numerical
advantages over the 12-6 LJ potential while still preserving well
approximate hard-wall interactions, allowing for significantly larger
time steps when sampling the ion configurations. Electrostatic interactions
between ions and/or the nanoparticles of charge q1 and q2 are given by the
Coulomb interaction 3  where ϵ is the dielectric constant of
the background medium and we use SI units. To account for the surface
charge density σ of the nanoparticle, we use Gauss’s
law,39 allowing us to use a point charge Q0 at the center of mass with Q0 = 4πR2σ, where R is the radius of the particle.

To handle the long-range
Coulumb interactions we use the particle–particle
particle–mesh (PPPM) approach,40,41 as implemented
in LAMMPS.42 For the nanochannel with slit
geometry, we use a variant of the PPPM method that uses periodic boundary
conditions in the xy directions.43 This method has been extended to allow the simulated system
to have a net charge within the slab interior.44 We use in our simulations the approach of Ballenegger et
al.,44 as implemented in LAMMPS. Our overall
system is electrically neutral with the electrostatics of the channel
walls to be interpreted using our approach discussed in Section S.1.

In simulations, to calculate
the potential of mean force, we use
a harmonic potential to hold the nanoparticle at a given location
by 4  where x0 is the target
location for the nanoparticle location x. The total potential
energy associated with a configuration of the nanochannel system including
the counterions, coions, and nanoparticle is given by 5  where we
represent the configuration of nanoparticle
and ions by the composite vector X = [Xnanoparticle, Xions]T. To
sample equilibrium configurations, we use Brownian dynamics (BD) based
on the Langevin equations45 6  The dX/dt = V gives the
collective particle velocity, m the particle mass,
γ the solvent drag, Φ(X) is the potential
energy of the collective configuration X of particles,
and Fthm is a stochastic force
modeling the thermal fluctuations of the system. We use for Fthm a Gaussian driving force with mean zero and
covariance ⟨Fthm(s)FthmT(t)⟩ = 2kBTγδ(t – s).45 For the time integration,
we use a stochastic velocity-Verlet method implemented within LAMMPS.42,46 All BD simulations are performed in LAMMPS, with parameter values
as given in Table 1.

Table 1 Parameter Values for the Nanochannel Modela
parameter	value	parameter	value	
nanochannel width (z), lz	6 nm	nanochannel length (x, y), lx, ly	18 nm	
wall surface charge, σw*	–0.72e/nm2	wall steric parameter lj93, bw	0.5 nm	
wall
cutoff parameter lj93, rc[w]	0.425 nm	wall energy lj93, ϵw	2.27 × 107 amu nm2/ns2	
particle surface charge, σ̃	–3e/nm2	particle radius, R	0.75 nm	
particle mass, m0	6.20 × 103 amu	temperature, T	300 K	
thermal energy, kBT	2.50 × 106 amu nm2/ns2	solvent mass density, ρ	6.02 × 102 amu/nm3	
solvent viscosity, μ	5.36 × 105 amu/(nm ns)	solvent relative permittivity, ϵr	80.1	
counterion radius, b–	0.116 nm	coion radius, b+	0.116 nm	
counterion charge, q–	–1e	coion charge, q+	+2e	
counterion effective mass, m–	2.3 × 101 amu	coion effective mass, m+	2.3 × 101 amu	
reference-ion concentration, c̅–	0.214 M	reference-ion concentration, c̅+	0.128 M	
wall LJ cutoff, rc[w]	0.425 nm	coulombic cutoff, rc[c]	6 nm	
Langevin time step, Δt	1.0 × 10–5 ns	Langevin drag, γ	6πμR	
Langevin equilibration time, τe	0.5 ns	 	 	
a We use by default these values unless
specified otherwise.

We
remark that throughout this paper we use BD to probe only equilibrium
properties of the system. The BD simulations were equilibrated from
random initial conditions over times long enough for the ions to diffuse
at least two times across the diameter of the nanochannel. We then
collected statistics on trajectories in which the ions diffused at
least five times across the nanochannel diameter.

2.1.1 Model
Parameters
We investigate
the structure of the double layer when varying the strength of the
charge of the nanoparticle and the ion concentrations. We characterize
the charge of the negatively charged nanoparticle Qparticle in terms of its surface charge density σ̃,
where Qparticle = 4πR2σ̃. We performed simulations for nanoparticles
with surface charge densities of σ̃ = −1, −3,
and −6e/nm2. In presenting our
results throughout, we introduce the nondimensional surface charge
quantity σ = σ̃/σ̃0, where
σ̃0 = +1e/nm2.
This gives the nondimensional surface charge cases σ = −1,
−3, and −6 on which we report throughout. We mostly
focus on divalent cations with q+ = 2e and monovalent anions with q– = −1e. We take as a reference concentration
for the counterions c̅+ = 0.128
M and for the coions c̅– =
0.214 M, expressed in molar units. These values were determined from
exploratory cDFT calculations of pure channels without nanoparticle
to find a physical regime indicative of interesting double-layer structures
to explore further with the particle-based model. The other ion concentrations
we consider are a multiple Cm of these
baseline reference concentrations. For example, Cm = 10 corresponds to a counterion concentration c+ = Cmc̅+ = 1.28 M and a coion concentration c– = Cmc̅– = 2.14 M. The simulations are performed with
a fixed number of ions, with an excess of counterions, so that the
bulk electrolyte solution is not neutral. The excess counterions (cations)
lead to an effective negative charge on the nanochannel walls, given
by the condition of overall electric neutrality 7  Here, N– = Vc– and N+ = Vc+ denote the number of ions
in the unit cell where V is the channel volume. Qwall is the charge on each wall in the unit
cell. For a given fixed concentration of coions and counterions, the
effective surface charge of the wall is obtained from electric neutrality
by solving for Qwall in eq 7. The wall surface charge density
for each system simulated is given in units of e/nm2 in Table 2. The wall charge density increases with increasing ion concentration.
Additionally, the wall surface charge densities vary slightly depending
on the nanoparticle charge, since we have a fixed number of ions in
the channel.

Table 2 Wall Surface Charge Density (Units
Are e/nm)a
 	σ = −1	σ = −3	σ = −6	
Cm = 1	–0.74	–0.72	–0.68	
Cm = 2	–1.49	–1.46	–1.43	
Cm = 4	–2.98	–2.96	–2.93	
Cm = 6	–4.48	–4.46	–4.43	
Cm = 8	–5.98	–5.95	–5.92	
Cm = 10	–7.47	–7.45	–7.42	
a For the different
regimes considered,
we give the implicit surface charge density that arises from electric
neutrality given by the condition in eq 7.

In the
regimes we consider, the electrostatic interactions vary
in strength. We can characterize the strength of the interactions
by the electrostatic coupling constant47 given by 8  Here, q = 2e is the charge of the divalent counterions
and σ is the charge
density of either the nanoparticle or the channel walls. With the
Bjerrum length lB, the distance at which
the electrostatic interaction energy is comparable to the thermal
energy kBT, is . In our systems with
divalent cations,
the electrostatic coupling constant ranges from g ≈ 17 for the least charged system up to g ≈ 188 for the most strongly charged system. Previous studies
of electrolytes near flat surfaces47 have
shown that the counterion density profiles agree with the PB theory
for g ≈ 1, the profiles show clear deviation
from PB theory for g = 10 and 100, and they show
good agreement with the strong-coupling limit for g = 104; see ref (47). Previous simulations of highly charged spheres explored
coupling constants ranging from g = 26 up to 615
and found attraction between like-charged spheres.48−50 We therefore
expect our simulations to be in the intermediate regime between weak
and strong coupling.

2.2 Classical Density Functional
Theory (cDFT)
In the classical density functional theory
(cDFT) calculations,
we model the ions as interacting charged hard spheres with diameters dα and charges qα in a background continuum dielectric medium to represent the solvent.
The nanoparticle is a larger hard sphere of radius R and surface charge density σ. The ions are treated as mobile
fluid species, whereas the nanoparticle has a fixed spatial location.
We account for the steric interactions between the ions and nanoparticle
using a hard-sphere interaction V(r) = ∞ for r < R, where r is the distance between the ion and the center of the
nanoparticle. In addition, we add a smooth truncated potential based
on the Lennard-Jones (LJ) interaction to the surface of the nanoparticle 9  where R is the radius of
the nanoparticle and r′ is the distance between
the ion and the surface of the nanoparticle. We truncate and shift
this potential to obtain 10  with Vαm(r′)
= 0 for r′ > rc′, at large
distances from the nanoparticle. In our notation, the subscript α
refers to the index of the particular ion species and the mLJ and
m refer to the modified Lennard-Jones potentials. This repulsive potential
serves to smooth the surface of the nanoparticle to reduce mesh-size
effects in our discretized cDFT. We used ϵm = 0.5kBT and σm = d (where d is the ion diameter) for all
calculations. The channel boundaries are modeled as hard walls with
the interaction potential for the ions 11  We use a version of cDFT that follows
closely
the work of Oleksy and Hansen51 and is
very similar to that of Henderson et al.52 We formulate the cDFT in an open ensemble, specified by the temperature T, the total volume V, and the chemical
potentials μα of all fluid species in the system.
We discuss the relation of these parameters to those used in the BD
simulations in Section 2.2.1.

The grand free energy of the system is given as a
functional of the ion densities ρα(r) 12   13  For notational
convenience, it is to be understood
that Ω[ρα(r)] depends on
all of the density fields {ρα} collectively.
Here, F[ρα(r)]
is the intrinsic Helmholtz free energy of the system. Vα(r) = V + Vm + Vw denotes the
neutral part of the potential that acts on each ion from the walls
and the nanoparticle. We find the equilibrium density profile ρα0(r) that minimizes the free-energy functional Ω[ρα(r)] through the variational derivative53 14  At equilibrium, the associated grand potential
free energy of the system is Ω0 = Ω[ρα0(r)].54 The intrinsic Helmholtz free energy
consists of four terms given by 15  The terms represent, respectively,
the Helmholtz
free energies for the ideal gas (id), hard spheres (hs), mean-field
Coulombic interactions (coul), and second-order charge correlations
(corr). The ion–ion correlation term Fcorr in cDFT captures higher-order effects of density fluctuations,
distinguishing the cDFT results from those of mean-field theories
like the Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) theory. Further details are
given in Section S.2, including the full
form of the cDFT residual equations that we solve.

The residual
equations are solved computationally within the spatial
domain of the nanochannel. The cDFT calculations are performed using
the open source package Tramonto, available at https://github.com/Tramonto/Tramonto. The residual equations are solved in real space on a Cartesian
mesh using inexact Newton iterations for the density fields and a
finite element method for the electrostatic potential. Details of
these numerical methods and discussions of related applications of
Tramonto to charged systems can be found in refs (55−58).

In the limit that the ions are treated as point particles
and do
not have any charge correlation contribution to their free energy,
the cDFT reduces to the nonlinear Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) equation 16  Here, d is a reference length
in the system that for convenience we take to correspond to the ion
size. The PB limit corresponds to the Helmholtz free-energy functional
with only the ideal gas and mean-field Coulombic contributions.

2.2.1 Parameterization
We parameterized
our cDFT calculations to yield results in physical regimes comparable
to the BD simulations. We set the Bjerrum length lB = 7.1 Å as in the simulations, use the same surface
charge density on the nanoparticle, match the ion diameters d = 2b = 0.232 nm, and use radius R = 0.75 nm for the nanoparticle. We used a channel with
total width lz = 6 nm as in the simulations.
The channel walls extend into the channel to the same distance as
in the simulations, so that we match the hard-wall condition in the
density functional theory (DFT) with the Lennard-Jones 9-3 repulsive
walls in the simulations.

To reduce computational costs in the
cDFT calculations, we placed the nanoparticle with its center on the z axis so that the symmetry of the system allows for reflecting
boundary conditions to be used in the x and y directions and thus only 1/4 of the particle needs to
be directly included in the calculations. The size of the computational
domain in the x and y directions
was lx = ly = 4.6 nm, for an effective channel length of 9.28 nm (taking into
account the reflecting boundary through the center of the particle).
We used a mesh size of 0.058 nm in all three-dimensional (3D) calculations
(i.e., a mesh size of 0.25d in reduced units, where d = 0.232 nm is the diameter of the ions).

The BD
simulations were performed in the canonical ensemble at
constant Nα, V,
and T. For cDFT, it is more natural to work in the
grand canonical ensemble at constant μα,V, and T. To make a correspondence between
these two sets of calculations, we set the chemical potentials in
the cDFT so that the average ion densities match the BD simulations
at the middle of the channel where nearly bulk conditions prevail.
In the middle of the channel, the electrolyte solution is neutral,
with c– = 2c+. We set the surface charge density of the channel walls in
the cDFT equal to the effective surface charge densities given in Table 2.

We solve eqs S11–S13 in the nanochannel
geometry with Neumann boundary conditions on ϕ(r) at the nanochannel walls and the nanoparticle, i.e., we set the
charge density of these surfaces. We employ Dirichlet boundary conditions
elsewhere, with a reflecting boundary through the nanoparticle, as
described above.

To obtain the free energy associated with the
particle at a particular
position within the channel, we performed a cDFT calculation at each
particle position and used the grand free energy of the resulting
density. We computed density profiles of ions around the particle
both in the case with the particle in the center of the channel and
in the case with the particle in the bulk fluid with no channel present.
The density profiles were found to be the same in both cases. We also
found that the density profile near the channel wall, at a location
in the channel far from the particle, was also independent of the
presence or absence of the nanoparticle. This allowed us a significant
reduction in computational costs by performing calculations of the
wall density profiles from one-dimensional (1D) systems using cDFT.
In our 1D calculations, we used a finer mesh size of 0.0232 nm for
better resolution in the reported results.

3 Results
We first discuss results of the BD simulations,
followed by comparisons
with cDFT and PB theory. All figures show results from the BD simulations
unless explicitly noted otherwise.

3.1 Ionic Double-Layer Structure:
BD Simulations
Typical distributions for the counterions
and coions as the nanoparticle
position is varied in the case of σ = −6 and Cm = 8 are shown in Figure 2. For correspondence with continuum concentration
fields, one must introduce a length scale over which we average the
particle configurations to obtain a local notion of concentration.
We report our concentration fields throughout in units of #/nm3. In the regime with σ = −6 and Cm = 8, we see strong layering occurs for the counterions
near the walls and near the nanoparticle surface. Also, a secondary
layer of coions occurs offset from the walls and the nanoparticle
surface adjacent to the counterion layer. This is especially visible
for the coions shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2.

Figure 2 Average concentration of counterions (top) and
coions (bottom)
as the nanoparticle position is varied within the nanochannel, at X0(3) = 3.0, 4.6, and 4.85 nm (left to right), for σ = −3
and Cm = 8. We also show the location
of the channel walls (solid gray bars).

We show the ion concentrations near the wall for σ
= −6
and varying Cm in Figure 3. The other cases with σ = −1
and −3 show ion concentrations that are indistinguishable after
scaling the concentration in the case with σ = −6. For
ions near the wall, there are two length scales associated with the
ion layers. The first length scale is the location of the closest
ion layer to the wall, which occurs at the minimum of the Lennard-Jones
potential of eq 2, at l* = (18/45)1/6bw = 0.43 nm. From the steric interactions, the next closest
layer can form only around l2 = l* + b+ + b–. For the parameters in Table 1, we have l2 = 0.66 nm. We see both of these length scales manifest
in the structure of the ion layers. The double layer essentially forms
according to the packing distance imposed by the ion and wall sterics.
This becomes especially pronounced as the concentration increases,
as seen in Figure 3.

Figure 3 Ion concentrations near the channel walls as Cm is varied, for σ = −6. Left: density profiles
for counterions (dashed curves) and coions (solid curves). Right:
expanded scale with density profiles of counterions (solid curves)
and coions (dashed curves). We remark that to help in comparing the
data sets, we use throughout the figures in plots solid lines to help
emphasize one ionic species and dotted lines to de-emphasize slightly
the other ionic species against which we are making a comparison.
To distinguish between the particular ionic species being plotted,
we use labels embedded near the plots with the labels “counterions”
or “coions.” The distances r reported
throughout are in units of nanometers. All concentrations are in units
of #/nm3.

As expected, as the ion concentration increases, the ion
layers
become smaller in width and more dense. For small concentrations,
there is significant overlap between the counterion and coion layers
with significant mixing of ions especially within the secondary coion
layer. As the concentration increases, the layers become more distinct.
For Cm < 4, the concentration of the
counterions monotonically decays to the bulk counterion concentration,
whereas for Cm > 4, the counterion
density
shows a depletion relative to the bulk density after the initial peak,
as shown in the bottom of Figure 3. This charge oscillation is often seen for divalent
counterions and strong surface charges, as in our system.59,60

In the nanochannel in the regimes, we consider the double-layer
structure is markedly different than in weakly charged systems, which
have an absorbed Stern layer of relatively immobile ions that transitions
to a gaseous mobile phase of ions.2,3 For our system,
at high ion concentrations, this transition effectively occurs on
the length scale of individual ions. Near the wall, the surface counterion
and coion positions are strongly correlated, as shown in the simulation
snapshot in Figure 4. Many of the ions form pairs with opposing ions or small clusters
or chains. The wall surface is covered in a condensed layer of counterions
along with a secondary layer of coions that forms as part of clusters
near individual counterions; see Figure 4. This indicates some of the challenges involved
in developing theory for such highly charged and concentrated regimes.

Figure 4 Left:
ion configurations near the wall, for σ = −6
and Cm = 8. Right: ions near the nanoparticle
in the bulk, for σ = −6 and Cm = 8, showing ion pairs and clusters.

Next, we show the density of counterions and coions near
the nanoparticle
surface for the three different surface σ = −1, −3,
and −6 in Figures 5, 6, and 7,
respectively. The concentrations are measured at distances r relative to the nanoparticle surface. The relevant steric
length scale for the position of the counterion layer in this case
is the steric length l** = 21/6(R + b) – R = 0.22 nm. The coion layer forms at a distance corresponding to l2* = l** + 2b± = 0.45 nm. Again, the layer locations
are primarily determined by the packing of the ions, as determined
by the sterics.

Figure 5 Nanoparticle double layer (σ = −1.0). We
show as an
inset a zoomed view of the layers over the range 0.0–1.0. We
discuss related notational and plotting conventions in Figure 3.

Figure 6 Nanoparticle double layer (σ = −3.0). We show as an
inset a zoomed view of the layers over the range 0.0–1.0. We
discuss related notational and plotting conventions in Figure 3.

Figure 7 Nanoparticle double layer (σ = −6.0). We show as an
inset a zoomed view of the layers over the range 0.0–1.0. We
discuss related notational and plotting conventions in Figure 3.

For a relatively weak particle charge density of σ
= −1,
the counterions form a tight layer near the nanoparticle surface with
significant mixing of coions into this primary layer. After this layer,
the coions exhibit concentrations that rapidly approach the bulk;
see Figure 5. For σ
= −3, the counterions also form a tight layer near the nanoparticle
surface but with relatively little mixing of coions into this primary
layer; see Figure 6. The coions show only a weak secondary peak. For the highest surface
charge density of σ = −6, a secondary layer of coions
forms. For the largest concentrations, some depletion of the counterions
is exhibited in the secondary layer relative to the bulk. This is
less pronounced than in the case of the walls due to the high curvature
of the particle but can be seen readily in the case with σ =
−6e/nm2 and Cm = 10, as highlighted in the inset in Figure 7.

For the smaller concentrations, there
is significant overlap of
the counterion layer with the coion layer, with significant mixing
in the secondary layer. From examining configurations of the ions
around the nanoparticle, we find this arises from strong correlations
between the counterions and coions, resulting in the formation of
transient charge clusters, as shown in Figure 4. As the nanoparticle charge increases, the
layer of counterions near the particle adheres more strongly and the
clusters are pushed increasingly toward the secondary layer. For the
case σ = −6, this is especially pronounced with the double
layer providing excess charge relative to what would be required to
achieve local electric neutrality. We find the amount of excess charge
increases monotonically with increasing bulk ion concentration; see Figure 8. Overcharging is
often seen in systems with divalent counterions at sufficiently high
concentrations and/or surface charges and is due to ion correlations.50,61

Figure 8 Total
collective amount of charge Q(r)
contained within the spherical volume of radius r around the nanoparticle, for σ = −6. Near the particle
surface, the double layer provides excess charges (overcharging) when
countering the nanoparticle charge. Q0 is the nanoparticle charge.

3.2 Free Energy of Nanoparticle Location: BD Simulations
We next consider the free energy E(d) of the system as a function of the nanoparticle position d; see Figure 9. The wall and the nanoparticle are both negatively charged, so we
expect the free energy to be repulsive when the particle is sufficiently
close to the wall. As the concentration of the counterions and coions
becomes sufficiently large, we find attraction occurs between the
like-charged nanoparticle and wall. A free-energy minimum occurs at
a distance comparable to the interaction length scale of the first
layers of ions of the wall and the nanoparticle surface. This can
be seen from the sum of the length scale for the first counterion
layer of the wall l* = 0.43 nm, and the
length scale of the counterion layer of the nanoparticle l** = 0.22 nm is l = l* + l** = 0.65 nm, corresponding
to , the approximate location of
the free-energy
minima in Figure 9.
The free-energy minimum can become significant compared to kBT at sufficiently large Cm. We discuss this further in Section 4.

Figure 9 Free-energy profile of
the nanoparticle–wall distance from
BD simulations. We show the free energy for σ = −1.0,
−3.0, and −6.0 as a function of the distance d between the particle and the wall. The results are normalized
by the thermal energy kBT and the half-width  of the nanochannel.

The free-energy profile has an interesting nonmonotonic dependence
on the nanoparticle charge and electrolyte-ion concentrations. We
see the depth of the free-energy minimum well that forms near the
wall is not entirely monotonic as the ionic concentration increases.
Most clearly, for σ = −6, the magnitude of the free-energy
well depth is larger for Cm = 6 than for Cm = 8 but then increases significantly for Cm = 10. There is also a significant free-energy
barrier, as large as 2kBT, that can arise separating the particle from the free-energy local
minimum near the wall. Making this even more interesting is that the
largest energy barriers appear to occur for the intermediate ionic
concentrations considered. For instance, see the cases with σ
= −3 and −6 and Cm = 8.
The free-energy barrier appears to arise from the condensed ion layers
that form on the nanoparticle surface and wall surface that must coordinate
and rearrange as the particle approaches the wall; see Figure 10.

Figure 10 Top-down view of nanoparticle
and ion distribution, showing typical
distributions of ions nearby the nanoparticle at different locations
within the nanochannel. We show the locations corrresponding to (i)
the middle of the channel at X0(3) = 3.0 nm, (ii) the maximum
attraction to the wall at X0(3) = 4.6 nm, and (iii) near-contact with
the wall having large repulsion at X0(3) = 4.85 nm.

When the particle is at the free-energy
minimum, the counterions
in the condensed layer typically form transient ringlike structures
near the surface of the nanoparticle, as shown in Figure 10. These counterions appear
to serve double duty in the condensed layer by screening both the
nanoparticle charge and the effective wall charge. This double duty
appears to be the source of the resulting free-energy gain. When the
nanoparticle is positioned at an even closer distance to the wall,
it penetrates into the condensed counterion layer. This excludes counterions,
which results in a significant pressure on the nanoparticle surface,
resulting in a strong free-energy penalty. It is important to remark
that the effective electric field from the walls cancel so that all
interactions beyond the steric distance are mediated by the ions.

3.3 Ion–Ion Correlations: BD Simulations
To further investigate the ion correlations in the system, we distinguish
between two cases. The first case concerns those ion correlations
that occur in the condensed layer near to the channel wall. The second
case concerns the ion correlations that occur near the channel center.
As a matter of convention, we refer to the ions near the channel wall
as “wall” correlations and those near the center as
being “bulk” correlations, as in Figures 11 and 12. We characterize
the correlations by calculating a radial distribution function (RDF) g(r) in two-dimensional for ions sampled
within the condensed layer near the wall (d <
1 nm) and an (RDF) g(r) in 3D for
ions sampled in the bulk near the channel center (d > 1 nm); for more details see Section S.4. Here, d refers to the closest distance of the ion
to the channel wall, in contrast, here, to the distance r measured from the reference ion in the RDF.

Figure 11 Radial distribution
functions g(r) for ion–ion
correlations in the bulk from the BD simulations.

Figure 12 Radial distribution functions g(r) for ion–ion correlations near the wall from the BD simulations.

The RDFs g(r) are normalized
by the reference number concentration given by taking the count of
all counterions or coions and dividing by the channel volume. Throughout
our simulations, reference values are determined from the channel
volume V = 1944 nm3 and from the reference
number concentrations ĝ– = 250/1944 × Cm nm–3 and ĝ+ = 150/1944 × Cm nm–3. We remark that since
the density of ions can be large near the walls, the g(r) can exhibit long-range normalized bulk values
that are significantly less than 1.0 and normalized wall values that
are in excess of 1.0.

The RDFs in the bulk are shown in Figure 11. In the bulk,
the counterion–counterion g(r) shows a correlation hole, with the
counterions not likely to be close together. The counterion–coion
interactions show strong correlations that indicate a counterion has
a cluster of coions in its proximity at a distance roughly twice the
steric distance. The coion–coion g(r)’s exhibit a small feature around r = 0.5, which appears to be related to ionic clusters that form with
multiple coions associated to a common counterion. Since we have divalent
counterions, it makes sense that there should roughly be two coions
associated with each counterion. These results indicate that on average,
the bulk electrolyte consists of triples of ions with one counterion
and two coions but not larger ion clusters.

Near to the wall,
the RDF g(r) exhibits features indicating
much stronger correlations than those
in the bulk. Although the counterion–coion correlations are
similar to those in the bulk, the counterion–counterion g(r) has a significant peak at small r. This is from the large density associated with the condensed
counterion layer near the wall. As the charge increases, there is
a transition around Cm ≥ 4 from
a correlated gaslike state to a state with significant correlations
that are more liquidlike.62 The peak that
develops moves closer toward the steric length scale of the ions with
peaks around 0.5 nm. The coion–coion correlations near the
wall exhibit a peak for all of the regimes considered. From examining
simulation trajectories, we find this arises from the strong correlations
of the coions with the counterions and from bulk coions that transiently
move to penetrate the strongly positively charged condensed layer.
The coion–coion peak occurs independent of concentration around
a similar length scale at 0.5 nm as the final counterion–counterion
peaks for large concentration. These results show that there are some
significant differences in ion–ion correlations when near the
wall relative to the bulk.

3.4 Results from Classical
Density Functional
Theory (cDFT) and the Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) Theory
The classical density functional theory (cDFT) and Poisson–Boltzmann
(PB) theory provide other approaches for investigating phenomena in
electrolytes and charged systems that are expected to be more computationally
efficient than BD simulations. However, in cDFT and PB, further approximations
are incurred in modeling the underlying physics of the charged system.
We expect that cDFT could provide a decent basis for describing the
nanochannel system given the inclusion of terms accounting for charge
correlations and ion sterics. The steric and correlation effects can
be seen in the ionic layering and clustered interactions in the simulation
results, particularly in Figures 1 and 4. To further emphasize
the importance of these effects, we include in our comparisons the
mean-field Poisson–Boltzmann (PB) theory, which we expect to
be qualitatively incorrect in the strongly charged regime. These results
further demonstrate the importance of ion correlation effects and
sterics to obtain correct phenomenology even at a qualitative level.

We compare the ion densities near the channel walls as calculated
from cDFT with the simulation density profiles in Figure 13. We find that cDFT predicts
trends qualitatively similar to the simulations but with some significant
quantitative differences. At smaller values of Cm, the profiles exhibit monotonic behavior. As observed in
the BD simulation results, at larger values of Cm, the cDFT counterion densities exhibit a distinct peak (condensed
layer) followed by a depleted region before attaining the bulk counterion
concentration; see Figure 13. The cDFT coion distributions exhibit a similar trend as
in the BD results with a distinct peak occurring at the location of
the depleted counterion region before attaining the bulk concentration;
see Figure 13. The
depletion after the first layer of counterions is not seen for ion
densities calculated using the Poisson–Boltzmann equation nor
for cDFT calculations with only mean-field electrostatics (i.e., without
the correlation term Fcorr). Instead,
in the absence of ion correlations, the counterions exhibit a single
peak near the wall that decays monotonically to the bulk whereas the
coion density profiles simply increase monotonically from the wall
to their bulk concentration, with no peak.

Figure 13 Left: comparison of
the counterion densities for the cDFT (dashed
curves) and BD simulations (solid curves) as a function of distance r from the channel wall, for wall charge densities from
the σ = −6 column of Table 2. Right: comparison of the coion densities
for the cDFT (dashed curves) and BD simulations (solid curves) as
a function of distance r from the channel wall, for
wall charge densities from the σ = −6 column of Table 2. We remark that in
contrast to BD and cDFT, the mean-field PB theory would exhibit a
monotonically varying density near the walls without such counterion
depletion or coion enriched regions.

Thus, the cDFT charge correlation terms capture the charge
density
qualitatively as the ionic concentration is varied but as the system
becomes more strongly charged, there are some significant quantitative
deviations with the simulation results. Compared to the BD simulations,
at smaller Cm, the cDFT underestimates
the magnitude of the coion peak but is in fairly good agreement with
the long-range behavior of the counterion density profiles. At larger
values, Cm > 6, the cDFT overestimates
the magnitude of the coion peak and also overestimates the amount
of depletion in the counterion density. For all concentrations and
wall charge densities, the cDFT overestimates the counterion contact
density at the charged wall as compared with the BD simulations (not
shown).

Similar behavior is seen for the ion concentrations
around the
nanoparticle, as shown in Figure 14 for σ = −3. The cDFT underestimates the
magnitude of the coion peak, especially for Cm = 4, and again overestimates the magnitude of the counterion
contact density (not shown).

Figure 14 Left: comparison of the counterion densities
for the cDFT (dashed
curves) and BD simulations (solid curves) as a function of distance r from nanoparticle, for σ = −3. Right: Comparison
of the coion densities for the cDFT (dashed curves) and BD simulations
(solid curves) as a function of distance r from the
nanoparticle, for σ = −3.

We note that we are using the simplest form of the charge
correlation
term in the cDFT, namely, the mean-spherical approximation (MSA) expression
for the direct correlation function c(r), evaluated at the bulk density of the ions (i.e., the densities
in the middle of the channel). In our previous study of the interactions
between charged nanoparticles in electrolyte, we found good agreement
between cDFT and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations in the density
profiles.50 However, for our cDFT approach
and for regimes comparable to our current studies, discrepancies have
been previously observed with simulations having large ion concentrations
and in regions near to highly charged walls in the work of Oleksy
and Hansen.51 Oleksy and Hansen compared
cDFT to Monte Carlo simulations for a 1:1 electrolyte at 1 M concentration
near a charged wall with reduced charge density σ* = 0.42.51 They also included a hard-sphere solvent and
found differences in the ion density profiles of magnitude similar
to those found in our work. Improvements to the charge correlation
term, such as using the local weighted density in the calculation
of c(r), leads to excellent agreement
between cDFT and, e.g., molecular dynamics (MD) simulations near highly
charged surfaces.63 The RFD functional
of Gillespie and co-workers,60 which uses
a local weighted density in c(r),
has been shown to give good agreement with simulation results and
experiment in a variety of studies.60,64 Thus, in strongly
charged regimes, a more sophisticated approach beyond the simple bulk
MSA treatment is needed to capture ion correlations if quantitative
accuracy is sought near surfaces. In this paper, our main focus was
to gain further insight into the qualitative role of charge correlations
so the more simple cDFT treatment is adequate. We also note that to
our knowledge, more sophisticated treatments of charge correlations
have not yet been implemented in a cDFT code that can also do 3D calculations
in the geometry we study here.

Next, we consider the free energy
for the nanoparticle as a function
of position in the nanochannel. For systems with large ionic concentrations
and high charge density on the particle, the cDFT becomes computationally
difficult to converge given the localized structures that develop
within the density fields. In Figure 15, we compare cDFT to the simulation results only for
σ = −3 and Cm = 1.0 and 2.0,
values which are accessible with the cDFT computational methods. We
see that cDFT captures the trends on a qualitative level compared
to the simulation results. In particular, for sufficiently high charge,
the cDFT also predicts the development of a free-energy minimum for
the nanoparticle near the wall. In contrast, both the PB theory, which
neglects sterics and correlations, and also mean-field cDFT with no
charge correlations are found to predict a purely repulsive interaction
energy between the nanoparticle and wall. Figure 16 shows cDFT results for differing charge
densities on the nanoparticle, all at Cm = 2.0. As the charge on the particle increases, the depth of the
minimum in the free energy increases, as also found (for higher particle
charges) by the BD simulations. In some cases, the cDFT also predicts
a small barrier in the free energy between the minimum and the center
of the channel but with cDFT, we cannot access the high ion concentration
regimes where this barrier is as large as that in the BD simulations.

Figure 15 Comparison
of the free energy as a function of particle position
in the nanochannel for cDFT, mean-field cDFT, and PB theory with the
BD simulations.

Figure 16 Free energy of the nanoparticle
as a function of position from
cDFT as the particle charge σ is varied.

The difficulty in converging the cDFT calculations was surprising,
but the systems studied here have higher ion concentrations and surface
charge densities than most previous cDFT studies. In particular, our
previous investigation of the interactions between like-charged nanoparticles
had maximum ion concentrations of about 220 mM, which is close to
the smallest ion concentration in the current study.50 Decreasing the strength of the electrostatic interactions
slightly in the cDFT, by increasing the reduced temperature from T* = 0.33 to 0.43 (where T* = d/lB), enabled convergence of systems
with higher ion concentration (e.g., the σ = −3, Cm = 4 system). This change corresponds to increasing
the ion diameter from 0.232 to 3.0 nm. However, further increases
would be needed in T* to get convergence at the higher
ion concentrations so we did not pursue those calculations.

Although cDFT agrees qualitatively with the simulation results,
there are some significant quantitative discrepancies. The location
of the free-energy minimum in the cDFT is significantly closer to
the nanochannel wall than the location of that in the BD simulations.
This is likely due to the somewhat more narrow ion layers in the cDFT.
We also find cDFT predicts a depth for the free-energy well that is
significantly smaller than that observed in the simulation results;
see Figures 15 and 16. Nevertheless, it is clear from these results
that the attractive well results from ion charge correlations.

4 Discussion
In the regimes studied, the ions tend to
form clusters in the bulk
electrolyte and a compact condensed layer near the channel walls.
The interplay between the ionic layers associated with the nanoparticle
and the wall can result in a significant attraction between the like-charged
nanoparticle and wall. As discussed in Section 3.1, this occurs at a distance comparable
to the thickness of the condensed counterion layer. As can be seen
in Figures 3 and 7, there is a secondary layer of negative coions
just beyond the counterion layer. At the distance of the free-energy
minimum, the negatively charged nanoparticle joins the secondary layer
of negative coions. From our comparisons between the BD simulations
and cDFT calculations, we found the attraction to be a consequence
of the ion–ion correlations. In contrast, the mean-field theories,
either PB or mean-field cDFT, that neglect these correlations predict
a purely repulsive interaction between the nanoparticle and wall.

The free energy of the nanoparticle location also exhibits an energy
barrier. For the case of the strongly charged nanoparticle and ion
concentrations (σ = −6 and Cm = 8), there is a significant condensed counterion layer on the particle
surface. As the nanoparticle approaches the wall, the condensed layer
of the nanoparticle merges with the condensed wall layer. These rearrangements
in some charge regimes result in the free-energy barriers, as observed
in Figure 9. This effect
appears to occur only for intermediate ion concentrations of Cm = 6 and 8, for σ = −3 and −6,
and disappears when the ion concentration becomes sufficiently large.
The significant rearrangements that occur as the ion approaches the
wall indicate a strong role played by the ion–ion correlations
and discrete structures in determining the free energy of the wall–particle
interactions.

It is interesting to consider further the differences
between multivalent
and monovalent systems. We performed two additional sets of simulations
of monovalent systems with 1:1 electrolytes; further details and results
are in Section S.3. In the first set of
simulations, we keep the number density of the monovalent ions the
same as that in the multivalent system. Although this case results
in a different charge density, it retains the same entropic contributions
in the free energy. In the second, we keep the charge density of the
system the same but double the number of counterions, which increases
the number of charge carriers and the entropic contributions in the
free energy. In both cases, we find that the 1:1 electrolyte no longer
results in a significant free-energy minimum. In the more strongly
charged systems with more charge carriers, the free-energy minimum
is further suppressed than in the case of the less charged system
that shows a very small (relative to kBT) and wide region of lower free energy; see Figures 9 and S1. This indicates that the multivalent system
may benefit significantly from having fewer charge carriers, which
reduces the entropic penalties associated with condensation of charge
on the walls and strong correlations at the nanoparticle surface.
There is also more of an energy gain or less entropic loss when sharing
a screening charge in common. It can also be seen in the monovalent
systems that the electrolyte is more diffused, without the presence
of transient ion clusters as in the multivalent system. The simulation
results indicate that it is the asymmetry between the ion charges
and the reduced entropic penality for forming discrete structures
that is responsible for the rich phenomena seen in multivalent electrolytes
and charged systems. It would also be of interest to explore how changing
the channel width might affect double-layer structures and nanoparticle–wall
interactions, especially in regimes where the two channel walls have
double layers that strongly overlap.

Thus, the simulation results
show that both the ion correlations
and the resulting discrete ion configurations play important roles
in determining the free energy of the system. In the BD simulations,
strong electrostatic interactions and multivalent ions can result
in the formation of discrete clusters and the interactions can be
mediated at the level of individual ions and their arrangements, as
seen in Figures 1, 4, and 10. This is expected
to pose significant challenges in formulating constitutive equations
for continuum descriptions of the system and in making quantitative
predictions. The radial distribution functions we report for the counterions
and coions for the bulk and near the wall may be helpful toward that
aim; see Figures 11 and 12. The significant quantitative differences
between the cDFT and the simulation results arise from the correlation
terms in the cDFT functional that are based on the mean-spherical
approximation (MSA) for bulk electrolytes. It would be of interest
in future work to examine whether the RFD functional,60 which is still based on the MSA direct correlation function
but for the local (inhomogeneous) rather than bulk density, would
be sufficient to match the present simulation results, or whether
improved expressions for the direct correlation function, such as
from the new DH-extended MSA (DHEMSA) closure of Olvera de la Cruz
and co-workers,65 would give better agreement.
However, it may also be the case that for nanosystems with finite
numbers of ions, finite ion numbers lead to effects that cannot be
captured by density functional theories that by construction only
include the average ion density.

5 Conclusions
We have investigated the behavior of a charged nanoparticle confined
in a nanochannel. We have found for multivalent 2:1 electrolytes that
strong ion–ion correlations can develop that give interesting
free-energy profiles for the nanoparticle position within the channel.
We found that the free-energy profile can exhibit minima giving a
preferred location for the nanoparticle near the channel center and
near to but separated from the channel wall. We found in some of the
charge regimes, the minima can be separated by significant energy
barriers. This is the result of overcharging of the double layer that
forms near the nanoparticle surface, as seen in Figure 8. Comparisons between our BD simulations
and cDFT and PB theory indicate the strong role played by ion–ion
correlations. As may be expected from a mean-field theory, the PB
theory was found to be inadequate in capturing even qualitative features
of the simulation results. The cDFT approach is found to capture at
a qualitative level the main trends seen in the simulation results
both for the ionic densities and for the free-energy profile as the
charge of the system is varied. However, the cDFT results have quantitative
discrepancies with the simulation results, in both the ionic layer
densities near the walls and in the depth of the free-energy well.
This appears to arise from the MSA approach used for the charge correlation
term, which is based on hard-sphere models of unconfined bulk electrolytes.
Our simulations indicate that near surfaces, the ions can form interesting
ionic structures, such as clusters or discrete layers differring significantly
from bulk behaviors. To obtain more quantitative accuracy, such effects
would have to be captured likely requiring further development of
correlation terms for cDFT. Overall, the cDFT did make predictions
in qualitative agreement with most of the BD simulation results.

The results, we report, could have implications for many phenomena
within nanochannels and more broadly, nanodevices that rely upon electrical
effects. For instance, in the case of capillary electrophoresis, the
free-energy profile indicates that nanoparticles within the device
may hop between positions close to the nanochannel wall and close
to the channel center. Given the expected differences in particle
mobilities in these locations, this could significantly affect arrival
time observations. More generally, our results show that discrete
ion–ion interactions may play a dominant role in nanodevices
requiring more sophisticated theory than that provided by traditional
mean-field approaches, such as the widely used Poisson–Boltzmann
theory. Discrete ion effects could also lead to interesting depletion
forces66,67 between interacting nanoparticles or possibly
in some regimes make contributions to the nanoparticle–wall
interactions. The methods we have introduced here may be useful in
performing further investigations of related depletion phenomena recently
discussed in refs (68, 69). Toward the broader aim of developing better correlation terms for
cDFT for charged systems, our bulk and wall radial distribution results
may also be useful. Many of our results are expected to be useful
in gaining insights into other charged systems such as biological
macromolecules where similar discrete ion interactions and collective
effects may be relevant.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01393.Analysis of electrostatics
in channels; description
of the classical DFT formulation; discussion of monovalent ion correlations;
ion–ion correlation analysis methods (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01393_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
P.J.A. and I.S.S. acknowledge support from research
grant NSF CAREER DMS-0956210, NSF DMS—1616353, W. M. Keck Foundation,
and DOE ASCR CM4 DE-SC0009254. We also acknowledge the UCSB Center
for Scientific Computing NSF MRSEC (DMR-1121053) and UCSB MRL NSF
CNS-0960316. The authors also thank Kai Sikorski for discussions and
work for developing codes for LAMMPS. This work is supported by the
Applied Mathematics Program within the Department of Energy (DOE)
Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR) as part of
the Collaboratory on Mathematics for Mesoscopic Modeling of Materials
(CM4). This work was performed, in part, at the Center for Integrated
Nanotechnologies, an Office of Science User Facility operated for
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science. Sandia National
Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by
National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC., a wholly
owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc. for the U.S. Department
of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under
contract DE-NA0003525. This paper describes objective technical results
and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed
in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department
of Energy or the United States Government.
==== Refs
References
Squires T. M. ; Quake S. R. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 
2005 , 77 , 977 10.1103/RevModPhys.77.977 .
Kirby B. J.  Micro- and Nanoscale
Fluid Mechanics: Transport in Microfluidic Devices ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 2010 .
Bazant M. Z.  Induced-Charge Electrokinetic Phenomena . In Electrokinetics and Electrohydrodynamics in Microsystems ; Ramos A.  , Ed.; CISM
Courses and Lectures ; Springer : Vienna , 2011 ; Vol. 530 , pp 221 –297 .
Derjaguin B. ; Landau L. 
Acta Physicochim. URSS 
1941 , 14 , 633 –662 . 10.1016/0079-6816(93)90013-L .
Verwey E. J. W. ; Overbeek J. T. G.  Theory of the Stability
of Lyophobic Colloids ; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 1948 .
Hansen J. P. ; Lowen H. 
Annu.
Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2000 , 51 , 209 –242 . 10.1146/annurev.physchem.51.1.209 .11031281 
Pennathur S. ; Santiago J. G.  Fluids Engineering
Conference, ASME 2004 International Mechanical Engineering Congress
and Exposition , 2004 ; pp 191 –196 .
Zänker H. ; Schierz A. 
Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 5 , 107 –132 . 10.1146/annurev-anchem-062011-143130 .
Kirby B. J. ; Hasselbrink E. F. 
Electrophoresis 
2004 , 25 , 187 –202 . 10.1002/elps.200305754 .14743473 
Baker N. A. ; Sept D. ; Joseph S. ; Holst M. J. ; McCammon J. A. 
Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 
2001 , 98 , 10037 –10041 . 10.1073/pnas.181342398 .11517324 
Sun H. ; Wen J. ; Zhao Y. ; Li B. ; McCammon J. A. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 143 , 24311010.1063/1.4932336 .26723595 
McCammon J. A. ; Harvey S. C.  Dynamics of Proteins
and Nucleic Acids ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 1987 .
Baldessari F. 
J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2008 , 325 , 526 –538 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2008.06.007 .18639883 
Das S. ; Chakraborty S.  Implications of
Interactions between Steric Effects and Electrical Double Layer Overlapping Phenomena
on Electro-Chemical Transport in Narrow Fluidic Confinements . 2010 , arXiv:1010.5731. arXiv.org e-Print archive.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1010.5731 (accessed Oct 27, 2010).
Guo L. ; Chen S. ; Robbins M. O. 
Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top. 
2016 , 225 , 1551 –1582 . 10.1140/epjst/e2016-60146-3 .
Pegado L. ; Jönsson B. ; Wennerström H. 
J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2008 , 20 , 49423510.1088/0953-8984/20/49/494235 .
Larsen A. E. ; Grier D. G. 
Nature 
1997 , 385 , 230 –233 . 10.1038/385230a0 .
Moreira A. G. ; Netz R. R. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2001 , 87 , 07830110.1103/PhysRevLett.87.078301 .11497925 
Kanduč M. ; Naji A. ; Jho Y. S. ; Pincus P. A. ; Podgornik R. 
J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 
2009 , 21 , 42410310.1088/0953-8984/21/42/424103 .21715838 
Kjellander R. ; Marcělja S. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1984 , 112 , 49 –53 . 10.1016/0009-2614(84)87039-6 .
Lau A. W. C. ; Lukatsky D. B. ; Pincus P. ; Safran S. A. 
Phys. Rev. E 
2002 , 65 , 05150210.1103/PhysRevE.65.051502 .
Sader J. E. ; Chan D. Y. 
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1999 , 213 , 268 –269 . 10.1006/jcis.1999.6131 .10191031 
Koltover I. ; Wagner K. ; Safinya C. R. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
2000 , 97 , 14046 –14051 . 10.1073/pnas.97.26.14046 .11121015 
Stevens M. J. 
Biophys. J. 
2001 , 80 , 130 –139 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(01)76000-6 .11159388 
Schiessel H. ; Pincus P. 
Macromolecules 
1998 , 31 , 7953 –7959 . 10.1021/ma980823x .
Kuron M. ; Arnold A. 
Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys. 
2015 , 38 , 20 10.1140/epje/i2015-15020-9 .
Bloomfield V. A. 
Biopolymers 
1991 , 31 , 1471 –1481 . 10.1002/bip.360311305 .1814499 
Nagornyak E. ; Yoo H. ; Pollack G. H. 
Soft Matter 
2009 , 5 , 3850 –3857 . 10.1039/b905080a .
Tagliazucchi M. ; Szleifer I. 
Mater. Today 
2015 , 18 , 131 –142 . 10.1016/j.mattod.2014.10.020 .
Mojarad N. ; Krishnan M. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012 , 7 , 448 10.1038/nnano.2012.99 .22728340 
Gillespie D. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 4302 –4309 . 10.1021/jp9121276 .20210321 
Wan Q.-H. 
Anal. Chem. 
1997 , 69 , 361 –363 . 10.1021/ac960478e .21639188 
Liu Y.-W. ; Pennathur S. ; Meinhart C. D. 
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2016 , 461 , 32 –38 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2015.08.039 .26397906 
Liu Y.-W. ; Pennathur S. ; Meinhart C. D. 
Phys. Fluids 
2014 , 26 , 11200210.1063/1.4901330 .
Torrie G. ; Valleau J. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1979 , 65 , 343 –346 . 10.1016/0009-2614(79)87078-5 .
Valleau J. P. ; Cohen L. K. ; Card D. N. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1980 , 72 , 5942 –5954 . 10.1063/1.439093 .
Valleau J. P. ; Cohen L. K. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1980 , 72 , 5935 –5941 . 10.1063/1.439092 .
Weeks J. D. ; Chandler D. ; Andersen H. C. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1971 , 54 , 5237 –5247 . 10.1063/1.1674820 .
Griffiths D. J.  Introduction to Electrodynamics , 3 rd ed.; Prentice Hall : Upper Saddle River, New Jersey , 1999 .
Hockney R. W. ; Eastwood J. W.  Computer Simulation
Using Particles ; Taylor & Francis Group : New York , 1988 .
Pollock E. ; Glosli J. 
Comput. Phys. Commun. 
1996 , 95 , 93 –110 . 10.1016/0010-4655(96)00043-4 .
Plimpton S. 
J. Comput. Phys. 
1995 , 117 , 1 –19 . 10.1006/jcph.1995.1039 .
Yeh I.-C. ; Berkowitz M. L. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1999 , 111 , 3155 –3162 . 10.1063/1.479595 .
Ballenegger V. ; Arnold A. ; Cerdà J. J. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 131 , 09410710.1063/1.3216473 .19739849 
Gardiner C. W.  Handbook of Stochastic
Methods , 3 rd ed.; Series in Synergetics ; Springer : Berlin , 1985 .
Wang Y. ; Sigurdsson J. ; Atzberger P. 
SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 
2016 , 38 , S62 –S77 . 10.1137/15M1026390 .
Moreira A. G. ; Netz R. R. 
Europhys. Lett. 
2000 , 52 , 705 10.1209/epl/i2000-00495-1 .
Allahyarov E. ; D’Amico I. ; Lowen H. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1998 , 81 , 1334 –1337 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.81.1334 .
Grønbech-Jensen N. ; Beardmore K. M. ; Pincus P. 
Phys. A 
1998 , 261 , 74 –81 . 10.1016/S0378-4371(98)00369-0 .
Salerno K. M. ; Frischknecht A. L. ; Stevens M. J. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2016 , 120 , 5927 –5937 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b01392 .27057763 
Oleksy A. ; Hansen J.-P. 
Mol. Phys. 
2006 , 104 , 2871 –2883 . 10.1080/00268970600864491 .
Henderson D. ; Lamperski S. ; Jin Z. ; Wu J. Z. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 
2011 , 115 , 12911 –12914 . 10.1021/jp2078105 .21970815 
Gelfand I. M. ; Fomin S. V.  Calculus of Variations ; Dover : NY , 2000 .
Evans R. 
Adv. Phys. 
1979 , 28 , 143 –200 . 10.1080/00018737900101365 .
Frink L. J. D. ; Salinger A. G. ; Sears M. P. ; Weinhold J. D. ; Frischknecht A. L. 
J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 
2002 , 14 , 12167 10.1088/0953-8984/14/46/320 .
Heroux M. A. ; Salinger A. G. ; Frink L. J. D. 
SIAM J. Sci.
Comput. 
2007 , 29 , 2059 –2077 . 10.1137/060661594 .
Muller R. P. ; Cygan R. T. ; Deng J. ; Frischknecht A. L. ; Hewson J. C. ; Kanouff M. P. ; Larson R. ; Moffat H. K. ; Tenney C. M. ; Schultz P. A. ; Wagner G. J.  Modeling
Thermal Abuse in Transportation
Batteries ; Technical Report No.
SAND2012-7816; Sandia National Laboratories : Albuquerque , 2012 .
Frink L. J. D. ; Frischknecht A. L. ; Heroux M. A. ; Parks M. L. ; Salinger A. G. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 1393 –1408 . 10.1021/ct200707b .26596753 
Boda D. ; Fawcett W. ; Henderson D. ; Sokolowski S. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2002 , 116 , 7170 –7176 . 10.1063/1.1464826 .
Gillespie D. ; Valiskó M. ; Boda D. 
J.
Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2005 , 17 , 6609 10.1088/0953-8984/17/42/002 .
Yu Y. X. ; Wu J. Z. ; Gao G. H. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 120 , 7223 –7233 . 10.1063/1.1676121 .15267630 
Chandler D.  Introduction to Modern
Statistical Mechanics ; Oxford : New York , 1987 .
Lee J. W. ; Nilson R. H. ; Templeton J. A. ; Griffiths S. K. ; Kung A. ; Wong B. M. 
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 2012 –2022 . 10.1021/ct3001156 .23316120 
Gillespie D. ; Khair A. S. ; Bardhan J. P. ; Pennathur S. 
J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2011 , 359 , 520 –529 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2011.03.088 .21531429 
Zwanikken J. W. ; Jha P. K. ; de la
Cruz M. O. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 135 , 06410610.1063/1.3624809 .21842925 
Asakura S. ; Oosawa F. 
J. Polym. Sci. 
1958 , 33 , 183 –192 . 10.1002/pol.1958.1203312618 .
Asakura S. ; Oosawa F. 
J. Chem. Phys. 
1954 , 22 , 1255 –1256 . 10.1063/1.1740347 .
Moazzami-Gudarzi M. ; Maroni P. ; Borkovec M. ; Trefalt G. 
Soft Matter 
2017 , 13 , 3284 –3295 . 10.1039/C7SM00314E .28402373 
Zeng Y. ; Grandner S. ; Oliveira C. L. P. ; Thünemann A. F. ; Paris O. ; Pedersen J. S. ; Klapp S. H. L. ; von
Klitzing R. 
Soft Matter 
2011 , 7 , 10899 –10909 . 10.1039/c1sm05971h .

