
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145954910.1021/acsomega.8b02421ArticleOperando Determination of the Thermal Decomposition of Supported
Ionic Liquids by a Radio-Frequency-Based Method Anke Marie-Luise *†‡Hämmerle Martin ‡Moos Ralf ‡Jess Andreas ††Department of Chemical Engineering and ‡Department of Functional Materials, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstraße 30, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany* E-mail: marie-luise.anke@uni-bayreuth.de.14 02 2019 28 02 2019 4 2 3351 3360 18 09 2018 04 01 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
analysis of the thermal stability of supported ionic liquids (ILs)
is of great interest for their application in catalysis. However,
thermogravimetric (TG) measurements are very time-consuming, destructive,
and cannot be conducted operando. Therefore, a new radio-frequency
(RF)-based method is presented that analyzes the electrical properties
of supported ILs in the microwave range and can detect a possible
IL mass loss caused by evaporation or decomposition. In this study,
the decomposition of supported 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium dimethylphosphate
([BMIM][DMP]) with and without palladium (as an active metal) is investigated
operando during the selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene. In addition
to volatile decomposition products, solid products are formed, which
remain on the carrier. These solid products impair the activity of
the Pd catalyst. Using the RF-based method, a distinction can be made
between “intact” IL and the solid decomposition products
because the electrical properties of both substances differ substantially.
In contrast, the destructive TG analysis only measures the mass loss
by the formation of gaseous decomposition products and thus cannot
distinguish between “intact” IL and the solid decomposition
products of [BMIM][DMP]. In addition, a model of the thermal decomposition
which depicts the measured mass losses well is presented.

document-id-old-9ao8b02421document-id-new-14ao-2018-02421cccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Ionic liquids (ILs)
are pure molten salts1 with a melting point
below 100 °C.2,3 Because they are mostly expensive,
several immobilization methods have been developed in recent years
for their economical use in catalysis,4 for example, the supported IL phase (SILP)-concept and the supported
catalyst with IL layer (SCILL)-concept.5 In the SILP-concept, a homogeneous catalyst is dissolved in an IL
and immobilized on a porous carrier.6 This
facilitates product separation and also prevents mass-transport limitations.6 The SCILL-concept is based on the coating of
a heterogeneous catalyst with an IL.7 This
modifies the chemical and physical properties of the catalyst and
optimizes the product distribution.7 For
example, in the selective hydrogenation of butadiene to butene, the
coating of a Pd catalyst with the IL 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium dimethylphosphate,
in short [BMIM][DMP], leads to an increase in selectivity to the desired
intermediate butene.8,9 Further information on the two
concepts can be found in ref (10).

For the application of supported ionic fluids, an
exact knowledge of the thermal stability (mass loss due to evaporation
and/or decomposition) of the IL layer is important. State of the art
to analyze the stability of supported ILs is thermogravimetry (TG).5,11 However, TG measurements are destructive, ex situ,
and they cannot be carried out under reaction conditions.12 Therefore, in this work, a radio-frequency (RF)-based
method to determine the thermal stability with regard to the decomposition
of the IL is presented. This method has already been successfully
applied to determine the coke loading of heterogeneous catalysts13,14 as well as to measure quantitatively the ammonia sorption of SCR
catalysts.15,16 Sulfur poisoning of Ni catalysts
has been qualitatively determined as well.17 In a previous study, the evaporation rate of supported [EMIM][NTf2] could be determined using the RF-based method.18,19 In all of these applications, the electrical parameters such as
the complex permittivity of the catalyst itself are analyzed. On the
basis of the results, conclusions can be drawn about the state of
the IL-coated catalyst.

The central part of the measurement
setup is a cavity resonator. The sample (e.g., catalyst or supported
IL) is introduced into the central axis of the cavity resonator, and
an electromagnetic field is excited in the resonator. Changes in the
electrical properties of the material under test affect the electromagnetic
field. For example, a decrease of the IL pore filling degree α,
which is the ratio of the IL volume VIL and the pore volume of the uncoated carrier Vpore,0 (eq 1),
reduces the dielectric and resistive losses (imaginary part of the
complex permittivity) of the sample and changes the field distribution
of the E-field.19 1  

In this work, this technique is applied
to measure the decomposition of supported ILs. The experiments are
conducted operando during the hydrogenation of butadiene to butene.
The IL [BMIM][DMP] is chosen for this purpose. This IL has a relatively
low decomposition temperature of 137 °C (1% mass loss per month),20 and its influence on the selectivity and activity
of a Pd catalyst has already been investigated by Mangartz et al.9 Even a thin IL layer yields a butene selectivity
of 100%.20 However, the activity of the
catalyst is affected by the IL layer, i.e., the rate of butadiene
hydrogenation decreases with increasing pore filling degree.20 Furthermore, the vapor pressure of [DMIM][DMP],
a structurally very similar IL, is only 0.2 mPa at 137 °C.20 Therefore, it is expected that mass loss by
evaporation is also negligible for [BMIM][DMP] at this temperature.
This matter [BMIM][DMP] is the ideal IL for operando analysis of the
thermal decomposition only and of the respective influence on the
activity and selectivity of a SCILL-catalyst.

Results and Discussion
RF Measurements
of Supported [BMIM][DMP] with and without Palladium
Figure 1 shows (a) the real
part of the complex permittivity ε′ and (b) the losses
ε″ as they depend on the pore filling degree α
for supported [BMIM][DMP] with and without palladium.
The real part of the permittivity is influenced neither by the degree
of pore filling nor by the low palladium content. The losses, on the
other hand, increase linearly with the pore filling degree α.
Because of the low Pd content, the electrical signal ε″
is not influenced by the active component palladium. The relationship
in Figure 1 for 20
°C can be approximated by eq 2. 2  

Figure 1 Real part of the complex permittivity ε′
(a) and losses ε″ (b) at 20 °C with (filled symbols)
and without palladium (open symbols) as they depend on the pore filling
degree α.

The losses ε″
of the pure carrier material at 20 °C are only 0.05. Because
of its ionic character, the IL exhibits significantly higher losses.
For this reason, losses increase strongly with increasing IL content.

Analysis of the Thermal Decomposition of the IL by Thermogravimetric
Investigation
The thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP]
was further investigated in a thermobalance at temperatures of even
up to 400 °C. Figure 2 shows the result of a transient TG analysis in nitrogen atmosphere
(normalized mass loss in Figure 2a and derivative in Figure 2b).

Figure 2 TG analysis of the thermal decomposition of
supported [BMIM][DMP], (a) normalized IL mass loss and (b) its derivative;
heating rate = 0.5 K min–1, 300 mL min–1 nitrogen. Only individual measuring points instead of a curve were
used to create a better distinction to the simulated results (e.g., Figure 8). For a better representation,
a different number of measuring points have been entered in both diagrams.

Most of the mass loss occurs between
200 and 350 °C. Two different processes can be distinguished
(see Figure 2b).

The first process at θ < 250 °C is attributed to the
decomposition of IL [BMIM][DMP]. It is assumed that besides gaseous
also liquid or solid products are formed. They remain on the surface.
Because there are only one or a few molecule layers on the carrier,
a distinction between liquid and solid states is difficult. In the
following, the term solid products are used, although it could be
a liquid product, as well. These solid products decompose at higher
temperatures (θ > 250 °C) causing the second maxima
in Figure 2b (at around
320 °C).

A contribution of evaporation (instead of thermal
decomposition) to the mass loss is negligible, as an additional TG
measurement with helium as the carrier gas proves (see the Supporting Information). Because of different
diffusion coefficients of the IL in helium and nitrogen, one would
expect a different mass loss rate if the evaporation is rate limiting
or at least contributes to the overall mass loss; however, that was
not the case.5

RF-Based Analysis of the
Thermal Decomposition of the Supported IL without Pd
Figure 3 depicts the course
of ε′ (Figure 3a) and the losses ε″ (Figure 3b) during the decomposition experiment of
the supported [BMIM][DMP] (without palladium) at 175 °C. Although
ε′ does not change significantly, ε″ decreases
with increasing decomposition time t, but the decrease
gets smaller with time.

Figure 3 Course of the real part of the complex permittivity
ε′ (a) and the losses ε″ (b, measured at
20 °C) during the thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP]
(0 wt % Pd) at 175 °C.

From the measured values of the losses ε″ during
the thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP] (Figure 1), the apparent pore filling
degree αapp,RF can be calculated using eq 2. In this context, the term apparent
degree of pore filling is introduced because it is not known to what
extent solid decomposition products are formed and whether they also
contribute to the measured losses ε″. The constant permittivity
during the test indicates that the IL does not decompose exclusively
into gaseous products. According to eq 8, the permittivity is also dependent on the sample
volume. Therefore, a significant decrease of the sample volume would
also cause a change of the permittivity. The effects of the sample
volume on the losses are not as pronounced.

As discussed below,
αapp,RF can be regarded as a good measure for the
residual pore filling degree with intact IL. Figure 4 shows the apparent pore filling degree αapp,RF determined by the RF-based technique (triangles) during
the decomposition experiment. In addition, the “real”
pore filling degree αTG as it is calculated on the
basis of the mass loss measured in a thermobalance (squares) is shown.
Up to a decomposition time of 10 h, the values of the RF measurements
correspond with the results of the TG analysis. After that, the pore
filling degree αTG, calculated from the mass loss
in a thermobalance, decreases only slightly. After 60 h, a pore filling
degree of 20% can still be determined with the TG, whereas the apparent
degree of pore filling is continuously decreasing to 0% using the
RF-based method. The large difference between the pore filling degrees
at t = 60 h determined by TG and RF measurement indicates
the formation of solid decomposition products. These decomposition
products may remain on the porous carrier during the decomposition
of [BMIM][DMP].

Figure 4 Pore filling degree during the thermal decomposition of
supported [BMIM][DMP] at 175 °C, measured every 5 h at 20 °C
by the RF-based method (αapp,RF) and at selected
times by thermogravimetric measurements (αTG). For
the TG analyses, each run (10, 20, and 60 h) had to be stopped and
the entire sample had to be removed. Accordingly, a total of three
independent runs was carried out, each with an identical, initial
pore filling degree; only during the longest of these runs (60 h),
the RF signal was recorded.

In the thermobalance, the solid decomposition products are
burned away with air by much higher temperatures than the used 175
°C. Thus, by TG, the content of “intact” IL is
overestimated because TG determines the total mass loss and cannot
distinguish between the solid decomposition products and “intact”
IL. On the other hand, the nonvolatile, solid decomposition products
probably do not contribute to the dielectric and resistive losses
and are therefore not covered by the RF method. The latter method
detects the portion of “intact” IL on the carrier.

Simulation of the Thermal Decomposition Supported [BMIM][DMP]
Using the results of the TG analysis and the RF-based method, a model
for the description of thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP]
is presented below. It is assumed that, in addition to gaseous products,
solid degradation products are formed during the IL decomposition.
The formed solid is decomposed into gaseous products at higher temperatures
in a further decomposition step. Figure 5 shows the model schematically.

Figure 5 Schematic representation
of the model of thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP].

The solid decomposition products
are formed with the rate constant k1,
the gaseous products are formed with k2, and the solid products are further decomposed with k3. For all three steps, a first-order reaction (with regard
to the IL and the solid decomposition products, respectively) is assumed.
The determination of the rate of IL decomposition and thus of the
residual mass of “intact” IL mIL is possible by eq 3, and the rate/mass of the solid products msolid,formed is obtained by eq 4.21 Because it
is assumed that a distinction between the “intact” IL
and its solid degradation products is not possible by thermogravimetric
measurements, mTG results from the sum
of mIL and msolid,formed (equation 5). All of
the rate constants depend on the temperature according to eq 6.21 3   4   5   6  ki describes the
decomposition rate constants, EA,i is
the activation energies, k0,i is the pre-exponential
factors, T is the temperature in K, and R is the ideal gas constant. These four equations can be used to describe
the thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP]. The three pre-exponential
factors and the three activation energies must be determined. This
is done by evaluating the three different decomposition experiments,
schematically shown in Figure 6. Using the RF-based method, the mass of the “intact”
IL can be determined over time, whereas the solid decomposition products
are not detected. Therefore, in this case, the decomposition of the
solid degradation products does not have to be taken into account
(k3 = 0) and the sum of k1 and k2 can be determined
for a temperature of 175 °C (Figure 6a).

Figure 6 Schematic representation of the decomposition
tests for modeling the thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP]:
(a) isothermal decomposition test by the RF-based method; (b) isothermal
decomposition test by thermogravimetric analysis; and (c) non-isothermal
decomposition test by thermogravimetric analysis.

In contrast to the RF method, the degradation of solid products
must be considered in thermogravimetric measurements because this
method cannot distinguish between the “intact” IL and
its solid decomposition products (Figure 6b). Thus, it detects the sum of both masses.
The rate constants of all three processes at 175 °C can be determined
using eqs 3–5. In the last step, a non-isothermal thermogravimetric
test (Figure 6c) is
used to determine the pre-exponential factors as well as the activation
energies using eqs 3–6. The results of the isothermal modeling are used
as boundary conditions.

The sample masses measured using TG
analysis (mTG,meas, filled symbols) and
the RF-based method (mRF,meas, unfilled
symbols) are compared in Figure 7 with the modeled values of mIL,mod, msolid,formed,mod, and mTG,mod.

Figure 7 Course of the IL mass during the thermal decomposition
of supported [BMIM][DMP] at 175 °C, measured with the RF-based
method (unfilled squares) and TG analysis (filled squares). In addition,
the modeled values are shown.

The modeled IL mass, as well as the mass of “intact”
IL measured using the RF-based method, decreases over the entire test
time. Here, the simulated course fits nicely with the measured values,
and the sum of k1 and k2 can be determined to 1.2 × 10–5 s–1 (175 °C). Already at the beginning of
the experiment, solid degradation products are produced by the decomposition
of the IL [BMIM][DMP] (see Figure 7). The sum of the masses of the solid products and
of the “intact” IL corresponds to the signal of the
thermobalance (filled symbols, Figure 7). The two isothermal experiments can be well described
by the model; the determined rate constants are found in Table 1.

Table 1 Kinetic Parameters of the Thermal Decomposition of Supported [BMIM][DMP]
at 175 °C
k1 (175 °C)	6.7 × 10–6 s–1	
k2 (175 °C)	4.8 × 10–6 s–1	
k3 (175 °C)	1.7 × 10–7 s–1	
The measured (squares) and modeled (dashed line) courses during a
non-isothermal TG examination are shown in Figure 8. Figure 8a
shows the mass mTG and Figure 8b its derivative dX/dt. The rate constants at 175 °C from the
two isothermal experiments serve as boundary conditions for the modeling.
The course of dX/dt shows two maxima,
indicating two different decomposition processes. This has already
been shown in Figure 2. At temperatures <250 °C, only the direct decomposition
of IL to gaseous products is visible, whereas at higher temperatures,
the already formed solid decomposition products of IL decompose to
gaseous substances. Because TG cannot distinguish between the mass
of “intact” IL and the mass of solid degradation products,
the sum of the masses mIL and msolid,formed is shown in Figure 8. With the help of the model, the measured
values can be well reproduced. A list of the kinetic parameters of
the model is found in Table 2.

Figure 8 Comparison of (a) IL mass and (b) its derivative with respect to
time of a thermogravimetric analysis of supported [BMIM][DMP] (squares)
and simulated values (dashed line), heating rate = 0.5 K min–1, 300 mL min–1 nitrogen. For a better representation,
a different number of measuring points have been entered in both diagrams.

Table 2 Kinetic Parameters
of the Thermal Decomposition of Supported [BMIM][DMP]a
EA,1	78 kJ mol–1	
EA,2	131 kJ mol–1	
EA,3	112 kJ mol–1	
k0,1	9.1 × 103 s–1	
k0,2	9.2 × 109 s–1	
k0,3	1.7 × 106 s–1	
a For the meaning of k0 and EA, refer to eq 6.

Figure 9 gives a closer look
how the masses evolve with temperature according to the model. Solid
degradation products are formed by the decomposition of [BMIM][DMP]
at a temperature above 150 °C. This leads to an increase of msolid,formed,mod up to 250 °C. Therefore,
at temperatures below 200 °C, the mass of the “intact”
IL is decisive. Above 270 °C, no “intact” IL is
present and mTG,mod only represents the
mass of solid degradation products.

Figure 9 Masses of intact IL (mIL,mod) and solid decomposition products (msolid,formed,mod) and their sum (mTG,mod) during a non-isothermal decomposition experiment of
supported [BMIM][DMP] in a thermobalance, as derived by the model.
Heating rate = 0.5 K min–1, 300 mL min–1 nitrogen.

The presented model represents
well the course of mass reduction during the thermal decomposition
of supported [BMIM][DMP] and supports the thesis of the formation
of solid decomposition products. Furthermore, the two isothermal and
the non-isothermal decomposition experiments were used to determine
the kinetic parameters. The second thesis that the RF-based method
only detects the portion of “intact” IL is also confirmed
by the simulation.

Influence of Thermal Decomposition of [BMIM][DMP]
on Activity and Selectivity of the Pd-SCILL-Catalyst
Figure 10 shows both the
influence of the IL coating and (for a given pore filling degree of
20%) of the thermal decomposition (35 h at 175 °C) of the IL
layer on the activity and selectivity of the SCILL-Pd-catalyst. The
butadiene conversion Ubutadiene as a function
of the modified residence time τmod′ is shown in Figure 10a. For all three catalysts,
the butadiene conversion increases with the residence time. However,
at a given modified residence time, the butadiene conversion of the
IL-coated Pd catalyst is significantly lower than that without IL
and the conversion is further drastically reduced by the thermal IL
decomposition. The selectivity to the butenes SΣbutene as a function of the butadiene conversion is
shown in Figure 10b. The two IL-coated catalysts have a selectivity to the butenes
of 100% independent of the butadiene conversion.

Figure 10 Influence of the IL
coating and the thermal decomposition (35 h, 175 °C) of the IL
layer on (a) butadiene conversion (Ubutadiene) over the modified residence time (τmod′) and (b) selectivity to the butenes
(SΣbutene) in dependence of the
butadiene conversion (Ubutadiene), open
squares: Pd catalyst without IL, open triangles: Pd catalyst coated
with IL (α = 20%), and filled triangles Pd catalyst coated with
IL and thermal aged at 175 °C for 35 h; 0.3 wt % Pd, α0 = 20%, θhydrogenation = 50 °C, mcat = 240–900 mg, p =
1 bar, cbutadiene = 0.5%, cH2 = 10%, balance: nitrogen.

Only for the pure Pd catalysts (without IL, open
squares), high butadiene conversions lead to the formation of butane.
No influence of the thermal decomposition of [BMIM][DMP] on the butene
selectivity can be observed. The increase in the butene selectivity
and the decreasing activity of the Pd catalyst by an IL coating agree
with the result of a previous work by Barth.20 She explains this effect by competing adsorption on the palladium
surface. Butadiene binds preferentially compared to the IL [BMIM][DMP],
and butene produced during the reaction is replaced by both substances.
Thus, the IL layer prevents the subsequent hydrogenation of butene
to butane.

Tourillon et al. investigated the adsorption enthalpies
of 1,3-butadiene and 1-butene on various active metals.22 1,3-Butadiene has a higher adsorption enthalpy
on palladium than 1-butene. Thus, butene desorbs from the palladium
surface and cannot adsorb again. Further isomerization of the formed
butenes is therefore suppressed.20 However,
this positive effect of the IL coating on the selectivity is counterbalanced
by the lower activity that is caused by a lower Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
(BET) surface area of the SCILL-catalyst. The BET surface area decreased
from 298 to 186 m2 g–1 after being coated
with IL (α = 20%).

To identify the reason for the lower
activity after thermal decomposition of [BMIM][DMP] on a Pd catalyst,
the course of the apparent pore filling degree during the decomposition
experiment was examined in more detail (see Figure 11). The apparent degree of pore filling was
again determined by the RF-based measurement technique. After completing
the test, the powder sample was examined in a thermobalance and the
mass loss in air was determined. αapp,RF decreases
considerably at the beginning and more slowly with time. After 35
h, the apparent degree of pore filling (and thus the amount of still
intact IL) had dropped from initially 20 to 4%. By means of TG, however,
the degree of pore filling was determined to 14% after thermal decomposition.
As in the decomposition experiment without palladium (Figure 4), the portion of “intact”
IL on the carrier is overestimated by TG because solid decomposition
products are formed in addition to volatile compounds. In contrast,
the solid products are inert to the electrical measurement and do
not contribute to the losses ε″. Thus, the RF-based analysis
records only the portion of “intact” IL on the carrier.

Figure 11 Course
of the apparent pore filling degree αapp,RF (measured
at 20 °C) during the thermal decomposition (at 175 °C) of
[BMIM][DMP] supported on a Pd catalyst (0.3 wt % Pd, α = 20%)
measured using the RF-based measurement technique (triangles). In
addition, after the experiment, the degree of pore filling was determined
in a thermobalance (square).

As shown in Figure 10, the formation of solid decomposition products also affects
the activity of the Pd catalyst. A relative high modified residence
time of 25 kgcat s m–3 is needed to reach
a butadiene conversion with the thermally treated catalyst of 30%,
whereas this conversion is already reached with the fresh, untreated
catalyst at a residence time of about 4 kgcat s m–3. Hence, the activity had dropped by a factor of about 6, which nicely
corresponds to the reduction of the pore filling degree with intact
IL from 20 to 4% (reduction by a factor 5), as measured by the RF
analysis (Figure 10). Therefore, most probably, the solid decomposition products, which
require a space corresponding to a filling degree of about 10% (difference
of αTG and αapp,RF after 35 hours
of treatment in N2 flow at 175 °C, see Figure 10), deactivate the catalyst
to a large extent, but the remaining surface, where intact IL and
hence a remaining part of the SCILL-catalyst are present and active,
still catalyzes the butadiene hydrogenation. This also explains why
the selectivity to the butenes is still 100% (as in the case of the
fresh SCILL-catalyst) (see Figure 10b).

On contrary to the RF-based analysis, TG
provides only limited information about the processes during decomposition
of supported ILs, that is, to what extent solid residues and/or volatile
gaseous products are formed. After a thermal aging of 35 h at 175
°C, the result of the TG analysis indicates only a relative small
change of the IL pore filling degree from 20 to 14%. Accordingly,
neither the selectivity to butenes nor the activity of the Pd catalyst
should change significantly. However, according to Figure 10, this is not the case. On
the other hand, the RF-based method detects nicely the portion of
“intact” IL in a contactless way and operando. After
a decomposition time of 35 h, an apparent pore filling degree of 4%
can be determined and therefore only 20% of the initial IL (α0 = 20%) is still left on the Pd catalyst. As discussed, this
lowers the activity of the catalyst at still constant selectivity
as long as enough “intact” IL is still present on the
catalyst. The solid decomposition products of the IL [BMIM][DMP] seem
to bind on the surface and hinder the adsorption (and reaction) both
of butadiene and butene on the porous surface. NMR measurements support
this hypothesis.

NMR Measurements
NMR spectra were
obtained from both the freshly supported IL [BMIM][DMP] and from a
thermally aged sample (60 h, 175 °C). Figure 12 shows the 1H-liquid-NMR spectrum
of (a) the pure IL [BMIM][DMP], (b) the IL dissolved from the porous
carrier silica with dichloromethane (DCM), and (c) the thermally aged
and subsequently dissolved IL from the porous carrier silica. The
resonance peaks of the pure IL could be matched to the individual
groups of the anion and the cation, respectively23 (see Figure 12a). The spectrum of the IL dissolved from the carrier (Figure 12b) shows no or
hardly any differences to the spectrum of the pure IL. Analysis of
the supported IL using 1H-liquid-NMR spectroscopy is therefore
possible. In contrast, the spectrum of thermally aged IL dissolved
from the carrier (Figure 12c) shows some changes.

Figure 12 1H-liquid-NMR spectrum of
(a) pure IL, (b) IL dissolved from the carrier, and (c) thermally
aged IL dissolved from the carrier, solvent: DMSO-d6.

On the one hand, an
increase in the number of resonance peaks and a further splitting
of the resonance peaks of the methyl/methylene groups 1–3 are
recognizable. On the other hand, resonance peak 6 of the imidazole
ring is shifted to lower δ-values and resonance peak 8 of the
methyl group of the anion decreases in height relative to the other
peaks. These deviations indicate a change in the chemical structure
of the anion and the cation of the coated IL under thermal aging.
In addition, several minor resonance peaks appear in the spectrum.
They may indicate decomposition products, but could not be assigned.
It should be noted that only those compounds that can be dissolved
from the carrier with DCM appear in the spectrum. Any decomposition
product that remains on the carrier is not visible.

To gain
further insight into the chemical nature of the thermally aged IL, 31P-solid state NMR spectra of four different samples were
recorded (Figure 13):(a) [BMIM][DMP] supported on silica

(b) [BMIM][DMP] supported on silica, with the IL partially
leached out from the support with DCM (the IL could not be completely
removed)

(c) [BMIM][DMP]
supported on silica, thermally aged at 175 °C for 60 h

(d) [BMIM][DMP] supported
on silica, thermally aged at 175 °C for 60 h and then partially
leached out from the support with DCM (the IL could not be completely
removed)



Figure 13 31P-solid NMR spectrum of
(a) freshly prepared, supported IL, (b) supported IL after removal
of a portion of the IL from the carrier, (c) thermally aged supported
IL, and (d) thermally aged supported IL after removal of a portion
of the IL.

All four spectra show
a resonance peak at a chemical shift of 2 ppm. This peak can be assigned
to the phosphate of the anion. In addition, a smaller peak at −9
ppm is weakly visible in the spectra of the IL leached out from the
support (Figure 13b) and clearly visible in the spectra of the thermally aged samples
(Figure 13c,d). This
indicates a further phosphate compound that is slightly existing in
the fresh sample but arises by thermal decomposition.

Kohli and Blanchard investigated
POCl3 on silica using 31P-solid state NMR and
observed the formation of two resonance peaks at −0.6 ppm and
−11.8 ppm.24 They assigned the peaks
to phosphor that is bound physically (−0.6 ppm) and chemically
(−11.8 ppm) on the support. This finding could lead to the
interpretation that the resonance peak at −9 ppm in our 31P spectra is caused by a chemically, strongly bound phosphor
compound that is formed during thermal aging.

A phosphor compound
strongly bound to the carrier would not or hardly contribute to electric
losses ε″ because of its strongly reduced mobility.25 This effect might be further increased by a
possible loss of its ionic character during thermal aging. In addition,
the strongly bound phosphor compound would hinder adsorption of the
substances 1,3-butadiene and butene. This would in turn result in
a lower activity of the thermally aged SCILL-catalyst combined with
unchanged high selectivity to the butenes.

Conclusions
In
this work, it could be shown that the RF-based measurement technology
is suitable to analyze the thermal decomposition of supported [BMIM][DMP].
Compared to TG, it has the advantage that it can be conducted without
contact and operando. Furthermore, the RF-based method allows a differentiation
between “intact” IL and its solid or liquid decomposition
products that remain on the carrier. A distinction between solid or
liquid products is not possible, especially because there are only
one or a few molecular layers on the carrier. The course of the real
part of the permittivity ε′ during a thermal decomposition
experiment shows no significant change. Therefore, an almost constant
sample volume can be assumed. The course of the losses ε″
indicates, in contrast, changes in the electrical properties. As a
conclusion, a changed structure of the supported IL can be deduced,
whereas a thermobalance only analyzes the pure mass loss. With the
help of a model, it could be confirmed that thermal decomposition
of supported [BMIM][DMP] produces solid as well as gaseous decomposition
products. The solid products negatively influence the activity of
a Pd-SCILL-catalyst. They bind on the catalyst surface and thus hinder
the hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene. A distinction between “intact”
IL and solid degradation products is therefore advantageous.

Experimental
Section
Measurement Setup and Calculation of the Complex Permittivity
The measurement setup, shown in Figure 14, is used to determine the complex dielectric
permittivity and the catalytic activity of the coated Pd catalyst.
It consists of a cylindrical cavity resonator and two concentrically
arranged quartz tubes. The catalyst bed (sample) is located on a porous
quartz frit in the inner tube. The process gas flows through it. The
outer tube is double-walled with an evacuated gap to minimize heat
losses. Hot air flows between the two tubes to heat both the sample
and the process gas. Two thermocouples are mounted before and after
the sample (outside the resonator). The mean value of both thermocouples
is assumed as the sample temperature. The temperature difference between
both thermocouples is always lower than 20 °C. A gas chromatograph
is connected downstream of the reactor to analyze the outlet gas composition.
Two loop couplers (inductive antennas) are mounted in the inner resonator
wall. They are connected via coaxial cables to a network analyzer
(Anritsu VNA MS2028B) and allow to excitate an electromagnetic field
as well as to record of the scattering parameters (transmission and
reflection).

Figure 14 Setup for operando measurements of the electrical parameters
in the microwave range of IL-coated Pd catalysts during the selective
hydrogenation of butadiene to butene.

The aluminum resonator is designed for a certain frequency
range that is determined not only by the permittivity of the sample
but also by the geometric dimensions of the cavity (inner diameter:
184 mm, height: 80 mm). In this study, the first transverse magnetic
resonance mode at a frequency of ca. 1.2 GHz is used because in the
position of the sample, its electric field is homogeneous and maximal.26 This setup and the fact that all other components
in the resonator are made of low-loss quartz allow the complex permittivity
of the sample to be determined. Further information on the measurement
setup can be found in refs.18,27

With a network analyzer, the transmission parameter S21, which is the ratio of the complex amplitudes
of transmitted and received waves,14 is
recorded over the excitation frequency. Figure 15 illustrates a transmission spectrum of
the empty sample tube (index 0), of a sample tube filled with pure
silica (index S) and filled with silica coated with
IL (α = 30%, index IL). At the resonant frequency, the absolute
value of the transmission parameter is maximal. In addition, the half-value
bandwidth (3 dB bandwidth) can also be determined from the spectrum
and the complex permittivity ε can then be calculated using eqs 7–9. 7   8   9  ε′
represents the real part of the complex permittivity and is a measure
for the polarization of a material in the electric field.28 ε″ denotes the imaginary part of
the complex permittivity and describes the dielectric and resistive
losses.28fres,0 stands for the resonant frequency of the empty sample tube, and
Δfres stands for the shift of the
resonant frequency after introducing a sample into the sample tube.
ΔBW is the corresponding widening of the bandwidth, j is the imaginary unit, and Vsample describes the sample volume, determined by a gas pycnometer (Micromeritics
AccuPyc 1330). Veff is a calibration variable
and was determined before each measurement by means of a polytetrafluorethylene
cylinder of known permittivity (ε′ = 2.1) by applying eq 8.26

Figure 15 Transmission spectrum of the empty sample tube (index 0), of the
sample tube filled with uncoated silica (index S),
and the sample tube filled with silica supported with IL (index IL,
α = 30%).

Preparation and Characterization
of Samples
Samples are prepared by wetness impregnation.
Silica 150 Å (Sigma-Aldrich) was used as the porous carrier.
In a first step, the silica was (if necessary) coated with the active
component palladium and, in a second step, the IL 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
dimethylphosphate ([BMIM][DMP], Iolitec, purity 99%) was immobilized
on the heterogeneous catalyst. Further details on the preparation
conditions are given below. The pore volume, the BET surface area,
and the mean pore diameter of all prepared samples were determined
by nitrogen adsorption measurements (Gemini V, Micromeritics). Before
each coating, the water content of the pure IL was measured by titration
(Karl Fischer titrator 831 KF, Metrohm). The average value of three
consecutive titrations was always less than 1 wt %. Further parameters
of the porous carrier and the IL are found in Table 3.

Table 3 Material Parameters
of the Porous Carrier and the Used IL
silica 150 Å powder	
pore surface ABET	308 m2 g–1	
specific pore volume Vpore,0	1.05 cm3 g–1	
mean pore diameter dpore,m	14 nm	
diameter of the particles dp	250 μm	
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium dimethylphosphate ([BMIM][DMP])	
density ρIL	1.18 g cm–120	
molar mass MIL	264 g mol–120	
vapor
pressure (taken from [DMIM][DMP]) pvap,IL	6.7 × 10–6 Pa (373 K)20	
 	0.2 mPa (410 K)20	
decomposition temperature Tdecomposition (mass loss 1%/month)	137 °C20	
water content	<1 wt %	
To prepare the IL-supported Pd catalysts, the required amount of
carrier material was mixed with the corresponding amount of the precursor
palladium(II)nitrate hydrate (Alfa Aesar, 39% Pd) in acetone that
served as a solvent. After slowly removing of the acetone, a drying
step (100 °C) was carried out in a rotary evaporator under high
vacuum. The powder was then calcined in air and reduced with hydrogen.
After determination of the resulting palladium content using inductively
coupled plasma–optical emission spectrometry (ICP–OES),
the IL was immobilized. Therefore, a given amount of the Pd catalyst
was mixed with the corresponding amount of IL in DCM, the DCM was
slowly removed, and the powder was dried in a rotary evaporator at
50 °C under high vacuum. Further information on the preparation
is given in Table 4.

Table 4 Preparation Parameter of the Pd Catalyst
porous carrier	silica 150 Å	
precursor	palladium(II)nitrate hydrate	
solvent	acetone	
calcination parameter	air	
 	1 K min–1	
 	θmax = 350 °C	
 	4 h	
parameter of reduction	10% H2 in N2	
 	2 K min–1	
 	θmax = 350 °C	
 	4 h	
The pore filling degree was then determined
from all samples using a thermobalance (TG 209 F3 Tarsus, Netzsch,
Selb, Germany). The measured values correspond well with the calculated
ones from the sample preparation (±20%). Before each RF-based
measurement, samples were pre-conditioned in the reactor for 1 h at
100 °C under nitrogen to remove any remaining adsorbed water.

Analysis of Thermal Decomposition
In order to analyze the
thermal decomposition, the supported IL (msample ≈ 0.5 g) was filled into the reactor. After a conditioning
phase of 1 h at 100 °C, the losses ε″ of the sample
were determined at 20 °C. Then, the reactor was heated to 175
°C to initiate the decomposition. After 5 h, the reactor was
cooled down to 20 °C again and the losses ε″ were
determined once again. This process cycle was repeated several times.
The measurement time at 175 °C after deduction of the heating
and cooling phases was 60 h (35 h, for samples with Pd addition).
Because the heating and cooling rates were very high, a possible decomposition
of the IL during these times can be neglected. Table 5 summarizes all measuring parameters.

Table 5 Parameter of the Thermal Decomposition Measurements
temperature of decomposing	175 °C	
temperature of RF measurements	20 °C	
time of decomposition	60 h (35 h, measurement with Pd)	
nitrogen volume
stream	20 L h–1 (STP)	
length/diameter of the fixed bed	18 mm/10 mm	
pressure	1 bar	
Thermogravimetric measurements
were also carried out for validation (Figure 4). For this purpose, after certain times
(10, 20, and 60 h), the measurement was interrupted and the entire
sample was taken out. A small part of the sample was then used to
determine the mass loss in a thermobalance. Subsequently, a fresh
sample with identical initial pore filling degree was used for another
experiment starting again at time t = 0 h. Altogether,
three independent experimental runs generated the three TG data points
in Figure 4. The electrical
signal was only evaluated during the longest measurement over 60 h.

Selective Hydrogenation of 1,3-Butadiene to Butene
To compare
the Pd catalysts with and without an IL loading, the selectivity to
the butenes was determined in addition to the butadiene conversion.
A gas chromatograph (Varian LHA, model CP-3800) analyzed the composition
of the reactant gas and the product gas. Table 6 shows the parameters of the measurement.
The palladium content of all used catalysts was 0.3 wt %.

Table 6 Experimental Parameters of the Selective Hydrogenation
of Butadiene
temperature	50 °C	
total pressure	1 bar	
partial
pressure butadiene	5 mbar	
partial pressure hydrogen	100 mbar	
palladium
content	0.3 wt %	
Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b02421.Diagram of a TG
analysis with the carrier gases nitrogen and helium to distinguish
between mass loss due to evaporation or due to thermal decomposition
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b02421_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written with contributions of all authors. All authors have given
approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare
no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
are indebted to the German Research Foundation (DFG) for financial
support (Je 257/21-1 and Mo 1060/27-1). The authors thank Jörg
Gerchau for help with the measurement setup, Birgit Brunner for the
ICP–OES analysis, Beate Bojer for the 31P-solid
state NMR, and Ulrike Lacher for the 1H NMR measurements.

Abbreviations
[BMIM][DMP]1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
dimethylphosphate

[DMIM][DMP]1,3-dimethylimidazolium dimethylphosphate

[EMIM][NTf2]1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium
bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide

ILionic liquid

Pdpalladium

RFradio frequency

SCILLsolid catalyst with ionic liquid layer

SCRselective catalytic reduction

SILPsupported ionic
liquid phase

TGthermogravimetry/thermogravimetric
==== Refs
References
Wasserscheid P. ; Keim W. 
Ionic Liquids-New ″Solutions″ for Transition Metal
Catalysis . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2000 , 39 , 3772 –3789 . 10.1002/1521-3773(20001103)39:21<3772::aid-anie3772>3.0.co;2-5 .
Holbrey J. D. ; Rogers R. D.  Physicochemical Properties of Ionic Liquids: Melting
Points and Phase Diagrams . In Ionic Liquids
in Synthesis ; Wasserscheid P. , Welton T.  , Eds.; John Wiley & Sons : Weinheim , 2008 ; pp 57 –72 .
Welton T. 
Room-Temperature Ionic Liquids. Solvents
for Synthesis and Catalysis . Chem. Rev. 
1999 , 99 , 2071 –2084 . 10.1021/cr980032t .11849019 
Wasserscheid P.  Outlook
- the Thechnikal Prospect of Supported Ionic Liquid Materials . In Supported Ionic Liquids ; Fehrmann R. , Riisager A. , Haumann M.  , Eds.; John Wiley
& Sons : Weinheim , 2013 ; pp 459 –465 .
Heym F. ; Korth W. ; Thiessen J. ; Kern C. ; Jess A. 
Evaporation and Decomposition Behavior
of Pure and Supported Ionic Liquids under Thermal Stress . Chem. Ing. Tech. 
2015 , 87 , 791 –802 . 10.1002/cite.201400139 .
Riisagera A. ; Fehrmanna R. ; Haumannb M. ; Wasserscheidb P. 
Supported ionic liquids: versatile
reaction and separation media . Top. Catal. 
2006 , 40 , 91 –102 . 10.1007/s11244-006-0111-9 .
Kernchen U. ; Etzold B. ; Korth W. ; Jess A. 
Solid Catalyst with Ionic Liquid Layer (SCILL) - A New Concept to
Improve Selectivity Illustrated by Hydrogenation of Cyclooctadiene . Chem. Eng. Technol. 
2007 , 30 , 985 –994 . 10.1002/ceat.200700050 .
Barth T. ; Korth W. ; Jess A. 
Selectivity-Enhancing
Effect of a SCILL Catalyst in Butadiene Hydrogenation . Chem. Eng. Technol. 
2016 , 40 , 395 –404 . 10.1002/ceat.201600140 .
Mangartz T. ; Häcker L. ; Korth W. ; Kern C. ; Jess A. 
Improving the Selectivity
to Butene Using a Solid Pd-Catalyst with an Ionic Liquid Laye (SCILL) . Oil Gas Eur. Mag. 
2014 , 130 , 84 –90 .
Supported Ionic Liquids ; Fehrmann R. , Riisager A. , Haumann M.  , Eds.; John Wiley
& Sons : Weinheim , 2013 .
Heym F. ; Kern C. ; Thiessen J. ; Jess A.  Transport Phenomena, Evaporation,
and Thermal Stability of Supported Ionic Liquids .
In Supported Ionic Liquids ; Fehrmann R. , Riisager A. , Haumann M.  , Eds.; John Wiley
& Sons : Weinheim , 2013 ; pp 105 –143 .
Bottom R.  Thermogravimetric Analysis . In Principles
and Applications of Thermal Analysis ; Gabbott P.  , Ed.; Blackwell
Publishing : Oxford , 2008 ; pp 87 –118 .
Müller N. ; Reiß S. ; Fremerey P. ; Jess A. ; Moos R. 
Initial tests to detect
quantitatively the coke loading of reforming catalysts by a contactless
microwave method . Chem. Eng. Process. 
2011 , 50 , 729 –731 . 10.1016/j.cep.2011.07.002 .
Rauch D. ; Fremerey P. ; Jess A. ; Moos R. 
In situ detection of coke deposits on fixed-bed catalysts by a radio
frequency-based method . Sens. Actuators, B 
2013 , 181 , 681 –689 . 10.1016/j.snb.2013.01.022 .
Dietrich M. ; Hagen G. ; Reitmeier W. ; Burger K. ; Hien M. ; Grass P. ; Kubinski D. ; Visser J. ; Moos R. 
Radio-Frequency-Controlled Urea Dosing
for NH3-SCR Catalysts: NH3 Storage Influence
to Catalyst Performance under Transient Conditions . Sensors 
2017 , 17 , 2746 10.3390/s17122746 .
Moos R. ; Rauch D. ; Votsmeier M. ; Kubinski D. 
Review on Radio Frequency Based Monitoring of SCR and
Three Way Catalysts . Top. Catal. 
2016 , 59 , 961 –969 . 10.1007/s11244-016-0575-1 .
Fremerey P. ; Jess A. ; Moos R. 
Why does the Conductivity
of a Nickel Catalyst Increase during Sulfidation? An Exemplary Study
Using an In Operando Sensor Device . Sensors 
2015 , 15 , 27021 –27034 . 10.3390/s151027021 .26512669 
Anke M.-L. ; Hämmerle M. ; Gerchau J. ; Moos R. ; Jess A. 
Radio Frequency-Based
In Situ Determination of the Mass Loss of Supported Ionic Liquids . Chem. Eng. Technol. 
2017 , 40 , 1660 –1665 . 10.1002/ceat.201700190 .
Anke M.-L. ; Hämmerle M. ; Jess A. ; Moos R. 
Radio frequency- and
impedance-based sensing of ionic liquids supported on porous carriers
and their limitations . Sens. Actuators, B 
2018 , 273 , 1564 –1571 . 10.1016/j.snb.2018.07.036 .
Barth T.  Selektivhydrierung von 1,3-Butadien an mit ionischen Fluiden beschichteten
heterogenen Katalysatoren . PhD Thesis, Universität Bayreuth , Bayreuth , 2016 .
Jess A. ; Wasserscheid P.  Chemical Technology ; John Wiley & Sons : Weinheim , 2013 ; pp 200 –216 .
Tourillon G. ; Cassuto A. ; Jugnet Y. ; Massardier J. ; Bertolini J. C. 
Buta-1,3-diene and but-1-ene chemisorption on Pt(111),
Pd(111), Pd(110) and Pd50Cu50(111) as studied
by UPS, NEXAFS and HREELS in relation to catalysis . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 
1996 , 92 , 4835 –4841 . 10.1039/ft9969204835 .
Kuhlmann E. ; Himmler S. ; Giebelhaus H. ; Wasserscheid P. 
Imidazolium
dialkylphosphates-a class of versatile, halogen-free and hydrolytically
stable ionic liquids . Green Chem. 
2007 , 9 , 233 –242 . 10.1039/B611974C .
Kohli P. ; Blanchard G. J. 
Probing Interfaces and Surface Reactions of Zirconium
Phosphate/Phosphonate Multilayers Using 31P NMR Spectrometry . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 695 –701 . 10.1021/la990668v .
Chen L. F. ; Ong C. K. ; Neo C. P. ; Varaden V. V. ; Varaden V. K.  Microwave Electronics: Measurements and Materials Characterisation ; John Wiley & Sons : West Sussex , 2004 ; pp 11 –16 .
Slocombe D. ; Porch A. ; Bustarret E. ; Williams O. A. 
Microwave properties of nanodiamond particles . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2013 , 102 , 244102 10.1063/1.4809823 .
Dietrich M. ; Rauch D. ; Porch A. ; Moos R. 
A laboratory test setup for in situ measurements of the dielectric
properties of catalyst powder samples under reaction conditions by
microwave cavity perturbation: set up and initial tests . Sensors 
2014 , 14 , 16856 –16868 . 10.3390/s140916856 .25211199 
Dietrich M. ; Rauch D. ; Simon U. ; Porch A. ; Moos R. 
Ammonia storage studies on H-ZSM-5
zeolites by microwave cavity perturbation: Correlation of dielectric
properties with ammonia storage . J. Sens. Sens.
Syst. 
2015 , 4 , 263 –269 . 10.5194/jsss-4-263-2015 .

