
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145793510.1021/acsomega.7b01725ArticleNew Insights into the Pt-Catalyzed CH3OH
Oxidation Mechanism: First-Principle Considerations on Thermodynamics,
Kinetics, and Reversible Potentials Ou Lihui *†‡† College
of Chemistry and Materials Engineering, Hunan University of Arts and Science, Changde 415000, China‡ Hunan
Province Cooperative Innovation Center for the Construction &
Development of Dongting Lake Ecologic Economic Zone, Hunan University of Arts and Science, Changde 415000, China* E-mail: oulihui666@126.com. Phone: +86 736 7186115 (L. H. Ou).24 01 2018 31 01 2018 3 1 886 897 04 11 2017 03 01 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A systematic first-principle study
of CH3OH oxidation
along indirect and direct pathways on Pt(111) has been carried out,
and some new insights into CH3OH oxidation pathways in
direct CH3OH fuel cells (DMFCs) are presented. The thermodynamics,
kinetics, and reversible potentials for all possible elementary steps,
initializing with C–H, O–H, and C–O bond cleavages
and proceeding via sequential decomposition and oxidation from the
reaction intermediates, are analyzed. Some key reactive intermediates
are identified. By comparing the activation energies and reversible
potentials of various possible elementary reaction steps, we can speculate
that the initial CH3OH oxidation step proceeds by the CH3O intermediate under a nonelectrochemical environment, whereas
it prefers to occur by the CH2OH intermediate under electrochemical
environment. Furthermore, CHO hydroxylation into HCOOH along a direct
pathway is more facile to occur than CHO dehydrogenation into CO along
an indirect pathway at the nonelectrochemical interface, whereas the
indirect and direct pathways may be parallel pathways on Pt(111) under
the present simulated electrochemical environment. Simultaneously,
CH3 can be easily formed through C–O bond cleavage
in CH3OH, which is a nonelectrochemical step. Thus, the
CHx (x = 0–3)
species is possibly formed on Pt(111) during CH3OH oxidation
regardless of being under an electrochemical or nonelectrochemical
environment. The adsorbed CHx species
will result in the blocking of the active sites and the prevention
of further CH3OH oxidation. Our present findings on the
formation of carbonaceous deposits on Pt(111) are consistent with
the experimentally observed C–O bond scission of CH3OH into CHx species. Thus, we propose
that the adsorbed residues that poisoned the Pt surface and impeded
the performance of DMFCs may be CHx species,
rather than CO species, since the direct pathway is more favorable
on Pt(111) at the nonelectrochemical interface. However, the poisonous
species that occupied the active sites of the Pt surface may be CHx and CO species due to the simultaneous occurrence
of oxidation pathways on Pt(111) under the present simulated electrochemical
environment. Based on the present study, some new insights into CH3OH oxidation mechanisms and designing strategies of Pt-based
alloy catalysts for CH3OH oxidation can be provided.

document-id-old-9ao7b01725document-id-new-14ao-2017-01725fccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Direct CH3OH fuel cells (DMFCs) are extremely interesting
since they can convert CH3OH directly into electricity
and efficiencies are significantly higher than conventional power
generation systems. In recent years, the CH3OH oxidation
that occurred at the anodes of DMFCs has been the subject of numerous
studies because of its importance in fuel cell application.1−5 So far, the best catalyst for CH3OH oxidation is Pt.
However, the performance of DMFCs is impeded because adsorbed residues
poison the anode surface. It is now generally accepted that CO is
the poisoning species formed during CH3OH oxidation, and
the poisoning is acute for the Pt anode. Due to the lack of a detailed
oxidation mechanism, the progress in developing improved DMFCs has
been hindered. Thus, it is necessary to clarify the CH3OH oxidation mechanisms on the Pt surface to provide some guidelines
for effectively designing catalysts used in DMFCs.

So far, experimental
and theoretical investigations have made tremendous
efforts in order to understand CH3OH oxidation mechanisms
on the Pt catalysts; it is hoped that DMFC anode catalysts will be
improved eventually based on insights gained from such studies. However,
there are still some controversies surrounding the mechanism on Pt
despite numerous investigations. The previous experimental investigations
focused on CH3OH oxidation mechanisms on Pt were carried
out mainly in ultra high vacuum (UHV) with numerous experimental methods,
such as temperature-programmed desorption (TPD), low-energy electron
loss spectroscopy (LEELS), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
(UPS), auger electron spectroscopy (AES), thermal desorption spectroscopy
(TDS), secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), infrared reflection
adsorption spectroscopy (IRAS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
temperature-programmed reaction spectroscopy (TPRS), and molecular
beam techniques, etc.6−21 For example, Sexton,6,7 using LEELS and TDS, showed that
at temperatures below 140 K CH3OH adsorbs molecularly on
Pt(111), whereas at higher temperatures it is oxidized into CO. Based
on the discussion from Davis and Berteau,22 CH3OH oxidation mainly proceeds through methoxy (CH3O) on Pt, as a first intermediate, and then forms formaldehyde
(CH2O), formyl (CHO), and CO by stepwise dehydrogenation.
This mechanism is also partly confirmed by another experimental study.10,13,14,17−19,23−25 For example, based on the surface science investigations in UHV,
Stuve et al.24 proposed the CH3OH oxidation mechanism into CO, in which CH3OH initially
oxidizes to form either CH3O or hydroxymethyl (CH2OH); subsequently, various other intermediates can be formed through
further oxidation before finally forming CO. However, little is known
about the exact CH3OH oxidation mechanisms and the corresponding
intermediates. Additionally, some experimental evidence also showed
that through initial C–O bond cleavage CH3OH can
be partially oxidized on Pt to form adsorbed CHx (x = 0–3) intermediates. For example,
Levis et al.20 indicated that adsorbed
CH3OH can be oxidized to form adsorbed CH3 species
by C–O bond breaking on Pt(111) at 180–220 K by using
SIMS. The CH3 can dehydrogenate to form adsorbed C atoms
at higher temperatures. Wang and Masel21 found that at temperatures above 140 K adsorbed CH3OH
on Pt(110) can be also oxidized to produce adsorbed CHx intermediates through the C–O bond cleavage
by using TDS and LEELS. By using in situ ambient-pressure XPS and
TPRS, CH3OH oxidation has also been examined on Pt(111)
between 300 and 650 K, in which CH3OH oxidation on Pt proceeds
through two competitive routes in the presence of oxygen: One is serial
dehydrogenation to CO through the CH3O intermediate, and
another is oxidation through C–O bond cleavage.25 It should be noted that the carbonaceous deposits
formed through the methanolic C–O bond cleavage may be able
to occupy the active sites of the Pt surface and thereby influence
the catalytic activity for CH3OH oxidation due to Pt catalyst
poisoning and fast deactivation.26−30 However, some other experimental studies13,31−34 dealing with CH3OH on transition metal surfaces ruled
out the C–O bond cleavage pathway.

Although some valuable
CH3OH oxidation mechanism information
has been provided by the above experimental investigations, many important
questions about the reaction pathways are still ambiguous. Fortunately,
the fundamental understanding of elementary reaction pathways can
be obtained through theoretical methods. Using the bond-order-conservation
approach, Shustorovich et al.35 studied
the reaction and activation energies for the various possible elementary
reaction steps of CO hydrogenation into CH3OH on Pt(111).
Kua et al.36 and Ishikawa et al.37 performed density functional theoretical (DFT)
studies on CH3OH oxidation on Pt, respectively. These studies
of the thermochemistry of the reaction36,37 have concluded
that CH3OH oxidation to CO proceeds via initial C–H
bond cleavage into the CH2OH intermediate. However, the
calculations lacked any kinetic analysis, which suggests the possibility
of other oxidation pathways, such as initial O–H cleavage,
for CH3OH oxidation. On the basis of DFT calculations,
CH2O38 and CHO39 adsorption in the initial O–H cleavage pathways
has been studied, but kinetic barriers for CH3OH oxidation
were still not considered. Simultaneously, only cluster models containing
8–10 Pt atoms were used in the previous studies, which can
make conclusions be not exact because of size effects. Despite all
this, an excellent starting point is provided by the above studies
in order to systematically understand the CH3OH oxidation
mechanism on Pt. More recently, for CH3OH oxidation on
Pt(111), a periodic DFT study was presented. For all the elementary
reaction steps, beginning with O–H and C–H bond breaking
and proceeding through serial dehydrogenation of the CH3O intermediate, the thermodynamic and kinetic analysis are presented.23 It is found that the O–H bond cleavage
in CH3OH is the rate-determining step for the CH3OH oxidation mechanism. CO formation is a strong exothermic process,
while the further oxidation of CH3O, CH2O, and
CHO intermediates has extremely low activation barriers, which make
these intermediates have very short lifetimes. The previous DFT results
also suggest that CH3OH oxidation to form CH2OH through O–H bond cleavage and then further oxidation of
CH2OH into either CH2O or CHOH intermediates
is also an energetically favorable pathway.40 However, DFT calculations conducted by Greeley and Mavrikakis23 show that the activation energy of C–O
bond cleavage is three times larger than that of C–H or O–H
bonds on Pt(111), which is disagreeable with some of the above-mentioned
previous experimental observations. It seems to mean that the dehydrogenation
pathway of CH3OH oxidation is more favorable than the initial
C–O bond cleavage pathway on Pt(111).

On the basis of
the above experimental and theoretical methods,
some valuable atomic-level information on the CH3OH oxidation
mechanism has been obtained. However, CH3OH oxidation may
follow a dual pathway mechanism that includes both indirect and direct
pathways on the Pt surfaces.41−43 The indirect pathway proceeds
through serial dehydrogenation steps to form CO, as demonstrated in
the above experimental and theoretical studies. The direct pathway
proceeds through the formation of CHO and HCOOH intermediates, which
can subsequently be oxidized to form CO2. As far as we
know, the direct pathway on the Pt surface remains to not be elucidated
theoretically at an atomic level, and the corresponding mechanism
details of the direct pathway are still unknown. Thus, many key questions
about the oxidation pathways are still ambiguous, and controversy
exists as to the CH3OH oxidation mechanism. For instance,
what is the optimal CH3OH oxidation pathway, the initial
C–H, O–H, or C–O bond cleavage on Pt(111)? Which
reaction step is the rate-determining step? Which pathway is responsible
for the formation of CHx species? Which
pathway may more easily occur, the indirect or direct pathway on the
Pt catalyst? Additionally, no detailed theoretical investigations
focused on the initial C–O bond cleavage mechanism on Pt were
found in the literature. Additionally, the design of better catalysts
requires a deeper understanding of CH3OH oxidation pathways.
Thus, CH3OH oxidation pathways initialing with C–H,
O–H, and C–O bond cleavages of CH3OH on Pt
catalysts deserve a systematic study. In the present paper, we perform
a thorough periodic DFT study on CH3OH oxidation on Pt(111)
starting with C–H, O–H, and C–O bond cleavages
involving indirect and direct pathways. The thermodynamics, kinetics,
and reversible potentials for the various possible elementary pathways
are addressed, and detailed minimum energy pathways (MEPs) showing
the interconversions of the various intermediates are presented.

Results
and Discussion
Adsorption Characteristics of Oxidation Intermediates
The possible surface species involved in an indirect pathway on
the
Pt(111) surface were investigated first. The optimized adsorption
configurations of eight species (CH3OH, CH2OH,
CH3O, CHOH, CH2O, CHO, COH, and CO) are given,
as shown in Figure 1; the most optimal adsorption sites for the possible intermediates
and corresponding adsorption energies are listed in Table 1. The adsorption energies are
calculated according to Eads = Eadsorbate/substrate – Esubstrate – Eadsorbate. A more negative Eads value indicates
a stronger adsorption.

Table 1 Most Optimal Adsorption
Sites and
Adsorption Energies (Eads, eV) for the
Possible Surface Species Included in Indirect Pathway on Pt(111)
species	sites	Eads (eV)	
CH3OH	top	–0.44	
CH3O	top	–1.74	
CH2OH	top	–2.10	
CH2O	top	–0.57	
CHOH	bridge	–4.06	
CHO	fcc	–2.41	
COH	fcc	–4.75	
CO	fcc	–1.89	
Figure 1 Optimized geometry configurations of the possible intermediates
included in the indirect pathway for CH3OH oxidation on
Pt(111): (a) CH3OH, (b) CH3O, (c) CH2OH, (d) CH2O, (e) CHOH, (f) CHO, (g) COH, and (h) CO.
Gray, red, brown, and pink spheres represent platinum, oxygen, carbon,
and hydrogen atoms, respectively.

Experimentally, CH3OH adsorption has been well
studied
on Pt(111). LEELS and UPS11,13,44 have indicated unequivocally that on Pt(111) CH3OH adsorbs
via the O atom. The studies from IRAS on Pt under UHV environments45 found that the CH3 group in CH3OH is oriented at an angle between perpendicular and parallel
to the surface. As shown in Figure 1(a), our present results show that CH3OH
weakly adsorbs on Pt(111) through the O atom at the top site with
an adsorption energy of −0.44 eV, which is consistent with
previous experimental investigations on adsorption configuration of
CH3OH, showing that the most favorable structure of adsorbed
CH3OH that our present studies have described is generally
accurate. Further, our calculated adsorption energy of CH3OH is also well consistent with the results of early experimental
and theoretical investigations. The previous experimental study on
Pt from TPD spectra data6,11,45 estimated CH3OH adsorption energy, ca. −0.45 eV.
Theoretical calculations by the DFT cluster and slab model also gave
calculated an adsorption energy of −0.66 and −0.33 eV,
respectively.23,36,37,40 The above experimental value is consistent
with our present calculated adsorption energy of −0.44 eV,
whereas the theoretical values using cluster methods are larger than
our value. These discrepancies can be explained. In the theoretical
studies, the used model differences between periodic and cluster methods
may lead to the discrepancies of adsorption energies. In the meantime,
the adsorption energy that was previously reported using slab methods
is slightly smaller than our adsorption energy. The discrepancies
with our results could be explained by coverage, in which the higher
coverage was used in previous calculations (1/9 ML), thus leading
to the more significant effects of hydrogen bonding.

Methoxy
(CH3O) formed via the initial O–H bond
cleavage within CH3OH is extremely unstable on Pt, and
no direct spectral data of this intermediate exist. Thus, structure
information is unavailable about this geometry configuration on Pt.
Fortunately, the structure and energetics of CH3O on Pt(111)
have been provided by theoretical methods. Using the cluster model,
Kua et al.36 calculate the adsorption energy
of CH3O, ca. −1.09 eV, and CH3O adsorbs
on a Pt top site through the O atom. Ishikawa et al.37 used similar methods to calculate an adsorption energy
of −2.07 eV for CH3O bound in a 3-fold hollow site.
Using periodic DFT methods, Greeley et al.40 found an adsorption energy of −1.54 eV for CH3O at a top site. Our results showed that CH3O prefers
to adsorb at a top site through O atom with the C–O bond inclined
on Pt(111), as shown in Figure 1(b), which is consistent with those of Greeley et al. and
Kua et al. Our calculated adsorption energy is −1.74 eV for
CH3O, which is not well consistent with that of Kua et
al. The finite cluster model used in previous calculations may again
explain this discrepancy. The hydroxymethyl (CH2OH) on
Pt(111) is also unstable. To our knowledge, for this intermediate,
geometry structural parameters have not been obtained experimentally.
However, there exist some DFT studies of the CH2OH intermediate.
Using the periodic slab model, Desai et al.46 and Greeley et al.23,40 found that CH2OH adsorbs
at the Pt top site through the C atom; the corresponding adsorption
energies are −2.17 and −1.98 eV, respectively. Similar
adsorption configurations were also found on Pt(111) by the cluster
model with adsorption energies of −2.85 eV37 and −2.51 eV.38 As shown
in Figure 1(c), the
adsorption configuration obtained in our present calculation is in
good agreement with the structures observed in previous theoretical
investigations. Our calculated adsorption energy of −2.10 eV
on Pt(111) for CH2OH is in agreement with the values obtained
from the slab model, whereas it is significantly lower than those
calculated from the cluster method. Similarly, the finite cluster
sizes may be able to explain this discrepancy. The total energy of
CH2OH on Pt(111) is −0.36 eV lower than that of
CH3O in our present studies, which suggests the CH2OH formation may be energetically preferred.

By further
dehydrogenation of intermediate CH3O or CH2OH,
formaldehyde (CH2O) can be formed on Pt(111).
Experimental investigations on adsorption of CH2O on Pt
single-crystal surfaces are somewhat more general than CH3O and CH2OH. However, the reliable structural parameter
for CH2O is still unavailable.12 Fortunately, some theoretical investigations on CH2O
adsorption have been performed on Pt(111). Based on Hückel
cluster model calculation, the adsorbed CH2O with top-bridge-top
configuration was found to be energetically more favorable, and the
determined adsorption energy was −0.99 eV.38 Using DFT cluster methods, top-bridge-top configuration
was also found to be the best adsorption sites with adsorption energy
of −0.42 eV.36 Periodic DFT slab
calculation found that CH2O adsorbs at top-bridge-top configuration
through C and O atoms to an adjacent two Pt top sites; the corresponding
adsorption energy is −0.50 eV.23,40 As shown in Figure 1(d), our present
results also showed that CH2O weakly adsorbs at the Pt
top site through C and O atoms on Pt(111), and the adsorption energy
is −0.57 eV, in which the site preference and the value of
adsorption energy are in good agreement with the previous theoretical
studies. Hydroxymethylene (CHOH) can be formed by further dehydrogenation
of intermediate CH2OH. CHOH species on Pt(111) are also
unstable, and experimental structure information and adsorption energy
are also not found. A previous DFT cluster study38 showed that CHOH prefers to adsorb at the top site through
the C atom with an adsorption energy of −3.79 eV. The bridge
adsorption was found to be a preferable site in another cluster study,37 and the adsorption energy was determined to
be −3.68 eV. The periodic DFT slab study found that CHOH prefers
to bind at a bridge site through the C atom with an adsorption energy
of −3.24 eV. Our present studies find that CHOH on Pt(111)
also prefers to adsorb at the bridge site through the C atom, and
the structure is shown in Figure 1(e), which is consistent with the previous reported
site preferences. However, our calculated adsorption energies of −4.06
eV are somewhat higher than the previous value.

Formyl (CHO)
is formed by dehydrogenation of intermediate CH2O or CHOH.
To our knowledge, no experimental studies of CHO
species were found due to its instability on Pt. However, some theoretical
investigations on CHO adsorption properties have been carried out.
Using the cluster method, CHO was found to adsorb perpendicular to
a bridge site through the C atom on Pt(111) with an adsorption energy
of −2.61 eV;39 the adsorptions to
top sites through the C atom were also found in other studies, and
the adsorption energies were reported to be −2.71 eV36 and −2.84 eV,37 respectively. The previous periodic DFT slab methods found that
CHO adsorbs at the Pt top site through the C atom; the adsorption
energy is −2.36 eV. Our calculated adsorption energy of −2.41
eV for CHO on Pt(111) is lower than those values calculated using
the cluster model due to finite size effects of the cluster method.
Notably, in our present studies, strong site preferences of CHO were
not shown on Pt(111). Four configurations are studied with the difference
of adsorption energies of ca. 0.05 eV; the adsorption energies for
top, bridge, fcc, and hcp states are −2.36, −2.35, −2.41,
and −2.36 eV, respectively, as shown in Figure 1(f). In all configurations, the CHO adsorbs
through the C atom. By dehydrogenation of CHOH, the final intermediate
hydroxymethylidyne (COH) species may be formed. Using the cluster
method, the previous DFT calculations on Pt(111) have obtained adsorption
energies of −5.25 eV37 and −4.86
eV38 for COH. Our present calculated adsorption
energy (−4.75 eV) and the previous value (−4.45 eV)
from Greeley et al. are lower than the above value yielded by the
cluster model; this difference is also able to be explained by the
discrepancies between the cluster and slab method. As shown in Figure 1(g), COH prefers
to adsorb at an fcc site through the C atom on Pt(111), which is in
good agreement with previous studies. Finally, by dehydrogenation
of CHO or COH, carbon monoxide (CO) is generated. As we all know,
a poor job of CO chemisorption through DFT methods has been done on
transition metal surfaces. For instance, the previous experimental
studies showed that top and bridge sites are favored, whereas DFT
results indicate that 3-fold hollow sites are the preferred adsorbing
sites on Pt(111).40,47 Our present DFT studies showed
that the 3-fold fcc site of the Pt(111) surface is preferable for
CO adsorption, as shown in Figure 1(h). Nonetheless, we note that our calculated adsorption
energy of −1.89 eV for CO on Pt(111) is well consistent with
the previous experimentally determined value of −1.75 eV using
single-crystal adsorption calorimetry methods.

It is well-known
that CHO is a generally accepted reactive intermediate
in indirect and direct pathways for CH3OH oxidation. Thus,
our present studies for the direct pathway start from CHO hydroxylation,
as shown in Scheme 1. The direct pathway on the Pt(111) surface relates to the formation
of HCOOH via CHO hydroxylation, and the final production of CO2 can be produced through the serial dehydrogenation of HCOOH.
The possible surface species involved in the direct pathway on Pt(111)
are investigated first. The optimized most stable adsorption configurations
of four possible intermediates (HCOOH, COOH, HCOO, and CO2) in the direct pathway are shown in Figure 2, and the most stable adsorption sites and
corresponding adsorption energies are listed in Table 2. On Pt(111), HCOOH physically adsorbs in
an upright fashion with the CH group pointing down toward the surface
and the OH group pointing up (see Figure 2(a)), and the corresponding adsorption energy
is calculated to be −0.13 eV. COOH prefers to adsorb at the
Pt top site through the C atom with OH group pointing up and with
an adsorption energy of −2.34 eV (see Figure 2(b)). Adsorbed HCOO adsorbs on two neighboring
Pt atoms of the Pt(111) surface through two O atoms, which is a bidentate
configuration with an adsorption energy of −2.38 eV (see Figure 2(c)). CO2 is nearly parallel to the Pt(111) surface in a linear configuration
and weakly physisorbs. and the adsorption energy is extremely small,
ca. −0.07 eV, as shown in Figure 2(d). Unfortunately, no experimental or theoretical
adsorption energies on Pt(111) exist to compare to our present results
in direct pathways of CH3OH oxidation.

Figure 2 Optimized geometry configurations
of the various possible species
included in the direct pathway for CH3OH oxidation on Pt(111):
(a) HCOOH, (b) COOH, (c) HCOO, and (d) CO2. Gray, red,
brown, and pink spheres represent platinum, oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen
atom, respectively.

Table 2 Optimal
Adsorption Sites and Corresponding
Adsorption Energies (Eads, eV) for the
Possible Surface Species Included in the Direct Pathway on Pt(111)
species	sites	Eads (eV)	
HCOOH	bridge	–0.13	
COOH	top	–2.34	
HCOO	bridge	–2.38	
CO2	top	–0.07	
Scheme 1 Simplified Reaction Scheme for CH3OH Oxidation along Direct
and Indirect Pathways
MEP Analysis of Indirect and Initial C–O Bond Scission
Pathways
To understand the surface-catalyzed indirect pathway
of CH3OH oxidation on Pt(111), we first studied the thermodynamics
and kinetics analysis for the various possible elementary reaction
steps that occur in CH3OH oxidation at the nonelectrochemical
interface. All possible oxidation steps in the indirect pathway were
considered for each reaction, but only the MEP is reported. The reaction
pathways on Pt(111) initialized with C–H, O–H, and C–O
bond cleavage are discussed in detail, as shown in Figure 3. The most stable adsorbed
states of intermediates are used as the initial and final states of
the elementary reaction steps. For the C–H bond cleavage of
CH3OH to form CH2OH on Pt(111), our calculated
activation energy is 1.06 eV; the corresponding reaction energy is
−0.24 eV. The present calculated activation energy is 0.84
eV with a reaction energy of 0.60 eV for the initial with O–H
bond cleavage of CH3OH into CH3O. For the initial
reaction with C–O bond cleavage of CH3OH into CH3, an activation energy of 0.70 eV is obtained with a reaction
energy of 0.28 eV. Almost no experimental data are used to compare
our calculated activation energies for initial CH3OH oxidation
pathways. Only a molecular beam study10 gave an estimate of ca. 0.50 eV for the activation energy on Pt(111)
in the initial CH3OH oxidation. The lowest value is 0.70
eV among our calculated activation energies, which is approximately
consistent with the previous experimental studies. For the initial
C–H and O–H cleavage, the previous periodic DFT calculations
on a (2 × 2) Pt(111) unit cell46 have
determined activation energies of 0.95 and 1.47 eV, respectively,
and the calculated activation energies for CH3OH oxidation
on a (3 × 3) Pt(111) unit cell are 0.67, 0.81, and 2.19 eV for
C–H, O–H, and C–O bond cleavage, respectively,23 which are significantly lower or higher than
our present calculated values; especially, the activation energy of
C–O bond cleavage is considerably larger than our calculated
value (2.19 eV vs 0.70 eV). The higher coverage used in the previous
study may lead to these significant deviations, in which the higher
coverage imposes the increased constraints on the geometry of the
transition state. Exceptionally, the previous calculated activation
and reaction energies for CH3OH oxidation on the (3 ×
3) Pt(111) unit cell are 0.81 and 0.62 eV (endothermic reaction step)
for O–H bond cleavage, which are well consistent with our calculated
results. According to our DFT calculated activation energies, the
formation of intermediates CH3O and CH3 has
approximately equal and lower activation energies than that of CH2OH. Thus, the first oxidation on Pt(111) proceeds through two parallel routes:
dehydrogenation through O–H bond cleavage into CH3O intermediate and decomposition through C–O bond cleavage
into CH3 although the above thermodynamic studies show
that CH2OH formation through C–H bond cleavage reactions
is found to be relatively more favorable. Actually, some previous
experimental evidence also showed that CH3OH on Pt can
partially dissociate to form adsorbed CHx species (x = 0–3) through the C–O
bond breaking,20,21,24 in which the formed carbonaceous deposits can block the Pt surface
and prevent further CH3OH oxidation.24 Accordingly, our present study shows that the produced
CHx species through initial C–O
bond cleavage can influence catalytic activation of the Pt surface
for CH3OH oxidation. Our present finding of a relatively
low activation energy (0.70 eV) for C–O bond cleavage is in
good agreement with the experimental observation on Pt(111).

Figure 3 Overall energy
diagram for indirect pathway of CH3OH
oxidation to form CO initial with C–H (black), O–H (red),
and C–O (blue) bond cleavages on Pt(111), respectively. TS
are transition states.

According to DFT calculations, the indirect pathway for CH3OH oxidation proceeds via CH3O or CH3 as a first intermediate on Pt(111). Starting from the CH3O intermediate, further CH3O oxidation on Pt(111) through
C–H and C–O bond cleavages may be able to produce CH2O and CH3 intermediates, respectively. Thereinto,
the C–H bond dissociation into CH2O only requires
an activation energy of 0.06 eV with a reaction energy of −0.39
eV, which is a nearly spontaneous process; for the C–O bond
cleavage within CH3O into CH3, a relatively
larger activation energy of 0.39 eV needs to be overcome. However,
the activation energy of C–O bond cleavage in CH3O is also very low, and this reaction is exothermic by about −0.21
eV. Thus, it is obvious that the C–H and C–O bond cleavages
in CH3O individually leading to CH2O and CH3 are very possible to occur on Pt(111) due to low activation
energy. Thus, the DFT calculated results explained well why CH3O is very unstable on Pt, and as demonstrated above, geometry
configuration of CH3O is unavailable on Pt(111) experimentally.
Although Peck et al.11 were able to produce
CH3O and estimate an activation energy for CH3O dissociation of ca. 0.48 eV (well consistent with the present calculated
value of 0.39 eV for C–O bond breaking), they were not able
to obtain structural parameters of the CH3O species based
on spectral data. Previous periodic DFT calculations on a (3 ×
3) Pt(111) unit cell have determined the activation energy of 0.25
eV for CH3O oxidation to CH2O, and the corresponding
reaction energy is −0.36 eV, which are well consistent with
our calculated values.40 For the dehydrogenation
of CH3 obtained during CH3OH oxidation via C–O
bond scission on Pt(111), CH2 formation through the C–H
bond cleavage requires an activation energy of 1.15 eV with a reaction
energy of 0.15 eV (endothermic process). Thus, due to the large activation
energy, the C–H bond cleavage into CH2 is very difficult
to occur. The possible intermediate CH2O may be able to
form CHO through the C–H bond cleavage or produce CH on Pt(111)
through the C–O bond breaking. The former is exothermic with
a reaction energy of −0.62 eV, whereas the latter is endothermic
by 0.48 eV. Moreover, the required activation energy for the former
is significantly lower than that of the latter (0.13 eV vs 1.47 eV).
Thus, the C–H bond cleavage of CH2O into CHO is
more facile to occur than the C–O bond cleavage on Pt(111)
thermodynamically and kinetically. Unfortunately, no experimental
results exist to compare to our present calculated reaction and activation
energies to CH2O oxidation. However, previous periodic
DFT calculations on a (3 × 3) Pt(111) unit cell also showed that
the adsorbed CH2O dehydrogenation to produce the CHO intermediate
is a nonactivated process with an activation energy of less than 0.10
eV, and the corresponding reaction energy for this elementary reaction
step is ca. −0.61 eV,40 which are
all well consistent with values obtained in our present study. For
the dehydrogenation of CH2 obtained via CH3 dehydrogenation,
the C–H bond breaking into CH needs to overcome an activation
energy of 0.69 eV with a reaction energy of −0.55 eV.

Starting from CHO oxidation, the C–H bond cleavage occurs
to produce CO. This step is highly exothermic by −1.01 eV with
an activation energy of 0.54 eV. The C–O bond cleavage is also
considered. However, the calculated activation energy is large, 1.89
eV, for this step, and the reaction is endothermic by 0.68 eV, showing
that C–O bond breaking is impossible to occur on Pt(111). No
experimental results exist to compare to our present calculated reaction
and activation energies for further CHO oxidation. The activation
energy of 0.23 eV for CHO oxidation into CO has been determined on
a (3 × 3) Pt(111) unit cell in previous periodic DFT calculations
with a reaction energy of −0.97 eV for this step.40 Our present calculated values of reaction and
activation energies are well consistent with the previous values,
although our value of activation energy is slightly higher than the
previous value. For the dehydrogenation of CH obtained via CH2 dehydrogenation, an activation energy of 1.19 eV needs to
be overcome for the C–H bond breaks to form C with a reaction
energy of 0.56 eV. Simultaneously, we also find that as the residuals
of H atoms gradually reduce within CHxO, the C–H bond cleavage steps are more and more exothermic
based on the above MEP analysis; namely, we find that the C–H
bond cleavage step within CHO is more exothermic than that within
CH2O, in turn, which is more exothermic than that within
the CH3O intermediate. As demonstrated above, the CHO intermediate
adsorbs strongly on Pt(111). Thus, the surface poisoning of CHO may
be expected to further CH3OH oxidation. However, we note
that on Pt(111) the C–H bond cleavage of CHO into CO is a highly
exothermic step. Accordingly, the CHO intermediates are possible to
dehydrogenate easily to produce CO though it strongly adsorbs the
Pt(111) surface. Similar to CHO, CO binds on the Pt(111) surface very
strongly. Furthermore, CO desorption from Pt(111) is strongly endothermic
by 1.89 eV, which seems to confirm that adsorbed CO can poison the
Pt(111) surface, as speculated in previous experimental studies.

The above thermodynamic and kinetic studies suggest that an indirect
pathway for CH3OH oxidation on Pt(111) can be proposed
at the nonelectrochemical interface, namely, CH3OH* →
(CH3O + H)*, CH3O* → (CH2O
+ H)*, CH2O* → (CHO + H)*, and CHO* → (CO
+ H)*. This is the initial O–H bond cleavage pathway despite
that the initial C–H bond cleavage within CH3OH
is an exothermic step. The rate-determining step of this pathway is
CH3OH dehydrogenation through O–H bond cleavage
into the CH3O intermediate since it has relatively higher
activation energy and more positive reaction energy. Additionally,
an initial C–O bond cleavage pathway is also proposed due to
subtle differences of activation energies between the initial O–H
and C–O bond breakings within CH3OH. It mainly proceeds
by CH3OH* → (CH3 + OH)* or CH3O* → (CH3 + O)*, CH3* → (CH2 + H)*, CH2* → (CH + H)*, and CH* →
(C + H)*, in which CH3 species can be formed through CH3OH and CH3O oxidation due to relatively lower activation
energies; cleavages of the C–H bond in CH3 and CH
to CH2 and C, respectively, may be the rate-determining
step of this pathway since these two steps have approximately equal
and relatively higher activation energies than others. Therefore,
both of the initial O–H and C–O bond cleavages are all
possible to simultaneously occur, which may be parallel on Pt(111)
during CH3OH oxidation. In a recent publication from Kaichev
et al., we also noted that the initial C–O bond cleavage pathway
was examined experimentally,25 in which
the carbon species can be formed due to CH3OH oxidation
through the C–O bond cleavage. Thus, the recent experimental
and our present theoretical results all show that surface poisoning
of Pt catalysts and insufficient high activity for CH3OH
oxidation may be mainly determined by carbon species that accumulate
on Pt.

MEP Analysis of a Direct Pathway through HCOOH Intermediate
The direct pathway includes the CHO hydroxylation to produce HCOOH
species, which can then form the final product CO2 via
serial dehydrogenation (see Scheme 1). The reaction pathways starting from CHO hydroxylation
are discussed on Pt(111) at the nonelectrochemical interface, as shown
in Figure 4. The formation
of HCOOH through CHO hydroxylation requires an activation energy of
0.20 eV with a reaction energy of −0.42 eV (exothermic), which
can be overcome at ambient temperature, and is an almost nonactivated
process. The results show that CHO hydroxylation on Pt(111) may be
facile. Once formed, HCOOH can further oxidize to produce HCOO through
O–H bond cleavage or COOH species through C–H bond cleavage.
The HCOO formation requires an activation energy of 0.02 eV with a
reaction energy of −0.29 eV. For the formation of COOH, the
activation energy is 0.19 eV, and this pathway is also exothermic
by 0.53 eV. Although the present results show that the activation
energy for COOH formation is slightly higher than that of HCOO formation,
the formations of both these intermediates have negative reaction
energies and very low activation energies, which can be easily overcome
by a thermo-activated process. Thus, HCOO and COOH intermediates are
all easily formed on Pt(111) during HCOOH oxidation, which may be
parallel pathways in the direct pathway. The CO2 product
may be able to be finally formed through the further oxidation of
HCOO and COOH. The activation energy for the final product CO2 formation through C–H bond cleavage of HCOO is 1.04
eV with a reaction energy of −0.43 eV, whereas CO2 formation only needs to overcome an activation energy of 0.42 eV
through breaking the O–H bond within COOH and with a reaction
energy of −0.21 eV. Thus, although the decomposition of HCOO
into CO2 has more negative reaction energy than that through
COOH decomposition, the activation energy COOH decomposition into
CO2 is significantly lower than that for the HCOO decomposition
process. Based on the adsorption structure of HCOO species on Pt(111),
we can speculate that the rigid adsorption structure of HCOO species
with the C–H bond oriented along the surface normal makes it
very difficult to break the C–H bond, as shown in Figure 2(c). Thus, further
oxidation of the COOH intermediate may be more favorable on Pt(111)
than that of the HCOO intermediate.

Figure 4 Overall energy diagram started from CHO
hydroxylation for direct
pathway of CH3OH oxidation to form CO2 through
the HCOO intermediate (black) and COOH intermediate (red) on Pt(111),
respectively.

Combined with the CHO
formation and further oxidation into CO2 via hydroxylation,
the direct pathway may occur on Pt(111)
through CH3OH* → (CH3O + H)*, CH3O* → (CH2O + H)*, CH2O* →
(CHO + H)*, (CHO + OH)* → HCOOH*, HCOOH* → (HCOO + H)*
or HCOOH* → (COOH + H)*, COOH* → CO2 + H*,
in which CH3OH* → (CH3O + H)* may be
the rate-determining step of this direct pathway with an activation
energy of 0.84 eV. Although HCOO and COOH intermediates are all easily
formed on Pt(111) during the further oxidation of HCOOH, and which
may be parallel pathways in the direct pathway for CH3OH
oxidation, further oxidation of HCOO via C–H bond scission
into CO2 is unfavorable kinetically because of the rigid
molecular configuration. The previous studies from Neurock and coauthors44 also showed that the COOH intermediate could
readily decompose to form CO2 on Pt(111) with a low activation
energy, and the simultaneous activation of both the C–H bond
within HCOO species and the O–H bond within COOH species was
not observed.

Optimal CH3OH Oxidation Pathways
at the Nonelectrochemical
Interface
By comparing the activation energies of elementary
reaction steps, the optimal indirect and direct pathways for CH3OH oxidation have an identical rate-determining step, CH3OH* → (CH3O + H)*, on Pt(111). As shown
in Scheme 1, the generally
accepted reaction intermediate is CHO during CH3OH oxidation
along indirect and direct pathways. Thus, further CHO dehydrogenation
into CO and hydroxylation into HCOOH are scrutinized since both of
them are competitive pathways on Pt(111). On the basis of the above
MEP analysis, the activation energy for CHO dehydrogenation into CO
is 0.54 eV, whereas CHO hydroxylation into HCOOH only requires a very
low activation energy of 0.20 eV, which can be overcome via a thermo-activated
process. Clearly, the activation energy of further CHO oxidation along
a direct pathway into HCOOH through hydroxylation is lower by 0.34
eV than CHO dehydrogenation into CO along an indirect pathway. Furthermore,
the indirect and direct pathways have an identical rate-determining
step. Thus, we can conclude that the direct pathway is more favorable
than the indirect pathway on Pt(111).

Simultaneously, it is
also noted that the intermediate CH3 formation through
C–O bond cleavage of CH3OH and CH3O has
slightly lower activation energy than CH3O formation (0.70
eV vs 0.84 eV) based on our DFT calculated activation energy. Thus,
CHx (x = 0–3)
species can be formed on Pt(111) during the course of CH3OH oxidation. The adsorbed CHx species
will occupy and block the active sites of the Pt surface, therefore
preventing further CH3OH oxidation. Because of the formation
of carbonaceous deposits on Pt(111), the catalytic activation of the
Pt surface for CH3OH oxidation can be influenced. Our present
findings on the formation of carbonaceous deposits due to relatively
low activation energy on Pt(111) are consistent with the experimentally
observed C–O bond scission of CH3OH into CHx species, as demonstrated in a previous section.
Thus, we can speculate that the adsorbed residues that poisoned the
Pt surface and impeded the performance of DMFCs may be CHx species, rather than CO species since the direct
pathway is more favorable on Pt(111) at the nonelectrochemical interface.

Reversible Potentials for CH3OH Oxidation
Due
to the complexity of CH3OH–H2O interactions48−50 and the difficulty to model a solid/liquid interface theoretically,
the present studies do not consider tentatively the modeling of an
aqueous electrochemical environment that included solvent effect in
the Pt/H2O system. At present, a common challenge in this
field is how to treat the H2O environment and determine
the electrode potential at the H2O/metal interface. However,
based on the linear Gibbs energy relationship (LGER),51,52 the reversible potentials for each of the one-electron transfer
steps during CH3OH oxidation into CO2 can be
calculated. This approach provides a proper way of avoiding the explicit
treatment of the solvated protons and modeling qualitatively the electrochemical
environment. Furthermore, it is advantageous to use the LGER approach
in the present study due to the large number of reactions. The formalism
for determining the electrode potentials is as follows. For the reaction  The reversible potentials
for the surface
reactions, Usurfrev, versus standard hydrogen electrode (vs
SHE), are given to good approximation by51,52  In this equation, U0 (vs SHE) is standard reversible potential during oxidation
of CH3OH into CO2, and the values of U0 for each oxidation pathway are from the literature
by
Anderson et al..51Eads are adsorption energies of various reaction intermediates
at the potential of zero charge, as shown in Table 1; F is Faraday’s
constant; and n is the number of electrons transferred.
Considering the complexity of the electrochemical environment, the
present theoretical studies do not include solvent effect. In spite
of this, we still expect that the qualitative calculated results can
be obtained, and the conclusions in trends are reasonably accurate.
For various possible elementary reaction steps involved in the indirect
pathway initialized with C–H and O–H bond cleavage into
CO and direct pathway starting from CHO hydroxylation into CO2 on Pt(111), the corresponding activation (Eact), the calculated reaction Gibbs energies (ΔGsurf) for the adsorbed species on Pt(111), and
the calculated reversible potential (Usurfrev) are summarized
in Tables 3 and 4, respectively.

Table 3 Activation Energies
(Eact, eV), the Calculated Reaction Gibbs
Energies (ΔGsurf, eV) for the Adsorbed
Species on Pt(111),
the Calculated Reversible Potential (Usurfrev, V), and
the Values of U0 for the Various Possible
Elementary Reaction Steps Involved in the Indirect Pathway for CH3OH Oxidation on Pt(111)
reaction	Eact, eV	U0, V	ΔGsurf, eV	Usurfrev, V	
CH3OH* → CH2OH* + H + e–	1.06	1.39	–0.71	–0.71	
CH3OH* → CH3O* + H + e–	0.84	1.86	0.12	0.12	
CH3OH* → (CH3 + OH)*	0.70	/	0.28	/	
CH2OH* → CH2O* + H + e–	0.94	–0.94	0.59	0.59	
CH2OH* → CHOH* + H + e–	0.74	1.06	–0.90	–0.90	
CH3O* → CH2O* + H + e–	0.06	–1.42	–0.25	–0.25	
CHOH* → COH* + H + e–	0.47	0.66	–0.03	–0.03	
CHOH* → CHO* + H + e–	0.26	–0.84	0.81	0.81	
CH2O* → CHO* + H + e–	0.13	1.16	–0.68	–0.68	
CHO* → CO* + H + e–	0.54	–1.45	–0.93	–0.93	
COH* → CO* + H + e–	0.37	–2.96	–0.10	–0.10	
Table 4 Activation Energies
(Eact, eV), the Calculated Reaction Gibbs
Energies (ΔGsurf, eV) for the Adsorbed
Species on Pt(111),
and the Calculated Reversible Potential (Usurfrev, V) for the
Various Possible Elementary Reaction Steps Starting from CHO Hydroxylation
Involved in the Direct Pathway for CH3OH Oxidation on Pt(111)
reaction	Eact, eV	U0, V	ΔGsurf, eV	Usurfrev, V	
(CHO+OH)* → HCOOH*	0.20	/	–0.42	/	
HCOOH* → COOH* + H + e–	0.19	1.52	–0.69	–0.69	
HCOOH* → HCOO* + H + e–	0.02	2.04	–0.21	–0.21	
HCOO* → CO2* + H + e–	1.04	–2.61	–0.30	–0.30	
COOH* → CO2 *+ H + e–	0.42	–2.09	0.18	0.18	
The previous
theoretical studies form Anderson et al.51,52 calculated the reversible potentials for various reaction steps
during CH3OH oxidation and predicted that the oxidation
pathways with low and negative reversible potentials should have low
activation energies. To confirm the previous prediction and compare
results with early studies, the reversible potentials are calculated
in the present work for each oxidation step involving proton transfer
based on the LGER approach. As shown in Table 3, the first oxidation of CH3OH
into CH2OH has a negative reversible potential, −0.71
V, which may make its information more favorable under an electrochemical
environment than CH3O formation with the reversible potential
of 0.12 V. The fundamentally consistent conclusions were also obtained
in a previous theoretical study,51 in which
the reversible potentials are −0.74 and 0.42 V for the first
oxidation step into CH2OH and CH3O intermediates
on Pt(111), respectively; namely, CH2OH can occupy more
spaces on Pt(111) than CH3O. In a previous experimental
study, Franaszczuk and coauthors53,54 showed that
the reaction in the electrochemical aqueous interface occurs by C–H
bond activation. However, our present and some previous experimental
and theoretical studies on Pt(111) obtained inconsistent conclusions,10−30 in which CH3O and CH3 formations have relatively
lower activation energies than CH2OH formation, as demonstrated
above. This may be able to be attributed to the nonelectrochemical
environment that is used in the present and previous paper. The difference
of first oxidation pathways between the gas-phase and electrochemical
aqueous environment may be because the O–H and C–O bonds
in CH3OH are more polar and hence more strongly solvated
by H2O molecules than the C–H bond, leading to higher
energy cost associated with O–H and C–O bond activation
in solution. Furthermore, CH2OH that forms on C–H
bond activation has an intact OH group that is exposed to the solvent
and is amenable to solvation.

Starting from further oxidation
of CH2OH, the calculated
reversible potentials are 0.59 and −0.90 V for CH2O and CHOH formations, respectively, in reasonable agreement with
trends with the previous theoretical study on CH2OH oxidation
into CH2O and CHOH intermediates (0.64 and 0.08 V) by Anderson
et al.,51 suggesting that CHOH formation
should have lower activation energy. In fact, the identical conclusions
are obtained based on the above MEP analysis (see Table 3); namely, CHOH is easily formed
on Pt(111). CH2O may be also formed by CH3O
further oxidation with the calculated reversible potential of −0.25
V, which is well agreeable with that of the corresponding step (−0.52
V) from Anderson et al.51 The extremely
low activation energy is also obtained for CH3O oxidation
into CH2O in our present study (ca. 0.06 eV). The reversible
potentials are calculated as −0.03 and 0.81 V for CHOH further
oxidation into COH and CHO, respectively, seeming to show that COH
formation is more favorable than CHO. The consistent trends for the
corresponding steps are also obtained in a previous theoretical study
(−0.56 and −0.13 V). However, our present calculated
activation energies are very low for both these steps and can be easily
overcome by a thermo-activated process as shown in Table 3. As shown above, it can be
observed that our present calculated values of some reversible potential
are different from those from a previous study. The difference of
adsorption energies among different calculated systems can result
in the different reversible potentials. The CHO intermediate may be
also able to be easily formed by CH2O further oxidation
with negative reversible potential (−0.68 V) and extremely
low activation energy (ca. 0.13 eV), in which the reversible potential
is very close to the value of the corresponding process (−0.69
V) from previous work.51

After CHO
and COH form, the reversible potentials for further oxidation
into CO are −0.93 and −0.10 V, respectively, suggesting
that CO formation through CHO oxidation may be more favorable due
to the significantly negative reversible potential under an electrochemical
environment, which is in reasonable agreeable with the previous theoretical
study by Anderson et al.51 Finally, CO
is oxidized into CO2 by hydroxylation with an activation
energy of 0.66 eV. Thus, we can propose the possible optimal indirect
pathways for CH3OH oxidation under simulated electrochemical
environment based on the calculated reversible potentials, CH3OH* → CH2OH* + H+ + e–, CH2OH* → CHOH* + H+ + e–, CHOH* → CHO* + H+ + e– or CHOH*
→ COH* + H+ + e–, CHO* →
CO* + H+ + e–, and (CO+OH)* →
CO2* + H+ + e–. The early
experimental studies can confirm our present conclusions on the indirect
pathways; for example, Xia et al. obtained hydrogenated species such
as COH, CHOH, and CH2OH along CO during CH3OH
electro-oxidation by using in situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(FTIR) and polycrystalline Pt electrode.55 Chen et al. also found the adsorbed intermediate CO on Pt film electrodes
by surface-enhanced infrared adsorption spectroscopic (SEIRAS).56 The previous theoretical studies from Anderson
et al.51 also showed that all the CHxOH intermediates with low and negative reversible
potentials can form CO and CHO intermediates.

Starting from
CHO hydroxylation, HCOOH can be formed with a negative
reaction energy of −0.42 eV and low activation energy of ca.
0.20 eV, which make HCOOH formation competitive with CHO further oxidation
into CO. In fact, Housmans et al. in a recent study concluded that
HCOOH can be formed during CH3OH electro-oxidation in different
acid electrolytes on Pt(111) electrodes,57 supporting our present conclusions. Subsequently, HCOOH is oxidized
to form HCOO and COOH intermediates, both having negative reversible
potentials of −0.21 and −0.69 V, respectively. HCOO
and COOH may be able to be further oxidized to CO2 with
the calculated reversible potentials of −0.30 and 0.18 V, respectively.
These are referred to as direct pathway. Thereinto, activation of
the C–H bond in HCOOH has a relatively more favorable reversible
potential of −0.69 V; thus, this is followed by the COOH oxidation
into CO2 at low reversible potential. Although further
oxidation of HCOO has negative reversible potential compared with
COOH, the particularly well-suited structure with two O atoms bonded
to the surface leads to our calculated large activation energy, ca.
1.04 eV, and impedes HCOO further oxidation since two O bonds to the
surface must be broken. The previous study modeling the aqueous electrochemical
interface from Neurock et al. supported our present conclusions,44 in which the activation energies of ca. 1.0
eV were also calculated on Pt(111). Our calculated reversible potentials
for direct pathway are also accurately consistent with trends with
the previous study from Anderson et al.51 Therefore, the direct pathway may proceed under the present simulated
electrochemical environment by CH3OH* → CH2OH* + H+ + e–, CH2OH* →
CHOH* + H+ + e–, CHOH* → CHO*
+ H+ + e–, (CHO+OH)* → HCOOH*,
HCOOH* → COOH* + H+ + e–, and
COOH* → CO2* + H+ + e–.

By combining the present calculated reversible potentials
with
activation energies, it can be speculated that the indirect and direct
pathways may be able to occur simultaneously on Pt(111) under the
electrochemical environment, which may be parallel pathways. Due to
lower activation energy of C–O bond activation into CH3 species in CH3OH, which is a nonelectrochemical
step, CHx (x = 0–3)
species may be able to be formed on Pt(111) during CH3OH
oxidation regardless of being in electrochemical or nonelectrochemical
environment, which will occupy the surface active sites, thereby preventing
further CH3OH oxidation. Thus, our present results show
that the adsorbed residues that poisoned the Pt surface and impeded
the performance of DMFCs may be CHx and
CO species due to the simultaneous occurrence of oxidation pathways
on Pt(111) under the present simulated electrochemical environment.
Based on the present study, some new insights into CH3OH
oxidation mechanisms and designing strategies of Pt-based alloy catalysts
for CH3OH oxidation can be provided. Simultaneously, the
present study is also able to partially explain why the first oxidation
of CH3OH proceeds through CH3O at the nonelectrochemical
interface, whereas it takes place by the CH2OH intermediate
under aqueous electrochemical environment on Pt(111) that was observed
experimentally.22,24,55

Conclusions
In summary, a systematic first-principle
study of CH3OH oxidation along indirect and direct pathways
on Pt(111) has been
carried out, and some new insights into CH3OH oxidation
pathways in DMFCs are presented. The thermodynamics, kinetics, and
reversible potentials for all possible elementary steps, starting
with C–H, O–H, and C–O bond cleavages and proceeding
via sequential decomposition and oxidation from the reaction intermediates
are analyzed. Some key reactive intermediates are identified. By comparing
the activation energies and reversible potentials of various possible
elementary reaction steps, it can be speculated that the initial CH3OH oxidation step proceeds by a CH3O intermediate
under a nonelectrochemical environment, whereas it prefers to occur
by a CH2OH intermediate under an electrochemical environment.
Furthermore, CHO hydroxylation into HCOOH along the direct pathway
is more facile to occur than CHO dehydrogenation into CO along an
indirect pathway at a nonelectrochemical interface. By combining the
present calculated reversible potentials with activation energies,
it can be concluded that the indirect and direct pathways may be parallel
pathways on Pt(111) under the present simulated electrochemical environment.
Simultaneously, it is observed that CH3 is also easily
formed through C–O bond cleavage in CH3OH, which
is a nonelectrochemical step. Thus, CHx (x = 0–3) species are possibly formed on
Pt(111) during the course of CH3OH oxidation regardless
of being in electrochemical or nonelectrochemical environment. The
adsorbed CHx species will result in the
blocking of the active sites and the prevention of further CH3OH oxidation. Our present findings on the formation of carbonaceous
deposits on Pt(111) are consistent with the experimentally observed
C–O bond scission of CH3OH into CHx species. Thus, we propose that the adsorbed residues that
poisoned the Pt surface and impeded the performance of DMFCs may be
CHx species rather than CO species since
the direct pathway is more favorable on Pt(111) at the nonelectrochemical
interface. However, the adsorbed species that poisoned the Pt surface
may be CHx and CO species due to the simultaneous
occurrence of oxidation pathways on Pt(111) under the present simulated
electrochemical environment. Based on the present study, some new
insights into CH3OH oxidation mechanisms and designing
strategies of Pt-based alloy catalysts for CH3OH oxidation
can be provided.

Models and Computational Details
Using the generalized gradient approximation with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof
exchange correlation functional, the periodic DFT slab approach was
used to perform all calculations.58 The
nuclei and core electrons were described by ultrasoft pseudopotentials.59 Using a plane-wave basis set, the Kohn–Sham
equations were solved self-consistently. To make the plane-wave basis
set finite, a kinetic energy cutoff of 30 Ry and a charge-density
cutoff of 300 Ry were used. The smearing technique60 of Methfessel–Paxton was used to treat the Fermi
surface with a parameter of 0.02 Ry. The PWSCF (plane-wave self-consistent
field) codes that involved in the Quantum ESPRESSO distribution have
been used to implement all calculations in the present study,61 while the XCRYSDEN (X-Window Crystalline Structures
and Densities)62−64 graphical package was used to produce the figures
of the chemical structures.

In the exposed basal planes of nanoparticles,
the (111) facet of
Pt is the most stable crystal plane. Therefore, for experimental and
theoretical studies, it is generally chosen as the representative
surface. Prior to calculations, the thickness of the (111) slab was
tested. The total energies of the two-, three-, four-, five-, and
six-layer Pt(111) slab with relaxation of top one, two, and three
layer Pt atoms were calculated, and the differences of the total energy
were obtained between three- and two-layer slab, four- and three-layer
slab, five- and four-layer slab, and six- and five-layer slab, in
which the differences of the total energy between the four- and three-layer
slab, five- and four-layer slab, and six- and five-layer slab are
basically constant. In principle, one should use as much as possible
slab layers to model the metal surface to achieve high accuracy in
calculations. However, increasing the slab layers in supercell systems
will decrease the computational efficiency and add computational cost.
Thus, a (4 × 4) three-layer fcc(111) slab with theoretical equilibrium
lattice constant is used to model the three-dimensionally infinite
periodic Pt(111) surface based on the consideration of computational
efficiency and cost in the present study. In order to study the adsorption
of the CH3OH molecule and their subsequent intermediates,
model systems that contained specific intermediates were created.
For all the structures explored, the surface metal layers and the
adsorbates were optimized. The special-point technique was used to
perform Brillouin-zone (BZ) integrations. For (4 × 4) slabs,
(3 × 3) uniformly shifted k-meshes were used, which were tested
to converge to a subset of the relative energies. A vacuum layer of
16 Å in thickness was added above the top layer of the slab,
which is sufficiently large to ensure that the interactions between
repeated slabs are negligible. The top layer Pt atoms on the (4 ×
4) three-layer slab and adsorbates are allowed to relax to minimize
the total energy of the system, whereas the Pt atoms in the bottom
two layers are fixed at the theoretical bulk positions. Structural
optimization was performed until the total energy converged to within
10–5 Ry and the Cartesian force components acting
on each atom were brought below 10–3 Ry/Bohr with
respect to structural optimization.

The climbing image nudged
elastic band (CI-NEB) method was used
to locate the saddle points and minimum energy pathways (MEPs).65,66 The transition state images from the NEB calculations were optimized
by the quasi-Newton method, which made the forces in finding the saddle
point be minimized. Structural optimization was also performed for
each intermediate point in MEPs. Based on the above analyses, the
CH3OH oxidation reaction on the Pt surface may occur via
a parallel and dual pathway mechanism.41−43 It is well-known that
CHO is a generally accepted reactive intermediate in CH3OH oxidation along both indirect and direct pathways.41−43 Thus, a simplified schematic of the dual pathways is given in Scheme 1, in which adsorbed
HCOOH in direct pathways may result in the formation of adsorbed HCOO
or COOH intermediates, and they may be the precursor for the formation
of CO2.

The author
declares no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This
work is financially supported by the Outstanding Youth
Foundation of the Education Department of Hunan Province (Grant No.
16B178), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
21303048), the Construct Program of the Key Discipline in Hunan Province
(Applied Chemistry), and Doctoral Start-up Fund of Hunan University
of Arts and Science.
==== Refs
References
Hsieh C. T. D. ; Tzou Y. ; Jiang M. T. 
Methanol
electro-oxidation on Pt
nanocatalysts prepared by atomic layer deposition . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2017 , 794 , 139 –147 . 10.1016/j.jelechem.2017.04.020 .
Chung D. Y. ; Lee K. J. ; Sung Y. E. 
Methanol
electro-oxidation on the
Pt surface: revisiting the cyclic voltammetry interpretation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 9028 –9035 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b12303 .
Garrick T. R. ; Diao W. J. J. ; Tengco M. ; Stach E. A. ; Senanayake S. D. ; Chen D. A. ; Monnier J. R. ; Weidner J. W. 
The effect
of the
surface composition of Ru-Pt bimetallic catalysts for methanol oxidation . Electrochim. Acta 
2016 , 195 , 106 –111 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2016.02.134 .
Xue Q. ; Yang Z. Y. 
Remarkable enhancement
of the specific activities of
Pt catalysts to methanol oxidation through tuning the surface properties
of supporting materials by fast microwave treatments . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2016 , 41 , 6310 –6315 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.03.036 .
Long G. F. ; Li X. H. ; Wan K. ; Liang Z. X. ; Piao J. H. ; Tsiakaras P. 
Pt/CN-doped
electrocatalysts: superior electrocatalytic
activity for methanol oxidation reaction and mechanistic insight into
interfacial enhancement . Appl. Catal., B 
2017 , 203 , 541 –548 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2016.10.055 .
Sexton B. A. 
Methanol
decomposition on platinum (111) . Surf. Sci. 
1981 , 102 , 271 –281 . 10.1016/0039-6028(81)90321-6 .
Sexton B. A. ; Rendulic K. D. ; Hughes A. E. 
Decomposition
pathways of C1–C4 alcohols adsorbed on
platinum (111) . Surf. Sci. 
1982 , 121 , 181 –198 . 10.1016/0039-6028(82)90245-X .
Ehlers D. H. ; Spitzer A. ; Lüth H. 
The adsorption
of methanol on Pt(111),
an IR reflection and UV photoemission study . Surf. Sci. 
1985 , 160 , 57 –69 . 10.1016/0039-6028(85)91026-X .
Gibson K. D. ; Dubois L. H. 
Step effects in the thermal decomposition of methanol
on Pt(111) . Surf. Sci. 
1990 , 233 , 59 –64 . 10.1016/0039-6028(90)90175-8 .
Diekhöhner L. ; Butler D. A. ; Baurichter A. ; Luntz A. C. 
Parallel pathways
in methanol decomposition on Pt(111) . Surf.
Sci. 
1998 , 409 , 384 –391 . 10.1016/S0039-6028(98)00298-2 .
Peck J. W. ; Mahon D. I. ; Beck D. E. ; Bansenaur B. ; Koel B. E. 
TPD, HREELS and UPS study of the adsorption and reaction
of methyl nitrite (CH3ONO) on Pt(111) . Surf. Sci. 
1998 , 410 , 214 –227 . 10.1016/S0039-6028(98)00284-2 .
Henderson M. A. ; Mitchell G. E. ; White J. M. 
The decomposition of formaldehyde
on Pt(111): a TPD and HREELS study . Surf. Sci. 
1987 , 188 , 206 –218 . 10.1016/S0039-6028(87)80152-8 .
Liu Z. ; Sawada T. ; Takagi N. ; Watanabe K. ; Matsumoto Y. 
Reaction intermediates
in the oxidation of methanol on a Pt(111)-(2 × 2) O surface . J. Chem. Phys. 
2003 , 119 , 4879 –4886 . 10.1063/1.1594718 .
Akhter S. ; White J. M. 
A static SIMS/TPD study of the kinetics of methoxy
formation and decomposition on O/Pt(111) . Surf.
Sci. 
1986 , 167 , 101 –126 . 10.1016/0039-6028(86)90788-0 .
Attard G. A. ; Chibane K. ; Ebert H. D. ; Parson R. 
The adsorption and
decomposition of methanol on Pt(110) . Surf.
Sci. 
1989 , 224 , 311 –326 . 10.1016/0039-6028(89)90917-5 .
Gibson K. D. ; Dubois L. H. 
Step effects in the thermal decomposition of methanol
on Pt(111) . Surf. Sci. 
1990 , 233 , 59 –64 . 10.1016/0039-6028(90)90175-8 .
Wang J. ; Masel R. I. 
Methanol adsorption
and decomposition on (2 ×
1) Pt(110): enhanced stability of the methoxy intermediate on a stepped
surface . Surf. Sci. 
1991 , 243 , 199 –209 . 10.1016/0039-6028(91)90358-Y .
Franaszczuk K. ; Herrero E. ; Zelenay P. ; Wieckowski A. ; Wang J. ; Masel R. I. 
A comparison of
electrochemical and
gas-phase decomposition of methanol on platinum surfaces . J. Phys. Chem. 
1992 , 96 , 8509 –8516 . 10.1021/j100200a056 .
Skoplyak O. ; Menning C. A. ; Berteau M. A. ; Chen J. G. 
Experimental and
theoretical study of reactivity trends for methanol on Co/Pt(111)
and Ni/Pt(111) bimetallic surfaces . J. Chem.
Phys. 
2007 , 127 , 114707 10.1063/1.2768520 .17887870 
Levis R. J. ; Jiang Z. C. ; Winograd N. ; Akhter S. ; White J. M. 
Methyl
formation from methanol decomposition on Pd{111} and Pt{111} . Catal. Lett. 
1988 , 1 , 385 –390 . 10.1007/BF00766168 .
Wang J. ; Masel R. I. 
C-O bond scission during methanol decomposition on
(1 × 1) Pt(110) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1991 , 113 , 5850 –5856 . 10.1021/ja00015a045 .
Davis J. L. ; Barteau M. A. 
Decarbonylation
and decomposition pathways of alcohol
on Pd(111) . Surf. Sci. 
1987 , 187 , 387 –406 . 10.1016/S0039-6028(87)80064-X .
Greeley J. ; Mavrikakis M. 
Competitive
paths for methanol decomposition on Pt(111) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 3910 –3919 . 10.1021/ja037700z .15038745 
Jarvi T. D. ; Stuve E. M.  Fundamental
aspects of vacuum and electrocatalytic reactions of methanol and formic
acid on platinum surfaces . In Electrocatalysis , Lipkowski J. , Ross P. N.  , Ed.; Wiley-VCH : New York , 1998 ; pp 75 –133 .
Miller A. V. ; Kaichev V. V. ; Prosvirin I. P. ; Bukhtiyarov V. I. 
Mechanistic
study of methanol decomposition and oxidation on Pt(111) . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 8189 –8197 . 10.1021/jp3122177 .
Kaichev V. V. ; Miller A. V. ; Prosvirin I. P. ; Bukhtiyarov V. I. 
In situ
XPS and MS study of methanol decomposition and oxidation on Pd(111)
under millibar pressure range . Surf. Sci. 
2012 , 606 , 420 –425 . 10.1016/j.susc.2011.11.001 .
Kaichev V. V. ; Morkel M. ; Unterhalt H. ; Prosvirin I. P. ; Bukhtiyarov V. I. ; Rupprechter G. ; Freund H. J. 
C-O bond scission
on “defect-rich and perfect” Pd(111) . Surf. Sci. 
2004 , 566–568 , 1024 –1029 . 10.1016/j.susc.2004.06.100 .
Morkel M. ; Kaichev V. V. ; Rupprechter G. ; Freund H. J. ; Prosvirin I. P. ; Bukhtiyarov V. I. 
Methanol
dehydrogenation and formation of carbonaceous
overlayers on Pd(111) studied by high-pressure SFG and XPS spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 12955 –12961 . 10.1021/jp048149a .
Kaichev V. V. ; Bukhtiyarov V. I. ; Rupprechter G. ; Freund H. J. 
Activation of the
C-O bond on the surface of palladium: an in situ study by X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy and sum frequency generation . Kinet.
Catal. 
2005 , 46 , 269 –281 . 10.1007/s10975-005-0073-0 .
Bukhtiyarov V. I. ; Kaichev V. V. ; Prosvirin I. P. 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
as a tool for in situ study of the mechanisms of heterogeneous catalytic
reactions . Top. Catal. 
2005 , 32 , 3 –15 . 10.1007/s11244-005-9254-3 .
Sawada T. ; Liu Z. ; Takagi N. ; Watanabe K. ; Matsumoto Y. 
Reactivity
of molecular oxygen: conversion of methanol to formate at low temperatures
on Pt(111) . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2004 , 392 , 334 –339 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2004.05.082 .
Gazdzicki P. ; Jakob P. 
Reactions of methanol
on Ru(0001) . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 2655 –2663 . 10.1021/jp9094722 .
Gazdzicki P. ; Jakob P. 
Formation
of methanol on Cu/Ru(0001) layers . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 1961 –1968 . 10.1021/jp107981x .
Mudalige K. ; Trenary M. 
Identification of formate
from methanol oxidation on
Cu(100) with infrared spectroscopy . Surf. Sci. 
2002 , 504 , 208 –214 . 10.1016/S0039-6028(02)01101-9 .
Shustorovich E. ; Bell A. T. 
Analysis of CO hydrogenation
pathways using the bond-order-conservation
method . J. Catal. 
1988 , 113 , 341 –352 . 10.1016/0021-9517(88)90263-1 .
Kua J. ; Goddard W. A. III
Oxidation of methanol on 2nd and
3rd row group VIII transition metals (Pt, Ir, Os, Pd, Rh, and Ru):
application to direct methanol fuel cells . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
1999 , 121 , 10928 –10941 . 10.1021/ja9844074 .
Ishikawa Y. ; Liao M. ; Cabrera C. 
Oxidation of methanol on platinum,
ruthenium and mixed Pt-M metals (M = Ru, Sn): a theoretical study . Surf. Sci. 
2000 , 463 , 66 –80 . 10.1016/S0039-6028(00)00600-2 .
Delbecq F. ; Sautet P. 
Low-temperature adsorption of formaldehyde
on a Pt(111)
surface: a theoretical study . Langmuir 
1993 , 9 , 197 –207 . 10.1021/la00025a039 .
Gomes J. R. B. ; Gomes J. A. N. F. 
Adsorption
of the formyl species
on transition metal surface . J. Electronanal.
Chem. 
2000 , 483 , 180 –187 . 10.1016/S0022-0728(00)00014-0 .
Greeley J. ; Mavrikakis M. 
A first-principles study of methanol decomposition
on Pt(111) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2002 , 124 , 7193 –7201 . 10.1021/ja017818k .12059245 
Nagao R. ; Cantane D. A. ; Lima F. H. B. ; Varela H. 
Influence of anion
adsorption on the parallel reaction pathways in the oscillatory electro-oxidation
of methanol . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 15098 –15105 . 10.1021/jp4028047 .
Bagotzky V. S. ; Vassiliev Y. B. ; Khazova O. A. 
Generalized scheme of chemisorption,
electrooxidation and electroreduction of simple organic compounds
on platinum group metals . J. Electroanal. Chem.
Interfacial Electrochem. 
1977 , 81 , 229 –238 . 10.1016/S0022-0728(77)80019-3 .
Parsons R. ; Vandernoot T. 
The oxidation of small organic molecules:
a survey
of recent fuel cell related research . J. Electroanal.
Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1988 , 257 , 9 –45 . 10.1016/0022-0728(88)87028-1 .
Neurock M. ; Janik M. ; Wieckowski A. 
A first principles
comparison of
the mechanism and site requirements for the electrocatalytic oxidation
of methanol and formic over Pt . Faraday Discuss. 
2008 , 140 , 363 –378 . 10.1039/B804591G .19213327 
Peremans A. ; Maseri F. ; Darville J. ; Gilles J. M. 
Interaction of methanol
with a polycrystalline platinum surface studied by infrared reflection
absorption spectroscopy . Surf. Sci. 
1990 , 227 , 73 –78 . 10.1016/0039-6028(90)90393-M .
Desai S. K. ; Neurock M. ; Kourtakis K. 
A periodic
density functional theory
study of the dehydrogenation of methanol over Pt(111) . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 2559 –2568 . 10.1021/jp0132984 .
Feibelman P. J. ; Hammer B. ; Nørskov J. K. ; Wagner F. ; Scheffler M. ; Stumpf R. ; Watwe R. ; Dumesic J. 
The CO/Pt(111) puzzle . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 4018 –4025 . 10.1021/jp002302t .
Columbia M. R. ; Crabtree A. M. ; Thiel P. A. 
Evidence for a hydrogen-bonded complex
between water and formic acid coadsorbed on Pt(111) . Surf. Sci. 
1992 , 271 , 139 –148 . 10.1016/0039-6028(92)90868-7 .
Allouche A. 
Quantum studies
of hydrogen bonding in formic acid and water ice surface . J. Chem. Phys. 
2005 , 122 , 234703 10.1063/1.1929733 .16008469 
Wei D. Q. ; Truchon J. F. ; Sirois S. ; Salahub D. 
Solvation of formic
acid and proton transfer in hydrated clusters . J. Chem. Phys. 
2002 , 116 , 6028 –6038 . 10.1063/1.1458543 .
Anderson A. B. ; Asiri H. A. 
Reversible potentials for steps in methanol and formic
acid oxidation to CO2; adsorption energies of intermediates
on the ideal electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation and CO2 reduction . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 10587 –10599 . 10.1039/C3CP54837F .24741672 
Anderson A. B. 
Insights
into electrocatalysis . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 14 , 1330 –1338 . 10.1039/C2CP23616H .
Herrero E. ; Franaszczuk K. ; Wieckowski A. 
Electrochemistry of methanol at low
index crystal planes of platinum: an integrated voltammetric and chronoamperometric
study . J. Phys. Chem. 
1994 , 98 , 5074 –5083 . 10.1021/j100070a022 .
Franaszczuk K. ; Herrero E. ; Zelenay P. ; Wieckowski A. ; Wang J. ; Masel R. I. 
A comparison of
electrochemical and
gas-phase decomposition of methanol on platinum surfaces . J. Phys. Chem. 
1992 , 96 , 8509 –8516 . 10.1021/j100200a056 .
Xia X. H. ; Iwasita T. ; Ge F. ; Vielstich W. 
Structural
effects and reactivity in methanol oxidation on polycrystalline and
single crystal platinum . Electrochim. Acta 
1996 , 41 , 711 –718 . 10.1016/0013-4686(95)00360-6 .
Chen Y. X. ; Miki A. ; Ye S. ; Sakai H. ; Osawa M. 
Formate, an
active intermediate for direct oxidation of methanol on Pt Electrode . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 3680 –3681 . 10.1021/ja029044t .12656581 
Housmans T. H. M. ; Wonders A. H. ; Koper M. T. M. 
Structure sensitivity of methanol
electrooxidation pathways on platinum: an on-line electrochemical
mass spectrometry study . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 10021 –10031 . 10.1021/jp055949s .16706461 
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Generalized
gradient approximation
made simple . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Vanderbilt D. 
Soft self-consistent
pseudopotentials in a generalized eigenvalue formalism . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1990 , 41 , 7892 –7895 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.41.7892 .
Methfessel M. ; Paxton A. T. 
High-precision sampling
for brillouin-zone integration
in metals . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 
1989 , 40 , 3616 –3621 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.40.3616 .
Baroni S. ; Dal Corso A. ; de Gironcoli S. ; Giannozzi P.   PWSCF and PHONON: Plane-wave
pseudo-potential codes. http://www.pwscf.org, 2001 .
Kokalj A. 
XCrySDen—a
new program for displaying crystalline structures and electron densities . J. Mol. Graphics Modell. 
1999 , 17 , 176 –179 . 10.1016/S1093-3263(99)00028-5 .
Kokalj A. ; Causà M.  Scientific visualization
in computational quantum chemistry . In Proceedings
of High Performance Graphics Systems and Applications European Workshop ; CINECA-Interuniversity Consortium : Bologna, Italy , 2000 .
Kokalj A. ; Causà M.   XCrySDen: (X-Window) CRYstalline Structures
and DENsities. http://www-k3.ijs.si/kokalj/xc/XCrySDen.html, 2001 .
Henkelman G. ; Jonsson H. 
Improved tangent
estimate in the nudged elastic band
method for finding minimum energy paths and saddle points . J. Chem. Phys. 
2000 , 113 , 9978 –9985 . 10.1063/1.1323224 .
Henkelman G. ; Uberuaga B. P. ; Jonsson H. 
A climbing image nudged elastic band
method for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths . J. Chem. Phys. 
2000 , 113 , 9901 –9904 . 10.1063/1.1329672 .

