
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03331ArticleThickness Dependence
of the Diffusivity and Solubility
of Cyclohexane in Nanoscale Bitumen Films Kislitsin Vadim Choi Phillip *Department of Chemical and
Materials Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton,Alberta T6G 1H9Canada* E-mail: phillip.choi@ualberta.ca.05 12 2019 17 12 2019 4 25 21578 21586 08 10 2019 20 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Diffusivity and solubility of cyclohexane in nanoscale
bitumen
films coated on hydrophilic substrates at ambient conditions were
studied using a gravimetric analyzer. Three substrates were used,
and they are as follows: sample A, monodisperse spherical glass beads;
sample B, polydisperse spherical glass beads mixed with polydisperse
irregular-shape kaolin clay particles; and sample C, irregular-shape
residual solids generated from a solvent extraction process of an
oil sand ore. All of the above samples had a mean diameter of 150 μm.
Diffusion coefficients were determined based upon the initial rates
of cyclohexane absorption when bitumen-coated samples at various amounts
(thicknesses) were exposed to a carrier gas with cyclohexane vapors
at two levels of relative saturations (RSs), and they were found to
be in the range of 10–18 to 10–16 m2/s. A double-first-order kinetics model fits well to
the absorption data, suggesting that there exists a concentration
gradient of polar (or nonpolar) bitumen molecules in the nanoscale
films. This is because the hydrophilic substrates attract the relatively
polar fraction of bitumen molecules to the region close to the substrates
and the nonpolar fraction resides in the region near the free surface.
As a result, the measured diffusion coefficients exhibited positive
thickness dependence when the thickness of the bitumen films was at
the nanoscale. The molecules near the substrates tended to diffuse
slower than those in the free surface region. However, diffusivity
was insensitive to the cyclohexane RS. On the other hand, the measured
solubility of cyclohexane in the nanoscale bitumen films exhibited
no thickness dependence but strong cyclohexane RS dependence. These
results suggest that solubility is not affected by the inhomogeneous
distribution of bitumen molecules in the nanoscale films and that
it follows more or less Henry’s law.

document-id-old-9ao9b03331document-id-new-14ao9b03331ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
In a variety of industrial and environmental
remediation processes,
removal of organic solvent is a necessary step. For example, in the
polyethylene industry, for safety reasons, residual solvent in the
freshly made polyethylene pellets needs to be removed before they
are transported to the customer sites. In typical soil remediation
processes, the solvent is removed to minimize the negative impact
on the environment. Recently, our group has been developing a process
where cyclohexane is used to extract bitumen from oil sand ores and
this process generates waste materials, hereafter referred to as gangue,
that contain mainly solid particles (coarse sand particles and fine
clay particles) and a small amount of residual bitumen.1−3 Cyclohexane, which is also in gangue, needs to be removed for obvious
environmental and process economics reasons. The amount of residual
bitumen in gangue is generally in the range of 0.5–2 wt %.
Despite such a small amount, it was found that the residue bitumen
significantly reduces the removal rate of cyclohexane3 and that one of the rate controlling steps is the diffusion
of cyclohexane in the residual bitumen.

Given the amount of
bitumen in gangue, it is interesting to note
that the thickness of the bitumen film on the solid residue could
be at the nanometer scale. Interestingly, there are a number of studies
suggesting that thermal, mechanical, transport, and absorption properties
including the diffusion coefficient in nanoscale polymer films are
thickness-dependent.4−13 This is because for nanoscale films, there exists a near-substrate
layer slowing down the rate of diffusion.4 For example, the effect of the substrate chemical structure was
evaluated and shown to have an impact on the diffusivity of water
in poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) nanofilms.14 The confinement effect was also evaluated for the transport of water
in thin Nafion films.8 This led to the
speculation that the diffusivity of solvent in nanoscale bitumen films
would also be thickness-dependent. It was also previously reported
that the spontaneous formation of water droplets at the oil/substrate
interface might occur in the presence of water or in a humid environment.15−17 This effect was not considered in the current study and requires
a separate rigorous experimental study.

Nevertheless, experimental
studies of the diffusion of organic
solvents in bitumen films are scanty. Using a gravimetric technique,
Noorjahan et al.18 measured the diffusion
coefficients of a couple of solvents in asphaltene (the most polar
fraction of bitumen) films. However, the effect of thickness was not
evaluated. A couple of previously reported studies attempted to determine
the diffusion coefficients of volatile solvents in bulk bitumen, and
the values for cyclohexane were estimated to be ∼3 × 10–12 m/s2.19,20 Most of the
measurements were done on well-defined geometries, plane sheets in
particular. Given that gangue particles have irregular shapes, we
are interested in studying whether the shape of gangue particles compared
to particles with well-defined geometry (e.g., sphere) but with comparable
mean diameter would yield different diffusion coefficients. In this
regard, we are interested in three samples. The first one is monodisperse
spherical glass beads with a diameter of 150 μm. The second
sample contains large spherical glass beads and fine, irregular-shape
kaolin clay particles with an overall mean diameter of 150 μm.
The final sample is the gangue with a mean particle size of 150 μm.
A gravimetric technique will be used to study the diffusivity of cyclohexane
in the aforementioned substrates with different amounts of coated
bitumen at ambient conditions. Since solubility can be readily obtained
from the experiments, we will also report such results.

Theory on the Measurement of Diffusion Coefficient
One of the oldest methods for the experimental determination of
diffusion coefficients is based on the rate of uptake of a diffusing
component by a plane sheet.21−23 In these experiments, a plane
sheet with thickness l is placed in an environment
with a known ratio of carrier gas to solvent vapor at constant temperature
and pressure and the mass change of the plane sheet is monitored as
a function of time. The solution for the diffusion equation for this
configuration is given by24 1  where Mt is the mass of vapor absorbed at time t and M∞ is the equilibrium mass
of vapor absorbed. When the value of  is equal to 0.5, which occurs at the initial
stage in many cases, eq 1 can further be approximated as follows: 2  and the diffusion coefficient
can be found using eq 3 3  It is important to mention
that eq 1 is valid under
the assumption that, as soon as the plane sheet is in contact with
the vapor, the concentration at the free surface is equal to the equilibrium
concentration (M∞) and remains
unchanged thereafter. This leads to the situation that the mass uptake
is linearly proportional to the square root of time at the initial
absorption stage.

It has been observed that the initial stage
diffusion coefficient
can be calculated by plotting the relative mass uptake as a function
of the square root of time. At the early stage, the plot has a linear
shape and thus the initial stage constant diffusion coefficient can
be calculated directly from the slope of the plotted line:23 4  Plotting  against (t/l2)1/2 yields the curve that is a straight line
at the initial part with the slope R. This slope R of a linear part (i.e., the early stage) of the curve
can be determined as 5  Then, the early-stage absorption
diffusion coefficient at the initial time is calculated as 6  It is worth saying that eqs 1−6 are only valid when the plane sheet has a uniform thickness.
This can also be applied to the cases that the material is coated
on a solid support with well-defined geometries with a uniform thickness.21,23,25

However, films, especially
in naturally occurring materials such
as oil sand ores, are not always coated on a plane sheet geometry
and curving of the film surface might occur. This can bring up a question
of whether it is reasonable to consider a nanoscale film coated on
a micron-scale spherical or irregular-shape particle as a plane sheet.
For instance, when a film has a spherical shape with an internal diameter a and external diameter b, it hence has
thickness l = b – a. The
total uptake of the diffusing substance in the spherical wall is given
by Crank21 7  For the case of diffusion
through the spherical wall, the amount traveling through the spherical
surface is 8  However, according to Crank,21 the case when  is defined as a plane sheet, and b/a ≥ 4 is a hollow sphere, so it
does not seem unreasonable to consider the bitumen nanoscale films
used in the present work, which had thicknesses below 1.25 μm,
as plane sheets since b/a is approximately
1 due to the fact that the size of the spherical particle used as
a solid support is orders of magnitude larger than the film thickness.
Regarding the irregular-shape particles, when their size dimensions
were converted into an equivalent diameter using the concept of sphericity,
such particles also satisfied the above plane sheet requirement.

Results and Discussion
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy images of samples
A, B, and C before and after bitumen coating are shown in Figure 1a–c respectively.
Since the thicknesses of the bitumen films and the size of the particles
differ by orders of magnitude, it is impossible to see the bitumen
films, which are in the nanoscale in these images. However, given
the uniform coating achieved on similar particles, it was assumed
that the bitumen film was evenly coated on all samples. As can be
seen in Figure 1b,
after bitumen coating, some fine clay particles in sample B attach
to the surface of large sand particles. Figure 1c clearly shows that the shape of the particles
in sample C is irregular. Although bitumen may not be coated uniformly
on the edges of such particles, it is also assumed that the film thickness
is uniform in order to calculate the corresponding diffusion coefficients.

Figure 1 SEM images.
Left images represent the particles before coating
(scale bar = 100 μm); right images show the particles after
coating (scale bar = 20 μm): (a) sample A, (b) sample B, and
(c) sample C.

CHNS Analysis
The CHNS analysis was used to determine
the actual amount of coated bitumen on the samples. The results are
shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Amount of Bitumen Coated on Various
Substrates (wt %)
sample A	0.20 ± 0.02	
0.74 ± 0.04	
1.10 ± 0.07	
1.14 ±
0.10	
2.23 ± 0.65	
sample B	0.11 ± 0.01	
0.54 ± 0.04	
0.88 ± 0.11	
0.98 ± 0.12	
2.55 ±
0.69	
sample C	0.62 ± 0.09a	
0.78 ± 0.00	
1.01 ± 0.19	
1.86 ± 0.10	
2.06 ± 0.12	
a Soxhlet solids after the Dean–Stark
extraction with no bitumen added (the sample still contains a small
amount of residual bitumen).

In general, the mass of bitumen actually coated on
the particles
was approximately half of the bitumen that was initially used for
the coating process. This is attributed to the unavoidable loss of
bitumen that coated on the walls of glassware. However, the range
of the bitumen actually coated (i.e., 0.5–2 wt %) corresponds
to that observed in gangue obtained from the solvent extraction process.26 The “average thickness” of each
sample was calculated as the thickness on particles of each mass fraction
“weighted” against the total surface area of the sample
calculated based upon the surface area of particles in each mass fraction.
The details of the average thickness calculations are given below.

To calculate the thickness of sample A, we first estimated the
number of glass beads: based on spherical geometry, the volume of
one particle was calculated. Then, the mass of one particle was found
as a product of volume and borosilicate density. To estimate the total
amount of particles in the monodisperse sample, the total sample mass
was divided by the mass of one particle. The mass of bitumen on each
glass bead was determined based on the assumption that bitumen was
evenly distributed among the glass beads. Using the estimated mass
of bitumen on each particle (from the bitumen content analysis) and
known bitumen density at room temperature, we then calculated the
volume of bitumen on each glass bead (spherical shape), thereby the
bitumen film thickness.

In the case of sample B, the average
thickness was calculated as
follows: the sample with known average bitumen content was separated
based on the particle sizes using four sieves (500, 212, 150, and
45 μm). Then, the average bitumen content was measured on each
size fraction using the CHNS analyzer, each measurement of the size
fraction sample was repeated five times, and the average value was
calculated. For instance, for the sample with 0.54 wt % average bitumen
content, it was found that the average bitumen content on particles
with a diameter of 500 μm and larger was 0.39 wt %, that with
a diameter of 212 μm was 0.48 wt %, that with a diameter of
150 μm was 0.61 wt %, and that with a diameter of 45 μm
and smaller was 0.89 wt %. Then, as mentioned before, the average
thickness on each size fraction was calculated by finding the volume
of bitumen on each glass bead. Using the estimated number of beads
of each size in the sample, the total surface area of all beads and
the surface area provided by each size fraction of beads were estimated.
For instance, it was found that the surface area of beads with a size
of 45 μm and smaller accounted for almost 30% of the total surface
area of the sample even though the weight fraction of such fine particles
was only around 5%. Then, the average thickness weighted by the area
fractions was calculated: “surface average thickness”
was found as a summation of the thickness of bitumen on particles
of one size multiplied by the fraction of surface area these particles
account for in the total sample area. This procedure was then repeated
for the remaining four coating ratios, and the average thickness was
calculated for each sample.

Similarly, the thickness was estimated
for sample C. However, due
to the shape of the particles being irregular, the equivalent diameter
was calculated using the sphericity, Φs,27 defined as the surface-volume ratio of a sphere
divided by the surface-volume ratio of an irregular particle as given
in eq 9: 9  

Assuming that the volumes
of particles with the same apparent size
(i.e., passed the same sieve) are approximately the same, we end up
with 10  

Here, D is the diameter of the particle. Therefore,
as suggested by eq 10, the ratio of diameter of the sphere and the corresponding diameter
of the irregular-shape particle is equal to the square root of sphericity,
which was chosen to be 0.65 (tabulated for crushed glass or flint
sands),27 and the diameter of the spherical
particle was calculated as a product of the irregular-shape particle
diameter and the square root of 0.65. This means that, for the particle
with an irregular shape, as in sample C, the equivalent diameter of
the spherical particle is smaller. Calculated thickness values for
all samples are summarized and plotted in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Calculated bitumen film thickness based upon
the amount of bitumen
coated (wt %) on various samples.

Gravimetric Absorption Analysis
To determine the diffusion
coefficients and solubility of cyclohexane for all 15 samples, the
corresponding absorption curves were obtained. For illustration purposes,
only the absorption curves for sample A at the lowest and highest
bitumen film thicknesses and two cyclohexane RS (20 and 90%) are shown
here (see Figure 3).
The rest of the absorption curves are shown in the Supporting Information
(see Figures S1–S3). As Figure 3 shows, the initial
rate of absorption (the initial slope), regardless of the RS, decreases
with increasing bitumen film thickness and a higher cyclohexane RS
yields a shorter time for reaching equilibrium. The cyclohexane RS
dependence is consistent with the concept of Henry’s law where
solubility increases with increasing partial pressure of the solvent
involved. However, the first observation deserves some explanation.

Figure 3 Cyclohexane
absorption curves of sample A at two bitumen film thicknesses
and two cyclohexane relative saturations.

To get insight into the above absorption curves,
two models were
attempted to fit into the mass uptake data: the Weibull relaxation
model and double-first-order kinetics model.1,6,28,29 The Weibull
model (eq 11) with a
relaxation parameter ς related to the relaxation time of viscoelastic
materials29,30 was previously found to be a good fit for
data for water absorption in polymers: 11  It appeared that the Weibull
model, which assumes only one stage of diffusion, does not fit well
to the present experimental data, suggesting that there exists more
than one diffusion mechanism involved in the absorption process. On
the other hand, the double-first-order (DFO) kinetics model (eq 12) shows a much better
fit of the experimental data, which suggests that there are two kinetic
mechanisms involved in the uptake of cyclohexane by the nanoscale
bitumen film: 12  

Here, ϕ is the
mass fraction of the bitumen in which diffusion
takes place by the first mechanism and k1 and k2 represent the rates of the mass
uptake at the initial and final stages of absorption, respectively.
The fitting was done to all samples. Fitting of the DFO kinetics model
to all samples is shown in Figure S4 in
the Supporting Information. For convenience, only the lowest and the
highest bitumen film thicknesses for sample A are shown. Figure 4 shows the DFO kinetics
model fit into the experimental data. Black lines represent experimental
data, while the red lines are those for the DFO kinetics model.

Figure 4 (A) Fitting
of the double-first-order kinetics model into the absorption
data for sample A with 108 nm film thickness: (a) 90% cyclohexane
saturation and (b) 20% cyclohexane saturation. Black curves signify
experimental data; red curves signify the fitted DFO kinetics model.
(B) Fitting of the double-first-order kinetics model into the absorption
data for sample A with 1250 nm film thickness: (a) 90% cyclohexane
saturation and (b) 20% cyclohexane.

All ki values for fitted
absorption
curves of samples A, B, and C are summarized in Tables S1–S3, respectively, of the Supporting Information and are plotted in Figure 5. All ki values plotted as a function of thickness in one plot are
shown in Figure S5. It is clear from Figure 5 that k1 (initial absorption rate) decreases while k2 (final absorption rate) increases with increasing bitumen
film thickness. Since the initial dissolution rate is used to determine
the diffusion coefficients, let us explore the thickness dependence
of k1. First, it is worth pointing out
at the outset that bitumen is a chemically inhomogeneous material.
Bitumen consists of four class fractions, namely, saturates, aromatics,
resins, and asphaltenes (known as SARA in the petroleum industry).31 For example, bitumen used in the present work
contains by weight ∼10.3% saturates, 5.3% aromatics, 62.3%
resin, and 22.2% asphaltenes. Also, such fractions exhibit a range
of polarities with the asphaltenes fraction being the most polar.
Given that the substrates used in this work are hydrophilic, it is
believed that most polar molecules (e.g., asphaltenes) are attracted
to the substrate surfaces while the relatively nonpolar molecules
(e.g., saturates) tend to reside in regions near the free surface.
This naturally generates a concentration gradient of polar (or nonpolar)
molecules in the film thickness direction. It should be emphasized
that the concentration gradient does not signify a phase separation
from a thermodynamics perspective. Since k1 is the largest for the thinnest film and cyclohexane is nonpolar,
the thickness dependence of k1 suggests
that the concentration of nonpolar molecules near the free surface
regions of the thinner bitumen films is higher than those of the thicker
bitumen films. On the other hand, the concentration of polar molecules
near the substrate surface of thinner bitumen films should be higher
than those of the thicker films. This leads to a slightly positive
thickness dependence of k2. This is because
the dissolution process taking place in the final stage involves the
dissolution of cyclohexane into a relatively polar environment in
the region near the substrate surface.

Figure 5 Rate constants k1 and k2 as determined
by fitting the double-first-order kinetics
model to the absorption curves of all samples.

The average diffusion coefficients and the equilibrium
solubility
of cyclohexane at different bitumen film thicknesses are shown in
the Supporting Information section (see Tables S4, S5, and S6). The results are also plotted against bitumen
film thickness and are shown in Figures 6 and 7.

Figure 6 Absorption
diffusion coefficient of cyclohexane in bitumen: solid
symbols indicate a cyclohexane relative saturation of 90% while open
symbols indicate a 20% cyclohexane relative saturation: sample A,
black; sample B, red; sample C, blue.

Figure 7 Solubility of cyclohexane in bitumen: solid symbols indicate
a
cyclohexane relative saturation of 90% while open symbols indicate
a 20% cyclohexane relative saturation: sample A, black; sample B,
red; sample C, blue.

Obviously, the measured diffusion coefficient exhibits
thickness
dependence but essentially no RS dependence while the solubility data
exhibits the opposite behavior. Let us discuss the diffusivity behavior
first. Unlike the observed thickness dependence of k1, the diffusion coefficient increases with increasing
bitumen film thickness. According to eq 4, the one we used to determine the diffusion coefficient
shows explicit positive thickness dependence. However, there is also
an indirect thickness dependence term in the equation and that is
the mass uptake term. The mass uptake term (Mt/M∞), as quantified by k1, exhibits a negative thickness dependence.
Such opposite thickness dependence in eq 4 suggests that when a film is very thick (k1 becomes relatively small), and the diffusion coefficient
would be thickness-independent as observed experimentally.5 However, when the bitumen film thickness is at
the nanoscale (i.e., k1 becomes relatively
large and is in the order of 10–2), the diffusion
coefficient shows an overall positive thickness dependence.

The above discussion alludes to the idea that the substrate chemical
properties could affect the diffusion in nanoscale bitumen films.
This speculation was reported for polymer films.5,14 Despite
both polymers5 and bitumen exhibited the
thickness dependence effect, the underlying molecular mechanisms may
be different. First, polymers are chemically homogeneous substances
while bitumen is not. Unlike the case of polymers, diffusion of cyclohexane
in bitumen is a complex process that takes place in a mixture of chemically
different species. Second, the molecular weight of polymers is significantly
higher than the molecular weight of bitumen (up to hundreds of thousands
of Daltons versus up to only hundreds of Daltons for bitumen).

The measured diffusion coefficient appeared to be dependent on
particle size distribution (Figure 6). At a given thickness, the measured diffusion coefficient
of sample A was higher than those in samples B and C. The effect is
more pronounced at high film thickness. This is due to the fact that
the average thicknesses of samples A, B, and C were different with
sample A having the thickest films.

As the calculations show,
the measured diffusion coefficients are
of the order of ∼10–16 m2/s, which
indicates an extremely slow diffusion process. However, such slow
rates of diffusion were previously reported by Kokes and Long32 in their study of organic vapor diffusion in
poly(vinyl acetate). In that study, the diffusion coefficients were
estimated to be 0.48 × 10–16 and 1.3 ×
10–15 m2/s for benzene and acetone, respectively.
Kokes and Long attributed such observation to the strong interactions
present in the systems as quantified by the Flory–Huggins interaction
parameters. The evaluation of the Flory–Huggins interaction
parameters might be also informative for further understanding of
the solvent–bitumen interaction of our systems.

Unlike
the diffusion coefficient, the solubility did not exhibit
thickness dependency but showed a strong cyclohexane RS dependence.
The cyclohexane RS dependence seems to be consistent with the concept
of Henry’s law where solubility increases with increasing partial
pressure of the solvent involved.33 However,
in this work, it is not sure whether such dependence is linear or
not as only two RSs were used. While the saturation concentration
values seem to be almost the same for all three samples at 20% cyclohexane
RS, the results for 90% RS seem a bit more disperse: in particular,
sample C exhibits slightly lower values. There is no obvious reason
for it; however, we believe that this might be due to the irregular
shape geometry of the particles in sample C. The irregularity of the
shape might create capillaries impermeable to cyclohexane but still
containing some bitumen accounted for in thickness calculations.

Conclusions
In this study, the thickness dependence
of the diffusivity and
solubility of cyclohexane in a nanoscale bitumen thin film coated
on particles with different shapes and size distributions was studied
at ambient conditions using a gravimetric technique. A good fitting
of the double-first-order-kinetics model to the experimental data
suggested that there existed a concentration gradient of polar (or
nonpolar) bitumen molecules in the film thickness direction with higher
concentration of more hydrophilic molecules near the hydrophilic substrates
(slower diffusion) and more hydrophobic molecules near the free surface
(faster diffusion). This led to the observation of the thickness dependence
of the diffusion coefficient in nanoscale bitumen films. The diffusion
coefficient was observed to increase with increasing thickness of
the bitumen film. It appeared that relative saturation of cyclohexane
in the vapor phase had no effect on the measured diffusion coefficient.
Monodisperse particles (sample A) yielded higher diffusivity compared
to the polydisperse particles (samples B and C). This is because the
mean bitumen film thickness of sample A was higher than those of samples
B and C. The measured values of diffusion coefficients at the initial
absorption stages were found to be in the range of 10–18 to 10–16 m2/s. Unlike the diffusion
coefficient, the saturation concentration of cyclohexane in nanoscale
bitumen films appeared to have no thickness dependence; however, a
strong relative cyclohexane vapor saturation dependence was observed.
The solubility of cyclohexane in bitumen films was not affected by
the concentration gradient present in the nanoscale films but only
by the partial pressure of cyclohexane in the carrier gas.

Experimental Section
Materials
The gangue was collected after the non-aqueous
extraction (Dean–Stark extraction) described elsewhere in the
literature26 using oil sand-rich grade
ore that was provided by Imperial Oil. The ore contained 11.5 ±
0.6% bitumen content by weight. ACS-certified cyclohexane was purchased
from Fischer Chemical. Spherical borosilicate glass beads (standard
sizes: 425–600, 150–212, ≤160 μm) were
purchased from Sigma Aldrich. USA. Standard test sieves nos. 35, 70,
and 100 were purchased from Fischer Scientific, USA. Standard testing
sieve no. 325 was purchased from Advantech Manufacturing. Pure kaolin
clay (irregular shape clay particles) with size of <45 μm
was purchased from Acros Organics. Nitrogen, the carrier gas, was
purchased from Praxair (99.999% purity).

Sample Preparation
As mentioned, three types of particles
were of interest in the present work and they were all coated with
bitumen at various bitumen particle weight ratios: Sample A contained
monodisperse spherical glass beads with a size of 150 μm. Sample
B contained polydisperse spherical glass beads (600–45 μm)
mixed with fine (<45 μm) glass beads and fine kaolin clay
(<45 μm) particles. The fine kaolin clay to fine glass bead
weight ratio was 45:55. As in the original gangue, the mean particle
size by weight in sample B was 150 μm. Sample C contained reconstituted
gangue composed of irregular-shape particles with a mean diameter
of 150 μm by weight.

Sample A
The purpose of preparing sample A is to create
a reference sample containing monodisperse particles with a spherical
geometry that represents the gangue particles. Considering the fact
that gangue contains essentially particles with an irregular shape
and that the concept of sphericity is used to quantify their size,
we decided to use spherical particles as the reference particles.27

Given that the weight average diameter
of the real gangue sample was approximately 150 μm, spherical
borosilicate glass beads with a diameter of 150 μm (monodisperse)
and a particle density of 2.26 g/cm3 were used. Figure 8 shows two glass
beads with a diameter of 3 mm with and without coated bitumen. The
coated glass bead had approximately 0.2 wt % bitumen. The coating
was carried out using a rotary evaporator Heidolph Hei-VAP Core. Bitumen
was first dissolved into cyclohexane, and the solution with a concentration
of 0.05 g bitumen/1 mL of cyclohexane was mixed with glass beads (monodisperse)
in a round flask so that the calculated mass of bitumen was 0.5 wt
% of the mass of glass beads. The round flask was connected to the
aforementioned rotary evaporator so that the cyclohexane was slowly
evaporated. The evaporation of solvent was carried out at a speed
of 40–60 rpm and 55 °C for approximately 6 h followed
by vacuum drying at 60 °C for 4 h. The reason for using a rotary
evaporator was that bitumen films with a uniform thickness would be
obtained. This was previously achieved in our lab by using the rotary
evaporator for coating on glass beads.34

The thickness was controlled by varying the amount of bitumen
solution
added to each sample before rotary evaporation. For a given sample
of particles, at the start, we arbitrarily added 1 mL of bitumen solution
to it. After the rotary evaporation and vacuum oven conditioning,
the amount of bitumen settled on the particles was calculated (mass
difference before and after). After the thickness was calculated as
described below, we estimated the amount of bitumen solution needed
to be added to achieve the desired range of thicknesses.

The
CHNS analysis was later done to determine the actual mass of
bitumen coated. Nonetheless, it appeared that the bitumen was evenly
coated on the entire glass bead (Figure 8).

Figure 8 Bare spherical glass bead with a diameter of
3 mm (right) and a
similar-size glass bead coated with a layer of bitumen (left) using
a rotary evaporator. The amount of coating was ∼0.2 wt % or
∼1 μm thick.

Sample B
This sample was composed of two broad classes
of particles. They were spherical borosilicate particles (45–600
μm) and fine particles (<45 μm) made up of fine kaolin
clay mixed with fine glass beads.24,26 To mimic the
gangue characteristics, for sample B, we mixed the aforementioned
types of particles with a particle size weight distribution and weight
average diameter similar to those of real gangue. To do so, we mixed
borosilicate glass beads of various sizes, 45 to 600 μm (glass
beads were also sieved to separate them by size) using the same weight
ratios of different sizes as found in gangue and given in Table 2. For the fine particles,
55% of the required amount was “modeled” by the glass
beads with less than 45 μm diameter and the remaining 45% was
“modeled” by using fine kaolin clay particles. The ratio
55:45 was used from the previously reported fine particle composition.24 Kaolin clay was sieved on a 45 μm sieve,
and the clay particles passing the sieve were collected and used as
the model of fine particles, which are reported to clays, predominantly
kaolin. The coating procedure was the same as that used for sample
A. Again, SEM imaging and CHNS analysis were done for the sample characterization.

Table 2 Particle Size Distribution of the
Gangue
size	wt %	
>500
μm	7.4	
500 μm >
... > 212 μm	11.3	
212 μm > ... > 150 μm	50.5	
150 μm > ...
> 45 μm	25.1	
<45
μm (fine)	5.7	
Sample C
The residual solids after the Dean–Stark
procedure was divided into small portions, placed on weighing dishes,
and left overnight in a fume hood. After drying in a fume hood, the
gangue was placed into a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 4–6
h to remove any traces of solvent that could have potentially been
left in the residual solids. The vacuum-dried gangue was then collected
and sieved through four standard testing sieves (500, 212, 150, and
45 μm). The approximate size distribution by weight is given
in Table 1 and the
corresponding weight average diameter was calculated. One noteworthy
point is that the Dean–Stark procedure did not remove all bitumen
(Table 1).

The
same coating procedure used for sample A was used. The resultant sample
was subjected to SEM and CHNS analysis.

Experimental Methods
Scanning Electron Microscopy
SEM images were obtained
on a Zeiss Sigma Field Emission–Scanning Electron Microscope
(FE-SEM). The beam voltage was set to 10 kV, and the working distances
were in the range of 5–15 mm. An in-lens detector was used.

CHNS Analysis
A Thermo-Scientific Flash 2000 CHNS/0
analyzer was used to determine the bitumen contents of all samples.
For each sample (i.e., samples A, B, and C), there were five bitumen
samples with different contents prepared. As a result, there were
a total of 15 samples. For each sample, the bitumen content measurement
was repeated five times and the corresponding average value is reported.

Gravimetric Absorption Analysis
Mass uptake was measured
using the Hiden Isochema intelligent gravimetric analyzer (IGA). The
experiment setup and operation protocols are described elsewhere.18Figure 9 shows a schematic setup for the instrument. The temperature
of experiments was set to 25 °C. The temperature was chosen to
be as close as possible to the normal ambient temperature and at the
same time high enough to avoid condensation of cyclohexane on the
sample surface. The pressure was set to the atmospheric pressure 1
atm. Both temperature and pressure were controlled throughout the
entire experiment. The temperature was controlled using a water bath
temperature controller. First, the sample was subjected to an 8 h
conditioning when the sample was retained in a carrier gas (N2) environment at a constant flow rate of 100 mL/min to remove
any residual volatile compounds and impurities before the experiment
as suggested by previous observations and experiments.18 Then, in the next step, cyclohexane was introduced
into the carrier gas stream at the RS of interest (20 or 90%) one
value of RS at a time. This was done to compare if there could be
any variations in the diffusion coefficients in low and high RS cases.
RSs of 20 and 90% were limited by the instrumentation to avoid condensation.
The change of mass of the sample, which was measured by a microbalance
with an accuracy of ±0.1 μg was monitored as a function
of time. All experiments were repeated at least three times.

Figure 9 Schematic representation
of an IGA system.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b03331.All sample absorption curve plots; fitting DFO equation
into experimental data; k1 and k2 value tables for all samples; k1 and k2 plotted vs film
thickness; and table of estimated diffusion coefficient values for
all samples (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b03331_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for
the financial support
provided by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) through the Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF)
and for the oil sand samples provided by the Institute for Oil Sands
Innovation at the University of Alberta.
==== Refs
References
Funk E. W. 
Behavior
of Tar Sand Bitumen with Paraffinic Solvents and Its Application to
Separations for Athabasca Tar Sands . Can. J.
Chem. Eng. 
1979 , 57 , 333 –341 .
Meadus F. W. ; Bassaw B. P. ; Sparks B. D. 
Solvent
Extraction of Athabasca Oil-Sand
in a Rotating Mill Part 2. Solids—Liquid Separation and Bitumen
Quality . Fuel Process. Technol. 
1982 , 6 , 289 –300 .
Hooshiar A. ; Uhlik P. ; Liu Q. ; Etsell T. H. ; Ivey D. G. 
Clay minerals
in nonaqueous extraction of bitumen from Alberta oil sands: Part 1.
Nonaqueous extraction procedure . Fuel Process.
Technol. 
2012 , 94 , 80 –85 .
Buss F. ; Göcke J. ; Scharfer P. ; Schabel W. 
From Micro to Nano
Thin Polymer Layers: Thickness and Concentration Dependence of Sorption
and the Solvent Diffusion Coefficient . Macromolecules 
2015 , 48 , 8285 –8293 .
Vogt B. D. ; Soles C. L. ; Lee H. J. ; Lin E. K. ; Wu W. L. 
Moisture
Absorption and Absorption Kinetics in Polyelectrolyte Films: Influence
of Film Thickness . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 1453 –1458 .15803734 
Majsztrik P. W. ; Satterfield M. B. ; Bocarsly A. B. ; Benziger J. B. 
Water Sorption,
Desorption and Transport in Nafion Membranes . J. Membr. Sci. 
2007 , 301 , 93 –106 .
Vogt B. D. ; Soles C. L. ; Wang C.-Y. ; Prabhu V. M. ; Mcguiggan P. M. ; Douglas J. ; Lin E. K. ; Wu W.-L. ; Satija S. K. ; Goldfarb D. L. ; et al. Water Immersion of Model Photoresists: Interfacial
Influences on Water Concentration and Surface Morphology . J. Micro/Nanolithogr., MEMS, MOEMS 
2005 , 4 , 01300310.1117/1.1861852 .
Eastman S. A. ; Kim S. ; Page K. A. ; Rowe B. W. ; Kang S. ; Soles C. L. ; Yager K. G. 
Effect of Confinement on Structure, Water Solubility,
and Water Transport in Nafion Thin Films . Macromolecules 
2012 , 45 , 7920 –7930 .
Lin E. K. ; Kolb R. ; Satija S. K. ; Wu W. 
Reduced Polymer Mobility
near the Polymer / Solid Interface as Measured by Neutron Reflectivity . Macromolecules 
1999 , 32 , 3753 –3757 .
Frank B. ; Gast A. P. ; Russell T. P. ; Brown H. R. ; Hawker C. 
Polymer Mobility
in Thin Films . Macromolecules 
1996 , 29 , 6531 –6534 .
Zheng X. ; Rafailovich M. H. ; Sokolov J. ; Strzhemechny Y. ; Schwarz S. A. ; Sauer B. B. ; Rubinstein M. 
Long-Range
Effects on Polymer Diffusion Induced by a Bounding Interface . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1997 , 79 , 241 –244 .
Fukao K. ; Miyamoto Y. 
Glass Transitions and Dynamics in Thin Polymer Films
: Dielectric Relaxation of Thin Films of Polystyrene . Phys. Rev. E 
2000 , 61 , 1743 –1754 .
Demaggio G. B. ; Frieze W. E. ; Gidley D. W. ; Zhu M. ; Hristov H. A. ; Yee A. F. 
Interface and Surface Effects on the Glass Transition
in Thin Polystyrene Films . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1997 , 78 , 1524 –1527 .
Vogt B. D. ; Soles C. L. ; Lee H. J. ; Lin E. K. ; Wu W. L. 
Moisture
Absorption into Ultrathin Hydrophilic Polymer Films on Different Substrate
Surfaces . Polymer 
2005 , 46 , 1635 –1642 .
Li Y. ; Yang Q. ; Mei R. A. ; Cai M. ; Heng J. Y. Y. ; Yang Z. 
Controlling the Accumulation of Water at Oil –
Solid Interfaces with Gradient Coating . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2017 , 121 , 6766 –6772 .28625061 
Zhang R. ; Liao W. ; Sun Y. ; Heng J. Y. Y. ; Yang Z. 
Investigating
the Role of Glass and Quartz Substrates on the Formation of Interfacial
Droplets . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2018 , 123 , 1151 –1159 .
Yang Z. ; Abbott N. L. 
Spontaneous Formation of Water Droplets
at Oil - Solid
Interfaces . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 13797 –13804 .20712383 
Noorjahan A. ; Tan X. ; Liu Q. ; Gray M. R. ; Choi P. 
Study of Cyclohexane
Diffusion in Athabasca Asphaltenes . Energy Fuels 
2014 , 28 , 1004 –1011 .
Tang J. S. 
On the
Determination of Diffusivities of Volatile Hydrocarbons in Semi-Solid
Bitumen . Can. J. Chem. Eng. 
2001 , 79 , 164 –168 .
Fu B. C. H. ; Phillips C. R. 
New Technique for Determination of
Diffusivities of
Volatile Hydrocarbons in Semi-Solid Bitumen . Fuel 
1979 , 58 , 557 –560 .
John C.  The Mathematics of Diffusion ; 2 nd ed.; Oxford University Press : Oxford , 1975 .
Bird R. B. ; Stewart W. E. ; Lightfoot E. N.  Transport Phenomena ; 2 nd ed.; John Wiley & Sons,
Inc : New York , 2007 .
Crank J. ; Park G.
S.  Diffusion in Polymers ; 1 st ed.; Academic Press : London , 1968 .
Nikakhtari H. ; Vagi L. ; Choi P. ; Liu Q. ; Gray M. R. 
Solvent
Screening for Non-Aqueous Extraction of Alberta Oil Sands . Can. J. Chem. Eng. 
2013 , 91 , 1153 –1160 .
Neale S. M. ; Stringfellow W. A. ; Walker W. P. 
The Absorption of Direct Dyestuffs
By Cellulose . J. Text. Inst., Proc. 
1933 , 24 , P145 –P149 .
Nikakhtari H. ; Wolf S. ; Choi P. ; Liu Q. ; Gray M. R. 
Migration
of Fine Solids into Product Bitumen from Solvent Extraction of Alberta
Oilsands . Energy Fuels 
2014 , 28 , 2925 –2932 .
McCabe W. L.  Unit Operations of
Chemical Engineering ; 7 th ed.; McGraw-Hill : Boston , 2005 .
Satterfleld M. B. ; Benziger J. B. 
Non-Fickian
Water Vapor Sorption Dynamics by Nafion
Membranes . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2008 , 112 , 3693 –3704 .18314970 
Dobreva A. ; Gutzow I. ; Schmelzer J. 
Stress and
Time Dependence of Relaxation
and the Kohlrausch Stretched Exponent Formula . J. Non-Cryst. Solids 
1997 , 209 , 257 –263 .
Fancey K. S. 
A Latch-Based
Weibull Model for Polymerie Creep and Recovery . J. Polym. Eng. 
2001 , 21 , 489 –510 .
Strausz O. P.  The Chemistry of Alberta
Oil Sands, Bitumens and Heavy Oils ; 7 th
ed.; Alberta Energy Research Institute : Calgary , 2003 .
Kokes R. J. ; Long F. A. 
Diffusion of Organic Vapors into
Polyvinyl Acetate . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1953 , 75 , 6142 –6146 .
Felder R. M. ; Rousseau R. W.  Elementary Principles
of Chemical Processes 3 rd ed.; John Wiley : New York , 2005 .
Bayati F. ; Boluk Y. ; Choi P. 
Inverse Gas
Chromatography Study
of the Permeability of Aroma through Hydroxypropyl Xylan Films . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2015 , 3 , 3114 –3122 .

