
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b01440ArticleHydrophobic Hydration Processes: Intensity Entropy and Null Thermal Free
Energy and Density Entropy and Motive Free Energy Fisicaro Emilia Compari Carlotta Braibanti Antonio *Department of Drug and Food,
Biological Physical Chemistry Section, University
of Parma, I-43124 Parma, Italy* E-mail: antoniobraibanti@virgilio.it. Fax: +39 0521 905026.11 11 2019 26 11 2019 4 22 19526 19547 17 05 2019 17 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The processes at the molecule level,
which are the source of the
ergodic properties of thermodynamic systems, are analyzed with special
reference to entropy. The entropy change produced by increasing the
temperature T depends on the increase of velocity
of the particles with a decrease of the squared mean sojourn time
(τm2) and gradual loss of instant energy
intensity. The diminution, which is due to dilution, of the number
of terms in the summation of cumulative sojourn time (τi2)Σ produces loss of energy density,
thus generating a gradual increase of density entropy, dSDens. The ergodic property of thermodynamic systems consists
of the equivalence of density entropy (dependent on dilution) with
intensity entropy (dependent on temperature). This equivalence has
been experimentally verified in every hydrophobic hydration process
as thermal equivalent dilution. An ergodic dual-structure partition
function {DS-PF} represents the state probability of every hydrophobic
hydration process, corresponding to the biphasic composition of these
systems. The dual-structure partition function {DS-PF} (Kmot·ζth) is the product of a motive
partition function {M-PF} (Kmot) multiplied
by a thermal partition function {T-PF} (ζth = 1).
{M-PF} gives rise to changes of density entropy, whereas {T-PF} gives
rise to changes of intensity entropy. {M-PF} is referred to a reacting
mole ensemble (reacting solute) composed of few elements (moles),
ruled by binomial distribution, whereas {T-PF} is referred to a nonreacting
molecule ensemble (NoremE) (nonreacting solvent), which is composed
of a very large population of elements (molecules), ruled by Boltzmann
statistics. Statistical thermodynamic methods cannot be applied to
{M-PF} that can be calculated by numerical methods from the experimental
titration data. By development of the dual-structure partition function
{DS-PF}, parabolic convoluted binding functions are obtained. The
tangents to the binding functions represent the dual enthalpy, −ΔHdual = (−ΔHmot – ΔHth), and the
dual entropy, ΔSdual = (ΔSmot + ΔSth). The connections between canonical and grand-canonical partition
functions of statistical thermodynamics with thermal and motive partition
functions of chemical thermodynamics, respectively, are discussed.
Special attention has been devoted to the equality ΔHth/T + ΔSth = 0, typical of NoremEs, as an entropy–enthalpy
compensation with ΔGth/T = 0. The thermodynamic potential change Δμ, as proposed
by potential distribution theorem (PDT) for iceberg formation from
{T-PF} of the solvent, is nonexistent because the excess solvent is
at a constant potential (Δμsolv = 0). The information
level offered by the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) is more complete
and correct than that offered by the potential distribution theorem
(PDT): the stoichiometry of the water reaction in hydrophobic hydration
processes is determined by the EAM as the function of the number ±ξw. Quasi-chemical approximation, renamed the chemical molecule/mole
scaling function (Che. m/M. sF), is a fundamental breakthrough in
the application of statistical thermodynamics to chemical reactions.
Boltzmann statistical molecule distribution of the thermal partition
function {T-PF} is scaled with binomial mole distribution of the motive
partition function {M-PF}. For computer-assisted drug design, the
alternative calculation procedure of Talhout, based on the previous
experimental determination of binding functions, is recommended. The
ergodic algorithmic model (EAM), applied to the experimental convoluted
binding functions, can recover the distinct terms of intensity entropy
(ΔHmot/T) and density
entropy (ΔSmot), together with other
essential information elements, lost by computer simulations.

document-id-old-9ao9b01440document-id-new-14ao9b01440ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
While
studying the thermodynamic properties of hydrophobic hydration
processes,1−6 we have had the opportunity of exploiting the thermal equivalent
dilution (TED) principle to get very reliable results valid for a
large set of reactions. We have found that the convoluted binding
function R ln Kdual =
(−ΔGdual/T) = {f(1/T) × g(T)} in every hydrophobic hydration process presents
a curved parabolic shape, parallel to that of the convoluted binding
function R ln Kdual =
{f(1/dA) × g(T)} where dA is the dilution of the ligand A, expressed in molar fractions. We
have verified the equivalence of temperature and dilution, as distinct
variables of intensity entropy and density entropy, respectively,
as a proof of the ergodic properties of these thermodynamic systems.

Now, we are going to show how the ergodic property of equivalence
of intensity entropy with density entropy originated at the molecule
level. We are thus setting the basis to find out the connection between
chemical thermodynamics and statistical thermodynamics.

This
article is the second part of a three-paper series concerning
hydrophobic hydration processes:I. Dual Structure Partition Function for
Biphasic Aqueous Systems.5

II. Intensity Entropy and Null Thermal
Free Energy and Density Entropy and Motive Free Energy (Ergodicity)

III. Ergodic Algorithmic Model
(EAM) Validation.6



In part I, the hydrophobic aqueous systems have been shown
to be
biphasic, consisting of the phase “solvent” in excess
and phase “diluted solute”. The thermodynamic state
of these systems is presented mathematically in the probability space
by the exponentials of a dual-structure partition function {DS-PF}
= {M-PF} · {T-PF}, composed of an exponential motive partition
function {M-PF}, referred to the solute, and by an exponential thermal
partition function {T-PF}, referred to the solvent. By taking the
exponents of these partition functions, we pass from the probability
space to the thermodynamic space where {DS-PF} gives rise to curved
“convoluted” binding functions R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}, which
conform to the binding functions experimentally determined, and constitute
an ergodic algorithmic model (EAM).

In part II, the molecular
origin of intensity entropy, as a property
dependent on temperature and hence on the velocity of the molecules,
will be demonstrated as well as the molecular origin of density entropy,
as a property dependent on dilution of the solute. Intensity entropy
is the function of time through the velocity of the particles, whereas
density entropy is the function of space through changes of the solvent
volume causing changes in dilution of the solute. The relationships
between thermodynamic functions and approximate computer-simulated
functions will be discussed. The potential distribution theorem (PDT)
will be shown to be not conforming to the biphasic composition of
hydrophobic hydration systems.

In part III,6 the statistical analysis
of the whole body of experimental data, determined for approximately
80 different compounds with approximately 600 experimental points,
will validate the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) by statistical inferences.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Ergodic Molecular Theory:
Intensity Entropy
and Density Entropy
The ergodic theory is based on the principle
that, in a system completely disordered such as a gas or a solute,
the system has “forgotten” its original distribution,
reaching a steady-state distribution, continuously changing but conserving
certain average measures. We imagine dividing the whole volume of
a solution into many microcells. Then, we imagine taking a set of
snapshots, at 1 ns exposure, of a section: we find a set of imaginary
cells wherein the disposition of the molecules in each cell is completely
different from one another (Figure 1). In each cell, the disposition of molecules, as points,
is completely random: the only property conserved is that where the
average number of molecules per cell is constant. If we increase the
exposure time to 1 μs, we find that each molecule has left a
trace on the photographic plate: the traces are longer, and their
color intensity is weaker the higher the temperature of the solution
(Figure 2). The molecules
moving within the cell are carrying a portion of thermal energy, measured
by a molecule thermal factor (mtf) φ = T–(Cp, A/kR). If we dilute the solution, we obtain
an increased dispersion in space of the thermal energy (Figure 3A). If we increase the temperature T, each molecule runs faster, leaving a weaker trace, indicating
that the energy intensity εintensity at each point
is lower (Figure 3B).
The parameter sojourn time (or persistence time) (τi = 1/li) of ith molecule measures the presence intensity in time. The lines represent
path lengths (li) of the molecules. The
longer the path length li, the faster
the molecule runs (vi = li) and the shorter is the sojourn time τi, (τi = 1/li), that is, the time spent by each molecule
to run one single length unita. The parameter
controlling the variability in space is concentration xA (in molecule fraction) of species A, whereas the parameter
controlling the variability in time is squared sojourn time τm2. As the time parameter, the squared mean sojourn
time τm2 corresponding
to the squared mean velocity (vm2 = 1/τm2) is on the same scale of the
kinetic energy (vm2). By summing
up all the squared sojourn times of all the N molecules
within a fixed selected sector of the solution, we obtain the cumulative
squared sojourn time (τi2)Σ. 1  

Figure 1 Solute
molecules in each cell of the solution are completely random.
Presence density is measured as a solute-to-solvent ratio.

Figure 2 The traces left by the moving molecules are longer the higher the
temperature T. Left: lower temperature; right: higher
temperature.

Figure 3 Ergodic parameters. A: Density entropy is proportional
to dilution
(reciprocal concentration): presence density in space → concn x (molar fraction) (exp(SDens/R) = (did(A))·( T(Cp, A/R))). B: Intensity entropy is proportional to velocity (reciprocal
sojourn time): presence intensity in time → sojourn time τi (lengths (li) are
traces of moving molecules impressed on a photographic plate) {exp(SInts/R) = (T(Cp, A/R))}.

The cumulative squared
sojourn time (τi2)Σ is a summation of the energy
intensity of the molecules, extended to the whole sector. The slower
the molecule is, the longer its energy intensity (persistence or sojourn
time) in a site is. For the ergodic theory, the activity of species
A is equal to a function of the squared sojourn time, which means
that the presence density in space (aA) equals the energy intensity in time (f(τi2)Σ). In general
terms, we can express the cumulative sojourn time as the product of
two factors 2  where τm2 is the squared mean sojourn time, xA is the mole fraction concentration, and ϕ is the molecule
thermal energy factor (thef, φ = T–(Cp, A/kB)). If, by increasing temperature,
we increase the velocity of the particles (supposing, for simplicity,
that we double the temperature T), we obtain shorter
squared sojourn times. If the squared velocity is doubled, then the
squared sojourn time τi2 of each molecule is halved, and the cumulative squared sojourn time
(τi2)Σ is halved as well. The activity is halved. 3  

In a different
sample of the same initial composition, we dilute
the solution at constant temperature so that the concentration xA of the molecules is halved. Then, we imagine
counting again the cumulative squared sojourn time (τi2)Σ: we obtain a
new value, which is halved because the mean number of terms in the
summation is now halved because of doubled dilution. 4  

By doubling
dilution, we can obtain the same change in virtual
activity as that obtained by doubling temperature T (Figure 4).

Figure 4 Ergodic property.
A: By increasing T, we increase
molecular velocity thus obtaining shorter cumulative squared sojourn
times, (τi2)Σ = Στi2. B: By
increasing d (e.g., by halving the concn) we obtain
shorter cumulative squared sojourn times (τi2)Σ due to the halved number
of terms of the summation.

The first factor xA in eq 2 depends, by definition, on the
concentration of solute A, and the second factor φ =
f(τm2) is a function of the reciprocal
of the squared mean velocity of the particles. The molecule thermal
factor (mtf) ϕ = f(τm2) = T–(Cp, A/kB) represents the thermal energy associated to each molecule A. We
can analyze the two factors in eq 4 separately, starting with f(τm2) = f′(1/vm2). If we put xA = 1 in eq 2, we refer
to a homogeneous phase where the concentration is meaningless, for
instance, a pure liquid or a solvent in excess (very diluted solutions),
and only the function of the squared sojourn time is effective. According
to the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution function, the mean velocity vm is connected to the temperature by 5  and by assuming
that all the
molecules as moving at the same mean velocity, we obtain that 6  

Then,
by passing to the logarithms of eq 5 and differentiation, we obtain 7  

By changing
the temperature T, we obtain a change
of squared mean velocity of the particles so that we can write the
entropy differential at the mole thermodynamic level as the function
of squared mean velocity at the molecule level. 8  

Thus, we have
shown how any change in the second factor ϕ = f(τm2) of eq 2 corresponds, through eq 8, to an equivalent change
of thermal entropy (intensity entropy) because the velocity of the
particles is changed. When the temperature is increased, the velocity
increases too, and the thermal change of entropy (intensity entropy)
increases as well. By changing the other factor in eq 2, we change the concentration. The
reciprocal of concentration is the ideal dilution did(A) = 1/xA of the species A where xA is in mole
fractions. The ideal calculated dilution (as a solute-to-solvent ratio)
is proportional to the number of possible statistical configurations
that the solute can occupy. The molecule A reaches its maximum dilution
because the associated thermal energy brings the molecules to occupy
the maximum accessible volume, thus reaching maximum dilution. Ideal
dilution did(A) represents
the experimental evaluation at the thermodynamic level of the probability
state of molecule ensemble (density entropy) of statistical mechanics 9  whereas the thermal change
of entropy or the intensity entropy change at constant did is represented by 10  

We can show how the analytical expressions of configuration and
thermal changes of entropy follow directly from the conditions at
the molecule level foreseen by the ergodic theory. In general, we
note (Table S1 in the Supporting Information,
Appendix H) that to each ergodic parameter xA or τm2 at the
molecule level corresponds a certain change, either a configuration
or thermal change of the entropy function at the thermodynamic level,
according to the scheme: it is worth noting the equivalence between
ideal dilution did(A) in eq 9 and temperature T in eq 10, a property that has been experimentally observed1−4 as thermal equivalent dilution
(TED). The ergodic theory assumes the equivalence between density
entropy (dispersion in space, as a function of xA) and intensity entropy (dispersion in time, as a function
of τm2) at the molecule
level: we should find an analogous equivalence between configuration
((dSDens)T = (R dln did(A))T and thermal ((dSInts)d = (Cp,A dln T)d changes of the thermodynamic function entropy at
the mole level. This equivalence can be verified by controlling (Table S2 in the Supporting Information, Appendix
H) the perfect equivalence of the changes in the properties of the
system either by changing ideal dilution did(A) or by changing temperature T.

2.2 Ergodic Algorithmic Model (EAM): “Convoluted”
Binding Functions
We have shown5 that, starting from the dual-structure partition function {DS-PF} 11  of the probability space,
valid for every hydrophobic hydration process, we can pass to the
thermodynamic space by taking the logarithms of each factor in eq 11. In such a way, we can
develop an ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) consisting of a set of
mathematical relationships (eqs 12–31) reported in Table 1.The binding functions R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} are
“convoluted” functions. Convolution
is a mathematical operation on two functions, f and g, to produce a third function C{f × g}, which expresses how the shape
of one f function is modified by the corresponding g function. The convolution of the two binding functions
of the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) is generated by the dual-structure
partition function

  

Table 1 Ergodic Algorithmic
Model (EAM)
(A) probability space	
(1) dual-Structure
partition function (for biphasic systems)	
 12  	
 13  	
 14  	
 15  	
 16  	
  	
  	
  	
(2) activity
→
solute	
 17  	
(3) ergodicity
→
dilution → temperature	
 18  	
(B) thermodynamic
space	
(1) binding function R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)} (convolution, at
constant did(A))	
curved
function (convoluted
function)	
 19  	
 20  	
linear
function (f(1/T)) (primary function)	
 21  	
 22  	
(2) binding function RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} (convolution, at constant did(A))	
curved function (convoluted
function)	
 23  	
 24  	
linear
function (f(T)) (primary function)	
 25  	
 26  	
(3) activity	
 27  	
(4) ergodicity	
density entropy and
intensity entropy	
 28  	
 29  	
thermal equivalent
dilution (TED)	
 30  	
 31  	
The primary function f(1/T) in
the convolution {f(1/T) × g(T)} or the primary function f(T) in the convolution {f(T) × g(ln T)}, representing
the modifiable function f, are generated by {M-PF},
whereas the secondary function g(T) in the convolution {f(1/T) × g(T)} or the secondary function g(ln T) in the convolution {f(T) × g(ln T)}, representing the modifying function g of the
convolution, are generated by {T-PF}. The simple modifiable functions f(1/T) and f(T), prior to modification, are linear functions, whereas the resulting
convoluted functions come out to be parabolic curves. The convoluted
binding functions of class A processes are convex (see Figure S8 in the Supporting Information, Appendix
F) (ΔCp,hydr >
0), whereas the convoluted binding functions of class B processes
are concave (see Figure S9 in the Supporting
Information, Appendix F).

An analogous couple (see Figure S9 in
the Supporting Information, Appendix F) of concave binding functions
is obtained for hydrophobic hydration processes of class B (ΔCp,hydr < 0). We recall that
reaction A {ξwWI (solvent) → ξwWII (iceberg)} with phase transition of water from solvent (WI) to iceberg (WII) takes place in the hydrophobic
hydration processes of class A, whereas reaction B {−
ξwWII (iceberg) →
ξwWI (solvent)} with
the opposite phase transition takes place in the hydrophobic hydration
processes of class B. The type of curvature has been determined by
analyzing the diagrams with the values of R ln Kdual (or other equivalent potential parameter)
reported as the function of 1/T. The shape of these
curves as f(1/T) repeats exactly the shape of the
function representing the variation of R ln Kdual as the function of reciprocal dilution
(thermal equivalent dilution, TED).

TED represents the first
example of experimental determination
of an ergodic property: equivalence between density entropy, dependent
upon the “space” variable, and intensity entropy, dependent upon the “time” variable.

We have calculated the coefficients of the binding functions of eqs 26 and 27 by interpolation of the experimental data. By calculating
the derivative in ∂(1/T) of eq 26, we have shown how, by taking
advantage of the ΔCp,hydr constant, we can calculate separately the thermal functions ΔHth and ΔSth from the slopes of eqs 28 and 29 (see Figures S10 and S11 in the Supporting Information, Appendix F). Then,
we can obtain, by subtraction of the thermal functions from ΔHdual and ΔSdual the intercepts at T = 0 and at ln T = 0, respectively. The intercepts are the respective motive functions
ΔHmot and ΔSmot. These motive functions, in their turn, are independent
from the temperature, and they will be shown to depend on iceberg
functions, that is, on the solute enthalpy and entropy changes associated
to formation or reduction of the iceberg.

These equalities indicate
that the observed total probability factor Kdual = (Kmot·ζth) with ζth = 1, experimentally determined,
is compatible with the product partition function of eq 11. We choose the dual-structure
partition function {DS-PF} as the correct function, suited to the
interpretation of the experimental data in every hydrophobic hydration
process.

The ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) demonstrates that
the assignment
of distinct partition functions for the solvent and solute in diluted
solutions of hydrophobic hydration systems is the correct choice for
biphasic systems. The validity of the dual structure of the partition
function is shown by the explicit calculations of the network of convoluted
curved binding functions, conforming to the EAM and matching the experimental
determinations of the respective chosen potential parameter, measured
at different temperatures.

A similar composite structural scheme
had been assumed for simulations
by Pratt and Rempe.7 They had, some years
ago, a correct insight of the problem of heterogeneity of the hydrophobic
systems without stating explicitly of a biphasic character. The distinctions
introduced by Pratt and Rempe7 include
(a) a defined proximal volume around the solute, belonging to the
solute, that is treated explicitly by the calculations, (b) the solute
conformational fluctuations prescribed by statistical thermodynamics
and the proximal volume fluctuating if the solute conformation fluctuates,
and (c) the interactions of the systems with more distant, extra system
solution species treated by approximate physical theories such as
dielectric continuum theories. Translated into EAM language, these
assumptions mean that (a) solute and the “defined proximal
volume” identify with the reacting phase concerning the motive
partition function {M-PF}, (b) the volume of the iceberg is variable
(i.e., it is fluctuating) with passage of water molecules WII (iceberg) to WI (solvent) or vice versa (passage of state)
concerning {T-PF}, and (c) the variable volume of the excess solvent
produces changes in the thermodynamic properties of the solute concerning
{M-PF}. These important discoveries by Pratt and Rempe7 have been nullified by prejudices: (a) a single homogeneous
partition function was necessary and enough to describe the whole
inhomogeneous system, and (b) the whole system, which is ruled by
Boltzmann statistics, is consequently suitable for computer statistical
simulations. We recall the point that, according to the EAM, the potential
function R ln ZM of the
reacting molar phase is ruled by binomial mathematical distribution
and can be determined by experiments, whereas the thermal partition
function is ruled by statistical distribution.

2.3 Nonreacting
Ensemble {T-PF} and Reacting Ensemble
{M-PF}
The ergodic algorithmic model5 is founded on the assignment of the dual-structure partition function
{DS-PF} of eq 11 to
each hydrophobic hydration process. The product partition function 32  is the multiplication of
a motive partition function, {M-PF} = exp(−ΔGmot/RT) = Kmot times a thermal partition function {T-PF} = exp(−ΔGth/RT) = ζth = 1. The dual-structure partition function {DS-PF} is a product,
valid for every hydrophobic hydration process. The motive partition
function ({M-PF} = exp(−ΔGmot/RT) ≠ 1) is referred to the solute, whereas
the thermal partition function (i.e., {T-PF} = exp(−ΔGth/RT) = 1) is referred to
the solvent. {M-PF}, concerning the reacting solute, can give rise
to changes of configuration entropy (or density entropy), whereas
{T-PF}, concerning the nonreacting solvent, can produce changes of
thermal entropy (i.e., intensity entropy) only.

Each partition
function, representative of an ensemble in the probability space,
gives rise to corresponding functions in the thermodynamic space.
The thermal functions enthalpy, ΔHth, and entropy, ΔSth, concerning
the solvent, are referred to a nonreacting molecule ensemble (NoremE)
of molecules, which is characterized (Figure 5) by enthalpy microlevels (hj) very narrowly spaced with interlevel separation
of the order of magnitude kBT on the molecule scale where kB is the
Boltzmann constant (kB = 1.3806 ×
10–23 J K–1). The NoremE is independent
from concentration or dilution so that only thermal changes of entropy
can be produced ((dS)x=1 = Cp dln T). The NoremE
ensemble is represented in the probability space by 33  which implies that the summation
∑ωiexp(−hi/kBT) can be factorized
in entropy and enthalpy probability factors 34  with
the ergodic property.
Ω is the statistical density entropy (in space) and η/T is the statistical intensity entropy (in time). The function
Ω or the function (η/T) can be calculated
by statistical mechanics methods, thus obtaining the Boltzmann entropy
for the NoremE by calculation of intensity entropy Ω or (η/T). 35  In eq 34, we state the equality of an entropy factor
Ω with an enthalpy factor (η/T): this
means that NoremE is assumed to be ergodic because, by calculating
the multiplicity in space Ω (i.e., density entropy), we obtain
the intensity entropy (η/T), that is, dispersion
in time.

Figure 5 The population of a NoremE system is distributed over a unique
set of microlevels of enthalpy hj/kB, narrowly spaced. The molecules are moving continuously from
one microlevel to another.

The NoremE is characterized in the thermodynamic space by the property 36  which means that this ensemble
is constitutionally and experimentally “ergodic”. This
relationship implies that we can calculate the integrals in thermodynamic
space 37   38  for which there holds the
relation 39  in accordance with eq 36. The symbol “≅”,
that is, almost equal, in eq 39 is indicative of the small ineffectual difference in inferior
integration limits (T = 0 and T =
1) under the condition that Tup > 273
≫ 1.

The motive thermodynamic function enthalpy, ΔHmot, and entropy, ΔSmot, are referred to the reacting solute. The solute moles
constitute
a reacting system represented by a reacting mole ensemble (REME) (Figure 6) where the difference
ΔHj between macrolevels is, on the
mole scale, a multiple of RT. This ensemble is at
variable entropic multiplicity ΔSi on the mole scale of the order of multiples of R ln xA. The REME is
constituted by few elements (moles). Approximations typical of Boltzmann
statistics (e.g., Stirling approximation) cannot be applied to this
small size set, and the REMEs cannot be calculated by computer statistical
simulations but only by mathematical distributions.

Figure 6 The mole population of
the REME is distributed over a set of macrolevels
<Hi/RT>. Each macrolevel,
representing the enthalpy macrolevel of each chemical species, distributed
over ΔSi/R multiple
cells consists of a set of molecule microlevels>, hi,j/TkB,and each of which,
at the
mole level, give a mean value of <Hi/RT>. The interlevel separation ΔHi/RT between macrolevels is
much
larger than the separation Δhi,j/kBT between microlevels. Density entropy
is represented as energy dispersion over multiple cells on the scale
of R ln(1/xi).

Dispersion over the cells by dilution (Figure 6) yields an increase
of density entropy. On the other hand, we recall
the point that distribution
of molecules (not moles!) over the microlevels (hi,j) of each Hi macrolevel follows
the thermal statistical distribution with the molecule thermal factor
(mtf): φ = f(τm2) = T–(Cp, A/kB), corresponding,
in the mole thermodynamic space, to the Lambert thermal energy factor
(THEF): Φ = T–(Cp, A/R).
The Lambert THEF transforms each solute molecule into a carrier of
energy, so that dilution of solute means dilution of energy also.
Being density entropy directly proportional to energy dilution, by
measuring solute dilution we are measuring density entropy as well
(Figure 7).

Figure 7 Moles of the
REME ensemble are dispersed (dilution) over solvent
cells. (Upper diagram) decrease of energy concn (ε1 > ε2 > ε3); red color intensity
proportional to energy concn. (Lower diagram) increase of density
entropy; blue color intensity proportional to density entropy.

2.4 From Chemical Thermodynamics
to Statistical
Thermodynamics
The REME, representing the reacting components,
is composed of few elements, and it is not ruled by Boltzmann statistics.
Because of the limited number of elements, a mole partition function ZM cannot be calculated by statistical mechanics
methods, rather by numerical methods of type HYPERQUAD8 by interpolation of titration data or by quasi-chemical
approximation,9 now renamed the chemical
molecule/mole scaling function (Che. m/M. sF).

This point deserves
a special comment because it concerns the relationships between chemical
and statistical thermodynamics.

In conclusion, we can state
that computer simulations are inadequate
to reproduce the motive partition function {M-PF}, which is dependent
on three distinct quantum level functions exp(−ΔGmot/RT), exp(−ΔHmot/RT), and exp(ΔSmot/R). The essential information
produced by the difference between exp(−ΔHmot/RT) and exp(ΔSmot/R), which is specific for each compound,
has been ignored and arbitrarily cancelled in the simulation.

The statement that computer simulations are not appropriate deserves
a comment. With reference to the equation 40  we observe that, if we plot
the expression of eq 40 in an orthogonal diagram with abscissa x(exp(−ΔH/RT)) and ordinate y(exp(ΔS/R)), we obtain an equilateral hyperbola
(see the Supporting Information, Appendix D). A set of expressions
exp(−ΔG/RT) = f(x,y) with increasing
values (−ΔG/RT) are
represented by a set of homologous hyperbolas. On the diagonal coplanar
axis z, we read the numerical scale of exp(−ΔG/RT). If we determine or computer-simulate
the numerical value of (−ΔG/RT), we are choosing one precise hyperbola on the scale.
Then, if we determine separately the value of abscissa x(exp(ΔS/R)) and the value
of ordinate y(exp(−ΔH/RT)), we choose a point on that hyperbola, thus
reaching all the information on elements disposable. If we do not
introduce specific values of the two factors, the intensity entropy
factor (−ΔHmot/T) and density entropy factor (ΔSmot), specific for each compound, we cannot define exactly the point
inherent in that process. This essential information element is lost
by computer simulations.

The most direct way to recover the
fundamental information necessary
to get the correct expression for free energy [(−ΔGmot/RT) = (−ΔHmot/RT) + (ΔSmot/R)] is the experimental determination
of the equilibrium constant R ln Kdual at five or six different temperatures to obtain,
by processing the data by the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM), the
curved convoluted binding functions R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}. These
convoluted binding functions contain in them the information necessary
to solve the problem.

In eq 48, we state
the fundamental connection of statistical thermodynamics to the experimental
data of chemical thermodynamics for hydrophobic hydration processes.

An analogous mathematical procedure that transforms the set of
statistical partition functions Z(N, V, T), each referred to one macrolevel Hi, composed of a population of hi,j microlevels, into a polynomial at the mole level
is the quasi-chemical theory.9,11 The quasi-chemical
approximation (actually, it is not an “approximation”;
rather, it is a correct fitting procedure) should be more appropriately
named as the chemical molecule/mole scaling function, (Che. m/M. sF), representing a fundamental breakthrough in the connection
of statistical thermodynamics with chemical thermodynamics. The Che.
m/M. sF scaling function does not assume that it is possible to extract
information from the thermal partition function {T-PF} of the solvent
to calculate free energy and employs the stoichiometry ±ξw of a chemical reaction as “additional information”
element to build up the motive partition function {M-PF} of the solute.
In addition, the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) guarantees that the
stoichiometric information ±ξw, calculated by
ΔCp,hydr, is pertinent
to that specific reaction because it has been extracted from the experimental
data through a thermal equivalent dilution (TED) analysis.

2.5 Dual-Structure Partition Function
The correct interpretation
of the thermodynamic behavior of hydrophobic
hydration processes is based on an ergodic algorithmic model (EAM).
This model consists of the dual-structure partition function {DS-PF},
which is a product function, constituted by a thermal partition function
{T-PF} multiplied by a motive partition function {M-PF}: 41  The dual-structure partition
function {DS-PF} in an explicit mathematical format results in being 42  

By mathematical development
of the exponential partition function {DS-PF}, we get a very essential
mathematical representation of the properties of each hydrophobic
hydration process.

The types of hydrophobic hydration processes
examined by means
of the ergodic algorithmic model are very different from one another
in molecular size, ranging from small gaseous molecules to macromolecular
proteins and from monocarboxylic acids to micelles: for every class A process, the reaction 43  with iceberg formation has
been observed, and for every class B process, the reaction 44  with iceberg reduction (i.e.,
water phase transition iceberg-to-solvent = reduction of iceberg)
has been observed. ξw is an absolute number, indicating
the pseudo-stoichiometric number of clusters of WI or (i)
melted in class A from the solvent to form the iceberg
clusters of WII or (ii) condensed in class B into the solvent WI to reduce the iceberg. The size of
the iceberg is proportional to the size of the incoming molecule for
small solute molecules or to the size of the branching moiety in denaturing
macromolecules. The iceberg can be considered as a soft niche in the
structure of the solvent where a solute can enter in. The number ξw does not correspond, in general, to an integer number and
is described pseudo-stoichiometric because it is not indicative of
an integer number of molecular or atomic units; rather, it indicates
the ratio between volume VWII (iceberg)
entering the unit and volume VWI of one
cluster (WI). The ratio between volumes is not, in general,
an integer number. The only reaction taking place at constant potential
in the solvent for class A is melting of ξwWI clusters, forming ξwWII iceberg clusters. As a state transition, each melting reaction yields
an entropy change 45  that, in analogy
with Trouton’s
rule, is a constant. For Trouton’s rule, the ratio between
evaporation heat and boiling temperature ΔHeb/Teb is a constant entropy
change for evaporation in many liquids, ΔHeb/Teb = ΔSevap = +86.9 ± 1.4 J K–1 mol–1. In class B, −ξwWI water clusters condense, thus producing iceberg reduction
with transformations exactly opposite of those in class A. The value at evaporation for liquids of ΔSevap = +86.9 ± 1.4 J K–1 mol–1 is coincident by changing the sign with the extrapolated
value at a null iceberg, ΔS0(ξw=0) = −86.4 J K–1 mol–1, common to many gases. This coincidence, involving
so many elements, cannot be by chance. It means that the intensity
entropy change at the trapping of gas in water is equal, but with
an opposite sign, to the intensity entropy change ΔSevap of the passage of a liquid to the vapor phase. Alternatively,
it is equal to the entropy change ΔScond of a vapor condensing to the liquid phase. We observe that both
entropy changes ΔSevap and ΔScond are intensity entropy changes with opposite
signs (ΔSevap = ΔSInt > 0 and ΔScond =
ΔSInt < 0) due to velocity gain
or velocity loss by the molecules, respectively.

We call the
attention of the reader on the peculiar property of
the hydrophobic isobaric heat capacity ΔCp,hydr, which is different from the usual
heat capacity Cp. The heat capacity Cp is usually attributed to the distribution
of energy over translational, vibrational, and rotational motions
of the molecules. The different energy levels corresponding to each
kind of motion can be reached successively by increasing the temperature:
in such a way, Cp is very often variable
with temperature T. In contrast, ΔCp,hydr as the thermal intensity entropy
change can be attributed only to changes of translational motions
of water molecules (WII), produced by the passage of state
of clusters of WI of the solvent to icebergs of WII of the solute. The water molecules of WI are moving from
the resting state of the liquid solvent to the moving state of the
solute in the solution as WII by acquiring thermal intensity
entropy (we remind that intensity entropy changes cannot contribute
to reaction free energy).

It is worth noting also that, in class A, the melting
units of ξwWI from the solvent are transformed
into icebergs at the very moment of receiving the incoming molecule.
The process of iceberg formation from the solvent at constant potential
generates a change in the thermodynamic potential of the solute because
the transformation of ξwWI clusters of
the solvent into icebergs of ξwWII of
the solute means reduction of the solvent volume (the solvent identifies
with WI) with a consequent concentration of the solute.
The process of iceberg formation is characterized by a large negative
unitary density entropy change, indicating an increase of solute concentration
(or diminution of dilution and hence diminution of density entropy)
and the reduction of solvent volume6 46  

In class B, −ξwWI water clusters, condensing into the solvent
at constant potential,
produce an increase of solvent volume with dilution of the solute,
thus increasing the density entropy of the solute6 47  

The calculations,
concerning motive functions, to get the unitary
values ⟨Δsfor⟩A and ⟨Δsred⟩B have been applied6 to approximately
80 hydrophobic processes of very different molecular sizes and very
different condensation states with approximately 600 data points.
The mean unitary values (unitary means referred to ξw = ±1 water cluster WI) reported above show variability
within the limits of experimental errors, presenting in such a way
a very good statistical validation of the ergodic algorithmic model
over a statistically significant population of experimental data,
as shown in detail in part III6 of this
series. The agreement between mean values ⟨Δsfor⟩A and ⟨Δsred⟩B reported above with significant
very low variability is reinforced by the numerical agreement between
the condensation Trouton constant ΔSconds = −86.9 ± 1.4 J K–1 mol–1 and the extrapolated value at the null iceberg for a set of inert
gases, ΔS0(ξw=0) = −86.4 J K–1 mol–1.

After so many promising results confirming the reliability of the
ergodic algorithmic model (EAM), we have raised the problem of comparing
the data obtained by us with the results of other experimental determinations
of thermodynamic properties of other systems and the many computational
works now frequently appearing in the physical chemistry journals.

2.6 Thermal Partition Function {T-PF}
2.6.1 Enthalpy–Entropy Compensation
The first problem
considered by us, concerning general molecular
properties of hydrophobic hydration processes, has been the discussion
of enthalpy–entropy compensation, largely debated in the literature,
as shown by the many papers that have been appearing over the past
50 years. No author is completely convinced that such compensation
corresponds to definite thermodynamic changes of the structure of
the solute. The scientists are skeptical on this point. The skepticism
is revealed by a report in Wikipedia under the heading “enthalpy–entropy
compensation”: “The existence of any real compensation
effect has been widely ‘derided’ in recent years and
attributed to the analysis of interdependent factors and chance.”
According to Gallicchio, Kubo, and Levy,13 in the phenomenon of entropy–enthalpy compensation, the transformations,
when carried out on a computer by free-energy perturbation simulations,
must be dubbed as “computational alchemy”. Sometimes,
the title itself of the paper reveals uncertainty as shown in “Entropy–Enthalpy
compensation: Fact or Artifact?” by Sharp.14

None of the many articles that have been appearing
in the literature over the past 50 years has mentioned a possible
essential contribution to entropy–enthalpy compensation by
both thermal enthalpy and thermal entropy. For the ergodic algorithmic
model (EAM), the following equality holds 48  which is itself
an entropy–enthalpy
ergodic compensation as 49  

The relevance of the high contribution of ΔHth and TΔSth from eq 73 to compensation can be appreciated if we recall that the two thermal
functions are calculated as 50  and 51  where the heat capacity of
water is Cp,w = 75.36
J K–1 mole–1 and the absolute
number ξw can be as high as 120 in some proteins.
The ratio between the two functions gives 52  

This assessment of entropy–enthalpy compensation based
on
the special structure of the thermal partition function {T-PF} concerning
the solvent represents a further validation of the ergodic algorithmic
model and a condemnation of all the theories and speculations on the
molecular origin of entropy–enthalpy compensation, other than
those implicit in eq 48.

2.6.2 Null Thermal Free Energy
Lee and
Graziano15 expressed the opinion that,
in biochemical processes, there are some side reactions where enthalpy
and entropy compensate for each other and do not influence the free
energy. The same hypothesis had been launched by Benzinger.16 Thermal enthalpy, ΔHth, and thermal entropy, ΔSth, satisfy the conditions foreseen by these authors.

The analysis
of the function free energy, enthalpy, and entropy in hydrophobic
hydration processes as development of the dual-structure partition
function {DS-PF} with distinction into motive and thermal functions
has made possible a comparison of the properties of the thermal functions
of {T-PF} with functions reported in the literature for the thermal
properties of hydrophobic hydration processes. We have verified that
the thermal free energy is erroneously considered different from zero
in some textbooks17 and articles. No mention
of the motive functions is seen in these texts, missing another essential
feature of these reactions. The formulas reported in the literature
concerning the functions ΔH(T), ΔS(T), and ΔG(T) for protein unfolding, and for micelle
formation are reported in the Supporting Information, Appendix F. The formulas17 reported
in the literature to calculate thermal free energy ΔG(T) as different from zero are erroneous,
as shown in the Supporting Information,
Appendix G.

Even Kronberg,18 discussing
the origin
of the hydrophobic effect (HE), considers the compensation between
enthalpy and entropy as significant, although the HE does not exclude
the existence of a certain portion of residual active thermal free
energy. In principle, any active thermal free energy is absolutely
excluded (see eq 69)
by the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM).

We would like to underline
that this identification of the solvent
as a nonreacting separate phase has been possible because of the introduction
of distinct partition functions for the solvent with the intensity
entropy thermal probability factor and solute with the density entropy
motive probability factor. The null free energy is a constitutional
invariable property of every nonreacting molecule ensemble (NoremE)
(see Figure 5).

We will show (see Section 2.9, Figure 11, below) how the distinction into thermal and motive functions
can help us solve one of the most debated problems of biochemical
thermodynamics: the interpretation of cold denaturation of proteins.
Having established that motive functions only contribute to free energy,
the problem of determining the cold denaturation consists of determining
the conditions of temperature at which the motive free energy ΔGmot becomes nil; above that temperature with
ΔGmot < 0, the folded protein
is the stable form, whereas below that temperature with ΔGmot > 0, the protein denatures.

2.7 Iceberg Formation/Reduction
2.7.1 {T-PF}:
Solvent and Niche for the Iceberg
The topics concerning “iceberg
formation” or “iceberg
reduction” are particularly suited to show the differences
between the dual-structure partition function {DS-PF} and statistical
mechanics calculations. Pohorille and Pratt22 have analyzed the problem of the cavities in molecular liquids in
connection with hydrophobic compound solubility. Other researchers
have put the question how the icebergs proposed in our model were
comparable with the cavities found by statistical calculations. The
cavities considered by Pohorille and Pratt22 and by Pratt and Chandler27 theory, such
as cavities obtained by statistical calculations, concern NoremEs;
the thermodynamic properties of these cavities are assumed to be calculated
from the partition function {T-PF} of the solvent, and the thermal
partition function {T-PF} represents the thermodynamic properties
of the solvent in hydrophobic hydration processes. Thermal enthalpy
and thermal entropy concerning {T-PF} do not contribute to free energy
because thermal free energy is invariably zero, being −ΔGth/T = −ΔHth/T + ΔSth = 0 with the solvent at constant potential. In conclusion,
{T-PF} cannot generate any potential function Δμ because
−ΔGth/T =
0 invariably. The thermodynamic functions for iceberg formation/reduction
must be searched for and found as development of the motive partition
function {M-PF} without any reference to the thermal function of the
solvent. We remind once again that thermal entropy ΔSth cannot contribute to free energy and cannot
be employed to calculate thermodynamic potentials (see the Supporting Information, Appendix G). On the other
hand, we have shown how, according to the ergodic algorithmic model
(EAM), the experimental dual functions ΔHdual and ΔSdual can be subdivided
into motive and thermal components, reflecting the biphasic structure
of these solutions. The motive entropy ΔSmot contributes to free energy as well as ΔHmot, whereas the functions ΔSth and ΔHth do not contribute
to free energy. The motive entropy ΔSmot can be obtained as the slope from the equation 53  if motive free energy
−ΔGmot = RT ln Kmot (which is a simple primary function
and not a “convolution”)
is reported as a function of T. Otherwise, the motive
entropy ΔSmot can be calculated
by extrapolation of ΔSdual to ln T = 0.

Further essential information elements can
be achieved by analyzing the motive functions.6 The unitary density entropy in processes of class A, ⟨Δsfor⟩A = −445 ± 3 J K–1 mol–1 ξw–1, is calculated for every
compound from the slope of the motive function, concerning the solute,
ΔSmot = f(ξw), reported as the function of the pseudo-stoichiometric number
±ξw. The negative unitary entropy change ⟨Δsfor⟩A for class A reported above indicates a density entropy loss by the solute, not
by the solvent. Iceberg formation represents for the solvent a change
of phase at constant potential with a decrease of solvent volume for
the reaction 54  with change in intensity
entropy 55  

dSth ≡
dSInts as the Intensity Entropy change
does not contribute to
free energy; the density entropy change ⟨Δsfor⟩A cannot be of concern of the solvent
but rather of the thermodynamic properties of the solute.

2.7.2 {M-PF}: Solute and Iceberg Formation/Reduction
We call
again the attention of the reader on the molecular and
thermodynamic process taking place at iceberg formation. Iceberg formation
generates a change of density entropy of the solute: iceberg formation
corresponds to a decrease in volume of the solvent (ΔVsolvent < 0) thus generating a higher concentration
of the solute and a density entropy loss by the solute (not by the
solvent, which is at constant potential).

Analogously, the process
of iceberg reduction, by the reaction 56  implying condensation of
cluster WI, leads to an expansion of solvent volume (ΔVsolvent > 0) with dilution of the solute
and
a corresponding increase of density entropy by the solute. The unitary
entropy function for iceberg reduction6 ⟨Δsred⟩B = +432 ± 4 J K–1 mol–1 ξw–1 indicates a positive gain of density
entropy by the solute (not by the solvent, which is kept at constant
potential).

The changes of density entropy, either positive
or negative, belong
to changes of the motive function {M-PF} concerning REME (reacting
ensembles), composed of few elements, that cannot be treated by statistical
mechanics calculations. Pratt et al.9,11 have introduced
for the purpose of overcoming the gap between NoremEs and REMEs the
quasi-chemical approximation, now renamed chemical molecule/mole scaling
function (Che. m/M. sF) with dismissal of the word “approximation”(see
the Supporting Information, Appendix B).

Some examples of entropy-driven reactions of the solute where the
density entropy contribution is produced by ⟨Δsred⟩B are the dissociation
of carboxylic acids and the formation of hydrophobic bonds (see Figure 12 below). As far
as hydrophobic bonds are concerned, on the grounds of the arguments
exposed above, the widely convoluted accepted interpretation that
the hydrophobic bond should be stabilized because it is entropy-driven
by the increase of thermal intensity entropy of the solvent is aberrant.
A thermal entropy increase would mean increase of intensity entropy,
and as such, it could not contribute to free energy. Intensity entropy
cannot in principle stabilize any bond whatsoever, hydrophobic or
not hydrophobic. The driving reaction is necessarily associated to
a density entropy gain by the reacting solute and not by the solvent,
which is at constant potential μ.

2.8 Ergodic
Algorithmic Model (EAM) and Free Energy
Simulations
2.8.1 Free Energy from the
Motive Partition Function
{M-PF}
In recent decades, the calculation of free energy
by computer simulations has become popular in physical and biophysical
chemistry.10 The purpose of these calculations
is the determination of free energy changes using numerical simulations
based on the fundamental principles of statistical mechanics. Developments
of computational power and of mathematical probability theories have
contributed to the advancement of free energy calculations. The result
of any computer simulation should be a representation of the thermodynamic
potential ΔμA and in general a simulation of
the motive binding functions R ln Kmot = −ΔGmot/T = f(1/T) and RT ln Kmot = −ΔGmot = f(T),
derived from the monocentric partition function {M-PF}. The functions
employed in statistical thermodynamics are continuous and not quantum
functions as the exponentials of {DS-PF}. The computer simulations
do not reproduce the motive binding functions R ln Kmot = −ΔGmot/T = f(1/T) and RT ln Kmot = −ΔGmot = f(T) as distinct components
of the curved convoluted binding functions R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}, found by interpolation of the experimental data determined
at different temperatures. The convoluted functions are studied and
explained by the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM), as derived from
the dual-structure partition function {DS-PF}. The ergodic algorithmic
model (EAM) is complementary to computer simulations and very often
substitutive of computer simulations because the free energy functions
are calculated by the EAM directly from the experimental data and
found to be conforming to the curved convoluted functions offered
by the EAM. The results of the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) are
highly reliable because they are obtained by mathematical procedures
directly from specific experimental data and not guessed as the simulated
ones.

Regarding the application of computer simulations to the
representation of the thermodynamic properties of hydrophobic hydration
processes, we observe that many computer simulations present two decisive
drawbacks, which exclude the possibility of using these methods, at
least in the formats used so far, to treat the hydrophobic hydration
processes. It is nonsense, in connection to the dual-structure partition
function {DS-PF} of hydrophobic hydration processes, to calculate
a thermodynamic potential ΔμA = ΔGA/n, which is a unitary free
energy, from thermal entropy function ΔSth belonging to the thermal partition function {T-PF}. We remind
that the thermal partition function gives rise to intensity entropy
changes, which do not contribute to free energy. The theory of Pratt
and Chandler27 based on the calculation
of an oxygen-pair correlation function of water around a cavity is
clearly referred to the thermal partition function {T-PF} of the solvent,
not contributing to free energy. The distinct behaviors of thermal
and motive partition functions depend on the biphasic structure of
every hydrophobic hydration solutions with each phase being referred
to different statistical ensembles: NoremE for the solvent and REME
for the solute. The dual structure of the partition function {DS-PF}
gives rise in thermodynamic space to “convoluted” functions
with complex mathematical structures. The computer simulations are
applicable to Boltzmann ensembles whereby large-number approximations
can be safely applied. The number of elements (molecules) of the NoremE,
representing the solvent, is very, very large and of the order of
some Avogadro numbers (NAv = 6.22 ×
1023), and this makes possible the application of approximations
for large numbers to these ensembles. The same approximations cannot
be applied to the REME representing the reacting solute: an REME is
composed of very few elements (moles) for which mathematical binomial
distribution holds instead of Boltzmann statistical distribution.
The chemical molecule/mole scaling function (Che. m/M. sF), that is,
quasi-chemical approximation,9,11 must be applied, or
alternatively, the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) can be used. The
properties of the motive partition function {M-PF}, referred to a
mole population, are suited to rule the progress of the chemical reaction.
The concept itself of the chemical reaction means transformation of
moles (or fractions of a mole) of a substance, not of molecules. We
can experimentally detect a reaction whenever we observe at least
a minimum detectable change of fractions of moles. This means that
in these cases, we find −ΔGmot ≠ 0.

The functions ΔHth and ΔSth as secondary functions g(T) and g(ln T) of the
convolutions
modify the linear motive binding functions R ln Kmot = f(1/T) and RT ln Kmot = f(T), thus determining the curvature amplitudes
of the convoluted binding functions at constant did(A), R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}. The curvature amplitude, referred to constant ΔCp,hydr, contains information
(±ξw) concerning iceberg formation in class A or iceberg reduction in class B. Losing this
information means losing the possibility of distinguishing between
the unitary density entropy changes Δsfor or Δsred, referred to
the solute, and the thermal intensity entropy changes, referred to
the solvent. Another essential information lost by computer simulations19 is the distinct values of intensity entropy
(ΔHmot/T) and density
entropy (ΔSmot). The formal ergodic
equivalence, assumed in computer simulations, between molecular dynamics
methods and Monte Carlo methods is a decisive drawback of computer
simulations, leading to the loss of essential information elements
(see the Supporting Information, Appendix
D).

Even the potential distribution theorem (PDT),20 because it is not based on a dual-structure
partition function
{DS-PF} of a biphasic system, lacks much information on hydrophobic
hydration processes and cannot be employed as such to calculate free
energy. Both motive functions with the reaction of iceberg formation/reduction
in hydrophobic hydration processes must be considered to calculate
free energy by the chemical molecule/mole scaling Function (Che. m/M.
sF), that is, by quasi-chemical approximation.9 These quasi-chemical calculations cannot be defined an “approximate”;
rather, they are the correct acceptable development of PDT, referred
to constant ΔCp,hydr and known ±ξw. The reaction stoichiometry
±ξw introduced by quasi-chemical calculations
is an additional information element obtained from the thermal partition
function {T-PF}, necessary to make the calculations conformed to the
biphasic structure of every hydrophobic hydration systems.

2.8.2 Ergodic Algorithmic Model (EAM) and Theory
of the Hydrophobic Effect
The ergodic algorithmic model (EAM)
founded on a dual-structure partition function {DS-PF} as the product
of a motive partition function {M-PF} for the solute phase times a
thermal partition {T-PF} for the solvent phase 57  offers a sound theoretical
basis to the theory of the hydrophobic effect.

The ergodic algorithmic
model (EAM) offers a scientific basis for the interpretation
of the hydrophobic effects. We observe that the expression (−ln pn ≈ ζ0 + ζ1n + ζ2n2) reported by Pratt23 in the
review “Molecular Theory of Hydrophobic Effects” is
the equation of a concave parabola, which repeats exactly the shape
of the experimental binding function RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} for a reaction of class B. The curved shape
of the apparent binding function is caused by the thermal component
ΔSth as the function of heat capacity
ΔCp,hydr (curvature
amplitude Campl = 0.7071/ΔCp,hydr). The identification
of the potential curve with the binding function RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} comprehending thermal functions is confirmed
by Pratt23 who states that the maximum
of the potential curve coincides with the point of entropy convergence
as determined by Baldwin25 and Lee26 for thermal entropy (see eq 18). 58  

Pratt23 has not recognized the
double
dependence on both T and ln T of eq 58 as a property of a convoluted
function. We remind once again that thermal entropy ΔSth cannot contribute to free energy and cannot
be employed to calculate thermodynamic potentials. The ergodic algorithmic
model (EAM) offers a different interpretation of the maximum of the
parabolic function. According to the EAM, the concave function is
typical of the processes of class B with iceberg reduction
(see Figures S2 and S9 in the Supporting
Information, Appendices A and F, respectively). In the processes of
class B, the maximum corresponds to the temperature T at which ΔSdual = ΔSmot + ΔSth = 0, and there is exact compensation between motive entropy, ΔSmot, and thermal entropy, ΔSth; this means that the point of entropy convergence is
at ΔS°(T1)
= −ΔSmot.

The molecular theory of hydrophobic effects and some parts
of the
potential distribution theorem (PDT)20 need
revision to become applicable to hydrophobic hydration processes.
The distinct behaviors of thermal and motive components are not considered
by potential distribution theorem (PDT); this theorem assumes that
the hydrophobic systems are monophasic, and a lot of information is
lost. Another fundamental limitation of PDT when applied to hydrophobic
hydration systems is that of not considering the possible alternative
of a concave or convex curve (alternative class A or
class B) as proposed by the ergodic algorithmic model
(EAM). The concave/convex alternative or class A/class B alternative, bound to the alternative of either iceberg
formation or iceberg reduction with phase transition of water at constant
potential, is completely ignored by PDT. The ergodic algorithmic model
(EAM) keeps for sure that every hydrophobic hydration system is biphasic.
A dual-structure partition function {DS-PF} = {M-PF}·{T-PF} represents
the biphasic system. Iceberg formation is a phase transition of ξwWI from solvent (WI) to solute (WII (iceberg)), that is, from an element of {T-PF} to an element
of {M-PF} with constant potential of WI. The iceberg function
is not the probability of forming a cavity in the solvent, as assumed
by PDT; rather, the iceberg derives from the transformation of portions
of the solvent, ξwWI, into a niche of
ξwWII, thus generating a phase transition.
This phase transition modifies the solvent volume, which generates
changes of the thermodynamic motive potential function {M-PF} of the
solute (see Section 2.9 below) but keeps the solvent at constant potential. In other words,
if we want to look for the origin of the potential Δμ,
we must search, as a driving force of any hydrophobic hydration processes,
among the factors of the motive function RT ln Kmot = f(T)
(Table 1). We can establish
the stoichiometry (±ξw) of the chemical reaction
of iceberg formation/reduction from the thermal partition function
{T-PF} of the solvent, but the free energy change of the reaction
is produced by the motive partition function {M-PF} of the solute.
Specifically, in the reactions of class A, the formation
of the iceberg reduces the solvent volume and reduces the dilution
1/xA of the solute, thus modifying the
partition function {M-PF} of the solute. By recognizing that the thermal
functions ΔHth and TΔSth cannot contribute directly
to free energy, the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) excludes the possibility
that the driving reaction might be found in the solvent. The opposite
reaction of iceberg reduction takes place in reactions of class B where the volume of the solvent is expanded, thus increasing
the dilution 1/xA of the solute. On the
ground of these transformations of the partition function {M-PF} of
the solute, we can state that the choices of Pratt23 and Pratt and Chandler27 of
calculating the potential Δμ from the partition function
{T-PF} of the solvent or from the oxygen–oxygen correlation
function of solvent water are unacceptable. In consequence, we must
search for a different explanation, coherent with the ergodic algorithmic
model (EAM), of the origin of the changes of potential μ within
the motive binding functions R ln Kmot = f(1/T) and RT ln Kmot = f(T) concerning the motive partition function {M-PF}
of the solute.

The statement that the potential distribution
theorem is unreliable
is referred only to the application of the theory to evaluate the
potential Δμ of the solvent in hydrophobic hydration processes,
but it is not referred to the whole theory in general. The criticism
on the specific point of hydrophobic hydration processes is well founded.
The foundations of the potential distribution theorem have been searched
for by Pratt11 et al. in the analogies
with the information theory. Some reflections on this choice are in
order. The information theory has been invocated by Pratt et al.11 with reference to the connection between “information-theoretic
entropy” and “thermodynamic entropy” where the
thermodynamic entropy is considered a parameter of disorder in chemical
systems. This kind of information-entropy disorder can be identified
with “energy dispersion in space”, that is, with density
entropy. In contrast with this, we have shown that every hydrophobic
hydration system is represented by a dual-structure partition function
{DS-PF} = {M-PF}·{T-PF} where the thermal partition function
{T-PF} is representative of the solvent. This thermal partition function
of the solvent can give rise to changes of dispersion of energy in
time (i.e., to intensity entropy change) at constant potential. It
is impossible to extract any potential function change Δμ
from thermal partition function {T-PF} because changes of Δμ
as a temperature-dependent property of the thermal partition function
of the solvent are nonexistent.

The inadequacy of PDT to explain
properties of the solvent is confirmed
by realizing that so many pretended results obtained by PDT in relation
to hydrophobic hydration processes are inconsistent with numerical
and geometrical properties of the functions obtained by application
of the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM). We remind that the ergodic
algorithmic model (EAM) is presenting convoluted binding functions R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}, which are free energy functions experimentally
determined. As obtained from experimental data, these functions do
not need any simulation with inherent uncertainties and loss of information.

Molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo calculations need corrections
with respect to the format employed so far. The maximum in the binding
function RT ln Kdual =
−ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}, which is a curved
concave function, is explained by the EAM by considering that the
maximum corresponds to the temperature at which ΔSdual = ΔSmot + ΔSth = 0. The potential distribution theorem (PDT)
with missing essential information elements does not even mention
that, for the same reaction of class B, another parallel
concave binding function R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} exists whose tangent is the dual enthalpy (−ΔHdual = −ΔHmot −ΔHth) with a
minimum for ΔHdual = 0. This concave
binding function R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)} presents in each compound the same curvature amplitude as the
other concave binding function RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} and an equal (negative) value of hydrophobic heat capacity ΔCp,hydr < 0. By passing to
more general considerations concerning both class A and
class B and not concerning one single reaction of class B only, the potential distribution theorem (PDT) ignores the
fact that we can find hydrophobic hydration processes of class A also (e.g., the solubility in water of inert gases) presenting
for each compound couples of “convex” binding functions R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} (see Figure S8 in the Supporting Information, Appendix F). Both these convex free
energy functions have in each compound the same curvature amplitude
and the same positive hydrophobic heat capacity, ΔCp,hydr > 0.

2.8.3 Molecule/Mole
Scaling Function or Quasi-Chemical
Approximation
The failure of PDT to explain the formation
of the cavity from the partition function of the solvent has surprised
us and suggested us to analyze the foundations of the theory.23 The potential distribution theorem originated
from the work of Widom28 on the theory
of fluids, and it seems that the theory concerned the solvent. The
PDT has been applied also in connection to computer simulations of
chemical reactions and free energy functions. Pratt. et al.22 represent the potential as 59  where xj is the mole fraction of species j for
this ideal case, xjp is the partial pressure
of species j, and p is the total
pressure. The factor β = 1/kBT indicates that it is referred to a population of molecules.
This expression and the parallelism of PDT with computer simulations
indicate that these relationships are referred to a statistical population,
ruled by Boltzmann statistics, whereas the mole population of the
solute in hydrophobic hydration systems is a reacting ensemble (REME),
composed of few elements and ruled by binomial distribution. The direct
application of PDT to the study of chemical reactions is inappropriate
if no distinction is done between binomial and Boltzmann statistical
distributions. Pratt et al.24 have correctly
adapted the potential distribution theorem to handle REMEs by considering
quasi-chemical approximation. They have introduced partition functions
analogous to the motive partition function {M-PF}, generating the
motive binding functions R ln Kmot = f(1/T) and RT ln Kmot = f(T) (see the Supporting Information, Appendix B), thus obtaining polynomial molar partition functions.
They consider that the components of the solute originate clusters.
They consider two levels of clustering of the solute: (a) inner level
clusters (icebergs) and (b) outer level clusters (icebergs). The equilibrium
hydration constants of eqs 63 and 64 are very likely referred to
outer level water clusters with stoichiometry ±ξw and suitable for quasi-chemical approximation.

quasi-chemical
approximation proposed by Pratt et al.,24 now renamed the chemical molecule/mole scaling function (Che. m/M.
sF) is coherent with the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) founded on
appropriate reference to chemical potential μ of the solute
on the mole scale 1/RT as a factor of the motive
partition function {M-PF}. In fact, we have shown in part I,5Table 1, that the chemical potential μ is a dilution-equivalent
density entropy function in REMEs 60  where active dilution, dA = (1/aA), is the
reciprocal of activity aA. The basic setting
of the thermodynamic potential (−μ/T) is the definition of activity aA. We
propose to change the expression for the activity of a species σ 61  as assumed by PDT22 into the expression (cf. eq 2) 62  

The latter expression
is considered at the molecule level with
both components of activity, thermal (as the thermal factor Φ
from thermal equivalent dilution) and motive. The activity aσ treated by the chemical molecule/mole
scaling function (Che. m/M. sF) or quasi-chemical approximation generates
at the mole level the motive partition function Kmot. The molecule distribution of each chemical species
A over the microlevels of hi,j generates
at the mole level the Lambert thermal activity factor Φ = T–(ΔCp, A/R), which is the source of
the ergodic property of chemical solutions. Equation 61 is based on the principle that entropy S can depend on both density entropy and intensity entropy.
We keep this same structure for activity aA when we apply the quasi-chemical approximation (Pratt et al.22) to the hydration equilibria involved in water-clustering
reactions of iceberg formation and iceberg reduction, concerning the
solute. The Lambert thermal factor Φ = T–(ΔCp, A/R), applied to the solvent molecules, is
the source of intensity entropy, whereas when applied to solute molecules
is the source of density entropy.

We have shown (see Section 2.9 below) that
the reactions of iceberg formation/reduction
are of concern with the water species WI and WII, generating changes of solvent volume. The change of solvent volume
modifies the properties of the solute of partition function {M-PF}
as distinct from the bulk solvent. The bulk solvent corresponds to
thermal partition function {T-PF}. The solvent/solute change of phase
of water, direct or inverse, can take place by two opposite reactions.
The reaction of iceberg formation, typical of class A with ξw > 0 is a hydration clustering reaction
with constant ξw (or ξ* with ξw > ξ* if not all the water molecules expelled from WI to form a niche with icebergs become ligands of the solute) 63  whereas the reaction of iceberg
reduction, eq 64, typical
of class B with −ξw is a dehydration
reaction with a constant of 64  (−ξw or −ξ* with
ξw > ξ* because
not all the water molecules reducing the iceberg niche might become
ligands of the solute)

Following Pratt,22 we transform the
expression of activity in eq 62 from the molecule scale to the mole scale by means of the
chemical molecule/mole scaling function (Che. m/M. sF) or quasi-chemical
approximation. The scaling ratio from molecule to mole yields 65   66  for the two factors of eq 66. We insist that the
name of quasi-chemical approximation should be changed into that more
appropriate, chemical molecule/mole scaling function (Che. m/M. sF)
(see the Supporting Information, Appendix
B).

Equation 66 considers
at the molecule level both components of activity, thermal (as for
thermal equivalent dilution) and motive (as for dilution). The activity aσ treated by the chemical molecule/mole
scaling function (Che. m/M. sF) or quasi-chemical approximation generates
at the mole level the motive partition function Kmot. The factor T(ΔCp, A/kB) generates at the mole level the Lambert thermal
factor Φ = T–(ΔCp, A/R) of
thermal equivalent dilution (TED). ΔCp had been previously calculated as ΔCp,hydr from the curvature amplitude of the
experimental binding functions R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} of
each compound. The activity aσ of eq 66 repeats at the molecular
level the dual structure of the second principle of thermodynamics
(see part I5, Appendix C). The activity is transformed
from the molecule scale to the mole scale of probability space; then,
it is transformed into the logarithmic form of thermodynamic space.

Equation 66, associated
to the thermal functions −ΔHth and TΔSth, gives
rise to calculated curved convoluted binding function RT ln Kcalc = {f(T) × g(ln T)}b, corresponding
to the experimental dual function RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}. The same relationship can be found between
the calculated binding function R ln Kcalc = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and the experimental function R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)}.

Following the ergodic algorithmic
model (EAM), we can find the
driving reactions among the reactions contributing to the motive function,
concerning the solute. We search for the factor components of the
motive binding functions RT ln Kmot = f(T) and R ln Kmot = f(1/T) after separation from the thermal functions.
The dual experimental binding functions are 67  and 68  

The first step is the separation of the thermal
functions from
the motive functions. This means that we must transform the parabolic
binding functions RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} and R ln Kdual =
{f(1/T) × g(T)} into the rectilinear binding functions RT ln Kmot = f(T)
and R ln Kmot = f(1/T), respectively. We note that, in
the partition function {DS-PF}, the multiplication (Kmot·ζth) by ζth = 1 yields such a significant change in the geometrical diagram.
The next step is the analysis of the structure (see part III,6 Section 5, Table 2), constituted by three terms, of the binding
functions RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} (see Table 2) corresponding
to free energy −ΔGdual =
−ΔG0 – ΔGth – ΔGiceberg. (A similar analysis could be performed on R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × f(T)}). One term, the thermal free energy
−ΔGth is equal to zero. The
term −ΔG0 is referred to
the initial transformation undergone by the solute at zero iceberg
(see part III,6Table 2). This first step is, for instance, (i)
the passage of a gas (phase transformation in a biphasic system) from
the kinetically active gaseous state to the resting trapped state
into the solvent, or (ii) the passage of a liquid from the free pure
state to the trapped state in the solution, or (iii) the passage of
a carboxylic acid from the nondissociated state to the dissociated
state in the solution. The first reaction step for a series of gases
corresponds to intensity entropy change at zero iceberg (ξw = 0), ΔS0(ξw = 0) = −86.4 J K–1 mol–1,
(intensity entropy change means loss of velocity of the molecules)
calculated in nonpolar gases (see ref (3), paragraph 6.1, page 124) with the entropy change
ΔScondens = −86.9 ±
1.4 J K–1 mol–1 (thermal entropy
change). This change in kinetic energy or intensity entropy change
is equal to that given by the Trouton constant, referring to the passage
from vapor to liquid. This interpretation of this state passage as
“lost kinetic energy” is indirectly confirmed by analyzing
the first-step entropy at zero iceberg formation (ξw = 0) of a set of liquids dissolving in water. In these liquids,
the entropy change at zero iceberg is ΔS0(ξw = 0) = −0.5 .4 J K–1 mol–1. The small value of entropy
changes of ΔS0(ξw = 0) at zero iceberg of the liquids depends on their condition. The liquids
are already condensed prior to dissolution in water, and there is
no loss of velocity of the molecules (cf. part III,6 Table 5) at condensation. The third term of free energy
−ΔGiceberg concerns the formation
or reduction of the iceberg. The term can be either −ΔGfor (iceberg formation) in processes of class A or −ΔGred (iceberg
reduction) in processes of class B. We remind the reader
that thermodynamic functions for iceberg formation or reduction are
changes of the thermodynamic potential functions of the solute, not
of the solvent, and correspond to water iceberg reactions. This is
because the only changes in the solvent at constant potential are
changes of volume (±ΔVsolvent), which produce changes (concentration or dilution) in the thermodynamic
state of the solute. The unitary entropy for iceberg formation (“unitary”
means referred to unity (±ξw = ±1) of water
cluster WI) is ⟨Δsfor⟩A = −445 ± 3 J K–1 mol–1 ξw–1 (σ
= ±0.7%) with a very low standard deviation.

Table 2 Terms Composing the Free Energy Function
−ΔGapp in Some Hydrophobic
Hydration Processes
–ΔGdual = −ΔHdual + TΔSdual	–ΔGmot – ΔGth = (−ΔHmot – ΔGth ) + T(ΔSdual +
ΔSdual)	RT ln Kdual = f(T)	curved	
–ΔGmot	–ΔGmot = −ΔHmot + TΔSmot	RT ln Kmot = f(T)	straight	
–ΔGth = −ΔHth + TΔSth = 0	ΔHth = ΔCp,hydrT; ΔSth = ΔCp,hydr ln T	→ solvent	
–ΔGapp = −ΔG0 – 0 – ΔGcav	–ΔG0: (gas
→
solute), (liq → solute), (undis → diss.)	→ solution	
–ΔGcav = −ΔHcav + TΔScav	ΔHcav = ξw·⟨Δhfor⟩A; ΔScav = ξw·⟨Δsfor⟩A	→ solution	
RT ln Kdual = −ΔHdual + TΔSdual	–ΔG0 – ΔG1 – ΔG2 – ΔGdual = −ΔG0 – ΔGth –
ΔGmot	→ solvent + solution	
On the grounds of the assignment of the main
reaction in each hydrophobic
hydration processes to the motive partition function {M-PF} of the
solute, we have examined which reaction of the solute was more suitable
to be treated by quasi-chemical approximation of Pratt et al.11 These authors define the clustering of solvent
molecules around a distinguished central molecule or single atom.
In our contest, the hydration reactions of eqs 63 and 64 can be considered.
Clustering means that there is a central unit, belonging to the solute,
attracting a cluster of ξw water molecules of WII, also belonging to the solute. The number ξw measured by us might be and almost always a non-integer. This non-integer
number cannot be considered a stoichiometric number between a central
unit M and nw clustered molecules. The
chemical reaction more credited to be accepted as a factor of quasi-chemical
approximation is the reaction for iceberg formation in class A and the reaction for iceberg reduction in class B, both with stoichiometry ±ξw. Formation or
reduction of the iceberg produces entropic effects bound to a change
of volume rather than an enthalpic effect bound to some energy difference.

2.8.4 Free Energy for Iceberg Formation/Reduction
from {M-PF}
The knowledge of the parameter ±ξw allows us to calculate the free energy change −ΔGred for iceberg reduction or the free energy
change −ΔGfor for iceberg
formation. For every process of class A, the reaction
with iceberg formation has been observed, and for every process of
class B, the reaction with iceberg reduction was observed.
By processing the thermodynamic data for approximately 80 different
hydrophobic hydration systems, we have calculated6 unitary values (unitary are referred to ζw = 1 water cluster WI) for processes of iceberg formation
and opposite iceberg reduction, respectively (Table 3). 69   70  

Table 3 Unitary Values (±ξw = ±1)
of Thermodynamic Functions for Every Hydrophobic
Hydration Process
class A: iceberg formation	unit	σ values	
⟨Δhfor⟩A = −22.7 ± 0.7	kJ mol–1 ξw–1	σ = ±3.1%	
⟨Δsfor⟩A = −445 ±
3	J K–1 mol–1 ξw–1	σ = ±0.7%	
class B:
iceberg reduction	unit	σ values	
⟨Δhred⟩B = +23.7 ± 0.6	kJ mol–1 ξw–1	σ = ±2.51%	
⟨Δsred⟩B = +432 ± 4	J K–1 mol–1 ξw–1	σ = ±0.9%	
The processes of iceberg formation/reduction are related
to the
motive partition function {M-PF} of the solute. Specifically, the
process of iceberg formation generates reduction of solvent volume
and consequent concentration of the solute. This is a process producing
a negative change of density entropy. As an example of a process of
a class A reaction, we consider the reaction of a gas
molecule or liquid molecule with water WI. By considering
the unitary functions  we obtain the unitary free energy
for iceberg
formation 71  

The process of iceberg
formation (Figure 8) results in being thermodynamically disfavored.
How can this counteraction be overcome? We must consider that this
process takes place under pressure: this pressure is forcing the gas
to enter the solvent. If the pressure were absent, the gas would be
spontaneously leaving the solvent with disruption of the iceberg.
Other molecular processes, which possibly can favor iceberg formation,
are(i) entropy
contribution by dilution, RT ln(1/xA), of gas molecules
in the aqueous phase and

(ii) hydration affinity between ξw′ water molecules
of WII and the hydrophilic
solute unit, as by the reaction of eq 54 for iceberg formation.



Figure 8 Iceberg formation
at dissolution of a gas in water WI.

For the processes of class B, hydrophobic bonding
(Figure 9) can be taken
as a representative. The molecule M in its iceberg is binding to another
molecule M in its own iceberg by hydrophobic bonding: the icebergs
coalesce to a common iceberg whose volume is smaller than the sum
of component icebergs. By considering the unitary values for iceberg
reduction ⟨Δhred⟩B = +23.7 ± 0.6 kJ mol–1 ξw–1 and ⟨Δsred⟩B = +432 ± 4 J K–1 mol–1 ξw–1,
the unitary free energy for iceberg reduction can be calculated 72  

Figure 9 Iceberg
reduction at hydrophobic bonding (iceberg contour in azure
color).

A negative Δgred indicates that
the process of iceberg reduction at the formation of a hydrophobic
bond is thermodynamically favored, driven by the positive entropic
contribution by the solute for iceberg reduction. This result is contradicting
the widely accepted interpretation that hydrophobic bonding is entropically
favored because of the degrees of freedom acquired by water molecules,
set free at the very moment of formation of the hydrophobic bond.
These people ignore that the thermal partition function of the solvent
(NoremE) is unsuitable for producing free energy changes because it
can give rise to changes of intensity entropy (solvent/iceberg phase
change) only but not to changes of density entropy.

At any rate,
the reaction steps contributing to free energy are
those composing the equilibrium constant Kmot. In the processes with iceberg formation (class A),
the favorable contributions are (i) the formation enthalpy ΔHfor = (−21.6·ξw) kJ mol–1 that indicates the affinity of the aliphatic
chain for a water sheath of molecules of WII and (ii) the
enthalpy at zero iceberg ΔH0(ξw = 0) = −31.7 kJ mol–1. This enthalpy change at zero iceberg in gaseous or liquid solutes
indicates the affinity between solutes and and the solvent sheath.
Through this bonding, the continuous source of water clusters by the
passage of states with entropy change at constant potential of water
WI, ΔHhydr/T = ΔCp,hydr, is maintained. The
unfavorable negative entropic contributions contrast the favorable
enthalpic contributions. The balance of these opposite effects leads
to significant chemical properties:(i) very low solubility of gas molecules
as measured by the thermodynamic solubility parameter;

(ii) free energy change at zero iceberg
ΔG0(ξw = 0) in the dissociation of carboxylic acids, corresponding to the dissociation
process of the acid. This property has been mathematically calculated
for several acids by subtracting the free energy ΔGfor for iceberg formation; the residual free energy calculated
as ln Kx = f(1/T) for a set of acids comes out to be linearly dependent
on the respective Hammett coefficient.4



Moreover, the ergodic algorithmic model
offers a clear explanation5 of the processes
of(i) protein
folding, ruled by the favorable
entropic contribution of iceberg reduction,

(ii) cold denaturation ruled exclusively
by positive or negative motive free energy,

(iii) thermal and chemical denaturation
by acting on water clustering equilibrium

(iv) formation of hydrophobic bonds, entropy-driven
by solute dilution by formation of volume of a solvent of WI.



The ergodic algorithmic model (EAM)
indicates the correct procedure
to calculate the motive free energy functions or motive binding functions RT ln Kmot (enthalpy units)
and R ln Kmot (entropy
units) and to analyze the free energy for iceberg formation or iceberg
reduction. We report below, to show the potency of the procedure,
the calculation of free energy for iceberg formation in a series of
carboxylic acids for which the constant value of +ξw = +2.1 was found.

2.8.5 From the Thermal Partition
Function {T-PF}
to the Motive Partition Function {M-PF}
In conformity with
the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM), the quasi-chemical
approximation, now renamed the “chemical molecule/mole scaling
function” (Che. m/M. sF), adds new information beyond the thermal
partition function {T-PF} (i.e., solvent) just as the stoichiometry
±ξw of the chemical reaction concerning the
motive partition function {M-PF} (i.e., solute). In such a way, the
quasi-chemical approximation recognizes that the passage from the
thermal partition function {T-PF} to the motive partition function
{M-PF} has taken place and, by indicating the stoichiometry of the
reaction, shows us that the calculations therefrom will be ruled by
binomial mole distribution and no longer by Boltzmann statistical
molecule distribution.

The ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) suggests
that one basic reaction step of the passage from {T-PF} to {M-PF}
is the reaction of iceberg formation or, for the opposite passage,
from {M-PF} to {T-PF}, the reaction of iceberg reduction where the
number ξw, experimentally determined by the curvature
amplitude of the binding functions, is proportional to the size of
the iceberg formed (if positive, +ξw) in class A or of the iceberg reduced (if negative, −ξw) in class B. By employing the unitary values
reported in Table 3, it is possible to calculate the free energy for iceberg formation
or for iceberg reduction in each hydrophobic reaction if we have previously
determined the number ±ξw by treatment of the
experimental data.

As an example of the type of information
that can be extracted
from the experimental data by means of the ergodic algorithmic model
(EAM), we can consider the set of protonation reactions of carboxylic
acids (Table 4). We
can show how the equilibrium constant determined by the EAM is composed
by two factors, at least, and one of them is always the constant for
iceberg formation or reduction. The reaction of iceberg formation
or reduction is necessarily present in every hydrophobic hydration
process. We wonder how in the computer simulations of free energy
calculations25,29 the reaction of iceberg formation
or that of iceberg reduction is systematically ignored.

Table 4 Residual Equilibrium Constant in Carboxylic
Acids with ξw = 2.1
acid	ΔHx	ΔSx	ΔGx	σHam	
Cl-ethane	9.21	–5.7	1707.81	0.37	
ethane	–1.34	14.59	–4349.16	–0.17	
CN-ethane	0.15	–13.81	4123.53	0.63	
methane	–0.91	0.75	–224.41	0.15	
propane	–0.99	17.8	–5305.39	–0.34	
Even Chipot, Kollman,
and Pearlman31 investigated the convergence
behavior of potential of mean force
(PMF) calculations using free energy perturbation (FEP),17 thermodynamic integration (TI), and “slow
growth” (SG) techniques. “Iceberg formation”
or “iceberg reduction” with distinction of reactions
of class A or class B is not even mentioned
by these authors.

This survey could be extended to many other
articles in the literature,
but we realize that the conclusion will be the same: free energy changes,
as produced in the partition function of the solute by the processes
of “iceberg formation” or “iceberg reduction”,
are never mentioned. We recall the point that, according to the ergodic
algorithmic model (EAM), the iceberg reaction is a process of phase
transition, in class A from water WI (solvent)
to water WII (iceberg, solute) with reduction of solvent
volume with the solvent at constant potential (thermal free energy
ΔGth = 0). In class B, the opposite reaction is taking place with the opposite phase transition
from solute to solvent. These phase transitions in the solvent induce
variations in the solvent volume and, in consequence, variations in
the thermodynamic functions of the solute, concerning {M-PF}) (ΔGmot ≠ 0), because they change the dilution
state of the solute.

The confirmatory statistical inference
of the validation process
of the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) (see part III6)
demonstrates that the reaction of iceberg formation/reduction is ubiquitous
in every hydrophobic hydration process. The statistical inference
stating the rule that, in every hydrophobic hydration process, we
must find an iceberg reaction as a factor of {DS-PF} holds not only
for the processes and compounds examined in the present articles but
must be extended with a high probability of success to whatever hydrophobic
hydration process thermodynamically analyzed in the past and in the
future. By applying the unitary thermodynamic functions reported in Table 3 together with the
number ±ξw experimentally determined for each
compound, we can calculate the equilibrium constants for iceberg ln Kicbg for any new hydrophobic process eventually
examined. Then, we can disaggregate the equilibrium constant ln Kmot, experimentally determined, by subtracting
the calculated iceberg equilibrium constant ln Kicbg and obtain a residual reliable equilibrium constant ln Kx, relative to the ancillary reactions associated
to the reaction of iceberg formation or reduction.

As an example
of the type of information that can be extracted
from the experimental data by means of the ergodic algorithmic model
(EAM), we can consider the set of protonation reactions of carboxylic
acids (Table 4). We
can show how the equilibrium constant determined by the ergodic algorithmic
model (EAM) is composed of two factors at least, and one of them is
the constant for iceberg formation or iceberg reduction. In the protonation
of carboxylate anions,3 the total reaction
can be written 73  which includes reaction A. The analysis of the residual protonation constant ln Kx 74  for five carboxylic
acids
with ξw = 2.1 has given the values of residual thermodynamic
functions in Table 4.

The values of free energy ΔGx correlate well as the function of the Hammett constant (Figure 10). This correlation
is a proof of validity of the disaggregation of ln Kmot into two components: (i) iceberg formation constants
and (ii) proton affinity constants, ln Kx. Probably, if we consider the remaining carboxylic acids of the
list examined by us with more complex molecule structures, it could
be possible to show how the values of the numbers ξw > 2.1 (ξw* = ξw – 2.1)
could be attributed to the formation of icebergs between water WII and aliphatic and aromatic chains, belonging to more complex
carboxylic acids.

Figure 10 Free energy ΔGx as the
function
of Hammett constant σHammet.

2.8.6 Hydrophobic Hydration and Structure-Based
Drug Design
Thermodynamics is a fundamental interpretative
tool for structure-based drug design. Experimental and theoretical
thermodynamic principles are applied to design compounds, structured
in such a way to be binding to macromolecular receptors for therapeutic
activity.30 The purpose of these studies
is calculating reaction free energy ΔG as a
parameter of potential energy of the chemical reaction.32−34 Free energy can be calculated by using molecular dynamics (MD) in
two ways: thermodynamic integration (TI) and free energy perturbation21 (FEP). Both methods are used to determine the
free energy difference between two molecules or between two molecular
conformations. These usual procedures employed in drug design must
be changed to make them conform to an ergodic algorithmic model (EAM).
The methodology followed by Talhout et al.32 for the study of the binding of a series of hydrophobically modified
benzamidinium chloride inhibitors to trypsin, must be applied. This
procedure consists of the preliminary experimental determination of
the thermodynamic properties of the system by ITC (isothermal titration
calorimetry). We note that whatever experimental method might be used
for measurements of a potential function or an equilibrium constant
at various temperatures. Enthalpy of binding, entropy of binding,
and Gibbs energy are the information acquired. The corresponding binding
functions R ln Kdual =
−ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual =
−ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} of each compound
are concave functions with equal curvature amplitude, connected by
thermal equivalent dilution (TED) to the potential parameter (see
Appendix A). Then, the curved functions R ln Kdual and RT ln Kdual, by taking advantage of the stoichiometry ±ξw of the water reaction calculated from the curvature, are
transformed into the linear functions R ln Kmot = f(1/T) and RT ln Kmot = f(T), respectively, which are the real
potential functions generating free energy −ΔGmot. MD computer simulations have provided the
values of statistical partition functions Z(N,V,T), each referred
to one macrolevel Hj. These molecular
values Z(N,V,T) must be transformed into the molar values {z(N,V,T)} and then linked, by reference to the experimentally measured thermodynamic
properties R ln Kmot and RT ln Kmot, to the mole structure
of the system. In such a way, information for potential function R ln Kmot and RT ln Kmot and for stoichiometry ξw of the water reaction can be achieved from the experimental
molar binding functions and connected to the molecular computer simulations
by appropriate scaling functions. Anyway, one point must be kept in
mind: the mathematical algorithm employed to calculate the simulated
function must necessarily contain in principle the basic constriction
that ΔCp,hydr is
constant in each compound (ΔCp,hydr = −ξwCp,w, class B), and even the coefficient ±ξw should be explicitly expressed in the new simulation algorithm.

The same procedure of associating the information obtained from
the curved experimental convoluted binding functions R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} with the equilibrium calculations could
be employed by Di Cera et al.33 for the
energetic dissection of serine proteases.

2.9 Motive Free Energy and Stability of Chemical
Compounds
The need of calculating motive functions, separately
from thermal functions, is clearly apparent if we consider the suitability
of motive free energy to measure the stability of chemical compounds
or chemical conformations.

Typical characteristics of the hydrophobic
interactions are the temperature dependences exemplified by cold denaturation.6 We can show how the ergodic algorithmic model
(EAM) can offer a convincing explanation of this phenomenon (Figure 11), an explanation based on the analysis of the properties
of R ln Kmot = −ΔGmot/T = f(1/T) or RT ln Kmot = −ΔGmot = f(T). We consider that only the motive functions contribute
to free energy, and in consequence, the motive functions only are
suited to determine if a reaction is thermodynamically favored or
not. We subtract the thermal components ΔHth and ΔSth from the observed
apparent functions ΔHdual and ΔSdual, respectively, and we obtain the linear
motive function RT ln Kmot = f(T). For the specific case
(Figure 11), we label
the resulting motive function with the subscript “fold”
(folding) instead of “mot” and obtain 75  

Figure 11 Application of the ergodic
algorithmic model (EAM): motive function
ΔGfold = ΔHfold – TΔSfold, calculated from the denaturation quotient at different T of a protein. Cold denaturation or folding stabilization
depends on the sign of the motive function (critical Tfold: 156,638/567.53 = 276 K).

If ΔHfold > 0 (ΔHfold = +156.638 kJ mol–1)
and ΔSfold > 0 (ΔSfold = +567.53 J K–1 mol–1), at the folding temperature Tfold,
we have ΔHfold – TΔSfold = 0. Above Tfold, the folded state is the stable one (ΔGfold < 0), whereas below Tfold, the stable state is the denatured protein (ΔGfold > 0; ΔGden < 0). From this discussion, we can draw the conclusion that the
potential Δμ (ΔGfold/n = Δμ) we must refer to is that calculated
from the linear motive function RT ln Kmot = f(T), obtained
by exclusion of the thermal components from RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × f(ln T)}.

Another example (Figure 12) where the motive function of the ergodic
algorithmic model RT ln Kmot = f(T) is working concerns the
new view of the hydrophobic bonding, as shown above.4 The entropy gain stabilizing the hydrophobic bond is the
increase of density entropy (i.e., configuration entropy) by the solute
and no longer the increase of intensity entropy (i.e., thermal entropy)
by the solvent, as erroneously repeated in the literature. In the
ergodic algorithmic model, the entropy-producing process of “iceberg
reduction” means extension of the solvent volume with equivalent
increasing of solute dilution and hence increasing of the density
entropy of the solute.

Figure 12 Hydrophobic bonding: density entropy term is
the prominent contributor
to the negative free energy (at 298 K) of the entropy-driven hydrophobic
bond as an element of the motive partition function {M-PF} of the
solute.4

3 Conclusions
The ergodic theory assumes the
equivalence between changes of a
thermodynamic function at variable temperature T with
changes of the same function on dependence of a space parameter. We
have found how this condition can be verified for the function entropy S. We have shown, in fact, how it is possible to have a
picture at the molecular level of the changes of the path length of
the molecules as the function of temperature T. The
increased velocity of the particles obtained by increasing the temperature T reduces the sojourn time of each molecule, thus producing
a decrease of instant energy intensity. A decrease of energy intensity
means an increase of intensity entropy at constant density, being
entropy inversely proportional to thermal energy. 76  

Alternatively, by reducing the concentration
of the molecules,
we reduce the cumulative residence time {(τi2)Σ} by decreasing the number
of molecules contributing to the summation Σ. In such a way,
we obtain a decrease of energy density, that is, an increase of energy
dilution and increase of density entropy. The increase
of density entropy is exactly parallel to the decrease of energy intensity
(εintens) obtained by increasing the temperature T. A decrease of energy density ε(density) means, again, an increase of density entropy. 77  

The parallelism
of the changes of intensity entropy as the function
of temperature T with the changes of density entropy
as the function of dilution dA is representative
of the ergodic property of the thermodynamic systems.

The equivalence
of intensity entropy with density entropy has been
experimentally verified in the study of thermodynamic properties of
hydrophobic hydration processes as thermal equivalent dilution (TED).
TED consists of the parallelism of the binding function R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)} with R ln Kdual = = {f(1/dA) × g(T)} and also of
the parallelism between RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} and RT ln Kdual = {f(dA) × g(ln T)}. The parallelism of the two functions gets 78  that represents
the mathematical
formulation of TED in hydrophobic hydration processes.c

The dual-structure partition function {DS-PF} represents
the state
probability of every hydrophobic hydration process: 79  

The dual-structure partition function {DS-PF}
is the product of
a thermal partition function {T-PF} multiplied by a motive partition
function {M-PF}. The thermal partition function {T-PF}, referred to
the solvent, can give rise to changes of intensity entropy that do
not have any influence upon free energy, whereas {M-PF}, referred
to the reacting solute, gives rise to changes of density entropy,
representing the essential and only contributions to free energy.
A NoremE is representative of the solvent (see Figure 5). It is composed of an extremely large set
of elements (molecules), a large enough set to be ruled by Boltzmann
statistics. Calculation of the thermal partition function {T-PF} can
be performed by applying the approximations of statistical thermodynamics
(e.g., Stirling approximation). In contrast, a REME (see Figure 6) is representative
of the solute and is composed of few elements (moles), distributed
over few macrolevels of Hj. The ergodic
algorithmic model (EAM) can offer for hydrophobic hydration processes
correct information by permitting the calculation of the binding functions
(i.e., free energy convoluted functions) R ln Kdual = −ΔGdual/T = {f(1/T) × g(T)} and RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}.
These convoluted free energy functions are obtained directly by treating
the experimental data without any support of computer simulations.
By analyzing the convoluted binding functions and then the component
motive functions ΔGmot, ΔHmot, and ΔSmot, essential information elements for hydrophobic hydration processes
can be achieved.

We examine further the relationships between
the ergodic algorithmic
model and statistical thermodynamics by recalling the fundamental
achievement of the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM), which combines
the peculiar statistical “molecule” distribution of
the thermal partition functions {T-PF}, concerning both the solvent
and microlevels of hi,j of each macrolevel Hi with the binomial “mole” distribution
of the solute over the macrolevels of Hi of the motive partition function {M-PF}.The property of the NoremE
(see Figure 5) 80  represents
a general case
of entropy–enthalpy compensation. Strangely enough, any one
of the many articles in the literature published for the last 50 years
does not even mention the possibility that large parts of entropy
and enthalpy giving origin to compensation come from changes (phase
transition) taking place within the solvent and concerning the thermal
partition function {T-PF} of the solvent. On the other hand, the solvent
in hydrophobic hydration processes behaves in a way conforming to
the molecular frame approach (MF) whereby, according to Henchman et
al.,12 the explicit nature of the solvent
is completely ignored using vacuum in the ideal gas as a reference
model of an implicit “continuum solvent”. Clusters of
WI constitute the solvent water. In contrast, clusters
of WII belong to the solute. The thermal partition function
{T-PF} corresponding to the NoremE represents the solvent. It is composed
of very many elements (molecules), but it cannot give origin to any
changes of free energy and consequently to any change of chemical
potential μ. The potential change Δμ, assumed for
the solvent by the potential distribution theorem (PDT), is nonexistent.
The solvent in diluted solutions is at constant potential because
it is at constant concentration.

A motive partition function
{M-PF} represents the solute and corresponds
to a REME, composed of few elements (moles). By developing the dual-structure
partition function {DS-PF}, the binding function RT ln Kdual = −ΔGdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} 81  can be calculated. This function
can be offered as a sound basis for the theory of hydrophobic effects.
As for computer simulations, the distinction between thermal and motive
components is ignored unfortunately, thus losing essential information
elements. Alternatively, the “chemical molecule/mole scaling
function” (Che. m/M. sF), that is, quasi-chemical Approximation,
is suited to calculate potentials by computer simulations: the binomial
distribution of motive free energy of the solute is combined with
Boltzmann statistical distribution of thermal partition functions
of solvent and of single separated Hj macrolevels.

At the end of the analysis, at both molecule and mole levels, of
the algorithmic model (EAM) for hydrophobic hydration reactions, we
can conclude that the statistical computations known so far must be
substantially changed to make them conform to the biphasic structure
of hydrophobic hydration systems. Computer simulations of monophasic
systems are inconsistent with the biphasic composition of these systems.
Monte Carlo computations and molecular dynamics simulations present
drawbacks deriving from the unsuitability of the thermal partition
function {T-PF} of the solvent to derive factors of the motive partition
function {M-PF} of the solute. The results of Monte Carlo computations
and molecular dynamics simulations must be corrected for the stoichiometric
information supported by the thermal components produced by the solvent.
The corrected results should be compared with the curved binding function RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)} or RT ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)} obtained from the experimental
data. Alternatively, the chemical molecule/mole scaling function (Che.
m/M. sF) or quasi-chemical approximation can be applied either through
the water cluster dissociation constant 82  or through the water cluster
association constant 83  and each of which was chosen
by reference to the sign of ±ξw, experimentally
determined. The ergodic activity aA is
calculated as a product of the Lambert thermal activity factor Φ
times molar fraction xA. 84  where Φ = T–(ΔCp, A/R), preserving the ergodic property of the
solution, and so forth for components B and W.

Alternatively,
calculations of iceberg volumes compatible with
the volumes of molecules or moieties of the molecule involved in each
hydrophobic hydration process could substitute the computer simulations
of statistical distributions. By assuming that the volume of one cluster
of WI is V(WI) = 19.9 cm3 mol–1 ξw–1 (see part III,6 Section 4) with reference
to isobaric heat capacity 85  the number (ξw)calc will be calculated from the ratio between the molecular
volume Vmol and volume V(WI) of water cluster WI involved in the reaction 86  thus offering a possibility
of comparison between calculated (ξw)calc and observed ξw.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01440.Calculation of
thermodynamic functions for structure-based
drug design, molecule/mole scaling function or quasi-chemical approximation,
appendix C: entropy = energy dispersal parameter, appendix D: exponential probability space and logarithmic thermodynamic
space, appendix E: approximations of computer simulations, appendix
F: experimental convoluted binding functions, appendix G: null thermal
free energy, and appendix H: thermal equivalent dilution (TED) and
the second law (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01440_si_001.pdf

 The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work is dedicated to the memory of Professor
Gian Paolo Chiusoli, Emeritus, University of Parma, who had highly
appreciated the ergodic algorithmic model (EAM) as a landmark in the
study of hydrophobic hydration processes and to the memory of Professor
Frank L. Lambert,35 Emeritus, Occidental
College, Los Angeles, (USA) for his advocacy of changing the definition
of thermodynamic entropy as “disorder” to its replacement
by viewing entropy as a measure of energy dispersal with energy generated
by the Lambert thermal factor Φ = T–Cp,A/R.

List of Symbols
xAconcentration
of A, in molar fractions

(τi2)squared sojourn
time of the ith molecule

(τi2)Σcumulative squared sojourn time

aAactivity
of A

aAf(τi2)Σ = [cA·f(τm2)]

aLactivity
of ligand L

τm2squared
mean sojourn time

Φ = f(τm2) = T–(Cp/R)thermal energy
factor (THEF) for moles as the function
of τm2

1/Φ = f′(vm2) = f′(T) = T(Cp/R)reciprocal THEF, to be associated to ideal dilution

ϕ = f(τm2) = T–(Cp/kB)molecule thermal factor
(mtf)
for molecules as the function of τm2

did(A) = (1/xA)ideal
calculated
dilution of A in the reciprocal molar fraction

dA = 1/aA = (1/xA)·(1/ϕ)active dilution of A

kBBoltzmann
constant = 1.381 × 10–23 J K–1

Kdualexperimental
equilibrium constant

Kdual = ζth·Kmotproduct partition
function with ζth = 1

Kmotmotive
equilibrium constant (partition function of the REME, concerning the
solute)

ζth =
1 Ω·(η/T)−1partition function
of the NoremE, concerning the solvent

{DS-PF}dual-structure partition function
(product partition function)

{T-PF}thermal partition function (for
NoremE)

{M-PF}motive
partition function (for
REME)

Cp,w =
75.36 J K–1 mole–1molar heat capacity for liquid water

Δsp,w = Cp,w = 75.36 J K–1 mole–1entropy change
for phase transition in pure water WI → WII

ΔCp,hydrheat capacity in hydrophobic
hydration processes (ΔCp,hydr = ±ξwCp,w)

ΔSp,hydr= ΔCp,hydrentropy
change for water phase transition: A (solvent →
solute) or B (solute →
solvent)

class Ahydrophobic hydration
process with phase transition: A{ξwWI (solvent) → ξwWII (iceberg)}

class Bhydrophobic hydration
process with phase transition: B{− ξwWII (iceberg) → ξwWI (solvent)}

WI (cluster), WII (cluster)types of water

nwnumber
of water molecules of WI changing phase in a hydrophobic
hydration process (ξw = |nw|)

±ξw = (ξw =
|nw|)± pseudo-stoichiometric
number of water molecules of WI

±ξ*coefficient of water
iceberg WII binding to the solute (+) or dissociating (−)
from the solute

TEDthermal equivalent dilution principle
(−R dln(aL)n = nCp,L dln T)

ΔHdualexperimental enthalpy (ΔHdual =
ΔHmot + ΔHth = ΔH0(ξw=0) + ΔHfor ± ξwCp,wT)

ΔSdualexperimental entropy (ΔSdual =
ΔSmot + ΔSth = ΔS0(ξw=0) + ΔSfor ± ξwCp.w ln T)

ΔHththermal enthalpy (ΔHth = ΔCp,hydr·T)

dSthdifferential
change of thermal entropy; differential of intensity entropy

dSIntsdifferential
of intensity entropy

Sththermal
entropy (ΔSth = ΔCp,hydr·ln T); intensity
entropy

ΔGththermal free energy (null) (−ΔGth/T = −ΔHth/T + ΔSth = 0)

dSconfdifferential
change of configuration entropy; differential change of density entropy

dSDensdifferential
of density entropy

ΔSconfconfiguration entropy or
density entropy (ΔSconf = R ln did)

ΔSdualdual (experimental) entropy = intensity entropy + density entropy
(ergodic property)

ΔHmot≡ΔH0motive enthalpy, from ΔHdual extrapolated to T = 0

ΔSmot≡ΔS0motive entropy, from ΔSdual extrapolated to ln T =
0

εdensityenergy concentration

1/εdensityenergy dispersal
in space (proportional to density entropy)

εintensenergy intensity

1/εintensenergy dispersal
in time (proportional to intensity entropy)

{f(1/T) × g(T)}convoluted function

{f(T) × g(ln T)}convoluted function

f(1/T) or f(T)linear primary function
of the convolution (“modified” to a curve by g(T)} or g(ln T), respectively)

g(T) or g(ln T)“modifying”
secondary function of the convolution

ΔGmotmotive
free energy (−ΔGmot = −ΔHmot + TΔSmot ≡ – ΔH0 + TΔS0); −ΔG°/RT = ln K

R ln Kmot = f(1/T)linear
motive binding function in entropy units

RT ln Kmot = f(T)linear motive
binding function in enthalpy units

R ln Kdual = {f(1/T) × g(T)}curved convoluted experimental
binding function

RT ln Kdual = {f(T) × g(ln T)}curved convoluted experimental
binding function

R = 8.31451 J K–1 mole–1gas constant

kB = 1.381 × 10–23 J K–1 molecule–1Boltzmann constant

ξw–1unitary, for ξw = 1

Tddenaturation
temperature

THtemperature
at which ΔHdual = 0 (at minimum
in class A or at maximum in class B)

TStemperature
at which ΔSdual = 0 (at minimum
in class A or at maximum in class B)

NAvAvogadro’s
number

S = kB ln ΩBoltzmann statistical
entropy, kB = 1.38064852(79) × 10–23 J K–1

kBNAv ln Ω(1/NAv) = R ln ZMmolar
partition function

Ωstatistical energy density (multiplicity)

η/Tstatistical
energy intensity

Cp,Amolar heat capacity
of A

τtsojourn time (or
persistence time), time spent by molecule i to run
one length unit

τi2squared sojourn time of
each molecule i

(τi2)Σcumulative squared sojourn time

NoremEnonreacting molecule ensemble

REMEreacting mole
ensemble

Che. m/M. sFchemical molecule/mole
scaling function

a Sojourn time (or
persistence time)
is calculated as τi = 1/li where li is the
path length of molecule i.

b For the different roles of the f function
and g function in the convoluted
function, see Appendix D in part I.5

c As far as we know, these are the first
examples of experimental determinations of ergodic property of TED (thermal equivalent dilution). Up to now, ergodicity had
been an assumed property of simulation calculations with supposed
equivalence of Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics calculations. TED
is an intrinsic invariable potential molecular property of every hydrophobic
hydration system, but it becomes active in some cases only.
==== Refs
References
Fisicaro E. ; Compari C. ; Braibanti A. 
Entropy/enthalpy compensation: hydrophobic
effect, micelles and protein complexes . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2004 , 6 , 4156 –4167 . 10.1039/b404327h .
Fisicaro E. ; Compari C. ; Duce E. ; Biemmi M. ; Peroni M. ; Braibanti A. 
Thermodynamics
of micelle formation in water, hydrophobic
processes and surfactant self-assemblies . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 10 , 3903 –3914 . 10.1039/b719630j .18688390 
Fisicaro E. ; Compari C. ; Braibanti A. 
Hydrophobic
hydration processes.
General thermodynamic model by thermal equivalent dilution determinations . Biophys. Chem. 
2010 , 151 , 119 –138 . 10.1016/j.bpc.2010.06.001 .20656401 
Fisicaro E. ; Compari C. ; Braibanti A. 
Hydrophobic
hydration processes . Biophys. Chem. 
2011 , 156 , 51 –67 . 10.1016/j.bpc.2011.02.009 .21482019 
Fisicaro E. ; Compari C. ; Braibanti A. 
Hydrophobic
Hydration Processes.
I: Dual-Structure Partition Function for Biphasic Aqueous Systems . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 15043 –15065 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b01685. .31458171 
Fisicaro E. ; Compari C. ; Braibanti A.  Part III. Hydrophobic
Hydration Processes. III. Ergodic Algorithmic Model Validation . This journal, to be submitted.
Pratt L. R. ; Rempe S. B. 
Quasi-Chemical Theory and Implicit Solvent Models for
Simulations . AIP Conf. Proc. 
1999 , 492 , 172 –201 . 10.1063/1.1301528 .
Gans P. ; Sabatini A. ; Vacca A. 
Investigation of equilibria in solution.
Determination of equilibrium constants with the HYPERQUAD suite of
programs . Talanta 
1996 , 43 , 1739 –1753 . 10.1016/0039-9140(96)01958-3 .18966661 
Pratt L. R. ; LaViolette R. 
Quasi-chemical theories of associated
liquids . Mol. Phys. 
1998 , 94 , 909 10.1080/002689798167485 .
Chipot C. ; Pohorill A.  Free Energy Calculations,
Theory and Applications in Chemistry and Biology ; Sperling , Berlin , 2012 .
Pratt L. R. ; LaViolette R. A. ; Gomez M. A. ; Gentile M. E. 
Quasi-Chemical Theory
for the Statistical Thermodynamics of the Hard-Sphere Fluid . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 11662 10.1021/jp011525w .
Irudayam S. J. ; Henchman R. H. 
Solvation theory
to provide a molecular interpretation
of the hydrophobic entropy loss of noble-gas hydration . J. Phys.: Condensed Matter 
2010 , 22 , 284108 –284112 . 10.1088/0953-8984/22/28/284108 .
Gallicchio E. ; Kubo M. M. ; Levy R. M. 
Entropy-Enthalpy
Compensation in
Solvation and Ligand Binding Revisited . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
1998 , 120 , 4526 –4527 . 10.1021/ja974061h .
Sharp K. 
Entropy-enthalpy
compensation: fact or artifact? . Protein Sci. 
2001 , 10 , 661 –667 . 10.1110/ps.37801 .11344335 
Lee B. ; Graziano G. 
A Two-State Model of Hydrophobic Hydration That Produces
Compensating Enthalpy and Entropy Changes . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
1996 , 118 , 5163 –5168 . 10.1021/ja9538389 .
Benzinger T. H. 
Thermodynamics,
chemical reactions, and molecular biology . Nature 
1971 , 229 , 100 –102 . 10.1038/229100a0 .4923089 
Hayne D. T.  Biological Thermodynamics ; Cambridge Univ. Press : Cambridge , 2001 .
Kronberg B. 
The Hydrophobic
Effect . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2016 , 22 , 14 –22 . 10.1016/j.cocis.2016.02.001 .
Zwanzig R. W. 
High-temperature
equation of state by a perturbation method. I. Nonpolar gases . J. Chem. Phys. 
1954 , 22 , 1420 –1426 . 10.1063/1.1740409 .
Beck T. M. ; Paulaitis M. E. ; Pratt L. R.  The Potential Distribution
Theorem and Models of Molecular Solutions ; Cambridge Univ. : Press, Cambridge , 2007 .
Jorgensen W. L. ; Thomas L. L. 
Perspective
on Free-Energy Perturbation Calculations
for Chemical Equilibria . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2008 , 4 , 869 –876 . 10.1021/ct800011m .19936324 
Pohorille A. ; Pratt L. R. 
Cavities in molecular liquids and the theory of hydrophobic
solubilities . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1990 , 112 , 5066 –5074 . 10.1021/ja00169a011 .11540917 
Pratt L. R. 
Molecular
theory of hydrophobic Effects: “She is too mean to have her
name repeated.” . Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2002 , 53 , 409 –436 . 10.1146/annurev.physchem.53.090401.093500 .11972014 
Garde S. ; Hummer G. ; García A. E. ; Paulaitis M. E. ; Pratt L. R. 
Origin of Entropy Convergence in
Hydrophobic Hydration
and Protein Folding . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 
1996 , 77 , 4966 –4968 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.4966 .
Baldwin R. L. 
Temperature
dependence of the hydrophobic interaction in protein folding . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
1986 , 83 , 8069 –8072 . 10.1073/pnas.83.21.8069 .3464944 
Lee B. 
Calculation
of volume fluctuation for globular protein models . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
1983 , 80 , 622 –626 . 10.1073/pnas.80.2.622 .6572909 
Pratt L. R. ; Chandler D. 
Theory of the hydrophobic effect . J. Chem. Phys. 
1977 , 67 , 3683 –3704 . 10.1063/1.435308 .
Widom B. 
Some Topics
in the Theory of Fluids . J. Chem. Phys. 
1963 , 39 , 2808 –2812 . 10.1063/1.1734110 .
Hodel A. ; Simonson T. ; Fox R. O. ; Brunger A. T. 
Conformational substrates
and uncertainty in macromolecular free energy calculations . J. Phys. Chem. 
1993 , 97 , 3409 –3417 . 10.1021/j100115a054 .
Simonson T.  Free Energy Calculations:
Approximate Methods for Biological Macromolecules .
In Free Energy Calculations: Theory and Applications in Chemistry
and Biology ; Chipot C. ; Pohorille A.  , Eds; Springer Ser. Chem. Phys., 86 , Springer GmbH : Berlin, Germany , 2007 ; pp 423 –461 .
Chipot C. ; Kollman P. A. ; Pearlman D. A. 
Alternative
approaches to potential
of mean force calculations: free energy perturbation versus thermodynamic
integration. Case study of some representative nonpolar interactions . J. Comput. Chem. 
1996 , 17 , 1112 –1131 . 10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(19960715)17:9<1112::AID-JCC4>3.0.CO;2-V .
Talhout R. ; Villa A. ; Mark A. E. ; Engberts J. B. F. N. 
Understanding
Binding Affinity: A Combined Isothermal Titration Calorimetry/Molecular
Dynamics Study of the Binding of a Series of Hydrophobically Modified
Benzamidinium Chloride Inhibitors to Trypsin . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 10570 –10579 . 10.1021/ja034676g .12940739 
Di Cera E. ; Vindigni A. ; Banerjee D.  Energetic Dissection
of Specificity in Serine Proteases . In Structure-Based
Drug Design, Thermodynamics, Modeling and Strategy ; Ladbury J.E. ; Connelly P. R.  , Eds; Springer : Berlin , 1997 ; pp 19 –84 .
Beveridge D. L. ; DiCapua F. M. 
Free Energy via Molecular Simulation: Applications
to Chemical and Bio-molecular Systems . Annu.
Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 
1989 , 18 , 431 –92 . 10.1146/annurev.bb.18.060189.002243 .2660832 
Lambert F. L. 
Configurational
Entropy Revisited . J. Chem. Educ. 
2007 , 84 , 1548 –1550 . 10.1021/ed084p1548 .

