
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145877710.1021/acsomega.8b00575ArticleDoes the Processing Method Resulting in Different States of an Interconnected Network
of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes in Polymeric Blend Nanocomposites
Affect EMI Shielding Properties? Pawar Shital
Patangrao †§Rzeczkowski Piotr ‡Pötschke Petra *‡Krause Beate ‡Bose Suryasarathi *†† Department
of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore 560012, India‡ Department
of Functional Nanocomposites and Blends, Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, Hohe Str. 6, D-01069 Dresden, Germany* E-mail: poe@ipfdd.de (P.P.).* E-mail: sbose@iisc.ac.in (S.B.).29 05 2018 31 05 2018 3 5 5771 5782 26 03 2018 16 05 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Electromagnetic interference (EMI),
an unwanted phenomenon, often
affects the reliability of precise electronic circuitry. To prevent
this, an effective shielding is prerequisite to protect the electronic
devices. In this study, an attempt was made to understand how processing
of polymeric blend nanocomposites involving multiwalled carbon nanotubes
(MWCNTs) affects the evolving interconnected network structure of
MWCNTs and eventually their EMI shielding properties. Thereby, the
overall blend morphology and especially the connectivity of the polycarbonate
(PC) component, in which the MWCNTs tend to migrate, as well as the
perfectness of their migration, and the state of nanotube dispersion
are considered. For this purpose, blends of varying composition of
PC and poly(methyl methacrylate) were chosen as a model system as
they show a phase diagram with lower critical solution temperature
type of characteristic. Such blends were processed in two different
ways: solution mixing (from the homogeneous state) and melt mixing
(in the biphasic state). In both the processes, MWCNTs (3 wt %) were
mixed into the blends, and the evolved structures (after phase separation
induced by annealing in solution-mixed blends) and the quenched structures
(as the blends exit the extruder) were systematically studied using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Both the set of blends were
subjected to the same thermal history, however, under different conditions
such as under quiescent conditions (in the case of solution mixing)
and under shear (in the case of melt mixing). The electrical volume
conductivity and the evolved morphologies of these blend nanocomposites
were evaluated and correlated with the measured EMI shielding behavior.
The results indicated that irrespective of the type of processing,
the MWCNTs localized in the PC component; driven by thermodynamic
factors and depending on the blend composition, sea-island, cocontinuous,
and phase-inverted structures evolved. Interestingly, the better interconnected
network structures of MWCNTs observed using TEM in the solution-mixed
samples together with larger nanotube lengths resulted in higher EMI
shielding properties (−27 dB at 18 GHz) even if slightly higher
electrical volume conductivities were observed in melt-mixed samples.
Moreover, the shielding was absorption-driven, facilitated by the
dense network of MWCNTs in the PC component of the blends, at any
given concentration of nanotubes. Taken together, this study highlights
the effects of different blend nanocomposite preparation methods (solution
and melt) and the developed morphology and nanotube network structure
in MWCNT filled blend nanocomposites on the EMI shielding behavior.

document-id-old-9ao8b00575document-id-new-14ao-2018-00575gccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Electromagnetic
radiation impacts almost all electronic and electrical
devices, which can lead to their improper operating conditions or
in some cases even to their damage. Electromagnetic interference (EMI)
problems can occur in any range of electromagnetic waves, but most
of them are caused by radio and microwave frequencies between 100
kHz and few gigahertz. Therefore, an effective EMI shielding, which
could minimize or even prevent the impact of electromagnetic radiation,
is desirable in every electronic and electrical device.1

For an effective shielding, materials with
high electrical conductivity
or high magnetic permeability are needed. Metals and some polymer
composites filled with conductive fillers were explored as suitable
materials for shielding because of their good electrical properties,
although the mechanism of shielding in metals and conducting particle
filled polymers can be very different. EMI shielding is based on three
mechanisms, that is, the electromagnetic wave can be either reflected
from the outer surface of the shield or absorbed within the shielding
material or can be reflected from the internal surfaces of the shield
inducing multiple reflections.1

In
designing of an enclosure/housing for shielding applications,
one of the most important concerns is the weight as the current electronic
era has drifted toward miniaturization. Therefore, lightweight and
noncorrosive polymeric materials with conducting fillers offer huge
advantage over other conductive materials such as metals which are
heavier.2 Owing to their exceptional properties,
polymer nanocomposites containing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been
developed for various applications.3−5 Recent review articles
highlight the key role of polymeric nanocomposites especially containing
carbonaceous fillers for EMI shielding applications.2,6,7 Among the various allotropes of
carbon, CNTs are considered as one of the best conductive nanofillers
because of their high inherent electrical conductivity, high mechanical
properties, and high aspect ratio, thereby providing sufficient electrical
conductivity to composites at relatively lower concentration8 as compared to conventional fillers such as carbon
black. Significant improvement in electric properties and EMI shielding
is observed with CNT concentration reaching or exceeding the electrical
percolation threshold.2 In ref (9), it was proposed that microwave
absorption can be optimized by adding a certain amount of CNTs slightly
above the percolation threshold and that the broadband absorption
can be improved by designing multilayered structures. It has been
well-established that the microwave absorption in polymer-based nanocomposites
can be enhanced through uniquely structured nanocomposites such as
layer-by-layer assembly,10−12 multilayered structure,13 and foamed structures.14−17 The thermal annealing of polymer
nanocomposites also depicted significant effect on EM absorption.18 Moreover, interconnected networks of conducting
nanoparticles in a given polymer matrix facilitate the elimination
of incoming microwave radiation.19 Therefore,
large efforts have been involved in enhancing the dispersion quality
of nanoparticles in polymer matrices through covalent and noncovalent
attachment of functional moieties on the surface of conducting nanoparticles,20−22 anchoring hybrid fillers such as metals and ceramic particles to
the surface of conducting nanoparticles,23−25 and incorporating
secondary fillers.26 In this context, processing
methodology employed for the preparation of nanocomposites also plays
a vital role in dispersion and network formation of nanoparticles
in a given matrix and thereby on the final EMI shielding performance
of the nanocomposites.

In this context, preparing conducting
polymer nanocomposites involving
CNTs requires that the nanotubes are well-individualized but at the
same time form an interconnected network-like structure in the matrix.
However, most often, even if a well-dispersed state is generated,
depending on various effects during fabrication processing, such as
crystallization, curing, viscosity changes, and so forth, the final
state of dispersion of CNTs can be negatively affected, resulting
in lower electrical conductivity than theoretically expected. Alternatively,
a strategy to facilitate an interconnected network-like structure
of CNTs in a matrix at low loadings is to localize them in a given
component of a cocontinuous blend.27−30 To this end, several reports
have been published as to how CNTs migrate to their preferred component
in binary blends either during processing or postprocessing operations
such as annealing, injection molding, and so forth.28,31,32 Interesting observations were reported especially
with partially miscible systems such as poly(α-methyl styrene-co-acrylonitrile)/poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), polystyrene/poly(vinyl
methyl ether), and PMMA/styrene-acrylonitrile (SAN) to name a few.
It is worth noting that CNTs are randomly distributed in these homogeneous
blends and migrate to the preferred component during demixing. This,
besides altering the overall charge transport in the blends, also
influences the evolving morphology during demixing. Recently, immiscible
blends with cocontinuous phase morphology illustrated a positive impact
on EMI shielding performance.6,30 Though immiscible blends
have been widely studied, the effect of phase separation [as in polycarbonate
(PC)/PMMA] is not yet fully understood, especially concerning EMI
shielding. Therefore, among the different pairs of partially miscible
blends, we focused on a particular pair: PC and PMMA, which shows
a cocontinuous type of morphology in a fixed compositional window.33−37 In the case of PC/PMMA blends, the effect of the processing technique
on the miscibility of phases is well-established where melt mixing
leads to phase-separated blends and solution mixing provides homogeneous
mixtures.38 However, in the case of solution-mixed
blends, miscibility is due to kinetically trapped polymer components
in the homogeneous state below the glass-transition temperature (Tg). In this case, phase separation is often
realized by heating the blend above the Tg, which is mainly due to very slow separation from the nonequilibrium
miscible state.39 Certain literature reported
that higher amount of PMMA (ca. 90 wt %) or PC (ca. 70 wt %) results
in phase-inverted structures. Besides composition, the viscosity ratio
also plays a major role in yielding this transient morphology. It
has been reported37 that for PC/PMMA blends
with 50–70 wt % of PMMA with lower viscosity PC or 60–70
wt % of PMMA with higher viscosity PC, a cocontinuous morphology could
be observed.

Although PC/PMMA blends exhibit partial miscibility
under certain
conditions, they phase-separate into different microstructures upon
annealing. Under the light of the existing literature, it is evident
that by adding nanoparticles, the various transient morphologies can
be stabilized—an action very similar to the classical block
copolymer route but with a different mechanism. Depending on the polarity
and the surface wetting, CNTs often localize in a component with higher
polarity, thereby minimizing the interfacial tension between the component
and CNTs. Among the different blend systems studied involving PC,
it is observed that CNTs mostly localize in the PC component possibly
driven by their higher polarity and/or lower melt viscosity.35,36,40 In ref (36), it was proposed, based
on interfacial energy calculations using geometric and harmonic mean
equations, that the CNTs migrated and localized in the PC component
within a PC/PMMA blend. In blends of PC/SAN,35,40 the CNTs mostly localized in the PC component, and by precompounding
SAN with a reactive maleic anhydride group, the localization of CNTs
in the SAN component was induced against the thermodynamic factors,
which is responsible for the localization of CNTs in the PC component
in the blends.40

Under this framework,
it is evident that migration and localization
of CNTs in a bicomponent system besides controlling the blend morphology
also influence the overall interconnected network structure of nanotubes
in the blends. As migration through viscous polymer melts is relatively
slower, the formation of interconnected network-like structures of
CNTs is impeded and often difficult to reach equilibrium within the
processing timeframe. This study mainly compares between different
processing (melt vs solution mixing) methods toward the overall conducting
network of MWCNTs in a partially miscible system (PC/PMMA). Besides,
this work also focuses on developing lightweight EMI shielding enclosures
utilizing the interconnected network-like structure of MWCNTs in various
PC/PMMA blends processed in the two different ways. Following the
selective localization of MWCNTs during processing or postprocessing
operations in a given component, a conductive pathway is developed
in the blends. These conducting blends were then evaluated for EMI
shielding applications. A detailed transmission electron microscopic
(TEM) analysis was carried out to understand the migration and localization
of MWCNTs in the blends. The DC electrical conductivity was measured
to obtain the volume resistivity/conductivity of various blend systems.
Finally, the different blend nanocomposites were evaluated for EMI
shielding properties, and the mechanism of shielding was systematically
studied. Taken together, this study makes an attempt to understand
as to how processing different conducting blend nanocomposites alters
the overall state of dispersion of MWCNTs and how the final quality
of dispersion affects the EMI shielding properties. This study will
help guide researchers working in this area from both fundamental
and end-application point of view.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Evolution of Morphology
during Processing
and Postprocessing of PC/PMMA Blends with MWCNTs
The morphology
of the solution- and melt-mixed blend nanocomposites was evaluated
systematically using TEM to gain an insight on two different aspects.
First, the distribution of components in the blends and second, the
localization and the quality of dispersion of MWCNTs in the blend
nanocomposites that were prepared by the two different mixing processes
(melt vs solution). As mentioned earlier, the content of MWCNTs was
varied from 1 to 3 wt % in various PC/PMMA blends (30/70, 50/50, 60/40,
and 70/30 by weight); however, for TEM analysis, only blends with
3 wt % MWCNTs were chosen to gain an insight in the process-induced
changes on the overall state of dispersion of MWCNTs. First, micrographs
with lower magnifications were captured to illustrate the distribution
of the components (PC and PMMA) in the blend nanocomposites. The images
with higher magnification were further recorded to reveal the localization
and the state of dispersion of MWCNTs in the blends. An important
difference between the morphology of the melt-mixed and solution-processed
blends is worth noting at this point. For effective comparison of
solution-processed and melt-mixed samples, representative samples
were melt-extruded under different processing conditions, and the
resulting volume conductivity was evaluated (not shown here). On the
basis of these results, the optimized processing parameters obtained
were 260 °C for 20 min at 60 rpm screw speed. The TEM micrographs
of melt-mixed samples represent the evolved structures after the extrusion
process (260 °C for 20 min, where the blends are already phase-separated).
As the melt leaves the die, the morphology is quenched and thin sections
were ultramicrotomed from the extruded solid strands without any further
treatment. In contrast, the TEM micrographs of solution-processed
samples (from the homogeneous state) were obtained after hot-pressing
them in a lab-scale compression molding machine at 260 °C for
20 min to induce phase separation. Although both the set of blends
were subjected to 20 min at 260 °C, the nature of processing
the blend nanocomposites widely varies. In the first case (melt mixing),
the blends are sheared at high temperature where de-entanglement of
MWCNTs is expected. In the second case (solution processing), though
the quality of dispersion of MWCNTs is expected to be better because
of lower solution viscosities compared to higher melt viscosities,
during annealing (hot-pressing), the MWCNTs migrate to their preferred
phase, while the blends phase-separate into PC-rich and PMMA-rich
phases. This leaves less time for the MWCNTs to develop fully interconnected
network-like structures in contrast to melt-mixed samples. The as-prepared
solution-mixed samples (before compression molding) showed single
glass-transition temperatures (see Figure S1), further confirming the homogeneous state of the samples. It is
only during compression molding that the blends phase-separate as
the temperature is much above the glass-transition temperature of
both the components (see Figure S1). It
is well-understood that the blend components are kinetically arrested
when heated above the glass-transition temperature. Hence, the effective
aspect ratio of MWCNTs is expected to be higher in solution-mixed
blends when compared with melt-processed samples (where high shear
stresses may break nanotubes and reduce the effective aspect ratio).
As PC/PMMA blends exhibit lower critical solution temperature (LCST)
type of behavior (above the glass-transition temperatures of the components),
we expect two phenomena to occur during compression molding: first,
the development of the blend microstructure and second, the migration/selective
localization of the nanotubes to the preferred component (here PC).
The objective of the following section is to take a closer look at
the various morphologies during processing or postprocessing operation
in the case of blend nanocomposites. This section is important from
a fundamental point of view as the overall state of dispersion and
localization of MWCNTs will greatly influence the conductivity and
the EMI shielding properties.

2.2 TEM of
Melt-Mixed Samples
Figure 1 presents the TEM
images of melt-mixed PC/PMMA 30/70 w/w % blends containing 3 wt %
MWCNTs. The darker regions in the captured micrographs represent the
PC component because of preferential interaction with the electron
beam, and the lighter regions can be assigned to the PMMA component,
which tends to be less affected by the electron beam. It is evident
that the PC component is dispersed in the PMMA matrix; however, the
morphology is strikingly different than the typical matrix-droplet
morphology (where often spherical droplets are dispersed in a matrix).
Another interesting feature worth mentioning is that the MWCNTs are
localized in the PC component of the blend and also observed to bridge
the components. This observation has been reported before in the literature
where high aspect ratio fillers (such as CNTs) especially bridge the
domains in cases where their characteristic lengths are larger than
the domain sizes.41−43 In addition, the preferred presence of MWCNTs in
a given component in biphasic systems often slows down the relaxation
of that particular phase and thereby prevents it from further coarsening.
This phenomenon typically results in irregular structures in filled
blends. A recent perspective article elaborates this phenomenon in
greater detail.44 As the MWCNTs are localized
in the minor component (here PC), the effective concentration of the
nanotubes in that particular component increases significantly, resulting
in a dense network-like structure of nanotubes as clearly observed
in Figure 1. This also
agrees with experimental results reported earlier in refs,36,40,45 where CNTs
tend to localize in the PC component within a blend structure consisting
of PC/PMMA45 or PC/SAN.36,40

Figure 1 TEM
micrographs of PC/PMMA 30/70 blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs
prepared by melt mixing: (a) low magnification and (a1)
high magnification.

Figure 2 presents
the TEM micrographs of melt-mixed PC/PMMA 50/50 blends with 3 wt %
MWCNTs. The morphology observed in the thin two-dimensional cuts suggests
that both the components are continuous (with few isolated domains
of the PC component) and that MWCNTs are localized in the PC component.
The MWCNTs in the PC component are well-dispersed and form an interconnected
network-like structure. Unlike the 30/70 blends, the 50/50 blends
showed relatively better dispersion of nanotubes as the volume available
for the dispersion of the nanotubes is ca. 1.7 times larger. Similar
to 50/50 PC/PMMA blends, the 60/40 PC/PMMA blends with MWCNTs also
show cocontinuous type of morphology (see Figure 3a). In this case, the interconnected PC domains
are more evident as compared to the 50/50 composition. The MWCNTs
are nicely localized in the PC component with relatively good dispersion.
The shearing action during extrusion facilitates the dispersion process
of primary MWCNT agglomerates which were infiltrated by the polymer
melt. There is a trade-off between higher shear stresses, resulting
in better dispersion and nanotube length shortening during the melt-extrusion
process.46−50 The higher the shear, the more is the shortening of the nanotubes,47,49,51 which often is not desired for
designing conducting blend nanocomposites. To understand this trade-off,
as mentioned earlier, based on the conductivity results of the samples
processed at different processing conditions, the optimized processing
parameters obtained were 260 °C for 20 min at 60 rpm screw speed
(not shown here). The observed cocontinuous morphology is also in
agreement with other reports presenting cocontinuous structures with
50 wt %34,35 and with 47 wt % of PMMA33 in PC.

Figure 2 TEM micrographs of PC/PMMA 50/50 blends containing 3 wt
% MWCNTs
prepared by melt mixing: (a) low magnification and (a1)
high magnification.

Figure 3 TEM micrographs of PC/PMMA
(a) 60/40 and (b) 70/30 blends containing
3 wt % MWCNTs prepared by melt mixing. (a1) and (b1) are high-resolution images of the respective blend nanocomposites.

Figure 3b presents
the TEM micrographs of PC/PMMA 70/30 blends. A distinct phase inversion
was observed in this case where PMMA domains are distributed in PC.
Unlike 30/70 blends, in this case much smaller PMMA domains with sizes
of 200–500 nm are well-dispersed in the PC matrix. This observation
is related to slowing down of the relaxation of the filled component
thereby suppressing the coarsening phenomenon, as it was discussed
earlier. In the case of 70/30 PC/PMMA blends, because the droplets
of the PMMA component are free of nanotubes, they can easily form
a regular droplet shape with fewer coalesced droplets. As the surrounding
matrix is expected to be of higher viscosity because of the presence
of nanotubes, the droplet deformation is expected to be higher during
processing. Hence, much smaller droplets appear in the case of 70/30
blends when compared with the 30/70 blends. Taken together, from the
TEM analysis, it is evident that irrespective of the composition,
the MWCNTs localize in the PC component driven by thermodynamic factors.
Further, the quality of dispersion of the nanotubes depends largely
on the amount in which it is localized, as this determines the effective
filler concentration. If the component which is preferred for the
nanotube localization (here PC) is the minor component in the blends,
the effective filler concentration becomes significantly higher and
results in denser interconnected networks of CNTs as compared to blends
with PC as the major component. However, the state of dispersion appears
to be better upon localization in the major PC component. Because
the connected network of nanofillers in the polymer matrix is crucial
for electrical conductivity and EMI shielding effectiveness of the
blend nanocomposites, the connectivity of the filled component also
plays a vital role. It is expected that blends with the continuous
PC component, achieved in blends with PC as the matrix, and cocontinuous
blends, only reached in a certain blend composition range, are preferred
for better properties. At different blend morphology types, the desired
multiple scattering between neighbored nanotubes and multiple scattering
between conducting domains has a different impact on attenuating the
incoming EMI radiation.

2.3 Optical Microscopy (OM)
and TEM of Solution-Mixed
Samples
PC/PMMA solution-mixed samples were prepared in addition
to melt-mixed samples to clearly understand how different blend preparation
processes influence the overall state of dispersion and distribution
of the nanotubes in blend nanocomposites. The PC/PMMA blends with
MWCNTs were obtained from the homogeneous mixing state and later subjected
to the compression molding process at 260 °C for 20 min to induce
the phase separation. Although both sets of blends were subjected
to similar thermal conditions, the evolving structures are expected
to be very different for shear (as in the extrusion mixing) and squeeze
flow deformation (as in compression molding shaping) processes. As
the two techniques of melt mixing and solution mixing followed by
compression molding are often used to fabricate nanocomposites and
blends, it is worth investigating how the evolved structures and the
continuity of the filled component together with the quality of nanotube
dispersion affect the electrical conductivity and EMI shielding properties.52

Before looking at high-magnification TEM
micrographs, optical micrographs of these solution-mixed blends after
compression molding were observed to get a general impression about
the blend morphology and nanotube agglomerate sizes. As discussed
earlier, the solution-mixed samples exhibited a single glass-transition
temperature confirming their thermodynamically miscible state (see Figure S1). As the glass-transition temperatures
of both the components are far apart, overlapping glass transitions
manifesting in a single thermal transition in differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) are ruled out. Because the hot-pressing temperature
is well above the LCST temperature of the blend system, during the
hot-pressing step at 260 °C for 20 min more or less complete
phase separation is expected. The optical micrographs of the as-pressed
different blend nanocomposites with 3 wt % MWCNTs are shown in Figure 4. In the images,
the phase separation resulting in cocontinuous structures with a bright
(CNT-free) component and another one with gray color of different
intensities (CNT containing) can be seen together with remaining black
CNT agglomerates of different sizes and shapes. This confirms the
expectation that at 260 °C, the blends phase-separate into PC-rich
and PMMA-rich phases and the nanotubes migrate to the preferred component
(here PC). The blends might undergo coarsening but to a limited extent
because of the presence of morphology stabilizing MWCNTs. However,
as the focus of this work is to understand the process-induced dispersion
of MWCNTs and its effect on EMI shielding, the coarsening phenomenon
was not studied here and is subjected to future investigations.

Figure 4 Optical micrographs
of solution-mixed PC/PMMA (a) 30/70, (b) 50/50,
(c) 60/40, and (d) 70/30 blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs after compression
molding.

Looking in more detail, the TEM
micrographs of PC/PMMA blends containing
3 wt % MWCNTs prepared by solution mixing shown in Figure 5 clearly illustrate that the
darker regions correspond to the PC component and the lighter regions
to PMMA. In 30/70 PC/PMMA blends (see Figure 5a), interestingly, the filled PC component
appears to form large interconnected structures in the PMMA matrix,
whereas in the 50/50 PC/PMMA blends (see Figure 5b), it seems that both components form larger
domains and a more pronounced segregation of the nanotubes in the
PC component. The cocontinuous structure is more clearly seen for
the 60/40 and 70/30 PC/PMMA blends (Figure 5c,d), whereby the smallest domain sizes and
most interconnectivity are seen in the 70/30 blend. As in the case
of melt-mixed samples, the localization of MWCNTs in the PC component
was consistent in the solution-mixed samples as well; however, the
perfectness of migration slightly depends on the general blend composition.
If PC forms the minor component (like in the 30/70 blend), it seems
to be more difficult for the nanotubes to migrate to PC, whereas in
the 70/30 blend, a more perfect localization in PC is observed. This
suggests that the general localization of nanotubes within the PC
component is the same irrespective of the way the blends are made.

Figure 5 TEM images
of solution-mixed and compression-molded polymer PC/PMMA
composites containing 3 wt % MWCNTs with weight ratios of (a) 30/70,
(b) 50/50, (c) 60/40, and (d) 70/30.

By comparing the TEM micrographs of both sets of blends,
it is
very evident that the general state of nanotube dispersion and the
perfectness of selective localization in the PC component are better
in the melt-mixed samples, which also show finer blend morphologies.
Thus, it appears that the nanotubes and their more pronounced agglomeration
state delay the demixing in the solution-based PC/PMMA blends during
compression molding, resulting in more irregular microstructures.

Although the nanotubes undergo intense shearing during the nanocomposite
preparation in solution mixing, the efficiency of disentanglement
of agglomerates seems to be lower than in melt mixing, resulting in
denser interconnected network structures. These structures are rather
restricted in migrating to the thermodynamically preferred PC. It
is expected that the dispersion of the nanotubes is better in solution-mixed
blends because of the ease in penetration of the dissolved polymer
chains into the nanotube agglomerates, which reduces their agglomerate
strength and helps finally in the agglomerate breakup. However, this
could not be confirmed by the TEM images of both blend series. However,
it appears that the nanotubes in the TEM images are much shorter in
melt-mixed blends as compared to the solution-mixed. This is possibly
due to the higher shear stresses applied inside the microcompounder.
Such effects of shortening CNTs in cocontinuous melt-mixed blends
were recently reported by Liebscher et al.,51 wherein shortening of length of CNTs by 25% of the initial length
after melt mixing in a similar kind of microcompounder was reported
for PC/SAN 60/40 blends with 1 wt % NC7000. As shorter nanotubes are
easier to disperse, the observation of better dispersion in melt-mixed
blends may be related to this nanotube breakage. Thus, it may be expected
that solution-mixed blends have longer nanotubes facilitating the
network formation at lower loadings and resulting in higher absolute
electrical conductivity. From the EMI shielding perspective, which
is the major focus of this work, larger extended nanotube networks,
such as that observed in solution processing, may offer higher intertube
scattering than well-dispersed structures localized in one of the
components of the blends. To understand the phenomena directing EMI
shielding, both the blends were systematically studied for their electrical
volume conductivity and EMI shielding properties.

2.4 Electrical Volume Conductivity of PC/PMMA
Blends
The electrical volume resistivity was measured for
melt-mixed nanocomposites of 30/70, 50/50, 60/40, and 70/30 PC/PMMA
blends containing 1, 2, and 3 wt % of MWCNTs. For solution mixing,
measurements were performed for four sets of blends: 30/70, 50/50,
60/40, and 70/30 PC/PMMA blends containing only 3 wt % of MWCNTs.
PC and PMMA are insulating materials with very low electrical conductivity. Figure 6 shows the DC conductivity
versus the nanotube content for melt-mixed blends and all values for
solution-mixed blends with 3 wt % MWCNTs. It can be clearly seen that
already the addition of 1 wt % MWCNTs to the different melt-mixed
PC/PMMA blends makes them conductive.

Figure 6 DC volume conductivity of (a) melt-processed
PC/PMMA blends as
a function of MWCNT content and (b) various solution-processed PC/PMMA
blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs.

The highest values of electrical conductivity were measured
for
nanocomposites made of PC/PMMA 70/30 in which the major PC component
forms the matrix phase and by such shows the highest connectivity
among all blends. Even if the local CNT content (assuming complete
selective localization) is the lowest at this blend composition, the
very good dispersion, the distinct selective localization, the perfect
PC connectivity, and possibly also a comparatively lower nanotube
shortening result in the most conductive networks. The conductivity
increases for all blends with MWCNT loading whereby the 60/40 blends
showed the lowest conductivity values but the highest relative increase
with the nanotube amount. The values found for the volume conductivities
are in agreement with previous reports on PC/SAN blend nanocomposites,
namely, PC/SAN/CNT 59/40/1 wt %36 and PC/SAN
60/40 containing 0.5 wt %.40

The
solution-mixed PC/PMMA blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs (Figure 6b) exhibit electrical
conductivities very close to each other in the range of 0.35–0.4
S/m, except for the 50/50 PC/PMMA blend which exhibits a slightly
higher conductivity, illustrating a higher degree of connectivity
in this blend, which goes along with the coarser blend structure at
this composition. Although the electrical volume conductivities are
more or less similar in both sets of blends at a given concentration
of nanotubes, the EMI shielding behavior can be very different. As
discussed before, the blend morphologies including the connectivity
of the conductive component PC, the perfectness of localization in
this component, and the state of dispersion (and nanotube length)
are different in the blends.

2.5 EMI Shielding: Influence
of Intertube and
Interphase Scattering
The EMI shielding effectiveness of
the PC/PMMA blends prepared by the two different techniques of melt
and solution mixing, which are primarily used for the preparation
of nanocomposites, was assessed over X and Ku-band frequencies,
as this frequency range is essential for most of the commercial applications.
Because polymer-based nanocomposites manifest absorption-driven shielding,
this class of materials has been emerging off late for EMI shielding
applications. Recently, owing to their flexibility in developing unique
microstructures, phase-separated multiphasic polymer blends resulted
in interesting outcomes toward microwave shielding. In this study,
different overall blend morphologies and by varying the blend composition,
different states of connectivity of the PC component, in which the
MWCNTs tend to migrate, as well as different states of perfectness
of that migration and of the state of nanotube dispersion were achieved
and can be compared.

Figure 7 shows total shielding effectiveness (SET) as a function of frequency for melt-processed PC/PMMA blends containing
different amounts of MWCNTs. The SET scaled with the amount
of MWCNTs in the blends and has absolute values as high as the nanotube
content. This is mainly attributed to the increased interconnectivity
of the nanotube networks of MWCNTs at higher loading and enhanced
dielectric loss associated with these denser networks. At higher amount
of MWCNTs, the distance between neighboring MWCNTs decreases, resulting
in an easier transport of nomadic charges, leading to a larger Ohmic
loss. In a recent study, the intertube and especially the interphase
scattering was shown to play a vital role in eliminating incoming
microwave radiation.23,24 Intertube scattering corresponds
to the scattering of penetrated microwaves from conducting MWCNTs,
and interphase scattering represents scattering of penetrated microwaves
from the interphase between the different blend components. Thereby,
these scattering events are strikingly different from multiple reflections
and facilitate the elimination of penetrated microwave radiation.
Comparing the different blend compositions, a slight influence of
the developed blend microstructure on the SET of melt-processed
PC/PMMA blends is observed. From TEM analysis, the distinct transition
of phase morphologies from the droplet matrix to cocontinuous and
finally phase inversion were observed with increasing PC content in
the blends. In all the blends, a very pronounced localization of MWCNT
in the PC component was found with better states of dispersion at
higher PC contents. It has been reported for immiscible polymer blends
that at a given concentration of MWCNTs, cocontinuous morphologies
lead to enhanced SET arising from interconnected MWCNTs
and well-connected phases.30 However, in
our study, in the case of melt-mixed blends, the continuous PC matrix
filled with MWCNTs and containing finely dispersed PMMA domains (i.e.,
70/30 wt/wt) depicted enhanced SET over the other two types
of morphologies, which is especially seen at 3 wt % MWCNT loading
as shown in Figure 7. In the 70/30 blend, the highest volume of the preferred PC component
(as compared to the other blend compositions) is available for the
accommodation of the MWCNTs resulting despite a lower local nanotube
concentration
in a relatively better dispersion of MWCNTs as observed from TEM analysis.
In addition, the PC forms a matrix, meaning that a perfect continuous
component and the MWCNTs show a high perfectness of migration into
that component. This explains why this particular blend shows slightly
higher electrical conductivity over the other blend compositions containing
3 wt % MWCNTs. The enhanced SET of the 70/30 blend also
echoes the same. Therefore, from the detailed TEM analysis (Figures 2 and 3) and EMI shielding performance of melt-mixed blends (Figure 7), one can conclude
that the degree of connectivity of the PC component, the perfectness
of MWCNT migration into PC, as well as the state of nanotube dispersion
govern the final EMI shielding performance of the blends. The better
continuous the PC component, the more pronounced the selective localization,
and the better the dispersion, the higher the electrical conductivity
and EMI shielding efficiency.

Figure 7 SET as a function of frequency for
melt-mixed PC/PMMA
blends (a) 30/70, (b) 50/50, (c) 60/40, and (d) 70/30 containing different
amounts of MWCNTs.

The SET as
a function of frequency for the solution-processed
PC/PMMA blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs is shown in Figure 8a, and the SET values
of melt- and solution-mixed blends are compared in Figure 8b. It is interesting to note
that at the selected concentration of MWCNTs (3 wt %), the effect
of blend composition plays a pronounced role. Thereby, the PC/PMMA
30/70 blend has the outstanding highest shielding efficiency followed
by 50/50, 70/30, and 60/40 blends, whereas in the melt-mixed blends,
the efficiency tended to increase with the higher PC content. Interestingly,
all solution-processed blends manifested in remarkably higher absolute
values of SET than the melt-mixed blends at any given blend
composition (Figure 8b). For instance, the best SET of −27 dB (@18 GHz),
suggesting more than 99% elimination of incoming microwave radiation,
was observed for the solution-mixed 30/70 PC/PMMA blend with 3 wt
% MWCNTs. Moreover, the observed SET value is well above
the required threshold for major commercial applications (i.e., ≥−20
dB; absolute value). As depicted in Figure 5, the solution-processed blends, next to
differences in the blend morphology when compared with the melt-mixed
ones, showed less pronounced perfectness of selective migration of
larger nanotube networks into the PC component. Thus, much larger
networks span over both components (see Figure 5). In addition, the nanotubes appeared to
be longer than in the melt-mixed blends, resulting in an easier network
formation at a given loading. The outstanding sample of PC/PMMA 30/70
should have the highest effective concentration of MWCNTs and also
shows the lowest perfectness of MWCNT migration into PC. Obviously,
a suitable CNT network morphology and spatial arrangement within the
blend morphology are formed, which results in the best shielding performance.
This sample is followed by the PC/PMMA 50/50 blend, which showed larger
blend domains and in context with this more pronounced selective nanotube
localization in PC. Thus, a relatively large segregated network spans
over the whole blend.

Figure 8 (a) SET as a function of frequency for solution-mixed
PC/PMMA blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs and (b) SET as
a function of PC concentration.

It is important to mention that in contrast to melt-mixed
blends,
in which conductivity showed a stronger dependence on composition
and EMI shielding followed conductivity, in solution-processed blends,
the electrical conductivity values of blends did not change much;
however, the EMI shielding performance changed drastically. This can
be attributed to enhanced intertube scattering because of networks
with locally higher density and a large continuous interface generated
because of cocontinuous phase morphology. This obviously leads to
maximum blocking of penetrated microwave radiation. At higher filler
concentration, apart from electrical conductivity, the developed microstructures
and interconnections between microwave active particles govern the
EMI shielding performance of the blends. Taken together, the synergy
between the cocontinuous phase morphology, the better retained nanotube
length, and the less perfect selective migration into one component
resulted in a type of segregated nanotube network structure generating
maximum attenuation of incoming microwave radiation. The results imply
that the blend morphology serves as a template for the segregated
nanotube network structure, which is in the case of solution-mixed
blends less matched as larger network areas than the domain sizes
are built. This discrepancy seems to be the highest at low PC content
resulting together with the blend interface to the best shielding
efficiency of these nanotube networks.

Because the EM smog has
become a great threat for safe functioning
of precise electronic devices, the attenuation of microwave radiation
through absorption is the most desired mechanism. Therefore, in order
to study the wave absorption ability of developed blends, shielding
effectiveness through absorption (SEA) of blends was assessed
over X and Ku-band frequency range. Figure 9 shows variation in the SEA for
both blend series at different blend compositions. It is seen that
irrespective of blend preparation technique and blend composition,
all blends manifest absorption-driven microwave shielding. All PC/PMMA
blends, irrespective of a processing technique, showed a phase-separated
structure with selective localization of MWCNTs in the PC component
leaving the PMMA component almost free of nanotubes and thus insulative.
Therefore, a large fraction of incoming microwave radiation gets penetrated
in the blends (i.e., minimized surface reflection which is essential
for microwave-absorbing materials) through the insulative PMMA component,
which is further attenuated by interaction with the conducting PC
component and the MWCNTs. Hence, the developed blends are not only
effective in blocking microwave radiation but also help in controlling
EM smog. Interestingly, at a given composition, solution-processed
blends showed remarkably higher SEA over melt-processed
(Figure 9). For instance,
the solution-mixed PC/PMMA 30/70 blend with cocontinuous morphology
depicted the highest absorption of penetrated microwave radiation.
Because the electrical conductivity of solution-processed blends,
irrespective of composition, was approximately similar, the enhanced
SEA is ascribed to the intertube and interphase scattering
in the blends. The effect of blend morphology and dispersion of MWCNTs
on microwave absorption ability of blends is well-evident. In the
case of polymer-based nanocomposite containing heterogeneous materials
with different electrical properties, the scattering of penetrated
microwave radiation due to impedance mismatch on the micron length
becomes more likely. Each scattering event leads to the decreased
power of penetrated microwave radiation and eventually leads to elimination.
This is often considered as absorption of microwave radiation through
the large dielectric and/or magnetic loss depending on the nature
of microwave active fillers. In this case, the multiple scattering
events are facilitated by the continuous conducting polymer component
(i.e., PC) and interconnected networks of MWCNTs. However, in both
the blends prepared using two different methods, elimination of microwave
radiation is associated with the conducting and dielectrically lossy
nature of MWCNTs.

Figure 9 SEA as a function of frequency for (a) melt-processed
and (b) solution-processed PC/PMMA blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs.

2.6 Underlying
Microwave Shielding Mechanism:
A Large Dielectric Loss
To understand the mechanism behind
microwave shielding in PC/PMMA blends, a closer look was taken on
the complex dielectric properties over X and Ku-band frequencies. Figure 10 shows real and
imaginary permittivity of PC/PMMA blends. Real permittivity (ε′)
corresponds to the storage of electrical energy and is greatly controlled
by the polarization in the material. In this case, the polarization
arises because of interfacial polarization induced by the large difference
between the conductivities of the insulating polymer matrix and the
conducting MWCNTs as well as from self-polarization associated with
defective MWCNTs. Moreover, because of phase-separated blend structure
and the selective localization of MWCNTs in the PC component, heterogeneous
media were developed, which act as an interface for charge accumulation
in the blends. The effect of blend composition (i.e., blend morphologies)
on ε′ is well-evident in both blend series. However,
there is no direct relation between ε′ and SET. Imaginary permittivity (ε″) represents the dielectric
loss in the material and greatly controls the attenuation of microwave
radiation. In this case, ε″ mainly corresponds to the
Ohmic loss arising from nomadic charge transport through interconnected
networks of MWCNTs. The ε″ was in line with the SET and SEA observed in PC/PMMA blends. It is worth
to note that the DC electrical conductivity of blends is not in line
with ε″ observed in gigahertz frequencies for PC/PMMA
blends. Hence, as mentioned earlier, the multiple intertube and interphase
scattering has a great impact on dielectric loss and attenuation of
microwave radiation. This is mainly due to enhanced interaction of
penetrated microwave radiation with a large number of discrete MWCNTs
in the conducting PC component. Therefore, it can be concluded that
the observed absorption of microwave radiation was initiated by a
large dielectric loss. For instance, in the case of solution-mixed
30/70 blends, the cocontinuous phase morphology and well-connected
networks of MWCNTs led to maximum ε″, which is also confirmed
by the highest SET and SEA.

Figure 10 Real permittivity of
(a) melt- and (b) solution-processed; imaginary
permittivity of (c) melt- and (d) solution-processed PC/PMMA blends
containing 3 wt % MWCNTs.

Figure 11a,b illustrates
the role of multiple scattering and provides a possible mechanism
of microwave attenuation in PC/PMMA blends. Hence, one can conclude
that by developing heterogeneous media through selective localization
of conducting nanoparticles (in this case MWCNTs) in immiscible polymer
blends with cocontinuous phase structure and enhanced dispersion of
nanoparticles by proper selection of processing methodology, enhanced
multiple scattering can be achieved, which further facilitates enhanced
elimination of incoming microwave radiation.

Figure 11 Cartoon illustrating
the description of mechanism of microwave
attenuation in (a) melt-mixed 70/30 and (b) solution-mixed 30/70 PC/PMMA
blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs.

3 Conclusions
The effect of two traditional
polymer blend nanocomposite fabrication
processes on the development of blend microstructures, the quality
of dispersion of MWCNTs, and the perfectness of migration into the
thermodynamically preferred component was investigated in detail for
various PC/PMMA blends containing MWCNTs using TEM analysis. In PC/PMMA
blends prepared by solution or melt mixing, sea-island, cocontinuous,
and phase-inverted microstructures can be obtained, depending on the
blend composition. A significant effect of processing methodology
on phase morphology was realized from TEM micrographs where melt-mixed
blends depicted cocontinuous phase structure starting at 50 wt % of
the PC component, whereas solution-mixed blends showed such morphologies
already at 30 wt % of PC. In the latter case, the blends were mixed
in the miscible state and phase separation occurred afterward during
annealing above the glass-transition temperature of the components.
Under these conditions, phase separation was restricted, which was
also promoted by the additional influence of the nanotubes. Irrespective
of the processing technique and blend composition, all blends showed
selective localization of MWCNTs in the PC component. However, the
perfectness of migration into this component depended on the PC content
and its domain type and size on the blend preparation technique. It
was better in melt-mixed than in solution-processed blends and was
as high as the PC content. In solution-mixed blends, larger extended
network structures not fitting into the PC component combined with
longer nanotubes were observed. The state of dispersion was better
in melt-mixed samples and if a higher accommodating PC volume was
available. In solution-mixed blends with 3 wt % MWCNTs, in spite of
similar electrical conductivities, a remarkable difference in EMI
shielding performance of the blends was observed depending on their
composition and blend microstructures. This implies that intertube
and interphase scattering plays a vital role in the elimination of
incoming microwave radiation. The highest EMI SE of −27 dB
(@18 GHz), mainly through absorption, was achieved in PC/PMMA 30/70
solution-mixed blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs. These blends were
cocontinuous, with a relatively fine blend structure, showed in context
with the low PC content a comparatively low degree of perfectness
of nanotube migration, and had relatively long nanotubes so that quite
large but segregated networks span over the sample volume. In summary,
this study provides first critical insights on the effect of blend
fabrication processes on the blend morphology, the nanotube arrangement,
and the quality of dispersion of MWCNTs, resulting in different connectivities
of the nanotube networks toward designing of high-performance microwave
absorbers.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
For designing polymer blends,
medium-viscosity PC Lexan 143R, Sabic and PMMA, Altuglas V825T, GSFC,
India, were used. MWCNTs (NC 7000) from Nanocyl S.A., Sambreville,
Belgium, with an average diameter of 9.5 nm and a length of 1.5 μm
were used as conducting fillers.

4.2 Preparation
of Nanocomposites
Melt
mixing of the polymers and MWCNTs was carried out using a twin-screw
HAAKE MiniLab II microcompounder with a set housing temperature of
260 °C and counter-rotating screw speed of 60 rpm for 20 min.
To avoid oxidative degradation, melt mixing was performed under continuous
flow of nitrogen. The blend components were vacuum-dried at 80 °C
for 12 h to eliminate traces of moisture. All components were premixed
and added together into the running compounder.

Solution mixing
of PC/PMMA blends in tetrahydrofuran was done using bath sonication
with a set power of 150 W for 30 min, followed by shear mixing using
an Ultra-Turrax T25 shear mixer at 8000 rpm for 45 min. The nanocomposite
was precipitated out using methanol and vacuum-dried to remove traces
of solvent. After drying, the blend samples were then compression-molded
at 260 °C for 20 min under 10 bar pressure.

4.3 Nanocomposite Characterization
4.3.1 Morphology—OM
and TEM
Blend
morphologies as well as selective localization and dispersion quality
of MWCNTs in the blends were analyzed using OM and TEM. For OM, thin
sections of 1 μm thickness were prepared from the solution-mixed
and afterward compression-molded films using a Leica ultramicrotome
and observed in transmission mode using an Olympus BX53M microscope
combined with the Olympus camera DP71. For TEM investigations, a Zeiss
Libra 120 microscope was used and the micrographs were captured with
an accelerating voltage of 120 kV. In the case of melt-processed blends,
ultrathin sections (thickness 60 nm) were cut from extruded strands
using a microtome (Leica EM UC7) equipped with a diamond knife at
a cutting speed of 0.4 mm/s at room temperature. For solution-mixed
blends, 60 nm thin sections were cut from the compression-molded plates.
No additional staining was done on the samples prior to the TEM imaging.

4.4 Electrical Volume Conductivity
For
electrical measurements, PC/PMMA blends were compression-molded in
a plate shape at 260 °C for 10 min. The measurements of electrical
volume resistivity (ρ) of the nanocomposites were performed
using a four-point test fixture (outer gold electrodes 16 mm distance,
inner gold electrodes 10 mm) coupled with a Keithley E6517A or DMM
2000 electrometer at 25 °C and 45% relative humidity. The samples
were cut from the pressed plates and had dimensions of 30 mm length
and 3 mm width. Electrical volume conductivity (σ) was calculated
from four measurements as a reciprocal of the obtained resistivity  

4.5 EMI Shielding
A vector network analyzer
(VNA, Anritsu MS4642A) coupled with a Damaskos M07T coax setup was
employed to study the EMI shielding properties of the prepared nanocomposites.
The reflection and absorption loss arising from the measurement set
up and transmission lines was counterbalanced by complete two port
short-open-load-through calibration prior to the measurements. The
toroidal shape specimens with an outer and inner diameter of 7.00
and 3.04 mm, respectively, were compression-molded at 260 °C,
and various scattering parameters were recorded over X and Ku-band frequencies. Complex permittivity values of nanocomposites
were estimated using the Nicolson–Ross algorithm coupled with
VNA.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00575.DSC thermographs
of solution- and melt-mixed PC/PMMA
(50/50) blends containing 3 wt % MWCNTs (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00575_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
§ Department
of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of
Calgary, 2500 University Dr NW, Calgary, Canada, AB T2N 1N4.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
S.B., P.P., and
S.P.P. would like to thank the Department
of Science and Technology (DST)—German Academic Exchange Service
(DAAD) for funding. In addition, S.B. would like to thank INSA (India)
for the financial assistance. The authors would like to thank Manuela
Heber (IPF Dresden) for assistance in TEM.
==== Refs
References
Tong X. C.  Electromagnetic
Interference Shielding Fundamentals and Design Guide . Advanced Materials and Design for Electromagnetic Interference
Shielding ; CRC Press , 2016 ; pp 1 –35 .
Qin F. ; Brosseau C. 
A Review and Analysis of Microwave Absorption in Polymer
Composites Filled with Carbonaceous Particles . J. Appl. Phys. 
2012 , 111 , 061301 10.1063/1.3688435 .
Li Y. ; Zhou B. ; Zheng G. ; Liu X. ; Li T. ; Yan C. ; Cheng C. ; Dai K. ; Liu C. ; Shen C. ; Guo Z. 
Continuously Prepared Highly Conductive
and Stretchable SWNT/MWNT
Synergistically Composited Electrospun Thermoplastic Polyurethane
Yarns for Wearable Sensing . J. Mater. Chem.
C 
2018 , 6 , 2258 –2269 . 10.1039/c7tc04959e .
Wu Z. ; Gao S. ; Chen L. ; Jiang D. ; Shao Q. ; Zhang B. ; Zhai Z. ; Wang C. ; Zhao M. ; Ma Y. 
Electrically
Insulated Epoxy Nanocomposites Reinforced with Synergistic Core–Shell
SiO2@MWCNTs and Montmorillonite Bifillers . Macromol. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 218 , 1700357 10.1002/macp.201700357 .
Sun K. ; Xie P. ; Wang Z. ; Su T. ; Shao Q. ; Ryu J. ; Zhang X. ; Guo J. ; Shankar A. ; Li J. 
Flexible Polydimethylsiloxane/Multi-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes Membranous Metacomposites with Negative Permittivity . Polymer 
2017 , 125 , 50 –57 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2017.07.083 .
Pawar S. P. ; Biswas S. ; Kar G. P. ; Bose S. 
High Frequency Millimetre
Wave Absorbers Derived from Polymeric Nanocomposites . Polymer 
2016 , 84 , 398 –419 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2016.01.010 .
Geetha S. ; Satheesh Kumar K. K. ; Rao C. R. K. ; Vijayan M. ; Trivedi D. C. 
EMI Shielding:
Methods and Materials—a Review . J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 
2009 , 112 , 2073 –2086 . 10.1002/app.29812 .
Zhang K. ; Li G.-H. ; Feng L.-M. ; Wang N. ; Guo J. ; Sun K. ; Yu K.-X. ; Zeng J.-B. ; Li T. ; Guo Z. 
Ultralow Percolation
Threshold and Enhanced Electromagnetic Interference Shielding in Poly(L-Lactide)/Multi-Walled
Carbon Nanotube Nanocomposites with Electrically Conductive Segregated
Networks . J. Mater. Chem. C 
2017 , 5 , 9359 –9369 . 10.1039/c7tc02948a .
Liu Z. ; Bai G. ; Huang Y. ; Li F. ; Ma Y. ; Guo T. ; He X. ; Lin X. ; Gao H. ; Chen Y. 
Microwave Absorption
of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes/Soluble Cross-Linked Polyurethane
Composites . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2007 , 111 , 13696 –13700 . 10.1021/jp0731396 .
Pande S. ; Singh B. P. ; Mathur R. B. ; Dhami T. L. ; Saini P. ; Dhawan S. K. 
Improved Electromagnetic Interference Shielding Properties
of MWCNT–PMMA Composites Using Layered Structures . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2009 , 4 , 327 10.1007/s11671-008-9246-x .20596500 
Joo J. ; Lee C. Y. 
High Frequency Electromagnetic
Interference Shielding
Response of Mixtures and Multilayer Films Based on Conducting Polymers . J. Appl. Phys. 
2000 , 88 , 513 –518 . 10.1063/1.373688 .
Bhattacharjee Y. ; Bhingardive V. ; Biswas S. ; Bose S. 
Construction of a Carbon
Fiber Based Layer-by-Layer (LbL) Assembly–a Smart Approach
Towards Effective EMI Shielding . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 112614 –112619 . 10.1039/c6ra24238c .
Wang Z. ; Wei R. ; Liu X. 
Fluffy and Ordered Graphene Multilayer Films with Improved
Electromagnetic Interference Shielding over X-Band . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 22408 –22419 . 10.1021/acsami.7b04008 .28640583 
Zhang H.-B. ; Yan Q. ; Zheng W.-G. ; He Z. ; Yu Z.-Z. 
Tough Graphene–Polymer
Microcellular Foams for Electromagnetic Interference Shielding . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2011 , 3 , 918 –924 . 10.1021/am200021v .21366239 
Yang Y. ; Gupta M. C. ; Dudley K. L. ; Lawrence R. W. 
Novel Carbon Nanotube–Polystyrene
Foam Composites for Electromagnetic Interference Shielding . Nano Lett. 
2005 , 5 , 2131 –2134 . 10.1021/nl051375r .16277439 
Eswaraiah V. ; Sankaranarayanan V. ; Ramaprabhu S. 
Functionalized Graphene–PVDF
Foam Composites for EMI Shielding . Macromol.
Mater. Eng. 
2011 , 296 , 894 –898 . 10.1002/mame.201100035 .
Thomassin J.-M. ; Pagnoulle C. ; Bednarz L. ; Huynen I. ; Jerome R. ; Detrembleur C. 
Foams of Polycaprolactone/MWNT
Nanocomposites for Efficient
EMI Reduction . J. Mater. Chem. 
2008 , 18 , 792 –796 . 10.1039/b709864b .
Wang Z. ; Jia K. ; Liu X. 
Temperature Dependent Electrical Conductivity and Microwave
Absorption Properties of Composites Based on Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotubes
and Phthalocyanine Polymer . J. Mater. Sci. Mater.
Electron. 
2015 , 26 , 8008 –8016 . 10.1007/s10854-015-3455-8 .
Chung D. D. L. 
Electromagnetic
Interference Shielding Effectiveness of Carbon Materials . Carbon 
2001 , 39 , 279 –285 . 10.1016/s0008-6223(00)00184-6 .
Ma P. C. ; Kim J.-K. ; Tang B. Z. 
Effects
of Silane Functionalization
on the Properties of Carbon Nanotube/Epoxy Nanocomposites . Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2007 , 67 , 2965 –2972 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2007.05.006 .
Ma P.-C. ; Mo S.-Y. ; Tang B.-Z. ; Kim J.-K. 
Dispersion, Interfacial
Interaction and Re-Agglomeration of Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes
in Epoxy Composites . Carbon 
2010 , 48 , 1824 –1834 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2010.01.028 .
Ma P.-C. ; Siddiqui N. A. ; Marom G. ; Kim J.-K. 
Dispersion
and Functionalization
of Carbon Nanotubes for Polymer-Based Nanocomposites: A Review . Composites, Part A 
2010 , 41 , 1345 –1367 . 10.1016/j.compositesa.2010.07.003 .
Pawar S. P. ; Gandi M. ; Saraf C. ; Bose S. 
Exceptional Microwave
Absorption in Soft Polymeric Nanocomposites Facilitated by Engineered
Nanostructures . J. Mater. Chem. C 
2016 , 4 , 4954 –4966 . 10.1039/c6tc01062h .
Pawar S. P. ; Gandi M. ; Bose S. 
High Performance Electromagnetic
Wave Absorbers Derived from PC/SAN Blends Containing Multiwall Carbon
Nanotubes and Fe3O4 Decorated onto Graphene
Oxide Sheets . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 37633 –37645 . 10.1039/c5ra25435c .
Pawar S. P. ; Marathe D. A. ; Pattabhi K. ; Bose S. 
Electromagnetic Interference
Shielding through MWNT Grafted Fe3O4 Nanoparticles
in PC/SAN Blends . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 656 –669 . 10.1039/c4ta04559a .
Zeraati A. S. ; Arjmand M. ; Sundararaj U. 
Silver Nanowire/MnO2 Nanowire
Hybrid Polymer Nanocomposites: Materials with High Dielectric Permittivity
and Low Dielectric Loss . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 14328 –14336 . 10.1021/acsami.6b14948 .28378996 
Li Y. ; Shimizu H. 
Conductive PVDF/PA6/CNTs Nanocomposites Fabricated
by Dual Formation of Cocontinuous and Nanodispersion Structures . Macromolecules 
2008 , 41 , 5339 –5344 . 10.1021/ma8006834 .
Göldel A. ; Kasaliwal G. ; Pötschke P. 
Selective Localization and Migration
of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes in Blends of Polycarbonate and Poly(Styrene-Acrylonitrile) . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2009 , 30 , 423 –429 . 10.1002/marc.200800549 .21706619 
Bose S. ; Bhattacharyya A. R. ; Kulkarni A. R. ; Pötschke P. 
Electrical,
Rheological and Morphological Studies in Co-Continuous Blends of Polyamide
6 and Acrylonitrile–Butadiene–Styrene with Multiwall
Carbon Nanotubes Prepared by Melt Blending . Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2009 , 69 , 365 –372 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2008.10.024 .
Pawar S. P. ; Gandi M. ; Arief I. ; Krause B. ; Pötschke P. ; Bose S. 
Graphene Derivatives
Doped with Nickel Ferrite Nanoparticles as Excellent
Microwave Absorbers in Soft Nanocomposites . ChemistrySelect 
2017 , 2 , 5984 –5999 . 10.1002/slct.201701022 .
Zhao X. ; Zhao J. ; Cao J.-P. ; Wang D. ; Hu G.-H. ; Chen F. ; Dang Z.-M. 
Effect
of the Selective Localization
of Carbon Nanotubes in Polystyrene/Poly(Vinylidene Fluoride) Blends
on Their Dielectric, Thermal, and Mechanical Properties . Mater. Des. 
2014 , 56 , 807 –815 . 10.1016/j.matdes.2013.11.073 .
Pötschke P. ; Pegel S. ; Claes M. ; Bonduel D. 
A Novel Strategy to
Incorporate Carbon Nanotubes into Thermoplastic Matrices . Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2008 , 29 , 244 –251 . 10.1002/marc.200700637 .
Miles I. S. ; Zurek A. 
Preparation, Structure,
and Properties of Two-Phase Co-Continuous
Polymer Blends . Polym. Eng. Sci. 
1988 , 28 , 796 –805 . 10.1002/pen.760281205 .
Steinmann S. ; Gronski W. ; Friedrich C. 
Cocontinuous Polymer Blends: Influence
of Viscosity and Elasticity Ratios of the Constituent Polymers on
Phase Inversion . Polymer 
2001 , 42 , 6619 –6629 . 10.1016/s0032-3861(01)00100-8 .
Bae D.-Y. ; Lee H.-S. 
Enhanced Compatibility of PC/PMMA
Alloys by Adding
Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes . Carbon Lett. 
2010 , 11 , 83 –89 . 10.5714/cl.2010.11.2.083 .
Liebscher M. ; Tzounis L. ; Pötschke P. ; Heinrich G. 
Influence of the Viscosity
Ratio in PC/SAN Blends Filled with MWCNTs on the Morphological, Electrical,
and Melt Rheological Properties . Polymer 
2013 , 54 , 6801 –6808 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2013.10.040 .
Marin N. ; Favis B. D. 
Co-Continuous Morphology
Development in Partially Miscible
PMMA/PC Blends . Polymer 
2002 , 43 , 4723 –4731 . 10.1016/s0032-3861(02)00280-x .
Chiou J. S. ; Barlow J. W. ; Paul D. R. 
Miscibility of Bisphenol-a
Polycarbonate
with Poly(Methyl Methacrylate) . J. Polym. Sci.,
Part B: Polym. Phys. 
1987 , 25 , 1459 –1471 . 10.1002/polb.1987.090250708 .
Nishimoto M. ; Keskkula H. ; Paul D. R. 
Role of
Slow Phase Separation in
Assessing the Equilibrium Phase Behaviour of PC-PMMA Blends . Polymer 
1991 , 32 , 272 –278 . 10.1016/0032-3861(91)90013-9 .
Gültner M. ; Göldel A. ; Pötschke P. 
Tuning the Localization of Functionalized
MWCNTs in SAN/PC Blends by a Reactive Component . Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2011 , 72 , 41 –48 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2011.09.013 .
Pötschke P. ; Bhattacharyya A. R. ; Janke A. 
Morphology and Electrical Resistivity
of Melt Mixed Blends of Polyethylene and Carbon Nanotube Filled Polycarbonate . Polymer 
2003 , 44 , 8061 –8069 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2003.10.003 .
Bose S. ; Bhattacharyya A. R. ; Bondre A. P. ; Kulkarni A. R. ; Pötschke P. 
Rheology,
Electrical Conductivity, and the Phase Behavior of Cocontinuous PA6/ABS
Blends with MWNT: Correlating the Aspect Ratio of MWNT with the Percolation
Threshold . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2008 , 46 , 1619 –1631 . 10.1002/polb.21501 .
Pötschke P. ; Bhattacharyya A. R. ; Janke A. 
Carbon Nanotube-Filled Polycarbonate
Composites Produced by Melt Mixing and Their Use in Blends with Polyethylene . Carbon 
2004 , 42 , 965 –969 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2003.12.001 .
Pawar S. P. ; Bose S. 
Peculiar Morphological
Transitions Induced by Nanoparticles in Polymeric
Blends: Retarded Relaxation or Altered Interfacial Tension? . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 14470 –14478 . 10.1039/c5cp01644d .25985750 
Park J. ; Lee S. ; Lee J. W. 
Effect
of Manufacturing Condition in PC/PMMA/CNT Nanocomposites
Extrusion on the Electrical, Morphological, and Mechanical Properties . Korea Aust. Rheol. J. 
2015 , 27 , 55 –62 . 10.1007/s13367-015-0007-y .
Krause B. ; Villmow T. ; Boldt R. ; Mende M. ; Petzold G. ; Pötschke P. 
Influence
of Dry Grinding in a Ball Mill on the Length
of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes and Their Dispersion and Percolation
Behaviour in Melt Mixed Polycarbonate Composites . Compos. Sci. Technol. 
2011 , 71 , 1145 –1153 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2011.04.004 .
Pötschke P. ; Villmow T. ; Krause B. 
Melt Mixed PCL/MWCNT Composites Prepared
at Different Rotation Speeds: Characterization of Rheological, Thermal,
and Electrical Properties, Molecular Weight, MWCNT Macrodispersion,
and MWCNT Length Distribution . Polymer 
2013 , 54 , 3071 –3078 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2013.04.012 .
Talò M. ; Krause B. ; Pionteck J. ; Lanzara G. ; Lacarbonara W. 
An Updated
Micromechanical Model Based on Morphological Characterization of Carbon
Nanotube Nanocomposites . Composites, Part B 
2017 , 115 , 70 –78 . 10.1016/j.compositesb.2016.10.032 .
Krause B. ; Mende M. ; Petzold G. ; Boldt R. ; Pötschke P.  Characterization
of Dispersability
of Industrial Nanotube Materials and Their Length Distribution before
and after Melt Processing . In Carbon Nanotube–Polymer
Composites ; Tasis D.  , Ed.; Royal Society of Chemistry : Cambridge, U.K. , 2013 ; p 212 .
Krause B. ; Boldt R. ; Pötschke P. 
A Method for
Determination of Length
Distributions of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes before and after Melt
Processing . Carbon 
2011 , 49 , 1243 –1247 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2010.11.042 .
Liebscher M. ; Domurath J. ; Krause B. ; Saphiannikova M. ; Heinrich G. ; Pötschke P. 
Electrical and Melt Rheological Characterization
of PC and Co-Continuous PC/SAN Blends Filled with CNTs: Relationship
between Melt-Mixing Parameters, Filler Dispersion, and Filler Aspect
Ratio . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2018 , 56 , 79 –88 . 10.1002/polb.24515 .
Faraguna F. ; Pötschke P. ; Pionteck J. 
Preparation of Polystyrene Nanocomposites
with Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes by Melt and Solution Mixing:
Investigation of Dispersion, Melt Rheology, Electrical and Thermal
Properties . Polymer 
2017 , 132 , 325 –341 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2017.11.014 .

