
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03594ArticleFolic Acid-Functionalized,
Condensed Magnetic Nanoparticles
for Targeted Delivery of Doxorubicin to Tumor Cancer Cells Overexpressing
the Folate Receptor Angelopoulou Athina *†Kolokithas-Ntoukas Argiris †‡Fytas Christos †Avgoustakis Konstantinos †§†Department
of Pharmacy, School of Health Sciences and ‡Department of Materials Science,
School of Natural Sciences, University of
Patras, Patras 26504, Greece§ Clinical
Studies Unit, Biomedical Research Foundation
Academy of Athens (BRFAA), 4 Soranou Ephessiou Street, Athens 11527, Greece* PhD Laboratory of Pharmaceutical
Technology, Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, GR. 26504,
Patras, Greece. Tel. 6974987290, 0030 2610962318. Email: angelopoulou@upatras.gr.09 12 2019 24 12 2019 4 26 22214 22227 25 10 2019 25 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

This study concerns the development of folic acid (FA)-functionalized
iron oxide condensed colloidal magnetic clusters for a more selective
delivery of doxorubicin (DOX) to tumor cancer cells overexpressing
the folate receptor. Alginate-coated condensed magnetic nanoparticles
(co-MIONs) were synthesized via an alkaline precipitation method of
an iron precursor in the presence of sodium alginate. Poly(ethylene
glycol) (OH-PEG-NH2) was conjugated to the carboxylic acid
end group of alginate and folic acid (FA) was conjugated to the hydroxyl
terminal group of PEG to produce folate-functionalized, pegylated
co-MIONS (Mag-Alg-PEG-FA). The physicochemical properties of nanoparticles
were fully characterized. DOX was loaded on the nanoparticles, and
the cellular uptake and anticancer efficacy of the nanoparticles were
examined in cancer cell lines expressing and not expressing the folate
receptor. The biocompatibility of the carrier (blank nanoparticles)
was also evaluated by cytocompatibility and hemocompatibility experiments.
The nanoparticles exhibited sustained DOX release in aqueous buffers
and biorelevant media, which was responsive to pH and external alternating
current magnetic fields. The effect of the magnetic field on DOX percentage
release appeared to be independent of the timing (onset time) of magnetic
field application, providing flexibility to the magnetic control of
drug release from the nanoparticles. The blank nanoparticles were
not cytotoxic and did not cause hemolysis. The DOX-loaded and FA-functionalized
nanoparticles exhibited increased uptake and caused increased apoptosis
and cytotoxicity against the MDA-MB-231 cell line, expressing the
folate receptor, compared to the MCF-7 cell line, not expressing the
folate receptor. The application of a 0.5 T magnetic field during
incubation of the nanoparticles with the cancer cells increased the
cellular uptake and cytotoxicity of the nanoparticles. The obtained
results indicate the potential of the folate-functionalized, pegylated
co-MIONS for a more efficacious DOX delivery to cancer cells of solid
tumors.

document-id-old-9ao9b03594document-id-new-14ao9b03594ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Conventional cancer pharmacotherapy methods
have several limitations,
such as the lack of therapeutic efficacy, toxicity to healthy tissues,
and the development of innate resistance of cancer cells to chemotherapeutic
agents, especially in the environment of solid tumors.1 The cellular environment of tumors is nowadays considered
as the most determining factor that could contribute to the treatment
of cancer.1,2 Of particular interest is the addition of
molecular targeting agents such as antibodies, peptides, folic acid
(FA), etc. to nanosized delivery systems.3−6 Such targeted and personalized
systems use the molecular characteristics of the cancer cells of the
tumor and its microenvironment to provide increased drug accumulation
in the tumor area and targeted and controlled release of the drug,
thereby reducing toxicity and thus improving the benefit/risk profile
for patients.3−6

Among the various forms of cancer, a particularly aggressive
and
rapidly growing form is solid tumors, the majority of which overexpress
the folic acid receptor, such as the ovary, kidney, lung, brain, endometrium,
pancreas, stomach, prostate, testicle, bladder, head and neck, breast,
and non-small-cell lung cancers.3 Folic
acid (FA) is absolutely essential for the synthesis, repair, and methylation
of DNA, as well as the metabolism of amino acids and RNA. Therefore,
its role is essential for cell growth, proliferation, and survival,
which signifies its particular importance in the development and maintenance
of cancer cells.3 Of the four known folate
receptor isoforms (folate receptors α, β, γ, and
d), FRα and FRβ are present in the plasma membrane and
bind folic acid with the highest affinity. Cells expressing FRα
are more efficient in absorbing folic acid, since FRα binds
folic acid with a binding affinity of 0.34 nM.3,4 In
normal tissues and organs, the expression of FRα is restricted
to only certain regions, which include the kidneys, lungs, choroid
membrane, and placenta, where FRα is restricted and cannot come
into contact with folic acid molecules administered intravenously,
such as folic acid molecules bound to a targeted delivery system administered
intravenously.3,4 Studies have shown that in solid
tumor environments, cancer cells exhibit high levels of FRα
receptor expression, where this overexpression is associated with
advanced stage disease and is a negative prognostic factor for breast,
colon, endometrium, and ovarian cancers.3−5 Therefore, the FRα
receptor is considered to be a particularly important therapeutic
target, as it can provide an effective option for targeted cancer
treatment through the development of folic acid-modified nanostructures
for the selective transfer of anticancer drugs to FR-overexpressing
cancer cells.6

An important application
for the development of targeted delivery
systems is provided by magnetic iron oxide nanoassemblies (MIONs),
which have attracted significant research interest as they can provide
both imaging and selective drug delivery capabilities.6−13 The use of magnetically targeted nanoparticles, whose biological
behavior (biodistribution) can be controlled by the application of
external magnetic fields, is a particularly interesting combinatorial
approach to molecular targeting for the development of selective therapies.
In essence, magnetic nanoparticles are state-of-the-art technology
in the field of drug delivery since they can be modified with biocompatible
polymers and biopolymers (poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), cellulose,
and alginic acid), carry molecular targeting agents and/or probe molecules
(fluorescent labels), and simultaneously be imaged by magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI).6−9

Colloidal magnetic nanocrystals can be grown in dense order
with
their nanocrystals arranged so that their crystalline planes adopt
the same orientation through epitaxial aggregation. These condensed
magnetic nanoparticles (co-MIONs) have significant advantages. They
exhibit dramatically increased magnetic response compared to conventional
magnetic nanocrystals, making them more effective in magnetic targeting
applications and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).7,8 Thus,
co-MIONs have the ability to entrap a large number of magnetic nanocrystals,
which are in close contact with each other, displaying excellent magnetic
properties.7,8 In recent studies of our group,7,8 the development of co-MIONs from a single ferrous molecular precursor
in the presence of alginate (alginate, Alg) at low temperature was
achieved. These colloidally dense co-MIONs exhibited a better response
when applied to an external static magnetic field, while the presence
of alginate proved to be crucial for the epitaxial aggregation of
the nanocrystals in the core. In addition, the alginate shell enabled
the efficient loading with drug and the functional modification of
the nanoparticles, e.g., the binding of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)
molecules capable of imparting desired properties to the particles,
such as increased blood-circulating properties after intravenous administration.8 Nevertheless, these pegylated co-MIONs still
lack the potential for specific interaction with the cancer cells
of the tumors, reducing their potential to deliver the drug they carry
selectively to the cancer cells and limiting, consequently, their
therapeutic potential. These co-MION nanosystems could, thus, be significantly
improved through further functional modification to possess molecular
targeting ability for the cancer cells through receptor–ligand
interaction and the ability to selectively release the drug in the
extracellular and intracellular environments of cancer cells. Thus,
in this work, the pegylated, alginate co-MIONS were further developed
by their functional modification with molecular targeting units (folic
acid molecules) for the targeting of tumor cancer cells overexpressing
folic acid receptors. In addition, PEG with a molecular weight (5000)
higher than previously used8 was selected
with the aim to increase the efficiency of pegylation to stabilize
the alginate co-MIONS. The Mag-Alg-PEG-FA co-MIONS were loaded with
the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin (DOX). These folate-functionalized,
doxorubicin-loaded co-MIONs are expected to accumulate in the tumor
area by applying an external magnetic field at the tumor area and
due to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.11 These, due to the FA units present on their
surface, would provide a more selective delivery of the chemotherapeutic
drug (DOX) to the cancer cells overexpressing FA receptors. The developed
DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA co-MIONS were characterized by their physicochemical
characteristics (size and ζ-potential), colloidal stability,
and ability to load and release the drug. The release of the drug
was studied at different pH values (blood pH 7.4 and an acidic pH
6.0, representing the acidic tumor environment) and in different biological
media [Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium14 and blood plasma15], as well as under hyperthermia in a specific magnetic fluid hyperthermia
(MFH) device. Optimal nanoparticle compositions were studied for their
anticancer activity and their intracellular localization in human
cancer cell lines expressing and not expressing (for comparison) the
FRα receptor.

Results
Characterization of the Synthesized Nanoparticles
The
maximum loading capacity of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA co-MIONS with DOX was 10.47%
(w/w) (Table 1). The
loading capacity with DOX was higher in the case of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
co-MIONS than in the case of Mag-Alg-PEG co-MIONS (Figure 1A). The initial DOX feed (50,
100, 150, and 200 μg/mL) did not affect the basic physicochemical
characteristics (size and ζ-potential) of the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles (see Supporting Information (SI) Figure S1). The Mag-Alg nanoparticles exhibited an average
size (hydrodynamic diameter) of 75 nm, which increased slightly after
pegylation (Mag-Alg-PEG nanoparticles) to 97.5 nm and did not change
significantly when FA was conjugated on the nanoparticles (Mag-Alg-PEG-FA).
The ζ-potential of the Mag-Alg nanoparticles was negative (−51
mV), due to the negatively charged groups of the magnetic core (Fe–O–) and the carboxylate groups (−COO–) of alginate (Alg). Upon nanoparticle pegylation, the ζ-potential
of Mag-Alg-PEG approached neutrality (−2 mV), due to the reduction
in the number of free carboxylic acid groups in alginate. After FA
conjugation on the pegylated nanoparticles, the ζ-potential
of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles again assumed negative values (−22
mV), due to the remaining free carboxylic acid groups (−COO–) of FA (Scheme 1). The successful functionalization of the nanoparticles was
confirmed by attenuated total reflection (ATR) spectroscopy (Figure 1D). The presence
of PEG in Mag-Alg-PEG nanoparticles was indicated by the presence
of characteristic stretching vibration bands in the PEG chain at 2870
cm–1 (C–H stretch vibration) and in the range
1300–1200 cm–1 (C–O–C stretch
vibration) and by the presence of N–H out-of-plane stretching
vibrations in the range 770–970 cm–1. The
conjugation of PEG on the Mag-Alg surface was further supported by
the distinct C–N stretching vibration bands of amide bonding
at 1650 and 1450 cm–1. As for Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles,
the successful FA conjugation on the hydroxyl (−OH) terminal
group of the PEG chain by an ester linkage was confirmed from the
presence of peaks at 1680 and 1508 cm–1, corresponding
to the stretching vibration bands of C=O and CO–O ester,
respectively.12,13 Detailed ATR characterization
is provided in SI Figure S2.

Figure 1 Loading capacity,
TGA curves, TEM images, and ATR spectra of the
magnetic nanoparticles. (A) Loading capacities of Mag-Alg-PEG and
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles at initial DOX amounts (feed) of 50,
100, 150, and 200 μg. (B) TGA curves of Mag-Alg (black circles),
Mag-Alg-PEG (magenta circles), and Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles (light-blue
circles). The mass change noted (yellow bar and orange bar) refers
to the residual mass difference between the Mag-Alg/Mag-Alg-PEG and
the Mag-Alg-PEG/Mag-Alg-PEG-FA curves at 450 °C. (C) Typical
TEM images from the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles. (D) ATR spectra
of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles (magenta line), folic acid (cyan line),
Mag-Alg-PEG nanoparticles (blue line), Mag-Alg nanoparticles (red
line), and OH-PEG-NH2 (black line). Alg: alginate; Mag:
magnetic; FA: folic acid; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; TGA:
thermogravimetric analysis.

Scheme 1 Graphic Representation of the Functionalization of
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
Magnetic Nanoparticles
Table 1 Physicochemical Characteristics of
Magnetic Nanoparticles
 	diameter
(nm)	polydispersity
index (PDI)	ζ-potential
(mV)	loading capacity
(%) for DOX or rhodamine	
Mag-Alg	75 ± 1.31	0.137 ± 0.025	–51.1 ± 3.87	 	
Mag-Alg-PEG	97.5 ± 0.42	0.106 ± 0.013	–1.99 ± 0.44	 	
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA	95.19 ± 0.26	0.093 ± 0.013	–22.1 ± 0.76	 	
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA/DOX	97.12 ± 0.76	0.111 ± 0.023	–0.57 ± 0.03	10.47 ± 0.44	
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA/rhodamine	91.81 ± 0.38	0.095 ± 0.011	–1.15 ± 0.15	3.06 ± 0.91	
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was implemented for
the parent
Mag-Alg and after every step of conjugation for the Mag-Alg-PEG and
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles, under a N2 stream, and the
curves of mass change versus temperature obtained are shown in Figure 1B. The observed mass
changes in TGA of the magnetic nanoparticles were due to the decomposition
of the organic material (alginate, alginate-PEG, or alginate-PEG-folate).
The thermograms indicated a mass loss of 10% (w/w) due to alginate
decomposition, a 12% (w/w) loss due to PEG decomposition, and a further
13% (w/w) loss due to FA decomposition. Taking this into consideration,
the composition (w/w) of the here-synthesized Mag-Alg-PEG-FA co-MIONS
is 65% iron oxide, 10% alginate, 12% PEG, and 13% FA.

The structural
characteristics of the magnetic nanoparticles were
also elucidated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis
(Figure 1C). TEM micrographs
indicated the structural organization of the nanoparticles forming
clusters of densely packed magnetic nanoparticles.7 The mean cluster size was around 40–50 nm. As expected,
the polymeric surface of Alg-PEG-FA surrounding the magnetic nanoparticles
could not be observed in TEM micrographs, due to the high contrast
of the crystalline planes of magnetic nanocrystallites.7,13

Colloidal Stability of Magnetic Nanoparticles
Preliminary
experiments indicated that the use of a higher-molecular-weight PEG
(5000) resulted in the higher stability of the alginate co-MIONS in
diluted blood plasma compared to a lower-molecular-weight PEG (2000)
used previously8 (SI Figure S3) and therefore a PEG (5000) was selected in this
study. The average hydrodynamic diameter of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles
remained essentially stable, and the nanoparticles did not aggregate
upon incubation up to 48 h in RPMI-1640 medium and diluted human blood
plasma (50% v/v) (Figure 2A). The average ζ-potential of the nanoparticles became
less negative when they were transferred to the biorelevant media,
−10 and −15 mV in plasma and RPMI-1640, respectively,
compared to −22 mV in water. With increased incubation time,
the ζ-potential of the nanoparticles was stabilized at values
around −9 and −12 mV in plasma and RPMI-1640, respectively
(Figure 2B). Probably,
the interaction of the nanoparticles with cationic constituents of
the biorelevant media resulted in the neutralization of a part of
the negative surface charges of the nanoparticles, leading to less
negative ζ-potential values in these media compared to water
(Figure 2B); however,
this interaction did not result in nanoparticle aggregation even after
a prolonged incubation period of 48 h (Figure 2A).

Figure 2 Evaluation of the colloidal stability of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles.
(A) Average size and (B) ζ-potential change upon 48 h incubation
of the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles in RPMI-1640 cell culture medium
and human blood plasma (diluted 50% v/v).

In Vitro DOX Release from the Nanoparticles
DOX release
from the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) (pH 7.4) was about 23% at 48 h, while the release in PBS (pH
6.0) was 43% in the same time period. At acidic pH, owing to the reduction
of the number of negatively charged carboxylate groups,16 a decrease in the electrostatic interaction
between DOX molecules (positively charged) and the alginate backbone17 is expected, which in combination with the increased
solubility of protonated DOX18,19 results in the higher
release of DOX in the acidic aqueous environment (Figure 3A). An increased release rate
relatively to pH 7.4 buffer was observed in the biorelevant media.
Thus, DOX release at 48 h reached 56% in human blood plasma (10% v/v)
and 62% in RPMI-1640 [with fetal bovine serum (FBS) 10% v/v] (Figure 3A), probably due
to the intervention of media constituents, such as proteins, in drug–carrier
interactions. To quantify the kinetics of DOX release, it was supposed
that drug release followed first-order kinetics and the release data
were fitted to first-order kinetics. The fitting provided release
constants of 0.011 and 0.036 h–1 for the release
in PBS with pH 7.4 and 6.0, respectively. In the case of human blood
plasma and RPMI-1640, the release constants were 0.049 and 0.054 h–1, respectively. Although the release values were low,
especially in pH 7.4, for precise release kinetics analysis, the values
of the release rate constants obtained indicated the significantly
higher rate (5-fold) of DOX release in the biorelevant media.

Figure 3 In vitro drug
release from the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles. (A)
Release profiles of DOX from the magnetic nanoparticles in phosphate-buffered
saline with pH 7.4 and 6.0, RPMI-1640, and human blood plasma (10%
v/v). (B) DOX release from the magnetic nanoparticles when an alternating
current (AC) magnetic field (f = 110.6 kHz, B = 25 mT, I = 12.2 A, V = 28.3 V) was applied for 15 min at the beginning of the second
(dark-blue circles) or at the beginning of the fourth hour (olive
circles).

The application of an AC magnetic field during
DOX release at pH
6.0 resulted in an increased release rate compared to the release
in the absence of the magnetic field (Figure 3B). The magnetic field was applied for 15
min (total time) at different time periods of the release experiments,
specifically for 15 min at the beginning of the second or for 15 min
at the beginning of the fourth hour. Similar release values of around
60% in 6 h were obtained in both cases (Figure 3B).

In Vitro Cytotoxicity
The viability of MCF-7 and MDA-MB
231 human breast adenocarcinoma cancer cell lines was investigated
after a 24 h incubation with Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles. At all
examined concentrations (0.43–86.9 μg/mL), the blank
(without the drug) nanoparticles resulted in high cell viability (above
80%) with both cell lines (Figure 4). The DOX-loaded nanoparticles exhibited dose-dependent
cytotoxicity against the MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 cell lines (Figure 4). Moreover, the
DOX-loaded nanoparticles exhibited lower cytotoxicity than free DOX
against MCF-7 cells (Figure 4A) and similar cytotoxicity with free DOX against MDA-MB 231
cells (Figure 4C).
When a 0.5 T magnetic field gradient was applied to the cells, the
DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles exhibited lower or similar
cytotoxicity (p < 0.05) compared to free DOX against
the MCF-7 cells (Figure 4B) but higher (p < 0.05) cytotoxicity than free
DOX against the MDA-MB 231 cells (Figure 4D). The IC50 values of DOX-loaded
nanoparticles and free DOX are presented in Table 2 for both cell lines. The nanoparticles exhibited
lower IC50 values against the MDA-MB 231 cells compared
to the MCF-7 cells, both with and without the application of a magnetic
field gradient. The IC50 values of free DOX are lower in
MCF-7 cells compared to the DOX-loaded nanoparticles, especially without
the application of a magnetic field gradient, whereas with the MDA-MB
231 cells, the IC50 values of the DOX-loaded nanoparticles
are comparable to or lower than the IC50 of free DOX.

Figure 4 Cytotoxicities
of free DOX, blank Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles,
and DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles on (A, B) MCF-7 cells
and (C, D) MDA-MB 231 after 24 h of incubation (A, C) in the absence
and (B, D) in the presence of an external magnetic field. Asterisks
indicate the statistical significance of the difference between results
obtained for DOX-loaded nanoparticles and free DOX (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.005). The concentrations
of blank nanoparticles in the graphs are 0.43, 4.34, 43.48, and 86.9
μg/mL and correspond to the concentrations of DOX-loaded nanoparticles
used to generate the DOX concentrations mentioned in the graphs (0.05,
0.5, 5, and 10 μg/mL, respectively).

Table 2 IC50 Values of DOX-Loaded
Magnetic Nanoparticles (Mag-Alg-PEG-FA/DOX) and Free Dox (DOX)
 	MCF-7	MDA-MB
231	
IC50 (ppm)	without magnet	with magnet	without magnet	with magnet	
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA/DOX	12	4	2.6	1.5	
DOX	1.66	1.7	2.7	2.8	
After a 24 h incubation of free DOX, DOX-loaded nanoparticles,
and blank nanoparticles with the cells, at equivalent DOX concentration
(5 μg/mL), the DOX-loaded nanoparticles stimulated significantly
higher degree of apoptosis than free DOX in MCF-7 (p < 0.05) and in MDA-MB 231 (p < 0.005) cell
lines (Figure 5). When
a magnetic field gradient (0.5 T) was applied, the triggered rate
of apoptosis by the DOX-loaded nanoparticles was significantly enhanced
in both the MCF-7 (p < 0.05) and the MDA-MB 231
(p < 0.005) cell lines (Figure 5).

Figure 5 Evaluation of cancer cell apoptosis caused by
the DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles. Apoptosis of (A) MCF-7 cells and (B) MDA-MB 231 cells
after 24 h of incubation with free DOX (5 μg/mL), DOX-loaded
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles (43.48 μg of nanoparticles equivalent
to 5 μg/mL DOX), and blank Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles (43.48
μg) in the presence (+) and absence (−) of an external
magnetic field (permanent magnet field of 0.5 T). Dox: doxorubicin;
MNP: magnetic nanoparticles. Asterisks indicate the statistical significance
of the difference between results obtained for DOX-loaded nanoparticles
and free DOX and DOX-loaded nanoparticles (A) with and (B) without
the magnet field (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.005).

Cellular Uptake
The Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles were
labeled with rhodamine to investigate their cellular uptake by the
MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 cells. The rhodamine content of the labeled nanoparticles
was 3.06% (w/w) (Table 1). The leakage of rhodamine from the nanoparticles was very low (<15%)
within a 24 h period (SI Figure S4). In
the MCF-7 cells, the uptake of the nanoparticles increased with time
from 1 to 4 h (p < 0.05) and more significantly
to 24 h (p < 0.005) (Figure 6A, green column difference). The application
of a magnetic field gradient (0.5 T) increased (p < 0.05) the uptake of the nanoparticles by the MCF-7 cells at
each time period of 1, 4, and 24 h (Figure 6A, green/blue column difference). As for
the MDA-MB 231 cells, the uptake of the nanoparticles increased significantly
with incubation time (Figure 6B, green column comparison). Under the application of a magnetic
field gradient (0.5 T) during nanoparticle–MDA-MB 231 cells
incubation, the uptake was significantly (p <
0.0001) enhanced at all time periods of 1, 4, and 24 h (Figure 6B, green/blue column comparison
at each incubation time). At all times, the uptake of nanoparticles
by the MDA-MB 231 cells was significantly higher compared to that
by the MCF-7 cells, especially under the influence of a magnetic field
gradient (Figure 6C,D).

Figure 6 Cellular
uptake (%) of rhodamine-labeled Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles
(43.48 μg of nanoparticles) by (A) MCF-7 and (B) MDA-MB 231
cells after 1, 4, and 24 h of incubation in the presence or absence
of an external magnetic field (0.5 T). In (C) and (D), the differences
between results at each time period (1, 4, and 24 h) for MCF-7 and
MDA-MB 231 cells in the absence and in the presence of a magnetic
field (dark blue/yellow column) have been evaluated. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.005, and ***p < 0.0001.

Fluorescent confocal microscopy was used to visualize
the uptake
of the rhodamine-labeled Mag-Alg-PEG-FA co-MIONS by the MDA-MB 231
(Figure 7 and SI Figure S7) and MCF-7 cells (SI Figures S5 and S6), with and without the application of a
magnetic field gradient (0.5 T). In agreement with the quantitative
analysis of cellular uptake (Figure 6), increased internalization was observed in the case
of the MDA-MB 231 cells compared to the MCF-7 cells. With the former
cells, the magnetic nanoparticles were co-localized with the acidic
compartments at early times (1 and 4 h incubation), while at longer
incubation periods (24 h), they were mostly co-localized with the
nuclei of the cells (Figure 7 and SI Figure S7). In the case
of MCF-7 cells, low internalization was observed at early times; specifically,
at 1 h, the nanoparticles could barely be noticed, and at 4 h, a low
localization with the acidic compartments was revealed. At a relatively
long incubation period of 24 h, however, a higher nanoparticle internalization
was observed and the nanoparticles were co-localized with the acidic
compartments (SI Figures S5 and S6).

Figure 7 Confocal fluorescence
microscopy images of the uptake of rhodamine-labeled
Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles by the MDA-MB 231 cancer cells at 1,
4, and 24 h under a static magnetic field. From left to right, the
panels in each row show fluorescence from 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) (nuclei stained blue), LysoTracker green (staining acidic intracellular
compartments), and rhodamine 6G (rhodamine-conjugated nanocarriers,
red) and merged images. In merged images, the co-localization of rhodamine
with LysoTracker green gives yellow-orange-colored areas and the co-localization
of rhodamine with DAPI purple-colored areas.

Hemolysis Assay
Biocompatibility is a key feature that
drug delivery systems should possess for use in biomedical applications.
The hemocompatibility of the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles was evaluated
here by a hemolysis test, to determine the hemolytic potential of
the nanoparticles. In particular, hemolysis is associated with hemoglobin
release into the surrounding fluid (blood plasma or normal saline)
caused by the disruption (lysis) of the erythrocyte membrane in vivo
(general blood circulation) or in vitro (normal saline). Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles were evaluated for their hemolytic activity in human
red blood cells (RBC, erythrocytes) (Figure 8). The hemolysis at all nanoparticle concentrations
tested (up to 2 mg/mL) did not exceed 2% (Figure 8A), indicating the absence of the hemolytic
activity of the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles.17

Figure 8 (A)
Hemolysis (%) caused by Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles after
4 h incubation with red blood cells (RBC) and (B) photos of suspensions
of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles with RBCs at varied nanoparticle concentrations.
In (B), the symbol (+) indicates the positive control of 100% hemolysis,
the symbol (−) indicates the negative control of 0% hemolysis,
and the numbers correspond to the nanoparticle concentration in mg/mL.

Discussion
MIONs have great advantages, mainly because
of their enhanced biocompatibility
and their superparamagnetic properties. Recent studies by our group
have focused on the development of condensed magnetic iron oxide nanoassemblies
(co-MIONs) in mild conditions and in aqueous media, where the produced
nanosystems exhibit enhanced magnetic properties over other structures
or configurations, which is advantageous in magnetic applications
and bioimaging.7,8 Often, in this dense arrangement,
the crystallographic planes of magnetic nanocrystals attain the same
crystallographic orientation through their epitaxial aggregation.
In this case, the MIONs are in close contact with each other, resulting
in an increase in the magnetic field response, due to the increase
in the magnetic moment of each colloidal magnetic nanocrystal.

MIONs are susceptible to aggregation due to their increased surface-to-volume-ratio;18,19 thus, multiple coating methods such as encapsulation,20,22 micelle formation,23 coaxial electrospray,24 microbeads,25 conjugations,26−28 and colloidal suspensions26−28 with biocompatible polymers20,22−28 or with biopolymers21,23 have been used for their effective
surface modification. Most specifically, the magnetic nanoparticles
can be suitably modified with polysaccharides (dextran, alginate,
and carboxymethylcellulose) or PEG,7−10 which will offer them colloidal stability
and the ability to be surface-modified. In general, polysaccharides
such as alginic acid are biocompatible polymers that can provide free
carboxyl groups for attachment (electrostatic or conjugation) of drug
molecules as well as for binding of other molecules that add to the
particular functionalities of nanoparticles (cell targeting and bioimaging),
such as proteins, targeting agents (e.g., folic acid), and fluorescent
labels.6,18−21

In this study, the alginate
co-MIONs were improved by applying
a more effective pegylation, using a PEG polymer of 5000 Da in contrast
to the PEG polymer of 2000 Da used in previous studies with the alginate
co-MIONs,8 to increase stability in biorelevant
media (Figure S3) and by functionalization
with folic acid-targeting ligands. In this way, the nanoparticles
should gain biological stability to maintain their structural integrity,
preventing them from aggregation when found in the general circulation
of blood after intravenous administration, and molecular targeting
properties that will lead to selective and efficient endocytosis of
the nanoparticles (and hence of the drug they carry) to the cancer
cells.

The here-developed Mag-Alg-PEG-FA magnetic nanoparticles
had an
average size (hydrodynamic diameter) of around 95 nm (Table 1), which is appropriate for
their accumulation in the tumor tissue upon intravenous administration,
taking advantage of the EPR phenomenon11 and their guided assembly by an external magnetic field applied
at the tumor site. The Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles did not aggregate,
expressing good stability in biorelevant media (such as blood plasma, Figure 2), suggesting that
they will retain their optimum size characteristics in vivo in blood
circulation, to exhibit the desired biodistribution properties (accumulation
in tumors due to the EPR effect and the application of external magnetic
fields at the tumor site). The enhanced stability of the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles observed here can be attributed to the presence of poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG 5000 Da molecular weight), which would reduce the interactions
between the nanoparticles and biorelevant media constituents, such
as proteins. The binding of proteins (opsonins) on the nanoparticle
surface in vivo (opsonization) leads to rapid uptake by the reticuloendothelial
system and removal of nanoparticles from general circulation.29 Rapid removal of nanoparticles from the blood
does not allow them to accumulate at their site of action (tumor area).

Effective control of drug release (doxorubicin) by Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles was achieved, since DOX release was very low at blood
pH (PBS of pH 7.4), while increased release was observed at the acidic
pH (PBS of pH 6) and in biorelevant media (blood plasma and RPMI-1640
cell culture medium) (Figure 3A). The acidic pH conditions offer a proton-rich environment
that leads to the protonation of the carboxylic groups of alginate,
reducing the electrostatic attraction of the positively charged DOX
molecules to alginate and facilitating DOX leakage from the nanoparticles.18,19 Since tumor tissues constitute an acidic environment and the intracellular
compartments of cancer cells (endosomes and lysosomes) provide even
lower pH than the extracellular environment (around 5.0–5.5),30 and providing DOX will have a similar release
behavior from the nanoparticles in vivo, the pH-responsive release
behavior of DOX from Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles is potentially important
with regard to the in vivo anticancer efficacy of DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles. Enhanced DOX release was observed in biorelevant media
compared to the buffer with pH 7.4 (Figure 3); however, even in these media, DOX release
was efficiently sustained, with only around 60% release in 48 h. Provided
that similar DOX release rates will exist in vivo, this would give
enough time window to the nanoparticles to reach the tumor site before
any significant drug leakage occurs. The enhanced DOX release from
the nanoparticles in the biorelevant media compared to the aqueous
buffer is possibly due to the antagonistic effect of the proteins
(in plasma) and growth factors (in RPMI with FBS 10% v/v) with DOX
for the carboxylic sites of the carrier. Since human blood plasma
is mainly composed of serum albumin (55%), globulins (38%), and fibrinogen
(7%), it is a highly heterogeneous medium of amphiphilic and hydrophilic
proteins and one cannot exclude that the antagonistic effect of plasma
proteins on DOX binding on the nanoparticles may also involve hydrogen
bonding and hydrophobic interactions, besides electrostatic interactions.31−33 Magnetically triggered DOX release was observed from the nanoparticles
under the influence of an AC magnetic field33,34 (Figure 3B). The
release experiment was conducted at low Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticle
concentration (<0.1% w/w in Fe2O3); thus,
no macroscopic temperature rise in drug release medium was observed.
Therefore, the enhanced magnetic drug release under the applied AC
magnetic field was probably the outcome of the heat released from
the MION assemblies resulting in the local heating of the polymeric
shell of the nanoparticles.33,35,36 Another contributing factor to the enhanced drug diffusion could
be the mechanical rotation of the MION assemblies under the influence
of the AC magnetic field.33,34 The effect of the magnetic
field on DOX percentage release appeared to be independent of the
timing (onset time) of the magnetic field application (Figure 3B), providing flexibility and
simplifying, thus, the magnetic control of drug release from the co-MIONS
in the in vivo situation.

The DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles
exhibited dose-dependent
cytotoxicity, lower than or similar to that of free DOX, against the
MCF-7 cells, which do not express the folate receptor (FL1R), while
higher cytotoxicity than that of free DOX was observed against the
MDA-MB 231 cells, which express the FL1R receptor (Figure 4). The enhanced cytotoxicity
of the loaded nanoparticles versus free DOX against the MDA-MA-231
cells (Figure 4C,D)
is probably associated with the increased rate of apoptosis induced
by the DOX-loaded nanoparticles in these cells (Figure 5). The observed apoptosis data are in agreement
with the DOX effect on apoptosis and oxidative stress against these
breast cancer cell lines.37 The DOX-loaded
nanoparticles exhibited increased cytotoxicity with lower IC50 values (Table 2)
and induced the increased rate of apoptosis against the MCF-7 and
MDA-MB 231 cancer cells, in the presence of a static magnetic field
(Figures 4B,D and 5). This effect is probably related to the increased
rate of nanoparticle internalization by the cells (internalization
is expressed as the percentage uptake vs incubation time, Figure 6) and thereby to
the higher rate of uptake of the drug entrapped in the nanoparticles,
in the presence of the magnetic field. The uptake of the nanoparticles
by the MCF-7 cells not expressing the folate receptor indicates that
the FR-receptor-mediated endocytosis (RME) was not the only endocytic
pathway of the magnetic nanoparticles uptake, as was also reported
recently by Allard-Vannier et al. for folic acid-functionalized SPIONs.32 The uptake of the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles
by the cancer cells was visualized with confocal microscopy (Figures 7 and S5–S7). In the absence of a magnetic field,
the nanoparticles are co-localized with the lysosomes in both cell
lines at prolonged time of incubation (24 h, Supporting Information Figures S6 and S7). In the case of the MCF-7
cells, which do not express the FA receptor, receptor-mediated endocytosis
(RME) cannot be responsible for nanoparticle internalization. As was
reported recently by Allard-Vannier et al.,32 RME is not the only possible endocytic pathway for superparamagnetic
nanoparticles (such as SPIONs and MIONs), proposing a clathrin-dependent
endocytosis (CDE) in breast cancer cells not expressing the FA receptor,
such as the MDA-MB 435 cells. CDE is characterized by the involvement
of clathrin (a triskelion-shaped protein scaffold), which polymerizes
around the cytoplasm, acting as a reinforcing matrix that facilitates
the internalization and recycling of a variety of receptors such as
tyrosine kinase receptors, uptake of low-density lipoprotein, and
recycling of iron-bound transferrin. Probably, the superparamagnetic
iron nanoparticles are recognized by the clathrin polymer network,
leading to their internalization.38

The presence of a static magnetic field highly accelerated nanoparticle
uptake by MDA-MB 231 cells even at early times (4 h incubation, Figure 7), where a granular
distribution of the nanoparticles in the cytoplasm was observed and
accumulation even in the nucleus was observed at 24 h. The presence
of the magnetic field did not increase the nanoparticle uptake by
MCF-7 cells at early times (1 and 4 h); however, an overall increase
of co-localization with the cytoplasm and the nucleus was observed
at a long incubation period (24 h, Supporting Information Figure S5). The enhancement of nanoparticle uptake
by the cancer cells in the presence of the external magnetic field
suggests the importance that magnetic targeting may have in increasing
the anticancer efficacy of nanoformulations based on co-MIONs.

The Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles exhibited no hemolytic activity
(Figure 8), and this
result, together with the absence of cytotoxicity of the nanoparticles,
is indicative of the biocompatibility of these nanoparticles. It is
recognized, however, that more studies are required to establish the
biocompatibility and safety of the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles for
drug delivery applications.

Conclusions
In this study, pegylated co-MIONs, functionalized
with FA and loaded
with DOX, were synthesized. These magnetic nanoparticles exhibited
controlled DOX release, even in biorelevant media (human blood plasma
and RPMI-1640 cell culture medium), which could be accelerated at
an acidic pH or in response to an alternating magnetic field. The
FA-functionalized co-MIONs caused increased apoptosis and cytotoxicity
against the MDA-MB-231 cell line, expressing the folate receptor,
compared to the MCF-7 cell line, not expressing the folate receptor.
Also, the nanoparticles exhibited increased uptake by and increased
cytotoxicity against the MDA-MB 231 cells under the influence of a
static magnetic field. These results suggest the potential of the
folate-functionalized, pegylated co-MIONS for a more efficacious DOX
delivery to cancer cells of solid tumors.

Experimental Section
Materials
Iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate (FeSO4·7H2O, assay > 99%, Chem Lab NV, Zedelgem, Belgium),
sodium alginate (Na-alginate, Sigma-Aldrich; the viscosity of 2% solution
at 25 °C: ∼250 cps), HCl (37%, Carlo Erba, Barcelona),
ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH, 30% for analysis, Carlo Erba)
were used for the synthesis of the nanoparticles. OH-PEG-NH2 (average molecular mass 5000 Da, RAPP Polymers) was used for the
PEGylation reaction. Coupling reagents used were N-ethyl-N′-(3-dimethyl aminopropyl) carbodiimide
hydrochloride (EDC HCl, assay > 98%, 191.7 g/mol), N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (s-NHS, assay > 98%, 217.14 g/mol), N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA, Merck),
hydroxybenzotriazole (HOBt, CBL Patras), and folic acid (FA, assay
> 98%, 441.4 g/mol). The fluorescent agent for the nanoparticles N-(2-aminoethyl)rhodamine 6G-amide bis(trifluoroacetate)
(rhodamine 6G, assay ≥ 95.0%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich,
and for cellular studies, LysoTracker Green (Invitrogen, CA) and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
dihydrochloride (DAPI assay ≥98%, Sigma-Aldrich) were used.
DOX hydrochloride was from Sigma-Aldrich. All other chemicals and
solvents were of analytical grade. Human blood plasma was obtained
from the University Hospital of Patras, Greece. In the experiments,
ultrapure 3D-H2O from an ELGA MEDICA apparatus was used.

Synthesis and Characterization of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA Nanoparticles
Synthesis of Mag-Alg Nanoparticles
The alginate-coated
condensed magnetic nanoparticles (co-MIONs) were synthesized according
to our previously described protocols of the alkaline precipitation
method.7−10 In brief, FeSO4·7H2O, used as a precursor,
predissolved in 3D-H2O (20 mL with 60 μL of 37% HCl),
was added in a sodium alginate solution in water (300 mg in 60 mL
of 3D-H2O with 4 mL of NH4OH). The reaction
was performed at 50 °C under magnetic stirring for 80 min. The
product (Mag-Alg) was centrifuged for purification (14 000
rpm for 35 min) where the supernatant containing byproducts was discarded,
and the precipitate was fractionated (4000 rpm for 20 min) where the
supernatant containing the final product was kept. The purification/fractionation
process was repeated in triplicate.

Synthesis of Mag-Alg-PEG Nanoparticles
The pegylation
process of the Mag-Alg condensed nanoparticles was based on Sarigiannis
et al.8 report with slight modifications.
The reaction was performed in dimethylformamide (DMF); thus, the nanoparticle
dispersion solvent was changed from 3D-H2O to DMF. Thus,
dialysis was required for 48 h in D-H2O (pH 4.3), to protonate
alginate carboxyl groups. The exchange from the aqueous to organic
solvent was performed with repeated centrifugation (15 000
rpm for 20 min), twice in D-H2O followed by centrifugation
(15 000 rpm for 20 min) twice in DMF. After each centrifugation
cycle, the supernatant including the byproducts was discarded and
the precipitate with the magnetic nanoparticles was resuspended in
the desired solvent. After the final centrifugation step, DIPEA (10
μL/mL) was added in the Mag-Alg nanoparticle dispersion in DMF.
For the pegylation, OH-PEG-NH2 was added in Mag-Alg dispersion
(of 3 mg/mL in DMF) at a molar ratio of −COOH/–NH2 = 1:1.6, under bath sonication for 15 min. For the activation
of carboxyl groups of Mag-Alg, EDC/HOBt predissolved in DMF was added
at a molar ratio of −COOH:EDC/HOBt = 1:5 (in mole), producing
a final EDC concentration of 10 mM (the final volume of reaction solution
was 1 mL). The mixture was left to react for 10 min under bath sonication
and was then incubated in a gently agitated water bath at ambient
temperature (25 °C) for 24 h in the dark. The final mixture was
centrifuged (15 000 rpm for 20 min) in DMF, and the precipitate
containing the final product (Mag-Alg-PEG) was redispersed in 3D-H2O (the final volume of 1 mL). Purification of the final product
was performed by centrifugation (15 000 rpm for 20 min) in
3D-H2O repeated in triplicate.

Synthesis of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA Nanoparticles
To prepare
folic acid-functionalized Mag-Alg-PEG nanoparticles, carbodiimide
chemistry was used to link the carboxyl groups (−COOH) of FA
with the hydroxylic groups (−OH) of PEG (ester bonding). An
aqueous solution of Mag-Alg-PEG nanoparticles was used (67 μL
from stock of 5 mg/mL in the final volume of 2 mL).12,13 The concentration used for the conjugation was Mag-Alg-PEG/FA =
1:1.3 (in mg) and the molar ratio for the activation was FA:EDC/s-NHS
= 1:5, producing a final concentration of EDC = 2.11 mM (the final
volume of reaction solution was 1 mL). For the conjugation reaction,
in an aqueous solution of FA (the final volume of 200 μL), EDC/s-NHS
predissolved in cold 3D-H2O (20 μL volume) was added
dropwise within 5 min, under bath sonication to activate carboxyl
groups (−COOH) of FA. Then, activated FA was added dropwise
in Mag-Alg-PEG aqueous solution (the final volume of 1 mL) within
15 min, under bath sonication. The reaction mixture was bath-sonicated
for 1 h, after which it was transferred to a gently agitated water
bath at ambient temperature (25 °C) for 24 h in the dark. The
final product (Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles) was transferred to a
cuvette holder, and magnetic separation/purification was used by adjusting
a cylindrical neodymium magnet (Nd-Fe-B of 0.5 T, dimensions: 20 mm
× 10 mm) along with the cuvette for 24 h, at ambient temperature
(25 °C), in a calm environment, in the dark. The pellet formed
after magnetic purification containing the final product (Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles, 200 μg/mL final product) was assayed spectrophotometrically
at 365 nm, and the data were corrected for the absorbance of plain
(without FA) nanoparticles at the same wavelength. The quantification
was based on an FA calibration curve (R2 = 0.99998) in NaOH (0.01 M).

Characterization of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA Nanoparticles
The
morphology of the synthesized nanoparticles was investigated by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM), wherein samples were prepared by casting
a droplet of a dilute aqueous suspension of nanoparticles (0.01% w/v
in Fe2O3) on copper grids coated by a Formvar
carbon film. Images were obtained by a JEOL, JEM-2100 instrument operating
at 200 kV. The determination of the hydrodynamic diameter (average
diameter [Dh] and polydispersity index
[PDI]) of nanoparticles dispersed in 3D-H2O was performed
using a ZetaSizer Nano series Nano-ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Malvern,
U.K.) equipped with a He–Ne laser beam at a wavelength of 633
nm and a fixed backscattering angle of 173°. The ζ-potential
of the nanoparticles was assessed using the same instrument as the
average of 100 runs with the phase analysis light scattering mode,
after equilibration at 25 °C. The composition of the nanoparticles
was investigated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) on a TA Instrument
Q500 series thermogravimetric analyzer at a heating rate of 10 °C/min
from room temperature to 700 °C in a nitrogen (N2)
atmosphere. The successful functionalization of MIONs after each conjugation
step was probed by ATR spectroscopy. The ATR spectra were recorded
in an FTS 3000 Excalibur Series Digilab spectrometer with an ATR adaptor
of PIKE MIRacle.

The colloidal stability of the magnetic nanoparticles
was assessed in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 cell medium
and human blood plasma (50% v/v in water). The nanoparticle samples
(100 μL of 3 mg/mL concentration and 0.51% w/v Fe2O3) were dispersed in RPMI-1640 cell culture medium and
in human blood plasma (the final volume of 1 mL) and incubated for
1, 5, and 24 at 37 °C under gentle agitation. After the desired
time periods, the samples were magnetically separated. Then, the precipitated
nanoparticles were redispersed in 3D-H2O, and their size
(hydrodynamic diameter) and ζ-potential were measured by dynamic
light scattering (DLS), as described in the above paragraph.

Labeling of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA Nanoparticles
The Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles were labeled with N-(2-aminoethyl)rhodamine
6G-amide bis(trifluoroacetate) (rhodamine, Rh) fluorescent dye by
applying carbodiimide chemistry to link the amine groups (−NH2) of rhodamine with the carboxylic groups (−COOH) of
alginate (amide bonding).12,13 An aqueous solution
of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles was used (67 μL from stock of
5 mg/mL in the final volume of 2 mL). The molar ratios for the activation
were −COOH(of Alg.)/–NH2(of Rh.) = 1:4 and
−COOH(of Alg.):EDC/s-NHS = 1:5, producing a final concentration
of EDC of 10 mM (the final volume of reaction solution was 1 mL).
A similar procedure described above for FA conjugation to PEG was
followed. In brief, in a Mag-Alg-PEG-FA aqueous solution, rhodamine
(100 μL from a stock solution of 1 mg/mL) was added under bath
sonication for 15 min. Then, predissolved EDC/s-NHS in cold 3D-H2O (20 μL) was added dropwise within 5 min, under bath
sonication to activate carboxyl groups (−COOH) of alginate.
The reaction mixture was bath-sonicated for 1 h, after which it was
transferred to a gently agitated water bath at ambient temperature
(25 °C) for 24 h in the dark. The final product (Mag-Alg-PEG-FA-Rh
nanoparticles) was transferred to a cuvette holder, and magnetic purification
was used by adjusting a cylindrical neodymium magnet (Nd-Fe-B of 0.5
T, dimensions: 20 mm × 10 mm) along with the cuvette for 24 h,
at ambient temperature (25 °C), in a calm environment, in the
dark. The pellet formed after magnetic separation contained the final
product (Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles). The amount of rhodamine that
had not been conjugated on the nanoparticles was measured spectrophotometrically
in the supernatant (3D-H2O) after the magnetic separation.
Then, by subtraction from the total amount of rhodamine initially
applied, the fraction of rhodamine conjugated to the nanoparticles
was calculated. The rhodamine absorbance in the supernatants was measured
at 529 nm, and the quantification was based on a calibration curve
(R2 = 0.9978).

Drug Loading
In dispersions of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles
(200 μg in 0.5 mL of water), DOX aqueous solution of 50, 100,
150, and 200 μL were added (from a DOX stock solution of 1 mg/mL),
and the final volume of each experiment was adjusted to 1 mL.10 The mixtures were then incubated in a gently
agitated water bath (25 °C) for 24 h in the dark. Subsequently,
the DOX-loaded nanoparticles were magnetically separated by adjusting
a cylindrical neodymium magnet (Nd-Fe-B of 0.5 T, dimensions: 20 mm
× 10 mm) along with the cuvette for 24 h at ambient temperature
(25 °C) in the dark. The precipitate containing the DOX-loaded
nanoparticles was resuspended in the initial volume of 3D-H2O (1 mL). The supernatant, containing the nonentrapped DOX fraction,
was freeze-dried and reconstituted in 3D-H2O (the final
volume of 1 mL) and filtered through a Millipore filter of 0.45 μm
diameter. DOX in the filtered samples was quantified spectrophotometrically
by a Shimadzu UV-1800 spectrophotometer. The absorbance of the sample
was measured at 480 nm, and the DOX concentration was calculated using
a calibration curve (R2 = 0.9998). The
limit of quantification was 5 μg/mL, and the linear part of
the standard curve used for the DOX assay was from 5 to 50 μg/mL.
The fraction of DOX entrapped in the magnetic nanoparticles was estimated
by subtracting the nonconjugated quantity of DOX from the total amount
(feed) of DOX initially added in the nanoparticles.

The loading
capacity and entrapment efficiency of DOX in Mag-Alg-PEG-FA magnetic
nanoparticles were calculated from the following equations 1  where WDOX and Wnps were the amount of attached drug and the
amount of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles, respectively.

In Vitro Drug Release
DOX release from the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
magnetic nanoparticles was determined in PBS of varied pH values (pH
= 6.0 and 7.4) at 37 °C. The ionic strength of the phosphate
buffer was 154 mM, similar to the 149.5 mM of human blood plasma.12,13 Thus, DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles (1 mL including 23
μg of DOX and 200 μg of nanoparticles) were enclosed in
dialysis sacs (molecular weight cutoff = 12 kDa) and incubated to
10 mL of phosphate buffer at 37 °C under gentle agitation in
a water bath in the dark. At predetermined time intervals (30 min
and 1, 2, 4, 6, 24, and 48 h), the entire release medium was removed
and replaced by fresh PBS prewarmed at 37 °C. The release medium
containing DOX was assayed by UV–vis spectroscopy at 480 nm.
The amount of released DOX, for each release medium (pH = 7.4 and
6), was calculated based on separate calibration curves (for pH =
7.4: R2 = 0.9994 and for pH = 6: R2 = 0.9981) by dissolving known concentrations
of DOX in the desired phosphate buffer. The limit of quantification
for pH = 7.4 was 0.1 μg/mL and for pH = 6 was 0.05 μg/mL.
The linear part of the standard curve used for DOX assay for pH =
7.4 was from 0.1 to 50 μg/mL and for pH = 6 was from 0.05 to
50 μg/mL.

DOX release from the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles
was also determined under the influence of an alternating magnetic
field (f = 110.6 kHz, B = 25 mT, I = 12.2 A, and V = 28.3 V), following
the process described above. The magnetic field was applied for 15
min during the second and fourth hours of release at pH 6.0, using
magnetic fluid hyperthermia (MFH) by MagneTherm device from NanoTherics,
thermostated at 37 °C.

The release of DOX from the Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles in RPMI-1640
cell medium14 (with 10% v/v FBS) and human
blood plasma15 (10% v/v in PBS) was also
determined as described above. In brief, DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles (23 μg of DOX and 200 μg of nanoparticles)
were suspended in RPMI-1640 (10% FBS) or human blood plasma (10% v/v)
(the total medium volume of 1 mL) and enclosed in dialysis sacs (molecular
weight cutoff = 12 kDa). The sacs were then incubated in the respective
(RPMI or plasma) biorelevant medium (the total outer volume of 5 mL)
at 37 °C under gentle agitation in a water bath in the dark.
At predetermined time intervals (30 min and 1, 2, 4, 6, and 24 h),
the entire release medium was removed, transferred to centrifugation
tubes, and replaced by fresh medium prewarmed at 37 °C. At each
time point, the tubes were centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 10
min and the supernatant, containing the released DOX, was kept. The
precipitate (contained precipitated proteins) was resuspended in DD
water (1 mL) to be centrifuged again, so as to fully extract the released
DOX. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was used to precipitate the remaining
plasma and RPMI proteins of the supernatants. Thus, after both centrifugations,
the supernatants (the total volume of 6 mL) were mixed with DMSO at
a ratio of 1:1 v/v and centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 10 min.
After this final centrifugation, proteins in the precipitate were
discarded and the supernatant containing only the released DOX (more
than 90%) was assayed in a UV–vis spectrophotometer at 480
nm. The complete process was repeated twice. For the calculation of
the amount of released DOX, standard curves of known concentrations
of the drug were prepared, following the above described process,
in each biorelevant medium (RPMI-1640: R2 = 0.9987 and human blood plasma: R2 =
0.9977). The limit of quantification for DOX in RPMI-1640 was 0.1
μg/mL and in human blood plasma was 0.05 μg/mL. The linear
part of the standard curve used for DOX assay in RPMI-1640 was from
0.1 to 50 μg/mL and in human blood plasma was from 0.05 to 50
μg/mL.

In Vitro Cellular Studies
Cell Lines
The human breast adenocarcinoma cancer cell
lines MDA-MB 231 (expressing the FA receptor FL1R) and MCF-7 (not
expressing the FA receptor) obtained from the European Collection
of Cell Cultures-Health Protective Agency (ECACC-HPA) were cultured
in 75 cm2 flasks (5520200, Orange Scientific) in RPMI-1640
medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS) and a
mixture of antibiotic agents (1.1% v/v penicillin/streptomycin and
0.15% v/v amphotericin). Cultures were maintained at 37 °C in
a humidified (100%) atmosphere with 95% (v/v) air and 5% (v/v) CO2. The culture medium was changed every 48 h, and cells were
harvested with 0.25% (w/v) trypsin in PBS.

Viability
DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles were
assayed for the in vitro anticancer activity (cytotoxicity) by the
MTT method (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide), as described.39 MDA-MB 231 and
MCF-7 cells were seeded into 24-well plates at a density 1 ×
104 cells/well and allowed to attach and proliferate as
a monolayer under standard conditions for 24 h. Then, the supernatant
in each well was completely removed and substituted with fresh medium
(500 μL of RPMI) consisting of different concentrations of free
DOX (0.05, 0.5, 5, and 10 μg/mL) or DOX-loaded magnetic nanoparticles
(0.43, 4.34, 43.48, and 86.9 μg/mL), producing equivalent drug
quantities to those of free DOX. The cytotoxicity of blank (without
DOX) magnetic nanoparticles was also evaluated, at concentrations
consistent to the carrier concentrations of DOX-loaded nanoparticles.
The assayed concentrations of DOX were selected through a preliminary
evaluation of free DOX in the range 0.01–15 μg/mL, to
determine the IC50 of the drug on MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231
cells. Following a 24 h incubation at 37 °C, the supernatant
was completely removed, the cells were washed twice with PBS, and
in each well 100 μL of fresh RPMI medium was added supplemented
with 10 μL MTT solution (from stock solution of 12 mM in PBS
[5 mg of MTT/1 mL of PBS]). The plates were incubated at 37 °C
for 4 h, and then, the medium was completely removed. Next, 150 μL
of DMSO was added in each well followed by incubation at 37 °C
for 15 min, under gentle agitation, to dissolve the formazan crystals.
The absorbance of the plates was measured using an MPR-700 Plate Reader,
Biotech Engineering Management Co. Ltd (U.K.). Absorbance was measured
at 492 nm, and a second wavelength at 590 nm was measured to subtract
the background “noise”. Cytotoxicity was expressed as
reduction in cell viability (%). The experiments were performed in
triplicates. The IC50 values of DOX and DOX-loaded magnetic
nanoparticles were calculated from the percentage cell viability versus
concentration data by fitting the dose–effect curves according
to a four-parameter logistic model with OriginPro 8 software (Origin
Lab Corp, Northampton, MA).12,13

Apoptosis
In cells, the loss of cellular membrane integrity
causes phosphatidylserine externalization, which is associated with
apoptotic or necrotic processes and marks the later stages of cell
death.12,13 Cells are considered to be in late apoptosis
or already dead if they are both Annexin V and PI positive; cells
in early apoptosis are Annexin V positive and PI negative, while viable
cells are both Annexin V and PI negative. In this study, Annexin V
protein (FITC-Annexin V, BD Pharmingen) was used as a marker of apoptosis
to detect the externalization of phosphatidylserine, as described.13

MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 cells were plated
into 24-well plates at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well
and allowed to attach and proliferate under standard conditions as
a monolayer for 24 h. Then, the supernatant in each well was removed
completely and replaced with fresh RPMI medium supplemented with blank
(without DOX) nanoparticles (43.48 μg/mL), DOX-loaded Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles (43.48 μg/mL corresponding to the DOX concentration
of 5 μg/mL), and DOX (5 μg/mL). After a 24 h incubation,
the supernatant was removed and the cells were washed twice with PBS
and detached by trypsinization (0.25% w/v trypsin). Then, the cells
placed in FACS tubes were centrifuged (1600 rpm for 5 min) and the
pellet was washed and resuspended in 1 mL of 1X Annexin V binding
buffer. The cells were again centrifuged (1600 rpm for 5 min), and
the pellet was resuspended in 100 μL of 1X Annexin V binding
buffer and incubated with 5 μL of FITC-Annexin V in the dark
for 15 min at room temperature. After that, the cells were washed
with and resuspended in 0.5 mL of Annexin V binding buffer. Cell fluorescence
due to Annexin V (% cell apoptosis) was determined by flow cytometry
(excitation λ = 495 nm, emission λ = 519 nm), in a FACS
Calibur, Coulter Epics XLMCL apparatus. The background fluorescence
of unlabeled cells was determined and used as a negative control.
Data analysis was performed with the WinMDI cytometry analysis software.

Cellular Uptake
The uptake of rhodamine-labeled Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles by MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, following 1, 6, and 24
h incubation, was evaluated by flow cytometry. Cells seeded in 24-well
plates at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well were allowed
to grow and proliferate as a monolayer in standard conditions for
24 h. The supernatant was then removed and replaced with fresh medium
supplemented with rhodamine-labeled nanoparticles at a concentration
of 43.48 μg/mL and incubated for 1, 6, and 24 h. Then, the supernatant
was removed and the cells were washed twice with PBS and harvested
by trypsinization (0.25% w/v trypsin). Rhodamine fluorescence was
measured using FACS (excitation 550 nm, emission 573 nm), in a FACS
Calibur, Coulter Epics XLMCL apparatus. The background fluorescence
of unlabeled cells was determined and used as a negative control.
Data analysis was performed with the WinMDI cytometry analysis software.

The uptake of the rhodamine-labeled magnetic nanoparticles was
also measured under the influence of an external static magnetic field
using a Nd-Fe-B magnet (0.5 T, with 10 mm diameter and 3 mm height)
placed in contact with the outer surface of the cell well plates.

The uptake of the rhodamine-labeled Mag-Alg-PEG-FA nanoparticles
by the MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells was visualized by confocal laser
microscopy.13 The cells at a density of
1 × 104 cells/well were plated in 24-well plates and
grown on sterilized cover slips (Borosilicate Glass, VWR) placed in
each well, under standard conditions described above. After a 24 h
incubation, the supernatant in each well was replaced with fresh medium
containing the rhodamine-labeled nanoparticles at a concentration
of 43.48 μg/mL and incubated for 1, 6, and 24 h. Then, the cells
were washed thrice with PBS and stained with a sufficient quantity
of 50 nM Lysotracker Green (green fluorescent dye staining the acidic
compartments in alive cells) for 15 min at 37 °C. Then, the cells
were washed thrice with PBS and a sufficient quantity of 300 nM DAPI
stain solution (blue fluorescent dye staining nucleic acids) was added.
After 10 min incubation at 37 °C, the cells were washed thrice
with PBS, drained, and mounted with Mowiol 4-88. The obtained test
samples were observed on a Leica SP5 confocal microscope (Germany)
equipped with appropriate filters for DAPI (excitation 359 nm, emission
457 nm), rhodamine (excitation 550 nm, emission 573 nm), and Lysotracker
Green (excitation 504 nm, emission 511 nm).13

Hemolysis Assay
The hemocompatibility of Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles was evaluated by a hemolysis assay.17 In brief, blood samples from healthy donors (obtained from
the University Hospital of Patras, Greece) were collected in heparin
tubes and centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min for plasma separation.
Then, the erythrocytes (red blood cells, RBCs) were washed thrice
with normal saline and a ratio of 1:20 pure RBCs was prepared (from
the initial volume of 0.5 mL blood in a final volume of 2 mL in normal
saline). Then, a suspension of magnetic nanoparticles was prepared
in PBS by serial dilution from 0.200 to 0.02 mg/mL. Equal quantities
of RBC suspension (0.5 mL) and nanoparticle suspension (0.5 mL) were
mixed with a rotator shaker and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Then,
the tubes were centrifuged (4000 rpm for 10 min) and the supernatant
containing the hemoglobin was transferred to 96-well plates and the
absorbance of the plates was measured at 570 nm using an MPR-700 Plate
Reader, Biotech Engineering Management Co. Ltd (U.K.). The positive
control (100% hemolysis) was prepared by suspending RBCs in double-distilled
water and the negative control (0% hemolysis) by suspending RBCs in
PBS. The test was repeated thrice. The percentage of hemolysis was
calculated from the following equations 2  where Anps, Anegative, and Apositive were the absorbance of hemoglobin contained in the supernatant of
the magnetic nanoparticles, the absorbance of the negative control,
and the absorbance of the positive control, respectively.

Statistical Analysis
Appropriate statistical methods
(Student’s t-test and one-way analysis of
variance for comparison of means) were applied for the statistical
analysis of experimental data using the IBM SPSS Statistics 25 software.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b03594.Detailed physicochemical characteristics of magnetic
nanoparticles; ATR spectra of magnetic nanoparticles and detailed
characterization; colloidal stability results of Mag-Alg-PEG (5 kDa)-FA
nanoparticles in comparison with Mag-Alg-PEG (2 kDa); rhodamine release
from Mag-Alg-PEG-FA magnetic nanoparticles; and confocal fluorescence
microscopy images of the uptake of rhodamine-labeled Mag-Alg-PEG-FA
nanoparticles by MCF-7 cancer cells with and without a magnetic field
and by MDA-MB-231 without a magnetic field (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b03594_si_001.pdf

 This research
has been co-financed by the Operational Program “Human Resources
Development, Education and Lifelong Learning” and the European
Union (European Social Fund) and Greek national funds.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr Maria Kollia from the Lab of Electron
Microscopy and Microanalysis at the University of Patras for the TEM
images and the Advanced Light Microscopy Facility of the Department
of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Patras and especially
Professor Stavros Taraviras for his help with confocal microscopy.
==== Refs
References
Boyle R. G. ; Travers S. 
Hypoxia: targeting the tumour . Anti-Cancer Agents Med. Chem. 
2006 , 6 , 281 –286 . 10.2174/187152006777698169 .
Huang J. ; Li Y. ; Orza A. ; Lu Q. ; Guo P. ; Wang L. ; Yang L. ; Mao H. 
Magnetic Nanoparticle
Facilitated
Drug Delivery for Cancer Therapy with Targeted and Image-Guided Approaches . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 3818 –3836 . 10.1002/adfm.201504185 .27790080 
Assaraf Y. G. ; Leamon C. P. ; Reddy J. A. 
The folate receptor as a rational
therapeutic target for personalized cancer treatment . Drug Resist. Updates 
2014 , 17 , 89 –95 . 10.1016/j.drup.2014.10.002 .
Boogerd L. S. F. ; Boonstra M. C. ; Beck A.-J. ; Charehbili A. ; Hoogstins C. E. S. ; Prevoo H. A. J. M. ; Singhal S. ; Low P. S. ; van de Velde C. J. H. ; Vahrmeijer A. L. 
Concordance of folate receptor-α
expression between biopsy, primary tumor and metastasis in breast
cancer and lung cancer patients . Oncotarget 
2016 , 7 , 17442 –17454 . 10.18632/oncotarget.7856 .26943581 
Muralidharan R. ; Babu A. ; Amreddy N. ; Bsalingappa K. ; Mehta M. ; Chen A. ; Zhao Y. D. ; Kompella U. B. ; Munshi A. ; Ramesh R. 
Folate receptor-targeted nanoparticle
delivery of HuR-RNAi suppresses lung cancer cell proliferation and
migration . Nanobiotechnology 
2016 , 14 , 1 –17 . 10.1186/s12951-016-0201-1 .
Jo S. D. ; Ku S. H. ; Won Y.-Y. ; Kim S. H. ; Kwon I. C. 
Targeted
Nanotheranostics for Future Personalized Medicine: Recent Progress
in Cancer Therapy . Theranostics 
2016 , 6 , 1362 –1377 . 10.7150/thno.15335 .27375785 
Zoppellaro G. ; Kolokithas-Ntoukas A. ; Polakova K. ; Tucek J. ; Zboril R. ; Loudos G. ; Fragogeorgi E. ; Diwoky C. ; Tomankova K. ; Avgoustakis K. ; Kouzoudis D. ; Bakandritsos A. 
Theranostics
of Epitaxially Condensed Colloidal Nanocrystal Clusters, through a
Soft Biomineralization Route . Chem. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 2062 –2074 . 10.1021/cm404053v .
Sarigiannis Y. ; Kolokithas-Ntoukas A. ; Beziere N. ; Zboril R. ; Papadimitriou E. ; Avgoustakis K. ; Lamprou M. ; Medrikova Z. ; Rousalis E. ; Ntziachristos V. ; Bakandritsos A. 
Synthesis
and evaluation of condensed magnetic nanocrystal clusters with in
vivo multispectral optoacoustic tomography for tumour targeting . Biomaterials 
2016 , 91 , 128 –139 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.03.015 .27045357 
Medříková Z. ; Novohradsky V. ; Zajac J. ; Vrana O. ; Kasparkova J. ; Bakandritsos A. ; Petr M. ; Zboril R. ; Brabec V. 
Enhancing
Tumor Cell Response to Chemotherapy through the Targeted Delivery
of Platinum Drugs Mediated by Highly Stable, Multifunctional Carboxymethylcellulose-Coated
Magnetic Nanoparticles . Chem. - Eur. J. 
2016 , 22 , 9750 –9759 . 10.1002/chem.201600949 .27246144 
Bakandritsos A. ; Papagiannopoulos A. ; Anagnostou E. N. ; Avgoustakis K. ; Zboril R. ; Pispas S. ; Tucek J. ; Ryukhtin V. ; Bouropoulos N. ; Kolokithas-Ntoukas A. ; Steriotis T. A. ; Keiderling U. ; Winnefeld F. 
Merging High
Doxorubicin Loading
with Pronounced Magnetic Response and Bio-repellent Properties in
Hybrid Drug Nanocarriers . Small 
2012 , 1 –13 . 10.1002/smll.201102525 .
Maeda H. ; Bharate G. Y. ; Daruwala J. 
Polymeric drugs for efficient tumor-targeted
drug delivery based on EPR-effect . Eur. J. Pharm.
Biopharm. 
2009 , 71 , 409 –419 . 10.1016/j.ejpb.2008.11.010 .19070661 
Angelopoulou A. ; Voulgari E. ; Kolokithas-Ntoukas A. ; Bakandritsos A. ; Avgoustakis K. 
Magnetic nanoparticles for the delivery
of dapagliflozin
to hypoxic tumors: physicochemical characterization and cell studies . AAPS PharmSciTech 
2018 , 19 , 621 –633 . 10.1208/s12249-017-0874-2 .28924948 
Angelopoulou A. ; Kolokithas-Ntoukas A. ; Papaioannou L. ; Kakazanis Z. ; Khoury N. ; Zoumpourlis V. ; Papatheodorou S. ; Kardamakis D. ; Bakandritsos A. ; Hatziantoniou S. ; Avgoustakis K. 
Canagliflozin-loaded magnetic nanoparticles
as potential
treatment of hypoxic tumors in combination with radiotherapy . Nanomedicine 
2018 , 2435 –2454 . 10.2217/nnm-2018-0145 .30311542 
Cao S. ; Slack S. D. ; Levy C. N. ; Hughes S. M. ; Jiang Y. ; Yogodzinski C. ; Roychoudhury P. ; Jerome K. R. ; Schiffer J. T. ; Hladik F. ; Woodrow K. A. 
Hybrid nanocarriers incorporating
mechanistically distinct drugs for lymphatic CD4 + T cell activation
and HIV-1 latency reversal . Sci. Adv. 
2019 , 5 , eaav632210.1126/sciadv.aav6322 .30944862 
Gonzalez-Fajardo L. ; Mahajan L. H. ; Ndaya D. ; Hargrove D. ; Manautou J. E. ; Liang B. T. ; Chen M.-H. ; Kasi R. M. ; Lu X. 
Reduced in
vivo toxicity of doxorubicin by encapsulation in cholesterol-containing
self-assembled nanoparticles . Pharmacol. Res. 
2016 , 107 , 93 –101 . 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.03.006 .26976795 
Lee K. Y. ; Mooney D. J. 
Alginate: properties
and biomedical applications . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2012 , 37 , 106 –126 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2011.06.003 .22125349 
Ayubi M. ; Karimi M. ; Abdpour S. ; Rostamizadeh K. ; Parsa M. ; Zamani M. ; Saedi A. 
Magnetic nanoparticles
decorated with PEGylated curcumin as dual targeted drug delivery:
Synthesis, toxicity and biocompatibility study . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2019 , 104 , 10981010.1016/j.msec.2019.109810 .
Huang J. ; Li Y. ; Orza A. ; Lu Q. ; Guo P. ; Wang L. ; Yang L. ; Mao H. 
Magnetic Nanoparticle
Facilitated
Drug Delivery for Cancer Therapy with Targeted and Image-Guided Approaches . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 3818 –3836 . 10.1002/adfm.201504185 .27790080 
Ulbrich K. ; Bakandritsos A. ; Tucek J. ; Zboril R. ; et al. Targeted
Drug Delivery with Polymers and Magnetic Nanoparticles: Covalent and
Noncovalent Approaches, Release Control, and Clinical Studies . Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 116 , 5338 –5431 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00589 .27109701 
Lim E. K. ; Huh Y. M. ; Yang J. ; Lee K. ; Suh J.-S. ; Haam S. 
pH-Triggered Drug-Releasing Magnetic
Nanoparticles for Cancer Therapy
Guided by Molecular Imaging by MRI . Adv. Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 2436 –2442 . 10.1002/adma.201100351 .21491515 
Peng N. ; Wu B. ; Wang L. ; He W. ; Ai Z. ; Zhang X. ; Wang Y. ; Fan L. ; Ye Q. 
High drug
loading and
pH-responsive targeted nanocarriers from alginate-modified SPIONs
for anti-tumor chemotherapy . Biomater. Sci. 
2016 , 4 , 1802 –1813 . 10.1039/C6BM00504G .27792228 
Afzalipour R. ; Khoei S. ; Khoee S. ; Shirvalilou S. ; Raoufi N. J. ; Motevalian M. ; Karimi M. R. 
Dual-Targeting Temozolomide
Loaded in Folate-Conjugated Magnetic Triblock Copolymer Nanoparticles
to Improve the Therapeutic Efficiency of Rat Brain Gliomas . ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 
2019 , 5 , 6000 –6011 . 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.9b00856 .
Yan L. ; Luo L. ; Amirshaghaghi A. ; Miller J. ; Meng C. ; You T. ; Busch T. M. ; Tsourkas A. ; Cheng Z. 
Dextran-Benzoporphyrin
Derivative (BPD) Coated Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticle
(SPION) Micelles for T2-Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Photodynamic
Therapy . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2019 , 2974 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.9b00676 .
Rasekh M. ; Ahmad Z. ; Cross R. ; Hernandez-Gil J. ; Wilton-Ely J. D. E. T. ; Miller P. W. 
Facile Preparation
of Drug-Loaded
Tristearin Encapsulated Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles
using Coaxial Electrospray Processing . Mol.
Pharmaceutics 
2017 , 14 , 2010 –2023 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00109 .
Martynenko I. V. ; Kusic D. ; Weigert F. ; Stafford S. ; Donnelly F. C. ; Evstigneev R. ; Gromova Y. ; Baranov A. V. ; Ruhle B. ; Kunte H.-J. ; Gun’ko Y. K. ; Resch-Genger U. 
Magneto-Fluorescent
Microbeads for Bacteria Detection Constructed from Superparamagnetic
Fe3O4 Nanoparticles and AIS/ZnS Quantum Dots . Anal. Chem. 
2019 , 91 , 12661 –12669 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b01812 .31525880 
Ferjaoui Z. ; Al Dine E. J. ; Kulmukhamedova A. ; Bezdetnaya L. ; Chang C. S. ; Schneider R. ; Mutelet F. ; Mertz D. ; Begin-Colin S. ; Quiles F. ; Gaffet E. ; Alem H. 
Doxorubicin-Loaded
Thermoresponsive Superparamagnetic Nanocarriers for Controlled Drug
Delivery and Magnetic Hyperthermia Applications . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2019 , 11 , 30610 –30620 . 10.1021/acsami.9b10444 .31359758 
Zuvin M. ; Kuruoglu E. ; Kaya V. O. ; Unal O. ; Kutlu O. ; Acar H. Y. ; Gozuacik D. ; Kosar A. 
Magnetofection of Green
Fluorescent Protein Encoding DNABearingPolyethyleneimine-Coated Superparamagnetic
Iron Oxide Nanoparticles to Human Breast Cancer Cells . ACS Omega 
2019 , 4 , 12366 –12374 . 10.1021/acsomega.9b01000 .31460354 
Alhasan A. H. ; Fardous R. S. ; Alsudir S. A. ; Majrashi M. A. ; Alghamdi W. M. ; Alsharaeh E. H. ; Almalik A. M. 
Polymeric Reactor for the Synthesis
of Superparamagnetic-Thermal Treatment of Breast Cancer . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2019 , 16 , 3577 –3587 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.9b00433 .
Bucak S. ; Yavuzturk B. ; Demir Sezer A.  Magnetic Nanoparticles:
Synthesis, Surface Modifications and Application in Drug Delivery . In Recent Advances in Novel Drug Carrier Systems , Open access peer-reviewed chapter (paragraph 2 Toxicity); IntechOpen , 2012 .
Kato Y. ; Ozawa S. ; Miyamoto C. ; Maehata Y. ; Suzuki A. ; Maeda T. ; Baba Y. 
Acidic extracellular microenvironment
and cancer . Cancer Cell Int. 
2013 , 13 , 1 –8 . 10.1186/1475-2867-13-89 .23305405 
Huang Y. ; Mao K. ; Zhang B. ; Zhao Y. 
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
conjugated with folic acid for dual target-specific drug delivery
and MRI in cancer theranostics . Mater. Sci.
Eng., C 
2017 , 70 , 763 –771 . 10.1016/j.msec.2016.09.052 .
Allard-Vannier E. ; Hervé-Aubert K. ; Kaaki K. ; Blondy T. ; Shebanova A. ; Shaitan K. V. ; Ignatova A. A. ; Saboungi M.-L. ; Feofanov A. V. ; Chourpa I. 
Folic acid-capped PEGylated magnetic nanoparticles
enter cancer cells mostly via clathrin-dependent endocytosis . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 
2017 , 1861 , 1578 –1586 . 10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.11.045 .27919801 
Le T. T. H. ; Bui T. Q. ; Ha T. M. T. ; Le M. H. ; Pham H. N. ; Ha P. T. 
Optimizing the alginate coating layer
of doxorubicin-loaded iron
oxide nanoparticles for cancer hyperthermia and chemotherapy . J. Mater. Sci. 
2018 , 53 , 13826 –13842 . 10.1007/s10853-018-2574-z .
Deok
Kong S. ; Zhang W. ; Lee J. H. ; Choi C. ; Khamwannah J. ; Karin M. ; Jin S. 
Externally triggered on-demand drug
release and deep tumor penetration . J. Vac.
Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom. 
2012 , 30 , 02C10210.1116/1.3694833 .
Babincová M. ; Altanerov V. ; Altaner C. ; Bergermann C. ; Babinec P. 
In vitro analysis of cisplatin functionalized magnetic
nanoparticles in combined cancer chemotherapy and electromagnetic
hyperthermia . IEEE Trans. NanoBiosci. 
2008 , 7 , 15 –19 . 10.1109/TNB.2008.2000145 .
Peiris P. M. ; Bauer L. ; Toy R. ; Tran E. ; Pansky J. ; Doolittle E. ; Schmidt E. ; Hayden E. ; Mayer A. ; Keri R. A. ; Griswold M. A. ; Karathanasis E. 
Enhanced delivery
of chemotherapy to tumors using a multicomponent nanochain with radio-frequency-tunable
drug release . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 4157 –4168 . 10.1021/nn300652p .22486623 
Pilco-Ferreto N. ; Calaf G. M. 
Influence of doxorubicin on apoptosis and oxidative
stress in breast cancer cell lines . Int. J.
Oncol. 
2016 , 49 , 753 –762 . 10.3892/ijo.2016.3558 .27278553 
Zhao P. ; Chen B. ; Li L. ; Wu H. ; Li Y. ; Shaneen B. ; Zhan Xi. ; Gu N. 
Missing-in-metastasis
protein promotes internalization of magnetic nanoparticles via association
with clathrin light chain and Rab7 . Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 
2019 , 1863 , 502 –510 . 10.1016/j.bbagen.2018.12.002 .30528490 
Mosmann T. 
Rapid colorimetric
assay for cellular growth and survival: Application to proliferation
and cytotoxicity assays . J. Immunol. Methods 
1983 , 65 , 55 –63 . 10.1016/0022-1759(83)90303-4 .6606682

