
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146010210.1021/acsomega.9b00340ArticleScanometric Detection of Tomato Leaf Curl New Delhi
Viral DNA Using Mono- and Bifunctional AuNP-Conjugated Oligonucleotide
Probes Dharanivasan Gunasekaran †Jesse Denison Michael
Immanuel †Rajamuthuramalingam Thangavelu †Rajendran Ganapathy †Shanthi Sathappan ‡Kathiravan Krishnan *††Department
of Biotechnology and ‡Department of Zoology, University of Madras, Guindy Campus, Chennai 600025, Tamil
Nadu, India* Email: drkkathiravan@gmail.com.11 06 2019 30 06 2019 4 6 10094 10107 06 02 2019 15 05 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Scanometric
detection of tomato leaf curl New Delhi viral DNA using
AuNP-conjugated mono- and bifunctional oligo probes through direct
DNA hybridization assay (DDH assay) and sandwich DNA hybridization
assay (SDH assay) with silver enhancement was developed. Tomato leaf
curl New Delhi virus (ToLCNDV) coat protein gene-specific thiol-modified
ssoligo probes were used for the preparation of mono- and bifunctional
AuNP-ssoligo probe conjugates (signal probes). ssDNA arrays were prepared
using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), rolling circle amplification
(RCA), genomic DNAs fragments, and phosphate-modified positive control/capture
probes through 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide/1-methylimidazole
conjugation on the amine-modified glass slide (GS) surface. In the
DDH assay, signal probes were directly hybridized with ssDNA array
of positive control and ToLCNDV DNA samples and the detection signals
were amplified by silver enhancement. Dark black/gray colors were
developed on the GS by the result of Ag enhancement, which can be
visualized and discriminated by the naked eye. The images were captured
using a simple flatbed scanner, and the determined amounts of signal
probes were hybridized with their target DNA. Similarly, the SDH assay
also performed through two rounds of hybridization between capture
probes and target DNA; target DNA and signal probes followed by silver
enhancement. The detection signals were found higher in the PCR sample
than the RCA and genomic DNA samples because of the presence of increased
copy numbers of complementary DNAs in PCR samples. Further, bifunctional
AuNP-ssoligo probe shows higher intensity of detection signal than
monofunctional probes because it can be hybridized with both strands
of dsDNA targets. Moreover, the DDH-based scanometric method showed
higher detection sensitivity than the SDH assay-based scanometric
method. Overall, bifunctional signal probes showed more detection
sensitivity than monofunctional probes in scanometric methods based
on both DDH and SDH assays. The limit of detection of this developed
scanometric method was optimized (100 zM to 100 pM concentration).
Further, DDH assay-based scanometric method shows significant advantages
over the SDH assay method, such as cost-effectiveness, because it
requires only single probes (signal probes), less time-consuming by
the need of only single-step hybridization, and higher detection sensitivity
(up to zM). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt
made to develop a scanometric-based nanoassay method for the detection
of plant viral DNA. This approach will be a remarkable milestone for
the application of nanotechnology in the development of nanobiosensor
for plant pathogen detection.

document-id-old-9ao9b00340document-id-new-14ao-2019-00340vccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The detection of DNA
sequences is very important in various fields,
such as clinical diagnosis of microbial infections, metabolic disorders,
genetic diseases, as well as in environmental and forensic applications.
Methods such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and southern blotting
with fluorescence tagged molecules are extensively used for the detection
of specific DNA. However, these methods have their own disadvantages
in the view of degree of accuracy, time, complexity, labor-intensiveness,
and cost.1 Over the past several years,
nanotechnology has been making a number of exciting advances in the
field of molecular diagnostics, enhancing the specificity and sensitivity
of the existing conventional detection methods.1,2 Particularly,
nanometer-sized gold particles exhibit unique size and shape, fascinating
optical and surface physicochemical properties, strong SPR band, and
biocompatibility.3 Nowadays, gold nanoparticles
(AuNPs) have been widely used in biosensors for the detection of target
DNA/protein and other molecules.4 The detection
of the target DNA sequence was performed using label-free unmodified
AuNPs with oligonucleotide probes,5−8 but the detection limit was very low. To
overcome the limitations, Mirkin and co-workers developed the scanometric
method for the detection of target DNA with AuNP-conjugated oligonucleotide
probes through silver enhancement. The detection limit was optimized
up to 50 fM, and the results can be read out through the naked eye
and flatbed scanner without the need of sophisticated instruments,
which were 100 times more sensitive than the fluorescence probe-based
method, where AuNPs act as an optical sensing element and the oligonucleotide
probe acts as a recognizing unit.9 Finally,
the detection sensitivity was increased up to atomolar level through
the array-based detection of DNA by the scanometric method with electrical
readout.10,11 Moreover, the scanometric method has been
used to detect single nucleotide mismatch, specific RNA targets, and
prostate cancer markers (microRNA). Scanometric-based biobarcode assay
is used for mRNA expression analysis and Alzheimer’s disease
diagnosis.9,12−16 It is also used to carry out imaging of DNA hybridization,
and high-level mismatch discrimination of anthrax lethal factor DNA,
light scattering property-based homogenous detection of DNA, microarray
detection of double- and triple-helix DNA binders, visual detection
of DNA with molecular beacon, and analysis of DNA microarray with
DNA intercalator-conjugated AuNPs were reported.17−22

However, the application of scanometric methods for the detection
of plant viruses is not yet reported so far. Particularly, whitefly-transmitted
tomato leaf curl New Delhi virus (ToLCNDV) belongs to the genus Begomovirus
and the family Geminivirus infecting tomato causing severe leaf curl
disease, where 100% yield loss was reported.23 ToLCNDV is considered as economically important because it can spread
easily and lead to uncontrolled infection due to the absence of an
effective detection method and disease management strategies. Also,
a high degree of nucleotide diversity was found among the different
isolates of ToLCV in India and worldwide.24 In this circumstance, degenerate probe has been used in the existing
conventional detection methods to overcome the diversity among isolates
of this virus. Recently, we have demonstrated label-free colorimetric
detection of Begomovirus with cholate-caped AuNPs using degenerate
probe with a detection sensitivity of ≥600 pM.7,8 However, it is difficult to control hybridization reaction and elimination
of unhybridized DNA, which may interfere with the results, and moreover
requires a huge volume of sample DNA. Hence, the development of a
new detection method with ultrasensitivity is very important. So far,
scanometric method-based detection was demonstrated using monofunctional
AuNP-oligo probes conjugate with synthetic and amplified targets through
silver and gold enhancement methods.9,10,17,25 More recently, we have
demonstrated colorimetric detection of ToLCNDV DNA using bifunctional
AuNP-oligo probe conjugates, which detect both strands of dsDNA targets
at the same time with increased sensitivity.26 However, bifunctional AuNP-oligo probe conjugate using scanometric
detection of target DNA is not yet reported. In continuation of our previous
works,26,27 herein, we have demonstrated scanometric
method-based detection of ToLCNDV DNA from amplified PCR and rolling
circle amplification (RCA) DNA and genomic DNA using mono- and bifunctional
AuNP-conjugated virus-specific oligo probes further detection signals
were amplified using silver enhancement.

Experimental Section
Materials
Trisodium citrate, hydrogen tetrachloroaurate
trihydrate (HAuCl4·3H2O), disodium hydrogen
phosphate (Na2HPO4), monosodium dihydrogen phosphate
(NaH2PO4), silver nitrate, hydroquinone (0.3%),
citric acid (0.4%), sucrose, acetone, ethanol, sodium chloride (NaCl),
sodium hydroxide (NaOH), and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were obtained
from Loba Chemie (Mumbai, India). Microscopic glass slide, ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA), sodium acetate, bovine serum albumin (BSA), and agarose
were purchased from HiMedia Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. (Mumbai, India).
Nitric acid (HNO3), sulfuric acid (H2SO4), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) were
purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific India Pvt. Ltd. (Mumbai, India).
(3-Aminopropyl)triethoxylsilane (APTES), 1-methylimidazole (1-MeIm),
and carbodiimide [1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide (EDC)]
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St. Louis). TempliPhi DNA amplification
kit, Illustra, was obtained from GE Healthcare Limited (U.K.). The
primers encoding the coat protein (CP) gene (ToLCVFP/ToLCVRP) were
synthesized commercially (Eurofins MWG Operon, India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore,
India). Red dye PCR Master Mix was purchased from Ampliqon A/S (Denmark).
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed in L1996GGD Peltier
model thermocycler purchased from Lark Innovative Fine Teknowledge
Pvt. Ltd. (India). Thiol and phospahte modified oligonucleotide probes
were synthesized from VBC-Biotech Service GmbH (Vienna, Austria).

Preparations and Characterizations of AuNP-Conjugated Mono-
and Bifunctional ssoligo Probes
Citrate-capped AuNPs were
synthesized through heat reduction method and characterized by a UV–visible
spectrophotometer, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(HR-TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), and ζ potential analysis.
The synthesized AuNPs molar concentration was calculated. Signal probe
1 for forward strand and signal probe 2 for reverse strand were designed
with thiol modifications at 3′ ends, which were used for the
preparation of AuNP-conjugated oligo probes with mono- and bifunctionalities.
Complementary strands specific for signal probes were also designed
with phosphate functional group at 5′ ends. Similarly, positive
control C2-ssDNA 1 and 2 complementary to capture probe 1 and signal
probe 1 as well as capture probe 2 and signal probe 2 were designed
in 72 and 74 mer, respectively, and all of the designed oligos were
custom-synthesized (Table S1). The prepared
AuNP-conjugated virus-specific monofunctional signal probe 1, signal
probe 2, and bifunctional signal probe were characterized by a UV–visible
spectrophotometer, HR-TEM, DLS, ζ potential analysis, and agarose
gel electrophoresis analysis. The number of ssoligo probes attached
on single AuNP surface was calculated (preparation and characterizations
of AuNPs and AuNP-ssoligo probes with bifunctionalities were already
published).8 PCR, RCA DNAs, and genomic
DNA of ToLCNDV prepared and fragmented through the heat fragmentation
method are described in the Supporting Information (Figure S1—agrose gel image for the analysis of isolated
DNA from infected sample; Figure S2—agarose
gel image for the analysis of PCR amplified 0.5 kb size of CP gene
of ToLCNDV for the confirmation of viral infection; and Figure S3—agarose gel for the analysis
of RCA products amplified from ToLCNDV-infected samples).

Modification
of Glass Slide Surface with Amine Functional Groups
Glass
slide (GS) surface was modified with amine functional groups
using APTES followed in our earlier report.27 In detail, glass slides were first treated with piranha solution
(H2O2/H2SO4, 30:70 ratio)
for 12 h, washed thoroughly with ddH2O, and dried under
a stream of N2 gas. For the silanization, the treated GSs
were immersed in a solution containing 2.0% of APTES at room temperature
(RT) for 30 min. After incubation, the slides were rinsed with ddH2O, dried under a stream of N2 gas, and the slides
were kept at 120 °C for 30 min for strong binding.

Preparation
of Sample DNA Array
Different concentrations
of 5′-phosphate-modified ssoligoes were immobilized on the
NH2-GS surface.28 Amine-modified
glass slide was divided into three rows and eight columns using acrylic
cover slide and adhesive glow. In detail, ice-cold 10 mM 1-methylimidazole
(1-MeIm) pH 7.0 was prepared as the final concentration from 0.1 M
ice-cold 1-MeIm. The ssoligo solution was loaded on amine-functionalized
GS (10 μL per spot) on ice. Carbodiimide (EDC) (0.2 M) was dissolved
in freshly prepared ice-cold 10 mM 1-MeIm, and 10 μL of EDC
was added to each spot in the slides and incubated at 50 °C for
5 h. After incubation, the slides were washed three times with washing
solution 1 (0.4 N NaOH + 0.25% sodium dodecyl sulfate) for 5 min at
50 °C followed by three times washing with sterile water. Finally,
the unbounded surface was blocked by adding 10 μL of 5% BSA
and allowed to rest for 30 min at RT, and then the slide was washed
with sterile water.29

Hybridization
of AuNP-conjugated oligo probe was optimized through direct DNA hybridization
(DDH) assay associated with silver enhancement. Hybridization was
performed with optimized parameters like temperature, pH, and time,
as reported earlier with slight modification.30 AuNP-conjugated signal probe 1 (5 μL) was mixed with 5 μL
of hybridization buffer (4× saline sodium citrate (SSC) buffer,
0.05% Tween-20, and 35% formamide: 0.6 M NaCl and 0.06 M trisodium
citrate were dissolved, pH 7.0 was adjusted with HCl, and the final
volume was made up to 100 mL with ddH2O) and added to each
well of different concentrations of C-ssDNA 1 (1 nM, 100 pM, 100 fM,
100 aM, and 100 zM) immobilized on GS. It was incubated at 40 °C
for 1 h for hybridization. After incubation, the slide was subjected
to high-stringency wash with 20 μL of washing solution 2 (0.5
M NaNO3 containing 0.05% of Tween-20) twice at RT (2 min
for each washing step) and one-time low-stringency wash with 0.4×
SSC buffer for 30 s.

Scanometric Detection
The presence
of hybridized signal
probes was amplified through silver enhancement.31 In brief, silver nitrate (0.04%), hydroquinone (0.3%),
citric acid (0.4%), and sucrose (0.1%) were prepared in pure acetone.
Solutions were protected from light, mixed on a rocking platform for
4 h, and then cooled to −20 °C overnight. Cooled solutions
were centrifuged at 600g for 10 min to remove insoluble
material and stored at −50 °C. For silver enhancement,
these four solutions were mixed in the following ratio: two parts
of silver nitrate/two parts of hydroquinone/one part of citric acid/one
part of sucrose (2:2:1:1). This mixed solution of 10 μL was
loaded on each spot and the slide was incubated at 4 °C for 2–3
min. After the incubation, the slide was washed thoroughly with sterile
water.12 Finally, the slide was dried at
RT and the developed black spots on the slides were scanned using
canon flatbed scanner (LiDE 110). The scanned image was converted
to grayscale, and the intensity of grayscale of silver enhancement
was measured by using ImageJ software.

Specificities of AuNP
signal probes 1 and 2 and bifunctional AuNP signal probe were studied
using ToLCNDV viral DNA and noncomplementary DNA through DDH and SDH
methods. In detail, 10 ng/μL concentration fragmented ToLCNDV
DNA and noncomplementary DNA were immobilized on GS surface for DDH,
and 100 fM capture probes 1 and 2 and equal mixture of 1 and 2 were
immobilized on GS surface for SDH assay, followed by hybridization
of 5 μL of mono- and bifunctional AuNP signal probes with 5
μL of hybridization buffer for DDH assay. Similarly, complementary
DNA 10 ng/μL mixed with 5 μL of hybridization buffer for
the first round of hybridization was followed by the second round
of hybridization with mono- and bifunctional AuNP signal probes. Silver
enhancement was carried out following the above-mentioned procedure,
and enhanced slides were scanned for analysis.

DDH Assay-Based Scanometric
Detection of ToLCNDV DNA
Different concentrations of C-ssDNA
1, C-ssDNA 2, and C-ssDNA 1 and
2 (100 pM, 100 fM, 100 aM, 100 zM, and 0 zM) were immobilized on amine-modified
GS surfaces following the above-described methods. Similarly, fragmented
PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA products were immobilized on the amine-modified
GS surface. In detail, 7.5 ng/μL concentration of DNA was prepared
and denatured at 95 °C for 10 min using a thermocycler, followed
by cooling in ice for 10 min. The denatured 10 μL of DNA from
PCR, RCA, and genomic samples were loaded on each spot separately
and immobilized by following the above-described procedure. The amount
of sample DNA immobilized on each spot was also measured spectrophotometrically.

After immobilization of DNA samples, the slides were subjected
to hybridization with AuNP signal probe 1, AuNP signal probe 2, and
bifunctional AuNP signal probe. Then, the slides were pretreated by
incubating at 95 °C for 5 min in a thermal cycler (PCR machine)
and hybridized at 40 °C for 1 h. After the incubation, the unbounded
signal probes were washed by high- and low-stringency washes. Then,
the slides were subjected to silver enhancement.

SDH Assay-Based
Scanometric Detection of ToLCNDV DNA
Sandwich (double-step)
hybridization-based scanometric detection
of ToLCNDV DNA was performed using two kinds of probes, viz., (1)
capture probes and (2) signal probes. In the present study, 27-mer
capture probe 1 was selected 110 bp away from signal probe 1 in the
CP gene region of ToLCNDV (309–420 nt) and 28-mer capture probe
2 was selected at 138 bp away from signal probe 2 in the CP region
(683–821 nt). These two capture probes were custom-synthesized
with 3′ phosphate group functionalization. The capture probes
stock solutions were prepared with a final concentration of 100 pM/μL.
In this method, different concentrations of capture probe 1 and 2
and equal mixture of capture probes 1 and 2 (100 pM, 100 fM, 100 aM,
100 zM, and 0 zM) were immobilized on the amine-modified GS surface
through EDC/1-MeIm condensation reaction. Further, unbounded surface
was passivated using 5% BSA. Capture probe-immobilized slides were
subjected to first-step hybridization with C2-ssDNA/samples DNA. Similarly,
capture probes 1 and 2 and equal mixture of 1 and 2 (100 pM/well)
were immobilized separately on GS surface for PCR, RCA, and genomic
DNA hybridization throughout the study. Complementary DNA (C2-ssDNA-1,
C2-ssDNA-2, and mixture of C2-ssDNA-1 and 2) (5 μL) were mixed
with 5 μL of 4× SSC hybridization buffer and added to each
well in the corresponding slides. Then, the slides were pretreated
by incubating at 95 °C for 5 min in a thermal cycler and allowed
for hybridization at 40 °C for 1 h. After the incubation, the
unbounded C2-ssDNAs underwent high- and low-stringency washes. Similarly,
5 μL of heat-fragmented PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA were also
mixed with 5 μL of hybridization buffer for the hybridization,
and unbounded strands of dsDNA were removed by washing with high-
and low-stringency wash buffers. Then, the slides were subjected to
the second-step hybridization with AuNP-conjugated monofunctional
signal probe 1, signal probe 2, and bifunctional signal probe. After
the hybridization, the slides were subjected to high- and low-stringency
washes. Silver enhancement was carried out to enhance detection signals
and characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and HR-TEM.

Results
and Discussion
Preparation of Mono- and Bifunctional AuNP-Conjugated
Signal
Probes
Synthesis and Characterization of Citrate-Capped AuNPs
Citrate-capped AuNPs were prepared through the heat reduction method
and used for the preparation of mono- and bifunctional signal probes.
Gradual change in the color of the reaction solution (HAuCl4) from yellow to purple and then to red after the addition of trisodium
citrate at the boiling condition confirmed the formation of AuNPs.
The synthesized AuNPs solution was analyzed by a UV–visible
spectrophotometer, and the absorbance peak of the red AuNP solution
was found at 520 nm. The size and shape of the synthesized AuNPs were
analyzed by HR-TEM. It shows that citrate-capped AuNPs are spherical
in shape with an average size of ∼19 nm diameter in a highly
monodispersed manner. The hydrodynamic diameter of the synthesized
citrate-capped AuNPs was studied using the DLS method. The average
hydrodynamic diameter of the monodispersed citrate-capped AuNPs was
found to be ∼30 nm with an electronegative ζ potential
−18 mV (Figure S4a–d). The
molar concentration of the synthesized AuNPs was calculated to be
3.75 nM, which has been already published.9

ssoligo Probes Designing and Synthesis
ToLCNDV-specific
oligonucleotide probes were designed by multiple-sequence alignment
of retrieved nucleotide sequences of ToLCNDV from NCBI using BioEdit
7.2.2 software.32 Oligo probe 1 (20 mer)
was selected at the beginning of coat protein (CP) gene, and oligo
probe 2 (20 mer) was selected at the end of the CP gene after sequence
alignment. However, six nucleotide bases were added at the 5′
end of probe sequences as a linker to enhance the recognition efficiency
for hybridization. In addition, self-dimer (self-complementation)
formation between probe 1, probes 1 and 2, and probe 2 was analyzed
and the designed oligo probes were custom-synthesized with thiol modification
at the 5′ end. Similarly, complementary sequences for these
two probes were also synthesized (Table S1, Supporting Information). Finally, the stock solutions were prepared
at a concentration of 100 pM/μL for all of the probes.

Preparation
of AuNP-Conjugated Mono- and Bifunctional ssoligo
Probes
AuNP-conjugated oligonucleotide probes that are monofunctional
signal probe 1, signal probe 2, and bifunctional signal probe (equal
mixture of oligo probe 1 and 2) were prepared by following the standard
protocol reported earlier based on the Au–S chemistry.8,33 Thiol-modified oligonucleotide probes at the 5′ end was chemisorbed
on AuNP surface and formed a self-assembled oligo thiol monolayer.
AuNPs and thiol-modified oligo probes 1 and 2, and equal mixture of
probes 1 and 2 were mixed individually and incubated in the presence
of phosphate-buffered saline. Salt aging process was used to reduce
the intermolecular repulsion forces between ssDNA oligonucleotide
probes and AuNPs and enhance the chemisorption.34,35 Further, unbounded AuNPs were removed through aggregation by salt
aging (Figure 1a).

Figure 1 Preparation
of AuNP-conjugated oligonucleotide probes. (a) Stability
of AuNP probe conjugates after the salt treatment. 1—AuNPs
with salt, 2—signal probe 1 with salt, 3—signal probe
2 with salt, 4—bifunctional signal probe with salt, and 5—AuNPs
without salt. (b) UV–visible spectra of AuNPs “a”,
AuNPs with NaCl “b”, signal probe 1 with NaCl “c”,
signal probe 2 with NaCl “d”, and bifunctional probe
with NaCl. (c) DLS characterization of AuNP-conjugated probes. Hydrodynamic
diameter of AuNP-SP1 (∼59 nm), AuNP-SP 2 (∼78 nm), and
bifunctional signal probe AuNP-SP 1 and 2 (∼65 nm) and its
corresponding HR-TEM images of two-dimensional (2D) arrangement of
AuNP-conjugated signal probe 1, signal probe 2, and bifunctional signal
probe (d). (The blue line indicates that part of figure is already
published and permission obtained from RSC Advance).8

The optical absorbance properties
of monofunctional signal probes
1 and 2 and bifunctional signal probe were analyzed with control and
reference after the salt aging process using a UV–visible spectrophotometer
(Figure 1b). AuNPs
show different light absorbance properties with and without salt treatment.
In the absence of salt, AuNPs show a sharp absorbance band at 520
nm with high intensity, but in the presence of salt, AuNPs show a
broadening peak toward the longer-wavelength region (above 600 nm)
with a small peak at 520 nm due to aggregation. The absorbance spectra
of signal probe 1, signal probe 2, and bifunctional signal probe (AuNP
probe conjugates) show an SPR band at 524 nm even after the salt treatment.
The red band shift of AuNPs from 520 to 524 nm found after the conjugation
of AuNPs with thiol-modified oligonucleotide probes could be due to
the change of refractive index surrounding the AuNPs and the formation
of dielectric layers around the particles. This can be further implied
to the successful adsorption of ssDNA probes onto the surface of AuNPs.

Dispersibility and aggregation of monofunctional signal probes
1 and 2 and bifunctional signal probe in high-salt environment were
analyzed by dynamic light scattering (DLS) technology along with control
and a reference (Figure 1c). The average hydrodynamic diameter of AuNPs without salt treatment
(reference) was found as ∼27 nm and that of AuNPs with salt
treatment (0.1 M final concentration) was found as ∼1410 nm
(data not shown). This could be attributed to the salt-induced irreversible
aggregation of uniformly dispersed AuNPs in aqueous medium. The average
hydrodynamic diameters of monofunctional signal probes 1 and 2 and
bifunctional signal probes after the salt treatment were found to
be ∼59, ∼78, and ∼65 nm, respectively. This could
be due to the formation of oligo thiol monolayer on AuNPs surface.
The significant difference in the particles size (hydrodynamic diameter)
is mainly due to the variation in the number of oligo probes attached
on the surface. Further, high-density chemisorption of oligo probes
on AuNP surface depends on the size, shape, pH, and base compositions.
In these, oligo probe sequence is the most important factor that determines
the adsorption potentials. In detail, thymidine (dT)-rich oligo probes
attached more numbers than dA-, dC-, and dG-rich oligo probes.36 Simultaneously, ζ potentials of mono-
and bifunctional signal probes were measured. The ζ potential
of citrate-capped AuNPs was found to be −18 mV (Figure S4d, inset). This electronegativity of
AuNPs is attributed by the anionic nature of citrate molecules, which
stabilize on the AuNPs surface. The ζ potential of AuNPs significantly
increased after the conjugation of ssDNA oligo probes. Monofunctional
signal probes 1 and 2 and bifunctional signal probe showed electronegative
ζ potentials of −32, −45, and −35 mV, respectively
(Figure 1c, inset).
This could be due to the presence of more electronegative ssDNA oligo
probes on the surface of AuNPs as a result of chemisorption.37

Mono- and bifunctional signal probes sizes
were investigated by
HR-TEM analysis (Figure 1d). The unconjugated AuNPs were found to be monodispersed with a
diameter of ∼19 nm before the salt treatment, which aggregated
with increased size (more than ∼400 nm) after the salt treatment
(data not shown). However, oligo probe-functionalized AuNP conjugates
were not aggregated in the high-salt environment and they were found
to be in 2D array arrangements. In addition, thin faint bands were
clearly observed surrounding the AuNP-oligo probe conjugates (inset
images of Figure 1d).
The thicknesses of the clearly visible layer were found to be 1.9,
2.0, and 1.7 nm, respectively. This is due to the conjugation of AuNPs
with thiol-modified ssDNA oligonucleotide probes. This functionalization
prevents particle overlapping and aggregation by maintaining interparticle
distance, and it proves that thiol-modified oligonucleotide-functionalized
AuNPs were not aggregated and resist the salt-induced aggregation.
Two-dimensional array arrangements of AuNP probe conjugates were mainly
due to the weaker interactions between ssDNA oligonucleotide probes
immobilized on AuNPs.

AuNP-conjugated mono- and bifunctional
signal probes were analyzed
using agarose gel electrophoresis. Figure S5a,b shows the electrophoretic separation of unmodified AuNPs (lane 1),
monofunctional signal probe 1 (lane 2), monofunctional signal probe
2 (lane 3), and bifunctional signal probe (lane 4). Uniform red color
bands were observed only in lanes 2, 3, and 4 of AuNP-ssoligo probe
conjugates. Unmodified AuNPs move faster than ssoligo probe-functionalized
AuNP and appeared as shearing without any identical bands (lane 1).
Moreover, partially and completely functionalized AuNPs move according
to their size and mass. Particularly, completely functionalized AuNPs-ssoligo
probe possesses more mass and moves very slowly than the partially
functionalized AuNPs. A great number of probes on AuNPs (spherical
nucleic acid) restrict the mobility of AuNPs.38Figure S5b shows measured band intensities
in all of the four lanes. Very less intensity was found in lane 1
with unmodified AuNPs than the lanes 2, 3, and 4, which show higher
band intensities with similar pattern of mobility. These results prove
that the ssoligo-functionalized AuNPs are more stable than the unmodified
AuNPs under the electrophoretic condition.

The number of oligonucleotide
probes chemisorbed on single AuNP
(∼19 nm) was calculated using the UV–visible spectroscopy.
AuNP-conjugated oligonucleotide probes (mono- and bifunctional signal
probes) were treated with β-mercaptoethanol, a strong reducing
agent, to break the Au–S bond and for the release of surface-bounded
oligo probes and aggregation of AuNPs.39 With assistance of molar concentration of AuNPs, ssoligoes, and
the number of AuNPs in synthesized solution, the number of oligonucleotide
probes immobilized on single AuNP were calculated as 103, 110, and
105/AuNP for signal probe 1, signal probe 2, and bifunctional signal
probe, respectively. The adsorbance efficiency of ssoligo probes depends
on the size and surface volume ratio of AuNPs, length of probes, and
ionic strength of the medium. More surface area of AuNPs facilitates
the adsorbance of a greater number of ssoligo probes.40

The amine group was functionalized on GS surfaces
through the silane
monolayer method using APTES for the immobilization of DNA, which
was already published.27 Briefly, the GS
surface was treated with piranha solution to clean organic residues
and other impurities present on GS surface. In addition, it is also
used to increase the hydrophilic property of glass by hydroxylating
the surface, thus increasing the number of silanol group on the surface.41 The treated GS surface was functionalized with
amine functional group through the silanization using APTES.27 The goal of silanization (or siliconization)
of glassware is to increase its hydrophobicity and is used for covalent
immobilization of biomolecules.42

It was reported that the 5′ end phosphate functional group
of DNA gets immobilized on the amine-functionalized GS surface through
condensation reaction using carbodiimide and imidazole as coupling
and catalytic agents.28 The general mechanism
for the immobilization of 5′ phosphate of DNA on aminated GS
surface is depicted schematically in Figure 2. Initially, 5′ phosphate group was
attacked by EDC to form active ester intermediate. Then, imidazole
reacts with active ester to release EDC in the form of isourea and
produce reactive phosphorylimidazole. This phosphorylimidazole reacts
with aminated GS surface to form a phosphoramidate covalent bond between
DNA and GS surface, and imidazole is released without any changes.
In this mechanism, EDC acts as a coupling/condensation agent and it
was hydrated to form isourea, where imidazole acts as a catalyst and
it activates DNA to form a covalent bond with GS surface.43

Figure 2 Schematic representation of covalent immobilization of
DNA on the
amine-modified GS surface.

The amount of DNA immobilized on the defined surface was
optimized
to prepare DNA/probe array for scanometric detection of DNA. The 5′
end phosphate group-functionalized complementary ssDNA specific for
signal probes 1 and 2 and bifunctional signal probe were immobilized
on amine-functionalized GS surface. In detail, different concentrations
of C-ssDNA (1 nM, 100 pM, 100 fM, 100 aM, and 100 zM) were immobilized
onto 5 mm diameter surface of amine-functionalized GS surface. EDC
absorbs a molecule of water to form isourea in this condensation reaction.
The formation of phosphoramidate bond was catalyzed by imidazole to
activate the phosphate group. In this method, only 5′ phosphate
end of C-ssDNA alone is immobilized on the surface and another end
(3′) is left free as such. The amount of C-ssDNA immobilized
on the 5 mm diameter of reaction well on the amine-functionalized
GS surface was calculated using a standard ssDNA concentration graph.
The amounts of C-ssDNA present in washed buffer solutions collected
from 1 nM (or 1000 pM) C-ssDNA (1, 2, and equal mixture of 1 and 2)
immobilized reaction wells were determined to be 56.05, 54.56, and
195 pM for C-ssDNA 1, 2, and mixture of 1 and 2, respectively. After
the subtraction of these values from the initial concentration of
C-ssDNA (1000 pM), the amounts of ssDNA immobilized on surface were
determined to be 943.95, 945.44, and 805 pM for C-ssDNA for 1, 2,
and the mixture of 1 and 2, respectively. The overall concentration
of C-ssDNA immobilized on 5 mm diameter aminated GS reaction well
was found to be 80.5–94.54% in this EDC-mediated immobilization
method (Figure S6a,b). The amounts of C-ssDNA
for probes 1 and 2 were found to be similar and higher than that of
the mixture of probes 1 and 2. This could be due to the formation
of dimer to some extent between probes 1 and 2, which might interfere
in the immobilization process. EDC-mediated selective immobilization
of DNA at the point of terminal phosphate group onto a solid surface
is involved extensively in clinical diagnosis. The perfect and selective
immobilization of unmodified DNA gives a new insight into the preparation
of ssDNA arrays.

Likewise, PCR- and RCA-amplified ToLCNDV DNA
products and isolated
total genomic DNA from infection suspected plant leaf samples were
also immobilized on the amine-functionalized GS surface to perform
the detection of specific nucleotide sequence through DDH assay-based
scanometric method. Prior to immobilization of DNA samples, it should
be fragmented into small pieces to increase the number of 5′
terminal phosphate groups and increase the efficiency of immobilization,
because the number of functional phosphate groups at the 5′
end of DNA and length of the DNA are the important factors in determining
the efficiency of DNA immobilization on the surface.43 Therefore, PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA were fragmented by
heat treatment.44 Heat fragmentation profiles
of PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA samples at 95 °C for different time
durations (10, 20, 30, and 40 min) are shown in Figure S6a–c, respectively. The complete disappearance
of band intensity in 40 min clearly indicates the complete fragmentation
of DNA in a wide size range. Heat fragmentation efficiency was found
to be higher in genomic DNA than RCA and PCR products reflected by
the band intensity. The intensity of genomic DNA was found to be lower
than the RCA and PCR products after 40 min heat treatment (Figure S6D). The corresponding agarose gel images
also confirm the disintegration (Figure S7) and indicate that the larger DNA (RCA and genomic DNA) gets fragmented
completely to 0.5–1.0 kb in size. All of the previous reports
deal with the heat fragmentation of genomic DNA into different sizes
from 100 bp to 1.0 kb. However, fragmentation of PCR DNA and RCA DNA
has not been investigated so far. In this study, we observed that
the fragmentation of genomic and RCA DNA occurred more rapidly than
the PCR DNA, and the size of PCR product was 0.5 kb, which required
more time (40 min) than larger DNA (30 min). Recently, the pretreatment
(fragmentation and denaturation) of genomic DNA has become necessary
for the hybridization assay. This immobilized dsDNA fragment was converted
to ssDNA through alkaline treatment using NaOH. Where dsDNA fragments
were denatured into ssDNA, unimmobilized strand was removed by frequent
washing.45 In the case of PCR DNA, the
complete quantity of DNA fragments (∼900 ng) was immobilized
on GS surface and optical absorbance of free DNA present in collected
washing solution was almost zero or the quantity of DNA in the solution
might be below detection sensitivity of instruments. This is because
the complete fragmentation of PCR DNA with short length posses a greater
number of phosphate ends, which enhance the immobilization efficiency.
The amounts of RCA and genomic DNA immobilized onto the surface was
calculated to be 1.98 and 2.43 μg, respectively, from 2.01 μg
of RCA DNA and 4.14 μg of genomic DNA (Figure S9). However, the size of fragments was not uniform in genomic
and RCA samples that lead to differences in the immobilization efficiency.

The amine-modified and ssDNA-immobilized GS surface properties
and morphologies were investigated by AFM analysis (Figure S10). The AFM image of ssDNA-immobilized GS had a surface
roughness of RMS 33.8 nm, which is 16 times greater than the surface
roughness of unmodified GS and 5 times higher than the amine-modified
GS. The increased roughness of GS surface is mainly due to the ssDNA
immobilization and ssDNA appearing in a bulblike shape on the surface.
This is due to the highly flexible nature of ssDNA, leading to the
formation of self-folding or compressed bulblike structure through
physical or weak interactions in nonaqueous environment. Moreover,
dense immobilization of ssDNA or dense ssDNA array on the surface
needs to be avoided and it is not desirable for the hybridization
assay due to the steric hindrance interference.46

Scanometric Detection of ToLCNDV DNA
Scanometric detection
of ToLCNDV DNA was done through DDH and SDH assays using AuNP-conjugated
virus-specific signal probes and silver enhancement. Figure 3a shows the diagrammatic representation
of selected target regions for capture and sensing probes for both
forward and reverse strands of CP gene in ToLCNDV DNA-A component. Figure 3b,c shows schematic
representation of DDH assay and SDH assay-based scanometric method.
DDH assay requires only signal probes (AuNP-conjugated probe) and
SDH assay requires two probes, which are capture probes as well as
signal probes. The limit of detection for this scanometric-based nanoassay
method was optimized for an effective detection of DNA. Different
concentrations of C-ssDNA-1 (1 nM, 100 pM, 100 fM, 100 aM, and 100
zM) were immobilized on GS surface and hybridized with signal probe
1. Further, the hybridized signal probe 1 was measured by silver enhancement
(Figure 4). The development
of black-gray color by the result of silver enhancement and its intensity
of Ag enhancement increased gradually while increasing the concentration
of C-ssDNA from 0 zM to 100 pM. Further increasing the concentration
of C-ssDNA 1 to 1 nM, the intensity of black color decreased considerably
(Figure 4a) and the
results could be easily discriminated by the naked eye. The intensity
of Ag enhancement increased (102, 193, 201, and 211 au) with increasing
concentration of C-ssDNA 1 from 0 zM, 100 zM, 100 aM, 100 fM, and
100 pM, respectively (Figure 4b). This is because increase in the signal probe 1 hybridization
with its respective concentration leads to increase in an autocatalytic
reduction of silver ions to metals as well as deposition on AuNP.47 This Ag enhancement increases the detection
limit of scanometry-based nanoassay method to ∼1000 times greater
sensitivity than fluorescence-based methods.48,49 Because silver metal strongly reflects the visible spectrum, it
can be detected using a flatbed scanner.50 Further, when the concentration of C-ssDNA 1 increased to 1 nM,
the intensity of Ag enhancement decreased to 198 au. This could be
attributed to the steric hindrance of C-ssDNA1 array and reduces the
hybridization efficiency of signal probe 1.47 The surface/volume ratio and steric hindrance are the important
factors that determine the hybridization efficiency of DNA strands
with AuNP probe conjugates.51 In detail,
1 nM ssDNA targets tightly packed on 5 mm glass slide surface generate
steric hindrance, which restricts the access and hybridization efficiency
of signal probes. Further, specificity analysis of mono- and bifunctional
signal probes was performed through DDH- and SDH-based scanometric
methods. High intensity of Ag enhancement was found only in the presence
of target ToLCNDV DNA than the noncomplementary DNA and control. This
is mainly due to the hybridization of a great number of AuNP-ssoligo
probe conjugates with its target DNA than the noncomplementary DNA.
The results were easily discriminated by the naked eye (Figure S10).

Figure 3 (a) Graphical representation of capture
and signal probes (1 and
2) specific sites at CP gene of ToLCNDV. (b) Schematic representation
of scanometric detection of ToLCNDV DNA through direct (single-step)
DNA hybridization method and sandwich (double-step) DNA hybridization
methods with silver enhancement (c).

Figure 4 Optimization of detection limits of scanometric detection of ToLCNDV
DNA using different concentrations of positive control (C-ssDNA 1)
(0 zM, 100 zM, 100 aM, 100 fM, 100 pM, and 1 nM). (a) Ag-enhanced
scanometric slide with different concentrations of positive control
(0–1 nM) and (b) bar graph of measured intensity of Ag enhancement
of different concentrations of positive control (p value ≥ 0.05).

DDH Assay-Based Scanometric Detection of ToLCNDV DNA Using Monofunctional
Signal Probes 1 and 2
Scanometric detection of ToLCNDV PCR,
RCA, and genomic DNA was done through DDH assay associated with silver
enhancement using three kinds of signal probes, which are monofunctional
AuNP probe 1 (specific for forward strand at the position of 310 nt
of CP gene), monofunctional AuNP probe 2 (specific for reverse strand
at the position of 810 nt of CP gene), and bifunctional AuNP probe
(mixture of oligo probes 1 and 2). Initially, ssDNA arrays were made
by the immobilization of different concentrations of C-ssDNA and heat-fragmented
PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA on GS surface. Immobilized PCR, RCA, and
genomic dsDNA samples were converted to ssDNA by alkaline denaturation,
followed by hybridization. Figure 5a shows the scanometric detection of ToLCNDV target
sequence using signal probe 1. Intensity of black-gray color construed
as a result of Ag enhancement, which was found to increase by increasing
the concentration of C-ssDNA 1 from 0 zM to 100 pM. The intensity
of Ag enhancement for PCR DNA was higher than those for RCA (slightly
above 100 zM) and genomic DNA (below 100 zM), which were very close
to 100 pM concentration of positive control (C-ssDNA 1).

Figure 5 Scanometric
detection of ToLCNDV PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA samples
by DDH assay using signal probe 1 (a), signal probe 2 (b), and bifunctional
signal probe (c) with different concentrations of C-ssDNA 1, C-ssDNA
2, and C-ssDNA 1 and 2 (0 zM, 100 zM, 100 aM, 100 fM, and 100 pM).
(d) Degree of potential of hybridization efficiency of monofunctional
signal probes 1 and 2 and bifunctional signal probe with different
concentrations of C-ssDNA 1, C-ssDNA-2, equal mixture of C-ssDNA 1
and 2, ToLCNDV PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA samples. The error bar indicates p value ≥0.05.

Similar results were found in the scanometric detection of
ToLCNDV
PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA with different concentrations of C-ssDNA
2 (0 zM, 100 zM, 100 aM, 100 fM, and 100 pM) using signal probe 2.
A black-gray spot on the scanned image is construed as a result of
Ag enhancement (Figure 5b). The intensity of color was found to gradually increase from 0
zM to 100 pM. ToLCNDV PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA also showed different
intensities of black-gray color development, indicating that hybridization
of signal probe 2 with its target sequence. The measured color intensities
at different concentrations of C-ssDNA 2 (0 zM to 100 pM) and ToLCNDV
PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA are presented in Figure 5b. The intensity of Ag enhancement for PCR
and RCA samples was very close to 100 fM and 100 zM concentration
of C-ssDNA 2, respectively. However, color intensity of genomic DNA
sample less than 100 zM concentration indicates the presence of low
quantity of viral DNA in natural host.

DDH Assay-Based Scanometric
Detection of ToLCNDV Using Bifunctional
Signal Probe
Signal probe with bifunctional property can
recognize and hybridize with both strands of dsDNA of ToLCNDV PCR,
RCA, and genomic DNA samples as well as increase detection sensitivity,
because any one strand of dsDNA was immobilized on GS surface at a
time while preparing ssDNA array. Scanometric detection of ToLCNDV
PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA with different concentrations of mixture
of C-ssDNA 1 and C-ssDNA 2 (0 zM to 100 pM) using bifunctional signal
probe and Ag enhancement is presented in Figure 5c. The intensity of Ag enhancement for PCR
sample was found to be higher than RCA and genomic DNA samples. Further,
the concentration of target in PCR product was estimated approximately
between 100 fM and 100 pM. However, the concentration of target sequence
in RAC was around 100 zM, and in genomic DNA samples, it was very
much lower than 100 zM. Interestingly, the bifunctional signal probe-based
scanometric detection of ToLCNDV DNA showed increased intensity, particularly
for PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA than monofunctional signal probe 1 and
signal probe 2. This indicates that the amount of bifunctional signal
probe hybridization with its targets, particularly PCR and RCA and
genomic DNA, was high. Hence, this can be hybridized with both strands
of dsDNA sample, leading to an increased Ag enhancement. Further,
bifunctional oligos probe-functionalized AuNPs show more sensitivity
and similar hybridization efficiency with monofunctional signal probes
(Figure 5d).

There are two main factors determining the hybridization efficiency
of signal probe: (1) the concentration of target DNA and (2) the length
of DNA fragments immobilized on GS.29 The
amount of PCR product immobilized on GS (0.9 μg) was less than
RCA DNA (1.98 μg) and genomic DNA (2.01 μg). However,
the concentration of complementary strands specific for signal probes
in PCR product was found to be higher than that for RCA DNA product.
Therefore, the hybridization was more with intense detection signal.
In RCA DNA products, copy numbers of targets might be less and have
immobilized other regions of DNA fragments, which causes the steric
hindrance on GS surface that reduces the hybridization of signal probes.51−53 Usually, the genomic DNA has less concentration of viral genome
and is not subjected to any amplification. Therefore, Ag-enhanced
intensity of genomic DNA was found to be very low.

Moreover,
the length of DNA fragments immobilized on the surface
also plays a vital role in the DNA hybridization. The size of fragments
was not uniform in genomic and RCA samples, leading to differences
in the immobilization and hybridization efficiency. Hence, the length
of RCA and genomic DNA fragments was found to be few hundred base
pairs to a few kb, which were higher than PCR product, which is less
than 100 bp. Larger DNA fragments have a high tendency to form a self-coiled
secondary structure than the smaller DNA fragments, and they occupy
more space than the smaller one.29 Secondary
structure formation within the targets can reduce the binding constant
of a specific probe by as much as 105–106 times.54 Hence, it was found that fragmented DNA can
minimize the possible inhibitory effects of secondary structure on
hybridization efficiency than the unfragmented DNA sample. The overall
Gibbs free energy was changed during hybridization of probe with targets.
Shortening amplified product/DNA fragments shows a high potential
of hybridization with more negative value of Gibbs free energy because
the lower Gibbs free energy (more in negative value) favors the formation
of probe–target duplex in higher potential than the longer
DNA fragments.29 Color intensity of Ag
enhancement of genomic DNA was very low, that is, one-third of 100
zM concentration because genomic DNA obtained from ToLCNDV-infected
sample has only a few copy numbers targets. After the amplification
by PCR and RCA, the number of complementary strand specific for signal
probes was increased in logarithmic scale and as a result the intensity
of Ag enhancement was found to be increased. Further, the detection
sensitivity of bifunctional signal probes significantly increased
compared to the monofunctional signal probes 1 and 2. This is because
single nanoparticle carries both signal probes, with the ability to
recognize both forward and reverse strands of dsDNA samples.55,56 Moreover, both stands of dsDNA sample have equal (50%) possibility
of getting immobilized on GS surface at the time of ssDNA array preparation.
Also, strand-specific immobilization of dsDNA samples is not possible
at aqueous state because both strands look similar at terminals.

SDH Assay-Based Scanometric Detection of ToLCNDV DNA Using Monofunctional
Signal Probes 1 and 2
This SDH assay-based scanometric detection
of ToLCNDV DNA was performed and compared with the DDH assay-based
scanometric detection method to review the cost and sensitivity as
well as time factors. Unlike the DDH assay, the SDH assay requires
two probes: (1) capture probe, which is immobilized on GS surface,
and (2) signal probe, which is labeled with AuNPs and hybridized with
target DNA. Both capture and signal probes are partially complementary
to the target sequences of ToLCNDV DNA CP gene. The capture probes
1 and 2 were modified with the phosphate functional group at 3′
end and partially complementary to 5′ end of ToLCNDV DNA. Further,
the capture probes were immobilized on aminated GS surface and subjected
to first-step DNA hybridization with target DNA, and they formed a
capture probe–target ssDNA complex. Followed by the second-step
hybridization of mono- and bifunctional signal probes with 3′
end of target DNA, it formed a capture probe–ssDNA target–signal
probe complex. This complex was subjected to silver enhancement to
increase the detection signal (Figure 3c).

Different concentrations of capture probe
1 (0 zM, 100 zM, 100 aM, 100 fM, and 100 pM) were immobilized on aminated
surface through phosphoramidate bond using EDC and imidazole as coupling
and catalytic agents, respectively. Similarly, 100 pM concentration
of capture probe 1 was arrayed in a separate well for PCR, RCA, and
genomic DNA of ToLCNDV. Arrayed GS were subjected to hybridization
with positive complementary ssDNA (C2ssDNA-1) and fragmented ToLCNDV
PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA. The second-step hybridization was carried
out with signal probe 1, and the detection signal was amplified through
Ag enhancement. Finally, the intensity of Ag enhancement was quantified
through the scanometric method (Figure 6a). The resulting black-gray color of Ag enhancement
was found to gradually increase with increasing concentrations of
capture probe 1 at 0 zM to 100 pM. At initial concentration (0 zM),
intensity of Ag enhancement increased with increasing concentrations
of capture probe 1, viz., 100 zM, 100 aM, 100 fM, and 100 pM. However,
intensity of Ag enhancement was increased by increasing the copy number
of target DNA sequence in ToLCNDV DNA sample in the order from genomic
DNA (123 au), which was below 100 zM concentration of target. Moreover,
the color intensity of PCR DNA was very close to 100 pM of positive
control and higher than RCA DNA product, which was between 100 zM
and 100 aM.

Figure 6 Scanometric detection of ToLCNDV PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA samples
by SDH assay using signal probe 1 (a), signal probe 2 (b), and bifunctional
signal probe (c) with different concentrations of capture probe 1,
capture probe 2, and equal mixture of capture probe 1 and 2 (0 zM,
100 zM, 100 aM, 100 fM, and 100 pM), as well as constant volume of
positive control. (d) Degree of potential of hybridization efficiency
of capture probes as well as monofunctional signal probes 1 and 2
and bifunctional signal probe with positive controls, ToLCNDV PCR,
RCA, and genomic DNA samples. The error bar indicates p value ≥0.05.

Signal probe 2 was also used in the scanometric detection
of ToLCNDV
DNA through the SDH assay method (Figure 6b). The concentrations of hybridized signal
probe 2 and C2-ssDNA 2 were increased by increasing the concentration
of capture probe 2 on GS surface that led to an increase in the color
intensity (Figure 6b). The intensities of Ag enhancement for ToLCNDV PCR, RCA, and genomic
DNA samples were found to be 158, 149, and 104 au, respectively. Even
though they show similar pattern of Ag enhancement, which decreases
from PCR to RCA and genomic DNA samples, their concentrations were
estimated to be below 100 zM for all of the three DNA samples.

SDH-Based
Scanometric Detection of ToLCNDV DNA Using Bifunctional
Signal Probe
The bifunctional signal probe has the capacity
to hybridize with both strands of dsDNA simultaneously. To increase
the detection signal with less quantity of target dsDNA samples, equal
mixture of capture probe 1 and 2 were immobilized on GS surface. The
scanometric detection of ToLCNDV PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA samples
with different concentrations of equal mixture of capture probes 1
and 2 (0 zM to 100 pM) hybridized with a constant concentration of
equal mixture of C2-ssDNA 1 and 2 and AuNP bifunctional signal probe
with Ag enhancement is presented in Figure 6c. The measured intensity of Ag enhancement
for the different concentrations (0 zM to 100 pM) of equal mixture
of capture probes 1 and 2 also shows similar results, that is, the
intensity increases with increasing concentration (Figure 6c). However, the calculated
target concentrations for all of these three samples were found to
be below 100 zM. This observation was similar to the above-discussed
concept, where the increase in the concentration of capture probes
1 and 2 also increased the hybridization of probes as well as detection
signal. However, the PCR DNA has shown higher signal intensity than
RCA and genomic DNA samples. Moreover, the high detection intensity
shown by the bifunctional signal probe than the monofunctional signal
probe-based scanometric detection of ToLCNDV through SDH assay method
(Figure 6d) could be
due to the hybridization of capture and signal probes with both strands
of dsDNA samples even in the presence of low-quantity targets.

In these SDH assay-based scanometric methods, many factors restrict
the detection efficiency and sensitivity. The RCA and genomic DNA
fragments are very large, which favors the formation of self-coiled
secondary structure that decreases hybridization efficiency as well
as Ag enhancement. In addition, there is a significant loss of target
DNA during more number of washing steps.29 In addition, target sequence concentration and copy numbers are
very less in RCA products and genomic DNA than the PCR DNA. These
reduces the detection sensitivity of SDH assay-based scanometric methods.
The scanometry-based detection of DNA through silver enhancement showed
sensitivity up to 50 fM, which is 100 times higher than the fluorescence-based
detection, as already reported. Scanometric-based detection of bio-bar-code
DNA was reported with detection sensitivity up to 500 zM.9,57 More recently, early detection of plant pathogen (Pseudomonas syringae) DNA using AuNP-conjugated probe
through recombinase polymerase amplification and differential pulse
voltammetry has been reported with 10 000 times more sensitivity
than the conventional PCR method.58 This
experimental evidence proves that bifunctional signal probe has great
advantages over the monofunctional probes. Overall, the DDH assay-based
scanometric method with bifunctional signal probe is more sensitive
and cost-effective than the SDH assay-based scanometric method. Moreover,
this is the first report for scanometric detection of plant virus
(ToLCNDV- DNA) using AuNP-conjugated probe with higher sensitivity
(100 zM) than the previous reports.9,57,58

AFM Characterization of Ag-Enhanced Signal
Probe in Scanometric
Detection of DNA
AFM was used to characterize the signal
probe-hybridized scanometric slide before and after Ag enhancement.
An AFM image (histogram and three-dimensional (3D) view) of signal
probe-hybridized slide before and after Ag enhancement is presented
in Figure 7a,b. The
surface roughness of signal probe-hybridized slide was found to be
∼6.9 nm, with spherical-shaped particles (size ca. 50–103
nm). After the sliver enhancement, surface roughness was increased
to ∼8.2 nm. Particles with size ∼50 nm were found in
the form of huge cluster or precipitate (ca. 183–255 nm in
size). This indicates the surface deposition of nanoscale Ag metal
on AuNP of signal probe as a result of particle appeared in cluster
or in precipitated topology. This proves that the Au acted as template
and autocatalyst for the reduction of Ag ions to metal and deposition.
This process could have occurred only in the presence of signal probe
on the scanometric slide.25,56,59,60

Figure 7 (a) AFM analysis signal probe-hybridized
DNA array before Ag enhancement
and after Ag enhancement (b) with histogram and 3D view. Increases
of particle size (nm) and height were clearly found after the Ag enhancement.

HR-TEM Characterization
of Ag-Enhanced Signal Probe in Scanometric
Detection of ToLCNDV DNA
Ag-enhanced signal probe in the
scanometric detection of ToLCNDV DNA was analyzed by HR-TEM. The light
microscopic images show the presence of black microscopic particles
formed as the result of Ag enhancement on the scanometric slide in
two different magnifications (10× and 40×) (Figure 8a). This is clearly interpreted
due to the reduction of Ag ions to metal that deposits on AuNPs surface.
The HR-TEM images show Ag enhancement of signal probe in the scanometric
detection of ToLCNDV DNA (Figure 8b). In these images, a strong Au core was present in
the center with size 18–25 nm and a Ag shell was present around
the Au core with 6–35 nm width. The total diameter of Ag-enhanced
signal probe was 40–71 nm. These results clearly indicate that
reduced metal was deposited on the Au surface and also prove that
Au acted as metal catalyst for the reduction of Ag ions as well as
template for surface deposition. This nanometal hybrid has high electron
density, which could be a reason for the black-gray appearance of
Ag-enhanced spot on the scanometric slide. Energy-dispersive X-ray
(EDX) spectroscopy analysis was used for the qualitative and quantitative
analyses of elemental composition of Ag-enhanced signal probe (Figure 8c). EDX spectrum
also shows the presence of both Au and Ag elements, confirming that
the particles shown in the image were Au core/Ag shell. The ratio
of Au to Ag of particle was 1.44:98.55, and their atomic percentages
were 0.79% and 99.20%, respectively, which indicates that Ag was present
predominately than Au in this particle. These data have correlation
with TEM image, which shows larger diameter of Ag shell (35 nm than
Au core 18 nm). The Au core has strong electron density, and the Ag
shell has less density and therefore it appears as layer.60,61

Figure 8 Microscopy
analysis of Ag-enhanced signal probe in scanometric
detection of ToLCNDV DNA. (a) Light microscopy images of Ag-enhanced
spot on the scanometric slide in different magnifications 10×
and 40× showing microscopic particles. (b) HRTEM analysis of
Ag enhancement of scanometric slide at different magnifications with
size of Au core (18 nm)/Ag shell (35 nm) in the images indicating
the surface deposition of Ag metal by autocatalytic reduction of Ag
ions by AuNPs. (c) EDX analysis of Ag-enhanced particles in scanometric
detection of ToLCNDV DNA, and the spectrum shows predominant presence
of Ag over Au in Au core/Ag shell nanoparticles.

Conclusions
Development of scanometric method for the
detection of plant pathogen,
especially ToLCNDV through direct and sandwich DNA hybridization using
virus-specific AuNP-oligo probe conjugates as signal probes was attempted
in the present study. Scanometric detection of ToLCNDV DNA was developed
through DDH and SDH assays with silver enhancement using mono- and
bifunctional signal probes. Direct hybridization required only signal
probe and sample ssDNA arrays that were prepared through EDC-based
immobilization of fragmented PCR, RCA, and genomic DNA obtained from
ToLCNDV-infected plant sample with positive control on amine-modified
GS surface. Sandwich hybridization required two probes, viz., capture
and signal probes, and it undergoes two steps of hybridization: first,
capture probes array on GS surface, followed by hybridization with
sample ssDNA fragments and signal probes. The scanometric detection
range was optimized using different concentrations of positive control
from 0 zM to 1 nM. Detection signal of 1 nM was lower than 100 pM
due to the steric hindrance at higher concentration of probe immobilized
on the defined GS surface. Therefore, the detection limit was optimized
between 100 zM and 100 pM. The hybridization signal was amplified
through Ag enhancement-based autocatalytic reduction of Ag ions by
AuNPs and surface deposition. The intensity of Ag enhancement in the
direct DNA hybridization using monofunctional signal probes 1 and
2 were found similar to the detection sensitivity up to 100 zM concentration
of positive control. However, the bifunctional signal probe showed
significantly increased detection signal intensity compared to the
monofunctional signal probes. In particular, PCR, RCA, and genomic
DNA sample bifunctional signal probes showed high hybridization efficiency
with higher detection signal intensity than monofunctional signal
probes. In this, PCR DNA showed higher intensity than RCA and genomic
DNA because of a number of complementary strands specific for signal
probe amplified in logarithmic scale by PCR and short length of fragments.
Genomic DNA sample with less viral genome with larger fragments would
lead to low detection intensity. Similar results were found in SDH-based
scanometric detection of ToLCNDV DNA. Bifunctional signal probe showed
better results than the monofunctional signal probe in all samples.
However, SDH-based scanometric detection required two kinds of probes,
which increases the detection cost. Direct DNA hybridization-based
scanometric detection of ToLCNDV required only one kind of probe and
sample DNA can be directly immobilized without any modification to
prepare the DNA array. Therefore, this method is advantageous in view
of the detection cost and time, and it also has similar detection
signal intensity of sandwich hybridization. This is the first report
on scanometric detection of ToLCNDV DNA using AuNP-conjugated oligo
probes with a high sensitivity of up to 100 zM. The application of
this developed method will be extended for detection of any other
target DNA.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00340.Experiments and
results of primer and probe designing
and synthesis, viral DNA isolation, PCR and RCA amplification, DNA
fragmentation, AuNP synthesis, AuNP-ssoligo probe conjugates preparation
and characterization, and specificity analysis (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00340_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
gratefully acknowledge the University Grants Commission
(F. No. 37-440/2009[SR]) and CSIR (F. No. 9/155(0763)/2013-EMR-I),
Government of India, New Delhi, for their financial assistance. They
thank the Director, NCNS&NT, University of Madras, for HR-TEM
analysis. They profusely thank the Director, NCNS&T, Anna University,
for providing AFM analysis. They also thank Dr. T.S. Seshadri, IFTR
Centre, Chennai, for his commends and suggestion about the manuscript.
==== Refs
References
Tansil N. C. ; Gao Z. 
Nanoparticles in biomolecular
detection . Nanotoday 
2006 , 1 , 28 –37 . 10.1016/S1748-0132(06)70020-2 .
Rosi N. L. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Nanostructures in biodiagnostics . Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 105 , 1547 –1562 . 10.1021/cr030067f .15826019 
Huang X. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Gold nanoparticles:
optical properties and implementations
in cancer diagnosis and photothermal therapy . J. Adv. Res. 
2010 , 1 , 13 –28 . 10.1016/j.jare.2010.02.002 .
Saha K. ; Agasti S. S. ; Kim C. ; Li X. ; Rotello V. M. 
Gold nanoparticles
in chemical and biological sensing . Chem. Rev. 
2012 , 112 , 2739 –2779 . 10.1021/cr2001178 .22295941 
Li H. X. ; Rothberg L. J. 
Colorimetric detection of DNA sequences based on electrostatic
interactions with unmodified gold nanoparticles . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2004 , 101 , 14036 –14039 . 10.1073/pnas.0406115101 .15381774 
Li H. X. ; Rothberg L. J. 
Label-free
colorimetric detection of specific sequences
in genomic DNA amplified by the polymerase chain reaction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 10958 –10961 . 10.1021/ja048749n .15339181 
Chandirasekar S. ; Dharanivasan G. ; Kasthuri J. ; Kathiravan K. ; Rajendiran N. 
A facile synthesis
of bile salt encapsulated gold nanoparticles
and its use in colorimetric detection of DNA . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 15266 –15273 . 10.1021/jp2044465 .
Dharanivasan G. ; Mohammed Riyaz S. U. ; Jesse D. M. I. ; Raja Muthuramalingam T. ; Rajendran G. ; Kathiravan K. 
DNA templated self-assembly of gold
nanoparticle clusters in the colorimetric detection of plant viral
DNA using a gold nanoparticle conjugated bifunctional oligonucleotide
probe . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 11773 –11785 . 10.1039/C5RA25559G .
Taton T. A. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Letsinger R. L. 
Scanometric DNA array detection with
nanoparticle probes . Science 
2000 , 289 , 1757 –1760 . 10.1126/science.289.5485.1757 .10976070 
Park S.-J. ; Taton T. A. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Array-based electrical
detection
of DNA with nanoparticle probes . Science 
2002 , 295 , 1503 –1506 . 10.1126/science.1067003 .11859188 
Cai H. ; Wang Y. ; He P. ; Fang Y. 
Electrochemical detection
of DNA hybridization based on silver-enhanced gold nanoparticle label . Anal. Chim. Acta 
2002 , 469 , 165 –172 . 10.1016/S0003-2670(02)00670-0 .
Cao Y. C. ; Jin R. C. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Nanoparticles
with Raman spectroscopic
fingerprints for DNA and RNA detection . Science 
2002 , 297 , 1536 –1540 . 10.1126/science.297.5586.1536 .12202825 
Alhasan A. H. ; Kim D. Y. ; Daniel W. L. ; Watson E. ; Meeks J. J. ; Thaxton C. S. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Scanometric
microRNA array profiling
of prostate cancer markers using spherical nucleic acid-gold nanoparticle
conjugates . Anal. Chem. 
2012 , 84 , 4153 –4160 . 10.1021/ac3004055 .22489825 
Thaxton C. S. ; Hill H. D. ; Georganopoulou D. G. ; Stoeva S. I. ; Mirkin C. A. 
A bio-barcode
assay based upon dithiothreitol induced oligonucleotide release . Anal. Chem. 
2005 , 77 , 8174 –8178 . 10.1021/ac0514265 .16351173 
Keating C. D. 
Nanoscience
enables ultrasensitive detection of Alzheimer’s biomarker . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2005 , 102 , 2263 –2264 . 10.1073/pnas.0500024102 .15703290 
Khan S. ; Klein W. ; Mirkin C. ; Chang L. ; Georganopoulou D. 
Fluorescent
and scanometric ultrasensitive detection technologies with the bio-bar
code assay for Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis . Nanoscape 
2005 , 2 , 7 –15 .
Wang J. ; Song F. ; Zhou F. 
Silver enhanced imaging of DNA hybridization
at DNA microarrays with scanning electrochemical microscopy . Langmuir 
2002 , 18 , 6653 –6658 . 10.1021/la011822s .
Pokorski J. K. ; Nam J. M. ; Vega R. A. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Appella D. H. 
Cyclopentane-modified
PNA improves the sensitivity of nanoparticle-based scanometric DNA
detection . Chem. Commun. 
2005 , 2101 –2103 . 10.1039/b418383e .
Xu X. ; Georganopoulou D. G. ; Hill H. D. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Homogeneous detection
of nucleic acids based upon the light scattering properties of silver
coated nanoparticle probes . Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 79 , 6650 –6654 . 10.1021/ac070867g .17663531 
Lytton-Jean A. K. R. ; Han M. S. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Microarray detection of duplex and
triplex DNA binders with DNA modified gold nanoparticles . Anal. Chem. 
2007 , 9 , 6037 –6041 . 10.1021/ac070635h .
Ji H. ; Dong H. ; Yan F. ; Lei J. ; Ding L. ; Gao W. ; Ju H. 
Visual scanometric
detection of DNA through silver
enhancement regulated by gold-nanoparticle aggregation with a molecular
beacon as the trigger . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2011 , 17 , 11344 –11349 . 10.1002/chem.201100563 .21850726 
Cho H. ; Jung J. ; Chung B. H. 
Scanometric analysis of DNA microarrays
using DNA intercalator-conjugated gold nanoparticles . Chem. Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 7601 –7603 . 10.1039/c2cc32869k .
Chakraborty S. ; Pandey P. K. ; Banerjee M. K. ; Kalloo G. ; Fauquet C. M. 
Tomato
leaf curl Gujarat virus, a new begomovirus species causing a severe
leaf curl disease of tomato in varanasi, India . Phytopathology 
2003 , 93 , 1485 –1495 . 10.1094/PHYTO.2003.93.12.1485 .18943612 
Reddy B. A. ; Patti M. S. ; Reddy K. M. ; Venkataravanappa V. 
Detection
and diagnosis of tomato leaf curl virus infecting tomato in northern
Karnataka . Afr. J. Agric. Res. 
2011 , 6 , 1051 –1055 .
Kim D. ; Daniel W. L. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Microarray
based multiplexed scanometric
immunoassay for protein cancer markers using gold nanoparticle probes . Anal. Chem. 
2009 , 81 , 9183 –9187 . 10.1021/ac9018389 .19874062 
Dharanivasan G. ; Jesse D. M. I. ; Chandirasekar S. ; Rajendiran N. ; Kathiravan K. 
Label free fluorometric characterization
of DNA interaction
with cholate capped gold nanoparticles using ethidium bromide as a
fluorescent probe . J. Fluoresc. 
2014 , 24 , 1397 –1406 . 10.1007/s10895-014-1417-9 .24946861 
Dharanivasan G. ; Rajamuthuramalingam T. ; Jesse D. M. I. ; Rajendiran N. ; Kathiravan K. 
Gold nanoparticles
assisted characterization of amine
functionalized polystyrene multiwell plate and glass slide surfaces . Appl. Nanosci. 
2015 , 5 , 39 –50 . 10.1007/s13204-013-0290-1 .
Rasmussen S. R. ; Larsen M. R. ; Rasmussen S. 
Covalent immobilization
of DNA onto
polystyrene microwells: the molecules are only bound at the 5′
end . Anal. Biochem. 
1991 , 198 , 138 –142 . 10.1016/0003-2697(91)90518-X .1789415 
Liu W.-T. ; Guo H. ; Wu J.-H. 
Effects of target
length on the hybridization efficiency
and specificity of rRNA-based oligonucleotide microarrays . Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
2007 , 73 , 73 –82 . 10.1128/AEM.01468-06 .17071797 
Bao Y. P. ; Huber M. ; Wei T-F. ; Marla S. S. ; Storhoff J. J. ; Muller U. R. 
SNP identification in unamplified human genomic DNA
with gold nanoparticle probes . Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2005 , 33 , e1510.1093/nar/gni017 .15659576 
Morphew M. ; He W. ; Bjorkman P. J. ; McIntosh J. R. 
Silver enhancement of Nanogold particles
during freeze substitution for electron microscopy . J. Microsc. 
2008 , 230 , 263 –267 . 10.1111/j.1365-2818.2008.01983.x .18445156 
de Muro M. A.  Probe Design,
Production and Applications . In Medical Biomethods
Handbook ; Walker J. M. , Rapley R.  , Eds.; Humana Press, Inc : Totowa , 2005 ; pp 13 –23 .
Hazarika P. ; Giorgi T. ; Reibner M. ; Ceyhan B. ; Niemeyer C. M.  Synthesis and
Characterization of Deoxyribonucleic Acid-Conjugated Gold Nanoparticles . In Methods in Molecular Biology—Bioconjugation Protocols:
Strategies and Methods ; Niemeyer C. M.  , Ed.; Humana
Press Inc : Totowa , 2004 ; pp 295 –304 .
Cutler J. I. ; Auyeung E. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Spherical Nucleic
Acids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 1376 –1391 . 10.1021/ja209351u .22229439 
Zhang X. ; Servos M. R. ; Liu J. 
Instantaneous and quantitative functionalization
of gold nanoparticles with thiolated DNA using a pH-assisted and surfactant-free
route . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 7266 –7269 . 10.1021/ja3014055 .22506486 
Storhoff J. J. ; Elghanian R. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Letsinger R. L. 
Sequence-dependent
stability of DNA-modified gold nanoparticles . Langmuir 
2002 , 18 , 6666 –6670 . 10.1021/la0202428 .
Sun L. ; Zhang Z. ; Wang S. ; Zhang J. ; Li H. ; Ren L. ; Weng J. ; Zhang Q. 
Effect of pH on the interaction of
gold nanoparticles with DNA and application in the detection of human
p53 gene mutation . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2009 , 4 , 216 –220 . 10.1007/s11671-008-9228-z .
Yao G. ; Pei H. ; Li J. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhu D. ; Zhang Y. ; Lin Y. ; Huang Q. ; Fan C. 
Clicking DNA to gold nanoparticles:
poly-adenine-mediated formation of monovalent DNA-gold nanoparticle
conjugates with nearly quantitative yield . NPG
Asia Mater. 
2015 , 7 , e15910.1038/am.2014.131 .
Demers L. M. ; Mirkin C. A. ; Mucic R. C. ; Reynolds R. A. ; Letsinger R. L. ; Elghanian R. ; Viswanadham G. 
A fluorescence-based method for determining
the surface coverage and hybridization efficiency of thiol-capped
oligonucleotides bound to gold thin films and nanoparticles . Anal. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 5535 –5541 . 10.1021/ac0006627 .11101228 
Hill H. D. ; Millstone J. E. ; Banholzer M. J. ; Mirkin C. A. 
The role of radius
curvature plays in thiolated oligonucleotide loading on gold nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 418 –424 . 10.1021/nn800726e .19236080 
Seu K. J. ; Pandey A. P. ; Haque F. ; Proctor E. A. ; Ribbe A. E. ; Hovis J. S. 
Effect of surface
treatment on diffusion and domain
formation in supported lipid bilayers . Biophys.
J. 
2007 , 92 , 2445 –2450 . 10.1529/biophysj.106.099721 .17218468 
Wang W. ; Vaughn M. W. 
Morphology and amine
accessibility of (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
films on glass surfaces . Scanning 
2008 , 30 , 65 –77 . 10.1002/sca.20097 .18320600 
Ghosh S. S. ; Musso G. F. 
Covalent attachment of oligonucleotides to solid supports . Nucleic Acids Res. 
1987 , 15 , 5353 –5372 . 10.1093/nar/15.13.5353 .3601674 
Babos K.  Affect of Heating Time
on DNA Fragmentation , 2012 . http://www.keatslab.org/blog/affectofheatingtimeondnafragmentation.
Wang X. ; Son A. 
Effects of pretreatment
on the denaturation and fragmentation of
genomic DNA for DNA hybridization . Environ.
Sci. Process Impacts 
2013 , 15 , 2204 –2212 . 10.1039/c3em00457k .24162665 
Lenigk R. ; Carles M. ; Nancy Y. I. ; Sucher N. J. 
Surface characterization
of a silicon-chip-based DNA microarray . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 2497 –2501 . 10.1021/la001355z .
Lee T. M. H. ; Cai H. ; Hsing I. M. 
Gold nanoparticle catalyzed silver
electrode position on an indium tin oxide electrode and its application
in DNA hybridization transduction . Electroanalysis 
2004 , 16 , 1628 –1631 . 10.1002/elan.200403039 .
Storhoff J. J. ; Lucas A. D. ; Garimella V. ; Bao Y. P. ; Muller U. R. 
Homogeneous
detection of unamplified genomic DNA sequences based on colorimetric
scatter of gold nanoparticle probes . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2004 , 22 , 883 –887 . 10.1038/nbt977 .15170215 
Storhoff J. J. ; Marla S. S. ; Bao P. ; Hagenow S. ; Mehta H. ; Lucas A. ; Garimella V. ; Patno T. ; Buckingham W. ; Cork W. ; Muller U. R. 
Gold nanoparticle-based detection
of genomic DNA targets on microarrays using a novel optical detection
system . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2004 , 19 , 875 –883 . 10.1016/j.bios.2003.08.014 .15128107 
Alexandre I. ; Hamels S. ; Dufour S. ; Collet J. ; Zammatteo N. ; De Longueville F. ; Gala J. L. ; Remacle J. 
Colorimetric
silver
detection of DNA microarrays . Anal. Biochem. 
2001 , 295 , 1 –8 . 10.1006/abio.2001.5176 .11476538 
Zhou X. ; Wu L. ; Zhou J. Z. 
Fabrication of DNA
microarrays on nano engineered polymeric
ultrathin film prepared by self-assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayers . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 8877 –8885 . 10.1021/la048950b .15379521 
Bajaj M. G.  DNA Hybridization:
Fundamental Studies and Applications in Directed Assembly ; Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology : Cambridge , 2005 . http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/32327.
Diehl F. ; Grahlmann S. ; Beier M. ; Hoheisel J. D. 
Manufacturing DNA
microarrays of high spot homogeneity and reduced background signal . Nucleic Acid Res. 
2001 , 29 , e3810.1093/nar/29.7.e38 .11266573 
Lima W. F. ; Monia B. P. ; Ecker D. J. ; Freier S. M. 
Implication of RNA
structure on antisense oligonucleotide hybridization kinetics . Biochemistry 
1992 , 31 , 12055 –12061 . 10.1021/bi00163a013 .1280997 
Niemeyer C. M. ; Ceyhan B. ; Noyong M. ; Simon U. 
Bifunctional DNA-gold
nanoparticle conjugates as building blocks for the self-assembly of
cross-linked particle layers . Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 
2003 , 311 , 995 –999 . 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.10.103 .14623280 
Niemeyer C. M. ; Ceyhan B. ; Hazarika P. 
Oligofunctional
DNA-gold nanoparticles
conjugates . Angew Chem., Int. Ed. 
2003 , 42 , 5766 –5770 . 10.1002/anie.200352744 .
Nam J. M. ; Stoeva S. I. ; Mirkin C. A. 
Bio-barcode based
DNA detection by
PCR like sensitivity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 5932 –5933 . 10.1021/ja049384+ .15137735 
Lau H. Y. ; Wu H. ; Wee E. J. H. ; Trau M. ; Wang Y. ; Botella J. R. 
Specific
and sensitive isothermal electrochemical biosensor for plant pathogen
DNA detection with colloidal gold nanoparticles as probes . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 3889610.1038/srep38896 .28094255 
Csáki A. ; Kaplanek P. ; Möller R. ; Fritzsche W. 
The optical
detection of individual DNA-conjugated gold nanoparticle labels after
metal enhancement . Nanotechnology 
2003 , 14 , 1262 –1268 . 10.1088/0957-4484/14/12/006 .21444979 
Lim D. K. ; Kim I. J. ; Nam J. M. 
DNA-embedded
Au/Ag core–shell
nanoparticles . Chem. Commun. 
2008 , 5312 –5314 . 10.1039/b810195g .
Cao C. ; Tram L.
L. T. ; Wolff A. ; Bang D.
D.   In An Improved Scanometric
Immunoassay Based on Dual Enlargement of Gold Nanoparticles for Rapid
and Low Cost Pathogen Detection , 14th International Conference
on Miniaturized Systems for Chemistry and Life Sciences, Groningen,
The Netherland, 2010 ; pp 572 –574 . http://www.rsc.org/binaries/LOC/2010/PDFs/Papers/198_0447.pdf.

