
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002388810.1021/acsomega.8b00215ArticleSurface Modification of Polymers for Tissue Engineering
Applications: Arginine Acts as a Sticky Protein Equivalent for Viable
Cell Accommodation Sengupta Poulomi Prasad Bhagavatula L. V. *Physical Chemistry Division, CSIR National Chemical Laboratory Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pashan, Pune 411008, India* E-mail: pl.bhagavatula@ncl.res.in.
Tel: 91-20-25902013. Fax: 91-2025902636.16 04 2018 30 04 2018 3 4 4242 4251 05 02 2018 09 04 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Hydrophobic polymers,
for their favorable mechanical properties,
are a popular choice as permanent bioimplants. These materials remain
absolutely bioinert for years, but throw up challenges when it comes
to fast integration with healthy tissue. Addressing this, herein,
we present a surface-modification technique of converting the hydrophobic
surface of a polymeric film into a hydrophilic one using a layer-by-layer
assembly process involving gold nanoparticles and small molecules
like amino acids. These films showed much improved animal cell (murine
fibroblast) adherence properties compared to commercially available
tissue culture plates. Moreover, arginine-modified films exhibited
a nearly equivalent cell viability compared to the films modified
with the natural extracellular matrix component fibronectin. The surface
hydrophilicity and roughness of our novel film were characterized
by contact angle measurement and atomic force microscopy. Cell counting,
fluorescence microscopy, cell viability, and collagen estimation assay
were employed to demonstrate that our film favored a much improved
cell adherence, and accommodation in comparison to the commercially
available tissue culture plates.

document-id-old-9ao8b00215document-id-new-14ao-2018-00215zccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Synthetic polymeric
scaffolds are being extensively used as tissue
replacements inside the human body.1 Load-bearing
organs such as the hip joint and the knee joint are regularly replaced
with either polymer or polymer–metal composites. Compared to
polymer–metal combinations, pure polymeric materials have several
advantages, as they can be molded into different shape/size/porosity.
For example, polymers like polyethylene have a very long history of
being “the material of choice” as implant applications
for their right strength and optimal hardness.2,3 Conversely,
being hydrophobic, these polymers are nonresponsive toward tissue
integration, which may lead to dislocation and fibrosis, followed
by multiple corrective surgeries.4−6 One way to overcome this
impediment is surface modification, where the bulk properties (mechanical
strength, elasticity) of a material remain unchanged, whereas small
modifications in the surface impart necessary characteristics, allowing
a faster integration of the implant with the tissue. In this context,
surface modification of the polymers with proteins (fibronectin, vitronectin,
laminin) present in the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a regularly
followed strategy.7,8 These proteins include a specific
tripeptide sequence RGD (arginine–glycine–aspartic acid)
that is very specifically recognized by the cell surface receptor
protein integrin. It has been widely reported in the literature that
fibronectin-coated polymeric scaffolds portray enhanced cellular adherence,
leading to a drastically improved cellular proliferation.9,10 To avail the benefits of both polymer (as material) and fibronectin/vitronectin
(as surface modifying agents), an even coating of ECM protein on polymer
will be ideal. But, the polymer of choice being hydrophobic, uniform
surface modification with a protein is impossible, exclusive of multistep
chemical interventions. In this context, the layer-by-layer11−14 assembly is emerging as a relatively simpler technique that can
produce a ubiquitously uniform surface modification. Previous reports
from our group have already established that plasma treatment of hydrophobic
polymeric films followed by layer-by-layer assembly of gold nanoparticle
and lysine can “lock” the hydrophilic characteristics
of the surface and increase the cell friendliness of the surface and
promote cell growth.15,16 This method is unquestionably
superior to sole NH3 plasma treatment due to the prolonged
retention of hydrophilicity. Moreover, such a modified surface works
as an excellent support for cell attachment and proliferation. At
room temperature, the films that were modified following the above
strategy were found to retain the hydrophilic characteristics for
more than 1 year. In contrast, with only plasma treated films, the
hydrophobic character got regenerated within a week.17

In this report, with the aim of creating a cell-friendly
surface
out of the readily available materials by a simple and convenient
technique, we have surface-modified plasma-treated polyetherimide
(PEI) films via layer-by-layer assembly of gold nanoparticles and
arginine. This has been achieved by simple overnight incubation of
the plasma-treated films in a gold sol followed by dip coating of
arginine (Figure 1).
We then evaluated the applicability of these films for murine fibroblast
cell L929 adherence and proliferation. As a positive control, we have
taken fibronectin-coated (on gold-coated films) films (Figure 1) and compared several properties
like cellular adhesion and proliferation, the quantification of live
cells, the expression of F-actin, and the quantification of collagen.
To our surprise, we have found nearly comparable results in both the
treatments, which led to the conclusion that the small molecule arginine
can be considered to be a sticky protein equivalent when it comes
to viable cell population on a surface-modified polymeric film. To
rationalize our observation, we also have shown that L929 cells grown
on both arginine- and fibronectin-coated films produce an equivalent
amount of collagen on prolonged culture, indicating that the cellular
accommodation mechanism with both these molecules is probably the
same.

Figure 1 Schematic representation of surface modification for polyetherimide
(PEI) films. (A) Plasma treatment on PEI films using 3:2 hydrogen
and nitrogen mixture. (B) Citrate-stabilized gold nanoparticles incubation
with plasma-treated films. (C) Dip coating of films inside the arginine–water
solution overnight. (D) Gold-coated films were incubated with a dilute
solution of fibronectin.

Results
Characterization of Films
Pristine and surface-modified
films were characterized using UV–vis, IR, atomic force microscopy
(AFM), and dynamic mechanical analyzer (DMA). The as-prepared Au NP
sol was prepared by the Turkevich method18 and displayed a peak in the UV–vis spectrum at 530 nm (Figure S1A). The transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) analysis indicated that the particles are around 20 nm (Figure S1B). On the other hand, the films coated
with gold nanoparticles displayed a peak at 580 nm (Figure S2A,B) in the UV–vis spectrum acquired. The
Supporting Information Figure S3 provides
the contact-mode AFM images, which highlight the transformation in
the surface structure and the roughness of the film consequent to
surface modification. In the case of pristine PEI film, the surface
roughness parameter was estimated to be Ra = 9.85 nm (Figure S3A). For gold-coated
films, the roughness value increased to ∼50 nm (Figure S3B). Interestingly, when the same films
were surface modified with arginine (Figure S3C), the surface roughness parameter increased drastically (Ra = 107 nm). On the other hand, fibronectin
coating on the gold-coated PEI surface did not change the surface
roughness parameter (Figure S3D) very much,
although a little elevation in its value (Ra = 66.1 nm), when compared to only gold-coated films was observed.

In Figure 2, the
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) data (attenuated total reflectance
(ATR) mode) for pristine PEI film, arginine-coated gold–PEI
film, and fibronectin-coated gold–PEI film in the 1300–1900
cm–1 range have been consolidated. Curve 1 (black
line) shows the FT-IR spectrum of the pristine PEI film. Curve 2 (in
blue) corresponds to the arginine-coated gold–PEI film, where
the stretching motion of the CO group at 1630 cm–1 could be seen. The band at 1520 cm–1 was assigned
to the bending vibration of −OH (indicated as peak a). Further,
the sharp peak at 1410 cm–1 corresponds to the symmetric
in-plane bending, and the asymmetric bending of CH3 groups
could be seen around 1450 cm–1. The fibronectin-coated
films when probed with FT-IR (curve 3, red line) showed very specific
amide I peak at 1670 cm–1 (b) and amide II peak
at 1560 cm–1 (c). The full-range IR spectrum is
provided in the Supporting Information Figure S5.

Figure 2 FT-IR spectrum taken in the ATR mode for the characterization of
signature peaks from (1) PEI film (2) arginine-coated PEI film, and
(3) fibronectin-coated PEI film. (a) Broad peak at 1550–1600
cm–1 corresponds to protonated, hydrated guanidium
groups. (b) Amide I (from fibronectin) 1670 cm–1 and (c) amide II 1560 cm–1.

The “contact angle measurement” is a strong
tool
for the determination of hydrophilicity and, accordingly, we measured
the contact angles after different surface-modification procedures,
which are presented in Figure 3. As can be noticed, the pristine PEI films exhibited a contact
angle value of 83° with 10 μL of water at the air–water
interface. Upon NH3 plasma treatment and citrate-stabilized
gold nanoparticle coating, the contact angle decreased to ∼75°.
The arginine-coated films were extremely hydrophilic, having a contact
angle in the low range around ∼19°. The fibronectin-coated
film, on the other hand, was more hydrophobic, having a contact angle
value of ∼68°.

Figure 3 Contact angle determination using 10 μL
water droplet on
the treated film. The data represented ±SD of n = 3.

A set of water absorption studies
were carried out, which have
revealed that the arginine-coated film held significantly more amount
of water on the surface in comparison to the fibronectin-coated or
the bare film. The results are presented in Figure S4. We also checked the tensile strength of the films after
different surface modifications using DMA (Figure S6). It may be noticed that in all the cases (the bare PEI,
arginine-coated, and fibronectin-coated films), there was no significant
change in the Young’s modulus value (value lies in the range
of 1000–2000 MPa). Till the application of 30 MPa pulling force,
no breaking of the film was experienced.

Cell Adhesion
Cellular
Adhesion Study
From the cell count experiment
using optical microscopy (Figure 4), it can be clearly seen that with the increase in
time, more and more murine fibroblast cells get adhered to the arginine-coated
film. The number of cells present in the supernatant decreased with
time, indicating that more than 40% of the cells adhered to the arginine-coated
films within 1 min, whereas in control nontreated plate, less than
20% cells adhered. Similarly, within 1 h, almost 60% cells adhered
to the arginine-coated films, whereas the extent remained around 30%
for the bare plate. At 2 h, the change was drastic, when almost 85%
cells adhered to the arginine-coated films and only around 35% cells
adhered to the control plate. In summary, we observed that almost
all the cells were found adhered to the arginine-coated films at ≤2
h.

Figure 4 Cellular adhesion experiment by cell counting where not-adhered
cells were estimated using Trypan blue. Data represented as a ±SD
of n = 3.

Cell Viability and Cytotoxicity
Cell Viability Study by
Mitochondrial Activity
In this
experiment (Figure 5), viable cells were estimated by mitochondrial activity, as indicated
by the reduction of resazurin to resofurin (emission at 590 nm). The
data presented here were normalized with respect to the untreated
plate value. In accordance with the cell-counting experiment, it was
observed that both fibronectin- and arginine-coated films allowed
cell proliferation from 122 to 125% at the end of 2 days. However,
for all the other controls, the value was less. The plasma-treated
films also had almost 120% viable cells. The normalized data show
that even with pristine PEI, the cell viability was above 100%.

Figure 5 Cell viability
by mitochondrial activity using resazurin indicator
at 48 h. Data represented as ±SD of n = 3.

Cell Viability by Live–Dead
Imaging
Propidium
iodide (PI) and acridine orange dyes were used for the analysis of
dead and alive cells present on the film surface, respectively. Here
also, the arginine-coated films showed an increased number of healthy
cells population, but there were few dead cells (Figure 6) as well. On the other hand,
the fibronectin-coated films showed excellently adhered cells and
no dead cells were present according to the PI staining. The emission
intensity from two fields green (representing live cells stained by
acridine orange) and red (representing dead cells stained by propidium
iodide), as shown in Figure S7A, also supports
this conclusion.

Figure 6 Live–dead assay by live cells imaging. Live and
dead cell
stains are acridine orange (AO) and propidium iodide (PI), respectively.
The scale bar is 100 μm.

Cellular Proliferation Analysis
Cellular Proliferation
Study by Cell Counting
In this
experiment, at the 1 day time point, arginine- and fibronectin-dipped
gold-coated PEI films were found to produce almost equal number of
live cells (Figure 7, blue columns). At 2 days time point as well, the arginine- and
fibronectin-coated films behaved almost similarly (Figure 7, red columns), whereas gold-coated
and pristine films showed a lower cell population. Similarly, fresh
plasma-treated films also indicated a reasonably high number of cellular
population.

Figure 7 Cell proliferation study by cell counting using Trypan blue exclusion
test (data represented as the mean ± SD of n = 3).

Cellular Population by
Fluorescence Microscopy
Using
this method, we visualized the cellular density of the adhered cells
on each surface-modified and control film. For pristine PEI films
(Figure 8), the cellular
density was low. For the gold-coated surfaces, the cellular density
was more than that of the pristine films but definitely less than
that of the plasma-treated films. For both arginine- and fibronectin-coated
films, the cellular density was rather high and uniform. However,
the fibronectin-coated films showed a more sticky behavior for the
fibroblast cells. Again, the measurement of fluorescence intensity
from green and blue channels represented a reasonably high cellular
density and their healthiness with both ariginine and fibronectin
surface modifications (Figure S7B).

Figure 8 Nucleus and
cytoplasm staining of L929 fibroblast cells using fluorescence
microscope. Scale bar is 100 μm.

Cellular Morphology by Actin Cityscape’s Staining
According to Figure 9, the arginine-coated films indicated an elongated disposition of
actin filaments, which confirmed the healthy and happy condition of
the cells. In fibronectin-coated films as well, the cells appeared
elongated and stretched. A closer look at the cellular adhesion (Figure S8) showed that L929 cells present on
arginine-coated films are elongated. At the same time, they are a
little folded at sides, which was absent in the case of the fibronectin-coated
films.

Figure 9 Actin filament staining of L929 cells with Alexafluor 488 phalloidin
and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for nucleus counterstaining.
Scale bar 20 μm.

Production of Collagen
In this experiment, we measured
the amount of collagen expressed both from cellular layer and spent
media. The collagen estimation kit works on the principle of oxidation
of both proline and hydroxyproline present in the ECM, which is directly
proportional to the amount of collagen produced by the healthy cells.
From the cell pellet (Figure 10A), the estimated collagen from both arginine- and fibronectin-coated
films were comparable in amount, whereas in control samples, the amount
was significantly less. The data were plotted after normalizing with
“only film” values, which indicated that collagen produced
in the arginine- and fibronectin-coated films was 3 times higher than
that present on the pristine film (Figure 10B). Even in the spent medium, a similar
trend is followed, which is in accordance with the cell viability
and cell count data.

Figure 10 Expression of collagen (A) on the surface of different
films (B)
in different well’s spent media.

Discussion
The gold nanoparticle surface chemistry
opens up a big horizon
for the functionalization of the polymeric solid scaffolds. Our strategy
to surface modify the polymeric films (which could be easily extended
to porous scaffolds) was initiated with the plasma treatment of a
hydrophobic polymeric film. For the plasma treatment, we used a mixture
of H2/N2 gases, which was expected to generate
ammonia plasma19,20 in situ. This reactive ammonia
plasma interacts with the surface of the polymers generating hydrophilic
functional groups21 (mostly −NH2 groups). These films were then dipped in a gold nanoparticle
hydrosol. These gold nanoparticles were in turn prepared by the well-established
citrate-reduction method.18 The as-prepared
gold nanoparticle sol has a characteristic wine-red color displaying
an absorbance peak at ∼520 nm in the UV–vis spectrum.
The absorbance is attributed to the localized surface plasmon resonance.
Subsequently, the simple dipping of the plasma-treated PEI films in
gold nanoparticle hydrosol leads to a quick and firm attachment of
the nanoparticles to the plasma-treated film surface due to the electrostatic
attraction between the positive and negative charges of amine and
citrate groups. This contention was supported by the UV–vis
spectrum of the gold nanoparticle adhered film, which shows a peak
at 580 nm (Figure S2A), which is significantly
different from the peak observed for the as-prepared gold sol. This
shift in surface plasmon resonance is expected and ascribed to the
aggregated nature of the gold nanoparticles on the film. To check
how strongly these Au NPs adhere to the PEI film, we immersed the
gold-decorated PEI films in water at 90 °C under stirring conditions.
We did not notice leaching of any gold into this water, as confirmed
by the absence of the surface plasmon peak of Au NPs in the supernatant.
Thinking that, in case any trace amount of Au NPs leached out by hot
water treatment, they should dissolve and convert to Au3+ ions in aqua regia, we evaporated the water and added aqua regia
to it. We did not find any signature of Au3+ ions from
this aqua regia solution. This confirms that no Au NPs got leached
into the hot water (these data are not included for brevity).

Our previous results suggest that the primary amine groups of the
amino acids electrostatically interact with the citrate groups on
the gold nanoparticles.17 The interaction
is stronger if the amino acids have more than one free amine group,
which can have a constructive interaction with the citrate capping
present on the gold nanoparticle surface. Although our previous results
suggested lysine as a good surface-coating agent, and provided enhanced
cell adhesion and proliferation,17 as a
part of this work several other amino acids were also tried (data
not shown). It was concluded that positively charged amino acid arginine
adsorbs very strongly to gold nanoparticles, resulting in a super
hydrophilic yet rough surface, which is expected to increase the cellular
adhesion properties, as confirmed from the contact angle measurements
described below.

The 83° water contact angle on the pure
polymer film clearly
established that it is considerably hydrophobic. Upon N2 + H2 plasma treatment, the contact angle decreased to
75°, indicating a lowering in the hydrophobic character of the
film. The attachment of the citrate-stabilized gold nanoparticle coating
on the plasma-treated PEI films changed the contact angle only slightly
(76°) (Figure 3). The overnight incubation of these films in arginine solution led
to a drastic lowering of the contact angle value (19°). This
is attributed to the guanidium group present in the side chain of
arginine, which is extremely hydrophilic. Once guanidium or any amine
group anchors on the gold nanoparticle surface, the other amine or
carboxylic acid groups present in arginine will be exposed outward
and preferentially interact with water thus explaining the enhanced
hydrophilicity. On the other hand, the fibronectin-coated films did
not show a great change in the contact angle (changed from 76°
in AuNP-coated film to 68°) value. This could be rationalized
by considering the composition of fibronectin, which is a combination
of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acids. From water absorption
studies, it has been confirmed that the arginine-coated films possess
a high water retention capability as shown in Figure S4. The bare PEI film, having no surface functionalization,
is unable to retain water on the surface. The fibronectin-coated films
showed moderate water absorption properties.

The trends in contact
angle changes and water absorption data are
reflected in the surface roughness characteristics determined from
the AFM measurements as well (Figure S3). The pristine polymer film displayed a roughness value of Ra = 9.85 nm. With arginine, the parameter increased
significantly to 107 nm, which may be attributed to the restructuring
of the nanoparticles on the polymeric film surface in the presence
of arginine (Figure S3C). The change in
the nature of nanoparticle adherence on the polymeric surface is also
corroborated by the change in the SPR position (580 nm; Figure S2A,B). In the case of the fibronectin-coated
films, the surface roughness also increased (Figure S3D), but it is not as high as that in the case of the arginine-coated
surface. This may be attributed to a higher molecular entanglement
present in protein in comparison to small molecules. The UV–vis
results also indicated the retention of the peak at 580 nm after incubation
with arginine and protein, confirming the presence of gold nanoparticles
on the polymer surface.

In spite of all these surface modifications,
there has not been
any significant change in the Young’s modulus of the bulk polymeric
film, as indicated by Figure S6. The strain
in samples (bare PEI film, arginine-, and fibronectin-coated films)
steadily increased with increase in stress in the mega pascal area,
which signifies that the high mechanical robustness of the polymeric
film did not get altered due to surface modification.

Whereas
the changes in UV–vis spectra, contact angle, water
absorption, and surface roughness values do provide an indication
of the changes in the surface characteristics of the films due to
the sequential layer-by-layer assembly of gold nanoparticles and the
coating of arginine or fibronectin onto them, characterization by
IR provides conclusive evidence of the presence of arginine and fibronectin
on the films. Solid-state FT-IR (ATR mode) is a robust technique for
determining the signatures in surface-modified films. It has to be
kept in mind that PEI itself is a chemically complex molecule that
has several signature peaks representing either aromatic C–H
units, or phthalimide groups, etc. The FT-IR spectrum of PEI alone
displayed a sharp peak at 1720 cm–1 corresponding
to the lactum carbonyl group present in it (curve 1 in Figure 2). Therefore, in all the surface-modified
films, a baseline with only PEI was performed. Accordingly, from the
FT-IR analysis, it can be very clearly seen that in the arginine-coated
films, a broad peak of protonated, hydrated guanidium group appears
in the range 1500–1600 cm–1 [curve 2(a), Figure 2]. Also, in the fibronectin-coated
films, a strong γN–H [amide I and amide II
peaks in Figure 2 curve
3(b,c), respectively] was observed, confirming the protein attachment
to the AuNP-coated films.

After establishing that the layer-by-layer
assembly of gold nanoparticles
and fibronectin or arginine can be achieved by simply dipping the
PEI films in the respective solutions, we proceeded to evaluate the
cellular adhesion capability of the surface-modified (by arginine)
films. For this, two different experiments were conducted. In the
first experiment, the cell-attaching properties of arginine-coated
films were evaluated in comparison to nontreated polystyrene plates.
The surface-modified films showed up to 85% cellular adhesion ≤2
h. We attribute this to the hydrophilic character of the arginine-coated
films (evident from contact angle, water absorption measurements),
roughness (evident from AFM measurements), and the presence of positive
charges (from the arginine side chain). The ultimate goal of these
surface-modified films is to accommodate healthy cells. So, after
establishing that the arginine-coated films support a strong cell
adherence, we wanted to check their cell proliferation capability
over time. For this purpose, we chose to compare the cell viability
properties with a strong positive control: the fibronectin-coated
films.

The amount of mitochondrial activity in viable cells
was determined
by the reduction of resazurin, which is a standard chemical for this
purpose. It may be noticed that after 48 h incubation, an equivalent
amount of viable cells were found in both arginine- and fibronectin-coated
films (Figure 5). Plasma-treated
films also showed a higher number of viable cells. This can result
from the transient surface modification of the polymer surface (due
to plasma treatment). As expected, untreated and gold-coated surfaces
showed less number of cells. In the case of untreated films, this
could be due to their hydrophobic character, whereas in the case of
gold nanoparticle-coated films, the negative charge of the citrate
molecules present on their surface may be implicated for the cell
unfriendliness. We wish to emphasize here that all the data from different
films showed a considerably higher cellular proliferation in comparison
to nontreated tissue culture plate, which supports the fact that the
PEI films per se are not at all cytotoxic.

One point worth noticing
in our results is that, in live–dead
imaging assay (Figure 6), arginine-coated films showed a few dead cells along with numerous
healthy cells. This may arise due to the dearth of space and nutrients,
which may impede the growth of cells and pushed the cell cycle toward
apoptosis. The fibronectin-coated films, on the other hand, accommodated
most of the healthy cells. This may arise due to the presence of fewer
cells in a smaller area (as the fibronectin-coated films are reasonably
hydrophobic, contact angle 68°; Figure 3), whereas the amount of nutrition (volume
of complete media) was the same in every other case (controls and
arginine-coated films). So, the amount of media was probably sufficient
for the fewer cells present in the case of the fibronectin-modified
films to thrive. On the other hand, in the case of surface modification
by arginine, the amount of media was not adequate for providing nutrition
for a larger number of cells that get adhered initially. We quantified
the green (corresponding to live cells) and red (corresponding to
dead cells) fluorescence intensities from several images. The normalized
(with respect to area) plotting indicated an increase in the acridine
orange fluorescence (green) on arginine- and fibronectin-coated polymers,
indicating more number of live cells. At the same time, the higher
dead cell population in bare polymers was proved by a higher red emission
by them (Figure S7A).

To determine
the extent of cellular proliferation, both cell counting
and imaging experiments were performed. The cell counting at different
intervals shows that the approximate number of cells adhered to both
arginine- and fibronectin-coated surfaces were very similar (Figure 8), keeping in mind
the reported doubling time of L929 cells.22 According to both fluorescence microscopy (Figure 8) and live–dead assay (Figure 6), both for arginine- and fibronectin-coated
films, the cellular density was higher. The quantification of green
fluorescence (coming from the healthy cells containing fluorescein)
and DAPI did show a similar trend as found in the microscopy experiment
(Figure S7B). Thus, the results from several
experiments clearly prove that the arginine- and fibronectin-coated
films behave very similarly when it comes to viable cells accommodation.
In the cellular proliferation study (Figure 5), using cell counting with Trypan blue,
the arginine- and fibronectin-coated films showed very comparable
cell counts that were significantly superior to control surfaces (pristine
PEI surface, gold nanoparticle-coated surface). Cell viability (by
mitochondrial activity) using resazurin as an indicator also showed
that at the end of 2 days, both arginine- and fibronectin-coated films
showed a remarkably higher viable cell population in comparison to
the control samples (Figure 5). Finally, the expression of F-actin (Figure 9; which indicates the healthy state of the
cells) shows that the cells on fibronectin-coated surfaces were well
stretched and prominent, which definitely arises due to the availability
of the preferable RGD sequence. Interestingly, a careful observation
(Figure S8) in the higher-magnification
images revealed that in the arginine-coated films as well, the F-actin
is equally well expressed.

The reason behind the considerably
excessive density of cells in
arginine-coated films in comparison to untreated controls can be supported
by the hydrophilicity generated by the arginine coating. But being
as good as the fibronectin-coated film is really unanticipated. We
speculate a 3-fold reason behind this phenomenon. The aginine-coated
films are blessed with two special properties: (i) increased surface
roughness (Figure S3), hence hydrophilicity
(contact angle data from Figure 2), and (ii) surface charge. These are supportive of
cellular spreading on the surface-coated films.23,24 Several literature reports stress upon the fact that surface polarization
and roughness are crucial for cellular adhesion.25 Numerous reports compared the cellular entry of positively
and negatively charged nanoparticles and found that the increasingly
rough surface also encourages a “foothold” of a cell
seeded on a material surface.26,27 Moreover, very fast
spreading of water or media containing cells provides enough space
in between cells for the healthy development in future and/or cellular
migration.28 This effectively is a “low
seeding density experiment”, which in one way should help the
proliferation of adhering cells like fibroblast. Instead, the fibronectin-coated
films have the integrin-binding RGD sequence, which strongly encourages
cells to bind to it, but at the same time, these films being hydrophobic,
they do not allow the cells to spread over a larger surface area.
As a result, during incubation, only a few cells adhere to the fibronectin-coated
films because of space constraints. Thus, whereas fibronectin carries
the RGD sequence and hence is friendly toward the cells, the arginine-coated
films have the material advantages in terms of surface roughness,
low contact angle, and positive charge so much that we believe they
behave very similarly to the positive effects of the RGD sequence
and ultimately become almost equally effective when it comes to viable
cell accommodation. The equivalent efficacy of both the films is also
reflected in collagen production (Figure 10), where both arginine- and fibronectin-coated
films produce a comparable amount of collagen. Also worth mentioning
is the fact that in the event of seeding, 2 h incubation and aspiration
of cells on the films is considered to be a mimic of polymeric implant
installation in the body, where new cells are suppose to adhere in
a flowing system rather than adherence aided by gravity (a general
in vitro practice).

Conclusions
Herein, we reported
the modification of a surface hydrophobic nature
of polyetherimide film to a hydrophilic one by simple procedure involving
the layer-by-layer assembly approach. Traditionally expensive sticky
proteins separated from animal tissue (fibronectin, vitronectin, laminin,
etc.) are used for improved effects on cell adherence. Conversely,
we demonstrated here that a small molecule like arginine is capable
of serving the same purpose in terms of total viable cells. Medical
translation of this simple concept could help lower down the costs
related to polymeric implant installation and avoid complications
arising out of a hydrophobic scaffold implantation.

Materials and
Methods
Polyetherimide (PEI) sold under the trade name Ultem
1000 was obtained
from General Electrical Co., Schenectady, NY. Chloroauric acid was
obtained from the Seisco Research Laboratory, India. Arginine, fibronectin
(tissue culture grade), carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE),
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) powder, resazurin, and propidium iodide (PI) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. The murine originated fibroblast cell line L929
was procured from the cell line repository of NCCS Pune, India. Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) and fetal bovine serum were
purchased from Invitrogen. The collagen estimation kit (K218) was
purchased from Biovision. Trypan blue was purchased from Himedia.
The F-actin marker Alexafluor 488 phalloidin conjugate was bought
from Thermo Fischer Scientific.

Preparation and Surface Modifications of
PEI Films
Casting of PEI Films
PEI (available as solid polymer
beads) was weighed and made into a solution of 0.0675 g/mL in dry
chloroform. It was carefully poured into 150 mm clean dry grease free
flat glass Petri dish and covered with aluminum foil. The overnight
setting at room temperature yielded a transparent light yellow film.

Gold Nanoparticles Synthesis
Gold nanoparticles were
synthesized by the Turkevich method,18 where
0.1 mM chloroauric acid was reduced by 10 mg/mL citric acid under
boiling water conditions. The particles were characterized by UV–vis
and TEM.

Plasma Treatment
Plasma treatment
was carried out using
N2 + H2 plasma at 60 W power for 20 min. The
flow ratio was maintained at 3:2 H2 to N2. The
instrument employed was the Emitech Plasma Asher K1050X.

Gold Nanoparticle
Coating on PEI Films
Freshly plasma-treated
PEI films were dipped in citrate-stabilized gold nanoparticle sol
at room temperature and stirred overnight. After some time, the gold
sol was found to lose its wine red color, following which it was replenished
until a uniform gold layer formed on the films.

Arginine
Coating on Gold-Coated PEI Films
The gold-coated
films obtained from the above step were immersed overnight in a solution
of arginine (4 g/L) in Milli-Q water. After incubation, the films
were washed with PBS and carried forward for characterization or applications.

Fibronectin-Coating on Gold Nanoparticle Coated PEI Films
The gold nanoparticle coated films were soaked in 40 μg/mL
of fibronectin in PBS overnight at 4 °C. All the films were washed
with PBS and air dried before characterization.

Characterization
of Surface-Modified Films
UV–Vis Spectrophotometry
In this experiment,
the PEI films were cut into 1 cm × 4 cm rectangular strips. After
plasma treatment followed by gold nanoparticle coating, the dry films
were placed in UV cuvettes. CARY 300 Conc UV–vis spectrophotometer
was used for the collection of the UV–vis spectrum.

Detection
of Surface Roughness by AFM
The surface-modified
films (gold nanoparticle coated film, arginine- and fibronectin-coated
films) and control (pristine films) were placed on glass slides and
scanned using Nano Wizard Atomic Force Microscopy by contact method.

IR Spectroscopy
The surface-modified films were subjected
to characterization using solid-state IR spectroscopy. In this method,
PerkinElmer Spectrum 2 spectrophotometer was used in attenuated total
reflectance (ATR) mode to collect data using 40 scans in the wavenumber
range 500–4000 cm–1. For both these surface-modified
films, background with only PEI was also taken.

Surface Hydrophilicity
by Contact Angle Measurement
Surface hydrophilicity was measured
by dropping 10 μL water
droplets on the modified polymer surface at room temperature and atmospheric
pressure. The data were collected from a minimum of ∼5 locations
and the average contact angle values were determined. Kruss drop shape
analyser version 1.41–02 was used for this purpose.

Water
Absorption Study
For water absorption studies,
the films were prepared after dipping them in arginine and fibronectin
solutions (as per method described in the Material
and Method section). They were air dried followed by high vacuum
exposure for 2 h. Each film was weighed using a microbalance. Each
film was separately dipped in water, taken out, wicked off using a
tissue paper, and weighed in the microbalance. The weight difference
is the amount of water adsorbed on the film.

Mechanical Stability
Tensile testing was performed
on a TA Instruments dynamic mechanical analyzer (DMA, RSA- III). Stretching
experiments were performed using the rectangular tension geometry
for the PEI sheets (control, arginine-coated, fibronectin-coated).
The samples were cut into dog bone shapes for tensile testing. They
were then clamped vertically in the rectangular geometry and stretched
at a constant rate of 0.01 mm/s. Young’s modulus was determined
from these experiments.

Cell Culture Experiments
with Modified Films
Common Protocol for Cell Culture Experiment
In all
the tissue culture experiments, nontreated sterile 24-well plates
were used. Films (modified as well as controls) were cut into 15 mm
diameter circles and sterilized under UV inside tissue culture hood
for 30 min on each side. They were aseptically put into an untreated
a 24-well plate. Ten thousand murine fibroblast L929 cells were suspended
in 50 μL complete medium and seeded on each film. After 2 h
incubation, the medium was aspirated and washed with 100 μL
of complete medium. Following this, all the films were allowed to
incubate with 500 μL complete DMEM medium under tissue culture
conditions for the mentioned period of time. The results from each
experiment were plotted as a mean including ±SE for n = 3.

Sample preparation for imaging: For imaging experiments,
the films were washed twice with PBS, fixed with 4% PFA for 15 min,
followed by washing with PBS. The cells were incubated in 0.1% Triton
X-100 in PBS for 5 min followed by washing (PBS). They were further
incubated in 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 20 min to avoid nonspecific
binding. Further, they were incubated with appropriate dyes. Images
pertaining to a single experiment were taken using equal exposure
time.

Evaluation of Cellular Adhesion
Cell Adhesion
Assay by Cell Counting (Trypan Blue Assay)
In this experiment,
the arginine-coated PEI films were aseptically
put into an untreated 24-well plate. Ten thousand healthy L929 fibroblast
cells dispersed in 50 μL complete DMEM medium were seeded on
each film. The films were washed after aspirating the media. This
step was performed to exclude gravitationally precipitated but nonadhered
cells. After each predetermined time interval, 50 μL media was
taken out of the film, consolidated (with washing liquid), and mixed
with Trypan blue. The number of cells present in the aliquot were
counted with the help of an inverted microscope. In this way, the
cellular density of “unattached” cells was determined.
The data were compared with the same number of cells seeded into each
well of a 24-well untreated tissue culture plate and normalized with
the cell number used for seeding.

Cell Viability and Cytotoxicity
Cell
Viability Assay (by Resazurin)
Cell seeding and
culture were performed as per the common protocol mentioned. At 48
h, the cells were incubated with 100 μM resazurin (in complete
DMEM) and allowed to incubate for 6 h under cell culture condition.
The relative amount of viable cells was estimated by reading the emission
at 590 nm (excitation 530–560 nm). The readings of cells grown
on surface-modified films were normalized with the reading from cells
grown on the adhering plate and plotted in percent.

Live–Dead
Assay by Fluorescence Microscopy
Fifty
thousand healthy L929 cells in 50 μL complete DMEM media were
seeded on each surface-modified films and controls. After 2 h, the
media were aspirated and replenished with 500 μL complete DMEM
media. At 2 days time point, the cells were washed with PBS, incubated
in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min in the dark, and 5% BSA in PBS. The
films were washed twice with PBS. Subsequently, they were incubated
with the live–dead assay stain of 10 μL 7.5 mM propidium
iodide, 1 μL 0.67 mM acridine orange in 1 mL complete DMEM media
(for each well) under cell culture conditions for 1 h. The wells were
washed with PBS and directly viewed under Axio Observer Z1 Carl Zeiss
microscope using green and red channels. Emission of both the colors
representing live and dead cells were quantified, normalized with
respect to area, and plotted.

Effects on Cellular Proliferation
Cell
Proliferation Study by Cell Counting
Cell seeding
and incubation were done according to the common protocol discussed.
After 1 and 2 days incubation under cell culture conditions, the media
were aspirated. The wells were washed twice with PBS and the films
were trypsinized with 100 μL Trypsin ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (for each film). After proper dilutions of the aliquots, the
cell numbers were counted with the help of Trypan blue stain and inverted
microscope. The plotted data were normalized with respect to the number
of cells seeded.

Cell Populations on Differently Treated Surfaces
by Fluorescence
Microscopy
Cell seeding was performed according to the common
protocol discussed. At 48 h time point, the cells were fixed and blocked.
They were treated with CFSE in PBS (5 μM) for 15 min at room
temperature in the dark followed by washing with PBS. The films were
incubated with 300 nM DAPI at room temperature in the dark for 4 min
followed by another brief PBS wash. They were mounted on clean glass
slides with mounting media, sealed, and observed using Axio Observer
Z1 Carl Zeiss microscope using green and cyan filters. The emission
of fluorescein and DAPI from adhered cells were quantified, normalized
with respect to area, and plotted.

Cell Morphology and Actin
Cytoskeleton Staining
The
cells were seeded according to the protocol discussed. They were incubated
for 24 h in complete DMEM media. After two times, the PBS wash films
were fixed and blocked. The actin filaments were stained by 100 times
diluted Alexafluor 488 phalloidin (in PBS) incubation in dark for
30 min at room temperature. The cell nuclei were counterstained with
DAPI at 300 nM concentration for 4 min at room temperature (in dark)
followed by two times wash in PBS. The films were directly placed
on a coverslip and the images were captured using green and cyan filters
by epifluorescence microscopy using an Axio Observer Z1 Carl Zeiss
microscope.

Collagen Production Assay
The L929
cells, 1 ×
106, were suspended in 200 μL complete media and
seeded on surface-modified UV-sterilized films (diameter 35 mm) kept
in 6-well plates. The media were aspirated after 2 h and 2 mL of fresh
complete media was added to each well. At 24 h, the media were changed.
The aspirated media were saved. At 2 days time point, the media were
aspirated and 1 mL spent media (from the combination of both days
media) of each well was stored. After washing the films two times
with sterile PBS, the cells were scraped off using a cell scraper
and 400 μL PBS. From the cells, collagen was estimated by lysing
followed by oxidation. From the spent media, protein was precipitated,
oxidized, and estimated according to the protocol mentioned in the
collagen estimation kit K218 from Biovision. The amount of collagen
generated in each sample was estimated by a calibration curve. The
data plotted were normalized with the amount of collagen present on
the bare film and presented in percent. From the data points (Figure 10), it may seem
that the fibronectin-coated films have a higher amount of collagen
formed. Genuinely, the difference (Figure 10A, third and fourth columns) is not significant
as proved by a t-test using Excel.

Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00215.Characterization
of gold nanoparticles by UV–vis
spectrophotometry, TEM; characterization of arginine- and fibronectin-coated
PEI films by UV–vis, AFM, and IR; water absorption study, mechanical
stability analysis, fluorescence intensity calculation, and actin
cytoskeleton staining by fluorescence microscopy (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00215_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
P.S. thanks DST-WOSA grant (grant number SR/WOS-A/CS-94/2012)
for fellowship and financial support. B.L.V.P. thanks CSIR, New Delhi,
for the financial support through the M2D (CSC0134) project. The authors
thank Ms Sneha of IISER Pune, Mr Shebeeb, and Ms S. Karthika from
CSIR-NCL for operating AFM, contact angle instruments, and DMA analyzer,
respectively.
==== Refs
References
Dhandayuthapani B. ; Yoshida Y. ; Maekawa T. ; Sakthi Kumar D. 
Polymeric
Scaffolds in Tissue Engineering Application: A Review . Int. J. Polym. Sci. 
2011 , 29060210.1155/2011/290602 .
Can Z. Z. ; Ercocen A. R. ; Apaydın I. ; Demirseren E. ; Sabuncuoglu B. 
Tissue Engineering of high density
porous polyethylene
implant for three dimensional reconstruction: An experimental study . Scand. J. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 
2000 , 34 , 9 –14 . 10.1080/02844310050160114 .
James S. P. ; Oldinski R. K. ; Zhang M. ; Schwartz H.  UHMWPE Biomaterials Handbook ; Elsevier , 2009 ; pp 259 –276 .
Deshpande S. ; Munoli A. 
Long-term results of high-density porous polyethylene
implants in facial skeletal augmentation: An Indian perspective . Indian J. Plast. Surg. 
2010 , 43 , 34 –39 . 10.4103/0970-0358.63955 .20924447 
Kim Y. H. ; Jang T. Y. 
Porous high-density
polyethylene in functional rhinoplasty:
Excellent long-term aesthetic results and safety . Plast. Surg. 
2014 , 22 , 14 –17 . 10.1177/229255031402200109 .
Fernandez-Bueno I. ; Di Lauro S. ; Alvarez I. ; Lopez J. C. ; Garcia-Gutierrez M. T. ; Fernandez I. ; Larra E. ; Pastor J. C. 
Safety and Biocompatibility
of a New High-Density Polyethylene-Based Spherical Integrated Porous
Orbital Implant: An Experimental Study in Rabbits . J. Ophthalmol. 
2015 , 90409610.1155/2015/904096 .26689343 
Khalili A. A. ; Ahmad M. R. 
A Review of Cell Adhesion Studies
for Biomedical and
Biological Applications . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2015 , 16 , 18149 –18184 . 10.3390/ijms160818149 .26251901 
Lotfi M. ; Nejib M. ; Naceur M.  Cell Adhesion to Biomaterials:
Concept of Biocompatibility . Adv. Biomater.
Sci. Biomed. Appl. 2013 , 10.5772/53542 .
Montaño-Machado V. ; Chevallier P. ; Mantovani D. ; Pauthe E. 
On the potential for
fibronectin/phosphorylcholine coatings on PTFE substrates to jointly
modulate endothelial cell adhesion and hemocompatibility properties . Biomatter 
2015 , 5 , e97967910.4161/21592535.2014.979679 .25785369 
Agarwal R. ; González-García C. ; Torstrick B. ; Guldberg R. E. ; Salmerón-Sánchez M. ; García A. J. 
Simple coating with fibronectin fragment enhances stainless
steel screw osseointegration in healthy and osteoporotic rats . Biomaterials 
2015 , 63 , 137 –45 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.06.025 .26100343 
He L. ; Tang S. ; Prabhakaran M. P. ; Liao S. ; Tian L. ; Zhang Y. ; Xue W. ; Ramakrishna S. 
Surface modification
of PLLA nano-scaffolds with laminin multilayer by LbL assembly for
enhancing neurite outgrowth . Macromol. Biosci. 
2013 , 13 , 1601 –1609 . 10.1002/mabi.201300177 .24038950 
Mehr N. G. ; Hoemann C. D. ; Favis B. D. 
Chitosan surface
modification of
fully interconnected 3D porous poly(ε-caprolactone) by the LbL
approach . Polymer 
2015 , 64 , 112 –121 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2015.03.025 .
Shi Q. ; Qian Z. ; Liu D. ; Liu H. 
Surface Modification
of Dental Titanium Implant by Layer-by-Layer Electrostatic Self-Assembly . Front. Physiol. 
2017 , 8 , 57410.3389/fphys.2017.00574 .28824462 
https://forschung-sachsen-anhalt.de/project/biomimetic-surface-modification-tissue-11863.
D’Britto V. ; Tiwari S. ; Purohit V. ; Wadgaonkar P. P. ; Bhoraskar S. V. ; Bhonde R. R. ; Prasad B. L. V. 
Composites
of
plasma treated poly(etherimide) films with gold nanoparticles and
lysine through layer by layer assembly: a “friendly-rough”
surface for cell adhesion and proliferation for tissue engineering
applications . J. Mater. Chem. 
2009 , 19 , 544 –550 . 10.1039/B817231E .
Sengupta P. ; Surwase S. S. ; Prasad B. L. V. 
Modification of porous polyethylene
scaffolds for cell attachment and proliferation . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2018 , 13 , 87 –90 . 10.2147/IJN.S125000 .
Sengupta P. ; Prasad B. L. V.  Surface
Modification of Polymeric Scaffolds for Tissue Engineering Applications . Regenerative Engineering and Translational Medicine 10.1007/s40883-018-0050-6 .
Turkevich J. ; Stevenson P. C. ; Hillier J. 
A study of the nucleation and growth
processes in the synthesis of colloidal gold . Discuss. Faraday Soc. 
1951 , 11 , 55 –75 . 10.1039/df9511100055 .
Hong J. ; Prawer S. ; Murphy A. B. 
Plasma
Catalysis as an Alternative
Route for Ammonia Production: Status, Mechanisms, and Prospects for
Progress . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2018 , 6 , 15 –31 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b02381 .
Jiao Y. ; Xu J. ; Zhou C. 
Effect of
ammonia plasma treatment on the properties
and cytocompatibility of a poly(L-lactic acid) film surface . J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 
2012 , 23 , 763 –777 . 10.1163/092050611X560690 .21477458 
Kleinhans C. ; Barz J. ; Wurster S. ; Willig M. ; Oehr C. ; Müller M. ; Walles H. ; Hirth T. ; Kluger P. J. 
Ammonia plasma treatment
of polystyrene
surfaces enhances proliferation of primary human mesenchymal stem
cells and human endothelial cells . Biotechnol.
J. 
2013 , 8 , 327 –337 . 10.1002/biot.201200210 .23070995 
Theerakittayakorn K. ; Bunprasert T.  Differentiation
Capacity of Mouse L929 Fibroblastic Cell Line Compare With Human Dermal
Fibroblast World Academy of Science, Engineering
and Technology International Journal of Medical and Health Sciences 2011 , 5  (2 ), 51 .
Finke B. ; Luethen F. ; Schroeder K. ; Mueller P. D. ; Bergemann C. ; Frant M. ; Ohl A. ; Nebe B. J. 
The effect of positively
charged plasma polymerization on initial osteoblastic focal adhesion
on titanium surfaces . Biomaterials 
2007 , 28 , 4521 –4534 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.06.028 .17628662 
Khang D. ; Kim S. Y. ; Liu-Snyder P. ; Palmore G. T. R. ; Durbin S. M. ; Webster T. J. 
Enhanced fibronectin
adsorption on carbon nanotube/poly(carbonate)
urethane: Independent role of surface nano-roughness and associated
surface energy . Biomaterials 
2007 , 28 , 4756 –4768 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2007.07.018 .17706277 
Miller D. C. ; Thapa A. ; Haberstroh K. M. ; Webster T. J. 
Endothelial and
vascular smooth muscle cell function on poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
with nano-structured surface features . Biomaterials 
2004 , 25 , 53 –61 . 10.1016/S0142-9612(03)00471-X .14580908 
Kim D.-H. ; Provenzano P. P ; Smith C. L. ; Levchenko A. 
Matrix nanotopography
as a regulator of cell function . J. Cell Biol. 
2012 , 197 , 351 –360 . 10.1083/jcb.201108062 .22547406 
Ranella A. ; Barberoglou M. ; Bakogianni S. ; Fotakis C. ; Stratakis E. 
Tuning cell
adhesion by controlling the roughness and wettability of 3D micro/nano
silicon structures . Acta Biomater. 
2010 , 6 , 2711 –2720 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2010.01.016 .20080216 
Selhuber-Unkel C. ; Erdmann T. ; Lopez-Garcıa M. ; Kessler H. ; Schwarz U. S. ; Spatz J. P. 
Cell adhesion strength
is controlled by intermolecular
spacing of adhesion receptors . Biophys. J. 
2010 , 98 , 543 –551 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2009.11.001 .20159150

