
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3032026410.1021/acsomega.8b02105ArticlePolyethylene Glycol-Encapsulated Histone Deacetylase
Inhibitor Drug-Composite Nanoparticles for Combination Therapy with
Artesunate Goswami Upashi †Kandimalla Raghuram ∥Kalita Sanjeeb ∥Chattopadhyay Arun *†‡Ghosh Siddhartha Sankar *†§†Centre
for Nanotechnology, ‡Department of Chemistry, and §Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, India∥ Drug
Discovery Lab, Institute of Advanced Study
in Science and Technology, Guwahati 781035, Assam, India* E-mail: arun@iitg.ernet.in (A.C.).* E-mail: sghosh@iitg.ernet.in (S.S.C.).20 09 2018 30 09 2018 3 9 11504 11516 20 08 2018 06 09 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Combination
drug therapy has become an effective clinical practice
for cancer treatment because of low cytotoxicity by the synergistic
effect of each medicine. Luminescent Au nanoclusters (Au NCs) were
formulated into spherical polyethylene glycol (PEG)–Au NC-encapsulated
drug–sodium butyrate (NaB) composite nanoparticles (PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs) in the presence of PEG and NaB. Their effect on
cancer cells was investigated using bio imaging, unravelling the mechanism
of the endocytosis pathway and combination therapeutic interventions
with a plant-based antimalarial drug artesunate (ART). PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs showed bright red luminescence in the lysosomal
compartment of the cells upon uptake predominantly through a caveolae-mediated
pathway. Combination of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs with ART displayed
enhanced therapeutic activity at a reduced dose compared to its individual
doses and revealed heightened synergistic activity as identified from
the combination index. The mechanism of synergism revealed elevated
generation of reactive oxygen species with both NaB and ART, which
disrupts mitochondrial membrane potential as evident from JC-1 staining.
Remarkably, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) assay and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick end labeling assay enlightened the role of NaB
and ART in HDAC inhibition and DNA fragmentation, respectively. Thus,
induction of apoptosis with the synergistic effect of both NaB and
ART with its meticulous mechanism makes it a promising tool for combinational
cancer therapy. In vivo activity of the NPs was evaluated on Daltons
lymphoma ascites bearing mice, which exhibited significant reduction
of tumor volume and viable tumor cells with a prolonged life span.

document-id-old-9ao8b02105document-id-new-14ao-2018-02105kccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
With various treatment
options such as surgical intervention, chemotherapy,
and radiotherapy for cancer, the most widely used single chemotherapeutic
activity (monotherapy) has become less attractive for clinical applications
because of its association with many drawbacks, such as high toxicity,
nonspecificity, and drug resistance.1−9 This is mainly because of the physiological heterogeneity of cancers
with a complex tumor microenvironment, which harbor abnormalities
in multiple signal pathways and are often associated with drug resistance.8−11 Along with this, the conventional chemotherapeutic drugs like doxorubicin,
paclitaxel, and cisplatin are associated with adverse side effects,
which induced a paradigm shift toward alternative drugs or combination
drug therapy. Combination therapy is the co-administration of two
different drugs with different pharmacological mechanisms, which achieves
therapeutic synergy efficacy, reduced toxicity, and long-term prognosis.12−16 Thus, the suitable combinations of drugs are essential to overcome
the drug resistance and enhanced therapeutic activity for preclinical
and clinical cancer treatment.6,7,9,13,16 At the same time, use of alternative drugs for combinational therapy
as the new effective therapeutics for cancer treatment remains an
important endeavour to reduce overall cytotoxicity associated with
standard chemotherapeutic drugs.1,17−19 The shortcomings associated with general administration of different
therapeutics (drugs) for combination therapy lies in its distinct
pharmacokinetic profiles, leading to inconsistent biodistribution
and thus an inefficient therapy. In addition, therapeutic drugs are
not directly delivered into targeted tumor sites, which induce adverse
effects on normal cells and result in killing of normal cells as well.4,20,21 Therefore, novel approaches that
can overcome the biological barriers and work upon the malignant cells
selectively without affecting the normal cells by delivering the optimal
dosage of the therapeutics in the complex tumor environment competently
are desired.

In the last few years, with advanced understanding
of development
of cancer, remarkable breakthroughs were unveiled for its diagnosis
and treatment in the field of nanomedicine.4,14,22−25 For the nanoparticle (NP)-based
therapeutics, nanocarriers and nanodrugs were poised to significantly
improve the aforementioned shortcomings as revealed by some prominent
reports, where some were already approved for clinical practices.4−6,26 The NP-based therapeutics and
nanocarriers of various metallic NPs like gold, silver, copper, and
silica have many advantages like better solubility, advanced delivery,
protection from a tumor microenvironment, and controlled release associated
with it.6,23,27,28 In addition, surface modification of NPs with poly
ethylene glycol (PEG) can augment these activities and have improved
drug delivery properties and prolonged circulation life time with
enhanced protection from clearance by mononuclear phagocytic systems.29−31 In fact, PEG and many other polymers are formulated into drugs containing
NPs29,32 and have longer in vivo circulation time
as well. In this regard, the use of biocompatible luminescent metal
nanoclusters (NCs), which has been growing as a promising tool for
theranostic applications was mostly anticipated where their luminescence
property could also be explored for probing and understanding of the
mechanism of uptake and activity.25,27,28 Metal NCs of Au, Ag, and Cu have been extensively
used for drug delivery purposes where Au NCs because of its stability,
potentially less toxicity or noncytoxicity, significant luminescence
properties, and low photobleaching arose as a new option, overcoming
the limits associated with organic dyes and quantum dots.25,27,33 Thus, we have synthesized polymer
PEG-coated nanodrugs by slightly modifying chitosan-based Au NCs as
reported earlier33 with the help of a negatively
charged drug sodium butyrate (NaB). As mentioned earlier, because
of the drug resistance and side effects associated with standard chemotherapeutic
drugs, novel drugs for cancer therapeutics are of intense interest.

As many epigenetic pathways are associated with cancer, one of
the prime regulatory mechanisms is the acetylation status of genes
controlled by histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases
(HDACs) for monitoring the gene expression and chromatin structure.34 At the same time, development of HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) has been received as a promising new class of antineoplastic
therapy for anticancer targets, which works by reactivation of tumor
suppressor genes.35,36 One of the common HDACi drugs
is sodium butyrate (NaB), which is a short fatty acid chain. NaB is
present in the human colon as a product of carbohydrate metabolism
and is produced by bacterial fermentation naturally.37 Moreover, the promising results of NaB as an anti-tumour
drug, possibly through inhibition of HDAC, have led to phase I and
phase II clinical trials.38 NaB acting
as an HDACi, is known to exhibit anticancer effects via differentiation
of carcinoma cells and instigate apoptosis in cancer cells both in
vivo and in several pre-clinical models.35,38 However, HDACi, although being a potent anti-cancer drug, has the
limitation of short half-life that is easily metabolized, and therefore,
it has better activity in combination with other therapeutic drugs
in clinical studies.36,39 Moreover, there are reports of
NaB delivery by solid lipid NPs to overcome the constraints associated
with fast metabolism of NaB.38 Hence, NaB
was used for nanodrug formulations for its enhanced delivery and is
intended for combination therapy for which a plant-based drug was
chosen.

Because of the adverse side effects associated with
standard chemotherapeutic
drugs, plant-based and naturally available potent anti-cancer agents
offer better alternatives and their use for cancer treatment is in
demand.40 In the last few decades, artemisinin,
which is a plant derivative from Chinese medical plant Artemisia annua L. (sweet wormwood), has been used
as an well-established antimalarial drug.41 Its semisynthetic derivatives are dihydroartemisinin, artesunic
acid, and artemether where artemisinin and sodium artesunate (ART)
are water-soluble salts of artesunic acid. The World Health Organization
(WHO) have recently recommended use of artemisinin and sodium ART
for chemotherapy of humans (artemisinin-based combination therapy,
ACT) in combination with conventional antimalarial drugs.41 Many reports suggest DNA fragmentation leading
to DNA damage as a prime reason for anticancer activity of ART.42 As ART is a prescribed remedy for malarial treatment
without any adverse effects and has potent anticancer activity, combination
therapy will aid to reduce the overall dose of ART and show enhanced
activity along with NaB. There is a report of using ART and NaB together,
but detailed understanding of their fate and anticancer mechanism
was not well studied.39 Thus, for combination
therapy with ART, a smart theranostic material was desired, having
cytotoxic activity with reduced side effects and which can be probed
to elucidate the mechanism.

Herein, polymer PEG-coated luminescent
NPs were synthesized with
Au NCs and the negatively charged drug NaB. NaB and PEG reacted with
Au NCs and formulated into spherical polymer drug-encapsulated composite
NPs, which is referred to as (PEG–Au NCs–NaB-NPs). The
luminescent NPs were used as a probe for uptake studies. Here, to
reduce the side effects associated with regular chemotherapeutic drugs,
a plant-based drug (ART) with an anticancer property and a naturally
available short chain fatty acid (NaB) were chosen for combinational
cancer therapy. This resulted in enhanced synergistic therapeutic
activity, and the mechanism of synergy was elucidated in detail. To
the best of our knowledge, for the first time, polymer-coated HDACi
drug-encapsulated composite NPs synthesized herein were studied in
detail for combination therapy with ART. The synergy of action of
both the drugs, that is, NaB and ART was studied, and the mechanism
has been studied meticulously. In vivo studies were also conducted
for its efficacy in Swiss albino mice with Dalton’s lymphoma
Ascites (DLA) to endorse it for real life applications.28 The schematic representation of formulation
of luminescent PEG–Au NC-coated drug-encapsulated composite
NPs and their synergistic combinational therapeutic activity in vitro
as well as in vivo highlighting the probable mechanism is elucidated
below (Scheme 1).

Scheme 1 Schematic Representation of Formulation of Luminescent PEG–Au
NCs Drug-Encapsulated Composite NPs (PEG–Au NCs–NaB-NPs)
and Their Synergistic Combinational Therapeutic Activity in Vitro
and in Vivo Systems
Results and Discussions
The polymer-coated drug-encapsulated
NPs were fabricated with red-emitting
chitosan-stabilized Au NCs by slightly modifying the previous protocol.33 The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image
revealed formation of an average of 1.4 ± 0.4 nm of Au NCs (Figure
S1a,b, Supporting Information), which were
transformed into polymer-coated drug-encapsulated NPs with the help
of negatively charged drug sodium butyrate (NaB) and nominally charged
PEG molecules. Moreover, the absence of any surface plasmon resonance
peak in the visible region rules out the formation of gold NPs (Figure
S2, Supporting Information). The formation
of spherical polymer-coated drug-encapsulated composite NP (PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs) has been confirmed with the TEM image (Figure 1a) with Au NCs embedded
on its surface (Figure 1b), while no characteristic selected area electron diffraction (SAED)
pattern for Au metal (Figure 1c) was observed. The average particle size of the composite
NPs was calculated to be 99.62 ± 18.25 nm (Figure 1d) using ImageJ software. TEM images showing
spherical homogenous NPs were also observed (Figure S3, Supporting Information). The particle size obtained
herein is greater than the established chitosan TPP nanocarrier with
Au NCs (72.1 ± 21.8), mainly because of PEG coating as PEGylation
increased the size along with its colloidal stability and reduced
the surface charge density.29−31 The NP formation would take place
because of the electrostatic interaction between positively charged
chitosan Au NCs and negatively charged NaB, and PEG might have helped
in modifying its surface. To corroborate this, potential studies were
conducted, which revealed a surface charge of 34.65 ± 8.35 and
−5.10 ± 3.24 mV for Au NCs and NaB, respectively, the
value of which was 8.97 ± 5.8 mV after polymeric NP formation
(Figure S4, Supporting Information). Synthesis
of polymeric NPs with chemotherapeutic drugs is well established where
PEG has been extensively used for NP formation with some of the known
standard drugs (e.g., doxorubicin).29,32 Polymeric
nanocomposites are known to have better drug encapsulation capacity
and delivery and help in sustained drug release with prolonged circulation
half-life.43 The as-synthesized PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs displayed strong red emission at 610 nm (λex = 320 nm) as shown in Figure 1e and in its inset image. Further, the atomic composition
of Au NCs was calculated using the Jellium model using the following
equation.44 1  

Figure 1 (a) TEM image of PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs (scale bar 100
nm) with the portion to be magnified is marked in red. (b) Magnified
image of the same sample clearly showing embedded Au NCs on its surface.
(c) SAED pattern obtained from image in (b) showing no characteristic
peaks of Au metal. (d) Histogram showing the particle size distribution
of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (as calculated from (b) and from
the others images taken from different sets of experiments). (e) Photoluminescence
spectra of the as-synthesized Au NCs and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
(λex = 320 nm) and the digital photograph in the
inset showing bright red luminescence of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
under UV transilluminator.

As emission maximum of Au NCs was observed at 610 nm, Eemission was calculated to be 2.032 eV. Further, EFermi of gold is reported to 5.53 eV. Thus,
on the basis of eq 1, N was calculated to be 20.1–20 atoms. The quantum
yield of the composite NP was calculated to be 6.8%, using quinine
sulphate as the standard and thus can be used for theranostic. The
hydrodynamic size of the PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs was found
to be 147.62 ± 10.21, measured with the help of dynamic light
scattering (DLS)-based studies (Figure S5, Supporting Information). This increment in size with respect to the size
measured from TEM may be due to the presence of chitosan and PEG polymer
surrounding the composite NPs.

To determine the percentage of
drugs encapsulated on PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs, binding assay was carried out by probing the luminescence
of the as-synthesized composite NPs. Probing the luminescence of the
composite NPs is one of the common methods used for enumerating drug
binding (%).27 Here, a negatively charged
drug NaB served as an ion-gelating agent for NP synthesis and PEG
helped in its encapsulation, which was carried out based on the solvent
exchange method and precipitation.45,46 For this,
various concentrations (10–60 mM) of drugs were used for NP
synthesis as mentioned in the Experimental Section. After synthesis, the aqueous phase was collected and centrifuged
at 10 000 rpm for 10 min. The pellet was carefully mixed in
2 mL Milli-Q water, and pH was maintained at ∼7, and the luminescence
was measured (λex = 320 nm and λem = 610 nm). It was found that NP synthesis with 50 mM concentration
of NaB retained 65% of drugs in the nanocomposite after which it became
saturated (Figure S6, Supporting Information). Thus, dispersion of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (50 mM) has
32.5 mM of NaB in it after encapsulation.

For effective application
of this composite NP in theranostics,
the size and its luminescence plays a pivotal role. First, the bright
luminescence of the PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs was probed. There
are many reports of use of metal NCs for theranostics because of their
intense luminescence, enhanced quantum yields, tunable fluorescence
emission, large Stokes shift, and good photostability as opposed to
conventional dyes, which undergo photobleaching.27,28 To elucidate its role in internalization and tracking of cancer
cells, PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs were incubated with a cervical
cancer cell line (HeLa cells) for 4 h, and confocal laser scanning
microscopic (CLSM) studies were carried out. Bright red luminescence
was evidently visible inside the cells as shown in Figure 2b, substantiating their uptake
by HeLa cells. This was further confirmed by depth projection (Z-stack)
studies which validated their successful internalization inside the
cells (Figure 2c).
Moreover, the emission spectrum was also measured inside the live
cells (Figure S7, Supporting Information) which corroborate the red emission obtained by the composite NPs.
The control cells, that is, cells without treatment with PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs, did not reveal any luminescence (Figure S8, Supporting Information). This shows the potential
of use of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs in cancer theranostics.

Figure 2 CLSM images
of HeLa cells after incubation with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
for 4 h. (a) Bright-field image of HeLa cells. (b) HeLa cells showing
distinct red emission because of uptake of luminescent PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs and (c) Z-stack projection of the cell imaged in
(b) confirming the uptake of the NPs.

We have also explored the intracellular localization of the
synthesized
composite NPs on HeLa cells to find out whether they penetrated the
nuclear membrane and entered the nucleus or were localized in the
lysosomes. For this, the treated cells were incubated with 2 μg/mL
of DAPI (for 10 min) and cytopainter green (for 2 h). The lack of
colocalization of the composite NPs (PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs)
with the nucleus marker DAPI was observed after 30 min of incubation
as can be seen in the merged image (Figure S9d, Supporting Information), whereas Figure S9a,b in the Supporting Information shows red and blue luminescence
of the probe and DAPI, respectively. This was carried out using CLSM
with the simultaneous mode where λex and λem of the composite NPs and nuclear marker were fixed in different
channels (λex = 405 nm and λem =
620 and 460 nm). Comparatively, noticeable colocalization was observed
with cytopainter green that specifically stains the lysosomes. It
is to be mentioned here that the cells (i.e., those treated with the
composite NPs and without cytopainter green) showed only red luminescence
(Figure 3b), and nothing
was observed in the green channel (Figure 3c). However, the cells treated with the PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs and cytopainter green clearly revealed colocalization
of the probe with cytopainter green in the merged image (Figure 3h), confirming its
presence in the lysosomes. In Figure 3f, red luminescence represents internalization of the
composite NPs, and the green luminescence in Figure 3g is due to staining of only lysosomes with
cytopainter green. Thus, the internalized PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
were randomly distributed in the perinuclear region and the lysosomal
compartments. The samples were analyzed using CLSM with (λex = 405 nm) and (λex = 488 nm) for the composite
NPs and cytopainter green, respectively. Chitosan used as a template
for synthesis of Au NCs in our system has N-acetylglucosamine
units, which have an affinity toward N-linked glycans present on the
lysosomal membrane, and this might be the prime reason for its localization
in the lysosomes.47

Figure 3 Confocal laser scanning
microscopy images of HeLa cells showing
intracellular distribution of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs after
4 h of incubation. (a) Bright-field image of the cell, (b) luminescence
observed under the red channel (λex = 405 nm and
λem = 610 nm), (c) luminescence observed under the
green channel (λex = 488 nm and λem = 520 nm), and (d) merged image of (b,c). CLSM images of HeLa cells
incubated along with counter stain cytopainter green. (e) Bright-field
image, (f) luminescence observed under the red channel (λex = 405 nm and λem = 610 nm), (g) luminescence
observed under the green channel (λex = 488 nm and
λem = 520 nm), and (h) merged image of (f,g) showing
yellow color, confirming its localization in the lysosome.

Localization of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
on lysosomes mainly
suggests their internalization through the endosomal pathway as transfer
to the lysosomes validates the characteristic transport pathway of
NPs internalized by encytotosis.48 As mentioned
earlier, the size of the NP also plays an crucial role in its uptake.
NPs with size <200 nm are usually taken by the endocytic pathway,
which is mainly divided into clathrin-dependent, caveolae, macropinocytosis,
and phagocytosis pathways.49 To shed light
in the cellular uptake mechanism of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs,
two inhibitors were used, namely, chlorpromazine (50 μM) and
methyl-β-cyclodextrin (10 mM), which are known clathrin- and
claveolae-mediated endocytosis inhibitors. In this context, HeLa cells
were incubated with the respective inhibitors for 1 h prior to their
treatment with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs for 4 h. Quantitative
analysis revealed significant decrease in the luminescence intensity
to 15.85 ± 2.9 and 61.22 ± 3.4% with chlorpromazine and
methyl-β-cyclodextrin, respectively, from that of control (Figure 4a). This was further
corraborrated with CLSM studies where less uptake of PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs was observed in chlorpromazine (Figure 4b(iii))-treated cells as compared
with that of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NP-treated cells without
inhibitors (Figure 4b(i)). Negligible luminescence was observed in methyl-β-cyclodextrin-treated
cells (Figure 4b(iv)),
which emphasizes that the uptake of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
was primarily through claveolae-mediated endocytosis.

Figure 4 (a) Quantitative analysis
of cellular uptake of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
by HeLa cells after 1 h incubation with chlorpromazine (50 μM)
and methyl-β-cyclodextrin (10 mM) inhibitors. All the measurements
were carried out in triplicates, and luminescence was measured in
Tecan (λex = 405 and λem = 610 nm).
Here, control stands for HeLa cells treated with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
(without inhibitors) for 4 h. (b) Confocal laser microscopy images
of HeLa cells treated with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs. (i) Luminescence
of the cells in the red channel without any inhibitors (λex = 405 and λem = 610 nm), (ii) bright-field
image of (i), (iii) luminescence of the cells after pretreatment with
chlorpromazine (50 μM for 1 h), (iv) bright-field image of (iii),
(v) luminescence of the cells after pretreatment with methyl-β-cyclodextrin
(10 mM for 1 h), and (vi) bright field image of (v).

To evaluate the potential therapeutic impact of
PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
and combination therapy with drugs (ART), the cell viability assay
with 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)
was carried out. The cytotoxic activity was tested on cervical cancer
cells (HeLa) with 48 h of treatment. The drug involved herein for
combination therapy was NaB, which was encapsulated on the composite
NPs (32.5 mM) and in conjunction with ART (100 μM) added separately.
First, the cytotoxic effect of NaB and ART were checked individually.
After 48 h of treatment with NaB and ART, MTT assay exhibited cell
viability of 43.7 and 40.23% at 11.1 mM and 51.3 μM concentration
of NaB and ART, respectively (Figure 5a,b). To calculate the IC50 values, a nonlinear
regression curve fit using Graphpad Prism software was used with which
the IC50 values were calculated to be 10.52 mM for NaB
and 51.40 μM for ART. The cytotoxic activity of control Au NCs
showed viability of 87.38% (Figure S10, Supporting Information), whereas after synthesis of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs,
the viability was found to be 22.24%, which is possibly because of
encapsulation of the drug NaB (11.1 mM). The IC50 value
for PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs was found to be 8.69 mM with respect
to NaB, which is lower than IC50 dose of control NaB (10.52
mM) as observed in Figure 5c. For combinational therapy, different ratios of PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs (32.5 mM) and ART (100 μM) were used, and
it was found to have enhanced activity. It is to be mentioned here
that after several trials, PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs of a fixed
concentration (1.8 mM) were given to all the cells. With the fixed
concentration of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs, varied concentrations
of ART (4.4, 8.8, 13.3, 17.7, and 22.2 μM) were added. The results
after 48 h of treatment exhibited significant reduction in the cell
viability percentage (Figure 5d). The IC50 value for the combination therapy
of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs with ART was calculated to be 1.8
mM and 17.32 μM for NaB and ART, respectively, which were prominently
less than individual IC50 doses of NaB (10.52 mM) and ART
(51.40 μM). At the same time, the cytotoxicity was also checked
in the normal lung cell line L132 where at the highest concentration
of combinational dose, 69% of cells were found to be viable (Figure
S11, Supporting Information). Thus, the
combination therapy helped to use drugs at a lower dose, which reduces
the cytotoxic activity of its individual doses; however, it enhances
the efficacy, suggesting the augmentation of synergistic activity.
To establish the synergistic effect between PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
and ART, the isobologram and combination index (CI) were calculated
by using the CalcuSyn software (Biosoft, Version 2.1). The isobologram
plot can be explained based on the median-effect equation (Chou) and
the CI theorem (Chou-Talalay). The CI values (CI values) were used
to characterize as synergy (CI < 1), additivity (CI = 1), and antagonism
(CI > 1).50 The isobologram plot of
combination
therapy of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs and ART (Figure 5d) revealed that the obtained
values of all the data points were <1 (CI < 1), which signified
drug–drug interactions (Figure 5e). The CI values for all the combinations are given
in Table S1, Supporting Information. Hence,
combination therapy with NaB and ART augmented the efficacy with heightened
synergistic activity, outweighing the benefits of monotherapy and
a prevalent combination therapy associated with many side effects,
and it paves a new way for plant-based combinational therapy with
naturally available drugs.

Figure 5 MTT assay was carried out to find out the number
of viable HeLa
cells after 48 h of treatment. All sets of experiments were carried
out in triplicates and are represented as the mean ± SD. The
ANOVA test was also carried out for each set where “*”
(p < 0.05), “**” (p < 0.005), “***” (p < 0.001)
and “****” (p < 0.0001) represent
statistical significance. (a) Cell viability assay of NaB (50 mM),
(b) cell viability assay of artesunte (200 μM), (c) cell viability
assay of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (32.5 mM with respect to
sodium butyrate), (d) cell viability assay of combination therapy
of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART, and (e) isobologram
analysis and CI values of combination therapy doses. All the values
were obtained below the line of additivity to indicate the synergistic
effect. Isobologram analysis was calculated using Calcusyn software.

To investigate the mode of impact
exerted by combination therapy
of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART and the possible mechanism
of synergistic therapeutic activity, fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS)-based experiments were carried out. First generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) was evaluated by measuring the DCF fluorescence
in HeLa cells following treatments with Au NCs, NaB, ART, PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs, and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART.
It was found that a trivial amount of ROS was generated with Au NCs
only, but significant enhancement of the fluorescence of DCF was observed
with NAB, ART, PEG–Au NC–NPs, and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART-treated
cells from that of the control (Figure S12, Supporting Information). Here, we would like to mention that the maximum
shift of the peak for PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART-treated
cells was mainly because of synergistic action of NaB and ART where
both the drugs are known to generate ROS.37,41,42 In ART-treated cells, oxidative cleavage
occurs, leading to ROS production.41 Elevated
ROS production with NaB and ART might be associated with dysfunction
of the mitochondria.37,51 To enlighten the fact, mitochondrial
membrane potential damage was measured with 5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′-tetraethylbenzimi-dazolylcarbocyanine
iodide JC-1 dye and observed under CLSM. It was found that the merged
image of HeLa cells treated with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART
primarily showed green luminescence (Figure 6t) as opposed to that of control that showed
red luminescence (Figure 6d). The primary reason was due to high mitochondrial membrane
potential of the control cells (without treatment) that allowed to
form J-aggregates and exhibited red emission, whereas in the cells
treated with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART, they failed
to undergo aggregation (because of low mitochondrial membrane potential)
and remained in the monomeric form to show green emission. As clearly observed
from the merged images, enhanced green luminescence was observed with
ART, and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART-treated cells
(Figure 6p,t) were
mainly due to mitochondrial dysfunction. In cells treated with NAB
and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs, less dysfunction of mitochondria
had occurred (Figure 6h,i), and hence, the role of ART in mitochondrial damage could be
stated here. At the same time, HDAC activity was also checked as NaB
is known to induce HDAC inhibition (HDACi), which is an upcoming treatment
domain of cancer inhibition.37,38 For this HDAC assay
kit, fluorometric was used for detection of HDAC activity. HDAC activity
analysis of HeLa cell lysates treated with NaB (10.52 mM), PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs (8.69 mM with respect to NaB), and PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART (1.8 mM of NaB and 17.32 μM of
ART) revealed significant decrease in the luminescence intensity as
compared with that of untreated HeLa cell lysate luminescence (Figure
S13, Supporting Information). Hence, the
role of NaB in HDACi might have contributed in enhanced synergistic
activity.

Figure 6 CLSM images of control HeLa cells along with JC-1 dye. First row:
(a) bright-field image, (b) red channel, (c) green channel, and (d)
merged image of (a–c). Second row: Hela cells treated with
NaB (10.52 mM). (e) Bright-field image, (f) red channel, (g) green
channel, and (h) merged image of (e–g). Third row: Hela cells
treated with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (8.69 mM). (i) Bright-field
image, (j) red channel, (k) green channel, and (l) merged image of
(i–k). Fourth row: Hela cells treated with ART (51.40 μM).
(m) Bright-field image, (n) red channel, (o) green channel, and (p)
merged image of (m–o). Fifth row: HeLa cells treated with PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART. (q) Bright-field image, (r) red channel,
(s) green channel, and (t) merged image of (q–s).

Further, the effect of combination therapy on cell
cycle progression
of HeLa cells was also examined by flow cytometric analysis with PI
staining, where arrest in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle was observed
in the case of cells treated with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART.
The cell population (%) in the G0/G1 phase after treatment with PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART was considerably higher (76.7%) than
that of the cells treated with individual drugs NaB (53.64%) and ART
(68.47%) (Figure S14, Supporting Information). This can be attributed to DNA damage caused by ART, which was
more in the case of combinational therapy. Additionally, terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) dUTP nick end labelling assay (TUNEL
assay) was also performed, which is a method employed for detection
of apoptotic DNA fragmentation and is a hallmark of late apoptosis.
In this, the addition of bromolated deoxyuridine triphosphates (Br-dUTP)
takes place on the broken or fragmented 3′-hydroxyl (OH) termini
of DNA and is catalyzed by TdT enzyme. These were analyzed by staining
the cells with a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled anti-BrdU
mAb and were observed under flow cytometry in the green channel. From
the histogram obtained (Figure S15, Supporting Information), it was evident that there was a shift in green
fluorescence intensity in the PEG–Au NC–NaB-NP-treated
cells, which is proportional to fragmented DNA. After 48 h of treatment
with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs, 25.46% of TUNEL-positive cells
were found, whereas a negligible amount of TUNEL-positive cells of
5.78% was found in the case of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs that
indicates the role of ART on DNA damage. To ensure apoptosis as the
mechanism of cell death, FACS-based Annexin V-7AAD assay was performed
where a considerable higher percentage (52.73%) of apoptotic cells
were obtained after treatment with an IC50 dose of PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART followed by observation of 34.64, 27.18,
and 14.24% of apoptotic cells following treatment with ART, PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs, and NaB, respectively (Figure 7).

Figure 7 FACS-based assay with annexin-V-7-AAD stained
HeLa cells. The dot
plots showing progression of cell death are divided into four quadrants,
where quadrant 2 and 3 represent early and late apoptotic cell population,
respectively. (a) Control cells. Annexin-V-7-AAD-stained HeLa cells
after treatment with (b) Au NCs, (c) NaB, (d) PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs,
(e) ART, and (f) PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART.

Finally, the efficacy of combination
therapy observed in vitro
was tested in vivo mice bearing DLA tumor. For induction of tumor,
adult male Swiss albino mice were used where subcutaneous inoculations
of DLA cells were performed in mice belonging to group G-II to group
G-VII. Following inoculation, the size of tumour growth (belly swelling)
was monitored for 8 days that were used for various experiments. First,
the uptake of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs on DLA cells was measured
for the use of these materials on the DLA model. The CLSM studies
revealed the uptake of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (red luminescence)
upon incubation for 4 h (Figure S16, Supporting Information) and thus, the DLA model was chosen for determining
the potent therapeutic activity with combination therapy. The toxicity
effects of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs and ART were pursued, which
showed the absence of deleterious effects on animal health at 20 mg/kg
(NaB and ART) till 14 days without any mortality. As no observed adverse
effect level of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs and ART was observed,
1/10th of its doses (2 mg/kg for NaB and 2 mg/kg for ART) were used
for cytotoxic assessment and tumor suppression activities for in vivo
experiments. The Swiss albino mice used for the experiments were first
distributed into seven distinct groups (n = 10) for
respective treatments which includes a control group as well. As already
mentioned for DLA tumorogenesis (tumour growth with swollen belly)
that is, after 8 days of inoculation, treatment with the nonlethal
dose was given in the peritoneal cavity of the mice at fixed intervals
(every 24 h). The nonlethal doses of Au NC (2 mg/mL), NaB (2 mg/kg),
PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (2 mg/kg), ART (2 mg/kg), and PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART (2 mg/kg) were given, and after completion
of 8 days of drug treatment, the trypan blue cell viability test was
conducted for the cells collected from the mice (on the 16th day).
The results, as shown in Table S2 in the Supporting Information, revealed that combination therapy with PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs and ART treatment resulted in significant reduction
in the percentage of viable DLA cells. Interestingly, PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs have shown distinct enhanced therapeutic activity
in contrast with other treated groups (NaB and ART only). The viable
numbers of DLA cells were similar in the case of Au NC-treated cells
to those of control cells showing almost no toxic effects of Au NCs.
At the same time, prominent reduction in tumor volume was observed
in both PEG–Au NC–NaB-NP- and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART-treated
mice, which was confirmed by the body weights measured on respective
days (0, 8th, and 15th day) as in Figure 8a. It can be inferred from Figure S17, Supporting Information, that treatment with PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs and combination therapy of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
with ART showed clear potential in tumor volume reduction (Figure S14d,f). Among all the treatments with
PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs and in combination therapy of PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs with ART showed less increment in body weight 2.44
± 0.36 and 1.85 ± 0.31 g, respectively, as calculated from
the initial body weight of the mice. There was an upsurge in body
weight of DLA-induced mice (11.28 ± 1.62 g) and Au NC-treated
group (10.52 ± 1.52). The results are illustrated in Table S2
in the Supporting Information.

Figure 8 (a) Effects
on body weight of tumor-bearing mice as monitored till
16 days following treatment with Au NC, NaB, PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs,
ART, and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART. (b) Survival
rate of DLA-induced mice monitored up to 50 days after treatment with
Au NC, NaB, PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs, ART, and PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART, as represented by the Kaplan–Meir
curve.

The enhanced therapeutic activity
with combinational therapy can
be attributed to synergistic activity of NaB and ART, where PEG-encapsulated
drug composite NPs provide a steric barrier, which prevents NP opsonization,
thereby increasing the blood circulation time and avoiding nonspecific
cellular uptake. Thus, it helps in EPR and sustained drug release.
The increased life span of DLA mice was found in PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART-treated
groups that emphasized superior therapeutic activity in combinational
treatment (Figure 8b). All the mice died within 17th and 18th days of post-tumour development
in the case of control and Au NC-treated group (Figure 8b). It is to be noted here that there was
upsurge in the mean survival time (MST) in the case of NaB- and ART-treated
groups, where mice died on 39th, 40th, and 47th day (3 out of 5) and
on 43rd and 46th day (2 out of 5), respectively. In an allied vein,
interestingly, having potent therapeutic activity PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART resulted in increasing
the survivability of mice in the course of study (50 days), where
systemic toxicity of NaB and ART was significantly reduced as observed
in Figure 8b.

For haematological parameters, increase in WBC counts was observed
in DLA-induced mice with reduced RBC and Hb counts (Table S3, Supporting Information). At the same time, similar
effects were observed on Au NC-treated groups. Treatment with NaB,
PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs, and ART also showed elevated WBC
counts, but less than only DLA-induced mice (i.e., without treatment).
The RBC and Hb counts though had improved in these groups, but they
still were in the lower range. Importantly, treatment with PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART indicated better outcomes with counts
almost close with that of normal levels of WBC, RBC, and Hb as shown
in (Table S3, Supporting Information).
To evaluate the hepatotoxicity in DLA mice after various treatment
conditions, the liver function tests were carried out. It was found
that there was a rapid elevation of liver function marker enzymes
(SGOT, SGPT, and ALP) in the case of DLA-induced mice as compared
to that of normal mice (Table S4, Supporting Information). The treatment with Au NCs also revealed enhanced liver function
marker enzymes. Though treatment with NaB and ART assisted in reduction
of these enzymes to some extent, it was still in a higher range. However,
treatments with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs and PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART showed substantial reduction and were
almost near to the levels of control animals (without DLA). The details
of the obtained liver function marker enzymes after various treatments
are included in Table S4, Supporting Information.

Further histopathological studies were also carried out in the kidney of
DLA-induced mice that resulted in tubular congestion, glomerular atrophy,
and deformed epithelial cells along with inflammatory cell infiltrates
(Figure 9a). Administration
of Au NCs failed to ameliorate the pathological condition to that
of DLA animals (Figure 9b). Intraperitoneal administration of NaB and ART exhibited pronounced
improvement in renal pathology where reduced occurrences of glomerular
and blood vessel congestion were recorded (Figure 9c,e), whereas PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART treatment ensured the
significant protection from DLA-induced renal deformities (Figure 9d,f), where pronounced
reduction of epithelial desquamation, tubular congestion, and hyperaemia
of the medullary part of kidney resembling the normal renal physiology
of mice was observed. Additionally, liver histology analysis portrayed
the pathological changes of liver in DLA mice. Abnormal hepatocytes
along with hepatic fibrillation, hemorrhage, polymorphic neutrophil
infiltration, and perinuclear clumping of the cytoplasm were observed
in DLA mice, whereas similar changes were observed on Au NC treatment
(Figure 9g,h). In contrast,
NaB, ART, PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs, and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART
(Figure 9i–l)
treatment demonstrated significant protection with normal hepatocellular
ultra-structures. Among all the treatments, the PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART
(Figure 9l) was found
to be the best in combating hepatic damage during the DLA condition.

Figure 9 Histopathology
of the kidney and liver collected on the 17th day
from different treatment groups (a,g), DLA mice without any drug treatment;
(b,h), DLA mice with Au NC treatment; (c,i), DLA mice with NaB treatment;
(d,j), DLA mice with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NP treatment; (e,k),
DLA mice with ART treatment; and (f,l) and DLA mice with PEG–Au
NCs–NaB-NPs–ART treatment.

Conclusions
In brief, spherical PEG-coated luminescent drug-encapsulated
composite
NPs (PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs) were synthesized in the presence
of negatively charged sodium butyrate as an ion-gelating agent. The
internalization of the luminescent PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
in Hela cells occurred through receptor-mediated endocytosis as was
evident from the experiments with specific inhibitors. The work emphasized
the use of combination therapy with a plant-based antimalarial drug
ART and small fatty acid chain (NaB) to enhance therapeutic activity.
The detailed studies on the mechanism of synergy of ART and NaB revealed
enhanced generation of ROS, which resulted in depolarization of mitochondria.
At the same time, the work highlighted the role of ART and NaB in
DNA damage and HDACi, resulting in cell death. Our findings were well
supported with in vivo studies to decipher synergistic therapeutic
activity and provided a promising combination platform for an effective
cancer therapy.

Experimental Section
TEM Analysis
TEM
analysis was carried out to find out
the size and morphology of the as-synthesized gold NCs (Au NCs) and
PEG–Au NC-encapsulated drug NPs (PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs)
by using JEOL, JEM 2100 TEM (Peabody, MA, USA), which operates at
the maximum accelerating voltage of 200 kV. For analysis, the as-synthesized
Au NCs were diluted in 1 mL of water and TEM was conducted. For PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs, first, 1 mL of it was taken and centrifuged at
10 000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the
pellet was dispersed in autoclaved Milli-Q water (1 mL). Thereafter,
it was diluted in a 1:10 ratio with autoclaved Milli-Q water, from
which 8 μL of the PEG-AuNC-NaB-NPs was drop-cast onto a copper-coated TEM grid.
The sample was left overnight for drying before analysis.

UV–Visible
and Fluorescence Spectroscopic Measurements
UV–vis
spectra of the composite NPs were recorded using
a PerkinElmer Lamda 25 UV–vis spectrophotometer. For fluorescence
measurements, Fluorolog-3, Horiba Jobin Yvon, Edison, NY, USA was
used.

DLS-Based Measurements
The Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS-90
instrument was used to measure the hydrodynamic diameter of the PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs and their net surface charges before and after drug
encapsulation. All experiments were performed at a temperature of
25 °C and with a fixed run time of 11 s where the scattering
angle was fixed at 90°. For sample preparations, a ratio of 1:10
(Au NC–NPs/H2O) was maintained, and experiments
were conducted in triplicates in three different sets. Data analysis
was carried out using the Malvern DTS 5.10 software.

Synthesis of
PEG-Coated Composite NPs of Chitosan–Au
NCs–NaB
For the synthesis of PEG-coated composite
NPs, first, Au NCs were synthesized by slightly modifying the previous
protocol. Thus, 1.5 mL of 0.5% (w/v) chitosan was added in 8 mL of
H2O in a reaction vessel under constant stirring. Into
this, 180 μL of 10 mM HAuCl4 and 60 μL of 0.11
M MPA were added and stirred for 10 min. Chitosan used as a template
was first prepared by dissolving 0.5% (w/v) of chitosan in 0.1% (v/v)
acetic acid and kept for overnight stirring, which was then filtered
by using Whatman filter paper to remove the residuals. The pH of the
chitosan solution was adjusted at 6.2 prior to synthesis of Au NCs.
For the synthesis of the composite NPs, 50 mM NaB (negatively charged
drug), which served as an ion-gelating agent was added into 2 mL of
Au NC solution. For the coating of PEG, 200 μL of PEG-400 was
taken in 1 mL of chloroform and added drop-wise into the as-synthesized
Au NC solution under probe sonication (50 amplitude) in an ice cold
condition for 10 min. Thus, PEG-coated drug-encapsulated composite
NPs (PEG–Au NC–NaB NPs) were formed in the aqueous phase,
which was collected carefully and centrifuged at 10 000 rpm
for 10 min. Finally, the precipitate was re-dispersed in 2 mL phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) solution (pH 7.4) and stored at 4 °C for
further use.

Drug Encapsulation Efficiency
The
encapsulation efficiency
of the drug was calculated based on the luminescence of Au NCs.27 For this, in a fixed concentration of Au NCs
(v/v), varied concentrations of the NaB drug (10, 20, 30, 40, 50,
and 60 mM) were added and incubated for 3 h. This was followed by
PEG coating and drug-encapsulated NP synthesis with the help of a
probe sonicator as already mentioned. The aqueous phase was collected
followed by centrifugation, and the precipitate was re-dispersed in
water. To find out the drug encapsulation efficiency, the luminescence
of Au NCs was probed using fluorescence spectrophotometer LS55 PerkinElmer,
at excitation and emission wavelengths of 320 and 610 nm, respectively.
Therefore, the luminescence of control Au NCs (without drugs) was
measured and Au NCs (with different concentration of drugs) was calculated
as follows  where Au NCsi refers to luminescence
intensity of control Au NCs (without drug) and Au NCsf refers
to luminescence intensity of Au NCs after drug binding (10–60
mM).

In Vitro Experiments (Mammalian Cell Culture)
All experiments
were carried out in human cervical cancer cell lines (HeLa), which
were procured from National Centre for Cell Sciences, Pune. Cells
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM, high glucose) along with 10% FBS, 10 000 units of penicillin
and 10 mg/mL streptomycin. The cultured cells were maintained in a
CO2 incubator with 5% carbon dioxide in humidified atmosphere.

Cell Viability Assay
The cytotoxic activity of composite
NPs along with various controls was carried out with the help of MTT
assay. For this, the treatments with the respective composites and
individual drugs were given for 48 h followed by MTT assay. Briefly,
96-well plates were seeded with 10 × 103 cells/well
and were allowed to attach for 24 h. Treatments were given for 48
h, in triplicates with varied concentrations of Au NCs, NaB (50 mM),
PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (32.5 mM) with respect to NaB, ART
(200 μM), and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART (where
NaB concentration is fixed, i.e., 1.8 mM and varied ART concentration,
i.e., 100 μM). MTT was added after the treatment period of 48
h in each well and incubated at 37 °C for 3 h which resulted
in formazon formation. The formed formazon was dissolved in DMSO and
gives purple color having absorbance at 550 nm. The measurements were
taken at 550 nm with the background reference measured at 655 nm in
a multiplate reader (Tecan) and were calculated based on the following
formula  

Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
Confocal laser microscopy
studies were carried out for uptake studies along with inhibition
and mitochondrial damage assay using the Zeiss LSM 880 microscope.
For the uptake studies, 10 × 103 cells were seeded
on a coverslip in 35 mm culture plates and were incubated in a CO2 incubator for 24 h. After attaining the required morphology
and confluency, cells were treated with the IC50 dose of
PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (8.69 mM with respect to NaB) for
4 h. Following incubation, the cells were thoroughly washed with PBS
and thereafter fixed with 4% formaldehyde (10 min at 37 °C).
The coverslips were slowly taken out from the plate with the help
of tweezers and were placed on a glass slide (upside down). The sides
of the coverslips were sealed. The prepared samples were observed
under Zeiss microscope LSM 880 with λex = 405 nm
and λem = 610 nm. For DAPI staining after incubation
with PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs (8.69 mM) for 4 h, cells were
thoroughly washed and incubated with DAPI (2 μg/mL) for 10 min
followed by fixing. To carry out imaging, the simultaneous mode was
used [(λex = 405 nm and λem = 460
for DAPI) and (λex = 405 nm and λem = 610 nm for PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs)].

Colocalization
Study
To confirm the prevalence of PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs on lysosomes, the cytopainter green lysosome staining
kit (Abcam) was used. Similarly, the cells were grown in a coverslip,
and following treatment with composite NPs for 4 h, 1 mL of cytopainter
green was added and incubated for 1 h. Thereafter, the cells were
washed with PBS twice followed by fixing and transferring into glass
slides, where the edges were sealed before analysis. The samples were
then analyzed; (λex = 405 nm) and (λex = 488 nm) for the composite NPs and cytopainter green, respectively.

Cellular Uptake Mechanism Study
To understand the endocytosis
mechanisms of composite NPs, clathrin and claveolar inhibitors were
used and luminescence based assays were carried out on a multiple
plate reader (Tecan) and using CLSM. The inhibitors used for studying
the endocytosis mechanism were chlorpromazine (50 μM) and methyl-β-cyclodextrin
(10 mM) for clathrin-based endocytosis and caveolae-mediated endocytosis,
respectively. For Tecan-based assay, 10 × 103 cells
were grown in 96-well plates, whereas for CLSM studies, cells were
grown on a coverslip in 35 mm culture plates for 24 h at 37 °C.
After attachment, first, the cells were incubated with the inhibitors
for 1 h followed by treatment with nanocomposites for 4 h. Then, the
cells were washed with PBS and readings were taken in Tecan (λex = 320 nm and λem = 610 nm), whereas for
CLSM studies, after washing, the samples were fixed on glass slides
and were analyzed (λex = 405 nm and λem = 610 nm).

JC-1 Staining
Apoptosis involves
series of events like
release of caspase activators such as cytochrome c, alterations in electron transport, and damage or change of mitochondrial
transmembrane potential, which eventually resulted in cellular death.
For early stages of programmed cell death, many changes happen in
mitochondria like variations in its membrane potential. For this,
a membrane-permeant cationic lipophilic dye (5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′-tetraethylbenzimi-dazolylcarbocyanine
iodide) (JC-1) is widely used for effective distinction between apoptotic
and healthy cells based on mitochondrial health. In normal healthy
cells (having high mitochondrial transmembrane potential), JC-1 forms
complexes known as J-aggregates in a mitochondrial matrix and gives
red fluorescence. However, in apoptotic or unhealthy cells, JC-1 remains
in the monomeric form as low mitochondrial transmembrane potential
prevents its accumulation in the mitochondria. Therefore, the dye
is disseminated throughout the cell, which results in shifting from
red (J-aggregates) to green fluorescence (JC-1 monomers), and hence,
gives green fluorescence. For this, the cells (10 × 103) were grown in life cell-imaging plates (from Thermofisher), and
treatments with an IC50 dose of NaB (10.52 mM), PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs (8.69 mM), ART (51.40 μM), and PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART (concentration of NaB is 1.8 mM and ART
is 17.32 μM) for 48 h were given. The cells were washed, and
phenol red free DMEM medium was added along with incubation with JC-1
dye (2.7 μM) for 10 min, and then life cell imaging was conducted.
CLSM was carried out in the simultaneous mode for red (λex = 525 nm) and green emission (λex = 480
nm).

HDACi Assay
HDACi was estimated using the fluorometric
HDAC activity assay kit (Sigma), which offers an easy method for the
detection of HDAC activity based on enzymatic reaction. For this,
cells were incubated with NaB (10.52 mM), PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs
(8.6 9 mM with respect to NaB), ART (51.40 μM), and PEG–Au
NC–NaB-NPs–ART, where the NaB concentration is fixed,
that is, 1.8 mM and ART concentration is 17.32 μM for 4 h. Following
treatment, the cells were lysed with buffer containing 50 mM HEPES,
150 mM NaCl, and 0.1% Triton X-100 supplemented with protease inhibitor
cocktail. The obtained cell lysates were then sonicated, and further
experiments were performed as per the protocol provided with the kit.
The Tecan plate reader (Infinite 200 PRO, Tecan, Switzerland) was
used to measure the luminescence intensity with λex = 350 nm and λem = 440 nm.

TUNEL Assay
TdT
dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) is an
established method for determination of DNA fragmentation, which is
a characteristic hallmark of apoptosis. In TUNEL assay, Br-dUTPs were
added to the 3′-hydroxyl (OH) termini of double- and single-stranded
DNA, which is catalyzed by the TdT enzyme. Thereafter, the sites are
stained with FITC-labeled anti-BrdU mAb and is identified with the
help of a flow cytometer. For this, 10 × 103 cells
were seeded in 6-well plates and were allowed to grow for 24 h followed
by treatment with Au NCs, sodium butyrate, PEG Au NC–NaB-NPs,
ART, and PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART for 48 h. The
cells were collected and fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde and incubated
in ice for 30–60 min. For further steps, protocols provided
by the manufacturer were followed.

In Vivo Experiments
For animal studies, adult male
Swiss albino mice weighing 22–25 g were used, which were obtained
from Chakraborty enterprise (1443/PO/b/11/CPCSEA), Kolkata, India.
The mice were retained in polypropylene cages at room temperature,
and relative humidity maintained at 22 ± 2 °C and 60–70%,
respectively, with a 12–12 h light–dark cycle. They
were sheltered at Central Animal Facility, Institute of Advanced Study
in Science and Technology (IASST), Guwahati, Assam, and standard Rodent
pellet diet (Provimi Animal Nutrition India Pvt. Ltd., India) with
water ad libitum was provided. The mice were closely monitored for
a week to acclimatize. The protocols for various experiments were
designed and implemented as per guidelines of Committee for the Purpose
of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA), Government
of India and was approved (IASST/IAEC/2016–17/2301) by the
Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC) of IASST.

In Vivo Tumor
(Dalton’s Ascites Lymphoma Cells) Development
DLA
cells were acquired from IASST Central Animal Facility and
maintained in Swiss albino mice through intraperitoneal (I.P.) injection
of viable cells (1 × 106 cells/mice). Abnormal belly
swelling and increased body weight were observed within 8–10
days after induction, confirming the growth of tumor.

Animal Grouping
and in Vivo Experimental Design
For
in vivo experiments, first, the acute toxicity of PEG–Au NC–NaB-NPs–ART
was carried out and the doses of NaB and ART were selected from already
established results. DLA cells (1 × 106 cells/mL in
0.2 mL of PBS/mice) were injected intraperitoneally on day 0 for the
growth of tumor, keeping aside the normal group. After growth of tumor,
drug treatments were started (9th day) and were given in the interval
of 24 h for 8 days. For the present work, mice were divided in 7 groups
with 10 mice in each group as follows:

1st group: Mice with
no DLA tumor + no drug treatment.

2nd group: DLA-bearing mice
+ 0.2 mL PBS (I.P) for 8 days.

3rd group: DLA-bearing mice +
Au NCs at 2 mg/kg (I.P) for 8 days.

4th group: DLA-bearing mice
+ NaB at 2 mg/kg (I.P) for 8 days.

5th group: DLA-bearing mice
+ PEG–Au NCs–NaB-NPs
at 2 mg/kg (I.P) for 8 days.

6th group: DLA-bearing mice + ART
at 2 mg/kg (I.P) for 8 days.

7th group: DLA-bearing mice + PEG–Au
NCs–NaB-NP–ART
at 2 mg/kg (I.P) for 8 days.

Effect of Treatment on
Tumor Growth
The mice were monitored
and measured daily for body weight changes during the experimental
period (30 days). For cell viability assay, cells from all the respective
groups were collected after the drug treatment period of 16 days.
For biochemical and histopathological analysis, on the 17th day, five
mice from each group were sacrificed by decapitation to collect the
blood, liver, and kidney. To estimate the MST and percentage increase
in life span (% ILS), all the remaining 5 mice from each group were
monitored up to 50 days.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b02105.List of materials
involved, experimental methods for
quantum yield measurements, in vitro-based experiments like ROS, cell
cycle analysis, annexin V-7AAD, in vivo experiment details such as
acute toxicity studies, trypan blue test, haematological profiling,
biochemical parameters, biochemical parameters, histopathological
analysis and measurement details of MST & increase in life span
% (ILS), characterization results including TEM, UV–vis spectrum,
DLS and zeta potential, binding assay, CLSM images, control MTT, ROS
production, HDAC inhibitor assay, cell cycle analysis, TUNEL assay,
and tables for reduction of tumor volume, hematological parameters,
and biochemical enzymes (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b02105_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the Department of Electronics
and Information Technology, Government of India (no. 5(9)/2012-NANO
(Vol. II)) and the DBT Programme Support (BT/PR13560/COE/34/44/2015)
project for financially supporting this work. Authors also acknowledge
the Central Instruments Facility (CIF) and instrumental support of
the Centre for Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati.
We also thank Prof. Jibon Kotoky for help in animal experiments and
Central Animal Facility, Institute of Advanced Study in Science and
Technology (IASST), Guwahati, Assam to carry out in vivo experiments.We
are thankful to Anil Bidkar for his assistance in FACS based assays.
==== Refs
References
Menna P. ; Salvatorelli E. ; Minotti G. 
Cardiotoxicity of Antitumor Drugs† . Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
2008 , 21 , 978 –989 . 10.1021/tx800002r .18376852 
Jin D. ; Ma X. ; Luo Y. ; Fang S. ; Xie Z. ; Li X. ; Qi D. ; Zhang F. ; Kong J. ; Li J. ; Lin B. ; Liu T. 
Application of a Microfluidic-Based Perivascular Tumor Model for
Testing Drug Sensitivity in Head and Neck Cancers and Toxicity in
Endothelium . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 29598 –29607 . 10.1039/c6ra01456a .
Senapati S. ; Mahanta A. K. ; Kumar S. ; Maiti P. 
Controlled Drug Delivery
Vehicles for Cancer Treatment and Their Performance . Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 
2018 , 3 , 7 10.1038/s41392-017-0004-3 .
Sun T. ; Zhang Y. S. ; Pang B. ; Hyun D. C. ; Yang M. ; Xia Y. 
Engineered Nanoparticles
for Drug Delivery in Cancer Therapy . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 12320 –12364 . 10.1002/anie.201403036 .
Peer D. ; Karp J. M. ; Hong S. ; Farokhzad O. C. ; Margalit R. ; Langer R. 
Nanocarriers as an
Emerging Platform
for Cancer Therapy . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2007 , 2 , 751 –760 . 10.1038/nnano.2007.387 .18654426 
Meng H. ; Mai X. W. ; Zhang H. ; Xue M. ; Xia T. ; Lin S. ; Wang X. ; Zhao Y. ; Ji Z. ; Zink J. I. ; Nel A. E. 
Codelivery of an Optimal drug/siRNA
Combination Using
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles To Overcome Drug Resistance in Breast
Cancer in Vitro and in Vivo . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 994 –1005 . 10.1021/nn3044066 .23289892 
Xie X. ; Shao X. ; Ma W. ; Zhao D. ; Shi S. ; Li Q. ; Lin Y. 
Overcoming Drug-Resistant Lung Cancer by Paclitaxel
Loaded Tetrahedral DNA Nanostructures . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 5457 –5465 . 10.1039/c7nr09692e .29484330 
Li F. ; Mahato R. I. 
MicroRNAs and Drug Resistance in Prostate Cancers . Mol. Pharm. 
2014 , 11 , 2539 –2552 . 10.1021/mp500099g .24742219 
Holohan C. ; Van Schaeybroeck S. ; Longley D. B. ; Johnston P. G. 
Cancer Drug Resistance:
An Evolving Paradigm . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2013 , 13 , 714 –726 . 10.1038/nrc3599 .24060863 
Li F. ; Zhao C. ; Wang L. 
Molecular-targeted agents combination
therapy for cancer: Developments and potentials . Int. J. Cancer 
2014 , 134 , 1257 –1269 . 10.1002/ijc.28261 .23649791 
von
Manstein V. ; Groner B. 
Tumor Cell Resistance against Targeted
Therapeutics: The Density of Cultured Glioma Tumor Cells Enhances
Stat3 Activity and Offers Protection against the Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor
Canertinib . Med. Chem. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 96 –102 . 10.1039/c6md00463f .
Jiang T. ; Mo R. ; Bellotti A. ; Zhou J. ; Gu Z. 
Gel-Liposome-Mediated
Co-Delivery of Anticancer Membrane-Associated Proteins and Small-Molecule
Drugs for Enhanced Therapeutic Efficacy . Adv.
Funct. Mater. 
2014 , 24 , 2295 –2304 . 10.1002/adfm.201303222 .
Yan X. ; Yu Q. ; Guo L. ; Guo W. ; Guan S. ; Tang H. ; Lin S. ; Gan Z. 
Positively
Charged Combinatory Drug Delivery Systems
against Multi-Drug-Resistant Breast Cancer: Beyond the Drug Combination . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 6804 –6815 . 10.1021/acsami.6b14244 .28185449 
Ma L. ; Kohli M. ; Smith A. 
Nanoparticles for Combination Drug
Therapy . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 9518 –9525 . 10.1021/nn405674m .24274814 
Mignani S. ; Bryszewska M. ; Klajnert-Maculewicz B. ; Zablocka M. ; Majoral J.-P. 
Advances
in Combination Therapies Based on Nanoparticles for Efficacious Cancer
Treatment: An Analytical Report . Biomacromolecules 
2015 , 16 , 1 –27 . 10.1021/bm501285t .25426779 
Wu H. ; Jin H. ; Wang C. ; Zhang Z. ; Ruan H. ; Sun L. ; Yang C. ; Li Y. ; Qin W. ; Wang C. 
Synergistic
Cisplatin/Doxorubicin Combination Chemotherapy for Multidrug-Resistant
Cancer via Polymeric Nanogels Targeting Delivery . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 9426 –9436 . 10.1021/acsami.6b16844 .28247750 
Licata S. ; Saponiero A. ; Mordente A. ; Minotti G. 
Doxorubicin Metabolism
and Toxicity in Human Myocardium: Role of Cytoplasmic Deglycosidation
and Carbonyl Reduction . Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
2000 , 13 , 414 –420 . 10.1021/tx000013q .10813659 
Jean S. R. ; Tulumello D. V. ; Riganti C. ; Liyanage S. U. ; Schimmer A. D. ; Kelley S. O. 
Mitochondrial Targeting of Doxorubicin Eliminates Nuclear
Effects Associated with Cardiotoxicity . ACS
Chem. Biol. 
2015 , 10 , 2007 –2015 . 10.1021/acschembio.5b00268 .26038829 
Zhang L. ; Cooper A. J. L. ; Krasnikov B. F. ; Xu H. ; Bubber P. ; Pinto J. T. ; Gibson G. E. ; Hanigan M. H. 
Cisplatin-Induced
Toxicity Is Associated with Platinum Deposition in Mouse Kidney Mitochondria
in Vivo and with Selective Inactivation of the α-Ketoglutarate
Dehydrogenase Complex in LLC-PK1Cells† . Biochemistry 
2006 , 45 , 8959 –8971 . 10.1021/bi060027g .16846239 
Dai L. ; Liu J. ; Luo Z. ; Li M. ; Cai K. 
Tumor Therapy: Targeted
Drug Delivery Systems . J. Mater. Chem. B 
2016 , 4 , 6758 –6772 . 10.1039/c6tb01743f .
Wang S. ; Konorev E. A. ; Kotamraju S. ; Joseph J. ; Kalivendi S. ; Kalyanaraman B. 
Doxorubicin Induces Apoptosis in Normal and Tumor Cells
via Distinctly Different Mechanisms . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2004 , 279 , 25535 –25543 . 10.1074/jbc.m400944200 .15054096 
Xu X. ; Ho W. ; Zhang X. ; Bertrand N. ; Farokhzad O. 
Cancer Nanomedicine:
From Targeted Delivery to Combination Therapy . Trends Mol. Med. 
2016 , 21 , 223 –232 . 10.1016/j.molmed.2015.01.001 .
Webb J. A. ; Bardhan R. 
Emerging Advances in
Nanomedicine with Engineered Gold
Nanostructures . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 2502 10.1039/c3nr05112a .24445488 
Björnmalm M. ; Thurecht K. J. ; Michael M. ; Scott A. M. ; Caruso F. 
Bridging Bio-Nano
Science and Cancer Nanomedicine . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 9594 –9613 . 10.1021/acsnano.7b04855 .28926225 
Fan Z. ; Fu P. P. ; Yu H. ; Ray P. C. 
Theranostic Nanomedicine
for Cancer Detection and Treatment . J. Food
Drug Anal. 
2014 , 22 , 3 –17 . 10.1016/j.jfda.2014.01.001 .24673900 
Bobo D. ; Robinson K. J. ; Islam J. ; Thurecht K. J. ; Corrie S. R. 
Nanoparticle-Based
Medicines: A Review of FDA-Approved Materials and Clinical Trials
to Date . Pharm. Res. 
2016 , 33 , 2373 –2387 . 10.1007/s11095-016-1958-5 .27299311 
Ghoshal A. ; Goswami U. ; Raza A. ; Chattopadhyay A. ; Ghosh S. S. 
Recombinant sFRP4 bound chitosan-alginate composite
nanoparticles embedded with silver nanoclusters for Wnt/β-catenin
targeting in cancer theranostics . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 85763 –85772 . 10.1039/c6ra16066b .
Goswami U. ; Dutta A. ; Raza A. ; Kandimalla R. ; Kalita S. ; Ghosh S. S. ; Chattopadhyay A. 
Transferrin-Copper
Nanocluster-Doxorubicin Nanoparticles as Targeted Theranostic Cancer
Nanodrug . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 3282 –3294 . 10.1021/acsami.7b15165 .29278317 
Jokerst V. J. ; Lobovkina T. ; Zare N. R. ; Gambhir S. S. 
Nanoparticle
PEGylation
for imaging and therapy . Nanomedicine 
2012 , 6 , 715 –728 . 10.2217/nnm.11.19 .
Hak S. ; Helgesen E. ; Hektoen H. H. ; Huuse E. M. ; Jarzyna P. A. ; Mulder W. J. M. ; Haraldseth O. ; de Lange Davies C. L. 
The Effect
of Nanoparticle Polyethylene Glycol Surface Density on Ligand-Directed
Tumor Targeting Studied in Vivo by Dual Modality Imaging . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 5648 –5658 . 10.1021/nn301630n .22671719 
Pelaz B. ; del Pino P. ; Maffre P. ; Hartmann R. ; Gallego M. ; Rivera-Fernández S. ; de la Fuente J. M. ; Nienhaus G. U. ; Parak W. J. 
Surface Functionalization
of Nanoparticles
with Polyethylene Glycol: Effects on Protein Adsorption and Cellular
Uptake . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 6996 –7008 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b01326 .26079146 
Wei W. ; Zhang X. ; Chen X. ; Zhou M. ; Xu R. ; Zhang X. 
Smart Surface Coating of Drug Nanoparticles with Cross-Linkable Polyethylene
Glycol for Bio-Responsive and Highly Efficient Drug Delivery . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 8118 –8125 . 10.1039/c5nr09167e .27025546 
Sahoo A. K. ; Banerjee S. ; Ghosh S. S. ; Chattopadhyay A. 
Simultaneous
RGB Emitting Au Nanoclusters in Chitosan Nanoparticles for Anticancer
Gene Theranostics . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 712 –724 . 10.1021/am4051266 .24281656 
Strahl B. D. ; Allis C. D. 
The Language of Covalent Histone Modifications . Nature 
2000 , 403 , 41 –45 . 10.1038/47412 .10638745 
Entin-Meer M. ; Rephaeli A. ; Yang X. ; Nudelman A. ; VandenBerg S. R. ; Haas-Kogan D. A. 
Butyric
Acid Prodrugs Are Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors
That Show Antineoplastic Activity and Radiosensitizing Capacity in
the Treatment of Malignant Gliomas . Mol. Cancer
Ther. 
2005 , 4 , 1952 –1961 . 10.1158/1535-7163.mct-05-0087 .16373710 
Steliou K. ; Boosalis M. S. ; Perrine S. P. ; Sangerman J. ; Faller D. V. 
Butyrate Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors . BioRes. Open Access 
2012 , 1 , 192 –198 . 10.1089/biores.2012.0223 .23514803 
Salimi V. ; Shahsavari Z. ; Safizadeh B. ; Hosseini A. ; Khademian N. ; Tavakoli-Yaraki M. 
Sodium Butyrate Promotes Apoptosis in Breast Cancer
Cells through Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Formation and Mitochondrial
Impairment . Lipids Health Dis. 
2017 , 16 , 208 10.1186/s12944-017-0593-4 .29096636 
Minelli R. ; Occhipinti S. ; Gigliotti C. L. ; Barrera G. ; Gasco P. ; Conti L. ; Chiocchetti A. ; Zara G. P. ; Fantozzi R. ; Giovarelli M. ; Dianzani U. ; Dianzani C. 
Solid Lipid Nanoparticles
of Cholesteryl Butyrate Inhibit the Proliferation of Cancer Cells
in Vitro and in Vivo Models . Br. J. Pharmacol. 
2013 , 170 , 233 –244 . 10.1111/bph.12255 .23713413 
Singh N. P. ; Lai H. C. 
Synergistic Cytotoxicity of Artemisinin and Sodium
Butyrate on Human Cancer Cells . Anticancer Res. 
2005 , 25 , 4325 –4331 .16309236 
Ren Y. ; Yu J. ; Kinghorn A. D. 
Development of Anticancer Agents from Plant-Derived
Sesquiterpene Lactones . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 23 , 2397 –2420 . 10.2174/0929867323666160510123255 .27160533 
Fröhlich T. ; Karagöz A. Ç. ; Reiter C. ; Tsogoeva S. B. 
Artemisinin-Derived
Dimers: Potent Antimalarial and Anticancer Agents . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 7360 –7388 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01380 .27010926 
Raza A. ; Ghoshal A. ; Chockalingam S. ; Ghosh S. S. 
Connexin-43 Enhances
Tumor Suppressing Activity of Artesunate via Gap Junction-Dependent
as Well as Independent Pathways in Human Breast Cancer Cells . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 7580 10.1038/s41598-017-08058-y .28790385 
Luk B. T. ; Zhang L. 
Current Advances in
Polymer-Based Nanotheranostics for Cancer Treatment
and Diagnosis . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 21859 –21873 . 10.1021/am5036225 .25014486 
Das N. K. ; Ghosh S. ; Priya A. ; Datta S. ; Mukherjee S. 
Luminescent
Copper Nanoclusters as a Specific Cell-Imaging Probe and a Selective
Metal Ion Sensor . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 24657 –24664 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b08123 .
Tong S. ; Hou S. ; Ren B. ; Zheng Z. ; Bao G. 
Self-Assembly of Phospholipid-PEG
Coating on Nanoparticles through Dual Solvent Exchange . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 3720 –3726 . 10.1021/nl201978c .21793503 
Miladi K. ; Sfar S. ; Fessi H. ; Elaissari A.  Polymer Nanoparticles
for Nanomedicines ; Springer , 2016 .
Chen X. ; Bi Y. ; Wang T. ; Li P. ; Yan X. ; Hou S. ; Bammert C. E. ; Ju J. ; Gibson K. M. ; Pavan W. J. ; Bi L. 
Lysosomal Targeting
with Stable and Sensitive Fluorescent Probes
(Superior LysoProbes): Applications for Lysosome Labeling and Tracking
during Apoptosis . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 9004 10.1038/srep09004 .25758662 
Yang L. ; Shang L. ; Nienhaus G. U. 
Mechanistic
Aspects of Fluorescent
Gold Nanocluster Internalization by Live HeLa Cells . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 1537 –1543 . 10.1039/c2nr33147k .23322237 
Canton I. ; Battaglia G. 
Endocytosis
at the nanoscale . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 2718 –2739 . 10.1039/c2cs15309b .22389111 
Foucquier J. ; Guedj M. 
Analysis of Drug Combinations: Current Methodological Landscape . Pharmacol. Res. Perspect. 
2015 , 3 , e00149 10.1002/prp2.149 .26171228 
Wang J. ; Zhang J. ; Shi Y. ; Xu C. ; Zhang C. ; Wong Y. K. ; Lee Y. M. ; Krishna S. ; He Y. ; Lim T. K. ; Sim W. ; Hua Z.-C. ; Shen H.-M. ; Lin Q. 
Mechanistic Investigation of the Specific Anticancer Property of
Artemisinin and Its Combination with Aminolevulinic Acid for Enhanced
Anticolorectal Cancer Activity . ACS Cent. Sci. 
2017 , 3 , 743 –750 . 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00156 .28776016

