
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03615Mini-ReviewTransition-Metal-Based
Zeolite Imidazolate Framework
Nanofibers via an Electrospinning Approach: A Review Sankar Selvasundarasekar
Sam †‡Karthick Kannimuthu †‡Sangeetha Kumaravel †‡Karmakar Arun †‡Kundu Subrata *†‡† Academy
of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CSIR-CECRI) Campus, New Delhi, India‡ CSIR-Central
Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI), Karaikudi 630003, Tamil Nadu, India* E-mail: skundu@cecri.res.in; kundu.subrata@gmail.com. Phone/Fax: (+91)
4565-241487.20 12 2019 14 01 2020 5 1 57 67 28 10 2019 04 12 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Zeolite imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are a subclass
of metal organic
frameworks (MOFs) and have been considered as a special finding in
the current platform of the research arena. ZIFs have been comprised
of metal ions with imidazolate linkers. In recent times, ZIFs have
been predominately utilized for various applications. This excellent
feature is because of its fascinating properties. During the evolution
of the materials era, one-dimensional (1-D) fibrous materials are
also considered as an important area of research. In order to make
the fibrous materials, electrospinning (ES) is considered as a more
reliable way for their synthesis. 1-D material has also been utilized
for various applications owing to their abnormal physicochemical properties.
In this mini-review, the recent developments with various processes
have been followed for the synthesis of ZIF materials and 1-D fibrous
materials. We elaborated their advantages over their applications
in the past years which are discussed and reviewed. More importantly,
we have proposed a new area for the incorporation of transition-metal-based
ZIF materials into the 1-D fibrous materials, which confers the new
direction to the research community to explore its use in various
applications.

document-id-old-9ao9b03615document-id-new-14ao9b03615ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Materials are considered
as a vital tool in any kind of research
applications. For many years, porous materials have dominated many
research fields owing to their utilization and also their uniqueness
in properties such as high surface area and tunable porous size nature.
However, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) have been considered as a
novel area of research, and their hybrid nature of organic–inorganic
moieties has been highly noticed by researchers. The term MOFs was
introduced by Yaghi and co-workers in 1995.1 MOFs have been utilized for various applications owing to their
notable properties such as porosity, low density, crystal volume,
high surface area, and biodegradability. For synthesizing MOFs, the
protocol is creating an ordered structure that can possess strong
bonds between inorganic and organic linkers. So, reticular methods
are highly preferred for synthesizing MOF-based materials. Chemical
and thermal stability of the MOFs is very high, and this could be
attained by strong bonds which are comprised of MOFs. Owing to that,
it can withstand a temperature up to 500 °C.2 From the aforementioned evidence, the application of the
MOFs is also superfluous which includes separation of gases, molecular
separation, chromatography, heterogeneous catalysis, fuel cells, drug
storage, drug delivery, sensing, and imaging. One of the phenomenal
advantages of MOFs is tuning the structural property by applying the
concept called secondary building units (SBUs), wherein the metal
clusters have been combined with various functionalities through polytopic
linkers.1

Zeolite imidazolate frameworks
(ZIFs) have gained more attention
in recent years.1 ZIFs have played their
role from the beginning of the 1980s when the well-known aluminosilicates
emerged, followed by transition-metal-based phosphate and aluminophosphates
which enriched interest in the zeolites tremendously in the later
1990s. ZIFs are considered as a subclass of MOFs, and the topology
has been similar to zeolites.3 This normally
consists of tetrahedrally coordinated metal (M) ions which are coordinated
with an organic imidazolate (Im) linker (M–Im–M). Owing
to this coordination, this exhibits unique structures of ZIFs, and
different crystal structures with molecular depictions have been given
in Figure 1.4 ZIF materials combined with MOFs have shown the
properties of crystallinity, porosity, and enthralling chemical and
thermal stability. Owing to the aforementioned properties, ZIFs are
also utilized in many fields. Due to the exploration of the various
materials, one-dimensional (1-D) materials also joined hands in the
field of materials chemistry.

Figure 1 Crystal structures of ZIFs are grouped according
to their topology
(three-letter symbol). The largest cage in each ZIF is shown with
ZnN4 in blue and CoN4 in pink polyhedra, and
the links are shown in ball-and-stick presentation. The yellow ball
indicates space in the cage. H atoms are omitted for clarity (C, black;
N, green; O, red; Cl, pink). Reprinted with permission from ref (4). Copyright 2010 American
Chemical Society.

1-D materials are highly desirable owing to their
properties and
advantages. 1-D materials includes nanofibers, nanowires, and nanotubes.
Among them, nanofibers have gained more interest due to their unique
properties such as uniform porosity, uniformity in size, unidirectional
flow of electrons, and so on.5 To synthesize
nanofibers, there are many methods available: for instance, template
synthesis, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), the solution growth method,
and the electrospinning (ES) method. Considering the aforementioned
processes, many require careful handling, high cost, and highly sophisticated
instrumentation. However, the electrospinning method has been considered
as the most reliable and one of the pioneering methods to synthesize
stable continuous fibrous material.6 Owing
to their excellent properties, this has been utilized in many fields
such as nanotechnology, biomedical, defense, tissue engineering, biotechnology,
and filtering applications. By combining transition-metal-based ZIFs
with 1-D fibrous materials, this will give combined properties with
improvised applications, and also this will give the future directions
to explore more in the field of material chemistry.7

In this mini-review, we have discussed the recently
achieved developments,
and some future directions have been added in the field of material
chemistry. It is separated into three parts: first, we elaborated
on the common synthetic methods available for preparing ZIFs and the
advantages of using ZIFs with their application, followed by the synthetic
importance of ES techniques for the synthesis of 1-D fibrous material
and their advantages over applications. For a future perspective,
a new area of finding the incorporation of transition-metal-based
ZIFs onto the 1-D fibers and their advantages with required developments
are also discussed and concluded.

2 Types of Zeolite Imidazolate Frameworks (ZIFs)
Zeolite imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) have emerged as a unique
class of metal organic frameworks (MOFs) which are built with imidazolate
liners. These kinds of MOF materials have exhibited more distinct
properties than other MOFs. According to their properties and flexibility
on functional group substitution, more than 150 structures have been
explored, enabling the aid of diverse topological behavior with obtained
structures, owing to the nature of the ZIFs, which has been broadly
classified into powder-based ZIFs and membrane-based ZIFs.1 The classification of their types and various
synthetic processes has been summarized and shown in Figure 2, and the detailed discussions
have been elaborated on below.

Figure 2 Summarized synthetic methods of ZIF materials/composites.

2.1 Synthesis of Zeolite Imidazolate Frameworks
(ZIFs)
2.1.1 Powder-Based ZIFs
ZIF materials
most commonly exist as a powder form which was utilized after the
impurities had been separated from the reaction mixture. Under this,
according to their preparation methods, two important classifications
were observed as synthesis with the aid of solvent and the solvent-free
synthesis process, but the observed resultant materials had equal
importance in various applications.

2.1.1.1 Hydrothermal Method
Recently,
the hydrothermal method for synthesizing ZIFs has become highly preferred,
wherein water as a solvent has been utilized for the facile formation
of various types of ZIFs. The ZIFs with different metals can be taken
for the facile formation of organic–inorganic ZIF networks.
With the change in reaction conditions, temperature, and time, it
can formulate different ZIF coordination structures. For example,
Miyake et al. synthesized pure ZIF-8 crystals in an aqueous system
and reported that at room temperature the crystalline ZIF-8 could
be formed.8 By improving the hydrothermal
activity, Liu et al. reported that ZIF-8 was synthesized under hydrothermal
conditions and was capable of showing high water resistance after
a shell–ligand exchange reaction, where the structural aspects
of the ZIF-8 were also well retained (Figure 3).9

Figure 3 Schematic representation
of the shell–ligand exchange reaction
(SLER) process of ZIF-8. Reproduced from ref (9) with permission from The
Royal Society of Chemistry.

For a water-based system, in order to improve the
ZIF formation
and also to reduce the use of ligand formation, deprotonating agents
have been used as additives. Most commonly, ammonium hydroxide has
been utilized which could directly arbitrate on the structural formation
of ZIFs.

2.1.1.2 Solvothermal Method
In the beginning,
the solvothermal method was considered as one of the highly followed
conventional methods compared to all other available methods. Here,
organic solvents such as methanol, ethanol, and isopropyl alcohol
have been broadly occupied for these aspects of ZIF preparation. Although
organic solvents give considerable product formation, due to their
high cost and flammable nature. But, it is highly dangerous to our
ecosystem. Jeong et al. carried out utilization of the in
situ counter-diffusion method10 for the formation of ZIF-8 membranes where zinc was deposited over
porous alumina support followed by 2-methylimidazole solution, and
then the diffusion of ZIF-8 from the support under the solvothermal
synthesis for 4 h at 120 °C. The synthesized ZIF-8 membrane
has shown superior separation performance. The detailed mechanism
has been displayed in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Schematic diagram of the membrane synthesis by the counter-diffusion-based in situ method: (zone a) metal precursor solution is located
in a ligand solution of sodium formate with an aid of porous alumina;
(zone b) diffused metal ions and ligands leads to the creation of
a “reaction zone” at the interface; and (zone c) ZIF-8
membranes have been developed through heterogeneous nucleation/crystal
growth on the interface. Reprinted with permission from ref (10). Copyright 2013 American
Chemical Society.

2.1.1.3 Ionothermal Method
Recent developments
were observed in the case of ZIF-based material preparation. One of
the better ways for the synthesis of ZIF is the ionothermal method.
Ionic liquids such as 1,3-dialkylimidazolium cations, tetrafluoroborate
(BF4–) anions, and hexafluorophosphate
(PF6–) anions have been utilized as both
solvents and templates for the preparation of ZIF materials by the
ionothermal method. Moreover, ionic liquids are utilized for the preparation
of a eutectic mixture from which ZIFs have been derived. In order
to avoid their competitive interaction, the hydrothermal route has
been chosen for the synthesis of ZIFs. Their advantages allow them
to undergo open atmospheric synthesis also. One of the greater advantages
engaged in ionic liquids is the recyclable nature for further usages.1

2.1.1.4 Mechanochemical Method
The mechanochemical
method has been considered as a greener and also solvent-free way
to construct a ZIF material, wherein ZIFs have been synthesized via
a mechanochemical approach more suitably by the ball-milling method.
However, limitation occurred by utilizing oxide-based materials for
the synthesis of ZIFs. In order to overcome this issue, Friscic et
al. introduced a modified way of synthesis called a liquid-assisted
grinding and ion- and liquid-assisted grinding method for the synthesis
of ZIFs using metal oxide ZnO with other ligands. In room-temperature
synthesis, the addition of the liquid phase could significantly increase
the mobility of the ions.11

As a
further advancement, solventless conversion of ZnO to ZIF-8 by using
a simple ball milling method has been reported by Tanaka et al. where
ZnO salt is mixed with a methylimidazole ligand under ball milling
conditions. At the end of the process, larger size particles confirmed
the presence of ZnO, but smaller sized nanoparticles confirmed the
formation of ZIF-8 as given in Figure 5.12

Figure 5 Schematic illustration
of the shell–ligand exchange reaction
(SLER) process of ZIF-8. Reproduced from ref (10) with permission of The
Royal Society of Chemistry.

2.1.2 Membrane-Based ZIFs
Membrane-based
ZIF materials are highly desirable owing to their abnormal properties.
After the utilization of the powdered ZIF material, membrane-based
materials were largely utilized in the field of gas separation and
catalysis and so on. The intrinsic activity of this material could
give an immense category compared to others. Membrane-based ZIFs are
broadly classified by the ZIF membranes and ZIF composites.

2.1.2.1 Crystallization Method
For the
synthesis of membrane-based ZIF materials, the recommended method
of synthesis is the crystallization method which includes both secondary
growth crystallization and in situ crystallization.
The secondary growth crystallization technique follows deposition
or pretreatment. For these processes, the notable techniques are the
dip coating and seeded growth method. The gaps observed on the membrane
have been nullified by the growth of seeds internally which leads
to the formation of a continuous membrane. Also, the advantage over
the seeded growth method is that the orientation of the membrane has
been controlled throughout the process, which includes membrane thickness
and grain size.1 Up to now, ZIF membranes
have been utilized for only a smooth molecular sieve effect for the
separation of lighter gases such as H2, CO2,
and CH4. However, in their study, they demonstrated that
the ZIF-8 membrane had shown a sharp molecular sieve separation on
H2/C3H8 also.

2.1.3 Applications
Transition-metal-based
ZIF-derived materials have been utilized in many fields, owing to
their notable properties such as uniform porosity, flexibility toward
substituents, numerous compositions, and most importantly physical
and chemical stability. Depending on the area of interest, ZIFs and
their composites/membranes have been utilized for specific application.
Some of the important applications are highlighted in this session.

2.1.3.1 Energy Storage Devices
In recent
years, energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors
are in high demand. Rechargeable batteries are majorly categorized
into lithium ion batteries (LIBs), lithium sulfur batteries (LSBs),
and supercapacitor.13−16 An electrode with improvised electrochemical behavior is required
to fulfill prerequisites of a conventional battery. To take over this
issue, transition-metal-based ZIF-derived materials can be potentially
utilized as an electrode material for energy storage devices. Zhang
et al. developed a new route to grow ZnO@ZnO QDs/C NRAs on carbon
cloth substrate by utilization of ZIF-8 material and applied as an
anode for LIBs. The material showed high specific capacity and excellent
stability over multiple cycles.17 Due to
the improvised electrochemical performance of ZIF-derived materials,
they can be utilized for other types of batteries as well.

2.1.3.2 Gas Separation
For the separation
of gases, pure ZIFs and their composite/membrane have been considered
as highly recommendable, owing to their properties such as tunable
porosity, flexibility over substituents, various structures, and multiple
chemical functionalities. CO2 adsorption/separation is
an expanding area, wherein pure CO2 has been adsorbed,
but in the case of CO2 separation it is associated with
other gas systems such as CO2/NH2, CO2/H2, and CO2/N2. The crystals inside
the ZIF materials are capable of adsorbing CO2, where ZIFs
can provide Langmuir sites. These sites have been replaced by the
adsorbed CO2 molecule. Song et al. synthesized a membrane-based
ZIF-8 nanoparticle dispersed through the polymer. This membrane can
enormously increase the permeability of CO2 on gas absorption
tests, which could clearly show that the loading of ZIFs significantly
influences the permeability of CO2.3

2.1.3.3 Drug Delivery
ZIF materials are
considered as one of the promising candidates for the drug delivery
platform owing to their pH-sensitive properties. ZIF-8 has been utilized
as an anticancer agent and is also used to give thermal production
for other drugs. ZIF-8 was synthesized by Sun et al. and mixed with
anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (∼660 mg of 5-FU/g).
They showed that the material had excellent anticancer activity and
could be a promising material for the treatment of cancer.18 Adhikari et al. have successfully encapsulated
an anticancer drug DOX in ZIF-7 and ZIF-8 and observed that both can
act as an excellent drug-releasing property when they made contact
with lipid membranes as well as micelles.2

2.1.3.4 Other Applications
Zeolite imidazolate
frameworks (ZIFs) have also been utilized in many other fields such
as catalysis, sensors, electronic devices, etc. Initially, ZIFs have
been considered as a typical aluminosilicate, and their utilization
as a catalyst in the commercial sector was enormous. ZIFs are utilized
as catalysts for many reactions, and in some cases it has been restored
and reused for other reactions. Intrinsic activity, notably textural
property, made ZIF a promising cedar for sensing applications also.
The main characteristic properties of tunable pore size and facile
functionalization enable them as an attractive material for many applications.1

3 Overview of One-Dimensional (1-D) Fibrous Material
One-dimensional (1-D) materials are classified as fibers, wires,
rods, tubes, and belts in micro- and nanoforms. Owing to their novel
properties and applications, much attention has been given for the
synthesis procedure to make size-controlled 1-D materials by tuning
the chemical composition of the precursor.5 Among the available 1-D materials, fibrous materials are highly
desirable. Their properties such as uniform size, unidirectional flow
of electrons, and uniform porosity made them an asset to the utilizer.
In order to synthesize fibrous materials, plenty of methods are available,
notably, the lithography method, solution growth method, roll printing
method, chemical vapor deposition method (CVD), template synthesis,
and electrospinning method.6 Among them,
electrospinning method has been considered as the most reliable technique
for the synthesis of fibrous materials. The electrospinning method
has several advantages such as simple handling, cost-effective technique,
and more importantly, it results in continuous fiber formation.

3.1 Electrospinning Method
Electrospinning
is also called electrostatic spinning. The first device has been demonstrated
to spray the liquids through the applied electrical charge. Thus,
it was starting to get popularized and also gained academic interest
across the world in the 1990s only. Researchers proved the possibility
of making fibrous materials using polymer solution under laboratory
conditions.7

3.1.1 Principle Behind Electrospinning
Electrospinning is a simple technique, and also we can easily control
the production of the fibers into nanometer size in range. At the
initial stages, pure polymer solutions have been utilized for the
fabrication of fibrous materials. Later, the trend has been improvised
into other materials also. The emblematic electrospinning setup has
been portrayed in Figure 6. The electrospinning instrument mainly consists of a high
voltage power supply, a spinneret, and the conductive collector. The
precursor solution was taken into the syringe with a thin nozzle,
where the high voltage will be applied, and this serves as an electrode.
The working distance of the nozzle and the counter electrode should
be approximately between 10 and 20 cm, although it depends on the
precursor materials used in the fiber formation.

Figure 6 Basic setup of the electrospinning
process.

By applying voltage, electrospun fibers are deposited
on the counter
electrode, when the strength of the electric field allows the electrostatic
forces to overcome the surface tension of the precursor material.
During this process, solvent can evaporate, and the solid fibers are
deposited as a nonwoven mat over the collector. The commonly available
electrospinning setup has been classified into vertical setup and
horizontal setup in Figure 7. Here the applied voltage causes a cone-shaped deformation
of the droplets from the polymeric precursor solution. Commonly used
water-soluble polymers are poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), poly(ethylene
oxide) (PEO), and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), and some of the organosoluble
polymers such as polyamide (PA), polycarbonate (PC), and polyacrylonitrile
(PAN) have been utilized for making fibrous materials. The electrospinnig
process is exclusively governed by many parameters, and the most important
parameters are classified into solution parameters, process parameters,
and ambient parameters.7

Figure 7 Classified vertical and
horizontal setup of the electrospinning
process.

3.1.2 Solution Parameters for Precursor Material
3.1.2.1 Viscosity
The viscosity of the
precursor materials is a vital parameter of the electrospinning process.
Solution viscosity is the major tool to determine the size and morphological
aspect of the fibrous material. It has been found that, for lesser
viscosity solution, there is no fiber formation as the quantity of
the droplet formation is high instead of fibers.

Also, the surface
tension of the solution is the factor which leads to beads or beaded
fiber formation. However, in the case of highly viscous medium, the
solution was wedged on the pathway of the nozzle. There is an optimal
viscosity needed for the continuous fiber formation.6

3.1.2.2 Surface Tension
Solvent composition
of the solution furthermore plays an important role in fiber formation.
Facile fiber formation has to be confirmed by the reduction of surface
tension of the solvent.7 Solvent having
higher surface tension directly contributes to the generation of droplets
on the collector. Lower surface tension solution helps the process
to occur at a lower electric field. Better fibrous performance has
been achieved by the lower surface tension solvents.

3.1.2.3 Molecular Weight
The molecular
weight of the polymer also plays a major role in determining all
the solution parameters such as viscosity, surface tension, and the
conductivity of the polymeric solution. It is another important parameter
to affect the morphology of the fibrous materials.5 Low molecular weight polymers produce beads rather than
the fibrous materials. In this case, the high molecular weight substance
tends to give fibrous materials with desired diameter, where the entanglements
are numerous. This exhibits sufficient intermolecular interaction
which provides high grade uniform fiber with lesser quantity of beads.7

3.1.2.4 Conductivity
The conductivity
of the solution is mainly determined by the type of the polymer that
has been used as solvent and the quantity of the ionizable salts which
are present on the precursor solution. Increasing the electrical conductivity
of the precursor solution is significantly decreased by the fiber
diameter. In the case of low conductivity polymer solution, due to
elongation by the electrical charge, the uniform fiber has been formed,
but the quantity of bead formation also becomes very high. However,
highly conductive solutions are unstable when a strong electric field
is applied and showed the broad diameter distribution and that the
size of the fibers is reduced drastically.6

3.1.3 Processing Parameters of Electrospinning
3.1.3.1 Working Distance
For the fiber
formation, one of the major criteria is working distance. The distance
between the tip and the collector is greatly influenced by the morphology
of the sample and diameter. The minimum distance is required for the
formation of fibers, and there is a need for sufficient time which
is required for the fibers once it is ejected out from the nozzle
and in order to get dried. Therefore, the distance should be optimum.
Otherwise, the bead formation will be observed even for high and low
working distance. The polymers such as PVA and polyvinylidene fluoride
(PVDF) have been examined, and it was reported that the morphology
has been greatly governed by the working distance.6

3.1.3.2 Applied Voltage
Applied voltage
is one of the most crucial parameters for the fiber formation. The
threshold voltage is a necessary factor for the formation of fibers.
This voltage initiates the charges through the precursor solution
which could end up with the fibers. As per the observation, when the
higher voltage is applied on the solution mixture, there is an ejection
of polymer, and this should be more, which are frontrunners to the
large diameter fibrous materials. Electrostatic repulsion has been
observed on the solution which narrows fiber formation in the aforementioned
cases.7 Coulombic forces have been observed
on the solution which leads to stretching and affects the fiber diameter.
In the case of low applied voltage, the charge is not sufficient to
make electrostatic repulsion which significantly affects the fiber
formation with numerous amounts of bead formation.

3.1.3.3 Flow Rate
Flow rate is the most
important parameter which influences the transfer rate of the solution
from the syringe. Low flow rate is highly desirable for the fiber
formation. So, the optimum flow rate is very important for feasible
fiber formation. The slow flow rate influences the fiber diameter
and also pore size distribution. Most of the significance of this
one is the optimum flow rate that has to give enough time to dry fibers,
although a higher flow rate leads to the beaded fiber with unstable
morphology.5

3.2 Application
Owing to their versatile
properties and morphological aspects, 1-D fibrous materials have been
utilized in diverse fields. Most of the highlighting properties such
as high surface to volume ratio and very high porous nature have taken
over 1-D materials in more specific applications. Manipulation of
the size and morphology can also be advantageous throughout the available
areas where application is required. 1-D fibrous materials have been
broadly utilized in medicinal applications, filtration, drug delivery,
catalysis, defense, and energy storage devices.5 Utilization of 1-D fibrous materials in various fields
has been given as shown in Figure 8. In the case of biomedical application, it includes
skin therapy and skin healing, whereas applications in life sciences
can be classified as wound dressing, drug delivery, hemostatic devices,
and enzyme encapsulation.19,20 Tissue engineering
and scaffolding are comprised of porous membrane materials for skin,
blood vessels, and nerve regeneration and 3-D scaffolding for bones.
In military protective clothing, it includes effective trapping of
aerosol particles and minimal impedance to air and antibiogas prediction.
1-D fibrous materials have been widely used in the field of sensor
application where it is categorized to biochemical sensors, piezoelectric
sensors, thermal sensors, and optical sensors. Filtration includes
water filtration, air filtration, and molecular filtration where 1-D
fibrous materials have been utilized in removing oils, proteins, and
chemicals, which causes health hazards from drinking water. In the
case of industrial wastewater, it will have heavy metals such as lead,
zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury, and chromium contamination and has
been controlled by 1-D fibrous materials. In air filtration technology,
it has been utilized as high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters
which are made up of microsized fiberglass, which is intended to remove
the tiny particles present in the atmosphere.

Figure 8 Applications of 1-D fibrous
materials in various fields.

4 Incorporation of ZIF in to 1-D Fibers
Incorporation of ZIF into the 1-D fibrous materials has given great
advantages to the scientific research community. Herein, the synthesis
of the 1-D fibrous materials with ZIF and the advantages along with
their properties and advantages associated with the application and
the future directions and challenges have been discussed.

4.1 Synthesis of the 1-D Fibrous Materials with
ZIF
In a typical synthesis, ZIF materials have been prepared
through the available methods such as hydrothermal, solvothermal,
and related synthetic methods as described above, and the synthesized
material was well characterized according to their size, morphology,
and elemental state. In addition, the use of suitable conductive polymers
has been chosen for making a polymeric solution using appropriate
solvent. ZIF mixtures are quantified and mixed with a suitable polymer
which has been mixed apparently with suitable requirements as we discussed
in the solution parameter part. At the time optimum viscosity is observed,
the solution is ready for further proceedings. Next, the processing
parameters of the electrospinning have been optimized in accordance
with the solution viscosity. The desired fibers have been formed,
and the resultant fiber is well characterized and utilized for application
processes.

4.2 Advantages and Applications
Incorporation
of ZIF materials into the 1-D fibrous materials has finer advantages
in the aspects of many fields due to their fascinating properties.
ZIF has the most important properties of highly porous material nature
and abnormal thermal stability. In the case of 1-D fibrous materials,
they exhibit many properties such as uniform porosity, unidirectional
flow of electron, uniform size, and unique physicochemical properties.
Another important condition in electrospinnig is tunable size and
the porosity. A combination of these two material properties has given
a greater opportunity to explore more in the aspects of applications
by the research community.

For example, Chen et al. have synthesized
hollow particle-based N-doped carbon nanofibers by simple carbonization
treatment of ZIF-8/PAN composite materials as a precursor for the
electrospinning process. The hierarchical porous nanofibers have been
utilized as an electrode for the supercapacitor and in turn showed
outstanding cycling stability of only 1.8% capacitance loss over 10 000
cycles.21 Liu et al. synthesized a Co–Zn-based
porous 1-D fiber having large surface area with high porosity. Owing
to this advantage, it showed good activity in oxygen reduction reaction
(ORR).22 Zhang et al. have synthesized
electrospun-ZIF-67 NPs followed by a thermal treatment, giving Co3O4 hollow nanoparticles (NPs). Owing to their unique
structural feature, synthesized materials have been utilized as an
anode for LIBs and shown excellent electrochemical behavior.23 Recently, we have synthesized electrospun Co-ZIF
microfibers (Figure 9), and the corresponding field emission scanning electron micrograph
(FESEM) images are given in Figure 10. Here, the metal particle present on the fiber has
been exposed over the surface of the fibrous material. This has been
utilized as a catalyst for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in 0.5
M H2SO4. Among the different samples analyzed,
Co-ZIF-550-N2 delivered a superior activity with a lower
overpotential of 405 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm–2.24

Figure 9 Schematic representation of Co-ZIF materials
prepared via the electrospinning
approach.

Figure 10 (a and b) FESEM images of Co-ZIF-350-Air fibers at different
magnifications.

In 1 M KOH, Co-ZIF-350-Air required an overpotential
of 370 mV
at 10 mA cm–2 and a lower Tafel slope value of 55
mV dec–1. In the same way, we have synthesized nitrogen-enriched
ZIF-67 -incorporated ZIF-7 microfibers (Figure 11), and the synthesized materials have been
utilized as a catalyst for OER in 1M KOH. It was shown that CoZn-ZIF-500
delivered superior activity at a current density of 10 mA cm–2 with a lower Tafel slope and explicitly exposed good long-term stability.25

Figure 11 Schematic illustration of ZIF-64-incorporated ZIF-7 synthesis
via
the electrospinning approach.

5 Summary and Outlook
In this mini-review,
the origin of the zeolite imidazolate framework,
a general synthetic process which is commonly available to synthesize
pure ZIFs as well as ZIFs composite, has briefly been discussed. In
addition, the application of ZIF materials in various fields with
their advantages in terms of properties has been discussed and elaborated
on in detail. In the same way, the significance of the 1-D fibrous
materials and advantages which are associated with the electrospinning
process, important parameters which engaged with making a precursor
solution, and also for processing have been detailed, and their advantages
and applications have been discussed. Incorporation of ZIFs into the
1-D fibrous materials has been proposed, and some of the applications
with their advantages have been highlighted specifically.

ZIF-incorporated
1-D fibrous materials are highly desirable, owing
to the combined properties of the materials. In spite of this, there
are lots of advantages. Some barricades have been associated with
those processes. In the case of ZIFs, we have learned that concepts
which are available to synthesize ZIFs but with zeolite chemistry
have to be explained and examined deeper in detail. Some of the simple
synthetic methods have been started to explore ZIFs with other proposed
methods; for example, continuous microfluidic synthesis has been chosen
to tune the pore size of the zeolites in ZIF preparation. For some
applications, powdered ZIFs should be shaped into pellets, and for
that some backlogs have to be rectified. Specified applications need
hierarchical superstructures of ZIFs, but that is still being used
at a moderate level. Most importantly, for commercial applications,
a cost-effective technique has to be explored for laboratory to large-scale
industries. In the case of composite materials, the materials which
are coordinated with the ZIFs are not appropriate; however, an adequate
assessment should give new opportunities and also new insights for
the exploration of ZIF synthesis.

A lot of improvements have
been observed in the case of synthesis
of 1-D fibrous materials in the electrospinning process such as coaxial
electrospinning, mixing and multiple electrospinning, core–shell
electrospinning, etc. These innovative findings gave an immense improvement
in the electrospinning process. For instance, there are some polymers
for which it is difficult to make fibers by utilization of the aforementioned
techniques that have been achieved. However, some improvement is needed
for the synthesis process. Solution viscosity is the major issue for
controlling the size. To control the defect and beads on the fibers,
these are still crucial for some cases. More importantly, incorporating
metal and metal oxides on the fibrous structure is problematic and
challenging where size is found to have a major role for this process.
The chemistry behind the electrospinning should be improved for attaining
an exact composition and feasible fiber formation. Incorporating other
morphological structures into the fibers is also a most challenging
one. In order to ensure the desired properties from the morphology
and various structures, a new development will be attained in the
near future. As per all the evidence, in future perspective we can
highlight the following important points:There are numerous types of ZIFs that could be identified
by utilizing their structural flexible properties via unique synthetic
approaches. Then the newly formed ZIFs can be made as fibers with
different nominal lengths via an electrospinning approach.

These 1-D fibers made through the electrospinning
method
can be explored in different fields of interest due its flexible nature
and stability.

By tuning the incorporation
of metals into ZIFs structures
and concentrations, polymers used can vary the nature of resulting
fibers, and this will be a new finding to further explore the area
of materials chemistry.

Owing to the
advantages, ZIF-incorporated 1-D fibers
via the electrospinning approach will be a promising candidate for
widespread applications in various fields such as the 1-D nature of
fibers formed and the nature of ZIFs taken for fiber formation.



The authors declare no
competing financial interest.



Selvasundarasekar Sam Sankar received his Bachelor’s
degree
in chemistry (2010–2013) from St. Xavier’s College affiliated
to Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, Tirunelveli, and received his
Master’s degree in chemistry (2013–2015) from Loyola
College affiliated to Madras University, Chennai. He cleared the CSIR-UGC
joint NET exam and was awarded with a UGC-JRF fellowship in December
2016. Currently, he is pursuing his Ph.D. under Dr. Subrata Kundu,
and his research interest includes electrospun transition-metal-based
fibrous materials for electrocatalytic water splitting.



Kannimuthu Karthick completed his B.Sc degree in Chemistry
from
Government Arts and Science College, Udumalpet, India. He continued
his M.Sc degree in Chemistry from The American College, Madurai, India.
After getting qualified for junior research fellows (JRF) from UGC,
New Delhi, India, in December 2014, he joined Dr. Subrata Kundu’s
research group in August 2015. He is currently working on his Ph.D.
thesis that is focused on the materials for electrocatalytic water
splitting applications.



Kumaravel Sangeetha received her Masters degree in organic
chemistry
(2014–2016) from Periyar University, Salem. As she was the
university topper in M.Sc, she received a gold medal and was awarded
as INSPIRE SCHOLAR (JRF) in March 2017 by DST, New Delhi. Currently,
she is pursuing her Ph.D. under Dr. Subrata Kundu since August 2017.
Her area of interest in research incluldes the size- and shape-selective
synthesis of metal and mixed metal oxide nanomaterials and their application
in catalysis and electrocatalysis fields.



Arun Karmakar received his B.Sc degree from Derozio Memorial
College
affiliated with West Bengal State University (2017) and received his
M.Sc degree in inorganic chemistry from the same university (2019).
While pursuing his M.Sc, he was qualified for the NET (National Level
Eligibility Test) and a JRF (Junior Research fellowship) from CSIR,
New Delhi. Now, he has been pursuing his Ph.D. under Dr. Subrata Kundu
in CSIR-CECRI since August 2019, and his Ph.D. thesis will be mainly
focused on “synthesis of nanostructured materials for catalysis,
electrocatalysis, and SERS application”.



Dr. Subrata Kundu received his Ph.D. from the Indian
Institute
of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur, India, in early 2005. Then he moved
to University of Nebraska, Lincoln, USA, and later to Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, USA as a postdoc fellow (from
2005 to 2010). He is currently working as a Senior Scientist at CSIR-CECRI,
Karaikudi, India. Dr. Kundu is serving as an editorial board member
of several international journals including the prestigious “Scientific Reports” from Nature publishers since
2015. Dr. Kundu and his co-workers are working in the forefront area
of material sciences, with emphasis on energy, environment, catalysis,
and electrocatalysis.

Acknowledgments
S.S.S. and S.K. wish to thank Dr. N. Kalaiselvi,
Director, CSIR-CECRI, Karaikudi, for her continuous support and encouragement.
S.S.S. and K.K. acknowledge UGC, New Delhi, for the award of SRF.
K.S. acknowledges DST, New Delhi, for the award of SRF, and A.K. acknowledge
CSIR, New Delhi, for the award of JRF.
==== Refs
References
Chen B. ; Yang Z. ; Zhu Y. ; Xia Y. 
Zeolitic Imidazolate
Framework Materials: Recent Progress in Synthesis and Applications . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2  (40 ), 16811 –16831 . 10.1039/C4TA02984D .
Adhikari C. ; Das A. ; Chakraborty A. 
Zeolitic Imidazole
Framework (ZIF) Nanospheres for
Easy Encapsulation and Controlled Release of an Anticancer Drug Doxorubicin
under Different External Stimuli: A Way toward Smart Drug Delivery
System . Mol. Pharmaceutics 
2015 , 12  (9 ), 3158 –3166 . 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.5b00043 .
Song Q. ; Nataraj S. K. ; Roussenova M. V. ; Tan J. C. ; Hughes D. J. ; Li W. ; Bourgoin P. ; Alam M. A. ; Cheetham A. K. ; Al-Muhtaseb S. A. ; et al. Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework (ZIF-8) Based Polymer Nanocomposite
Membranes for Gas Separation . Energy Environ.
Sci. 
2012 , 5  (8 ), 8359 –8369 . 10.1039/c2ee21996d .
Phan A. ; Doonan C. J. ; Uribe-Romo F. J. ; Knobler C. B. ; O’Keeffe M. ; Yaghi O. M. 
Synthesis, Structure, and Carbon Dioxide Capture Properties
of Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks . Acc. Chem.
Res. 
2010 , 43  (1 ), 58 –67 . 10.1021/ar900116g .19877580 
Lu X. ; Wang C. ; Wei Y. 
One-Dimensional Composite Nanomaterials:
Synthesis by Electrospinning and Their Applications . Small 
2009 , 5  (21 ), 2349 –2370 . 10.1002/smll.200900445 .19771565 
Greiner A. ; Wendorff J. H. 
Electrospinning: A Fascinating Method for the Preparation
of Ultrathin Fibers . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2007 , 46  (30 ), 5670 –5703 . 10.1002/anie.200604646 .
Bhardwaj N. ; Kundu S. C. 
Electrospinning: A Fascinating Fiber Fabrication Technique . Biotechnol. Adv. 
2010 , 28  (3 ), 325 –347 . 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2010.01.004 .20100560 
Tanaka S. ; Kida K. ; Okita M. ; Ito Y. ; Miyake Y. 
Size-Controlled
Synthesis of Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework-8 (ZIF-8) Crystals in
an Aqueous System at Room Temperature . Chem.
Lett. 
2012 , 41  (10 ), 1337 –1339 . 10.1246/cl.2012.1337 .
Liu X. ; Li Y. ; Ban Y. ; Peng Y. ; Jin H. ; Bux H. ; Xu L. ; Caro J. ; Yang W. 
Improvement of Hydrothermal Stability
of Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49  (80 ), 9140 –9142 . 10.1039/c3cc45308a .
Kwon H. T. ; Jeong H. K. 
In Situ Synthesis
of Thin Zeolitic-Imidazolate Framework
ZIF-8 Membranes Exhibiting Exceptionally High Propylene/Propane Separation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135  (29 ), 10763 –10768 . 10.1021/ja403849c .23758578 
Beldon P. J. ; Fábián L. ; Stein R. S. ; Thirumurugan A. ; Cheetham A. K. ; Friščić T. 
Rapid Room-Temperature
Synthesis of Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks by Using Mechanochemistry . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49  (50 ), 9640 –9643 . 10.1002/anie.201005547 .
Tanaka S. ; Kida K. ; Nagaoka T. ; Ota T. ; Miyake Y. 
Mechanochemical
Dry Conversion of Zinc Oxide to Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49  (72 ), 7884 –7886 . 10.1039/c3cc43028f .
Pramanik M. ; Tsujimoto Y. ; Malgras V. ; Dou S. X. ; Kim J. H. ; Yamauchi Y. 
Mesoporous
Iron Phosphonate Electrodes with Crystalline
Frameworks for Lithium-Ion Batteries . Chem.
Mater. 
2015 , 27  (3 ), 1082 –1089 . 10.1021/cm5044045 .
Hwang S. M. ; Lim Y. G. ; Kim J. G. ; Heo Y. U. ; Lim J. H. ; Yamauchi Y. ; Park M. S. ; Kim Y. J. ; Dou S. X. ; Kim J. H. 
A Case Study on Fibrous Porous SnO2 Anode for Robust,
High-Capacity Lithium-Ion Batteries . Nano Energy 
2014 , 10 , 53 –62 . 10.1016/j.nanoen.2014.08.020 .
Jung K. N. ; Kim J. ; Yamauchi Y. ; Park M. S. ; Lee J. W. ; Kim J. H. 
Rechargeable
Lithium-Air Batteries: A Perspective on the Development of Oxygen
Electrodes . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016 , 4  (37 ), 14050 –14068 . 10.1039/C6TA04510C .
Lee J. ; Moon J. ; Han S. A. ; Kim J. ; Malgras V. ; Heo Y. U. ; Kim H. ; Lee S. M. ; Liu H. K. ; Dou S. X. ; et al. Everlasting Living and
Breathing Gyroid 3D Network
in Si@SiOx/C Nanoarchitecture for Lithium Ion Battery . ACS Nano 
2019 , 13  (8 ), 9607 –9619 . 10.1021/acsnano.9b04725 .31380622 
Zhang G. ; Hou S. ; Zhang H. ; Zeng W. ; Yan F. ; Li C. C. ; Duan H. 
High-Performance
and Ultra-Stable Lithium-Ion Batteries Based on
MOF-Derived ZnO@ZnO Quantum Dots/C Core-Shell Nanorod Arrays on a
Carbon Cloth Anode . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27  (14 ), 2400 –2405 . 10.1002/adma.201405222 .25728828 
Sun C. Y. ; Qin C. ; Wang X. L. ; Yang G. S. ; Shao K. Z. ; Lan Y. Q. ; Su Z. M. ; Huang P. ; Wang C. G. ; Wang E. B. 
Zeolitic
Imidazolate Framework-8 as Efficient PH-Sensitive Drug Delivery Vehicle . Dalt. Trans. 
2012 , 41  (23 ), 6906 –6909 . 10.1039/c2dt30357d .
Shieh F. K. ; Wang S. C. ; Yen C. I. ; Wu C. C. ; Dutta S. ; Chou L. Y. ; Morabito J. V. ; Hu P. ; Hsu M. H. ; Wu K. C. W. ; et al. Imparting Functionality
to Biocatalysts via
Embedding Enzymes into Nanoporous Materials by a de Novo Approach:
Size-Selective Sheltering of Catalase in Metal-Organic Framework Microcrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137  (13 ), 4276 –4279 . 10.1021/ja513058h .25781479 
Liang K. ; Ricco R. ; Doherty C. M. ; Styles M. J. ; Bell S. ; Kirby N. ; Mudie S. ; Haylock D. ; Hill A. J. ; Doonan C. J. ; et al. Biomimetic
Mineralization of Metal-Organic
Frameworks as Protective Coatings for Biomacromolecules . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 4 –11 . 10.1038/ncomms8240 .
Chen L. F. ; Lu Y. ; Yu L. ; Lou X. W. 
Designed Formation of Hollow Particle-Based
Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanofibers for High-Performance Supercapacitors . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2017 , 10  (8 ), 1777 –1783 . 10.1039/C7EE00488E .
Liu C. ; Wang J. ; Li J. ; Liu J. ; Wang C. ; Sun X. ; Shen J. ; Han W. ; Wang L. 
Electrospun ZIF-Based
Hierarchical Carbon Fiber as an Efficient Electrocatalyst for the
Oxygen Reduction Reaction . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2017 , 5  (3 ), 1211 –1220 . 10.1039/C6TA09193H .
Zhang C. L. ; Lu B. R. ; Cao F. H. ; Yu Z. L. ; Cong H. P. ; Yu S. H. 
Hierarchically Structured
Co 3 O 4 @carbon Porous Fibers Derived
from Electrospun ZIF-67/PAN Nanofibers as Anodes for Lithium Ion Batteries . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2018 , 6  (27 ), 12962 –12968 . 10.1039/C8TA03397H .
Sankar S. S. ; Ede S. R. ; Anantharaj S. ; Karthick K. ; Sangeetha K. ; Kundu S. 
Electrospun Cobalt-ZIF
Micro-Fibers for Efficient Water Oxidation
under Unique PH Conditions . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2019 , 9  (8 ), 1847 –1856 . 10.1039/C8CY02620C .
Sankar S.
S. ; Karthick K. ; Sangeetha K. ; Kundu S. 
In Situ Modified Nitrogen-Enriched
ZIF-67 Incorporated ZIF-7 Nanofiber: An Unusual Electrocatalyst for
Water Oxidation . Inorg. Chem. 
2019 , 58  (20 ), 13826 –13835 . 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b01621 .31599590

