
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3032027110.1021/acsomega.8b01379ArticleConformational Sampling of Macrocyclic Drugs in Different
Environments: Can We Find
the Relevant Conformations? Poongavanam Vasanthanathan †Danelius Emma ‡○Peintner Stefan †Alcaraz Lilian ∥Caron Giulia ⊥Cummings Maxwell D. #Wlodek Stanislaw ∇Erdelyi Mate †§Hawkins Paul C. D. ∇Ermondi Giuseppe *⊥Kihlberg Jan *†† Department
of Chemistry—BMC, Uppsala University, Box 576, SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden‡ Department
of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University
of Gothenburg, Kemivägen
10, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden§ The
Swedish NMR Centre, Medicinaregatan
5, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden∥ Medicinal
Chemistry, Johnson & Johnson Innovation, One Chapel Place, London W1G 0BG, U.K.⊥ Department
of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino, Quarello 15, 10135 Torino, Italy# Janssen
Research & Development, 1400 McKean Road, Spring House, Pennsylvania 19477, United States∇ OpenEye
Scientific Software, 9 Bisbee Court, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87508, United States* E-mail: giuseppe.ermondi@unito.it. Phone: +39 (0)11 6708337 (G.E.).* E-mail: jan.kihlberg@kemi.uu.se. Phone: +46 (0)18 4713801 (J.K.).24 09 2018 30 09 2018 3 9 11742 11757 19 06 2018 04 09 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Conformational flexibility
is a major determinant of the properties of macrocycles and other
drugs in beyond rule of 5 (bRo5) space. Prediction of conformations
is essential for design of drugs in this space, and we have evaluated
three tools for conformational sampling of a set of 10 bRo5 drugs
and clinical candidates in polar and apolar environments. The distance-geometry
based OMEGA was found to yield ensembles spanning larger structure
and property spaces than the ensembles obtained by MOE-LowModeMD (MOE)
and MacroModel (MC). Both MC and OMEGA but not MOE generated different
ensembles for polar and apolar environments. All three conformational
search methods generated conformers similar to the crystal structure
conformers for 9 of the 10 compounds, with OMEGA performing somewhat
better than MOE and MC. MOE and OMEGA found all six conformers of
roxithromycin that were identified by NMR in aqueous solutions, whereas
only OMEGA sampled the three conformers observed in chloroform. We
suggest that characterization of conformers using molecular descriptors,
e.g., the radius of gyration and polar surface area, is preferred
to energy- or root-mean-square deviation-based methods for selection
of biologically relevant conformers in drug discovery in bRo5 space.

document-id-old-9ao8b01379document-id-new-14ao-2018-01379pccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Half
of all protein targets thought to be involved in human diseases
have been classified as difficult to drug1,2 with
small molecules that comply with Lipinski’s rule of 5 (Ro5).3,4 Recent investigations have highlighted that macrocycles (here defined
as having ≥12 atoms in the macrocycle ring)5,6 and
other compounds residing in beyond rule of 5 (bRo5) chemical space,7−9 provide improved opportunities for modulation of difficult-to-drug
targets.5,6,10 Since macrocycles
are more prone to adopt disk- and spherelike conformations than non-macrocycles,
they appear to be particularly well-suited to bind to targets that
have large, flat, or groove-shaped binding sites,6,7 e.g.,
protein–protein interactions.11,12 Macrocyclization
has also been suggested to contribute to improved cell permeability
and intestinal absorption for compounds in bRo5 space.5,10,13,14 These two suggestions are consistent with the observed enrichment
of macrocycles among oral drugs and clinical candidates in bRo5 space.8 Compounds in bRo5 space are likely to have more
complex structures than those of Ro5 compliant molecules, and their
synthesis will consequently be more challenging. This is a particular
issue for macrocycles as the macrocyclization step is often sensitive
to small structural variations and subject to low yields.15 It is therefore important to be able to predict
the conformational preferences of macrocycles prior to synthesis to
assess conformation-dependent properties, such as aqueous solubility,
cell-permeability, and binding to targets and off-targets. Synthetic
efforts can then focus on compounds with favorable predicted properties.

Recent publications indicate that interest in conformational sampling
of macrocycles is increasing.16−25 Although a complete review of the literature is beyond the scope
of this paper, studies of conformational sampling are characterized
by the choice of sampling algorithm, the dataset of investigated structures,
and the strategy used to evaluate the results. Algorithmic approaches
to macrocycle conformational sampling include distance geometry (DG),16,17 dihedral angle-based sampling,21 molecular
dynamics (MD),18,19 and inverse kinematics.20 A variety of datasets have been used to validate
these methods: 19 macrocycles from three chemical classes [cyclo(Gly)x peptides, cyclodextrins, and cyclic peptide
natural products],16 a diverse set of 67
macrocycles,20 and a set of 37 polyketides.21 Conformational sampling with different algorithms
is usually evaluated by comparison of their ability to reproduce conformations
observed in the solid state.17,25 The ability of different
algorithms to reproduce the target-bound conformation of macrocycles
has been discussed recently,22−24 and results have also been evaluated
with regard to the structural diversity of conformational spaces sampled.25 Several studies have focused on the conformation
adopted by the macrocycle core only,19−21 thereby omitting the
conformation of attached side chains, which, however, are essential
for target engagement as well as all other properties of the macrocycle.

Despite recent advances, it remains unclear how conformational
sampling should be used to find relevant conformers of macrocycles.
Hence, questions such as how the influence of the environment should
best be incorporated in sampling and how relevant conformers can be
identified among the theoretically reasonable pool of conformers remain
to be answered. For further insights, we have evaluated the performance
of MacroModel (MC),19 MOE-LowModeMD (MOE),18 and a novel method implemented most recently
in OMEGA.26 We chose MC and MOE as they
are used frequently and may be viewed as standard methods for sampling
of macrocycles. MOE is based on a specifically designed MD approach,
whereas MC is based on the perturbation of low frequency vibrational
modes, and their output ensembles may depend on the starting three-dimensional
(3D) conformation. Then, we selected OMEGA because it samples conformational
space in a completely different manner than MC and MOE. OMEGA uses
a DG method that is expected to explore conformational space in a
more comprehensive manner, independent of the starting point. For
results to be relevant to drug discovery, we selected a set of 10
drugs and clinical candidates of high structural complexity, including
macrocycles and non-macrocyclic analogues. Importantly, the selected
compounds reside in bRo5 chemical space where conformational flexibility
has been proposed to be essential to allow them to adjust their properties
to the surrounding environment.27−30 For example, conformations with intramolecular hydrogen
bonds (IMHBs) present a less polar surface in an apolar environment,
such as a cell membrane, whereas conformations lacking IMHBs expose
a more polar surface in an aqueous environment.

Evaluating the
accuracy, here, the reproduction of solid-state
structures, by a new method in comparison to existing ones, is mandatory
but not sufficient for applications in drug discovery. It is also
essential to know (a) if and how conformational sampling is influenced
by the dielectric constant of the solvent, (b) how molecular properties
vary across the conformational space sampled, and (c) if the minimum
energy conformer (MEC) is representative (or not) of the conformations
populated by the compound in crystal structures of different origins,
or in different solutions. To address these topics, we performed conformational
sampling in polar and apolar environments. We evaluated conformational
ensembles by comparison to solid-state structures and by assessing
the variation across three molecular descriptors in both media. The
radius of gyration (Rgyr) is an index
of molecular dimensions and shape, the polar surface area (PSA) quantifies
the polar regions of a molecule, and the number of intramolecular
hydrogen bonds (IMHBs) heavily influences the whole molecular property
profile. Conventional, extensive molecular dynamics (eMD) simulations
were also performed for a subset of the drugs and clinical candidates
in our dataset. Finally, NMR spectroscopy was used to determine how
conformational preferences are influenced by the solvent for the erythronolide
roxithromycin.

Results and Discussion
Dataset of Drugs and Clinical
Candidates
We selected
a dataset of five macrocyclic erythronolide antibacterial drugs, three
macrocyclic Hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS3/4a protease inhibitors, and
two non-macrocyclic HCV NS3/4a protease inhibitors (Figure 1). This set includes drugs
and clinical candidates of high complexity that originate from natural
products or from structure-based design. It allowed investigation
of conformational sampling for 14- to 20-membered macrocycles, with
up to three complex side chains pendant to the macrocyclic core.

Figure 1 Structures
of erythronolides and HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors
used in this study. Important structural differences amongst the erythronolides
are shown in pink. Peptide backbones are indicated in red for the
protease inhibitors, nonpeptidic atoms forming part of the macrocycles
are in blue.

At least one crystal
structure is available for each of the 10
selected drugs and clinical candidates (Table 1), allowing comparison to the conformational
ensembles generated by the three search methods. Multiple crystal
structures in which the compounds adopt different conformations have
been reported for all erythronolides and the two non-macrocyclic HCV
protease inhibitors, indicating that they may be conformationally
flexible also in solution. Molecular weights ranged from 680 Da for
telaprevir to 837 Da for roxithromycin, in the range of >600–700
Da where conformational flexibility has been suggested to be essential
for drugs to display both adequate aqueous solubility and cell permeability.27,28,31 The macrocycles had 7–13
rotatable bonds in their side chains, and the two non-macrocyclic
protease inhibitors had 18 and 19 rotatable bonds, respectively. For
those compounds with multiple crystal structures showing two or more
distinct conformations (here defined as root-mean-square deviation
(RMSD) >0.75 Å between conformations), the maximum differences
ranged from 0.93 Å RMSD for azithromycin to 6.13 Å RMSD
for telithromycin.

Table 1 Crystal Structure Dataset for the
Selected Erythronolides
and HCV NS3/4A Protease Inhibitors
compound	MW (Da)	nRotBa	no. of structures	no. of conformationsb	max. RMSDc	IDd	resolution
(Å)	R-factor (%)	
erythromycin	733.9	7	10	6	1.94	1YI2	2.65	 	
2J0D*	2.75	 	
3FRQ	1.76	 	
QIFKEX	 	2.92	
NAVTAF	 	4.30	
LAPDEN*	 	6.21	
clarithromycin	748.0	8	14	3	3.13	CIWJIC*	 	3.36	
NAVSUY01*	 	6.16	
WANNUU	 	4.50	
azithromycin	749.0	7	7	2	0.93	1YHQ*	2.40	 	
GEGJAD*	 	7.70	
roxithromycin	837.1	13	3	3	4.60	1JZZ*	3.8	 	
 	 	 	 	 	 	FUXYOM	 	4.70	
 	 	 	 	 	 	KAHWAT*	 	1.68	
telithromycin	812.0	11	5	5	6.13	1YIJ*	2.60	 	
1P9X*	3.40	 	
4V7S	3.25	 	
4V7Z	3.10	 	
4WF9	3.43	 	
danoprevir	729.8	11	3	1	 	3SU1	1.40	 	
grazoprevir	768.9	10	4	1	 	3SUG	1.80	 	
vaniprevir	755.9	9	5	1	 	3SU4	2.26	 	
asunaprevir	748.3	18	4	2	3.02	4WH6*	1.99	 	
MIYWOI*	 	11.38	
telaprevir	679.9	19	5	3	1.40	3SV6*	1.40	 	
3SV7	1.55	 	
LERJID*	 	4.69	
a Number of rotatable bonds calculated
using Canvas.

b Structures
were clustered into conformations
for which representative structures differed in RMSD by >0.75 Å.

c RMSD between representative
structures
of the conformations displaying the largest structural variation for
each compound.

d The representative
structures of
the conformations displaying the largest variation for each compound
have been indicated by an asterisk. RMSD values were calculated on
the basis of all heavy atoms in the compounds.

Inspection of the conformations
adopted by the erythronolides in
the crystalline state shows that the macrocycles of erythromycin,
the close analogue clarithromycin, and azithromycin maintain similar
conformations across multiple crystal structures (Figure 2). The saccharide side chains
of erythromycin and clarithromycin show more variability. Roxithromycin
and telithromycin are different, with the multiple crystal structures
showing significant conformational differences in the macrocyclic
core and the attached side chains. The RMSDs between the least similar
experimental conformations of these molecules are large (Table 1). The observed conformations
also differ significantly in the number of IMHBs (roxithromycin, 0–2)
or Rgyr (telithromycin, 4.90–7.63
Å). We expected that the strikingly different experimental conformations
observed for roxithromycin and telithromycin would provide a challenging
test system for conformational sampling algorithms.

Figure 2 Overlays of the different
conformations found in the crystalline
state of each erythronolide. Overlays were generated by alignment
of the heavy atoms in the macrocyclic core only for each erythronolide.
The color used for the protein data bank (PDB) and Cambridge Structural
Database (CSD) codes match those of the carbon atoms in the corresponding
structures.

Only one crystal structure
is available for each of the macrocyclic
HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors (Figure S1, Supporting Information), and they all originate from complexes
with the protease. For the non-macrocyclic asunaprevir and telaprevir,
the overlaid crystal structures show some variation between the small-molecule
and protease complex crystal structures, most notably at the C-termini
of these peptidomimetics. Consistent with known protease binding preferences,
the peptidic backbones of both the macrocyclic and non-macrocyclic
inhibitors adopt an extended β-strand conformation. In addition,
the macrocycle linker provides an overall flat, disk-shaped conformation
to the three macrocyclic inhibitors that matches the relatively flat
binding site of the protease.

Conformational Sampling
The conformational spaces accessible
to the 10 molecules in our set were explored with MC, MOE, and OMEGA,
starting from the simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES)
codes of the compounds. The ionization state at physiological conditions
(pH = 7.0) was used for all compounds. Sampling was performed both
in apolar (vacuum, ε = 1) and polar (aqueous, ε = 80)
environments to investigate how the polarity of the environment influenced
the output. Conformations obtained within an energy window of 25 kcal/mol
were retained, i.e., within a window that should be large enough to
include all significant conformers and thus provide a comprehensive
picture of the structure and property space exhibited by the different
drugs. Conformations obtained from sampling with the three methods
were energy-minimized using the molecular mechanics force field MMFF94s
to ensure that the results were not affected by the use of different
force fields for different methods.32

Comparison to Crystal Structures
As a DG-based conformational
sampling method was recently implemented in OMEGA, we first evaluated
OMEGA’s performance in comparison to that of MC and MOE with
regards to how accurately crystal structures were reproduced. Comparison
of the calculated minimum energy conformation of a compound to the
experimentally determined crystal structure(s) using RMSD cutoffs
of 2 and 4 Å, respectively, was used as the first criterion of
accuracy (Figure 3A).
The similarity between the sampled conformation most similar to the
crystal structure (the minimum RMSD conformer, MRC) and that crystal
structure was used as a second accuracy criterion (Figure 3B).

Figure 3 MC, MOE, and OMEGA compared
in terms of how accurately crystal
structures are reproduced. (A) Accuracy in reproducing the crystal
structure(s) of the 10 drugs and clinical candidates by the predicted
minimum energy conformer (MEC) of each compound. (B) Accuracy in reproducing
the crystal structure(s) by the conformer most similar to the crystal
structure (the minimum RMSD conformer, MRC) for the 10 compounds.
Both accuracies are given with RMSD cutoff of <2 and <4 Å
for each of the three methods in apolar and polar environments, respectively.
They were calculated from the data in Tables S1 and S2 in the Supporting Information.

The MECs predicted by the three methods reproduced the crystal
structures with, at best, modest accuracy, on the basis of an RMSD
cutoff of <2.0 Å (Figure 3A). Under the conditions used in this study, MC performed
significantly better than MOE, which in turn performed better than
OMEGA, in both environments. All methods predicted the crystal structures
better in a polar environment than in vacuum. Nine of the 19 crystal
structures of the five erythronolides were reproduced with an RMSD
< 2.0 Å, with MC succeeding with all nine of these examples
(Table S1, Supporting Information). With
the exception of danoprevir, none of the methods were able to reproduce
any of the eight crystal structures of the HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors
with <2.0 Å accuracy (Table S1,
Supporting Information). However, when the RMSD cutoff was increased
to the much more lenient <4.0 Å, all methods showed 70–95%
accuracy in both environments, with OMEGA performing better than MC
and MOE. Closer inspection of the overlays of the MECs calculated
in water for the three macrocyclic protease inhibitors and the crystal
structures revealed that the major structural differences were found
in the orientation of the side chains, whereas the conformation of
the macrocyclic core was reproduced with reasonable accuracy (often <1.0
Å RMSD, Table S3, Supporting Information).
This was also the case for the macrocyclic cores of erythromycin,
clarithromycin, and azithromycin, which all display limited variation
across their different crystal structures. The cores of roxithromycin
and telithromycin, which both show greater conformational difference
across multiple structures, were reproduced less well by the three
methods (Figure 2 and Table S3, Supporting Information). Just as for
the overall structures, MC performed better than MOE and OMEGA in
predicting the conformations of the macrocyclic cores.

The MRCs
show how well each of the methods performs in generating
a conformer similar to the experimental structure within a relatively
tolerant energy window (here, chosen as <25 kcal/mol above the
MEC). In an apolar environment, MRCs predicted by OMEGA reproduced
the crystal structures significantly better than those predicted by
MOE and MC when using the more demanding RMSD cutoff at <2 Å
(Figure 3B). However,
in a polar environment, all methods reproduced the crystal structures
within 2.0 Å (accuracy >80%), with OMEGA performing marginally
better than MC and MOE. The energies of the MRCs were in general significantly
higher (>15 kcal/mol) than those of the MECs of the compound (Table S2, Supporting Information).

In summary,
the MECs generated by the three methods reproduce the
crystal structures of the 10 drugs and clinical candidates at best
with modest accuracy, as judged by a <2 Å RMSD criteria. However,
the cores in the eight macrocycles were usually reproduced with much
better accuracy by the MECs, revealing the side chains as a significant
source of uncertainty in conformational sampling. All methods found
conformers (MRCs) close to the crystal structures, but they usually
had significantly higher energies than those in the MEC. As judged
by both accuracy criteria for reproduction of crystal structures,
sampling carried out in a polar environment performed slightly better
than in an apolar one. We conclude that OMEGA is complementary to
MC and MOE as it performs better in finding a conformation close to
that of crystal structures but worse as judged by the accuracy by
which MECs reproduce crystal structures. OMEGA should therefore be
considered as a viable method for conformational sampling of macrocycles
and possibly also for other compounds with complex structures.

Comparison
of Molecular Descriptors
We envisaged that
property-based analysis of conformational ensembles could provide
different information than comparisons based on RMSD values. Therefore,
we first investigated a possible correlation between RMSD-based differences
between conformations and variations in two 3D descriptors, Rgyr and PSA. This was done for the five drugs
and clinical candidates in our dataset for which three or more distinct
conformations are available in crystal structures (Table 1). Interestingly, only a weak
correlation was observed between conformational differences (ΔRMSD)
and differences in Rgyr, whereas no correlation
was found between ΔRMSD and differences in PSA (Figure 4).

Figure 4 Differences in (A) radius
of gyration (Rgyr) and (B) polar surface
area (PSA) plotted vs differences in RMSD
for drugs and clinical candidates in the dataset that have three or
more conformations. The crystal structure in which each of the five
compounds adopts a conformation having the minimum Rgyr or 3D PSA, respectively, was chosen as reference.
The reference value was then subtracted from the Rgyr and 3D PSA values, respectively, of the other conformations,
and the differences were plotted vs the differences in RMSD.

To obtain additional information
to that provided by RMSD values
for the ensembles generated by MC, MOE, and OMEGA, we proceeded to
calculate Rgyr, PSA, and the number of
IMHBs for all conformers of the 10 compounds in our dataset. The calculated
ranges and means for the three properties were then compared between
conformational sampling methods and environments and also to the corresponding
properties calculated from the crystal structure(s) of each compound.

Radius of Gyration (Rgyr)
The Rgyr of a compound in a specific
conformation provides a numerical description of its size and shape
and is calculated as the root-mean-square distance (RMSD) between
the compound’s atoms and its center of mass. On the basis of
studies of passive permeability, this 3D descriptor has been suggested
to be a better surrogate for molecular size than MW, the 2D descriptor
most typically used in this context.33

The calculated Rgyr ranges for the sampled
conformations are small (<1 Å) for the first three erythronolides,
somewhat larger for roxithromycin, and much larger for telithromycin
(<2 Å), in particular, in a polar environment (Figures 5 and S2). This agrees well with the limited conformational flexibility inferred
from the crystalline states of the first three and the greater flexibility
observed for the latter two (Figure 2). Predicted Rgyr ranges
are in general larger for the HCV protease inhibitors than for the
erythronolides, ranging from approximately 0.7 Å for grazoprevir
and vaniprevir (calculated with MC) up to >1.5 Å for danoprevir,
vaniprevir, and asunaprevir (calculated with OMEGA). However, no major
difference in the range of Rgyr was observed
between the macrocyclic and non-macrocyclic protease inhibitors, tentatively
indicating that they have similar flexibility. This finding is in
line with a recent analysis of crystal structures from a wider set
of bRo5 drugs and clinical candidates.7 OMEGA generally provides greater coverage of Rgyr space than MC, in particular for the erythronolides. Interestingly,
all compounds in our dataset except for telithromycin had Rgyr ranges <7 Å, the value suggested
as an upper cutoff for cell permeable small-molecule drugs; larger
compounds often have poorer permeabilities.33 Thus, our results are largely consistent with the Rgyr cutoff of 7 Å for cell permeability and oral
absorption.

Figure 5 Radius of gyration (Rgyr) calculated
for the erythronolides and HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors. For each
compound, Rgyr has been calculated for
the conformation(s) adopted in the crystal structures and for the
conformational ensembles generated by MC (green), MOE (pink), and
OMEGA (yellow) in apolar and polar environments. Rgyr was calculated using the MOE software.34 Box plots show minimum and maximum values as
whiskers; the boxes span the 25th–75th percentile range, and
the MECs are indicated as black circles. Figure S2 shows these data plotted with a fixed scale for Rgyr for all 10 compounds.

Rgyr ranges are often smaller
in apolar
than in polar environments for ensembles from the three methods. Such
an environmental influence is also pronounced for the median Rgyr values from OMEGA for all but azithromycin
among the erythronolides but only for vaniprevir among the HCV protease
inhibitors. MC and MOE show this dependence of median Rgyr on the environment for the majority of the protease
inhibitors but not for the erythronolides. In contrast, the Rgyr values of the MECs for each compound do
not show a consistent dependence on the environment.

The Rgyr ranges calculated from the
ensembles obtained by the three methods in general include those of
the crystal structures, both for the erythronolides and HCV protease
inhibitors. Depending on the method used for sampling as well as on
the specific drug investigated, the predicted and crystallographic
median values may or may not be close in numerical value for the two
classes of drugs. For example, all median Rgyr values for azithromycin and danoprevir are similar, whereas those
for clarithromycin and telaprevir show significant variation. However,
the Rgyr of the MEC shows even larger
variation and is extremely dependent both on the drug and the method
applied for sampling. Thus, in spite of their variation, the Rgyr values of the median conformations in the
ensembles are closer to those of the crystal structures than those
of the MECs.

Polar Surface Area
Polarity is a
molecular property
of great importance in drug discovery.35,36 It is thought
to play a pivotal role in permeability and solubility and other absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion-related properties. Polar
Surface Area (PSA) is a widely used descriptor of polarity and is
commonly defined as the surface area of a molecule that arises from
oxygen and nitrogen atoms, plus hydrogens attached to these atoms.

The predicted PSA ranges of the sampled conformations of the investigated
compounds varied from approximately 30 to 60 Å2 between
compounds and with the sampling method used to generate the ensembles
(Figures 6 and S3). Interestingly, compounds such as erythromycin,
clarithromycin, and azithromycin that displayed limited Rgyr ranges showed major variations in PSA between conformations
(Figure S3). This observation further highlights
the lack of correlation between variations in 3D structure and PSA
discussed above (Figure 4). Ranges calculated from ensembles generated by OMEGA were generally
larger than those obtained with MC and MOE, whereas only very minor
differences between values calculated in apolar and polar environments
were observed. Median and MEC PSA values were lower in apolar than
polar environments for the ensembles from MC and OMEGA but not for
MOE. Thus, the median and MEC conformations derived from MC and OMEGA
are consistent with the idea that flexible compounds conformationally
adapt to reduce their PSA in an apolar environment as compared to
that in a polar one.

Figure 6 Polar surface area (PSA) calculated for the erythronolides
and
HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors. For each compound, PSA has been calculated
for the conformation(s) adopted in the crystal structures and for
the conformational ensembles generated by MC (green), MOE (pink),
and OMEGA (yellow) in apolar and polar environments. PSA was calculated
on the basis of the surface area of the molecule that arises from
oxygen and nitrogen atoms, plus their attached hydrogen atoms, using
the Schrödinger software.37,38 Box plots
show minimum and maximum values as whiskers; the boxes span the 25th–75th
percentile range, and the MECs are indicated as black circles. Figure S3 shows these data plotted with a fixed
scale for PSA for all 10 compounds.

For the erythronolides, predicted PSA ranges included those
of
the crystal structures, with the exception of telithromycin for which
all predicted ranges apart from the one obtained in an apolar environment
by OMEGA were smaller than those of the crystal structures. With only
two exceptions, the predicted PSA for the HCV protease inhibitors
included the values of the crystal structures.

For both classes
of drugs, the PSA of the MEC varies dramatically
with the sampling method and the nature of the environment. Sometimes
it is found within the 25th–75th percentiles (c.f. roxithromycin
and telaprevir), but often it is located in the 0th–25th percentile.
For the erythronolides, the median PSA values obtained from the conformational
ensembles provide a better approximation of the median PSA of the
crystal structures of each compound than the PSA of the MEC. However,
such a correlation was not observed for the HCV protease inhibitors,
possibly because there is only one crystal structure for each of the
three macrocycles.

Intramolecular Hydrogen Bonding
Among the five erythronolides,
all but telithromycin displayed up to two IMHBs in their crystal structures
(Figure 7). The ensembles
obtained by conformational sampling with OMEGA covered a larger conformational
space, with both ranges and median values of IMHBs being higher than
those for MC and MOE. As judged by comparison of the 25th–75th
percentiles or the MECs, for each compound, all three methods generated
ensembles having more IMHBs in an apolar than a polar environment
but to various extents. OMEGA was more consistent in predicting this
dependence on the environment, which is in line with how a conformationally
flexible compound would be expected to adapt to its environment.27−30 The IMHB ranges predicted by all three methods, both in apolar and
polar media, included the number of IMHBs observed in the crystal
structures. Usually, the MECs of the different ensembles contained
a larger number of IMHBs, than that observed in the crystal structures,
in particular, MECs predicted by MC and OMEGA in vacuum.

Figure 7 Number of IMHBs
in the crystal structures and in the conformational
ensembles generated by MC (green), MOE (pink), and OMEGA (yellow)
in apolar and polar environments for the erythronolides. IMHBs were
calculated using the Schrödinger software.37,38 Box plots show minimum and maximum values as whiskers; the boxes
span the 25th–75th percentile range, and the MECs are indicated
as black circles.

Neither the macrocyclic
nor the non-macrocyclic HCV NS3/4A protease
inhibitors displayed IMHBs in their crystal structures, most of which
are complexed with the protease (Figure S4, Supporting Information). This behavior is consistent with the expected
binding mode for peptidelike active site protease inhibitors where
hydrogen bonds are instead formed between the inhibitor and the protease.
However, the ensembles from conformational sampling of each inhibitor
included conformations with up to a range of two to four IMHBs. As
for the erythronolides, OMEGA sampled a conformational space with
more IMHBs than MC and MOE and also had a higher degree of IMHB formation
in an apolar than a polar environment.

Extensive MD (eMD) Simulations
Extensive molecular
dynamics (eMD) simulations are often used to evaluate the molecular
property space described by the “natural” fluctuations
of a molecule, starting from a single conformation.39 We applied a standard eMD method,40 with CPU demands consistent with those in routine application in
the context of a medicinal chemistry project, to a subset of the 10
compounds in our dataset. Our aim was to investigate whether methods
for conformational sampling, such as MC, MOE, and OMEGA, explore a
different molecular property space than that explored by eMD and to
study whether molecular property ranges obtained from eMD varied when
explicit solvents of different polarities were used in the simulations.

We selected six compounds that are structurally diverse but still
representative of the full set of 10 drugs and clinical candidates
(c.f. structures in Figure 1). For the erythronolides, we choose the parent compound erythromycin,
the ring-expanded azithromycin, and roxithromycin, which has a flexible
side chain attached to the macrocycle. The macrocyclic HCV NS3/4A
protease inhibitors belong to two different structural classes, and
one from each class was selected, i.e., danoprevir and grazoprevir.
Asunaprevir, which constitutes a non-macrocyclic analogue of danoprevir,
was also included. Starting from their SMILES structures, these six
compounds were submitted to eMD simulations in explicit water and
chloroform, the latter used as a model of an apolar environment. The
stability of the systems was confirmed by the modest fluctuations
of their potential energies (Figure S5A,B, Supporting Information). The trajectories of the six selected compounds
were then used to evaluate the molecular property space populated
by each compound and compared to that populated by the ensembles from
OMEGA (Figure S6, Supporting Information),
which samples the largest molecular property space of the three methods
for conformational sampling evaluated herein (cf. above).

Rgyr and PSA space from the ensembles
obtained by eMD were in general smaller than those for the ensemble
from OMEGA, both in an apolar and polar environment (Figure S6, Supporting Information). In addition, the Rgyr and PSA ranges from eMD and OMEGA showed
limited overlap for several compounds, revealing that eMD often samples
a different property space than that by OMEGA. Both for Rgyr and PSA, the ranges from eMD often included the respective
values for the crystal structures but major discrepancies were found
for either or both properties for half of the selected compounds.
Some influence of the polarity of the solvent on Rgyr and PSA was observed in the eMD simulations (Figure S6, Supporting Information). Thus, the Rgyr ranges and PSA medians were both smaller
in chloroform than in water for the six compounds, with erythromycin
and azithromycin PSA medians showing the largest differences.

Conformations
of Roxythromycin in Chloroform and Water
To gain experimental
insight into the conformational flexibility
of macrocycles and the variation of their conformational landscape
between apolar and polar environments, we studied the conformations
of roxithromycin in chloroform and water by NMR spectroscopy. The
solution ensembles were used as an independent set of data for comparison
to the ensembles generated by MC, MOE, and OMEGA. Roxithromycin was
selected as three X-ray crystal structures differing in RMSD by up
to 4.6 Å have been reported (Table 1), indicating a significant molecular flexibility
that should be challenging for conformational sampling. Previous NMR
studies of roxithromycin concluded that its predominant solution conformation
in chloroform resembles its geometry in one of its crystal structures
(KAHWAT)41 and emphasized the
importance of intramolecular hydrogen bonding in the stabilization
of the macrolide conformation.42 NMR studies
have also been performed in methanolic solution, suggesting that the
conformation identified for chloroform remains dominant. The aqueous
solution conformation of roxithromycin has so far not been studied
nor the influence of the polarity of the environment on its overall
molecular conformation.

As roxithromycin can be expected to
exist as a dynamic ensemble of interconverting conformations in solution,
we analyzed it in water and chloroform solutions using the NAMFIS
algorithm43 that has previously been successfully
applied for the description of the solution ensemble of various flexible
macrocycles.44−51 Experimental population-averaged distances were determined by the
acquisition of nuclear Overhauser enhancement (NOE) buildups at 900
MHz and by conversion of the initial buildup rates into interproton
distances (Tables S6 and S7, Supporting Information). A theoretical ensemble covering the entire available conformational
space was generated using an unrestrained Monte Carlo conformational
search using water and chloroform solvation models. Monte Carlo simulations
were used so that the solution ensembles obtained by NMR would be
independent of the ensembles generated by MC, MOE, and OMEGA, thereby
allowing validation of the output from these three methods by the
results from NMR. Following redundant conformation elimination, conformations
from all individual searches were combined and used as theoretical
input for the NAMFIS analyses. Solution ensembles were determined
by varying the probability of each conformation and fitting the back-calculated
distances for each computationally predicted conformation to the experimentally
determined population-averaged distances derived from the NMR studies
in chloroform and water (Table S9, Supporting Information), respectively.

The best fit, providing the
lowest RMSD of the experimental and
probability-averaged theoretical data, was obtained for ensembles
possessing three conformations in chloroform (Figure 8) and six conformations in water (Figure 9). The lower number
and less diverse conformational families in chloroform as compared
to those in water reveal a higher molecular flexibility in the more
polar environment. In chloroform, the methoxy group of the oxime side
chain forms a hydrogen bond to OH-11 of the macrocycle in all three
conformations (Figure 8A). It should also be noted that the highest populated conformation
in chloroform (71%) resembles the conformation observed in one of
the crystal structures of roxithromycin (KAHWAT), with the polar functionalities being buried from
solvent by intramolecular hydrogen bonds and the oxime chain oriented
over the macrocycle (Figure 8B). This observation is in good agreement with those of previous
investigations.42,52,53 In aqueous solution, the oxime chain shows higher flexibility and
is solvent-exposed in a majority of the conformations, representing
82% of the solution ensemble (Figure 9A,B). Only two of the minor conformations in water
display intramolecular hydrogen bonds to the oxime side chain, one
of them (conformation 2) being found also in chloroform. The most
populated conformation in water (59%) has some resemblance to the
conformation observed in one of the crystal structures of roxithromycin
(FUXYOM), with the major differences originating from the
orientation of the two monosaccharides (Figure 9C). Interestingly, the target-bound structure
of roxithromycin (1JZZ) is similar to one of the minor conformations (14%) observed in
water (Figure 9D).
The latter observation is consistent with the expectation54−56 that the protein-bound conformation of a flexible ligand should
be measurably populated when free in aqueous solution. However, in
contrast to earlier reports,57 the dominant
conformation in chloroform shows lower similarity to the bioactive
conformation of roxithromycin. Importantly, our observations demonstrate
a major influence of solvent polarity on the conformation of roxithromycin,
with a more rigid and closed ensemble being adopted in chloroform
and a more flexible and solvent-exposed one being observed in water.

Figure 8 Solution
ensemble of roxithromycin in CDCl3, as determined
by NAMFIS analysis, and comparison to one of the crystal structures
of roxithromycin. (A) An overlay of the three conformations found
in CDCl3 with the most populated one indicated in green
(number 3). The conformation also found in D2O is indicated
in blue (number 2). (B) Overlay of the most populated conformation
(number 3, green) and the most similar crystal structure (CSD KAHWAT, orange); RMSD = 1.82 Å. Hydrogen bonds to
the oxime side chain of roxithromycin are indicated by black dotted
lines, whereas nonpolar hydrogen atoms have been omitted for clarity.

Figure 9 Solution ensemble of roxithromycin in D2O, as determined
by NAMFIS analysis and comparisons to two of the crystal structures
of roxithromycin. (A, B) Overlays of the six conformations found in
D2O, with the most populated one in green (number 4). For
clarity, conformation 4 has been compared to four of the conformations
in (A) and to one of the most different ones in (B). (C) Overlay of
the most populated conformation (number 4, green) and the most similar
crystal structure (CSD FUXYOM, orange); RMSD = 2.93 Å. (D) Overlay of solution
conformation 2, with the crystal structure (PDB 1JZZ, orange) that is
most similar to any of the six solution conformations; RMSD = 2.02
Å. Hydrogen bonds to the oxime side chain of roxithromycin are
indicated by black dotted lines in (C) and (D), and nonpolar hydrogen
atoms have been omitted for clarity in (A)–(D).

The MECs predicted by MC, MOE, and OMEGA for apolar
and polar environments
were unable to accurately reproduce the different conformations observed
for roxithromycin in chloroform or water (Table S4, Supporting Information). However, conformational sampling
did explore similar (RMSD <
2 Å) conformations within the energy window used in our study
(<25 kcal/mol; Figure 10). OMEGA stood out by reproducing the three solution conformations
found in chloroform, whereas MOE was able to reproduce one of the
two minor conformations. In water, MOE reproduced all six solution
conformations with higher frequencies than those of OMEGA whereas
MC reproduced the major conformation (number 4) with high accuracy,
as well as two of the minor conformations.

Figure 10 Ability of conformations
in the ensembles generated by MC, MOE,
and OMEGA to reproduce the solution ensembles of roxithromycin in
chloroform and water, as determined by NMR spectroscopy. Reproducibilities
have been determined as the frequency of conformations found within
an RMSD cutoff of <2 Å of each of the solution conformations.
The population (in %) of each solution conformation, as determined
by NMR spectroscopy, is stated below the number of the conformation.

As expected, roxithromycin populates
a larger property space in
water than in chloroform (Figure 11, PSA and IMHB panels). Comparison of Rgyr, PSA, and IMHBs for the major conformation identified
by NMR spectroscopy to the predicted median values revealed that OMEGA
had the best correlation for Rgyr, both
for polar and apolar solutions. PSA was well predicted both by the
medians of MC and OMEGA, whereas MC showed the best correlation for
IMHBs in an apolar environment and OMEGA did so for polar environments.
Median values from MOE differed more from those of the conformations
populated in solution than those from MC and OMEGA, which agrees well
with that MOE is influenced by the environment to a lesser extent
than MC and OMEGA (cf. above). These observations indicate that conformational
sampling by MC or OMEGA, followed by ranking of conformations by Rgyr and PSA and selection of the median conformations
may constitute an approach to prediction of the properties of macrocycles
in apolar and polar environments. However, median Rgyr and PSA conformations do not necessarily constitute
an approximation of the 3D structure of the experimental conformations.

Figure 11 Radius
of gyration (Rgyr), polar surface
area (PSA), and intramolecular hydrogen bonding (IMHB) for roxithromycin.
The descriptors have been calculated for the conformations observed
in the three crystal structures of roxithromycin, for the conformations
adopted in apolar (CDCl3) and polar (D2O) solutions,
as determined by NMR spectroscopy, and for the median conformations
in the ensembles obtained by conformational sampling (CS) using MC
(green), MOE (pink), and OMEGA (yellow) in apolar and polar environments.
The population (in %) of each solution conformation, as determined
by NMR spectroscopy, is stated adjacent to the corresponding descriptor
values. The most populated conformations are indicated in red.

Conclusions
Conformational
flexibility is required for bRo5 drugs to possess
adequate aqueous solubility, cell permeability, and oral absorption,
as well as potent target binding.27−30 To facilitate drug discovery,
the prediction of biologically relevant conformers for drug candidates
in bRo5 space is therefore of major interest.

To gain understanding
of the influence of the polarity of the environment
on the ensembles, we have applied three different computational methods
for conformational sampling to a set of eight macrocyclic and two
non-macrocyclic bRo5 drugs and clinical candidates, providing the
following key findings. First, consistent with earlier studies,17,25 the experimentally determined conformations for the 10 compounds
were usually not accurately reproduced by the MEC generated by the
three computational methods. Instead, the experimental structures
were often found at higher energies within the ensembles. OMEGA performed
somewhat better than MC and MOE in sampling conformations structurally
similar to those of the crystal structures. Second, as expected, different
methods for conformational sampling generated different results from
the same input. OMEGA in general provided ensembles of conformers
describing a larger structure and property space than those described
by ensembles of conformers provided by MC and MOE, which most likely
explains its better performance in sampling conformations similar
to crystal structures. MECs often differ significantly between these
methods. Third, the impact of the polarity of the environment in governing
the conformational behavior in bRo5 space cannot be neglected, as
revealed by the NMR studies of roxithromycin. Both MC and OMEGA generated
different ensembles for apolar and polar environments, whereas the
output from MOE was less dependent on the environment. However, only
OMEGA sampled conformational space that included the solution ensembles
of roxithromycin in apolar and polar solutions, as determined by NMR
spectroscopy.

The difference in performance shown by OMEGA,
as compared to that
shown by MC and MOE, in the current investigation most likely originates
in the different algorithms implemented by the three methods. MOE
is based on a specifically designed MD approach and MC is based on
the perturbation of low frequency vibrational modes, whereas OMEGA
decomposes molecules into its constituent atoms and generates different
arrangements under distance constraints. The reconstruction of the
molecules permits OMEGA to explore a larger conformational space than
that covered by MC and MOE. In addition, OMEGA samples conformational
space independent of the starting conformation, whereas ensembles
generated by MC and MOE may depend on the starting conformation.

Our findings provide some guidance for the identification of conformers
of bRo5 molecules for use in the prediction of properties that contribute
to solubility and cell permeability. To maximize the likelihood of
identifying biologically relevant conformers, simulations should be
carried out in both polar and apolar media but the MECs are not good
representatives of the biologically relevant conformations. Instead,
molecular descriptors such as Rgyr and
PSA appear to provide advantages compared with criteria based on energies
and geometry (e.g., RMSD) for the selection or clustering of conformers.
In fact, median conformations from ensembles ranked by Rgyr or PSA provided better estimates of the properties
of conformations adopted in the solid state or in solution, in particular,
for ensembles generated by MC and OMEGA.

Experimental Section
X-ray
Crystal Structures
A dataset of crystal structures
for 10 drugs and clinical candidates was assembled (Figure 1). It is composed of five macrocyclic
erythronolides (erythromycin, clarithromycin, azithromycin, roxithromycin,
and telithromycin) and five HCV NS3 protease inhibitors, three of
which are macrocyclic (danoprevir, vaniprevir, and grazoprevir) and
two are non-macrocyclic drugs (asunaprevir and telaprevir). All crystal
structures of these 10 compounds were retrieved from the PDB (www.rcsb.org/pdb)58 and CSD (www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk)59 using searches
by common name, synonyms, and chemical structure.

From the PDB,
only crystal structures with a resolution <3 Å were included
in the dataset, except for one structure for each of roxithromycin
(1JZZ: 3.8 Å)
and telithromycin (1P9X: 3.4 Å) in which the structures showed interesting conformations
(see Results and Discussion). All structures
found in the CSD for the 10 compounds were included in the dataset.
The structures were imported and analyzed with the Maestro tool from
the Schrödinger Suite.37 Hydrogen
atoms were added according to the ionization state at pH 7.4 using
the Epik tool.60 No further structural
refinements were carried out.

Conformational Sampling
The simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) codes
of the 10 compounds were obtained from the PubChem database.61 Stereochemistry in the SMILES was carefully
cross-checked with both the DrugBank database62 and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration label. Initial conformations
were generated by importing the SMILES codes into the Maestro module
of the Schrödinger Suite.37 Chirality
and protonation states were verified and corrected with Epik tool.60 The resulting conformations were used as input
for conformational sampling with MOE-LowModeMD18 and MC (MacroModel−Large Scale Low Mode sampling),19 whereas the SMILES codes where used directly
as input for OMEGA.26 Generation of starting
conformations from SMILES codes in this manner is rapid and provides
consistent input across structures and search methods.

For sampling
of macrocyclic molecules, OMEGA uses a method for
conformational sampling that relies on distance geometry with constraints.26 Initially, a molecule is decomposed into its
constituent atoms and the heavy atoms and chiral hydrogen atoms are
placed at random coordinates in a Cartesian space. This arrangement
is minimized under distance constraints using eq 1. In eq 1, di,j represents interatomic distances and ci,j represents lower or upper
distance constraints from a force field (OMEGA uses MMFF94s)32,63 whereas Vk represents
tetrahedral constraints arising from planarity or atom or bond chirality. 1  If all constraints are met, a rough candidate
conformation for the molecule is formed, which is then refined against
MMFF94. The product of the refinement is a candidate conformation
for the molecule at a local minimum in the MMFF94 potential energy
surface. Candidate conformations are retained if they are unique in
their geometry. At the conclusion of the calculation (when a preset
number of DG attempts have been completed), the resulting ensemble
of conformations is ranked by energy. High-energy conformations and
duplicates, the latter based on heavy atom RMSD, are removed. More
extensive details on the OMEGA algorithm are to be published soon.26

For each of the three methods, two different
environments, vacuum
(ε = 1) and aqueous (ε = 80.0) environment, were used.
Either the Born solvation model64,65 (MOE and MC) or the
Sheffield solvation model66 (OMEGA) were
used to mimic an aqueous environment. The following settings were
used throughout the study: energy window (ewindow, 25 kcal/mol), elimination
of duplicate conformer threshold (RMSD, 0.75 Å), the total number
of iterations (10 000 steps), and force field (MMFF94s). In
MOE, the rejection limit was increased from the default 100–500;
the search is deemed complete when this number of consecutive search
iterations fails to identify a new conformation. For all search methods,
the MM iteration limit, the maximum number of energy minimization
steps performed during the minimization of each conformer, was set
to 10 000 steps. Conformations obtained from sampling with
all three methods were energy-minimized using the same molecular mechanics
force field, i.e., MMFF94s.32

Extensive Molecular
Dynamics (eMD) Simulations
The same initial conformers were
used for conformational sampling
(cf. above) for the six compounds selected for eMD simulations, as
described in detail elsewhere.40 TIP3P
water molecules (∼1500 water molecules) were added with a 10
Å buffering distance between the edges of the truncated octahedron
box. For chloroform (ε = 4.8, frcmod.chcl3), a 30 Å buffering
distance was used (approximately 1200–2000 solvent molecules
in the box). MD production was run for 20 ns using a time step of
2 fs, and coordinates were saved every 10 ps (in total 2000 snapshots).
Initial geometry optimization and MD simulations were performed using
Gaussian 0967 and Amber 14 software,68 respectively.

Comparison of Conformers
To compare the conformations generated from different programs
to the experimentally observed conformations from X-ray crystal structures
and the ensembles determined by NMR spectroscopy, the RMSD metric
was used as implemented in the OpenEye Toolkit (rmsd.py; root-mean-square
deviation of all nonhydrogen atom positions).69

Structural properties such as the number of intramolecular
hydrogen
bonds (IMHBs) and polar surface area (PSA) were calculated using the
Schrödinger software.37,38 Conformation-dependent
radius of gyration (Rgyr) for all conformations
was calculated using the MOE software.34

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR spectra were recorded on a 900 MHz
BRUKER Avance III HD NMR
spectrometer equipped with a TCI cryogenic probe at 25 °C for
D2O and CDCl3 solutions. Assignments were based
on NOESY/TOCSY walks, whereas NOESY buildups were acquired with seven
mixing times varying between 100 and 700 ms. Spectra were acquired
with 16 scans, 4096 points in the direct whereas 512 points in the
indirect dimension, with d1 as 2.5 s and
without solvent suppression. Interproton distances were calculated
according to the initial rate approximation from the linear part of
the buildups (r2 > 0.98) using the
germinal
methylene protons as an internal distance reference (1.78 Å).
The nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) peak intensities were calculated
using normalization of both cross peaks and diagonal peaks according
to ([cross peak1 × cross peak2]/[diagonal peak1 × diagonal
peak2])0.5. Initial NOE buildup rates were converted into
distances using the equation rij = rref(σref/σij)(1/6), where rij is the distance between protons i and j in angstrom and σij is the normalized
intensity obtained from NOESY experiments. Further information is
provided in the Supporting Information.

NAMFIS
Analysis
Unrestrained conformational searches were performed
using the Monte
Carlo algorithm with intermediate torsion sampling, 50 000
Monte Carlo steps, and RMSD cutoff set to 2.0 Å, followed by
molecular mechanics energy minimization with the software Macromodel
(v.9.1), as implemented in the Schrödinger package. For energy
minimization, the Polak–Ribiere type conjugate gradient algorithm
was used with 5000 maximum iteration steps. All conformations within
42 kJ/mol from the global minimum were saved. Conformational searches
were done using the OPLS-2005 and the Amber* force field, with water
and chloroform solvation models. The ensembles from the conformational
searches using the different force fields were combined. Redundant
conformations were eliminated by comparison of heavy atom coordinates
applying an RMSD cutoff of 1–1.5 Å, giving input ensembles
encompassing 62 versus 38 conformations, in water and chloroform,
respectively, that were used in NAMFIS.

Solution ensembles were
determined using the NAMFIS algorithm43,70 by fitting
the experimentally measured distances and coupling constants
to those back-calculated for the computationally predicted conformations.
Distances involving methylene protons were treated as d = (((d1–6) + (d2–6))/2)−1/6 and those involving methyl protons according to d = (((d1–6) + (d2–6) + (d3–6))/3)−1/6. The
validity of the output ensembles was confirmed using standard methods,
that is, through evaluation of the reliability of the conformational
restraints by the addition of 10% random noise to the experimental
data, by the random removal of individual restraints, and by comparison
of the experimentally observed and back-calculated distances. Since
the orientations of oxime side chain and the sugars of roxithromycin
are not equally well described by the experimental data as the macrocyclic
core, and are less well predicted by the theoretical conformational
search, only the NMR data of the macrocycle was included in the initial
NAMFIS analyses (for details, see the Supporting Information). The goodness of the fit of the experimental to
theoretical data was expressed as the sum of the square differences
(SSDs) between the measured and modeled variables (a lower SSD reflects
a better fit), as previously described by Snyder et al.70 Subsequent qualitative analysis of the NOEs
observed between the protons of the macrocycle and those of the oxime
chain as well as of the saccharides corroborated the conclusions that
were drawn from the NAMFIS analyses. Further information about the
NAMFIS analysis is provided in the Supporting Information.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01379.Tabulated data
and figures comparing calculated conformational
ensembles to experimental structures for the 10 drugs and clinical
candidates in the investigated dataset; tabulated data for the NMR-based
structural determination of roxithromycin in chloroform and water
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01379_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
○ Department of Chemistry—BMC, Uppsala University, P.O. Box
576, SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden (E.D.).

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was funded by grants from Janssen Biopharmacueticals
and the Swedish Research Council (grant no. 2016-05160, J.K. and 2016-03602,
M.E.). We thank Paul Jackson at Janssen R&D for support during
this project and OpenEye scientific software and ChemAxon for providing
free academic licenses. We are indebted to Renee DesJarlais for a
rigorous and insightful review during manuscript preparation.
==== Refs
References
Surade S. ; Blundell T. L. 
Structural biology and drug discovery of difficult
targets: the limits of ligandability . Chem.
Biol. 
2012 , 19 , 42 –50 . 10.1016/j.chembiol.2011.12.013 .22284353 
Perola E. ; Herman L. ; Weiss J. 
Development
of a rule-based method
for the assessment of protein druggability . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 1027 –1038 . 10.1021/ci200613b .22448735 
Hopkins A.
L. ; Groom C. R. 
The druggable
genome . Nat. Rev.
Drug Discovery 
2002 , 1 , 727 –730 . 10.1038/nrd892 .12209152 
Rask-Andersen M. ; Masuram S. ; Schiöth H. B. 
The druggable
genome: evaluation
of drug targets in clinical trials suggests major shifts in molecular
class and indication . Annu. Rev. Pharmacol.
Toxicol. 
2014 , 54 , 9 –26 . 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-011613-135943 .24016212 
Giordanetto F. ; Kihlberg J. 
Macrocyclic drugs and
clinical candidates: what can
medicinal chemists learn from their properties? . J. Med. Chem. 
2014 , 57 , 278 –295 . 10.1021/jm400887j .24044773 
Villar E. A. ; Beglov D. ; Chennamadhavuni S. ; Porco J. A. Jr.; Kozakov D. ; Vajda S. ; Whitty A. 
How proteins bind macrocycles . Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2014 , 10 , 723 –731 . 10.1038/nchembio.1584 .25038790 
Doak B. C. ; Zheng J. ; Dobritzsch D. ; Kihlberg J. 
How beyond rule of
5 drugs and clinical candidates bind to their targets . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 2312 –2327 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01286 .26457449 
Doak B. C. ; Over B. ; Giordanetto F. ; Kihlberg J. 
Oral druggable space
beyond the rule of 5: insights from drugs and clinical candidates . Chem. Biol. 
2014 , 21 , 1115 –1142 . 10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.08.013 .25237858 
DeGoey D. A. ; Chen H.-J. ; Cox P. B. ; Wendt M. D. 
Beyond the rule
of 5: lessons learned from AbbVie’s drugs and compound collection . J. Med. Chem. 
2018 , 61 , 2636 –2651 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00717 .28926247 
Driggers E. M. ; Hale S. P. ; Lee J. ; Terrett N. K. 
The exploration
of macrocycles for drug discovery--an underexploited structural class . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2008 , 7 , 608 –624 . 10.1038/nrd2590 .18591981 
Arkin M. R. ; Tang Y. ; Wells J. A. 
Small-molecule inhibitors of protein-protein
interactions: progressing toward the reality . Chem. Biol. 
2014 , 21 , 1102 –1114 . 10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.09.001 .25237857 
Scott D. E. ; Bayly A. R. ; Abell C. ; Skidmore J. 
Small molecules, big
targets: drug discovery faces the protein-protein interaction challenge . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2016 , 15 , 533 –550 . 10.1038/nrd.2016.29 .27050677 
Brandt W. ; Haupt V. J. ; Wessjohann L. A. 
Chemoinformatic analysis of biologically
active macrocycles . Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 
2010 , 10 , 1361 –1379 . 10.2174/156802610792232060 .20536415 
Mallinson J. ; Collins I. 
Macrocycles in new
drug discovery . Future Med. Chem. 
2012 , 4 , 1409 –1438 . 10.4155/fmc.12.93 .22857532 
Marsault E. ; Peterson M. L. 
Macrocycles are great cycles: applications, opportunities,
and challenges of synthetic macrocycles in drug discovery . J. Med. Chem. 
2011 , 54 , 1961 –2004 . 10.1021/jm1012374 .21381769 
Bonnet P. ; Agrafiotis D. K. ; Zhu F. ; Martin E. 
Conformational analysis
of macrocycles: finding what common search methods miss . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2009 , 49 , 2242 –2259 . 10.1021/ci900238a .19807090 
Hawkins P.
C. ; Nicholls A. 
Conformer
generation with OMEGA: learning from the
data set and the analysis of failures . J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 2919 –2936 . 10.1021/ci300314k .23082786 
Labute P. 
LowModeMD--implicit
low-mode velocity filtering applied to conformational search of macrocycles
and protein loops . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2010 , 50 , 792 –800 . 10.1021/ci900508k .20429574 
Watts K. S. ; Dalal P. ; Tebben A. J. ; Cheney D. L. ; Shelley J. C. 
Macrocycle
conformational sampling with MacroModel . J.
Chem. Inf. Model. 
2014 , 54 , 2680 –2696 . 10.1021/ci5001696 .25233464 
Coutsias E. A. ; Lexa K. W. ; Wester M. J. ; Pollock S. N. ; Jacobson M. P. 
Exhaustive
conformational sampling of complex fused ring macrocycles using inverse
kinematics . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2016 , 12 , 4674 –4687 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00250 .27447193 
Wang Q. ; Sciabola S. ; Barreiro G. ; Hou X. ; Bai G. ; Shapiro M. J. ; Koehn F. ; Villalobos A. ; Jacobson M. P. 
Dihedral angle-based sampling of natural product polyketide
conformations: application to permeability prediction . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2016 , 56 , 2194 –2206 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00237 .27731994 
Chen I. J. ; Foloppe N. 
Tackling the conformational sampling of larger flexible
compounds and macrocycles in pharmacology and drug discovery . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 21 , 7898 –7920 . 10.1016/j.bmc.2013.10.003 .24184215 
Anighoro A. ; de la Vega de León A. ; Bajorath J. 
Predicting bioactive
conformations and binding modes of macrocycles . J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 
2016 , 30 , 841 –849 . 10.1007/s10822-016-9973-5 .27655412 
Alogheli H. ; Olanders G. ; Schaal W. ; Brandt P. ; Karlen A. 
Docking of
macrocycles: comparing rigid and flexible docking in Glide . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2017 , 57 , 190 –202 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00443 .28079375 
Sindhikara D. ; Spronk S. A. ; Day T. ; Borrelli K. ; Cheney D. L. ; Posy S. L. 
Improving accuracy,
diversity, and speed with prime
macrocycle conformational sampling . J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 
2017 , 57 , 1881 –1894 . 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00052 .28727915 
Hawkins P. C. D. , Wlodek S.  , Eds.; OMEGA , version 3.0; OpenEye Scientific Software : Santa
Fe, NM , in preparation, 2016 .
Matsson P. ; Doak B. C. ; Over B. ; Kihlberg J. 
Cell permeability
beyond
the rule of 5 . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2016 , 101 , 42 –61 . 10.1016/j.addr.2016.03.013 .
Whitty A. ; Zhong M. ; Viarengo L. ; Beglov D. ; Hall D. R. ; Vajda S. 
Quantifying the chameleonic
properties of macrocycles and other high-molecular-weight
drugs . Drug Discovery Today 
2016 , 21 , 712 –717 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.02.005 .26891978 
Rezai T. ; Yu B. ; Millhauser G. L. ; Jacobson M. P. ; Lokey R. S. 
Testing
the conformational hypothesis of passive membrane permeability using
synthetic cyclic peptide diastereomers . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 2510 –2511 . 10.1021/ja0563455 .16492015 
Caron G. ; Ermondi G. 
Updating molecular
properties during early drug discovery . Drug
Discovery Today 
2017 , 22 , 835 –840 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2016.11.017 .27890670 
Sebastiano M. R. ; Doak B. C. ; Backlund M. ; Poongavanam V. ; Over B. ; Ermondi G. ; Caron G. ; Matsson P. ; Kihlberg J. 
Impact of dynamically exposed polarity
on permeability
and solubility of chameleonic drugs beyond the rule of 5 . J. Med. Chem. 
2018 , 61 , 4189 –4202 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.8b00347 .29608068 
Halgren T. A. 
Merck molecular
force field. I. Basis, form, scope, parameterization, and performance
of MMFF94 . J. Comput. Chem. 
1996 , 17 , 490 –519 . 10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(199604)17:5/6<490::AID-JCC1>3.0.CO;2-P .
Guimarães C. R.
W. ; Mathiowetz A. M. ; Shalaeva M. ; Goetz G. ; Liras S. 
Use of 3D properties
to characterize beyond rule-of-5 property space
for passive permeation . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 882 –890 . 10.1021/ci300010y .22394163 
Molecular Operating Environment
(MOE), 2015.10; Chemical Computing Group ULC, 1010 Sherbooke St. West,
Suite #910, Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 2R7, 2016 .
Clark D. E. 
What has
polar surface area ever done for drug discovery? . Future Med. Chem. 
2011 , 3 , 469 –484 . 10.4155/fmc.11.1 .21452982 
Caron G. ; Ermondi G. 
Molecular descriptors
for polarity: the need for going
beyond polar surface area . Future Med. Chem. 
2016 , 8 , 2013 –2016 . 10.4155/fmc-2016-0165 .27739329 
Maestro , Schrödinger Release 2015-1; Schrödinger,
LLC : New York, NY , 2016 .
QikProp , Schrödinger Release 2015-1; Schrödinger,
LLC : New York,
NY , 2016 .
Foloppe N. ; Chen I. J. 
Conformational sampling and energetics of drug-like
molecules . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2009 , 16 , 3381 –3413 . 10.2174/092986709789057680 .19515013 
Poongavanam V. ; Olsen J. M. ; Kongsted J. 
Binding free energy
based structural
dynamics analysis of HIV-1 RT RNase H-inhibitor complexes . Integr. Biol. 
2014 , 6 , 1010 –1022 . 10.1039/C4IB00111G .
Bachet B. ; Brassy C. ; Mornon J. P. 
[O-(Dioxa-2,5
hexyl) oxime]-9 de
l’erythromycine A hydratee . Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun. 
1988 , 44 , 112 –116 . 10.1107/S0108270187008540 .
Gharbi-Benarous J. ; Ladam P. ; Delaforge M. ; Girault J.-P. 
A conformational
exploration of the protonated and unprotonated macrolide antibiotic
roxithromycin: comparative study by molecular dynamics and NMR spectroscopy
in solution . J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2 
1992 , 1989 –2006 . 10.1039/p29920001989 .
Cicero D. O. ; Barbato G. ; Bazzo R. 
NMR analysis of molecular flexibility
in solution: a new method for the study of complex distributions of
rapidly exchanging conformations. application to a 13-residue peptide
with an 8-residue loop . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1995 , 117 , 1027 –1033 . 10.1021/ja00108a019 .
Erdélyi M. ; Pfeiffer B. ; Hauenstein K. ; Fohrer J. ; Gertsch J. ; Altmann K.-H. ; Carlomagno T. 
Conformational
preferences of natural
and C3-modified epothilones in aqueous solution . J. Med. Chem. 
2008 , 51 , 1469 –1473 . 10.1021/jm7013452 .18271516 
Erdélyi M. 
Application
of the halogen bond in protein systems . Biochemistry 
2017 , 56 , 2759 –2761 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00371 .28534610 
Andersson H. ; Danelius E. ; Jarvoll P. ; Niebling S. ; Hughes A. J. ; Westenhoff S. ; Brath U. ; Erdelyi M. 
Assessing the ability
of spectroscopic methods to determine the difference in the folding
propensities of highly similar beta-hairpins . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 508 –516 . 10.1021/acsomega.6b00484 .28261689 
Danelius E. ; Brath U. ; Erdelyi M. 
Insight into
beta-hairpin stability:
interstrand hydrogen bonding . Synlett 
2013 , 24 , 2407 –2410 . 10.1055/s-0033-1339670 .
Danelius E. ; Pettersson M. ; Bred M. ; Min J. ; Waddell M. B. ; Guy R. K. ; Grotli M. ; Erdelyi M. 
Flexibility
is important
for inhibition of the MDM2/p53 protein-protein interaction by cyclic
[small beta]-hairpins . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2016 , 14 , 10386 –10393 . 10.1039/C6OB01510G .27731454 
Andersson H. ; Demaegdt H. ; Vauquelin G. ; Lindeberg G. ; Karlen A. ; Hallberg M. ; Erdelyi M. ; Hallberg A. 
Disulfide
cyclized tripeptide analogues of angiotensin IV as potent and selective
inhibitors of insulin-regulated aminopeptidase (IRAP) . J. Med. Chem. 
2010 , 53 , 8059 –8071 . 10.1021/jm100793t .21047126 
Thepchatri P. ; Cicero D. O. ; Monteagudo E. ; Ghosh A. K. ; Cornett B. ; Weeks E. R. ; Snyder J. P. 
Conformations of Laulimalide in DMSO-d6 . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 12838 –12846 . 10.1021/ja042890e .16159277 
Jogalekar A. S. 
Conformations
of stevastelin C3 analogs: computational deconvolution of NMR data
reveals conformational heterogeneity and novel motifs . Biopolymers 
2010 , 93 , 968 –976 . 10.1002/bip.21504 .20564058 
Gharbi-Benarous J. ; Delaforge M. ; Artaud I. ; Girault J.-P. 
Analysis of the 1H and 13C NMR spectra of the novel macrolide antibiotic
roxithromycin. Structure and conformation in solution . Magn. Reson. Chem. 
1990 , 28 , 846 –855 . 10.1002/mrc.1260281003 .
Gharbi-Benarous J. ; Ladam P. ; Delaforge M. ; Girault J.-P. 
Conformational analysis
of major metabolites of macrolide antibiotics roxithromycin and erythromycin
A with different biological properties by NMR spectroscopy and molecular
dynamics . J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2 
1993 , 2303 –2321 . 10.1039/p29930002303 .
Jiménez-Barbero J. ; Canales A. ; Northcote P. T. ; Buey R. M. ; Andreu J. M. ; Díaz J. F. 
NMR determination of the bioactive conformation of
peloruside a bound to microtubules . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 8757 –8765 . 10.1021/ja0580237 .16819869 
Altschuh D. ; Vix O. ; Rees B. ; Thierry J. C. 
A conformation of cyclosporin A in
aqueous environment revealed by the X-ray structure of a cyclosporin-Fab
complex . Science 
1992 , 256 , 92 10.1126/science.1566062 .1566062 
Thepchatri P. ; Eliseo T. ; Cicero D. O. ; Myles D. ; Snyder J. P. 
Relationship
among ligand conformations in solution, in the solid state, and at
the Hsp90 binding site: Geldanamycin and radicicol . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 3127 –3134 . 10.1021/ja064863p .17323946 
Bertho G. ; Gharbi-Benarous J. ; Delaforge M. ; Girault J. P. 
Transferred nuclear
Overhauser effect study of macrolide-ribosome interactions: correlation
between antibiotic activities and bound conformations . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
1998 , 6 , 209 –221 . 10.1016/S0968-0896(97)10028-1 .9547944 
Berman H. M. ; Westbrook J. ; Feng Z. ; Gilliland G. ; Bhat T. N. ; Weissig H. ; Shindyalov I. N. ; Bourne P. E. 
The Protein Data Bank . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , 235 –242 . 10.1093/nar/28.1.235 .10592235 
Groom C. R. ; Bruno I. J. ; Lightfoot M. P. ; Ward S. C. 
The Cambridge Structural
Database . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct.
Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater. 
2016 , 72 , 171 –179 . 10.1107/S2052520616003954 .
MacroModel , Schrödinger Release 2015-1; Schrödinger,
LLC : New York,
NY , 2016 .
Kim S. ; Thiessen P. A. ; Bolton E. E. ; Chen J. ; Fu G. ; Gindulyte A. ; Han L. ; He J. ; He S. ; Shoemaker B. A. ; Wang J. ; Yu B. ; Zhang J. ; Bryant S. H. 
PubChem
substance and compound databases . Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2016 , 44 , D1202 –D1213 . 10.1093/nar/gkv951 .26400175 
Wishart D. S. ; Knox C. ; Guo A. C. ; Shrivastava S. ; Hassanali M. ; Stothard P. ; Chang Z. ; Woolsey J. 
DrugBank:
a comprehensive resource for in silico drug discovery and exploration . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2006 , 34 , D668 –D672 . 10.1093/nar/gkj067 .16381955 
Spellmeyer D. C. ; Wong A. K. ; Bower M. J. ; Blaney J. M. 
Conformational analysis
using distance geometry methods . J. Mol. Graphics
Modell. 
1997 , 15 , 18 –36 . 10.1016/S1093-3263(97)00014-4 .
Still W. C. ; Tempczyk A. ; Hawley R. C. ; Hendrickson T. 
Semianalytical
treatment of solvation for molecular mechanics and dynamics . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1990 , 112 , 6127 –6129 . 10.1021/ja00172a038 .
Qiu D. ; Shenkin P. S. ; Hollinger F. P. ; Still W. C. 
The GB/SA continuum
model for solvation. a fast analytical method for the calculation
of approximate born radii . J. Phys. Chem. A 
1997 , 101 , 3005 –3014 . 10.1021/jp961992r .
Grant J. A. ; Pickup B. T. ; Sykes M. J. ; Kitchen C. A. ; Nicholls A. 
A simple formula
for dielectric polarisation energies: The Sheffield solvation Model . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2007 , 441 , 163 –166 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2007.05.008 .
Frisch M. J. ; Trucks G. W. ; Schlegel H. B. ; Scuseria G. E. ; Robb M. A. ; Cheeseman J. R. ; Scalmani G. ; Barone V. ; Mennucci B. ; Petersson G. A. ; Nakatsuji H. ; Caricato M. ; Li X. ; Hratchian H. P. ; Izmaylov A. F. ; Bloino J. ; Zheng G. ; Sonnenberg J. L. ; Hada M. ; Ehara M. ; Toyota K. ; Fukuda R. ; Hasegawa J. ; Ishida M. ; Nakajima T. ; Honda Y. ; Kitao O. ; Nakai H. ; Vreven T. ; Montgomery J. A. ; Peralta J. E. ; Ogliaro F. ; Bearpark M. ; Heyd J. J. ; Brothers E. ; Kudin K.
N. ; Staroverov V. N. ; Kobayashi R. ; Normand J. ; Raghavachari K. ; Rendell A. ; Burant J. C. ; Iyengar S. S. ; Tomasi J. ; Cossi M. ; Rega N. ; Millam J. M. ; Klene M. ; Knox J. E. ; Cross J. B. ; Bakken V. ; Adamo C. ; Jaramillo J. ; Gomperts R. ; Stratmann R. E. ; Yazyev O. ; Austin A. J. ; Cammi R. ; Pomelli C. ; Ochterski J. W. ; Martin R. L. ; Morokuma K. ; Zakrzewski V. G. ; Voth G. A. ; Salvador P. ; Dannenberg J. J. ; Dapprich S. ; Daniels A. D. ; Farkas O. ; Foresman J. B. ; Ortiz J. V. ; Cioslowski J. ; Fox D. J.  Gaussian 09 , revision B.01; Gaussian, Inc. : Wallingford, CT , 2009 .
Case D. A. ; Babin V. ; Berryman J. T. ; Betz R. M. ; Cai Q. ; Cerutti D. S. ; Cheatham T. E. ; Darden T. A. ; Duke R. E. ; Gohlke H. ; Goetz A. W. ; Gusarov S. ; Homeyer N. ; Janowski P. ; Kaus J. ; Kolossváry I. ; Kovalenko A. ; Lee T. S. ; LeGrand S. ; Luchko T. ; Luo R. ; Madej B. ; Merz K. M. ; Paesani F. ; Roe D. R. ; Roitberg A. ; Sagui C. ; Salomon-Ferrer R. ; Seabra G. ; Simmerling C. L. ; Smith W. ; Swails J. ; Walker ; Wang J. ; Wolf R. M. ; Wu X. ; Kollman P. A.  Amber 14 , 2014 .
OpenEye-Toolkits ; OpenEye Scientific Software : Santa Fe, NM , 2016 . http://www.eyesopen.com.
Nevins N. ; Cicero D. ; Snyder J. P. 
A test of the single-conformation
hypothesis in the analysis of NMR data for small polar molecules:
A force field comparison . J. Org. Chem. 
1999 , 64 , 3979 –3986 . 10.1021/jo9824450 .

