
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145788010.1021/acsomega.7b01650ArticleNanocapillarity and Liquid
Bridge-Mediated Force between Colloidal
Nanoparticles MacDowell Luis G. *†Llombart Pablo †Benet Jorge †Palanco Jose G. ‡Guerrero-Martinez Andrés †† Departamento
de Química Física, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Complutense, Avda. Complutense s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain‡ Departamento
de Materiales y Producción Aeroespacial, ETSI Aeronáuticos, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Plaza del Cardenal Cisneros 3, 28040 Madrid, Spain* E-mail: lgmac@quim.ucm.es. Phone: +34 (0)91 394 42 13. Fax +34 (0)91 394
41 35 (L.G.M.).05 01 2018 31 01 2018 3 1 112 123 26 10 2017 21 12 2017 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In
this work, we probe the concept of interface tension for ultrathin
adsorbed liquid films on the nanoscale by studying the surface fluctuations
of films down to the monolayer. Our results show that the spectrum
of film height fluctuations of a liquid–vapor surface may be
extended to ultrathin films provided we take into account the interactions
of the substrate with the surface. Global fluctuations of the film
height are described in terms of disjoining pressure, whereas surface
deformations that are proportional to the interface area are accounted
for by a film thickness-dependent surface tension. As a proof of concept,
we model the capillary forces between colloidal nanoparticles held
together by liquid bridges. Our results indicate that the classical
equations for capillarity follow very precisely down to the nanoscale
provided we account for the film height dependence of the surface
tension.

document-id-old-9ao7b01650document-id-new-14ao-2017-016504ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
If one studies monolayer formation on
droplets,1 evaporative colloidal deposition,2,3 the
buoyancy of suspended particles on an interface,4 or the aggregation of colloidal nanoparticles by capillary
condensation,5 most likely, the behavior
of the system can be explained in terms of capillarity theory.6,7 At the heart of this approach lies the approximation that bulk and
surface properties of large planar bodies can be extrapolated to describe
small and curved systems. Such is the case of the Young–Laplace
equation relating the curvature κ of a curved interface with
the bulk pressure difference between the liquid and vapor phases,
Δp, and the interface tension, γlv, that is, Δp = γlvκ. This result, namely, that films and interfaces adopt shapes
of constant curvature has been tested and proved for a wide range
of situations in systems from the millimeter to the micrometer range.7 However, as the scale of systems decreases below
micrometers, phenomenological corrections for the macroscopic properties
are required and concepts such as line tension and Tolman length need
to be introduced.8 These corrections indicate
the presence of intermolecular forces with a range that approaches
the scale of the problem in hand.9

In the study of adsorption, thin liquid films of a few-nanometer
thickness fall in this group. The liquid–vapor interface of
the adsorbed film feels interactions from the substrate, and the force
balance embodied in the Laplace equation no longer holds. The missing
link required to re-establish the mechanical equilibrium in such cases
is the celebrated concept of disjoining pressure, Π(h),10 which measures the forces
exerted by the substrate on a film of height h(x) above a point x. This leads to the Young–Laplace–Derjaguin
equation of thin adsorbed films:6,7 1  

This result has been employed ubiquitously
to describe the average
shape and forces of colloidal systems in the nanometer range.11,12 However, intrinsic to systems of small size is the presence of large
thermodynamic fluctuations. These become important on the nanoscale
because large deviations from the average have only a small free energy
penalty relative to the most stable state. In such cases, it is convenient
to have at hand a way to assess the relative probabilities of the
most significant fluctuations.13

In thin liquid films, precisely, this goal may be accomplished
using interface Hamiltonians borrowed from the field of surface physics.
Here, one considers not the force balance but rather the free energy
cost of specific realizations of the film profile, h(x), which, for adsorbed films, may be conveniently
cast as 2  where g(h) is the interface potential
or free energy of a planar film of height h above
a substrate, with Π(h) =
−dg(h)/dh, and the integration is carried out over a flat reference plane
with a coordinate x (Monge representation). The minimization
of this functional with respect to the film profile provides exactly eq 1 for the equilibrium condition
of a film, but the integrated form mentioned above allows also the
assessment of the free energy cost of fluctuations.

In fact,
the partition function of this Hamiltonian may be solved
in the limit of small gradients by expanding the film height in surface
Fourier modes, h(q), with q, a vector in the reciprocal space of x. It is then
possible to calculate the free energy cost of fluctuations disturbing
locally the surface height away from the average equilibrium value, he. This yields an equation for the mean-squared
amplitude of surface Fourier modes as9,14−16 3  where g″(h) = −dΠ/dh is given by the derivative
of Π with respect to h and A is the lateral area. This result indicates that the spectrum of
surface fluctuations provides interesting information on the properties
of the adsorbed liquid–vapor interface, γlv, as well as on the molecular forces that tie it to the substrate, g″(h). Indeed, using X-ray surface
scattering techniques, it is possible to probe the related parallel correlation length, ξ∥2 = γlv/g″(he), which corresponds to the familiar capillary
length for interfaces subject to gravity.17 A number of experiments performed for thin films of several-nanometer
thickness confirm that ξ∥2 ∝ he4, as expected for wetting films
governed by van der Waals interactions, where , with Aw being
the Hamaker constant. However, it has been proved far more difficult
to confirm that the coefficient of q2 in eq 3 is precisely equal to
the liquid–vapor surface tension, with conflicting results
found in the literature.18−20

Recently, we have performed
computer simulation studies of thin
adsorbed films subject to van der Waals forces.16,21,22 Our calculations indicate that the results
for Π(h) obtained from the spectrum of surface
fluctuations are in very good agreement with independent estimates
for the disjoining pressure calculated by means of thermodynamic integration.
However, we have found that an accurate agreement with eq 3 can only be recovered if we accept
a film height-dependent surface tension, γ(h), which becomes equal to γlv for sufficiently large
γ(h).16,21−23 In fact, we have argued and shown empirically that decay of γ(h) toward γlv is given in terms of disjoining
pressure as16,21−23 4  where
ξe is a parameter describing
the width of the liquid–vapor interface. This result is consistent
with previous unexplained computer simulation results15 and with theoretical results for simplified models.24 It should be noted that such a simple dependence
is warranted only for systems that are dominated by long-range van
der Waals interactions and does not hold in systems where the source
of the disjoining pressure is given by structural contributions.

According to linear response theory, the spectrum of surface fluctuations
is related to the response of the surface to external perturbations.14 This means that eq 4 is not merely a minor correction required to describe
the spectrum of surface fluctuations in detail but rather it accounts
for substrate–film interactions that become relevant for sufficiently
thin films and that are missed altogether in the Young–Laplace–Derjaguin
equilibrium condition of eq 1. Unfortunately, the significance of a film height-dependent
surface tension in capillarity theory beyond its signature in the
capillary wave spectrum has not been tested to date. In this work,
we will analyze the recent results for the force between titanium
dioxide nanospheres joined by capillary bridges to assess the role
of the film height-dependent surface tension.

In the next section,
we provide an overview of a number of simulation
techniques that have been employed in our laboratory to study and
characterize model systems, which include the calculation of bulk-phase
diagrams, interface potentials, and capillary wave fluctuations. We
apply them here to obtain a detailed characterization of a well-known
model of argon adsorbed on a solid carbon dioxide substrate. In the
next section, we discuss the prewetting behavior of this system and
exploit our results to illustrate the film height dependence of the
surface tension. We then exploit our theoretical results for the film
height-dependent surface tension of flat films to model capillary
forces of curved interfaces in liquid bridges. We end our paper with
a discussion on the significance of our results.

Characterization of Adsorbed
Interfaces Using Computer Simulations
In this section, we
provide an overview of a number of computer
simulation techniques that are useful to describe the wetting behavior
of adsorbates on model substrates. We first discuss the molecular
model of argon adsorbed on CO2 used in this work and studied
extensively in the literature.25−34 We then provide details of the calculation of its full bulk-phase
diagram. This allows us to put into context the prewetting line reported
previously.32 We then calculate the interface
potential of this system at a temperature slightly above the wetting
temperature but yet safely above the triple point, in a region where
the system exhibits prewetting. In such cases, the system can form
metastable thick films. Finally, we describe how to calculate the
surface tension of such films from an analysis of the capillary wave
fluctuations. This will allow us to identify a film thickness-dependent
surface tension and confirm the validity of an approximate theory
meant to describe such dependence for thick films under the effect
of long-range van der Waals forces.

Model and Simulations
The energy of interaction between
two particles separated by a distance r is evaluated
by the truncated Lennard-Jones (LJ) 12-6 potential. 5  where
ϵ and σ are the energy and
range parameters of the model, respectively, and Rc = 2.5σ is the cutoff radius. Their corresponding
values for argon are ϵ/kB = 119.8
K and σ = 3.40 Å.

The energy of interaction between
the adsorbing wall and fluid particles a distance z away is evaluated by a long-range 9-3 potential: 6  where, for the system Ar/CO2, the
parameter values are σw = 3.727 Å, ϵw/k = 153 K, and ρwσw3 = 0.988. This choice of parameters was adopted
in the seminal work of Ebner and Saam on the prewetting transition
and later adopted with a cutoff radius of Rc = 2.5 Å by Finn and Monson.25,35 It has been
thereof a standard model for the study of wetting in both simulation
studies and theoretical calculations.27,30−32,36

From now on, dimensionless
quantities will be used, being ϵ
and σ the characteristic units for energy and length, respectively.

Phase Diagram
Despite the previous calculations of
the triple point for the full LJ potential37,38 and the truncated and shifted LJ potential Rc = 2.5σ,34,39 we were unable to find the corresponding
result for the truncated LJ without the shift that is employed in
this work.

This is an important matter as regards our study
because the wetting temperature of the LJ fluid on our model substrate
is very low, kBTw = 0.60ϵ.32 We can therefore
not rule out that it corresponds to the wetting of a metastable liquid
phase below the triple point, a situation that is known under the
name of triple-point wetting.40 For this
reason, we calculated the full phase diagram, as indicated in the Methods section.

Figure 1a shows
the complete LJ phase diagram obtained from our results. Figure 1b is an enlarged
view in the neighborhood of the triple point. Using the prewetting
chemical potentials reported by Errington,32 which are in excellent agreement with our own results, we calculated
the prewetting vapor densities from the virial equation of state.
The region where the vapor and prewetting densities meet is shown
in Figure 1b and clearly
indicates a wetting temperature, kBTw = 0.60ϵ, which is below the bulk triple
point, kBTt = 0.631ϵ.

Figure 1 Bulk and wetting phase diagram for argon adsorbed on carbon
dioxide.
A) Bulk phase diagram of argon in the temperature−density plane.
B) Detailed description of the liquid−vapor, solid−vapor
and prewetting lines in the neighborhood of the triple point.

This behavior is coincident with
that observed by Toxvaerd for
the truncated and shifted LJ and also corresponds to the experimental
observation for Ar on solid CO241 and the theoretical predictions.36

These results are an interesting case of metastability in small
systems. In principle, it is not possible to measure the wetting temperature
directly in a system exhibiting triple-point wetting. Below the triple
point, the liquid–vapor coexistence curve is inside the region
of stability of the solid phase. Accordingly, the system freezes before
it is possible to observe the liquid phase wetting the substrate.
Experimentally, triple-point wetting is often evidenced as the sudden
wetting of a substrate as the vapor phase is heated across the triple
point.41−43

Surprisingly, both Errington and ourselves
could perform extremely
long grand canonical simulations displaying the growth of a wetting
liquid film at kBT =
0.60ϵ (below the bulk triple point of the model LJ fluid) without
any evidence of freezing.21,32 Two possible reasons
for this observation are as follows: (i) kinetically, a fast removal/insertion
in the grand canonical simulations interferes with a slow nucleation
process of the solid phase (ii) and thermodynamically, the limited
system sizes and film heights studied could result in stabilization
of the liquid film in regions where the bulk liquid phase is metastable.40,42 Interestingly, a series of NVT simulations that were subsequently
performed suggest that both reasons could be in play. Indeed, for
sufficiently lengthy NVT simulation and sufficiently large film heights
(of about h > 6σ), the layered liquid profiles
developed gradually very strong peaks resembling a solid phase. This
behavior was not found at all for thin films. A plausible interpretation
is that in the latter, the liquid phase is still favored, even below
the triple point, because of the influence of the wall–substrate
interaction.40,42 As the adsorbed phase becomes
macroscopically large, however, it cannot possibly remain in the liquid
phase and the film freezes. Because, possibly, the freezing is kinetically
very slow and occurs only for thick enough films, as indicated by
the NVT simulations, it is completely inhibited in the grand canonical
simulations, which tunnel back and forth from thick to thin films
and never give the thick films sufficient time to freeze.

Although
this explanation seems plausible, further work is needed
to clarify the stability of the wetting liquid phases simulated previously
at kBT = 0.60ϵ.

Interface Potential
In mean field theory, the interface
potential, g(h), measures the free
energy of a flat film of height h. In previous work,44,45 we simply have assumed that the film height could be read off directly
as a mass balance from the excess adsorbed number of molecules, whence Nex = A(ρl –
ρv)h. However, in the course of
the simulations, the films are never strictly flat but rather exhibit
capillary wave fluctuations. Therefore, the instantaneous film profile
is best defined as a function h(x).
In this work, it is precisely the fluctuations of this instantaneous
film height profile that we will use to probe the interface. Therefore,
it is convenient to use here a measure of the average film height
of a flat film that is consistent with the one we will use to measure
surface fluctuations. In the next section, we will discuss the intrinsic
sampling method (ISM) employed in this work to describe the local
film height profile h(x) in more detail.46 For the time being, it suffices to assume that
for a system with N molecules and surface area, A, inside volume V, there is a uniquely
defined canonically averaged film height for each N, as 7  where the subscript
indicates both lateral
and canonical averages. In essence, this is simply a convenient way
to express the average adsorption in units which roughly indicate
the thickness of the adsorbed film.

Notice that such a definition
coarsens the fluctuations of the film height at fixed N. For example, one could envisage situations where (i) the adsorbed
film evaporates or condenses partially, with the excess amount accommodated
into the vapor phase,48 or (ii) the film
breaks and forms a sessile droplet.49 In
practice, because we are at a fairly low temperature, close to the
wetting transition, and the lateral area is small, the role of these
fluctuations is not important.48,49

Once a simple
coarse-grained measure of adsorption is defined,
we set up a simulation box with the CO2 adsorbing wall
at one side and a purely hard repulsive wall at the other side. A
grand canonical simulation is then performed at some arbitrarily chosen
chemical potential, μ0 close to coexistence. During
the course of the simulation, the total number of molecules fluctuates
and we can monitor P0(N) the probability of observing a given amount of molecules. From
this distribution, it is possible to estimate the corresponding probability
at coexistence chemical potential, μc, through the
relation50,51 8  where β = 1/kBT. In fact, we do not know μc,
a priori, but we can apply a trick which we have often used in our
laboratory that yields excellent results. The idea is that precisely
at coexistence, the free energy of a wetting film of sufficient thickness
is essentially independent of N. For films away from
coexistence, on the contrary, growing liquid films are weighted by
a bulk term eβ(μc–μ0)N. Therefore, a logarithmic plot of P0(N) as a function of N becomes a straight line for sufficiently large N, and the slope of that line gives us precisely β(μ0 – μc), whereby we can estimate μc from that slope (see the inset of Figure 2a). This method is approximate to the extent
that the substrate interacts with the liquid–vapor interface.
However, this interaction is very weak for thick films. For more accurate
calculations, the same trick may be performed for a liquid slab placed
at the center of a prismatic simulation box with periodic boundary
conditions in all three directions, where we have checked that the
method produces coexistence chemical potentials with an accuracy comparable
with the equal area rule,47 at much less
computational cost. We illustrate this in Figure 2a by comparing the coexistence chemical potentials
obtained using this method with the previous results by Wilding and
Errington using the equal area rule. As shown in the figure, the method
works very accurately all the way from low temperatures to the vicinity
of the critical point.32,47

Figure 2 Calculation of the interface potential.
(a) Coexistence chemical
potential as a function of temperature as determined from this work
for systems of size 10 × 10 × 20 (crosses) and 13 ×
13 × 42 (squares). The results are compared with the equal area
rule at high (circles47) and low temperatures
(diamonds32). The inset shows the results
of ln P(N) as a function of N for a liquid slab in a simulation box of a lateral side
of 13 × 13σ and a perpendicular distance of 42σ,
simulated off coexistence at a temperature T = 0.9412
and a chemical potential βμ0 = −3.9312.
The symbols fit to a straight line with a slope of −0.18502,
which subtracted to βμ0 provide βμc = −3.74613 in excellent agreement with the method
of equal area rule. (b) Interface potential for Ar(g) adsorbed on
a substrate at a temperature above the wetting point. A metastable
minimum can be observed. Inset: corresponding disjoining pressure
isotherm obtained upon numerical differentiation of the interface
potential.

Once we know Pc(N),
we estimate a coarse-grained interface potential as44 9  where we simply exploit
the univocal correspondence
between N and h that results from
the definition in eq 7.

Obviously, the success of this method relies on having a
sufficiently
accurate probability function Pc(N) over a large range of molecules covering all the way
from close to zero adsorption to the formation of thick wetting films.
This is generally not an easy task because even at μ = μc, there might be large free energy barriers separating the
thin films from the wetting films. To properly sample a prescribed
range of molecules, we have employed transition matrix Monte Carlo.52 This technique allows exploiting the information
of rejected insertion/removal attempts to simultaneously build up
an accurate probability histogram and tunneling the free energy barriers.
The application of this method to the grand canonical ensemble has
been largely documented by Errington and co-workers, and we refer
the reader to that work for further details.32,53

The full line of Figure 2b shows an interface potential calculated as described
above.
Unfortunately, the definition of the order parameter introduced in eq 7 as an average of h(x) breaks down for films thinner than about
1.5 molecular diameter. Indeed, h(x)
as obtained from the ISM relies on defining first of all what liquid
molecules are. The criterion that is employed relies on the properties
of a bulk liquid so that when the few condensed atoms are all too
close to the substrate, the method does no longer work. To fix this,
we resort to an alternative definition based on the location of the
equimolar dividing surface: 10  where ρl and ρv are the coexistence bulk liquid and vapor
densities, respectively.
In practice, the only significant difference between ĥ and h is a constant mismatch of ≈0.30σ,
so that g(ĥ) and g(h) differ by a mere translation. Obviously,
we could have simply presented g(h) using the equimolar criterion for h, which is
just as good. However, for later comparison with the results for the
film height fluctuations, which are best studied with the local order
parameter, we need to have the interface potential described on the
same footing.

Capillary Wave Spectrum
As mentioned
earlier, the surface
of a film is never actually flat but rather exhibits local height
fluctuations that convey a wealth of information of the surface properties.15,21,46,54,55 This information may be obtained conveniently
from the spectrum of film height fluctuations, ⟨h2(q)⟩, also known as the capillary
wave spectrum. To calculate the height fluctuations, it is necessary
to define the location of the liquid–vapor interface in the
first place. Particularly, it is necessary to estimate the local interface
position, h(x), at every point x of the substrate, for each atomic configuration. Usually,
this implies applying some criteria to decide which atoms belong to
the liquid phase, followed by a decision as to which of such atoms
lie on the surface (pivot atoms).15,46,54,56,57 This task cannot be done at atomic scale resolution without some
degree of arbitrariness.57 In this work,
we have adopted the ISM,46 which is quite
time-consuming but provides results that are very much consistent
with the capillary wave theory.21,46,58,59 The distinct feature of this
method is that the pivot atoms are selected iteratively in such a
way as to minimize the nominal surface area of the actual interface.
This can only be achieved at a high computational cost but allows
extending the small wavevector regime of capillary wave theory to
atomic scales.21,22,58−60 This is very important in simulations of finite-size
systems because the regime of wavevectors that can be explored is
limited to qmin = 2π/Lx, where Lx is the lateral system size.

Having decided
the criteria to locate the interface, we perform NVT Monte Carlo simulations
as explained above. For each fixed amount of molecules, we select
5 × 104 configurations and obtain the thermal average
of the capillary wave fluctuations, ⟨δh2(q)⟩. According to the expectations
from the capillary wave theory, the inverse Fourier amplitudes of
the spectrum for adsorbed fluids with short-range fluid–fluid
interactions follow a polynomial in even powers of the wavevector:61,62 11  where gcw″(h),
γcw(h), and κcw(h) are the coefficients of the polynomial expansion.
The subscript cw in the coefficients indicates that we make no a priori
assumption as to their physical significance, and the argument h indicates that in the absence of any physical input, we
allow them to exhibit, in principle, a film height dependence. Of
course, the names of the coefficients do remind us of capillary wave
theory expectations, where gcw″(h) = g″(h) is given by the second derivative
of the interface potential while the remaining higher order coefficients
are constant and obey γcw(h) = γlv and κcw(h) = κlv,, where γlv and κlv are
the interface tension and the bending rigidity of the liquid–vapor
interface, respectively. Notice that in the study of the capillary
wave spectrum, we will use β = 1/kBT as unit of energy.

Fitting an arbitrary
function to a polynomial in such a way that
the coefficients retain their physical significance is not an easy
task. This problem is particularly relevant in this case because eq 11 is, in principle, a
limiting law restricted to small wavevectors and indeed the results
of the fit depend strongly on the number of data points that is used
in the regression.

The strategy we have adopted is as follows.
First, we attempt to
fit the spectrum for the thickest film. In such cases, we know a priori
that gcw″, which decays fast, is very small and we can assume
that gcw″ = 0. Accordingly, γcw(h) = γlv corresponds to the surface tension of a
free interface, which we know from independent simulations. With this
information at hand, we perform a fit to eq 11 for several sets of points in the low q regime. The largest set that provides a good enough estimate
of γlv from the coefficient γcw(h) determines the number of data points that we will employ
in all subsequent fits to the spectrum of thinner films. This corresponds,
in our case, to the capillary wave amplitudes ⟨h2(q)⟩ for the five smaller wavevectors,
which lie between qσ = 0.62 and qσ = 1.77. Having obtained a consistent fit for the thickest
film, we then use the parameters so obtained as the initial guess
for the next film and proceed iteratively up to the thinnest film
studied. This procedure is crucial for the success of the analysis.

Results
Interface Potential and Prewetting Equilibrium
Figure 2b shows the interface
potential calculated at a temperature kBT = 0.65ϵ. Clearly, the interface potential
exhibits a pronounced minimum at very small adsorption. However, the
minimum is located at surface free energies that are above those corresponding
to infinitely thick films. Hence, the minimum is metastable. Yet,
the only way for the thick film to grow is by crossing a rather large
activation barrier. Films formed with thicknesses greater than those
at the maximum, within the region where the interface potential is
concave, are stable films that can develop into fully wetting films
as coexistence is approached.

The derivative of the interface
potential, as described in the Introduction, provides the disjoining pressure isotherm, which is shown in the
inset. Disjoining pressures that are positive correspond to the adsorbed
films at supersaturation. A horizontal line above 0 represents the
states at supersaturation. For sufficiently small saturations, the
line crosses three states of small, intermediate, and large adsorption.
Out of these three states, the second one at intermediate adsorption
corresponds to an unstable state. The thin and thick films are either
absolutely or partially stable states. For one single supersaturation
obeying the equal area rule under the disjoining pressure isotherm,
the thin and thick films may be found in equilibrium.

We checked
that our system exhibits the prewetting equilibrium
expected from the disjoining pressure isotherm. To this end, we place
a layer of molecules on a substrate with a total adsorption in between
those expected for the thin and thick states of the prewetting equilibrium
and performed lengthy canonical simulations. Our results show that
a flat layered “pancake” is equilibrated in the system,
whence, showing the coexistence between a thick and a thin adsorbed
film, close to a bare substrate (Figure 3). The pancake is distinctly different from
a droplet because it remains flat on the top and only grows laterally,
with the pancake height remaining constant. Similar to a droplet,
however, growth of the pancakes is an activated process, which is
favored by the surface free energy but penalized by contributions
from the line tension along the perimeter of the pancake. Such a free
energy, also known as boundary tension, is positive for prewetting
films and becomes equal to the line tension precisely at the wetting
temperature.33 Because of this free energy
cost, in an open system, the pancake will either grow to a full homogeneous
thick film or evaporate to the low adsorption state.

Figure 3 Prewetting equilibrium
of a thick adsorbed layer with a thin (almost
bare substrate) state. Left: density plot showing the layered structure
of a pancake. Right: density cuts across the center of the pancake
(blue line) and on the thin state (red line).

Spectrum of Height Fluctuations
In Figure 4, we show the results obtained
from the fit of eq 11 to the capillary wave spectrum for films with thickness ranging
from one to nine molecular diameters (symbols).

Figure 4 Coefficients of the capillary
wave spectrum obtained as a function
of film height. Left: second derivative of the interface potential
as obtained from the numerical differentiation of g(h) (lines) and a fit to the capillary wave spectrum
(symbols). Right: film height-dependent surface tension as obtained
from a fit to the capillary wave spectrum. The lines are the results
obtained from eq 11,
with the adjustable parameter ξ = 1.46σ.

The left panel shows the zeroth order coefficient
of the fit, which,
according to eq 11,
is equal to the second derivative of the interface potential. Using
the results for g(h) obtained by
the thermodynamic integration in the previous section (c.f. Figure 2), we can test this
prediction of capillary wave theory. The results for g″(h) as obtained from the numerical differentiation
of the thermodynamic integration exhibit excellent agreement with
the zeroth order coefficient of the capillary wave spectrum all the
way from thick films of several-molecular diameter to about only two
molecular diameters.

This is a remarkable result because in
principle the capillary
wave theory is formulated as a low wavevector limit of surface fluctuations.
Accordingly, the parameters of the theory, in principle, can be extracted
from a fit to eq 11 only
in the limit of zero wavevectors. In practice, in our finite-system
size simulations, we can only study wavevectors that are limited by
the fairly small system size of L = 10 molecular
diameters. Yet, clearly, the agreement between thermodynamic integration
and capillary wave results for g″(h) is excellent down to the adsorbed bilayers. Furthermore,
the agreement remains good even in a region where g″(h) is negative, and accordingly, the uniform
film is unstable for sufficiently small wavevectors. In practice,
in this regime, our finite system sizes turn out to be advantageous
because from the theory of spinodal dewetting, we know that films
can remain metastable to fluctuations of wavevectors larger than .63 Eventually,
for thicknesses even smaller than two molecular diameters, the agreement
does no longer hold. Essentially, we cannot possibly go beyond this
film thickness because the cluster algorithm designed to locate the
liquid–vapor surface boundary starts to break down for such
thin films. However, an interesting avenue for further exploration
would be to extend the method such that it produces a limiting zero
film height when the bare substrate is left locally without coverage.

In the right panel of Figure 4, we show the results obtained for the second-order
coefficient of the fit of capillary wave fluctuations. According to
the classical capillary theory, this coefficient corresponds to the
interface tension. In the figure, we can see that thick adsorbed layers
exhibit indeed a constant coefficient, which approaches the liquid–vapor
interface tension as obtained from independent simulations of the
liquid–vapor coexistence.45 However,
for thicknesses below about five molecular diameters, we find that
the coefficients of the fit start to develop a clear and strong oscillatory
behavior. The classical theory of capillarity does not provide an
explanation for this behavior. However, in previous work, we have
shown that for adsorbed fluids that are subject to van der Waals interactions,
the film thickness dependence of the surface tension as measured from
the spectrum of surface fluctuations is related to the disjoining
pressure, as indicated in eq 4. Fortunately, we can test this equation readily, performing
numerical differentiation of the disjoining pressure isotherm obtained
previously (c.f. Figure 2) and using ξe, the width of the interface, as an
empirical parameter. The results, which are shown as a full line,
indicate that the theory is accurate again down to about two and a
half molecular layers of thickness.

Below that thickness, unfortunately,
the theoretical result of eq 4 seems to break down completely.
This is in fact not altogether a surprise because eq 4 is an approximate expression which
assumes that the liquid–vapor density profile of the adsorbed
film does not change with film thickness. This obviously is a rather
coarse approximation but seems to remain robust for very thin films.
Eventually, however, a bulk liquid phase does not develop at all,
and the approximation breaks down. Unfortunately, a simple analytical
expression for γ(h) does not seem possible
in this regime of small film thickness, where the density profile
strongly changes with film thickness.

Despite this difficulty,
the results are remarkable because they
show that a theory meant to describe the liquid–vapor interface
may be used for thin adsorbed interfaces and extrapolated down to
thicknesses of almost two molecular diameters, which really is the
limit where defining a liquid–vapor interface makes sense.

The good agreement that is found here for a prewetting film is
in line with previous results obtained from computer simulations for
two related systems21,22 and with a statistical mechanical
theory proposed recently.23

Just
as the measure of interface tensions in flat liquid films
is used in capillary theory to describe curved interfaces via the
Young–Laplace equation, we will next try to assess whether
the concept of film thickness-dependent surface tensions may be extended
to describe the behavior of curved thin interfaces that are present
in capillary bridges between spherical colloidal nanoparticles.

Application to Liquid Bridges
Capillary forces are able
to stick spherical colloids together
in the presence of humidity. Because of the presence of vapor, water
molecules condense on the nanosphere surface and form a liquid bridge
that binds them together.6

As long
as the nanoparticles remain inert and are not subject to
reconstruction, the force required to pull the nanoparticles away
is the sum of a structural contribution, mainly due to the packing
effects of water molecules, and a capillary force. In the classical
approximation for large spherical particles, the capillary force stems
exclusively from a bulk pressure difference between the condensed
and vapor phases, which is sustained by surface tension. For a pair
of wet spherical particles of radius R with a capillary
bridge spanning a (small) filling angle β, the force is then
simply F = 2πRγlv, independent of humidity and filling angle.6 For smaller nanoparticles, the filling angle is no longer
small, and the tension along a perimeter of the ring R sin(β) now makes a
significant contribution that may even supersede the bulk contribution.64 In this case, the classical capillary theory
is expected to obey the following equation:65,66 12  where rm and lm are the equatorial and meridian radii of curvature
of the pendular ring, respectively, which depend on the thermodynamic
conditions and the distance, D, between the colloids;
and Θ is the contact angle of the liquid film on the nanoparticle
substrate.

In a recent computer simulation study, the force
due to water capillary
bridges between two TiO2 nanoparticles of radius R = 4 nm was studied as a function of nanoparticle distance D.64 The simulations offer a
very convenient tool to study the problem. The measure of force versus
distance curves shows clearly a number of large amplitude oscillations
(hydration forces that result from the layered water structure), superimposed
over a smooth monotonic decay that can be attributed to the capillary
forces alone. For very hydrophilic rutile particles similar to the
ones considered here, the contact angle turns out to be Θ =
0 in practice and the nanoparticles are always surrounded by a layer
of liquid. In this case, by measuring separately the force between
the liquid bridge-mediated particles and that found between two equal
particles completely immersed in water, it is possible to resolve
the structural and capillary contributions to the overall adhesion
force and test each separately against theory.64 As an additional token, the shape of the capillary bridge
can be readily calculated from the equilibrium density profile of
water molecules. In this way, eq 12 may be tested using the exact geometrical parameters
describing the simulated capillary bridge.

Unfortunately, in
the study, it was found that the capillary force
measured as a function of D did not obey eq 12, even when the correct
geometrical parameters obtained in the simulation were used as inputs.

One reason for the discrepancy with classical results is that the
nanoparticles are wet by a liquid film with thickness he which is not negligible relative to the small nanoparticle
radius, R. Accordingly, the Young–Laplace
equation is no longer accurate as a means to determine the shape of
the capillary bridge. The exact treatment requires solving eq 1, taking into account the
role of the film–vapor disjoining pressure explicitly, but
simple analytical solutions are only available for large particles.67 Fortunately, for atomic force microscopy (AFM)
tips as small as 10 nm in radius, it has been noticed that the known
results for the capillary bridge in the absence of wetting65 provide a very good approximation for the wet
nanoparticles, by merely applying the simple transformations R → R + he and D → D + 2he in eq 12.68,69

In ref (64), it
was noticed that this approximation provides accurate results for
the shape of the capillary bridge, but it was found that even using
the exact filling angle β obtained from averaged film profiles,
the calculated capillary force was smaller than that measured in the
computer simulations. Physically, the implication is that the force
required to stretch the interface as the nanoparticles are pulled
away must be larger than expected. That is, this suggests that γlv in eq 12 does
not fully account for the tangential stress of the adsorbed interface.
On the contrary, it was found that by replacing γlv by an effective humidity-dependent surface tension, γ, larger
than γlv, a very good agreement could be achieved
(Figure 5). Such results
are consistent with previous observations for the capillary force
on AFM tips,70,71 but an explanation for this increased
surface tension is entirely lacking.

Figure 5 Plot of the film height-dependent surface
tension. The filled diamonds
are effective surface tensions obtained from a fit of capillary forces
to eq 12.64 The shaded symbols are theoretical predictions
from eq 13, using different
choices for the disjoining pressure (inset). The red squares correspond
to Π(h) as estimated for a planar film, using eq 1 with κ = 0; the
blue circles are results for Π(h;R) as estimated for a film on the spherical nanoparticle, using eq 1 with κ = 2/(R + h). Derivatives of the disjoining pressure
are evaluated at the mid points between adjacent data as the slope
of the line joining them.

In the light of eq 4, we expect that the humidity of the atmosphere imposes a
surface
coverage, Γe, which can be related to the film height
as Γe = ρlhe, with ρl being the bulk liquid density of
water at coexistence. Because in the simulations, the humidity remains
essentially constant as the particles are pulled out, γ remains
constant throughout but may become significantly larger than γlv for sufficiently low coverage. Indeed, it was found that
the effective surface tension required to describe F(D) increased as the film coverage or humidity decreased.
This provides a qualitative explanation of the observations of ref (64).

We now test whether
it is possible to describe quantitatively the
empirical surface tensions observed in terms of surface coverage,
as 13  which is simply
a rewrite of eq 4 in
terms of Γ.

First, we need to asses the disjoining pressure
isotherm corresponding
to the adsorption of water on spherical TiO2 nanoparticles.

Assuming that the coverage of water on the spherical nanoparticles
is similar to that on a flat substrate, where κ = 0, we obtain
from eq 1 Π(Γ)
= pv(μ) – pl(μ),6,22,72,73 where pv and pl denote the bulk pressures of vapor and liquid
phases at the chemical potential of the water atmosphere, respectively.
For incompressible liquids with a negligible vapor pressure, we can
write 14  where pv* is the vapor pressure
of coexisting
planar phases (volumetric phase coexistence). Fortunately, from the
reported ratio pv(Γ)/pv*, we are
able to calculate the full disjoining pressure isotherm, as shown
in Figure 5.

In practice, it is known that the finite size and curved surface
of the nanoparticles considerably impact on the disjoining pressure.74−77 Accordingly, we must distinguish Π(Γ), pertaining to
a flat substrate, from Π(Γ;R), corresponding
to the disjoining pressure of the liquid film on the curved substrate.
Again, we can also assess Π(Γ;R) from eq 1, by noticing that in the
sides opposite to the liquid bridge, the curvature is essentially
given by κ = 2/(R + he). Hence, 15  As expected for systems with van der Waals
forces, we find for h < R that
Π(Γ;R) is larger than Π(Γ)
but the slopes remain similar. Indeed, from theoretical considerations,
it is found that in a regime h/R < 1, Π(Γ;R) differs from Π(Γ)
by a factor (1 + 1/2·he/R), which remains small for all ranges of surface coverage studied
here.74,75,77

Having
the disjoining pressure at hand, we could apply eq 13, using ξe2 as
an adjustable parameter. Instead, we recall that
ξe is a measure of the interface width.23 Accordingly, we can obtain this parameter ab
initio from the results of the liquid–vapor interface profile
of the TIP3P model used in the simulations.78,79 Using fits from ref (79) for the interface profile for the TIP3P model precisely at the temperature
of interest T = 300 K, we find γlv = 49.5 mJ/m2 and ρlξe2 = 2.3 nm–1.a We use this result together with Π(h) to
predict γ(Γ), as shown in Figure 5. The agreement is impressive, given the
absence of any adjustable parameter. In fact, the definition of an
interface width is slightly ambiguous and depends on a number of choices
so that the optimal result for ρlξe2 obtained without fitting must be considered as slightly
coincidental. This serves, nevertheless, to highlight that the order
of magnitude of the fitting parameter ξe is indeed
dictated by the interface width as expected from the theoretical considerations.21−23 We can also estimate γ(Γ) employing Π(Γ;R) instead of Π(Γ) in eq 13, using now a corrected value for ρlξe2 that is obtained from the
average ratio of Π(h)/Π(Γ;R). The results shown in the figure also provide a very
good agreement for the observed film height-dependent surface tension
γ(Γ).

Discussion
Despite the very good
agreement observed, we must take these results
with some caution.

First, Tolman corrections indicate that the
ratio between surface
tensions for curved and flat interfaces varies as 1
– 2δ/R, where δ
is the Tolman length and R is the radius of the interface.
We are not aware of the measurements of the Tolman length for the
TIP3P model used in the simulations, but simulations of the mW and
TIP4P/2005 models suggest a small and negative Tolman length of about
δ ≈ −0.05 nm.80 Such
a small value is in line with theoretical estimates, which indicates
that the Tolman length is given by the difference between the bulk
correlation lengths of liquid and vapor phases.81 Taking into account that the radius of the liquid–vapor
envelope changes in this study from 2.2 nm at the lowest humidity
and 2.6 nm at the highest, we find that Tolman corrections could,
in principle, be as much as 5% but, on the other hand, can only account
for a variation of the surface tension of less than 2% within the
range of humidities considered. On the contrary, the surface tensions
analyzed here exhibit a variation of about a factor of 2 in this range.
Therefore, whatever the extent of the correction from curvature effects,
it seems it has too weak size dependence to account for the large
change in surface tension observed here.

Other curvature corrections,
such as a possible ln R term resulting from the van
der Waals interactions,75,77 cannot explain the
large variations observed here for similar reasons.
Indeed, he always remains considerably
smaller than R so that the change of curvature with
humidity is only of order he/R, and one can hardly expect this to provide such a large humidity
dependence as observed for γ(Γ) (nor is there a reason
to suspect such dependency is to follow dΠ/dΓ).

A far more difficult issue refers to the applicability of eq 12. This equation assumes
that the net force stems from a bulk pressure effect ΔpR2 sin2 β, producing effectively
a force on the projected area, R2 sin2 β, and a surface tension effect γlvR sin2 β on the perimeter of that
surface. Both contributions may be expressed in terms of γlv by the use of Δp = 2γlvκ. The empirical surface tension measured from simulations
is obtained by replacing γlv with the humidity-dependent
γ(Γ). This seems rather plausible for the surface contribution
stemming from the tension at the rim of the bridge on the sphere because
there the film height is very close to he. However, it is less justified to do this for the bulk pressure
contribution because the pressure drop is measured in the equatorial
plane of the capillary bridge, where the influence of the disjoining
pressure should be smaller and may not justify a tension significantly
larger than γlv. On the other hand, if the disjoining
pressure were not negligible at the equator of the bridge, then the
full Young–Laplace–Derjaguin equation should be employed
to estimate the pressure drop.

Furthermore, we notice that in
ref (64) as well as
in other theoretical studies,67−71,82 the disjoining pressure was considered
either implicitly or explicitly as a means to assess the size of the
pendular bridge, yet the classical force balance of eq 12 was employed in all cases. However,
it must be born in mind that such a result is obtained for systems
where the liquid phase has a uniform and constant pressure as dictated
by the Young–Laplace equation. For smaller systems with wetting
films, where the disjoining pressure is introduced, the pressure of
the condensed phase does not remain uniform throughout. In fact, at
the poles of the spheres, the film pressure is larger than that of
the vapor phase, whereas in the bridge, it becomes smaller. A full
account of the capillary force in this very complex situation seems
to be lacking, but the results reported here make such a study desirable
to fully elucidate the significance of the film height-dependent surface
tension observed by Laube et al. and discussed here.

As a final
word of caution, we note that the approach studied here
holds provided the nanoparticles remain inert while approaching each
other. For sufficiently small distances and particularly for such
small distances that a single water layer does not fit in the space
between, the nanoparticles could undergo surface reconstruction and
even fully chemical adhesion, and such a complicated scenario is completely
beyond the capabilities of this approach.

Conclusions
In
colloidal science, the Young–Laplace equation is employed
ubiquitously to study curved interfaces on the micrometer scale. Beyond
this scale down to decades of nanometers, one must account for first-order
corrections to the fluid–substrate interactions via the disjoining
pressure, as in the Young–Laplace–Derjaguin equation, eq 1. In this paper, we have
shown that approaching the limit of very thin films fully accounting
for fluid–substrate interactions requires taking into consideration
a modified surface tension, which can be more than double γlv for films of about 1 nm thickness. Fortunately, we have
shown that the resulting film height-dependent surface tension may
be described in terms of the known disjoining pressure. With this
addition, the results of capillarity theory meant for the micrometer
range may be apparently extrapolated down to the limit where a “film”
is meaningful provided the short distances do not trigger significant
covalent interactions between the surfaces. A detailed analysis on
the force required to pull small nanoparticles subject to inhomogeneous
pressure fields seems desirable to fully asses the significance of
this observation.

Methods
Unless otherwise stated,
we simulate adsorbed films in a prismatic
box, with sides of size Lx = Ly = 10σ and Lz = 50σ. An adsorbing
wall mimicking CO2 is placed at one side of the box perpendicular
to the z direction, and a purely repulsive wall is
placed in the opposite side. Canonical Monte Carlo simulations are
performed, which implement both ordinary center of mass metropolis
translations and configurational biased translations of a molecule
chosen at random to a random position on the simulation box.83 Simulations are organized in cycles, with a
cycle consisting of as many MC attempts as molecules in the system.
The trial attempts described above are performed in a ratio of 1:1.
Typical averages are collected over five batches of 107 cycles.

To precisely locate the triple point, we proceeded
as follows.
First, we simulated the liquid–vapor coexistence curve in a
wide range of temperatures between kBT = 1.00ϵ and kBT = 0.50ϵ, well below the expected triple point using
the method of direct coexistence. Our results are in good agreement
with ref (84). For
higher temperatures, the direct coexistence method is less reliable
because the large bulk correlation lengths result in very broad interfaces.
This precludes an accurate determination of the bulk densities in
our finite system (Lx = Ly = 10σ and Lz = 50σ) because the
density profile hardly attains bulk values. For this reason, we resorted
to multicanonical and histogram reweighting simulations combined with
finite-size scaling.85−87 We checked that our results are in excellent agreement
with previous calculations for the same model.47

In a second stage, we estimated the solid–vapor
coexistence
curve by direct coexistence. A perfect face-centered cubic lattice
of atoms was arranged in a cubic box with sides of Lx = Ly = Lz = 10σ.
The system was then simulated using NPT Monte Carlo simulations at kBT = 0.50σ and 0 pressure.
After equilibration, we performed a cell expansion, leaving the equilibrated Lx = Ly sides fixed and increasing Lz up to 50σ. This leaves a condensed
solid slab in the center of the simulation box, surrounded by the
vapor phase. Simulations were then performed in the canonical ensemble,
and the vapor densities were evaluated from the equilibrated density
profile. The final configuration was employed as the initial state
for a new run at higher temperatures, and the process was repeated
until the solid phase melts.

Because the vapor–solid
interface of the LJ fluid exhibits
surface melting, we were unable to observe any significant overheating
of the solid phase. To accurately locate the triple point, we fitted
the vapor densities, ρv(T), of the
solid–vapor and liquid–vapor branches to a polynomial
in the temperature and estimated the triple-point temperature as the
intercept of both curves, yielding kBTt = 0.631ϵ and σ3ρv(Tt) = 0.00155. This result lies
between the two available results for the truncated and shifted LJ
potentials with equal cutoff, which unfortunately differ significantly.
Toxvaerd performed direct coexistence simulations and estimated kBTt = 0.618ϵ,34 whereas van Meel et al. performed free energy
calculations and suggested kBT ≈ 0.65ϵ.39

To complete
the phase diagram, we estimated the triple-point pressure
from the above density, using a virial expansion, with virial coefficients
as determined from Sun and Teja.88 The
resulting triple-point pressure and temperature were employed thereof
to estimate the coexistence liquid and solid densities in NPT simulation.
The results for the enthalpies and densities of the condensed phases
were then used as inputs to extrapolate the coexistence pressure at
higher temperatures, using the Clapeyron equation. This process so
iterated is known as the Gibbs–Duhem integration method89 and allowed us to estimate the solid–liquid
coexistence line up to kBT = 1.0ϵ.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We would like
to thank Nebil A. Katcho for invaluable
assistance. L.G.M. would like to thank H. Kusumaatmaja and C. Semprebon
for helpful discussions and A. Archer and D. Sibley for an enjoyable
stay at the University of Loughborough. A travel grant from the Spanish
Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte, Programa Salvador
de Madariaga (Ref. PRX17/00460) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors
would also like to acknowledge the financial support from the Spanish
Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad under grant MAT-2014-59678-R.

a Notice that the definition of interface
width is not without ambiguity. In refs (22) and (23), we show that eq 13 follows by assuming that the interface profile may be fit
to an error function of width ξe. In practice, in
ref (79), the authors
perform fits of the interface profile in terms of hyperbolic tangent
function of width ξt but report results of the so-called
10–90 width, t10–90 = 2.2/2ξt. Using their result t10–90 = 0.378 nm and the relation ξe = π3/24·ξt2,78 we find ξe2 = 0.070 nm2.
This, with ρl = 0.980 g cm–3,79 yields the reported value ρlξe2 = 2.3 nm–1.
==== Refs
References
Haimov B. ; Iakovlev A. ; Glick-Carmi R. ; Bloch L. ; Rich B. B. ; Müller M. ; Pokroy B. 
Kinetics of nano-scale self-assembly
measured on liquid drops by macroscopic optical tensiometry: from
mercury to water and fluorocarbons . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 2585 –2591 . 10.1021/jacs.5b10446 .26790500 
Yunker P. J. ; Still T. ; Lohr M. A. ; Yodh A. G. 
Suppression of the
coffee-ring effect by shape-dependent capillary interactions . Nature 
2011 , 476 , 308 –311 . 10.1038/nature10344 .21850105 
Coelho J. P. ; González-Rubio G. ; Delices A. ; Barcina J. O. ; Salgado C. ; Ávila D. ; Peña-Rodríguez O. ; Tardajos G. ; Guerrero-Martínez A. 
Polyrotaxane-Mediated
Self-Assembly of Gold Nanospheres into Fully Reversible Supercrystals . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2014 , 53 , 12751 –12755 . 10.1002/anie.201406323 .
Maestro A. ; Guzmán E. ; Ortega F. ; Rubio R. G. 
Contact angle of
micro- and nanoparticles at fluid interfaces . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2014 , 19 , 355 –367 . 10.1016/j.cocis.2014.04.008 .
Kusumaatmaja H. ; Lipowsky R. 
Equilibrium Morphologies and Effective
Spring Constants
of Capillary Bridges . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 18734 –18741 . 10.1021/la102206d .21114264 
Israelachvili J. N.  Intermolecular
and Surfaces Forces , 3 rd ed.; Academic Press : London , 1991 ; pp 1 –674 .
de Gennes P. G. ; Brochard-Wyart F. ; Quéré D.  Capillarity
and Wetting Phenomena ; Springer : New York , 2004 ; pp 1 –292 .
Boruvka L. ; Neumann A. W. 
Generalization of the classical theory of capillarity . J. Chem. Phys. 
1977 , 66 , 5464 –5476 . 10.1063/1.433866 .
Rowlinson J. ; Widom B.  Molecular Theory of Capillarity ; Clarendon : Oxford , 1982 .
Deryagin B.
V. 
Modern
State of the Investigation of Long-Range Surface Forces . Langmuir 
1987 , 3 , 601 –606 . 10.1021/la00077a001 .
Philip J. R. 
Unitary
Approach to Capillary Condensation and Adsorption . J. Chem. Phys. 
1977 , 66 , 5069 –5075 . 10.1063/1.433814 .
Sharma A. 
Equilibrium
Contact Angles and Film Thicknesses in the Apolar and Polar Systems:
Role of Intermolecular Interactions in Coexistence of Drops with Thin
Films . Langmuir 
1993 , 9 , 3580 –3586 . 10.1021/la00036a038 .
Goldenfeld N.  Lectures
on Phase Transitions and the Renormalization Group ; Perseus Books : Reading, MA , 1992 ; pp 1 –394 .
Evans R. 
The nature
of the liquid-vapour interface and other topics in the statistical
mechanics of non-uniform, classical fluids . Adv. Phys. 
1979 , 28 , 143 –200 . 10.1080/00018737900101365 .
Werner A. ; Müller M. ; Schmid F. ; Binder K. 
Effect of Long-Range
Forces on the Interfacial Profiles in Thin Binary Polymer Films . J. Chem. Phys. 
1999 , 110 , 1221 –1229 . 10.1063/1.478164 .
MacDowell L. G. ; Benet J. ; Katcho N. A. ; Palanco J. M. G. 
Disjoining Pressure
and the Film-Height-Dependent Surface Tension of Thin Liquid Films:
New Insight from Capillary Wave Fluctuations . Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2014 , 206 , 150 –171 . 10.1016/j.cis.2013.11.003 .24351859 
Pershan P. S. ; Schlossman M.  Liquid Surfaces and Interfaces:
Synchrotron X-ray Methods ; Cambridge University
Press : Cambridge , 2012 ; pp 1 –311 .
Doerr A. K. ; Tolan M. ; Prange W. ; Schlomka J.-P. ; Seydel T. ; Press W. ; Smilgies D. ; Struth B. 
Observation
of Capillary
Waves on Liquid Thin Films from Mesoscopic to Atomic Length Scales . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1999 , 83 , 3470 –3473 . 10.1103/physrevlett.83.3470 .
Heilmann R. K. ; Fukuto M. ; Pershan P. S. 
Quenching of Capillary Waves in Composite
Wetting Films from a Binary Vapor: An X-Ray Reflectivity Study . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2001 , 63 , 205405 10.1103/physrevb.63.205405 .
Fukuto M. ; Gang O. ; Alvine K. J. ; Pershan P. S. 
Capillary wave fluctuations
and intrinsic widths of coupled fluid-fluid interfaces: An x-ray scattering
study of a wetting film on bulk liquid . Phys.
Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 
2006 , 74 , 031607 10.1103/physreve.74.031607 .
MacDowell L. G. ; Benet J. ; Katcho N. A. 
Capillary Fluctuations and Film-Height-Dependent
Surface Tension of an Adsorbed Liquid Film . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2013 , 111 , 047802 10.1103/physrevlett.111.047802 .23931407 
Benet J. ; Palanco J. G. ; Sanz E. ; MacDowell L. G. 
Disjoining
Pressure, Healing Distance, and Film Height Dependent Surface Tension
of Thin Wetting Films . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 22079 –22089 . 10.1021/jp506534b .
MacDowell L. G. 
Capillary
Wave Theory of Adsorbed Liquid Films and the Structure of the Liquid-Vapor
Interface . Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft
Matter Phys. 
2017 , 96 , 022801 10.1103/physreve.96.022801 .
Bernardino N. R. ; Parry A. O. ; Rascón C. ; Romero-Enrique J. M. 
Derivation
of a Nonlocal Interfacial Model for 3D Wetting in an External Field . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2009 , 21 , 465105 10.1088/0953-8984/21/46/465105 .21715903 
Finn J. E. ; Monson P. A. 
Adsorption Equilibria
in an Isobaric Ensemble . Mol. Phys. 
1988 , 65 , 1345 –1361 . 10.1080/00268978800101841 .
Finn J. E. ; Monson P. A. 
Prewetting at a
Solid–Fluid Interface via Monte
Carlo Simulation . Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt.
Phys. 
1989 , 39 , 6402 –6408 . 10.1103/physreva.39.6402 .
Sokolowski S. ; Fischer J. 
Wetting Transitions
at the Argon-Solid-CO2 Interface:
Molecular-Dynamics Studies . Phys. Rev. A: At.,
Mol., Opt. Phys. 
1990 , 41 , 6866 –6870 . 10.1103/physreva.41.6866 .
Fan Y. ; Monson P. A. 
Further Studies
of Prewetting Transitions via Monte
Carlo Simulations . J. Chem. Phys. 
1993 , 99 , 6897 –6906 . 10.1063/1.465833 .
Bojan M. J. ; Stan G. ; Curtarolo S. ; Steele W. A. ; Cole M. W. 
Wetting
transitions of Ne . Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys.,
Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 
1999 , 59 , 864 –873 . 10.1103/physreve.59.864 .
Sweatman M. B. 
Weighted
density-functional theory for simple fluids: Prewetting of a Lennard-Jones
fluid . Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft
Matter Phys. 
2001 , 65 , 011102 10.1103/physreve.65.011102 .
Shi W. ; Zhao X. ; Johnson J. K. 
Phase transitions
of adsorbed fluids
computed from multiple-histogram reweighting . Mol. Phys. 
2002 , 100 , 2139 –2150 . 10.1080/00268970210122118 .
Errington J. R. 
Prewetting
Transitions for a Model Argon on Solid Carbon Dioxide System . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 3798 –3804 . 10.1021/la0360106 .15875418 
Errington J. R. ; Wilbert D. W. 
Prewetting Boundary
Tensions from Monte Carlo Simulation . Phys.
Rev. Lett. 
2005 , 95 , 226107 10.1103/physrevlett.95.226107 .16384244 
Toxvaerd S. 
Molecular
Dynamics Simulation of Prewetting . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2007 , 111 , 15620 –15624 . 10.1021/jp073665x .
Ebner C. ; Saam W. F. 
New Phase Transition
in Thin Argon Films . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1977 , 38 , 1486 –1489 . 10.1103/physrevlett.38.1486 .
Velasco E. ; Tarazona P. 
Comment on “Prewetting
at a solid-fluid interface
via Monte Carlo simulation” . Phys. Rev.
A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 
1990 , 42 , 2454 –2457 . 10.1103/physreva.42.2454 .
Agrawal R. ; Kofke D. 
Thermodynamic and Structural Properties of Model Systems at Solid-Fluid
Coexistence. II. Melting and Sublimation of the Lennard-Jones System . Mol. Phys. 
1995 , 85 , 43 –59 . 10.1080/00268979500100921 .
Mastny E. A. ; de Pablo J. J. 
Melting line of
the Lennard-Jones system, infinite
size, and full poten tial . J. Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 127 , 104504 10.1063/1.2753149 .17867758 
van
Meel J. A. ; Page A. J. ; Sear R. P. ; Frenkel D. 
Two-step vapor-crystal
nucleation close below triple point . J. Chem.
Phys. 
2008 , 129 , 204505 10.1063/1.3026364 .19045871 
Pandit R. ; Fisher M. E. 
Wetting Transitions Near Bulk Triple Points . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1983 , 51 , 1772 –1775 . 10.1103/physrevlett.51.1772 .
Mistura G. ; Ancilotto F. ; Bruschi L. ; Toigo F. 
Wetting of Argon on
CO2 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1999 , 82 , 795 –798 . 10.1103/physrevlett.82.795 .
Sukhatme K. G. ; Rutledge J. E. ; Taborek P. 
Wetting near Triple
Points . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1998 , 80 , 129 –132 . 10.1103/physrevlett.80.129 .
Bruschi L. ; Mistura G. 
Triple–point Wetting of Argon
and Methane on
Gold . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2001 , 61 , 4941 –4947 . 10.1103/physrevb.61.4941 .
MacDowell L. G. ; Müller M. 
Adsorption of Polymers on a Brush:
Tuning the Order
of the Wetting Transition . J. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 124 , 084907 10.1063/1.2172597 .16512742 
de
Gregorio R. ; Benet J. ; Katcho N. A. ; Blas F. J. ; MacDowell L. G. 
Semi-Infinite Boundary Conditions for the Simulation
of Interfaces: The Ar/CO2(s) Model Revisited . J. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 136 , 104703 10.1063/1.3692608 .22423854 
Chacón E. ; Tarazona P. 
Characterization of
the Intrinsic Density Profiles
for Liquid Surfaces . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2005 , 17 , S3493 –S3498 . 10.1088/0953-8984/17/45/039 .
Wilding N. B. 
Critical–Point
and Coexistence–Curve Properties of the Lennard-Jones Fluid:
A Finite–Size Scaling Study . Phys. Rev.
E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 
1995 , 52 , 602 –611 . 10.1103/physreve.52.602 .
Fernández E. M. ; Chacón E. ; Tarazona P. 
Thickness and Fluctuations of Free
and Adsorbed Liquid Films . Phys. Rev. E: Stat.,
Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 
2011 , 84 , 205435 10.1103/physrevb.84.205435 .
MacDowell L. G. 
Computer
Simulation of Interface Properties: Towards a First Principle Description
of Complex Interfaces? . Eur. Phys. J.: Spec.
Top. 
2011 , 197 , 131 –145 . 10.1140/epjst/e2011-01447-6 .
Müller M. ; MacDowell L. G. 
Interface
and Surface Properties of Polymer Solutions:
Monte Carlo Simulations and Self-Consistent Field Theory . Macromolecules 
2000 , 33 , 3902 –3923 . 10.1021/ma991796t .
MacDowell L. G. ; Müller M. ; Binder K. 
How do Droplets on a Surface Depend
on the System size? . Colloids Surf., A 
2002 , 206 , 277 –291 . 10.1016/s0927-7757(02)00086-9 .
Fitzgerald M. ; Picard R. R. ; Silver R. N. 
Canonical
transition probabilities
for adaptive Metropolis stimulation . Europhys.
Lett. 
1999 , 46 , 282 –287 . 10.1209/epl/i1999-00257-1 .
Grzelak E. M. ; Errington J. R. 
Computation
of Interfacial Properties via Grand Canonical
Transition Matrix Monte Carlo simulation . J.
Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 128 , 014710 10.1063/1.2812285 .18190215 
Benjamin I. 
Theoretical
study of the water/1,2-dichloroethane interface: Structure, dynamics,
and conformational equilibria at the liquid–liquid interface . J. Chem. Phys. 
1992 , 97 , 1432 –1445 . 10.1063/1.463219 .
Müller M. ; MacDowell L. G. 
Wetting
of Polymer Liquids: Monte Carlo Simulations
and Self Consistent Field Calculations . J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter 
2003 , 15 , R609 –R653 . 10.1088/0953-8984/15/19/201 .
Usabiaga F. B. ; Duque D. 
Applications of computational
geometry to the molecular simulation
of interfaces . Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear,
Soft Matter Phys. 
2009 , 79 , 046709 10.1103/physreve.79.046709 .
Jorge M. ; Jedlovszky P. ; Cordeiro M. N. D. S. 
A Critical Assessment of Methods
for the Intrinsic Analysis of Liquid Interfaces. 1. Surface Site Distributions . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 11169 –11179 . 10.1021/jp101035r .
Fernández E. M. ; Chacón E. ; Tarazona P. ; Parry A. O. ; Rascón C. 
Intrinsic
Fluid Interfaces and Nonlocality . Phys. Rev.
Lett. 
2013 , 111 , 096104 10.1103/physrevlett.111.096104 .24033052 
Chacón E. ; Fernández E. M. ; Tarazona P. 
Effect of Dispersion Forces on the
Capillary-Wave Fluctuations of Liquid Surfaces . Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 
2014 , 89 , 042406 10.1103/physreve.89.042406 .
Fernández E. M. ; Chacón E. ; Tarazona P. 
Capillary Waves Spectrum at Adsorbed
Liquid Films . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 
2012 , 86 , 085401 10.1103/physrevb.86.085401 .
Mecke M. ; Winkelmann J. ; Fischer J. 
Molecular Dynamics Simulations of
the Liquid–Vapor Interface: Binary Mixtures of Lennard-Jones
Fluids . J. Chem. Phys. 
1999 , 110 , 1188 –1194 . 10.1063/1.478160 .
Blokhuis E. M. 
On the
Spectrum of Fluctuations of a Liquid Surface: From the Molecular Scale
to the Macroscopic Scale . J. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 130 , 014706 10.1063/1.3054346 .19140630 
Vrij A. 
Possible Mechanism
for the Spontaneous Rupture of Thin, Free Liquid Films . Discuss. Faraday Soc. 
1966 , 42 , 23 –33 . 10.1039/df9664200023 .
Laube J. ; Salameh S. ; Kappl M. ; Mädler L. ; Ciacchi L. C. 
Contact Forces between TiO2 Nanoparticles
Governed
by an Interplay of Adsorbed Water Layers and Roughness . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 11288 –11295 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b02989 .26414448 
Orr F. M. ; Scriven L. E. ; Rivas A. P. 
Pendular
Rings Between Solids: Meniscus
Properties and Capillary Forces . J. Fluid Mech. 
1975 , 67 , 723 –742 . 10.1017/s0022112075000572 .
Butt H.-J. ; Kappl M. 
Normal Capillary Forces . Adv. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2009 , 146 , 48 –60 . 10.1016/j.cis.2008.10.002 .19022419 
Charlaix E. ; Crassous J. 
Adhesion forces between
wetted solid surfaces . J. Chem. Phys. 
2005 , 122 , 184701 10.1063/1.1886732 .15918741 
Asay D. B. ; de Boer M. P. ; Kim S. H. 
Equilibrium Vapor Adsorption and
Capillary Force: Exact Laplace-Young Equation Solution and Circular
Approximation Approaches . J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. 
2010 , 24 , 2363 –2382 . 10.1163/016942410x508271 .
Crassous J. ; Ciccotti M. ; Charlaix E. 
Capillary Force between
Wetted Nanometric
Contacts and Its Application to Atomic Force Microscopy . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 3468 –3473 . 10.1021/la103781y .21370887 
Asay D. B. ; Kim S. H. 
Effects of adsorbed
water layer structure on adhesion
force of silicon oxide nanoasperity contact in humid ambient . J. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 124 , 174712 10.1063/1.2192510 .16689595 
Asay D. B. ; Kim S. H. 
Molar Volume and
Adsorption Isotherm Dependence of
Capillary Forces in Nanoasperity Contacts . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 12174 –12178 . 10.1021/la701954k .17949117 
Bhatt D. ; Newman J. ; Radke C. J. 
Molecular Simulation of Disjoining-Pressure
Isotherms for Free Liquid, Lennard-Jones Thin Films . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 6529 –6537 . 10.1021/jp0202136 .
Han M. 
Disjoining
Properties of Ne and Ar on Graphite Surface . Colloids Surf., A 
2008 , 317 , 679 –686 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2007.12.003 .
Gelfand M. P. ; Lipowsky R. 
Wetting on cylinders
and spheres . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 
1987 , 36 , 8725 –8735 . 10.1103/physrevb.36.8725 .
Bieker T. ; Dietrich S. 
Wetting of curved surfaces . Phys.
A 
1998 , 252 , 85 –137 . 10.1016/s0378-4371(97)00618-3 .
Bryk P. ; Roth R. ; Mecke K. R. ; Dietrich S. 
Hard Sphere Fluids
in Contact with Curved Substrates . Phys. Rev.
E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 
2003 , 68 , 031602 10.1103/physreve.68.031602 .
Nold A. ; Malijevský A. ; Kalliadasis S. 
Wetting on a spherical wall: Influence
of liquid-gas interfacial properties . Phys.
Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 
2011 , 84 , 021603 10.1103/physreve.84.021603 .
Ismail A. E. ; Grest G. S. ; Stevens M. J. 
Capillary waves at the liquid-vapor
interface and the surface tension of water . J. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 125 , 014702 10.1063/1.2209240 .16863319 
Vega C. ; de Miguel E. 
Surface tension
of the most popular models of water
by using the test-area simulation method . J.
Chem. Phys. 
2007 , 126 , 154707 10.1063/1.2715577 .17461659 
Joswiak M. N. ; Do R. ; Doherty M. F. ; Peters B. 
Energetic and entropic components
of the Tolman length for mW and TIP4P/2005 water nanodroplets . J. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 145 , 204703 10.1063/1.4967875 .27908116 
Iwamatsu M. 
The Surface
Tension and Tolman’s Length of a Drop . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
1994 , 6 , L173 –L177 . 10.1088/0953-8984/6/13/004 .
Dobbs H. T. ; Darbellay G. A. ; Yeomans J. M. 
Capillary Condensation Between Spheres . Europhys. Lett. 
1992 , 18 , 439 10.1209/0295-5075/18/5/011 .
MacDowell L. G.  Termodinámica
Estadística de Moléculas Flexibles: Teoría y
Simulación . Ph.D. Thesis, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid , 2000 .
Trokhymchuk A. ; Alejandre J. 
Computer Simulations of Liquid/Vapor
Interface in Lennard-Jones
Fluids: Some Questions and Answers . J. Chem.
Phys. 
1999 , 111 , 8510 –8523 . 10.1063/1.480192 .
Berg B. A. ; Neuhaus T. 
Multicanonical Ensemble:
A New Approach to Simulate
First-Order Phase Transitions . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1992 , 68 , 9 –12 . 10.1103/physrevlett.68.9 .10045099 
Ferrenberg A. M. ; Swendsen R. H. 
Optimized Monte Carlo Data Analysis . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1989 , 63 , 1195 –1198 . 10.1103/physrevlett.63.1195 .10040500 
Müller M. ; Wilding N. B. 
Phys. Rev. E 
1994 , 57 , 2076 .
Sun T. ; Teja A. S. 
An Equation of State
for Real Fluids Based on the Lennard-Jones
Potential . J. Phys. Chem. 
1996 , 100 , 17365 –17372 . 10.1021/jp9620476 .
Kofke D. A. 
Direct
Evaluation of Phase Coexistence by Molecular Simulation via Integration
Along the Saturation Line . J. Chem. Phys. 
1993 , 98 , 4149 –4162 . 10.1063/1.465023 .

