
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145997710.1021/acsomega.9b00611ArticleEstablishing Drug Discovery and Identification of
Hit Series for the Anti-apoptotic Proteins, Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 Murray James
B. †Davidson James †Chen Ijen †Davis Ben †Dokurno Pawel †Graham Christopher J. †Harris Richard †Jordan Allan †⊥Matassova Natalia †Pedder Christopher †Ray Stuart †Roughley Stephen D. †Smith Julia †Walmsley Claire †Wang Yikang †Whitehead Neil †Williamson Douglas S. †Casara Patrick ‡Le Diguarher Thierry ‡Hickman John ‡Stark Jerome ‡Kotschy András §Geneste Olivier ‡Hubbard Roderick E. *†∥† Vernalis
(R&D) Ltd., Granta
Park, Abington, Cambridge CB21 6GB, U.K.‡ Institut
de Recherches Servier Oncology R&D Unit, Croissy Sur Seine 78290, France§ Servier
Research Institute of Medicinal Chemistry, Budapest 1031, Hungary∥ YSBL,
University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, U.K.* E-mail: r.hubbard@vernalis.com.23 05 2019 31 05 2019 4 5 8892 8906 05 03 2019 08 03 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We describe our work to establish
structure- and fragment-based
drug discovery to identify small molecules that inhibit the anti-apoptotic
activity of the proteins Mcl-1 and Bcl-2. This identified hit series
of compounds, some of which were subsequently optimized to clinical
candidates in trials for treating various cancers. Many protein constructs
were designed to identify protein with suitable properties for different
biophysical assays and structural methods. Fragment screening using
ligand-observed NMR experiments identified several series of compounds
for each protein. The series were assessed for their potential for
subsequent optimization using 1H and 15N heteronuclear
single-quantum correlation NMR, surface plasmon resonance, and isothermal
titration calorimetry measurements to characterize and validate binding.
Crystal structures could not be determined for the early hits, so
NMR methods were developed to provide models of compound binding to
guide compound optimization. For Mcl-1, a benzodioxane/benzoxazine
series was optimized to a Kd of 40 μM
before a thienopyrimidine hit series was identified which subsequently
led to the lead series from which the clinical candidate S 64315 (MIK
665) was identified. For Bcl-2, the fragment-derived series were difficult
to progress, and a compound derived from a published tetrahydroquinone
compound was taken forward as the hit from which the clinical candidate
(S 55746) was obtained. For both the proteins, the work to establish
a portfolio of assays gave confidence for identification of compounds
suitable for optimization.

document-id-old-9ao9b00611document-id-new-14ao-2019-00611rccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Mcl-1
and Bcl-2 are members of the family of Bcl-2-like proteins1 that play a key role in regulating programmed
cell death or apoptosis. The family consists of three classes of protein
which contain between one and four of the so-called Bcl-2 homology
domains (BH1–BH4). The pro-apoptotic class of protein such
as Bax and Bak contains three BH domains that on activation form pores
in mitochondria, triggering release of caspases leading to cell death.
Activation is by a number of as-yet not fully characterized mechanisms
but a major factor is relief of inhibition by binding to a class of
single BH3-only proteins such as Bim, Puma, Bad, Hrk, and Noxa. These
BH3-only proteins bind variedly to the well-characterized class of
anti-apoptotic proteins Mcl-1, Bcl-2, and Bcl-xL (and less-studied
Bcl-w and Bfl-1 or A1) which usually have four BH domains. These anti-apoptotic
proteins are frequently upregulated in cancer cells, sequestering
the BH3-only pro-apoptotic proteins, thus inhibiting apoptosis, and
disruption of this interaction has been identified for a long time
as a possible strategy for cancer therapy.

The Bcl-2 family
represents a class of proteins for which it is
challenging to generate drug-like molecules2 because of the generally hydrophobic nature of the large protein–protein
interaction surfaces to be disrupted. A number of other groups have
reported success on these targets.3 For
Bcl-2, a series of clinical candidates eventually led to the marketed
drug, ABT-199,4−6 while a number of other groups report potent Mcl-1
inhibitors7−9 some of which have entered clinical trials. We have
recently disclosed compound series that inhibit Bcl-210 and Mcl-1,11 and members of
these series are now in clinical trials as a therapy for various cancers.

The first challenge faced for this class of target is to establish
a robust drug discovery platform, including production of protein
suitable for biophysical and functional assays, generating structural
information and identifying tool compounds which can validate the
assays that underpin hit identification and subsequent compound optimization.
In this paper, we describe the development of structure-based discovery
platforms for our Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 projects, which resulted in identification
of the hit series of compounds which were subsequently optimized to
clinical candidates. The structure-guided optimization of a thienopyrimidine
series to cell-active inhibitors of Mcl-1 is described.12 The optimization of other compounds will be
described elsewhere.

Figure 1 shows the
structure we determined of the single helix of Bim bound into the
groove provided by Mcl-1, similar to that of the first published structure
(pdb code: 2PQK(13)). This is architecturally similar to
the complexes seen for other pro-apoptotic/anti-apoptotic pairs such
as Bcl-xL with Bad (pdb code 1g5j) and summarizes the issue for generation
of drug-like, potent inhibitors of the interaction which typically
have subnanomolar affinities.14 Mcl-1 has
a large and predominantly hydrophobic cleft, characterized by a central
charged amino acid (R263), flanked by a series of predominantly hydrophobic
pockets, labeled S1–S5, which are occupied by the side chains
of Bim.

Figure 1 Crystal structure of the Bim peptide bound to hMcl-1. (a). Mcl-1
helical structure, colored from N (blue) to C (red) terminus, with
the regions designated BH1–BH4 indicated, and with the Bim
peptide in stick representation. (b). Details of the Bim peptide binding
site on Mcl-1 with labels for the S1–S5 pockets and R263 of
Mcl-1.

The following sections describe
the approach taken to generate
the structure-based discovery platform for both Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 and
the fragment and compound screening and characterization, which led
to identifying hit series suitable for optimization for both the proteins.
The description is organized with separate sections for each of the
proteins under each method and activity. This is because there was
considerable crossover between the projects in the development of
the methods and identification of initial hit compounds. The experimental
methods are described in the section at the end of the manuscript
with additional details including compound synthesis in the Supporting Information.

2 Results
2.1 Generation of Suitable Protein—Bcl-2
Early structural
work on Bcl-xL15 by a group
at Abbott characterized a long flexible loop between
residues 28–80, connecting helices 2 and 3 in structures determined
by both NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. This loop can
be truncated with no effect on the function or structure. Bcl-2 has
an equivalent long flexible loop. Work by the same Abbott group16 found that intact Bcl-2 is not sufficiently
soluble for structural studies but designed a Bcl-2/Bcl-xL hybrid for two isoforms of Bcl-2 (hereafter, Bcl-2#1 and Bcl-2#2),
where the loop is shortened with a Bcl-xL sequence. Structures
were reported for these Bcl-2 proteins determined by NMR spectroscopy.16

We generated Bcl-2#2 but found it was
expressed in low yields and had poor stability in our hands, giving
variable behaviors in NMR experiments. Modification of the screening
buffers [to 50 mM MES/bis-TRIS pH 7.0, 20 mM Arg/Glu, 2 mM dithiothreitol
(DTT)] provided a more stable protein which was used in initial NMR
experiments and for surface plasmon resonance (SPR). However, we were
not able to obtain crystals of Bcl-2#2 and a more stable protein was
required for more extensive and routine NMR experiments.

Comparison
of the sequence of Bcl-2#2 with Bcl-xL and
its crystal structure identified a number of surface and C-terminal
residues which could have an impact on protein behavior and crystallization.
Modifications to these residues (shown in Figure 2) gave a construct we call Bcl-2#3 which
was expressed in high yield. This construct had a similar selectivity
profile for BH3-only peptides as wild-type Bcl-2 and weak interaction
with the Bcl-xL- specific peptide Hrk (Table S1). Bcl-2#3 was stable at 800 μM for 2–3
weeks at 30 °C, suitable for structural studies by both NMR spectroscopy
(15N labeled and 15N, 13C labeled)
and X-ray crystallography. In addition, the protein showed slow exchange
on the NMR timescale when binding potent ligands, with evidence of
the increased order (see Figure S1). A
further modified version was produced (Bcl-2#3′), in which
some surface glutamic acids were modified (to alanine or glutamine)
to remove some carboxylate/carboxylate interactions seen in crystal
packing, and this was used for one of the crystal structures reported
here (2 in Figure 3); subsequent work on advanced compounds derived from 2 showed the same binding mode in other Bcl-2 constructs.10 Unmodified human Bcl-2 residues 1–207
with an N-terminal hexa-His tag and a thrombin cleavage site (hereafter
hBcl-2) was produced for assays.

Figure 2 Amino acid sequence of (a) Bcl-2—a
comparison of the Bcl-2#2
sequence used to generate PDB entry 2o21 and used here for fragment screening
and initial NMR experiments and the sequence designed for the Bcl-2#3
construct, which was used for X-ray crystallography, SPR, and most
NMR experiments. Sequence numbering is for human Bcl-2. Highlighted
in green is the loop which is not seen in the crystal structure and
identity between the two sequences is indicated with *; a construct
with reduced surface charge (Bcl-2#3′) was used for some X-ray
crystallography with E to A mutations at positions marked in pink
except for E114Q (FAEM- > FAQM) (b) Mcl-1—a comparison of
the
sequence seen in the crystal structures of Bim bound to the modified
Mcl-1 in PDB entry 2NL9 with hMcl-1, mMcl-1, and hMcl-1#1. Sequence numbering is for human
Mcl-1. * signifies sequence identity between hMcl-1 and mMcl-1. The
sequence differences between 2NL9 and hMcl-1 are highlighted in pink and the differences
between hMcl-1 and hMcl-1#1 in blue. X is seleno-methionine. Full
sequences (including tags) are in the Supporting Information.

Figure 3 Bcl-2#3 crystal structures:
(a) Bcl-2#3 bound to Puma; (b) structure
of Puma bound to Bcl-2#3 (blue) and hMcl-1 (orange), overlaid on Puma;
(c). Structure of Bcl-2#3 bound to Puma (blue) and 1 (yellow);
(d) detail of binding of 1 (yellow); and (e) detail of
binding of 2 (grey) to Bcl-2#3′.

2.2 Generation of Suitable
Protein—Mcl-1
The first crystal structures of Mcl-1
were published in 2007 (PDB
code: 2NL9(17)) as we began our work on Mcl-1. Mouse Mcl-1
(hereafter mMcl-1) was more soluble than human Mcl-1 (hereafter hMcl-1),
and a number of mouse mutations were introduced into hMcl-1 for this
structure. We introduced further nine mutations to vary surface residues
and alter the pI of the protein and the length of the N and C termini.
This eventually led to the protein we term hMcl-1#1 (with an N-terminal
GST tag and 3C protease cleavage site), which was used to determine
some initial crystal structures with pro-apoptotic peptides bound
(a cartoon representation of the structure of hMcl-1#1 bound to the
BH3-only peptide Puma is shown in Figure S2). We then found that sufficient quantities of soluble hMcl-1 could
be generated with no mutations, by swapping to an N-terminal hexahis
tag and either a TEV or thrombin cleavage site. This hMcl-1 was used
for subsequent crystallographic studies, fragment screening, and various
assays and initial 1H and 15N heteronuclear
single-quantum correlation (HSQC) NMR experiments. In addition, a
double his-tagged version was produced for SPR,18 which was also suitable for isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC). However, the lack of long-term solubility of hMcl-1 precluded
its use for routine Kd determination using 1H, 15N HSQC experiments, and so mMcl-1 was used. Figure 2b compares the sequence
in PDB code 2NL9(17) with that of mMcl-1, hMcl-1, and hMcl-1#1.

2.3 Assays To Validate Binding of Compounds to
Proteins
In addition to the 1D 1H NMR methods
used in ligand-observed NMR fragment screening described below, four
different assays were developed to validate or characterize binding
of compounds to Bcl-2 or Mcl-1 during this hit identification phase:
fluorescence polarisation (FP), 1H, 15N HSQC
NMR, ITC, and SPR. Details of the reagents and protocols are provided
in the Experimental Section, in brief:

2.3.1 FP Assays
Ligand binding was measured
from the change in FP on displacement of the BH3-only peptide, F-Puma
(Puma peptide N-terminally labeled with a fluorescein analogue), using
hBcl-2 or hMcl-1.

2.3.2 1H and 15N HSQC NMR
This 2D NMR experiment on an 15N isotopically labeled
protein sample generates a peak for each amide with a chemical shift
highly sensitive to the chemical environment near that particular
amide group. Typically, spectra are acquired for 30–50 μM
protein with increasing concentration of the ligand, limited only
by the solubility of the ligand. Clearly defined peaks for most amides
indicate a homogenous and soluble protein sample with binding of the
ligand to a defined site, giving a titration of movement of peaks
of amides in the binding site (e.g., Figure S1) from which Kd can be estimated if saturation
can be achieved. The initial HSQC NMR experiments used hMcl-1 and
subsequent experiments used the more soluble and stable mMcl-1.

2.3.3 Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
Experiments
were conducted, where compounds have sufficient solubility,
at 25 °C by titration of a stock sample of the 100 μM compound
onto a solution of 10 μM hMcl-1 in a GE ITC200 instrument. The
lower solubility of later compounds sometimes required titration of
the protein onto the compound.10

2.3.4 Surface Plasmon Resonance
A direct
binding method was used, in which the protein (his-tagged Bcl-2#2
or hMcl-1 with a double his-tag18) was
immobilized on an NTA chip on a Biacore T100 instrument. Serial dilutions
of the ligand were then made to flow over the surface, with regeneration
of the surface between each sample. A competition or “affinity
in solution” method was developed later for optimized compounds
for both Mcl-111 and Bcl-2,10 in which variable concentrations of the ligand
with a fixed concentration of protein are made to flow over an SPR
chip with a potent ligand bound (either the peptide or optimized compound).
This format of SPR assay was not used for the compounds referenced
here.

2.4 Bcl-2 Structural Information—X-ray
Crystallography
Although there were crystal structures of
various BH3-only peptides binding to Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL when
we began our project, there were no published structures determined
by either NMR spectroscopy or X-ray crystallography of such peptides
binding to Bcl-2. We determined the crystal structure of Bcl-2#3 bound
to the BH3-only peptide, Puma, and compared it with a structure we
determined of Puma bound to hMcl-1 (Figure 3). There is an overall similarity in the
binding mode of Puma, with some small variation in the relative orientations
of the various helices that form the peptide binding cleft.

Data shown for all compounds in this paper are μM values for eKi for FP assay for that target [with data in
brackets for measurements of Kd by HSQC
NMR (N), SPR (S), or ITC (I) where available], unless the assay curve
is incomplete, when it is expressed as percentage inhibition at the
highest concentration. NM—not measurable at the concentrations
used in the assay (for FP—2.5 mM or solubility limit).

We could only crystallize Bcl-2#3 in the presence of a high affinity
ligand. Therefore, we were not able to determine structures with the
early hit series from fragment screening. The first crystal structure
we determined of a small molecule binding to Bcl-2#3 was with compound 1, an analogue of ABT-737 (Figure 3d). This binds with a very similar pose to
that seen for the then-published structure of ABT-737 in Bcl-xL (pdb code: 2YXJ(19)).

2.5 Mcl-1
Structural Information—X-ray
Crystallography
Similar to our experience with Bcl-2#3, we
could only determine the structures of hMcl-1 in complex with peptides
or small molecules with potency better than 100 nM, and the success
rate for cocrystallization was low. In the latter stages of our Mcl-1
project, more routine crystal structure determination was achieved
with a maltose binding protein (MBP)-Mcl-1 fusion (as described elsewhere11), but this was not available at the time of
the studies reported here.

Figure 4 shows the crystal structure of hMcl-1 bound
to the indole acid compound 3, a tool compound derived
from a patent but reinforced by an indole acid fragment hit (see later).
Two copies of the ligand occupy the binding cleft. The ligand in S2
is binding into a deep pocket that is not present in the Puma-bound
structure (Figure 2e). The ligand centered on S4 is between two molecules in the crystal
packing environment, which we believe is an artifact of crystallization
as ITC experiments demonstrate binding with 1:1 stoichiometry, and
the poor enclosure of the ligand in S4 makes it unlikely to be a relevant
pocket. The binding affinity of 3 for hMcl-1 is 100 nM eKi in the FP assay, consistent with ITC and
SPR data (see Figure S3), with selectivity
of about 300-fold over Bcl-2.

Figure 4 hMcl-1 crystal structures: (a,b) structure of
compound 3 bound to two sites on hMcl-1 with (c). Detail
of binding of 3 that binds in the S2 pocket; (d) comparison
of hMcl-1 structures
with 3 (yellow) and Puma (blue) bound with (e). Detail
of the hMcl-1 binding surface for Puma overlaid in blue on the observed
binding position of 3 in the S2 pocket. The convention
for the assay data is summarized in the legend to Figure 3.

These structures demonstrate that there is conformational
flexibility
in both the proteins (more in Bcl-2 than in Mcl-1), where both side-chain
and main-chain movements can adjust the surface of the protein to
accommodate changes in the ligand. These movements can substantially
change the nature of the binding surface, revealing additional pockets
that increase the “druggability20” of the protein.

2.6 Identifying and Characterizing
Fragment Hits—Bcl-2
The initial NMR experiments on
Bcl-2 were acquired with the Bcl-2#2
protein at 10 μM. A total of 1088 fragments were screened as
mixtures of 8 (with each compound at 500 μM). The initial analysis
suggested 82 hits, with a hit defined as showing competition with
the 30 μM Puma peptide in three ligand-observed NMR experiments
[saturation transfer difference spectroscopy (STD), water-LOGSY, and
Carr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill]. However, there was
some variability and ambiguity in assigning hits because of protein
instability giving low signal to noise in the experiments. The initial
set of hits were remeasured in the ligand-observed experiments as
singletons and with a single-point and 1H, 15N titration HSQC experiments, resulting in 24 validated hits which
could be grouped into 5 structural classes (Figure S4).

At this point in the project, the Bcl-2#3 protein
had been obtained for X-ray crystallography. This showed increased
stability and was adopted for all subsequent studies.

2.7 Identifying and Characterizing Fragment Hits—Mcl-1
The initial fragment hits came from two sources. First, the 1064
fragments in the library at that time were screened at 500 μM
each compound as mixtures of 8 against 10 μM hMcl-1 using ligand-observed
NMR with 25 μM Noxa-B peptide as the competitor. A total of
39 fragments were confirmed when retested as singletons as competitive
in all three NMR experiments and fall into 13 different classes (Figure S5). Second, building on the observation
that biaryl acids are often found as binding to this type of protein–protein
interaction surface,21 commercially available
analogues of two biaryl acids (4 and 5)
were assessed, and from this, the pyrazolo-acid 6 was
identified. Any compounds that were hits were also assessed by 1H, 15N HSQC NMR experiments and tested in the hMcl-1
FP assay.

2.8 NMR-Guided Models
We were unable
to determine the structures for fragment hits binding to either Bcl-2
or Mcl-1 by X-ray crystallography. Instead, we used an approach that
we refer to as NMR-guided models (NGMs). This technique is suitable
for proteins with a molecular weight up to around 35 kDa, with either
a full assignment or partial assignment (sometimes achieved with selective
labeling of particular amino acid types). The Experimental
Section describes the methods in detail, but in summary, the
spectrum of the ligand is assigned in the bound state using 13C, 15N purged 1D and nuclear Overhauser spectroscopy (NOESY)
experiments. A full 3D 13C-edited, 13C, 15N-filtered NOESY (so-called X-filtered NOESY) is then acquired,
which identifies intermolecular NOEs between the ligand and protein.
These restraints are then used to filter ligand poses from docking
into an ensemble of protein conformations.

For each of Mcl-1
and Bcl-2, an ensemble of protein conformations (including movement
of side chains in the putative ligand binding sites) was generated
from the then available structures (determined by X-ray crystallography
or NMR) supplemented by analysis of molecular dynamics (MD) simulation
and homology models. For Mcl-1, only peptide-bound crystal structures
were available, but a homology model based on the available ligand-bound
Bcl-2 structures and the simulation suggested movement of helix 4.
For Bcl-2, both ligand and peptide-bound structures were available,
and the simulation suggested movement of helix 3. The compound of
interest was then docked into all enumerated protein conformations
and the three docking models that best satisfied the observed NOEs
were subjected to an induced-fit docking protocol. The docking models
from fixed-protein and induced-fit docking were examined side by side
to select a final model.

As crystal structures could be determined
for larger compounds
such as 2 for Bcl-2 and 3 for Mcl-1, we
generated an NGM of 2 with Bcl-2 and 3 with
Mcl-1 and compared these to the X-ray structures (Figure S6). This confirmed that the NGM can provide an adequate
model for compound optimization for both the proteins.

2.9 Hit Identification—Bcl-2
A
number of fragment series were explored for Bcl-2 and representatives
of the hit series emerging for Mcl-1 (see later). The affinity for
Bcl-2 of various fragments and fragment-derived series was low (see Table 1 and Figure 5) and there was no selectivity
for Bcl-2 over Mcl-1, so the series were not progressed further for
Bcl-2. However, a number of thienopyrimidines (such as 7, 8, 9) were identified in the near neighbor
screening, which showed emerging SAR and selectivity for Mcl-1 (see
later).

Figure 5 Compounds referenced in this paper (see also Table 1 and other figures). The convention for the
assay data is summarized in the legend to Figure 3.

Table 1 Optimisation of the Benzadioxane/Benzoxazole
Series
Cmpd	R1	R2	R3	R4	X	A1	Mcl-1 eKi2 (μM)	Mcl-1 Kd3 (μM)	Bcl-2 eKi4 (μM)	
15	–NMe2	 	H	H	O	 	NM	2600	NM	
21	–OH	 	H	H	O	 	40	280	300	
225	–OH	 	H	CH2Ph	O	 	40	85 (S-140)	80 (N-210)	
23	–OH	H	H	H	N	 	500	360	NM	
24	–OH	Et	H	H	N	 	20	220	500	
25	–OH	CH2Ph	H	H	N	 	40	40 (S-450)	800 (N-210)	
26	–OH	CH2Ph	H	H	N	R	30	110	NM	
27	–OH	CH2Ph	H	H	N	S	40	140	NM	
285	–OH	CH2Ph	Me	H	N	R	47	70	93	
a NM—not measurable
at top
concentration tested, usually 2.5 mM or solubility limit;1 a blank means the racemic compound was tested;2eKi (μM) is measured by Mcl-1 FP assay;3Kd is measured by 1H, 15N HSQC (S is Kd measured
by SPR);4eKi is measured by
Bcl-2 FP assay (μM unless incomplete assay curve, when expressed
as percentage inhibition at the top concentration), N is Kd measured by 1H, 15N HSQC;5 and NGM is generated.

It was striking that a number of benzodioxanes were identified
for both targets, such as 10. The Mcl-1 project also
identified benzodioxoles such as 11 (see later) and limited
SAR identified 12 with an affinity of 67 μM for
Bcl-2#3 by 1H, 15N HSQC and with suitable physicochemical
properties such that an NGM could be determined for binding to Bcl-2#3.
This collection of results suggested that such a semisaturated fused-ring
system could occupy the S2 pocket in Bcl-2. We also determined the
crystal structure of the then-leading candidate for Bcl-2 (ABT-2635, 13) and realized, as shown in Figure 6, that piperazine of 13 overlays with the bromobenzene in 12, suggesting
that chlorobenzene of 13 could be replaced by benzodioxole
of 12. This hybrid compound (14) was synthesized
and it binds with an affinity of around 1 nM (FP data confirmed by
SPR, data in Figure S1), although it has
only weak cellular activity (data not shown) and was not pursued further.
However, the crystal structure of 14 bound to Bcl-2#3
(Figure 6c) confirms
that the design strategy was correct and provides further confirmation
that the NGM approach does generate poses for small molecules that
can be exploited in synthesis.

Figure 6 Design of the hybrid Bcl-2 compound showing
on the left the experimentally
determined pose (Bcl-2 protein structure omitted) for each of (a)
crystal structure of ABT-263, 13; (b) NGM model of binding
of benzodioxole, 12, and (c) crystal structure of the
hybrid compound, 14. The convention for the assay data
is summarized in the legend to Figure 3.

After exploring the various
fragments and hit series for nearly
a year, a publication from UCB22 revealed
tetrahydroisoquinoline amide substituted phenyl pyrazoles as potent
and selective Bcl-2 inhibitors. A novel representative of the series, 2, was synthesized, characterized, and the crystal structure
bound to Bcl-2#3 was determined (Figure 3c). This provided the hit series, which was
subsequently optimized to a clinical candidate,10 through a structure-guided design that will be described
elsewhere.

2.10 Hit Identification—Mcl-1
It is challenging to evolve fragments in the absence of detailed
structural information, so the initial exploration for Mcl-1 aimed
to generate SAR through assessment of near neighbors of the hits identified
from fragment screening that were available in the Vernalis in-house
library. This library is held on 96-well plates and where more than
20 near neighbors were present, the whole plate was screened. In total,
over 2000 compounds were screened and four hit series emerged: benzodioxanes
such as 15; aminothiazoles as exemplified by 16 (a serendipitous hit from screening a plate of compounds), pyrazolo
acids exemplified by 6 (a near neighbour of indole acid
fragment hits such as 17), and the thienopyrimidine series
which were fragment hits for both Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 (7–9, 18, 19). Preliminary exploration of the
SAR around these series was informed by the structural models for
binding derived from the NGMs (see Figure 7).

Figure 7 hMcl-1 NGM structures: molecular surface of
the Mcl-1 structure
used to generate models of compound binding with (a) selected amino
acid side chains of BIM from the 2NL9 structure shown in stick with
grey carbon atoms with the NGM-derived pose of the R-enantiomer of benzadioxane 22 (purple) (the model of
the S-enantiomer was identical except for slight
rearrangement of the benzodioxane moiety); NGM-derived pose of (b)
benzoxazine 28 in stick with green carbon atoms superposed
on 22; (c) pyraloacid 29 with orange carbons;
and of (d) aminothiazole 20 with yellow carbons.

2.10.1 Benzodioxane/Benzoxazines
Analogues
of benzodioxane fragment 15 were explored by purchase
or synthesis, leading to the optimized benoxazine 20 as
summarized in Table 1. Although 15 had very weak affinity for Mcl-1, the
carboxylic acids, such as 21, were more potent, and an
NGM was generated for the analogue 22. The model (Figure 7a) suggests dioxane
is not making specific interactions, and a nitrogen atom (i.e. benzoxazine)
could offer a vector into the S2 pocket. Although oxazine 23 binds more weakly than its equivalent dioxane, 21,
introduction of an ethyl (24) and then benzyl (25) gave increased potency with no preference for R (26) compared to S (27) stereoisomer. Additional modifications explored around
the benzene moiety of the benzoxazine and an NGM was generated for
one of the most potent compounds, the R enantiomer 28, demonstrating the success of the NGM model in the guiding
design. However, limited progress was made in improving the ligand
efficiency. Other bicyclic compounds such as benzodioxole 11 were identified under the NIH Pubchem initiative from a fluorescence
resonance energy transfer-based uHTS conducted to identify inhibitors
of the Mcl-1/NOXA or Mcl-1/Bid interaction at the Emory University
Molecular Libraries Screening Centre (bioassay 1021 and 1022 in https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioassay). 11 had some selectivity for Mcl-1 over Bcl-2 but
poor behavior in biophysical assays. The benzoxazine and benzodioxole
series of compounds were not pursued further for Mcl-1.

2.10.2 Aminothiazoles
There were aminothiazole-containing
fragment hits (such as 15—which was classified
as a benzodioxane series member), but the series actually developed
from analysis of near neighbors of other fragment hits and from serendipitous
hit identification during whole-plate screening in the near neighboring
process. Compound 16 is a typical representative of the
series which had reasonable potency and generated an NGM. A number
of analogues were explored synthetically, but the series was not progressed
because of poor physicochemical properties (mainly solubility), with
modifications to improve solubility, leading to a rapid drop in ligand
efficiency.

2.10.3 Pyrazoloacids
The commercially
available pyrazoloacids were investigated and for one (29), an NGM was obtained, which reinforced the emerging hypothesis
that the acidic moiety binds to R263, anchoring the compound with
an aromatic group pointing toward the S2 pocket. However, the series
was not progressed as most of the compounds had poor solubility and
so were difficult to characterize.

2.10.4 Indole
Acids
The fragment screen
identified a number of indole (and related fused ring) acids as hits
for Mcl-1. In addition, a patent from Abbott reported indole acids
from an HTS screen23 (subsequently optimized
to potent Mcl-1 compounds24). A number
of analogues were synthesized, including 3, which had
sufficient potency to give a crystal structure (Figure 4) and showed some selectivity for Mcl-1 over
Bcl-2. This provided a compound that could be used to validate the
structural biology and biophysical assays for the project. However,
as well as not being novel, the series showed very high plasma protein
binding and so was not pursued further.

2.10.5 Thienopyrimidines
The initial
screen of the Vernalis compound collection for near neighbors of fragment
hits (as described above) was performed before the Bcl-2 project was
underway and identified some thienopyrimidines (such as 18 and 19) with activity in the FP assay. However, this
series was not pursued initially as other series looked more promising.
When the additional thienopyrimidines were identified in the Bcl-2
project, it was found that this series had tractable SAR, selectivity,
and opportunities for optimization against Mcl-1. The thienopyrimidines
were therefore adopted as the lead series, and the optimization from
the initial hit to a cell-active, high-affinity, and selective Mcl-1
inhibitor is described elsewhere.12

3 Discussion
The discovery of the hit compounds
that led to the Servier/Vernalis
clinical candidates for each of the Bcl-210 and Mcl-111 proteins provides an example
of how structure-based drug discovery can be enabled for the challenging
task of inhibiting a protein–protein interaction. The approach
taken requires the extension and integration of established techniques
from across many different disciplines such as protein production,
assay development, biophysical measurement of protein–ligand
interactions, X-ray crystallography, and NMR spectroscopy.

The
essential requirement for any structure-based drug discovery
approach is the production of protein material suitable for a range
of biophysical and functional assays. At the time we initiated our
Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 projects, there were published constructs that had
been successfully used for NMR-based structural-based discovery for
Bcl-26 and some preliminary structural
studies of Mcl-1.17 These published constructs
did not have the required stability or solubility in our hands, and
so, a number of modifications were made. For Bcl-2, the main improvement
came from structure-guided modification of the surface of the protein
to alter physical properties, using information from available crystal
structures of the more tractable homolog, Bcl-xL. The Mcl-1
project required more substantial protein engineering. Although variations
in the purification tag (and cleavage approach) generated human Mcl-1
(hMcl-1) protein suitable for FP assay and crystallography, the protein
did not have the solubility and stability required for the longer
timescale of 1H, 15N NMR experiments, and so,
mouse Mcl-1 (mMcl-1) was used.

The biophysical and structural
methods used in these early hit
identification studies included a number of mutations in the protein
to improve properties such as solubility, stability, and crystallzsation.
Although SAR was mainly derived from the FP assay against the wild-type
protein, there is a danger that these mutations might lead to anomalies
in the biophysical or structural data generated. For Bcl-2, the profile
of binding to different BH3-only peptides (Table S1) gave confidence that the Bcl-2#3 construct was appropriate
for the biophysical assays. The difference in sequence between mouse
and human Mcl-1 was not considered for the early hit compounds reported
here. This was an issue for compounds later in optimization (9-fold
higher affinity for a published compound in human vs mouse11), probably because of the L246F mutation which
affects compounds binding deep into the S2 pocket. However, this interaction
is not exploited in the early hit compounds.

The use of several
assay formats can aid establishing reliable
measurements of affinity for the interaction of weakly binding compounds
to proteins such as Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 where there are large hydrophobic
clefts, which could promote poor compound behavior. For example, we
found considerable variability in the measurement of affinity using
an early version of the FP assay with values that were inconsistent
with measurements by other biophysical methods. Each of the assay
formats has different dynamic ranges and different requirements for
the protein construct, for the behavior of the compound and protein
in solution (solubility, aggregation) and the amount of the reagent
required. Most of the cross-validation of binding during hit identification
and hit optimization used 1H, 15N HSQC measurements
of affinity (to a Kd of around 10 μM)
with either ITC or SPR used to measure binding affinity of more potent
compounds to these proteins.10,11 The 1H, 15N HSQC measurements are the most robust as they directly
measure the protein and ligand state. Each experiment confirms the
solubility and concentration of the protein and ligand, the folded
state of the protein and the integrity of the ligand. In addition,
the measurements can give an indication of which site the ligand is
binding to. There are varying issues with the other assay formats,
including spectral interference with the FP assay, solubility for
ITC, and solubility and nonspecific binding to the chip surface, giving
nonstoichiometric responses for SPR. Such anomalies can be particularly
acute for low-affinity compounds. The consistency of compound behavior
in the assays was one of the contributing factors to selecting thienopyrimidines
as hits to be progressed for Mcl-1.

A number of groups have
reported25−28 on how the number of hits from
a fragment screen provides an indication of the intrinsic ability
of the protein to bind small molecules (sometimes referred to as druggability;
the phrase ligandability is more appropriate29). The earliest example of this is from the Abbott group.26 Our own analysis of fragment screening campaigns
some years ago25 highlighted that a low
hit rate in fragment screening gave an indication of how difficult
it would be to identify lead-like compounds for a target. As discussed
in that paper,25 this could be due to the
nature of the protein interaction surface (such as the essentially
flat, hydrophobic cleft of β-catenin, PPI-3 in that paper) or
the intrinsic flexibility of the binding site, providing an entropic
penalty for any ligand binding such as for the ATPase site on Hsp70.
The number of validated fragment hits for Bcl-2 (24) and Mcl-1 (39)
is higher than the number which could be anticipated for a fairly
large, hydrophobic cleft. However, the NGMs (e.g., Figure 6) suggest that many of the
hits exploit the charged residue in the center of the cleft (R146
for Bcl-2 and R263 for hMcl-1), as confirmed in subsequent crystal
structures. The difference in the hit rate from the fragment screen
between the two targets could be due to different intrinsic flexibilities
and ligandability of the proteins. There are indications from crystal
structures that Bcl-2 is more flexible than Mcl-1. The root-mean-square
deviation (rmsd) for least squares overlap on main chain atoms for
the published crystal structure of Bcl-2 bound to BAX (PDB code: 2XA0) compared to the
structure bound to S 55746 (6GL810) is 3.6 Å; this
contrasts with an rmsd of 1.7 Å for Mcl-1 bound to Bim (2NL9) compared to the
structure bound to S 63845 (5LOF11). The challenge of identifying
lead candidates may also be reflected in the different numbers of
reported clinical candidates (including our own series, 2 for Bcl-24 and at least 5 for Mcl-17,9,30).

The crystal structure of Bcl-xL was determined some
time ago,15 and it was our experience (not
reported here) that we were able to determine many crystal structures
of this BH3 family protein in complex with both pro-apoptotic peptides
and with various ligands. However, there remain relatively few published
crystal structures for Bcl-2. The early drug discovery relied on NMR
structure determination,16 and it was our
experience that crystal structures with small molecule ligands were
only obtained once high affinity binding had been achieved (as shown
in Figure 3, see also
ref (10)). For Mcl-1,
it was relatively straightforward to obtain crystal structures with
peptides bound (as shown in Figures 1 and 3), but again crystallization
of the native hMcl-1 complexed with small molecules required high-affinity
ligands.11 For both proteins, we were unable
to obtain crystals of the apo protein, perhaps because the ligand
was required to stabilize a conformation of the protein which crystallized.
One recent innovation is to fuse Mcl-1 with MBP.31 This stabilizes the protein and generates crystals with
the ligand binding pocket available for soaking of ligands. Using
a similar strategy, we were able to obtain many crystal structures
of MBP-Mcl-1 with both low- (Figure S6)
and high-affinity11 compounds bound.

As discussed, the early structure-based design work at Abbott on
Bcl-2 relied on structures determined by NMR spectroscopy. Such NMR
structures require considerable effort in labeling with multiple isotopes
(2H, 13C, 15N), the collection of
many 2D NMR spectra, and the time-consuming assignment of each peak
in the spectrum to individual nuclei. Once assigned, NOE experiments
can then identify specific protein–protein and protein–ligand
interactions from which a full structure determination can be achieved.
This takes some time and in addition, optimization of the ligand can
lead to changes in the spectrum which require reassignment to be performed.
We adopted an NGM approach. This begins with generating computational
models that reflect the possible conformations for the protein and
a cascade of rigid followed by flexible docking protocols to generate
putative binding poses for the ligand in the protein binding site.
The NMR experiments do not require full assignment but generate sufficient
information to identify which nuclei in the ligand are interacting
with which nuclei on the protein. These distances are then used to
select the model for the ligand binding to the protein from the docking
poses.

The NGM approach was initially validated by the compound
design
illustrated in Figure 6. The NGM of a fragment-derived compound (11) was used
to design a high-affinity compound (14) which merged
the fragment with part of an established Bcl-2 binding motif (13). The subsequent crystal structure confirmed that the NGM
had successfully identified the correct binding mode for 11. NGMs were generated for the various hit series for Mcl-1 and can
assist in optimization, as shown for the benzodioxane to benzoxazine
optimization in Figure 4b. However, there are limits to the extent to which the NGM binding
modes can be used to rationalize observed affinity and selectivity.
An NGM was generated for the thienopyrimidine 30 binding
to Bcl-2. As can be seen in Figure S6,
there is a significant difference in the binding pose of the central
thienopyrimidine motif seen in this NGM compared to that seen in the
later determination of the crystal structure of the closely related
compound, 9, determined in MBP-hMcl-1 (note that the
pose of the thienopyrimidine core in 9 was retained into
the optimized compounds such as S 6384511). It may be that compounds binding with around 200 μM (30) to 500 μM (9) affinity do adopt different
conformations, for example, to accommodate the additional aromatic
ring in the naphthalene of 30 and the NGM is reporting
an incorrect pose, or the change in orientation is due to differences
between Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 in this pocket. Because of this uncertainty,
it was difficult to provide a structural rationale for the consistent
selectivity for Mcl-1 over Bcl-2 seen for the initial thienopyrimidine
series. However, the initial SAR for this series (described elsewhere12) was sufficient to guide early optimization
without the support of structural information.

The fragment
screening against each of the targets identified several
hit series. The consistent feature in most of the fragment hits for
both of the proteins is a negative charge which binds the charged
arginine side chain in Mcl-1 (R263) or Bcl-2 (R146), which “anchors”
the compound as seen in Figures 4 and 7, and this is retained
in the optimized compounds such as 1 for Bcl-2 and S
6384511 for Mcl-1. However, the fragment
hit 11 demonstrates that small uncharged compounds can
bind to Mcl-1, as also seen for the early hit 2 binding
to Bcl-2 and retained in the optimized compound S 55746.10 Although the initial fragment hits did not lead
directly to the lead compounds for either of these targets, the experience
with the fragments allowed the assays and platform to be established
and validated, such that good quality hits could be recognized when
they become available.

4 Conclusions
We have demonstrated how the
combination of biophysical and structural
methods enabled structure-based discovery platforms to be built for
each of the Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 proteins. Such target enablement is increasingly
a barrier to establish drug discovery for many of the recently proposed
target classes identified by modern “omics” technologies.
Also, as well as the increasing number of protein–protein interaction
targets,2 similar challenges exist for
large multidomain, multiprotein complexes and intrinsically disordered
proteins. Establishing such a platform can take some time and resource—a
tool compound is usually needed to validate the assays, but the assays
are needed to identify the tool compound. However, such investment
is needed to identify compounds of sufficient potency, selectivity,
and cellular activity to demonstrate whether inhibition (or activation)
delivers the expected effect on the biology of the system. The thienopyrimidine
series provided compounds which characterize the effect of Mcl-1 inhibition
on cells.11,12

5 Experimental Section
5.1 Materials
Peptides were obtained
from Biopeptide LLC. The peptide F-Puma (31) was used
for assays.

Puma has the sequence RGEEEQWAREIGAQLRRMADDLN

Puma-S has the sequence EEEQWAREIGAQLRRMADD

Peptide Bim has
the sequence DMRPEIWIAQELRRIGDEFWAYYARR

Peptide Noxa-B has the
sequence PADLKDECAQLRRIGDKVNL

5.2 Methods
5.2.1 Protein Production—Bcl-2
Codon-optimized genes
encoding respective Bcl-2 proteins were synthesized
(DNA2.0, now ATUM) and ligated to pET28a (Bcl-2#2) or pET21a (Bcl-2#3
and hBcl-2) between the NdeI and XhoI sites. The sequences of the
proteins are given in the Supporting Information.

5.2.2 Expression of Bcl-2 Proteins
Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) pLysS cells were transformed
with respective Bcl-2-encoding plasmid and cultured at 37 °C
in 10 flasks each containing 1 L Luria–Bertani (LB) supplemented
with 50 μg/mL of kanamycin (for Bcl-2#2) or 100 μg/mL
of ampicillin (for Bcl2#3 and hBcl-2). Once the culture had reached
an OD600 of 0.6, 1 M IPTG was added to each flask to induce
expression (1 mM final concentration). The cells were pelleted after
16 h at 18 °C via centrifugation (10 000 rcf, 20 min)
and stored at −80 °C. For the production of labeled protein
for NMR studies, complex M9 media supplemented with 13C-labeled d-glucose and/or 15N-labeled ammonium sulphate was
used instead of LB.

5.2.3 Purification of Bcl-2
Proteins
Cell pellets were resuspended in 200 mL of lysis
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl,
500 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM DTT, 10% (w/v) glycerol, and pH 8.0) containing
Roche Complete ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-free protease
inhibitor cocktail and DNase I (Sigma). The resuspended cells were
lysed by mechanical homogenization. The lysed cells were centrifuged
(41 000 rcf, 60 min) and the supernatant was applied to a 5
mL of HisTrap FF column (GE Healthcare) using an AKTA FPLC system
(GE Healthcare). Column-bound protein was washed with lysis buffer
containing 25 mM imidazole and then eluted with lysis buffer containing
500 mM imidazole. The eluted protein was then applied to a HiLoad
26/60 Superdex 200pg column (GE Healthcare) in sizing buffer (20 mM
Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and pH 8.0) and stored
at −80 °C.

5.2.4 Protein Production—Mcl-1
Human Mcl-1 (hMcl-1) and mouse Mcl-1 (mMcl-1) were generated by
gene
synthesis (Celtek BioScience, TN, USA/ATUM, CA, USA). hMcl-1#1 was
generated by a DNA shuffling technique of fragments from hMcl-1 and
mMcl-1. These genes were introduced into a number of different expression
vectors as listed in the Supporting Information.

5.2.5 Expression of Mcl-1 Proteins
The
Mcl-1 constructs were expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) pLysS. For material that required isotopic labeling,
EPBNF (EnPresso, Germany) or M9 media was supplemented with 15N (NH4)2SO4 and/or 13C d-glucose (CIL, MA, USA).

5.2.6 Purification
of the MBP-hMcl-1 Protein
The expression and purification
of this protein are described elsewhere11

5.2.7 Purification of Other Mcl-1 Proteins
Purification involved either Ni2+ affinity followed by
ion-exchange/size-exclusion chromatography or initial capture by GST
affinity chromatography. Where needed, the resulting protein was incubated
with either PreScission protease (GE Healthcare, USA) or thrombin
to yield untagged proteins. Cleaved material was further purified
by either ion-exchange or size-exclusion chromatography.

5.2.8 NMR Experiments to Characterize Binding
All NMR spectra
were acquired at 298 K on a Bruker AVANCE 600 MHz
spectrometer with either a TCI or a QCI-F cryogenically cooled probe,
including a z-axis pulse-field gradient coil. Dissociation
equilibrium constants (KD) of compounds
were determined by monitoring the chemical shift perturbations from
the acquisition of a series of 2D 1H, 15N HSQC
spectra with increasing compound concentration and analyzed with MNOVA
Binding (MNova, Mestrelab Research, Santiago de Compostela, Spain)
using a single binding site model. Titrations were acquired on 50
μM mMcl-1 in MES pH 6.0 buffer or 20 mM Tris pH 7.8, 50 mM NaCl,
2 mM DTT, and on 30–40 μM Bcl-2#3 in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5.

5.2.9 Assignment/NOE Detection for NGMs
The
backbone and side-chain resonances of apo Bcl-2#3 (concentration
and buffer) and apo mMcl-1 (concentration and buffer) were achieved
using three-dimensional HNCO, HNCA, HN(CA)CB, CBCA(CO)NH, and HBHA(CBCACO)NH
and HCCH-TOCSY experiments and analyzed using CCPN Analysis.32 For each NGM, the HSQC titration was followed
to achieve saturation of the protein with the ligand. For ligands
in slow to medium exchange, the collection of three-dimensional experiments
were performed to reassign the spectra. For ligands in fast exchange,
the resonance assignments were extrapolated from those of the apo
protein by comparing two-dimensional 1H, 13C
HSQC spectra at increasing ligand concentrations. Ligand–protein
NOEs were detected from a 3D 1H, 13C-edited, 13C/15N-filtered NOESY acquired with a mixing time
of either 120 or 150 ms on 200 μM mMcl-1 in 50 mM MES/bistris
pH 6.0 or 200 μM Bcl-2#3 in 20 mM MES/bistris pH 7.4.

5.2.10 Calculation of NGMs for Mcl-1
Molecular modeling was
conducted either with the molecular operating
environment (MOE) (http://www.chemcomp.com) or Schrodinger (http://www.schrodinger.com) suites of software. Analysis of the available BH3 public structures
upon project inception already suggested a significant conformational
change between a peptide bound compared to a compound-bound BH3 protein.
However, there were only peptide-bound Mcl-1 structures at the time
this project was started. To address the possibility of protein flexibility,
we first carried out an MD simulation of Mcl-1 (details below), and
then, a protein conformational ensemble was prepared for Mcl-1 for
NGM derivation. When enumerating such ensemble of conformations, we
focused particularly on movements of helix 4 suggested by the internal
MD simulation analysis of Mcl-1 and also the side chain orientations
of the residues involved in the NOEs. In addition, to expand the diversity
of protein conformations, homology models based on ligand-bound Bcl-2/Bcl-xL structures were built and added to the ensemble. The compound
of interest was then docked into all enumerated protein conformations.
The resulting docking models were visually inspected, and the best
three docking models in terms of satisfying the observed NOEs were
then subjected to the induced-fit docking protocol. A set of docking
models from fixed-protein and induced-fit docking was examined side
by side to nominate a final model.

5.2.11 Mcl-1
MD Simulation
The published
structure of hMcl-1 bound to BIM (pdb code 2PQK(13)) was chosen
to start the MD simulation for Mcl-1. The missing loop connecting
helix 1 and helix 2 was rebuilt with MOE guided by the structure of
mMcl-1 bound to NOXA the peptide (pdb code 2JM6(33)). The rebuilt
Mcl-1 protein was prepared using Schrodinger’s Protein Preparation
Wizard,34 which added hydrogens, assigned
appropriate protonation and rotamer states for residues, and performed
restrained minimization. The simulation system of apo hMcl-1 (starting
from BIM bound conformation) was built with the Schrodinger’s
Maestro interface in the NPT ensemble, with explicit
TIP3P waters and counter ions added to neutralize the overall charge
of the system. The default setup parameters were kept unless mentioned
specifically here. Periodic boundary conditions were applied, and
long-range electrostatic interactions were treated with Ewald sums.35 The MDs were performed with Desmond36 at a constant temperature (300 K) and pressure
(1.01 bar), and coordinates were saved every 4.8 ps, keeping the default
settings. The AMBER ff98SB force field37 was used for a 50 ns simulation. The simulation results were analyzed
with tools from Schrodinger and MOE. A set of diverse conformations
and 2PQK were
included in the final protein conformational ensemble for NGM enumeration.

5.2.12 Mcl-1 Homology Models Based on Bcl-2/Bcl-xL
The experimental ligand-bound Bcl-xL structures
(pdb codes: 2O1Y, 2O2F, 2O21, 2W3L and 2YXJ) and ligand-bound
Bcl-2 structure (compound 1) were used as templates.
The sequence alignments and model building were performed using MOE
with AMBER ff99 force-field37 and generalized
Born solvation.38 Up to 10 main-chain models
were built for each template.

5.2.13 Docking
Details for Mcl-1
Prior
to docking, compounds were prepared with LigPrep from Schrodinger
and docking grids were generated by Glide39,40 on all protein conformations. The default parameters were used.
Compounds were modeled in each of the protein conformations using
the Glide SP protocol from Schrodinger, generating up to 10 poses
while everything else was kept at default. The selected docking models
with reasonable NOE matching were subjected to Schrodinger’s
Induced-Fit docking protocol.41 All the
resulting docking models were visually inspected to propose a final
model.

5.2.14 Computational Work for Bcl-2 NGMs
The approach used to enumerate Bcl-2 NGMs is similar to that described
for Mcl-above. One difference was the availability of ligand-bound
Bcl-xL experimental structures at the time of the project.
Bcl-xL is highly analogous to Bcl-2 in sequences, and the
bound ligands also inhibit Bcl-2. This allows construction of Bcl-2
ligand-bound homology models, which enhances the diversity of the
protein conformational ensemble but also allows for anticipating Bcl-2
flexibility in a more defined manner. The available experimental structures
suggest that the main flexibility of Bcl-xL and likely
for Bcl-2 comes from helix 3 upon ligand binding. Therefore, we explored
helix 3 mobility when generating a Bcl-2 conformational ensemble.
The compound of interest was subjected to the same docking protocol
as Mcl-1, fixed-protein followed by induced-fit docking. Inspection
of selected docking poses led to final models used for medicinal chemistry.

5.2.15 Bcl-2 Ligand Bound Homology Models
The
experimental ligand-bound Bcl-xL structures (PDB codes: 1YSG, 1YSI, 1YSN, 2O1Y, 2O2F, 2O2M, 2O2N, 2O21, 2O22, 2W3L, and 2YXJ) were extracted
from PDB to use as templates. The alignments and model building were
performed using MOE with AMBER ff99 force-field37 and generalized Born solvation.38 Up to 10 main-chain models were built for each template. A ligand-bound
Bcl-2 X-ray structure (compound 1) was later determined
internally which validated the homology model approach.

5.2.16 Docking Details for Bcl-2
Prior
to docking, compounds were prepared with LigPrep from Schrodinger
and docking grids were generated by Glide39,40 on selected Bcl-2 protein conformations with default parameters.
The Glide SP protocol in the Schrodinger suite was employed to model
compounds in selected Bcl-2 protein conformations, generating up to
10 poses per compound per protein conformation. The docking models
with reasonable NOE matching were subjected to Schrodinger’s
Induced-Fit docking protocol.41 All the
resulting docking models were visually inspected to propose a final
model.

5.3 Assays
5.3.1 F-Puma Assay
The assays were carried
out in black-walled, flat-bottomed, low binding, 384-well plates.
Compound [final conc. 5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)] was mixed in buffer
(10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, 150 mM
NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20, and pH 7.4), containing 10 nM compound 31 (F-Puma) and either 10 nM His-TEV-hMcl-1 or hBcl-2. Assay
plates were incubated ∼2 hours at room temperature and FP measured
on a Synergy 2 reader (Ex. 528 nm, Em. 640 nm, cut off 510 nm). The
binding of increasing doses of compound was expressed as a percentage
reduction in mP compared to the window established between “DMSO-only”
and “total inhibition” controls (10–30 μM
Puma). The inhibitory concentrations that gave a 50% reduction in
mP (IC50) were determined, from an 11-point dose response
curves, in XL-Fit using a 4-Parameter Logistic Model (Sigmoidal Dose–Response
Model). Ki was subsequently calculated
as previously described.42 All FP data
reported in this publication are the average of at least three determinations.
For most compounds, the standard deviation in eKi values were within 15% of the average; for some, the standard
deviation was 40%.

5.3.2 Isothermal Titration
Calorimetry
Double His-tag TEV hMcl-1 was dialyzed prior
to use in 2 L of 50
mM Phosphate, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5% MTG (v/v) 1 mM EDTA at pH 7.4 for 3
h at room temperature. The protein was dialyzed using a 3.5 K molecular
weight cut-off Slide-A-Lyzer cassette. The protein solution was recovered,
spin-filtered through a 0.22 μM frit, and the resulting protein
quantified by UV absorbance at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient
of 20 970 M–1 cm–1. 500
mL of dialysis buffer was retained (remainder used to rinse out SCHOT
bottle) and degassed for a minimum of 30 min under vacuum with constant
stirring. Experiments were performed on a GE ITC200 instrument. 100
μM compound was titrated from the syringe into the cell containing
10 μM protein. The solutions were carefully matched to ensure
same solvent and buffer conditions were present in both the syringe
and cell (this is to minimize heat of dilution effects). The final
solution was the dialysis buffer plus 1% DMSO. The experiment was
performed over 25 injections with stirring at 1000 rpm, gain setting
high, and at 25 °C. Pure water was used in the reference cell.
The first injection was 0.4 μL with a duration of 1 s with a
gap of 150 s until the further 24 injections of 1.6 μL with
a duration 6.1 and a 240 s interval between injections. Data were
analyzed using the vendor supplied software, PEAQ-ITC Analysis Software.
The data model used was the single site model. The data shown are
the average of two independent experiments.

5.3.3 SPR—Direct
Binding
Experiments
were carried out on a Biacore T100 instrument (GE Healthcare) at 25
°C in HBS-P buffer at pH 7.4 supplemented with 1 mM TCEP and
1% DMSO. Single his-tagged Bcl-2#2 or double His-TEV-hMcl-1 proteins
were immobilized on Series S NTA chips. The surface in the experimental
channel was consecutively treated with 500 μM NiCl2 and 50 nM protein. Reference surfaces without immobilized Ni2+ served as controls for nonspecific binding and refractive
index changes. The protein surface was regenerated between experiments
with 0.35 M EDTA and 40% DMSO (both for 1 min, 15 μL min–1). Serial dilutions of the compound in the running
buffer were injected over the surface. All sample measurements were
performed at a flow rate of 30 μL min–1. Data
processing was performed using BIAevaluation 1 (BIAcore GE Healthcare
Bio-SciencesCorp) software. Sensorgrams were double-referenced prior
to global fitting of the concentration series to a 1:1 binding model.

5.4 Fragment Screening
The Vernalis fragment
library of approximately 1000 compounds43 was screened in mixtures of eight compounds per sample on a Bruker
DRX600 equipped with a BACS-120 sample changer. Mcl-1 samples contained
10 μM hMcl-1 protein and 500 μM of each compound, in 20
mM tris pH 7.4 50 mM NaCl, 100 μM DTT, and 10% D2O. Bcl-2 samples contained 12 μM Bcl-2#2 and 500 μM of
each compound in 50 mM tris pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 250 μM DTT,
500 μM EDTA, and 10% D2O. 1H 1D, STD,44 the water ligand observed via gradient spectroscopy
(waterLOGSY),45 and relaxation-filtered
spectra46 were acquired on all samples
under ICONNMR automation, using excitation sculpting to suppress the
solvent peak. Excitation sculpting used 2 ms square pulses with γB1/2Π
≈ 250 Hz. A spectral width of 12 376 Hz was used in
all experiments, and all experiments were acquired at 298 K. Competition
was determined by addition of the 25 μM NoxaB peptide (Mcl-1)
or 500 μM Puma peptide (Bcl-2), following acquisition of the
set of NMR experiments for each sample, in order to confirm specific
binding at or near to the active site. Data were analyzed as described
previously47—the spectra were analyzed
manually and competitive hits confirmed as singletons.

5.5 X-ray Crystal Structure Determination
5.5.1 Crystallisation
of Bcl-2
The hBcl-2#3
protein was used for the crystal structure of Bcl-2 complexed with
compounds 1, 13, and 14, and
hBcl-2#3′ was used for compound 2. In all cases,
the protein was initially complexed with the ligand by mixing protein
(4 mg/mL, 0.2 mM in 20 mM Tris buffer pH 8.0, 0.2 M NaCl, and 1 mM
DTT) with 10-fold excess of compound from 200 mM stock DMSO solution
and incubated at 4 °C for 1 h and then concentrated to about
9 mg/mL (0.4 mM) before being used for crystallization with commercial
screens. For Bcl-2 in complex with compound 1, crystals
appeared after four weeks in a droplet containing 1.4 M sodium/potassium
phosphate, pH 5.6. The bipyramidal crystal (with edge of ∼0.2
mm) was immersed in cryo-protection solution (1 M Na/K phosphate pH
5.6, 30% glycerol) and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. For Bcl-2
in complex with Puma-S, crystals appeared overnight and grew up to
∼0.2 mm in the longest dimension over the following three days.
Crystals grown from 0.2 M MgCl2, 25% PegMME 2k, 0.1 M Na
acetate buffer pH 5.5 were prepared for data collection by cryo-protection
(immersion in mother liquor enriched in Peg1k by 10%) and flash-frozen
in liquid nitrogen. For Bcl-2 in complex with compound 2, crystals were obtained from 0.2 M Ca acetate, 15% Peg4k, and 0.1
M Tris pH 7.5. Crystals were harvested, cryoprotected (immersion in
mother liquor enriched in Peg1k by 20%), and flash-frozen in liquid
nitrogen. For Bcl-2 in complex with 13, crystals appeared
overnight in a droplet containing 0.2 M NaCl, 25% Peg3350, and 0.1
M Bis-Tris buffer pH 5.5. Bipyramidal crystal was immersed in cryo-protection
solution (70% crystallisation buffer, 30% glycerol) and flash-frozen
in liquid nitrogen. For Bcl-2 in complex with 14, crystals
were grown from solution containing 0.15 M KSCN, 20% Peg1500, and
0.1 M Na acetate buffer pH 5.5.

5.5.2 Crystallisation
of Mcl-1
The hMcl-1
protein was used for determination of the structure with BIM. Mcl-1
solution at ∼10 mg/mL was mixed with 10-fold excess of the
BIM peptide (water solution) and incubated overnight at 277 K. The
formed complex was used for crystallization as described in 2NL9.17 (0.2 M Zn acetate, 0.2 M Imidazole pH 5.75, room temperature).
hMcl-1#1 was used for the structure with Puma. Mcl-1 solution at ∼10
mg/mL was mixed with 10-fold excess of the Puma peptide (water solution)
and incubated overnight at 277 K. The formed complex was mixed with
equal volume of the crystallization reservoir (0.1 M imidazole pH
7.0, 0.1 M Zn acetate, 25% Peg3350, 5% ethylene glycol) in a hanging
drop, vapor diffusion technique. Elongated needles appeared overnight
and were harvested in 2–4 days. MBP-hMcl-1 was used for the
determination of the structure of 9 bound to Mcl-1. Structure
determination was performed as described elsewhere11 for S64385 bound to MBP-hMcl-1 PDB code 5LOF). His-thrombin-hMcl-1
was used for structure determination with 3. Crystals
were grown in solution containing equal parts of protein solution
(∼5–10 mg/mL) mixed an appropriate compound (with 3–5
fold excess) and crystallization reservoir solution (1.8 M ammonium
citrate pH 7.0) in the hanging drop format of the vapor diffusion
technique, using 24-well Linbro plates.

5.5.3 X-ray
Data Collection
Suitable
crystals for data collection were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen
after cryoprotection using the crystallization reservoir enriched
in ethylene glycol (Mcl-1) and Peg1k or glycerol (Bcl-2). Table S2 summarizes the data collection statistics,
with data obtained from ESRF and dynamic light scattering synchrotrons
or single crystal X-ray diffraction equipment consisting of rotating
anode generator RUH300 coupled with a Raxis-IV++ image plate detector
(Rigaku MSC instrument installed at Vernalis, Cambridge, UK). Data
were processed and scaled with DENZO/Scalepack package48 for all structures except Bcl-2 with 30 which
used d*TREK.49

5.5.4 X-ray
Structure Determination
All
software was from the CCP4 package50 unless
explicitly mentioned. The structure of Mcl-1 complexed with the BIM
peptide was solved by molecular replacement using MolRep51 using the published structure of Mcl-1 complexed
with the BIM peptide (PDB code: 2NL9(17)) as a model.
Subsequent Mcl-1 complexes were solved using the Mcl-1 model stripped
of the peptide. The structure of the Bcl-2 complex with compound 1 was solved by molecular replacement using MolRep using the
published crystal structure of Bcl-xL complexed with ABT-737
(PDB code 2YXJ(19)) stripped of the compound and solvent.
From initial electron density maps, it became apparent that 1 is present in the binding site of Bcl-2. Initial maps allowed
extension of the refinement resolution range and correct placement
of side chains. At this point, differences between the Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL sequence were clearly visible, and appropriate changes were
made in the model. In all cases, the refined structure of the relevant
protein (stripped of the compound) was used as a starting model for
solving by molecular replacement subsequent structures of the complexes
of Mcl-1 or Bcl-2 with ligands. After structure solution, several
cycles of refinement were conducted with Refmac552 software from the ccp4 package, alternating with manual
rebuilding using the program COOT.53 Compounds
were modeled in the surplus peaks in difference Fourier electron density
maps. Topology files for the ligands were created by ProDrg54 (also from ccp4 package). Refinement statistics
for each new structure reported in this paper are in Table S2.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00611.Supplementary
figures and tables and description of
compound synthesis (PDF)

Atomic coordinates and experimental data for all X-ray
crystal structures and the atomic coordinates for NMR-guided models
(PDB)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00611_si_001.pdf

 ao9b00611_si_002.pdb

 Author Present Address
⊥ Sygnature Discovery, Discovery Building, BioCity, Pennyfoot Street,
Nottingham, NG1 1GR, U.K.

Author Contributions
J.B.M. and
J.D. contributed equally. The manuscript was written through contributions
of all the authors. All the authors have given approval to the final
version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Heather Simmonite and Loic Le
Strat for analytical support at Vernalis and the industry liaison
teams at the ESRF and Diamond synchrotrons for their help and assistance
with X-ray data collection.

Abbreviations
AISaffinity in solution

BadBcl-2-associated death
factor

BakBcl-2
homologous antagonist killer

BaxBcl-2-associated X protein

Bcl-2B-cell lymphoma 2

Bcl-wBcl-2-like protein 2

Bcl-xLB-cell lymphoma extra
large

Bfl-1Bcl-2-related
protein A1

BH3Bcl-2
homology domain 3

BimBcl-2-like protein 11

FPfluorescence polarization

Hrkactivator of apoptosis Harakiri

ITCisothermal titration calorimetry

Mcl-1myeloid chronic
leukemia 1

Noxaphorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced protein 1

Pumap53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis

SPRsurface plasmon
resonance
==== Refs
References
Juin P. ; Geneste O. ; Gautier F. ; Depil S. ; Campone M. 
Decoding and
unlocking the BCL-2 dependency of cancer cells . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2013 , 13 , 455 –465 . 10.1038/nrc3538 .23783119 
Wells J. A. ; McClendon C. L. 
Reaching
for high-hanging fruit in drug discovery at
protein-protein interfaces . Nature 
2007 , 450 , 1001 –1009 . 10.1038/nature06526 .18075579 
Yap J. L. ; Chen L. ; Lanning M. E. ; Fletcher S. 
Expanding
the Cancer
Arsenal with Targeted Therapies: Disarmament of the Antiapoptotic
Bcl-2 Proteins by Small Molecules . J. Med. Chem. 
2017 , 60 , 821 –838 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01888 .27749061 
Souers A. J. ; Leverson J. D. ; Boghaert E. R. ; Ackler S. L. ; Catron N. D. ; Chen J. ; Dayton B. D. ; Ding H. ; Enschede S. H. ; Fairbrother W. J. ; Huang D. C. S. ; Hymowitz S. G. ; Jin S. ; Khaw S. L. ; Kovar P. J. ; Lam L. T. ; Lee J. ; Maecker H. L. ; Marsh K. C. ; Mason K. D. ; Mitten M. J. ; Nimmer P. M. ; Oleksijew A. ; Park C. H. ; Park C.-M. ; Phillips D. C. ; Roberts A. W. ; Sampath D. ; Seymour J. F. ; Smith M. L. ; Sullivan G. M. ; Tahir S. K. ; Tse C. ; Wendt M. D. ; Xiao Y. ; Xue J. C. ; Zhang H. ; Humerickhouse R. A. ; Rosenberg S. H. ; Elmore S. W. 
ABT-199, a potent
and selective BCL-2 inhibitor, achieves antitumor activity while sparing
platelets . Nat. Med. 
2013 , 19 , 202 –208 . 10.1038/nm.3048 .23291630 
Tse C. ; Shoemaker A. R. ; Adickes J. ; Anderson M. G. ; Chen J. ; Jin S. ; Johnson E. F. ; Marsh K. C. ; Mitten M. J. ; Nimmer P. ; Roberts L. ; Tahir S. K. ; Xiao Y. ; Yang X. ; Zhang H. ; Fesik S. ; Rosenberg S. H. ; Elmore S. W. 
ABT-263: a potent and orally bioavailable Bcl-2 family
inhibitor . Cancer Res. 
2008 , 68 , 3421 –3428 . 10.1158/0008-5472.can-07-5836 .18451170 
Oltersdorf T. ; Elmore S. W. ; Shoemaker A. R. ; Armstrong R. C. ; Augeri D. J. ; Belli B. A. ; Bruncko M. ; Deckwerth T. L. ; Dinges J. ; Hajduk P. J. ; Joseph M. K. ; Kitada S. ; Korsmeyer S. J. ; Kunzer A. R. ; Letai A. ; Li C. ; Mitten M. J. ; Nettesheim D. G. ; Ng S. ; Nimmer P. M. ; O’Connor J. M. ; Oleksijew A. ; Petros A. M. ; Reed J. C. ; Shen W. ; Tahir S. K. ; Thompson C. B. ; Tomaselli K. J. ; Wang B. ; Wendt M. D. ; Zhang H. ; Fesik S. W. ; Rosenberg S. H. 
An inhibitor of Bcl-2 family proteins induces regression
of solid tumours . Nature 
2005 , 435 , 677 –681 . 10.1038/nature03579 .15902208 
Johannes J. W. ; Bates S. ; Beigie C. ; Belmonte M. A. ; Breen J. ; Cao S. ; Centrella P. A. ; Clark M. A. ; Cuozzo J. W. ; Dumelin C. E. ; Ferguson A. D. ; Habeshian S. ; Hargreaves D. ; Joubran C. ; Kazmirski S. ; Keefe A. D. ; Lamb M. L. ; Lan H. ; Li Y. ; Ma H. ; Mlynarski S. ; Packer M. J. ; Rawlins P. B. ; Robbins D. W. ; Shen H. ; Sigel E. A. ; Soutter H. H. ; Su N. ; Troast D. M. ; Wang H. ; Wickson K. F. ; Wu C. ; Zhang Y. ; Zhao Q. ; Zheng X. ; Hird A. W. 
Structure Based
Design of Non-Natural Peptidic Macrocyclic Mcl-1 Inhibitors . ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 239 –244 . 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.6b00464 .28197319 
Zhao B. ; Sensintaffar J. ; Bian Z. ; Belmar J. ; Lee T. ; Olejniczak E. T. ; Fesik S. W. 
Structure of a Myeloid cell leukemia-1
(Mcl-1) inhibitor bound to drug site 3 of Human Serum Albumin . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2017 , 25 , 3087 –3092 . 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.03.060 .28428041 
Caenepeel S. R. ; Belmontes B. ; Sun J. ; Coxon A. ; Moody G. ; Hughes P. E. 
Abstract 2027: Preclinical evaluation of AMG 176, a
novel, potent and selective Mcl-1 inhibitor with robust anti-tumor
activity in Mcl-1 dependent cancer models . Cancer
Res. 
2017 , 77 , 2027 10.1158/1538-7445.am2017-2027 .
Casara P. ; Davidson J. ; Claperon A. ; Toumelin-Braizat G. L. ; Vogler M. ; Bruno A. ; Chanrion M. ; Lysiak-Auvity G. ; Diguarher T. L. ; Starck J.-B. ; Chen I. ; Whitehead N. ; Graham C. ; Matassova N. ; Dokurno P. ; Pedder C. ; Wang Y. ; Qiu S. ; Girard A.-M. ; Schneider E. ; Gravé F. ; Studeny A. ; Guasconi G. ; Rocchetti F. ; Maïga S. ; Henlin J.-M. ; Colland F. ; Kraus-Berthier L. ; Gouill S. L. ; Dyer M. J. ; Hubbard R. ; Wood M. ; Amiot M. ; Cohen G. M. ; Hickman J. A. ; Morris E. ; Murray J. ; Geneste O. 
S55746 is a novel orally active BCL-2
selective and potent inhibitor that impairs hematological tumor growth . Oncotarget 
2018 , 9 , 20075 –20088 . 10.18632/oncotarget.24744 .29732004 
Kotschy A. ; Szlavik Z. ; Murray J. ; Davidson J. ; Maragno A. L. ; Le Toumelin-Braizat G. ; Chanrion M. ; Kelly G. L. ; Gong J.-N. ; Moujalled D. M. ; Bruno A. ; Csekei M. ; Paczal A. ; Szabo Z. B. ; Sipos S. ; Radics G. ; Proszenyak A. ; Balint B. ; Ondi L. ; Blasko G. ; Robertson A. ; Surgenor A. ; Dokurno P. ; Chen I. ; Matassova N. ; Smith J. ; Pedder C. ; Graham C. ; Studeny A. ; Lysiak-Auvity G. ; Girard A.-M. ; Gravé F. ; Segal D. ; Riffkin C. D. ; Pomilio G. ; Galbraith L. C. A. ; Aubrey B. J. ; Brennan M. S. ; Herold M. J. ; Chang C. ; Guasconi G. ; Cauquil N. ; Melchiore F. ; Guigal-Stephan N. ; Lockhart B. ; Colland F. ; Hickman J. A. ; Roberts A. W. ; Huang D. C. S. ; Wei A. H. ; Strasser A. ; Lessene G. ; Geneste O. 
The MCL1 inhibitor S63845 is tolerable
and effective in diverse cancer models . Nature 
2016 , 538 , 477 –482 . 10.1038/nature19830 .27760111 
Szlávik Z. ; Ondi L. ; Csékei M. ; Paczal A. ; Szabó Z. B. ; Radics G. ; Murray J. ; Davidson J. ; Chen I. ; Davis B. ; Hubbard R. E. ; Pedder C. ; Dokurno P. ; Surgenor A. ; Smith J. ; Robertson A. ; LeToumelin-Braizat G. ; Cauquil N. ; Zarka M. ; Demarles D. ; Perron-Sierra F. ; Geneste O. ; Kotschy A.  The structure guided discovery of a selective Mcl-1
inhibitor with cellular activity . Submitted for publication.
Fire E. ; Gullá Stefano V. ; Grant Robert A. ; Keating Amy E. 
Mcl-1–Bim
complexes accommodate surprising point mutations via minor structural
changes . Protein Sci. 
2010 , 19 , 507 –519 . 10.1002/pro.329 .20066663 
Chen L. ; Willis S. N. ; Wei A. ; Smith B. J. ; Fletcher J. I. ; Hinds M. G. ; Colman P. M. ; Day C. L. ; Adams J. M. ; Huang D. C. S. 
Differential targeting of prosurvival Bcl-2 proteins
by their BH3-only ligands allows complementary apoptotic function . Mol. Cell 
2005 , 17 , 393 –403 . 10.1016/j.molcel.2004.12.030 .15694340 
Muchmore S. W. ; Sattler M. ; Liang H. ; Meadows R. P. ; Harlan J. E. ; Yoon H. S. ; Nettesheim D. ; Chang B. S. ; Thompson C. B. ; Wong S.-L. ; Ng S.-C. ; Fesik S. W. 
X-ray and NMR structure
of human Bcl-xL, an inhibitor of programmed cell death . Nature 
1996 , 381 , 335 –341 . 10.1038/381335a0 .8692274 
Petros A. M. ; Medek A. ; Nettesheim D. G. ; Kim D. H. ; Yoon H. S. ; Swift K. ; Matayoshi E. D. ; Oltersdorf T. ; Fesik S. W. 
Solution structure of the antiapoptotic
protein bcl-2 . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2001 , 98 , 3012 –3017 . 10.1073/pnas.041619798 .11248023 
Czabotar P. E. ; Lee E. F. ; van Delft M. F. ; Day C. L. ; Smith B. J. ; Huang D. C. S. ; Fairlie W. D. ; Hinds M. G. ; Colman P. M. 
Structural
insights into the degradation of Mcl-1 induced by BH3 domains . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2007 , 104 , 6217 –6222 . 10.1073/pnas.0701297104 .17389404 
Fischer M. ; Leech A. P. ; Hubbard R. E. 
Comparative Assessment of Different
Histidine-Tags for Immobilization of Protein onto Surface Plasmon
Resonance Sensorchips . Anal. Chem. 
2011 , 83 , 1800 10.1021/ac103168q .21314134 
Lee E. F. ; Czabotar P. E. ; Smith B. J. ; Deshayes K. ; Zobel K. ; Colman P. M. ; Fairlie W. D. 
Crystal structure of ABT-737 complexed
with Bcl-xL: implications for selectivity of antagonists of the Bcl-2
family . Cell Death Differ. 
2007 , 14 , 1711 –1713 . 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402178 .17572662 
Cheng A. C. ; Coleman R. G. ; Smyth K. T. ; Cao Q. ; Soulard P. ; Caffrey D. R. ; Salzberg A. C. ; Huang E. S. 
Structure-based
maximal affinity model predicts small-molecule druggability . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2007 , 25 , 71 –75 . 10.1038/nbt1273 .17211405 
Hajduk P. J. ; Bures M. ; Praestgaard J. ; Fesik S. W. 
Privileged molecules
for protein binding identified from NMR-based screening . J. Med. Chem. 
2000 , 43 , 3443 –3447 . 10.1021/jm000164q .10978192 
Porter J. ; Payne A. ; de Candole B. ; Ford D. ; Hutchinson B. ; Trevitt G. ; Turner J. ; Edwards C. ; Watkins C. ; Whitcombe I. ; Davis J. ; Stubberfield C. 
Tetrahydroisoquinoline
amide substituted phenyl pyrazoles as selective Bcl-2 inhibitors . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2009 , 19 , 230 –233 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.10.113 .19027294 
Elmore S. W. ; Souers A. J. ; Bruncko M. ; Song X. ; Hasvold L. A. ; Wang L. ; Kunzer A. R. ; Park C.-M. ; Wendt M. D. ; Tao Z.-F.  7-Substituted
indoles as MCL-1 protein
inhibitors and their preparation . PCT Int. Appl. WO2008131000A2 , 2008 .
Bruncko M. ; Wang L. ; Sheppard G. S. ; Phillips D. C. ; Tahir S. K. ; Xue J. ; Erickson S. ; Fidanze S. ; Fry E. ; Hasvold L. ; Jenkins G. J. ; Jin S. ; Judge R. A. ; Kovar P. J. ; Madar D. ; Nimmer P. ; Park C. ; Petros A. M. ; Rosenberg S. H. ; Smith M. L. ; Song X. ; Sun C. ; Tao Z.-F. ; Wang X. ; Xiao Y. ; Zhang H. ; Tse C. ; Leverson J. D. ; Elmore S. W. ; Souers A. J. 
Structure-Guided
Design of a Series of MCL-1 Inhibitors with High Affinity and Selectivity . J. Med. Chem. 
2015 , 58 , 2180 –2194 . 10.1021/jm501258m .25679114 
Chen I.-J. ; Hubbard R. E. 
Lessons for fragment
library design: analysis of output
from multiple screening campaigns . J. Comput.-Aided
Mol. Des. 
2009 , 23 , 603 –620 . 10.1007/s10822-009-9280-5 .19495994 
Hajduk P. J. ; Huth J. R. ; Fesik S. W. 
Druggability
indices for protein
targets derived from NMR-based screening data . J. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 2518 –2525 . 10.1021/jm049131r .15801841 
Doak B. C. ; Morton C. J. ; Simpson J. S. ; Scanlon M. J. 
Design and Evaluation
of the Performance of an NMR Screening Fragment Library . Aust. J. Chem. 
2013 , 66 , 1465 10.1071/ch13280 .
Chilton M. ; Clennell B. ; Edfeldt F. ; Geschwindner S. 
Hot-Spotting
with Thermal Scanning: A Ligand- and Structure-Independent Assessment
of Target Ligandability . J. Med. Chem. 
2017 , 60 , 4923 –4931 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00208 .28537726 
Edfeldt F. N. B. ; Folmer R. H. A. ; Breeze A. L. 
Fragment
screening to predict druggability
(ligandability) and lead discovery success . Drug Discovery Today 
2011 , 16 , 284 –287 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2011.02.002 .21315179 
Pelz N. F. ; Bian Z. ; Zhao B. ; Shaw S. ; Tarr J. C. ; Belmar J. ; Gregg C. ; Camper D. V. ; Goodwin C. M. ; Arnold A. L. ; Sensintaffar J. L. ; Friberg A. ; Rossanese O. W. ; Lee T. ; Olejniczak E. T. ; Fesik S. W. 
Discovery of 2-Indole-acylsulfonamide
Myeloid Cell Leukemia 1 (Mcl-1) Inhibitors Using Fragment-Based Methods . J. Med. Chem. 
2016 , 59 , 2054 –2066 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01660 .26878343 
Clifton M. C. ; Dranow D. M. ; Leed A. ; Fulroth B. ; Fairman J. W. ; Abendroth J. ; Atkins K. A. ; Wallace E. ; Fan D. ; Xu G. ; Ni Z. J. ; Daniels D. ; Van Drie J. ; Wei G. ; Burgin A. B. ; Golub T. R. ; Hubbard B. K. ; Serrano-Wu M. H. 
A Maltose-Binding
Protein Fusion Construct Yields a Robust Crystallography Platform
for MCL1 . PLoS One 
2015 , 10 , e012501010.1371/journal.pone.0125010 .25909780 
Vranken W. F. ; Boucher W. ; Stevens T. J. ; Fogh R. H. ; Pajon A. ; Llinas M. ; Ulrich E. L. ; Markley J. L. ; Ionides J. ; Laue E. D. 
The CCPN data model for NMR spectroscopy:
development
of a software pipeline . Proteins 
2005 , 59 , 687 –696 . 10.1002/prot.20449 .15815974 
Czabotar P. E. ; Lee E. F. ; van Delft M. F. ; Day C. L. ; Smith B. J. ; Huang D. C. S. ; Fairlie W. D. ; Hinds M. G. ; Colman P. M. 
Structural
insights into the degradation of Mcl-1 induced by BH3 domains . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2007 , 104 , 6217 –6222 . 10.1073/pnas.0701297104 .17389404 
Madhavi
Sastry G. ; Adzhigirey M. ; Day T. ; Annabhimoju R. ; Sherman W. 
Protein and ligand preparation: parameters, protocols,
and influence on virtual screening enrichments . J. Comput.-Aided Mol. Des. 
2013 , 27 , 221 –234 . 10.1007/s10822-013-9644-8 .23579614 
Sagui C. ; Darden T. A. 
Molecular dynamics
simulations of biomolecules: long-range
electrostatic effects . Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol.
Struct. 
1999 , 28 , 155 –179 . 10.1146/annurev.biophys.28.1.155 .10410799 
Bowers K. J. ; Chow E. ; Xu H. ; Dror R. O. ; Eastwood M. P. ; Gregersen B. A. ; Klepeis J. L. ; Kolossvary I. ; Moraes M. A. ; Sacerdoti F. D. ; Salmon J. K. ; Shan Y. ; Shaw D.
E.  Scalable Algorithms
for Molecular
Dynamics Simulations on Commodity Clusters . Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing (SC06) , Tampa, Florida , 2006 .
Case D. A. ; Darden T. A. ; Cheatham T. E. ; Simmerling C. L. ; Wang J. ; Duke R.
E. ; Luo R. C.
W. ; Zhang W. ; Merz K.
M. ; Roberts B. ; Hayik S. ; Roitberg A. ; Seabra G. ; Swails J. ; Kolossváry I. ; Wong K. F. ; Paesani F. ; Vanicek J. ; Wolf R. M. ; Liu J. ; Wu X. ; Steinbrecher T. ; Gohlke H. ; Cai Q. ; Ye X. ; Wang J. ; Hsieh M.-J. ; Cui D. R. R. ; Mathews D. H. ; Seetin M. G. ; Salomon-Ferrer R. ; Sagui C. ; Babin V. ; Luchko S. G. ; Kovalenko A. ; Kollman P. A.  Amber12 ; University
of California : San Francisco , 2012 .
Onufriev A. ; Bashford D. ; Case D. A. 
Modification
of the Generalized Born
Model Suitable for Macromolecules . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2000 , 104 , 3712 –3720 . 10.1021/jp994072s .
Halgren T. A. ; Murphy R. B. ; Friesner R. A. ; Beard H. S. ; Frye L. L. ; Pollard W. T. ; Banks J. L. 
Glide:
a new approach for rapid,
accurate docking and scoring. 2. Enrichment factors in database screening . J. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 1750 –1759 . 10.1021/jm030644s .15027866 
Repasky M.
P. ; Shelley M. ; Friesner R. A. 
Flexible ligand docking with Glide . Curr Protoc. Bioinformatics 
2007 , 18 , 8 12.1 10.1002/0471250953.bi0812s18 .
Sherman W. ; Day T. ; Jacobson M. P. ; Friesner R. A. ; Farid R. 
Novel procedure for
modeling ligand/receptor induced fit effects . J. Med. Chem. 
2006 , 49 , 534 –553 . 10.1021/jm050540c .16420040 
Nikolovska-Coleska Z. ; Wang R. ; Fang X. ; Pan H. ; Tomita Y. ; Li P. ; Roller P. P. ; Krajewski K. ; Saito N. G. ; Stuckey J. A. ; Wang S. 
Development and optimization
of a binding assay for the XIAP BIR3
domain using fluorescence polarization . Anal.
Biochem. 
2004 , 332 , 261 –273 . 10.1016/j.ab.2004.05.055 .15325294 
Baurin N. ; Aboul-Ela F. ; Barril X. ; Davis B. ; Drysdale M. ; Dymock B. ; Finch H. ; Fromont C. ; Richardson C. ; Simmonite H. ; Hubbard R. E. 
Design and characterization of libraries
of molecular fragments for use in NMR screening against protein targets . J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 
2004 , 44 , 2157 –2166 . 10.1021/ci049806z .15554686 
Mayer M. ; Meyer B. 
Characterization of Ligand Binding by Saturation Transfer Difference
NMR Spectroscopy . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
1999 , 38 , 1784 –1788 . 10.1002/(sici)1521-3773(19990614)38:12<1784::aid-anie1784>3.0.co;2-q .
Dalvit C. ; Fogliatto G. ; Stewart A. ; Veronesi M. ; Stockman B. 
WaterLOGSY
as a method for primary NMR screening: practical aspects and range
of applicability . J. Biomol. NMR 
2001 , 21 , 349 –359 . 10.1023/a:1013302231549 .11824754 
Hajduk P. J. ; Olejniczak E. T. ; Fesik S. W. 
One-Dimensional Relaxation- and Diffusion-Edited
NMR Methods for Screening Compounds That Bind to Macromolecules . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 12257 –12261 . 10.1021/ja9715962 .
Brough P.
A. ; Barril X. ; Borgognoni J. ; Chene P. ; Davies N. G. ; Davis B. ; Drysdale M. J. ; Dymock B. ; Eccles S. A. ; Garcia-Echeverria C. ; Fromont C. ; Hayes A. ; Hubbard R. E. ; Jordan A. M. ; Jensen M. R. ; Massey A. ; Merrett A. ; Padfield A. ; Parsons R. ; Radimerski T. ; Raynaud F. I. ; Robertson A. ; Roughley S. D. ; Schoepfer J. ; Simmonite H. ; Sharp S. Y. ; Surgenor A. ; Valenti M. ; Walls S. ; Webb P. ; Wood M. ; Workman P. ; Wright L. 
Combining
hit identification strategies: fragment-based
and in silico approaches to orally active 2-aminothieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine
inhibitors of the Hsp90 molecular chaperone . J. Med. Chem. 
2009 , 52 , 4794 –4809 . 10.1021/jm900357y .19610616 
Otwinowski Z. ; Minor W.  DENZO and SCALEPACK . In International Tables
for Crystallography Volume F: Crystallography
of Biological Macromolecules ; Rossmann M. G. , Arnold E.  , Eds.; Springer
Netherlands : Dordrecht , 2001 ; pp 226 –235 .
Pflugrath J. W. 
The finer
things in X-ray diffraction data collection . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
1999 , 55 , 1718 –1725 . 10.1107/s090744499900935x .10531521 
Winn M. D. ; Ballard C. C. ; Cowtan K. D. ; Dodson E. J. ; Emsley P. ; Evans P. R. ; Keegan R. M. ; Krissinel E. B. ; Leslie A. G. W. ; McCoy A. ; McNicholas S. J. ; Murshudov G. N. ; Pannu N. S. ; Potterton E. A. ; Powell H. R. ; Read R. J. ; Vagin A. ; Wilson K. S. 
Overview
of theCCP4 suite and current developments . Acta
Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
2011 , 67 , 235 –242 . 10.1107/s0907444910045749 .21460441 
Vagin A. ; Teplyakov A. 
Molecular replacement with MOLREP . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
2010 , 66 , 22 –25 . 10.1107/s0907444909042589 .20057045 
Murshudov G. N. ; Vagin A. A. ; Dodson E. J. 
Refinement of macromolecular
structures
by the maximum-likelihood method . Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
1997 , 53 , 240 –255 . 10.1107/s0907444996012255 .15299926 
Emsley P. ; Cowtan K. 
Coot: model-building
tools for molecular graphics . Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
2004 , 60 , 2126 –2132 . 10.1107/s0907444904019158 .15572765 
Schüttelkopf A. W. ; van Aalten D. M. F. 
PRODRG: a tool for high-throughput crystallography
of protein-ligand complexes . Acta Crystallogr.,
Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
2004 , 60 , 1355 –1363 . 10.1107/s0907444904011679 .15272157

