
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145711610.1021/acsomega.6b00027ArticlePolymeric Ionic Liquid Nanoparticle
Emulsions as a
Corrosion Inhibitor in Anticorrosion Coatings Taghavikish Mona †Subianto Surya †Dutta Naba Kumar †‡de Campo Liliana §Mata Jitendra P. §Rehm Christine §Choudhury Namita Roy *†‡† Future
Industries Institute, Mawson Lakes Campus, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, Adelaide, SA 5095, Australia‡ School
of Chemical Engineering, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia§ Bragg
Institute, ANSTO, New
Illawarra Rd, Lucas Heights, Sydney, NSW 2234, Australia* E-mail: namita.choudhury@unisa.edu.au; namita.roychoudhury@adelaide.edu.au. Tel.: +6188302 3719.06 07 2016 31 07 2016 1 1 29 40 26 04 2016 15 06 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical
Society2016American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In this contribution, we report the
facile preparation of cross-linked
polymerizable ionic liquid (PIL)-based nanoparticles via thiol–ene
photopolymerization in a miniemulsion. The synthesized PIL nanoparticles
with a diameter of about 200 nm were fully characterized with regard
to their chemical structures, morphologies, and properties using different
techniques, such as Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, thermogravimetric
analysis, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron
microscopy. To gain an in-depth understanding of the physical and
morphological structures of the PIL nanoparticles in an emulsion,
small-angle neutron scattering and ultra-small-angle neutron scattering
were used. Neutron scattering studies revealed valuable information
regarding the formation of cylindrical ionic micelles in the spherical
nanoparticles, which is a unique property of this system. Furthermore,
the PIL nanoparticle emulsion was utilized as an inhibitor in a self-assembled
nanophase particle (SNAP) coating. The corrosion protection ability
of the resultant coating was examined using potentiodynamic polarization
and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The results show that
the PIL nanoparticle emulsion in the SNAP coating acts as an inhibitor
of corrosion and is promising for fabricating advanced coatings with
improved barrier function and corrosion protection.

document-id-old-9ao6b00027document-id-new-14ao-2016-00027mccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Recently, polymerizable
ionic liquid (PIL)-based nanoparticles
have received significant interest as a new class of functional polymers
that combines both the properties of ionic liquids (ILs) with polyelectrolyte
characteristics and improved mechanical durability and dimensional
control. Polymer nanoparticles have been conveniently prepared either
from preformed polymers, by methods including precipitation, solvent
evaporation, dialysis, and supercritical fluid expansion, or by direct
polymerization of monomers using classical polymerization, including
microemulsion, miniemulsion, surfactant-free emulsion, and interfacial
polymerization.1 The preparation of PILs
as nanoparticles via suspension polymerization,2 water-in-oil concentrated emulsion polymerization,3 and precipitation polymerization in water without
stabilizers using IL monomers with long alkyl chains has been recently
reported.4,5 Because of their dense charge and IL functionality,
PIL nanoparticles have an important role in the practical design of
various functional materials, such as catalyst supports, binders,
coatings, and sensors.6 One example of
this type of application is work by Yang et al.,7 who reported the preparation of cross-linked PIL microspheres
with a diameter of about 200 nm synthesized via miniemulsion polymerization
for use as a potential scaffold to immobilize metal nanoparticles
for electrocatalysis and heterogeneous catalysis.

Miniemulsion,
with droplet sizes typically in the range of 20–200
nm, is one of the most common methods used for the fabrication of
polymer nanoparticles in a water-borne system. The use of water as
the dispersion medium is one of the main advantages of this system,
which makes it environmentally friendly and also allows it to have
excellent heat dissipation during the polymerization process.8

Recently, “click” polyaddition
reactions in miniemulsions,
specifically thiol-mediated chemistry (i.e., thiol–ene/yne,
thiol-Michael), have attracted attention as facile methods for the
synthesis of polymer microparticle, nanoparticle, and nanocapsule
dispersions in heterophase media with high efficiency.9−11 The earliest example of using a thiol–ene reaction in a miniemulsion
system was reported by Van Berkel et al.12 This involved thiol–ene chemistry for the facile surface
functionalization of composite nanoparticles dispersed in a wide variety
of solvents. On the other hand, a recent example of the incorporation
of thiol–ene chemistry into a water-borne system by Shipp and
co-workers reported water-borne thiol–ene photopolymerization
that yields dispersions of polymer particles.13 In another work by the same group, the effect of surfactants on
particle size and stability was investigated, where they found that
during water-borne thiol–ene photopolymerization the use of
emulsifying agents is crucial to prevent particle aggregation.14 Similarly, Amato et al. reported the synthesis
of small, sub-100 nm cross-linked polythioether nanoparticles using
miniemulsion thiol–ene photopolymerization.8 The authors studied the effects of the miniemulsion formulation,
including inhibitors, surfactant concentration, and monomer weight
fraction as well as process parameters such as ultrasonication time
and amplitude, on nanoparticle size.

Considering the synergistic
properties of PILs and thiol–ene
photopolymerization, combining the two certainly broadens their application
potential.15 Because there are relatively
few examples of the combination of thiol-mediated polyadditions in
dispersed systems with PILs, there is a significant opportunity to
exploit thiol-mediated polyadditions in miniemulsions using PILs for
the fabrication of cross-linked functional polymer nanoparticles.
In our previous work, we reported the facile preparation of polymerizable
IL-based gel beads using thiol–ene click chemistry and illustrated
their unique properties as multipurpose materials suitable for pH
sensing or anticorrosion applications.16

Since ILs are known to inhibit corrosion in metals, the PIL
emulsion
system is expected to exhibit corrosion inhibition properties when
incorporated into inorganic sol–gel coatings, such as a self-assembled
nanophase particle (SNAP) coating. Unlike free ILs, they would be
immobilized within the coating and thus should provide better protection
against the leaching of free ILs from the SNAP coating, which has
shown good anticorrosion properties on materials such as aluminum
alloys.17 However, its potential for metals
has not been fully explored with respect to low carbon steel. Unlike
polymer-based paints, inorganic coatings are prone to crack formation
and hence become more permeable, but their ability to bond with surface
oxides and hydroxides makes them promising materials for use as interfacial
layers.

In this article, we demonstrate the fabrication of cross-linked
PIL-based nanoparticles via thiol–ene photopolymerization in
a miniemulsion. By combining thiol–ene and PIL functionalities
in a water-based system, we demonstrate the application of these nanoparticles
in anticorrosion coatings. This is the first report on the application
of PIL-based nanoparticles in anticorrosion coatings, where the particles
were characterized for their structure, size, shape, electrochemical
performance, using neutron scattering, microscopy, and electrochemical
techniques.

Experimental Section
Materials
Pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercaptopropionate)
(PETKMP), 1-vinylimidazole, 1,4-dibromobutane, benzophenone (BP),
Triton X-100, azobis(isobutyronitrile) (AIBN), sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS), (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane, sorbitan monostearate, toluene,
acetone, hexane diethyl ether, and methanol (analytical grade) were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification.
Fluorosurfactant FC-4432 was obtained from 3M. Double distilled water
(DDW) was used for all experiments.

Synthesis of 1,4-Di(vinylimidazolium)butane
Bisbromide
1,4-Di(vinylimidazolium)butane bisbromide (DVIMBr)
was synthesized
by stirring a 2:1 molar ratio mixture of 1-vinylimidazole and 1,4-dibromobutane
in methanol at 60 °C for 15 h. Upon cooling, the reaction mixture
was poured dropwise into 1 L of diethyl ether. The white precipitate
was filtered off and dried at room temperature until the weight was
constant, with a yield of 68%.4

1H NMR (300 MHz, D2O, δ, ppm): 8.98 (2H),
7.69 (2H), 7.49 (2H), 7.04 (2H), 5.75 (2H), 5.33 (2H), 4.21 (4H),
1.87 (4H).

Miniemulsion Thiol–Ene Photopolymerization
A
typical miniemulsion photopolymerization reaction for the synthesis
of PIL nanoparticle involves the mixing of two separate phases, an
organic phase and an aqueous phase. The organic phase consists of
0.24 g of PETKMP dissolved in 0.1 mL of toluene and mixed with 0.1
g of Triton surfactant (2.5 wt % with respect to the monomer) and
18.2 mg of benzophenone (BP) photoinitiator (5 wt % with respect to
the monomer concentration). Separately, an aqueous phase was prepared
by dissolving 0.4 g of DVIMBr in 9 mL of DDW. The organic phase was
added to the aqueous solution dropwise using a syringe needle, and
the reaction mixture was stirred for approximately 5–10 min
and then ultrasonicated in an ice bath for 10 min at an amplitude
of 50% to emulsify the organic phase in the aqueous phase and to create
nanodroplets. Finally, photopolymerization was performed in the presence
of ultraviolet light (365 nm wavelength) inside a black box for another
1 h with continuous stirring, resulting in cross-linked polymer nanospheres
and a stable emulsion (Scheme 1). The solution was degassed before and after photopolymerization
to remove any bubbles.

Scheme 1 General Reaction Scheme for the Development
of Water-Borne Thiol–Ene
Polymer Nanoparticles
The emulsion solution was centrifuged at 5000 rpm for
30 min at
room temperature. As a result, two fully separated phases formed:
one phase containing unstable particles and unreacted monomers and
another phase with stable PIL particles that was collected in the
water phase (Figure 1). PIL nanoparticles were washed with methanol and toluene to remove
any trace of impurities. The concentration of PIL nanoparticles before
centrifugation was 35 mg/mL, which was decreased to 23 mg/mL after
removing all of the unreacted monomer. Collecting PIL nanoparticles
in the water phase has the advantage that characterization is easier.

Figure 1 Fabrication
of PIL nanoparticles through thiol–ene photopolymerization.

Preparation of the PIL
Nanoparticle-Based Coating
Coatings
were prepared using SNAP as a matrix for coating and for the addition
of different concentrations of the emulsion to improve the barrier
and protective properties of the SNAP coating. The SNAP coating was
prepared by the method proposed by Donley et al.17 Mild steel substrates (CA3SN-G, 0.08% carbon contents,
thickness ∼ 0.6 mm, 1.7 cm × 1.7 cm) were cleaned using
a process reported by our group.18 The
coating solutions with a total volume of 20 mL were prepared by diluting
7 mL of SNAP solution with DDW by a factor of 1.75. In order to find
an optimized concentration of the PIL nanoparticle emulsion, three
different concentrations (0.4, 0.8, and 1.6 wt %) of the emulsion
were added to the SNAP solution followed by the addition of surfactant
(3M FC-4432, 0.04 % w/v). Then, the mixtures were ultrasonicated at
50% for 5 min to obtain homogeneous solutions. At the end, (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
cross-linking agent was added into the solutions, and the final mixture
was vigorously stirred and applied to cleaned metal substrates by
dip coating at a withdrawal speed of 10 cm/min. The coated sample
was dried at room temperature for 24 h to allow solvent evaporation.
Finally, the coating was thermally cured at 80 °C and 60% humidity
overnight in a humidity oven (ESPEC model SH-241).

Characterization
1H NMR analysis was performed
on a 300 MHz Bruker Avance spectrometer at room temperature using
deuterium oxide (D2O) as the solvent. Infrared spectra
of the gels were acquired using a Nicolet Magna-IR spectrometer 750
in photoacoustic mode with 256 scans and a carbon black reference.

Quantitative analysis of particle size was done via dynamic light
scattering (DLS) using a Nano ZS Zetasizer (Malvern Instruments Ltd.)
equipped with a 633 nm He–Ne laser to measure the hydrodynamic
size distribution of the PIL nanoparticles in aqueous solutions. Differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were conducted using a TA
Instruments Discovery DSC. The instrument was calibrated to obtain
the baseline and cell constant prior to running the experiments. The
samples were sealed in hermetic aluminum pans for use in the DSC experiment,
and an empty pan was used as the reference. The temperature range
for the experiment was from −70 to 200 °C, with a heating
rate of 10 °C/min, under a controlled nitrogen gas flow of 50
mL/min. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using a TA
Instruments Discovery TGA with an aluminum pan. The samples were subjected
to a 10 °C/min ramp rate from 100 to 550 °C under a nitrogen
atmosphere. The size and morphology of the particles were analyzed
by optical microscopy (Prism optical microscope) and field emission
scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) using a Philips XL30 FEG instrument
operated at an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. For electron microscopy
analysis, the sample was placed on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass
as a conducting surface, and images were taken without any further
coating. In addition, morphologies of the coatings surface were observed
using SEM, where compositions were analyzed from the energy dispersive
spectroscopy (EDS) module (OXFORD instruments) attached to the microscope.

Also, a JEOL 2100F transmission electron microscope (TEM) was used
for size characterization, which was operated at 200 kV with a resolution
∼2 Å.

Small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) experiments
were performed
with a QUOKKA SANS instrument at OPAL, Australian Nuclear Science
and Technology Organization (ANSTO),19 with
a neutron beam from a large liquid-D2 cold source (5 Å)
using sample-to-2D detector distances of 2, 8, and 20 m. The sample
concentration was 0.8 wt % and was run using Helma quartz cells (2
mm path length in D2O). The measurements and analyses were
conducted at 25 °C using a scattering vector, Q, ranging from 6.9 × 10–4 to 0.5 Å–1. The D2O background was subtracted from
the sample.

Ultra-small-angle neutron scattering (USANS) experiments
were carried
out with the KOOKABURRA instrument at OPAL (ANSTO, Lucas Heights,
Sydney) using a long wavelength, 4.74 Å. The measurements were
conducted at room temperature. The USANS data were reduced using an
empty sample container as background and converted to absolute scale
using python scripts based on the standard procedure.20 The Q range covered using USANS was 2.9
× 10–5 to 1.8 × 10–2 Å–1. The experimental data were desmeared
using the Lake algorithm, incorporated in the NIST USANS macros,20 before they were merged with the SANS data.
The structural parameters of the nanoparticle emulsion were obtained
from fits of the SANS and USANS data using the SasView program.

Utilizing a technique based on the Wilhelmy balance principle,
advancing and receding contact angles were measured using a dynamic
contact angle analyzer at a constant velocity (100 μm/s) and
23 °C (42% relative humidity in a clean room). The advancing
and receding contact angles were determined using the scanning Wilhelmy
plate method for the SNAP, emulsion, and SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion (optimized
concentration). The substrates used for these contact angle investigations
were clean steel metal plates with 12.7 mm length and 0.12 mm thickness.
The plates were cleaned with acetone and ethanol and dried with a
nitrogen flow before each experiment. The surface tension of the coatings
was also measured by the Wilhelmy plate using a platinum plate with
19.9 mm length and 0.2 mm thickness. The advancing and receding contact
angles were calculated from the scanning Wilhelmy plate result.

Electrochemical characterization of the uncoated and coated samples
was carried out using a standard corrosion cell (1 L, Pine Research
Instrumentation) with a conventional three electrode setup in a nondeaerated
3.5 wt % NaCl solution prepared from analytical grade chemicals (ChemSupply,
Australia) and distilled water (Milli-Q). A saturated calomel electrode
(SCE, Pine Research Instrumentation, +0.24 V vs normal hydrogen electrode,
NHE) was employed as the reference electrode, a graphite rod of 2
mm diameter was used as the counter electrode, and the sample under
test served as the working electrode. All reported potentials in this
article (determined using electrochemical techniques) are with reference
to the SCE. Initially, the open circuit potential (OCP) of the specimens
was determined as a function of time, and the samples were allowed
to stabilize at their OCP for 1 h before measurements. Potentiodynamic
polarization analysis was conducted at a scan rate of 1 mV/s in the
potential range of ±300 mV relative to OCP. Electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed using a Solartron 1260
impedance/gain-phase analyzer in combination with a Solartron 1280B
electrochemical interface. The impedance measurements were carried
out in a 1 MHz to 10 kHz frequency range with 40 steps per decade.
All spectra were recorded at OCP with an applied 10 mV sinusoidal
perturbation. The impedance data was fitted using Zview software and
a model for permeable coating consisting of resistive elements (due
to solution resitance Rs, coating resistance Rcoat, and interfacial resistance Rint) and constant phase elements (to represent imperfect
capacitors due to coating capacitance CPEcoat and interfacial
capacitance CPEint), where the parameters obtained from
the constant phase elements are used to calculate the capacitance
using the relationship C = R([1–n]/n) × Q(1/n), where R is the resistance parallel to the constant phase elements, Q is the pseudo capacitance, and n is the
phase change value obtained from fitting.

Results and Discussion
PIL Nanoparticles
by Miniemulsion Photopolymerization
PIL-based nanoparticles
were synthesized via thiol–ene photopolymerization
in a miniemulsion. The thiol–ene miniemulsion was prepared
using an organic phase of PETKMP, a photoinitiator, Triton, and solvent,
which was then added to an aqueous phase consisting of water and DVIMBr.
A stoichiometric ratio of precursors PETKMP to DVIMBr was chosen.
A water-immiscible solvent such as toluene was used to facilitate
emulsification as well as to lower the viscosity of the dispersed
phase. Once it was mixed, the organic phase was then emulsified in
the aqueous phase via ultrasonication to create PIL nanoparticles
(1:10 oil-to-water ratio). Centrifugation has been used as a means
to isolate PIL nanoparticles. The use of a centrifuge to separate
microcapsules is reported in the literature by Szabó et al.21

The stability and size of polymer nanoparticles
obtained from heterogeneous miniemulsion photopolymerization are strongly
influenced by several process parameters, including surfactant structure
and initiators. To examine this effect on the stability of the emulsion,
the effects of different surfactants and initiators have been studied.
When the thermal initiator (AIBN) was replaced with BP, this resulted
in colloidally unstable latexes and significant coagulum formation.
However, the same system in bulk form has been prepared using either
thermal or photoinitiator polymerization, and the behavior of the
synthesized polymer is similar.16 Additionally,
two reaction systems, each with a different surfactant, were examined
in order to obtain the most stable emulsion. In one system, anionic
surfactant SDS was used in the water phase, and in the other system,
nonionic surfactant sorbitan was replaced with Triton. In the presence
of an anionic surfactant, we observed phase separation and settling
of the PIL nanoparticles to the bottom of the aqueous phase. When
attractive forces between surfactant molecules and particles are dominant,
the particles will adhere; however, if the repulsive forces are stronger,
then the particles will remain suspended separately.22 In this system, the attractive van der Waals interactions
between the Br– group in PIL and Na+ in
SDS lead to phase separation.23 In contrast,
when using a nonionic surfactant like sorbitan, the surfactant layer
provides steric stabilization to keep the nanoparticles from aggregating.
However, a weak adsorption of the surfactant on the particles (in
the case of sorbitan) resulted in the coalescence of emulsion droplets
after a couple of hours.

With Triton, long-term stability of
the emulsion system can be
achieved due to the fact that nonionic surfactants (such as Triton
X-100) do not ionize in aqueous solution because their hydrophilic
groups are nondissociable.24 Therefore,
there will be no ions to interact with Br– in the
IL and destabilize the system. Thus, Triton was chosen for the rest
of the studies presented here.

Structure and Morphology
of PIL Nanoparticles
To investigate
the chemical composition of the emulsion and characteristics of each
layer after centrifugation, FTIR analysis of the sample before and
after centrifugation was performed, and the spectra are presented
in Figure 2. As discussed
earlier, after centrifugation, the solution was separated into two
layers. As can be seen in Figure 1, before centrifugation the emulsion is a white, milky
color, which separates into a clear stable top layer and an unstable
white bottom layer after centrifugation. In the stable top layer,
the FTIR spectrum does not show any band due to sulfur–hydrogen
stretching around 2570 cm–1, and there is an absence
of the C=C vinyl peak at 1644 cm–1. This
observation confirms that the thiol and vinyl groups have fully reacted
in this layer. Furthermore, a comparison of the spectrum of the unstable
layer with PETKMP also confirms that the bottom layer contains unreacted
thiol groups. However, in both layers, there was a reduction in the
intensity of the peaks due to vinyl groups at 3080 cm–1 and around the 761–768 and 914–998 cm–1 regions (in comparison with the DVIMBr spectra), which confirms
the consumption of vinyl groups in both layers. Since it appears that
the main difference between the two layers is unreacted thiol groups,
these results suggest that fully cured, stoichiometric particles are
well-dispersed and stable in the stable layer (unaffected by centrifugation)
due to the hydrophilicity of the PIL, whereas any unreacted reagents
and those with a nonstoichiometric (less than 1:2 DVIMBr/PETKMP) composition
formed unstable aggregates that settle to the bottom layer after centrifugation
because of the more hydrophobic nature of the thiol component (PETKMP).

Figure 2 FTIR spectra
of emulsions before and after centrifugation and comparison
with spectra of a stable layer with DVIMBr.

Analysis of the PIL particle size was performed using an
optical
microscope, SEM, and DLS (Figure 3). For optical microscopy, samples were prepared by
air-drying or drying in a vacuum oven on glass slides, whereas for
SEM, due to the need for a conductive substrate for improved resolution,
the emulsion was dried on ITO glass. DLS results of the particle dispersion
in water showed a hydrodynamic particles size (diameter) around 200
nm, which is in very good agreement with SEM results (Figure 3c); however, the optical images
of dried samples show a larger particle size of around 20 μm
(Figure 3b). This is
attributed to the difference in the substrates used for optical and
SEM microscopies, that is, by drying the sample for the optical image
some of the particles aggregate and become larger, as illustrated
in Figure 3b. Interestingly,
although the same aggregation phenomenon is seen in some part of the
ITO glass (as seen in the SEM images), this is significantly reduced.
This may be due to the comparatively rough nature of the ITO surface
“trapping” some of the individual emulsion particles
and thus preventing them from coalescing to form larger aggregates
as the solvent dries.

Figure 3 (a) Size distribution of PIL nanoparticles in dilute solutions
as determined by DLS, (b) microscopy images of dried PIL nanoparticles
on glass slides, and (c) SEM image of dried PIL nanoparticles on ITO-coated
glass.

Considering the significant role
that surfactants play in particle
size and stabilization, we investigated the effect of surfactant concentration
on particle formation. In this investigation, emulsions were made
with varying Triton surfactant concentrations of 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8
wt %. DLS and TEM were used to compare the results of this study,
and the results are shown in Figure S1.
As can be seen from the TEM images, at the lowest surfactant concentration
(Figure S1a), the particles are small and
spherical, but there appears to be a greater variation in particle
size. DLS analysis also indicates a dual distribution centered at
around 150 and 700 nm, which indicates aggregation of the particles
in solution due to the low surfactant concentration. Larger particles
were not observed in the TEM images. Increasing the surfactant concentration
to 0.4 wt % (Figure S1b) results in particles
that are similar in size but with a narrower distribution. DLS analyses
of the particles show a single distribution with a particle size of
around 200 nm, which corresponds well with the microscopy results.
Further increasing the surfactant concentration to 0.8 wt % resulted
in much broader particle size distributions and larger particles (as
observed in TEM images, Figure S1c), which
may be due to excess surfactant material affecting particle formation.
This is because an excess of surfactant may lead to an attraction
between multiple particles in solution, causing the polymer particles
to undergo destabilization and aggregation. Thus, the surfactant concentration
of 0.4 wt % was considered to be optimal and was used for all investigations.

USANS/SANS of the Nanoparticle Emulsion
Detailed SANS
and USANS studies were undertaken to characterize the microstructure
(USANS) and nanostructure (SANS) of the emulsion, as well as to obtain
a better understanding of the shape, size, and internal structure
of the PIL nanoparticles. Figure 4 shows the combined SANS/USANS data for the nanostructured
emulsion, where the extended Q range provides an
extraordinary opportunity to study its hierarchical structure. USANS
data, covering the range of 3.5 × 10–5 to 1
× 10–2 Å–1, provide
information on the microscale, which covers the particle size and
interparticle distances, whereas SANS data in the Q range above 1 × 10–2 provide information
on the internal structure of the gel nanoparticles. A sufficient overlap
within the USANS and SANS data was taken to ensure a good fit when
the two data sets were combined.

Figure 4 Combined USANS and SANS curves for the
nanoparticle emulsion with
combined Guinier–Porod fitting.

The combined view of the SANS/USANS data in Figure 4 shows three shoulders: the
first two are
attributed to the particle sizes at low Q, and the
third is attributed to the internal structures in the emulsion in
the higher Q range. Distinct Guinier and Porod regions
are visible for the three shoulders. The three distinct regions are
fitted with three combined Guinier–Porod models, which can
be used to fit scattering data from both spherical and non spherical
objects25 using SASView. This gives the
radius of gyration (Rg) of the scattering
objects, Porod exponent values, and the dimensional variable(s), which
are summarized in Table 1. The scattering at the very low Q region points
towards a small amount of very large particles that will be excluded
from further analysis. The parameters obtained from the Guinier–Porod
fit provide useful information for further modeling of the USANS and
SANS data.

Table 1 Summary of Rg, Porod Exponents, and Dimensional Variable of Nanoparticle
Emulsion Obtained from Guinier–Porod Fitting of USANS and SANS
Data
Q region (from Figure 4)	Rg (Å)	m (Porod exponent)	S (dimensional variable)	
very low Q (USANS) region 0	23530 (±740)	3.6 ((±0.03))	0.6 ((±0.06))	
low Q (USANS) region 1	2916.0 (±0.2)	4.31 (±0.01)	0 (±0.05)	
high Q (SANS) region 2	20.1 (±0.6)	3.93 (±0.02)	0.79 (±0.02)	
For the USANS
region, we know from the other techniques that the
scattering comes from polydisperse spherical emulsion droplets. The
Porod exponent of 4 in this region (Porod region 1) represents a smooth
surface of the scattering particles. A dimensionality of 0 is expected
for objects with a known spherical shape.25,26 A Rg of 291 nm is larger than the radius
we obtained from DLS and microscopy, which indicated a particle size
of around 150–200 nm (diameter). This can be attributed to
the difference in concentration as well as the impact of the average
particle size. Indeed, USANS measures an intensity average, so large
particles are much more visible and will be weighted more than small
particles. Thus, the average size will be larger than for the other
averages.

Concerning the internal emulsion structure, determined
in the SANS
region, the Porod exponent (Porod region 2) was also close to 4, indicative
of a smooth surface of the scattering objects. The obtained dimensionality
value close to 1 points toward cylindrical structures, which is also
suggested by a clear porod slope of Q–1 in Guinier region 2 (Figure 4).

On the basis of the Guinier–Porod model analysis,
a sphere
model was used to model the scattering profile of the PIL nanoparticle
emulsion, which is consistent with the expected shape of the nanoparticles
based on other data such as microscopy. The scattering length density
(SLD) of the D2O solvent and the nanoparticles was kept
fixed at 5.76 × 10–6 and 4.48 × 10–6, respectively, during data fitting because they were
determined on the basis of the material properties and were not expected
to vary significantly from bulk materials.

In the SANS region,
the slope of −1 in Guinier region 1,
as well as the dimensional variable from the Guinier–Porod
model, suggests a cylindrical shape of the particles in the higher Q region; thus, a cylinder model was employed to fit this
region. The cylinder model results in a good fit of the data and provides
valuable insights into the underlying structure, which could not be
detected using other characterization methods due to their lack of
contrast (Figure 5a).
Unlike other methods, the SANS contrast comes from the presence of
D2O in the ionic domains; thus, SANS scattering is expected
to arise due to internal structures within the gel particles where
the ionic PIL domains would be swollen with D2O. Fitting
with the cylinder model gives a length of ∼13.5 nm and a radius
of 2.7 nm (27 Å).

Figure 5 (a) Scattering data and sphere and cylinder model fit
to USANS–SANS
data. (b) Proposed structure of the PIL nanoparticle emulsion based
on neutron scattering data.

On the basis of these values, obtained from fitting neutron
scattering
data and other known data for the material, it is evident that the
PIL nanoparticle emulsion is composed of spheres of around 200 nm
in size, the internal structure of which consists of cylindrical domains
with a size of roughly 2.7 nm, which could not be detected using a
non-neutron-based technique due to a lack of contrast (Figure 5b). Therefore, neutron scattering
provides valuable insight and an in-depth understanding of particle
formation and its arrangements in an emulsion system.

Phase Behavior
of PIL Nanoparticles
In order to investigate
the phase behavior and glass transition temperature (Tg) of the PIL nanoparticle emulsion, different thermal
techniques were employed. DSC analysis of a dried nanoparticle emulsion
sample revealed a Tg of −53 °C
for PIL nanoparticles obtained using the miniemulsion method (Figure 6a), whereas in our
previous study, the bulk PIL gel obtained using a solvent evaporation
method showed a Tg of −23 °C
(Figure 6b),16 indicating that the composition and network
structure of the polymer produced in the water-borne system were more
elastic than those obtained using the more traditional solvent evaporation
system. The DSC results also show that the glass-to-rubber transition
occurs over a relatively narrow temperature range, indicating a homogeneous
network structure, which is typical of thiol–ene polymers.

Figure 6 DSC thermogram
showing the glass transition temperature of (a)
PIL nanoparticles and (b) PIL gel beads under a temperature ramp of
10 °C/min.

TGA analysis of both
the stable dispersion and the nonstoichiometric
precipitate layer after centrifugation showed that the well-dispersed
PIL nanoparticles in the top layer were thermally stable up to 305
°C under nitrogen, which was similar to that of bulk PIL gel
(Figure S2). However, the precipitate showed
two degradation temperatures around 350 and 450 °C, which correlate
to free IL and some unreacted thiols, which indicates that unreacted
thiols and vinyl monomers were not stable in the dispersion and thus
were selectively removed by centrifugation.

Additionally, the
phase behavior of the SNAP/emulsion coating was
investigated using TGA and DSC. TGA analysis of SNAP (Figure S3a) has only one degradation temperature
around 430 °C, which was altered to two temperatures (400 and
500 °C) in the SNAP with PIL nanoparticles. This could be attributed
to a structural change of the emulsion due to the addition of SNAP,
which was also proved with DSC results. DSC of both the SNAP and SNAP/emulsion
samples did not show any Tg, which is
due to the inorganic SNAP coating (which is inorganic and thus shows
no glass transition) being the major component. Additionally, since
PIL emulsion nanoparticles were present only in small quantities (0.8
wt %), their Tg was not detected in the
DSC analysis (Figure 3Sb).

Evaluation
of Corrosion Resistance
Potentiodynamic Polarization
To
evaluate and understand
the corrosion protection mechanism of the PIL-emulsion-loaded SNAP
coating (which will be referred to here as SNAP/emulsion for simplicity),
potentiodynamic polarization measurements were carried out. The PIL
loading for this study was initially chosen based on previous results
using microcontainers such as halloysite.27 To find the optimum concentration of the PIL nanoparticle emulsion
to use for achieving a better efficiency on an interfacial layer of
the coating, a potentiodynamic polarization study of SNAP, SNAP with
three different concentrations of the emulsions (PIL nanoparticles)
(0.4, 0.8, and 1.6 wt %), and blank metal was carried out, and the
results are shown in Figure 7 for the coated samples for both the initial samples and after
24 h of measurement in aqueous salt solution (3.5 wt % NaCl). The
corrosion current density (Icorr) and
corrosion potential (Ecorr) values were
then estimated by fitting the anodic and cathodic polarization curves
using CORRVIEW software, and the values are presented in Table S1.

Figure 7 Potentiodynamic analysis of SNAP PIL emulsion
coated samples at
three different emulsion concentrations, blank metal, and the SNAP
coating alone at the beginning of the experiment and after 24 h of
immersion in a 3.5 wt % NaCl solution.

Initially, the Icorr value of
the SNAP/0.8
wt % emulsion coated samples was lower by 2 orders of magnitude in
comparison with that of blank metal and is very close to the Icorr for the SNAP-coated sample, as would be
expected for a barrier coating. However, after 24 h, there was an
order of magnitude increase in Icorr for
pristine SNAP compared to that of the SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion coated
sample. On the other hand, the SNAP coatings containing 0.4 and 1.6
wt % emulsions showed higher Icorr compared
to that of pristine SNAP. After 24 h of immersion in salt solution,
all of the emulsion-containing samples showed a significantly lower
increase in Icorr compared to that of
pristine SNAP, with the best-performing system being the SNAP/0.8
wt % emulsion sample. This can be attributed to the presence of the
optimum concentration of PIL nanoparticles, which reinforce the SNAP
structure and prevent it from corroding. When a lower or higher concentration
of the emulsion was used, Icorr increased
compared to that of SNAP, which indicates that at these concentrations
the emulsion particles are not acting synergistically, interfering
with and weakening the efficiency of the SNAP coating. Therefore,
the better protection of the SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion could be attributed
to the fact that this amount of emulsion has better miscibility with
the SNAP structure, enhancing the performance of the SNAP coating
and providing better protection of the metal surface. Moreover, the
inhibition efficiency EI (%) is calculated
from values of Icorr using the following
equation28 1  where Icorr and I′corr are uninhibited and inhibited corrosion
current densities, respectively. These results are also indicative
of the SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion having a better EI, with the highest value of 78.6% (Table S1).

The SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion also shows the best corrosion
protection
based on the Ecorr values, showing a more
noble Ecorr (−0.3769 V) among the
samples and remaining at more noble potentials (−0.5192) after
24 h. The shifting of the Ecorr values
to the noble potential indicates enhanced corrosion resistance due
to the inhibition effect of the coatings. In the case of the 0.4 and
1.6 wt % samples, the Ecorr is shifted
to more negative values, as it can be seen that the final Ecorr values are very similar to those of pristine
SNAP, indicating that these concentrations are not structurally optimal.

It has been reported that imidazolium compounds show corrosion-resistant
behavior on steel due to the specific interaction between the −C=N–
group and electronegative nitrogen in the molecule with the metal
surface.29 Therefore, such an interaction
is highly likely in the present system and can also result in the
observed reduction in the changes in Ecorr of SNAP/emulsion in comparison to pristine SNAP due to the use of
imidazolium-based IL emulsion particles in this formulation.

EIS Investigation
EIS was used to investigate the nature
of the coatings. Figure 8 shows the Bode plot of the impedance modulus vs frequency and phase
angle vs frequency for the coated samples. The impedance modulii for
the SNAP and SNAP/emulsion coated samples at three different concentrations
decrease in the following order: |Z| (SNAP/0.8 wt
% emulsion) > |Z| (SNAP) > |Z| (SNAP/1.6
wt % emulsion) > |Z| (SNAP/0.4 wt % emulsion).
This
is in agreement with the inhibiting efficiency demonstrated by the
Tafel plot in Figure 7, where the SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion coated sample shows the lowest Icorr, which correlates to a higher impedance
for this type of coating.

Figure 8 (a) Phase angle and (b) Bode plot as a function
of frequency for
SNAP with emulsion coated samples at three different concentrations
in comparison with those of SNAP alone.

As illustrated in Figure 8a, the SNAP and SNAP/emulsion coated samples exhibit
similar
profiles except for the SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion coated sample, which
exhibits an additional time constant at middle frequencies. The first
time constant at low frequency observed in all samples is commonly
associated with the diffusion of electrolyte and corrosion activity
on the substrate surface. However, the presence of another time constant
at middle frequencies in the impedance spectrum of the SNAP/0.8 wt
% emulsion indicates the presence of another interface due to an intermediate
layer formed by the interaction of the emulsion with the metal surface,
which could be due to the presence of the imidazolium groups on the
PIL. Such behavior (an increase in the phase angle at middle frequencies)
can be indicative of the presence of ionic species at the metal–coating
interface.30 In this case, since the EIS
measurements were done after only a short equilibration (and thus
this increase in the phase angle is unlikely to be due to corrosion),
this extra time constant can be attributed to an emulsion interface
between the SNAP coating and the metal surface, which indicates the
preferential migration of the emulsion particles at the metal surface
during the dip-coating process, as confirmed with a wettability study.

In order to better understand this phenomenon, an electrical equivalent
circuit was used to analyze and model the impedance data. In general,
semipermeable coatings can be modeled by the equivalent circuit displayed
in Figure 9, which
takes into account the resistance of the solution, coating, and interface,
with capacitive elements due to the bulk coating and the metal/coating
interface.30,31 The impedance spectra of SNAP
and SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion samples were fitted using this model. Modeling
of the impedance results as shown on the Nyquist plot in Figure 10a shows that the
coating resistance increases but the interfacial resistance decreases
for the SNAP/emulsion sample compared to those of pristine SNAP, with
the coating resistance increasing from 180 to 348 Ω and the
interfacial resistance decreasing from 578 to 61 kΩ (Table 2). The presence of
the emulsion particles in the SNAP coating also increases the coating
capacitance and the interfacial capacitance, which could be due to
the ionic nature of these emulsion particles, resulting in a greater
amount of charges in both the bulk coating and at the metal–coating
interface.

Figure 9 Electrical equivalent circuit used to model the impedance data
of a permeable coating.

Figure 10 Nyquist plot and fitting results for the SNAP and SNAP/0.8 wt %
emulsion coated samples in 3.5% NaCl solution. Impedance measurement
was done after (a) 1 h of equilibration and (b) 24 h of immersion.

Table 2 Values Obtained from
Fitting the Impedance
Data
sample	Rsolution (Ω)	Rcoating (Ω)	Ccoating (F)	Rinterface (Ω)	Cinterface (F)	
SNAP only	7	180	6.71 × 10–9	578 320	5.31 × 10–4	
SNAP only 24 h	8	156	7.98 × 10–9	1305	2.01 × 10–3	
SNAP/emulsion	33	348	2.24 × 10–6	61 499	1.26 × 10–4	
SNAP/emulsion 24 h	22	365	2.15 × 10–6	8925	2.40 × 10–4	
After 24 h, clear differences can be observed
in the behavior of
the samples with and without the PIL emulsion. In the SNAP-only sample,
the initial coating has a very high interfacial resistance, which
decreases significantly after 24 h, from 578 to 1.3 kΩ. This
reduction of the interfacial resistance is accompanied by an increase
in the interfacial capacitance from 0.5 to 2 mF, indicating corrosion
on the SNAP–metal interface and potential delamination or blister
formation. The coating resistance and capacitance, meanwhile, remain
quite similar; thus, this change in the properties of the interface
indicates that the SNAP coating, being an interfacial layer rather
than a barrier layer, was still permeable to electrolyte, which allows
corrosion to occur at the SNAP–metal interface.

Similar
to the SNAP samples, the SNAP/emulsion sample after 24
h also shows a significant reduction in interfacial resistance from
61 to 8 kΩ, but this is accompanied by only a slight increase
in the interfacial capacitance from 0.12 to 0.24 mF (the coating resistance
and capacitance remain relatively unchanged), indicating a similar
corrosion process as that of the SNAP sample. However, the interfacial
resistance remains higher than that of SNAP alone (8 kΩ for
SNAP/emulsion compared to 1.3 kΩ for SNAP alone), which indicates
that the presence of the emulsion helps to protect the interface.

The results show that the PIL emulsion slightly increased the resistance
of the coating, which indicates that the PIL emulsion resulted in
some improvement in the barrier properties of the SNAP coating. Furthermore,
some of the emulsion particles may be present at the SNAP–metal
interface due to the emulsion particles acting like a surfactant that
adheres to the metal surface during coating, resulting in an interfacial
layer that contributes to the anticorrosion properties of the coating.

Surface Characterization
Figure 11 shows the SEM surface morphology of blank
metal, SNAP, and SNAP/emulsion before and after 1 day of immersion
in a 3.5 wt % NaCl solution. Before immersion, the SNAP and SNAP/emulsion
coated samples show very smooth, homogeneous surfaces, with some visible
particles in the SNAP/emulsion coating. After 24 h of immersion in
the salt solution, the image of the blank metal surface (Figure 11a′) shows
that it is strongly corroded, resulting in a porous, rough, and heterogeneous
surface with visible corrosion products. The SNAP and SNAP/emulsion
coated samples (Figure 11b′,c′) also show a roughening of their surface
after immersion in the salt solution, with the coating showing a rougher
surface after immersion. However, it is evident that the SNAP/emulsion
coated sample has retained a smoother and more uniform surface than
the SNAP-only sample, which indicates the beneficial effect of the
PIL emulsion on the integrity of the SNAP coating.

Figure 11 SEM images of (a) and
(a′) blank metal, (b) and (b′)
SNAP, and (c) and (c′) SNAP/emulsion before and after 24 h
in a salt solution, respectively.

EDS data of the surface of the blank metal, SNAP, and SNAP/emulsion
coated samples are summarized in Table 3. EDS analysis of the surface of the blank metal (Figure 9b) mostly shows the
presence of peaks attributed to Fe and C, specific elements of the
steel. After immersing in salt solution (Figure S3), the blank metal surface, which contains mainly Fe and
C (with small quantities of Si contaminants), now also shows the presence
of oxygen, which indicates the corrosion of iron through the formation
of iron oxides. On the other hand, EDS of the surface of the SNAP
and SNAP/emulsion coatings were initially showing only carbon, oxygen,
and silicon due to the SNAP coating (the oxygen is due to Si–O
in the SNAP composition). The appearance of a low oxygen content with
a large amount of iron after immersion in the salt solution in the
EDS profile of the SNAP and SNAP/emulsion coatings indicates that
the SNAP coating may adsorb ferric and ferrous ions; however, the
low oxygen content indicates that these species are present as ions
and not as oxides. The lower Si content of the coating after immersion
supports this as this indicates the presence of ferrous ions that
are adsorbed on the surface, and the presence of surface ions would
mask the Si from the SNAP coating underneath the adsorbed ions. This
result indicates that the SNAP coating strongly binds to ionic species,
which may inhibit corrosion through blocking the formation of oxides
and scavenging released ions.

Table 3 EDS Surface Analysis
before and after
Immersion in a 3.5 wt % Salt Solution for 24 h
 	elemental content (atom %)	
samples	C	O	Fe	Si	
blank metal	39.5	0.00	59.4	1.1	
blank metal 24 h	38.6	17.5	42.5	1.3	
SNAP	56.7	31.8	0.3	11.1	
SNAP 24 h	34.4	6.4	58.2	0.9	
SNAP/emulsion	57.4	30.7	0.3	11.5	
SNAP/emulsion 24 h	34.0	5.1	59.5	1.4	
Wettability of the Coated Substrate Using the Wilhelmy Balance
Technique
To support our hypothesis from the electrochemical
analysis results, such as potentiodynamic polarization studies and
EIS investigations, which revealed that the PIL nanoparticle emulsion
migrates to the interface during the dip-coating process and leads
to a better protection mechanism for the SNAP coating, a dynamic wettability
study with contact angle measurements was undertaken using the Wilhelmy
technique at 23 °C.

A wetting cycle with the SNAP system
is shown in Figure S5. In a typical dynamic
contact angle measurement, the sample moves against the liquid when
the sample is immersed in the liquid and the advancing contact angle
is recorded. When the sample emerges, the receding contact angle is
measured. It comprises forced and spontaneous movement regions. At
the metal–coating interface, the SNAP solution wets the surface
well, with the force decreasing marginally. Contact angle hysteresis
is also recorded as the difference between the advancing and receding
contact angles.32

The contact angle
data is used to evaluate the dynamic wetting
behavior and interaction of the PIL emulsion with the metal surface.
Generally, a lower contact angle corresponds to a higher adhesion
per unit area, and wetting of the surface is very favorable; thus,
the fluid will spread over a large area of the surface. The work of
adhesion was also calculated from the contact angle as follows 2  where Y1 is the
surface tension of the liquid and θ is the contact angle.33Table 4 shows the physical properties, such as viscosity and surface
tension, of the probe liquids as well as the work of adhesion and
contact angle.

Table 4 Physical Properties of the Probe Liquids
and Wettability of the Metal with SNAP, Emulsion, and SNAP/0.8 wt
% Emulsion
sample	viscosity
(mPas)	surface tension (mN/m)	advancing
contact angle (deg)	work of adhesion (mN/m)	
SNAP	2.1	37.6	65.2 ± 2	53.4	
0.8 wt % emulsion	1.0	31.9	52.4 ± 1.6	51.4	
SNAP/0.8 wt % emulsion	1.9	37.5	52.3 ± 1.9	60.4	
It is
interesting to note that the viscosity of the emulsion (1
mPas) is one-half of that of the SNAP solution, and the surface tension
is also the lowest compared to all samples. One of the important criteria
of good adhesion is that the coating should wet the surface.34,35 Therefore, the surface energy of the substrate has to be higher
than that of the organic coating, which is in agreement with the data
obtained in this study. The surface tension of all coatings is far
below the surface tension value for steel, which ranges from 700 to
1100 mN/m depending on the cleaning process.36 The results indicate that the lower the angle, the higher the surface
polarity, resulting in a better work of adhesion.

Moreover,
the contact angle value of the emulsion containing sample
is in the range of ∼52.4°, indicating that the emulsion
samples used in this study wet the surface very well compared to that
of stand-alone SNAP (Table 4). This could be attributed to the fact that applying an emulsion
to SNAP increases the interaction with the metal surface with high
wettability. The contact angle data of the PIL nanoparticle emulsion
(surface tension 31.9 vs 37.5 mN/m) compared to that of the SNAP nanoparticle
solution indicates a strong affinity and preferential diffusion and
adsorption of the PIL nanoparticle emulsion onto the metal surface.
As a result, it could act as inhibitor layer with improved barrier
performance against the diffusion of oxygen and moisture into the
metal surface by the adsorbed layer. Figure S6 illustrates the diffusion pathway into the metal surface using SNAP
and SNAP with emulsion coating. The strong affinity of the PIL nanoparticle
emulsion to the metal substrate leads to a stronger interfacial layer
at the interface, which illustrates its potential to be used as an
organic inhibitor in SNAP or other coatings.

Conclusions
We report the facile preparation of cross-linked PIL-based nanoparticles
via thiol–ene photopolymerization in miniemulsions. The utilization
of this method offers great potential for the development of cross-linked
polymer nanoparticles in the water phase. The synthesized PIL nanoparticles
were fully characterized for their chemical structures, morphologies,
and properties. SAS analysis provided valuable insight into the physical
and molecular arrangements of the nanoparticles in the emulsion. Furthermore,
in this study, we applied PIL nanoparticles at different concentrations
into a SNAP-based interfacial layer on mild steel surfaces. Potentiodynamic
polarization and EIS investigations show that the sample containing
0.8 wt % of the emulsion improved the inhibitor properties of the
coating. EIS and contact angle/wettability studies also revealed that
these nanoparticles improve the corrosion resistance of the SNAP–metal
interface by preferentially migrating to the metal surface during
coating because there is a strong affinity between the PIL nanoparticle
emulsion and the metal surface. This shows the potential for these
PIL nanoparticle emulsions to enhance the corrosion protection ability
of SNAP-based coatings.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.6b00027.TEM images of
emulsion particles at different concentrations,
DLS data, TGA data, and a summary table of potentiodynamic polarization
and wettability studies (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao6b00027_si_001.pdf

 The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of
the Australian Research Council’s Linkage grant for carrying
out this work and also the industry partner Wave Rider Energy. Access
to the SANS (QUOKKA) and USANS (KOOKABURRA) facility at ANSTO, Lucas
Heights, Sydney, was supported through an ANSTO beam time award (proposal
4492).
==== Refs
References
Rao J. P. ; Geckeler K. E. 
Polymer nanoparticles: Preparation techniques and size-control
parameters . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2011 , 36 , 887 –913 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2011.01.001 .
Muldoon M. J. ; Gordon C. M. 
Synthesis of gel-type
polymer beads from ionic liquid
monomers . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2004 , 42 , 3865 –3869 . 10.1002/pola.20299 .
Marcilla R. ; Sanchez-Paniagua M. ; Lopez-Ruiz B. ; Lopez-Cabarcos E. ; Ochoteco E. ; Grande H. ; Mecerreyes D. 
Synthesis
and characterization of new polymeric ionic liquid microgels . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2006 , 44 , 3958 –3965 . 10.1002/pola.21483 .
Yuan J. ; Antonietti M. 
Poly(ionic
liquid) Latexes Prepared by Dispersion Polymerization
of Ionic Liquid Monomers . Macromolecules 
2011 , 44 , 744 –750 . 10.1021/ma102858b .
Yuan J. ; Soll S. ; Drechsler M. ; Müller A. H. E. ; Antonietti M. 
Self-Assembly of Poly(ionic liquid)s:
Polymerization,
Mesostructure Formation, and Directional Alignment in One Step . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 17556 –17559 . 10.1021/ja207080j .21980995 
Men Y. ; Kuzmicz D. ; Yuan J. 
Poly(ionic liquid) colloidal particles . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2014 , 19 , 76 –83 . 10.1016/j.cocis.2014.03.012 .
Yang J. ; Qiu L. ; Liu B. ; Peng Y. ; Yan F. ; Shang S. 
Synthesis
of polymeric ionic liquid microsphere/Pt nanoparticle hybrids for
electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol and catalytic oxidation of
benzyl alcohol . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym.
Chem. 
2011 , 49 , 4531 –4538 . 10.1002/pola.24895 .
Amato D. V. ; Amato D. N. ; Flynt A. S. ; Patton D. L. 
Functional, sub-100
nm polymer nanoparticles via thiol-ene miniemulsion photopolymerization . Polym. Chem. 
2015 , 6 , 5625 –5632 . 10.1039/C4PY01449A .
Hoyle C. E. ; Lee T. Y. ; Roper T. 
Thiol–enes: Chemistry of the
past with promise for the future . J. Polym.
Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2004 , 42 , 5301 –5338 . 10.1002/pola.20366 .
Hoyle C. E. ; Bowman C. N. 
Thiol–Ene Click Chemistry . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2010 , 49 , 1540 –1573 . 10.1002/anie.200903924 .
Hoyle C. E. ; Lowe A. B. ; Bowman C. N. 
Thiol-click chemistry: a multifaceted
toolbox for small molecule and polymer synthesis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2010 , 39 , 1355 –1387 . 10.1039/b901979k .20309491 
Van
Berkel K. Y. ; Hawker C. J. 
Tailored composite polymer–metal
nanoparticles by miniemulsion polymerization and thiol-ene functionalization . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2010 , 48 , 1594 –1606 . 10.1002/pola.23917 .
Durham O. Z. ; Krishnan S. ; Shipp D. A. 
Polymer
Microspheres Prepared by
Water-Borne Thiol–Ene Suspension Photopolymerization . ACS Macro Lett. 
2012 , 1 , 1134 –1137 . 10.1021/mz300358j .
Durham O. Z. ; Shipp D. A. 
Suspension thiol-ene photopolymerization: Effect of
stabilizing agents on particle size and stability . Polymer 
2014 , 55 , 1674 –1680 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2014.02.044 .
Wei H. ; Wang Y. ; Guo J. ; Shen N. Z. ; Jiang D. ; Zhang X. ; Yan X. ; Zhu J. ; Wang Q. ; Shao L. ; Lin H. ; Wei S. ; Guo Z. 
Advanced micro/nanocapsules
for self-healing smart anticorrosion coatings . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 469 –480 . 10.1039/C4TA04791E .
Taghavikish M. ; Subianto S. ; Dutta N. K. ; Choudhury N. R. 
Facile
Fabrication of Polymerizable Ionic Liquid Based-Gel Beads via Thiol–ene
Chemistry . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 17298 –17306 . 10.1021/acsami.5b04405 .26171715 
Donley M. S. ; Mantz R. A. ; Khramov A. N. ; Balbyshev V. N. ; Kasten L. S. ; Gaspar D. J. 
The self-assembled
nanophase particle
(SNAP) process: A nanoscience approach to coatings . Prog. Org. Coat. 
2003 , 47 , 401 –415 . 10.1016/j.porgcoat.2003.08.017 .
Taghavikish M. ; Subianto S. ; Dutta N. ; Roy Choudhury N. 
Novel Thiol-Ene
Hybrid Coating for Metal Protection . Coatings 
2016 , 6 , 17 10.3390/coatings6020017 .
Rehm C. ; Brûlé A. ; Freund A. K. ; Kennedy S. J. 
Kookaburra: the
ultra-small-angle neutron scattering instrument at OPAL . J. Appl. Crystallogr. 
2013 , 46 , 1699 –1704 . 10.1107/S0021889813025788 .
Kline S. 
Reduction
and analysis of SANS and USANS data using IGOR Pro . J. Appl. Crystallogr. 
2006 , 39 , 895 –900 . 10.1107/S0021889806035059 .
Szabó T. ; Molnár-Nagy L. ; Bognár J. ; Nyikos L. ; Telegdi J. 
Self-healing
microcapsules and slow release microspheres in paints . Prog. Org. Coat. 
2011 , 72 , 52 –57 . 10.1016/j.porgcoat.2011.03.014 .
Diane J. B.  , Ed. Physical
Stability of Dispersed Systems . In Injectable
Dispersed Systems ; CRC Press , 2005 ; pp 1 –37 .
Ahualli S. ; Iglesias G. R. ; Wachter W. ; Dulle M. ; Minami D. ; Glatter O. 
Adsorption of Anionic
and Cationic Surfactants on Anionic
Colloids: Supercharging and Destabilization . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 9182 –9192 . 10.1021/la201242d .21696199 
Samiey B. ; Cheng C.-H. ; Wu J. 
Effects of
Surfactants on the Rate
of Chemical Reactions . J. Chem. 
2014 , 2014 , 908476 10.1155/2014/908476 .
Hammouda B. 
A new Guinier-Porod
model . J. Appl. Crystallogr. 
2010 , 43 , 716 –719 . 10.1107/S0021889810015773 .
Krishnamoorti R. ; Silva A. S. ; Modi M. A. ; Hammouda B. 
Small-Angle Neutron
Scattering Study of a Cylinder-to-Sphere Order–Order Transition
in Block Copolymers . Macromolecules 
2000 , 33 , 3803 –3809 . 10.1021/ma991842p .
Lvov Y. M. ; Shchukin D. G. ; Möhwald H. ; Price R. R. 
Halloysite Clay
Nanotubes for Controlled Release of Protective Agents . ACS Nano 
2008 , 2 , 814 –820 . 10.1021/nn800259q .19206476 
Daoud D. ; Douadi T. ; Issaadi S. ; Chafaa S. 
Adsorption and corrosion
inhibition of new synthesized thiophene Schiff base on mild steel
X52 in HCl and H 2 SO 4 solutions . Corros. Sci. 
2014 , 79 , 50 –58 . 10.1016/j.corsci.2013.10.025 .
Xu A. ; Zhang F. Z. ; Jin F. ; Zhang R. ; Luo B. ; Zhang T. 
The Evaluation of Coating
Performance by Analyzing the Intersection
of Bode Plots . Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
2014 , 9 , 5116 –5125 .
Wang H. ; Akid R. 
A room temperature
cured sol–gel anticorrosion pre-treatment
for Al 2024-T3 alloys . Corros. Sci. 
2007 , 49 , 4491 –4503 . 10.1016/j.corsci.2007.04.015 .
Banerjee P. ; Woo R. ; Grayson S. ; Majumder A. ; Raman R. 
Influence of Zeolite
Coating on the Corrosion Resistance of AZ91D Magnesium Alloy . Materials 
2014 , 7 , 6092 10.3390/ma7086092 .28788178 
Gao L. ; McCarthy T. J. 
Contact Angle Hysteresis
Explained . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 6234 –6237 . 10.1021/la060254j .16800680 
Ginic-Markovic M. ; Choudhury N. R. ; Dimopoulos M. ; Matisons J. ; Kumudinie C. 
Macromolecular
modification of EPDM: Wettability, miscibility, and morphology study . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2001 , 80 , 2647 –2661 . 10.1002/app.1378 .
Wicks Z. W. ; Jones F. N. ; Pappas S. P. ; Wicks D. A.  Adhesion . In Organic Coatings ; John Wiley
& Sons, Inc. , 2006 ; pp 121 –136 .
Feldman D. 
Fundamentals
of adhesion . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym.
Chem. 
1991 , 29 , 1834 10.1002/pola.1991.080291219 .
Davim J. P.  Sustainable Manufacturing , 1 st ed.; John Wiley & Sons , 2013 ; pp 79 –105 .

