
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145781010.1021/acsomega.7b00364ArticleFacile Fabrication of Ordered Component-Tunable Heterobimetallic
Self-Assembly Nanosheet for Catalyzing “Click” Reaction Gu Xiang †Bi Sa †Guo Linna †Zhao Yaqing †Li Tiesheng *†Liu Minghua *‡Chen Penglei ‡Wu Yangjie *†† College
of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, The Key Lab of Chemical Biology
and Organic Chemistry of Henan Province, and The Key Lab of Nano-information
Materials of Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou University, Kexuedadao 100, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R.
China‡ Beijing
National Laboratory for Molecular Science, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhongguancun North First Street
2, Beijing 100190, P. R. China* E-mail: lts34@zzu.edu.cn. Fax: (+)86-371-67766667 (T.L.).* E-mail: liumh@iccas.ac.cn (M.L.).* E-mail: wyj@zzu.edu.cn (Y.W.).05 09 2017 30 09 2017 2 9 5415 5433 28 03 2017 19 06 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

How to maximize the number of desirable active sites on the surface of the
catalyst and minimize the number of sites promoting undesirable side
reactions is currently an important research topic. In this study,
a new way based on the synergism to achieve the successful fabrication
of an ordered heterobimetallic self-assembled monolayer (denoted as BMSAM) with a controlled composition and an excellent orientation
of metals in the monolayer was developed. BMSAM consisting
of phenanthroline and Schiff-base groups was prepared, and its novel
heterobimetallic (Cu and Pd) self-assembled monolayer anchored in
silicon (denoted as Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM) with a controlled
composition and a fixed position was fabricated and characterized
by UV, cyclic voltammetry, Raman, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD),
inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES),
and water-drop contact angle (WDCA) analyses. The effects of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM on its catalytic properties were also systematically
investigated using “click” reaction as a template by
WDCA, XPS, SEM, XRD, ICP-AES and in situ Fourier transform infrared
analyses in a heterogeneous system. The results showed that the excellent
catalytic characteristic could be attributed to the partial (ordered
or proper distance) isolation of active sites displaying high densities
of specific atomic ensembles. The catalytic reaction mechanism of
the click reaction interpreted that the catalytic process mainly occurred
on the surface of the monolayer, internal active site (Pd) and rationalized
that the Cu(I) species and Pd(0) reduced from the Cu(II) and Pd(II)
catalyst were active species, which had a proper distance between
two different metals. The cuprate–triazole intermediate and the palladium intermediate,
whose production is the key step, should lie in a proper position
between the copper and active palladium sites, with which the reaction
rate of transmetalation would be improved to increase the amount of
the undesired Sonogashira coupling product.

document-id-old-9ao7b00364document-id-new-14ao-2017-003643ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Catalysis
based on transition-metal materials has emerged as a
powerful synthetic tool in the synthesis of simple to complex molecules
and the development of industrial processes, especially in fine chemicals.1,2 Among the many transition-metal catalysts reported to date, palladium
catalysts are known to be very powerful and are often used as active
transition metals, with extensive applications in organic catalysis.3 Copper is well accepted as one of the most prominent,
promising catalysts because of its versatility, low cost, abundant
availability,4 and precedency in numerous
catalytic reactions.5 Polynuclear complexes
with the same or a different metal have long been recognized to have
a catalytic activity different from that of their mononuclear analogues.6 This is because when a number of substrates are
placed in a single reaction vessel containing several catalysts, the
selectivity of these metallic components is challenging but necessary
if a single product is to emerge. Over the last decades, tremendous
efforts have been made to synthesize structurally defined polynuclear
complexes, in particular heterobimetallic complexes.7 Bimetallic catalysts show obvious advantages compared to
those of the monometal counterparts, such as enhanced catalytic activity
and improved stability and selectivity due to synergistic effects.8 They have recently attracted much attention because
they represent an important class of catalytic materials9 as well as they can enhance the performance of
metal catalysts by tuning the stabilization degree of key intermediates
in different reactions for the construction of various bonds.10 In particular, Pd-based bimetallic catalysts11 and Cu-based bimetallic catalysts12 have been successfully used for the construction
of different bonds in many applications.13 Palladium–copper14 or copper–palladium15 bimetallic catalysts designed for a combined
effect of two metals exhibited higher activities for the same reaction
than those of the mononuclear catalyst.16

The control over the well-defined structure of bimetallic
catalysts
is of more interest in the fields of chemistry and physics mainly
due to their new and enhanced properties that are superior to those
of their monometallic counterparts. Previous studies have shown that
the performance of a catalyst can be improved by tuning its size,
feature, and composition.11a,11b,11d,11g,11h,12d,13d−13g,13m,13n,14a,14b,17

From the papers reported
above, some of the catalysts are usually
homogeneous, which are often very efficient. However, their preparation
often is tedious and expensive, with difficulties in handling and
recycling. To solve these problems, considerable efforts have been
devoted to develop suitable supports, especially in the field of heterogenization
of homogeneous catalysts.18 It should be
mentioned that the ratio of metallic components in a catalyst is essential
to enhance its catalytic activity, which must be readily tuned by
deposition, mixing,19 self-assembly, and functional
molecular-based ligands.20 On the other
hand, the activity of the Cu-based catalysts was reported to strongly
depend on their structure and morphology.21

The copper-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC)
reaction, which is the most widely recognized example of click chemistry,22 has been used in a wide range of new syntheses
and applications in scientific research.23 Moreover, studies on various nitrogen or carbon ligand/Cu(I) complexes
covalently immobilized on solid substrates for the CuAAC reaction
were reported.24

Recently, a new
heterobimetallic catalyst containing nickel or
palladium and copper immobilized on supports has emerged as a multitask
catalyst for catalyzing sequential Sonogashira–click and click–Heck
reactions and the multicomponent reaction of terminal alkynes, sodium
azide, and benzyl bromide derivatives because of its positive and
synergistic effect of the metallic species.18g,25

Although considerable progress has been made in this field,6 methods to fabricate a large amount of defined
heterobimetallic catalyst at the molecular level are in high demand.
To date, there are only very few reports on the rational fabrication
of the ordered self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of a component-tunable
bimetallic catalyst (Cu–Pd) related to CuAAC, Sonogashira coupling
or Heck reactions, or other reactions, with which the catalytic mechanism
can be investigated deeply.

In the design of molecular-based
ligands, functional groups, which
can coordinate with certain metals, are usually introduced into molecules
to get mono- or bi-metallic complexes for catalyzing reactions, such
as the Schiff-base26 and 1,10-phenanthroline27 groups, which have attracted considerable attention
due to their facile synthesis, diversity in structural topology, and
ability to produce stable complexes with a large number of transition-metal
ions and present efficient catalytic properties,28 especially suppressing the catalytic effect in some reactions,1c,28a,28b in which the cooperative effect
must be considered also in reactions that are catalyzed by both metals,
whose mechanisms are different from each other.29

SAMs offer customized design, ease of recovery, recyclability,
stability, and superior activity,30 as
well as can potentially combine the advantages of homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysis in a single platform through structural maneuvers.31 Our group has got a
series of cyclopalladated ferrocenylimines used for Heck, Suzuki,
Sonogashira, Kumada, and other reactions in a homogeneous or immobilized
substrate in self-assembled films, wherein they showed a highly efficient
catalytic ability.32,33

In the reports mentioned
above, bulk copper–metal alloys,11f−11h bimetallic copper–metal nanoalloys,3a, 3d, 9a, 9b, 9d,10,11b,11c,11e,12b,12d,13e,13g,13i,14a,14b,16a,17a,17b,19a,19d,20c,25 core–shell-type nanoparticles,19e−19g nanowires,11a,11d,19b nanosponges,19c nanorods,13l nanowheels, nanodendrites,13f and bimetallic copper–metal molecular catalysts,6,7b,8g,9e,13o,14c,15a,15b,16b,26a,28e,29 are well-known and much developed
systems, but ordered, component-tunable, distribution-controllable,
and position-controllable bimetallic self-assembled monolayers anchored
on substrates by engineering of molecules have received relatively
little attention. At the same time, it is quite challenging to achieve
fundamental insights into how each of these factors affect the catalytic
performance due to the interplay between the structural and chemical
factors, which are crucial for the rational design of a catalyst with
high activity, selectivity, and durability.10 To the best of our knowledge, this is the potential design in which
the electronic properties of a ligand and the strategy effect of heterobimetals
in an ordered self-assembled monolayer have been shown to influence
the activity of the incorporated bimetallic catalysts in predictable
ways. Therefore, much needs to be known how to control the relative
distributions of the different metals or active sites on the surface
of the self-assembled monolayer for optimal performance.

In
this study, on the basis of our previous studies on monometallic
self-assembled catalytic monolayer,33 we
designed the framework for preparing complexes with two different
metal ions that would be sufficiently close to ensure an interaction
between the coordinated metals.34 Schiff
base and 1,10-phenanthroline moieties were selected and introduced
into one molecule as the binding site for palladium ion, copper ion,
or other metal ion. It is based on the assumption that the character
of the phenanthroline and Schiff-base group could provide suitable
sterics, electronics, and coordination demands, which are needed along
the different steps of the catalytic reaction. Then, the monolayer
of the ligand and its self-assembled monolayer linked to a functional
substrate with different ratios of palladium and copper were fabricated
via self-assembly, which may offer a super control over the orientation,
distribution, and composition of metals and even the locations where
the atoms are fixed, with which a powerful and highly versatile tool
for the orientation and component-controlled fabrication of multimetal
catalytic films may be provided.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Preparation and Characterization
of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd Heterobimetallic Self-Assembled Monolayer
(BMSAM) Self-Assembled Monolayer
In this section,
we are interested in developing a system in which two different metals
brought into close proximity by an appropriately selected ligand act
in a cooperative manner, which can allow for cooperative effects at
inter- or intra-molecular levels, both improving their efficiency
in catalysis and promoting reactions that are not possible using a
single metal center. The targeted catalysts are heterobimetallic complexes,
in which both metals are capable of activating small-molecule substrates.29,34 To date, many examples of “heterobimetallic” compounds
showing some cooperative effect on their catalytic properties have
been reported. However, reports on the cooperative effect for a heterobimetallic
catalyst in an ordered, self-assembled monolayer are still scarce.
This is due to the lack of rational synthetic methods to incorporate
two different kinds of metal ions into a single molecule in a certain
position. To overcome this problem, we have developed a multifunctional
molecular approach, in which a self-assembled molecule having several
sites coordinates in a stepwise fashion to the second and third metal
ions to form the desired bimetallic coordination compounds. Scheme 1 shows the preparation
route of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM.

Scheme 1 Preparation Route
of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM
2.1.1 Water-Drop
Contact Angle (WDCA) Analysis
WDCA analysis was carried out
on SAM to determine the wettability
of functionalized surfaces. To some extent, the free energy of the
functionalized surface can be related to the molecular composition
and structure of the monolayer.36 The hydrophilic
silicon (Si-OH) gave a WDCA of 2.0° (Figure S10). The results indicated that the surface
changed from a hydrophilic to hydrophobic state when treated with
APTES (Si-APTES), followed by Fmp (Si-Fmp) (from 43.6 to 60.8°). Its transition was caused by the monolayer
surface covered with a hydrophobic phenanthroline ring. However, the
WDCA on the surface of Cu-phenanthroline imine (Si-Fmp-Cu) decreased to 50.1° due to its hydrophilic moiety of the copper
complex structure, but WDCA had a little change (from 50.1 to 47.8°)
after coordinating with palladium (Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM). The results indicated that the surface configuration had significantly
changed, which could clearly exhibit the chemical gradient of each
step. It also meant that the catalyst monolayer on solid substrates
was fabricated via self-assembly.

2.1.2 Electronic
Absorption Spectroscopy
The UV–vis spectra of modified
quartz along with the immobilizing
process offered further evidences of the preparation of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM (Figure S11). Hydrophilic
quartz plates (black line) and those modified with APTES (red line)
showed almost no absorption, and the absorption intensity of the modified
quartz plates gradually increased with different degrees of functionality. A peak at ∼229 and peaks at
∼287 and ∼336 nm of quartz plates modified with the
Schiff-base phenanthroline derivative had also been observed (blue
line), consistent with the literature, which revealed two peaks, at
∼229 nm due to the imine group (attributed to the π–π*
and n−π* transitions of the −C=N group)37 and ∼287 and 336 nm due to phenanthroline.27 The absorption peak at 287 nm gradually shifted
to longer wavelengths due to the coordination interaction between
phenanthroline and copper (pink line). In the spectrum of Si-Fmp-Pd-Cu
BMSAM (pink line), a broad band ranging from 280 to 360 nm
attributed to the π–π* electronic transfer of conjugated
double bond of Schiff base, benzene, and imidzaophenanthroline27 and a peak at 226 nm appeared due to the coordination
interaction of the Schiff base with Li2PdCl4 (yellow line),38 suggesting a stronger
interaction between the molecules and the metal ion.

2.1.3 Vibrational Spectroscopy
Raman
spectroscopy is an important technique that is considered to be a
powerful tool for characterizing the structures of catalyst molecules.39Figure S12 presents
the Raman spectra of the bimetallic catalytic monolayer compared to
those of its precursors. The stretching vibrations of −CH2 groups for grafted APTES could be observed at 2992–2895
cm–1 (Figure S12A), and
the imine moiety grafting onto the silicon surface could also be monitored
at 1609 cm–1 (Figure S12B),40 suggesting the successful grafting
of the phenanthroline derivative onto the silicon surface,41 in which the shifting frequency and line width
were caused by the interactions between molecules and metals. After
the Cu-phenanthroline imine grafting (Figure S12C), the C=N band at 1609 cm–1 shifted to
about 1599 cm–1, indicating that the structure of
the molecules in the monolayer changed due to the complexing between
phenanthroline and copper.42 Finally, the
C=N band at 1599 cm–1 shifted to about 1586
cm–1, indicating that the Schiff-base groups in
the structure of the molecules in the monolayer have coordinated with
palladium (Figure S12D).43 The results obtained indicated that the novel Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM monolayer was successfully grafted onto the substrate.

2.1.4 Charge-Transfer Resistance (Rct)
As illustrated
in Figure S13, the behavior
of impedance with different monolayers was presented. For Si-OH, Si-APTES, and Si-Fmp monolayers, the
impedance behavior is dependent on the molecular structure grafted
onto the electrode, in which the resistance increased in the procedure
steps (Figure S13a–c). With the Si-Fmp-Cu monolayer, the impedance behavior is a strong function
of the complexed metals, as depicted in Figure S13d, in which the resistance decreased due to the coordination
between SAM with copper. This behavior is thought to be due to the
introduction of copper ion, making electron transfer easy from the
surface to ITO. However, the impedance found for the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd monolayer increases by a factor of nearly as five times as compared
to the behavior of the Si-Fmp-Cu monolayer. This phenomenon
observed in the electrodes can be explained that the electron transfer
between the ITO electrode and the redox species in the solution phase
through the SAM was destroyed due to the introduction of palladium.
This interpretation suggests that the charge density of the interface
may affect the magnitude of the experimental Rct observed.44,45

2.1.5 X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) Studies
The survey XPS and detailed Pd 3d and Cu 2p XPS analyses of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM are shown in Figure S14a–d. The survey spectrum shows only the N 1s signals
at 399.6 eV in the preparation of films fabricated with APTES (Figure S14a) and then grafted with Fmp (Figure S14b). The high-resolution XPS
spectrum of the Si-Fmp-Cu film showed the characteristic
peaks of Cu 2p at 963.07, 963.47, 943.07, and 933.07 eV, which were
assigned to Cu(II) (Figure S14c).46 The high-resolution XPS spectrum of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM not only showed two peaks of Pd 3d at 338.15 and 343.47
eV assigned to Pd(II) (Figure S14d)33i but also the Cu2p peaks and the peak of Cl
2p at 200.10 eV (Figure S14d). XPS analysis
of the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM catalyst also showed the presence
of Cu(II) and Pd(II) in the sample, suggesting that Cu or Pd was not
reduced during the self-assembly process. These results demonstrate
that the intermetallic catalyst (Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM)
was successfully prepared.

2.1.6 Low-Angle X-ray Diffractograms
(LAXD)
X-ray diffractograms for the preparation procedure
of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd-BMSAM on quartz were measured as shown
in Figure S15a–d. As depicted in Figure S15a, two characteristic
peaks were observed at 0.6 and 1.025° after grafting with APTES.
The same peak at 0.6° and a slightly shifted peak at 1.080°
appeared when L was grafted (Figure S15b). The diffractogram of films modified with Cu also
showed two peaks, in which the peak at 1.125° could be observed
(Figure S15c), indicating that phenanthroline
and copper coordinated to form Si-Fmp-Cu.47 However, after Pd(II) coordinated with Si-Fmp-Cu to yield Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM, two peaks
shifted to a low angle of 1.075° were obtained (Figure S15d). Although the position of the peaks changed significantly during the
preparation process, their width and intensity had a little change,
which demonstrated that the films fabricated above maintained a crystalline
nature. Obvious layered structures of the fabricated catalyst monolayers
proved by LAXD indicated that the ordered heterobimetallic self-assembled
catalytic monolayer was grafted onto the surface of the solid substrate.

2.1.7 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) Investigation
SEM images of the catalyst-grafted surface presented the evidence
of high-density arrays and ordered structure (Figure S16). As shown in Figure S16A, a very smooth surface can be obtained after hydrophilic treatment,
and a similar flat surface in the next procedure with silanization
is shown in Figure S16B. Granules appeared after reaction with the ligand (Figure S16C), and more granules were observed after complexing
with copper (Figure S16D). The surface
of the resultant samples (Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM) shown in Figure S16E is also relatively smooth with a
little coarse feature due to a little agglomeration, which is proved
clearly by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) results (Figure S15). The ordered structure and the stability of Si-Fmp-Cu demonstrated by these characterizations may impact
the catalytic performance, which prompted us to explore the surface
chemical reactions in the heterogeneous system.

2.2 Contrast Experiment and Characterization
As we know,
it is important to determine the position and distribution
of metals complexed with certain functional groups in the molecular
surface or interior, which helps determine the factors affecting the
catalytic properties and the catalytic mechanism. To determine whether
copper only coordinated with the 1,10-phenanthroline group, as shown
in Scheme 2, the test
depicted in Scheme S1 was designed and
characterized.

Scheme 2 Design and Synthetic Routes of Si-BBA-Cu (OAc)2 and Si-BBA-Li2PdCl4 Self-Assembled Monolayers
UV spectra were recorded during
the fabrication process, as shown
in Figure S17. Hydrophilic quartz plates
(black line) or those modified with APTES (red line) showed almost
no absorption, and the absorption intensity of the modified quartz
plates gradually increased with different degrees of functionality.
Quartz plates modified with p-bromo benzaldehyde
(Si-BBA, blue line) showed peaks at ca. 203, 258, 284,
and 294 nm, consistent with the literature, which revealed two peaks
(at ∼229 nm) of the imine group (attributed to the π–π*
and n–π* transitions of the −C=N
group),48 and the four peaks did not change
when the self-assembled monolayer (Si-BBA) was put into
copper(II) acetate solution at different times (green and purple lines),
indicating that the coordination interaction of Si-BBA with copper(II) did not occur. On the other hand, there were two
broad peaks at about 223 nm, attributed to the coordination interaction
of Schiff base with Li2PdCl4,38 and 302 nm, due to the π–π* electronic
transfer of the conjugated double bond of the Schiff base. Benzene
appeared when the self-assembled monolayer (Si-BBA) was
immersed in the Li2PdCl4 solution, suggesting
the stronger interaction between the Schiff-base group in the molecules
with copper (orange line).

WDCAs shown in Figure S18 were also
measured. The hydrophilic silicon substrate presented a WDCA value
of 3.0°, which indicated that the surface transformed from hydrophilic
to hydrophobic when treated with APTES and imine (from 38 to 60°)
due to the coverage of the surface of the monolayer with a phenyl
ring. The WDCA of the surface treated with copper acetate showed a
little change (59°). However, WDCA decreased (from 59 to 54°)
after coordinating with palladium. The result indicated that only
palladium could coordinate with the Schiff-base group. Furthermore,
the survey XPS and detailed Pd 3d, Cu 2p, N 1s, Cl 2p, and Br 3d analyses
of Si-BBA immersed in copper acetate and palladium solution
are shown in Figure S19a–d. The
survey spectrum showed only N 1s signals at 399.6 eV in the preparation
of the monolayers (Figure S19a–d). The high-resolution XPS spectrum of the Si-BBA-Cu(OAc)2 monolayer showed only a Br3d peak and no
characteristic peaks of Cu 2p at 963.07, 963.47, 943.07, and 933.07
eV. However, the high-resolution XPS spectrum of Si-BBA-Li2Pd Cl4 not only showed two peaks of Pd 3d at 338.15 and 343.47 eV assigned
to Pd(II) (Figure S14d)33i but also the Br3d peak and the peak of Cl 2p at 200.10
eV, which is an evidence that palladium can be complexed with the
Schiff-base group under adopted conditions. Using the
current synthetic protocol, the composition of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM in the location of the metallic ion with an ordered structure
can be readily tuned by simply controlling the initial molar ratio
of the Cu and Pd salts.

2.3 Catalytic Performance for
Three-Component
Click Reaction
Click chemistry is one of these methods based
on reactions which have a wide scope, give high yields, and use highly
energetic reactants to form irreversible carbon–carbon or carbon–heteroatom
bonds.22,49 In this section, we took into account that
the combined effect of copper and palladium is fixed in the self-assembled
monolayer, possibly by coordination. On the basis of our experience
with self-assembled systems,33 we selected
to examine the fixation and activity of copper(II)–palladium(II)
on silicon.

2.3.1 Screening of Catalytic Condition
To evaluate the effectiveness of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM containing
different ratios of Cu/Pd as a heterogeneous catalyst, a three-component
cycloaddition of benzyl bromide, phenylacetylene, and sodium azide
was chosen as a model for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole derivatives
mentioned above. The reaction was investigated under various conditions
(Table 1). In the preliminary
experiment, various solvents were used as media for screening their
suitability in a fixed amount of catalyst and reaction time (12 h)
and sodium ascorbate (SAB) (5 mg) at 80 °C. As evidenced in Table 1 (entries 1–12),
a significant effect on time and yield was observed with the different
solvents, of which water presented the greatest effect, giving the
desired product in a yield of about 92%. However, better yield was
also obtained using a mixture of H2O and EtOH (4:1). Considering
the cost and green nature, we selected pure water. Also, the yields
obtained with water as solvent had a little change when the reaction
time was prolonged (entries 13 and 14). Optimization for the amount
of catalyst was then explored with an equimolar ratio of the reactant
and SAB. Their yield decreased to 85% with increasing the temperature
to 100 °C (entry 15). Decreasing the reaction temperature to
70, 50 °C, and room temperature (RT) results in the decrease
of yield (entries 16, 17, and 20).

Table 1 Effect of Solvent,
Temperature, and
Time on the One-Pot Synthesis of 1-Benzyl-4-phenyl-1H-1,2,3-triazolea
entry	solvent	T (°C)	time (h)	yield (%)b	yield (%)c	
1	H2O	80	12	92	85	
2	EtOH	80	12	7	trace	
3	THF	80	12	trace	7	
4	DMF	80	12	11	15	
5	toluene	80	12	trace	trace	
6	EtOAc	80	12	trace	10	
7	MeOH	80	12	trace	trace	
8	H2O/EtOH = 1:1	80	12	20	17	
9	H2O/EtOH = 2:1	80	12	46	18	
10	H2O/EtOH = 3:1	80	12	37	38	
11	H2O/EtOH = 4:1	80	12	95	61	
12	H2O/EtOH = 5:1	80	12	86	10	
13	H2O	80	16	92	85	
14	H2O	80	24	91	86	
15	H2O	100	12	85	82	
16	H2O	70	12	86	69	
17	H2O	55	12	82	60	
18	H2O	RT	4	55	7	
19	H2O	RT	8	66	10	
20	H2O	RT	12	80	15	
21	H2O	RT	16	96	17	
22	H2O	RT	20	93	20	
23	H2O	RT	16	98d	 	
24	H2O	RT	16	95e	 	
25	H2O	RT	16	94f	 	
26	H2O	RT	16	93g	 	
27	H2O	RT	16	93h	 	
28	H2O	RT	16	94i	 	
29	H2O	RT	16	92j	 	
30	H2O	RT	16	95k	 	
31	H2O	RT	16	92l	 	
32	H2O	RT	16	87m	 	
33	H2O	RT	16	95n	 	
34	H2O	RT	16	92o	 	
35	H2O	RT	16	57p	 	
36	H2O	RT	16	45q	 	
37	H2O	RT	16	26r	 	
a Reaction condition: benzyl bromide
(0.125 mmol), phenylacetylene (0.15 mmol), sodium azide (0.15 mmol),
SAB (5 mg), solvent (7 mL), under N2 atmosphere, substrate:
3 cm × 0.6 cm × 0.8 cm.

b Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (1:1)
isolated yield.

c Si-Fmp-Cu
BMSAM (1:0)
isolated yield.

d Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM (1:0.15)
isolated yield.

e Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM (1:0.31)
isolated yield.

f Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM (1:0.37)
isolated yield.

g SAB (5 mg).

h SAB (7 mg).

i SAB (10 mg).

j SAB (20 mg).

k Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (1:0.74).

l Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (1:0.61).

m Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (1:0.36).

n ITO-Fmp-Cu-Pd(1:1).

o SG-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (1:1).

p Fmp/Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4.

q Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4.

r Cu(OAc)2.

It is also observed that increasing the reaction time enhanced
the yield of product up to 96% until 16 h (entries 18–22),
whereas the yield slightly changed (entries 26–29) on increasing
the amount of SAB. Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM with different
ratios exhibited similar results (entries 23–25). Consequently,
in the presence of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (1:1), the best
yield of 1,2,3-triazole could be obtained in the reaction of benzyl
bromide, phenylacetylene, and sodium azide (ratio 1:1.5:1) with 5
mmol % SAB at room temperature after 16 h. These were used as the
optimum conditions (entry 21). This supported Cu/Pd bimetallic catalyst
(Table 1, entry 21)
is among the most active catalysts for the three-component click reaction,
proceeding in 16 h at room temperature.

On the basis of the
higher catalytic activity of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM in the model reaction, the substrate scope of the synthesis
of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles was evaluated, and the results
are summarized in Table S2. A wide range
of different substituted benzyl and allyl groups were subjected to
the click reaction. It was found that all reactions produced triazole;
however, in the case of chlorides, only moderate yield could be obtained (entry 7). It was also found that
benzyl halides containing electron-donating or electron-deficient
groups all can give desired products in high yield (entries 1–6).
Aromatic acetylenes were also quantitatively converted to the corresponding
triazoles. It was noted that acetylenes having electron-deficient
groups, which were normally inactive substrates for click reaction,
could react to give a higher yield of desired triazoles (entries 8–14).
Compared to that of the Si-Fmp-Cu catalyst under high
reaction temperature with middle yield of product, Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM showed higher catalytic activity due to the cooperation
between copper and palladium. These results showed that Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM was an active heterogeneous copper–palladium catalyst,
which could effectively catalyze the three-component cycloaddition
of aromatic halide, azide, and alkyne for the synthesis of triazole
derivatives.

2.3.2 Component-Tunable Investigation
The ratio of heterobimetallic or multimetallic components in the
catalyst was essential to enhance the catalytic activity, which must
be readily tuned by deposition in step or by mixing way.19 Although modification of the functional groups
in the self-assembled monolayer and the ratio in the catalyst can
be utilized to optimize the catalytic activity, the research on such
modifications can be a challenging task.50 In fact, it is often even more difficult to predict what structure
of the molecule is suitable and how changes to the ratio of the heterobimetallic
catalyst will influence its catalytic activity. Herein, we investigated
the ratio and distribution of supported Cu–Pd bimetallic self-assembled
catalysts (Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM) through optimization approach,
in which both the ratio of M1/M2 and distribution in the self-assembled
monolayer contribute to the catalyst activity in click reaction, wherein
the reaction path for the formation of alkylene copper and cuprate
trizole on the surface of the sample could be → *RC = CCu →
cuprate trizole → transmetalation → elimination to get
TM. Meanwhile, the incorporation of Pd was done to facilitate the
absorption of Ph-X to form Ph-Pd-X, resulting in an enhanced transmetalation.
However, the atomic ratio of Cu to Pd should be optimized, as too
much Pd on the surface means a low density of adsorbed alkynes and
azo, which can be used to produce cuprate–triazole intermediates.
It certainly limits the catalytic performance of Si-Fmp-Cu–Pd BMSAM.50

To find the ratio of
certain metals in an ordered self-assembled film, the self-assembled
monolayer was immersed in different concentration ratios of the Cu/Pd
mixture solvent in a stepwise coordination way, that is, first complexing
with copper and then with palladium. Catalytic monolayers with different
compositions could be obtained by mixing or stepwise route (presented
in Table S1). It is easy to determine the
desired ratio in a catalytic reaction with the above procedure. Next,
we probed into the effect of the ratio of Cu/Pd on catalysis (Table 1, entries 21, 23–29,
and 30–32). The results showed
that the higher the percentage of copper to palladium, the higher
the activity of the catalyst when the total loading of copper was
held (entries 21, 23–29, and 30–32) compared to that
of monometallic copper catalysts (entry 21, yieldc) at
room temperature, indicating that palladium had a profound effect
on the catalytic properties. This supported Cu/Pd bimetallic catalyst
(entry 21, yieldb) is the most active catalyst for the
three-component click reaction, proceeding in just 16 h at room temperature.
Different supports were used for fabricating functional catalysts
(Table 1, entries 33
and 34), such as ITO glass and silica gel (denoted as ITO-Fmp-Cu–Pd
BMSAM and SG-Fmp-BMSAM, respectively), also with
higher yields. In the case of only Fmp ligand coordinated
with the Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4 mixture,
Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4 mixture, or only
Cu(OAc)2 utilized for catalyzing, higher yields could not
be achieved (Table 1, entries 35–37), indicating that not only the structure of
the ligand but also the orientation and density of the catalyst and palladium
coeffect are very important for fixing the catalytic active sites
and their distribution, which will have an impact on its catalysis.

Having demonstrated the wide scope of the catalyst prepared, we
want to explore the impact of the structure of the ligand and the
orientation, density, and distribution of the metal at the interface
on the catalytic activity. It has been based on the hypothesis that
interactions between the metals on the surface and the electrons of
the aromatic rings having nitrogen atom in the ligand facilitate the
formation of the controlled nanocatalyst and stabilize the resulting
nanoactive species toward oxidation.51 At
the same time, if the groups complexed with different metals are too
far apart, they cannot cooperate; however, if they are too close,
they may interact in an intramolecular fashion and thus prevent the
association of the substrate. This strategy has the potential to simplify
catalyst optimization in heterogeneous catalysis, similar to what
is accomplished by a modified ligand in homogeneous transition-metal
catalysis.52 Therefore, catalysts consisting
of fitting distributions with well-defined composition and defined
position with proper distance between two different catalytic metals
can be conceived in this way.53 Thus, we
thought that the differences in the catalytic activities of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM should relate to a combination of variations
in different molecular structures, density, orientation, and strength
of the metal–functional group interaction.54 Therefore, another self-assembled monolayer of ligands
containing only phenanthroline or terpyridine functional group without
a Schiff-base group (denoted as Si-HOP and Si-TPy, Scheme 3),55,24j which has different complexing abilities to Cu or Pd, was designed
and fabricated (Scheme 3), with which heterobimetallic complex monolayers (denoted as Si-HOP-Cu-Pd and Si-TPy-Cu-Pd) were formed and
characterized (Schemes S2 and S3 and Figures S20–S25) and their catalytic properties influenced by the effect of the
structure of the ligand and the distribution of the catalyst on the
surface were investigated compared to those of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM.

Scheme 3 Fabrication of Heterobimetallic Catalytic Monolayers
(denoted as Si-HOP-Cu-Pd and Si-TPy-Cu-Pd)
Catalytic monolayers with different
compositions are listed in Table S3. More
palladium ions were incorporated
in Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (Table S1, entries 3–5) compared to those in Si-HOP-Cu-Pd (Table S3, entries 1–3) or Si-TPy-Cu-Pd (Table S4, entries
1–3) due to the lack of the Schiff-base group. The complexing
ability of copper and palladium with phenanthroline or terpyridine
is different, in which more copper was incorporated on the surface.
We also investigated the catalytic properties of Si-HOP-Cu-Pd and Si-TPy-Cu-Pd for click reaction, and the results
are presented in Table S3 (entries 1–3
and 6) and Table S4 (entries 1–4),
in which the catalytic yields were lower than those of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM under the same condition.

A higher percentage of
copper to palladium in Si-HOP-Cu-Pd or Si-TPy-Cu-Pd also led to a mediate activity (Table S3, entries 1–3; Table S4, entries
1–3) but lower than that of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (Table 1, entries
21, 23–25), indicating that not only
palladium on the surface but also internal palladium located with
the Schiff-base group should have a profound effect on the catalytic
properties. Not surprisingly, the yield of the obtained products increased
with increasing Cu content used for Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM. However, in the case of Si-HOP-Cu-Pd, the yield decreased
with increasing palladium content (Table S3, entries 1–3), which showed that the ratio, orientation,
density, and distribution were not the only factors affecting the
catalytic properties. Therefore, the distance between the two different
catalytic sites (Cu–Pd distance) on the surface or between
Cu on the surface with the internal palladium must be considered (as
depicted in Scheme 4), which may have a significant impact on its catalytic efficiency
according to different catalytic mechanisms, such as the metal transformation
step.15b Therefore, if the cuprate–triazole
intermediate and the palladium intermediate lie exactly between the
copper and active palladium sites, then the reaction rate of transmetalation
would be improved, and the facility of transmetalation would increase
the amount of the undesired Sonogashira coupling product, which is
the most challenging issue of the proposed three-component cycloaddition
coupling reaction. We presumed that the number of real synergistic
sites having a proper distance between different metals also had a
significant impact on the catalytic activity. On the other hand, Si-TPy-Cu-Pd with different ratios
had the catalytic activity opposite to the results (Table S4, entries 1–3), which showed that the yields
decreased with decreasing palladium content due to the decrease of
real synergistic sites, which was also the evidence that the performance
of catalysts can be enhanced by engineering their surface, internal
structure, or surroundings. Meanwhile, phenanthroline introduced in
this research onto the surface showed that it could potentially prevent
the metal nanoparticles from oxidation, with which a good concentration
of the catalytically active complexes will be maintained throughout
the reaction56 and also have an effect
on both the equilibrium distribution and the rate of equilibration
among the active sites to substantially enhance the rate of reaction
on its own by promoting the presence of the most active sites,28d which was sufficient to allow molecules to
diffuse to/from the internal catalyst.17b It also provided the absorbed configuration of reactant molecules,
dissociated species, intermediates, and even products, which influences
the selection of a specific reaction pathway to give the desired product.

Scheme 4 Proposed Plausible Transmetalation in Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM via Synergistic Sites with Proper Distance
2.3.3 Recycling Experiment
For recycling
experiments, the catalyst was recovered from the reaction mixture
by drawing and made ready for reuse after washing with solvents. The
reusability of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM was tested through
the one-pot synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles from alkyl
halides, alkyne, and sodium azidethe. As shown in Figure 1, Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (1:1) showed a higher stability upon reuse than Cat. 1–3 (Table S1, entries 3–5)
and Si-Fmp-Cu. Although, for four cycles, the catalyst
could maintain a high activity without discernible activity. However,
a significant decrease in yield was observed during the fifth cycle.
The amount of Cu and Pd in the substrate is measured (ICP: Cu: 1.40
× 10–10 mol/cm2; Pd: 0.14 ×
10–10 mol/cm2), which suggested that
catalyst deactivation occurred as the reaction progressed. However,
the recyclability may be influenced by the amount of palladium, that
is to say, Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM has not only palladium
on the surface but an internal monolayer, which is likely a container.57

Figure 1 Recycle of Cat. Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM, Cat. 1,
Cat. 2, Cat. 3 (RT, 16 h), and Cat. Si-Fmp-Cu (80 °C, 12 h). Reaction
condition: benzyl bromide (0.625 mmol), phenylacetylene (0.75 mmol),
sodium azide (0.75 mmol), H2O (50 mL), SAB (30 mg), RT,
16 h, N2 atmosphere; substrate: 100 mL single-mouth bottle.
Isolated yield.

2.4 Investigation
on the Mechanism of Catalyzing
Click Reaction
The problem of distinguishing homogeneous
catalysis from heterogeneous catalysis is an important question that
arises more and more often. Heterogeneous catalytic systems may partly
dissolve to yield a homogeneous component, which might be much more
reactive than the parent metal surface.58 Therefore, it is necessary to investigate whether or not the leaching
of the catalyst during the reaction process, careful kinetic studies,
hot filtration tests, and catalyst poisoning tests are very helpful
to solve the question of heterogeneity,59 in which the surface function of the nanomonolayer is a well-designed
way to bridge the gap between heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis.
In heterogeneous catalysis, the surface and structural understanding
of the well-defined catalyst material is important for the optimization
and mechanism of the catalyst systems.

2.4.1 Water
Contact Angle Analysis
Wettability
is an important property of solid materials that is governed by both
surface chemical composition and geometrical structure, and a suitable
wettability in principle can enhance the catalytic activity.60Figure 2 shows the changes of WDCA in Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM during the catalytic process. The hydrophilic silicon substrate
generates a WDCA value of 4.0°. The water contact angles of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM changed from 49° (0 h) to 55°
(1 h), 57° (2 h), 63° (3 h), 67° (5 h), 62° (7
h), 60° (10 h), and 53° (16 h), which demonstrates that
catalysis occurred on the surface of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM and reveals that the surface nature of the catalyst monolayer maintained
after catalysis.

Figure 2 WDAC of click reaction catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM at 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, and 16 h.

2.4.2 Kinetic Studies and Hot Filtration Experiment
As shown in Figure 3, the yield increased rapidly within a 4 h reaction time. After 4
h, the yield increased slowly. For catalyst loading, the reaction
completed after 16 h and led to a 96% yield. The high efficiency of
the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM catalyst can be attributed to
the favorable orientation and dispensability on the surface. The filtration
test relies on a comparison of catalytic activities before and after
drawing the active catalyst from solution. This test is probably most
useful to check whether the bulk metal is responsible for the catalysis.61 To explore if the leaching of catalyst occurred
during the reaction process, the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM catalyst
was removed from the reaction system after 4 h and the reaction kinetics
was monitored from then on. As shown in Figure 3, after the catalyst was removed, the yield
slightly increased, which was the evidence that few palladium ions
leached during the reaction process.

Figure 3 Hot filtration experiment of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM on
the three-component click reaction.

2.4.3 XRD Patterns of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM for Catalyses
The LAXRD patterns of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM used for catalyzing at different times were measured
(Figure 4). Initially, Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM showed a good XRD pattern, which proved that the structure
is ordered. The diffraction peak shifted to a lower angle although
the pattern types had no change during catalyzing (from 1 to 16 h),
indicating that the thickness of the catalyst monolayer increased
and finally became a certain pattern. It was the evidence that the
structure was not damaged before and after reaction, demonstrating
that the heterobimetallic catalyst was durable and maintained its
orientation under the adopted conditions.

Figure 4 LAXRD of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM for catalyzing click reaction
at 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, and 16 h.

2.4.4 XPS of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM in
Catalyzing Process
The XPS spectrum of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM obtained during the catalytic reaction showed not only
two peaks of Pd 3d at 338.15 and 343.47 eV assigned to Pd(II) (Figure S5)33i but
also Cu 2p peaks at 298.10 eV. The survey XPS and detailed Cu 2p and
Pd 3d XPS analyses of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM during the catalytic
process are shown in Figure 5. The high-resolution XPS spectrum of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd-MSAM showed the characteristic peaks of Cu 2p at 963.07, 963.47, 943.07,
and 933.07 eV, assigned to Cu(II),62 without
catalysis (Figure 5A). New peaks appeared in the Cu(I) spectrum at 953.77 and 932.17
eV during catalysis, and their densities increased with increasing
time and became the main state, indicating that Cu(II) was reduced
to Cu(I), which could catalyze the cycloaddition to form the cuprate–triazole
intermediate. Finally, the main state of copper turned into Cu(II)
with a little Cu(I) after 16 h.

Figure 5 XPS spectra of (A) Cu 2p and (B) Pd 3d
at different times (0, 1,
5, 10, and 16 h).

The result of the high-resolution
XPS spectrum of Pd 3p in Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM was similar
to that of Cu 2p, as shown
in Figure 5B, in which
Pd(0) appeared and increased with increasing time and disappeared
at the end. These results demonstrate that the intrabimetallic catalyst
(Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM) could catalyze the click reaction
successful by a synergic way.

The survey spectrum shows the
N 1s signal at 399.6 eV (0 h), the
peak of Cl 2p at 199.8 eV (0 h), and Br 3d with no signal (0 h) before
catalyzing, as shown in Figure 6. The positive shifts of the N 1s peak from 399.7 eV (1 h)
to 401.1 eV (5 h) and to 400.8 eV (10 h) indicated that the N-metal
bond changed during the catalytic process, which suggested that the
intermolecular coordination of different copper and palladium ions
with the nitrogen occurred. Then, it almost returned to the original
position (399.7 eV) when finished (Figure 6A). In the case of Br 3d, the appearance
of Br 3d peaks changed from 69.2 eV (1 h) to 69.5 and 69.4 eV during
the catalytic process, indicating that the Pd(0) oxidative addition
with Br-Ph occurred to form Br-Pd-Ph on the catalytic surface or interior.
The peak of Br 3d was not detected after completion of the reaction
(Figure 6C). According
to the result of Cl2p shown in Figure 6B, no change of Cl 2p was observed, indicating that
a Pd–Cl bond existed during the catalytic procedure

Figure 6 XPS spectra
of (A) N 1s, (B) Cl 2p, and (C) Br 3d at different
times (0, 1, 5, 10, and 16 h).

2.4.5 SEM of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM in
Catalyzing Process
Figure 7 presents the SEM images of the surface of the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM catalyst. As shown in Figure 7A, individual morphologies
are small and round in shape, dispersing without any obvious agglomeration
phenomenon. Figure 7B,C shows the SEM images of the catalyst surface after 1 and 5 h,
respectively, which reveals that the surface of the sample has more
substrates due to the main factor of adsorption. In Figure 7D, the surface exhibits a rough
feature owing to the adsorption and resultant phenomenon of more similar
particles. Furthermore, these particles are uneven in size due to
the mixture of the substrate and resultants, in which the adsorption
and desorption of resultants are equivalent. Figure 7E confirms that the desorption of resultant
is the main factor because of the appearance of a uniform surface,
which is proved clearly by the XPS results (Figures 5 and 6). The SEM image
of the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM catalyst after 16 h is shown
in Figure 7F. The surface
of samples is relative smooth, with a slight agglomeration phenomenon
compared to that of Figure 7A. It can be inferred that the catalytic mechanism is heterogeneous.

Figure 7 SEM images
of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM for catalyzing click
reaction at (A) 0 h, (B) 1 h, (C) 5 h, (D) 7 h, (E) 10 h, and (F)
16 h.

2.4.6 Catalyst
Poisoning Experiment
To
ensure that our catalytic mechanism is whether or not heterogeneous,
catalyst poisoning tests were carried out. As shown in Table S5, when a drop of mercury was added to
the reaction mixture before starting the model reaction (Table S4, entry 2), the catalytic activity could
be effectively inhibited. However, the catalyst could not be poisoned
completely due to the fact that mercury could not come in sufficient
contact with the catalytically active site because of its poor dispersibility
in the reaction solvent.33 After that, PPh3 ligand was added
to the reaction mixture and a significant loss of catalytic activity
was not observed (Table S5, entry 1). This
phenomenon is probably attributed to the strong coordination ability
of PPh3, which led to ligand exchange with chlorine. Therefore,
PPh3 is not an effective poisoning additive for our catalytic
system. It is noteworthy that when poisoning a catalyst with thiophene
additives even with less than 1.0 equiv per metal atom, no significant
activity was noted due to the coverage of the active sites by thiophene.
The results obtained above were the evidence that the catalyzing process
mainly occurred on the surface and that Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM acted as a heterogeneous catalyst. The result indicates that the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM catalyst was stable under the experimental
conditions.

2.4.7 In Situ Fourier Transform
Infrared (FTIR)
Spectroscopy Monitoring
ReactIR is a suitable
tool for monitoring reactions and investigating catalytic mechanisms.63 As shown in Figures 8 and 9, the ReactIR
3D maps over time catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM (Figure 8) and homogeneous
Cu(OAc)2/Li2 PdCl4 (Figure 9) showed a marked difference.
For the ReactIR 3D maps over time catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM, the intensity of the peak at 2095 cm–1 assigned to acetylene showed a slowly decreasing trend with increasing
time during the reaction process (Figure 8B). However, the ReactIR 3D maps over time
catalyzed by Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4 showed
a rapidly decreasing peak intensity within 2 h (Figure 9B). The marked differences indicated different
catalytic mechanisms when catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM and Cu(OAc)2/Li2 PdCl4. For homogeneous
Cu(OAc)2/Li2 PdCl4, the catalyst
can be evenly dispersed in the reaction solution and the environment
of isotropy allows the reactants to attack the catalyst from all directions.
Therefore, the reaction intermediates are also evenly dispersed in
the reaction solution. As such, at the beginning of the reaction,
reaction intermediates generated rapidly. For this reason, a rapidly
decreasing peak intensity trend was observed from the ReactIR 3D map
within 1 h. The reaction intermediates gradually converted into product
through the reaction process, so rapidly declining peak intensities
were observed. For the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM catalyst, a
heterogeneous catalytic mechanism was suggested. The surface of a
heterogeneous catalyst contains a limited number of active metal atoms.
Therefore, a surface reaction mechanism was considered.64 The reactants were adsorbed onto the internal
catalytic surface, and reaction intermediates were generated at specific
active sites during the reaction process. After that, the products
are diffused to the reaction solution by desorption of the products
from the catalytic surface, so few reaction intermediates diffused
to the reaction solution. Therefore, the ReactIR 3D maps of the coupling
reaction catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM showed that
the characteristic peaks of the substrate decreased during the reaction
process. To ensure our conclusion, FTIR spectra at different times
during catalysis by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM and Cu(OAc)2/Li2 PdCl4 were selected, as shown in Figure 7c. We assigned the
band at 1486 cm–1 to the skeleton vibration of the
benzene ring and the band at 1069 cm–1 to the flexural
vibration of the C–H bond. The bands at 823, 754, and 696 cm–1 are well known as the flexural vibration of para-substituted
benzene.65 All of the peak intensities
showed an increasing trend during the reaction process. The kinetic
analysis of the reaction was carried out using the band at 2095 cm–1 assigned to acetylene (Figure 10) because the high intensity would give
less error. For the reaction catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM, the yield decreased slowly within 16 h, indicating that full conversion
was achieved (Figure 10, red line), in which some intermediates were produced during 4–7
h. In the case of homogeneous Cu(OAc)2/Li2 PdCl4, a rapid decrease in absorbance was observed, indicating
a different catalytic mechanism (Figure 10, black line).

Figure 8 ReactIR plots over time
for the formation of triazole derivatives
by click reaction. (A) Three-dimensional map catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM. (B) FTIR spectra of triazole at different times, catalyzed
by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM.

Figure 9 ReactIR plots over time for the formation of triazole derivatives
by click reaction. (A) Three-dimensional map catalyzed by Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4. (B) FTIR spectra of triazole
at different times, catalyzed by Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4.

Figure 10 Kinetic analysis of
the reaction catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM and Cu(OAc)2/Li2PdCl4 (at 2092–2096 cm).

On the basis of the results obtained above, a proposed process
during the catalytic reaction was presented (Scheme 5). First, the CuII and PdII precursors were reduced in suit to active CuI and Pd0 on the surface and interior of the molecular
monolayer and efficiently stabilized by phenanthroline. Subsequently,
copper(I) acetylide and sodium azide quickly formed a cuprate–triazole
intermediate on the surface and the catalytic activation of Ph-Br
was realized on the Pd0 species to produce a palladium
intermediate on the surface or interior, which should lie at a proper
distance between the copper and active palladium sites, followed by
a quick transmetalation to afford a palladated intermediate on the
surface. A reductive elimination of these intermediates yielded the
desired product, accompanied by the generation of CuI and
Pd0 species. Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM is a true
heterogeneous catalysts and acts as a reservoir of molecular species.
In this latter case, either “naked copper and palladium atoms”
may leach from the monolayer or the first step of the reaction, namely,
the cycloaddition and the oxidative addition, occurred at the surface
of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM, followed by leaching of the cuprate–triazole
intermediate and the [Pd(Ar)X] species, which could be transmetalated
with the cuprate–triazole intermediate on the surface of the
catalyst or an internal molecule. The picture emerged is one where
catalytic conversion occurs on surface sites or internal sites, which
are made out of well-defined local ensembles of atoms on the surface
and interior of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM.

Scheme 5 Plausible Mechanism
for Catalyzing Click Reaction by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM
3 Conclusions
A solution to achieve the successful fabrication
of heterobimetallic
self-assembled monolayer (BMSAM) with a controlled composition
of different metals was developed. BMSAM containing phenanthroline
and Schiff-base groups was prepared, and its novel heterobimetallic
(Cu and Pd) self-assembled monolayer anchored on silicon (denoted
as Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM) with controlled composition and
fixed position was also fabricated and in-depth characterized by UV,
Raman, XPS, SEM, XRD, inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry
(ICP-AES), and WDCA analyses. The effects of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM on its catalytic properties were also systematically investigated.
The preferred orientation and composition of the heterobimetallic
monolayer can be controlled by means of selecting a material containing
certain functional groups and coordinating way. The catalytic properties
of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM for the three-component click reaction
were studied, and the catalytic mechanism of the click reaction in
a heterogeneous system was proposed preliminarily. The results showed
that the partial (ordered) isolation of active sites played a great
role in the catalytic performance. The catalytic reaction mechanism
of click reaction interpreted that the catalytic process mainly occurred
on the surface of the film and the internal active site (Pd) and rationalized
that the Cu(I) species and Pd(0) reduced from the Cu(II) and Pd(II)
catalysts were active species. The cuprate–triazole intermediate and the palladium intermediate,
whose formation was the key step, should lie in proper positions between
copper and active palladium sites, with which the rate of transmetalation
would be accelerated to increase the amount of the undesired Sonogashira
coupling product. We presumed that the number of real synergistic
sites having a proper distance between the different metals also played
a great role in the catalytic activity. These variations in the structure
of ligand lead to predictable changes in the catalyst activity that
can be used to optimize catalyst efficiency and provide an effective
route to obtain an ordered heterobimetallic self-assembled monolayer,
which represents a new intraheterometallic nanocatalyst with potential
applications in a wide range of heterogeneous catalyzed reactions.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Chemicals and Reagents
All chemicals,
silicon wafer, and ITO conductive glass (<10 Ω/sq) were purchased
from commercial sources. Solvents were distilled before use.

4.2 Apparatus
1H NMR and 13C NMR
spectra were recorded using a Bruker DPX-400 spectrometer
in CDCl3 with tetramethylsilane as an internal standard.
Mass spectra were measured with an LC-MSD-Trap-XCT instrument. WDCA
were performed on a commercial HARKE-SPCAX1 instrument. High-performance
liquid chromatography was conducted with a Waters 600 liquid chromatograph.
ICP-AES was carried out with an ICAP 6000 Series (Thermo Scientific).
XPS data were obtained with an ESCALab220i-XL electron spectrometer
from VG Scientific using 300 W Al Kα radiation. XRD was performed
on a PAN analytical X-Pert PRO instrument. FTIR spectroscopy was carried
out on a BRUKER TENSOR FTIR spectrometer using KBr pellets. Raman
spectra were measured with a Thermo Scientific DXR Raman microscope
with an excitation laser wavelength of 532 nm. SEM images were recorded
using a Hitachi S-4800 system. UV–vis spectra were recorded
on a PerkinElmer Lambda 35 UV–vis spectrophotometer.

4.3 Preparation of Compounds
1,10-Phenanthroline
imine derivative and terpyridine derivative, 2-(4-formylphenyl)imidazo[4,5-f][1,10]phenanthroline (Fmp), 4-(1H-imidazo[4,5-f]-1,10-phenanthrolin-2-yl)phenol (HOP), and 4-(4-carboxyphenyl)-2,2,6,2-terpyridine (TPy) were prepared according to the literature35 (Figures S1–S9).

4.4 Preparation of Catalytic Monolayer
Surface hydrophilic
treatment and surface modification of 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane,
ITO, quartz, and glass were treated according to the literature.33

4.4.1 Monolayer Preparation
of 1,10-Phenanthroline
Imine or Terpyridine Derivative on the Wafer
A 3-aminopropylated
wafer and 2 mmol of 1,10-phenanthroline carboxaldehyde or tripydine carboxaldehyde were placed in dry toluene (20 mL). The
entire mixture was heated at 80 or 25 °C for 24 h in a nitrogen
stream. The functionalized wafer was carefully washed by petroleum
ether, ethyl acetate, ethanol, and deionized water.33

4.4.2 Preparation of a Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM Monolayer on the Wafer with Certain Ratio
of Pd/Cu
Route
1: Appropriate amounts of copper acetate were dissolved in water.
The functionalized wafer was put into the prepared solution for 16
h and then washed by sonication in ethanol, to give a Si-Cu BMSAM
self-assembled monolayer. The Cu BMSAM slide was added to the solution
of Li2PdCl4 for 16 h and washed with ethanol
to yield the Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM monolayer. Route 2: The
functionalized wafer was added to the mixture of copper acetate and
Li2PdCl4 at room temperature for 3 or 16 h,
and the physisorbed species were removed by sonication in ethanol
to give Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM, Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd BMSAM, and Si-TPy-Cu-Pd, with different ratios of Pd/Cu.

4.5 Electrochemical Measurements
Voltammetric
detection was performed on a CHI650A electrochemical work station
(CH Instruments, Inc., Shanghai, China). The ITO electrode linked
with catalyst was used as the working electrode. A Pt wire and a Ag/AgCl
wire were used as the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively.
The voltammetric measurements were recorded with cyclic potential
scans between −1.0 and 0 V in a 0.1 mol L–1 Tris–HCl buffer solution.

4.6 General
Procedure for the Three-Component
Click Reactions
Organic azide (0.15 mmol), benzyl bromide
(0.125 mmol), and alkyne (0.15 mmol) were added into a glass vessel
equipped with a magnetic stir bar under a nitrogen atmosphere. Catalysts
immobilized on the substrates were added into the vessel under N2, and degassed water was added to obtain 5–7 mL as
the total volume of water. The reaction mixture was stirred for 16
h at 25 °C. Then, the mixture was extracted using ethylacetate
(3 × 10 mL). The solvent was removed in vacuo and chromatographed
with petroleum ether/ethylacetate (1:1,v/v) as an eluent to give the corresponding 1,2,3-triazole
derivatives.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00364.Synthesis of ligands;
characterization of Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd
BMSAM; contrast experimental and characterization; preparation
and characterization of Si-HOP-Cu-Pd and Si-TPy-Cu-Pd; substrate scope of synthesis catalyzed by Si-Fmp-Cu-Pd and BMSAM (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00364_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully
acknowledge the Chinese Academy of
Sciences (Grant No. XDA09030203), the Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant Nos. 20973157 and 21172200), the NSFH (142300410223),
and the Research and Development Foundation of Zhengzhou (094SGZG23056)
for financial support. They also thank Prof. Zhi Ma (Institute of
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai) for Raman measurement.
==== Refs
References
a Cho S. H. ; Kim J. Y. ; Kwak J. ; Chang S. 
Recent advances
in the transition metal-catalyzed twofold oxidative C–H bond
activation strategy for C–C and C–N bond formation . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 5068 –5083 . 10.1039/c1cs15082k .21643614  b Jana R. ; Pathak T. P. ; Sigman M. S. 
Advances
in Transition Metal (Pd,Ni,Fe)-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions
Using Alkyl-organometallics as Reaction Partners . Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 111 , 1417 –1492 . 10.1021/cr100327p .21319862  c Liu S. ; Jin Z. ; Teo Y. C. ; Xia Y. 
Efficient
Synthesis of Rigid Ladder Polymers via Palladium Catalyzed Annulation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 17434 –17437 . 10.1021/ja5110415 .25423254  d Gnanamgari D. ; Crabtree R. H. 
Terpyridine
Ruthenium-Catalyzed One-Pot Conversion of Aldehydes into Amides . Organometallics 
2009 , 28 , 922 –924 . 10.1021/om8010678 . e Kamata K. ; Suzuki A. ; Nakai Y. ; Nakazawa H. 
Catalytic
Hydrosilylation of Alkenes by Iron Complexes Containing Terpyridine
Derivatives as Ancillary Ligands . Organometallics 
2012 , 31 , 3825 –3828 . 10.1021/om300279t .
Allen S. E. ; Walvoord R. R. ; Padilla-Salinas R. ; Kozlowski M. C. 
Aerobic
Copper-Catalyzed Organic Reactions . Chem. Rev. 
2013 , 113 , 6234 –6264 . 10.1021/cr300527g .23786461 
a Chinchilla R. ; Nájera C. 
Chemicals from Alkynes with Palladium
Catalysts . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 1783 –1826 . 10.1021/cr400133p .23789922  b Deeming A. S. ; Russell C. J. ; Willis M. C. 
Palladium(II)-Catalyzed Synthesis
of Sulfinates from Boronic Acids and DABSO: A Redox-Neutral, Phosphine-Free
Transformation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 747 –750 . 10.1002/anie.201508370 . c Surry D. S. ; Buchwald S. L. 
Biaryl Phosphane Ligands in Palladium-Catalyzed Amination . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 6338 –6347 . 10.1002/anie.200800497 . d Balanta A. ; Godard C. ; Claver C. 
Pd nanoparticles
for C–C coup6ling reactions . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 4973 –4985 . 10.1039/c1cs15195a .21879073  e Larsen M. H. ; Nielsen M.B. 
The Gilded Edge in Acetylenic Scaffolding
II: A Computational Study of the Transmetalation Processes Involved
in Palladium-Catalyzed Cross-Couplings of Gold(I) Acetylides . Organometallics. 
2015 , 34 , 3678 –3685 . 10.1021/acs.organomet.5b00135 . f Chow P.-K. ; Cheng G. ; Tong G. S. M. ; Ma C. ; Kwok W.-M. ; Ang W.-H. ; Chung C. Y.-S. ; Yang C. ; Wang F. ; Che C.-M. 
Highly
luminescent palladium(II) complexes with sub-millisecond blue to green
phosphorescent excited states. Photocatalysis and highly efficient
PSF-OLEDs . Chem. Sci. 
2016 , 7 , 6083 –6098 . 10.1039/C6SC00462H .30034749 
a Yu F. ; Li F. ; Zhang B. ; Li H. ; Sun L. 
Efficient Electrocatalytic Water Oxidation by a Copper Oxide Thin
Film in Borate Buffer . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5 , 627 –630 . 10.1021/cs501510e . b Hu X. ; Soleilhavoup M. ; Melaimi M. ; Chu J. X. ; Bertrand G. 
Air-Stable
(CAAC)CuCl and (CAAC)CuBH4 Complexes as Catalysts for the
Hydrolytic Dehydrogenation of BH3NH3 . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 6008 –6011 . 10.1002/anie.201500224 .
a Nguyen T. N. T. ; Thiel N. O. ; Pape F. ; Teichert J. F. 
Copper(I)-Catalyzed
Allylic Substitutions with a Hydride Nucleophile . Org. Lett. 
2016 , 18 , 2455 –2458 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.6b00941 .27151495  b Wendlandt A. E. ; Suess A. M. ; Stahl S. S. 
Copper-Catalyzed
Aerobic Oxidative C-H Functionalizations: Trends and Mechanistic Insights . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 11062 –11087 . 10.1002/anie.201103945 . c Monnier F. ; Taillefer M. 
Catalytic
C-C, C-N, and C-O Ullmann-Type Coupling Reactions: Copper Makes a
Difference . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 3096 –3099 . 10.1002/anie.200703209 . d Thomas A. W. 
Modern
Synthetic Methods for Copper-Mediated C(aryl)-O, C(aryl)-N, and C(aryl)-S
Bond Formation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2003 , 42 , 5400 –5449 . 10.1002/anie.200300594 . e Zhou J.-L. ; Wang L.-J. ; Xu H. ; Sun X.-L ; Tang Y. 
Highly Enantioselective
Synthesis of Multifunctionalized Dihydrofurans by Copper-Catalyzed
Asymmetric [4 + 1] Cycloadditions of α-Benzylidene-β-ketoester
with Diazo Compound . ACS Catal. 
2013 , 3 , 685 –688 . 10.1021/cs400019u . f Castanheiro T. ; Suffert J. ; Gulea M. ; Donnard M. 
Aerobic Copper-Mediated
Domino Three-Component Approach to 2-Aminobenzothiazole Derivatives . Org. Lett. 
2016 , 18 , 2588 –2591 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.6b00967 .27192105  g Alexakis A. ; Bäckvall J.-E. ; Krause N. ; Pàmies O. ; Diéguez M. 
Enantioselective Copper-Catalyzed Conjugate Addition
and Allylic Substitution Reactions . Chem. Rev. 
2008 , 108 , 2796 –2823 . 10.1021/cr0683515 .18671436 
a Sevin A. ; Hengtai Y. ; Chaquin P. 
Theoretical semi-empirical
study of concerted oxidative additions to dinuclear complexes . J. Organomet. Chem. 
1984 , 262 , 391 –397 . 10.1016/S0022-328X(00)99166-6 . b Rowlands G. J. 
Ambifunctional cooperative catalysts . Tetrahedron 
2001 , 57 , 1865 –1882 . 10.1016/S0040-4020(01)00057-6 . c Kuwamura N. ; Kurioka Y. ; Konno T. 
A platinum(II)–palladium(II)–nickel(II)
heterotrimetallic coordination polymer showing a cooperative effect
on catalytic hydrogen evolution . Chem. Commun. 
2017 , 53 , 846 –849 . 10.1039/C6CC08789B .d Winpenny R. E. P.  High Nuclearity
Clusters: Clusters and Aggregates with Paramagnetic Centers: Oxygen
and Nitrogen Bridged Systems . In Comprehensive
Coordination Chemistry II , 2 nd ed.; McCleverty J. A. , Meyer T. J.  , Eds.; Academic
Press , 2004 ; Vol. 7 , pp 125 –171 . e Brechin E. K. 
Using tripodal
alcohols to build high-spin molecules and single-molecule magnets . Chem. Commun. 
2005 , 5141 –5153 . 10.1039/b510102f . f Nesterov D. S. ; Kokozay V. N. ; Skelton B. W. 
A Pentanuclear Cu/Co/Ni
Complex with 2-(Dimethylamino)ethanol -Observation of a Rare Molecular
Structure Type and Its Place in GeneralStructural Types: An Analysis
of the Cambridge Structural Database . Eur. J.
Inorg. Chem. 
2009 , 5469 –5473 . 10.1002/ejic.200900815 .
a Severin K. 
Asymmetric Halogeno-Bridged Complexes:
New Reagents
in Organometallic Synthesis and Catalysis . Chem.
– Eur. J. 
2002 , 8 , 1514 –1518 . 10.1002/1521-3765(20020402)8:7<1514::AID-CHEM1514>3.0.CO;2-Z . b Wheatley N. ; Kalk P. 
Structure and Reactivity of Early–Late
Heterobimetallic Complexes . Chem. Rev. 
1999 , 99 , 3379 –3420 . 10.1021/cr980325m .11849025  c Zhu D. D. ; Liu J.-L. ; Qiao S. Z. 
Recent Advances in Inorganic Heterogeneous
Electrocatalysts for Reduction of Carbon Dioxide . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 3423 –3452 . 10.1002/adma.201504766 .26996295  d Wang Z.-L. ; Yan J.-M. ; Ping Y. ; Wang H.-L. ; Zheng W.-T ; Jiang Q. 
An Efficient CoAuPd/C Catalyst for
Hydrogen Generation from Formic Acid at Room Temperature . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 4406 –4409 . 10.1002/anie.201301009 .
a Singh A. K. ; Xu Q. 
Synergistic Catalysis over Bimetallic
Alloy Nanoparticles . ChemCatChem 
2013 , 5 , 652 –676 . 10.1002/cctc.201200591 . b Gilroy K. D. ; Ruditskiy A. ; Peng H. C. ; Qin D. ; Xia Y. N. 
Bimetallic
Nanocrystals: Syntheses, Properties, and Applications . Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 10414 –10472 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00211 .27367000  c Singh A. ; Mehrotra R. C. 
Novel heterometallic alkoxide coordination
systems of polyols (glycols, di- and tri-ethanolamines) derived from
the corresponding homometallic moieties . Chem.
Rev. 
2004 , 248 , 101 –118 . 10.1016/j.cct.2003.09.004 . d John L. ; Sobata P. 
Acc. Synthesis of
Heterometallic Compounds with Uncommon Combinations of Elements for
Oxide Nanomaterials Using Organometallics . Acc.
Chem. Res. 
2014 , 47 , 470 –481 . 10.1021/ar400153q .24164412  e Cook T. R. ; Stang P. 
Recent Developments in the Preparation
and Chemistry of Metallacycles and Metallacages via Coordination . Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 7001 –7045 . 10.1021/cr5005666 .25813093  f Li H. ; Yao Z.-J. ; Jin G.-X. 
Multi-component
coordination-driven self-assembly toward heterometallic macrocycles
and cages . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 293–294 , 139 –157 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.08.014 . g Ogawa T. ; Kumagai N. ; Shibasaki M. 
Self-Assembling Neodymium/Sodium
Heterobimetallic Asymmetric Catalyst Confined in a Carbon Nanotube
Network . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 6196 –6201 . 10.1002/anie.201302236 .
a Zhang H. ; Jin M. ; Xia Y. 
Enhancing
the catalytic
and electrocatalytic properties of Pt-based catalysts by forming bimetallic
nanocrystals with Pd . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 8035 –8049 . 10.1039/c2cs35173k .23080521  b Li G. ; Sproviero E. M. ; McNamara W. R. 
Reversible Visible-Light Photooxidation
of an Oxomanganese Water-Oxidation Catalyst Covalently Anchored to
TiO2 Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2010 , 114 , 14214 –14222 . 10.1021/jp908925z .19924873  c Han L. ; Yu X.-Y. ; Lou X.-W. 
Formation of Prussian-Blue-Analog
Nanocages via a Direct Etching Method and their Conversion into Ni-Co-Mixed
Oxide for Enhanced Oxygen Evolution . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 4601 –4605 . 10.1002/adma.201506315 .27008038  d Liu Y.-X. ; Liu X.-W. ; Feng Q.-C. ; He D.-S. ; Zhang L.-B. ; Lian C. ; Shen R.-A. ; Zhao G.-F. ; Ji Y.-J. ; Wang D.-S. ; Zhou G. ; Li Y.-D. 
Intermetallic NixMy
(M = Ga and Sn) Nanocrystals: A Non-precious Metal Catalyst for Semi-Hydrogenation
of Alkynes . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 4747 –4754 . 10.1002/adma.201600603 .27074143  e Chen Y. ; Shi J.-L. 
Chemistry of Mesoporous Organosilica in Nanotechnology:
Molecularly Organic-Inorganic Hybridization into Frameworks . Adv. Mater. 
2016 , 28 , 3235 –3272 . 10.1002/adma.201505147 .26936391 
Cao S. ; Tao F. F. ; Tang Y. ; Li Y.-T. ; Yu J.-G. 
Size- and
shape-dependent catalytic performances of oxidation and reduction
reactions on nanocatalysts . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2016 , 45 , 4747 –4765 . 10.1039/C6CS00094K .27276189 
a Lva J.-J. ; Wang Z.-J. ; Feng J.-J. ; Qiu R. H. ; Wang A.-J. ; Xu X. H. 
Facile synthesis
of highly active Pd-Cu nanowires catalyst through a simple wet-chemical
strategy for ligand-free Suzuki cross coupling reaction . Appl. Catal., A 
2016 , 522 , 188 –193 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2016.02.015 . b Crespo-Quesada M. ; Yarulin A. ; Jin M. S. ; Xia Y. A. ; Kiwi-Minsker L. 
Structure Sensitivity of Alkynol
Hydrogenation on Shape- and Size-Controlled Palladium Nanocrystals:
Which Sites Are Most Active and Selective? . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 12787 –12794 . 10.1021/ja204557m .21749155  c Hong J. W. ; Kim D. ; Lee Y. W. ; Kim M. ; Kang S. W. ; Han S. W. 
Atomic-Distribution-Dependent Electrocatalytic
Activity of Au–Pd Bimetallic Nanocrystals . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 8876 –8880 . 10.1002/anie.201102578 . d Teng X. ; Wang Q. ; Liu P. ; Han W. Q. ; Frenkel A. I. ; Wen W. ; Marinkovic N. ; Hanson J. C. ; Rodriguez J. A. 
Formation of Pd/Au Nanostructures
from Pd Nanowires via Galvanic Replacement Reaction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 1093 –1101 . 10.1021/ja077303e .18161978  e Hong J.-W. ; Kim D.-H. ; Lee Y. W. ; Kim M. J. ; Kang S. W. ; Han S. W. 
Atomic-Distribution-Dependent
Electrocatalytic Activity of Au-Pd Bimetallic Nanocrystals . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 8876 –8880 . 10.1002/anie.201102578 . f Rej S. ; Hsia C.-F. ; Chen T.-Y. ; Lin F.-C. ; Huang J.-S. ; Huang M. H. 
Facet-Dependent
and Light-Assisted Efficient Hydrogen Evolution from Ammonia Borane
Using Gold-Palladium Core-Shell Nanocatalysts . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2016 , 55 , 7222 –7226 . 10.1002/anie.201603021 . g Kim D. ; Lee Y. W. ; Lee S. B. ; Han S. W. 
Convex Polyhedral Au@Pd Core-Shell Nanocrystals with
High-Index Facets . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 159 –163 . 10.1002/anie.201106899 . h Chen Y.-Z. ; Xu Q. ; Yu S.-H. ; Jiang H.-L. 
Tiny Pd@Co
Core-Shell Nanoparticles Confined inside a Metal-Organic Framework
for Highly Efficient Catalysis . Small 
2015 , 11 , 71 –76 . 10.1002/smll.201401875 .25201445 
a Bracey C. L. ; Ellis P. R. ; Hutchings G. J. 
Application
of copper-gold alloys in catalysis: current status and future perspectives . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2009 , 38 , 2231 –2243 . 10.1039/b817729p .19623346  b Gawande M.
B. ; Goswami A. ; Felpin F.-X. ; Asefa T. ; Huang X. X. ; Silva R. ; Zou X. ; Zboril R. ; Varma R. S. 
Cu and Cu-Based Nanoparticles: Synthesis
and Applications in Catalysis . Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 116 , 3722 –3811 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00482 .26935812  c Hirunsit P. ; Soodsawang W. ; Limtrakul J. 
CO2 Electrochemical Reduction to Methane and Methanol on Copper-Based
Alloys: Theoretical Insight . J. Phys. Chem.
C. 
2015 , 119 , 8238 –8245 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b01574 . d Zhao W. ; Yang L. ; Yin Y. ; Jin M. 
Thermodynamic
controlled synthesis of intermetallic Au3Cu alloy nanocrystals
from Cu microparticles . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 902 –912 . 10.1039/C3TA13921B .
a Miyaura N. ; Suzuki A. 
Palladium-Catalyzed
Cross-Coupling Reactions of Organoboron Compounds . Chem. Rev. 
1995 , 95 , 2457 –2483 . 10.1021/cr00039a007 . b Liu R.-R. ; Li B.-L. ; Lu J. ; Shen C. ; Gao J.-R ; Jia Y.-X. 
Palladium/L-Proline-Catalyzed
Enantioselective α-Arylative Desymmetrization of Cyclohexanones . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 5198 –5201 . 10.1021/jacs.6b01214 .27078124  c Liu Z. X. ; Tan H. C. ; Fu T. R. ; Xia Y. ; Qiu D. ; Zhang Y. ; Wang J. B. 
Pd(0)-Catalyzed
Carbene Insertion into Si-Si and Sn-Sn Bonds . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 12800 –12803 . 10.1021/jacs.5b09135 .26401829  d Wang Z.-J. ; Lv J.-J. ; Feng J.-J. ; Li N. ; Xu X. ; Wang A.-J. ; Qiu R. 
Enhanced catalytic performance of
Pd-Pt nanodendrites for ligand-free Suzuki cross-coupling reactions . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 28467 –28473 . 10.1039/C5RA02462E . e Zhang Y. ; Bu L. Z. ; Jiang K. Z. ; Guo S. J. ; Huang X. Q. 
Concave Pd-Pt Core-Shell Nanocrystals with Ultrathin
Pt Shell Feature and Enhanced Catalytic Performance . Small 
2016 , 12 , 706 –712 . 10.1002/smll.201502755 .26708012  f Li Y. ; Chen Y. ; Zhou H. ; Duan X. ; Huang Y. 
Plasmonic and Catalytic AuPd Nanowheels for the Efficient Conversion
of Light into Chemical Energy . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 6063 –6067 . 10.1002/anie.201301096 . g Zheng Z. ; Tachikawa T. ; Majima T. 
Plasmon-Enhanced Formic
Acid Dehydrogenation Using Anisotropic Pd-Au Nanorods Studied at the
Single-Particle Level . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 948 –857 . 10.1021/ja511719g .25543832  h Wang F. ; Li C. ; Chen H. ; Jiang R. ; Sun L.-D. ; Li Q. ; Wang J. ; Yu J. C. ; Yan C.-H. 
Plasmonic Harvesting of Light Energy for Suzuki Coupling
Reactions . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 5588 –5595 . 10.1021/ja310501y .23521598  i Moreno M. ; Kissell L. N. ; Jasinski J. B. ; Zamborini F. P. 
Selectivity
and Reactivity of Alkylamine- and Alkanethiolate-Stabilized Pd and
PdAg Nanoparticles for Hydrogenation and Isomerization of Allyl Alcohol . ACS Catal. 
2012 , 2 , 2602 –2613 . 10.1021/cs300361y . j Jiang H. ; Zhang Y. ; Chen D. S. ; Zhou B. ; Zhang Y. H. 
An Approach to Tetraphenylenes via Pd-Catalyzed C-H
Functionalization . Org. Lett. 
2016 , 18 , 2032 –2035 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.6b00641 .27109585  k Osswald J. ; Kovnir K. ; Armbrüster M. ; Giedigkeit R. ; Jentoft R. E. ; Wild U. ; Grin Y. ; Schlögl R. 
Palladium-gallium intermetallic compounds for the selective
hydrogenation of acetylene: Part I: Preparation and structural investigation
under reaction conditions . J. Catal. 
2008 , 258 , 210 –209 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2008.06.013 . l Feng L. ; Chong H. ; Li P. ; Xiang J. ; Fu F. ; Yang S. ; Yu H. ; Sheng H. ; Zhu M. 
Pd-Ni Alloy
Nanoparticles as Effective Catalysts for Miyaura-Heck Coupling Reactions . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 11511 –11515 . 10.1021/jp510988m . m Wang F. ; Li C. ; Chen H. ; Jiang R. ; Sun L.-D. ; Li Q. ; Wang J. ; Yu J. C. ; Yan C.-H. 
Plasmonic Harvesting of Light Energy
for Suzuki Coupling Reactions . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 5588 –5597 . 10.1021/ja310501y .23521598  n Wang Q. ; Li X. W. 
Synthesis of 1H-Indazoles from Imidates
and Nitrosobenzenes via Synergistic Rhodium/Copper Catalysis . Org. Lett. 
2016 , 18 , 2102 –2105 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.6b00727 .27082502  o Li Y. ; Deng P. ; Zeng Y. M. ; Xiong Y. ; Zhou H. 
anti-Selective Asymmetric Henry Reaction Catalyzed by a Heterobimetallic
Cu-Sm-Aminophenol Sulfonamide Complex . Org.
Lett. 
2016 , 18 , 1578 –1581 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.6b00432 .26974859  p Rasul S. ; Anjum D. H. ; Jedidi A. ; Minenkov Y. ; Cavallo L. ; Takanabe K. 
A Highly Selective Copper-Indium
Bimetallic Electrocatalyst for the Electrochemical Reduction of Aqueous
CO2 to CO . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 2146 –2155 . 10.1002/anie.201410233 .
a Sengupta D. ; Saha J. ; De G. ; Basu B. 
Pd/Cu bimetallic nanoparticles embedded in macroporous ion-exchange
resins: an excellent heterogeneous catalyst for the Sonogashira reaction . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 3986 –3992 . 10.1039/c3ta14916a . b Rossy C. ; Majimel J. ; Delapierre M. T. ; Fouquet E. ; Felpin F.-X. 
Palladium and copper-supported on
charcoal: A heterogeneous multi-task catalyst for sequential Sonogashira-Click
and Click-Heck reactions . J. Organomet. Chem. 
2014 , 755 , 78 –85 . 10.1016/j.jorganchem.2014.01.006 . c Tsukada N. ; Ohnishi N. ; Aono S. ; Takahashi F. 
Amination
of Aryl Iodides Catalyzed by a Palladium-Copper Complex Supported
by a Chelate-Bridging Ligand . Organometallics 
2012 , 31 , 7336 –7338 . 10.1021/om300902t .
a Gallop C. W. D. ; Chen M.-T. ; Navarro O. 
Sonogashira
Couplings Catalyzed by Collaborative (N-Heterocyclic Carbene)-Copper
and -Palladium Complexes . Org. Lett. 
2014 , 16 , 3724 –3727 . 10.1021/ol501540w .24992380  b Wei F. ; Li H. Y. ; Song C. L. ; Ma Y. D. ; Zhou L. ; Tung C.-H. ; Xu Z. H. 
Cu/Pd-Catalyzed, Three-Component
Click Reaction of Azide, Alkyne, and Aryl Halide: One-Pot Strategy
toward Trisubstituted Triazoles . Org. Lett. 
2015 , 17 , 2860 –2863 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.5b01342 .26000564 
a Yamamoto K. ; Bruun T. ; Kim J. Y. ; Zhang L. ; Lautens M. 
A New Multicomponent Multicatalyst
Reaction (MC)2R: Chemoselective Cycloaddition and Latent
Catalyst Activation for the Synthesis of Fully Substituted 1,2,3-Triazoles . Org. Lett. 
2016 , 18 , 2644 –2647 . 10.1021/acs.orglett.6b00975 .27213631  b Karshtedt D. ; Bell A. T. ; Tilley T. D. 
Synthesis and Study
of Heterobimetallic Complexes Supported by a Ferrocene-Based Bisphosphine-Diamine
Ligand . Organometallics 
2003 , 22 , 2855 –2861 . 10.1021/om0300631 .
a Kang Y. J. ; Murray C. B. 
Synthesis and Electrocatalytic
Properties of Cubic Mn-Pt Nanocrystals (Nanocubes) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 7568 –7577 . 10.1021/ja100705j .20469855  b Campbell C.
T. 
Nanoparticles for Catalysis . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 1671 –1672 . 10.1021/ar400148q .23957601 
a Baleizão C. ; Garcia H. 
Chiral Salen Complexes:
An Overview to Recoverable and Reusable Homogeneous and Heterogeneous
Catalysts . Chem. Rev. 
2006 , 106 , 3987 –4043 . 10.1021/cr050973n .16967927  b Liu X. ; Novoa N. ; Manzur C. ; Carrillo D. ; Hamon J.-R. 
New organometallic
Schiff-base copper complexes as efficient “click” reaction
precatalysts . New J. Chem. 
2016 , 40 , 3308 –3313 . 10.1039/C5NJ02681D . c Deraedt C. ; Pinaud N. ; Astruc D. 
Recyclable Catalytic
Dendrimer Nanoreactor for Part-Per-Million CuI Catalysis
of “Click” Chemistry in Water . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 12092 –12098 . 10.1021/ja5061388 .25093967  d Girard C. ; Onen E. ; Aufort M. ; Beauviere S. ; Samson E. ; Herscovici J. 
Reusable Polymer-Supported Catalyst
for the [3 + 2] Huisgen Cycloaddition in Automation Protocols . Org. Lett. 
2006 , 8 , 1689 –1692 . 10.1021/ol060283l .16597142  e Baig R. B. N. ; Varma R. S. 
Copper on chitosan: a recyclable
heterogeneous catalyst for azide-alkyne cycloaddition reactions in
water . Green Chem. 
2013 , 15 , 1839 –1843 . 10.1039/c3gc40401c . f Pourjavadia A. ; Safaiea N. ; Hosseinia S. H. ; Bennett C. 
Graphene oxide/poly(vinyl imidazole) nanocomposite:
an effective support for preparation of highly loaded heterogeneous
copper catalyst . Appl. Organomet. Chem. 
2015 , 29 , 601 –607 . 10.1002/aoc.3336 . g Rossy C. ; Majimel J. ; Delapierre M. T. ; Fouquet E. ; Felpin F.-X. 
Palladium and copper-supported on
charcoal: A heterogeneous multi-task catalyst for sequential Sonogashira-Click
and Click-Heck reactions . J. Organomet. Chem. 
2014 , 755 , 78 –85 . 10.1016/j.jorganchem.2014.01.006 . h Collis W. A. E. C. ; Horvath I. T. 
Heterogenization
of homogeneous catalytic systems . Catal. Sci.
Technol. 
2011 , 1 , 912 –919 . 10.1039/c1cy00174d . i Gawande M. B. ; Branco P. S. ; Varma R. S. 
Nano-magnetite (Fe3O4) as a support for recyclable catalysts in the
development of sustainable methodologies . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 3371 –3393 . 10.1039/c3cs35480f .23420127  j Climent M. J. ; Corma A. ; Iborra S. 
Heterogeneous Catalysts
for the One-Pot Synthesis of Chemicals and Fine Chemicals . Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 111 , 1072 –1133 . 10.1021/cr1002084 .21105733  k Felpin F.-X. ; Ibarguren O. ; Nassar-Hardy L. ; Fouquet E. 
Synthesis of Oxindoles by Tandem Heck-Reduction-Cyclization
(HRC) from a Single Bifunctional, in Situ Generated Pd/C Catalyst . J. Org. Chem. 
2009 , 74 , 1349 –1352 . 10.1021/jo802467s .19113937  l Ibarguren O. ; Zakri C. ; Fouquet E. ; Felpin F.-X. 
Heterogeneous palladium multi-task catalyst for sequential
Heck-reduction-cyclization (HRC) reactions: influence of the support . Tetrahedron Lett. 
2009 , 50 , 5071 –5074 . 10.1016/j.tetlet.2009.06.084 . m Zhang X. ; Corma A. 
Supported
Gold(III) Catalysts for Highly Efficient Three-Component Coupling
Reactions . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 4358 –4361 . 10.1002/anie.200800098 .
a Li C. W. ; Kanan M. W. 
CO2 Reduction
at Low Overpotential on Cu Electrodes Resulting from the Reduction
of Thick Cu2O Films . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 7231 –7234 . 10.1021/ja3010978 .22506621  b Xiao M. ; Li S. ; Zhao X. ; Zhu J. ; Yin M. ; Liu C. ; Xing W. 
Enhanced Catalytic Performance of
Composition-Tunable PtCu Nanowire Networks for Methanol Electrooxidation . ChemCatChem 
2014 , 6 , 2825 –2831 . 10.1002/cctc.201402186 . c Xiao M. ; Feng L. G. ; Zhu J. B. ; Liu C. P. ; Xing W. 
Rapid synthesis of a PtRu nano-sponge with different surface compositions
and performance evaluation for methanol electrooxidation . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 9467 –9471 . 10.1039/C5NR00639B .25966842  d Guo X. ; Zhang Y. ; Deng C. ; Li X. ; Xue Y. ; Yan Y. M. ; Sun K. 
Composition dependent activity of
Cu-Pt nanocrystals for electrochemical reduction of CO2 . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 1345 –1348 . 10.1039/C4CC08175G . e Metin Ö ; Ho S. ; Alp C. ; Can H. ; Mankin M. ; Gültekin M. ; Chi M. ; Sun S. 
Ni/Pd core/shell
nanoparticles supported on rapheme as a highly active and reusable
catalyst for Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling reaction . Nano Res. 
2013 , 6 , 10 –18 . 10.1007/s12274-012-0276-4 . f Metin Ö ; Kayhan E. ; Özkar S. ; Schneider J. J. 
Palladium nanoparticles supported on chemically derived
rapheme: An efficient and reusable catalyst for the dehydrogenation
of ammonia borane . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2012 , 37 , 8161 –8169 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.02.128 . g Thathagar M. B. ; Beckers J. ; Rothenberg G. 
Copper-Catalyzed
Suzuki Cross-Coupling Using Mixed Nanocluster Catalysts . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2002 , 124 , 11858 –11865 . 10.1021/ja027716+ .12358523 
a Akitsu T. ; Itoh T. 
Polarized spectroscopy
of hybrid materials of chiral Schiff base cobalt(II), nickel(II),
copper(II), and zinc(II) complexes and photochromic azobenzenes in
PMMA films . Polyhedron 
2010 , 29 , 477 –487 . 10.1016/j.poly.2009.06.050 . b Wezenberg S. J. ; Kleij A. W. 
Material Applications for Salen Frameworks . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 2354 –2364 . 10.1002/anie.200702468 . c Crowley J. D. ; Bandeen P. H. ; Hanton L. R. 
A one pot multi-component CuAAC “click”
approach to bidentate and tridentate pyridyl-1,2,3-triazole ligands:
Synthesis, X-ray structures and copper(II) and silver(I) complexes . Polyhedron 
2010 , 29 , 70 –83 . 10.1016/j.poly.2009.06.010 .
Tang W. ; Peterson A. A. ; Varela A. S. ; Jovanov Z. P. ; Bech L. ; Durand W. J. ; Dahl S. ; Norskov J. K. ; Chorkendorff I. 
The importance
of surface morphology in controlling the selectivity of polycrystalline
copper for CO2 electroreduction . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 76 –81 . 10.1039/C1CP22700A .22071504 
a Kolb H. C. ; Finn M. G. ; Sharpless K. B. 
Click Chemistry:
Diverse Chemical Function from a Few Good Reactions . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2001 , 40 , 2004 –2012 . 10.1002/1521-3773(20010601)40:11<2004::AID-ANIE2004>3.0.CO;2-5 . b Rostovtsev V. V. ; Green L. G. ; Fokin V. V. ; Sharpless K. B. 
A Stepwise Huisgen Cycloaddition Process: Copper(I)-Catalyzed
Regioselective “Ligation” of Azides and Terminal Alkynes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2002 , 41 , 2596 –2599 . 10.1002/1521-3773(20020715)41:14<2596::AID-ANIE2596>3.0.CO;2-4 . c Pourjavadi A. ; Safaie N. ; Hosseini Seyed H. ; Bennett C. 
Graphene oxide/poly(vinyl
imidazole) nanocomposite: an effective support for preparation of
highly loaded heterogeneous copper catalyst . Appl. Organometal. Chem. 
2015 , 29 , 601 –607 . 10.1002/aoc.3336 .
a Wang C. L. ; Wang D. ; Yu S. L. ; Cornilleau T. ; Ruiz J. ; Salmon L. ; Astruc D. 
Design and
applications of an efficient amphiphilic “click” CuI
catalyst in water . ACS Catal. 
2016 , 6 , 5424 –5431 . 10.1021/acscatal.6b01389 . b Wu P. ; Felman A. K. ; Nugent A. K. ; Hawker C. J. ; Scheel A. ; Voit B. ; Pyun J. ; Frechet J. M. J. ; Sharpless K. B. ; Fokin V. V. 
Efficiency and Fidelity in a Click-Chemistry Route
to Triazole Dendrimers by the Copper(I)-Catalyzed Ligation of Azides
and Alkynes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2004 , 43 , 3928 –3932 . 10.1002/anie.200454078 . c Liang L. ; Astruc D. 
The copper(I)-catalyzed alkyne-azide
cycloaddition (CuAAC) “click” reaction and its applications.
An overview . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 255 , 2933 –2945 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.06.028 . d Wang C. ; Ikhlef D. ; Kahlal S. ; Saillard J. ; Astruc D. 
Metal-catalyzed azide-alkyne “click”
reactions: Mechanistic overview and recent trends . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 316 , 1 –20 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2016.02.010 . e Murphy A. R. ; Frechet J. M. J. ; Chang P. ; Lee J. ; Subramanian V. 
Organic Thin Film Transistors from a Soluble Oligothiophene
Derivative Containing Thermally Removable Solubilizing Groups . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 1596 –1597 . 10.1021/ja039529x .14871066  f Chan T. R. ; Hilgraf R. ; Sharpless K. B. ; Fokin V. V. 
Polytriazoles as Copper(I)-Stabilizing Ligands in Catalysis . Org. Lett. 
2004 , 6 , 2853 –2855 . 10.1021/ol0493094 .15330631  g Hong V. ; Presolski S. I. ; Ma C. ; Finn M. G. 
Analysis
and Optimization of Copper-Catalyzed Azide-Alkyne Cycloaddition for
Bioconjugation . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009 , 48 , 9879 –9883 . 10.1002/anie.200905087 . h Tasdelen M. A. ; Yagci Y. 
Light-induced copper(I)-catalyzed
click chemistry . Tetrahedron Letters 
2010 , 51 , 6945 –6947 . 10.1016/j.tetlet.2010.10.166 . i Nakamura T. ; Terashima T. ; Ogata K. ; Fukuzawa S. 
Copper(I)
1,2,3-Triazol-5-ylidene Complexes as Efficient Catalysts for Click
Reactions of Azides with Alkynes . Org. Lett. 
2011 , 13 , 620 –623 . 10.1021/ol102858u .21214257  j Roy S. ; Chatterjee T. ; Pramanik M. ; Roy A. S. ; Bhaumik A. ; Islam S. M. 
Cu(II)-anchored functionalized mesoporous SBA-15: An
efficient and recyclable catalyst for the one-pot Click reaction in
water . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2014 , 386 , 78 –85 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2014.01.027 . k Sabaqian S. ; Nemati F. ; Heravi M. M. ; Nahzomi H. T. 
Copper(I)
iodide supported on modified cellulose-based nano-magnetite composite
as a biodegradable catalyst for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles . Appl. Organomet. Chem. 
2016 , 1 –12 . 10.1002/aoc.3660 .
a Gallier I. ; Jlalia F. ; Brodie-Linder N. ; Uziel J. ; Aué J. ; Lubin-Germain N. 
Copper(II)
SBA-15: A reusable catalyst for azide-alkyne cycloaddition . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2014 , 393 , 56 –61 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2014.06.003 . b Wang D. ; Etienne L. ; Echeverria M. ; Moya S. ; Astruc D. 
A Highly Active and Magnetically
Recoverable Tris(triazolyl)-CuI Catalyst for Alkyne-Azide Cycloaddition
Reactions . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2014 , 20 , 4047 –4054 . 10.1002/chem.201304536 .24574335  c Collinson J. M. ; Wilton-Ely J. D. E. T. ; Diez-Gonzalez S. 
Reusable and
highly active supported copper(I)-NHC catalysts for Click chemistry . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49 , 11358 –11360 . 10.1039/c3cc44371j . d Wan L. ; Cai C. 
Multicomponent Synthesis
of 1,2,3-Triazoles in Water Catalyzed by Silica-Immobilized NHC-Cu(I) . Catal. Lett. 
2012 , 142 , 1134 –1140 . 10.1007/s10562-012-0880-7 . e Mirsafaei R. ; Heravi M. M. ; Ahmadi S. ; Moslemin M. H. ; Hosseinnejad T. 
In situ prepared
copper nanoparticles on modified KIT-5 as an efficient recyclable
catalyst and its applications in click reactions in water . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2015 , 402 , 100 –108 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2015.03.006 . f Suzuka T. ; Kawahara Y. ; Ooshiro K. ; Nagamine T. ; Ogihara K. ; Higa M. 
Reusable Polymer-Supported 2,2′-Biarylpyridine-Copper
Complexes for Huisgen [3 + 2] Cycloaddition in Water . Heterocycles 
2012 , 85 , 615 –626 . 10.3987/COM-11-12405 . g Albadi J. ; Keshavarz M. 
Polymer-Supported Azide and Copper(I):
Green Reusable Reagent and Catalyst for Click Cyclization . Synth. Commun. 
2013 , 43 , 2019 –2030 . 10.1080/00397911.2012.671434 . h Keshipour A. S. 
Copper(I) and palladium
nanoparticles supported on ethylenediamine-functionalized cellulose
as an efficient catalyst for the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition/direct
arylation sequence . Appl. Organometal. Chem. 
2014 , 28 , 116 –119 . 10.1002/aoc.3091 . i Zohreh N. ; Hosseini S. H. ; Pourjavadi A. ; Bennett C. 
Immobilized copper(II) on nitrogen-rich polymer-entrapped
Fe3O4 nanoparticles: a highly loaded and magnetically
recoverable catalyst for aqueous click chemistry . Appl. Organometal. Chem. 
2016 , 30 , 73 –80 . 10.1002/aoc.3398 . j Khodaei M. M. ; Bahrami K. ; Meibodi F. S. 
Ferromagnetic nano-
particle-supported copper complex: A highly efficient and reusable
catalyst for three-component syntheses of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles
and C-S coupling of aryl halides . Appl. Organomet.
Chem. 
2017 , e371410.1002/aoc.3714 . k Shaabani S. ; Tabatabaei Azadeh T. ; Shaabani A. 
Copper(I) oxide nanoparticles supported
on magnetic casein as a bio-supported and magnetically recoverable
catalyst for aqueous click chemistry synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted
1,2,3-triazoles . Appl. Organomet. Chem. 
2017 , 31 , e355910.1002/aoc.3559 .
Perez J. M. ; Cano R. ; Ramon D. J. 
Multicomponent azide-alkyne cycloaddition
catalyzed by impregnated bimetallic nickel and copper on magnetite . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 23943 –23951 . 10.1039/C4RA03149K .
a Rezaeivala M. ; Keypour H. 
Schiff base
and non-Schiff
base macrocyclic ligands and complexes incorporating the pyridine
moiety - The first 50 years . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 280 , 203 –245 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.06.007 . b Vigato P. A. ; Peruzzo V. ; Tamburini S. 
Acyclic and
cyclic compartmental ligands: Recent results and perspectives . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2012 , 256 , 953 –1114 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.01.009 . c Whiteoak C. J. ; Salassa G. ; Kleij A. W. 
Recent advances with π-conjugated salen systems . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 622 –661 . 10.1039/C1CS15170C .21842040 
a Brandt W. W. ; Dwyer F. P. ; Gyarfas E. D. 
Chelate
Complexes of 1,10-Phenanthroline and Related Compounds . Chem. Rev. 
1954 , 54 , 959 –1017 . 10.1021/cr60172a003 . b Bencini A. ; Lippolis V. 
1,10-Phenanthroline: A versatile
building block for the construction of ligands for various purposes . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2010 , 254 , 2096 –2180 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.04.008 . c Eseola O. ; Adepitan O. ; Gö rlsb H. ; Plassb W. 
Electronic/substituents influence
on imidazole ring donor-acceptor capacities using 1H-imidazo[4,5-f][1,10]phenanthroline
frameworks . New J. Chem. 
2012 , 36 , 891 –902 . 10.1039/c2nj20880f . d Stephenson M. ; Reichardt C. ; Pinto M. ; Wächtler M. ; Sainuddin T. ; Shi G. ; Yin H. ; Monro S. ; Sampson E. ; Dietzek B. ; McFarland S. A. 
Ru(II)
Dyads Derived from 2-(1-Pyrenyl)-1H-imidazo[4,5-f][1,10]phenanthroline:
Versatile Photosensitizers for Photodynamic Applications . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2014 , 118 , 10507 –10521 . 10.1021/jp504330s .24927113  e Zeng L. L. ; Chen Y. ; Liu J. P. ; Huang H. Y. ; Guan R. L. ; Ji L. N. ; Chao H. 
Ruthenium(II)
Complexes with 2-Phenylimidazo[4,5-f][1,10]phenanthroline Derivatives
that Strongly Combat Cisplatin-Resistant Tumor Cells . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 1944910.1038/srep19449 .26763798  f Yi X. T. ; Zhou Y. F. ; Zhao Q. ; Li F. Y. ; Huang C. H. 
Multi-state molecular switches based on dithienylperfluorocyclo-pentene
and imidazo [4,5-f] [1,10] phenanthroline . Tetrahedron 
2006 , 62 , 10072 –10078 . 10.1016/j.tet.2006.08.061 .
a Faizullah A.
T. ; Townshend A. 
Spectrophotometric
determination of copper by flow injection analysis with an on-line
reduction column . Anal. Chim. Acta 
1985 , 172 , 291 –296 . 10.1016/S0003-2670(00)82618-5 . b Campos C. ; Guzman R. ; Lopez-Fernandez E. ; Casado A. 
Evaluation of the copper(II) reduction assay using
bathocuproinedisulfonic acid disodium salt for the total antioxidant
capacity assessment: The CUPRAC-BCS assay . Anal.
Biochem. 
2009 , 392 , 37 –44 . 10.1016/j.ab.2009.05.024 .19464250  c Darensbourg D. J. 
Making Plastics from Carbon Dioxide:
Salen Metal Complexes as Catalysts for the Production of Polycarbonates
from Epoxides and CO2 . Chem. Rev. 
2007 , 107 , 2388 –2437 . 10.1021/cr068363q .17447821  d Lewis W. G. ; Magallon F. G. ; Fokin V. V. ; Finn M. G. 
Discovery
and Characterization of Catalysts for Azide-Alkyne Cycloaddition by
Fluorescence Quenching . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004 , 126 , 9152 –9153 . 10.1021/ja048425z .15281783  e McGarrigle E. M. ; Gilheany D. G. 
Chromium- and Manganese-salen Promoted
Epoxidation of Alkenes . Chem. Rev. 
2005 , 105 , 1563 –1602 . 10.1021/cr0306945 .15884784 
a Rodriguez B. A. ; Delferro M. ; Marks T. J. 
Bimetallic
Effects for Enhanced Polar Comonomer Enchainment Selectivity in Catalytic
Ethylene Polymerization . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 5902 –5919 . 10.1021/ja900257k .19351155  b Tsukada N. ; Tamura O. ; Inoue Y. 
Synthesis and Structures
of Palladium and Platinum A-Frame Complexes Bridged by a Novel Binucleating
Ligand, N,N′-Bis[(2-diphenylphosphino)phenyl]- formamidine . Organometallics 
2002 , 21 , 2521 –2528 . 10.1021/om020003f . c Rodriguez B.
A. ; Delferro M. ; Marks T. J. 
Retraction of “Bimetallic Effects for Enhanced
Polar Comonomer Enchainment Selectivity in Catalytic Ethylene Polymerization” . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 17651 10.1021/ja409590r .24191741  d Liu S. F. ; Motta A. ; Delferro M. ; Marks T. J. 
Synthesis,
Characterization, and Heterobimetallic Cooperation in a Titanium-Chromium
Catalyst for Highly Branched Polyethylenes . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 8830 –8833 . 10.1021/ja4039505 .23734980  e Meana I. ; Espinet P. ; Albéniz A. C. 
Heterometallic
Complexes by Transmetalation of Alkynyl Groups from Copper or Silver
to Allyl Palladium Complexes: Demetalation Studies and Alkynyl Homocoupling . Organometallics 
2014 , 33 , 1 –7 . 10.1021/om4005498 .
a Hara K. ; Tayama S. ; Kano H. ; Masuda T. ; Takakusagi S. ; Kondo T. ; Uosaki K. ; Sawamura M. 
Functionalization of silicon surfaces with catalytically
active Pd complexes and application to the aerobic oxidation of benzylic
alcohols . Chem. Commun. 
2007 , 4280 –4282 . 10.1039/b710820f . b Marshall S.
T. ; O’Brien M. ; Oetter B. ; Corpuz A. ; Richards R. M. ; Schwartz D. K. ; Medlin J. W. 
Controlled selectivity for palladium catalysts using
self-assembled monolayers . Nat. Mater. 
2010 , 9 , 853 –858 . 10.1038/nmat2849 .20835234  c Sedona F. ; Marino M. D. ; Forrer D. ; Vittadini A. ; Casarin M. ; Cossaro A. ; Floreano L. ; Verdini A. ; Sambi M. 
Tuning the catalytic activity of Ag(110)-supported Fe phthalocyanine
in the oxygen reduction reaction . Nat. Mater. 
2012 , 11 , 970 –977 . 10.1038/nmat3453 .23085570 
a Kakkar A. K. 
Nano-Organometallics: Heterogenizing
Homogeneous Catalysts via Thin Film Methodology . Chem. Rev. 
2002 , 102 , 3579 –3588 . 10.1021/cr010360k .12371894  b Fernandes A. ; Hensenne P. ; Mathy B. ; Guo W. M. ; Nysten B. ; Jonas A. M. ; Riant O. 
Increased Catalytic
Activity of Surface-Immobilized Palladium Complexes in the Fluorogenic
Deprotection of an Alloc-Derivatized Coumarin . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2012 , 18 , 788 –792 . 10.1002/chem.201102245 .22170459  c Singh V. ; Mondal P. C. ; Chhatwal M. ; Jeyachandran Y. L. ; Zharnikov M. 
Catalytic oxidation of ascorbic acid via copper–polypyridyl
complex immobilized on glass . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 23168 –23176 . 10.1039/c4ra00817k . d Paul H. ; Bhaduri S. ; Lahiri G. K. 
Platinum Carbonyl
Cluster Derived Catalyst of Superior Activity in Ketone and Unusual
Selectivity in Nitrile Hydrogenation Reactions . Organometallics 
2003 , 22 , 3019 –3021 . 10.1021/om0302286 .
a Wang J. ; Mu B. ; Fu Z. ; Wu Y. 
Cyclopalladated ferrocenylimines with ester groups for Heck and Suzuki
coupling reactions . Chin. J. Catal. 
2014 , 35 , 1059 –1067 . 10.1016/S1872-2067(14)60045-0 . b Li X. ; Yang F. ; Wu Y. J. 
Palladacycle-Catalyzed
Decarboxylative Coupling of Alkynyl Carboxylic Acids with Aryl Chlorides
under Air . J. Org. Chem. 
2013 , 78 , 4543 –45550 . 10.1021/jo400574d .23573947  c Zhang Q. ; Yang F. ; Wu Y. J. 
Palladium-catalyzed ortho-acylation
of 2-aryl pyridine derivatives using arylmethyl amines as new acyl
sources . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49 , 6837 –6839 . 10.1039/c3cc42106f . d Xu K. ; Yang F. ; Zhang G. D. ; Wu Y. J. 
Palladacycle-catalyzed
phosphonation of aryl halides in neat water . Green Chem. 
2013 , 15 , 1055 –1060 . 10.1039/c3gc00030c . e Mu B. ; Li T. ; Xu W. ; Zeng G. ; Liu P. ; Wu Y. 
Synthesis, characterization, and applications in Heck
and Suzuki coupling reactions of amphiphilic cyclopalladated ferrocenylimines . Tetrahedron 
2007 , 63 , 11475 –11488 . 10.1016/j.tet.2007.08.004 . f Mu B. ; Li T. ; Li J. ; Wu Y. 
The highly
efficient Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction using cyclopalladated
N-alkylferrocenylimine as a catalyst in aqueous medium at room temperature
under ambient atmosphere . J. Organomet. Chem. 
2008 , 693 , 1243 –1251 . 10.1016/j.jorganchem.2008.01.012 . g Mu B. ; Li T. S. ; Fu Z. H. ; Wu Y. J. 
Cyclopalladated
ferrocenylimines catalyzed-homocoupling reaction of arylboronic acids
in aqueous solvents at room temperature under ambient atmosphere . Catal. Commun. 
2009 , 10 , 1497 –1501 . 10.1016/j.catcom.2009.04.002 .
a Mu B. ; Li T. S. ; Li C. H. ; Liu P. P. ; Shang W. ; Wu Y. J. 
Langmuir–Blodgett
films of cyclopalladated ferrocenylimine: preparation, characterization,
and application in Suzuki coupling reaction . Tetrahedron 
2009 , 65 , 2599 –2604 . 10.1016/j.tet.2008.12.075 . b Fu Z. ; Zhang N. ; Li T. S. ; Xu W. J. ; Wu Y. J. ; et al. N-hydroxymethyl acrylamide polymer brush and its application
in catalyzing coupling reaction . J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
2013 , 394 , 409 –418 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2013.01.010 .23375806  c Zhao N. ; Li T. ; Zhai Z. ; Qiu J. ; Xu W. ; Liu H. ; Wu Y. 
Cyclopalladated Arylimine Self-Assembly
Films for Suzuki Reaction . ChemCatChem 
2013 , 5 , 1481 –1489 . 10.1002/cctc.201200730 . d Fu Z. H. ; Liu J. ; He X. H. ; Li T. S. ; Wu Y. J. 
The recyclable cyclopalladated ferrocenylimine self-assembly catalytic
film and investigation of its role in the mechanism of heterogeneous
catalysis . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 26413 –26420 . 10.1039/c4ra02540g . e Fu Z. H. ; Li T. S. ; He X. H. ; Liu J. ; Xu W. J. ; Wu Y. J. 
Cyclopalladated ferrocenylimine functionalized
polymer brushes film and its mechanism investigation of heterogeneous
catalysis . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2014 , 395 , 293 –299 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2014.08.038 . f Fu Z. ; Li T. ; Mu B. ; Mao L. ; Li G. ; Xu W. ; Wu Y. 
Cyclopalladated ferrocenylimine self-assembly
films for Suzuki coupling reaction . J. Mol.
Catal. A: Chem. 
2012 , 363–364 , 200 –208 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2012.06.010 . g Zou K. K. ; Liu H. ; Li T. S. ; Chen P. L. ; Liu M. H. ; Wu Y. J. 
An electrochemically polymerized
and assembled cyclopalladated bi-thiophene imine for catalyzing coupling
reactions: a modern strategy to enhance catalytic activity . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 16654 –16663 . 10.1039/C4RA14974B . h Liu H. ; Li T. S. ; Xue X. X. ; Xu W. J. ; Wu Y. J. 
The mechanism of a self-assembled Pd(ferrocenylimine)–Si compound-catalysed
Suzuki coupling reaction . Catal. Sci. Technol. 
2016 , 6 , 1667 –1676 . 10.1039/C5CY01341K . i Zhao Y. Q. ; Zhao N. ; Zou M. L. ; Li T. S. ; Li G. P. ; Li J. P. ; Wu Y. J. 
Highly ordered amphiphilic
cyclopalladated arylimine self-assembly films for catalyzing Heck
and Suzuki coupling reactions . Appl. Organomet.
Chem. 
2016 , 30 , 540 –549 . 10.1002/aoc.3467 . j Xue Z. Q. ; Huang P. P. ; Li T. S. ; Qin P. X. ; Xiao D. ; Liu M. H. ; Chen P. L. ; Wu Y. J. 
A novel
“tunnel-like” cyclopalladated arylimine catalyst immobilized
on grapheme oxide nano-sheet . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 781 –791 . 10.1039/C6NR07521E .27982152 
a Segura J. L. ; Mancheñoa M. ; Zamora F. 
Covalent organic frameworks based on Schiff-base chemistry:
synthesis, properties and potential applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2016 , 45 , 5635 –5671 . 10.1039/C5CS00878F .27341661  b Sanyal R. ; Zhang X. P. ; Chakraborty P. ; Giri S. ; Chattopadhyay S. K. ; Zhao C. Y. ; Das D. 
Role of solvent
in the phosphatase activity of a dinuclear nickel(II) complex of a
Schiff base ligand: mechanistic interpretation by DFT studies . New J. Chem. 
2016 , 40 , 7388 –7398 . 10.1039/C6NJ01043A . c Handa S. ; Nagawa K. ; Sohtome Y. ; Matsunaga S. ; Shibasaki M. 
A Heterobimetallic Pd/La/Schiff Base Complex for anti-Selective Catalytic Asymmetric Nitroaldol Reactions
and Applications to Short Syntheses of β-Adrenoceptor Agonists . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 3230 –3233 . 10.1002/anie.200705617 . d Zaleska-Medynska A. ; Marchelek M. ; Diak M. ; Grabowska E. 
Noble metal-based
bimetallic nanoparticles: the effect of the structure on the optical,
catalytic and photocatalytic properties . Adv.
Colloid Interface Sci. 
2016 , 229 , 80 –107 . 10.1016/j.cis.2015.12.008 .26805520  e Castilla A. M. ; Curreli S. ; Escudero-Adán E. C. ; Belmonte M. M. ; Benet-Buchholz J. ; Kleij A. W. 
Modular Synthesis
of Heterobimetallic Salen Structures Using Metal Templation . Org. Lett. 
2009 , 11 , 5218 –5221 . 10.1021/ol902149p .19845369  f Elemans J. A. A. W. ; Wezenberg S. J. ; Escudero-Adán E. C. ; Benet-Buchholz J. ; den Boer D. ; Coenen M. J. J. ; Speller S. ; Kleij A. W. ; de Feyter S. 
Axial ligand control over monolayer and bilayer formation
of metal-salophens at the liquid–solid interface . Chem. Commun. 
2010 , 46 , 2548 –2551 . 10.1039/b922212j . g Salassa G. ; Coenen M. J. J. ; Wezenberg S. J. ; Hendriksen B. L. M. ; Speller S. ; Elemans J. A. A. W. ; Kleij A. W. 
Extremely Strong Self-Assembly of a Bimetallic Salen
Complex Visualized at the Single-Molecule Level . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 7186 –7192 . 10.1021/ja3030802 .22475214 
a He X.-J ; Zeng L. ; Yang G. ; Xie L.-J. ; Sun X.-N. ; Tan L.-F. 
DNA binding, photocleavage
and topoisomerase inhibitory activity of polypyridyl ruthenium(II)
complexes containing the same ancillary ligand and different main
ligands . Inorg. Chim. Acta 
2013 , 408 , 9 –17 . 10.1016/j.ica.2013.08.010 . b Wei C.-Y. ; Wang J.-H. ; Ye W.-N. ; Liu J. ; Wang L.-H. 
4-(1H-Imidazo[4,5-f]-1,10-phenanthrolin-2-yl)phenol-based
G-quadruplex DNA binding agents: Telomerase inhibition, cytotoxicity
and DNA-binding studies . Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 21 , 3379 –3387 . 10.1016/j.bmc.2012.11.059 .23611765  c Stublla A. ; Potvin Pierre G. 
Ruthenium(II) Complexes of Carboxylated
Terpyridines and Dipyrazinylpyridines . Eur.
J. Inorg. Chem. 
2010 , 3040 –3050 . 10.1002/ejic.201000122 .
Adamson A. W. ; Gast A. P.  The Solid-Liquid
Interface–Contact Angle . In Physical
Chemistry of Surfaces , 6 th ed.; Ponec V.  , Ed.; Academic
Press : New York , 1997 ; pp 347 –383 .
Mini P. S. S. P. ; Antony R. ; Manickam S. T. D. ; Thanikaikarasan S. ; Subramanian R. ; Balakumar S. ; Mahalingam T. ; Saldana S. ; Ixtlilco L. 
Synthesis, Characterization and Electrochemical
Properties of Schiff Base Complexes Derived from Amino Acids . J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst. 
2014 , 17 , 179 –183 .
Das S. ; Bhunia S. ; Maity T. ; Koner S. 
Suzuki cross-coupling
reaction over Pd-Schiff-base anchored mesoporous silica catalyst . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2014 , 394 , 188 –197 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2014.07.017 .
Gerhard M. 
In situ Raman
spectroscopy—a valuable tool to understand operating catalysts . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2000 , 158 , 45 –65 . 10.1016/S1381-1169(00)00042-X .
Heyde M. E. ; Gill D. ; Kilponen R. G. ; Rimai L. 
Raman spectra of Schiff
bases of retinal (models of visual photoreceptors) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1971 , 93 , 6776 –6780 . 10.1021/ja00754a012 .5133090 
Gnyba M. ; Keränen M. ; Kozanecki M. ; Kosmowski B. B. 
Spectroscopic
Studies of Sol-Gel Derived Thin-Film Structures for Integrated Optics . Mater.Sci.-Poland 
2005 , 23 , 29 –39 .
Kneipp K. ; Kneipp H. ; Itzkan I. ; Dasari R. R. ; Feld M. S. 
Surface-enhanced
Raman scattering and biophysics . J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter. 
2002 , 14 , R597 –R624 . 10.1088/0953-8984/14/18/202 .
Haubner K. ; Murawski J. ; Olk P. ; Eng L. M. ; Ziegler C. ; Adolphi B. ; Jaehne E. 
The Route
to Functional Graphene
Oxide . ChemPhysChem 
2010 , 11 , 2131 –2139 . 10.1002/cphc.201000132 .20491134 
Yang S. L. ; Xu B. F. ; Zhang J. Q. ; Huang X. D. ; Ye J. S. ; Yu C. Z. 
Controllable Adsorption of Reduced Graphene Oxide onto Self-Assembled
Alkanethiol Monolayers on Gold Electrodes: Tunable Electrode Dimension
and Potential Electrochemical Applications . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 4389 –4393 . 10.1021/jp911760b .
Sanders W. ; Vargas R. ; Anderson M. R. 
Characterization
of Carboxylic Acid-Terminated
Self-Assembled Monolayers by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
and Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 6133 –6139 . 10.1021/la704059q .18494511 
Nastasoví A. B. ; Ekměšcíc B. M. ; Sandic Z. P. ; Ran –
delovíc D. V. ; Mozetǐ M. ; Vesel A. ; Onjia A. E. 
Mechanism
of Cu(II), Cd(II) and Pb(II) ions sorption from aqueous solutions
by macroporous poly(glycidyl methacrylate-co-ethylene glycol dimethacrylate) . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2016 , 385 , 605 –615 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.05.165 .
Baran T. ; Sargin I. ; Mente A. ; Kaya M. 
Exceptionally high
turnover frequencies recorded for a new chitosan-based palladium(II)
catalyst . Appl. Catal., A 
2016 , 523 , 12 –20 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2016.05.012 .
Panther T. ; Behrens U. 
Heterodinukleare Cobalt(II)-, Nickel(II)-,
Kupfer(II)-,
Zink(II)-und Palladium(II)-Komplexe mit einem makrocyclischen Liganden
vom Schiff-Basen-Typ: Synthesen und Strukturen . Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
2000 , 626 , 1934 –1941 . 10.1002/1521-3749(200009)626:9<1934::AID-ZAAC1934>3.0.CO;2-G .
a Serna P. ; Boronat M. ; Corma A. 
Tuning the
Behavior of Au and Pt Catalysts for the Chemoselective Hydrogenation
of Nitroaromatic Compounds . Top. Catal. 
2011 , 54 , 439 –466 . 10.1007/s11244-011-9668-z . b Lim B. ; Xia Y. 
Metal Nanocrystals with Highly Branched
Morphologies . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 76 –85 . 10.1002/anie.201002024 . c Somorjai G. A. ; Park J. Y. 
Molecular Factors of Catalytic Selectivity . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 9212 –9228 . 10.1002/anie.200803181 . d Somorjai G. A. ; Park J. Y. 
Molecular
Factors of Catalytic Selectivity . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 9212 10.1002/anie.200803181 . e Zhao X. ; Luo B. ; Long R. ; Wang C. ; Xiong Y. 
Composition-dependent activity of Cu–Pt alloy nanocubes for
electrocatalytic CO2 reduction . J.
Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 4134 –4139 . 10.1039/C4TA06608A .
a Kolb H. C. ; Sharpless K. B. 
The growing
impact of click chemistry on drug discovery . Drug Discovery Today 
2003 , 24 , 1128 10.1016/S1359-6446(03)02933-7 .b Huisgen R.   In 1,3-Dipolar
Cycloaddtion Chemistry: Introduction, Survey, Mechanism in 1, 3-Dipolar
Cycloaddition Chemistry(V1) ; Padwa A.  , Ed.; Academic
Press : New York , 1984 ; pp 1 –76 . c Girard C. ; Onen E. ; Aufort M. ; Beauvière S. ; Samson E. ; Herscovici J. 
Reusable Polymer-Supported Catalyst
for the [3+2] Huisgen Cycloaddition in Automation Protocols . Org. Lett. 
2006 , 8 , 1689 –1692 . 10.1021/ol060283l .16597142 
Udumula V. ; Tyler J. H. ; Davis D. A. ; Wang H. ; Linford M. R. ; Minson P. S. ; Michaelis D. J. 
Dual Optimization
Approach to Bimetallic
Nanoparticle Catalysis: Impact of M1/M2 Ratio and Supporting Polymer
Structure on Reactivity . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5 , 3457 –3462 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b00830 .
a Vu K. B. ; Bukhryakov K. V. ; Anjum D. H. ; Rodionov V. O. 
Surface-Bound Ligands Modulate Chemoselectivity
and Activity of a Bimetallic Nanoparticle Catalyst . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 5 , 2529 –2533 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b00262 . b Yan N. ; Yuan Y. ; Dyson P. J. 
Nanometallic chemistry:
deciphering nanoparticle catalysis from the perspective of organometallic
chemistry and homogeneous catalysis . Dalton
Trans. 
2013 , 42 , 13294 –13304 . 10.1039/c3dt51180d .23770799 
Chandler B. ; Gilbertson J.  Dendrimer-Encapsulated Bimetallic Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization,
and Applications to Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Catalysis . In Dendrimer Catalysis ; Topics in Organometallic
Chemistry ; Springer , 2006 ; Vol. 20 , pp 97 –120 .
a An K. ; Somorjai G. A. 
Nanocatalysis I:
Synthesis of Metal and Bimetallic Nanoparticles and Porous Oxides
and Their Catalytic Reaction Studies . Catal.
Lett. 
2015 , 145 , 233 –248 . 10.1007/s10562-014-1399-x . b Notar F. I. ; Fontaine-Vive F. ; Antoniotti S. 
Synergy in
the Catalytic Activity of Bimetallic Nanoparticles and New Synthetic
Methods for the Preparation of Fine Chemicals . ChemCatChem 
2014 , 6 , 2784 –2791 . 10.1002/cctc.201402252 . c An K. ; Somorjai G. A. 
Size and Shape Control of Metal Nanoparticles
for Reaction Selectivity in Catalysis . ChemCatChem 
2012 , 4 , 1512 –1524 . 10.1002/cctc.201200229 .
Stublla A. ; Potvin P. G. 
Ruthenium(II) Complexes of Carboxylated
Terpyridines
and Dipyrazinylpyridines . Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 
2010 , 3040 –3050 . 10.1002/ejic.201000122 .
Meldal M. ; Tornøe C. W. 
Cu-Catalyzed Azide–Alkyne Cycloaddition . Chem. Rev. 
2008 , 108 , 2952 –3015 . 10.1021/cr0783479 .18698735 
a Mal P. ; Schultz D. ; Beyeh K. ; Rissanen K. ; Nitschke J. R. 
An Unlockable–Relockable Iron
Cage by Subcomponent Self-Assembly . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 8297 –8301 . 10.1002/anie.200803066 . b Neyman A. ; Meshi L. ; Zeiri L. ; Weinstock I. A. 
Direct
Imaging of the Ligand Monolayer on an Anion-Protected Metal Nanoparticle
through Cryogenic Trapping of its Solution-State Structure . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 16480 –16481 . 10.1021/ja807160f .19554721 
Paul S. ; Islam M. M. ; Islam S. M. 
Suzuki–Miyaura
reaction by
heterogeneously supported Pd in water: recent studies . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 42193 –42200 . 10.1039/C4RA17308B .
Widegren J. A. ; Finke R. G. 
A review of the
problem of distinguishing true homogeneous
catalysis from soluble or other metal-particle heterogeneous catalysis
under reducing conditions . J. Mol. Catal. A:
Chem. 
2003 , 198 , 317 –324 . 10.1016/S1381-1169(02)00728-8 .
a Onda T. ; Shibuichi S. ; Satoh N. ; Tsujii K. 
Super-Water-Repellent Fractal Surfaces . Langmuir 
1996 , 12 , 2125 –2127 . 10.1021/la950418o . b Hui M. ; Blunt M. J. 
Effects of Wettability on Three-Phase
Flow in Porous Media . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2000 , 104 , 3833 –3845 . 10.1021/jp9933222 . c Nakajima A. ; Hashimoto K. ; Watanabe T. 
Recent Studies on Super-Hydrophobic
Films . Monatsh. Chem. 
2001 , 132 , 31 –41 . 10.1007/s007060170142 . d Li Y. B. ; Zhao C. 
Enhancing Water Oxidation Catalysis
on a Synergistic Phosphorylated NiFe Hydroxide by Adjusting Catalyst
Wettability . ACS Catal. 
2017 , 7 , 2535 –254 . 10.1021/acscatal.6b03497 . e Wang L. ; Xiao F. S. 
The Importance of Catalyst Wettability . ChemCatChem 
2014 , 6 , 3048 –3052 . 10.1002/cctc.201402437 .
MacQuarrie S. ; Horton J. H. ; Barnes J. ; McEleney K. ; Loock H.-. ; Crudden C. M. 
Visual Observation
of Redistribution and Dissolution
of Palladium during the Suzuki-Miyaura Reaction . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 3279 –3282 . 10.1002/anie.200800153 .
a Wei W. ; Lu Y. ; Chen W. ; Chen S. 
One-Pot Synthesis,
Photoluminescence, and Electrocatalytic Properties
of Subnanometer-Sized Copper Clusters . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 2060 –2063 . 10.1021/ja109303z .21280578  b Martnez-Franco R. ; Moliner M. ; Thogersen J. R. ; Corma A. 
Efficient One-Pot Preparation of Cu-SSZ-13 Materials using Cooperative
OSDAs for Their Catalytic Application in the SCR of NOx . ChemCatChem 
2013 , 5 , 3316 –3323 . 10.1002/cctc.201300141 . c Corma A. ; Diaz U. ; Garica T. ; Sastre G. ; Velty A. 
Multifunctional Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Catalytic Materials with
a Hierarchical System of Well-Defined Micro- and Mesopores . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 15011 –1502 . 10.1021/ja106272z .20879788 
a Calow A. D. J. ; Batsanov A. S. ; Fernandez E. ; Sole C. ; Whiting A. 
Novel transformation
of α,
β-unsaturated aldehydes and ketones into γ-amino alcohols
or 1,3-oxazines via a 4 or 5 step, one-pot sequence . Chem. Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 11401 –11404 . 10.1039/c2cc36129a . b Foley D. A. ; Doecke C. W. ; Buser J. Y. ; Merritt J. M. ; Murphy L. ; Kissane M. ; Collins S. G. ; Maguire A. R. ; Kaerner A. 
ReactNMR and ReactIR as Reaction
Monitoring and Mechanistic Elucidation Tools: The NCS Mediated Cascade
Reaction of α-Thioamides to α-Thio-β-chloroacrylamides . J. Org. Chem. 
2011 , 76 , 9630 –9737 . 10.1021/jo201212p .22029382 
Santra S. ; Hota P. K. ; Bhattacharyya R. ; Bera P. ; Ghosh P. ; Mandal S. K. 
Palladium Nanoparticles
on Graphite Oxide: A Recyclable
Catalyst for the Synthesis of Biaryl Cores . ACS Catal. 
2013 , 3 , 2776 –2782 . 10.1021/cs400468h .
McLachlan F. ; Mathews C. J. ; Smith P. J. 
Palladium-Catalyzed
Suzuki Cross-Coupling
Reactions in Ambient Temperature Ionic Liquids: Evidence for the Importance
of Palladium . Organometallics 
2003 , 22 , 5350 10.1021/om034075y .

