
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145790010.1021/acsomega.7b01451ArticleInfluence of the Capping Ligand on the Band Gap and
Electronic Levels of PbS Nanoparticles through Surface Atomistic Arrangement
Determination Garcia-Gutierrez Diana
Fabiola †‡Hernandez-Casillas Laura Patricia †‡Cappellari Maria Victoria §Fungo Fernando §Martínez-Guerra Edgar ∥García-Gutiérrez Domingo Ixcoatl *†‡†Facultad
de Ingeniería Mecánica y Eléctrica,
FIME and ∥Facultad de Ciencias Físico Matemáticas, FCFM, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, UANL, Av. Universidad S/N, Cd. Universitaria, San Nicolás de los Garza, C.P. 66450 Nuevo León, Mexico‡ Centro
de Innovación, Investigación y Desarrollo en Ingeniería
y Tecnología, CIIDIT, Universidad
Autónoma de Nuevo León, UANL, Km. 10 de la nueva carretera al Aeropuerto Internacional
de Monterrey, PIIT Monterrey, Apodaca, C.P. 66600 Nuevo León, Mexico§ Departamento
de Química, Universidad Nacional
de Rio Cuarto, UNRC. CONICET, RN36
601, X5804BYA Río Cuarto, Córdoba, Argentina* E-mail: domingo.garciagt@uanl.edu.mx. Phone: +52 (81) 1340-4000 ext. 1525 (D.I.G.-G.).11 01 2018 31 01 2018 3 1 393 405 11 10 2017 29 12 2017 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Lead sulfide (PbS)
nanoparticles were synthesized by chemical methods
with different sizes and different capping ligands (oleic acid, myristic
acid, and hexanoic acid), avoiding ligand exchange procedures, to
study the effect of characteristics of the capping ligands on their
energy levels and band gap values. Experimental results (UV–vis–NIR,
Fourier transform infrared, and Raman spectroscopies, cyclic voltammetry,
transmission electron microscopy, and electron energy loss spectroscopy)
showed a marked influence of the capping ligand nature on the electro-optical
properties of PbS nanoparticles with a very similar size. Differences
were observed in the atomistic arrangement on the nanoparticle surface
and phonon vibrations with the different capping ligands. These observations
suggest that the electro-optical properties of PbS nanoparticles are
not only determined by their size, through quantum confinement effects,
but also strongly affected by the atomistic arrangement on the nanoparticle
surface, which is determined by the capping ligand nature.

document-id-old-9ao7b01451document-id-new-14ao-2017-014515ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
In
recent years, lead sulfide nanoparticles have become promising
building blocks for optoelectronic devices, mainly because of the
fact that their absorbance and emission can be tailored by means of
controlling their size. Their optical band gap can be tuned between
0.5 and 1.5 eV, with a photoresponse in the near-infrared, characteristics
that make them attractive for applications in photodetectors1−3 and photovoltaic devices.4−6 Recent reports on photovoltaic
devices based on PbS nanoparticles have focused on the concept of
“band alignment engineering”,7−9 which basically
implies the tuning of the energy levels of the nanoparticles by varying
their surface ligands. This action not only allows certain control
on the value of the energy levels of the nanoparticles but also makes
them more stable under atmospheric conditions. Through this concept,
highly efficient solar cells have been fabricated based on PbS nanoparticles,
with efficiencies over 9%.7 The effect
of the surface ligand of nanoparticles on the values of the highest
occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level and lowest unoccupied molecular
orbital (LUMO) level has recently been reported.10−12 Previously,
variations in the energy levels of semiconductor nanoparticles were
attributed mainly to quantum confinement effects related to the variations
in nanoparticle size; these variations in the energy levels were evidenced
through the increment of the optical band gap energy (Egopt), corresponding
to a decrement in the nanoparticle size, and they were measured via
UV–vis–NIR optical absorbance spectroscopy.11,13 Nonetheless, Jasieniak et al.11 were
able to measure, through photoelectron spectroscopy in air, that for
the same CdSe nanoparticle size (4.7 nm), the variation of the surface
ligand had a marked effect on the ionization energy (IE). For the
case of alkyl amines of different chain lengths, the IE observed was
around 5.4 eV, regardless of the length of the chain, whereas for
the cases of trioctylphosphine (TOP) oxide, oleic acid (OA), alkane
thiols, and pyridine, the IEs measured were 5.45, 5.60, 5.65, and
5.75 eV, respectively. This finding showed a clear impact of the surface
ligand of nanoparticles on the IE measured. In a similar study, Brown
et al.,10 using ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopy, were able to measure the energy level shifts of PbS
nanoparticles treated with 12 different ligands; they measured valence
band (VB) maxima varying within a range of 0.9 eV for nanoparticles
of the same size just by modifying the surface ligand through a “solid-state
ligand exchange” method. The observed energy levels shifts
were attributed to the contribution from both the nanoparticle/ligand
interface dipole12 and the intrinsic dipole
moment of the ligand molecule itself.14 On the other hand, Soreni-Harari et al.12 observed the same trend when the ligand molecule is changed; however,
they did so by using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and scanning tunneling
spectroscopy. Using CV, they were able to observe the energy level
tuning, following the ligand exchange, by determining the HOMO level
by analyzing nonaqueous solutions of the nanoparticles. In their studies,
they focused on determining the HOMO level because Egopt did not
show any variation after the ligand exchange; thus, a corresponding
shift was expected in the LUMO level. It has been reported in the
literature that semiconductor nanoparticles after a ligand exchange
process show small variations (tens of nanometers), or no variations
at all, in their first absorption peak, compared to the original capping
ligand; thus, their Egopt remains basically the same.7,12,14

However, for the case of
PbS nanoparticles, when the literature
is reviewed in detail, reports can be found where similar synthesis
methodologies produce nanoparticles with the same measured size that
show differences in their first absorption peak maxima higher than
100 nm. Debellis et al.15 reported the
synthesis of PbS nanoparticles of 2.9, 3.5, 4.9, and 6.7 nm in size
by the “one-pot” method, with their first absorption
peak maxima at approximately 870, 964, 1339, and 1723 nm, respectively.
On the other hand, Hyun et al.,16 using
the same synthesis methodology, reported PbS nanoparticles of 2.9,
3.4, 4.8, and 6.6 nm in size, with their first absorption peak maxima
at approximately 730, 870, 1245, and 1690 nm, respectively. The differences
in the first absorption peak maxima for PbS nanoparticles of 2.9,
3.5, and 4.9 nm in size between these two studies are of 140, 94,
and 94 nm, respectively. In both studies, the capping ligand is based
on a lead oleate layer found on the surface of the nanoparticles,
which is formed during the growth process of the PbS nanoparticles,
as it has been previously reported for lead chalcogenide nanoparticles
when synthesized by the one-pot method.17,18 From these
observations, it is implied that the nanoparticle size is not the
only parameter determining the first absorption peak maximum value
in semiconductor nanoparticles and thus Egopt. One small difference
between the two synthesis methodologies, even though both PbS nanoparticles
were synthesized using the one-pot method, was the fact that Hyun
et al. suggest the use of TOP, as the dilution solvent of the S precursor,
bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide (TMS), as well as 1-octadecene (ODE), whereas
Debellis et al. only specify the use of ODE. Hines and Scholes13 have reported the use of both TOP and ODE, as
the dilution solvent for TMS, claiming no perceivable effect on the
synthesized PbS nanoparticles. However, this small difference in the
synthesis process could be the reason for the clear differences in
the optical absorbance of PbS nanoparticles with the same size.

Similar observations have been made in magic-sized clusters (MSCs)
of some semiconductor materials, where absorption peak maximum shifts
have been observed after ligand exchange procedures are performed.19−23 Possible explanations for this phenomenon that have been proposed
in the literature include an atomic surface rearrangement on the MSCs
or even a phase change;23,24 however, it has been
reported that this phenomenon is observed only in MSCs, not in nanoparticles,
and only after performing ligand exchange procedures.

On the
other hand, it has been reported for PbSe nanoparticles
that varying the ratio between the capping ligand and the Pb precursor
has an impact on the final shape and facets found on the surface of
the synthesized nanoparticles.25 This variation
of the capping ligand concentration found on the reaction affected
the degree of surface coverage on the different facets displayed by
PbSe nanoparticles, thus affecting the surface energy of each facet.
The variation of the surface energies of the different facets found
on the surface of the PbSe nanoparticles ({100} and {111} facets)
with ligand coverage determines the equilibrium core shape of the
PbSe nanoparticles. The equilibrium shape of a crystal is given by
the surface energies of the facets and is obtained through the Wulff
construction.26 Theoretical studies for
PbS nanoparticles have reported that varying the type of capping ligand
(lead oleate, formate, acetate, nonanoate, trans-oleate,
and cis-oleate) has an effect on the surface energy
of the different facets found on the surface of face-centered cubic
(fcc) PbS nanoparticles ({100} and {111}), thus affecting the final
shape of the nanoparticles and determining the atomistic arrangement
on their surface.27 None of the previous
studies report on the possible effects of such a nanoparticle shape
or atomistic surface arrangement of nanoparticles on their optical
properties or electronic structure.

In the present work, PbS
nanoparticles were synthesized by chemical
methods, through the one-pot method, using different capping ligands
OA, myristic acid (MA), and hexanoic acid (HA), in which capping ligand
exchange procedures are avoided. Afterward, the energy levels of the
synthesized PbS nanoparticles were measured from UV–vis–NIR
absorbance spectroscopy, CV measurements of the nanoparticles in solution,
and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) measurements. Additionally,
the synthesized PbS nanoparticles were thoroughly characterized by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and its related techniques,
along with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR), and Raman spectroscopy
measurements. Once the morphological and physicochemical characteristics
of the nanoparticles were determined, a correlation of the nanoparticle
size and the capping ligand characteristic with the energy level behavior
was made. A clear effect of the nanoparticle size on the calculated
values for the energy levels was observed, as reported previously
and expected from quantum confinement effects. However, the variation
of the molecular characteristics of the capping ligand not only affected
the final values of the HOMO and LUMO levels but also had an effect
on the value of Egopt because nanoparticle systems with different
capping ligands and very similar sizes and size distribution displayed
optical energy band gaps with marked differences, showing variations
only in the atomistic arrangement on their surface, an aspect that
has not been deeply analyzed in the literature.

2 Experimental
Section
2.1 Materials
Lead oxide (PbO, 99.999%,
Aldrich), ODE (90%, Aldrich), diphenylphosphine (DPP, 98%, Aldrich),
TMS (synthesis grade, Aldrich), HA (99%, Aldrich), MA (98%, Fluka),
OA (90%, Aldrich), tetrahydrofuran (THF), tetrabutylammonium perchlorate
(TBAP), tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate, anhydrous toluene,
anhydrous hexane, anhydrous chloroform, anhydrous ethanol, and anhydrous
acetone were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, whereas dissolvents such
as anhydrous methanol, chloroform, hexane, acetone, methanol, and
ethanol were purchased from J.T. Baker and CTR Scientific. All reagents
were used as received without further purification, except for THF.

2.2 Synthesis of PbS Nanoparticles with Different
Capping Ligands
PbS nanoparticles were synthesized using
the slightly modified one-pot synthesis method. The variation of the
capping ligand was performed since the preparation of the lead precursor.
Three carboxylic acids (CAs) were used to prepare the lead precursor:
HA, MA, and OA. First, in a three-neck round-bottom flask, 23 mL of
ODE, 0.45 g of PbO, and the CA in amounts reaching a ratio of 2.5
CA/1 Pb were mixed and heated at 150 °C for 1 h. For the sulfur
precursor, 2 mL of ODE, 0.2 mL of TMS, and 0.1 mL of DPP were stirred
for 30 min at room temperature in a glovebox under a nitrogen atmosphere.
For the synthesis of the PbS nanoparticles, the sulfur precursor was
quickly added with a syringe into the lead precursor, and the nucleation
and growth of the nanoparticles occurred immediately. The colorless
lead precursor turned dark at the moment the sulfur precursor was
added. Different reaction times (10, 120, 300, and 600 s) were used
to vary the nanoparticle size. The synthesized PbS nanoparticles were
separated from the organic byproducts by centrifugation with an excess
of acetone and then redispersed in anhydrous toluene; this cleaning
process was repeated five more times for PbS-OA, three times for PbS-MA,
and only once for PbS-HA nanoparticles. More details about the synthesis
of the PbS nanoparticles with different capping ligands can be found
in ref (28).

2.3 Characterization
The synthesized
nanoparticles were characterized by means of TEM with the use of an
FEI TEM Titan G2 80-300 operated at 300 kV, with scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM) capabilities, and equipped
with a high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) detector from Fishione;
a bright-field STEM detector from Gatan; an ADF STEM detector from
Gatan; and an EDAX energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) detector.
Aberration-corrected STEM images along with EELS spectra were acquired
in a TEM JEOL JEM-ARM 200F equipped with a Gatan GIF Tridiem filter;
all EELS spectra were acquired with an accelerating voltage of 80
kV and a collection angle (β) of 2.1 mrad; and these working
conditions produced a zero-loss peak with an fwhm of 0.7 eV. The TEM
samples were prepared as follows: one drop of a solution containing
the nanoparticles was cast on a carbon-coated copper grid. A UV–vis–NIR
optical absorption spectrometer Cary 5000 from Agilent was used to
acquire the absorption spectra from the nanoparticles. The surface
chemistry of the PbS nanoparticles was evaluated through FTIR spectroscopy
studies in the transmission mode using a Thermo Fisher Nicolet 6770
FT-IR spectrometer, with a detection range between 400 and 4000 cm–1 and a resolution of 4 cm–1 with
32 scans per sample. Raman spectra were acquired with a Thermo Fisher
DXR Raman microscope using a laser excitation of 532 nm, a laser power
of 7 mW, a rectangular aperture of 50 μm, and an objective lens
of 10×. Raman studies were performed on thin films of the PbS
nanoparticles deposited by drop casting on glass substrates.

2.4 Electrochemical Studies
Electrochemical
studies were carried out with an Interface 1000 potentiostat/galvanostat/ZRA
(Gamry Instruments) in a three-electrode cell. A platinum (Pt) disc
was used as the working electrode (2.01 mm2), a silver
wire was used as the reference electrode, and a Pt coil was used as
the counter electrode. The Pt working electrode was polished with
0.05 μm Al2O3 and then sonicated in deionized
water. Before using the polished Pt electrode, cleanliness of the
metal surface was checked by obtaining the characteristic voltammogram
of Pt in 0.1 M H2SO4. PbS nanoparticle solutions
were prepared in freshly distilled THF with 0.1 M TBAP as the supporting
electrolyte and then deaerated with high-purity Ar. Before each experiment,
electrolyte blank was made to discard possible electrochemically active
interferences. All potential values reported are expressed relative
to ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple (Fc/Fc+ = 0.40 V
vs SCE), which was used as an internal standard.29 All reported voltammograms were acquired with a velocity
of 100 mV/s.

3 Results and Discussion
PbS nanoparticles synthesized with HA (PbS-HA) showed a quasi-spherical
morphology with a high size distribution (approximately 1.1 nm); at
short reaction times, no clear agglomerates could be observed (Figure S1). However, at a reaction time of 300
s and higher, coalescence of nanoparticles became evident, originating
nanoparticles of 10 nm in size or larger, which formed agglomerates
with a size larger than 100 nm. Observations of the PbS nanoparticles
synthesized with MA (PbS-MA) showed a system with good size distribution
(between 0.5 and 1 nm), with average nanoparticle sizes ranging from
2.9 to 5.3 nm, corresponding to the different reaction times. No nanoparticle
agglomerates could be observed at any reaction time, nor the evidence
of coalescence between nanoparticles (Figure S2). PbS nanoparticles synthesized with OA (PbS-OA) showed the lowest
size distribution (between 0.47 and 0.79 nm), with average nanoparticle
sizes ranging from 5.3 to 6.7 nm, corresponding to the different reaction
times. Similar to the MA case, no nanoparticle agglomerates were observed
at any reaction time, nor the evidence of coalescence was observed
(Figure S3). For the determination of the
average size and standard deviation displayed by the PbS nanoparticles
synthesized at the different reaction times, 300 nanoparticles were
measured.

Figure 1a,c,e show
the typical STEM–HAADF images of the synthesized PbS nanoparticles
with different capping ligands. It can be observed that as the C chain
length gets shorter in the capping ligand, the size dispersion increases.
The PbS nanoparticles synthesized with OA were highly monodisperse
with a low standard deviation in size (Figure 1a), whereas the PbS nanoparticles synthesized
with HA were more polydisperse with higher standard deviations (approximately
1.1 nm) (Figure 1e).
Shown as insets are typical selected area electron diffraction (SAED)
patterns from the synthesized PbS nanoparticles, where the interplanar
distances identified correspond to the planes {111}, {200}, {220},
{311}, {222}, {400}, {420}, {422}, and {511} of the fcc crystal structure
(JCPDS 77-0244) of PbS. All SAED patterns from the synthesized PbS
nanoparticles, regardless of the capping ligand used in their synthesis,
showed lattice spacings corresponding to this fcc crystal structure.

Figure 1 HAADF-STEM
images corresponding to (a) OA-, (c) MA-, and (e) HA-capped
PbS nanoparticles. Insets: representative SAED patterns for the nanoparticle
systems. On the left side, UV–vis–NIR absorption spectra
showing a size-dependent behavior of (b) PbS-OA-capped, (d) PbS-MA-capped,
and (f) PbS-HA-capped nanoparticles. Average size and standard deviation
for each studied sample are included.

Different absorption UV–vis–NIR spectra acquired
for the synthesized samples are shown in Figure 1b,d,f. Clear quantum confinement effects
can be observed as the size of the nanoparticles decreases. For the
case of the PbS-OA nanoparticles, the first absorption peak maximum
ranged between 1095 and 1368 nm (Figure 1b). In the case of the PbS-MA nanoparticles,
the range of the first absorption peak maximum was observed between
779 and 1400 nm (Figure 1d), whereas for the PbS-HA nanoparticles, only two reaction times
produce a well-defined absorption peak; these two values were 817
and 1285 nm (Figure 1f), corresponding to the average sizes of 4.03 and 5.05 nm, respectively.

The composition of the synthesized PbS nanoparticles with different
capping ligands was determined by means of EDXS studies. Figure 2 shows the typical
EDXS spectrum for the synthesized PbS nanoparticles capped with OA.
As previously reported for lead chalcogenide nanoparticles synthesized
by the one-pot method,17,18,30 the current synthesized PbS nanoparticles also showed a higher concentration
of Pb compared to S. The excess of Pb on the nanoparticle surface
is attributed to the oxidation of Pb by the capping agent, in this
case, OA, MA, and HA, producing a capping layer of the corresponding
lead carboxylate (lead oleate, lead myristate, and lead hexanate).
This composition trend was similar in all capping ligands used (Figure S4). Table 1 shows the compositions measured for the three different
capping ligands and the Pb/S ratios they showed.

Figure 2 (a) Low-magnification
HAADF-STEM image of the nanoparticles, the
gray rectangle showing the area analyzed. (b) Representative EDXS
spectrum for the PbS nanoparticles synthesized with OA as the capping
ligand.

Table 1 Compositions of the
Nanoparticles
Synthesized with the Three Different Capping Ligands (OA, HA, and
MA) and Their Corresponding Pb/S Ratios
sample	Pb at. %	S at. %	Pb/S	
PbS-OA	57.3 ± 5.9	42.7 ± 6.2 	1.34	
PbS-HA	56.3 ± 5.1 	43.7 ± 5.0 	1.29	
PbS-MA	55.3 ± 6.7 	44.7 ± 5.7 	1.23	
The FTIR spectra of the PbS nanoparticles capped with
OA, MA, and
HA (Figure S5) showed similar features;
all of them displayed bands related to the C–H stretching vibration
at ∼2925 cm–1 due to the asymmetric stretching
of the methylene group and at ∼2854 cm–1 associated
with the symmetric stretching of the methylene group. However, these
signals are clearly less intense in the PbS-HA sample, a behavior
attributed mainly to the shorter C chain of HA compared to those of
OA and MA. Also, a band can be detected at 1884 cm–1 related to the symmetric stretching of the C–H group, which
is observed to be less intense in the case of PbS-MA. Another signal
can be observed at ∼1765 cm–1 in all three
samples, associated with the stretching vibration of the C=O
functional groups (present in the original CA); again, this band showed
the lowest intensity for the case of the PbS-MA sample. On the other
hand, the bands observed at ∼1572 cm–1 in
PbS-HA, at ∼1515 cm–1 in PbS-MA, and at ∼1545
cm–1 in PbS-OA samples can be associated with the
asymmetric vibration of the ionized carboxyl (COO−), whereas
the band at ∼1466 cm–1 in PbS-HA and PbS-MA
and the band at ∼1457 cm–1 in the PbS-OA
sample can be associated with the symmetric vibration of the ionized
carboxyl (COO−). The wavenumber separation, Δ, between
the asymmetric and symmetric vibrations of the COO– IR bands
can be used to determine the type of interaction between the carboxylate
group and the metal atom. A larger Δ (200–320 cm–1) corresponds to a monodentate interaction, whereas
a smaller Δ value (<110 cm–1) is associated
with a chelating bidentate interaction.31,32 In these results,
the value for Δ obtained is always smaller than 110 cm–1; thus, in all three samples, the capping ligand seems to show a
chelating bidentate interaction with the PbS nanoparticle surface.
These results support the idea of the presence of a carboxylate on
the surface of the nanoparticles, in this case, lead oleate, myristate,
and hexanate.18,31,32

Figure 3 shows
the
Raman spectra of the PbS nanoparticles synthesized with OA, MA, and
HA. The three samples show very similar signals. The bands observed
at 135 and 964 cm–1 are related to the photo-oxidation
of PbS by the effect of the laser used for the Raman study and to
the formation of PbO and PbSO4, respectively.33 The bands below 80 and around 270 cm–1 are related to the formation of phonons in the crystal lattice of
the PbS nanoparticles.34 Bozyigit et al.
correlate a band at around 84 cm–1 with the excitation
of a longitudinal acoustic (LA) phonon in bulk PbS; they also report
how this excitation shifts toward lower wavenumbers for PbS nanoparticles
of between 1 and 8 nm in size.34 For our
synthesized PbS nanoparticles, the band related to the excitation
of this LA phonon can be observed at ∼78, ∼76, and ∼76
cm–1 for the nanoparticles synthesized with OA,
MA, and HA, respectively. Additionally, the band observed at ∼268
cm–1 is related to the formation of a discrete optical
phonon on the surface of the PbS nanoparticles, due to the presence
of the capping layer, and the discontinuity of the crystal lattice;34 this signal is more clearly observed in PbS-OA
(Figure 3a). Figure 3b shows a zoom-in
view of the region marked by the red dotted rectangle in Figure 3a, where an additional
band can be clearly observed at ∼61 cm–1 in
PbS-MA and, with much lower intensity, in PbS-HA, whereas for the
case of PbS-OA, this band cannot be clearly observed. The appearance
of this band at ∼61 cm–1 can be attributed
to the “softening” of the nanoparticle surface, proposed
by Bozyigit et al. for PbS nanoparticles,34 and they also proposed how this softening enables the appearance
of a large number (>100) of low-frequency phonon modes. Finally,
the
bands observed at 1352 and 1580 cm–1 are related
to the signals associated with the C–C bonds, where the ratio
of the signals, the value of the band maximum, and the width of the
band indicate the existing ratio between the sp2 and sp3 hybridizations displayed by the C atoms in the analyzed sample.35 In the samples studied, the characteristics
of these bands indicate a high degree of disorder displayed by the
C atoms found in the capping layer of the PbS nanoparticles.

Figure 3 (a) Raman spectra
of PbS nanoparticles with different capping ligands.
(b) Zoom-in view of the region marked by the red dotted rectangle
in (a).

The electrochemical response of
the PbS nanoparticles synthesized
with OA, MA, and HA was studied to calculate the HOMO and the LUMO
energy levels of the nanoparticles. CV experiments were performed
on PbS nanoparticles dispersed in organic solution because a current
needs to be generated through the electrode/solution interface by
applying an external voltage, where a solid theoretical framework
exists.36−38 It was decided not to perform the electrochemical
studies of the synthesized PbS nanoparticles in the form of thin films
deposited on top of the working electrode because of the known limitations
of analyzing nanoparticulate thin films by electrochemical methods;
among the limitations, we can mention the following:39 (1) Thin films made out of semiconductor nanoparticles
are substantially consumed in the very first scan because of the fact
that the electron transfer followed by the chemical reaction degrades
the nanoparticles.40 (2) In thin films,
nanoparticles can lose their identity because of the strong interaction
between them, and also, the appearance of phenomena such as grain
boundary and electrolyte diffusion can mask the electrochemical behavior
of individual nanoparticles. On the other hand, in films, the measured
current is not controlled by the particle diffusion; therefore, detailed
analysis of such data is often complicated. Allowing the nanoparticles
to diffuse would resolve this problem and facilitate the analysis.
(3) In theoretical models,41 a condition
of “isolated nanoparticle” is assumed for the charge
transfer from/to nanoparticles; this boundary condition is not satisfied
in nanoparticle thin films because of the proximity to the electrode.

Figures 4–6 show the voltammograms and corresponding
UV–vis–NIR absorbance spectra for the three synthesized
PbS nanoparticle systems. The presented voltammograms are arranged
by size, from largest to smallest, showing only the first cycle acquired
with a clean Pt electrode, and the potential sweep starts toward oxidation
potentials. To the right of each voltammogram, the corresponding UV–vis–NIR
absorbance spectrum of the same sample is shown, where manifest quantum
confinement effects can be observed for these systems, and the optical
transition maximum wavelengths (λmax) are summarized
in Table 2. All shown
voltammograms in Figures 4–6 displayed a diffusional redox
response between 0.25 and −2.5 V versus Fc/Fc+.29 The CV results for the three different nanoparticle
systems studied show similar features: an oxidation signal can be
observed between ∼0.0 and 0.3 V; meanwhile in the cathodic
potential scanning, reduction processes can be observed between ∼−1.7
and −2.2 V. Then, after this reduction takes place and the
potential scan is back to the anodic direction, only in the case of
the OA-capped nanoparticles can be clearly observed a new anodic peak
in the range between −0.5 and −0.7 V (see Figures 4–6). This is an indication that the reduced PbS nanoparticles have
coupled chemical reactions that produce intermediary species, which
is more evidently observed on the OA nanoparticles than on the MA
and HA systems.

Figure 4 Left column: the voltammograms corresponding to the first
scanning
potential cycle for the OA-capped PbS nanoparticles. Right column:
the UV–vis–NIR absorption spectra for each corresponding
sample.

Figure 5 Left column: the voltammograms corresponding
to the first scanning
potential cycle for the MA-capped PbS nanoparticles. Right column:
the UV–vis–NIR absorption spectra for each corresponding
sample.

Figure 6 Left column: the voltammograms corresponding
to the first scanning
potential cycle for the HA-capped PbS nanoparticles. Right column:
the UV–vis–NIR absorption spectra for each corresponding
sample.

Table 2 Summary of the Results
from the Characterization
of the PbS Nanoparticles Synthesized with Different Capping Ligandsa
system	size (nm)	onsetred (V)	onsetoxi (V)	Egechem (eV)	Abs λmax, (nm)	Egopt (eV)	Eg(EELS) (eV)	CB LUMO (eV)	VB HOMO (eV)	
PbS-OA	4.18	–2.04	–0.30	1.76	1000	1.11	1.35	3.06	4.24	
 	5.32	–1.87	0.05	1.92	1095	1.07	 	3.23	4.36	
 	5.97	–1.86	–0.11	1.75	1222	0.95	 	3.24	4.24	
 	6.27	–1.88	–0.11	1.77	1285	0.89	 	3.22	4.16	
 	6.73	–1.71	0.12	1.83	1368	0.842	 	3.39	4.28	
PbS-MA	2.94	–2.03	–0.10	1.93	779	1.30	1.5	3.07	4.47	
 	3.64	–2.11	–0.16	1.95	1029	1.046	 	2.99	4.12	
 	3.83	–2.13	–0.19	1.94	1049	1.054	 	2.97	4.10	
 	4.08	–2.14	–0.08	2.06	1166	0.96	 	2.96	3.99	
 	5.33	–2.24	–0.13	2.11	1400	0.79	 	2.86	3.71	
PbS-HA	4.03	–2.07	–0.12	1.95	817	1.20	 	3.03	4.30	
 	5.05	–2.08	–0.10	1.98	1285	0.80	 	3.02	3.88	
a Reduction and oxidation onsets with
respect to ferrocene (Fc) used as an internal standard. Egechem = electrochemical
band gap, Abs = maximum value of the first optical absorption peak, Egopt = optical band gap, and Eg(EELS) = band
gap calculated through EELS. HOMO and LUMO are calculated on an absolute
energy scale using the following equations:  (3)20 and  (4)10

The redox behavior of the dispersed PbS nanoparticles
in the electrolyte
to the applied voltage stimulus shows a similarity to previous reports.42−44 The observed anodic process can be associated with the sulfur oxidation
(anodic dissolution, eq 1), whereas the reduction process can be associated with the lead
reduction (eq 2). On
the other hand, the current wave measured at −0.5 and −0.7
V, obtained after the nanoparticle reduction and clearly observed
for the PbS-OA system (see Figure 4), can be related to the metallic lead deposition on
the electrode surface, which is reoxidized when the potential scanning
reaches positive potentials (eq 2). These main processes are indicated in Figures 4–6. 1   2  

According to the
reviewed refs (42−44) and the analyses of the obtained voltammograms, it is concluded
that the two observed defined redox processes can be reliably related
to the PbS nanoparticles. These anodic and cathodic redox processes
are separated by a planar region where no voltammetric features can
be observed. The physical separation between the oxidation and reduction
onsets is related to an electrochemical band gap (Egechem), and
the values obtained for the three studied systems are summarized in Table 2, along with other
electrochemical and optical parameters.17 It is observed that all three different systems show similar behaviors
and features in their voltammetry response. However, the current signal
related to the PbS nanoparticle oxidation (the anodic dissolution
process) can be sensitive to the capping ligand nature; for example,
PbS-MA, in Figure 5, shows that the oxidation process is suppressed with regard to PbS-HA
and PbS-OA. Also, the oxidation of electrodeposited lead, after PbS
nanoparticle reduction eq 2, decreases noticeably for the MA and HA systems (see Figures 4–6). Therefore, this shows that the capping ligand can influence the
electrochemical behavior of the nanoparticles. It seems that in the
cases of MA and HA, the anodic dissolution is stabilized and avoids
the lead electrodeposition reaction. The chemical reactions associated
with the electrochemical processes affect the redox process reversibility,
and this can mask the size confinement effect on the redox onset potentials;
care should be taken when the electrochemical parameters for the three
studied systems are analyzed.

A potential onset is defined as
the potential where the injection
of electrons or holes toward the LUMO and HOMO levels, respectively,
becomes evident by an increment in the cathodic or anodic current.29

Small variations in the reduction onset
value can be observed as
the size changes for the OA and MA systems, whereas for the HA system,
only two different samples displayed results of enough quality to
be analyzed, and no clear differences could be observed between them.
The variations observed in the reduction onset values of the OA and
MA systems could be related to the quantum confinement effects displayed
by the nanoparticles. The mentioned variation was observed to be opposite
in those two systems: whereas in the OA system, the value of the reduction
onset increased (became less negative) with increasing nanoparticle
size, in the MA system, the value of the reduction onset decreased
(became more negative) with increasing nanoparticle size. This trend
is more evident when the largest and smallest nanoparticle sizes are
compared because the reduction onset values for the other nanoparticle
sizes in between are very close to each other.

Further studies
trying to elucidate the energy levels of the synthesized
PbS nanoparticles include EELS experiments within TEM. EELS provides
information about the inelastic scattering events the electrons in
the microscope beam undergo while traveling through the sample. Among
these inelastic events we find the intra- and interband transitions,
being the transition from the VB (HOMO) to the conduction band (CB)
(LUMO) one of the most important in semiconductors; reason why this
technique has been previously used to determine the band gap, Eg, of certain semiconductor materials.45,46Figure S6 shows the acquired and treated
spectra for samples PbS-MA-2.94nm and PbS-OA-4.18nm. It can be noticed
that the optical band gap, Egopt, is lower than the measured Eg, for both samples.45−48 Sample PbS-MA-2.94nm showed an Eg of approximately 1.5 eV, whereas it displayed
an Egopt of approximately 1.3 eV. On the other hand, sample PbS-OA-4.18nm
showed an Eg of approximately 1.35 eV,
whereas this same sample displayed an Egopt of approximately
1.1 eV. In both cases, Eg calculated through
EELS was approximately 0.2 eV higher than Egopt. This difference
between Egopt and Eg calculated
using EELS has been previously attributed to the size distribution
of the analyzed nanoparticles and the facts that Egopt gives
average information of many nanoparticles analyzed at the same time,
whereas Eg through EELS provides information
of only a few nanoparticles.46

In Table 2, all
data gathered from CV, UV–vis–NIR, and EELS are presented,
whereas Figure 7 shows
a graphical representation of the different energy levels calculated
for the different nanoparticles. It is organized for the different
nanoparticle systems (capping) by size. The first column corresponds
to the specific nanoparticle system; the second column shows the average
sizes of the nanoparticles; and the following three columns show the
relevant information acquired from the CV measurements, such as the
oxidation and reduction onsets and the electrochemical band gaps.

Figure 7 Graphic
representation indicating the calculated energy levels
for all different PbS nanoparticle systems analyzed.

In the following column can be found the values
of the optical
absorption peak or λmax in nm, and next to it is
displayed Egopt, calculated based on ref (49). As previously mentioned, Egopt shows a well-defined quantum confinement effect. The next column
shows the Eg(EELS) values calculated for
samples PbS-OA-4.18nm and PbS-MA-2.94nm, based on the methodology
previously described.46 Finally, the last
two columns show the values calculated for the LUMO and HOMO based
on eqs 3 and 4 in the footnote of Table 2.

The LUMO value is related to the
electron affinity, which is the
energy required to add an electron to an atom or a molecule in the
gas phase.29 In this study, two electrochemical
processes can be observed, as previously mentioned, a cathodic and
an anodic peak. The cathodic peak (∼1.6–2.2 V) represents
the reduction or the process through which electrons are adhering
to the nanoparticles. Additionally, this reduction potential displays
dependence on the nanoparticle size and capping ligand. Because the
other important signal, the anodic peak, did not show evident variations
with the size and is affected by the capping ligand, it was decided
to use the reduction onset value to calculate the LUMO level of the
nanoparticles. The LUMO level is calculated by adding 5.1 eV to the
reduction onset to change the LUMO level to an absolute energy scale,
according to ref (29). The HOMO level was calculated based on the methodology suggested
in ref (10), where
a Coulombic stabilization energy is considered between the electron–hole
pair, due to the exciton generation, as shown in eq 4 in the footnote
of Table 2 , where e is the electron charge, ε0 is the vacuum
permittivity, εQD is the optical dielectric constant
of the nanoparticles, and R is the nanoparticle radius.10 Using these equations, the HOMO and LUMO values
shown in Table 2 were
calculated.

Figure 8 shows the
CV curves and UV–vis–NIR absorbance results for samples
PbS-HA-4.03nm, PbS-MA-4.08nm, and PbS-OA-4.18nm. In this case, these
PbS nanoparticles display a similar average size of approximately
4 nm, but with a different capping ligand. However, the calculated
values for their Egopt and Egechem show marked differences (see Table 2). Samples PbS-OA-5.32nm
and PbS-MA-5.33nm, not included in Figure 8, also showed a very similar size and size
distribution, but with a difference of over 300 nm in the value of
their optical absorption peak maxima. The observed effects of the
capping ligand on the HOMO and LUMO values of PbS nanoparticles are
in agreement with previous reports.10 Brown
et al. attributed the differences in the HOMO and LUMO levels to the
formation of dipoles on the surface of the nanoparticles due to the
difference between the dielectric constants of the capping ligand
and the nanoparticles and a contribution from the intrinsic dipole
moment of the ligand itself, but assumed that the band gap remained
constant, as the average size of the nanoparticles remained constant
after the capping ligand exchange.10 In
the results presented in Figure 8, it is undoubtedly shown that nanoparticles with a
similar size but with different capping ligands (same anchoring group
with different tail lengths) have different optical and electrochemical
properties. These variations, in the absorption peak maxima and in
the reduction onset values, observed in the same-sized nanoparticles
translate into different calculated values of Egopt and LUMO level.
Even though the surface chemistries of the three systems are very
similar, as evidenced by the FTIR and Raman results, and the dielectric
constants of the three capping ligands are similar, the effect of
changing the capping ligand found on the surface of the PbS nanoparticles
on the values of the energy levels and the band gap is evident. As
previously reported,10 the formation of
dipoles on the nanoparticle surface, due to the variations in the
dielectric constant of the capping layer, produces energy shifts in
the levels of the nanoparticles; however, to affect the band gap,
the ligand molecules should create new energy states within the band
gap. Nonetheless, the used capping ligands (OA, MA, and HA) have the
same anchoring functional groups (−COO), which do not have
orbital states located within Eg of the
PbS nanoparticles,50,51 and even though they would, the
new density of states should be high enough compared to Pb and S orbitals
corresponding to intrinsic LUMO and HOMO levels, respectively. In
this case, it seems inadequate to conceive the capping ligands as
mere dipoles on the nanoparticle surface. Debellis et al.15 recently reported the enhancement of the optical
absorption of colloidal PbS quantum dots, and they proposed an increment
in the optical active sites induced by the extent of π conjugation
of the ligands and by the presence of heteroatoms either as electron-donor
substituents or as part of the system.15

Figure 8 Voltammograms
and UV–vis–NIR absorption spectra of
PbS-HA-4.03nm, PbS-MA-4.08nm, and PbS-OA-4.18nm samples, all of them
showing a nanoparticle average size of approximately 4 nm.

The capability of the capping ligand to determine
the atomistic
arrangement in metallic nanoparticles has been previously reported
for the case of metallic nanoparticles, such as Pd.52 Corthey et al.52 reported the
role the capping ligand molecules play on the way the Pd atoms arrange
themselves in nanoparticles. They observed that Pd atoms arrange in
a less ordered way in thiolate-capped nanoparticles than in amine-capped
nanoparticles. This effect on the arrangement was most important on
the surface of the nanoparticles; however, under some conditions,
this effect was observed throughout the nanoparticle.

For the
case of PbS nanoparticles with OA as the capping molecule,
a recent study by Zherebetskyy et al.51 revealed that there is a preferential coverage of (001) surfaces
by OA because of a strong binding energy originated from the carboxyl
functional group. They found that the carboxyl group relaxes on the
(001) surface by forming a bidentate bridge between the (Pb–O−)
and the (S···HO−) with the Pb and S surface
atoms.51 On the other hand, the interaction
between the OA and the (111) surface is significantly different because
these surfaces are polar and require charge compensation;51 thus, the surface needs to be reconstructed
or passivated. However, because of the steric interactions between
the “tails” of the lead oleate molecules, it is not
possible to have a full coverage of these (111) surfaces only by this
capping ligand, and additional −OH groups are needed to provide
charge balance. Hence, the (111) surfaces in these PbS nanoparticles
are covered partially by −OH groups because of the length of
the lead oleate molecules. This particular capping layer promotes
an atomistic arrangement on the surface of PbS nanoparticles that
produces a certain ratio between (100) and (111) facets on the surface
of the nanoparticles. As previously mentioned, the equilibrium core
shape of a nanoparticle can be obtained through the Wulff construction
ratio:26 5  where hhkl is the distance from the center of the crystal to the {hkl} facet along the direction perpendicular to the surface.51 In their study, Zherebetskyy et al.51 observed how varying the capping ligand from
OA to acetic anhydride (AA) changes the atomistic arrangement of the
nanoparticle surface. Whereas the OA-capped nanoparticles displayed
a Wulff ratio (h111/h100) of approximately 0.9, the AA-capped nanoparticles
did not show the (111) facets; instead, these PbS nanoparticles showed
irregular shapes with steplike structures, related to the (100) facets.51

Figure 9 shows the
high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images of the PbS nanoparticles synthesized
with the different capping ligands. The HRTEM images of the PbS-OA
nanoparticles are shown in Figure 9a,b; in those images, clearly faceted nanoparticles
of approximately 4 nm in size can be observed displaying the (100)
and (111) facets with a Wulff ratio of approximately 1.1 for these
nanoparticles. In Figure 9c,d, the HRTEM images of the PbS-HA nanoparticles can be observed;
in this case, well-faceted nanoparticles displaying the (100) and
(111) facets can be seen. However, the shape of the nanoparticles
is more irregular compared to the PbS-OA case, with a Wulff ratio
of approximately 1.09 for these nanoparticles. The HRTEM images of
the PbS-MA nanoparticles are shown in Figure 9e,f; in this case, the nanoparticle shape
is very irregular, compared to the previous cases. Even for the nanoparticles
shown in Figure 9e,
no clear (111) facets could be observed, and only the (100) facets
could be seen; for the case of the nanoparticles shown in Figure 9f, where a few (111)
facets were observed, a Wulff ratio of approximately 0.88 was calculated.

Figure 9 HRTEM
images of (a,b) PbS-OA nanoparticles; (c,d) PbS-HA nanoparticles;
and (e,f) PbS-MA nanoparticles. Lines A and B correspond to the distance
to the (100) and (111) facets, respectively, from the center of the
nanoparticle.

These images show the
effect of the capping ligand molecule on
the atomistic arrangement on the surface of PbS nanoparticles synthesized
by the one-pot method; it can be observed that OA produces nanoparticles
with more regular shapes than the other CAs, whereas MA produces nanoparticles
with a more irregular shape. This irregular shape in the PbS-MA nanoparticles
is associated with a difference in the atomistic arrangement on the
nanoparticle surface. The Wulff ratio of 0.88 calculated from Figure 9f, the lowest of
the three samples, can be associated with an increment in the presence
of the (100) facets on the surface of the nanoparticles, compared
to the (111) facets. It has been reported in the literature that increasing
the presence of the (100) facets in PbS nanoparticles reduces the
Pb/S composition ratio,27 as this is confirmed
in the data presented in Table 1. On the other hand, the Wulff ratio of 1.1 calculated for
the PbS-OA nanoparticles, the highest of the three samples, can be
associated with an increment in the presence of the (111) facets on
the surface of the nanoparticles, compared to the (100) facets. As
the (111) facets are Pb-terminated,23 an
increment in the presence of these facets on the surface of PbS nanoparticles
will increase the Pb/S ratio, as this can be confirmed in Table 1.

The previous
discussion shows the effect of the capping ligand
on the final shape of the synthesized PbS nanoparticles, particularly
on their atomistic surface arrangement, that translates into which
crystallographic facets are present on their surface. Nonetheless,
a correlation between this atomistic surface arrangement and the value
of the band gap has not been established. As it has been previously
mentioned, the variations observed in the band gap cannot be attributed
to the orbital states of ligand molecules located within Eg of the PbS nanoparticles50,51 but are related
to the confinement effects involving preferred atomic facets found
on the surface of the nanoparticles. From a molecular point of view,
as a molecule becomes larger, the number of atomic orbitals that overlap
to form molecular orbitals increases, leading to an increasingly larger
number of energy levels, thus decreasing the HOMO–LUMO energy
gap. Each molecular orbital has a well-defined energy value, located
at intermediate values of the energy gap. For several hundred atoms,
these intermediate energy levels, closely spaced to each other, end
up forming a continuum band. Clearly, this molecular explanation provides
a simple understanding on the size dependence of the HOMO–LUMO
energy gap; however, this is valid only for an increasingly larger
number of identical orbitals, with the same energy and symmetry.53 For PbS nanoparticles, it is a little more complicated,
due essentially to two factors: (1) Pb and S are elements with different
electronegativities and different types of atomic orbitals are combined
and (2) the ratio between core/surface molecular states.

First,
the electronic configuration of S and Pb are [Ne] 3s2 3p4 and [Xe] 4f14 5d10 6s2 6p2, respectively. From a linear combination of
atomic orbital approach and from a hypothetical PbS single unit, the
HOMO will be closer in energy to the 3p(S) and 6s(Pb) orbitals, whereas
the LUMO will be closer in energy to the 3s(S) and 6p(Pb) orbitals.54 As an increasingly larger number of units are
combined in an hypothetical 1D PbS crystal, the VB would be progressively
constructed from a linear combination of 3p(S) and 6s(Pb) orbitals,
whereas the CB would be formed from 3s(S) and 6p(Pb) orbitals.54 Edges of these bands would be primarily constituted
by most bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals. Again, from the
previous molecular model, for a few hundred atoms, these closely degenerated
states would constitute the HOMO and LUMO extended bands; as the size
increases, the band gap separating them would reduce. It would be
expected that as these PbS 1D chains keep growing in all directions,
eventually they will reach a size that will display a band gap corresponding
to the value of bulk PbS.

Second, for PbS nanoparticles with
a size ranging from 2.94 to
6.73 nm, contributions of molecular orbitals of PbS units from the
surface and the core of the nanoparticles are of the same order of
magnitude. Thus, shapes and crystallographic preferred facets found
on the surface would change this core/surface ratio. Recently, it
has been demonstrated that for H-terminated nanodiamonds, the HOMO
at the top of the VB is dominated by the contribution from carbon
atoms in the core, whereas the LUMO at the base of the CB is dominated
by the contribution from carbon atoms on the surface.55 Also, in a similar study, Barnard et al.56 were able to observe a shape-dependent trend in the
electronic properties of diamond nanoparticles. They studied 17 nanoparticles,
ranging from 259 C atoms (∼1.2 nm) to 1798 C atoms (∼3.3
nm), including entirely (111), majority (111), majority (100), and
majority (110) facets on their surface. Their results showed a variation
in the energy value of the LUMO level for entirely (111) and (110),
inversely proportional to the size, whereas shapes containing a combination
of (111) and (100) facets showed a different trend.56 Undoubtedly, a similar shape dependency in the final energy
values of the HOMO and LUMO levels can be observed in PbS nanoparticles
in the results shown in Figures 7 and 9. The PbS-OA and PbS-HA
nanoparticles show a predominant size dependence of energy gap, whereas
in the PbS-MA nanoparticles, this trend is lost (Figure 7). On the other hand, PbS-OA
and PbS-HA exhibit similar Wulff ratios (∼1.1), which can be
interpreted to represent a similar presence of (111) and (100) facets
on the surface of these nanoparticles, increasing the contribution
of surface molecular orbitals due to the presence of the (111) higher
atomic density facets on the surface, whereas in the PbS-MA nanoparticles,
a majority of (100) facets are present on the surface, inverting the
size dependence trend, an observation that could be related to the
fact that the (100) facets found on the surface of these nanoparticles
are lower atomic density planes, compared to the (111) facets, thus
reducing the amount of atoms on the surface and increasing the contribution
of the core molecular orbitals of the nanoparticle. Thus, it seems
that OA and HA passivation guarantees a similar presence of the (111)
and (100) facets on the surface of the PbS nanoparticles and a quantum
confinement control related mostly to the size. A detailed theoretical
simulation study is underway trying to gain a better understanding
on the effect the surface atomistic arrangement in PbS nanoparticles
has on the values of their energy band gap and HOMO and LUMO levels.

Another effect related to the variations in the type of facets
found on the nanoparticle surface is the appearance of additional
phononic vibrations. It is clear that as the presence of the (100)
facets on the surface of the nanoparticles increases, a band starts
to appear on the Raman spectrum (Figure 3) at approximately 61 cm–1, as it is clearly observed in the PbS-MA sample (a Wulff ratio of
∼0.88). This band could be attributed to a phononic vibration
related to a nanoparticle surface with a lower density of atoms because
the (100) facets in fcc structures show a lower atomic density compared
to the (111) facets. As the presence of the (111) facets on the nanoparticle
surface starts to increase, the intensity of this band at approximately
61 cm–1 starts to decrease, as observed for the
cases of the PbS-MA and PbS-OA samples, with Wulff ratios of ∼1.09
and ∼1.1, respectively. It has been recently reported that
nanoparticles of semiconductor materials display a softening of their
surface,34 which is strongly related to
the presence of the capping molecules. Bozyigit et al.34 concluded that this mechanical softening of
the nanoparticle surface enabled the appearance of a large number
(>100) of low-frequency phonon modes that can efficiently drive
multiphonon
processes. They also proposed that phonon interactions, including
the scattering with electrons, neutrons, photons, and other phonons,
will be enhanced in nanomaterials because of this surface softening
and should be taken more importantly into consideration. Further studies
are underway trying to gain a more complete understanding on the origin
of this band on the Raman spectrum of PbS nanoparticles at approximately
61 cm–1.

These results are evidence that the
value of the absorption peak
maximum in PbS nanoparticles is related not only to the size of the
nanoparticles, due to the quantum confinement effects, but also to
the atomistic arrangement of the nanoparticle surface, which is determined
by the nature of the capping ligand molecule. Further studies, both
theoretical and experimental, are needed to get a more complete understanding
of the relationship between the values of the energy band gap, the
HOMO and LUMO values, and the atomistic arrangement of the nanoparticle
surface.

4 Conclusions
PbS nanoparticles synthesized
with different capping ligands, in
particular, OA, MA, and HA, avoiding the common ligand exchange process,
displayed an fcc structure and a similar composition, regardless of
the CA used in the synthesis, with slight variations in the Pb/S ratio,
being highest for the case of OA and lowest for MA. The main difference
observed between the three different capping ligands was the average
size and the size distribution. These differences in the average size
and size distribution of the nanoparticles were clearly observed in
their UV–vis–NIR spectra, where all nanoparticle systems
displayed quantum confinement effects. FTIR and Raman studies showed
a very similar surface chemistry for the nanoparticles with the different
capping ligands, displaying only small variations in the energy associated
with the excitation of a LA phonon mode associated with PbS nanoparticles,
and the clear appearance of an additional band at approximately 61
cm–1 for the case of the PbS-MA nanoparticles. The
electrochemical studies of nanoparticles show the typical behavior
expected for PbS, displaying an oxidation signal associated with PbS
anodic dissolution and a reduction signal associated with the cathodic
reduction of Pb2+ to Pb0. However, the electrochemical analysis provides
evidence that differences in the ligand carbon chain length and morphology
affect the chemical reactions associated with the charged PbS nanoparticles.
With all of these data, a reliable sketch of the energy levels in
PbS nanoparticles of different sizes and with different capping ligands
can be drawn. Varying the capping ligand of the nanoparticles not
only affects the position of the HOMO and LUMO energy levels but also
affects the value of Eg, as it was observed
for nanoparticles of a similar size but with different capping ligands.
Whereas in the literature, it has been referenced that the variations
in the value of Eg in semiconductor nanoparticles
depend only on the size, through quantum confinement effects, the
current work presents experimental evidence on how the atomistic arrangement
on the nanoparticle surface, through the type of crystallographic
facets present on this surface, determined by the nature of the capping
ligand molecule, also has an effect on the value of Eg and the energy values of the HOMO and LUMO levels. Further
theoretical and experimental studies are needed to gain a better understanding
on the effect the surface atomistic arrangement in PbS nanoparticles
has on the values of their energy band gap and HOMO and LUMO levels.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01451.TEM images of
the nanoparticles PbS-HA, PbS-MA, and
PbS-OA at different magnifications, EDXS spectra and calculated composition
for the samples PbS-HA and PbS-MA, FTIR data for PbS-OA, PbS-HA, and
PbS-MA, and EELS data acquired for the samples PbS-MA-2.94nm and PbS-OA-4.18nm
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b01451_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the
Mexican Secretary
of Education (SEP), PROMEP program, through the project “Apoyo
a la Incorporacion de Nuevos PTC”, project number PROMEP/103.5/10/3889,
and also by CONACYT through project numbers 148691 and 154303. The
authors thank the International Center for Nanotechnology and Advanced
Materials, ICNAM, at the University of Texas at San Antonio, for the
support provided for the use of their Kleberg Advanced Microscopy
Center. D.F.G.-G. and L.P.H.-C. acknowledge the financial support
received from CONACYT Mexico. We also thank Consejo Nacional de Investigaiones
Cientificas y Tecnicas (CONICET-Argentina), Agencia Nacional de Promoción
Científica y Tecnológica (ANPCYT Argentina), Universidad
Nacional de Río Cuarto. F.F. is a scientific member of CONICET.
==== Refs
References
McDonald S. A. ; Konstantatos G. ; Zhang S. ; Cyr P. W. ; Klem E. J. D. ; Levina L. ; Sargent E. H. 
Solution-processed PbS quantum dot
infrared photodetectors and photovoltaics . Nat.
Mater. 
2005 , 4 , 138 –142 . 10.1038/nmat1299 .15640806 
Konstantatos G. ; Sargent E. H. 
PbS colloidal quantum
dot photoconductive photodetectors:
Transport, traps, and gain . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2007 , 91 , 173505 10.1063/1.2800805 .
Szendrei K. ; Cordella F. ; Kovalenko M. M. ; Böberl M. ; Hesser G. ; Yarema M. ; Jarzab D. ; Mikhnenko O. V. ; Gocalinska A. ; Saba M. ; Quochi F. ; Mura A. ; Bongiovanni G. ; Blom P. W. M. ; Heiss W. ; Loi M. A. 
Solution-Processable
Near-IR Photodetectors Based on Electron Transfer from PbS Nanocrystals
to Fullerene Derivatives . Adv. Mater. 
2009 , 21 , 683 –687 . 10.1002/adma.200801752 .
Zhao N. ; Osedach T. P. ; Chang L.-Y. ; Geyer S. M. ; Wanger D. ; Binda M. T. ; Arango A. C. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Bulovic V. 
Colloidal
PbS Quantum Dot Solar Cells with High Fill Factor . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 3743 –3752 . 10.1021/nn100129j .20590129 
Szendrei K. ; Gomulya W. ; Yarema M. ; Heiss W. ; Loi M. A. 
PbS nanocrystal
solar cells with high efficiency and fill factor . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2010 , 97 , 203501 10.1063/1.3518067 .
Chang L.-Y. ; Lunt R. R. ; Brown P. R. ; Bulović V. ; Bawendi M. G. 
Low-Temperature Solution-Processed
Solar Cells Based
on PbS Colloidal Quantum Dot/CdS Heterojunctions . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 994 –999 . 10.1021/nl3041417 .23406331 
Chuang C.-H. M. ; Brown P. R. ; Bulović V. ; Bawendi M. G. 
Improved performance
and stability in quantum dot solar cells through band alignment engineering . Nat. Mater. 
2014 , 13 , 796 –801 . 10.1038/nmat3984 .24859641 
Ko D.-K. ; Maurano A. ; Suh S. K. ; Kim D. ; Hwang G. W. ; Grossman J. C. ; Bulović V. ; Bawendi M. G. 
Photovoltaic Performance
of PbS Quantum Dots Treated with Metal Salts . ACS Nano 
2016 , 10 , 3382 –3388 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b07186 .26909739 
Cao Y. ; Stavrinadis A. ; Lasanta T. ; So D. ; Konstantatos G. 
The role of
surface passivation for efficient and photostable PbS quantum dot
solar cells . Nat. Energy 
2016 , 1 , 16035 10.1038/nenergy.2016.35 .
Brown P. R. ; Kim D. ; Lunt R. R. ; Zhao N. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Grossman J. C. ; Bulović V. 
Energy Level Modification in Lead Sulfide Quantum Dot
Thin Films through Ligand Exchange . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 5863 –5872 . 10.1021/nn500897c .24824726 
Jasieniak J. ; Califano M. ; Watkins S. E. 
Size-Dependent Valence and Conduction
Band-Edge Energies of Semiconductor Nanocrystals . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 5888 –5902 . 10.1021/nn201681s .21662980 
Soreni-Harari M. ; Yaacobi-Gross N. ; Steiner D. ; Aharoni A. ; Banin U. ; Millo O. ; Tessler N. 
Tuning Energetic Levels in Nanocrystal
Quantum Dots through Surface Manipulations . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 678 –684 . 10.1021/nl0732171 .18179278 
Hines M. A. ; Scholes G. D. 
Colloidal PbS Nanocrystals
with Size-Tunable Near-Infrared
Emission: Observation of Post-Synthesis Self-Narrowing of the particle
size Distribution . Adv. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 1844 –1849 . 10.1002/adma.200305395 .
Heimel G. ; Romaner L. ; Zojer E. ; Brédas J.-L. 
Toward
Control of the Metal-Organic Interfacial Electronic Structure in Molecular
Electronics: A First-Principles Study on Self-Assembled Monolayers
of Pi-Conjugated Molecules on Noble Metals . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 932 –940 . 10.1021/nl0629106 .17326692 
Debellis D. ; Gigli G. ; ten Brink S. ; Infante I. ; Giansante C. 
Quantum-Confined
and Enhanced Optical Absorption of Colloidal PbS Quantum Dots at Wavelengths
with Expected Bulk Behavior . Nano Lett. 
2017 , 17 , 1248 –1254 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b05087 .28055216 
Hyun B.-R. ; Zhong Y.-W. ; Bartnik A. C. ; Sun L. ; Abruña H. D. ; Wise F. W. ; Goodreau J. D. ; Matthews J. R. ; Leslie T. M. ; Borrelli N. F. 
Electron Injection
from Colloidal PbS Quantum Dots
into Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles . ACS Nano 
2008 , 2 , 2206 –2212 . 10.1021/nn800336b .19206384 
Garcia-Gutierrez D. I. ; De Leon-Covian L. M. ; Garcia-Gutierrez D. F. ; Treviño-Gonzalez M. ; Garza-Navarro M. A. ; Sepulveda-Guzman S. 
On the role of Pb0 atoms
on the nucleation and growth of PbSe and PbTe nanoparticles . J. Nano Res. 
2013 , 15 , 1620 10.1007/s11051-013-1620-7 .
Garcia-Gutierrez D. I. ; Garcia-Gutierrez D. F. ; De Leon-Covian L. M. ; Treviño-Gonzalez M. T. ; Garza-Navarro M. A. ; Moreno-Cortez I. E. ; Cienfuegos-Pelaes R.
F. 
Aberration
Corrected STEM Study of the Surface of Lead Chalcogenide Nanoparticles . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 22291 –22298 . 10.1021/jp5057804 .
Zhou Y. ; Wang F. ; Buhro W. E. 
Large Exciton
Energy Shifts by Reversible
Surface Exchange in 2D II–VI Nanocrystals . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 15198 –15208 . 10.1021/jacs.5b09343 .26568026 
Newton J. C. ; Ramasamy K. ; Mandal M. ; Joshi G. K. ; Kumbhar A. ; Sardar R. 
Low-temperature synthesis
of magic-sized CdSe nanoclusters:
influence of ligands on nanocluster growth and photophysical properties . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 4380 –4389 . 10.1021/jp2086818 .
Mahler B. ; Nadal B. ; Bouet C. ; Patriarche G. ; Dubertret B. 
Core/shell colloidal semiconductor
nanoplatelets . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 18591 –18598 . 10.1021/ja307944d .23057684 
Lawrence K. N. ; Johnson M. A. ; Dolai S. ; Kumbhar A. ; Sardar R. 
Solvent-like
ligand-coated ultrasmall cadmium selenide nanocrystals: strong electronic
coupling in a self-organized assembly . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 11667 –11677 . 10.1039/c5nr02038g .26098759 
Nevers D. R. ; Williamson C. B. ; Hanrath T. ; Robinson R. D. 
Surface chemistry
of cadmium sulfide magic-sized clusters: a window into ligand-nanoparticle
interactions . Chem. Commun. 
2017 , 53 , 2866 –2869 . 10.1039/c6cc09549f .
Landes C. ; Braun M. ; Burda C. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Observation of Large
Changes in the Band Gap Absorption Energy of Small CdSe Nanoparticles
Induced by the Adsorption of a Strong Hole Acceptor . Nano Lett. 
2001 , 1 , 667 –670 . 10.1021/nl015619t .
Bealing C. R. ; Baumgardner W. J. ; Choi J. J. ; Hanrath T. ; Hennig R. G. 
Predicting
Nanocrystal Shape through Consideration of Surface-Ligand Interactions . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 2118 –2127 . 10.1021/nn3000466 .22329695 
Ringe E. ; Van Duyne R. P. ; Marks L. D. 
Wulff Construction for Alloy Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 3399 –3403 . 10.1021/nl2018146 .21744799 
Choi H. ; Ko J.-H. ; Kim Y. H. ; Jeong S. 
Steric-Hindrance-Driven
Shape Transition in PbS Quantum Dots: Understanding Size-Dependent
Stability . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 5278 –5281 . 10.1021/ja400948t .23496143 
García-Gutiérrez D. F. ; Ovalle D. G. ; Casillas L. P. H. ; Fungo F. ; Gutiérrez D. I. G. 
Efecto
del cambio de agente protector en las propiedades ópticas y
eléctricas de nanopartículas de sulfuro de plomo (PbS) . Ingenierias 
2014 , 17 , 6 –16 .
Cardona C. M. ; Li W. ; Kaifer A. E. ; Stockdale D. ; Bazan G. C. 
Electrochemical
considerations for determining absolute frontier orbital energy levels
of conjugated polymers for solar cell applications . Adv. Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 2367 –2371 . 10.1002/adma.201004554 .21462372 
Moreels I. ; Justo Y. ; De Geyter B. ; Haustraete K. ; Martins J. C. ; Hens Z. 
Size-Tunable, Bright,
and Stable
PbS Quantum Dots: A Surface Chemistry Study . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 2004 –2012 . 10.1021/nn103050w .21355621 
Sliem M. A. ; Chemseddine A. ; Bloeck U. ; Fischer A. 
PbSe nanocrystal shape
development: oriented attachment at mild conditions and microwave
assisted growth of nanocubes . CrystEngComm 
2011 , 13 , 483 –488 . 10.1039/c0ce00106f .
Wu N. ; Fu L. ; Su M. ; Aslam M. ; Wong K. C. ; Dravid V. P. 
Interaction
of Fatty Acid Monolayers with Cobalt Nanoparticles . Nano Lett. 
2004 , 4 , 383 –386 . 10.1021/nl035139x .
Blackburn J. L. ; Chappell H. ; Luther J. M. ; Nozik A. J. ; Johnson J. C. 
Correlation
between Photooxidation and the Appearance of Raman Scattering Bands
in Lead Chalcogenide Quantum Dots . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2011 , 2 , 599 –603 . 10.1021/jz2000326 .
Bozyigit D. ; Yazdani N. ; Yarema M. ; Yarema O. ; Lin W. M. M. ; Volk S. ; Vuttivorakulchai K. ; Luisier M. ; Juranyi F. ; Wood V. 
Soft surfaces of nanomaterials
enable strong phonon interactions . Nature 
2016 , 531 , 618 –622 . 10.1038/nature16977 .26958836 
Kudin K. N. ; Ozbas B. ; Schniepp H. C. ; Prud’homme R. K. ; Aksay I. A. ; Car R. 
Raman Spectra of Graphite Oxide and
Functionalized Graphene Sheets . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 36 –41 . 10.1021/nl071822y .18154315 
Bard A. J. ; Faulkner L. R.  Electrochemical
Methods . Fundamentals and Applications , 2 nd ed.; John Wiley & Sons,
Inc : New York , 2001 .
Zoski C. G.  Handbook of Electrochemistry , 1 st ed.; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2007 .
Murray R. W. 
Nanoelectrochemistry:
Metal Nanoparticles, Nanoelectrodes, and Nanopores Royce . Chem. Rev. 
2008 , 108 , 2688 –2720 . 10.1021/cr068077e .18558753 
Inamdar S. N. ; Ingole P. P. ; Haram S. K. 
Determination
of Band Structure Parameters
and the Quasi-Particle Gap of CdSe Quantum Dots by Cyclic Voltammetry . ChemPhysChem 
2008 , 9 , 2574 –2579 . 10.1002/cphc.200800482 .18956405 
Kucur E. ; Riegler J. ; Urban G. A. ; Nann T. 
Determination of quantum
confinement in CdSe nanocrystals by cyclic voltammetry . J. Chem. Phys. 
2003 , 119 , 2333 –2337 . 10.1063/1.1582834 .
Wang L.-W. ; Zunger A. 
Pseudopotential calculations
of nanoscale CdSe quantum
dots . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
1996 , 53 , 9579 –9582 . 10.1103/physrevb.53.9579 .
Ogawa S. ; Hu K. ; Fan F.-R. F. ; Bard A. J. 
Photoelectrochemistry
of Films of
Quantum Size Lead Sulfide Particles Incorporated in Self-Assembled
Monolayers on Gold . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1997 , 101 , 5707 –5711 . 10.1021/jp970737j .
Chen S. ; Truax L. A. ; Sommers J. M. 
Alkanethiolate-Protected PbS Nanoclusters:
Synthesis, Spectroscopic and Electrochemical Studies . Chem. Mater. 
2000 , 12 , 3864 –3870 . 10.1021/cm000653e .
Cuharuc A. S. ; Kulyuk L. L. ; Lascova R. I. ; Mitioglu A. A. ; Dikusar A. I. 
Electrochemical
Characterization of PbS Quantum Dots Capped with Oleic Acid and PbS
Thin Films—a Comparative Study . Surf.
Eng. Appl. Electrochem. 
2012 , 48 , 193 –211 . 10.3103/s1068375512030040 .
Lazar S. ; Botton G. A. ; Wu M.-Y. ; Tichelaar F. D. ; Zandbergen H. W. 
Materials science applications of
HREELS in near edge
structure analysis and low energy loss spectroscopy . Ultramicroscopy 
2003 , 96 , 535 –546 . 10.1016/s0304-3991(03)00114-1 .12871814 
Erni R. ; Browning N. D. 
Quantification of
the size-dependent energy gap of
individual CdSe quantum dots by valence electron energy-loss spectroscopy . Ultramicroscopy 
2007 , 107 , 267 –273 . 10.1016/j.ultramic.2006.08.002 .16996213 
French R. H. ; Müllejans H. ; Jones D. J. 
Optical Properties of Aluminum Oxide:
Determined from Vacuum Ultraviolet and Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopies . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
1998 , 81 , 2549 10.1111/j.1151-2916.1998.tb02660.x .
Van
Benthem K. ; French R. H. ; Sigle W. ; Elsässer C. ; Rühle M. 
Valence electron energy loss study of Fe-doped SrTiO3
and a Σ13 boundary: electronic structure and dispersion forces . Ultramicroscopy 
2001 , 86 , 303 10.1016/s0304-3991(00)00121-2 .11281150 
Dholakia D. A. ; Solanki G. K. ; Patel S. G. ; Agarwal M. K. 
Optical Band Gap
studies of Tungsten Sulphoselenide Single Crystals Grown by DVT Technique . Scientia Iranica 
2003 , 10 , 373 –382 .
Wang C. ; Zhou G. ; Liu H. ; Wu J. ; Qiu Y. ; Gu B.-L. ; Duan W. 
Chemical Functionalization of Carbon
Nanotubes by Carboxyl Groups on Stone-Wales Defects: A Density Functional
Theory Study . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 10266 –10271 . 10.1021/jp060412f .16722728 
Zherebetskyy D. ; Scheele M. ; Zhang Y. ; Bronstein N. ; Thompson C. ; Britt D. ; Salmeron M. ; Alivisatos P. ; Wang L.-W. 
Hydroxylation of the surface of PbS nanoparticles passivated
with oleic acid . Science 
2014 , 344 , 1380 –1384 . 10.1126/science.1252727 .24876347 
Corthey G. ; Olmos-Asar J. A. ; Casillas G. ; Mariscal M. M. ; Mejía-Rosales S. ; Azcárate J. C. ; Larios E. ; José-Yacamán M. ; Salvarezza R. C. ; Fonticelli M. H. 
Influence of Capping on the Atomistic
Arrangement in Palladium Nanoparticles at Room Temperature . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 24641 –24647 . 10.1021/jp5083505 .
Koole R. ; Groeneveld E. ; Vanmaekelbergh D. ; Meijerink A. ; de Mello Donegá C.  Size
Effects on Semiconductor Nanoparticles . In Nanoparticles ; de Mello Donegá C.  , Ed. ; Springer : Berlin, Heidelberg , 2014 : pp 29 –31 .
Walsh A. ; Watson G. W. 
The origin of the stereochemically active Pb(II) lone
pair: DFT calculations on PbO and PbS . Jour.
Sol. St. Chem. 
2005 , 178 , 1422 –1428 . 10.1016/j.jssc.2005.01.030 .
Drummond N. D. ; Williamson A. J. ; Needs R. J. ; Galli G. 
Electron emission from
diamondoids: a diffusion quantum Montecarlo study . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2005 , 95 , 096801 10.1103/physrevlett.95.096801 .16197235 
Barnard A. S. 
Shape-Dependent
confinement of the nanodiamond band gap . Cryst.
Growth Des. 
2009 , 9 , 4860 –4863 . 10.1021/cg900680e .

