
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145796410.1021/acsomega.7b01995ArticleKinetic Implications of the Presence of Intermolecular
Interactions in the Response of Binary Self-Assembled Electroactive
Monolayers Gonzalez Joaquin *Sequí Jose-Alfonso Departamento de Química Física,
Facultad de Química, Regional Campus of International Excellence
“Campus Mare Nostrum”, Universidad
de Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain* E-mail: josquin@um.es.30 01 2018 31 01 2018 3 1 1276 1292 15 12 2017 28 12 2017 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Quantitative analysis of the influence
of intermolecular interactions
on the response of electroactive binary monolayers, incorporating
the presence of electroinactive coadsorbed species and Marcus–Hush
kinetic formalism, has been deduced as an extension of previous models.
An expression for the current–potential relationship in terms
of two global phenomenological interaction parameters and the apparent
charge-transfer rate constant and formal potential has been obtained
and applied to multipotential chronoamperometry for the analysis of
intermolecular interaction effects on the kinetics of the charge transfer.
Experimental verification of the theoretical framework has been performed
with binary ferrocenylundecanethiol/decanethiol monolayers on gold
and platinum substrates for different coverage degrees of the redox
probe. The increase of the ferrocene coverage gives rise to a slowing
down of the charge-transfer process through a decrease of the apparent
rate constant above a 90% for gold and platinum electrodes when the
surface coverage increases from 1–2 to 15–30%. Significant
differences in the magnitude of intermolecular interactions and the
symmetry degree of the charge-transfer process are observed between
gold and platinum electrodes. Moreover, for high surface coverages
of ferrocene, two different domains appear, from which it is possible
to carry out a kinetic discrimination of the two responses. Values
of the interaction and kinetic parameters have been obtained for the
different monolayers under study, and the limit of applicability of
this treatment is discussed.

document-id-old-9ao7b01995document-id-new-14ao-2017-019958ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The
interest and applications of redox molecular systems confined
at conducting interfaces, and electroactive monolayers in particular,
have grown remarkably in recent years. Among the increasing number
of applications of these systems, the following can be cited: the
design of new electrocatalytic platforms and bioplatforms for the
development of new sensors and biosensors,1−3 molecular and
organic electronics,4−6 and energy storage systems,7,8 among
many others, together with the possibility of exploring in detail
fundamental aspects of charge-transfer processes as well as the chemical
reactivity at electrified interfaces.9,10 To this purpose,
it has been of great help in a number of procedures for immobilizing
neutral and charged species at a wide range of conductive substrates,3,11−13 together with the use of instrumental techniques
that allow for analyzing and in some cases controlling the structure
of the modified interfaces.12,14,15

To improve the performance of these devices, it is necessary
to
get a detailed insight of the processes taking place, and with this
aim, several theoretical models have been developed and tested with
different electrochemical techniques, especially with cyclic voltammetry
(CV).16−18 Unfortunately, in most practical situations, the
experimental electrochemical responses deviate from the most used
models that are based on an “ideal” behavior of the
system, that is, a perfectly homogeneous 2-D electroactive monolayer
with uniform solvation of the redox probes, local potential at the
reactive molecules independent of the redox conversion degree, and
the absence of intermolecular interactions.17−19 Unless rigorous
procedures are followed for the synthesis of the monolayers to reasonably
ensure the abovementioned requirements (i.e., low coverage degree
of the redox probes and a reasonably rigid structure of the monolayer,
among others), the ideal behavior is indeed a naive picture of the
real experimental situation. Nonidealities, such as the presence of
intermolecular interactions,19,20 the complex influence
of the electrical double layer through the interfacial potential distribution,21,22 or the existence of different electrostatic environments leading
to distinct structural (and therefore redox functional) domains, will
cause a distortion of the electrochemical response of these systems.23−26

In this paper, we will focus on the influence of intermolecular
interactions related to nonuniform solvation and ineffective electrostatic
screening of the redox probes, together with the presence of noncovalent
interactions.19,27 This gives rise to the appearance
of different energetic landscapes surrounding the redox probes as
a result of the balance between Coulombic (long range) and van der
Waals (short range) interactions from which an attractive or repulsive
global character of interactions is defined.19,20 Electrochemical modelization of intermolecular interactions began
in the 1970s with a number of seminal works, including those by Laviron16,28−30 who deduced expressions for the current of charge
processes of surface-confined species for different electrochemical
techniques (including CV), valid for any reversibility degree of the
process. Laviron’s model was based on the application of the
Frumkin isotherm, which leads to the introduction of phenomenological,
potential independent interaction parameters, with no insight into
the molecular origins of such interactions. One of the main assumptions
of Laviron’s model is the fully randomized structure of the
monolayer, which has been later criticized because of the apparent
contradiction between the presence of attractive interactions and
a completely disordered 2-D system.31 Laviron’s
model was refined by Tokuda et al., who introduced the notion of “apparent”
values for the rate constant and the formal potential.32 The complexity of the modified model when non-Nernstian
processes are considered has resulted in a very scarce application
to the experimental analysis of the influence of intermolecular interactions
on the redox kinetics and, as far as we know, most papers devoted
to the study of electroactive monolayers with a significant influence
of interactions assume a Nernstian character of the redox conversion
because of the fact that under these conditions, simpler criteria
for a quantification of this influence are available. However, the
range of validity of the assumption of fast kinetics, independently
of the degree of influence of intermolecular interactions, has not
been assessed systematically and critically.

Because of the
above, in this paper, we present an extension of
the theory corresponding to the current of electroactive monolayers
by including the presence of intermolecular interactions by means
of a simplified version of previous models. As the main novelty of
our model, we have considered, together with classical Butler–Volmer
(BV) formalism for the charge-transfer kinetics, the more complex
asymmetric Marcus–Hush (MH) one. The presence of electroinactive
coadsorbates at the monolayer has been also included. The impact of
such interactions on the kinetics of the charge-transfer processes
has been quantified through the analysis of the current obtained upon
the application of a single constant potential pulse or a sequence
of constant potential pulses, with special interest in the so-called
Chidsey–Tafel plots, assuming that a single type of active
ferrocene is present in the monolayer. A manageable expression for
the current–potential relationship in terms of two interaction
parameters and apparent values of the charge-transfer rate constant
and formal potential has been obtained.

To validate the theoretical
results, the experimental analysis
of the response of binary ferrocenylundecanethiol/decanethiol monolayers
at gold and platinum electrodes at different coverages of the redox
probe has been carried out. The results obtained show significant
differences between both metallic substrates in the magnitude of the
intermolecular interactions as well as in the symmetry of the rate
of oxidation and reduction charge-transfer half reactions. The present
model enables us to reproduce the experimental Chidsey–Tafel
plots, which are severely distorted, as well as to determine both
kinetic and interaction parameters of the different monolayers under
study and to clarify the limit of applicability of this treatment.

2 Results and Discussion
In the following section, we
will discuss the application of the
simplified Laviron–Tokuda fully randomized model (s-LT-FR,
see the Theory section) to a surface-confined
redox pair when a single constant potential E or
a sequence of n consecutive constant potentials E1, E2, ..., En is applied to the electrode,
and the results will be compared with those corresponding to the ideal
situation. For the sake of simplicity, henceforth, kap,global0′ will be denoted as kap0′.

2.1 Theoretical
Results: Multipotential Pulse
Chronoamperometry
The influence of parameters G and S on the current–time curves for the
charge-transfer process given by (I) will be
first analyzed. To simplify the analysis of the chronoamperometric
responses, eqs 8 and 38 (or 41) can be rewritten
as 1  

In the
abovementioned expression, we
have re-defined the time scale through the dimensionless time T = kap0′t. Both BV and MH
kinetics formalisms have been considered (with a typical value of
α = 0.5 in the former and, unless specified, γ = 0 in
the latter).

Equation 1 cannot
be analytically solved, and therefore, standard numerical procedures
have been employed (e.g., the fourth-order Runge–Kutta method33). Nevertheless, analytical solutions can be
obtained when some additional simplifications are introduced. Thus,
in the absence of interactions (i.e., aij = 0, i, j = O,
R, ≠, and, therefore, G = S = Sp = 0, see eq 29), the abovementioned equation presents a
simple solution which takes the following expression for any potential Ej of an arbitrary sequence
applied during a time tj(34) 2  with keff(Ej) being the effective rate
constant at potential Ej given by 3  and kox and kred being the rate constants for the oxidation
and reduction processes, for which the particular mathematical form
of the dependence with potential does not need to be established a
priori and, therefore, both BV and MH kinetics formalisms can be directly
applied.a34,35 Thus, from eq 2, it is evident that the
current shows a faster decay with time as the effective rate constant
is higher, and that the plots of ln(Φ) versus time are linear
with a slope equal to keff(Ej).34,35

In Figure 1, several
Φ–T current–time curves have
been plotted as obtained numerically from eq 1 for an applied potential (E – Eap0′) = 0.15 V assuming the BV formalism.
These curves have been calculated for several values of θEG (shown in the curves) and three values
of θES (1, 0 and −1). The
“ideal” behavior (absence of interactions, θEG = 0, and θES = 0) can be seen in Figure 1b (blue lines).

Figure 1 Dimensionless chronoamperometric current–time
curves (Φ–T) obtained numerically from eq 1 for an applied potential
(E – Eap0′) = 0.15 V, assuming
a BV formalism
with α = 0.5. The values of θEG are shown in the curves. The values of θES are 1 (a), 0 (b), and −1 (c).

From the curves in this figure, it can be seen that the shape
of
the chronoamperograms is strongly affected by the values of the interaction
parameters θEG and θES. Concerning the influence of θEG, when its value varies from negative (global repulsive
character) to positive (global attractive character), the Φ–T curves show a slower temporal evolution for lower values
of T (and even an increase with time for values of
θEG > 1 and θES ≥ 0, Figure 1a,b), whereas the opposite behavior is observed for
longer
values of T (compare curves with θEG = −1.5 and 1.5 in Figure 1a,c). On the other hand, the decrease of
θES gives rise to a faster evolution
of the current, whatever the value of θEG (compare Figure 1a,c).b For example, the value of T required for reaching a 10% of the initial current value is 0.043
for θES = −1, whereas it
is more than three times higher for θES = 0 (T = 0.1322), and in the case of θES = 1, the value is above 0.25 (T = 0.3615).

The origin of the abovementioned influences lies
in the differential
character of the current for surface-confined species, that is, Φ
= −dfR/dT. We
have plotted in Figure S1 the dimensionless
charge–time curves (Q/QF)–T corresponding to the current–time
ones given in Figure 1, where it is clear that the increase of both θEG and θES gives
rise to a slower temporal increase of the charge. The current behavior
observed at shorter T values is related to a change
in the curvature of the (Q/QF)–T curves, mainly for positive values
of θES and θEG > 1. This is the responsible for the striking increase
of the dimensionless current shown in Figure 1a,b.

When the MH formalism is considered,
the global trends discussed
above also hold, but the current–time curves show a slower
time evolution as compared with those corresponding to BV for all
the cases under study. In Figure S2, we
have plotted the comparison between BV (lines) and MH treatments for
Λ = 20 (i.e., a reorganization energy λ ≃ 0.5 eV,
symbols) calculated for θEG = 1,
three values of θES (shown in the
curves), and (E – Eap0′) = 0.15
V. The slower time evolution predicted by MH is based on the fact
that the dimensionless effective global rate constant, defined as 4  is smaller for MH than that corresponding
to BV because it is fulfilled that, under these conditions, gMH(ηap) < gBV(ηap) (see eq 36 and ref (36)).

A usual procedure to obtain the values
of the effective rate constant
at each potential is to plot the logarithm of the current versus time
(i.e., an exponential temporal decrease is assumed and thus, from
the values of the slopes of these lines, it is possible to obtain keff(E) (see eq 2 and refs (34) and (35)). To know if this methodology
can be applied when the influence of intermolecular interactions is
significant, Figure 2a–c shows the logarithms of the currents shown in Figure 1 for the different
cases under study (assuming the BV kinetic formalism). As can be seen,
a good linearity is only observed for higher values of T (typically T ≥ 0.15 values are recommended
to carry out this kind of kinetic analysis, although for negative
values of θES, this limit time can
be smaller). It should also be taken into account that, ideally, for
a constant potential, the value of keff(E) should indeed be constant. However, although
for negative values of θEG there
is no significant influence of the interactions parameters on the
slope of the logarithm curves, for θEG ≥ 0, an increase of the absolute value of the slope is observed,
being much more apparent as θES decreases
(compare Figure 2a,c).
Therefore, the value of keff(E) obtained from the logarithmic curves under these conditions is
clearly affected by the presence of interactions and it should be
considered as an apparent value.

Figure 2 Logarithmic chronoamperometric current–time
curves (ln(Φ)–T) obtained numerically
from eq 1 for an applied
potential (E – Eap0′) = 0.15
V, assuming a BV formalism
with α = 0.5. The values of θEG are shown in the curves. The values of θES are 1 (a), 0 (b), and −1 (c).

When the MH formalism is considered, the linearity between
ln(Φ)
and T is also observed for values of T ≥ 0.15 (see Figure S3), although
the slopes of these straight lines are smaller than those obtained
for BV curves, indicating a lower effective rate constant keff,D(E). As in the abovementioned
case, one should be aware of the dependence of the values of keff(E) on the experimental
conditions.

We will consider now the application of a staircase
sequence of
constant potentials of the form Ej = (Einitial – Eap0′) + jΔE with j = 1, 2, ..., n, with ΔE being
a constant potential amplitude. Each potential is applied during a
dimensionless time 0 ≤ Tj ≤ τ, with the total time being T = Tj + (j – 1)τ. The current for each potential is obtained by
solving eq 1 for the
corresponding applied potential and boundary conditions. Thus, in Figure 3a, the Φ–T curves obtained for the application of 31 potential pulses
are plotted with (Einitial – Eap0′) = −0.15 V, τ = 0.25, and ΔE = 0.01 V. Three values of the θEG parameter have been considered (−1, 0, and 1, corresponding
to black, red, and blue lines, respectively) for θES = 0. In Figure 3b, the ln Φ–T curves
are shown to be restricted to the potential interval (−0.1,
0.1) V.

Figure 3 Dimensionless chronoamperometric Φ–T (a) and logarithmic chronoamperometric ln(Φ)–T (b), current–time curves obtained numerically from eq 1 for a potential sequence
of the form Ej = (Einitial – Eap0′) + jΔE with j = 31,
(Einitial – Eap0′) = −0.15
V, τ = 0.25, and ΔE = 0.01 V. Three values
of the θEG parameter have been considered
(−1, 0, and 1, corresponding to black, red, and blue lines,
respectively) for θES = 0. The plots
of the logarithmic curves in (b) have been restricted to the potential
interval (−0.1, 0.1) V.

The current transients in this figure show the typical sawtooth-shaped
feature of surface-confined species (see, e.g.,34), with the increase of θEG causing the increase of the current at potentials around Eap0′, whereas the opposite behavior is observed for |Ej – Eap0′| >
0.075
V. This can also be observed in the linear plots of Figure 3b, from which it is clear that
the slopes of the logarithmic curves increase with θEG (in the absolute value) for potentials far away
from Eap0′, whereas these slopes become practically independent
of θEG for E ≈ Eap0′.

In general, the influence of θEG and θES on Φ–T and ln Φ–T, and therefore
on the apparent reversibility degree of the process, is complex. When
one considers the combined increase of both parameters (see Figure S4), the overall effect is the decrease
of the slope of the logarithmic curve together with the shift of the
response toward more positive potentials. The combined increase (in
the absolute value) of θEG and θES could be related to an overall increase
of the attractive interactions due to a greater incidence of van der
Waals interactions.20,37

To determine, or at least
estimate, the values of kap0′ and Eap0′, the
most direct approach is that
proposed by Chidsey,35 where the slopes
of the logarithms of chronoamperometric curves obtained for different
applied potentials are plotted versus the applied potentials, thus
obtaining a V-shaped curve (Chidsey–Tafel plot) from which
the values of 2kap0′ and Eap0′ are extracted
from the ordinate and abscissa of the minimum, respectively.

In Figure 4, three
sets of Chidsey–Tafel plots (ln(keff,D)–(E – Eap0′)) are
plotted, calculated from a multipotential sequence analogous to that
used in Figure 3 for
several values of θEG (shown in
the curves) and three values of θES (1, 0, and −1, Figure 4a–c, respectively). Both the Butler–Volmer (lines)
and the symmetrical Marcus–Hush (γ = 0, symbols) models
have been considered. In the latter case, a dimensionless reorganization
energy of Λ = 40 (i.e., λ = 1 eV) has been assumed.38 The values of ln(2) (horizontal dashed lines)
and 0 (vertical dotted line) corresponding to the minimum ordinate
and abscissa of an ideal situation have been included in the three
figures.

Figure 4 Dimensionless Chidsey–Tafel plots (ln(keff,D(E))–(E – Eap0′)curves), obtained numerically from eq 1 for a potential step sequence of the form Ej = (Einitial – Eap0′) + jΔE with j = 31, (Einitial – Eap0′) = −0.15 V, τ =
0.25, and ΔE = 0.01 V. BV formalism with α
= 0.5 (lines) and the MH one with Λ = 40 (symbols) have been
considered. The values of θEG are
indicated in the curves. The values of θES are 1 (a); 0 (b); and −1 (c).

From the abovementioned curves, it can be seen that intermolecular
interactions cause a strong deviation of the Chidsey–Tafel
curves from the ideal situation (see the curve with θEG = θES = 0 in Figure 4b). In general, the
increase of θEG gives rise to the
approach of the cathodic and anodic branches of these curves in such
a way that the electrochemical response will develop in a narrower
potential interval.

Moreover, it is clear that when θES ≠ 0, the estimation of kap0′ and Eap0′ from the minima of these curves would
lead to significant errors.
Thus, for positive values of θES (Figure 4a), the
ordinate of the minima is below ln(2) for any value of θEG (being this value much smaller for θEG > 1), whereas the opposite is observed
for negative values of θES (Figure 4c). As an example,
for θEG = 0.5 and θES = 1, there is a negative deviation of −63%
in the value of kap0′, whereas for the same value of θEG and θES = −1, there is a positive deviation of +53%. Concerning the
abscissa of the minima, for θES ≥
0, it is located at negative overpotentials, and it shifts toward
more positive values as θEG increases,
whereas the opposite trend is observed for negative values of θES.

The influence of θES is much
more important for the cathodic branch of the Chidsey–Tafel
plots, as can be seen in Figure S5, where
these curves have been calculated for a given θEG and different values of θES. Thus, it can be seen that in the cathodic branch, there is a decrease
of around one unity of ln(keff,D) per
unity of θES. In the anodic branch,
the influence of θES is lost at
high overpotentials because the surface excess of species R is practically
null, and therefore e–θESfR → 1 (see eq 1).

When the MH formalism is used, although the
minimum of Chidsey–Tafel
plots logically coincides for both the MH and BV formalisms, the values
of ln(keff,D(E)) obtained
with the MH formalism are smaller than those corresponding to BV,
especially at high overpotentials. In this sense, these deviations
are more important for negative values of θEG (see, e.g., curves with θEG ≤ 0 in Figures 4a–c or in S5c).

Concerning
the effect of the symmetry factor γ, in Figure S6, we have plotted the Chidsey–Tafel
curves calculated for θEG = 0.5,
θES = −0.5, and different
positive (S6a) and negative (S6b) values of γ. As previously reported,36 a nonnull value of γ implies an asymmetry
in the energy requirements for the direct and reverse redox half-reactions
and, therefore, the increase of |γ| will affect the relative
slopes of the cathodic and anodic branches of the Chidsey–Tafel
plots. In agreement with Figure S6a, a
positive value of γ give rises to a decrease of the slopes of
the anodic branch and an increase of the slopes of the cathodic branch
(i.e., to a decrease of keff|E>Emin and to an increase
of keff|E<Emin for a given value of |E – Emin|, with Emin being the potential of the minimum), and the opposite
is observed for a negative value of γ (see Figure S6b). The decrease of the slope of one of the branches
of the Chidsey–Tafel plots is related, in general, to stronger
kinetic limitations for the corresponding redox conversion (i.e.,
with sluggish charge transfers).

It is important to remind that
the distortions observed in the
experimental Chidsey–Tafel plots will be related to the combined
effect of the interaction parameters and the asymmetry of the rate
constant (through the value of γ, see below).

As stated
above, it is not possible to solve eq 1 analytically for any value of the applied
potential, but approximate solutions corresponding to very negative
and very positive potentials can be obtained in the way discussed
in section S2 of the Supporting Information. Thus, the following expressions are obtained for these limits 5  from which
the following expressions for the
logarithms of the effective rate constants are deduced 6  

Thus, a linear dependence of ln(keff,D) with the overpotential is expected whenever
the condition ln(g(ηap)) ≅
constant × ηap holds, and from the intercepts
of these lines, the interaction
parameters could be determined. In the case of the BV formalism, the
linear dependence will always be fulfilled because ln(gBV(ηap)) = −αηap (see eq 17), whereas in the case of the MH formalism, ln(gMH(ηap)) ≅ A(Λ)ηap, with A(Λ) being a constant value
for a given Λ.

Nevertheless, it should also be taken into
account that the experimental
measured current always presents a capacitive component that, for
the application of a potential jump of magnitude ΔE, is given by39,40 7  with Ru and Cdl being the uncompensated resistance and double
layer capacitance of the monolayer/solution interface. The inverse
of the product (RuCdl) is a characteristic time below which the nonfaradaic component
of the current becomes dominant (see section S3 of the Supporting Information and Figures S7 and S8).
Thus, the value of (RuCdl) fixes a practical limit value of the effective rate
constant that can be determined and, therefore, the applicability
of approximate solutions given by eq 6 is very restricted.

2.2 Experimental
Results: Binary Ferrocenylundecanethiol/Decanethiol
Monolayer
We have validated the theory presented with the
analysis of the chronoamperometric responses of binary monolayers
of ferrocenylundecanethiol/decanethiol (FcC11SH/C10SH) at gold and
platinum electrodes. These monolayers have been prepared by using
mixtures of ethanolic solutions 1 mM of the redox probe 11-(ferrocenyl)undecanethiol
and electroinactive 1-decanethiol in the following ratios (v/v): 1:15,
1:10, 1:5, and 1:2.5 (see the Experimental Conditions section). The influence of an increasing presence of the redox probe
on the electrochemical response of the system will be analyzed. We
will consider in our treatment that under working conditions, there
is a single type of ferrocene moiety at the different monolayers and,
therefore, the differences observed between them are solely due to
changes in the microenvironment of the redox probe related to the
different amount of redox probes but not with the appearance of different
domains of ferrocenes. The validity of this assumption will be tested
below.

The electrolyte medium chosen is EtOH/ClO4NBu4 0.1 M, and the supporting electrodes are polycrystalline
gold and platinum. As discussed in previous refs (19)(31), and (41), one of the main pitfalls
of the LMT model is the “fully randomized” (FR) assumption
for the redox probes in the monolayer, which seems to be noncompatible
with the presence of strong attractive interactions resulting in a
global quasiordering of the 2D system. Nevertheless, the polycrystalline
nature of the substrates will give rise to an average current corresponding
to different surface microenvironments such that the overall response
should be reasonably coincident with an FR one, even though there
could be some local order in some of the microenvironments.c

Although, as far as we know, only a few contributions
in the literature
have been devoted to the analysis of the electrochemical behavior
of monolayers at nonaqueous media (see, e.g., refs (42) and (43)), ethanolic medium has
been chosen to avoid phase transitions or reordering processes in
the binary monolayer, which are frequent for medium–high coverages
of the redox probe when aqueous media are used, giving rise to the
appearance of complex responses (e.g., multiple peaks in the cyclic
voltammograms, see refs (23)–26). For a value of the full coverage of ferrocene of around ΓM = 4.8 × 10–10 mol cm–2,23 the percentage of the surface-confined
redox probe, θFc, has been maintained below 30% in
all the cases (see data in Tables 1, S2 and S3).

Table 1 χFc, Mole Fraction
(in %) of Ferrocene in the Assembling Solutions of FcC11SH/C10SH in
Proportions (VFcC11SH/VC10SH) and θFc|substrate,
Surface Coverage (in %) of Ferrocene Probes at the Different Monolayers
at Gold and Platinum Electrodes Calculated from Experimental Data
in Tables S2 and S4
χFc/(VFcC11SH/VC10SH)	θFc|Au	θFc|Pt	
6.25/(1:15)	1.4	1.9	
9.10/(1:10)	5.8	3.7	
16.70/(1:5)	8.4	6.9	
28.60/(1:2.5)	29.1	14.0	
Figure 5 shows the
CV responses of the four monolayers under study corresponding to gold
electrodes for different values of the scan rate (v = 50, 100, 200, and 300 mV s–1), with the analogue
curves for platinum electrodes given in Figure S9. The values of the peak parameters (peak current, peak potential,
and full width at the half maximum (fwhm)) for the different scan
rates, corresponding to the direct anodic scan, are given in Tables
S2 and S3 of section S4 of the Supporting Information.

Figure 5 CV curves corresponding to FcC11SH/C10SH monolayers on gold electrodes
for different surface coverages θFc (in %): (a) 1.3,
solution 1:15; (b) 5.8, solution 1:10; (c) 8.3, solution 1:5; and
(d) 29, solution 1:2.5. The values of the scan rates (in V s–1) are as follows: 0.050 (black lines); 0.100 (red lines); 0.200 (blue
lines); and 0.300 (pink lines). EtOH/0.1 M ClO4NBu4, T = 298 K. Negative currents correspond
to direct anodic scan.

From the CV curves in Figures 5 and S9, it can be seen
that they present a single pair of peaks in all the cases with a typical
Gaussian-like feature for the lower ferrocene coverages, θFc ≤ 2% for the 1:15 monolayers, which is distorted
as θFc increases up to 30% in the case of 1:2.5 monolayers
at gold, for which the distortion is very evident (see Figure 5c,d).

The experimental
studies of the influence of intermolecular interactions
on the CV curves have been mostly devoted to Nernstian processes for
which, in agreement with,17,19 fwhm values different
from the ideal 90 mV value (for T = 298 K) and peak
potentials dependent on the surface coverage of the redox molecules
are expected. Under these conditions, the value of parameter θEG is crucial for determining the global character
of these interactions. We have calculated the values of θEG directly from the experimental CV curves
of the anodic scan of the four systems under study by using eqs 18 and 19 of ref (29), which are valid only for Nernstian conditions (see Tables S2 and
S3 of section S4 of the Supporting Information).

On the basis of the abovementioned criteria and the peak
parameters
values, it is evident that the CV curves for gold and platinum electrodes
are affected by intermolecular interactions. Thus, the fwhm values
for the lower θFc are greater than 90 mV (105–107
mV for gold and 98–102 mV for platinum, with θEG = −0.27 and −0.16, respectively),
revealing the predominance of repulsive interactions in the CV curve.
When the ferrocene coverage and therefore the surface redox charge
increases, the fwhm values begin to decrease, indicating a change
in the global character of interactions from repulsive to attractive
(e.g., for the 1:2.5 monolayer, fwhm is in the range 44–53
mV for gold and 57–59 mV for platinum, with θEG = 0.84 and 0.62, respectively). Concerning the
influence of the ferrocene coverage on the position of the CV curves,
there is a shift of the responses toward higher potentials at both
gold and platinum electrodes as θFc increases, which
is more important for the latter electrode.

Moreover, the influence
of intermolecular interactions affects
not only the shape of the response but also the reversibility of the
same. Thus, the CV curve for a redox molecule confined at the electrode
surface can be considered as Nernstian on the basis of the following
features: a scan rate-independent peak potential and (ICV,peak/v) ratio and a fwhm value of
90 mV as stated above.17,19,39,40 In the case of non-Nernstian ideal systems
(i.e., for log(k0′/(Fv/RT)) ≤ 1), the increase of the scan rate
affects the three peak parameters (with a decrease of the peak height,
a shift of the peak potentials toward more positive/negative potentials
depending on the anodic/cathodic character of the charge transfer,
and an increase of the fwhm values).

For the lower coverages
(θFc ≤ 2%, Figures 5a and S9a), the
two first features of ideal Nernstian
systems hold but, as θFc becomes higher, the decrease
of (ICV,peak/v) and the
shift toward more positive potentials of the direct peak as the scan
rate increases are observed (compare Figure 5a–d corresponding to gold electrodes).
The higher sensitivity of the CV curves to the scan rates, together
with the distortion of the typical Gaussian-like shape the CV curves,
points to a decrease of the apparent rate constant kap0′ (and therefore of the reversibility of the charge transfer) from
1:15 to 1:2.5 monolayers due to the increase of the interaction parameters
θEG and θES (in the absolute value).

In the case of platinum
electrodes, the CV curves shown in Figure S9 follow the general trends indicated
for gold electrodes, although the CV curves corresponding to the most
diluted monolayers (θFc = 2 and 3.7% for 1:15 and
1:10 monolayers, respectively) are severely distorted because of a
low faradaic to background signal ratio. Moreover, the influence of
the scan rate on the peak currents and potentials for the most concentrated
monolayers is smaller than that observed for gold, indicating a higher
value of the apparent rate constant.

Now, to determine, or at
least to make an estimation, of kap0′ of the different monolayers
under study, the I–t and
ln(I)–t curves
for gold (Figure 6a,b)
and platinum (Figure S10a,b) electrodes
are obtained, corresponding to the application of a staircase potential
of the form Ej(V) = 0.15 + jΔE with j = 1, 2, ..., 35 and ΔE = 0.01 V,
for different values of the time lengths of the potential steps in
the range 1–100 ms. The curves in Figures 6 and S10 show
sawtooth features in line with the theoretical predictions given in Figure 3, with sharper decays
of the current for the lowest ferrocene coverage (see black lines
in Figures 6a and S10a, corresponding to θFc =
1.3 and 2% for gold and platinum electrodes), and almost linear time
dependence for the higher θFc value (see blue lines
in Figures 6a and S10a obtained for θFc = 29 and
14% for gold and platinum electrodes).

Figure 6 Chronoamperometric I–t (a) and ln(I)–t (b) curves
corresponding to FcC11SH/C10SH monolayers on gold electrodes for different
surface coverages θFc (in %): (a) 1.3, solution 1:15,
black lines; (b) 5.8, solution 1:10, red lines; (c) 8.3, solution
1:5, green lines; (d) 29, solution 1:2.5, blue lines. Ej(V) = 0.15 + jΔE with j = 1,
2, ..., 35, τ = 0.010 s and ΔE = 0.01
V. EtOH/0.1 M ClO4NBu4, T =
298 K.

Concerning the logarithmic curves
in Figures 6b and S10b, a
decrease in the slope of the straight lines can be clearly seen as
θFc increases, evidencing a decrease of the effective
rate constant keff(E)
and therefore of the kinetics of the ferrocene oxidation. This result,
in an analogous way to that observed for CV, is clearly related to
the increasing effect of intermolecular interactions.

Thus,
the Chidsey–Tafel plots at gold and platinum electrodes
will be used for the four systems under study to determine the effective
rate constants at each potential and, from these values, the apparent
rate constant and formal potential of the ferrocene monolayers as
well as the interaction parameters. The MH formalism will be considered
and, therefore, Λ, γ, kap0′, Eap0, θEG, and θES will be adjustable parameters to be determined. The values of kap0′ and Eap0 obtained from the minima of the Chidsey–Tafel
plots will be used as seeds for these parameters, whereas Λ
will be restricted to the range 25–40, which corresponds to
typical values for redox probes at alkanethiol monolayers.36,42,43 As stated in section 2.1, to assure a good linearity of the ln(I)–t curves, time values fulfilling the condition
(kap0′t) ≥ 0.15 should be employed
(although this limit could be smaller for negative values of θES). For the experimental conditions used
here, pulse time lengths of 10 and 50 ms have been used.

The
ln(keff)–E curves
for the four systems considered are shown in Figures 7 and 8 (black circles)
for gold and platinum electrodes, respectively,
for the 1:15, 1:10, and 1:5 monolayers (with a pulse time τ
= 10 ms). Because of their special features, the 1:2.5 ones (corresponding
to a pulse time τ = 50 ms) are plotted separately in Figure 9 for both gold and
platinum electrodes. The theoretical curves corresponding to the best
fittings obtained have been included, by using eq 1, with the parameters listed in Table 2 (diamonds). In this table,
we have also included the values corresponding to the effective rate
constant and formal potential obtained directly from the coordinates
of the minima of the curves.

Figure 7 Experimental (black circles) and theoretical
(red diamonds) Chidsey–Tafel
plots (ln(keff(E))–E curves), corresponding to FcC11SH/C10SH monolayers on
gold electrodes for different surface coverages: (a) solution 1:15;
(b) solution 1:10; and (c) solution 1:5. Ej(V) = 0.15 + jΔE with j = 1, 2, ..., 35, τ = 0.010
s and ΔE = 0.01 V. EtOH/0.1 M ClO4NBu4, T = 298 K. Theoretical curves have
been obtained by solving eq 1 numerically with the parameters shown in Table 2. Horizontal dashed lines correspond
to the values of −ln(RuCdl) for fully reduced and fully oxidized monolayers
given in Table S1.

Figure 8 Experimental (black circles) and theoretical (red diamonds) Chidsey–Tafel
plots (ln(keff(E))–E curves), corresponding to FcC11SH/C10SH monolayers on
platinum electrodes for different surface coverages: (a) solution
1:15; (b) solution 1:10; and (c) solution 1:5. Ej(V) = 0.15 + jΔE with j = 1, 2, ..., 35,
τ = 0.010 s and ΔE = 0.01 V. EtOH/0.1
M ClO4NBu4, T = 298 K. Theoretical
curves have been obtained by solving eq 1 numerically with the parameters shown in Table 2. Horizontal dashed
lines correspond to the values of −ln(RuCdl) for fully reduced and fully
oxidized monolayers given in Table S1.

Figure 9 Experimental (circles) and theoretical (diamonds)
Chidsey–Tafel
plots (ln(keff(E))–E curves), corresponding to FcC11SH/C10SH monolayers on
gold (a) and platinum (b) electrodes for a 1:2.5 monolayer. Ej(V) = 0.15
+ jΔE with j = 1, 2, ..., 35, τ = 0.010 s, and ΔE = 0.01 V. EtOH/0.1 M ClO4NBu4, T = 298 K. Theoretical curves have been obtained by solving eq 1 numerically with the parameters
shown in Table 2. Horizontal
dashed lines correspond to the values of −ln(RuCdl) for fully reduced and
fully oxidized monolayers given in Table S1.

Table 2 Best Fitting Values
of Λ, kap0, Eap0, G, and S Parameters for
the Chidsey–Tafel Plots in Figure 7a
 	gold
electrode/fitting parameters	gold
electrode/values from the minima	
ferrocene proportion
θFc/(v/v)	θEG	θES	kap0′/s–1	Eap0′/V vs
Ag QRE	Λ	γ	kap0′/s–1	Eap0′/V vs Ag QRE	
1:15	0.2	–0.3	355	0.325	30	0	426	0.326	
1:10	0.5	–0.4	155	0.310	30	0	189	0.318	
1:5	0.6	–0.8	80	0.302	30	0	96	0.310	
1:2.5	1.3, 1.3	–2.0, −1.9	12, 9.5	0.287, 0.286	30	–0.8, −0.9	14, 12.5	0.296, 0.294	
 	platinum
electrode/fitting parameters	platinum
electrode/values from the minima	
ferrocene proportion θFc/(v/v)	θEG	θES	kap0′/s–1	Eap0′/V vs Ag QRE	Λ	γ	kap0′/s–1	Eap0′/V vs
Ag QRE	
1:15	0.2	–0.2	515	0.277	30	1.0	521	0.304	
1:10	0.3	–0.3	215	0.275	30	0.7	233	0.294	
1:5	0.3	–0.3	165	0.257	30	0.4	182	0.266	
1:2.5	0.95, 1.05	–0.8, −0.7	43, 36	0.247, 0.245	30	0.0	54.7, 41.5	0.256, 0.251	
a The first and second values in the
row for 1:2.5 monolayers correspond to blue and red symbols, respectively,

The Chidsey–Tafel plots
in Figure 7 corresponding
to gold electrodes show a
practically symmetrical V-shape, whereas those corresponding to platinum
electrodes in Figure 8 are clearly nonsymmetrical, showing a distortion at positive overpotentials,
with the experimental values of ln(keff) tending to a constant limit value for potentials above 0.40 V,
especially for the 1:15 case (Figure 8a).

Moreover, at more positive and negative overpotentials,
the experimental
values of the slopes of the logarithms of current versus time curves
deviate from the theoretical ln(keff(E)) ones (i.e., potentials below 0.23–0.24 V and
above 0.4 V for gold electrodes and below 0.20–0.22 V and above
0.4 V for platinum electrodes). These deviations are more apparent
for the most diluted ferrocene monolayers, especially for the 1:15
case (see Figures 7a and 8a), and they are related to the double
layer charging process taking place, which contaminates or even dominates
the response. In practice, under these conditions, the charge-transfer
process would present a rate similar or faster than that corresponding
to the charge of the double layer. Therefore, the values of the slopes
of the logarithmic chronoamperograms corresponding to these regions
are not valid for the estimation of the kinetic and interaction parameters
because they correspond to (RuCdl)−1 (see eq 7). To determine a practical potential
limit above which no reliable kinetic information can be obtained,
we have analyzed the current transients at such extreme potential
regions. By assuming that the response is purely nonfaradaic, the
logarithm of the current would allow us to obtain the value of (RuCdl) (see sections
S3 and S4 of the Supporting Information). By proceeding in this way, the values of the time constant corresponding
to a fully reduced and fully oxidized monolayer shown in Table S1 have been obtained. We have marked in Figures 7 and 8 the values of −ln(RuCdl) given in this table as horizontal dashed
lines that delimit the potential interval valid to carry out kinetic
measurements.

Concerning the values obtained from the different
fittings shown
in Table 2, it can
be concluded that the value Λ = 30 for the dimensionless reorganization
energy (corresponding to λ = 0.75 eV) gives rise to satisfactory
fittings for both gold and platinum electrodes. The values of the
apparent rate constant kap0′ obtained from these fittings
are smaller than those obtained from the minima ordinate with deviations
of around 20–22% for gold and 13–16% for platinum, indicating
a negative value of the θES parameter
in line with Figure 3. Moreover, the apparent rate constant kap0′ decreases
with the increase of θFc from 355 to 80 s–1 for gold and from 521 to 165 s–1 for platinum
when moving from 1:15 to 1:5 monolayers. The decreases of kap0′ indicate a progressive slowing down of the charge-transfer process
associated with the increase of attractive interactions (θEG varies from 0.2 to 0.6 for gold and from
0.2 to 0.3 for platinum) together with a decrease of the parameter
θES (which varies from −0.3
to −0.8 for gold and from −0.1 to −0.3 for platinum).
This is in agreement with the s-LT-FR model, that predicts that the
decrease of the term θE(S – G) will cause a decrease of the apparent rate constant (see eq 42).

Together with
the strong decrease of the apparent rate constant
for the ferrocene oxidation as θFc increases with
both supporting electrodes, there are important differences between
the monolayers at gold and platinum. Thus, for the case of gold, the
symmetry of the Chidsey–Tafel plots in Figure 7 is evident, and therefore, a value of γ
= 0 has been used in the three plots shown in this figure. However,
the ln(keff)–E curves for platinum, especially the 1:15 case, are strongly asymmetrical,
and positive values of γ parameter are necessary to achieve
satisfactory fittings. The value of γ employed for platinum
electrodes decreases as θFc increases (this effect
can be clearly seen in the anodic branch of the Chidsey–Tafel
plots that “elevates” as the coverage of the redox probe
increases). As stated in Theory section, the
positive value of γ indicates greater force constants for the
oxidized species than for the reduced ones (or smaller slopes for
the anodic branches of the Chidsey–Tafel plots, see Figure S6). Moreover, for platinum electrodes,
the interaction parameters take low values as compared with gold electrodes
(see Table 2). Both
facts suggest that at low ferrocene coverage (for which small absolute
values of parameters θEG and θES are obtained), the “accommodation”
of the oxidized redox probes in the monolayer is more difficult at
platinum than at gold, for which intermolecular interactions are more
intense. This “accommodation” refers to the energetics
of the processes taking place when ferrocene is oxidized, that is,
changes in solvation, conformation, and interactions with the surroundings.
Thus, the increase of these interactions, linked to that of θFc, seems to cause a more favorable electrostatic environment
within the monolayer (i.e., the energetic requirements are lower).
The different magnitude of interactions at both metals can be related
to a different structure of the alkanethiol monolayers, which changes
as a function of the ferrocene coverage. If the abovementioned assumption
is correct, for higher values of θFc (and therefore
higher absolute values of parameters θEG and θES), the ferrocenium state
of the redox probe in the monolayer would be more stable, and lower
(or even negative) values of γ should be required at platinum
and gold electrodes (see below).

The curves corresponding to
1:2.5 monolayers at gold and platinum
in Figure 9 show more
complex responses compared to monolayers that are more diluted in
ferrocene. A first evidence of this fact comes from the analysis of
the logarithms of the current for both gold and platinum electrodes
because they show two very defined linear domains with slopes that
change with the applied potential (for some examples of these plots,
see Figures S11 and S12). This suggests
the existence of two different types of ferrocenes that will be denoted
as types I and II, with different kinetic and interaction parameters
arising from different environments (and as a consequence different
redox functionality), a known fact for monolayers with medium–high
values of θFc.20,24,25

This fact has not been considered until now because of the
lower
values of θFc of monolayers in Figures 7 and 8. Note that
under these conditions, the analysis of the Chidsey–Tafel plot
curves cannot be performed unless the apparent rate constants of the
two redox processes taking place were different enough such that a
kinetic discrimination between them was advisable in the way discussed
in ref (44). In any
other case, the logarithm of the chronoamperometric current would
not be coincident with keff because the
plots of the logarithm of Itotal(=II + III) versus
time would not be linear or, if linearity holds, the slopes would
be a combination of keff,I and keff,II.

Bearing the above in mind, on
the basis of the experimental ln(keff)–E plots, it is
clear that, because two clearly separated linear sections are obtained
for the 1:2.5 monolayers, it is possible to decouple both responses,
and therefore, it is possible to obtain two Chidsey–Tafel plots.
For this, the chronoamperograms corresponding to pulse times of 10
and 50 ms have been considered to assure a good linearity of the resulting
logarithms curves, and the results for both electrodes are plotted
in Figure 9. The blue
and red dots correspond to the slopes obtained at shorter (1–5
ms) and longer (2–30 ms) times, respectively. In both cases,
the Chidsey–Tafel plots are of a similar shape, with differences
in the cathodic branch (suggesting different values of θES, see Figure S5), the presence of two different minima, and the overlapping in the
right anodic branch, reaching a constant limit at very anodic potential.
The fitting parameters for the two curves at each electrode, given
in Table 2, show differences
of 2 mV in the apparent potential and around 24–30% in the
apparent rate constant, pointing out the great sensitivity of chronoamperometry
(CA) for kinetic discrimination.

Moreover, the Chidsey–Tafel
plots for gold electrodes shown
in Figure 9a are clearly
asymmetrical, unlike what is observed at lower ferrocene coverages
(Figure 7), and they
present high absolute values of the interaction parameters (θEG = 1.3 and θES = −2.0 and −1.9) with negative values of γ (−0.8
and −0.9) being necessary to get satisfactory fittings. As
stated above, negative values of γ indicate that the reduction
of the ferrocenium state of the redox probe in the monolayer is now
more sluggish. This evidence for medium–high coverages of the
electroactive probe has been previously reported for several redox
groups at gold.d36,45

In the
case of platinum electrodes, much more symmetrical Chidsey–Tafel
plots than those corresponding to lower values of θFc (see Figure 8) are
obtained. Indeed, we have used the value γ = 0 for the fitting
of both curves. This fact points again to a monolayer structure for
which intermolecular interactions are progressively destabilizing
the oxidized species as compared with the results for lower ferrocene
coverages, such that for the coverage used, there are no kinetic “asymmetries”
between the ferrocene oxidation and the ferrocenium reduction. As
in the case of gold electrodes, this result is in agreement with previous
data that show symmetrical Marcus–Hush plots for high ferrocene
coverages at platinum.45

As a summary,
the magnitude of intermolecular interactions is different
at gold and platinum electrodes, a fact that suggests different structures
for the corresponding alkanethiol monolayers. The increase of the
ferrocene coverage causes changes in the structure, much more apparent
for gold, which gives rise to a strong slowing down of the charge-transfer
process together with the appearance of different domains and a change
in the relative stability of reduced and oxidized states of the redox
probe in the monolayer.

3 Conclusions
We have
presented the theoretical and experimental analysis of
the influence of intermolecular interactions on the kinetics of the
response of binary electroactive monolayers. The theoretical model
expands previous efforts by including relevant novelties such as the
presence an electroinactive coadsorbate and asymmetric Marcus–Hush
kinetic formalism, and it presents an expression for the current–potential
relationship in terms of two interaction parameters and apparent values
of the formal potential and rate constants. We have considered the
application of a single constant potential and of a sequence of constant
potentials, with special interest in the so-called Chidsey–Tafel
plots. The theoretical framework predicts a clear influence of the
intermolecular interactions on the apparent formal potential of the
redox probe and also on the apparent rate constant for the charge
transfer. To validate these theoretical results, experimental analysis
of the response of binary ferrocenylundecanethiol/decanethiol monolayers
at gold and platinum electrodes in ethanolic media has been performed.
A decrease of around 90% in the value of the apparent rate constant
for the ferrocene oxidation has been observed for the abovementioned
monolayers when the surface coverage of the redox probe increases
by one order of magnitude. Moreover, for the monolayers with higher
surface coverage, two functional domains appear for which different
rate constants, formal potentials, and interaction parameters have
been determined by means of a kinetic discrimination of the corresponding
current–time transients. The data also suggest the existence
of different monolayer structures at gold and platinum, for which
the increase of the ferrocene coverage causes changes in the relative
stability of reduced and oxidized states of the redox probe.

These results clearly show the great applicability of CA to get
a deeper insight into the processes taking place, although it should
be noted that, because the influence of intermolecular interactions
changes with time, the time window of the different techniques could
lead to different values of the interaction parameters (e.g., compare
the values of θEG obtained for CV
and CA). Both the apparent rate constant and formal potential reflect
the environmental influences on the redox centers, an energetic landscape
that is affected by both θFc and the nature of the
supporting electrode. Thus, the values of kap0′ and Eap0′ obtained with the different techniques should be placed in the specific
context (potential perturbation, time window) where they have been
obtained.

Because the knowledge of interaction parameters could
be of great
interest for an appropriate design of new functional materials,46 as well as for a better understanding of the
mechanisms of charge-transfer processes at different interfaces of
technological relevance,10 it is clear
that an adequate diagnosis and quantification of these influences
is required, and further analysis devoted to other techniques beyond
CV is necessary.

The validity of CA as a tool for the kinetic
analysis of electroactive
monolayers is beyond doubt because it reveals a much more complex
framework than CV does. In this sense, the use of multipotential pulse
techniques would be very helpful, such as square wave voltammetry
and voltcoulommetry, as complementary techniques.

4 Experimental Conditions
4.1 Reagents and Chemicals
Ethanol (Merck),
11-(ferrocenyl)undecanethiol (C11H22FeS), 10-decanethiol
(C10SH), and tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (Sigma-Aldrich)
were reagent grade and used as received.

4.2 Electrochemistry
Multipotential pulse
CA and CV were performed using a home-made computer-driven potentiostat–galvanostat.

A three-electrode cell was employed in the experiments with gold
and platinum disc electrodes of diameter 0.3 cm as working electrodes
(CH Instruments). The counter electrode was a Pt foil, and the quasireference
electrode was a silver wire (Ag QRE). Solutions were prepared with
distilled deionized water (Milli-Q filtering system). Ethanol-saturated
nitrogen gas was passed through solutions for de-aeration for 20 min
prior to measurements, with nitrogen atmosphere maintained over the
solution during all the experiments.

The coverages of the ferrocene
moiety have been calculated by numerical
integration of the baseline-corrected voltammograms of freshly prepared
monolayers corresponding to the direct anodic scan and are given in Tables S2 and S3 of section S4 of the Supporting Information.

4.3 Preparation
of the Binary Ferrocene Monolayers
at Gold and Platinum Electrodes
Monolayers of ferrocene were
formed by the self-assembling technique on gold and platinum substrates.
The gold and platinum electrodes were mechanically polished on alumina
slurry (0.05 μm, Bueliler), washed, and electrochemically cleaned
by cycling the potential between 0 and −1.4 V (vs SCE) in 2.0
M NaOH and then between 1.6 and 0.4 V (vs SCE) in 1.0 M H2SO4 until stable voltammograms were obtained. They were
then washed with ethanol and water, and after that, they were soaked
in solutions 2 mM of 11-(ferrocenyl)undecanethiol (FcC11SH) + 1-decanethiol
(C10SH) in four different proportions (ratio v/v) for 48 h at room
temperature. The proportions chosen were as follows: 1:15, 1:10, 1:5,
and 1:2.5, with the total volume of the assembling solution being
5 mL in all the cases. Upon removal from this solution, the electrode
was thoroughly rinsed with ethanol and left in the organic solvent
for 48 h before use.

The variation of the surface coverage of
ferrocene probes of the different monolayers at gold and platinum
electrodes (θFc|substrate), as a function
of the mole fraction of ferrocene in the assembling binary solutions
χFc, is shown in Figure 10. Thus, the surface coverage of ferrocene
increases linearly with the mole fraction for the case of platinum,
whereas for gold, the evolution of θFc is not linear
and, for medium–high coverages, it is fulfilled that θFc|Au > θFc|Pt. These
results are in line with previous data for gold substrates.23

Figure 10 Variation of surface coverage of ferrocene probes (in
%), θFc|substrate, of the different monolayers
at gold
(red dots) and platinum (blue dots) electrodes, as a function of the
mole fraction (in %) of ferrocene in the assembling solutions of FcC11SH/C10SH.

Moreover, the monolayers at both
electrodes are very stable, and
no significant loss of signal is observed during four-five weeks,
especially at platinum.

5 Theory
In this section,
we will briefly discuss the derivation of the
expression for the current–potential response of the adsorbed
electroactive couple O/R in presence of the electroinactive coadsorbate
P. Let us consider the following charge-transfer process that the
surface-confined species undergo I  where kox and kred are the rate constants
for the electro-oxidation
and electro-reduction processes. In the following, we will describe
different approaches for obtaining a current–potential relationship
for process (I) in the absence (ideal behavior)
and in the presence (nonideal behavior) of intermolecular interactions
when a single constant potential E or a sequence
of n consecutive constant potentials E1, E2, ..., En is applied to the electrode. In both
cases, the current corresponding to process (I) for any potential can be written as16,39,40 8  where 9   10   11  

Γi (mol/cm2) is the
surface concentration of species i, and ΓM is the saturation surface concentration. If we assume that
O and R have equal maximum surface concentrations and that ΓM remains constant during the experiment, in line with eqs 9 and 10, it is possible to define the surface coverage in terms of
ΓM or ΓE 12  

5.1 Ideal Behavior
If we assume that
all the surface sites are equivalent, the oxidized and reduced species
occupy the same area and are uniformly solvated, the local electric
potential at the reaction site is independent of the charge-transfer
extent, and the interactions between adsorbed species can be neglected,
“ideal” conditions hold.16,17,19 The relationship between the surface coverage of
species O and R and the electrochemical potential μ̅ defines
the Langmuir’s isotherm16,39,47 13  where, μ̅i = μi + ziFϕς = μi0,ς + RT ln Ai + ziFϕς. Ai and zi are the activity and charge number,
respectively,
of species i, and μi0,ς and ϕς are the standard chemical potential and the Galvani
potential in phase ς.

By dividing the two equations in 13 for species O and R, and taking into account that
(μ̅O – μ̅R)/RT = F(E – E0′)/RT, with E0′ being the formal potential of process
(I), a potential–current relationship
formally identical to the Nernst equation is obtained 14  because mass conservation holds (fR + fO = 1).

Equation 14 corresponds
to an equilibrium-type situation that, in practice, is reached only
when the charge-transfer reaction is very fast. If the rate constants kox and kred are
assumed as finite, an equation analogous to that of solution–soluble
species is obtained16,48 15  with 16  

The particular expression for the rate constant kred depends on the kinetic formalism,39,40 and two of them will be considered here, the Butler–Volmer
and the asymmetric Marcus–Hush one, for which kred is given as (see ref (36)) 17  

In eq 17, k0′ is the conditional rate constant,
α is the charge-transfer coefficient, and 18  Λ is the dimensionless reorganization
energy given by 19  where λ is the molar
reorganization
energy,36,38,49 and γ
is the asymmetry parameter that accounts for differences between the
inner-shell force constants of the oxidized and the reduced species
(a positive γ value is associated with greater force constants
for the oxidized species and the opposite for negative γ values).
The case γ = 0 (equal force constants for both reduced and oxidized
states) corresponds to the simpler symmetrical Marcus–Hush
model. Note that for both MH and BV kinetics formalisms, the following
is fulfilled 20  

5.2 Nonideal Behavior and the
Presence of Intermolecular
Interactions: Laviron–Tokuda Fully Randomized Monolayer Model,
LT-FR, with the Presence of the Electroinactive Coadsorbate
The presence of intermolecular interactions between redox species
confined at the electrode surface give rises to the appearance of
“nonidealities” in the electrochemical response of these
systems. Typical deviations of the ideal behavior in CV are the shift
of the peak potentials as the number of redox moieties at the electrode
surface increases, as well as half peak width values below or above
90 mV.17,19

To incorporate the influence of intermolecular
interactions to the ideal situation (eqs 14 and 15), from a theoretical
point of view, is usually assumed the so-called “mean-field
approximation”, which considers that all adsorbates on the
surface lattice are randomly mixed and uncorrelated.50 As a result, the average interaction energy that an adsorbate
feels from the others is proportional to the coverage f. If we restrict to the nearest-neighbor interactions, an additional
energy term should be added to the electrochemical potential, thus
giving rise to the Frumkin isotherm, which for two adsorbates O and
R and an electroinactive coadsorbate P takes the following expression51 21  with aOO, aRR, aOR, aOP, and aRP being
the interaction coefficients for couples O–O, R–R, O–R/R–O,
OP, and RP, respectively (with aij being positive for attractions and negative for repulsions30). As in the ideal case described in section 2.1, eq 21 corresponds to an equilibrium-like
situation.

To consider finite electron transfer kinetics, the
treatment followed
in ref (30) will be
employed where intermolecular interactions are assumed to cause a
linear increase of the activation free energy of the anodic and cathodic
charge-transfer processes. Within a transition-state kinetic formalism,
initial and final “equilibrium” states O and R also
interact with a transition state denoted as ≠ II  and thus, new interaction coefficients a≠O and a≠R would appear. Under these
conditions, the activation free energy
for species O, R, and ≠ are given by 22   23   24  and the free energy
of anodic and cathodic
reactions are 25  where 26  

The linear contributions to the activation
free energy due to the
interactions are translated into the appearance of activity coefficients
for species O and R, υO and υR,
which are dependent on the coverages of the three species present
in the monolayer, O, R, and P (see, e.g., refs (8)(30), and (37)) 27  

The current–potential relationship under these conditions
is given in terms of the activities of species O and R, defined as
the products υifi (i = O, R) 28  

By dividing the two equations appearing in 21, or from eq 28, by
inserting the condition k0 ≫ 1
s–1, it is possible to deduce the Nernstian limit
which leads to a nonexplicit relationship between the potential and
the surface coverage29 29  with 30   31  Eap0′ is an “apparent”
formal potential obtained by inserting conditions fR = fO = 1/2 and I = 0 in eq 28. G, S, and SP are lineal combinations of the parameters defined in eq 26.

Note that G, S, and SP do not contain a≠i terms (with i = O, R, and P), that
is, they are related to states O, R, and P, and they do not inform
about the transition state. It is usually assumed that the sign of
parameter G defines the global character of interactions
as attractive (G > 0) or repulsive (G < 0), whereas G = 0 would correspond to an ideal
situation where positive and negative interactions cancel each other
out (ideal behavior, see section 5.1).17,29 Note that the phenomenological
character of the present model does not allow for giving a molecular
insight to parameters G and S, but
it is clear that their values and sign are directly related to the
“electrostatic landscape” of the redox probes. The latter
is the result of the balance between Coulombic (long range) and van
der Waals (short range) interactions that define the attractive/repulsive
global character of the interactions. In this sense, and depending
on the experimental conditions (redox probe, solvent, electrolyte),
the increase of the coverage of the electroactive species could give
rise to an increase or decrease of the values of parameters G and S because of a change in the dominant
interaction from short range to long range or viceversa.20,52

The model proposed in ref (30) was later refined in ref (32) by including the idea
that interaction coefficients
would affect both the rate constant and the formal potential such
that only the apparent values could be obtained. This led Tokuda et
al. to rewrite eq 28 in terms of kap0′ and Eap0′, such
that the I–E curve only depends
on the interaction parameters G and S′ 32  where G is
given by eq 31 and 33   34   35   36  

Eap0′, S, and SP are given
by eqs 30 and 31. Note that S′
and S are not coincident (see eqs 31 and 35), and the relationship
between them is 37  

Equation 32 can be
written in the following way 38  with 39  

5.3 Presence of Intermolecular
Interactions: Simplified
Laviron–Tokuda Fully Randomized Monolayer Model, s-LT-FR, with
the Presence of the Electroinactive Coadsorbate
An additional
simplification of the LT-FR model can be introduced by assuming that
the interaction parameters related to the transition state, a≠O, a≠R, and a≠P, are much smaller than
the corresponding coefficients for O, R, and P, aOO, aRR, aOR, aOP, and aRP (i.e., a≠i ≪ aii, aij with i, j = O, R, and P). Under these conditions (see eq 26) 40  

From eqs 31 and 35, it is clear
that the expressions of G and SP do not change and S′ = S. By following an analogous discussion to that shown in the previous
section, it is possible to deduce the following expression for the
current–potential relationship 41  with Eap0′ given by eq 30 and 42  

On the basis of eqs 38 and 41,
it can be concluded that both the
complete and simplified models have a formally identical current–potential
relationship, although the global apparent rate constant for the LT-FR
model depends on the interaction parameters in a more complex way.
Moreover, the terms related to the transition state do not appear
in the simplified model (see eq 42).

5.3.1 Limit Behaviors
5.3.1.1 Homogeneous Interactions
If we
assume that the interaction coefficients of the different pairs are
approximately equal (homogeneous interactions, aOO = aRR = aOR = aOP = aRP = a), then G = S = SP = 0 such that the current–potential
relationship is formally identical to that corresponding to the ideal
case (see eq 15), but
there is a remaining influence of intermolecular interactions on the
kinetics through coefficient a because (see, e.g.,53) 43  

5.3.1.2 Absence of the Electroinactive Coadsorbate
It is evident that the above formalisms can also be applied to
a monolayer without the presence of an electroinactive coadsorbate
by simply inserting the condition fP =
0 in eqs 30, 41, and 42 for the general case
and in eq 43 for homogeneous
interactions.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01995.Additional theoretical
results, expressions for the
dimensionless current corresponding to high overpotentials, influence
of the double layer current on the chronoamperometric response of
monolayers, and additional experimental results (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b01995_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors greatly appreciate the financial support
provided by the Fundación Séneca de la Región
de Murcia (Project 19887/GERM/15) as well as by the Ministerio de
Economía y Competitividad (Projects CTQ-2015-65243-P and CTQ-2015-71955-REDT
Network of excellence “Sensors and Biosensors”). The
authors also acknowledge the discussions about Marcus–Hush
formalism with Dr. Eduardo Laborda from University of Murcia.

a This situation is different from the
case of CV where the potential dependence of the rate constants, that
is, in particular, the kinetic formalisms, needs to be established
in an explicit way for obtaining a solution of the problem.

b This different behavior at small or
high values of T will have a strong influence on
the current response (e.g., in the case of CV curves as compared with
chronoamperometric ones).

c This is in line with a more sophisticated
model by Matsuda et al., in which the FR assumption was changed by
a “quasichemical approximation,” and a coordination
number z for the redox probe was introduced in ref (41). In this paper, the authors
claim that for a number of neighbors z ≥ 10,
the behavior observed for the current–potential response coincides
with that obtained for a disordered monolayer. Thus, the “average”
overall character of the current would reflect a combination of different
coordination numbers, being equivalent under these conditions to a
randomized monolayer.

d In ref (45), two different values
for the reorganization
energy, λan and λcat, were considered
for the cathodic and anodic branches of the Chidsey–Tafel plots,
with λan > λcat for gold and
λcat ≅ λan for platinum.
This assumption
is not compatible with the Nernst limit and can be avoided by considering
the asymmetry coefficient γ.
==== Refs
References
Zhu C. ; Yang G. ; Li H. ; Du D. ; Lin Y. 
Electrochemical
Sensors and Biosensors Based on Nanomaterials and Nanostructures . Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 230 –249 . 10.1021/ac5039863 .25354297 
Labib M. ; Sargent E. H. ; Kelley S. O. 
Electrochemical
Methods for the Analysis
of Clinically Relevant Biomolecules . Chem. Rev. 
2016 , 116 , 9001 –9090 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00220 .27428515 
Cao C. ; Zhang Y. ; Jiang C. ; Qi M. ; Liu G. 
Advances on
Aryldiazonium Salt Chemistry Based Interfacial Fabrication for Sensing
Applications . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 5031 –5049 . 10.1021/acsami.6b16108 .28124552 
Halik M. ; Hirsch A. 
The potential of molecular self-assembled
monolayers
in organic electronic devices . Adv. Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 2689 –2695 . 10.1002/adma.201100337 .21823250 
Heimel G. ; Romaner L. ; Zojer E. ; Bredas J.-L. 
The interface
energetics
of self-assembled monolayers on metals . Acc.
Chem. Res. 
2008 , 41 , 721 –729 . 10.1021/ar700284q .18507404 
Nerngchamnong N. ; Yuan L. ; Qi D.-C. ; Li J. ; Thompson D. ; Nijhuis C. A. 
The role of van der Waals forces
in the performance
of molecular diodes . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 113 –118 . 10.1038/nnano.2012.238 .23292010 
Wang Q. ; Evans N. ; Zakeeruddin S. M. ; Exnar I. ; Grätzel M. 
Molecular
wiring of insulators: charging and discharging electrode materials
for high-energy lithium-ion batteries by molecular charge transport
layers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 3163 –3167 . 10.1021/ja066260j .17326635 
Costentin C. ; Porter T. R. ; Savéant J.-M. 
How do pseudocapacitors store energy?
Theoretical analysis and experimental illustration . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 8649 –8658 . 10.1021/acsami.6b14100 .28195702 
Henstridge M. C. ; Laborda E. ; Rees N. V. ; Compton R. G. 
Marcus–Hush–Chidsey
theory of electron transfer applied to voltammetry: A review . Electrochim. Acta 
2012 , 84 , 12 –20 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2011.10.026 .
Zhang L. ; Vogel Y. B. ; Noble B. B. ; Gonçales V. R. ; Darwish N. ; Le Brun A. ; Gooding J. J. ; Wallace G. G. ; Coote M. L. ; Ciampi S. 
TEMPO Monolayers on
Si(100) Electrodes:
Electrostatic Effects by the Electrolyte and Semiconductor Space-Charge
on the Electroactivity of a Persistent Radical . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 9611 –9619 . 10.1021/jacs.6b04788 .27373457 
Gooding J. J. ; Ciampi S. 
The molecular level
modification of surfaces: from
self-assembled monolayers to complex molecular assemblies . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 2704 –2718 . 10.1039/c0cs00139b .21290036 
Encyclopedia of Electrochemistry ; Fujuhira M. , Rusling J. F. , Rubinstein I. , Bard A.
J. , Stratmann M.  , Eds.; Modified Electrodes ; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim , 2007 ; Vol. 10 .
Milton R. D. ; Wang T. ; Knoche K. L. ; Minteer S. D. 
Tailoring biointerfaces
for electrocatalysis . Langmuir 
2016 , 32 , 2291 –2301 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b04742 .26898265 
Nanoelectrochemistry ; Mirkin M. V. , Amemiya S.  , Eds.; CRC Press : Boca Raton , 2015 .
Scanning Electrochemical Microscopy ; Bard A. J. , Mirkin M. V.  , Eds., 2 nd ed.; CRC Press : Boca Raton , 2012 .
Laviron E.  Voltammetric methods
for the study of adsorbed species . In Electroanalytical
Chemistry ; Bard A. J.  , Ed.; Marcel Dekker : New York , 1982 ; Vol. 12 , pp 53 –157 .
Honeychurch M. J. ; Rechnitz G. A. 
Voltammetry of adsorbed molecules. Part 1: Reversible
redox systems . Electroanalysis 
1998 , 10 , 285 –293 . 10.1002/(sici)1521-4109(199804)10:5<285::aid-elan285>3.0.co;2-b .
Honeychurch M. J. ; Rechnitz G. A. 
Voltammetry of adsorbed
molecules. Part 2: Irreversible
redox systems . Electroanalysis 
1998 , 10 , 453 –457 . 10.1002/(sici)1521-4109(199806)10:7<453::aid-elan453>3.0.co;2-f .
Calvente J. J. ; Andreu R. 
Intermolecular interactions
in electroactive thiol
monolayers probed by linear scan Voltammetry . Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 
2017 , 1 , 22 –26 . 10.1016/j.coelec.2016.12.006 .
Nerngchamnong N. ; Thompson D. ; Cao L. ; Yuan L. ; Jiang L. ; Roemer M. ; Nijhuis C. A. 
Nonideal
electrochemical behavior
of ferrocenyl–alkanethiolate SAMs maps the microenvironment
of the redox unit . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 21978 –21991 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b05137 .
Smith C. P. ; White H. S. 
Theory of the interfacial potential
distribution and
reversible voltammetric response of electrodes coated with electroactive
molecular films . Anal. Chem. 
1992 , 64 , 2398 –2405 . 10.1021/ac00044a017 .19827817 
Calvente J. J. ; Andreu R. ; Molero M. ; López-Pérez G. ; Domínguez M. 
Influence of spatial redox distribution on the electrochemical
behavior of electroactive self-assembled monolayers . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 9557 –9568 . 10.1021/jp011990t .
Chidsey C.
E. D. ; Bertozzi C. R. ; Putvinski T. M. ; Mujsce A. M. 
Coadsorption of
ferrocene-terminated and unsubstituted alkanethiols on gold: Electroactive
self-assembled monolayers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1990 , 112 , 4301 –4306 . 10.1021/ja00167a028 .
Lee L. Y. S. ; Sutherland T. C. ; Rucareanu S. ; Lennox R. B. 
Ferrocenylalkylthiolates as a probe of heterogeneity
in binary self-assembled monolayers on gold . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 4438 –4444 . 10.1021/la053317r .16618200 
Tian H. ; Xiang D. ; Shao H. ; Yu H.-Z. 
Electrochemical
identification of molecular heterogeneity in binary redox self-assembled
monolayers on gold . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 13733 –13742 . 10.1021/jp5040745 .
Rudnev A. V. ; Yoshida K. ; Wandlowski T. 
Electrochemical characterization
of self-assembled ferrocene-terminated alkanethiol monolayers on low-index
gold single crystal electrodes . Electrochim.
Acta 
2013 , 87 , 770 –778 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2012.09.090 .
Trasobares J. ; Rech J. ; Jonckheere T. ; Martin T. ; Alévêque O. ; Levillain E. ; Diez-Cabanes V. ; Olivier Y. ; Cornil J. ; Sivakumarasamy R. ; Smaali K. ; Leclere P. ; Fujiwara A. ; Théron D. ; Vuillaume D. ; Clément N. 
Estimation
of π–π electronic couplings from current measurements . Nano Lett. 
2017 , 17 , 3215 –3224 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00804 .28358215 
Laviron E. ; Roullier L. 
General expression
of the linear potential sweep voltammogram
for a surface redox reaction with interactions between the adsorbed
molecules: Applications to modified electrodes . J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1980 , 115 , 65 –74 . 10.1016/S0022-0728(80)80496-7 .
Laviron E. 
Surface linear
potential sweep Voltammetry: Equation of the peaks for a reversible
reaction when interactions between the adsorbed molecules are taken
into account . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1974 , 52 , 395 –402 . 10.1016/0368-1874(74)85054-9 .
Laviron E. 
A.C. Polarography
and faradaic impedance of strongly adsorbed electroactive species.
Part II. Theoretical study of a quasi-reversible reaction in the case
of a Frumkin isotherm . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1979 , 105 , 25 –34 . 10.1016/s0022-0728(79)80336-8 .
Matsuda H. ; Aoki K. ; Tokuda K. 
Theory of
electrode reactions of
redox couples confined to electrode surfaces at monolayer levels:
Part II. Cyclic voltammetry and ac impedance measurements . J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1987 , 217 , 15 –32 . 10.1016/0022-0728(87)85061-1 .
Daifuku H. ; Aoki K. ; Tokuda K. ; Matsuda H. 
Electrode
kinetics
of surfactant polypyridine osmium and ruthenium complexes confined
to tin oxide electrodes in a monomolecular layer by the Langmuir-Blodgett
method . J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1985 , 183 , 1 –26 . 10.1016/0368-1874(85)85478-2 .
Hoffman J. D.  Numerical Methods
for Engineers and Scientists , 2 nd ed.; Marcel-Dekker : New York , 1992 .
González J. ; Abenza N. ; Molina Á. 
Analytical solutions of the multipotential
pulse quasi-reversible Q–E–t and I–E–t
responses of strongly adsorbed redox molecules . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2006 , 596 , 74 –86 . 10.1016/j.jelechem.2006.07.034 .
Chidsey C. E. D. 
Free
Energy and Temperature Dependence of Electron Transfer at the Metal-Electrolyte
Interface . Science 
1991 , 251 , 919 –922 . 10.1126/science.251.4996.919 .17847385 
Laborda E. ; Henstridge M. C. ; Batchelor-McAuley C. ; Compton R. G. 
Asymmetric Marcus–Hush
theory for Voltammetry . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 4894 –4905 . 10.1039/c3cs35487c .23508098 
Alévêque O. ; Blanchard P.-Y. ; Gautier C. ; Dias M. ; Breton T. ; Levillain E. 
Electroactive self-assembled monolayers: Laviron’s
interaction model extended to non-random distribution of redox centers . Electrochem. Commun. 
2010 , 12 , 1462 –1466 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2010.07.039 .
Oldham K. B. ; Myland J. C. 
On the evaluation of the Marcus–Hush–Chidsey
integral . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2011 , 655 , 65 –72 . 10.1016/j.jelechem.2011.01.044 .
Bard A. J. ; Faulkner L. R.  Electrochemical Methods:
Fundamental and Applications , 2 nd ed.; Wiley : New York , 2001 .
Molina A. ; Gonzalez J.  Pulse Voltammetry in
Physical Electrochemistry and Electroanalysis: Theory and Applications ; Springer : Heidelberg , 2106 ; Chapter 6.
Matsuda H. ; Aoki K. ; Tokuda K. 
Theory of electrode reactions of
redox couples confined to electrode surfaces at monolayer levels:
Part I. Expression of the current-potential relationship for simple
redox reactions . J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial
Electrochem. 
1987 , 217 , 1 –13 . 10.1016/0022-0728(87)85060-x .
Ravenscroft M. S. ; Finklea H. O. 
Kinetics of electron
transfer to attached redox centers
on gold electrodes in nonaqueous electrolytes . J. Phys. Chem. 
1994 , 98 , 3843 –3850 . 10.1021/j100065a047 .
Forster R. J. ; Faulkner L. R. 
Electrochemistry
of spontaneously adsorbed monolayers.
Effects of solvent, potential, and temperature on electron transfer
dynamics . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1994 , 116 , 5453 –5461 . 10.1021/ja00091a058 .
Forster R. J. ; Faulkner L. R. 
Kinetic separation of faradaic currents: binary monolayers
as model systems . Anal. Chem. 
1995 , 67 , 1232 –1239 . 10.1021/ac00103a014 .
Finklea H. O. ; Yoon K. ; Chamberlain E. ; Allen J. ; Haddox R. 
Effect of
the metal on electron transfer across self-assembled monolayers . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 3088 –3092 . 10.1021/jp0041510 .
Hsu S.-H. ; Reinhoudt D. N. ; Huskens J. ; Velders A. H. 
Lateral interactions
at functional monolayers . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 2428 –2444 . 10.1039/c0jm02696d .
Schmickler W. ; Santos E.  Interfacial
Electrochemistry , 2 nd ed.; Springer : Heidelberg , 2010 .
Laviron E. 
General expression
of the linear potential sweep voltammogram in the case of diffusionless
electrochemical systems . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1979 , 101 , 19 –28 . 10.1016/s0022-0728(79)80075-3 .
Feldberg S. W. 
Implications
of Marcus–Hush theory for steady-state heterogeneous electron
transfer at an inlaid disk electrode . Anal.
Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 5176 –5183 . 10.1021/ac1004162 .20496865 
Koper M. T. M.  Statistical
mechanics and kinetic modeling of electrochemical reactions on single-crystal
electrodes using the lattice-gas approximation . In Electrocatalysis: Theoretical Foundations and Model Experiments , 1 st ed.; Alkire R. C. , Kibler L. A. , Kolb D. M. , Lipkowski J.  , Eds.; Wiley-VCH : Weinheim , 2013 ; pp 75 –98 .
Peng W. ; Rusling J. F. 
Intermolecular interactions between surfactants coadsorbed
on electrodes . J. Phys. Chem. 
1995 , 99 , 16436 –16441 . 10.1021/j100044a035 .
Goujon F. ; Bonal C. ; Limoges B. ; Malfreyt P. 
Molecular
dynamics
simulations of ferrocene-terminated self-assembled monolayers . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2010 , 114 , 6447 –6454 . 10.1021/jp911467x .20411913 
Mirčeski V. ; Lovrić M. ; Gulaboski R. 
Theoretical and experimental study
of the surface redox reaction involving interactions between the adsorbed
particles under conditions of square-wave Voltammetry . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2001 , 515 , 91 –100 . 10.1016/s0022-0728(01)00609-x .

