
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146041510.1021/acsomega.9b00399ArticleInsights to the Assembly of a Functionally Active
Leptospiral ClpP1P2 Protease Complex along with Its ATPase Chaperone
ClpX Dhara Anusua Hussain Md Saddam Datta Debika Kumar Manish *Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, Assam, India* E-mail: mkumar1@iitg.ac.in. Phone: +91-361-258-2230. Fax: +91-361-258-2249.31 07 2019 31 07 2019 4 7 12880 12895 12 02 2019 11 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Leptospira interrogans genome is
predicted to encode multiple
isoforms of caseinolytic proteases (ClpP1 and ClpP2). The ClpP proteins
with the aid of its ATPase chaperone are known to be involved in establishing
cellular proteostasis and have emerged as a target for developing
new antibiotics. We report the molecular characterization of recombinant
ClpP1 (rClpP1) and rClpP2 of Leptospira along with its ATPase chaperone rClpX. The two isoforms of rClpPs
when coupled together in an equivalent concentration exhibit optimum
activity on small fluorogenic peptide substrates, whereas the pure
rClpP isoforms are enzymatically inactive. Isothermal titration calorimetry
analysis suggests that the two rClpP isoforms bind each other moderately
in a 1:1 stoichiometry with a dissociation constant of 2.02 ±
0.1 μM at 37 °C and is thermodynamically favored. Size
exclusion chromatography fractionates the majority of pure rClpP1
at ≥308 kDa (14–21-mer) and the pure rClpP2 at 308 kDa
(tetradecamer), whereas the functionally active rClpP isoform mixture
fractionates as a tetradecamer. The distinct and unprecedented oligomeric
form of rClpP1 was also evident through native-gel and dynamic light
scattering. Moreover, the rClpP isoform mixture formed after the site-directed
mutation of either or both the isoforms at one of the catalytic triad
residues (Ser 98/97 to Ala 98/97) resulted in the complete loss of
protease activity. The rClpP isoform mixture gets stimulated to degrade
the casein substrate in the presence of rClpX and in an energy-dependent
manner. On the contrary, pure rClpP1 or the rClpP2 isoform in association
with rClpX are incapable of forming operative protease. The reported
finding suggests that in Leptospira, the enzymatic activity of the rClpP protease complex in the presence
or absence of cochaperone is performed solely by the tetradecamer
structure which is hypothesized to be composed of 2-stacked ClpP heptameric
rings, wherein each ring is a homo-oligomer of ClpP1 and ClpP2 subunits.
Understanding the activities and regulation principle of multi-isoforms
of ClpP in pathogenic bacteria may aid in intervening disease
outcomes particularly to the co-evolving antibiotic resistance strains.

document-id-old-9ao9b00399document-id-new-14ao-2019-003996ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Leptospira
interrogans is a spirochete
of zoonotic importance responsible for causing leptospirosis disease
in animals and humans worldwide.1 It is
estimated that over a million human cases of severe leptospirosis
are reported each year globally, with approximately 60 000
deaths from this disease.2 It is worth
noting that leptospirosis is a serious economic problem in developing
tropical and subtropical countries.3,4 Each year,
there are significant economic losses due to reproductive disorders
in cattle, sheep, pigs, and horses that are suffering from leptospirosis.5 Despite the severity of leptospirosis and its
global importance, the molecular mechanisms of the Leptospira pathogenesis are not well understood,
possibly due to the difficulty in studying the causal agent by the
reverse genetics approach.6 Identification
of the Leptospira virulence factors
and characterization of their activity is particularly important for
understanding the mechanisms of the disease. In the last two decades,
there is a growing list of pathogens shown to be impaired in their
ability to infect or cause disease when lacking the components of
the Clp protease system,7−15 including the chaperone–peptidase complex (ClpY-Q) in pathogenic
spirochete L. interrogans.16 The caseinolytic protease system is composed
of the core catalytic components, regulatory chaperones (ATPases),
and the adaptor proteins.17 It has been
observed that Escherichia coli ClpP
forms complexes with AAA+ (ATPases associated with various
cellular activities) chaperones, ClpX and ClpA.18,19 The Clp adaptors20 and anti-adaptors21 provide other means for the extensive regulation
of ClpP-dependent protein degradation. Clp adaptor protein binds to
the N-terminal domain of ClpA altering its substrate specificities.22

The core catalytic components of the Clp
protease system in leptospires
are encoded by clpP1, clpP2, and clpQ gene. The protease complex of ClpP and its cochaperone
constitutes a fascinating Clp protease system that is still required
to be explored for designing suitable drugs either by targeting protein
activities or protein interactions during cellular proteostasis. One
of the Leptospira caseinolytic protease
complex ClpQ–ClpY (HslUV)23 has
been demonstrated to have a critical role in leptospiral survival
in hosts and transmission of leptospirosis.16 However, there is a lack of biochemical and functional information
regarding multi-ClpP isoforms present in the Leptospira.

Caseinolytic protease P (ClpP) is a well-conserved cylindrical/barrel-shaped
serine protease in most bacterial species.24 A bacterium needs such protease to maintain protein homeostasis.
Bacterial ClpP has an important role in the degradation of misfolded
or damaged proteins,25 virulence,26 numerous regulatory processes27−29 such as cell
division, stress tolerance, morphological differentiation, and antibiotic
resistance. Unlike other serine proteases, ClpP proteases have evolved
as self-compartmentalized barrel-shaped enzymes to establish cellular
proteostasis.30 Such a scaffold of ClpP
prevents the bacterial cytosol matrix from breaching their catalytic
site (Ser-His-Asp) harbored inside the barrel-shaped enzyme. In recent
years, with the advent of ClpP-targeting antibacterial compounds,
the major emerging focus of such a study is to develop an alternative
therapy for antibiotic-resistant and persistent microbes.31 While ClpPs from single isoform-expressing bacteria
have been studied in detail, the function and regulation of species
including L. interrogans with more
than one clpP gene are still poorly understood. Several
pathogenic bacteria like Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Listeria monocytogenes, Chlamydia trachomatis, and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa that harbor two isoforms of ClpP have been
demonstrated to play an indispensable role in virulence.11,32−34 These multiple ClpP isoforms tend to reveal structural
and functional disparity in an organism-specific manner. It has been
established that in E. coli(35) and Mycobacterium,36 the ClpP protomers must undergo proteolytic preprocessing at the
N-terminal for achieving the functional activity. Nevertheless, in
many other pathogenic bacterial ClpP protomers32,34,37 with multiple isoforms, the peptidase activity
have been demonstrated even without such preprocessing. The barrel-shaped
ClpP protease with axial pores strictly gives access to the unfolded
polypeptide generated by ATP-dependent regulatory chaperones. Probing
the behavior of ClpP systems in multi-isoform-containing organisms
enables additional understanding of the function and regulation of
ClpP systems leading to its clinical exploitation in intervening disease
outcomes. In the present study, comprehensive molecular characterization
of the multi-ClpP isoforms of Leptospira along with its co-chaperone ClpX was executed.

Results and Discussion
Caseinolytic
Protease Genes in the Leptospira Genome
The genome analysis
of the sequenced spirochete, L.
interrogans serovar Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130
shows that it harbors various genes of the caseinolytic protease (clp) system. The caseinolytic protease system in Leptospira is composed of genes encoding catalytic,
regulatory, and adaptor proteins. The set of genes encoding catalytic
components of the clp system in Leptospira are clpP1 (LIC11417), clpP2 (LIC11951), and clpQ (LIC11600). The Clp AAA+ (ATPases associated with
various cellular activities) are encoded by clpX (LIC11418), clpA (LIC11814), clpB (LIC12017), clpC (LIC10339), and clpY (LIC11601) genes, whereas the adaptor proteins are encoded
by clpS (LIC11356 and LIC11815) (Figure 1 and Table 1). It has
been previously reported that the genes encoding caseinolytic proteases
are highly conserved in both saprophytic and pathogenic strains of Leptospira and comprise a part of the core group
of genes in the genus Leptospira.38 The two core catalytic components ClpP1 and
ClpP2 are the paralogs of peptidase ClpP, a serine protease, which
is predicted to perform the proteolysis activity mainly in association
with the regulatory proteins. The components ClpA, ClpB, ClpC, ClpX,
and ClpY are the chaperone proteins belonging to the Clp/Heat shock
protein 100 (Hsp100) family that carry AAA+ domains, a characteristic
of the ATPase superfamily. These Clp ATPase subunits have been clustered
as the class-I and class-II chaperone based on the number of the AAA+
domain it carries. The class-I chaperone (ClpX and ClpY) in Leptospira carries one AAA+ domain, whereas class-II
chaperone (ClpA, ClpB, and ClpC) carries two AAA+ domains (Figure 1). Among the class-II
chaperone, ClpB lacks a binding motif (P-loop motif) at the C-terminal
that is essential for forming the Clp proteolytic complex. Therefore,
the Leptospira ClpB mainly mediates
protein disaggregation with or without the co-operation of the DnaK
chaperone system and is established to be a virulence factor in pathogenic Leptospira.23,39 In addition, deletion
of the ClpB chaperone in Leptospira exhibited impaired growth under stress conditions.23 In the Leptospira genome,
the genes clpP1 and clpX are located
in close proximity to each other with an intergenic gap of 10 base
pairs (bps), whereas clpP1 and clpP2 are separated by 34 different genes (Table 1). Based on the location of the genes encoding
ClpP isoforms in the Leptospira genome,
these clpP genes may be independently transcribed
and regulated. Using a quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR), the analysis of mRNA transcripts of clpP isoforms in Leptospira demonstrated
each gene to be differentially transcribed (Figure S1 and Table S1). In Leptospira spp., the existence of two paralogs of the clpS gene were also predicted, where one (LIC11815)
of the clpS genes lies adjacent to clpA (LIC11814), whereas the other (LIC11356) clpS is located distant apart on the chromosome
(Figure 1 and Table 1). The catalytic unit
ClpQ, a threonine protease of Leptospira has been established previously to interact with the chaperone ClpY
to form the functional ClpYQ protease (also known as HslUV).16 Moreover, in a previous study, it is proposed
that regulatory proteins ClpX, ClpA, and ClpC of Leptospira have a binding motif (P-loop motif) at the C-terminal that may interact
with the N-terminal loop of ClpP and form the Clp proteolytic complex.23 Therefore, it was interesting to study how multi-isoforms
of ClpP in Leptospira interact with
its chaperone to form the operative proteases.

Figure 1 Schematic arrangement
of genes encoding a caseinolytic protease
(clp) system in L. interrogans genome. The arrangement of Clp genes and its annotation
in the Leptospira genome are represented
by an arrow diagram (not scaled) based on bioinformatics analysis
and previous report.23 The caseinolytic
protease system in Leptospira is composed
of genes encoding catalytic subunits (clpP1, clpP2, clpQ; blue color), Clp AAA+ subunits
(clpA, clpB, clpC, clpX, and clpY), and adaptor
proteins (clpS; green color). The intergenic regions
are depicted as interrupted lines. The Clp AAA+ proteins have been
grouped as class-I (ClpX, ClpY; orange color) and as the class-II
chaperone (ClpA, ClpB, ClpC; grey color) based on the number of ATPase
domain(s).

Table 1 Caseinolytic Protease
(clp) Genes Location in Leptospira Genome
gene (locus tag)	gene coordinates (NCBI accession no. NC_005823.1)	UniProt
accession no.	gene size (bp)	intergenic region (bp) (between successive clp genes)	
clpC (LIC10339)	384 088–386 628	Q72VF8	2541	1 283 538 (clpC & clpS)	
clpS (LIC11356)	1 670 167–1 670 487	Q72SM3	321	72 860 (clpS & clpP1)	
clpP1 (LIC11417)	1 743 348–1 743 944	Q72SG6	597	10 (clpP1 & clpX)	
clpX (LIC11418)	1 743 955–1 745 217	Q72SG5	1263	214 309 (clpX & clpQ)	
clpQ (LIC11600)	1 959 527–1 960 069	Q72RY8	543	9 (clpQ & clpY)	
clpY (LIC11601)	1 960 079–1 961 518	Q72RY7	1440	245 082 (clpY & clpA)	
clpA (LIC11814)	2 206 601–2 208 841	Q72RD2	2241	4 bp overlap (clpA & clpS)	
clpS (LIC11815)	2 208 838–2 209 173	Q72RD1	336	150 158 (clpS & clpP2)	
clpP2 (LIC11951)	2 359 332–2 359 925	Q72R01	594	68 240 (clpP2 & clpB)	
clpB (LIC12017)	2 428 166–2 430 748	Q72QU2	2583	not applicable	
Molecular Characterization
of Core Catalytic Component ClpP
The open reading frames
of full-length clpP1 (597
bp), clpP2 (594 bp), and clpX (1263
bp) were amplified by PCR using genomic DNA as a template of L. interrogans. The PCR amplicons of clpP1, clpP2, and clpX were cloned separately
in pET23a expression vector, and the recombinant proteins were overexpressed
in E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells (Figure 2A). The overexpressed
recombinant proteins (rClpP1, 23 kDa; rClpP2, 22 kDa; and rClpX, 47
kDa) of Leptospira were purified using
Ni-NTA affinity column chromatography (Figure 2B). The purified rClpP1 and rClpP2 were used
to generate polyclonal antibodies in rabbit and BALB/c mice, respectively.
In silico analysis of the available amino acid (aa) sequence of clpP1 and clpP2 in L. interrogans Copenhageni exhibits 100% identity to its orthologs in another pathogenic
serovar, L. interrogans Lai (clpP1-LA2559; clpP2-LA1953), whereas nonpathogenic
serovar Leptospira biflexa Patoc, possesses
only 44.1% (clpP1-LEPBI_I1760) and 42.5% (clpP2-LEPBI_I0969) identities. The ClpP isoforms in the Leptospira (serovars Lai and Copenhageni) lysates
were detected at a comparable molecular size to that of the recombinant
protein on immunoblotting and no remarkable detection was observed
in the serovar Patoc (Figure 2C,D). The immunoblot result of the rClpP isoforms in Leptospira serovars is in agreement with the in silico
findings. We also validated the cross-reactivity of the generated
polyclonal antibodies towards each rClpP isoforms of Leptospira as they show 42% identities within themselves.
To our surprise, a cross-reactivity of anti-ClpP1 antibodies with
rClpP2 using immunoblots was detected; however, anti-ClpP2 antibodies
were very specific (data not shown). In recent years, well-designed
biophysical studies have established the ClpP function to be governed
by inter and intramolecular conformational switches that conduct regulation
signals through the complex.26,37 Therefore, to determine
if critical motifs for conducting regulation signals are conserved,
we aligned the primary sequences of Leptospira ClpP1 and ClpP2 to other organisms having well-characterized ClpP
orthologs. Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of ClpPs in Leptospira and its orthologs in Helicobacter, Listeria, Mycobacterium, Staphylococcus, and Escherichia was demonstrated to have a conserved
catalytic triad (Ser-His-Asp), an essential motif for the charge-relay
in the serine peptidase family (Figure 3). The catalytic triad residues in ClpP1 and ClpP2
of Leptospira achieved alignment at
Ser98-His123-Asn172 and Ser97-His122-Asp173, respectively. Interestingly,
ClpP1 isoforms of Leptospira has an
Asn172 residue instead of the commonly observed Asp residue in the
catalytic triad, which is similar to that reported ClpP1 catalytic
triad in Listeria(37) (Figure 3). Other key hot spots of ClpP, like the Tyr activation trigger,
Asp (Glu)/Arg oligomerization sensor domains, and the Gly-rich heptamer
dimerization domain, are highly conserved in both ClpP isoforms of L. interrogans. In contrast, significant variations
are observed in the motif E-helix (α5) and the N-terminal loop
of ClpP isoforms that is known to intercalate with the cognate opposite
heptameric ring and its hexameric ATPase chaperone, respectively.
Such amino acid sequence variations at these hotspots encouraged us
to characterize the ClpP isoform function and its regulation in Leptospira. The sequence identity of ClpP1 and ClpP2
amino acid of Leptospira with the orthologs
in selected pathogenic bacteria is in the range of 35–64 and
35–50%, respectively (Table 2). The highest sequence identity of ClpP1 and ClpP2
amino acids of Leptospira was found
with its orthologs in Helicobacter pylori (64%) and Streptococcus pneumoniae (50%), respectively.

Figure 2 Molecular characterization of L. interrogans ClpP1, ClpP2, and ClpX. (A) Cloning and overexpression of ClpPs
and ClpX in E. coli. The Coomassie-blue
stained 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel showing the resolved protein lysates
of E. coli cells overexpressing LeptospiraclpP1 (pET23a-clpP1), clpP2 (pET23a-clpP2), and clpX (pET23a-clpX),
after induction with (+) or without (−) 1 mM IPTG. (B) The
affinity-purified Leptospira recombinant
proteins. The Ni-NTA affinity-purified rClpP1 (∼23 kDa), rClpP2
(∼22 kDa), and rClpX (∼47 kDa) proteins were resolved
on 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and stained with Coomassie-blue. In
image (A,B), M denotes the standard protein molecular size marker
(in kDa). (C,D) Western blot of native ClpP1 and ClpP2 of Leptospira, respectively. The native ClpP1 and ClpP2
in Leptospira lysates were detected
in pathogenic strains (serovar Lai and Copenhageni) but not in the
nonpathogenic strain (serovar Patoc) using the primary antibodies
generated against rClpP1 and rClpP2, respectively. Native and recombinant
ClpP isoforms were detected at a similar molecular size.

Figure 3 MSA and secondary structure assignment of ClpP proteases.
MSA of
ClpP orthologs from various pathogenic bacteria were performed using
Clustal Omega software. The ClpP orthologs used for amino acid alignment
are HelPy_ClpP: H. pylori (P56156),
LIC_ClpP1: L. interrogans Copenhageni
(Q72SG6), LIC_ClpP2: L. interrogans Copenhageni (Q72R01), Mtb_ClpP1: M. tuberculosis (P9WPC5), Mtb_ClpP2: M. tuberculosis (P9WPC3), Lm_ClpP1: L. monocytogenes (Q8Y7Y1), Sa_ClpP: Staphylococcus aureus (P63786); E.coli_ClpP: E. coli (P0A6G7),
Lm_ClpP2: L. monocytogenes (Q9RQI6).
The UniProt accession numbers are provided in the parenthesis. Secondary
structural elements present in the HelPy_ClpP (PDB ID: 2ZL0) and Lm_ClpP2 (PDB
ID: 4YRF) structures
are shown on the top and bottom of the sequence alignment, respectively.
Identical and semi-identical residues in ClpP proteases are highlighted
in red and yellow colors, respectively, with residue numbers at the
top of the alignment after HelPy_ClpP. The conserved key structural
motifs in the ClpP isoforms including the Tyr63 activation trigger,
catalytic triad (Ser-His-Asp), Asp(Glu)/Arg oligomerization sensor
domains, E-helix, and the Gly-rich heptamer dimerization domain are
outlined in different colored boxes and marked with specific symbols
at the bottom of the box.

Table 2 Comparative Analyses of Leptospira ClpP Orthologs in Selective Pathogenic
Bacteria
ClpP1 and ClpP2 Coupling
are Essential for Cleaving Small Peptide
Substrates
The MSA of ClpP isoforms of Leptospira shows that both ClpPs retain their key structural motifs, although
only 42% percent identity exists within themselves (Table 2). Such an observation incites
queries whether single or both ClpP isoform(s) would form active tetradecameric
complexes capable of peptide/protein degradation. The catalytic triad
Ser-His-Asp alignment of ClpP in the extended conformation is capable
of degrading small peptides (<5–6 amino acids) without the
requirement of its chaperone or ATP.40 Therefore,
the capability of pure rClpP isoforms to hydrolyze fluorogenic di-
and tetra-peptides such as Suc-LY-AMC40 (S1) and Suc-LLVY-AMC40 (S2), respectively,
and a fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled full-length casein protein
substrate41 (FITC-casein, S3) were evaluated.
Unexpectedly, the pure rClpP isoforms of Leptospira was enzymatically inactive on the fluorogenic small peptide substrates
(S1 and S2) till 1 h of the reaction (Figure 4A). For further validation, the peptidase
reaction time was extended till 48 h but no peptidolytic activity
was measured using the pure rClpP isoforms (data not shown). The possibility
of N-terminal preprocessing of ClpP isoforms of Leptospira to produce mature ClpP peptidase was not determined as there are
other reported pathogenic bacterial species like Listeria,37Clostridium,42Pseudomonas,32 and Chlamydia(34) whose pure ClpP isoforms showed functional
activity without any preprocessing. However, when pure rClpP isoforms
of Leptospira were incubated together
in an equimolar concentration for 10 min at 37 °C, the resulting
rClpP isoform mixture was able to hydrolyze the fluorogenic small
peptide substrates (S1 and S2) at variable rates (Figure 4A). The substrate S1 was selected
to determine the enzyme kinetic parameters of the rClpP isoform mixture
due to its faster rate of hydrolysis and accepted model peptide substrate
for ClpP protease study. Unlike other reported enzyme kinetics of
the functional ClpP16,42 which show Michaelis–Menten
kinetics, Leptospira rClpP isoform
mixture exhibit Hill kinetics on fluorogenic substrate S1. The substrate
S1 cleavage saturation curve by rClpP isoform mixture was sigmoidal
with a Vmax of 2531 ± 114 ΔRFU/min
and apparent KM (KM″) of 0.87
± 0.05 mM. The dependency on the substrate (S1) concentration
for increased peptidase activity of rClpP isoforms reflected a slightly
cooperative mechanism with a Hill coefficient (H)
of 3.53 ± 0.62 (Figure 4B). This suggests that the multiple molecules of the substrate
(S1) bind to the rClpP1P2 mixture of Leptospira and stimulate its activity, in addition to being its substrate.
Previously, activation of such an inactive ClpP1P2 complex of M. tuberculosis by peptide activators (Z-Leu-Leu and Z-Leu-leucinal) in the hydrolysis of Z-Gly-Gly-Leu-AMC (0.1 mM) and Ac-Nle-Pro-Nle-Asp-AMC (0.1
mM) substrates followed a highly cooperative mechanism (H = 5–7).36 Additionally, in agreement
with the earlier evidence of the ClpP biochemical function in other
pathogens,22 no protease activity was recorded
on the FITC-casein substrate (S3) by the rClpP isoform mixture of Leptospira (data not shown). These multiple ClpP
isoforms tend to exhibit the functional disparity in an organism-specific
manner.11,32−34 In a recent study on Clostridium difficile, both ClpP isoforms are capable
of forming functional peptidase independently.42 Our results of ClpP isoform peptidase activity are in agreement
with M. tuberculosis, where both isoforms
are also inactive towards the di-peptide substrate.36 It is also possible that Leptospira pure rClpP isoforms may show activity independently on other types
of small peptides that are yet to be evaluated. In L. interrogans coupling of each rClpP isoforms ensures
achieving peptidase activity on small model peptide substrates (S1
and S2), whereas activity on the large protein substrate (S3) may
require additional unfolding by its cochaperone. In addition, although
gene encoding each ClpP isoforms of Leptospira are chromosomally far apart and show lower sequence identity, this
assay provided us a clue that pure rClpP1 and rClpP2 of Leptospira may interact and self-assemble into a
functional heteromeric peptidase complex.

Figure 4 Peptide degradation assays
using recombinant ClpP (rClpP) isoforms
of Leptospira. (A) Peptidase activity
of rClpP isoforms on the small fluorogenic peptide substrates S1 and
S2. Peptide degradation was measured fluorometrically as a relative
fluorescent unit (RFU × 1000) using the fluorogenic substrates,
Suc-LY-AMC (S1) and Suc-LLVY-AMC (S2) for 1 h. The pure rClpP isoforms
are inactive on small peptide substrates (S1 and S2), whereas the
rClpP isoform mixture is enzymatically active. (B) Peptidase kinetics
of ClpP isoforms on fluorogenic substrate S1 determined using the
Hill function. The apparent KM″ or the substrate concentration
corresponding to the half-maximal velocity of the reaction (KM″ = 0.87 ± 0.05 mM), maximal reaction velocity (Vmax = 2531 ± 114 ΔRFU/min), and the Hill coefficient
(H = 3.53 ± 0.62) of rClpP isoform mixture during
fluorogenic substrate S1 hydrolysis was determined by the nonlinear
curve fitting function of Origin Software. (C,D) Effect of sodium
citrate on the peptidase activity of rClpP isoform mixture on fluorogenic
substrate S1 and S2, respectively. The gradient increase in the sodium
citrate concentration stimulates the peptidase activity of rClpP isoform
mixture but not of the pure rClpP isoforms. The error bars represent
the standard deviations (SDs) from the two independent experiments
performed in duplicates.

We next assessed whether the activity of rClpP isoform mixture
could be enhanced in the presence of sodium citrate, a salt that promotes
oligomeric complex stabilization and has been reported to increase
ClpP peptidase activity.30,32 It is to be noted that
salts like sodium citrate have high Hofmeister strength causing a
“salting out” effect and thereby stabilizing functional
heteromeric complexes. Interestingly, with the gradient increase in
the sodium citrate concentration (0.2–0.6 M), there was an
increase in peptidase activity of rClpP isoform mixture on the model
peptide substrates (S1 and S2), whereas the pure rClpP1 and rClpP2
did not show any gain in peptidase activity (Figure 4C,D). The effect of sodium citrate on ClpP
peptidase activity was in agreement to other reported ClpP multi-isoforms.30,34

Leptospira rClpP1 and rClpP2 Display Optimum Peptidase Activity
at 1:1 Stoichiometry
As we showed that in Leptospira each rClpP isoform in combination is essential
for peptidase activity on smaller peptide substrates (S1 and S2),
it captured our interest to identify the optimum molar-ratio of pure
ClpP isoforms required for heterocomplex formation. Isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) is a well-established method employed to study protein–protein
interactions and estimate the stoichiometry of the heterocomplex.43−46 Therefore, the molar ratio required for forming the heterocomplex
between the pure rClpP isoforms of Leptospira was determined using ITC measurements. The ITC data demonstrate
that 1 molecule (n = 0.945) of rClpP1 was bound to
1 molecule of pure rClpP2 with a dissociation constant (Kd) of 2.02 ± 0.1 μM at 37 °C and is thermodynamically
favored (Figure 5A).
Moreover, the measured Kd value demonstrates
a moderate binding affinity between the two rClpP isoforms and therefore,
the coupling of rClpP isoforms and its stabilization may be time dependent.
In support to ITC data, an additional peptidase assay was performed
with varying ratios of the pure rClpP isoform mixture required to
exhibit maximal activity. Upon increasing the amounts of pure rClpP1
(0–2.5 μg) with a constant amount of pure rClpP2 (1.0
μg) in the mixture, the peptidase activity gradually increased
on substrate S2. The peptidase activity on fluorogenic substrate S2
(tetrapeptide) reached its optimum when the equimolar ratio (1.1–1.2)
of rClpP1 and rClpP2 was mixed (Figure 5B). Such a finding was in agreement with the reported
optimum peptidase activity of multi-isoforms of ClpP in Mycobacterium.36 These
results suggest that the maximum peptidase activity on substrate S2
is achieved when the mixture of pure rClpP1 and rClpP2 isoforms of Leptospira acquires 1:1 stoichiometry under the given
in vitro conditions.

Figure 5 Leptospira rClpP isoform
mixture
interacts in an equimolar ratio for optimal peptidase activity. (A)
ITC of pure rClpP1 and rClpP2. One molecule of rClpP1 binds with one
molecule of rClpP2 at 37 °C. Parameters of the ITC experiment
obtained includes the stoichiometry factor (n) =
0.945 ± 0.05; dissociation constant (Kd) = 2.02 ± 0.1 μM; enthalpy (ΔH) = −30 220 ± 2636 cal–1 mol–1; entropy (ΔS) = −71.4
cal–1 mol–1 K–1. (B) Optimum peptidase activity of the rClpP mixture on the fluorogenic
substrate Suc-LLVY-AMC (S2). Constant amounts of pure rClpP2 (1 μg)
were mixed with increasing amounts of pure rClpP1 and hydrolysis of
fluorogenic substrate S2 was measured as a relative fluorescence unit
(RFU × 1000). The maximal activity of the rClpP isoform mixture
is indicated by the dotted lines in the graph. The error bars represent
the SDs from the two independent experiments performed in duplicates.

rClpP1 and rClpP2 of Leptospira
Undergo Subunit Rearrangement
for Composing Functional ClpP Protease
The size-exclusion
chromatography (SEC) of the pure rClpP isoforms or its mixture were
performed to know if these have the tendency to oligomerize as reported
in other ClpP of bacteria.32,36 The SEC analysis demonstrated
that the rClpP isoform mixture of Leptospira tends to elute as a tetradecamer exactly like the pure rClpP2 (22
kDa × 14 subunits ∼308 kDa), whereas the pure rClpP1 displays
a broad elution profile indicating higher oligomeric species in addition
to the tetradecamer (Figure 6A). The pure rClpP isoforms also demonstrated a possible heptameric
species (∼200 kDa) as a small shoulder peak during SEC (Figure 6A). Such an oligomerization
property was also observed when the pure rClpP isoforms or its mixture
were resolved on native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (native-PAGE)
and stained with Coomassie blue (Figure 6B). However, the oligomeric forms of ClpP1
and the heterocomplex mixture on native-PAGE showed discrepancy in
size with respect to the SEC elution profile. The Leptospira pure rClpP1 on native-PAGE got resolved in majority at a higher
order of oligomeric species (∼480 kDa; 21-mer) and the pure
rClpP2 resolved at the tetradecameric form (∼308 kDa). In SEC
and native-PAGE gel, the proteins migrate not only according to their
size but also to their shape and hydrodynamic properties. Such a difference
in migration behavior of proteins might explain the inconsistency
between the sizes of the ClpP oligomers determined. To further validate,
the pure rClpP isoforms and its mixture were incubated for a short
period (1 h) and an extended period (48 h) at 4 °C to allow time
for subunit re-arrangement, and thereafter, resolved on the native-PAGE.
A shift in the mobility of rClpP1 to a functional tetradecamer size
from 21-mer species was detected on native-PAGE in the rClpP isoform
mixture after 48 h of incubation but not in the short period-incubated
rClpP isoform mixture (Figure S2). In contrast,
the pure rClpP1 resolved at 21-mer species even after 48 h of incubation,
an observation that is in agreement with the finding under SEC.

Figure 6 Leptospira pure rClpP isoforms and
its mixture oligomerization. (A) Size exclusion chromatography of
pure rClpP isoforms and its mixture. The oligomeric states of pure
rClpP isoforms and its mixture were monitored by size exclusion chromatography
using an Enrich 650 High-Resolution column. Elution positions of the
standard proteins with its molecular weight are indicated in arrows
pointing downward. The molecular weight standard protein markers in
kiloDalton (kDa) include β-amylase (200), alcohol dehydrogenase
(158), albumin (66), carbonic anhydrase (29), and cytochrome C (12.4).
The pure rClpP2 and the rClpP isoform mixture were eluted as a tetradecamer
(308 kDa), whereas the pure rClpP1 display a broad elution profile
(≥308 kDa). A small shoulder peak corresponding to 200 kDa
was also seen for pure rClpP1 and rClpP2. (B) Pure rClpP isoforms
or its mixture resolved on the native-polyacrylamide gel. The purified
rClpP isoforms or its mixture (2 μg) were resolved on a 4–20%
native-PAGE and stained with Coomassie-blue. The standard molecular
weight marker was run in lane 1 (M). The purified rClpP1 and rClpP2
resolved at around 480 kDa (23 kDa × 21 = 483 kDa) and 308 kDa
(22 kDa × 14 = 308 kDa), respectively, whereas the rClpP isoform
mixture was resolved at 480 and 308 kDa. (C) Denaturing polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis of pure rClpP1 after glutaraldehyde (C5H8O2) cross-linking. Chemical cross-linking
of pure rClpP1 with glutaraldehyde shows distinct higher molecular
weight bands that get intensified with time (0–15 min) (D)
Denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of pure rClpP2 oligomeric
subunits after glutaraldehyde cross-linking. Chemical cross-linking
of pure rClpP2 with glutaraldehyde (C5H8O2) show distinct higher molecular weight bands in comparison
to control (without C5H8O2). (E)
Denaturing gel electrophoresis of the rClpP isoform mixture after
glutaraldehyde cross-linking. The cross-linked subunits pattern of
rClpP isoform mixture is similar to that of pure rClpP isoforms. The
denaturing polyacrylamide gels were stained with Coomassie-blue and
for clarity; the image obtained is represented after inversion.

It is to be noted that the pure
rClpP1 and rClpP2 of Leptospira are
functionally inactive and are fractionating
by SEC empirically at ≥308 kDa (14–21-mer) and 308 kDa
(tetradecamer), respectively, whereas the functionally active rClpP
isoform mixture fractionate as a tetradecamer (Figures 6A and S2). The
functional activity in Leptospira rClpP
protease is attained only when both the isoforms are contributing
together to frame the tetradecameric structure where possibly the
catalytic triad are aligned (i.e., active) in an extended conformation.
Moreover, because the ITC result demonstrates that the rClpP1 and
rClpP2 bind in a 1:1 stoichiometry, the active rClpP protease (14-mer)
macromolecule may be composed of 2-stacked heptameric rings (7 + 7-mer)
formed by homogenous subunits of rClpP1 and rClpP2. It is also conceivable
that each heptameric ring contains a mixture of rClpP1 and rClpP2
subunits, as has been reported in the Synecchococcus ClpP complexes.47,48 To determine the composition
of the rClpP heptameric ring, the subunits of pure rClpP isoforms
or its mixture was chemically cross-linked using glutaraldehyde. After
15 min of the cross-linking reaction, distinct bands of cross-linked
rClpP1 intermediates corresponding to 1-, 2-, 4-, 5-, 6-, and 7-mers
on molecular weight were evident on SDS-PAGE stained with Coomassie
blue (Figure 6C). Similar
patterns of oligomeric bands of rClpP2 corresponding to 1-, 2-, 5-,
6-, and 7-mers were also evident after 15 min of the chemical cross-linking
reaction (Figure 6D).
With the increasing time of chemical cross-linking, the intensity
of transient forms of pure rClpP1 and rClpP2 cross-linked bands were
observed with reduced intensity of protomers after gel electrophoresis.
Moreover, when the rClpP isoform mixture were chemically cross-linked,
bands of cross-linked products identical to pure rClpP isoforms were
observed, suggesting each heptameric forms of pure rClpP isoforms
constitute the active tetradecameric structure of the ClpP protease
of Leptospira (Figure 6E).

To address the size distribution
(hydrodynamic diameter) of the
oligomeric species of rClpP in solution, dynamic light scattering
(DLS) was performed on pure rClpP and its isoform mixture. The pure
rClpP1 incubated either for 1 or 24 h demonstrated two major peaks
with a similar hydrodynamic diameter by DLS. The representative two
major peaks for pure rClpP1 (24 h incubation) correspond to mean hydrodynamic
diameters of 19.06 ± 5.76 and 197.8 ± 73.2 nm (Figure 7A). On the contrary,
only one population of oligomeric species of a lower particle size
(16.57 ± 6.03 nm) was detected in pure rClpP2 incubated either
for 1 or 24 h (Figure 7B). The rClpP isoform mixture after a short incubation period of
1 h for self-assembly showed two major peaks with mean hydrodynamic
diameters of 19.06 ± 5.29 and 312.5 ± 113.7 nm (Figure 7C). The DLS results
demonstrated the existence of multiple populations of self-assembled
oligomeric species for both pure rClpP1 and the rClpP isoform mixture.
Interestingly, the rClpP isoform mixture after a longer period of
incubation (24 h) showed a shift in the oligomeric species from multiple
to single populations with an average hydrodynamic diameter of 18.21
± 5.54 nm (Figure 7C). For further substantiation, the obtained values of polydispersity,
polydispersity index, count rate, and estimated molecular weight of
pure rClpP isoforms or its mixture (1 or 24 h incubation) during DLS
analyses are listed (Table S2) along with
their correlation coefficient and size distribution by mass (Figures S3 and S4). Such a shift in the population
of oligomeric species to a single population was accompanied with
higher peptidase activity on fluorogenic substrate S1 in comparison
to the rClpP isoform mixture displaying multiple populations of oligomeric
species formed during the short re-arrangement/self-assembly period
(1 h) (Figure 7D).

Figure 7 Size distribution
in rClpP isoforms by dynamic light scattering
(DLS). (A) The size distribution profile of oligomeric subunits in
pure rClpP1. The pure rClpP1 after 24 h of incubation shows two major
peaks of oligomeric species with a particle diameter of 19.06 ±
5.76 and 197.8 ± 73.2 nm. (B) The size distribution profile of
oligomeric subunits in pure rClpP2. The representative size distribution
data in pure rClpP2 after 24 h of incubation showed a single oligomeric
species with an average hydrodynamic diameter of 16.57 ± 6.03
nm. Consistent size distribution profile was obtained for pure rClpP
isoforms during short incubation (1 h) too. (C) The size distribution
profile of oligomeric subunits in rClpP isoform mixture. The rClpP
isoform mixture, when incubated for a longer duration (24 h) (dashed
line), showed a shift in the size distribution of the oligomeric species
to the single population compared to the equivalent amount of rClpP
isoform mixture incubated for a shorter duration (1 h) (solid line).
The representative size distribution data of the 10 scans performed
in duplicates are presented in (A–C). (D) Effect on peptidase
activity of the rClpP isoform mixture subsequent to a longer duration
of a rClpP self-assembly. Incubation of rClpP isoform mixture for
24 h to self-assemble resulted in higher (1.4 times) and statistically
significant (p-value <0.05) peptidase activity
on fluorogenic substrate S1 than the rClpP isoform mixture incubated
for 1 h. Control denotes the background fluorescence of substrate
S1 in the reaction.

The Leptospira ClpP isoforms being
classified in the serine peptidase family, the effect of mutation
of rClpP isoforms (rClpP1S98A and rClpP2S97A) at one of the residues
(Ser) of the catalytic triad was investigated. The complex of the
mutant rClpP isoform mixture (rClpP1S98A-rClpP2 and rClpP1-rClpP2S97A)
did not demonstrate any peptidase activity on S1 and S2 substrates
(Figure 8A), despite
the fact that the mutant retained its ability to oligomerize, like
wild-type ClpP isoforms (Figure S5). In
contrast, the complex of Listeria LmClpP2-S98A
and LmClpP1 has been previously demonstrated to have a 75-fold increase
in peptidase activity compared with pure LmClpP1.37 The addition of sodium-citrate (0.6 M) to such a complex
of mutant rClpP isoform mixture failed to display any gain of peptidase
activity on fluorogenic substrate S1 (Figure 8B) and S2 substrates (data not shown). Thus,
the analysis of the pure rClpP isoforms or its mixture macromolecule
using various techniques suggests that the functional rClpP protease
in Leptospira is a tetradecamer and
hypothesized to be composed of 2-heptameric rings of homogenous subunits
of rClpP1 and rClpP2 where the proper alignment of all the 14-catalytic
triad is essential.

Figure 8 Peptidase activity of the mutant rClpP isoform mixture.
Peptidase
activity of the rClpP mixture is presented as a percentage (%), wherein,
after 1 h of enzymatic reaction end-point fluorescence was measured.
The measured end-point value of the wild-type rClpP isoform mixture
was considered as 100% for measuring relative peptidase activity.
The control shows the background fluorescence of the substrates in
the reaction. (A) Comparison of peptidase activity of wild-type rClpP
isoform mixture with mutant rClpP isoform mixtures on fluorogenic
peptide substrates. Mutation of rClpP isoforms (rClpP1S98A and rClpP2S97A)
was performed by substituting the Ser98/97 to Ala98/97 residue in
the catalytic triad. The rClpP isoform mixture generated in various
combinations with the mutant and wild-type ClpP isoforms showed a
complete loss of peptidase activity in the mutant rClpP isoform mixture.
(B) Effect of the presence of sodium citrate on peptidase activity
of the wild-type rClpP isoform mixture and mutant rClpP isoform mixtures.
The presence or absence of sodium citrate (0.6 M) does not lead to
a gain in the peptidase activity in mutant rClpP isoform mixtures
on fluorogenic peptide substrate S1. The error bars represent the
SDs from the two independent experiments performed in duplicates.
Statistical analysis was performed by the Student’s t-test for comparing the measured fluorescence value obtained
for control and mutant rClpP isoform mixtures after 1 h of the assay
(p-value >0.05).

Leptospira rClpX (LIC11418) Stimulates
rClpP Heterocomplex for Protein Degradation in an Energy-dependent
Process
The overexpressed and purified rClpX of Leptospira was assessed for its ATPase activity,
an activity essentially required for unfolding and permitting the
unfolded larger protein substrate to pass through the axial pores
of ClpP protease.22 Moreover, ClpX oligomerization
is stabilized by ATP; therefore, the assembly can be followed indirectly
by monitoring the changes in the rate of ATP hydrolysis.32,49 The free inorganic phosphate generated during the enzymatic hydrolysis
of ATP by rClpX of Leptospira was quantified
as described before for ClpC in M. tuberculosis(36) (Figure S6A,B). The rClpX exhibited surge in ATPase activity with increasing ATP
concentration (0.25–4.0 mM) and thereafter, the activity reached
saturation at the tested ATP concentration (4.0–8.0 mM) (Figure 9A). The ATPase reaction
follows Michaelis–Menten kinetics and is in agreement to earlier
study on ATP-dependent protease (Ti and ClpX) of E.
coli.49,50 The calculated half-maximal ATP
concentration for rClpX (KM) of Leptospira was 0.78 ± 0.07 mM (Figure 9A). In addition, we carried
out a peptidase/protease assay using the substrates S1, S2, and S3
to investigate if pure rClpX has any peptide hydrolysis activity.
As expected, rClpX did not exhibit any peptidase/protease activity
on substrates S1, S2, and S3 (data not shown). These observations
also advocate that there are no contaminants of E.
coli ClpP that might have got associated during purification
of rClpX of Leptospira. We next addressed
whether the presence of protein substrates like casein could enhance
the rClpX ATPase activity of Leptospira in a fashion similar to that reported in other chaperones like HslU16 and ClpA.50 To our
surprise, the presence of FITC-casein (S3) and β-casein (S4)
substrates stimulated the ATPase activity of Leptospira rClpX by 1.8-fold compared to the control (no substrate), whereas
the small peptide substrates (S1 and S2) failed to significantly stimulate
the ATP hydrolysis by rClpX (Figure 9B). This shows that the energy is utilized by rClpX
for unfolding the protein substrate (casein) as increasing the concentration
of casein leads to an increase in the reaction rate of ATP hydrolysis.
Moreover, no such increase in ATP hydrolysis was observed in rClpX
on the addition of the small peptide substrate.

Figure 9 Biochemical activity
of purified recombinant ClpX. (A) Effect on
ATPase activity of pure rClpX at increasing concentration of ATP.
The rate of ATP hydrolysis by rClpX increases as a function of ATP
concentration and gets saturated at 8 mM. The kinetic constants of
the rClpX enzymatic reaction on ATP were determined using Michaelis–Menten
kinetics. The KM or the substrate concentration
corresponding to the half-maximal velocity of the reaction and maximal
reaction velocity during ATP hydrolysis was determined by the nonlinear
curve fitting function of Origin software. The calculated Vmax and KM of the
rClpX was 2.63 ± 0.07 μM min–1 and 0.78
± 0.07 μM, respectively. (B) The ATPase activity of pure
rClpX is increased in the presence of protein substrates. Increase
in ATPase activity of pure rClpX was observed in the presence of bigger
protein substrates (S3 and S4) and was unaltered in the presence of
small peptide substrates (S1 and S2). Substrates S3 and S4 stimulate
ATPase activity of rClpX in comparison to the control where no peptide/protein
substrate was present. The measured ATPase activity of rClpX for 1
h at 37 °C (control) was considered as 100%. (C) Comparison of
protease activity of wild-type and mutant rClpP isoform mixture in
the presence of rClpX. The wild-type rClpP isoform mixture is stimulated
by rClpX to degrade fluorogenic substrate S3 only in the presence
of ATP. Substitution of ATP with ATPγS, a nonhydrolysable ATP
analogue, impairs substrate S3 degradation. The pure rClpP isoforms
and the mutant rClpP isoform mixture fails to degrade substrate S3
in the presence of rClpX and ATP. The error bars represent the SDs
from the two independent experiments performed in duplicates. Statistical
analysis was performed by the Student’s t-test
for comparing the rClpX ATPase activity obtained for control and in
the presence of different substrates after 1.5 h of the assay (p-value <0.05).

Previous studies on C. difficile(42) and P. aeruginosa(32) have described ClpP1–ClpX together
form an active protease complex and the genes encoding these components
are regulated under a single operon. In a similar fashion, the CDS
of clpP1 and clpX in L. interrogans are separated by only 10 bps and apparently
is regulated under a single operon. Thus, it was interesting to address
if the association of Leptospira rClpX
with pure rClpP isoforms or its mixture could stimulate protease activity
on fluorogenic substrate S3. Unexpectedly, rClpX of L. interrogans failed to stimulate the pure rClpP
isoform enzymatic activity in the presence or absence of ATP. However,
in agreement with our peptidase assay of rClpP isoforms (Figure 4A), rClpX was able
to stimulate rClpP isoform mixture for protease activity on fluorogenic
substrate S3 in the presence of ATP (Figure 9C). Moreover, rClpX in the presence of a
nonhydrolysable ATP-analogue (ATPγS) failed to stimulate the
rClpP isoform mixture for protease activity (Figure 9C). These biochemical behaviors of rClpX
are in consensus with the previous findings where ATP hydrolysis is
required for unfolding the protein substrate and permit its passage
in the axial-pore of the ClpP catalytic chamber.51,52 In addition, it was interesting to address if a mutation in the
catalytic-triad of ClpP isoforms could affect its proteolytic activity.
Therefore, the protease activity of the mutant ClpP protease macromolecule
in association with rClpX was evaluated. The chaperone rClpX, however,
could not stimulate the mutant ClpP protease macromolecule (rClpP1S98A-rClpP2
and rClpP1-rClpP2S97A) in degrading the fluorogenic substrate S3 (Figure 9C). Thus, the conformational
orientation of all the 14-catalytic triad of ClpP protease is the
prerequisite of controlled degradation processes in addition to the
concerted action of energy-dependent chaperone ClpX.

Conclusions
Exploration of genomic and proteomic data of L.
interrogans specified that the ClpP system in Leptospira might exhibit a divergent behavior from
that of other reported multi-ClpP organisms studied to date. We have
unraveled an unconventional oligomeric self-assembly of Leptospira ClpP1 and ClpP2 mixtures that is intrinsically
active and distinct from those of other ClpPs, especially the well-characterized Mycobacterium ClpP isoforms. Earlier reported ClpP
orthologs in pathogenic bacteria demonstrated that one or both of
the pure isoforms of ClpP could self-assemble into a functional tetradecamer
form, whereas in Leptospira both the
pure isoforms despite self-assembling were found to be functionally
inactive. Exploitation of this unprecedented regulation of proteolytic
complexes may enable the development of an effective therapeutic target
because of large diversity between bacterial and mammalian proteolytic
systems.53 However, to precisely understand
the existing evolutionary invented ClpP diversity, elucidation of
conformation of the catalytic triad in the protease complex of Leptospira by high-resolution X-ray structure is
further warranted. Likewise, genetic manipulation of the ClpP system
in recalcitrant L. interrogans may
shed light on the biological significance of harboring multi-isoform
of ClpP and chaperone proteins. Substrate specificity has been demonstrated
by the ClpP1P2 complex of M. tuberculosis,36,54 however, the substrate cleavage preference
for leptospiral pure ClpP isoforms or its mixture demands further
exploration. The role of the other class of chaperones and adaptor
proteins in regulating ClpP biochemical behavior in Leptospira still remains to be answered.

Materials and
Methods
Bacterial Strains, Primers, and Plasmids
Bacterial
strains, primers, and plasmids used in the work are listed in Table 3. L.
interrogans serovar Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130, L. interrogans serovar Lai, and L.
biflexa serovar Patoc were obtained from the Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Regional Medical Research Centre
(RMRC), Port Blair, Andaman and Nicobar Island, India. Spirochetes
were cultured in Ellinghausen–McCullough–Johnson–Harris
media at 28–30 °C at an interval of 5–7 days. Luria–Bertani
(LB) medium was used for culturing E. coli DH5α and BL21 (DE3) (Novagen) required for cloning and expression
of recombinant proteins.

Table 3 Bacterial Strains,
Plasmids, and Primers
Used in This Study
bacterial
strains, plasmids, or primers	characteristics or sequence	source or reference	
bacterial
strains	L. interrogans serovar Copenhageni
strain Fiocruz L1-130	wild-type	ICMR, Port
Blair	
 	L. interrogans serovar Lai	 	 	
 	L. biflexa serovar
Patoc	 	 	
 	E. coli DH5α	supE44 ΔlacU169 (ϕ80 lacZΔM15) hsdR17 recA1 endA1 gyrA96thi-1relA1	Novagen	
 	E. coli BL21 (DE3)	F–ompT hsdSb (rBmB–) gal(λ c I 857 ind 1 Sam7 nin5 lacUVt7gene 1)dcm (DE3)	 	
plasmids	pTZ57R/T	linearized TA vector with 3′-ddT overhangs for TA cloning of PCR products	Thermo Scientific	
 	pET23a	bacterial vector
for expression of C-terminally His6-tagged proteins	Novagen	
primers	clpP1F	5′CTAGCTAGCATGGCGTAATCCCGTATGTG3′(NheI)	this work	
 	clpP1R	5′CCGCTCGAGTTCAGTTTGTTTACGATCGATCT3′(XhoI)	 	
 	clpP2F	5′CTAGCTAGCATGCCAGAAACAGAAAAATCG3′(NheI)	 	
 	clpP2R	5′CCGCTCGAGATTAAAATCGATTTTAGTAGCGAG3′(XhoI)	 	
 	clpXF	5′CTAGCTAGCTTGGCTAAGAAAACACCGG3′(NheI)	 	
 	clpXR	5′CCGCTCGAGAGCAATCTTAGATTCTTTTTTGAG3′(XhoI)	 	
 	clpP1(S98A)F	5′TCAGGCTTCTgctCTATGGCGGC3′	 	
 	clpP1(S98A)R	5′CCTAAACAAAGAGTTCTTACATC3′	 	
 	clpP2(S97A)F	5′AATGGCTGCTgctCTATGGGTTCTG3′	 	
 	clpP2(S97A)R	5′CCCATACAAACCGTGTGAAC3′	 	
Cloning, Expression, and
Purification of Recombinant Proteins
The full-length genes clpP1 (LIC11417), clpP2 (LIC11951), and clpX (LIC11418) of L. interrogans serovar Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130 were PCR amplified using
its genomic DNA as a template. The oligonucleotides for PCR were designed
using the genomic sequence of L. interrogans Copenhageni strain Fiocruz L1-130 available on the National Centre
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). The clpP1, clpX, and clpP2 genes were cloned individually
into the pET23a vector at the NheI and XhoI multiple cloning sites that can express a C-terminal (His)6-tagged recombinant protein. To rule out any mutation in the
generated recombinant pET23a plasmids, sequencing was performed by
outsourcing (Eurofins, India) the DNA. The recombinant plasmids were
transformed in BL21 (DE3) cells and the transformed cells were cultivated
at 37 °C in LB medium supplemented with 100 μg mL–1 of ampicillin. Protein expression in the transformed BL21 (DE3)
cells was induced with 1 mM isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG). After cultivation of the bacterial cells for another 6 h at
37 °C, the cells were harvested and washed with 1× phosphate
buffer saline (PBS; 10 mM sodium phosphate, 137 mM NaCl and 2.7 mM
KCl; pH 7.4) by centrifugation at 3000×g for
5 min to remove cellular debris. The recombinant proteins were purified
by affinity column chromatography using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid
(Ni-NTA) resins (Invitrogen). The recombinant ClpP1 and ClpP2 protein
purification was carried out in native conditions as described before
in our laboratory.55 The recombinant proteins
were eluted in buffer-A (50 mM Tris-Cl, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole;
pH 8.0) containing 10% glycerol. For recombinant ClpX purification,
a hybrid method was followed as described previously.56 Briefly, E. coli BL21-pET23a-clpX cells expressing ClpX were lysed in denaturing lysis
buffer-B (200 mM sodium phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, 8 M urea; pH 7.8).
The soluble lysate was allowed to bind to the Ni-NTA beads and washed
with native wash buffer-C (50 mM Tris-Cl, 300 mM NaCl; pH 8.0). The
bound recombinant protein to beads was eluted in native elution buffer-D
(50 mM Tris-Cl, 150 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole; pH 8.0) containing
10% glycerol. Elutes of purified ClpP1, ClpP2, or ClpX were concentrated
using 10 kDa centrifugal filter units (Amicon, catalog no. UFC901024)
and dialyzed against buffer-E (50 mM Tris-Cl, 100 mM NaCl; pH 8.0)
or 1× PBS, both containing 10% glycerol. The purified proteins
were visualized on 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel by
Coomassie staining. Protein concentrations were estimated by the Bradford
method with bovine serum albumin as the standard or by measuring the
absorption at 280 nm using the extinction coefficients of ClpP1 (ε0.1% = 0.741 [mg/mL]−1 cm–1), ClpP2 (ε0.1% = 0.856 [mg/mL]−1 cm–1), or ClpX (ε0.1% = 0.261
[mg/mL]−1 cm–1) calculated from
the amino acid composition using program ProtParam.57

MSA and Site-Directed Mutagenesis of Leptospira
rClpP Isoforms
Amino acid sequences of ClpP orthologs from
different pathogenic
bacteria were retrieved from UniProtKB database58 and MSA was performed using Clustal Omega software59 to find out conserved sequence motifs in Leptospira ClpP isoforms. MSA is represented using
online tool ESPript (Easy Sequencing in PostScript) for better clarity.60 The secondary structures used in the study were
obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB).61 Based on the findings of MSA, a site-directed single amino acid
mutation was introduced in the generated recombinant plasmids pET23a-clpP1 and pET23a-clpP2 using a Q5 site-directed
mutagenesis kit (NEB, catalog no. E0554S). Using a NEBaseChanger tool,
the primers were designed for site-directed mutation at 98th and 97th
Ser to the Ala residue in rClpP1 and rClpP2, respectively, resulting
in the generation of rClpP1S98A and rClpP2S97A (Table 3). The rClpP1S98A and rClpP2S97A variants
were overexpressed and purified from E. coli cells as described for the rClpP isoforms.

Generation of Polyclonal
Antibodies Against Purified rClpP1
and rClpP2
Antibodies against rClpP1 were generated in rabbits
by outsourcing the purified protein to Abgenex, Bhubaneswar, India.
To generate anti-rClpP2 antibody, 4–6 weeks old BALB/c mice
were immunized with purified rClpP2 subcutaneously. About 10 μg
per mouse of the rClpP2 protein emulsified in the Freund’s
complete adjuvant (catalog no. sc-3727; Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
was used for primary immunization (4 mice per group). A negative control
group was injected with an equal volume of PBS along with the adjuvant.
Immunized mice were further given two booster injections of rClpP2
antigen emulsified in Freund’s incomplete adjuvant (catalog
no. 3726; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at 14 and 24 days of primary immunization.
At 10 days after the second booster, blood was collected from each
mouse by retro-orbital bleeding and then the mouse was sacrificed
using the atlanto-occipital dislocation method as described previously.56 Sera obtained were pooled for the antibody titer
analysis by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) before experimental
use. Immunization experiments with mice were performed at the Department
of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science, Assam Agriculture
University Guwahati, India, after approval from the Institutional
Animal Ethics Committee.

Western Blotting of Leptospira Whole-Cell
Lysates
To
detect ClpP1 and ClpP2 expressions in Leptospira, whole-cell lysates of 109 spirochetes were re-suspended
in SDS loading dye. The resulting lysates of Leptospira were resolved in 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose
membrane (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The membranes were blocked with
5% non-fat dried milk prepared in Tris-buffered saline (TBS; pH 8.0)
containing 0.05% Tween 20 (TBS-T) and separately probed with anti-rClpP1
(1:1000) or anti-rClpP2 (1:250) antibodies for 2 h at room temperature.
After being washed, the membranes were incubated with horse radish
peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat antirabbit or antimouse IgG (1:5000;
Sigma) for 1 h and immunoblots were developed by adding the chemiluminescence
substrate (Thermo Scientific, catalog no. 32209). All dilutions of
antibodies were prepared using 2% non-fat dried milk in 0.1% TBS-T.

Peptide Hydrolysis
Peptidase activity was monitored
by the rate of production of fluorescent AMC (7-amino-4-methylcoumarin)
after cleavage from fluorogenic peptide substrates. The peptide substrates
used in the hydrolysis assay were N-succinyl-Leu-Tyr-AMC
(Suc-LY-AMC) as substrate 1 (S1) and Suc-LLVY-AMC as substrate 2 (S2)
(Sigma). Peptidase assays were performed in black flat-bottom 96-well
plates (Invitrogen) at 37 °C. Each 96-well contained a fluorogenic
peptide substrate (0.1 mM) and pure rClpP isoforms or its mixture
(0.0125 μg μL–1) in 80 μL of buffer-F
(50 mM phosphate buffer, 100 mM KCl, 5% glycerol; pH 7.6). Fluorescence
was measured in the Infinite M200Pro plate reader (Tecan) at 380 and
460 nm wavelength of excitation and emission, respectively. The peptide
substrate S1 (0.01–5.0 mM) was incubated with rClpP isoform
mixture (0.025 μg μL–1) in 80 μL
of buffer-F to determine the kinetic parameters of leptospiral rClpP
isoform mixture. The subsequent experimental procedure to detect the
hydrolysis of substrate S1 was the same as described above. Initial
and final readings were taken at 0 and 1 h, respectively (excitation:
380 nm/emission: 460 nm). The measurements obtained were processed
in Microsoft Excel and then data were transferred to Origin9.0 for
Hill kinetics and statistical analysis. Similar peptidase assays were
carried out on substrates S1 and S2 using pure rClpP mutant isoforms
(rClpP1S98A and rClpP2S97A) or the rClpP isoform mixture constituted
by either of the mutant isoforms. All the experiments were performed
twice independently and in duplicates.

ATPase Assay of Leptospira
Recombinant ClpX Chaperone
The ATPase assays were carried
out using an ATPase/GTPase activity
assay kit (Sigma, catalog no. MAK113). The amount of free phosphate
determined from the standard graph was used to calculate the ATPase
activity of rClpX on ATP in μmole min–1 μL–1 or μM min–1. The ATP hydrolysis
rates of rClpX (0.05 μg μL–1) were monitored
with increasing concentrations of ATP (0–8 mM) in 40 μL
of buffer-G (50 mM Tris-Cl, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, and 8 mM MgCl2; pH 7.8) at 37 °C for 1.5 h. The measurements obtained
were processed in Microsoft Excel and then data were transferred to
Origin9.0 for Michaelis–Menten kinetics and statistical analysis.
In addition, the ATPase activity of rClpX (0.08 μg μL–1) was measured in the presence of various substrates
(0.1 μg μL–1) including small peptides
(S1 and S2) and large protein substrates (Fluorescein isothiocyanate
tagged-casein; FITC-casein [S3] and β-casein [S4]) in a total
reaction volume of 25 μL in buffer-G at 37 °C for 1.5 h.
In every ATPase assay, the reaction mix was prepared with the activity
buffer, rClpX, and the substrate; and pre-incubated at 37 °C
for 10 min prior to the addition of ATP. The measurements of absorbance
at 620 nm were performed using a Multiskan GO Microplate UV–vis
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). All the experiments were performed
twice independently and in duplicates.

Protease Assay of Leptospira
Recombinant ClpP Isoforms in Association
with Its ATPase Chaperone
All protease assays were performed
using a protease fluorescent detection kit (Sigma, catalog no. PF0100)
as per the manufacturers’ instructions. The pure rClpP isoforms
or its mixture along with the chaperone rClpX were assayed for protease
activity using fluorescent protein substrate S3 provided in the kit.
Briefly, 20 μL of substrate S3 (1.5 μg μL–1) was prewarmed at 37 °C and incubated with pure rClpP isoforms
or its mixture (0.02 μg μL–1) and rClpX
(0.04 μg μL–1) in buffer-G for 10 min
prior to addition of 2 mM ATP/ATPγS or without ATP in a total
volume of 100 μL of the reaction. The protease reactions were
performed in the dark at 37 °C for 1.5 h, followed by termination
of the reaction with trichloroacetic acid (0.6 N). The resulting fluorescence
was recorded at 492 and 519 nm wavelength of excitation and emission,
respectively. A similar proteolysis assay was carried out using the
rClpP isoform mixture constituted of wild-type and mutant isoforms
(rClpP1S98A or rClpP2S97A). All the experiments were performed twice
independently and in duplicates.

Chemical Cross-Linking
of Recombinant ClpP Isoforms of Leptospira
The pure rClpP
isoforms or its mixture (0.2 μg μL–1) were cross-linked with the glutaraldehyde solution
(0.02%) in assay buffer-F in a total reaction volume of 100 μL.
In the case of rClpP isoform mixture, each isoform (0.1 μg μL–1) was mixed to yield a final concentration of 0.2
μg μL–1. From the total reaction volume,
a 20 μL of the cross-linking reaction was terminated at various
intervals (2–15 min) by addition of 4× sample loading
buffer (200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 8% SDS; 0.4% bromophenol blue; 100
mM DTT and 40% glycerol) and boiling at 95 °C for 10 min. A control
reaction containing pure rClpP isoforms or its mixture without glutaraldehyde
was prepared for comparison. The reaction products at each time point
were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie staining.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
ITC experiments were
performed on a MicroCal iTC200 system (GE Healthcare) at 37 °C
in buffer-B with constant stirring at 250 rpm. The pure rClpP1 and
rClpP2 were concentrated using 3 kDa cut-off centrifugal filter units
(Amicon, catalog no. UFC800324) in buffer-B to equilibrate the buffer
conditions of ITC syringe and sample solutions. The sample cell and
the syringe were washed twice with buffer-E before loading the analytes.
The equilibrated pure rClpP1 (60 μL of 90 μM) and the
rClpP2 (300 μL of 9 μM) was loaded into the ITC syringe
and the sample cell, respectively. The experiment was initiated after
equilibration for 300 s with the first injection of rClpP1 (0.4 μL)
that was discarded during the analysis. rClpP1 (1.5 μL) was
titrated into the sample cell at an interval of 120 s. Power was recorded
at “high” gain setting with a reference power of 10
μcal s–1 and a 5 s filter period. Data analysis,
including baseline correction and evaluation was carried out using
OriginPro 8.5 ITC.

Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC)
An enrich SEC 650
high-resolution column (10 mm × 300 mm, catalog no. 7801650)
was used for SEC on an NGC chromatography system (Bio-Rad). The column
was equilibrated with a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 100
mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol. The column was calibrated with β-amylase
(200 kDa), alcohol dehydrogenase (158 kDa), albumin (66 kDa), carbonic
anhydrase, (29 kDa) and cytochrome C (12.4 kDa) (Sigma, catalog no.
MWGF-200). The rClpP isoforms were used at a final concentration of
0.5 mg mL–1 and were incubated overnight at 4 °C.
The rClpP isoform samples (250 μL) equilibrated in the same
buffer were loaded onto the column, and gel-filtration experiments
were carried out with a flow rate of 0.3 mL min–1 at room temperature.

Native Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
Pure rClpP
isoforms (2 μg) and its mixture in buffer-B were incubated at
37 °C for 10 min followed by mixing with 3× native sample
buffer (240 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 30% glycerol, 0.03% bromophenol blue).62 The rClpP isoform subunit interaction in solution
was analyzed on a 4–20% gradient gel (Bio-Rad MiniProtean,
catalog no. 456–1096) after resolving for 2 h at 120 V. The
resolved proteins in gradient gel were visualized using Coomassie
stain and compared with known molecular weight standard protein markers
(Invitrogen, cata1og no. 928387).

Dynamic Light Scattering
DLS experiments were performed
on a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments) at 25 °C. Pure rClpP
isoforms or their mixture (0.5 mg mL–1) in buffer-B
were incubated for 1 or 24 h at 4 °C and were added to polystyrene
cuvettes. The scattering was recorded at 173° angle; a 633 nm
He-Ne laser was used as the light source. A total of ten autocorrelation
functions were recorded for each of the protein samples, and intensity-weighted
hydrodynamic diameters determined. The profile corresponding to the
average particle sizes were generated as reported and discussed elsewhere.63

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00399.Details of RNA
isolation and qRT-PCR for differential
transcription analysis of clpP1 and clpP2 in Leptospira under in vitro conditions,
details of calculation for estimation of rClpX ATPase activity, DLS
analysis data of pure rClpP isoforms and its mixture, and native PAGE
analysis of pure rClpP isoforms, its mixture, and rClpP serine mutants
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00399_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
M.K. conceived
and supervised the study; M.K. and A.D. designed experiments and analyzed
data; A.D. performed experiments; M.S.H. performed SEC analysis; D.D.
performed and analyzed DLS experiment, M.K., A.D., and M.S.H. wrote
the manuscript.

The present work
was financially supported by the Department of Science and Technology
(DST), Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Government of
India, bearing project number SERB/EMR/2015/000255.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge ICMR, Port Blair
India for providing the Leptospira strains
and Dr. Nitin Chaudhary, Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati Guwahati (IIT Guwahati) for
providing help in recording and analyzing the DLS experiments. We
acknowledge the Central Instruments Facility, IIT Guwahati for ITC
measurements. We would also like to thank the Department of Microbiology,
College of Veterinary Science, Guwahati, for generating polyclonal
antibodies.

Abbreviations
Clpcaseinolytic protease

AAA+ATPases associated with
various cellular activities

qRT-PCRquantitative real time polymerase chain reaction

AMC7-amino-4-methylcoumarin

Suc-LY-AMCN-succinyl-Leu-Tyr-AMC

Suc-LLVY-AMCN-succinyl-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC

FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate

ITCisothermal titration
calorimetry

Kddissociation constant

SECsize exclusion chromatography

PAGEpolyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis

SDSsodium dodecyl sulphate

DLSdynamic light scattering

ATPadenosine 5′-triphosphate

ATPγSadenosine 5’-(3-thiotriphosphate)

ELISAenzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay

HRPhorse radish peroxidase
==== Refs
References
Bharti A. R. ; Nally J. E. ; Ricaldi J. N. ; Matthias M. A. ; Diaz M. M. ; Lovett M. A. ; Levett P. N. ; Gilman R. H. ; Willig M. R. ; Gotuzzo E. ; Vinetz J. M. 
Leptospirosis:
a zoonotic disease
of global importance . Lancet Infect. Dis. 
2003 , 3 , 757 –771 . 10.1016/s1473-3099(03)00830-2 .14652202 
Costa F. ; Hagan J. E. ; Calcagno J. ; Kane M. ; Torgerson P. ; Martinez-Silveira M. S. ; Stein C. ; Abela-Ridder B. ; Ko A. I. 
Global morbidity
and mortality of leptospirosis: a systematic review . PLoS Neglected Trop. Dis. 
2015 , 9 , e000389810.1371/journal.pntd.0003898 .
Victoriano A. F. B. ; Smythe L. D. ; Gloriani-Barzaga N. ; Cavinta L. L. ; Kasai T. ; Limpakarnjanarat K. ; Ong B. L. ; Gongal G. ; Hall J. ; Coulombe C. A. 
Leptospirosis
in the Asia Pacific region . BMC Infect. Dis. 
2009 , 9 , 147 10.1186/1471-2334-9-147 .19732423 
Torgerson P. R. ; Hagan J. E. ; Costa F. ; Calcagno J. ; Kane M. ; Martinez-Silveira M. S. ; Goris M. G. A. ; Stein C. ; Ko A. I. ; Abela-Ridder B. 
Global burden of leptospirosis: estimated in terms
of disability adjusted life years . PLoS Neglected
Trop. Dis. 
2015 , 9 , e000412210.1371/journal.pntd.0004122 .
Ellis W. A.  Animal leptospirosis . In Leptospira and Leptospirosis ; Springer , 2015 ; Vol. 387 , pp 99 -137 .
Picardeau M.  Genomics, proteomics,
and genetics of leptospira . In Leptospira
and Leptospirosis , Springer , 2015 ; pp 43 –63 .
Hensel M. ; Shea J. ; Gleeson C. ; Jones M. ; Dalton E. ; Holden D. 
Simultaneous identification
of bacterial virulence
genes by negative selection . Science 
1995 , 269 , 400 –403 . 10.1126/science.7618105 .7618105 
Mei J.-M. ; Nourbakhsh F. ; Ford C. W. ; Holden D. W. 
Identification
of
Staphylococcus aureus virulence genes in a murine model of bacteraemia
using signature-tagged mutagenesis . Mol. Microbiol. 
1997 , 26 , 399 –407 . 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.5911966.x .9383163 
Frees D. ; Qazi S. N. A. ; Hill P. J. ; Ingmer H. 
Alternative roles of
ClpX and ClpP in Staphylococcus aureus stress tolerance and virulence . Mol. Microbiol. 
2003 , 48 , 1565 –1578 . 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03524.x .12791139 
Zhao B.-b. ; Li X.-h. ; Zeng Y.-l. ; Lu Y.-j. 
ClpP-deletion impairs
the virulence of Legionella pneumophila and the optimal translocation
of effector proteins . BMC Microbiol. 
2016 , 16 , 174 10.1186/s12866-016-0790-8 .27484084 
Gaillot O. ; Pellegrini E. ; Bregenholt S. ; Nair S. ; Berche P. 
The ClpP serine
protease is essential for the intracellular parasitism and virulence
of Listeria monocytogenes . Mol. Microbiol. 
2000 , 35 , 1286 –1294 . 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01773.x .10760131 
Kwon H.-Y. ; Ogunniyi A. D. ; Choi M.-H. ; Pyo S.-N. ; Rhee D.-K. ; Paton J. C. 
The ClpP protease
of Streptococcus pneumoniae modulates
virulence gene expression and protects against fatal pneumococcal
challenge . Infect. Immun. 
2004 , 72 , 5646 –5653 . 10.1128/iai.72.10.5646-5653.2004 .15385462 
Sassetti C. M. ; Boyd D. H. ; Rubin E. J. 
Genes required
for mycobacterial
growth defined by high density mutagenesis . Mol. Microbiol. 
2003 , 48 , 77 –84 . 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03425.x .12657046 
Bhandari V. ; Wong K. S. ; Zhou J. L. ; Mabanglo M. F. ; Batey R. A. ; Houry W. A. 
The Role of ClpP
Protease in Bacterial Pathogenesis
and Human Diseases . ACS Chem. Biol. 
2018 , 13 , 1413 10.1021/acschembio.8b00124 .29775273 
Frees D. ; Qazi S. N. A. ; Hill P. J. ; Ingmer H. 
Alternative
roles of
ClpX and ClpP in Staphylococcus aureus stress tolerance and virulence . Mol. Microbiol. 
2003 , 48 , 1565 –1578 . 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2003.03524.x .12791139 
Dong S.-L. ; Hu W.-L. ; Ge Y.-M. ; Ojcius D. M. ; Lin X. ; Yan J. 
A leptospiral AAA+ chaperone–Ntn peptidase complex, HslUV,
contributes to the intracellular survival of Leptospira interrogans
in hosts and the transmission of leptospirosis . Emerging Microbes Infect. 
2017 , 6 , e10510.1038/emi.2017.93 .
Olivares A. O. ; Baker T. A. ; Sauer R. T. 
Mechanical
Protein Unfolding and
Degradation . Annu. Rev. Physiol. 
2018 , 80 , 413 –429 . 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021317-121303 .29433415 
Gottesman S. ; Clark W. P. ; de Crecy-Lagard V. ; Maurizi M. R. 
ClpX, an alternative
subunit for the ATP-dependent Clp protease of Escherichia coli. Sequence
and in vivo activities . J. Biol. Chem. 
1993 , 268 , 22618 –22626 .8226770 
Maurizi M. R. ; Singh S. K. ; Thompson M. W. ; Kessel M. ; Ginsburg A. 
Molecular
Properties of ClpAP Protease ofEscherichia coli: ATP-Dependent Association
of ClpA and ClpP . Biochemistry 
1998 , 37 , 7778 –7786 . 10.1021/bi973093e .9601038 
Neher S. B. ; Sauer R. T. ; Baker T. A. 
Distinct peptide signals in the UmuD
and UmuD’ subunits of UmuD/D’ mediate tethering and
substrate processing by the ClpXP protease . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2003 , 100 , 13219 –13224 . 10.1073/pnas.2235804100 .14595014 
Battesti A. ; Hoskins J. R. ; Tong S. ; Milanesio P. ; Mann J. M. ; Kravats A. ; Tsegaye Y. M. ; Bougdour A. ; Wickner S. ; Gottesman S. 
Anti-adaptors provide multiple modes
for regulation of the RssB adaptor protein . Genes Dev. 
2013 , 27 , 2722 –2735 . 10.1101/gad.229617.113 .24352426 
Kress W. ; Maglica Ž. ; Weber-Ban E. 
Clp chaperone-proteases:
structure
and function . Res. Microbiol. 
2009 , 160 , 618 –628 . 10.1016/j.resmic.2009.08.006 .19732826 
Lourdault K. ; Cerqueira G. M. ; Wunder E. A. ; Picardeau M. 
Inactivation
of clpB in the pathogen Leptospira interrogans reduces virulence and
resistance to stress conditions . Infect. Immun. 
2011 , 79 , 3711 –3717 . 10.1128/iai.05168-11 .21730091 
Liu P. ; Zhang H. ; Lv M. ; Hu M. ; Li Z. ; Gao C. ; Xu P. ; Ma C. 
Enzymatic production of 5-aminovalerate
from L-lysine using L-lysine monooxygenase and 5-aminovaleramide amidohydrolase . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 5657 10.1038/srep05657 .25012259 
Wickner S. ; Maurizi M. R. ; Gottesman S. 
Posttranslational
quality control:
folding, refolding, and degrading proteins . Science 
1999 , 286 , 1888 –1893 . 10.1126/science.286.5446.1888 .10583944 
Gersch M. ; List A. ; Groll M. ; Sieber S. A. 
Insights into the
structural network responsible for oligomerization and activity Of
the bacterial virulence regulator caseinolytic protease P (ClpP) . J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 9484 –9494 . 10.1074/jbc.m111.336222 .22291011 
Culp E. ; Wright G. D. 
Bacterial proteases, untapped antimicrobial drug targets . J. Antibiot. 
2017 , 70 , 366 10.1038/ja.2016.138 .27899793 
Frees D. ; Gerth U. ; Ingmer H. 
Clp chaperones
and proteases are
central in stress survival, virulence and antibiotic resistance of
Staphylococcus aureus . Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 
2014 , 304 , 142 –149 . 10.1016/j.ijmm.2013.11.009 .24457183 
Viala J. ; Mazodier P. 
The ATPase ClpX is
conditionally involved in the morphological
differentiation of Streptomyces lividans . Mol.
Genet. Genomics 
2003 , 268 , 563 –569 . 10.1007/s00438-002-0783-1 .12589431 
Gersch M. ; Stahl M. ; Poreba M. ; Dahmen M. ; Dziedzic A. ; Drag M. ; Sieber S. A. 
Barrel-shaped
ClpP Proteases Display
Attenuated Cleavage Specificities . ACS Chem.
Biol. 
2016 , 11 , 389 –399 . 10.1021/acschembio.5b00757 .26606371 
Malik I. T. ; Brötz-Oesterhelt H. 
Conformational
control of the bacterial
Clp protease by natural product antibiotics . Nat. Prod. Rep. 
2017 , 34 , 815 –831 . 10.1039/c6np00125d .28375422 
Hall B. M. ; Breidenstein E. B. M. ; de la Fuente-Núñez C. ; Reffuveille F. ; Mawla G. D. ; Hancock R. E. W. ; Baker T. A.  , Two isoforms
of Clp peptidase in Pseudomonas aeruginosa control distinct aspects
of cellular physiology . J. Bacteriol. 2016 , 199 , 10.1128/jb.00568-16 
Raju R. M. ; Unnikrishnan M. ; Rubin D. H. F. ; Krishnamoorthy V. ; Kandror O. ; Akopian T. N. ; Goldberg A. L. ; Rubin E. J. 
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis ClpP1 and ClpP2 Function Together in Protein Degradation
and Are Required for Viability in vitro and During Infection . PLoS Pathog. 
2012 , 8 , e100251110.1371/journal.ppat.1002511 .22359499 
Wood N. A. ; Chung K. ; Rodrigues de Almeida N. ; Conda-Sheridan M. ; Fisher D. J. ; Ouellette S. P.  , Initial Characterization of the Two ClpP Paralogs of Chlamydia trachomatis
Suggests Unique Functionality for Each . J
Bacteriol. 2018 , 201  (), 10.1128/jb.00635-18 
Maurizi M. R. ; Clark W. P. ; Katayama Y. ; Rudikoff S. ; Pumphrey J. ; Bowers B. ; Gottesman S. 
Sequence and
structure of Clp P,
the proteolytic component of the ATP-dependent Clp protease of Escherichia
coli . J. Biol. Chem. 
1990 , 265 , 12536 –12545 .2197275 
Akopian T. ; Kandror O. ; Raju R. M. ; Unnikrishnan M. ; Rubin E. J. ; Goldberg A. L. 
The active ClpP
protease fromM. tuberculosisis
a complex composed of a heptameric ClpP1 and a ClpP2 ring . EMBO J. 
2012 , 31 , 1529 –1541 . 10.1038/emboj.2012.5 .22286948 
Zeiler E. ; List A. ; Alte F. ; Gersch M. ; Wachtel R. ; Poreba M. ; Drag M. ; Groll M. ; Sieber S. A. 
Structural
and functional insights into caseinolytic proteases reveal an unprecedented
regulation principle of their catalytic triad . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 11302 –11307 . 10.1073/pnas.1219125110 .23798410 
Picardeau M. ; Bulach D. M. ; Bouchier C. ; Zuerner R. L. ; Zidane N. ; Wilson P. J. ; Creno S. ; Kuczek E. S. ; Bommezzadri S. ; Davis J. C. ; McGrath A. ; Johnson M. J. ; Boursaux-Eude C. ; Seemann T. ; Rouy Z. ; Coppel R. L. ; Rood J. I. ; Lajus A. ; Davies J. K. ; Médigue C. ; Adler B. 
Genome sequence of the saprophyte Leptospira biflexa provides insights
into the evolution of Leptospira and the pathogenesis of leptospirosis . PLoS One 
2008 , 3 , e160710.1371/journal.pone.0001607 .18270594 
Krajewska J. ; Modrak-Wójcik A. ; Arent Z. J. ; Więckowski D. ; Zolkiewski M. ; Bzowska A. ; Kędzierska-Mieszkowska S. 
Characterization
of the molecular chaperone ClpB from the pathogenic spirochaete Leptospira
interrogans . PLoS One 
2017 , 12 , e018111810.1371/journal.pone.0181118 .28700685 
Woo K. M. ; Chung W. J. ; Ha D. B. ; Goldberg A. L. ; Chung C. H. 
Protease
Ti from Escherichia coli requires ATP hydrolysis for protein breakdown
but not for hydrolysis of small peptides . J.
Biol. Chem. 
1989 , 264 , 2088 –2091 .2644253 
Li M. ; Kandror O. ; Akopian T. ; Dharkar P. ; Wlodawer A. ; Maurizi M. R. ; Goldberg A. L. 
Structure
and Functional Properties
of the Active Form of the Proteolytic Complex, ClpP1P2, fromMycobacterium
tuberculosis . J. Biol. Chem. 
2016 , 291 , 7465 –7476 . 10.1074/jbc.m115.700344 .26858247 
Lavey N. P. ; Shadid T. ; Ballard J. ; Duerfeldt A. S. 
Clostridium
difficile ClpP Homologs are Capable of Uncoupled Activity and Exhibit
Different Levels of Susceptibility to Acyldepsipeptide Modulation . ACS Infect. Dis. 
2018 , 5 , 79 –89 . 10.1021/acsinfecdis.8b00199 .30411608 
Pierce M. M. ; Raman C. S. ; Nall B. T. 
Isothermal
titration calorimetry
of protein-protein interactions . Methods 
1999 , 19 , 213 –221 . 10.1006/meth.1999.0852 .10527727 
Velazquez-Campoy A. ; Leavitt S. A. ; Freire E. 
Characterization of
protein-protein
interactions by isothermal titration calorimetry . Methods Mol. Biol. 
2015 , 1278 , 183 –204 . 10.1007/978-1-4939-2425-7_11 .25859950 
Ka D. ; Lee H. ; Jung Y.-D. ; Kim K. ; Seok C. ; Suh N. ; Bae E. 
Crystal Structure of
Streptococcus pyogenes Cas1 and Its Interaction
with Csn2 in the Type II CRISPR-Cas System . Structure 
2016 , 24 , 70 –79 . 10.1016/j.str.2015.10.019 .26671707 
Nuñez J. K. ; Kranzusch P. J. ; Noeske J. ; Wright A. V. ; Davies C. W. ; Doudna J. A. 
Cas1-Cas2
complex formation mediates spacer acquisition
during CRISPR-Cas adaptive immunity . Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 
2014 , 21 , 528 10.1038/nsmb.2820 .24793649 
Stanne T. M. ; Pojidaeva E. ; Andersson F. I. ; Clarke A. K. 
Distinctive Types
of ATP-dependent Clp Proteases in Cyanobacteria . J. Biol. Chem. 
2007 , 282 , 14394 –14402 . 10.1074/jbc.m700275200 .17371875 
Andersson F. I. ; Tryggvesson A. ; Sharon M. ; Diemand A. V. ; Classen M. ; Best C. ; Schmidt R. ; Schelin J. ; Stanne T. M. ; Bukau B. ; Robinson C. V. ; Witt S. ; Mogk A. ; Clarke A. K. 
Structure
and Function of a Novel Type of ATP-dependent
Clp Protease . J. Biol. Chem. 
2009 , 284 , 13519 –13532 . 10.1074/jbc.m809588200 .19237538 
Burton R. E. ; Baker T. A. ; Sauer R. T. 
Energy-dependent degradation: Linkage
between ClpX-catalyzed nucleotide hydrolysis and protein-substrate
processing . Protein Sci. 
2003 , 12 , 893 –902 . 10.1110/ps.0237603 .12717012 
Hwang B. J. ; Woo K. M. ; Goldberg A. L. ; Chung C. H. 
Protease Ti, a new
ATP-dependent protease in Escherichia coli, contains protein-activated
ATPase and proteolytic functions in distinct subunits . J. Biol. Chem. 
1988 , 263 , 8727 –8734 .2967816 
Martin A. ; Baker T. A. ; Sauer R. T. 
Protein unfolding by a AAA+ protease
is dependent on ATP-hydrolysis rates and substrate energy landscapes . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2008 , 15 , 139 10.1038/nsmb.1380 .18223658 
Baker T. A. ; Sauer R. T. 
ClpXP, an ATP-powered
unfolding and protein-degradation
machine . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Res. 
2012 , 1823 , 15 –28 . 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.06.007 .
Raju R. M. ; Goldberg A. L. ; Rubin E. J. 
Bacterial
proteolytic complexes as
therapeutic targets . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2012 , 11 , 777 10.1038/nrd3846 .23023677 
Akopian T. ; Kandror O. ; Tsu C. ; Lai J. H. ; Wu W. ; Liu Y. ; Zhao P. ; Park A. ; Wolf L. ; Dick L. R. ; Rubin E. J. ; Bachovchin W. ; Goldberg A. L. 
Cleavage Specificity
ofMycobacterium tuberculosisClpP1P2 Protease and Identification of
Novel Peptide Substrates and Boronate Inhibitors with Anti-bacterial
Activity . J. Biol. Chem. 
2015 , 290 , 11008 –11020 . 10.1074/jbc.m114.625640 .25759383 
Dixit B. ; Ghosh K. K. ; Fernandes G. ; Kumar P. ; Gogoi P. ; Kumar M. 
Dual nuclease activity of a Cas2 protein in CRISPR-Cas subtype I-B
ofLeptospira interrogans . FEBS Lett. 
2016 , 590 , 1002 –1016 . 10.1002/1873-3468.12124 .26950513 
Ghosh K. K. ; Prakash A. ; Balamurugan V. ; Kumar M. 
Catecholamine-Modulated
Novel Surface-Exposed Adhesin LIC20035 of Leptospira spp. Binds Host
Extracellular Matrix Components and Is Recognized by the Host during
Infection . Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
2018 , 84 , e0236010.1128/aem.02360-17 .29269501 
Kelly S. M. ; Jess T. J. ; Price N. C. 
How to study proteins
by circular
dichroism . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Proteins
Proteomics 
2005 , 1751 , 119 –139 . 10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.06.005 .
Consortium U. 
UniProt: a
hub for protein information . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 43 , D204 –D212 . 10.1093/nar/gku989 .25348405 
Sievers F. ; Wilm A. ; Dineen D. ; Gibson T. J. ; Karplus K. ; Li W. ; Lopez R. ; McWilliam H. ; Remmert M. ; Söding J. 
Fast, scalable
generation of high-quality protein multiple sequence alignments using
Clustal Omega . Mol. Syst. Biol. 
2011 , 7 , 539 10.1038/msb.2011.75 .21988835 
Robert X. ; Gouet P. 
Deciphering key features in protein structures with the new ENDscript
server . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , W320 –W324 . 10.1093/nar/gku316 .24753421 
Berman H. M. ; Westbrook J. ; Feng Z. ; Gilliland G. ; Bhat T. N. ; Weissig H. ; Shindyalov I. N. ; Bourne P. E. 
The protein data bank . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
2000 , 28 , 235 –242 . 10.1093/nar/28.1.235 .10592235 
Preissler S. ; Chambers J. E. ; Crespillo-Casado A. ; Avezov E. ; Miranda E. ; Perez J. ; Hendershot L. M. ; Harding H. P. ; Ron D. 
Physiological
modulation of BiP activity by trans-protomer engagement of the interdomain
linker . Elife 
2015 , 4 , e0896110.7554/elife.08961 .26473973 
LaBreck C. J. ; May S. ; Viola M. G. ; Conti J. ; Camberg J. L. 
The Protein Chaperone
ClpX Targets Native and Non-native Aggregated Substrates for Remodeling,
Disassembly, and Degradation with ClpP . Front.
Mol. Biosci. 
2017 , 4 , 26 10.3389/fmolb.2017.00026 .28523271

