
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3168190410.1021/acsomega.9b01335ArticleSynthesis of Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam)-Based Microgels by
Precipitation Polymerization: Pseudo-Bulk Model for Particle Growth and Size
Distribution Janssen Franca A. L. †Kather Michael ‡§∥Ksiazkiewicz Agnieszka ‡Pich Andrij ‡§Mitsos Alexander *††Aachener Verfahrenstechnik—Process Systems
Engineering and ‡Institute of Technical and Macromolecular Chemistry,
RWTH Aachen University, 52056 Aachen,
Germany§ DWI—Leibniz-Institute for
Interactive Materials, 52056 Aachen, Germany* E-mail: amitsos@alum.mit.edu.13 08 2019 27 08 2019 4 9 13795 13807 09 05 2019 22 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No
Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and
creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Particle size distribution and in particular the mean particle size are key properties
of microgels, which are determined by synthesis conditions. To describe particle growth
and particle size distribution over the progress of synthesis of
poly(N-vinylcaprolactam)-based microgels, a pseudo-bulk model for
precipitation copolymerization with cross-linking is formulated. The model is fitted and
compared to experimental data from reaction calorimetry and dynamic light scattering,
showing good agreement with polymerization progress, final particle size, and narrow
particle size distribution. Predictions of particle growth and reaction progress for
different experimental setups are compared to the corresponding experimental data,
demonstrating the predictive capability and limitations of the model. The comparison to
reaction calorimetry measurements shows the strength in the prediction of the overall
polymerization progress. The results for the prediction of the particle radii reveal
significant deviations and highlight the demand for further investigation, including
additional data.

document-id-old-9ao9b01335document-id-new-14ao-2019-01335mccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) (PVCL)-based nano- and microgels are
thermoresponsive, biocompatible, and easily functionalized.1 In
consequence, PVCL-based microgels are under investigation for versatile applications,
ranging from microgel-coated membranes2 to nanocoatings for
biointerfaces.3 However, each application demands a specific microgel
size, typically from a few nanometers to several micrometers, with a narrow particle size
distribution (PSD).4 In conclusion, particle size distribution and
particularly the mean particle size are important properties of microgels that need to be
controlled by the synthesis operation.

Batch precipitation polymerization is a simple and common method for the synthesis of
PVCL-based microgels and allows narrow particle size distributions.5 All
reactants are initially dissolved in a solvent, typically water. The thermal initiator,
2,2′-azobis(2-methylpropionamidine) dihydrochloride (AMPA), initiates the free
radical cross-linking copolymerization reaction of VCL and the cross-linker,
N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide (BIS). Dissolved
oligomers collapse due to a lower solubility of oligomers with higher chain lengths and form
precursor particles. At this stage, the homogeneous system with dissolved oligomers
transfers into a heterogeneous system with a continuous aqueous phase and disperse polymer
particles. The precursor particles continue to grow until the final microgels are obtained.
With internal cross-linking by the incorporated cross-linker, stable microgels are obtained,
which can undergo reversible swelling and collapse. Growth of the polymer particles thereby
is a combination of several simultaneous mechanisms illustrated in Figure
1: polymerization by absorption of the monomer and cross-linker
and chain propagation reactions in the microgels, entry and desorption of oligomers, as well
as coagulation among the growing particles.

Figure 1 Illustration of different particle growth mechanisms contributing to microgel growth in
a precipitation polymerization: nucleation (rate Rnuc),
monomer absorption (partition coefficient DM), radical
absorption and desorption (rates Re and
Rdes), and particle coagulation (rate
Rcoag).

The different growth mechanisms determine the characteristics of the particle size
distribution. However, the contributions of the individual growth mechanisms are not fully
understood yet. A better understanding of growth mechanisms will enable the targeted
synthesis of predefined microgel sizes by a tailored process operation. For this purpose,
process modeling and simulation is a valuable tool to complement experimental
investigations.

Several experimental studies address the effects of different operation conditions of the
PVCL-based microgel synthesis on the obtained microgel sizes. Imaz and Forcada (2008)
provide a fundamental study of the impact of concentrations of monomer, cross-linker,
initiator, and surfactant as well as temperature in emulsion polymerization. They report
that increasing cross-linker and initiator concentrations lead to increasing microgel
diameters, whereas an increase of the surfactant concentration results in smaller
diameters.6 In a consecutive study, the effects of different
cross-linker types, BIS and the biocompatible cross-linker poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate,
and their respective concentrations on the particle size are compared.7
Schneider et al. (2014) characterize the particle size in relation to the cross-linker
concentration for precipitation polymerization, with particular focus on the radial
heterogeneous cross-link distribution within the particles and the resulting swelling
behavior.8 These studies emphasize the multitude of influencing factors
of the final microgel sizes.

So far, only a few models have been proposed for microgel synthesis. The focus of these
contributions is rather the internal copolymer composition of microgels such as
cross-linking density, whereas little attention has been paid to particle size
(distribution). Hoare and McLean (2006) propose a kinetic model for the prediction of the
internal microgel structure of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM)-based
microgels. The study correlates the solution polymerization reaction rates of NIPAM with
several comonomers with the local polymer composition9 and employs this
approach to further adjust the microgel internal copolymer composition.10
With the assumptions of a monodisperse particle size distribution and the lacking onset of
gelation, solution polymerization kinetics can be applied to describe a surfactant-free
emulsion polymerization of PNIPAM-based microgels. Similarly, Acciaro et al. (2011) employ
the solution polymerization rate constants of PNIPAM-based microgels to obtain information
on the internal distribution as microgel growth is assumed to occur by polymerization on the
surface of the particles.11 Based on reaction rates of the solution
copolymerization, a feeding strategy is determined to synthesize homogeneously cross-linked
microgels. Likewise, assuming the solution polymerization mechanism, Virtanen et al. (2015)
provide empirical equations to predict the particle number density and, hence, particle size
of PNIPAM-based microgels depending on the monomer and initiator concentration.12

In contrast to these solution-polymerization-based models, a two-phase-based model for the
precipitation polymerization of PVCL-based microgels was presented in our previous
work.13 The model distinguishes between an aqueous liquid and a
polymer-rich gel phase, whereas the mass transfer among the phases is described by
precipitation at critical chain length. Comparing the impact of the polymerization reactions
in gel to the liquid phase, the gel phase is identified as the primary reaction locus. The
growth of the gel phase related to the cross-linking reaction provides a prediction of the
internal cross-linking distribution. In an enhancement, the model is adapted to
PVCL–PNIPAM-based microgels for a coarse prediction of the internal comonomer
distribution.14

All of the previous models for microgel synthesis share in their prediction of particle
growth the assumption of a uniform particle size. The narrow particle size distribution is
mechanistically explained by a short particle formation phase, after which the formed
microgels are considered to grow evenly. However, this assumption lacks a mechanistic
description of the microgel formation and, in particular, prevents the description of the
period of precipitation and coagulation, the number of formed microgels, and their size and
particle size distribution. This information can be captured by population balance equation
(PBE) models.

PBE models are widely applied for emulsion polymerization.15−18 They can be subdivided
into 0-1 models and pseudo-bulk models based on the number of radicals present in a polymer
particle. In 0-1 models, only polymer particles with either no or a single radical exist as
the radical undergoes immediate termination in the presence of a second
radical.19−21 Hence, they are generally
recommended for disperse systems with small particle sizes, unless the radical propagation
is fast.17,18

In contrast, pseudo-bulk models have no limitation regarding the number of radicals.
Instead, an average number of radicals for particles of the same radius is assumed. The
assumptions of pseudo-bulk models are often controversially discussed due to lack of
accuracy for small particles,17 which has a large impact on the
prediction of particle formation, and alternative modifications have been proposed to
overcome this issue.22 However, the pseudo-bulk model is the most general
formulation and, hence, more suited to describe the entire conversion range.18 Araujo et al. (2001) presented a pseudo-bulk model for copolymerization with
coagulation. Therein, colloidal stability of the polymer particles is expressed in terms of
stable particles, which are unable to undergo coagulation with other stable particles.
Immanuel et al. (2002) provide a comprehensive first-principle pseudo-bulk model for the
seeded emulsion polymerization of vinyl acetate with butyl acrylate. In addition to micellar
nucleation, homogeneous nucleation due to precipitation is considered while coagulation is
neglected.23 In a subsequent contribution, they extend the pseudo-bulk
model by coagulation under the impact of a sterical stabilizer.24
Kiparissides et al. (2002) apply a pseudo-bulk model to describe the impact of oxygen on the
particle size distribution of vinyl chloride-based latex particles.25
Brunier et al. (2017) apply the pseudo-bulk model for emulsion polymerization.26 The focus of their contribution is on ongoing diffusion limitation within
the gel particles, beginning with the gel effect and leading to full stagnation of the
polymerization by the emerging glass effect. The drawback of the lacking accuracy is avoided
by neglecting the first interval of emulsion polymerization and coagulation, focusing on
preexisting and stable particles. In summary, pseudo-bulk models are probably the most
applied models for emulsion polymerization systems.

In this work, a pseudo-bulk polymerization model is employed for the synthesis of
PVCL-based microgels. Several considerations argue in favor of the pseudo-bulk model for
this purpose. First, Wu (1994) and Varga et al. (2001) concluded for NIPAM-based microgels
that more than one radical can be present in a growing microgel.27,28 Further, when the termination is not
the rate-determining step in the overall polymerization progress, pseudo-bulk models are
favorable over zero-one models.17 The previously determined termination
rate constants in the gel phase were low, as is usually the case with diffusion-controlled
termination, and hence, polymerization is rate determining.13,14 Finally, more explicit models such as 0-1-2,
0-1-2-3, or hybrid 0-1-pseudo-bulk models require population balances for more particle
species, distinguished by their respective number of radicals.22,29,30 This comes with
high computational cost, especially when parameter estimations are performed. Hence, the
pseudo-bulk model comes in handy for this first-time investigation.

From the well-established emulsion polymerization models, mechanisms such as the
homogeneous nucleation by precipitation of oligomers can be adapted to describe
precipitation polymerization. The following chapter presents the first pseudo-bulk model to
describe precipitation copolymerization with internal cross-linking for the synthesis of
PVCL-based microgels. The model uses well-established descriptions for the growth
mechanisms’ radical entry, radical desorption, and coagulation. A parameter
estimation is performed to determine the contributions of radical entry, desorption, and
coagulation from experimental data. Therein, the central question is whether the model can
equally be fitted to the experimental data from reaction calorimetry while simultaneously
achieving the experimental particle size with a narrow particle size distribution. With the
estimated parameter values, simulations for different initial initiator and cross-linker
concentrations as well as reaction temperatures are performed and compared to experimental
data to evaluate the qualification of the pseudo-bulk model for this purpose.

Modeling Particle Size Distribution for Precipitation Polymerization
Central to the pseudo-bulk model is the population balance equation
(PBE) 1  which
describes the particle number density F(r,
t) in moles as a function of the particle radius r and
time t (cf. refs (15,
16)). For simplicity, time dependence of variables is
not stated explicitly in the following. The time derivative of
F(r, t) is a function of the velocity
of radial particle growth v(r), nucleation with rate
Rnuc(r), and coagulation among particles with
rate Rcoag(r). Particle nucleation therein
occurs exclusively at the nucleation radius rnuc, which is
expressed by the Kronecker delta function
δrnuc,r. Integration of
F(r, t) over the particle radius
provides the absolute number of particles
Npar 2  where
NA is the Avogadro constant and V is the
volume of the reactor content.

The free radical copolymerization reactions assumed to take place in both phases are listed
in Table 1. Therein, the basic assumptions
concerning the polymerization reactions are based on our previous work.13
The species initiator I, initiator radicals I•, monomers
Mi, radicals Ri, pendant double
bonds PDB, and dead polymer P refer to the respective phase (liquid phase l and gel
particles g). The indices i, j correspond to the species
of the monomer or terminal end of the radical (i, j = 1
for VCL and i, j = 2 for BIS), and n and
m denote the length of the radical or polymer.

Table 1 Reactions of Free Radical Copolymerization Occurring in Both Phases (Liquid Phase l
and Gel Particles g)a
reaction	 	
initiator decompositionb	  	
initiation	  	
chain propagation	  	
chain transfer to monomer	  	
terminationc	  	
cross-linking	  	
a The indices i, j correspond to the respective
species of monomer or terminal end (i, j = 1 for VCL
and i, j = 2 for BIS).

b For the initiation reaction of initiator radicals and monomers applies the initiator
efficiency fI.

c Termination modeled by the disproportionation mechanism and
ktij =
(ktiiktjj)0.5.

Based on the reaction mechanisms above, the terms of the pseudo-bulk model are formulated
in the following. First, the formulation of particle nucleation, represented by
Rnuc in eq 1, is
described as well as the consecutive monomer partitioning between the liquid phase and the
recently formed particles. Then, particle growth due to ongoing polymerization, represented
by v(r), and, in this context, the average number of
particles with radical entry and desorption are described. Further, the formulation for the
coagulation rate Rcoag in eq 1 is established, before a population balance equation for the PDB of the
cross-linker is introduced to account for the cross-linking reactions in the particles.
Finally, the calculations of the reaction enthalpy transfer rate and properties of particle
size distribution for the connection of the model and experimental data are described.

Particle Nucleation and Monomer Partitioning
The nucleation rate Rnuc in eq 1 describes the formation of precursor particles. These particles are
formed when the dissolved oligomers precipitate due to lower solubility at high chain
length. Corresponding to the homogeneous nucleation in emulsion polymerization, this is
expressed by the propagation beyond a discrete critical chain length with η
repeating units (cf. refs (23,
31)). Hence, the nucleation rate is obtained
by 3  with
kpijl as the propagation rate constant of monomers of type j with
radicals with terminal end i, cRηl as the concentration of
radicals with length η, pil as the fraction of radicals with
terminal end of species i, cMjl as concentrations
of monomers of species j, and Vl as the
volume of the liquid phase. The derivation of pil and cRηl based on the
quasi-homopolymerization approach32 and the quasi-steady state
assumption is described in the Supporting Information SI I.

The nucleation radius rnuc is calculated assuming spherical
precursor particles. Each precursor particle consists of one oligomer with η
repeating units, each with the molar mass Mw,unit (cf.
Supporting Information SI I, eq S13), and with a residue water mass fraction
wWg. 4  The
density ρg of the microgel particle is derived from the polymer density
ρP and the water density ρW under the assumption of
incompressible volumes of water and
polymer. 5  The
total volume of the reactor content V consists of the volumes of the two
phases V = Vl +
Vg. The volume of the gel phase
Vg is calculated by the integral of the volumes of the
individual particles
Vp(r) 6  where Vp(r)
is calculated by Vp(r) =
4/3πr3.

For smaller molecules involved in the reactions in Table 1, such as initiator I, monomer M1 and cross-linker
M2, transport limitations are neglected and the concentrations in the liquid
phase and gel particles are assumed to be determined by phase equilibrium. A similar
assumption is proposed by Arosio et al. (2011).33 This is represented
by the partition coefficient
Do. 7  Hence, the balances for the overall amount of substance
n and the concentrations c in the respective phases
can be formulated
as 8   9   10  where kd is the initiator
decomposition rate and kfmij denotes the
chain transfer to monomer rate constants of radicals with terminal end i
and monomer of species j. cλ0l represents the concentration of
radicals in the liquid phase (cf. Supporting Information SI I), n̅(r)
represents the average number of radicals in a particle of radius r, and
pj is the fraction of radicals of species
j in the respective phase. The temperature dependence of the
initiation, chain propagation, and chain transfer to monomer reaction rate constants is
expressed in terms of the Arrhenius
equation 11  where A is the frequency factor,
EA is the activation energy, R is the
universal gas constant, and T is the reaction temperature.

Particle Growth
The particles continue to grow by chain propagation of the radicals inside a particle.
Hence, the radial growth rate of particles with radius r results from the
addition of polymer volume and
water 12  where pig and cMjg denote
the species of terminal end of the radical and the monomer concentration in the gel phase,
respectively. The average number of radicals per particle
n̅(r) in eq 12 is derived from the Smith–Ewart theory,34,35 for which steady state is
assumed 13  The
rates of formed and entered radicals per particle, RIp(r) and Rep(r), equal the rates
of exited and terminated radicals, Rdesp(r) and Rtp(r), with the last two being
functions of n̅(r). The superscript p represents
that these rates refer to individual particles of size r. As a
consequence of initiator partitioning, eq 13 also
includes the radical formation by initiator decomposition in the
particle 14  with initiator efficiency fIg. The termination rate in a particle
with the pseudo-bulk assumption and for copolymerization (cf. refs (23, 34)) 15  includes the termination rate constants
ktijg, which is distinguished into the chemical termination contribution
(=ktijl) and a diffusion-controlled contribution (ktiidiff) by
ktiig–1 = ktiil–1 +
ktiidiff–1.36 The diffusion-controlled contribution is
assumed to be independent of conversion as a high polymer content ensues immediately from
precipitation in the particles.13

Radical Entry and Desorption
The entry of oligomers from the liquid phase into a particle is described by the entry
rate Rep(r). For Rep(r), we employ the diffusion-controlled
radical capture model by Smith and Ewart34 16  which assumes that diffusion of oligomers in the
liquid phase determines radical entry. The diffusion coefficient of monomers in the
liquid phase, DWi, is adjusted by the
average oligomer length navgl (cf. Supporting Information SI I, eq S3) in the liquid phase to describe the
diffusion coefficient of oligomers. fe is an efficiency
factor to compensate for the overprediction of the radical capture model.35

For the radical desorption rate Rdesp(r) from a single particle, a simple form of
the radical desorption model proposed by Harada et al. (1971) is applied.37 17  Therein, only monomeric radicals formed by chain
transfer to monomer can desorb from the particles. Desorption, described by the
equilibrium radical desorption coefficient
k0i for the monomeric radicals of species
i, competes with chain propagation, which is expressed in terms of
probability. k0i depends on the diffusion
coefficients DWi and
DP in water and polymer, respectively, and the partition
coefficients DMi according to the relation
established by Harada et al. (1971)37 18  

Particle Coagulation
The particle coagulation rate Rcoag(r)
combines formation and depletion of particles with radius r. Depletion
describes the loss of particles due to their aggregation with other particles. Formation
accounts for the gain of particles due to the aggregation of smaller particles. The
coagulation rate is employed as described by Immanuel et al. (2003).38 19  The
radii of the aggregating particles are therein related by the combined volume, which
equals the volume of the particle with radius r:
r′3 + r″3 =
r3. The size-dependent coagulation kernel
β(r, r̃) is calculated employing a
semiempirical approach. The simplification distinguishes between unstable and stable
particles with respective radii below and above a stable particle radius
rstable.30,39 Unstable particles can coagulate with unstable particles
as well as stable particles, whereas stable particles can aggregate with unstable
particles but not with other stable particles. This is described by an adaptation of the
Fuchs modification of the Smucholski equation as used by Vale and McKenna (2009)30 20  r* denotes the smaller particle
radius of the particles involved, r or r′.
kB, μl, and W represent
the Boltzmann constant, the viscosity of the liquid phase, and the Fuchs stability ratio,
respectively. The distinction between unstable and stable particles ensures that particle
aggregation will come to a hold, which is essential for a monodisperse particle size
distribution.

Pendant Double-Bond Density
PDBs are tied to a specific polymer particle by reaction. Hence, the PDBs are balanced
depending on the particle radius r, comparable to the particle density
F(r, t). The distribution of the
pseudo-species PDB, FPDB(r,
t), is formulated in terms of its moles in particles of radius
r. Hence, it can be interpreted as the product of
F(r, t), V, and the
average number of PDB per particle with radius
r. 21  Like the particle number density,
FPDB(r, t) depends on
precipitation, growth, and coagulation. In addition,
FPDB(r, t) is also
affected by the formation of new PDB in a particle by reactions of the cross-linker,
cross-linking itself with the cross-linking efficiency fPDBg, as well as radical absorption and
desorption. For the gain of PDB by precipitation and absorption, the number of entering
PDB is calculated from the length of the entering polymer chains, η and
navgl,
respectively, and the fraction of the incorporated cross-linker, which is approximated by
the fraction of radicals with the terminal end of the type cross-linker
p2l. For loss of
PDB by desorption, the desorption rate for radicals of the type cross-linker is employed
and, since only radicals with one repeating unit can desorb, it is not required to
consider the chain length here.

With the cross-linking reaction, the terminal end of the reacting oligomer changes to a
radical end of the species cross-linker. Hence, the Mayo–Lewis equation to
calculate the fraction pig of radicals with species i is extended by the
pseudo-species
PDB 22   23  with the average PDB concentration
cPDBg 24  

Particle Characterization
The particle size distribution is characterized by the average microgel radius
rh and the standard deviation of the particle size
distribution σ. The polydispersity index PDI, as defined for dynamic light
scattering (DLS) measurements, is a measure of the width of the particle size
distribution.40 25   26   27  

Reaction Enthalpy Transfer Rate
The reaction enthalpy transfer rate ∑R represents the enthalpy released
when double bonds react in a propagation reaction. Considering the propagation reactions
in both the liquid phase and the gel particles, and propagation reactions with pendant
double bonds, ∑R is calculated according
to 28  where
ΔHRij represents the enthalpy of the
specific propagation reaction of a radical with terminal end j with
monomer i. With the enthalpy transfer rate, the model can be linked with
experimental data from reaction calorimetry.13

Experimental Data
The recipes for the microgel syntheses are listed in Table 2. All reaction components except the initiator are initially
dissolved in the solvent, and the reaction mixture is heated under stirring to the reaction
temperature. The reactor is purged for 30 min with nitrogen. When steady state is obtained,
the initiator is added and the synthesis runs for 1 h. After synthesis, the reactor content
is cooled to room temperature and the microgels are dialyzed. The specifications for monomer
and initiator concentrations as well as temperature for the reference experiment are defined
according to the common and well-tested recipe for PVCL-based microgels by precipitation
polymerization (e.g., refs (8, 41, 42)), whereas the selected cross-linker
concentration corresponds to the middle cross-linker concentration investigated in our
previous work.13 The recipe variations include changes of the initial
initiator or cross-linker concentrations or temperature, modified one at a time and both
lower and higher than the reference value.

Table 2 Recipes for the Reference Microgel Synthesis and the Investigated Experiment
Variations of Different Temperatures, Initial Initiator, or Cross-Linker
Concentrationsa,b
label	nM1 (t = 0 s) (mol)	nM2 (t = 0 s) (mol)	nI (t = 0 s) (mol)	T (K)	
reference	0.0318	7.78 × 10–4	3.69 × 10–4	343	
333 K	0.0318	7.78 × 10–4	3.69 × 10–4	333	
353 K	353	
0.6 mol % I	0.0318	7.78 × 10–4	1.84 × 10–4	343	
2.4 mol % I	7.37 × 10–4	
1.2 mol % BIS	0.0318	3.89 × 10–4	3.69 × 10–4	343	
5.0 mol % BIS	1.56 × 10–3	
a Information is given as initial conditions for eqs 8 and 9. The labels refer to the initiator or cross-linker
to monomer ratios in the respective experiment variations.

b All experiments are performed in 0.3 L water as the solvent with 0.0443 g of CTAB as
the stabilizer.

From the measurements of the Mettler Toledo reaction calorimeter RTcal in the isothermal
control mode, the reaction enthalpy transfer rate ∑R is calculated with
the energy balance for the isothermal batch reactor (cf. ref (13)). The experimental data of reaction calorimetry for the reference experiment
and the variation of the initial cross-linker concentrations is used as published
previously.14

The final particle size in the collapsed state is determined by dynamic light scattering at
323 K. It has been reported previously that dialysis does not affect the measured particle
radius in the collapsed state;6 hence, particle characterization is
performed after dialysis. For the reference experiment, the particle radius is determined by
the mean of 5 experiment repetitions with a standard deviation
(σrh = 3.8 nm). The particle radii for the
experiment variations are determined from single experiments.

Simulation and Parameter Estimation
The model is implemented in gProms Model Builder, version 5.0.1.43 The
discretization of the partial differential equations (PDEs) in eqs 1 and 21 is performed by the gProms intrinsic
first-order backward finite differences method. To reduce the error of numerical diffusion
of the selected solution method, a fine discretization of 250 intervals is chosen. For
dynamic integration, the gProms intrinsic DASOLV solver is selected, which is based on a
variable time step and the variable-order backward differentiation formula. The employed
parameter values are listed in Table 3 and provided
in the Nomenclature. Note that the temperature dependence for diffusion coefficients,
partition coefficients, critical chain length, and water density and viscosity is also
provided in the Nomenclature. Parameter estimation of the adjustable parameters is conducted
with the maximum likelihood method with the same solution parameters as selected for dynamic
integration.

Table 3 Parameter Values for the Arrhenius Equation (eq 11) Used in This Work to Calculate Reaction Rate Constantsa
 	liquid phase	gel phase	 	
rate constant	A	EA	A	EA	ΔHR13	
kd(45)	9.19 × 1014	1.24 × 105	9.19 × 1014	1.24 × 105	 	
kp11	6.49 × 104	30.81 × 103	1.71 × 104	29.42 × 103	–83.2	
kp12	2.23 × 105	18.39 × 103	1.03 × 105	18.35 × 103	–87.4	
kp21	3.65 × 104	19.91 × 103	1.48 × 104	20.01 × 103	–74.8	
kp22	9.03 × 104	26.63 × 103	3.51 × 104	28.31 × 103	–77.8	
kfm11	1.83 × 108	65.00 × 103	1.83 × 108	65.00 × 103	 	
kfm12	0	1	0	1	 	
kfm21	1.57 × 109	76.80 × 103	1.57 × 109	76.80 × 103	 	
kfm22	8.82 × 106	128.0 × 103	8.82 × 106	128.00 × 103	 	
a Parameter values for chain propagation and transfer to monomer are calculated as
described by Kröger et al. (2017).44 Dependence of the
reaction on the polymer content of the surrounding phase is calculated only for chain
propagation (wWg = 0.5).

Six adjustable parameters (W, rstable,
fe, DP, kt11diff, and kt22diff) are determined by parameter
estimation. The termination rate constants ktiidiff have been previously
estimated with our two-phase model.14 Unpublished simulation studies with
the previous model have shown that temperature-independent termination rate constants
provide sufficiently accurate predictions in the considered temperature range. Hence, a
temperature dependence of the termination rate constants ktiil and
ktiidiff is neglected. Nonetheless, considering additional mass transfer among the
phases (radical entry and desorption) and distinct particle volumes instead of a continuous
gel phase implies a change of the average radical concentration and consequently demands an
adjustment of the termination rate constant ktiidiff. The previously determined
values for ktiidiff are used as initial guesses for parameter estimation.

The parameter values are estimated based on the reference experiment (cf. Table 2). Experimental data for the parameter estimation includes
the reaction enthalpy transfer rate ∑R and the final particle radius
rh as well as the condition for a monodisperse PSD (PDI =
0.01). For parameter estimation, the interval of 700 s after initiation (t
= 0 s) is used because reaction calorimetry shows only within this time frame significant
dynamic behavior. The number of ∑R measurements, which are available in 2
s intervals, outweighs the end-point measurements of rh and PDI.
Since the gProms intrinsic parameter estimation does not allow one to weigh the experimental
data, the measurements of rh and PDI are duplicated over the
interval of t = 600–700 s. Within this interval, calorimetry
measurements are in steady state. The introduction of artificial measurement points
compensates the high number of data points for ∑R compared with few data
points for rh and PDI and will ensure that the measurements of
the particle radius are respected.

Results and Discussion
In the following, the simulation of the fitted model is compared to the experimental data.
First, the results of the parameter estimation are evaluated by a comparison of simulation
with the fitted model and experimental data. This comparison includes the reaction enthalpy
transfer rate (eq 28), the average particle radius
(eq 25), and the polydispersity (eq 27). Afterward, the fitted model is employed to predict
particle growth for the variation of reaction conditions, and the predictions are compared
to the corresponding experimental data.

Simulation of the Reference Experiment
Figure 2 shows the comparison of the simulation
and experimental data in terms of ∑R over the polymerization time
t. The experimental data is used as published previously.
t = 0 s represents the time of initiation and the beginning of the
simulation. Immediately after initiation, ∑R increases rapidly to a
first maximum after approximately t = 25 s, caused by the fast
cross-propagation reaction of VCL and BIS.13 Then, the enthalpy
transfer rate decreases due to the consumption of the cross-linker, before it increases
again due to the polymerization of the remaining VCL. The simulation with the fitted model
agrees with the experimental data within the accuracy of the standard deviation. In
conclusion, the pseudo-bulk model is equally suited to fit reaction enthalpy measurements
as the two-phase model presented previously.

Figure 2 Comparison of experimental data (cf. Janssen et al. (2018)14) and
simulation with the fitted model for a polymerization of the reference experiment (cf.
Table 2). The error bars denote the
standard deviations of measurements of three experimental repetitions. For parameter
estimation, a constant mean variance model is applied (σ = 0.32 W).

Besides the reaction calorimetry, the simulation satisfies the experimental values for
the mean particle radius. Figure 3 shows the
predicted growth of the average particle radius over the polymerization time. The average
particle radius increases rapidly immediately after initiation, and after approx.
t = 400 s, the microgels have obtained their final particle size. At
the end of the simulation, the predicted average particle radius shows a very good
agreement with the particle radius from DLS, and the deviation is below the experimental
error. For further insight, the prediction of the mean particle radius is validated with
data from in situ DLS, which is provided in the Supporting Information SI II.

Figure 3 Predicted mean particle radius over polymerization time and measured final radius
(DLS) for the reference experiment (cf. Table 2). The deviation is below the standard deviation of the measurements.
Vertical lines illustrate the predicted ends of (a) nucleation and (b)
coagulation.

Finally, the simulation needs to satisfy the condition of a monodisperse PSD. Figure 4 shows the PSD in terms of particle number
density F(r, t) over the particle
radius at different stages of the synthesis. At early stages (t =
10–50 s), coagulation has a significant effect on particle number density, as the
area under curves, proportional to the particle number, decreases rapidly. With further
progress (t = 100–400 s), coagulation comes to a hold, and radical
and monomer absorption merely shift the mean of F(r,
t) to higher radii, whereas the particle number, represented by the
area under the curves, remains unaffected. At late stages (t = 400, 700
s), particle growth comes to an end as the particle number densities cannot be
distinguished. Throughout the synthesis, the predicted particle density shows that a
monodisperse PSD is obtained despite the inhomogeneous consumption of cross-linker and
monomer in Figure 2, since small particles are
absorbed instead of leading to a secondary nucleation. Virtanen et al. (2019) recently
concluded a comparable formation mechanism based on in situ small-angle neutron scattering
measurements of the synthesis of PNIPAM-based microgels.46

Figure 4 Prediction of particle size distribution for the reference experiment (cf. Table 2) at different stages of the process. For
comparison of the final particle size distribution, intensity measurements from DLS
for an individual sample (323 K) are included. For parameter estimation, a PDI = 0.01
for the measured rh was used.

For comparison of the final particle size distribution, the intensity measurement from
DLS for an individual sample is provided. The intensity measurement reveals a narrow
distribution around the mean particle radius. The comparison shows that the simulated
F(r, t) provides a good prediction of
the monodisperse particle size distribution of the final microgels.

The estimated parameter values, listed in Table 4, show the general trend of the impacts of the individual growth mechanisms.
Three central aspects should be highlighted here. (1) The radical entry efficiency is high
compared with values proposed in the literature. It is probably exaggerated due to the
inaccuracy of pseudo-bulk models to describe nucleation. Nonetheless, the reported values
are determined for emulsion polymerization and might not apply for precipitation
polymerization. (2) The diffusion-controlled contributions of the termination rate
constants estimated with the pseudo-bulk model provide the same trends as those previously
estimated with the two-phase model, but cannot be transferred directly under the given
assumptions. The larger value of kt22diff affects only the beginning of the process before the
cross-linker is fully consumed. Hence, the diffusion-controlled contribution effectively
decreases in value over time (and conversion), which could represent an increasing
diffusion limitation from gelation in the particles. (3) The results for the stable
particle radius and the Fuchs stability ratio suggest that coagulation has a significant
impact on particle growth and is not limited to precursor particles.

Table 4 Estimated Parameter Valuesa
parameter	symbol	unit	parameter value	
radical entry efficiency	fe	 	0.534	
diffusion coefficient	DP	m3 s–1	10–16.65	
diffusion limited contribution of termination rate
constants	kt11diff	m3 (mol s)−1	10–0.90	
kt22diff	m3 (mol s)−1	101.64	
stable particle radius	rstable	nm	26.27	
Fuchs stability ratio	W	 	104.44	
a Additional remarks regarding their interpretation or context of literature values
are provided in the Supporting Information SI III.

In this context, it should also be noted that despite the effort to limit the number of
adjustable parameters for the first-time investigation of the reaction system, the
estimated parameter values reveal in parts significant correlations. This concerns the
values of the parameters W, rstable, and
fe, but also the combination of parameter values for
DP and kt,11diff. These high correlations indicate that parameter values are
not identifiable based on the available experimental data. For instance, both coagulation
parameters rstable and W have a significant
effect on the particle size distribution (cf. Supporting Information SI IV for a small simulation study). Higher
rstable leads to larger particle radii since larger
particles coagulate, broadening the particle size distributions in terms of higher PDI.
Decreasing W increases the coagulation kernel and therefore accelerates
particle aggregation, leading to larger particle radii and more narrow PDI. Hence, both an
increased rstable and a decreased W result in
larger particle radii. The difference in the final predicted PDI can be small, especially
in comparison to the experimental error. However, more distinct differences in the PDI can
be observed at earlier polymerization times. Hence, when particle size distribution
measurements at an early stage of polymerization are provided, correlations among the
coagulation parameters can be reduced, and the parameter estimation results can be
improved. Also, further model simplification can reduce or eliminate correlations, for
example, neglecting radical desorption due to its low impact, which eliminates the
parameter DP. Hence, the estimated parameter values need to be
treated carefully in terms of model predictions. Nonetheless, the predictive capability of
the model will be investigated without further model adjustments in the following.

Prediction of Experiment Variations
To evaluate the predictive capabilities of the fitted model, variations of the microgel
synthesis are simulated and compared to experimental data. The comparison is performed in
terms of reaction enthalpy transfer rates and final particle size for variations of
reaction temperature, initial initiator, and cross-linker concentration.

Variation of Reaction Temperature
The first simulation addresses the impact of reaction temperature on the overall
polymerization time as well as the final particle size.

The comparison of predicted and measured ∑R for 333 and 353 K is
depicted in Figure 5. The simulation for both
temperatures predicts that an increase of the reaction temperature facilitates the
overall polymerization. For 353 K, the maximal ∑R is higher, and it
approaches zero after approx. 300 s, indicating the end of synthesis, whereas the
simulation for 333 K predicts a duration of almost 1000 s for the synthesis.

Figure 5 Comparison of experimental and predicted reaction enthalpy transfer rates for
different reaction temperatures. Experimental data has not been published
previously. For improved readability, measurement data is shown only for 4 s
intervals.

The experimental data for both temperatures confirm the predictions. Comparing the
accuracy of the predictions, the simulation for 333 K matches the experimental data
better, whereas the prediction for 353 K exceeds the experimental data around its
maximum value. Also, the simulation does not predict the secondary increase in measured
∑R for T = 353 K (t =
200–300 s), which probably results from a delayed heat transfer due to the
polymer film on the reactor surface.47 Nonetheless, in terms of
∑R, the pseudo-bulk model provides a good prediction of the
temperature dependence of the process.

Figure 6 shows the corresponding predicted
mean particle radii over the progress of polymerization. The trend reveals that with
increasing T, microgels initially grow faster but obtain a lower final
particle size. At the early stage, more particles are formed by nucleation due to the
higher initiator decomposition rate and lower η. Faster chain propagation, radical
entry, and coagulation lead to a high number of particles obtaining the stable particle
radius. Beyond the stable particle radius, coagulation is limited and the high number of
particles competes for absorption of smaller particles and monomers. In contrast to the
predicted particle radii, the DLS measurements of microgels synthesized at different
temperatures show no significant trend, and deviations are within the experimental error
of the reference experiment. There are several explanations for the differences among
prediction and experimental data. First, the temperature could affect the coagulation of
the particles, which would not be covered by the empirical modeling approach employed in
this work. Further, microgels synthesized at different temperatures might have different
densities, whereas in this contribution, a constant density is assumed. Also, the
measurement error needs to be taken into account, as DLS measurements are obtained from
singular synthesis and a temperature dependence has been observed previously in the
literature for PVCL-based6 and more thoroughly for PNIPAM-based
microgels.48,49
In conclusion, the predictions indicate a significant dependence of particle size on
temperature. However, a confirmation or disproval of the goodness of the prediction
would require further experimental investigation.

Figure 6 Comparison of predicted radii and measured final radii (DLS) for different reaction
temperatures (cf. Table 2). Markers
illustrate the corresponding measured particle radii at the end of synthesis (cyan
triangle up open: 333 K; open circle: ref (343 K); red cross: 353 K).

Variation of Initial Initiator Concentration
As illustrated in Figure 7, the prediction of
∑R increases and shifts to earlier polymerization times with
increasing initiator concentrations. The initiator concentration affects the overall
polymerization in a similar manner to reaction temperature, as the initiator decomposes
faster with increasing temperature. However, unlike the temperature, the initiator
concentration does not affect the propagation rate constant and, in consequence, the
maximal ∑R for 2.4 mol % I is lower than for 353 K. Again, the
predicted ∑R is in good agreement with the experimental data without
further parameter adjustment, especially for 0.6 mol % I.

Figure 7 Comparison of experimental and predicted reaction enthalpy transfer rates for
different initial initiator concentrations. Experimental data has not been published
previously. For improved readability, measurement data is shown only for 4 s
intervals.

The predicted particle growth for different initial initiator concentrations is
depicted in Figure 8. Based on the estimated
parameter values, the largest final particle radii are obtained for the lowest initial
initiator concentration, following the same argumentation as for temperature dependence
that fewer particles are formed in the beginning of the process. However, DLS
measurements show the opposite behavior. As previously observed for PVCL- and
PNIPAM-based microgels, an increase of the initial initiator concentration leads to an
increase of the final microgel size.6,48,49 Hence, based entirely on the
reaction rates, the final particle size dependence on the initiator concentration cannot
be predicted. An adjustment of the coagulation parameters, such as a decrease of
W and/or an increase of rstable, appears
to be the apparent approach. However, this bears to this point of too many unknown
parameters and factors for a mechanistic modeling approach (e.g., DLVO theory) and too
few experimental data points for an empirical description.

Figure 8 Comparison of predicted particle growth and measured final radii (DLS) for
different initial initiator concentrations (cf. Table 2). Markers illustrate the corresponding measured particle
radii at the end of synthesis (cyan triangle up open: 0.6 mol % I; open circle: ref
(1.2 mol % I); red cross: 2.4 mol % I).

Variation of Initial Cross-Linker Concentration
The predictions in Figure 9 show a significant
impact of the initial cross-linker concentration on the ∑R profile. The
fast cross-propagation of VCL and BIS, which is discussed above in the context of Figure 2, amplifies on increasing the initial
cross-linker concentration. This results in a rapid increase of the first peak in the
predicted ∑R profile for 5 mol % BIS, whereas for 1.2 mol % BIS, it
almost disappears. The comparison to ∑R from measurements shows that the
predictive qualities of the model for overall polymerization progress in terms of the
reaction enthalpy transfer rate are good, even for changing monomer/cross-linker
ratios.

Figure 9 Comparison of experimental (Janssen et al. (2018)14) and predicted
reaction enthalpy transfer rates for different initial cross-linker concentrations.
For improved readability, measurement data is shown only for 4 s intervals.

Although reaction rates represented by ∑R differ significantly, the
predicted particle growth for different cross-linker concentrations in Figure 10 differs only insignificantly. The differences in the
final predicted particle radii are within the order of magnitude of standard deviation of
the reference. In contrast to the variations of temperature and initial initiator
concentration, the progress of the particle growth differs insignificantly in the
beginning, leading to the prediction of similarly sized final microgels. For 1.2 mol %
BIS, the largest final particle size is predicted, and for 5 mol % BIS, microgels are the
smallest. This prediction is the opposite trend to the microgel sizes determined by DLS
measurements. The measurements show that the differences among the microgel radii are
clearly larger than the standard deviation, and further, larger microgels are obtained for
higher initial cross-linker concentrations. Again, this leads to the conclusion that
reaction rates alone cannot be employed to explain the dependence of microgel size on
initial cross-linker concentration. An extension of the coagulation behavior, such as an
increasing rstable or preferably a decrease of
W as a function of increasing cross-linker concentration in the
particles, is recommended. However, in this context, it should also be noted that
microgels with a higher cross-linker concentration reveal higher densities due to higher
internal cross-linking.8,41 Higher microgel densities would facilitate the trend that smaller
particles are obtained for higher cross-linker concentrations. On the other hand, the
higher densities, resulting in higher polymer fractions in the particles, will also impact
the reaction rate constants in the gel phase44 and are accompanied by a
higher diffusion limitation of the termination reaction. In consequence, for a predictive
model that captures the impact of a cross-linker on the final particle size, quantitative
reliable experimental data of the polymer fraction in the collapsed state is required.

Figure 10 Comparison of predicted particle growth and measured final radii (DLS) for different
cross-linker concentrations (cf. Table 2).
Markers illustrate the measured particle radii at the end of synthesis (cyan triangle
up open: 1.2 mol % BIS; open circle: ref (2.5 mol % BIS); red cross: 5.0 mol %
BIS).

Conclusions
The synthesis of cross-linked PVCL-based microgels by precipitation polymerization was
described by a pseudo-bulk model. The purpose of this first-time investigation was to obtain
a mechanistic model that cohesively describes the most important quantities of microgel
synthesis: the overall polymerization progress as well as the final particle size and a
narrow particle size distribution. The model comprises common formulations for all growth
mechanisms in microgel synthesis. Precipitation of precursor particles is described by
homogeneous nucleation. The particles continue to grow by absorption of monomers and
radicals and successive polymerization within particles as well as coagulation of the
growing particles.

Based on experimental data from reaction calorimetry and DLS measurements for the final
microgel size, the six adjustable parameters of the model are estimated. The comparison of
simulation with the fitted model and experimental data shows that the pseudo-bulk model can
in principle be fitted to describe the characteristics of the specific synthesis process.
The simulation of the reaction enthalpy transfer rate coincides with the experimental data
within the order of magnitude of the experimental error while the requirements of the final
particle size are met. The estimated parameter values suggest the impact of individual
growth mechanisms. High radical entry efficiency and low effective termination rate
constants in the gel phase express that the particles are the preferred reaction locus. The
stable particle, which is significantly larger than the nucleation radius, suggests that
larger particles do not absorb precursor particles exclusively and coagulation has a
significant impact on particle growth and particle size distribution.

These contributions result in the following microgel formation process. After initiation,
particles are formed in a short nucleation phase only. Particles coagulate until stable,
while also growing by polymerization with absorbed monomers and oligomers. Growth continues
by absorption of monomers and oligomers and ongoing polymerization in the particles until
the monomer is fully consumed. The short nucleation phase and the following coagulation
facilitate the narrow particle size distribution.

Testing the predictive capabilities of the fitted model for variations of the experimental
recipes demonstrates its potential and current limitations. For variations of temperature,
initial initiator, and cross-linker concentration, good predictions of the reaction enthalpy
transfer rates were obtained. The prediction of the final microgel radii on the other hand
shows the shortcomings and hence requirement of further research in both modeling and
experimental investigation. While predictions show the largest impact on final microgel size
by variation of temperature, measurements show no significant impact. In contrast, for the
cross-linker concentrations, experiments show significant differences in particle radii,
whereas simulations predict similar microgel sizes. The deviations of predictions and
measurements might indicate the need for model adjustments. However, an advanced and
validated modeling will require more quantitative information on the particles’
properties, such as density or water content as well as accurate measurements of particle
size throughout the synthesis process. Nonetheless, the good results for the simulation of
the standard synthesis and predictions of reaction enthalpy show that the pseudo-bulk model
bears the opportunity to describe the precipitation polymerization of PVCL-based
microgels.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01335.Comprehensive formulation of liquid phase modeling, discussion of
estimated parameter values, comparison to in situ DLS measurements, and simulation
study for coagulation parameter values (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01335_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ Aachener Verfahrenstechnik—Chemical Process Engineering, RWTH Aachen University,
52056 Aachen, Germany (M.K.).

The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within the Collaborative
Research Center SFB 985 “Functional Microgels and Microgel Systems”, Project
“Microgel synthesis: Kinetics, particle formation and reactor modeling”, for
financial support. A.P. thanks the Volkswagen Stiftung for financial support.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Leif C. Kröger and Kai Leonhard for calculation of the Arrhenius
parameters of the reaction rate constants.

Nomenclature
Variables (For Simplicity, Time Dependence is Not Denoted Explicitly)cImol m–3—initiator concentration

cMimol m–3—concentration of monomers of species
i

cPDBmol m–3—concentration of pseudo-species PDB

cRηmol m–3—concentration of radicals with critical chain
length

cλ0lmol m–3—concentration of radicals in the liquid phase

F(r)mol m–3 nm–1—particle density
distribution

FPDB(r)mol nm–1—pendant double-bond distribution

k0i(r)s–1—radical desorption rate for radicals of species
i

kds–1—initiator decomposition rate (cf. Table 3)

kfmijm3 (mol s)−1—chain transfer to monomer rate
constant of radical of species i with monomer of type
j (cf. Table 3)

kpijm3 (mol s)−1—propagation rate constant of radical
of species i with monomer of type j (cf. Table
3)

ktijgm3 (mol s)−1—termination rate constant of radical
i with radical j in the gel phase

Mw,unitg mol–1—average molecular weight of single repeating
unit

n̅(r)average number of radicals per particle of size (r)

navglaverage number of repeating units per oligomer in the liquid phase

nImol—amount of substance of initiator

nMimol—amount of substance of monomer of species i

nMirmol—moles of reacted monomer of species i

PDIpolydispersity index

pifraction of radicals with terminal end of species i

Rcoag(r)mol m–3 s–1
nm–1—coagulation rate

Rnucmol m–3 s–1—nucleation rate

Rdesip(r)s–1—radical desorption rate (species i) in
particles of radius r

Rep(r)s–1—oligomer absorption rate in particles of radius
r

RIp(r)s–1—radical initiation rate in particles of radius
r

Rtp(r)s–1—radical termination rate in particles of radius
r

β(r, r′)m3 (mol s)−1—size-dependent intrinsic coagulation
rate

rnm—particle radius

rnucnm—nucleation radius

rhnm—average particle radius

TK—temperature

ts—time

v(r)nm s–1—growth rate

Vgm3—volume of disperse gel phase

Vlm3—volume of continuous liquid phase

Vp(r)m3—volume of microgel with radius r

Vm3—control volume reactor content

β(r, r)m3 (mol s)−1—coagulation kernel

δr,rnucKronecker delta function

ρgg m–3—mean density of microgel particle

∑RW—reaction enthalpy transfer rate

σnm—standard deviation

Parameters and Parameter Values
Acf. Table 3; m3 (mol s)−1; frequency factor of the
respective reaction

DM18.9439–0.0177·T; partition coefficient for VCL (linear
correlation, T = 333–353 K)

DM22.9671–0.0048·T; partition coefficient for BIS (linear
correlation, T = 333–353 K)

DI0.1; partition coefficient for AMPA (assumption)

DPcf. Table 4; m s–1; diffusion constant for radicals in the polymer
phase

DW110–14.57T/μl; m2
s–1; diffusion constant of VCL in water, calculated based on Wilke
and Chang (1955)50

DW210–14.55T/μl; m2
s–1; diffusion constant of BIS in water, calculated based on Wilke
and Chang (1955)50

EAcf. Table 3; J mol–1; activation energy of the respective
reaction

fPDBg1.28 × 10–3; cross-linking efficiency

fecf. Table 4; radical absorption efficiency

fI0.6; initiator efficiency

kB1.38064 × 10–23; J K–1; Boltzmann constant

kt11l105.22; m3 (mol s)−1; termination rate constant
of VCL in the liquid phase

kt22l106.37; m3 (mol s)−1; termination rate constant
of BIS in the liquid phase

kt11diffcf. Table 4; m3 (mol s)−1; diffusion-controlled
contribution to the termination rate constant of VCL in the gel phase

kt22diffcf. Table 4; m3 (mol s)−1; diffusion-controlled
contribution to termination rate constant of BIS in the gel phase

MM1139.19; g mol–1; molecular weight of VCL

MM2154.17; g mol–1; molecular weight of BIS

NA6.022 × 1023; mol–1; Avogadro constant

R8.314; J (mol K)−1; universal gas constant

rmin, rmax0.1, 100; nm; lower and upper integration boundaries

rstablecf. Table 4; nm; stable particle radius for coagulation

Wcf. Table 4; Fuchs stability factor

wWg0.5; mass fraction of water in gel particles

η15, 12, 10; critical chain length in dependence of temperature (333, 343, 353 K)

μl; N s
m–2; viscosity of the liquid phase (water)51

ρP1.38 × 103; kg m–3; density of PVCL8

ρW; g
m–3; density of water51

ΔHRijcf. Table 3; J mol–1; reaction enthalpy of the propagation reaction
of radical i with monomer j

Superscripts
ggel; average of polymer particles

lliquid

pparticle

Abbreviations
AMPA2,2′-azobis(2-methylpropionamidine) dihydrochloride

BISN,N′-methylene(bisacrylamide)

CTABcetyltrimethylammonium bromide

DLSdynamic light scattering

DLVO theoryDerjaguin, Landau, Verwey, Overbeek theory

NIPAMN-isopropylacrylamide

PBEpopulation balance equation

PDBpendant double bond

PDEpartial differential equation

PDIpolydispersity index

PSDparticle size distribution

PVCLpoly(N-vinylcaprolactam)

VCLN-vinylcaprolactam
==== Refs
References
Cortez-Lemus N. A. ; Licea-Claverie A. 
Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam), a comprehensive review on a
thermoresponsive polymer becoming popular . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2016 , 53 , 1 –51 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2015.08.001 .
Lohaus T. ; de Wit P. ; Kather M. ; Menne D. ; Benes N. E. ; Pich A. ; Wessling M. 
Tunable permeability and selectivity: Heatable inorganic porous hollow
fiber membrane with a thermo-responsive microgel coating . J. Membr. Sci. 
2017 , 539 , 451 –457 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2017.05.052 .
Kather M. ; Skischus M. ; Kandt P. ; Pich A. ; Conrads G. ; Neuss S. 
Functional Isoeugenol-Modified Nanogel Coatings for the Design of
Biointerfaces . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 2497 –2502 . 10.1002/anie.201609180 .
Plamper F. A. ; Richtering W. 
Functional Microgels and Microgel Systems . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 50 , 131 –140 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00544 .28186408 
Pich A. ;
Richtering W.  
In Chemical Design of Responsive Microgels ; Pich A. ; Richtering W.  , Eds.; Advances in Polymer
Science ; Springer :
Berlin , 2011 ; Vol. 234 , pp
1 –37 .
Imaz A. ; Forcada J. 
N-vinylcaprolactam-based microgels: Synthesis and
characterization . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2008 , 46 , 2510 –2524 . 10.1002/pola.22583 .
Imaz A. ; Forcada J. 
N-vinylcaprolactam-based microgels: Effect of the
concentration and type of cross-linker . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2008 , 46 , 2766 –2775 . 10.1002/pola.22609 .
Schneider F. ; Balaceanu A. ; Feoktystov A. ; Pipich V. ; Wu Y. ; Allgaier J. ; Pyckhout-Hintzen W. ; Pich A. ; Schneider G. J. 
Monitoring the Internal Structure of
Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) Microgels with Variable Cross-Link
Concentration . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 15317 –15326 . 10.1021/la503830w .25493607 
Hoare T. ; McLean D. 
Multi-Component Kinetic Modeling for Controlling Local Compositions in
Thermosensitive Polymers . Macromol. Theory Simul. 
2006 , 15 , 619 –632 . 10.1002/mats.200600031 .
Hoare T. ; McLean D. 
Kinetic prediction of functional group distributions in thermosensitive
microgels . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 20327 –20336 . 10.1021/jp0643451 .17034214 
Acciaro R. ; Gilányi T. ; Varga I. 
Preparation of monodisperse poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
microgel particles with homogenous cross-link density distribution . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 7917 –7925 . 10.1021/la2010387 .21591700 
Virtanen O. L. J. ; Ala-Mutka H. M. ; Richtering W. 
Can the Reaction Mechanism of Radical Solution Polymerization Explain the
Microgel Final Particle Volume in Precipitation Polymerization of
N-Isopropylacrylamide? . Macromol. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 216 , 1431 –1440 . 10.1002/macp.201500118 .
Janssen F. A. L. ; Kather M. ; Kröger L. C. ; Mhamdi A. ; Leonhard K. ; Pich A. ; Mitsos A. 
Synthesis of Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam)-Based Microgels by
Precipitation Polymerization: Process Modeling and Experimental
Validation . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 56 , 14545 –14556 . 10.1021/acs.iecr.7b03263 .
Janssen F. A. ;
Ksiazkiewicz A. ;
Kather M. ;
Kröger L. C. ;
Mhamdi A. ;
Leonhard K. ;
Pich A. ;
Mitsos A.  28th European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering ;
Computer Aided Chemical Engineering ;
Elsevier , 2018 ; Vol. 43 ,
pp 109 –114 .
Vale H. M. ; McKenna T. F. 
Modeling particle size distribution in emulsion polymerization
reactors . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2005 , 30 , 1019 –1048 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2005.06.006 .
Kiparissides C. 
Challenges in particulate polymerization reactor modeling and optimization:
A population balance perspective . J. Process Control 
2006 , 16 , 205 –224 . 10.1016/j.jprocont.2005.06.004 .
Thickett S. C. ; Gilbert R. G. 
Emulsion polymerization: State of the art in kinetics and
mechanisms . Polymer 
2007 , 48 , 6965 –6991 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2007.09.031 .
Sheibat-Othman N. ; Vale H. M. ; Pohn J. M. ; McKenna T. F. L. 
Is Modeling the PSD in Emulsion Polymerization a Finished Problem? An
Overview . Macromol. React. Eng. 
2017 , 11 , 160005910.1002/mren.201600059 .
Crowley T. J. ; Meadows E. S. ; Kostoulas E. ; Doyle F. J. III
Control of particle size distribution described by a population balance
model of semibatch emulsion polymerization . J. Process Control 
2000 , 10 , 419 –432 . 10.1016/S0959-1524(00)00017-2 .
Coen E. M. ; Gilbert R. G. ; Morrison B. R. ; Leube H. ; Peach S. 
Modelling particle size distributions and secondary particle formation in
emulsion polymerisation . Polymer 
1998 , 39 , 7099 –7112 . 10.1016/S0032-3861(98)00255-9 .
Sajjadi S. 
Particle formation under monomer-starved conditions in the semibatch
emulsion polymerisation of styrene. Part II. Mathematical modelling . Polymer 
2003 , 44 , 223 –237 . 10.1016/S0032-3861(02)00735-8 .
Coen E. M. ; Peach S. ; Morrison B. R. ; Gilbert R. G. 
First-principles calculation of particle formation in emulsion
polymerization: Pseudo-bulk systems . Polymer 
2004 , 45 , 3595 –3608 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2004.03.084 .
Immanuel C. D. ; Cordeiro C. F. ; Sundaram S. S. ; Meadows E. S. ; Crowley T. J. ; Doyle F. J. 
Modeling of particle size distribution in emulsion co-polymerization:
Comparison with experimental data and parametric sensitivity studies . Comput. Chem. Eng. 
2002 , 26 , 1133 –1152 . 10.1016/S0098-1354(02)00031-5 .
Immanuel C. D. ; Doyle F. J. ; Cordeiro C. F. ; Sundaram S. S. 
Population balance PSD model for emulsion polymerization with steric
stabilizers . AIChE J. 
2003 , 49 , 1392 –1404 . 10.1002/aic.690490606 .
Kiparissides C. ; Achilias D. S. ; Frantzikinakis C. E. 
The Effect of Oxygen on the Kinetics and Particle Size Distribution in
Vinyl Chloride Emulsion Polymerization . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2002 , 41 , 3097 –3109 . 10.1021/ie010928f .
Brunier B. ; Sheibat-Othman N. ; Othman S. ; Chevalier Y. ; Bourgeat-Lami E. 
Modelling particle growth under saturated and starved conditions in
emulsion polymerization . Can. J. Chem. Eng. 
2017 , 95 , 208 –221 . 10.1002/cjce.22640 .
Wu X. ; Pelton R. H. ; Hamielec A. E. ; Woods D. R. ; McPhee W. 
The kinetics of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) microgel latex
formation . Colloid Polym. Sci. 
1994 , 272 , 467 –477 . 10.1007/BF00659460 .
Varga I. ; Gilányi T. ; Mészáros R. ; Filipcsei G. ; Zrínyi M. 
Effect of Cross-Link Density on the Internal Structure of
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) Microgels . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 9071 –9076 . 10.1021/jp004600w .
Sajjadi S. 
Population balance modeling of particle size distribution in
monomer-starved semibatch emulsion polymerization . AIChE J. 
2009 , 55 , 3191 –3205 . 10.1002/aic.11917 .
Vale H. M. ; McKenna T. F. 
Particle Formation in Vinyl Chloride Emulsion Polymerization: Reaction
Modeling . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2009 , 48 , 5193 –5210 . 10.1021/ie801406n .
Hansen F. K. ; Ugelstad J. 
Particle nucleation in emulsion polymerization. I. A theory for homogeneous
nucleation . J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed. 
1978 , 16 , 1953 –1979 . 10.1002/pol.1978.170160814 .
Storti G. ; Carrà S. ; Morbidelli M. ; Vita G. 
Kinetics of multimonomer emulsion polymerization. The
pseudo-homopolymerization approach . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
1989 , 37 , 2443 –2467 . 10.1002/app.1989.070370901 .
Arosio P. ; Mosconi M. ; Storti G. ; Banaszak B. ; Hungenberg K.-D. ; Morbidelli M. 
Precipitation Copolymerization of Vinyl-imidazole and Vinyl-pyrrolidone, 2
- Kinetic Model . Macromol. React. Eng. 
2011 , 5 , 501 –517 . 10.1002/mren.201100020 .
Smith W. V. ; Ewart R. H. 
Kinetics of Emulsion Polymerization . J. Chem. Phys. 
1948 , 16 , 592 –599 . 10.1063/1.1746951 .
Nomura M. ;
Tobita H. ;
Suzuki K.   In
Polymer Particles ; Okubo M.  , Ed.;
Advances in Polymer Science ; Springer :
Berlin , 2005 ; Vol. 175 , pp
1 –128 .
Buback M. ; Gilbert R. G. ; Russell G. T. ; Hill D. J. T. ; Moad G. ; O’Driscoll K. F. ; Shen J. ; Winnik M. A. 
Consistent values of rate parameters in free radical polymerization
systems. II. Outstanding dilemmas and recommendations . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
1992 , 30 , 851 –863 . 10.1002/pola.1992.080300516 .
Harada M. ; Nomura M. ; Eguchi W. ; Nagata S. 
Studies of the Effect of Polymer Particles on Emulsion
Polymerization . J. Chem. Eng. Jpn. 
1971 , 4 , 54 –60 . 10.1252/jcej.4.54 .
Immanuel C. D. ; Doyle F. J. III
Computationally efficient solution of population balance models
incorporating nucleation, growth and coagulation: Application to emulsion
polymerization . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2003 , 58 , 3681 –3698 . 10.1016/S0009-2509(03)00216-1 .
Araújo P. H. H. ; de la Cal J. C. ; Asua J. M. ; Pinto J. C. 
Modeling Particle Size Distribution (PSD) in Emulsion Copolymerization
Reactions in a Continuous Loop Reactor . Macromol. Theory Simul. 
2001 , 10 , 769 –779 . 10.1002/1521-3919(20011001)10:8<769::AID-MATS769>3.0.CO;2-Z .
nanoComposix - Guidelines for
DLS Measurement and Analysis . www.nanocomposix.com/pages/knowledge-base (accessed Nov 22,
2018 ).
Balaceanu A. ; Demco D. E. ; Möller M. ; Pich A. 
Microgel Heterogeneous Morphology Reflected in Temperature-Induced Volume
Transition and 1H High-Resolution Transverse Relaxation NMR. The Case of
Poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) Microgel . Macromolecules 
2011 , 44 , 2161 –2169 . 10.1021/ma200103y .
Wolff H. J. M. ; Kather M. ; Breisig H. ; Richtering W. ; Pich A. ; Wessling M. 
From Batch to Continuous Precipitation Polymerization of Thermoresponsive
Microgels . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 24799 –24806 . 10.1021/acsami.8b06920 .29952202 
Process Systems Enterprise,
gPROMS . www.psenterprise.com/gproms, 1997–2019 .
Kröger L. C. ; Kopp W. A. ; Leonhard K. 
Prediction of Chain Propagation Rate Constants of Polymerization Reactions
in Aqueous NIPAM/BIS and VCL/BIS Systems . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2017 , 121 , 2887 –2895 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b09147 .28287724 
Industries, Wako Pure Chemical,
Ltd . https://www.wako-chemicals.de/en/product/v-50 (accessed March 30,
2017 ).
Virtanen O. L. J. ; Kather M. ; Meyer-Kirschner J. ; Melle A. ; Radulescu A. ; Viell J. ; Mitsos A. ; Pich A. ; Richtering W. 
Direct Monitoring of Microgel Formation during Precipitation Polymerization
of N-Isopropylacrylamide Using in Situ SANS . ACS Omega 
2019 , 4 , 3690 –3699 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b03461 .31459582 
Virtanen O. L. J. ; Brugnoni M. ; Kather M. ; Pich A. ; Richtering W. 
The next step in precipitation polymerization of
N-isopropylacrylamide: Particle number density control by monochain
globule surface charge modulation . Polym. Chem. 
2016 , 7 , 5123 –5131 . 10.1039/C6PY01195K .
Gao J. ; Frisken B. J. 
Influence of Reaction Conditions on the Synthesis of Self-Cross-Linked
N-Isopropylacrylamide Microgels . Langmuir 
2003 , 19 , 5217 –5222 . 10.1021/la034207s .
Virtanen O. L. J. ; Richtering W. 
Kinetics and particle size control in non-stirred precipitation
polymerization of N-isopropylacrylamide . Colloid Polym. Sci. 
2014 , 292 , 1743 –1756 . 10.1007/s00396-014-3208-x .
Wilke C. R. ; Chang P. 
Correlation of diffusion coefficients in dilute solutions . AIChE J. 
1955 , 1 , 264 –270 . 10.1002/aic.690010222 .
Dortmund Data
Bank . www.ddbst.com,
2018 .

