
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146021810.1021/acsomega.9b00772ArticleSmartphone-Based Paper Microfluidic Particulometry of Norovirus from
Environmental Water Samples at the Single Copy Level Chung Soo †Breshears Lane E. ‡Perea Sean §Morrison Christina M. ∥Betancourt Walter Q. ∥Reynolds Kelly A. ⊥Yoon Jeong-Yeol *††Department
of Biosystems Engineering, ‡Department of Biomedical Engineering, §Department of Chemical
and Environmental Engineering, ∥Department of Soil, Water and Environmental
Science, and ⊥Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, United States* E-mail: jyyoon@email.arizona.edu.27 06 2019 30 06 2019 4 6 11180 11188 20 03 2019 14 06 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Human enteric viruses can be highly
infectious and thus capable of causing disease upon ingestion of low
doses ranging from 100 to 102 virions. Norovirus
is a good example with a minimum infectious dose as low as a few tens
of virions, that is, below femtogram scale. Norovirus detection from
commonly implicated environmental matrices (water and food) involves
complicated concentration of viruses and/or amplification of the norovirus
genome, thus rendering detection approaches not feasible for field
applications. In this work, norovirus detection was performed on a
microfluidic paper analytic device without using any sample concentration
or nucleic acid amplification steps by directly imaging and counting
on-paper aggregation of antibody-conjugated, fluorescent submicron
particles. An in-house developed smartphone-based fluorescence microscope
and an image-processing algorithm isolated the particles aggregated
by antibody–antigen binding, leading to an extremely low limit
of norovirus detection, as low as 1 genome copy/μL in deionized
water and 10 genome copies/μL in reclaimed wastewater.

document-id-old-9ao9b00772document-id-new-14ao-2019-00772eccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Human enteric viruses
are small infectious agents that can cause gastrointestinal disease
upon ingestion of very low doses. Detection of these viruses requires
an extremely low limit of detection (LOD), especially when assessing
viruses in reclaimed wastewater or unconfined aquifers used as sources
of drinking water. Norovirus is one of such well-known examples and
is the most common cause of epidemic and sporadic gastroenteritis
worldwide.1 Studies have indicated that
norovirus infection can occur upon exposure to as few as 18 virions.2,3 Highly sensitive detection methods are needed for assessing exposure
to norovirus, especially considering that the methods for virus recovery
and concentration from environmental matrices are rather inefficient.
In addition, the infectivity of human noroviruses by in vitro cell
culture has proven to be quite complex (only possible in stem cell-derived
human enteroids),4 which prevents the use
of traditional culture-based assays for evaluating virus infectivity
in environmental matrices. Because of this limitation, norovirus has
been assayed by either reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR)5 or sandwich immunoassay6 techniques. While RT-PCR-based techniques do
provide necessary specificity for detection and identification of
norovirus, these molecular methods are susceptible to inhibition by
multiple components associated with environmental matrices and fail
to provide sufficient rapidity and field-applicability.7 Immunoassay techniques are simpler than RT-PCR
and have the potential to be incorporated on a microfluidic platform.
Specifically, microfluidic paper analytic devices (μPADs) have
shown numerous advantages over silicone-based microfluidic devices,
as they are lightweight, easy to fabricate via wax printing (no lithography),
use spontaneous flow by capillary action, and have potential on-chip
filtration capability.8,9 However, optical detection of
low concentrations of pathogens has rarely been demonstrated on paper
substrates because paper is optically opaque and non-homogeneous (porous),
generating substantial background scatter and reflection. So far,
single virus copy level detection of norovirus has rarely been demonstrated
on paper substrates (including lateral flow assays and μPADs).
While single copy level detection of other virus targets has indeed
been demonstrated on paper substrates (20 copies of Ebola, 20 copies/μL
of pseudorabies, and 1 copy/μL of HIV), all of them required
nucleic acid amplifications, most notably isothermal methods such
as loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP).10−12 Such methods
are not sufficiently simple for field-based applications (requiring
a heater and thermostat system plus an expensive isothermal amplification
kit) and cannot be considered near-real-time (just the amplification
part can take from 15 min to 2.5 h). As described previously, immunoassay
on μPAD without sample concentration and/or nucleic acid amplification
is the ideal method for field-based norovirus detection, which has
unfortunately not been demonstrated at the single virus copy level.
The LODs of paper-based norovirus immunoassays ranged from 104 to 106 copies/μL (=10 fg/μL to 1 pg/μL,
as the weight of a single norovirus particle is approximately 10 ag
considering its diameter of 35–40 nm)13 without concentration or amplification14,15 and 102 copies/μL with 1 h reaction of signal amplification.16

In this work, we attempted to “visualize”
the norovirus-induced particle immunoagglutination down to the single
virus copy level directly on a μPAD toward field-based applications.
Antibody-conjugated, submicron, fluorescent polystyrene particles
were used on μPAD to quantify norovirus. The μPAD allows
the antibody-conjugated particles and norovirus to “flow”
through paper pores spontaneously via capillary action, which is much
faster and more effective than passive, diffusional mixing. As the
submicron particles move much slower than norovirus, unbound noroviruses
can also be washed from the antibody-conjugated particles, potentially
eliminating a separate washing step.17 The
extent of particle aggregation caused by antibody–antigen binding
was correlated to the norovirus concentration in the samples. A smartphone-based
fluorescence microscope was used to identify and quantify these aggregated
particles to provide additional field applicability. Only the aggregated
particles could be isolated through image processing, enabling extremely
sensitive detection down to the single virus copy level. Neither sample
concentration nor nucleic acid amplification steps are necessary due
to such an extremely low LOD. This novel method is wholly different
from other optical biosensing methods where their signals are ensemble-averaged,
that is, specific, nonspecific, and background signals are not fully
isolated. By securing direct evidence of particle aggregation, credibility
and accuracy of the assay could be improved. In addition, it is also
entirely different from other imaging-based virus counting methods,
where host cells are infected with target viruses.18 Such methods require in vitro cultivation of noroviruses,
which is costly and time-intensive,19 and
most importantly, are complex and difficult for norovirus.

To
accomplish our goal, we designed and tested a smartphone-based fluorescence
microscope to image aggregated particles directly on a wax-printed
μPAD (Figure 1a). In this novel method, norovirus target solutions (5 μL
each) were first loaded on μPADs, followed by the addition of
antibody-conjugated, yellow-green fluorescent polystyrene particle
suspension that resulted in particle aggregation (i.e., immunoagglutination).
This alternative approach enabled the antibody-conjugated particles
to spread and flow through the entire channel, allowing them to be
imaged separately and minimizing nonspecific aggregation. In addition,
much lower concentration of the antibody-conjugated particles (0.001–0.002%)
was used for the particle suspension than those used in other particle
immunoassays, which also contributed to minimizing nonspecific aggregation.
A smartphone-based fluorescence microscope (Figure 1b) was constructed to fluorescently image
the several different areas of a μPAD channel. Through a novel
image processing algorithm, only the aggregated particles were isolated
to relate them to the norovirus concentration. Field water samples—tap
water and reclaimed wastewater—were also evaluated.

Figure 1 Schematic illustration
of norovirus assay on μPAD using a smartphone-based fluorescence
microscope. (a) Norovirus solutions (5 μL) are added directly
to the main channel of μPAD (made out of nitrocellulose), followed
by 2 μL of anti-norovirus particle suspension (0.001% w/v).
Solutions spread throughout the entire channel by capillary action,
which are imaged by a smartphone-based fluorescence microscope. (b)
Blue LED (480 nm) irradiates the μPAD from the side. A smartphone
with a microscope attachment and a bandpass filter (525 ± 20
nm; green emission) captures the fluorescent images of a μPAD
(photograph courtesy: Soo Chung and Sean Perea; copyright 2019).

The overarching aim of this work
is to demonstrate extremely low LOD, preferably near to the single
virus copy level (corresponding to ∼10 ag), in a rapid and
field-ready manner using a μPAD and smartphone-based fluorescence
microscopy.

Results and Discussion
Benchtop Microscope Assays
Initially,
μPAD assays were conducted for assessing the norovirus capsids
using a benchtop fluorescence microscope and subsequent ImageJ analysis.
All serial dilutions were made in 1 mL volume and vortex-mixed to
ensure that there were sufficient amounts of norovirus in each dilution
even at the lowest concentration. For each assay, four different areas
of a single channel were imaged. Through size analysis, the locations
of fluorescent particles (both nonaggregated and aggregated) could
easily be determined, which showed the pixel intensities of at least
100 (out of 255). Distinction could also be made between nonaggregated
and aggregated particles using the pixel area of 50. Therefore, the
raw images were processed to eliminate the pixels with <100 intensity
(to remove background) and the pixel area <50 (to remove nonaggregated
particles). From these four processed images from a single μPAD
channel, a number of pixels were added together to yield a single
data point. This number corresponded to the extent of particle aggregation
and thus norovirus concentration. Experiments were repeated 3–4
times, each time using a different μPAD. Representative zoomed-in
images (raw and processed) are provided in Figure 2 to the left to better represent the aggregated
particles. To confirm whether the pixel area truly represented the
particle size and distinguished the aggregated from non-aggregated
particles, fluorescence and light microscopic images were obtained
for the aggregated particles on a μPAD and processed in the
same manner (Figure S1). Two different
types of particles were observed in fluorescence images, where the
smaller ones potentially represent the nonaggregated particles and
the bigger ones the aggregated particles. Note that the particle size
(0.5 μm) is comparable to the emission wavelength (525 nm) of
fluorescent particles. With light microscopic images, however, only
the bigger particles could be observed, exactly at the same locations
of bigger sized particles in the fluorescence microscopic images.
As the particle size (0.5 μm) is smaller than the upper limit
of visible wavelength (400–750 nm), it will be difficult to
image the 0.5 μm, nonaggregated particles, while the aggregated
particles (>0.8 μm) can be imaged relatively easily.

Figure 2 Benchtop microscope
assay results for norovirus capsids. For each assay, four different
areas of a single channel were imaged and analyzed to obtain the pixel
counts of aggregated particles. The pixel counts from 4 different
images were added together to yield a single data point. Only green
channel images were used. Experiments were repeated three times (0–1
fg/μL) or 4 times (10 fg/μL to 10 pg/μL), each time
using a different μPAD. Error bars represent standard errors
of such 3–4 assays. * indicates statistically significant difference
(p < 0.05 with Wilcoxon rank sum test) from a
negative control sample. Left: representative raw, background-removed,
and nonaggregated particles-removed images (captured by a benchtop
fluorescence microscope and processed with ImageJ) of a μPAD
at given norovirus capsid concentrations. These images are zoomed-in
versions (400 μm × 400 μm) to clearly show the particles;
the actual images used in the assays are 1.060 mm wide and 0.792 mm
long. Right: average pixel counts from μPAD are plotted against
norovirus capsid concentrations, using a benchtop fluorescence microscope
and ImageJ processing.

The averages and standard errors of these pixel counts from
3 to 4 independent assays were plotted against the norovirus concentration
in Figure 2 to the
right. As the sample size is relatively small, it was difficult to
assume normal distribution for each data point. Therefore, the nonparametric
Wilcoxon rank sum test was conducted for each data point in comparison
to the zero-concentration data point [in deionized (DI) water] as
a negative control. The lowest concentration of norovirus capsid that
passed the Wilcoxon rank sum test (p < 0.05) was
100 ag/μL, which is the LOD of this assay. All concentrations
from 100 ag/μL to 10 pg/μL were also significantly different
from the zero concentration (negative control), indicating that the
particle aggregation was highly correlated to the norovirus presence
and minimum nonspecific aggregation. This LOD is several orders of
magnitude lower than 0.25–12.5 pg/μL (=ng/mL) with the
commercial lateral flow assays (including immunoCatch-Noro from Eiken
Chemical, GE test Noro Nissui from Nissui Pharmaceutical, and Quick
Navi-Noro 2 from Denka Seiken) and 10–100 fg/μL as reported
in the recent literature utilizing nanostructures as well as laboratory
equipment such as a microplate reader24 or surface plasmon resonance equipment.25 Because the weight of a single norovirus particle is approximately
10 ag considering its diameter (35–40 nm),13 this LOD value is close to a single virus particle level
within an order of magnitude.

Specificity Test
To evaluate the specificity of this assay, Zika virus was assayed
using anti-norovirus-conjugated particles and compared with the results
of norovirus assay. Experimental conditions were identical to those
of norovirus assays. As shown in Figure 3, the pixel counts were much smaller with
Zika virus than with norovirus. All Zika virus concentrations were
not significantly different from the zero concentration (negative
control) using the nonparametric Wilcoxon rank sum test. Taking these
results together, satisfactory specificity was achieved by the assay
at least for the given experimental conditions.

Figure 3 Specificity test. Three
different concentrations of Zika virus and norovirus were tested with
anti-norovirus-conjugated particles. Benchtop microscope assays and
ImageJ analyses were used. Other experimental conditions are identical
to those shown in Figure 2.

Smartphone Microscope Assays
Next, the same experiments were repeated while replacing norovirus
capsids with intact noroviruses (refer to the Methods section for the preparation of intact norovirus and RT-qPCR assay).
The μPAD assays were conducted for assessing intact norovirus
using a smartphone microscope shown in Figure 1b and MATLAB mobile graphical user interface
(GUI) app (Figure S2). Intact noroviruses
were initially diluted in DI water. Again, all serial dilutions were
made in 1 mL volume and vortex-mixed to ensure that there were sufficient
amounts of norovirus even at the lowest concentration (1000 genome
copies in 1 copy/μL sample). Because the smartphone constantly
attempts to compensate for lighting bias and exposure, and to adjust
white balance, the overall brightness of raw images was different
from assay to assay. Therefore, the raw images (already square-cropped
circumscribing circular field of view) were processed to eliminate
the pixels with the intensities smaller than the overall mean + 50
(out of 255; to remove background noise), binarized, and further processed
to eliminate the pixel areas smaller than 30 (to remove nonaggregated
particles). Refer to the Methods section for
details. Similar to the benchtop microscope assays, four different
areas of a single channel were imaged and analyzed, and the pixel
counts were added together to yield a single data point. Experiments
are repeated three times, each time using a different μPAD.
The results are depicted in Figure 4, showing the representative, zoomed-in images (raw,
background removed, and aggregation isolated) for 1 copy/μL
(the lowest concentration assayed) and 1000 copies/μL (the highest
concentration significantly different from the negative control, i.e.,
virus-free deionized water) to the left, and the plot of average pixel
counts against the norovirus concentration (genome copies per μL)
to the right. All final processed images without zoom-in are summarized
in Figure S3. The lowest concentration
that is significantly different (p < 0.05 with
Wilcoxon rank sum test) from the control (virus-free DI water) is
1 copy/μL, the LOD of this assay. It corresponds to 10 ag/μL
considering the size of a norovirus particle, 35–40 nm,13 and is 1 order of magnitude lower than that
of assaying norovirus capsids, 100 ag/μL. This can be attributed
to the fact that the norovirus capsids were recombinant proteins that
might have inferior affinity to the anti-norovirus compared to the
intact norovirus samples. Concentrations of 10 and 100 copies/μL
are also significantly different from the control (p < 0.05). The average pixel count at the highest concentration,
1000 copies/μL, is slightly smaller than that of 100 copies/μL,
indicating that this concentration is outside the linear range of
assay. In other words, there were too many virus particles that “consumed”
all antibodies, which subsequently failed to connect antibody-conjugated
particles together. Despite this, it is still substantially higher
than the negative control (p < 0.05).

Figure 4 Smartphone
assay results for intact norovirus in DI water. For each assay, four
different areas of a single channel were imaged and analyzed to obtain
the pixel counts of aggregated particles. The pixel counts from four
different images were added together to yield a single data point.
Both green and red channels were combined to maximize pixel intensities.
Experiments were repeated three times, each time using a different
μPAD. Error bars represent standard errors of such three assays.
The Wilcoxon rank sum test was performed and * indicates statistically
significant difference (p < 0.05) from a negative
control sample. Left: representative raw and processed images of μPAD
at given intact norovirus concentrations. These images are zoomed-in
versions (196 μm × 196 μm) to clearly show the particles.
Right: Average pixel counts from μPAD are plotted against intact
norovirus concentrations using a smartphone-based fluorescent microscope
and a MATLAB code.

To further confirm this
extremely low LOD of 1 copy/μL, the number of aggregated particle
clusters (not the pixel counts) in four different images (from a single
μPAD channel) was totaled together. The total average from the
three different assays was 6 ± 1. The volume of the loaded sample
of 5 μL, corresponding to 1 copy/μL × 5 μL
= 5 copies, is comparable to the above count of particle clusters.
It should be noted that a portion of such clusters may not represent
“true” aggregation caused by antibody–antigen
binding but rather nonspecific aggregation. The result shown in Figure 4 further corroborate
this fact, as the pixel counts with zero concentration is ∼80,
representing a small extent of nonspecific aggregation, while those
with 1 copy/μL is ∼280. In addition, the genome copy
number (evaluated by RT-qPCR) does not truly represent the number
of “all” virus particles, which can be higher. It is
also possible that the sample contained free antigens and fragments
in addition to intact viruses, which could also enable particle immunoagglutination.

Smartphone Microscope Assays with Field Water Samples
We
then proceeded to further evaluate this method for two different field
water samples: intact noroviruses were spiked into tap water and reclaimed
wastewater. Water samples were serially diluted using the same tap
water or reclaimed wastewater; thus the sample matrices were undiluted.
As described in the Methods section, the raw
images were processed to remove background noise using the cut-off
intensities of the overall mean +40, +45, or +50. These images were
then binarized and further processed to remove nonaggregated particles
(isolating only the aggregated particles) using the cut-off pixel
areas of 30. The cut-off intensities (mean + 40, +45, or +50) were
selected that minimized the presence of background noise, represented
by single pixels not clustered together. Particles were always represented
by clusters of pixels. Experiments were repeated 6 times with both
tap water and reclaimed wastewater, each time using a different μPAD.

The assay results with tap water are depicted in Figure 5. No data points passed the
Wilcoxon rank sum test (p > 0.05), while the p
value was the smallest (0.063) with the highest concentration of 1000
copies/μL. While the overall pixel counts generally increased
from the negative control, they were not significantly different.
Additionally, the pixel counts are also lower (80–160) than
those with DI water (270–390). These results can be attributed
to electrolytes common in tap water (its conductivity was 920 ±
10 μS/cm) or its high chlorine content (0.5 ± 0.1 ppm).

Figure 5 Smartphone
assay results for tap water. Other experimental conditions are identical
to those shown in Figure 3, except that the assays were repeated six times.

Identical experiments were repeated with reclaimed
wastewater. The assay results with reclaimed wastewater are shown
in Figure 6. While
the pixel counts (40–140) are still lower than those with DI
water (270–390) and comparable to those of tap water (40–140),
the lowest concentration that was significantly different (with Wilcoxon
rank sum test) from the negative control (unspiked reclaimed wastewater)
is 10 copies/μL (corresponding to 100 ag/μL), again close
to the single virus copy level. The overall curve also resembles the
one with DI water, that is, an increase up to 100 copies/μL
followed by a decrease at 1000 copies/μL. The conductivity of
reclaimed wastewater was 1260 ± 10 μS/cm, which was even
higher than that 920 ± 10 μS/cm of tap water, while its
chlorine content was 0.15 ± 0.06 ppm, significantly lower than
that 0.5 ± 0.1 ppm of tap water. To confirm the effect of chlorine
to our assay, a control experiment was performed by adding 0.5 and
5 ppm chlorine to DI water, and the results are shown in Figure S4. Compared to the DI water results (Figure 4), the error bars
were larger and comparable to those with the tap water results (Figure 5). With 0.5 ppm chlorine,
a very narrow linear response up to 10 copies/μL was observed
followed by premature saturation. Such narrow linearity could not
be found with 5 ppm chlorine, 1 order of magnitude higher concentration
than that of tap water. Thus, chlorine could be responsible for rendering
the assay results less reproducible, although the role of electrolytes
in tap water could not be ruled out entirely. In addition, chlorine
might have adversely affected the availability of antibody-conjugated
particles. (Chlorines can easily be removed by simply letting them
to evaporate from water samples).

Figure 6 Smartphone assay results for reclaimed
wastewater. Other experimental conditions are identical to those shown
in Figure 3, except
that the assays were repeated six times.

The excellent LODs in DI water and reclaimed wastewater can
be attributed to many factors. Most importantly, we developed an image-processing
algorithm that isolated only the immunoagglutinated particles and
counted the total number of such pixels. While a large number of fluorescent
dyes and/or nanoparticles were necessary to collect sufficiently strong
signals in other optical detection methods, only a small number of
particles were necessary for individual counting. It also contributed
to minimizing nonspecific aggregation and facilitating capillary action-driven
washing. In addition, most immunoagglutinated particles were retained
and quantified in the field of view through direct imaging and counting
on a paper substrate, enabling single virus copy level detection.

Conclusion
To summarize, we demonstrated an easy-to-use,
low-cost, and extremely sensitive assay for detecting waterborne virus
pathogens that does not require concentration, in vitro cell culture,
and/or nucleic acid amplification. A μPAD was fabricated via
wax printing, and noroviruses were captured directly on a μPAD.
Antibody-conjugated submicron particles were then loaded to a μPAD
and resulting particle aggregation was imaged directly on a μPAD
surface. An image analysis algorithm was developed to isolate only
the aggregated particles while removing the background, generating
visually convincing assay results that were not affected by lighting
biases and perturbations. Benchtop fluorescence microscope and subsequent
ImageJ analysis were initially performed to identify and quantify
norovirus capsids in DI water. Smartphone-based fluorescence microscope
and original MATLAB mobile GUI app were then used to quantify intact
norovirus samples in various field water samples. The LODs with smartphone
assays were 1 copy/μL in DI water and 10 copies/μL in
reclaimed wastewater at single virus particle level. Because of these
extremely low LODs, virus concentration or nucleic acid amplification
steps were not necessary. The results with tap water were inferior,
presumably because of its high chlorine content. This can be easily
resolved by simply letting chlorine to evaporate from water samples.
Additionally, a separate “control” channel is not necessary,
which is typically required for other optical microfluidic biosensing.
This method with extremely low LOD can also be applied for detection
of any other viral pathogens in environmental samples such as food,
water, and fomites.

Methods
μPAD Fabrication
A ColorQube wax printer (Xerox Corporation; Norwalk, CT, USA) was
used to print the microfluidic design (Figure 1a) onto a nitrocellulose paper (Hi-Flow Plus
Membrane, catalog number HF07502XSS; Millipore; Billerica, MA, USA).
Each chip has four wax-printed channels (21 mm long and 2.4 mm wide).
Each chip was heated on a hot plate (Corning; Corning, NY, USA) at
120 °C until the surface-printed wax was melted to fill the paper
pores underneath.

Antibody Conjugation to Fluorescent Particles
The rabbit polyclonal antibody to norovirus capsid protein VP1
(anti-norovirus, catalog number ab92976; Abcam, Inc.; Cambridge, MA,
USA) was used for assaying both norovirus capsids and intact noroviruses.
Anti-norovirus was covalently conjugated to carboxylated, yellow-green
fluorescent, polystyrene particles (particle diameter = 0.5 μm;
Magsphere, Inc.; Pasadena, CA, USA). The fluorescent characteristics
of these particles were reported by the manufacturer: maximum excitation
at 480 nm (blue) and maximum emission at 525 nm (green). Prior to
antibody conjugation, particles were pre-washed with DI water to remove
surfactants from the stock solution, through centrifuging at 9.9g for 13 min. The antibody was then conjugated to these
fluorescent particles following a protocol described in detail elsewhere.20

Norovirus Sample Preparation
Initially,
recombinant norovirus group-1 capsid (MyBioSource, Inc.; San Diego,
CA, USA) was used as a target. Norovirus capsids were serially diluted
in DI water from the 1 ng/μL stock solution to make 10 pg/μL,
1 pg/μL, 100 fg/μL, 10 fg/μL, 1 fg/μL, 100
ag/μL, 10 ag/μL, and 1 ag/μL, all in 1 mL volume
at 1:10 dilution each (4–10 serial dilutions). The systematic
errors of pipettes were ±0.8% for a 1000 μL pipette and
±0.6% for a 100 μL pipette, resulting in the propagated
errors of 2.0–3.1% for the given range of dilutions. These
errors were too small to be represented as the horizonal error bars
in the logarithmic scale x-axes in all plots.

Intact norovirus samples were collected from toilet fecal samples
during an active norovirus outbreak. These samples were confirmed
and quantified by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR). Fecal samples were suspended in sterile phosphate
buffered saline solution (pH 7.4) at 10% w/v. These fecal suspensions
were centrifuged at 1455g for 10 min using Centriprep
centrifugal filters (50 kDa cutoff; EMD Millipore, Burlington, MA,
USA) to purify virus particles. The retentates (∼0.75 mL) were
divided into aliquots of 200 μL and frozen or subjected to nucleic
acid extraction. To confirm and quantify norovirus, virus nucleic
acids were extracted using the QIAmp viral RNA extraction kit (Qiagen,
Chatsworth, CA, USA) and RT-qPCR assays were performed for three different
genogroups of norovirus (GI, GII, and GIV) following previously reported
assays.21−23 GII norovirus RNA was predominantly detected from
the fecal suspensions, with a viral load of approximately 107 virus targets per mL of a stool supernatant. These fecal suspensions
were serially diluted in various water samples (described in the following
section) from the 10 000 genome copies/μL to obtain 1000
genome copies/μL, 100 copies/μL, 10 copies/μL, and
1 copy/μL, again all in 1 mL volume at 1:10 dilution each (1–4
serial dilutions). Using the same systematic errors of pipettes, the
propagated errors were 1.0–2.0% for the given range of dilutions.
Again, these errors were too small to be represented as the horizonal
error bars in the logarithmic scale x-axes in all
plots.

Specificity Test
Zika virus (attenuated virus particles;
NATtrol Zika Virus Range Verification Panel; ZeptoMetrix Corporation,
Buffalo, NY, USA) was used to evaluate the cross-reactivity of anti-norovirus
with this assay. Both norovirus and Zika virus are single-stranded
RNA viruses, have globular shapes, and are similar in size. Identical
experiments were performed by substituting norovirus samples with
Zika virus samples. The concentrations of Zika virus samples were
1.6 pg/μL, 200 fg/μL, and 20 fg/μL.

Water Samples
Various types of environmental water samples, spiked with known
concentrations of norovirus, were tested in this work: DI water, drinking
tap water, and reclaimed wastewater. The latter was produced in a
facility utilizing primary sedimentation dissolved air flotation,
four parallel five-stage Bardenpho processes, disk filtration, and
chlorination. These water samples were tested for pH, conductivity,
and chlorine residual. pH was measured using the pH electrode and
pH monitor (Pinpoint American Marine Inc.; Ridgefield, CT, USA). Conductivity
was measured using the Ultrapen PT1 (Myron L Company; Carlsbad, CA,
USA). Free chlorine residual was assayed by the EPA-accepted Thermo
Orion Method AC4P72 (using N,N-diethyl-p-phenylenediamine, thus known as DPD method; Thermo Fisher,
Waltham, MA, USA) by measuring absorbance at 520 nm using a miniature
spectrophotometer (USB4000, Ocean Optics, Inc.; Dunedin, FL, USA).

Assay Procedure
Norovirus suspensions (5 μL) from
spiked environmental water samples were pipetted directly to the center
of each μPAD channel made out of nitrocellulose paper, without
using any pre-treatments. This norovirus suspension spread through
each microfluidic channel, where norovirus particles were captured
onto nitrocellulose paper (polarity filter) via electrostatic interactions.
After loading norovirus, 2 μL of anti-norovirus-conjugated fluorescent
polystyrene particle suspension (0.001% w/v for DI water and 0.002%
w/v tap water and reclaimed wastewater) was loaded onto the center
of each channel on the μPAD where noroviruses were captured
(Figure 1a). Anti-norovirus
conjugated particles flowed through and filled the entire channel
by capillary action (or wicking). These particles were aggregated
by antibody–antigen binding, that is, immunoagglutination,
which were imaged as described in the following section.

Imaging Particle
Aggregation on μPADs Using a Benchtop Fluorescence Microscope
Particle aggregation with norovirus was imaged by taking 4 random
images of each channel with a 5 s exposure time, initially using a
benchtop fluorescence microscope (Eclipse TS 100; Nikon Corp.; Tokyo,
Japan), equipped with a fluorescence filter (A.G. Heinze B-2E/C; A.G.
Heinze, Inc.; Lake Forest, CA, USA) and imaging software (NIS Elements;
Nikon Corp.; Tokyo, Japan). Only green channel images were used. From
the processed images, the pixel counts were evaluated, which were
added together for 4 different images to yield a single data point.
This procedure was repeated 3–4 times, each time using a different
μPAD.

Imaging Particle Aggregation on μPADs
Using a Smartphone-Based Fluorescence Microscope
The smartphone-based
fluorescence microscope (Figure 1b) consisted of an external microscope (XFox Professional
300X Optical Glass Lenses; X&Y Ind., Shenzhen, China) with magnification
200× to 300×, attached to a smartphone (iPhone 7; Apple,
Inc.; Cupertino, CA, USA). A blue excitation light source was provided
by a secondary smartphone flashlight with a 480 ± 10 nm bandpass
filter (catalog number 43-115; Edmund Optics, Barrington, NJ, USA).
This can be easily replaced by any blue light-emitting diode (LED).
An unmounted 525 ± 20 nm bandpass filter (catalog number BP525-D25;
Midwest Optical Systems, Inc.; Palatine, IL, USA) was placed in between
the μPAD and the objective lens of a microscope to capture green
fluorescence emission. All images were taken using the ProCam 4 app
(Samer Azzam, http://www.procamapp.com; downloaded via iTunes), where the exposure time and white balance
could be manually adjusted. Light trail exposure time was 4 s, white
balance was 4000, and ISO was 200. Similar to benchtop fluorescence
microscopy, four images were taken from each channel to yield a single
data point. Experiments were repeated 3–6 times, each time
using a different μPAD.

Image Analysis for Benchtop
Fluorescence Microscopic Images
ImageJ (U.S. National Institutes
of Health; Bethesda, MD, USA) was initially processed on a separate
desktop computer to analyze the images taken on a benchtop fluorescence
microscope. For benchtop fluorescence microscopic images, “Find
Edges” option in ImageJ was utilized to outline the image of
particles. All pixels with intensity values <100 (out of 255 for
green emission) were considered background noise and eliminated. This
threshold value (100) was determined by comparing the images with
those measured by a higher magnification fluorescence microscope.
All other pixels with intensity values ≥100 were selected,
the interior of the edges was filled, and these selected pixels were
binarized. This procedure resulted in binary images of the particles.
Once the images were binarized, “Analyze Particles”
function was selected in ImageJ, and the pixel area was obtained.
The pixel area <50 was eliminated because they were single particles
that were not aggregated by norovirus. This threshold value (50) was
determined by comparing the images to those measured by a higher magnification
fluorescence microscope. The final data consisted of the following:
(1) the number of aggregated particle clusters and (2) the total accumulated
pixel counts of all aggregated particles, for the given image. This
procedure is schematically illustrated in Figure 7.

Figure 7 Image-processing algorithm using ImageJ for
benchtop fluorescence microscopic images (left) and MATLAB GUI code
for smartphone fluorescence microscopic images (right). Using the
predetermined cut-off pixel intensity (to remove background) and pixel
area (to isolate aggregated particles), along with binarization, a
processed image is generated showing only the aggregated particles.
The total pixel counts are added altogether from four different images
from a single μPAD channel, which makes up a single data point.
This experiment is repeated 3–6 times, each time using a different
μPAD, to evaluate the average pixel counts. Images in the first
and last columns are raw images; those in the second and third columns
are zoomed-in versions to clearly show the particles.

Image Analysis for Smartphone-Based Fluorescence
Microscopic Images
All smartphone-based fluorescence microscopic
images were split into red, green, and blue channels. While the maximum
emission wavelength of the fluorescent particles was 525 nm, their
emission is actually ranged over 550 nm, that is, boundary of green
and red colors (hence, they are referred to as “yellow-green”
particles). Therefore, their fluorescence emission could be captured
in not only green but also red channels. Because nitrocellulose paper
absorbed and scattered light at most wavelengths (its color is bright
white) and the maximum exposure time of a smartphone camera was much
shorter than that of a benchtop fluorescence microscope, the pixel
intensities were quite low. Therefore, both green and red channels
were combined to maximize the pixel intensities. Unlike the benchtop
fluorescence microscopy, the mean pixel intensities of combined green
and red channel images were evaluated using an original code developed
in MATLAB version R2017a (The MathWorks, Inc.; Natick, MA, USA). A
GUI (Figure S1) was created and used to
automate the analysis procedure and to provide its user-friendliness.

Smartphone microscopic images were processed using a similar algorithm
to the benchtop fluorescence microscopy and ImageJ processing. Because
the bright-field views of smartphone microscopic images were circular
in shape, all images were cropped into squares circumscribing those
circles, such that all pixels could be utilized for analyses. Aggregated
fluorescent particles always exhibited the combined green and red
pixel intensities substantially higher than the overall mean intensities
of the cropped area. To eliminate background noise and isolate only
the particles, cut-off intensities were applied to the images set
at overall mean intensity + 40 to 50. The resulting images were then
binarized. To eliminate the nonaggregated particles, those with a
pixel area <30 were eliminated from the binarized images. This
cut-off value of a 30 pixel area was smaller than that of benchtop
fluorescence microscopy, 50 because of the lower magnification and
narrower dynamic range of smartphone-acquired images. This threshold
filtering successfully eliminated all ambient light variations, indicating
that the method is appropriate for field use. Again, this procedure
is schematically illustrated in Figure 7. The MATLAB GUI generated the accumulated pixel counts
of all aggregated particles, for the given image. The MATLAB code
and its GUI were adapted to be executed within MATLAB mobile (The
MathWorks, Inc.; Natick, MA, USA) to enable the image analysis performed
within a smartphone (Figure S2). Once images
were acquired, the total assay time was less than 1 min including
the time for user input.

Statistical Analysis
Four different
images were taken from each μPAD channel (Figure 1A) and the sum of pixel counts from these
four images (representing the extent of particle aggregation) was
recorded for the given concentration of norovirus. These experiments
were repeated 3–6 times for each concentration of norovirus,
each time using different μPAD. Averages of these 3–6
μPAD assays were recorded. P values for each
norovirus concentration against the negative control sample (unspiked)
were calculated using the Wilcoxon rank sum test, performed with JMP
software version 14.3.0 (SAS Institute, Inc.; Cary, NC, USA) with
α = 0.05.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available
free of charge on the ACS Publications
website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00772.Representative
raw (left), background-removed (middle), and non-aggregated particles-removed
images (right) of a μPAD, captured by a benchtop fluorescence
(top) and light (bottom) microscope and processed with ImageJ (Figure
S1); User interface of an original, MATLAB GUI app (Figure S2); Processed
μPAD channel images using a MATLAB code from smartphone fluorescence
microscopic images (Figure S3); Smartphone assay results for 0.5 ppm
(left) and 5 ppm (right) chlorine added to DI water (Figure S4) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00772_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
J.-Y.Y. conceived the overall
concept with input from S.C. and K.A.R. S.C. designed, assembled and
fabricated μPADs and the smartphone based fluorescence microscope,
and conducted all benchtop and smartphone microscope assay experiments,
with assistance from L.E.B. and S.P. S.C. and J.-Y.Y. developed an
image processing procedure. S.C. analyzed all data, with assistance
from L.E.B. and input from J.-Y.Y. and K.A.R. W.Q.B. and C.M.M. collected
water samples from the water reclamation facility and analyzed them
by RT-qPCR. J.-Y.Y. and S.C. wrote the manuscript with input from
L.E.B., S.P., W.Q.B. and K.A.R. All authors have given approval to
the final version of the manuscript.

Funding for this research
was provided by the University of Arizona National Science Foundation
Water and Environmental Technology (WET) Center (award number IIP-1361815)
and Tucson Water.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The
authors are grateful to Dr. Ian L. Pepper and Dr. Charles P. Gerba,
both at Department of Soil, Water and Environmental Science and Water
and Energy Sustainable Technology (WEST) Center at the University
of Arizona, as well as Daniel R. Quintanar at Tucson Water, for helpful
discussions and suggestions for this project.
==== Refs
References
Katayama H. ; Vinjé J.  Norovirus and
other Calicivirus . Global Water Pathogens
Project : Michigan State University, UNESCO : East Lansing , 2017 . http://www.waterpathogens.org/book/norovirus-and-other-caliciviruses.
Teunis P. F. M. ; Moe C. L. ; Liu P. ; Miller S. E. ; Lindesmith L. ; Baric R. S. ; Le Pendu J. ; Calderon R. L. 
Norwalk virus: how infectious is it? . J. Med. Virol. 
2008 , 80 , 1468 –1476 . 10.1002/jmv.21237 .18551613 
Atmar R. L. ; Opekun A. R. ; Gilger M. A. ; Estes M. K. ; Crawford S. E. ; Neill F. H. ; Ramani S. ; Hill H. ; Ferreira J. ; Graham D. Y. 
Determination of
the 50% human infectious dose for Norwalk virus . J. Infect. Dis. 
2014 , 209 , 1016 –1022 . 10.1093/infdis/jit620 .24253285 
Ettayebi K. ; Crawford S. E. ; Murakami K. ; Broughman J. R. ; Karandikar U. ; Tenge V. R. ; Neill F. H. ; Blutt S. E. ; Zeng X.-L. ; Qu L. ; Kou B. ; Opekun A. R. ; Burrin D. ; Graham D. Y. ; Ramani S. ; Atmar R. L. ; Estes M. K. 
Replication of human noroviruses
in stem cell-derived human enteroids . Science 
2016 , 353 , 1387 –1393 . 10.1126/science.aaf5211 .27562956 
Coudray-Meunier C. ; Fraisse A. ; Martin-Latil S. ; Guillier L. ; Delannoy S. ; Fach P. ; Perelle S. 
A comparative
study of digital RT-PCR and RT-qPCR for quantification of Hepatitis
A virus and Norovirus in lettuce and water samples . Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
2015 , 201 , 17 –26 . 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2015.02.006 .25725459 
de Bruin E. ; Duizer E. ; Vennema H. ; Koopmans M. P. G. 
Diagnosis of Norovirus outbreaks by commercial ELISA
or RT-PCR . J. Virol. Methods 
2006 , 137 , 259 –264 . 10.1016/j.jviromet.2006.06.024 .16901556 
Park J. P. ; Cropek D. M. ; Banta S. 
High affinity
peptides for the recognition of the heart disease biomarker troponin
I identified using phage display . Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 
2010 , 105 , 678 –86 . 10.1002/bit.22597 .19891006 
Mu X. ; Zhang L. ; Chang S. ; Cui W. ; Zheng Z. 
Multiplex microfluidic paper-based immunoassay for
the diagnosis of hepatitis C virus infection . Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 5338 –5344 . 10.1021/ac500247f .24794788 
Hu J. ; Wang S. ; Wang L. ; Li F. ; Pingguan-Murphy B. ; Lu T. J. ; Xu F. 
Advances in
paper-based point-of-care diagnostics . Biosens.
Bioelectron. 
2014 , 54 , 585 –597 . 10.1016/j.bios.2013.10.075 .24333570 
Du Y. ; Pothukuchy A. ; Gollihar J. D. ; Nourani A. ; Li B. ; Ellington A. D. 
Coupling
sensitive nucleic acid amplification with commercial pregnancy test
strips . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2017 , 56 , 992 –996 . 10.1002/anie.201609108 .
Meng X.-Y. ; Gao Y. ; Zhang H. ; Luo Y. ; Sun Y. ; Qiu H.-J. 
Cross-priming
amplification-based lateral flow strip as a novel tool for rapid on-site
detection of wild-type Pseudorabies virus . Sens.
Actuators, B 
2018 , 259 , 573 –579 . 10.1016/j.snb.2017.12.087 .
Rohrman B. A. ; Richards-Kortum R. 
A Paper and
Plastic Device for Performing recombinase polymerase amplification
of HIV DNA . Lab Chip 
2012 , 12 , 3082 –3088 . 10.1039/c2lc40423k .22733333 
Greening G. E. ; Cannon J. L.  Human and animal
viruses in food (including taxonomy of enteric viruses) . Viruses in Foods ; Springer : Berlin , 2016 .
Weng X. ; Neethirajan S. 
Aptamer-based fluorometric determination
of norovirus using a paper-based microfluidic device . Microchim. Acta 
2017 , 184 , 4545 –4552 . 10.1007/s00604-017-2467-x .
Hagström A. E. V. ; Garvey G. ; Paterson A. S. ; Dhamane S. ; Adhikari M. ; Estes M. K. ; Strych U. ; Kourentzi K. ; Atmar R. L. ; Willson R. C. 
Sensitive detection of norovirus
using phage nanoparticle reporters in lateral-flow assay . PLoS One 
2015 , 10 , e012657110.1371/journal.pone.0126571 .25978622 
Han K. N. ; Choi J.-S. ; Kwon J. 
Three-dimensional paper-based slip device for one-step point-of-care
testing . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 25710 10.1038/srep25710 .27174731 
Cho S. ; Park T. S. ; Nahapetian T. G. ; Yoon J.-Y. 
Smartphone-based, sensitive μPAD detection of
urinary tract infection and gonorrhea . Biosens.
Bioelectron. 
2015 , 74 , 601 –611 . 10.1016/j.bios.2015.07.014 .26190472 
Fujita M. ; Adachi K. ; Nagasawa M. 
Development
of a homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence assay for detection of
viral double-stranded RNA . Anal. Biochem. 
2019 , 566 , 46 –49 . 10.1016/j.ab.2018.10.021 .30352199 
Costantini V. ; Morantz E. K. ; Browne H. ; Ettayebi K. ; Zeng X.-L. ; Atmar R. L. ; Estes M. K. ; Vinjé J. 
Human norovirus
replication in human intestinal enteroids as model to evaluate virus
inactivation . Emerg. Infect. Dis. 
2018 , 24 , 1453 –1464 . 10.3201/eid2408.180126 .30014841 
Park T. S. ; Yoon J.-Y. 
Smartphone detection of Escherichia coli from field water samples on paper
microfluidics . IEEE Sens. J. 
2015 , 15 , 1902 –1907 . 10.1109/jsen.2014.2367039 .
Betancourt W. Q. ; Kitajima M. ; Wing A. D. ; Regnery J. ; Drewes J. E. ; Pepper I. L. ; Gerba C. P. 
Assessment of virus
removal by managed aquifer recharge at three full-scale operations . J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part A: Environ. Sci. Eng. 
2014 , 49 , 1685 –1692 . 10.1080/10934529.2014.951233 .
Kageyama T. ; Kojima S. ; Shinohara M. ; Uchida K. ; Fukushi S. ; Hoshino F. B. ; Takeda N. ; Katayama K. 
Broadly reactive and highly sensitive assay for Norwalk-like
viruses based on real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR . J. Clin. Microbiol. 
2003 , 41 , 1548 –1557 . 10.1128/jcm.41.4.1548-1557.2003 .12682144 
Kitajima M. ; Oka T. ; Haramoto E. ; Takeda N. ; Katayama K. ; Katayama H. 
Seasonal distribution
and genetic diversity of genogroups I, II, and IV noroviruses in the
Tamagawa River, Japan . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2010 , 44 , 7116 –7122 . 10.1021/es100346a .20715862 
Ahmed S. R. ; Takemeura K. ; Li T.-C. ; Kitamoto N. ; Tanaka T. ; Suzuki T. ; Park E. Y. 
Size-controlled preparation of peroxidase-like
graphene-gold nanoparticle hybrids for the visible detection of norovirus-like
particles . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2017 , 87 , 558 –565 . 10.1016/j.bios.2016.08.101 .27611475 
Ashiba H. ; Sugiyama Y. ; Wang X. ; Shirato H. ; Higo-Moriguchi K. ; Taniguchi K. ; Ohki Y. ; Fujimaki M. 
Detection
of norovirus virus-like particles using a surface plasmon resonance-assisted
fluoroimmunosensor optimized for quantum dot fluorescent labels . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2017 , 93 , 260 –266 . 10.1016/j.bios.2016.08.099 .27597126

