
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03566ArticleMicrostructural
and Nanostructural Evolution of Light
Harvester Perovskite Thin Film under the Influence of Ultrasonic Vibrations Ahmadian-Yazdi Mohammad-Reza †Barratt Claire †‡Rahimzadeh Amin †§Eslamian Morteza *†† University
of Michigan-Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China‡ Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, United States§ MOE
Key Laboratory for Power Machinery and Engineering, School of Mechanical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China* E-mail: Morteza.Eslamian@sjtu.edu.cn, Morteza.Eslamian@gmail.com.30 12 2019 14 01 2020 5 1 808 821 23 10 2019 16 12 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A key step of inexpensive and scalable perovskite thin-film
formation
is defect-free fabrication through low-cost and facile post-treatment
processes. Methods using high annealing temperatures are not favorable
for the scale-up of solution-processed thin-film solar cells, particularly
on plastic/flexible substrates. This contribution analyzes the effect
of ultrasonic vibrations, a recently developed low-cost post-treatment
process, on thin-film quality. Ultrasonic vibrations were applied
to as-spun CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite
thin films prepared with various solvents and antisolvents deposited
on substrates with compact and mesoporous textures. Then, mechanisms
of solvent evaporation, nucleation, and crystallization of perovskite
grains were characterized during ultrasonic vibration. These studies
demonstrate that ultrasonic vibration at low temperature facilitates
heterogeneous crystallization of perovskite grains with a higher conversion
of nuclei into crystal, compared with the conventional annealing process.
Topographic scanning electron microscopy images confirm the dense
and fully covered thin films after the evaporation of solvent. Furthermore,
it is shown that crystal orientation does not change with the choice
of solvent, eliminating the effect of solvent on the deposition of
thin-film perovskites with this method. Therefore, this ultrasonic
vibration post-treatment method is applicable to any solution-processed
material and deposition technique, and it can be used to fabricate
a range of thin-film devices and printed electronics.

document-id-old-9ao9b03566document-id-new-14ao9b03566ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation
The projected increases
in both energy demand worldwide and global warming necessitate the
development of renewable energy sources with a reasonable cost. Perovskite
solar cells (PSCs) are an unprecedented class of emerging thin-film
photovoltaic SCs, possessing outstanding optoelectronic properties
and compatible deposition methods with high-volume manufacturing techniques
because of their solution processability. Solution processing of perovskite
and other solution-based thin films via various liquid-based or droplet-based
deposition techniques affects the device performance,1,2 and in situ and post-treatment techniques are required to remove
defects such as pinholes. Novel methods for improving thin-film quality
include soft cover,3 flash infrared annealing,4,5 vacuum,6,7 ultrasonic vibration of wet films,8,9 application of electric10 and magnetic11 fields, ion migration,12 and microwaves.13,14

The focus of this work
is the effect of ultrasonic vibration on wet films of solutions: application
of ultrasonic vibration during drying creates micromixing inside the
liquid and influences interaction between the components, which alters
the associated physical phenomena.15−21 Indeed, other external forces such as microwaves, electric waves,
and magnetic waves have similar effects. External forces such as ultrasonic
vibrations may also result in a change in the rate of nucleation and
crystal growth in ionic solutions22 such
as perovskites. In this context, Zabihi and Eslamian22 studied the kinetics of PbI2 crystallization
excited by ultrasonic vibrations using the Avrami equation.23 For this particular system, the study showed
that crystal transformation from a two-dimensional (2D) structure
to epitaxial three-dimensional structure prevents thin-film dewetting
under ultrasonic vibration. This study of PbI2, a precursor
of perovskites, gives insight into the fabrication of PSCs as a whole.

To assess the merit of a deposition method for perovskite solid
films, the required operating temperature and the resulting power
conversion efficiency (PCE) of the ensuing devices are important factors
to consider. Minimizing the density of recombination trap sites directly
results in an improved PCE, and larger grain sizes usually serve this
purpose because of reduced grain boundaries. Grain size is strongly
dependent on the deposition and post-treatment method. In particular,
soft cover processing, mentioned above, yielded grain size smaller
than 1 μm3, whereas larger grain sizes, >1 μm,
were observed with the ultrasonic vibration method.9 Furthermore, because ultrasonic vibration is a mechanical
processing method, it is favorable for large-scale perovskite thin-film
production on flexible substrates: it is robust, reproducible, cost-effective,
and compatible with temperatures as low as ∼40 °C.8 This method has also shown applicability to other
solution-processed materials, for example, improvement of physical
and chemical properties of graphene–TiO2,20 ZnO,24 and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene
sulfonate16 thin films. Ahmadian-Yazdi
et al.25 performed ultrasonic vibrations
on mesoporous structured PSCs before annealing on single and mixed-halide
perovskites, and their results demonstrated substantial film coverage
and charge-transfer improvement. In another study, Ahmadian-Yazdi
et al.8 eliminated the annealing process
for perovskite thin-film processing by employing diethyl ether (DEE)
as an antisolvent for n-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP)
during spin casting. An antisolvent-free and annealing-free process
was also introduced by replacing NMP by NMP/acetonitrile, which resulted
in PCEs of 14.09 and 9.20%, respectively.8 Later, Xiong et al. improved the PCE of the annealing-free device
to 18.55% using ultrasonic vibrations applied on a mixed perovskite
and achieved a grain size larger than 1 μm, whereas the reference
thermally annealed device showed a PCE of 15.17% with a smaller grain
size.9

1.2 Theoretical Background
The aforementioned
introduction reveals the merit and potential of ultrasonic vibrations
for the preparation of annealing-free perovskite films at room temperature.
This section provides a background on evaporation and crystallization
of thin films of liquid solutions; the following sections present
results on the effects of ultrasonic vibration on evaporation, crystallization,
and other characteristics of perovskite thin films.

1.2.1 Evaporation
Post-treatment methods
of perovskite films, including heat treatment and ultrasonic vibrations,
mainly control solvent evaporation. There are numerous studies on
evaporation of liquid films, pure liquids or wet coatings, subjected
to heat transfer26,27 but very few studies on liquids
subjected to ultrasonic vibrations19 as
an unconventional drying process. The evaporation rate of the solvent
from a thin film of a solution (E), as realized in
wet perovskites and other coatings, is complex. It is a function of
the thin-film temperature (T),28 which is nearly uniform, surface tension of wet thin film
(γ),28 heat capacity of solvent (Cp), pressure (p),28 surface structure and roughness of
the substrate (R),29 solution
concentration (c),28 and
surface wettability. Perovskite solutions show low contact angle and
high wetting on titanium dioxide (TiO2),17 which is a result of low surface energy. The wet film exhibits
hydrogen bonding between the molecules of perovskite and the solvents;
the resulting change in surface tension as concentration varies over
time affects the chance of molecules to escape from the surface of
the film. Furthermore, the bulk and vapor pressure, as well as disjoining
pressure for ultrathin films, play an important role in the evolution
of the thin film and its evaporation. Here, only the bulk ambient
pressure (p) is considered. In addition, surface
roughness is the only surface property accounted for, as a first approximation.
For simplicity, the aforementioned parameters are grouped into several
dimensionless numbers using the π-Buckingham theorem. These
numbers are obtained as follows based on three main parameters, E, T, and R, where other
parameters are repeated 1  

As mentioned before, evaporation is
affected by the wettability of the surface, surface texture, and roughness
because the micro–nanostructures increase the liquid surface
area and behave as capillary wicking agents, which may lead to changes
in surface energy and fluid flow. In this context, confining the perovskite
solution via the macro–nanopores of the substrate to improve
the conversion of perovskite precursors to perovskite crystals with
a desired orientation has been studied,30,31 whereas evaporation
has been seldom emphasized as a route to control the characteristics
of the perovskite thin film. Compact and mesoporous TiO2 (C-TiO2 and M-TiO2 hereafter, respectively)
are the classic substrates for the deposition of perovskite films,
and their different surface texture, through roughness, may affect
the mechanism of perovskite deposition and solvent evaporation, to
be studied in this work.

1.2.2 Nucleation and Crystallization
Upon sufficient solvent evaporation from a wet perovskite thin film,
nucleation starts which then leads to crystallization. Owing to its
crucial role in film quality, significant effort has been devoted
to the control of nucleation,32,33 prior to post-treatment
by thermal annealing, ultrasonic vibrations, and so on. Nucleation
and crystallization can happen simultaneously throughout the thin-film
formation.34 The removal of the solvent
drives the solution into the supersaturation phase,35 at which point nuclei may form at the interface of the
solution–substrate (heterogeneous nucleation) and/or in the
bulk of the thin film (homogeneous nucleation). The nuclei may then
grow under favorable thermodynamic conditions to form crystals.

The total free-energy change for homogeneous nucleation in a solution
is given by36 2  where VM is the
molar volume of the nucleus, T is the absolute temperature, S is the ratio of the solution concentration to the equilibrium
solubility limit (supersaturation parameter), r is
the nucleus radius, γcl is the interfacial energy
between crystals and the liquid solution, and Rg is the gas constant. The solution concentration determines
the thermodynamic stability of the nuclei and consequently the critical
nuclei size. At a constant temperature, critical nuclei size, rc = 2VMγcl/RgT ln (S), is associated with the solution concentration. Nuclei
larger and smaller than rc will grow and
dissolve in the solution, respectively.37

Furthermore, besides homogeneous nucleation in the bulk of
the
solution, supersaturation in a wet thin film results in the formation
of monomers at the interface of the solution and substrate, where
these monomers can form a single crystal nucleus37 through a process called heterogeneous nucleation. The
nucleolus on the substrate is usually modeled as a spherical cap,
as depicted in Figure 1. As heterogeneous nucleation appears at the interface of the solution
with a foreign surface, the free energy of nucleation (eq 2) is reduced because of the changes
in surface energy and contact angle between nuclei/crystals and the
solution, γclF(θ).37 In other words, nucleation is heterogeneous
when the nuclei energy barrier in homogeneous nucleation decreases
because of the reduction of interface energy with the amount F(θ), that is, the reduction in the free energy is
a function of the contact angle θ.34,35 The contact angle is related to binary interfacial energies through
Young’s equation as follows 3  and F(θ) is obtained
as follows 4  where γcl and γsl are the interfacial energies between the crystal (c)—liquid
(l) and solid (s)—liquid (l) interfaces, respectively, as shown
in Figure 1. Here, in this study, the solid phase is either C-TiO2 or M-TiO2 substrates; the liquid is the perovskite
solution; and the crystal is the perovskite crystals.

Figure 1 Nucleus/crystal spherical
cap model on a solid substrate, among
three phases. The subscripts s, l, and c denote the solid substrate,
crystal, and liquid solution phases.

Figure 2 Perovskite thin-film (a) deposition (e.g., by spin coating)
and
(b) post-treatment with ultrasonic vibrations.

Typically, both types of nucleation may happen,
but heterogeneous
nucleation dominates when supersaturation S from eq 2 is low, whereas a high S favors homogeneous nucleation.37 Another consideration is that nucleation growth is faster at higher
temperatures, but the perovskite decomposes at certain high temperatures;
therefore, there exists a specific range of favorable temperatures
below the decomposition temperature where the nucleation rate is still
high. Despite a large thermodynamic force for nucleation at low temperatures,
molecular diffusion is slow, leading to a lower overall nucleation
rate.37 In the case of perovskite formation
by spin coating, nucleation may happen during both deposition and
post-treatment.

1.3 Objectives
The aforementioned literature
review and background show that the evaporation process of perovskite
liquid films is not well studied. In addition, apart from demonstrating
the merit of the method for device performance, the annealing-free
ultrasonic vibration post-treatment of perovskite thin films has never
been explained in detail. Thus, this paper aims to study the evaporation
and evolution of perovskite thin films under ultrasonic vibrations.
Here, two common perovskite solutions spun on compact and mesoporous
TiO2 substrates are used to study the crystallization process
over vibration time, and the major factors that affect perovskite
thin-film evolution during ultrasonic vibrations are evaluated. The
study of evaporation rate, solvent choice, and antisolvent choice
gives a holistic understanding of the effect of ultrasonic vibration
on thin-film evolution.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Effect of Substrate, Solvent, and Antisolvent
on Evaporation
Figures 3a and 3b display the atomic
force microscopy (AFM) surface topography of C-TiO2 and
M-TiO2 films, showing the compact and mesoporous texture
of the films, respectively. The inset scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) image shows the larger area of M-TiO2 with high porosity. Figure 3c,d shows the X-ray
diffraction (XRD) pattern and transmittance of rutile C-TiO2 and M-TiO2, corroborating the crystalline phase of TiO238,39 and the high transmittance within the visible
range because of the large band gap of TiO2. The TiO2 films are deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated
glass, and therefore the XRD peaks of FTO are also detected.

Figure 3 AFM images
of (a) C-TiO2 and (b) M-TiO2 thin
films spun on FTO-coated glass. In (b), the inset shows the SEM image
as well, where the scale bar is 2 μm. (c) XRD pattern and peaks
of TiO2 (#) spun on FTO-coated glass, where (*) denotes
the peaks of FTO. (d) Transmittance curves of C-TiO2 and
M-TiO2 films.

Figure 4 Mass loss ratio of a perovskite solvent because of spin
coating,
with two solvents or solvent mixtures (DMSO/DMF and NMP) and two antisolvents
(DEA and DEE). The as-spun samples were weighed without any post-treatment.

Figure 4 shows the
mass loss ratio of the solvent in perovskite films prepared with two
solvents or solvent mixtures [dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/dimethylformamide
(DMF) and NMP] and two antisolvents [diethyl acetate (DEA) and DEE],
without ultrasonic vibration treatment. It is shown that the perovskite
films prepared with NMP on both substrates exhibit higher mass loss
and solvent evaporation. Additionally, Figure 4 shows that for all solvents and antisolvents,
M-TiO2 enables a higher rate of solvent evaporation and
thus a higher supersaturation ratio, S, because of
the presence of pores. From this result, it is inferred that a higher
initial solution concentration in the samples with high mass loss
ratio prior to post treatment leads to an early nucleation and a smaller
critical nucleus size and, therefore, a higher likelihood of stable
nucleation (eq 2, with
a higher S).

2.2 Thin-Film Evolution and Solvent Depletion
with Ultrasonic Vibrations
Although some part of the DMF/DMSO/NMP
solvents leave the thin film before ultrasonic vibration or heat treatment,
the aforementioned solvents create intermediate phases after spin
casting. Evaluation of the variations of the formation of intermediate
perovskite phases in the thin film is important to understand the
changes in the interfacial energy. These intermediate phases are the
quasi-binary PbI2–DMF and PbI2–nDMSO and quasi-ternary pMAI·mPbI2·nDMSO, where m, n, and p denote the number of associated
molecules. Guo et al.40 identified (MA)2Pb3I8·2DMSO, a yellowish intermediate
phase, by introducing DEE into the solution. Moreover, (MA)2Pb3I8·2DMSO is suggested to be the most
favorable intermediate phase of DMSO–perovskite. Note that
this intermediate phase and DMSO could increase the polarity of MAI–PbI2–solvent films.41−44 In the case of NMP, the formation of an MAI–PbI2–NMP intermediate phase has also been reported.45 The formation of intermediate phases at the
early stages of film formation will be verified by Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and XRD characterization, later.

The confined interaction of perovskites with the solvents NMP and
DMSO/DMF are verified by FTIR, as shown in Figure 5a,b, respectively, for samples subjected
to 60 and 180 s of ultrasonic vibrations. The solvent diffusion into
the precursors implies intermediate phase formation, and strong peaks
appear at 1015 (cm–1) and 1640 (cm–1), associated with DMSO and NMP, respectively, which reduce with
the time of ultrasonic vibrations. Figure 5a,b shows C=O and S=O bonds,
typical of NMP and DMSO, respectively. It is expected that the C=O
bond in the NMP–perovskite complex decreases because of the
interaction of MAI that weakens the bond between PbI2 and
the solvents by intercalating into the PbI2 framework.46 The reduction of this bond happens with increasing
the time of ultrasonic vibrations.

Figure 5 FTIR analysis performed on perovskite
films. (a) NMP-based perovskite
and (b) DMSO/DMF-based perovskite. (c) Mass change of the perovskite
film with respect to the ultrasonic vibration time and (d) mass change
of the as-spun perovskite film because of natural convection, without
ultrasonic vibrations.

Solvent depletion was also characterized by mass.
The qualitative
study of the normalized mass of the perovskite films prepared with
NMP and DMSO/DMF (Figure 5c) reveals that the perovskite film deposited on M-TiO2 reaches the minimum amount of solvent after 1 min of ultrasonic
vibrations. Figure 5c also shows additional solvent mass reduction from the film deposited
on C-TiO2 substrates after 1 min of ultrasonic vibrations,
indicating higher evaporation rate on mesoporous substrates, as observed
before for nonvibrated samples as well, as seen in Figure 4. The solvent evaporation slows
down after 2–3 min of vibrations on both substrates, which
proves that the majority of the solvent evaporates after a short period
of ultrasonic vibration at room temperature.

Overall, the trend
of the measured solvent mass reduction (Figure 5c) is qualitatively
consistent with the peak of solvent from the FTIR analysis (Figure 5a,b). Furthermore,
the mass loss of the as-spun wet perovskite film because of natural
convection is measured, as shown in Figure 5d. The results show that the effect of natural
evaporation is negligible, and therefore the major solvent evaporation
in the samples treated with ultrasonic vibrations is in fact a direct
result of ultrasonic vibrations.

The mass loss analysis in Figure 5c can be used to
obtain the solution concentration
in the thin film (c), defined as the mass of the
solute per total mass of the film, by calculating the mass of the
solvent and dry film, where the solvent mass decreases with the vibration
time. The evaporation rate of the solvent (E), the
film uniform temperature (T), and other parameters
are listed in Table 1 for two perovskite solvent systems, namely, NMP and DMSO/DMF. Then,
the dimensionless numbers obtained previously and shown as eq 1 were evaluated, leading
to a correlation between the perovskite solution evaporation number
π1 and the film temperature number, π2, as shown in Figure 6, whereas the effect of the substrate type through the roughness
number, π3, is weaker. Thus, the correlation between
the aforementioned numbers can be written as follows 5  

Figure 6 Evaporation (π1) and temperature
(π2) numbers for perovskite film evaporation on C-TiO2 with roughness of R = 21.7 nm and on M-TiO2 with
roughness
of R = 79 nm, where all films were subjected to ultrasonic
vibrations. The details of the data and calculations are given in Table 1. For the C-TiO2 substrate, , and for the M-TiO2 substrate, . The temperature in π2 is in Kelvin units to reflect the fact that the evaporation rate
is inversely proportional to absolute temperature, as physical models
suggest.

Table 1 Perovskite Solution and Thin-Film
Properties, Deposited on C-TiO2 and M-TiO2 Substrates,
Prepared in a Glovebox at Ambient Pressure of 100 kPa, Where Two Solvent
Systems of NMP and DMSO/DMF Were Used
 	C-TiO2	M-TiO2	
 	T (°C)	γsa (mN/m)	Cp (J/mol °K)	c (kg/m3) × 10–5	E (kg/s) × 106	T (°C)	γsa (mN/m)	Cp (J/mol °K)	C (kg/m3) × 10–5	E (kg/s) × 106	
DMSO/DMF	34	66.54	149	51.32	5.18	31	64.99	149	53.12	5.3	
 	34	64.04	149	52.4	4.8	31	67.86	149	52.20	5.11	
 	36	64.05	150	53.13	2.54	35	60.76	150	65.38	2.62	
 	36	60.05	150	63.75	2.3	35	60.90	150	65.40	2.5	
NMP	34	64.03	174	130.80	2.4	31	65.22	174	77.27	3.13	
 	34	66.04	174	130.76	2.85	31	63.28	174	81.00	1.3	
 	36	64.06	175	147.82	1.38	35	59.56	175	80.95	1.56	
 	36	61.45	175	153.54	0.77	38	53.30	178	113.00	0.8	
 	39	52.29	178	154.54	0.92	38	54.25	178	113.33	1.03	
Figure 6 shows that
with an increase in the temperature dimensionless number π2, the evaporation dimensionless number π1 rapidly decreases, indicating a quick solvent depletion resulting
in a decrease in the evaporation rate. The correlation between the
two dimensionless numbers is given in the caption of Figure 6 where it has been assumed
that the evaporation rate varies with the inverse of absolute temperature,
consistent with the evaporation models developed for liquid films
and droplets.47−49 Additional experiments and data points are required
to develop a robust and reliable correlation and model considering
all process parameters.

2.3 Perovskite Thin-Film Interfacial Energy
In a recent study, Tsai et al.50 used
slow crystallization to improve the quality of perovskites; so, this
analysis uses perovskite samples with a high volume of solvent in
the thin film for a slower crystallization. In addition, DMSO/DMF
solvent was chosen for the interfacial energy study in this section
and for the crystallization study in the following sections.

Figure 7 shows that
the interfacial energy of the perovskite film decreases with the time
of imposed ultrasonic vibrations. The decrease of interfacial energy
is attributed to the reduction of the residual solvent, which affects
the perovskite structure and composition, because intermediate phases
of perovskite form before the final phase. Figure 7 shows that for both mesoporous and compact
substrates, the perovskite interfacial energy starts at the same value
of ∼68 mN/m but ends at different values after 180 s of vibrations.
This observation indicates the effect of the substrate texture on
the amount of solvent evaporation during evaporation, consistent with
the findings of Figure 3. In the following section, the effect of interfacial energy with
respect to solvent evaporation will be studied because of its key
role in the fabrication of perovskite films.

Figure 7 Interfacial energy of
perovskite thin films versus time of imposed
ultrasonic vibrations. The films were prepared using DMSO/DMF as the
solvent and DEA and DEE as antisolvents on (a) M-TiO2 and
(b) C-TiO2 films.

It was inferred from the FTIR results of Figure 5, and also from the
XRD patterns to be discussed
later, that the intermediate phases of the perovskite–solvent
transform to perovskite crystals by losing the polar solvents, that
is, DMSO and NMP, in the thin film. This conversion alters the polarity
of the thin film. Figure 8a shows that the dispersive component of the interfacial energy
at a given vibration time, γd(t),
normalized with respect to the dispersive interfacial energy associated
with 60 s of ultrasonic vibrations, γlad(60), is only reduced by 10% after t = 180 s of ultrasonic vibrations, whereas Figure 8b shows that the polar component,
γp(t), reduces by 50% for all samples
after t = 180 s of ultrasonic vibrations. Therefore,
the reduction in interfacial energy here is due to the depletion of
polar solvents.

Figure 8 (a) Dispersive and (b) polar interfacial energy of perovskite
thin
films for various times of ultrasonic vibrations, normalized with
respect to the associated values at 60 s of ultrasonic vibrations.
A combination of substrates and antisolvents was used. The solvent
is DMSO/DMF.

2.4 Perovskite Thin-Film Crystallization
So far, these results have shown that the solvent depletes and the
interfacial energy of perovskite films decreases with increasing the
time of imposed ultrasonic vibrations. In addition, in previous studies,
it has been shown that ultrasonic vibrations result in an improvement
in the perovskite light absorption8 and
a decrease25 or increase9 in the grain size, depending on the choice of the substrate
and solutions, as discussed in the Introduction section. The aforementioned effects may be because of the variations
in the nucleation and crystallization of the perovskite, under the
presence and varying time of ultrasonic vibrations. In this section,
the classical theory of nucleation will be used to quantify the heterogeneous
or homogeneous nucleation of the perovskite during ultrasonic vibrations.

In previous sections, it was shown that the perovskite solvents
evaporate after 180 s of vibrations in all cases (cf. Figure 5) and that interfacial energy
decreases with the time of ultrasonic vibrations (cf. Figure 7). According to eq 4, with the known contact angle of
perovskite nuclei on the TiO2 film (cf. Table 2), it can be determined whether the nucleation is homogeneous,
that is, F(θ) = 1, or heterogeneous, that is,
0 < F(θ) < 1, at a given time of ultrasonic
vibrations. Figure 9a,b shows the values of θ and F(θ),
associated with perovskites spun on C-TiO2 and M-TiO2 substrates, respectively, for perovskite films prepared with
two antisolvents, DEA and DEE. Figure 9 shows that on both compact and mesoporous substrates,
both homogeneous (in bulk of the solution) and heterogeneous (on the
interface) nucleations are present. In addition, the mesoporous layer
favors heterogeneous nucleation compared to the compact layer because
of its lower F(θ), after 120 s of ultrasonic
vibrations.

Figure 9 Variations of F(θ) vs ultrasonic vibration
time for the film spun on (a) C-TiO2 and (b) M-TiO2 substrates. The solutions were prepared with two antisolvents
DEA and DEE and with the DMSO/DMF solvent.

Table 2 Interfacial Tensions (mN/m) between
Various Phases for the Spherical Cap Model, for DMSO/DMF-Based Perovskite
Filmsa
 	 	γsl	γsc	γcl	θ
(deg)	
substrate	vibration time (s)	DEA	DEE	DEA	DEE	DEA	DEE	DEA	DEE	
compact	60	0.22	0.12	0.66	0.66	1.82	2.69	105	102	
 	120	0.24	0.43	0.66	0.66	1.57	0.47	107	124	
mesoporous	60	0.71	0.18	0.73	0.73	1.57	2.79	91	101	
 	120	1.31	1.22	0.73	0.73	0.89	1.31	50	65	
a θ (Figure 1) was calculated from eq 3, for two antisolvents and two vibration times,
where the films are still wet and the spherical cap model is still
valid.

Furthermore, as studied in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, surface
features, that is, surface compactness and porosity, influence the
rate of evaporation, which also affect the rate of perovskite nucleation/crystallization.
As the concentration of the perovskite increases with increasing ultrasonic
vibration time, the rate of nucleation changes. The classical nucleation
theory expresses the rate of nucleation as follows35,36 6  where I is the nucleation
rate and QD is the activation energy of
the transport of monomer to the nucleus/solution interface. Assuming
that the sum of the activation energy and free energy is constant
in annealing (performed at 100 °C) and in ultrasonic vibrations
(performed at 25 °C), only the post-treatment temperature associated
with annealing and vibrations affects the nucleation rate. The ratio
of nucleation in annealing to ultrasonic vibrations can be obtained
as follows 7  

Equation 7 reveals
that the nucleation rate of the perovskite during annealing can be
higher than that during vibrations, provided that QD + ΔG remains constant between
the two processes. However, individually assuming that QD remains temperature-independent and ΔG can increase with temperature,  decreases and  can increase with decreasing temperature.51 Considering the overall energy changes with
temperature leads to the nucleation rate model, which reaches a maximum
and then decreases with increasing temperature.52 Therefore, the perovskite thin film can exist in region
I, where the nucleation rate is larger at a higher temperature, whereas
in region II the nucleation rate is larger at a lower temperature,
as shown in Figure 10. Here, with the assumption that perovskite films as-spun and treated
by ultrasonic vibrations remain in region I, studying another parameter
can provide additional insight into the vibrational effect on the
perovskite film quality, to be elaborated in the following.

Figure 10 Nucleation
rate with respect to the effect of temperature.

The QD and ΔG values are positive before reaching the critical Gibbs
free energy
(ΔGc) or the critical radius of
nuclei; then, ΔG decreases until it reaches
a negative value, indicative of a state of crystal growth. Further,
the Boltzmann energy distribution states that the number of nuclei
with the potential to become crystals is proportional to exp(−ΔG/kT), k being the Boltzmann
constant. However, a higher operating temperature is more favorable
for a high rate of nucleation in the post-treatment stage, whereas
supersaturation and precipitation happen during spin coating with
the antisolvent treatment. It follows that the nucleation rate can
be lower during post-treatment and decreases at room temperature,
compared with the usual annealing at ∼100 °C. Thus, although
ultrasonic vibration post treatment results in a lower number of nuclei,
this method also allows for the conversion of more stable nuclei with
small or negative free energy because the Boltzmann energy distribution
is larger at lower temperature for ultrasonic vibrations, as long
as the nuclei are larger than the critical size.

One may argue
that a lower rate of nucleation may result in a poor
coverage of perovskite film, but in fact, optimum nucleation should
be achieved during spinning before post-treatment begins. In other
words, spinning already facilitates nucleation before post-treatment;
so, it is expected that crystal growth dominates the nucleation/crystallization
process during the post-treatment of the thin film. As a result, it
is evident that (i) heterogeneous nucleation and (ii) the effective
impact of ultrasonic vibrations on diffusion with high thermodynamic
driving forces explain the higher quality found in the perovskite
thin films subjected to ultrasonic vibrations, compared to the thermally
annealed films, as shown in Figure 11. Although pinholes appear early in the vibration treatment,
a fully covered thin film is produced as the vibration time increases
as a result of continuous nucleation, solvent evaporation, reduction
of interfacial energy, and higher nucleus conversion into the growth
stage. Figure 11 shows
the presence of pinholes in the thermally annealed sample, which can
be a result of faster evaporation in the thin film and a lower conversion
of nuclei, compared with the samples subjected to ultrasonic vibrations.
Each SEM image of Figure 11 displays the average grain size, showing that the grain size
is controlled by a range of parameters such as the post-treatment
method (annealing or vibration), solvent system, substrate interfacial
energy, and surface features. Figure 11 shows that the samples prepared with the NMP solvent
have larger grains compared to the samples incorporating the DMSO/DMF
solvent system. The complex phenomena of grain growth will be further
discussed in the following.

Figure 11 SEM topography of perovskite thin films subjected
to ultrasonic
vibrations (without thermal annealing) and films subjected to thermal
annealing only. The scale bar is 200 nm. The average grain size obtained
by image analysis is shown in each SEM image.

Nucleation rate is not the sole parameter controlling
all variations
in perovskite coverage and grain size; lower free energy and ion migration
have been argued to be likely the reasons for larger grains,53 although the effect of other parameters cannot
be ruled out. This phenomenon can also be explained partially by the
diffusion of perovskite ions. As interfacial energy increases, ions
travel more slowly near the substrate, as the interfacial energy imposes
friction forces against ion movement at the interface of the liquid
and solid.53 In contrast, at a lower interfacial
energy, better traveling of ions near the substrate or more ion diffusion
enables the continuous growth of perovskite grains and produces larger
grain sizes. Here, the reduction of perovskite interfacial energy
over the course of post-treatment may happen in two different schemes
with annealing and ultrasonic vibrations.

Another consideration
is that large grain sizes require an optimum
number of nuclei. In other words, for the high density of nuclei,
many grains form and reach the boundaries of neighboring grains, resulting
in the formation of small grains. This likely causes coarsening, which
may result in nonuniform small grains. The thermodynamic driving force
of coarsening is the difference in curvature.37 Polycrystalline materials have different grain sizes and sides,
and the grains are categorized based on the number of their sides:
six, more than six, and fewer than six. Six-sided grains are stable
and do not change or grow significantly with the external energy,
whereas grains with more than six sides grow, and grains with fewer
than six sides shrink. This phenomenon is called solid-state coarsening.
The solid-state grain coarsening rate can be found as follows54 8  where t is time, r0 and rt are the grain radii at time zero and t, respectively,
and QB is the energy of the grain boundary
motion. Figure 11 compares
the topography of samples with two different post-treatment methods.
The presence of a solvent in a one-step annealing method advances
the Ostwald ripening in competition with the monomers and nucleation.
This competition results in small grain sizes such as those shown
in Figure 11 for annealed
samples. Although high-temperature post-treatment leads to small grain
sizes, resulting in Ostwald coarsening, ultrasonic vibrations may
follow a different mechanism of coarsening. We hypothesize that imposing
ultrasonic vibrations, instead of annealing, promotes solid-state
coarsening, and larger grains appear, whereas smaller grains shrink,
as seen in Figure 11. Here, the results show that the imposed ultrasonic vibrations provide
sufficient energy to overcome the activation energy of the grain boundary
motion. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to conduct
room-temperature post-treatment to control the motion of thin-film
grain boundaries. This gives evidence that the different grain sizes
of perovskites for each post-treatment method can be attributed to
the differences in solid–liquid interfacial energy, nucleus
density, and coarsening of grains.

2.5 Crystallographic Parameters
To characterize
the perovskite crystal growth direction over ultrasonic vibration
time, intensity and integrated intensity of diffraction peaks in XRD
tests were obtained. The full-range XRD pattern of Figure 12a for annealed and vibrated
samples for 2 and 3 min exhibits major reflections from the (110),
(220), and (310) planes, corresponding to ∼14.05°, 28.4°,
and 31.8°, revealing a tetragonal structure, which is the dominant
phase of the perovskite.55Figure 12a shows that the intensity
of all perovskite peaks increase with the vibration time at the same
rate. Therefore, the degree of preferred orientation does not change
significantly across vibration times. The shift of the (110) plane
at 14.05° to a lower angle, commonly observed in the literature,
can be because of the compressive strain of the perovskite crystal,
which indicates the same process as seen in annealing of the thin
film.56 The preferred orientation of the
crystal is determined by the surface structure, that is, pores and
the evaporation rate of the perovskite thin film. Figure 12b shows the XRD pattern for
lower angles, where some additional peaks are detected when the vibration
time is insufficient for the complete conversion of precursors to
perovskites (vibrations for 1 and 2 min). For the annealed and vibrated
sample for 3 min, these peaks have disappeared. These peaks have been
attributed to the intermediate phases of the perovskite,57 discussed earlier in Section 2.2.

Figure 12 XRD patterns of perovskites: (a) M-TiO2/NMP perovskite,
(b) intermediate phases of the perovskite, where (*) and (#) denote
the perovskite intermediate phases and perovskite peaks, respectively.
(c) Ratio of integrated intensity of the (110) plane of the perovskite
crystal of samples exposed to ultrasonic vibrations and treated with
DEE to that of thermally annealed sample. (d) Energy gap of the perovskite
thin film after 3 min of vibration.

Figure 12c shows
the ratio of integrated intensity of the (110) plane of the perovskite
crystal of samples exposed to ultrasonic vibrations and treated with
DEE to that of the thermally annealed sample. In the case of the NMP
solvent with a higher evaporation rate and a lower solvent residue,
the deposited film exhibits a higher integrated intensity with the
preferred (110) orientation. Further vibration time beyond 2 min causes
the intensity of the (110) peak to intensify even more than that in
the annealed perovskite thin film. More importantly, the crystal lattice
changes as the peak shifts toward a lower angle of diffraction after
1 min vibration. Furthermore, the perovskite peak at 14° is consistent
among all samples, exposed to ultrasonic vibrations or thermally annealed,
except for the sample treated with ultrasonic vibrations for only
1 min. This result shows the consistent phase of perovskite throughout
the time of post-treatment, same as the annealed sample.

Although
the perovskite phase does not change, the crystal growth
orientation can be different. It has been shown that the application
of different solvents changes the preferred direction of the perovskite
crystal growth,58 whereas in ultrasonic
vibration post-treatment, regardless of the solvent, the preferred
direction of perovskite growth is found to be toward the (220) plane.
Consequently, increases in the intensity of perovskite in both the
(110) and (220) planes show improvement in crystallinity.

To
further corroborate the formation of perovskites, UV–vis
analysis was performed on the perovskite sample prepared with 3 min
of vibration (Figure 12d), where a band gap of 1.65 eV was obtained, consistent with the
literature reports.

Some recent studies have focused on elucidating
the impact of grain
size and the grain-preferred orientation on the PCE of PSCs.59 The fact that interfacial defect sites can be
suppressed with a large grain size and low grain angle has important
consequences not only on recombination and PCE but also on the stability
of PSCs. Wieghold et al.59 demonstrated
that low angular orientation is a prerequisite for better charge extraction
at the interface. To this end, inclination of the grain of perovskite
thin films was calculated with the help of AFM images. Figure 13 shows smaller grain angles
for perovskites spun on the M-TiO2 layer, whereas the distribution
of angles is larger on the C-TiO2 layer and annealed samples.
In contrast to other reports on conventionally annealed samples,59 there were no significant changes in crystal
orientation with the process of ultrasonic vibrations between DMSO/DMF
and NMP samples.

Figure 13 Incline angle of perovskite grains with respect to plane
face for
perovskite thin films prepared with different solvents, substrates,
and post-treatment methods. C-annealing and M-annealing denote the
thermally annealed samples spun on compact and mesoporous TiO2 substrates, whereas other samples were treated by ultrasonic
vibrations.

As noted in previous sections, the perovskite thin
films treated
with ultrasonic vibrations are highly crystalline with a high coverage,
with the grain size smaller than 200 nm, where similar grain sizes
and improved film quality were reported with a different antisolvent8 and also when Cl was added into the perovskite
precursor.25 In addition, another previous
report made use of SnO2 instead of TiO2 as the
substrate along with a different perovskite formulation, resulting
in a significantly increased grain size up to 1 μm, yielding
a device PEC of 18.55%.9 Therefore, in
terms of quality and morphology of the perovskite films, ultrasonic
vibrations in current and previous studies resulted in defect-free
films. However, the achieved perovskite grain size also depends on
the substrate characteristics and perovskite formulations. An earlier
study of the effect of ultrasonic vibration on PbI2 crystals
proposed that the higher nucleation rate achieved by ultrasonic vibrations
is responsible for the resulting dense thin film,22 whereas the effect of temperature on Gibbs energy and activation
energy was not considered. Here, the possibility of lower nucleation
rates was also considered; therefore, Boltzmann energy distribution
was studied to explain dense perovskite thin films, which showed that
heterogeneous nucleation is enhanced on a mesoporous substrate when
ultrasonic vibration is applied.

3 Conclusions
This work addresses the
importance of low-temperature post-treatment
methods and annealing-free approach for large-scale production of
perovskite films. Ultrasonic vibration imposed on the as-deposited
wet perovskite film was shown to have a significant impact on the
morphology, crystal structure, and grain orientation. Compared to
high-temperature annealing, this method better controls the evaporation
rate to produce dense, higher quality perovskite thin films as a result
of homogeneous–heterogeneous nucleation. Ultrasonic vibration
is shown to facilitate a better conversion of nuclei to crystals,
not necessarily at a higher nucleation rate. The high-quality crystal
can be attributed to higher thermodynamic forces and molecular diffusion,
which increase crystallization without high temperature. Although
the literature on annealing methods has reported that perovskite crystal
orientation may change depending on the choice of the solvent, this
phenomenon was not seen with ultrasonic vibration. Instead, ultrasonic
vibrations had a uniform effect on crystal orientation, independent
of the solvent. Furthermore, the grain orientation angle of vibration-treated
samples is smaller than that of the annealed samples, resulting in
reduced charge recombination and improved PCE. As a result, ultrasonic
vibration is a suitable universal fabrication and post-treatment method
for crystalline thin films. Application of this method is an improved
route to inexpensive and large-scale fabrication of perovskite thin
films.

4 Materials and Methods
Methylammonium
iodide [CH3NH3I (MAI), 99.5%]
and lead iodide (PbI2, 98.5%) were supplied by Xi’an
Reagents Co., China. N-Methylpyrrolidone (NMP), DEE,
DEA, 2-propanol, DMSO, DMF, hydrogen chloride (HCl, 37.5%), ethanol
(99.9%), titanium(IV)isopropoxide (97%), and titanium dioxide paste
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Diiodomethane and glycerol were
purchased from Macklin.

FTO-coated glass (10 mm × 10 mm)
substrates were washed
sequentially by detergent, deionized water, 2-propanol, and acetone
in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min each, followed by UV–ozone
treatment conducted for 15 min. The titanium dioxide compact layer
(C-TiO2) was prepared by diluting 2.54 mL of titanium(IV)
isopropoxide into 16.9 mL of ethanol and then added to a solution
of 350 μL of HCl in 16.9 mL of ethanol. The resulting solution
with a low concentration of 0.23 mmol/mL was spun onto an FTO glass
at 2000 rpm for 60 s to undergo a sol–gel process, and then
the film was sintered at 500 °C for 30 min. The paste of mesoporous
titanium dioxide (M-TiO2) nanoparticles was added to ethanol
(2:7 mass ratio), and then the solution with the concentration of
2.7 mmol/mL was spun at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and the thin film was sintered
for another 30 min at 500 °C. The C-TiO2 and M-TiO2 precursors had different characteristics, such as initial
concentrations, and therefore, were spun at a suitable spinning speed
and time, in order to achieve best results, in line with the literature
reports, as well.38,60

The perovskite solution
was made with the precursors MAI (158.9
mg) and PbI2 (461.01 mg) dissolved in 1 mL of NMP or DMF/DMSO
(4:1 by volume) in a glovebox. A perovskite thin film was spun onto
the C-TiO2 or M-TiO2 thin-film substrates in
two steps: first, the perovskite solution was spun at 1000 rpm for
12 s, and then the speed was increased to 4000 rpm for 30 s. After
12 s in the second step, 300 μL of antisolvent, DEA or DEE,
was dripped on the thin film and spun for the remaining 18 s. The
resulting thin film was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min (only for
the reference sample) or placed immediately on an ultrasonically vibrating
steel box for up to 180 s after spin casting. A disk-type Langevin
ultrasonic transducer was installed inside the steel box, transferring
vertical ultrasonic vibrations, 40 kHz frequency and 40 W, to the
horizontally situated substrate and wet film. Under these conditions,
a maximum vertical displacement of ∼7 nm is sensed on the surface
of the steel box, which is then transferred to the glass substrate
and liquid film.16Figure 2 depicts the process of post-treatment of
a perovskite wet film when the substrate is placed atop an ultrasonic
transducer.

In order to investigate the stability of the perovskite
films,
without any top layer, samples prepared under 3 min of ultrasonic
vibrations were stored in a desiccator with a relative humidity (RH)
< 20% and also at ambient conditions with RH ≈ 50–60%.
After 3 days, the samples stored in RH ≈ 20% remained intact
with the original dark black color, indicating that the perovskite
films remained stable. However, samples exposed to RH ≈ 50–60%
partially turned yellow, and the XRD analysis revealed the formation
of PbI2 peaks because of the partial decomposition of the
perovskite. Therefore, the samples studied in this work were analyzed
immediately to avoid partial decomposition.

The perovskite film
thickness,25 roughness,61 and heat capacity of NMP62 were
extracted from other works. The heat capacity of the
DMSO/DMF mixture was found using the heat capacity of DMSO63 and DMF64 and the
mass fraction of each solvent in the mixture, based on the knowledge
of the volume fraction of DMF/DMSO (4:1) and the density of DMSO and
DMF, using a linear weighted averaging approach. Thus, the heat capacity
of the DMSO/DMF mixture at 25 °C was found as Cp = 0.23 ×153 + 0.77 × 146
= 147.6 (J/mol °K).

The perovskite films prepared by ultrasonic
vibrations were characterized
as follows. The thin films were weighed with a microbalance (Mettler
Toledo, USA). The mass of each as-spun sample without imposing vibrations
but with antisolvent treatment was considered as the reference sample
(m0). However, in order to find the solvent
mass loss with respect to the effect of antisolvent, first the as-spun
sample without antisolvent treatment was weighed and then a similar
antisolvent-treated sample was weighed to find the magnitude of solvent
evaporation solely because of the effect of the antisolvent. The difference
between the former and latter masses gives the solvent mass loss with
respect to the effect of the antisolvent. In addition, the antisolvent-treated
sample subjected to ultrasonic vibrations for 1, 2, and 3 min was
weighed. An infrared camera (FLIR C2, USA) was used to measure the
temperature of the perovskite films spun on C-TiO2 and
M-TiO2 substrates and subjected to ultrasonic vibrations
up to 180 s, as presented in Figure 14.

Figure 14 Temperature variations of a fresh as-spun perovskite film
on the
C-TiO2 layer with a roughness of R = 21.7
nm and on the M-TiO2 layer with R = 71
nm, while placed on an ultrasonic vibrator. Glovebox temperature was
29 °C.

To find the contact angles and interfacial energies,
we used a
tensiometer (Theta, Biolin Scientific, Finland). The liquid–vapor
interfacial tensions (surface tension) of perovskite solutions were
obtained directly from the pendant droplet method, whereas the interfacial
energies of the solids cannot be measured directly in one step. Thus,
the polar and dispersive interfacial energies of the prepared perovskite
thin films subjected to ultrasonic vibrations for 0, 1, 2, and 3 min
with respect to air, γsap and γsad, respectively, were calculated by measuring
the contact angle, θ, of diiodomethane and glycerol, as two
probe liquids, on the perovskite thin film. The two contact angles
were used in the Owens, Wendt, Rabel, and Kaelble equation to yield
two equations with two unknowns γsap and γsad65 9  where the subscript s denotes
the perovskite thin solid film, a denotes the air or gas phase, and
l denotes the abovementioned probe liquids, for which their interfacial
energies are known, that is, γlad and γlap. The sum of γsap and γsad yields the total interfacial energy
of the perovskite solid film with respect to air. Combining the above
equation with the Young’s equation, γsa =
γsl + γla cos (θ), results
in the following equation, which describes the interfacial energy
of a solid with respect to a liquid phase, such as a solid perovskite
with respect to a perovskite liquid solution. The other parameters
are already known (γsad, γsap, and γsa obtained from eq 9), and γlad and γlap are any probe
liquid (here perovskite solution) interfacial tensions 10  

Equation 10 is valid
for any three phases, which are in contact in a system. Now, to be
able to utilize the spherical cap model for nucleation/crystallization,
and then to find θ and F(θ) according
to Figure 1 and eqs 3 and 4, the interfacial energy of perovskite crystals with respect to the
perovskite solution, γcl, as depicted in Figure 1, is required. Here,
we used the interfacial energy of the perovskite film with respect
to air, γsa, obtained from eq 10, to find γcl through the
following equation, where the phase s in eq 10 has been changed to phase c, the crystal
phase. 11  

In eq 11, γca is the interfacial energy of
the perovskite crystal with
respect to the air or gas phase, which we assume to be the same as
the interfacial energy of perovskite thin films with respect to air,
γsa. γla is the interfacial tension
(surface tension) of the perovskite solution. We obtained the surface
tension of perovskite films spun on both C-TiO2 and M-TiO2 substrates, separately, as the average of γsa of heat-treated samples spun on M-TiO2 (50 mN/m) and
C-TiO2 (46 mN/m) and the DMSO/DMF-based samples post-treated
with ultrasonic vibrations, according to Section 2.4.

The following procedure was used
to find the contact angle of the
crystal with respect to the substrate, θ, to determine the level
of homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation using eqs 3 and 4. An
atomic force microscope (FastScan, Bruker, USA) was used to find the
surface topography of TiO2 films as well as the grain incline
angle and the interfacial energy between TiO2 and the perovskite
crystal, γsc, in eq 3. A TiO2 particle was attached to the atomic
force microscope probe, and the Hamaker constant between the particle
and the perovskite dry film or crystal was obtained. Using the correlation
between the Hamaker constant, A̅, cutoff distance, D, and interfacial energy, γ = A̅/24πD2,66 the interfacial energy between the perovskite crystal and the TiO2 substrate, γsc, was obtained. Here, the
Hamaker constant is 5 × 10–19 (mJ) and 5.5
× 10–19 (mJ) for compact and mesoporous TiO2, respectively, and the cutoff distance is 0.1 (nm). In addition,
the interfacial energy between TiO2 substrates and the
perovskite film (γsl) in the spherical cap model
was calculated using eq 10, with the known interfacial properties of the TiO2 substrate
and perovskite solution, and γcl was obtained from eq 11. The foregoing three
interfacial energies were plugged into eq 3 to find θ for the perovskite wet films
subjected to ultrasonic vibrations at 60 and 120 s, as listed in Table 2, for the perovskite
films prepared with the DMSO/DMF solvent.

The topography of
perovskite thin films was examined with a scanning
electron microscope (Zeiss Ultra Plus, Germany). XRD tests (model
D5005, Bruker, USA) were conducted to show the composition and crystal
orientation of the perovskite thin films. Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR, Spectrum-100, PerkinElmer Inc., USA) was employed
to study the presence of solvents in the thin film. The direct band
gap of the perovskite film was calculated from the UV–vis spectrum
(Thermo Scientific, GENESYS 10S, US). The optical band gap of a semiconductor
can be calculated using the Tauc curve––(αhν)2 versus hν––where h is Planck’s constant, α is the absorbance
coefficient from the UV–vis curve, and ν is the frequency.67

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Financial support from the Shanghai Municipal Education
Commission via the Oriental Scholar fund and the funding from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) are acknowledged.
==== Refs
References
Mathies F. ; Eggers H. ; Richards B. S. ; Hernandez-Sosa G. ; Lemmer U. ; Paetzold U. W. 
Inkjet-Printed Triple Cation Perovskite
Solar Cells . Appl. Energy Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 1834 –1839 . 10.1021/acsaem.8b00222 .
Bu T. ; Li J. ; Zheng F. ; Chen W. ; Wen X. ; Ku Z. ; Peng Y. ; Zhong J. ; Cheng Y. B. ; Huang F. 
Universal
passivation strategy to slot-die printed SnO2 for hysteresis-free
efficient flexible perovskite solar module . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 4609 10.1038/s41467-018-07099-9 .30389948 
Ye F. ; Chen H. ; Xie F. ; Tang W. ; Yin M. ; He J. ; Bi E. ; Wang Y. ; Yang X. ; Han L. 
Soft-cover
deposition of scaling-up uniform perovskite thin films for high cost-performance
solar cells . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2016 , 9 , 2295 –2301 . 10.1039/c6ee01411a .
Sanchez S. ; Hua X. ; Phung N. ; Steiner U. ; Abate A. 
Flash Infrared Annealing
for Antisolvent-Free Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2018 , 8 , 1702915 10.1002/aenm.201702915 .
Troughton J. ; Carnie M. J. ; Davies M. L. ; Charbonneau C. ; Jewell E. H. ; Worsley D. A. ; Watson T. M. 
Photonic
flash-annealing
of lead halide perovskite solar cells in 1 ms . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016 , 4 , 3471 –3476 . 10.1039/c5ta09431c .
Li X. ; Bi D. ; Yi C. ; Décoppet J.-D. ; Luo J. ; Zakeeruddin S. M. ; Hagfeldt A. ; Grätzel M. 
A vacuum flash–assisted solution
process for high-efficiency large-area perovskite solar cells . Science 
2016 , 353 , 58 –62 . 10.1126/science.aaf8060 .27284168 
Xie F. X. ; Zhang D. ; Su H. ; Ren X. ; Wong K. S. ; Grätzel M. ; Choy W. C. H. 
Vacuum-Assisted
Thermal Annealing
of CH3NH3PbI3 for Highly Stable and
Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 639 –646 . 10.1021/nn505978r .25549113 
Ahmadian-Yazdi M.-R. ; Eslamian M. 
Toward scale-up of perovskite solar cells: Annealing-free
perovskite layer by low-cost ultrasonic substrate vibration of wet
films . Mater. Today Commun. 
2018 , 14 , 151 –159 . 10.1016/j.mtcomm.2018.01.006 .
Xiong H. ; Zabihi F. ; Wang H. ; Zhang Q. ; Eslamian M. 
Grain engineering
by ultrasonic substrate vibration post-treatment of wet perovskite
films for annealing-free, high performance, and stable perovskite
solar cells . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 8526 –8535 . 10.1039/c8nr00540k .29694485 
Vijayan R. ; Swathi K. ; Narayan K. S. 
Synergistic Effects of Electric-Field-Assisted
Annealing and Thermal Annealing in Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 19436 –19445 . 10.1021/acsami.6b09480 .27731618 
Tai C. Y. ; Wu C.-K. ; Chang M.-C. 
Effects of magnetic field on the
crystallization of CaCO3 using permanent magnets . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2008 , 63 , 5606 –5612 . 10.1016/j.ces.2008.08.004 .
Yuan Y. ; Huang J. 
Ion Migration in Organometal
Trihalide Perovskite and Its Impact
on Photovoltaic Efficiency and Stability . Acc.
Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 , 286 –293 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00420 .26820627 
Maitani M. M. ; Iso D. ; Kim J. ; Tsubaki S. ; Wada Y. 
Microwave Application
to Efficient Annealing Process of CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Crystalline
Films . Electrochemistry 
2017 , 85 , 236 –240 . 10.5796/electrochemistry.85.236 .
Wang K.-L. ; Zhang C.-C. ; Jiang Y.-R. ; Liu H.-R. ; Li X.-M. ; Jain S. M. ; Ma H. 
High-quality
perovskite films via
post-annealing microwave treatment . New J. Chem. 
2019 , 43 , 9338 –9344 . 10.1039/c8nj05941a .
Eslamian M. 
Excitation
by acoustic vibration as an effective tool for improving the characteristics
of the solution-processed coatings and thin films . Prog. Org. Coat. 
2017 , 113 , 60 –73 . 10.1016/j.porgcoat.2017.08.008 .
Gholampour N. ; Brian D. ; Eslamian M. 
Tailoring
Characteristics of PEDOT:PSS
Coated on Glass and Plastics by Ultrasonic Substrate Vibration Post
Treatment . Coatings 
2018 , 8 , 337 10.3390/coatings8100337 .
Ahmadian-Yazdi M.-R. ; Rahimzadeh A. ; Chouqi Z. ; Miao Y. ; Eslamian M. 
Viscosity,
surface tension, density and contact angle of selected PbI2, PbCl2 and methylammonium lead halide perovskite solutions
used in perovskite solar cells . AIP Adv. 
2018 , 8 , 025109 10.1063/1.5019784 .
Rahimzadeh A. ; Eslamian M. 
Experimental study on the evaporation of sessile droplets
excited by vertical and horizontal ultrasonic vibration . Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 
2017 , 114 , 786 –795 . 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.06.099 .
Rahimzadeh A. ; Eslamian M. 
On evaporation of thin
liquid films subjected to ultrasonic
substrate vibration . Int. Commun. Heat Mass
Transf. 
2017 , 83 , 15 –22 . 10.1016/j.icheatmasstransfer.2017.03.004 .
Zabihi F. ; Ahmadian-Yazdi M.-R. ; Eslamian M. 
Photocatalytic Graphene-TiO2 Thin
Films Fabricated by Low-Temperature Ultrasonic Vibration-Assisted
Spin and Spray Coating in a Sol-Gel Process . Catalysts 
2017 , 7 , 136 10.3390/catal7050136 .
Zabihi F. ; Eslamian M. 
Low-cost transparent graphene electrodes
made by ultrasonic
substrate vibration-assisted spray coating (SVASC) for thin film devices . Graphene Tech. 
2017 , 2 , 1 –11 . 10.1007/s41127-017-0003-8 .
Zabihi F. ; Eslamian M. 
Effect of the Ultrasonic
Substrate Vibration on Nucleation
and Crystallization of PbI2 Crystals and Thin Films . Crystals 
2018 , 8 , 60 10.3390/cryst8020060 .
Avrami M. 
Kinetics of
Phase Change. II Transformation-Time Relations for Random Distribution
of Nuclei . J. Chem. Phys. 
1940 , 8 , 212 –224 . 10.1063/1.1750631 .
Miao Y. ; Du P. ; Wang Z. ; Chen Q. ; Eslamian M. 
Ultrasonic vibration
imposed on nanoparticle-based ZnO film improves the performance of
the ensuing perovskite solar cell . Mater. Res.
Express 
2018 , 5 , 026404 10.1088/2053-1591/aaaa88 .
Ahmadian-Yazdi M.-R. ; Habibi M. ; Eslamian M. 
Excitation of Wet Perovskite
Films
by Ultrasonic Vibration Improves the Device Performance . Appl. Sci. 
2018 , 8 , 308 10.3390/app8020308 .
Feng C. ; Chandra S. 
Evaporation of ethanol
films wicking on structured,
porous coatings deposited on copper plates . Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 
2019 , 136 , 821 –831 . 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.03.045 .
Wang B.-B. ; Zhang H.-H. ; Xu Z.-M. ; Wang X.-D. ; Zhao Q. ; Yan W.-M. 
Acceleration of
aqueous nano-film evaporation by applying
parallel electric field: A molecular dynamics simulation . Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 
2019 , 138 , 68 –74 . 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.04.042 .
Wayner P. C. 
Interfacial
profile in the contact line region of a finite contact angle system . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
1980 , 77 , 495 –500 . 10.1016/0021-9797(80)90322-7 .
Bigham S. ; Fazeli A. ; Moghaddam S. 
Physics of
microstructures enhancement
of thin film evaporation heat transfer in microchannels flow boiling . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 44745 10.1038/srep44745 .28303952 
Tong S. W. ; Balapanuru J. ; Fu D. ; Loh K. P. 
Thermally Stable
Mesoporous Perovskite Solar Cells Incorporating Low-Temperature Processed
Graphene/Polymer Electron Transporting Layer . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 29496 –29503 . 10.1021/acsami.6b10278 .27730813 
Wang M. ; Jiang X. ; Bian J. ; Feng Y. ; Wang C. ; Huang Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Shi Y. 
High-Performance and
Stable Mesoporous Perovskite Solar Cells via Well-Crystallized FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3 . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2019 , 11 , 2989 –2996 . 10.1021/acsami.8b17833 .30585718 
Bi D. ; Yi C. ; Luo J. ; Décoppet J.-D. ; Zhang F. ; Zakeeruddin S. M. ; Li X. ; Hagfeldt A. ; Grätzel M. 
Polymer-templated nucleation and
crystal growth of perovskite films for solar cells with efficiency
greater than 21% . Nat. Energy 
2016 , 1 , 16142 10.1038/nenergy.2016.142 .
Gao H. ; Bao C. ; Li F. ; Yu T. ; Yang J. ; Zhu W. ; Zhou X. ; Fu G. ; Zou Z. 
Nucleation and Crystal
Growth of Organic-Inorganic Lead Halide Perovskites under Different
Relative Humidity . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 9110 –9117 . 10.1021/acsami.5b00895 .25871284 
Tung H.-H. ; Paul E. L. ; Midler M. ; McCauley J. A.  Crystallization of
Organic Compounds ; JohnWiley & Sons , 2009 .
Brinker C. J. ; Scherer G. W.  Sol–Gel Science,
The Physics and Chemistry of Sol-Gel Processing ; Academic Press , 1990 .
Klein D. H. 
Kinetics
of precipitation (Nielsen, Arne E.) . J. Chem.
Educ. 
1965 , 42 , A428 10.1021/ed042pa428.1 .
Zhou Y. ; Game O. S. ; Pang S. ; Padture N. P. 
Microstructures
of Organometal Trihalide Perovskites for Solar Cells: Their Evolution
from Solutions and Characterization . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6 , 4827 –4839 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b01843 .26560696 
Zhou Z. ; Yuan S. ; Fan J. ; Hou Z. ; Zhou W. ; Du Z. ; Wu S. 
CuInS2 quantum dot-sensitized
TiO2 nanorod
array photoelectrodes: synthesis and performance optimization . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2012 , 7 , 652 10.1186/1556-276x-7-652 .23181940 
Kakiage K. ; Osada H. ; Aoyama Y. ; Yano T. ; Oya K. ; Iwamoto S. ; Fujisawa J. I. ; Hanaya M. 
Achievement of over
1.4 V photovoltage in a dye-sensitized solar cell by the application
of a silyl-anchor coumarin dye . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 35888 10.1038/srep35888 .27762401 
Guo Y. ; Shoyama K. ; Sato W. ; Matsuo Y. ; Inoue K. ; Harano K. ; Liu C. ; Tanaka H. ; Nakamura E. 
Chemical Pathways
Connecting Lead(II) Iodide and Perovskite via Polymeric Plumbate(II)
Fiber . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 15907 –15914 . 10.1021/jacs.5b10599 .26617161 
Hao F. ; Stoumpos C. C. ; Liu Z. ; Chang R. P. H. ; Kanatzidis M. G. 
Controllable
Perovskite Crystallization at a Gas–Solid Interface for Hole
Conductor-Free Solar Cells with Steady Power Conversion Efficiency
over 10% . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 16411 –16419 . 10.1021/ja509245x .25374278 
Miyamae H. ; Numahata Y. ; Nagata M. 
The Crystal Structure Of Lead(II)
Iodide-Dimrthylsulphoxide(1/2), PbI2(DMSO)2 . Chem. Lett. 
1980 , 9 , 663 –664 . 10.1246/cl.1980.663 .
Guo Y. ; Shoyama K. ; Sato W. ; Matsuo Y. ; Inoue K. ; Harano K. ; Liu C. ; Tanaka H. ; Nakamura E. 
Chemical Pathways
Connecting Lead(II) Iodide and Perovskite via Polymeric Plumbate(II)
Fiber . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 15907 –15914 . 10.1021/jacs.5b10599 .26617161 
Rong Y. ; Tang Z. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhong X. ; Venkatesan S. ; Graham H. ; Patton M. ; Jing Y. ; Guloy A. M. ; Yao Y. 
Solvent engineering towards controlled grain growth in perovskite
planar heterojunction solar cells . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 10595 –10599 . 10.1039/c5nr02866c .26037081 
Jo Y. ; Oh K. S. ; Kim M. ; Kim K.-H. ; Lee H. ; Lee C.-W. ; Kim D. S. 
High Performance of Planar Perovskite
Solar Cells Produced from PbI2(DMSO) and PbI2(NMP) Complexes by Intramolecular Exchange . Adv. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 3 , 1500768 10.1002/admi.201500768 .
Matsui T. ; Seo J.-Y. ; Saliba M. ; Zakeeruddin S. M. ; Grätzel M. 
Room-Temperature Formation of Highly
Crystalline Multication
Perovskites for Efficient, Low-Cost Solar Cells . Adv. Mater. 
2017 , 29 , 1606258 10.1002/adma.201606258 .
Susarla N. ; Ahmed S. ; Dees D. W. 
Modeling and analysis
of solvent
removal during Li-ion battery electrode drying . J. Power Sources 
2018 , 378 , 660 –670 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.01.007 .
Eslamian M. ; Ahmed M. ; Ashgriz N. 
Modelling
of nanoparticle formation
during spray pyrolysis . Nanotechnology 
2006 , 17 , 1674 –1685 . 10.1088/0957-4484/17/6/023 .26558577 
Price P. E. ; Cairncross R. A. 
optimization
of single-zone dring of polymer solution
coating to avoid blister deffects . Dry. Technol. 
1999 , 17 , 1303 –1311 . 10.1080/07373939908917616 .
Tsai C.-M. ; Wu G.-W. ; Narra S. ; Chang H.-M. ; Mohanta N. ; Wu H.-P. ; Wang C.-L. ; Diau E. W.-G. 
Control of preferred
orientation with slow crystallization for carbon-based mesoscopic
perovskite solar cells attaining efficiency 15% . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2017 , 5 , 739 –747 . 10.1039/c6ta09036b .
Schawe J. E. K. 
The
Gibbs free energy difference between a supercooled melt and the crystalline
phase of polymers . J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 
2015 , 120 , 1417 –1425 . 10.1007/s10973-015-4453-z .
Lorenzo A. T. ; Müller A. J. 
Estimation
of the nucleation and crystal growth contributions
to the overall crystallization energy barrier . J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 
2008 , 46 , 1478 –1487 . 10.1002/polb.21483 .
Chen Z. ; Dong Q. ; Liu Y. ; Bao C. ; Fang Y. ; Lin Y. ; Tang S. ; Wang Q. ; Xiao X. ; Bai Y. ; Deng Y. ; Huang J. 
Thin single crystal perovskite solar
cells to harvest below-bandgap light absorption . Nat. Commun. 
2017 , 8 , 1890 10.1038/s41467-017-02039-5 .29192232 
Kingery W. D. ; Bowen H. K. ; Uhlmann D. R.  Introduction to Ceramics ; John
Wiley & Sons , 1976 .
Baikie T. ; Fang Y. ; Kadro J. M. ; Schreyer M. ; Wei F. ; Mhaisalkar S. G. ; Graetzel M. ; White T. J. 
Synthesis and crystal
chemistry of the hybrid perovskite (CH3NH3)PbI3 for solid-state sensitised
solar cell applications . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2013 , 1 , 5628 10.1039/c3ta10518k .
Zhao J. ; Deng Y. ; Wei H. ; Zheng X. ; Yu Z. ; Shao Y. ; Shield J. E. ; Huang J. 
Strained hybrid perovskite
thin films and their impact on the intrinsic stability of perovskite
solar cells . Sci. Adv. 
2017 , 3 , eaao561610.1126/sciadv.aao5616 .29159287 
Li Y. ; Zhi L. ; Ge G. ; Zhao Z. ; Cao X. ; Chen F. ; Cui X. ; Lin F. ; Ci L. ; Sun J. ; Zhuang D. ; Wei J. 
Investigation on Crystallization of CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite and Its
Intermediate Phase from Polar Aprotic Solvents . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2018 , 19 , 959 –965 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.8b01516 .
Chen Y. ; He M. ; Peng J. ; Sun Y. ; Liang Z. 
Structure and Growth
Control of Organic-Inorganic Halide Perovskites for Optoelectronics:
From Polycrystalline Films to Single Crystals . Adv. Sci. 
2016 , 3 , 1500392 10.1002/advs.201500392 .
Wieghold S. ; Correa-Baena J.-P. ; Nienhaus L. ; Sun S. ; Shulenberger K. E. ; Liu Z. ; Tresback J. S. ; Shin S. S. ; Bawendi M. G. ; Buonassisi T. 
Precursor
Concentration Affects Grain Size, Crystal Orientation, and Local Performance
in Mixed-Ion Lead Perovskite Solar Cells . ACS
Appl. Energy Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 6801 –6808 . 10.1021/acsaem.8b00913 .
Li W. ; Zhang W. ; Van Reenen S. ; Sutton R. J. ; Fan J. ; Haghighirad A. A. ; Johnston M. B. ; Wang L. ; Snaith H. J. 
Enhanced
UV-light stability of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells
with caesium bromide interface modification . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2016 , 9 , 490 –498 . 10.1039/c5ee03522h .
Brian D. ; Ahmadian-Yazdi M.-R. ; Barratt C. ; Eslamian M. 
Impact dynamics and
deposition of perovskite droplets on PEDOT:PSS and TiO2 coated glass
substrates . Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 
2019 , 105 , 181 –190 . 10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2019.03.021 .
Dávila M. J. ; Martin Trusler J. P. 
Thermodynamic
properties of mixtures of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone
and methanol at temperatures between 298.15K and 343.15K and pressures
up to 60MPa . J. Chem. Thermodyn. 
2009 , 41 , 35 –45 . 10.1016/j.jct.2008.08.003 .
Clever H. L. ; Westrum E. F. 
Dimethyl sulfoxide and dimethyl sulfone.
Heat capacities,
enthalpies of fusion, and thermodynamic properties . J. Phys. Chem. 
1970 , 74 , 1309 –1317 . 10.1021/j100701a027 .
Smirnova N. N. ; Tsvetkova L. Y. ; Bykova T. A. ; Marcus Y. 
Thermodynamic properties
of N,N-dimethylformamide and N,N-dimethylacetamide . J. Chem. Thermodyn. 
2007 , 39 , 1508 –1513 . 10.1016/j.jct.2007.02.009 .
Owens D. K. ; Wendt R. C. 
Estimation of the Surface Free Energy of Polymers . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
1969 , 13 , 1741 –1747 . 10.1002/app.1969.070130815 .
Israelachvili J. N.  Van der Waals Forces between Particles and Surfaces . Intermolecular and Surface Forces ; Elsevier , 2011 ; pp 253 –289 .
Tauc J. ; Grigorovici R. ; Vancu A. 
Optical Properties and Electronic
Structure of Amorphous Germanium . Phys. Status
Solidi B 
1966 , 15 , 627 –637 . 10.1002/pssb.19660150224 .

