
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02209ArticleProtein-Stabilizing Effect of Amphiphilic Block Copolymers with a
Tertiary Sulfonium-Containing Zwitterionic Segment Imamura Ryutaro †‡Mori Hideharu *†† Graduate School
of Organic Materials Science, Yamagata University, 4-3-16 Jonan, Yonezawa, Yamagata 992-8510, Japan‡ NOF Corporation, 5-10 Tokodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2635, Japan* E-mail: h.mori@yz.yamagata-u.ac.jp. Phone: +81-238-26-3765. Fax: +81-238-26-3749.22 10 2019 05 11 2019 4 19 18234 18247 17 07 2019 08 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Tertiary
sulfonium-containing zwitterionic block copolymers consisting of N-acryloyl-l-methionine methyl sulfonium salt (A-Met(S+)-OH) and n-butyl acrylate (BA) were newly
synthesized to develop a novel protein stabilizer. The zwitterionic
block copolymers were prepared by reversible addition–fragmentation
chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization of BA using a hydrophilic macro-chain-transfer
agent (CTA) obtained from N-acryloyl-l-methionine
(A-Met-OH) and subsequent postmodification. RAFT polymerization of
A-Met-OH using poly(BA) macro-CTA, followed by postmodification, also
afforded the target poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA). The block copolymers stabilized horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) during storage at 37 °C for 5 days, and the protein-stabilizing
effect was enhanced with increase in the A-Met(S+)-OH content.
In particular, the block copolymer with ∼85% A-Met(S+)-OH content showed a significant protein-stabilizing effect at a
temperature (37 °C) higher than the room temperature, which is
highly desirable for practical and industrial applications. The addition
of sucrose into the block copolymer–protein solution led to
a considerable increase in the HRP activity under the same conditions.
Excellent alkaline phosphatase stabilization at 37 °C for 12
days was also achieved using the block copolymers. The zwitterionic
block copolymers with the optimal hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance
were found to serve as efficient protein-stabilizing agents, in comparison
with the corresponding homopolymer and random copolymers. Dynamic
light scattering, zeta potential, transmission electron microscopy,
and circular dichroism measurements revealed that the zwitterionic
block copolymer stabilizes an enzyme by wrapping with a slight change
in the size, whereas the secondary and ordered structures of the enzyme
are maintained.

document-id-old-9ao9b02209document-id-new-14ao9b02209ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The past few decades
have seen a significant interest in zwitterionic copolymers, owing
to their unique and diverse features, especially their excellent protein
resistance.1−4 These zwitterionic polymers contain oppositely charged ionic groups
on the same molecule.5 Because of the structural
similarity between the zwitterionic group and the cell membrane, zwitterionic
polymers have also been employed as protein models and biointerfaces
for medical,6−8 diagnostic, and biotechnological applications.9,10 Zwitterionic polymers, also known as betaine polymers, are generally
categorized into phosphobetaine,11 sulfobetaine,12−15 and carboxybetaine.16−20 In most cases, the ammonium- and nitrogen-containing ionizable groups
have been used as cationic components of the zwitterionic polymers.

Recently, a novel zwitterionic polymer containing tertiary sulfonium
cationic groups has emerged, which can be regarded as one of the most
promising candidates for various applications.21,22 A variety of sulfonium-based zwitterionic polymers have been recently
developed, which comprise sulfothetins (i.e., sulfonium sulfonates)23 and carboxythetins (i.e., sulfonium carboxylates).24,25 Very recently, we reported the controlled synthesis of a tertiary
sulfonium-containing zwitterionic polymer by reversible addition–fragmentation
chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization of N-acryloyl-l-methionine (A-Met-OH), followed by postmodification.26 RAFT polymerization was selected, as it enables
controlled syntheses of various zwitterionic polymers from zwitterionic
and other functional monomers without the protection chemistry or
postpolymerization modification.5,27 RAFT is the most versatile
with respect to the functional monomer and the reaction medium, which
leads to the development of a variety of polymeric architectures with
functional groups. Additionally, ease of scale-up of the reaction
process and no possible deactivation of proteins and biologically
active substances by metal residues make it a promising technique
to produce well-defined polymers for protein stabilization. The resulting
zwitterionic component, with a tertiary sulfonium group and a carboxylic
acid moiety in the monomer unit (N-acryloyl-l-methionine methyl sulfonium salt: A-Met(S+)-OH, which
belongs to carboxythetins), has a structure similar to the protein-protecting
agent dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), which is released by marine
algae.28−30 DMSP, with the general formula (CH3)2S+CH2CH2COO–, is known to have antioxidant activity as well as the ability to
protect cells from UV damage.31,32 Our previous investigation
indicated that DMSP-mimicking zwitterionic poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) has low cytotoxicity and stabilizes horseradish peroxidase
(HRP), peroxidase-labeled mouse antibody immunoglobulin G (IgG-HRP),
and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) during storage (at 4 °C for HRP
and IgG-HRP and at 37 °C for ALP) and freeze–thaw cycles,
even at low concentrations.26 Amphiphilic
random copolymers consisting of A-Met(S+)-OH and n-butyl acrylate (BA), obtained via RAFT copolymerization
and subsequent postmodification, exhibited excellent protein stabilization
properties. However, the protein-stabilizing effect of the tertiary
sulfonium-containing amphiphilic block copolymer has not yet been
investigated.

In this report, we have tested the protein-stabilizing
effect of novel tertiary sulfonium-containing zwitterionic block copolymers,
poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s, which
present a novel paradigm, where decrease in protein activity can be
suppressed by controlling the hydrophilic/hydrophobic (zwitterionic
A-Met(S+)-OH/nonionic BA) balance and monomer sequence
(block or random). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report on the RAFT synthesis of sulfonium-containing zwitterionic
block copolymers showing excellent protein stabilization effects.
Practical application of proteins and antibodies as pharmaceuticals
or detection of highly sensitive proteins using antibodies requires
the development of a variety of protein-stabilizing macromolecules.
Several polymer-like excipients, such as bovine serum albumin (BSA),33 polyethylene glycol and polypropylene glycol,34 glycopolymers,35 and
2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine (MPC)-containing polymers,36 have been employed as additives to prevent the
aggregation and denaturation of proteins. A variety of polymers have
been developed via grafting of a polymer chain, via in situ polymerization
of a cross-linked shell, or by assembling a preformed polymer to extend
the enzyme shelf life.37 Enzymes can be
shielded from aggressive environments by using these polymers, thus
delaying denaturation and increasing control of the immediate environment
around the enzyme and consequently resulting in a possible control
of substrate diffusion. However, the development of novel, more effective,
and nontoxic synthetic stabilizers, which preserve the structure and/or
activities of enzymes for long periods of time under physiological
and more severe conditions, is still required.

Block copolymer
micelles are an important class of aqueous colloids that find several
applications in the biomedical field, such as formulation of lipophilic
drugs in cancer treatments and delivery of oligonucleotides in gene
therapy.38,39 Several amphiphilic block copolymers have
been employed to prevent the aggregation of unfolded proteins.40 For example, triblock copolymers and tetrafunctional
block copolymers composed of hydrophobic poly(propylene oxide) and
hydrophilic poly(ethylene oxide) chains were reported to reduce the
aggregation of the unfolded lysozyme, signifying the importance of
a match in size between the hydrophobic region of the denatured protein
and that of the amphiphilic copolymer.41 Similarly, amphiphilic copolymers based on propylene oxide and ethylene
oxide were also effective in preventing the aggregation of denatured
and reduced lysozyme, and these amphiphilic copolymers can be used
as a synthetic chaperone in the innate molecular repair mechanism
of cells.42

Zwitterionic block copolymers,
which are central to the development in this field, can be classified
into two broad categories: polyampholytes, in which cationic and anionic
groups are covalently linked, and polybetaines, which have oppositely
charged groups in the same monomer unit.5,27 The latter
block copolymers composed of zwitterionic (polybetaine) and nonionic
groups belong to a group of amphiphilic block copolymers that self-assemble
into diverse morphologies because of incompatibility between at least
one of the building blocks and the solvent. Diverse micellar constructs
with a compact hydrophobic domain and a swollen hydrophilic shell
are formed in aqueous media and exhibit characteristic morphologies
and properties in response to the external environment.11,43−45 Several zwitterionic block copolymers containing
covalently linked zwitterionic and hydrophobic segments have been
employed as protein-stabilizing macromolecules. For example, Ishihara
et al. reported that the stabilizing effect of the protein was greatly
improved when a block copolymer composed of MPC and butyl methacrylate
was modified on the enzyme surface.36 They
also reported the synthesis and protein stabilization properties of
MPC-based random copolymers composed of hydrophobic styrene46 and n-dodecyl methacrylate.47

In this work, a novel class of zwitterion-based
block copolymer micelles has been produced, and a method to control
the comonomer composition, assembled structure, and protein-stabilizing
ability has been demonstrated. This has been achieved by the synthesis
and fine-tuning of zwitterionic block copolymers obtained by RAFT
polymerization. While the hydrophobic group usually serves as the
core-forming unit, the second block of the copolymer consists of a
hydrophilic polymer that is responsible for the stabilization of the
block copolymer micelles when located in the micellar shell. Limited
solubility in common organic solvents creates challenges in producing
large libraries of amphiphilic copolymers based on zwitterionic monomers
and in controlling the properties of the final synthesized product.
In other words, the high hydrophilicity of the zwitterionic polymers
makes the last step of the block copolymer synthesis critical because
of the high difference in hydrophilicity (and lipophilicity) between
the two blocks. In this study, the zwitterionic block copolymers were
synthesized via a two-step procedure, which consists of the RAFT polymerization
of BA using dithiocarbamate-terminated poly(A-Met-OH) and subsequent
modification of the methyl thioether moiety (Scheme 1a). In this approach, the initial synthesis
of the amphiphilic block copolymer with the anionic (carboxylic acid-containing)
poly(A-Met-OH) segment can be regarded as a precursor to the targeted
zwitterionic segment and allows higher solubility in the reaction
mixture during polymerization. Poly(A-Met-OH) acted as an anionic
macro-chain-transfer agent (CTA), thereby minimizing the difficulty
in synthesis in terms of reactivity and solubility. Rapid conversion
of the poly(A-Met-OH) macro-CTA to the block copolymer is required,
without unfavorable side reactions, allowing the chains to initiate
the formation of the second poly(BA) block at approximately the same
time48,49 to obtain block copolymers with the as-designed
structure and low dispersity. BA was selected as a hydrophobic monomer
for the synthesis because of the various advantageous properties of
BA-containing copolymers, such as excellent biocompatibility as well
as high flexibility, stability, mechanical properties, and good adhesion.
Hence, BA is frequently employed as a comonomer in biocompatible soft
materials, including gels,50−52 polymer networks,53,54 and random copolymers.55,56 The zwitterionic–hydrophobic
block copolymer was also synthesized by RAFT polymerization of the
unprotected amino acid-based monomer (A-Met-OH) from poly(BA) macro-CTA,
followed by the same modification of the methyl thioether moiety (Scheme 1b). In our system,
both acrylate and acrylamide belong to the conjugated monomer group,
which may support efficient block formation. Limited solubility of
the zwitterionic poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) in organic solvents
is a challenge, especially when attempting the addition of the hydrophobic
poly(BA) block. Distinct from the zwitterionic homopolymer, poly(A-Met(S+)-OH), the carboxylic acid-containing poly(A-Met-OH) was soluble
in various organic solvents, such as methanol, ethanol, and dimethylformamide
(DMF), which enables the synthesis of targeted zwitterionic block
copolymers. In both systems, a positively charged sulfonium group
in the poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) segment can be recognized as
an inherently quenched ionic species regardless of the pH range, whereas
the carboxylic acid is subject to protonation/deprotonation equilibria
depending on the pH value. A systematic study of the effect of varying
block copolymer compositions is presented, which enables the identification
of a suitable zwitterionic–nonionic combination to achieve
high protein stabilization. The effect of the comonomer sequence (block
or random) on protein stability was also investigated. In the system
developed in this study, specific interactions between proteins and
polymers can be tuned by modifying two parameters, the hydrophilic/hydrophobic
balance and the monomer sequence, which correspond to the location
and distribution of a tertiary sulfonium-containing zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH unit in the copolymers and hence an efficient approach
in protecting a targeted protein.

Scheme 1 (a) Synthesis of Amphiphilic Block
Copolymers by (a) RAFT Polymerization of BA Using Poly(A-Met-OH) as
a Hydrophilic Macro-CTA, Followed by Postmodification and (b) RAFT
Polymerization of N-Acryloyl-l-methionine
(A-Met-OH) Using Poly(BA) as a Hydrophobic Macro-CTA, Followed by
Postmodification
Results and Discussion
Synthesis
of Zwitterionic Block Copolymers, Poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)
In this study, we report the controlled
synthesis of novel sulfonium-containing zwitterionic block copolymers,
with unique amphiphilic (zwitterionic–nonionic) properties,
by RAFT polymerization, and their self-assembled structures, as well
as their protein-stabilizing effects. The zwitterionic block copolymers,
poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s, were initially
synthesized by RAFT polymerization of BA using the dithiocarbamate-terminated
poly(A-Met-OH), followed by postmodification (Scheme 1a). Poly(A-Met-OH) macro-CTA was initially
synthesized by RAFT polymerization of A-Met-OH using a dithiocarbamate-type
CTA and 2,2′-azobis(isobutyronitrile) (AIBN) as the initiator
in DMF at 65 °C according to a previously reported procedure.26 Following polymerization at a proportion of
[M]/[CTA]/[AIBN] = 100/2/1 for 3 h, the reaction mixture was purified
by reprecipitation in a large excess of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), and the purified poly(A-Met-OH) obtained was
a yellow solid. The size exclusion chromatography (SEC) trace of the
methylated sample, poly(A-Met-OMe), indicated a narrow molar mass
distribution (Mw/Mn = 1.23). The molar mass of the poly(A-Met-OH) (Mn,NMR was 12 000) was estimated from the relative
integration of the 1H NMR signals for the polymer backbone
protons (−CH2CH2–S–
unit at 2.5–2.8 ppm) and the end-group protons (benzyl unit
at 7.0–7.3 ppm), as shown in Figure S1a (Supporting Information). The dithiocarbamate-terminated poly(A-Met-OH)
having the carboxylic acid moiety in the monomer unit was employed
as a hydrophilic macro-CTA (Mw/Mn = 1.23, Mn,NMR = 12 000, Mn,SEC = 8200) for the synthesis
of the amphiphilic block copolymers.

Subsequently, poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s were synthesized by RAFT polymerization of BA
using the poly(A-Met-OH) macro-CTA in ethanol, which is a good solvent
for both components. In this study, the polymerization conditions
were adjusted to keep the system homogeneous and to avoid unfavorable
side reactions. In order to manipulate the comonomer composition,
the [M]0/[macro-CTA]0 molar ratio was adjusted
from 5 to 115 under suitable conditions. The results are summarized
in Table 1. Polymerization
proceeded in a homogeneous manner when conducted in ethanol ([M] =
1.0 M) in the presence of AIBN as the initiator at 65 °C. After
the reaction mixture was reprecipitated into MTBE, poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s were obtained in reasonable yields (37–77%).
Because the CTA-to-initiator ratio was fixed to [macro-CTA]/[I] =
1/0.5 in this system, the higher [M]/[macro-CTA] ratio leads to the
decrease in the initiator concentration, resulting in the decrease
in the polymer yield. In contrast, significant increase in the poly(BA)
chain length, relative to that of poly(A-Met-OH) macro-CTA, may induce
higher chain flexibility to increase the diffusion rate of the propagating
radical, owing to better solubility of the poly(BA) chain, compared
to that of the poly(A-Met-OH), in ethanol. Both factors, the initiator
concentration and radical diffusion rate, may contribute to the polymer
yields.

Table 1 Synthesis of the Amphiphilic Block Copolymer,
Poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s, in Ethanol
at 65 °C for 20 ha
 	 	 	 	Mn (×103)	 	 	
entry	macro-CTA	[M]/[macro-CTA]	conv.b/yieldc (%)	Theod	NMRb	SECe	Mw/Mne	Comp.b A-Met(S+)-OH/BA	
BP1f	poly(A-Met-OH)	5	77/72	13.3	13.1	8.7	1.36	96/4	
BP2f	poly(A-Met-OH)	15	81/78	14.3	14.3	10.0	1.33	83/17	
BP3f	poly(A-Met-OH)	21	41/37	13.9	14.1	8.6	1.16	85/15	
BP4f	poly(A-Met-OH)	115	78/77	24.3	29.7	11.0	1.41	31/69	
BP5g	poly(BA)	50	100/95	15.9	16.8	18.3	1.54	67/33	
a Polymerization
with AIBN as an initiator ([CTA]/[AIBN] = 2) at 65 °C for 20
h in EtOH ([M] = 1.0 M), where A-Met-OH = N-acryloyl-l-methionine, A-Met(S+)-OH = N-acryloyl-l-methionine methyl sulfonium salt, and AIBN = 2,2′-azobis(isobutyronitrile).

b Calculated by 1H
NMR in CD3OD.

c MTBE-insoluble part.

d For BP1–4; Mn,theory = (Mw of BA) × [BA]0/[macro-CTA]0 × conv. + (calculated Mn of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) as macro-CTA), For BP5; Mn,theory = (Mw of A-Met(S+)-OH) × [A-Met-OH]0/[macro-CTA]0 × conv. + (Mn of macro-CTA).

e Measured
by SEC using MMA standards in DMF containing 1 g/L LiBr.

f Poly(A-Met-OH) (Mn,NMR = 12 000, Mn = 8200, and Mw/Mn = 1.23 in the
methylated form) was used as macro-CTA (calculated Mn of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) = 12,800, DP = 58.5).

g Poly(BA) (Mn,NMR = 4100) was used as macro-CTA.

The block copolymer composition
was determined using 1H NMR spectroscopy by a comparison
of the peaks associated with the two comonomers, that is, the peak
at 2.5–2.8 ppm attributed to the S–CH2– proton (2H) of the A-Met-OH unit and the peak
at 0.9–1.0 ppm corresponding to the CH2–CH3 peak protons (3H) of the BA unit (Figure 1a). The BA content
in the block copolymers varies from 4 to 69 mol % depending on the
comonomer feed ratio. Similar to the homopolymer, the resulting poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s required derivatization prior to SEC analysis
in DMF containing 1 g/L LiBr as the eluent. The carboxylic acid units
in the poly(A-Met-OH) segment of the amphiphilic block copolymers
were converted into methyl ester forms, poly(A-Met-OMe)-b-poly(BA)s, by TMS-diazomethane. As shown in Figure 2, SEC analysis of the resulting poly(A-Met-OMe)-b-poly(BA)s revealed a reasonable shift in the unimodal SEC peak toward
a higher molar mass (BP4; Mn,SEC = 11 000), with an increase in [M]0/[CTA]0 ratio while maintaining low dispersity. The molecular weights of
the resulting poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s determined
by 1H NMR were in reasonable agreement with the theoretical
values calculated from the conversion and feed ratio of the comonomer.
The molecular weights of the poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)
(BP4; Mn,NMR was 29 000,
which corresponds to 29 700 in the zwitterionic form) were estimated
from the relative integration of the 1H NMR signals for
the peaks corresponding to the two comonomers (the peak at 2.5–2.8 ppm
attributed to the S–CH2–
proton and the peak at 1.0 ppm corresponding to the −CH2-CH3 protons). Note that SEC analysis
of these ionic–nonionic block copolymers was challenging because
these species are prone to hydrophilic and electrostatic interactions
with the stationary phase. In this study, the methylated block copolymers
having relatively low BA contents showed unimodal SEC traces (Figures 2 and S2, Supporting Information) with reasonable molar
mass, which were measured in DMF (1 g/L LiBr) using poly(methyl methacrylate)
standards for calibration. However, the block copolymers having relatively
high BA contents (BP4 and BP5) may lead
to difficulty in accurate determination of the molar mass by SEC measurements.
Another possible reason for the discrepancy between Mn,NMR and Mn,SEC as well as
the theoretical values is the occurrence of partial terminations and
unfavorable side reactions at the last stage of the polymerization.
Nevertheless, these results clearly demonstrate that the chain extension
of the poly(A-Met-OH) macro-CTA with BA was well-controlled in ethanol
under suitable conditions, by which the composition of each segment
and molar mass of poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s could
be tuned by adjusting the monomer-to-macro-CTA ratio in the feed.

Figure 1 1H NMR spectra of (a) poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA) in
CD3OD, (b) poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) (BP4) in CD3OD, (c) poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) (BP4) in CD3OD + 20% D2O, and (d) poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) (BP4) in D2O.

Figure 2 SEC traces of (a) poly(A-Met-OMe)-b-poly(BA)s (BP2 and BP4) obtained from poly(A-Met-OH) macro-CTA
and (b) poly(BA)-b-poly(A-Met-OMe) (BP5) obtained from poly(BA) macro-CTA. See Table 1 for detailed polymerization conditions.

In a previous report, we demonstrated that both
the structure of the chain-end groups and polydispersity significantly
influence the protein stabilization ability of the zwitterionic polymer,
poly(A-Met(S+)-OH).26 As shown
in Figure 1, the chain
end groups of poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s were not
detected clearly, suggesting the possibility to change the chain-end
structures by partial terminations and unfavorable side reactions.
Distinct from the homopolymer, nevertheless the effect of the end
groups is not crucial in the case of the block copolymers because
the hydrophobic poly(BA) segment should affect predominantly the self-assembled
structures and protein stabilization.

The carboxylic acid-containing
amphiphilic block copolymers, poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s,
were modified using iodomethane to afford zwitterionic block copolymers
consisting of hydrophilic poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) and hydrophobic
poly(BA) segments. The resulting poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s were purified by dialysis against methanol and
water, followed by lyophilization. Note that the anionic/nonionic
poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s were purified by the reprecipitation
into MTBE, whereas the purification of the zwitterionic–nonionic
poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s was conducted
by dialysis, which is mainly due to the difference in the solubility
between the block copolymers composed of anionic poly(A-Met-OH) and
zwitterionic poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) (see Tables S1 and S2, Supporting Information). The formation of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) was confirmed using 1H NMR spectroscopy. A larger downfield shift of the signal
corresponding to the methyl group of the pendant thioether (δ
= 2.1 ppm) in poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA) compared
to that of the newly formed sulfonium species (δ = 2.9–3.1
ppm) in poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)
was observed in CD3OD (Figure 1b). Similar to the case of the zwitterionic
homopolymer,26 the almost quantitative
modification was confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Figure 1c) by comparing the
integration of the methylene resonance at 3.4–3.8 ppm (CH2–CH2–S(CH3)2) with the intensity of the methine resonances at 4.3–4.7 ppm
(NH–CH–COOH), as well as the peak at
4.3–4.7 ppm (NH–CH–COOH)
and the peak at 3.0–3.2 ppm (CH2–S(CH3)2). In all cases (BP1–BP3 and BP5), the degree of the modification to Met(S+) in each copolymer was more than 99%, which was confirmed
by 1H NMR. The 1H NMR spectrum of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) (BP4) measured
in D2O is shown in Figure 1d. The measurement solution was resuspended in D2O, and the peak (E) derived from BA disappeared, in addition
to the significant decrease in the integrated value of the methyl
protons of the BA unit (peak H). Hence, it is reasonable to consider
that poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) forms
micelles in water, in which the water-insoluble poly(BA) segment is
located inside the core, whereas the water-soluble poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) segment forms the shell part that forms an interface
with water.

After postmodification, the zwitterionic functionality
of the synthesized block copolymers is quantitatively formed, which
leads to the increase in the water solubility derived from effective
micelle formation. Similar to the zwitterionic homopolymer poly(A-Met(S+)-OH), poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s
with a high zwitterionic content (A-Met(S+)-OH content
≥ 83%) were soluble in water, and the block copolymers with
lower A-Met(S+)-OH content (≤67%) were difficult
to dissolve in water (Table S2, Supporting Information). This is in accordance with a general tendency that the overall
solubility of amphiphilic block copolymers can be controlled by changing
the respective blocks in the composition. The zwitterionic block copolymers
were found to be soluble in CH3OH + 20% H2O,
independent of the comonomer composition. The tendency was apparently
distinct from that of the anionic (carboxylic acid-containing)–nonionic
poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s, which exhibited good
solubility in acetone, methanol, ethanol, and DMF, while being insoluble
in water. Note that the anionic block copolymers having relatively
high poly(A-Met-OH) contents (≥67%) were soluble in the CH3OH/H2O mixed solvent (Table S1, Supporting Information).

We also attempted to synthesize
the zwitterionic block copolymers by RAFT polymerization of A-Met-OH
using a hydrophobic poly(BA) as a macro-CTA (Scheme 1b). When designing a block copolymer by RAFT
polymerization, the order of preparation of the blocks determines
the final position of the RAFT end group. In the second approach,
a hydrophobic poly(BA) macro-CTA was prepared first, followed by chain
extension with the hydrophilic A-Met-OH as a second monomer (Scheme 1b). In theory, the
reverse order would be possible because both building blocks are based
on the conjugated monomers, acrylate and acrylamide. A hydrophobic
macro-CTA, poly(BA), was synthesized by RAFT polymerization of BA
using a dithiocarbamate-type CTA with AIBN as the initiator in DMF
at 65 °C for 2 h. After polymerization, the reaction mixture
was dialyzed against acetone for 2 days [molecular weight cutoff (MWCO):
1000 Da]. The 1H NMR signals for the polymer backbone
protons (O–CH2CH2–
unit at 3.9–4.1 ppm) and the end group protons (benzyl unit
at 7.0–7.3 ppm) were employed for the determination of the
molar mass (Mn,NMR = 4100, Figure S3 in
the Supporting Information). Poly(BA)-b-poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) was synthesized by RAFT
polymerization of A-Met-OH using the dithiocarbamate-terminated poly(BA)
in ethanol with AIBN as the initiator at 65 °C. As shown in Figure 2b, a clear shift
of the unimodal SEC peak from the macro-CTA was observed for the resulting
poly(BA)-b-poly(A-Met-OMe). The 1H NMR
spectrum of the block copolymer (BP5) showed peaks corresponding
to the two comonomers (BA and A-Met(S+)-OH, Figure S3, Supporting Information), suggesting the formation
of the targeted block copolymer with intermediate BA content (33%).

The glass-transition points (Tg) of
the poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s were
determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements
(Figure S4). The observed Tg values were −51.2 °C for BP4 and -52.9 °C for BP5 (BA content = 69 and 33%,
respectively), which are attributed to that of the poly(BA) segment
(Tg of poly(BA) = −55 °C).
In contrast, the block copolymers having relatively low BA content
exhibited no detectable transition temperature. These results indicate
the formation of block copolymers having different poly(BA) chain
lengths by RAFT polymerization.

Assembled Structures of
Poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s in Aqueous
Solutions
Assembled structures of the zwitterionic block
copolymers with 31–96% A-Met(S+)-OH contents were
investigated in aqueous solution under various conditions. Initially,
the property of dissolution in water (pH = 7), which is a good solvent
for poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA), was characterized using dynamic light scattering
(DLS). While water is a good solvent for zwitterionic block copolymers
with a short hydrophobic segment, the zwitterionic block copolymers
with longer hydrophobic segments (BA content ≥ 33%) can only
be dissolved in a mixed water–methanol solvent. Because of
the amphiphilic properties of the block copolymers, the synthesized
materials can directly self-assemble into nanoparticles if dissolved
in an organic solvent and then added dropwise into an aqueous medium.
A concentrated solution of the block copolymers in CH3OH
+ 20% H2O, which forms a good solvent for both segments,
was gradually dispersed by the slow addition of water. Samples were
filtered (0.8 μm), followed by the measurement at 25 °C.
As shown in Figure S5 and Table S3 (Supporting Information), poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) with low BA content (4%) showed a unimodal distribution
of hydrodynamic diameters in the selected solvent, and the relatively
narrow distribution (Dh = 19.8 nm) probably
indicates the existence of spherical micelles consisting of a relatively
hydrophobic core of poly(BA) and a hydrophilic shell of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) in neutral water (pH = 7). In the case of the zwitterionic
block copolymers, the surface of the assembled structure is expected
to consist of an equal number of positive and negative charges, resulting
in a zeta potential close to 0. The zeta potential of BP1 in water was −7.2 mV at pH = 7.4 (Figure S6, Supporting Information), suggesting that poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) (BP1) is electrically
neutral with no significant deviation of charge under the conditions
employed. As expected, the size of the micelles increased with increasing
hydrophobic poly(BA) content. As shown in Figure 3, the relatively narrow hydrodynamic diameter
distribution (Dh = 22.4 nm), which may
correspond to the uniform micelles consisting of a poly(BA) core and
a poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) shell, was still detected for the
block copolymer with a 15% BA unit, whereas a significant increase
in the size (Dh = 146 nm) was observed
in the block copolymer with a higher BA content (69%), which is probably
attributed to the aggregated micelles.

Figure 3 Z-averaged
hydrodynamic diameter distributions of block copolymers, poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s (Dh, as determined by DLS): (a) BP3 and (b) BP4. The A-Met(S+)-OH/BA composition = (a) 85/15
and (b) 31/69, respectively. (c) Intensity-averaged hydrodynamic diameter
distributions (Dh) against the composition
of the zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH unit of the block and
random copolymers.

In comparison, the zwitterionic
random copolymers with 32–86% A-Met(S+)-OH contents
were investigated in aqueous solution under the same conditions. We
employed the random copolymers, poly(A-Met(S+)-OH-co-BA)s, which were synthesized in our previous work26 via copolymerization of A-Met-OH and BA, followed
by methylation using iodomethane (Table S4, Supporting Information). Owing to the polar nature of the A-Met(S+)-OH unit, the synthesized amphiphilic random copolymers were
soluble in water depending on the comonomer composition and soluble
in water–methanol mixed solvent independent of composition.

In both block and random copolymers with A-Met(S+)-OH
units, poly(BA) enriches the hydrophobic property of its derived copolymers
to enable better compatibility with the targeted proteins. As shown
in Figures 3c and S7
(Supporting Information), the hydrodynamic
diameter distributions (Dh) were 97 and
111 nm for the random copolymers with a higher BA content (50 and
68%), which may be ascribed to the aggregated micelles. In contrast,
random copolymers with a higher A-Met(S+)-OH content (86
and 68%) showed no detectable DLS peaks, suggesting no assembled structures
under the conditions (Table S4, Supporting Information). In both block and random copolymers with a relatively high BA
content (>50%), relatively large species were formed in aqueous
solutions, which are closely related to the protein stabilization
properties described in the next section.

Protein Stabilization Test
(Accelerated Degradation Test)
We have previously reported
that hydrophobicity in polymers greatly contributes to the protein-stabilizing
effect, and the random copolymers consisting of hydrophobic BA and
zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH had a higher stabilizing effect
at 4 °C than the poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) homopolymer.26 In a previous work, the protein-stabilizing
effect of the random copolymers was investigated during storage at
4 °C for HRP. In this study, the ability of the zwitterionic
block copolymers to stabilize proteins was initially evaluated using
HRP as an enzyme and 2,2′-azino-di-[3-ethylbenzthiazoline sulfonate]
(ABTS) as a substrate in conditions resembling physiological conditions.
It must be noted that the protein stability at a temperature higher
than the room temperature is highly desirable for practical and industrial
applications because of the feasibility to keep protein stability
without a cooling system. Although HRP has numerous medical and industrial
applications, its industrial applications have been limited by its
instability under various conditions such as elevated temperatures
and excess H2O2. The proteins were stored at
37 °C for several days in an aqueous solution containing 0.1%
by weight of each sample as a protein stabilizer, which corresponds
to an accelerated degradation test, whose effectiveness was evaluated
by measuring the decrease in enzyme activity. The results of these
protein stabilization tests are shown in Figure 4a,c. When no excipients were added, the activity
of HRP was almost completely lost under the severe conditions. When
the poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) homopolymer (P1) was used as a stabilizer,
the activity was maintained at 90% under the conventional condition
of 4 °C for 5 days,26 whereas it decreased
drastically to 5% under severe condition at 37° C for 5 days
(Figure 4c). When the
zwitterionic block copolymers with different A-Met(S+)-OH
contents (BP1-5) were used as protein stabilizers, the
protein-stabilizing effect was enhanced as the A-Met(S+)-OH content increased. In particular, the zwitterionic block copolymer
with around 85% of A-Met(S+)-OH (BP2 and BP3) exhibited a significant effect on protein stability,
with more than 60% of the activity remaining under severe conditions
(37° C for 5 days), which is apparently higher than that obtained
using BSA, a commonly used polymer-type protein stabilizer. In the
case of the block copolymer (BP1) with the lowest hydrophobic
segment (A-Met(S+)-OH/BA ratio = 96/4), the enzyme activity
decreased drastically, suggesting that a specific amount of the hydrophobic
component is required to achieve effective adsorption between the
protein and polymer. In other words, a suitable hydrophilic/hydrophobic
(zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH/nonionic BA) balance is crucial
to obtain an effective protein-stabilizing effect of the sulfonium-containing
zwitterionic block copolymers with characteristic amphiphilic property.

Figure 4 Activity
of (a,c) HRP and (b,d) ALP after 5 days of storage at 37 °C with
0.1% by weight of (a,b) zwitterionic block copolymers (poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s) (BP1–BP5, Table 1) and (c,d)
random copolymers, poly(A-Met(S+)-OH-co-BA)s (CP1–4, Table S4, Supporting Information) (**p < 0.01 vs no additive, ##p < 0.01 vs BSA).

In order to clarify the effect of the comonomer sequence, the protein-stabilizing
effect was compared between the block copolymers and random copolymers.
The poly(A-Met(S+)-OH-co-BA)s, which were
prepared through two-step RAFT copolymerization and postmodification
by using iodomethane,26 were employed for
this purpose. In the case of random copolymers, poly(A-Met(S+)-OH-co-BA)s (CP1–4, Table S4, Supporting Information), the protein-stabilizing
effect for HRP increases as the A-Met(S+)-OH content increases
(Figure 4c), which
is similar to the tendency observed for the block copolymers. This
is the indication that the increase in the hydrophobic BA units resulted
in a decrease in the enzyme activity, which may be due to the increase
in the interaction between each protein and adsorption to hydrophobic
surfaces. The comparison of the remaining activity between block and
random copolymers (Figure 4a,c) indicates higher stabilization effect of the block copolymers,
compared to that of the random copolymer, suggesting that the monomer
sequence (location and distribution of hydrophobic BA units) is a
crucial factor in determining the protein stability. Enzyme activity
is generally decreased by contact between proteins because of interactions
between the hydrophobic domains and adsorption to hydrophobic surfaces.
Proteins in the polymer-type stabilizer solution interact with the
hydrophobic site of the polymer, and therefore, the contact between
proteins is suppressed and then stabilized.

To examine the effectiveness
of these synthesized block copolymers as a protein-stabilizing agent,
the stability of ALP was compared in the presence of the block copolymers,
random copolymers, and homopolymers. Figure 4b,d exhibits the activity of ALP after 12
days of storage at 37 °C in the presence of 0.1% by weight of
poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s (BP1–5) and poly(A-Met(S+)-OH-co-BA)s (CP1–4), respectively. In the presence of the zwitterionic
block copolymers, relatively high ALP activity was maintained (>80%),
independent of the A-Met(S+)-OH content of the block copolymers,
under the same conditions. As shown in Figure 5, the zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH
content-dependent stability of ALP is apparently distinct from that
of HRP. There was a slight difference in the surface charges and molar
mass between HRP (molar mass = 40 200 and zeta potential = −6.6
mV) and ALP (molar mass = 80 000 and zeta = −16.6 mV).
In addition, the surface hydrophobicity of the enzymes should be related
closely to the protein stabilization effect. Hence, a suitable hydrophilic/hydrophobic
(zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH/nonionic BA) balance for protein
stabilization is governed by the nature of the protein. In all cases,
the block copolymers show higher stability compared to those of the
random copolymers. Similar tendency of the higher stabilizing effect
of block copolymers compared to random copolymers was observed in
MPC-based zwitterionic copolymer systems.36

Figure 5 Activity
of (a) HRP and (b) ALP against the composition of the zwitterionic
A-Met(S+)-OH unit of the block and random copolymers.

Figure 6 shows the postulated structures of a protein in the presence
of block and random copolymers comprising of zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH and hydrophobic BA. When the zwitterionic block copolymer
is used as a stabilizer, the surface of the protein–stabilizer
complex is covered predominantly with a hydrophilic unit without significant
defects. Hence, the contact between protein–stabilizer complexes
is further suppressed, and a high stabilization effect is attained,
if the poly(BA) chain is sufficiently long. In contrast, in the random
copolymers, the hydrophilic A-Met(S+)-OH and the hydrophobic
BA are randomly arranged. Therefore, the hydrophobic unit is also
exposed on the surface of the protein–stabilizer complex, leading
to increased interaction between the hydrophobic units. The increase
in the BA content results in more contact between the protein–stabilizer
complexes and decrease in enzyme activity. Another important factor
for protein stabilization is the mobility of proteins inside the stabilizer,
which is governed by the hydrophobic components around proteins.36 Predominant presence of the poly(BA) segment
at the protein interface can contribute to less movement of the protein,
resulting in higher stability of the protein–block copolymer
complex. In contrast, a certain amount of the zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH unit is located around the protein in random copolymers,
which leads to the increase in the movement of the protein. Less contact
between proteins due to the preferable presence of the zwitterionic
poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) segment on the surface of the protein–stabilizer
complex and less movement of the protein due to the predominant presence
of the poly(BA) segment around the protein may contribute to higher
protein-stabilizing effect in block copolymers compared to that in
random copolymers. Note that the protein stabilization test was conducted
at diluted solution (2.0 μg/mL), which is most probably lower
than the critical micelle concentration. In terms of the effect of
the comonomer composition, the increase in the hydrophobic BA content
in the copolymers may lead to decrease in the mobility of the protein
and decrease in the interaction between the protein–stabilizer
complexes, which corresponds to the positive and negative effects
on the protein stability, respectively. Such opposite effects of the
incorporation of the hydrophobic BA unit on the protein stability
are attributed to the presence of suitable hydrophilic/hydrophobic
(zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH/nonionic BA) balance for protein
stabilization depending on the nature of the protein. In addition
to hydrophobic interaction, electrostatic interaction is another possible
factor to affect protein stabilization. Nevertheless, the effect of
the electrostatic interaction is not significant in the copolymers
developed in this study because the zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH unit is electrically neutral.26 Hence,
the hydrophobic interaction is considered to be one of the major factors
to contribute protein stabilization.

Figure 6 Schematic illustration of the postulated
structures of a protein in the presence of block and random copolymers
comprising of zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH and hydrophobic
BA.

In the next stage, the protein
stabilization effect of the zwitterionic block copolymer was evaluated
in the presence of a sugar because saccharides (e.g., sucrose and
trehalose) have been frequently used as low-molecular-weight protein-stabilizing
compounds.57 Here, the zwitterionic block
copolymer showing the highest stabilization effect (BP3, A-Met(S+)-OH content = 85%) was selected as a polymeric
stabilizer, and sucrose was used as a representative sugar-based stabilizer.

The protein stability test was evaluated using HRP, which was stored
at 37 °C for 5 days in an aqueous solution containing 0.1% by
weight of the zwitterionic block copolymer (BP3) in the
presence and absence of sucrose (15% by weight). As shown in Figure 7, relatively low
HRP was detected even in the presence of only sucrose, whereas a drastic
increase in HRP activity was obtained by using a mixture of the zwitterionic
block copolymers and sucrose. Structural stability via hydrogen bonding
between the protein and sucrose may contribute to significant improvement
in protein stability.58−60 Sugars play a crucial role in the protection of cells
and proteins by replacing the water for hydrogen bonding as well as
the production of the glassy matrix. Another possible contributing
factor is the exclusion volume of the sugars and the chemical nature
of the protein surface.

Figure 7 Activity of HRP after 5 days of storage at 37
°C with 0.1% by weight of the zwitterionic block copolymer, poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) (BP3), with
15% by weight of sucrose (**p < 0.01 vs no additive, ##p < 0.01 vs BP3).

Zwitterionic polymers are known to prevent protein
aggregation by binding to hydrophobic sites on the protein surface,
facilitating suitable polymer–protein interactions, which lead
to the suppression of unfavorable protein–protein interactions
and structural changes in the highly ordered structures.9,61,62 In order to obtain further information
on the interaction between the protein and the zwitterionic block
copolymer, the hydrodynamic size, size distribution, and zeta potential
of the protein in the presence and absence of the block copolymer
were evaluated by DLS in the phosphate buffer (pH = 7.4) at 25 °C.
To achieve sufficient peak intensity, DLS measurement was conducted
in HRP solution (1 mg/mL) at a more concentrated condition used for
the protein stabilization test (2.0 μg/mL). As shown in Figure
S8 and Table S5 (Supporting Information), HRP solution exhibited two species, and a gradual change in the
intensity-averaged hydrodynamic sizes (Dh) and their distributions was observed after the addition of the
zwitterionic block copolymer (BP3, 0.1–1.0 mg/mL).
Under the conditions, the zeta potentials of the polymer–stabilizer
complexes were −3.52 and −3.63 mV at the HRP/polymer
weight ratio = 1/0.1 and 1/1, respectively, which are between the
values of pristine HRP (−6.64 mV) and block copolymer (−2.28
mV). The slight decrease in the zeta potential of HRP by the addition
of the block copolymer indicates that the HRP is wrapped by the block
copolymer. No significant difference in the zeta potential between
the polymer–stabilizer complexes obtained at the HRP/polymer
weight ratio = 1/0.1 and 1/1 suggests that the outermost surface of
the polymer–stabilizer complexes is covered predominantly by
the zwitterionic poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) segment, independent
on the HRP/polymer weight ratio in the feed. In other words, a suitable
selection of the concentration range of the zwitterionic block copolymer
stabilizer is essential to achieve effective protein stabilization.

The zeta potential data of ALP in aqueous solution in the presence
and absence of the amphiphilic block copolymer (BP3)
at pH = 7.4 are shown in Figures S9 and S10 (Supporting Information). ALP was diluted with BP3 solution
dissolved in ion exchange water (0.24 mg/mL), and then the zeta potential
measurement was conducted. The zeta potential of pristine ALP was
−16.6 mV, whereas the value of BP3 alone
was almost zero (+0.5 mV). This is in good agreement with the general
tendency of zwitterionic polymers, in which the zeta potential should
be zero at the isoelectronic point. As BP3 was added
to ALP, the zeta potential increased, as expected, suggesting that BP3 covers the surface of ALP via hydrophobic interaction.
The zeta potential reached a plateau at a concentration of [BP3] = 0.016 mg/mL, where the zwitterionic block copolymer
(BP3) may sufficiently covers the surface of the protein
at the concentration of 1 mg/mL used in the protein stabilization
test.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was also employed
to study the interaction between the HRP and zwitterionic block copolymer
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). As shown in Figure 8a, spherical structures having a diameter
of ca. 50–150 nm and their larger aggregated states composed
of several spherical species are visible in the native HRP in PBS,
which was stained with OsO4. Aggregated structures of HRP
are also detected after the interaction with the amphiphilic block
copolymer (BP3) at the HRP/polymer weight ratio = 1/0.1
(Figure 8b). Under
the condition, crystalline-like structures were occasionally observed.
In contrast, isolated spherical structures with more uniform size
distribution are mainly seen when the sufficient amount of the block
copolymer was employed (HRP/polymer weight ratio = 1/1, Figure 8c). Hence, TEM results suggest
the preservation of the morphology and slight increase in the size
of the native HRP in PBS by the addition of the zwitterionic block
copolymer.

Figure 8 TEM photos of (a) 1 mg/mL of native HRP in PBS, (b) 1 mg/mL of
HRP + 0.1 mg/mL of BP3 in PBS, and (c) 1 mg/mL of HRP
+ 1 mg/mL of BP3 in PBS.

The change in the conformation of the HRP–block copolymer
relative to pristine HRP was evaluated by CD measurements in phosphate
buffer (pH = 7.4) at 25 °C. HRP consists of 13 α-helices
and 2 short antiparallel β-strands.63 As shown in Figure 9, pristine HRP exhibited a strong negative peak at around 220 nm,
which was attributed to the characteristic α-helix structure.
No significant change was detected in the negative peak at around
220 nm after the addition of the zwitterionic block copolymer into
the HRP solution, suggesting that the interaction with the block copolymer
did not lead to any significant change in the enzyme helicity. The
positive CD signal of HRP around 195 nm was shifted to around 205
nm, which may be due to the change in the hydrophilic–hydrophobic
valence of the side chains by the interaction with the block copolymer.
Nevertheless, these results consistently suggest that the zwitterionic
block copolymer stabilizes an enzyme by wrapping with a slight change
in the size, whereas most of the secondary and ordered structures
of the enzyme are maintained.

Figure 9 Circular dichroism (CD) data of HRP, HRP with BP3, and BP3 in phosphate buffer (0.05 mg/mL).

Conclusions
In summary, we synthesized
a series of sulfonium-containing zwitterionic block copolymers consisting
of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) and poly(BA) by RAFT polymerization
and postmodification, in which the poly(BA) block can enrich the hydrophobic
properties of these polymers and their compatibility with proteins,
resulting in improved thermal stability. Initially, we found the conditions
best suited toward controlled radical polymerization of the hydrophobic
monomer (BA) from the hydrophilic poly(A-Met-OH) via the RAFT process
in ethanol. The presynthesized poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA)s
were successfully modified by reacting methyl iodide to afford targeted
poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s. The RAFT
polymerization of A-Met-OH using the hydrophobic poly(BA) macro-CTA
and the subsequent postmodification were found to be another efficient
approach for the controlled synthesis of poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)s with different zwitterionic–nonionic
(hydrophobic) compositions. The poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) with 85% of the zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH content exhibited the highest stability for HRP at 37 °C
for 5 days. The addition of sucrose into the zwitterionic block copolymer–protein
solution led to a drastic increase in the HRP activity under the same
conditions. In the presence of the zwitterionic block copolymers,
the activity of ALP was maintained even after 12 days of storage at
37 °C. Tertiary sulfonium-containing zwitterionic copolymers
consisting of A-Met(S+)-OH and BA had excellent properties
to enhance the stability of proteins by manipulating the sequence
of the monomer units (block and random) and hydrophilic/hydrophobic
(zwitterionic A-Met(S+)-OH/nonionic BA) balance originating
from the comonomer composition.

Experimental Section
Materials
l-Methionine (>99%), acryloyl chloride (>98%), iodomethane
(>99.5%), BA (>99%), trimethylsilyldiazomethane (0.6 M in hexane
solution), and p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP, ready-to-use
solution) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry and were used
without purification. N-Acryloyl-l-methionine
(A-Met-OH) was prepared by the reaction of acryloyl chloride with l-methionine according to a method reported previously.26,64,65 The monomer was purified by column
chromatography on silica with ethyl acetate/methanol (1:1, v/v) as
the eluent.

The radical initiator AIBN (>98%) was purchased
from FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation and was used without
purification. Benzyl 1-pyrrolecarbodithioate (97%), as a dithiocarbamate-type
CTA, and BSA (>98%) were purchased from Aldrich and were used directly.
Ethanol (>99.5%) and MTBE (>99%) were purchased from Kanto Chemical
Corporation.

For protein stabilization tests, HRP (>100 units/mg,
molar mass = 40 200) and ALP (40–80 units/mg, molar mass =
80 000) were purchased from FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation.
The ABTS microwell peroxidase substrate (one-component system) was
purchased from SeraCare Life Sciences, Inc. All other materials were
purchased and used without purification.

Synthesis of Amphiphilic
Block Copolymers, Poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA)
The synthesis of the block copolymer employing
poly(A-Met-OH) as the macro-CTA was performed in accordance with Scheme 1a. A-Met-OH (4.28
g, 20.0 mmol), CTA (93.2 mg, 0.40 mmol), AIBN (32.8 mg, 0.20 mmol),
and DMF (20 mL) were placed in a dry round-bottom flask equipped with
a magnetic stirring bar, and the solution was degassed by N2 gas bubbling for 0.5 h. The mixture was stirred at 65 °C for
3 h, and the resulting polymer was precipitated into MTBE. Conversion
of double bonds was 77% as detected by 1H NMR. The yellowish
solid obtained (2.74 g, 64%) was subjected to 1H NMR (CD3OD, 400 MHz), yielding the following values: δ 4.3–4.6
(1H, NH–CH–COOH), 2.5–2.8 (2H,
CH2–CH2–S), 2.0–2.6
(5H, CH2–CH2–S,
S–CH3), 1.6–2.6 (polymer
backbone). 13C NMR (CD3OD, 100 MHz) values were
as follows: δ 175.6 (COOH), 175.3 (C(=O)NH), 52.9 (CH–COOH),
43.2 (polymer backbone), 37.0 (polymer backbone), 31.7 (CH–CH2–CH2–S), 27.3 (CH2–S–CH3), 15.7 (S–CH3).

SEC was conducted on the methylated
sample poly(A-Met-OMe), which was obtained by treating the carboxylic
acid groups of the resulting poly(A-Met-OH) with trimethylsilyldiazomethane.
The methylation of the poly(A-Met-OH)s was carried out according to
a previously reported method.66,67 The solvents were then
removed by evaporation, and the methylated samples were measured by
SEC, without any purification, using DMF Mn = 8200 and Mw/Mn = 1.23 in the methylated form, which corresponds to Mn = 7700 in the carboxylic acid-containing poly(A-Met-OH).
Note that trimethylsilyldiazomethane must be accompanied by appropriate
safety precautions, and the evaporation process should be carried
out with proper ventilation. Quantitative esterification (>99%)
was confirmed by comparing the integration of the methyl resonance
at 3.5–3.8 ppm (−COOCH3)
with the intensity of the methylene resonance at 2.4–2.7 ppm
(CH2–CH2–S). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3OD) values were as follows:
δ 4.4–4.6 (1H: NH–CH–COOH),
3.5–3.8 (3H: -COOCH3), 2.4–2.7
(2H, CH2–CH2–S),
2.0–2.6 (5H, CH2–CH2–S, S–CH3). The 1H NMR spectra of poly(A-Met-OH) and poly(A-Met-OMe) are shown
in Figure S1 (see the Supporting Information).

For the synthesis of the block copolymer (BP4), the dithiocarbamate-terminated poly(A-Met-OH) (Mn,NMR = 12 000 and Mw/Mn = 1.23, 236 mg, 20.0 μmol), BA (298
mg, 2.30 mmol), AIBN (1.60 mg, 10.0 μmol), and ethanol (2.3.0
mL) were placed in a dry glass tube equipped with a magnetic stirring
bar, and the solution was degassed by N2 gas bubbling for
0.5 h. The mixture was stirred at 65 °C for 20 h. The BA conversion
was determined by the integration of the monomer C=C–H resonance at ≈5.9 ppm compared to the sum of the
(C=O)–OCH2– peak
intensities for the polymer and monomer at ≈4.8 ppm. The BA
conversion was found to be 78%. The resulting block copolymer, poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA), was purified by reprecipitation from ethanol
solution into a large excess of MTBE. The product was dried under
vacuum at room temperature to yield a yellow solid product (468 mg,
77%). The comonomer composition of the anionic–hydrophobic
block copolymer (A-Met-OH/BA molar ratio = 31/69) was determined using 1H NMR spectroscopy by comparison of the peaks corresponding
to the two comonomers (with the peak at 2.5–2.8 ppm attributed
to the S–CH2– proton and
the peak at 1.0 ppm corresponding to the −CH2–CH3 protons). 1H NMR (CD3OD, 400 MHz) values are as follows: δ 4.4–4.8 (1H, NH–CH–COOH), 3.8–4.3 (2H, (C=O)–OCH2), 2.5–2.8 (2H, CH2–CH2–S), 2.2–2.5 (2H, CH2–CH2–S) 2.0–2.2 (3H,
S–CH3), 1.6 (2H, (C=O)–O–CH2–CH2), 1.4 (2H, CH2–CH2–CH3), 1.0 (3H, CH2–CH3), 1.2–2.6 (polymer backbone). The solubility of the anionic–hydrophobic
block copolymer in various solvents is summarized in Table S1 (see
the Supporting Information).

Similar
to the homopolymer, the methylation of the poly(A-Met-OH) block in
the resulting poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA) was conducted
by treating the carboxylic acid groups with trimethylsilyldiazomethane
for SEC measurement. An excess of the methylation agent (0.6 M in
hexane solution, 100 μL, 60 μmol) was added to 300 μL
of tetrahydrofuran/MeOH (2:1 v/v) solution of the block copolymer
(10 mg, which corresponds to 41.5 μmol of A-Met-OH unit), and
the solution was stirred for another 4 h at room temperature. After
removing the solvents by evaporation, the methylated sample was measured
by SEC without any purification. The methylated poly(A-Met-OMe)-b-poly(BA) displayed an Mn (as
determined by SEC) of 11 000 and a polydispersity index of 1.41.

The zwitterionic block copolymer, poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA), was obtained by treating the sulfide group of
the A-Met-OH component in the carboxylic acid-containing amphiphilic
block copolymer, poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA), with
iodomethane. For the block copolymer ([BA]/[macro-CTA] = 115/1, BP4), poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA) (200 mg)
was dissolved in ethanol (3 mL), and 0.5 mL of iodomethane ([iodomethane]/[A-Met-OH]
= 9/1) was added. After stirring at room temperature for 20 h in an
N2 environment, the poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA) was further dialyzed against methanol for 6 h,
followed by dialysis against H2O for 1 day (MWCO: 1000
Da). The copolymer solution was lyophilized to yield a yellowish powdery
product (205 mg, 95%). 1H NMR (CD3OD + 20% D2O, 400 MHz) values were as follows: δ 4.3–4.7
(1H, NH–CH–COOH), 3.8–4.3 (2H,
(C=O)–CH2), 3.4–3.8
(2H, CH2–CH2–S(CH3)2), 3.0–3.2 (6H, CH2–S(CH3)2), 1.2–2.8 (CH2–CH2–S, polymer backbone), 1.6
(2H, (C=O)–CH2–CH2), 1.2 (2H, CH2–CH2–CH3), 0.9 (3H, CH2–CH3). The 1H NMR spectra of the carboxylic
acid-containing and zwitterionic block copolymers, poly(A-Met-OH)-b-poly(BA) and poly(A-Met(S+)-OH)-b-poly(BA), are shown in Figure 1. The solubility of the zwitterionic block copolymers
in various solvents is summarized in Table S2 (see the Supporting Information).

The zwitterionic–hydrophobic
block copolymer (BP5) was also synthesized by RAFT polymerization
of A-Met-OH from poly(BA) macro-CTA, followed by similar modification
of the methyl thioether moiety (Scheme 1b). The procedure is detailed in the Supporting Information. The 1H NMR spectra of the
poly(BA) macro-CTA, poly(BA)-b-poly(A-Met-OH), and
poly(BA)-b-poly(A-Met(S+)-OH) are shown
in Figure S3 (Supporting Information).

Protein Stabilization Study (Accelerated Degradation Test)
Protein Stabilization
Test with HRP
HRP solution (2.0 μg/mL) was prepared
in PBS pH 7.4. The samples were dissolved in PBS pH 7.4 at a concentration
of 0.1% by weight. Aliquots (50 μL) of the HRP solution were
added to the sample solutions (1 mL) at 4 °C. Sample solutions
containing HRP and an additive-free control sample were stored at
37 °C for several days. All samples were assessed immediately
after preparation. ABTS was used as the substrate, and the reaction
of HRP was carried out at ambient temperature for 30 min. Then, the
reaction was stopped using 1 wt % sodium dodecyl sulfate solution.
Absorbance was measured at 410 nm to monitor activity, and the assay
was repeated thrice. All p-values were calculated
using the Tukey–Kramer test.

Protein Stabilization Test
with ALP
An ALP solution (1.2 mg/mL) was prepared in Tris-HCl
buffer saline pH 9.0 containing 1.0 mM MgCl2. The samples
were dissolved in Tris-HCl buffer saline pH 8.0 containing 1.0 mM
MgCl2 at a concentration of 0.1% by weight, and 4 μL
of aliquots were added to the sample solutions (1 mL) at 4 °C.
Sample solutions containing ALP and an additive-free control sample
were stored at 37 °C for several days. All samples were assessed
immediately after preparation. pNPP was used as the substrate, and
the reaction of HRP was carried out at ambient temperature for 30
min. Then, the reaction was stopped using 2 M sodium hydroxide solution.
Absorbance was measured at 405 nm to monitor activity, with the assay
being repeated thrice. All p-values were calculated
using the Tukey–Kramer test.

Instrumentation
The 1H (400 MHz) and 13C (100 MHz) spectra
were recorded using a JEOL JNM-AL400. Mn and Mw/Mn were estimated using SEC at 40 °C using a Tosoh HPLC HLC-8020
system equipped with refractive index and ultraviolet detectors. For
poly(A-Met-OMe) and poly(A-Met-OMe)-b-poly(BA), the
column set was as follows: two consecutive columns [Polymer Laboratories
(PLgel) (bead size, exclusion-limited molar mass): mixed-D (5 μm,
4 × 105) × 2] and a guard column [Polymer Laboratories
(PLgel) guard column]. The system was operated at a flow rate of 0.6
mL/min, and DMF containing 1 g/L of LiBr was used as the eluent. Poly(methyl
methacrylate) standards were employed for calibration. Zeta potential
data were obtained on a Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern) in H2O. Block copolymer micelles were formed by gradual addition of deionized
water (5 mL) to a solution of the polymer (5 mg) in 50 μL of
MeOH + 20% H2O, affording a mixed solvent (water/MeOH =
124/1 vol %). Prior to the light scattering measurements, the polymer
solutions were filtered using Millipore Teflon filters with a pore
size of 0.8 μm into a dust-free cylindrical cuvette. Zeta potential
data were obtained on a Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern) in H2O. The pH was adjusted using sodium hydroxide and hydrogen chloride.
The CD was measured using a JASCO J-720 spectropolarimeter. Measurements
in the far-ultraviolet region (180–250 nm) were performed on
sample solutions in pH 7.0, 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer employing
a 1.0 mm path-length cell at 25 °C. The CD spectra were recorded
under the same conditions running two scans for each sample, corrected
by subtracting the appropriate blank runs.

TEM observation was
performed on a JEOL TEM-2100F field emission electron microscope at
an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The sample for TEM observation
was prepared by mounting a drop of the mixed sample dissolved in PBS
with an adjusted concentration on carbon-coated Cu grids. After the
solvent was evaporated at room temperature for 3 h, aliquots of an
aqueous solution of OsO4 (2 wt %) were dropped onto the
dried grit, and the sample was stained for 3 min. Then, the sample
was washed with hexane and dried for overnight. The glass-transition
points (Tg) of the copolymers were measured
by DSC (DSC 6220, Seiko Instruments Inc.). After annealing at 120
°C, the samples were cooled to −80 °C at a cooling
rate of 10 °C/min and subsequently scanned at a heating rate
of 10 °C/min from −80 to 120 °C.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02209.1H
NMR spectroscopy; gas permeation chromatography chart; zeta potential
data; DSC data; solubility of polymers; and solution properties of
the zwitterionic block copolymers, random copolymers, and protein/block
copolymers (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02209_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
==== Refs
References
Ishihara K. ; Nomura H. ; Mihara T. ; Kurita K. ; Iwasaki Y. ; Nakabayashi N. 
Why do phospholipid polymers reduce protein adsorption? . J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
1998 , 39 , 323 –330 . 10.1002/(sici)1097-4636(199802)39:2<323::aid-jbm21>3.0.co;2-c .9457564 
Ishihara K. ; Iwasaki Y. 
Reduced protein adsorption
on novel phospholipid polymers . J. Biomater.
Appl. 
1998 , 13 , 111 –127 . 10.1177/088532829801300203 .9777463 
Laschewsky A. 
Structures and Synthesis of Zwitterionic
Polymers . Polymers 
2014 , 6 , 1544 –1601 . 10.3390/polym6051544 .
Kobayashi M. ; Terayama Y. ; Yamaguchi H. ; Terada M. ; Murakami D. ; Ishihara K. ; Takahara A. 
Wettability and Antifouling Behavior
on the Surfaces of Superhydrophilic Polymer Brushes . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 7212 –7222 . 10.1021/la301033h .22500465 
Laschewsky A. ; Rosenhahn A. 
Molecular
Design of Zwitterionic Polymer Interfaces: Searching for the Difference . Langmuir 
2019 , 35 , 1056 –1071 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.8b01789 .30048142 
Ishihara K. ; Ishikawa E. ; Iwasaki Y. ; Nakabayashi N. 
Inhibition of fibroblast cell adhesion on substrate
by coating with 2-methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine polymers . J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed. 
1999 , 10 , 1047 –1061 . 10.1163/156856299x00676 .10591131 
Ueda T. ; Oshida H. ; Kurita K. ; Ishihara K. ; Nakabayashi N. 
Perparation
of 2-Methacryloyloxyethyl Phosphorylcholine Copolymers with Alkyl
Methacrylates and Their Blood Compatibility . Polym. J. 
1992 , 24 , 1259 –1269 . 10.1295/polymj.24.1259 .
Nakabayashi N. ; Iwasaki Y. 
Copolymers of 2-methacryloyloxyethyl
phosphorylcholine (MPC) as biomaterials . Biomed.
Mater. Eng. 
2004 , 14 , 345 –354 .15472384 
Keefe A. J. ; Jiang S. 
Poly(zwitterionic)protein
conjugates offer increased stability without sacrificing binding affinity
or bioactivity . Nat. Chem. 
2011 , 4 , 59 –63 . 10.1038/nchem.1213 .22169873 
Nagao M. ; Sengupta J. ; Diaz-Dussan D. ; Adam M. ; Wu M. ; Acker J. ; Ben R. ; Ishihara K. ; Zeng H. ; Miura Y. ; Narain R. 
Synthesis of Highly Biocompatible
and Temperature-Responsive Physical Gels for Cryopreservation and
3D Cell Culture . ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 356 –366 . 10.1021/acsabm.8b00096 .
Yusa S.-i. ; Fukuda K. ; Yamamoto T. ; Ishihara K. ; Morishima Y. 
Synthesis of well-defined amphiphilic block copolymers
having phospholipid polymer sequences as a novel biocompatible polymer
micelle reagent . Biomacromolecules 
2005 , 6 , 663 –670 . 10.1021/bm0495553 .15762627 
Shih Y.-J. ; Chang Y. 
Tunable blood compatibility of polysulfobetaine from controllable
molecular-weight dependence of zwitterionic nonfouling nature in aqueous
solution . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 17286 –17294 . 10.1021/la103186y .20882958 
Chang Y. ; Chen S. ; Yu Q. ; Zhang Z. ; Bernards M. ; Jiang S. 
Development of Biocompatible Interpenetrating Polymer Networks Containing
a Sulfobetaine-Based Polymer and a Segmented Polyurethane for Protein
Resistance . Biomacromolecules 
2007 , 8 , 122 –127 . 10.1021/bm060739m .17206797 
Yuan J. ; Chen L. ; Jiang X. ; Shen J. ; Lin S. 
Chemical graft
polymerization of sulfobetaine monomer on polyurethane surface for
reduction in platelet adhesion . Colloids Surf.,
B 
2004 , 39 , 87 –94 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2004.08.019 .
Chan G. Y. N. ; Hughes T. C. ; McLean K. M. ; McFarland G. A. ; Nguyen X. ; Wilkie J. S. ; Johnson G. 
Approaches
to improving the biocompatibility of porous perfluoropolyethers for
ophthalmic applications . Biomaterials 
2006 , 27 , 1287 –1295 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.08.005 .16169586 
Wang Z. ; Ma G. ; Zhang J. ; Lin W. ; Ji F. ; Bernards M. T. ; Chen S. 
Development of zwitterionic
polymer-based doxorubicin conjugates: tuning the surface charge to
prolong the circulation and reduce toxicity . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 3764 –3774 . 10.1021/la5000765 .24617705 
Kitano H. ; Tada S. ; Mori T. ; Takaha K. ; Gemmei-Ide M. ; Tanaka M. ; Fukuda M. ; Yokoyama Y. 
Correlation between the structure of water in the vicinity
of carboxybetaine polymers and their blood-compatibility . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 11932 –11940 . 10.1021/la0515571 .16316135 
Zhang Z. ; Chen S. ; Jiang S. 
Dual-Functional
Biomimetic Materials: Nonfouling Poly(carboxybetaine) with Active
Functional Groups for Protein Immobilization . Biomacromolecules 
2006 , 7 , 3311 –3315 . 10.1021/bm060750m .17154457 
Zhang Z. ; Chao T. ; Chen S. ; Jiang S. 
Superlow fouling sulfobetaine and carboxybetaine polymers on glass
slides . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 10072 –10077 . 10.1021/la062175d .17107002 
Ladd J. ; Zhang Z. ; Chen S. ; Hower J. C. ; Jiang S. 
Zwitterionic
polymers exhibiting high resistance to nonspecific protein adsorption
from human serum and plasma . Biomacromolecules 
2008 , 9 , 1357 –1361 . 10.1021/bm701301s .18376858 
Ge C. ; Zhao L. ; Ling Y. ; Tang H. 
Thermo and pH dual
responsive polypeptides derived from “clickable” poly(γ-3-methylthiopropyl-l-glutamate) . Polym. Chem. 
2017 , 8 , 1895 –1905 . 10.1039/c7py00170c .
Maji T. ; Banerjee S. ; Bose A. ; Mandal T. K. 
A stimuli-responsive methionine-based zwitterionic
methacryloyl sulfonium sulfonate monomer and the corresponding antifouling
polymer with tunable thermosensitivity . Polym.
Chem. 
2017 , 8 , 3164 –3176 . 10.1039/c7py00460e .
Santa Chalarca C. F. ; Emrick T. 
Reactive polymer zwitterions:
Sulfonium sulfonates . J. Polym. Sci., Part A:
Polym. Chem. 
2017 , 55 , 83 –92 . 10.1002/pola.28359 .
Bailey F. E. ; La Combe E. M. 
Synthesis and Some
Properties of Some Sulfonium Polyelectrolytes: Polymers and Copolymers
Derived from Methylthioethyl Acrylate . J. Macromol.
Sci., Part A: Chem. 
1970 , 4 , 1293 –1300 . 10.1080/00222337008081730 .
Perlmann G. E. ; Katchalski E. 
Conformation
of Poly-L-methionine and Some of its Derivatives in Solution . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1962 , 84 , 452 –457 . 10.1021/ja00862a026 .
Imamura R. ; Mori H. 
Synthesis of Zwitterionic
Polymers Containing a Tertiary Sulfonium Group for Protein Stabilization . Biomacromolecules 
2019 , 20 , 904 –915 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.8b01542 .30566330 
Lowe A. B. ; McCormick C. L. 
Synthesis
and Solution Properties of Zwitterionic Polymers . Chem. Rev. 
2002 , 102 , 4177 –4190 . 10.1021/cr020371t .12428987 
Broy S. ; Chen C. ; Hoffmann T. ; Brock N. L. ; Nau-Wagner G. ; Jebbar M. ; Smits S. H. J. ; Dickschat J. S. ; Bremer E. 
Abiotic stress protection by ecologically
abundant dimethylsulfoniopropionate and its natural and synthetic
derivatives: insights fromBacillus subtilis . Environ. Microbiol. 
2015 , 17 , 2362 –2378 . 10.1111/1462-2920.12698 .25384455 
Van Alstyne K. L. ; Pelletreau K. N. ; Rosario K. 
The Effects of Salinity on Dimethylsulfoniopropionate
Production in the Green Alga Ulva fenestrata Postels et Ruprecht (Chlorophyta) . Bot. Mar. 
2003 , 46 , 350 –356 . 10.1515/bot.2003.033 .
Keller M. ; Kiene R. ; Kirst G. ; Visscher P.  Biological
and Environmental Chemistry of DMSP and Related Sulfonium Compounds ; Springer Science & Business Media , 2012 .
Sunda W. ; Kieber D. J. ; Kiene R. P. ; Huntsman S. 
An antioxidant function for DMSP and DMS in marine
algae . Nature 
2002 , 418 , 317 –320 . 10.1038/nature00851 .12124622 
Cushman J. C. ; Bohnert H. J. 
Genomic approaches to plant stress tolerance . Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 
2000 , 3 , 117 –124 . 10.1016/s1369-5266(99)00052-7 .10712956 
Kamerzell T. J. ; Esfandiary R. ; Joshi S. B. ; Middaugh C. R. ; Volkin D. B. 
Protein-excipient
interactions: Mechanisms and biophysical characterization applied
to protein formulation development . Adv. Drug
Delivery Rev. 
2011 , 63 , 1118 –1159 . 10.1016/j.addr.2011.07.006 .
Lougheed W. D. ; Albisser A. M. ; Martindale H. M. ; Chow J. C. ; Clement J. R. 
Physical stability of insulin formulations . Diabetes 
1983 , 32 , 424 –432 . 10.2337/diabetes.32.5.424 .6341125 
Lee J. ; Lin E.-W. ; Lau U. Y. ; Hedrick J. L. ; Bat E. ; Maynard H. D. 
Trehalose glycopolymers
as excipients for protein stabilization . Biomacromolecules 
2013 , 14 , 2561 –2569 . 10.1021/bm4003046 .23777473 
Miyamoto D. ; Watanabe J. ; Ishihara K. 
Molecular design of reactive amphiphilic
phospholipid polymer for bioconjugation with an enzyme . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2005 , 95 , 615 –622 . 10.1002/app.21339 .
Chapman R. ; Stenzel M. H. 
All Wrapped up:
Stabilization of Enzymes within Single Enzyme Nanoparticles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2019 , 141 , 2754 –2769 . 10.1021/jacs.8b10338 .30621398 
Cabral H. ; Miyata K. ; Osada K. ; Kataoka K. 
Block Copolymer Micelles
in Nanomedicine Applications . Chem. Rev. 
2018 , 118 , 6844 –6892 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00199 .29957926 
Lächelt U. ; Wagner E. 
Nucleic Acid Therapeutics
Using Polyplexes: A Journey of 50 Years (and Beyond) . Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 11043 –11078 . 10.1021/cr5006793 .25872804 
Vlassi E. ; Papagiannopoulos A. ; Pispas S. 
Self-assembly of poly(ethylene glycol-b-phenyl oxazoline)
diblock copolymers in aqueous media and their interactions with proteins . Colloid Polym. Sci. 
2017 , 295 , 1359 –1369 . 10.1007/s00396-017-4076-y .
Chin J. ; Mustafi D. ; Poellmann M. J. ; Lee R. C. 
Amphiphilic copolymers
reduce aggregation of unfolded lysozyme more effectively than polyethylene
glycol . Phys. Biol. 
2017 , 14 , 016003 10.1088/1478-3975/aa5788 .28061483 
Poellmann M. J. ; Sosnick T. R. ; Meredith S. C. ; Lee R. C. 
The Pentablock Amphiphilic
Copolymer T1107 Prevents Aggregation of Denatured and Reduced Lysozyme . Macromol. Biosci. 
2017 , 17 , 1600217 10.1002/mabi.201600217 .
Fujihara A. ; Shimada N. ; Maruyama A. ; Ishihara K. ; Nakai K. ; Yusa S.-i. 
Preparation of upper
critical solution temperature (UCST) responsive diblock copolymers
bearing pendant ureido groups and their micelle formation behavior
in water . Soft Matter 
2015 , 11 , 5204 –5213 . 10.1039/c5sm00499c .25971855 
Kim Y. ; Binauld S. ; Stenzel M. H. 
Zwitterionic guanidine-based oligomers
mimicking cell-penetrating peptides as a nontoxic alternative to cationic
polymers to enhance the cellular uptake of micelles . Biomacromolecules 
2012 , 13 , 3418 –3426 . 10.1021/bm301351e .22946476 
Skinner M. ; Johnston B. M. ; Liu Y. ; Hammer B. ; Selhorst R. ; Xenidou I. ; Perry S. L. ; Emrick T. 
Synthesis of Zwitterionic Pluronic Analogs . Biomacromolecules 
2018 , 19 , 3377 –3389 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.8b00676 .30024744 
Sakaki S. ; Iwasaki Y. ; Nakabayashi N. ; Ishihara K. 
Water-Soluble 2-Methacryloyloxyethyl
Phosphorylcholine Copolymer as a Novel Synthetic Blocking Reagent
in Immunoassay System . Polym. J. 
2000 , 32 , 637 10.1295/polymj.32.637 .
Ohshio M. ; Ishihara K. ; Yusa S.-i. 
Self-Association Behavior of Cell
Membrane-Inspired Amphiphilic Random Copolymers in Water . Polymers 
2019 , 11 , 327 10.3390/polym11020327 .
Moad G. ; Rizzardo E. ; Thang S. H. 
Living
Radical Polymerization by the RAFT Process—A Third Update . Aust. J. Chem. 
2012 , 65 , 985 10.1071/ch12295 .
Gregory A. ; Stenzel M. H. 
Complex polymer
architectures via RAFT polymerization: From fundamental process to
extending the scope using click chemistry and nature’s building
blocks . Prog. Polym. Sci. 
2012 , 37 , 38 –105 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2011.08.004 .
Halacheva S. S. ; Adlam D. J. ; Hendow E. K. ; Freemont T. J. ; Hoyland J. ; Saunders B. R. 
Injectable biocompatible
and biodegradable pH-responsive hollow particle gels containing poly(acrylic
acid): the effect of copolymer composition on gel properties . Biomacromolecules 
2014 , 15 , 1814 –1827 . 10.1021/bm5002069 .24684558 
Cao D. ; Zhang Y. ; Cui Z. ; Du Y. ; Shi Z. 
New strategy for design and fabrication of polymer
hydrogel with tunable porosity as artificial corneal skirt . Mater. Sci. Eng., C 
2017 , 70 , 665 –672 . 10.1016/j.msec.2016.09.042 .
Prasitsilp M. ; Siriwittayakorn T. ; Molloy R. ; Suebsanit N. ; Siriwittayakorn P. ; Veeranondha S. 
Cytotoxicity study of homopolymers and copolymers of
2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate and some alkyl acrylates for potential
use as temporary skin substitutes . J. Mater.
Sci.: Mater. Med. 
2003 , 14 , 595 –600 . 10.1023/a:1024066806347 .15348420 
Schoener C. A. ; Hutson H. N. ; Peppas N. A. 
Amphiphilic
Interpenetrating Polymer Networks for the Oral Delivery of Chemotherapeutics . AIChE J. 
2013 , 59 , 1472 –1478 . 10.1002/aic.14077 .
Mayer A. ; Roch T. ; Kratz K. ; Lendlein A. ; Jung F. 
Pro-angiogenic CD14(++) CD16(+) CD163(+)
monocytes accelerate the in vitro endothelialization of soft hydrophobic
poly (n-butyl acrylate) networks . Acta Biomater. 
2012 , 8 , 4253 –4259 . 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.08.011 .22902818 
Rodríguez G. ; Fernández-Gutiérrez M. ; Parra J. ; López-Bravo A. ; Honduvilla N. G. ; Buján J. ; Molina M. ; Duocastella L. ; San Román J. 
Bioactive polymeric systems with platelet antiaggregating
activity for the coating of vascular devices . Biomacromolecules 
2010 , 11 , 2740 –2747 . 10.1021/bm100801k .20866066 
Cui J. ; Trescher K. ; Kratz K. ; Jung F. ; Hiebl B. ; Lendlein A. 
Melt-processable hydrophobic
acrylonitrile-based copolymer systems with adjustable elastic properties
designed for biomedical applications . Clin.
Hemorheol. Microcirc. 
2010 , 45 , 401 –411 . 10.3233/CH-2010-1322 .20675924 
Arakawa T. ; Tsumoto K. ; Kita Y. ; Chang B. ; Ejima D. 
Biotechnology applications of amino
acids in protein purification and formulations . Amino Acids 
2007 , 33 , 587 –605 . 10.1007/s00726-007-0506-3 .17357829 
Arakawa T. ; Timasheff S. N. 
Stabilization
of protein structure by sugars . Biochemistry 
1982 , 21 , 6536 –6544 . 10.1021/bi00268a033 .7150574 
Gekko K. ; Timasheff S. N. 
Mechanism of protein stabilization
by glycerol: preferential hydration in glycerol-water mixtures . Biochemistry 
1981 , 20 , 4667 –4676 . 10.1021/bi00519a023 .7295639 
Carpenter J. F. ; Prestrelski J. F. ; Anchordoguy T. J. ; Arakawa T.  Interactions of Stabilizers with Proteins During Freezing and Drying . Formulation and Delivery of Proteins and Peptides ; American Chemical Society , 1994 ; pp 134 –147 .
Chou D. K. ; Krishnamurthy R. ; Randolph T. W. ; Carpenter J. F. ; Manning M. C. 
Effects of Tween 20 and Tween 80 on the stability of
Albutropin during agitation . J. Pharm. Sci. 
2005 , 94 , 1368 –1381 . 10.1002/jps.20365 .15858848 
Joshi O. ; Chu L. ; McGuire J. ; Wang D. Q. 
Adsorption and function of recombinant
Factor VIII at the air-water interface in the presence of Tween 80 . J. Pharm. Sci. 
2009 , 98 , 3099 –3107 . 10.1002/jps.21569 .18781611 
Cha H. J. ; Jang D. S. ; Jin K. S. ; Choi K. Y. 
Structural analyses combined with small-angle X-ray
scattering reveals that the retention of heme is critical for maintaining
the structure of horseradish peroxidase under denaturing conditions . Amino Acids 
2017 , 49 , 715 –723 . 10.1007/s00726-016-2372-3 .28144743 
Bueno M. P. ; Cativiela C. ; Mayoral J. A. ; Avenoza A. ; Charro P. ; Roy M. A. ; Andres J. M. 
Natural amino acids as chiral auxiliaries in asymmetric
Diels–Alder reactions . Can. J. Chem. 
1988 , 66 , 2826 –2829 . 10.1139/v88-437 .
Bueno M. P. ; Cativiela C. A. ; Mayoral J. A. ; Avenoza A. 
Models for the use
of .alpha.-amino acids as chiral auxiliaries in asymmetric Diels-Alder
reactions . J. Org. Chem. 
1991 , 56 , 6551 –6555 . 10.1021/jo00023a020 .
Mori H. ; Matsuyama M. ; Sutoh K. ; Endo T. 
RAFT Polymerization
of Acrylamide Derivatives Containingl-Phenylalanine Moiety . Macromolecules 
2006 , 39 , 4351 –4360 . 10.1021/ma052756u .
Couvreur L. ; Lefay C. ; Belleney J. ; Charleux B. ; Guerret O. ; Magnet S. 
First Nitroxide-Mediated
Controlled Free-Radical Polymerization of Acrylic Acid . Macromolecules 
2003 , 36 , 8260 –8267 . 10.1021/ma035043p .

