
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145965910.1021/acsomega.8b03658ArticleModel Amphiphilic Polymer Conetworks in Water: Prediction of Their
Ability for Oil Solubilization Varnava Constantina K. Patrickios Costas S. *Department of Chemistry, University of
Cyprus, P.O. Box 20537, 1 University Avenue 2109 Aglantzia, 1678 Nicosia, Cyprus* E-mail: costasp@ucy.ac.cy.04 03 2019 31 03 2019 4 3 4721 4738 28 12 2018 13 02 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In this work, we computationally
explored the ability of water-swollen, model ionizable ABA triblock
copolymer-based amphiphilic polymer conetworks (APCNs) to solubilize
a water-immiscible organic solvent (oil), via Gibbs free energy minimization.
This was done as a function of the conetwork hydrophobe (A-blocks)
mol fraction and the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic B-blocks.
Expectedly, highest oil solubilization capacities were calculated
for the most hydrophobic and least ionized APCNs, which could absorb
up to 6.4 times more oil than water and exhibited a lamellar morphology.
Our results also included a phase diagram, which indicated transitions
from spheres to cylinders, lamellae, and unimers in oil, as the hydrophobe
content increased and the degree of ionization decreased. All of these
transitions were accompanied by discontinuous changes in the degrees
of swelling in the aqueous and oil nanophases, discontinuous changes
in the asymmetry ratios (for the anisotropic morphologies), and discontinuous
changes in the oil solubilization capacities. This is the first time
that a dual discontinuous volume phase transition is reported within
a polymer gel.

document-id-old-9ao8b03658document-id-new-14ao-2018-036585ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
This year marks the
50th anniversary of Dušek’s1,2 theoretical
prediction of the discontinuous volume phase transition in polymer
gels and the 40th anniversary of its experimental confirmation by
Tanaka.3,4 Although this discontinuous transition may
also take place within uncharged polymer gels,5 it always takes place when the gel is even slightly charged and
when the solvent is not too good for the polymer. Solvent quality,
temperature, pH, salt concentration, light irradiation, electric field,
biochemical stimuli, and stress were subsequently shown to be able
to trigger this volume phase transition in gels; furthermore, multiple
discontinuous transitions were observed in certain polyampholytic
gel systems.6

In all of the above
experimental systems,3−6 the gel structure was poorly controlled, with the length of the
chains between cross-linking points being broadly distributed and,
in the case of copolymer gels, the two or more types of monomer repeating
units being randomly distributed. In contrast, the polymeric hydrogel
experimental system we developed 20 years ago possesses a much better
structure.7−10 In particular, our polymer gels comprised polymers of well-defined
length and composition, end-linked at cross-linking cores with a distribution
of functionality.11 In enriching the behavior
of our hydrogel experimental system, we also introduced hydrophobic
segments, which, together with the hydrophilic ones, rendered the
material amphiphilic.12−16 Amphiphilic polymer conetworks (APCNs)17−19 represent a
rapidly emerging class of polymeric materials with important properties,
the most important of which are swelling in both water and oil, microphase
separation, and a variety of applications, including soft contact
lenses,20 drug delivery,21 phase transfer catalysis,22 and
solid or gel polymer electrolytes.23,24

Despite
the great interest in the experimental study of the properties and
applications of APCNs, much less effort has been undertaken by the
scientific community to investigate theoretically the behavior of
these intriguing polymer systems, especially well-defined (“regular”)
APCNs. The ability to predict via theory or simulations the properties
of these materials may facilitate the design of new-generation APCNs
with better attributes and superior performance in their applications.
In a relatively recent important self-consistent field approach, Schmid25 observed that a regular APCN based on end-linked
diblock copolymers (in the melt) undergoes with temperature a discontinuous
transition from the disordered state to lamellae. This is in contrast
to the non-cross-linked analogue in which the transition is continuous.
Our team used phenomenological Gibbs free energy descriptions and
investigated end-linked ABA triblock copolymer-based APCNs in the
melt over a broad polymer composition range and found that, in addition
to lamellae, these systems can also organize into spheres and cylinders,
depending on their comonomer composition and cross-linking functionality.26−28

Earlier theoretical work by our group29 showed that APCNs based on end-linked ABA triblock copolymers with
a hydrophilic, ionizable mid-block and hydrophobic nonionic end-blocks
in water are in a disordered state under certain conditions but could
microphase-separate into spheres upon changing solvent conditions
or/and copolymer composition. This disorder-to-sphere transition was
accompanied by discontinuous volume phase transitions. Subsequent
work30 revealed a richer phase diagram
for this APCN system. In particular, in addition to the disordered
state and spheres, cylinders and lamellae also appeared at very low
degrees of ionization and intermediate to high hydrophobe contents.
Again, transitions between different structures were accompanied by
large changes in the aqueous degrees of swelling. Large changes in
the aqueous degrees of swelling of APCNs upon small changes of an
external condition are known from experiments,31−33 whereas APCN
organization in water into morphologies with long-range order has
recently been recorded using scattering and microscopy techniques.34−38

In the present investigation, we further extend our previous
modeling work on the phase behavior of APCNs based on end-linked ionizable
amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers by including, in addition to water,
a water-immiscible organic solvent (“oil”). Thus, each
of the nanophases of the presently explored system can be swollen
with the respective solvent. The model calculates exactly the extent
of this swelling in each nanophase, from which the oil solubilization
capacity (SC) of the system is determined, a property highly relevant
to applications such as water-remediation (removal of oil from contaminated
water39−41) and the delivery of hydrophobic drugs.21 The model also provides a phase diagram and
the dependence of the swelling degrees in each nanophase, both of
which present discontinuous changes when a morphological transition
takes place. To our knowledge, this is the first report on a dual
discontinuous volume phase transition within the same polymer gel
material.

The rest of the article is organized as follows. First,
the Geometry and Forces section describes
the geometry of the considered morphologies, the peculiarity in the
configuration of some of the polymer chains within these morphologies,
and the components used to calculate the total Gibbs free energy.
Next, the Theory section provides all mathematical
expressions used in the article that led to the main findings, which
are presented in the Results and Discussion section. The Conclusions section is followed
by five appendices in the Supporting Information, the first two of which further analyze the anisotropic morphologies,
lamellae and cylinders; the third one gives tables revealing the main
Gibbs free energy components responsible for some of the volume phase
transitions; the fourth one provides several extra figures to better
illustrate the connection among the degrees of swelling, the asymmetry
ratios, and the oil solubilization capacity; and the last one derives
approximate analytical expressions to help explain some of the swelling
trends presented in the Results and Discussion section.

Geometry and Forces
We consider ionizable amphiphilic
polymer conetworks (APCNs) with an ideal structure, comprising ionizable
amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers of well-defined size and composition,
end-linked at cores of exact functionality. This APCN system can exist
in an ordered morphology or in a disordered state. Three ordered morphologies
are considered, the spherical, the cylindrical, and the lamellar.
The disordered state concerns the unimers either in oil or in water. Figure 1 illustrates the
unit cells for spheres, cylinders, and lamellae, which are a cube,
a regular hexagon parallelepiped, and a square parallelepiped, respectively.
There is one cross-link at the center of each unit cell. Three copolymer
chains (although a number of 20 is used in the calculations that follow)
appear to emanate from each cross-link. Each of these three polymer
chains is part of an ABA triblock copolymer, half of which belongs
to a given unit cell (i.e., an AB diblock copolymer), whereas the
other half belongs to a neighboring unit cell. Each of the three diblock
copolymer chains illustrated points toward one of the three Cartesian
coordinates. For the purposes of this investigation, the overall length
(total degree of polymerization) of the constituting AB diblock copolymer
chains was kept constant, but the relative lengths of the A- (hydrophobic,
in red) and B- (hydrophilic ionizable, in blue) blocks were systematically
varied so as to thoroughly explore the effect of copolymer composition
on the properties of the system.

Figure 1 Unit cells for ionizable APCNs based on
end-linked ionizable amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers microphase-separated
to spheres, infinite cylinders, and infinite lamellae. In each unit
cell, the conformation of three copolymer chains, each toward one
of the three Cartesian coordinates, is indicated.

Considering now more than one unit cells, we can recognize
a peculiarity in the anisotropic morphologies, i.e., cylinders and
lamellae, illustrated in Figure 2. Some chains act as bridges, interconnecting hydrophobic
cores in different lines in cylinders (two out of three chains) and
in different planes in lamellae (one out of three chains), whereas
the rest of the chains are in the form of loops, connecting hydrophobic
cores in the same line in cylinders (one out of three chains) and
in the same plane in lamellae (two out of three chains). This distribution
of loops and bridges is imposed by the initially cross-linked state
of the conetwork assumed to be formed in a nonselective solvent and,
consequently, in a disordered state. Although also encountered in
infinite cylinders and infinite lamellae formed by linear block copolymers,
the occurrence of loops is less frequent in the systems comprising
linear block copolymers.42 Thus, the following
calculations implicitly consider the occurrence of a large percentage
of polymer chains in a loop configuration, 33% in cylinders and 67%
in lamellae.

Figure 2 Bridges and loops in the anisotropic morphologies (cylindrical
and lamellar). Bridges interconnect hydrophobic cores in different
lines in cylinders and in different planes in lamellae, whereas loops
connect hydrophobic cores in the same line in cylinders and in the
same plane in lamellae.

The prevailing morphology for each conetwork composition
and degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units is the one with
the lowest value in minimized total Gibbs free energy. The total Gibbs
free energy comprises the following components: the Gibbs free energies
of mixing in the core and in the shell, the electrostatic Gibbs free
energy in the shell, the elastic Gibbs free energies in the core and
in the shell, and the interfacial Gibbs free energy.

Theory
The mathematical expressions for the components of the Gibbs free
energies for the considered structures are listed in Table 1. These expressions were derived
for one unit cell containing one cross-link at its center, as illustrated
in Figure 1, whereas
all symbols are defined in the footnote to Table 1. For the disordered state (unimers), absorbing
only one type of solvent, either oil or water, only one independent
variable was necessary for minimization, and this was chosen to be
the (overall) polymer volume fraction, φ.29,30 In contrast, for the three ordered morphologies, absorbing both
immiscible solvents, at least two independent variables were required
for minimization. In particular, for the more symmetrical spherical
morphology, exactly two independent variables were necessary, and
these were chosen to be the polymer volume fractions in the aqueous
hydrophilic and organic solvent hydrophobic nanophases, φAshell and φBcore, respectively.
On the other hand, for the anisotropic morphologies, cylinders and
lamellae, two further independent variables were required, and these
were the two asymmetry ratios, one in each of the nanophases.

Table 1 Equations for the Gibbs Free Energy Components for
the Various Structures Formed by the Ionizable Amphiphilic Polymer
Conetworks in Equilibrium with Water and Oila
equations for Gibbs free energy components for
the various structures	
Gibbs free energy of mixing	
Unimers in Oil	Unimers in Water	
 T1.1  	 T1.2  	
Core of Spheres, Cylinders, and Lamellae	Shell of
Spheres, Cylinders, and Lamellae	
 T1.3  	 T1.4  	
electrostatic Gibbs
free energy	
Unimers	Shell of Spheres,
Cylinders, and Lamellae	
 T1.5  	 T1.6  	
elastic
Gibbs free energy	
Unimers	
 T1.7  	
Core of Spheres	Shell of
Spheres	
 T1.8  	 T1.9  	
Core of Cylinders	Shell of Cylinders	
 T1.10  	 T1.11  	
Core of Lamellae	Shell of
Lamellae	
 T1.12  	 T1.13  	
interfacial
Gibbs free energy	
Unimers	Spheres	
 T1.14  	 T1.15  	
Cylinders	Lamellae	
 T1.16  	 T1.17  	
a Symbols. Constants: φ0, polymer volume fraction
in the unperturbed state, taken as that upon synthesis, set equal
to 0.2; β, number of arms per cross-link, taken equal to 20
throughout the manuscript; χA–water, Flory–Huggins
interaction parameter between water and the hydrophilic units, set
equal to 0.45; χB–oil, Flory–Huggins
interaction parameter between oil and the hydrophobic units, also
set equal to 0.45; χA-oil, Flory–Huggins
interaction parameter between oil and the hydrophilic units in unimers,
set equal to 2.0; χB–water, Flory–Huggins
interaction parameter between water and the hydrophobic units in unimers,
also set equal to 2.0; χAB, Flory–Huggins
interaction parameter between the water-swollen hydrophilic nanophase
and the oil-swollen hydrophobic nanophase, set equal to 2.0; Variables:
ζ, number of monomer repeating units in the hydrophobic block,
varied between 2.4 and 237.6; η, number of monomer repeating
units in the hydrophilic block, varied between 237.6 and 2.4; ι,
degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units, varied between 0.001
and 0.1; Independent variables: φ, polymer volume fraction for
unimers; φAshell, polymer volume fraction in the hydrophilic nanophase of ordered
morphologies; φBcore, polymer volume fraction in the hydrophobic nanophase
of ordered morphologies; other symbols: ΔG,
Gibbs free energy change; k, Boltzmann’s constant; T, absolute temperature; , asymmetry ratio for the hydrophobic
nanophase in cylinders; , asymmetry ratio for the hydrophilic nanophase
in cylinders; , asymmetry ratio for the hydrophobic nanophase
in lamellae; , asymmetry ratio for the hydrophilic nanophase
in lamellae.

Asymmetry Ratios for the
Anisotropic Morphologies
In this approach, the total Gibbs
free energy for each of the three ordered morphologies consists of
six Gibbs free energy components: the Gibbs free energies of mixing
in the core and in the shell, the electrostatic Gibbs free energy
in the shell, the elastic Gibbs free energies in the core and in the
shell, and the interfacial Gibbs free energy. These Gibbs free energy
components are dependent on the polymer volume fractions in the two
nanophases and, for the two anisotropic ordered morphologies, are
also dependent on the asymmetry ratios of the nanophases (lamellar
stretching and cylindrical compression), with these asymmetry ratios
appearing only in the last three above-mentioned Gibbs free energy
components. Their appearance in the expressions of only some of the
Gibbs free energy components allowed for the derivation of closed-form
expressions for these asymmetry ratios by appropriate Gibbs free energy
minimization, as detailed in Appendices A and B for lamellae and cylinders, respectively. These expressions
correlated the asymmetry ratios to the two polymer volume fractions,
thereby keeping the number of independent variables for numerical
minimization down to 2.

The asymmetry ratio for the hydrophobic
nanophase in lamellae is the ratio of the stretched to unstretched
heights of the lamellar core, h/h0. The expression for h/h0 is given by 1  whereas the derivation is
given in Appendix A.

The asymmetry
ratio for the hydrophilic nanophase in lamellae is the ratio of the
stretched to unstretched heights of the lamellar shell, l/l0. The expression for l/l0 is given by 2  and the derivation is also
given in Appendix A.

The asymmetry
ratio for the hydrophobic nanophase in cylinders is the ratio of the
compressed to uncompressed heights of the cylindrical core, H/h0. The expression for H/h0 is given by 3  whereas the relevant derivation
can be found in Appendix B.

The asymmetry
ratio for the hydrophilic nanophase in cylinders is the ratio of the
compressed to uncompressed heights of the hexagonal shell, H/l0. The expression for H/l0 is given by 4  and the derivation can also be found in Appendix B.

Gibbs Free Energy of Mixing
Equations T1.1 and TTT1.2 give the Gibbs free energy
of mixing in oil and water, respectively, for the unimer-like network.
These equations originate from the classical Flory–Huggins
expression for the Gibbs free energy of mixing of solvent with a polymer
network.43a In these equations, the enthalpies
from the interaction of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic units with
water, in the case of unimers in water (eq T1.2), or that of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic
units with oil, in the case of unimers in oil (eq T1.1), are expressed through the first two terms
in brackets, ζχB–solvent and ηχA–solvent, where “solvent” corresponds
either to water (eq T1.2) or to oil (eq T1.1).
For simplicity, our approach considered that all χ-parameters
are independent of polymer concentration. The third and final term
in brackets is the translational entropy of the solvent. The size
of the polymer network is infinite, and, consequently, the term corresponding
to the translational entropy of the polymer segments is omitted. The
terms β(ζ + η) and , in these two equations,
represent the total number of monomer repeating units and the total
number of solvent molecules within the unit cell, respectively.

For the ordered networks, with the morphologies of spheres, cylinders,
and lamellae, the Gibbs free energies of mixing in the core and in
the shell are given by eqs T1.3 and T1.4, respectively, for all three
morphologies. In these expressions, the first term in brackets is
the enthalpic interaction between the hydrophobic units and oil in eq T1.3, χB–oil, and between the hydrophilic units and water in eq T1.4, χA–water. The second and final term in brackets is the solvent translational
entropy. In both eqs T1.3 and T1.4, the enthalpic interactions between
incompatible solvent–block pairs are omitted, as these interactions
are described in the expressions for the interfacial Gibbs free energy
(eqs T1.15–T1.17).

Electrostatic Gibbs Free Energy
Equation T1.5 provides
the electrostatic Gibbs free energy for the unimer-like network, originating
from the translational entropy of the counterions to the conetwork
charges,44 captured by the logarithmic
term whose argument is exactly the volume fraction of these counterions.
Due to the low degrees of ionization explored in this investigation,
our simple description of the electrostatic Gibbs free energy ignored
the part of the electrostatic energy due to the electrostatic repulsion
among the charged polymer chains.

For the ordered networks,
the expression for the electrostatic Gibbs free energy (eq T1.6) is based on the same concept as
in the unimer-like system described above, i.e., based on the counterion
translational entropy, with the only difference that the relevant
control volume is not that of the whole unit cell but only a part
of it, namely, its hydrophilic shell.

Elastic Gibbs Free Energy
Equation T1.7 is the
expression for the elastic Gibbs free energy for the unimer-like network,
in which the first term in brackets (the one raised to the 2/3 power)
represents the contribution from the isotropic linear deformation,
whereas the last term in brackets (the logarithmic one) is that due
to the incompressibility condition.43b,43c The constant  in this equation is
derived from the original Flory coefficient for one elastic chain
of  and the effective number of chains of  lying within one unit cell.

For the
ordered networks, the elastic Gibbs free energies in the core and
in the shell are given by eqs T1.8–T1.13. Equations T1.8 and T1.9 are the result
of applying eq T1.7 in the
core and in the shell, respectively, for the isotropic spherical morphology.
For the anisotropic morphologies, the elastic Gibbs free energy expressions
in the core and in the shell, given in eqs T1.10–T1.13, are functions
of the respective asymmetry ratios.43d The
derivations of the expressions for the asymmetry ratios are given
in Appendices A and B. These expressions
constitute great improvements compared to the ones in our previous
work30 in which the elastic energy from
the looped chains was taken equal to zero. In contrast, here, the
proper elastic energy values from the incompressibility condition
were calculated.

Interfacial Gibbs Free Energy
Due
to lack of microphase separation, the interfacial Gibbs free energy
for the unimer-like network in eq T1.14 is zero. In contrast, the interfacial Gibbs free energies
for the ordered networks are nonzero and represent the interfacial
interaction between the hydrophilic nanophase (hydrophilic blocks
plus water) and the hydrophobic nanophase (hydrophobic blocks plus
oil). These energies, ΔGinterfacialordered, are given in eqs T1.15–T1.17 and were calculated as the product of the interfacial tension
between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases, γ, times
the interfacial area in the unit cell, Sinterfacialordered 5  The interfacial tension, γ, is related to χAB through the following equation45 6  where A2 is the
area corresponding to one monomer repeating unit.

For the spherical
morphology, the interfacial area, Sinterfacialspheres, can be first
related to the radius of the spherical oil-swollen hydrophobic nanophase, R 7  Subsequently, R can be related to the composition
(ζ) and swelling (φBcore) characteristics of the hydrophobic nanophase
through volume balance. Volume balance dictates that the volume of
the spherical hydrophobic nanophase, Vcorespheres, can
be calculated both from its radius R and also from
the volume occupied by its (dry) polymer content, βζA3, in combination with its polymer volume fraction,
φBcore 8  Equation 8 can be used to obtain an
expression for R, which can be substituted into eq 7, giving 9  Substituting eqs 6 and 9 into eq 5 leads to 10  The calculations for the interfacial areas
of the lamellar and cylindrical oil-swollen cores, Sinterfaciallamellae and Sinterfacialcylinders, are more complicated, and the derivations
are given in Appendices A and B, respectively.

Total Gibbs Free Energy
The total Gibbs free energies for
the conetworks are equal to the sum of all their Gibbs free energy
components. In particular, for unimers (either in oil or water), the
total Gibbs free energy, ΔGtotalunimers, is given by the expression 11  For the spherical morphology,
the total Gibbs free energy, ΔGtotalspheres, is 12  For the cylindrical morphology, the total Gibbs free
energy, ΔGtotalcylinders, is given by the expression 13  For the lamellar morphology,
the total Gibbs free energy, ΔGtotallamellae, is 14  

Equilibrium Degree of Swelling (DS)
In this investigation, we adopt the following definition for the
(volumetric) degree of swelling, DS 15  Consequently, the degree of swelling in water for the hydrophilic
nanophase, DSshell, is 16  Similarly, the degree of swelling in oil for the hydrophobic
nanophase, DScore, is 17  For the calculation of the global degree of swelling, DSglobal, the following definition is used 18  As already noted, the present model requires
(at least) two independent variables for minimization for the three
ordered morphologies, and these variables were chosen to be the polymer
volume fractions in the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases. Thus,
the expression for the total Gibbs free energy for each morphology
was minimized with respect to both φAshell and φBcore. In the case of unimers, either
in water or in oil, only one minimization variable was required, and
this was the polymer volume fraction, φ. The total Gibbs free
energy versus φ curve for unimers in water usually presented
two minima.1,6,46 The low-φ
minimum corresponded to swollen unimers in water, whereas the higher-φ
minimum corresponded to shrunk unimers in water. Subsequently, the
values for the minimized total Gibbs free energies for the six (or
five, unimers in water may be either in a swollen or in a shrunk state)
possible conetwork structures, swollen unimers and shrunk unimers
in water and spheres, cylinders, lamellae, and unimers in oil, were
compared to each other, the one possessing the lowest value was determined,
and the corresponding structure was identified as the prevailing one.

When the prevailing structure was an ordered morphology, the two
polymer volume fractions corresponding to its total Gibbs free energy
minimum were noted and used to calculate the equilibrium degrees of
swelling in the two nanophases as their inverse 19  and 20  Then, the global degree of swelling, DSglobal, was also calculated from the polymer volume fractions in the hydrophilic
and hydrophobic nanophases and conetwork composition 21  When the
prevailing structure was the unimer-like one, the single equilibrium
DS was simply calculated as the inverse value of the polymer volume
fraction, φ, at the total Gibbs free energy minimum 22  

Solubilization Capacity
The ability of APCNs to solubilize organic solvents was quantified
through the solubilization capacity, SC, defined as 23  It can be easily shown that the
SC can be related to the polymer volume fractions in the hydrophilic
and hydrophobic nanophases and the copolymer composition as 24  SC has a meaning only for the three ordered
morphologies, which take on both water and oil. In contrast, the SC
cannot be calculated for the unimer-like structures because these
structures lack one of the two liquids, the oil or the water.

Minimization
Procedure
The Newton–Raphson method47 was employed to numerically minimize the total Gibbs free
energies. This necessitated the prior analytical calculation of the
first and second derivatives of the total Gibbs free energies with
respect to φ in the case of unimers and with respect to φAshell and φBcore for the three
ordered morphologies.

For the anisotropic morphologies, cylinders
and lamellae, the minimization problem has four unknowns, the asymmetry
ratios in the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases and the polymer
volume fractions in these two nanophases. However, as mentioned before,
this problem was simplified by first analytically determining the
asymmetry ratios as a function of the polymer volume fractions, φAshell and φBcore, via a rather
simple analytical minimization procedure. This was possible because
the asymmetry ratios appear only in the elastic Gibbs free energies
in the core and in the shell and the interfacial Gibbs free energy
components (Appendices A and B). The obtained
expressions for the four asymmetry ratios are given in eqs 1–4. Thus, the problem was simplified to one with only two, rather than
four, unknowns and could be solved as that for the spherical morphology.

Assumptions Made and Range of Variables Investigated
The
system was considered to have an ideal structure, comprising ABA triblock
copolymers of well-defined size and composition, end-linked at cores
of exact functionality. The A end-blocks were assumed to be hydrophobic,
whereas the B mid-block, hydrophilic and ionizable, as shown in Figure 1. This assignment
of hydrophilic and hydrophobic blocks would lead to self-assembled
and shrunk end-blocks next to the cross-links and swollen and expanded
mid-blocks, whereas the reverse assignment would have resulted in
a more frustrated microphase-separated structure, with self-assembled
and shrunk mid-blocks and swollen and expanded end-blocks next to
the cross-links. Furthermore, the counterions were assumed to be restricted
only within the hydrophilic nanophase, being excluded from the hydrophobic
one where they would be insoluble. Constant values were assigned to
the quantities φ0, β, χA–water, χB–oil, χA–oil,
χB–water, and χAB throughout
this investigation, with, as mentioned before, all χ-parameters
being treated as polymer-concentration-independent. The choice of
these values is justified as follows. φ0, the polymer
volume fraction in the unperturbed state, was taken equal to 0.2,
the same as the volume fraction upon synthesis in our experimental
system.12 β, the number of arms per
cross-link, was fixed to 20, close to the values determined by static
light scattering for star polymers prepared by analogous methods.10 The Flory–Huggins interaction parameters
between water and the hydrophilic units and between oil and the hydrophobic
units, χA–water and χB–oil, respectively, were set equal to 0.45, consistent with the experimentally
determined χ values for the interaction between water and 2-(dimethylaminoethyl)methacrylate31 and between toluene and polystyrene.48,49 The Flory–Huggins interaction parameters between the incompatible
solvent–block pairs, χA–oil, χB–water, and χAB, were assigned the
value of 2.0, typical for the value for the propylene oxide–water
pair.50,51

In this investigation, we systematically
varied the values of the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units
and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units in the conetworks at
constant (ζ + η = 240) overall degree of polymerization
of a chain within the unit cell. The fractional degrees of ionization
were varied from 0.001 to 0.10 (0.1–10%), whereas the mol fraction
of the hydrophobic units was varied in the range from 0.01 to 0.99
(1–99%).

Results and Discussion
This section
presents all results of this study, which include a phase diagram,
the equilibrium degrees of swelling in water and oil, the overall
(global) equilibrium degree of swelling, the asymmetry ratios in water
and oil for the anisotropic morphologies (i.e., cylinders and lamellae),
and the oil solubilization capacity, all as a function of the conetwork
composition and the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units.
The degrees of swelling, the asymmetry ratios, and the oil solubilization
capacity are given in three-dimensional (3-D) plots, whose base (x–y plane) is the phase diagram,
with axes the conetwork composition (x axis), and
the hydrophile ionization degree (y axis), and also
in the two possible two-dimensional (2-D) projections.

Phase Diagram
Figure 3 is the
phase diagram for ionizable APCNs based on end-linked ionizable amphiphilic
ABA triblock copolymers in oil and water as a function of the degree
of ionization of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the
hydrophobic units. This phase diagram is in qualitative agreement
with previous works on APCNs in the melt25−28 or swollen only in water29,30 but with important differences arising from the inclusion of oil.
Four of the five structures considered in this study appeared in the
present phase diagram: spheres, cylinders, lamellae, and unimers in
oil. The structure not encountered in the phase diagram was that of
unimers in water, as its minimum total Gibbs free energy was always
somewhat greater than that for spheres (Figure 4a,b). The main observations from the phase
diagram in Figure 3 were the following.

Figure 3 Phase diagram for ionizable APCNs based on end-linked
ionizable amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers in oil and water as
a function of the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units and
the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units. The values used for the
parameters were φ0 = 0.2, β = 20, χA–water = 0.45, χB–oil = 0.45,
χA–oil = 2.0, χB–water = 2.0, χAB = 2.0, and η + ζ = 240.

Figure 4 (a) Effect of the mol fraction of the hydrophobic
units on the minimized total Gibbs free energy per chain, in kT units, for the six possible structures considered for
ionizable APCNs with a 0.02 degree of ionization. (b) Magnification
of the low-hydrophobicity region of (a). The values used for the parameters
were the same as those used in Figure 3, i.e., φ0 = 0.2, β = 20, χA–water = 0.45, χB–oil = 0.45,
χA-oil = 2.0, χB–water = 2.0, χAB = 2.0, and η + ζ = 240.

When the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units was high and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic
units was low, spheres and cylinders were the dominant structures
in the conetworks. This may be attributed to the fact that these ordered
morphologies could more efficiently accommodate the high curvature52−54 induced by their highly swollen hydrophilic nanophases (mid-blocks
B are the hydrophilic ones), arising from the high conetwork content
in hydrophilic units and their high degree of ionization. In contrast,
when the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units was high and the degree
of ionization of the hydrophilic units was low, lamellae and unimers
in oil were the prevailing structures in the conetworks.

One
may observe from Figure 3 that as the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units spanned the range
from 0.01 to 0.99, three (at two constant values of the degree of
ionization, 0.001 and 0.01) or four (nine cases, 0.02–0.10
degrees of ionization) different structures were encountered at constant
degree of ionization. In contrast, as the degree of ionization increased
from 0.001 to 0.10, one (at six constant values of the mol fraction
of the hydrophobic units, 0.01, 0.10, 0.70, 0.80, 0.90, and 0.99),
two (four cases, 0.30, 0.40, 0.50, and 0.60 hydrophobe mol fractions),
or three (one case, 0.20 hydrophobe mol fraction) different structures
were encountered at constant mol fraction of the hydrophobic units.
Thus, it appears that, for the selected range of values for the degree
of ionization and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units, the latter
quantity affected more strongly the prevailing structures.

Gibbs
Free Energy Components at the Energy Minima
Figures 4 and 5 provide the minimized total Gibbs free energies for the various
structures, from which the lowest minimum and the prevailing structure
were obtained. Figure 4 focuses on the effect of the conetwork composition at constant degree
of ionization, whereas Figure 5 focuses on the effect of the degree of ionization at constant
conetwork composition. The particular values at which the degree of
ionization (0.02) in Figure 4 and the hydrophobe mol fraction (0.20) in Figure 5 were kept constant were chosen
such that a maximum number of equilibrium structures be encountered
as conetwork composition and degree of ionization were varied (see
the phase diagram in Figure 3).

Figure 5 (a) Effect of the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units
on the minimized total Gibbs free energy per chain, in kT units, for each of the six possible structures considered for ionizable
APCNs with a 0.20 mol fraction of the hydrophobic units. (b) Magnification
of the low degree of ionization region of (a). The values used for
the parameters were also the same as those used in Figure 3, i.e., φ0 = 0.2, β = 20, χA–water = 0.45, χB–oil = 0.45, χA-oil = 2.0,
χB–water = 2.0, χAB = 2.0,
and η + ζ = 240.

Figure 4 illustrates
the effect of the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units, at a constant
degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units of 0.02, on the minimized
total Gibbs free energy for each of the six structures considered
for the conetworks.

Figure 4a includes the whole range of values of the hydrophobe
mol fraction, whereas Figure 4b focuses on the lower range of values where most of the transitions
took place. A first inspection of Figure 4a reveals that lamellae presented the lowest
minimized total Gibbs free energy for a large compositional range,
corresponding to a mol fraction of the hydrophobic units from 0.30
to 0.90. At the composition extremes, spheres and unimers in oil displayed
the lowest minimized total Gibbs free energies at low and high hydrophobe
contents, respectively. The highest minimized total Gibbs free energies
were exhibited by unimers in oil and shrunk unimers in water at low
and high hydrophobe contents, respectively. Examining now Figure 4b, which is a magnification
of the low-hydrophobicity region (hydrophobe mol fractions of 0.01–0.30)
in Figure 4a where
most transitions took place, the lowest minimized total Gibbs free
energies at 0.01–0.10, 0.20, and 0.30 hydrophobe mol fractions
corresponded to spheres, cylinders, and lamellae, respectively. Furthermore,
it is noteworthy that the difference between the lowest minimized
total Gibbs free energy and the next one was very small.

Figure 5 shows the effect
of the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units, at a constant
mol fraction of the hydrophobic units of 0.20, on the minimized total
Gibbs free energy for each of the six possible structures considered
for the conetworks.

Figure 5a includes the whole range of values of the degrees
of ionization, whereas Figure 5b focuses on the lower range of values where the transitions
between different structures took place. A first observation from Figure 5a is that spheres
and cylinders had similar values of their minimized total Gibbs free
energies for the whole range of values of the degrees of ionization
considered. This observation was confirmed by examining Figure 5b too. However, a closer look,
especially at Figure 5b, reveals that cylinders prevailed for degrees of ionization from
0.02 to 0.04 and spheres were the dominant structure for degrees of
ionization of 0.05 and higher. At the lowest degrees of ionization
(0.001–0.01), lamellae displayed the lowest total minimized
Gibbs free energies. The highest minimized total Gibbs free energies
were exhibited by unimers in oil (Figure 5a).

Appendix C in the Supporting Information analyzes, with the aid of tables, the
Gibbs free energy components whose change is mainly responsible for
several of the transitions shown in Figures 4 and 5.

Degrees of
Swelling in Water and Oil
Figure 6a–f shows the degrees of swelling
in water and oil for the hydrophilic and hydrophobic polymeric nanophases,
respectively, for ionizable APCNs based on end-linked ionizable amphiphilic
ABA triblock copolymers, as a function of the mol fraction of the
hydrophobic units and the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic
units. Figure 6a,d
shows 3-D histograms for the swelling degrees in water and oil, respectively,
in which the degrees of swelling are presented as bars of different
colors according to the structure, whereas the rest of the graphs
in the figure are 2-D projections of these two 3-D plots. We wish
to reiterate here that the x–y base of Figure 6a,d
is the phase diagram of Figure 3. Furthermore, we note that simplified versions of the degrees
of swelling in water and oil, together with the asymmetry ratios and
oil solubilization capacities, are plotted against conetwork composition
and degree of ionization in Appendix D in the Supporting Information.

Figure 6 Degrees of swelling of the hydrophilic
nanophase in water and of the hydrophobic nanophase in oil for ionizable
APCNs based on end-linked ionizable amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers
in an oil–water mixture, as a function of the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units.
Dependence of the degree of swelling of the hydrophilic nanophase
in water (a) on both the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units
and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units in a 3-D plot, (b) on
the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units for different degrees of
ionization (0.001–0.10 = 0.1–10%) of the hydrophilic
units in a 2-D plot, and (c) on the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic
units for different mol fractions of the hydrophobic units (0.01–0.99
= 1–99%) in a 2-D plot. Dependence of the degree of swelling
of the hydrophobic nanophase in oil (d) on both the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units
in a 3-D plot, (e) on the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units for
different degrees of ionization (0.001–0.10 = 0.1–10%)
of the hydrophilic units in a 2-D plot, and (f) on the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units for different mol fractions of the hydrophobic
units (0.01–0.99 = 1–99%) in a 2-D plot. The values
of the parameters used were the same as those used in Figure 3, and, in particular, φ0 = 0.2, β = 20, χA–water = 0.45,
χB–oil = 0.45, χA-oil = 2.0, χB–water = 2.0, χAB = 2.0, and η + ζ = 240.

A significant observation from the 3-D plots in Figure 6a,d is the discontinuous
volume phase transitions, taking place simultaneously in the aqueous
and organic nanophases at the points where a structural change was
observed. This is the first time this simultaneous (dual) discontinuous
volume phase transition is reported, and it is due to the fact that
the two nanophases are inter-related but, at the same time, they keep
a fair degree of independence from each other. Regarding the former,
the two nanophases depend on each other as their polymeric components
are parts (blocks, segments) of the same conetwork, which leads to
the simultaneous transitions. Regarding the latter, these nanophases
can still swell relatively independently of each other as the solvents
they absorb are mutually immiscible, permitting the occurrence of
one volume phase transition in each nanophase.

Another key observation
is the significant difference (∼2 orders of magnitude) in the
degrees of swelling in water and oil for the two polymeric nanophases.
In particular, the degrees of swelling in water for the hydrophilic
nanophase were very high, especially where the conditions greatly
favor swelling in water, i.e., high degrees of ionization and low
hydrophobe mol fractions, leading to a maximum calculated value for
the degree of swelling in water of about 1700, whereas the degrees
of swelling in oil for the hydrophobic nanophase were relatively low,
with a maximum calculated value of about 20. This large difference
was a consequence of the presence of the charged groups in the hydrophilic
nanophase, building up an osmotic pressure through the translational
entropy of the counterions to these charges. A third observation is
that these 3-D plots interestingly displayed a complementarity in
shape, i.e., when the degrees of swelling in water for the hydrophilic
nanophase were high, the degrees of swelling in oil for the hydrophobic
nanophase were low, whereas when the degrees of swelling in oil for
the hydrophobic nanophase were relatively high, the degrees of swelling
in water for the hydrophilic nanophase were low. Moreover, the 3-D
plots in Figure 6a,d
indicated that the degrees of swelling in water and oil for the two
polymeric nanophases were highly dependent on structure. In particular,
the degrees of swelling in water for the hydrophilic nanophase decreased
when the most energetically favored structure changed from spherical
to cylindrical, lamellar, and unimers in oil, whereas for the same
sequence of structure change, the degrees of swelling in oil for the
hydrophobic nanophase increased.

Figure 6b,e illustrates the effect of the mol fraction
of the hydrophobic units on the degrees of swelling in water and oil
for the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases, respectively, for
different degrees of ionization of the hydrophilic units in the conetworks.
The figures show simultaneous discontinuous changes in the degrees
of swelling in water and oil arising from the transitions between
different structures (morphologies). For example, at a degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units of 0.02 (2%), an increase in the mol fraction
of the hydrophobic units in the conetworks from 0.01 to 0.99 caused
three discontinuous changes in the degrees of swelling in water and
oil, corresponding to transitions from spheres to cylinders (at a
0.101 mol fraction of the hydrophobic units), from cylinders to lamellae
(at a 0.22 mol fraction of the hydrophobic units), and from lamellae
to unimers in oil (at a 0.955 mol fraction of the hydrophobic units),
consistent with Figures 3 and 4a.

For the spherical and cylindrical
morphologies, at a given degree of ionization, an increase in the
mol fraction of the hydrophobic units in the conetworks from 0.01
to 0.99 expectedly led to a systematic reduction in the degrees of
swelling in water for the hydrophilic nanophase (Figure 6b) and a systematic increase
in the degrees of swelling in oil for the hydrophobic nanophase (Figure 6e). In contrast,
in the regions where lamellae prevailed, a more complex swelling behavior
was observed. First, it is worth mentioning that the swelling in the
two lamellar nanophases was restricted between 4 and 8. Furthermore,
the (small) variation of the degrees of swelling in both lamellar
nanophases exhibited, in some cases, unexpected dependence on hydrophobe
content. In particular, for degrees of ionization from 0.001 to 0.03,
the degrees of swelling in water for the hydrophilic nanophase unexpectedly
slightly increased with the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units,
whereas for degrees of ionization of 0.04 and higher, the degrees
of swelling in water for the hydrophilic nanophase presented a shallow
minimum as the content in hydrophobic units increases. On the other
hand, the degrees of swelling in oil for the hydrophobic nanophase
unexpectedly slightly decreased with the mol fraction of the hydrophobic
units for all degrees of ionization considered.

This counterintuitive
behavior in lamellae was due to the dependence of their degrees of
swelling not only on polymer composition and degree of ionization
but also on the asymmetry ratios (see relevant subsequent section
in the article), which were usually large and varied, sometimes, greatly
with polymer composition and, more importantly, in a way opposite
to the one by which polymer composition directly influenced the degree
of swelling. This dependence of the lamellar degrees of swelling on
both polymer composition and asymmetry ratios is clearly shown in
eq E43 in Appendix E whose two terms on
the right-hand side separately indicate the effects of the asymmetry
ratio (first term), and polymer composition and degree of ionization
(second term) on the degree of swelling in water for the hydrophilic
nanophase. Further discussion on this is provided in Appendices D
and E in the Supporting Information, where
the explanation of the counterintuitive behavior in the swelling of
the lamellar hydrophobic nanophase in oil is also given.

The
non-counterintuitive behavior in the degrees of swelling of the other
anisotropic morphology, the cylinders, was due to the much smaller
asymmetry ratios observed, whose variation with polymer composition
could not be large enough to counteract the effect of polymer composition
and degree of ionization on the degree of swelling. Furthermore, the
hydrophilic nanophase in cylinders usually swelled much more than
that in lamellae, with this great swelling in cylinders being due
to the relatively high content in hydrophilic units and high degree
of ionization.

Figure 6c,f displays the effect of the degree of ionization of the
hydrophilic units on the degrees of swelling in water and oil for
the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases, respectively, for different
mol fractions of the hydrophobic units in the conetworks. The figure
showed simultaneous discontinuous increases in the degrees of swelling
in water and reductions in the degrees of swelling in oil, which were
again due to transitions between different structures. For example,
at a 0.20 mol fraction (20%) of the hydrophobic units, an increase
in the degree of ionization in the conetworks from 0.001 to 0.100
caused two discontinuous changes in the degrees of swelling in water
and oil, corresponding to transitions from lamellae to cylinders (at
a degree of ionization of 0.019) and from cylinders to spheres (at
a degree of ionization of 0.048), consistent with Figures 3 and 5a.

For most mol fractions of the hydrophobic units, an increase
in the degree of ionization in the conetworks from 0.001 to 0.100
led to a systematic increase in the degrees of swelling in water for
the hydrophilic nanophase (Figure 6c), except for the 0.99 mol fraction of the hydrophobic
units, where unimers in oil exclusively prevailed, a structure that
did not swell in water at all. This increase in the degrees of swelling
in water was to be expected as a higher degree of ionization of the
hydrophilic units led to more charged groups in the hydrophilic nanophase,
which favored aqueous swelling. Despite the absence of such charged
groups in the hydrophobic nanophase, an increase in the degree of
ionization in the conetworks from 0.001 to 0.100 caused a slight increase
in the degrees of swelling in oil in the areas where cylinders, lamellae,
and unimers in oil prevailed (Figure 6f). This slight increase was attributed to the asymmetry
ratios of the anisotropic morphologies and the disordered state of
unimers in oil. The degrees of swelling in oil for the hydrophobic
nanophase of the more symmetrical spherical morphology were totally
independent of the degree of ionization. All above trends in swelling
are explained in more detail in Appendices D and E in the Supporting Information.

Careful examination
of Figure 6c led to
the observation of linear increases of the degrees of swelling in
water for the hydrophilic nanophase with the degree of ionization
for all three ordered morphologies, above a certain degree of ionization
(above 0.01 for spheres and above 0.04 for cylinders and lamellae)
in the double-logarithmic plot. This observation implied power-law
dependencies of the degrees of swelling in water on the degree of
ionization. The power-law exponents were calculated for certain values
of the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units, 0.10, 0.40, and 0.70,
plotted separately in Figures S6a, S7a, and S8a in Appendix D in the Supporting Information. These power-law exponents were found to be 1.40, 1.27, and 0.48,
for spheres, cylinders, and lamellae, respectively. These values should
be compared with the value of 1.50 derived from the approximate analytical
solutions (based on the balancing of the two dominant first derivatives
of the Gibbs free energy components, which, in this region of the
phase diagram, were those of the electrostatic Gibbs free energy in
the shell and the elastic Gibbs free energy in the shell) provided
in Appendix E.

The slight deviation
in the case of spheres could be attributed to the small, but finite,
contribution of the first derivative of the Gibbs free energy of mixing
in the shell to the hydrophilic nanophase of spheres (Table S3 in Appendix E) as well. The slightly
greater deviation in the case of cylinders was due to the contribution
of the first derivatives of the Gibbs free energy of mixing in the
shell, the elastic Gibbs free energy in the core, and the interfacial
Gibbs free energy, in addition to the dominant first derivatives (Table S3). Finally, the significant deviation
in the case of lamellae was due to the fact that, apart from the first
derivatives of the electrostatic Gibbs free energy in the shell and
the elastic Gibbs free energy in the shell, the first derivatives
of the Gibbs free energy of mixing in the shell, the elastic Gibbs
free energy in the core, and the interfacial Gibbs free energy also
contributed significantly (Table S3).

Global Degree of Swelling
Figure 7a,c shows the global degree of swelling for
the ionizable APCNs based on end-linked ionizable amphiphilic ABA
triblock copolymers as a function of the mol fraction of the hydrophobic
units and the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units. Figure 7a is a 3-D histogram
for the global degree of swelling, in which the global degrees of
swelling are presented as bars of different colors according to the
structure, whereas the rest of the graphs in the figure are 2-D projections
of the 3-D plot.

Figure 7 Global degrees of swelling for ionizable APCNs based on
end-linked ionizable amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers in an oil–water
mixture, as a function of the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic
units and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units. Dependence of
the global degree of swelling (a) on both the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units
in a 3-D plot, (b) on the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units for
different degrees of ionization (0.001–0.10 = 0.1–10%)
of the hydrophilic units in a 2-D plot, and (c) on the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units for different mol fractions of the hydrophobic
units (0.01–0.99 = 1–99%) in a 2-D plot. The values
of the parameters used were the same as those used in Figure 3, and, in particular, φ0 = 0.2, β = 20, χA–water = 0.45,
χB–oil = 0.45, χA-oil = 2.0, χB–water = 2.0, χAB = 2.0, and η + ζ = 240.

According to eq 21, the global degree of swelling is the polymer-composition-weighted
average of the degrees of swelling in the two nanophases. Thus, the
global degree of swelling, the calculated values of which are plotted
in Figure 7, is very
important for the overall appearance of an APCN, absorbing both water
and water-immiscible organic solvent. Figure 7a is very similar to Figure 6a both qualitatively and quantitatively because
the APCN water absorption behavior dominated in the overall absorption
behavior as oil absorption was much less than water absorption for
most of the composition–degree of ionization space. The only
region where the APCN oil absorption behavior prevailed over the water
absorption behavior was where unimers in oil prevailed (highest hydrophobe
content over whole degree of ionization range). The global degrees
of swelling for unimers in oil were higher than those of the neighboring
lamellae, which, in combination with the fact that cylinders and spheres
had much higher global (and aqueous) degrees of swelling than those
in lamellae, gave rise to minima for each APCN global degree of swelling vs. conetwork composition curve.

Figure 7b,c is similar to Figure 6b,c, respectively,
in the same way as Figure 7a was similar to Figure 6a. Furthermore, Figure 7b,c displayed discontinuous volume phase transitions
at the same positions as Figure 6b,c, respectively.

Asymmetry Ratios in Water
and Oil
Figure 8 plots the asymmetry ratios within the hydrophilic nanophase in water
and within the hydrophobic nanophase in oil as a function of the mol
fraction of the hydrophobic units and the degree of ionization of
the hydrophilic units in ionizable APCNs based on end-linked ionizable
amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers. This information is presented
both in 3-D histograms, in which the asymmetry ratios are presented
as bars of different colors according to the structure (parts (a)
and (d)), and in the two possible 2-D projections (parts (b), (c),
(e), and (f)) of the 3-D plots.

Figure 8 Asymmetry ratios within the hydrophilic
nanophase in water and within the hydrophobic nanophase in oil for
ionizable APCNs based on end-linked ionizable amphiphilic ABA triblock
copolymers in an oil–water mixture, as a function of the degree
of ionization of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the
hydrophobic units. Dependence of the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophilic
nanophase in water (a) on both the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic
units and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units in a 3-D plot,
(b) on the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units for different degrees
of ionization (0.001–0.10 = 0.1–10%) of the hydrophilic
units in a 2-D plot, and (c) on the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic
units for different mol fractions of the hydrophobic units (0.01–0.99
= 1–99%) in a 2-D plot. Dependence of the asymmetry ratio within
the hydrophobic nanophase in oil (d) on both the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units
in a 3-D plot, (e) on the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units for
different degrees of ionization (0.001–0.10 = 0.1–10%)
of the hydrophilic units in a 2-D plot, and (f) on the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units for different mol fractions of the hydrophobic
units (0.01–0.99 = 1–99%) in a 2-D plot. The values
of the parameters used were the same as those used in Figure 3, and, in particular, φ0 = 0.2, β = 20, χA–water = 0.45,
χB–oil = 0.45, χA-oil = 2.0, χB–water = 2.0, χAB = 2.0, and η + ζ = 240.

A first observation from the 3-D plots in Figure 8a,d is that the asymmetry ratios
for spheres within both the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases
were equal to 1, set to that value because of the high symmetry of
spheres. In contrast, the asymmetry ratios for the anisotropic ordered
morphologies, cylinders and lamellae, within either of the two polymeric
nanophases were different from 1 and spanned a range of values from
0.65 to 4.26. In particular, cylinders had asymmetry ratios within
the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases lower than or slightly
higher than 1 (ranging from 0.65 to 1.16) because cylinders are a
“compressed”
(essentially to disks) morphology (see Figure S2 in Appendix B), whereas lamellae had asymmetry ratios within
the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases greater than 1 (ranging
from 1.28 to 4.26) because lamellae are an “elongated”
morphology (see Figure S1 in Appendix A).
The higher asymmetry ratios in lamellae were facilitated by the low
degrees of swelling in both nanophases of this morphology, which kept
the polymer chains near their unperturbed state, subsequently allowing
them to be relatively easily deformed to an elongated shape to minimize
the interfacial area between the nanophases.

Figure 8b,e displays the effect of
the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units on the asymmetry ratios
within the hydrophilic nanophase in water and within the hydrophobic
nanophase in oil, respectively, for different degrees of ionization
of the hydrophilic units in the conetworks. As in the case of the
degrees of swelling in water and oil (Figure 6b,e), these figures also showed simultaneous
discontinuous changes in the asymmetry ratios in water and oil arising
from the transitions between different structures. For example, at
a degree of ionization of 0.02 (2%), an increase in the mol fraction
of the hydrophobic units in the conetworks from 0.01 to 0.99 caused
two discontinuous changes in the asymmetry ratios within the hydrophilic
and hydrophobic nanophases, corresponding to transitions from spheres
to cylinders (at a 0.101 mol fraction of the hydrophobic units) and
from cylinders to lamellae (at a 0.22 mol fraction of the hydrophobic
units), consistent with Figures 3, 4a, and 6b,e.

By examining parts (b) and (e) of Figure 8, one may observe how the asymmetry ratios
within the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases, respectively, changed
as the conetwork hydrophobe content increased. Focusing first on lamellae,
for all degrees of ionization where this anisotropic morphology prevailed,
the asymmetry ratios in the two nanophases exhibited opposite dependencies
on conetwork composition. In particular, an increase in the hydrophobe
content in the conetworks resulted in a reduction in the asymmetry
ratio within the hydrophilic nanophase in water and in an increase
in the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophobic nanophase in oil. The
increase in the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophobic nanophase in
oil for lamellae (h/h0) (Figure 8e) was
mainly due to the increase of the height of the hydrophobic nanophase
in the unit cell at swelling equilibrium, h, with
the number of units in the hydrophobic end-block, ζ (eqs A1
and A2 in Appendix A), in combination with
the relative constancies of φBcore (eq A1, for
its constancy, see Figure 6e), and the length of the edge of the square corresponding
to the interfacial surface area per unit cell, w (eq A2, for its constancy, see Figure S9 in Appendix D in the Supporting Information). The
dependence of the height of the hydrophobic nanophase in the unit
cell at the state of conetwork preparation, h0, on ζ (eq A14) was much
weaker than that of h on ζ. The latter dependence
was stronger due to the elongated state of the polymer chains in lamellae.
Analogous explanations may be given for the opposite dependence of
the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophilic nanophase in water for
lamellae (l/l0) (Figure 8b) on conetwork composition.
In particular, this asymmetry ratio decreased as hydrophobe content
increased, owing to the reduction of the overall height of the hydrophilic
nanophase in the unit cell at swelling equilibrium, l, with the number of units in the hydrophobic end-block, ζ
(eqs A20 and A21; increase of l with η, which varied inversely with ζ), in combination
with the relative constancies of φAshell (eq A21, for its constancy, see Figure 6b), and the length of the edge of the square corresponding
to the interfacial surface area per unit cell, w (eq A20, for its constancy, see Figure S9). The dependence of the height of the hydrophilic
nanophase in the unit cell at the state of conetwork preparation, l0, on η (eq A19) was much weaker than that of l on η. The
latter dependence was again stronger due to the elongated state of
the polymer chains in lamellae.

Focusing now on cylinders, for
all degrees of ionization where this anisotropic morphology prevailed,
the asymmetry ratios in the two nanophases also exhibited opposite
dependencies on conetwork composition, but, in this case, an increase
in the hydrophobe content in the conetworks resulted in an increase
in the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophilic nanophase in water and
in a reduction in the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophobic nanophase
in oil. As mentioned before, unlike those in lamellae, the polymer
chains in cylinders are compressed. The reduction in the asymmetry
ratio within the hydrophobic nanophase in oil for cylinders (H/h0) (Figure 8e) was mainly due to the increase of the
height of the hydrophobic nanophase in the unit cell at the state
of conetwork preparation, h0, with the
number of units in the hydrophobic end-block, ζ (eq B14 in Appendix B). The dependence of the height of
the hydrophobic nanophase in the unit cell at swelling equilibrium, H, on ζ was much weaker than that of h0 on ζ (eqs B1 and B2) because the increase in the hydrophobe content was mainly reflected
in the radius of the cylinder, r (eqs B2 and B3, for its trend, see Figure S10 in Appendix D). This fact, in combination with the relative
constancy of φBcore (eq B1, for its constancy,
see Figure 6e), made
the reduction of H ζ almost negligible. Analogous
explanations may be given for the opposite dependence of the asymmetry
ratio within the hydrophilic nanophase in water for cylinders (H/l0) (Figure 8b) on conetwork composition. In particular,
this asymmetry ratio increased as the hydrophobe content increased,
owing to the reduction of the height of the hydrophilic nanophase
in the unit cell at the state of conetwork preparation, l0, with the number of units in the hydrophobic end-block,
ζ (eq B19; increase of l0 with η, which varied inversely with ζ).
The dependence of the height of the hydrophilic nanophase in the unit
cell at swelling equilibrium, equal to H, on ζ
(eqs B1 and B2) was much weaker than that
of l0 on ζ. The latter dependence
was stronger due to the compressed state of the polymer chains in
cylinders.

Figure 8c,f illustrates the effect of the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic
units on the asymmetry ratios within the hydrophilic nanophase in
water and within the hydrophobic nanophase in oil, respectively, for
different mol fractions of the hydrophobic units in the conetworks.
As in the case of the degrees of swelling in water and oil (Figure 6c,f), these figures
also showed simultaneous discontinuous changes in the asymmetry ratios
in water and oil arising from the transitions between different structures.
For example, at a 0.20 mol fraction (20%) of the hydrophobic units,
an increase in the degree of ionization in the conetworks from 0.001
to 0.10 caused two discontinuous changes in the asymmetry ratios within
the hydrophilic and the hydrophobic nanophases, corresponding to transitions
from lamellae to cylinders (at a degree of ionization of 0.019) and
from cylinders to spheres (at a degree of ionization of 0.048), consistent
with Figures 3, 5a, and 6c,f.

By examining
parts (c) and (f) of Figure 8, one may observe how the asymmetry ratios within the hydrophilic
and hydrophobic nanophases, respectively, changed as the degree of
ionization of the hydrophilic units increased. Focusing first on lamellae,
for all hydrophobe mol fractions where this anisotropic morphology
prevailed, the asymmetry ratios in the two nanophases exhibited opposite
dependencies on ionization. In particular, an increase in the degree
of ionization in the conetworks resulted in an increase in the asymmetry
ratio within the hydrophilic nanophase in water and in a reduction
in the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophobic nanophase in oil. The
increase in the asymmetry ratio within the hydrophilic nanophase in
water for lamellae (l/l0) (Figure 8c) was
due to the increase of the overall height of the hydrophilic nanophase
in the unit cell at swelling equilibrium, l, with
the aqueous degree of swelling in lamellae, DSshelllamella (eqs A20 and A21 in Appendix A; DSshelllamella increased with the degree of ionization;
for its trend, see Figure 6c), in combination with the slight increase in the length
of the edge of the square corresponding to the interfacial surface
area per unit cell, w, with the degree of ionization
(eq A20, for its trend see Figure S11 in Appendix D). The height of the
hydrophilic nanophase in the unit cell at the state of conetwork preparation, l0, was totally independent of the degree of
ionization (eq A19). Analogous explanations
may be given for the opposite dependence of the asymmetry ratio within
the hydrophobic nanophase in oil for lamellae (h/h0) (Figure 8f) on the ionization degree. In particular, this asymmetry
ratio decreased as the degree of ionization increased, owing to the
reduction of the height of the hydrophobic nanophase in the unit cell
at swelling equilibrium, h, with the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units (Figure S11).
This latter trend was despite the increase in the degree of swelling
in oil for the hydrophobic nanophase of lamellae, DScorelamella, with the degree of
ionization (for this trend, see Figure 6f); this increase was not significant and was only
reflected in the length of the edge of the square corresponding to
the interfacial surface area per unit cell, w (eq A2, for its trend, also see Figure S11), allowing the reduction of h.
The height of the hydrophobic nanophase in the unit cell at the state
of conetwork preparation, h0, was duly
totally independent of the degree of ionization (eq A14).

Focusing now on cylinders, for all hydrophobe
mol fractions where this anisotropic morphology prevailed, an increase
in the degree of ionization in the conetworks resulted in reductions
in the asymmetry ratios within both nanophases, the aqueous and the
organic, H/l0 and H/h0, respectively (Figure 8c,f). Since the heights
of both the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases in the unit cell
at the state of conetwork preparation, l0 and h0, respectively, were expectedly
totally independent of the degree of ionization (eqs B14 and B19 in Appendix B,
respectively), the reductions in the asymmetry ratios within both
nanophases were due to the slight reduction in the common (for the
two nanophases) height in the unit cell at swelling equilibrium, H, with the degree of ionization of the hydrophilic units
(see Figure S12 in Appendix D). Again,
this latter trend was despite the increases in the degrees of swelling
in water and oil for the hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanophases, DSshellcylinder and
DScorecylinder, respectively, for cylinders with the degree of ionization (for
these trends, see Figure 6c,f); these increases were only reflected in the radius of
the cylinder, r (eqs B2 and B3; for its trend, see Figure S12), allowing
the reduction of H.

Oil Solubilization Capacity
Figure 9 illustrates
the oil solubilization capacity for ionizable APCNs based on end-linked
ionizable amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers as a function of the
mol fraction of the hydrophobic units and the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units. Figure 9a is a 3-D histogram for the oil solubilization capacity,
in which the oil solubilization capacities are presented as bars of
different colors according to the structure, whereas Figure 9b,c shows 2-D projections of
the 3-D plot.

Figure 9 Oil solubilization capacities for ionizable APCNs based
on end-linked ionizable amphiphilic ABA triblock copolymers in an
oil–water mixture, as a function of the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units.
Dependence of the oil solubilization capacity (a) on both the degree
of ionization of the hydrophilic units and the mol fraction of the
hydrophobic units in a 3-D plot, (b) on the mol fraction of the hydrophobic
units for different degrees of ionization (0.001–0.10 = 0.1–10%)
of the hydrophilic units in a 2-D plot, and (c) on the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units for different mol fractions of the hydrophobic
units (0.01–0.99 = 1–99%) in a 2-D plot. The values
of the parameters used were the same as those used in Figure 3, and, in particular, φ0 = 0.2, β = 20, χA–water = 0.45,
χB–oil = 0.45, χA-oil = 2.0, χB–water = 2.0, χAB = 2.0, and η + ζ = 240.

Figure 9a
shows that the oil solubilization capacity expectedly increased with
the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units and decreased with the degree
of ionization of the hydrophilic units. Another very important observation
is that the oil solubilization capacity was highly dependent on the
structure, with the transitions between the different structures being
accompanied by discontinuities in the oil solubilization capacity,
arising from the corresponding discontinuities in the degrees of swelling
in water and oil (Figure 6a,d). The highest oil solubilization capacity was presented
when the APCN system was organized into lamellae, in which the values
of the oil solubilization capacity ranged between 0.18 and 6.38. The
important experimental implication of this observation is that an
APCN is more capable to selectively solubilize organic solvents when
it forms lamellae.55 Furthermore, given
that the oil solubilization capacities in the other ordered morphologies,
i.e., spheres and cylinders, were much lower than those in lamellae,
the large change in oil solubilization capacity effected upon a transition
between the ordered morphologies would result in a large oil absorption
or expulsion. The latter may be exploited in applications such as
delivery of hydrophobic drugs21 or regeneration
of an APCN system saturated with hydrophobic pollutants.39,41

Figure 9b displays
the effect of the mol fraction of the hydrophobic units on the oil
solubilization capacity, for different degrees of ionization of the
hydrophilic units in the conetworks. For low hydrophobe contents,
the oil solubilization capacity was very low. An increase in the hydrophobe
content of the conetworks resulted in an increase in the oil solubilization
capacity for all degrees of ionization. This observation was expected
as the increase in hydrophobe content, thereby the reduction in hydrophilic
content at a constant overall degree of polymerization, made the corresponding
conetwork more compatible with the organic solvent and, therefore,
more capable to solubilize it. The discontinuous changes in the oil
solubilization capacity were due to the transitions between different
structures, as discussed before.

Figure 9c depicts the effect of the degree of ionization
of the hydrophilic units on the oil solubilization capacity, for different
mol fractions of the hydrophobic units in the conetworks. For low
degrees of ionization, the oil solubilization capacity was high. An
increase in the degree of ionization in the conetworks resulted in
a reduction in the oil solubilization capacity for all hydrophobe
contents. This reduction was a consequence of the presence of more
charged groups in the hydrophilic nanophase of the conetwork at higher
degrees of ionization. These charged groups made the corresponding
conetwork more compatible with the aqueous solvent and hence less
capable to solubilize the incompatible organic solvent. The reduction
in the oil solubilization capacity was not significant for compositions
in hydrophobic units of 0.70 and higher, but it was considerable for
lower hydrophobe contents. The discontinuous changes in the oil solubilization
capacity were again due to the previously mentioned transitions between
different structures.

Careful examination of part (c) of Figure 9 leads to the observation
of linear decreases of the oil solubilization capacities with the
degree of ionization for all three ordered morphologies, above a certain
degree of ionization (above 0.01 for spheres and above 0.04 for cylinders
and lamellae) in the double-logarithmic plot. This observation implied
power-law dependencies of the oil solubilization capacities on the
degree of ionization. The power-law exponent for spheres was calculated
for a 0.10 mol fraction of the hydrophobic units and was found to
be −1.41 (Figure S16 in Appendix
D). This exponent was consistent with the +1.40 power-law exponent
for the degree of swelling in water versus degree of ionization for
the same hydrophobe content (Figure S6a), noting that the oil solubilization capacity and the degree of
swelling in water for the hydrophilic nanophase were inversely proportional
(DScore nearly independent of the degree of ionization).
The inverse dependence of the oil solubilization capacity and the
degree of swelling in water for the hydrophilic nanophase is shown
in detail in Appendix D (eq D2). The power-law
exponents of the oil solubilization capacities for the anisotropic
morphologies were also calculated for certain values of the mol fraction
of the hydrophobic units, 0.40 for cylinders and 0.70 for lamellae,
and are plotted separately in Figures S17 and S18 in the Supporting Information. These power-law exponents
were found to be −1.23 and −0.37 for cylinders and lamellae,
respectively. These exponents also indicated that the oil solubilization
capacity and the degree of swelling in water for the hydrophilic nanophase
were inversely proportional because the corresponding degree of swelling
in water versus degree of ionization power-law exponents were 1.27
and 0.47 for cylinders and lamellae, respectively. The deviations
from the expected value (−1.50) were explained in detail in
the discussion of the aqueous swelling degrees.

Comparison
with Experimental Solubilization Capacities
To examine the
usefulness of the oil solubilization capacities predicted by our model,
in this paragraph, we compare them with those determined in a rare
experimental study by Kennedy and co-workers.56 The experimental study utilized four APCNs based on end-linked poly(dimethylsiloxane)
(PDMS) and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) segments (four different compositions,
spanning a range from 60.0 to 84.0 wt % in hydrophobic content, i.e.,
PDMS plus a silane cross-linker), simultaneously swollen in n-heptane and water. Figure 10 plots the experimentally measured values
of the oil solubilization capacity against the corresponding predictions
of our model. The experimentally determined oil solubilization capacities
varied between 0.61 and 10.67, whereas the corresponding predicted
values ranged from 1.43 to 4.18. The comparison of these values is
done in the figure, with the aid of the diagonal.

Figure 10 Comparison between the
predicted oil solubilization capacities and experimental oil solubilization
capacities determined by Kennedy and co-workers on a PDMS–PEG
system simultaneously swollen in n-heptane and water.56

In the figure, two points lie below the diagonal, one on
it, and the fourth above it. Although the highest experimentally measured
oil solubilization capacity in the figure was higher than the corresponding
predicted value by a factor of 2.55, there was rather good quantitative
agreement between experiment and theory for the other three points.
This latter observation is very satisfactory given the differences
in the structure of the experimental and model systems. The underestimation
by our model by a factor of 2.55 of the oil solubilization capacity
of the strongest solubilizer might be attributed to the greater affinity
between the PDMS units and n-heptane than our model
considered, which assumed an almost θ-behavior between the two
(χB–oil = 0.45), although a range of values,
from 0.39 to 0.51, have been mentioned in the literature for the PDMS–n-heptane χ-parameter.57

Conclusions
A computational model was developed to
predict the phase behavior and swelling properties of perfect ionizable
amphiphilic polymer conetworks (APCNs) based on end-linked ABA triblock
copolymers of different hydrophilic/hydrophobic compositions and different
degrees of ionization, equilibrated in an oil–water mixture.
Depending on composition and ionization, the APCNs were found either
to organize into ordered morphologies (spheres, cylinders, or lamellae)
and absorb both oil and water (usually more water than oil) or to
remain in a disordered state absorbing only oil (unimers in oil).
In particular, under conditions that greatly favored aqueous swelling,
i.e., high conetwork contents in hydrophilic units and high degrees
of ionization, spheres and cylinders prevailed because these ordered
morphologies were more appropriate for water-swollen structures. In
contrast, for high conetwork contents in hydrophobic units and low
degrees of ionization, lamellae and unimers in oil were found to be
the prevailing structures in the conetworks.

Thus, the variation
of the conetwork composition or/and the degree of ionization of the
hydrophilic units in the conetworks caused transitions between different
structures. These transitions were always accompanied by discontinuous
changes in the degrees of swelling in water and oil. It is noteworthy
that these discontinuous changes took place simultaneously in the
aqueous and organic nanophases. This is the first time this simultaneous
(dual) discontinuous volume phase transition is reported, and it is
due to the fact that the two nanophases are inter-related but, at
the same time, they keep a fair degree of independence from each other.

The anisotropic morphologies, cylinders and lamellae, were characterized
by asymmetries in each nanophase, calculated by the computational
model as asymmetry ratios, some of which acquired rather high values
(430% for some of the lamellae). Upon each transition, the model predicted
simultaneous discontinuous changes in the asymmetry ratios in water
and oil, similar to the degrees of swelling. The high values of asymmetry
ratios in lamellae significantly affected the degrees of swelling
in water and oil for lamellae and could explain the counterintuitive,
in some cases, lamellar swelling behavior. In contrast, the much smaller
asymmetry ratios in water and oil observed in the case of cylinders
(cylindrical asymmetry ratio of down to 65%) could not strongly affect
the cylindrical swelling behavior.

The overall appearance of
the APCN, absorbing both water and water-immiscible organic solvent,
was captured by the global degree of swelling of the conetwork, which
was a composition-averaged degree of swelling. The global degree of
swelling also displayed discontinuous changes at the transitions due
to the corresponding transitions in the two individual nanophases.

One of the most useful properties of APCNs is that of oil solubilization
arising from their ability to also absorb oil, in addition to water.
The APCN oil solubilization capacities were predicted using the developed
computational model and were found to agree well with experimental
literature data. Our model predictions indicated that the oil solubilization
capacities were highest when the APCNs were organized into lamellae.
This observation could be exploited experimentally via the use of
APCNs as efficient solubilizers of organic derivatives. The calculated
oil solubilization capacities exhibited a discontinuous change upon
a volume phase transition, similar to the degrees of swelling and
the asymmetry ratios. These discontinuous changes, as well as the
much greater capacity of the lamellar APCNs for oil solubilization
compared to that of the spherical and cylindrical ones, could be exploited
for the use of APCNs in a variety of applications.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03658.Derivation of
the analytical expressions for the asymmetry ratios for the lamellar
morphology (Appendix A); the corresponding derivation for cylinders
(Appendix B); tables disclosing the main Gibbs free energy components
responsible for some of the transitions (Appendix C); extra figures
better illustrating the connection among the degrees of swelling,
the asymmetry ratios, and the oil solubilization capacity (Appendix
D); and approximate analytical expressions that can explain some of
the swelling trends displayed in the figures in the Results and Discussion section (Appendix E) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b03658_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare
no competing financial interest.

Dedication
This work is dedicated to the pioneers
of the volume phase transition in polymer networks, Professor Karel
Dušek (Czech Academy of Sciences) and the late Professor Toyoichi
Tanaka (formerly of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
==== Refs
References
Dušek K. ; Patterson D. 
Transition
in Swollen Polymer Networks Induced by Intermolecular Condensation . J. Polym. Sci., Part A-2 
1968 , 6 , 1209 –1216 . 10.1002/pol.1968.160060701 .
Dušek K. ; Prins W. 
Structure and Elasticity of Non-crystalline
Polymer Networks . Adv. Polym. Sci. 
1969 , 6 , 1 –102 . 10.1007/bfb0051042 .
Tanaka T. 
Collapse of
Gels and the Critical Endpoint . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1978 , 40 , 820 –823 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.40.820 .
Tanaka T. ; Fillmore D. ; Sun S.-T. ; Nishio I. ; Swislow G. ; Shah A. 
Phase Transitions in
Ionic Gels . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1980 , 45 , 1636 –1639 . 10.1103/PhysRevLett.45.1636 .
Wu C. ; Zhou S. 
Volume Phase Transition of Swollen Gels: Discontinuous
or Continuous? . Macromolecules 
1997 , 30 , 574 –576 . 10.1021/ma960499a .
Shibayama M. ; Tanaka T. 
Volume Phase Transition and Related Phenomena of Polymer
Gels . Adv. Polym. Sci. 
1993 , 109 , 1 –62 . 10.1007/3-540-56791-7_1 .
Costa C. N. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Near-Monodisperse α-Hydroxy and α,ω-Dihydroxy
Amine-Based Polymers: Synthesis and Characterization . J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 
1999 , 37 , 1597 –1607 . 10.1002/(SICI)1099-0518(19990601)37:11<1597::AID-POLA5>3.0.CO;2-X .
Patrickios C. S. ; Simmons M. R. 
Catalytically-Active,
Imidazole-Containing Polymers: Homopolymers, Block Copolymers and
Model Networks . Colloids Surf., A 
2000 , 167 , 61 –72 . 10.1016/S0927-7757(99)00483-5 .
Simmons M. R. ; Yamasaki E. N. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Cationic
Homopolymer Model Networks and Star Polymers: Synthesis by Group Transfer
Polymerization and Characterization of the Degree of Swelling . Polymer 
2000 , 41 , 8523 –8529 . 10.1016/S0032-3861(00)00201-9 .
Vamvakaki M. ; Hadjiyannakou S. C. ; Loizidou E. ; Patrickios C. S. ; Armes S. P. ; Billingham N. C. 
Synthesis
and Characterization of Novel Networks with Nano-Engineered Structures:
Cross-Linked Star Homopolymers . Chem. Mater. 
2001 , 13 , 4738 –4744 . 10.1021/cm010569e .
Vamvakaki M. ; Yamasaki E. N. ; Hadjiyannakou S. C. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Characterization
of Hydrophilic Networks Synthesized by Group Transfer Polymerization . Macromol. Symp. 
2001 , 171 , 209 –224 . 10.1002/1521-3900(200106)171:1<209::AID-MASY209>3.0.CO;2-U .
Simmons M. R. ; Yamasaki E. N. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Cationic
Amphiphilic Model Networks: Synthesis by Group Transfer Polymerization
and Characterization of the Aqueous Degree of Swelling . Macromolecules 
2000 , 33 , 3176 –3179 . 10.1021/ma991720x .
Krasia T.
C. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Amphiphilic
Polymethacrylate Model Co-Networks: Synthesis by RAFT Radical Polymerization
and Characterization of the Swelling Behavior . Macromolecules 
2006 , 39 , 2467 –2473 . 10.1021/ma051747i .
Georgiou T. K. ; Patrickios C. S. ; Groh P. W. ; Iván B. 
Amphiphilic Model Conetworks of Polyisobutylene
Methacrylate and 2-(Dimethylamino)ethyl Methacrylate Prepared by the
Combination of Quasi-Living Carbocationic and Group Transfer Polymerizations . Macromolecules 
2007 , 40 , 2335 –2343 . 10.1021/ma062307+ .
Rikkou-Kalourkoti M. ; Loizou E. ; Porcar L. ; Matyjaszewski K. ; Patrickios C. S. 
End-linked Amphiphilic Degradable Conetworks: Synthesis
by Sequential Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization Using a Bifunctional
Cleavable Initiator . Polym. Chem. 
2012 , 3 , 105 –116 . 10.1039/C1PY00349F .
Rikkou-Kalourkoti M. ; Patrickios C. S. ; Georgiou T. K.  Model Networks and Functional Conetworks . In Polymer Science: A Comprehensive Reference ; Matyjaszewski K. , Möller M.  , Eds.; Elsevier
BV : Amsterdam , 2012 ; Vol. 6 , pp 293 –308 .
Patrickios C. S. ; Georgiou T. K. 
Covalent Amphiphilic
Polymer Networks . Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2003 , 8 , 76 –85 . 10.1016/S1359-0294(03)00005-0 .
Erdodi G. ; Kennedy J. P. 
Amphiphilic Conetworks:
Definition, Synthesis, Applications . Prog. Polym.
Sci. 
2006 , 31 , 1 –18 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2005.11.001 .
Mespouille L. ; Hedrick J. L. ; Dubois P. 
Expanding
the Role of Chemistry to Produce New Amphiphilic Polymer (Co)networks . Soft Matter 
2009 , 5 , 4878 –4892 . 10.1039/b910041p .
Guzman G. ; Es-haghi S. S. ; Nugay T. ; Cakmak M. 
Zero-order Antibiotic Release from Multilayer Contact
Lenses: Nonuniform Drug and Diffusivity Distributions Produce Constant-rate
Drug Delivery . Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2017 , 6 , 160077510.1002/adhm.201600775 .
Gu D. ; Tan S. ; O’Connor A. J. ; Qiao G. G. 
On-Demand Cascade
Release of Hydrophobic Chemotherapeutics from a Multicomponent Hydrogel
System . ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 
2018 , 4 , 1696 –1707 . 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b00166 .
Schoenfeld I. ; Dech S. ; Ryabenky B. ; Daniel B. ; Glowacki B. ; Ladisch R. ; Tiller J. C. 
Investigations
on Diffusion Limitations of Biocatalyzed Reactions in Amphiphilic
Polymer Conetworks in Organic Solvents . Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 
2013 , 110 , 2333 –2342 . 10.1002/bit.24906 .23532873 
McLeod K. R. ; Tew G. N. 
Microphase-Separated
Thiol–ene Conetworks from Telechelic Macromonomers with Asymmetric
Molecular Weights . Macromolecules 
2017 , 50 , 8042 –8047 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.7b01681 .
Apostolides D. E. ; Patrickios C. S. ; Sakai T. ; Guerre M. ; Lopez G. ; Améduri B. ; Ladmiral V. ; Simon M. ; Gradzielski M. ; Clemens D. ; Krumm C. ; Tiller J. C. ; Ernould B. ; Gohy J.-F. 
Near-model Amphiphilic Polymer Conetworks Based on
Four-arm Stars of Poly(vinylidene fluoride) and Poly(ethylene glycol):
Synthesis and Characterization . Macromolecules 
2018 , 51 , 2476 –2488 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.7b02475 .
Schmid F. 
Self-Consistent Field Approach for
Cross-Linked Copolymer Materials . Phys. Rev.
Lett. 
2013 , 111 , 02830310.1103/PhysRevLett.111.028303 .23889451 
Karbarz M. ; Stojek Z. ; Patrickios C. S. 
ABA Triblock
Copolymer-Based Model Networks in the Bulk: Effect of the Number of
Arms on Microphase Behavior . Polymer 
2005 , 46 , 7456 –7462 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2005.06.021 .
Karbarz M. ; Stojek Z. ; Georgiou T. K. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Microphase Separation in ABA Triblock Copolymer-Based
Model Conetworks in the Bulk: Effect of Loop Formation . Polymer 
2006 , 47 , 5182 –5186 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2006.05.006 .
Karbarz M. ; Stojek Z. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Microphase
Separation in the Bulk in ABA Triblock Copolymer-Based Model Conetworks:
Effects of Core Crowding and Loop Formation . Macromol. Theory Simul. 
2013 , 22 , 323 –334 . 10.1002/mats.201300001 .
Vamvakaki M. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Polyelectrolytic
Amphiphilic Model Networks in Water: A Molecular Thermodynamic Theory
for Their Microphase Separation . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2001 , 105 , 4979 –4986 . 10.1021/jp003307t .
Georgiou T. K. ; Vamvakaki M. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Microphase Separation Under Constraints: A Molecular
Thermodynamic Theory for Polyelectrolytic Amphiphilic Model Networks
in Water . Polymer 
2004 , 45 , 7341 –7355 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2004.08.024 .
Triftaridou A. I. ; Hadjiyannakou S. C. ; Vamvakaki M. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Synthesis, Characterization and Modeling of Cationic
Amphiphilic Model Hydrogels: Effects of Polymer Composition and Architecture . Macromolecules 
2002 , 35 , 2506 –2513 . 10.1021/ma0114077 .
Vamvakaki M. ; Patrickios C. S. 
Synthesis
and Characterization of the Swelling and Mechanical Properties of
Amphiphilic Ionizable Model Conetworks Containing n-Butyl Methacrylate Hydrophobic Blocks . Soft
Matter 
2008 , 4 , 268 –276 . 10.1039/B710926A .
Kamata H. ; Chung U. ; Shibayama M. ; Sakai T. 
Anomalous Volume Phase Transition in a Polymer Gel with Alternative
Hydrophilic–amphiphilic Sequence . Soft
Matter 
2012 , 8 , 6876 –6879 . 10.1039/c2sm25168j .
Kepola E. J. ; Loizou E. ; Patrickios C. S. ; Leontidis E. ; Voutouri C. ; Stylianopoulos T. ; Schweins R. ; Gradzielski M. ; Krumm C. ; Tiller J. C. ; Kushnir M. ; Wesdemiotis C. 
Amphiphilic Polymer Conetworks Based
on End-linked “Core-first” Star Block Copolymers: Structure
Formation with Long-range Order . ACS Macro Lett. 
2015 , 4 , 1163 –1168 . 10.1021/acsmacrolett.5b00608 .
Hiroi T. ; Kondo S. ; Sakai T. ; Gilbert E. P. ; Han Y.-S. ; Kim T.-H. ; Shibayama M. 
Fabrication
and Structural Characterization of Module-Assembled Amphiphilic Conetwork
Gels . Macromolecules 
2016 , 49 , 4940 –4947 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.6b00842 .
Mortensen K. ; Annaka M. 
Structural Study of Four-Armed Amphiphilic
Star-Block Copolymers: Pristine and End-Linked Tetronic T1307 . ACS Macro Lett. 
2016 , 5 , 224 –228 . 10.1021/acsmacrolett.5b00936 .
Fujiki M. ; Ito M. ; Mortensen K. ; Yashima S. ; Tokita M. ; Annaka M. 
Friction Coefficient
of Well-Defined Hydrogel Networks . Macromolecules 
2016 , 49 , 634 –642 . 10.1021/acs.macromol.5b01997 .
Mortensen K. ; Annaka M. 
Stretching PEO–PPO
Type of Star Block Copolymer Gels: Rheology and Small-Angle Scattering . ACS Macro Lett. 
2018 , 7 , 1438 –1442 . 10.1021/acsmacrolett.8b00792 .
Hurter P. N. ; Hatton T. A. 
Solubilization of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
by Poly(ethylene oxide-propylene oxide) Block Copolymer Micelles:
Effects of Polymer Structure . Langmuir 
1992 , 8 , 1291 –1299 . 10.1021/la00041a010 .
Nagarajan R. ; Ganesh K. 
Block Copolymer Self-Assembly in
Selective Solvents: Theory of Solubilization in Spherical Micelles . Macromolecules 
1989 , 22 , 4312 –4325 . 10.1021/ma00201a029 .
McFann G. J. ; Johnston K. P. ; Hurter P. N. ; Hatton T. A. 
Carbon Dioxide Regeneration
of Block Copolymer Micelles Used for Extraction and Concentration
of Trace Organics . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
1993 , 32 , 2336 –2344 . 10.1021/ie00022a017 .
Spontak R. J. ; Zielinski J. M. ; Lipscomb G. G. 
Effect of Looping
on the Microstructure of Linear Multiblock Copolymers . Macromolecules 
1992 , 25 , 6270 –6276 . 10.1021/ma00049a025 .
Flory P. J.  Principles of Polymer
Chemistry ; Cornell University Press : Ithaca, NY , 1953 ;a  Chapter XII, pp 507 –511 ;b  Chapter XI, pp 464 –470 ;c  Chapter XII, pp 577 –581 ;d  Chapter XI, pp 492 –493 .
Zeldovich K. B. ; Khokhlov A. R. 
Osmotically Active
and Passive Counterions in Inhomogeneous Polymer Gels . Macromolecules 
1999 , 32 , 3488 –3494 . 10.1021/ma9815298 .
Leibler L. ; Orland H. ; Wheeler J. C. 
Theory
of Critical Micelle Concentration for Solutions of Block Copolymers . J. Chem. Phys. 
1983 , 79 , 3550 –3557 . 10.1063/1.446209 .
Hiemenz P. C.  Polymer Chemistry:
The Basic Concepts ; Marcel Dekker, Inc. : NY , 1984 ; Chapter 8,
pp 505 –582 .
Dahlquist G. ; Björck Å.  Numerical Methods ; Prentice-Hall, Inc. : Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey , 1974 ;
Chapter 6, pp 222 –227 .
Mark J. E.  Physical Properties
of Polymers Handbook ; University of Cincinnati : Cincinnati, Ohio , 2007 ; Chapter 14, pp 233 –257 .
Bawn C. E. H. ; Freeman R. F. J. ; Kamaliddin A. R. 
High Polymer
Solutions. Part I. – Vapour Pressure of Polystyrene Solutions . Trans. Faraday Soc. 
1950 , 46 , 677 –684 . 10.1039/TF9504600677 .
Malcolm G. N. ; Rowlinson J. S. 
The Thermodynamic
Properties of Aqueous Solutions of Polyethylene Glycol, Polypropylene
Glycol and Dioxane . Trans. Faraday Soc. 
1957 , 53 , 921 –931 . 10.1039/tf9575300921 .
Nagarajan R. ; Ganesh K. 
Block Copolymer Self-Assembly in
Selective Solvents: Spherical Micelles with Segregated Cores . J. Chem. Phys. 
1989 , 90 , 5843 –5856 . 10.1063/1.456390 .
Svensson M. ; Alexandridis P. ; Linse P. 
Phase Behavior and Microstructure in Binary Block Copolymer/Selective
Solvent Systems: Experiments and Theory . Macromolecules 
1999 , 32 , 637 –645 . 10.1021/ma9812940 .
Svensson M. ; Alexandridis P. ; Linse P. 
Modeling of the Phase Behavior in
Ternary Triblock Copolymer/Water/Oil Systems . Macromolecules 
1999 , 32 , 5435 –5443 . 10.1021/ma990075r .
Lombardo D. ; Kiselev M. A. ; Magazù S. ; Calandra P. 
Amphiphiles Self-Assembly: Basic Concepts and Future
Perspectives of Supramolecular Approaches . Adv.
Condens. Matter Phys. 
2015 , 15168310.1155/2015/151683 .
Hurter P. N. ; Scheutjens J. M. H. M. ; Hatton T. A. 
Molecular Modeling
of Micelle Formation and Solubilization in Block Copolymer Micelles.
1. A Self-Consistent Mean-Field Lattice Theory . Macromolecules 
1993 , 26 , 5592 –5601 . 10.1021/ma00073a010 .
He C. ; Erdodi G. ; Kennedy J. P. 
Individual
and Simultaneous Swelling of Amphiphilic Conetworks in Water and n-Heptane . J. Polym. Sci., Part B:
Polym. Phys. 
2006 , 44 , 1474 –1481 . 10.1002/polb.20810 .
Barton A. F. M.  Handbook of Solubility Parameters and Other Cohesion Parameters ; CRC Press : Boca
Raton, Florida , 1983 ; p 257 .

