
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3146020310.1021/acsomega.9b01372ArticleOutstanding Room-Temperature Hydrogen Gas Detection
by Plasma-Assisted and Graphene-Functionalized Core–Shell Assembly
of SnO2 Nanoburflower Nandi Anupam †∥Nag Pratanu §∥Panda Dipankar †Dhar Sukanta †Hossain Syed Minhaz ‡Saha Hiranmay †Majumdar Sanhita *††Centre
of Excellence for Green Energy and Sensor Systems (CEGESS) and ‡Department of
Physics, Indian Institute of Engineering
Science and Technology (IIEST), P.O. Botanic Garden, Shibpur, Howrah 711103, West
Bengal, India§ Department
of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700032, West Bengal, India* E-mail: email2sm@gmail.com. Phone: +91-033 2668 4561. Fax: +91 (033) 2668
2916.25 06 2019 30 06 2019 4 6 11053 11065 12 05 2019 13 06 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Here,
we have reported the synthesis of three-dimensional, mesoporous,
nano-SnO2 cores encapsulated in nonstoichiometric SnO2 shells grown by chemical as well as physical synthesis procedures
such as plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition, followed by functionalization
with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) on the surface. The main motif to
fabricate such morphology, i.e., core–shell assembly of burflower-like
SnO2 nanobid is to distinguish gases quantitatively at
reduced operating temperatures. Electrochemical results reveal that
rGO anchored on SnO2 surface offers excellent gas detection
performances at room temperature. It exhibits outstanding H2 selectivity through a wide range, from ∼10 ppm to 1 vol %,
with very little cross-sensitivity against other similar types of
reducing gases. Good recovery as well as prompt responses also added
flair in its quality due to the highly mesoporous architecture. Without
using any expensive dopant/catalyst/filler or any special class of
surfactants, these unique SnO2 mesoporous nanostructures
have exhibited exceptional gas sensing performances at room temperature
and are thus helpful to fabricate sensing devices in most cost-effective
and eco-friendly manner.

document-id-old-9ao9b01372document-id-new-14ao-2019-01372accc-price
==== Body
Introduction
To enlighten our surroundings,
we have used different fuels like
coal, petroleum, natural gas, etc. H2 is the latest in
the succession of fuels with many socioeconomic advantages in its
favor. But for practical use, it has high risk due to its combustible
nature in aerial medium as it is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless
gas, and not detectable by human sensorium. For this reason, deployment
of H2 sensor is indispensable, where H2 is produced
or used as fuel.

Significant developments have been made in
the area of metal oxide-based
semiconducting ceramic gas sensors since their invention. Currently,
these sensors are extensively used for domestic, industrial, and environmental
applications.1−7 These are the simple type of gas sensors possessing superiority
due to compact size, simple fabrication technique, durability, low
cost, minimal power consumption, and simple electronic circuits.1,2 In 1962, Taguchi was the first inventor to patent the capability
of SnO2 in detecting low concentration of combustible and
reducing gases by measuring their change in resistance on exposure
to such gases.4 Although SnO2-based thick-film gas sensors have been available commercially for
a long time, their performances such as high sensitivity, preferential
selectivity, response and recovery times, and durability still need
further improvements especially in low- or room-temperature (RT) region.
Hence, the development of SnO2-based gas sensors with optimum
sensitivity at room temperature and selectivity toward a particular
gas has been a major challenge in the field of semiconductor sensors
in recent years. To tackle this problem, researchers worldwide have
concentrated on the synthesis technique of SnO2 that can
solve this delinquent during the grass route level without adding
any expensive chemicals as catalyst/dopant/filler/modifier. Various
morphologies of nano-SnO2 have been exploited, such as
nanowires (NWs), hollow spheres, nanocrystals, etc., for selective
or multiple detection of chemicals, where, in almost all cases, it
has been kept in mind to enhance the effective surface area along
with the other qualities, since sensitivity is primarily a surface-induced
phenomenon. Wang et al.8 exploited SnO2 NW-based sensors, which can detect hydrogen (H2) for a wide range of concentrations (10–1000 ppm), attributed
to the undercoordinated atoms on the SnO2 NW surfaces.
So, they focused on the material morphology to widen the detection
concentration limit. In a comparative study, Brunet and his group9 concluded that SnO2 NW sensors have
higher detection efficiencies, i.e., more than 30 times than the SnO2 thin-film sensors toward CO, CH4, H2, CO2, SO2, and H2S, attributed
to a lack of grain boundaries. Hence, they also focused on structural
and morphological aspects to escalate the conventional sensing limit.
Banarjee and her group10 claimed about
91% sensitivity toward 1000 ppm n-butane with a recovery
time of 15 s, using SnO2 nanoparticles (NPs) synthesized
by the spontaneous gel autocombustion (Petchini) technique. By this
way, they concentrated on the synthesis and fabrication procedure
to overcome decade-long sensing drawbacks like optimum sensitivity
with prompt recovery of their fabricated prototype.

With the
recent advancement in nanotechnology, plasma-assisted
nanofabrication has become an exciting new direction because plasma-based
approaches can deliver unique predefined structures at the nanoscale
level that cannot be achieved by other techniques in a more economical
and environment-friendly manner. Over the last decade, there have
been exiting breakthroughs in the utilization of plasma processes
in the fabrication of a rich diversity of nanomaterials (nanowires,
nanotubes, nanobelts, nanoparticles, etc.) and nanoengineered coatings.
Some of these materials can simply not be derived by conventional
means while many others have remarkable plasma-induced properties
setting them apart from their conventional counterpart. In this regard,
it is worth mentioning that plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition
(PECVD) is an appealing technique to develop extremely controllable
multifunctional oxide nanoarchitectures under relatively mild conditions,
owing to the unique features and activation mechanisms of nonequilibrium
plasma. Inspired by mother nature, the potential of plasma bombardment
has been exploited in our study to synthesize tailor-made controlled
structure of a naturally occurring flower (burflower), to increase
the surface-to-volume ratio since sensitivity is a surface phenomenon.

In this work, SnO2 core–shell assembly has been
synthesized using chemical (wet chemical synthesis) and physical (plasma
bombardment technique) methods to fabricate solid-state gas sensors
focusing on its response toward hydrogen gas in the ppm level to as
high as volume percentage level. It is well known that this is a highly
challenging task to fabricate semiconductor metal oxide (SMO)-based
sensor devices (e.g., SnO2), which exhibit high sensitivity
and prolonged stability at the same time and above all perform selective
detection of a particular gas even at room temperature. Besides examining
the interrelations between the material properties and the synthesis
conditions, special focus is given to their emerging application for
a practical need of room-temperature hydrogen gas detection for a
wide range of concentrations. Here, we have proposed a novel H2 sensing material, which is basically a modified SnO2 pseudosphere consisting of several biddings on the surface of the
SnO2 base substrates, which eventually appeared as “kadamba”
flower (burflower).

Experimental Section
Materials and Methods
The synthesis technique of SnO2 nanoparticles includes
chemical and physical routes, with
the former involving the wet chemical technique followed by calcination
for phase purification, and the latter involving deposition by e-beam
and multiple plasma treatments (viz., H2 and Ar) with various
operational parameters to fabricate nanoparticles with desired shape,
size, and morphology.

Wet Chemical Synthesis
Calculated
amount of powdered
dihydrated stannous chloride (SnCl2·2H2O) is added to 250 mL of deionized (DI) water in a beaker to make
the solution of 0.01 M in slightly acidic medium (in the presence
of 2–3 mL of dil. HCl). Liquor ammonia (NH4OH, 30%
(v/v)) is added to the solution dropwise until precipitation, which
was confirmed by achieving pH 9.11,12 The solution
was then centrifuged at 4000 rpm to separate out the solid portion
(precipitate) from the liquid. The solid part was collected and washed
with DI water and acetone sequentially to remove impurities present,
if any. Finally, it was collected in a Petri dish and then vacuum-dried
at room temperature.

Pellet Formation
SnO2 nanoparticles synthesized
by the wet chemical method were used to form pellets with anticipated
diameter, which will be used as a target material in an electron beam
deposition chamber. Granular poly(vinyl alcohol) (10 wt % (with respect
to SnO2)) was used as binder in pellet formation to restrict
cracking and breakage of pellets. SnO2 pellets of desired
thickness and diameter were fabricated using high-pressure (1.5 Torr)
hydraulic press (Polyhydron, Belgaum) under atmospheric temperature
(∼27 °C). The pellets were placed in a programmable tube
furnace (Nuskar, Kolkata) for calcination at 600 °C with 6 h
soaking time to get phase pure material (SnO2) and for
the removal of binder used.

E-Beam Deposition of SnO2 Nanoparticles
SnO2 pellets were used as a target material in an e-beam
chamber (AUTO-500 HHV) having graphite crucible holder. A SnO2 thin film (25 nm) was deposited as a conformal layer on the
surface of a polished Si wafer, where the substrate temperature was
kept at 200 °C. The deposition was done in the presence of oxygen
gas (purity, 99.999%) with a deposition rate of 3 Å/s, and the
system vacuum was maintained at 1.04 × 10–4 mbar.

H2 Plasma in PECVD Unit
H2 plasma
treatment was done in PECVD cluster tool (CT-100 HHV) on SnO2-coated polished Si wafer by maintaining the base vacuum of the system
at 5 × 10–7 Torr. After achieving the equilibrium
temperature of the PECVD cluster tool at 300 °C, H2 gas (purity, 99.999%) was purged into the chamber and the process
pressure was maintained at 1 Torr. H2 gas flow rate of
100 sccm was controlled by a mass flow controller (MFC, Bronkhorst).
Power density and plasma processing time were varied from 70 to 110
W/cm2 and 20 to 30 min to develop SnO2 nanoparticles
of desired dimensions.

Bidding (Overgrowth) on SnO2 Nanoparticle
Using Ar
Plasma Treatment
Ar plasma treatment was performed by reactive
ion etching (RIE) unit (ION ETCH 150-HHV), where the base vacuum pressure
of the system was maintained at 1 Torr. The power of Ar plasma projected
on the sample was 100 W with average deflection of 20 W inside the
vacuum chamber. Argon gas (purity, 99.999%) flow was controlled at
100 sccm by MFC (Bronkhorst), and an inert atmosphere was maintained
inside the chamber. The time of plasma treatment on the sample was
varied from 10 to 20 min to grow the desired bidding (overgrowth)
of SnO2 over SnO2 nanoparticles (self-cloning)
by surface etching of the second one (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Schematic showing the stepwise formation of
SnO2 bidding
over SnO2 nanoparticles along with graphene-coated nanocrystalline
SnO2 bids.

Introduction of Reduced Graphene Oxide (rGO) on the Surface
of SnO2
Graphene or reduced graphene oxide was
synthesized through wet chemical bottom-up approach (modified Hummers’
method) with graphene oxide as the intermediate product, which was
reduced by hydrazine hydrate to form amine-functionalized rGO, which
may act as an n-type semiconductor13 due
to the presence of primary amine group (−NH2) at
the edge of rGO as well as on the basal plane (very less amount) and
form an inner armchair (zigzag) structure.14 A thin rGO layer was developed on the surface of bided SnO2 by capillary action. It can be assumed that the highly ordered and
repetitive patterned mesoporous tiny particles of SnO2 as
well as the spaces between the particles behave like a capillary,
which supports capillary action to cover the surface with a thin layer
of graphene, which was suspended in isopropyl alcohol (IPA). Slightly
increased temperature (∼45 °C), considerably low-dimensional
capillary tube diameter (channel diameters, ca. 1–2 nm), and
comparatively low surface tension of IPA (21.70 ± 0.05 mN/m at
room temperature, while the same for water is 71.99 ± 0.05 mN/m)
are responsible to support this action. Low density of the solvent
also helps the phenomenon (IPA has a density of 0.790 g/mL at RT,
whereas the same for water is 0.998 g/mL at the same temperature).
However, it has been seen that coating continuity is more uniform
in the lower portion of the substrate probably due to the action of
gravity.

Sample(s) Nomenclature
Powdered SnO2 synthesized
by the wet chemical (precipitation) route is named as “sample
1” (S1). This sample was used to form SnO2 tablet
at a high pressure, which has been used as a target material to grow
conformal thin film of thickness ∼25 nm deposited on a polished
silicon wafer by e-beam deposition technique and named as “sample
2” (S2). Sample “S2” was used in PECVD cluster
tool as a substrate under H2 plasma with different operating
powers for 5 min. Samples in H2 plasma operated with 3,
5, and 7 W consumption power are named as “sample 3”
(S3), “sample 4” (S4), and “sample 5”
(S5), respectively. Sample S2 was used in PECVD cluster tool again
as a substrate under an operating power of 5 W for different operating
times. Sample S2 that underwent a 5 W H2 plasma treatment
for 10, 15, and 20 min is named as “sample 6” (S6),
“sample 7” (S7), and “sample 8” (S8),
respectively. On the basis of particle’s shape, size, and morphology,
sample “S7” has been chosen as the optimum H2 plasma-treated sample (through the reactive ion etching method).
This sample 7 was then further treated with Ar plasma for different
times under 1 Torr base pressure with 100 sccm Ar flow rate inside
a vacuum chamber with operating power of 100 W. For the sake of simplicity
and to reduce the total number of samples, 25, 50, 75, 100, and 125
W Ar plasma treatments were also performed on sample S7, among which,
the 100 W treatment was chosen as the optimum one. Now, sample S7
treated in Ar plasma with 100 W for 10, 15, and 20 min operating time
is named as “sample 9” (S9), “sample 10”
(S10), and “sample 11” (S11), respectively. With preferred
growth of bidding (overgrowth) on SnO2 surface, sample
“S10” was chosen as the optimum one and is collected
for graphene (rGO) coating treatment, and the coated sample is named
as “sample 12” (S12).

Results
To confirm
the phase purity, orientations of crystal lattice structures,
and probable lattice plains of the synthesized materials, room-temperature
X-ray diffraction study was performed in RIGAKU Ultima IV, and the
corresponding peak positions along with the detail explanations are
provided in the Supporting Information (SI).
From the X-ray diffractograms, “lattice strain” was
calculated using eq 1,15 where ∈ and η are the
effective particle size and effective strain, respectively. 1  The
effective particle size (∈) can
be estimated by plotting (β cos θ)/λ
as Y axis against (sin θ/λ) as X axis (shown in SI), where λ
= 1.541 Å (Cu Kα1 X-ray wavelength), “θ”
is Bragg’s diffraction angle, and “β” is
the angular full width at half-maximum (FWHM) intensity. The effective
strain (η) may be induced in particles due to the prolonged
plasma treatment with variable power. Degree of strain induced in
the particle due to the size reduction has been estimated from the
slope of the strain graphs (elaborated in SI).16 Some physical properties of the synthesized
SnO2 nanoparticles (NP) derived from X-ray diffractogram
are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Physical Properties of Synthesized
SnO2 NP Derived from X-ray Diffractogram
sample no.	d-spacing value (Å)	crystallite size; DXRD (nm)	lattice parameter
(Å)	c/a ratio	FWHM (2θ)	lattice strain (β cos θ)/λ)	
S1	1.75	8.42	a = b = 4.525, c = 3.225	0.7127	0.45	0.0042	
S2	1.72	1.50	a = b = 4.928, c = 2.997	0.6082	1.05	0.0082	
S3	1.71	1.48	a = b = 4.814, c = 3.005	0.6242	1.01	0.0078	
S4	1.72	1.49	a = b = 4.794, c = 3.125	0.6519	0.96	0.0066	
S5	1.74	1.98	a = b = 4.778, c = 3.148	0.6589	0.81	0.0058	
S6	1.75	2.62	a = b = 4.752, c = 3.172	0.6675	0.68	0.0052	
S7	1.76	3.12	a = b = 4.737, c = 3.184	0.6722	0.56	0.0048	
S8	1.77	4.08	a = b = 4.718, c = 3.206	0.6795	0.44	0.0040	
S9	1.76	2.07	a = b = 4.721, c = 3.173	0.6721	0.81	0.0069	
S10	1.771	2.76	a = b = 4.728, c = 3.178	0.6725	0.93	0.8100	
S11	1.77	3.16	a = b = 4.734, c = 3.181	0.6719	0.90	0.0045	
S12	1.77	2.76	a = b = 4.732, c = 3.183	0.6726	0.88	0.0080	
JCPDS (77-0447)	1.76	 	a = b = 4.735, c = 3.185	0.6726	 	 	
The interrelations between the material properties, structural
orientations, and the synthesis conditions have further been corroborated
using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy,
and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), as presented in the Supporting Information (SI).

Field Emission Scanning
Electron Microscopy (FESEM) Studies
Figure 2 depicts
the FESEM images of samples S1–S12, along with the particle
size distribution (PSD, where possible) with normalized Gaussian distribution
function, showing the mean size of the particles. The morphologies
of the synthesized nanoparticles were visualized on a field emission
scanning electron microscope (SIGMA ZEISS) at 5 kV electron high tension
using a high efficiency in-lens detector, having base pressure of
the vacuum chamber in the range of 3 × 10–6 mbar (gun vacuum in the range of 1.95 × 10–9 mbar). However, in this technique, samples can potentially sublimate
under high-vacuum conditions, thus increasing the risk of charging.
To restrict this tendency, an aluminum (Al) foil tape was attached
with the stage of each sample for discharging, if necessary. The micrographs
behave as the footprint of step-by-step synthesis of the desired material
in the form of nanobid composite. From Figure 2, it could be seen that S1 possesses nanoparticles
having nonuniform diameter distribution in the range of ca. 20–200
nm. The shape of the particles includes rhombohedra-like, elongated
spherical, quasi-spherical, as well as perfect spherical structures.
The presence of such mixed shapes can probably be explained in terms
of (i) interrupted growth of nanoparticles, (ii) overgrowth, (iii)
incomplete lattice formation, (iv) introduction of defects (atomic
voids, excess oxygen-ion incorporation, excess Sn-ion incorporation,
interstitial defects, etc.), (v) agglomeration, (vi) recrystallization,
and (vii) strain-induced formation of nanocrystal/particles. Such
mixed-shape and mixed-phase SnO2 was used to generate uniform
SnO2 pallet and was used as a target material in an electron
beam deposition chamber to deposit SnO2 on a polished silicon
wafer (S2). The detailed condition of deposition is discussed in the Materials and Methodssection. For the sample S2,
thickness of the deposited thin film (conformal layer) of SnO2 was ∼25 nm, measured by the thickness profilometer
(DektakXT; Bruker), and is presented as inset of S2 of Figure 2. To grow SnO2 nanoparticles
from the conformal coating, hydrogen plasma treatment was performed
in PECVD cluster tool (HHV CT-100), keeping the other conditions constant,
viz., for all of the cases: (i) maintaining base pressure of the chamber
at 1 Torr; (ii) keeping the temperature of the substrates at 300 °C;
(iii) keeping the working distance of all at 7 cm, etc. Shape, size,
morphologies, and distributions of the as-grown SnO2 nanoparticles
on the polished silicon wafer substrate were studied for plasma treatment
powers of 3, 5, and 7 W for 5 min and are displayed in Figure 2 as S3, S4, and S5, respectively.
The thickness of the film of samples S2, S3, and S5 was measured using
a surface profilometer. The measured thickness of the film of sample
S3 is ∼24 nm, which is almost identical to that of sample S2,
supporting an early initiation of plasma-dependent nanoparticle growth.
Decrement of film thickness can be a result of etching of SnO2 surface by hydrogen plasma at higher operating power. The
SnO2 film thickness of the sample S5 is found to be roughly
∼38 nm, shown in the inset of the same figure. From the figure,
it can also be found that the surface of the SnO2 is rough.
This roughness of the surface is an effect of overetching of SnO2 due to prolonged plasma exposure. From the morphological
point of view, it could be seen that for sample S3, nanoparticle formation
started randomly. Higher operating power (5 W) was provided for 5
min to optimize the formation of nanoparticles from SnO2 thin film, and has been assigned as S4. From the micrograph of S4
sample, a continuous layer of SnO2 nanoparticles could
be seen with uniform particle shape and size distribution (∼25
nm), estimated using Java-based ImageJ software (developed by National
Institutes of Health) and presented as inset particle size distribution
(PSD) histogram (with std. error of ±3 nm). But when moved on
to sample S5, the particle deformed with uneven distributions. This
is also evident from the surface profilometer study. From these micrograph
studies, 5 W operating power of PECVD cluster tool was opted as the
optimum power for nanoparticle growth formation.

Figure 2 FESEM microstructures
of S1–S12 samples (with 200 nm bar)
with corresponding particle size distributions histogram and surface
profile study (whichever appropriate).

The operating plasma treatment time was changed further,
keeping
the power same (5 W), to realize further probable changes in the formation
of SnO2 nanoparticle. In doing so, H2 plasma
treatment time was chosen as 10, 15, and 20 min, and the corresponding
micrographs are presented as S6, S7, and S8 in Figure 2. Gradual particle growth could be observed
in S6, S7, and S8. For S6, a uniform spherical growth of SnO2 nanoparticle could be seen with a dense matrix having average particle
diameter of ∼50 nm (evident from PSD graph, presented as inset
in S6). The particle diameter increased to 100 and 150 nm for S7 and
S8, respectively, with gradual increment of plasma treatment time
from 15 to 20 min. Although the particle size is increased, the size,
shape, and distribution of sample S8 deformed and the spherical shape
became quasi-spherical with discontinued base, due to complete etching
of the conformal base layer of SnO2 through H2 plasma treatment. For this reason, time progression study of the
H2 plasma treatment was stopped at 20 min and no further
study was performed with higher time of plasma treatment. The deformation
tendency of sample S8 could be a result of exploiting higher power
of hydrogen plasma (overplasma growth), which are not suitable for
the size range of base particles. On the basis of these FESEM images,
15 min H2 plasma-treated sample (S7) was opted for further
study. Ar plasma bombardment was especially performed to develop overgrowth
(bidding) on the outer surface of SnO2 nanoparticles for
the sake of surface area enhancement. S7 sample was further treated
with 100 W Ar plasma for 10, 15, and 20 min time intervals, and subsequent
micrographs are presented as S9, S10, and S11, respectively, along
with their respective particle size distributions in Figure 2. The best shape was found
in S10 sample with preferred growth of bidding (overgrowth) on SnO2 surface that appeared just like natural kadamba (burflower)
with numerous tiny overgrowths, which would ultimately facilitate
the sensing phenomenon. S12 represents the micrograph of n-type rGO-coated
SnO2 NP in the same magnification range, where both the
thickness of the rGO layer and the SnO2 particle distribution
can be visualized.

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) Studies
The
particle size, morphology, and local crystallographic structures were
studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), and the related micrographs
are presented in Figure 3. The bright-field images help us to get an idea about the effective
particle sizes of the different SnO2 nanoparticles. Figure 3b depicts the bright-field
TEM image of wet chemically synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles
(S1), which has been tinged (brownish) to enhance visualization. Figure 3a is its corresponding
high-resolution (HRTEM) counterpart. The TEM image exhibits round
particles of different sizes and shapes, and corroborates well with
FESEM images. The HRTEM image clearly shows spacing between lattice
fringes corresponding to the (200) plane orientation of SnO2 according to JCPDS card no. 77-0447. Figure 3c indicates the corresponding selected area
electron diffraction (SAED) patterns with probable indexed planes
of SnO2. Figure 3d,f depicts the micrographs of SnO2 nanoparticle
prepared by H2 plasma treatment (S7). Here also a similar
pattern of representation has been followed, i.e., Figure 3e is the bright-field TEM image, Figure 3d is the HRTEM image,
and Figure 3f is the
corresponding SAED crystallographic orientation of S7 sample, with
the lowest crystallite size among the synthesized SnO2s.
From this series of TEM images, the well-dispersed spherical particles
having diameter in the order of 80–90 nm size can be seen with
relatively less degree of agglomeration as the particles retain their
boundary very precisely from one another.

Figure 3 Transmission electron
micrography (TEM) images and their related
images (like HR and demarcated SAED patterns) of wet chemically synthesized
SnO2 nanoparticles (S1) illustrated as (a)–(c);
H2 plasma-treated SnO2 nanoparticles (S7) illustrated
as (d)–(f); Ar plasma-treated SnO2 bidding sample
(S10) illustrated as (g)–(i); and rGO-coated bided sample (S12)
illustrated as (j)–(l).

Figure 3g–i
represents TEM images and their related images of Ar plasma-treated
SnO2 bidding sample (S10). From Figure 3h, two parts of the image can be clearly
identified, in which the denser and darker part has been assigned
as “core” and lighter outer part is dispensed as “shell”
originated probably by SnO2 nanoparticles formed by H2 plasma treatment and SnO2 bidding formed by Ar
plasma treatment, respectively. The core part has a diameter of nearly
50 nm, and the shell part has a thickness of about 20 nm. This core–shell
feature is also visible in its high-resolution counterpart as well.
Therefore, these types of particles with average size of around 100
nm or lower can be thought of as a new type of core–shell structure
that is yet to be reported by any group as this contains the same
material (SnO2) as both core and shell components.

Generally, core–shell structures consist of two different
compositions,17−19 but here in this modified core–shell structure,
it consists of materials with same compositions but with different
stoichiometries and crystallographic orientations. With the gradual
optimization of plasma packing from S7 to S10, the particle size increases
although the degree of agglomeration decreases, as is evident from Figure 3e,h. Figure 3i confirms the SAED pattern
of highly crystalline SnO2 with typical reflections of
(110), (101), (111), (211) (220), and (310) crystal planes. The TEM
image of rGO-coated sample (S12) with bids is demonstrated in Figure 3k, which clearly
indicates the graphene layer coating on the outer surface of shell
SnO2. In fact, this layer acts like a porous membrane and
turns the particles as densely arranged black spheroid, which is well
supported by the corresponding high-resolution HRTEM images. It is
clear from the images that graphene is well dispersed and distributed
throughout the SnO2 surface. In Figure 3j, a typical crystalline domain with interplanar
spacings (d = 0.18 and 0.26 nm) corresponds to (211)
and (101) reflections of SnO2 tetragonal rutile phase (JCPDS
77-0447), which confirms the presence of SnO2, and (002)
reflection of carbon confirms the presence of finely dispersed rGO
particles on the same matrix of SnO2. There is also a clear
indication of a Moiré pattern in Figure 3j, which usually occurs due to the overlapping
of crystal planes of either the same material or two different materials.
The SAED pattern in Figure 3l taken from a representative area shows the presence of lattice
fringes corresponding to (110), (101), (200), and (211) crystal planes
of tetragonal SnO2. However, there is no indication of
the presence of rGO in the SAED pattern probably because of its negligible
amount compared to SnO2. Nevertheless, TEM images and the
related images substantiate well with the results found from XRD studies.

Sensing Studies
Figure 4a,b and Tables 2–5 depict the sensing characteristics
of SnO2 nanoparticles (NPs), SnO2 nanoparticles
with bidding, and SnO2 nanoparticle-bidding coated with
graphene (rGO) identified with sample numbers S1, S10, and S12, respectively. Figure 4a shows the dynamic
response–recovery characteristics of S1, which exhibited n-type
sensing characteristics with 5.27, 22.08, 48.82, 72.02, and 88.00%
responses toward a wide range of H2 gas (viz., 10, 100,
1000, 10 000, and 100 000 ppm, respectively). Although
it carried out satisfactory sensitivities only at and above 10 000
ppm H2 gas, it is not very much acceptable considering
the practical applicability of a H2 gas sensor. On the
contrary, the S10 sample exhibited excellent sensing appearances with
almost full-scale response range with as high as 52.24, 68.78, 78.67,
91.0, and 99.89% sensitivities, respectively, for the same order of
gradually increasing (of the order of 10-fold) five different H2 gas concentrations mentioned earlier. But when graphene (chemically
synthesized, in the form of n-type reduced graphene oxide, or rGO)
was introduced into the system as a thin surface layer, the sensing
responses have been affected slightly. From Table 2, it could be seen that for the same concentration
of same gas (H2), percentage of sensitivity increases drastically
from S1 to S10, on the formation of tiny biddings on the SnO2 NP surfaces. The probable reason would be surface area enhancement
due to overgrowth for bidding and consequent undulations leading to
enhanced sensing response as sensing is primarily a surface phenomenon.

Figure 4 Combined
dynamic response–recovery curves against five different
concentrations of hydrogen gases (viz., 10, 100, 1000, 10 000,
and 100 000 ppm; from left to right) at 250 °C operating
temperate for the samples (a) S1 and (b) S10.

Table 2 Sensitivity against Different Concentrations
of Hydrogen Gas at 250 °C Operating Temperature
material
compositions	10 ppm H2	100 ppm H2	1000 ppm H2	10 000 ppm H2	100 000 ppm H2	
SnO2 NP	5.27	22.08	48.82	72.02	88.00	
SnO2 bidding	52.24	68.78	78.67	91.01	99.89	
SnO2 bidding + rGO	37.77	51.12	63.39	75.50	90.00	
However, sensitivity falls to some extent if rGO was
also present
on the surface. Probably, it formed a primary contact barrier between
SnO2 NP and the analyte gases. But as the synthesized rGO
was n-type in nature (evidence shown in the Supporting Information) and inherently possessed excellent room-temperature
electrical conductivity12 with low electrical
noise due to its high degree of crystallinity (shown in the Supporting Information), sample S12 showed very
good low temperature sensitivity even at room temperature (∼27
°C). To explore the effects of working temperature on sensing
characteristics, all of the samples measured at different working
temperatures and the measured sensing response data ranging from room
temperature to 350 °C working temperature are shown in Table 3. The S1 sample exhibited
sensitivities of 30.36, 72.02, 74.45, and 75.55% toward 1% H2 gas at 200, 250, 300, and 350 °C working temperatures, respectively.
Below 200 °C, the sample (S1) was unable to show any sensitivity
(resistance overload). Although SnO2 NP with bidding (sample
S10) shows sensing response at 100 °C temperature also, the extent
is quite poor (only ∼8%). From Table 3, it could be noted that only S12 sample
could show room-temperature sensitivity and the values are considerably
high enough (95 and 90.9% responses at room temperature and at 100
°C, respectively). Without rGO, SnO2 NP and/or SnO2 bidding did not show any room-temperature sensitivity; thus,
it could be concluded that rGO is only responsible for low temperature
sensing responses. However, sensitivity of S12 increases with increasing
concentration of H2 gas (Table 4). From Table 5, it could be claimed
that all of the samples (S1 as well as S10 and S12) displayed fairly
good selectivity toward hydrogen gas in comparison to the same concentration
(1000 ppm) of some other n-type reducing gases like methane and butane.
Some p-type oxidizing gases have also been reported in the literature20−23 for similar kind of SnO2-based sensors, but the present
study was limited to n-type reducing gases only for the sake of comparison
with H2 (which is the main target gas in this study and
is n-type reducing in nature). Above 250 °C operating temperature,
SnO2 NP and SnO2 bidding responses increase
only slightly, strictly speaking, sensitivity almost ceases. For this
reason, sensing responses did not record above 350 °C working
temperature. It should be mentioned here that at 250 °C working
temperature, the base resistance of SnO2 NP (S1) was 180
MΩ and the same for SnO2 bidding (S10) and SnO2 bidding + rGO (S12) were 528 and 66 MΩ, respectively.
The value for S10 sample was fairly explainable as with bidding/overgrowth
formation, surface area increases, which in turn increases the extent
of depletion region. Such enhanced depletion layer tried to encompass
more ambient oxygen species, which has been reflected through higher
base resistance or air resistance values compared to sample S1 comprising
only SnO2 NP. On the contrary, when rGO was incorporated
into the system, conductance of the system increased, as rGO is a
good conductor at room temperature and it provides sufficient carrier
electrons from its two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb lattice to reduce
the resistance of the composite systems.

Table 3 Sensitivity
at Different Operating
Temperatures against 1% H2
material
compositions	RT	100 °C	200 °C	250 °C	300 °C	350 °C	
SnO2 NP	 	 	30.36	72.02	74.45	75.55	
SnO2 bidding	 	8.22	68.82	91.01	93.34	94.68	
SnO2 bidding + rGO	95.00	90.92	84.48	75.55	67.00	62.22	
Table 4 Sensitivity against Different Concentrations
of Hydrogen Gas at Room Temperature
material
compositions	10 ppm H2	100 ppm H2	1000 ppm H2	10 000 ppm H2	100 000 ppm H2	
SnO2 bidding + rGO	56.67	71.33	79.99	95.00	97.67	
Table 5 Cross-Sensitivities against Different
n-Type Reducing Gases of Same Concentration at 250 °C Operating
Temperature
material
compositions	1000 ppm H2	1000 ppm methane	1000 ppm butane	
SnO2 NP	48.82	22.44	14.02	
SnO2 bidding	78.67	28.84	8.62	
SnO2 bidding + rGO	63.39	25.56	5.66	
Figure 5a,b displays
the combined dynamic response–recovery curves of sample S12
at different operating temperatures, e.g., Figure 5a at 250 °C operating temperature, and Figure 5b at room temperature.
From the curves, it is evident that for both the cases, at room temperature
and at elevated temperature (250 °C), S12 showed gradually improved
sensitivity with increase of H2 gas concentration. However,
room-temperature gas exposure exhibits better sensing responses than
its elevated counterpart, which indicates that the sensor is best
suited at room temperature. After reaching a saturation plateau, the
dynamic curves switched from desorption mode to adsorption mode. Such
steady states (plateau) indicate saturation of gas molecules at the
depletion regions as well as the response time of the sensors.24,25 From the curves, it could be seen that the responses are quick (within
20 s) even to a trace amount (0.001%, or 10 ppm) of H2 gas
and the recovery is swift as the resistance output evenly comes back
almost to its original level, suggesting highly reproducible and reversible
response nature of the sensors against the analyte gas. However, the
recovery time is not appreciably low probably because of slow oxidation
of gas molecules on the surface of the sensors. It is noteworthy that
a number of experiments have been carried out to measure the sensitivity
as a function of operating temperature and time. In all of the cases,
sensitivity of the sensor elements showed approximately constant values,
indicating the repeatability and reproducibility nature of the sensors.
To explore the reproducibility of the sensors and to examine their
shelf-life, the following data have been acquired and are presented
as Figure 6.

Figure 5 Combined dynamic
response–recovery curves toward five different
concentrations of hydrogen gases (viz., 10, 100, 1000, 10 000,
and 100 000 ppm, from left to right) for the same sample (S12)
at different operating temperatures, e.g., (a) 250 °C and (b)
room temperature.

Figure 6 Dynamic response–recovery
characteristics of S12 sample
toward 100 000 ppm (10%) hydrogen gas measured at room temperature
for a longer period of time (∼10 min).

The reproducible nature of S12 sensor sample was confirmed
by its
dynamic response–recovery features portrayed in Figure 6. It is evident that the S12
sample exhibited almost a similar kind of sensing rejoinders for the
same gas exposure time (of ∼20 s) at room temperature for five
consecutive cycles at a stretch, without showing any fatigue changes
in its adsorption and/or desorption segment, leading to the evidence
of its fast response and instant recovery of the sample with no drift.

Discussion
Working Principle
To understand the influence of surface
properties on sensing performances, the mechanism of surface chemistry
and lattice structure with stoichiometric defect of the synthesized
components involved are to be understood primarily. Since gas sensing
characteristics are primarily surface phenomena, the focus has been
shifted to increase the surface area so that the surface-to-volume
ratio can be enhanced. Inspired by mother nature, attempts to synthesize
structures like naturally occurring burflower (kadamba), which has
several spikelike bids (overgrowth), in turn would help increase the
surface area of the synthesized material. The micrographs (FESEM and
HRTEM) shown in Figure 7i portray the resemblance of the synthesized material with naturally
occurring “burflower” and visualize the control over
the synthesis parameters. The existence of a large number of bids
on the SnO2 matrix has increased the percentage response
to about 61% compared to only SnO2 NP (78.67% sensitivity
of SnO2 with bids against 1000 ppm H2, measured
at 250 °C operating temperature, and the same for SnO2 NP was only 48.82%, measured at similar conditions). Figure 7i illustrates a schematic depicting
the surface chemistry mechanism of rGO-coated SnO2 in the
presence of analyte gases like H2. When the sensor is exposed
to hydrogen gas, it is expected to either remain as H2 (ads)
on the surface or get dissociated into two H atoms. These adsorbed
H atoms will interact with the active oxygen species on surface, as
shown in eqs 2 and 3 2   3  Thus,
the adsorption of O2– and O– ions on the nanocrystalline
SnO2 surface is the key factor for enhancing the receptor
function of the sensor, which in turn controls the response of the
sensor. The greater the ability of the surface to oxidize the target
gas, the higher could be the response of the sensor.

Figure 7 (i) (a) Real image of
naturally occurring burflower and (b) its
schematic impression illustrating the resemblance of the synthesized
material with their electron micrographs [(c) FESEM and (d) HRTEM].
(ii) Proposed schematic surface chemistry mechanism of rGO-coated
SnO2 in the presence of analyte gases.

Synthesized rGO, being n-type in nature (established through
hot
probe test24,26 and elaborated in SI), facilitate the desired molecular exchange(s)
on the sensor surface since SnO2 is also n-type intrinsically,
leading to fortify the sensing performances by catalyzing interfacial
reactions (Figure 7ii). Moreover, rGO possesses excellent electrical conductivity at
room temperature, and it has also been seen that extremely small change
in the resistance of a graphene sheet caused by gas adsorption even
down to the molecular level is detectable. For these reasons, the
presence of graphene enables the prototype to detect gases at low
temperature, even down to room temperature.

Electronic Band Structure
The overall working principle
of the gas sensing mechanism of SnO2 NP bidding and the
same SnO2 NP with rGO (composite) at room temperature as
well as at elevated temperature is illustrated in Figure 8. It is assumed that the total
conductivity (σTotal) of a crystalline semiconductor
is the sum of electronic (σe and σh) and ionic conductivities (σion), where subscripts
“e” and “h” represent electrons and holes,
respectively. Metal oxide semiconductors (MOSs) like SnO2 usually best operated at temperatures between 200 and 450 °C.14,27,28 In this operating temperature
range, the contribution from ionic conduction is negligibly low. So,
the total conductivity of SnO2 can be assumed according
to eq 4 as follows28 4  The resistance of the homogeneous bulk material
(Rb) with bulk conductivity σbulk, mobility μ, length l, and cross
section A can be calculated according to eq 5 as follows28 5  where the bulk conductivity
(σbulk) is 6  Here,
“b” and
“d” are the length and breadth of the
material, respectively; “n” and “q” are the magnitudes of the free electron and hole
(charge carrier) concentrations (i.e., the number of electrons or
holes per cubic meter) for an intrinsic semiconductor like SnO2, respectively; and “e” is
the charge of an electron (1.6 × 10–19 C).
The n-type behavior of SnO2 associated with the oxygen
deficiency in the bulk could be understood from Figure 8a. The donors are singly negative and doubly
ionized oxygen vacancies (like O2– or
O=) with donor levels DL1 and DL2 located around 0.03 and 0.15 eV below the conduction band edge.25 In the case of SnO2, the extrinsic
donors are multistep donors.29 Therefore,
donor and acceptor energy level concentrations and the operating temperatures
determine the bulk conductivity of SnO2. In the typical
temperature range for sensor operation (200–450 °C), the
donors can be considered completely ionized and adsorbed with the
semiconductor surface predominantly through two basic approaches,
namely, physisorption and chemisorption. “Physisorption”
is the process of adsorption with the least possible interaction with
no charge transfer. “Chemisorption” is based on stronger
forces and hence is connected with an electron transfer between the
adsorbent and adsorbate and ultimately provides a band gap (Eg) of 3.6 eV for SnO2 (at standard
condition). Hence, physisorption is associated with a neutral state
where gas molecules condense on the metal oxide surface at low temperature
while chemisorption takes place at temperatures higher than 150 °C,
where the electron exchange takes place between adsorbed species and
conduction band of SnO2 surface.30 Ionosorption is basically “delocalized chemisorption”
as the charge is transferred from/to the conduction band. In the presence
of graphene (or reduced graphene oxide, rGO), however, these phenomena
happen at much lower temperature, even at room temperature due to
unique and excellent electrical properties of graphene at such temperature
range. rGO possesses very high electron mobility at room temperature.
Moreover, devices based on graphene are expected to have relatively
low Johnson noise because of their high conductance and low crystal
defect density. Although graphene can independently sense gas molecules
in a quantitative manner,12 here it has
been incorporated only at the top of the samples as a surface layer
to improve some SMO-based sensor drawbacks (like reduces operating
temperature, enhances durability, etc.). rGO preserves the layer structures
of the parent graphite, but the layers are buckled and the interlayer
spacing is about 2 times larger (∼0.7 nm) than that of graphite.31 Besides bridging oxygen atoms (oxygen epoxide
groups), other functional groups are also found as carbonyl (C=O),
hydroxyl (−OH), phenol (−C6H5),
ammine (−NH4), etc.12,26,32 It is actually an optically transparent multilayered
film, which is impermeable under dry conditions. But when exposed
to ambient moisture, they allow passage of molecules below a certain
size. The films consist of millions of randomly stacked flakes, leaving
nanosized capillaries between them, where ambient oxygen species may
take shelter and develop a conduction band edge. When a large number
of gas molecules were absorbed on the graphene surface, a transverse
intermolecular force between the gas molecules would result, which
is responsible for some changes to the microscopic corrugations of
the adjacent sheets of graphene layers. Since the synthesized graphene
is also n-type in nature, a significant decrease in the intersheet
distance occurred due to intersheet electron tunneling effect (Figure 8b), which resulted
in reduction of resistance, evident from the measured values of the
pure and composite samples of SnO2 (at 250 °C operating
temperature, base resistances of SnO2 NP, SnO2 bidding, and SnO2 bidding with rGO are 180, 528, and
66 MΩ, respectively). Such lowering of resistance also decreases
the activation energy of sorption (physisorption and/or chemisorption)
and hence the electrons of the conduction band are trapped creating
a pretty good depletion layer (layer depth is denoted by the Debye
length LD) leading to a decent and significant
sensing output. In addition, due to having two-dimensional planner
layers in it, graphene composite also increases the overall surface
area, which ultimately facilitates the sensing phenomenon. However,
after graphene incorporation, percent response was slightly affected
due to the presence of 2D carbon layer in between semiconductor (SnO2) and the analyte gas(es), although it improves shelf-life
of the sensor samples by developing a protective layer against corrosive
environmental pollutants and surface contaminants.33−35Figure 8c illustrates that negative
charges are built at the surface of SnO2 NP bidding due
to sufficient adsorption of ambient oxygen species, which restricts
further charge transfer across the surface. A band bending at equilibrium
will influence the material resistance. Here, conducting electrons
are represented by “e–”, and “+”
represents the donor sites. During interaction, reducing gases release
electrons into the surface of sensing materials and thus decrease
the sensor resistance. If the surface-adsorbed species (Sad) possesses a dipole moment, the electron affinity (χ)
gets changed.36 Electron affinity and band
bending influence the work function Φ of the sensing layer.37−40 Here, it should be mentioned that the changes of the chemical potential
have been considered to be negligible in the adsorption of the studied
oxygen species. The H2 gas sensing mechanism in the case
of an n-type semiconducting oxide like SnO2 involves two
main surface chemical reactions. In the first reaction, the atmospheric
oxygen gets ionosorbed on the metal oxide (SnO2) surface.
This negative surface charge leads to an upward band bending of the
conduction and valence bands resulting in an electron-depleted region.41 This band bending produces an effective surface
potential barrier. The height and depth of the band bending depend
on the overall surface charge present from the beginning, which is
determined by the amount and type of adsorbed oxygen, as can be seen
in Figure 8c. The ionosorbed
species act as electron acceptors due to their relative energetic
position with respect to Fermi level (EF) as well as electron affinity (Figure 8a). Reactions of such oxygen species with
analyte gases (reducing in nature) decreases the band tailing and
ultimately restores it in the opposite direction with improved conductivity
and less band bending. This change in resistance/conductance is measured
through a source meter/multimeter and quantified as a percentage response
or sensitivity with the conjecture that magnitude of the changes was
proportional to the concentrations of analyte gases, which is believed
to be the dominant sensing mechanism of surface-conductive gas sensors
like SnO2. However, once the reducing analyte (H2) is removed, the surface is reoxidized by surrounding oxygen species,
leading to the increase of resistance and return almost to its original
level (reflected by the graphs shown in Figures 4, 6, and 7), indicating its highly reversible and reproducible
nature. The reversible nature of these sensors also get fortified
by thermodynamically stable irreversible reaction of the analyte gases
(H2 in this case) to produce H2O molecules (shown
in Figure 8c), which
means environmentally favorable condition sustained with respect to
positive entropy (ΔS) and negative enthalpy
(ΔH).

Figure 8 (a) Schematic band diagram of the SnO2 bulk and two
vacancy donor levels (DL1 and DL2). (b) Schematic
diagram of structural band bending after chemisorptions of charged
species (ionosorption of oxygen), where EV, EF, and EC designate energy levels of the valence band, Fermi level, and conduction
band, respectively. (c) Schematic exhibiting hydrogen gas sensing
mechanism by SnO2 nanoparticle overgrowth (bids).

It can be said that metal oxide
semiconductors like SnO2 are normally high-band-gap oxides
that have insulating properties,
from which the semiconducting behavior originates due to deviation
of stoichiometry, as depicted in eq 7 using the Krögen–Vink notation42 7  where subscript “o” defines
the oxygen lattice position, “Vo” denotes oxygen (anion) vacancy, OoX represents a normal anion in an oxide
with zero effective charge, e– is
the charge of an electron, and “n”
is the number of electrons (integer). Oxygen vacancies are generally
singly (n = 1) or doubly (n = 2)
ionized, depending on the temperature. This Krögen–Vink
notation is a set of conventions that are used to describe electric
charge and lattice position for point defect species to indicate various
defect reactions. Therefore, bulk oxidation and reduction originates
from surface lattice variations when it reacts with ambient oxygen.
Here, the nonstoichiometry arises basically due to the oxygen vacancy,
since oxygen atoms take positions at the interstitial places.

When SnO2 in the form of sample “S1” with
SnO2−δ is coupled with highly nonstoichiometric
sample S10 with SnO2−Δ, it forms an n–n-type
homojunction.43 In the same way, SnO2−Δ also forms an n–n-type heterojunction
with rGO (which is deliberately synthesized as n-type)-coated SnO2 (sample “S12”). In such a junction, electron
transfer may occur from semiconductors with low work function to semiconductors
with high work function, until the Fermi levels (Ef) equalize. This creates an electron-depleted layer at
the interface, which bends the energy band to some extent. The same
logic is applicable for SnO2−Δ/rGO heterojunction,
where the band tailing takes place to a substantial amount. The enhanced
sensing performance of the composite of SnO2−δ/SnO2−Δ/rGO is attributed to the combined
effect of the formation of depleted layer at the surface/interface
of individual core–shell structure as well as the in-between
graphene and SnO2 grains. Figure 9 illuminates this idea in the form of a schematic
presentation of the possible band bending by forming an “n–n+–n++”-type homo/heterojunction due
to defect density or strain generated at the interface region. The
formation of two depleted layers, one at the homojunction of SnO2−δ/SnO2−Δ core–shell
interface and the other at the heterointerface of SnO2−Δ/rGO junction by adsorption of ambient oxygen species, promotes higher
oxygen adsorption on the sensor surface to a greater extent, which
might provide higher reaction sites.44,45 Incorporation
of rGO is responsible to reduce the base resistance (or resistance
in air) of the sensor prototype, which may be considered as one of
the major advantages of such combined heterojunctional composite material
under investigation. For this reason, SnO2/rGO composite
gas sensors can be measured at room temperature, which is rather impossible
for only SnO2 sensors.

Figure 9 Schematic presentation showing defect-mediated
homojunctional band
bending at SnO2/SnO2−δ interface
of core–shell nanoparticles of SnO2 and at the heteojunctional
interface of SnO2/rGO (n-type) before (a) and after (b)
gas sorption.

It can be seen from Figure 9 that before any
gaseous interaction at the homojunction of
SnO2−δ/SnO2−Δ core–shell
interface, a defect-mediated band bending takes place due to the presence
of electron cloud, which arises mainly due to the large difference
of electrons in the core (SnO2) and shell (SnO2−δ) materials (although the compositions of both the materials are
same). The same assumption is also true for SnO2−Δ/rGO heterointerface. The presence of higher numbers of electrons
shifts the Fermi level (Ef) nearer to
the conduction band. After gas sorption, H2 molecules interact
with the open surfaces of the nanocomposite and electronic exchanges
take place, which reduce the density of the electronic cloud and minimize
the barrier height at SnO2−δ/SnO2−Δ/rGO interfaces and channelize the electron flow toward the lower-energy
states. The flow of electrons also minimizes band tailing, and for
this reason, for n-type materials, resistance decreases after the
gas exposure.

Plasma Effects
Plasma is an energy-rich
hot ionized
gas, consisting of approximately equal numbers of positively charged
ions and negatively charged electrons. Plasma technology is versatile
and capable of providing a large variety of processes. Among the plasma-assisted
methods, three main approaches are especially promising for mild processing
of nanomaterials: (i) plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD),
where gaseous molecular precursors are introduced into the plasma,
whose role is either to activate the sole precursor or to avoid/enhance
peculiar growth effects on the substrate surface. The potential utilization
of metal catalyst nanoparticles can also be effective in this domain.46,47 (ii) Sputtering, involving plasma bombardment of an externally biased
target and the consequent ejection of neutral and charged species,
enabling a high versatility in the preparation of supported nanoparticles
or nanocomposites.48,49 (iii) Plasma treatment of solid
materials, based on the exploitation of bombardment leading to etching
effects to modify the system surface, producing the tailor-made desired
nanostructures.50,51 However, there are some unresolved
aspects in these mechanisms as the underlying elementary processes
are yet to be known.

Here, among the three processes, the PECVD
technique has been adopted for our sample preparations because PECVD
is a state-of-the-art thin-film deposition technique that is widely
known for semiconductor processing. In PECVD, the process material
is delivered in the form of a special precursor gas that is broken
down into a glow discharge (plasma), which transforms the gas mixture
into reactive radicals/ions and other highly excited species interacting
with the substrate. Depending on the nature of these interactions,
either etching or deposition process occurs at the substrate. The
desirable properties of this PECVD films are good adhesion, low pinhole
density, good step coverage, and uniformity.51 Moreover, the synthesized layer thickness can also be controlled
in this technique. In general, using the PECVD method, the deposition,
ablation, and surface modification processes are always concurrent
and the predominance of one over the others has been attained in this
work by a judicious choice of the experimental parameters, including
pressure, power density, flow rates, reflected power, plasma composition,
and their alterations. In this contribution, each parameter has been
changed on an empirical basis to get the optimized conformal layer
thickness with high-end purity.

Crystallite Size Effects
Sensitivity of thick- or thin-film
gas sensor depends primarily on exposed surface area and hence on
the particle size, shape, and their distribution and porosity of the
film. All of these properties are directly related to the method of
preparation of the samples. Thus, preparation techniques that can
produce controlled size and shaped particles (like physically synthesized
bottom-up approach as in the PECVD deposition method or top-down approach
as in RI etching techniques) are of paramount importance in gas sensor
material development, since wet chemical procedure has least control
overgrowth dynamics. The gas response behavior of a semiconductor
ceramic material mainly depends on grain boundary contacts, neck contacts,
as well as inter- and intragrain contacts.52 In most of the cases, they possess a wide range of mean crystallite
size (D). Now if it is assumed that sensor elements
are one-dimensional chain of SnO2 crystallites that are
connected by substantial number of necks and less number of grain
boundary contacts, then three possible situations may arise: (i) When D ≫ 2ts (where “t” is the thickness of the space charge layer or
electron-depleted region), the electron conduction takes place in
channels through necks. The grain boundary contacts share most of
the electrical resistance of the chain and therefore the gas response
is almost independent of D. (ii) In the cases where D becomes closer to 2ts, the
necks become the most resistive part in the chain and control the
gas response by neck control mechanism. (iii) When D < 2ts, each constituent of grain
is depleted for conduction of electrons as a whole. Under this circumstance,
grains share the dominant part of the resistance of the chain and
control the gas response by grain control mechanism. The response
in this region strongly depends on D, and therefore,
the increase of gas response takes place with decrease in D.52 When the grain or particle
size gets reduced to nanometric dimensions, a dramatic improvement
in the gas sensing properties takes place since a large fraction of
the atoms are present at the surface or at the interface regions with
structure and properties different from those of the bulk. The prominent
effect of “nano” size, however, is associated with the
thickness of the electron-depleted surface layer, which is defined
as the Debye length “LD”.
The Debye length LD for a semiconducting
material could be calculated as2 8  where “kB” is the Boltzmann
constant; “ε” is the
dielectric constant = εo × εr, where “εr” is the relative permittivity
= ε/εo; “εo”
is the permittivity of free space; “T”
is the operating temperature in Kelvin scale; “e” is the electron charge (1.6 × 10–19 C); and “nd” is the carrier
concentration.53,54 It has been estimated by the
researchers that LD for SnO2 is 3 nm with ε = 13.5, εo = 8.85 × 10–12 F/m, and nd = 3.6 ×
1024 m–3.3,8,25,53 Therefore, when the
SnO2 particle size is reduced to a size that is comparable
to or lower than 2LD, i.e., 6 nm, the
whole crystallite will be fully depleted of electrons, which in turn
causes the gas response of the element to change dramatically with D. Since LD for S10 sample is
found to be 2.76 nm (overgrowth diameter), which is much lower than
the critical size at which SnO2 could exhibit the “size-related
nanoeffect”, its gas sensing response pitched to its highest
level.

Conclusions
Three-dimensional, mesoporous,
core–shell SnO2 nanobids have been synthesized by
wet chemical as well as physical
procedures, including plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition and
reactive ion etching method to fabricate solid-state gas sensors.
Experimental parameters have been altered judiciously to achieve tailor-made
nanostructures, resulting in spectacular burflower-like structures
originating due to screwlike overgrowth of SnO2. Such overgrowth
or bidding can readily accommodate H2 molecules within
its preferential structure with ready to adsorb and/or desorb properties
and thus responsible for hydrogen selectivity for a wide range of
gas concentrations (from 10 ppm to 1%) with very little cross-sensitivity
against other similar types of gases. The synthesized core–shell
assembly of the same material (SnO2) has been functionalized
by introducing reduced graphene oxide (rGO) on its surface using modified
thin-layer chromatography (capillary action) technique, aiming to
be operative at a lower range of temperature, including room temperature.
Hence, the synthesized SnO2 is a novel structure useful
for selective H2 detection at room temperature for a wide
range of gas concentrations and may be beneficial for industries like
petroleum and chemical, coolant, welding, refining, metallurgical,
glass, electronics, and so on. Besides using as reactant and reductant,
H2 is also used as a green fuel, and development of such
hydrogen-selective sensors operable at room temperature not only reduces
the risk of its use, but also makes it user-friendly for common people
and enhances socioeconomic advantages in its favor.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01372.Hot probe test
to establish the type of graphene (rGO),
X-ray diffraction studies, as well as FTIR, Raman, and XPS spectral
analyses to establish the material properties (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01372_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
∥ A.N. and P.N. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
S.M. acknowledges
the financial support received from DST
WOS-A (KIRAN) (Sanction Order No.: SR/WOS-A/CS-1054/2015), and P.N.
acknowledges the financial support from Science and Engineering Research
Board (SERB), Govt. of India for National Post Doctoral Fellowship
(NPDF) (Sanction Order No.: PDF/2017/002340/ES).
==== Refs
References
Ray I. ; Chakraborty S. ; Chowdhury A. ; Majumdar S. ; Prakash A. ; Pyare R. ; Sen A. 
Room temperature synthesis of γ-Fe2O3 by sonochemical route and its response towards
butane . Sens. Actuators, B 
2008 , 130 , 882 –888 . 10.1016/j.snb.2007.10.057 .
Nag P. ; Majumdar S. ; Bumajdad A. ; Devi P. S. 
Enhanced gas sensing
performance of tin dioxide-based nanoparticles for a wide range of
concentrations of hydrogen gas . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 18512 –18521 . 10.1039/c3ra48060g .
Eranna G. ; Joshi B. C. ; Runthala D. P. ; Gupta R. P. 
Oxide Materials
for Development of Integrated Gas Sensors—A Comprehensive Review . Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci. 
2004 , 29 , 111 –188 . 10.1080/10408430490888977 .
Taguchi N.  JP45-38200 , 1962 .
Majumdar S. ; Devi P. S. 
Synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles
using ultrasonication . AIP Conf. Proc. 
2010 , 1276 , 1 –7 . 10.1063/1.3504298 .
Prakash A. ; Majumdar S. ; Devi P. S. ; Sen A. 
Polycarbonate membrane
assisted growth of pyramidal SnO2 particles . J. Membr. Sci. 
2009 , 326 , 388 –391 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2008.10.012 .
Majumdar S. 
The effects
of crystallite size, surface area and morphology on the sensing properties
of nanocrystalline SnO2 based system . Ceram. Int. 
2015 , 41 , 14350 –14358 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2015.07.068 .
Wang B. ; Zhu L. F. ; Yang Y. H. ; Xu N. S. ; Yang G. W. 
Fabrication
of a SnO2 nanowire gas sensor and sensor performance for
hydrogen . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008 , 112 , 6643 –6647 . 10.1021/jp8003147 .
Brunet E. ; Maier T. ; Mutinati G. C. ; Steinhauer S. ; Köck A. ; Gspan C. ; Grogger W. 
Comparison of the gas
sensing performance of SnO2 thin film and SnO2 nanowire sensors . Sens. Actuators, B 
2012 , 165 , 110 –118 . 10.1016/j.snb.2012.02.025 .
Banerjee S. ; Nag P. ; Majumdar S. ; Devi P. S. 
High butane sensitivity and selectivity
exhibited by combustion synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles . Mater. Res. Bull. 
2015 , 65 , 216 –223 . 10.1016/j.materresbull.2015.01.025 .
Chakraborty S. ; Mandal I. ; Ray I. ; Majumdar S. ; Sen A. ; Maiti H. S. 
Improvement of recovery
time of nanostructured tin
dioxide-based thick film gas sensors through surface modification . Sens. Actuators, B 
2007 , 127 , 554 –558 . 10.1016/j.snb.2007.05.005 .
Majumdar S. ; Nandi A. ; Datta S. K. ; Saha H.   In Switching of Selectivity from Sulfur Dioxide
to Butane: The Role of V2O5 Concentration in
Nanostructured SnO2 Sensors , IEEE First International
Conference on Control, Measurement and Instrumentation (CMI-16); IEEE , 2016 ; pp 162 –166 .
Nandi A. ; Majumdar S. ; Datta S. K. ; Saha H. ; Hossain S. M. 
Optical
and electrical effects of thin reduced graphene oxide layers on textured
wafer-based c-Si solar cells for enhanced performance . J. Mater. Chem. C 
2017 , 5 , 1920 –1934 . 10.1039/C6TC04030F .
Tetsuka H. ; Asahi R. ; Nagoya A. ; Okamoto K. ; Tajima I. ; Ohta R. ; Okamoto A. 
Optically
Tunable Amino-Functionalized
Graphene Quantum Dots . Adv. Mater. 
2012 , 24 , 5333 –5338 . 10.1002/adma.201201930 .22833282 
Nandi A. ; Nag P. ; Saha H. ; Majumdar S. 
Precursor
Dependent Morphologies
of Microwave Assisted ZnO Nanostructures and their VOC Detection Properties . Mater. Today: Proc. 
2018 , 5 , 9831 –9838 . 10.1016/j.matpr.2017.10.174 .
Ghosh H. ; Mitra S. ; Dhar S. ; Nandi A. ; Majumdar S. ; Saha H. ; Datta S. K. ; Banerjee C. 
Light-harvesting properties
of embedded tin oxide nanoparticles for partial rear contact silicon
solar cells . Plasmonics 
2017 , 12 , 1761 –1772 . 10.1007/s11468-016-0443-7 .
Chaudhuri R. G. ; Paria S. 
Core/shell nanoparticles: classes,
properties, synthesis mechanisms,
characterization, and applications . Chem. Rev. 
2012 , 112 , 2373 –2433 . 10.1021/cr100449n .22204603 
Gawande M. B. ; Goswami A. ; Asefa T. ; Guo H. ; Biradar A. V. ; Peng D. L. ; Zboril R. ; Varma R. S. 
Core–shell
nanoparticles: synthesis and applications in catalysis and electrocatalysis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 7540 –7590 . 10.1039/C5CS00343A .26288197 
Majhi S. M. ; Naik G. K. ; Lee H. J. ; Song H. G. ; Lee C. R. ; Lee I. H. ; Yu Y. T. 
Au@NiO
core-shell nanoparticles as
a p-type gas sensor: Novel synthesis, characterization, and their
gas sensing properties with sensing mechanism . Sens. Actuators, B 
2018 , 268 , 223 –231 . 10.1016/j.snb.2018.04.119 .
Liu S. ; Wang Z. ; Zhang Y. ; Zhang C. ; Zhang T. 
High performance
room temperature NO2 sensors based on reduced graphene
oxide-multiwalled carbon nanotubes-tin oxide nanoparticles hybrids . Sens. Actuators, B 
2015 , 211 , 318 –324 . 10.1016/j.snb.2015.01.127 .
Wang Z. ; Zhang Y. ; Liu S. ; Zhang T. 
Preparation of Ag nanoparticles-SnO2 nanoparticles-reduced
graphene oxide hybrids and their application
for detection of NO2 at room temperature . Sens. Actuators, B 
2016 , 222 , 893 –903 . 10.1016/j.snb.2015.09.027 .
Liu S. ; Wang Z. ; Zhang Y. ; Li J. ; Zhang T. 
Sulfonated
graphene anchored with tin oxide nanoparticles for detection of nitrogen
dioxide at room temperature with enhanced sensing performances . Sens. Actuators, B 
2016 , 228 , 134 –143 . 10.1016/j.snb.2016.01.023 .
Wang Z. ; Han T. ; Fei T. ; Liu S. ; Zhang T. 
Investigation of Microstructure
Effect on NO2 Sensors Based on SnO2 Nanoparticles/Reduced
Graphene Oxide Hybrids . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 41773 –41783 . 10.1021/acsami.8b15284 .30419750 
Panda D. ; Nandi A. ; Datta S. K. ; Saha H. ; Majumdar S. 
Selective
detection of carbon monoxide (CO) gas by reduced graphene oxide (rGO)
at room temperature . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 47337 –47348 . 10.1039/C6RA06058G .
Majumdar S. 
Effect of
palladium on gas sensing properties of Sn(Sb2O3)O2 nanoparticles synthesized by sonochemical processing
at room temperature . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2016 , 376 , 290 –297 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.02.246 .
Roy D. ; Nandi A. ; Roy A. B. ; Majumdar S. ; Mandal S. ; Kundu A. ; Hossain S. M. 
Piezoelectricity
in amine functionalized
reduced graphene oxide . Mater. Today: Proc. 
2018 , 5 , 9876 –9880 . 10.1016/j.matpr.2017.10.181 .
Majumdar S. ; Chakraborty S. ; Devi P. S. ; Sen A. 
Room temperature synthesis
of nanocrystalline SnO through sonochemical route . Mater. Lett. 
2008 , 62 , 1249 –1251 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2007.08.022 .
Korotcenkov G. 
Metal oxides
for solid-state gas sensors: what determines our choice? . Mater. Sci. Eng., B 
2007 , 139 , 1 –23 . 10.1016/j.mseb.2007.01.044 .
Batzill M. ; Diebold U. 
The surface and materials
science of tin oxide . Prog. Surf. Sci. 
2005 , 79 , 47 –154 . 10.1016/j.progsurf.2005.09.002 .
Brynzari V. ; Korotchenkov G. ; Dmitriev S. 
Simulation of thin film gas sensors
kinetics . Sens. Actuators, B 
1999 , 61 , 143 –153 . 10.1016/S0925-4005(99)00285-3 .
Mertens R.  The Graphene Handbook ; Lulu.com, Murray Media : Florida , 2018 .
Nandi A. ; Dhar S. ; Majumder S. ; Banerjee C. ; Hossain S. M. ; Saha H.   In Effect of Layer Variation of Graphene
on ITO Thin Film and Its Transmittance and Sheet Resistance Study , Research Scholars Colloquium 2016, at IIEST, Shibpur; 2016 ; pp 221 –222 .
Su Y. ; Kravets V. G. ; Wong S. L. ; Waters J. ; Geim A. K. ; Nair R. R. 
Impermeable barrier films and protective coatings based
on reduced graphene oxide . Nat. Commun. 
2014 , 5 , 484310.1038/ncomms5843 .25208890 
Majumdar S. ; Nandi A. ; Saha H. 
Synergistic effects of dual-metal
catalysts for selective butane detection by SnO2/graphene
nanocomposite sensor . IEEE Sens. J. 
2018 , 18 , 6517 –6526 . 10.1109/JSEN.2018.2849863 .
Majumdar S. ; Mandal P. K. ; Das S. K. ; Majumdar R. 
Metal impregnated silica-carbon
materials from rice husk: a versatile sorbent for toxic organics and
inorganics in water and air . Clean: Soil, Air,
Water 
2013 , 41 , 291 –297 . 10.1002/clen.201100430 .
Korotcenkov G. 
The role of
morphology and crystallographic structure of metal oxides in response
of conductometric-type gas sensors . Mater. Sci.
Eng., R 
2008 , 61 , 1 –39 . 10.1016/j.mser.2008.02.001 .
Barsan N. ; Koziej D. ; Weimar U. 
Metal oxide-based
gas sensor research:
how to? . Sens. Actuators, B 
2007 , 121 , 18 –35 . 10.1016/j.snb.2006.09.047 .
Yamazoe N. ; Sakai G. ; Shimanoe K. 
Oxide semiconductor
gas sensors . Catal. Surv. Asia 
2003 , 7 , 63 –75 . 10.1023/A:1023436725457 .
Nandi A. ; Majumder R. ; Nag P. ; Datta S. K. ; Saha H. ; Majumdar S. 
Precursor dependent tailoring of morphology and bandgap
of zinc oxide nanostructures . J. Mater. Sci.:
Mater. Electron. 
2017 , 28 , 10885 –10892 . 10.1007/s10854-017-6867-9 .
Majumdar S. ; Nag P. ; Devi P. S. 
Enhanced
performance of CNT/SnO2 thick film
gas sensors towards hydrogen . Mater. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 147 , 79 –85 . 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2014.04.009 .
Maier J. 
Ionic conduction
in space charge regions . Prog. Solid State Chem. 
1995 , 23 , 171 –263 . 10.1016/0079-6786(95)00004-E .
Nag P. ; Das P. P. ; Roy A. ; Devi P. S. 
Iron antimonate
quantum dots exhibiting tunable visible light emission . New J. Chem. 
2017 , 41 , 1436 –1446 . 10.1039/C6NJ02767A .
Nandi A. ; Biswas S. ; Chakrabarty S. ; Majumdar S. ; Saha H. ; Saini M. ; Hossain S. M. 
Development
of graphene capped silicon–silicon
oxide core–shell nano-structure: charge trapping characteristics
at the interfaces . Appl. Mater. Today 
2018 , 13 , 370 –380 . 10.1016/j.apmt.2018.10.006 .
Kohl P. A. ; Frank S. N. ; Bard A. J. 
Semiconductor
electrodes: XI behavior
of n- and p-type single crystal semiconductors covered with thin n-TiO2 films . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1977 , 124 , 225 –229 . 10.1149/1.2133270 .
Dingle R. ; Störmer H. L. ; Gossard A. C. ; Wiegmann W. 
Electron mobilities
in modulation-doped semiconductor heterojunction superlattices . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1978 , 33 , 665 –667 . 10.1063/1.90457 .
Goldston R. J. ; Rutherford P. H.  Introduction to Plasma
Physics ; IOP Publishing Ltd., Techno House : Redcliffe Way, Bristol, U.K. , 1995 .
Ostrikov K. ; Levchenko I. ; Cvelbar U. ; Sunkara M. ; Mozetic M. 
From nucleation
to nanowires: a single-step process in reactive plasmas . Nanoscale 
2010 , 2 , 2012 –2027 . 10.1039/c0nr00366b .20721365 
Armelao L. ; Barreca D. ; Bottaro G. ; Gasparotto A. ; Maccato C. ; Tondello E. ; Lebedev O. I. ; Turner S. ; Tendeloo G. V. ; Sada C. ; Štangar U. L. 
Rational
design of Ag/TiO2 nanosystems by a combined RF-sputtering/sol-gel
approach . Chem. Phys. Chem. 
2009 , 10 , 3249 –3259 . 10.1002/cphc.200900571 .19882618 
Coburn J. W. ; Kay E. 
Plasma diagnostics of an RF-sputtering glow discharge . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1971 , 18 , 435 –438 . 10.1063/1.1653483 .
Hudis M.  Plasma Treatment of Solid
Materials, in Techniques and Applications of Plasma Chemistry ; John Wiley & Sons : New York , 1974 .
Zheng J. ; Yang R. ; Xie L. ; Qu J. ; Liu Y. ; Li X. 
Plasma-assisted approaches in inorganic nanostructure fabrication . Adv. Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 1451 –1473 . 10.1002/adma.200903147 .20349435 
Yamazoe N. 
New approaches
for improving semiconductor gas sensors . Sens.
Actuators, B 
1991 , 5 , 7 –19 . 10.1016/0925-4005(91)80213-4 .
Nandi A. ; Mandal S. ; Ghosh S. ; Dhar S. ; Majumdar S. ; Saha H. ; Hossain S. M. 
Application
of hybrid rGO-ITO bilayer
TCO on a-Si solar cell for performance enhancement . IEEE J. Photovoltaics 
2019 , 9 , 12 –17 . 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2873707 .
Nandi A. ; Dhar S. ; Majumdar S. ; Saha H. ; Hossain S. M. 
Performance
Enhancement of Solar Cell by Incorporating Bilayer RGO-ITO Smart Conducting
Antireflection Coating . Global Challenges 
2019 , 180010910.1002/gch2.201800109 .31565390

