
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3149768510.1021/acsomega.9b00892ArticleHydrophobic Silica with Potential for Water-Injection
Augmentation of a Low-Permeability Reservoir: Drag Reduction and Self-Cleaning
Ability in Relation to Interfacial Interactions Liu Peisong †§Niu Liyong †‡Tao Xiaohe †Li Xiaohong *†‡§Zhang Zhijun *†‡§†Engineering
Research Center for Nanomaterials and ‡National & Local Joint Engineering
Research Center for Applied Technology of Hybrid Nanomaterials, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, P. R. China§ Engineering
Research Center for Nanomaterials Company Limited, Henan University, Jiyuan 459000, P. R. China* E-mail: 10330015@vip.henu.edu.cn (X.L.).* E-mail: zhangzhijun@henu.edu.cn (Z.Z.).14 08 2019 27 08 2019 4 9 13681 13686 04 04 2019 15 05 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

An
aqueous nanofluid containing superhydrophobic silica nanoparticles
with a high surface activity and an average size of 7 nm was used
to enhance the water injection of a low-permeability well. The mechanism
for the aqueous nanofluid to enhance water injection was discussed.
Findings indicate that the silica aqueous nanofluid can greatly increase
the effective water permeability even after injecting water for 2100
pore volumes. This is because the hydrophobic silica nanoparticles
can be well adsorbed onto the surface of the porous channels to cause
hydrophilic to hydrophobic transformation. Both the hydrophobic capillary
force and adhesion work contribute to increasing water injection;
and in particular, there is a critical point in the pressure-permeability
curves for the rock cores with different wettabilities. Only above
the critical point, the hydrophobic rock core exhibits a higher effective
water permeability than that of the hydrophilic one, which is imperative
for drag reduction. Moreover, the hydrophobic rock core surface has
a remarkable self-cleaning ability and can reduce the expansion ratio
of clay and inhibit the formation of scale in association with the
increase of effective porosity via decreasing the hydration film amount.
This approach, highlighting the important role of wettability alteration
in increasing water injection, could potentially promote the application
of a silica aqueous nanofluid in enhanced oil recovery.

document-id-old-9ao9b00892document-id-new-14ao-2019-00892dccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Low permeability reservoirs
are widely distributed among the world,
and Changqing Oilfield (Xi’an, China) and Yanchang Oilfield
(Yan’an, China) are the representative ones in China. Usually,
the low permeability reservoirs are characterized by low waterflood
injectivity, poor sweep, and low productivity, because of their internal
microporous or even nanoporous structure.1 The average oil recovery from low permeability reservoirs after
the primary production period (produced by natural reservoir energy)
is only about 13%, which means that an enormous amount of petroleum
is left underground thereafter. In recent years, most of the low permeability
oil fields in the world have entered the stage of water flooding exploitation,
with which crude oil cannot be displaced from the formation unless
enough water is injected into the macro and nanopores.2 However, the macro and nanopores are often easily blocked
owing to the gradual formation of scale and the hydration layer on
the surface of the porous rock core walls, which makes it infeasible
for water to be injected into the reservoir after a long period of
operation.

Usually, waterflooding injectivity is greatly affected
by the injection
pressure, the wettability of the pore surface, and the size of the
pore.3 It often requires the injection
of a large volume of water into the reservoirs, which could cause
a very high injection pressure of the water injection well. This is
why it still remains a challenge to develop more cost-effective high-pressure
equipment and technology for the extraction of low permeability reservoirs.4 As a traditional pathway for enhancing water
injection of low permeability reservoirs, acidizing can help to open
the pores, but it has a short validity and can cause irreversible
damage to the stratum.

Wettability may mediate water resistance
to increase injection
without acting alone to add pressure, and it could control the flood
and spatial distribution of fluids in the porous medium, thereby greatly
affecting water and oil permeability.5,6 When the rock
is hydrophilic, there is a tendency for water to occupy the small
pores and the majority of the rock surface. Pure water does not penetrate
spontaneously into a hydrophobic porous capillary unless being given
an external force.7 In recent years, surfactants
and nanoparticles have been adopted to alter the wettability of the
pore surface so as to increase water injection and enhance oil recovery.8 To date, it has been found that surfactants with
ultralow interfacial tension (IFT) (0.001 mN/m) can reduce the capillary
pressure, thereby potentially increasing the amount of water injected
into reservoirs.9 For example, Ju et al.10 used one kind of polysilicon with a size of
10–500 nm to change the wettability of porous media and enhance
water injection of an oil field. Zhang et al.11 and Yan et al.12 separately investigated
the water injection behavior of hydrophobic silica nanoparticle; and
they suggested that the enhanced water injection could be related
to the drag reduction of the superhydrophobic surface via a slip effect.
Mousavi et al.,13 Sepehrinia and Mohammadi,14 and Feng et al.15 prepared hydrophobic/oleophobic fluorinated silica nanoparticles
for removing liquid banking near the wellbore region. They found that
the nanosilica particulates can be diffused into the layers of low-permeability
rocks to form low drag surfaces with macro-nanochannels, therein effectively
removing the liquid film of the pore surface and reducing the flood
resistance.

We previously reported that a series of superhydrophobic
silica
nanoparticles can alter the hydrophilic wellbore to a hydrophobic
one and enhance water injection. Nevertheless, currently available
superhydrophobic silica nanoparticles are actually cost ineffective
and environmentally unacceptable in oil recovery engineering, because
they rely on organic solvents such as diesel and benzene for dispersion
and transfer and exist in a state of serious aggregation with a size
from 40 to 1000 nm (the aggregates in organic solvents can form a
thick adsorption layer to block the microscopic or nanoscale pore
throats of the reservoir rock). Recently, we found that the aqueous
silica dispersion with a size of about 7 nm as well as good dispersibility
in water may have promising potential for increasing water injection
of low permeability reservoirs.16 The mechanism
for the silica aqueous nanofluid to increase water injection, however,
still remains unknown at this stage, especially with a view to the
different physical and chemical properties of the hydrophobic surface
and the hydrophilic one.

In the present research, therefore,
we focus on the effect of the
silica nanofluid on the surface wettability, water permeability, and
water injection of low permeability reservoirs. Based on the validity
evaluation by the clay expansion test and scale formation examination
as well as the core flooding test and porosity measurement of the
porous channels, this article deals with the long-term enhanced water-injection
mechanism of the silica nanofluid in relation to the interfacial reactions
between the injected water and the porous channel surface, including
capillary pressure, adhesion work, and injection pressure.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Interface Behavior of the
Silica Nanofluid
The silica aqueous nanofluid containing
superhydrophobic silica
nanoparticle and sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS) is used as
an agent to reduce the injection pressure so as to enhance the water
injection efficiency in low permeability reservoirs. The silica aqueous
nanofluid with a size distribution from 4 to 12 nm has extremely stability,
and there is no phase separation even after being placed in the natural
environment for more than 3 months.16 It
can be reckoned as a microemulsion dispersion system, because the
superhydrophobic nanoparticle can be thought of as the dispersed oil
droplets. The IFT between the silica aqueous nanofluid and kerosene
is about 0.2 mN/m (see Figure 1a); and such a low IFT could be meaningful for promoting the
injection of the silica aqueous nanofluid into the reservoirs. Because
the SDBS-stabilized emulsions can be easily destroyed by salt water,
the superhydrophobic silica nanoparticle can be induced to be separated
from the aqueous dispersion by NH4Cl. The as-released superhydrophobic
nanosilica can transfer from the water phase into the oil phase, as
illustrated in Figure 1b. This means that the as-prepared superhydrophobic silica nanofluid
is simultaneously hydrophobic and lipophilic.

Figure 1 IFT of the silica nanofluid
(a) and phase transfer behavior of
hydrophobic silica nanoparticles separated from the aqueous dispersion
(b).

The rock in the water-injection
well is commonly water-wet because
of the long-term water injection. Water contact angle (WCA) measurements
were conducted to evaluate the wettability of the rock core before
and after the introduction of the silica aqueous nanofluid. As shown
in Figure 2a, the water
droplet can rapidly permeate into the untreated rock core, and the
WCA is only about 32°. However, the WCA rises to 134° after
the core is treated with the silica aqueous nanofluid for 36 h (Figure 2b). In the absence
of the silica aqueous nanofluid, a large amount of clay sheets with
clear edges and corners is present on the rock core surface (Figure 2c). After treatment
with acid liquor, a large amount of hydroxyl is exposed on the rock
core surface; and the exposed hydroxyl can react with the hydrophobic
silica nanoparticle released from the silica aqueous nanofluid to
form a continuous and dense adsorption layer with a low surface energy
as well as macro and nanostructure on the porous channel surface (see Figure 2d,e). The silica
layer adsorbed on the rock core surface is very thin and would not
obviously occupy the micro-nanochannels; and it could alter the hydrophilic
rock core surface to a hydrophobic one, thereby enhancing water injection.

Figure 2 Images
of the water droplet on the rock core before (a) and after
(b) the introduction of the silica aqueous nanofluid as well as FE-SEM
images of the rock core surface before (c) and after (d,e) the introduction
of the silica aqueous nanofluid.

2.2 Water Injection Behavior
Injection
pressure and effective water permeability are two important parameters
to describe the water injection capacity of a rock core. The fluid
permeability (K) is estimated based on the Darcy–Weisbach
formula: K = (Q × L × μ)/(A × ΔP), where Q is the permeation flow rate, L and A are the length and sectional area
of the core, μ is the viscosity of the injected liquid, and
ΔP is the injection pressure. Figure 3a shows the effect of the silica
aqueous nanofluid on the injection capacity (the injection pressure
and effective water permeability) of no. 1 rock core under a constant
injection rate of 5 mL/min. The injection pressure and original-effective
water permeability of an acidified rock core are about 1.5 MPa and
1.8 mD, respectively. After the introduction of the silica aqueous
nanofluid with a low IFT, the injection pressure decreases to 1.1
MPa and the effective permeability declines to 2.4 mD. After adsorbing
for 36 h, the injection pressure is further reduced to 0.69 MPa and
the effective permeability of the rock core is increased to 4.0 mD,
which indicates that the silica aqueous nanofluid contributes to significantly
reducing the resistance of the core upon water injection.

Figure 3 Injection pressure
and water permeability of no. 1 rock core under
different injection rates before and after treatment with the silica
aqueous nanofluid (a) as well as injection validity of no. 2 rock
core after the injection of SDBS and silica aqueous nanofluid (b).

After SDBS is injected into no.
2 rock core with a water permeability
of 4 mD, the water permeability rises to 5 mD because of the enhanced
dispersion of the silica aqueous nanofluid in water therewith. However,
the water permeability declines from 5 to 4 mD after the water injection
of 1400 PV (Figure 3b). This implies that SDBS is adsorbed on the surface of the rock
core channel via a weak force. Besides, the introduction of the silica
aqueous nanofluid increases the water permeability of no. 2 rock core
from 4 to 8.3 mD (Figure 3b), which demonstrates that the silica aqueous nanofluid is
more efficient in enhancing water injection than the SDBS, possibly
because of the adsorption of superhydrophobic silica nanoparticles
on the pore surface. Moreover, the silica aqueous nanofluid is able
to retain a stable water permeability of about 8.3 mD during a significantly
prolonged injection of more than 2200 PV. This could be because the
highly active silica nanoparticles can be combined promptly with the
pore surface.

2.3 Drag Reduction Mechanism
for Hydrophobic Pores
When the rock is water-wet, there is
a tendency for water to occupy
the small pores and to contact the majority of the rock surface. Pure
water does not penetrate spontaneously into a hydrophobic porous capillary,
because if the contact angle is greater than π/2, it can only
be forced to penetrate through.17,18 The hydrophobic silica
nanoparticles on the pore surface can prevent water from flowing into
the pores, thereby effectively reducing the resistance of the water
flow. However, the water permeability of the pore surface is greatly
increased in association with the change of wettability upon the adsorption
of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles thereon. Figure 4a shows the effect of the silica aqueous
nanofluid on the injection pressure and water permeability of no.
3 rock core with different wettability (the silica aqueous nanofluid
is injected for different cycles). The WCAs of no. 3 rock core treated
once and twice are about 134° and 142°, respectively, which
indicates that an increasing injection cycle leads to an increase
in the hydrophobicity of the rock core. In the meantime, the same
rock core with different wettability exhibits a much different phase
permeability under different injection pressures. Namely, the hydrophilic
rock core exhibits a larger effective water permeability than that
of the hydrophobic one under a low injection pressure; and the hydrophobic
rock core exhibits a larger effective water permeability than that
of the hydrophilic one under a high injection pressure. More importantly,
three critical points are observed in the three phase permeability
curves under an injection pressure of 0.223, 0.181, and 0.16 MPa,
respectively, which could help to provide some clues to explaining
the mechanism responsible for water-injection augmentation of the
silica aqueous nanofluid and to controlling the wettability of the
reservoir for enhanced oil recovery.

Figure 4 Variation in water permeability of no.
3 rock core possessing different
wettability with injection pressure (a) and schematic diagram showing
the interfacial interactions between the silica aqueous nanofluid
and hydrophilic or hydrophobic rock core (b).

As shown in Figure 4b, three kinds of forces have an impact on the injected water:
the
pressure of the to be injected water (Piw), the adhesion force between water and the porous channel surface
(Wad), and the capillary fore (Pc). Piw is a power
for water flooding. The capillary force, according to the Laplace
theory,19 is described as Pc = −(2σ × cos θ)/rc (σ is the surface tension, θ is the contact
angle of the liquid on the rock core surface, and rc is the radius of curvature). Therefore, the injected
water would tend to occupy the small pores and the majority of the
rock surface when the rock is hydrophilic, because in this case Pc is larger than zero. Moreover, based on the
Young Dupréʼs equation,20Wad can be calculated as Wad = γlg(1 + cos θlv), where
γlg and θlv refer to the surface
tension of the liquid/air interface and relevant contact angle of
the liquid in air, respectively. Because the hydrophilic rock core
exhibits a larger Wad than the hydrophobic
one, Pc and Piw should be the dominant powers for water flooding of the hydrophobic
rock core under a low injection pressure (in this case, Wad would act as the secondary power for water flooding).
Under a high Piw, however, the stranded
layer would be thickened, because of the increase in the flowing rate
of the injected water; and the effective seepage porosity would tend
to decrease while the water permeability remains nearly unchanged
owing to adequate permeation of the injected water in most pores.

Under a low injection pressure, the hydrophobic rock core surface
exhibits a considerably lower water permeability than the hydrophilic
one, because in this case Pc and Wad would play key roles to prevent water flooding.
However, under a high injection pressure, the Wad between water and the hydrophobic channel surface is much
smaller than that of the hydrophilic surface, which, in association
with the decrease of the water retention layer, plays a key role in
changing the water permeability. As a result, the water permeability
of the pore surface under a large injection pressure is greatly increased
in association with the change of wettability upon the adsorption
of hydrophobic silica nanoparticles. For achieving desired water-injection
augmentation, the equilibrium point, that is, the critical point,
among Piw, Pc, and Wad would be of special significance.

2.4 Self-Cleaning Performance
The reduction
of Wad is a key factor for increasing
water injection in association with decreasing injection pressure,
but not the only one. Therefore, the self-cleaning performance of
the silica aqueous nanofluid is investigated in this study. The pore
size directly affects water flow efficiency; and the wettability of
the untreated porous channel surfaces are hydrophilic and liable to
wetting by water. In other words, a small effective porosity refers
to a thick hydrated layer; and the effective porosity corresponds
to the effective channels for water flooding. To further study the
water injection behavior, we measured the effective porosity and the
amount of the hydration layer (i.e., the amount of the adsorbed silica
nanoparticle) of the sand-filled tube. As shown in Figure 5a, when the sand-filled tube
undergoes hydrophilic to hydrophobic transformation upon the introduction
of the silica aqueous nanofluid, the thickness of the hydration layer
tends to decrease obviously; and its effective porosity tends to significantly
increase from 18.3 to 23.1%. As a result, the pore radius is effectively
expanded to the decrease water injection pressure and increase effective
permeability.

Figure 5 Porosity and amount of hydration layer of the sand-filled
tube
before and after treatment with the silica aqueous nanofluid (a) as
well as optical microimages of the dried clay lump placed into the
SDBS solution and silica aqueous nanofluid (b).

The swelling of clay is a key factor responsible for permeability
decrease of the low permeability reservoir. Figure 5b shows the swelling rate of the clay in
the water and silica aqueous nanofluid. After 12 days of immersion
in SDBS solution, the clay has a swelling volume of 20 mL. However,
the swelling volume is only about 15 mL in the silica aqueous nanofluid.
This means that the silica aqueous nanofluid contributes to significantly
improving the swelling resistance of the clay. At the same time, the
clay particles are more likely to accumulate in silica aqueous nanofluids,
thereby greatly inhibiting particle migration and reducing the possibility
for the particles to block microporous channels.

The commonly
used injection water in oil fields is brine, and it
tends to form a lot of scale on the rock core channel surfaces. Simulated
rock core displacement tests were conducted to investigate the effect
of the silica aqueous nanofluid on the formation of scale on the porous
channel surface. The energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) mappings
of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic core sections after immersion in
the brine solution (2 wt % CaCl2 + 1 wt % MgCl2) for 48 h are shown in Figure 6a. After immersion in the brine solution, the untreated
hydrophilic rock core contains a large amount of Ca and Mg, corresponding
to the formation of a large amount of scale on the pore surfaces thereafter.
The as-formed scale can greatly decrease the pore size, leading to
a very small effective porosity of water permeating. However, the
rock core treated with the silica aqueous nanofluid has a strong hydrophobicity,
and the hydrophobic surface can keep water away from the pore surface.
As a result, a very small amount of Ca and Mg is detected by EDS on
the treated rock core surface, which is favorable for maintaining
a high effective porosity for water permeability and a stable effective
water permeability for a long period.

Figure 6 Scale inhibition performance of the hydrophobic
rock core: (a)
element distribution of Ca and Mg on the surfaces of core sections
and (b) injection pressure and water permeability of the rock core
before and after immersion in brine solution as well as (c) schematic
diagram of the porous channel structure before and after treatment
with the silica aqueous nanofluid.

Another core flooding experiment conducted to evaluate the
effect
of surface wettability on scale formation is shown in Figure 6b. It is seen that no. 4 rock
core untreated with the silica aqueous nanofluid exhibits an injection
pressure of about 0.17 MPa and an effective permeability of about
4.8 mD. When a certain volume of brine (2 wt % CaCl2 +
1 wt % MgCl2) is injected into the rock core at a low velocity,
the injection pressure increases to 0.21 MPa and the effective permeability
declines to 3.7 mD. This is due to the formation of scale on the hydrophilic
channel surface. When the same rock core is treated with HCl to remove
the as-formed scale and then injected with the same volume of the
silica aqueous nanofluid to alter the wettability, the resultant hydrophobic
rock core has quite a low injection pressure of about 0.09 MPa and
a high effective permeability of about 7.9 mD. This hydrophobic rock
core surface is nearly free of scale formation after the injection
of the same brine solution, and its injection pressure and effective
water permeability vary slightly therewith. This demonstrates that
the introduction of the silica aqueous nanofluid results in hydrophilic
to hydrophobic transformation of the rock core surface and helps to
prevent the formation of scale in its porous channel, thereby adding
to the structural stability of the porous channel and to water-injection
augmentation in the long run as well.

3 Conclusions
Silica aqueous nanofluid with an average particle size of about
7 nm is used to alter the hydrophilic rock core surface to a hydrophobic
one via forming a dense nanosilica layer thereon. Thanks to the small
size and high activity of the silica nanoparticle released from the
silica aqueous nanofluid, the resultant hydrophobic porous channels
of the rock core exhibit greatly increased water permeability and
significantly reduced the injection pressure as well as drastically
prolonged injection validity for the water-injection well of the low-permeability
reservoir. This is highly dependent on the hydrophilic to hydrophobic
transformation of the porous rock cores in association with the increase
in the water injection via the hydrophobic capillary mechanism and
the decrease in the surface energy of the rock cores upon the introduction
of the silica aqueous nanofluid. Moreover, a critical point is observed
in the pressure-permeability curves for the rock cores with different
wettability; and the hydrophobic rock core exhibits a higher effective
water permeability than the hydrophilic one only above the critical
point, which could be significant for better understanding the mechanisms
of drag reduction at the hydrophobic core channels. In addition, the
self-cleaning performance of the hydrophobic surface treated with
the silica nanofluid could provide a clue to regulating the oil–water
phase flow for enhanced oil recovery. In summary, the present approach,
highlighting the interface behaviors between water and pore channels,
could be promising for water-injection augmentation of low permeability
reservoirs and enhancing oil recovery as well.

4 Experimental
Section
4.1 Materials
The silica aqueous nanofluid
with good dispersibility in water was fabricated at our laboratory;
and its structure characterizations are available in our previous
work.16 Industrial reagents calcium chloride
(CaCl2) and magnesium chloride hexahydrate (MgCl2·6H2O) as well as analytical reagents SDBS were purchased
from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Company Limited (Shanghai, China).
Distilled water prepared in our laboratory was used as the solvent
and/or for rinsing.

4.2 Rock Core Flooding Test
and Effective Porosity
Measurement
A series of rock core flooding tests were conducted
with four artificial rock cores. The parameters of the rock cores
are listed in Table 1. The water phase permeability before and after acidification was
tested at a constant water injection rate;16 and the clay swelling behavior was also measured. Furthermore, a
sand-filled tube was used to measure the effective porosity and the
amount of hydrated layer adsorbed on the sand. The sand-filled tube
has a fixed volume denoted as V. The amount of the
dried sand filled into the tube is denoted as Ws; and the amount of water filled into the pores of the sand-filled
tube is denoted as Ww. After being filtrated
until there is no water dripping, the amount of the wet sand with
a hydrated layer is obtained as Wh. The
amount of the hydrated layer (W, referring to the
amount of the adsorbed silica nanoparticle) is calculated as W = Wh – Ws. The effective porosity (Pe) of the sand-filled tube is calculated as Pe = W/Ww ×
100%.

Table 1 Rock Core Parameters
 	properties	
rock cores	length (mm)	diameter (mm)	pore volume (cm3)	porosity (%)	
no. 1	44.3	25.4	3.65	16.3	
no. 2	88.2	25.1	5.83	13.4	
no. 3	98.0	25.0	7.19	16.2	
no. 4	45.9	25.2	3.42	15.0	
4.3 Characterizations
The IFT between
kerosene and the silica aqueous nanofluid was measured with a Texas-500C
spinning drop tension meter at a rotation speed of 5000 rpm and a
temperature of 40 °C; and the IFT was calculated based on the
Young–Laplace formula. The morphology and element composition
(determined by EDS) of the rock cores were analyzed with a FEI Nova
Nano SEM 450 field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) at
an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. Prior to FESEM imaging, the to be
tested sample was coated with a thin layer of Au (1 min sputtering
with an E-1045 ion sputter; Hitachi Corporation, Japan). The water
contact angles were recorded with a DM300 liquid/solid interface analyzer
(Kyowa Interface Science Co., Ltd., Japan), and at least three repeat
measurements were conducted for each to-be-tested sample.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge
the financial
support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
nos. 21571188 and 21371047), Program for Innovative Research Team
in Science and Technology in University of Henan Province (grant no.
17IRTSTHN004) and Science and Technology Committee of Jiyuan City
(grant no. 17022010). They are also grateful to Professor Laigui Yu
and Dr. Fei Hui for helpful discussions.
==== Refs
References
Bedrikovetsky P. G. ; Nguyen T. K. P. ; Hage A. ; Ciccarelli J. R. ; Wahab M. a. ; Chang G. ; de Souza A. L. S. ; Furtado C. A. 
Taking
advantage of injectivity decline for improved recovery during waterflood
with horizontal wells . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2011 , 78 , 288 –303 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2011.05.020 .
Dai C. ; Wang X. ; Li Y. ; Lv W. ; Zou C. ; Gao M. ; Zhao M. 
Spontaneous imbibition
investigation of self-dispersing
silica nanofluids for enhanced oil recovery in low-permeability cores . Energy Fuels 
2017 , 31 , 2663 –2668 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.6b03244 .
Hendraningrat L. ; Torsæter O. 
Spontaneous
imbibition investigation of self-dispersing
silica nanofluids for enhanced oil recovery in low-permeability cores . Energy Fuels 
2014 , 28 , 6228 –6241 . 10.1021/ef5014049 .
Agarwal A. K. ; Srivastava D. K. ; Dhar A. ; Maurya R. K. ; Shukla P. C. ; Singh A. P. 
Effect
of fuel injection timing and pressure on combustion,
emissions and performance characteristics of a single cylinder diesel
engine . Fuel 
2013 , 111 , 374 –383 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2013.03.016 .
Takahashi S. ; Kovscek A. R. 
Wettability estimation of low-permeability,
siliceous
shale using surface forces . J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2010 , 75 , 33 –43 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2010.10.008 .
Liang T. ; Zhou F. ; Lu J. 
of wettability
alteration and IFT
reduction on mitigating water blocking for low-permeability oil-wet
rocks after hydraulic fracturing . Fuel 
2017 , 209 , 650 –660 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2017.08.029 .
Fatemi S. M. ; Sohrabi M. 
Relative permeabilities
hysteresis for oil/water, gas/water
and gas/oil systems in mixed-wet rocks . J. Pet.
Sci. Eng. 
2018 , 161 , 559 –581 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2017.11.014 .
Zheng N. ; Liu K. ; Li X. ; Zhang Z. 
Preparation of super-hydrophobic
nano-silica aqueous dispersion and study of its application for water
resistance reduction at low-permeability reservoir . Micro Nano Lett. 
2012 , 7 , 526 –528 . 10.1049/mnl.2012.0192 .
Mirchi V. ; Saraji S. ; Goual L. ; Piri M. 
Dynamic interfacial
tension and wettability of shale in the presence of surfactants at
reservoir conditions . Fuel 
2015 , 148 , 127 –138 . 10.1016/j.fuel.2015.01.077 .
Ju B. S. ; Dai S. G. ; Luan Z. A. ; Zhu T. G. ; Su X.
T. ; Qiu X. F.  , A study of wettability and
permeability change caused by adsorption of nanometer structured polysilicon
on the surface of porous media . SPE Asia Pacific
Oil and Gas Conference and Exhibition , Copyright 2002; Society of Petroleum Engineers Inc. : Melbourne, Australia , 2002 .
Zhang R.-l. ; Di Q.-f. ; Wang X.-l. ; Gu C.-y. 
Numerical
study
of wall wettabilities and topography on drag reduction effect in micro-channel
flow by Lattice Boltzmann Method . J. Hydrodyn. 
2010 , 22 , 366 –372 . 10.1016/s1001-6058(09)60066-4 .
Yan Y.-L. ; Cui M.-Y. ; Jiang W.-D. ; He A.-L. ; Liang C. 
Drag reduction
in reservoir rock surface: Hydrophobic modification by SiO2, nanofluids . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2017 , 396 , 1556 –1561 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.11.209 .
Mousavi M. A. ; Hassanajili S. ; Rahimpour M. R. 
Synthesis of fluorinated nano-silica
and its application in wettability alteration near-wellbore region
in gas condensate reservoirs . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2013 , 273 , 205 –214 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2013.02.014 .
Sepehrinia K. ; Mohammadi A. 
Wettability
alteration properties of fluorinated silica
nanoparticles in liquid-loaded pores: An atomistic simulation . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2016 , 371 , 349 –359 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2016.02.218 .
Feng C. ; Kong Y. ; Jiang G. ; Yang J. ; Pu C. ; Zhang Y. 
Wettability modification
of rock cores by fluorinated copolymer emulsion
for the enhancement of gas and oil recovery . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2012 , 258 , 7075 –7081 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2012.03.180 .
Liu P. ; Niu L. ; Li X. ; Zhang Z. 
Environmental response nanosilica
for reducing the pressure of water injection in ultra-low permeability
reservoirs . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2017 , 19 , 390 10.1007/s11051-017-4086-1 .
Breisig H. ; Schmidt M. ; Wolff H. ; Jupke A. ; Wessling M. 
Droplet-based
liquid–liquid extraction inside a porous capillary . Chem. Eng. J. 
2017 , 307 , 143 –149 . 10.1016/j.cej.2016.08.024 .
Huang K. ; Pan L. ; Yoon R.-H. 
A capillary
flow model for filtration . Miner. Eng. 
2018 , 115 , 88 –96 . 10.1016/j.mineng.2017.10.012 .
Ge J. ; Zhang J. ; Wang F. ; Li Z. ; Yu J. ; Ding B. 
Superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic
nanofibrous membrane
with hierarchical structured skin for effective oil-in-water emulsion
separation . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2017 , 5 , 497 –502 . 10.1039/c6ta07652a .
Gulec S. ; Yadav S. ; Das R. ; Tadmor R. 
Reply to comment on
″solid-liquid work of adhesion . Langmuir 
2017 , 33 , 13899 –13901 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b03350 .29129080

