
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145926410.1021/acsomega.8b01388ArticleRevealing the Role of Poly(vinylidene fluoride) Binder
in Si/Graphite Composite Anode for Li-Ion Batteries Zhao Xiuyun †Niketic Svetlana †Yim Chae-Ho †Zhou Jigang ‡Wang Jian ‡Abu-Lebdeh Yaser *†† National
Research Council Canada, 1200 Montreal Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0R6, Canada‡ Canadian
Light Source Incorporation, Saskatoon S7N 2V3, Canada* E-mail: Yaser.Abu-Lebdeh@cnrc-nrc.gc.ca (Y.A.-L.).24 09 2018 30 09 2018 3 9 11684 11690 04 07 2018 10 09 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

The
conventional polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder works well
with the graphite anode, but when combined with silicon in composites
to increase the energy density of Li-ion batteries, it results in
severe capacity fade. Herein, by using scanning electron microscopy
and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analyses, we reveal that
this failure stems from the loss of connectivity between the silicon
(or its agglomerates), graphite, and PVDF binder because of the mechanical
stresses experienced during battery cycling. More importantly, we
reveal for the first time that the PVDF binder undergoes chemical
decomposition during the cycling of not only the composite but also
the Si-only or even graphite-only electrodes despite the excellent
battery performance of the latter. Through X-ray photoemission electron
microscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy techniques, LiF was
identified as the predominant decomposition product. We show that
the distribution of LiF in the electrodes due to the differences in
the interactions between PVDF and either Si or graphite could correlate
with the performance of the battery. This study shows that the most
suitable binder for the composite electrode is a polymer with a good
chemical interaction with both graphite and silicon.

document-id-old-9ao8b01388document-id-new-14ao-2018-013889ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Recently,
there is a great interest in combining graphite with
silicon as an anode material for lithium-ion batteries to increase
their practical energy density for the next-generation consumer electronics,
electric vehicles, and energy storage for the grid.1−4 The focus is on composites with
low silicon content (<25 wt %) to design a graphite-rich composite
electrode that is compatible with the current manufacturing processes
and can lead to incremental improvement in the practical energy density
of full Li-ion batteries eventually reaching a maximum of 17%.1

It is well-known that the binders play
an essential role in the
mechanical stabilization of electrodes. Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)
is still one of the most popular binders for graphite electrode in
the industry, but it is not effective for Si electrodes. A number
of alternative binders have been investigated in the literature for
Si-based negative electrodes, and stable cycling could be obtained
by using the polyimide binder or water-based binders based on poly(carboxylic
acid)s and their alkali metal salts, such as carboxymethyl cellulose,
poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), and alginate.5 However, these binders are not perfect for Si/graphite composite
electrodes, and to the best of our knowledge, very few binders have
been designed specifically for Si/graphite composite electrodes. During
our search for the ideal binders, we have been intrigued by the finding
that the graphite-rich Si/graphite composite electrode with PVDF binder
loses its capacity very quickly during cycling, and after five cycles,
the capacity is even lower than that of the graphite-only electrode.6 We essentially want to address the question “How
could a small amount of silicon cause such a catastrophic effect on
a composite that is very rich in graphite which is known for its good
affinity to PVDF?”

Previous studies focused on the role
of silicon7 in electrode morphology and
mechanical stability8 with the LiPAA binder
and/or the LiPF6-based electrolytes. Bareño et al.
have found that the erosion
of Si particles by hydrofluoric acid produced from LiPF6 hydrolysis is a leading cause for the deterioration of the electrochemical
performance of silicon-containing electrodes as well as the silica
deposited on the positive side.7 However,
to the best of our knowledge, very little research has focused on
the failure analysis of graphite-rich Si/graphite composite electrode
with the PVDF binder. Gómez-Cámer et al. prepared 4.75%
Si/90 wt % graphite composite electrodes with a 4 wt % PVDF binder
and studied the electrode layer expansion by electrochemical in situ
dilatometry.8 They found that the charge
capacity dropped to the value corresponding to the graphite contribution
for the electrodes made with KS6, whereas for SLP30 graphite-containing
electrodes the charge capacity faded even below the expected value
for the amount of graphite present in the electrode. They suggest
that the SLP30 graphite-containing electrodes besides the Si particles
become partially electrochemically inactive because of their microstructure.
The SLP30 graphite flakes are mostly aligned in parallel to the current
collector, and a larger number of graphite platelets are connected
through plane-to-plane contacts to the current collector. Thus, the
electric conductive network in the SLP30 electrodes is easy to be
disrupted by the expanding Si nanoparticles with more and more graphite
contacts being interrupted.8 However, the
role of PVDF binder in the failure mechanism could not be clearly
identified because of the presence of another fluorine-containing
species such as the LiPF6 salt in the Li-ion cells.

In this work, we have used a nonfluorinated salt, LiClO4, in the electrolyte, so PVDF is the only source of fluorine in the
cells. We have prepared a graphite-rich Si/graphite composite electrode
(20 wt % Si, 65 wt % graphite) with the PVDF binder and have investigated
the electrode failure and the effect of binder decomposition on the
electrochemical performance using a nonfluorinated salt, LiClO4, in nonaqueous electrolyte solution. Electrochemical test,
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDXS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and X-ray photoemission
electron microscopy (X-PEEM) are carried out to analyze the origin
of electrode failure and the change in binder composition during battery
cycling. The results provide a useful guide to the design of better
binders for a graphite-rich Si/graphite composite electrode system.

2 Results and Discussion
Figure 1a shows
the cycling performance of Li-ion cells made with the graphite-only
electrode, Si-only electrode, and Si/graphite composite electrode
using the PVDF binder. The graphite-only electrode shows a first discharge
capacity of about 394 mA h/g and a first reversible capacity of 350
mA h/g corresponding to the electrochemical intercalation reaction
6C + Li+ + e– → LiC6 with a theoretical capacity of 372 mA h/g. After the initial solid
electrolyte interphase (SEI) formation, the graphite-only electrode
has a good capacity retention during the following 50 cycles with
a stable capacity of ∼350 mA h/g. The Si-only electrode shows
an extremely low first discharge capacity of 40 mA h/g and nearly
no initial reversible capacity. At room temperature, in theory, silicon
can alloy electrochemically with lithium following the reaction Si
+ 3.75Li+ + 3.75e– → Li3.75Si with a theoretical capacity of 3578 mA h/g.5 Experimentally, it still shows a substantial capacity when
other binders such as lithium salt of PAA (LiPAA) are used as shown
in Figure S1. It delivers a first discharge
capacity of about 2125 mA h/g and a first reversible capacity of 1133
mA h/g, and after 50 cycles, it can still retain a capacity of ∼400
mA h/g. This proves that the failure in the case of PVDF is not due
to silicon and points the finger toward PVDF. The Si/graphite composite
electrode shows a discharge capacity of ∼858 mA h/g and a charge
capacity of ∼554 mA h/g in the first cycle with an initial
Coulombic efficiency of 64.6%. Intriguingly, this graphite-rich composite
electrode starts to show a lower capacity than that of the graphite
electrode beyond the fifth cycle. A charge capacity of only 55 mA
h/g can be observed in the 50th cycle.

Figure 1 (a) Cycling performance
of the graphite-only electrode, Si-only
electrode, and Si/graphite composite electrode with the PVDF binder.
(b) Differential capacity curves of the Si/graphite composite electrode
with the PVDF binder in the first five cycles.

The differential capacity curves of the Si/graphite composite
electrode
were plotted for the first five cycles and are shown in Figure 1b. In the first cycle, the
electrode shows the characteristic profile of graphite, as well as
a broad peak at about 0.44 V, indicating the formation of the Li15Si4 phase.5 From the
second cycle onward, the 0.44 V peak disappears, and the graphite
features dominate the profile, indicating that the Si nanoparticles
become electrochemically inactive. In the following four cycles, all
the graphite peaks become broader, and the anodic peaks shift to a
higher potential progressively showing electrode polarization and
impedance increase. Beyond the fifth cycle, the characteristic features
of the graphite electrode almost disappear, and the residual capacity
is likely to originate from lithium ion adsorption/desorption at the
electrode surface similar to the case of conversion-type electrodes.9 This indicates that the graphite in the composite
electrode loses its electrochemical reactivity to lithium.

In
order to elucidate the failure mechanism, the electrodes were
recovered from the cells after five cycles and were analyzed and compared
with the uncycled electrodes by the SEM and EDXS analysis. Figure 2a,d,g and b,e,h shows
the SEM images of the cycled Si/graphite composite electrode, Si-only
electrode, and graphite-only electrode with the PVDF binder and the
corresponding EDXS maps of fluorine element distribution, respectively.
For the Si/graphite electrode, there are no significant changes in
the electrode morphology of a low-magnification SEM image compared
to that before cycling. The cycled electrode still has a uniform surface,
and the dispersion of nanosilicon particles and carbon black particles
in the composite seems uniform, which was also confirmed by the EDXS
analysis shown in Figures S2 and S3. In
a higher magnification image shown in Figure 2a, it can be seen that the silicon particles
are still connected with carbon black particles by the PVDF binder.
However, these Si nanoparticles have a rougher surface because of
the pulverization during cycling. In addition, they have agglomerated
into bigger particles, and there are gaps between these bigger particles.
Finally, naked graphite chunks can be seen in some regions, and most
of the PVDF binder resides with silicon. This was confirmed by the
EDXS map of the F shown in Figure 2b. Correspondingly, the gaps can be observed between
these naked graphite and the agglomerated silicon particles. This
could be caused by the volume expansion and contraction of silicon
particles which were connected with the graphite by the PVDF binder
and carbon black particles before cycling. As a result, the capacity
loss of silicon is likely to originate from the electrical conductivity
loss caused by pulverization and subsequent agglomeration of the particles,
whereas the capacity loss of graphite is likely to originate from
the electrical conductivity loss caused by the separation between
the graphite electrode and the PVDF binder and carbon black. Both
of them contribute to the loss of electrochemical activity of the
Si/graphite composite electrode.

Figure 2 (a,d,g) SEM images of the cycled Si/graphite
composite electrode,
Si electrode, and graphite electrode, respectively; (b,e,h) corresponding
EDXS mappings of the F element; and (c,f,i) XPS spectra of F 1s for
the corresponding electrodes before and after cycling.

For the Si-only electrode before cycling, the PVDF
was uniformly
mixed with silicon and carbon black as the EDXS map of F shows a very
uniform distribution, as shown in Figure S4, and some cracks can be clearly seen before cycling. After cycling,
it is also very clear that most silicon particles have a much rougher
surface compared to that before cycling, and these cycled silicon
particles and carbon black particles agglomerate together as shown
in Figures 2d and S5. Also, the PVDF binder distribution is not
as good as before cycling as the EDXS map of F element shows that
F is concentrated on big Si particles after cycling (Figure 2e). This is why the Si-only
electrode with the PVDF binder shown in Figure 1 could not deliver the initial reversible
capacity. For the graphite-only electrode, the PVDF binder adheres
to each graphite chunk by carbon black particles before cycling, as
shown in Figure S6. After cycling, some
uniform spots can be seen on the electrode surface, and the F element
is concentrated on these spots, as shown in Figure 2g,h. This is very interesting as it looks
like some PVDF decomposition also occurred during the cycling in a
graphite-only electrode.

In order to further understand the
capacity loss of graphite in
the Si/composite electrode, XPS was carried out to analyze the composition
change of the electrode surface. Figure 2c shows the XPS spectra of F 1s for the Si/graphite
composite electrode. Before cycling, there is only one peak at 687
eV related to the C–F bonds (CF2 in the PVDF binder).
After cycling, the F 1s peak becomes broader and comprises two components
at 684.7 and 687 eV, associated with LiF and C–F bonds of the
PVDF binder, respectively. The presence of LiF component at the surface
indicates that during cycling, Li reacts directly with the PVDF binder,
which is the only source of fluorine in the whole system. Interestingly,
similar XPS results were observed for the Si-only and graphite-only
electrodes, as shown in Figure 2f,i. This suggests that it is not very clear whether the chemical
decomposition of the PVDF binder is the main cause of the poor electrochemical
properties of the Si/graphite composite electrode and the Si-only
electrode and, if so, by how much. This is not consistent with the
conventional view in which a decomposed binder can no longer perform
its function to hold the electrode assembly by binding all of its
components together and also adhering them to the current collector.10 However, Kim et al. have indicated that PVDF
decomposition might take place at a potential higher than 1 V when
half cells were tested with more than 50% PVDF was used with synthetic
graphite.11 Herein, we confirm that this
is a general phenomenon for PVDF that can also take place at even
small amounts of PVDF and irrespective of the active material, and
the decomposition product is mainly LiF.

As XPS indicates that
the chemical decomposition of the PVDF binder
into LiF occurs during the cycling of all the three electrodes, the
X-PEEM measurement was performed to further disclose the distribution
of LiF throughout the electrodes. The F K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge
structure (XANES) spectra and chemical mapping of various F species
in the Si/graphite electrode before cycling are shown in Figure 3. The two fitting
spectra were extracted from the two regions with distinct morphological
features: region 1 has dominant small particles, whereas region 2
is dominated with large particles. Spectrum 1 and spectrum 2 shown
in Figure 3a are corresponding
to these two regions, respectively. As for the electrode before cycling,
it is clear that there is no LiF in the composition. Compared to the
fluorine reference spectra in PVDF and in LiF shown in Figure 3b, the spectroscopic profile
in spectrum 2 likely corresponds to PVDF, whereas the sharp peak at
693 eV in spectrum 1 may be due to the formation of some fluorine-containing
species, such as F–O or F–Si, during the electrode drying
process. The existence of LiF in region 1 is spectroscopically excluded
because of the absence of the characteristic peak at ∼703 eV.
The distribution of these two types of species, PVDF (green) and the
reacted PVDF (red), was mapped out by fitting the F K-edge image stack
of the electrode as shown in Figure 3c.

Figure 3 (a) Fluorine K-edge XANES spectra of the Si/graphite electrode
before cycling. (b) Standard fluorine K-edge XANES spectra of PVDF
and LiF. (c) Fluorine chemical mapping out of fitting F K-edge image
stack of the electrode.

Figure 4 shows
the
F K-edge XANES spectra (Figure 4a) and the fluorine chemical mappings of the cycled Si/graphite
electrode (Figure 4b), Si-only electrode (Figure 4c), and graphite-only electrode (Figure 4d). The distribution of PVDF and LiF in these
chemical mappings was obtained through fitting F K-edge spectra image
stacks by using the reference spectra of PVDF and LiF. The appearance
of the sharp peak at ∼693 eV and the broad peak at ∼703
eV in the F K-edge spectra from all the three electrodes suggests
the formation of LiF after cycling.12 The
signal-to-noise ratio decreases from the graphite-only to the Si/graphite
composite and to the Si-only composite, which could imply a similar
decrease in the total amount of F in the electrodes. Furthermore,
the LiF and PVDF distribution in those electrodes was exhibited as
a repulsive guidance molecule mapping, which shows the existence of
LiF-rich hot spots in the Si/graphite and Si-only electrodes, whereas
a more uniform coexistence dispersion in the cycled graphite-only
electrode. Combined with the EDXS mapping of the cycled graphite-only
electrode shown in Figure 2i, it is suspected that the uniform decomposition of PVDF
is partly responsible for good electrochemical performance of the
graphite-only electrode. On the basis of this finding, we hypothesize
that LiF that forms part of the SEI in conventional electrolytes does
not only originate from the LiPF6 salt but also from the
PVDF binder. The electrochemical decomposition of PVDF generates fluoride
ion species that react chemically with lithium ions and form LiF.
A similar behavior was reported in the case of sodium-ion cells.10 It was shown that in the presence of additives
such as fluoroethylene carbonate, the decomposition of PVDF could
suppress this process by releasing the fluoride ions that can compete
for the ions (sodium or Li), which might explain why graphite electrodes
maintain their integrity during cycling and retain a good battery
performance.

Figure 4 (a) Fluorine K-edge XANES spectra and corresponding fluorine
chemical
mappings of (b) cycled Si/graphite, (c) cycled Si, and (d) cycled
graphite electrodes.

3 Conclusions
To conclude, we investigated
the failure mechanism of the graphite-rich
Si/graphite composite electrode with the PVDF binder in Li-ion half-cell.
We revealed that it could be attributed to two reasons: one is silicon
inactivity caused by the pulverization and agglomeration of silicon
particles because of the large volume change during cycling that takes
place right after the first cycle. The other one is graphite inactivity
where some graphite particles lose their connection with carbon black
and PVDF binder that is caused by the expansion and contraction of
neighboring silicon particles. Moreover, it was demonstrated that
the PVDF binder decomposes to form LiF at the surface of the electrodes
during cycling in the fluorine-free electrolyte in both single electrode
(Si-only or graphite-only) and the Si/graphite composite electrode
with no impact on the battery performance in the case of graphite.
However, it is still not very clear how this binder decomposition
affects the battery performance, but it can be concluded that an appropriate
binder for any Si/graphite composite even with the smallest amount
of silicon should have a strong interaction/adhesion to both silicon
and graphite surfaces.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Electrode Preparation
The graphite
electrode was made by mixing the graphite powder (MAG-D, Hitachi),
Super P carbon black (Timical Carbon, Belgium), and PVDF (HSV 900
Kynar) binder in a 90:2:8 mass ratio. An appropriate N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous 99.5%) was used
to form the slurry. The silicon electrode was made by combining nanosilicon
powder (<100 nm, Aldrich), carbon black and LiPAA binder (LiPAA),
or PVDF binder in an 85:5:10 mass ratio. Distilled water and isopropanol
were added to form the slurry in the LiPAA case; NMP was added in
the PVDF binder case. The Si/graphite composite electrode was prepared
by mixing nanosilicon, graphite, carbon black, and PVDF in a 20:65:5:10
ratio; and NMP was used as a solvent.

The slurry was mixed for
10 min in a THINKY Planetary Centrifugal Mixer (ARE-310, Japan). The
electrode slurry was coated onto the surface of the Cu foil using
a 150 μm stainless steel notch bar. The electrode coatings were
first dried in air at 85 °C for 1.5 h and then in vacuum at 80
°C for 3 days. The active material loadings of Si electrodes
are about 1 mg/cm2. The active material loadings of all the other
electrodes ranged about 2.5–5 mg/cm2.

4.2 Coin Cell Preparation and Electrochemical
Test
The 2325 coin-type cell was made by using the National
Research Council Canada cell parts, two Celgard 2500 separators, and
a lithium foil disk as a counter/reference electrode in an argon-filled
glove box. LiClO4 (1 M) in ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate
[1/2 v/v] was used as an electrolyte for all the cells. The electrochemical
test was performed on an Arbin BT2000 Test System at 30 °C. The
test procedure follows the constant current constant voltage protocol.
The voltage range is 0.005–0.9 V for all the cell tests. In
the first cycle, the C rate is C/10 with a 0.1 mA trickle; from the
second cycle, the C rate was changed to C/5 with a 0.2 mA trickle.
The calculation of C rate was based on the theoretical capacities
of 3578 and 372 mA h/g for Si- and graphite-active phases, respectively.
The measured capacities were calculated based on the graphite mass
for the graphite electrode, silicon mass for the Si electrode, and
the total mass of silicon and graphite for the composite electrodes
except as otherwise noted.

4.3 Electrode Material Characterization
The electrode disks before and after cycling were characterized
by
SEM, XPS, and X-PEEM methods, respectively. To prepare the cycled
electrode samples, first, the cells cycled after five discharge/charge
cycles were put into an Ar-filled glove box and then disassembled
using an opener (DPM Solutions Inc.) without short circuit. The coating
disks were carefully removed from the cells and washed in dimethyl
carbonate to remove the electrolyte and sealed in vials in Ar for
test.

A Hitachi SU5000 SEM and an EDXS analyzer (X-Max Oxford
Instruments) were used to observe the morphology of the electrode
coatings and analyze the elemental distribution, respectively. The
XPS spectra were carried out on an AXIS Ultra instrument (Kratos Analytical
Ltd.) with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 eV) at
15 kV and 15 mA (emission current); the base pressure within the chamber
was approximately 10–8 Pa. The shift in the binding
energy was corrected using the C 1s level at 284.8 eV as an internal
standard. The X-PEEM measurement was performed at the spectromicroscopy
beamline of the Canadian Light Source. The monochromatic X-ray beam
was focused using an ellipsoidal mirror to an ∼20 μm
spot on the sample in PEEM and an incident at a grazing angle of 16°.
The sample was biased at −20 kV with respect to the PEEM objective
lens, and the base pressure of the PEEM chamber was maintained at
∼10–9 Torr. Image stacks (sequences) for
a specific field of view at the F K-edge was measured. The measured
X-PEEM data were analyzed by a Xis 2000 (http://unicorn.mcmaster.ca/aXis2000.html). The chemical component maps for PVDF and LiF distribution in electrodes
were obtained by fitting the F K-edge stack with the linear reference
spectra of PVDF and LiF.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01388.Cycling performance
of the Si-only electrode with the
LiPAA binder and SEM images and EDXS maps of the Si/graphite composite,
Si-only electrode, and graphite-only electrodes before and after cycling
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01388_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the funding from the Office
of Energy Research and Development at the Natural Resources Canada.
The authors also thank Oltion Kodra (for his assistance toward XPS
data acquisition and David Kingston for his help in taking the SEM
and EDXS measurements.
==== Refs
References
Yim C.-H. ; Niketic S. ; Salem N. ; Naboka O. ; Abu-Lebdeh Y. 
Towards Improving
the Practical Energy Density of Li-Ion Batteries: Optimization and
Evaluation of Silicon:Graphite Composites in Full Cells . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2017 , 164 , A6294 –A6302 . 10.1149/2.0481701jes .
Han Z.-J. ; Yamagiwa K. ; Yabuuchi N. ; Son J.-Y. ; Cui Y.-T. ; Oji H. ; Kogure A. ; Harada T. ; Ishikawa S. ; Aoki Y. ; Komaba S. 
Electrochemical lithiation performance and characterization
of silicon-graphite composites with lithium, sodium, potassium, and
ammonium polyacrylate binders . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 3783 –3795 . 10.1039/c4cp04939j .25559330 
Klett M. ; Gilbert J. A. ; Trask S. E. ; Polzin B. J. ; Jansen A. N. ; Dees D. W. ; Abraham D. P. 
Electrode
Behavior RE-Visited: Monitoring
Potential Windows, Capacity Loss, and Impedance Changes in Li1.03(Ni0.5Co0.2Mn0.3)0.97O2/Silicon-Graphite
Full Cells . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2016 , 163 , A875 –A887 . 10.1149/2.0271606jes .
Klett M. ; Gilbert J. A. ; Pupek K. Z. ; Trask S. E. ; Abraham D. P. 
Layered
Oxide, Graphite and Silicon-Graphite Electrodes for Lithium-Ion Cells:
Effect of Electrolyte Composition and Cycling Windows . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2017 , 164 , A6095 –A6102 . 10.1149/2.0131701jes .
Obrovac M. N. ; Chevrier V. L. 
Alloy Negative Electrodes for Li-Ion Batteries . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 11444 –11502 . 10.1021/cr500207g .25399614 
Zhao X. ; Yim C.-H. ; Du N. ; Abu-Lebdeh Y. 
Shortly Branched,
Linear Dextrans as Efficient Binders for Silicon/Graphite Composite
Electrodes in Li-Ion Batteries . Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 
2018 , 57 , 9062 –9074 . 10.1021/acs.iecr.8b01055 .
Bareño J. ; Shkrob I. A. ; Gilbert J. A. ; Klett M. ; Abraham D. P. 
Capacity
Fade and Its Mitigation in Li-Ion Cells with Silicon-Graphite Electrodes . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 20640 –20649 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b06118 .
Gómez-Cámer J. L. ; Bünzli C. ; Hantel M. M. ; Poux T. ; Novák P. 
On the Correlation
between Electrode Expansion and Cycling Stability of Graphite/Si Electrodes
for Li-Ion Batteries . Carbon 
2016 , 105 , 42 –51 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2016.04.022 .
Duncan H. ; Courtel F. M. ; Abu-Lebdeh Y. 
A Study of
the Solid-Electrolyte-Interface
(SEI) of ZnMn2O4: A Conversion-Type Anode Material for Li-Ion Batteries . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2015 , 162 , A7110 –A7117 . 10.1149/2.0141513jes .
Vogt L. O. ; El Kazzi M. ; Berg E. J. ; Villar S. P. ; Novák P. ; Villevieille C. 
Understanding the Interaction of the Carbonates and
Binder in Na-Ion Batteries: a Combined Bulk and Surface Study . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 1210 –1216 . 10.1021/cm5039649 .
Kim M. J. ; Lee C. H. ; Jo M. H. ; Jeong S. K. 
Electrochemical
Decomposition of Poly(Vinylidene Fluoride) Binder for a Graphite Negative
Electrode in Lithium-Ion Batteries . Mater. Sci.
Forum 
2017 , 893 , 127 –131 . 10.4028/www.scientific.net/msf.893.127 .
Zhou J. ; Wang J. ; Hu Y. ; Lu M. 
Chemical Imaging of
Nanoscale Interfacial Inhomogeneity in LiFePO4 Composite Electrodes
from a Cycled Large-Format Battery . ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 39336 –39341 . 10.1021/acsami.7b11427 .29072451

