
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145748010.1021/acsomega.6b00450ArticleIn Situ Monitoring of Linear RGD-Peptide Bioconjugation
with Nanoscale Polymer Brushes Psarra Evmorfia †§∥König Ulla *†∥Müller Martin †Bittrich Eva †Eichhorn Klaus-Jochen †Welzel Petra B. †Stamm Manfred †‡Uhlmann Petra *†§† Leibniz
Institute of Polymer Research Dresden, Hohe Street 6, 01069 Dresden, Germany‡ Faculty
of Science, Department of Chemistry, Chair of Physical Chemistry of
Polymeric Materials, Technische Universität
Dresden, Bergstr. 66, 01069 Dresden, Germany§ Department
of Chemistry, Hamilton Hall, University
of Nebraska-Lincoln, 639 North 12th Street, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, United
States* E-mail: koenig-ulla@ipfdd.de (U.K.).* E-mail: uhlmannp@ipfdd.de (P.U.).16 03 2017 31 03 2017 2 3 946 958 01 12 2016 24 02 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Bioinspired
materials mimicking the native extracellular matrix
environment are promising for biotechnological applications. Particularly,
modular biosurface engineering based on the functionalization of stimuli-responsive
polymer brushes with peptide sequences can be used for the development
of smart surfaces with biomimetic cues. The key aspect of this study
is the in situ monitoring and analytical verification of the biofunctionalization
process on the basis of three complementary analytical techniques.
In situ spectroscopic ellipsometry was used to quantify the amount
of chemisorbed GRGDS at both the homopolymer poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)
brush and the binary poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
(PNIPAAm)–PAA brushes, which was finally confirmed by an acidic
hydrolysis combined with a subsequent reverse-phase high-performance
liquid chromatography analysis. In situ attenuated total reflection-Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy provided a step-by-step detection
of the biofunctionalization process so that an optimized protocol
for the bioconjugation of GRGDS could be identified. The optimized
protocol was used to create a temperature-responsive binary brush
with a high amount of chemisorbed GRGDS, which is a promising candidate
for the temperature-sensitive control of GRGDS presentation in further
cell-instructive studies.

document-id-old-9ao6b00450document-id-new-14ao-2016-00450vccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Advanced engineered biosurfaces
have to not only recognize but
also modulate complex molecular biointerfacial processes occurring
in biological microenvironments. The current biomimetic surface engineering
strategies have been developed to create graded and adaptive synthetic
biointerfaces with multiple stimuli-sensitive functions able to modify
their interactions with cells and biomolecules. In this regard, surface
bioengineering approaches for various biotechnological and biomedical
applications especially focus on the creation of biomimetic substrates
that resemble the ECM microenvironment. For instance, engineering
cell adhesion onto surfaces is often mediated by short peptide sequences
(integrins), which specifically bind to intracellular membrane proteins.1 Because the RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) tripeptide motif
is one of the most common minimal-recognition sequences for integrin
receptors, various surface biofunctionalization approaches have been
employing the introduction of RGD-containing moieties by various biofunctionalization
strategies.2,3 For cell adhesion at bioengineered surfaces,
longer synthetic oligopeptides, such as GRGDS (Gly-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser)
or GRGDSPK (Gly-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser-Pro-Lys), can be applied to elicit
cellular impacts similar to those of native ECM proteins.4−6

In recent years, advanced nanocoatings have attracted great
attention.
A special method to create such ultrathin coatings is tethering stimuli-responsive
polymers by one functional terminal group onto a surface. If the surface-grafting
density is high enough, the polymer chains are forced to stretch away
from the interface due to excluded volume effects, creating a polymer
brush. Nanoscale polymer brushes are advantageous because of their
well-defined constitution and synergistic response to external stimuli.
Therefore, polymer brushes exhibit effective nanostructures and have
the promising potential to regulate complex interactions even in natural
living systems. Polymer brushes with various chemical compositions
have been used to generate responsive thin films on a variety of surfaces.7−9 Upon switching by external stimuli, biomodified binary brush surfaces
can hide or expose biofunctionalities on demand.

One of the
most commonly used bioconjugation methods is a carbodiimide-mediated
reaction for direct conjugation of carboxylic groups (−COOH)
with primary amines (−NH2).10,11N-Ethyl-N′-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)
carbodiimide (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS)
are used simultaneously to increase the reaction efficiency and create
stable intermediates.12−14 The advantages of the EDC/NHS bioconjugation method
are its feasibility, high conversion efficiency, and the minor influence
on the bioactivity of the conjugated biomolecules due to the mild
reaction conditions, as well as the water solubility of the reagents.
Moreover, EDC/NHS coupling yields sustainable, nontoxic products compared
to other coupling procedures, such as glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde.15,16 Despite the popular use of the EDC/NHS bioconjugation procedure,
only few publications are focusing on the detailed analytical investigation
of the carboxyl-to-amine conjugation reaction taking place directly
at the interface of nanoscale polymer brush films.11,13,17−23

We prepared “grafting-to” brushes of a temperature-responsive
polymer, that is, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm)
with a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) around 32 °C,
and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA). PAA contains carboxylic groups, which
can be used for covalent binding reactions with amino groups of biomolecules.
Biofunctionalization of the polymer brushes with cell-mediating RGD
peptides was done by covalent binding (chemisorption) to a PAA homopolymer
brush and a more complex thermoresponsive PNIPAAm–PAA binary
polymer brush, and related to physisorption. The main objective of
this study was the in situ investigation of the stepwise RGD-peptide
bioconjugation at these polymer brushes and in the aqueous environment
to identify optimal process conditions. For this purpose, complementary
high-sensitive in situ attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR), in situ ellipsometry, and acidic
hydrolysis combined with a subsequent reverse-phase high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis were applied.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Polymer Brush Characterization
As
the initial step of our bioconjugation approach, homogeneous nanoscale
homo-PAA and homo-PNIPAAm brushes and binary PNIPAAm–PAA brushes
with a ratio of 80:20 and 20:80 were prepared. First of all, thin
unmodified polymer brush layers were characterized by ellipsometry.
Thereby, the following brush thickness values in the dry state were
measured: d = 7.2 ± 0.3 nm for the PAA homopolymer
brush, d = 9.3 ± 0.3 nm for the PNIPAAm homopolymer
brush, and d = 7.2 ± 0.3 nm for the 20:80 PNIPAAm–PAA
polymer ratio, as well as d = 12.6 ± 0.4 nm
for the 80:20 PNIPAAm–PAA polymer ratio.

In addition
to already published information obtained by ATR-FTIR about the grafting-to process of PAA brushes24,25 in Figure 3a, the
bottom ATR-FTIR spectrum (I) represents the grafted PAA layer recorded
after the grafting-to process. Significantly, the
ν(C=O) band at 1710 cm–1 was obtained,
which is indicative of the carboxyl groups of PAA. In Figure 3b, the bottom ATR-FTIR spectrum
(I) shows the grafted PNIPAAm layer with its characteristic amide
I and amide II bands at 1630 and 1535 cm–1, respectively.

2.2 Physisorption of GRGDS Peptide onto PNIPAAm
and PAA Homopolymer Brushes
The physical adsorption of GRGDS
onto PNIPAAm and PAA homopolymer brushes was monitored by in situ
spectroscopic ellipsometry. Figure 1a,b shows changes in the ellipsometric angles, swollen
thickness, and refractive index upon physisorption of GRGDS onto thermoresponsive
PNIPAAm homopolymer brushes. The experiments were performed in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) (pH 7.4, 100 mM) aiming at physiological conditions and
using 0.1 mg/mL GRGDS. Previous investigations of protein adsorption
on PNIPAAm brushes employing the grafting-to method
showed that PNIPAAm is protein-repellent at 25 °C, whereas only
minor amounts of protein were adsorbing at 37 °C.26,27 Nevertheless, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there
are no reported data of RGD-peptide adsorption on these particular
PNIPAAm polymer layers. Looking at the change of the ellipsometric
angles, Δ and Ψ, before and after GRGDS physisorption,
we observed changes, ranging from 0.1 to 0.3° for Ψ and
1 to 5° for Δ (Figure 1a). Error bars are given due to statistical variation
over three to six different samples. By fitting of the very sensitive
changes in the ellipsometric angles, we obtained negative changes
of the refractive index (|Δn| < 0.01, Δn < 0) of the swollen layers, for GRGDS physisorption
at both temperatures (Figure 1b). These negative changes in n were accompanied
by small positive changes in the layer thickness (Δd ∼ 1–3 nm), which can be explained by polymer chain
reorientation after peptide incubation and washing (Figure 1b). Modeling of the RGD-peptide
surface density, ΓRGD, according to eq 1, led to ΓRGD ∼
0 mg/m2, for GRGDS at both temperatures. Considering the
particular sensitivity of ellipsometry toward adsorbed amounts higher
than 0.5 mg/m2 at PNIPAAm brushes, it can be concluded
that GRGDS physisorption is less than this detection limit at PNIPAAm
homopolymer brushes under physiological (i.e., in PBS at pH 7.4) conditions
below and above the LCST of the PNIPAAm brushes at 31 °C in PBS
buffer.28

Figure 1 GRGDS physisorption (concentration, 0.1
mg/mL): (a) and (b) onto
homo-PNIPAAm brushes at two different temperatures (25 and 40 °C)
in PBS buffer and (c) and (d) onto homo-PAA brushes at different pH
values using 100 mM sodium acetate (pH 4 and 5) and sodium phosphate
(pH 7 and 8) buffers. The change in the ellipsometric angles, Psi
(Ψ) and Delta (Δ), for the selected wavelength of 632
nm as well as the changes of thickness (d) and refractive
index (n) upon GRGDS-peptide physisorption are plotted
vs temperature and pH.

Further, we performed pH-dependent physisorption experiments
on
PAA homopolymer brushes. Figure 1c,d shows results of the GRGDS-peptide adsorption at
room temperature. According to previously published data, these polyelectrolyte
(PEL) brushes are expected to adsorb biomolecules like proteins (e.g.,
albumin or fibrinogen) in large amounts, which are significantly dependent
on salt concentration and pH.29−32 At high salt concentrations, charges are screened
and therefore electrostatic interactions between charged biomolecules
and oppositely charged PEL brushes are rather low.27 On the contrary, high adsorbed amounts of biomolecules
are expected at pH values close to the IEP of the biomolecule.32 We performed GRGDS physisorption at 100 mM ionic
strength and at four different pH values (Figure 1c,d): at pH = 5, which is below the IEP of
the GRGDS peptide (pIGRGDS = 6.2); at pH = 6, which is
close to pIGRGDS; at pH = 7; and far above the pIGRGDS at pH = 8, where both the peptide and the surface are negatively
charged. Changes in the modeled parameters, d and n, were small, and all adsorbed amounts calculated with eq 1 were below 0.2 mg/m2. However, the errors of the changes in the original ellipsometric
angle (Ψ) are critically large for pH 6–8. The error
is calculated by averaging the results for six different samples.
Although only minimal adsorption at the PAA brushes occurred at pH
5 under electrostatically attractive conditions, the absence of physisorption
at a higher pH remains inconclusive due to statistical variance. However,
the absence of significant physisorption at pH 8 in 100 mM borate
buffer was confirmed by acidic hydrolysis and a subsequent HPLC analysis
(Figure 6).

In
summary, we could confirm that both homopolymer brushes PNIPAAm
and PAA do not adsorb the GRGDS peptide in significant amounts relevant
for the following chemisorption conditions. For binary brushes, again
the HPLC analysis confirmed the absence of significant physisorption
(Figure 6). Therefore,
to be able to provide end-grafted, nanoscale polymer brushes for specific
bioapplications under physiological conditions, there is the need
to introduce covalent binding methods, which will be subsequently
described.

2.3 Modalities of GRGDS Peptide
Bioconjugation
Using EDC/NHS on Homo-PAA Brushes
As the next step, to fabricate
cell-instructive homo-PAA brushes, GRGDS was chemisorbed onto equilibrated
swollen homo-PAA brushes. Herein, GRGDS was covalently bound to the
PAA brush surface via carbodiimide conjugation using EDC and NHS simultaneously.

Scheme 1 illustrates
the molecular mechanism of GRGDS bioconjugation via EDC/NHS chemisorption.
In the first reaction step, an O-acylurea intermediate
is formed by the reaction of EDC with the carboxylic groups of the
PAA brush. Because the formed O-acylurea product
is prone to hydrolysis in aqueous solution, adding NHS simultaneously
to the activation solution can achieve a more stable conversion to
the next intermediate. Consequently, NHS-ester as the main product
is formed by a nucleophilic attack of NHS to O-acylurea, which can
ideally exhibit a very high yield efficiency as shown by Sam et al.23 However, few other side products may be formed
during the activation procedure, for instance, an anhydride probably
due to the regeneration of COOH after hydrolysis.20 The anhydride might further react directly with primary
amines and form equal amounts of amide bonds. Furthermore, a stable N-acylurea might be formed after intramolecular acyl rearrangements.
However, under the reaction conditions applied in our experiments,
this is negligible because it only becomes important at high temperatures
and high reactant concentrations. Moreover, the reactivity of NHS-ester
is highly dependent on pH, which is attributed to different degrees
of the protonation of the amine groups. Furthermore, the adjacent
amino acids have also an impact on the reactivity of NHS-ester. Although
primary amines are most likely to form NHS-ester, other groups present
in peptide side chains (−OH for tyrosine, serine, threonine;
guanidinium for arginine; and sulfhydryls for cysteines) might also
react. Conclusively, it should be noted that the buffer pH of the
bioconjugation reaction has to be controlled precisely to favor the
N-terminal reaction versus side-chain reactions of the peptides.20−23,33

Scheme 1 Bioconjugation Procedure
of Homo-PAA Brush via EDC/NHS Chemisorption,
The first formed intermediate, O-acylurea, of the EDC/NHS activation is able to react in
different ways depending on the reaction conditions.

The main product is NHS-ester. By hydrolysis
of O-acylurea, the COOH functionalities will be regenerated.
Further byproducts are the anhydride and N-acylurea.
Both NHS-ester and the anhydride are reactive toward NH2-containing biomolecules (herein RGD peptide: GRGDS) and result in
covalent binding of the biomolecule to the PAA brush surface by amide
formation mainly between the primary amine at the free N-terminus
of the peptide, that is, on the glycine residue and the activated
ester groups at the PAA. Although GRGDS has a second amine group as
part of the guanidinium side group of the arginine amino acid, the
primary amine on the glycine residue is expected to be more nucleophilic
and more reactive.

Because of the complexity
of the illustrated bioconjugation reaction,
our investigation aimed at the optimization of the GRGDS chemisorption
process. First of all, a set of seven selected bioconjugation protocols
based on the activation and covalent binding methods listed in Table 1 was established.
Details of the particular protocols (Prot. I–Prot. VII) are
summarized in Table 1. As surface chemical analytical tool, in situ ATR-FTIR spectroscopy
was used. ATR-FTIR spectra of the GRGDS-functionalized PAA brush can
be found in Figure 2a. The quantitative analysis was based on amide I and amide II band
integrals, which can be used as a direct measure of the bound GRGDS
amount if the polymer layer is sufficiently thin (d < 100 nm). A similar analytical approach has been reported.34−36 Determined amide band integrals are given in Figure 2b, illustrating and comparing the different
GRGDS bioconjugation efficiencies. The initial GRGDS concentration
was 0.1 mg/mL for all experiments.

Figure 2 ATR-FTIR analysis of GRGDS bioconjugation
(0.1 mg/mL) onto homo-PAA
brush surfaces. Comparison of exemplarily selected EDC/NHS chemisorption
protocols according to Table 2. (a) Final surface state after GRGDS chemisorption. Curves
were shifted along the vertical axis for better display. Rinsing with
acetate solution of pH 4.0 was performed before the analysis. (b)
Absorbance units refer to normalized relative band intensities of
the amide I and amide II as well as the sum of the amide I and amide
II vibration frequency bands.

Table 1 EDC/NHS Chemisorption of GRGDS Peptide
onto Homo-PAA Brush Surfacesa,b
a Experimental parameters
of the final
bioconjugation Protocols I–VII.

b The colors used for each protocol
are identical with those used in the figures of ATR-FTIR (Figures 2 and 3), VIS–SE (Figures 4 and 5), and HPLC (Figure 6) analyses.

Concerning the activation step,
for an optimal GRGDS conjugation
efficiency, several factors, such as solvent, pH, and the control
of competitive side reactions, have to be considered. Alternatively
to aqueous solutions, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is often used to dissolve
EDC/NHS. Thereby, the hydrolysis of the intermediate products can
be avoided.37 Protocol I refers to the
GRGDS conjugation after activation in DMSO. Figure 2b shows low amide I and amide II band integrals,
indicating low amounts of immobilized GRGDS. In this case, the covalent
binding of GRGDS to the PAA brush was insufficient. Therefore, buffer
solutions were used for the following protocols.

The EDC reaction
is most efficient under slightly acidic (pH 5–6)
conditions and must be performed in carboxyl- and amine-free buffers.37,38 In Figure 2, Protocol
II shows results for phosphate buffer at pH 6. It is known that the
dissociation of carboxylic groups is advantageous for an effective
COO– turnover to the O-acylurea
intermediate.22,39 Attendant, in situ ellipsometric
analysis has shown a considerably stronger swelling of the brush layer
at pH 6 due to a larger degree of dissociation of the COOH groups
of the brush (data not shown). The ionic strength of all used buffers
was kept constant at 100 mM. Comparing Protocol II with Protocol III,
for which 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES)
buffer was used instead of phosphate buffer during the activation
step, we could see an 8% increase in amide I + amide II intensities.
This could be explained by the fact that EDC can be slightly reactive
toward phosphate groups, which act as competitive inhibitors in the
very first step of the activation procedure.37 An increase in the concentration of EDC could alternatively solve
this problem.

One main consideration that should be taken into
account concerning
the covalent binding reaction step is the competition between the
NHS-ester hydrolysis and the reaction with primary amines. The half-life
of NHS-ester strongly depends on the reaction temperature and the
pH of the buffer solution. Because the existence of hydroxyl ions
promotes the hydrolysis of NHS-ester, pH > 8 is not preferable.
A
comparison of Protocols IV and V (Figure 2) shows the influence of the specific
buffers, PBS (pH 7.4) and borate (pH 8.0), applied in the
final covalent conjugation step. An increase in amide I + amide II
intensities of around 16% was observed here. Therefore, as for various
other published protocols, the use of borate buffer was proved to
be beneficial compared to that of PBS during GRGDS-peptide chemisorption.37,40−42

The variation of the molar ratio of
EDC to NHS had only a minor influence on the conjugated GRGDS
amount. Protocol
III showed an increase of about 3% in amide I + amide II intensities
of compared to that of Protocol IV, where 1 mM EDC and 2.5 mM NHS
dissolved in MES buffer solution (pH 6, 100 mM) were employed.

Along with the effect of the pH value on the NHS-ester lifetime,
the selected conjugation temperature is an important parameter. Because
the activity of NHS-ester may significantly increase at a lower reaction temperature, the covalent binding of the GRGDS was performed
comparatively at 4 °C (Protocol V) and 25 °C (Protocol VI).41 However, at 25 °C, an 8% increase in amide
I + amide II intensities compared to that in the reaction at 4 °C
was observed (see Figure 2). Presumably, the higher diffusion rate of GRGDS at 25 °C
results in a better amidation efficiency despite the high hydrolysis
rate and short lifetime of NHS-ester with around 4–5 h at 25
°C.37

Moreover, the reaction time had a significant
effect on the bioconjugation efficiency. The covalent GRGDS binding
onto PAA brushes according to Protocol VI was performed for 2 h, whereas
the bioconjugation lasted 16 h referring to Protocol VII. A significant
increase of 39% in amide I + amide II intensities was found for the
longer conjugation time.

In conclusion, an overall 78% increase
of the bioconjugation efficiency
was achieved proceeding from Protocols I to VII. The reaction time
had the greatest impact on the chemisorbed GRGDS-peptide amount and
was finally fixed at 16 h, for best chemisorption results. The EDC/NHS
molar ratio had only a slight effect, whereas the temperature during
the covalent binding step strongly influenced the GRGDS conjugation
efficiency. The final reaction temperature was 25 °C. The precise
selection of solvents and buffers with appropriate pH value and ionic
strength played a significant role in each bioconjugation step. In
summary, the investigation and comparison of the exemplarily selected
seven bioconjugation protocols have evidenced that a precise control
of the EDC/NHS chemisorption parameters guarantees a high RGD-peptide
conjugation efficiency to polymer brush films.

Figure 2 illustrates
the results obtained for the seven protocols in terms of ATR-FTIR
spectra (a) and the normalized amide I and amide II band integrals
(b). The selected colors of the spectra (a) correspond to those of
the normalized amide integral bars (b) as well as to the description
of the protocols in Table 2. Importantly, the respective swollen thicknesses
were smaller than 80 nm, classifying these films as “thin films”
according to Harrick, from which it can be approximated that the measured
band integrals are linear to the bound peptide amount (see also above).43 Conclusively, the GRGDS bioconjugation via EDC/NHS
chemisorption Protocol VII could be identified as the most efficient
one.

Table 2 Infrared Band Assignments in the Carbonyl
Stretching Frequency Region44
wavenumber
(cm–1)	vibration
mode	molecular
assignment	
1729	ν (C=O), carbonyl stretching	poly(glycidyl methacrylate) (PGMA) (dry), ester	
1713	ν (C=O), carbonyl stretching	PAA (dry), COOH	
1720	ν (C=O), carbonyl stretching	PAA (in situ), COOH	
1556	νa(C=O), assymm. stretching	PAA (in situ), COO–	
1800	ν (C=O), carbonyl stretch	NHS-ester	
1761	νs (C=O), imidyl symmetric stretching	NHS-ester	
1732	νas (C=O), imidyl assymmetric stretching	NHS-ester, C=O	
1660	amide I, mainly
ν(C), C=O stretching	RGD, amide groups	
1550	amide II, mainly δ(N–H), N–H bending	RGD, amide groups	
2.4 Analysis of the Optimized
GRGDS Peptide Bioconjugation
Procedure Using Dynamic in Situ ATR-FTIR
Dynamic in situ
ATR-FTIR data describe the chemical composition changes at the polymer
brush surface during bioconjugation over a certain time period. With
respect to a detailed illustration of the EDC/NHS activation step
and the GRGDS conjugation step, in situ ATR-FTIR spectra were subsequently
recorded using a liquid cell for the chemisorption, according to Protocol
VII (see Section 2.3) for both homo-PAA brushes and PNIPAAm–PAA (80:20) binary
brushes analogously.

Figure 3a shows time-dependent in situ
ATR-FTIR spectra recorded in the wavenumber region of 1900–1500
cm–1 in each surface preparation step of the GRGDS
bioconjugation onto the PAA brush surface. The recorded time lapse
starts from the bottom gray thick line, continues with the gray thinner
lines, and ends up with the red line, which represents the final measurement
of each modification step. Each line has a time frame distance of t = 5 min from the next spectrum line. Table 2 summarizes the vibrational
band assignments in the focused wavenumber region at the final time
point of each examined surface state.

Figure 3 In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of GRGDS bioconjugation
(0.1 mg/mL) onto
polymer brushes. (a) GRGDS covalent binding to PAA brush; (b) GRGDS
covalent binding to PNIPAAm–PAA brush with a ratio of 80:20.
The experiment was performed in five discrete steps. Step I: swelling
of the brush in MES; step II: EDC/NHS activation; step III: GRGDS
conjugation; step IV: washing with PBS; and step V: quenching with
acetate buffer at pH 4.0. The spectra were dynamically recorded over
the entire time frame of each experimental step with a time step of t = 5 min. Curves were shifted along the vertical axis for
better display.

Figure 3a (I) shows
the ATR-FTIR spectrum of the PAA brush layer in MES buffer (pH 6).
The swelling of the brush was recorded for 15 min to ensure equilibrium.
The band at 1729 cm–1 is attributed to the C=O
stretching vibration of the underlying PGMA layer (ester group). Generally,
the PAA brush shows two discrete vibrational bands in the examined
region: at 1556 cm–1, where the asymmetric stretching
vibration, νa(COO–), of dissociated
COO– groups appears, and at 1720 cm–1, attributed to the carbonyl stretching vibration, ν(C=O),
of protonated COOH groups. The intensity ratio of those signals depends
on the degree of protonation of the PAA and thus also on the ionic
strength and pH of the solution. The first and last spectra of the
dynamic swelling measurements are identical, denoting the instantaneous
swelling of the brush layer and nearly full dissociation of the carboxylic
acid groups at pH 6.

For the EDC/NHS-activated PAA brush in Figure 3a (II), three new
vibrational bands appear:
at 1800 cm–1, assigned to NHS-ester; 1761 cm–1, assigned to the carbonyl stretch; and 1732 cm–1, assigned to the symmetric and asymmetric vibrations
of the C=O. A slight shift to lower frequencies over time could
be seen here for the first 30 min of the measurement, denoting the
increased amount of activated carboxylic groups over this time frame.
Interestingly, there was no obvious sign of N-acylurea
and anhydride byproducts during the carboxylic group activation of
PAA brush.

The amidation kinetics during chemisorption for 2
h is shown in Figure 3a (III). The NHS-ester
band vanishes with time, whereas, simultaneously, the amide I and
amide II bands gradually increase at 1660 and 1550 cm–1, respectively, denoting GRGDS-peptide bioconjugation. On a subsequent
step, the surface was thoroughly rinsed with PBS, and all loosely
bound GRGDS was washed away, whereas the nonreacted NHS-ester was
hydrolyzed back to COOH (Figure 3a, IV). Finally, to overcome the overlap of the νa(COO–) band (1556 cm–1) and the amide II band (1550 cm–1), the surface
was quenched with an acetate buffer (pH = 4). Upon protonation of
the carboxylic groups, a new carbonyl stretching band (ν(C=O))
appeared at 1720 cm–1 (Figure 3a, V), which is assigned to COOH groups.
As the benefit of this procedure, the spectrum of step (V) shows the
quantitatively evaluable amide I and amide II bands without spectral
overlap with the PAA bands.

In comparison, Figure 3b shows the ATR-FTIR spectra
on the GRGDS bioconjugation onto
the PNIPAAm–PAA binary brush. Because of the PNIPAAm component
of the binary brush, several additional bands were observed in all
taken spectra (Figure 3b, I–V). For instance, the PNIPAAm polymer caused an additional
amide I band at 1630 cm–1 and an amide II band between
1535 and 1545 cm–1, which further overlaps with
the νa(COO–) band at 1556 cm–1 originated from the deprotonation of COOH groups
of the PAA component at pH 6. Therefore, both amide bands are more
pronounced in all binary brush spectra. Furthermore, in the ATR-FTIR
spectra of PNIPAAm–PAA binary brushes, an additional ν(CH)
stretching vibration of the isopropyl groups of PNIPAAm was detected
at around 2980 cm–1, which is not shown in the zoomed-in
spectra between 1500 and 1900 cm–1.

Summing
up, in situ ATR-FTIR was used to analyze the GRGDS bioconjugation
process directly at the polymer brush surface on the basis of the
dynamic increase and decrease of diagnostic infrared bands. Of particular
relevance were the ATR-FTIR spectra after the EDC/NHS activation (II)
as well as after the GRGDS conjugation (III). For both polymer brush
systems, PAA and PNIPAAm–PAA, no bioconjugation byproducts
were detected. Comparing Figure 3a,b (II in both), the relevant bands of the NHS-ester
intermediate were less pronounced in the case of binary PNIPAAm–PAA
brush activation compared to the homo-PAA brush because of the lower
amount of the PAA component (20%) in the former. However, both dynamic
conjugation spectra, Figure 3a,b (III in both), prove the successful GRGDS covalent binding
to both PAA and PNIPAAm–PAA brushes. While for both systems
the NHS-ester bands disappeared, the intensity of the GRGDS-peptide
bands, amide I and amide II, increased. After the rinsing step (IV)
and the quenching step (V) in Figure 3b, no differences were observed between these corresponding
spectra. In contrast to this, a relevant difference between the conjugation
spectrum (III), the rinsing spectrum (IV), and the quenching spectrum
(V) can be seen in Figure 3a. In case of the homopolymer brush, the washing and quenching
procedure resulted obviously in the removal of a certain amount of
weakly bound GRGDS and the regeneration of carboxylic groups after
the hydrolysis of the unreacted NHS-ester. Finally, the amide I and
amide II band intensities after quenching verify the formation of
a stable bioconjugation of both polymer brushes.

2.5 In Situ VIS–SE Analysis of GRGDS Bioconjugation
Besides the detailed ATR-FTIR analysis, in situ VIS–SE experiments
were carried out to monitor each step of the bioconjugation process
performed in the ellipsometry batch cell over time. The ellipsometric
study was focused on the monitoring of the GRGDS bioconjugation for
about 2 h under optimal conditions regarding Protocol VI in comparison
to the less optimized bioconjugation reaction of Protocol II (see Table 2). In general, the
experimental parameters of Protocol VI and the final optimized Protocol
VII were the same except the longer reaction time of 16 h used for
Protocol VII and the absence of shaking for the monitoring of kinetics
by in situ ellipsometry.

Initially, the dry PAA brush layer
thickness was 8.0 nm. The PAA brush substrate was equilibrated in
either 100 mM phosphate (Protocol II) or 100 mM MES (Protocol VI)
at pH 6. At this pH, the COOH groups were dissociated, and the PAA
brush layer thickness increased with a swelling ratio (dswollen/ddry) of approximately
9.0 for all protocols. After the exchange of the buffer against the
EDC/NHS activation solution, the PAA brush rapidly collapsed upon
reaction of the COO– groups with EDC/NHS components
independent of the EDC/NHS ratio. Once the EDC/NHS solution was substituted
by the GRGDS solution, the bioconjugation reaction was initiated. Figure 4a shows the continuous increase of layer thickness and the
decrease of refractive index during the GRGDS chemisorption onto homo-PAA
brushes with bioconjugation time. During the ellipsometric measurements,
the qualitative changes of the PAA brush layer upon the covalent GRGDS
binding are influenced by the different bioconjugation temperatures
and buffer solutions of Protocols II and VI. In comparison, Figure 4b describes the amount
of GRGDS chemisorbed onto the PAA brush surface under the experimental
conditions of both protocols. Obviously, the optimized bioconjugation
conditions of Protocol VI led to faster changes during the chemisorption
reaction and reached a plateau value, whereas the GRGDS bioconjugation
according to Protocol II is slower and less effective.

Figure 4 In situ VIS–SE
monitoring of GRGDS bioconjugation (0.1 mg/mL)
onto homo-PAA brushes. (a) Detection of PAA layer thickness and refractive
index changes during bioconjugation. (b) The time-dependent GRGDS
amount (mg/m2) chemisorbed onto the PAA brush surfaces
comparing Protocols II and VI. In situ ellipsometry measurements are
performed in a batch cell without stirring.

Moreover, additional ellipsometric measurements were carried
out
to evaluate the influence of different initial GRGDS concentrations
(0.05, 0.1, 0.25, and 0.5 mg/mL) on the peptide saturation of the
homo-PAA brush layer during 16 h of bioconjugation in the immobilization
chamber with additional shaking (see Section 4.4). The experiments were done comparatively
under less optimal (Protocol II) and most optimal (Protocol VII) chemisorption
conditions, referring to Table 2.

Figure 5 shows the
quantitative results of the GRGDS-bioconjugated homo-PAA brush surface.
As expected, increasing initial peptide concentrations caused an increasing
amount of immobilized GRGDS peptide. The optimal process (Protocol
VII (red)) led to about 3-fold higher amounts of bound GRGDS for the
same initial peptide concentration, which demonstrates again the higher
bioconjugation efficiency of Protocol VII. This is attributed to the
higher diffusion rates and consequently the faster chemisorption at
25 °C. Therefore, interactions between GRGDS peptides themselves
and between the PAA brush surface and the GRGDS peptide are different
for both chemisorption protocols.37Figure 5 also illustrates
that the biofunctionalization of PAA-containing polymer brushes can
be effectively accomplished only by covalent binding of functional
GRGDS peptides and not by GRGDS-peptide physisorption. For the Protocol
VII and 0.1 mg/mL concentration of GRGDS in solution, a 20% functionalization
efficiency of the carboxylic groups can be estimated from the chemisorbed
amount of GRGDS (12 mg/m2) (Figure 2) and the amount of PAA at the surface (7
mg/m2).

Figure 5 Quantitative VIS–SE analysis of the amount of GRGDS,
Γ
(mg/m2), bound to homo-PAA brushes as a function of GRGDS
concentration. Comparison of the GRGDS bioconjugation efficiency between
the less optimal Protocol II and the most optimal Protocol VII as
well as with the GRGDS physisorption results under the same conditions
as for conjugation.

2.6 Analysis
of GRGDS Bioconjugation via Acidic
Hydrolysis/HPLC
To verify the amounts of GRGDS peptides bioconjugated
to polymer brushes as determined by ellipsometry, a chromatographic
analysis of the amino acids was performed after the acidic hydrolysis
of the surface-bound GRGDS peptide.29

Figure 6 shows the surface-bound GRGDS amount after physisorption
and chemisorption onto PAA, PNIPAAm–PAA (PN–PAA) 20:80,
and PNIPAAm–PAA 80:20 polymer brushes using an initial GRGDS
peptide concentration of 0.1 mg/mL. On the one hand, it was proved
that upon physisorption, almost no GRGDS was adsorbed to any of the
investigated PAA-containing polymer brushes (Figure 6, light gray column). On the other hand,
GRGDS was successfully chemisorbed to the PAA component of the brush
using Protocol VII (Figure 6, red column). The GRGDS amount chemisorbed to the binary
brushes decreased with their PAA concentration: 5.6 mg/m2 (homo-PAA) > 5.2 mg/m2 (binary PN–PAA 20:80)
>
4.5 mg/m2 (PN–PAA 80:20). However, this decrease
was smaller than the decrease of the PAA concentration in the binary
brushes from 80 to 20%. It seems that dilution of the PAA chains by
PNIPAAm improves the accessibility of the PAA chains and the carboxylic
acid group for bioconjugation. The binary brush PNIPAAm–PAA
80:20 will be a promising candidate for further conformational considerations
with respect to a possible spatial GRGDS arrangement, which is important
for cell-responsive studies.

Figure 6 Quantification of the GRGDS peptide bound to
a homo-PAA brush and
to binary PNIPAAm–PAA brushes with ratios 20:80 and 80:20 by
acidic hydrolysis and subsequent HPLC analysis. Comparison of physisorption
and chemisorption following the optimized Protocol VII. Initial GRGDS
concentration was 0.1 mg/mL. The physisorbed amounts were below the
detection limit (n.d.).

Notably, the HPLC calculated amount, ΓGRGDS, is
in the same range but not in an absolute agreement with the modeled
VIS–SE data (see Section 2.5). We assume that a considerable amount of peptide
has been absorbed either on the walls or on the underlying surface
of the incubator (Petri dish microplates) or washed away. Consequently,
the efficiency of the conjugation (feed vs obtained) in case of the
HPLC analysis was found to be low (7.5% for PAA polymer surface).

3 Conclusions
This study aimed at a detailed
understanding of the interfacial
bioconjugation of the RGD-peptide GRGDS with polymer brush coatings
in the context of designing nanoscale biointerfaces with versatile
biomedical cues. Two homopolymer brushes, PAA and PNIPAAm, and a two
binary polymer brush system (PNIPAAm–PAA) prepared by the grafting-to approach were used. The pentapeptide, GRGDS,
was bound via physisorption or chemisorption. As the main research
issue, in situ monitoring of the GRGDS bioconjugation was addressed
by complementary analytical techniques such as in situ ATR-FTIR, in
situ VIS–SE, and acid hydrolysis/HPLC analyses.

Because
it was shown that the GRGDS physisorption on all tested
brush coatings was minimal, chemisorption of GRGDS was mandatory.

Hence, GRGDS was covalently bound to the PAA component on the basis
of the carboxyl-to-amine bioconjugation using EDC and NHS simultaneously.
In situ monitoring of the chemisorption steps by ATR-FTIR analysis
revealed the influence of experimental parameters, such as the chosen
buffer, reaction time, and temperature, and led to the identification
of optimal conditions as 100 mM MES buffer at pH 6 for activation
and 100 mM borate buffer at pH 8, 16 h, and T = 25
°C for conjugation. This method, which is sensitive to chemical
changes at the interface, delivered information about successful PAA
activation as well as via changes of the band intensities of NHS-ester
and amide I and amide II, a confirmation of the effectiveness of the
GRGDS bioconjugation.

Complementarily, in situ VIS–SE
measurements provided brush
thicknesses and adsorbed GRGDS amounts, which were verified by direct
quantitative amino acid analysis using acidic hydrolysis and subsequent
HPLC analysis, as an additional measure of the effectiveness of the
bioconjugation process. On the basis of these findings, a thermoresponsive
PNIPAAm–PAA binary brush with a ratio of 80:20 functionalized
with a considerably high amount of GRGDS peptide was produced. This
system is expected to have a specific relevance for temperature-responsive
GRGDS presentation at the brush surface for further investigations,
such as cell-instructive studies. In summary, the reported bioconjugation
approach shown exemplarily for GRGDS paves the way for manifold applications
of polymer brush platforms in bioscience, bioengineering, and bionanotechnology,
where the surface-induced modulation of cellular functions, such as
adhesion, spreading, migration, proliferation, and cytoskeletal organization,
is required.

4 Experimental Procedures
4.1 Materials
PGMA (Mn = 17 500
g/mol, Mw/Mn = 1.7), PAA (Mn = 25 000 g/mol, Mw/Mn = 1.2), and
carboxy-terminated PNIPAAm (Mn = 42 000
g/mol, Mw/Mn = 1.2) were purchased from
Polymer Source, Inc., Canada. Ethanol absolute, chloroform (CHCl3), and acetic acid were obtained from VWR, Fisher, and Merck
(all Germany), respectively. PBS (tablets, pH 7.4), EDC, NHS, potassium
phosphate dibasic trihydrate, sodium phosphate dibasic dihydrate,
sodium hydroxide, boric acid, and MES were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(Germany). Fibronectin active fragment Gly-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (GRGDS)
was obtained from Peptides International Inc. (Louisville, KY and
Canada). Silicon wafers oriented in [100] direction and with 2 nm
native SiO2 layer from Si-Mat (Landsberg, Germany) were
used as substrates.

4.2 Preparation of Polymer
Brushes
Polymer
brushes were prepared by the grafting-to method according
to previously published work.7,25,26 Briefly, silicon wafer pieces (size 1.3 cm × 2 cm) were cleaned
with ethanol by ultrasonication and subsequently activated in an oxygen
plasma chamber (1 min at 100 W). To prepare anchoring layers for the
brush polymers on the silicon substrates, PGMA solution (0.02 wt %
in chloroform) was spin-coated and annealed at 100 °C under vacuum
for 20 min, resulting in a thin reactive layer with epoxy groups for
the following grafting-to step. A second polymer
solution consisting of PAA (1 wt % in ethanol) was spin-coated and
annealed at 80 °C for 30 min. The nongrafted polymer was removed
by washing the samples in ethanol for 20 min and drying them with
a N2 flux. The procedure led to the fabrication of PAA
homopolymer pseudobrushes, where the polymers are grafted with more
than one anchoring point to the surface, forming loops and tails.
These layers behave similarly to polymer brushes as the number of
anchoring points (n) is between 1 and 2 and the swelling
ratio is comparable to the swelling ratio of a PAA brush made by end-tethered
polymers.45,46 For the preparation of PNIPAAm homopolymer
brushes, a solution of carboxy-terminated PNIPAAm (1 wt% in chloroform)
was spin-coated on the PGMA layer and subsequently annealed at 150
°C overnight. The unbound polymer was extracted in water for
4 h, and the brushes were finally dried by a N2 flux. For
the preparation of binary brushes, carboxy-terminated PNIPAAm (1 wt%
in chloroform) was initially spin-coated and annealed at different
time intervals to achieve different grafted amounts of PNIPAAm. After
extraction with water, PAA was grafted to the surface in the same
manner as for the homopolymer brush. The composition of the binary
brushes was determined by the ratio of the subsequent polymer layer
thickness determined by ellipsometry.7 A
detailed physicochemical analysis of particular polymer brushes was
published previously.26,45

4.3 Biofunctionalization
of Polymer Brushes with
RGD Peptides
Both physisorption and chemisorption of RGD
peptides onto polymer brushes were carried out by using a home-built
immobilization chamber designed by König.47 For physisorption, GRGDS in buffer solution was adsorbed
overnight onto primarily swollen polymer brush surfaces under gentle
stirring. The adsorption on PNIPAAm brushes was performed with PBS
buffer (pH = 7.4) at different temperatures (25 or 40 °C), lower
and higher than the LCST of PNIPAAm (around 32 °C). The physisorption
on PAA brushes was done in buffers with varied pH values at 25 °C.
For pHs 5 and 6, a 100 mM sodium acetate buffer was used, and for
pHs 7 and 8, a 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer was used. GRGDS solutions
were prepared with the following concentrations: 0.05, 0.1, 0.25,
and 0.5 mg/mL.

For the bioconjugation process via EDC/NHS, we
investigated several experimental reaction parameters, such as the
concentration and molar ratio of the activation and conjugation reagents,
buffer characteristics, activation and conjugation times, and temperatures,
and the final washing steps on the GRGDS-peptide conjugation efficiency. Table 3 gives a general overview
of the investigated chemisorption parameters. For all experiments
illustrated in the following figures, the GRGDS-peptide concentration
of 0.1 mg/mL was used.

Table 3 Summary of All Comparatively
Investigated
Reaction Parameters Tested for the GRGDS Bioconjugation via EDC/NHS
Chemisorption
 	activation
(A)	
parameters	method A-I	method A-II	
activation buffer	100 mM MES; pH 6	100 mM phosphate; pH 6	
EDC/NHS molar ratio	2.5/1 vs 1/2.5	2.5/1 vs 1/2.5	
temperature	25 °C	25 °C	
activation time	30 min to 2 h	30 min to 2 h	
rinsing	no rinsing vs with MES buffer	no rinsing vs with phosphate
buffer	
 	covalent
binding (B)	
parameters	method B-I	method B-II	
conjugation buffer	100 mM borate, pH 8	100 mM PBS; pH 7.4	
temperature	4 vs 25 °C	4 vs 25 °C	
conjugation time	30 min to 16 h	30 min to 16 h	
rinsing	1. thorough washing with PBS	
2. quenching with acetate buffer; pH 4	
In detail, for the most optimal Protocol VII of Table 2, the following steps
were performed.
Before the activation procedure, the polymer brush surface was incubated
with 1 mL of MES buffer (pH 6; 100 mM) for 10 min. Then, the surface
was aspirated, and 1 mL of EDC/NHS (molar ratio, 1:2.5) was added
for 30 min to activate the COOH groups. For the covalent binding,
the surface was aspirated, and 0.1 mg/mL GRGDS in borate buffer (pH
8; 100 mM) was added; chemisorption was performed for 16 h under shaking.
EDC/NHS was provided in large excess (μmol) compared to the
amount of carboxylic groups (nmol) at the PAA chains. The surface
was thoroughly washed with PBS buffer before analytical testing.

4.4 Surface Characterization Methods
4.4.1 ATR-FTIR
ATR-FTIR spectra were
recorded on a BRUKER TENSOR 27 spectrometer (Bruker Optics GmbH, Ettlingen,
Germany) equipped with a dedicated in situ ATR-FTIR device (OPTISPEC,
Zürich, Switzerland). In situ ATR-FTIR flow cells (custom made)
with four separated liquid compartments on the lower and upper halves
of the front and rear housing trapezoidal internal reflection elements
(IRE, KOMLAS GmbH, Berlin) of silicon (Si) with dimensions 50 ×
20 × 2 mm3 allowing incident angles (θ) of 45°
were used. For the ATR-FTIR experiments, a dedicated optical ATR attachment
operating by the “single-beam-sample reference” (SBSR)
concept (OPTISPEC, Zürich, Switzerland) was used on the basis
of a recording sample (silicon/polymer, IS) and a reference (silicon) intensity (IR) quasi-simultaneously by shuttling the upper (sample) and lower
halves (reference) of the Si-IRE separately into the IR beam (lift).
Relating IS to IR results in well-compensated ATR-FTIR absorbance spectra according
to A = −log(IS/IR).

In detail, after a thorough
cleaning of the Si-IRE by plasma cleaning under reduced air pressure
(Plasma Cleaner, Harrick, Ossining), the Si-IRE was first coated by
anchoring a PGMA layer according to the protocol given above on the
full front side. Thereafter, the lower half (50 × 10 × 2
mm3) of the Si-IRE was thoroughly cleaned using a folded
soft tissue soaked in ethanol, and the corresponding ATR-FTIR spectrum
of PGMA was recorded. In the second step, the PAA or PNIPAAm–PAA
brush was grafted to this PGMA layer according to
the protocol given above, and the corresponding PGMA/brush ATR-FTIR
spectrum was recorded. The same procedure was applied for the activation
step, the GRGDS-peptide binding step, and further steps. The ATR-FTIR
spectra of actual total layer assemblies were obtained by subtracting
the spectrum of bare Si-IRE, whereas those of the corresponding actual
top layers (e.g., bound RGD peptide) could be obtained by subtracting
the spectrum of the respective underlying layer assemblies. The samples
were analyzed in either the dry state or the wet state, where after
each modification step the compartments were either purged by N2 or filled with respective aqueous medium. Measurements after
each step were performed after an equilibration time of 10 min. Experimental
analysis was performed using OPUS software (version 7.0) supplied
by BRUKER Optics GmbH (Ettlingen, Germany).

4.4.2 In
Situ Spectroscopic Ellipsometry (VIS–SE)
The in situ
ellipsometric setup for measurements on highly swellable
polymer brushes and subsequent biomolecule conjugation as well as
modeling of these systems has been reviewed recently.48 In the present study, a spectroscopic ellipsometer equipped
with a rotating compensator (α-SE; Woollam Co., Inc., Lincoln
NE) was used. The ellipsometric data, Δ (relative phase shift)
and tan Ψ (relative amplitude ratio), were recorded at
wavelengths within the visible optical range of 400–800 nm.
The angle of incidence (Φ0) was kept constant at
70°, close to the Brewster angle of silicon. All data were acquired
and analyzed using Complete EASE software, version 4.46. The in situ
measurements for the investigation of the peptide conjugation were
performed in different buffers at 25 °C using a quartz cuvette
(TSL Spectrosil, Hellma, Muellheim, Germany). The wafers were kept
fixed in the cuvette by a home-built Teflon holder.

The ellipsometric
modeling of the polymer brushes was based on a multilayer box model
with distinct interfaces consisting of silicon, silicon dioxide, anchoring
layer PGMA, and the polymer brush to evaluate the refractive index
(n) as well as dry and swollen brush thickness (d) of the layers. The optical dispersion relations for silicon
and silicon oxide were taken from the software library, and the refractive
index of PGMA was set to n(PGMA) = 1.525.
The dependence of the refractive index on the wavelength was described
by the Cauchy relation: n(λ) = A + B/λ2. In case of very thin (d < 10 nm), dry brush films, the Cauchy parameters, A
and B, were modeled from measurements of a 50 nm thick dry polymer
layer and applied as fixed values in the Cauchy relation. The extinction
coefficients, k(λ), of the PGMA and brushes
are zero in the measured spectral range.

Modeling RGD-peptide
adsorption on swollen, soft polymer brush
films from ellipsometric data requires different analysis models than
for smooth, rigid surfaces because of the increased complexity of
the RGD-brush system. No sharp interface between the peptide and the
polymer brush is present, and the peptide is assumed to penetrate
into the PEL brush layer. Thus, a composite polymer–peptide
box layer is modeled, resulting in an average Cauchy dispersion for
both components, which does not differentiate between the incorporation
mode (primary: onto the PGMA layer; secondary: at the brush–solution
interface; or ternary: along the polymer chains). The resulting parameters
of the model are a combined in situ layer thickness (dcomb) and the average dispersion relation (ncomb(λ)). To determine the GRGDS-peptide amount
chemisorbed onto the brush surface, a modified de Feijter equation
was used. 1  Here, dbrush and nbrush are the parameters of the swollen brush
layer before adsorption, namb is the refractive
index of the ambient solution, and (dn/dc)GRGDS = 0.185 cm3/g is the refractive index
increment of the peptide, averaged over the individual amino acids.49 The relation dadd = dcomb – dbrush accounts for changes in the layer thickness due to the
adsorption process. It can be shown that eq 1 is valid for dadd positive or negative and represents a virtual two-layer approach
for calculation only. Changes in the brush conformation upon adsorption
do not have to be regarded directly, given that the amount of brush
polymer stays constant at the surface. Typically, n (λ = 633 nm) was chosen for the calculations.

4.4.3 Acidic Hydrolysis and Subsequent HPLC
Quantification
of the bioconjugated GRGDS, which was either physisorbed
or chemisorbed on polymer brushes, was performed by acidic hydrolysis
of the surface-bound peptide sequence and subsequent reverse-phase
HPLC analysis of the amino acids, as described in Salchert et al.
in detail.29 Therefore, GRGDS-functionalized
polymer brushes were first subjected to vapor-phase hydrolysis in
vacuum using 6 M HCl at 110 °C for 24 h and subsequent neutralization.
The extraction of amino acids from the samples was accomplished by
repeated rinsing with a definite volume of 50 mM sodium acetate buffer
at pH 6.8. A defined volume of this extract was injected into the
HPLC system (Agilent 1100 LC), and the dissolved amino acids were
chromatographically separated after precolumn derivatization with
ortho-phthalaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich) on a Zorbax SBC18 column (4.6
× 150 mm2, 3.5 μm, Agilent Technologies, Boeblingen,
Germany) followed by a fluorescence detection (excitation wavelength
of 335 nm, emission measured at 455 nm). At least two empty glass
tubes without samples were checked in parallel to give a blank value.
After calibration with an amino acid standard for fluorescence detection
(Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), the HPLC peaks (area) of aspartic acid,
serine, glycine, and arginine were evaluated to calculate the mass
of GRGDS in the injected volume. From this, the surface concentration
of GRGDS (in mg/m2) was obtained by taking into account
the ratio of the injected volume to the total volume of the amino
acid extract and the surface area of the silicon wafer pieces (1.3
× 2 cm2) and, if necessary, dilution factors.

Author Contributions
∥ E.P. and
U.K. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by the DFG grants STA 324/49-1 and EI 317.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors
acknowledge German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD)
and particularly the RISE program. Special thanks go to Argyro Spinthaki,
who performed the RGD-peptide physisorption on PNIPAAm brushes within
this program. The authors also thank their partners within a joint
project in the frame of “Materials Word Network” funded
by DFG and NSF for fruitful discussions. In particular, they thank
Milauscha Grimmer for the diligent HPLC performance and analysis.
Special thanks also go to Carolin Böhm, who supported the polymer
brush fabrication and analysis.
==== Refs
References
Hynes R. O. 
Integrins:
a family of cell surface receptors . Cell 
1987 , 48 , 549 –554 . 10.1016/0092-8674(87)90233-9 .3028640 
Pierschbacher M. D. ; Ruoslahti E. 
Cell attachment
activity of fibronectin can be duplicated
by small synthetic fragments of the molecule . Nature 
1984 , 309 , 30 –33 . 10.1038/309030a0 .6325925 
Delaittre G. ; Greiner A. M. ; Pauloehrl T. ; Bastmeyer M. ; Barner-Kowollik C. 
Chemical approaches to synthetic
polymer surface biofunctionalization
for targeted cell adhesion using small binding motifs . Soft Matter 
2012 , 8 , 7323 –7347 . 10.1039/C2SM07407A .
Luo Y. ; Shoichet M. S. 
A photolabile hydrogel
for guided three-dimensional
cell growth and migration . Nat. Mater. 
2004 , 3 , 249 –253 . 10.1038/nmat1092 .15034559 
Grafahrend D. ; Heffels K.-H. ; Beer M. V. ; Gasteier P. ; Möller M. ; Boehm G. ; Dalton P. D. ; Groll J. 
Degradable polyester
scaffolds with controlled surface chemistry combining minimal protein
adsorption with specific bioactivation . Nat.
Mater. 
2011 , 10 , 67 –73 . 10.1038/nmat2904 .21151163 
Alves N. M. ; Pashkuleva I. ; Reis R. L. ; Mano J. F. 
Controlling cell
behavior through the design of polymer surfaces . Small 
2010 , 6 , 2208 –2220 . 10.1002/smll.201000233 .20848593 
Minko S. ; Patil S. ; Datsyuk V. ; Simon F. ; Eichhorn K.-J. ; Motornov M. ; Usov D. ; Tokarev I. ; Stamm M. 
Synthesis
of adaptive polymer brushes via “grafting to” approach
from melt . Langmuir 
2002 , 18 , 289 –296 . 10.1021/la015637q .
Lemieux M. ; Usov D. ; Minko S. ; Stamm M. ; Shulha H. ; Tsukruk V. V. 
Reorganization of binary polymer brushes: Reversible
switching of surface microstructures and nanomechanical properties . Macromolecules 
2003 , 36 , 7244 –7255 . 10.1021/ma034634c .
Stuart M. A.
C. ; Huck W. T. ; Genzer J. ; Müller M. ; Ober C. ; Stamm M. ; Sukhorukov G. B. ; Szleifer I. ; Tsukruk V. V. ; Urban M. 
Emerging applications
of stimuli-responsive polymer materials . Nat.
Mater. 
2010 , 9 , 101 –113 . 10.1038/nmat2614 .20094081 
Krishnamoorthy M. ; Hakobyan S. ; Ramstedt M. ; Gautrot J. E. 
Surface-initiated
polymer brushes in the biomedical field: applications in membrane
science, biosensing, cell culture, regenerative medicine and antibacterial
coatings . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 10976 –11026 . 10.1021/cr500252u .25353708 
Jiang H. ; Xu F.-J. 
Biomolecule-functionalized polymer brushes . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 3394 –3426 . 10.1039/c2cs35453e .23348574 
Ebara M. ; Yamato M. ; Aoyagi T. ; Kikuchi A. ; Sakai K. ; Okano T. 
The effect of extensible
PEG tethers on shielding between grafted
thermo-responsive polymer chains and integrin–RGD binding . Biomaterials 
2008 , 29 , 3650 –3655 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2008.05.030 .18582933 
Li L. ; Wu J. ; Gao C. 
Gradient immobilization
of a cell adhesion RGD peptide
on thermal responsive surface for regulating cell adhesion and detachment . Colloids Surf., B 
2011 , 85 , 12 –18 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2010.09.028 .
Navarro M. ; Benetti E. M. ; Zapotoczny S. ; Planell J. A. ; Vancso G. J. 
Buried,
covalently attached RGD peptide motifs in poly (methacrylic acid)
brush layers: the effect of brush structure on cell adhesion . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 10996 –11002 . 10.1021/la800999y .18767823 
Hopwood D. 
A comparison
of the crosslinking abilities of glutaraldehyde, formaldehyde and
α-hydroxyadipaldehyde with bovine serum albumin and casein . Histochem. Cell Biol. 
1969 , 17 , 151 –161 . 10.1007/BF00277781 .
Kiernan J. A. 
Formaldehyde,
formalin, paraformaldehyde and glutaraldehyde: what they are and what
they do . Microsc. Today 
2000 , 1 , 8 –12 .
Harris B. P. ; Kutty J. K. ; Fritz E. W. ; Webb C. K. ; Burg K. J. ; Metters A. T. 
Photopatterned polymer brushes promoting cell adhesion
gradients . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 4467 –4471 . 10.1021/la053417x .16649749 
Kutnyanszky E. ; Vancso G. J. 
Nanomechanical properties of polymer brushes by colloidal
AFM probes . Eur. Polym. J. 
2012 , 48 , 8 –15 . 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2011.09.008 .
Choi W. S. ; Bae J. W. ; Lim H. R. ; Joung Y. K. ; Park J.-C. ; Kwon I. K. ; Park K. D. 
RGD peptide-immobilized
electrospun
matrix of polyurethane for enhanced endothelial cell affinity . Biomed. Mater. 
2008 , 3 , 04410410.1088/1748-6041/3/4/044104 .19029617 
Wang C. ; Yan Q. ; Liu H.-B. ; Zhou X.-H. ; Xiao S.-J. 
Different EDC/NHS
activation mechanisms between PAA and PMAA brushes and the following
amidation reactions . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 12058 –12068 . 10.1021/la202267p .21853994 
Steffens G.C.M. ; Nothdurft L. ; Buse G. ; Thissen H. ; Höcker H. ; Klee D. 
High density binding of proteins and peptides to poly (D, L-lactide)
grafted with polyacrylic acid . Biomaterials 
2002 , 23 , 3523 –3531 . 10.1016/S0142-9612(02)00091-1 .12099298 
Sehgal D. ; Vijay I. K. 
A method for the
high efficiency of water-soluble carbodiimide-mediated
amidation . Anal. Biochem. 
1994 , 218 , 87 –91 . 10.1006/abio.1994.1144 .8053572 
Sam S. ; Touahir L. ; Salvador Andresa J. ; Allongue P. ; Chazalviel J.-N. ; Gouget-Laemmel A. ; Henry de Villeneuve C. ; Moraillon A. ; Ozanam F. ; Gabouze N. 
Semiquantitative study of the EDC/NHS
activation of acid terminal groups at modified porous silicon surfaces . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 809 –814 . 10.1021/la902220a .19725548 
Psarra E.  Biofunctionalization
of Polymer Brush Surfaces . Thesis, Technische Universität Dresden , Germany, 2015 .
Psarra E. ; Foster E. ; König U. ; You J. ; Ueda Y. ; Eichhorn K.-J. ; Müller M. ; Stamm M. ; Revzin A. ; Uhlmann P. 
Growth Factor-Bearing
Polymer Brushes - Versatile Bioactive
Substrates Influencing Cell Response . Biomacromolecules 
2015 , 16 , 3530 –3542 . 10.1021/acs.biomac.5b00967 .26447354 
Psarra E. ; König U. ; Ueda Y. ; Bellmann C. ; Janke A. ; Bittrich E. ; Eichhorn K.-J. ; Uhlmann P. 
Nanostructured Biointerfaces:
Nanoarchitectonics of Thermoresponsive Polymer Brushes Impact Protein
Adsorption and Cell Adhesion . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 12516 –12529 . 10.1021/am508161q .25651080 
Burkert S. ; Bittrich E. ; Kuntzsch M. ; Müller M. ; Eichhorn K.-J. ; Bellmann C. ; Uhlmann P. ; Stamm M. 
Protein resistance
of PNIPAAm brushes: application to switchable protein adsorption . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 1786 –1795 . 10.1021/la902505q .19764778 
Xue C. ; Yonet-Tanyeri N. ; Brouette N. ; Sferrazza M. ; Braun P. V. ; Leckband D. E. 
Protein
adsorption on poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
brushes: dependence on grafting density and chain collapse . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 8810 –8818 . 10.1021/la2001909 .21662243 
Salchert K. ; Pompe T. ; Sperling C. ; Werner C. 
Quantitative Analysis
of Immobilized Proteins and Protein Mixtures by Amino Acid Analysis . J. Chromatogr. A 
2003 , 1005 , 113 –122 . 10.1016/S0021-9673(03)00932-4 .12924786 
Czeslik C. ; Jackler G. ; Hazlett T. ; Gratton E. ; Steitz R. ; Wittemann A. ; Ballauff M. 
Salt-induced protein resistance of
polyelectrolyte brushes studied using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy
and neutron reflectometry . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2004 , 6 , 5557 10.1039/b410805a .
Wittemann A. ; Haupt B. ; Ballauff M. 
Adsorption of proteins on spherical
polyelectrolyte brushes in aqueous solution . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2003 , 5 , 1671 –1677 . 10.1039/b300607g .
de
Vos W. M. ; Biesheuvel P. M. ; de Keizer A. ; Kleijn J. M. ; Cohen Stuart M. A. 
Adsorption of the Protein Bovine
Serum Albumin in a Planar Poly(acrylic acid) Brush Layer As Measured
by Optical Reflectometry . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 6575 –6584 . 10.1021/la8006469 .18507422 
Iwasawa T. ; Wash P. ; Gibson C. ; Rebek J. 
Reaction of an Introverted
Carboxylic Acid with Carbodiimide . Tetrahedron 
2007 , 63 , 6506 –6511 . 10.1016/j.tet.2007.03.075 .18612332 
Müller M. ; Keßler B. ; Houbenov N. ; Bohata K. ; Pientka Z. ; Brynda E. 
pH Dependence
and Protein Selectivity of Poly(ethyleneimine)/Poly(acrylic
acid) Multilayers Studied by in Situ ATR-FTIR Spectroscopy . Biomacromolecules 
2006 , 7 , 1285 –1294 . 10.1021/bm050631r .16602751 
Müller M. ; Torger B. ; Bittrich E. ; Kaul E. ; Ionov L. ; Uhlmann P. ; Stamm M. 
In-situ ATR-FTIR for Characterization
of Thin Biorelated Polymer Films . Thin Solid
Films 
2014 , 556 , 1 –8 . 10.1016/j.tsf.2013.12.025 .
Burkert S. ; Müller M. ; Uhlmann P. ; Stamm M. 
Sensitive Swelling
and Controlled Protein Adsorption on Thin Polymer Brush Layers . Macromol. React. Eng. 
2007 , 1 , F25 –F26 .
Hermanson G. T.  Bioconjugate Techniques , 3 rd ed.; Academic Press , 2013 .
Vashist S.
K. 
Comparison
of 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide based strategies
to crosslink antibodies on amine-functionalized platforms for immunodiagnostic
applications . Diagnostics 
2012 , 2 , 23 –33 . 10.3390/diagnostics2030023 .26859395 
Fischer M. J. E.  Amine Coupling
through EDC/NHS: A Practical Approach . In Surface Plasmon Resonance ; Mol N. J. , Fischer M. J. E.  , Eds.; Methods
in Molecular Biology ; Humana Press , 2010 ; Vol. 627 , pp 55 –73 .
Bentzen E.
L. ; Tomlinson I. D. ; Mason J. ; Gresch P. ; Warnement M. R. ; Wright D. ; Sanders-Bush E. ; Blakely R. ; Rosenthal S. J. 
Surface
modification to reduce nonspecific binding of quantum dots in live
cell assays . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2005 , 16 , 1488 –1494 . 10.1021/bc0502006 .
Bartczak D. ; Kanaras A. G. 
Preparation of peptide-functionalized gold nanoparticles
using one pot EDC/sulfo-NHS coupling . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 10119 –10123 . 10.1021/la2022177 .21728291 
de
los Santos Pereira A. ; Riedel T. ; Brynda E. ; Rodriguez-Emmenegger C. 
Hierarchical
antifouling brushes for biosensing applications . Sens. Actuators, B 
2014 , 202 , 1313 –1321 . 10.1016/j.snb.2014.06.075 .
Harrrick N. J. ; Beckmann K. H.  Internal Reflection
Spectroscopy . In Characterization of Solid
Surfaces ; Kane P. F. , Larrabee G. B.  , Ed.; Plenum Press : New York , 1974 ; pp 215 –245 .
Lin-Vien D. ; Colthup N. B. ; Fateley W. G. ; Grasselli J. G.  The Handbook of Infrared
and Raman Characteristic Frequencies of Organic Molecules ; Academic Press , 1991 .
Bittrich E. ; Rodenhausen K. B. ; Eichhorn K.-J. ; Hofmann T. ; Schubert M. ; Stamm M. ; Uhlmann P. 
Protein adsorption on and swelling
of polyelectrolyte brushes: A simultaneous ellipsometry-quartz crystal
microbalance study . Biointerphases 
2010 , 5 , 159 –167 . 10.1116/1.3530841 .21219037 
Guiselin O. 
Irreversible
adsorption of a concentrated polymer solution . Europhys. Lett. 
1992 , 17 , 225 10.1209/0295-5075/17/3/007 .
König U.  Molekulare
Grenzschichtgestaltung zur Verbesserung der Blutkompatibilität
von Polytetrafluorethylen . Thesis, Technische Universität Dresden , Germany, 2000 .
Bittrich E. ; Uhlmann P. ; Eichhorn K.-J. ; Hinrichs K. ; Aulich D. ; Furchner A.  Polymer Brushes,
Hydrogels, Polyelectrolyte Multilayers: Stimuli-Responsivity and Control
of Protein Adsorption . In Ellipsometry of
Functional Organic Surfaces and Films ; Hinrichs K. , Eichhorn K.-J.  , Eds.; Springer Series
in Surface Sciences ; Springer-Verlag : Berlin , 2014 ; pp 79 –105 .
Zhao H. ; Brown P. H. ; Schuck P. 
On the distribution of protein refractive
index increments . Biophys. J. 
2011 , 100 , 2309 –2317 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2011.03.004 .21539801

