
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145711110.1021/acsomega.6b00103EditorialChemistry, From Alpha to
Omega, Open to All Bohne Cornelia Liz-Marzán Luis M. Ganesh Krishna N. Zhang Deqing 06 07 2016 31 07 2016 1 1 1 1 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical
Society2016American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.document-id-old-9ao6b00103document-id-new-14ao-2016-00103bccc-price
==== Body
Welcome to ACS Omega, the new, open-access publication
from the American Chemical Society.
ACS is the largest scientific society in the world and home to nearly
50 impact-making journals covering a wide range of areas related to
chemistry. We are excited to announce ACS Omega as
an open common platform to disseminate
research in all areas with connections to chemistry.

The objective of ACS Omega is to be an open-access global
publication for high quality and technically sound research articles
of any length that describe new findings in chemistry and interfacing
areas of science, without any perceived evaluation of immediate impact.

In this respect, it will bring together the growing potential
of
disciplines allied to chemistry such as materials science, life science,
computational research, and engineering science as well as any other
research areas interfacing with chemistry. ACS Omega seeks original articles that describe new findings on chemistry-related
topics, highlighting hypothesis-driven research in emerging multidisciplinary
fields. It broadens the type of published articles, which may include
“negative” results, in the sense that experimentation
or computation may have shown a result different from that of the
initial hypothesis. While maintaining the quality standards of ACS
in data and reporting, the manuscripts will be evaluated without any
restrictive or subjective assessment of importance. We thus aim to
provide new opportunities for publishing to the global chemistry community
via dissemination of a large volume of technically validated data
that could benefit researchers and other professionals. Additionally,
the open access model of ACS Omega immediately makes
the published knowledge available to policy makers and the general
public, thereby returning scientific outcomes to society at large.

The journal endeavors to provide quality service to authors not
only through fair review of submitted research but also by expedited
manuscript handling with support by expert editors and professional
editorial staff. Formatting requirements at the time of submission
are simplified, leaving details to ACS staff so that authors can focus
on the scientific content. An attractive feature of ACS Omega is the facile, efficient, and organized transfer of manuscripts
from other ACS journals, with or without referee reports.

With
the four co-editors in multidisciplinary chemistry areas drawn
from across the globe, ACS Omega will have worldwide
reach and aims to greatly expand the pool of international reviewers.
All four editors are active researchers and possess wide publishing,
reviewing, and editorial experience.

The fresh and important
features that ACS Omega brings to the chemistry publication
world are the following:Innovative
research outcomes in chemistry-relevant areas
of science

Multidisciplinary research
in chemical science and engineering
that defies conventional categorizations and describes new findings
in high-quality original articles of any length.

Extremely broad in scope, publishing work that is scientifically
valid while foregoing any subjective assessment by reviewers and editors
of the work’s novelty or general interest

Original submissions that may not fit the scope of other
ACS journals but are of high technical quality, including negative
results or unambiguous confirmation of preliminary published results

Compatibility with other ACS journals with
the unique
benefit of seamless transfer of manuscripts with or without referee
reports, facilitated resubmission by authors, and rapid decision-making
by ACS Omega

Full citations
with page numbers at the time of Web
publication, enabling greater visibility and citations to published
articles

Expanding the emerging open
access publishing model
to chemistry to provide immediate visibility in an accelerated manner
to the global audience of academics, industry, and the public at large

Fair publication fees, with ACS member and
countrywide
discounts. Authors may also use ACS Author Rewards from their previous
publications. Details are reported on the ACS Web site: http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf



We hope that ACS Omega will create a unique author
community of scientists working in chemistry and associated areas,
as future challenges in science and breakthroughs will necessarily
come from a confluence of disciplines.

Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the authors and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.

