
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145903310.1021/acsomega.8b00913ArticleProperties of Omp2a-Based Supported Lipid Bilayers:
Comparison with Polymeric Bioinspired Membranes Puiggalí-Jou Anna †‡Pawlowski Jan §del Valle Luis J. †‡Michaux Catherine ∥Perpète Eric A. ∥Sek Slawomir *§Alemán Carlos *†‡† Departament
d’Enginyeria Química, EEBE, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, C/Eduard Maristany, 10-14, Ed. I2, 08019 Barcelona, Spain‡ Barcelona
Research Center for Multiscale Science and Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, C/Eduard Maristany, 10-14, Ed. C, 08019 Barcelona, Spain§ Biological
and Chemical Research Centre, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Zwirki i Wigury 101, 02-089 Warsaw, Poland∥ Laboratoire
de Chimie Physique des Biomolécules, University of Namur, Rue de Bruxelles, 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium* E-mail: slasek@chem.uw.edu.pl (S.S.).* E-mail: carlos.aleman@upc.edu (C.A.).13 08 2018 31 08 2018 3 8 9003 9019 05 05 2018 19 07 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Omp2a β-barrel outer membrane
protein has been reconstituted
into supported lipid bilayers (SLBs) to compare the nanomechanical
properties (elastic modulus, adhesion forces, and deformation) and
functionality of the resulting bioinspired system with those of Omp2a-based
polymeric nanomembranes (NMs). Protein reconstitution into lipid bilayers
has been performed using different strategies, the most successful
one consisting of a detergent-mediated process into preformed liposomes.
The elastic modulus obtained for the lipid bilayer and Omp2a are ∼19
and 10.5 ± 1.7 MPa, respectively. Accordingly, the protein is
softer than the lipid bilayer, whereas the latter exhibits less mechanical
strength than polymeric NMs. Besides, the function of Omp2a in the
SLB is similar to that observed for Omp2a-based polymeric NMs. Results
open the door to hybrid bioinspired substrates based on the integration
of Omp2a-proteoliposomes and nanoperforated polymeric freestanding
NMs.

document-id-old-9ao8b00913document-id-new-14ao-2018-00913eccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Membrane proteins (MPs)
play a key role in many biological processes,
such as cell recognition, signal transmission, enzymatic reactions,
and transport of metabolites.1−3 Their importance is proved by
the fact that 50% of medical drugs are currently on the marked target
MPs.2−4 The structure of MPs is restricted to α-helix and β-barrel
due to the need to satisfy all hydrogen bonds within the water-excluded
native bilayer environment. Although α-helical MPs are present
in most biological membranes, β-barrel MPs are exclusively found
in the outer membranes (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria5 and eukaryotic organelles directly derived from prokaryotic
ancestors, namely, mitochondria6 and chloroplasts.7

Porins are β-barrel outer membrane
proteins (OMPs) that form
water-filled open channels and allow the passive penetration of hydrophilic
molecules. Because of their capacity in exchange of ions and small
nutrients (i.e., typically <667 Da) over the OM, porins have been
used to fabricate smart biomimetic nanomembranes (NMs) that could
incorporate biological functions, such as controlled ion transport.8 For this purpose, three different approaches
are currently followed: (1) reconstitution of natural OMPs into lipid
bilayers,9,10 (2) immobilization of porins onto supported
organic or inorganic NMs,11−14 and (3) confinement of OMPs inside synthetic pores.15−17 In recent studies, we have probed the technological potential of
approaches (2) and (3) coupling Omp2a, a β-barrel OMP from Brucella melitensis that permits the passive diffusion
of small molecular weight hydrophilic materials, to polymeric NMs.14,17 First, we modified a supported polypyrrole (PPy) matrix by immobilizing
Omp2a onto the surface of heterocyclic conducting polymer.14 The resulting biointerface, which was hydrophilic,
electroactive, and biocompatible, promoted the passive transport of
ions. More recently, we fabricated bioinspired freestanding NMs (FsNMs)
for selective ion transport by immobilizing the Omp2a β-barrel
protein inside nanoperforations created in flexible poly(lactic acid)
(PLA) NMs.17 This functionalization of
the nanoperforations caused effects similar to those observed in biological
NMs. Moreover, the diffusion of Ca2+ and Na+ ions through Omp2a was found to be significantly higher than that
of K+, which was attributed to the preference imposed by
the protein pore walls. Note that the pores of porins are too large
to ensure selectivity but pore walls are supposed to impart some preferences
for ion permeability.18

After successful
studies on Omp2a-based PPy and PLA biomimetic
NMs, in this work, we focused on the study of this protein in a more
native ambient, similar to that encountered in nature. Amazingly,
until now no effort has been made to study Omp2a in a supported lipid
bilayer (SLB), which consists of a planar in vitro assembly of lipids
sitting on a solid support. In such a configuration, which is closer
to the natural system than polymeric biomimetic NMs, the structure
and properties of the protein have been probed using a variety of
surface sensitive atomic force microscopy (AFM) and electrochemical
techniques. More specifically, mechanical mapping with PeakForce quantitative
nanomechanical mapping (QNM) mode, which combines single-molecule
force spectroscopy with single-molecule imaging, has provided information
about molecular forces. Furthermore, the function of Omp2a in the
SLB has been examined using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS) and the results have been compared with previous data obtained
for Omp2a-based polymeric artificial membranes.

Results and Discussion
Lipid
Formulations
The total lipid composition in B. melitensis is about 37% of phosphatidylcholine
(POPC), 33%
of phosphatidylethanolamine (POPE), 20% of cardiolipine (CL), and
10% of phosphatidylglycerol (POPG).19 Although
POPE is the main phospholipid in many Gram-negative OMs, POPC is most
present in the OM of B. melitensis.
This particular feature gives to this strain of bacteria high stability
in the OM in comparison with other Gram-negative bacteria, whereas
the content of POPE in animal cell total lipid membranes is low. For
example, in the blood cells, POPE and POPG constitute about 6 and
2%, respectively, of all the membrane phospholipids.20 Indeed, POPC is the major lipid component of the animal
cell membranes.20

Three different
lipid compositions, which consisted of mixtures of POPC, POPE, POPG,
and/or CL (Scheme 1), were investigated by AFM, transmission electron microscopy (TEM),
dynamic light scattering (DLS), and ζ-potential: mixt-1 composed
of 4:3 POPC/POPE, mixt-2 of 4:3:1 POPC/POPE/POPG, and mixt-3 of 4:3:1:2
POPC/POPE/POPG/CL.

Scheme 1 Chemical Composition of the Lipids Used in This Work
Mixt-1 showed a clear phase
separation of the two lipid domains
constituted by PE and PC. Specifically, AFM images show that difference
in height of the phases is ∼0.8 nm (Figure 1a) (the bilayer thickness reported for POPC
and POPE is 4.33 and 4.03 nm, respectively21). Instead, mixt-2 displayed the most homogenous and flat surface,
these characteristics being expected to facilitate the rapid recognition
of the protein. Consequently, mixt-2 was selected for further studies
with the porin. In this case, the thickness of the bilayer was 5.4
nm, which is significantly lower than the protein’s height
(around 7 nm) (Figure 1b). Finally, mixt-3 showed less phase separation than mixt-1 but
still the difference between the domains was also clear, with 1.3
nm height differences (Figure 1c). Furthermore, as the AFM tip was prone to go through the
lipid membrane, consequently disrupting the acquiring image, very
low forces were needed to achieve its visualization. This feature
indicates that the consistency of the lipid bilayer is lower for mixt-3
than for mixt-1 and mixt-2, suggesting that CL increases the fluidity
of the lipid bilayer. This hypothesis is supported by the results
reported by Unsay et al.,22 who found that
the fluidity of lipid bilayers increases and its mechanical stability
decreases by enhancing the CL concentration. Thus, CL apparently decreases
the packing of the lipid membrane.

Figure 1 Topographic AFM images with the corresponding
vertical profiles
and TEM images of SLBs obtained from liposomes composed of: (a) 4:3
POPC/POPE (mixt-1), (b) 4:3:1 POPC/POPE/POPG (mixt-2), and (c) 4:3:1:2
POPC/POPE/POPG/CL (mixt-3) diluted 1/5 in 1× phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS). The red lines in the AFM images (a–c) indicate
where from the vertical profile shown next to each image has been
extracted. (d) DLS graph expressing the intensity vs diameter and
(e) the ζ-potential (e) of the mixt-1, mixt-2, and mixt-3.

It should be mentioned that results
derived from microscopy techniques
can be limited by the drying of the samples, which affects both AFM
and TEM, and/or the deposition of the carbon layer used to support
the sample in TEM analyses, which may alter the scattering of electrons.
Thus, although the dry state is by far the most frequent technique
for AFM and TEM observations (i.e., accompanied with staining for
the latter), the drying of the samples on the substrate may cause
deformation, or even complete destruction of the sample. However,
it has been observed that many block copolymer-based assemblies and
synthetic lipid bilayers tend to be rigid and therefore retain their
shape.23−25 TEM images displayed in Figure 1 show some small irregularities in the edges,
suggesting that sizes may be slightly affected by the drying process.
Therefore, dimensions derived from TEM should be considered as approximate
values only, while AFM images were recorded in the liquid state.

Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements proved that the three
mixtures led to several liposome sizes (Figure 1d), with diameters ϕ ≈ 1075,
555, and 213 nm for mixt-1, mixt-2, and mixt-3, respectively. Besides,
the polydispersity in ϕ varied from sample to sample: 0.38,
0.35, and 0.19 for mixt-1, mixt-2, and mixt-3, respectively. On the
other hand, the ζ-potential reported for pure POPC, POPE, and
POPG phospholipids is −2.3 ± 2.0, −32.4 ±
3.4, and −56.0 ± 2.2 mV, respectively.26 Interestingly, although POPC and POPE are structurally
very similar zwitterionic phospholipids, they were found to exhibit
dramatic differences in terms of accessible surface charge.26 The ζ values determined in KCl aqueous
solution for mixt-1, mixt-2, and mixt-3 were −30 ± 9,
−60 ± 9, and −61 ± 8 mV, respectively (Figure 1e). Although POPC
and POPE lipids are zwitterions (Scheme 1), mixt-1 was found to exhibit a moderate
negative surface charge at neutral pH. The incorporation of POPG and
CL, which contain anionic polar heads (Scheme 1), markedly increased the negative-ζ
of the liposomes. This behavior has been attributed to the fact that
negatively charged phosphate group is not counterposed by any other
positively charged group, as occurs in the other two tested lipids
(i.e., POPC and POPE).27

Figure S1 shows topographic AFM images
of SLB obtained from 4:3:1 POPC/POPE/POPG liposomes incubated over
mica overnight and diluted in 1× PBS at 1/5, 1/10, and 1/20 ratios.
The highest area covered by the lipid bilayer corresponds to the 1/5
dilution, which was selected for further experiments. The breakthrough
force of the lipid bilayer was ∼0.18 nN, and the apparent height
was 3.4 nm (Figure S2). Clearly, the latter
value is underestimated compared with equilibrium thickness of the
film. This is related to the fact that in force spectroscopy experiment,
AFM tip is pushed against the sample surface, leading to elastic deformation
of the bilayer before the breakthrough event. Hence, the measured
thickness corresponds to the elastically deformed bilayer.

Insertion
of Omp2a into Lipid Bilayers
The protein
was inserted into the lipid bilayer by employing two different methods:
(a) creation of proteoliposomes from detergent-mediated reconstitution
of the protein into the preformed liposomes and (b) reconstitution
directly incorporating the Omp2a protein into SLBs. The first methodology
consists of the following four steps (Figure 2a): (1) liposomes are detergent-destabilized
by titration with Triton X-100, a nonionic surfactant; (2) destabilized
liposomes are mixed with the detergent-solubilized Omp2a; (3) detergent
is removed with polystyrene beads (Bio-Beads), resulting in the formation
of sealed proteoliposomes; and (4) SLB are formed by promoting the
fusion of proteoliposomes onto a hydrophilic mica substrate. The second
approach only needed three steps (Figure 2b): (1) spreading of liposomes onto a mica
substrate; (2) addition of Triton X-100 to destabilize the lipid bilayer;
and (3) protein insertion onto the membrane. Results obtained from
each of such two approaches are described below.

Figure 2 Protein was inserted
on the lipid bilayer using two different methods:
(a) formation of proteoliposomes from preformed liposomes and (b)
insertion of the Omp2a protein by direct incorporation of the Omp2a
protein into SLBs. The four- and three-step approaches (a) and (b)
are described in the text.

Proteoliposomes from Detergent-Mediated Reconstitution of the
Protein into Liposomes
To grasp the effect of protein reconstitution
onto liposomes, the first-mentioned method was studied at 40, 80,
and 100 w/w lipid-to-protein ratios using earlier reported protocols.28−31 In general, the diameter of the liposomes was slightly affected
by protein reconstitution (Figure 3a), whereas ζ decreased progressively upon the
incorporation of either protein or protein buffer into the liposome
solution (Figure 3b).
On the other hand, comparison of the circular dichroism (CD) spectra
recorded for solutions with the free protein and the different lipid-to-proteins
suggest that the protein structure undergoes some changes inside the
lipid membrane (Figure 3c). However, in all cases, the spectra contained the minimum and
maximum ellipticity near 220 and ∼195 nm, respectively, indicating
that the β-strand rich motives are maintained within the proteoliposomes.32 Incubation of Omp2a with anionic unilamellar
vesicles resulted in the co-sedimentation of a major portion of protein
with liposomes after centrifugation, even though some protein was
lost during the proteoliposomes purification step, as shown by sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE; Figure 3d). The ratio of
protein in the pellet/supernatant was 3, 8, and 4.4 for samples coming
from 100, 80, and 40 w/w lipid-to-protein ratios, respectively. Accordingly,
the 80 w/w lipid-to-protein proportion allowed the most efficient
protein retention. Interestingly, the presence of trimers and dimers
is higher in proteoliposomes than in solution. Just 2% of the population
presented a trimer organization in the Omp2a free solution (band at
110 kDa in Figure 3d), although increasing to 3.4, 5.8, and 6.2% in samples coming from
100, 80, and 40 w/w lipid-to-protein ratios. This feature suggests
that protein confinement into lipidic membranes enhances their reorganization,
bringing them to a state closer to the natural one.

Figure 3 DLS results expressed
in terms of (a) intensity vs diameter; (b)
ζ values; and (c) CD spectra of proteoliposomes prepared from
detergent-mediated reconstitution of the protein using 40, 80, and
100 w/w lipid-to-protein ratios, control liposomes (i.e., preformed
liposomes), blank liposomes (i.e., preformed liposomes altered by
adding the reconstitution detergent medium but without protein), and
Omp2a solution. (d) SDS-PAGE gel for the proteoliposomes. TEM micrographs
of (e) blank liposomes and (f) proteoliposomes prepared using an 80
w/w lipid-to-protein ratio. Histograms showing the diameter distributions
are also displayed.

TEM images of blank liposomes
(control) and proteoliposomes (Figure 3e,f, respectively)
were obtained following the protocol reported by Opalińsky
et al.33 Micrographs denoted that the samples
had some polydispersity, the diameters of liposomes and proteoliposomes
varying between 100 and 350 nm (Figure 3e) and between 50 and 400 nm (Figure 3f), respectively. The addition of Omp2a to
anionic vesicles had some influence on their size and, presumably,
shape, which is in full agreement with the results derived from DLS.
Proteoliposomes are clearly bigger than control liposomes. In addition,
the former exhibit folds, which may be attributed to the reorganization
induced by the protein reconstitution inside the lipid bilayer (i.e.,
sterically driven reorganization). However, it should be mentioned
that such folds could be also due to an artifact induced by the dry
state. Thus, the above mentioned reorganization could result in a
weakening of the interactions inside the lipid bilayer and, consequently,
cause deformation upon drying of the sample for TEM observation. On
the other hand, the integrity of the membranes was found to be intact
after conducting the four steps for protein insertion (Figure 2a).

SLBs were obtained
by spreading the control liposomes and the proteoliposomes
onto a mica substrate. Although the most common procedure to obtain
SLBs is the Langmuir–Blodgett method, this technique usually
becomes far complicated when multicomponent membranes, like those
including OMPs, are studied. Instead, vesicle fusion onto a planar
hydrophilic solid support is perfectly suitable for such cases. Different
theories have been developed to elucidate how these vesicles spread
over the hydrophilic surface. One of the most accepted models assumes
that the vesicles adsorb on hydrophilic surface, then undergo substrate-induced
deformation that causes their rupture on a solid surface.34,35 However, the rupture events can be driven by several other factors,
including fusion between neighboring vesicles, the high surface density
of vesicles, and the presence of active edges of already formed bilayer
patches. In this work, the SLB formation was performed in the presence
of Ca2+, which favors vesicle adsorption onto mica support,
especially for those containing negatively charged lipids.36

Figure 4 displays
AFM images of SLB onto a mica substrate obtained after spreading the
control liposomes and the proteoliposomes. AFM images acquired for
the liposomes reflect a homogenous and flat surface (Figure 4a), with an average roughness
of (0.15 ± 0.01 nm). Representative cross-sectional profiles
indicate that the treatment for obtaining proteoliposomes does not
cause protrusions in the lipid bilayer. Instead, small protuberances
of ∼2 nm height and ∼25 nm width appear upon the incorporation
of Omp2a (Figure 4b–d).
Moreover, AFM images evidence that the amount of protuberances decreases
with increasing lipid-to-protein ratios, whereas the size of the protuberances
increases. More specifically, the amount of protuberances decreases
by ∼25 and ∼35% when the lipid-to-protein ratio increases
from 40 to 80 and 100 w/w, respectively. It is worth noting that large
aggregates (∼4 nm in height and ∼100 nm in width) appeared
for the highest concentration of protein (Figure 4c), limiting protein nanomechanical studies.

Figure 4 Topographic
AFM images (first row) of SLB obtained from (a) POPC/POPE/POPG
(4:3:1) liposomes or from proteoliposomes achieved using (b) 40, (c)
80, and (d) 100 w/w lipid-to-protein ratios spread over mica. Data
were recorded on buffer solution (150 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl,
pH 7.8). The red lines in AFM images indicate where from the vertical
profile shown below (second row) each image has been extracted. Also,
insets of each AFM image and profile are shown below (third and fourth
rows, respectively).

Magnified AFM images provide improved visualization of the
protein’s
shape (Figure 4b–d).
More specifically, magnification of the SLB derived from proteoliposomes
obtained using 80 w/w lipid-to-protein ratio reflects structures of
1.5–2 nm height and 10 nm width, with small cavities in the
middle. This condition seems to be the ideal in terms of protein’s
reconstitution efficiency and visualization. Therefore, more insights
of this condition are shown in Figure 5a, where AFM images of different patches on this surface
are displayed. Comparison with the TEM images of the free protein
in solution, which are shown in Figure 5b, suggests that such small patches on the membrane
correspond to clusters of 5–10 monomers laterally associated.
A membrane surface screening allowed to separate large protein–detergent
aggregates (>50 nm, dark blue in Figure 5c) from small clusters of proteins (<50
nm, light blue in Figure 5c). Analysis of the height for the population of small clusters
indicates an average value of 2.3 ± 0.5 nm (Figure 5d), which is in accordance
with the protein and lipid heights.37

Figure 5 (a) Representative
topographic AFM images of SLB obtained from
POPC/POPE/POPG (4:3:1) proteoliposomes (80 w/w lipid-to-protein ratio)
spread over mica. The red lines in the AFM images indicate the region
used to extract vertical profile shown next to each image. (b) TEM
images of Omp2a stained with uranyl acetate (scale bar: 10 nm). (c)
Representative topographic AFM images of SLB obtained from POPC/POPE/POPG
(4:3:1) proteoliposomes (80 w/w lipid-to-protein ratio) spread over
mica. Particle analyses were performed on 2 × 2 μm2 images. Light blue regions indicate particles below 45 nm
(protein oligomers), whereas dark blue spots correspond to particles
above 45 nm (protein aggregates). Data were recorded with a buffer
solution (150 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.8). (d) Particle
diameter distribution and height distribution of protein oligomers
(<45 nm).

Omp2a Reconstitution by
Direct Incorporation into the SLB
The alternative method
of incorporation of Omp2a into SLBs, which
is schematized in Figure 2b, was followed using AFM analysis at high resolution. The
main assumption for this approach was deeply investigated by Milhiet
et al.38 and is based on the insertion
of proteins into the destabilized SLB after its deposition onto the
mica substrate. In a very recent work, Sumino et al.39 directly attached transmembrane proteins, which were solubilized
with a histidine tag, to a Ni2+ coated mica surface. After
this, detergent-destabilized liposomes were added to fill the space
between the proteins, achieving an oriented reconstitution.

In this work, SLBs were disrupted by the addition of Triton X-100,
and afterward, the protein was incorporated. Figure 6 displays topographic AFM images of SLB obtained
from POPC/POPE/POPG (4:3:1) liposomes at the three different steps
of the reconstitution process. The spread liposomes, where two faces
can be visualized, are shown in Figure 6a. After incubation with 0.01% Triton X-100 to destabilize
the membrane, noticeable changes were observed (Figure 6b); that is, the surface became flatter and
more homogeneous. Finally, the bilayer was further incubated in a
protein-refolding solution with 10 μg mL–1 of Omp2a. At this point, large protrusions from the lipid bilayer
emerged (Figure 6c).
The width and height of such protrusions were 93 and 2.3 nm, as evidenced
by vertical profiles extracted from the AFM images (red lines in Figure 6c). Nevertheless,
no single units of protein were detected. Instead, the bilayer was
broken into many sites and agglomerates of protein were found. This
was attributed to the fact that the concentration of Omp2a used in
this process was too high. In addition, previous studies suggested
that lipid bilayers could be destabilized by the detergent used in
the refolding solution.40

Figure 6 Topographic AFM images
of: (a) SLB obtained from POPC/POPE/POPG
(4:3:1) liposomes, (b) after being incubated with 0.01%Triton X-100,
and (c) further incubated in a refolding solution with 10 μg
mL–1 Omp2a. Data were recorded for the buffer solution
(150 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.8). The red lines in the
AFM images (a–c) indicate where from the vertical profiles
shown below have been extracted.

To overcome the limitation associated to the protein concentration,
the latter was reduced. As above, the surface of spread liposomes
(Figure 7a) became
flatter and more homogeneous after incubation with 0.01% Triton X-100
(Figure 7b). After
incubation in a 2 μg mL–1 Omp2a refolding
solution, some breakages and agglomerates were also visualized (Figure 7c), even though at
such low concentration, single protein’s shape could be identified
when higher contrasts were used. The recognized protein was around
10 nm wide and 1.5 nm high, showing a deeper part in the middle, as
expected.

Figure 7 Topographic AFM images of: (a) SLB obtained from POPC/POPE/POPG
(4:3:1) liposomes, (b) after being incubated with 0.01% Triton X-100,
and (c) further incubated in a refolding solution with 2 μg
mL–1 Omp2a. Data were recorded with the buffer solution
(150 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.8). The red square shows
where the inset has been obtained from. The red line in the AFM image
indicates (c) where from the vertical profile shown below has been
extracted. Red circles correspond to protein agglomerates.

In summary, although high-resolution images of
the proteins reconstituted
into the lipid bilayer were obtained, this strategy is limited by
the adverse effects caused by the detergent used for the refolding.
Thus, the lipid bilayer is still disrupted when the protein concentration
is reduced from 10 to 2 μg mL–1. Because of
this drawback, the strategy based on detergent-mediated reconstitution
of the protein into liposomes (Figure 2a) was used to insert the Omp2a into the lipid bilayer
for both nanomechanical and functional studies. Specifically, this
methodology allows a higher control of the process, as proved by the
fact that the substrate surface is homogeneously coated by the lipid
bilayer and a homogeneous protein distribution into the bilayer is
observed.

Nanomechanical Properties of Omp2-Containing
SLBs Prepared Using
Preformed Liposomes
Lateral organization of lipid, carbohydrates,
and proteins found in biological membranes is involved in many cellular
events, for example, signal transduction or membrane fusion.41 Furthermore, structural, physical, and chemical
properties of biomacromolecules can control their activity at different
length scales. In particular, nanomechanical properties can affect
some biological functions of proteins in processes such as cell signaling,
membrane signal transduction, and immune responses.42−44 For example,
antibodies need high flexibility to bind to diversified antigens.44 Accordingly, deep-end studies on how proteins
modify the consistency of lipid bilayers and how soft proteins are
in comparison with the hosting lipid bilayers are not only attractive
but also very relevant from a biotechnological point of view. Because
of recent advances in AFM technologies, it is currently possible to
measure mechanical properties of single molecules in physiological
conditions. Thus, force–distance (FD) curves, which are directly
obtained from cantilever’s deflection, can be collected at
the same time as the AFM images are acquired. For each pixel of the
topographic image, the AFM records FD curves with angstrom precision
and piconewton sensitivity. More specifically, interaction forces
between the AFM stylus and the biological sample surface are mapped
pixel by pixel, enabling quantification of the elastic modulus, adhesion
forces, and deformation of the sample simultaneously.45 In this work, the elasticity has been extracted using the
Derjaguin–Muller–Toporov (DMT) model,46 whereas the adhesion force has been acquired from the vertical
difference of the minimum force during retraction and the zero force.
Lipid bilayers were examined using a soft cantilever (nominal spring
constant ks = 0.7 N m–1), with the set point adjusted to get minimum sample deformation.

Figure 8a shows
a 2 × 2 μm2 topographic image of Omp2a molecules
embedded on the lipid membrane over a mica substrate, which was obtained
in the PeakForce QNM tapping mode. The peak force set point was adjusted
to a force of 544 pN. For analysis, a cross-sectional profile of 2
μm length (dashed red line) is plotted next to the AFM windows.
The DMT modulus map (Figure 8b) reflects the presence of two domains with different constant
elasticities, corresponding to the lipid bilayer surface and Omp2a
molecules. Figure 8b includes the profile of elasticity fitted with the DMT modulus.
The mean DMT modulus obtained for the lipid bilayer and Omp2a are
19 and 10.5 ± 1.7 MPa, respectively, the latter being obtained
by selecting aggregates smaller than 40 nm. These results are consistent
with high-resolution topographic AFM studies on OmpG reconstituted
into native Escherichia coli lipids
that evidenced that the OMP is softer than the lipid bilayer,45,47 even though no quantitative estimation of the elastic modulus was
provided. However, studies on other related proteins (i.e., bacteriorhodopsin
and multiprotein complexes contained in erythrocyte membrane) using
quantitative mechanical AFM mapping48,49 and microsecond
force spectroscopy50 probed that the stiffness
of MPs depends on the environment (e.g., electrolyte identity and
concentration, pH, and substrate), ranging from a few megapascal to
tens of megapascal. Similarly, the reported moduli of lipid bilayers
ranged from ∼10 to ∼500 MPa, depending on the chemical
identity and environment.51,52 However, the modulus
of elasticity of ∼18 MPa was recently reported for Lα phase of the mica-supported bilayer composed of lipids extracted
from E. coli.53 Moreover, the modulus of polymeric FsNMs was reported to increase
from ∼25 to ∼35 MPa with the thickness (i.e., from 10–20
to ∼80 nm).54

Figure 8 FD-based AFM images of
POPC/POPE/POPG (4:3:1) proteoliposomes (80
w/w lipid-to-protein ratio) spread onto mica: (a) topography, (b)
DMT modulus map, (c) adhesion map, and (d) deformation map. Data were
recorded with the buffer solution (150 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl,
pH 7.8). The red lines in the AFM images (a–d) indicate where
from the vertical profile shown below or next to each image has been
extracted. The histograms below the profiles express the percentage
of particles below 45 nm in diameter (protein oligomers) vs the difference
in the indicated parameter with respect to lipid bilayer values.

Figure 8c displays,
on one hand, the adhesion map, as obtained from the FD curves recorded
in each pixel, and, on the other hand, both the profile and histogram
of the difference between lipid bilayer and protein adhesion. It should
be noted that the DMT model used in this work is appropriated for
weak adhesive forces and tips with a small curvature radius.55 The adhesion force of the SLB was around 200
pN, whereas that of Omp2a was 161.9 ± 9 pN. Lipids therefore
adhered more to the AFM tip than the protein, which should be attributed
to the asymmetric distributions of van der Waals forces. Consequently,
the tip forms stronger interactions with the flat surface of lipids
than with the curved surface of Omp2a, the latter providing less contact
area.56 It is worth noting that the adhesion
forces determined for the lipid bilayer and the OMP are 1 order of
magnitude smaller than those reported for polymeric FsNMs.17 More specifically, the adhesion force of polymeric
FsNMs were found to be comprised between 5 and 7 nN.54

Two phases are also observed in the representative
deformation
map displayed in Figure 8d. Indeed, the corresponding profile and histogram provided deformation
values of ∼1 and 4.6 ± 0.7 nm for the SLB and Omp2a, respectively.
These results prove that mechanical properties, such as the elasticity
or deformation, can be imaged at high resolution. Strikingly, the
contour of single molecules becomes apparent when their mechanical
properties are studied, even though their recognition becomes easier
when height images are also considered. Similar analyses were performed
for the control SLBs (i.e., liposomes treated like the proteoliposomes)
onto the mica substrate (Figure S3). Results
corroborated that nanofeatures previously described were due to the
protein reconstitution. Thus, no small protrusion was observed in Figure S3 and in addition, no significant changes
in the DMT modulus, adhesion, and deformation were detected when comparing
values obtained for SLBs with and without protein.

Overall,
comparison of the results obtained in this section with
those reported for polymeric NMs54 indicates
that immobilization of OMPs inside the nanopores of polymer-based
FsNMs offers advantages over the lipid bilayer-based approaches. Indeed,
although synthetic lipid bilayers, like those studied in this work,
are more stable than pure biological membranes, their mechanical strength
is lower than that of polymeric NMs. The fragility of lipid bilayers
may be a handicap for practical applications, whereas the mechanical
flexibility and resistance of polymeric FsNM were reported to be enough
for this purpose. Thus, in many practical applications, for example,
those related with molecular filtration, nanofluidics, and nanodetection,
stable FsNMs are needed to sustain mechanical stress during the fabrication
and operation processes.

Electrochemical Detection of Omp2a in Proteoliposomes
Electrochemical methods are widely accepted to detect residues
with
redox properties in proteins, such as tyrosine (Tyr) and tryptophan
(Trp).57,58 Among the different electrochemical strategies
(e.g., sweep voltammetry and cyclic voltammetry), square-wave voltammetry
(SWV) stands out since high peak resolution is obtained with very
low peptide and protein concentrations after correcting with an efficient
base line.59 In addition, the usage of
electrochemical method has the advantage that proteins can be easily
adsorbed on many surfaces, facilitating the preparation of protein-modified
electrodes.60

It is well-known that
the peak potential of Tyr and Trp depend on the buffer. Thus, Vacek
et al.61 showed that pH plays a key role
in the peak potential, which shifts toward less positive values with
increasing pH. Furthermore, analysis of the peak potential shifts
at a given buffer conditions allows to discriminate between native
and denatured forms of proteins.57 Omp2a
contains 22 Tyr and 10 Trp residues, which are mainly located in the
external part of the barrel in the native protein. Therefore, proteoliposomes
are expected to be at the interface between the lipid bilayer and
the medium if the protein remains stable. To prove the stability of
the protein native form in the proteoliposomes, characterization of
the Omp2a Tyr and Trp residues has been performed by applying the
label-free and sensitive SWV methodology. Specifically, the response
of the protein when it is alone (control of the native form) and embedded
into the lipid bilayer has been compared.

Three negative controls
were analyzed: bare glassy carbon electrode
(GCE), GCE covered by 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol-containing refolding
buffer (GCE + MPD), and GCE covered by the spread liposomes (GCE +
liposomes). As can be seen in Figure 9, none of the mentioned samples gave rise to any substantial
peak. Instead, when the protein was adsorbed with the refolding buffer,
two peaks can be visualized. These correspond to the oxidation peaks
of Tyr and Trp (+0.45 and +0.62 V, respectively). The peak current
density is much higher for the first than for the second, which is
fully consistent with the larger quantity of Tyr than Trp in the Omp2a
sequence. In contrast, a single less intense peak at +0.5 V was found
when proteoliposomes were spread onto the glassy carbon surface. This
is correlated with the lower protein presence on the proteoliposomes
since there is not a complete protein loading, and therefore the monitoring
of the Trp signal becomes more difficult.

Figure 9 Voltammograms of SWV
obtained for bare glassy carbon electrode
(GCE) and GCE covered by 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol-containing refolding
buffer (GCE + MPD), spread liposomes (GCE + liposomes), and spread
proteoliposomes (GCE + proteoliposomes).

Functionality of Omp2a in SLBs
The chemical environment
is critical to maintain the biological functionality of OMPs. Hence,
biological nanopores offer precise control over ion selectivity rectification
and gating as well as outstanding permeability. Molecular recognition
is the hallmark of biological interactions to enable these functions,
especially the ion selectivity, so that embedded biochannels often
lose their activity upon leaving the biological environment. Several
strategies have been studied to transfer properties of naturally occurring
nanopores to supported polymeric NMs. For example, incorporation of
the lipid bilayer onto supported NM10,62−64 and functionalization of the nanopore surfaces through ligands65−68 are considered as the most reliable ones. Nevertheless, the utilization
of supported NMs drastically limits the practical application of the
device and, unfortunately, functionalization of nanopore surfaces
in polymeric FsNMs is not an easy task. To engineer new strategies
for the fabrication of more effective bioinspired FsNMs, we devoted
this section to study the functionality of Omp2a immobilized inside
SLB and its comparison to the results reported for Omp2a-based PLA
FsNMs.17

The electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy (EIS) method has been employed to measure the current
through electrodes covered by the systems investigated in this study.
This technique exploits the fact that lipid bilayers are electrically
resistant and behave as insulators, monitoring the membrane conductance
related to the transport of ions. In this work, the electrode used
for the functional characterization is indium tin oxide (ITO) supported
on glass, which is a suitable substrate for the characterization of
lipid bilayer membranes and does not induce protein denaturation.69−72 The complex EIS signal has been related to the electrical properties
of each component of the system (i.e., the electrode, the lipid bilayer
with or without protein, and the electrolyte, KCl), representing them
as electrical elements on an electric equivalent circuit (EEC). Each
element contributes at different frequency regimes, enabling the separation
of the effects of the components at the interface. The quality of
the fitting between the experimental data and the ECC has been proved
by evaluating the percentage error associated to each circuit element,
which is lower than 10% in all cases.

Consistent with our previous
work on Omp2a-filled nanoperforated
PLA FsNMs, the EEC (Figure 10a) obtained for bare ITO electrodes shows the electrolyte
resistance (RS) connected in series with
the constant-phase element (CPE) of the double-layer semiconductor/electrolyte
interface (Qdl).17 Here, lipid bilayer-coated electrodes behave as a circuit in which
the RS is followed by the lipid membrane
CPE element (QM) in parallel with the
membrane resistance (RM) and the semiconductor/electrolyte
interface Qdl element, which arises from
lipid bilayer defects (i.e., lipid bilayers are dynamic in nature,
and therefore the apparition of changing defects and holes is expected
to be relatively frequent). Moreover, this EEC is not altered by the
incorporation of Omp2a inside the bilayer (Figure 10a).

Figure 10 (a) Schemes representing the ITO, the
lipid bilayer, and the lipid
bilayer containing Omp2a with the corresponding EEC used for fitting
the experimental data from EIS measurements: RS is the electrolyte resistance, QM and RM are the membrane constant-phase
element and resistance, respectively, and Qdl is the double-layer constant-phase element for the electrode surface.
(b) Nyquist plots of ITO (green stars), lipid bilayer (purple triangles),
and lipid bilayer with the reconstituted protein at 100 (blue circles),
80 (red diamonds), and 40 w/w (black squares) lipid-to-protein ratios
in 0.1 M KCl. Symbols correspond to experimental data, whereas lines
are the fitted curves according to EEC. (c) Average conductance measured
for the lipid bilayer and those containing the protein at different
lipid-to-protein ratios. (d) Bode plots of the systems described in
(b).

Figure 10b displays
the Nyquist plots recorded for the bare ITO substrate and four different
lipid bilayers (i.e., lipid bilayers using 40, 80, and 100 w/w lipid-to-protein
ratios and lipid bilayer without protein) using 0.1 M KCl aqueous
solution. All four bilayers display curves with one semicircle in
the high frequency range and a straight ascending line in the low
frequency range. The starting point of the curve indicates RS, whereas the diameter of the semicircle corresponds
to the charge-transfer resistance, RM.
Besides, the conductivity calculated for each system is represented
in Figure 10c. The
membrane conductivity (σ, in S cm–1) has been
determined using the following expression 1  where L is the thickness
of the membrane (5.5 × 10–7 cm), A is the area of the electrode (0.5 cm2), and RM is the membrane resistance. As expected, the membrane
conductivity increases as a function of the protein concentration
on the lipid bilayer, being significantly higher for the 40 w/w lipid-to-protein
ratio.

Figure 10d displays
the Bode plots obtained for each condition, where both the difference
of logarithmic impedance versus the logarithm of frequency (log f, where f is expressed in hertz) and the
change in phase angle versus the logarithm of frequency are represented.
Bare ITO shows a steady increase of the impedance signal log f below 3, the same being observed in the difference of
phase angle. Instead, when the electrode was covered by the lipid
bilayer (with/without protein), a well-defined shoulder appeared at
the log f regime of 1–3. This is related
to the resistance and constant-phase element (QM) induced by the presence of the lipid bilayer.

The
resistance obtained for the lipid bilayer alone (4.2 kΩ
cm2) (Table 1), which is close to that reported for the single component 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
bilayer,73 is significantly lower than
that previously reported for nonperforated PLA FsNMs (7.4 kΩ
cm2)17 but higher than what
was obtained for supported PPy membranes (821 Ω cm2).14 According to these results, ion diffusion
decreases as follows: supported PPy ≫ SLB > PLA. This relative
order can be explained considering, on one hand, that the average
thickness of insulating PLA NMs (∼100 nm) is very high compared
to that of lipid bilayers (∼5 nm) and on the other hand, that
PPy is a conducting polymer, which facilitates the electron transfer
to the electrode surface. Furthermore, the resistance of 40 w/w lipid-to-protein
ratio SLBs (1.5 kΩ cm2) is relatively similar to
that of nanoperforated Omp2a-filled PLA FsNMs (1.9 kΩ cm2)17 and higher than that of PPy-Omp2a
(243 Ω cm2).14 As expected,
the reduction in the resistance of each Omp2a-containing system with
respect to its corresponding nonfunctionalized analog evidences that
the incorporation of the porin channel enhances ion diffusion in all
cases. Moreover, the affinity of K+ ions toward the protein-containing
systems follows this order: PPy ≫ SLB ≈ PLA.

Table 1 Resistances (R) and
Constant-Phase Elementsb (CPEs) for Each Sample,
Analyzed in KCl 0.1 M Solution, from Fitting Parameters Obtained with
the EECs Displayed in Figure 10aa
 	RS (Ω cm2)	QM (F cm–2 sn–1)	n	RM (kΩ cm2)	Qdl (F cm–2 sn–1)	n	
ITO	120.9 (0.6)	 	0.9 (0.5)	 	6.9 × 10–6 (0.1)	 	
lipid bilayer	44.7 (0.5)	5.2 × 10–6 (1.2)	0.7 (0.2)	4.2 (0.4)	7.8 × 10–4 (1.0)	0.8 (0.6)	
Omp2a in SLB (100 w/w)	75.5 (3.3)	4.2 × 10–6 (1.2)	0.7 (1.2)	3.7 (1.9)	4.5 × 10–4 (3.4)	0.8 (1.9)	
Omp2a in SLB (80 w/w)	43.8 (2.4)	6.0 × 10–5 (5.9)	0.7 (0.9)	2.7 (3.7)	1.0 × 10–3 (3.7)	0.8 (1.8)	
Omp2a in SLB (40 w/w)	44.4 (2.2)	3.2 × 10–5 (8.1)	0.8 (1.6)	1.5 (3.8)	6.3 × 10–4 (3.6)	0.8 (2.2)	
a The percentage error associated
to each circuit element is included in parentheses.

b The CPE impedances have been expressed
as: ZCPE = [Q(jω)n]−1. CPEs represent a capacitor
and a resistor for n = 1 and 0, respectively, whereas
it is associated with a diffusion process when n =
0.5.

The resistance values
obtained in this work for lipid bilayers
are smaller than those previously reported in the literature (i.e.,
>80 kΩ cm2).2 This
observation
could be attributed to one of the following two reasons or to a combination
of both. First, the ion concentration used in this work (i.e., 0.1
M KCl), which was chosen for consistency with our previous studies
on Omp2a-based PPy and PLA bioinspired NMs,14,17 is 1 order of magnitude higher than the one typically used. It is
worth noting that higher the electrolyte concentration, lower is the
membrane resistance.3 Also, the presence
of defects in the bilayer and the consequent reduction in the packing
density of the immobilized lipids can explain the low resistances
determined in this work, in comparison with those obtained in other
studies.2 Thus, such imperfections could
be due to the difficulty of completely covering the ITO surface with
the lipid bilayer.

Conclusions
The nanomechanical properties
and functionality of Omp2a reconstituted
into SLBs have been evaluated and compared with those of bioinspired
Omp2a-polymeric NMs. Among the three tested lipid compositions, bilayers
made of 4:3:1 POPC/POPE/POPG have been found to be the most homogenous
and consistent. Besides, reconstitution of the OMP into preformed
liposomes using detergent as mediator has allowed obtaining homogenous
and reproducible surfaces. The estimated average DMT moduli, adhesion
force, and deformation of Omp2a is 10.5 ± 1.7 MPa, 161.9 ±
9 pN, and 4.6 0.7 nm, respectively. These values are clearly distinguishable
from the ones determined for the lipid bilayer, reflecting the satisfactory
incorporation of the OMP. The low stiffness of Omp2a and its high
deformability compared with the dimensions of the molecule (nominal
height: 7 nm) reflect a high molecular flexibility. This key property,
which is related to the conformational adaptability of the protein,
could be responsible for an essential aspect of Omp2a biological functionality:
it allows the passage of a number of molecules with varying sizes
and shapes to ensure the nutrition of the bacteria. On the other hand,
the ion affinity significantly increases with the protein concentration
used in the proteoliposomes reconstitution, a reduction of ∼78%
being observed between the control and the lowest lipid-to-protein
ratio.

In summary, the reconstitution of OMPs into lipid bilayers
provides
platforms that fulfill both the nanometric dimensional requisite for
truly mimicking biological attributes and the conditions necessary
for exploring their properties. In spite of these advantages, the
properties Omp2a-based SLBs are less suitable for technological applications
than those of polymeric FsNMs with Omp2a immobilized in nanoperforations.
Our future research in this field will focus on the integration of
such two platforms to collect in a single system their potential individual
benefits. Thus, we plan to immobilize Omp2a-based lipid bilayers into
the pores of nanoperforated polymeric membranes to improve the ion
affinity detection capability. This system is expected to be the most
versatile from a biotechnological point of view since the protein
environment will be very close to native conditions and therefore
the negative influence of the polymer in the protein structure will
be eliminated.

Methods
Expression, Purification,
and Refolding of the Omp2a Outer Membrane
Protein from B. melitensis
Bacterial
Strain and Growth
Cells of E. coli BL21 (DE3) carrying pLysS and pET2a plasmids
(containing the gene Omp2a without peptide signal) were grown in Luria–Bertani
medium at 37 °C with constant shaking. Log cultures (OD 0.6)
of 500 mL were stimulated with IPTG (0.2 mg mL–1) for 3 h. Cells were then harvested by centrifugation at 4000g for 30 min, the resulting bacterial pellets being stored
at −20 °C.

Overexpression and Non-native Purification
of Omp2a
The bacterial pellets were thawed and treated with
8 mL of TEN lysis
buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetate
(EDTA), 17 mM NaCl, 125 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride, and 250 mg mL–1 lysozyme) for 20 min at
25 °C. Harvested cells were further broken by addition of 10
mg of sodium deoxycholate for 60 min at 37 °C with constant shaking
and 2 mg of DNase I for 60 min at 25 °C. The suspension was then
centrifuged at 14 000g for 20 min at 4 °C.
The resulting pellet underwent a washing buffer (2 M urea, 20 mM Tris–HCl
pH 8, 500 mM NaCl, 2% Triton X-100) and centrifugation at 14 000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The inclusion bodies were solubilized
with 8 mL of TEN buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 17
mM NaCl, and 8 M urea). Then, the solubilized proteins were applied
onto an anion-exchange diethylaminoethyl cellulose column previously
equilibrated with 25 mL of buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 17
mM NaCl, and 8 M urea). Omp2a was eluted with a 50 mL linear gradient
of NaCl from 17 to 500 mM, whereas the protein profile was further
analyzed using SDS-PAGE. Fractions containing 39 kDa proteins were
then pooled and stored at 4 °C.

Omp2a Refolding in Sodium
Dodecyl Sulfate–2-Methyl-2,4-pentanediol
(SDS–MPD) System
To refold Omp2a, the protein solution
(1 mg mL–1 protein, 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl
pH 8, and 8 M urea) was eluted onto a PD-10 column to exchange the
buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, and 120 mM SDS, which
is 15 times the critical micellar concentration). SDS-unfolded samples
were then diluted 1:1 in a refolding solution (50 mM Tris–HCl
pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, and 3 M MPD). The protein solution was then incubated
at room temperature. The samples were stored at −20 °C
to stop the refolding reaction. Hereafter, Omp2a protein at this procedure
stage is named as obtained Omp2a.

Liposome Production
The procedure used to produce liposomes
is depicted in Scheme 2. Initially, liposomes were generated by dissolving and mixing lipids
in 4:1 chloroform/methanol, which assured a homogeneous mixture (1).
After this, the solvent was evaporated using argon stream and agitation
to yield a thin lipid film (2). The film was thoroughly dried to remove
residual organic solvent by placing the vial on a vacuum pump for
30 min. Then, film rehydration was performed by adding the adequate
buffer (3) and sonicating for 30 min at 37° (4). Vesicles were
stored at 4 °C. Liposome solutions were diluted 1/5 and deposited
over the mica substrate for analyses with the AFM (5).

Scheme 2 Fabrication
of Liposomes
Formation of Proteoliposomes
from Preformed Liposomes
Shortly, liposomes were detergent-destabilized
by titration with
Triton X-100 and subsequently mixed with the detergent-solubilized
Omp2a transmembrane protein. After this, controlled removal of the
detergent by polystyrene beads (Bio-Beads) resulted in the formation
of sealed proteoliposomes. Then, the proteoliposomes were incubated
onto the mica substrate to facilitate their spreading.

Strategy of
Protein Reconstitution by Direct Incorporation into
SLBs
SLBs were first incubated for 15 min at room temperature
in the presence of the detergent (Triton X-100 at 0.01%) to destabilize
the membrane. After this, they were further incubated at the same
temperature with detergent-solubilized proteins (10 or 2 μg
mL–1), allowing them to be inserted into the membrane.
The excess of detergent and proteins was removed by extensive washing
with Milli-Q water.

SDS-PAGE
Proteoliposomes were pelleted
by ultracentrifugation
(15 min, 10 000g), and the pellet was resuspended
in 25 μL of loading buffer. The protein in the supernatant and
pellet (equal volumes) were subsequently subjected to glycine SDS-PAGE
using 15% acrylamide gels and visualized with comassie blue.

Dynamic
Light Scattering (DLS)
The size distribution
of the protein in 1× PBS pH 7.4 and in 50 mM Tris–HCl
pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, and 3 M MPD was determined using a NanoBrook Omni
ζ potential analyzer from Brookheaven Instruments Corporation.
Particularly, three consecutive runs of 60 s each were conducted for
every sample.

AFM Measurements
Topography imaging
of the samples
was performed at 24 °C with 5500 AFM (Keysight) operating in
magnetic alternating current (MAC) mode. In this intermittent contact
mode, magnetically coated cantilevers are driven by an oscillating
magnetic field. This enables elimination of spurious responses generated
by cantilever holding mechanism or the surrounding fluid. For imaging,
we have used MAC Levers VII with a nominal spring constant of 0.14
N m–1 but its exact value was determined for each
individual tip from thermal tuning. Nanomechanical measurements were
carried out with Dimension Icon (Bruker) instrument operating in PeakForce
QNM mode, which enables simultaneous imaging of the topography and
mapping of the nanomechanical properties of the sample. In this mode, Z-piezo is modulated at the frequency of 2 kHz with default
peak force amplitude and during each cycle the force–distance
curve is recorded for every pixel of the scanned area. On the basis
of analysis of the retract curves, it is possible to determine the
adhesion force (Fadh) and reduced modulus
of elasticity (E*) according to the Derjaguin–Muller–Toporov
(DMT) contact mechanics model 2  where Ftip denotes
force acting on AFM tip, d defines the distance between
the said tip and sample surface, and R is the tip
radius. Modulus of elasticity (Es) for
the given sample can be estimated using the equation 3  where νt and νs are Poisson’s ratios for the
material of the tip and
the sample, respectively, whereas Et denotes
the modulus of elasticity of the tip material. To calibrate the instrument,
determination of the modulus of elasticity was evaluated using poly(dimethylsiloxane)
test sample (Bruker) with a nominal value of the modulus of elasticity
equaling 3.5 MPa. All images/maps were acquired in aqueous buffers.
We have used ScanAsyst-Fluid+ cantilevers (Bruker) with a nominal
spring constant of 0.7 N m–1 and the nominal tip
radius of 5 nm. However, the exact value of the spring constant for
each cantilever was obtained from the thermal tune method.

Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM)
The liposomes
and proteoliposomes were placed on carbon-coated grids and stained
with 0.5% uranyl acetate and examined by electron microscopy. Solution
containing Omp2a (0.34 mg mL–1) was dispersed on
glow-discharged carbon-coated copper grids (300 mesh) and negatively
stained with uranyl acetate (2.0% w/v). After incubation (30 s), the
excess of protein was removed with filter paper and the grids air
dried for a further 1–2 s. TEM images were obtained with a
Philips TECNAI 10 electron microscope operating at 100 kV.

Circular
Dichroism (CD)
CD measurements were performed
on a Chirascan-plus qCD spectrometer (Applied Photophysics,
APL, U.K.) equipped with a temperature-controlled cell using a call
path length 10 mm. Spectra were recorded between 180 and 260 nm. Machine
settings were as follows: 1 nm bandwidth, 1 s response, 0.5 nm data
pitch, 100 nm min–1 scan speed, and cell length
of 0.1 cm. All CD spectra presented in this work correspond to the
average from three independent measurements.

Square-Wave Voltammetry
(SWV)
SWV experiments were
carried out using glassy carbon electrodes (GCE) (2 mm diameter) as
anodes. Before conducting any experiment, the GCE was mechanically
polished with powder of alumina to produce a mirrorlike surface. The
electrodes were subsequently sonicated to remove adhered alumina particles,
rinsed with water, and left to dry. Finally, 5 μL of the corresponding
sample was deposited on the top of the surface.

Electrochemical
characterization was carried out with an Autolab PGSTAT302N. Experiments
were conducted in a phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 0.1 M (pH = 7.4)
at room temperature. The initial and final potential were 0 and +1
V. SWV amplitude: 25 mV, frequency: 20.

Electrochemical Impedance
Spectroscopy (EIS)
EIS measurements
were performed using a conventional three-electrode cell and an AUTOLAB-302N
potentiostat/galvanostat operating between the frequency range of
104.5 and 10–2 Hz and 5 mV of amplitude for the sinusoidal
voltage. All experiments were performed at room temperature with lipid
bilayers deposited onto ITO and using 100 mM KCl. ITO was used as
working electrode and platinum as counter electrode, whereas Ag|AgCl
saturated (KCl 3 M) was employed as reference electrode. After data
collection, EIS results were processed and fitted to an electric equivalent
circuit (EEC).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00913.Description of
the experimental methods; AFM images
and force–distance curve-based AFM of SLB obtained from 4:3:1
PC/PE/PG liposomes (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00913_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Authors
acknowledge MINECO/FEDER (MAT2015-69367-R) and the
Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de
Recerca (2017SGR359) for financial support. S.S. is grateful for the
support from National Science Centre within the project no. 2016/21/B/ST4/02122.
Support for the research of C.A. was received through the prize “ICREA
Academia” for excellence in research funded by the Generalitat
de Catalunya. C.M. and E.A.P. are grateful to the Belgian National
Fund for Scientific Research for their research associate and senior
research associate positions, respectively.
==== Refs
References
Jores T. ; Klinger A. ; Groß L. E. ; Kawano S. ; Flinner N. ; Duchardt-Ferner E. ; Wöhnert J. ; Kalbacher H. ; Endo T. ; Schleiff E. ; Rapaport D. 
Characterization of
the Targeting Signal in Mitochondrial β-Barrel Proteins . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 1203610.1038/ncomms12036 .27345737 
Saurel O. ; Iordanov I. ; Nars G. ; Demange P. ; Le Marchand T. ; Andreas L. B. ; Pintacuda G. ; Milon A. 
Local and Global Dynamics
in Klebsiella pneumoniae Outer Membrane
Protein a in Lipid Bilayers Probed at Atomic Resolution . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 1590 –1597 . 10.1021/jacs.6b11565 .28059506 
Hwang P. M. ; Choy W. Y. ; Lo E. I. ; Chen L. ; Forman-Kay J. D. ; Raetz C. R. H. ; Prive G. G. ; Bishop R. E. ; Kay L. E. 
Solution
Structure and Dynamics of the Outer Membrane Enzyme PagP by NMR . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2002 , 99 , 13560 –13565 . 10.1073/pnas.212344499 .12357033 
Overington J. P. ; Al-Lazikani B. ; Hopkins A. L. 
How Many Drug Targets Are There? . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2006 , 5 , 993 –996 . 10.1038/nrd2199 .17139284 
Koebnik R. ; Locher K. P. ; Van Gelder P. 
Structure and Function of Bacterial
Outer Membrane Proteins: Barrels in a Nutshell . Mol. Microbiol. 
2000 , 37 , 239 –253 . 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01983.x .10931321 
Weeber E. J. ; Michael L. ; Sampson M. J. ; Anflous K. ; Armstrong D. L. ; Brown S. E. ; Sweatt J. D. ; Craigen W. J. 
The Role of Mitochondrial
Porins and the Permeability Transition Pore in Learning and Synaptic
Plasticity . J. Biol. Chem. 
2002 , 277 , 18891 –18897 . 10.1074/jbc.M201649200 .11907043 
Fischer K. ; Weber A. ; Brink S. ; Arbinger B. ; Schünemann D. ; Borchert S. ; Heldt H. W. ; Popp B. ; Benz R. ; Link T. A. ; Eckerskorn C. ; Flügge U.-I. 
Porins
from Plants – Molecular-Cloning and Functional-Characterization
of 2 New Members
of the Porin Family . J. Biol. Chem. 
1994 , 269 , 25754 –25760 .7523392 
Shen Y. X. ; Saboe P. ; Sines I. T. ; Erbakan M. ; Kumar M. 
Biomimetic
Membranes: A review . J. Membr. Sci. 
2014 , 454 , 359 –381 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2013.12.019 .
Kumar M. ; Grzelakowski M. ; Zilles J. ; Clark M. ; Meier W. 
Highly Permeable
Polymeric Membranes Based on the Incorporation of the Functional Water
Channel Protein Aquaporin Z . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2007 , 104 , 20719 –20724 . 10.1073/pnas.0708762104 .18077364 
González-Pérez A. ; Stibius K. B. ; Vissing T. ; Nielsen C. H. ; Mouritsen O. G. 
Biomimetic
Triblock Copolymer Membrane Arrays: A Stable Template for Functional
Membrane Proteins . Langmuir 
2009 , 25 , 10447 –10450 . 10.1021/la902417m .19735126 
Ali M. ; Nasir S. ; Nguyen Q. H. ; Sahoo J. K. ; Tahir M. N. ; Tremel W. ; Ensinger W. 
Metal Ion Affinity-based Biomolecular
Recognition and Conjugation inside Synthetic Polymer Nanopores Modified
with Iron–Terpyridine Complexes . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 17307 –17314 . 10.1021/ja205042t .21928814 
Hou X. ; Guo W. ; Jiang L. 
Biomimetic
Smart Nanopores and Nanochannels . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 2385 –2401 . 10.1039/c0cs00053a .21308139 
Pérez-Madrigal M. M. ; del Valle L. J. ; Armelin E. ; Michaux C. ; Roussel G. ; Perpète E. A. ; Alemán C. 
Polypyrrole-Supported Membrane Proteins
for Bio-Inspired Ion Channels . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 1632 –1643 . 10.1021/am507142f .25585165 
Zhang X. ; Fu W. ; Palivan C. G. ; Meier W. 
Natural Channel Protein Inserts and
Functions in a Completely Artificial, Solid-Supported Bilayer Membrane . Sci. Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 219610.1038/srep02196 .23846807 
Hall A. R. ; Scott A. ; Rotem D. ; Mehta K. K. ; Bayley H. ; Dekker C. 
Hybrid Pore Formation
by Directed Insertion of [alpha]-Haemolysin
into Solid-State Nanopores . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2010 , 5 , 874 –877 . 10.1038/nnano.2010.237 .21113160 
Balme S. ; Janot J. M. ; Berardo L. ; Henn F. ; Bonhenry D. ; Kraszewski S. ; Picaud F. ; Ramseyer C. 
New Bioinspired
Membrane
Made of a Biological Ion Channel Confined into the Cylindrical Nanopore
of a Solid-State Polymer . Nano Lett. 
2011 , 11 , 712 –716 . 10.1021/nl103841m .21174453 
Puiggalí-Jou A. ; Pérez-Madrigal M. M. ; del Valle L. J. ; Armelin E. ; Casas M. T. ; Michaux C. ; Perpète E. A. ; Estrany F. ; Alemán C. 
Confinement of a β-Barrel Protein
in Nanoperforated Free-Standing Nanomembranes for Ion Transport . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 16922 –16935 . 10.1039/C6NR04948F .27714137 
Aguilella V. M. ; Queralt-Martín M. ; Aguilella-Arzo M. ; Alcaraz A. 
Insights on the Permeability of Wide
Protein Channels:
Measurement and Interpretation of Ion Selectivity . Integr. Biol. 
2011 , 3 , 159 –172 . 10.1039/C0IB00048E .
Moriyón I. ; López-Goñi I. 
Structure
and Properties of the Outer Membranes
of Brucella abortus and Brucella melitensis . Int. Microbiol. 
1998 , 1 , 19 –26 .10943337 
Uran S. ; Larsen A. ; Jacobsen P. B. ; Skotland T. 
Analysis of Phospholipid
Species in Human Blood Using Normal-Phase Liquid Chromatography Coupled
with Electrospray Ionization Ion-Trap Tandem Mass Spectrometry . J. Chromatogr. B: Biomed. Sci. Appl. 
2001 , 758 , 265 –275 . 10.1016/S0378-4347(01)00188-8 .11486836 
Leekumjorn S. ; Sum A. K. 
Molecular Characterization of Gel
and Liquid-Crystalline
Structures of Fully Hydrated POPC and POPE Bilayers . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2007 , 111 , 6026 –6033 . 10.1021/jp0686339 .17488110 
Unsay J. D. ; Cosentino K. ; Subburaj Y. ; García-Sáez A. J. 
Cardiolipin
Effects on Membrane Structure and Dynamics . Langmuir 
2013 , 29 , 15878 –15887 . 10.1021/la402669z .23962277 
Li Z. ; Ma J. ; Lee N. S. ; Wooley K. L. 
Dynamic Cylindrical Assembly of Triblock
Copolymers by a Hierarchical Process of Covalent and Supramolecular
Interact . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 1228 –1231 . 10.1021/ja109191z .21204539 
Yan Q. ; Yuan J. ; Cai Z. ; Xin Y. ; Kang Y. ; Yin Y. 
Voltage-Responsive Vesicles Based on Orthogonal Assembly of Two Homopolymers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 9268 –9270 . 10.1021/ja1027502 .20565093 
Yan Q. ; Zhou R. ; Fu C. ; Zhang H. ; Yin Y. ; Yuan Y. 
CO2-Responsive
Polymeric Vesicles that Breathe . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 4923 –4927 . 10.1002/anie.201100708 .
Willumeit R. ; Kumpugdee M. ; Funari S. S. ; Lohner K. ; Pozo-Navas B. ; Brandenburg K. ; Linser S. ; Andrä J. 
Structural
Rearrangement of Model Membranes by the Peptide Antibiotic NK-2 . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2005 , 1669 , 125 –134 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2005.01.011 .
Zeczycki T. N. ; Whelan J. ; Hayden W. T. ; Brown D. ; Shaikh S. R. 
Increasing
Levels of Cardiolipin Differentially Influence Packing of Phospholipids
Found in the Mitochondrial Inner Membrane . Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2014 , 450 , 366 –371 . 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.133 .24905496 
Rigaud J. L. ; Pitard B. ; Levy D. 
Reconstitution
of Membrane Proteins
into Liposomes: Application to Energy-Transducing Membrane Proteins . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg. 
1995 , 1231 , 223 –246 . 10.1016/0005-2728(95)00091-V .
Geertsma E. R. ; Nik Mahmood N. A. ; Schuurman-Wolters G.
K. ; Poolman B. 
Membrane Reconstitution
of ABC Transporters and Assays of Translocator Function . Nat. Protoc. 
2008 , 3 , 256 –266 . 10.1038/nprot.2007.519 .18274528 
Seddon A. M. ; Curnow P. ; Booth P. J. 
Membrane
Proteins, Lipids and Detergents:
Not Just a Soap Opera . Biochim. Biophys. Acta,
Biomembr. 
2004 , 1666 , 105 –117 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2004.04.011 .
Rigaud J.-L. ; Lévy D. 
Reconstiution
of Membrane Proteins into Liposomes . Methods
Enzymol. 
2003 , 372 , 65 –86 . 10.1016/S0076-6879(03)72004-7 .14610807 
Santos H. J. ; Imai K. ; Makiuchi T. ; Tomii K. ; Horton P. ; Nozawa A. ; Ibrahim M. ; Tozawa Y. ; Nozaki T. 
A Novel Mitosomal
β-Barrel Outer Membrane Protein in Entamoeba . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 854510.1038/srep08545 .25711150 
Opaliński Ł. ; Kiel J. A. K. W. ; Williams C. ; Veenhuis M. ; van der Klei I. J. 
Membrane
Curvature During Peroxisome Fission Requires
Pex11 . EMBO J. 
2011 , 30 , 5 –16 . 10.1038/emboj.2010.299 .21113128 
Leonenko Z. V. ; Carnini A. ; Cramb D. T. 
Supported Planar Bilayer Formation
by Vesicle Fusion: The Interaction of Phospholipid Vesicles with Surfaces
and the Effect of Gramicidin on Bilayer Properties Using Atomic Force
Microscopy . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2000 , 1509 , 131 –147 . 10.1016/S0005-2736(00)00288-1 .
Richter R. ; Mukhopadhyay A. ; Brisson A. 
Pathways of Lipid Vesicle Deposition
on Solid Surfaces: A Combined QCM-D and AFM Study . Biophys. J. 
2003 , 85 , 3035 –3047 . 10.1016/S0006-3495(03)74722-5 .14581204 
Berquand A. ; Lévy D. ; Gubellini F. ; Le Grimellec C. ; Milhiet P. E. 
Influence of Calcium
on Direct Incorporation of Membrane
Proteins into In-Plane Lipid Bilayer . Ultramicroscopy 
2007 , 107 , 928 –933 . 10.1016/j.ultramic.2007.04.008 .17544216 
le
Maire M. ; Champeil P. ; Møller J. V. 
Interaction
of Membrane Proteins and Lipids with Solubilizing Detergents . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2000 , 1508 , 86 –111 . 10.1016/S0304-4157(00)00010-1 .
Milhiet P.-E. ; Gubellini F. ; Berquand A. ; Dosset P. ; Rigaud J. L. ; Le Grimellec C. ; Levy D. 
High-Resolution AFM
of Membrane Proteins
Directly Incorporated at High Density in Planar Lipid Bilayer . Biophys. J. 
2006 , 91 , 3268 –3275 . 10.1529/biophysj.106.087791 .16905620 
Sumino A. ; Uchihashi T. ; Oiki S. 
Oriented Reconstitution of the Full-Length
KcsA Potassium Channel in a Lipid Bilayer for AFM Imaging . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 8 , 785 –793 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b03058 .28139934 
Chada N. ; Sigdel K. P. ; Gari R. R. S. ; Matin T. R. ; Randall L. L. ; King G. M. 
Glass is a Viable
Substrate for Precision Force Microscopy
of Membrane Proteins . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 1255010.1038/srep12550 .26228793 
Lü J. ; Yang J. ; Dong M. ; Sahin O. 
Nanomechanical Spectroscopy
of Synthetic and Biological Membranes . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 7604 –7608 . 10.1039/C3NR02643D .24895687 
Lingwood D. ; Simons K. 
Lipid Rafts as a Membrane-Organizing Principle . Science 
2010 , 327 , 46 –50 . 10.1126/science.1174621 .20044567 
Voss A. ; Dietz C. ; Stocker A. ; Stark R. W. 
Quantitative Measurement
of the Mechanical Properties of Human Antibodies with Sub-10-nm Resolution
in a Liquid Environment . Nano Res. 
2015 , 8 , 1987 –1996 . 10.1007/s12274-015-0710-5 .
Saphire E. O. ; Stanfield R. L. ; Crispin M. D. ; Parren P. W. ; Rudd P. M. ; Dwek R. A. ; Burton D. R. ; Wilson I. A. 
Contrasting IgG
Structures Reveal Extreme Asymmetry and Flexibility . J. Mol. Biol. 
2002 , 319 , 9 –18 . 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00244-9 .12051932 
Pfreundschuh M. ; Martinez-Martin D. ; Mulvihill E. ; Wegmann S. ; Muller D. J. 
Multiparametric
High-Resolution Imaging of Native Proteins by Force-Distance Curve-Based
AFM . Nat. Protoc. 
2014 , 9 , 1113 –1130 . 10.1038/nprot.2014.070 .24743419 
Derjaguin B. V. ; Muellen V. M. ; Toporov Y. P. 
Effect of Contact Deformations on
the Adhesion of Particles . J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
1975 , 53 , 314 –326 . 10.1016/0021-9797(75)90018-1 .
Mari S. A. ; Köster S. ; Bippes C. A. ; Yildiz Ö. ; Kühlbrandt W. ; Muller D. J. 
pH-Induced Conformational Change of the β-Barrel-Forming
Protein OmpG Reconstituted into Native E. coli Lipids . J. Mol. Biol. 
2010 , 396 , 610 –616 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.12.034 .20036258 
Medalsy I. D. ; Muller D. J. 
Nanomechanical Properties of Proteins
and Membranes
Depend on Loading Rate and Electrostatic Interactions . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 2642 –2650 . 10.1021/nn400015z .23442147 
Dong M. ; Husale S. ; Sahin O. 
Determination
of Protein Structural
Flexibility by Microsecond Force Spectroscopy . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2009 , 4 , 514 –517 . 10.1038/nnano.2009.156 .19662014 
Picas L. ; Rico F. ; Deforet M. ; Scheuring S. 
Structural
and Mechanical Heterogeneity of the Erythrocyte Membrane Reveals Membrane
Stability . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 1054 –1063 . 10.1021/nn303824j .23347043 
Sullan R. M. ; Li J. K. ; Zou S. 
Direct Correlation of Structures
and Nanomechanical Properties of Multicomponent Lipid Bilayers . Langmuir 
2009 , 25 , 7471 –7477 . 10.1021/la900395w .19292499 
Li J. K. ; Sullan R. M. ; Zou S. 
Atomic Force
Microscopy Force Mapping
in the Study of Supported Lipid Bilayers . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 1308 –1313 . 10.1021/la103927a .21090659 
Konarzewska D. ; Juhaniewicz J. ; Guzeloglu A. ; Sek S. 
Characterization of
Planar Biomimetic Lipid Films Composed of Phosphatidylethanolamines
and Phosphatidylglycerols from Escherichia coli . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
2017 , 1859 , 475 –483 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.01.010 .
Pérez
Madrigal M. M. ; Giannoti M. I. ; Oncins G. ; Franco L. ; Armelin E. ; Puiggalí J. ; Sanz F. ; del Valle L. J. ; Alemán C. 
Bioactive Nanomembranes of Semiconductor Polythiophene
and Thermoplastic Polyurethane: Thermal, Nanostructural and Nanomechanical
Properties . Polym. Chem. 
2013 , 4 , 568 –583 . 10.1039/C2PY20654D .
Lin D. C. ; Dimitriadis E. K. ; Horkay F. 
Robust Strategies for Automated AFM
Force Curve Analysis-II: Adhesion-Influenced Indentation of Soft,
Elastic Materials . J. Biomech. Eng. 
2007 , 129 , 904 –912 . 10.1115/1.2800826 .18067395 
Medalsy I. ; Hensen U. ; Muller D. J. 
Imaging and Quantifying Chemical
and Physical Properties of Native Proteins at Molecular Resolution
by Force-Volume AFM . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 12103 –12108 . 10.1002/anie.201103991 .
Ostatná V. ; Černocká H. ; Kurzątkowska K. ; Paleček E. 
Native and Denatured Forms of Proteins Can Be Discriminated
At edge Plane Carbon Electrodes . Anal. Chim.
Acta 
2012 , 735 , 31 –36 . 10.1016/j.aca.2012.05.012 .22713914 
Brabec V. 
Electrochemical
Oxidation of Nucleic Acids and Proteins at Graphite Electrode. Qualitative
Aspects . J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1980 , 116 , 69 –82 . 10.1016/S0022-0728(80)80222-1 .
Paleček E. ; Tkác J. ; Bartošík M. ; Bertók T. ; Ostatná V. ; Paleček J. 
Electrochemistry of Nonconjugated
Proteins and Glycoproteins. Toward Sensors for Biomedicine and Glycomics . Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 2045 –2108 . 10.1021/cr500279h .25659975 
Paleček E. ; Jelen F. ; Teijeiro C. ; Fučík V. ; Jovin T. M. 
Biopolymer-Modified Electrodes in
the Voltammetric
Determination of DNA and Protein at the Submicrogram Level . Anal. Chim. Acta 
1993 , 273 , 175 –186 . 10.1016/0003-2670(93)80156-F .
Vacek J. ; Vrba J. ; Zatloukalová M. ; Kubala M. 
Electrochemical Oxidation
of Proteins Using Ionic Liquids as Solubilizers, Adsorption Solvents
and Electrolytes . Electrochim. Acta 
2014 , 126 , 31 –36 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2013.06.115 .
Hille B.  Ligand Gated Channels
of Fast Chemical Synapses . In Ion Channels
of Excitable Membranes , 3 rd ed.; Sinauer Associates : Sunderland, MA , 2001 ; pp 169 –200 .
Fyles T. M. 
Synthetic
Ion Channels in Bilayer Membranes . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2007 , 36 , 335 –347 . 10.1039/B603256G .17264934 
Kumar M. ; Grzelakowski M. ; Zilles J. ; Clark M. ; Meier W. 
Highly Permeable
Polymeric Membranes Based on the Incorporation of the Functional Water
Channel Protein Aquaporin Z . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2007 , 104 , 20719 –20724 . 10.1073/pnas.0708762104 .18077364 
Ali M. ; Ramirez P. ; Mafe S. ; Neumann R. ; Ensinger W. 
A pH-Tunable
Nanofluidic Diode with a Broad Range of Rectifying Properties . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 603 –608 . 10.1021/nn900039f .19222230 
Cao L. X. ; Guo W. ; Ma W. ; Wang L. ; Xia F. ; Wang S. T. ; Wang Y. G. ; Jiang L. ; Zhu D. B. 
Towards Understanding
the Nanofluidic Reverse Electrodialysis System: Well Matched Charge
Selectivity and Ionic Composition . Energy Environ.
Sci. 
2011 , 4 , 2259 –2266 . 10.1039/c1ee01088c .
Vlassiouk I. ; Apel P. Y. ; Dmitriev S. N. ; Healy K. ; Siwy Z. S. 
Versatile
Ultrathin Nanoporous Silicon Nitride Membranes . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2009 , 106 , 21039 –21044 . 10.1073/pnas.0911450106 .19948951 
Kim S. ; Nham J. ; Jeong Y. S. ; Lee C. S. ; Ha S. H. ; Park H. B. ; Lee Y. J. 
Biomimetic Selective Ion Transport
through Graphene Oxide Membranes Functionalized with Ion Recognizing
Peptides . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 1255 –1261 . 10.1021/cm504212j .
Gritsch S. ; Nollert P. ; Jähnig F. ; Sackmann E. 
Impedance Spectroscopy
of Porin and Gramicidin Pores Reconstituted into Supported Lipid Bilayers
on Indium–Tin–Oxide Electrodes . Langmuir 
1998 , 14 , 3118 –3125 . 10.1021/la9710381 .
Hillebrandt H. ; Wiegand G. ; Tanaka M. ; Sackmann E. 
High Electric Resistance
Polymer/Lipid Composite Films on Indium–Tin–Oxide Electrodes . Langmuir 
1999 , 15 , 8451 –8459 . 10.1021/la990341u .
Lin J. ; Motylinski J. ; Krauson A. J. ; Wimley W. C. ; Searson P. C. ; Hristova K. 
Interactions
of Membrane Active Peptides with Planar
Supported Bilayers: An Impedance Spectroscopy Study . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 6088 –6096 . 10.1021/la300274n .22416892 
Wiegand G. ; Arribas-layton N. ; Hillebrandt H. ; Sackmann E. ; Wagner P. 
Electrical
Properties of Supported Lipid Bilayer Membranes . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 4245 –4254 . 10.1021/jp014337e .
Juhaniewicz J. ; Sek S. 
Atomic Force Microscopy
and Electrochemical Studies of Melittin Action
on Lipid Bilayers Supported on Gold Electrodes . Electrochim. Acta 
2015 , 162 , 53 –61 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2014.10.039 .

