
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145871110.1021/acsomega.8b00600ArticleEffect of Co-Adsorbate and Hole Transporting Layer
on the Photoinduced Charge Separation at the TiO2–Phthalocyanine
Interface Virkki Kirsi †Tervola Essi †Medel Maria ‡Torres Tomás *‡§∥Tkachenko Nikolai V. *‡† Laboratory
of Chemistry and Bioengineering, Tampere
University of Technology, P.O. Box 541, FI-33101 Tampere, Finland‡ Departamento
de Química Orgánica, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain§ Institute
for Advanced Research in Chemical Sciences (IAdChem), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain∥ IMDEA
Nanociencia, C/Faraday,
9, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain* E-mail: tomas.torres@uam.es (T.T.).* E-mail: nikolai.tkachenko@tut.fi (N.V.T.).07 05 2018 31 05 2018 3 5 4947 4958 29 03 2018 26 04 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Understanding the primary processes
of charge separation (CS) in
solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and, in particular,
analysis of the efficiency losses during these primary photoreactions
is essential for designing new and efficient photosensitizers. Phthalocyanines
(Pcs) are potentially interesting sensitizers having absorption in
the red side of the optical spectrum and known to be efficient electron
donors. However, the efficiencies of Pc-sensitized DSSCs are lower
than that of the best DSSCs, which is commonly attributed to the aggregation
tendency of Pcs. In this study, we employ ultrafast spectroscopy to
discover why and how much does the aggregation affect the efficiency.
The samples were prepared on a standard fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)
substrates covered by a porous layer of TiO2 nanoparticles,
functionalized by a Pc sensitizer and filled by a hole transporting
material (Spiro-MeOTAD). The study demonstrates that the aggregation
can be suppressed gradually by using co-adsorbates, such as chenodeoxycholic
acid (CDCA) and oleic acid, but rather high concentrations of co-adsorbate
is required. Gradually, a few times improvement of quantum efficiency
was observed at sensitizer/co-adsorbate ratio Pc/CDCA = 1:10 and higher.
The time-resolved spectroscopy studies were complemented by standard
photocurrent measurements of the same sample structures, which also
confirmed gradual increase in photon-to-current conversion efficiency
on mixing Pc with CDCA.

document-id-old-9ao8b00600document-id-new-14ao-2018-006007ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The
performance and competitiveness of dye-sensitized solar cells
(DSSCs) are improving constantly with the power conversion efficiency
(PCE) exceeding 12% in laboratory conditions.1,2 However,
the achieved efficiency is still behind the theoretical limit by a
factor of 2, and research efforts are refocused to examine and eliminate
all pitfalls resulting in the efficiency loss. The final characterization
of solar cells is done by measuring I–V characteristics and calculating the maximum PCE or the
external quantum efficiency. The PCE is the principal characteristic
of the solar cells, but it depends on many internal processes and
presents a cumulative effect of losses at different stages starting
from the light caption and primary photoinduced charge separation
(CS) to power losses due to resistivity of electrodes.3 Eventually, optimization of the DSSC should be done for
all the processes involved and has to be based on the knowledge of
all the individual steps of photon-to-current conversion. The very
first events of the photon conversion are extremely fast taking place
in the femto- to picosecond time domain and were under active investigation
for the past few decades using ultrafast optical and terahertz spectroscopy
methods.4−8 The reactions of interest include light harvesting by sensitizers
and electron injection to semiconductors in the picosecond time domain
and following dye regeneration by electrolytes in the sub-nanosecond
time domain in the case of liquid DSSCs.9,10

Solid-state
DSSCs (ssDSSCs) are relatively new development in which
the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a solid hole transporting material
(HTM).11−13 This makes such devices more robust and attractive
for large scale applications, though the best efficiencies achieved
are roughly 2 times lower than that of traditional liquid DSSCs.14 Few specific challenges of ssDSSCs are selection
of suitable small molecules for the HTM and pore filling by the material,15 which affect the conversion efficiency drastically
and put restrictions on the thickness and porosity of the TiO2 layer. A common requirement for both liquid and ssDSSCs is
design and syntheses of cost efficient sensitizers which have high
absorption in the green-red part of the spectrum and close to unity
quantum yield of CS at semiconductor–organic interfaces.12,16,17

Among a wide range of sensitizers
tested in DSSC applications,
porphyrin derivatives gained considerable attention recently,16,18−20 and porphyrin-based sensitizers were used to achieve
the highest efficiencies in both types of DSSCs.1,14 The
most efficient sensitizers are complex molecules with specifically
designed peripheral groups reducing interchromophore aggregation and
implementing the so-called push–pull strategy when the sensitizer
is complemented by electron donating and/or withdrawing groups accelerating
electron injection to TiO2 from the photoexcited sensitizer.1,14,21,22 These are complex state-of-the-art compounds produced using multistep
synthetic routes in very small amounts.

Although porphyrin derivatives
are very versatile compounds for
solar cell applications, they have a disadvantage of exhibiting relatively
low absorption intensity in the green-red part of the spectrum. Therefore,
another dye from the same group of tetrapyrrole macrocyclic compounds,
phthalocyanine (Pc), has attracted attention because it is an equally
good electron donor and has a strong absorption band in the red part
of the spectrum.17 A number of Pc derivatives
have been tested in DSSCs and demonstrated reasonably good efficiencies,23,24 though the final PCE was roughly 2 times lower than that of the
best porphyrin and Ru-dye derivatives. Aggregation tendency of Pcs
was considered to be the main reason for the efficiency loss. This
stimulated the synthesis of Pcs with specifically designed bulky peripheral
groups to reduce the aggregation,25,26 though this
approach requires again multistep synthesis and thus gradually increases
the cost of the compounds. Another possibility to solve the aggregation
problem is to use co-adsorbate compounds mixed with the photoactive
Pcs during the sensitization process.27 An advantage of this approach is that it does not require synthesis
of new and expensive compounds. This method was tested in a number
of studies and has proven to increase the conversion efficiency but
the efficiency gain was not as large as one could hope for.

The aims of the study reported herein are to use a reasonably inexpensive
sensitizer, Pc derivative known as TT1,23 to examine the primary photoreactions in ssDSSC model systems, to
study the aggregation effect on the carrier generation, and to find
out to which extent co-adsorbate may reduce the efficiency loss due
to aggregation. To reduce the aggregation, the Pc was mixed with the
widely used co-adsorbate, chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA).28,29 In addition, oleic acid (OA), a well-known lipid molecule, was tested
as a replacement for CDCA. The ssDSSC model samples were completed
by infiltrating the layer of photosensitized TiO2 nanoparticles
by the HTM, Spiro-MeOTAD (Spiro).30,31 The primary
photoreactions in the samples were studied by the ultrafast transient
absorption (TA) spectroscopy technique also know as the pump–probe
method. Both Pc and Spiro have distinct spectroscopy features of their
transient states, cations and anions,32−34 which allow to establish
reaction mechanisms and do quantitative evaluation of reaction rates
and efficiencies. To compare the results of spectroscopy studies with
“real life” use case of ssDSSCs, silver electrodes were
deposited on top of the HTM and standard solar cell characterization
was carried out for the same sample structures. For the comparison
purpose, the quantum yields of photon-to-electron conversion were
estimated. The comparison shows that CDCA can effectively reduce aggregation
and even as simple Pc as TT1 can reach close to unity quantum yield
of photocurrent generation.

2 Results and Discussion
The chemical structure of zinc carboxyphthalocyanine (Pc) derivative
used in this study is presented in Figure 1 together with those of two co-adsorbates,
CDCA and OA. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene
(Spiro-MeOTAD or Spiro) was used as the HTM.

Figure 1 Compounds used to functionalize
TiO2 nanoparticle films.

Samples were prepared on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)-coated
glass substrates coated by a thin TiO2 compact layer, on
top of which TiO2 mesoporous layers were prepared by screen-printing
or spin-coated as described in Methods and Materials section below. The typical thickness of screen-printed layer was
2.5 μm and of spin-coated 0.8 μm. Cross-section electron
microscopy images of a few samples are shown in Supporting Information Figure S1.

2.1 Absorption
Spectra
2.1.1 Pc Aggregation on the TiO2 Surface
Absorption spectra of Pcs change significantly upon aggregation.
This change can be used for monitoring the degree of aggregation.
The absorption spectrum of the Pc in a good solvent, ethanol (EtOH),
at a low concentration (roughly 0.8 μM) is shown in Supporting Information Figure S2. The spectrum
has relatively narrow band at 677 nm, the Q-band, and a shoulder in
the 600–650 nm range. However, to deposit the Pc onto TiO2, the concentration of Pc must be much higher. Furthermore,
it was noted previously that for similar Pcs, a 1:1 (vol/vol) mixture
of tert-butanol and MeCN is a better solvent for
self-assembled monolayer (SAM) deposition on ZnO.35 It turned out that the same mixture allows deposition of
stable SAMs on TiO2. Absorption spectra of the Pc in this
solvent at a concentration close to what was used for the SAM depositions
(roughly 50 μM) are shown in Figure S3 in the Supporting Information. There is noticeable aggregation of
Pc in this solution, which also can be reduced by adding a co-adsorbate
such as CDCA. The absorption spectra for the Pc/CDCA mixtures with
different Pc/CDCA ratios can also be found in Figure S3.

Absorption spectra of a series of Pc SAMs
on TiO2 with varying relative concentrations of the co-adsorbates
are presented in Figure 2. As a rough approximation, the absorption spectra in the Q-band
area (580–720 nm) can be presented as superposition of two
bands, a “blue” band with maximum close to 630 nm and
a “red” band with maximum in the 680–690 nm range.
A clear sign of aggregation is high relative intensity of the blue
band and broadening of the red band. These are typical features of
Pc aggregates, and sharp rise of the blue band can be tentatively
attributed to H-type aggregation or formation of face-to-face aggregates.36 The spectrum of the sample without the co-adsorbate
is the broadest and it has the highest relative intensity at the blue
band, which can be considered as the highest degree of aggregation
in this series.

Figure 2 Absorption spectra of Pc SAMs on TiO2 with
different
relative concentrations of (a) CDCA and (b) OA. Solid lines are measured
spectra after subtracting spectra of TiO2-covered substrates
and dotted lines are two band approximations of the Q-band area.

As a measure of aggregation, the
relative intensities of the blue
band with respect to the red band were calculated by decomposing the
spectrum on two Gaussian bands and calculating the ratio of the band
intensities (see Table S1 in the Supporting Information). According to this aggregation degree estimation, CDCA reduces
the aggregation more efficiently than OA. The ratio decreases from
1.18 for the pure Pc SAM to 0.83 and 0.5 for relative CDCA concentrations
of 10 and 50, respectively. However, for OA it decreases to only 1.0
and 0.65 for relative OA concentrations of 10 and 100, respectively.
It has to be noted that the lipid structure of the OA molecule might
take less space in the SAM than the steroid base CDCA, thus resulting
in higher surface density of Pc in OA environment than in CDCA.

Furthermore, the surface binding rate of Pc, CDCA, and OA may differ
and the ratio of molecules Pc/CDCA or Pc/OA on the TiO2 surface may differ from the corresponding ratios in the sensitization
solution used to deposit SAM. Estimation of the surface density is
a complicated task in this case, but one can compare decrease of absorption
intensities at increased co-adsorbate concentrations and make some
qualitative conclusions. This analysis is presented in Supporting Information (Table S1, Figure S6,
and corresponding comments), and it suggests that (1) co-adsorbate
to Pc molecular ratio on the TiO2 surface is few times
lower than that in the layer deposition solution (relative proportion
Pc is few times higher in solid samples), which is probably due to
higher binding rate of Pc compared to CDCA and OA, and (2) at the
same Pc to co-adsorbate molar ratio, the average surface density of
the Pc is higher in the OA samples than in the CDCA samples, resulting
in a higher absorption for the Pc/OA samples compared to the Pc/CDCA
samples. Because accurate estimation of the Pc/co-adsorbate ratio
on the TiO2 surface was not possible at this stage, the
samples will be distinguished by the molar ratio in the sensitization
solution in this study, meaning that, for example, the ratio 1:10
refers to the ratio in the solution used to prepare the sample. This
is justified by reasonably proportional decrease of Pc density with
increase of the co-adsorbate concentration in the solution as presented
in Supporting Information Figure S6.

Even at the highest relative co-adsorbate concentrations shown
in Figure 2, the Pc
spectra are still not a perfect match with the Pc spectrum in a good
solvent at a low concentration (Figure S2). This can be interpreted as some remaining aggregation. Another
reason for the difference is the completely different environment
in the SAMs compared to a solution. Higher concentrations of the co-adsorbates
were tested but the absorption of such samples was lower with the
spectrum shape remaining essentially the same.

Samples with
OA co-adsorbate were observed to degrade faster than
the CDCA-containing samples. In particular at Pc/OA = 1:100, the sample
became colorless after 2 days when kept in the dark. On the contrary,
practically no detectable degradation was noticed for the Pc/CDCA
= 1:50 sample after a week of storage. Degradation was lower for lower
OA concentration, for example at Pc/OA = 1:10 the degradation was
less than 20% (of absorption intensity) after a few days.

2.1.2 Effect of Spiro on Pc Absorption
Addition of the HTM
had also a strong effect on the steady-state
absorption spectra of the samples, as illustrated in Figure 3. In all samples, the absorption
intensity increased slightly in the Q-band region and the spectra
became slightly narrower after the deposition of Spiro. It can be
noticed that Spiro has negligible absorption in the green-red part
of the spectrum. Its absorption dominates in the ultraviolet (UV)-blue
region, and it is seen as a sharp rise at wavelengths shorter than
420 nm in Figure 3.
Therefore, the absorption in the 550–750 nm region is solely
due to the Pc. For the sample shown in Figure 3, the width of the band at 620–630
nm decreases from 30 to 23 nm and for the band at 680–690 nm
from 27 to 19 nm on addition of the Spiro layer, which is typically
interpreted as lower aggregation degree. However, the band ratio remains
virtually the same, 1.23 and 1.25, respectively, which leads to a
conclusion that relative proportion of H-type aggregates is the same.
If the ratio is taken as a measure of aggregation degree, one may
conclude that the type of aggregation does not change, but the aggregates
are more homogeneous after Spiro deposition, which results in the
band narrowing. Similar changes were observed for other samples, see
Figures S4, S5 and Table S1 in the Supporting Information. Importantly, no detectable degradation was observed
for any of the samples covered with the Spiro hole transporting layer
within a few weeks, regardless of which co-adsorbate was used.

Figure 3 Absorption
spectra of Pc SAMs before (blue) and after (red) deposition
of Spiro hole transporting layer and absorption spectrum of a reference
Spiro sample (green dashed line). Solid lines are measured spectra
(after subtracting spectra of TiO2-covered substrates)
and dotted lines are two band approximations of the Q-band area.

These changes in the absorption
spectra upon addition of the Spiro
layer can be rationalized assuming that Spiro has a tendency to fill
the space between the Pc molecules, resulting in weaker inter-Pc interactions
and thus a lower degree of aggregation. This phenomenon is desired
as it may also improve the efficiency of the hole collection from
the Pc monolayer after electron injection into TiO2. It
also may result in an efficient electron or hole transfer at the Pc|Spiro
interface, as was reported previously,35 and will be discussed below.

As a summary of the examination
of the steady-state absorption
spectra, the Pc/CDCA = 1:50 sample is taken as the model example of
a virtually nonaggregated sample, although the absorption spectrum
of the sample is not a perfect match with the absorption spectrum
of this Pc in a good solvent (Figure S2 in the Supporting Information).

2.2 TA Responses
of TiO2–Pc
Samples
First, the samples without the Spiro layer were studied.
The time-resolved TA spectra of the least aggregated sample, Pc/CDCA
= 1:50, are shown in Figure 4a at a few selected delay times. The spectra were corrected
for the group velocity dispersion and the instrument response function
(roughly 0.1 ps), which is essential for a short delay times and fast
decay components. Therefore, the spectrum at 0.02 ps delay time can
be considered as an “ideal” spectrum formed instantly
after the excitation and can be taken as the spectrum of the singlet
excited state, Pc*. It has a relatively flat absorption in the 470–610
nm range and a broad absorption at >850 nm that slowly decreases
toward
the longer wavelengths. At later delay times, the spectrum is transformed
to show a broad absorption band around 540 nm and a relatively sharp
band near 860 nm. Both of these features are typical of the Pc cation,32,35,37,38 which is in agreement with the expected electron injection from
the excited Pc* into TiO2.

Figure 4 (a) TA spectra and (b) decay component
spectra for the Pc/CDCA
= 1:50 sample. Excitation wavelength was 695 nm.

In this case, the expected sequence of reactions following
photoexcitation
of Pc is 1  where τinj is the electron
injection time constant and τcr is the time constant
of the charge recombination (CR) at the TiO2|Pc interface.
Despite this rather simple reaction chain, at least five-exponential
fit had to be used to obtain a reasonably good approximation of the
TA decays in the 460–1050 nm wavelength range (Figure 4b). However, one can notice
that there is no significant difference in the component spectra shapes
in a wide time domain covering several time constants of the fit (5
ps, 100 ps, and 19 ns). This indicates inhomogeneity in the sample
which leads to essentially “nonexponential” decay kinetics
of the CR at the TiO2|Pc interface. Similar nonexponential
decays were reported for virtually all similar systems.4−6,9 On a qualitative level, the fast
component, 0.12 ps, has features indicating formation of the bands
at 540 and 860 nm and can be attributed to the electron injection
from Pc* to TiO2 with τinj = 0.12 ps.
The following component, 0.95 ps, results in the formation of a better
pronounced cation spectrum (Figure 4a, spectrum at 2 ps delay time). It is a mixture of
competing electron injection and nonradiative excited state relaxation
reactions most probably. After that the spectrum shape virtually does
not change and this decay can be attributed to the CR at the semiconductor–sensitizer
interface which is known to be essentially nonexponential7,9 and in this case is spread in the time interval from few picoseconds
to tens of nanoseconds.

The corresponding time-resolved and
decay component spectra for
the sample without any co-adsorbate are shown in Figure 5. Although the TA response
of the sample seems to be similar to that with CDCA, there are a few
essential differences. First of all, it is even more difficult to
find a delay time at which the singlet excited state of the Pc would
be well-resolved in the sample without a co-adsorbate. The shortest
time constant obtained from the fit, 70 fs, is shorter than the time
resolution of the instrument (roughly 100 fs), and although it can
be assigned to the excited state relaxation, the corrected spectrum
generated for a very short delay time (0.015 ps, in Figure 5a) has features deviating gradually
from that of the singlet excited state in the visible part of the
spectrum, and it has low and “noisy” intensity in the
near-infrared (NIR) part of the spectrum. This mismatch between the
visible and NIR parts is most probably due to the limited accuracy
of the group velocity compensation but not to any real phenomenon.
Second, one can notice a relatively high absorption in the 950–1000
nm range for the aggregated sample and even a broad band at these
wavelengths in the decay components with time constants 1 and 14 ps.
The Pc anion is known to have an absorption band in this wavelength
range,33,39−41 though the band is broader
than typically observed for Pc anions, which can be attributed to
rather random aggregation of Pcs on the TiO2 surface. Appearance
of this band can be interpreted in favor of a CS reaction in the excited
aggregates, or intra-aggregate CS, with a time constant τagg 2  

Figure 5 (a)
Time-resolved TA spectra and (b) decay component spectra for
the Pc sample without a co-adsorbate. Excitation wavelength was 695
nm. The response in the NIR (840–1060 nm) is multiplied by
2 for clarity.

Although the mechanism
of CS may be more complex and may involve
formation of an intermolecular exciplex prior the complete CS, as
was reported for Pc–fullerene dyads with strong electronic
coupling.42 In any case, this is the process
competing with the electron injection into TiO2 from the
initially generated excited state, Pc*, and it reduces the lifetime
of the singlet excited state compared to that of the nonaggregated
sample (Pc/CDCA = 1:50). Within this simplified model, the observed
singlet state relaxation time constant is τs = (τinj–1 + τagg–1)−1 ≈ 70 fs, and τagg ≈
0.13 ps, or roughly equal to τinj.

The TA response
of the Pc/CDCA = 1:10 sample takes an intermediate
position between responses of the two samples discussed above (see
Figure S7 in the Supporting Information).

The time-resolved spectra of the Pc/OA = 1:10 sample are
presented
in Figure 6. The response
is very similar to that of the sample with CDCA as the co-adsorbate,
though the spectra at longer delay time are slightly stronger, for
example, at 2000 ps, indicating that relative yield of the long-lived
Pc+ is marginally higher in the sample with OA. However,
the yield of the long-lived Pc+ is small in both cases
being not more than 20% relative to that of the Pc/CDCA = 1:50 sample.

Figure 6 Time-resolved
TA spectra of Pc/OA = 1:10 sample. The response in
the NIR (840–1060 nm) is multiplied by 2 for clarity.

Because of the rapid degradation
of the Pc/OA samples, especially
at high OA concentrations, reliable spectroscopic data were not obtained.

The primary CS in both series of samples with CDCA and OA was at
the limit of the time resolution of the instrument used, 100 fs. Within
this time resolution limit, the two co-adsorbates have the same effect
on the relaxation of the singlet excited state, Pc*. The two main
processes contributing to the Pc* relaxation are the electron injection
into TiO2 and intra-aggregate CS. This leads to the disappearance
of the Pc singlet excited state within the time interval close to
100 fs. The samples are quite heterogeneous, however, and the Pc*
relaxation is not exponential. A “tail” of the singlet
relaxation is extended to the picosecond time domain. We cannot exclude
nonradiative intra-aggregate relaxation, but its contribution does
not seem to be high and it is difficult to quantify.

The wavelength
range of the most different decay profiles for the
studied samples is 900–1050 nm. Figure 7a presents decays at 990 nm as an example.
Two intermediate states have the main contribution to the TA at this
wavelength: the singlet excited state, Pc*, and the Pc anion, Pc–. Being the least aggregated sample, the Pc/CDCA =
1:50 sample shows the fastest decay at this wavelength because there
is no intra-aggregate CS and thus no Pc– formed.
Respectively, the sample with no co-adsorbate shows the strongest
response at the middle delay times, roughly 1–20 ps, being
the most aggregated and thus the most efficient in generating Pc–. However, the final relaxations of the Pc/CDCA = 1:10
and co-adsorbate-free samples are roughly the same, indicating that
the relaxation of Pc– is not sensitive to the concentration
of CDCA.

Figure 7 Normalized TA decays at (a) 990 and (b) 860 nm for four samples:
Pc SAM without a co-adsorbate, two different relative concentrations
of CDCA, 1:10 and 1:50, and OA at 1:10.

The OA co-adsorbate is less efficient in reducing aggregation
effect,
according to the relative intensity of the TA at 990 nm in the 1–20
ps delay time interval. The decay of the sample with OA co-adsorbate
is slightly slower than that with CDCA; however, the difference is
rather minor.

Another important wavelength is 860 nm, because
this is the wavelength
of maximum absorption of the Pc cation, Pc+. The decays
at 860 nm are presented in Figure 7b for the same set of samples. Unfortunately, the singlet
state has also relatively high absorption at this wavelength. Therefore,
the transition Pc* → Pc+ has virtually no effect
on the absorption. Another intermediate state which has a significant
contribution to the absorption at this wavelength is the Pc anion,
Pc–. The anion absorption band is at 990 nm, but
at shorter wavelengths it has a flat absorption with intensity at
860 nm close to half of that at 990 nm (see below).

Assuming
that the Pc/CDCA = 1:50 sample is virtually nonaggregated,
the decay at 860 nm can be used to monitor the CR process at the semiconductor–sensitizer
interface, eq 1. Then,
the first conclusion is that the CR is essentially a nonexponential
process, as can be expected. The TA intensity drops by roughly 50%
during the first 3 ps, indicating that 50% of the Pc+ have
recombined. Roughly half of the left cations relax in the following
10 ps. For the remaining part, recombination is shifted to hundreds
of picoseconds, and roughly 10% of the Pc cations have a lifetime
extended to the nanosecond time domain. This is rather fast CR. For
example, the longest reported half times are >1 ns for porphyrin
sensitizer9,43 and much more than 1 ns for Ru-dyes.10 Rather fast CR at the TiO2|Pc interface
is surprising
and undesired result. It was noticed that the electron injection from
sensitizer into TiO2 takes place in two steps.7 The first step is an electrostatically coupled
electron–cation complex is formed, and then, the electron leaves
the surface and becomes a “free” carrier in the conduction
band of TiO2. A possible explanation of a faster recombination
is that the electron–cation complex is more stable for Pc than
for porphyrin and Ru-dye sensitizers studied previously. This would
result in a competition between the CR of the complex and the electron
promotion into the TiO2 bulk, which leaves a long-lived
cation on the surface. In the case of the TiO2|Pc interface,
the competition is shifted in favor of the first process, surface
complex recombination, which is definitely an undesired process.

For the samples without co-adsorbates or relatively low concentration
of co-adsorbates (e.g. 1:10), the cation band at 860 nm cannot be
used as an indicator of the CS efficiency at the TiO2|Pc
interface, because the electron injection is competing with CS (eq 2) in the Pc aggregates.
The reason for the slower decay of these samples is the slower relaxation
of the intra-aggregate charge separated state compared to the CR at
the TiO2|Pc interface.

One can presume that the Pc– formed as the result
of intra-aggregate CS may later inject an electron into TiO2 and thus contribute to the CS at the organic–semiconductor
interface through a two-step process 3  

An indication of this process
is a slower decay of TA at 860 nm
(Pc+ indicator) compared to that at 990 nm (indicator of
Pc–) for the co-adsorbate-free sample. However,
we did not come up with a method of quantitative separation of these
two processes. In a qualitative level, the remaining absorption at
860 nm (indicator of Pc+) is not higher than that of the
least aggregated sample with still measurable absorption at 990 nm
(indicator of Pc–). Therefore, the efficiency of
reactions in eq 3 is
low for all samples.

2.3 Samples with Spiro Overlayer:
Effect of the
Hole Transporting Layer
The effect of the HTM, Spiro, on
the photoinduced CS at the organic–semiconductor interface
of the least aggregated sample is very similar to that reported for
aggregation protected Pcs on ZnO nanorods.35 The time-resolved TA spectra of the Pc/CDCA = 1:50 sample covered
by the Spiro layer are shown in Figure 8a, and the global fit results using the model combining
exponential and distributed decay (see ref (35) for details) are presented in Figure 8b, respectively. Comparing
to the sample without the HTM layer, the most obvious difference in
the TA response is a rather sharp band at 990 nm which forms with
a time constant close to 1 ps and decays with a time constant close
to 170 ps (see Figure S7 in the Supporting Information). This band can be attributed to the anion Pc–.35,39,40 Another characteristic
feature of the anion is the band close to 590 nm, which is most clearly
seen in the 170 ps component.

Figure 8 (a) Time-resolved TA spectra and (b) decay component
spectra of
the sample with Pc/CDCA = 1:50 covered by Spiro. The fit model combined
exponential distributed decay functions35 denoted as exp(τ) and dist(τaver), respectively.
Excitation wavelength was 695 nm. The NIR response (840–1260
nm) is multiplied by 2.

The first qualitative conclusion which can be made comparing
TA
measurements of the Pc/CDCA = 1:50 sample with and without Spiro,
presented in Figures 8 and 4, respectively, is that Spiro not only
penetrates through the whole 2 μm thick TiO2 layer,
but it is in contact with most Pc sensitizers. This conclusion becomes
evident after comparing time-resolved spectra at long delay time.
The spectra of the sample with Spiro holds mainly the features of
the Spiro cation, the band 590 nm and very weak and featureless absorption
in the 850–1100 nm range, and only a minor bleaching at 650
nm which may arise from minor population of Pc not interacting with
Spiro. Whereas features of the Spiro-free sample is a band at 860
nm and relatively strong bleaching at 650 nm compared to the broad
and featureless induced absorption band at 500–600 nm.

Assuming that Pcs are nonaggregated in the sample with Spiro and
the intra-aggregate CS can be excluded, the only feasible reaction
to generate Pc– is the CS at interface between Pc
and Spiro 4  where τsp is the time constant
for the hole transfer from the excited Pc to Spiro. The spectra at
long delay times (e.g. at 1000 ps, Figure 8a) and the spectrum of the long-lived component
(>20 ns, Figure 8b),
respectively, can be attributed to the Spiro cation.11,34,35,40 It has a band at 530 nm and a broad absorption in the IR region
which is observed as a slowly rising absorption toward the longer
wavelengths starting from 1000 nm. Therefore, relaxation of the Pc– can be attributed to the electron injection into TiO2 5  where τet is the time constant
of the electron transfer from Pc– into TiO2.

In addition to the reaction sequence depicted by eqs 4 and 5, the
long-distance CS state can be obtained by a competing process. Here,
the electron is first injected from the Pc* into TiO2,
followed by the hole transfer from the Pc+ to the Spiro 6  where τht is the time constant
of the hole transfer from Pc+ to Spiro.

The electron
injection time constant, τinj, in
the sample without Spiro is roughly 0.12 ps, and it competes with
the CS at Pc*|Spiro having time constant of ≈1 ps. In a homogeneous
system, a process with a few times longer time constant would be very
inefficient. The Pc monolayer on TiO2 is, however, not
homogeneous. Even more importantly, noticing a gradual change in the
absorption spectra of the samples with and without Spiro, one can
expect that Spiro changes the packing of the Pc molecules on the semiconductor
surface. More specifically, it is likely that Spiro molecules tend
to penetrate between the Pcs, thus reducing inter-Pc interactions
and enforcing an upright orientation of the Pc molecules on the TiO2 surface. The latter has an effect of increased distance from
the Pc core to the surface and will result in a slower electron injection
into TiO2.

The reaction sequence in eq 6 would result in a relatively sharp
transient band at 860
nm and a broad band around 540 nm corresponding to Pc+,
which would later transform into a broad band around 530 nm and a
broad absorption in the NIR region. The observed TA response of the
TiO2|Pc/CDCA|Spiro sample has no such features. Furthermore,
the singlet excited state features for the Pc can be noticed in the
time-resolved spectra at delay times as long as 0.2 ps as sub-band
structures in the 590–650 nm region. Therefore, the main relaxation
pathway of the excited state is the sequence of reactions 4 and 5, with average reaction
time constants τsp ≈ 1 ps and τet ≈ 170 ps.

The TA responses of the most aggregated
sample, Pc layer without
the co-adsorbate, are shown in Figure 9. The essential difference with the nonaggregated sample
at short delay times is the virtually nonresolved singlet excited
state of the Pc. Overall, the spectra of pure Pc samples with (Figure 9) and without (Figure 5a) Spiro are very
similar at least within the first 100 ps relaxation time, though the
Pc– band is more pronounced in the sample with Spiro
top layer. This suggests that intra-aggregate CS is the dominating
reaction pathway. At longer delay times, a broad NIR band attributed
to Spiro+ becomes visible, though the intensity of the
band is much lower for the sample without a co-adsorbate. The global
exponential fitting of the TA data is presented in Figure S9 in the Supporting Information. The fitting results suggest
that the intra-aggregate CS takes place with a time constant τagg ≈ 0.16 ps, and the following relaxation of the Pc– takes place in the time interval 1–300 ps.
These time constants are slightly longer than in the case of the sample
without Spiro, but the difference is rather marginal.

Figure 9 Time-resolved TA spectra
of the TiO2|Pc|Spiro sample.
The NIR response (840–1260 nm) is multiplied by 2.

Comparison of the TA spectra in Figures 8 and 9 indicates that
at long delay times the yield of the long-distance CS state, TiO2–|Pc|Spiro+, is higher in the
Pc/CDCA = 1:50 sample, which is seen as higher relative intensities
at 530 and 1250 nm. However, there are probably still some losses
in the long-distance CS yield at few hundred picosecond delay time
even in the 1:50 sample, because the component with the 170 ps time
constant (Figure 8b)
has an IR tail with intensity rising toward longer wavelengths, though
this IR tail is smaller in intensity than that of the longest lived
component (>20 ns in Figure 8b). This means that some of the Pc anions may relax as the
result of CR at the Pc–|Spiro+ interface,
instead of donating an electron to TiO2. The effect of
this relaxation on the solar cell performance depends on time needed
for the hole to reach the cathode, if holes leave the HTM faster than
the relaxation constant, the relaxation will have no considerable
effect on the cell performance.

The TA responses for the samples
with Pc/CDCA = 1:10 and Pc/OA
= 1:10 are shown in the Supporting Information (Figures S10–S13). The responses take intermediate positions
between the sample with high concentration of CDCA (Pc/CDCA = 1:50)
and the sample without a co-adsorbent, though the response of Pc/CDCA
= 1:10 is very close to that of Pc/CDCA = 1:50 sample, whereas the
response of the Pc/OA = 1:10 sample is closer to that of the pure
Pc sample.

2.4 Solar Cells
To
study the effect of
aggregation of photocurrent generation in solar cells, silver electrodes
were deposited on top of the samples with Spiro hole transporting
layer, and standard current–voltage (I–V) characteristics where measured in the dark and under
“one sun” (AM 1.5) illumination. Typical I–V curves are presented in Figure 10 for Pc/CDCA = 1:20 sample.
Each sample had four electrode pairs with an overlap area of roughly
2 mm2. The variation in I–V curves of different electrode pairs on the sample was
reasonably small, as can be seen in Figure 10.

Figure 10 Current–voltage characteristics of Pc/CDCA
= 1:20 sample
in the dark (dashed lines) and under illumination (solid lines). One
sample had four electrode pairs with an overlap area of roughly 2
mm2.

The obtained PCEs were
in the range 0.1–0.4% for the samples
discussed here. This is roughly 1 order in magnitude lower than the
efficiencies reported for the best ssDSSCs with the same Pc.31 However, the primary goal of this part is to
compare the results of ultrafast spectroscopy study of the primary
photoreactions with the properties of the complete ssDSSCs. Therefore,
the samples were optimized to get most out of the spectroscopy measurements
but not to achieve the highest PCE. The aim is also to get a fair
comparison of different sensitizer/co-adsorbate combinations. This
means in particular that all samples have to be prepared with the
same TiO2 base structure to ensure that the samples infiltrated
by Spiro similarly. The thickness of the TiO2 film was
selected such that the absorption of Pc at maximum (Q-band) is close
to 1 (OD), which is the maximum reasonable value for accurate pump-probe
measurement. As the result, the absorption of the sample with a high
relative concentration of co-adsorbate (e.g. Pc/CDCA = 1:100 in sensitization
solution) was rather low, around 0.15 (OD), which is still sufficient
for TA measurements but far from optimum for efficient power conversion.

The parameter of interest for this study is the internal conversion
efficiency (ICE), or the ratio of the generated electrons to absorbed
photons, ϕICE. The electron flux can be obtained
directly from the measured short circuit current, Isc (I at V = 0 in Figure 10). However, the
number of absorbed photons cannot be measured directly and has to
be evaluated from the available data. This number can be evaluated
from the excitation photon flux and sample absorption.

The Pc
samples have main absorption bands in the range 580–720
nm, which is commonly referred to as the Q-band area. Another absorption
band commonly referred to as the Soret band is at wavelengths shorter
than 400 nm and its intensity is few times lower than that of the
Q-band. Also, the sun intensity is maximal in the Q-band area and
decreases sharply at <400 nm. Therefore, the spectral area of significance
for the studied samples is the Q-band area, and for all samples, it
is within the range 550–750 nm. The sunlight intensity does
not change much within this range having the average value P650 = 1.24 W m–2 nm–1 with standard deviation 0.12 W m–2 nm–1.44 Therefore, to compare light harvesting
efficiencies of the samples, average absorptances, aav, were calculated in the range 550–750 nm. As
an example, the values of aav are 0.37,
0.29, and 0.045 for Pc/CDCA samples with ratios 1:0, 1:10, and 1:100,
respectively, which means that the pure Pc sample (1:0) absorbs 37%
of photons in the range 550–750 nm, and the 1:100 sample absorbs
only 4.5% of photons in this range (see Figure S14 in Supporting Information).

2.4.1 Photocurrent
Generation Efficiency
To compare the quantum efficiency of
the photocurrent generation,
the short circuit Isc was divided by aav, to account for absorbed photons only. Reference
samples without the co-adsorbate were prepared a few times (five series)
during the tests, and the ratios Inorm = Isc/aav for these samples were averaged and used to normalized the ratios
obtained for all other samples, thus calculating “relative”
current values Irel(x) = Inorm(x)/Inorm(0), where x is the co-adsorbate
concentration and Inorm(0) is the average
or all samples without the co-adsorbate. The results of calculations
are presented in Figure 11 as a function of the relative co-adsorbate concentration
and show increase or decrease of ICE of the sample relative to the
average value of samples without the co-adsorbate. Although there
is relatively large deviation of the result for the samples with the
same composition, addition of CDCA has a clear effect of gradual increase
of the quantum efficiency of the photocurrent generation. According
to this estimation, the quantum efficiency is roughly 3 times higher
for 1:10 and 1:20 samples, and it increases furthermore for 1:100
and 1:200 samples.

Figure 11 Relative photocurrent generation efficiencies, Irel, plotted as a function of relative co-adsorbate
concentration.
Values are normalized to the average of the samples without the co-adsorbate.
The lines are indicating trends for visual guidance.

The same results are summarized in Table 1 by averaging relative efficiencies
(Irel) for the samples of the same composition.
Also, it has to be noted that the standard deviation of the relative
efficiencies were rather high, 20–50%.

Table 1 Relative
Efficiency of the CS at the
Semiconductor–Organic Interface of Spiro-Containing Samples
Estimated from TA and Photocurrent Measurementsa
sample	ΔArel (2 ps)	ΔArel (2 ns)	Irel	
Pc only	0.15	0.12	1.0	
Pc/CDCA = 1:10	0.25	0.16	3.1	
Pc/CDCA = 1:20	 	 	3.2	
Pc/CDCA = 1:50	0.29	0.14	 	
Pc/CDCA = 1:100	0.27	0.20	6.7	
Pc/CDCA = 1:200	 	 	9.6	
Pc/OA = 1:10	0.13	0.06	1.5	
Pc/OA = 1:75	 	 	1.6	
Pc/OA = 1:100	0.16	0.13	1.4	
a The relative TA values (ΔArel()) were calculated by taking absorbance
change at 1250 nm at 2 ps and 2 ns delay time and dividing by the
change at 860 nm right after the excitation, and relative photocurrents
(Irel) are the short-circuit currents
of the samples with to that without the co-adsorbate and normalized
to average sample absorptance (aav) in
the 550–750 nm range (see the text for details).

The efficiency estimation of the
long-distance CS based on spectroscopy
is more complex as it requires quantitative knowledge of the absorption
spectra of the intermediate states of interest, namely, primary excited
sensitizers and states involved in photocurrent generation. The conduction
band electrons in TiO2 have no distinct spectroscopic features
which can be seen on top of TA responses of Pc and Spiro. However,
the Spiro cation has two features, the band at 530 nm and the broadband
absorption at >1000 nm. The NIR absorption of Spiro+ seems
to be a better choice because the Pc cation and anion have negligible
absorption at the red side of the measured range. Therefore, the TA
response at 1250 nm can be used as an indicator of the Spiro+ yield at least at delay time >1 ps, that is, after relaxation
of
the singlet excited state of Pc which also has some absorption at
this wavelength, as can be seen in response of all samples at short
delay time (<0.1 ps). The primary excited sensitizer in our case
is the singlet excited state of Pc. The absorption at a short delay
time (e.g. at 0.02 ps in Figure 9) is the strongest at 860 nm, and it can be taken as
the measure of the number of excited Pcs. Therefore, the ratio of
the absorbances at 1250 nm at a long delay time to that at 860 nm
right after the excitation, ΔArel = ΔA1260/ΔA860, must be proportional to quantum yield of (absorbed)
photons to hole conversion. These relative absorption changes were
calculated for two delay times, 2 ps and 2 ns, and presented in Table 1 (denoted as ΔArel(2 ps) and ΔArel(2 ns), respectively).

A common trend for both ΔArel and Irel seen
in Table 1 is the increase
in the efficiency of Spiro+ and current generation with
the increase of CDCA concentration,
though the increase of Irel is larger
than of ΔArel. According to the
TA responses discussed above, this increase can be attributed to the
lower Pc aggregation upon addition of CDCA, suppressing the undesired
intra-aggregate CS. Interestingly, at a longer delay time, 2 ns, the
yield is virtually the same for three first samples in the table.
This may be interpreted in favor of a relatively fast hole diffusion
to the electrode, so that slow (nanosecond) CRs does not affect photocurrent
generation. Though TA measurements are rather difficult after top
electrode deposition and were not carried out.

Both TA and photocurrent
measurements do not show significant increase
in photon-to-current efficiency on addition of OA co-adsorbate, although
the absorption spectra (Figure 2b) suggest a gradual decrease in the aggregation degree. One
possible explanation for this difference between CDCA and OA is the
length difference between the molecules. A rough estimation of the
CDCA molecule length is 1.2 nm, which is close to or a little shorter
than the length of Pc molecules standing upright on the TiO2 surface. The length of OA is roughly 1.6 nm, or longer than the
Pc molecule, which may prevent a sufficient contact between the Pc
and Spiro needed for efficient electronic interactions at the Pc|Spiro
interface and may thus explain the lower hole transfer efficiency
to Spiro in the OA-containing samples. However, this explanation is
in contradiction with the observed change in the Pc absorption spectrum
after the deposition of Spiro. Still it seems to be reasonable to
suggest that some structural difference between the Pc/CDCA and Pc/OA
SAMs is responsible for the difference in the photophysics of the
samples. Another obvious reason for the relatively poor results with
OA co-adsorbate is rather fast sample degradation especially at higher
OA concentrations, as was mentioned above.

The absolute value
of the quantum efficiency can be estimated using
excitation power density, P650, short
circuit current, Isc, and average absorptances, aav (see Supporting Information for the details of calculations). This estimation suggests that
the quantum yield of photon-to-electron conversion is roughly 13%
for the samples without the co-adsorbate, close to 40% for 1:10 and
1:20 Pc/CDCA samples, and approaches 100% for 1:100 and 1:200 samples.
The latter is least accurate as the estimation accuracy depends critically
on average absorption calculation, which in turn depends on accuracies
of subtracting “background absorption” of TiO2 and spectra correction procedure after the deposition of Spiro.

The absolute values of external PCEs for this series was higher
for Pc/CDCA = 1:10 and 1:20 samples than for the samples without CDCA
by a factor of 2 (0.4 vs 0.15%). For 1:100 samples the efficiency
dropped down to that of the samples without CDCA, but average absorptance, aav, of the 1:100 sample is only 0.045 (in the
550–750 nm range), whereas for the sample without CDCA aav ≈ 0.5, or the 1:100 sample uses absorbed
photons 10 times more efficiently than the sample without CDCA. The
1:100 sample is not efficient in absorbing light because its optical
density is only 0.12 at the maximum of the Q-band (695 nm) and the
spectrum band width is roughly 30 nm only. One obvious approach to
increase cell efficiency could be to increase the thickness of TiO2 nanoparticle film, though in this case the thickness must
be increased by 10 times at least (to be ≥20 μm), which
will create another problem of pore filling with the HTM.15

Another approach to increase the PCE of
Pc-based solar cells is
to use co-adsorbates with chromophores, which would work as a light
harvesting subsystem in a way similar to that reported by M’Sabah
et al.,45 absorbing the solar light and
delivering the excited state energy to Pc by the nonradiating energy
transfer mechanism. This approach may also help to solve another problem
of Pc sensitizers, weak absorption in the green part of the spectrum,
if the light harvesting co-adsorbate is designed to cover the green-yellow
part of the spectrum. Also, mixing Pc with sensitizers utilizing the
green-yellow part of the spectrum, such as porphyrins,17 may also help to solve the problem.

3 Conclusions
Aggregation of Pcs is usually
considered as the most detrimental
factor to the efficiency of Pc-sensitized DSSCs. The results reported
here are in full agreement with this notion and indicate that intra-aggregate
CS is the main mechanism of the excited state deactivation. A traditional
method to reduce aggregation is to use co-adsorbate molecules. One
of the most widely used compounds for this purpose is CDCA. For comparison,
we have used OA as well. Addition of the co-adsorbate reduces the
aggregation gradually, as can be seen from the steady-state absorption
spectra change and transient responses of the samples.

Addition
of a hole-transporting layer of Spiro-MeOTAD changes the
primary CS events quite drastically, switching the main reaction route
to the CS at the organic–organic interface, Pc|Spiro, instead
of the electron injection at TiO2|Pc. In the case of aggregated
Pc layer deposited without the co-adsorbate, the intramolecule interactions
compete with the CS and reduce the efficiency of CS at the Pc|Spiro
interface. However, mixing Pc with CDCA at ratios larger than 1:20
(in sensitizing solution) reduces the aggregation effect to a negligible
level, thus generating the Pc–|Spiro+ state with almost unity yield.

The increase in quantum yield
of photocurrent generation was also
confirmed by depositing top electrodes on the TiO2|Pc|Spiro
structures and comparing short circuit currents of the cells. An estimation
suggests that the quantum yield of photon-to-current conversion is
less than 15% for samples without the co-adsorbate but can be increased
to almost unity by mixing Pc with CDCA at ratio 1:100. However, at
this ratio, the PCE is few times lower than for the best sample in
the series because of very low absorption of the sample (OD < 0.15
at the Q-band maximum).

4 Methods and Materials
4.1 Materials
EtOH (≥99.5% by
mass) was purchased from Altia Plc. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene
(Spiro-MeOTAD or Spiro) was purchased from Lumtec (Luminescence Technology
Corp.). TiO2 nanoparticle paste was purchased from Solaronix
(Ti-Nanoxide T/SP) and from Dyesol (18NR-T). CDCA and OA were used
as co-adsorbates to reduce aggregation in the Pc monolayers. They
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich along with all other solvents and
chemicals and used without further purification. FTO-coated glass
substrates (TEC7) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and cleaned as
described below. Zinc carboxyphthalocyanine (Pc, Figure 1) derivative used in this study
and also known as TT1 was synthesized according to a protocol described
elsewhere.23

4.2 Samples
The FTO-coated glass substrates
were cut to approx. 20 × 20 mm substrates and patterned by mechanical
etching with a grinding tool. After the patterning, the substrates
were washed by 15 min sonication in 2% aqueous Hellmanex III solution,
followed by 15 min sonication in 2-propanol, and dried under vacuum.

A thin TiO2 compact layer was used as a hole-blocking
layer. The layer was prepared by spin-coating (3000 rpm, 30 s) a 0.22
M solution of titanium isopropoxide in acidic EtOH (13 mM of HCl)
onto the cleaned and patterned FTO substrates, followed by sintering
at 475 °C for 45 min in air. For better film quality, the spin-coating
and sintering procedure was repeated.

TiO2 mesoporous
layers were prepared by screen-printing
and by spin-coating. For the screen-printed layers, the Ti-Nanoxide
T/SP paste was screen-printed on top of the substrates through a 77–55
mesh (mesh thickness, 87 μm). For the spin-coated layers, the
Dyesol 18 NR-T paste was diluted in EtOH at a 2:5 weight ratio and
spin-coated (1000 rpm, 45 s) onto the substrates. After depositing
the TiO2 mesoporous layer, the substrates were sintered
again at 475 °C. The TiO2 nanoparticle film thickness
was approx. 2.5 μm for the screen-printed layers and approx.
800 nm for the spin-coated layers, respectively. Typical cross-section
electron microscopy images are shown in Supporting Information Figure S1.

To increase the surface roughness
in the TiO2 layer
and therefore to adsorb more dye, the TiO2 substrates were
treated with aqueous TiCl4. A 2 M aqueous stock solution
of TiCl4 was prepared: 1.56 mL of Milli-Q H2O was frozen with a stir bar, 440 μL of TiCl4 was
added dropwise in an ice bath, and the solution was stirred for 10
min. The 2 M stock solution was then diluted into 0.02 M, and the
substrates were immersed into this solution at 70 °C for 30 min
and washed thoroughly with Milli-Q H2O. The substrates
were sintered after the TiCl4 treatment, and after sintering
they were ready for staining.

To deposit SAMs of the Pc with
and without the co-adsorbates, the
substrates were immersed into solutions of the Pc, typically for 20
h. The solutions were prepared in t-BuOH/MeCN 1:1
(vol/vol) at 0.1 mmol/L concentration. The co-adsorbates were added
into the solutions at different Pc to co-adsorbate molar ratios ranging
from 1:10 to 1:100 or using concentration of co-adsorbates up to 10
mM. After the reaction, the substrates were removed from the Pc solutions
and washed by immersing them for 5 min into the t-BuOH/MeCN mixture.

The sensitized TiO2 samples
were coated with a hole
transporting layer, Spiro, following a reported procedure. Spiro was
doped with bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt (LiTFSI)
and 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP)
for a better hole conductivity. The hole transporting layer was prepared
by spin-coating typically a 214 g/L solution of Spiro with 23 mM of
LiTFSI and 233 mM of t-BP in anhydrous chlorobenzene
onto the sensitized TiO2 substrates. The solution was allowed
to diffuse into the TiO2 mesoporous layer for 30 s after
the spreading. Then, the samples were rotated for 60 s at 1000 rpm.
To ensure that sufficient amount of Spiro was deposited, cross-section
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the samples were taken,
in which a thin Spiro layer on top of the TiO2 film can
be seen (see Supporting Information Figure
S1).

For the solar cell measurements, the sample structure was
finalized
by thermally evaporating a 75 nm Ag electrode on top of the sample
structure at a high vacuum (approx. 10–6 mbar).
The electrode areas were typically 2–3 mm2.

4.3 Instruments
Absorption spectra of
the samples were measured using a Shimadzu UV-1800 UV–Vis–NIR
spectrophotometer in the range 350–850 nm.

The sample
morphology was investigated using a field-emission SEM (Carl Zeiss
Ultra 55).

Standard solar cell characterization was carried
out by measuring I–V curves
(Agilent Tech. E5272A
source/monitoring unit) in the dark and under one sun (AM 1.5) illumination
(Sciencetech SS150 solar simulator).

Ultrafast TA responses
of the samples were measured using a pump-probe
system described previously.46,47 Briefly, the samples
were excited by laser pulses at 695 nm (Libra F, Coherent Inc., coupled
with Topas C, Light Conversion Ltd.). A white continuum generator
(sapphire crystal) was used to produce the probe beam. The TA responses
were measured using an ExciPro TA spectrometer (CDP, Inc.) equipped
with a CCD array for the visible spectral range (460–770 nm)
and an InGa diode array for the NIR wavelengths (840–1045 and
1050–1260 nm). The pulse repetition rate of the laser system
was 1 kHz and the spectra were typically acquired by averaging over
5 s. Typical time resolution of the instrument was 100 fs. Data collected
in the three wavelength ranges were fitted globally to a sum of exponential
functions or a combination of exponential, stretched-exponential,
and distributed decay models.48 The fit
program accounted for the instrument response (through a deconvolution
process) and did the group velocity dispersion compensation. Therefore,
the generated time-resolved spectra were free of dispersion and had
an “improved” time resolution.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00600.Cross-section
SEM images of the studied samples, absorption
spectra of Pc in solutions, details of spectra fitting in the Q-band
region, spectra fits, absorption spectra of Pc/CDCA = 1:10 and Pc/OA
= 1:10 samples, normalized TA decays of Pc/CDCA = 1:50 with Spiro,
time-resolved and component TA spectra of Pc/CDCA = 1:10, pure Pc|Spiro,
Pc/CDCA, and PcOA 1:10 with Spiro, absorptance spectra of 1:0, 1:10,
and 1:100 Pc/CDCA samples used photocurrent measurements, and dependence
of efficiency on the relative concentration of CDCA (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00600_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
K.V. acknowledges the Doctoral Programme of
Tampere
University of Technology for the financial support. N.V.T. acknowledges
NATO SPS project no. 985043. Financial support from Comunidad de Madrid,
Spain (S2013/MIT- 2841, FOTOCARBON) and MINECO, Spain (CTQ2014-52869-P
and CTQ2017-85393-P) is acknowledged. IMDEA Nanociencia acknowledges
support from the “Severo Ochoa” Programme for Centres
of Excellence in R&D (MINECO, grant SEV-2016-0686).
==== Refs
References
Yella A. ; Lee H.-W. ; Tsao H. N. ; Yi C. ; Chandiran A. K. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. ; Diau E. W.-G. ; Yeh C.-Y. ; Zakeeruddin S. M. ; Grätzel M. 
Porphyrin-Sensitized Solar Cells with Cobalt (II/III)–Based
Redox Electrolyte Exceed 12 Percent Efficiency . Science 
2011 , 334 , 629 –634 . 10.1126/science.1209688 .22053043 
Ye M. ; Wen X. ; Wang M. ; Iocozzia J. ; Zhang N. ; Lin C. ; Lin Z. 
Recent Advances
in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells: from Photoanodes,
Sensitizers and Electrolytes to Counter Electrodes . Mater. Today 
2015 , 18 , 155 –162 . 10.1016/j.mattod.2014.09.001 .
Hagfeldt A. ; Boschloo G. ; Sun L. ; Kloo L. ; Pettersson H. 
Dye-Sensitized
Solar Cells . Chem. Rev. 
2010 , 110 , 6595 –6663 . 10.1021/cr900356p .20831177 
Asbury J. B. ; Hao E. ; Wang Y. ; Ghosh H. N. ; Lian T. 
Ultrafast Electron
Transfer Dynamics from Molecular Adsorbates to Semiconductor Nanocrystalline
Thin Films . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 4545 –4557 . 10.1021/jp003485m .
Furube A. ; Katoh R. ; Hara K. 
Electron injection dynamics in dye-sensitized
semiconductor nanocrystalline films . Surf. Sci.
Rep. 
2014 , 69 , 389 –441 . 10.1016/j.surfrep.2014.09.003 .
Martín C. ; Ziółek M. ; Douhal A. 
Ultrafast and fast charge separation
processes in real dye-sensitized solar cells . J. Photochem. Photobiol., C 
2016 , 26 , 1 –30 . 10.1016/j.jphotochemrev.2015.12.001 .
Němec H. ; Rochford J. ; Taratula O. ; Galoppini E. ; Kužel P. ; Polívka T. ; Yartsev A. ; Sundström V. 
Influence
of the Electron-Cation Interaction on Electron Mobility in Dye-Sensitized
ZnO and TiO2 Nanocrystals: A Study Using Ultrafast Terahertz
Spectroscopy . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2010 , 104 , 197401 10.1103/physrevlett.104.197401 .20866996 
Milot R. L. ; Moore G. F. ; Crabtree R. H. ; Brudvig G. W. ; Schmuttenmaer C. A. 
Electron
Injection Dynamics from Photoexcited Porphyrin Dyes into SnO2 and TiO2 Nanoparticles . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 21662 –21670 . 10.1021/jp406734t .
Imahori H. ; Kang S. ; Hayashi H. ; Haruta M. ; Kurata H. ; Isoda S. ; Canton S. E. ; Infahsaeng Y. ; Kathiravan A. ; Pascher T. ; Chábera P. ; Yartsev A. P. ; Sundström V. 
Photoinduced Charge Carrier Dynamics
of Zn–Porphyrin–TiO2 Electrodes: The Key
Role of Charge Recombination for Solar Cell Performance . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2011 , 115 , 3679 –3690 . 10.1021/jp103747t .20961148 
Antila L.
J. ; Myllyperkiö P. ; Mustalahti S. ; Lehtivuori H. ; Korppi-Tommola J. 
Injection
and Ultrafast Regeneration in Dye-Sensitized
Solar Cells . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 7772 –7780 . 10.1021/jp4124277 .
Cappel U. B. ; Smeigh A. L. ; Plogmaker S. ; Johansson E. M. J. ; Rensmo H. ; Hammarström L. ; Hagfeldt A. ; Boschloo G. 
Characterization
of the Interface Properties and Processes in Solid State Dye-Sensitized
Solar Cells Employing a Perylene Sensitizer . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 4345 –4358 . 10.1021/jp111466h .
Howard I. A. ; Meister M. ; Baumeier B. ; Wonneberger H. ; Pschirer N. ; Sens R. ; Bruder I. ; Li C. ; Müllen K. ; Andrienko D. ; Laquai F. 
Two Channels of Charge
Generation in Perylene Monoimide Solid-State Dye-Sensitized Solar
Cells . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2014 , 4 , 1300640 10.1002/aenm.201300640 .
Humphry-Baker N. ; Driscoll K. ; Rao A. ; Torres T. ; Snaith H. J. ; Friend R. H. 
Time-Evolution of Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) as an Energy
Relay Dye in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells . Nano
Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 634 –639 . 10.1021/nl203377r .22208767 
Qin P. ; Sanghyun P. ; Dar M. I. ; Rakstys K. ; ElBatal H. ; Al-Muhtaseb S. A. ; Ludwig C. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. 
Weakly
Conjugated Hybrid Zinc Porphyrin Sensitizers for Solid-State Dye-Sensitized
Solar Cells . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 5550 –5559 . 10.1002/adfm.201601120 .
Melas-Kyriazi J. ; Ding I.-K. ; Marchioro A. ; Punzi A. ; Hardin B. E. ; Burkhard G. F. ; Tétreault N. ; Grätzel M. ; Moser J.-E. ; McGehee M. D. 
The Effect of Hole
Transport Material
Pore Filling on Photovoltaic Performance in Solid-State Dye-Sensitized
Solar Cells . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2011 , 1 , 407 –414 . 10.1002/aenm.201100046 .
Urbani M. ; Grätzel M. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. ; Torres T. 
Meso-Substituted Porphyrins
for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 12330 –12396 . 10.1021/cr5001964 .25495339 
Ragoussi M.-E. ; Ince M. ; Torres T. 
Recent Advances in Phthalocyanine-Based
Sensitizers for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells . Eur. J. Org. Chem. 
2013 , 6475 –6489 . 10.1002/ejoc.201301009 .
Imahori H. ; Umeyama T. ; Ito S. 
Large π-Aromatic
Molecules as Potential Sensitizers for Highly Efficient Dye-Sensitized
Solar Cells . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2009 , 42 , 1809 –1818 . 10.1021/ar900034t .19408942 
Higashino T. ; Imahori H. 
Porphyrins as excellent dyes for dye-sensitized solar
cells: recent developments and insights . Dalton
Trans. 
2015 , 44 , 448 –463 . 10.1039/c4dt02756f .25381701 
Brogdon P. ; Cheema H. ; Delcamp J. H. 
Near-Infrared-Absorbing
Metal-Free
Organic, Porphyrin, and Phthalocyanine Sensitizers for Panchromatic
Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells . ChemSusChem 
2018 , 11 , 86 –103 . 10.1002/cssc.201701441 .28926685 
Krishna N. V. ; Krishna J. V. S. ; Singh S. P. ; Giribabu L. ; Han L. ; Bedja I. ; Gupta R. K. ; Islam A. 
Donor-π-Acceptor Based Stable Porphyrin Sensitizers for Dye-Sensitized Solar
Cells: Effect of π-Conjugated Spacers . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 6464 –6477 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b12869 .
Li X. ; Xu B. ; Liu P. ; Hu Y. ; Kloo L. ; Hua J. ; Sun L. ; Tian H. 
Molecular engineering of D–A–π–A sensitizers for highly efficient solid-state
dye-sensitized solar cells . J. Mater. Chem.
A 
2017 , 5 , 3157 –3166 . 10.1039/c6ta10673k .
Cid J.-J. ; Yum J.-H. ; Jang S.-R. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. ; Martínez-Ferrero E. ; Palomares E. ; Ko J. ; Grätzel M. ; Torres T. 
Molecular Cosensitization
for Efficient Panchromatic Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2007 , 46 , 8358 –8362 . 10.1002/anie.200703106 .
Ragoussi M.-E. ; Cid J.-J. ; Yum J.-H. ; de la Torre G. ; Di Censo D. ; Grätzel M. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. ; Torres T. 
Carboxyethynyl Anchoring Ligands: A Means to Improving
the Efficiency of Phthalocyanine-Sensitized Solar Cells . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2012 , 51 , 4375 –4378 . 10.1002/anie.201108963 .
Li Y. ; Lu P. ; Yan X. ; Jin L. ; Peng Z. 
Non-aggregated hyperbranched
phthalocyanines: single molecular nanostructures for efficient semi-opaque
photovoltaics . RSC Adv. 
2013 , 3 , 545 –558 . 10.1039/c2ra21496b .
Tejerina L. ; Martínez-Díaz M. V. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. ; Torres T. 
The Influence of Substituent Orientation on the Photovoltaic
Performance of Phthalocyanine-Sensitized Solar Cells . Chem.—Eur. J. 
2016 , 22 , 4369 –4373 . 10.1002/chem.201600166 .26777385 
Wang M. ; Plogmaker S. ; Humphry-Baker R. ; Pechy P. ; Rensmo H. ; Zakeeruddin S. M. ; Grätzel M. 
Molecular-Scale Interface Engineering
of Nanocrystalline Titania by Co-adsorbents for Solar Energy Conversion . ChemSusChem 
2012 , 5 , 181 –187 . 10.1002/cssc.201100549 .22213705 
Günsel A. ; Güzel E. ; Bilgiçli A. T. ; Şişman I. ; Yarasir M. N. 
Synthesis
of non-peripheral thioanisole-substituted
phthalocyanines: Photophysical, electrochemical, photovoltaic, and
sensing properties . J. Photochem. Photobiol.,
A 
2017 , 348 , 57 –67 . 10.1016/j.jphotochem.2017.07.040 .
Jungsuttiwong S. ; Sirithip K. ; Prachumrak N. ; Tarsang R. ; Sudyoadsuk T. ; Namuangruk S. ; Kungwan N. ; Promarak V. ; Keawin T. 
Significant
enhancement in the performance of porphyrin for dye-sensitized solar
cells: aggregation control using chenodeoxycholic acid . New J. Chem. 
2017 , 41 , 7081 –7091 . 10.1039/c7nj01184a .
Hsu C.-Y. ; Chen Y.-C. ; Lin R. Y.-Y. ; Ho K.-C. ; Lin J. T. 
Solid-state
dye-sensitized solar cells based on spirofluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) and
arylamines as hole transporting materials . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 14099 –14109 . 10.1039/c2cp41326d .22735398 
Li X. ; Xu B. ; Liu P. ; Hu Y. ; Kloo L. ; Hua J. ; Sun L. ; Tian H. 
Molecular
engineering of D–A–π–A
sensitizers for highly efficient solid-state
dye-sensitized solar cells . J. Mater. Chem.
A 
2017 , 5 , 3157 –3166 . 10.1039/c6ta10673k .
Nojiri T. ; Alam M. M. ; Konami H. ; Watanabe A. ; Ito O. 
Photoinduced
Electron Transfer from Phthalocyanines to Fullerenes (C60 and C70) . J. Phys. Chem. A 
1997 , 101 , 7943 –7947 . 10.1021/jp9714734 .
Ou Z. ; Jiang Z. ; Chen N. ; Huang J. ; Shen J. ; Kadish K. M. 
Electrochemistry and spectroelectrochemistry of tetra-α-substituted metallophthalocyanines . J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines 
2008 , 12 , 1123 –1133 . 10.1142/s1088424608000492 .
Grätzel M. ; Bach U. ; Lupo D. ; Comte P. ; Moser J. E. ; Weissörtel F. ; Salbeck J. ; Spreitzer H. 
Solid-State
Dye-Sensitized Mesoporous TiO2 Solar Cells with High Photon-to-Electron
Conversion Efficiencies . Nature 
1998 , 395 , 583 –585 . 10.1038/26936 .
Virkki K. ; Hakola H. ; Urbani M. ; Tejerina L. ; Ince M. ; Martínez-Díaz M. ; Torres T. ; Golovanova V. ; Golovanov V. ; Tkachenko N. V. 
Photoinduced Electron Injection from
Zinc Phthalocyanines into Zinc Oxide Nanorods: Aggregation Effects . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 9594 –9605 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b01562 .
Kakade S. ; Ghosh R. ; Palit D. K. 
Excited State Dynamics of Zinc-Phthalocyanine
Nanoaggregates in Strong Hydrogen Bonding Solvents . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 15155 –15166 . 10.1021/jp304369r .
Guldi D. M. ; Zilbermann I. ; Gouloumis A. ; Vázquez P. ; Torres T. 
Metallophthalocyanines:
Versatile Electron-Donating
Building Blocks for Fullerene Dyads . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2004 , 108 , 18485 –18494 . 10.1021/jp047105z .
Fukuzumi S. ; Ohkubo K. ; Ortiz J. ; Gutiérrez A. M. ; Fernández-Lázaro F. ; Sastre-Santos Á. 
Formation
of a Long-Lived Charge-Separated State of a Zinc Phthalocyanine-Perylenediimide
Dyad by Complexation with Magnesium Ion . Chem.
Commun. 
2005 , 30 , 3814 –3816 . 10.1039/b506412k .
Mack J. ; Stillman M. J. 
Photochemical Formation
of the Anion Radical of Zinc
Phthalocyanine and Analysis of the Absorption and Magnetic Circular
Dichroism Spectral Data. Assignment of the Optical Spectrum of [ZnPc(−3)]− . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1994 , 116 , 1292 –1304 . 10.1021/ja00083a015 .
Hakola H. ; Sariola-Leikas E. ; Efimov A. ; Tkachenko N. V. 
Effect
of Hole Transporting Material on Charge Transfer Processes in Zinc
Phthalocyanine Sensitized ZnO Nanorods . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 7044 –7051 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b01583 .
Konarev D. V. ; Khasanov S. S. ; Lyubovskaya R. N. 
Effect
of Deprotonation and Reduction
on the Molecular Structure and Optical and Magnetic Properties of
Metal-Free Phthalocyanine (Pc): Comparison of H2Pc– and HPc–
Anions . Asian J. Org. Chem. 
2017 , 6 , 1028 –1033 . 10.1002/ajoc.201700295 .
Lemmetyinen H. ; Tkachenko N. ; Efimov A. ; Niemi M. 
Transient states in
photoinduced electron transfer reactions of porphyrin- and phthalocyanine-fullerene
dyads . J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines 
2009 , 13 , 1090 –1097 . 10.1142/s108842460900139x .
Hakola H. ; Perros A. P. ; Myllyperkiö P. ; Kurotobi K. ; Lipsanen H. ; Imahori H. ; Lemmetyinen H. ; Tkachenko N. V. 
Photo-Induced
Electron Transfer at Nanostructured Semiconductor–Zinc Porphyrin
Interface . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2014 , 592 , 47 –51 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2013.11.028 .
U.S. Department
of Energy (DOE)/NREL/ALLIANCE  . Reference Solar Spectral Irradiance:
Air Mass 1.5 . http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/ (accessed 2018 -02-03).
M’Sabah B. L. ; Boucharef M. ; Warnan J. ; Pellegrin Y. ; Blart E. ; Lucas B. ; Odobel F. ; Bouclé J. 
Amplification
of light collection in solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells via
the antenna effect through supramolecular assembly . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 9910 –9918 . 10.1039/c4cp05712k .25776534 
Virkki K. ; Demir S. ; Lemmetyinen H. ; Tkachenko N. V. 
Photoinduced
Electron Transfer in CdSe/ZnS Quantum Dot–Fullerene Hybrids . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 17561 –17572 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b04251 .
Stranius K. ; George L. ; Efimov A. ; Ruoko T.-P. ; Pohjola J. ; Tkachenko N. V. 
Photophysical Study of a Self-Assembled Donor-Acceptor
Two-Layer Film on TiO2 . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 944 –952 . 10.1021/la5025873 .25547810 
Lehtivuori H. ; Efimov A. ; Lemmetyinen H. ; Tkachenko N. V. 
Distributed
Decay Kinetics of Charge Separated State in Solid Films . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2007 , 437 , 238 –242 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2007.02.029 .

