
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3159246110.1021/acsomega.9b01978ArticleOptimizing a High-Entropy System: Software-Assisted
Development of Highly Hydrophobic Surfaces using an Amphiphilic Polymer Subianto Surya *†Li Cheng ‡Rubin de Celis Leal David †Rana Santu ‡Gupta Sunil ‡He Rongliang †Venkatesh Svetha ‡Sutti Alessandra *††Institute
for Frontier Materials and ‡Applied Artificial Intelligence
Institute, Deakin University, Geelong 3220, Australia* E-mail: Surya.Subianto@deakin.edu.au (S.S.).* E-mail: Alessandra.Sutti@deakin.edu.au (A.S.).23 09 2019 01 10 2019 4 14 15912 15922 30 06 2019 21 08 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In materials science, the investigation
of a large and complex
experimental space is time-consuming and thus may induce bias to exclude
potential solutions where little to no knowledge is available. This
work presents the development of a highly hydrophobic material from
an amphiphilic polymer through a novel, adaptive artificial intelligence
approach. The hydrophobicity arises from the random packing of short
polymer fibers into paper, a highly entropic, multistep process. Using
Bayesian optimization, the algorithm is able to efficiently navigate
the parameter space without bias, including areas which a human experimenter
would not address. This resulted in additional knowledge gain, which
can then be applied to the fabrication process, resulting in a highly
hydrophobic material (static water contact angle 135°) from an
amphiphilic polymer (contact angle of 90°) through a simple and
scalable filtration-based method. This presents a potential pathway
for surface modification using the short polymer fibers to create
fluorine-free hydrophobic surfaces on a larger scale.

document-id-old-9ao9b01978document-id-new-14ao-2019-01978nccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The
relationship between superhydrophobicity and the surface structure
has been widely studied, using natural examples of superhydrophobic
materials as well as designed surfaces with surface features of controlled
size and distribution. Superhydrophobicity is generally defined as
a surface having a static water contact angle (WCA) of 150° or
greater.1 Superhydrophobic surfaces have
been reported in the literature using many hydrophobic polymers, with
WCA tuned through micro and nanostructure.2−4 Many models
that study the effect of surface roughness on the contact angle are
available. Typically, a combination of the Wenzel5 (a fully wetted surface) and Cassie–Baxter6 models is used (a partially wetted surface).

To a lesser extent, there have also been reports of superhydrophobic
surfaces prepared excluding fluorinated compounds and using amphiphilic
polymers. Extraordinary control of feature size is typically required
to obtain high WCA. Feng et al.7 created
a superhydrophobic surface of aligned poly(vinyl alcohol) nanofibers
through a template-based extrusion method, while Dong et al.8 used electrospinning and evaporation-induced
self-assembly to fabricate superhydrophobic zein surfaces. Common
techniques to obtain structured hydrophobic surfaces such as lithography
or templating enable manufacturing of highly ordered, homogeneous
structures with predefined distinct morphology and characteristic
dimensions (size and spacing of features). The approaches above can
result in very high contact angles, enabled by a high degree of morphological
control, but present a challenge from scale-up and practical application
perspectives.

In contrast, surfaces formed through random packing
of materials,
such as papers, do not enable the same level of morphological and
ordering control. The characteristic dimensions of the “surface
morphology features” responsible for the roughness are determined
by local packing and ordering, which are in turn determined by processing
conditions and the size of the starting particles (fibers, in the
case of papers). With low control over the size and spacing of features,
maximizing WCA of such surfaces is difficult, and fluorination surface
modification is often used,9−11 although it is undesirable industrially
because of adverse environmental effects. Manufacture of highly hydrophobic
papers without the use of fluorine is a complex task but holds a high
potential value.

In this study, we apply artificial intelligence
approaches to guide
our experiments with the aim of creating a highly hydrophobic surface
solely through the randomized packing of one-dimensional amphiphilic
materials of varied sizes and roughness. This work demonstrates that
highly entropic systems can be optimized by combining the power of
machine learning and the depth of the experimenter’s scientific
understanding.

We have developed a flow system capable of producing
short polymer
fibers in a dispersion12−14 (Scheme 1). Such dispersions can be used to produce paper using vacuum
filtration. Since the WCA is strongly related to the surface structure,
the initial hypothesis in this work was that the size and distribution
of short fibers, and hence their packing, can be taken as a proxy
to produce the surface roughness required to achieve hydrophobicity.

Scheme 1 Schematic of the Short Fiber Production Process using a Flow Device
In essence, the size distribution and polydispersity
of the fiber
length and diameter, as well as their inherent roughness, would have
an effect on the type of surface obtained and thus would have
a correlation with the surface’s apparent water contact angle.
Following established principles, we used a porogen (oil) in the process,
to create additional surface roughness in each fiber. This is expected
to further increase hydrophobicity through secondary roughness. In
contrast with structure-controlled methods, such as lithography, the
distribution, and combination of fiber properties required to maximize
the contact angle is unknown.

We chose this approach as an ideal
candidate for artificial intelligence
optimization,15−17 as it relies on fiber manufacturing, and on the random
combination and arrangements of the fibers in paper fabrication to
create the surface structures, and as such poses a complexity that
makes experimental optimization extremely challenging (Scheme 2).

Scheme 2 Iterative Optimization
Process of the Software
This complexity and “ideal structure unpredictability”
is also compounded by the two-step nature of the process we propose.
Although the formation of the fibers is controlled by the fabrication
parameters, known to some degree through previous work, the hydrophobicity
of the assembled paper is dependent on surface features that are governed
by complex factors including the way these fibers settle, pack, and
ultimately come together. Correlating fiber production conditions
with WCA of the assembled paper samples has not been done before.

In such a complex, interrelated system, a human-designed optimization
process for the fiber production generally starts with making hypotheses
as to “an ideal structure”. Targeted experiments would
be performed to test the hypotheses and sequentially optimize and
lock single parameters in an increasingly narrow experimental space
(Figure 1).

Figure 1 Conceptual
comparison of a typical human-designed optimization
(left) vs AI-driven optimization (right) in a parameter space.

This poses a limitation in that the parameters
are optimized with
respect to a previous set of parameters and thus the optimization
itself occurs in a linear branching pattern where most of the parameter
space is not investigated. This is not a suitable approach for highly
unpredictable systems, as a sequential selection of conditions may
lead to areas of the parameter space that do not contain experimental
optima.

In an ideal world, every possible combination of parameters
would
be explored in a factorial design or a response surface approach.
These techniques are not typically adaptive, resulting in experimental
overheads and noninformative experiments. To adapt, the parameter
space set by the experimenter is often significantly narrowed according
to various assumptions and predictions based on the knowledge available.
This in turn creates a situation where, faced with a system with many
unknowns, the experimenter needs to predict results based on very
limited knowledge and thus may decide to focus on the areas of the
parameter space with the greatest certainty, leaving significant portions
of the parameter space unexplored.

Unlike human experimenters,
machine learning algorithms practically
do not have a limitation on the number of parameters they can simultaneously
vary and thus can efficiently explore a very large parameter space,
to optimize a process or a material. In “Big data” approaches,
software is trained on a particular task using a large set of data.
In contrast, optimization algorithms that work on a “lean data”
basis allow the experimenter to start with a small amount of data,
and the software to sequentially learn through multiple iterations
of experiments. With the help of an algorithm, the experimenter can
explore a much more complex system, using a mathematically proven
optimization concept to minimize the time required to achieve the
optimal result. This minimizes experimental costs and maximizes the
opportunities to explore a complex space.

This type of algorithm
is advantageous for such a complex, highly
entropic space as the one investigated here, in which prior knowledge
is of limited use in predicting the outcome. This approach allows
mathematically proven valid exploration of conditions that a human
experimenter may not have otherwise investigated (due to high risk).
The greater associated risk/benefits efficiency compared to random
experiments lead to a greater knowledge gain from the experiments
than what would be obtained from a traditional experimental design.

We propose in this work that combining higher-level human learning
and machine learning algorithms provides a powerful platform for high-risk
optimization of complex and unexplored parameter space.

This
work demonstrates how high-entropy experiments can be optimized
with the aid of machine learning algorithms, providing new materials
with extraordinary properties, which would have otherwise not been
attainable.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Hypothesis
Development and Testing
We have previously reported the rapid
optimization of the basic poly(ethylene-co-acrylic
acid) (PEAA) short fiber production process using
a Bayesian algorithm.17 The process is
robust and scalable, such that short polymer fibers have established
commercial applications.

In previous work, we optimized the
process above toward specific fiber length and diameter values. This
knowledge will be used to support the algorithms in this work, although
the system here optimized has the extra complexity of a porogen being
added to the spinning polymer dope.

The integration of algorithm-supported
optimization with human
input is an emerging area. Examples include self-cleaning surfaces
produced through the control of the surface structure by reactive
ion etching, followed by chemical vapor deposition.18 Human input helped to restrict and direct the parameter
space in each iteration. Although the interplay between parameters
was unknown, the surface structures were well-defined, uniform, and
could be controlled in both steps.

In comparison, this study
introduces multiple layers of complexity:
one additional processing step (porogen emulsification) and additional
processing parameters, the effects of which are unknown, and an element
of randomness in terms of fiber packing during a subsequent processing
step (Scheme 3).

Scheme 3 Schematic of the Production Process and the Parameters Used
Bayesian algorithms are able to take into account
prior knowledge.
This is advantageous where prior experience might help optimize one
part of the experiment. As such, in this work, there are fiber production
parameters (polymer flow, coagulant flow, constriction angle, and
distance to constriction) where the effects are known from prior work.
This prior knowledge has been made available to the algorithm, to
improve control over fiber synthesis. However, the additional parameters
used in this work, such as the optional emulsification of porogen
(oil), and the way the fibers will pack into a surface during paper
fabrication, are very difficult to predict and no prior knowledge
is available that can be coded into the algorithm.

To begin
with, we started with a subset of a sample based on a
previously optimized PEAA paper control sample17 (without porogen). This sample has a contact angle of 126°,
which is significantly higher than what was measured for a cast PEAA
film (90°). This shows the effectiveness of the paper morphology
in increasing the hydrophobicity of the material surface. Further
experiments were conducted using the same flow conditions but varying
oil contents and emulsification shear. The resulting fibers (Figure 2) were then analyzed
with regard to their size distribution and made into paper to measure
the contact angle.

Figure 2 Optical microscopy images of the short polymer fibers
without (a,
b) and with porogen (c, d).

Looking at the correlation between parameters (Figure 3), it can be seen that a clear
trend is absent, as expected in such a small sample size. At this
point, a human experimenter would likely target parameters close to
the highest observed contact angle that was obtained, and localize
the search area around those particular values to quickly reach a
maximal outcome.

Figure 3 Line plot of the contact angle and fiber distribution
results obtained
based on a subset of previously optimized parameters for fiber production
(without porogen) and adding porogen based on the original hypothesis.

In contrast, the algorithm developed in this work
treats the system
as a “black box”,16 enabling
search of a large space with mathematically demonstrated precision
and efficiency. Another important distinction is that the machine
learning algorithm, which is adaptive, will recalculate a model at
every iteration, considering all data points collected, whereas
a human experimenter with a randomized experiment set will generally
treat certain points as outliers.

The algorithm balances exploration
of the space and exploitation
of the data. Although this may appear to delay the discovery of high
WCA, the probability to find maxima far from the initial best is increased
as the algorithm guides the human experimenter in areas they otherwise
would not tackle. This key feature might enable the discovery of novel
phenomena and will increase the ability of the experimenter to develop
novel materials with extraordinary functionality.

2.2 Software Optimization
Conventional
machine learning methods generally require a large amount of training
data,19 however, this approach cannot be
applied to experiments where limited data is available. As such, the
technique of Bayesian optimization20 (BO)
was used to search for the optimal fiber production parameters to
explore the various possibilities in the most efficient way possible.
Bayesian optimization has been demonstrated as a sample-efficient
tool in various applications18,21,22 and has significant potential in improving the cost efficiency of
materials development.

A Gaussian process model provides a probabilistic
model of a function, to predict function values at unobserved locations
of the input space, using the current observation set and a covariance
model between the function values. The prediction takes the form of
a Gaussian-distributed random variable for each location, expressing
both the belief and the epistemic uncertainty about the belief. Because
of the induced covariances, proximity to several already observed
locations would make the prediction more accurate and more certain
at the same time, whereas it would be opposite for far off locations
of the input space, making the predictive distribution very spatial.
From this, it may be tempting to perform the next experiment at a
location where the predictive mean value is at the optimum, i.e.,
at the location of the current-highest result obtained. However, such
a strategy that only exploits the current knowledge tends to remain
focused  around a local optimum, and risks sacrificing the opportunity
to achieve a global optimum.

Bayesian optimization combines
both the exploitative and the explorative
behavior in an optimal strategy that provides the fastest convergence
rate among all of the global optimization methods. Expected improvement
(EI) is such a strategy.23 In the Bayesian
optimization literature, such strategies are also known as “acquisition
functions”. The global optimizer of the acquisition function
is used as the next experimental location. Figure 4 depicts the Bayesian algorithm in action
at three different iterations. For this simple function, convergence
occurred within the first 9 iterations.

Figure 4 One-dimensional example
of the standard Bayesian optimization iterative
process. The Gaussian process is used as the prior of the latent function f. The posterior mean and variance of f can then be computed and are used to construct the expected improvement
(EI) acquisition function, which guides the search for the next evaluation
point. In this example, we achieve the global maximum with nine iterations.

The standard Bayesian optimization algorithm is
originally constructed
to recommend only one experiment per iteration. To maximize efficiency,
a batch Bayesian optimization algorithm is created, as a modification
of the original. This algorithm recommends multiple experiments per
iteration, where the first one is still the same as that of the standard
Bayesian optimization. The subsequent suggestions are obtained by
temporarily inserting the previous batch elements as known experiments
with their function values being substituted by the model predicted
values. The first member of the batch was chosen as a reference because
it is the most promising recommendation, as other batch members are
sequentially obtained using fictitious function values of the prior
batch members. To achieve this, the acquisition functions for the
secondary batch members are optimized within the restricted input
space with the fixed values for those input variables. In this study,
the batch was set to have fixed properties along the production parameters
that are more difficult to change (geometry-related parameters), to
maximize time efficiency.

Compared to random search and grid
search that do not take the
information from previous experiments into account, Bayesian optimization
keeps track of past evaluation results and uses them to build up a
probabilistic model mapping experimental inputs to outputs. As more
data becomes available, the reasoning becomes more accurate since
the model is updated with the new data.

2.3 Material
Optimization and Building Knowledge
in the Parameter Space
With each iteration, the algorithm
was able to explore the parameter space, including in distant areas
of the space, which a human experimenter would typically not explore
because of the high risk of failure (Supporting Information 1). The algorithm suggests experimental conditions
that the experimenter would act upon. Multiple suggestions (batch
optimization) were provided to the experimenter to reduce the “cost
of setup” of the experiment. Because of this, the batch optimization
process was performed with a single sample produced for every suggestion
to maximize time efficiency, and the algorithm was relied on to take
into account any potential “noise” and outliers.
Once sufficient knowledge is gained from the system, the experimenter
then duplicated selected samples, chosen as those that
showed the highest potential to provide greater insight.

In
the batch optimization process, when looking at the spread of values
obtained with each iteration (Figure 5), there was a narrowing trend, with the minimum WCA
values becoming higher overall with each iteration and the maximal
WCA values remaining quite stable, although slightly increasing. This
is consistent with the algorithm’s having found a plateau where
higher contact angle values are aggregated. From the spread of the
contact angle results, it is evident that by iteration 5 the spread
of the obtained WCA values had narrowed significantly, resulting in
a batch with a very high overall contact angle in iteration 7. This
shows the result of the algorithm’s learning, in that it was
able to achieve what appears to be a maximum in 7 iterations.

Figure 5 Graph showing
the improvement in the contact angle obtained by
the algorithm with increasing numbers of iterations (solid lines)
overlaid on violin plots of all of the contact angle values obtained
in each iteration.

Figure 6 shows the
length and diameter distribution of two optima, which were produced
in duplicates after the batch optimization. The maximum identified
by the software is reached through packing fibers which are very different
from the highest value in the initial, human-optimized, set. Comparing
the fiber size distribution between the highest result obtained by
the software (WCA = 132°) and that from the initial sequential
set (WCA = 130°, Supporting Information 1), the software appears to have achieved high WCA through
the packing of short fibers with large thickness variation. In contrast,
the initial optimum was reached with longer fibers, with additional
surface roughness due to the porogen. Indeed, the highest value in
the initial set was obtained from the sample that had the lowest amount
of porogen added to it, which implies that the original control sample
was already close to the initially reached optimum.

Figure 6 Comparison of the software
optimum to the initial “optimum”
based on adding porogen to an optimized set of fiber production parameters.

The algorithm in this work takes into account the
average fiber
diameter and length, due to a need to represent fiber properties using
the first-order statistical moments, as is necessary to incorporate
prior knowledge. The use of values, such as the median or mean, can
result in a significant loss of information in terms of the morphology
of the fibers (and consequently how they pack on the surface of the
paper). Two samples with very similar median fiber values can show
very different distributions, as seen in Figure 7. To take this complexity into account during
the optimization, we have adaptively added second-order statistics
such as standard derivation and skewness in the software’s
target objectives. Although the broad effects of the distribution
are taken into account, optimization still relies on reducing complex
morphology information into numbers.

Figure 7 Two samples with similar fiber size median
values but different
distributions and water contact angles, and a simplified diagram showing
how such points may be treated by the algorithm.

From these results, it became apparent that there is a need to
look at the underlying factors affecting WCA, such as the morphology
of the paper produced with these different fibers, as shown in Figure 8 (additional images
in Supporting Information 2). Looking at
the surface structure of these papers, it becomes clear that more
open, rougher structures are correlated with higher WCA values, whereas
the samples with a lower WCA show a much denser surface structure.
Low WCA samples also show a lower occurrence of debris and other surface
features. Bimodal distributions instead resulted in a denser packing
of fibers and a surface that is significantly less open, also with
a lower WCA.

Figure 8 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface
of the
paper produced by sample 2–1, contact angle 131° (left)
and sample 4–4, contact angle 112° (right) (fiber size
distribution of the two samples shown in Figure 10).

When looking at samples with different WCA values, it became apparent
that no single value, such as the median or mean, would be sufficient
to correlate with the contact angle. When it comes to the software-assisted
optimization process, the only output that is measured on the paper
itself is the contact angle, and as such other paper properties are
secondary and not considered. Unlike a human experimenter, the software
optimizes without the need to understand the process behind how such
a result is obtained, and this function is hidden inside the black
box function which is difficult for the experimenter to gain insight
into.

To gain a better understanding of the nature of the surface
and
to see if parameters other than WCA would be more suitable for optimization,
some of the paper samples were analyzed for roughness, as measured
through an optical profilometer, to identify possible correlation
with WCA. As can be seen from Figure 9, a certain value of average roughness provides high
WCA, with the lowest value of roughness giving lower WCA values, and
very high roughness also giving WCA values that are quite high, but
remain lower than those of samples with intermediate roughness values.
Countering this trend, a sample with low WCA in the same roughness
range can also be observed in the set. This indicates that, although
there may be a relationship between the roughness value and WCA, it
is also likely that the roughness value does not sufficiently
take into account roughness at different length scales, and thus is
insufficient to represent the complexity behind the various factors
that determine the contact angle of the surface. Roughness values
were therefore not used to inform the optimization.

Figure 9 Surface roughness of
selected paper samples measured using a laser
profilometer and SEM images of some corresponding samples. The line
shows the cross-section profile of the surface across a 3 mm line,
while CA denotes contact angle values and Ra denotes the average roughness values.

It is possible that using various additional input parameters in
addition to fiber size would improve the efficacy of the algorithm,
however, this would not be cost-effective and would result in significantly
less data being produced.

An emerging trend to maximize efficiency
and minimize cost is to
have human input guide AI algorithms,18 as a human would be able to derive more information from certain
types of results, such as visual information, based on fundamental
prior knowledge. This approach has been followed in this work.

The high data complexity of this work makes it difficult to theoretically
predict the WCA that would be obtained for a certain fiber size distribution.
Many previous studies2−4,24 have derived WCA values
based on feature size using models derived from the Cassie–Baxter
and the Wenzel models, generally using surfaces with a regular pattern
and distinct feature size. The Wenzel model assumes full wetting of
the surface, whereas the Cassie–Baxter model assumes incomplete
wetting and introduces additional variables to account for the proportion
of the surface wetted by water. However, both assume regularity in
surface features and thus is difficult to translate to a highly entropic
system, such as the one here described, where the feature size cannot
be easily defined in a single parameter.

As the intrinsic contact
angle of PEAA tends toward hydrophobic,
the Cassie–Baxter model for apparent WCA of porous surfaces6 was used to calculate the theoretical WCA of
the paper samples. Using fiber thickness as the feature size and the
standard deviation as the basis for the spacing in between features,
it was assumed that the variance of the thicker fibers will be acting
as the dominant spacer and thus would be a suitable proxy for the
model. Fiber length was not included in this calculation, as its influence
on the feature size is difficult to ascertain and is beyond the scope
of this work. This idealized calculation has limitations, in that
it does not take into account the high complexity of the fiber size
distribution, but it serves to highlight the difficulty in distilling
complex distribution information into a usable variable for use in
calculations.

As can be seen from Figure 10, the theoretical
approach
is quite good at predicting the values of samples close to the median
contact angle of the samples, and overall the values of diameter produce
a similar WCA spread. However, the measured and calculated values
of individual points differed significantly. Similar issues arise
when other variables were used as the value of the spacing between
the fibers, indicating that the calculated values are not able to
appropriately account for the variations that effectively determine
the highest and lowest WCA values, as the equation used here necessarily assumes
a uniform distribution of features. Modeling a complex structure with
various feature size will be much more complex, and this is where
a practical, optimization guided approach may have an advantage as
the result is guided by experimental data and human intuition, and
thus may be able to better encompass the complexity of such a system.

Figure 10 Comparison
of measured vs predicted contact angle based on fiber
size.

As previously outlined, the algorithm
was designed to search for
the ideal fiber size, and then infer the parameters required to achieve
this fiber size. However, the data obtained thus far indicates that
rather than an ideal fiber size, the correct hypothesis would be to
have an ideal “distribution” and “shape”,
both of which are not as easily incorporated into numerical values.
Since the whole process is treated as a black box, the model that
the software develops and uses is hidden in the algorithm,15 and not easily adapted to “learn”
additional information without restarting the process. As such, the
algorithm cannot utilize unquantified information such as the fiber
shape, bend, pore shape, density of pores in fibers, and other variations
of fiber morphology. For example, different shapes and the presence
of spheres and debris definitely affect fiber packing, resulting in
different WCA values, but are hard to capture. This results in a loss
of information in distilling the complexity of the fibers’
morphology into numbers that can be used in the algorithm and thus
the software would be unable to see more complex, abstract definitions
such as shape variations. Other studies using Bayesian optimization25−27 were generally aimed at optimizing well-defined systems, and as
such may not have encountered this issue of an evolving hypothesis.

In hindsight, using a two-step optimization process where the software
takes an intermediate step instead of a single optimization process,
in which all of the parameters are correlated directly with the contact
angle may have resulted in a loss of information in the middle step.
Looking at the parameters directly in Figure 11, it can be seen that only some parameters
show a clear trend. This highlights the challenge and the pitfalls
in software-assisted optimization, in that initial assumptions need
to be sufficiently robust or it may result in a sub-optimal process.
Nevertheless, despite this limitation, the software did manage to
achieve what can be deemed as an optimum within this large parameter
space in 7 iterations, which underlines the value of its assistance
in exploring complex systems where knowledge is limited.

Figure 11 Line graph
correlation of water contact angle with fiber size distribution
(top), and with production parameters (bottom).

2.4 Applying the Obtained Knowledge to Maximize
Hydrophobicity
This exploration of the parameter space has
given several important insights into physical phenomena linked to
WCA. First, variation in both shape and size of surface features seems
to drive greater roughness and higher WCA. High variance in length
or thickness, or in both, led to higher hydrophobicity. Second, it
was discovered that, unlike the original hypothesis, the roughness
of the fibers themselves did not seem to be a significant driver behind
hydrophobicity. To further understand the factors that drive the hydrophobicity
of the material, selected key samples were duplicated to confirm the
findings and were looked at in more detail.

Figure 12 shows the fiber size distribution
of some of these samples. First, two samples with a very different
distribution, both of which displayed a relatively high contact angle.
The large variance in length and thickness distribution was observed
in both samples. This implies that size variance is an important lever
by which WCA may be maximized. Furthermore, a comparison of the samples
with the highest WCA to the samples with the lowest WCA. In terms
of thickness, a large variance appears to be beneficial, but only
if there were fibers within that distribution that had relatively
small diameters (below ca. 2 μm). In contrast, the length distribution
did not seem to show large differences between the highest and lowest
contact angle samples.

Figure 12 Two samples with a similar water contact angle
(130° vs 131°)
but very different fiber size distribution, and length and thickness
distribution. Comparison between samples with the highest (HIGHCA)
and lowest (LOWCA) contact angle values.

Fiber roughness was not observed to affect the WCA much, and
appears to invalidate parts of our initial hypothesis that fiber roughness
due to porogen will be an important factor. This is consistent with
lower shear values for the porogen emulsification resulting in better
WCA than using higher shear values. This is likely because using mid
shear values resulted in the formation of both large and small oil
droplets. These, in turn, maximized the variance in both fiber size
and length, by disturbing the fiber formation mechanism. The larger
droplets may result in irregular filament breakage, bulges, and spherical
particles, while smaller oil droplets may introduce roughness and
further weak points along which the fiber could break unevenly.

To test the hypothesis that mid-range values for shear could lead
to higher WCA, we tried a small set of samples where the points were
chosen to give the maximum possible variation in size and shape, using
a set of parameters that was chosen based on the trend observed in Figure 11, as well as basing
our assumptions on the more complete understanding of the surface
roughness of the paper samples developed through the algorithm.

Three samples were prepared (in duplicates) with this approach,
using only conditions that are available to the algorithm. One
sample showed a value of 135° for WCA, which is a 3° increase
over the previous highest value obtained from the algorithm. There
is also an overall 45° increase from the contact angle of a cast
PEAA film, and although it is not as high as those obtained by methods
such as templating or lithography, it was achieved using a simple,
scalable approach of random organization of fibers into a paper.

Figure 13 shows
the comparison of the fiber distributions in this sample (sample 8–10,
WCA 135°), in comparison with the previous best obtained
(sample 8–5, WCA 132°). As can be seen from the plot,
the distribution of the two is very similar, however, the sample with
the higher contact angle shows a larger tail in both length and thickness,
consistent with greater variance in fiber size. This strongly supports
our modified hypothesis that greater variance resulted in higher contact
angles, and it is likely due to the increased roughness afforded by
a combination of thicker and thinner fibers, and having longer, larger
fibers provide the spacing for the macroscopic roughness, while the
smaller, thinner fibers and debris provided the microscopic roughness.

Figure 13 Size
distribution comparison of the sample with maximized variance
(sample 8–10, contact angle 135°) vs the previously obtained
“best value” sample (sample 8–5, contact angle
132°).

Given sufficient time and iterations,
it is likely that the software
may reach similar or higher WCA results. However, to achieve
even higher WCA, it is likely that the parameter space needs to be
altered and the input parameters modified to better reflect the newly
obtained knowledge. Indeed, it has become apparent in this study that
the use of machine learning algorithms is a powerful tool in exploring
such a huge parameter space, but its very nature imposes a limitation
in a small-data environment. This limitation is imposed on it by its
very design in that it assumes the original hypothesis is correct.
Unlike a human experimenter, an algorithm is unable to easily adjust
these assumptions to accommodate new knowledge as this becomes available.
Furthermore, this exercise has also shown that reducing the complexity
of morphology into numbers was insufficient to capture all of the
relevant information, and so the challenge remains in terms of the
human–software interface in how to capture the information,
including those that a human can subconsciously process and translate
it into usable input values.

Nevertheless, the error in our
initial hypothesis and the development
of the new hypothesis also shows the value of this software-assisted
approach, without which many of the points that have provided the
insights that led to the development of the second hypothesis would
have been left unexplored. As previously discussed, without the software
to guide the experimenter through a large space, the experimental
process would likely progress in a sequential manner, where one parameter
is optimized independently of other parameters. This would result
in a bias, which drives the experimenter toward a particular outcome,
minimizing scrutiny on less favorable outcomes in the name of efficiency.

The use of a machine learning algorithm then presents itself as
a powerful tool to remove this bias, without resorting to the inefficiency
of random experiments, as the software would pursue outcomes based
on the relationship between the points, while the experimenter can
act as an observer to maximize the knowledge gain from the study.
The algorithm also serves to give the experimenter confidence that
unlike random experiments, the time cost of each iteration would be
minimized as the software simply considers good and bad results as
data, and can correlate points regardless of their position in the
experimental space. In contrast, a human experimenter performing random
sampling would likely be unsure of correlations in the data obtained.

3 Conclusions
We have demonstrated the fabrication
of a highly entropic and highly
hydrophobic material from an amphiphilic polymer through a software-assisted
morphology optimization. This approach made short fiber dispersion
of poly(ethylene-co-acrylic acid), a polymer with
a native contact angle of 90° (when cast as a film), which can
be made into a paper-type surface through a simple and scalable filtration-based
method. Although not considered superhydrophobic, the PEAA paper shows
a very high contact angle of 135°, a 45° increase compared
to the base polymer. This approach presents a potential pathway of
surface modification using the short polymer fibers to create a fluorine-free
hydrophobic surface on a larger scale.

The use of a machine
learning algorithm allows the efficient exploration
of a much larger parameter space, which allows experimenters to obtain
additional information and knowledge about the system, but it was
also limited by the initial assumptions put to it in its design.

Despite these limitations, it remains a powerful tool for experimental
design as it enables the experimenter to efficiently explore a large
parameter space that would be too time-consuming to do by a randomized
selection. It also gives the experimenter additional confidence in
exploring systems with little prior knowledge. This would allow researchers
to obtain a more complete understanding of the system at a greater
time efficiency. However, care must be taken in the experimental design
to minimize the loss of information in the process, and in some cases,
it may be better for a software-assisted approach to run without any
assumptions imposed on it and optimize the results solely based on
input parameters.

Further improvement in the use of such machine
learning algorithms
will likely come from a co-learning or a higher learning approach,
where the software can incorporate new knowledge as this is obtained,
as well as a more sophisticated input system, which may overcome the
problem of how to distill complex factors into numbers that the algorithm
can use. This highlights one of the main challenges in machine learning,
in how to have a system flexible enough to learn and adapt as new
knowledge and information becomes available.

4 Materials
and Methods
4.1 Materials and Short Polymer Fiber Synthesis
Poly(ethylene-co-acrylic acid) pellets (Primacor
5990I DOW) were added to an aqueous solution of deionized water and
ammonium hydroxide under reflux at 110 °C to prepare a 16.5%
w/v dispersion (polymer dope). This polymer dope was loaded into a
syringe, placed on a syringe pump (Legato 270), which injected the
polymer dope into a fluidic device in front of a constricted channel
with variable injection positions (d = 0, 15, or
30 mm) and constriction angle (α = 10 or 25°), giving a
total of 6 different configurations. The coagulant liquid used was
1-butanol (>99%, Chem Supply), maintained at a temperature of 4–10
°C and driven by a lobe pump (Unibloc LABTOP 200). For all experiments,
10 mL of PEAA dispersion was injected into 400 mL of 1-butanol at
a fixed polymer and coagulant flow rate. The coagulant was constantly
recirculated until the full volume of the polymer was injected, and
the resulting short fiber dispersion was then collected.

The
PEAA paper samples were prepared by concentrating the short fiber
dispersion using an Amicon filtration system, where the volume of
the dispersion was reduced from 400 mL to around 100 mL. The concentrated
dispersion was then poured into ethanol (400 mL) and left overnight
to stabilize the PEAA short fibers. The dispersion was filtered through
an Amicon filtration system under pressure (2 bar) until most of the
solvent was removed, and the resulting paper was removed from the
filter and dried in ambient conditions on a glass Petri dish. For
the optimization process, a single sample is made, however, key samples
were later duplicated using the same production parameters for further
analysis and comparison

4.2 Algorithm
The
overall algorithm in
this experiment has four main steps (Scheme 2) and begins after a few human-selected experimental
data became available. Step 1 models the unknown function f that relates the fiber properties (z) to
the contact angle (y) using a Gaussian process,28 and then using the standard form of the Bayesian
optimization, a set of target fiber properties ztT that can potentially result in the highest contact angle is
recommended. Step 2 models the unknown function g that relates the production parameter (x) to the fiber
properties (z) using another Gaussian process, and then
using batch Bayesian optimization,29 a
batch of production parameters {xtb}b=1B is recommended. In step 3, the experiments
are performed and the corresponding fiber properties zt are measured, including the contact
angle yt. In step 4,
the algorithm terminates if any one of the B experiments
achieves a sufficiently high contact angle, otherwise the new data
is added into the previous ones and steps 1–4 are repeated.

The following sections outline the specific details with respect
to the set-up outlined above:

Step 1: Recommendation of target
fiber properties ztT

All M fiber properties were represented by a vector zt = {zt1, ···, ztM}. The standard Bayesian optimization was applied
to suggest a target fiber ztT = {zt1T, ···, ztMT}. The Bayesian optimization
uses the Gaussian process to model the unknown function f:z → y. Squared exponential
function was used as the covariance model between two function values
at x and x′. The covariance function
can be computed as  where d is the number of
dimensions for the vector x and li is the length-scale at dimension i, which controls the smoothness of the unknown function
at that dimension. The maximal likelihood estimation method28 was used to automatically estimate the length
scales.

The posterior predictive mean and variance of the Gaussian
process
are denoted as μ(z′) and
σ2(z′), respectively, for
any point z′. Then, the expected improvement
(EI) acquisition function is computed as  where  and y+ is the
highest value out of the current observation set. Φ and ϕ
are the cumulative density function and probability density function
of the standard normal distribution, respectively. The recommended
fiber properties ztT was obtained
by maximizing the EI acquisition function.

Step 2: Recommendation
of fiber production experiment batch Xt

At this step, the M fiber properties
were the
output corresponding to the input of the fiber production parameters.
To maintain simplicity, M fiber properties were merged
into a single objective using linear scalarization, or  All objectives were normalized between 0 and
1 prior to scalarization. Normalization was achieved using the minimum
and maximum value of each fiber property. The next task was to recommend
a batch Xt = {xtb}b=1B of B points to minimize vt. The Gaussian process was again employed to model the unknown function h:x → vt. GP-BUCB29 was used as
the batch Bayesian optimization algorithm to construct the next batch
of experiments. In the algorithm, the geometry parameters of the whole
batch were forced to that of the first member of the batch characterization.

4.3 Instrumental Characterization
To
measure the fiber size distribution, some of the short fiber dispersion
was taken and highly diluted in ethanol to obtain a very dilute dispersion.
This diluted dispersion was then dried on a microscope slide in air
at room temperature. Sample images with magnifications of 5, 10, and
20× were obtained using an optical microscope (Olympus BX51 with
a DP71 camera). An appropriate magnification was then selected, where
the fibers can be clearly seen and are separate and distinct from
each other. The length and diameter of the fibers were then measured
from the optical images using a custom-made Fiber Separation app on
an Image Pro Premiere software.

The static contact angle was
measured on the paper using a KSV contact angle analyzer with the
Attension software. The contact angle was measured as an average of
5 points across the paper sample from the center to the edge of the
paper. SEM images are taken on a Zeiss Supra 55VP SEM. Samples were
prepared by drying a diluted short fiber dispersion onto an aluminum
stub. After drying, the samples were coated with gold prior to analysis.
The SEM images were then used to provide a qualitative value of fiber
roughness based on a scale of 1–5, with 5 being the roughest.
SEM images of paper samples were also taken to visually compare the
surface features of various samples. The roughness of the selected
samples was measured using an Olympus LEXT laser profilometer. The
roughness analysis was performed using a 10× magnification lens
across a 3 × 1 mm2 surface.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01978.Optimization parameters,
fiber size parameters, and
static water contact angle data; additional electron microscopy images
of selected samples (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01978_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
This manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the help of Dr. Ben
Allardyce and Dr. Dang Nguyen, Dr. Keiran Pringle for manufacture
and design of the devices, Dr. Teo Slezak for early project discussions,
and Dr. Murray Height and HeiQ Australia for very insightful discussions
during this project. This study was performed with the support of
the Australian Research Council Research Hub for Future Fibers (IH140100018).
Prof Venkatesh is the recipient of an ARC Australian Laureate Fellowship
(FL170100006). Deakin University’s Advanced Characterization
Facility is acknowledged for the use of the Electron Microscopy facility.

Abbreviations
WCAwater contact angle

SPFshort polymer fibers

PEAApoly(ethylene-co-acrylic acid)

BOBayesian optimization

GPGaussian process
==== Refs
References
Wang S. ; Jiang L. 
Definition
of Superhydrophobic States . Adv.
Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 3423 –3424 . 10.1002/adma.200700934 .
Avrămescu R. E. ; Ghica M. V. ; Dinu-Pîrvu C. ; Prisada R. ; Popa L. 
Superhydrophobic
Natural and Artificial Surfaces-A Structural Approach . Materials 
2018 , 11 , 866 10.3390/ma11050866 .
Cansoy C. E. ; Erbil H. Y. ; Akar O. ; Akin T. 
Effect of Pattern Size
and Geometry on the Use of Cassie–Baxter Equation for Superhydrophobic
Surfaces . Colloids Surf., A 
2011 , 386 , 116 –124 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2011.07.005 .
Sarkar A. ; Kietzig A. M. 
General Equation
of Wettability: A Tool to Calculate
the Contact Angle for a Rough Surface . Chem.
Phys. Lett. 
2013 , 574 , 106 –111 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2013.04.055 .
Wenzel R. N. 
Resistance
of Solid Surfaces to Wetting by Water . Ind.
Eng. Chem. 
1936 , 28 , 988 –994 . 10.1021/ie50320a024 .
Cassie A. B. D. ; Baxter S. 
Wettability of Porous
Surfaces . Trans. Faraday Soc. 
1944 , 40 , 546 –551 . 10.1039/tf9444000546 .
Feng L. ; Song Y. ; Zhai J. ; Liu B. ; Xu J. ; Jiang L. ; Zhu D. 
Creation of a Superhydrophobic Surface
from an Amphiphilic Polymer . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2003 , 42 , 800 –802 . 10.1002/anie.200390212 .
Dong F. ; Zhang M. ; Tang W. W. ; Wang Y. 
Formation and Mechanism
of Superhydrophobic/Hydrophobic Surfaces Made from Amphiphiles through
Droplet-Mediated Evaporation-Induced Self-Assembly . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2015 , 119 , 5321 –5327 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b00011 .25835644 
Jeevahan J. ; Chandrasekaran M. ; Britto Joseph G. ; Durairaj R. B. ; Mageshwaran G. 
Superhydrophobic
Surfaces: A Review on Fundamentals, Applications, and Challenges . J. Coat. Technol. Res. 
2018 , 15 , 231 –250 . 10.1007/s11998-017-0011-x .
Darband G. B. ; Aliofkhazraei M. ; Khorsand S. ; Sokhanvar S. ; Kaboli A.  Science and Engineering
of Superhydrophobic Surfaces: Review of Corrosion Resistance, Chemical
and Mechanical Stability . Arabian J. Chem. 2018 .10.1016/j.arabjc.2018.01.013 
Gupta A. ; Joshi M. R. ; Mahato N. ; Balani K. 
Superhydrophobic
Surfaces . Biosurfaces 
2015 , 11 , 170 –200 . 10.1002/9781118950623.ch6 .
Sutti A. ; Lin T. ; Kirkland M. A.  Fibre-Forming
Process and Fibres
Produced by the Process . WO2013/056312 A 2013 .
Pringle K.  An Investigation into
Short Polymer Fibre Production in Fluid Systems ; Deakin University , 2018 .
Sutti A. ; Lin T. ; Wang X. 
Shear-Enhanced Solution Precipitation: A Simple Process
to Produce Short Polymeric Nanofibers . J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 11 , 8947 –8952 . 10.1166/jnn.2011.3489 .22400285 
Liu Y. ; Zhao T. ; Ju W. ; Shi S. 
Materials Discovery
and Design Using Machine Learning . J. Mater. 
2017 , 3 , 159 –177 . 10.1016/j.jmat.2017.08.002 .
Dieb T. M. ; Tsuda K.  Machine Learning-Based
Experimental Design in Materials Science . In Nanoinformatics ; Tanaka I.  , Ed.; Springer : Singapore , 2018 ; pp 65 –74 .
Li C. ; Rubín De Celis
Leal D. ; Rana S. ; Gupta S. ; Sutti A. ; Greenhill S. ; Slezak T. ; Height M. ; Venkatesh S. 
Rapid Bayesian
Optimisation for Synthesis of Short
Polymer Fiber Materials . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 568310.1038/s41598-017-05723-0 .28720869 
Haghanifar S. ; McCourt M. ; Cheng B. ; Wuenschell J. ; Ohodnicki P. ; Leu P. W. 
Creating Glasswing Butterfly-Inspired
Durable Antifogging Superomniphobic Supertransmissive, Superclear
Nanostructured Glass through Bayesian Learning and Optimization . Mater. Horiz. 
2019 , 10.1039/C9MH00589G .
Ramprasad R. ; Batra R. ; Pilania G. ; Mannodi-Kanakkithodi A. ; Kim C. 
Machine Learning in Materials Informatics:
Recent Applications and
Prospects . npj Comput. Mater 
2017 , 3 , 54 10.1038/s41524-017-0056-5 .
Snoek J. ; Larochelle H. ; Adams R.
P.   In Practical Bayesian
Optimization of Machine Learning Algorithms , Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2012 ; pp 2951 –2959 .
Ju S. ; Shiga T. ; Feng L. ; Hou Z. ; Tsuda K. ; Shiomi J. 
Designing Nanostructures for Phonon Transport via Bayesian
Optimization . Phys. Rev. X 
2017 , 7 , 02102410.1103/PhysRevX.7.021024 .
Todorović M. ; Gutmann M. U. ; Corander J. ; Rinke P. 
Bayesian Inference
of Atomistic Structure in Functional Materials . npj Comput. Mater. 
2019 , 5 , 3510.1038/s41524-019-0175-2 .
Jones D. R. ; Schonlau M. ; Welch W. J. 
Efficient
Global Optimization of
Expensive Black-Box Functions . J. Global Optim. 
1998 , 13 , 455 –492 . 10.1023/A:1008306431147 .
Zheng Q. ; Lü C. 
Size Effects of Surface Roughness
to Superhydrophobicity . Procedia IUTAM 
2013 , 10 , 462 –475 . 10.1016/j.piutam.2014.01.041 .
Korany M. A. ; Ragab M. A. A. ; Youssef R. M. ; Afify M. A. 
Experimental Design
and Machine Learning Strategies for Parameters Screening and Optimization
of Hantzsch Condensation Reaction for the Assay of Sodium Alendronate
in Oral Solution . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 6385 –6394 . 10.1039/C4RA12750A .
Sánchez
Lasheras F. ; Vilán Vilán J. A. ; García
Nieto P. J. ; del Coz Díaz J.
J. 
The Use of Design of
Experiments to Improve a Neural Network Model in Order to Predict
the Thickness of the Chromium Layer in a Hard Chromium Plating Process . Math. Comput. Modell. 
2010 , 52 , 1169 –1176 . 10.1016/j.mcm.2010.03.007 .
Thomas M. ; Schwartz R. 
A Method for Efficient Bayesian Optimization of Self-Assembly
Systems from Scattering Data . BMC Syst. Biol. 
2018 , 12 , 6510.1186/s12918-018-0592-8 .29884203 
Rasmussen C. E. ; Williams C. K. I.  Gaussian
Processes for Machine Learning . In Adaptive
Computation and Machine Learn ; Dietterich T.  , Ed.; MIT Press , 2006 ; Vol. 11 , pp 3011 –3015 .
Desautels T. ; Krause A. ; Burdick J. 
Parallelizing Exploration-Exploitation
Tradeoffs with Gaussian Process Bandit Optimization . J. Mach. Learn. Res. 
2014 , 15 , 4053 –4103 .

