
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 3145844810.1021/acsomega.8b02950ArticleUniversal McMillan–Mayer van der Waals Langevin
Gel Manning Gerald S. *Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08854, United States* E-mail: jerrymanning@rcn.com.31 12 2018 31 12 2018 3 12 18857 18866 25 10 2018 17 12 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We present a theory for a universal
gel based on a McMillan–Mayer treatment of a solute–solvent
fluid as a generalization of the universal van der Waals equation
of state for a pure liquid/vapor system. The elastic resilience of
the networked gel is modeled by a universal Langevin function. This
combination of van der Waals interactions and nonlinear Langevin elasticity
produces an abrupt onset of large-amplitude density fluctuations deep
in the interior of the gel at a critical temperature. Then, at a second,
lower, critical temperature, the entire swollen gel collapses to a
high-density phase. The universal gel has an “upper”
critical temperature behavior, meaning that the gel transition to
high density occurs on decreasing the temperature. At the cost of
loss of universality, the theory is generalized to predict lower critical
temperature dependence, whereby an aqueous hydrophobic gel exhibits
phase coexistence when the temperature is raised. The theory is consistent
with the Gibbs phase rule, suitably generalized to coexisting phases
that are not at the same pressure in equilibrium conditions.

document-id-old-9ao8b02950document-id-new-14ao-2018-029504ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
An
equilibrated swollen gel as immersed in its solvent is a physically
or chemically cross-linked polymer mesh infused to capacity with the
solvent.1−3 At critical environmental conditions, an initially
swollen gel can collapse discontinuously to a much smaller volume.4−7 The observation by scattered light of divergent density fluctuations
at a critical temperature is a strong indicator of an actual phase
transition.8,9 As the result of extensive observations
on a wide variety of gels, both synthetic and as formed from naturally
occurring biopolymers, Tanaka suggested that the possibility of a
gel phase transition may be universal to all gels.5 Moreover, if one considers the complexity of polymeric
materials, Tanaka’s great insight was that the universality
of the gel transition supports an analogy to the universal vapor–liquid
transition of one-component fluids. The polymeric gel segments dispersed
in the swollen state are the vapor molecules, whereas the disordered
polymer condensed in the collapsed volume becomes the liquid. Even
the circumstances where gel volume transitions are often progressive,
and conditions for discontinuity have not been found, can be rationalized
in a vapor–liquid framework because at supercritical temperatures,
a vapor does not condense but only passes progressively with increasing
pressure into a regime of densities similar to the liquid state.

With Tanaka, we agree that similar to the vapor–liquid transition,
“gel phase transition is a result of a competitive balance
between a repulsive force that acts to expand the polymer network
and an attractive force that acts to shrink the network”.5 For the pure vapor–liquid system, the
equality of chemical potentials at two-phase equilibrium demonstrates
the large difference in vapor and liquid densities because of the
dominance of attractive intermolecular forces in the liquid phase
that impede entropic dispersal (by far the dominant effectively repulsive
thermodynamic force). These same opposed tendencies must operate in
a gel also, thus accounting for Tanaka’s analogy. The high
density of gel material in the collapsed phase is stabilized by the
dominance of attractive interactions that impede entropic dissolution
into the solvent. However there is a qualitative difference that prevents
outright identification of the two systems, gel and vapor/liquid.
The gel “solute” is networked into a mesh. The presence
of the network may be consistent with a partial analogy but the elastic
resilience of the cross-links endows the gel with solid-like properties
that are absent from a free fluid.10−14 Specifically, unlike a vapor that expands to fill
its container, or a liquid confined only by the container walls, a
swollen gel has a distinct shape and volume of its own, and a distinct
boundary separates it from the solvent bath in which it is immersed.
In conditions of coexistence, the gel is a three-phase system, swollen
and collapsed polymer network, and a pure solvent.12

The van der Waals equation of state predicts a universal
vapor–liquid phase separation for pure fluids.15−18 This classic 1873 insight into the properties of gases and liquids
was so successful, wrote Uhlenbeck and Ford, that it “practically
killed the subject for more than 50 years.”17 To clarify the partial analogy of fluid and gel phase transitions,
we revisit the van der Waals equation as suitably generalized by McMillan–Mayer
(MM) statistical mechanics to apply to a liquid solution with a solute
(the gel particles) distinguished from a solvent.19,20 To model the limited expansion of the gel because of its networking,
we impose a nonlinear restoring potential on the solute that allows
calculation of gel density in a restricted volume. The famous van
der Waals instability of a pure fluid below a critical temperature
occurs also in our model for the gel but because of the potential
energy of the network, in an augmented form that we think has not
previously been explored. Moreover, the gel transition is universal
in the same sense that the reduced van der Waals equation implies
the universal law of corresponding states.15−18

It will be noticed that
our analysis does not rely on traditional Flory-style polymer theory21−25 or its more modern elaborations.26 Relevant
commentary on this point and on previous approaches to gel modeling
are reserved for the Discussion section,
where we also take up diverse topics such as the pressure inside the
gel and the applicability of the Gibbs phase rule.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Van der Waals Equation
of State: A Review
The van der Waals equation suggests how
the temperature, pressure, and volume (here, the density) of a one-component
fluid at equilibrium may be related 1  where P is the pressure, T is the Kelvin temperature, and n is the number density N/V, where N is the number of molecules, V is the volume. Boltzmann’s constant is designated by kB. The van der Waals constant α characterizes
the quadratic effect of attractive interactions between pairs of fluid
molecules, and the constant β accounts collectively for the
excluded volume of fluid molecules.

The van der Waals equation
is cubic in the density n. At low densities, the
(α, β) corrections are small, and the equation is almost
the same as for an ideal gas. Therefore, in the low density range,
there is only one real root for n near its ideal
value P/kBT and two complex conjugate roots. Following Wall’s treatment,15 we note that for the existence of a critical
isotherm at lower temperatures and higher densities, the cubic equation
must collapse to the form (n – nc)3 = 0 at a unique critical point, where nc, the critical density, is a real root of multiplicity
3. The reason is that this form yields the necessary inflection point
for criticality. Indeed, if we expand both forms of the equation and
compare coefficients of the powers of n, we find
the well-known formulas for the critical (subscript c) temperature,
pressure, and density in terms of the van der Waals constants, nc = 1/3β, Pc = α/(27β2), kBTc = 8α/(27β). The next step
in this classic analysis is to measure the state variables in units
of their critical values. That is, reduced temperature, pressure,
and density (t, p, ρ) are
defined by T = tTc, P = pPc, and n = ρnc, and then the critical values
of the reduced variables are all equal to unity. Substitution into
the van der Waals eq 1 yields the universal reduced van der Waals equation 2  

All quantities in this equation
are dimension-free. It is a universal equation of state in that the
van der Waals constants α and β, specific to fluid species,
are absent.

For isotherms below critical but still nearby, a
continuity argument requires that the equation have three distinct
real roots, not far from the critical root, and this requirement is
numerically confirmed in Figure 1 (which of course can be found in any physical chemistry
textbook, usually with variable volume instead of density). For still
more dense states at lower temperatures, a real root ρ near
but less than 3 (closest packing) is evident from eq 2, as well as a pair of complex conjugate
roots near ρ2 = −(1/3)p.

Figure 1 Representative
isotherms (t is the reduced temperature) for the
reduced van der Waals equation of state if the ordinate is the reduced
pressure p; or for the reduced MM van der Waals equation
of state if the ordinate is the reduced osmotic pressure π.
The isotherms are plotted as functions of reduced number density ρ
of a one-component van der Waals fluid or of the solute for an MM
van der Waals solution.

For our purposes, the most interesting aspect of the reduced
van der Waals equation is the “wiggle” for intermediate
densities seen in Figure 1.17 In this region the slope is
negative, that is, the vapor pressure p is a decreasing
function of density ρ. But a general requirement for stable
thermodynamic equilibrium for any system is that a higher pressure
results in decreased volume (higher density).16 In this range of densities the van der Waals equation therefore
describes an unstable fluid, which must split into two stable phases,
a low-density vapor and a high-density liquid. Maxwell’s rule
of equal areas,15 and the lever rule, are
required to supplement the van der Waals equation in this region if
the values of the densities and coexisting amounts of vapor and liquid
are to be determined, but we have no need to pursue the analysis further.

2.2 MM Generalization of van der Waals
In this
section, we consider a two-component liquid solution in which a solute
species is distinguished from the solvent. The van der Waals equation
for a one-component fluid has been generalized to fluid mixtures of
any number of components, with the variables of state being pressure,
temperature, volume, and composition.27 In our present application, we are not interested in the vapor pressure P of a mixture but instead focus on the osmotic pressure
Π of our solute–solvent solution. When this solution
is separated from pure solvent by a membrane permeable only to solvent
and not to the solute, the pressure at equilibrium of the solution
is different from the pressure on the pure solvent side of the membrane.
The quantity Π, the osmotic pressure, is the pressure difference P(solution) – P(pure solvent).

The McMillan−Mayer (MM) theory is an exact result of statistical
mechanics.19,20 It states that there is a virial
series for the osmotic pressure that is an exact replica of the virial
series for the pressure of a real gas. The latter of course was the
first fundamental advance over the van der Waals equation as applied
to a real gas. It corrects the ideal gas not only for interactions
between two gas molecules but sequentially for interactions among
three, four, ... gas molecules. The coefficients of the series in
powers of the gas density are exact, and depend on the vacuum potentials
among two, three, ... gas molecules. The MM virial series for the
osmotic pressure of a solute–solvent solution has exactly the
same form as its counterpart for a gas. It is an infinite series in
powers of the solute density. The expressions for the coefficients
have exactly the same form, but with the vacuum potentials replaced
by the potentials of mean force among solute molecules, as averaged
over positions of the solvent molecules.

The van der Waals eq 1 is itself an approximation
to the full virial series, but within that limitation, the replacement
of P in the van der Waals equation of state for a
real gas by the osmotic pressure Π of a solute–solvent
solution can be said from MM theory to be an exact procedure 3  

The density n is now the number density of solute molecules, whereas
the van der Waals constants α and β become MM van der
Waals constants. The constant α reflects attractive interactions
between two solute molecules as influenced by the solvent, and β
characterizes the excluded volume of solute, again as influenced by
solvent molecules. We have to make an additional approximation beyond
that inherent in the van der Waals equation itself. Because the MM
van der Waals constants are influenced by the randomized configurations
of solvent molecules, they must be dependent on temperature. We continue
our development with the assumption that it applies to solutions for
which this dependence is slight and may be neglected, if not for quantitative
purposes, then at least for the qualitative considerations of interest
here.

We can now apply exactly the same analysis as in the previous
section to obtain a reduced universal MM van der Waals equation for
the reduced osmotic pressure π of a solute–solvent solution
in terms of the reduced solute number density ρ and reduced
temperature t 4  The isotherms are exactly as in Figure 1, only with reduced osmotic pressure replacing
reduced vapor pressure as the ordinate.

In Figure 1 for p versus
ρ, a negative slope in an isotherm indicates an unstable state,
which must separate into vapor and liquid phases according to the
discussion of the previous section. But if Figure 1 represents π versus ρ for a
solute–solvent solution, what then is the meaning of a region
of negative slope? It would say that the osmotic pressure decreases
when the impermeable solute density increases, which intuition suggests
might well be an unstable situation resolved by separation into two
phases of low and high solute density, analogous to vapor–liquid
coexistence. We give the proof in the next paragraph.

From the
reduced MM van der Waals equation, we can extract the reduced form
of van’t Hoff’s law π = (8/3)ρt for dilute solutions by letting ρ → 0 in the terms
on the left representing nonideal corrections. Then to represent the
corrections in a formal way, we introduce the reduced osmotic coefficient
φ by π = (8/3)φρt. The osmotic
coefficient is a measure of the nonideality of the chemical potential
of solvent, and the Gibbs–Duhem equation, ρ dln(γρ)
= d(φρ), may be used to obtain the reduced solute activity
coefficient γ from it. We want the slope of an isotherm on a
π versus ρ plot, dπ/dρ = (8t/3)d(φρ)/dρ = ρ dln(γρ)/dρ
= ρ dμ/dρ, where μ is the chemical potential
of solute. An absolute thermodynamic requirement for stable equilibrium
is that the solute density dependence of the chemical potential of
solute be monotonously increasing,16 which
completes the proof.

We will need an explicit expression for
the activity coefficient of solute. Substituting (8/3)φρt for π in the MM van der Waals equation, and solving
for the osmotic coefficient, we get 5  

Note that φ properly
tends to unity (the solution becomes ideal dilute) as ρ →
0. Next, by actually performing the integration of the Gibbs–Duhem
differential equation of the previous paragraph, we find the solute
activity coefficient γ 6  

The activity coefficient also tends to unity as our universal
solution becomes ideal dilute, ρ → 0. In Figure 2, we show a plot of the function
ρ(dμ/dρ) = 1 + (dln γ/dln ρ) for a supercritical
temperature t = 3, the critical temperature t = 1, and a subcritical t = 0.5. The negative
region for the latter marks instability, where the solute chemical
potential increases with decreasing density. Considering that the
range of ρ is from zero only up to 3 (close packing of the excluded
volume), we understand that universal solution instability occurs
in a wide range of densities when the temperature is below critical.

Figure 2 Isotherms
for the dependence of solute chemical potential on reduced number
density in an MM van der Waals solution. For t =
3, the solution is stable across the entire range of solute densities.
For t = 1, the critical value dμ/dρ =
0 is attained at ρ = 1. For t = 0.5, the solution
is unstable in the negative region of densities and will split into
solute-rich and solute-poor phases.

2.3 Gel Model
Our goal in this paper
is to illuminate the analogy between the universal gel volume transition
(equilibrium coexistence of a swollen solvent-rich phase with a collapsed
phase dense in gel material) and the universal vapor–liquid
transition of a one-component fluid. The MM van der Waals solute–solvent
liquid solution discussed in the previous section is not sufficient
to this purpose. Certainly, the MM van der Waals solution illustrates
the close connection between the vapor–liquid transition and
phase separation in solution into solute-rich and solute-lean regions.
However, an ordinary solution is not a gel. If solute molecules are
initially confined to a small spatial region of solvent, then in time,
if the solvent is good enough, the solute diffuses out until at equilibrium
it uniformly fills the container. In contrast, a networked gel has
been likened to a “giant molecule” with internal constraints
among its parts that prevent complete dissolution even when invaded
by good solvents.2 In this sense, a gel–solvent
system is more like a permeable solid than a liquid solute–solvent
solution, and indeed, its elastic moduli are measurable. The problem
for us then is to devise a gel model that clearly illustrates the
observationally close analogy with a vapor–liquid transition
while still being recognizable as at least an abstracted representation
of a real gel network.

We start with the solute in an ordinary
solute–solvent liquid solution. For the solute to represent
the gel material, we impose a potential energy u on
each solute unit. The potential energy must meet some requirements
if this minimal model is to resemble a gel immersed in a solvent bath.
To restrain the solute from complete dissolution it must be suitably
chosen to reach infinite energy before the solute particles reach
the walls of the container. We note that the averaged resultant of
the constraining forces in a homogeneous and isotropically distributed
gel must be radially directed toward the center, so we take u(r) as a function of radial distance r. Here, we are thinking of a gel with a spherical or long
cylindrical shape, so that r is the distance from
the center of the sphere or radial distance from the central axis
of the cylinder. To take many nodes of the gel mesh into account with
no assumption of rubber elasticity (see Discussion), we reason that the strength of u(r) should be correlated with the number of nodes in a ball or rod
of gel material of radius r. That is, in the equilibrated
gel, further outward diffusion of gel material at r has been restrained by a positive net number of nodes behind it
(the nodes behind minus the nodes ahead). The implication is that u(r) increases with the distance. Finally,
we know that a gel has measurable elastic moduli, therefore it is
reasonable to assume that u(r) reduces
to Hooke’s law for small r. In summary, u(r) is a monotonically increasing function
that reaches infinity at some distance rmax short of the walls of the container, but that acts like a linearly
elastic spring for small r.

Out of an infinite
number of functions that meet these minimal requirements, we choose
the familiar. Consider the statement 7  where u must be
a dimension-free quantity, and hence r also. The
series expansion of the hyperbolic cotangent shows that where u is small, then to first order, u = r2. Thus, if u(r) represents a potential energy measured in units of kBT, and if r2 is defined by (1/2)(q/kBT)R2, where R is the radial distance from the origin, and q is an elastic constant, then u(r) is a nonlinear reduced generalization of Hooke’s law; it
becomes anharmonic as the distance from the origin increases. Because
coth(3u) approaches unity when u tends to ∞, we see also from eq 7 that the reduced elastic energy u(r) becomes infinite when r approaches
unity. The function u(r) is therefore
consistent with what we are looking for; it restricts the density
of solute particles (the gel material) to a ball or rod of finite
(reduced) radius r = 1. Because u(r) cannot be given as an explicit function of r, we will be working with r as a function
of u, as illustrated in Figure 3, showing r = 1 as the outer
boundary of the gel where u(r) becomes
infinite and prevents further swelling.

Figure 3 Reduced radial distance
as the inverse function of network potential energy u(r).

Of course, r(u) is the
square root of the Langevin function, and u(r), the inverse of r2, is well
known in the classical theory of flexible polymers as describing a
single chain stretched beyond a Gaussian distribution.22,25 Oppermann in particular13 has applied
this function to individual chains in a gel to explore its effects
on gel elasticity, remaining within the framework of Flory theory.
Here we use it in a related but different context. The scale of the
variable r is macroscopic. A concentric volume element
4πr2 dr contains
a large number of polymer segments and a large number of mesh nodes.
Correspondingly, the potential energy u(r) is not that of an individual polymer segment or monomer at r. Instead, we conceptualize a solute “unit”,
or “particle”, as including sufficiently many polymer
segments and nodes such that spatial correlation among units is almost
lost, and is therefore consistent with the MM van der Waals equation
of state. The chemical potential of the section following is then
the chemical potential of these coarse-grained solute units.

2.4 MM van der Waals Analysis of the Universal Gel
We begin
by writing the chemical potential of gel solute in kBT units. On a macroscopic scale, it
is a local quantity with individual contributions dependent on r 8  

The first term on the right accounts
for thermal free energy of individual gel solute particles and interactions
of a single solute particle with surrounding solvent molecules. Its
dependence on r is only through a pressure that varies
locally (see Discussion). This dependence
is negligible in any condensed phase (except in an ultracentrifuge23). The ln ρ term is the ideal entropy.
The activity coefficient term accounts for interactions among solute
molecules; its dependence on r is through ρ(r). Finally, the potential energy term u(r) contributes to the energy component of the chemical
potential.

A fundamental thermodynamic principle is that at
equilibrium the chemical potential is uniform, dμ(r)/dr = 0. Its individual contributions may depend
on r, but in such a way that the total chemical potential
does not 9  

With eq 6 for the activity coefficient,
we get 10  

Integrating, 11  

We know that u = 0 when r = 0, and at r = 0,
we designate ρ(0) by ρ0, so that the integration
constant is just the left-hand side with ρ set equal to ρ0. Then 12  

This equation for u may be substituted into eq 7 to give r[u(ρ,t;ρ0)], that is, location r as a function of density and temperature with “initial”
density ρ0 as the parameter. In other words, the
density profiles ρ(r) have been determined
as implicit functions, and we apply ourselves to some numerical work.

In van der Waals theory, t = 1 is a critical temperature
above which coexisting liquid and vapor phases cannot exist. For our
gel, also, t = 1 is critical in the same sense. Figure 4 shows gel density
profiles, all at t = 1, as functions of location r. The different curves correspond to different choices
of reduced density at r = 0, ρ0 =
{0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5}, covering a density range from low to high
(recall the value 3 as the maximum density). All trajectories converge
to ρ = 0 at the gel periphery r = 1. For each
choice of ρ0, there is only one stable gel; that
is, the curves ρ(r) are single-valued. This
feature is true for all t > 1 as well (not shown).
For all choices of ρ0, the gel density decreases
as the periphery is approached. The density decrease is gentle for
the relatively dilute gel; whereas the nearly closest packed gel remains
uniformly dense almost up to the periphery, then abruptly falls to
zero in a thin layer. The monotone decrease of density is easily understood
as a consequence of increasing potential energy (Figure 3). The question is what universal
significance might be attached to the negative value of dρ/dr, so we interrupt the numerical work for a brief return
to analysis.

Figure 4 Gel density profiles, all at t = 1, but
with differing choices of ρ0, the density at r = 0. Black, ρ0 = 0.5; blue, ρ0 = 1.0; gray, ρ0 = 1.5; orange, ρ0 = 2.0; red; ρ0 = 2.5.

From eq 8 for
the chemical potential, we have 13  

But dμ/dρ
= (dμ/dr)(dr/dρ), and
at equilibrium dμ/dr = 0. So at equilibrium 14  

The thermodynamic factor in brackets must be positive, dμ/dρ
> 0, if the system is to return to uniform solute density, as it
must, when the elasticity field −du/dr is turned off. A stable positive density gradient, dρ/dr > 0, is then consistent only with a negative elasticity
gradient, du/dr < 0. However, u(r) is given in our model as increasing
with r. Therefore, dρ/dr <
0 is a universal requirement for stability of the gel.

To see
clearly what happens at temperatures t less than
unity, we construct the density profile ρ(r) in Figure 5 with t = 0.75. We have picked the free parameter, the density
at the origin, as ρ0 = 1. Despite this single choice
ρ0 = 1, two other values of ρ(0) appear, near
0.19 and 2.07. The curve now has three branches, the low density branch
(leftmost) corresponding to ρ(0) = 0.19, a high density branch
(rightmost) for ρ(0) = 2.07, and a third branch for the intermediate
density ρ(0) = ρ0 = 1. The latter two branches
coalesce at an asymmetric maximum at the point (ρ, r) = (1.65, 0.56). In the gap, and for densities higher than 2.07,
the values of r are imaginary. Because the graph
has been generated from the equation dμ/dr =
0, the chemical potential is equal along any continuous curve in the
graph, but more than that, the chemical potential is equal at the
three points on the three branches that are intersected by a horizontal
line at any constant r (there are no discontinuities
of chemical potential). The chemical potential is the same for all
points on all three branches. These statements have been confirmed
by direct numerical checking. All points represent coexisting equilibrium
gel densities.

Figure 5 Reduced gel density as an implicit function ρ(r) of distance r for a subcritical temperature t = 0.75. The choice ρ0 = 1 leads to an
unstable gel with density increasing outward from ρ(0) = 1.0.
However two additional values of ρ(0) appear at 0.19 and 2.07.
The unstable gel splits into two stable phases with outward decreasing
density, a dilute one at 0.19 and a dense one at 2.07.

The low-density branch and the high-density branch
(to the right of the maximum) behave properly; for both, dρ/dr < 0, that is, density decreases with increasing r as the potential energy increases. These branches represent
stable equilibrium gel states. The intermediate branch, to the left
of the maximum, has density increasing as r becomes
larger. This state of the gel is an equilibrium state, but it is unstable.
At equilibrium, these densities coexist with the others. However such
a state cannot exist for more than a practically infinitesimal length
of time. The instant it comes into existence, the gel splits into
stable, coexisting, low-, and high-density regions, while the unstable
densities disappear. More specifically, in a given spherical shell
(or, for a cylinder, an annular ring) at some fixed r (in Figure 5, visualize
any horizontal line for constant r that intersects
all three branches), regions of gel density corresponding to the leftmost
and rightmost branches for that value of r will coexist
(their chemical potentials have the same values). Any fixed volume
element r2 sin θ dr dθ dϕ within the spherical shell will experience density
fluctuations. Densities in a volume element at the origin will, for
example, jump discontinuously back and forth between 0.19 and 2.07.

We also offer a concluding remark intended to be helpful in the
physical interpretation of Figure 5. Multiple coexisting phases within a single macroscopic
gel signify that at any instant of time some regions of the gel are
dilute in the gel material, whereas other regions are dense, or, equivalently,
a single region fluctuates in density between dilute and condensed.
The same is true for ordinary liquid–vapor coexistence; in
a gravity-free environment, liquid droplets are interspersed with
vapor.

By skipping from t = 1 in Figure 4 to t = 0.75
in Figure 5, we have
skirted the most interesting aspect of gel behavior, its criticality.
For a closer look, we have generated Figure 6 for a range of temperatures. Here, the points
represent the gel density at the origin ρ(0), plotted against
temperature t. Each point has been computed for the
same choice of free parameter ρ0 = 1. The red points
in the range t ≥ 1 show that only one stable
gel (the fully swollen one) exists at each temperature in this range.
For these points, ρ(0) = ρ0 = 1. However at t = 1, there is an abrupt bifurcation. For any t < 1, there are two stable gels that coexist, one with relatively
low density and small value of ρ(0), and one with relatively
high density and large value of ρ(0). As t decreases,
the low-density gel decreases in density, and the high-density gel
increases in density.

Figure 6 Point plot of reduced density at the gel center ρ(0)
as a function of reduced temperature t. The free
parameter ρ0 = 1. The red points correspond to the
swollen gel; the black points correspond to the coexisting dense gel
that abruptly appears at t = 1.

The continuous bifurcation at t = 1 in Figure 6 is a special case,
contingent on the choice of unity for ρ0, both quantities
in this case being the familiar critical values for an ordinary van
der Waals fluid. In Figure 7, a different choice ρ0 = 0.5 has been made
for each point. Here, we see a discontinuity at t = 0.944.... From the high to the low side of this temperature, the
density ρ(0) jumps from the dilute swollen value 0.5 to a dense
1.30. To see intuitively why there is a discontinuity instead of a
smooth bifurcation is not too easy because we are dealing with the
numerical outcomes of nonlinear transcendental equations. However
if there were not a discontinuity at any value of t < 1 when ρ0 = 0.5 is also less than unity (as
in Figure 7), then
as the temperature decreases further the increasingly more dense phase
would ultimately have a ρ(0) value increasing past unity (i.e.,
greater than 0.5). However we already know from Figure 6 that ρ(0) = 1 corresponds to t = 1. This contradiction shows why the discontinuity must
occur.

Figure 7 Point plot of reduced density at the gel center ρ(0) as a function
of reduced temperature t with the free parameter
ρ0 set to 0.5. The red points correspond to the swollen
gel; the black points correspond to the coexisting dense gel that
abruptly appears at t = 0.944....

Figure 8 shows gel density profiles proceeding outward from ρ0. As in Figure 7, the free parameter ρ0 is set to 0.5. Figure 8 shows stable density
profiles for various temperatures (see caption) in the implicit function
form r versus ρ(r). Unstable
profiles are not shown. The figure is color coded, so that, for example,
the pair of gray profiles represents the pair of coexisting phases,
one dilute, the other much more dense, present at t = 0.75. From left to right in the subset of dense profiles (on the
right), the values of t decrease in the order 0.943
> 0.93 > 0.87 > 0.75 > 0.6. The dense phase at t = 0.943 (black, at right), a value just lower than the
critical value 0.944..., can barely be seen (it would not be present
at all if t were just greater than critical, say t = 0.95). In fact, note that only a dilute phase is present
at t = 1.1 (red) because dense phases emerge only
for lower temperatures, t = 0.944.... The collection
of profiles in Figure 8 shows that the dense phase grows and becomes denser as the temperature
decreases, whereas the amount of gel material in the coexisting dilute
phase diminishes. The small amplitude dense profiles, for example
at t = 0.943 and t = 0.93, illustrate
the discontinuous emergence of high-density phases only near the gel
center when the temperature decreases just below critical. Using t = 0.943 again as the example, its (barely visible) density
is in the range ρ = 1.3–1.4, discontinuously greater
than the corresponding dilute phase density 0.5 at the center r = 0.

Figure 8 Density profiles of the stable coexisting phases. The
free parameter ρ0 is set to 0.5. Red, t = 1.1; black, t = 0.943; orange, t = 0.93; green, t = 0.87; gray, t = 0.75; blue, t = 0.6. Note that only a dilute
phase is stable at t = 1.1 (red, at left); there
is no red profile among the dense profiles at the right. On the scale
of the figure, the black and orange profiles for the dilute profiles
are all but indistinguishable, but are easily distinguished among
the dense profiles.

Although a same-color
pair of density profiles in Figure 8 represents coexisting gels, it does not necessarily
make full contact with typical laboratory experiments. Because the
amount of gel material is correlated with the area under (i.e., to
the left) of the density curves, it should be apparent that the high-density
blue trajectory in Figure 8 represents a gel containing much more material than in the
corresponding dilute gel. However in a typical phase-transition experiment,
a single gel, initially fully swollen, transits to a shrunken state
as environmental conditions change. Because the gel consists of an
intact polymer network, the two gel states contain the same network
and hence the same amount of gel material. We have not yet imposed
a condition of invariant number of gel particles on our model, and
we proceed to do so.

At the same temperature, the condition
for particle number invariance in the present universal gel model
is 15  (substitute 2πr dr for the cylindrical case), where subscript v evokes the swollen low-density “vapor” branches
of the MM van der Waals r versus ρ trajectories,
while l for “liquid” stands for the
high-density trajectories. We have recognized that all of the swollen
gels, by construction, have periphery at r = 1 but
the maximum values rl of the dense forms can be different (obvious from Figure 8). Integration by parts, using
ρv(1) = 0 yields 16  

For any dilute/dense isothermal pair of density trajectories, all
the parameters in this equation are numerically available; hence the
integrations can be performed numerically. For example, rl is the value of r corresponding
to the root ρl of ∂r/∂ρ = 0. In this way, we find for spherical
symmetry that when ρ0 is chosen to equal unity, density
fluctuations in the swollen gel arise at t = 1 (Figure 6), whereas the entire
swollen gel collapses to a dense gel with the same amount of gel material
at t = 0.84. At this temperature, the swollen gel
has density 0.31 at its center r = 0, and zero density
at its periphery r = 1. The collapsed gel has a density
of 1.85 at its center, and a density of 1.51 at its periphery r = 0.38. Notice that the collapsed gel is indeed smaller
than the swollen gel, an aspect of internal consistency not apparent
simply by construction of the model.

If ρ0 =
0.5, then density fluctuations set in at t = 0.944...
(Figure 7), and the
gel collapse transition is at t = 0.87. The swollen
gel at the temperature of collapse has a density of 0.5 at r = 0 and zero density at the periphery r = 1, whereas the collapsed gel with the same amount of gel material
has a density of 1.85 at its center and 1.45 at its outer edge r = 0.42. The swollen/collapsed pair in this case is shown
as the green density profiles in Figure 8.

2.5 Inverted Temperature Dependence
of Hydrophobic Hydrogels
The universal gel analyzed in the
previous section has an intuitive temperature dependence; the collapsed
high density phase appears at subcritical temperatures. However, a
commonly employed class of gels has the opposite dependence on temperature.5,11 With water as the solvent, the gel polymer backbone is partially
hydrophobic, bearing groups such as N-isopropyl. The self-attraction
of the gel material then strengthens at higher temperatures because
of its entropic nature, and a swollen-to-collapsed transition is observed
to occur above a critical temperature. We can capture this inverted
temperature dependence with a slight modification of the present model,
but only at the cost of the loss of universality.

In a van der
Waals fluid, the pairwise and excluded volume interactions are in
vacuum, and there is assumed to be no dependence of the two van der
Waals parameters α and β on temperature. In a MM solute–solvent
system, the interactions are through solvent, and the corresponding
parameters are potentials of mean force and thus, in general, are
affected by temperature. For our “universal” gel, discussed
in previous sections, we carried over the van der Waals assumption
that the two parameters do not depend on temperature, or if they do,
then slightly enough to be neglected. If we take the temperature dependence
of α and β into account, and repeat the mathematical analysis,
the result corresponding to eq 12 is 17  where ρ, t, and u are the same reduced density, temperature, and elastic potential
energy of previous sections. The quantities α̅ and β̅
are also reduced; α̅ = α(T)/α(Tc), β̅ = β(T)/β(Tc). If there is no dependence
on T, then α̅ = β̅ = 1, and
this equation reduces to the universal case.

For numerical work,
we will assume that hydrophobicity does not affect excluded volume,
β̅ = 1. We do know, however, that hydrophobic attraction
increases with temperature; α̅ > 1 if T > Tc, i.e., if t > 1. In fact, we gain qualitative capture of the experimentally
observed behavior if α̅ increases more strongly than t itself; that is, if α̅/t = tδ, δ > 0. In Figure 9, we have set α̅
= t1.5 for illustrative purposes. The
red density profile is the single stable phase present at t = 1. A second, dense, phase appears (gray curve) when t is raised past 1.3, and increases in amplitude (black
curve to right of maximum) as temperature is raised toward t = 2; the coexisting dilute phases (gray, black) change
only slightly in this range.

Figure 9 Inverted temperature dependence of hydrophobic
gels. The red curve is the single stable phase at t = 1. A second, dense, phase appears when t >
1.3, coexisting with the dilute phase (gray curves). The dense phase
is more prominent at t = 2 (black curves).

2.6 Discussion
We have presented a model for a gel that brings into sharp relief
an analogy between the gel phase transition from a solvent-rich swollen
gel to a polymer-rich collapsed structure, and the vapor–liquid
transition of a one-component fluid, whereby the rarified vapor condenses
to a closely packed, nearly incompressible liquid. Our MM van der
Waals analysis of a solute–solvent system, proceeds in direct
analogy with van der Waals’ equation of state, which historically
provided the first clear understanding of the related physical properties
of gases and liquids. However the analysis then goes beyond van der
Waals in imposing a distance-dependent potential energy on the solute
(gel particles) to mimic gel networking, thereby restricting the gel
to a discrete volume, like a solid. The analysis is thrown into a
reduced form, freeing it from dependence on parameters specific to
the gel material. In this way, we find a universal equation of state
for a gel in the form of a temperature- and location-dependent density.

The central feature of the universal gel is an unstable density
profile, dρ/dr > 0, for intermediate densities
at subcritical temperatures, as illustrated in Figure 5. This density distribution is unstable because
the elastic potential energy is higher near the periphery than in
the interior. The instability is resolved by discrete internal density
fluctuations between low and high values that set in abruptly at a
critical temperature. At a second, lower, critical temperature, the
entire swollen gel collapses to a dense structure. These predictions
of the theory are consistent with laboratory observations of critical
gel behavior.5,8,9

What is the scope of the “universal” equation of state?
Certainly it does not describe the behavior of hydrophobic hydrogels,
which possess an opposite temperature dependence because of the water-organizing
properties of the hydrophobic groups.5 However
at the cost of a loss of universality, we find a simple extension
of the model sufficient to capture this behavior, allowing as well
the quasi-universal characterization of such “inverted”
gels as those with reduced van der Waals attractive interactions that
strengthen with temperature like ta, a > 1.

With this exception, the
universal gel may be regarded as applicable to neutral gels, such
as unhydrolyzed polyacrylamide. However, we believe it is also consistent
with ionized gels. For that, we accept the generally held assessment
that the colligative properties of ionized macroscopic gels are usually
dominated by the numerous counterions.2 Then the reduced number density ρ refers to the counterion
density. However because electroneutrality holds throughout the interior
of a macroscopic gel, and because the number density is a reduced
quantity (a dimensionless ratio of densities), ρ equally well
refers to the density of gel polymer material. Then, the excluded
volume factor in the MM van der Waals equation presents no conceptual
problem; however, the quadratic term could represent counterion-mediated
gel particle attraction in these relatively dense systems.28−31

The model and theoretical analysis offered here contains features
in common with previous treatments but also differs from them. The
possibility of a gel phase transition was theoretically predicted
by Dušek and Patterson,32 a decade
before the phenomenon was observed in the laboratory with polyacrylamide
gels.4 These authors also noted a theoretical
similarity to the condensation of a van der Waals gas but their calculations
were based on Flory’s polymer theories and did not make the
use of the van der Waals equation of state. Subsequently, Shibayama
and Tanaka6 presented a related Flory-type
theory, employing the van der Waals equation only as introductory
material, enabling the derivation of a formula for the θ–temperature
of a free polymer solution. More importantly, neither of these analyses
went beyond our Figure 1, in effect identifying a gel with a free fluid. However, a gel is
not a free fluid; the gel material is networked, endowing the gel
with a discrete volume that does not disperse to fill its container.
Despite inclusion in these early theories of Flory-type terms purporting
to represent the effect of the network, a distinctive gel behavior
does not appear to have been captured.

The improved theory of
Khokhlov33 and subsequent elaborations34 require a third virial coefficient and so cannot
be directly compared with a van der Waals based theory. The van der
Waals equation of state may be formally expanded into an infinite
series in powers of fluid density but the resulting virial coefficients
of order three and higher are of no physical significance because
all of them stem from the excluded volume factor, whereas the complete
van der Waals equation of state contains attractive interactions of
the molecules only in pairs, and not in triples or higher order clusters.

The description of the polymer network of a gel is most often based
on Flory’s entropic model for gel swelling. In turn, Flory
argued “by analogy with the deformation of rubber”.21 However we know that, in contrast to most materials,
rubber shrinks when heated; most materials expand. Most gel types
also expand when heated. Hydrophobic gels are the cardinal exception
but they shrink when heated because of their hydrophobicity, not because
they are like rubber. Hirotsu10−12 has measured Poisson’s
ratio σ for a gel, that is, the negative of the ratio of transverse
to longitudinal strains. All common materials have positive Poisson’s
ratio, signifying that they become thinner when stretched, thicker
when compressed. The value for rubber is very close to a perfect (no
volume change) σ = 0.5. The measured value of σ for the
collapsed gel was indeed close to 0.5 but σ for the swollen
gel was about half this value, closely corresponding to Poisson ratios
of common hard solids such as steel, copper, glass, carbon fiber,
and so forth.

To our awareness, simulated data have thus far
been restricted to gels on the nanometer size scale.35−38 The thermodynamic framework of present considerations requires a
macroscopic gel for its subject, so that direct comparison is difficult.
Even when transitions are reported on the nanoscale, the simulations
have not addressed experimentally observed indicators of gel phase
transitions, such as divergence of critical fluctuations in scattered
light,8,9 critical anomalous behavior of measured
elastic moduli,10−12,14 or perhaps most fundamentally,
the stable equilibrium coexistence of visually observable distinct
phases.12

A feature of some previous
theories and simulations of the gel phase transition is an emphasis
on negative pressure, vanishing or negative osmotic pressure, or applied
tension.6,32,35,38 Our Figure 1 in fact does exhibit a subcritical isotherm at t = 0.75 that falls into negative values but it is important to understand
that Figure 1 pertains
only to free one-component fluids or free solute–solvent solutions.
Looking at Figure 1, we see the van der Waals interpretation of the negative pressure
region of the t = 0.75 isotherm as an absence of
coexistence of a stable vapor phase because the attractive interactions
in the liquid overwhelm the temperature. Analogously, if Figure 1 represents the osmotic
pressure of a semi-permeable solute–solvent system, a negative
osmotic pressure is possible at low temperatures. It would mean that
at equilibrium the pressure of the pure solvent compartment is higher
than the pressure of the solution with its impermeable solute. If
the two pressures were maintained as equal, the solvent would flow
from the solution side to the pure solvent side, ultimately leaving
behind only dry solute.

We do not believe that the understanding
of gel behavior requires invocation of such extreme conditions. In
fact, the pressure inside our universal gel is always positive, and
always greater than the pressure of the pure solvent in which it is
immersed. To explain, we recall the basic equation of hydrostatic
balance, where forces imposed on the contents of a volume element
are balanced by the pressure gradient across that element. In the
present case, with reduced quantities, this equation reads 18  Since du/dr is positive (potential energy of network increases toward the periphery),
the pressure gradient inside the gel is negative. If the pressure
of the bathing solvent is, say, 1 atm, then the pressure inside the
gel increases from 1 atm at the gel periphery to higher values toward
the center.

There has been discussion of the applicability of
the Gibbs phase rule to gel systems.12,39 This rule
for any thermodynamic system at equilibrium15,16 states that NDF = NC – NP + 2, where NC is the number of
components; NP is the number of phases; and NDF is the number of degrees
of freedom (intensive variables) necessary and sufficient for description
of the equilibrated system. For example, a homogeneous pure liquid
or gas has two degrees of freedom according to the rule (NC = NP =
1), and they may be chosen as temperature and pressure; whereas a
single phase solute–solvent liquid solution has three degrees
of freedom (NC = 2, NP = 1), corresponding to temperature, pressure,
and solute concentration. An apparent “breakdown” for
gels of this thermodynamically rigorous theorem has led to suggestions
that of the two coexisting gel phases, one must be metastable (with
solvent and solute chemical potentials not the same as in the other).
We agree with Hirotsu that this suggestion is unfounded,12 and proceed to show consistency with the Gibbs
theorem as suitably modified to cover osmotic systems such as gels.

For a conventional osmotic system (two compartments separated by
a membrane permeable only to solvent, one compartment containing pure
solvent, the other a solute–solvent solution), the Gibbs phase
rule predicts 2 degrees of freedom (NC = 2, NP = 2). However there
are three; we are free to choose the temperature of the system, the
pressure of the pure solvent compartment, and the solute concentration
of the solution, all of them consistent with osmotic equilibrium.
The reason for “breakdown” of the phase rule is simply
that its derivation does not apply to this system; specifically, the
pressure at equilibrium is not uniform across both compartments, nor
is the solute chemical potential. An applicable derivation provides
the correct answer. For the system in general nonequilibrium conditions,
there are two temperatures and two pressures, one of each for each
phase (compartment), and one composition variable (the concentration
of solute), for a total of five. At equilibrium, there are two constraints:
the two temperatures are equal, and the chemical potential of the
solvent is the same in both phases. Five minus two equals three. (Note
that the equilibrium pressure in the solution compartment is determined
by the equality of solvent chemical potentials at equilibrium; it
is not an independent constraint).

For a gel system containing
three coexisting phases, two stable gels (swollen and collapsed) in
a pure solvent bath, NP = 3, NC = 2 (solvent plus gel material), so
the Gibbs phase rule predicts a single degree of freedom at equilibrium.
However again there are three; we are free to choose the temperature
(in the range of phase coexistence), the pressure of the solvent reservoir,
and the density of pregelation material. Again, the reason for the
breakdown of the phase rule is that its derivation does not apply
to the system in question; specifically, the equilibrated pressures
in the three phases are not equal, and the chemical potential of gel
material is absent from the pure solvent phase. Again, an applicable
modification of the derivation provides the correct answer. In general
nonequilibrium conditions, there are three temperatures and three
pressures, one of each for each of the three phases, and two gel densities,
one for the swollen gel and one for the coexisting collapsed gel,
for a total of 8. At equilibrium, there are five constraints: all
three temperatures are equal (two constraints), the solvent chemical
potential is equal in all three phases (two constraints), and the
solute chemical potential is equal in the two gel phases (one constraint),
for a total of five constraints. Eight minus five equals three.

Our universal gel is consistent with this analysis. We have seen
that for a choice of subcritical temperature, and, implicitly, a pressure
for the solvent bath, a single free choice of ρ0 determines
the other two values of ρ(0). Once again, reference to extreme
conditions or states of matter, such as metastability, may not be
necessary to understand gel behavior.

The author declares no
competing financial interest.
==== Refs
References
Biomedical Applications of
Hydrogels Handbook ; R. M. M. , Ottenbrite , Park K. , Okano T.  , Eds.; Springer : Berlin , 2010 .
Smidsrod O. ; Moe S.
T.  Biopolymer Chemistry ; Tapir Academic Press : Trondheim, Norway , 2008 , ch. 14.
Polymer Gels ; H. .B. , Bohidar , Dubin P. , Osada Y.  , Eds.; ACS Symposium Series 833 ; American Chemical Society : Washington,
DC , 2002 .
Tanaka T. 
Collapse of
Gels and the Critical Endpoint . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1978 , 40 , 820 –823 . 10.1103/physrevlett.40.820 .
Tanaka T.  Phase Transitions of Gels , In Polyelectrolyte
Gels ; R. S. , Harland , Prud’homme R. K.  , Eds.; ACS Symposium Series 480 ; American Chemical Society : Washington,
DC , 1992 , pp 1 –21 .
Shibayama M. ; Tanaka T. 
Volume Phase Transitions
and Related Phenomena of Polymer Gels . Adv.
Polym. Sci. 
1993 , 109 , 1 –62 . 10.1007/3-540-56791-7_1 .
Kokufuta E. ; Wang B. ; Yoshida R. ; Khokhlov A. R. ; Hirata M. 
Volume Phase Transition of Polyelectrolyte
Gels with Different Charge Distributions . Macromolecules 
1998 , 31 , 6878 –6884 . 10.1021/ma971565r .
Hochberg A. ; Tanaka T. ; Nicoli D. 
Spinodal Line and Critical Point
of an Acrylamide Gel . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1979 , 43 , 217 –219 . 10.1103/physrevlett.43.217 .
Tokita M. ; Tanaka T.. 
Reversible Decrease
of Gel-Solvent Friction . Science 
1991 , 253 , 1121 –1123 . 10.1126/science.253.5024.1121 .17731808 
Hirotsu S. 
Softening of Bulk Modulus and Negative
Poisson’s Ratio Near the Volume Phase Transition of Polymer
Gels . J. Chem. Phys. 
1991 , 94 , 3949 –3957 . 10.1063/1.460672 .
Hirotsu S. 
Static and
Time-Dependent Properties of Polymer Gels Around the Volume Phase
Transition . Phase Transitions 
1994 , 47 , 183 –240 . 10.1080/01411599408200347 .
Hirotsu S. 
Some Exotic Properties of Polymer Gels Associated with
the Volume Phase Transition . Ferroelectrics 
1997 , 203 , 375 –388 . 10.1080/00150199708012861 .
Oppermann W.  Swelling Behavior and Elastic Properties of Ionic
Hydrogels , In Polyelectrolyte Gels ; R. S. , Harland , Prud’homme R. K.  , Eds.; ACS Symposium Series 480 ; American Chemical
Society : Washington, DC , 1992 , pp 159 –170 .
Hashmi S. M. ; Dufresne E. R. 
Mechanical Properties
of Individual Microgel Particles Through the Deswelling Transition . Soft Matter 
2009 , 5 , 3682 –3688 . 10.1039/b906051k .
Wall F. T.  Chemical Thermodynamics ; W. H. Freeman : San Francisco , 1974 .
Kirkwood J. G. ; Oppenheim I.  Chemical Thermodynamics ; McGraw-Hill : New York , 1961 .
Uhlenbeck G. E. ; Ford G. W.  Lectures in Statistical
Mechanics ; American Mathematical Society : Providence , 1963 .
Sanchez I. C. 
Dimensionless Thermodynamics: A New Paradigm for Liquid
State Properties . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2014 , 118 , 9386 –9397 . 10.1021/jp504140z .25014632 
McMillan W. G. ; Mayer J. E. 
The Statistical Thermodynamics of Multicomponent Systems . J. Chem. Phys. 
1945 , 13 , 276 –305 . 10.1063/1.1724036 .
Vafaei S. ; Tomberli B. ; Gray C. G. 
McMillan-Mayer
Theory of Solutions Revisited: Simplifications and Extensions . J. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 141 , 154501 10.1063/1.4897980 .25338903 
Flory P. J.  Principles of Polymer Chemistry ; Cornell University Press : Ithica , 1953 .
Frenkel J.  Kinetic Theory of Liquids ; Dover : New York , 1955 .
Tanford C.  Physical Chemistry of
Macromolecules ; Wiley : New York , 1961 .
Dill K. A. ; Bromberg S.  Molecular Driving Forces ; Garland Science : New York , 2003 .
Treloar L. R. G.  The Physics of
Rubber Elasticity ; Clarendon : Oxford , 1975 .
Rubinstein M. ; Panyukov S. 
Elasticity of Polymer Networks . Macromolecules 
2002 , 35 , 6670 –6686 . 10.1021/ma0203849 .
Van Konynenburg P. H. ; Scott R. L. 
Critical
Lines and Phase Equilibria in Binary van der Waals Mixtures . Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 
1980 , 298 , 495 –540 . 10.1098/rsta.1980.0266 .
Winkler R. G. ; Gold M. ; Reineker P. 
Collapse of Polyelectrolyte Macromolecules
by Counterion Condensation and Ion Pair Formation: A Molecular Dynamics
Simulation Study . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1998 , 80 , 3731 –3734 . 10.1103/physrevlett.80.3731 .
Manning G. S. 
Counterion Condensation Theory of
Attraction Between Like Charges in the Absence of Multivalent Counterions . Eur. Phys. J. E 
2011 , 34 , 132 10.1140/epje/i2011-11132-6 .
Varghese A. ; Rajesh R. ; Vemparala S. 
Aggregation
of Rodlike Polyelectrolyte Chains in the Presence of Monovalent Counterions . J. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 137 , 234901 10.1063/1.4771920 .23267499 
Tata B. V. R. ; Mohanty P. S. ; Valsakumar M. C. 
Bound Pairs:
Direct Evidence for Long-Range Attraction Between Like-Charged Colloids . Solid State Commun. 
2008 , 147 , 360 –365 . 10.1016/j.ssc.2008.06.026 .
Dušek K. ; Patterson D. 
Transition
in Swollen Polymer Networks Induced by Intramolecular Condensation . J. Polym. Sci., Part A-2 
1968 , 6 , 1209 –1216 . 10.1002/pol.1968.160060701 .
Khokhlov A. R. 
Swelling and Collapse of Polymer Networks . Polymer 
1980 , 21 , 376 –380 . 10.1016/0032-3861(80)90005-1 .
Polotsky A. A. ; Plamper F. A. ; Borisov O. V. 
Collapse-to-Swelling
Transitions in pH- and Thermoresponsive Microgels in Aqueous Dispersions:
The Thermodynamic Theory . Macromolecules 
2013 , 46 , 8702 –8709 . 10.1021/ma401402e .
Schneider S. ; Linse P.. 
Discontinuous Volume Transition in Cross-Linked Polyelectrolyte
Gels Induced by Short-Range Attractions and Strong Electrostatic Coupling . Macromolecules 
2004 , 37 , 3850 –3856 . 10.1021/ma035512n .
Kobayashi H. ; Halver R. ; Sutmann G. ; Winkler R. 
Polymer conformations in ionic microgels
in the presence of salt: Theoretical and mesoscale simulation results . Polymers 
2017 , 9 , 15 10.3390/polym9010015 .
Jha P. K. ; Zwanikken J. W. ; Detcheverry F. A. ; de Pablo J. J. ; Olvera de la Cruz M. 
Study of Volume
Phase Transitions in Polymeric Nanogels by Theoretically Informed
Coarse-grained Simulations . Soft Matter 
2011 , 7 , 5965 –5975 . 10.1039/c1sm05264k .
Escobedo F. A. ; de Pablo J. J. 
Molecular Simulation of Polymeric Networks and Gels:
Phase Behavior and Swelling . Phys. Rep. 
1999 , 318 , 85 –112 . 10.1016/s0370-1573(99)00012-5 .
Andersson M. ; Hansson P. 
Phase Behavior of Salt-Free
Polyelectrolyte Gel-Surfactant Systems . J. Phys.
Chem. B 
2017 , 121 , 6064 –6080 . 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b02215 .28541037

