
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b01692ArticleChemical Structure of Fe–Ni Nanoparticles for
Efficient Oxygen Evolution Reaction Electrocatalysis Acharya Prashant †Nelson Zachary J. †Benamara Mourad ‡Manso Ryan H. §Bakovic Sergio I. Perez †Abolhassani Mojtaba †Lee Sungsik ∥Reinhart Benjamin ∥Chen Jingyi §Greenlee Lauren F. *††Ralph
E. Martin Department of Chemical Engineering, ‡Institute for Nanoscience and Engineering, and §Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of
Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701, United
States∥ Advanced
Photon Source, Argonne National Lab, Argonne, Illinois 60439, United States* E-mail: greenlee@uark.edu.11 10 2019 22 10 2019 4 17 17209 17222 09 06 2019 03 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Bimetallic iron–nickel-based
nanocatalysts are perhaps the
most active for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline electrolytes.
Recent developments in literature have suggested that the ratio of
iron and nickel in Fe–Ni thin films plays an essential role
in the performance and stability of the catalysts. In this work, the
metallic ratio of iron to nickel was tested in alloy bimetallic nanoparticles.
Similar to thin films, nanoparticles with iron–nickel atomic
compositions where the atomic iron percentage is ≤50% outperformed
nanoparticles with iron–nickel ratios of >50%. Nanoparticles
of Fe20Ni80, Fe50Ni50,
and Fe80Ni20 compositions were evaluated and
demonstrated to have overpotentials of 313, 327,, and 364 mV, respectively,
at a current density of 10 mA/cm2. While the Fe20Ni80 composition might be considered to have the best
OER performance at low current densities, Fe50Ni50 was found to have the best current density performance at higher
current densities, making this composition particularly relevant for
electrolysis conditions. However, when stability was evaluated through
chronoamperometry and chronopotentiometry, the Fe80Ni20 composition resulted in the lowest degradation rates of
2.9 μA/h and 17.2 μV/h, respectively. These results suggest
that nanoparticles with higher iron and lower nickel content, such
as the Fe80Ni20 composition, should be still
taken into consideration while optimizing these bimetallic OER catalysts
for overall electrocatalytic performance. Characterization by electron
microscopy, diffraction, and X-ray spectroscopy provides detailed
chemical and structural information on as-synthesized nanoparticle
materials.

document-id-old-9ao9b01692document-id-new-14ao9b01692ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The
global economy remains heavily reliant on fossil-fuel-based
non-renewable sources of energy.1 Fossil
fuels are a major contributor to greenhouse gases, as the burning
of fossil fuels leads to the release of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere.2 In 2013 alone, an
estimated 9.78 billion metric tons of CO2 were released
into the atmosphere because of the use of fossil fuels.3 Having fuel alternatives to fossil fuels thus
continues to be urgent as the environmental impacts brought on by
global warming become increasingly severe.4 Hydrogen as a fossil fuel replacement has the potential to reconfigure
the energy sector’s use of fuel sources and usher in an era
of clean energy.5−7 However, currently, almost 95% of the estimated 55
million metric tons of hydrogen produced annually worldwide are done
so using non-renewable sources (i.e., through coal or natural gas
steam reforming).7,8

Electrolysis of water is
considered to be a more environmentally
sustainable approach to produce hydrogen (i.e., CO2-emissions
free when coupled with renewable energy input).8−10 Besides, electrolysis
may also play a crucial role in the storage of energy from renewable
sources such as sunlight and wind.6,11,12 The splitting of water results from two half-reactions:
the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction
(OER).13 In an alkaline environment, the
half reactions are as follows    

The efficiency
of water electrolysis depends on the efficiency
of both HER and OER.14 OER is the slower
of the two half-reactions, as it is kinetically hindered by a multi-step-proton-coupled-electron
transfer mechanism.15−17

Electrocatalysts increase the kinetics of OER
and lower the overpotential
(i.e., the applied potential required beyond the theoretical potential, E0 = 1.23 V). Rare transition metals such as
RuO2 and IrO2 are considered the most advanced
commercially available catalysts for OER. However, RuO2 and IrO2 are expensive and scarce precious metals, thus
making these catalyst materials non-viable candidates for large-scale
industrial manufacturing of electrolysis technology.18,19 First-row late transition metals (e.g., Fe, Co, and Ni) have recently
been shown to have excellent promise as alternatives to precious metals.
These first-row transition metals are less costly, widely available,
stable, and insoluble in alkaline electrolytes. Besides, these metals
result in catalyst materials that are highly active for OER, where
the metals typically exist as oxides or hydroxides.20−22

Recent
studies have shown that monometallic oxide and hydroxide
catalysts of iron, nickel, and cobalt are not as active as their sister
bimetallic or trimetallic oxide and hydroxide catalysts.23−25 Further, bimetallic catalysts at certain ratios have been shown
to complement the drawbacks of monometallic catalysts. Corrigan found
that by precipitating Fe (10–50 at. %) in a composite iron–nickel
hydrous oxide, the Tafel slope was greatly lowered (by ∼65%),
indicating faster reaction kinetics for OER.26 The Tafel slope can also offer insight on the rate-limiting step,
and the decrease in the Tafel slope can be associated with the surface
adsorbed species formed during the initial phase of the OER remaining
predominant.27 Fe0.25Ni0.75OOH films resulted in an increase of OER activity by 500-fold
over pure Fe and Ni films,28 while Stevens
et al. were able to show an increase in activity of 150-fold for 10%
Fe-containing NiOxHy films.29 Finally, Louie and Bell
observed optimal OER activity for iron–nickel oxide thin films
with 40 at. % iron composition.30 Generally,
measured overpotential also appears to be directly correlated to the
FeNi atomic composition.28,31 The lowest OER onset
potential (i.e., overpotential) was observed by Steimecke et al. for
Ni/Fe films containing 15% Fe, while Fidelsky et al. used density
functional theory (DFT) calculations to theorize that Fe-doped NiOOH
are capable of lowering the overpotential by more than 40% compared
to pure NiOOH.32,33 These studies demonstrate the
importance of iron incorporation into nickel-based hydroxide catalysts
and suggest that the ratio of iron to nickel plays a significant role
in the eventual OER activity. Several mechanisms for the improvement
in OER performance have been suggested. Fidelsky and Toroker suggested
that a band-like charge mechanism for charge transport may be present
in Fe-doped NiOOH materials, which positively influences both the
catalytic performance and electronic conductivity.33 Iron doping into NiOOH has also been suggested to enhance
the probability of hydrogen transfer while simultaneously requiring
less activation energy.34 DFT calculations
have shown that the addition of iron dopant increases the predicted
OER activity by weakening the bonds of OER intermediates.35

In related work, Burke et al. demonstrated
that Fe incorporation
in CoOOH (Co1–xFexOOH; x = 0.6–0.7) enhanced the OER
activity by almost 100-fold and hypothesized that Fe is the active
site for OER catalysis, while CoOOH affords chemical stability, conductivity,
and electrolyte permeability for Fe active sites.20 In the case of Ni(OH)2/NiOOH, Trotochaud et
al. reported that Fe incorporation in Ni(OH)2/NiOOH increased
the conductivity of the catalyst by more than 30-fold and indicated
that Fe induces a partial-charge transfer mechanism that initiates
Ni centers throughout the catalyst film, thereby increasing the OER
activity of the catalyst.31 Friebel et
al. applied operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), along with
high energy resolution fluorescence detection and computational methods,
to suggest that Fe3+ incorporated in Ni1–xFexOOH increases the
OER activity and that Fe sites, and not Ni sites, are the active catalytic
sites in Ni1–xFexOOH.28 As the discussion of the
nature of the active site of these Ni1–xFexOOH materials continues in the
literature, thus far, it appears clear that Ni and Fe play synergistic
roles and that the active site is likely composed of a Ni–Fe–O
coordinated chemical structure. Recently, Shin et al. revealed through
DFT studies that Fe4+ and Ni4+ in Ni1–xFexOOH function as cocatalysts
for OER as high-spin d4 Fe4+ stabilizes the radical character
on the O of M–O bond which subsequently facilitates O–O
coupling on low-spin d6 Ni4+.36 Surface metal sites (M) are largely considered to be where OER occurs,
including facilitating the adsorption and reaction of a series of
intermediates such as M–OH, M–O, M–OOH, and M–OO.37 However, to further complicate understanding
of Ni1–xFexOOH materials, it was recently suggested by Doyle et al.35 that Ni1–xFexOOH materials may have a bulk contribution
to the overall observed OER activity. This computational study was
based on the more ordered β-Ni(OH)2, rather than
the disordered alpha phase that is a closer match to the disordered
Ni1–xFexOOH materials,31 but the results are compelling
and require further inquiry.

The majority of studies thus far
have focused on iron incorporated
into homogeneous thin films. However, Burke et al. point to the need
for high-surface-area catalysts to be developed to enable a scalable
catalyst and electrode development with low mass transport limitations
and high mass activity performance.37 Görlin
et al. synthesized nano-sized Ni–Fe catalysts using a microwave-assisted,
surfactant-free solvothermal route and showed that Fe incorporation
of around 50% resulted in the highest OER activity.38 Further, Liu et al. managed to develop a nanostructured
FeNi alloy where they incorporated S and N-doped carbon which drastically
improved OER catalysis with a very low overpotential of 230 mV to
achieve the current density of 10 mA cm–2.39 Similarly, Liu et al. were also involved in
the fabrication of FeNi3 nanoparticles incorporated on
carbon doped with multiple nonmetal elements (FeNi3/M–C)
that demonstrated an overpotential of 246 mV at 10 mA cm–2.40 Meng et al. claimed that the excellent
OER performance shown by a stereo film on carbon cloth comprising
FeNi3 nanosheet covered FeOOH was due to factors such as
the synergistic effects of iron and nickel ratio and the availability
of exposed catalytic sites for OER derived from the oxidation of the
FeNi3 nanosheets during the anodic oxidation.41 Interestingly, Du et al. were able to engineer
N-doped carbon-coated FeNiP nanoparticles, which turned out to be
a good bifunctional catalyst for alkaline water electrolysis.42 There is now an opportunity to develop nanostructured
catalysts that have similar, or better, performance metrics for OER
but are amenable to scalable electrode design.

In this work,
results are presented for a suite of bimetallic iron–nickel
(Fe–Ni) alloy nanoparticles that are active for OER in alkaline
electrolytes. To explore the role of Fe content on OER activity, Fe–Ni
alloy nanoparticles were synthesized at three different molar ratios
of iron to nickel. The ratios studied are mole Fe/mole Ni—1:4,
1:1, and 4:1 and will be denoted as Fe20Ni80, Fe50Ni50, and Fe80Ni20. The synthesis of these Fe–Ni bimetallic nanoparticles involved
a series of precisely-timed synthesis steps in aqueous solution. Fe–Ni
nanoparticles were characterized subsequently using energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
(ICP–MS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS). Detailed characterization was performed via synchrotron-based
hard XAS. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used for imaging
morphology and diffraction analysis. From characterization results,
we report new findings on the chemical and structural nature of these
complex alloy nanoparticle materials. The electrochemical analysis
was conducted on the Fe–Ni bimetallic catalysts using cyclic
voltammetry (CV), and stability testing was performed using chronoamperometry
(CA) and chronopotentiometry (CP). The results from this work demonstrate
that the ratio of iron to nickel plays a critical role in the OER
activity of synthesized nanoparticles, similar to results reported
for the thin films work outlined above. Activity and stability, however,
must both be evaluated before a catalyst design direction is determined.
Furthermore, the results demonstrate that highly active nanocatalysts
can be synthesized by a scalable synthesis process, with the potential
for scale-up and industrial production of the Fe–Ni bimetallic
catalysts at gram to kilogram levels.

2 Results
and Discussion
Nanoparticle morphology is shown in Figure 1. The images suggest
that the nanoparticles
of all three ratios tend to agglomerate together when deposited onto
the TEM grid; from these results, it may be likely that the nanoparticles
also similarly agglomerate on the working electrode surface. The nanoparticles
appear to be roughly spherical but structurally disorganized and heterogeneous.
The nanoparticles of all three ratios appear to have a mixture of
both crystalline and amorphous regions. Fe20Ni80 and Fe50Ni50 may be more crystalline, compared
to Fe80Ni20, as a higher content of lattice
planes is observed. Fe80Ni20 had a d-spacing value of 0.21 ± 0.02 nm which was indexed to the lattice
plane (111) of FeNi alloy by Li et al.43 Fe50Ni50 had a d-spacing
value of 0.20 ± 0.01 nm, and Fe20Ni80 had
a d-spacing value of 0.20 ± 0.02 nm, which Ding
et al. described to be approximately close to (110) planes of bcc
FeNi alloy while Xia et al. indexed the d-spacing
value to (111) planes of face-centered cubic (fcc) γ-FeNi phase.43−45 For all three samples, the nanoparticles have an apparent core–shell-like
morphology (additional images presented in Figure S1 of the Supporting Information), but instead of one core
being enclosed by a shell, multiple cores are surrounded by the same
shell. From these results, we postulate that the synthesis approach
causes a mixed metallic phase to form, with regions of crystallinity,
where the increasing iron content causes an expansion of the lattice
structure, with possible shifts in the phase present and insertion
of iron into the nickel lattice likely.31 During synthesis, the nanoparticles are exposed to water, and once
synthesized, the nanoparticles are also exposed to the ambient environment.
Both iron and nickel are expected to oxidize upon contact with water
and oxygen, and the outer shell visible as a lighter phase contrast
region in TEM imaging is likely an oxidized layer that forms on the
bimetallic core nanoparticles. Line scans and point measurements of
nanoparticles (Figure S1) identify both
iron and nickel in the shell and support this conclusion.

Figure 1 TEM and HRTEM
images of synthesized alloy nanoparticles: (a,d)
Fe20Ni80, (b,e) Fe50Ni50, and (c,f) Fe80Ni20.

All three ratios of iron–nickel nanoparticles appear to
have a relatively similar size, thus indicating that the ratio between
the two metals in the bimetallic composition does not control the
overall size of the nanoparticles during the synthesis process. Often,
the ratio between the metal precursors and the stabilizers used [e.g.,
amino tris(methylene phosphonic acid) (ATMP), polyvinylpyrrolidone
(PVP)] plays a bigger role in controlling the particle size of nanoparticles
synthesized through solution-phase chemistry techniques, such as our
aqueous-based chemical reduction technique.46

Because of the complexity of the nanoparticle morphology,
a suite
of characterization tools was used to investigate elemental composition
(summarized in Table 1). The purpose of the suite of measurements was to determine possible
differences between the observed core and shell structures, as well
as to compare methods that provide bulk versus surface-sensitive measurements.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) EDX was used to obtain elemental
information, where the spectra represent an overall average measurement
from a large population of nanoparticles. TEM EDX point measurements
were made on individual nanoparticles for both the observed darker
core region and the observed lighter phase contrast shell encapsulating
the cores. While EDX, in general, is a highly useful characterization
tool, all EDX measurements are at most semi-quantitative and thus
should be used to compare within a sample set and should always be
compared to more quantitative measurements. Both ICP–MS and
XPS characterization were used to compare to EDX measurements. ICP–MS
is a precise and quantitative measurement tool, but is a bulk measurement
of the metals in the sample and cannot measure oxygen content. Finally,
XPS is surface-sensitive and measures a large particle population,
but is considered to be a more precise quantification of composition
within a comparative sample set, as compared to EDX. XRD was also
used to characterize the samples, and the result is presented in the Supporting Information. Thus, the combination
of these techniques can provide an overall understanding of the nanoparticle
bulk and surface composition, the relative amount of oxygen in the
sample (which can include contributions from ligand stabilizers),
the atomic ratio of iron to nickel, and any discrepancies between
individual versus populations of particles.

Table 1 Comparison
of Elemental Composition
Analysis Results from Bulk and Surface-Sensitive Techniquesa
 	SEM EDX atomic %	TEM EDX atomic %	TEM EDX atomic %	ICP atomic %	XPS atomic %	
 	multiple particle average	individual particle core	individual particle shell	bulk sample average	surface sample average	
sample	Fe	Ni	O	Fe	Ni	O	Fe	Ni	O	Fe	Ni	Fe	Ni	O	
Fe20Ni80	9	42	49	9	38	53	4	21	75	18	82	16	44	40	
Fe50Ni50	25	25	50	18	19	63	9	11	80	50	50	25	29	46	
Fe80Ni20	45	9	46	38	5	57	11	1	88	83	17	40	9	51	
a All ratios are
given as Fe/Ni.

The elemental
analysis from SEM EDX of the three ratios of iron–nickel
nanoparticles is summarized in Table 1, for the relative amounts of iron and nickel in each
sample. In the data shown in Table 1, iron and nickel atomic % are reported out of 100%;
other minor components (e.g., salt contaminants from synthesis such
as sodium and chloride) and oxygen content are not reported. As a
semi-quantitative measurement, EDX is primarily used herein to compare
relative ratios of Fe/Ni between samples synthesized in this work.
Our EDX measurements during SEM imaging verify that the ratios measured
in the synthesized nanoparticle samples match the theoretical target
ratios of precursors used in the synthesis procedure. The Fe/Ni ratios
reported in Table 1 are below the expected EDX margin of error of 10%, compared to the
theoretical target molar ratios (i.e., 5:1, 1:1, and 1:5) for all
three nanoparticle samples. EDX measurements thus corroborate the
initial calculations used for the synthesis of different molar ratios
of nanoparticles and demonstrate that the samples tested contained
the target Fe concentrations. A more detailed table of SEM EDX for
both atomic and weight % is reported in the (Supporting Information).

TEM EDX analysis was performed as a series
of point measurements.
TEM dark field images of the point measurement locations are reported
in the Supporting Information, and the
elemental composition data are summarized in Table 1. Several interesting observations can be
made from these data, as well as when these data are compared to SEM
EDX data. First, there are measurable differences in the oxygen content
of the core versus the shell, where the shell of all three samples
has significantly higher oxygen atomic % than the core. These results
are consistent with the observable phase contrast between the core
and shell for all three samples in Figures 1 and S1, where
a darker phase contrast typically indicates a larger metal content.
Second, the Fe50Ni50 composition does not result
in measurable differences in the iron to nickel ratio in the core
versus the shell, whereas Fe20Ni80 has a slightly
higher content of nickel in the shell than the core. Interestingly,
the iron content in the shell compared to the core for Fe80Ni20 was much larger, and both measured ratios of Fe/Ni
were greater than the bulk ratios obtained from SEM EDX and ICP, as
well as greater than the surface ratio of Fe/Ni as measured by XPS.
This discrepancy may indicate particle-to-particle variability. Finally,
the measured iron to nickel ratios are, overall, generally consistent
with the target theoretical ratios intended during synthesis. As mentioned
above, the aqueous synthesis method does allow some exposure to oxygen
as well as direct exposure to water molecules during synthesis, and
the synthesized nanoparticles are also exposed to the ambient atmosphere
after synthesis. Our characterization data presented in Table 1 further support the initial
conclusion based on TEM imaging that exposure to oxygen and water
likely enables the formation of a more oxygen-rich shell, with associated
oxide or hydroxide formation as well as metal migration and restructuring.
We do not currently understand when the shell structure forms or exactly
how the morphology changes during or after synthesis. However, the
result is a complex and heterogeneous morphology with direct implications
for OER performance and catalyst stability.

Analysis of the
data collected by ICP–MS is used to quantitatively
account for the metal compositions (iron and nickel) of the samples.
The raw data provided by the instrument gave counts per second for
iron and nickel, which was then converted into concentration at parts
per billion (ppb) (reported in Supporting Information). The concentrations in μM for iron and nickel were obtained
by dividing concentrations in ppb by the molecular weight of their
respective isotopes (57 Fe for iron and 60 Ni for nickel). The molar
ratio of Fe/Ni was obtained by dividing the concentration of iron
in μM by that of nickel in μM. The molar ratios of Fe20Ni80, Fe50Ni50, and Fe80Ni20 obtained from ICP–MS were below a
margin of error of 10% in comparison to the targeted theoretical molar
ratios during synthesis for all three nanoparticle samples. Also,
the ratios measured by ICP–MS are the same as those measured
by SEM EDX. Along with EDX results, ICP–MS results thus provide
an additional verification that the composition of iron and nickel
in all three nanoparticle samples was reflective of the desired molar
ratios from a bulk particle perspective.

Surface elemental composition
of the nanoparticle samples was determined
by XPS, which is a highly surface-sensitive tool that analyzes to
a depth of <10 nm of a surface.47 For
the nanoparticle morphology and size scale shown in Figure 1, XPS measurements likely probed
both the surface oxide shell and the core. For a nanoparticle sample,
XPS measures a population of nanoparticles in a nanoparticle film,
and one might expect some variability in nanoparticle packing with
resulting variability in the microscopic topology of the film. This
variability can result in variability in the actual depth of the XPS
measurement into the sample, and thus, our results may represent an
average of surface and subsurface composition. Survey spectra lines
(reported in Supporting Information) were
analyzed to calculate relative elemental concentration for Fe, Ni,
O, C, and N. All trace elements present in the samples were discarded
from the summation presented in Table 1, but are reported in the Supporting Information. All three nanoparticle samples contained a substantial
amount of oxygen, as was also suggested by the TEM EDX results. However,
the oxygen content estimated by XPS measurements is less relative
to iron and nickel, as compared to TEM EDX point measurements of the
shell regions and is rather more similar to the oxygen content measured
for the cores of the nanoparticles. This result could suggest that
there may be a potential overestimate in relative oxygen content by
the TEM EDX measurements and also that there is reduced metal content
in the subsurface of the nanoparticles, which is not surprising given
that the synthesis technique relies on the chemical reduction of both
metal cation precursors by borohydride to form particles. However,
we propose that the TEM EDX measurements are not an overestimate and
that the XPS measurements are, in this case, not solely measuring
the surface of the nanoparticles. Given that XPS will probe approximately
3–5 nm into the surface of the nanoparticles, and the shell
morphologies observed in Figures 1 and S1 are on the order
of ∼2 nm, it is likely that the XPS data are reflective of
a combined surface and subsurface chemical composition, while the
TEM EDX data of the shell are more reflective of just the shell composition.
If we make this assumption, we can evaluate the metal to oxygen ratio
and begin to develop a picture of the surface chemistry. For the Fe20Ni80 composition, the ratio of metal to oxygen
is 25–75, while for the Fe50Ni50 composition,
the ratio of metal to oxygen is 20–80 and for Fe80Ni20, the ratio is 12–88. The two compositions
with lower Fe content thus have a metal (M) to oxygen (O) ratio, M/O,
of ∼1:3–∼1:4. These ratios are higher than what
would be expected for a nominal oxide or hydroxide based on an iron-incorporated
nickel host phase, but might suggest that the phase is more likely
to be similar to an iron-incorporated nickel hydroxide [FexNi100–x(OH)2] rather than a nickel oxide (NiO) or an iron oxide (e.g.,
Fe2O3). Because we believe that the shell measurement
for the Fe80Ni20 composition is slightly off
based on our other measurements, we assume at this point in the analysis
that the higher iron content composition has a similar initial surface
phase as the other as-synthesized nanoparticle compositions. Overall,
these results likely point to some extent of overestimation of oxygen
content by TEM EDX, where the analysis of low atomic weight elements
such as oxygen is less reliable than the analysis of metal species.
The combination of our TEM EDX and XPS results can be used as complementary
techniques to probe the surface, subsurface, and bulk chemical character
of as-synthesized nanoparticles. The results also illustrate the importance
of using and understanding multiple characterization tools to characterize
morphologically complex nanomaterials.

The oxygen present in
the surface of nanoparticle samples can thus
likely be attributed to metal hydroxides, with a minor contribution
from the oxygen atoms attached to the organic ligands (ATMP and PVP)
that were used as stabilizers during nanoparticle synthesis.48 It is not expected that there would be a significant
contribution from ambient organic contamination to the oxygen signal
because the samples were cleaned and stored in methanol until prepped
for XPS measurements. The amount of carbon is approximately equal
in the three nanoparticle samples, while nitrogen accounts for a smaller
percentage. Both carbon and nitrogen can be traced back to the use
of organic compounds (ATMP and PVP) that could not be completely rinsed
off after synthesis. The XPS-measured iron and nickel content in Fe80Ni20 and Fe50Ni50 match
relatively closely with the SEM EDX results (Table 1) for the same sample, while the amount of
nickel in Fe20Ni80 is 40% lower in comparison
to the SEM EDX results.

High-resolution XPS was performed on
both iron and nickel regions
to further understand the oxidation state of the metal species in
the nanoparticles (Figure 2). The Fe 2p region for the three nanoparticles shows a shift
in Fe 2p3/2 peaks, but the Fe 2p1/2 peak positions
are similar for all three samples. The Fe 2p3/2 peak was
observed at 710.8 eV for Fe80Ni20 (Figure 2a), which can be
attributed to both iron oxide and hydroxide species. For Fe50Ni50, the Fe 2p3/2 peak (Figure 2c) was at 711.4 eV, which suggests that iron
is likely present as iron hydroxide in either the alpha or gamma phase.
Similarly, Fe20Ni80 has a Fe 2p3/2 peak at 711.8 eV (Figure 2e), which also points toward the presence of an alpha or gamma
hydroxide species. The 2p1/2 peak positions for Fe80Ni20, Fe50Ni50, and Fe20Ni80 were located at 724.2, 723.9,, and 724.0
eV, respectively, which collectively can be attributed to both iron
oxide and hydroxide species.49−51 For Fe80Ni20, there appears to be a small peak around 707 eV which indicates
the presence of some iron metal species at an oxidation state of 0.
Neither Fe50Ni50 nor Fe20Ni80 composition had a distinct iron metal peak, but both spectra have
a broadening of the Fe 2p3/2 peak between 708 and 703 eV,
suggesting that there is a metallic contribution to the chemical environment
of the iron atoms. The lack of a distinct metal peak may result from
the inherent variability of the nanoparticle film and the probing
depth of the XPS technique, which includes both the shell and a portion
of the bulk underneath the visible shell. The nanoparticles are also
exposed to the atmospheric conditions which could result in oxidized
surfaces, and because XPS is a surface-sensitive technique, the spectra
could not account for the metallic region that might be present underneath
the oxidized surfaces. Because the lack of a distinct metal peak occurred
in the two nanoparticles with higher nickel content, Fe50Ni50 and Fe20Ni80, the iron metal
signal could have been suppressed by the greater amount of nickel
that is present in the surface of the two nanoparticle films.

Figure 2 XPS spectra
of (a) Fe 2p for Fe20Ni80, (b)
Ni 2p Fe20Ni80, (c) Fe 2p for Fe50Ni50, (d) Ni 2p for Fe50Ni50, (e)
Fe 2p for Fe80Ni20, and (f) Ni 2p for Fe80Ni20.

In the Ni 2p region, all three nanoparticles had bulk metal content,
which supports the compositional analysis discussed above. Unlike
the iron spectra, the nickel spectra all display a sharp, distinct
peak for the metallic nickel. The peaks at 852.2, 852.3,, and 852.0
eV for Fe80Ni20, Fe50Ni50, and Fe20Ni80, respectively, can be classified
as nickel metal peaks. The Ni 2p3/2 peak at 855.6 eV was
observed for Fe80Ni20, but the Ni 2p1/2 peak was not distinguishable from the noise. Ni 2p3/2 peaks for Fe50Ni50 and Fe20Ni80 were observed at 855.6 and 855.4 eV, respectively, and the
nearly identical peak locations suggest that the nickel chemical environment
is similar in all three samples. The Ni 2p3/2 peaks for
all three nanoparticles suggest the presence of nickel hydroxide.
The Ni 2p1/2 peak for Fe50Ni50 was
located at 873.0 eV and similarly for Fe20Ni80 at 873.2 eV, which suggests the presence of nickel oxide.25,48,52,53 The peak positions for both iron and nickel spectra for all three
nanoparticles are within a similar range of one another which suggests
that the speciation and oxidation state are similar between the three
samples. With the XPS results for the three nanoparticles, a case
can be made for iron to be primarily in a +3 oxidation state, with
a minor contribution from Fe0, whereas nickel is primarily
in a +2 oxidation state, with some of the nickel content in the 0
oxidation state.

To further understand the chemistry of the
nanoparticles, XAS was
performed. Unlike XPS, which is a surface characterization tool, XAS
is a bulk characterization technique. XAS data can be classified into
three different regions: pre-edge region, X-ray near edge spectroscopy
(XANES), and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS). XANES
data are reported in Figure 3. XANES data for the iron K edge region show that all three
samples qualitatively appear to be similar with only minor differences
in the spectra. The Fe K edge spectra for Fe80Ni20 and Fe50Ni50 virtually overlap on top of each
other. The Fe K edge of Fe20Ni80 has higher
intensity at the main absorption peak and slightly lower intensity
at the pre-edge, compared to the Fe80Ni20 and
Fe50Ni50. Out of the three standards shown,
only the pre-edge feature of metallic iron is slightly similar to
that of the three nanoparticle samples, while the other two standards
have much more distinct pre-edge features (additional standards are
reported in the Supporting Information).
Generally, the weak pre-edge feature, which corresponds to 1s →
3d electronic transitions, can be seen in both the iron and nickel
regions for the three nanoparticle samples and is potentially indicative
of octahedral coordination,54−57 but a more in-depth analysis suggests, particularly
for iron, that the XAS measurement is a combination of multiple iron
chemical environments and, potentially, multiple coordination environments.

Figure 3 XANES
region of the (a) Fe K-edge and the (b) Ni K-edge.

For iron specifically, the pre-edge shape and position suggest
contributions from metallic iron and Fe3+, where the position
matches the pre-edge peak position of the Fe(OH)3 reference,
but the shape of the pre-edge is more reflective of a lower-intensity
iron metal pre-edge. The Fe metal reference material was an iron foil,
with the bulk bcc crystal structure and iron atoms in a tetrahedral
geometry. The ferric hydroxide reference, also known as goethite,
had a closed packed hexagonal structure, where iron atoms occupy octahedral
positions within the hydroxide structure. The nickel ferrite (NiFe2O4) reference is known to have an inverse spinel
fcc crystal structure, where the divalent nickel occupies only octahedral
sites, while trivalent iron equally occupies both octahedral and tetrahedral
interstitial sites within the crystal structure.58 In addition to the oxidation state, the pre-edge feature
can also provide information about the metal coordination geometry59 of a material. Comparison to these reference
spectra pre-edge peak shape and positions suggests that iron atoms
that are in the +3 oxidation state may be chemically situated in an
octahedral coordination environment, while a population of the iron
atoms may be in a zero valent metallic state. However, the coordination
environment of the zero valent iron atoms is unlikely to be a simple
bcc coordination like that of bulk iron metal. Given that the lattice
spacing results from TEM imaging and the possibility that internal
iron and nickel atoms are in a metallic alloyed phase, we consider
the impact of iron composition on the crystal structure of iron–nickel
alloys. Mckeehan reported in 192360 on
the effect of composition on the FeNi alloy crystal structure, where
for iron atomic compositions of 70% or less, the alloy takes an fcc
crystal structure with octahedral coordination, while for iron compositions
of greater than 75%, the alloy phase takes on an iron-like bcc crystal
structure with tetrahedral coordination. Based on this work, the iron
atoms in a metallic oxidation state are likely to be coordinated more
similarly to octahedral coordination chemistry for the Fe20Ni80 and Fe50Ni50 compositions but
may be more likely to be closer to tetrahedral geometry for the Fe80Ni20 composition. The challenge with our nanoparticles
is that XAS analysis is a bulk characterization technique and averages
morphologically and chemically distinct regions of our nanoparticles
into one single spectrum. While other studies28,38,59 can model XAS data based on a singular phase,
we know that our nanoparticles have a multiregion morphology with
distinct phases likely. Thus, our analysis remains qualitative, but
characterization through XAS does provide additional detail about
potential phases and metal coordination that is not possible with
the other techniques presented herein.

The main Fe K edge absorption
peak of Fe20Ni80 aligns well with that of Fe(OH)3, whereas the primary
Fe K absorption peak for NiFe2O4 is quite similar
in shape to that of Fe50Ni50 and Fe80Ni20. This difference is perhaps the most significant
when the three FeNi nanoparticle samples are compared. Both reference
materials have iron in the 3+ oxidation state; none of the three experimental
sample Fe K edges are at all similar to the Fe K edge of the iron
foil reference. From the XANES region of Fe K edge, a strong case
can be made for the majority of the iron atoms in our nanoparticles
to be primarily in +3 oxidation with low contributions from metallic
iron, with perhaps a small contribution of iron atoms in the 0 oxidation
state.

Similarly, the XANES data for the nickel region of the
three samples
have almost identical spectra with a slight exception of Fe20Ni80 having a moderately higher normalized intensity.
The Ni K edge spectra of Fe50Ni50 and Fe80Ni20 are effectively the same. In comparison to
the pre-edge of the three standards, only the metallic nickel feature
had resemblance with the three nanoparticles. The pre-edge features
of the other two standards, β-Ni(OH)2 and NiFe2O4, are very distinct in comparison to that of
the three nanoparticles and the Ni metal foil reference. The samples
show a metal-like pre-edge feature, but interestingly very high white-line
intensity which expected in oxidized Ni. The main absorption peaks
for NiFe2O4 and β-Ni(OH)2 have
absorption energies in the same range as the three nanoparticle samples
but with higher normalized intensity.

Nickel foil was used as
a reference for the nickel metal and had
an fcc crystal structure. β-Ni(OH)2 has a hexagonally
closed packed-structure of Ni2+ and OH– and is the more stable polymorph of Ni(OH)2.61 β-Ni(OH)2 is found naturally
as the mineral theophrastite and is isostructural with brucite [Mg(OH)2].62 In β-Ni(OH)2, each Ni atom is surrounded by six O atoms to form an octahedral
structure. The symmetry of the metal–ligand cluster is the
determining factor for the existence and intensity of the pre-edge
features.63 McBreen et al. further suggested
that in a pure octahedral configuration, no pre-edge feature should
be present at all owing to the center of inversion of the octahedron.
Thus, weak pre-edge features only arise with the distortion of the
octahedral environment, which leads to the removal of the center of
inversion of the symmetry.63 The presence
of broad pre-edge peaks for the nanoparticles could be indicative
of Ni distorted octahedral coordination.64 Kim et al. also suggested that small magnitude of pre-edge features
can be emblematic of distorted octahedral coordination.57 Similar to the alpha phase of Ni(OH)2, β-Ni(OH)2 can also be classified as an insulator
and bulk NiFe2O4 also behaves as an insulator.62,65,66 Unlike in metals, where the screening
of the core-hole electron is usually complete, the core-hole electron
is only partially screened in insulators. Because of the photo-electron
core hole interactions in these nickel oxides (insulators), pre-edge
features can be influenced by molecular orbitals of the cluster formed
by absorbing and backscattering atoms. Therefore, Mansour et al. cautioned
against the direct comparison of pre-edge regions in nickel metal
and nickel oxides.64 Thus, for all three
nanoparticle samples, which lacked a distinct pre-edge feature and
had only weak and broad spectra, we conclude that the pre-edge shape
is the result of the nanoparticles having nickel in distorted octahedral
configuration. The pre-edge shape and position strongly align with
metallic nickel, but judging by the main absorption peak position,
both β-Ni(OH)2 and NiFe2O4,
which have an oxidation state of +2 for Ni, closely match with the
three nanoparticle samples. However, the intensities of the main absorption
peaks of the three nanoparticle samples are lower than both β-Ni(OH)2 and NiFe2O4 references. Numerous variables,
which include charge density, ligand symmetry, and spin density, can
affect the XANES spectra, but the absorption edge position can be
a reliable indicator of the oxidation state in nickel.67,68 Therefore, taking into account the pre-edge and XANES spectra points
to a mixed oxidation state of +2 and 0 for nickel, where nickel atoms
in the +2 oxidation are likely the majority species at both the bulk
and also the surface of the nanoparticles, as seen through XPS results,
while some amount of metallic nickel is prominent in the bulk. Given
the known difference in the standard reduction potentials for both
Fe2+ (E0 = −0.44 V)
and Ni2+ (E0 = −0.23
V), the latter is more likely, as the reduced iron species will preferentially
donate electrons to the nickel cations present, causing a reduction
to the zero oxidation state. This thermodynamically favorable reaction
thus results in the oxidation of the iron metal to a ferrous iron
cation. The iron and nickel spectra of three nanoparticle samples
having closely related features could be explained by the fact that
the synthesis process used was identical regarding salt precursors,
ligand stabilizers, reducing agents, and general procedure. XANES
data thus give a great insight into the atomic level chemistry of
the nanoparticles and thus give a basis for further investigation
of bimetallic iron–nickel nanoparticles for enhanced OER performance.

The results of the electrochemical analysis done on the iron–nickel
nanoparticles using CV are shown in Figure 4a. Fe20Ni80 had the
lowest onset potential, followed by Fe50Ni50 and Fe80Ni20. The same trend held for the
potential required to achieve a benchmark current density (j) of 10 mA/cm2. The overpotentials for Fe20Ni80, Fe50Ni50, and Fe80Ni20 were 313, 327,, and 364 mV, respectively,
at 10 mA/cm2 (Figure 4b). Another benchmark used to test the catalysts in
OER is to measure the current density at an overpotential (η)
of 300 mV. Fe20Ni80 yet again outperformed Fe50Ni50 and Fe80Ni20. Fe20Ni80 had a current density of 4.92 mA/cm2, which was followed by Fe50Ni50 with 3.43
mA/cm2 and Fe80Ni20 with 0.54 mA/cm2. However, at an overpotential (η) of 450 mV, Fe50Ni50 outperformed the other two catalysts as it
reached current density (j) of 207 mA/cm2, while Fe20Ni80 and Fe80Ni20 managed to have current densities (j) of
only 150 and 131 mA/cm2, respectively. Based on those three
standards (j = 10 mA/cm2, η = 300
mV, and η = 450 mV), it can be inferred that the iron–nickel
nanoparticle with lowest iron proportion of iron is the most active
at lower overpotential and the nanoparticle having iron quantity of
50% is only slightly less active at lower overpotential but had the
highest current density at greater overpotentials. This switch in
the best-performing composition is particularly important when one
considers that an electrolysis cell would be operating at elevated
current densities beyond 10 mA/cm2.69 Fe80Ni20, with the highest amount
of iron, performed significantly worse than the other two nanoparticles.
The result obtained in this study closely mirrors the ones in the
literature for nickel-based thin films. Corrigan et al. observed that
a sweet spot existed for the iron addition in nickel thin films which
occurred between 10 and 50%, while Louie et al., Friebel et al., and
Trotochaud et al. independently came to the same conclusion.26,28,30,31 We find it fascinating that the relationship between the ratio of
iron to nickel and the OER catalytic performance that exists for the
FeNi hydroxide thin films also holds in this study for nanoparticles,
but it is also compelling that our results suggest that the recent
literature benchmarks for OER (i.e., measurement of overpotential
at 10 mA/cm2 and measurement of current at 300 mV of overpotential)
are perhaps not appropriate for selecting optimal OER catalysts nor
for necessarily selecting directions for catalyst development and
design. Instead, we recommend considering a second set of metrics
at potentials relevant to commercial electrolysis, such as those tested
in the study by Speck et al.69 At a current
density of 100 mA/cm2, our nanoparticle catalysts resulted
in overpotentials of 415, 391,, and 436 mV for Fe20Ni80, Fe50Ni50, and Fe80Ni20, respectively. Interestingly, the gap between Fe20Ni80 and Fe80Ni20 is even lower
when the catalysts reached a current density of 150 mA/cm2. At a current density of 150 mA/cm2, our nanoparticle
catalysts resulted in overpotentials of 450, 415, and 457 mV for Fe20Ni80, Fe50Ni50, and Fe80Ni20, respectively. Prior work by our group has
evaluated the electrochemical surface area.70 Turnover frequency was calculated for each sample, and the result
is shown in Table S5. A CV graph of IrO2, a reference catalyst for OER, is shown in Figure S8.

Figure 4 (a,b) CV scans of Fe–Ni NPS in 1 M KOH electrolyte
solution
after 20 cycles.

Our performance data
generally suggest that the nanoparticles synthesized
herein may be in some respects a close replica of advanced iron–nickel
hydroxide-based thin films, which is a similar conclusion to our prior
work.48 An interesting feature of nickel-based
catalysts for OER is the presence of the nickel redox peak before
the OER onset potential. Fe20Ni80 had a large
nickel redox peak, while Fe50Ni50 had a notably
smaller peak and Fe80Ni20 had virtually nonexistent
nickel redox peak. The size of the peak is proportional to the nickel
content in the nanoparticles. In Fe20Ni80, which
had the earliest OER onset potential among the three nanoparticles,
the nickel redox peak occurred at the lowest potential. The second
most active catalyst Fe50Ni50 had a nickel redox
peak at a slightly higher potential than Fe20Ni80. The trend observed in our work suggests that an increase in nickel
content (decrease in iron content) shifts the nickel redox peak to
occur at a lower potential. The difference in oxidation peaks between
Fe20Ni80 and Fe50Ni50 was
around 40 mV. Similarly, Louie and Bell noted that the incorporation
of iron into nickel hydroxide films shifted the nickel redox peak
toward higher potentials, and the amount of iron was linearly proportional
to the shift in potential and inversely proportional to the redox
area, that is, increase in the iron content in the film directly corresponded
to the higher potentials at which the redox peaks occurred.30 Louie and Bell. implied that increasing iron
content led to the shift in nickel redox peak toward higher potential,
which in turn resulted in the suppression of electrochemical oxidation
of Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH by iron.30 The result obtained by Louie et al. confirmed the trend observed
in our results. In Corrigan’s work, between 0% Fe containing
nickel oxide film and 10% Fe containing nickel oxide film, the nickel
redox couple for iron-containing film increased by almost 50 mV and
the redox couple area was visibly decreased.26 Lu et al. observed the same trend for NiFe-layered double hydroxide
where Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox couple shifted to higher potential
and the redox area decreased compared to just a Ni(OH)2 film which they attributed to inhibition of Ni2+ to Ni3+ conversion by highly charged Fe3+ ions which
occupied the neighboring spaces.71 Hu and
Wu claimed that the OER activity for Fe–Ni materials could
be reliably predicted by the nickel redox peak that occurs before
OER and that the nickel redox peak is strongly dependent on the composition
of Fe–Ni which also controls the overall activities of OER.
Similar to our work, Hu et al. observed that the nickel redox peak
shifted toward more positive potential with increasing iron content.72 Li et al. also observed the nickel redox peak
shift toward more positive potential for Ni/Fe(OH)2 film
in comparison to Ni(OH)2 film and asserted that the oxidation
potential in a mixed Ni/Fe(OH)2 is actually determined
by the potential of Fe(III)/Fe(IV) conversion as Fe(OH)3 is a poor conductor until it is converted into the higher oxidation
state.73 Similar to our work where Fe80Ni20, which contained a high amount of iron did
not show any redox peak, Bates et al. also observed a muted redox
peak for their Fe/Raney Ni and suggested that the iron-rich surfaces
do not increase OER activity as much as other iron–nickel based
catalysts.23 To address the phenomenon
of iron affecting nickel redox properties, Görlin et al. theorized
that negatively charged oxygen ligands are formed in iron centers
which suggests a transformation from a two proton-two electron process
to a two proton-one electron transfer.74

CA and CP data are presented in Figure 5, with a summary of performance metrics in Table 2. CA was conducted
at a constant potential of 1.6 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode
(RHE), and CP was performed at a constant current density of 10 mA/cm2. Observing the CA data, Fe80Ni20 is
the most stable catalyst throughout the 12 h with a degradation rate
of −0.003 mA/h. The overall degradation rate of Fe50Ni50 was −0.025 mA/h, while Fe20Ni80 was the most unstable catalyst out of the three tested,
with a degradation rate of −0.026 mA/h. Interestingly, the
CA results are inverse in trend compared to the OER activity results
obtained through the CV. Both Fe20Ni80 and Fe50Ni50 compositions, which had the lowest onset
OER potentials, were much more unstable than Fe80Ni20, which had the largest onset OER potential among the three.
CP data in Figure 5 also indicates the same stability trend of the nanoparticle catalysts.
Fe80Ni20 was the most stable with a degradation
rate of 0.017 mV/h, followed by Fe50Ni50 with
a 0.951 mV/h degradation rate, and Fe20Ni80 with
a 1.288 mV/h degradation rate. Tafel slopes for the three catalysts
are plotted in Figure 5c. Fe50Ni50 had the lowest Tafel slope of 44.2
mV dec–1 followed by Fe80Ni20 with a Tafel slope of 48.6 mV dec–1, and Fe20Ni80 had the highest Tafel slope of 62.5 mV dec–1. Tafel slopes for all three nanoparticle catalysts
being less than 120 mV dec–1 rules out the prevalence
of surface species that were formed a step earlier than the rate determining
step.27 A Tafel slope value of 40 mV dec–1 demonstrates that there is a pre-equilibrium where
a one-electron electrochemical step is followed by another one-electron
electrochemical rate-determining step.71,75 Typically,
Tafel slopes close to 40 mV dec–1 are indicative
of a second-electron transfer step as the rate determining step.76,77 In comparison, a Tafel slope value of 60 mV dec–1 occurs when the rate-determining step involves a chemical step after
the first electron transfer step.78 Judging
by the Tafel slope values for the three nanoparticles, there arises
a distinct possibility that the OER kinetics for Fe50Ni50 and Fe80Ni20 was controlled by a second-electron
transfer step as the rate determining step and the kinetics for Fe20Ni80 controlled by the chemical step following
the first electron transfer step. In their work on electrodeposited
nickel–iron alloy thin films, Singh et al. calculated Tafel
slopes for thin films with a differing composition of iron and nickel
at 40 ± 5 mV dec–1. Singh et al. proposed the
reaction order to be approximately 2 concerning OH– concentration. Singh et al. also suggested that OER initiates at
the Ni3+ sites in the mixed iron–nickel films and
goes through a fast electrochemical step where surface adsorbed OH– is formed and followed by a slow step, where desorption
takes place.79 Lyons and Brandon measured
the Tafel slope value of around 40 mV dec–1 for
both nickel oxide and iron oxide electrodes in their work. Lyons and
Brandon proposed that the rate-determining step is caused by the formation
of an −OOH species for iron oxides, while the mechanism for
nickel oxides was similar to that of iron oxides.78

Figure 5 (a) CA of Fe–Ni NPs at 1.6 V vs RHE. (b) CP of Fe–Ni
NPs at 10 mA/cm2. (c) Tafel slopes of Fe–Ni NPs.

Table 2 Electrochemical Performance of the
Catalysts for OER
 	 	 	 	degradation rate	
sample	Tafel slope (mV dec–1)	current density@overpotential of 300 mV (mA cm–2)	overpotential@current density of 10 mA cm–2 (mV)	mA/h	mV/h	
Fe80Ni20	48.6	0.45	363	–0.003	0.017	
Fe50Ni50	44.2	3.21	326	–0.025	0.951	
Fe20Ni80	62.5	5.53	313	–0.026	1.288	
3 Conclusions
Three nanoparticles with varying iron to nickel ratios were synthesized
to test whether the ratio between iron and nickel in these catalysts
impacted the OER activity and performance. TEM, ICP, and EDX were
used to observe the morphology and verify the composition of the nanoparticles.
Characterization tools such as XPS and XANES helped in exploring and
understanding the catalysts at the atomic level. Existence of different
phases was found in the catalysts with iron mostly in the +3 oxidation
state and nickel primarily in the +2 oxidation state. Electrochemistry
tests (CV, CA, and CP) were performed to assess the activity and stability
of the synthesized catalysts. Fe20Ni80 showed
the best performance with lower overpotential and higher current density,
thus indicating that bimetallic iron–nickel nanoparticles with
iron around 20% and nickel 80% are the most active one. However, the
stability of Fe20Ni80 underperformed compared
to the other two catalysts, Fe50Ni50 and Fe80Ni20. The results of this study indicate that
there is a trend with catalysts containing a lower amount of iron
having greater OER activity. However, stability is also a critical
factor in the design of a catalyst and the nanoparticle with the higher
iron content (Fe80Ni20) was much more stable
compared to the low iron ones (Fe50Ni50 and
Fe20Ni80). Thus, future research into bimetallic
iron–nickel based catalysts should help in a further understanding
of the effects that ratio plays in the electrocatalysis of OER to
ultimately design low-cost and effective OER catalysts.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
Chemicals
were obtained
as ACS grade commercial products and used without further purification
unless specified. Iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate (FeSO4·7H2O), nickel(II) chloride hexahydrate (NiCl2·6H2O), amino tris(methylene phosphonic acid) (ATMP), polyvinylpyrrolidone
(PVP40000), sodium borohydride (NaBH4), potassium
hydroxide (KOH), methanol, concentrated nitric acid (HNO3), and concentrated sulfuric acid (H2SO4) were
purchased from commercial vendors. Ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ·H2O) was obtained from a Milli-Q integral system installed in
the laboratory. Cationic ionomer was obtained from Prof. E. Bryan
Coughlin at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst and used in solution
to make catalyst inks.

4.2 Nanoparticle Synthesis
Fe–Ni
nanoparticles were synthesized under room temperature and atmospheric
pressure conditions. All of the solutions used ultrapure deionized
water as the solvent. Solutions of 29.79 g/L ATMP and 4.982 g/L of
FeSO4·7H2O were mixed at a molar ratio
of 0.05:1 in water and hand-mixed for a short time. The ATMP compound
stabilizes the iron cations in solution. Separately, PVP40000 (molar ratio of Ni/PVP40000 = 1:0.005) and NiCl2·6H2O solutions were hand-mixed together for a short
time. The amount of NiCl2·6H2O added depends
on the molar ratio of Fe and Ni desired. The first mixture of Fe/ATMP
solution, along with the second mixture of Ni/PVP solution, were then
transferred to a 250 mL three-neck borosilicate flask and placed on
an orbital shaker. The solution inside the three-neck flask was mixed
under argon gas for 15 min and at 100 rpm. Argon bubbling of the iron–nickel
solution is performed to prevent the unwanted oxidation of the iron
and nickel precursors and to control oxidation during nanoparticle
formation. At approximately 13 min of argon bubbling, NaBH4 [molar ratio of metal/BH4– = (1:2.2)]
aqueous solution was prepared to minimize the reaction time of NaBH4 with water before adding to the iron–nickel precursor
solution. The aqueous solution of NaBH4 was then added
into the metal precursor solution in the three-neck flask dropwise
via a syringe at a rate of approximately 30 μL/s while hand
mixing the solution. Borohydride ions (BH4–) reduce the stabilized Fe2+ and Ni2+ ions
into Fe0 and Ni0, respectively, forming nanoparticles
during the reduction reaction. The solution in the three-neck flask
was then mixed under vacuum for 15 min on an orbital shaker at 100
rpm. After 15 min of mixing, the solution in the three-neck flask
was transferred to a 50 mL test tube and centrifuged for approximately
3 min. The supernatant from the centrifuged test tube was then decanted.
The nanoparticles remaining in the test tube were mixed with 20 mL
of methanol in a vortex shaker for about 30 s. The test tube containing
the solution was again centrifuged for about 3 min, and the supernatant
was decanted. The nanoparticles were then mixed with 20 mL of methanol
and resuspended. Because the nanoparticles are exposed to water and
air during and after synthesis, respectively, and the nanoparticles
are not kept in a completely anoxide environment, we expect that the
surface of the nanoparticles will oxidize.

4.3 Characterization
Imaging was performed
on an FEI Titan 80-300 transmission electron microscope operating
at 300 kV. The imaging was carried out in TEM mode. The TEM samples
were prepared on TEM grids (Ted Pella Inc Formvar/Carbon 200M Cu)
by diluting the nanoparticles from a concentration of 1–0.01
g/L in methanol, and 2 μL of the diluted nanoparticle solution
was dropped cast on to the grid, and the methanol present in the solution
was allowed to evaporate completely. Analysis of TEM images was done
using Gatan software. EDX was performed with a Nova Nanolab 200.

ICP–MS was performed using IcapQ ICP–MS (Thermo Scientific)
on the Fe–Ni nanoparticles to confirm the stoichiometry in
the as-synthesized materials. Each nanoparticle sample was diluted
to a concentration of 50 ppb in a 2.5% nitric acid matrix. The standard
curves for iron and nickel were generated using commercial ICP standards
(Aristar, BDH) for each metal and diluting standard solutions to concentrations
of 5, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 ppb. A 2.5% nitric acid matrix was used
as the lab blank.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was
performed on a PHI Versaprobe
5000 for each Fe–Ni nanoparticle sample to obtain a detailed
chemical and elemental analysis, and the data analysis was done with
the PHI MultiPack software. A monochromated Al Kα beam, along
with Ar and C-60 cluster ion guns, was used. An initial scan of 0–1400
eV was carried out on the samples. This initial analysis was accompanied
by detailed scans of iron (700–740 eV) and nickel (844–894
eV).

XAS was performed on the Fe–Ni nanoparticles at
a synchrotron
facility in Advanced Photon Source (12-BM-B) which is a user facility
branch of the Argonne National Laboratory. The samples and the standards
tested for XAS were dried and suspended in a solid matrix (Kapton
tape). The measurements were done around the K-edge of Fe (7112 eV)
and K-edge of Ni (8333 eV). Data analysis was done using the software
program Athena.

4.4 Electrochemical Measurements
All
electrochemical experiments were carried out in a conventional cell
at room temperature using a potentiostat (PINE WaveNow 50) in three
stationary electrodes (working electrode, counter electrode, and reference
electrode) system. AfterMath software was used for data collection
purposes. A gold electrode (1.6 mm Au BASi) was used as the working
electrode, 3 M Ag/AgCl was used as the reference electrode of the
cell, and a graphite rod was used as the counter electrode. The electrolyte
solution for all experiments was 1 M KOH. The reference electrode
was placed in a salt bridge consisting of 3 M NaCl solution to avoid
the dissolution of the frit, as well as to prevent the formation of
Ag2O due to contact with KOH solution.

Catalyst inks
were prepared for all three samples by combining the nanoparticles
with a cationic ionomer at a ratio of iron to ionomer of 6:1 in methanol.
The ink was then sonicated for 45 min in a cold-water bath to ensure
a homogeneous mixture of the nanoparticle and the ionomer, and 1 μL
of the ink was then drop-cast on the surface of a clean Au electrode
(surface area of 0.02 cm2), and the methanol was allowed
to dry for 15 min at room temperature. The mass loading onto the electrode
surface was ∼50 μg/cm2. The cleaning procedure
involved the polishing of the electrode surface with alumina solutions
(5, 0.05 μm) on a polishing pad, followed by sonication of the
electrode in deionized (DI) water for 5 min. Next, the gold working
electrode was placed in a three-electrode cell setup consisting of
0.5 M H2SO4 as the electrolyte solution. CV
was carried out in the cell for 50 cycles at 100 mV/s between −0.3
and 1.7 V versus Ag/AgCl. The working electrode was then taken out
and then rinsed with 18.2 MΩ DI water.

All solutions of
the 1 M KOH electrolyte were purified to remove
trace iron impurities by following a procedure developed by Trotochaud
et al.31 In essence, to purify KOH, first,
all the glassware and polypropylene centrifuge tubes that were used
in the procedure were cleaned with 10% sulfuric acid (H2SO4) solution. Then, 2 g of nickel nitrate hexahydrate
[Ni(NO3)2·6H2O] was dissolved
with 4 mL of 18.2 MΩ DI H2O in a tube, and 20 mL
of 1 M KOH was added together and mixed to obtain nickel hydroxide
[Ni(OH)2] as a precipitate. The mixture was then shaken
on a vortex shaker for approximately 1 min and centrifuged. The supernatant
was emptied from the tube, and three more cycles of washing Ni(OH)2 precipitate with 20 mL H2O and 2 mL of 1 M KOH
were employed with each wash cycle followed by re-dispersion, centrifugation,
and supernatant decantation successively. After the 3rd cycle was
completed, 50 mL of the 1 M KOH electrolyte to be purified was added
into the tube and shaken with a vortex shaker for approximately 10
min, and the mixture was allowed to rest for 3 h for iron impurity
removal, after which the solution was centrifuged, and the purified
1 M KOH supernatant was decanted into an H2SO4-cleaned tube.

CV was conducted on the samples in a 3-electrode
setup as described
above. The Fe-free KOH (electrolyte solution) was bubbled with Ar
gas for 30 min before running CVs to remove dissolved O2. During CV experiments, a continuous flow of Ar gas was maintained
in the headspace. CVs were taken between 0 and 0.8 V versus the reference
electrode. Five CV cycles were run with the clean Au electrode, and
15 CV cycles were run with the catalyst deposited on the Au working
electrode. The scan rate was 20 mV/s for all CV experiments. Also,
the measured potential versus Ag/AgCl was converted to potential versus
RHE, ERHE, using the following equation 1  

The measured pH of 1 M KOH was ∼14. EAg/AgCl0 is 0.21
V for the Ag/AgCl reference electrode in 3 M NaCl. The data were then
adjusted for iRu correction, where i is the current and Ru is the
uncompensated resistance. Ru was measured
using potentiostatic electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and the
values for Ru were taken at a frequency
of 100 KHz. iRu values were then subtracted
from the measured potential versus RHE. Overpotential was calculated
by subtracting the theoretical potential for OER, 1.23 V, from the
measured potential versus RHE. Current measurements are reported as
current density (j), where current is normalized
to the geometric surface area of the Au electrode (0.02 cm2). CP and CA were performed on the sample using the same electrochemical
setup as was used to obtain CV data. CP was conducted at a constant
current density of 10 mA/cm2 for 12 h and CA at a constant
potential of 1.6 V versus RHE for 12 h.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b01692.TEM of Fe–Ni
nanoparticles, EDX results of Fe–Ni
nanoparticles, ICP results of Fe–Ni nanoparticles, XPS survey
spectra and detailed compositional results, and XANES and EXAFS spectra
for Fe–Ni nanoparticles and relevant standards (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b01692_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
L.F.G., P.A., J.C., and R.H.M. acknowledge support
from the National Science Foundation, Award Number 1703827. L.F.G.
and P.A. acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation,
Award Number 1738165. S.I.P.B. and L.F.G. acknowledge support from
the Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences Catalysis Program,
Award # DE-SC0016529. S.I.P.B. contributed his expertise on XPS analysis
for this paper. M.A. acknowledges support from the National Institute
of Standards and Technology Phase II SBIR program and industrial collaborator
AxNano, LLC through award # 100937. We thank 12BM-B at the Advanced
Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory which is supported by
the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic
Energy Sciences, Scientific User Facilities Division, under the contract
no. DE-AC02-06CH11357.
==== Refs
References
Hoffert M. I. ; Caldeira K. ; Benford G. ; Criswell D. R. ; Green C. ; Herzog H. ; Jain A. K. ; Kheshgi H. S. ; Lackner K. S. ; Lewis J. S. ; Lightfoot H. D. ; Manheimer W. ; Mankins J. C. ; Mauel M. E. ; Perkins L. J. ; Schlesinger M. E. ; Volk T. ; Wigley T. M. 
Advanced technology
paths to global
climate stability: energy for a greenhouse planet . Science 
2002 , 298 , 981 –987 . 10.1126/science.1072357 .12411695 
Hoel M. ; Kverndokk S. 
Depletion
of fossil fuels and the impacts of global
warming . Resour. Energy Econ. 
1996 , 18 , 115 –136 . 10.1016/0928-7655(96)00005-x .
Andres R. J. ; Boden T. A. ; Marland G.  Annual Fossil-Fuel CO2 Emissions: Isomass of Emissions Gridded by One Degree Latitude
by One Degree Longitude ; Carbon Dioxide Information
Analysis Center (CDIAC); Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) : Oak Ridge, TN (USA) , 2016 .
Steinberg M. 
Fossil fuel
decarbonization technology for mitigating global warming . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
1999 , 24 , 771 –777 . 10.1016/s0360-3199(98)00128-1 .
Wang D. ; Zhou J. ; Hu Y. ; Yang J. ; Han N. ; Li Y. ; Sham T. K. 
In situ
x-ray absorption near-edge structure study
of advanced NiFe(OH)x electrocatalyst on carbon paper for
water oxidation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 19573 –19583 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b02685 .
Walter M. G. ; Warren E. L. ; McKone J. R. ; Boettcher S. W. ; Mi Q. ; Santori E. A. ; Lewis N. S. 
Solar water splitting cells . Chem. Rev. 
2010 , 110 , 6446 –6473 . 10.1021/cr1002326 .21062097 
Pletcher D. ; Li X. 
Prospects for alkaline
zero gap water electrolysers for hydrogen
production . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2011 , 36 , 15089 –15104 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.08.080 .
Swierk J. R. ; Klaus S. ; Trotochaud L. ; Bell A. T. ; Tilley T. D. 
Electrochemical
study of the energetics of the oxygen evolution reaction at nickel
iron (oxy) hydroxide catalysts . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2015 , 119 , 19022 –19029 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b05861 .
Gong M. ; Dai H. 
A mini review of NiFe-based
materials as highly active oxygen evolution
reaction electrocatalysts . Nano Res. 
2015 , 8 , 23 –39 . 10.1007/s12274-014-0591-z .
Hong W. T. ; Risch M. ; Stoerzinger K. A. ; Grimaud A. ; Suntivich J. ; Shao-Horn Y. 
Toward the
rational design of non-precious transition
metal oxides for oxygen electrocatalysis . Energy
Environ. Sci. 
2015 , 8 , 1404 –1427 . 10.1039/c4ee03869j .
Morales-Guio C. G. ; Mayer M. T. ; Yella A. ; Tilley S. D. ; Grätzel M. ; Hu X. 
An optically transparent
iron nickel oxide catalyst for solar water
splitting . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 9927 –9936 . 10.1021/jacs.5b05544 .26200221 
Gao Y. ; Li H. ; Yang G. 
Amorphous nickel hydroxide nanosheets with ultrahigh
activity and super-long-term cycle stability as advanced water oxidation
catalysts . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2015 , 15 , 4475 –4483 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b00752 .
Fang W. ; Liu D. ; Lu Q. ; Sun X. ; Asiri A. M. 
Nickel promoted
cobalt disulfide nanowire array supported on carbon cloth: an efficient
and stable bifunctional electrocatalyst for full water splitting . Electrochem. Commun. 
2016 , 63 , 60 –64 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2015.10.010 .
Jin H. ; Wang J. ; Su D. ; Wei Z. ; Pang Z. ; Wang Y. 
In situ cobalt–cobalt oxide/N-doped
carbon hybrids as superior
bifunctional electrocatalysts for hydrogen and oxygen evolution . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 2688 –2694 . 10.1021/ja5127165 .25658518 
Kanan M. W. ; Nocera D. G. 
In situ formation
of an oxygen-evolving catalyst in
neutral water containing phosphate and Co2+ . Science 
2008 , 321 , 1072 –1075 . 10.1126/science.1162018 .18669820 
Concepcion J. J. ; Jurss J. W. ; Brennaman M. K. ; Hoertz P. G. ; Patrocinio A. O. T. ; Murakami Iha N. Y. ; Templeton J. L. ; Meyer T. J. 
Making oxygen with ruthenium complexes . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2009 , 42 , 1954 –1965 . 10.1021/ar9001526 .19817345 
Yang Y. ; Zhou M. ; Guo W. ; Cui X. ; Li Y. ; Liu F. ; Xiao P. ; Zhang Y. 
NiCoO2 nanowires grown
on carbon fiber paper for highly efficient water oxidation . Electrochim. Acta 
2015 , 174 , 246 –253 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2015.05.159 .
Lee Y. ; Suntivich J. ; May K. J. ; Perry E. E. ; Shao-Horn Y. 
Synthesis
and activities of rutile IrO2 and RuO2 nanoparticles
for oxygen evolution in acid and alkaline solutions . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2012 , 3 , 399 –404 . 10.1021/jz2016507 .26285858 
Zhu X. ; Tang C. ; Wang H.-F. ; Zhang Q. ; Yang C. ; Wei F. 
Dual-sized NiFe layered
double hydroxides in situ grown on oxygen-decorated
self-dispersal nanocarbon as enhanced water oxidation catalysts . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 24540 –24546 . 10.1039/c5ta08019c .
Burke M. S. ; Kast M. G. ; Trotochaud L. ; Smith A. M. ; Boettcher S. W. 
Cobalt-Iron
(Oxy)hydroxide Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysts: The Role of Structure
and Composition on Activity, Stability, and Mechanism . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 3638 –3648 . 10.1021/jacs.5b00281 .25700234 
Tang C. ; Wang H.-F. ; Wang H.-S. ; Wei F. ; Zhang Q. 
Guest-host
modulation of multi-metallic (oxy)hydroxides for superb water oxidation . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016 , 4 , 3210 –3216 . 10.1039/c6ta00328a .
Merrill M.
D. ; Dougherty R. C. 
Metal oxide
catalysts for the evolution of O2 from H2O . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008 , 112 , 3655 –3666 . 10.1021/jp710675m .
Bates M. K. ; Jia Q. ; Doan H. ; Liang W. ; Mukerjee S. 
Charge-Transfer Effects
in Ni-Fe and Ni-Fe-Co Mixed-Metal Oxides for the Alkaline Oxygen Evolution
Reaction . ACS Catal. 
2015 , 6 , 155 –161 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b01481 .
Trotochaud L. ; Boettcher S. W. 
Precise oxygen evolution catalysts:
Status and opportunities . Scr. Mater. 
2014 , 74 , 25 –32 . 10.1016/j.scriptamat.2013.07.019 .
Klaus S. ; Louie M. W. ; Trotochaud L. ; Bell A. T. 
Role of catalyst
preparation on the electrocatalytic activity of Ni1–xFe xOOH for the oxygen evolution reaction . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 18303 –18316 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b04776 .
Corrigan D. A. 
The catalysis
of the oxygen evolution reaction by iron impurities in thin film nickel
oxide electrodes . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1987 , 134 , 377 –384 . 10.1149/1.2100463 .
Shinagawa T. ; Garcia-Esparza A. T. ; Takanabe K. 
Insight on Tafel slopes from a microkinetic
analysis of aqueous electrocatalysis for energy conversion . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 13801 10.1038/srep13801 .26348156 
Friebel D. ; Louie M. W. ; Bajdich M. ; Sanwald K. E. ; Cai Y. ; Wise A. M. ; Cheng M.-J. ; Sokaras D. ; Weng T.-C. ; Alonso-Mori R. ; Davis R. C. ; Bargar J. R. ; Nørskov J. K. ; Nilsson A. ; Bell A. T. 
Identification of Highly Active Fe
Sites in (Ni,Fe)OOH for Electrocatalytic Water Splitting . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 1305 –1313 . 10.1021/ja511559d .25562406 
Stevens M.
B. ; Trang C. D. M. ; Enman L. J. ; Deng J. ; Boettcher S. W. 
Reactive
Fe-Sites in Ni/Fe (Oxy)hydroxide Are Responsible for Exceptional Oxygen
Electrocatalysis Activity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 11361 –11364 . 10.1021/jacs.7b07117 .28789520 
Louie M. W. ; Bell A. T. 
An Investigation of Thin-Film Ni-Fe
Oxide Catalysts
for the Electrochemical Evolution of Oxygen . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 12329 –12337 . 10.1021/ja405351s .23859025 
Trotochaud L. ; Young S. L. ; Ranney J. K. ; Boettcher S. W. 
Nickel-Iron
Oxyhydroxide Oxygen-Evolution Electrocatalysts: The Role of Intentional
and Incidental Iron Incorporation . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 6744 –6753 . 10.1021/ja502379c .24779732 
Steimecke M. ; Seiffarth G. ; Bron M. 
In situ characterization of Ni and
Ni/Fe thin film electrodes for oxygen evolution in alkaline media
by a Raman-coupled scanning electrochemical microscope setup . Anal. Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 10679 –10686 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b01060 .28933151 
Fidelsky V. ; Toroker M. C. 
The secret behind
the success of doping nickel oxyhydroxide
with iron . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 19 , 7491 –7497 . 10.1039/c6cp08590c .28197563 
Elbaz Y. ; Caspary Toroker M. 
Dual mechanisms: Hydrogen transfer during water oxidation
catalysis of pure and Fe-doped nickel oxyhydroxide . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 16819 –16824 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b04142 .
Doyle A. D. ; Bajdich M. ; Vojvodic A. 
Theoretical insights to bulk activity
towards oxygen evolution in oxyhydroxides . Catal.
Lett. 
2017 , 147 , 1533 –1539 . 10.1007/s10562-017-2010-z .
Shin H. ; Xiao H. ; Goddard W. A. 
In silico
discovery of new dopants
for Fe-doped Ni oxyhydroxide (Ni1-xFexOOH) catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2018 , 140 , 6745 –6748 . 10.1021/jacs.8b02225 .29749225 
Burke M. S. ; Enman L. J. ; Batchellor A. S. ; Zou S. ; Boettcher S. W. 
Oxygen
Evolution Reaction Electrocatalysis on Transition Metal Oxides and
(Oxy)hydroxides: Activity Trends and Design Principles . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 7549 –7558 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b03148 .
Görlin M. ; Chernev P. ; Ferreira
de Araújo J. ; Reier T. ; Dresp S. ; Paul B. ; Krähnert R. ; Dau H. ; Strasser P. 
Oxygen evolution reaction
dynamics, faradaic charge
efficiency, and the active metal redox states of Ni–Fe oxide
water splitting electrocatalysts . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2016 , 138 , 5603 –5614 . 10.1021/jacs.6b00332 .27031737 
Liu Z. ; Yu H. ; Dong B. ; Yu X. ; Feng L. 
Electrochemical oxygen
evolution reaction efficiently boosted by thermal-driving core-shell
structure formation in nanostructured FeNi/S, N-doped carbon hybrid
catalyst . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 16911 –16918 . 10.1039/c8nr05587d .30178814 
Liu Z. ; Yu X. ; Yu H. ; Xue H. ; Feng L. 
Nanostructured FeNi3 incorporated with carbon doped with multiple nonmetal elements
for the oxygen evolution reaction . ChemSusChem 
2018 , 11 , 2703 –2709 . 10.1002/cssc.201801250 .29892992 
Meng H. ; Ren Z. ; Du S. ; Wu J. ; Yang X. ; Xue Y. ; Fu H. 
Engineering a stereo-film
of FeNi3 nanosheet-covered FeOOH
arrays for efficient oxygen evolution . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 10971 –10978 . 10.1039/c8nr02770f .29855010 
Du Y. ; Han Y. ; Huai X. ; Liu Y. ; Wu C. ; Yang Y. ; Wang L. 
N-doped carbon coated FeNiP nanoparticles based hollow microboxes
for overall water splitting in alkaline medium . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2018 , 43 , 22226 –22234 . 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.10.091 .
Li M. ; Li H. ; Xu T. ; Nie Y. 
Synthesis, characterization and electromagnetic
properties of SnO-coated FeNi alloy nanocapsules . Mater. Res. 
2016 , 19 , 1393 –1398 . 10.1590/1980-5373-mr-2015-0718 .
Ding X. ; Huang Y. ; Wang J. 
Synthesis
of FeNi3 nanocrystals
encapsulated in carbon nanospheres/reduced graphene oxide as a light
weight electromagnetic wave absorbent . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 64878 –64885 . 10.1039/c5ra12098e .
Xia Z. ; He J. ; Ou X. ; He S. ; Zhao D. ; Yu G. 
Influence
of electric field on the microstructures and magnetic softness of
FeNi nanoparticle films . Appl. Phys. A 
2016 , 122 , 860 10.1007/s00339-016-0383-2 .
Greenlee L. F. ; Rentz N. S. 
ATMP-stabilized iron nanoparticles:
chelator-controlled
nanoparticle synthesis . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2014 , 16 , 2712 10.1007/s11051-014-2712-8 .
Gilbert J. B. ; Rubner M. F. ; Cohen R. E. 
Depth-profiling
X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of interlayer diffusion in polyelectrolyte
multilayers . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2013 , 110 , 6651 –6656 . 10.1073/pnas.1222325110 .23569265 
Candelaria S. L. ; Bedford N. M. ; Woehl T. J. ; Rentz N. S. ; Showalter A. R. ; Pylypenko S. ; Bunker B. A. ; Lee S. ; Reinhart B. ; Ren Y. ; Ertem S. P. ; Coughlin E. B. ; Sather N. A. ; Horan J. L. ; Herring A. M. ; Greenlee L. F. 
Multi-Component
Fe-Ni Hydroxide Nanocatalyst
for Oxygen Evolution and Methanol Oxidation Reactions under Alkaline
Conditions . ACS Catal. 
2016 , 7 , 365 –379 . 10.1021/acscatal.6b02552 .
Grosvenor A. P. ; Kobe B. A. ; Biesinger M. C. ; McIntyre N. S. 
Investigation of
multiplet splitting of Fe 2p XPS spectra and bonding in iron compounds . Surf. Interface Anal. 
2004 , 36 , 1564 –1574 . 10.1002/sia.1984 .
McIntyre N.
S. ; Zetaruk D. G. 
X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopic studies of iron oxides . Anal.
Chem. 
1977 , 49 , 1521 –1529 . 10.1021/ac50019a016 .
Temesghen W. ; Sherwood P. 
Analytical utility
of valence band X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy of iron and its oxides, with spectral interpretation
by cluster and band structure calculations . Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2002 , 373 , 601 –608 . 10.1007/s00216-002-1362-3 .12185571 
Grosvenor A. P. ; Biesinger M. C. ; Smart R. S. C. ; McIntyre N. S. 
New interpretations
of XPS spectra of nickel metal and oxides . Surf.
Sci. 
2006 , 600 , 1771 –1779 . 10.1016/j.susc.2006.01.041 .
Biesinger M. C. ; Payne B. P. ; Lau L. W. M. ; Gerson A. ; Smart R. S. C. 
X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopic chemical state quantification of mixed
nickel metal, oxide and hydroxide systems . Surf.
Interface Anal. 
2009 , 41 , 324 –332 . 10.1002/sia.3026 .
Balasubramanian C. ; Joseph B. ; Gupta P. ; Saini N. L. ; Mukherjee S. ; Di Gioacchino D. ; Marcelli A. 
X-ray absorption spectroscopy characterization
of iron-oxide nanoparticles synthesized by high temperature plasma
processing . J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 
2014 , 196 , 125 –129 . 10.1016/j.elspec.2014.02.011 .
Manceau A. ; Gates W. P. 
Surface structural
model for ferrihydrite . Clays Clay Miner. 
1997 , 45 , 448 –460 . 10.1346/ccmn.1997.0450314 .
Berry A. J. ; O’Neill H. S. C. ; Jayasuriya K. D. ; Campbell S. J. ; Foran G. J. 
XANES calibrations
for the oxidation state of iron in a silicate glass . Am. Mineral. 
2003 , 88 , 967 –977 . 10.2138/am-2003-0704 .
Kim S. ; Tryk D. A. ; Antonio M. R. ; Carr R. ; Scherson D. 
In situ X-ray
absorption fine structure studies of foreign metal ions in nickel
hydrous oxide electrodes in alkaline electrolytes . J. Phys. Chem. 
1994 , 98 , 10269 –10276 . 10.1021/j100091a049 .
Wang W. ; Ding Z. ; Zhao X. ; Wu S. ; Li F. ; Yue M. ; Liu J. P. 
Microstructure and magnetic properties of MFe2O4 (M= Co, Ni, and Mn) ferrite nanocrystals prepared using
colloid mill and hydrothermal method . J. Appl.
Phys. 
2015 , 117 , 17A328 10.1063/1.4917463 .
Boubnov A. ; Lichtenberg H. ; Mangold S. ; Grunwaldt J.-D. 
Identification
of the iron oxidation state and coordination geometry in iron oxide-
and zeolite-based catalysts using pre-edge XAS analysis . J. Synchrotron Radiat. 
2015 , 22 , 410 –426 . 10.1107/s1600577514025880 .25723943 
McKeehan L. W. 
The Crystal
Structure of Iron-Nickel Alloys . Phys. Rev. 
1923 , 21 , 402 10.1103/physrev.21.402 .
Jeevanandam P. ; Koltypin Y. ; Gedanken A. 
Synthesis of Nanosized α-Nickel
Hydroxide by a Sonochemical Method . Nano Lett. 
2001 , 1 , 263 –266 . 10.1021/nl010003p .
Hall D. S. ; Lockwood D. J. ; Bock C. ; MacDougall B. R. 
Nickel
hydroxides and related materials: a review of their structures, synthesis
and properties . Proc. R. Soc. A 
2015 , 471 , 20140792 10.1098/rspa.2014.0792 .25663812 
McBreen J. ; O’Grady W. E. ; Tourillon G. ; Dartyge E. ; Fontaine A. ; Pandya K. I. 
In situ time-resolved x-ray absorption near edge structure
study of the nickel oxide electrode . J. Phys.
Chem. 
1989 , 93 , 6308 –6311 . 10.1021/j100354a010 .
Mansour A. N. ; Melendres C. A. ; Pankuch M. ; Brizzolara R. A. 
X-Ray absorption
fine structure spectra and the oxidation state of nickel in some of
its oxycompounds . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1994 , 141 , L69 –L71 . 10.1149/1.2054990 .
Motori A. ; Sandrolini F. ; Davolio G. 
Electrical properties of nickel hydroxide
for alkaline cell systems . J. Power Sources 
1994 , 48 , 361 –370 . 10.1016/0378-7753(94)80032-4 .
Cheng C. 
Enhanced magnetization
and conductive phase in NiFe2O4 . J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 
2013 , 325 , 144 –146 . 10.1016/j.jmmm.2012.07.020 .
Bediako D. K. ; Lassalle-Kaiser B. ; Surendranath Y. ; Yano J. ; Yachandra V. K. ; Nocera D. G. 
Structure-Activity Correlations in a Nickel-Borate
Oxygen Evolution Catalyst . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012 , 134 , 6801 –6809 . 10.1021/ja301018q .22417283 
Pandya K. I. ; Hoffman R. W. ; McBreen J. ; O’Grady W. E. 
In Situ
X-Ray Absorption Spectroscopic Studies of Nickel Oxide Electrodes . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1990 , 137 , 383 –388 . 10.1149/1.2086450 .
Speck F. D. ; Dettelbach K. E. ; Sherbo R. S. ; Salvatore D. A. ; Huang A. ; Berlinguette C. P. 
On the
electrolytic stability of
iron-nickel oxides . Chem 
2017 , 2 , 590 –597 . 10.1016/j.chempr.2017.03.006 .
Acharya P. ; Burrow J. ; Abolhassani M. ; Greenlee L. F. 
Role of Surface
Area on the Performance of Iron Nickel Nanoparticles for the Oxygen
Evolution Reaction (OER) . ECS Trans. 
2018 , 85 , 81 –89 . 10.1149/08511.0081ecst .
Lu Z. ; Xu W. ; Zhu W. ; Yang Q. ; Lei X. ; Liu J. ; Li Y. ; Sun X. ; Duan X. 
Three-dimensional NiFe
layered double
hydroxide film for high-efficiency oxygen evolution reaction . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 6479 –6482 . 10.1039/c4cc01625d .
Hu C.-C. ; Wu Y.-R. 
Bipolar performance
of the electroplated iron-nickel deposits for
water electrolysis . Mater. Chem. Phys. 
2003 , 82 , 588 –596 . 10.1016/s0254-0584(03)00316-x .
Li X. ; Walsh F. C. ; Pletcher D. 
Nickel based
electrocatalysts for
oxygen evolution in high current density, alkaline water electrolysers . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2011 , 13 , 1162 –1167 . 10.1039/c0cp00993h .21076764 
Görlin M. ; Ferreira
de Araújo J. ; Schmies H. ; Bernsmeier D. ; Dresp S. ; Gliech M. ; Jusys Z. ; Chernev P. ; Kraehnert R. ; Dau H. 
Tracking catalyst redox states and
reaction dynamics in Ni–Fe oxyhydroxide oxygen evolution reaction
electrocatalysts: The role of catalyst support and electrolyte pH . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 2070 –2082 . 10.1021/jacs.6b12250 .28080038 
Castro E. ; Gervasi C. A. 
Electrodeposited Ni-Co-oxide electrodes:characterization
and kinetics of the oxygen evolution reaction . Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 
2000 , 25 , 1163 –1170 . 10.1016/s0360-3199(00)00033-1 .
Doyle R. L. ; Lyons M. E. G.  The oxygen
evolution reaction: mechanistic concepts and catalyst design . In Photoelectrochemical Solar Fuel Production ; Giménez S. , Bisquert J.  , Eds.; Springer : Switzerland , 2016 ; pp 41 –104 .
Marshall A. T. ; Vaisson-Béthune L. 
Avoid the
quasi-equilibrium assumption
when evaluating the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction mechanism
by Tafel slope analysis . Electrochem. Commun. 
2015 , 61 , 23 –26 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2015.09.019 .
Lyons M. E. G. ; Brandon M. P. 
A comparative study
of the oxygen evolution reaction
on oxidised nickel, cobalt and iron electrodes in base . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2010 , 641 , 119 –130 . 10.1016/j.jelechem.2009.11.024 .
Singh R. ; Pandey J. ; Anitha K. 
Preparation
of electrodeposited thin
films of nickel-iron alloys on mild steel for alkaline water electrolysis.
Part I: Studies on oxygen evolution . Int. J.
Hydrogen Energy 
1993 , 18 , 467 –473 . 10.1016/0360-3199(93)90002-r .

