
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02861ArticleA “One-Pot”
Route for the Synthesis
of Snowflake-like Dendritic CoNi Alloy-Reduced Graphene Oxide-Based
Multifunctional Nanocomposites: An Efficient Magnetically Separable
Versatile Catalyst and Electrode Material for High-Performance Supercapacitors Makkar Priyanka †Chandel Madhurya †Patra Manoj Kumar ‡Ghosh Narendra Nath *†† Nano-materials
Lab, Department of Chemistry, Birla Institute
of Technology and Science, Pilani K K Birla Goa Campus, Zuarinagar, Goa 403726, India‡ Defence
Lab, Jodhpur 342011, India* E-mail: naren70@yahoo.com. Tel./Fax: +91 832 2580318/2557033.25 11 2019 10 12 2019 4 24 20672 20689 04 09 2019 14 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In this paper, a simple “one pot” methodology
to
synthesize snowflake-like dendritic CoNi alloy-reduced graphene oxide
(RGO) nanocomposites has been reported. First-principles quantum mechanical
calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) have been conducted
to understand the electronic structures and properties of the interface
between Co, Ni, and graphene. Detailed investigations have been conducted
to evaluate the performance of CoNi alloy and CoNi-RGO nanocomposites
for two different types of applications: (i) as the catalyst for the
reduction reaction of 4-nitrophenol and Knoevenagel condensation reaction
and (ii) as the active electrode material in the supercapacitor applications.
Here, the influence of microstructures of CoNi alloy particles (spherical
vs snowflake-like dendritic) and the effect of immobilization of CoNi
alloy on the surface of RGO on the performance of CoNi-RGO nanocomposites
have been demonstrated. CoNi alloy having a snowflake-like dendritic
microstructure exhibited better performance than that of spherical
CoNi alloy, and CoNi-RGO nanocomposites showed improved properties
compared to CoNi alloy. The kapp value
of the (CoNiD)60RGO40-catalyzed reduction
reaction of 4-nitrophenol is 20.55 × 10–3 s–1, which is comparable and, in some cases, superior
to many RGO-based catalysts. The (CoNiD)60RGO40-catalyzed Knoevenagel condensation reaction showed the %
yield of the products in the range of 80–93%. (CoNiD)60RGO40 showed a specific capacitance of 501
F g–1 (at 6 A g–1), 21.08 Wh kg–1 energy density at a power density of 1650 W kg–1, and a retention of ∼85% of capacitance after
4000 cycles. These results indicate that (CoNiD)60RGO40 could be considered as a promising electrode material
for high-performance supercapacitors. The synergistic effect, derived
from the hierarchical structure of CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites,
is the origin for its superior performance. The easy synthetic methodology,
high catalytic efficiency, and excellent supercapacitance performance
make (CoNiD)60RGO40 an appealing
multifunctional material.

document-id-old-9ao9b02861document-id-new-14ao9b02861ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Bimetallic nanoparticles
have gained immense attraction from the
researchers because of their plethora of applications in diverse fields
such as catalysis, optical, magnetic, biomedical, magnetic devices,
etc.1 In many cases, the physicochemical
properties of the bimetallic alloys, particularly in their nanostructure
form, are superior to those of the constituent metals. The alteration
of the electronic structures of the metals, which occurs due to their
alloy formation, is responsible for the improvement of the properties
of the alloys.1

Though compared to
bulk materials, nanostructured materials exhibit
exotic properties and superior performance in many applications (e.g.,
catalysis, magnetic, electrical, optical, etc.), but the agglomeration
of nanoparticles due to their high surface energy quite often poses
a major challenge. To overcome this limitation, the immobilization
of the nanoparticles on a suitable support appeared as an attractive
strategy. For the past couple of years, graphene or reduced graphene
oxide (RGO) has attracted the attention of the scientists as an interesting
support material for immobilization of a variety of nanoparticles
for different applications.2,3 The unique properties
of graphene, such as large specific surface area (∼2600 m2 g–1),4,5 chemical stability,
mechanical flexibility with Young’s modulus (∼1 TP),6 high adsorption capacity of different ions on
its surface, etc., make it a very promising support material and broaden
the horizons of applications of graphene-based nanocomposites. The
additional advantage that graphene offers as a support matrix is that
it possesses high electrical conductivity and its π electrons
affect the electronic structure of the nanoparticles, which are immobilized
on its surface and in turn influence their properties.

Our current
work deals with the catalytic and electrochemical properties
of CoNi alloy and CoNi-reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites. CoNi
alloy is an important transition metal alloy system that has been
widely used for catalysis, magnetic devices, microwave absorption,
etc.7 It has already been reported that
CoNi alloy exhibit a superior catalytic and electrochemical property
to the monometallic counterpart.8 The CoNi
alloy system exhibits richer faradic redox reactions, higher electrical
conductivity, stability, and enhanced electrochemical performance
due to the synergistic effect arising from the intimate coexistence
of Ni and Co in the alloy.8,9 The electrochemical
performances of various types of CoNi-based systems (such as CoNi
oxides, CoNi hydroxides, NiCo chalcogenides, CoNi phosphides, etc.)
have been reported by several researchers where the improved electrochemical
properties of the bimetallic systems have been demonstrated.9−13

Several synthetic methodologies, such as electrodeposition,
hydro/solvothermal,
sol–gel, spray pyrolysis, polyol process, microemulsion, mechanical
alloying, etc., have been reported by several researchers for the
preparation of CoNi alloy with different microstructures (e.g., Ni49Co51 sphere, NiCo dumbbells, Ni70Co30 nanorings, NiCo nanochains, NiCo nanowire, handkerchief-like
Ni82Co18, CoNi nanoneedle, Ni19Co81 nanotube array, etc.).14 Wu et
al.14 have reported a solution-phase reduction
method to prepare NiCo alloy having a dendritic structure. They have
shown that the presence of sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate resulted
in the formation of flower-like microstructures, whereas cetyltrimethylammonium
bromide produced dendritic Ni33.8Co66.2 alloy.14 Rashid et al. have synthesized chain-like CoNi
nanostructures by employing a polymer-assisted methodology, where
poly(vinyl methyl ether) was used.1

Here, we report the synthesis of CoNi alloy particles with a snowflake-like
dendritic structure and the nanocomposites (CoNi-RGO), where the surface
of the nanometer-thin RGO sheets are decorated with these CoNi alloy
nanoparticles. We have evaluated the performance of these materials
as the catalyst for two important reactions: (i) reduction of 4-nitrophenol
to 4-aminophenol in the presence of NaBH4 and (ii) Knoevenagel
condensation reaction between an aromatic aldehyde and ethyl cyanoacetate.
We have also studied the electrochemical properties of these materials
to explore the possibility of the use of these materials as an electrode
material for high-performance supercapacitor applications. We have
chosen to investigate the abovementioned applications of the synthesized
CoNi-RGO nanocomposites for the following reasons:(i) Reduction of 4-nitrophenol reaction:
The reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) in the
presence of an excess of NaBH4 in an aqueous medium was
chosen as a model reaction because this is simple and trustworthy,
can easily monitor the reaction, and yields a single product. This
reaction has been extensively used by the researchers across the globe
to evaluate the catalytic property of the nanostructured catalysts
developed by them.15,16 Moreover, nitrophenols and their
derivatives are used/produced during the commercial production of
a variety of chemicals (e.g., synthetic dyes, herbicides, insecticides,
pesticides, etc.), and 4-NP is used in numerous industries such as
pharmaceutical, textile, leather, steel manufacturing, refinery, etc.
The effluents from these industries contain a considerable amount
of 4-NP, which causes water pollution due to its toxicity. It has
detrimental effects on the central nervous system, kidney, liver,
and blood for both humans and animals.17 On the other hand, 4-AP, which is produced from the reduction of
4-NP, is a useful chemical for polymer, pharmaceutical, herbicide,
etc., production industries.15,16,18 Several types of nanocatalysts, including noble metals, coinage
metals, and catalysts where various metal nanoparticles are supported
on solid supports (e.g., silica, alumina, polymer, dendrimer, etc.),
graphene/RGO-supported catalysts, magnetic nanoparticle (such as ferrites)-based
nanocomposites, etc., have been reported for the reduction reaction
of 4-NP in the presence of excess of NaBH4.19,20 In Table S1, several nanocatalysts (including
Co, Ni, and CoNi alloy catalysts), which were reported for the reduction
of 4-NP in an aqueous medium in the presence of excess NaBH4, and the associated rate constants for the catalysis reaction are
listed.

(ii) Knoevenagel
condensation reaction:
Knoevenagel condensation reaction is one of the important and widely
used carbon–carbon bond-forming reactions. This reaction involves
the condensation between a carbonyl compound and a compound having
an active methylene group containing one or two electron-withdrawing
groups (such as nitrile, acyl, and nitro). This reaction is extensively
used for the commercial production of many cosmetics, perfumes, coumarin
derivatives, fine chemicals, pharmaceutical chemicals, etc.21 Traditionally, this reaction is performed in
the presence of different bases (e.g., ammonia, ethylenediamine, piperidine,
etc.) and their salts.22 However, quite
often, the use of homogeneous catalysts causes the problem in the
purification of the product and demands tedious workup procedures.23 Therefore, some heterogeneous catalysts like
Al2O3,24 zeolite,25 ionic liquids,26 metal–organic
frameworks, metal ion-based coordination polymers, mesoporous silica-based
catalysts, etc., have been developed for the Knoevenagel condensation
reaction.27 However, some of the disadvantages
often experienced during the use of these catalysts are the harsh
reaction conditions, low yield of the product, need of toxic/expensive
organic solvents, low reusability of the catalysts, etc. Examples
of some of the metal nanoparticle-based catalysts, which have been
reported for the Knoevenagel reaction are Fe powder, Cu powder, Co
powder, C/Co, C/Fe, Ag powder, Au powder, Ni nanoparticles, etc.22,23 As nanosized catalysts are difficult to separate from the reaction
mixture, development of magnetically separable catalysts has been
adopted by several researchers as a promising strategy. NiFe2O421 and CoFe2O428 nanoparticles have been reported
as magnetically separable catalysts for the Knoevenagel reaction.

(iii) Supercapacitor: Supercapacitors
are of immense interest due to their applications in varieties of
energy storage and conversion systems, such as electric vehicles,
uninterruptible power supplies, laptop, solid-state devices, mobile
phones, load leveling, intermittent wind, solar energy systems, etc.29 The use of supercapacitors in the emergency
doors of an Airbus A380 is one of many of its commercial applications.
In the supercapacitors, the charging or discharging process generally
takes place in seconds. Though supercapacitors possess a lower energy
density (∼5 Wh kg–1) than batteries, they
can provide higher power density (∼10 kW kg–1) for shorter times.30 Electrical double
layer (EDL) electrodes and pseudocapacitor electrodes are the two
major classes of supercapacitors based on their different charge storage
mechanisms. In EDL electrodes, which are mostly carbon-based materials,
energy storage occurs via fast ion adsorption on the electrode surface.
As this process is highly dependent on the available surface area
of the active electrode materials, porous carbon and graphene-based
electrodes exhibit high power density and long shelf life but low
energy density.31 Fast redox reactions
at the electrode/electrolyte interface are the origin of the high
capacitance of pseudocapacitor electrodes. Several metals oxides,
conducting polymers, etc., have been reported as electrode materials
to construct pseudocapacitor electrodes.32,33 However, one of the limitations associated with pseudocapacitor
electrodes is their poor cycling performance, which might be due to
the structural instability of electrode materials in the reaction
process.34 To achieve a supercapacitor
with high capacitor performance, design of composites, composed of
carbon-based materials and redox-active materials, is an attractive
strategy, where the advantages of EDLCs and pseudocapacitor electrodes
can be exploited at the same time.29,30 Several scientists
have explored a variety of graphene-based nanocomposites, transition
metal (e.g, Fe, Co, and Ni)-based metal–organic framework materials,
and silica-based composites for energy storage applications (such
as supercapacitors, an electrode for Li-ion battery, etc.).35−40



In this paper, we report a “one pot” method
to prepare
nanocomposites, which are composed of varying amounts of snowflake-like
dendritic CoNi alloy particles and RGO. To understand the electronic
structures of CoNi alloy and Co-Ni-graphene superlattice, first-principles
quantum mechanical calculations based on density functional theory
(DFT) have been performed. We have evaluated the performance of CoNi
alloy and CoNi-RGO nanocomposites for two different types of applications:
(i) as the catalyst for the reduction reaction of 4-nitrophenol and
Knoevenagel condensation reaction and (ii) as the active electrode
material in the supercapacitor applications. The influence of microstructures
of CoNi alloy particles (spherical vs snowflake-like dendritic) and
the effect of immobilization of CoNi alloy on the surface of RGO on
the catalytic and supercapacitive properties have been investigated
in detail. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that
the demonstration of the multifunctional nature of CoNi-RGO nanocomposites
by showing its application as a catalyst for two different types of
reactions and as an active electrode material for supercapacitors
and the determination of its electronic structures and electronic
properties by a DFT study have been reported.

2 Result and Discussion
2.1 Formation of the Materials and Their Characterizations
Two wet chemical methods were used to prepare CoNi alloy particles.
In both of these synthesis methodologies (Method-I and Method-II),
CoNi alloy particles were formed due to the reduction of Co2+ and Ni2+ in alkaline medium. In Method-I, ethylene glycol
and N2H4 acted as the reducing agents. The reduction
of Co2+ and Ni2+ by ethylene glycol and N2H441,42 can be presented by the reactions
given below (reaction 1–4) 1   2   3   4  where M2+ = Co2+, Ni2+ .

Pure Co and Ni nanoparticles were
also synthesized by employing Method-I and Method-II. Field emission
scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) micrographs of the synthesized
materials are illustrated in Figure 1. Figure 1a shows the nanometer-thin RGO sheets, and the X-ray diffraction
(XRD) of pure RGO is shown in Figure S1.43Figure 1b reveals that the pure Ni particles (NiS), which were obtained from Method-I, are spherical in nature and
the diameter of the spheres lies in the range of 80–100 nm. Figure S1 shows the XRD pattern of NiS. Figure 1c shows
that the pure Co particles, which were synthesized by Method-II, possess
a dendritic microstructure (CoD). The XRD pattern of CoD is presented in Figure S1. The
FESEM micrograph (Figure 1d) of the CoNiS particles (prepared by Method-I)
shows their spherical nature, and the diameter of the spheres is in
the range of 230–500 nm. EDS analysis (Figure S2a) of these spheres confirms the presence of both
Co and Ni in each sphere in the desired weight ratio, indicating the
formation of CoNi alloy due to the simultaneous reduction of Ni2+ and Co2+. Elemental color mapping of the spheres
also supports this result (Figure S2b).
XRD analysis of CoNiS (Figure 1i) shows a diffraction peak at 2θ =
44.37°, which corresponds to (111) and (002) planes of Ni and
Co, respectively.1 However, the weak intensity
of this peak and the absence of other diffraction peaks of Co and
Ni indicate the poor crystallinity of CoNiS. In Method-II,
the CoNiD particles were formed from the reduction of Co2+ and Ni2+ by N2H4 (reaction 4). FESEM micrographs
illustrate that CoNiD particles possess a snowflake-like
dendritic microstructure (Figure 1e,f).

Figure 1 FESEM micrographs of the synthesized materials (a) RGO,
(b) NiS (Method I), (c) CoD (Method II), (d)
CoNiS (Method I), (e) CoNiD (Method II), (f)
enlarged
micrograph of CoNiD, (g) (CoNiD)60RGO40, (h) enlarged micrograph of (CoNiD)60RGO40 showing the CoNiD particle on
the surface of RGO, and (i) XRD patterns of CoNiS, CoNiD, and (CoNiD)60RGO40.

EDS analysis of CoNiD particles shows
that the dendritic
structure is composed of both Co and Ni (Figure S3a), and the elemental color mapping of these particles also
supports this observation (Figure S3b).
The XRD pattern of CoNiD (Figure 1i) shows the diffraction peaks at 2θ
= 41.71°, 44.71°, 47.54°, and 76.19°, which can
be assigned to (100), (002), (101), and (110) planes of CoNi alloy
with the hexagonal close-packed (hcp) phase of Co.14 In this synthesis method, CTAB acts as a microstructure
directing agent. According to Wu et al., CTAB controls the growth
rate kinetics of (100), (110), and (010) planes of CoNi alloy and
interacts with the faces via the adsorption–desorption process
and facilitates the growth of the dendritic structure.14

Investigations on the catalysis property
and electrochemical properties
were performed for both the spherical CoNiS and dendritic
CoNiD. It was observed that the CoNiD exhibited
superior properties to CoNiS. For further improvement of
these properties, we have synthesized CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites
by using a “one pot” method where dendritic CoNiD particles were immobilized on the surface of RGO. In this
method, the formation of dendritic structured CoNi alloy particles
(CoNiD) and transformation of GO to RGO occur simultaneously.
FESEM micrographs of CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites (Figure 1g,h) reveal the presence
of snowflake-like dendritic CoNiD particles on the surface
of nanometer-thin RGO sheets. EDS analysis and elemental color mapping
(Figure S4a,b) also confirm the immobilization
of CoNiD on the RGO surface in CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites.
The CoNiD particles in CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites
are to some extent smaller in size in comparison with pure CoNiD particles. In the composite, the presence of RGO might have
restricted the growth of the CoNiD particles. In the XRD
pattern of CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites (Figure 1i), the presence of diffraction peaks at
2θ = 41.71°, 44.71°, 47.54°, and 76.19°
indicates the presence of CoNiD. In this XRD pattern, the
absence of peaks at 2θ = 9.76° and 42.14°, which are
the characteristic peaks of (001) and (101) planes of GO (Figure S5), is noticed.18 This could be due to the transformation of GO to RGO during the
formation of CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites. In this “one
pot” methodology, the conversion of Co2+ and Ni2+ to CoNiD alloy and reduction of GO to RGO occurred
simultaneously. Raman spectra of the CoNiD-RGO nanocomposite
and pure GO are shown in Figure S6. The
Raman spectra of GO shows that the peaks corresponding to D and G
bands appear at 1342 and 1582 cm–1, respectively,
whereas, for CoNiD-RGO, these bands red-shifted to 1336
and 1585 cm–1. This shifting of D and G bands in
the nanocomposite can be attributed to the conversion of GO to RGO.
The ID/IG ratio
of the nanocomposite (ID/IG = 1.10) is greater than that of GO (ID/IG = 0.96), and this increase
in ID/IG might
be due to the decrease in the average size of sp2 domains
upon the reduction of GO during the formation of the CoNiD-RGO nanocomposite.18

2.2 First-Principles Calculations of Electronic
Structure
We have performed the first-principles quantum
mechanical calculations based on DFT to understand the interfacial
interactions between Co, Ni, and graphene in the CoNi alloy and Co-Ni-graphene
superlattices. Geometrical optimization was performed for each system
before the calculation of DOS (density of states), TDOS (total density
of states), and band structure. The superlattice structures of Co,
Ni, graphene, Co–Ni interface, and Co-Ni-graphene superlattice
before and after full relaxation are shown in Figure S7a,b. The obtained lattice parameters for the hcp
unit cell of Co are a = b = 2.50
Å and c = 4.06 Å ,and those for the fcc
Ni unit cell are a = b = c = 3.52 Å. The lattice parameter values thus obtained
match well with the previously reported values.44,45

In the Co-Ni-graphene superlattice, the lattice distortion
is observed after relaxation with a ∼2.3% expansion in the z direction of the Co–Ni interface. In this superlattice,
the binding energy between the Co–Ni interface and graphene
is −3.49 eV. These results indicate the existence of strong
interactions between the Co–Ni interface and graphene. The
equilibrium interlayer distance between them is 2.96 Å.

The DOS and TDOS analysis for both Co and Ni unit cells show (Figures S8 and S9) that, in both cases, the valence
bands and conduction bands originated mainly from the contribution
of their 3d and 3p orbitals. Figure S10 shows the contributions from Ni 3d and Co 3d in the valence band
region near the Fermi level in the TDOS of the Co–Ni interface.
The presence of Ni 3d and Co 3d states across the Fermi level indicates
its metallic nature. In the case of Co-Ni-graphene, the TDOS (Figure S11) shows the contribution from C 2p,
Ni 3d, and Co 3d orbitals across the Fermi level and the asymmetric
nature of the spin up and spin down phase. These facts clearly indicate
the metallic nature and the ferromagnetic nature of Co-Ni-graphene.46,47 The band structure of graphene (Figure S12) clearly shows its zero band gap nature.48 The band structures of Co, Ni, Co-Ni, and Co-Ni-graphene also indicates
their metallic character. The band structure of the hcp Co unit cell
(Figure S8) and fcc Ni unit cell (Figure S9) match well with the previously reported
band structures.45,49,50 In the band structure of the Co–Ni interface (Figure S10), the appearance of new bands near
the Fermi level in comparison with the band structures of individual
Co and Ni unit cells indicates the occurrence of hybridization between
3d states of Co and Ni. In the band structure of Co-Ni-graphene (Figure S11), the appearance of new bands at both
valence and conduction band regions occurs due to the hybridization
between C 2p states of graphene, Ni 3d, and Co 3d states. The charge
density plot and difference charge density interface and the electron
plot of the Co–Ni interface and Co-Ni-graphene are shown in Figure 2a,b. In the Co–Ni
interface, the density of some of the Co centers becomes relatively
less in comparison with pure Co. This could be due to the orbital
level interactions between Co and Ni in the interface and higher electronegativity
of Ni (1.91) than that of Co (1.88). The difference charge density
plot of the Co–Ni interface also shows this depletion of the
electron density of Co. Figure 2c,d shows the interaction between Co–Ni, C–Ni,
and C–Co in the interface in Co-Ni-graphene. These DFT calculations
clearly demonstrate the existence of strong orbital level hybridization
between Co, Ni, and graphene in Co-Ni-graphene. From this hybridization
point of view, we can predict that the conductivity of Co-Ni-RGO nanocomposite
will be higher than that of Co-Ni alloy. EIS measurements of the synthesized
materials support this prediction by showing the lower Rct (charge transfer resistance) value of (CoNiD)60RGO40 (0.53 Ω) compared to CoNiD (1.61 Ω). This fact indicates that the incorporation
of RGO causes the enhancement of the conductivity of the nanocomposites.
The detailed discussion on the results obtained from EIS measurements
is provided in Section 2.4.

Figure 2 Charge density plots of the (a) Co–Ni interface and (b)
Co–Ni graphene interface and difference charge density plot
of the (c) Co–Ni interface and (d) Co–Ni graphene interface
(where the red color represents charge accumulation and the blue color
represents charge depletion in the difference charge density plot).

2.3 Catalysis Reactions
2.3.1 Reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP
We have
performed the room temperature reduction of 4-NP in an aqueous medium
in the presence of aqueous NaBH4 using the synthesized
materials as catalysts. We have also performed this reaction without
using any catalyst and observed that no reaction has occurred. This
reaction was monitored by using UV–Vis spectroscopy. 4-NP in
aqueous medium shows the maximum absorption (λmax) at 317 nm, and the addition of NaBH4 solution to 4-NP
solution causes a red shift of this λmax to 400 nm
due to the formation of dark yellow-colored phenolate ions.16,51,52 With the progress of the reaction,
the color of 4-nitrophenolate starts to fade. With the increasing
reaction time, the intensity of λmax(4-NP) at 400 nm gradually decreases. Simultaneously, a new peak at λmax = 300 nm grows, which indicates the formation of 4-aminophenol
due to the reduction of 4-nitrophenol. This reduction reaction is
a pseudo-first-order reaction. As a representative, time-dependent
UV–Vis spectra of CoNiS-, CoNiD-, and
(CoNiD)60RGO40-catalyzed reaction
are presented in Figure 3.

Figure 3 Time-dependent UV–Vis spectra of the reduction reaction
of 4-nitrophenol catalyzed by (a) CoNiS, (b) CoNiD, and (c) (CoNiD)60RGO40 and (d)
pseudo-first-order kinetic plot of this reaction.

To understand the role of individual Co, Ni, and
RGO in the CoNi-RGO
catalyst, we have performed the reaction with pure RGO, NiS, CoS (spherical), and CoD (dendritic structure)
(Figure S13). The induction time, reaction
completion time, and the value of kapp, which were observed for the reactions catalyzed by different synthesized
materials, are listed in Table S3. In the
present reaction condition, pure RGO does not show any catalytic activity.
The values of kapp for pure NiS- and CoS-catalyzed reactions are 2.93 × 10–3 and 2.23 × 10–3 s–1, respectively.
The use of CoD as the catalyst results in a decrease in
both the induction time (from 6 to 3 min) and the reaction completion
time (32 to 24 min) compared to the CoS nanoparticle. kapp increases significantly due to the use of
spherical CoNiS (kapp = 4.33
× 10–3 s–1) as the catalyst
instead of pure Co or Ni nanoparticle. This fact clearly indicates
the beneficiary effect of the use of CoNi alloy as a catalyst instead
of pure Co or Ni. The influence of the microstructure of the catalyst
on the reaction kinetics was investigated by performing the reaction
using spherical CoNiS and snowflake-like dendritic CoNiD as the catalyst. For the CoNiD catalyst, the value
of kapp (6.11 × 10–3 s–1) is higher than that of CoNiS (kapp = 4.33 × 10–3 s–1), and the reaction completion time reduces from 21
to 17 min. These results indicate that CoNiD acts as a
better catalyst than CoNiS. To develop a catalyst having
enhanced efficiency, we have synthesized nanocomposites by immobilizing
different amounts of CoNiD on the surface of RGO. Figure S13 shows the higher catalytic activity
of CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites than that of CoNiD. The catalyst containing 60 wt % CoNiD and 40 wt % RGO,(CoNiD)60RGO40 exhibits the highest catalytic
activity with almost no initiation time and the minimum reaction completion
time of 4 min with the highest kapp of
20.55 × 10–3 s–1 (Figure 3).

The reduction
of 4-NP to 4-AP is a six-electron transfer reaction.53 The metal nanoparticle-catalyzed reduction reaction
of 4-NP to 4-AP proceeds via an electron transfer (ET)-induced hydrogenation
mechanism. In the initial stage, BH4– ions are adsorbed on the surface of metal nanoparticles. Electron
transfer from BH4– to metal nanoparticles
resulted in the production of active hydrogen atoms, and these hydrogen
atoms reduce 4-NP to 4-AP. Here, the metal nanoparticles act as storage
of electrons after ET from BH4–.16,54 Ballauff et al. have proposed the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism
for the reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP on Au nanoparticles55 where both the reactants were adsorbed on the surface of
the catalyst before the reaction. The reconstruction of the surface
of the metal nanoparticles occurs when BH4– reacts with it and forms metal-H bonds.15,56 The reaction between metal-H and adsorbed 4-NP results in the formation
of 4-AP. This reaction proceeds as 4-nitrophenol → 4-nitrosophenol
→ 4-hydroxyaminophenol → 4-aminophenol.57 The possible mechanism of the (CoNiD)60RGO40-catalyzed reaction of 4-nitrophenol can be schematically
presented as Scheme 1.

Scheme 1 Plausible mechanism for the (CoNiD)60RGO40-Catalyzed Reduction Reaction of 4-Nitrophenol in
the Presence
of Excess NaBH4 in an Aqueous Medium
In the present investigation, the following
important points were
noted: (i) Co-Ni alloy exhibits better catalytic activity than that
of individual pure Ni and pure Co. DFT calculation shows the generation
of electron deficiency in Co in the Co–Ni system. These electron-deficient
Co sites might act as better electron-storing sites during the electron
transfer process from BH4– than pure
metal nanoparticles. (ii) CoNiD with a snowflake-like dendritic
structure exhibits better catalytic activity than that of spherical
CoNiS. This could be due to the fact that, in CoNiD, the electron transfer occurs more efficiently via a fast
ballistic charge transfer mechanism due to its well-defined sharp-edged
dendritic microstructure, whereas in spherical CoNiS, the
electron transfer proceeds via a relatively slow diffusion-controlled
pathway. (iii) Immobilization of CoNiD on the surface of
RGO enhances the catalytic activity of the catalyst. (CoNiD)60RGO40 demonstrates better catalytic efficiency
than that of CoNiD. As the reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP is
a six-electron transfer reaction, the electrical conductivity of the
catalyst plays a crucial role in this reaction. The EIS measurements
of the catalysts clearly show that the conductivity of (CoNiD)60RGO40 is higher than that of CoNiD. DFT calculation also shows the existence of orbital level hybridization
in the interface between Co, Ni, and C in the Co–Ni graphene
system. Due to this orbital level hybridization between Co–Ni,
Co–C, and Ni–C, the conductivity of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite becomes higher than
that of CoNiD. Due to this enhanced conductivity, the electron
transfer process occurs more efficiently in the RGO-containing catalysts,
and they show greater catalytic activity. Moreover, (CoNiD)60RGO40 possesses a high adsorption capacity
of 4-NP.18 According to Rout et al., the
strong adsorption of 4-NP on the surface of RGO causes stretching
of the N=O bond of the −NO2 group of 4-NP
(from 1.23 to 1.28 Å), and this stretching of bond activates
−NO2 for the reduction reaction.58 These factors enhance the catalytic efficiency of (CoNiD)60RGO40 toward the reduction of 4-NP
to 4-AP.

2.3.2 Knoevenagel Reaction
As the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite exhibits the
highest catalytic activity amongst the synthesized materials toward
the reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol, we have explored
the utilization of this nanocomposite as a catalyst for the Knoevenagel
condensation reaction. Here, we have performed the condensation of
an aromatic aldehyde with ethyl cyanoacetate in ethanol medium in
the presence of (CoNiD)60RGO40. To
validate the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite
as a catalyst for this reaction, we have used several aromatic aldehydes
with different substitutions in the −Ph ring and obtained ∼80–93%
product yield depending upon the aldehyde. In Table 1, the percentages of the yield of the obtained
products are listed. The purity and chemical structures of the obtained
products were verified by using FTIR, DSC (for melting point determination),
LC–MS, and 1H NMR analysis (Figures S14–S17).21,28

Table 1 (CoNiD)60RGO40-Catalyzed Knoevenagel Condensation Reaction of an Aromatic
Aldehyde and Ethyl Cyanoacetatea
a Reaction condition: 4-nitrobenzaldehyde
(1 mmol), ethyl cyanoacetate (1.2 mmol), ethanol (4 mL), catalyst
dose (25 mg), reaction temperature: 50 °C, reaction time: 12
h.

A plausible mechanism for the Knoevenagel condensation
reaction
is presented in Scheme 2 on the basis of reported mechanisms.21,23,59 The CoNi alloy nanoparticles act as the catalytically
active centers in the catalyst. A DFT study shows that the interfacial
interactions between Co, Ni, and RGO in the Co-Ni-RGO interface generate
electron-deficient Co centers. The interaction between the carbonyl
group of the aromatic aldehyde and Co causes the polarization of this
group and the electrophilic character of the carbonyl carbon atom
increases. This polarization helps in the attack of methylene carbon
of ethyl cyanoacetate to the carbonyl carbon of the aromatic aldehyde.
The cyano group of ethyl cyanoacetate also interacts with Co, which
enhances the acidity of methylene carbon of ethyl cyanoacetate and
helps in the formation of nucleophilic species via deprotonation of
methylene carbon of ethyl cyanoacetate. The attack of this nucleophilic
carbon to the carbonyl carbon of aromatic aldehyde results in the
formation of a new C–C bond. In the protic solvent, this intermediate
dissociates from the catalyst. Dehydration of this intermediate generates
the final product, α,β-unsaturated carbonyl compound.
In the present catalyst (CoNiD)60RGO40, the presence of RGO offers the following advantages: (i) nanometer-thin
RGO sheets provide a strong but mechanically flexible support to host
the catalytically active centers (i.e., CoNiD), (ii) immobilization
of CoNiD nanoparticles on the surface of RGO helps to prevent
their agglomeration, therefore the reactant molecules get better accessibility
to the catalytically active sites, (iii) the high surface area of
RGO helps to absorb the reactant molecules on the surface of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 catalyst via π–π
stacking interaction, and (iv) the conducting nature of the RGO support
enhances the electron transfer process of the catalysis reactions.

Scheme 2 Plausible Mechanism for the (CoNiD)60RGO40-Catalyzed Knoevenagel Condensation Reaction of an Aromatic
Aldehyde and Ethyl Cyanoacetate in Ethanol Medium
2.3.3 Magnetic Separation and Reusability Test
of the Catalyst
A VSM was used to determine the magnetic
property of (CoNiD)60RGO40, which
shows its saturation magnetization (Ms) and coercivity (Hc) values are 65 emu
g–1 and 300 Oe (Figure S18), respectively. By exploiting the magnetic character of this catalyst,
its separation from the reaction mixture was conducted by using a
permanent magnet externally (Figure 4a,c). To test the reusability of the catalyst, we have
recycled the catalyst up to six reaction cycles. Figure 4b,d demonstrates that the recovered
catalyst retains almost the same efficiency even up to the six cycles.
The examination of the recovered catalyst by XRD and FESEM shows no
significant change in its crystal structure and microstructure (Figure S19) and indicates the structural robustness
of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 catalyst.

Figure 4 Magnetic
separation of (CoNiD)60RGO40 catalyst
from the reaction mixture and performance of recycles catalyst
for (a, b) reduction reaction of 4-nitrophenol and (c, d) Knoevenagel
condensation reaction.

2.4 Electrochemical Properties
As (CoNiD)60RGO40 demonstrated its efficient
performance as a catalyst, we have now explored the capability of
this nanocomposite as an active electrode material for the supercapacitor
application. To evaluate the electrochemical properties of the synthesized
nanocomposites, CV and GCD measurements were performed. CV measurements
were conducted to understand the electrochemical reactions, which
are occurring on the surface of the electrodes in the presence of
aqueous 3 M KOH solution as the electrolyte. To investigate the effect
of microstructure of the active electrode materials on their electrochemical
properties, working electrodes were prepared with CoNiS and CoNiD. The electrochemical reactions of Co and Ni
in the alkaline medium have been investigated by several researchers
and several reactions have been proposed, and reactions can be presented
as follows:60−63 5   6   7   8   9  

According to Behl and
Toni, during the electro-oxidation reaction of Co in the KOH medium,
a thin film of Co(OH)2 forms on the surface of Co, which
is subsequently oxidized to Co3O4 and CoOOH.61 In the case of Ni, the formation of Ni(OH)2 and NiOOH occurs during the electro-oxidation process.62,63

In the present case, the CV curves of CoNiS and
CoNiD show a distinct pair of redox peaks within the potential
window of 0–0.55 V versus Hg/HgO, and the anodic peak appears
at ∼0.38 V and the cathodic peak at ∼ 0.30 V (Figure 5). The redox peaks
around this potential range can be attributed to the conversion of
Ni2+/Co2+ to Ni3+/Co3+, and the corresponding electrochemical reactions can be presented
as reactions 7 and 9.64 The identical nature
of anodic and cathodic peaks indicates the reversibility of the electrochemical
process.65 The presence of distinct redox
peaks in CoNiS and CoNiD electrodes within the
potential window of 0–0.55 V versus Hg/HgO indicates the faradic
behavior (i.e., pseudocapacitive) of these electrodes in the electrochemical
process. Comparison of the CV profiles of pure Co and pure Ni (Figure S20) with that of CoNi alloy shows that
the redox peaks for the pure Co and pure Ni electrodes appear at ∼0.38/0.30
V and 0.50/0.32 V, respectively, and in the case of CoNi alloy, overlapping
of these redox peaks causes the broadening of the oxidation and reduction
peak.62Figure 5 shows that the area under the CV curve for
CoNiD is larger than that of CoNiS and indicates
that the specific capacitance of CoNiD is greater than
that of CoNiS. This could be due to the difference in the
microstructure between CoNiD and CoNiS. The
sharp-edged dendritic structure of CoNiD offers more active
sites for the electrochemical reactions and better electron transfer
ability to the electron collector.66Figure S21 presents the CV profile of pure RGO,
and the quasi-rectangular shape of this CV curve indicates the EDLC
feature of RGO.67Figure 5a also illustrates that the peak area under
the CV curve of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite is even larger than that of CoNiD, demonstrating
the higher specific capacitance of (CoNiD)60 RGO40 than that of CoNiD. The redox peaks
of (CoNiD)60RGO40 appear almost in
the same positions, where they appear for CoNiD. This fact
indicates that the electrochemical reactions, which are happening
for the CoNiD electrode, are also occurring for (CoNiD)60RGO40. The CV curves of the electrodes,
which were measured at different scan rates (10–100 mV s–1), are presented in Figures S22–S24, which shows the effect of the increase in scan rate on the peak
potential and the peak current. With the increase in scan rate, the
shifting of the anodic and cathodic peaks toward anodic and cathodic
directions, respectively, can be observed in these CV profiles. This
could be due to the development of an overpotential, which limited
the faradic reactions occurring on the surface of the electrodes.
The increase in peak current with increasing scan rate indicates the
excellent rate capability of electrode materials.30,68 The Randles–Sevcik plots of the electrodes are shown in Figure 5b, which shows a
linear increase in peak current with the progressive increase in scan
rate. This could be due to the influence of scan rate on the migration
and diffusion of electrolytic ions into the electrode.

Figure 5 (a) CV curves of the
synthesized materials at 10 mV s–1 in 3 M KOH and
(b) Randles–Sevcik plots.

When the scan rate is relatively low, a thick diffusion
layer of
ions forms on the surface of the electrode, which restricts the migration
of electrolyte ions into the electrode and resulted in the lowering
of peak current. On the other hand, at a relatively high scan rate,
this diffusion layer cannot grow on the electrode surface. Therefore,
the migration of ion increases into the electrodes and ultimately
enhances the peak current.69 The specific
capacitance (Cs) values of the electrodes
were calculated from the GCD curves of CoNiS (Figure S25), CoNiD (Figure 6a), and (CoNiD)60RGO40 (Figure 6b) at different current densities from 1 to 10 A g–1 under an applied potential between 0 and 0.55 V.
In 3 M KOH, CoNiS, CoNiD, and (CoNiD)60RGO40 shows the Cs values of 89, 130, and 278 F g–1, respectively,
at a current density of 1 A g–1. The dendritic CoNiD possesses higher Cs than that
of spherical CoNiS, and the Cs value has further increased when CoNiD nanoparticles
are immobilized on RGO in (CoNiD)60RGO40. The synergistic effect arising from the combination of the EDLC
nature of RGO and the pseudocapacitance feature of CoNiD are responsible for the outstanding performance of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite. The energy density
(E) and power density (P) of the
electrodes were determined from the GCD. CoNiS, CoNiD, and (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrodes
exhibit the energy densities of 3.74, 5.5, and 11.68 Wh kg–1, respectively, at a power density of 275 W kg–1 in 3 M KOH, and a decreasing trend of energy density value with
increasing power density. Figure S26a (Ragone
Plot) illustrates this decrease in energy density with increasing
power density. The cyclic behavior of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode was evaluated at a constant current density
of 7 A g–1 within a potential window of 0–0.55
V in 3 M KOH and presented as Figure S26b, which shows the retention of ∼85% capacitance up to 4000
cycles. The XRD pattern and FESEM micrograph of (CoNiD)60RGO40 after charge–discharge cycles exhibit
the almost retention of its crystalline phase and microstructure (Figure S27), indicating its structural stability.

Figure 6 Galvanostatic
charge–discharge curves of (a) CoNiD and (b) (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrodes
at different current densities (1–10 A g–1) in 3 M KOH in a three-electrode system.

The addition of a complementary redox couple with
matching potential
(e.g., [Fe(CN)6]4–/[Fe(CN)6]3– (0.20/0.37 V)) in the electrolyte system has
been adopted by the researchers to enhance the specific capacitance
of the electrode.70 We have added 0.1 M
K4[Fe(CN)6] aqueous solution to the 3 M KOH
solution. In this condition, along with the faradic reactions of Co
and Ni, an additional redox reaction, which is offered by [Fe(CN)6]4–/[Fe(CN)6]3–, occurs. Figure 7a shows the CV curves of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode when measurements were conducted with 3 M KOH
and 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] mixture. The
CV curves clearly show that the addition 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] in 3 M KOH electrolyte solution causes the increase in the
area under the CV curve and indicates the enhancement of Cs. The [Fe(CN)6]4–/[Fe(CN)6]3– redox couple acts as an electron buffer
source in the redox reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface,
which enhances the specific capacitance. The addition of 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] to 3 M KOH electrolyte solution results
in the increase in Cs of (CoNiD)60RGO40 to 501 F g–1 at
a current density of 6 A g–1 (Figure 7b). This value of Cs decreases to 334 F g–1 when the current
density increases to 20 A g–1 showing ∼66.7%
retention of Cs and indicates its good
rate capability. In this electrolyte system, the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite exhibits an energy density
of 21.08 Wh kg–1 at a power density of 1650 W kg–1. Figure S28a presents
the Ragone plot, which shows the decrease in energy density up to
14.05 Wh kg–1 when the power density increases to
5500 W kg–1. Figure S28b demonstrates the cyclic behavior of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 and shows the retention of ∼85% capacitance
after 4000 cycles when the testing was performed at a current density
of 7 A g–1.

Figure 7 (a) CV curves of (CoNiD)60RGO40 at 10 mV s–1 in 3 M KOH electrolyte
and 3 M KOH
+ 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] electrolyte. (b) GCD curves
of (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode in 3
M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] electrolyte.

To mimic a supercapacitor device, a two-electrode
symmetric cell
was devised using (CoNiD)60RGO40 as
an electrode material though it is a well-known fact that two-electrode
systems show a lower Cs value than that
of a three-electrode system.71 The reason
for the lower capacitance value in the case of the two-electrode system
as compared to the three-electrode system is due to the difference
in the packaging and configuration of the cells. In a three-electrode
system, only one working electrode contains the active material being
analyzed, whereas in the case of a two-electrode system, two symmetric
working electrodes where both the electrodes contain the active material
are used, which leads to a difference in the applied voltage and charge
transfer across a single electrode in comparison to two electrodes.72 Also, in a symmetrical two-electrode cell, the
potential differences applied to each electrode are equal to each
other and are one-half of the values of the applied voltage potential.72 CV and GCD measurements of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode in a two-electrode symmetric
system to choose the appropriate operating potential window measurements
were conducted using different potential windows at a scan rate of
10 mV s–1, and it was observed that a stable voltammogram
was obtained when the operating window was 0–0.8 V.73Figure 8 shows the CV profile and GCD plot of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode when measurements were conducted
in the two-electrode system using 3 M KOH, and 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] electrolyte solutions in a potential
window of 0–0.8 V. The Cs values
thus obtained are 125 F g–1 at a current density
of 1 A g–1 in 3 M KOH and 405 F g–1 at a current density of 3 A g–1 in 3 M KOH + 0.1
M K4[Fe(CN)6]. Figure S29 presents the specific capacitance and Coulombic efficiency of the
(CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode as a function
of current density in 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] electrolyte solution. It was observed that, though the specific
capacitance of the electrode is decreased with increasing current
density, the Coulombic efficiency is found to be increased from 50
to 90% when the current density is increased from 3 to 10 A g–1.74−78 (CoNiD)60RGO40 also exhibits the
value of energy density of 9 Wh kg–1 when the power
density is 1200 W kg–1in 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] and energy density decreases with increasing
power density. The energy density becomes 4 Wh kg–1 when the power density is 8000 W kg–1.

Figure 8 (a, b) GCD
curves of (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode
in (a) 3 M KOH electrolyte and (b) 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] electrolyte. (c) CV curves of (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode at 10 mV s–1 in 3 M
KOH and 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6]
electrolyte in a two-electrode symmetric cell system.

The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
measurements were
performed for the synthesized materials to determine their charge
transfer resistance (Rct) and internal
resistance (Rs). Nyquist plots were generated,
and an equivalent circuit was constructed to fit the impedance data.
In the Nyquist plot, the intercept of Z′ (real
axis) in the high-frequency region provides the value of Rs. The combination of the following effects is the origin
of Rs: (i) the contact resistance between
the electrode material and the current collector, (ii) the intrinsic
resistance of the electrode materials, and (iii) the ionic resistance
of the electrolyte.79 In the Nyquist plot,
the diameter of the semicircle at the intermediate frequency range
indicates the value of Rct, and Rct indicates the faradic pseudocapacitance of
the electrode materials. The Nyquist plots of the synthesized materials
are shown in Figure 9a, and Rct and Rs values are listed in Table S3.
EIS analysis revealed that (i) Rct and Rs values of CoNiD are lower than
those of spherical CoNi, (ii) immobilization of CoNiD on
the surface of RGO causes a further decrease in Rct and Rs values, and (iii) Rct and Rs values
of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite
are lower than those of pure RGO. This could be due to the fact that
the charge transfer occurs more efficiently in CoNiD because
of its well-defined sharp-edged dendritic structure. In this case,
the charge transfer occurs via a ballistic charge transport mechanism,
which is faster than that of a diffusive transport mechanism that
occurs in spherical CoNiS, (iv) the (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite possesses higher conductivity
than that of pure RGO and CoNiD. In the nanocomposite,
CoNiD nanoparticles are in close contact with RGO. Strong
interfacial interaction between CoNiD and electron-rich
RGO provides a shorter transport path to the electrons, which helps
to enhance the conductivity of the CoNiD-RGO nanocomposite.

Figure 9 (a) Electrochemical
impedance spectra of the synthesized materials,
and the insets show the high-frequency region and equivalent circuit
used for the fitting of Nyquist plot. (b) |Z| versus
frequency plot, (c) Phase angle versus frequency plots.

To understand the capacitive behavior and determine
the “knee
frequency”, Bode plots were generated by plotting |Z| versus frequency (Figure 9b) and phase angle versus frequency (Figure 9c). In the |Z| versus frequency plots, the materials with a higher conductivity
show relatively lower |Z| value at the low frequency. Figure 9b shows a lower |Z| value of CoNiD (|Z| = 32.48
Ω) than that of CoNiS (|Z| = 38.91
Ω), indicating the higher conductivity of CoNiD.
(CoNiD)60RGO40 (|Z| = 24.56 Ω) also shows a lower |Z| value
than that of pure RGO (|Z|= 31.14 Ω) and CoNiD, which also indicates the enhanced conducting nature of the
(CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite compared
to CoNiD and RGO.

In the phase angle versus frequency
plot, the phase angle of 90°
in the low frequency suggests the ideal capacitive behavior of the
electrode, and the phase angle of 0° indicated the pure resistance
behavior.80,81 The knee frequency (fo) is the frequency at the phase angle of 45°, and in
this frequency, the capacitive and resistive impedance are equal.
In Figure 9c, the higher fo value of (CoNiD)60RGO40 compared to CoNiS and CoNiD indicates
the high rate capability of this nanocomposite. The higher relaxation
time (τ = fo–1) of (CoNiD)60RGO40 (4.1 ×
10–3 s) than those of CoNiS (7.3 ×
10–3 s) and CoNiD (5.7 × 10–3 s) indicates that, in the nanocomposite, the immobilization
of dendritic CoNiD particles on the surface of RGO creates
shorter ion transport paths, which helps to increase its electrical
conductivity by decreasing the internal resistance. The enhanced conductivity
of (CoNiD)60RGO40 is one of the important
factors that are responsible for its superior supercapacitive nature
than CoNiS or CoNiD.

Investigation of
the electrochemical properties of the synthesized
materials revealed that the Cs value of
CoNiD is greater than that of CoNiS and this
value further increases when (CoNiD)60RGO40 is used as an electrode material. (CoNiD)60RGO40 shows a Cs of
501 F g–1 at a current density of 6 A g–1 along with the good retention of the capacitance and rate capability
property. It also possesses an energy density of 21.08 Wh kg–1 at a power density of 1650 W kg–1 in a three-electrode
system and an energy density of 9 Wh kg–1 when the
power density is 1200 W kg–1 in a two-electrode
symmetric system, which are comparable to the commercial supercapacitors
(3–9 Wh kg–1 at 3000–10,000 W kg–1).30,82Figure 10 shows the illumination of seven red LED
bulbs when three pair of electrodes were connected in series to construct
the two-electrode system. The illumination of seven red LED bulbs
for over 3 min demonstrates the potential of (CoNiD)60RGO40 to be used as an active electrode material
for the construction of a supercapacitor.

Figure 10 Demonstration of the
lighting of a series of red light-emitting
diode (LED; 3 V each) powered by three (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrodes connected in series. (a–d) Glowing
LEDs at different time intervals.

3 Conclusions
We have reported a simple
“one-pot” methodology to
synthesize snowflake-like dendritic CoNi alloy-RGO nanocomposites.
The effect of microstructure on the catalytic property and the electrochemical
property of CoNi alloy has been demonstrated here. Compared to spherical
CoNiS, snowflake-like dendritic structure CoNiD has exhibited better performance as a catalyst for the reduction
reaction of 4-nitrophenol and Knoevenagel reaction and as an active
electrode material for supercapacitor applications. The nanocomposite
that was prepared by immobilizing (60 wt %) CoNiD on the
surface of RGO (40 wt %) showed superior performance in the aforesaid
applications than CoNiD and CoNiS. The synergistic
effect, which arises from the coexistence of CoNiD and
RGO in the hierarchical structure of the CoNiD-RGO nanocomposite,
is responsible for its superior performance than the individual components.
First-principles calculations based on DFT provided insight into the
interfacial interactions between Co, Ni, and graphene in the Co-Ni-graphene
superlattice. The obtained electronic structures of the Co–Ni
interface and Co-Ni-graphene superlattice were helpful to understand
why CoNi alloy showed better performance than that of pure Co and
Ni and why the CoNi-RGO nanocomposite did exhibit improved properties
compared to CoNi alloy. (CoNiD)60RGO40 demonstrated its multifunctional character by exhibiting its high
efficiency as a magnetically separable catalyst for two important
reactions and as an excellent electrode material for high-performance
supercapacitors. The kapp value for the
(CoNiD)60RGO40-catalyzed reduction
reaction of 4-nitrophenol is 20.55 × 10–3 s–1, which is comparable and, in some cases, superior
to many RGO-based catalysts. The % yield of the products obtained
for the (CoNiD)60RGO40-catalyzed
Knoevenagel condensation reaction between several aromatic aldehydes
and ethyl cyanoacetate lies in the range of 80–93%. In addition
to showing this versatile catalytic activity, (CoNiD)60RGO40 also offers an advantage of its easy magnetic
separation by the use of an external magnet. This overcomes the separation-related
limitations that many nanostructured catalysts encounter. The recycled
catalysts also showed satisfactory performance. The specific capacitance
value of (CoNiD)60RGO40 was 501 F
g–1 at a current density of 6 A g–1. Along with good rate capability and ∼85% retention of capacitance,
it also exhibited 21.08 Wh kg–1 energy density at
a power density of 1650 W kg–1. These results indicate
that (CoNiD)60RGO40 could be considered
as a favorable electrode material for the construction of high-performance
supercapacitors. The easy synthetic methodology, high catalytic efficiency,
and excellent supercapacitance performance make (CoNiD)60RGO40 an appealing multifunctional material.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Synthesis of Materials
Two wet chemical
methods have been used to prepare CoNi alloy particles possessing
two distinct types of morphology. These two methods were also used
to prepare pure Co and pure Ni nanoparticles. A simple but novel “one-pot”
method was employed to prepare CoNi-RGO nanocomposites.

4.1.1 Method-I: Synthesis of Spherical CoNi Alloy
Particles (CoNiS)
In this method, a calculated
amount of CoCl2·6H2O and NiCl2·6H2O was dissolved in a mixture of ethylene glycol
and polyvinylpyrrolidone (molar ratio 2:1). To this mixture, NaOH
pellets were dissolved till the pH of the solution became ∼10
and then N2H4 was added to it (metal ion/N2H4 molar ratio 1:40). This reaction mixture was
refluxed at 85 °C for 15 min. After cooling it at room temperature,
the precipitate thus formed was separated, washed, and dried. As the
alloy particles, which were formed in this method were spherical in
shape, now onward, we will refer them as CoNiS.

4.1.2 Method-II: Synthesis of Dendritic CoNi Alloy
Particles (CoNiD)
In this methodology, a coprecipitation-reduction
technique was used in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
(CTAB).14 CoNi alloy particles were synthesized
by using CoCl2·6H2O and NiCl2·6H2O (molar ratio 2:1) as starting materials. The
metal chloride salts were mixed with a solution of CTAB (0.1 mmol)
in ethanol. After stirring this mixture thoroughly, it was heated
at 55 °C, and then a solution containing NaOH and N2H4 was added to it. This reaction mixture was refluxed
for 30 min at 55 °C. The black precipitate thus formed was separated,
washed with distilled water, and dried. As the FESEM micrograph of
these particles revealed their snowflake-like dendritic structure,
now onward, these CoNi alloy particles will be referred to as CoNiD.

4.1.3 Synthesis of CoNiD-RGO Nanocomposites
A “one-pot” synthetic methodology was employed to
prepare the CoNiD-RGO nanocomposites having a different
amount of CoNiD and RGO. First, graphene oxide (GO) was
prepared by using a modified Hummers method.83 Then, in a round-bottom flask, a calculated amount of GO was dispersed
in a mixture of ethanol and CTAB. In this mixture, an appropriate
amount of CoCl2·6H2O and NiCl2·6H2O (molar ratio 2:1) was added. This mixture was
heated at 55 °C with continuous stirring. A solution containing
NaOH and N2H4 was added to it dropwise, and
then it was refluxed at 55 °C for 30 min. After reflux, the reaction
mixture was allowed to cool down at room temperature. The precipitate
thus formed was separated, washed, and finally dried at 60 °C.
The flow chart for the synthesis of CoNiD-RGO nanocomposite
is presented as Scheme 3.

Scheme 3 Schematic Presentation of the Synthesis of (CoNiD)-RGO
4.2 Catalytic Activity Tests
4.2.1 Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol to 4-Aminophenol
For evaluating the catalytic property of the as-prepared catalysts,
the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) to 4-aminophenol (4-AP) was
conducted in the presence of excess NaBH4 in an aqueous
medium. In a typical run, 4.5 mL of 9 × 10–2 mM aqueous solution of 4-NP was mixed with 0.5 mL of H2O and 1 mL of 0.2 M NaBH4 solution followed by the addition
of a 2 mL aqueous suspension of the catalyst (0.1 g L–1). Four milliliters of this mixture was transferred immediately in
a quartz cuvette, and the absorbance spectra of the solution were
recorded using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer at an interval of
1 min. The progress of the reduction reaction of the 4-NP was monitored
by following the decrease in the intensity of the λmax peak at 400 nm of the 4-NP with time. In the reaction, the concentration
of NaBH4 was in excess, and it remained almost constant
throughout the reaction. It is a well-proven fact that, in the aqueous
medium, the nanoparticle-catalyzed reduction reaction of 4-nitrophenol
in the presence of excess NaBH4 follows the pseudo-first-order
kinetics.16,53 As the absorbance of 4-NP at λmax is proportional to its concentration, the ratio of the
absorbance of 4-NP At (measured at time t) to A0 (at t = 0) is equal to Ct/C0 (where C0 is the initial
concentration and Ct is the concentration
at time t of 4-NP). The apparent rate constant (kapp) was determined using the following equations: 10   11  

The value of kapp was calculated from the slope of the ln(At/A0) versus time
plot.

4.2.2 Knoevenagel Condensation Reaction
Different aromatic aldehydes and ethyl cyanoacetate were used as
starting materials. In a typical reaction, an aldehyde and ethyl cyanoacetate
(1:1 molar ratio) were dissolved in 4 mL of ethanol in a round-bottom
flask. To this reaction mixture, 25 mg of catalyst was added and refluxed
at 50 °C for 12 h. The progress of the reaction was monitored
by using thin layer chromatography (TLC).

After completion of
the reaction, the catalyst was separated with the help of an external
magnet, and ethanol was evaporated from the reaction mixture. Ten
milliliters of ethyl acetate was added to it, and the product was
obtained by crystallization. The product was further purified by column
chromatography using a mixture of ethyl acetate and petroleum ether
as the eluent.

4.2.3 Recycling of the Catalyst
After
each reaction cycle, the catalyst was recovered from the reaction
mixture by applying the magnetic separation technique using a permanent
magnet (N35 grade NdFeB magnet having an energy product BHmax = 33–36 MGOe) externally. After separation, the recovered
catalyst was washed with distilled water and ethanol. Then, the catalyst
was dried and used for the next reaction cycle.

4.3 Electrochemical Testing
To determine
the electrochemical properties of the synthesized materials, cyclic
voltammetry (CV), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and
galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) measurements were performed
by using a three-electrode system. The synthesized materials (e.g.,
CoNiS, CoNiD, pure RGO, and CoNiD-RGO nanocomposite) were used as active electrode materials for the
fabrication of working electrodes. To prepare the working electrodes,
a viscous paste was prepared by mixing 10 wt % poly(vinylidene fluoride),
10 wt % acetylene black, and 80 wt % active material in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone. This paste was cast on (1.5 cm × 1.5
cm) nickel foam (thickness, ∼0.2 mm). After casting the electrode
material, the residual solvent was removed from the electrode by drying
the electrode at 60 °C for 24 h in a vacuum oven. In the working
electrode, the weight of the active materials was ∼3 mg. A
double junction Hg/HgO electrode was used as the reference electrode
and a gold electrode as the counter electrode. The electrochemical
measurements were performed in two electrolytes: (i) 3 M KOH aqueous
solution and (ii) a mixture of 3 M KOH and 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6]. All the CV measurements were recorded using a potential
window of 0–0.55 V at different scan rates ranging from 10
to 100 mV s–1. Galvanostatic charge–discharge
(GCD) measurements were performed at different current densities ranging
from 1 to 20 A g–1. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS) measurements were carried out in the frequency range of 0.01–10,000
Hz at an open circuit potential with an alternating current amplitude
of 0.01 V.

Specific capacitance (Cs), energy density (E), and power density (P) of the synthesized materials were determined from the
GCD measurements by using the following equations 12   13   14  where i (A)
represents the charge or discharge current, ΔE (V) is the applied potential window, m (g) is the
mass of the active electrode material, Δt (s)
is the discharge time, E is the energy density (Wh
kg–1), Cs (F g–1) is the specific capacitance based on the mass of the electroactive
material, V is the potential window of discharge
(V), P is the power density (W kg–1), and Δt is the discharge time (s).

Coulombic efficiency of the synthesized material was calculated
by using the following equation 15  where η is the Coulombic
efficiency, tD is the discharging time
(s), and tC is the charging time (s).

The synthesized materials were characterized by using an X-ray
diffractometer, field emission scanning electron microscope, Raman
spectrometer, and vibrating sample Magnetometer (VSM). UV–Vis
spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC), liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
(LC–MS), and 1H NMR were used to monitor the catalysis
reactions and characterize the products obtained from these reactions.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to study the electrochemical properties
of the synthesized materials. Details of the chemicals and the instruments
used for this purpose are provided in the Supporting Information.

4.4 First-Principles Calculations
To
perceive the electronic structures of Co unit cell, Ni unit cell,
Co–Ni interface, and Co-Ni-graphene superlattice, we have conducted
the first-principles quantum mechanical calculations based on DFT.
Quantum ESPRESSO computational package51,84 was used to
calculate the ground-state structures, binding energy, density of
states (DOS), projected density of states (PDOS), and total density
of state (TDOS) using a plane-wave set and pseudopotentials.51,84 DFT was used with generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and parameterized
by Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE).85 Kohn–Sham orbitals were expanded in a plane-wave basis set
up to the kinetic energy cutoff 30 Ry (408.17 eV). The convergence
criterion for the self-consistent calculation was 10–7 Ry per Bohr (0.0257 eV Å–1). For calculating
the final electronic properties of the structures, an empirical dispersion-corrected
density functional theory (DFT-D2) approach, which was proposed by
Grimme, was employed.53,86 Grimme-D2 corrections were used
to account for the intermolecular interactions and van der Waals (vdW)
interactions.86

In the present study,
five systems were investigated: (i) pure Co having a hexagonal close
packing structure (space group P63/mmc), (ii) pure Ni having a face-centered cubic structure
(space group Fm3̅m), (iii)
graphene superlattice, (iv) Co–Ni interface, and (v) Co-Ni-graphene
superlattice. Ultrasoft pseudopotentials for these systems were constructed
by using 15, 16, and 4 electrons for Co (3p63d74s2), Ni (3p63d84s2),
and C (2s22p2), respectively. From the Quantum
ESPRESSO website, the pseudopotentials of Co, Ni, and C were chosen.87 To select the k-point mesh,
the Monkhorst–Pack approach88 was
used, and the details of k points for each system
are provided in the Computational details section in the Supporting Information. The Brillouin zone integration
of these systems was performed with Methfessel–Paxton smearing
technique89 for Co and Ni unit cells. The
Marzari–Vanderbilt90 smearing technique
was used for graphene, Co–Ni interface, and Co-Ni-graphene
superlattice. Here, the smearing parameter was 0.005 Ry. The binding
energy of the Co-Ni-graphene superlattice was calculated from the
difference between the total energy of the Co-Ni-graphene superlattice
and the sum of each system alone (Co-Ni interface and graphene). The
sizes of the unit cells of the simulated systems are listed in Table S4. The details of the sample input files
for the geometric optimization of Co, Ni, graphene, Co–Ni,
and Co-Ni-graphene superlattice are provided in the Computational
details section in the Supporting Information.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b02861.(Table S1) Comparison of the catalytic efficiency of
different reported catalysts for the reduction reaction of 4-NP in
the presence of NaBH4; (Figure S1) XRD pattern of RGO,
pure CoD, and NiS; (Figure S2a) EDS spectra
of synthesized CoNiS nanocomposites; (Figure S2b) FESEM
micrographs and elemental color mapping of synthesized CoNiS nanocomposites; (Figure S3a) EDS spectra of synthesized CoNiD nanocomposites; (Figure S3b) FESEM micrographs and elemental
color mapping of synthesized CoNiD nanocomposites; (Figure
S4a) EDS spectra of synthesized (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposites; (Figure S4b) FESEM micrographs and elemental
color mapping of synthesized (CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposites; (Figure S5) room temperature wide-angle
powder XRD pattern of GO; (Figure S6) Raman spectra of GO and the
(CoNiD)60RGO40 nanocomposite; (Figure
S7a) the initial structure of Co unit cell, Ni unit cell, Co–Ni
interface, Co-Ni-graphene superlattice, and graphene; (Figure S7b)
the optimized structure of Co unit cell, Ni unit cell, Co–Ni
interface, Co-Ni-graphene superlattice, and (e) graphene; (Figure
S8) the band structure and density of states of Co unit cell; (Figure
S9) the band structure and density of states of Ni unit cell; (Figure
S10) the band structure and density of states of Co–Ni interface;
(Figure S11) the band structure and density of states of Co-Ni-graphene
superlattice; (Figure S12) the band structure and density of states
of graphene; (Figure S13) time-dependent UV–Vis spectral changes
of the reaction mixture of 4-NP catalyzed by NiS, CoS, CoD, (CoNiD)90RGO10, (CoNiD)80RGO20, (CoNiD)70RGO30, (CoNiD)50RGO50, and (CoNiD)40RGO60, pseudo-first-order
kinetic plot of 4-NP reduction reaction with pure NiS,
CoS, CoD, (CoNiD)90RGO10, (CoNiD)80RGO20, (CoNiD)70RGO30, (CoNiD)50RGO50 and (CoNiD)40RGO60; (Table S2) details of completion time and rate constant of the
synthesized catalyst for reduction of 4-nitrophenol in the presence
of NaBH4; product of Knoevenagel condensation reaction
(Table 1); (Figure
S14) FTIR spectra of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-phenyl acrylate,
(E)-ethyl 3-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate, (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(4-nitrophenyl)acrylate, (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(2-methoxyphenyl)acrylate, (E)-ethyl
2-cyano-3-(p-tolyl)acrylate, (E)-ethyl
2-cyano-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)acrylate, and (E)-ethyl
3-(4-bromophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate; (Figure S15) DSC of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-phenylacrylate, (E)-ethyl 3-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate,
(E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(4-nitrophenyl)acrylate, (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(2-methoxyphenyl)acrylate, (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(p-tolyl)acrylate, (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)acrylate, and (E)-ethyl 3-(4-bromophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate; (Figure S16a) LC–MS
full scan of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-phenylacrylate;
(Figure S16b) LC–MS full scan of (E)-ethyl
3-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate; (Figure S16c) LC–MS full
scan of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(4-nitrophenyl)acrylate;
(Figure S16d) LC–MS full scan of (E)-ethyl
2-cyano-3-(2-methoxyphenyl)acrylate; (Figure S16e) LC–MS full
scan of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(p-tolyl)acrylate;
(Figure S16f) LC–MS full scan of (E)-ethyl
2-cyano-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)acrylate; (Figure S16g) LC–MS full
scan of (E)-ethyl 3-(4-bromophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate;
(Figure S17a) 1H NMR spectrum of (E)-ethyl
2-cyano-3-phenylacrylate; (Figure S17b) 1H NMR spectrum
of (E)-ethyl 3-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate;
(Figure S17c) 1H NMR spectrum of (E)-ethyl
2-cyano-3-(4-nitrophenyl)acrylate; (Figure S17d) 1H NMR
spectrum of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(p-tolyl)acrylate; (Figure S17e) 1H NMR spectrum of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(2-methoxyphenyl)acrylate; (Figure S17f) 1H NMR spectrum of (E)-ethyl 2-cyano-3-(4-methoxyphenyl)acrylate;
(Figure S17g) 1H NMR spectrum of (E)-ethyl
3-(4-bromophenyl)-2-cyanoacrylate; (Figure S18) room temperature magnetic
hysteresis loop of (CoNiD)60RGO40; (Figure S19) FESEM images and XRD of the recycled (CoNiD)60RGO40 catalyst; (Figure S20) cyclic voltammetry
curves of pure Co and pure Ni electrodes at different scan rates in
3 M KOH electrolyte; (Figure S21) cyclic voltammetry curve of RGO
in 3 M KOH in the three-electrode system; (Figure S22) cyclic voltammetry
curves of CoNiS in 3 M KOH at different scanning rates
(10–100 mV s–1); (Figure S23) cyclic voltammetry
curves of CoNiD in 3 M KOH at different scanning rates
(10–100 mV s–1); (Figure S24) cyclic voltammetry
curves of CoNiD)60RGO40 in 3 M KOH
at different scanning rates (10–100 mV s–1); (Figure S25) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of CoNiS electrodes at different current densities (1–10 A
g–1) in 3 M KOH in a three-electrode system; (Figure
S26) Ragone plots of CoNiS, CoNiD, and (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrodes and cyclic stability
of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode in
3 M KOH showing the capacitance retention after 4000 cycles using
a charge–discharge at a constant current density of 7 A g–1; (Figure S27) XRD pattern and SEM micrograph of the
(CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode after charge–discharge
cycles; (Figure S28) Ragone plots of (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrodes in 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] and cyclic stability of the (CoNiD)60RGO40 electrode in 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4[Fe(CN)6] showing the capacitance retention after 4000 cycles using
a charge–discharge at a constant current density of 7 A g–1; (Figure S29) a plot of Coulombic efficiency and
specific capacitance of (CoNiD)60RGO40 as a function of current density; (Table S3) fitting results of
the EIS data of all the synthesized nanocomposites; Materials, Characterization
and Instrumentation, and Computational details sections; (Table S4)
the sizes of the unit cells of simulated systems; and details of the
input files for geometric optimization of the Co unit cell, Ni unit
cell, graphene superlattice, Co–Ni interface, and Co-Ni-graphene
superlattice (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02861_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
N.N.G. is thankful to the Central
Sophisticated
Instrumentation Facility (CSIF) of BITS Pilani K K Birla Goa campus
for providing the FESEM facility.
==== Refs
References
Rashid M. H. ; Raula M. ; Mandal T. K. 
Polymer assisted synthesis of chain-like
cobalt-nickel alloy nanostructures: magnetically recoverable and reusable
catalysts with high activities . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 4904 –4917 . 10.1039/c0jm03047c .
El-Kady M. F. ; Shao Y. ; Kaner R. B. 
Graphene for batteries, supercapacitors
and beyond . Nat. Rev. Mater. 
2016 , 1 , 16033 10.1038/natrevmats.2016.33 .
Qiu B. ; Xing M. ; Zhang J. 
Recent advances in three-dimensional
graphene based materials for catalysis applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2018 , 47 , 2165 –2216 . 10.1039/C7CS00904F .29412198 
Stoller M.
D. ; Park S. ; Zhu Y. ; An J. ; Ruoff R. S. 
Graphene-based
ultracapacitors . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 3498 –3502 . 10.1021/nl802558y .18788793 
Moitra D. ; Chandel M. ; Ghosh B. K. ; Jani R. K. ; Patra M. K. ; Vadera S. R. ; Ghosh N. N. 
A simple ‘in situ’ co-precipitation method for the preparation of multifunctional CoFe2O4–reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites:
excellent microwave absorber and highly efficient magnetically separable
recyclable photocatalyst for dye degradation . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 76759 –76772 . 10.1039/C6RA17384E .
Compton O. C. ; Nguyen S. T. 
Graphene Oxide.
Highly Reduced Graphene Oxide, and
Graphene: Versatile Building Blocks for Carbon-Based Materials . Small 
2010 , 6 , 711 –723 . 10.1002/smll.200901934 .20225186 
Bai S. ; Shen X. ; Zhu G. ; Li M. ; Xi H. ; Chen K. 
In situ growth of NixCo100–x nanoparticles
on reduced graphene oxide nanosheets and their magnetic and catalytic
properties . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 2378 –2386 . 10.1021/am300310d .22486337 
Surendran S. ; Shanmugapriya S. ; Sivanantham A. ; Shanmugam S. ; Kalai Selvan R. 
Electrospun carbon nanofibers encapsulated with NiCoP:
a multifunctional electrode for supercapattery and oxygen reduction,
oxygen evolution, and hydrogen evolution reactions . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2018 , 8 , 1800555 10.1002/aenm.201800555 .
Liang H. ; Xia C. ; Jiang Q. ; Gandi A. N. ; Schwingenschlögl U. ; Alshareef H. N. 
Low temperature
synthesis of ternary metal phosphides
using plasma for asymmetric supercapacitors . Nano Energy 
2017 , 35 , 331 –340 . 10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.04.007 .
Hu Y.-M. ; Liu M.-C. ; Hu Y.-X. ; Yang Q.-Q. ; Kong L.-B. ; Kang L. 
One-pot hydrothermal
synthesis of porous nickel cobalt phosphides
with high conductivity for advanced energy conversion and storage . Electrochim. Acta 
2016 , 215 , 114 –125 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2016.08.074 .
Chen H. ; Chen S. ; Fan M. ; Li C. ; Chen D. ; Tian G. ; Shu K. 
Bimetallic nickel cobalt
selenides:
a new kind of electroactive material for high-power energy storage . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 23653 –23659 . 10.1039/C5TA08366D .
Chen S. ; Xue M. ; Li Y. ; Pan Y. ; Zhu L. ; Qiu S. 
Rational design
and synthesis of NixCo3–xO4 nanoparticles derived from multivariate MOF-74 for supercapacitors . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 20145 –20152 . 10.1039/C5TA02557E .
Sun X. ; Wang G. ; Sun H. ; Lu F. ; Yu M. ; Lian J. 
Morphology controlled high performance
supercapacitor behaviour of
the Ni–Co binary hydroxide system . J.
Power Sources 
2013 , 238 , 150 –156 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.03.069 .
Wu K.-L. ; Wei X.-W. ; Zhou X.-M. ; Wu D.-H. ; Liu X.-W. ; Ye Y. ; Wang Q. 
NiCo2 alloys: controllable synthesis, magnetic
properties, and catalytic applications in reduction of 4-nitrophenol . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 16268 –16274 . 10.1021/jp201660w .
Zhao P. ; Feng X. ; Huang D. ; Yang G. ; Astruc D. 
Basic concepts
and recent advances in nitrophenol reduction by gold-and other transition
metal nanoparticles . Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2015 , 287 , 114 –136 . 10.1016/j.ccr.2015.01.002 .
Aditya T. ; Pal A. ; Pal T. 
Nitroarene
reduction: a trusted model reaction to test
nanoparticle catalysts . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 9410 –9431 . 10.1039/C5CC01131K .
Lai T.-L. ; Yong K.-F. ; Yu J.-W. ; Chen J.-H. ; Shu Y.-Y. ; Wang C.-B. 
High efficiency degradation of 4-nitrophenol by microwave-enhanced
catalytic method . J. Hazard. Mater. 
2011 , 185 , 366 –372 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.09.044 .20940080 
Moitra D. ; Ghosh B. K. ; Chandel M. ; Ghosh N. N. 
Synthesis of a BiFeO3 nanowire-reduced graphene
oxide based magnetically separable
nanocatalyst and its versatile catalytic activity towards multiple
organic reactions . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 97941 –97952 . 10.1039/C6RA22077K .
Rajesh R. ; Venkatesan R. 
Encapsulation of silver nanoparticles into graphite
grafted with hyperbranched poly (amidoamine) dendrimer and their catalytic
activity towards reduction of nitro aromatics . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2012 , 359 , 88 –96 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2012.04.001 .
Ghosh B. K. ; Hazra S. ; Naik B. ; Ghosh N. N. 
Preparation of Cu
nanoparticle loaded SBA-15 and their excellent catalytic activity
in reduction of variety of dyes . Powder Technol. 
2015 , 269 , 371 –378 . 10.1016/j.powtec.2014.09.027 .
Li Q. ; Wang X. ; Yu Y. ; Chen Y. ; Dai L. 
Tailoring
a magnetically separable NiFe2O4 nanoparticle
catalyst for Knoevenagel condensation . Tetrahedron
Lett. 
2016 , 72 , 8358 –8363 . 10.1016/j.tet.2016.11.011 .
Kumar A. ; Dewan M. ; Saxena A. ; De A. ; Mozumdar S. 
Knoevenagel
condensation catalyzed by chemo-selective Ni-nanoparticles in neutral
medium . Catal. Commun. 
2010 , 11 , 679 –683 . 10.1016/j.catcom.2010.01.017 .
Schneider E. M. ; Zeltner M. ; Kränzlin N. ; Grass R. N. ; Stark W. J. 
Base-free
Knoevenagel condensation catalyzed by copper metal surfaces . Chem. Commun. 
2015 , 51 , 10695 –10698 . 10.1039/C5CC02541A .
Makowski P. ; Weber J. ; Thomas A. ; Goettmann F. 
A mesoporous
poly (benzimidazole) network as a purely organic heterogeneous catalyst
for the Knoevenagel condensation . Catal. Commun. 
2008 , 10 , 243 –247 . 10.1016/j.catcom.2008.08.028 .
Reddy T. I. ; Varma R. S. 
Rare-earth (RE)
exchanged NaY zeolite promoted Knoevenagel
condensation . Tetrahedron Lett. 
1997 , 38 , 1721 –1724 . 10.1016/S0040-4039(97)00180-9 .
Yadav J. S. ; Reddy B. V. S. ; Basak A. K. ; Narsaiah A. V. 
[Bmim] BF4 ionic liquid: a novel reaction
medium for the synthesis of β-amino
alcohols . Tetrahedron Lett. 
2003 , 44 , 1047 –1050 . 10.1016/S0040-4039(02)02735-1 .
Martínez F. ; Orcajo G. ; Briones D. ; Leo P. ; Calleja G. 
Catalytic
advantages of NH2-modified MIL-53 (Al) materials for Knoevenagel
condensation reaction . Microporous Mesoporous
Mater. 
2017 , 246 , 43 –50 . 10.1016/j.micromeso.2017.03.011 .
Senapati K. K. ; Borgohain C. ; Phukan P. 
Synthesis of highly stable CoFe2O4 nanoparticles and their use as magnetically
separable catalyst for Knoevenagel reaction in aqueous medium . J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 
2011 , 339 , 24 –31 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2011.02.007 .
Tian M. ; Li R. ; Liu C. ; Long D. ; Cao G. 
Aqueous Al-ion Supercapacitor
with V2O5 Mesoporous Carbon Electrodes . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2019 , 11 , 15573 –15580 . 10.1021/acsami.9b02030 .30965001 
Moitra D. ; Anand C. ; Ghosh B. K. ; Chandel M. ; Ghosh N. N. 
One-Dimensional
BiFeO3 Nanowire-Reduced Graphene Oxide Nanocomposite as
Excellent Supercapacitor Electrode Material . ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 464 –474 . 10.1021/acsaem.7b00097 .
Zhang L. L. ; Zhao X. S. 
Carbon-based materials
as supercapacitor electrodes . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2009 , 38 , 2520 –2531 . 10.1039/b813846j .19690733 
Simon P. ; Gogotsi Y. 
Materials for Electrochemical Capacitors . Nat. Mater. 
2008 , 7 , 845 –854 . 10.1038/nmat2297 .18956000 
Liu C. ; Yu Z. ; Neff D. ; Zhamu A. ; Jang B. Z. 
Graphene-based supercapacitor
with an ultrahigh energy density . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 4863 –4868 . 10.1021/nl102661q .21058713 
Wang T. ; Chen H. C. ; Yu F. ; Zhao X. S. ; Wang H. 
Boosting the
cycling stability of transition metal compounds-based supercapacitors . Energy Storage Mater. 
2019 , 16 , 545 –573 . 10.1016/j.ensm.2018.09.007 .
Zheng S. ; Li X. ; Yan B. ; Hu Q. ; Xu Y. ; Xiao X. ; Xue H. ; Pang H. 
Transition-metal
(Fe, Co, Ni) based metal-organic frameworks
for electrochemical energy storage . Adv. Energy
Mater. 
2017 , 7 , 1602733 10.1002/aenm.201602733 .
Guo X. ; Zheng S. ; Zhang G. ; Xiao X. ; Li X. ; Xu Y. ; Xue H. ; Pang H. 
Nanostructured graphene-based materials
for flexible energy storage . Energy Storage
Mater. 
2017 , 9 , 150 –169 . 10.1016/j.ensm.2017.07.006 .
Guo X. ; Zhang Y.-Z. ; Zhang F. ; Li Q. ; Anjum D. H. ; Liang H. ; Liu Y. ; Liu C.-s. ; Alshareef H. N. ; Pang H. 
A novel strategy for the synthesis
of highly stable ternary SiOx composites for Li-ion-battery
anodes . J. Mater. Chem. 
2019 , 15969 10.1039/C9TA04062E .
Yin Y. ; Xu Y. ; Zhou Y. ; Yan Y. ; Zhan K. ; Yang J. ; Li J. ; Zhao B. 
Millimeter-Long
Vertically Aligned Carbon-Nanotube-Supported
Co3O4 Composite Electrode for High-Performance
Asymmetric Supercapacitor . ChemElectroChem 
2018 , 5 , 1394 –1400 . 10.1002/celc.201800138 .
Xu Y. ; Yan Y. ; He T. ; Zhan K. ; Yang J. ; Zhao B. ; Qi K. ; Xia B. Y. 
Supercritical CO2-Assisted synthesis of
NiFe2O4/vertically-aligned carbon nanotube arrays
hybrid as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for efficient overall water
splitting . Carbon 
2019 , 145 , 201 –208 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2019.01.011 .
Zhou Y. ; Wen L. ; Zhan K. ; Yan Y. ; Zhao B. 
Three-dimensional porous
graphene/nickel cobalt mixed oxide composites for high-performance
hybrid supercapacitor . Ceram. Int. 
2018 , 44 , 21848 –21854 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.08.292 .
Zhu L. P. ; Xiao H. M. ; Fu S. Y. 
Surfactant-assisted
synthesis and
characterization of novel chain-like CoNi alloy assemblies . Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 
2007 , 3947 –3951 . 10.1002/ejic.200700558 .
Yang J. ; Deivaraj T. C. ; Too H.-P. ; Lee J. Y. 
Acetate stabilization
of metal nanoparticles and its role in the preparation of metal nanoparticles
in ethylene glycol . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 4241 –4245 . 10.1021/la0361159 .15969423 
Zong M. ; Huang Y. ; Zhao Y. ; Sun X. ; Qu C. ; Luo D. ; Zheng J. 
Facile preparation, high microwave absorption and microwave
absorbing mechanism of RGO-Fe3O4 composites . RSC Adv. 
2013 , 3 , 23638 –23648 . 10.1039/c3ra43359e .
Cinquini F. ; Delbecq F. ; Sautet P. 
A DFT comparative
study of carbon
adsorption and diffusion on the surface and subsurface of Ni and Ni3Pd alloy . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 11 , 11546 –11556 . 10.1039/b914418h .20024427 
Singal C. M. ; Das T. P. 
Electronic structure of ferromagnetic hcp cobalt. I.
Band properties . Phys. Rev. B 
1977 , 16 , 5068 10.1103/PhysRevB.16.5068 .
Schwindt V. C. ; Sandoval M. ; Ardenghi J. S. ; Bechthold P. ; González E. A. ; Jasen P. V. 
Electronic structure and magnetism
on FeSiAl alloy: A DFT study . J. Magn. Magn.
Mater. 
2015 , 389 , 73 –76 . 10.1016/j.jmmm.2015.04.047 .
Yang J. ; Xiao Z. ; Li Z. ; Wen Q. ; Yang F. 
First principles
study on the structural, electronic and magnetic properties of Ni4C . Comput. Condens. Matter 
2014 , 1 , 51 –57 . 10.1016/j.cocom.2014.11.002 .
Moitra D. ; Dhole S. ; Ghosh B. K. ; Chandel M. ; Jani R. K. ; Patra M. K. ; Vadera S. R. ; Ghosh N. N. 
Synthesis
and microwave
absorption properties of BiFeO3 nanowire-RGO nanocomposite
and first-principles calculations for insight of electromagnetic properties
and electronic structures . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2017 , 121 , 21290 –21304 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b02836 .
Wang C.-p. S. ; Callaway J. 
Band structure of nickel: Spin-orbit
coupling, the
Fermi surface, and the optical conductivity . Phys. Rev. B 
1974 , 9 , 4897 10.1103/PhysRevB.9.4897 .
Batallan F. ; Rosenman I. ; Sommers C. B. 
Band structure and
Fermi surface
of hcp ferromagnetic cobalt . Phys. Rev. B 
1975 , 11 , 545 10.1103/PhysRevB.11.545 .
Chandel M. ; Makkar P. ; Ghosh B. K. ; Moitra D. ; Ghosh N. N. 
A facile
synthesis methodology for preparation of Ag–Ni-reduced graphene
oxide: a magnetically separable versatile nanocatalyst for multiple
organic reactions and density functional study of its electronic structures . RSC Adv. 
2018 , 8 , 37774 –37788 . 10.1039/C8RA08235A .
Ghosh B. K. ; Moitra D. ; Chandel M. ; Patra M. K. ; Vadera S. R. ; Ghosh N. N. 
CuO nanoparticle
immobilised mesoporous TiO2–cobalt ferrite nanocatalyst:
A versatile, magnetically separable
and reusable catalyst . Catal. Lett. 
2017 , 147 , 1061 –1076 . 10.1007/s10562-017-1993-9 .
Chandel M. ; Moitra D. ; Makkar P. ; Sinha H. ; Hora H. S. ; Ghosh N. N. 
Synthesis of multifunctional
CuFe2O4–reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite:
an efficient
magnetically separable catalyst as well as high performance supercapacitor
and first-principles calculations of its electronic structures . RSC Adv. 
2018 , 8 , 27725 –27739 . 10.1039/C8RA05393F .
Ghosh B. K. ; Moitra D. ; Chandel M. ; Lulla H. ; Ghosh N. N. 
Ag nanoparticle
immobilized mesoporous TiO2-cobalt ferrite nanocatalyst:
A highly active, versatile, magnetically separable and reusable catalyst . Mater. Res. Bull. 
2017 , 94 , 361 –370 . 10.1016/j.materresbull.2017.06.015 .
Wunder S. ; Polzer F. ; Lu Y. ; Mei Y. ; Ballauff M. 
Kinetic analysis
of catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol by metallic nanoparticles
immobilized in spherical polyelectrolyte brushes . J. Phys. Chem. C. 
2010 , 114 , 8814 –8820 . 10.1021/jp101125j .
Liu B. H. ; Li Z. P. 
A review: hydrogen
generation from borohydride hydrolysis reaction . J. Power Sources 
2009 , 187 , 527 –534 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.11.032 .
Farhadi S. ; Kazem M. ; Siadatnasab F. 
NiO nanoparticles
prepared via thermal
decomposition of the bis (dimethylglyoximato) nickel (II) complex:
A novel reusable heterogeneous catalyst for fast and efficient microwave-assisted
reduction of nitroarenes with ethanol . Polyhedron 
2011 , 30 , 606 –613 . 10.1016/j.poly.2010.11.037 .
Rout L. ; Kumar A. ; Dhaka R. S. ; Reddy G. N. ; Giri S. ; Dash P. 
Bimetallic Au-Cu alloy
nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide support:
Synthesis, catalytic activity and investigation of synergistic effect
by DFT analysis . Appl. Catal., A 
2017 , 538 , 107 –122 . 10.1016/j.apcata.2017.03.017 .
Li J. P. H. ; Kennedy E. M. ; Adesina A. A. ; Stockenhuber M. 
Mechanistic
insights into the Knoevenagel condensation reaction over ZnO catalysts:
Direct observation of surface intermediates using in situ FTIR . J. Catal. 
2019 , 369 , 157 –167 . 10.1016/j.jcat.2018.10.039 .
Meier H. G. ; Vilche J. R. ; Arvía A. J. 
The electrochemical
behaviour of
cobalt in alkaline solutions part II. The potentiodynamic response
of Co(OH)2 electrodes . J. Electroanal.
Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1982 , 138 , 367 –379 . 10.1016/0022-0728(82)85088-2 .
Behl W. K. ; Toni J. E. 
Anodic oxidation
of cobalt in potassium hydroxide electrolytes . J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1971 , 31 , 63 –75 . 10.1016/S0022-0728(71)80043-8 .
Silva R. P. ; Eugénio S. ; Silva T. M. ; Carmezim M. J. ; Montemor M. F. 
Fabrication
of three-dimensional dendritic Ni–Co films by electrodeposition
on stainless steel substrates . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2012 , 116 , 22425 –22431 . 10.1021/jp307612g .
Wang L. ; Lu X. ; Ye Y. ; Sun L. ; Song Y. 
Nickel-cobalt nanostructures
coated reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite electrode for nonenzymatic
glucose biosensing . Electrochim. Acta 
2013 , 114 , 484 –493 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2013.10.125 .
Ding R. ; Li X. ; Shi W. ; Xu Q. ; Liu E. 
One-pot solvothermal
synthesis of ternary Ni-Co-P micro/nano-structured materials for high
performance aqueous asymmetric supercapacitors . Chem. Eng. J. 
2017 , 320 , 376 –388 . 10.1016/j.cej.2017.03.060 .
Zhang X. ; Wu A. ; Wang X. ; Tian C. ; An R. ; Fu H. 
Porous NiCoP
nanosheets as efficient and stable positive electrodes for advanced
asymmetric supercapacitors . J. Mater. Chem.
A 
2018 , 6 , 17905 –17914 . 10.1039/C8TA05551C .
Zhang G. Q. ; Wu H. B. ; Hoster H. E. ; Chan-Park M. B. ; Lou X. W. D. 
Single-crystalline NiCo2O4 nanoneedle
arrays grown on conductive substrates as binder-free electrodes for
high-performance supercapacitors . Energy Environ.
Sci. 
2012 , 5 , 9453 –9456 . 10.1039/c2ee22572g .
Liu G. ; Wang L. ; Wang B. ; Gao T. ; Wang D. 
A reduced
graphene oxide modified metallic cobalt composite with superior electrochemical
performance for supercapacitors . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 63553 –63560 . 10.1039/C5RA09748G .
Zhang W. ; Quan B. ; Lee C. ; Park S.-K. ; Li X. ; Choi E. ; Diao G. ; Piao Y. 
One-step facile solvothermal
synthesis of copper ferrite–graphene composite as a high-performance
supercapacitor material . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 2404 –2414 . 10.1021/am507014w .25584805 
Alam M. ; Karmakar K. ; Pal M. ; Mandal K. 
Electrochemical supercapacitor
based on double perovskite Y2NiMnO6 nanowires . RSC Adv 
2016 , 6 , 114722 –114726 . 10.1039/C6RA23318J .
Maiti S. ; Pramanik A. ; Mahanty S. 
Extraordinarily
high pseudocapacitance
of metal organic framework derived nanostructured cerium oxide . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 11717 –11720 . 10.1039/C4CC05363J .
Rakhi R. B. ; Chen W. ; Cha D. ; Alshareef H. N. 
High performance
supercapacitors using metal oxide anchored graphene nanosheet electrodes . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 16197 –16204 . 10.1039/c1jm12963e .
Khomenko V. ; Frackowiak E. ; Béguin F. 
Determination of the specific capacitance
of conducting polymer/nanotubes composite electrodes using different
cell configurations . Electrochim. Acta 
2005 , 50 , 2499 –2506 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2004.10.078 .
Noori A. ; El-Kady M. F. ; Rahmanifar M. S. ; Kaner R. B. ; Mousavi M. F. 
Towards
establishing standard performance metrics for batteries, supercapacitors
and beyond . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2019 , 48 , 1272 –1341 . 10.1039/C8CS00581H .30741286 
Han Y. ; Lu Y. ; Shen S. ; Zhong Y. ; Liu S. ; Xia X. ; Tong Y. ; Lu X. 
Enhancing the capacitive storage
performance of carbon fiber textile by surface and structural modulation
for advanced flexible asymmetric supercapacitors . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2019 , 29 , 1806329 10.1002/adfm.201806329 .
Lu W. ; Shen J. ; Zhang P. ; Zhong Y. ; Hu Y. ; Lou X. W. D. 
Construction
of CoO/Co-Cu-S Hierarchical Tubular Heterostructures
for Hybrid Supercapacitors . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2019 , 58 , 15441 –15447 . 10.1002/anie.201907516 .
Yuksel R. ; Coskun S. ; Unalan H. E. 
Coaxial
silver nanowire network core
molybdenum oxide shell supercapacitor electrodes . Electrochim. Acta 
2016 , 193 , 39 –44 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2016.02.033 .
Elkholy A. E. ; Heakal F. E.-T. ; Allam N. K. 
Nanostructured
spinel manganese cobalt
ferrite for high-performance supercapacitors . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 51888 –51895 . 10.1039/C7RA11020K .
Bhujun B. ; Tan M. T. T. ; Shanmugam A. S. 
Study of
mixed ternary transition
metal ferrites as potential electrodes for supercapacitor applications . Results Phys. 
2017 , 7 , 345 –353 . 10.1016/j.rinp.2016.04.010 .
Maiti S. ; Pramanik A. ; Mahanty S. 
Influence
of imidazolium-based ionic
liquid electrolytes on the performance of nano-structured MnO2 hollow spheres as electrochemical supercapacitor . RSC Adv 
2015 , 5 , 41617 –41626 . 10.1039/C5RA05514H .
Arunkumar M. ; Paul A. 
Importance of electrode
preparation methodologies in supercapacitor
applications . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 8039 –8050 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b01275 .31457354 
Cai X. ; Shen X. ; Ji Z. ; Sheng X. ; Kong L. ; Yuan A. 
Synthesis and remarkable capacitive performance of reduced graphene
oxide/silver/nickel-cobalt sulfide ternary nanocomposites . Chem. Eng. J. 
2017 , 308 , 184 –192 . 10.1016/j.cej.2016.09.059 .
Burke A. 
Ultracapacitors:
why, how, and where is the technology . J. Power
Sources 
2000 , 91 , 37 –50 . 10.1016/S0378-7753(00)00485-7 .
Hummers W. S. Jr.; Offeman R. E. 
Preparation
of graphitic oxide . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1958 , 80 , 1339 –1339 . 10.1021/ja01539a017 .
Giannozzi P. ; Baroni S. ; Bonini N. ; Calandra M. ; Car R. ; Cavazzoni C. ; Ceresoli D. ; Chiarotti G. L. ; Cococcioni M. ; Dabo I. ; Dal Corso A. ; de Gironcoli S. ; Fabris S. ; Fratesi G. ; Gebauer R. ; Gerstmann U. ; Gougoussis C. ; Kokalj A. ; Lazzeri M. ; Martin-Samos L. ; Marzari N. ; Mauri F. ; Mazzarello R. ; Paolini S. ; Pasquarello A. ; Paulatto L. ; Sbraccia C. ; Scandolo S. ; Sclauzero G. ; Seitsonen A. P. ; Smogunov A. ; Umari P. ; Wentzcovitch R. M. 
QUANTUM
ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software project for quantum simulations
of materials . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2009 , 21 , 395502 10.1088/0953-8984/21/39/395502 .21832390 
Perdew J. P. ; Burke K. ; Ernzerhof M. 
Generalized
gradient approximation
made simple . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3865 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865 .10062328 
Grimme S. ; Ehrlich S. ; Goerigk L. 
Effect of the damping
function in
dispersion corrected density functional theory . J. Comput. Chem. 
2011 , 32 , 1456 –1465 . 10.1002/jcc.21759 .21370243 
Quantum ESPRESSO  , Files: C.pbe-n-rrkjus_psl.1.0.0.UPF, Co.pbe-n-rrkjus_psl.1.0.0.UPF,
and Ni.pbe-n-rrkjus_psl.1.0.0.UPF, https://www.quantum-espresso.org/pseudopotentials, (accessed March 2019).
Monkhorst H. J. ; Pack J. D. 
Special
points for Brillouin-zone integrations . Phys.
Rev. B 
1976 , 13 , 5188 10.1103/PhysRevB.13.5188 .
Methfessel M. ; Paxton A. T. 
High-precision sampling for Brillouin-zone
integration
in metals . Phys. Rev. B 
1989 , 40 , 3616 10.1103/PhysRevB.40.3616 .
Marzari N. ; Vanderbilt D. ; De Vita A. ; Payne M. C. 
Thermal contraction
and disordering of the Al (110) surface . Phys.
Rev. Lett. 
1999 , 82 , 3296 10.1103/PhysRevLett.82.3296 .

