
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145806410.1021/acsomega.8b00579ArticleEffect of Incorporation of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes
on the Microstructure and Flow Behavior of Highly Concentrated Emulsions Bhagavathi Kandy Sharu †‡¶Simon George P. §Cheng Wenlong ∥Zank Johann ⊥Joshi Kapil #Gala Dharmesh #Bhattacharyya Arup R. *‡† IITB-Monash
Research Academy, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India‡ Department
of Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai 400076, India§Department of Materials Science and
Engineering and ∥Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia⊥ Orica
Mining Services, George Booth Drive, Kurri Kurri, New South Wales 2327, Australia# Anton-Paar
India Pvt. Ltd., Gurugram, Haryana 122016, India¶ Department
of Thermal and Energy Engineering, School of Mechanical Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamilnadu 632014, India* E-mail: arupranjan@iitb.ac.in. Phone: +91 22 2576 7634. Fax: +91 22 2572 6975 (A.R.B.).19 10 2018 31 10 2018 3 10 13584 13597 27 03 2018 01 08 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Multiwalled
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were incorporated into highly
concentrated water-in-oil emulsions with the ultimate aim of achieving
a uniform and effective dispersion of MWCNTs within the emulsion matrix.
The emulsion was formulated in such a way, wherein the internal phase
consists of higher than 90 wt %. By keeping the same aqueous-to-oil
phase ratio, the amount of MWCNTs in the oil phase was systematically
adjusted to investigate their effects on the microstructure development
and rheological behavior of the emulsion. The addition of MWCNTs led
to a reduced droplet size and also resulted in a narrower distribution
of the droplet size. The rheological behavior of nanotube-incorporated
emulsions was characterized with varying MWCNT concentrations and
also as a function of the emulsification time. The rheological characteristics
of the nanotube-incorporated emulsions were identical to those of
the neat emulsion and were primarily governed by the variation in
the droplet size and droplet-size distribution. However, the yield
strain and cross-over strain were independent of the mean droplet
size and polydispersity of the emulsion. Emulsions that have smaller
droplets exhibited higher storage modulus (G′),
yield stress (τY), and apparent viscosity (η).
For all refining times investigated, nanotube-incorporated emulsions
have higher G′, τY, and η
values when compared to the neat emulsion, and these values further
increased with the MWCNT concentration. This was primarily due to
the decrease in the droplet size with MWCNT addition. Furthermore,
our findings suggest that the incorporated MWCNTs did not induce any
significant change in the rheological behavior of emulsions with identical
droplet sizes, and it remained essentially unchanged with the concentration
of MWCNTs. However, the nanotube-incorporated emulsions possessed
solidlike behavior up to a higher applied stress when compared to
a neat emulsion of identical droplet size.

document-id-old-9ao8b00579document-id-new-14ao-2018-00579bccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Emulsions
containing dispersed phase volume fraction (ϕ)
higher than 0.74 are referred to as highly concentrated emulsions
(HCEs). HCEs are extensively used in the food industry, paints, pharmaceuticals,
cosmetics, and petroleum-based industries. In addition, HCEs are widely
used as reaction media in chemical reactions1−3 and as templates
for the preparation of low-density organic and inorganic substances.4−6 The preparation of stable HCEs with volume fractions exceeding the
critical value is only possible by using extremely polydisperse systems
and/or by the deformation of spherical droplets into polyhedrons.7 HCEs maintain their original structure at such
high values of ϕ because of the polydispersity and the “compression”
of spherical droplets within the system.8

Relevant to this work, highly concentrated water-in-oil (w/o) emulsions find application in
the mining industry
as commercial explosives and are widely used in commercial blasting
because of their superior characteristics such as water resistance,
variable viscosity, low vulnerability to accidents, and higher detonation
performance.9,10 The composition of an emulsion
explosive comprises an oxygen-supplying dispersed phase and a continuous
phase that contains an organic fuel.9 A
supersaturated aqueous solution of oxidizing salts that makes up greater
than 90 wt % of the emulsion forms the dispersed phase, whereas the
continuous phase is a solution of the emulsifier in a blend of hydrocarbon
oils. Several studies were reported on different aspects of w/o HCEs,
such as the conditions of formation,9,11−13 preparation,14 and morphology.15 HCEs are characterized as viscoplastic liquids
with complex flow behavior. A number of studies were reported on the
influence of various governing factors on the rheological characteristics
of HCEs, and emulsion explosives in particular.16−27

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are an extremely valuable resource
in nanotechnology,
electronics, optics, and other areas of materials science. They are
used as additives to enhance the thermal, mechanical, and electrical
performances of various structural materials such as ceramics, metals,
and polymers. CNTs are reported to be a unique nanomaterial towards
the formation of both oil-in-water (o/w) and w/o Pickering emulsions.28−33 Wang et al. reported the first emulsion stabilized by CNTs, in which
the single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) were used to stabilize w/o emulsion
system of toulene and water.28 Hobbie et
al. demonstrated that the DNA-coated SWCNTs could stabilize the interface
between two immiscible liquids.29 In addition,
CNT-stabilized w/o and o/w emulsions exhibited a significant decrease
in the rate of coalescence of droplets as compared to emulsions stabilized
by various spherical particles.34 Thus,
CNTs showed the potential to act as emulsion stabilizers.

Recently,
CNTs and several other nanoparticles were incorporated
into HCEs either as Pickering stabilizers or as co-stabilizers, and
the role of various factors such as the particle size, hydrophobicity,
and surfactant/particle ratio on the emulsion stability was studied.35−38 Multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) were also utilized as “cosurfactants”
along with conventional surfactants to prepare w/o HCEs.38 Studies on poly high internal phase emulsion
(polyHIPE) composite foams provided some useful insights regarding
the formation of percolating networks in HCEs.39−43 Conductive polyHIPE composites having a low electrical
percolation threshold were prepared by the polymerization of highly
concentrated w/o emulsions incorporated with CNTs, where CNTs were
either added in the aqueous phase or in the organic phase. Noh et
al. had reported higher electrical conductivity of foams when CNTs
were dispersed in the aqueous phase of HCEs.44 It was assumed that the dispersed CNTs in the aqueous phase could
form an efficient two-dimensional network on the cell surface after
the polymerized monolith becomes dry. By contrast, CNTs have to form
a three-dimensional (3D) network structure inside the polymerized
matrix of the foam if it is dispersed in the organic phase and hence
requires a higher concentration of CNTs.40

In the current study, MWCNTs were incorporated into the oil
phase
of highly concentrated w/o emulsions. If MWCNTs in sufficient quantity
are uniformly and selectively dispersed in the continuous oil phase
of the emulsion, a continuous 3D “networklike” structure
of MWCNTs can be developed throughout the emulsion matrix. An efficient
3D network of MWCNTs within the emulsion can be utilized to vary its
physical characteristics. Further, MWCNTs can impart additional properties
through the 3D network formation, which could be utilized for the
process enhancements and preparation of high-performance materials.
To achieve this, MWCNTs should be selectively dispersed and localized
in the oil phase of the emulsion. Because the continuous phase constitutes
only less than 10 wt % of the total emulsion, the MWCNT network can
be developed with a relatively low amount of nanotubes. The objective
of the current investigation is to elucidate the influence of MWCNT
incorporation on the microstructure, refining characteristics, and
flow behavior of HCEs. A comparator w/o emulsion system with the internal
phase volume fraction greater than 90 wt % was chosen for this study.
Based on the emulsion composition and volume fraction of the phases,
the rheological characteristics of these emulsion systems are identical
to the precursor emulsion utilized in the preparation of “liquid
explosives.” MWCNTs were incorporated into the oil phase of
the HCE, and the influence of the incorporated MWCNTs on the microstructural
development and rheological characteristics of HCEs has been investigated
elaborately.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Characterisation of MWCNTs
The morphology
of MWCNTs, as observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) analyses, is shown in Figure S1a–c
provided in the Supporting Information.
TEM analysis suggests that the average diameter of the MWCNTs is ∼10.2
± 2 nm; MWCNTs exhibit a highly entangled and agglomerated structure.
Figure S1d, provided in the Supporting Information, shows the Raman spectrum of MWCNTs, which exhibit a D-band at ∼1344
cm–1 and a G-band at ∼1581 cm–1. The origin of the D-band is correlated with the defect concentration,45 and the G-band is assigned to the C=C
stretching vibration in the graphene plane for ordered graphitic structures.46 MWCNTs exhibit the Raman intensity ratio, ID/IG, value of ∼1.22,
which is used as a measure of nanotube perfection. X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was performed to determine the elemental
composition and functional groups present on the MWCNT surface. It
was found that the amounts of carbon (C 1s) and oxygen (O 1s) present
in the MWCNTs were 95.3 and 4.7 at. %, respectively. The XPS spectra
of MWCNTs are shown in Figure S2.

2.2 Nanotube-Incorporated HCEs: Microstructure,
Refining Characteristics, and Dispersion of MWCNTs
2.2.1 Refining Behavior: Microstructure Development
during Emulsification
As discussed in the section on emulsion
preparation, the emulsification proceeds in two stages: “formation”
and “refining.” The emulsion formed at the end of the
“formation” step is a coarse emulsion with large droplets
and high polydispersity. Subsequently, during the high-speed “refining”
step, larger droplets of the coarse emulsion get refined further because
of the high applied shear rate. As the “refining” stage
of emulsification proceeds, the mean droplet size reduces and the
distribution width becomes narrower. A thorough understanding of the
refining behavior of HCEs is vital to prepare emulsions with the desired
and essential characteristics. To evaluate the influence of MWCNTs
on the refining behavior of HCEs, the emulsion samples were collected
at varying refining times (tr = 0, 3,
6, and 10) during the “refining” stage. The refining
time tr = 0 indicates the coarse emulsion
formed at the end of the “formation” step. For each
sampling time, microscopic analysis was carried out for all emulsions
with varied concentrations of MWCNTs to investigate their refining
behavior. The neat emulsion had achieved the target viscosity within
10 min of refining, and hence all emulsion samples with different
concentrations of MWCNTs were refined for 10 min. However, the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions achieved a much higher viscosity within the 10 min of refining
when compared to the neat emulsion, and the viscosity significantly
increased with the increase in the MWCNT concentration.

Photographic
images of nanotube-incorporated HCEs with varying concentrations of
MWCNTs are shown in Figure S3. The emulsion
color gradually changes to black with the increase in the concentration
of MWCNTs. Confocal laser scanning micrographs of the neat and various
nanotube-incorporated emulsions, at various stages of refining, are
shown in Figure 1.
These emulsions consist of multifaceted polyhedral droplets of a few
micrometre size and are separated by a submicron-thin layer of the
oil phase. Irrespective of the concentration of the MWCNTs, the droplet
size of the emulsion decreased with an increase in tr. As observed from Figure 1, “agglomerates” of MWCNTs were present
in the emulsion matrix. Average agglomerate size of the remaining
MWCNT agglomerates was estimated from the confocal microscopic analysis
of emulsions of varying MWCNT concentrations. The number of MWCNT
agglomerates and their average size increased with the concentration
of MWCNTs (9.9 μm for 0.5NT emulsion, 11.3 μm for 1NT
emulsion, 12.4 μm for 2NT emulsion, and 14.2 μm for 2NT
emulsion).

Figure 1 Confocal laser scanning micrographs of the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions that are subjected to varying refining times (tr): (a–d) neat emulsion; (e–h) 0.5NT; (i–l)
1NT; (m–p) 2NT; and (q–t) 4NT.

Till date, the highest concentration CNT dispersions in organic
solvents have reported a maximum concentration of nearly 2 mg mL–1.47 However, in the present
study, the concentration of MWCNTs in the oil blend ranges between
2.24 and 35.8 mg mL–1, which is much higher than
the previously reported highest concentration CNT dispersions in various
organic solvents.47 Owing to the very high
concentration of MWCNTs, achieving a homogenous dispersion of “debundled”
MWCNTs in the oil blend is challenging. A fraction of MWCNTs remained
as agglomerates in the oil blend–MWCNT dispersion after ultrasonication.
Further, it was observed that even the extended ultrasonication could
not provide any significant improvement in the dispersion state of
MWCNTs in the oil blend. MWCNT agglomerates were more prominent in
the dispersion that contains higher concentrations of MWCNTs.

For each sampling time, around 700–1000 droplets were considered,
and the diameter data were processed to estimate the average droplet
size and distribution. The droplet-size distribution and the corresponding
probability distribution were then determined for each tr to investigate the microstructural development of emulsions. Figure S4 illustrates the droplet-size distribution
of all emulsions with varying refining times. At all stages of refining,
the droplet-size distributions can be well curve-fitted using the
log-normal fitting. The curve-fitting data were extracted from the
droplet-size distributions for the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions and were analyzed in detail. The width of the droplet-size
distribution was found to decrease with the increase in tr. Figure 2 depicts the superimposed droplet-size distribution curves for the
neat and nanotube-incorporated emulsions at specific refining time
intervals during the emulsification process. The superimposed droplet-size
distribution curves at various stages of emulsification for each emulsion
are shown in Figure S5. The analysis illustrates
the variation in the droplet-size distribution with MWCNT concentration
at various stages of emulsification and provides insights to understand
the refining characteristics of the nanotube-incorporated emulsions.
The strong influence of the concentration of MWCNTs in the evolution
of the emulsion microstructure is clear from the refining characteristics.
It is observed that the increase in the MWCNT concentration results
in finer droplet size and a narrower droplet-size distribution.

Figure 2 Droplet-size
distribution plots of the neat and the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions at different refining times (tr) during emulsification: (a) 0, (b) 3, (c) 6, and (d) 10 min of refining
(log-normal curve fitting data were extracted from the experimental
droplet-size distribution data).

The emulsion refinement data were analyzed further in detail
to
investigate the influence of the incorporated MWCNTs in the emulsion-refining
characteristics. The Sauter mean diameters (mean volume–surface
diameter, d32) at different stages of
refinement were calculated for the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions. The d32 value for each refining
time was determined as follows 1  where ni is the number
of droplets with a diameter di.

Figure 3 depicts
the evolution of d32 values of emulsions
in terms of increasing tr. In general,
the droplet size decreased exponentially with increase in tr and asymptotically converged to saturating
values with the further increase in tr. This behavior is consistent with our previous study on the refining
kinetics of HCEs as well as with the findings on other concentrated
emulsions.48,49

Figure 3 Evolution of the Sauter mean diameter
(d32) as a function of the refining time
(tr) for the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions. The data points
represent the measurement data, and dashed lines represent the exponential
curve-fitting obtained using eq 2.

For the neat coarse emulsion,
that is, the neat emulsion formed
at the end of the “formation” step of emulsification
(tr = 0 min), the estimated d32 value was 54.4 μm. Within 3 min of refining (tr = 3 min), the d32 value reduced rapidly to 23.6 μm. Subsequent to the initial
abrupt refinement, the droplet size further decreased gradually to
6.4 μm for tr = 10 min. Nanotube-incorporated
emulsions also exhibited an exponential reduction in d32 values with the increase in the refining time. Moreover, d32 values at various stages of refining for
the nanotube-incorporated emulsions strongly depend on the concentration
of the MWCNTs in the corresponding emulsion. For the 0.5NT emulsion,
the coarse emulsion d32 value reduced
to 45.6 μm when compared to d32 =
54.4 μm corresponding to the neat coarse emulsion. With a further
increase in the MWCNT concentration in the oil phase, there was a
substantial decrease in the coarse emulsion d32 value. The coarse emulsion d32 value reduced to 13.9 μm with the addition of 4 wt % MWCNTs
in the oil phase. At a specific refining time, the corresponding d32 values for nanotube-incorporated emulsions
decrease with the increase in the concentration of MWCNTs.

The d32 evolution trend of different
emulsions during the emulsion “refining” stage can be
modelled using the following empirical model48 2  where ds, di, and r are
the fitting parameters; ds is the saturating
diameter, r is the rupture rate, and tr is the refining time. The droplet diameter decreases
exponentially with the increase in tr during
refining, and d32 asymptotically approaches
a saturating value ds. Further extended
refining does not produce any significant reduction in the droplet
size. The saturating diameter strongly relies on the shearing rate
and is inversely proportional to the shearing rate.49,50 Moreover, the rupture rate, r, depends on both
the shearing rate and the coarse emulsion diameter. Coarse emulsions
with large droplets exhibit high rupture rates, and the droplet break-up
probability vanishes as the droplets converge to the saturating diameter.
The experimental data were fitted using eq 2, and the values of ds, di, and r obtained for the neat and the nanotube-incorporated emulsions
are presented in Table 1.

Table 1 Values of Fitting Parameters in Eq 2 Calculated for the Neat
and Nanotube-Incorporated Emulsions
emulsion	ds (μm)	di (μm)	r (s–1)	
neat emulsion	4.85	49.34	0.0051	
0.5NT	4.43	41.49	0.0058	
1NT	4.36	17.60	0.0095	
2NT	3.92	16.12	0.0100	
4NT	3.56	10.35	0.0102	
Figure 4a shows
the variation of ds and d32 values after the completion of 10 min of refining,
with the MWCNT concentration in the oil phase of the corresponding
emulsions. It clearly suggests that increasing MWCNT concentration
leads to a decrease in the average droplet size. Similar reports have
been documented in the case of Pickering emulsions, wherein the emulsion
droplet size decreased with the increase in the concentration of silica
particles,51,52 CNTs,28,30 and other hybrid nanoparticles.53 For
the CNT-incorporated polyHIPE foams, the average cell size decreased
with increase in the CNT content.40 Further,
as observed from Figure 4a, the difference between ds and d32 values becomes marginal with an increase
in the concentration of MWCNTs. Hence, with increasing MWCNT concentration,
the emulsion droplets approach the saturating diameter faster during
emulsification. Figure 4b exhibits the variation in the rupture rate as a function of the
concentration of MWCNTs in the emulsion. The rupture rate increases
with the increase in the MWCNT loading. The d32 value, after the completion of 10 min of refining, reduced
from 6.7 to 5.1 μm with the addition of 0.5 wt % MWCNTs. For
the emulsion with 4 wt % MWCNTs in the oil phase, d32 value reduced by ∼48% of that of the neat emulsion.
This suggests that the rupture rate increases with the MWCNT concentration,
and consequently, the mean droplet size decreases.

Figure 4 (a) Variation in the
Sauter mean diameter (d32) (for refining
time, tr = 10
min) and saturating diameter (ds) (derived
from the curve fitting using eq 2) of different emulsions with the increase in the concentration
of MWCNTs in the oil phase; (b) variation in the rupture rate (r) with varying concentration of MWCNTs.

A rapid droplet refinement was exhibited by all
emulsions during
the early stage of the emulsion “refining,” irrespective
of their MWCNT content. Further, with the extended shearing, the droplet
size decreased slowly and asymptotically converged to a saturating
value. The emulsification mechanism and the complex refining kinetics
of HCEs are not well-understood.54 In general,
the initial abrupt droplet refinement could be due to Rayleigh instability,
in which the droplet undergoes rupturing when it attains the critical
radius.49,55,56 Droplets undergo
subsequent gradual rupturing, and the polydispersity decreases with
further shearing. The stress needed to deform a droplet is higher
for a smaller droplet, and hence, the rupture probability decreases
with the reduction in the droplet size. In addition, various physical
and formulation factors often affect the droplet size and the polydispersity
of emulsions.48

Fundamentals of droplet-rupturing
mechanism were first derived
by Taylor, and those analyses were based on a Newtonian continuous
phase. Taylor’s theory was well-suited for dilute emulsions
with a low surfactant concentration.57,58 Subsequently,
researchers developed further much-needed extensions to Taylor’s
theory to broaden its scope.59,60 The analysis has also
been extended to HCEs by calculating the governing shear stress based
on the effective emulsion viscosity (ηeff) instead
of the continuous phase viscosity.56 The
droplet breakup takes place when the capillary number is above a critical
number, Cacrit, which depends on the viscosity
ratio and the type of flow.57,59 For HCEs, it is defined
as Cacrit = ηeff γ̇ r/Γ, where
γ̇ is the shear rate, r is the
radius of the droplet, and Γ is the interfacial tension.40,54 The size of the droplet after the break up is given as r ∝ Cacrit Γ/ηeffγ̇. Thus, the average droplet size of HCEs primarily
depends on the viscosity ratio (note, for HCEs, the viscosity ratio
is defined as the ratio of the dispersed phase viscosity to the effective
viscosity of the emulsion), interfacial tension, and the applied shearing
stress during emulsification. It should be noted that these expressions
were derived on the basis of simple shear flow experiments imposed
on a single droplet without any interaction between the droplets.
However, the actual situation during the formation of HCEs is different,
and the formation and refinement of HCEs could be significantly affected
by the interdroplet interaction.40,49 Moreover,
the flow during mechanical stirring may be a combined simple shear
and elongational flow, instead of purely simple shear flow that was
considered in the original analysis.

The microstructure of the
nanotube-incorporated HCEs can be influenced by the concentration
of MWCNTs and their degree of dispersion. The nanotube-incorporated
emulsions exhibited a significantly higher viscosity when compared
to the neat emulsion, and the viscosity of the emulsion increased
significantly with increase in the MWCNT content. Thus, the trend
of decreasing droplet size with the increase in the concentration
of MWCNTs can be explained by the influence of the viscosity ratio
on Cacrit. It has been reported that the
effective viscosity of the HCE (ηeff) is one of the
major factors, which dictates the droplet refinement of the emulsion,
and the shear thinning nature of the HCEs may enhance its monodispersity.55

Viscosities of the oil phase of emulsions,
as a function of the
shear rate, were measured to estimate the variation in the viscosity
of the continuous phase with respect to the concentration of the incorporated
MWCNTs. Figure 5 illustrates
the viscosity curves for the oil phases of all emulsions. The neat
oil blend viscosity is in the order of ∼0.08 Pa·s and
exhibits largely Newtonian behavior. It can be seen that the viscosity
of the oil blend–MWCNT dispersion (which constitutes the oil
phase of the nanotube-incorporated emulsions) increases significantly
with an increase in the MWCNT content. The oil blend–MWCNT
dispersion showed a “solidlike” behavior at rest, followed
by shear-thinning behavior at high shear rates. The viscosity of the
oil blend–MWCNT dispersion that contains 0.5 wt % MWCNTs was
3 orders of magnitude greater when compared to the viscosity of oil
phase of the neat emulsion at the shear rate of 1 s–1. It is likely that the viscosity of the oil phase plays a major
role in the microstructure evolution of the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions. It is known that the droplet size and the droplet formation
frequency can be controlled by altering the viscosity of the continuous
phase liquid.61 For a given shear rate,
γ̇, and continuous phase viscosity, ηc, the shear stress applied on the droplet is ηCγ̇.
Thus, an increase in the oil phase viscosity results in a relatively
higher shear force on the penetrating aqueous phase, and hence a there
is a higher probability of droplet rupture. Therefore, the addition
of MWCNTs in the oil phase results in an increase in the applied stress
during refining, which in turn leads to a decrease in the droplet
size. The rupture rate, being a function of the shearing rate, also
increases with the increase in the concentration of MWCNTs.

Figure 5 Variation in
the viscosities of the oil phase of the neat and the
nanotube-incorporated emulsions as a function of the shear rate: illustration
of the increase in the apparent viscosity with the addition of MWCNTs.

Furthermore, the interfacial tension
Γ is another important
factor, which influences the droplet size. The estimation of the interfacial
tension of HCEs and determining its change with an increasing concentration
of MWCNTs are difficult. It is well-known that CNTs, depending on
their surface functionality, can reside at the oil–water interface
and act as Pickering stabilizers.28−32 MWCNTs used in the present study are pristine and
are highly hydrophobic in nature, and they would prefer to stay in
the oil phase of the emulsion. However, the XPS analysis suggests
that the MWCNTs contain ∼4.7 at. % oxygen functionality. Therefore,
there is a possibility that a minor fraction of dispersed MWCNTs may
reside at the oil–water interface. If a fraction of the incorporated
MWCNTs resides at the oil–water interface, it could act as
a co-surfactant and lead to a reduction in the interfacial tension
and diminish the coalescence rate in the emulsion.34,38 The reduction in the interfacial tension, if any, would also contribute
to a reduction in the droplet size. Thus, the state of dispersion
of nanotubes within the emulsion also plays a vital role in determining
the final droplet size of the nanotube-incorporated HCEs.

2.2.2 State of Dispersion of MWCNTs in the Emulsion:
Morphological Analysis Using Cryo-Field Emission Gun (FEG)-SEM
The cryo-FEG-SEM analysis was carried out to understand more directly
the state of dispersion of MWCNTs in the emulsion. The emulsion samples
were frozen using liquid nitrogen, and SEM images were captured with
the fractured surfaces. The resulting cryo-FEG-SEM images of the neat
and nanotube-incorporated emulsions at various magnifications are
shown in Figure 6.
Micrographs of the neat emulsion at different magnifications are shown
in Figure 6a–d.
The nonspherical droplets of the dispersed aqueous phase and the thin
layer of the continuous oil phase between the polyhedral droplets,
both are signatures of HCEs, can be clearly observed in the micrographs.
The morphology of the 1NT emulsion (Figure 6e–h), 2NT emulsion (Figure 6i–l), and 4NT emulsion
(Figure 6m–p)
are depicted in the cryo-FEG SEM micrographs at different magnifications
(Figure 6e–p).
MWCNTs dispersed in the emulsion matrix can be seen on the fractured
surfaces of the emulsion. However, the selective dispersion of MWCNTs
in the continuous phase of the emulsion cannot be unequivocally concluded
from the fractured surface morphology. Thus, cryo-FEG-SEM observation
alone is not sufficient to fully understand the dispersion states
of MWCNTs in the respective emulsions.

Figure 6 Cryo-FEG-SEM micrographs
of the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions: (a–d) neat emulsion at different magnifications;
nanotube-incorporated emulsions of varying concentration of MWCNTs
at different magnifications: (e–h) 1NT; (i–l) 2NT; and
(m–p) 4NT.

The majority of the incorporated
MWCNTs are expected to remain
in the oil phase of the emulsion and form a 3D networklike structure
within the emulsion matrix. However, it is possible that a fraction
of MWCNTs may reside at the interface or even move to the aqueous
phase during the rigorous mixing. In addition, the maximum amount
of MWCNTs that can be incorporated into the emulsion is limited. Stable
emulsions were hardly obtained when the concentration of MWCNTs exceeded
∼5 wt % of the oil phase, or even if some emulsions were formed,
they could not accommodate the same volume fraction of the aqueous
phase. Hence, the aqueous-to-oil phase ratio will no longer remain
the same if the concentration of MWCNTs exceeds ∼5 wt % of
the oil phase. Alternately in HCEs, the thin film of the oil blend
covers a large area between the dispersed aqueous droplets, and hence
the dispersed MWCNTs should be in sufficient amount to form an efficient
3D network throughout the oil phase of the emulsion. A homogenous
dispersion of the individualized MWCNTs, which forms an efficient
3D network of MWCNTs throughout the oil phase, is necessary for modifying
the emulsion properties.

2.3 Rheological
Characteristics of Nanotube-Incorporated
Emulsions
The rheological characteristics of HCEs, and emulsion
explosives in particular, play a crucial role in the processing operations,
packaging, and also when they are pumped through long pipelines during
their use and transportation.62 Furthermore,
rheological analysis can be used to probe the morphology and also
to assess the stability of the emulsion.62 On the basis of the applied load, HCEs exhibit either “solidlike”
or “liquidlike” rheological response. HCEs possess yield
stress, and when subjected to small deformations that are lower than
its yield stress, these emulsions demonstrate elastic, gel-like rheological
response over a wide frequency range.17,21,63 When subjected to stresses exceeding its yield stress,
HCEs demonstrate a shear rate-dependent viscosity and eventually start
flowing like liquids with strong non-Newtonian behavior. The viscoelastic
properties of HCEs have been shown to depend on the mean droplet size,
droplet-size distribution, interfacial tension, and volume fractions
of the phases.64

Steady-state shear
and dynamic oscillatory rheological tests were carried out to understand
the manner in which the MWCNT incorporation and the resultant microstructure
influence the rheological behavior of HCEs. Rheological properties
of the nanotube-incorporated emulsions were characterized as a function
of the emulsification time as well as the concentration of MWCNTs.
Rheological tests were carried out on HCEs prepared with different
mixing times to assess the role of droplet size in dictating the rheological
behavior. Further, emulsion samples with an identical droplet size
of d32 ≈ 5 μm were chosen
from HCEs with different MWCNT contents, and their rheological behavior
was analyzed separately. This was intended to eliminate the effect
of decreased droplet size, with the addition of MWCNTs, on the rheological
behavior. Thus, the sole effect of the incorporated MWCNTs in dictating
the rheological characteristics, if any, could be elucidated. The
droplet-size distributions of the emulsion samples with an identical
droplet size, along with their d32 and
corresponding tr, are given in Figure 7.

Figure 7 Droplet-size distributions
of emulsions of varying MWCNT concentrations
and identical droplet size of d32 ≈
5 μm. The inset table shows details of the corresponding refining
time (tr) and d32 values for all emulsion samples.

2.3.1 Oscillatory Tests: Amplitude Sweep Testing
in Small and Large Deformation Regimes
The oscillatory amplitude
sweep measurement results are illustrated in Figure 8, which depicts the variation of dynamic
storage modulus (G′) and loss modulus (G″) with shear strain (γ). The corresponding
stress behavior data, which were extracted from the strain sweep tests
that shows the variation in G′ and G″ as a function of the increasing shear stress,
are shown in Figure S6 provided in the Supporting Information. Amplitude sweep tests were performed in the strain
range that covers both small and large amplitude deformation regimes
to get a reasonable understanding of the linear viscoelastic (LVE)
and non-LVE behavior of these emulsions. The results suggest that
when subjected to low strain values, these emulsions exhibit LVE behavior,
as indicated by the constant plateau values of both G′ and G″ in the low deformation range.
At higher deformation range, beyond the LVE regime, these emulsions
exhibit a yield point and a cross-over point.

Figure 8 Amplitude sweep test
results illustrating the variation of the
dynamic storage modulus (G′) and loss modulus
(G″) with shear strain (γ) for (a) neat
emulsions with different refining times (tr); (b) 1NT emulsions with different tr; (c) emulsions with different MWCNT concentrations and an identical
droplet size, d32 ≈ 5 μm;
and (d) emulsions with different MWCNT concentrations and same tr = 10 min (oscillatory tests were performed
by varying % strain from 0.01 to 200% at a frequency of 1 Hz; filled
symbols denote G′ and open symbols denote G″).

Figure 8a,b
demonstrates
the variation in G′ and G″ with increasing strain amplitude for the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsion samples prepared with different tr. For nanotube-incorporated emulsions, the amplitude sweep test results
of only 1NT emulsion samples with different refining times are shown
here because a similar trend with tr is
demonstrated by all nanotube-incorporated emulsions. Evolutions of G′ and G″ of the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions are quite similar to that of the neat emulsion, although G′ values increase significantly with the increase
in the concentration of MWCNTs. The constant plateau values at low
strain indicate that these emulsions exhibit a primarily solidlike
elastic response in this strain range. At higher deformation amplitudes, G′ values decrease because of the collapse of the
interdroplet structure. Eventually, the G′/G″ cross-over happens at the cross-over strain, indicating
a solidlike to liquidlike transition, and the emulsions demonstrate
a viscosity-dominant rheological response.25 The G′ and G″ curves
do not fall constantly when the deformation is increased beyond the
LVE range. The G″ curves show one peak, and
the increasing G″ values in the partial range
indicate the increasing portion of deformation energy, which is spent
to change the internal structure before the final break down of the
emulsion structure.65 Several studies have
reported similar dependencies between the deformation amplitude and
the shear modulus for HCEs.21,22,25,66,67

Further, the amplitude results suggest that the yield strain
and
the cross-over strain is independent of the refining time (hence,
independent of the droplet size and the polydispersity) of the emulsion.
The yield strain and cross-over strain of the neat emulsion and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions do not change significantly for samples prepared with different
refining times. However, there is a considerable increase in G′ values with the refining time for all samples,
irrespective of the concentration of MWCNTs.

There is a significant
increase in the flow stress (τf, shear stress at
which G′ = G″; for
a deformation amplitude that exceeds τf, viscous
behavior dominates over elastic response) for both
neat and nanotube-incorporated emulsions with the decrease in the
droplet size (Figure S6a,b of the Supporting Information). The thin continuous oil phase layer between the dispersed droplets
will get thinner with extended refining because of the reduction in
the droplet size, and there will be a subsequent increase in the total
interfacial area per unit volume. Eventually, a thicker and more elastic
emulsion, which is capable of storing more interfacial energy per
unit volume, will be formed. In addition, the surface area-to-volume
ratio of the dispersed droplets increases with the reduction in the
droplet size, which in turn leads to an improved interparticle interaction.
Thus, the energy requirements for the emulsion to commence the flow
increase with the decrease in the average droplet size. It explains
the increase in G′ and τf with the increase in tr.

Figure 8c presents
the comparison of amplitude test results of emulsions with different
MWCNT concentrations and identical droplet size (d32 = 5 ± 0.2 μm). No significant changes in
stress and strain behaviors are noticed over the range of studied
MWCNT concentrations. However, there is a consistent and modest decrease
in the G′ value with the increase in MWCNT
loading. Presumably, this can be attributed to the increase in the
average size of the remaining MWCNT agglomerates in the emulsion with
the concentration of MWCNTs. As seen from the microscopic observations
above, the number of agglomerates and their average size increase
with the MWCNT addition, which in turn lead to a decrease in the G′ value of the emulsion. Further, there is a consistent
increase in the flow stress, yield point, and cross-over strain of
the emulsion with the increase in the concentration of MWCNTs, implying
the increase in the energy required to initiate the flow. The cross-over
strain and flow stress values of the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions are listed in Table 2. An increase in the cross-over strain indicates the increased
resistance of the emulsion to a strain-induced irreversible deformation.
Thus, the flow of nanotube-incorporated emulsions seems to start at
a slightly higher strain value when compared to the neat emulsion.
The nanotube-incorporated emulsions possess solidlike behavior up
to a higher applied stress, when compared to the neat emulsion, and
the cross-over strain increases with the concentration of MWCNTs.

Table 2 Cross-over Strain, Flow Stress (τf), and Storage Modulus (G′) Values
for Emulsions with an Identical Droplet Size (d32 ≈ 5 μm) and Varying Concentration of MWCNTs
(G′ Values were Estimated from the Plateau
of the Angular Frequency (ω) Dependence of G′ Given in Figure 9)
emulsion	tr (min)	cross-over
strain (%)	flow stress,
τf (Pa)	G′ (Pa)	
neat emulsion	15	52	552.8	2580	
0.5NT	10	55	564.2	2430	
1NT	8	59	580.0	2470	
2NT	6	62	581.4	2390	
4NT	3	69	583.5	2200	
Figure 8d demonstrates
the strain behavior of emulsions with different MWCNT contents and
the same refining time, tr = 10 min. Emulsions
exhibit a consistent increase in G′, τf, yield strain, and cross-over strain with an increase in
the MWCNT concentration (Figures 8d and S6d in the Supporting Information). A similar trend is observed at all measured refining times, and
the observation is consistent with the observation in the microstructure
analysis above. For a fixed tr, the emulsion
droplet size decreases with the increase in the concentration of MWCNTs
and makes the emulsion more elastic in nature. Thus, the important
factor that led to the increase in rheological parameters of the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions is the enhanced droplet refinement with the addition of
MWCNTs.

2.3.2 Oscillatory Tests: Small Amplitude Frequency
Sweep Measurements
The frequency sweep tests were carried
out in the angular frequency (ω) range of 0.05–300 rad
s–1, and the strain amplitude was 0.5%. The frequency
sweep tests were performed only with a small strain amplitude, and
the amplitude sweep tests indicated that 0.5% strain was within the
LVE regime for all emulsion samples under study. Frequency sweep tests
could indicate the stability of the emulsion at a constant strain
amplitude over the measured frequency range.

The frequency sweep
test results of different samples that demonstrate the variation of G′ and G″ with angular frequency
(ω) are illustrated in Figure 9. It is observed that G′ is almost constant in a wide range of angular
frequency covering several orders of magnitude for the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions, regardless of the droplet size and MWCNT concentration,
as shown in Figure 9a–d. Often, this plateau value in the wide range of ω
is considered as the elastic modulus of the emulsion.63,68 Further, G′ dominated over G″ in the measured frequency range for all samples, which indicates
that the rheological response of these emulsions is mostly elastic
during the frequency sweep tests. The dynamic behavior of different
emulsions in terms of variation of complex viscosity (|η*|)
with ω is shown in Figure S7 provided in the Supporting Information. The |η*| data characterize the
total resistance of emulsions to flow, which arises from contributions
of both the viscous and elastic resistances. All emulsions behave
as a non-Newtonian shear-thinning fluid, and the decrease of |η*|
with the increase in frequencies can be attributed to the increased
dissipation of energy within the emulsion, thus leading to a decrease
in the resistance to flow.

Figure 9 Frequency sweep results illustrating the behavior
of storage modulus
(G′) and loss modulus (G″)
with angular frequency (ω) for different emulsion samples: (a)
neat emulsions with different refining times (tr); (b) 1NT emulsions with different tr; (c) emulsions with different MWCNT concentrations and an
identical droplet size, d32 ≈ 5
μm; and (d) emulsions with different MWCNT concentrations and
same tr = 10 min (frequency sweep tests
performed by varying ω from 0.05 to 200 rad s–1 at a constant strain of 0.5%; filled symbols denote G′ and open symbols denote G″).

It is further observed that G′ and |η*|
values increase with the increase in tr (Figure S7a,b of the Supporting Information and Figure 9a,b).
Furthermore, for samples that are prepared with same tr, both G′ and |η*| increase
with the increase in the MWCNT concentration (Figure S7d of the Supporting Information and Figure 9d). This observation is consistent with our
previous discussion on the role of the droplet size. The emulsion
droplet size decreases with the addition of MWCNTs, and hence the
increase in G′ and |η*| are primarily
because of the reduced droplet size. An increase in the complex viscosity
with the addition of MWCNTs implies a higher total resistance of the
emulsion against an applied stress. The behavior of G′, G″, and |η*| remained essentially
unchanged with changes in the MWCNT concentration for the samples
with identical droplet sizes (Figure S7d of the Supporting Information and Figure 9d). However, there is a modest decrease in
the G′ values with the increase in the MWCNT
concentration for samples with an identical droplet size (Table 2). This affirms the
data in the previous section, again pointing to the increase in the
number and average size of the remaining MWCNT agglomerates in the
emulsion with the increase in the concentration of MWCNTs. It indicates
that the stability of emulsions could be affected because of the presence
of MWCNTs in the continuous oil phase.

2.3.3 Rotary
Shear Sweep Tests: Yield Behavior
of HCEs
Steady-state rotary tests were performed to investigate
the yield behavior and apparent viscosity of emulsions. Steady-state
flow curves of different samples were procured in the upward shear
rate-sweeping mode. The deformation behavior in terms of shear stress
(τ) variation with respect to the shear rate (γ̇)
is presented in Figure 10. The variation in viscosity (η) with γ̇
is shown in Figure S8 provided in the Supporting Information. The flow curves show yield behavior (Figure 10), and the viscosity
curves exhibit a reducing apparent viscosity (Figure S8 of the Supporting Information) with the increasing shear
rates for all samples, irrespective of the concentration of MWCNTs.
HCEs possess yield stress, and hence they do not undergo any irreversible
deformation when the applied shear stress is below the yield value.
However, at shear stresses that exceed the yield stress, HCEs exhibit
shear-thinning behavior. As the shear stress increases and approaches
the yield stress, droplets get deformed and the emulsion microstructure
starts to break down. The collapse of the emulsion interdroplet structure
results in a drop in the apparent viscosity, and subsequently, emulsions
start to flow. Thus, the large decrease in viscosity with the increase
in the shear rate suggests the fracturing of the stable emulsion structure.40

Figure 10 Steady-state flow curves obtained through shear sweep
tests for
different emulsions, illustrating the variation in the shear stress
(τ) with shear rate (γ̇): (a) neat emulsions with
different refining times (tr); (b) 1NT
emulsions with different tr; (c) emulsions
of varying MWCNT concentrations and an identical droplet size, d32 ≈ 5 μm; (d) emulsions of varying
MWCNT concentrations and same tr = 10
min (shear sweep tests were performed by varying γ̇ from
0.001 to 10 s–1).

The flow curve shifts to higher shear stress for an emulsion
that
is subjected to higher refining time and hence exhibits higher yield
stress (Figure 10a,b).
It is evident from the apparent viscosity curves that the emulsion
with smaller droplets shows a higher viscosity, especially at low
shear rates (Figure S8a,b of the Supporting Information). For all refining times, the emulsions being studied exhibit non-Newtonian
shear-thinning flow behavior and possess a yield stress. These observations
suggest that the yield stress and viscosity of the emulsions primarily
depend on the droplet size and the polydispersity. For a given tr, the yield stress and apparent viscosity of
the emulsions increase with the MWCNT concentration (Figure S8d of
the Supporting Information and Figure 10d). The reduction
in the droplet size and the subsequent thinning of intervening liquid
layers with the addition of MWCNTs affect the emulsion’s ability
to flow, leading to an increase in their yield stress and apparent
viscosity. This reinforces the discussion in previous sections that
the continuous oil phase layer between the aqueous droplets plays
a crucial role in dictating the rheological behavior and consistency
of HCEs.69 An increase in the yield stress
and viscosity with an increase in the CNT content was reported in
CNT-incorporated poly(styrene-co-divinylbenzene)-based
HCEs.40 Similar observations were reported
in the case of Pickering emulsions as well.70

Further, it is noticed that the deformation behavior nearly
remains
the same as a function of the MWCNT concentration for emulsions with
an identical droplet size for studied concentrations of MWCNTs, as
shown in Figure S8c of the Supporting Information and Figure 10c.
This suggests that the deformation behavior of HCEs is not much affected
because of the presence of dispersed MWCNTs within the thin intervening
oil phase. It should be noted that there was a considerable change
in the apparent viscosity of the of the continuous oil phase with
the addition of MWCNTs. However, this did not affect the overall viscosity
of the HCEs. This is desirable because the pumping of nanotube-incorporated
HCEs does not require much additional energy when compared to that
of the neat emulsion. To summarize, the rheological behavior of nanotube-incorporated
emulsions essentially remained the same for emulsions with an identical
droplet size, regardless of their MWCNT concentrations. However, the
decrease in the droplet size with the addition of MWCNTs plays a crucial
role in modifying the rheological behavior of emulsions prepared with
the same tr.

3 Conclusions
MWCNTs were incorporated into the highly concentrated w/o emulsions, which are identical
to the precursor
emulsion used in the production of liquid explosives. MWCNTs were
initially dispersed in the oil phase of the emulsion to achieve an
efficient 3D network of MWCNTs throughout the continuous phase of
the emulsion, which can ultimately modify the emulsion characteristics.
The refining characteristics and rheological properties of nanotube-incorporated
emulsions have been investigated. This study shows a range of important
features. The incorporation of MWCNTs led to a finer emulsion microstructure
with a reduced droplet size and a narrowed droplet-size distribution.
The decrease in the droplet size with the addition of MWCNTs is primarily
because of the increase in the viscosity of the oil phase, which in
turn results in an increased applied stress during the refining of
the emulsion. The state of dispersion of nanotubes within the emulsion
also plays a crucial role in determining the final microstructure
of the nanotube-incorporated emulsions. The state of dispersion of
MWCNTs in the emulsion was investigated through cryo-FEG-SEM analysis,
and the majority of the incorporated MWCNTs were expected remain in
the oil phase of the emulsion forming a 3D networklike structure at
some percolation threshold. However, the selective dispersion of MWCNTs
in the continuous phase was not unequivocally concluded from the fractured
surface morphology.

The rheological characteristics of the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions
were identical to that of the neat emulsion. The influence of the
refining time and the concentration of MWCNTs on the rheological properties
were characterized separately. The rheological behavior of these emulsions
was primarily governed by their droplet size and droplet-size distribution.
However, the yield strain and cross-over strain values were independent
of the droplet size and polydispersity of the emulsion. It was noticed
that the storage modulus (G′), yield stress
(τY), and apparent viscosity (η) values increased
with the refining time. At higher refining times, the droplets get
refined, and the smaller droplets are more tightly packed than the
larger ones. The thickness of the continuous oil phase layer plays
a crucial role in dictating the viscoelasticity and consistency of
the emulsion. Investigations on the role of refining times indicated
that, for any given refining time, nanotube-incorporated emulsions
exhibited higher G′, τY,
and η values than the neat emulsion, and there was a consistent
increase in their values with the increase in the MWCNT concentration.
This can be attributed to the decrease in the droplet size with the
addition of MWCNTs. The investigation on the influence of the MWCNT
concentration on emulsions with identical droplet sizes suggested
that the incorporation of MWCNTs did not induce any significant change
in the rheological behavior of emulsions. However, the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions possessed solidlike behavior up to a higher applied stress,
when compared to the neat emulsion of identical droplet size, as indicated
by the increase in the yield and cross-over strain values. Furthermore,
the modest decrease in the G′ values indicates
the reduction in the elasticity of emulsions because of the presence
of MWCNT agglomerates in the emulsion matrix.

4 Experimental
Section
4.1 Materials Used
Ammonium sulphate
and ammonium chloride were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. All constituents
of the oil phase, that is, canola oil, paraffinic oil, and polyisobutylene
succinic anhydride (PIBSA)-diethanolamine derivative emulsifier were
provided by Orica Australia Pty. Ltd. Thin, purified MWCNTs prepared
by the catalytic carbon vapor deposition process were obtained from
Nanocyl S.A., Belgium (grade: NC 3100; D = 9.5 nm, L = 1.5 μm, purity > 95% as per manufacturer).
All
emulsion samples were prepared using deionized water.

4.2 Preparation of Emulsions
4.2.1 Dispersed
Phase
An aqueous solution
of inorganic salts forms the dispersed phase of the emulsion, and
it constitutes 93.5 wt % of the total emulsion. Water constitutes
∼55 wt % of the dispersed phase, and the remaining material
is ammonium sulphate and ammonium chloride salts and some trace additives.
Trace additives of low concentration (0.1 wt % each) are used to regulate
the pH of the aqueous phase. The aqueous phase density is ∼1.2
g/cm3.

4.2.2 Continuous Phase
The mixture of
the emulsifier in a blend of two industrial grade hydrocarbon oils,
namely, canola oil and paraffinic oil forms the continuous phase.
The emulsifier is an alkanolamine derivative of PIBSA and is prepared
through the reaction of 1:1 M ratio of PIBSA and diethanolamine. The
molar mass of the PIBSA derivative surfactant ranges from 900 to 1300,
and its hydrophile–lipophile balance value is low, between
2 and 4, and favors the formation of w/o emulsions. The hydrophilic
moieties of the surfactant consist of ester, amide, and salt components,
and the lipophilic moiety is derived from the PIBSA chain. The emulsifier
is a mixture of the surfactant and diluent oil. The emulsifier makes
up 36 wt % of the oil phase in all emulsions. The density of the oil
phase (consisting of oils and the emulsifier) is 0.895 g/cm3.

4.2.3 Preparation
The emulsion samples
were prepared using Caframo BDC 1850, which is a high-torque mixer,
along with a high-shear Jiffy impeller (Jiffy Mixer LM, 32 mm diameter).
To effectively “debundle” the MWCNT agglomerates and
achieve a better state of dispersion in the oil phase, MWCNTs were
initially dispersed in tetrahydrofuran (THF) through ultrasonication
for 30 min using a probe sonicator (Sonics & Materials Inc., Ultrasonic
Processor 750W, 40% amplitude). THF was then evaporated from the suspension
and vacuum dried to obtain a less-agglomerated powder of MWCNTs. To
incorporate these MWCNTs into the HCEs, MWCNTs were then dispersed
in the oil blend through ultrasonication for 2 h using a probe sonicator
under the same conditions as before. MWCNT–oil blend dispersions
with varied concentrations of MWCNTs were used as the oil phase to
prepare the nanotube-incorporated HCEs.

The concentration of
MWCNTs in the emulsion for the study has been varied from 0.5 to 4
wt % of the oil phase of the emulsion; the corresponding concentration
of MWCNTs in the emulsion ranges from 0.0325 to 0.26 wt % of the total
emulsion. The aqueous phase-to-oil phase ratio in the nanotube-incorporated
emulsions was the same as that of the neat emulsion. The aqueous phase
composition of emulsions was unaltered for all studied samples. However,
an equivalent amount of paraffinic oil was replaced by MWCNTs in the
oil phase of the nanotube-incorporated emulsions to maintain the aqueous
phase-to-oil phase ratio. It should be noted that these emulsions
are stabilized by a large amount of the surfactant, and hence these
are not the Pickering emulsions. Details of the emulsion compositions
and their sample codes are presented in Tables 3 and 4. The sample
code nNT represents the emulsion sample in which
MWCNTs constitute n wt % of the oil phase. Table 3 summarizes the concentration
of MWCNTs in the oil phase and their corresponding fraction in the
total emulsion for each emulsion sample. Table 4 depicts the oil-phase composition of the nNT emulsion.

Table 3 Sample Codes and
Their Compositions
for Nanotube-Incorporated Emulsions
 	concentration
of MWCNTs (wt %)	
sample code	in oil phase	in total
emulsion	
neat emulsion	0	0	
0.5NT	0.5	0.0325	
1NT	1	0.065	
2NT	2	0.13	
4NT	4	0.26	
Table 4 Oil-Phase Composition
for Different
Nanotube-Incorporated Emulsions
 	oil phase
composition of nanotube-incorporated emulsions	
sample code	MWCNTs (wt %)	canola oil + paraffinic oil (wt %)	surfactant/diluent oil mixture (wt %)	
nNT	n	64 – n	36	
The emulsification process is completed in two stages:
a low-speed
(700 rpm) “emulsion formation” stage and a high-shear
(1400 rpm) “emulsion refining” stage. The detailed emulsion
preparation procedure can be found elsewhere.48 The temperature was kept above the fudge point of the aqueous phase
throughout the emulsification process and was then gradually brought
to ambient temperature after the “refining” stage. The
aqueous phase is a supersaturated solution and is at the supercooled
condition at the ambient temperature, and hence the emulsion is thermodynamically
unstable. Nevertheless, at least for several weeks, these HCEs are
kinetically stable. All results presented in this study are based
on the analysis performed on freshly prepared samples.

4.3 Characterization Techniques
4.3.1 Characterization
of MWCNTs
Raman
spectroscopic analysis of MWCNTs was performed using an HR 800 micro-Raman
spectrometer (HORIBA Jobin Yovon, France) with an incident laser excitation
wavelength of 532 nm. TEM investigation was performed using a JEOL
JEM-2100 F (Japan) field emission electron microscope for MWCNTs.

SEM analysis was performed using FEG-SEM (JSM-7600F, Japan) at 10
kV accelerating voltage. XPS was carried out using an AXIS Supra X-ray
photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos Analytical, UK). Monochromatic
Al Kα (1486.6 eV), 600 W X-ray source was used for XPS measurements.
The energy resolution was ∼0.5 eV, and the XPS-imaging spatial
resolution was ∼1 μm. Deconvolution of C 1s and O 1s
XPS spectra was done by using XPSPeak 4.1 software.

4.3.2 Characterization of Emulsions
Confocal
micrographs were captured using an Olympus IX 81 confocal laser scanning
microscope. A thin layer of the emulsion was made between glass slides
for the confocal microscopic analysis. The sample preparation for
the confocal microscopic analysis can be found elsewhere.48 The emulsion droplet diameters were measured
using ImageJ (National Institute of Health, USA) software.

The
emulsion microstructure and the state of dispersion of MWCNTs in the
emulsion were studied using the cryo-FEG-SEM facility, JSM-7600F,
with a cryo-preparation system (PP3000T, Japan). The sample preparation
for the cryo FEG SEM investigation can be found elsewhere.48

The rheological tests were performed at
25 °C using an Anton
Paar Rheometer (model: Physica MCR302) with a sandblasted parallel-plate
measuring system. The diameter of the sandblasted parallel-plate geometry
was 40 mm, and the gap between plates was 1 mm. The dynamic behavior
of emulsions was investigated through oscillatory rheological tests,
and the steady-state flow curves were acquired through rotational
shear sweep tests. The initial relaxation of emulsion samples was
ensured during all measurements by operating the rheometer at constant
initial values of the controlled parameter, that is, shear or strain.
In rotary shear sweep tests, the shear rate ranged between 0.001 and
10 s–1. In amplitude sweep tests, the % strain was
varied from 0.01 to 200% at 1 Hz frequency. This strain range covers
both small and large amplitude regimes and provided a reasonably good
assessment of the LVE and non-LVE behaviors. Frequency sweep tests
were conducted at a small strain amplitude of 0.5%, and the angular
frequency was varied from 0.05 to 300 rad s–1. The
strain amplitude of 0.5% was within the LVE regime for all emulsion
samples under study and was decided from the amplitude sweep tests.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00579.SEM and TEM micrographs
and Raman spectrum of MWCNTs;
XPS spectra of MWCNTs; photographs of nanotube-incorporated HCEs of
varying MWCNT concentrations; evolution of the droplet-size distribution
of the neat and nanotube-incorporated emulsions at different stages
of emulsification; superimposed droplet-size distribution curves at
various stages of emulsification for the neat and nanotube-incorporated
emulsions of varied MWCNT concentrations; amplitude sweep test results
illustrating the variation of the dynamic storage modulus (G′) and loss modulus (G″)
with shear stress (τ); frequency sweep results illustrating
the behavior of complex viscosity (|η*|) with angular frequency
(ω) for different emulsion samples; and steady-state flow curves
obtained through shear sweep tests for different emulsions, illustrating
the variation in the viscosity (η) with shear rate (γ̇)
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00579_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful
to Orica Australia Pty.
Ltd. for the financial support. The authors would also like to acknowledge
SAIF, CRNTS, the “CRYO-FEG-SEM Central Facility”, the
“XPS Central Facility” and the “Confocal Laser
Scanning Microscope Central Facility” of IIT Bombay. The authors
are thankful to Anton Paar India Pvt. Ltd and Dr. Ashish Lele, NCL
Pune, India for the support to carry out rheological tests.
==== Refs
References
Espelt L. ; Clapés P. ; Esquena J. ; Manich A. ; Solans C. 
Enzymatic
Carbon–Carbon Bond Formation in Water-in-Oil Highly Concentrated
Emulsions (Gel Emulsions) . Langmuir 
2003 , 19 , 1337 –1346 . 10.1021/la020811b .
Clapés P. ; Espelt L. ; Navarro M. A. ; Solans C. 
Highly Concentrated
Water-in-Oil Emulsions as Novel Reaction Media for Protease-Catalysed
Kinetically Controlled Peptide Synthesis . J.
Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2 
2001 , 1394 –1399 . 10.1039/b100784j .
Solans C. ; Esquena J. ; Azemar N. 
Highly Concentrated
(Gel) Emulsions,
Versatile Reaction Media . Curr. Opin. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
2003 , 8 , 156 –163 . 10.1016/s1359-0294(03)00021-9 .
Esquena J. ; Sankar R. ; Solans C. 
Highly Concentrated
W/O Emulsions
Prepared by the PIT Method as Templates for Solid Foams . Langmuir 
2003 , 19 , 2983 –2988 . 10.1021/la026129z .
Sonneville-Aubrun O. ; Bergeron V. ; Gulik-Krzywicki T. ; Jönsson B. ; Wennerström H. ; Lindner P. ; Cabane B. 
Surfactant
Films in
Biliquid Foams† . Langmuir 
2000 , 16 , 1566 –1579 . 10.1021/la990599k .
Maekawa H. ; Esquena J. ; Bishop S. ; Solans C. ; Chmelka B. F. 
Meso/Macroporous
Inorganic Oxide Monoliths from Polymer Foams . Adv. Mater. 
2003 , 15 , 591 –596 . 10.1002/adma.200304248 .
Lissant K. J. 
The Geometry
of High-Internal-Phase-Ratio Emulsions . J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
1966 , 22 , 462 –468 . 10.1016/0021-9797(66)90091-9 .
Solans C. ; Esquena J. ; Azemar N. ; Rodríguez C. ; Kunieda H.  Highly Concentrated
(Gel) Emulsions: Formation and Properties . In Emulsions: Structure, Stability and Interactions ; Petsev D.  , Ed.; Elsevier
Ltd : London , 2004 ; pp 511 –555 .
Yates D. E. ; Dack S. W.  Emulsion Explosive
Composition . U.S. Patent 4,710,248 A , 1987 .
Sudweeks W. B. 
Physical
and Chemical Properties of Industrial Slurry Explosives . Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev. 
1985 , 24 , 432 –436 . 10.1021/i300019a019 .
Kunieda H. ; Solans C. ; Shida N. ; Parra J. L. 
The Formation of
Gel-Emulsions in a Water/Nonionic Surfactant/Oil System . Colloids Surf. 
1987 , 24 , 225 –237 . 10.1016/0166-6622(87)80352-9 .
Solans C. ; Azermar N. ; Parra J. L. 
High-Internal-Phase-Volume
Emulsions
in Water/Nonionic Surfactant/Hydrocarbon Systems . Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci. 
1988 , 76 , 224 –227 . 10.1007/bfb0114197 .
Bampfield H. A. ; Cooper J.  Emulsion Explosives . In Encyclopedia of Emulsion
Technology ; Becher P.  , Ed.; Marcel
dekker : New York , 1988 ; Vol. 3 , pp 281 –306 .
Pons R. ; Carrera I. ; Erra P. ; Kunieda H. ; Solans C. 
Novel Preparation
Methods for Highly Concentrated Water-in-Oil Emulsions . Colloids Surf., A 
1994 , 91 , 259 –266 . 10.1016/0927-7757(94)02950-4 .
Pons R. ; Ravey J. C. ; Sauvage S. ; Stébé M. J. ; Erra P. ; Solans C. 
Structural
Studies on Gel Emulsions . Colloids Surf., A 
1993 , 76 , 171 –177 . 10.1016/0927-7757(93)80076-q .
Pons R. ; Solans C. ; Stebé M. J. ; Erra P. ; Ravey J. C. 
Stability
and Rheological Properties of Gel Emulsions . Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci. 
1992 , 89 , 110 –113 . 10.1007/bfb0116290 .
Pons R. ; Solans C. ; Tadros T. F. 
Rheological
Behavior of Highly Concentrated
Oil-in-Water (o/w) Emulsions . Langmuir 
1995 , 11 , 1966 –1971 . 10.1021/la00006a023 .
Foudazi R. ; Masalova I. ; Malkin A. Y. 
The Rheology of
Binary Mixtures of
Highly Concentrated Emulsions: Effect of Droplet Size Ratio . J. Rheol. 
2012 , 56 , 1299 10.1122/1.4736556 .
Tripathi S. ; Bhattacharya A. ; Singh R. ; Tabor R. F. 
Rheological Behavior
of High Internal Phase Water-in-Oil Emulsions: Effects of Droplet
Size, Phase Mass Fractions, Salt Concentration and Aging . Chem. Eng. Sci. 
2017 , 174 , 290 –301 . 10.1016/j.ces.2017.09.016 .
Langenfeld A. ; Stébé M. J. 
Influence
of Physico-Chemical Parameters
on Rheological Properties of Concentrated Reverse Emulsions . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2002 , 4 , 322 –327 . 10.1039/b107745g .
Masalova I. ; Malkin A. Y. 
Peculiarities of
Rheological Properties and Flow of
Highly Concentrated Emulsions: The Role of Concentration and Droplet
Size . Colloid J. 
2007 , 69 , 185 –197 . 10.1134/s1061933x0702007x .
Malkin A. Y. ; Masalova I. ; Slatter P. ; Wilson K. 
Effect of
Droplet Size
on the Rheological Properties of Highly-Concentrated w/o Emulsions . Rheol. Acta 
2004 , 43 , 584 –591 . 10.1007/s00397-003-0347-2 .
Yakhoub H. A. ; Masalova I. ; Haldenwang R. 
Highly Concentrated
Emulsions: Role
of Droplet Size . Chem. Eng. Commun. 
2010 , 198 , 147 –171 . 10.1080/00986445.2010.499841 .
Foudazi R. ; Masalova I. ; Malkin A. Y. 
The Role
of Interdroplet Interaction
in the Physics of Highly Concentrated Emulsions . Colloid J. 
2010 , 72 , 74 –92 . 10.1134/s1061933x10010102 .
Saiki Y. ; Horn R. G. ; Prestidge C. A. 
Droplet
Structure Instability in
Concentrated Emulsions . J. Colloid Interface
Sci. 
2008 , 320 , 569 –574 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2008.01.014 .18279885 
Masalova I. ; Foudazi R. ; Malkin A. Y. 
The Rheology
of Highly Concentrated
Emulsions Stabilized with Different Surfactants . Colloids Surf., A 
2011 , 375 , 76 –86 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2010.11.063 .
Masalova I. ; Malkin A. Y. ; Ferg E. ; Kharatiyan E. ; Taylor M. ; Haldenwang R. 
Evolution
of rheological properties
of highly concentrated emulsions with aging -Emulsion-to-suspension
transition . J. Rheol. 
2006 , 50 , 435 –451 . 10.1122/1.2206712 .
Wang H. ; Hobbie E. K. 
Amphiphobic Carbon Nanotubes as Macroemulsion Surfactants . Langmuir 
2003 , 19 , 3091 –3093 . 10.1021/la026883k .
Hobbie E. K. ; Bauer B. J. ; Stephens J. ; Becker M. L. ; McGuiggan P. ; Hudson S. D. ; Wang H. 
Colloidal
Particles Coated and Stabilized
by DNA-Wrapped Carbon Nanotubes . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 10284 –10287 . 10.1021/la051827f .16262277 
Chen W. ; Liu X. ; Liu Y. ; Bang Y. ; Kim H.-I. 
Preparation of O/W
Pickering Emulsion with Oxygen Plasma Treated Carbon Nanotubes as
Surfactants . J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 
2011 , 17 , 455 –460 . 10.1016/j.jiec.2010.10.027 .
Zhai W. ; Li G. ; Yu P. ; Yang L. ; Mao L. 
Silver Phosphate/Carbon
Nanotube-Stabilized Pickering Emulsion for Highly Efficient Photocatalysis . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 15183 –15191 . 10.1021/jp404456a .
Briggs N.
M. ; Weston J. S. ; Li B. ; Venkataramani D. ; Aichele C. P. ; Harwell J. H. ; Crossley S. P. 
Multiwalled Carbon
Nanotubes at the Interface of Pickering Emulsions . Langmuir 
2015 , 31 , 13077 –13084 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.5b03189 .26549532 
Wang R. K. ; Reeves R. D. ; Ziegler K. J. 
Interfacial
Trapping of Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotube Bundles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2007 , 129 , 15124 –15125 . 10.1021/ja076700m .18020340 
Wu T. ; Wang H. ; Jing B. ; Liu F. ; Burns P. C. ; Na C. 
Multi-Body Coalescence in Pickering Emulsions . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 5929 10.1038/ncomms6929 .25581366 
Vílchez A. ; Rodríguez-Abreu C. ; Menner A. ; Bismarck A. ; Esquena J. 
Antagonistic Effects between Magnetite Nanoparticles
and a Hydrophobic Surfactant in Highly Concentrated Pickering Emulsions . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 5064 –5074 . 10.1021/la4034518 .24738961 
Tshilumbu N. N. ; Kharatyan E. ; Masalova I. 
Effect of Nanoparticle Hydrophobicity
on Stability of Highly Concentrated Emulsions . J. Dispersion Sci. Technol. 
2014 , 35 , 283 –292 . 10.1080/01932691.2013.775584 .
Tshilumbu N. N. ; Masalova I. 
Stabilization of Highly
Concentrated Emulsions with
Oversaturated Dispersed Phase: Effect of Surfactant/Particle Ratio . Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 
2015 , 102 , 216 –233 . 10.1016/j.cherd.2015.06.025 .
Masalova I. ; Kharatyan E. ; Malkin A. Y. 
Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes as
a Cosurfactant for Highly Concentrated Emulsions . J. Dispersion Sci. Technol. 
2013 , 34 , 1074 –1078 . 10.1080/01932691.2012.735960 .
Hermant M. C. ; Klumperman B. ; Koning C. E. 
Conductive Pickering-Poly(High Internal
Phase Emulsion) Composite Foams Prepared with Low Loadings of Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes . Chem. Commun. 
2009 , 2738 –2740 . 10.1039/b820638d .
Kim H. ; Ahn K. H. ; Lee S. J. 
Conductive Poly(High Internal Phase
Emulsion) Foams Incorporated with Polydopamine-Coated Carbon Nanotubes . Polymer 
2017 , 110 , 187 –195 . 10.1016/j.polymer.2017.01.007 .
Hermant M. C. ; Verhulst M. ; Kyrylyuk A. V. ; Klumperman B. ; Koning C. E. 
The Incorporation of Single-Walled
Carbon Nanotubes
into Polymerized High Internal Phase Emulsions to Create Conductive
Foams with a Low Percolation Threshold . Compos.
Sci. Technol. 
2009 , 69 , 656 –662 . 10.1016/j.compscitech.2008.12.013 .
Zhang X. ; Du Z. ; Zou W. ; Li H. ; Zhang C. ; Li S. ; Guo W. 
A Porous Elastomeric
Polyurethane Monolith Synthesized by Concentrated
Emulsion Templating and Its Pressure-Sensitive Conductive Property . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 65890 –65896 . 10.1039/c5ra12072a .
Cohen N. ; Samoocha D. C. ; David D. ; Silverstein M. S. 
Carbon
Nanotubes in Emulsion-Templated Porous Polymers: Polymer Nanoparticles,
Sulfonation, and Conductivity . J. Polym. Sci.,
Part A: Polym. Chem. 
2013 , 51 , 4369 –4377 . 10.1002/pola.26851 .
Noh W.-J. ; Kang M.-H. ; Lee S.-J. 
Morphology
and Electrical Conductivity
of Polystyrene/Carbon Nanotube Microcellular Foams Polymerized by
High Internal Phase Emulsions . Polymer 
2012 , 36 , 579 –585 . 10.7317/pk.2012.36.5.579 .
Mirershadi S. ; Mortazavi S. Z. ; Reyhani A. ; Moniri N. ; Novinrooz A J. 
Effective
Condition for Purification of Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes by Nitric
Acid . Synth. React. Inorg., Met.-Org., Nano-Met.
Chem. 
2009 , 39 , 204 –208 . 10.1080/15533170902858104 .
Dresselhaus M. S. ; Dresselhaus G. ; Saito R. ; Jorio A. 
Raman Spectroscopy
of Carbon Nanotubes . Phys. Rep. 
2005 , 409 , 47 –99 . 10.1016/j.physrep.2004.10.006 .
Lee H. W. ; You W. ; Barman S. ; Hellstrom S. ; LeMieux M. C. ; Oh J. H. ; Liu S. ; Fujiwara T. ; Wang W. M. ; Chen B. ; et al. Lyotropic
Liquid-Crystalline Solutions of High-Concentration Dispersions of
Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with Conjugated Polymers . Small 
2009 , 5 , 1019 –1024 . 10.1002/smll.200800640 .19291730 
Sharu B. K. ; Simon G. P. ; Cheng W. ; Zank J. ; Bhattacharyya A. R. 
Development
of Microstructure and Evolution of Rheological Characteristics of
a Highly Concentrated Emulsion during Emulsification . Colloids Surf., A 
2017 , 532 , 342 –350 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2017.04.070 .
Mabille C. ; Leal-Calderon F. ; Bibette J. ; Schmitt V. 
Monodisperse Fragmentation
in Emulsions: Mechanisms and Kinetics . Europhys.
Lett. 
2003 , 61 , 708 –714 . 10.1209/epl/i2003-00133-6 .
Caubet S. ; Le Guer Y. ; Grassl B. ; El Omari K. ; Normandin E. 
A Low-Energy
Emulsification Batch Mixer for Concentrated Oil-in-Water Emulsions . AIChE J. 
2011 , 57 , 27 –39 . 10.1002/aic.12253 .
Binks B. P. ; Whitby C. P. 
Silica Particle-Stabilized
Emulsions of Silicone Oil
and Water: Aspects of Emulsification . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 1130 –1137 . 10.1021/la0303557 .15803687 
Binks B. P. ; Philip J. ; Rodrigues J. A. 
Inversion of Silica-Stabilized Emulsions
Induced by Particle Concentration . Langmuir 
2005 , 21 , 3296 –3302 . 10.1021/la046915z .15807567 
Shen M. ; Resasco D. E. 
Emulsions Stabilized by Carbon Nanotube–Silica
Nanohybrids . Langmuir 
2009 , 25 , 10843 –10851 . 10.1021/la901380b .19735138 
Welch C. F. ; Rose G. D. ; Malotky D. ; Eckersley S. T. 
Rheology
of High Internal Phase Emulsions . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 1544 –1550 . 10.1021/la052207h .16460072 
Mason T. G. ; Bibette J. 
Emulsification in Viscoelastic Media . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1996 , 77 , 3481 –3484 . 10.1103/physrevlett.77.3481 .10062231 
Mason T. G. ; Bibette J. 
Shear Rupturing of Droplets in Complex Fluids . Langmuir 
1997 , 13 , 4600 –4613 . 10.1021/la9700580 .
Taylor G. I. 
The Formation
of Emulsions in Definable Fields of Flow . Proc.
R. Soc. London, Ser. A 
1934 , 146 , 501 –523 . 10.1098/rspa.1934.0169 .
Taylor G. I. 
The Viscosity
of a Fluid Containing Small Drops of Another Fluid . Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 
1932 , 138 , 41 –48 . 10.1098/rspa.1932.0169 .
Grace H. P. 
Dispersion
Phenomena in High Viscosity Immiscible Fluid Systems and Application
of Static Mixers as Dispersion Devices in Such Systems . Chem. Eng. Commun. 
1982 , 14 , 225 –227 . 10.1080/00986448208911047 .
Janssen J. M. H. ; Meijer H. E. H. 
Droplet Breakup
Mechanisms: Stepwise Equilibrium versus
Transient Dispersion . J. Rheol. 
1993 , 37 , 597 –608 . 10.1122/1.550385 .
Gupta A. ; Kumar R. 
Flow Regime Transition at High Capillary Numbers in a Microfluidic
T-Junction: Viscosity Contrast and Geometry Effect . Phys. Fluids 
2010 , 22 , 122001 10.1063/1.3523483 .
Cartwright R. V. 
Rheology
of Emulsion Explosives: A Practical Method . Propellants, Explos., Pyrotech. 
1989 , 14 , 215 –218 . 10.1002/prep.19890140508 .
Mason T. G. ; Bibette J. ; Weitz D. A. 
Elasticity of Compressed
Emulsions . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1995 , 75 , 2051 –2054 . 10.1103/physrevlett.75.2051 .10059196 
Jager-Lézer N. ; Tranchant J.-F. ; Alard V. ; Vu C. ; Grossiord J.-L. ; Tchoreloff P. C. 
Rheological Analysis of Highly Concentrated
w/o Emulsions . Rheol. Acta 
1998 , 37 , 129 –138 . 10.1007/s003970050099 .
Mezger T. G.  The Rheology Handbook:
For Users of Rotational and Oscillatory Rheometers , 2 nd ed.; Vincentz Network GmbH & Co
KG , 2006 .
Pal R. 
Rheology of
High Internal Phase Ratio Emulsions . Food Hydrocolloids 
2006 , 20 , 997 –1005 . 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2005.12.001 .
Bengoechea C. ; Cordobés F. ; Guerrero A. 
Rheology and Microstructure of Gluten
and Soya-Based o/w Emulsions . Rheol. Acta 
2006 , 46 , 13 –21 . 10.1007/s00397-006-0102-6 .
Derkach S. R. ; Krägel J. ; Miller R. 
Methods of measuring rheological
properties of interfacial layers (Experimental methods of 2D rheology) . Colloid J. 
2009 , 71 , 1 –17 . 10.1134/s1061933x09010013 .
Pal R. 
Effect of
Droplet Size on the Rheology of Emulsions . AIChE
J. 
1996 , 42 , 3181 –3190 . 10.1002/aic.690421119 .
Pajouhandeh A. ; Kavousi A. ; Schaffie M. ; Ranjbar M. 
Experimental Measurement
and Modeling of Nanoparticle-Stabilized Emulsion Rheological Behavior . Colloids Surf., A 
2017 , 520 , 597 –611 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2017.02.002 .

