
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145782810.1021/acsomega.7b00282ArticleExperimental and Computational Modeling of H-Bonded
Arginine–Tyrosine Groupings in Aprotic Environments Banyikwa Andrew
Toyi †§Goos Alan †∥Kiemle David J. ‡Foulkes Michael A. C. †Braiman Mark S. *†† Chemistry
Department, Center for Science & Technology, Syracuse University, Room 1-014, Syracuse, New
York 13244, United
States‡ Analytical
and Technical Services, SUNY College of
Environmental Science and Forestry, 123 Jahn Laboratory, Syracuse, New York 13210, United
States* E-mail: mbraiman@syr.edu.08 09 2017 30 09 2017 2 9 5641 5659 09 03 2017 28 06 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

H-bonds between neutral
tyrosine and arginine in nonpolar environments
are modeled by small-molecule phenol/guanidine complexes. From the
temperature and concentration dependence of UV spectra, a value of
ΔH° = −74 ± 4 kJ mol–1 is deduced for the formation of H-bonded p-cresol/dodecylguanidine
in hexane. ΔE = −71 kJ mol–1 is computed with density functional theory (in vacuo). In dimethyl
sulfoxide or crystals, (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidines
form head-to-tail homodimers with two strong H-bonding interactions,
as evidenced by UV, IR, and NMR spectral shifts, strong IR continuum
absorbance bands, and short O···N distances in X-ray
crystal structures. Phenol/alkylguanidine H-bonded complexes consist
of polarizable rapidly interconverting tautomers, with the proton
shift from phenol to guanidine increasing with increase in the polarity
of the aprotic solvent. As measured by NMR, both groups in these strongly
H-bonded neutral complexes can simultaneously appear to be predominantly
protonated. These systems serve as models for the hypothetical hydrogen-Bonded
Uncharged (aRginine + tYrosine), or “BU(RY)”, motifs
in membrane proteins.

document-id-old-9ao7b00282document-id-new-14ao-2017-00282kccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
There has been little
experimental modeling of H-bonding interactions
between the guanidine group of arginine and the phenolic group of
tyrosine, especially with the guanidine in a deprotonated state. Geometries
suitable for H-bonding between tyrosine and arginine were for a long
time quite uncommon in observed crystal structures of proteins, making
such H-bonds a relatively uninteresting field of study. (See section
titled “Possible New Motif for Membrane
Protein Structures”, for more details on the relative
infrequency of such groupings in the crystallographic database.)

However, this has changed recently with the publication of a number
of crystal structures of active intermediates of membrane proteins,
in which conserved arg–tyr pairs approach each other within
a hydrophobic region of the protein interior, in a geometry that would
permit H-bonding between them. Examples were seen first in the M state
of bacteriorhodopsin (bR), a microbial rhodopsin,1 and subsequently in bovine opsin, a G-protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR).2 (For an explanation of the distinction
between these the two major superfamilies of heptahelical transmembrane
(7-TM) proteins, see a recent review of microbial rhodopsins.3) In examples from both these superfamilies,1,2 the conformational change that forms the active intermediate involves
significant displacement of a highly conserved arginine in the third
transmembrane helix, away from an asp or glu salt-bridge partner and
into a less-polar protein environment that includes a conserved tyr.

Evidence for arg–tyr interaction can be seen in greater
detail in more recent crystal structures of metarhodopsin II (Meta
II), with and without the C-terminal binding portion of the α
subunit of Gt, GαCT (see Figure 1). These structures show that one of the
key interactions in Meta II involves the protrusion of GαCT
deep into the protein interior, allowing a direct H-bonded interaction
of the backbone of GαCT with the highly conserved arginine (R135
in rhodopsin).4

Figure 1 H-bonding interactions
of the conserved arginine–tyrosine
grouping in activated rhodopsin (Meta II), without (left) and with
(right) the peptide backbone of the bound C-terminal portion of transducin
(GαCT, with a backbone shown in green in the right panel). Coordinates
were obtained from data published with 3.0 Å (3XPO) and 2.85
Å (3PQR) resolutions, respectively.4 In Meta II without GαCT (at left), one of terminal nitrogens
of Arg135 from TM3 is only 2.7 Å from the Tyr223 oxygen atom.
The other two nitrogens are not within the H-bond distance to donor
or acceptor group detected in the crystal structure. Upon binding
of Meta II with GαCT (right panel), the latter protein’s
Val347 backbone C=O group serves as an H-bond acceptor for
the other terminal nitrogen of Arg135, as well as for the intrachain
nitrogen, with N–O distances of 3.0 and 3.1 Å, respectively.
(Only the former distance is indicated by a dashed line in this figure.)
Furthermore, the C-terminal carboxylate of GαCT moves in to
become the closest anion, ∼9 Å away from Arg135. Formation
of these ionic and H-bonding interactions between GαCT and Arg135
apparently weakens the H-bonding interaction of the arginine with
tyr223, as evidenced by an increased N–O distance (3.3 Å
in the right panel).

Each time a Gt binds to a Meta II in this fashion,
the
Gt nucleotide-binding site opens up, permitting the spontaneous
release of GDP, and replacement with GTP from solution. This cyclical,
catalytic G-protein activation process clearly depends on the specificity,
tightness, and reversibility of the binding of Gt to Meta
II. Many aspects of the binding interaction are conserved in other
GPCR systems.

Both arginine and tyrosine side chains are generally
thought to
be protonated (cationic and neutral, respectively) in most biological
environments, including the highly conserved arginine–tyrosine
grouping within Meta II (Figure 1), as well as other activated GPCRs.6−9 However, interpretation of these
side chains’ protonation and H-bonding state in these structures
is complicated by their unusually aprotic environment. In the published
crystal structure of Meta II in the absence of GαCT (3XPO, Figure 1), numerous structural
water molecules are observable in the protein interior, but the closest
is at a distance of ∼8.5 Å from arg135.4,5 In
fact, the environment within 5 Å of the arg135–tyr223
H-bond consists almost exclusively of hydrocarbon side chains. Such
an environment is very different from those that have previously been
used to model the arginine side chain spectroscopically.10,11 Deprotonated arginine side chains, and H-bonded arginine–tyrosine
dyads, should be spectroscopically modeled in aprotic environments
similar to these proteins’ interiors. The current study,
and the accompanying paper,12 provides
some key steps toward achieving this.

Scheme 1 summarizes
three generalized proton configurations corresponding to H-bonded
arginine–tyrosine dyads that would most likely be observable
in nonpolar environments. The first (A) involves neutral tyrosine
acting as an H-bond acceptor for protonated arginine,
which additionally participates in a stabilizing Coulombic interaction
with a nearby counterion (X–). The second (B) involves
a zwitterion comprising deprotonated tyrosine and protonated arginine,
in which the tyrosine oxygen again acts as an H-bond acceptor. The
third (C) is fully neutral, comprising neutral tyrosine serving as
an H-bond donor, as well as neutral (deprotonated)
arginine taking on the new role of H-bond acceptor (right).

Scheme 1 Three Possible Protomeric Configurations for Arg−Tyr
Dyads
in Nonpolar Environments
Scheme 1B,C are
the proton-limiting structures of an overall-neutral
H-bonded pair. That is, they differ only by a very small movement
of a proton within an H-bond. Therefore, if either is present, the
other is expected also to be present, in rapid equilibrium.

We modeled structures B/C computationally; and A–C experimentally
by synthesizing model compounds that exhibited these three structures
in properly selected aprotic solvents, based on spectroscopic evidence.
Three common aprotic solvents, and one protic solvent used as a control,
were chosen to span a wide range of dielectric constants (ε):
hexane (ε = 1.8), CCl4 (ε = 2.2), dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO, ε = 47), and methanol (ε = 33). This
span includes the smaller ranges generally assumed for protein and
membrane interiors. These solvents were also selected for several
other important properties, including ready availability with needed
isotope variations for NMR; maintaining chemical stability of our
samples; and allowing sufficient solubility of them to obtain UV,
IR, and/or NMR spectra with suitable signal/noise ratios. Water itself
is not generally a suitable solvent for spectroscopy of any of the
deprotonated guanidine compounds because hydroxide-catalyzed hydrolysis
occurs within minutes at high pH. We were also able to crystallize
several of the model compounds in the forms corresponding to both
A and B.

Using our model systems, we demonstrate that the net-neutral
pair
(structures B and C in Scheme 1) can indeed be formed with well-defined stoichiometry in
the three aprotic solvents examined, and structure B can be observed
in the crystalline state. The H-bond between guanidine and phenol
in such overall-neutral systems is not only unusually strong but also
highly polarizable. In the least-polar environments, both protomers
participate nearly equally.

These results allow more accurate
spectroscopic modeling of membrane-buried
arg–tyr dyads that might undergo deprotonation, that is, with
overall loss of a proton shared between arginine and a nearby tyrosine.
We term this an H-Bonded Uncharged (aRginine–tYrosine), or
“BU(RY)” dyad. We also present a specific hypothesis
for the role such a BU(RY) dyad might play in G-protein activation
by GPCRs.

Results
Computational Studies of the Phenol–Guanidine
H-Bond
The complex between p-cresol and
monoalkylguanidines
was modeled by using density functional theory (DFT). Rather than
dodecylamine itself, the computational modeling used the shorter alkyl
chain of ethylguanidine. The energy-optimized structure of the 1:1
complex of p-cresol with ethylguanidine in vacuo
is shown in Figure 2A (see Supporting Information for details).
The computed binding energy is −71 kJ mol–1, which corresponds to the energy of the optimized geometry (Figure 2A), relative to the
sum of the energies of the same two molecules optimized individually.
Even when a larger basis set was used (e.g., 6-311G** as compared
to 6-31G**), the computed binding energy remained unchanged to within
∼1%.

Figure 2 DFT-computed H-bonding geometries. (A) p-Cresol/ethylguanidine
complex. (B) Internally H-bonded p-phenol-dodecylguanidine.
See Supporting Information for computational
details and energy-optimized Cartesian coordinates.

In the optimized geometry (Figure 2A), both H-bonds are significantly nonlinear.
For example,
there is a 158° O–H–N angle for the primary H-bond,
which has a 2.60 Å distance from the phenolic oxygen to the imino
nitrogen. There is also a more distorted secondary (2.90 Å) H-bond,
from an amine nitrogen back to the oxygen. Formation of the H-bond(s)
resulted in significant lengthening of the O–H covalent bond
length, to 1.03 Å (from 0.98 Å in isolated p-cresol).

A similar H-bonding geometry was obtained when the
ethylguanidine
and cresol were linked together with a dodecyl chain, as shown in Figure 2B. One interesting
difference is the involvement of the intrachain NH group in the H-bond,
instead of only the two terminal nitrogens. Despite the overall similar
bond lengths and angles for the H-bonding groups as in Figure 2A, the binding energy in Figure 2B is only −39
kJ mol–1. In this case, the reference state was
the optimized local energy minimum, with an extended
dodecyl chain in an all-s-trans conformation. Presumably, the H-bond
energy in Figure 2B,
which by itself would not be expected to be greatly different than
that in Figure 2A,
was significantly canceled by unfavorable strain introduced in the
alkane chain.

UV Spectroscopic Detection of Phenol–Guanidine
H-Bonding
in Hexane
The formation of p-cresol/alkylguanidine
complexes in nonpolar solvents was confirmed experimentally by UV
spectral measurements. The ∼280 nm absorption band of the phenol
group is strongly affected by the formation of H-bonded complexes,
as has been shown previously using amines as the H-bond acceptor groups.13,14 Similar effects are clearly seen in the UV spectra shown in Figure 3, which demonstrates
the interaction between p-cresol and dodecylguanidine
in hexane. From these data, we determined a value for the enthalpy
of complex formation in hexane (ΔH° =
−74 ± 4 kJ mol–1) that closely matched
the computed in vacuo ΔE = −71 kJ mol–1. (The closeness of this match is fortuitous; see Discussion.) Details of this experimental determination
are as follows.

Figure 3 UV absorption spectra demonstrating the reversible complexation
of p-cresol with equimolar dodecylguanidine in hexane.
Spectra were obtained as a function of total concentration of p-cresol (A, in which all seven spectra were measured at
58 °C; the inset shows a log–log plot of A308 vs total concentration); or as a function of temperature
(B, in which all eight spectra were measured with 0.50 mM total concentrations
of p-cresol and dodecylguanidine; the inset shows
a van’t Hoff plot). Temperatures in (B) are indicated by trace
colors: blue, 58 °C; green, 60 °C; orange, 62 °C; red,
64 °C. Two nearly superimposed traces of each color are plotted,
measured during up-then-down temperature steps. Spectral traces in
black (overlapping curves near 0 absorbance) in (A) and (B) represent
the residuals after subtracting the best-fitted linear combination
of the spectra of free p-cresol and complexed p-cresol/dodecylguanidine (C). The contribution of free p-cresol was computed as the measured extinction-coefficient
spectrum of pure p-cresol in hexane (C, black trace),
multiplied by its measured total concentration and the best-fit mole
fraction for it. These 11 mole fractions of free p-cresol, 1 for each of the 11 measured spectra, were calculated as
1 – Xi, where the values of Xi were 11 of the 512 adjustable parameters during
the least-squares fit. These Xi were the
mole fractions of the p-cresol present as a 1:1 complex
with dodecylguanidine. All 501 values of the extinction-coefficient
spectrum of this 1:1 complex (C, red trace) were also optimized during
the fit. See Supporting Information for
further details.

First, absorption spectra
of the unassociated species were determined.
When dissolved by itself in hexane, p-cresol gives
a strong UV absorption with a maximum at 278 nm as well as vibronic
structure (Figure 3C, black trace). This spectrum shows no sign of concentration dependence
below ∼10 mM. Similarly, dilute dodecylguanidine free base
in hexane shows no measurable extinction coefficient (<1 M –1 cm–1) anywhere in this 250–350
nm range. However, at dodecylguanidine concentrations above ∼5
mM, significant light scattering occurs (data not shown), indicating
self-association as reverse micelles. Unassociated dodecylguanidinium
cation was presumed also not to have any significant absorption in
hexane, based on the low absorbance (<0.001) measured for ∼10
mM solutions of dodecylguanidinium bromide in other solvents (DMSO,
CHCl3; data not shown). However, dodecylguanidine–HBr
was not sufficiently soluble in hexane to measure its extinction-coefficient
spectrum directly.

Combining ethylguanidine and p-cresol in hexane
clearly results in an H-bonded complex. This is evident from the concentration
and temperature dependence of the p-cresol absorption
band in the presence of an equimolar amount of dodecylguanidine (Figure 3). Exact stoichiometric
equivalence is easily obtained by mixing together ∼1 mM hexane
solutions of the two components, and then collecting the resulting
crystalline precipitate (“dodecylguanidinium p-cresolate”).

This precipitated salt has a 1:1 fixed
stoichiometry regardless
of relative initial concentrations, as shown by relative 1H NMR peak areas after the salt is collected and redissolved in DMSO.
The solid dodecylguanidinium p-cresolate salt has
very low solubility in hexane at room temperature, but it can easily
be redissolved to a concentration of ∼10–3 M in hexane at temperatures >55 °C. UV absorbance spectra
were
measured as function of further dilution with hexane (Figure 3A), or further temperature
elevation (Figure 3B). These spectra clearly show a broad absorption band centered near
310 nm. This species likely has a structure related to phenolate anion,
because pure sodium p-cresolate also gives a broad
absorption band near 310 nm in DMSO15 (see
also Supporting Information).

It
is a priori unlikely that such a low-dielectric solvent as hexane
(ε = 1.8) would contain independently solvated dodecylguanidinium
and p-cresolate ions. This hypothesis is supported
experimentally by the observed dilution-dependent increases in the A280/A310 spectral
absorbance ratio in Figure 3A. This is not what is expected, if a simple Brønsted–Lowry
acid–base equilibrium prevails, that is, ϕ-OH + :N-guan
⇄ ϕ-O– + HN+-guan. For such
an equilibrium, the ratio of [ϕ-OH]/[ϕ-O–] should be unaffected by dilution with additional solvent. (As a
control, such Brønsted–Lowry behavior was shown to occur
when methanol was used as a solvent for the same equilibrium; see
below.)

Instead, we determined that concentration- and temperature-dependent
spectral changes in hexane could be better modeled by the equilibrium,
ϕ-OH + :N-guan ⇄ ϕ-OH:N-guan, which describes the
formation of a Lewis acid–base complex. Note that what is written
as a unitary complexation product on the right-hand side probably
involves multiple interconverting protomers, such as the ones shown
in Scheme 1B,C.

The simplest demonstration of this is a log–log plot of A308 versus dissolved concentration of dodecylguanidinium p-cresolate (Figure 3A inset). This shows a limiting slope of ∼2 at low
concentrations, a clear sign that the 310 nm absorption band results
from the formation of a binary complex. A higher-order complex would
be expected to show a higher-power concentration dependence.

It was possible to determine more precise values of equilibrium
concentrations by fitting a wider range of wavelengths simultaneously.
At a total concentration near 1 mM and temperatures near 60 °C,
the 1:1 mixture of p-cresol and dodecylguanidine
shows a broad spectral shape with a variable plateau from 298 to 310
nm (Figure 3A,B). The
relative size of this plateau decreases either upon overall dilution
with hexane (Figure 3A) or upon heating (Figure 3B). The reversibility of the complexation reaction is demonstrated
by the nearly perfect superposition of spectra in Figure 3B obtained during heating (from
58 to 64 °C) and then cooling (from 64 to 58 °C), at intervals
of 2 °C There was evidence for ∼1% overall decrease in p-cresol content over the course of the entire heating–cooling
cycle, as evidenced by a uniform decrease in the entire absorption
spectrum in the final spectrum at 58 °C, as compared with the
initial spectrum at the same temperature. This continual slow loss
of sample was corrected (to first order) during the subsequent data
analysis by averaging the identical-temperature spectra pairwise from
the heating–cooling cycle.

By subtracting out differently
weighted amounts of the pure p-cresol spectrum in
hexane (Figure 3C,
black trace), it required only a simple
least-squares fitting procedure to compute the shape of the UV spectrum
of the single additional component (Figure 3C, red trace) that could best account for
all the measured spectra in Figure 3A,B. The fitting procedure utilized singular value
decomposition (SVD) to minimize the sum-of-squares in the residual
absorbance spectra (thin black traces in Figure 3A,B) that could not be accounted for by linear
combinations of just p-cresol and one other species.

This SVD-based fitting procedure gave a unique spectral shape,
but not its vertical scale. That is, based solely on the SVD procedure,
the fitted spectral bandshape (Figure 3C, red trace) could be rescaled vertically by any arbitrary
factor. Choosing the scale for the red trace in Figure 3C required one additional assumption, namely,
that the eight different concentrations of the 1:1 complex, deduced
from the properly scaled extinction-coefficient spectrum, should give
the same equilibrium constant for 1:1 complex formation, Kcomplex, for all eight dilutions measured at 58 °C
(seven measurements in Figure 3A, plus one in Figure 3B). In fact, the scale was optimized to minimize the standard
deviation among eight resultant values of ΔG°, rather than among the values of Kcomplex itself (see Table 2-S in Supporting Information
for details).

The optimization gave a value of ΔG°
= −23.5 ± 0.8 kJ mol–1 at 58 °C,
corresponding to Kcomplex = 5100 ±
1500 M –1. The reciprocal of this Kcomplex represents the dissociation constant in hexane
at 58 °C, Kd = 0.195 ± 0.06
mM. The moderate standard deviation is generally consistent with the
initial hypothesis that 1:1 complexation is the main reaction occurring
over the 12-fold concentration range used in these experiments, although
clearly this is not the whole story.

The best-fit extinction-coefficient
spectrum (Figure 3C,
red trace) can be most easily
interpreted as involving two species in rapid internal proton-transfer
equilibrium, corresponding to structures B and C in Scheme 1. These structures give rise,
respectively, to “guanidinium/phenolate” absorbance
near 310 nm and “guanidine/phenol” absorbance near 280
nm in Figure 3C. However,
even the latter subcomponent shows a significantly different vibronic
substructure than the isolated p-cresol in hexane
(Figure 3C, black trace).

The scaled spectrum (Figure 3C, red trace) was also used to determine the temperature dependence
of the concentrations in Figure 3B, and thus of the equilibrium constant. A linear least-squares
fit of the resulting van’t Hoff plot (Figure 3B, inset) gave a value of ΔH° = −74 ± 4 kJ mol–1 for the formation of the 1:1 complex. (The stated uncertainty here
is simply R times the standard error of the slope,
obtained from the linear regression of ln K vs 1/T. Concentration errors from the SVD fit contribute to errors
in the four individual values for Kcomplex, but these end up being insignificant compared with 4 kJ mol–1, as can be judged by smaller size of the error in
ΔG°.) Combining this value of ΔH° with the value of ΔG°
at 58 °C, we obtain the value of ΔS°
= −152 ± 12 J mol–1 K–1 at 58 °C. We can further extrapolate these results to physiological
temperature (37 °C), obtaining a value of ΔG° = −26.7 ± 0.8 kJ mol–1 and a
corresponding Kd = 0.03 ± 0.01 mM
for the formation of a heterodimer complex in hexane.

UV Measurements
in More Polar Solvents
DMSO offers
distinct advantages for studying the interactions between phenol and
guanidine groups. The most important is significantly greater solubility,
for example, for the covalently linked free bases (p-phenolyl)-dodecylguanidine and (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
and their HBr salts, as well as for potassium p-cresolate.
None of these compounds dissolved sufficiently in alkanes to permit
measurement of an interpretable UV spectrum. Furthermore, dodecylguanidine
itself could be dissolved to a much higher concentration in DMSO (∼50
mM), without producing strongly scattering micelles as was consistently
observed above ∼2 mM in hexane. Similar high concentrations
could also be obtained in the protic solvent MeOH, which served as
an important control.

UV spectral measurements in DMSO (Figure 4A–D) also
provide evidence for Lewis acid–base complexation rather than
Brønsted–Lowry H+ transfer. The 1:1 dodecylguanidinium p-cresolate salt, obtained as above, when redissolved at
0.1 and 1 mM in DMSO (Figure 4B, black and red traces) gave extinction-coefficient spectra
superimposable on those of pure p-cresol (Figure 4A, black and red
traces). Thus, in DMSO, the presence of <1 mM concentrations of
the very strong base, dodecylguanidine, was insufficient to deprotonate
a similar concentration of p-cresol, a weak acid,
contrary to expectation if Brønsted–Lowry acid–base
equilibrium predominated.

Figure 4 UV spectral detection of phenol–guanidine
interactions,
measured using DMSO (A–D) or MeOH (E–H) as solvent.
Each column represents spectra obtained on the solute molecule shown
above (or two solutes, in the case of the second column). Spectra
are presented as extinction-coefficient data, to correct for varying
path lengths and concentrations used during measurements, and are
color-coded according to solute concentration(s). Every panel (A–H)
includes one spectrum of the indicated phenol-containing compound
at 0.1 mM (black), and one at 1.0 mM (red); in (B) and (F), those
red and black traces also include 0.1 or 1.0 mM dodecylguanidine free
base, respectively. (B) and (F) each also include three additional
traces in green, blue, and purple, taken respectively with 5, 10,
and 50 mM total concentration of dodecylguanidine free base; all of
these still have only 1.0 mM p-cresol. All spectra
were measured at 25 °C with 1 cm pathlength sample and reference
cuvettes on a Shimadzu UV-265 spectrometer. Absolute vertical scales
of the spectra are accurate only to ±20% due to weighing and
dilution imprecision and were adjusted within this range to facilitate
comparisons.

We did not obtain measurements
of the 1:1 salt in DMSO at concentrations
above 1 mM, due to too high p-cresol absorption for
the 1 cm pathlength cuvette we were using. However, when additional
crystalline dodecylguanidine free base was added to the 1 mM salt,
a new absorption maximum could be seen at ∼318 nm (Figure 4B). This increased
in intensity as the total dodecylguanidine concentration was raised
successively to 5, 10, and 50 mM (Figure 4B, green, blue, and violet traces, respectively).
This 318 nm peak is consistent with Lewis acid–base complex
formation, analogous to that seen in hexane (Figure 3A). However, the appearance of a new band
at 272 nm at the highest (50 mM) dodecylguanidine concentration (Figure 4B) makes clear that,
compared with hexane, it is less reasonable in DMSO to analyze the
equilibrium based on the assumption of only two species (isolated p-cresol and its 1:1 complex with dodecylguanidine). From
the spectra in Figure 4B, we can only estimate an apparent Kd for the p-cresol/dodecylguanidine complex of 10–50
mM in DMSO at 25 °C. This is the dodecylguanidine concentration
for which 50% of the maximum possible 318 nm cresolate absorbance
is achieved. This apparent Kd is at least
∼100-fold greater than in hexane (extrapolated to a similar
temperature), indicating a weaker H-bonding interaction in DMSO.

Complexation in DMSO clearly occurs at a lower concentration for
covalently linked (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidines (Figure 4C,D) than is required
for p-cresol/dodecylguanidine (Figure 4B). That is, the spectra of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine and (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine
in DMSO (Figure 4C,D)
show clear evidence of Lewis acid–base complexation, as evidenced
by the appearance of a 318 nm band even at concentrations of ∼1
mM but not at 0.1 mM. This complexation is probably intermolecular
rather than intramolecular, given the absence of the 318 nm peak at
the lower (0.1 mM) concentration, and its similar size at 1 mM, for
both alkyl chain lengths. The short ethyl linker clearly cannot permit
the formation of an intramolecular H-bond. The dodecyl linker also
does not appear to favor intramolecular H-bonding in DMSO solvent,
despite computations (Figure 2B), indicating that a conformational rearrangement to permit
intramolecular H-bond formation is energetically favored in vacuo.
Empirically, the extended chain form appears to allow much more favorable
external interactions in condensed phases, that is, both in solid
state (as shown in crystal structures below) and for either dimers
or monomers solvated in DMSO, as suggested by Figure 4C,D. There is a barely perceptible 318 nm
absorbance above the baseline for 0.1 M (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine
in DMSO (Figure 4D,
black trace), which is not present for the ethyl-linked compound (Figure 4C, black trace).
This could be a sign of a small amount of intramolecular H-bonding
in the former. However, we cannot rule out that this could simply
be due to a minor difference in light scattering.

Free-energy
and enthalpy changes for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
dimerization in DMSO were determined by using concentration- and temperature-dependent
UV spectral analyses, as described above for the p-cresol/dodecylguanidine system in hexane. Due to considerably higher
solubility, the spectra in DMSO could be measured over a wider temperature
range (19–45 °C), as well as a wider concentration range
(0.1–10 mM; Figure 4C and Supporting Information).
The thermodynamic values obtained for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
dimerization in DMSO are ΔG°298 = −8.4 ± 0.6 kJ mol–1 and ΔH° = −22 ± 3 kJ mol–1. Because there are two H-bonding interactions per dimer, the enthalpy
change for forming each phenol/guanidine H-bond is only −11
± 2 kJ mol–1, that is, barely one-sixth of
the value in hexane.

In contrast to the complexation behavior
in hexane and DMSO, the
same molecules in MeOH simply undergo Brønsted–Lowry acid–base
equilibria. This is seen in Figure 4F, where sufficiently high relative concentrations
of the base (dodecylguanidine) fully deprotonate the acid (p-cresol), as evidenced by the complete replacement of the
280 nm absorption band by the 296 nm band characteristic of cresolate
in MeOH. That is, the purple trace in Figure 4F, corresponding to 1 mM p-cresol + 50 mM dodecylguanidine, matches almost perfectly the spectrum
of 1 mM potassium p-cresolate in MeOH (data not shown).
There is a fairly clean isosbestic point in Figure 4F, indicating that only two species (solvated p-cresol and solvated p-cresolate) contribute
to the spectra in this panel.

Likewise, the lack of concentration
dependence in the spectra in Figure 4G,H is indicative
of the presence of buffering concentrations of conjugate acid and
base forms of both groups within a single amphiprotic solute. The
concentration-independent acid–base equilibrium of these (p-phenolyl)alkylguandine compounds is analogous to other
amphiprotic zwitterions, such as amino acids. When present as the
only solute in water or other protic solvents, such zwitterions buffer
the pH at the midpoint between the two pKa values and show almost no concentration dependence for the extent
of H+ transfer.

The presence of both phenol and phenolate
forms in Figure 4F–H
indicates that in
methanol, the pKa value of the phenol
group in this solvent must be quite similar to the pKa of the guanidinium. In the limit of phenol and guanidinium
groups sitting on separate molecules in MeOH, ΔpKa ≈1.6. This is seen in Figure 4F, where 50% conversion of p-cresol to p-cresolate (corresponding roughly to
the green trace), requires approximately a 20-fold excess of total
guanidine (10 mM) over total p-cresol (0.5 mM). Thus,
surprisingly, in MeOH, which is often thought of as only a little
less polar than water, the relative acidity of these two groups is
already swapped, with guanidinium clearly more acidic than phenol.

However, as the two groups are held progressively closer, for example,
by a dodecyl or an ethyl linker, the phenol becomes progressively
more acidic, eventually becoming about as acidic as guanidine, as
seen by the nearly 50% contribution of phenolate to the spectrum (compare
296 nm peaks for black traces in Figure 4F–H). That is, the zwitterionic form
is favored by progressively closer distances between the charges,
a clear sign of electrostatic perturbation of the pKa values. This is analogous to the well-known phenomenon
in amino acids, where the pKa values of
amino and carboxylic acid groups are pushed farther apart, favoring
the zwitterionic form, as a result of these groups’ proximity
and mutual electrostatic stabilization.

IR Spectroscopy
Direct IR evidence for 1:1 complexation
was not as strong for IR as for UV spectra, because measurement of
the concentration dependence of the IR solution spectra was not possible.
In nonpolar solvents (hexane, CCl4), the maximum room-temperature
solubility of (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidine compounds
was too low (<0.5 mM) to measure spectra accurately. In DMSO, the
background solvent absorbances were too high to permit precise quantitative
measurements even at saturating concentrations (∼150 mM). Nevertheless,
IR spectra are consistent with the presence of H-bonded complexes
of phenol with guanidine free bases. Such spectra show clearly that
the H-bond between these groups is polarizable, that is, the equilibrium
position of the proton shifts moving increasingly toward the guanidine
group as the polarity of the environment increases from CCl4 to DMSO to MeOH to tightly packed crystals.

Nonpolar Solvents
Due to its low solubility, we failed
to obtain adequate-quality IR spectra of p-cresol-dodecylguanidine
1:1 in hexane, which would be directly analogous to the UV spectra
in Figure 3. The closest
solvent we could use is CCl4 (Figure 5). This spectrum supports formation of a
binary H-bonded complex, as indicated by characteristic bands due
to both p-cresol (1514 and 1255 cm–1) and p-cresolate (1498 and 1272 cm–1).16,18 The characteristic C–N stretch region
of the guanidino group, between 1500 and 1700 cm–1, also shows features characteristic of both deprotonated guanidine
(1629 and 1555 cm–1) and guanindinium ion (1665
cm–1). A key feature observed is the strong broad
absorption band between 3500 and 2500 cm–1, a “continuum”
absorbance characteristic of polarizable H-bonded systems.

Figure 5 IR absorbance
spectrum of p-cresol/dodecylguanidine
1:1 dissolved in CCl4. The strong continuum absorbance
from 3500 to 2500 cm–1 is a clear evidence of the
formation of a strongly H-bonded complex, rather than a simple Brønsted–Lowry
proton transfer equilibrium. The exact position and intensity of the
most characteristic peak of the deprotonated guanidine group (1555
cm–1) are difficult to quantify due to interference
by a strong solvent absorption band at this frequency. Spectral region
near 2350 cm–1 is blanked due to interference by
CO2 absorption.

DMSO and MeOH Solutions
It was possible to obtain spectra
of (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine in DMSO (Figure 6A) and in MeOH (Figure 6C), but only at ∼100-fold
higher concentrations than for the corresponding UV spectra (Figure 4D,H). The strongest
characteristic IR bands of the protonated forms of both guanidinium
(∼1670 cm–1 shoulder) and phenol (1514 cm–1) are present in DMSO (Figure 6A). The additional bands at 1642 and (especially)
1548 cm–1 are characteristic of deprotonated guanidine
in either DMSO12,17 or chloroform.19 Meanwhile, characterisitic phenolate bands are observed
at 1599 and 1494 cm–1 (Figure 6A), that is, shifted somewhat relative to
this compound in MeOH (Figure 6B, 1602 and 1501 cm–1). The latter wavenumber
values are identical with those seen for high-pH aqueous phenolate18 and tyrosine.16

Figure 6 IR spectra
of (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine, as
the “free base” (green; A, B) or as the HBr salt (purple;
C, D), with the former two showing clear evidence of H-bonding and/or
proton transfer from the phenol. Each sample was recrystallized from
methanol, dried, and then redissolved to a concentration of ∼100
mM in DMSO (A, C) or methanol (B, D). The absorbance scale on the y axis is approximate; the measured spectra had somewhat
different concentrations and path lengths and were rescaled for optimum
visual comparison.

Thus, these IR spectra
confirm that in DMSO, this free base compound
exists in an equilibrium between a guanidinium/phenolate zwitterion
(Scheme 1B) and a fully
neutral guanidine/phenol form (Scheme 1C). The relative sizes of the bands suggest that the
zwitterion accounts for some 50–75% of the total concentration,
more than seen in the UV absorption spectra in Figure 4D. This can be explained by the presence
of a higher proportion of the H-bonded complex, as a result of a ∼100-fold
higher overall concentration in the IR samples.

An even greater
contribution from the zwitterionic form is observed
in MeOH (Figure 6B)
(e.g., larger characteristic guanidinium peak near 1670 cm–1 in Figure 6B compared
with an unlabeled shoulder in Figure 6A). This vibration is characteristic of guanidinium;
it is clearly seen in the spectra of the corresponding HBr salt in
either DMSO or MeOH (Figure 6C,D). Likewise, in MeOH, phenolate peaks are stronger (1602
and 1501 cm–1 in Figure 6B). Similar features were observed in the
spectrum of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine free base
dissolved in methanol (data not shown). These spectra also indicate
that the zwitterion contribution to the spectrum is increased significantly
by the use of >100-fold higher concentration for the IR spectrum
(Figure 6B), as compared
with
the <1 mM concentrations used to measure UV spectra (Figure 4H). This might contradict somewhat
the hypothesis of simple Brønsted–Lowry acid–base
equilibrium. Alternatively, it could simply result from favorable
long-range electrostatic (dipole–dipole) interactions coming
into play at the highest concentrations.

Very different IR results
are obtained with the salt (p-phenolyl) dodecylguanidinium
bromide, which corresponds to the structure
in Scheme 1A, with
X– = Br–. This HBr salt has a
much higher solubility in most solvents compared with the free-base
compound, especially in DMSO. This makes it easier to measure accurately
over a wider spectral range (Figure 7). In both DMSO (Figure 6C; and Figure 7, purple trace) and MeOH (Figure 6D), this salt contains a solvated fully protonated
guanidinium, with no evidence of interaction with the phenolic group.
The monoalkylguanidinium C–N stretch bands at 1668 and 1651
cm–1 in DMSO (Figure 6C; Figure 7, purple trace) are largely unchanged from their appearance
in dodecylguanidinium bromide in the same solvent (Figure 7, red trace).5,17

Figure 7 IR
evidence that the phenol and guanidinium groups in (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidinium bromide are independently
solvated by DMSO, that is, there is no significant interaction between
them. The IR spectrum of this salt (purple) resembles a simple sum
of absorbances due to separate samples of dodecylguanidinium bromide
(red) and p-cresol (blue). All spectra were obtained
in DMSO.

Likewise, characteristic phenol
peaks are observed near 1615, 1594,
1515, 1266, and 1236 cm–1 in (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidinium bromide (Figure 6C,D; Figure 7, purple trace), virtually unchanged from p-cresol (Figure 7,
blue trace). In fact, these characteristic phenol peaks are generally
very insensitive to the environment. This is shown in greater detail
in Figure 8. The C–O
stretch vibration is consistently observed as a strong IR absorbance
band for p-alkylated phenols in a fairly narrow range
between 1245 and 1275 cm–1. The lowest frequencies
in this range have been reported for poly-tyrosine in dried films
or aqueous solvents.18 In Figures 7 and 8A–C, which are limited to crystalline samples and solution
measurements in methanol and DMSO, the variation is within a narrower
range of 1265–1268 cm–1.

Figure 8 Phenolic C–O stretch
region (1250–1310 cm–1) is less sensitive
to solvent environment when the phenolic group
is protonated (A–C) than when it is unprotonated (D–G).
(A) p-Cresol in DMSO; (B) (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidinium
bromide in DMSO, continuation of spectrum in Figure 6C; (C) (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidinium
bromide in MeOH, continuation of Figure 6D; (D) (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
free base in methanol, continuation of Figure 6B; (E) (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine
free base in DMSO, continuation of Figure 6A; (F) p-cresol and dodecylguanidine
free base (1:1) in CCl4, expanded region from Figure 5; (G) potassium p-cresolate in DMSO.

In contrast, deprotonation of the phenolic group leads to
a much
larger range of C–O stretch frequencies, as seen in Figure 8D–G. The lowest
observed value, 1264 cm–1, is for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine free base in MeOH (Figure 8D). This value overlaps with the range seen
for protonated phenol (Figure 8A–C), yet it was measured under conditions where the
phenolate form predominates, as shown by the C=C ring modes
(1602, 1501 cm–1 in Figure 6B). At the same time, the structurally similar
compound, (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine in DMSO, appears
to show a 40 cm–1 higher frequency for its phenolate
C–O stretch (1309 cm–1, Figure 8E).

These big differences
in C–O stretch frequency for phenolate
in various environments are likely attributable to a strong dependence
of the C–O bond order on solvation and H-bond strength. These
also produce changes in the degree of delocalization of negative charge
into the ring, weakly altering other characteristic vibrational frequencies.
For example, the phenolate C=C ring stretching vibrations are
lower in frequency for the H-bonded complex of (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine in DMSO (1599 and 1494 cm–1, Figure 6A) than
in MeOH (1602 and 1501 cm–1, Figure 6B). The corresponding frequencies for tyrosinate
in water at a high pH16,18 are intermediate, that is, 1600
and 1498 cm–1, suggesting that the H-bonding interactions
of phenolate with water are stronger than with MeOH, but that neither
type of solvent produces an H-bonding perturbation on phenol that
is as strong overall as a single H-bond to guanidine in an aprotic
solvent such as DMSO. The protonated phenol group again serves as
a useful control; its solvent interactions are weaker than those of
phenolate, that is, only small solvent-dependent effects are observed
for the phenol ring vibrations (near 1615, 1595, and 1515 cm–1 in Figures 6A,C,D
and 7).

Solid-State IR Spectra
An important question is, what
do Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra indicate for the protomeric
form(s) present in the crystalline state, specifically in crystals
that are suitable for determining high-resolution X-ray structures?
In such crystals, the polar ends of neighboring dimers are packed
close to each other, and also within the H-bonding distance of structural
MeOH molecules (see below). Thus, the environment around the guanidine–phenol
H-bond is quite polar.

Indeed, in the IR spectrum of these crystals
(green trace in Figure 9), only the phenolate peak at 1498 cm–1 is observed;
the peak at 1516 cm–1, characteristic of protonated
(neutral) phenol, is completely missing. Additionally, in the crystalline
forms of both the free base (Figure 9, green trace) and the corresponding HBr salt (Figure 9, purple trace),
the strongest C–N stretch bands are very similar in frequency,
near 1655 cm–1. This is a lower wavenumber than
is typically seen for monoalkylguanidinium salts in most solvents
(cf. Figures 6 and 7). Nonetheless, it agrees with the measurements
in the crystalline state of the highest-frequency C–N stretch
vibration for dodecylguanidinium bromide, anisolyl dodecylguanidinium
bromide, phenolyl ethylguanidine free base, and phenolyl ethylguanidinium
bromide, which are consistently observed between 1659 and 1669 cm–1 (Figure 6-S). In all these
crystals, therefore, the free base exists mostly as the zwitterionic
form, with a guanidinium group (Scheme 1B). In contrast, the highest C–N stretch frequencies
for the crystalline states of authentic monoalkylguanidine free bases,
such as dodecylguanidine or anisolyldodecylguanidine, are 1637 and
1636 cm–1, respectively (see spectra C and E in Figure 6-S).

Nevertheless, the IR spectrum
of the p-phenolyl-dodecylguanidine
free base (Figure 9, green trace) may be consistent with the presence of small amounts
of the strongly H-bonded but fully neutral structure (Scheme 1C). The new peaks, which are
observed only in the free base crystals (Figure 8, green trace), and not the HBr salt (Figure 9, purple trace),
include a characteristic deprotonated guanidine frequency (1554 cm–1), as well as a broad continuum absorption band from
2500 to 3500 cm–1. Both of these features can also
be discerned in the crystalline samples of either (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine, or (less prominently) dodecylguanidinium p-cresolate salt (see Supporting Information). Because of the absence of characteristic vibrational bands of
MeOH, at most, a small portion of the continuum bands (above ∼3200
cm–1) can be attributed to O–H stretch vibrations
from the cocrystallized MeOH in the phenolyl alkylguanidine free bases
(see crystal structures below). Instead, these broad absorption bands
are likely indicative of proton polarizability,20 which is associated with a strong H-bonding.21,22

Figure 9 Broad
IR continuum absorbance 3500–2500 cm–1 in
FTIR spectrum of a crystalline sample of p-phenol-dodecylguanidine
free base (green) is the evidence that it is more strongly H-bonded
than the corresponding crystalline p-phenol-dodecylguanidinium
bromide salt (purple). Both samples were measured in KBr disks. Blanked
regions had errors due to background correction, for example, CO2 absorbance near 2350 cm–1.

1H and 13C NMR Measurements
of the Phenol–Guanidine
Interaction
Clear support for the formation of an H-bonding
interaction between phenol and guanidine groups was also observed
in the solution-state 1H and 13C NMR spectra. Figure 10 shows that at
a low concentration of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine,
the chemical shifts of both the guanidine group and the phenol group
are much the same as when measured individually in dodecylguanidine
or p-cresol, respectively. However, as the concentration
is increased above ∼30 mM, there is a significant change, especially
in the value for the guanidine protons.

Figure 10 Concentration dependence
of the 1H chemical shifts of
the phenolic ring (gray solid circle, orange solid circle) and of
the guanidine group (blue solid circle), in (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine.
Average values are shown for peaks split by j–j coupling. Likewise, for the monoalkylguanidinium bromide salts,
there were two to three partially resolved resonances for the guanidino
group protons in the range of 6.9–7.5; these were averaged
with weightings of 1:2:2 to give the plotted value of 7.25 ppm (blue
line next to the right axis). Well below ∼30 mM, the chemical
shifts in (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine are nearly identical
with those seen for isolated phenol and guanidine groups, indicated
by lines next to the left vertical axis. The changing values over
the 20–150 mM concentration range are consistent with the formation
of an H-bonded dimer complex. That is, at the highest concentrations,
the averaged chemical shift of the guanidine protons approaches that
of dodecylguanidinium cation, whereas the phenolic ring protons move
somewhat toward the values for phenolate. The latter are represented
by the chemical shifts of Br– or K+ salt
solutions in DMSO, respectively, as indicated next to the right axis.

Figure 11 shows
additional 13C NMR results in DMSO solution, which also
demonstrate an H-bonding interaction in (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
dimers at elevated concentrations. The chemical shift of the phenol
ring carbons is clearly dependent on concentration. The dependence
is strongest for the ipso carbon, which shifts from 157.0 ppm at 3
mM (Figure 11A) to
158.7 ppm at 200 mM (Figure 11C), and for the para carbon (128.1–126.3 ppm; same
spectra).

Figure 11 13C NMR spectra (112–172 ppm portion) of the
indicated samples, calibrated to the chemical shift value for the
solvent (d6-DMSO, 39.5 ppm). (A)–(G)
were measured with a 600 MHz Bruker NMR and (H)–(K), with a
300 MHz instrument. The chemical shift values labeled in blue are
assigned to the guanidine carbon; in black, to the six phenolic ring
carbons. The two largest phenolic peaks always correspond to ortho
and meta positions, each representing 2 equiv carbons. Horizontally
expanded and horizontally shifted insets for (D), (F), and (G) aid
in visualizing spectral details near 157 ppm. Spectrum (F) was measured
at 2× finer resolution than the others, the better to resolve
the nearly overlapping phenolic ipso and guanidine resonances at 157.2
ppm.

Properly assigning the phenolic
ipso carbons within their overlapping
ranges with the guanidine carbon required careful measurements of
a number of control spectra (Figure 11D–K). To minimize perturbations on the guanidine
group from H2O impurities, which could lead to formation
of guanidinium hydroxide rather than the free base, these were measured
on samples that had been recrystallized from acetonitrile, protected
from moisture during storage, weighed quickly, then redissolved at
100–200 mM by adding each directly to a freshly opened glass
ampule of d6-DMSO. Comparisons between
monoalkylguanidine free bases lacking other H-bond donor groups (Figure 11F,J), and their
corresponding HBr salts (Figure 11G,K) show firstly that protonation of guanidine produces
only a ∼0.5 ppm change in its 13C chemical shift.
These control measurements made clear that regardless of the protonation
state, the 13C chemical shifts for monoalkylguanidine compounds
in DMSO can safely be assigned within the narrow range of 156.7–157.3
ppm.

The lowest concentration of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
(Figure 11A) showed
closely spaced 13C resonances at 157.0 and 157.2 ppm. These
could be definitively assigned based on a comparison with the similar
compound (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine (Figure 11D). The latter
was measured as a 50/50 mix of the natural-abundance compound with
an otherwise-identical compound that had been prepared with both terminal
nitrogens labeled with >97% 15N. Such labeling produced
a triplet pattern due to j–j coupling between 13C and two attached 15N
nuclei, which could easily be seen for the peak at 157.2 (Figure 11D inset). The fourth
component peak at 157.2 ppm, which is the largest and nearest to the
center of the triplet pattern, is due to the ∼50% of sample
with 14N on all three of the guanidine nitrogens. The coupling
pattern in this sample allows the 157.2 peak in Figure 11D to be assigned to the guanidine
group, and by analogy also in Figure 11A. The minor differences in phenolic ipso-carbon chemical
shifts between Figure 11A,D might be due to the difference in the H-binding geometries, as
suggested by different X-ray crystal structures (see below).

As with the UV spectra in Figure 4D and the IR spectra in Figure 6A above, the concentration-dependent NMR
results in both Figures 10 and 11 are consistent with the formation
of an H-bonded Lewis acid–base dimer of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine, rather than the formation of solvated zwitterion
monomers with complete H+ transfer. In particular, even
at the highest concentrations, the 1H and 13C chemical shift values for the phenol group never come close to
those seen for potassium p-cresolate. The concentration
range over which the chemical shifts are seen to change is approximately
consistent with the dissociation constant (34 mM) computed from the
concentration dependence of the UV spectra of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
(see ΔG° value given above; and raw data
in Supporting Information). Thus, the NMR
results confirm that in DMSO, phenol and guanidine groups readily
form strong H-bonded Lewis acid–base complexes, with partial
H+ transfer, that is, a hybrid of the structures shown
in Scheme 1B,C.

At the highest concentration for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
in Figure 10 (0.05
M), the average chemical shift of the guanidine protons (5.9) had
risen just over 50% of the way from the value for dodecylguanidine
free base (4.3) to the value for protonated dodecylguanidinium bromide
(7.3). Overall, there is less sensitivity of the guanidine 13C NMR signal to its protonation state. Nevertheless, for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine at 0.05 M (Figure 11C), it is also shifted to 157.0, that is,
about halfway from the ∼157.3 ppm value for deprotonated guanidine
(Figure 11F,J) to
the ∼156.7 ppm value seen for protonated guanidinium salts
(Figure 11E,G,K).
This change is consistent with the predicted dimer fraction of 55%
(of the total mass) at 0.05 M (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine,
based on Kd = 34 mM. Together, these chemical
shifts suggest that the guanidinium group in the dimer complex behaves
as if it is fully protonated, that is, the proton transfer from phenol
to guanidine is nearly complete in the dimer in DMSO.

However,
at the same (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
concentration, the phenolic ring protons moved only ∼20% of
the way from their values for p-cresol to p-cresolate (Figure 10). The phenolic ipso carbon 13C shift in Figure 11C, at 158.7 ppm,
is also only 25% of the way from its value in p-cresol
(155.2 ppm, Figure 11G) to the value in p-cresolate (Figure 11H). Likewise, the 13C shifts for the other ring carbons in the (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
dimer (Figure 11C)
are very similar to those of p-cresol (Figure 11I), and quite different
from those of the potassium salt of p-cresolate (Figure 11H). Based purely
on an assumption of time-averaging of chemical shifts, this would
suggest that the phenol group is less than 50% deprotonated in the
dimer complex, a conclusion that would be somewhat at odds with the
results from optical spectroscopy (both UV and IR).

In summary,
the NMR chemical shifts in Figure 11A make the guanidine group look about 50%
protonated, whereas the phenolic group looks nearly ∼75% protonated.
That is, by NMR both groups participating in the H-bond look predominantly
protonated, despite the lack of HBr or other possible external proton
donor. This is not due to contamination of the NMR solvent (DMSO-d6) with water (or another acid), which could
indeed cause both groups of the free base to appear protonated because
of the formation of guanidinium hydroxide (or another salt). Contrary
to what would be expected in such hypothetical cases, simple dilution
with the same DMSO-d6 causes a breakup
of the H-bonded complex and results in the guanidine group becoming less protonated, that is, both its 1H and 13C signals move closer to the values seen in guanidine free
bases without strong H-bond donor groups.

15N NMR
We were unable to observe 15N chemical shifts of the terminal
guanidine nitrogens for the phenolyl-dodecylguanidine
free base in DMSO, despite the use of 50% 15N isotopic
enrichment. This was true over a range of temperatures from 25 to
50 °C, even after sufficient signal-averaging that we could observe
the 15N resonance from the natural-isotope-abundance intrachain
nitrogen at 63 ppm (see Figure 11-S). However,
we were able to obtain high-quality solid-state cross-polarized magic-angle-spinning
(CP-MAS) signals from crystalline samples of this compound, as well
as a number of control samples (Figure 12).

Figure 12 15N solid-state CP-MAS NMR spectrum
of the free bases
of (p-anisolyl)-dodecylguanidine-[15N2] (A); (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine-[15N2] (B); (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine-[15N2] (C); and the corresponding HBr salts (D-F,
respectively). The x axis scale represents chemical
shift, in ppm, relative to solid ammonium-[15N] sulfate.

The first control spectrum is
noteworthy. Crystalline (p-anisolyl)-dodecylguanidine-[15N2] free base (Figure 12A) shows widely separated resonances for
imine (110 ppm) and amine
(52 and 46 ppm) nitrogens. A similar separation was also seen for
the dodecylguanidine-[15N2] free base.12 However, the dodecylguanidine spectrum showed
only a single amine resonance at 49 ppm; addition of the anisolyl
group (Figure 12A)
splits this into two peaks. Only the two terminal nitrogens in the
(p-anisolyl)-dodecylguanidine were 15N-labeled,
so it is not immediately obvious why these crystals should show three
distinct resonances of similar intensity (Figure 12A). The likeliest explanation is the possible
presence of crystalline polymorphs. Another explanation is that in
the crystal unit cell, there could be two nonequivalent molecules
with different environments for their amino nitrogen, as was seen
for a number of crystalline arginine salts.25 A full explanation of the amine resonance splitting in Figure 12A is not possible
in the absence of a crystal structure, which we have not yet been
able to obtain for (p-anisolyl)-dodecylguanidine.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the anisole group, which lacks an H-bond
donor, produces only a minor perturbation on the 15N spectrum
of the deprotonated dodecylguanidine.12

A very different situation prevails when a phenol group is
present
instead of anisole. The free bases of crystalline (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine-[15N2] (Figure 12B) and (p-phenolyl)-ethylguanidine-[15N2]
(Figure 12C) each
show only two distinct resonances, at ∼50 and ∼45 ppm.
The 5 ppm chemical shift splittings likely correspond to the distinct
H-bonding patterns for the two terminal nitrogens, as seen in the
corresponding crystal structures (see below). The distinct 15N chemical shift ranges confirm the distinct chemical identities
of the free bases and their HBr salts.

Among the three HBr salts
(Figure 12D–F),
there are varying degrees of separation
for the two terminal −NH2 resonances. However, none
show any sign of an imino-type nitrogen with a strongly downfield-shifted 15N resonance near 110 ppm. That is, the guanidine groups in
these compounds behave almost fully protonated, as their 15N NMR spectra are generally similar to those of the corresponding
HBr salts (Figure 12E,F). In (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidinium-[15N2] bromide (Figure 12F), the 6 ppm separation likely corresponds to the
different H-bonding environment of the two −NH2 groups,
which is clearly visible in the crystal structure (see below). Somewhat
surprisingly, in the corresponding dodecyl-linked compounds (Figure 12E), the resonances
are superimposed (Figure 12E). This indicates that H-bonding environments of the two
terminal nitrogens are very similar. In the corresponding (p-anisolyl)dodecylguanidine-[15N2]
compound (Figure 12D), the asymmetry in the environment of the two terminal nitrogens
appears to be highest among the three HBr salts. Without the crystal
structures for either of the dodecyl-linked HBr salts (Figure 12D,F), we cannot provide any
detailed rationalization for these results.

All of the HBr salts
(Figure 12D–F)
give resonances near 54 ppm, that is, shifted
a bit downfield from the amino resonances of the corresponding free
bases (Figure 12A–C).
However, the chemical shift of all the −NH2 resonances
in Figure 12B–F,
as well as the splittings between resonances within any one molecule,
is well within the range of those seen previously seen among various
arginine salts.25 We thus conclude that
these five spectra represent fully protonated guanidinium groups.
Only Figure 12A, as
well as the similar result obtained for dodecylguanidine,12 represent good models for the 15N
spectrum of a fully deprotonated monoalkylguanidine.

X-ray Crystallography
High-resolution crystal structures
were obtained from (p-phenolyl)-dodecylguanidine
free base (Figure 13A), (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine free base (Figure 13B) and (p-phenolyl)guanidinium bromide (Figure 13C). These three compounds all crystallize
from MeOH as head-to-tail dimers in the unit cell. Both free bases
(Figure 13A,B) actually
crystallize as guanidinium + phenolate zwitterions. In these, but
not the HBr salt (Figure 13C), multiple solvent (MeOH) molecules per unit cell are clearly
included, clustered about the phenol–guanidine interaction
site. As a result of the presence of protic solvent, these zwitterion
crystals have significantly weaker individual H-bonds between guanidinium
and phenolate than are present in for dimer complexes formed in aprotic
solvents (see Discussion). Thus, the X-ray
crystal geometries are merely suggestive of the solution complexes.

Figure 13 Crystal
structures of compounds containing both phenol and guanidine
groups, showing H-bond network and distances. (A) (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine free base. Formula: C21 H41N3O3. Space group: P – 1. Cell length (Å): a = 6.7626, b = 7.9144, c = 21.892. Cell angles: α
= 94.407°, β = 98.175°, γ = 106.478°. R-factor (%): 4.27. (B) (p-Phenolyl)ethylguanidine
free base. Formula: C10 H17N3O2. Space group: P21/c. Cell length (Å): a = 10.1822 (5), b = 10.0597 (5), c = 11.9084 (6). Cell
angles: α = 90.00°, β = 109.8880° (10), γ
= 90.00°. R-factor (%): 3.03. (C) (p-Phenolyl)ethylguanidinium bromide. Formula: C9H14BrN3O2. Space group: P21/c. Cell length (Å): a = 11.1931 (7), b = 10.0659 (6), c = 9.8327 (6). Cell angles: α = 90.00, β = 101.508(2),
γ = 90.00. R-factor (%): 1.95.

These structures are even imperfect representations
of the free-base
samples that we measured using the IR spectra in KBr pellets and solid-state
NMR, which did not include MeOH. That is, when crystals prepared for
X-ray measurements were directly redissolved in DMSO, spectral signals
from the cocrystallized MeOH could usually be seen (see, e.g., the 13C NMR signal from MeOH in Figure 10-S-E). However, even when the X-ray crystals were thoroughly ground with
KBr to make pellets for IR measurements, no IR absorption bands from
MeOH were ever detected. It appears the MeOH was lost during KBr grinding.
Because stoichiometric MeOH could not be included in the IR samples,
acetonitrile was used as the recrystallization solvent for those samples;
and this choice was extended to solid-state NMR samples as well.

Nevertheless, these crystal structures (Figure 13) support the conclusion from solid-state 15N NMR (see above) that protons in the crystalline states
of the (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidine free base compounds
are essentially fully transferred from the phenol to form guanidinium.
In all of them, the three C–N bonds of the guanidinium group
are of equal length, lying in a narrow range of 1.33–1.34 Å.
However, the free base crystal structures (Figure 13A,B) still show clear signs of stronger
H-bonding than is present in the HBr salt (Figure 13C).

In (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine
(Figure 13A), the
two terminal guanidinium
nitrogens form H-bonds with three different O atoms. The shortest,
with an N–O distance of 2.75 Å, is with the phenolate
of the partner molecule in the head-to-tail dimer. The others are
to 2 distinct cocrystallized MeOH molecules. One MeOH accepts H-bonds
from both terminal nitrogens, of very similar lengths (2.87 and 2.95
Å). The other MeOH accepts an even stronger H-bond (2.83 Å)
from only one of the two terminal nitrogens. The two MeOH molecules
also serve as H-bond donors to the phenolate oxygen, with O–O
distances of 2.36 and 2.62 Å. Somewhat surprisingly, the intrachain
nitrogen does not participate in any H-bonding in this crystal.

By contrast, in (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine free
base (Figure 13B),
all of the three nitrogens participate in H-bonding. There are four
H-bond acceptor groups for each guanidinium. Three of these are distinct
MeOH oxygens, accepting H-bonds from the terminal nitrogens, with
the O–N bond distances in the narrow range of 2.85–2.90
Å. The fourth H-bond acceptor, phenolate, shows an H-bonding
pattern that is strikingly different from that in the dodecyl-linked
compound (Figure 13A), in that it accepts moderately strong H-bonds of nearly equal
length (2.87 and 2.88 Å) from two nitrogens of the same guanidinium
group, one being the intrachain nitrogen. The phenolate in the ethyl-linked
compound (Figure 13B) simultaneously accepts even stronger H-bonds from two other groups,
as measured by their short lengths. One is MeOH (O–O distance
of 1.69 Å); the other is a guanidine nitrogen from a neighboring
dimer (O–N distance of 2.85 Å).

One desired control
compound, the HBr salt of the dodecyl-linked
compound in Figure 13A, has not yet been amenable to crystallography. However, the HBr
salt of the corresponding ethyl-linked compound (Figure 13C) again clearly demonstrates
head-to-tail dimer formation. In this case, Br– counterions
are present, and no cocrystallized MeOH molecules. This results in
somewhat different H-bonding patterns. As with the corresponding free
base (Figure 13B),
the intrachain nitrogen and one of the terminal nitrogens still form
equal-length H-bonds with the phenolic oxygen of the dimer partner
molecule. However, in the HBr salt (Figure 13C), the N–O bond distances are both
larger than any N–O distances in the free bases. This indicates
weaker H-bonding between guanidinium and protonated phenol, as compared
to guanidinium + phenolate. Furthermore, as a result of complete proton
transfer to the phenol group, the phenolic C–O bond length
is also clearly 0.2–0.4 Å longer in the HBr salt than
in the free bases.

Discussion
Phenol and Guanidine Free-Base
Groups Form an Unusually Strong
and Polarizable H-Bond in Nonpolar Environments
Computations
in vacuo (Figure 2)
and UV spectroscopic experiments in hexane (Figure 3) demonstrate that phenol and guanidine groups
form an overall-neutral H-bonded complex in nonpolar environments,
with a binding ΔE or ΔH of −70 kJ mol–1. The closeness of the agreement
between the computational and experimental numbers is fortuitous,
because the in vacuo computation did not take into account changes
in solvent interfacial interactions that could easily contribute up
to ±10–20 kJ mol–1 to the binding energy.
Furthermore, Figure 2 presents only the single H-bonded structure with the very lowest
energy. Several other local minima (e.g., involving H-bonding with
a deprotonated intrachain nitrogen) were only a few kJ mol–1 higher in energy and would likely be represented in the physiological-temperature
ensemble measured in the experimental work. Such alternative structures
could also easily play a role inside proteins.

The experimental
UV spectrum of the H-bonded complex in hexane (Figure 3C) was computed by a least-squares fitting
procedure, based on the assumption of a simple complexation equilibrium
that could be shifted by dilution or heating. This UV spectrum shows
distinct features attributable to both phenol (∼280 nm) and
phenolate (∼310 nm) structures, indicating a rapid protomeric
equilibrium within the complex corresponding to the structures in Scheme 1B,C. There is no
certain way to extract the individual extinction coefficients and
individual concentrations of individual protomers. However, in hexane,
they appear to provide roughly equal mole fractions on the basis of
an assumption of roughly equal integrated extinction coefficients
for the phenol (280 nm) and phenolate (310 nm) bands.

Even in
a more polar aprotic solvent (DMSO), H-bonding is detectable
in UV spectroscopic measurements, which show concentration-dependent
formation of (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidine dimer complexes
(Figure 4; additional
data in Supporting Information). The experimental
values of ΔG°298 = −4
kJ mol–1 and ΔH° = −11
kJ mol–1 per phenol–guanidine H-bonding pair
are considerably smaller in DMSO than in hexane. This is attributable
to the much stronger solvating power of DMSO than of hexane. As a
result of solvation, formation of the dimer is expected to disrupt
numerous energetically favorable interactions between DMSO molecules
and each (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine monomer. These
include interactions in which DMSO oxygens act as H-bond acceptors
from phenol, as well as other dipole–dipole interactions.

The UV spectrum of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
dimer in DMSO was also estimated (see Supporting Information). In this case, the phenolate-like absorbance band,
with a maximum at ∼308 nm, was clearly predominant, and only
much smaller features near 280 nm might be attributable to a contribution
from phenol. Thus, shifting from hexane to a more polar solvent such
as DMSO is sufficient to favor the zwitterionic protomer within the
H-bonded dimer. Even taken by themselves, these UV spectral results
demonstrate that the H-bond between phenol and guanidine is indeed
highly polarizable. That is, the favored protomer can easily be changed
by alterations in solvent environment. With widely differing dielectric
constants, DMSO and hexane produce big changes in proton polarization.

The existence of phenol–guanidine complexes exhibiting rapid
protomeric equilibria and large proton polarizability is also supported
by IR spectroscopy in aprotic solvents. In both CCl4 (Figure 5) and DMSO (Figure 6), the phenol/guanidine
H-bonded complexes simultaneously exhibit characteristic peaks of
protonated and deprotonated phenol groups, as well as protonated and
deprotonated monoalkylguanidine groups. In DMSO (Figure 6), the IR bands representative
of the zwitterionic limiting structure (Scheme 1B) are more favored. However, in the less-polar
CCl4 (Figure 5), there are nearly equal contributions of both forms (Scheme 1B,C).

Methylating the
phenol, or protonating guanidine with a strong
acid such as HBr, eliminates the possibility of this type of strong
H-bonding interaction. Consistent with this, in crystals or in DMSO,
the IR and NMR signals from the guanidine group of (p-anisolyl)dodecylguanidine free base are nearly the same as those
from dodecylguanidine free base. The same similarities apply to the
corresponding HBr salts, (p-anisolyl)dodecylguanidinium-Br
and dodecylguanidinium bromide. In the latter case, the similarities
also extend to (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidinium bromide.
This shows that a protonated (neutral) phenol group interacts only
weakly with guanidinium. Spectral features of phenol are also reciprocally
unaffected by the presence of guanidinium (Figure 7; see also Supporting Information). These control experiments show that the O of
anisole or neutral phenol serves as only a very weak
H-bond acceptor from guanidinium (and also, as shown
in the case of anisole, from guanidine free base).

Phenolate Spectral
Properties Are Strongly Perturbed When It
Accepts an H-Bond from Guanidinium, but This Is Only Seen in Aprotic
Environments
Strong perturbation of the phenolate group by
H-bonding to a guanidinium counterion in aprotic solvents is detectable
with UV, IR, and NMR spectroscopy.

UV
The phenolate
component of the H-bonded complex
(Scheme 1B) appears
to have λmax near 310 nm in hexane (Figure 3) and double maxima at 293
and 310 nm in DMSO (see Figure 4-S). In
contrast, cresolate salts in protic solvents show a single broad peak
with λmax near ∼296 nm. This value is seen
for MeOH in Figure 4F–H, and is nearly the same as that reported for tyrosinate
in water at high pH (λmax ≈ 294 nm).18 That is, when combined in protic solvents, phenol
and guanidine simply form solvated phenolate and guanidinium ions
in the familiar Brønsted–Lowry type of acid–base
equilibrium. Even at concentrations exceeding ∼50 mM (Figure 4), there is no evidence
of significant formation of H-bonded complexes between these ions
in protic solvents.

The neutral (phenol) species within the
very same H-bonded complexes serves as a control. It shows considerably
less solvent-dependent variability for λmax, which
appears at 280–283 nm for both protic and aprotic solvents
(Figures 3 and 4). Only the vibronic bandshape changes, with considerable
sharpening as the solvent polarity is reduced.

IR
A clear IR demonstration of H-bonding perturbation
on the phenolate is seen for the strongest C=C stretch mode.
For (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine in DMSO, at a concentration
expected to produce mainly the dimer complex, it is at 1494 cm–1 (Figure 6A), compared with 1501 cm–1 in MeOH (Figure 6B). The latter frequency
is also observed in tyrosine solutions at high pH.18 This same vibration is at an intermediate frequency of
1498 cm–1 both in CCl4 (Figure 5) and in a solid state measurement
(Figure 9).

In
all these spectra, the phenolate peak at 1494–1501 cm–1 consistently has a larger half-width than the phenol peak at ∼1515
cm–1, likely due to inhomogeneous broadening. This
is consistent with a greater degree of sensitivity of the phenolate
vibrational frequency to the solvent environment as compared to phenol
itself.

An even greater variability of phenolate vibrational
frequencies
is seen for the C–O stretch. This vibration ranges from 1264
to 1309 cm–1 depending on the solvent and counterion
environments (Figure 8D–G). The lowest value, for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
in MeOH, is similar to the value of 1270 cm–1 reported
for aqueous tyrosine and tyrosine-containing peptides at a high pH.18 The highest value of 1309 cm–1, for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine in DMSO, is probably
related to the unusual H-bonding environment in the dimer complex.
Once again, the corresponding C–O vibration in phenol itself
is more constant (Figure 8A–C). It varies in intensity, sometimes resulting in
the inability to resolve it from a nearby peak at 1235 cm–1, but appears to fall in a narrow (∼3-cm–1) range around 1246 cm–1. The latter is its value
in MeOH (Figure 8C)
and in water-solvated tyrosine.18 In summary,
in the IR as in the UV region, phenolate spectral bands are much more
sensitive to solvent environment than the corresponding features of
phenol.

NMR
The phenol/phenolate ring 1H resonances
in DMSO show a consistent dependence on the presence and concentration
of guanidine/guanidinium H-bonding partners, but they always remain
far from the values seen in potassium p-cresolate.
This can be seen most clearly in Figure 10. The asymptotic values at low (<5 mM)
concentration of (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine match
those of p-cresol. The asymptotic values at high
(>100 mM) concentration shift barely a quarter of the way to those
seen for potassium p-cresolate in DMSO. Similarly,
the spectra of dodecylguanidinium-phenolate salts in DMSO show ring 1H resonances (see Figures 9-S-B,C in Supporting Information) that are much closer to those of p-cresol than of potassium p-cresolate.
This is seen with a dodecylguanidine/phenol ratio of either 1:1 or
1.6:1, either of which would be expected to fully deprotonate 0.06
M p-cresol in DMSO if Brønsted–Lowry
acid–base equilibrium was present. That is, the 1H NMR spectra of phenolate when strongly H-bonded to a guanidinium
counterion largely resemble those of p-cresol itself,
and are very different than with a weakly H-bonded K+ counterion.
Similar conclusions apply to the 13C resonance of the phenolate
ring in aprotic solvents. With a guanidinium counterion, these phenolate
salts remain closer to values seen for p-cresol,
than to the corresponding potassium salt (see Figure 11).

Proton Polarizability
Based on UV, IR, and NMR spectroscopic
measurements, the proton in the phenol–guanidine H-bond rapidly
shifts position between the two bases (guanidine and phenolate), and
is highly polarizable. That is, the fraction of time it spends on
each of the two groups is strongly dependent on the solvent environment,
with the zwitterionic form being favored in more polar solvents. Additionally,
IR spectra of the H-bonded complexes in aprotic solvents (Figure 5), as well as in
crystalline state (Figures 9 and 6-S-G) display a strong broad
absorption band between 3500 and 2500 cm–1. Such
a continuum absorption is characteristic of
a polarizable H-bond. It is notably absent from the control spectra
of the HBr salts of the same compounds in crystalline state (also
shown in Figures 9 and 6-S-G in Supporting Information). This confirms
that the phenol–guanidinium H-bonding interaction is much weaker
than for phenolate–guanidinium.

The different degrees
of polarization in various solvent environments can be correlated
with solvent-dependent pKa values of the
phenol and guanidine groups. In aprotic solvents less polar than DMSO,
the acidity of guanidinium is expected to increase, whereas that of
phenol is expected to decrease, effectively bringing the pKa values of guanidine and phenol closer together.
This promotes the formation of an even stronger H-bond, with an even
greater proton polarizability, because H-bonding is generally strongest
when the pKa of the donor is closest to
that of (the conjugate-acid form of) the acceptor.22 That is, the proton affinities of the groups competing
for the H+ must be large to get the strongest H-bonds.
This is precisely the case for guanidine and phenolate in our H-bonded
complexes, most particularly in nonpolar solvents such as hexane and
CCl4. A much weaker interaction is expected when guanidinium
serves as the H-bond donor and phenol serves as the H-bond acceptor
because of the much lower proton affinity of (neutral) phenol compared
with phenolate.

No single parameter such as dielectric constant
is a perfect predictor
of solvent-dependent pKa, nor of whether
phenol and guanidine are likely to participate in the H-bond interactions.
Indeed, when considering such H-bonding in crystals and other solid
states, including the interiors of any particular protein or lipid
bilayer, only wide ranges are available for the dielectric constant.
Furthermore, trying to predict the interactions of a highly directional
and localized H-bond with its environment by using a continuum model
is intrinsically unreliable. Therefore, we cannot claim to be modeling
the arg–tyr system inside a protein or membrane with great
precision by sampling their side chains’ behavior in only four
homogeneous solvents. Observing our model compounds in a wider range
of solvent environments will likely reveal interesting additional
aspects of their interactions.

Additionally, the concept of
pKa in
nonaqueous environments is not rigorous and depends strongly on the
particular counterions present. This lack of rigor explains some experimentally
contradictory behavior. In water, guanidinium is unquestionably a
weaker Brønsted–Lowry acid than phenol. However, we have
shown quite directly (Figure 4F) that in MeOH, guanidinium is the stronger acid by about
1.3 pKa units. This contradicts the much
lower published pKa value for p-cresol than for guanidinium in DMSO (18.523 and 28.5,24 respectively). These
published values suggest that guanidine free base should be capable
of completely deprotonating phenol in either MeOH or DMSO. Besides
showing an opposite Brønsted–Lowry behavior in MeOH (Figure 4F), our spectra measured
in DMSO (e.g., Figure 4B–D) indicate that Brønsted–Lowry acid–base
equilibria do not occur with this pair of solutes. Instead, Lewis
acid–base complexation predominates. Within such a complex,
it is not easy to assign pKa values to
the individual components.

Moderately Strong H-Bonding between Guanidine
and Phenol Groups
Is Retained in the Crystalline State
So far, we have only
been able to obtain crystal structures of the zwitterion (Scheme 1B) in the presence
of cocrystallized MeOH. Even in the absence of MeOH, the IR spectra
of KBr pellets (Figure 8) support the conclusion that the zwitterion predominates in the
solid state. These IR spectra nevertheless demonstrate that even this
zwitterion form (predominantly Scheme 1B) retains a more polarizable H-bond than the phenol
+ guanidinium salt form (Scheme 1A), as evidenced by the stronger continuum absorption
band (compare Figure 8 green and purple spectra). Thus, the phenolate + guanidinium H-bond
remains much stronger than the phenol + guanidinium H-bond. This conclusion
also finds support in the crystal structures, which show guanidinium-phenolate
H-bonds that are shorter (2.75–2.9 Å, Figure 13A,B), than for guanidinium
+ phenol (2.96–3.00 Å; Figure 13C). The value of 2.75 Å is indicative
of quite a strong H-bonding. Indeed, it is close to the range (<2.65
Å) for very strong N–H···O bonds that have
been interpreted as having partial covalent character.26

Interpretation of 15N NMR Measurements
The
solid-state 15N chemical shifts of the terminal nitrogens
of (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidines (Figure 12B,C) are all within the range
of 44–51 ppm. These are similar to those of the corresponding
HBr salts (Figure 12E,F) and are also well within the 30–70 ppm range previously
observed in 15N NMR chemical shifts of arginine and other
guanidinium salts in solutions,17 as well
as in the solid state.25 These results
are consistent with the conclusion from X-ray crystallography and
IR spectra that the zwitterion, that is, the guanidinium-phenolate
protomer, predominates in the crystals of (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidine
free bases.

In contrast, actual stoichiometric deprotonation
of the guanidine group produces changes far outside the range for
guanidinium. Thus, the ∼60 ppm separation between amino and
imino 15N chemical shifts for crystalline (p-anisolyl)dodecylguanidine free base (Figure 12A) falls on a continuum with values previously
published for alkylguanidine free bases in various solvent environments.
The least H-bonded of these are the penta-alkylated guanidine free
bases, which in aprotic solvents completely lack H-bond donors. In
such solvents, the chemical shift splitting between the imino and
amino nitrogens is very large, typically near 150 ppm.27 These splittings can be observed directly in
the solution-state measurements in CHCl3 because there
are no rapid H+ transfers that can make the terminal amino
and imino nitrogens chemically equivalent. The same prior work showed
that when even a single N–H bond is introduced, that is, in
tetra-alkylated guanidine free bases in CHCl3, the 15N chemical shift splitting drops to 126 ppm. As we have now
shown, with four N–H bonds per guanidine, specifically in monoalkylated
guanidine free bases such as dodecylguanidine, the splitting drops
further to 60 ppm. However, due to rapid tautomerization in a solution,
this chemical shift splitting can only be observed with the solid-state
measurements (see ref (12) and Figure 12A).

We conclude that large variations in 15N chemical shift
splittings in deprotonated guanidines are produced by the presence
or absence of H-bond donation to the imino nitrogen, mainly from neighboring
amino nitrogens within the same alkylguanidine molecule. The presence
of such H-bonding renders the chemical environment of the imino nitrogen
more “amino-like”. Additionally, in the presence of
a sufficiently strong proton donor(s) external to the guanidine group,
the imino group becomes completely or nearly completely protonated,
that is, nearly indistinguishable from the nearby amino group, leading
to small splittings such as in Figure 12B,C.

The availability of internal
and external H-bond donor(s) to the
imino nitrogen thus can account for most of the enormous variation
in 15N chemical-shift splittings seen in guanidine-free
bases. The weaker the overall H+ donation to the imino
group, the greater the splitting. If this hypothesis is true, then
it should be possible to systematically adjust the H+-donating
strength of the environment to obtain just about any value of splitting
for the η-nitrogens of arginine, from 0 to 60 ppm. NMR spectroscopic
modeling of possible arginine environments in biology cannot likely
be considered complete until a good range of intermediate values have
been observed experimentally.

In the (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidine
model system
we have developed, nearly complete H+ transfer prevails,
and the splittings of only 5–6 ppm are obtained (Figure 12B,C). However,
making the environment around the neutral phenol–guanidine
H-bond less polar, so as to emphasize Scheme 1C more, should result in less H+ transfer to the imino group, and thus to greater splitting. The
simplest way to accomplish this, while still allowing X-ray crystallography
and solid-state 15N measurements, might be to crystallize
our (p-phenolyl)alkylguanidine model compounds without
including MeOH. Alternatively, it should be possible to resolve a
large splitting of 15N chemical shifts of the two terminal
nitrogens of the H-bonded dimer complex in DMSO, either in a liquid
state or as a glassy solid. Our attempts at these measurements have
not been successful to date (see Supporting Information for 15N NMR measurements in DMSO at 25 and 50 °C).

Possible New Motif for Membrane Protein Structures
The 70
kJ mol–1 binding enthalpy of the (phenol
+ guanidine) complex is quite large—nearly double that of (phenol
+ alkylamine) complexes, which have been measured by direct calorimetry,28 as well as by UV measurements similar to those
shown in Figure 3 above.13,14

H-bonded dyads (e.g., arg–asp pairs with closest contacts
commonly below 3.0 Å) have long been an identifiable motif in
crystal structures, as shown in a statistical analysis of amino acid
geometries in such structures.29 In this
publication, no common H-bonded tyr–arg patterns were clearly
discernable; however, no membrane proteins were included among the
62 proteins analyzed, as it was limited to structures determined prior
to 1988. The database used for a more recently updated online version
of this catalog30 now includes ∼40×
as many structures. This probably includes a number of membrane proteins;
however, the database is not organized according to protein type or
localization. This recent database shows recurring geometric motifs
that appear to be suitable for H-bonding not only for dyads of tyr–lys
(“Cluster 6”) but also for tyr–arg (“Cluster
1” and “Cluster 5”). The H-bonded tyr–arg
grouping in Figure 1 appears possibly to fit in the latter Cluster 5.

Still, few
tyr–arg environments have been clearly identified
in proteins that are sufficiently aprotic and nonpolar, for example,
as in Meta II (Figure 1) that they might, based on our modeling, support deprotonation of
arg; certainly not as readily as deprotonation of lys. Nevertheless,
we hypothesize, based on our modeling, that the overall neutral form
of the (arg + tyr) dyad may play a significant role in a small number
of protein structures, specifically in very nonpolar aprotic environments.
We designate this hypothetical grouping a Bonded Uncharged (aRginine
+ tYrosine) or BU(RY) motif, signifying any strongly H-bonded arg–tyr
dyad that is overall neutral, that is, in zwitterionic (Scheme 1B), fully neutral (Scheme 1C), or intermediate
protomeric states.

Our experimental modeling clearly shows this
dyad is not likely
allowed in protic environments. Thus, a functional BU(RY) grouping
resembling our model compounds will probably occur only in biological
environments deficient in H-bonding groups, predominantly membranes,
where no proton acceptor for the tyrosine-OH is available, besides
a deprotonated arginine; and no proton donor is available for that
deprotonated arginine, besides the tyrosine-OH. A specific example
of a sufficiently nonpolar aprotic environment is provided in the
region surrounding the conserved R–Y grouping in Meta II (Figure 1).4 Conserved adjacent RY groupings in protein primary sequences
are quite common in small-peptide hormones, such as members of the
neuropeptide Y family. In fact, the powerful endogenous brain analgesic
kyotorphin is simply Y–R dipeptide. The fact that kyotorphin
and other RY-rich hormones tend to act at or within membranes suggests
that the formation of a BU(RY) dyads within the nonpolar interior
of a membrane bilayer should be considered as a possible physiological
structure for such peptides.

Other candidates for BU(RY) motifs
are in the activated intermediate
states of heptahelical membrane proteins. X-ray crystallography shows
a conserved arg135–tyr223 dyad in an aprotic environment in
Meta II. When the G-protein transducin reversibly dissociates from
this activated receptor (Figure 1A), there is no clear evidence of any counteranion
for arg135 remaining behind or entering the binding pocket to substitute
for transducin’s C-terminal carboxylate. In fact, the only
protic or oxygen-containing group within 5 Å of the arg135 guanidine
group is tyr227. Specifically, no structural water molecules are observable
within this distance. Instead, nearby hydrocarbon side chains almost
completely fill the space surrounding arg135 and tyr223. Their H-bonding
distance of 2.7 Å matches well that seen in our best crystallographic
model for a BU(RY) grouping, (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine
dimer (2.75 Å, Figure 13).

Solid-state NMR measurements have previously been
performed, which
detected a clear perturbation of tyr227 during Meta II formation,
but seemed to exclude the possibility that either it or arg135 underwent
deprotonation.10 However, it may not be
safe to rely on expectations based on prior model compounds,10,25,27,31,32 which did not include any with a guanidine–phenol
pairing. In fact, (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine and
(p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine in aprotic environments
deviate significantly in their spectroscopic behavior from all of
the earlier model compounds. Specifically, based only on earlier model
compounds, deprotonation of tyr227 would be expected to result in
a ∼15 ppm downfield shift for the 13C resonance
of its ipso carbon.10 However, our new
model compounds for such a BU(RY) dyad show 13C and 1H chemical shift values for the phenolic ring that are substantially
closer to those of neutral p-cresol than potassium p-cresolate, while still showing the 13C and 1H chemical shifts closer to protonated guanidinium than to
guanidine (see Figures 10 and 11). That is, when strongly H-bonded,
both guanidine and phenol can appear spectroscopically to be mostly
protonated, even though overall they are neutral, that is, there is
a full stoichiometric deprotonation of the combined grouping.

Rather than NMR or IR, the best spectroscopic method to detect
a BU(RY) grouping in a membrane protein may be UV absorption, using
the spectral marker band for the phenolate component near 310–315
nm (Figures 3 and 4), or possibly UV resonance Raman. Unfortunately,
the strong UV–visible absorption bands of retinylidene chromophores
of rhodopsin and Meta II overlap this 310 nm region. As a result,
Meta II-minus-rhodopsin UV–visible difference spectra provide
no clear evidence, or lack of evidence, for a 310 nm difference band
attributable to a BU(RY) dyad.33 However,
substitution of a retinal analogue such as retinal2 could
shift the absorption spectrum of both rhodopsin and Meta II chromophores
to longer wavelengths, reducing spectral interference in the 310 nm
region. Alternatively, many other GPCRs and their agonists have no
competing absorptions in this region, so UV difference spectroscopy
should provide a rather simple and unambiguous test of whether a BU(RY)
dyad can form upon addition of agonist to receptor.

Materials and
Methods
UV–Visible Spectra
Measurements were performed
on a Shimadzu UV-265 dual-beam spectrometer, using 0.5 or 1 cm pathlength
fused silica cuvettes as indicated.

IR Spectra
Spectra
were obtained using a Nicolet Magna
IR 860 spectrometer. For solution spectra, a refillable variable pathlength
cell with 15 μm spacers and 2 mm thick CaF2 windows
was used. For crystalline samples, the samples were prepared as KBr
pellets.

UV/Visible/IR Spectral Manipulations and Fitting
Spectral
manipulations (e.g., water vapor subtraction, smoothing, peak fitting)
were performed using GRAMS32/AI software, except for SVD, which was
performed by transferring the data as ASCII files and then manipulating
them as matrices in Matlab. The SVD routine in Matlab was used to
compute the best-fit spectrum of the 1:1 complex formed between p-cresol and n-dodecylguanidine in hexane,
at varying dilutions of an initial total concentration of ∼700
μM; as well as the best-fit concentration of this species. The
fitting was done in a least-squares fashion by fitting a set of 11
measured spectra of the sample at different concentrations and temperatures
to weighted sums of two components: the separately measured spectrum
of pure p-cresol in hexane and a single additional
spectral component, which was allowed to vary. Further details are
provided in Results and Supporting Information.

Computational Modeling
All computations were done by
using GAUSSIAN09 implemented with the GAUSSVIEW 4.1 visualization
interface. DFT energy computations used the B3LYP functional with
6-31G++ or 6-311G++ basis set.

Solution-State 1H and 13C NMR Spectra
Except where another solvent
was indicated, all of the 1H and 13C NMR spectra
were recorded in DMSO-d6 using a 400 MHz
Bruker NMR spectrometer. Chemical shifts
are presented in ppm and are referenced to the residual DMSO peak
at 2.50 ppm for 1H and to the natural-abundance 13C-DMSO peak at 39.5 ppm peak.

15N Solid-State
NMR Spectra
All solid-state 15N NMR cross-polarization
magic-angle spinning (CP-MAS) measurements
were performed at the Analytical and Technical services at the SUNY
ESF using a 400 MHz Bruker spectrometer. The spinning rate was 4000
Hz, with a delay between pulse 5 s, 400 ppm sweep width (12 165.450
Hz), and 1H decoupling field of 47 200 Hz. Number
of data points was 484, acquisition time was 0.02 s; processed with
a line broadening of 40 Hz reference to ammonium-15N2 sulfate standard at 0 ppm.

Sources of Chemicals
p-Cresol, as
well as all of the reagents and solvents used in the synthesis and
analysis of other compounds were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used
directly unless otherwise indicated. The solvents were dried by the
addition of molecular sieves. KBr for solid-state IR samples was dried
at 110 °C over several days before use.

Syntheses of Model Compounds
Detailed procedures for
synthesis of p-phenol-dodecylguanidinium bromide
and dodecylguanidinium bromide are described elsewhere.12 Analogous procedures were followed to prepare p-phenol-ethylguanidinium bromide, using commercially available p-phenol-ethylamine, that is, tyramine, as the starting
point and converting the amine to a guanidine by reaction with S-methyl thiourea hydroiodide, just as was done to p-phenol-dodecylamine in the previously described synthesis
of p-phenol-dodecylguanidinium bromide.12 The procedure for incorporating enriched (∼50
atom %) 15N at the guanidine terminal nitrogens, in this
case to aid in obtaining solid-state 15N NMR spectra, was
also described in the same publication.

Deprotonation of Alkylguanidine
Compounds
A general
method for deprotonating alkylguanidinium bromides to form alkylguanidine
free bases is described in the accompanying paper.12 This procedure reproducibly gave crystalline samples, with
elemental analyses that match the predicted values for the corresponding
free bases. In brief, a dry crystalline alkylguanidinium bromide (or p-phenol alkylguanidinium bromide) was first recrystallized
from acetonitrile and then redissolved in dry methanol (MeOH). Potassium tert-butoxide (1 mol equiv), also dissolved in dry methanol
just before use, was added into the solution dropwise, causing the
solution to become milky due to the precipitation of KBr. After the
precipitation had stopped, the solution was heated briefly to boiling,
then centrifuged while still hot (2 min, 3000g).
The clear supernatant was transferred to a clean test tube and then
concentrated ∼20-fold under a gentle stream of dry N2. The evaporative cooling aided in promoting a high yield of crystals.
These were harvested while still cold by pipetting off the bulk of
residual tert-butanol and MeOH and then drying under
N2.

Sample Crystallization and X-ray Crystallography
Crystals
of the free bases of (p-phenolyl)-dodecylguanidine
and (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine, as well as their
HBr salts, were obtained by slowly evaporating and cooling concentrated
solutions of them in dry MeOH, under a gentle stream of room-temperature
N2. Making a sufficiently concentrated solution of (p-phenolyl)dodecylguanidine free base in dry MeOH required
gentle heating, whereas the other compounds dissolved readily at room
temperature. The resulting ∼0.1 mm size crystals were stored
for up to ∼1 week in a minimal volume of MeOH at 4 °C
before mounting in the diffractometer. Structures were recorded at
90 K.

Crystals of (p-phenolyl)-dodecylguanidinium
bromide, (p-anisolyl)-dodecylguanidine free base
and its HBr salt, as well as dodecylguanidine free base and its HBr
salt could also be made by the approach described above, but were
not of sufficient quality to produce good diffraction.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00282.Individual .cif
files for the structures shown in Figure 13 (CIF) (CIF) (CIF)

(Tables 1-S–4-S) Gaussian input (.gjf)
files
for computed structures and energies as shown in Figure 2; tabulated raw UV absorbance
spectral data on cresol + dodecylguanidine in hexane as shown in Figure 3; matrices obtained
during the optimization used to compute thermodynamic parameters;
and tabulated raw spectral absorbance for (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
dimerization in DMSO; (Figures 1-S–4-S) computed UV spectral
results for the dimerization of (p-phenolyl)ethylguanidine
in DMSO; (Figures 5-S–6-S) additional IR spectra; (Figures
7-S–11-S) additional solution 1H, 13C,
and 15N NMR spectra in MeOH and DMSO (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00282_si_001.cif

 ao7b00282_si_002.cif

 ao7b00282_si_003.cif

 ao7b00282_si_004.pdf

 Author Present Address
∥ Department of Physics, University of Texas,
El Paso, Texas 79968,
United States (A.G.).

Author Present Address
§ Chemistry
Department, University of Dodoma, Tanzania (A.T.B.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was
supported by Syracuse University, and by NSF
Instrumentation Grants for NMR and X-ray crystallography instruments.
We thank Carlos Castaneda and Bruce Hudson for helpful suggestions,
and Sharece Toner for assistance with GAUSSIAN computations.
==== Refs
References
Sass H. J. ; Büldt G. ; Gessenich R. ; Hehn D. ; Neff D. ; Schlesinger R. ; Berendzen J. ; Ormos P. 
Structural alterations
for proton translocation in the M state of wild-type bacteriorhodopsin . Nature 
2000 , 406 , 649 –653 . 10.1038/35020607 .10949308 
Choe H.-W. ; Kim Y. J. ; Park J. H. ; Morizumi T. ; Pai E. F. ; Krauß N. ; Hofmann K. P. ; Scheerer P. 
Crystal structure of
opsin in its G-protein-interacting conformation . Nature 
2008 , 455 , 497 –502 . 10.1038/nature07330 .18818650 
Govorunova E. G. ; Sineshchekov O. A. ; Li H. ; Spudich J. L. 
Microbial rhodopsins:
diversity, mechanisms, and optogenetic applications . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
2017 , 86 , 845 10.1146/annurev-biochem-101910-144233 .28301742 
Choe H. W. ; Kim Y. J. ; Park J. H. ; Morizumi T. ; Pai E. F. ; Krauss N. ; Hofmann K. P. ; Scheerer P. ; Ernst O. P. 
Crystal
structure of metarhodopsin II . Nature 
2011 , 471 , 651 –655 . 10.1038/nature09789 .21389988 
Braiman M. S. ; Briercheck D. M. ; Kriger K. M. 
Modeling vibrational
spectra of amino
acid side chains in proteins: Effects of protonation state, counterion,
and solvent on arginine C–N stretch frequencies . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1999 , 103 , 4744 –4750 . 10.1021/jp983011b .
Schneider E.
H. ; Schnell D. ; Strasser A. ; Dove S. ; Seifert R. 
Impact of
the DRY motif and the missing ionic lock on constitutive activity
and G-protein coupling of the human histamine H4 receptor . J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
2010 , 333 , 382 –392 . 10.1124/jpet.109.163220 .20106995 
Ballesteros J. A. ; Jensen A. D. ; Liapakis G. ; Rasmussen S. G. F. ; Shi L. ; Gether U. ; Javitch J. A. 
Activation of the
β2-adrenergic receptor involves disruption of an
ionic lock between the cytoplasmic ends of transmembrane segments
3 and 6 . J. Biol. Chem. 
2001 , 276 , 29171 –29177 . 10.1074/jbc.M103747200 .11375997 
Valentin-Hansen L. ; Groenen M. ; Nygaard R. ; Frimurer T. M. ; Holliday N. D. ; Schwartz T. W. 
The arginine of the DRY motif in transmembrane segment
III functions as a balancing micro-switch in the activation of the
β2-adrenergic receptor . J.
Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 31973 –31982 . 10.1074/jbc.M112.348565 .22843684 
Shan J. ; Khelashvili G. ; Mondal S. ; Weinstein H. ; et al. Ligand-dependent conformations
and dynamics of the serotonin 5-HT(2A)
receptor determine its activation and membrane-driven oligomerization
properties . PLoS Comput. Biol. 
2012 , 8 , e100247310.1371/journal.pcbi.1002473 .22532793 
Goncalves J. A. ; South K. ; Ahuja S. ; Zaitseva E. ; Opefi C. A. ; Eilers M. ; Vogel R. ; Reeves P. J. ; Smith S. O. 
Highly
conserved tyrosine stabilizes the active state of rhodopsin . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2010 , 107 , 19861 –19866 . 10.1073/pnas.1009405107 .21041664 
Zundel G. 
Hydrogen bonds
with large proton polarizability in proteins—studies with model
systems . Recent Res. Dev. Phys. Chem. 
1998 , 2 , 501 –532 .
Banyikwa A. ; Miller S. E. ; Gao T. ; Krebs R. A. ; Xiao Y. ; Carney C. ; Braiman M. S.  Small-molecule
models for arginine side chains and arginine-tyrosine pairs
in nonpolar environments ACS Omega  (accompanying paper).
Farah L. ; Giles G. ; Wilson D. ; Ohno A. ; Scott R. M. 
Hydrogen
bonding interactions of aliphatic amines with ortho-substituted phenols . J. Phys. Chem. 
1979 , 83 , 2455 –2458 . 10.1021/j100482a007 .
Albrecht G. ; Zundel G. 
Phenol-amine hydrogen bonds with large proton polarizabilities.
Position of the OH···N ⇋ O···H+N
equilibrium as a function of the donor and acceptor . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1 
1984 , 80 , 553 –561 . 10.1039/f19848000553 .
Bos M. ; Ijpma S. T. ; Dahmen E. A. M. F. 
The coulometric titration of acids
and bases in dimethylsulfoxide media . Anal.
Chim. Acta 
1976 , 83 , 39 –47 . 10.1016/S0003-2670(01)84629-8 .
DeLange F. ; Klaassen C. H. ; Wallace-Williams S. E. ; Bovee-Geurts P. H. ; Liu X. M. ; DeGrip W. J. ; Rothschild K. J. 
Tyrosine
structural changes detected during the photoactivation of rhodopsin . J. Biol. Chem. 
1998 , 273 , 23735 –23739 . 10.1074/jbc.273.37.23735 .9726981 
Xiao Y. ; Braiman M. 
Modeling amino acid side chains in proteins: 15N NMR spectra of guanidino groups in nonpolar environments . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 16953 –16958 . 10.1021/jp051279e .16853157 
Rothschild K. J. ; Roepe P. ; Ahl P. L. ; Earnest T. N. ; Bogomolni R. A. ; Das Gupta S. K. ; Mulliken C. M. ; Herzfeld J. 
Evidence for a tyrosine
protonation change during the primary phototransition of bacteriorhodopsin
at low temperature . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1986 , 83 , 347 –351 . 10.1073/pnas.83.2.347 .3001733 
Xiao Y. ; Hutson M. S. ; Belenky M. ; Herzfeld J. ; Braiman M. S. 
Role of
Arginine-82 in Fast Proton Release during the Bacteriorhodopsin Photocycle:
A Time-Resolved FT-IR Study of Purple Membranes Containing 15N-Labeled Arginine . Biochemistry 
2004 , 43 , 12809 –12818 . 10.1021/bi049238g .15461453 
Zundel G. 
Proton transfer
in and proton polarizability of hydrogen bonds: IR and theoretical
studies regarding mechanisms in biological systems . J. Mol. Struct. 
1988 , 177 , 43 –68 . 10.1016/0022-2860(88)80078-4 .
Zundel G. ; Eckert M. 
IR continua of hydrogen
bonds and hydrogen-bonded systems,
calculated proton polarizabilities and line spectra . J. Mol. Struct.: THEOCHEM 
1989 , 200 , 73 –92 . 10.1016/0166-1280(89)85045-6 .
Brzezinski B. ; Zundel G. 
Formation of hydrogen-bonded chains
between a strong
base with guanidine-like character and phenols with various pKa values—an FT-IR study . J. Mol.
Struct.: THEOCHEM 
1996 , 380 , 195 –204 . 10.1016/0022-2860(96)09221-6 .
Bordwell F. G. ; McCallum R. J. ; Olmstead W. N. 
Acidities
and hydrogen bonding of
phenols in dimethyl sulfoxide . J. Org. Chem. 
1984 , 49 , 1424 –1427 . 10.1021/jo00182a020 .
Bordwell F. G. ; Ji G. Z. 
Effects of structural changes on
acidities and homolytic bond dissociation
energies of the hydrogen-nitrogen bonds in amidines, carboxamides,
and thiocarboxamides . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1991 , 113 , 8398 –8401 . 10.1021/ja00022a029 .
Petkova A. T. ; Hu J. G. ; Bizounok M. ; Simpson M. ; Griffin R. G. ; Herzfeld J. 
Arginine Activity in the Proton-Motive
Photocycle of
Bacteriorhodopsin: Solid-State NMR Studies of the Wild-Type and D85N
Proteins . Biochemistry 
1999 , 38 , 1562 –1572 . 10.1021/bi981968z .9931023 
Gilli P. ; Bertolasi V. ; Ferretti V. ; Gilli G. 
Evidence for intramolecular
NH···O resonance-assisted hydrogen bonding in β-enaminones
and related heterodienes: A combined crystal-structural, IR and NMR
spectroscopic, and quantum-mechanical investivation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2000 , 122 , 10405 –10407 . 10.1021/ja000921+ .
Kanamori K. ; Roberts J. D. 
A nitrogen-15 NMR
study of the barriers to isomerization
about guanidinium and guanidino carbon-nitrogen bonds in L-arginine . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1983 , 105 , 4698 –4701 . 10.1021/ja00352a028 .
Kogowski G. ; Scott R. M. ; Filisko F. 
Enthalpy change of hydrogen bond
formation between ortho-substituted phenols and aliphatic amines . J. Phys. Chem. 
1980 , 84 , 2262 –2265 . 10.1021/j100455a009 .
Singh J. ; Thornton J. M.  Atlas of Protein Side-Chain
Interactions ; IRL Press : Oxford , 1992 .
Laskowski R. A. M. S. ; Thornton J. M.  Atlas of Side-Chain
Interactions . http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/sidechains (accessed May 13, 2017 ).
Pregosin P. S. ; Randall E. W. ; White A. I. 
Natural abundance nitrogen-15 nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy-amino-acid derivatives . J. Chem. Soc. D 
1971 , 1602 –1603 . 10.1039/C29710001602 .
Blomberg F. ; Maurer W. ; Rüterjans H. 
15N nuclear magnetic resonance
investigations on amino acids . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
1976 , 73 , 1409 –1413 . 10.1073/pnas.73.5.1409 .5722 
Imamoto Y. ; Kojima K. ; Oka T. ; Maeda R. ; Schichida Y. 
Helical rearrangement
of photoactivated rhodopsin in monomeric and dimeric forms probed
by high-angle X-ray scattering . Photochem. Photobiol.
Sci. 
2015 , 14 , 1965 –1973 . 10.1039/C5PP00175G .26293780

