
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145781210.1021/acsomega.7b00963ArticleSingle Amino Acid Substitution in the Vicinity of
a Receptor-Binding Domain Changes Protein–Peptide Binding Affinity Malovichko Galina Zhu Xiangdong *Department of Physics, University of California, Davis, California 95616, United States* E-mail: xdzhu@physics.ucdavis.edu.06 09 2017 30 09 2017 2 9 5445 5452 10 07 2017 24 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Using
a microarray-based assay, we studied how the substitution
of amino acids in the immediate vicinity of the receptor-binding domain
on a peptide affects its binding to a protein. Replicates of 802 linear
peptides consisting of the variants of WTHPQFAT and LQWHPQAGK, GKFPIPLGKQSG, and NGQFQVWIPGAQK, different by one
amino acid, were synthesized on a glass slide with a maskless photolithography.
Using a microarray-compatible label-free optical sensor, we measured
the binding curves of streptavidin with the synthesized peptides and
extracted the streptavidin–peptide affinity constants. We found
that (a) the substitution of one residue in the HPQ motif
reduces the affinity constant Ka from
108 M–1 by at least 3–4 orders
of magnitude, with an exception of HPM; (b) substitution
of the immediate flanking residue on the Gln side also causes the
affinity to decrease by up to 3–4 orders of magnitude, depending
on the substituting residue and the second-neighboring flanking residue;
(c) substitution of the flanking residues on the His side has no significant
effect on the affinity, possibly due to the strong binding of streptavidin
to HPQF and HPQAG motifs. We also found
that some of amino acid residues located close to the C-terminus (and
the solid surface) improve the yield of peptide synthesis on a glass
surface and can be exploited in the fabrication of peptide microarrays.

document-id-old-9ao7b00963document-id-new-14ao-2017-00963fccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Understanding specific protein–peptide
binding reactions
and the corresponding structure–activity relationship (SAR)
is a key to understanding and controlling protein–protein interactions
and the associated signal pathways. Typically, through combinations
of X-ray-based structural characterization and suitable affinity assays
such as phage display,1,2 one-bead-one-compound (OBOC) screening,3 or synthetic peptide combinatorial library (SPCL),4 one can identify a short sequence of amino acids
on a peptide that serves as the receptor-binding domain (RBD) to a
protein receptor, such that substituting any one amino acid in this
sequence dramatically reduces the affinity between the receptor and
the “modified” peptide. From the structural characterization,5,6 one may reasonably ascertain how the geometric arrangement of the
short sequence minimizes the Gibbs free energy through an optimal
combination of the hydrogen bond formation, hydrophobic interaction,
and peptic conformation. The length of such sequences varies from
3 to no more than 10 amino acids.7,8 The roles of
the flanking amino acid residues outside the RBD are less known, even
though scattered experimental investigation on these residues indicate
that they can have a significant positive or negative effect on the
stability of protein–peptide complexes. The scarcity of such
an information on the flanking residues is because (at least partly)
the structural studies based on X-ray crystallography require stable
protein–peptide complexes, making those peptides containing
the same RBD but with “unfavorable” flanking residues
inaccessible. This is also true for high-throughput screening assays
such as phase display screening (routinely used to identify RBD in
a peptide). Phage libraries may contain up to 108–1011 random sequences of amino acids, and phase display screening
efficiently selects those peptides with high-affinity RBD.1,9 Unfortunately, many (if not most) less-stable protein–peptide
complexes with unfavorable flanking residues are not retained after
panning or washing steps. In this regard, a high-throughput screening
assay capable of following the association and dissociation of protein–peptide
complexes in real time is desirable, as it can be employed to study
systematically how the flanking amino acids outside an RBD on a peptide
alter over a wide range the affinity between the protein and the peptide.

We here report a study of this kind using a combination of a photolithographically
fabricated peptide microarray10,11 and a compatible label-free
optical sensor.12,13 Although surface-plasmon-resonance
(SPR)-based sensors have also been used to detect peptide microarrays,
they are not yet compatible with photolithographically fabricated
peptide microarrays.14 For a model of protein–peptide
complex that involves a well-defined RBD, we use streptavidin and
synthesized peptides containing the HPQ motif. In particular,
we examine the effect of altering single amino acid residue in WTHPQFAT and LQWHPQAGK on the affinity of the peptide
variant to streptavidin. We will show that such an assay platform
is useful for exploring the amino acid residues outside the RBD on
a peptide for desirable as well as undesirable binding behaviors with
a specific protein receptor. Our main finding is that the flanking
residues up to the second neighbor can have a profound influence on
the stability of a protein–peptide complex depending on the
chemical identity and the structural attribute of the residues.

Peptide ligands to streptavidin are typically discovered through
the phage library screening1,15 or one-bead-one-compound
(OBOC) screening,3 followed by microcalorimetry
and X-ray crystallographic studies of those with high affinity to
protein. High-affinity ligands usually contain common motifs such
as HPQ or HPM that bind to the same pocket
to which biotin binds. The affinity of the HPQ-containing
peptides has been shown, albeit in a limited way, to depend on the
peptide conformation and the flanking residues.3,5,6,15 For example,
cyclic peptides are found to have affinity that is orders of magnitude
higher than that of their linear counterparts due to a smaller entropic
cost of the complex formation; the stability of streptavidin–HPQF motif benefits from the hydrophobic interaction of the
Phe residue with a likewise pocket on streptavidin; the binding to
a HPQN motif is assisted by Asn that forms extra H-bonds;
whereas the streptavidin–HPQGG complex is strengthened
by the flexibility of the Pro–Pro sequence that facilitates
an optimal peptide conformation.

To systematically explore the
roles of flanking residues outside
the RBD in a peptide, we use a real-time-detected synthetic peptide
microarray platform. Although the throughput of 104–105 per microarray is lower than that of the phage display or
the OBOC screening assays, a lithographically fabricated peptide microarray
has systematically modified and spatially registered peptide targets
on a solid surface and enables the real-time detection of the protein–peptide
association and dissociation during the reactions.10−14 As a result, one can measure the peptide–protein
affinity over a large dynamic range.

Materials and Procedures
Microarray
Synthesis and Layout
The peptide microarray
was synthesized with the maskless photolithography on glass slides
by NimbleGen Inc.11 The array consists
of 4524 square features in a 52 × 87 arrangement. Each feature
has a size of 108 × 108 μm2. The gap between
the features is also 108 μm. The entire microarray occupies
a rectangular area of 11.1 × 18.7 mm2. The feature
size is chosen to ensure that the optical scanner (as described later)
with a beam waist of 6 μm adequately resolves the features.
In each feature, a variant of the following four peptides is synthesized:
WTHPQFAT (linear octapeptides), LQWHPQAGK
(linear nonapeptides), GKFPIPLGKQSG, and NGQFQVWIPGAQK. The last two
peptides that do not contain the HPQ motifs are included
as negative controls. In all of the cases, the C-terminus is at the
right end of the sequence. Each variant is different from the original
peptide by only one amino acid. Twenty natural amino acids are used
to produce variants: Ala (A), Arg (R), Asn (N), Asp (D), Cys (C),
Gln (Q), Glu (E), Gly (G), His (H), Ile (I), Leu (L), Lys (K), Met
(M), Phe (F), Pro (P), Ser (S), Thr (T), Trp (W), Tyr (Y), and Val
(V). For the original sequences, there are 65 replicates of WTHPQFAT, 36 replicates of LQWHPQAGK, 48 replicates
of GKFPIPLGKQSG, and 52 replicates of NGQFQVWIPGAQK in the microarray.
For variants, four replicates of each are synthesized at “random”
locations in the microarray. In total, we have 802 distinct peptide
variants, including the original sequences, and a total of 3537 peptide
replicates of interest. The remaining features are included for alignment
and fabrication controls.

Streptavidin–Peptide Binding Reaction
Procedures
The glass slide bearing a peptide microarray is
assembled with a
custom fluidic chamber. The assembly is initially filled with 1×
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). To block the portion of the glass
surface that has no fabricated features, we incubate the microarray
in 2 μM of bovine serum albumin (BSA) solution in 1× PBS
for 30 min. From the real-time binding curve measurements, we observe
no evidence of BSA binding to the glass surface, indicating that the
feature-free part of the glass surface is protected from nonspecific
protein binding. For the reaction with streptavidin at room temperature,
we incubate the microarray in fresh 1× PBS for 10 min to obtain
a baseline for binding curves. We then replace the buffer with a 3
μM solution of streptavidin in 1× PBS and incubate the
microarray under the flow condition for 60 min (the association phase);
afterward, we replace the streptavidin solution with 1× PBS again
and incubate under a flow condition for another 120 min (the dissociation
phase).

Microarray-Compatible Label-free Optical Detection
To measure 4524 association–dissociation curves during the
reactions of streptavidin with the synthetic peptide microarray having
as many features, we use an ellipsometry-based label-free sensor (oblique-incidence
reflectivity difference (OI-RD)) that has been described previously.12 With this sensor, we measure the phase change
in a reflected optical beam due to the presence of a biomolecular
layer on a solid support during the reaction. Similar to a surface-plasmon-resonance
(SPR) sensor, the phase change in OI-RD detection is proportional
to the surface mass density Γ of the biomolecular layer. The
advantage of an OI-RD-based sensor is that it is compatible with microarray-based
assays and capable of simultaneously detecting in real time tens of
thousands reactions on a solid support.13,14 The label-free
feature of the detection also enables one to examine the quality of
the microarray before the reaction for analysis and optimization.

Figure 1 shows the
arrangement of an OI-RD-based detection of a peptide microarray in
a fluidic chamber. The differential phase change δ is proportional
to the surface mass density Γ with a proportionality constant C = −1.1 × 104 rad·cm2/g, assuming that the volume mass density and refractive indices
of peptides and protein probes are independent of the amino acid composition.12

Figure 1 Scanning OI-RD microscope for detecting 4524 protein–peptide
reactions in real time. A polarized laser beam passes a photoelastic
modulator and a phase shifter that alter the beam polarization periodically
and statically. A lens assembly focuses and scans the polarization-modulated
beam across the surface of the microarray along the y direction, whereas a translation stage holding the fluid chamber
moves along the x direction to complete the two-dimensional
scan. The beam is total internally reflected from the surface and
then passes through an analyzer before being detected with the photodiode.
The ratio of the first harmonic (1H) of the modulation frequency in
the photocurrent to the second harmonic (2H) is used to extract the
differential phase δ. The latter is proportional to the surface
mass density of the biomolecular layer.

We acquire an OI-RD image at 10 μm steps in both x direction and y direction. Figure 2a shows the image of a fresh
peptide microarray in 1× PBS before the reaction. Four replicates
of a peptide variant are highlighted. For the end points of the streptavidin
reactions with the synthesized peptides, we capture the OI-RD images
of the microarray before the association phase and after the dissociation
phase of the reaction. We take the difference as the measure of captured
streptavidin or, more precisely, nondissociated streptavidin–peptide
complexes after 2 h. This is shown in Figure 2b. It reveals the amount of captured streptavidin
by those peptides with sufficiently high affinity.

Figure 2 (a) Image in surface
mass density of the peptide microarray in
1× PBS acquired with an OI-RD microscope before the reaction.
Yellow boxes show four replicates of LPWHPQAGK. (b) Change
in the surface mass density as a result of the reaction with streptavidin
obtained by taking the difference between the image acquired after
the dissociation phase and the image obtained before the association
phase. The scale of (b) is expanded by a factor of 2 from that of
(a).

For the association–dissociation
curve measurements, we
record the signals only from the center of each feature and a point
midway between the two neighboring features (a reference pixel). We
take the difference between the signal from a peptide feature and
the average of the signals from the two neighboring reference pixels
as one time point. Each time step takes 18 s. By scanning the microarray
repeatedly every 18 s, we acquire the association–dissociation
curves for all of the 4254 peptide variants and controls; 1393 of
them are variants of WTHPQFAT and LQWHPQAGK. Figure 3 shows
the association–dissociation curves for the three variants
of LQWHPQAGK. For each of the 802 peptide variants, regardless
of whether it forms a stable complex with streptavidin that survives
the dissociation phase, we have a set of association–dissociation
curves acquired from its replicates. We globally fit the curve set
to one-site Langmuir reaction model. From the fit, we obtain the affinity
constant given by Ka = kon/koff. We use Ka instead of the end points of the reaction in our analysis
because Ka’s obtained from the
binding curve sets have a much larger dynamic range and include those
reactions with large dissociation rate constants and are, thus, easily
missed in the differential image (Figure 2b).

Figure 3 Association–dissociation (binding) curves
of streptavidin
to variants of LQWHPQAGK. Vertical dashed lines mark
the start and the end of a 60 min association phase, preceded by a
10 min baseline, and followed by a 120 min dissociation phase. Solid
black lines show fitting to one-site Langmuir model.

Results
Figure 4 displays
the affinity constants of 153 variants of WTHPQFAT with
streptavidin. There are eight panels, and each panel displays Ka of the 20 variants that are different by one
amino acid at a fixed location on WTHPQFAT. For example,
the third panel shows the affinity constants of those peptides that
have the form of WT(X)PQFAT, with X being one of the
20 natural amino acids. Figure 5 displays the affinity constants of 172 variants of LQWHPQAGK, and there are nine panels for as many residue locations
on the peptide. The error bar on each data point is the variance obtained
from four or more duplicate targets of the same peptide sequence.
When the captured streptavidin is below the detection limit in the
present study, only the upper bound is reported. For a few peptide
ligands, the dissociation rates koff are
below the detection limit; in these cases, we report only the lower
bound of Ka.

Figure 4 Affinity constants of
153 variants of WTHPQFAT to
streptavidin. The unit for the horizontal axes is log10(Ka), with Ka in M–1. Panel (1) lists those for (X)THPQFAT; panel (2) for W(X)HPQFAT; panel (3) for WT(X)PQFAT; panel (4) for WTH(X)QFAT;
panel (5) for WTHP(X)FAT; panel (6) for WTHPQ(X)AT; panel (7) for WTHPQF(X)T; and panel (8) for WTHPQFA(X). X is one of the 20 natural amino acids.

Figure 5 Affinity constants of 172 variants of LQWHPQAGK to
streptavidin. The unit for the horizontal axes is log10(Ka), and Ka is in M–1. Panel (1) lists those for (X)QWHPQAGK; panel (2) for L(X)WHPQAGK; panel (3)
for LQ(X)HPQAGK; panel (4) for LQW(X)PQAGK;
panel (5) for LQWH(X)QAGK; panel (6) for
LQWHP(X)AGK; panel (7) for LQWHPQ(X)GK;
panel (8) for LQWHPQA(X)K; and panel (9) for LQWHPQAG(X). X is one of the 20 natural amino acids.

When a peptide sequence is synthesized on a solid
support, the
motif of interest is purposely located at a distance from the surface
through a spacer (in this case, a few nonfunctional amino acids) to
minimize the effect of the surface. Figures 4 and 5 show that as
few as two to three 3 amino acid residues are sufficient to buffer
the motif from the presence of the solid surface, indicating that
the flanking residues beyond the second neighbor do not have a significant
effect on the peptide–protein binding. We now examine the details
revealed by these two figures.

HPQ is the Receptor-Binding Domain (RBD)
of a Linear Peptide
for Complex Formation with Streptavidin
One can immediately
see that the affinity constants for XX-HPQFAT, XXX-HPQAGK, WTHPQFA-X, and LQWHPQAG-X
are essentially the same, namely, Ka ≈
108 M–1. As a result, the latter is typical
of the high-affinity linear peptide ligands to streptavidin on a solid
support. From panels (3)–(5) in Figure 4 and from panels (4)–(6) in Figure 5, we can conclude
that the substitution of any one residue in the HPQ motif
(except for HPM) causes the affinity constant to decrease
from 108 M–1 by at least 3 orders of
magnitude, that is, below 105 M–1 (the
detection limit under the current assay condition). This reaffirms
what is known in the literature that HP(Q/M) are necessary for a peptide to bind strongly to streptavidin
at the pocket where a biotin binds.

First- and Second-Neighboring
Flanking Residues Adjacent to
Gln of HPQ have Profound Effects on Formation of Peptide–Streptavidin
Complexes
From panels (6) and (7) of Figure 4 and panels (7) and (8) of Figure 5, we see that Ka begins to significantly deviate from 108 M–1 when one of the first- and second-neighboring flanking
residues on the Gln side is replaced, namely, for WTHPQ(X ≠ F)AT, WTHPQF(X ≠ A)T, LQWHPQ(X ≠ A)GK, and LQWHPQA(X ≠ G)K.

Specifically, panel (6) in Figure 4 illustrates the profound influence of the first flanking
residue on the Gln side for the stability of peptide–streptavidin
complexes as only 5 out of 20 WTHPQ(X)AT (i.e., WTHPQ(F, A, G, N, V)AT) have the affinity constants over 107 M–1, whereas the remaining 15 WTHPQ(X)AT have their affinity constants less than 105 M–1.

Panel (7) in Figure 5 and panel (6) in Figure 4 collectively reveal almost as important
an effect of the
second flanking residue on the stabilizing linear peptide–streptavidin
complexes. By replacing the second flanking residue from A to G, 15
out of 20 LQWHPQ(X)GK (e.g., LQWHPQSGK)
form stable complexes with streptavidin, with the affinity constants
in the range of 107 M–1. Only LQWHPQ(C, H, K, P)GK have drastically reduced affinity to streptavidin—under
105 M–1. The combination of these two
panels suggest that regardless of the residues at other locations,
linear peptides containing HPQ(C, H, K, P) do not form
stable complexes with streptavidin, whereas linear peptides containing HPQ(F, G, N, V) do. The role of the second-neighboring flanking
residue is further illustrated in panel (8) in Figure 5. When the second-neighboring flanking residue
is one of C, I, K, and L, the linear peptides with HQPA motifs do not form stable complexes with streptavidin.

First- and
Second-Neighboring Flanking Residues Adjacent to
His of the HPQ Motif Have Little Effect on Stable Complex Formation
of Streptavidin with Peptides Containing HPQF and HPQAG
Panels
(1) and (2) in Figure 4 show that the substitution of the first and second flanking residues
on the His side of the HPQ motif does not significantly
change the affinity of (XX)HPQFAT. Similarly, panels
(1) and (2) in Figure 5 show that the substitution of the first and second flanking residues
on the His side of the HPQ motif has little effect on
the affinity of L(XX)HPQAGT. One of the two possibilities
is at work here: the substitution of the flanking residues on the
His side generally has no substantial effects on the affinity of a HPQ-containing linear peptide to streptavidin, or HPQF and HPQAG motifs provide the needed stability of a
linear peptide with the protein so that other residues, including
the flanking residues on the His side, are rendered insignificant
in affecting the complex formation. From the studies reported by Giebel
et al.15 and Lam et al.,3 both possibilities seem to be at work.

Discussion
The roles of flanking residues outside the HPQ motif
in the complex formation of peptides with streptavidin have been reported
and discussed in the literature.5,6,15 By screening the cyclic hexa/hepta/octapeptide phage libraries,
Giebel and co-workers found that (a) isolated peptides (in solution
phase as opposed to those attached to a substrate such as a solid
support) that strongly bind to streptavidin all have an HPQ motif; (b) the HPQ motif is almost always immediately
adjacent to the N-terminal cysteine; and (c) these cyclic peptide
ligands have either HPQ(G, F, V, N) motifs or HPQ(SG) motif. For hexapeptides, only CHPQFC is found after
three rounds of biopanning. The fact that cyclic hepta- and octapeptide
ligands almost always have the HPQ motif close to the
N-terminal was attributed by these authors to the constraint on the
short cyclic peptides and the need for an optimal display of HPQ side chains. In the light of our present study, it seems
equally likely (if not more so) that cyclic hepta- and octapeptide
ligands need to have suitable flanking residues adjacent to the Gln
side to have peptide–streptavidin complexes. This can be accommodated
only if the HPQ sequence is close to the N-terminal cysteine,
making room for flanking residues such as F, G, V, N, and SG on the
Gln side. This explanation is consistent with our observation that
linear peptides with HPQ(G, F, V, N) motif or HPQ(SG) motif and yet no constraint brought about by the cyclic structure
also bind to streptavidin with high affinity. It is also consistent
with our observation that flanking residues on the His side seem less
important than the residues on the Gln side in stabilizing the complexes.

Specific to our present microarray-based study, we found that linear
peptides containing HPQ(F, G, N, V) motifs form stable
complexes with streptavidin as their cyclic counterparts. In addition,
we found that the linear peptides containing HPQ(A) motif
also form stable complexes with streptavidin—a motif not reported
in previous studies. Furthermore, similar to the observation by Giebel
et al. on short cyclic peptides,15 we found
that linear peptides containing HPQ(SG) motif form stable
complexes with streptavidin as well. More importantly, we discovered
the reason for the high affinity of HPQ(SG) motif: as
the second flanking residue on the Gln side, the Gly residue acts
to stabilize the complex formation of streptavidin with HPQSG and nine other linear peptides with HPQ(D, E, I,
L, M, N, Q, R, T, W, Y)G motifs. It seems that HPQF and HPQAG motifs sufficiently stabilize the peptide–streptavidin
complexes, rendering the flanking residues on the His side irrelevant.
In the absence of suitable flanking residues on the Gln side, Lam
et al. found 12 HPQ-containing linear pentapeptide ligands
to streptavidin with flanking residues (MY, RE, IQ, GN, TV, IG, WM,
GA, PL, AI, AA, and TP) only on the His side.3 Their observation indicates that the stabilizing effect of these
flanking residues on the His side (not encountered in our present
study) is also significant.

Constraints on Linear Peptides Synthesized
on a Solid Support
Increases the Affinity to Streptavidin Due to Reduced Entropy Cost
Affinity constants Ka for the majority
of synthesized linear peptides that bind to streptavidin are between
107 and 109 M–1. This means
that the equilibrium dissociation constants KD are between a few nM and 100 nM, much higher than those for
isolated HPQ-containing linear peptides with same flanking
residues. This is expected, as constraints on the conformation of
linear peptides synthesized on a solid support reduce the entropy
cost when forming complexes with streptavidin and thus increase affinity
constants from those for solution-phase linear peptides.15

Mechanisms for Complex Formation of Streptavidin
with Linear
Peptides Having Various HPQ-Containing Motifs
With limited
X-ray-based structural data available, it is difficult and premature
to draw a general rule on how flanking residues help to stabilize
peptide–streptavidin complexes. Yet, based on the work of Katz,5 we make an attempt here to propose a few likely
scenarios as guides to understand the protein–peptide complex
formation in general. On the role of the first flanking residue, it
seems that (a) the HPQG motif stabilizes the linear peptide–protein
complex by the Gly main chain amide forming an intrapeptide hydrogen
bond with the His main chain carbonyl, thus defining a favorable type
I β-turn in the peptide, as found by Katz in the CHPQGPPC–streptavidin complex; (b) the HPQN motif
stabilizes the complexes by Asn residue forming additional direct
and water-mediated hydrogen bonds with the protein, as found in FSHPQNT–streptavidin complex by Katz; (c) HPQ(F,V,A) motifs achieve the same feat by (F,V,A) enacting hydrophobic
interaction with a likewise pocket on the protein, as in CHPQFC–streptavidin complexes. Because the hydrophobic side chain
on Ala is much smaller, its stabilizing effect is expected to be somewhat
reduced. This would explain why linear peptides with HPQA(C, I, K, L) motifs have a much lower affinity to streptavidin than
those with HPQF(C, I, K, L) motifs.

The roles of
the second-neighboring flanking residues on the formation of peptide–streptavidin
complexes have not been studied before. As such, there is no direct
or indirect X-ray structural data available that would shed light
on what they bring to the complex. Yet, the influence of these flanking
residues is clearly not negligible. The positive effect is illustrated
in panel (6) of Figure 4 and panel (7) of Figure 5: the Gly residue stabilizes most peptides with HPQ(X)G motifs with streptavidin, whereas the Ala residue does a much
poorer job for peptides with HPQ(X)A motifs. On the other
hand, the fact that linear peptides with HPQA(C, I, K,
L) motifs have affinities at least 3 orders of magnitude less than
those with HPQA(X, X ≠ C, I, K, L) motifs demonstrates
the destabilizing effect of C, I, K, and L as the second-neighboring
flanking residues.

Finally, we should note that the OI-RD image
of a peptide microarray
before the reaction enables us to examine the quality of the array. Figure 2a shows that the
surface mass density of the synthesized peptides varies within a square
feature and from one feature to another. This image ensures that the
negative “hit” is not due to the absence of target materials.
In further analyzing the image, we notice that the sequence of a peptide,
particularly the amino acid residues close to the C-terminus, affects
the efficiency of the synthesis and, in turn, the peptide target number
density. Figure 6 shows
the surface mass densities of the variants of WTHPQFAT
and Figure 7 shows
the variants of LQWHPQSGK. We find that some residues
close to the C-terminus, and thus the solid surface, lead to significantly
higher peptide densities, whereas some others do just the opposite.
For example, the linear peptides with Asp (D) and Glu (E) having negatively
charged side chains and being close to the C-terminus have significantly
higher surface number densities than the linear peptides of otherwise
same sequences. In contrast, Trp (W) and Tyr (Y), having bulky aromatic
side chains, have significantly smaller surface number densities when
they are close to the C-terminus. These tendencies hold true even
when these residues are farther away from the C-terminus. One can
then use the residues such as D, E, W, and Y to optimize the number
density of synthesized peptides for subsequent binding assays.

Figure 6 Surface mass
densities (in unit of 10–7 g/cm2) of
153 variants of WTHPQFAT synthesized on
a glass slide. Panel (1): (X)THPQFAT; panel (2): W(X)HPQFAT; panel (3): WT(X)PQFAT; panel (4): WTH(X)QFAT; panel (5): WTHP(X)FAT;
panel (6): WTHPQ(X)AT; panel (7):WTHPQF(X)T;
and panel (8): WTHPQFA(X). X is one of the 20 natural
amino acids.

Figure 7 Surface mass densities
(in unit of 10–7 g/cm2) of 172 variants
of LQWHPQAGK synthesized on
a glass slide. Panel (1): (X)QWHPQAGK; panel (2): L(X)WHPQAGK; panel (3): LQ(X)HPQAGK; panel (4): LQW(X)PQAGK; panel (5): LQWH(X)QAGK; panel
(6): LQWHP(X)AGK; panel (7): LQWHPQ(X)GK;
panel (8): LQWHPQA(X)K; and panel (9): LQWHPQAG(X). X is one of the 20 natural amino acids.

Conclusions
The quest for understanding protein–protein
interactions
and devising peptide-based drugs to modulate these interactions calls
for the identification and functional characterization of key receptor-binding
domains (RBD) on a peptide.9,16,17 Our present study, in combination with earlier studies by others,
shows that the flanking residues outside an RBD, at least up to the
second neighbors, are crucial in stabilizing or destabilizing the
peptide–protein complex formation and their roles should be
systematically investigated and explored. A photolithographically
synthesized peptide microarray on a glass slide detected with a compatible
label-free sensor is an efficient assay platform for such an investigation
and exploration. If it generally holds that only up to the second
neighboring flanking residues are important in peptide–protein
binding, one can then explore residues at positions beyond the second
neighbors that add other desirable attributes of drug candidates,
such as resistance against proteolysis, circulation time, plasma membrane
penetration, and low toxicity,9,16,17 or simply enable efficient and controllable synthesis on a solid
support.11

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank NimbleGen Inc. for supplying the peptide
microarrays used in this work.
==== Refs
References
Devlin J. J. ; Panganiban L. ; Devlin P. 
Random peptide libraries: a source
of specific protein binding molecules . Science 
1990 , 249 , 404 –406 . 10.1126/science.2143033 .2143033 
Fukunaga K. ; Taki M. 
Practical tips for construction of
custom peptide libraries and affinity
selection by using commercially available phase display cloning systems . J. Nucleic Acids 
2012 , 2012 , 29571910.1155/2012/295719 .22991651 
Lam K. S. ; Salmon S. E. ; Hersh E. M. ; Hruby V. J. ; Kazmierski W. M. ; Knapp R. J. 
A new type of synthetic
peptide library for identifying
ligand-binding activity . Nature 
1991 , 354 , 82 –84 . 10.1038/354082a0 .1944576 
Houghten R. A. ; Pinilla C. ; Blondelle S. E. ; Appel J. R. ; Dooley C. T. ; Cuervo J. H. 
Generation and use of synthetic peptide combinatorial
libraries for basic research and drug discovery . Nature 
1991 , 354 , 84 –86 . 10.1038/354084a0 .1719428 
Katz B. A. 
Binding
to protein targets of peptidic leads discovered by phage display:
crystal structures of streptavidin-bound linear and cyclic peptide
ligands containing the HPQ sequence . Biochemistry 
1995 , 34 , 15421 –15429 . 10.1021/bi00047a005 .7492542 
Katz B. A. 
Structural
and mechanistic determinants of affinity and specificity of ligands
discovered or engineered by phase display . Annu.
Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 
1997 , 26 , 27 –45 . 10.1146/annurev.biophys.26.1.27 .9241412 
Tompa P. ; Davey N. E. ; Gibson T. J. ; Babu M. M. 
A million peptide
motifs for the molecular biologist . Mol. Cell 
2014 , 55 , 161 –169 . 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.05.032 .25038412 
Shiba K. 
Natural and
artificial peptide motifs: their origins and the application of motif-programming . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2010 , 39 , 117 –126 . 10.1039/B719081F .20023842 
McGregor D. P. 
Discovering
and improving novel peptide therapeutics . Curr.
Opin. Pharmacol. 
2008 , 8 , 616 –619 . 10.1016/j.coph.2008.06.002 .18602024 
Shin D.-S. ; Lee K.-N. ; Yoo B.-W. ; Kim J. ; Kim M. ; Kim Y.-K. ; Lee Y.-S. 
Automated maskless
photolithography
system for peptide microarray synthesis on a chip . J. Comb. Chem. 
2010 , 12 , 463 –471 . 10.1021/cc100009g .20666398 
Albert T. ; Richmond T. ; Rodesch M. ; Stengele K.-P ; Buehler J. ; Ott M.  Methods for Synthesis of an
Oligopeptide Microarray . U.S. Patent US20120238477
A1 , 2013 .
Landry J. P. ; Fei Y. ; Zhu X. D. 
Simultaneous measurement of 10,000 protein-ligand affinity
constants using microarray-based kinetic constant assays . Assay Drug Dev. Technol. 
2012 , 10 , 250 –259 . 10.1089/adt.2011.0406 .22192305 
Landry J. P. ; Ke Y. ; Yu G.-L. ; Zhu X. D. 
Measuring affinity constants of 1,450
monoclonal antibodies to peptide targets with a microarray-based label-free
assay platform . J. Immunol. Methods 
2015 , 417 , 86 –96 . 10.1016/j.jim.2014.12.011 .25536073 
Cherif B. ; Roget A. ; Villiers C. L. ; Calemczuk R. ; Leroy V. ; Marche P. N. ; Livache T. ; Villiers M. 
Clinically
related protein-peptide interactions monitored in real time on novel
peptide chips by surface plasmon resonance imaging . Clin. Chem. 
2006 , 52 , 255 –262 . 10.1373/clinchem.2005.058727 .16339301 
Giebel L. B. ; Cass R. ; Milligan D. L. ; Young D. ; Arze R. ; Johnson C. 
Screening of cyclic
peptide phage libraries identifies
ligands that bind streptavidin with high affinities . Biochemistry 
1995 , 34 , 15430 –15435 . 10.1021/bi00047a006 .7492543 
Sato A. K. ; Viswanathan M. ; Kent R. B. ; Wood C. R. 
Therapeutic peptides:
technological advances driving peptides into development . Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
2006 , 17 , 638 –643 . 10.1016/j.copbio.2006.10.002 .17049837 
Vlieghe P. ; Lisowski V. ; Martinez J. ; Khrestchatisky M. 
Synthetic
therapeutic peptides: science and market . Drug
Discovery Today 
2010 , 15 , 40 –56 . 10.1016/j.drudis.2009.10.009 .19879957

