
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002368310.1021/acsomega.7b00371ArticleGraphene Oxide-Coated Surface: Inhibition of Bacterial
Biofilm Formation due to Specific Surface–Interface Interactions Yadav Nisha †Dubey Amrita ‡Shukla Swapnil †Saini Chetan Prakash §Gupta Govind ∥Priyadarshini Richa *‡Lochab Bimlesh *††Department
of Chemistry, ‡Department of Life Sciences, and §Department of Physics, School of Natural Sciences, Shiv Nadar University, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar
Pradesh 201314, India∥ Physics
of Energy Harvesting, TEC Building, CSIR-National
Physical Laboratory, Dr. K.S. Krishnan Marg, New Delhi 110012, India* E-mail: richa.priyadarshini@snu.edu.in (R.P.).* E-mail: bimlesh.lochab@snu.edu.in (B.L.).03 07 2017 31 07 2017 2 7 3070 3082 29 03 2017 14 06 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Graphene oxide (GO) is a promising
and remarkable nanomaterial that exhibits antimicrobial
activity due to its specific surface–interface interactions.
In the present work, for the first time, we have reported the antibacterial
activity of GO-coated surfaces prepared by two different methods (Hummers’
and improved, i.e., GOH and GOI) against bacterial
biofilm formation. The bacterial toxicity of the deposited GO-coated
surfaces was investigated for both Gram-negative (Escherichia
coli) and Gram-positive (Staphylococcus
aureus) models of bacteria. The mechanism of inhibition
is different on the coated surface than that in suspension, as determined
by measurement of the percentage inhibition of biofilm formation,
Ellman’s assay, and colony forming unit (CFU) studies. The
difference in the nature, degree of oxidative functionalities, and
size of the synthesized GO nanoparticles mitigates biofilm formation.
To better understand the antimicrobial mechanism of GO when coated
on surfaces, we were able to demonstrate that beside reactive oxygen
species-mediated oxidative stress, the physical properties of the
GO-coated substrate effectively inactivate bacterial cell proliferation,
which forms biofilms. Light and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images
display a higher inhibition in the proliferation of planktonic cells
in Gram-negative bacteria as compared to that in Gram-positive bacteria.
The existence of a smooth surface with fewer porous domains in GOI inhibits biofilm formation, as demonstrated by optical microscopy
and AFM images. The oxidative stress was found to be lower in the
coated surface as compared to that in the suspensions as the latter
enables exposure of both a large fraction of the active edges and
functionalities of the GO sheets. In suspension, GOH is
selective against S. aureus whereas
GOI showed inhibition toward E. coli. This study provides new insights to better understand the bactericidal
activity of GO-coated surfaces and contributes to the design of graphene-based
antimicrobial surface coatings, which will be valuable in biomedical
applications.

document-id-old-9ao7b00371document-id-new-14ao-2017-00371kccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Graphene
is a two-dimensional single-atom-thick sheet of sp2-hybridized
carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal array.1 The attractive electronic, thermal, and mechanical
properties of graphene have generated exceptional interest in the
research community and its utilization in applications ranging from
electro-optic to biomedical devices has been studied.2 Most of the practical applications, especially at industry
level, demand a cost-effective, scalable preparation of graphene with
easy processability whilst retaining its beneficial properties, and
this is most efficiently resolved by its graphene oxide (GO) derivative.
GO is produced in a facile manner from a naturally occurring allotrope
of carbon, graphite. GO possesses oxidative functionalities, such
as phenolic hydroxyl, carbonyl, epoxide, and carboxylic groups, that
enables their good water dispersibility.3 GO can either be utilized as produced, it can undergo reduction
to form reduced GO (rGO), or it can be further chemically modified
to widen its scope of applications. The presence of oxidative functionalities
has imparted GO with an inherent toxicity that impedes its application
in the medical field. The adverse effects shown by GO include the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), DNA damage, cell apoptosis,
inflammatory cell infiltration, pulmonary edema, etc.4 The issue of toxicity is generally handled by coupling
the oxidative functionalities with biocompatible polymers to advance
their applications as nanocarriers for drug delivery to cell imaging.5−7 However, the presence of such oxidative functionalities can be taken
as an advantage to circumvent problems where cell death is desired.
A major health problem is bacteria-induced infectious diseases that
affect millions of people worldwide annually. To safeguard public
health and quality of life, several products have been designed with
antibacterial materials to prevent or restrict bacterial growth during
their usage. Such infections are widely treated or inhibited using
antibiotic drugs,8 which are ineffective
due to the simultaneous development of resistance against many strains.9 Research on novel materials such as metal nanoparticles10,11 and ammonium compounds12 is still ongoing
to prevent such proliferation of bacterial diseases. All of these
compounds, especially antibiotic drugs, involve multistep syntheses
which are both time-consuming and cost ineffective, and may display
lower efficacies after their tedious and lengthy synthetic protocols.
In addition, the associated environmental issues of their large-scale
production cannot be ignored. Therefore, alternative simplistic methodologies
need to be found to provide commercially viable solutions to inhibit
such bacterial proliferation.

Previous studies on carbon nanomaterials,
such as carbon nanotubes,
fullerene, and graphene, have shown appreciable and promising antimicrobial
activities.13−15 The cytotoxic effect of these materials was found
to be dependent on both the nature of the nanomaterial and the type
of bacteria. Understanding the nanomaterial perspective, size, degree
and nature of oxidation,15 and electronic
state16 may be the key to dictating its
antimicrobial properties. These parameters can be controlled synthetically,
accounting for the importance of the quantum confinement effect and
miniaturization, as a forward strategy for identifying and designing
novel antimicrobial materials. Amongst all the nanomaterials, graphene
materials have gained importance due to their relatively larger sheet
size and higher specific surface areas enabling higher efficacies.
In addition, the combination of simpler synthetic protocols, the coexistence
of hydrophilic (due to oxidative functionalities) and hydrophobic
graphitic domains, along with nanoscale thickness provides great promise
for their use in a wider set of applications including antimicrobial
activity. Most publications have focused on the antibacterial activity
of GO nanomaterials toward Gram-negative bacteria, Escherichia coli, and percentage inhibition was determined
on their suspensions by colony forming unit (CFU) measurement.17−19 The stability of the suspended GO nanoparticles in the dispersions
within the incubation time with the bacteria is of paramount importance
as it may dictate the percentage inhibition and mechanisms involved
in killing the bacterial cells. The cell growth inhibition mechanisms
of the graphene materials may be mediated via physical or chemical
means leading to reversible and irreversible bacteriostatic and bactericidal
effects, respectively. The mechanisms proposed to explain the inhibitory
effect of GO-suspended nanoparticles include the direct contact mechanism,17 oxidative stress,18 and the wrapping/trapping of bacteria19 in aggregated nanosheets leading to cell suffocation and thereby
prevention of their proliferation. The chemical reason is attributed
to the over-production of ROS that disintegrate the cell membrane,
followed by cell death via production of lipid peroxides.20 The antimicrobial properties of GO involving
the cellular aggregation, wrapping, and piercing of the cell membrane
were found to be dependent on sheet size and the presence of sharp
edges. For example, Liu et al. reported that the lateral dimension
of the GO sheet increases from 0.01 to 0.127 μm2 leading
to an increase in the loss of cell viability due to poor cell proliferation
in GO-wrapped cells.21 A similar result
was reported wherein an increase in sheet area size of GO from 0.01
to 0.65 μm2 led to an enhancement in antimicrobial
effect due to cell entrapment by the larger sheet size.18 It was observed that the reduced form of GO
and its precursor, rGO and graphite, respectively, showed higher antibacterial
activity than that of their oxidized forms due to their different
electronic properties beside their larger particle size.19 Conductive graphitic materials, such as rGO
and graphite, have shown higher oxidation capacities than those of
insulating GO materials because of the formation of a conductive bridge
over the insulating lipid bilayer of a cell due to oxidative stress.
The destructive extraction of lipid molecules may happen due to the
interaction of the lipophilic nature of graphene-rich materials.22

The antimicrobial activity of GO has been
explored mainly as an
aqueous dispersion against the population growth of bacteria. In comparison
to suspension assays, the antimicrobial effect of graphene as a film
has also been studied but not to such a great extent. Reduced graphene
and GO paper as free standing and flexible paper prepared via vacuum
filtration have shown effective inhibition against E. coli. GO films were shown to have a relatively
higher inhibition activity than that of rGO, which was attributed
to the presence of different surface charges and functional groups.23 Akhavan et al. discussed the antibacterial effect
of electrophoretic-deposited nanosheets of a GO–magnesium salt
nanocomposite on a stainless steel substrate.13 Perreault et al. demonstrated that a GO-coated cellulosic filter
causes bacterial inactivation due to direct contact between the bacterial
cell and the GO-coated surface. The number of live E. coli cells decreases with decreasing GO sheet
size.18 Recently, Zhou et al. demonstrated
that the existence of a wrinkled surface in GO films has a profound
effect on the antibacterial properties.24 A correlation was shown of the surface roughness of the corrugated
surface with the size of the bacterial cell to demonstrate the antibacterial
activity.

The GO nanomaterial reported in most antibacterial
studies involves
GO preparation using the modified Hummers and Offeman’s method.
The studies so far have included variation of either the size of the
nanosheet or functionality via reduction to rGO and the analysis has
mainly been based on bacterial suspensions using colony count or turbidometry
methods. There have been no reports until now on the exploration of
other synthetic methodologies of GO preparation via other routes and
their effectiveness against bacterial biofilm formation.

Most
bacteria in the environment exist as surface-associated, sessile
bacterial communities, known as biofilms.25 Biofilms are enclosed in an exopolysaccharide matrix, which shields
the bacteria from the outside environment making it harder for antibiotics
to penetrate and kill bacterial cells.26 Hence, in a clinical setting, the development of biofilms leads
to severe complications and re-infections, including cystic fibrosis,
chronic otitis media, and urinary tract infections. For example, Staphylococcus aureus, a Gram-positive cocci, is
the causative agent of a variety of diseases ranging from minor skin
infections to endocarditis and toxic shock syndrome. S. aureus is also capable of biofilm formation, which
increases its persistence and boosts its levels of antimicrobial resistance.
Biofilms of S. aureus have been observed
on catheters, pacemakers, and medical implants. Moreover, with the
emergence of antibiotic-resistant S. aureus strains, such as the methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), these infections have caused increased morbidity and mortality.27 Reoccurring urinary tract infections have been
attributed to biofilm formation by uropathogenic E.
coli (UPEC).28,29 The treatment of biofilm-mediated
infections is a big challenge that demands more sensitive and effective
anti-biofilm strategies for their removal or reduction.

In recent
years, the use of graphene and GO and
their applications
in antibacterial materials have been reported.18,19,21 The importance of graphene coated on a substrate,
with a particular emphasis on the potential of anti-biofilm formation,
has been described by Parra et al.30,31 The nature
of graphene and bacteria surfaces is of paramount importance in dictating
surface energy, wettability, and electrostatic interactions, which
is essential for bacterial adhesion and to induce anti-biofouling
properties. Dellieu et al.32 demonstrated
that the conductivity of a graphene film on a gold substrate has no
role in the antibacterial properties. Further, Li et al. suggested
that the antibacterial properties of graphene proceed via a charge
transfer mechanism.33 However, the mechanism
of the interactions of GO coated on a substrate has not been reported
and needs further exploration as it is currently not well understood.
Further, applications exploiting the antibacterial effects of graphene
for water purification, polymeric films for biomedical devices, antimicrobial
fabric materials, and biofilm-resistant surfaces require its usage
as a membrane rather than as a suspension. Therefore, to mimic a similar
environment to that required in the above-mentioned applications,
studies on GO-coated surface need to be performed. This has motivated
us to explore the antibacterial effect of GO synthesized via two different
routes and also the effect of these materials against bacterial biofilm
formation. The present work involves the potential of GO synthesized
from the traditional Hummers’ method and an improved method,
differing in the functionality and size of the GO produced, its characterization,
and the effect on antibacterial behavior after immobilization on the
surface. The bacterial strains utilized were pathogenic and non-pathogenic, S. aureus and E. coli, respectively, and are known to form biofilms. In addition, to understand
the difference in antimicrobial activity, GO coated on the substrate
and as an aqueous dispersion were also studied.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Preparation and Characterization
of GO Nanosheets
and Their Deposition
In the present study, GO was synthesized
by oxidizing natural graphite using the traditional Hummers’
method (GOH) and an improved method (GOI) (Figure 1a). The Hummers’
method is the most commonly used synthetic protocol, and involves
graphite being chemically exfoliated by treatment with KMnO4 and NaNO3 in concentrated H2SO4.34 This procedure is hazardous, especially
during scale up, as it involves the generation of the toxic gas(es)
NOx in large volumes. In the improved
method, the reaction eliminates the usage of NaNO3, which
consequently eliminates toxic gas evolution simultaneously maintaining
good yields, making it a versatile strategy for the large-scale production
of GO.35 The aqueous dispersion of GO prepared
by the two different methods is shown in Figure 1a. Previous reports on antibacterial activity
have mainly been based on GO synthesized by the modified Hummers and
Offeman’s method. The equivalent of KMnO4 used in
the traditional Hummers’ method is half that used in the modified
Hummers and Offeman’s method. The GO (GOH and GOI) nanoparticles synthesized in the current work differ significantly
both chemically and physically in terms of degree of functionality
and size as compared to that of GO described in other reports on its
antibacterial properties. The variation in color of the dispersions,
at the same concentration of nanoparticles, prepared by the Hummers’
and improved method is suggestive of the different physiochemical
properties of the two GO samples (as shown in the inset of Figure 1a).

Figure 1 Overview of the synthetic
methodology for the preparation of GO
and the fabrication process. (a) Left: Schematic showing the preparation
of GO via the Hummers’ method and improved method. Inset shows
the respective dispersions of GO at the same concentration (0.5 mg/mL).
(b) Right: Drop-casting method of the GO aqueous dispersion onto a
96-well plate followed by slow air-oven drying to allow evaporation
of water to form the GO-coated surface on the well plate. (c) Representative
light microscopy images of the drop-casted GO-coated surface (GOH and GOI) at different solid contents. The black
regions are the porous domains formed in the coated GO surface, and
the gray area represents the GO nanosheets. At higher solid contents,
the porosity of the GOH coating is much higher. The GOI surface showed a comparatively less porous surface. Scale
bar = 50 μm.

Figure 1b shows
the schematic of the fabrication process utilized to prepare the GO
coated onto the 96-well plate. Pristine GO films are known to form
self-assembled controlled architectures via vacuum filtration,36,37 spin-coating,38 or by slow evaporation.39 The presence of extensive hydrogen-bonding interactions
between the GO nanosheets enables the films to be highly stable in
water once they have been dried, imparting them with exceptionally
good mechanical properties and flexibility.40 The mass production and easy processability of graphene films at
low cost give this technology enormous scope ranging from environmental
to medical applications. The surface coverage and material density
of the synthesized GO on the substrate are important parameters to
understand its efficacy for antibacterial activity. The drop-casting
method followed by slow oven drying allowed the self-assembled growth
of GO nanosheets, forming a coating on the well plate. The processing
conditions were identical for each well plate, which enabled a similar
thermal-driven layered growth of GO nanosheets along the basal plane
of the microplate. This methodology adopted for GO coating on the
surface was found to be a simplistic strategy to form water-stable
coatings that remained intact during the antibacterial studies. This
is in accordance with the literature that reports that once prepared,
GO films are stable in water and show appreciable mechanical properties
once they have been air dried. This could be attributed to the π–π
stacking and extensive H-bonding across the GO nanoparticles enabling
the formation of mechanically stable films. The concentration of GO
solution and other processing conditions were optimized to form homogeneous
and uniform film coverage of the well plate with sufficient material
density. It was observed that the intensity of color was enhanced
with higher GOI loading onto the well plate, which may
be attributed to a higher solid content (Figure S1). GO loading below 60 μg led to incomplete surface
coverage of the 96-well plate. Therefore, a solid content of GO in
the 60–200 μg range was found to be promising and was
used in the current work. The GO-coated surface containing GOI was found to be more transparent in nature than GOH with the same solid loading (Figure S1). The morphology of the coated films was determined by optical microscopy
(Figure 1c). Optical
microscopy images revealed that the GOH coating possesses
a rough surface with porous domains, whereas the use of GOI leads to a comparatively smoother surface. This was further confirmed
by surface thickness measurements (Table S2). As compared to that of the GOI coating, the thickness
of the GOH coating was found to be nonhomogeneous and the
difference in thickness (at edge vs. middle) was nearly 3- and 11-fold
higher at 60 and 200 μg, respectively. In contrast, the GOI coated surface was found to be uniform and had a similar
thickness in all directions within the studied range of solid content.

The successful transformation of graphite to GO was confirmed by
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies.
The appearance of characteristic vibration modes due to O–H,
>C=O of carboxylic acid, carbonyl, sp2-hybridized
C=C, and C–O–C epoxide functionalities at 3200,
1730, 1617, 1425, and 1050 cm–1, respectively in
the FT-IR spectra of both GOH and GOI suggest
oxidation of the graphitic domains of graphite (Figure 2a). The FT-IR spectrum of GOH exhibited
a strong peak in the range 1700–1730 cm–1, compared to that of GOI, which is ascribed to carboxyl
groups. The XRD patterns (Figure 2b) also support the successful oxidation of graphite
to GO. There is no peak at 3.7 Å, indicating the absence of graphite
flakes (starting material) in both of the GO samples. The interlayer
spacing of the materials obtained from the XRD patterns is proportional
to the degree of oxidation. The interlayer spacing for GOH and GOI was found to be 7.82 and 9.03 Å, respectively,
which is indicative of the higher degree of oxidation in the latter
material. To understand the nature and percentage of oxidative functionality,
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was used to investigate
the changes in the chemical states of the GO prepared by the two synthetic
methods. The nature of the functional groups and their percentage
was determined by deconvolution of the C 1s XPS spectra of GOH and GOI (Figure 2c). The C 1s core level peak of both samples was fitted
according to the literature.21 The binding
energy of ∼285.0 eV was ascribed to the C=C, C–C,
and C–H bonds on the surface of the sheets. The deconvoluted
peaks centered at the binding energies of 286.2, 288.1, and 289.6
eV were attributed to the C–OH, epoxy, C=O, and COOH
functional groups, respectively. The deconvoluted peaks suggest that
both GO materials possess highly oxygenated functionalities. GOI showed a relatively higher proportion of C–OH and
epoxy-rich domains whereas GOH has COOH groups (Table S3), which is in agreement with the FT-IR
spectrum of GOH. Both XPS and XRD patterns revealed that
the relative contents of the different oxygenated groups were different
in the prepared GO materials.

Figure 2 (a) FT-IR spectra, (b) XRD patterns, and (c)
high-resolution deconvoluted
C 1s XPS spectra of GOH and GOI.

The surface morphology of the coated GO surfaces
was studied by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A representative SEM image of
exfoliated GOH (Figure 3a) revealed a rougher, rippled, and folded surface
whereas the GOI sheets showed a thin and smooth surface
morphology. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging of GOH (Figure 3b) showed
a higher thickness of ∼3.9 nm, suggesting the coexistence of
multiple sheets to form a multilayered graphene architecture. The
GOI sheets exhibited an average thickness of ∼1
nm, which suggests the presence of a single-layer of exfoliated sheets.
The occurrence of the higher surface roughness in GOH can
be visualized further from the 3D AFM images (Figure S2), which corroborate the optical microscopy results.
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Figure S3) analysis indicated that the size of GOI (200 nm) is
6-fold smaller than GOH, suggesting larger nanoparticles
in the latter material. The larger sheet size of the GOH nanoparticles may be responsible for the observed folding and wrinkles,
as indicated in the SEM and AFM analysis, which is also in agreement
with the optical microscopy images.

Figure 3 (a) SEM and (b) AFM images of GOH and GOI sheets deposited on a silicon substrate and (c)
with their sheet
height distribution.

The difference in the degree and nature of oxidation, size,
and
roughness of the GO prepared via the two different methodologies shows
promise for exploring its potential in antimicrobial activity.

2.2 Interaction between GO and Bacterial Cells
2.2.1 Biofilm Formation
Microbes form
surface-adherent community structures called biofilms, which play
a critical role in the advancement of bacterial infection. These biofilms
provide antibiotic resistance and sometimes become harmful to the
host immune system. Many studies have confirmed the antimicrobial
activities of GO against Gram-negative bacteria. Although a plethora
of data exists on the antimicrobial properties of GO sheets in suspension,
not much is known about the interaction of GO-coated surfaces and
bacterial cells. In this study, we have focused our attention on the
use of GO-coated surfaces to prevent bacterial biofilm formation.
The antibacterial activity of both synthesized GOI- and
GOH-coated surfaces was evaluated against Gram-negative
bacteria (E. coli) by performing a
biofilm formation assay with different solid contents. Firstly, a
96-well plate was coated with different GO contents ranging from 60
to 200 μg. After this, the GO-coated plates were seeded with
bacterial cells under conditions conducive for biofilm formation.
Parallel experiments were also carried out on a 96-well plate without
GO films that served as a positive control.

The GO synthesized
via the improved method, GOI, was found to be more effective
than GOH in inhibiting biofilm formation from Gram-negative
bacteria (E. coli) (Figures 4a and S4). The biofilm formation percentage decreased as the content
of GOI increased, indicating the role of GO nanomaterials
in the inhibition of bacterial film proliferation. However, in the
case of GOH, biofilm formation is further assisted by GOH, as indicated by the higher optical density than that of
the control (Figure S4). The biofilm inhibition
percentage reached almost 90% at a GOI content of 150 μg
and even achieved over 100% at GOI contents of 180 and
200 μg. The inhibition value did not change further on increasing
the GO content, suggesting that 200 μg was the saturation limit
for the E. coli bacterial cells. The
above results are in agreement with Perreault et al., who showed that
GO-coated surfaces on cellulosic fibers at 400 μg of GO loading
decreased the vitality of E. coli cells
to a value of 30%.18 Zou et al. reported
a maximum survival rate of 20% of E. coli cells at a much higher thickness (∼2 μm) and concentration
of GO loading (>1 mg/mL) of GO films on a Whatmann polymer membrane.24

Figure 4 Antibacterial activity of GOI-coated surface
against
bacterial biofilm. Quantitative analysis of bacterial biofilms after
treatment of GO-coated surface with E. coli and S. aureus. Graphical representation
of percentage biofilm inhibition of E. coli (a) and S. aureus (b). Data represented
here shows the statistical difference (p-value <
0.05) between the GOI-treated and control sample. Parallel
experiments were also carried out on a 96-well plate without GO films,
which served as a positive control.

The effectiveness of GOI is much higher than these
reported
values, which may be due to the difference in the nature of the GO
and available surface area for interaction with the E. coli cells. The higher efficiency of the GOI-coated surface over that of the GOH-coated surface
for bacterial growth inhibition of E. coli motivated us to explore the potential effect of GOI on
Gram-positive bacteria (S. aureus)
(Figure 4b). Similarly
to that for E. coli, GOI also showed inhibition of S. aureus biofilm formation. However, GOI was found to not be as
effective as it was in the case of E. coli. The results indicated that biofilm inhibition was not linear with
increasing GOI content. The increase in GOI content
from 60 to 150 μg showed a marginal inhibition in biofilm formation
but it was not as significant as compared to that for E. coli. The maximum percentage inhibition of 88%
was found when using 150 μg and it was only 81% with 200 μg.
As shown in the graph, the inhibition (65% vs 36%) at lower GO content
(60 μg) is higher for S. aureus as compared to that for E. coli,
which may be attributed to the different natures of the bacterial
strains.

2.2.2 Microscopy Studies
To further confirm
the anti-biofilm properties of GO, light microscopy and AFM studies
were carried out to study the interaction between the GO-coated surfaces
and the bacterial cells. Light microscopy images of E. coli and S. aureus at the GOI-coated surface are shown in Figure 5. As shown in the micrographs,
compact and robust biofilms were formed by S. aureus and E. coli in the control samples
devoid of GO. However, only a few scattered cell aggregates can be
observed in the biofilms in the presence of the GO-coated surface,
as indicated by the dark domains in Figure 5. The optical microscopy images suggest a
higher density of dark domains representing a higher concentration
of biofilm in the case of Gram-positive S. aureus as compared to that of Gram-negative E. coli. The GOI-coated surface is more efficient against biofilm
formation of E. coli, which supports
our biofilm formation assay results. It was observed that the methodology
adopted in the deposition of the GO nanomaterial on the surface plays
a significant role in the inhibition of a biofilm. Deposition of the
same solid content of GO via a single step was found to be more effective
as compared to that of a double-step deposition for antibacterial
activity. This could be explained by assuming that one-step processing
mediates the assembly of GO nanosheets in a fashion that has a higher
inhibiting effect, may be due to a higher exposure of surface functionalities
or morphology that avert bacterial growth.

Figure 5 Light microscopy images
of E. coli and S. aureus biofilms stained with
crystal violet. (A, B) E. coli and S. aureus biofilms in the absence of GOI (control). Micrographs showing biofilm inhibition in the presence
of GOI content as prepared by one-step deposition (E, F)
of an aqueous dispersion of GOI (2 mg/mL, 200 μg,
100 μL). To understand the effect of the number of depositions,
the same solid content of GOI was loaded by a double deposition
(2 × 100 μg, 50 μL) onto the surface. For the double
deposition, the first 50 μL sample was loaded and dried in an
air oven followed by drop-casting of another 50 μL (C, D) and
air drying. Scale bar = 10 μm. In the control images, the violet
regions are bacterial biofilms whereas for the GOI treated
surface (C–E), the black regions are biofilms and the yellow-brown
region is the GOI nanomaterial.

Figure 6 shows
the
AFM images of biofilms of E. coli and S. aureus in the absence and presence of the GOI-coated surface. In the absence of GOI, the cells
are spherical (S. aureus) and rodlike
(E.coli), present in clusters, and
compact biofilm formation was observed. Whereas, in the presence of
the GOI-coated surface, biofilm formation decreased, as
indicated by the occurrence of small cell clusters and isolated domains
of biofilm and GOI nanomaterial. The 3D AFM images of E. coli and S. aureus cells after incubation with the GOI-coated substrate
also support the existence of few-cell colonies
of bacteria forming within the localized porous channels of the GO-coated
substrate, and growth is not observed on the nonporous regions (Figure S5).

Figure 6 Representative AFM (topography and amplitude)
images of E. coli and S. aureus biofilms after incubation with the GOI (200 μg)-coated
surface. Biofilm formation in the absence of GO films was taken as
the positive control. (A, B) E. coli and (C, D) with GOI-coated microslides; (E, F) S. aureus and (G, H) with GOI-coated microslides.
The microscopy images show biofilm inhibition in the presence of the
same GO content of 200 μg. Scale bar = 2 μm.

Biofilm formation is a multistep process involving
the growth of
planktonic bacteria comprising first attachment to the surface, leading
to intracellular adhesion, followed by their proliferation to form
cell colonies. Once such colonies reach the maturation stage, they
disperse to release more cells, which then subsequently reattach to
the surface to form new colonies in a similar mode.41 In contrast to S. aureus, biofilm formation was greatly reduced in the case of E. coli, which was further indicated by the higher
number of isolated cells in the AFM images (Figure 6C,D). The results from the microscopy experiments
are in good agreement with our data from the biofilm formation assays.
The GOI nanomaterial was found to be effective in inhibiting
biofilm formation for both strains of bacteria, Gram-positive (S. aureus) and Gram-negative (E. coli), which could be explained by several factors. The efficacy is lower
in the case of S. aureus, which is
primarily attributed to the difference in the nature of its cell wall.42 In S. aureus,
in addition to the presence of the cell membrane, it is further supported
by a thicker peptidoglycan layer. In addition, the Gram-negative bacteria
possess an additional outer membrane comprising lipopolysaccharide,
which protects the peptidoglycan layer from chemical attacks. It is
worth mentioning that nanoparticle-mediated toxicity toward bacterial
species not only relies on the bacterial structure but also depends
on several factors including the enzymatic activity.43

It is worth noting that during the establishment
of biofilm formation,
the bacterial cells become embedded in the energy-rich self-produced
extracellular polymeric matrix comprising polysaccharides, proteins,
lipids, and nucleic acids.44 Signaling
across the bacterial network promotes genetic growth in response to
favorable environmental conditions allowing the transition between
the free planktonic state to surface-attached cells and their further
proliferation. In order for the occurrence of such a growth mechanism,
generation of a foothold by the bacteria on the surface is a mandatory
requirement to mediate cell-to-cell and cell-to-surface interactions
with the support of a nutrient supply to develop bacterial structural
scaffolds. If the surface is not supportive and is antiadhesive to
such growth of the biofilm either chemically or physically, this will
be key to preventing such undesirable bacterial colonization.

Considering the material perspective, the antibacterial properties
of GO are associated with inherent or structurally modified chemical
and physical factors. Some studies based on suspensions of GO particles
have suggested that the sharp edges of GO sheets penetrate and puncture
the cell membrane leading to cell death via leakage of cytoplasmic
materials. In our case, the nanosheets of the GO material are not
in suspension but rather they are coated on the substrate. It is expected
that the slow evaporation of aqueous media leads to a self-assembled
nano-layer coated surface where the majority of the sheets lie flat
in the basal plane of the surface of the substrate. The profilometry
and morphology studies indicate the formation of thinner and more
uniform packed sheets in the case of GOI than that of GOH, which is due to their smaller sheet size. It is anticipated
that at lower solid loadings of GO, there will be fewer sharp edges
than at those at higher loadings, which may account for the cell death
due to penetration and rupturing of the cell membrane. The SEM images
showed a wrinkled/folded surface for GOH, whereas the surface
is smooth for GOI, implying minimal or insignificant physical
destruction due to nanomaterial edges in the latter. The presence
of the smooth surface may not provide sufficiently attractive surface
properties for anchoring of bacteria thereby interfering with the
cell–surface interactions and inhibiting bacterial attachment,
which is the primary requirement for the establishment of a biofilm.
The GO-uncoated control surface showed intricate bacteria densely
embedded in the matrix; the development of thick, dense biofilms that
uniformly covered the surfaces. From our results, the morphologies
of the GOH and GOI surfaces differed significantly
in terms of their porous framework and surface roughness on the physical
front, and chemically in terms of their surface functionalities. In
this case, one may argue that the GOH surface possesses
a modest rough surface, which is conducive to the formation of a bacterial
foothold and may promote biofilm formation by facilitating the anchoring
mechanism. On the contrary, the GOI-coated surface was
smooth, which may have prevented the adhesion of bacteria to a moderate
level, allowing the initial aggregation of bacteria only at the place
of seeding the colony, which mediate the growth locally creating a
partially covered surface, however further growth is inhibited.

2.2.3 CA Measurements
To understand the
importance of the surface–interface interactions of the GO-coated
substrate, further detailed study in this direction is necessary.
The key dictating parameters for surfaces to mitigate attachment and
proliferation of bacteria on an anti-biofouling surface are the surface
free energy, wettability,30,31 elasticity, surface
topography in terms of pore size and their density,45 and surface roughness.24 Simultaneously,
the nature of and surface charge on bacteria also play a crucial role
in facilitating their electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions with
an anti-biofouling surface, controlling their growth.30,31 It has been reported that depending upon the species of bacteria
and ionic strength of a medium, the surface properties of the bacteria
may change. Both hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions play a significant
role in attachment of bacteria to any surface. The surface properties
of graphene-coated substrates against biofouling have been immensely
studied by Parra et al.30,31 They demonstrated that
the surface properties of graphene-coated metallic substrates are
important for understanding the mechanistic aspect of biofilm formation.
Such graphene coatings modify the material’s surface energy
via hydrophobic–hydrophilic and electrostatic interactions
between the coated material and bacteria, which is essential for imparting
anti-biofouling characteristics. The graphene surface provides an
effective barrier thereby preventing physical contact between the
bacteria and underlying substrate to substantially suppress interaction,
which is an essential requirement for the establishment of the biofilm.
An antibacterial activity study of graphene coated on gold and copper
substrates demonstrated that graphene conductivity plays no role in
bacterial viability, rather the release of cupric ions is responsible
for the bactericidal affect.32

To
understand the importance of surface energies for anti-biofouling
properties, CA measurements on GOH/GOI-coated
substrates was performed (Figure S6). The
GOH and GOI surfaces showed a CA of ∼33
and ∼46°, respectively, suggesting the former is more
hydrophilic in nature. This is also in good agreement with our XPS
results (Table S3), as the former possesses
a larger number of more hydrophilic carboxylic functionalities.

The GOI-coated substrate being more hydrophobic in nature
than that with GOH should favor the growth of a bacterial
biofilm that possesses a hydrophobic surface such as E. coli. However, the results suggest there are some
other factors too. The bioadhesive material released from bacteria
is a complex mixture of polysaccharides along with proteins that possess
both hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties leading to an aqueous
gellike network.46 The ratio of these constituents
may vary amongst bacterial species. It is anticipated that the different
surface energies of the GOH- and GOI-coated
substrates may be playing a significant role in the spread of the
released adhesive glue31 by bacteria across
their surfaces, which is essential for biofilm formation. Biofilm
formation is a complex process and is dictated by a variety of physicochemical
and biological factors at the interface of the cell and surface of
the substrate, facilitating cell attachment, microcolony formation,
and the release of adhesive glue followed by release of planktonic
cells.

In comparison to that of GOH, the surface
properties
of the GOI-coated substrate are not cooperative with bacterial
biofilm formation, and may affect the interactions of the cell with
the surface and inhibit the initial bacterial attachment, which is
the primary requirement for biofilm establishment. However, where
some cell attachment succeeded, it was not allowing to further grow.
This could be explained in chemical terms, as the released bacterial
adhesive, which is essential for the spread of bacteria, may undergo
some chemical modification due to the different surface functionalities
on the GOI surface affecting proliferation. Simultaneously,
physical barriers may counter biofilm development by affecting the
abiotic surface binding energies and inter-/intra-cellular adhesive/cohesive
forces that are dependent on porosity45 and the surface energy of the substrate.30,31

2.2.4 Oxidative Stress Studies
Besides
the physical parameters, chemical factors such as the generation of
ROS believed to enhance oxidative stress, which is responsible for
toxicity due to cellular oxidation of molecules, may lead to cell
death. The oxidative stress in bacterial cells is minimized by a self-defense
mechanism involving the redox reaction of thiol/sulfhydryl groups
(−SH) present in glutathione (GSH) to form glutathione disulfide
(GSSG). The concentration of GSH in the cell plays a significant role
in negating such stresses. Carbon nanomaterials,47 such as fullerene,48 CNTs,16 and GO,21 are known
to enhance ROS species inside the cell. The oxidation of glutathione
by GO can occur either via the direct oxidation of biomolecules by
GO sheets or the adsorption of oxygen on defect sites or through oxidizable
functionalities leading to the formation of the graphene structure.
Even reduced graphene has exhibited a higher loss of glutathione,
which is explained by superoxide anion-independent oxidative stress
due to its conducting nature.19 The intercalation
of water molecules at the graphene surface has been shown to generate
hydroxyl radical species that support the ROS mechanism involving
attack on peptide linkages with the simultaneous destruction of the
cell wall of bacteria.49 The density of
functional groups, size, and conductivity plays a crucial role in
generating such stress hampering of cell growth. The sheet size reduction
of GO has been reported to cause a higher percentage of loss of glutathione.18 The oxidative stress due to ROS can be determined
by oxidant-sensitive dye 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate
assay,50 nitro blue tetrazolium reduction
assay,51 and more commonly by Ellman’s
assay. GO can therefore lead to oxidative stress in the presence of
oxygen and cellular antioxidants, either by formation of ROS or by
the depletion of cellular antioxidants. To confirm whether a similar
mechanism was occurring on the GO-coated surface and may be responsible
for the inhibition of biofilms, we studied the oxidative stress mediated
by the GO-coated surface on the well plate. The amount of free thiol
groups due to GSH present in the cell was investigated by Ellman’s
reagent, which is a water-soluble colorimetric reagent, which upon
reaction with free thiol moieties forms a yellow-colored product,
2-nitro-5-thiobenzoic acid (NTB), which can be measured at 412 nm
by UV–visible spectroscopy. Here, a bicarbonate buffer (50
mM) was used as a negative control and because H2O2 (1 mM) induces ROS, it was employed as a positive control.
The amount of oxidative stress generated by the GOI surface
was quantified and is shown in Figure 7, wherein glutathione percentage decreased with increasing
GO content coated on the well plate. The oxidation of GSH by graphene-based
materials in suspension has been known to increase with increasing
concentration to generate more oxidative stress toward bacterial cells.19 In our case, as GOI content increased
from 60 to 90 μg, the percentage loss of glutathione increased
from 50 to 60%, which may be due to a higher GO content leading to
higher ROS-mediated oxidative stress, as expected. Surprisingly, as
the GO content increased further, the loss of glutathione decreased
to a value of 35% at 200 μg. The oxidative stress due to the
GO coating is dictated both by GO content and availability of exposed
surface functionalities. Therefore, oxidative stress was found to
increase with increasing GO content from 60 to 90 μg. However,
with the further increase in GO content to 200 μg, a decrease
in oxidative stress is observed. The reason for this decrease in oxidation
potential of GO beyond a certain loading (i.e., 90 μg) may be
attributed to the non-accessibility of initially deposited GO sheets
due to the higher loading of GO content on top of it. In addition,
it may involve some of the surface functionalities undergoing inter/intramolecular
H-bonding amongst GO nanoparticles leading to the formation of a thicker
layer at higher GO content. Therefore with a higher loading (>
90
μg) of more GO nanosheets, both of these processes may be responsible
for the reduction in GSH oxidation. Seemingly, besides other probable
reasons for the antibacterial activity, the GO-coated sheets also
exhibited the potential to create oxidative stress on the bacterial
cells as in suspension. To further support our hypothesis of the ineffectiveness
of the initially deposited GO sheets due to further GO loading, Ellman’s
assay was performed in a GO suspension. Figure S7 shows that loss of glutathione was found to be dependent
on GOI content; the value increases with increasing GO
concentration in the suspension, which is in agreement with the literature.
The percentage loss of GSH is similar at lower GOI content
(∼50–60 μg) both for the coating and suspension
confirming the availability of similar surface functionalities and
density of states to oxidize GSH. However, at higher GOI content (∼90–100 μg), the suspension showed
nearly 20% higher loss of glutathione than that of the coated nanomaterial
supporting our hypothesis that there is more exposure to and interaction
of the GO surface with the bacteria in suspension than that as a coating
on the substrate. In addition, at 100 μg/mL, both GOI and GOH dispersions showed a similar percentage loss
of GSH, 77 and 76%, respectively. This suggests that irrespective
of the nature of the synthetic route adopted in the synthesis, both
GOH and GOI will cause similar oxidative stress
to the bacterial cells.

Figure 7 Oxidative stress induced by GOI-coated
surface. Loss
of glutathione percentage after in vitro incubation with the GO films
at different GO contents ranging from 60 to 200 μg for 3 h.
A bicarbonate buffer without a GO film was taken as the negative control
and H2O2 was used as a positive control. Data
represented here for glutathione oxidation between the treated and
control samples was found to be statistically significant (p-value < 0.05).

It has been reported that the sheet size of GO dictates the
extent
of glutathione oxidation, that is, a smaller sheet size leads to a
higher oxidation potential.18 Chemically,
it is expected that carboxylic groups possess a greater oxidation
capability than that of epoxy and hydroxyl groups. Therefore, it is
worth mentioning that even though the nature and
degree of oxygenated functionalities are different for GOI (epoxide- and hydroxyl-rich) and GOH (carboxyl-rich),
the possibility of oxidation of glutathione or substantial adsorption
of both water and oxygen molecules to mediate oxidative stress must
also be taken into account. Therefore, oxidative stress-induced bacterial
cell inhibition may not be a predominant mechanism in dictating bacterial
proliferation and cell death.

2.2.5 Antimicrobial
Effect of GO in Dispersions
Further, the antibacterial activity
of GO dispersions prepared
by the two methods against both E. coli and S. aureus at the same concentration
(50 and 100 μg/mL) in suspension was also determined using the
CFU method (Figure S8). The results revealed
that both GOI and GOH are selective in their
antibacterial activity. GOI inhibits E.
coli (77 and 85%) and S. aureus (44 and 52%) at 50 and 100 μg/mL, respectively. Whereas, GOH inhibits E. coli (49 and 66%)
and S. aureus (84 and 93%) at 50 and
100 μg/mL, respectively. The results were further supported
by spot analysis (Figure S9), which showed
similar results. GOH showed a pronounced antibacterial
activity against S. aureus. As both
GOH and GOI have similar oxidative stress, as
determined by Ellman’s assay, it may be the size of the nanoparticles
that dictates the selective killing of cells. DLS studies revealed
a smaller hydrodynamic radii of GOI (200 nm) than that
of GOH (1200 nm), as shown in Figure S3. This suggests that the mechanism of inhibitory effect of
GOI is via piercing the thin cell wall in E. coli cells. However, the thicker cell wall in S. aureus is difficult to pierce by GOI and therefore wrapping of the bacterial cells by larger sheets of
GOH is the predominant mechanism to lower its population.
In the suspension studies, the effect of GO may be more bacteriostatic
than bactericidal as the percentage of inhibition observed was below
99.99%.

The above experiments assist us in stating that bacterial
biofilm formation is mainly inhibited by the surface morphology of
GO-coated substrates, as dictated by the porosity and surface roughness.
However, an ROS-mediated mechanism plays a limited role in preventing
biofilm formation.

3 Conclusions
In summary,
syntheses of GO via an improved and traditional Hummers’
method were carried out and the fabrication of a GO-coated surface
on a well plate was optimized and demonstrated to be efficient in
preventing biofilm formation. The GOI nanosheet possesses
epoxide- and hydroxyl-rich surface functionalities and a smaller size
whereas that of GOH is dominated by carboxylic-rich groups
and a larger sheet size. The analysis of the coated surfaces revealed
a smooth, less porous, thinner film in the case of GOI,
which enhances its inhibition of bacterial biofilm formation of the
model bacterium E. coli. On the contrary,
adhesion of bacterial cells is promoted by the higher surface roughness
and non-uniform thickness of the GOH-coated surface. The
mechanism for such inhibition was further supported by microscopy
and loss of GSH studies. Further understanding of the inhibitory effect
on bacterial proliferation showed a selective inhibitory effect of
the GO nanoparticles. GOH showed a pronounced inhibiting
effect on S. aureus whereas GOI is more selective toward the E. coli population. In response to environmental cues, bacterial cells promote
gene transcription that facilitates the transition between free planktonic
states and surface-attached cells. Cell-to-cell and cell-to-surface
interactions play an important role in biofilm establishment. Bacteria
adhere to the surface by a fibrillary structure such as fimbriae or
pili during biofilm formation. It is probable that in the presence
of GO, any one or more of these complex processes is disturbed leading
to a decrease in biofilm formation. The current findings on GO surfaces
preventing biofilm formation are expected to have immediate implications
in their design and utility for commercial applications, especially
within the health care sector.

4 Materials and Methods
4.1 Preparation and Characterization of GO
Graphite flakes
[Alfa Aesar, 99.8%, natural graphite (325 mesh)],
sulfuric acid (Finar), sodium nitrate, potassium permanganate, ortho-phosphoric
acid, and hydrogen peroxide [30% (w/w)] were obtained from Fisher
scientific. All reagents were used as received.

FT-IR spectra
were recorded on a Nicolet iS5 spectrometer equipped with an iD5-ATR
accessory, in the range of 4000–400 cm–1 with
a resolution of 4 cm–1. Absorbance measurements
were carried out on a Thermo Scientific Evolution 201 UV–visible
spectrophotometer by preparing dispersions of the respective nanomaterial
in deionized water. X-ray diffraction studies were performed on a
Rigaku SmartLab X-ray Diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ
= 1.5406 Å). The surface morphology of the samples was studied
using a scanning electron microscope (Zeiss EVO MA15) under an acceleration
voltage of 1 kV. Samples were mounted on aluminum stubs and sputter-coated
with gold and palladium (10 nm) using a sputter coater (Quorum-SC7620)
operating at 10–12 mA for 120 s. AFM (PARK, XE-007) in noncontact
mode was used to detect the morphology and thickness of GO. The average
particle size of the particles was measured by DLS (Nanosizer, Malvern,
U.K.). XPS (Omicron Multiprobe Surface Analysis System) measurements
using a monochromatized Al Kα (1486.7 eV) radiation source were
carried out to analyze the surface chemistry of GO. Contact angle
(CA) measurements were performed to characterize the surface properties
of the GO-coated polystyrene (PS) substrates on a CA system (Krüss
GmbH, DSA-25). A drop of milliQ water (2 μL) was placed on the
surface of the GO-coated and uncoated PS sample and images were immediately
captured using a CCD camera equipped with a magnifying lens. To confirm
the repeatability of the recorded data, measurements at different
positions on each sample were recorded and errors were found to be
within ± 2°. A surface profilometer (Bruker, Dektak XT)
was used to measure the surface thickness of the GO-coated surfaces.
Centrifugation was carried out using an Eppendorf 5810R (25 °C,
9000 rpm, 20 min for each centrifugation cycle). Evaporation of the
solvent from the GO suspension was performed using a Heidolph rotavac
(122 rpm, ∼60 °C). A probe sonicator (Sonics USA; 500
W, 20 kHz) was used at 40% max. amplitude with a pulse time of 10
s. A Thermofisher air oven (HERA therm) was used to make the GO film
on the 96-well plate.

Graphite flakes were oxidized using two
different procedures, namely,
Hummers’ method and an improved method to prepare GOH and GOI, respectively. For the Hummers’ method,34 graphite flakes (1.0 g, 1.0 wt equiv) were added
to a mixture of concentrated sulfuric acid (23.0 mL) and sodium nitrate
(0.5 g, 0.5 wt equiv) while keeping the temperature at 0 °C with
continuous stirring. This was followed by a gradual addition of potassium
permanganate (3.0 g, 3.0 wt equiv) while maintaining the temperature
below 20 °C. Upon completion of the addition, the ice bath was
removed and the resultant suspension was stirred. The mixture turned
to a brownish gray color in 30 min after which distilled water (46
mL) was added. The solution was finally treated with warm water (140
mL) and hydrogen peroxide (30% w/w, 3 mL) to give a brown colored
GO. The formed GO was washed, redispersed in water, and then centrifuged
(9000 rpm for 20 min) until the pH of the suspension was found to
be neutral. The residue obtained was dried under vacuum to yield a
brown solid (0.82 g, GOH). For the improved method (methodology
was followed from a reported procedure by Marcano et al.35 with slight modifications), a mixture of concentrated
sulfuric acid/phosphoric acid (134 mL, 8.6:1) was added to a mixture
of graphite flakes (1.0 g, 1.0 wt equiv) with stirring at room temperature.
To this, potassium permanganate (6.0 g, 6.0 wt equiv) was slowly added
with the production of a slight exotherm to 45 °C. After the
addition, the reaction mixture was heated to 50 °C and stirred
for a further 12 h. The reaction mixture was allowed to cool to room
temperature. Under stirring, a mixture of ice cold water/H2O2 (250:3 mL) was added slowly. During the addition, a
noticeable color change was observed from dark brown to yellow. The
reaction mixture was allowed to settle under gravity and the supernatant
was decanted. The residue formed was washed, redispersed in water,
and then centrifuged (9000 rpm for 20 min) and the process was repeated
until the pH of the dispersion was found to be neutral. The resulting
suspended material obtained after a multiple-wash process was dried
in a rotary evaporator at 50 °C under vacuum to yield a light
brown solid (2.30 g, GOI).

4.2 Deposition
of GO
A respective GOH/GOI suspension
was prepared in double deionized
water with a stock concentration of 2 mg/mL. Then, the suspension
was sonicated using a probe sonicator for 2 min before drop-casting
the solution on a 96-well microtiter flat bottom plate. Thereafter,
the suspension was slowly dried in an air oven at 50 oC
for 4 h to obtain the GO-coated wells. A series of different GO contents
in triplicate were loaded onto the well plate and details of the volumes
used are given in Table S1.

4.3 Bacterial Strains and Culture Conditions
E. coli (MG1655) and S. aureus were grown overnight at 37 °C in Luria
bertani (LB) and tryptic soy broth (TSB), respectively. Culture media
(TSB and LB), glucose, and acetic acid were obtained from Himedia,
Mumbai. Crystal violet was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO). All bacterial cultures were grown at 37 °C in aerobic conditions.

4.4 Antimicrobial Activity of GO-Coated Surfaces
toward Biofilm Formation Assay
To examine the antibacterial
activity of the GO-coated surface, the biofilm formation percentage
of E. coli and S. aureus was determined using the 96-well microtiter plate52 coated with the GO surface. Wells coated with GO served
as the test and uncoated wells were taken as the control. The overnight
grown bacterial culture was diluted by 1:100 in fresh TSB (S. aureus) and LB (E. coli) media supplemented with 2% glucose. After 24 h, planktonic cells
were removed gently and wells were washed thrice with distilled water.
Biofilms formed on coated GO were stained with 0.2% crystal violet
solution and again washed with distilled water. Acetic acid, 30%,
was used for biofilm quantification and the optical density at 595
nm was determined using an i-Mark Microplate reader (Bio-Rad).

4.5 Microscopy
For AFM, biofilms were
grown on coverslips coated with GO, after 24 h, planktonic cells were
removed gently by rinsing the coverslips three times in distilled
water. When dry, the coverslips were imaged directly under AFM using
tapping mode. For light microscopy, a 24-well PS plate coated with
a GO content of 200 μg was used. After staining the biofilms
with crystal violet, wells were washed with distilled water. When
the plates were dried, light microscopy of the stained biofilms was
performed by a Leica (DMIL LED Model) using 40× objective. The
same microscope was used to record the microscopy image of the GO-coated
surface.

4.6 Ellman’s Assay
Thiol oxidation
by GO as a coating and as suspension was determined using Ellman’s
reagent [Alfa aesar, 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid)] under
acellular conditions. Reduced glutathione (0.8 mM) was exposed to
the coated GO surface with different GO contents (60–200 μg)
in a bicarbonate buffer (pH
8.6). Samples were incubated at room temperature for 3 h in the dark.
For dispersion analysis, GOH and GOI at concentrations
of 50 μg/mL and 100 μg/mL in 50 mM bicarbonate buffer
were incubated with 0.8 mM glutathione for 3 h at 150 rpm in the dark.
After incubation, the amount of nonoxidized glutathione (GSH) was
quantified spectrophotometrically at 412 nm by adding 0.05 mM TrisCl
and 100 mM Ellman’s reagent, which reacts with the thiol groups
of GSH to yield NTB. A GSH solution without GO was used as the negative
control whereas GSH oxidation by hydrogen peroxide (1 mM) was used
as the positive control in the following experiments. The loss of
GSH was evaluated using the equation below  

4.7 Cell
Viability Test
We studied the
antibacterial activity of GOH and GOI against E. coli and S. aureus. Cells at 107 CFU/mL were used to determine antibacterial
activity. Briefly, 50 μg/mL and 100 μg/mL of GOH or GOI (probe sonication for 2 min) were incubated with
the bacterial cell suspensions and kept at 200 rpm to ensure proper
contact. Parallel experiments were also conducted with bacterial cell
suspensions without any compound to serve as the positive control.
After 24 h, 100 μL of the cell suspension was 10-fold serially
diluted and spread on an agar plate. The antimicrobial activity of
GO was evaluated by CFU and expressed in terms of percentage inhibition.

For spot assay, overnight grown cultures of E. coli and S. aureus were harvested and
washed with saline to remove the medium and macromolecules. The bacterial
cell suspension was then diluted to obtain 107 CFU/mL and
the cells were treated with 50 and 100 μg/mL of GOH or GOI (probe sonication for 2 min), untreated cells
were taken as the control. Both treated and untreated cells were allowed
to grow for 24 h at 37 °C and 200 rpm. After 24 h, serial dilutions
of the treated and control samples were performed and 5 μL was
spotted on agar plates. Plates were incubated overnight at 37 °C
and digital images were recorded.

4.8 Statistical
Analysis
For all of the
graphical experiments, analysis of variance was used to evaluate the
significant differences. The p-value was found to
be <0.05 for all of the experiments.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00371.Digital images
of GO-coated well plates of different
GO solid content loadings; AFM (3D) images of GOH and GOI films and representative height distribution; hydrodynamic
mean diameter and size distribution of GOH and GOI; quantitative analysis of antibacterial activity of GOH-coated surface against E. coli bacterial
biofilm formation; 3D AFM images of E. coli and S. aureus cells after incubation
with GOI-coated substrate; images of CA measurements using
MilliQ water in contact with (a) PS substrate (control), (b) GOH coated on PS, and (c) GOI coated on PS; in vitro
glutathione oxidation induced by GO nanomaterials; antimicrobial activity
of GOH and GOI with different concentrations;
spot assay representing antimicrobial activity of GOI and
GOH; methodology adopted for preparation of different GO
solid contents onto 96-well plate; surface thickness measurements
of GOH- and GOI-coated surface; XRD data (d—interlayer spacing) and XPS deconvoluted percentage
component of GOH and GOI; comparison of our
GO-coated substrate with previously reported literature (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao7b00371_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of N.Y., A.D., S.S., R.P., and B.L.
and C.P.S. assisted in recording the AFM images and surface thickness
measurements. G.G. assisted in recording and analyzing XPS data. All
authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was financially supported by Shiv Nadar University.
The authors would like to acknowledge Prof. Aloke Kanjilal for allowing
the use of the CA instrument that was purchased through the Alexander
von Humboldt Foundation.
==== Refs
References
Novoselov K. S. ; Geim A. K. ; Morozov S. V. ; Jiang D. ; Zhang Y. ; Dubonos S. V. ; Grigorieva I. V. ; Firsov A. A. 
Electric Field Effect
in Atomically Thin Carbon Films . Science 
2004 , 306 , 666 –669 . 10.1126/science.1102896 .15499015 
Mkhoyan K. ; Contryman A. ; Silcox J. ; Stewart D. ; Eda G. ; Mattevi C. ; Miller S. ; Chhowalla M. 
Atomic and
Electronic Structure of Graphene-Oxide . NanoLett. 
2009 , 9 , 1058 –1063 . 10.1021/nl8034256 .
Lerf A. ; He H. ; Forster M. ; Klinowski J. 
Structure of Graphite Oxide Revisited . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1998 , 102 , 4477 –4482 . 10.1021/jp9731821 .
Krishnamoorthy K. ; Veerapandian M. ; Zhang L. H. ; Yun K. ; Kim S. J. 
Antibacterial
Efficiency of Graphene Nanosheets against Pathogenic Bacteria via
Lipid Peroxidation . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 17280 –17287 . 10.1021/jp3047054 .
Cha C. ; Shin S. R. ; Annabi N. ; Dokmeci M. R. ; Khademhosseini A. 
Carbon-Based
Nanomaterials: Multi-Functional Materials for Biomedical Engineering . ACS Nano 
2013 , 7 , 2891 –2897 . 10.1021/nn401196a .23560817 
Yang K. ; Zhang S. ; Zhang G. ; Sun X. ; Lee S.-T. ; Liu Z. 
Graphene in Mice: Ultrahigh in Vivo
Tumor Uptake and Efficient Photothermal
Therapy . Nano Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 3318 –3323 . 10.1021/nl100996u .20684528 
Feng L. ; Liu Z. A. 
Graphene in Biomedicine: Opportunities and Challenges . Nanomedicine 
2011 , 6 , 317 –324 . 10.2217/nnm.10.158 .21385134 
Moran A. ; Israela B. ; Ziberman M. 
Gentamicin-Loaded
Bioresorbable Films
for Prevention of Bacterial Infections Associated with Orthopedic
Implants . J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 
2007 , 83A , 10 –19 . 10.1002/jbm.a.31184 .
Levy S. B. ; Marshall B. 
Antibacterial Resistance Worldwide:
Causes, Challenges
and Responses . Nat. Med. 
2002 , 12 , 122 –129 . 10.1038/nm1145 .
Kumar A. ; Vemula P. K. ; Ajayan P. M. ; John G. 
Silver-Nanoparticle-Embedded
Antimicrobial Paints Based on Vegetable Oil . Nat. Mater. 
2008 , 7 , 236 –241 . 10.1038/nmat2099 .18204453 
Payne J. N. ; Waghwani H. K. ; Connor M. J. ; Hamilton W. ; Tockstein S. ; Moolani H. ; Chavda F. ; Badwaik V. ; Lawrenz M. B. ; Dakshinamurthy R. 
Novel Synthesis
of Kanamycin Conjugated Gold Nanoparticles
with Potent Antibacterial Activity . Front. Microbiol. 
2016 , 7 , 607 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00607 .27330535 
Bataillon S. B. ; Tattevin P. ; Mallet M. B. ; Gougeon A. J. 
Emergence
of Resistance
to Antibacterial agents: the Role of Quaternary Ammonium Compounds
- A Critical Review . Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 
2012 , 39 , 381 –389 . 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2012.01.011 .22421329 
Akhavan O. ; Ghaderi E. 
Toxicity of Graphene
and Graphene Oxide Nanowalls against
Bacteria . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 5731 –5736 . 10.1021/nn101390x .20925398 
Lyon D. Y. ; Adams L. K. ; Falkner J. C. ; Alvarez P. J. J. 
Antibacterial
Activity of Fullerene Water Suspensions: Effects of Preparation Method
and Particle Size . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2006 , 40 , 4360 –4366 . 10.1021/es0603655 .16903271 
Kang S. ; Herzberg M. ; Rodrigues D. F. ; Elimelech M. 
Antibacterial
Effects of Carbon Nanotubes: Size Does Matter . Langmuir 
2008 , 24 , 6409 –6413 . 10.1021/la800951v .18512881 
Vecitis C. D. ; Zodrow K. R. ; Kang S. ; Elimelech M. 
Electronic-Structure-Dependent
Bacterial Cytotoxicity of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 5471 –5479 . 10.1021/nn101558x .20812689 
Tu Y. ; Lv M. ; Xiu P. ; Huynh T. ; Zhang M. ; Castelli M. ; Liu Z. ; Huang Q. ; Fan C. ; Fang H. ; Zhou R. 
Destructive
Extraction of Phospholipids from Escherichia coli Membranes by Graphene Nanosheets . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 8 , 594 –60 . 10.1038/nnano.2013.125 .23832191 
Perreault F. ; de Faria A. F. ; Nejati S. ; Elimelech M. 
Antimicrobial
Properties of Graphene Oxide Nanosheets: Why Size Matters . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 7226 –7236 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b02067 .26091689 
Liu S. ; Zeng T. H. ; Hofmann M. ; Burcombe E. ; Wei J. ; Jiang R. ; Kong J. ; Chen Y. 
Antibacterial activity
of Graphite, Graphite Oxide, Graphene Oxide, and Reduced Graphene
Oxide: Membrane and Oxidative Stress . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 6971 –6980 . 10.1021/nn202451x .21851105 
Wang X. ; Quinn P. J. 
Vitamin E and its Function in Membranes . Prog. Lipid Res. 
1999 , 38 , 309 –336 . 10.1016/S0163-7827(99)00008-9 .10793887 
Liu S. ; Hu M. ; Zeng T. H. ; Wu R. ; Jiang R. ; Wei J. ; Wang L. ; Kong J. ; Chen Y. 
Lateral Dimension-Dependent
Antibacterial Activity of Graphene Oxide Sheets . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 12364 –12372 . 10.1021/la3023908 .22827339 
Pham V. T. H. ; Truong V. K. ; Quinn M. D. J. ; Notley S. M. ; Guo Y. ; Baulin V. A. ; Kobaisi M. A. ; Crawford R. J. ; Ivanova E. P. 
Graphene
Induces Formation of Pores that Kill Spherical and Rod-Shaped Bacteria . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 8458 –8467 . 10.1021/acsnano.5b03368 .26166486 
Hu W. ; Peng C. ; Luo W. ; Lv M. ; Li X. ; Li D. ; Huang Q. ; Fan C. 
Graphene based
Antibacterial Paper . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 4317 –4323 . 10.1021/nn101097v .20593851 
Zou F. ; Zhou H. ; Jeong D. Y. ; Kwon J. ; Eom S. U. ; Park T. J. ; Hong S. W. ; Lee J. 
Wrinkled Surface-Mediated
Antibacterial Activity of Graphene Oxide Nanosheets . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 1343 –1351 . 10.1021/acsami.6b15085 .28004574 
Costerton J. W. ; Stewart P. S. ; Greenberg E. P. 
Bacterial Biofilms: A Common Cause
of Persistent Infections . Science 
1999 , 284 , 1318 –1322 . 10.1126/science.284.5418.1318 .10334980 
Donlan R. M. ; Costerton J. W. 
Biofilms:
Survival Mechanisms of Clinically Relevant
Microorganisms . Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 
2002 , 15 , 167 –193 . 10.1128/CMR.15.2.167-193.2002 .11932229 
Klevens R. M. ; Morrison M. A. ; Nadle J. ; et al. Invasive Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus Infections in the United States . J. Am. Med. Assoc. 
2007 , 298 , 1763 –1771 . 10.1001/jama.298.15.1763 .
Johnson J. R. 
Virulence
factors in Escherichia coli Urinary
Tract Infection . Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 
1991 , 4 , 80 –128 . 10.1128/CMR.4.1.80 .1672263 
Soto S. M. ; Smithson A. ; Martinez J. A. ; Horcajada J. P. ; Mensa J. ; Vila J. 
Biofilm formation in Uropathogenic Escherichia coli Strains: Relationship with Prostatitis,
Urovirulence factors and Antimicrobial Resistance . J. Urol. 
2007 , 177 , 365 –368 . 10.1016/j.juro.2006.08.081 .17162092 
Parra C. ; Silva F. M. ; Henríquez R. ; Flores M. ; Garín C. ; Ramírez C. ; Moreno M. ; Correa J. ; Seeger M. ; Häberle P. 
Suppressing
Interaction with Copper Surfaces through
Graphene and Hexagonal-Boron Nitride Coatings . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 6430 –6437 . 10.1021/acsami.5b01248 .25774864 
Parra C. ; Dorta F. ; Jimenez E. ; Henríquez R. ; Ramirez C. ; Rojas R. ; Villalbos P. 
Nanomolecular
Approach to Decrease Adhesion of Biofouling-producing Bacteria to
Graphene-Coated . J. Nanobiotechnol. 
2015 , 13 , 82 –91 . 10.1186/s12951-015-0137-x .
Dellieu L. ; Laware E. ; Reckinger N. ; Didembourg C. ; Letesson J.-J. ; Sarrazin M. ; Deparis O. ; Matroule J.-Y. ; Colomer J.-F. 
Do CVD Grown Graphene Films have
Antibacterial Activity
on Metallic Substrates? . Carbon 
2015 , 84 , 310 –316 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2014.12.025 .
Li J. ; Wang G. ; Zhu H. ; Zhang M. ; Zheng X. ; Di Z. ; Liu X. ; Wang X. 
Antibacterial Activity of Large-Area
Monolayer Graphene Film Manipulated By Charge Transfer . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 435910.1038/srep04359 .24619247 
Hummers W. S. ; Offeman R. E. 
Preparation of Graphitic
Oxide . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1958 , 80 , 1339 10.1021/ja01539a017 .
Marcano D. C. ; Kosynkin D. V. ; Berlin J. M. ; Sinitskii A. ; Sun Z. ; Slesarev A. ; Alemany L. B. ; Lu W. ; Tour J. M. 
Improved
Synthesis of Graphene Oxide . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 4806 –4814 . 10.1021/nn1006368 .20731455 
Dikin D. A. ; Stankovich S. ; Zimney E. J. ; Piner R. D. ; Dommett G. H. ; Evmenenko G. ; Nguyen S. T. ; Ruoff R. S. 
Preparation and
Characterization of Graphene Oxide Paper . Nature 
2007 , 448 , 457 –460 . 10.1038/nature06016 .17653188 
Putz K. W. ; Compton O. C. ; Segar C. ; Zhi An ; Nguyen S. B. T. ; Brinson L. C. 
Evolution of Order during Vacuum-Assisted
Self-Assembly
of Graphene Oxide Paper and Associated Polymer Nanocomposites . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 6601 –6609 . 10.1021/nn202040c .21740055 
Robinson J. T. ; Zalalutdinov M. ; Baldwin J. W. ; Snow E. S. ; Wei Z. ; Sheehan P. ; Houston B. H. 
Wafer-Scale Reduced Graphene Oxide
films for Nano Mechanical Devices . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 3441 –3445 . 10.1021/nl8023092 .18781807 
Rodolfo C.-S ; Aaron M. ; Mauricio T. ; Ana L.
A. ; Nestor P.-L. ; Morinobu E.  Method for Preparing Graphene
Oxide Films and Fibers . U.S. Patent 9284193 B2 , 2016 .
Paul D. R. 
Creating
New Types of Carbon-based Membranes . Science 
2012 , 335 , 413 –414 . 10.1126/science.1216923 .22282798 
Rendueles O. ; Ghigo J. M. 
Multi-species Biofilms: How to Avoid
Unfriendly Neighbors . FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 
2012 , 36 , 972 –989 . 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2012.00328.x .22273363 
Silhavy T. J. ; Kahne D. ; Walker S. 
The Bacterial
Cell Envelope . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect.
Biol. 
2010 , 2 , a00041410.1101/cshperspect.a000414 .
Wang L. ; Hu Chen. ; Shao L. 
The Antimicrobial
Activity of Nanoparticles:
Present Situation and Prospects for the Future . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2017 , 12 , 1227 –1249 . 10.2147/IJN.S121956 .
Donlan R. M. 
Biofilms:
Microbial Life on Surfaces . Emerging Infect.
Dis. 
2002 , 8 , 881 –890 . 10.3201/eid0809.020063 .12194761 
Feng G. ; Cheng Y. ; Wang S. Y. ; Tascuic D. A. B. ; Worobo R. W. ; Moraru C. I. 
Bacterial Attachment
and Biofilm Formation on Surfaces
are Reduced by Small-Diameter Nanoscale Pores: How Small is Small
Enough? . npj Biofilms Microbiomes 
2015 , 1502210.1038/npjbiofilms.2015.22 .28721236 
Sutherland I. 
Biofilm Exopolysaccharides:
A Strong and Sticky Framework . Microbiology 
2001 , 147 , 3 –9 . 10.1099/00221287-147-1-3 .11160795 
Nel A. ; Xia T. ; Madler L. ; Li N. 
Toxic Potential of
Materials at the
Nano Level . Science 
2006 , 311 , 622 –627 . 10.1126/science.1114397 .16456071 
Lyon D. Y. ; Brunet L. ; Hinkal G. W. ; Wiesner M. R. ; Alvarez P. J. J. 
Antibacterial
Activity of Fullerene Water Suspensions (nC60) is not due to ROS-Mediated
Damage . Nano Lett. 
2008 , 8 , 1539 –1543 . 10.1021/nl0726398 .18410152 
Valko M. ; Morris H. ; Cronin M. T. D. 
Metals, Toxicity and Oxidative Stress . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2005 , 12 , 1161 –1208 . 10.2174/0929867053764635 .15892631 
Nanda S. S. ; An S. S. A. ; Yi D. K. 
Oxidative Stress and Antibacterial
Properties of a Graphene Oxide-Cystamine Nanohybrid . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2015 , 10 , 549 –556 . 10.2147/IJN.S75768 .
Becerra M. C. ; Albesa I. 
Oxidative Stress Induced
by Ciprofloxacin in Staphylococcus aureus . Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2002 , 297 , 1003 –1007 . 10.1016/S0006-291X(02)02331-8 .12359254 
O’Toole G. A. ; Kolter R. 
Initiation of Biofilm Formation in Pseudomonas
fluorescens WCS365 Proceeds via Multiple, Convergent
Signaling Pathways: A Genetic Analysis . Mol.
Microbiol. 
1998 , 28 , 449 –461 . 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.00797.x .9632250

