
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002357510.1021/acsomega.7b00446ArticleRecognition Site Generated by Natural Changes in Erm
Proteins Leads to Unexpectedly High Susceptibility to Chymotrypsin Le Tien †Lee Hak Jin ‡Jin Hyung Jong *†† Department
of Bioscience and Biotechnology, The University
of Suwon, Hwaseong City, Gyeonggi-Do 18323, Republic of Korea‡ Department
of Life Science, Korea University Graduate
School, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea* E-mail: hjjin@suwon.ac.kr. Phone: 82-31-220-2290. Fax: 82-31-220-2519.20 11 2017 30 11 2017 2 11 8129 8140 12 04 2017 10 07 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Erms are proteins that methylate
the adenine (A2058) in Escherichia coli 23S rRNA, which results in resistance
to macrolide, lincosamide, and streptogramin B antibiotics. In a previous
report, ErmN appeared to be more susceptible to contaminating proteases
in DNase I. To determine the underlying mechanism, cleavage with chymotrypsin
over time was investigated. ErmN possesses unusually high-susceptibility
recognition site (F45) as evidenced by a band (band 1) that represented
greater than 80% of the total band intensity at 30 s. The exposure
rate of the hydrophobic core was more than 67-fold and 104-fold faster
in ErmN than those in ErmS and ErmE, respectively. After cleavage
at F45, some of the hydrophobic interactions were disrupted. Further
digestion of band 1 occurred through the exposed F163 with a half-life
of 3.18 min. After 30 min, less than 1% of ErmN remained. On the basis
of the structure of ErmC′, the location of F45 was presumed
to be in an α helix at the bottom of a cavity. Both substitution
of most common amino acids such as isoleucine, valine, or leucine
with phenylalanine (ErmH, ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ out of the 37 known
Erms) and the apparent added flexibility, which could result from
the additional loop region attached to phenylalanine that is four
to nine amino acids longer (ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ, which form one cluster
in the phylogenetic tree), could cause unusually high susceptibility.
The unexpectedly high susceptibility among the homologous proteins
could indicate that caution should be taken not to misinterpret the
observations when conducting any procedure in which protease or protease
contamination is involved.

document-id-old-9ao7b00446document-id-new-14ao-2017-004467ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Proteolysis serves a variety of functional
roles in organisms including
the digestion of proteins in food, the conversion of precursor proteins
to active proteins, involvement in the regulation of some physiological
and cellular processes, prevention of the accumulation of unwanted
or abnormal proteins in cells, and association with diseases as a
result of an abnormal proteolytic activity. However, some proteins
exhibit increased susceptibility to proteolytic degradation that requires
the implementation of special measures to inhibit potential proteolysis
during isolation or purification, which could otherwise result in
severe degradation.1,2 A likely explanation for this
observation is the intrinsic flexibility3,4 of certain
site(s) in the proteins that might otherwise be resistant to proteolytic
cleavage when the proteins are in their native, fully folded state.
Because of this physical property, the protein could undergo local
unfolding, which could provide certain length of peptide thread to
the active site of the protease and result in cleavage. Once this
initial cleavage occurs and the overall folding of the protein is
affected, additional susceptible sites could be exposed, leading to
complete degradation of the protein.

Erythromycin ribosome methylation
(Erm) proteins methylate the
single adenine residue within the 23S rRNA to reduce the affinity
of antibiotics to a region around the peptidyl transferase circle,
thereby conferring resistance to macrolide, lincosamide, and streptogramin
B (MLSB) antibiotics in various microorganisms.5,6 Approximately 40 different erm methyltransferase
genes have been isolated and sequenced from diverse sources, ranging
from antibiotic producers to pathogens. A comparison of the Erm methyltransferases
that have been characterized revealed that sufficient homology exists
in the regions of alignable amino acid sequences,7 suggesting that they might share a very similar structure.
On the basis of the previously determined structures, Erm proteins
are believed to be composed of two domains, a catalytic domain and
a substrate-binding domain.8−10 The larger N-terminal catalytic
domain exhibits a typical α/β/α sandwich architecture
that contains the S-adenosyl-l-methionine-binding
site. The smaller C-terminal domain consists of three α-helices
that reportedly function as an rRNA-binding domain.

ErmS and
ErmN methyltransferases are two of the four gene products
synthesized by Streptomyces fradiae (S. fradiae) to be resistant to its
autogenous antibiotic, tylosin.11,12 ErmS specifically dimethylates
the adenine residue (A2058) in 23S rRNA, conferring a high level of
resistance to MLSB antibiotics. Unlike the dimethylation
by ErmS, ErmN causes the monomethylation of the same A2058 position,
which confers a high level of resistance to lincosamide antibiotics
but a lower level resistance to macrolide and streptogramin B antibiotics.

A previous report13 revealed that ErmN
was seemingly more susceptible than ErmS to contaminating proteases
in a commercial DNase I preparation. Accordingly, the current study
aimed to elucidate the difference in proteolytic susceptibility between
ErmS and ErmN and to discuss the consequences of the apparent increased
susceptibility of ErmN and its effects on our daily experiments. To
confirm our hypothesis that ErmN is more susceptible to proteolysis
than other Erm proteins, we also employed ErmE,14 a dimethylase from Saccharopolyspora erythraea, as a reference.

Results
Number of Putative Cleavage
Sites That Satisfy the Chymotrypsin
Specificity Requirement among the Erm Proteins Tested
In
the previous report, ErmN was more readily cleaved than ErmS by contaminating
proteases in a commercially available DNase I, mainly chymotrypsin
and trypsin. All of the cleavable bonds in ErmN, ErmS, and ErmE (using
ErmC and ErmB as reference sequences, the structures of which have
been elucidated) were searched for the potential alignment of these
sequences. With trypsin, large variations in the number of susceptible
sites among ErmE, ErmN, and ErmS were apparent (64, 42, and 54, respectively).
The extent of the protease contamination in the DNase I, which was
prepared from the bovine pancreas, was on the order of chymotrypsinogen
> chymotrypsin > trypsin.15,16 Therefore, chymotrypsin
could have a greater effect on the increased susceptibility of ErmN.
Furthermore, the number of preferential cleavage sites (W, Y, and
F) among ErmE, ErmN, and ErmS was quite similar at 20, 24, and 21,
respectively, even though the positions of the sites did not match
exactly among the Erm proteins (Figure 1). However, 11 of the sites matched in position (marked
with ▲ or ●) and with respect to preferential cleavability
(○), which is indicated by a red triangle, a solid circle,
or an open circle depending on the degree of consensus (Figure 1). The actual number of preferential
cleavage sites was 22, 25, and 22. The positioning of proline (P;
colored pink in Figure 1) on the carboxy-terminal side of the scissile bond blocked the cleavage
almost completely, independent of the amino acids [even with the most
preferable amino acids (W, F, and Y)] found on the amino-terminal
side.18 Consequently, the putative preferential
cleavage sites for ErmE, ErmN, and ErmS were reduced to 20, 24, and
21, respectively. When ErmN was treated with chymotrypsin, greater
than 80% of the protein was converted to a 28.6 kDa fragment that
was produced by the action of chymotrypsin at the phenylalanine 45
(F45) residue of ErmN (Figure 2). Therefore, three other preferential cleavage sites before
F45 (F77, column numbering) were, likewise, not considered. Thus,
despite the ability to locate each site in different environments,
such as accessibility and the secondary structure element shown in Figure 1, which could affect
the cleavability by chymotrypsin, the number of sites susceptible
to chymotrypsin was nearly the same among the Erm proteins tested
at 20, 20, and 21.

Figure 1 Sequence alignment of the representative Erm proteins:
ErmB, ErmC′,
ErmE, ErmN, and ErmS. The conserved residues are shown in white on
a red background, and the conservative substitutions are shown in
red. The structure of ErmC′ (PDB entry 1QAM) was used to assign
the secondary structure on top of the alignment. The blue numbers
are in accord with the ErmN sequence, and the black numbers are based
on the column numbering. The relative accessibility is indicated below
the sequence alignment with blue, cyan, and white representing accessible,
intermediate, and buried, respectively. The preferential chymotrypsin
cleavage sites [tryptophan (W), tyrosine (Y), and phenylalanine (F)]
are marked as follows: a red triangle is shown below the sequence
when the cleavage sites are conserved in all five aligned sequences,
a solid red circle is shown below the sequence to indicate conservation
among the Erm sequences tested (ErmE, ErmN, and ErmS), and an open
red circle is shown below the alignment to indicate that W, Y, or
F is located at the same position in the alignment among the Erm sequences.
The other preferential cleavage sites are indicated in green boxes.
F in ErmN, which exhibited unexpectedly high susceptibility to chymotrypsin,
is marked with a pink star below the sequence. Four extra amino acids
in the loop region of ErmN are indicated in blue boxes, which might
help to exhibit the unusually high susceptibility to chymotrypsin.
The figure was generated using Easy Sequencing in PostScript (ESPript).17

Figure 2 SDS-PAGE profiles of the proteolytic degradation of ErmN (a), ErmS
(b), and ErmE (c) by chymotrypsin. Purified Erm protein (10 μg)
was treated with sequencing grade chymotrypsin at an enzyme/substrate
ratio of 1:50 in 10 μL of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) and
50 mM CaCl2 at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped by
adding phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) at a final concentration
of 5 mM, and the mixture was boiled for 5 min. The samples were then
analyzed on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. The major products that resulted from
the treatment with chymotrypsin were named and marked with arrows.
The molecular weights of the bands were then deduced from the peptide
sequence using the ExPASy ProtParam tool (*) provided by expasy.org(19) or were estimated from a calibration curve constructed
by plotting the log molecular weight versus the migration distance
of the protein markers and the Erm proteins/their identified peptides
(**).20 The red arrows indicate the theoretical
location of the products that were generated but degraded rapidly
after the removal of bands 4 and 5 from the native protein by digestion
at Y135 and W144, which might have disproportionately affected the
two resultant products and rapidly degraded the other products (see Results). To facilitate the identification of the
cleavage site that generated the major degradation products after
chymotrypsin treatment, the sample was subjected to N2+ affinity chromatography purification to obtain peptides containing
the His-tag at the C-terminal end, which were subsequently exhibited
on an SDS-PAGE gel (data not shown). Following this procedure, bands
1 and 2 from all of the Erm proteins investigated were confirmed as
products that resulted from N-terminal cleavage, whereas bands 3,
4, and 5 from ErmN and ErmE were derived from cleavage at the C-terminal
end (M: molecular weight marker; 1: untreated protein; and lanes 2–9
contain the products following incubation for 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10,
15, and 30 min).

Preferred Cleavage Sites
in Each Erm Protein
The digestion
of the purified Erm proteins with chymotrypsin at an enzyme/substrate
ratio of 1:50 was monitored over time by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (Figure 2). Undigested Erm proteins, including the C-terminal
His-tag, yielded a band on SDS-PAGE that corresponded to a molecular
mass of 44.1 kDa (ErmE), 37.05 kDa (ErmS), or 33.8 kDa (ErmN; Figure 2). As previously
stated, the three Erm proteins exhibited almost the same number of
susceptible sites with regard to preferential cleavage sites with
high specificity for chymotrypsin (W, F, and Y). As well, sequencing
grade chymotrypsin, which is known to exhibit higher specificity compared
with the other chymotrypsin grades, was used. However, at a lower
rate, the peptide bonds after leucine (L), methionine (M), alanine
(A), aspartic acid (D), and glutamic acid (E) could be degraded with
chymotrypsin. With ErmS (Figure 2a), three bands could be observed in all lanes (0.5–30
min), including intact ErmS. Among these, band 2 was purified using
the His-tag located at the C-terminal end of the protein, separated
by SDS-PAGE, extracted, and subjected to N-terminal sequencing. On
the basis of the results, it was determined that the band originated
from a cleavage at F67 (similar to the column numbering).13 Band 1 was detected after a 1 min incubation
and after Ni2+ affinity chromatography, implying that the
cleavage occurred near the N-terminus. Therefore, this band was thought
to originate from a cleavage after Y23 (similar to the column numbering),
showing a mobility similar to that of the deduced molecular weight
of the cleaved fragment (34.4 kDa). Many other small bands (more than
those in ErmN and ErmE) appeared only at certain time points or throughout
the reaction. According to the structure of ErmC′, two cleavage
sites that form bands 1 and 2 are located outside of the main body
of ErmS, do not form any secondary structures that could be easily
recognized by chymotrypsin, and become the main cleavage site. The
possibility exists for the region around and preceding F67 to form
an α helix (unpublished result), but it would not form an extensive
core interaction with the protein body and likely would not influence
the stability of the protein. A fragment from the truncation of ErmS
at F67 survived intact even when it was treated with chymotrypsin
for 30 min, which supports the aforementioned theory. However, the
fragments appeared to be gradually degraded more by chymotrypsin in
sites located within the protein body, reducing the total amount of
staining of ErmS and its degraded fragments.

There were six
noticeable bands corresponding to ErmE that could be detected in all
of the SDS-PAGE lanes (Figure 2b). One of them represented intact ErmE and another (band
2) was believed to result from digestion after F39 (F63, column numbering)
or F43 (F67), which could exhibit a mobility similar to that of the
molecular weight calculated from the truncated fragment (39.2 and
38.8 kDa, respectively). Band 3, which was estimated to be 32 kDa,
could be observed in all SDS-PAGE lanes in this study but was not
recovered by Ni2+ affinity chromatography, suggesting that
this fragment might have originated from the native protein and resulted
from a cleavage near the C-terminal end. Thus, band 3 might have been
derived from a digestion after Y271 (Y303, generating a band of 30.7
kDa), after W277 (W309, generating a band of 31.5 kDa), or after F281
(F313, generating a band of 32 kDa). Bands 4 and 5 could be detected
from the onset of the reaction with chymotrypsin until the point that
most of the native protein disappeared (after 30 min incubation with
chymotrypsin), suggesting that these bands might result from the native
protein, although the likelihood exists that the digestion product
of band 3 could contribute to the intensity of the two bands to some
extent. Because bands 4 and 5 could not be recovered by the affinity
chromatography, these bands might have resulted from the digestion
after W144 (generating a 16.3 kDa band) and after Y135 (generating
a 15.3 kDa band), respectively. The other bands generated from the
cleavage that occurred after W144 and Y135 in the native band were
barely detected, presumably because of the rapid degradation (red
arrows in Figure 2).
This rapid degradation could be true for the C-terminal end band that
occurred after the cleavage of band 3 at Y135 or W144, presumably
because this rapid degradation could be the result of the ensuing
structural perturbation after the cleavage at Y135 and W144 that disproportionately
affected the two resultant bands. The estimated molecular weight of
band 1 of ErmE was approximately 42 kDa. The ErmE sequence did not
contain a preferential recognition site near the N-terminal end that
would enable chymotrypsin to generate a band similar to the estimated
molecular weight of band 1, despite the fact that band 1 could be
recovered by affinity chromatography. However, considering the location
of band 1, the 40 kDa marker, and band 2 (39 kDa), the cleavage site
might be between D16 and R17 (generating a band of 42.1 kDa) or between
L27 and G28 (generating a band of 40.9 kDa), which would indicate
the recognition of a less preferable site.

Unlike the other
Erm proteins, an unusually drastic cleavage was
observed as band 1 in ErmN (Figure 2c). A fragment corresponding to this band was previously
purified using a C-terminal end His-tag, transferred to a membrane,
and subjected to N-terminal sequencing to verify that the N-terminus
contained A46 (ErmN numbering, A78 in the column numbering) generated
by the cleavage at F45.13 Even after only
a 30 s incubation, band 1 (28.6 kDa) represented more than 80% of
the total density of the SDS-PAGE gel with the concomitant appearance
of bands as small as 27.5 kDa (band 2) and 16 kDa (band 3). Bands
2 and 3 both presumably originated from band 1. This inference could
be explained as follows: Although increasing the incubation time by
2 min (from 3 to 5 min) or by 1 min (from 1 min through 2–3
min) increased the densities of bands 2 and 3, respectively, the apparent
decrease in the intact band density of ErmN could not cope with this
increase. These observations strongly suggested that the structural
disruption caused by the truncation after F45 resulted in the exposure
of the inner susceptible sites and facilitated the cleavage of these
sites by chymotrypsin. Although band 2 could be recovered by affinity
chromatography, band 3 was not recovered by affinity chromatography,
implying that band 2 resulted from digestion on the N-terminal side
but band 3 resulted from digestion on the C-terminal side. Band 2
presumably resulted from the further degradation of band 1 at one
of the following sites: A52–E53 (84 and 85, generating a 27.9
kDa band), E53–S54 (85 and 86, generating a 27.8 kDa band),
A55–G56 (87 and 88, generating a 27.7 kDa band), or D58–S59
(90 and 91, generating a 27.4 kDa band). In addition, band 3 might
have been derived from the further degradation of band 1 at F191–A192
(229 and 230, 163 and 164 in ErmC′ numbering, generating a
16.3 kDa band). On the basis of the results of the SDS-PAGE analysis
of degradation patterns of the three proteins, the extent of digestion
of the native protein, both outside and inside the core region, was
greater in ErmS than that in ErmE. This degradation pattern was also
observed in the kinetic analysis of the degradation of the three proteins
(Figure 5).

Structural
Consideration of F45 and the Truncation Fragment
after F45
After the marked degradation of the native ErmN
protein between F45 and A46, the resulting fragment (band 1 in Figure 2a) appeared to immediately
degrade further into 27.5 and 16 kDa fragments (bands 2 and 3 in Figure 2a, respectively)
because the two bands appeared on the gel with band 1 after only a
0.5 min incubation with chymotrypsin. Among the intermediate degradation
bands detected from the three Erm proteins on the SDS-PAGE gels (Figure 2), the degradation
rate of these bands was thought to be second only to fragments generated
from cleavage after W144 and Y135 in intact ErmE and its band 3, which
could not be observed in any lane of the gel. The effect of cleavage
after F45 [ErmN numbering and is substituted with isoleucine (Ile)
22 in ErmC′] was analyzed based on the structure of ErmC′
(presented below in the Discussion and Conclusions section) because unfortunately the structure of ErmN is not yet
solved. As expected, the truncation after F45 could remove most of
the first α helix and expose a portion of the ErmN hydrophobic
core for rapid degradation by chymotrypsin (Figures 2 and 3). On the basis
of the ErmC′ structure, the following residues (all are numbered
according to ErmC′ numbering) could be exposed by the loss
of hydrophobic interaction residues in the first α helix and
the preceding loop [the criteria for recognizing the hydrophobic interaction
were based on the Protein Interactions Calculator (PIC),21 which indicated that two hydrophobic residues
fell within 5 Å]: Lys41, Phe44, Ile126, and Val158 (Figure 3b). Lys41 (located
in the loop between β1 and α2) interacted with Phe12 in
the loop preceding α1, Val158 (at the end of β6) interacted
with Ile13 in the preceding loop, Phe44 (in α2) interacted with
Ile19 in α1, Phe44 and Ile126 (in β5) interacted with
Ile22 in α1 (replaced by F45 in ErmN), and Phe99 (in β4)
interacted with Ile22, but the distance between these two residues
was 5.4 Å. Phe44 interacted with Phe99 and Ile126 as well; thus,
Phe44 interacted with four different residues (Ile19, Ile22, Ile126,
and Phe99) in total. If Ile19 and Ile22 are lost following the truncation
of α1, the interactions of Phe44 with Phe99 and Ile126 and the
interaction between Phe99 and Ile126 might be affected. Among these,
interactions that cause the disruption of the protein core structure
might be Ile13 with Val158, Ile19 with Phe44, Ile22 with Ile126, or
Ile22 with Phe44. Additionally, interactions of Phe44 with Phe99 and
Ile126 and between Phe99 and Ile126 might likewise be disturbed. Interestingly,
following the exposure and loss of the interactions, the nearby (both
structurally and sequentially) preferential recognition site (F191
in ErmN numbering and F163 in ErmC′ numbering) was recognized
and digested to generate band 3 from band 1 in ErmN (Figure 3b). Notably, this exposure
of a new preferential site and its cleavage appeared to occur immediately
after the cleavage at F45 and the subsequent disruption of the complicated
interaction network described above, because band 3 was observed with
band 1 within 30 s of incubation with chymotrypsin. According to the
structure of ErmC′, the F45 residue in ErmN is located at the
bottom of the cavity that developed opposite the active site (Figure 4). Hence, it is quite
interesting that as a member of the α helix, the F45 in this
location could be recognized and cleaved rapidly by chymotrypsin (see
below). Furthermore, the immediate digestion of band 1 to generate
band 2 was also noticeable because it involves less preferable recognition
sites (see the Discussion and Conclusions section).

Figure 3 Exposed
residues (Lys41, Phe44, Ile126, and Val158; ErmC′
numbering, colored yellow) generated by the loss of the preceding
loop to α1 and most of α1 after the truncation at F45
(Ile22 in ErmC′) of ErmN and residue F163 (ErmC′ numbering,
colored magenta), which generated band 3 of ErmN following digestion,
as illustrated using the ErmC′ structure (PDB 1QAM). As described in
the Results section, Lys41 (in α2) and
Val158 (at the C-terminal end of β6) interact with Phe12 and
Ile13 in the preceding α1 loop, respectively. In addition to
the interaction with the truncated Ile19 and Ile22, Phe44 interacts
with Phe99 and Ile126. When the residues and the associated interactions
are lost, the interactions of Phe44 with Phe99 and Ile126 might be
affected (a further reason for this is that Ile22 interacts with Ile126
as well). Furthermore, the interaction between Phe99 and Ile126 could
be affected. Therefore, Phe99 (colored yellow) might be exposed by
indirect effects. Thus, after the exposure of the hydrophobic core
and the loss of the interaction, the structurally and sequentially
nearby F163 (ErmC′ numbering; F191, ErmN numbering; and F229,
column numbering) was recognized and digested to generate band 3 of
ErmN. The remaining M23 in α1 after truncation at I22 is colored
brown. (a) Ribbon structure of ErmC′; (b) ribbon structure
of ErmC′ truncated at I22 (replaced by F45 in ErmN) with the
exposed residues and F163 highlighted; (c) surface structure of ErmC′;
and (d) surface structure of ErmC′ truncated at I22 but with
the truncated amino acids represented with sticks.

Figure 4 Location of the isoleucine residue (I22) in ErmC′
that is
replaced by the phenylalanine residue (F45), which is highly susceptible
to chymotrypsin in ErmN. In the ErmC′ structure, I22 is located
at the bottom of the cavity that develops opposite the active site
of ErmC′, the location of which is presumed to be difficult
for chymotrypsin to penetrate. (a) Surface structure of ErmC′
illustrating the cavity containing I22 at the bottom, which is indicated
with an arrow, and (b) location of I22 in the cavity.

Kinetics of Proteolysis
To quantify
the degradation
kinetics of each Erm protein investigated in the presence of chymotrypsin,
the residual band intensity, which was calculated by densitometry,
was plotted against the incubation time (Figure 5). The residual band intensity could correspond to that of
the native protein, which remained after a certain time of incubation
with chymotrypsin. However, the comparison could be made based on
the core structure of each protein, with the exception of the N- or
C-terminal unstructured region or the region that is structured but
does not interact extensively with the core structure, because the
N- or C-terminal region could be digested much more easily than the
protein core because of the increased flexibility of these regions.
Therefore, the residual band intensity would rather represent the
combined intensity of the native band plus the bands that resulted
from a truncation at the N- and/or C-terminal region outside the core
structure, such as bands 1 and 2 in ErmS and bands 1 and 2 in ErmE,
which could serve as a means to compare the degradability of the core
structure of each protein. However, when the degradation rate of ErmN
band 1 was considered, the residual band intensity was deemed equivalent
to the intensity of ErmN band 1 because the degradation of ErmN band
1 was inherently involved. When only the native protein was considered
to be the residual band, intact ErmN (●) disappeared almost
immediately within a half-life of 0.21 min. Additionally, ErmE was
the most difficult protein to degrade using chymotrypsin, as it exhibited
a half-life of 12.67 min, which was approximately 60-fold higher compared
with the half-life of ErmN (inset table in Figure 5a). The degradation rate observed in this
step primarily reflected the digestion that occurred outside the core
structure of each protein. Although both ErmE and ErmS harbor two
preferred truncation sites outside the core structure, ErmS (▼)
appeared to exhibit a higher digestion rate, as reflected in the curves
in Figure 5a, which
indicates a greater than three-fold shorter half-life than that of
ErmE (○). This observation could be confirmed in Figure 5b because the digestion rate
of the ErmS core structure was similar to that of the digestion that
occurred outside the core structure of ErmE. The slower digestion
rate of ErmE compared with that of ErmS, in what was assumed to be
the unstructured region, might be caused by the fact that ErmE contained
one less preferable recognition site out of the possible two sites
in that region compared with ErmS, which contained the two preferential
recognition sites that generated bands 1 and 2 of each protein.

Figure 5 Kinetics of
the proteolytic degradation of Erm proteins with chymotrypsin.
The proteolytic degradation was quantified by densitometry after scanning
the SDS-PAGE gels shown in Figure 2 using the GelQuant.NET software. The intensity of
the bands corresponding to the untreated proteins served as a control
for 100% protection against chymotrypsin action, unless otherwise
indicated. The percentage of the intact protein (and truncated peptides
as indicated) was plotted as a function of treatment time to monitor
the degradation kinetics. The rate constant (K, min–1) and half-life (min) of proteolytic degradation (inset
table) were calculated from at least three different experiments by
the exponential fitting of one-phase decay curve to the above data
using the GraphPad Prism software. (a) Kinetics of the major pathways
corresponding to the degradation of both the inside and outside core
structures of the Erm proteins, whereas (b) kinetics of the pathways
corresponding to the degradation of the outside core structure only.
* To investigate the degradation of ErmN band 1, the intensity of
band 1 in lane 2 in Figure 2a was used as a control. The contribution of intact ErmN to
band 1 was calculated and subtracted after estimating the intensity
of band 1 (from lanes 3–9, Figure 2a) because the contribution of ErmN to band
1 could be greater than 15%.

Band 1 of ErmN (▲) was degraded faster than the region
outside
the core structure of ErmS (slightly more than three-fourths in the
half-life), the rate of which would be marginally accelerated by digestion
at the core of ErmS because the structures both outside and inside
the core are simultaneously attacked by chymotrypsin. As reasoned
above, if the bands generated from the digestion outside the core
structure were included in the residual band, the degradation rate
decreased, which reflected the relative insusceptibility of the recognition
sites in the core structure of each protein to the protease. As observed
in the digestion rate at the region outside the core structure, the
digestion rate of the ErmE (□) core structure was slower than
the digestion rate of the ErmS (◆) core structure, as indicated
by the half-life ratio of 1:0.64. As shown in Figure 2, ErmS appeared to have an increased number
of recognition sites and higher subsequent digestion rates than ErmE
in the absence of a distinctive degradation pathway, evidenced by
the increased number of bands on the SDS-PAGE gel. Furthermore, the
degradation of ErmN band 1, when compared with the cleavage of ErmS
plus bands 1 and 2 and to ErmE plus bands 1 and 2, showed approximately
a 4.4-fold and 6.8-fold shorter half-life than ErmS and ErmE, respectively.

Bioinformatic Analysis of Unusually High Susceptibility of ErmN
Substitution with F at the position of 45 of ErmN does not seem
enough to cause the unusually high susceptibility to chymotrypsin
because a lot of preferential recognition sites are present without
corresponding strong cleavage. Furthermore, F45 resides at the bottom
of the cavity as a member of an α helix formed on the opposite
side of the active site based on the structure of ErmC′, which
does not appear to be favorable for the recognition and cleavage by
chymotrypsin (Figure 4). If this is true for ErmN, it would be interesting to investigate
the mechanisms by which chymotrypsin interacts with ErmN, recognizes
the buried residue, unfolds it locally, and cleaves the peptide bond
after phenylalanine rapidly in contrast to the established notion
that burial and structural constraint from the interaction with other
residues could hinder the proteolysis by proteases.22 However, another possibility exists that should not be
ruled out. In addition to the F45 substitution, ErmN harbors a loop
connecting α1 and β1 that is four residues longer than
the corresponding loop in the other four Erm proteins employed in
this study (Figure 1). Hence, this longer loop could distort the local structure and
expose the F45 residue, which would directly enable a reaction with
chymotrypsin and/or increase the flexibility around F45 to facilitate
easier recognition and cleavage. A multiple sequence alignment of
the 37 Erm proteins known to date (Figure 6a) revealed that the position F45 of ErmN
is most often occupied by hydrophobic amino acids, such as isoleucine,
leucine, and valine, and, in some cases, by alanine. In addition to
ErmN, the substitution with phenylalanine at that position is found
in ErmH (from Streptomyces thermotolerans),23 ErmI (from Streptomyces
mycarofaciens),24 and ErmZ
(from Streptomyces ambofaciens).25 Although ErmH harbors a loop connecting α1
and β1 that has a length similar to most other Erm proteins
in the multiple sequence alignment, ErmI and ErmZ contain a loop that
is six to nine residues longer than the other Erm proteins (Figure 6a). In addition,
ErmN harbors two to five longer loops than the other Erm proteins.
This observation suggests that at least 3 (ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ) out
of the 37 known Erm proteins could exhibit the unusually high susceptibility
to chymotrypsin digestion as well. Furthermore, ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ
except ErmH form one cluster in the phylogenetic tree, implying that
they originated from a common ancestor. In addition, ErmI and ErmZ
with longer inserted amino acids are located close to each other in
the phylogenetic tree7 (Figure 6b).

Figure 6 (a) Multiple sequence
alignment of 37 Erm proteins known to date
in the region encompassing α1 and β1 and the loop connecting
two secondary structures. From the multiple sequence alignment, several
Erm proteins were detected to harbor additional amino acids in the
loop region connecting α1 and β1, which could put more
flexibility to the regions around the chymotrypsin recognition site
(F, colored pink) in ErmH, ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ as well. Length of
the added amino acids in ErmH, ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ depends on which
Erm sequence is compared to them. Among these Erm sequences in comparison,
ErmO and ErmV, in which additional amino acids are boxed with a blue
line, have the longest loop. On comparing with these two sequences,
ErmN, ErmI, and ErmZ are found to harbor the extra amino acids (colored
blue) of 2, 6, and 6, respectively. When the first 8 Erm sequences
in a multiple sequence alignment are selected for comparison, which
harbor the shortest loop, ErmH, ErmN, ErmI, and ErmZ contain 1, 3,
3, and 3 more amino acids (colored cyan), which might be added in
the loop region, and the total extra amino acids in the loop become
1, 5, 9, and 9, respectively. On comparing with ErmC′, which
gives a reference secondary structure on top of the multiple sequence
alignment, ErmE, and ErmS, added extra amino acids are 4, 9, and 9
in ErmN, ErmI, and ErmZ, respectively. The substituted amino acid
F in ErmH, ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ is colored pink. Amino acid numbers
are based on the column numbering. (b) Phylogenetic tree of 37 Erm
proteins known to date. Erm proteins such as ErmI, ErmZ, and ErmN
with a long loop region form one cluster, implying that they are originated
from a common ancestor and ErmI and ErmZ with the longest loop are
the closest members to each other.

Discussion and Conclusions
The previous report13 showed that ErmN
was apparently more susceptible than ErmS to the contaminating proteases
contained in a commercially available DNase I, possibly indicating
a structural difference between mono- and dimethyltransferases. This
increased susceptibility to proteolysis could be caused by chymotrypsin
and/or trypsin contamination. In regard to trypsin, there is greater
variation in the number of susceptibility sites among ErmN, ErmS,
and ErmE. However, the levels of chymotrypsin contamination in DNase
I prepared from bovine pancreas are higher, and its preferential cleavage
sites are similar in number among ErmN, ErmS, and ErmE. The fastest
ErmN degradation rate could be ascribed to both the unusually rapid
digestion at F45 and the resultant structural perturbation that accelerated
the degradation of the resulting polypeptide. Even though there could
be many other cleavage products that facilitate further degradation
following the exposure of the hydrophobic core of other Erm proteins,
the amounts of those products were notably less than band 1 of ErmN.
The rapid formation of digestion products and their subsequent degradation
could be major points that determine the protease degradation rate
of the protein. In this sense, ErmN is quite remarkable because within
30 s of incubation, the first visible truncated product, ErmN band
1 (28.6 kDa), represented greater than 80% of the total band intensity
and appeared to be digested at both C- and N-terminal ends as soon
as it was formed to yield two degradation products that were approximately
16 and 27 kDa in size. In regard to the generation of the product
that led to the exposure of the hydrophobic core and caused more rapid
degradation, the half-life of native ErmN in relation to band 1 was
more than 67-fold and 104-fold shorter than the half-lives of ErmS
and ErmE, respectively, even though the comparison was drawn between
one site in ErmN (F45) and several sites in ErmS and ErmE. After the
ErmN band 1 was generated, its degradation rate (3.18 min half-life)
was estimated to be approximately 1.3- and 4-fold shorter in terms
of half-life than the degradation rate of ErmS and ErmE, respectively,
in the region outside the core structure. Furthermore, the digestion
rate at F45 of ErmN to form band 1 is faster than that of band 1 degradation
by more than 15 times and is more than 60 and 20 times faster than
the digestion rate of preferential recognition site on the N-terminal
unstructured regions of ErmE and ErmS, respectively.

When considering
the core structure, the number of preferential
recognition sites in the core structure of each Erm protein investigated
was close to each other: 18 for ErmE, 20 for ErmN (after F45), and
19 for ErmS. As well, at seven of these sites, the position and identity
of the recognition amino acid were the same in the multiple sequence
alignment. As well, the position was the same, but the preferential
recognition amino acid varied at three other sites (hereafter, these
10 sites will be referred to as the preferential equivalent sites).
Therefore, a time-dependent chymotrypsin digestion using standard
conditions (an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50) could be employed
to compare the conformational features surrounding the recognition
sites and the chymotrypsin cleavage patterns, if the digestion occurs
at the equivalent sites described above.22,26 Over the course of the chymotrypsin reaction, ErmS exhibited many
small bands in each lane in the course of incubation from 30 s to
30 min, with only two or three clearly noticeable bands that were
derived from the N-terminal region. This suggests that chymotrypsin
binds to many recognition sites and cleaves even without strongly
preferred sites. In contrast to this observation, ErmE and ErmN, in
particular, appeared to follow the major degradation pathway, displaying
apparently discrete bands that resulted from the detection of a unique
and distinct pattern of recognition sites during the course of incubation
with chymotrypsin. ErmN yielded bands 1, 2, and 3. Band 1 resulted
from a deviation (F45) from the consensus sequence that was not a
member of the preferential equivalent sites. Likewise, band 2 was
not from a preferential site. Band 3 originated from a preferential
equivalent site, but only after digestion at F45 and the subsequent
structural modification that presumably resulted in the exposure of
the site for recognition by chymotrypsin. ErmE yielded bands 1, 2,
3, 4, and 5, all of which were from the native protein. Among these,
bands 1 and 2 were derived from the digestion of the N-terminal region,
whereas band 3 originated from the preferential equivalent sites [W277,
ErmE numbering (W309, column numbering) or F281 (F313) or Y271 (Y303,
nonequivalent but shared with ErmS)]. Bands 4 and 5 resulted from
the cleavage at Y135 (Y165, one of the preferential equivalent sites)
and W144 (174, nonequivalent site but shared with ErmS), respectively.
Even though only clearly detectable bands were considered, no consensus
cleavage site existed in either the native protein or the structurally
perturbed protein after the digestion of ErmE, ErmN, or ErmS at their
respective core structures. It is possible that preferential equivalent
residues that matched with those from ErmE to generate bands 3, 4,
and 5 existed among the digested but uninvestigated ErmS sites. Presumably,
these probable bands were not detected because of either their very
weak recognition and cleavage or their distinct structural environment,
which subsequently resulted in no cleavage. However, after structural
perturbation, the digestion of ErmN at F163 (ErmC′ numbering)
could be considered unique because it is caused by exposure, which
resulted in recognition and cleavage by chymotrypsin after the loss
of a particular set of interactions, as described above. ErmE still
clearly exhibited these intermediate degradation bands up until incubation
with chymotrypsin for 30 min, whereas the ErmN intermediate degradation
bands were not clearly visible on the SDS-PAGE gel, indicating that
some of the ErmE intermediate states (especially, bands 4 and 5) were
more stable than those of ErmN, although the explanation for this
observation remains unclear at this time. It was apparent that ErmS
exhibited a half-life of the core structure degradation that was more
than 1.5-fold shorter than the corresponding half-life in ErmE, suggesting
that many bands generated during the reaction with chymotrypsin might
result from the digestion of the native protein. ErmN and ErmS both
originated from S. fradiae and are
homologous despite their functional differences as mono- and dimethyltransferases.
ErmE and ErmS come from the same Actinobacteria clade and are located close to each other on the phylogenetic tree.7 Despite this close relationship among the Erm
proteins investigated, the microenvironments of each protein for chymotrypsin
recognition are thought to be slightly different; thus, digestion
with chymotrypsin cannot distinguish between the mono- and dimethyltransferase.

In this study, we intended to pay more attention to the preferential
recognition sites (F, W, and Y) by employing sequencing grade chymotrypsin,
which exhibited more specificity to these recognition sites than other
chymotrypsin grades. Most of the cleavage sites investigated were
observed to occur after preferable recognition sites, except D16–R17
or L27–G28, which generated band 1 in ErmE, and A52–E53,
E53–S54, A55–G56, or D58–S59, which generated
band 2 in ErmN. Although there are many other theoretical loop region
positions matching less preferable recognition sites (L, M, A, D,
and E), they were not detected in this study. Two less preferential
cleavage recognition sites were located in the purportedly unstructured
N-terminal region of the substrate polypeptide, which does not contain
any preferential susceptibility sites near each site; thus, these
two sites could presumably be recognized and truncated by chymotrypsin
without any further need for the local unfolding of any secondary
structures such as an α helix. The exemption from the need for
local unfolding could outweigh the disadvantage associated with less
preferable recognition sites, with regard to recognition and digestion
by chymotrypsin, and enable faster digestion rates compared with other
inefficient preferable sites. However, further investigations are
necessary to identify the exact mechanism of preferable truncation
at the less favorable recognition sites, especially because the observed
speed at which band 2 was generated from ErmN band 1 was quite fast.

Generally, Erm proteins are believed to exhibit a high structural
similarity. ErmN and ErmC′ share 20% sequence identity and
46% similarity. Furthermore, the two proteins have a paralogous relationship7 and perform mono- or dimethylation, respectively.
The KsgA/Dim1 family of proteins is the closest to the Erm family,
sharing approximately 15–25% amino acid sequence identity.
Despite their involvement in the distinct adenine dimethylation reaction,
KsgA from Thermus thermophilus and
ErmC′ exhibit similar structures and could be aligned with
a root-mean-square deviation of 1.7 Å for 197 Cα atoms
out of 236 residues, with the most notable divergence apparent in
the C-terminal domains.27 This similarity
suggests the plasticity of the core structures of these two closely
related adenine methyltransferases, which has allowed these orthologous
and potentially paralogous proteins to fill multiple and distinct
roles with only modest adaptive changes. The extensive phylogenetic
analysis generated two clearly separate clusters of Erm proteins:
those from Actinobacteria, which are
composed of antibiotic producers (including ErmN), and those from Firmicutes, which represent pathogenic bacteria (containing
ErmC′). Although these proteins could form different clusters
in the phylogenetic tree, they are closer to each other than KsgA,
suggesting that they could assume more similar structures than between
the Erm and KsgA/Dim1 protein clusters. Furthermore, it is not possible
to differentiate between a monomethyltransferase and a dimethyltransferase
based on sequence comparison28,29 or using a phylogenetic
tree construction algorithm.7 Therefore,
the structural analysis of ErmN based on the structure of ErmC′
appeared to be reasonable in this study. In this regard, the location
of F45 in ErmN (substituted with isoleucine in ErmC′) and the
loop region around it, which existed in the more structurally conserved
N-terminal domain, was determined based on the structure of ErmC′.

The unexpectedly high susceptibility of ErmN to chymotrypsin could
not be predicted based on a typical or known protein degradation pathway,
such as the intrinsically high susceptibility of sinemin to proteolysis,1,30,31 the proline, glutamic acid, serine,
and threonine protein sequence that targets a protein for rapid degradation,32 or ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation,33 to name a few. Further, the substitution of
isoleucine, leucine, or valine with phenylalanine does not appear
to occur by chance because the substitution is found in 4 out of 37
Erm proteins known to date. Even though the origin of the increased
susceptibility conferred by the phenylalanine substitution, which
likely occurs in conjunction with the juxtaposition of the longer
loop region, could not be determined based on the biology of Streptomyces at this time and could be a serendipitous
event, the fact that ErmI, ErmN, and ErmZ, which carry substitution
with F and harbor longer loop region, originate from a common ancestor
and ErmZ and ErmI containing the longest loop are the closest member
to each other could be a starting point for investigation. The observations
made in this study might enable us to define the novel recognition
sites leading to unexpectedly high susceptibility to chymotrypsin,
which include not only one amino acid (F, Y, and W) immediately before
the scissile bond but also structural features around the recognition
sites. In addition, hopefully, extremely high susceptibility observed
in ErmN and other similar results, which are expected to be acquired,
could contribute to elucidate the catalytic mechanism on how remote
interaction from the active site could affect the catalytic activity
and its regulation of serine protease, which lacks in our understanding
of protease action mechanism at present. This understanding will be
helpful to grasp the catalytic mechanism of related proteolytic enzymes
including the most abundant chymotrypsin-like serine proteases with
significant physiological roles and affect the ability to design effective
drugs and new therapeutics. Considering the unexpectedly high susceptibility
of ErmN to chymotrypsin, successful overexpression of ErmN might not
correlate with the amount of purified protein and could result in
little to no protein recovery because of the action of the chymotrypsin
contaminant in the DNase I preparation used for the removal of DNA
released during cell disruption.13 To this
end, the overexpressed ErmN in a prior study (approximately 41 mg/L
of induced cell culture, unpublished result) was almost completely
degraded by contaminating proteases in the DNase I product during
purification (see lane 6 of Figure S1 in ref (13)). Most of the commercially
available DNase I endonuclease products that are currently marketed
are not clearly labeled to indicate the extent of their protease contamination.
In fact, 73% of the 101 products surveyed do not provide any information
on protease contamination. Compared to the numbers obtained from a
survey conducted 2 years ago, nothing appears to have changed with
regard to indicating protease contamination on DNase I labels. Therefore,
this unusual, unexpected, and thus unpredictable susceptibility to
certain protease(s) could pose significant problems and could prevent
accurate observations, interpretations, and conclusions during the
performance of biological procedures including protein purification
and other molecular and biochemical processes including proteases
or reagents potentially contaminated with proteases.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
Luria–Bertani broth (cat. no. 3220142)
was obtained from Difco Laboratories (Detroit, MI, USA). The inducer,
isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, cat. no.
MB-I4385), was purchased from MB Cell (Los Angeles, CA, USA). His·Bind
resin (cat. no. N71757-6) was obtained from Novagen Inc. (Madison,
WI, USA). PMSF (cat. no. PMS123.5) was purchased from BioShop Canada
Inc. (Burlington, ON, Canada). The Pierce BCA protein assay kit (cat.
no. 23225) was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA,
USA). Sequencing grade chymotrypsin (cat. no. 11418467001) was purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). The protein marker (cat.
no. EBM-1018) was purchased from Elpis Biotech (Daejeon, Korea). The
polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (cat. no. IPVH 000 10) was
purchased from Millipore (Billerica, MA, USA). All other reagents
were purchased from Bio Basic (Markham, ON, Canada) or from Sigma-Aldrich.

Strains, Templates, and Plasmids
E.
coli DH5α (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and BL21(DE3)
cells (Novagen Inc., Madison, WI, USA) were used for the general cloning
and expression of His6-tagged ErmE (UniProt accession ID
is T2S3U9), ErmN (UniProt accession ID is P97178), and ErmS (UniProt accession ID
is P45439). The total DNA from S. erythraea NRRL 2338 and S. fradiae NRRL 2702
was used as the DNA templates for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification of ermE and ermN.34,35 The pET23b bacterial expression vector (Novagen Inc., Madison, WI,
USA) was used to construct ermE and ermN expression systems.

Protein Sequence Alignment and Phylogenetic
Tree Construction
The sequence alignment of several representative
Erm proteins,
including ErmB, ErmC′, ErmE, ErmN, and ErmS and all 37 Erm
protein sequences, was generated using CLUSTALX2,36 and the resulting alignment was visualized using ESPript,17 with the secondary structure of ErmC′
(PDB entry 1QAM) on top of the alignment, as a reference. The residue locations
were numbered according to the ErmN sequence (above the alignment)
and column numbering (below the alignment). The relative degree of
accessibility of each position is shown below the alignment according
to the structure of ErmC′. The preferential chymotrypsin cleavage
sites [tryptophan (W), tyrosine (Y), and phenylalanine (F)] were differentially
marked depending on the degree of consensus among the aligned Erm
proteins (see the Results and Figure 1 for more details). The phylogenetic
tree of 37 Erm proteins known to date was constructed using CLUSTALX2.

Construction of the Expression Vector
The ErmS expression
vector was constructed as previously described.37 Expression vectors for ErmN and ErmE were constructed using
the same strategy. Briefly, two oligonucleotides, 5′GGAATTCcatatgAGCAGTTCGGACGAGCAGCCGCGCCCG3′ and 5′CCGctcgagCCGCTGCCCGGGTCCGCC3′, were used as the forward
and reverse primers of ErmE, respectively, and two oligonucleotides,
5′GGAATTcatatgCCGTCTCGTCCGCGTACCGATTCGCCCCACCGGCACGAGGG3′
and 5′CCGctcgagGCGCCTCCGCTGCGGCGAGATGCG3′,
were used as the forward and reverse primers of ErmN, respectively.
The primer sequences were modified to include a restriction site for NdeI (5′catatg3′) overlapping the initiation
methionine codon and a site for XhoI (5′ctcgag3′).
In addition, the italicized sequence in each oligonucleotide was added
at the end of DNA fragment for cleavage to occur more easily. The
resulting PCR products were treated with the restriction enzymes and
directly ligated and cloned into the pET23bNdeI–XhoI sites. Consequently, the overexpressed proteins in
this study harbored six histidine residues at the C-terminus, which
facilitated effective enzyme purification on a Ni2+ affinity
column but had no discernible effect on the activity or specificity
of the Erm proteins.37,38 The resulting plasmids were transformed
into E. coli DH5α cells to obtain
a sufficient amount of the plasmids, which were then sequenced to
confirm the sequence of the insert and frame. The plasmids were finally
transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3)
cells for the overexpression of the recombinant proteins.

Overexpression
and Purification of Recombinant Proteins
Expression and purification
of the His6-tagged Erm proteins
were conducted using a previously described strategy, with slight
modifications.13,37 Briefly, E. coli cells overexpressing the desired protein by culturing at 22 °C
for 18–20 h after IPTG (1 mM) induction were harvested, and
each 1 g of wet cell mass was resuspended in 15 mL of buffer A [500
mM KCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), and 10 mM MgCl2] containing
5 mM imidazole and 1 mM PMSF. The disruption of the cells was accomplished
by sonication on ice using a GEX-130 ultrasonic processor (130 W,
20 kHz) at 50% amplitude for 5 s pulses with 10 s intervals for cooling.
The total sonication time was 5 min. The cell lysate was centrifuged
at 11 000g at 4 °C for 15 min, and the
clarified supernatant was applied to a column containing 2 mL of nickel
(Ni2+)-charged affinity resin (Novagen, Madison, WI, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The column was
then washed with buffer A containing 25 mM imidazole, and the recombinant
protein was eluted using buffer A containing 300 mM imidazole. The
eluted fraction was dialyzed overnight at 4 °C in buffer B [50
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 50%
(v/v) glycerol]. The resulting protein concentrations were determined
in triplicate using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit with bovine serum
albumin as the protein standard (cat. no. 23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
MA, USA).

Proteolytic Digestion Assay
The purified Erm proteins
(10 μg) were treated with sequencing grade chymotrypsin (cat.
no 11418467001, Sigma-Aldrich) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50
in 10 μL of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) with 50 mM CaCl2. After incubating at 37 °C for 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10,
15, and 30 min, the reaction was stopped by the addition of PMSF to
a final concentration of 5 mM, and the mixture was boiled for 5 min.
The samples were then subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE, and the resulting
gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250.39

Protein Blotting and N-Terminal Sequencing
After SDS-PAGE,
the proteins/peptides were transferred to a 0.45 μm PVDF membrane
using a TE 22 Mighty Small tank transfer system (Amersham Biosciences,
Piscataway, NJ, USA). Briefly, the transfer was carried out using
Towbin buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, and 20% v/v methanol, pH
8.3) at a constant current mode of 0.2 A in a cold chamber (Jisico,
Seoul, Korea) for 6 h. The proteins were visualized by staining with
0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue R-250, followed by destaining in 50%
methanol. The N-terminus of each protein was sequenced by Edman degradation
using a Procise 491 HT protein sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA, USA) in accord with the experiments completed in a previous
study.13 In a separate experiment, the
degraded products obtained in the prior study13 and obtained in this study were subjected to SDS-PAGE to determine
the identical peptide bands.

Estimating the Molecular Weights of the Proteins/Peptides
The molecular weight of the Erm proteins/degradation product peptides
was deduced from the peptide sequence using the ExPASy ProtParam tool.19 The calculation included the sequence incorporated
at the C-terminus of each protein, including the hexa-His-tag, during
the construction of the expression vector. This was also true for
the digested peptides retained on the Ni2+ affinity column
during purification. As an alternative, the molecular weight of the
Erm proteins/degradation product peptides was also estimated using
a procedure recommended by G-Bioscience.20 The sample was processed as described above and analyzed on a 12%
SDS-PAGE gel using a set of commercially available protein markers
(cat. no. EBM-1018, Elpis Biotech, Daejeon, Korea). The molecular
weights of the Erm proteins/degradation product peptides were then
determined based on a standard curve generated by plotting the log
molecular weight versus the migration distance of the protein markers
and the Erm proteins/their identified digestion peptides. The method
typically yields an accuracy that deviates less than 5% for a band
larger than 15 kDa.

Analyzing the Proteolytic Digestion Kinetics
Proteolytic
degradation kinetics were determined by measuring the protein/peptide
band intensities on an SDS-PAGE gel using the GelQuant.NET software
provided by biochemlabsolutions.com. The intensity of the band corresponding to the untreated proteins
served as a control for 100% protection against chymotrypsin action
unless otherwise indicated (see Results).
The band intensities were plotted against the incubation time to monitor
the degradation kinetics, and the resultant curves appeared to follow
the first-order degradation kinetics. The rate constant and half-life
of the proteolytic degradation were determined by fitting one-phase
decay to the above data using GraphPad Prism version 7.00 for Windows
(exhibiting R-squared values ranging from 0.95 to
0.995, GraphPad software, La Jolla, CA, USA, www.graphpad.com).

Author Contributions
H.J.J. and
H.J.L. conceived the experiment and together with T.L. carried it
out; H.J.J. and T.L. designed and carried out the data analysis; and
H.J.J. coordinated the study and wrote the paper. Figures 1, 3, 4, and 6a,b were
prepared by H.J.J., and Figures 2 and 5 were prepared by T.L.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The project described was supported
by grants from
Business for Cooperative R&D between Industry, Academy, and Research
Institute funded Korea Small and Medium Business Administration (grants
no. C0350515 to H.J.J.) in 2015 and the Basic Science Research Program
(2010-0011442 to H.J.J.) through the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology.

Abbreviations
Ermerythromycin
ribosome methylation

MLSB antibioticsmacrolide–lincosamide–streptogramin
B antibiotics

IPTGisopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside

PMSFphenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride

PVDFpolyvinylidene
fluoride
==== Refs
References
Bilak S. R. ; Sernett S. W. ; Bilak M. M. ; Bellin R. M. ; Stromer M. H. ; Huiatt T. W. ; Robson R. M. 
Properties of the novel intermediate
filament protein synemin and its identification in mammalian muscle . Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 
1998 , 355 , 63 –76 . 10.1006/abbi.1998.0702 .9647668 
Taniguchi T. ; Kobayashi T. ; Kondo J. ; Takahashi K. ; Nakamura H. ; Suzuki J. ; Nagai K. ; Yamada T. ; Nakamura S. ; Yamamura H. 
Molecular
cloning of a porcine gene
syk that encodes a 72-kDa protein-tyrosine kinase showing high susceptibility
to proteolysis . J. Biol. Chem. 
1991 , 266 , 15790 –15796 .1874735 
Reyes-Vivas H. ; Martínez-Martínez E. ; Mendoza-Hernández G. ; López-Velázquez G. ; Pérez-Montfort R. ; de Gómez-Puyou M. T. ; Gómez-Puyou A. 
Susceptibility
to proteolysis of triosephosphate isomerase from two pathogenic parasites:
characterization of an enzyme with an intact and a nicked monomer . Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
2002 , 48 , 580 –590 . 10.1002/prot.10179 .
Rawlings N. D. 
A large
and accurate collection of peptidase cleavages in the MEROPS database . Database 
2009 , 2009 , bap015 10.1093/database/bap015 .20157488 
Lai C. J. ; Weisblum B. 
Altered methylation
of ribosomal RNA in an erythromycin-resistant
strain of Staphylococcus aureus . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1971 , 68 , 856 –860 . 10.1073/pnas.68.4.856 .5279527 
Skinner R. ; Cundliffe E. ; Schmidt F. J. 
Site of action of a ribosomal RNA
methylase responsible for resistance to erythromycin and other antibiotics . J. Biol. Chem. 
1983 , 258 , 12702 –12706 . 10.1016/0022-2836(87)90349-4 .6195156 
Park A. K. ; Kim H. ; Jin H. J. 
Phylogenetic analysis of rRNA methyltransferases, Erm
and KsgA, as related to antibiotic resistance . FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 
2010 , 309 , 151 –162 . 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2010.02031.x .20618865 
Bussiere D. E. ; Muchmore S. W. ; Dealwis C. G. ; Schluckebier G. ; Nienaber V. L. ; Edalji R. P. ; Walter K. A. ; Ladror U. S. ; Holzman T. F. ; Abad-Zapatero C. 
Crystal structure
of ErmC′,
an rRNA methyltransferase which mediates antibiotic resistance in
bacteria . Biochemistry 
1998 , 37 , 7103 –7112 . 10.1021/bi973113c .9585521 
Schluckebier G. ; Zhong P. ; Stewart K. D. ; Kavanaugh T. J. ; Abad-Zapatero C. 
The 2.2 Å structure of the rRNA methyltransferase
ErmC′ and its complexes with cofactor and cofactor analogs:
implications for the reaction mechanism . J.
Mol. Biol. 
1999 , 289 , 277 –291 . 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2788 .10366505 
Yu L. ; Petros A. M. ; Schnuchel A. ; Zhong P. ; Severin J. M. ; Walter K. ; Holzman T. F. ; Fesik S. W. 
Solution structure
of an rRNA methyltransferase (ErmAM) that confers macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin
antibiotic resistance . Nat. Struct. Biol. 
1997 , 4 , 483 –489 . 10.1038/nsb0697-483 .9187657 
Liu M. ; Douthwaite S. 
Resistance to the macrolide antibiotic tylosin is conferred
by single methylations at 23S rRNA nucleotides G748 and A2058 acting
in synergy . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2002 , 99 , 14658 –14663 . 10.1073/pnas.232580599 .12417742 
Weisblum B. 
Erythromycin
resistance by ribosome modification . Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 
1995 , 39 , 577 –585 . 10.1128/aac.39.3.577 .7793855 
Le T. ; Lee H. J. ; Jin H. J. 
An efficient
method to eliminate
the protease activity contaminating commercial bovine pancreatic DNase
I . Anal. Biochem. 
2015 , 483 , 4 –6 . 10.1016/j.ab.2015.04.030 .25944416 
Cundliffe E. 
How antibiotic-producing
organisms avoid suicide . Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 
1989 , 43 , 207 –233 . 10.1146/annurev.mi.43.100189.001231 .2679354 
Otsuka A. S. ; Price P. A. 
Removal of proteases
from DNase I by chromatography
over agarose with covalently attached lima bean protease inhibitor . Anal. Biochem. 
1974 , 62 , 180 –187 . 10.1016/0003-2697(74)90379-0 .4215338 
Wang D. ; Moore S. 
Preparation of protease-free
and ribonuclease-free pancreatic deoxyribonuclease . J. Biol. Chem. 
1978 , 253 , 7216 –7219 .701244 
Robert X. ; Gouet P. 
Deciphering key features in protein structures with the new ENDscript
server . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2014 , 42 , W320 –W324 . 10.1093/nar/gku316 .24753421 
Keil B.  Specificity of Proteolysis , 1 st ed.; Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg : NewYork , 1992 ; pp 206 –214 .
Artimo P. ; Jonnalagedda M. ; Arnold K. ; Baratin D. ; Csardi G. ; de Castro E. ; Duvaud S. ; Flegel V. ; Fortier A. ; Gasteiger E. ; Grosdidier A. ; Hernandez C. ; Ioannidis V. ; Kuznetsov D. ; Liechti R. ; Moretti S. ; Mostaguir K. ; Redaschi N. ; Rossier G. ; Xenarios I. ; Stockinger H. 
ExPASy: SIB
bioinformatics resource portal . Nucleic Acids
Res. 
2012 , 40 , W597 –W603 . 10.1093/nar/gks400 .22661580 
Man P.   Determining
Protein Molecular
Weight with SDS-PAGE: An Overview of the Process. Web Blog Post. The
Protein Man’s Blog. G-Biosciences. http://info.gbiosciences.com/blog/bid/196974/Determining-Protein-Molecular-Weight-with-SDS-PAGE-An-Overview-of-the-Process, 2014 .
Tina K. G. ; Bhadra R. ; Srinivasan N. 
PIC: Protein
Interactions Calculator . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2007 , 35 , W473 –W476 . 10.1093/nar/gkm423 .17584791 
Hubbard S. J. 
The structural
aspects of limited proteolysis of native proteins . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Protein Struct. Mol. Enzymol. 
1998 , 1382 , 191 –206 . 10.1016/s0167-4838(97)00175-1 .
Epp J. K. ; Burgett S. G. ; Schoner B. E. 
Cloning
and nucleotide sequence of
a carbomycin-resistance gene from Streptomyces thermotolerans . Gene 
1987 , 53 , 73 –83 . 10.1016/0378-1119(87)90094-1 .3036668 
Hara O. ; Hutchinson C. R. 
Cloning
of midecamycin (MLS)-resistance genes from
Streptomyces mycarofacines, Streptomyces lividans and Streptomyces
coelicolor A3(2) . J. Antibiot. 
1990 , 43 , 977 –991 . 10.7164/antibiotics.43.977 .2211365 
Karray F. ; Darbon E. ; Oestreicher N. ; Dominguez H. ; Tuphile K. ; Gagnat J. ; Blondelet-Rouault M.-H. ; Gerbaud C. ; Pernodet J.-L. 
Organization of the biosynthetic
gene cluster for the macrolide antibiotic spiramycin in Streptomyces
ambofaciens . Microbiology 
2007 , 153 , 4111 –4122 . 10.1099/mic.0.2007/009746-0 .18048924 
Fontana A. ; de Laureto P. P. ; Spolaore B. ; Frare E. ; Picotti P. ; Zambonin M. 
Probing protein structure by limited
proteolysis . Acta Biochim. Pol. 
2004 , 51 , 299 –321 .15218531 
Demirci H. ; Belardinelli R. ; Seri E. ; Gregory S. T. ; Gualerzi C. ; Dahlberg A. E. ; Jogl G. 
Structural rearrangements in the
active site of the Thermus thermophilus 16S rRNA methyltransferase
KsgA in a binary complex with 5′-methylthioadenosine . J. Mol. Biol. 
2009 , 388 , 271 –282 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.02.066 .19285505 
Pernodet J. L. ; Fish S. ; Blondelet-Rouault M.
H. ; Cundliffe E. 
The macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin
B resistance phenotypes characterized by using a specifically deleted,
antibiotic-sensitive strain of Streptomyces lividans . Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
1996 , 40 , 581 –585 .8851574 
Pernodet J.-L. ; Cundliffe E. ; Gourmelen A. ; Blondelet-Rouault M. H. 
Dispensable
ribosomal resistance to spiramycin conferred by srmA in the spiramycin
producer Streptomyces ambofaciens . Microbiology 
1999 , 145 , 2355 –2364 . 10.1099/00221287-145-9-2355 .10517588 
Granger B. L. ; Lazarides E. 
Synemin: a
new high molecular weight protein associated
with desmin and vimentin filaments in muscle . Cell 
1980 , 22 , 727 –738 . 10.1016/0092-8674(80)90549-8 .7006832 
Sandoval I. V. ; Colaco C. A. ; Lazarides E. 
Purification
of the intermediate
filament-associated protein, synemin, from chicken smooth muscle.
Studies on its physicochemical properties, interaction with desmin,
and phosphorylation . J. Biol. Chem. 
1983 , 258 , 2568 –2576 .6822575 
Rogers S. ; Wells R. ; Rechsteiner M. 
Amino acid
sequences common to rapidly
degraded proteins: the PEST hypothesis . Science 
1986 , 234 , 364 –368 . 10.1126/science.2876518 .2876518 
Hochstrasser M. 
Ubiquitin-dependent
protein degradation . Annu. Rev. Genet. 
1996 , 30 , 405 –439 . 10.1146/annurev.genet.30.1.405 .8982460 
Labeda D. P. 
Transfer
of the Type Strain of Streptomyces erythraeus (Waksman 1923) Waksman
and Henrici 1948 to the Genus Saccharopolyspora Lacey and Goodfellow
1975 as Saccharopolyspora erythraea sp. nov., and Designation of a
Neotype Strain for Streptomyces erythraeus . Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 
1987 , 37 , 19 –22 . 10.1099/00207713-37-1-19 .
Zalacain M. ; Cundliffe E. 
Cloning of
tlrD, a fourth resistance gene, from the
tyiosin producer, Streptomyces fradiae . Gene 
1991 , 97 , 137 –142 . 10.1016/0378-1119(91)90021-3 .1995426 
Larkin M. A. ; Blackshields G. ; Brown N. P. ; Chenna R. ; McGettigan P. A. ; McWilliam H. ; Valentin F. ; Wallace I. M. ; Wilm A. ; Lopez R. ; Thompson J. D. ; Gibson T. J. ; Higgins D. G. 
Clustal
W and Clustal X version 2.0 . Bioinformatics 
2007 , 23 , 2947 –2948 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm404 .17846036 
Jin H. J. ; Yang Y. D. 
Purification and
biochemical characterization of the
ErmSF macrolide–lincosamide–streptogramin B resistance
factor protein expressed as a hexahistidine-tagged protein in Escherichia
coli . Protein Expression Purif. 
2002 , 25 , 149 –159 . 10.1006/prep.2002.1621 .
Vester B. ; Nielsen A. K. ; Hansen L. H. ; Douthwaite S. 
ErmE methyltransferase
recognition elements in RNA substrates . J. Mol.
Biol. 
1998 , 282 , 255 –264 . 10.1006/jmbi.1998.2024 .9735285 
Laemmli U. K. 
Cleavage
of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage
T4 . Nature 
1970 , 277 , 680 –685 . 10.1038/227680a0 .

