
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02031Articleg-C3N4-Mediated
Synthesis of Cu2O To Obtain Porous Composites with Improved
Visible Light Photocatalytic Degradation of Organic Dyes Surikanti Ganesh
Reddy †‡§Bajaj Pooja †‡§Sunkara Manorama V. *†‡† Nanomaterials
Laboratory, Department of Polymers and Functional Materials, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500 007, India‡ Academy
of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad 201002, India* E-mail: manorama@iict.res.in, manorama@csiriict.in. Phone: +91 40 27193225. Fax: +91 40 27193991.07 10 2019 22 10 2019 4 17 17301 17316 03 07 2019 16 09 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A highly porous architecture of graphitic
carbon nitride g-C3N4/Cu2O nanocomposite
in the form of
cubes with a side length of ≈ 1 μm, large pores of 1.5
nm, and a high surface area of 9.12 m2/g was realized by
an optimized in situ synthesis protocol. The synthesis protocol involves
dispersing a suitable “Cu” precursor into a highly exfoliated
g-C3N4 suspension and initiating the reaction
for the formation of Cu2O. Systematic optimization of the
conditions and compositions resulted in a highly crystalline g-C3N4/Cu2O composite. In the absence of
g-C3N4, the Cu2O particles assemble
into cubes with a size of around 300 nm and are devoid of pores. Detailed
structural and morphological evaluations by powder X-ray diffraction
and field emission scanning electron microscopy revealed the presence
of highly exfoliated g-C3N4, which is responsible
for the formation of the porous architecture in the cube like assembly
of the composite. The micrographs clearly reveal the porous structure
of the composite that retains the cubic shape of Cu2O,
and the energy-dispersive spectroscopy supports the presence of g-C3N4 within the cubic morphology. Among the different
g-C3N4/Cu2O compositions, CN/Cu-5
with 10% of g-C3N4, which is also the optimum
composition resulting in a porous cubic morphology, shows the best
visible light photocatalytic performance. This has been supported
by the ultraviolet diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV-DRS) studies
of the composite which shows a band gap of around 2.05 eV. The improved
photocatalytic performance of the composite could be attributed to
the highly porous morphology along with the suitable optical band
gap in the visible region of the solar spectrum. The optimized composite,
CN/Cu-5, demonstrates a visible light degradation of 81% for Methylene
Blue (MB) and 85.3% for Rhodamine-B (RhB) in 120 min. The decrease
in the catalyst performance even after three repeated cycles is less
than 5% for both MB and RhB dyes. The rate constant for MB and RhB
degradation is six and eight times higher with CN/Cu-5 when compared
with the pure Cu2O catalyst. To validate our claim that
the dye degradation is not merely decolorization, liquid chromatography–mass
spectroscopy studies were carried out, and the end products of the
degraded dyes were identified.

document-id-old-9ao9b02031document-id-new-14ao9b02031ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Access
to the essential necessities of life, such as clean air,
safe and potable water, and so forth, have become a challenge, owing
primarily to our lifestyle, industrial development, ever-increasing
demands, and unsustainable growth. The challenge of acute shortage
of clean drinking water is compounded with the dwindling water bodies
and the pollution of the existing ones primarily by human activities
that include callous dumping of effluents from industries. To address
the issue of water pollution, several measures are concurrently being
adopted both at the governmental policy making and at the grass root
level but still not enough to solve the problem in its entirety, which
is getting more severe. Dyes, an important class of synthetic organic
compounds commonly used in many industries, especially textiles, are
becoming universal environmental pollutants during their synthesis,
fiber dyeing, and later when they are released into the water bodies.
From the materials science perspective, global efforts are underway
to develop suitable materials that could convert these effluents into
benign end products by eco-friendly and safe methodologies. In this
context, the first and simplest technique that comes to mind is photocatalysis,
where the pollutant in the presence of the photocatalyst under solar
irradiation gets degraded and is converted into benign end products.
Semiconducting oxides such as TiO2 and ZnO have been extensively
studied for their applications in photocatalysis, primarily because
of their inherent features such as nontoxicity, stability, insolubility
in water, high reactivity, and favorable photochemical properties.1−4 One of the major drawbacks of these materials is their optical band
gap in the UV region, limiting their widespread applicability. To
some extent, this limitation has been surmounted by combining these
oxides with noble metals to extend the absorption into the visible
region by the plasmonic effect, thereby improving their performance.5−8 Alternatively, these materials have been combined with low band
gap materials such as Cu2O,9,10 WO3,,11,12 In2O3,13,14 CdS,15 and so forth, rendering them favorable
for the photocatalytic applications.

Our earlier work on manipulating
the electronic properties of TiO2 for photocatalytic applications
includes a simple method
to obtain high-surface area TiO2 nanoparticles with a tunable
brookite/rutile and brookite/anatase phase ratio that demonstrated
enhanced visible light photoactivity for RhB degradation.16 In another study, ZnO structures with tunable
exposed polar facets synthesized by a hydrothermal route in an aqueous
base environment for enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity
were reported.17 The versatility of hierarchical
CuO/ZnO interleaved heterostructures by impregnation displayed multifunctionality
as a CO2 gas sensor and a visible light catalyst for MB
degradation.18

Another line of research
using C-based materials such as carbon
nanotubes or graphene composites led to the development of photocatalytic
materials that exhibit properties such as better conductivity, lower
charge recombination properties, and suitable band gap, facilitating
broader absorption profile.19−23 The most interesting research material in the present scenario is
graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) that is similar
to graphene and is endowed with exceptional thermal and chemical stability,
which is available abundantly, inexpensive, facile to produce24 and possesses hetero atoms, an added advantage
over graphene, facilitating greater flexibility in tailoring the properties
suitably, to further improve its performance.25−27 Peng et al.
reported the synthesis of the g-C3N4/Cu2O composite catalyst by an alcohol-aqueous-based chemical
precipitation method where g-C3N4 was loaded
onto the surface of Cu2O spheres.28 In an alternative procedure reported by Zuo et al., the synthesis
of the acid-treated g-C3N4/Cu2O composite
catalyst by the hydrothermal reduction followed by high-temperature
calcination and acid exfoliation resulted in flakes of scattered g-C3N4 particles deposited on the surface of Cu2O.29 To improve the conductivity,
Yan et al. introduced reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and reported the
synthesis of the Cu2O/g-C3N4/RGO
composite 3D aerogel photocatalyst, fabricated by the self-assembly
method and obtained g-C3N4 in the form of thin
sheets with Cu2O in spherical morphology.30 In another report, Liang et al. reported the synthesis
of porous g-C3N4/Ag/Cu2O by chemical
adsorption of Ag-doped cubic Cu2O onto porous small flat
sheets of g-C3N4, leading to enhanced photocatalytic
performance.31 In another report, a small
amount of 1–5 mol % of Cu(II) salt was incorporated into presynthesized
g-C3N4, and the role of Cu concentration on
its oxidation state, particle size, and the optical properties of
the nanocomposites for their suitability in chemical catalysis was
studied.32

In our earlier work, we
had optimized a protocol to obtain Cu2O with a cubic and
octahedral morphology and further to use
the octahedral morphology with TiO2 to synthesize a highly
efficient visible light Cu2O@TiO2 photocatalyst
for RhB degradation.33 In the present work,
we have adopted the protocol of the cubic morphology of Cu2O with g-C3N4 to realize the Cu2O/g-C3N4 composite by an in situ low-temperature
sol–gel technique. Further, by systematically increasing the
g-C3N4 content, a highly porous morphology was
obtained, which could be anticipated to exhibit excellent photocatalytic
performance because of the synergy of convenient band gap of Cu2O and the conductivity of g-C3N4 that
would help in the separation of the charge carriers and the mesoporous
nature of the material, resulting in a high surface area that would
greatly enhance the catalytic activity.

The present work details
an in situ procedure using a simple sol–gel
synthesis technique to obtain mesoporous Cu2O and a detailed
study, as will be described in the following section on how g-C3N4 influences the structure, morphology, and the
electronic properties of the composite, while retaining the cubical
shape of Cu2O making it suitable as an excellent visible
light photocatalyst, exhibiting improved performance over the earlier
reports.

2 Material Characterization
The first
confirmation of the composition of the as-synthesized
material was obtained from powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies
obtained on a PANalytical (Empyrean) X-ray diffractometer. The instrument
is equipped with a Cu Kα source operated at 40 kV, 30 mA, and
the diffraction data are recorded in the 2θ range of 10°–80°
with a standard monochromator provided with a Ni filter to avoid Cu
Kβ interference. The morphology of the material was studied
by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) on a JEOL JSM-7610F
equipped with an Oxford Instruments energy-dispersive spectroscopy
(EDS) analyzer for the elemental analysis. For the FESEM analysis,
the sample was spread thinly on a carbon tape fixed on a brass stub.
Detailed high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)
studies were performed on a Talos 200X high-resolution transmission
electron microscope, the selected area electron diffraction (SAED)
patterns showed the crystallinity of the nanoparticles, and the elemental
composition of the material was analyzed by high-angle annular dark
field (HAADF). The samples for the HRTEM analysis were prepared by
dispersing the material in water by ultrasonication and drop-drying
onto a carbon-coated grid. For the information on binding energies
of the elements in the composites, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) analysis was carried out on a KRATOS AXIS SUPRA using an Al
Kα anode (hν = 1486.6 eV) to know the
chemical state of the different elements in the material from the
binding energy values of the photoelectrons emitted from these materials.
The photoelectrons emitted were analyzed by a hemispherical analyzer.
This study would also shed light on the change in the oxidation states
of the individual oxides, if any, when the composites are formed,
in order to understand and support the photocatalytic performance.
UV–visible spectra of solid samples were recorded using the
UV-DRS accessory, and the absorbance was plotted using a Kubelka–Munk
function. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area
and pore size analysis of the samples were measured by nitrogen adsorption–desorption
isotherm measurements on a Quantachrome NOVA 4000e equipment. Emission
spectra of samples were obtained from photoluminescence (PL) studies
on a Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer (Spex model, Jobin Yvon) with
an excitation wavelength of 460 nm. Time-resolved fluorescence spectra
of samples were recorded on a picosecond time-correlated single-photon
counting setup (Fluorolog 3-Triple Illuminator, IBH HORIBA Jobin Yvon)
employing a light-emitting diode laser (NanoLED) under 460 nm laser
excitation at room temperature. Finally, the photocatalytic performance
of the composites was evaluated by monitoring the characteristic UV–visible
absorbance maxima of the dye in water at different time intervals
on a Varian Cary 5000 UV–vis spectrophotometer. Liquid chromatography–mass
spectroscopy (LC–MS) experiments were performed on a Waters
Xevo G2-XS QTof instrument equipped with an electron multiplier ion
trap detector using an ESI source, operated under negative mode to
estimate the extent of degradation and identify the intermediate and
end products. LC–MS separation was achieved on a BEH-C18 column,
100 mmL × 2.1 mm i.d × 1.7 μm d.p. Gradient elution
was applied to the mobile phase consisting of a mixture of aqueous
0.1% (v/v) formic acid/H2O (solvent A) and 0.1 (v/v) acetonitrile/formic
acid (solvent B). The flow rate was set as 0.2 mL/min. The injected
volume was 5 μL.

2.1 Photocatalytic Studies
For the photocatalytic
reactions, the dye solutions were initially prepared by dissolving
calculated amounts of the dye in deionized water (ρ = 18.2 MΩ).
All the photocatalytic dye degradation studies were performed using
a 400 W sodium vapor lamp as a visible light source. The photoreactor
used in these studies consist of a double jacketed cylindrical tube
(length ≈ 28 cm, inner diameter ≈ 5 cm, outer diameter
≈ 7 cm). In a typical photocatalytic study, an aqueous suspension
was prepared by taking 0.5 mg/mL of the catalyst and 50 mL of 1 ×
10–5 M dye solution. The mixture was sonicated for
15 min, followed by 1 h continuous stirring in the dark in order to
attain adsorption–desorption equilibrium of the dye on the
catalyst. Subsequently, the reaction mixture was placed in the photoreactor
and irradiated by visible light for different time durations. The
reaction progress was monitored by drawing aliquots of the dye solution
at regular intervals. The solution was centrifuged to separate out
the catalyst, and the UV–visible absorbance of the supernatant
solution was recorded. The intensity of the absorbance maximum of
the dye is a measure of residual dye in the reaction mixture based
on which the extent of the degradation of the dye can be estimated.

3 Results and Discussion
The synthesized materials
were characterized in detail to reveal
their structure, morphology, and optical properties, and then their
photocatalytic performance was evaluated. Thereafter, detailed HRTEM
and XPS were carried out on the best-performing catalyst. The photocatalytic
activity was then correlated with the structure and electronic properties
to understand their behavior, and from the conclusions drawn, a probable
reaction mechanism has been put forth.

3.1 Structural
and Morphological Characterization
Figure 1 shows the
XRD traces of the synthesized materials identified from the characteristic
X-ray diffractograms. Figure 1a corresponds to the XRD trace for the synthesized g-C3N4 and Figure 1b for the synthesized Cu2O. Figure 1c presents the XRD patterns
for the various compositions of g-C3N4/Cu2O composites with the increasing g-C3N4 content. Figure 1a shows the characteristic peaks at 13.09° (d = 6.754 Å) and 27.48° (d = 3.242 Å)
attributed to the (100) and (002) lattice planes of g-C3N4.34 The low-intensity peak
of (100) corresponds to the in-plane repeated tri-s-triazine units and the high-intensity peak of (002) corresponds
to the interlayer stacking reflection in perfect agreement with reported
data.35 The sharp and strong diffraction
peaks in Figure 1b
observed at 2θ values of 29.55° (d = 3.019
Å), 36.6° (d = 2.452 Å), 42.59°
(d = 2.121 Å), 61.31° (d = 1.525 Å), 73.52° (d = 1.286 Å),
77.75° (d = 1.227 Å), the values in parenthesis
are the corresponding “d ” values,
and can be indexed to the (110), (111), (200), (220), (311), and (222)
lattice planes of Cu2O respectively.36 Apart from these indexed peaks corresponding to Cu2O with a face-centered cubic (FCC) structure, no other peaks
of Cu or CuO were observed, confirming the phase purity of the synthesized
material. For the FCC system, the lattice constant “a ” was calculated to be approximately 4.25
Å, which is in good agreement with the reported value of 4.27
Å.37Figure 1c(i–vi) shows the XRD traces in increasing
order of the content of g-C3N4 from 2 to 12
wt %. Figure 1c(i,ii)
clearly shows the peaks indexed to Cu2O only because of
the low content of g-C3N4 (2 and 4%). With increasing
wt % of g-C3N4 to 6 and 8% ((iii) and (iv)),
the corresponding g-C3N4 peaks around 14.24°
and 27.04° can be identified as small peaks. Interestingly, in
the XRD trace (v) corresponding to the CN/Cu-5 composite with 10 wt
% of g-C3N4, the interlayer stacking reflection
of g-C3N4 can be deciphered only as a small
hump at 27.03° shifted from its designated position of 27.48°,
and the major peak of Cu2O also shows a slight shift. These
two observations have been emphasized by the enlarged views of the
XRD traces in Figure 1d,e. Figure 1d shows
the shift in the g-C3N4 peak at 28° for
g-C3N4 and CN/Cu-5 corresponding to an increase
in the interplanar distance from 3.24 to 3.29 Å. Figure 1e shows the peak shift in the
Cu2O peak around 36.5° corresponding to an increase
in the d-spacing from 2.452 to 2.46 Å. These
two observations are suggestive of an interpenetration of the lattices
during the composite formation. With further increase in the g-C3N4 content (12 wt %) for the composite, the two
peaks of g-C3N4 reappear as independent sharp
peaks. This is the first observation that in the CN/Cu-5 composition,
g-C3N4 is getting completely assimilated into
Cu2O to form the nanocomposite. Further studies would shed
more light on the structural, optical, and electrical properties and
bonding between the constituent species in the composite.

Figure 1 XRD traces
of the (a) g-C3N4, (b) Cu2O, and
(c) g-C3N4/Cu2O composites.
(d) Enlarged trace of the 2θ region around 28° in g-C3N4 and CN/Cu-5 and (e) enlarged trace of the 2θ
region around 35.6° in Cu2O and CN/Cu-5.

Figure 2 shows
the
FESEM micrographs showing the surface morphologies of the as-synthesized
g-C3N4, Cu2O, and g-C3N4/Cu2O composite materials. The FESEM micrograph
of the pristine g-C3N4 (Figure 2a) can be described as a fluffy sheetlike
morphology. Figure 2b shows the micrograph of the as-synthesized Cu2O showing
uniform sized cubes with an edge length of around 300 nm. It is seen
that with the increasing content of g-C3N4,
there is gradual loss of surface smoothness of the Cu2O
cubes (Supporting Information, Figure S2a–f).
Initially, the surface becomes increasingly rough, and small pores
begin to appear. In addition, the FESEM micrographs also show the
presence of g-C3N4 flakes around the Cu2O cubes. Figure 2c shows the FESEM micrograph of the CN/Cu-5 composite with 10 wt
% of g-C3N4 that shows well-formed highly porous
cubes. One important observation is the increase in the size of cubes
to about 1 μm compared to the 300 nm-sized pristine Cu2O cubes. The high-magnification micrograph in Figure 2d reveals the highly porous morphology of
the CN/Cu-5 composite, and it gives an impression that the in situ
synthesis process leads to internalization of g-C3N4 into the Cu2O cubes, resulting in the porous morphology
and an increase in the size of the cubes. Interestingly, with further
increase in the Cu2O content, the cubical morphology is
distorted (Supporting Information, Figure
S2). Figure 2e,f shows
the EDS data recorded on the surface of Cu2O cubes and
on the composite (CN/Cu-5) cubes. The image shows the location, and
the corresponding spectra confirm the presence of g-C3N4 in the Cu2O cubes supporting our hypothesis that
the synthesis procedure successfully incorporates the flaked g-C3N4 into the Cu2O cubes imparting them
the porosity as observed. The EDS data for the remaining compositions
have been presented in Figure S3. Further
support to this observation was obtained by point EDS analysis that
was carried out at different locations on the composite shown in Figure S4, and the corresponding weight percentages
of Cu, O, N, and C are presented in Table 1.

Figure 2 FESEM micrographs of (a) g-C3N4 and (b) Cu2O. (c,d) Low and high magnification
images of the CN/Cu-5
composite. (e) EDS spectra of Cu2O and (f) EDS spectra
of the CN/Cu-5 composite.

Table 1 Cu, C, N, and O Contents Estimated
from the FESEM–EDS Data for the Different g-C3N4/Cu2O Composites
S. No.	Sample code	Cu (wt %)	C (wt %)	O (wt %)	N (wt %)	
1	CN/Cu-1	68.2	16.5	10.7	4.6	
2	CN/Cu-2	63.0	24.8	11.8	0.4	
3	CN/Cu-3	56.8	25.7	13.5	4.0	
4	CN/Cu-4	49.5	24.3	8.1	18.1	
5	CN/Cu-5	46.4	33.8	14.2	5.6	
6	CN/Cu-6	41.0	43.0	9.3	6.7	
3.1.1 Effect of Ultrasonication
on the Morphology
of the Composite
To appreciate the impact of ultrasonication
on the morphology of g-C3N4, g-C3N4 was subjected to prolonged ultrasonication in water.
This ultrasonication resulted in exfoliation and breakdown of the
sheet morphology into smaller-sized petals, which can be seen in the
FESEM micrograph (Figure S5). It can be
hypothesized that during the composite synthesis, which also involves
this ultrasonication step, g-C3N4 undergoes
similar morphological change, which manifests itself in the final
product that is highly porous. The highly dispersed g-C3N4 and Cu precursors are in intimate contact, and as the
Cu salt progressively crystallizes into Cu2O following
the steps as described in Scheme 2, the cubic morphology of Cu2O
is retained and the presence of highly exfoliated g-C3N4 leads to a porous composite material. It is believed that
the internalization of g-C3N4 into the Cu2O cubes leads to the expansion of cubes with high porosity.

Scheme 1 Proposed Degradation Mechanism of Dyes MB and RhB over the g-C3N4/Cu2O Composite Catalyst under Visible
Light Irradiation
Scheme 2 Schematic Representation
of As-Synthesized (a) Cu2O Cubes
and (b) Bulk g-C3N4 and (c) Interaction of Cu(II)
Ions with the g-C3N4 and (d) g-C3N4/Cu2O Composites (the Backgrounds in (b–d)
Are the Corresponding FESEM Images)
3.1.2 Effect of Temperature on the Morphology
of the Composite
To understand the role of temperature in
obtaining the above morphology, the reaction temperature was varied
between 60 and 90 °C, and the results are presented in Figure S6. This study reveals that with increasing
temperature from 60 to 90 °C, the size of the composite gradually
decreases from 1 μm to 500 nm. Similarly, a concomitant clear
decrease in the porosity is also observed. These two observations
suggest that the higher temperatures lead to more compact structures.
Our studies demonstrate that the optimum temperature for the formation
of the best porous architecture is 60 °C.

3.1.3 Mechanism of Formation of the Porous g-C3N4/Cu2O Nanocomposite Morphology
On the basis of
the findings from the above studies, a probable mechanism
to explain the porous cubic morphology of the optimized composition
can be put forth. First, our idea was to design a suitable photocatalyst
based on Cu2O, a low band gap oxide which shows visible
light activity.38 The idea was to make
a composite with another material that would impart some sort of conductivity
in the photocatalytic mechanism to transport the photogenerated electron–hole
pairs to the site where the photodegradation reaction would take place.
First, the g-C3N4 ultrasonication step facilitated
the delamination and exfoliation of the g-C3N4 sheets in the medium. At this point, the introduction of the precursor
salt of Cu, viz., CuCl2·2H2O, into the
medium results in the intimate contact between the exfoliated g-C3N4 and Cu salt. Interestingly, during the synthesis
of the composite with varying compositions, we observed an evolution
in the morphology. In particular, for the CN/Cu-5 composition, we
observed cubes of size 1 μm, which on careful inspection revealed
a porous structure. The cubes resembled the Cu2O cubes
albeit with increased size. This prompted us to speculate that g-C3N4 is responsible for the porous morphology while
maintaining the cube structure of Cu2O. The self-polycondensation
of Cu2O particles to form a cubelike morphology in the
presence of well-dispersed sheetlike g-C3N4 resulted
in the porous cubelike g-C3N4/Cu2O composite. Similar formation mechanism is responsible for the formation
of a 3D framework as reported for the bioinspired synthesis of 3D
porous g-C3N4@carbon microflowers,39 and further, it could be hypothesized that the
π-stacking interactions and the hydrogen-bonding interactions
favor the formation of such 3D structures similar to those in isosystems
of g-C3N440 and coassembly
of g-C3N4/GO hybrid nanosheets.41

3.2 Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectroscopic Studies
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(FT-IR) spectra were recorded
for pure Cu2O, g-C3N4, and g-C3N4/Cu2O composite and presented in the Supporting Information (Figure S7). A sharp peak
at 630 cm–1 corresponding to the vibrational mode
of Cu–O in the Cu2O phase is identified42 along with features at 1624.74 and 3445.37 cm–1 that could be assigned to the −OH bending
and stretching vibrational modes from the adsorbed water.43 A small peak at 2922.81 cm–1 is attributed to the vibrational mode of alkane of the L-ascorbic
acid that was used during the synthesis (Supporting Information, Figure S7a). Pure g-C3N4 displays a sharp feature around 800 cm–1 attributed
to the breathing modes of the s-triazine ring modes.44 The characteristic bands observed in the region
from 1240 to 1635 cm–1 can be ascribed to the stretching
frequencies of heptazine derivative repeating units of g-C3N4.45 The broad band at 3192.28
cm–1 can be attributed to the terminal −NH2 or −NH groups45 (Supporting Information, Figure S7b). The features
observed in Cu2O and g-C3N4 were
also observed in the FT-IR data of the composite material, that is,
CN/Cu-5, with slight shifts in the peak positions. This observation
is in line with our XRD and FESEM data, suggesting that the interaction
between Cu2O and g-C3N4 could be
the reason for the observed shifts in the FT-IR data (Supporting Information, Figure S7c).

3.3 Surface Area and Pore Size Estimation
The EM images
reveal the porous morphology of the composite, but
the surface area and pore size distribution are two essential parameters
that need to be evaluated in order to ascertain its suitability as
a good catalytic material. The BET method was used to estimate the
surface area of the as-prepared Cu2O and CN/Cu-5 nanocomposite,
and it was carried out by N2 adsorption–desorption
experiments.

Nitrogen sorption measurements and pore size distribution
curves recorded at 77 K were used to estimate the surface area and
porosity of the synthesized catalysts. Figure 3 represents nitrogen adsorption and desorption
isotherms of Cu2O and CN/Cu-5, and the corresponding BET
surface areas for the Cu2O and CN/Cu-5 composites were
estimated to be 7.73 and 9.13 m2/g, respectively. The inset
of Figure 3 shows the
pore size distribution (BJH) curves of Cu2O and CN/Cu-5
samples that give the mean pore sizes of 1.78 and 1.52 nm, respectively.
On addition of g-C3N4 to Cu2O, there
is an increase in surface area, but the pore size is seen to decrease.
This could be an outcome of the formation of the composite. It could
also be anticipated that the incorporation of g-C3N4 into Cu2O resulted in the reduction of the effective
pore size.

Figure 3 Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm and (inset) the
corresponding Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) pore size
distribution curve of Cu2O and CN/Cu-5, respectively.

3.4 Optical Properties
Having confirmed
the structure, composition, and morphology of the composites, an understanding
of how the composite formation would influence the optical properties
is elucidated by the UV-DRS studies. The UV-DRS studies would also
shed light on the electronic transitions and photocatalytic performance
of composites. The UV-DRS data for pure Cu2O and the pristine
g-C3N4 material are shown in Figure 4a,b. The absorbance plot as
a function of the wavelength for g-C3N4, which
is known to be an indirect band gap material,46 and Cu2O, a direct band gap material,47 shows an absorption edge at around 430 and 630 nm corresponding
to the band gap values of about 2.88 and 1.96 eV, respectively, as
shown in Figure 4c.
This was followed by the UV-DRS studies on the various composites.
The absorbance was used to calculate the Kubelka–Munk function F(R).48Figure 4d shows the plots
of F(R) versus energy from which
the corresponding band gap values were calculated. The F(R) plots for the composites show two distinctly
linear regions corresponding to Cu2O and g-C3N4 as expected. We focus on the Cu2O region
because it is involved in the visible light activity. It can be clearly
seen that with an increase in the g-C3N4 content
in the composites, the variation in the band edge shifts minimally
from 2.01 to 2.06 eV for the CN/Cu-1 to CN/Cu-6 composite. The composites
were attempted with a premise that the capability of the low band
gap Cu2O would be augmented by the presence of highly conducting
g-C3N4 that would lead to a significant improvement
in the photocatalytic response. From Figure 4d, we can see that the UV-DRS plots for the
composites show two distinct regions corresponding to each of the
components. The intercept corresponding to Cu2O is considered
because it is the major part component participating in the photoabsorption
process. The observation is that with an increase in the wt % of g-C3N4, the intercept shows a small shift in the absorption
edge ∼0.05 eV, suggesting that the composite still maintains
the absorption in the visible region and could be a good visible light
photocatalyst. Another factor that is also of prime concern is the
recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which
is also a major contributing factor in the photocatalytic performance.
To have an idea of the charge carrier recombination of photoexcited
species and efficiency of charge carrier trapping, transfer, and migration,
PL spectra of the synthesized materials were recorded.

Figure 4 (a,b) UV–visible
absorbance of Cu2O and g-C3N4 as
a function of wavelength. (c) Tauc plots
showing the direct band gap of Cu2O with an inset showing
the indirect band gap of g-C3N4 and (d) Kubelka–Munk
function (F(R)) of as-synthesized
different wt % of g-C3N4 on the Cu2O (CN/Cu-1 to CN/Cu-6) catalyst showing band gap measurements.

Figure 5a shows
the PL emission spectra of the synthesized Cu2O and CN/Cu-5
composites where the samples were excited by the light of 460 nm wavelength.
In the PL emission spectrum, Cu2O shows very high PL intensity,
which is suggestive of fast recombination of the photogenerated charge
carriers. Finally, a look at the PL spectra corresponding to the composite
reveals the apparent decrease in the PL intensity of the CN/Cu-5 composite,
suggesting that the charge carriers are efficiently separated, inhibiting
the recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
The ease of generating the electron–hole pair coupled with
high conductivity of g-C3N4 is anticipated to
lead to improved efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction. Further,
the interfacial combination between Cu2O and g-C3N4 in CN/Cu-5 creating suitable heterojunctions was also
beneficial for the charge separation, thereby improving the photocatalytic
performance.

Figure 5 (a) PL spectra of the as-synthesized Cu2O and
CN/Cu-5
composites as a function of wavelength. (b) Time-resolved spectra
of the as-synthesized Cu2O and CN/Cu-5 composites as a
function of time in nanoseconds.

Improved electron-transfer behavior of the as-synthesized samples
was further confirmed by time-resolved PL decays. The calculated lifetime
values are presented in Figure 5b. We can clearly see that the CN/Cu-5 composite exhibited
a longer average lifetime of about 0.41 ns than the pure Cu2O (0.26 ns), indicating that the recombination of photoexcited species
is inhibited in the composite. Finally, the CN/Cu-5 composite shows
a lower PL intensity but a greater average lifetime.29 This could be attributed to the heterojunction formation,
which inhibits electron–hole recombination, thus increasing
the lifetime of the species and decreasing the PL intensity.

3.5 Photocatalytic Activity Studies
The
UV-DRS studies of the composite materials showed the absorption edge
in the visible region of the solar spectrum, suggesting that the materials
show visible light activity and the PL and lifetime measurements showed
characteristics that would favor the photocatalytic activity. With
this background, we investigated the photocatalytic dye degradation
activity of the synthesized samples using visible light radiation.
The photocatalytic activities of the as-synthesized catalyst were
evaluated by the degradation of two model organic dyes MB and RhB
under visible light irradiation.

As a reference, a blank reaction
was first carried out where MB and RhB photodegradation without the
catalyst was exposed to light, and the results showed that the degradation
for MB and RhB was negligible even after 120 min under visible light
irradiation. Before the illumination with visible light, in order
to attain the adsorption–desorption equilibrium of the dye
on the catalyst, the dye solution along with the catalyst was kept
in dark with continuous stirring for 1 h. The photoactivity of all
the synthesized Cu2O, g-C3N4, and
g-C3N4/Cu2O catalysts was studied
from the degradation kinetics of MB and RhB under visible light irradiation,
and data are summarized in Figure 6.

Figure 6 (a,b) UV–visible absorbance of MB and RhB dyes
with the
CN/Cu-5 catalyst. (c,d) Corresponding change in the concentration
of MB and RhB as a function of time and (e,f) Linear fitting curves
of log(C/Co) vs time
“t ” for MB and RhB dyes for
Cu2O, g-C3N4, CN/Cu-1, CN/Cu-2, CN/Cu-3,
CN/Cu-4, CN/Cu-5 and CN/Cu-6 catalysts, respectively.

To have our own benchmark, the photocatalytic degradation
studies
were carried out using the synthesized Cu2O cubes on MB
dye solution in the presence of visible light irradiation. The absorbance
maximum for MB at 663 nm and RhB at 553 nm was used for the dye degradation
studies. It is seen that with Cu2O, about 15% of degradation
in the MB intensity was observed in 120 min. The experiments on MB
were then carried out using pure Cu2O, g-C3N4, and the various composite catalysts, viz., CN/Cu-1, CN/Cu-2,
CN/Cu-3, CN/Cu-4, CN/Cu-5, and CN/Cu-6, which showed a degradation
of 15, 26, 41.4, 48, 62, 75, 81, and 60%, respectively, in 120 min,
suggesting CN/Cu-5 as the best composite (Supporting Information, Figure S8). To establish if it is the unique morphology
of the composite catalyst that is responsible for the improved photocatalytic
performance, the above studies were performed on the RhB dye, a model
organic azo group dye with the absorption maxima at 553 nm and the
above experiments were repeated under visible light irradiation. Interestingly,
even for RhB, the same composite CN/Cu-5 showed the best performance
of 85.3% in 120 min with other composition catalysts (Cu2O, g-C3N4, CN/Cu-1, CN/Cu-2, CN/Cu-3, CN/Cu-4,
CN/Cu-6) as 16, 29, 36, 54, 61, 68, and 65%, respectively (Supporting Information, Figure S9).

Figure 6a,b shows
the UV–visible absorbance data for MB and RhB dyes with the
CN/Cu-5 catalyst, which is the optimum composition that showed the
best performance of 81 and 85.3% degradation after 120 min. Figure 6c,d shows the C/Co of MB and RhB as a function
of time for all synthesized catalysts, where “Co” is the initial concentration of the dye solution
and “C ” is the concentration
of the dye solution at time “t ”.
This result implies that the g-C3N4 content
is a crucial factor for improving the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4/Cu2O heterojunctions and that an
optimized ratio of the component is needed to form an efficient heterojunction
interface between the two components, which forms a potential barrier,
thereby limiting the recombination of photogenerated charges.49 The probable reason for the decrease in performance
beyond an optimum composition could be that the excess g-C3N4 which is also observed to alter the cubic morphology
as seen from the FESEM images (Figure S2e,f) could also be blocking the active sites on the Cu2O
surface, hindering the photocatalytic activity which is a well-known
phenomenon.44Figure 6e,f shows the linear correlation between
log(C/Co) and time (t) for MB and RhB, which suggests that the photodegradation
reaction follows pseudo-first-order kinetics. The pseudo-first-order
model gives the information about the degradation rate kinetics of
Cu2O, g-C3N4, and all g-C3N4/Cu2O composites for both MB and RhB photocatalytic
reactions that can be expressed as follows50  where K = pseudo-first-order
rate constant, t = reaction interval time, Co= initial concentration of the dye solution,
and C = concentration of the dye solution at time
“t ”.

The estimated values
of rate constants for all the synthesized
catalysts for MB and RhB degradation are presented in Table 2. The photocatalytic activity
of the CN/Cu-5 sample for MB degradation is found to be about eight
times higher and that for RhB is found to be about six times higher
when compared to the activity of pure Cu2O.

Table 2 Pseudo-First-Order Rate Constant Values
of g-C3N4/Cu2O with Different Amounts
of g-C3N4 for the Degradation of MB and RhB
under Visible Light Irradiation
S. No	Catalyst	Rate constants (1 × 10–3) for MB	Rate constants (1 × 10–3) for RhB	
1	Cu2O	1.33	1.81	
2	g-C3N4	1.91	2.71	
3	CN/Cu-1	3.29	3.50	
4	CN/Cu-2	4.60	4.95	
5	CN/Cu-3	5.96	5.68	
6	CN/Cu-4	7.20	6.56	
7	CN/Cu-5	11.2	12.5	
8	CN/Cu-6	9.76	7.48	
3.5.1 Identification
of the Active Species by
Scavengers
To investigate the active species involved in
the photodegradation of the composite, quenching experiments were
performed by considering iso propyl alcohol (IPA) as the hydroxy radical
scavenger (•OH) and para-benzoquinone
(p-BQ) as the superoxide anion radical scavenger
(O2•–). The experimental procedure
remains the same as that described in the previous section, except
that here along with the catalyst and dye to be degraded, scavengers
were also added simultaneously to reach the adsorption–desorption
equilibrium, and after that in the presence of light, at various intervals
the supernatant was collected and rate constants were determined using
UV–visible studies. Figure 7a,b shows the corresponding values of change in MB
and RhB concentrations in the presence of CN/Cu-5 and CN/Cu-5 with
IPA and p-BQ, respectively. Figure 7c,d shows the pseudo-rate constant values
of CN/Cu-5 and CN/Cu-5 with IPA and p-BQ under visible
light irradiation. The rate constant values for the MB degradation
by p-BQ are 4.5 times that of the CN/Cu-5 catalyst
and those by IPA are about 1.5 times that of the CN/Cu-5 catalyst.
Similarly, the rate constant values for RhB degradation in the presence
of p-BQ are 4.1 times higher and that by IPA is 3
times higher than the composite. The rate constant values of MB and
RhB are presented in Table 3. The decrease in the rate constant values for p-BQ suggests that superoxide radicals (O2•–) are the major active species responsible for the degradation of
both MB and RhB dyes.

Figure 7 (a,b) Corresponding values of change in MB and RhB concentration
in the presence of the CN/Cu-5 catalyst, CN/Cu-5 with IPA, and CN/Cu-5
with p-BQ. (c,d) Pseudo-rate constant values of the
CN/Cu-5 catalyst, CN/Cu-5 with IPA, and CN/Cu-5 with p-BQ under visible light irradiation.

Table 3 Pseudo-First-Order Rate Constant Values
of the CN/Cu-5 Catalyst, CN/Cu-5 with IPA, and CN/Cu-5 with p-BQ for the Degradation of MB and RhB under Visible Light
Irradiation
S. No.	Catalyst	Rate constant (1 × 10–3) for MB	Rate constant (1 × 10–3) for RhB	
1	CN/Cu-5	10.6	11.3	
2	CN/Cu-5 (isopropanol)	6.28	8.31	
3	CN/Cu-5 (p-BQ)	2.34	2.76	
3.5.2 LC–MS
Studies To Analyze the Degradation
of Dyes
To understand the progress of the reaction and identify
the intermediate species formed during the degradation process, we
have performed LC–MS analysis for both the dyes, that is, MB
and RhB. LC–MS is recorded for the samples degraded at time
intervals 0, 40, 80, and 120 min. The analysis procedure adopted for
each of the dyes can be described as follows:

3.5.2.1 Methylene
Blue
MB has an absorption
band of 663 nm in the visible region. The peak assigned at m/z 284 is the molecular ion peak of MB.
The retention time (tR) of this peak is
3.93 min. For the better understanding of how the degradation is taking
place, we have performed further analysis of degradation at around
the same tR.

The peak area that
is initially very intense gradually decreases from 40 to 60, and finally,
at 120 min, it reaches minimum as shown in Figure S10. The percentage of degradation is 66.6%. This confirms
that the pollutant dye is getting degraded as a function of time.
The intermediates of the dye are recorded by the mass spectra at different
positions. The obtained peaks in Figure S10 correspond to the MB-degraded products, which further decompose
into ultimate fragments such as CO2 and water as presented
in Table S1.51

3.5.2.2 Rhodamine B
RhB has an absorption
band of 553 nm in the visible region. The molecular ion peak at 443
could be assigned to RhB with the tR of
4.79 min. As observed in Figure S11, the
peak area gradually decreases with increase in time interval, suggesting
the degradation of the dye molecule. The percentage degradation was
found to be 75.3% at the end of 120 min. Mass spectra of the sample
shown in Figure S11 result in smaller fragments,
which corresponds to N-deethylated intermediates
and 2-hydroxy propanoic acid.52 The corresponding
molecular weights of the intermediates are tabulated in Table S2.

3.5.3 Catalyst
Reusability Studies
To
have an idea of the catalyst stability, reusability studies were carried
out. The catalyst was used for three repeated cycles. After each cycle,
the catalyst was washed and dried, and the experiment was repeated. Figure 8a,b shows the findings
from the recycle studies of the CN/Cu-5 catalyst using MB and RhB
under visible light irradiation. As indicated by our results, CN/Cu-5
exhibits the best photocatalytic performance under visible light.
It can be seen that even after three repeated cycles, there was <
5% reduction in activity under visible light irradiation, indicating
that the CN/Cu-5 catalyst is reasonably stable under the reaction
conditions.

Figure 8 (a,b) Recyclable experiments of the CN/Cu-5 catalyst for the degradation
of MB and RhB, respectively, under visible light irradiation for three
repeated cycles.

3.6 XPS Studies
Having confirmed the
structure and morphology of the composite, the photocatalytic studies
showed that the CN/Cu-5 composite exhibits good catalytic activity
under visible light irradiation. XPS studies were carried out to shed
light on the chemical composition on the catalyst surfaces, the oxidation
states, and any possible interaction that could influence the photocatalytic
performance. XPS studies were carried out on Cu2O, g-C3N4, and CN/Cu-5 by first recording the survey scans
and the high-resolution core-level spectra of each of the constituent
elements. Figure 9 shows
the survey scans for the three samples (Cu2O, g-C3N4, and CN/Cu-5 composites), showing the presence of Cu,
N, O, and C consistent with our findings from FESEM–EDS analysis.
This was followed by the high-resolution XPS study of the individual
core level. All spectra were calibrated to adventitious carbon at
the binding energy of 284.5 eV.53Figure 10a shows the C 1s
spectra in the three samples. Figure 10a(i) shows the C 1s core-level spectra recorded on
the Cu2O surface that could be deconvoluted and fitted
to three peaks. Apart from the adventitious alkyl-type (C–C,
C–H) sp3 carbon, two peaks at higher binding energy, centered
around 286 and 287.7 eV, are observed. The former could be attributed
to the presence of alcohol (C–OH) and/or ester (C–O–C)
functionality and the latter to the C–O functionality. The
presence of these species on the surface could be anticipated because
of the synthesis protocol involving ascorbic acid.54 The C 1s core-level spectra in g-C3N4 presented as Figure 10a(ii) show two peaks centered around 285.8 and 287.8 eV apart from
the 284.5 eV, adventitious carbon peak. The peak at 285.8 due to C–NH
and that at 287.8 eV due to C=N binding of the [(N−)2C(=N)] group are in perfect agreement with earlier
reports representing the major carbon species in g-C3N4.29 The C 1s peak in the CN/Cu-5
composite in Figure 10a(iii) also shows the presence of the three peaks as in g-C3N4, except that the peak corresponding to the C=N
peak at 287.8 eV is reduced in intensity compared to sp2-bonded C at 284.5 eV. This reduced C=N peak is proportional
to the g-C3N4 content in the composite, which
is in line with the findings of FESEM–EDS analysis.

Figure 9 XPS wide-scan
spectra of the synthesized Cu2O, g-C3N4, and CN/Cu-5 composites.

Figure 10 (a)
C 1s fitted spectra of (i) Cu2O, (ii) g-C3N4, and (iii) CN/Cu-5 composites. (b) Cu 2p fitted spectra
of (i) Cu2O and (ii) CN/Cu-5 composites. (c) N 1s fitted
spectra of (i) g-C3N4 and (ii) CN/Cu-5 composites.

Figure 10b shows
the core-level spectra of Cu 2p in the Cu2O sample showing
the characteristic 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 spin–orbit
splitting. The key observation is the broad satellite peak on the
higher binding energy side of the Cu 2p3/2 spectra, which
hints at the presence of CuO, suggesting the presence of the Cu2+ component in the Cu 2p spectrum. Accordingly, the deconvolution
of 2p3/2 revealed the presence of multiple peaks centered
around 932.05, 933.35, and 933.66 eV as shown in Figure 10b(i) that can be correlated
to the presence of Cu2O (major component) and small amount
of CuO taking a clue from the satellite peak and a miniscule amount
of Cu(OH)2.55 The latter two
components are not totally unexpected considering the possibility
of the surface interaction with the atmospheric oxygen and water vapor,
leading to the oxidation of Cu2O to CuO and the formation
of hydroxide though in disagreement from our XRD studies, which shows
the presence of only Cu2O. This disparity could be due
to the difference in the sensitivities to surface and bulk of the
two techniques. Similarly, the Cu 2p3/2 spectrum in the
case of the composite shown in Figure 10b(ii) on deconvolution also shows three
peaks at 932, 933.4, and 934.6 eV. The last two peaks are similar
to those observed in Cu2O as described in the earlier section.
The first one at 932 eV could be attributed to Cu–N in agreement
with earlier reports.56 The small peak
at 933.4 eV could be assigned to the binding energy position of Cu
in CuO, indicating its presence even in the composite, and interestingly,
the intensity is higher than that of the Cu2O peak (934.6
eV), suggesting an increased oxidation of Cu2O to CuO on
the surface during the formation of the composite. Supporting the
presence of this, CuO can be observed strongly in the satellite peak
at around 945 eV. Figure 10c(i) represents the deconvoluted N 1s XPS spectrum in which
g-C3N4 shows the three peaks, a major one at
398.31 eV assigned to N involved in the triazine ring of g-C3N4, the second one at 400.01 eV due to the tertiary nitrogen
groups, and the third one at still higher binding energy at about
403.86 eV, which could be due to the amino groups on the surface.29Figure 10c(ii) shows the N 1s core-level spectrum in the CN/Cu-5 composite,
which shows a broad peak centered around 398.2 eV with a full width
at half-maximum of nearly 2 eV, which suggests the presence of more
than one peak. Deconvolution resulted in two peaks at 398.5 and 399.2
eV corresponding to N in g-C3N4, and the peak
at 399.2 eV indicates the presence of Cu–N species in the composite
in perfect agreement with earlier reports.57 Further, the peak at about 401.0 eV could be due to the remaining
amino groups present on the surface of the composite.

The unambiguous
assignment of the peaks both in the core-level
N 1s spectra and the corresponding peak in the Cu 2p core-level spectra
to the Cu–N binding confirms the formation of some species
with Cu–N bonding in the CN/Cu-5 composite. The following section
details the HRTEM analysis that could identify the exact species on
the composite surface and interface.

3.7 High-Resolution
Transmission Electron Microscopy
The final confirmation of
the composition on the surface in the
CN/Cu-5 composite could be identified from HRTEM studies. Figure 11a shows the HRTEM
images of the CN/Cu-5 composite, which shows cubes with rough surface
and the contrast clearly identifies two distinct species, the Cu2O cube and g-C3N4. Figure 11b shows the lattice fringes
of the g-C3N4, Cu2O, and Cu–N
planes recorded at the selected area at the interface of the CN/Cu-5
composite at three different locations. For a better accuracy, sets
of three equal thickness fringes were chosen, and the average d-spacing was calculated. The first two sets give a d value of 245.3 pm corresponding to the (111) peak of Cu2O58 and 330 pm to the (002) peak
of g-C3N4,59 confirming
the presence of Cu2O and g-C3N4,
respectively. The third set of lattice fringes with a d-spacing of about 370–380 pm could not be assigned to any
of the known d-spacing of Cu2O or g-C3N4. On the basis of the XPS results as described
in the earlier section identifying the presence of Cu–N species,
the 370–380 pm d-spacing could be assigned
to the (100) plane of the Cu3N phase.60Figure 11c shows the SAED pattern of the Cu2O, g-C3N4, and Cu–N major planes, which are taken at the interface
of the CN/Cu-5 composite. The spots which are marked with yellow lines
correspond to the (220), (200), (311), and (111) planes of Cu2O with the fcc structure. The spots which are marked with
green and red colors correspond to the (002) plane of g-C3N4 and the (100) plane of Cu3N. Figure 11d shows a HAADF micrograph
of a selected area of the CN/Cu-5 composite. From the elemental analysis,
we conclude that Cu, C, and N are present and distributed in the composite.

Figure 11 (a)
HRTEM images of the as-synthesized CN/Cu-5 composite catalyst.
(b) Lattice fringes of Cu2O (1), g-C3N4(2), and Cu–N(3) in the CN/Cu-5 composite and d-spacing for Cu2O, g-C3N4, and Cu–N
are 245.3, 330, and 370–380 pm, respectively (value averaged
by selecting three fringes). (c) SAED pattern at the CN/Cu-5 interface.
(d) HAADF image of the CN/Cu-5 catalyst and corresponding elemental
mapping images of Cu, C, N, and O.

Corroborating this finding from the HRTEM studies with the conclusions
drawn from the core-level spectra of XPS, the distinct peak of Cu–N
in the Cu 2p and N 1s species could be unambiguously attributed to
the presence of Cu3N at the interface of the g-C3N4/Cu2O composite. Earlier studies had only
shown the presence of the Cu and N61 species,
but our studies confirmed a bonding between the Cu and N species,
and finally, the SAED pattern confirms the formation of Cu3N. The formation of the Cu–N phase could have been facilitated
by interaction of the lone pair of electrons of the N atom of g-C3N4 with the copper(II) ion, and a probable mechanism
for its formation could be hypothesized as described in the following
section.

3.8 Justification for the Formation of Cu3N
The detailed spectroscopic and microscopic analysis
while confirming the structure, morphology, and the electronic properties
of the composite also indicates the presence of Cu3N at
the interface of Cu2O and g-C3N4.
This observation though not totally unexpected is difficult to comprehend
in the present synthesis strategy which is a low-temperature process.
Cu3N, a metastable semiconducting material with excellent
dielectric properties, is conventionally synthesized by radio frequency
sputtering, reactive pulsed laser deposition, sputtering, etc.62−65 Some recent reports involve the use of a single source precursor
with a 3:1 stoichiometric ratio of Cu/N, resulting in the reasonably
low-temperature decomposition to obtain Cu3N.66−68 Synthesis of nitrides and oxynitrides by the nitridation of oxides
is also a reported process. The Cu3N observed by the protocol
reported falls in this category. Our in situ synthesis could also
have been facilitated by the presence of the amine functionality in
g-C3N4 in contact with the Cu2O surface,
resulting in the localized formation of Cu3N.

3.9 Photocatalytic Mechanism
On the basis
of the photocatalytic degradation experiments and the characterizations
at different stages of our study, the proposed mechanism of photocatalytic
degradation of MB and RhB dyes over the CN/Cu-5 catalyst under visible
light irradiation is presented in Scheme 1. There are two main reasons for high photocatalytic
activity in the CN/Cu-5 heterojunction. The first one is the broad-band
width of photoabsorption, leading to an increase in photogenerated
electron–hole pairs, and the second one is the catalyst morphology
and electronic structure, leading to the buildup of charge at the
heterojunction formed at the interface of CN/Cu-5, which is the effective
pathway for separation of the photogenerated charge carriers and efficient
utilization of the charge carriers in the oxidation/reduction reactions
of the dye degradation process. When p-type Cu2O and n-type
g-C3N4 are in contact with each other, the Fermi
level of p-type and n-type attains equilibrium with the band bending
seen as a potential barrier. Under the influence of the internal electric
field, the photogenerated electrons are drifted to the positive field
(n-g-C3N4) and holes are drifted toward the
negative field (p-Cu2O).59 Once
light is irradiated at the heterojunctions of the CN/Cu-5 composite,
the band bending facilitates movement of electrons from the conduction
band (CB) level of Cu2O toward the CB of g-C3N4 and the generated holes move simultaneously from the
valence band (VB) level of g-C3N4 to VB of Cu2O. The photogenerated electrons at the CB of g-C3N4 react with O2 present in the system to produce
superoxide radical anion O2•–.
At the same time, oxidation reaction occurs at the VB of Cu2O to produce OH• radical species. The photogenerated
active species OH• and O2•– participate in the degradation process of the pollutant dye. Though
both the species are responsible for the dye degradation, controlled
experiments in the presence of appropriate scavengers showed that
photogenerated electrons play a crucial role in the degradation pathway
of the two pollutant dyes MB and RhB.

4 Conclusions
In summary, we have presented a simple method to realize an optimized
g-C3N4/Cu2O composite credited with
a highly porous morphology, favorable electronic properties such as
band gap and PL, facilitating a better adsorption of the dye, and
visible light photoactivity with appreciable improvement in the performance.
Our studies reveal that the CN/Cu-5 composite with a 10 wt % of g-C3N4 in Cu2O under controlled synthesis
conditions resulted in a highly porous architecture while retaining
the cubical morphology of Cu2O. The UV-DRS studies assigned
an optical band gap Eg from 2.01 to 2.06
eV for the composites, and the PL studies showed a reduced lifetime
from 0.41 to 0.26 ns for the composite. The XPS and HRTEM studies
confirmed the formation of the heterojunction and the evidence for
the presence of Cu–N species at the interface which could be
categorically assigned to Cu3N by the “d ” spacing obtained from the SAED pattern in the HRTEM.
The composite wasevaluated by the visible light photocatalytic degradation
of two well-known dyes MB and RhB, which is much higher than earlier
reports. Scavenger experiments suggest that the photocatalytic mechanism
involves the electrons as the majority charge carriers in the degradation
of dyes. The photostability experiments confirm a minimal decrease
in the efficiency by <5% even after three repeated cycles. It can
be concluded that the improved performance could be due to several
factors such as large surface area and heterojunction formation that
builds up the charge to effectively separate the photogenerated charge
carriers that synergistically lead to excellent visible light degradation
of the dyes.

5 Experimental Section
All chemicals and reagents were of analytical grade and used as
received without any further purification. The two components of the
composite, Cu2O and g-C3N4, were
synthesized independently to serve as benchmarks, followed by an in
situ sol–gel process to synthesize the g-C3N4/Cu2O composite.

5.1 Synthesis
of Cu2O
In a
typical synthesis procedure, 0.171 g of CuCl2·2H2O was dissolved in 100 mL of deionized (DI) water in a 250
mL round-bottom flask and heated to 60 °C, at which stage 10
mL of NaOH (2 M) was added dropwise, where the solution changes color
initially from pale green to bluish green, and on complete addition
of NaOH, the total solution turns black. The first color change confirms
the formation of Cu(OH)2, which is bluish green in color,
and later the formation of CuO, which is black in color. At this stage,
the solution was heated for another 30 min, followed by addition of
10 mL of L-ascorbic acid (0.6 M) dropwise. This step is very crucial
to track the progress of the reaction visually where the black CuO
changes to orange-red color, which confirms the conversion of CuO
to Cu2O (Supporting Information, Figure S1 is the pictorial representation of reaction with the
sequence of color changes). L-Ascorbic acid acts as a reducing agent
that is responsible for the reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I). The above
conditions were maintained at 60 °C for 3 h to ensure completion
of the reaction. Subsequently, the reaction mixture was cooled, and
the product was separated by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 10 min
and washed repeatedly to eliminate any unreacted precursors or other
soluble impurities present. The product was dried overnight and analyzed
for the confirmation of composition, structure, and morphology.

5.2 Synthesis of g-C3N4
g-C3N4 was synthesized from urea by a slightly
modified procedure of an earlier report.69 Typically, 5 g of urea was dissolved in 5 mL of DI water and placed
in an oven at 70 °C overnight. The dried sample was then put
into the muffle furnace maintaining the temperature at 550 °C
for 2 h at a ramping rate of 5°/min. The synthesized compound
that appeared yellow in color was ground finely and used for the further
studies.

5.3 Synthesis of g-C3N4/Cu2O
The synthesis procedure to obtain the composite
materials, that is, g-C3N4/Cu2O,
is similar to that described above in Section 5.1 for Cu2O except that along
with CuCl2·2H2O, corresponding stoichiometric
ratios of g-C3N4 were added to obtain the different
weight percentages (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12%), respectively. The mixture
was subjected to sonication for 1 h before the addition of NaOH. This
step ensured intimate mixing of the two components and also good dispersion
of the Cu ions in the g-C3N4 layers, leading
to highly dispersed g-C3N4/Cu2O composite
particles. All the other steps in the synthesis protocol remain the
same. The as-prepared composites are sequentially labeled as CN/Cu-1,
CN/Cu-2, CN/Cu-3, CN/Cu-4, CN/Cu-5, and CN/Cu-6 as shown in Table 4.

Table 4 Synthesized Cu2O, g-C3N4, and g-C3N4/Cu2O Composites with Incorporated
wt % of g-C3N4
S.No	Sample code	wt % of g-C3N4	
1	Cu2O	Nil	
2	g-C3N4	100	
3	CN/Cu-1	2	
4	CN/Cu-2	4	
5	CN/Cu-3	6	
6	CN/Cu-4	8	
7	CN/Cu-5	10	
8	CN/Cu-6	12	
Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02031.Visual schematic
showing the sequence of color changes,
FESEM and EDS images of various composites as well as images of g-C3N4 before and after sonication, point-id image
of the studied composite, FESEM images of the studied composite at
various temperatures, UV–visible absorbance spectra of MB and
RhB for all of the nanocomposites other than those included in the
mansscript, and LC–MS of MB and RhB dyes (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02031_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
§ G.R.S. and
P.B. equally contributing authors.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
G.R.S. and
P.B. acknowledge the Department of Science
and Technology, India, for the financial assistance in the form of
the INSPIRE research fellowship (GAP-0529 and GAP-0740). All the authors
are thankful to Y. Swarnalatha and B. Arun Kumar for the analytical
support. Dr. Pratyay Basak and Dr. Gousia Begum are gratefully acknowledged
for their suggestions on the data and schematic presentation. Support
from Dr. Mudiam Mohana Krishna Reddy in the LC–MS analysis
and Dr. L Giribabu for the lifetime measurements is appreciated. All
authors sincerely thank Director, CSIR-IICT, for his encouragement
(IICT Communication no. 204).
==== Refs
References
Schneider J. ; Matsuoka M. ; Takeuchi M. ; Zhang J. ; Horiuchi Y. ; Anpo M. ; Bahnemann D. W. 
Understanding
TiO2 Photocatalysis:
Mechanisms and Materials . Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 9919 –9986 . 10.1021/cr5001892 .25234429 
Kumar S. G. ; Devi L. G. 
Review on Modified TiO2 Photocatalysis under
UV/Visible Light: Selected Results and Related Mechanisms on Interfacial
Charge Carrier Transfer Dynamics . J. Phys. Chem.
A 
2011 , 115 , 13211 –13241 . 10.1021/jp204364a .21919459 
Ong C. B. ; Ng L. Y. ; Mohammad A. W. 
A review
of ZnO nanoparticles as
solar photocatalysts: Synthesis, mechanisms and applications . Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 
2018 , 81 , 536 –551 . 10.1016/j.rser.2017.08.020 .
Fang Y. ; Li Z. ; Xu S. ; Han D. ; Lu D. 
Optical properties
and photocatalytic activities of spherical ZnO and flower-like ZnO
structures synthesized by facile hydrothermal method . J. Alloys Compd. 
2013 , 575 , 359 –363 . 10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.05.183 .
Kim S. ; Hwang S.-J. ; Choi W. J. 
Visible
Light Active Platinum-Ion-Doped
TiO2 Photocatalyst . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2005 , 109 , 24260 –24267 . 10.1021/jp055278y .16375422 
Chen Y. ; Shen C. ; Wang J. ; Xiao G. ; Luo G. 
Green Synthesis
of Ag–TiO2 Supported on Porous Glass with Enhanced
Photocatalytic Performance for Oxidative Desulfurization and Removal
of Dyes under Visible Light . ACS Sustainable
Chem. Eng. 
2018 , 6 , 13276 –13286 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b02860 .
Chang Q.-Q. ; Cui Y. W. ; Zhang H.-H. ; Chang F. ; Zhu B.-H. ; Yu S.-Y. 
C-doped ZnO decorated
with Au nanoparticles constructed from the
metal-organic framework ZIF-8 for photodegradation of organic dyes . RSC Adv. 
2019 , 9 , 12689 –12695 . 10.1039/c8ra09985e .
Bao Z. ; Yuan Y. ; Leng C. ; Li L. ; Zhao K. ; Sun Z. 
One-Pot Synthesis of Noble Metal/Zinc
Oxide Composites with Controllable
Morphology and High Catalytic Performance . ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 16417 –16425 . 10.1021/acsami.7b02667 .28467040 
Pham V. V. ; Bui D. P. ; Tran H. H. ; Cao M. T. ; Nguyen T. K. ; Kim Y. S. ; Le V. H. 
Photoreduction route for Cu2O/TiO2 nanotubes
junction for enhanced photocatalytic
activity . RSC Adv. 
2018 , 8 , 12420 –12427 . 10.1039/c8ra01363b .
Zou X. ; Fan H. ; Tian Y. ; Yan S. 
Synthesis of Cu2O/ZnO
hetero-nanorod arrays with enhanced visible light-driven photocatalytic
activity . CrystEngComm 
2014 , 16 , 1149 –1156 . 10.1039/c3ce42144a .
Liu K.-I. ; Hsueh Y.-C. ; Chen H.-S. ; Perng T.-P. 
Mesoporous TiO2/WO3 hollow fibers with interior interconnected
nanotubes for photocatalytic application . J.
Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 5387 –5393 . 10.1039/c3ta15007k .
Adhikari S. ; Sarkar D. ; Madras G. 
Highly efficient
WO3-ZnO
mixed oxides for photocatalysis . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 11895 –11904 . 10.1039/c4ra13210f .
Mu J. ; Chen B. ; Zhang M. ; Guo Z. ; Zhang P. ; Zhang Z. ; Sun Y. ; Shao C. ; Liu Y. 
Enhancement
of the Visible-Light Photocatalytic Activity of In2O3-TiO2 Nanofiber Heteroarchitectures . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 424 –430 . 10.1021/am201499r .22148464 
Liu H. ; Hu C. ; Zhai H. ; Yang J. ; Liu X. ; Jia H. 
Fabrication
of In2O3/ZnO@Ag nanowire ternary composites
with enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 37220 –37229 . 10.1039/c7ra04929c .
Gao S. ; Zhang J. ; Li Y. ; Jiao S. ; Yuan J. ; Wang G. ; Li X. ; Wang J. ; Yu Q. ; Zhang X. 
Synthesis of a ZnO/CdS/TiO2
Composite with Enhanced Photocatalytic
Activity and Stability by a Simple Solution-Based Method . Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 
2018 , 2018 , 1916 –1920 . 10.1002/ejic.201800072 .
Boppella R. ; Basak P. ; Manorama S. V. 
Viable Method for the Synthesis of
Biphasic TiO2 Nanocrystals with Tunable Phase Composition
and Enabled Visible-Light Photocatalytic Performance . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2012 , 4 , 1239 –1246 . 10.1021/am201354r .22339883 
Boppella R. ; Anjaneyulu K. ; Basak P. ; Manorama S. V. 
Facile Synthesis
of Face Oriented ZnO Crystals: Tunable Polar Facets and Shape Induced
Enhanced Photocatalytic Performance . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 4597 –4605 . 10.1021/jp311443s .
Joshi S. ; Ram Kumar C. B. ; Jones L. A. ; Mayes E. L. H. ; Ippolito S. J. ; Sunkara M. V. 
Modulating
Interleaved ZnO Assembly with CuO Nanoleaves
for Multifunctional Performance: Perdurable CO2 Gas Sensor
and Visible Light Catalyst . Inorg. Chem. Front. 
2017 , 4 , 1848 –1861 . 10.1039/c7qi00474e .
Ma J. ; Zhou C. ; Long J. ; Ding Z. ; Yuan R. ; Xu C. 
Reducing the barrier effect of graphene sheets on a Ag cocatalyst
to further improve the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 . RSC Adv. 
2018 , 8 , 14056 –14063 . 10.1039/c8ra02268b .
Li X. ; Yu J. ; Wageh S. ; Al-Ghamdi A. A. ; Xie J. 
Graphene in Photocatalysis:
A Review . Small 
2016 , 12 , 6640 –6696 . 10.1002/smll.201600382 .27805773 
Upadhyay R. K. ; Soin N. ; Roy S. S. 
Role of graphene/metal oxide composites
as photocatalysts, adsorbents and disinfectants in water treatment:
A review . RSC Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 3823 –3851 . 10.1039/c3ra45013a .
Yan Y. ; Miao J. ; Yang Z. ; Xiao F.-X. ; Yang H. B. ; Liu B. ; Yang Y. 
Carbon nanotube catalysts: recent advances in synthesis,
characterization and applications . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2015 , 44 , 3295 –3346 . 10.1039/c4cs00492b .25855947 
Olowoyo J. O. ; Kumar M. ; Jain S. L. ; Babalola J. O. ; Vorontsov A. V. ; Kumar U. 
Insights into Reinforced
Photocatalytic Activity of the CNT–TiO2 Nanocomposite
for CO2 Reduction and Water Splitting . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2019 , 123 , 367 –378 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b07894 .
Zhao Z. ; Sun Y. ; Dong F. 
Graphitic
carbon nitride based nanocomposites: a review . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 15 –37 . 10.1039/c4nr03008g .25407808 
Chen X. ; Zhou B. ; Yang S. ; Wu H. ; Wu Y. ; Wu L. ; Pan J. ; Xiong X. 
In situ construction
of an SnO2/g-C3N4 heterojunction
for enhanced
visible-light photocatalytic activity . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 68953 –68963 . 10.1039/c5ra11801h .
Vattikuti S. V. P. ; Reddy P. A. K. ; Shim J. ; Byon C. 
Visible-Light-Driven
Photocatalytic Activity of SnO2–ZnO Quantum Dots
Anchored on g-C3N4 Nanosheets for Photocatalytic
Pollutant Degradation and H2 Production . ACS Omega 
2018 , 3 , 7587 –7602 . 10.1021/acsomega.8b00471 .31458911 
Fu J. ; Yu J. ; Jiang C. ; Cheng B. 
g-C3N4-Based
Heterostructured Photocatalysts . Adv. Energy
Mater. 
2017 , 8 , 1701503 10.1002/aenm.201701503 .
Peng B. ; Zhang S. ; Yang S. ; Wang H. ; Yu H. ; Zhang S. ; Peng F. 
Synthesis and characterization of
g-C3N4/Cu2O composite catalyst with
enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation . Mater. Res. Bull. 
2014 , 56 , 19 –24 . 10.1016/j.materresbull.2014.04.042 .
Zuo S. ; Xu H. ; Liao W. ; Sun L. ; Han D. ; Zan J. ; Zhang B. ; Li D. ; Xia D. 
Acid-treated g-C3N4-Cu2O composite
catalyst with enhanced
photocatalytic activity under visible-light irradiation . Appl. Organomet. Chem. 
2018 , 32 , e444810.1002/aoc.4448 .
Yan X. ; Xu R. ; Guo J. ; Cai X. ; Chen D. ; Huang L. ; Xiong Y. ; Tan S. 
Enhanced photocatalytic
activity
of Cu2O/g-C3N4 heterojunction coupled
with reduced graphene oxide three-dimensional aerogel photocatalysis . Mater. Res. Bull. 
2017 , 96 , 18 –27 . 10.1016/j.materresbull.2016.12.009 .
Liang S. ; Zhou Y. ; Cai Z. ; She C. 
Preparation of porous
g-C3N4/Ag/Cu2O: a new composite with
enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity . Appl. Organomet. Chem. 
2016 , 30 , 932 –938 . 10.1002/aoc.3523 .
Mitra A. ; Howli P. ; Sen D. ; Das B. ; Chattopadhyay K. K. 
Cu2O/g-C3N4 nanocomposites: An insight
into the band structure tuning and catalytic efficiencies . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 19099 –19109 . 10.1039/c6nr06837e .27824200 
Surikanti G. R. ; Bandarapu A. K. ; Sunkara M. V. 
A Facile One Pot Synthesis of Cu2O@TiO2: A Nanocomposite Catalyst for Enhanced Visible
Light Driven Photocatalysis . ChemistrySelect 
2019 , 4 , 2249 –2257 . 10.1002/slct.201900003 .
Zhang W. ; Zhou L. ; Deng H. 
Ag modified g-C3N4 composites with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic
activity
for diclofenac degradation . J. Mol. Catal. A:
Chem. 
2016 , 423 , 270 –276 . 10.1016/j.molcata.2016.07.021 .
Jayaraman T. ; Raja S. A. ; Priya A. ; Jagannathan M. ; Ashokkumar M. 
Synthesis of a visible-light active
V2O5–g-C3N4 heterojunction
as an
efficient photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical material . New J. Chem. 
2015 , 39 , 1367 –1374 . 10.1039/c4nj01807a .
Lin J. ; Liu Y. ; Wang Y. ; Jia H. ; Chen S. ; Qi J. ; Qu C. ; Cao J. ; Fei W. ; Feng J. 
Designed formation
of NiO@C@Cu2O hybrid arrays as battery-like electrode with
enhanced electrochemical performances . Ceram.
Int. 
2017 , 43 , 15410 –15417 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2017.08.082 .
Yu H. ; Yu J. ; Liu S. ; Mann S. 
Template-free Hydrothermal Synthesis
of CuO/Cu2O Composite Hollow Microspheres . Chem. Mater. 
2007 , 19 , 4327 –4334 . 10.1021/cm070386d .
Brandt I. S. ; Martins C. A. ; Zoldan V. C. ; Viegas A. D. C. ; Dias
da Silva J. H. ; Pasa A. A. 
Structural and optical properties
of Cu2O crystalline electrodeposited films . Thin Solid Films 
2014 , 562 , 144 –151 . 10.1016/j.tsf.2014.04.013 .
Tong Z. ; Yang D. ; Zhao X. ; Shi J. ; Ding F. ; Zou X. ; Jiang Z. 
Bio-inspired synthesis
of three-dimensional porous
g-C3N4@carbonmicroflowers with enhanced oxygen
evolution reactivity . Chem. Eng. J. 
2018 , 337 , 312 –321 . 10.1016/j.cej.2017.12.064 .
Tong Z. ; Yang D. ; Sun Y. ; Nan Y. ; Jiang Z.  Tubular g-C3N4 Isotype Heterojunction:
Enhanced Visible-Light Photocatalytic Activity through Cooperative
Manipulation of Oriented Electron and Hole Transfer . Small 2016 , 12 ,
DOI:4093 −4101 10.1002/smll.201601660 .27348710 
Tong Z. ; Yang D. ; Shi J. ; Nan Y. ; Sun Y. ; Jiang Z. 
Three-Dimensional Porous Aerogel
Constructed by g-C3N4 and Graphene Oxide Nanosheets
with Excellent Visible-Light
Photocatalytic Performance . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 25693 –25701 . 10.1021/acsami.5b09503 .26545166 
Ji C. ; Yin S.-N. ; Sun S. ; Yang S. 
An in situ mediator-free
route to fabricate Cu2O/g-C3N4 type-II
heterojunctions for enhanced visible-light photocatalytic H2 generation . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2018 , 434 , 1224 –1231 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.11.233 .
Ansari A. ; Ali A. ; Asif M. ; Shamsuzzaman S. 
Microwave-assisted MgO NP catalyzed
one-pot multicomponent synthesis of polysubstituted steroidal pyridines . New J. Chem. 
2018 , 42 , 184 –197 . 10.1039/c7nj03742b .
Xu M. ; Han L. ; Dong S. 
Facile Fabrication
of Highly Efficient g-C3N4/Ag2O Heterostructured
Photocatalysts with
Enhanced Visible-Light Photocatalytic Activity . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 12533 –12540 . 10.1021/am4038307 .24206347 
Qiu J. ; Feng Y. ; Zhang X. ; Zhang X. ; Jia M. ; Yao J. 
Facile stir-dried preparation
of g-C3N4/TiO2 homogeneous composites
with enhanced photocatalytic activity . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 10668 –10674 . 10.1039/c7ra00050b .
Tu D. ; Liao H. ; Deng Q. 
Synthesis of BN/g-C3N4 as Visible-light-driven Photocatalysts for Degradation of
Different Organic Pollutants . ChemistrySelect 
2018 , 3 , 7170 –7177 . 10.1002/slct.201800921 .
De
Jongh P. E. ; Vanmaekelbergh D. ; Kelly J. J. 
Cu2O:
Electrodeposition and Characterization . Chem.
Mater. 
1999 , 11 , 3512 –3517 . 10.1021/cm991054e .
Praus P. ; Svoboda L. ; Dvorský R. ; Reli M. ; Kormunda M. ; Mančík P. 
Synthesis
and properties of nanocomposites of WO3 and exfoliated
g-C3N4 . Ceram. Int. 
2017 , 43 , 13581 –13591 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2017.07.067 .
Ge L. ; Han C. ; Liu J. 
Novel visible
light-induced g-C3N4/Bi2WO6 composite photocatalysts for efficient
degradation of methyl orange . Appl. Catal.,
B 
2011 , 108–109 , 100 –107 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2011.08.014 .
Reddy T. N. ; Begum G. ; Rana R. K. 
A bio-inspired
strategy for the interfacial
assembly of graphene oxide with in situ generated Ag/AgCl: designing
sustainable hybrid photocatalysts . Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 
2017 , 19 , 7624 –7630 . 10.1039/c6cp07854k .28252117 
Houas A. ; Lachheb H. ; Ksibi M. ; Elaloui E. ; Guillard C. ; Herrmann J.-M. 
Photocatalytic degradation
pathway of methylene blue
in water . Appl. Catal., B 
2001 , 31 , 145 –157 . 10.1016/s0926-3373(00)00276-9 .
Yu K. ; Yang S. ; He H. ; Sun C. ; Gu C. ; Ju Y. 
Visible Light-Driven Photocatalytic Degradation of Rhodamine B over
NaBiO3: Pathways and Mechanism . J.
Phys. Chem. A 
2009 , 113 , 10024 –10032 . 10.1021/jp905173e .19705819 
Wang W. ; Huang X. ; Wu S. ; Zhou Y. ; Wang L. ; Shi H. ; Liang Y. ; Zou B. 
Preparation of p–n junction
Cu2O/BiVO4 heterogeneous nanostructures with
enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity . Appl. Catal., B 
2013 , 134–135 , 293 –301 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2013.01.013 .
Yu L. ; Li G. ; Zhang X. ; Ba X. ; Shi G. ; Li Y. ; Wong P. K. ; Yu J. C. ; Yu Y. 
Enhanced Activity and
Stability of Carbon-Decorated Cuprous Oxide Mesoporous Nanorods for
CO2 Reduction in Artificial Photosynthesis . ACS Catal. 
2016 , 6 , 6444 –6454 . 10.1021/acscatal.6b01455 .
Biesinger M. C. 
Advanced
analysis of copper X-ray photoelectron spectra . Surf. Interface Anal. 
2017 , 49 , 1325 –1334 . 10.1002/sia.6239 .
Sithole R.
K. ; Machogo L. F. E. ; Airo M. A. ; Gqoba S. S. ; Moloto M. J. ; Shumbula P. ; Van Wyk J. ; Moloto N. 
Synthesis and characterization
of Cu3N nanoparticles using pyrrole-2-carbaldpropyliminato
Cu(II) complex and Cu(NO3)2 as single-source
precursors: the search for an ideal precursor . New J. Chem. 
2018 , 42 , 3042 10.1039/c7nj05181f .
Chang Y.-M. ; Leu J. ; Lin B.-H. ; Wang Y.-L. ; Cheng Y.-L.  Comparison of H2 and NH3 Treatments for Copper Interconnects . Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2013 , 2013 , Article ID 1 –7 , 10.1155/2013/825195 
Zhang Z. ; Song R. ; Yu Z. ; Huang W. 
Crystal-plane effect
of Cu2O templates on compositions, structures and catalytic
performance of Ag/Cu2O nanocomposites . CrystEngComm 
2019 , 21 , 2002 –2008 . 10.1039/c8ce02164c .
Jiang J. ; Zou J. ; Wee A. T. S. ; Zhang W. 
Use of Single-Layer g-C3N4/Ag
Hybrids for Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 34599 10.1038/srep34599 .27687573 
Meng F.-L. ; Zhong H.-X. ; Zhang Q. ; Liu K.-H. ; Yan J.-M. ; Jiang Q. 
Integrated Cu3N porous nanowire array electrode for high-performance
supercapacitors . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2017 , 5 , 18972 –18976 . 10.1039/c7ta05439d .
Reichert M. D. ; White M. A. ; Thompson M. J. ; Miller G. J. ; Vela J. 
Preparation
and Instability of Nanocrystalline Cuprous Nitride . Inorg. Chem. 
2015 , 54 , 6356 –6362 . 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b00679 .26091284 
Majumdar A. ; Drache S. ; Wulff H. ; Mukhopadhyay A. ; Bhattacharyya S. ; Helm C. ; Hippler R. 
Strain Effects
by Surface
Oxidation of Cu3N Thin Films Deposited by DC Magnetron
Sputtering . Coatings 
2017 , 7 , 64 10.3390/coatings7050064 .
Maruyama T. ; Morishita T. 
Copper nitride
thin films prepared by radio-frequency
reactive sputtering . J. Appl. Phys. 
1995 , 78 , 4104 –4107 . 10.1063/1.359868 .
Kamat H. ; Wang X. ; Parry J. ; Qin Y. ; Zeng H. 
Synthesis
and Characterization of Copper-Iron Nitride Thin Films . MRS Adv. 
2016 , 1 , 203 –208 . 10.1557/adv.2015.13 .
Gallardo-Vega C. ; de la Cruz W. 
Study of the
structure and electrical properties of
the copper nitride thin films deposited by pulsed laser deposition . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2006 , 252 , 8001 –8004 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2005.10.007 .
Takashi N. ; Hiromichi H. ; Taka-aki H. ; Takeo E. 
Preparation of Copper
Nitride (Cu3N) Nanoparticles in Long-Chain Alcohols at
130–200 °C and Nitridation Mechanism . Inorg. Chem. 
2014 , 53 , 710 –715 . 10.1021/ic4011604 .24369736 
Dick K. ; Dhanasekaran T. ; Zhang Z. ; Meisel D. 
Size-dependent melting
of silica-encapsulated gold nanoparticles . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
2002 , 124 , 2312 –2317 . 10.1021/ja017281a .11878986 
Mudunkotuwa I. A. ; Rupasinghe T. ; Wu C.-M. ; Grassian V. H. 
Dissolution of ZnO
Nanoparticles at Circumneutral pH: A Study of Size Effects in the
Presence and Absence of Citric Acid . Langmuir 
2012 , 28 , 396 –403 . 10.1021/la203542x .22122742 
Dong F. ; Wu L. ; Sun Y. ; Fu M. ; Wu Z. ; Lee S. C. 
Efficient
synthesis of polymeric g-C3N4 layered materials
as novel efficient visible light driven photocatalysts . J. Mater. Chem. 
2011 , 21 , 15171 –15174 . 10.1039/c1jm12844b .

