
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02642ArticleTuning the Multifunctional Surface Chemistry of Reduced
Graphene Oxide via Combined Elemental Doping and Chemical Modifications Yap Pei Lay †‡Kabiri Shervin ‡§Auyoong Yow Loo ∥Tran Diana N. H. †‡Losic Dusan *†‡†School
of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials and ‡ARC Hub for Graphene
Enabled Industry Transformation, The University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia§ School
of Agriculture, Food and Wine, The University
of Adelaide, PMB 1, Waite
Campus, Glen Osmond, SA 5064, Australia∥ Research
& Business Partnerships, Research Services, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia* E-mail: dusan.losic@adelaide.edu.au.11 11 2019 26 11 2019 4 22 19787 19798 16 08 2019 28 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
synthesis of graphene materials with multiple surface chemistries
and functionalities is critical for further improving their properties
and broadening their emerging applications. We present a simple chemical
approach to obtain bulk quantities of multifunctionalized reduced
graphene oxide (rGO) that combines chemical doping and functionalization
using the thiol-ene click reaction. Controllable modulation of chemical
multifunctionality was achieved by simultaneous nitrogen doping and
gradual chemical reduction of graphene oxide (GO) using ammonia and
hydrazine, followed by covalent attachment of amino-terminated thiol
molecules using the thiol-ene click reaction. A series of N-doped
rGO (N-rGO) precursors with different levels of oxygen groups were
synthesized by adjusting the amount of reducing agent (hydrazine),
followed by subsequent covalent attachment of cysteamine via the thermal
thiol-ene click reaction to yield different ratios of mixed functional
groups including N (pyrrolic N, graphitic N, and aminic N), S (thioether
S, thiophene S, and S oxides), and O (hydroxyl O, carbonyl O, and
carboxyl O) on the reduced GO surface. Detailed XPS analysis confirmed
the disappearance of unstable pyridinic N in cys-N-rGO and the reduction
degree threshold of N-rGO for effective cysteamine modification to
take place. Our study establishes a strong correlation between different
reduction degrees of N-rGO with several existing oxygen functional
groups and addition of new tunable functionalities including covalently
attached nitrogen (amino) and sulfur (C–S–C, C=S,
and S–O). This simple and versatile approach provides a valuable
contribution for practical designing and synthesis of a broad range
of functionalized graphene materials with tailorable functionalities,
doping levels, and interfacial properties for potential applications
such as polymer composites, supercapacitors, electrocatalysis, adsorption,
and sensors.

document-id-old-9ao9b02642document-id-new-14ao9b02642ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Graphene
has sparked tremendous research interest over the last
two decades owing to its unique 2D structure, high surface area, extraordinary
electron mobility, notable mechanical strength, thermal conductivity,
and structural and optical properties in a diverse range of applications
across industrial sectors including composites, supercapacitors, batteries,
fuel cells, inks, protective and functional coatings.1 Many of these applications require specific chemical functionalizations
of graphene to achieve its integration with other materials, which
are different in nature including polymers, organic molecules, biomolecules,
metals, semiconductors, nanoparticles, or other 2D materials. Chemical
functionalization of graphene powder materials is particularly needed
to make stable graphene–water dispersions for improved processability
to achieve better incorporation of these materials for engineering
new functional and hybrid materials needed for broad applications.2

Many functionalization strategies of graphene
have been explored
over the last two decades based on covalent or noncovalent chemical
binding of organic molecules and functional groups containing oxygen
(i.e., graphene oxide), nitrogen (amino), sulfur (mercapto), fluorine,
or hydrogen to the carbon atoms. These methods are mostly inherited
from the developments of “older” carbon nanoforms such
as fullerenes and carbon nanotubes that have paved the way for the
functionalization of graphene and its derivatives today. Graphene
oxide (GO), prepared from the oxidation and exfoliation of graphite
in the presence of strong acids and oxidants, is one of the most popular
forms of chemically (oxygen) functionalized graphene used not only
as an important precursor to convert the intermediate, reduced GO
(rGO), into produce bulk graphene but also for other applications
such as membranes, sensors, and composites. GO addresses some inherent
disadvantages of pristine graphene such as high hydrophobicity, chemical
inertness, and a lack of dispersibility in water. However, GO also
has some drawbacks such as low conductivity and amorphous structure,
which hinder its broader applications.2 Hence, a balance is required between the desirable properties of
both GO and graphene to harness the benefits of both materials. Controllable
reduction and chemical functionalization are considered as a rational
approach in achieving these requirements is needed for many applications.

Chemical functionalization of graphene bulk materials can significantly
lead to the generation of a new type of graphene-based materials,
which facilitates the unprecedented properties of graphene with other
compound classes.3 Among many explored
reactions, the thiol-ene click route based on the targeted attack
on the sp2 carbon using thiol radicals generated by the
action of either heat or light appears to be one of the most efficient
and promising strategies to achieve these tasks.4,5 The
assimilation of graphene with the thiol-ene click reaction has recently
gained remarkable attention in advanced macromolecular engineering
and materials chemistry given the attributes that this approach is
highly efficient, versatile, simple, catalyst-free, and proceeds in
benign solvents under mild reaction conditions in addition to the
high yield conversion.4,6

On the other hand, elemental
doping of graphene with selected elements
(with N, S, B, and P) has been recognized as a desirable approach
for controlling the band gap and tailoring the electrical and electron
transport properties, as well as electrocatalytic performances, of
graphene. This approach offers a unique way to extend the limited
zero band-gap energies of graphene by the hybridization of electronic
orbitals from sp2 to sp3 and opening large band
gaps (>4 eV), which are important for many applications.7−9 Numerous strategies were reported for individual (N) or co-doping
(N and S) to insert the dual atoms simultaneously into the carbon
network using gaseous, hydrothermal, and solvothermal processes with
different precursors such as ammonia,10 thiophene,10l-cysteine,11 hydrazine,12 ammonium
thiocyanate,13 etc. These hybrid materials
are used as catalysts to enhance the electrocatalytic oxygen reduction,14 as the anode material to improve the adsorption
capability of sodium ions in sodium-ion batteries,15 and as metal-free cathode catalysts for the application
in direct biorenewable alcohol fuel cells.10 However, there are still limited studies on combining these two
concepts to target the heteroatom insertion in the graphene lattice
with surface functionalization, which can be regarded as a highly
valuable approach for engineering of a broad range of bulk graphene
hybrid materials needed for many emerging applications.

The
aim of this study was to demonstrate the combination of simultaneous
binary-heteroatom doping and click chemistry to create bulk multifunctional
graphene materials with tunable surface chemistry for more diverse
electronic, sensing, catalytic, and adsorption properties and applications
following our previous study, which showed promising performance for
water remediation by applying multifunctional graphene composites
synthesized via the thiol-ene click reaction.19 In this work, the controllable modulation of chemical multifunctionality
is proposed by consequent elemental doping and gradual chemical reduction
of GO using ammonia and hydrazine followed by covalent attachment
of amino-terminated thiol molecules (cysteamine) via the thermal thiol-ene
click reaction, which has not been addressed previously. Our primary
focus is targeted on the fundamental understanding of the changes
in the surface property to identify the chemical species (functional
groups) of the thiol-ene-clicked graphene composites using reduced
graphene oxide (rGO) with varied oxidation levels. The formation of
the resulting derivative of nitrogen-doped and cysteamine-functionalized
reduced graphene oxide (cys-N-rGO) with varying levels and configurations
of oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur atoms within the graphene framework
was confirmed by a series of characterization techniques including
UV–vis, Raman, XRD, TGA–DTA, FTIR, and XPS analyses.
Results from this study underpin the fundamental mastery of controllable
functionalization to tailor the properties of graphene and its derivatives
using the combination of simultaneous binary-heteroatom doping and
click chemistry, which is needed for a broad range of applications.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Simultaneous Nitrogen Doping
and Gradual Chemical
Reduction of GO
In the first experiment, synthesis of N-doped
reduced graphene oxide with a controllable level of oxygen functional
groups was performed by simultaneous doping and chemical reduction
of GO using ammonia and hydrazine (details of synthesis conditions
are included in Table S1, Supporting Information).
A series of characterization results including TEM, SEM, and XPS are
summarized in Figure 1 and Table S2 to confirm the structural,
elemental, and chemical compositions of the prepared N-doped rGO precursors. Figure 1A presents the SEM
and TEM images of the typical structure of GO sheets with sizes in
the nanometer range and thickness of a few graphene layers, which
are used for the entire experiments. The wrinkled and fairly smooth
surface of GO can be clearly observed from its SEM image, whereas
the ultrathin stacked GO layers can be seen from the TEM image as
incorporated in the inset of Figure 1A.

Figure 1 (A) FESEM image with the inset displaying the TEM image
of exfoliated
GO nanosheets used for the synthesis of N-doped rGO precursors. Plots
of (B) XPS survey spectra with characteristic C 1s, O 1s, and N 1s
peaks; high-resolution XPS of (C) C 1s scan and (D) N 1s scan with
background subtracted; (E) C/O atomic ratios, and (F) C/N atomic ratios
for GO, N-GO, and N-rGO precursors (low, mild, and high).

Figure 1B
shows
a series of survey XPS spectra recorded from GO (control), N-doped
GO (N-GO), and N-doped rGO (N-rGO) with different levels of reduction
(low, mild, and high) showing characteristic C 1s, O 1s, and N 1s
peaks detected at ∼285, ∼532, and ∼400 eV, respectively,
indicating the presence of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen on the surface
of N-doped precursors. A series of individual high-resolution peaks
showing carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen peaks for all prepared N-GO and
N-rGO precursors to confirm their chemical functionalities are depicted
in Figures 1C,D and S1, respectively. These spectra clearly demonstrated
changes of the peak intensity as a result of the reduction in oxygen
functionalities and the increased N-doping effect after treatment
with ammonia and hydrazine. Normalized atomic percentages of C, O,
and N calculated from the area of the survey spectra under C 1s, O
1s, and N 1s peaks, respectively, and their aspect ratios are summarized
in Table S2 and Figure 1E and F, correspondingly. The XPS results
showed that the highest amount of oxygen was found in control GO,
with nearly 32% of oxygen detected. As expected, the atomic percentage
of oxygen was slightly reduced to ∼31% for N-GO and progressively
to ∼20% for the N-rGO precursor with the highest reduction
degree as the amount of hydrazine and reduction time increased. The
carbon-to-oxygen (C/O) atomic ratio determined from the XPS survey
scans (Figure 1E) confirmed
these changes in reduction, showing a gradual increase in the value
(2.13, which is typical for GO) to 2.21 (N-GO), 2.52 (low N-rGO),
2.84 (mild N-rGO), and 3.80 (high N-rGO), which verified the gradual
reduction of GO. From the literature, it is reported that upon reduction,
the C/O atomic ratio can increase to 12 for highly reduced GO, depending
on the type and amount of the reducing agent and the reduction conditions
used.20−22 However, the primary goal in this work was having
a series of rGO precursors with different levels of oxygen functional
groups (C/O atomic ratio between 2 and 4), which suited the next functionalization
step to attach thiol organic molecules with amino functional groups.

In addition to the decreased oxygen level, the use of hydrazine
treatment with ammonia on GO provides simultaneous N-doping by the
integration of nitrogen atoms into the graphene network, while ammonia
can also be used to change the charge state of rGO sheets, preventing
the agglomeration of graphene sheets upon reduction.23,24 The doping of N in the graphene network is confirmed from the XPS
survey spectra and reflected by the progressive increase of N concentrations
(Table S2) and surface-carbon-to-nitrogen
(C/N) atomic ratio, as illustrated in Figure 1F. Contrary to the increasing trend of the
C/O atomic ratio, the C/N atomic ratio of rGO precursors was pronouncedly
decreased from the control to N-rGO of high reduction degree, implying
the growing amount of N incorporated into the rGO network as the reduction
degree increased. By adjusting the amount of hydrazine and reduction
time progressively, the atomic percentage of O was found to decrease
visibly, whereas that of N was increased simultaneously. This finding
suggests that the elemental compositions of O and N on GO can be easily
dictated by varying the amount of hydrazine and reduction time.

Further peak fitting analysis of the high-resolution XPS scans
of C 1s, O 1s, and N 1s was carried out to determine the chemical
environment and species present on the surface of GO, N-GO, and N-rGOs.
To ensure that the peak fitting outcomes remain mathematically and
chemically realistic, we prudently fitted and deconvoluted the high-resolution
C 1s peaks into two main components (nonoxygenated and oxygenated
carbon) after imposing parameter constraints as mentioned in the characterization
section on their respective position and full width at half-maximum
(fwhm) of the components. The nonoxygenated C components include C–C
(sp3 C, ∼285 eV), C=C (sp2 C,
∼284.6 eV), C–N (∼285.7 eV), and C–S (∼285.2
eV), while the oxygenated C components consist of C–O–C
(epoxide, ∼287.2 eV), C–OH (hydroxyl, ∼286.6
eV), C=O (carbonyl, ∼288.1 eV), and HO–C=O
(carboxyl, ∼289.0 eV). It is noteworthy that the component
assignments are conforming to the reported literature, despite that
some slight shifts in terms of the position of the components were
observed after the reduction treatment.25−29 The peak deconvolution studies of high-resolution
C 1s spectra of GO (Figure S2A), N-GO,
and N-rGO are displayed in Figure 2A–D. Control GO and N-doped GO (N-GO) showed
typical characteristics of C 1s species for GO with strongly oxidized
surface and oxygenated functional groups predominantly made up of
epoxides (C–O–C), carboxyls (HO–C=O),
carbonyls (C=O), and hydroxyls (C–OH). A higher peak
intensity exhibited by C–O–C (287 eV) relative to C–C
(285 eV) is an indication of an ordinary well-oxidized GO decorated
with a plethora of oxygen functional groups under a harsh oxidization
process.30,31 The deconvoluted C 1s spectra of other rGOs
with low, mild, and high reduction degrees showed the same oxygen-containing
groups, however with weaker peak intensities, clearly demonstrating
a gradual reduction of oxygen groups. For low and mild N-rGOs (Figure 2B and C), the spectra
show similar peaks of carbon species C–O–C (287 eV)
and the C–C peak (285 eV) with the only difference that peak
intensities are decreased. However, for high N-rGO, its spectrum (Figure 2D) exhibits relatively
weak C–O–C (287 eV) than C–C (285 eV) peaks,
revealing the formation of a highly reduced graphene structure, which
is in agreement with the previous reports.18,32 In agreement with the C 1s narrow-scan analysis, the O 1s XPS plots
of all of these samples characterized by their respective binding
energies also indicated the formation of different oxygen-containing
groups including quinone, aromatic C=O, aliphatic C–O,
and aromatic C–O, which are detailed in Figures S2B (GO) and S3(N-GO and
N-rGOs). On the other hand, a very intense C=C peak (284 eV)
is observed for these materials for the product with the highest degree
of graphene reduction, as illustrated in Figure 2D.

Figure 2 Plots of deconvoluted high-resolution spectra
of (A–D) C
1s and (E–H) N 1s, and possible chemical structures determined
from XPS deconvolution analysis of (I) N-GO, N-rGOLow,
and N-rGOMild and (J) N-rGOHigh after simultaneous
N-doping and reduction by ammonia and hydrazine (not drawn on scale).

The high-resolution and peak deconvolution studies
of N 1s spectra
positioned at around 401 eV for N-GO and N-rGOs are presented in Figure 2E–H. These
results obviously indicate a considerable buildup of nitrogen species
in all of the hydrazine-reduced GO. It could be seen that N-GO low
and mild N-rGOs could be resolved into three different nitrogen-bonding
configurations within the graphene lattice including pyridinic N (bonded
to sp2 C in a hexagonal configuration) at around 398.1–399.5
eV, pyrrolic N (bonded to sp3 C in a pentagonal configuration)
at 399.8–401.2 eV, and quaternary or graphitic N, which is
sp3-hybridized found at 401.1–402.7 eV, as depicted
in Figure 2E–H.24 According to Park et al., the peak at around
400 eV can be allotted to pyrazoline groups (non-aromatic 5-membered
rings), which can be further resolved into two N 1s peaks at 398.6
and 400.5 eV representing two N atoms in different chemical environments,
as illustrated in Figure 2E–H.12 Interestingly, the
high N-rGOs exhibited dissimilar chemical N environments with their
corresponding narrow peaks deconvoluted into pyridinic N at 399.3
eV, pyrrolic N at 400.6 eV, and N-oxides of pyridinic nitrogen at
around 403 eV.24 The N-oxides detected
in high N-rGO are commonly attached to nitrogen-containing dangling
bonds or physisorbed species, which is concordant with the findings
in the reported literature.7,33 As proposed by Stankovich
et al., hydrazine is well known to feasibly ring-open epoxides and
form hydrazine alcohols. Although the chemical environment of N species
was not resolved in their work, the significant nitrogen incorporation
in the graphene network further rendered the intriguing query on how
the mechanism of deoxygenation and re-establishment of the graphene
conjugated network can take place via hydrazine treatment. The mechanism
of simultaneous deoxygenation and insertion of N in the graphene structure
still remains an open question.21 In the
work conducted by Park et al., hydrazine treatment of GO was proven
to insert an aromatic nitrogen moiety in a 5-membered ring at the
platelet edges of graphene, and the aromaticity of the pyrazole moiety
can enhance electron conduction in the rGO due to the reduced band
gap and localized electronic states of the sp2 configuration
of N. They also proposed that hydrazine-reduced/substituted graphene
oxide is a more precise description for GO treated by hydrazine due
to the doped N in the graphene structure.12 Meanwhile, it was reported that hydrazine also resulted in nitrogen
doping, evidenced by the XPS technique with about 2.86 at % nitrogen
content detected as well as resolved pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, and
graphitic N discovered in the graphene structure, demonstrating the
excellent capacity stability and improved cyclic performance in lithium-sulfur
batteries.34 Xie et al. found that graphene
designed with high percentages of doped pyridinic N and pyridone N
(6.8–8 at % of total nitrogen content) can be achieved by the
combination of ammonia and hydrazine under hydrothermal treatment,
which enhanced the capacitance and cycling performance for electrochemical
applications.33 Based on the literature
references and the detailed XPS analysis of high-resolution C 1s,
N 1s, and O 1s in the present study, a series of N-doped rGOs with
varying oxygen levels can be simply prepared using the chemical reduction
approach, and the chemical structure of the obtained N-doped precursors
is schematically proposed in Figure 2I and J. It should be highlighted that hydrazine exhibits
dual roles as a reductant and an N-dopant for graphene oxide, which
enables simultaneous N-doping and GO reduction to achieve rGO with
different functionalities including several types of N groups (pyridinic,
pyrolytic, and graphitic N) combined with different levels of O groups
(quinone, aliphatic, and aromatic O).33,34

To further
verify these observations and the proposed chemical
structure of the prepared precursors, XRD, UV–vis, FTIR, Raman,
and DTA analyses were carried out and are presented in Figure 3. XRD patterns in Figure 3A reveal the characteristic
peaks for GO (2θ = 10.78°) and N-GO (2θ = 10.76°),
which were found to progressively reduce and disappear in all of the
prepared N-rGOs. A new broad peak at around 2θ = 24° was
observed for high-reduction-degree N-rGO, indicating the re-establishment
of the conjugated rGO network, which could be attributed to the elimination
of the oxygen-containing groups intercalated between the GO layers
after the reduction reaction.35,36 Meanwhile, a weak peak
at around 2θ ∼ 43° was also found for high-reduction-degree
N-rGO, which could be associated with the turbostratic band of the
disordered carbon materials.37 The obvious
peak shift observed in the XRD patterns of GO and N-rGO from approximately
11 to 24° further affirmed the presence of different reduction
degrees of the N-rGOs due to varied oxygen contents and doped N that
resulted after the chemical reduction treatment, as evidenced by the
XPS analysis discussed previously.

Figure 3 Plots of (A) XRD, (B) UV–vis, (C)
FTIR, (D) DTA, (E) Raman
analyses, (F) ID/IG ratio measured from Raman spectra of GO, N-GO, and N-rGO
(low, mild, and high) samples prepared by simultaneous doping and
reduction using hydrazine and ammonia.

The reduction degree of the N-rGO precursors was also confirmed
by the UV–vis technique, and their respective UV–vis
spectra are illustrated in Figure 3B, which all show a single absorption peak attributed
to the π–π* transition of a C=C bond in
the aromatic carbon. The strong absorption plasmon peak recorded for
the N-GO at 227 nm is found to be almost similar to that for GO at
230 nm, suggesting that oxygen groups were not significantly reduced
by the ammonia treatment. On the other hand, different reduction degrees
of N-rGOs exhibited significant variations in their absorption maxima,
which can also be visibly recognized by the color of their dispersions
(Figure S4, Supporting Information). In Figure 3B, the absorption
maximum has progressively shifted to the right, moving from GO to
N-rGO of high reduction degree. The red-shifted spectra to a longer
wavelength indicated that there is a gradual increase in π-electron
density and the restoration of sp2 carbon in the graphene
network.38,39 Complementing with the outcomes from XPS
and XRD techniques, the UV–vis results strongly suggest the
formation of N-rGO with different reduction degrees.

The FTIR
spectra as depicted in Figure 3C show the characteristic bands of GO and
N-GO precursors in the regions of 3100–3500, 1720, 1380, and
1218–1230 cm–1, which can be ascribed to
the stretching mode of hydroxyl and the vibration modes of the carbonyl,
C–OH, and epoxy groups, respectively.40 These transmittance bands are also present in the N-rGO precursors
but were slightly shifted after the hydrazine treatment.40 It can be observed that the intensity of the
O–H (3000–3500 cm–1) and C–O–C
(1218–1230 cm–1) bands gradually decreased
and eventually the bands disappeared, particularly for N-rGO of the
highest reduction degree. This result indicated that oxygen moieties
such as O–H and C–O–C groups can be prominently
removed when using a large amount of hydrazine for a prolonged reaction
time. This finding is consistent with the previous studies, where
hydrazine is effective in removing in-plane oxygen functional groups
such as epoxy and hydroxyls, leaving the edge moieties such as carboxyls
and carbonyls on GO.39,40 The declining peak intensity
particularly for OH and C–O–C groups on rGO precursors
clearly manifested that N-rGO precursors with gradual removal of oxygen
groups were effectively created, in good agreement with the outcomes
from the C/O atomic ratio determined using the XPS technique.

The thermal stabilities of GO, N-GO, and N-rGO samples were evaluated
by both TGA and differential thermogravimetric (DTA) analyses (Figures S5 and 3D, respectively).
Overall, it could be detected that all N-rGOs exhibited higher thermal
stability relative to GO, which reflects the success of the reduction
process of GO and the chemical reduction via the removal of attached
oxygen functional groups by hydrazine. The calculated derivative mass
change at ∼200 °C (from 1.057 to 0.052 wt %/°C for
GO control to N-rGO with the highest reduction degree) displayed in
the DTA plots (Figure 3D) verified that the oxygen moieties were removed progressively by
controlled chemical reduction using hydrazine. This peak can be ascribed
to the decomposition of labile oxygen-containing functional groups,
such as hydroxyl (−OH), epoxy [−CH (O) CH−],
and carboxyl (−COOH) groups, between the layers of GO nanosheets.32 This finding demonstrates that the effective
stepwise oxygen reduction degree was introduced into the N-rGO, which
correlates well with the XPS elemental composition, UV–vis,
FTIR, and XRD results discussed in the previous section. More details
on the mass-loss events are provided in Figure S5, Supporting Information.

Finally, Raman spectra (Figure 3E) of GO, N-GO, and
N-rGO with different reduction
degrees were recorded to confirm the structural features and defects
formed during the doping and chemical reduction processes. Two apparent
peaks at approximately 1344 and 1591 cm–1 corresponding
to the D and G bands, respectively, are observed, in which the D band
arises due to the breathing mode of aromatic rings, which requires
a defect for its activation, whereas the G band can be related to
the bond stretching of sp2 carbon pairs in both rings and
chains.39 The intensity ratio of the D
to G bands, ID/IG (measure for the degree of disorder), as illustrated in the
inset of Figure 3E,
shows that the ID/IG ratio increases gradually from control GO to N-rGO with the
highest reduction degree. The steady rise of ID/IG values strongly reflects that
defects were created in the reduced samples due to the removal of
oxygen groups and doping of nitrogen atoms during the reduction of
GO using hydrazine.39,41,42 This finding shows that the amount of defect sites present in the
N-rGO precursors of different reduction degrees can be effectively
controlled via the amount of hydrazine and reaction time used.

2.2 Chemical Functionalization of N-rGO via the
Thermal Thiol-ene Click Reaction
In the second step, we performed
further chemical functionalization on N-doped GO and N-rGO with different
levels of reduction using amino-terminated thiol (cysteamine) via
thiol-ene click chemistry to demonstrate the synthesis of graphene
with a broad range of multifunctionalities, which includes doped nitrogen,
oxygen, amino, and sulfur functional groups. A series of characterization
methods were used again including XPS, XRD, FTIR, TGA–DTA,
and Raman analyses to confirm the structural and chemical composition
changes.

The XPS survey spectra of click-chemistry cysteamine-functionalized
N-rGOs (cyst-N-rGO) are shown in Figure 4A, and the corresponding peaks of C 1s, O
1s, N 1s, and S 2p located at ∼285, ∼400, and ∼164
eV, respectively (Figure 4B–D), clearly indicate the successful incorporation
of new nitrogen and sulfur species into the rGO framework. The atomic
concentrations of all the cysteamine-functionalized N-GO and N-rGOs
are tabulated in Table S3, and the elemental
ratios of C/O, C/N, and C/S were also calculated to determine the
chemical composition of cys-N-rGOs after the covalent attachment of
cysteamine, which are depicted in Figure 4B–D. These figures and ratio numbers
indicate that the C/O ratio of cys-N-rGOs increases when compared
to that of their respective N-rGO intermediates. It should be noted
that the C/O atomic ratio of cys-N-rGOs was found to be in the range
of 3.50–6.17 compared to 2.21–3.80 for N-rGOs, revealing
that a further reduction event had occurred with more oxygen atoms
being removed in the treatment using cysteamine, indicating the role
of cysteamine both as covalently attaching molecules and as an additional
reducing agent in this thiol-ene click chemical reaction. Meanwhile,
a substantial drop of the C/N atomic ratio is observed in cys-N-rGOs
(Figure 4C) when compared
to their respective N-rGO precursors (Figure 1F) visibly indicating that cysteamine is
adding more nitrogen into the graphene network by having amino groups
on their ends. It is important to mention that the C atomic percentage
of functionalized cys-N-rGO increases (Table S3) when compared to that of its respective N-rGO precursors (Table S2), signifying the effective functionalization
of N-rGOs and attachment of new cysteamine molecules since each cysteamine
molecule has two C atoms, which enhanced the total amount of C. An
interesting trend showed that cysteamine modification tends to attach
more nitrogen per carbon atom onto N-GO compared with N-rGO. An increasing
C/S atomic ratio was observed for cys-N-GO (2.62 at %S) and cys-N-rGO
with low (2.45 at %S) and mild (2.28 at %S) reduction levels, implying
that a slightly greater amount of sulfur per carbon atom was grafted
into the graphene network. Interestingly, high cys-N-rGO with N-rGO
of the highest reduction degree exhibited the lowest amount of sulfur
being anchored. The significant trend found in the C/N and C/S ratios
of cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGOs could be related to the presence of oxygen
functionalities on the GO surface, which may imply the presence and
the role of oxygen groups as activation agents of C=C in the
thiol-ene click reaction, as also highlighted by Luong et al.6

Figure 4 (A) Plots of XPS survey spectra with characteristic C
1s, O 1s,
and N 1s peaks and high-resolution XPS of (B) C 1s scan, (C) N 1s
scan, and (D) S 2p with background subtracted and their corresponding
C/O, C/N, and C/S atomic ratios before and after cysteamine functionalization
of N-GO and N-rGOs.

The peak deconvolution
studies of the C 1s profile for cys-N-rGOs
are displayed in Figure 5A–D. A significant decrease of the C=C signal (284
eV) was observed for all cys-N-rGOs relative to their respective N-rGO
precursors (Figure S6, Supporting Information),
suggesting that C=C species were prominently involved in the
functionalization using cysteamine. On the other hand, a substantial
decline in the C–O–C (287 eV) peak was also noticed
for cys-N-GO and mild and low cys-N-rGOs in contrast to their respective
N-rGO precursors. The cysteamine-directed reduction events, i.e.,
hydrogenation and oxygen removal on these carbon species, could be
greatly responsible for the diminished signals.43 The dramatic decline of the C–O–C peak could
be linked to the reduction process, whereas the obvious fall trend
observed for the C=C bond can be associated with the thiol-ene
reaction, which targeted the sp2 C on the graphene network
to click the −SH group on the cysteamine molecule via the thermal
thiol-ene click reaction. Remarkably, the C–S species (285
eV) was detected in all the spectra of cys-N-rGOs. The formation of
C–S species in all cys-N-rGOs can be prominently attributed
to the successful anchoring of cysteamine onto the graphene oxide
surface via the thermal thiol-ene click reaction. Apparently, the
results showed that both the reduction and modification processes
occurred simultaneously. This discovery divulges and confirms the
synergistic role of cysteamine not only as an effective functionalization
agent but also as a reducing agent, which was evident in our studies
and has been supported in the literature.43

Figure 5 Plots
of deconvoluted high-resolution (A–D) C 1s, (E–H)
N 1s, and (I–L) S 2p peaks of cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGOs formed
from their corresponding N-rGO precursors at different reduction levels.

From the N 1s deconvolution analysis, two major
N 1s peak components
at around 399.8–401.2 and 401.1–402.7 eV (Figure 5E–H), which could be
assigned to pyrrolic and graphitic N, respectively, were detected
in all of the cys-N-rGO derivatives. Simultaneously, the binding energies
positioned at around 399 and 401 eV are also known to be attributed
to C–NH2 and N–H bonds (N connected to a
single C), respectively, which could contribute to the same peaks
as found in the high-resolution N 1s spectra of all cys-N-rGOs.24,44−46 The presence of C–NH2 and N–H
in all final products revealed that cysteamine molecules have been
successfully clicked on their respective N-rGOs via the thiol-ene
click reaction, as verified in the previous analyses. For cys-N-GO,
an additional peak at 403.4 eV due to the formation of oxide-N species
on top of the pyrrolic and quaternary N was also identified in its
N 1s narrow spectrum (Figure 5E).46 On the other hand, only two
dominant peaks, corresponding to pyrrolic (399.8–401.2 eV)
and graphitic (401.1–402.7 eV) nitrogen, were observed for
the rest of the cys-N-rGO samples.24 Further
quantification details for the N1 scan can be found in Table S4, Supporting Information. It should be
highlighted that pyridinic N, which was initially present after hydrazine
treatment, disappeared in all of the derivatives after the cysteamine
functionalization. Despite the low amount of pyridinic N present initially
after the N-doping process, the diminished pyridinic N could also
be linked to the favorable degradation of this N species in the form
of NH3 after recombination with NH2 through
the diffusion during the cysteamine functionalization.47 It has been reported that the control of the
type of N species formed in the doped graphene network plays a very
important role in affecting the electrochemical behavior of supercapacitors.48,49 From the previous studies, pyrrolic N is found to increase the wettability
of graphene in aqueous electrolytes besides its enhanced contribution
to pseudocapacitance. Quaternary N can give rise to better electron
transfer by decreasing the intrinsic resistance of carbon, particularly
at high current loads, which affects the energy storage performance
of supercapacitors.11,49 In the presence of a lone pair
of electrons and higher electronegativity (relative to carbon) exhibited
by nitrogen, the doped N can unreservedly play its roles as the Lewis
basic sites to enhance the charge transfer, which aids in disrupting
the chemically inert graphene network in terms of its electronic properties.42 Moreover, the doped N can also act as an electron
pair donor to form a metal complex with heavy metals for water purification
applications.19 Therefore, the development
of the cys-N-rGOs with controlled content and tailorable N species,
as described in this contribution, is important to provide insights
into the material design for applications with a specific interest.

The peak deconvolution analysis of S 2p for cys-N-rGOs was performed
by fitting the S 2p doublet (2p3/2 and 2p1/2) at a peak area ratio of 2:1 with 1.2 eV of spin–orbit splitting
between these two doublet peaks, and the results are depicted in Figure 5I–L. In general,
all cys-N-rGOs displayed similar peak profiles, except for N-GO, which
exhibited an extra shoulder in the contour with the presence of a
variety of S species including thioether S, C–S–C, (164.0
eV), thiophene S (163.6 eV), thioketone C=S (165.1 eV), and
SO3 (166.7 eV), as shown in Figure 5I.50−52 For cys-N-rGO with low reduction
level, only sulfur species of C–S–C and C=S were
found, whereas C–S–C and S–O species were discovered
in the rest of the cys-N-rGOs, as demonstrated in Figure 5I–L. One of the most
apparent findings from this high-resolution S 2p deconvolution analysis
is the detection of C–S–C species in all of the cys-N-rGOs,
as evidenced by its corresponding doublet (S 2p3/2 at ∼163.9
eV and S 2p1/2 at ∼165 eV).52 The quantification details of each S species are included in Table S5, Supporting Information. The formation
of C–S–C species on the surface of the final products
strongly proves the successful event of clicking −SH species
from the cysteamine molecule on the N-rGO precursors via the surface-functionalized
thermal thiol-ene click reaction.52 Given
the chemical structure of cysteamine as HS–CH2CH2–NH2, the detection of the C–S–C
peak on all cys-N-rGOs clearly revealed that the cysteamine molecules
are neither physically attached nor chemically bonded via amino groups
but covalently bonded through the active functional group (−SH)
to the rGO surface via the thermal thiol-ene click reaction, as proposed
in this work. Our results also indicate that the fixed GO/cysteamine
ratio used in this study is the main factor to determine the amount
of S being grafted onto the surface of graphene, with the reduction
degree threshold at the ratio of hydrazine/GO = 0.15 for 24 h reduction
time. Moreover, owing to the lone pair of electrons possessed by sulfur,
the sulfur-rich graphene composites including cys-N-GOs prepared herein
can also act as an additional functional group providing an electron
pair to form coordinate bonds that can be used for many applications
such as the binding of the heavy metals (electron pair acceptor) for
remediation of contaminants in the environment.19,53 As reported in the literature, the variation of chemical states
of sulfur specifically related to the oxidized sulfur species incorporated
into the carbon network plays significant roles in modulating the
surface chemistry for designing high-performance capacitors.48,54 In our present study, it can be clearly observed that a combination
of different S environments existing in a tunable amount was created
when GO with different reduction degrees was subjected to the thiol-ene
click reaction. This is an important finding and a new strategy for
the design of graphene materials with properties of both graphene
and GO with a specific combination of chemical elements and functionalities
required for catalysis, environmental remediation, and energy storage
applications.

Based on the XPS analysis of high-resolution peaks
of C 1s, N 1s,
and S 2p and literature data, the chemical functionalities of the
obtained cys-N-rGO derivatives are identified and schematically presented
in Figure 6. It could
be seen that by attaching the amino-terminated thiol molecules on
N-doped rGO via thiol-ene click chemistry, it is possible to create
a more complex multifunctionality on graphene with additional amino
and sulfur functional groups. To further confirm the presence of nitrogen,
oxygen, and sulfur functional groups in the prepared cys-N-rGO derivatives,
further analyses using Raman, FTIR, TGA–DTA, and XRD techniques
were performed, with their results summarized in Figures 7 and S7.

Figure 6 Proposed general chemical structure with main functional groups
detected on the multifunctional derivative, cys-N-rGO, formed from
the N-rGO precursor.

Figure 7 Plots of (A) FTIR, (B)
DTA, and (C) Raman analyses and (D) ID/IG ratio for cys-N-GO
and cys-N-rGOs formed from their corresponding N-GO and N-rGO precursors
at different reduction levels.

The presence of functional groups in cys-N-rGOs was investigated
using FTIR analysis, and the results are displayed in Figure 7A. The first transmittance
signal we can locate in the spectra is the −OH group stretching
vibrations at ∼3400 cm–1 where this peak
can also be found in GO, N-GO, and low and mild N-rGO precursors (Figure 3C). Among all of
the cys-N-rGOs synthesized, this specific −OH moiety was observed
only in the spectrum of cys-N-GO, implying that some hydroxyl groups
that are originally present in its respective N-GO precursor (Figure 3C) still remained
intact in the cys-N-GO network after cysteamine functionalization.
From the FTIR analysis, it can be observed that the chemical reduction
by cysteamine via the removal of the O–H group is incomplete
for cys-N-GO, whereas it is complete for the rest of the cys-N-rGOs.
This discovery is in good correlation with the XRD result of all cys-N-rGOs
discussed in Figure S7A, Supporting Information.
Furthermore for all of the cys-N-rGOs studied, the appearance of a
new peak near 1435 cm–1 (enlarged Figure 7A), which can be attributed
to C–S vibrations, was also detected.55 A detailed inspection of the two peaks positioned at 1384 and 1548
cm–1 (enlarged Figure 7A), which can be attributed to the stretching
vibrations of C–N and N–H, respectively, was also identified.56−58 It is essential to note that all the peaks corresponding to N–H,
C–N, and S–H vibrations were not detected in the FTIR
spectra of their respective N-rGO precursors. Moreover, no absorption
associated with the stretching vibration of the S–H group,
commonly recorded between 2500 and 2600 cm–1 was
observed, signifying the breaking of the S–H bond in cysteamine
to covalently attach on the reduced graphene sheets via thiol-ene
click functionalization.59,60 Coupled with the strong
evidence from these observations, we can infer the successful grafting
of the cysteamine functional groups onto the graphene framework via
the thermal thiol-ene click reaction, which converted the N-GO and
N-rGO precursors to cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGOs, respectively.

The
TGA–DTA graphs of all cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGOs (Figures S7B and 7B) show
a stepwise decreasing trend at approximately 200 °C in which
this pattern is very similar to that of their respective N-rGO precursor
thermograms (Figure 3D). The percentage mass loss for all cys-N-rGOs in this temperature
range is significantly lower compared to that of their respective
N-rGO precursors, which implies that the amount of the oxygen moiety
in cys-N-rGOs is lesser compared to that in their respective N-rGO
precursors. Cysteamine was proven, with its reducing ability, to carry
out reduction by removing the labile oxygen functional group, which
could explain this result of mass loss observed at approximately 200
°C. The thermograms of cys-N-rGOs also demonstrated a final steep
mass loss starting at around 600–700 °C in which this
could be linked to the pyrolysis of the more stable and labile oxygen-containing
residuals attached to the skeleton of carbon atoms. It was observed
that the final mass loss for most of the cys-N-rGOs (Figure 7B) produced was slightly shifted
to a higher temperature compared to that of their respective N-rGO
precursors (Figure 3D). This implies that higher thermal stability can be attained for
the end product, cys-N-rGOs, in contrast to their respective N-rGO
precursors, which can be explained by a higher reduction rate induced
by additional reduction by cysteamine. The appearance of a weak shoulder
at around 250 °C for all cys-N-rGOs (Figure 7B) and its absence in the thermograms of
their respective N-rGO precursors (Figure 3D) further confirm that the N-rGO precursors
have been successfully modified with cysteamine. This weak signal
can be highly correlated to the detachment of cysteamine from cys-N-rGOs,
which evidently suggests the successful incorporation of cysteamine
into cys-N-rGOs sheets. This finding is also consistent with our previous
study showing cysteamine can also be anchored onto graphene oxide
via a one-pot modification approach.19

The structural features and defects formed in the end product,
cys-N-rGOs, investigated using Raman spectroscopy (Figure 7C) with two intense characteristic
bands (D band at 1342 cm–1 and G band at 1589 cm–1), were identified. The intensity ratios of the D
and G bands (ID/IG) for all cys-N-rGOs were calculated and compared with those
of their respective N-rGOs demonstrated in Figure 7D. In comparison to all N-rGO precursors,
it can be seen that all cys-N-rGOs exhibit higher ID/IG values. This observation
revealed that more defects were being created in cys-N-rGOs after
the modification using cysteamine. Additionally, the amount of defect
sites generated in cys-N-rGOs is highly dependent on the reduction
degree of N-rGO precursors used, as manifested by the enhanced ID/IG ratio after
cysteamine-directed modification. In short, the higher the reduction
degree of the N-rGO precursor used, the more defect sites eventually
created in the end product, cys-N-rGOs, which is an indication of
successful anchoring of cysteamine on the surface of the N-rGO precursor.

3 Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated
a simple modification approach
of graphene materials that combines chemical doping and functionalization,
which is able to control their chemical composition and level of multiple
functional groups with O, N, and S elements. The synthesis of a broad
range of graphene precursors (N-rGO) with different functionalities
was performed by simultaneous nitrogen doping and gradual chemical
reduction of GO using ammonia and hydrazine, followed by covalent
attachment of amino-terminated thiol molecules (cysteamine) using
the thiol-ene click reaction. Controllable modulation of the chemical
multifunctionality of synthesized cys-N-doped rGO (cys-N-rGO) derivatives
with different levels of oxygen groups (carboxyl, hydroxyl, and carbonyl)
and different ratios of mixed functional groups including N (pyrrolic
N, quaternary N, and aminic N) and S (thioether S, thiophene S, and
S oxides) is confirmed by comprehensive characterization techniques
including UV–vis, FTIR, Raman, XRD, TGA–DTA, and XPS
analyses. Thorough XPS analysis showed the introduction of doped binary
nitrogen- and sulfur-containing groups, in particular of pyrrolic
N and quaternary N as well as thioether S and thiophenic S, whose
level can be controlled by modulating the reduction degree of GO prior
to modification using cysteamine. In addition, the XPS analysis also
confirmed the disappearance of unstable pyridinic N after cysteamine
modification, which unveils the protocol for the future design of
N-doped graphene derivatives, in particular for oxygen reduction catalysts.
This study provides mechanistic insights into the role of reduction
degree of GO to be used as a synthetic platform combined with other
functionalization methods such as click chemistry to create graphene
materials with complex chemical multifunctionality and desirable interfacial
properties such as doping level needed for a wide range of polymer
composites, sensors, environmental, catalysis, and energy storage
applications.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
Natural graphite rocks
were obtained from a local mining site (Uley, Eyre Peninsula, South
Australia, Australia), crushed into powder using a benchtop ring mill
(Rocklabs), and sifted using a 25 μm sieve. Potassium permanganate
(Sigma-Aldrich), 85% w/w phosphoric acid (Chem-Supply), 98% sulfuric
acid (Chem-Supply), 30% hydrogen peroxide (Chem-Supply), 36% hydrochloric
acid (Chem-Supply), 64–65% hydrazine monohydrate (Sigma-Aldrich),
30% ammonia (Chem-Supply), cysteamine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich), N,N-dimethylforamide (DMF, Chem-Supply),
2,2-azobis-2-methylpropionitrile (AIBN, Sigma-Aldrich), hexane (Chem-Supply),
ethyl acetate (Chem-Supply), and ethanol (Chem-Supply) were used directly
without prior purification.

4.2 Preparation of Graphene
Oxide (GO)
GO was synthesized by the oxidation of graphite
according to improved
Hummer’s method.16 Briefly, sieved
graphite powder (≤25 μm, 3.0 g) was added to a round-bottom
flask containing KMnO4 (18.0 g). The acid mixture (9:1
H2SO4/H3PO4) was cooled
to 4 °C and slowly poured onto the graphite powder in the presence
of KMnO4 and stirred at room temperature before heating
(60 °C, 16 h) to form a thick paste. The formed paste was cooled
to room temperature; poured onto ice cubes in the presence of hydrogen
peroxide (3 mL); washed with distilled water and 30% hydrochloric
acid, followed by distilled water and ethanol. The product was centrifuged
at 4200 rpm for each successive wash. The obtained GO was dispersed
in ethanol and freeze-dried to give a brown product.17

4.3 Preparation of N-Doped
Reduced Graphene Oxide
(N-rGO)
A series of N-rGO samples with several reduction
degrees were prepared by the reduction of GO according to reported
methodology by Morimoto et al.18 Prepared
GO (400 mg) was dispersed in distilled water (2 mg mL–1) in a glass reaction flask. Hydrazine monohydrate (32, 6030, and
120 μL) was added into separate reaction flasks containing GO
dispersion. The mixtures were sonicated (10 min), ammonia (80 μL)
was added, and the mixtures were heated with magnetic stirring (90
°C, 2 h). N-GO was prepared as a control without hydrazine monohydrate.
Subsequently, the as-formed products were cooled to room temperature,
washed several times with distilled water and ethanol, and dried (40
°C, 24 h) prior to characterizations.

4.4 Synthesis
of Cysteamine-Functionalized N-GO
and N-rGO (cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGO)
Cysteamine-functionalized
N-rGO (cys-N-rGO) was prepared as previously described in our work
with some modifications.19 N-rGO (100 mg)
was added to DMF (50 mL), sonicated (30 min) to obtain a homogeneous
dispersion, and purged with N2 gas (30 min) to create an
inert environment. The cysteamine reaction mixture consisting of AIBN
(200 μL), cysteamine hydrochloride (200 mg), and DMF (100 mL)
was sonicated (30 min) and added into the N-rGO dispersion. The dispersion
was purged with N2 gas for further 30 min and transferred
into a round-bottom flask, which was sealed and heated (70 °C,
12 h) in a silicon oil bath. Similarly, N-GO was treated with the
cysteamine reaction mixture to produce cys-N-GO. The resulting product
was cooled to room temperature and washed with a mixture of 1:1 hexane/ethyl
acetate, followed by ethanol and distilled water. The product was
then freeze-dried and characterized to obtain the corresponding cysteamine-functionalized
derivatives.

4.5 Characterizations
Prepared GO, N-GO,
N-rGO, cys-N-GO, and cys-N-rGO were characterized using several techniques
including UV–visible absorbance (UV–vis), Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) (Quanta 450 FEG, FEI) at an operating voltage
of 10 kV and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Tecnai G2 Spirit)
at an operating voltage of 100 kV were used to characterize the morphology
of the GO. UV–vis analysis was conducted using a Shimadzu UV–vis
spectrometer (UV-1601) in the range of 200–800 cm–1 to probe the reduction degree of the samples prepared. All of the
samples were diluted in ethanol prior to measurements at room temperature,
with at least three independent runs of reproducible results obtained
for each sample. FTIR spectroscopy (Nicolet 6700, Thermo Fisher) in
the range of 500–4000 cm–1 was carried out
under attenuated total reflection (ATR) mode to identify the functional
groups in the materials. Raman spectroscopy (LabRAM HR Evolution,
Horiba Jvon Yvon Technology, Japan) with a 532 nm laser (mpc 3000)
as the excitation source was used to determine the vibrational properties
of the materials. All of the spectra were recorded with an integration
time of 10 s, each on three different spots. An X-ray diffractometer
(600 Miniflex, Rigaku, Japan) equipped with a Cu X-ray tube was used
for analysis on GO, N-doped and cysteamine-functionalized materials
to unveil the composition of the materials in the range of 2θ
= 5–80° at 40 kV and 15 mA with a 10° min–1 scan speed. The thermal stabilities, reduction degrees, and functionalization
levels of the materials were investigated using TGA (Q500, TA Instruments)
under a nitrogen atmosphere with the samples heated to 900 °C
at a heating rate of 10 °C min–1. The elemental
compositions and chemical states of the materials were determined
using XPS [AXIS Ultra_DLD (Kratos, U.K.) equipped with a monochromatic
Al Kα radiation source (hv = 1486.7 eV)] at
225 W, 15 kV, and 15 mA. XPS wide scans were acquired at 0.5 eV step
size over 10–1100 eV at the pass energy of 160 eV, whereas
the narrow scans were obtained at a 0.1 eV step size and pass energy
of 20 eV. The deconvolution and fitting of peaks were performed using
Casa XPS software. All of the core-level spectra involved in this
work were calibrated to the primary peak (C–C/C–H peak)
of the adventitious carbon at 285 eV; the relative sensitivity factor
(RSF) values were set at 0.278 for C 1s, 0.668 for S 2p, 1.8 for N
1s, and 2.93 for O 1s. Meanwhile, the components in C 1s were deconvoluted
by referencing to the adventitious carbon (C–C peak), with
their respective fwhm confined between 1 and 1.2 eV; a constraint
was also imposed on the position of the C 1s components relative to
the adventitious carbon (C–C peak), and the area of the satellite
peak was restricted to 0.069634 relative to the C=C peak.

Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02642.Synthesis conditions
for N-doped and cysteamine-functionalized
derivatives; high-resolution XPS O 1s scans for GO, N-GO, and N-rGOs;
normalized atomic percentages of C, O, and N for GO, N-GO, and N-rGOs;
high-resolution XPS deconvoluted C 1s and O 1s peaks for GO; high-resolution
XPS deconvoluted O 1s peaks for N-GO and N-rGOs; photographs of GO,
N-GO, and N-rGO with varied reduction degrees dispersed in ethanol;
TGA plots of GO, N-GO, and N-rGO precursors; normalized atomic percentages
of C, O, and N for cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGOs; plots of relative contributions
of C 1s C=C and C–O–C components for N-GO, N-rGOs,
cys-N-GO, and cys-N-rGOs; relative surface concentrations of nitrogen
and sulfur species of cys-N-rGOs; XRD patterns of cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGOs;
and TGA plots of cys-N-GO and cys-N-rGOs (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02642_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the funding by the ARC Research Hub
for Graphene Enabled Industry Transformation (IH150100003). We thank
Dr Nathan Stanley for the drawing of the chemical structure, Australian
Microscopy and Microanalysis Research Facility (AMMRF) for XPS analysis,
and Adelaide Microscopy for the access of SEM and TEM facilities.

Abbreviations
GOgraphene oxide

N-GOnitrogen-doped graphene oxide

N-rGOnitrogen-doped
reduced graphene oxide

cys-N-rGOcysteamine-functionalized nitrogen-doped reduced graphene
oxide

H2SO4sulfuric acid

H3PO4phosphoric acid

H2O2hydrogen peroxide

HClhydrochloric acid

C2H7NScysteamine

DMFN,N-dimethylforamide

TEMtransmission electron
microscopy

SEMscanning
electron microscopy

FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy

TGAthermogravimetric analysis

DTAderivative thermogravimetric
analysis

XRDX-ray
diffraction

XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

UV–visUV–visible spectroscopy

ID/IGintensity ratio of D and G bands

C/Ocarbon-to-oxygen
atomic ratio

C/Ncarbon-to-nitrogen atomic ratio

C/Scarbon-to-sulfur atomic ratio

Ccarbon

Ooxygen

Ssulfur

Nnitrogen

OHhydroxyl

CH(O)CHepoxy

COOHcarboxyl

C=Ocarbonyl

COORester

C–O–Cepoxide

C–S–Cthioether

C=Sthioketone

SO3sulfur
trioxide
==== Refs
References
Mohan V. B. ; Lau K.-T. ; Hui D. ; Bhattacharyya D. 
Graphene-Based
Materials and Their Composites: A Review on Production, Applications
and Product Limitations . Composites, Part B 
2018 , 142 , 200 –220 . 10.1016/j.compositesb.2018.01.013 .
Georgakilas V. ; Otyepka M. ; Bourlinos A. B. ; Chandra V. ; Kim N. ; Kemp K. C. ; Hobza P. ; Zboril R. ; Kim K. S. 
Functionalization
of Graphene: Covalent and Non-Covalent Approaches, Derivatives and
Applications . Chem. Rev. 
2012 , 112 , 6156 –6214 . 10.1021/cr3000412 .23009634 
Hirsch A. ; Englert J. M. ; Hauke F. 
Wet Chemical Functionalization of
Graphene . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2013 , 46 , 87 –96 . 10.1021/ar300116q .22946482 
Salavagione H. J. 
Promising
Alternative Routes for Graphene Production and Functionalization . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 7138 –7146 . 10.1039/C3TA15455F .
Lowe A. B. 
Thiol-ene
“click” reactions and recent applications in polymer
and materials synthesis: a first update . Polym.
Chem. 
2014 , 5 , 4820 –4870 . 10.1039/C4PY00339J .
Luong N. D. ; Sinh L. H. ; Johansson L. S. ; Campell J. ; Seppälä J. 
Functional
Graphene by Thiol-ene Click Chemistry . Chem.
- Eur. J. 
2015 , 21 , 3183 –3186 . 10.1002/chem.201405734 .25580698 
Hwang J. O. ; Park J. S. ; Choi D. S. ; Kim J. Y. ; Lee S. H. ; Lee K. E. ; Kim Y.-H. ; Song M. H. ; Yoo S. ; Kim S. O. 
Workfunction-Tunable,
N-Doped Reduced Graphene Transparent
Electrodes for High-Performance Polymer Light-Emitting Diodes . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 159 –167 . 10.1021/nn203176u .22148918 
Xu X. ; Liu C. ; Sun Z. ; Cao T. ; Zhang Z. ; Wang E. ; Liu Z. ; Liu K. 
Interfacial
Engineering in Graphene Bandgap . Chem. Soc.
Rev. 
2018 , 47 , 3059 –3099 . 10.1039/C7CS00836H .29513306 
Son J. ; Lee S. ; Kim S. J. ; Park B. C. ; Lee H.-K. ; Kim S. ; Kim J. H. ; Hong B. H. ; Hong J. 
Hydrogenated Monolayer
Graphene with Reversible and Tunable Wide Band Gap and Its Field-Effect
Transistor . Nat. Commun. 
2016 , 7 , 1326110.1038/ncomms13261 .27830748 
Qiu Y. ; Huo J. ; Jia F. ; Shanks B. H. ; Li W. 
N- and S-Doped Mesoporous
Carbon as Metal-Free Cathode Catalysts for Direct Biorenewable Alcohol
Fuel Cells . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2016 , 4 , 83 –95 . 10.1039/C5TA06039G .
Wang T. ; Wang L.-X. ; Wu D.-L. ; Xia W. ; Jia D.-Z. 
Interaction
between Nitrogen and Sulfur in Co-Doped Graphene and Synergetic Effect
in Supercapacitor . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 959110.1038/srep09591 .25880811 
Park S. ; Hu Y. ; Hwang J. O. ; Lee E.-S. ; Casabianca L. B. ; Cai W. ; Potts J. R. ; Ha H.-W. ; Chen S. ; Oh J. ; Kim S. O. ; Kim Y.-H. ; Ishii Y. ; Ruoff R. S. 
Chemical
Structures of Hydrazine-Treated Graphene Oxide and Generation of Aromatic
Nitrogen Doping . Nat. Commun. 
2012 , 3 , 63810.1038/ncomms1643 .22273676 
Rivera L. M. ; Fajardo S. ; Arévalo M. D.
C. ; García G. ; Pastor E. 
S- and N-Doped Graphene Nanomaterials for the Oxygen
Reduction Reaction . Catalysts 
2017 , 7 , 278 10.3390/catal7090278 .
Amiinu I. S. ; Zhang J. ; Kou Z. ; Liu X. ; Asare O. K. ; Zhou H. ; Cheng K. ; Zhang H. ; Mai L. ; Pan M. ; Mu S. 
Self-Organized 3D Porous Graphene Dual-Doped with Biomass-Sponsored
Nitrogen and Sulfur for Oxygen Reduction and Evolution . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 29408 –29418 . 10.1021/acsami.6b08719 .27740758 
Shi J. ; Wang Y. ; Su Q. ; Cheng F. ; Kong X. ; Lin J. ; Zhu T. ; Liang S. ; Pan A. 
N-S Co-Doped C@SnS
Nanoflakes/Graphene Composite as Advanced Anode for Sodium-Ion Batteries . Chem. Eng. J. 
2018 , 353 , 606 –614 . 10.1016/j.cej.2018.07.157 .
Marcano D. C. ; Kosynkin D. V. ; Berlin J. M. ; Sinitskii A. ; Sun Z. ; Slesarev A. ; Alemany L. B. ; Lu W. ; Tour J. M. 
Improved
Synthesis of Graphene Oxide . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 4806 –4814 . 10.1021/nn1006368 .20731455 
Kabiri S. ; Tran D. N. H. ; Azari S. ; Losic D. 
Graphene-Diatom Silica
Aerogels for Efficient Removal of Mercury Ions from Water . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 11815 –11823 . 10.1021/acsami.5b01159 .25835089 
Morimoto N. ; Kubo T. ; Nishina Y. 
Tailoring the Oxygen Content of Graphite
and Reduced Graphene Oxide for Specific Applications . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 2171510.1038/srep21715 .26911893 
Yap P. L. ; Kabiri S. ; Tran D. N. H. ; Losic D. 
Multifunctional Binding
Chemistry on Modified Graphene Composite for Selective and Highly
Efficient Adsorption of Mercury . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2019 , 11 , 6350 –6362 . 10.1021/acsami.8b17131 .30507147 
Dreyer D. R. ; Park S. ; Bielawski C. W. ; Ruoff R. S. 
The Chemistry of
Graphene Oxide . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2010 , 39 , 228 –240 . 10.1039/B917103G .20023850 
Stankovich S. ; Dikin D. A. ; Piner R. D. ; Kohlhaas K. A. ; Kleinhammes A. ; Jia Y. ; Wu Y. ; Nguyen S. T. ; Ruoff R. S. 
Synthesis of Graphene-Based
Nanosheets via Chemical Reduction of Exfoliated Graphite Oxide . Carbon 
2007 , 45 , 1558 –1565 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2007.02.034 .
Pei S. ; Cheng H.-M. 
The Reduction of
Graphene Oxide . Carbon 
2012 , 50 , 3210 –3228 . 10.1016/j.carbon.2011.11.010 .
Li D. ; Müller M. B. ; Gilje S. ; Kaner R. B. ; Wallace G. G. 
Processable
Aqueous Dispersions of Graphene Nanosheets . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2008 , 3 , 101 10.1038/nnano.2007.451 .18654470 
Wang H. ; Maiyalagan T. ; Wang X. 
Review on Recent Progress in Nitrogen-Doped
Graphene: Synthesis, Characterization, and Its Potential Applications . ACS Catal. 
2012 , 2 , 781 –794 . 10.1021/cs200652y .
Shang Y. ; Zhang D. ; Liu Y. ; Guo C. 
Preliminary Comparison
of Different Reduction Methods of Graphene Oxide . Bull. Mater. Sci. 
2015 , 38 , 7 –12 . 10.1007/s12034-014-0794-7 .
Baskoro F. ; Wong C.-B. ; Kumar S. R. ; Chang C.-W. ; Chen C.-H. ; Chen D. W. ; Lue S. J. 
Graphene
Oxide-Cation Interaction:
Inter-Layer Spacing and Zeta Potential Changes in Response to Various
Salt Solutions . J. Membr. Sci. 
2018 , 554 , 253 –263 . 10.1016/j.memsci.2018.03.006 .
Li Y. ; Bao L. ; Zhou Q. ; Ou E. ; Xu W. 
Functionalized Graphene
Obtained via Thiol-Ene Click Reactions as an Efficient Electrochemical
Sensor . ChemistrySelect 
2017 , 2 , 9284 –9290 . 10.1002/slct.201700659 .
Tadjarodi A. ; Moazen Ferdowsi S. ; Zare-Dorabei R. ; Barzin A. 
Highly Efficient Ultrasonic-Assisted
Removal of Hg(II) Ions on Graphene Oxide Modified with 2-Pyridinecarboxaldehyde
Thiosemicarbazone: Adsorption Isotherms and Kinetics Studies . Ultrason. Sonochem. 
2016 , 33 , 118 –128 . 10.1016/j.ultsonch.2016.04.030 .27245963 
Tian Z. ; Li J. ; Zhu G. ; Lu J. ; Wang Y. ; Shi Z. ; Xu C. 
Facile Synthesis of
Highly Conductive Sulfur-Doped Reduced Graphene
Oxide Sheets . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 1125 –1130 . 10.1039/C5CP05475C .26659603 
Sun W. ; Wang L. ; Yang Z. ; Zhu T. ; Wu T. ; Dong C. ; Liu G. 
Tuning the Oxidation Degree of Graphite
toward Highly Thermally Conductive Graphite/Epoxy Composites . Chem. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 7473 –7483 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b01902 .
Ganguly A. ; Sharma S. ; Papakonstantinou P. ; Hamilton J. 
Probing the Thermal
Deoxygenation of Graphene Oxide Using High-Resolution In Situ X-ray-Based
Spectroscopies . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 17009 –17019 . 10.1021/jp203741y .
Peng-Gang R. ; Ding-Xiang Y. ; Xu J. ; Tao C. ; Zhong-Ming L. 
Temperature
Dependence of Graphene Oxide Reduced by Hydrazine Hydrate . Nanotechnology 
2011 , 22 , 05570510.1088/0957-4484/22/5/055705 .21178230 
Xie B. ; Chen Y. ; Yu M. ; Shen X. ; Lei H. ; Xie T. ; Zhang Y. ; Wu Y. 
Carboxyl-Assisted Synthesis of Nitrogen-Doped
Graphene Sheets for Supercapacitor Applications . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2015 , 10 , 332 10.1186/s11671-015-1031-z .
Han J. ; Xi B. ; Feng Z. ; Ma X. ; Zhang J. ; Xiong S. ; Qian Y. 
Sulfur–Hydrazine
Hydrate-Based Chemical Synthesis of Sulfur@Graphene
Composite for Lithium–Sulfur Batteries . Inorg. Chem. Front. 
2018 , 5 , 785 –792 . 10.1039/C7QI00726D .
Wu N. ; She X. ; Yang D. ; Wu X. ; Su F. ; Chen Y. 
Synthesis
of Network Reduced Graphene Oxide in Polystyrene Matrix by a Two-Step
Reduction Method for Superior Conductivity of the Composite . J. Mater. Chem. 
2012 , 22 , 17254 –17261 . 10.1039/c2jm33114d .
Hou D. ; Liu Q. ; Wang X. ; Quan Y. ; Qiao Z. ; Yu L. ; Ding S. 
Facile Synthesis
of Graphene via Reduction of Graphene Oxide by Artemisinin
in Ethanol . J. Materiomics 
2018 , 4 , 256 –265 . 10.1016/j.jmat.2018.01.002 .
Dave K. ; Park K. H. ; Dhayal M. 
Two-Step Process for
Programmable
Removal of Oxygen Functionalities of Graphene Oxide: Functional, Structural
and Electrical Characteristics . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 95657 –95665 . 10.1039/C5RA18880F .
Cui X. ; Fang X. ; Zhao H. ; Li Z. ; Ren H. 
An Electrochemical
Sensor for Dopamine Based on Polydopamine Modified Reduced Graphene
Oxide Anchored with Tin Dioxide and Gold Nanoparticles . Anal. Methods 
2017 , 9 , 5322 –5332 . 10.1039/C7AY00991G .
Eda G. ; Chhowalla M. 
Chemically
Derived Graphene Oxide: Towards Large-Area
Thin-Film Electronics and Optoelectronics . Adv.
Mater. 
2010 , 22 , 2392 –2415 . 10.1002/adma.200903689 .20432408 
Ţucureanu V. ; Matei A. ; Avram A. M. 
FTIR Spectroscopy
for Carbon Family
Study . Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 46 , 502 –520 . 10.1080/10408347.2016.1157013 .26941009 
Tran D. N. ; Kabiri S. ; Wang L. ; Losic D. 
Engineered
Graphene–Nanoparticle
Aerogel Composites for Efficient Removal of Phosphate from Water . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 6844 –6852 . 10.1039/C4TA06308B .
Duan X. ; O’Donnell K. ; Sun H. ; Wang Y. ; Wang S. 
Sulfur and
Nitrogen Co-Doped Graphene for Metal-Free Catalytic Oxidation Reactions . Small 
2015 , 11 , 3036 –3044 . 10.1002/smll.201403715 .25786381 
Dutta S. ; Chatterjee S. ; Mukherjee I. ; Saha R. ; Singh B. P. 
Fabrication
of ZnS Hollow Spheres and RGO-ZnS Nanocomposite Using Cysteamine as
Novel Sulfur Source: Photocatalytic Performance on Industrial Dyes
and Effluent . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2017 , 56 , 4768 –4778 . 10.1021/acs.iecr.7b00107 .
Jalani G. ; Cerruti M. 
Nano Graphene Oxide-Wrapped Gold
Nanostars as Ultrasensitive
and Stable SERS Nanoprobes . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 9990 –9997 . 10.1039/C4NR07473D .25981393 
Xu J. ; He S. ; Zhang H. ; Huang J. ; Lin H. ; Wang X. ; Long J. 
Layered Metal-Organic Framework/Graphene Nanoarchitectures for Organic
Photosynthesis under Visible Light . J. Mater.
Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 24261 –24271 . 10.1039/C5TA06838J .
Kondo T. ; Casolo S. ; Suzuki T. ; Shikano T. ; Sakurai M. ; Harada Y. ; Saito M. ; Oshima M. ; Trioni M. I. ; Tantardini G. F. ; Nakamura J. 
Atomic-Scale Characterization of
Nitrogen-Doped Graphite: Effects of Dopant Nitrogen on the Local Electronic
Structure of the Surrounding Carbon Atoms . Phys.
Rev. B 
2012 , 86 , 03543610.1103/PhysRevB.86.035436 .
Naumov O. ; Naumov S. ; Abel B. ; Varga A. 
The Stability Limits
of Highly Active Nitrogen Doped Carbon ORR Nano-Catalysts: A Mechanistic
Study of Degradation Reactions . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 6724 –6733 . 10.1039/C7NR08545A .29589847 
Zhang D. ; Zheng L. ; Ma Y. ; Lei L. ; Li Q. ; Li Y. ; Luo H. ; Feng H. ; Hao Y. 
Synthesis of Nitrogen-
and Sulfur-Codoped 3D Cubic-Ordered Mesoporous Carbon with Superior
Performance in Supercapacitors . ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 2657 –2665 . 10.1021/am405128j .24471376 
Hulicova-Jurcakova D. ; Seredych M. ; Lu G. Q. ; Bandosz T. J. 
Combined Effect
of Nitrogen- and Oxygen-Containing Functional Groups of Microporous
Activated Carbon on its Electrochemical Performance in Supercapacitors . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2009 , 19 , 438 –447 . 10.1002/adfm.200801236 .
Wang D. H. ; Xia X. H. ; Xie D. ; Niu X. Q. ; Ge X. ; Gu C. D. ; Wang X. L. ; Tu J. P. 
Rational In-Situ
Construction of Three-Dimensional Reduced Graphene Oxide Supported
Li2S/C Composite as Enhanced Cathode for Rechargeable Lithium–Sulfur
Batteries . J. Power Sources 
2015 , 299 , 293 –300 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.09.002 .
Wu F. ; Li J. ; Tian Y. ; Su Y. ; Wang J. ; Yang W. ; Li N. ; Chen S. ; Bao L. 
3D Coral-Like Nitrogen-Sulfur Co-Doped
Carbon-Sulfur Composite for High Performance Lithium-Sulfur Batteries . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 1334010.1038/srep13340 .26288961 
Huang B. ; Liu Y. ; Huang X. ; Xie Z. 
Multiple Heteroatom-Doped Few-Layer
Carbons for the Electrochemical Oxygen Reduction Reaction . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2018 , 6 , 22277 –22286 . 10.1039/C8TA06743K .
Kumar A. S.
K. ; Jiang S.-J. 
Preparation
and Characterization of Exfoliated Graphene
Oxide-L-cystine as an Effective Adsorbent of Hg (II) Adsorption . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 6294 –6304 . 10.1039/C4RA12564A .
Zhao X. ; Zhang Q. ; Chen C.-M. ; Zhang B. ; Reiche S. ; Wang A. ; Zhang T. ; Schlögl R. ; Sheng Su D. 
Aromatic Sulfide, Sulfoxide, and
Sulfone Mediated Mesoporous
Carbon Monolith for Use in Supercapacitor . Nano
Energy 
2012 , 1 , 624 –630 . 10.1016/j.nanoen.2012.04.003 .
Awad F. S. ; AbouZeid K. M. ; El-Maaty W. M. A. ; El-Wakil A. M. ; El-Shall M. S. 
Efficient
Removal of Heavy Metals from Polluted Water with High Selectivity
for Mercury(II) by 2-Imino-4-thiobiuret–Partially Reduced Graphene
Oxide (IT-PRGO) . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 34230 –34242 . 10.1021/acsami.7b10021 .28880523 
Liu J. ; Zhu K. ; Jiao T. ; Xing R. ; Hong W. ; Zhang L. ; Zhang Q. ; Peng Q. 
Preparation of Graphene
Oxide-Polymer
Composite Hydrogels via Thiol-ene Photopolymerization as Efficient
Dye Adsorbents for Wastewater Treatment . Colloids
Surf., A 
2017 , 529 , 668 –676 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2017.06.050 .
Luo X. ; Ma K. ; Jiao T. ; Xing R. ; Zhang L. ; Zhou J. ; Li B. 
Graphene Oxide-Polymer
Composite Langmuir Films Constructed by Interfacial
Thiol-Ene Photopolymerization . Nanoscale Res.
Lett. 
2017 , 12 , 99 10.1186/s11671-017-1864-8 .28181162 
Tiwari I. ; Gupta M. ; Pandey C. M. ; Mishra V. 
Gold Nanoparticle
Decorated
Graphene Sheet-Polypyrrole Based Nanocomposite: Its Synthesis, Characterization
and Genosensing Application . Dalton Trans. 
2015 , 44 , 15557 –15566 . 10.1039/C5DT01193K .26242385 
Ke J. ; Li X. ; Zhao Q. ; Hou Y. ; Chen J. 
Ultrasensitive Quantum
Dot Fluorescence Quenching Assay for Selective Detection of Mercury
Ions in Drinking Water . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 562410.1038/srep05624 .25005836 
Cai Y. ; Du G. ; Gao G. ; Chen J. ; Fu J. 
Colour-Tunable Quantum
Dots/Poly(NIPAM-co-AAc) Hybrid Microgels Based on Electrostatic Interactions . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 98147 –98152 . 10.1039/C6RA19659D .

