
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145783410.1021/acsomega.7b00798ArticlePhoton-Induced Light Emission from Foamed Gold with
Micro/Nanohollow Sphere Structures Li Chaojian †Ding Lan *†Liang Changneng †Zhang Jie †Zhang Chao ‡Mei Hongying ‡Wang Chao ‡Wu Weidong §Zhang Jin †Xu Wen *†‡† School
of Physics and Astronomy, International Joint Research Center for
Optoelectronic and Energy Materials, and Yunnan Key Laboratory for
Micro/Nano Materials and Technology, Yunnan
University, 2 Cuihu North
Road, Kunming 650091, China‡ Key
Laboratory of Materials Physics, Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 350 Shushanhu Road, Hefei 230031, China§ Research
Center of Laser Fusion, Chinese Academy
of Engineering Physics, 64 Mianshan Road, Mianyang 621900, China* E-mail: dinglan@ynu.edu.cn (L.D.).* E-mail: wenxu_issp@aliyun.com (W.X.).14 09 2017 30 09 2017 2 9 5759 5765 15 06 2017 29 08 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical
Society2017American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We present a study on photon-induced
light emission at room temperature
from macroscale foamed gold with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres synthesized
by seed-mediated growth method. Samples with a fixed sphere diameter
but different Au densities are examined. It is demonstrated that strong
and characteristic light emission from these samples can be achieved
under optical excitation. In a short excitation wavelength regime
(280–470 nm), the peak position in the photoemission spectrum
increases almost linearly with excitation wavelength. In a relatively
long-wavelength excitation regime (478–520 nm), photoluminescence
(PL) can be observed where the peak position in the PL spectrum depends
very little on excitation wavelength and two peaks can be seen in
the PL emission spectrum. These effects do not change significantly
with varying sample density, although it is found that the intensity
of the light emission increases with sample density. We find that
the features of the PL emission from foamed gold with micro/nanoscale
hollow spheres differ significantly from those observed for Au nanoparticles.
This study is relevant to the application of Au micro/nanostructures
as advanced optoelectronic materials and devices.

document-id-old-9ao7b00798document-id-new-14ao-2017-00798qccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
At present, foamed metal materials have
been widely applied in
aviation, aerospace, automobile, biochemical sensors, and other related
fields owing to their superior features,1 such as strong impact-energy absorption, catalytic activity enhancement,
filtration efficiency improvement, to mention but a few. With the
development of micro/nanoscience and technology, nowadays, it has
become possible to realize macroscale and monolithic foamed metal
materials with micro/nanoscale structural units. These newly developed
foamed metal materials have some unusual properties, such as large
aperture rate, high porosity, large specific surface area, and so
forth. As a result, they have been proposed as new materials for advanced
electronic and optoelectronic devices,2 which can provide more freedom in the allocation of their electronic
and optical properties. The macroscale foamed metal materials with
micro/nanoscale structural units have shown some unique and interesting
electronic and optoelectronic properties,2,3 which
cannot be observed for the corresponding bulk and thin-film structures.
In particular, for foamed metal materials with micro/nanoscale structural
units realized from noble metals, such as gold and silver, the increase
in the surface area of the metal structural units can result in an
enhanced absorption of the radiation field due to the surface plasmon
(SP) resonance effect4 on the surface of
the metal units. Thus, markedly enhanced optoelectronic phenomena,
such as optical absorption, fluorescence, Raman scattering, ultrafast
nonlinear optical response, and so forth, can be expected.

Gold-based
micro/nanostructures, such as micro/nanoparticles,5 micro/nanosphere arrays,6 micro/nanotubes,7 and so forth, have
been considered as advanced optical materials owing to their excellent
plasmonic properties8 and strong and characteristic
photoemission9 in the presence of an external
excitation field, such as optical pumping. The macroscale foamed Au
material with micro/nanoscale structural unit is a new class of micro/nano-Au
structure, which has not yet been investigated widely and deeply.
For the potential application of macroscale and monolithic foamed
Au materials with micro/nanoscale structural units as optical and
optoelectronic materials and devices, it is of importance and significance
to study the basic optical and optoelectronic properties of the material
systems. From a technical point of view, due to strong optical absorption
of the surface plasmon in the sample structure, it is rather hard
to measure the pronounced light transmission signals from the sample.
On the other hand, the foamed Au structure can result in a joint effect
of the random absorption and the diffuse reflections so that the optical
reflection spectrum is heavily damped and broadened. As a result,
the photoinduced light emission experiment becomes an obvious option
for the optical characterization and investigation of macroscale foamed
Au materials with micro/nanoscale structural units. Moreover, from
a viewpoint of physics, in the presence of excitation radiation field,
the strong absorption of the light field by electrons in the sample
system can lead to the excitation and relaxation of photoexcited electrons
in the foamed Au material. Thus, the photoinduced light emission can
occur especially in a relatively high-frequency or short-wavelength
regime, where the electron–phonon coupling is not strong enough
for the quick relaxation of photoexcited electrons in the sample structure.
Therefore, the results obtained from photon-induced light emission
or photoluminescence (PL) measurement can help us to gain some important
information about electronic band structure and electronic relaxation
mechanisms.

The prime motivation of this study is to examine
the basic features
of photon-induced light emission from gold-based foamed metal materials
with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structure. In such a sample structure,
the corresponding optoelectronic properties can be tuned by varying
sample parameters, such as the diameter of the hollow Au microsphere,
the nanoscale thickness of the Au shell, and the aperture rate or
density of the sample.

Results and Discussion
In this work,
the foamed Au samples consisted of uniformly dispersed
hollow gold microspheres with inner diameter d (d = 2r1) and shell thickness t (t = r2– r1), as shown in Figure 1a. Here, the diameter of the hollow sphere
is about d = 10 μm and the Au shell thickness
is in the range of about t = 70–90 nm. We
find from the bare-eye observation that the color of the samples is
nearly black. The diameter of Au hollow sphere can be tuned by using
different sizes of polystyrene (PS) microspheres and by electroless
plating process to grow different thicknesses of the Au shell. The
aperture rate or density of the sample can be controlled by the seed-mediated
growth process and by the slip-casting procedure, which can lead to
randomly packed Au/PS spheres with void spaces between individual
particle units.10 The details of the sample
fabrication are presented in Methods. Here,
we refer the foamed Au sample to be as a micro/nanoscale hollow sphere
structure because the thickness and diameter of the Au shells are
in the nano- and micrometer spatial scales, respectively.

Figure 1 (a) Schematic
of hollow gold microsphere. (b–e) Images of
formed Au samples, obtained by field emission scanning electron microscopy
(FESEM), with different Au hollow sphere diameters d and sample densities ρ. (b) d = 10 μm,
ρ = 0.5 g/cm3; (c) d = 10 μm,
ρ = 0.6 g/cm3; (d) d = 10 μm,
ρ = 0.7 g/cm3; and (e) d = 5 μm,
ρ = 0.7 g/cm3.

We take the foamed Au samples with different sample densities
(ρ
= 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7 g/cm3) and with a fixed Au sphere diameter d = 10 μm for optical measurement. The porosities
of these samples are more than 90%. The images of the foamed Au with
micro/nanoscale hollow spheres, obtained from field emission scanning
electron microscopy (FESEM, S-4800), are shown in Figure 1b–e for different sphere
diameters d and sample densities ρ.

The
spectrum of photon-induced light emission is shown in Figure 2a for a sample with
a fixed density ρ = 0.5 g/cm3 and a fixed Au hollow
sphere diameter d = 10 μm at different excitation
wavelengths λex = 280, 340, 400, 460, and 478 nm.
As we can see from Figure 2a, the corresponding PL peaks appear at about λem = 372, 417, 472, 511, and 572 nm. Over this excitation wavelength
regime, the position of the PL peak depends on pumping wavelength
and λem red-shifts with increasing excitation wavelength
(λex). Meanwhile, the intensity of the PL spectrum
first increases with increasing λex from 280 to 400
nm and then decreases with increasing λex from 400
to 478 nm. These results shown in Figure 2a indicate that when the excitation wavelength
is below 478 nm, the intensity and the peak position of the photoemission
from foamed Au with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres depend sensitively
on the pumping wavelength (λex).

Figure 2 Photoluminescence spectrum
of the foamed gold with micro/nanoscale
hollow spheres for different excitation wavelengths. The sample density
ρ and the diameter of the Au sphere d are as
indicated. The results are shown over the excitation wavelength regime
from 280 to 478 nm (a) and from 478 to 520 nm (b).

When we gradually increase the excitation wavelength
(λex) in the range of 478–520 nm, we find
that the peak
position λem in the PL spectrum for the sample is
always at about 572 nm, which does not alter markedly with varying
the pumping wavelength, as shown in Figure 2b. In this excitation wavelength regime,
the intensity of the PL spectrum of the sample decreases monotonously
with increasing pumping wavelength. The results shown in Figure 2b indicate that when
the excitation wavelength is above 478 nm, the peak position of the
photoemission from foamed Au with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres depends
very weakly on the pumping wavelength. This implies that over this
excitation wavelength regime the photoemission is mainly achieved
via typical excitonic light emission mechanism.11

We also carry out measurements for foamed Au with
micro/nanoscale
hollow spheres at a fixed diameter of the Au hollow spheres d = 10 μm but for different sample densities ρ
= 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7 g/cm3. The results are shown in Figure 3, where a fixed excitation
wavelength is applied. As we can see, the basic features for the obtained
results are very similar to those shown in Figure 2b, except for which we find that the intensity
of the photoemission increases markedly with increasing sample density.
This effect is due mainly to the fact that a higher sample density
corresponds to a larger ingredient of Au material in the sample and,
as a result, to a stronger photoemission from Au shell layers. It
is known that the macroporosity rate and the existence of spherical
voids in the samples are related directly to the sample density. Normally,
the higher the sample density is, the lower the macroporosity rate
is. Therefore, the results shown in Figure 3 also imply that a sample with a lower macroporosity
rate can emit more strongly the PL. Moreover, we find that the difference
between the pumping wavelength λex and the peak position
λem of photoemission (i.e., λem –
λex) is almost independent of the density of the
foamed Au samples. Hence, we are able to plot the results for the
peak position λem of photoemission against pumping
wavelength λex for samples with different densities
of foamed Au, which is shown in Figure 4. Interestingly, from Figure 4, we see that over the pumping wavelength
regime λex from 280 to 470 nm, the wavelength position
of the PL peak λem depends roughly linearly on λex with a slope of about k = 0.75. Thus, in
this excitation wavelength range, the wavelength of the photoemission
peak can be estimated through λem ≈ a + kλex, with a being about 166 nm, where a and k are obtained by statistical averaging of the experimental
data. Furthermore, λem remains at about 572 nm for
foamed Au samples with different densities when λex is within the range of 478–520 nm. In this excitation wavelength
regime, the PL emission (PLE) occurs mainly through the excitonic
mechanism for these samples with different densities, namely, the
photoemission is achieved mainly via the combination and separation
of the electron–hole pairs in the presence of optical excitation.

Figure 3 PL spectrum
at a fixed excitation wavelength λex = 478 nm for
samples with a fixed hollow sphere diameter but with
different densities as indicated.

Figure 4 Peak wavelength of the photo-induced light emission λem as a function of excitation wavelength λex for
foamed Au samples with different densities ρ as indicated.
Here, k is the slope of a roughly linear dependence
in shorter pumping wavelength regime. The symbols represent experimental
data, and the solid black line is drawn to guide the eye.

It is known that the PL emission via excitonic
mechanism is of
great importance and significance in understanding the electronic
band structure and the electronic relaxation mechanism of an electronic
system.11 We therefore would like to focus
our attention on the PL emission in the excitation wavelength (λex) range of 478–520 nm. Because the peak position in
the PL emission spectrum is at a wavelength λem ∼
572 nm, which does not vary markedly with altering the pumping wavelength
(see Figure 2b), we
can perform the PLE measurement on these samples for a fixed emission
wavelength. In Figure 5, we plot the intensity of the PLE detected at a fixed light emission
wavelength λem = 572 nm against excitation wavelength
for samples with different densities. Again, a sample with a larger
density can lead to a stronger PLE at a wavelength of about 572 nm
for different excitation wavelengths. We notice that two emission
peaks can be observed in the PLE spectrum by varying the excitation
wavelength: one is at λex ∼ 408 nm and the
other is at λex ∼ 478 nm. This interesting
finding implies that there are two electronic transition channels
or mechanisms responsible for the emission of the PL at a wavelength
λem = 572 nm observed experimentally.

Figure 5 Intensity of PLE at a
fixed emission wavelength λem = 572 nm as a function
of excitation wavelength for samples with
different densities as indicated. Two peak wavelengths are indicated.

Now we discuss the physical mechanism
behind the experimental findings
shown in Figures 2–5 for foamed Au with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres.12 We know that gold is a monovalent metal,
which belongs to the face-centered cubic lattice structure with a
shell structure being as [Au] 5d10–6sp1. The atomic structure of Au is quite similar to that of the alkali
metals, but Au has the s-orbit near the d-orbit. It is known12 that when gold atoms form into the Au solid
with a lattice structure, the s-orbits in Au evolve into a wide s-band
due to large overlap of the electron wave functions, whereas the d-orbits
evolve into a narrow d-band due to the effect of the localization.
For the case of Au-based micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structures,
because the thickness of the Au shell is on the nanometer scale, the
quantum size effect takes place so that the corresponding energy band
can be quantized into the electronic sub-bands.13 As a result, the visible fluorescence from Au-based micro/nanoparticles
is attributed mainly to interband electronic transitions between the
6sp1 conduction-like band and the 5d10 valence-like
levels.14 From the results obtained from
this study, we are able to construct an energy-level diagram and possible
electronic transition channels accompanied by the absorption and emission
of photons for foamed gold with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structure,
which is shown in Figure 6. In the presence of excitation light field, the electrons
in the 5d10 valence-like band are pumped into the 6sp1 conduction-like band via the optical absorption mechanism
(blue lines in Figure 6). There are two major channels or mechanisms for radiative relaxation
of photoexcited electrons in the 6sp1 band as follows.

Figure 6 Schematic
diagram of the energy states for Au hollow sphere structure
and the corresponding electronic transition channels for optical excitation
(blue lines), nonradiative electronic relaxation (gray lines), and
photo-induced light emission (green lines).

The first channel or mechanism for photon-induced light emission
is the direct photoemission induced by electronic transitions from
higher energy levels to lower energy states. As we know, the electrons
in the higher energy states have normally a quicker (shorter) relaxation
time than those in the lower energy states. For the case of relatively
short-wavelength excitation, the photon-induced light emission from
foamed Au is mainly achieved through this mechanism. The photoexcited
electrons in the higher energy states in the 6sp1 band
first quickly relax into the lower energy states via nonradiative
intraband relaxation mechanism, such as electron–phonon scattering
and electron–electron interaction (gray lines in Figure 6). When the nonradiative electronic
relaxation time for electrons in the 6sp1 states is longer
or larger than the radiative electronic relaxation time, these electrons
can go back to the 5d10 band and emit photons (green lines
in Figure 6). With
decreasing pumping wavelength, more states in the 5d10 band
and especially in the 6sp1 band can take part in these
pumping, relaxation, and emission processes and thus the peak wavelength
in the light emission spectrum decreases with excitation wavelength.
Therefore, the wavelength of the light emission depends on the excitation
light wavelength. The roughly linear increase in the peak wavelength
of light emission with excitation wavelength implies that the nonradiative
electronic relaxation time increases almost linearly with lowering
energy levels in the 5d10 band for electrons in foamed
Au, as observed in this study.

The second channel or mechanism
for photon-induced light emission
from foamed Au is the excitonic mechanism.10 When electrons in the 5d10 band are pumped optically
into the 6sp1 states, the holes are generated in the 5d10 band and the excitons or electron–hole pairs induced
by electron–hole interaction due to Coulomb potential can be
formed in the sample system. By this mechanism, the photoexcited electrons
in the high energy states in the 6sp1 band are relaxed
into the low energy states via nonradiative intraband electronic transition
channels and these electrons are combined with the holes in the 5d10 band to form the excitons. The separation of the electron–hole
pairs can lead to the emission of light with the peak wavelength corresponding
to the energy gap between the 6sp1 and 5d10 bands.
Because this energy gap does not change with pumping wavelength, the
peak wavelength of the PLE from foamed Au does not vary with the pumping
wavelength. For the case of relatively long-wavelength excitation,
the PLE from foamed Au is mainly achieved through this mechanism.
The result obtained from this study suggests that the energy gap between
the 6sp1 and 5d10 bands in foamed Au with micro/nanoscale
hollow spheres is about 527 nm or 2.35 eV, which is much larger than
1.48 eV measured from the PL for Au nanoparticles4 with 488 nm argon-ion laser pumping. The main reason why
the foamed Au with nanoshells has a larger energy gap than that in
Au nanoparticles is that the stronger quantum size effect can be achieved
in the nanoshell structure,13 which can
enhance the energy spacing between the lowest sub-band in the 6sp1 band and the highest sub-band in the 5d10 band.
It should be noted that a relatively sharp PL peak was observed for
Au nanoparticles,4 whereas the rather broad-band
PLE can be seen for foamed Au with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres.
Therefore, the basic features of PLE from foamed Au materials differ
significantly from those observed for Au nanoparticles. Moreover,
in contrast to single-wavelength optical pumping to measure the PLE
for Au nanoparticles,4 here we are able
to conduct the measurements via varying the excitation wavelength
so that the emission via excitonic mechanism can be confirmed and
verified.

It should be noted that the two light emission channels
or mechanisms
discussed above for foamed Au are competitive. When electronic relaxation
time for direct light emission is shorter than excitonic lifetime,
wavelength-dependent light emission can be observed, and vice versa.
Because the higher energy states in the 6sp1 band normally
have shorter electronic lifetime, the wavelength-dependent light emission
can be observed with shorter wavelength pumping, whereas the PLE via
excitonic mechanism can be seen with relatively longer-wavelength
pumping. The results obtained from this study suggest that 478 nm
excitation wavelength is a critical point between two mechanisms.
Namely, the electronic relaxation time for energy states above this
level is shorter than excitonic lifetime so that the direct light
emission can be observed, whereas the excitonic lifetime for energy
states below this level is shorter than nonradiative electronic relaxation
time so that the PLE can be observed.15 Furthermore, a larger density of the sample means more sources
of photo-emission. This is the main reason why the intensity of the
PL emission from foamed Au with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres increases
with sample density, as shown in Figures 3 and 5.

It is
reported that PL emission in noble-metal-nanoparticles can
enhanced by the presence of the plasmon locla field effect.15 However, although the foamed Au samples consist of micro/nanoscale
hollow Au spheres, we have not observed explicit resonant optical
phenomena associated with localized surface plasmons (LSPs) during
the photo-induced light emission measurements in the visible regime.
As we know, the LSPs supported by metallic nanoshell are usually thought
to arise via the hybridization of the dipolar modes of a metallic
sphere and a corresponding dielectric void in a metal substrate.16 This kind of hybridization in the nanoshell
geometry can lead to both shifts of the plasmon frequencies into the
long-wavelength region (such as the near-infrared region) and reduced
plasmon linewidth, when both the inner and outer radii of the shell
are in the subwavelength scale. The scattering from the nanoshells
with subwavelength inner and outer radii can provide light with wave
vector components in a broad range,16 which
leads to effective hybridization of the dipolar plasmon modes of metallic
spheres and dielectric inner voids. However, in the present study, r1 and r2 of the
hollow spheres are nearly 16–35 times larger than the excitation
or emission wavelength (i.e., r1, r2 ≫ λex, λem). Therefore, it is very difficult to excite dipolar modes
in very large spheres and inner voids to further generate localized
plasmonic resonances (such as LSPs) effectively, even if there may
be a few subwavelength defects and cracks in the Au nanoshells. In
other words, the efficiency of the plasmonic excitations of the hollow
spheres is too low to cause obvious resonant phenomena in the visible
range.

Moreover, due to the casting procedure in the sample
fabrication,
the arrangement of the hollow gold microspheres is disordered, which
also means disordered arrangement of the voids both inside and outside
the nanoshells. It should be noted that the disordered voids outside
the nanoshells can act as disordered cavities with random sizes, which
corresponds to random resonant wavelengths in a broad range. Thus,
the joint effect of the strong random absorption in these disordered
cavities and the diffuse reflections on the rough sphere surfaces
can give rise to broad-band absorbance. It is responsible for the
weak reflection spectra submerged in background noise when we performed
the conventional light reflection experiment. Another obvious evidence
of this kind of broad-band absorption in visible bandwidth is that
the color of the samples is nearly black from the bare-eye observation.
Moreover, the number of hollow gold spheres on top of each other may
affect the corresponding optical properties of the samples. At present,
it is difficult to control the stacked number and order of the disordered
hollow spheres in the foamed Au structure via current sample fabrication
technique.

Although we have not prepared flat Au films via electroless
plating,
we believe that the basic PLE behavior of the thin Au film does not
depend on the method of fabrication. Thus, the results of our foamed
Au materials can be compared to the results of Au films obtained in
previous works. It should be noted that in visible bandwidth normally
there is only one typical PL peak to be observed in Au thin films
(see, e.g., Figure 2 in ref (17)), for which the peak position does not vary with excitation
wavelength. This corresponds to the direct optical transition between
s- and d-bands in Au. As for Au nano/macrosphere array structures,
two PL peaks can be observed:6 one corresponding
to the band gap between s- and d-bands and the other to the pattern
of the array structure. The experimental results shown and discussed
in this work indicate that the basic features of the PLE from foamed
Au materials with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structures differ
significantly from those in flat Au films and Au nanosphere arrays.
Moreover, by comparing the results measured for Au mirror, Au nano/macrosphere
array structures,6 and foamed Au materials,
we find that generally larger PL intensities can be observed in Au
mirror and Au nano/macrosphere array structures. A relatively weak
PL intensity can be measured for foamed Au materials. This implies
that the quantum yield of the light emission from foamed Au materials
with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structures is lower than that from
Au mirror and Au nano/macrosphere array structures.

Conclusions
In this study, we have fabricated the macroscale and monolithic
foamed Au materials with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structures,
which is a new class of Au-based micro/nanostructure. The basic features
of photon-induced light emission from these samples with different
densities have been examined. The main conclusions obtained from this
study can be summarized as follows.

The strong and characteristic
light emission from foamed Au materials
with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structures can be observed in the
presence of optical excitation. In a relatively short-wavelength excitation
regime (280–470 nm), the peak position in the photoemission
spectrum increases almost linearly with excitation wavelength. This
effect is mainly induced by direct photon emission when electronic
relaxation time in high energy states in the 6sp1 band
is shorter than excitonic lifetime in low energy states. In a relatively
long-wavelength excitation regime (478–520 nm), the PLE can
be observed where the peak position in the PL spectrum depends very
little on excitation wavelength and two peaks can be seen in the emission
spectrum. In this excitation wavelength regime, the PLE from foamed
Au is achieved mainly via excitonic mechanism. We have found that
the energy gap between the 6sp1 and 5d10 bands
in our samples is about 527 nm or 2.35 eV. These important features
do not change significantly with varying sample density, although
it has been found that the intensity of the light emission increases
with sample density. The results presented and discussed in this article
indicate that the features of the photo-induced emission from foamed
gold with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres differ significantly from
those observed for Au nanoparticles. For foamed Au with hollow micro/nanosphere
structural units, the corresponding optoelectronic properties can
be tuned by varying sample parameters, such as the diameter of the
hollow Au microsphere, the nanoscale thickness of the Au shell, and
the aperture rate or density of the sample. We hope the interesting
and important findings from this study can help us to gain an in-depth
understanding of the basic optical properties of the macroscale and
monolithic foamed Au materials with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere
structures and to provide significant information about the application
of Au micro/nanostructures as advanced optoelectronic materials and
devices.

Methods
Sample Fabrication
The macroscale
and monolithic foamed
Au materials with micro/nanoscale hollow sphere structure are fabricated
through the main process, as shown in Figure 7. (i) The gold particles with average grain
size of about 4.6 nm are made in toluene by the electrostatic technique.
They can be adhered and coated on the surface of PS microspheres with
a diameter r1. (ii) The Au particles coated
on the surface of the PS microspheres are taken as seed crystals for
electroless plating to grow the Au shell layers. The deposited gold
with thickness of about 70–90 nm and grain size of about 30–60
nm can be obtained. The diameter of the spheres with Au shell is r2, and the thickness of the Au shell is t = r2 – r1. (iii) The reducing agent is kept on the surface of
the seeds on deoxidizing HAuCl4 to make the gold plating
layer continue to grow thicker. This step is followed by a casting
procedure analogous to slip casting of ceramic. This procedure can
result in randomly packed PS/Au spheres with void spaces between individual
particles. Thus, the arrangement or pattern of the hollow gold microspheres
obtained in the structure is normally not ordered in contrast to the
usual fabrication of nanoarray structure based on PS particle templates.
(iv) The PS spheres inside the Au shells are removed by further heat
treatment under nitrogen atmosphere and at a temperature of about
400 °C. After removing the PS microspheres, the Au shells are
self-supported with reasonable mechanical strength. Using this technique,
the monolithic foamed gold with disordered and self-supported hollow
microspheres can be directly obtained in the macroscale size, in contrast
to the conventional layer-by-layer growth method. The sample obtained
in the present study is a black-looking cylinder with both diameter
and height of about 4 mm. In these samples, the diameter of the hollow
sphere is about d = 10 μm, which is decided
by the size of the PS microsphere seed, and the Au shell thickness t can be controlled in the range of about 70–90 nm
corresponding to different densities (ρ = 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7
g/cm3). In this study, the sample density is estimated
by ρ = M/V, with M being the measured mass and V being the volume
calculated by sample diameter and height. More detailed information
about the synthesis process can be found in ref (10).

Figure 7 Flow chart for the preparation
of foamed gold material with micro/nanoscale
hollow spheres. Here, r1 is the radius
of the PS sphere, t = r2 – r1 is the thickness of the
Au shell, and d is the diameter of the hollow sphere.
In step (4), the photo of the sample is shown. It is important to
note that it is only a schematic of the sample fabrication process
here. The details of the process are presented in Methods.

PL Emission Measurements
We take a standard experimental
setup to measure the photo-induced light emission from foamed Au samples
with micro/nanoscale hollow spheres in visible bandwidth. The HORIBA
fluorescence system is applied for the measurement, where a xenon
lamp is taken as broad-band excitation light source, the GEMIMI 180
monochromator is used for choosing the pumping wavelength, and the
iHR320 grating spectrometer together with a photoelectric multiplier
tube detector is used for recording the spectrum of the light emission
from samples. The excitation light beam is applied at an angle of
about 45° to the sample surface, and the detection is undertaken
at about 60° to the sample surface. The accuracy of the measurement
system can be up to 0.2 nm in optical wavelength, and the measurements
are carried out at room temperature.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (11574319 and 11304272), the Ministry of Science and Technology
of China (2011YQ130018), the Hefei Center of Physical Science and
Technology, the Department of Science and Technology of Yunnan Province
(2013FD003 and 2016FC001), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
==== Refs
References
Ji K. ; Xu Y. ; Zhang J. ; Chen J. ; Dai Z. 
Foamed-metal-reinforced
composites: Tribological behavior of foamed copper filled with epoxy–matrix
polymer . Mater. Des. 
2014 , 61 , 109 –116 . 10.1016/j.matdes.2014.04.072 .
Young P. E. ; Rosen M. D. ; Hammer J. H. ; Hsing W. S. ; Glendinning S. G. ; Turner R. E. ; Kirkwood R. ; Schein J. ; Sorce C. ; Satcher J. H. ; Hamza A. Jr.; Reibold R. A. ; Hibbard R. ; Landen O. ; Reighard A. ; McAlpin S. ; Stevenson M. ; Thomas B. 
Demonstration of the
Density Dependence
of X-Ray Flux in a Laser-Driven Hohlraum . Phys.
Rev. Lett. 
2008 , 101 , 03500110.1103/PhysRevLett.101.035001 .18764258 
Rosen M. D. ; Hammer J. H. 
Analytic expressions
for optimal inertial-confinement-fusion
hohlraum wall density and wall loss . Phys. Rev.
E 
2005 , 72 , 05640310.1103/PhysRevE.72.056403 .
Schasfoort R. B. M. ; Tudos A. J.  Handbook
of Surface Plasmon Resonance ; RSC Publishing : U.K. , 2008 ; pp 15 –31 .
Lin A. ; Son D. H. ; Ahn I. H. ; Song G. H. ; Han W.-T. 
Visible
to infrared photoluminescence from gold nanoparticles embedded in
germano-silicate glass fiber . Opt. Express 
2007 , 15 , 6374 10.1364/OE.15.006374 .19546942 
Zhang Y. Y. ; Xiao Y. M. ; Duan G. T. ; Su F. H. ; Cai W. P. ; Xu W. 
Optical Properties of Gold Nanosphere Arrays Formed on Polystyrene
Templates . Integr. Ferroelectr. 
2012 , 136 , 66 –70 . 10.1080/10584587.2012.686784 .
Wang J. ; Zhang C. ; Zhang J. ; Song H. ; Wang P. ; Lu Y. ; Fei G. ; Xu W. ; Xu W. ; Zhang L. ; Kivshar Y. S. ; Zhang L. 
Hybrid Plasmonic Cavity
Modes in
Arrays of Gold Nanotubes . Adv. Opt. Mater. 
2017 , 5 , 160073110.1002/adom.201600731 .
Zhu J. ; Li J.-j. ; Zhao J.-w. 
The Study of Surface Plasmon Resonance
in Au–Ag–Au Three-Layered Bimetallic Nanoshell: The
Effect of Separate Ag Layer . Plasmonics 
2014 , 9 , 435 –441 . 10.1007/s11468-013-9640-9 .
Nakaji K. ; Li H. ; Kiba T. ; Igarashi M. ; Samukawa S. ; Murayama A. 
Plasmonic
enhancements of photoluminescence in hybrid Si nanostructures with
Au fabricated by fully top-down lithography . Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2012 , 7 , 629 10.1186/1556-276X-7-629 .23158215 
Xiulan T. ; Gao N. ; Kai L. ; Lou J. ; Weidong W. ; Yongjian T. 
Preparation
of Monolithic Foamed Gold by Seed-Mediated Growth . Rare Met. Mater. Eng. 
2012 , 41 , 169 –172 .
Siwach O. P. ; Sen P. 
Synthesis and study of fluorescence properties of Cu nanoparticles . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2008 , 10 , 107 –114 . 10.1007/s11051-008-9372-5 .
Mooradian A. 
Photoluminescence
of Metals . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1969 , 22 , 185 10.1103/PhysRevLett.22.185 .
Xiao Y. ; Xu W. ; Zhang Y. ; Hu J. 
Terahertz plasmon and surface-plasmon
modes in hollow nanospheres . Nanoscale Res.
Lett. 
2012 , 7 , 578 10.1186/1556-276X-7-578 .23092121 
Huang T. ; Murray R. W. 
Visible luminescence of water-soluble monolayer-protected
gold clusters . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2001 , 105 , 12498 –12502 . 10.1021/jp0041151 .
Shahbazyan T. V. 
Theory
of Plasmon-Enhanced Metal Photoluminescence . Nano Lett. 
2013 , 13 , 194 10.1021/nl303851z .23234309 
Maier S. A.  Plasmonics: Fundamentals
and Applications ; Springer : New York , 2007 ; pp 65 –87 .
Vengurlekar A. ; Ishihara T. 
Photoluminescence in Au film: Enhanced emission for
a corrugated film . J. Lumin. 
2007 , 122–123 , 796 –799 . 10.1016/j.jlumin.2006.01.291 .

