
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145872410.1021/acsomega.8b00097ArticleElucidating the Effect of Water-To-Cement Ratio on
the Hydration Mechanisms of Cement Ley-Hernandez Aida Margarita †Lapeyre Jonathan ‡Cook Rachel §Kumar Aditya *∥Feys Dimitri ⊥†Department
of Civil, Architectural, and Environmental Engineering, ‡Department of Materials
Science and Engineering, §Department of Materials Science and Engineering, ∥Department of Materials
Science and Engineering, and ⊥Department of Civil, Architectural, and Environmental
Engineering, Missouri University of Science
and Technology (S&T), Rolla, Missouri 65409-0340, United States* E-mail: kumarad@mst.edu. Phone: 573-341-6994 (A.K.).09 05 2018 31 05 2018 3 5 5092 5105 16 01 2018 27 04 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The hydration of cement is often
modeled as a phase boundary nucleation
and growth (pBNG) process. Classical pBNG models, based on the use
of isotropic and constant growth rate of the main hydrate, that is,
calcium–silicate–hydrate (C–S–H), are
unable to explain the lack of any significant effect of the water-to-cement
(w/c) ratio on the hydration kinetics
of cement. This paper presents a modified form of the pBNG model,
in which the anisotropic growth of C–S–H is allowed
to vary in relation to the nonlinear evolution of its supersaturation
in solution. Results show that once the supercritical C–S–H
nuclei form, their growth remains confined within a region in proximity
to the cement particles. This is hypothesized to be a manifestation
of the sedimentation of cement particles, which imposes a space constraint
for C–S–H growth. In pastes wherein the sedimentation
of cement particles is disrupted, the hydration kinetics are no longer
unresponsive to changes in w/c.
Unlike C–S–H, the ions in solution are not confined,
and hence, the supersaturation-dependent growth rate of C–S–H
diminishes monotonically with increasing w/c. Overall, the outcomes of this work highlight important
aspects that need to be considered in employing pBNG models for simulating
hydration of cement-based systems.

document-id-old-9ao8b00097document-id-new-14ao-2018-00097vccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The reaction between
cement and water, that is, hydration, involves
dissolution of the anhydrous phases concomitant with precipitation
of the hydration products (subsequently referred to as hydrates).
Extensive research has been devoted to study the kinetics of cement
hydration, as it principally dictates the development of the microstructure
and the consequent evolution of both fresh (e.g., workability and
time of set) and hardened properties (e.g., the rate/extent of strength
development) of concrete.1−3 It is widely accepted1,2,4−6 that the early
stage of cement hydration is driven by the nucleation and growth7−10 of the main hydration product, that is, calcium–silicate–hydrate1,5,11−13 (C–S–H,
as per cement chemistry notation: C = CaO, S = SiO2, H
= H2O, A = Al2O3, and F = Fe2O3); although, it is worth mentioning that in some
studies,14,15 it has been argued that kinetics of cement
hydration is controlled by dissolution of the phases present in cement.
In a typical plain cement paste (i.e., cement + water), C–S–H
nucleates heterogeneously on the solid-phase boundaries, that is,
surfaces of cement particles, and therefore, the mechanism of its
formation is usually termed as phase boundary nucleation and growth
(pBNG). As hydration progresses, the percolation of the overlapping
layers of C–S–H binds the paste cohesively and leads
to setting and subsequent development of mechanical properties.5,11,16,17 Akin to pBNG processes occurring in metallic systems (e.g., solidification
of metal),18,19 the temporal evolution of cement
hydration rate, as monitored using isothermal calorimetry techniques,
comprises a characteristic reaction rate peak (i.e., the main hydration
peak) up to which the rate of reaction accelerates and beyond which
it declines.1,13

Several numerical models
based on the pBNG mechanism have been
developed to reproduce the experimental measurements of cement hydration
rates.5,6,11,12,16,20,21 In these models, a single product
of constant density is assumed to form heterogeneously on solid phase
boundaries at a given nucleation event, and its subsequent growth
into the contiguous capillary pore space is treated as the rate-controlling
mechanism. As the product fills up the capillary pore space, impingements
between product nuclei, growing on the same or adjacent anhydrous
particles, become increasingly dominant and ultimately cause a deceleration
in the overall hydration rate. Numerical models, based on this premise
and some additional assumptions (e.g., spherical or needlelike geometry
of the product, diffusion-limited kinetics at later ages, and time-dependent
growth of C–S–H) have successfully been used to fit
the hydration rates of cementitious systems.5,6,12,16,20−24 These fits are typically obtained by iteratively varying relevant
pBNG parameters (e.g., nucleation site frequency and product growth
rate) to minimize the deviation between numerical and experimental
hydration rates. However, as pointed out,6,22,25 the parameters derived from such a fitting
can be misleading as some underlying assumptions of the classical
pBNG mechanism do not necessarily represent the physics of C–S–H
nucleation and growth accurately. More specifically, the assumptions
of (a) isotropic (i.e., spherical) growth of the product does not
represent the experimentally observed needlelike geometry of C–S–H
growth at early ages,26−28 (b) the constant rate of product growth does not
comply with the time-dependent variation of its supersaturation in
the solution,13,22,27,29,30 and (c) unconstrained
formation of the product throughout the capillary pore space fails
to explain the lack of any significant effect of the water-to-cement
ratio ( w/c mass basis) on the hydration
kinetics of cement.16,31,32 The last point is the main focus of this study and is described
in further detail below.

Past studies12,16,31 have shown that the early age (i.e., up
to 24 h) hydration kinetics
of cement are broadly unaffected by the w/c of the system. However, in pBNG models,6,16,25,32 an increase
in w/c implies a decrease in the
area of the substrate per unit volume of the paste, which in turn
affects the rate of formation of C–S–H and thus the
overall hydration kinetics. Specifically, with increasing w/c, whereas impingements between C–S–H
nuclei growing on the same particle remain broadly unaffected (i.e.,
assuming the same nucleation density of C–S–H), impingements
between C–S–H layers growing on adjacent cement particles
are fewer because of larger spacing between them. As a result, pBNG
models predict a dependency of the hydration rate on w/c, unlike what is observed in experiments.12,16,31 These contradictions between
experimentally observed hydration rates and predictions of the pBNG
model, including ones that involve the implementation of the nucleation
and densifying growth theory (i.e., time-dependent densification of
C–S–H),5,16,33 are highlighted in the work of Kirby and Biernacki.31 In a recent study, Masoero et al.34 proposed a reaction zone hypothesis to reconcile
the aforementioned contradictions. The authors proposed that during
the early hydration period, C–S–H grows exclusively
within regions close to surfaces of the reactant particles; these
regions collectively were designated as the reaction zone. Within
the reaction zone, as the amount of C–S–H increases
with hydration, growing impingements between C–S–H nuclei
causes deceleration of the hydration rate, all while abundant capillary
pore space remains unoccupied outside of the reaction zone. The hypothesis
provides novel and significant insights and, more importantly, explains
the mechanisms driving the deceleration of the hydration rate beyond
the main hydration peak in high w/c systems. However, the assumption of the growth rate of C–S–H
being constant throughout the process of hydration, as used in the
study,34 is inconsistent with recent studies
that clearly show a temporal decline of C–S–H supersaturation
(i.e., driving force for the growth of C–S–H) in solution.22,27,29,30 In addition, Masoero et al.34 assumed
the growth of C–S–H to occur at equivalent rates in
all directions. This assumption has implications not just on the geometry
of C–S–H nuclei but also on the overall rate of hydration.
Scherer et al.6,28 noted that at early stages of
cement hydration, the growth of C–S–H occurs in a highly
anisotropic manner. Specifically, the growth rate of C–S–H
in the direction normal to and away from the substrate is higher than
its growth rate in the direction parallel to the substrate. This theory
of anisotropic growth of C–S–H gains support from recent
microscopic observations of the geometry of C–S–H growth.26−28 Assuming isotropic growth of C–S–H also results in
greater impingements of its nuclei and, thus, a faster approach to
the main hydration peak.6,25 As a result of these
discrepancies between experiments and assumptions made within the
model presented in ref (34), the pBNG parameters derived from the simulations are difficult
to interpret. As examples, the predictions of (i) significantly higher
nucleation density of C–S–H in C3S (i.e.,
tricalcium silicate, the major phase in cement constituting 50–70%
of its mass3) suspensions (i.e., w/c = 50) as compared to that in pastes
(i.e., w/c = 0.40)34 are difficult to reconcile considering that the critical
supersaturation at which nucleation of C–S–H occurs
should be independent of the w/c,5,22,35 and (ii) the smaller
size of the reaction zone in suspensions as compared to that in pastes34 is counterintuitive, considering that the capillary
pore space increases with increasing w/c, thus allowing C–S–H to grow more freely. To resolve
these inconsistencies and to better explain the role of w/c on the mechanisms of cement hydration, further
refinement of the pBNG model is needed. Such refinements need to be
based on observations from experiments reported in various recent
studies.26,27

This study employs a combination of
experiments and computer simulations
to elucidate the effect of w/c on
the early age hydration kinetics of cement. Isothermal microcalorimetry
is used to measure the hydration rates of cementitious systems across
a wide range of w/c, including both
pastes and suspensions. A pBNG model, incorporating a modification
of the reaction zone hypothesis and allowing anisotropic and time-dependent
growth rate of the hydrate, is developed and tested against experiments.
Results obtained are used to describe the mechanisms that drive the
progress of nucleation and growth of the C–S–H in such
systems. The outcomes provide new understanding and quantification
of rate controls of cement hydration and highlight important aspects
pertaining to pBNG processes that need to be considered in the development
of numerical pBNG models.

pBNG Model
A modified pBNG formulation
is applied to describe the effects
of w/c on the hydration kinetics
of cement. The cement used in our study is composed of four phases
(C3S, C2S, C3A, and C4AF), all of which react with water simultaneously, though at different
rates.1 C2S and C4AF have low intrinsic dissolution rates and, hence, do not release
substantial amounts of heat at early ages.1,6,14 In contrast to these phases, the reaction
of C3A with water and aqueous SO42– ions (i.e., resulting from the dissolution of gypsum) is rapid;
this causes nucleation of ettringite crystals within the first few
minutes of mixing.36,37 Nonetheless, after the initial
nucleation burst, ettringite subsequently grows at a very slow (and
near constant) rate for the next few hours, thus releasing little
heat.36,38 As such, in pBNG models applied to cement
pastes,6,11,12,16,25,39 including the model used herein, early age kinetics of cement hydration
is assumed to be dominated by hydration of the C3S phase.
The same assumption implies that during the early stages of cement
hydration, the major products in the cement paste are C–S–H
and CH, both of which form in stoichiometric amounts in relation to
the amount of hydrated C3S. On the basis of these assumptions,
in pBNG models, a single product of constant density (i.e., combining
the bulk density of CH and C–S–H phases) is assumed
to form at a given nucleation event, and its subsequent growth on
solid-phase substrate boundaries (i.e., cement surfaces) is treated
as the rate-controlling mechanism that drives the kinetics during
the early ages of cement hydration. This assumption is referred to
as the site saturation condition, implying that the
growth of the product phase begins from a fixed number of nuclei that
form at very early ages (i.e., at time = τ h), and no further
nuclei are permitted to form after this very initial nucleation burst40,41 (i.e., nucleation rate = 0 μm–2·h–1). On the basis of these criteria, at any given time t (h), the volume fraction of the reactants (i.e., C3S and water) transformed to product [X(t), unitless: volume of product divided by the total initial
volume of the paste] is given by eq 1.13,22,25,35,42 1  where 2  

In eq 1, FD is the f-Dawson
function, expressed as an integral (eq 2). The variable ks (h–1) is related to the
reciprocal of time required by the product nuclei to provide complete
coverage of anhydrous cement particles.6,25 The value
of ks depends on the product’s
nucleation density (Idensity, units of
μm–2), that is, the number of total supercritical
nuclei produced per unit surface area of cement as well as on the
geometry and rate of their growth (eq 3). In the model presented in this study, the growth
of the product is assumed to occur in an anisotropic fashion while
varying with respect to time. Gout(t) (μm·h–1) is the outward
growth rate of the product, representing the direction normal to and
away from the substrate (i.e., surfaces of cement particles). Gpar(t) (μm·h–1) is the growth rate in a lateral direction, that
is, along the two-dimensional (2D) plane parallel to the boundary
of the substrate. Along this 2D plane, the growth rate is assumed
to be isotropic. The introduction of a time dependency on the product
growth rate is a digression from the classical form of pBNG, which
assumes the growth rate to remain constant throughout the hydration
process. This is based on an implementation originally formulated
by Bullard et al.22 and subsequently adopted
by Oey et al.,35 Meng et al.,13 and Lapeyre and Kumar42 to capture the temporal variation in the growth rate of C–S–H,
as its supersaturation in the solution varies nonlinearly with time.
As both the outward (Gout) and parallel
(Gpar) growth rates vary with time, a
constant 2:1 ratio for Gout/Gpar is assumed, such that the anisotropy factor, that
is, g (unitless) in eq 4, is 0.25 throughout the hydration process. This relationship between Gout and Gpar represents
the anisotropic growth of needlelike domains of the product6,25 and is in good agreement with recent experimental data of the geometry
of C–S–H growth at early ages.26−28,30 3   4  

In eq 1, the variable kG (h–1) is related to the
reciprocal of time required for the product to fill the capillary
pore space. The value of kG depends on
the product’s outward growth rate (Gout) as well as on the constant rG (unitless),
which represents the ratio of the growth rate into and out of the
substrate in the normal direction (eq 5). In their study, Scherer et al.6,25 noted
that at early ages of hydration, hydrates do not penetrate the cement
particles, and therefore, rG ≈
0.50. This is because at early ages, the ionic species, that is, H3SiO4–/H2SiO42–, CaOH+/Ca2+, and OH–, responsible for the precipitation of C–S–H
transport predominantly from the substrate’s surface toward
the contiguous solution while showing little movement through the
product in the reverse direction.6 Therefore,
in all simulations presented in this study, the value of rG was assumed to be constant at 0.50. Another important
parameter that dictates the value of kG, and thus the kinetics of hydration, is the boundary area of the
substrate per unit volume of the reaction vessel (aBV, μm–1) (eqs 5 and 6). Here, the area
of the substrate is simply the initial total surface area of the cement
particles. The definition of the reaction vessel, however, differs
among different studies. Thomas12 defined
the reaction vessel as the space required by hydrates when the hydration
of cement is complete (i.e., α = 1), thus rendering the volume
of the reaction vessel, and consequently aBV, independent of the w/c ratio.
As per this definition, the reaction vessel’s volume is set
at its minimum value, just enough to accommodate the hydrates. In
several subsequent studies,5,6,13,25,32,35 however, the reaction vessel’s volume
was set at its maximum allowable value, that is, equal to the volume
of the paste. On the basis of this definition, aBV changes in response to changes in w/c, and the implication is that the hydrates are allowed
to grow throughout the capillary pore space until either it is fully
occupied or the hydration of cement is complete. As different definitions
of aBV exist in the literature, in this
study, a modified definition has been used that allows the volume
of the reaction vessel to vary between the minimum and maximum allowable
values (eq 6). In eq 6, ρ is the density
(water = 1000 kg·m–3 and cement = 3150 kg·m–3), and SSAcem (m2·kg–1) is the specific surface area of cement particles.
The parameter pf (unitless) acts as a
free variable used in the simulations to represent the reactive paste
fraction, that is, the fraction of the paste’s volume within
which the formation of hydrates occurs. When pf = 1, the entire volume of the paste acts as the reaction
vessel, whereas for fractional values of pf, the volume of the reaction vessel is smaller than that of the paste.
In such cases (i.e., pf < 1), the amount
of water contained within the reaction vessel is smaller than the
amount of water added to the paste, though all of the solid phases
(i.e., anhydrous cement particles and hydrates) are assumed to be
bounded within the reaction vessel. By accounting for the excess water
(i.e., water outside of the reaction vessel), the w/c ratio of the reaction vessel (w/cRV, by mass) can be calculated from eq 7. 5   6   7  

The volume fraction
of the product [X(t)], as calculated
from eq 1, and the degree
of hydration (α, unitless) of
cement are related by a constant B (unitless)13,22,35 described in eq 8a 8a   8b  where,
ρproducts is the bulk
density of combined hydration products (assumed to be 2070 kg·m–3),43,44 and the parameter c = −7.04 × 10–5 m3·kg–1 represents the chemical shrinkage per kilogram of
cement that is consumed over the course of its hydration.45

On the basis of the scheme described above,
measured hydration
rates can be simulated using the pBNG model by varying three parameters: Gout(t), Idensity, and pf. Of the three parameters, Idensity and pf are
constants with respect to time, whereas Gout(t) varies with respect to time. Therefore, to obtain
the optimum values (i.e., of Idensity and pf) or functional forms (i.e., of Gout(t)) of these parameters for a given
system, a Nelder–Mead-based simplex algorithm35,46,47 that uses derivative-free and
nonlinear optimization principles is employed in two steps. In the
first step, the value of Gout is kept
constant throughout the 24 h of cement hydration and fixed at 0.075
μm·h–1 for all systems. Similar values
of Gout have been reported in a prior
study26 based on scanning transmission
electron microscopy (STEM) analyses of early age hydration of impure
C3S. The simplex algorithm then iteratively varies Idensity and pf,
within predefined bounds (i.e., 0.1 μm–2 ≤ Idensity ≤ 1000 μm–2, and 0.0 ≤ pf ≤ 1.0),
until the magnitude of the difference between the simulated and measured
rates of product formation—expressed as dX/dt, or the derivative of eq 1—for each paste is minimized. It is
pointed out that within the first step, the model represents the classical
pBNG formulation,12 wherein the anisotropic
growth of the product nucleating at a virtual time τ (h) is
kept constant throughout the hydration process. Past studies,13,22,35,42 however, have shown that such classical pBNG models are unable to
capture the decline in the growth rate of the product as its supersaturation
in the solution declines with time. Therefore, to account for the
time-dependent variation in the growth rate, a second simulation step
is employed. Here, at any given time t, the optimum
values of Idensity and pf yielded from the first step are used as constants, whereas Gout is allowed to vary iteratively within the
bounds of 10–4-to-102 μm·h–1 to minimize the deviation between the simulated and
measured hydration rates (expressed as dα/dt or derivative of eq 8aaJJJJJJJ) for each paste. When the simplex algorithm converges, the value
of Gout is taken to be the optimum value
at that time. The optimum values of Gout for the entire duration of cement hydration are thus determined
by implementing such an optimization process over the first 24 h of
hydration using a time step of 0.05 h. The time-dependent Gout, obtained as such, mimics the growth of
the product in relation to its supersaturation in the solution,13,22,35,42 as described in the Results and Discussion section.

Results and Discussion
To study the effect of w/c on
the hydration mechanisms of cement, the kinetics of hydration of two
different particle size distributions (PSDs: see Figure 1) of the same cement (i.e.,
of the same composition) were determined. Figure 2 shows representative heat evolution profiles
of pastes prepared using the coarse cement at different w/c ratios. As can be seen, despite significant differences
in water contents (i.e., 58.64 and 96.93%vol of water in
pastes prepared at w/c of 0.45 and
10, respectively), the kinetics and degree of cement hydration within
the first 24 h are broadly similar across all pastes. The lack of
any significant effect of w/c was
also observed for pastes prepared with the fine cement (Figure 3). These results are in good
agreement with those reported in prior studies.12,16,31 Upon comparing the heat evolution profiles
of pastes prepared with fine and coarse cements, faster hydration
kinetics was noted for the former (Figure 3c). This enhancement in hydration of the
fine cement is highlighted as the leftward shift of the heat evolution
profile and a higher heat flow rate at the main hydration peak and
can be attributed to the higher SSA of its particles,5,48−50 which enhances the number density of topological
dissolution sites as well as sites for heterogeneous nucleation of
hydrates. It should be pointed out that these enhancements in hydration
rates of the fine cement are smaller in relation to the augmentation
in the SSA of its particles with respect to those of the coarse cement
(e.g., 72% increment in the heat flow rate at the peak vis-à-vis
125% increment in SSA). This suggests a nonlinear relationship between
reactivity enhancements and surface area increments. On the basis
of these results as well as those reported in prior studies,13,16,50 it is hypothesized that improvements
in reactivity are realizable only up to a threshold level of particulate
fineness. Beyond this threshold, reactivity enhancements decline due
to agglomeration of the finer particles, which renders a fraction
of their surface area unavailable for reaction.13,16,50 It is clarified, however, that the aforementioned
loss in the surface area is not responsible for the apparent insensitivity
to w/c.

Figure 1 PSDs of the “as-received”
(coarse) and ground (fine)
cements measured using SLS methods. The largest uncertainty in the
median diameter (d50, μm) of the
powders based on six replicate measurements was ±6%.

Figure 2 Isothermal microcalorimetry-based determinations of (a)
heat flow
rates, and (b) cumulative heat release of pastes prepared using the
coarse cement at different w/c.
(c) repeatability of heat flow rate determinations for a representative
system. Similar analyses conducted on multiple pastes reveal that
the uncertainty in the heat flow rate is within ±2%.

Figure 3 Isothermal microcalorimetry-based determinations of (a)
heat flow
rates and (b) cumulative heat release of pastes prepared using the
fine cement at different w/c ratios.
(c) Comparison of heat flow rates of pastes prepared at equivalent w/c using cements of different fineness.

Figures 2 and 3 qualitatively
show the influence of w/c and cement
fineness on the hydration kinetics
of cement. To obtain quantitative information, portlandite contents
of the pastes and the degree of hydration of cement after 24 h of
hydration were determined using differential thermogravimetry (DTG)51 and calorimetry methods (Figure 4). As can be seen, across all w/c, portlandite contents are broadly similar, provided
that the fineness of the cement does not change. Pastes prepared with
the finer cement have higher portlandite contents compared to their
coarser cement counterparts. This is attributed to the higher degree
of hydration of the finer cement (Figure 4b). Past studies, based on microstructural
investigation,34,52,53 have shown that the precipitation of portlandite occurs homogenously
in the capillary pore space. This would imply that an increment in
the capillary pore volume would facilitate the formation of portlandite.
However, the equivalency in portlandite contents across pastes prepared
at different w/c ratios suggests
that the rate controlling factor for the precipitation of portlandite
is not the volume of capillary pores, but rather the rate of cement
hydration, which, in turn, is driven by the nucleation and growth
of C–S–H.

Figure 4 (a) Portlandite mass contents (as mass percent
of the binder) and
(b) degree of hydration of cement (α) after 24 h of hydration
in pastes prepared at different w/c, as determined from DTG analyses. (c) Comparison between α
calculated from microcalorimetry and DTG methods. The dashed lines
represent ±2.5% bounds. The highest uncertainty in phase quantifications
or determination of α by DTG methods is ±2.5%.

The heat evolution profiles (Figures 2 and 3) and the results
obtained from DTG analyses (Figure 4) show that the rates of cement hydration and C–S–H
precipitation are independent of the w/c and, therefore, the availability of space in the microstructural
volume (i.e., capillary pore space). To quantify the evolution of
the unoccupied space in the microstructure (i.e., capillary porosity)
as a function of the degree of hydration of cement, the Powers model54,55 was used. The results obtained from the Powers model (Figure 5a) clearly show that at the
degree of hydration corresponding to the time of occurrence of the
main hydration peak (i.e., α = 0.13, obtained by averaging values
of α determined from calorimetry profiles of pastes prepared
using the coarse cement at different w/c ratios), there is plenty of space available in the microstructural
volume, even in pastes prepared at a low w/c. For example, in pastes prepared at w/c of 0.45 and 10, capillary pores comprise of 52.1
and 96.3% of the paste’s volume, when α = 0.13. The decline
in the hydration rate, after the main hydration peak, in spite of
the abundance in space cannot be explained solely on account of impingements
between C–S–H nuclei growing on cement particle surfaces.
To illustrate this point, virtual microstructures of pastes generated
by a three-dimensional (3D) microstructural model5,16,33,42,56−59 are shown (Figure 5b,c). In these simulations, C–S–H and
other hydrates (e.g., portlandite), precipitating as a result of cement
hydration, are allowed to grow heterogeneously on cement particle
surfaces and homogeneously in the pore space, respectively. Further
details pertaining to the generation of virtual microstructures can
be found in the Supporting Information.
As can be seen in Figure 5b,c, at the main hydration peak, although C–S–H
nuclei provide partial coverage of the cement particles, impingements
between C–S–H layers growing on neighboring particles
are insignificant, especially in high w/c pastes. Therefore, mechanisms other than the impingements between
C–S–H nuclei are responsible for deceleration of the
hydration rate of cement in pastes.

Figure 5 (a) Correlation between capillary porosity
and degree of hydration
(α) in pastes prepared at different w/c. In these calculations, α is provided as an input,
and the corresponding capillary porosity is calculated based on the
phase assemblages predicted by the Powers model.54,55 The solid vertical line indicates the average value of α of
all pastes, prepared using the coarse cement at the main hydration
peak. 3D virtual microstructures of cement pastes prepared using the
coarse cement at (b) w/c = 0.45
and (c) w/c = 10 when α =
0.13 (i.e., at the main hydration peak). The anhydrous cement particles
(red) are packed as randomly dispersed spheres within the cubic representative
elementary volume (size = 100 μm3). As cement reacts
with water, C–S–H (blue) and other hydrates (green)
are allowed to grow heterogeneously on cement surfaces and homogeneously
in the pore space, respectively. See the Supporting Information (section B) for further details pertaining to the
simulations.

To further investigate
the role of w/c on cement hydration,
measured hydration rates of pastes were simulated
using the pBNG model. As can be seen in Figure 6, through the evaluation of optimum values
of the outward growth rate of the product (Gout(t)), the product nucleation density (Idensity), and the reactive fraction of the paste
(pf), the model is able to reproduce the
experimental results. The variations in these simulation parameters
are analyzed below to describe the alterations in the nucleation and
growth process in relation to the initial process parameters, that
is, w/c and cement fineness.

Figure 6 Representative
set of simulated and measured hydration rates (dα/dt) of cement in pastes prepared at different w/c. The red dashed line represents the final output
from the simulations, wherein Gout is
allowed to vary with time.

As stated previously, within the pBNG framework, simulations
are
employed in two steps. In the first step, optimum values of Idensity and pf are
determined, and in the second step, the optimum function form of Gout(t) is determined. On the
basis of the optimizations, it was found that Idensity is 3.50 ± 0.08 μm–2 for
all pastes, regardless of the w/c ratio and the SSA of cement. This value of Idensity is within the same order of magnitude of values reported
in previous studies involving pBNG simulations of cement-based systems6,13,16,34,35 as well as those determined from STEM analyses
of early age hydration of impure C3S.26 Minor differences in the values of Idensity between this study and those derived from other pBNG
models6,13,16,34,35 can be attributed to
multiple factors including differences in the cement composition and
assumptions involving the nature of growth of the product6 (e.g., anisotropy factor). As examples, in the
simulations presented in this study, (i) changing the value of rG from 0.5 (i.e., penetration of hydrate into
the substrate grain is not permitted) to 1.0 (i.e., penetration of
hydrate into the substrate is permitted) would necessitate a decrease
in Idensity(6,25) from ≈3.50
to ≈1.62 μm–2 and (ii) increasing the
anisotropy factor (g) from 0.25 to 1.0 would enhance
the probability of lateral impingements between C–S–H
nuclei,6 and, thus, require a reduction
in Idensity from ≈3.50 to ≈0.87
μm–2. However, regardless of the choice of
these parameters, measured hydration rates of all pastes presented
in this study could be fitted using a unique value of Idensity. This equivalency in the value of Idensity across all pastes is expected because when water
is abundant, as it is during the first 24 h of hydration, the critical
supersaturation at which nucleation of C–S–H occurs
should be about the same and, thus, independent of the amount of water
present in the system or the SSA of the cement particles.35 It should be noted that at a high w/c, the larger dilution is expected to cause a slight
delay in reaching C–S–H supersaturation. However, because
of the intrinsically high dissolution rate of cement60 and the very low solubility (i.e., Ksp) of C–S–H,29,44 it is expected
that the solution rapidly supersaturates with respect to C–S–H
in all pastes regardless of the w/c, and, thus, does not cause significant alterations (e.g., lengthening
of the induction period) in the early age hydration behavior.26,39,61−66

While the product nucleation density was found to be independent
of the w/c, significant changes
in the reactive paste fraction (pf) were
noted across different pastes (Figure 7a). As can be seen, pf is
unaffected by the cement’s SSA, but decreases broadly in a
linear manner with increasing w/c. This implies that as the water content of the paste increases,
the formation of C–S–H is confined within smaller volume
fractions of the paste. It is pointed out that if simulations are
implemented by imposing a constant value of pf (i.e., pf = 1)—essentially
assuming that the entire reaction vessel participates in the nucleation
and growth process—the hydration rates of high w/c pastes, as estimated from the pBNG simulations,
are significantly different (i.e., broader) compared to those obtained
from experiments. This is because at larger values of pf, the enlargement of the reaction vessel ensures larger
spacing between the cement particles, which results in fewer impingements
between product nuclei growing on neighboring particles; this manifests
as a slower approach to the main hydration peak and, more importantly,
a slower decline in the hydration rate after the peak. Further details
pertaining to the sensitivity of the pBNG simulations with respect
to variations in pf and the justification
for varying pf are included in the Supporting Information (Figure S3).

Figure 7 Parameters
derived from the simulations: (a) reactive paste fraction
(pf) and (b) w/c ratio within the reaction vessel (w/cRV) as functions of w/c. (c) Comparison between the average spacing between cement
particle surfaces within the reaction vessel (y-axis)
vis-à-vis the average spacing between them when they are assumed
to remain suspended (x-axis). The dashed lines represent
the lines of ideality.

As described previously (pBNG Model section),
the reactive fraction of the paste can be described as the reaction
vessel, which consists of all of the solids (i.e., anhydrous cement
particles and hydrates) but only a fraction of the capillary water.
By factoring in the values of pf (as obtained
from the simulations) in eq 7, the w/c ratio within the
reaction vessel (i.e., w/cRV) was determined (Figure 7b). Interestingly, regardless of the w/c ratio of the paste or the SSA of cement, in all pastes,
the w/cRV is broadly
similar, with values ranging from 0.40 to 0.51. Strikingly, these
values of w/cRV are in
close proximity to the critical w/c (i.e., 0.42) needed for complete hydration of cement.54,55 This indicates that during the early stages of cement hydration,
as C–S–H nucleates on cement surfaces and subsequently
grows into the contiguous capillary space, its growth is confined
within a region (i.e., the reaction vessel) in the vicinity of cement
particles that supply the ions for C–S–H precipitation.
The reaction vessel’s volume is independent of the w/c and roughly equal to the critical (i.e.,
minimum) volume required for the occupation of the hydrates after
the hydration of cement is complete (i.e., when α = 1). Whereas
the reasons for equivalency in the reaction vessel’s volume
across pastes prepared at different w/c ratios are not clear, it is speculated that the sedimentation of
cement particles, in addition to particle-aggregation (i.e., flocculation/agglomeration
caused due to interparticle forces), lead to similar particle assemblages.
This definition of the reaction vessel (and, thus, of aBV) is similar to that suggested by Thomas12 and indicates that, regardless of the w/c, the calculation of aBV (eq 6)
for plain pastes should be based on the volume of the hydrates at
α = 1 (as the reaction vessel’s volume) rather than the
total volume of the paste. The results, suggesting confined growth
of C–S–H on and around the cement particles, are also
in good agreement with the reaction zone hypothesis
advanced by Masoero et al.34 In spite of
similarity in findings between this study and the study by Masoero
et al,34 there are differences pertaining
to the origins of C–S–H’s confinement, which
are highlighted below.

In the model used by Masoero et al.,34 it is assumed that the cement particles remain
suspended, and the
growth of C–S–H occurs in a confined region (i.e., in
the semipore space) in proximity to the cement particles. First, in
practice, because of the large density difference between cement (i.e.,
3150 kg·m–3) and water (i.e., 1000 kg·m–3), the sedimentation of cement particles always occurs
in pastes (in the absence of viscosity-modifying admixtures or when
in situ mixing is not employed), as was also observed in the current
experiments. Second, the assumption of particles being suspended combined
with the confinement of C–S–H, as assumed in the model
developed by Masoero et al.,34 significantly
marginalizes the likelihood of impingement between C–S–H
layers growing on different particles, especially at early ages when
the degree of hydration of cement is low. This is difficult to reconcile
as the setting of the paste,67 which occurs
at a low degree of hydration of cement, necessitates such early age
impingements between C–S–H layers growing on adjacent
cement grains. In contrast to the model presented in ref (34), the pBNG model used in
this study does not incorporate any assumption regarding the occurrence,
or lack thereof, of sedimentation of cement particles. However, based
on the simulation results, which indicate that in high w/c pastes, the reaction vessel is consistently smaller
than the paste’s volume (Figure 7), it is inferred that the sedimentation of cement
particles does occur. This inference gains support from experiments,
in which the solids (i.e., cement particles and hydrates) were consistently
found to be settled at the bottom of the reaction container after
24 h of hydration. This assemblage of cement particles within a fraction
of the paste’s volume causes the particles to pack more closely
as compared to an equivalent system in which particles remain suspended.

To better illustrate the effects of sedimentation of cement particles
on particle packing, the 3D microstructural model, described above
and in ref5,16,33,56−59 was used to generate virtual
microstructures for two cases: one in which cement particles remain
suspended and the other in which sedimentation occurs. In the former
and latter cases, the water contents resemble the original w/c and the w/cRV (determined from pBNG simulations), respectively.
Once the sought packing is achieved, the average initial spacing between
cement particle surfaces (i.e., interparticle distance) is calculated
using algorithms described in ref (68). The virtual microstructures generated from
the simulations are shown in Figure 8, and the calculated interparticle distances are shown
in Figure 7c. As can
be seen, because of the sedimentation of cement particles in high w/c pastes, the interparticle distance
within the reaction vessel is reduced to a fraction of the interparticle
distance at the time of mixing (i.e., when sedimentation has not occurred).
It is also noteworthy that across pastes prepared using the same PSD
of cement but at different w/c ratios,
the interparticle distances within the reaction vessel remain broadly
the same. This is due to the equivalency in the values of w/cRV (Figure 7b) and suggests that as cement particles
settle, their assemblage and access to water needed for hydration
remain broadly the same regardless of the original w/c. In pastes prepared with the fine cement, the
interparticle distances within the reaction vessel are smaller (i.e.,
≈1.0 μm) as compared to those prepared with the coarse
cement (i.e., ≈2.1 μm), although the volumes of the reaction
vessel are equivalent across all pastes. This is attributed to the
larger number of particles (per unit mass) in the fine cement. These
interparticle distances, presented in Figure 7c, are analogous to the size of the reaction
zone reported by Masoero et al.,34 as in
both studies, these sizes represent the linearized space within which
the growth of C–S–H occurs and remains confined. In
this study, the interparticle distances range between 1.0 and 2.1
μm, whereas in ref (34), the sizes of the reaction zone were estimated between
≈0.38 and ≈1.1 μm. It is reasonable to say that
these differences are small and can be attributed to differences in
the schemes (e.g., anisotropy in the growth of C–S–H)
employed in the pBNG simulations as well as the differences in the
properties (i.e., PSD and composition) of the cementing material.
The assumption of particles remaining suspended, as implemented in
ref (34), is also expected
to alter the likelihood of impingement between C–S–H
nuclei and, thus, contribute to the aforementioned differences.

Figure 8 3D virtual
microstructures showing the packing of particles at
the time of mixing (i.e., without sedimentation of particles) in pastes
prepared at (a) w/c = 0.45 and (b) w/c = 10. (c) effects of sedimentation
of particles in a paste prepared at w/c = 10. The smaller cubic volume schematically represents the reaction
vessel, which includes all of the cement particles but only a fraction
of the water. The volumetric content of water in the reaction vessel
is derived from w/cRV, as calculated from pBNG simulations.

On the basis of these results, it is hypothesized that the
confinement
of C–S–H is a manifestation of the space constraint
induced by the close packing of the settled cement particles within
the reaction vessel. Because of the smaller spacing between cement
particles within the reaction vessel, C–S–H layers growing
on adjacent cement particles are able to percolate and cause the paste
to set, even when the w/c is relatively
high (e.g., w/c = 0.75). The enhanced
impingements between C–S–H layers as well as the impingements
between C–S–H nuclei growing on the same particle contribute
toward the occurrence of the main hydration peak, which occurs within
12 h of hydration and at a low degree of hydration (i.e., α
≈ 0.13) even in pastes prepared at high w/c (Figures 2 and 3). In addition to these impingements,
the temporal variation in the growth rate of C–S–H (described
below), as driven by its supersaturation, is expected to affect the
hydration rates.

Figure 9a describes
the influence of w/c on the product
growth rate [Gout(t)].
As shown, the product grows at rates that decrease nonlinearly by
about 2 orders of magnitude over the course of cement hydration in
the first 24 h. This functional form of the growth rate has been reported13,22,35 to mimic the evolving supersaturation
of C–S–H in the solution, wherein high and low supersaturations
imply larger and smaller driving forces for C–S–H growth,
respectively. It is noted that at any given time (Figure 9a) or degree of hydration of
cement (Figure 9b), Gout decreases with increasing w/c. This is better shown in Figure 10, which plots the growth rates of pastes,
extracted at α = 10, 20, and 30% against the w/c. The diminishment of the product growth rate
with increasing w/c suggests abatement
in the driving force for C–S–H growth in diluted systems.
It is hypothesized that in high w/c systems, though C–S–H is confined within a smaller
fraction of the paste volume (i.e., the reaction vessel), the ions29 (i.e., H3SiO4–/H2SiO42–, CaOH+/Ca2+, and OH–) responsible for the
precipitation of C–S–H are able to transport across
the entire paste’s volume. As such, the supersaturation of
C–S–H in the solution and, hence, the driving force
for its growth are sensitive to the paste’s water content and
decrease with increasing w/c; this
point is described in more detail through experimental results further
in the text. This decrease in C–S–H supersaturation
manifests as a systematic diminishment of its growth rate with increasing w/c (Figures 9 and 10). It is pointed
out that, in spite of the ions being able to move throughout the paste’s
volume, it is expected that their abundance is relatively higher in
regions in proximity to their source, that is, cement particles. This
would imply higher supersaturation and, therefore, higher growth rate
of C–S–H around the cement particles. While the current
simulations do not consider gradients in ion concentrations, results
shown in Figure 10 do support the theory. As can be seen, at equivalent w/c, growth rates at early ages (i.e., when α
= 0.10) are higher in pastes prepared with the fine cement as compared
to those prepared with the coarse cement. This is hypothesized to
be on account of smaller spacing between particles (Figure 7c) in pastes prepared with
the fine cement, such that the overlapping (or closely packed) ion-abundant
regions around the closely packed particles bolster the driving force
for the growth of C–S–H. At later ages, when the supersaturation
of C–S–H in the solution is low,22 the effect of interparticle spacing on the growth rate
diminishes. This is reflected in Figure 10b,c, which show that at higher degrees of
cement hydration, growth rates are independent of the spacing between
particles (or fineness of the cement).

Figure 9 Outward growth rate of
the product (Gout) as a function of the
(a) time and (b) degree of hydration of the
coarse cement.

Figure 10 Outward growth rate
of the product (Gout) as a function of w/c when (a)
α = 0.10, (b) α = 0.20, and (c) α = 0.30. Results
for both coarse and fine cements are shown.

The growth rates shown in Figure 9 qualitatively allude to the temporal evolution
of
the supersaturation of C–S–H in the solution. For quantitative
determinations of the supersaturation, a generic relationship between
the growth rate and supersaturation of C–S–H must be
known. In a recent study, Scherer et al.27 showed that the growth rate of C–S–H exhibits a cubic
dependence on its supersaturation, as shown in eq 9. 9  where, Gout-c (μm h–1) is a constant and βCSH(t) (unitless)
is the time-dependent supersaturation
of C–S–H in the solution. As the exact value of Gout-c is not known and is expected to
change depending on the concentration of calcium (i.e., Ca2+) in the solution,27 a value of Gout-c = 0.075 μm h–1 is assumed in this study. This value, as described previously, is
used in the first step of the pBNG simulations and is within the same
order of magnitude as experimental values.26,27,64 By plugging in the estimated value of Gout-c and Gout(t) (i.e., obtained from pBNG simulations) in eq 9, the temporal evolution
of βCSH in the pastes was estimated (Figure 11). Admittedly, on account
of the uncertainty in the values of Gout-c, the values of βCSH are expected to be a rough,
rather than an accurate estimate. However, these estimated values
are expected to capture the effects of variations in the process parameters,
that is, w/c and SSA of cement,
as they are all derived using the same value of Gout-c.

Figure 11 Estimated temporal evolution of the supersaturation
of C–S–H
(βCSH) in pastes prepared using (a) the coarse cement
at different w/c, (b) the coarse
and fine cements at w/c = 3, and
(c) the coarse and fine cements at w/c = 10.

The temporal evolutions of βCSH, shown in Figure 11, are qualitatively
similar to those reported in the literature and derived from kinetic
cellular automata simulations22,27,29,30,61,69 and reflect the trends in the abundance
of aqueous ionic species—the silicate species (i.e., H2SiO42– and H3SiO4–) in particular—in the solution.61,69−72 At very early ages (i.e., around the time of mixing), when C–S–H
is present in small amounts and cement continues to dissolve rapidly
releasing ions at a fast rate into the solution, βCSH is expectedly high. With time, the dissolution rate of cement declines,
and more ions, including aqueous silicate species, are consumed as
the rate of precipitation of C–S–H increases; this manifests
as a steep decline in βCSH. It should be noted, however,
that this decline in βCSH is nonmonotonic, particularly
in the case of low w/c systems.
Specifically, around the main hydration peak, βCSH increases—albeit slightly—and then continues to decrease.
These minor fluctuations in the evolution of βCSH are expected to mimic the increase in the silicate concentration
that occurs around the main hydration peak when there is a sharp decrease
in the Ca2+ concentration.22,35 At later ages
(i.e., in the subsequent hours following the main hydration peak),
ion concentrations in the solution stabilize,22,39,61,70 and thus βCSH also stabilizes. At any given time, pastes prepared at
a lower w/c have higher βCSH as compared to those prepared at a higher w/c. This, as stated previously, is expected to be
due to the larger dilution in the higher w/c pastes and is corroborated by the evolutions of the solution
electrical conductivity and pH. As can be seen in Figure 12a,b, whereas the overall profiles
of electrical conductivity and pH evolution are similar across different w/c—which is expected due to similar
hydration kinetics (Figure 2)—the magnitudes of both parameters at equivalent times
are lower in high w/c pastes on
account of higher dilution (i.e., larger volume of solution per mole
of a given ion). Lower concentration of ions in the pore solutions
of high w/c pastes causes βCSH to be lower compared to those prepared at low w/c. It is also interesting to note that βCSH is broadly insensitive to the PSD of cement (Figure 11b,c). This suggests
that the differences in the hydration kinetics induced by the SSA
of cement (as shown in Figure 3) are unable to cast a significant impact on the composition
of the solution and, therefore, the supersaturation of C–S–H.

Figure 12 (a)
Electrical conductivity and (b) pH of the pore solution of
pastes prepared using the coarse cement at different w/c. Because of the large difference in the magnitudes
of the solution’s electrical conductivity, rescaled subplots
for the two curves are included within (a). (c) Heat flow rates of
pastes, prepared using the coarse cement at w/c = 10, measured without (static) and with in situ stirring.

Overall, the results described
thus far suggest that the hydration
kinetics of cement is not affected by the w/c on account of the sedimentation of cement particles. As
cement particles settle, they are packed more closely, which in turn
creates a space constraint for the growth of C–S–H and
results in its confinement. On the basis of this theory, it could
be hypothesized that if the sedimentation of cement particles is prevented—or
even disrupted—C–S–H would not remain confined,
thus causing the hydration kinetics to change. To test this hypothesis,
hydration kinetics was monitored for a paste prepared at w/c = 10, wherein the paste was continuously stirred
at a low speed (i.e., 80 rpm) using an electrically-driven agitator
throughout the 24 h of hydration. It is clarified that the low rotational
speed of the agitator minimizes the heat released due to mixing action
(i.e., <0.15 J of cumulative heat over a 24 h period, see the Supporting Information) but is unable to completely
prevent the sedimentation of cement particles. As shown in Figure 12c, in the stirred
paste, the hydration rates are indeed different—broader, with
delayed occurrence of the main hydration peak and slower postpeak
decline of the hydrate rate—compared to the static paste (i.e.,
without in situ mixing). These differences can be reconciled by considering
the effect of stirring on the spacing between cement particles. Specifically,
in the stirred pastes, sedimentation of cement particles is partially
prevented, which results in larger spacing between them and, consequently,
fewer impingements between C–S–H layers growing on neighboring
cement particles. Because of such lack in confinement of C–S–H
in the stirred pastes, the main hydration peak is delayed and the
decline in the postpeak hydration rate is slower. By contrast, in
the static paste, the closely packed cement particles ensure more
impingements between the C–S–H layers and thus a faster
approach to and departure from the main hydration peak. The results
shown in Figure 12 are in good agreement with the results shown in Figure S3b (of the Supporting Information), wherein it is shown
that if the reaction vessel’s volume is larger (i.e., pf ≈ 1.00), the pBNG-simulated hydration
rates of high w/c pastes have a
delayed occurrence of the main hydration peak and a slower postpeak
decline of the hydration rate. The results shown in Figure 12 are also in good agreement
with a prior study,31 which shows that
in pastes provisioned with dispersants, the enhanced dispersion of
cement particles causes cement hydration rates to change (i.e., to
get progressively broader) in relation to increasing w/c.

On the basis of these results, it is hypothesized
that sedimentation
of cement particles is at the origin of C–S–H confinement
and insensitivity of cement hydration rates to changes in w/c. It is clarified that, although this
hypothesis has been construed from the hydration behavior of water-rich
systems (i.e., w/c > 0.42), past
studies12,31 and additional data included in the Supporting Information show that early age hydration
rates of low w/c pastes (i.e., w/c < 0.42) are also insensitive to w/c. Results obtained from pBNG simulations
(not shown) indicate that even in low w/c pastes, the reaction vessel’s volume is equivalent to the
volume occupied by hydrates at α = 1. Thus, it is proposed that
in pBNG models, to account for C–S–H confinement, the
determination of the boundary area per unit volume of the substrate
(aBV: eq 6) for plain pastes should be calculated based on the
volume of hydrates that would form when all of the cement has reacted,
rather than the total volume of the paste (including excess water)
which depends on the w/c. As per
this definition, in blended systems wherein cement is partially replaced
by a filler, aBV would be equal to the
ratio of the total solid surface area at α = 0 (i.e., combined
surface areas of cement and filler) to the total volume of solids
at α = 1 (i.e., combined volumes of hydrates and filler). As
pointed out by Scherer and Bellmann,27 pBNG
models should account for the highly nonlinear supersaturation-dependent
variation in the growth rate of C–S–H. In this study,
although the evolution of growth rate and supersaturation of C–S–H
were derived indirectly from heat evolution profiles, it is possible
to incorporate a supersaturation-dependent growth rate directly into
pBNG models through experimental measurements of the evolving solution
composition.27 Last, it is recognized that
further investigation of cement hydration kinetics in pastes, wherein
sedimentation of particles is progressively mitigated (e.g., using
viscosity-modifying admixtures), is required for validation and further
refinement of the hypotheses presented in this study. A study focused
on the description of hydration kinetics of C3S suspensions,
with and without the disruption of particle sedimentation, is currently
underway at Missouri S&T; outcomes of this study will be presented
in a future publication.

Conclusions
A series of experiments
and pBNG simulations were applied to elucidate
the role of w/c ratio on the hydration
kinetics of cement in plain pastes. The experiments, conducted using
isothermal microcalorimetry methods, show that cement hydration rates
are insensitive to changes in w/c. As classical pBNG models are unable to explain such effects, a
modified pBNG model is presented, in which the growth of the main
hydrate, that is, C–S–H, is assumed to be anisotropic
and allowed to vary in relation to the nonlinear evolution of its
supersaturation in the solution.

Results obtained from the pBNG
simulations show that the nucleation
density of C–S–H, forming heterogeneously on cement
surfaces, is unaffected by the w/c of the paste as well as the SSA of cement particulates. However,
as the w/c increases, the fraction
of the paste’s volume that participates in the nucleation and
growth process reduces. This reactive (i.e., participatory) fraction
of the paste, termed as the reaction vessel in this study, was found
to be equivalent (i.e., equivalent size/volume and water content)
across pastes prepared at different w/c ratios and cements of different SSAs.

On the basis of these
results, it is hypothesized that at early
ages, the nucleation and growth of C–S–H remains confined
within the reaction vessel, such that its formation is limited to
ion-abundant regions in proximity to cement particles. This confinement
of C–S–H is hypothesized to be a manifestation of the
sedimentation of cement particles. As cement particles settle, they
are packed more closely, which in turn creates a space constraint
for the growth of C–S–H and results in its confinement.
Indeed, in pastes, wherein the sedimentation of cement particles is
disrupted using in situ stirring, the hydration kinetics is no longer
insensitive to changes in the w/c.

Results from this study also suggest that, unlike C–S–H,
the ions in solution are not confined within the reaction vessel.
The transport of ions throughout the volume of the paste causes the
supersaturation of C–S–H, that is, the driving force
for its growth, to decline with increasing w/c. This results in a systematic diminishment of C–S–H
growth rate with increasing w/c.

Overall, the outcomes of this work provide novel insights into
the mechanisms that cause cement hydration rates to remain insensitive
to changes in the paste’s water content. Whereas a simplified
view is presented, the discussion highlights important aspects that
need to be incorporated in pBNG models to account for C–S–H
confinement as well as the sedimentation of cement particles. Investigation
of the cement hydration kinetics in systems, wherein sedimentation
of particles is progressively mitigated (e.g., using viscosity modifying
admixtures), is expected to aid in validation and in further refinement
of the hypotheses presented in this study.

Materials and Methods
A commercially available type I ordinary portland cement with an
estimated crystalline phase composition of 61% C3S, 8%
C2S, 6% C3A, 9% C4AF, and 3.4% of
gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O) was used in this study.
Further details pertaining to the chemical composition of cement—as
obtained using a combination of X-ray fluorescence and quantitative
X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods—are provided in the Supporting Information. The cement, as received
from the supplier, was ground using a ring grinder to generate two
different PSDs. In the subsequent discussions, the “as-received”
and ground cements are referred to as coarse and fine cements, respectively.
The PSDs of the cements, shown in Figure 1, were measured using a Beckman Coulter static
light scattering (SLS) analyzer (LS13-320) using a 750 nm laser source
that is incident on a dilute suspension of powder particles in isopropyl
alcohol, dispersed by ultrasonication. The median particle sizes (d50, μm) of the PSDs of the coarse and
fine cements were determined as 15.55 and 9.23 μm, respectively.
By factoring the bulk density (i.e., 3150 kg·m–3, as measured using a pycnometer), the total SSA (m2·kg–1) of the coarse and fine cements were calculated from
the PSDs as 196 and 441 m2·kg–1,
respectively. XRD patterns were obtained for the coarse and fine cements,
and based on the results, it was confirmed that there was no change
in the cement’s composition as a result of the grinding.

To study the effects of the water content, cement + water mixtures
were prepared at different w/c (mass
basis) ranging from 0.45 to 10. Low and high w/c cementitious mixtures are typically described as paste
and suspension, respectively. However, as the limiting w/c beyond which a mixture ceases to be a paste (or
becomes a suspension) is not well-known, in this paper, all mixtures
are referred to as pastes. It should be noted that all pastes included
in this study are water-rich, as their w/c exceeds the critical value of 0.42 (i.e., minimum w/c needed for complete hydration of cement).54,55

The rate and extent of hydration were monitored up to 24 h
after
mixing using a TAM IV isothermal conduction microcalorimeter programmed
to maintain the sample at a constant temperature of 20 ± 0.1
°C. Compared to conventional methods of reactivity assessment
(e.g., isothermal calorimetry), microcalorimetry methods are considered
more accurate as they allow quantification of the heat flow rate of
the reaction at a very high resolution (10–7 J/s),
which enables monitoring the dissolution of compounds even at high
dilutions.13,73,74 The titration cell (maximum diameter = 1.25 cm) of the microcalorimeter
is fitted with an electrically driven agitator, which allows in situ
mixing of hydrating pastes prepared at high w/c. However, with the exception of selected experiments (which
are identified in the text), heat evolution profiles of all pastes
discussed in this paper were obtained without the use of the agitator.
In situ mixing was purposely avoided for two reasons: (i) to mimic
practical concrete mixing protocols, which are also devoid of in situ
mixing and (ii) to maintain consistent protocols across experiments,
as in situ mixing cannot be applied to low w/c pastes. The cumulative and differential heat release obtained
from calorimetry experiments were normalized by the enthalpy of cement
hydration (as calculated from mass fractions and enthalpy of individual
phases5), 472 J. gcement–1, to determine the extent of hydration13,16 (i.e., degree of hydration, α, expressed as the fraction of
cement reacted) and the rate of hydration (i.e., dα/dt, h–1) of cement, respectively, as functions
of time. This method of derivation of α and dα/dt is based on the assumption that the measured heat release
is solely on account of cement hydration. In addition to monitoring
the evolution of heat linked to hydration, the evolutions of the electrical
conductivity and pH of the pore solution of the pastes were measured
at discrete time steps between mixing and 48 h of hydration. These
measurements were carried out using a HI5522 electric conductivity
and pH meter with the HI76312 and HI1131 probes, respectively. Samples
used for these measurements were prepared using the same protocols
as those for calorimetry experiments.

A Netzsch STA 409 PC thermogravimetric
analyzer was used to identify
and measure the quantities of phases present at different hydration
times. Toward this, the mass loss (thermogravimetry) and the differential
mass loss (DTG) traces were processed to quantify the degree of hydration
and phase contents, that is, loss on ignition, evaporable and nonevaporable
water, portlandite, and calcite (if any may have formed because of
carbonation of calcium-rich phases). For these quantifications (i.e.,
α and phase contents), well-established methods detailed in
prior studies51,75 were used.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00097.Cement composition
and mixing procedure, description
of the 3D microstructural model, description of the isothermal microcalorimetry
method, sensitivity of pBNG parameters, and heat evolution profiles
of water-deficient pastes (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00097_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted in the Materials Research
Center (MRC) at Missouri S&T. The authors gratefully acknowledge
the financial support that has made these laboratories and their operations
possible. Funding for this research was provided by the National Science
Foundation [NSF, CMMI: 1661609], MRC at Missouri S&T [MRC Young
Investigator Seed Funding] and the University of Missouri Research
Board [UMRB].
==== Refs
References
Bullard J. W. ; Jennings H. M. ; Livingston R. A. ; Nonat A. ; Scherer G. W. ; Schweitzer J. S. ; Scrivener K. L. ; Thomas J. J. 
Mechanisms of Cement
Hydration . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2011 , 41 , 1208 –1223 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.09.011 .
Scrivener K. L. ; Juilland P. ; Monteiro P. J. M. 
Advances
in Understanding Hydration
of Portland Cement . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2015 , 78 , 38 –56 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2015.05.025 .
Taylor H. F. W.  Cement Chemistry , 2 nd ed.; Thomas Telford : London, United Kingdom , 1997 .
Thomas J. J. ; Biernacki J. J. ; Bullard J. W. ; Bishnoi S. ; Dolado J. S. ; Scherer G. W. ; Luttge A. 
Modeling and Simulation of Cement
Hydration Kinetics and Microstructure Development . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2011 , 41 , 1257 –1278 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.10.004 .
Kumar A. ; Bishnoi S. ; Scrivener K. L. 
Modelling Early Age Hydration Kinetics
of Alite . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2012 , 42 , 903 –918 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.03.003 .
Scherer G. W. ; Zhang J. ; Thomas J. J. 
Nucleation
and Growth Models for
Hydration of Cement . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2012 , 42 , 982 –993 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.03.019 .
Avrami M. 
Kinetics of
Phase Change. I General Theory . J. Chem. Phys. 
1939 , 7 , 1103 –1112 . 10.1063/1.1750380 .
Avrami M. 
Granulation,
Phase Change, and Microstructure Kinetics of Phase Change. III . J. Chem. Phys. 
1941 , 9 , 177 –184 . 10.1063/1.1750872 .
Jun S. ; Zhang H. ; Bechhoefer J. 
Nucleation
and Growth in One Dimension.
I. The Generalized Kolmogorov-Johnson-Mehl-Avrami Model . Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 
2005 , 71 , 011908 10.1103/physreve.71.011908 .
Cahn J. W. 
The Kinetics
of Grain Boundary Nucleated Reactions . Acta
Metall. 
1956 , 4 , 449 –459 . 10.1016/0001-6160(56)90041-4 .
Thomas J. J. ; Jennings H. M. ; Chen J. J. 
Influence
of Nucleation Seeding on
the Hydration Mechanisms of Tricalcium Silicate and Cement . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 , 4327 –4334 . 10.1021/jp809811w .
Thomas J.
J. 
A New Approach
to Modeling the Nucleation and Growth Kinetics of Tricalcium Silicate
Hydration . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2007 , 90 , 3282 –3288 . 10.1111/j.1551-2916.2007.01858.x .
Meng W. ; Lunkad P. ; Kumar A. ; Khayat K. 
Influence of Silica
Fume and Polycarboxylate Ether Dispersant on Hydration Mechanisms
of Cement . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2016 , 120 , 26814 –26823 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b08121 .
Nicoleau L. ; Nonat A. ; Perrey D. 
The Di- and Tricalcium
Silicate Dissolutions . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2013 , 47 , 14 –30 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2013.01.017 .
Nicoleau L. ; Bertolim M. A. 
Analytical Model
for the Alite (C3S) Dissolution Topography . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2016 , 99 , 773 –786 . 10.1111/jace.13647 .
Oey T. ; Kumar A. ; Bullard J. W. ; Neithalath N. ; Sant G. 
The Filler Effect: The Influence
of Filler Content and Surface Area
on Cementitious Reaction Rates . J. Am. Ceram.
Soc. 
2013 , 96 , 1978 –1990 . 10.1111/jace.12264 .
Masoero E. ; Del Gado E. ; Pellenq R. J.-M. ; Ulm F.-J. ; Yip S. 
Nanostructure
and Nanomechanics of Cement: Polydisperse Colloidal Packing . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2012 , 109 , 155503 10.1103/physrevlett.109.155503 .23102331 
Price C. W. 
Use of
Kolmogorov-Johnson-Mehl-Avrami Kinetics in Recrystallization of Metals
and Crystallization of Metallic Glasses . Acta
Metall. Mater. 
1990 , 38 , 727 –738 . 10.1016/0956-7151(90)90024-b .
Kolmogorov A. N. 
On the
Statistical Theory of the Crystallization of Metals . Bull. Acad. Sci. USSR, Math. Ser. 
1937 , 1 , 355 –359 .
Peterson V. K. ; Whitten A. E. 
Hydration Processes
in Tricalcium Silicate: Application
of the Boundary Nucleation Model to Quasielastic Neutron Scattering
Data . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 113 , 2347 –2351 . 10.1021/jp807209w .
Peterson V. K. ; Juenger M. C. G. 
Hydration of Tricalcium Silicate: Effects of CaCl2
and Sucrose on Reaction Kinetics and Product Formation . Chem. Mater. 
2006 , 18 , 5798 –5804 . 10.1021/cm061724y .
Bullard J. W. ; Scherer G. W. ; Thomas J. J. 
Time Dependent
Driving Forces and
the Kinetics of Tricalcium Silicate Hydration . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2015 , 74 , 26 –34 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2015.03.016 .
Valentini L. ; Favero M. ; Dalconi M. C. ; Russo V. ; Ferrari G. ; Artioli G. 
Kinetic Model of Calcium-Silicate
Hydrate Nucleation
and Growth in the Presence of PCE Superplasticizers . Cryst. Growth Des. 
2016 , 16 , 646 –654 . 10.1021/acs.cgd.5b01127 .
Ridi F. ; Fratini E. ; Luciani P. ; Winnefeld F. ; Baglioni P. 
Tricalcium Silicate Hydration Reaction
in the Presence
of Comb-Shaped Superplasticizers: Boundary Nucleation and Growth Model
Applied to Polymer-Modified Pastes . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2012 , 116 , 10887 –10895 . 10.1021/jp209156n .
Scherer G. W. 
Models
of Confined Growth . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2012 , 42 , 1252 –1260 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.05.018 .
Bazzoni A. ; Ma S. ; Wang Q. ; Shen X. ; Cantoni M. ; Scrivener K. L. 
The Effect
of Magnesium and Zinc Ions on the Hydration Kinetics of C3S . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2014 , 97 , 3684 –3693 . 10.1111/jace.13156 .
Scherer G.
W. ; Bellmann F. 
Kinetic Analysis
of C-S-H Growth on Calcite . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2018 , 103 , 226 –235 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2016.07.017 .
Zhang Z. ; Scherer G. W. ; Bauer A. 
Morphology
of Cementitious Material
during Early Hydration . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2018 , 107 , 85 –100 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2018.02.004 .
Bullard J. W. ; Scherer G. W. 
An Ideal Solid Solution
Model for C-S-H . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2016 , 99 , 4137 –4145 . 10.1111/jace.14493 .29880975 
Bellmann F. ; Scherer G. W. 
Analysis of C-S-H Growth Rates in Supersaturated Conditions . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2018 , 103 , 236 –244 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2017.05.007 .
Kirby D. M. ; Biernacki J. J. 
The Effect
of Water-to-Cement Ratio on the Hydration
Kinetics of Tricalcium Silicate Cements: Testing the Two-Step Hydration
Hypothesis . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2012 , 42 , 1147 –1156 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.05.009 .
Oey T. ; Stoian J. ; Li J. ; Vong C. ; Balonis M. ; Kumar A. ; Franke W. ; Sant G. 
Comparison of Ca(NO3)2
and CaCl2 Admixtures on Reaction, Setting, and Strength Evolutions
in Plain and Blended Cementing Formulations . J. Mater. Civ. Eng. 
2014 , 27 , 04014267 10.1061/(asce)mt.1943-5533.0001240 .
Kumar A. ; Sant G. ; Patapy C. ; Gianocca C. ; Scrivener K. L. 
The Influence
of Sodium and Potassium Hydroxide on Alite Hydration: Experiments
and Simulations . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2012 , 42 , 1513 –1523 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.07.003 .
Masoero E. ; Thomas J. J. ; Jennings H. M. 
A Reaction
Zone Hypothesis for the
Effects of Particle Size and Water-to-Cement Ratio on the Early Hydration
Kinetics of C3S . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2014 , 97 , 967 –975 . 10.1111/jace.12713 .
Oey T. ; Kumar A. ; Falzone G. ; Huang J. ; Kennison S. ; Bauchy M. ; Neithalath N. ; Bullard J. W. ; Sant G. 
The Influence
of Water Activity on the Hydration Rate of Tricalcium Silicate . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2016 , 99 , 2481 –2492 . 10.1111/jace.14181 .
Quennoz A. ; Scrivener K. L. 
Hydration
of C3A–gypsum Systems . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2012 , 42 , 1032 –1041 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.04.005 .
Minard H. ; Garrault S. ; Regnaud L. ; Nonat A. 
Mechanisms and Parameters
Controlling the Tricalcium Aluminate Reactivity in the Presence of
Gypsum . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2007 , 37 , 1418 –1426 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2007.06.001 .
Quennoz A. ; Scrivener K. L. 
Interactions
between Alite and C3A-Gypsum Hydrations
in Model Cements . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2013 , 44 , 46 –54 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.10.018 .
Garrault S. ; Nonat A. 
Hydrated Layer Formation
on Tricalcium and Dicalcium Silicate Surfaces:
Experimental Study and Numerical Simulations . Langmuir 
2001 , 17 , 8131 –8138 . 10.1021/la011201z .
Bullard J. W. 
A Determination
of Hydration Mechanisms for Tricalcium Silicate Using a Kinetic Cellular
Automaton Model . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2008 , 91 , 2088 –2097 . 10.1111/j.1551-2916.2008.02419.x .
Bullard J. W. ; Flatt R. J. 
New Insights into
the Effect of Calcium Hydroxide Precipitation
on the Kinetics of Tricalcium Silicate Hydration . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2010 , 93 , 1894 –1903 . 10.1111/j.1551-2916.2010.03656.x .
Lapeyre J. ; Kumar A. 
Influence of Pozzolanic
Additives on Hydration Mechanisms of Tricalcium
Silicate . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2018 , 10.1111/jace.15518 .
Allen A. J. ; Thomas J. J. ; Jennings H. M. 
Composition and Density of Nanoscale
Calcium–silicate–hydrate in Cement . Nat. Mater. 
2007 , 6 , 311 –316 . 10.1038/nmat1871 .17384634 
Thomas J. J. ; Jennings H. M. ; Allen A. J. 
Relationships
between Composition
and Density of Tobermorite, Jennite, and Nanoscale CaO–SiO2–H2O . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2010 , 114 , 7594 –7601 . 10.1021/jp910733x .
Bentz D. P. ; Lura P. ; Roberts J. W. 
Mixture
Proportioning for Internal
Curing . Concr. Int. 
2005 , 27 , 35 –40 .
Nelder J. A. ; Mead R. 
A Simplex Method for Function Minimization . Comput. J. 
1965 , 7 , 308 –313 . 10.1093/comjnl/7.4.308 .
McKinnon K. I. M. 
Convergence
of the Nelder–Mead Simplex Method to a Nonstationary Point . SIAM J. Optim. 
1998 , 9 , 148 –158 . 10.1137/s1052623496303482 .
Kumar A. ; Oey T. ; Falla G. P. ; Henkensiefken R. ; Neithalath N. ; Sant G. 
A Comparison of Intergrinding
and Blending Limestone on Reaction
and Strength Evolution in Cementitious Materials . Constr. Build. Mater. 
2013 , 43 , 428 –435 . 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2013.02.032 .
Bentz D. P. ; Garboczi E. J. ; Haecker C. J. ; Jensen O. M. 
Effects of Cement
Particle Size Distribution on Performance Properties of Portland Cement-Based
Materials . Cem. Concr. Res. 
1999 , 29 , 1663 –1671 . 10.1016/s0008-8846(99)00163-5 .
Kumar A. ; Oey T. ; Falzone G. ; Huang J. ; Bauchy M. ; Balonis M. ; Neithalath N. ; Bullard J. ; Sant G. 
The Filler Effect:
The Influence of Filler Content and Type on the Hydration Rate of
Tricalcium Silicate . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2017 , 100 , 3316 –3328 . 10.1111/jace.14859 .
Stoian J. ; Oey T. ; Bullard J. W. ; Huang J. ; Kumar A. ; Balonis M. ; Terrill J. ; Neithalath N. ; Sant G. 
New Insights into the
Prehydration of Cement and Its Mitigation . Cem.
Concr. Res. 
2015 , 70 , 94 –103 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2015.01.012 .
Gallucci E. ; Scrivener K. ; Groso A. ; Stampanoni M. ; Margaritondo G. 
3D Experimental
Investigation of the Microstructure
of Cement Pastes Using Synchrotron X-Ray Microtomography (ΜCT) . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2007 , 37 , 360 –368 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2006.10.012 .
Jennings H. M. ; Johnson S. K. 
Simulation of Microstructure
Development during the
Hydration of a Cement Compound . J. Am. Ceram.
Soc. 
1986 , 69 , 790 –795 . 10.1111/j.1151-2916.1986.tb07361.x .
Powers T. C. 
Structure
and Physical Properties of Hardened Portland Cement Paste . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
1958 , 41 , 1 –6 . 10.1111/j.1151-2916.1958.tb13494.x .
Powers T. C. ; Brownyard T. L. 
Studies
of the Physical Properties of Hardened Portland
Cement Paste . ACI J. Proc. 
1946 , 43 , 101 –132 . 10.14359/15302 .
Kumar A. ; Oey T. ; Kim S. ; Thomas D. ; Badran S. ; Li J. ; Fernandes F. ; Neithalath N. ; Sant G. 
Simple Methods to Estimate
the Influence of Limestone Fillers on Reaction and Property Evolution
in Cementitious Materials . Cem. Concr. Compos. 
2013 , 42 , 20 –29 . 10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2013.05.002 .
Puerta-Falla G. ; Kumar A. ; Gomez-Zamorano L. ; Bauchy M. ; Neithalath N. ; Sant G. 
The Influence of Filler
Type and Surface Area on the Hydration Rates
of Calcium Aluminate Cement . Constr. Build.
Mater. 
2015 , 96 , 657 –665 . 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2015.08.094 .
Juilland P. ; Kumar A. ; Gallucci E. ; Flatt R. J. ; Scrivener K. L. 
Effect
of Mixing on the Early Hydration of Alite and OPC Systems . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2012 , 42 , 1175 –1188 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2011.06.011 .
Banala A. ; Kumar A. 
Numerical Simulations of Permeability of Plain and Blended Cement
Pastes . Int. J. Adv. Eng. Sci. Appl. Math. 
2017 , 9 , 67 –86 . 10.1007/s12572-017-0184-7 .
Kumar A. ; Reed J. ; Sant G. 
Vertical Scanning
Interferometry:
A New Method to Measure the Dissolution Dynamics of Cementitious Minerals . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
2013 , 96 , 2766 –2778 . 10.1111/jace.12482 .
Garrault-Gauffinet S. ; Nonat A. 
Experimental Investigation of Calcium Silicate Hydrate (C-S-H) Nucleation . J. Cryst. Growth 
1999 , 200 , 565 –574 . 10.1016/s0022-0248(99)00051-2 .
Garrault S. ; Finot E. ; Lesniewska E. ; Nonat A. 
Study of C-S-H Growth
on C3S Surface during Its Early Hydration . Mater.
Struct. 
2005 , 38 , 435 –442 . 10.1617/14343 .
Juilland P. ; Gallucci E. ; Flatt R. ; Scrivener K. 
Dissolution
Theory Applied to the Induction Period in Alite Hydration . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2010 , 40 , 831 –844 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.01.012 .
Bazzoni A. ; Cantoni M. ; Scrivener K. L. 
Impact
of Annealing on the Early
Hydration of Tricalcium Silicate . J. Am. Ceram.
Soc. 
2014 , 97 , 584 –591 . 10.1111/jace.12691 .
Damidot D. ; Nonat A. ; Barret P. 
Kinetics of
Tricalcium Silicate Hydration
in Diluted Suspensions by Microcalorimetric Measurements . J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 
1990 , 73 , 3319 –3322 . 10.1111/j.1151-2916.1990.tb06455.x .
Bellmann F. ; Damidot D. ; Möser B. ; Skibsted J. 
Improved Evidence for
the Existence of an Intermediate Phase during Hydration of Tricalcium
Silicate . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2010 , 40 , 875 –884 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.02.007 .
Zhang J. ; Weissinger E. A. ; Peethamparan S. ; Scherer G. W. 
Early Hydration
and Setting of Oil Well Cement . Cem. Concr.
Res. 
2010 , 40 , 1023 –1033 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.03.014 .
Kumar A. ; Oey T. ; Kim S. ; Thomas D. ; Badran S. ; Li J. ; Fernandes F. ; Neithalath N. ; Sant G. 
Simple Methods to Estimate
the Influence of Limestone Fillers on Reaction and Property Evolution
in Cementitious Materials . Cem. Concr. Compos. 
2013 , 42 , 20 –29 . 10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2013.05.002 .
Garrault S. ; Behr T. ; Nonat A. 
Formation
of the C–S–H
Layer during Early Hydration of Tricalcium Silicate Grains with Different
Sizes . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006 , 110 , 270 –275 . 10.1021/jp0547212 .16471532 
Lothenbach B. ; Winnefeld F. 
Thermodynamic Modelling of the Hydration of Portland
Cement . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2006 , 36 , 209 –226 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2005.03.001 .
Brown P. W. ; Franz E. ; Frohnsdorff G. ; Taylor H. F. W. 
Analyses of the
Aqueous Phase during Early C3S Hydration . Cem.
Concr. Res. 
1984 , 14 , 257 –262 . 10.1016/0008-8846(84)90112-1 .
Brown P. W. ; Harner C. L. ; Prosen E. J. 
The Effect
of Inorganic Salts on
Tricalcium Silicate Hydration . Cem. Concr. Res. 
1986 , 16 , 17 –22 . 10.1016/0008-8846(86)90063-3 .
Ahmed H. ; Buckton G. ; Rawlins D. A. 
The Use
of Isothermal Microcalorimetry
in the Study of Small Degrees of Amorphous Content of a Hydrophobic
Powder . Int. J. Pharm. 
1996 , 130 , 195 –201 . 10.1016/0378-5173(95)04288-1 .
Darcy P. ; Buckton G. 
Quantitative Assessments of Powder
Crystallinity: Estimates
of Heat and Mass Transfer to Interpret Isothermal Microcalorimetry
Data . Thermochim. Acta 
1998 , 316 , 29 –36 . 10.1016/s0040-6031(98)00300-1 .
Zhang J. ; Scherer G. W. 
Comparison of Methods for Arresting
Hydration of Cement . Cem. Concr. Res. 
2011 , 41 , 1024 –1036 . 10.1016/j.cemconres.2011.06.003 .

