
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145711510.1021/acsomega.6b00009ArticleMetallic Nanodroplet Induced Coulomb Catalysis for
Off-Resonant Plasmonic Enhancement of Photoemission in Semiconductors Neogi Arup *†‡#Gryczynski Karol ‡¶Llopis Antonio ‡¶∇Lin Jie ‡Main Kyle ‡Shimada Ryoko §Wang Zhiming *†Lee Jihoon ∥Salamo Gregory ⊥Krokhin Arkadii *‡† Institute
of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P.R. China‡ Department
of Physics, University of North Texas, 211 Avenue A, Denton, Texas 76203, United States§ Department
of Physics and Mathematical Sciences, Japan
Women University, 2-8-1
Mejirodai, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8681, Japan∥ College
of Electronics and Information, Kwangwoon
University, 447-1 Wolgye-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul 139-701, South Korea⊥ Department
of Physics, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701, United States# Advanced
Materials Manufacturing Process Institute, UNT Discovery Park, 3940 North Elm Street, #E132, Denton, Texas 76207-7102, United States* (A.N.) E-mail: arup@unt.edu.* (Z.W.) E-mail: zmwang@gmail.com.* (A.K.) E-mail: arkady@unt.edu.06 07 2016 31 07 2016 1 1 19 28 08 04 2016 14 06 2016 Copyright © 2016 American Chemical
Society2016American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The enhancement of light from semiconductors
due to surface plasmons
coupled resonantly to its emission is limited because of dissipation
in the metal and is also restricted by the dielectric characteristics
and homogeneity of the metal–semiconductor interface. We report
a new mechanism based on electrostatic interactions of carriers and
their image charges in metals to generate more photons from optical
sources at frequencies that are off-resonant to the localized plasmon
frequency. Coulomb catalysis of carrier accumulation resulting from
the inhomogeneity of metal nanodroplets on a semiconductor’s
surface can result in an enhancement of light that is nondissipative
and does not require resonant coupling of plasmons to the emission
wavelength. The enhancement occurs because of an increase in the ratio
of radiative to nonradiative recombination in the vicinity of metal
nanoparticles. It is equally effective with any type of metal and
enhances radiation at any frequency, a property that is of principal
importance for the realization of widely tunable semiconductor emitters.
This fundamental mechanism provides a new perspective for improving
the efficiency of light emitters and controlling carrier concentration
on the nanoscale. The structural characteristics of the hybrid metal–semiconductor
emitters are studied using electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy.
We demonstrate the electrostatic mechanism by studying steady-state
and transient photoluminescence from two-dimensional semiconductors,
such as GaAs/AlGAs quantum wells, and bulk semiconductors, such as
ZnO thin films, emitting in the near-IR and UV wavelength regimes,
respectively.

document-id-old-9ao6b00009document-id-new-14ao-2016-00009bccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The intensity of light emitted by a semiconductor
source is generally
determined by the availability of electron–hole (e–h)
pairs and by the rate of their spontaneous recombination. However,
this rate can be modified by the environment.1 In particular, a metal film deposited on an emitter enhances the
rate of radiative spontaneous emission because a photon can be emitted
into a surface plasmon channel.2,3 The strongest enhancement
is observed at the frequency of plasmonic resonance, ωs. During the last 2 decades, the resonant enhancement of light due
to a coupling of the recombining carriers to the surface plasmons
has been reported for different emitters, including quantum wells,2,4 quantum dots,5 Si quantum wires,6 distributed Bragg reflectors,7 ionized centers in a diamond,8 and dye lasers.9 A similar plasmonic
mechanism leads to a higher recombination rate for emitters in a plasmonic
nanocavity10 and organic light emitters.11 Recently, a nonresonant enhancement of radiation
from a dipole electromagnetically coupled to a hyperbolic metal–dielectric
metamaterial has also been predicted and detected.12−15 Together, these careful studies
demonstrate the enhancement of optical emission for radiation with
a frequency near the plasmonic resonance ωs or below
the frequency of the topological phase transition (for the case of
coupling to a metamaterial). Here, we report the observation that
electrostatic interactions between the recombining carriers and the
metal also gives rise to a phenomena that increases the intensity
of light emitted from optical sources. The nature of the enhancement
is akin to the strong Coulomb attraction of an electron that is pulled
back by its image charge as it attempts to leave a metal surface.
Accordingly, the primary component of the work function in metals
is due to attraction between an electron and its image.16 Since the electrostatic force between a charge
and its image is always attractive, an isolated metallic nanostructure
inclusion within a semiconductor attracts both electrons and holes
equally, creating a boundary layer with a higher concentration of
carriers. The Coulomb force resulting from the metal thereby catalyzes
the modulation of the carrier concentration in the semiconductor.
The charge carriers can be localized in a relatively narrow spatial
region dependent on the range and dimension of the inhomogeneous field
around the metal nanoparticle. Within this enriched layer, the probability
of radiative e–h recombination may be orders of magnitude higher
than that in the rest of the active zone of the semiconductor emitter.

In most plasmonic-enhanced light emitters, thin films or nanoparticles
are deposited on the surface of an emitter. A similar geometry is
considered in the present work, but instead of using electrodynamic
enhanced light emission due to plasmons, an electrostatic effect resulting
from Coulomb interactions in the off-resonant plasmon regime is used
for the light emission process. Compared to prior work,17 where nanoparticles were embedded within the
active region of the emitter, in the present case the metal nanoparticles
are on the surface and separated by a dielectric layer in a two-dimensional
quantum well system to demonstrate the image charge effect on surface
engineered structures for the first time. This work also shows a direct
comparison of the increase in the effect resulting from the electrostatic
image charge in the nanoparticles compared to metal thin films. The
inhomogeneity due to the random shape and size of the metal nanoparticles
accentuates the electrostatic effect compared to that of the metal
thin films, where image charge formation is more homogeneous, as shown
using a metal–ZnO nanoparticle system.

The width of the
enriched layer can be readily estimated. If the
carriers can access the region in the vicinity of the metal, then
within the layer of thickness d the electrostatic
energy of the interaction of a carrier with its image is ∼e2/εd, where ε is
the dielectric constant of the semiconductor. This energy must exceed kT; otherwise, the electrostatic attraction is dominated
by random thermal fluctuations. Assuming that ε ≈ 10,
one obtains the thickness of the layer d ≈ e2/(εkT) ∼ 20 nm
at T = 300 K, which is comparable to the width of
a single active layer in conventional multilayered semiconductor light
sources. This limit is valid when e–h plasma is in thermal
equilibrium. In a light emitter, the e–h plasma is not in equilibrium.
In this case, the enriched layer is formed because of a dynamic balance
among the recombining carriers, carriers created by external excitation,
and carriers drifting toward metallic inclusion due to attraction
to their images in metal. Because of the drift, the width of the enriched
layer may be much greater than 20 nm, extending up to the diffusion
length of the carriers.

A high concentration of carriers in
the enriched layer increases
both the radiative, Γr, and nonradiative, Γnr, recombination rates. The most efficient process for radiative
recombination in direct-gap semiconductors occurs through a bimolecular
mechanism that is quadratic in the carrier concentration, Γr = Bn2. In contrast, the Shockley–Read–Hall
mechanism of nonradiative recombination is characterized by a linear
rate, Γnr = An. Because Γr increases more quickly with n than Γnr, a higher concentration leads to an increase in the internal
quantum efficiency of the system 1  Here, we have neglected the Cn3 term for Auger recombination as the carrier concentrations
remain low enough compared to the radiative and nonradiative contributions
to ignore its contribution. Although the increase in η occurs
only within a narrow layer near the metal nanoparticle, it is sufficient
for a many-fold enhancement of the photoluminescence. The layer is
composed partly of carriers generated in situ via photoexcitation
and partly of e–h pairs drifting in from distant regions. Many
of the pairs that drift in would otherwise have recombined nonradiatively
in the absence of the metallic nanoparticle. These carriers comprise
a significant portion of the enhanced photoluminescence present in
the system.

Frequency matching condition, ω =
ωs, represents the principal
issue for
the plasmonic mechanism. For example, the InGaN/GaN quantum well emits
blue light (ω = 3.05 eV); therefore, frequency matching occurs
for a silver film with ωs ≈ 3.0 eV, leading
to a strong plasmonic enhancement.4 The
enhancement due to the image charge effect caused by a single inclusion
is determined by its size and geometry but not by the type of metal.
This universality is well-known in electrostatics, where the field
near a conductor is determined by its shape but not conductivity.
This insensitivity to the type of metal guaranties a frequency-independent
enhancement, which is required for the operation of a wide-band emitter.
It is also worth mentioning that gold is the preferred metal in electronics
due to its low rate of degradation, as compared to that of other metals.
Therefore, it is desirable to use gold in light sources emitting in
the visible and UV parts of the spectrum. Although a thin gold film
with ωs = 2.36 eV covering an InGaN/GaN multiquantum
well does not lead to a plasmonic enhancement4 because of the frequency mismatch (ωs < ω),
the gold nanoparticles embedded into the same structure strongly enhance
photoluminescence,17 thus providing potential
for a technological breakthrough in the design of semiconductor light
sources.

The geometry of the metallic component is a very important
issue
in the electrostatic mechanism. A flat and uniform metal film deposited
on a quantum well attracts carriers through their images. Since drift
occurs in the direction perpendicular to the metal plane, the e–h
pairs are compressed in this direction, but the average in-plane distance
between electrons and holes remains unchanged. Increasing the carrier
concentration along only a single axis (z axis) leads
to a faster recombination of the e–h pairs with the dipole
moment oriented along the z axis because these dipoles
have a stronger overlap of their e–h wavefunctions. The photons
emitted by these dipoles propagate almost parallel to the surface
of the quantum well. They can barely escape the structure through
the surface because of the total internal reflection. Thus, the fastest
e–h recombination processes do not contribute to the emission
detected. This leads to a slight decrease in the emission from a GaN
quantum well covered by thin gold film.4 Unlike a homogeneous flat film, metallic nanoparticles or metallic
objects with sharp edges serve as point attractors. The drift due
to Coulomb forces induced by the electrostatic image charge effect
leads to the concentration of carriers around a point attractor and
is not accompanied by the alignment of the e–h pairs perpendicular
to the surface. A local increase in the carrier concentration results
in a strong electrostatic enhancement.17

While both the plasmonic and electrostatic mechanisms of enhancement
are ineffective for InGaN/GaN QW structures capped with a thin gold
film, there is an observable effect of electrostatic attraction. The
spectrum of the structure with a gold covering is blue-shifted with
respect to the reference sample, as reported in our earlier work.34 The blue shift reported in ref (4) remained unexplained. Now,
we conclude that it originates from a reduction of the effective width
of the quantum well due to the electrostatic attraction of the carriers
to the metal film. A stronger confinement of carriers leads to a blue
shift in the spectrum. The Stark effect produced by image charges
always leads to a blue shift, unlike fields induced by spontaneous
polarization and lattice mismatch. These strain-induced electric fields
separate electrons and holes, leading to red-shifted emission compared
to the quantum well without the internal fields.18,19

Results and Discussion
Enhancement of IR Light from GaAs/AlGaAs
Quantum Wells
To best demonstrate nonresonant enhancement,
the resonant (plasmonic)
mechanism of enhancement has to be avoided by using metallic inclusions
with a plasmon frequency lying well below the frequency of light emission,
ωs < ω. We used a GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well,
which emits primarily at 1.53 eV. Metal nanodroplets of Ga were deposited
on an epitaxially grown GaAs heterostructure (Figure 1A,B). The enhanced and reference photoluminescence
spectra from the GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well are shown in Figure 2. In the reference sample,
the spectrum exhibits two peaks, at 1.53 and 1.51 eV. At T = 11 K, these peaks are due to excitons in the GaAs quantum well
and in bulk GaAs (the GaAs buffer region pictured in Figure 1A), respectively. The bulk
GaAs emission is not significantly affected by the image charges since
the buffer layer is far removed from the Ga droplets. The quantum
well emission, however, is enhanced by more than a factor of 20. This
enhancement cannot be due to plasmonic coupling. Indeed, for a homogeneous
film of Ga deposited on GaAs, ωs = 1.446 eV, which
lies below the emission spectrum in Figure 2. Moreover, for a nanoparticle, the localized
plasmon frequency is even lower, depending on its size and shape.
For the nanodroplet shown in Figure 1A, the sharp corners produce a strong confinement of
the charge distribution, leading to a further decrease of the resonant
frequency. It was recently shown20 that
in the vicinity of a corner α the resonant frequency drops as . For a nanoparticle with wetting
angle
α = 36° shown in Figure 1A, this means a decrease by at least 2.23-fold as compared
to a homogeneous film. An additional significant feature of the enhanced
spectrum is a 25 meV blue shift. This feature, together with the results
of time-resolved photoluminescence given below, clearly rules out
reflection and scattering at the Ga nanodroplets as reasons for the
observed enhancement. At the same time, the electrostatic mechanism
offers a natural explanation for these modifications of the spectrum.

Figure 1 Sample
structures including metal nanoparticles. (A) TEM image
of a GaAs quantum well (width of 10 nm) with a Ga nanodroplet (ND)
on the GaAs cap layer. The quantum well is separated from the Ga ND
by a cap layer consisting of a 5 nm GaAs and 10 nm AlGaAs barrier
layer. The wetting angle is 36°. Note that the quality of the
cap layer beneath the droplet is unaffected by the growth of the droplet.
(B) AFM image of the same sample showing the distribution of nanodroplets
on the surface. Silver (C), nickel (D), and gold (E) clusters/islands
covering the surface of bulk ZnO sample.

Figure 2 Photoluminescence spectra of the GaAs quantum well with Ga nanodroplets
(red) and reference (black) at T = 11 K. Here, the
enhancement is observed in the near-IR region, and the blue shift
is about 25 meV. The left-most peak represents bulk GaAs emission,
which has been used as a reference to normalize the relative intensities
of the quantum well peaks. Note the logarithmic scale along the y axis. A CW HeNe laser with 100 mW power at 633 nm was
used for the photoluminescence measurements.

In the presence of metal nanoparticles, the carrier concentrations
are essentially inhomogeneous. They can be calculated from the coupled
nonlinear diffusion equations with the drift terms caused by the electrostatic
field E(r) 2  The equation
for holes is obtained by replacing
e with h. Here, De,h are the diffusion
coefficients for electrons and holes, and g is the
density of e–h pairs produced by the pump light source in 1
s. The electrostatic field E(r) in the
drift term in eq 2 is
obtained from the Poisson equation 3  where ne,h(r) are the image charge densities
of the electrons and holes
and n′e,h(r′)
are the densities of their electrostatic images. These image charges
are displaced inside metallic nanostructure inclusions. Equations 2 and 3 form a self-consistent nonlinear set that defines the carrier densities
and the distribution of the electric field. Even in the simplest cases,
it can be solved only numerically. The strongly inhomogeneous character
of the solution is provided by the drift term. In the vicinity of
the metallic inclusion, the drift term has a singularity since the
field E tends to infinity, independent of the shape
of the inclusion. For a plane metal film and a metal sphere, the image
of a carrier and the corresponding attractive force can be easily
calculated. For a spherical segment in the shape of a cut sphere,
shown in Figure 1A,
the solution for the electrostatic potential can be well-approximated
by the potential produced by a probe charge at a metallic wedge, which
is known in electrostatics.21 Near the
edge of the segment, the wedge’s solution is practically exact.
For points away from the edge beneath the segment, a solution is given
that is practically undistinguishable from the solution for a homogeneous
plane. The distribution of the electric field due to an electron near
the wedge with angle α = 36° (the wetting angle in Figure 1A) is shown in Figure 6 in the Experimental Section. The attractive force toward
the edge of the droplet is provided by the net force, which has two
components: in-plane eEr directed along
the radius of the base circle and out-of-plane vertical eEz. For a nanodroplet with radius r =
30 nm, the in-plane region of attraction extends over 50 nm beyond
the edge of the nanodroplet. The typical electrostatic energy ∫r∞eEr(r)dr of a carrier displaced within the region of attraction (r < 80 nm) greatly exceeds the thermal energy kT at 11 K, allowing for the formation of a wide enriched
layer with a high concentration of carriers.

The attractive
out-of-plane component Ez confines the
motion of the carriers, thus effectively reducing the
width of the quantum well. Since the exciton emission energy increases
in a quantum well that is more narrow, we conclude that the blue shift
in the enhanced spectrum in Figure 2 is due to the field Ez, i.e., the Stark effect induced by image charges. Note that the
peak at 1.51 eV is not blue-shifted since it is due to bulk excitons.
The energy released at their recombination is independent of quantum
confinement, unlike the energy of the excitons in the quantum well.

The luminescence in the GaAs quantum well and bulk ZnO structures
is mostly due to the recombination of excitons. Being electrically
neutral particles, excitons are attracted to their electrostatic images
in metals due to dipole–dipole interactions. The attractive
force for such a case is F = (p·∇)E, where p = ed is the
dipole moment of the excitons. In the GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well, the
exciton Bohr radius λB is >10 nm, i.e., it is
comparable
with the quantum well width D and with the size R of the Ga nanodroplets, λB ∼ D ∼ R. In this situation, the exciton
dynamics is not very different from the dynamics of free e–h
pairs since the force of dipole–dipole interactions F ∼ (eλB)(E/R) ∼ eE ∼ e2/λB is, by an order of magnitude,
the same as the Coulomb attraction eE ∼ e2/D of a free electron (or
hole) to a Ga nanodroplet. Thus, the approximation of plasma of electron–hole
pairs is qualitatively valid.

The electrostatic mechanism exhibits
a specific power dependence
that is not observed for the plasmonic mechanism. Figure 3A shows how the enhancement
saturates as the excitation power is increased. Saturation is expected
since, in an e–h plasma, the range of electrostatic interactions
decreases with increasing carrier concentration (due to Debye screening).
Numerical simulations in Figure 3B, based on eqs 2 and 3, show a saturation of the enhancement,
at approximately the same level as that observed in the experiment.
It is clear that the saturation is due to the presence of metallic
nanodroplets since the reference sample shown in Figure 3A,B by black squares exhibits
a linear power dependence, thus indicating that Debye screening is
still negligible.

Figure 3 Saturation of emission intensity. (A) Power-dependent
intensity
for the GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructure with Ga nanodroplets shown in Figure 1A. Red circles are
samples with Ga nanodroplets, and black squares are reference samples.
Note that the intensity for the reference sample grows linearly with
power, whereas it grows nonlinearly and then saturates for the samples
with Ga. (B) Simulated integrated intensity versus excitation power
density. (C) Observation of increased photoluminescence decay. Measured time-dependent
photoluminescence for the sample with Ga nanodroplets (solid red line)
and for the reference sample (dashed black line).

One of the distinguishing features of image charge induced
light
enhancement, compared to plasmon or scattering induced enhancement,
is manifested in the behavior of the time-resolved photoluminescence.
The coupling of carriers in the quantum well to surface plasmons strongly
accelerates the recombination process, decreasing the lifetime of
e–h pairs by orders of magnitude.3,4,22 In a sample with a homogeneous distribution of carriers,
the e–h lifetime can be extracted directly from the time-resolved
experiment since all e–h pairs recombine at the same rate.
This is not the case for a sample with distributed metal nanoparticles,
where the concentration of e–h pairs is strongly inhomogeneous.
In the electrostatic case, the recombination rate induced by Coulomb
catalysis within the enriched layer is also significantly increased,
whereas the decrease in the lifetime is masked by the continual drift
of carriers toward the nanoparticle. The drift draws carriers that
would have otherwise recombined nonradiatively into the enriched region,
where they instead recombine radiatively (see eq 1). This process continues much longer than
the lifetime in the enriched layer since the pairs that have recombined
are replaced by those delivered by electrostatic drift. As a result,
the time-resolved photoluminescence in Figure 3C shows a slower decay for the quantum well
with nanodroplets than in the reference sample. However, this longer
decay cannot be attributed to a decrease in the recombination rate,
which increases within the enriched layer. Thus, electrostatic attraction
not only enhances the intensity of the luminescence but also extends
the time of the luminescence due to increased photon recycling. This
paradoxical result originates from a strongly inhomogeneous distribution
of carriers that, on one hand, locally increases the rate of radiative
recombination and, on the other hand, provides more available carriers
because of the interplay between drift and diffusion. It can be seen
from Figure 3C that
the total radiated energy, given by the area under the red curve of
slowly decaying intensity, is increased at least by a factor of 2
because of the Ga nanodroplets compared to the energy radiated by
the reference sample. This experiment proves that metallic nanostructure
inclusions may essentially increase the efficiency of the emitter,
thus showing a possible way to conserve energy resources, i.e., to
develop techniques that produce more light with the same input power.
Numerical simulations based on equations in ref (17) for the regime of time-resolved
luminescence in the GaN quantum well with infiltrated gold nanoparticles
also clearly demonstrate an increase in the decay time. Comparing
the enhancement in the light emission process from a simple molecular
or quantum well emitter or a plasmonic emitter, where the light emission
is directly proportional to the input pump intensity (as shown by
the black squares in Figure 3A), the total emission due to the image charge effect saturates.

The presence of metal does indeed lead to a spatially inhomogeneous
population of carriers, which is the main idea of the proposed mechanism
of light enhancement. It is true that an inhomogeneous concentration
of carriers leads to a coordinate-dependent decay rate, namely, the
higher the concentration, the higher the rate of spontaneous emission.
Such inhomogeneous decay rates lead, at far field, to a very unusual
decay of the photoluminescence, as shown in Figure 3C. This curve is a result of the superposition
of incoherent photons emitted with different rates from different
parts of the sample. At far field, individual decay rates are undistinguishable.
The electrostatic enhancement is sensitive to the concentration of
Ga nanodroplets. For too large a concentration, the image charge effect
is saturated, whereas for very few droplets on the surface, the Coulomb
force is not strong enough to modify the carrier density to enhance
the photoemission.

There are other factors that can influence
the enhancement in the
light emission due to the image charge effect. The scale of the distance
of the metal nanodroplets from the emitter with respect to the exciton
Bohr radius of the semiconductor quantum well emitter is expected
to influence the extent of the light enhancement process, which will
be studied in future work. This effect is Coloumbic in nature; thereby,
the distance of the nanoparticles from the quantum well is also expected
to influence the in-plane force due to the inhomogeneity of the nanoparticles.
This electrostatic force has a longer range compared to that of the
surface plasmonic field that decreases exponential away from the metal–dielectric
interface. However, in a light emitter system where the radiative
recombination rate is higher, such as that induced by resonant plasmonic
nanoparticles, the influence due to image charge is weaker as the
speed of the drift and diffusion toward the metal nanoparticles is
significantly slower than the e–h recombination rate.35

Enhancement of Near-UV Light Emission from
ZnO Bulk Semiconductors
The GaAs quantum well shown in Figure 1A,B represents a
particularly “ideal”
semiconductor heterostructure with a low concentration of structural
defects, high carrier mobility, and well-defined shape of the metallic
inclusions. The exciton Bohr radius was comparable to the width of
the dimension of the 2D quantum well light emitter. The exciton binding
energy is (∼20 meV) comparable to the thermal energy at room
temperature, which restricts the enhancement only to low temperatures,
where nonradiative recombination is not dominant. However, to demonstrate
the universal nature of this effect at room temperature without any
quantum confined light emission, the bulk form of a light emitting
material system with a stronger exciton binding energy, such as ZnO
(∼60 meV), is considered.

The electrostatic mechanism
of enhancement is also observed in ZnO, which is a comparatively “nonideal”
semiconductor with a higher defect density and lower carrier mobility
compared those of GaAs, at room temperature. Here, the emission is
due to the recombination of bulk excitons. Since this mechanism leads
to an enhancement that is expected to be independent of the type of
metal, the samples were coated with silver, nickel, and gold nanostructures
(Figure 1C–E).
These films were intentionally made nonuniform to avoid the alignment
of image dipoles, which leads to a quenching of the electrostatic
enhancement. The observed enhanced spectra are shown in Figure 4A. The strongest enhancement,
roughly 10-fold, is observed for silver and gold coatings, and a 2-fold
enhancement is observed for the nickel coating. The difference in
the level of enhancement is not due to the metals themselves but is
instead due to the different morphologies of the films. The size of
the Ni nanoparticles is significantly larger, which reduces the inhomogeneous
electric field distribution compared to that with the sharp edges
or smaller size of the Au or Ag nanoparticles. The enhancement disappears,
and the spectra become practically equal in the case of a high-quality
uniform coating, as shown in Figure 4B. None of the metals used induce plasmonic enhancement
since all three resonant frequencies are below the frequency of emission
of a ZnO crystal (see the inset of Figure 4B). Since the emission in ZnO originates
from the bulk excitons, the spectra with a metal coating in Figure 4 do not exhibit a
blue shift because the image charge fields do not change the binding
energy of the bulk excitons.

Figure 4 Spectra of a ZnO sample coated by strongly nonuniform
island films
(A) and high-quality uniform films (B) of Ag, Au, and Ni. The inset
shows the dispersion curves for surface plasmons propagating along
the interface between ZnO and one of the metals. The band edge or
excitonic emission from ZnO is higher than the SP energy. A HeCd laser
with 325 nm excitation was used.

Although both plasmonics and the image charge effect have
a similar
end result (enhancement), they are independent and have different
physical origins. It is possible that some effects currently attributed
to plasmonics might instead arise from electrostatic interactions.
For example, the plasmonic mechanism has previously been invoked to
explain an enhancement in the UV emission of ZnO due to Au nanoparticles23 as well as IR emission in Si using Ag nanoparticles.24 Since the resonant frequency for Au nanoparticles
is well below the emission frequency of ZnO and, similarly, that of
Ag nanoparticles is well above that of Si light emitters, coupling
to surface plasmons should be ruled out as a source of enhancement.

There have been numerous studies of an emission enhancement in
ZnO layers due to disordered Ag coatings. In all of these publications
(see, e.g., refs (25−27)), the obvious frequency
mismatch is ignored and the enhancement is unambiguously attributed
to plasmonic coupling. Now, we conclude that surface plasmons make
a negligible contribution to the enhancement. This is seen from Figure 4B, where a smooth
uniform coating by three different metals does not modify the emission
spectrum. If plasmons in the Ag film were strongly coupled to the
carriers in the ZnO layer, then the blue curve in Figure 4B would be noticeably higher
than the others. At low temperatures, nonradiative recombination is
reduced and the enhancement in spontaneous emission due to the radiative
recombination process exceeds the loss due to the nonradiative process.
Moreover, in the backscattered geometry of the photoluminescence measurement,
the reflection of the pump laser light due to the Ag film is also
expected to enhance the photoluminescence emission from the bulk ZnO.

For disordered islands, the frequency mismatch becomes even stronger
since any defect on an ideal plane has a finite curvature that reduces
the restoring force, which drives plasma oscillations at the metal
surface. A decrease in the plasmonic frequency has been recently demonstrated
for a metal wedge.20 More complicated geometries
may lead to a broad-band spectra of plasmonic resonances that, however,
always lie below the surface plasmon frequency ωs for a plane, see, e.g., refs (28) and (29). The strong enhancement of the intensity of electric field at “hot
spots” in disordered metallic aggregates30 and at sharp corners of plasmonic waveguides28,31 does not increase the resonant frequency.

Thus, the enhancement
in ZnO samples with a Ag coating cannot be
explained by resonant interaction with plasmons. The coupling of excitons
in ZnO with surface plasmons requires metallic nanoparticles or islands
with resonant frequencies higher than those of silver. Resonant coupling
was observed in a ZnO quantum well with deposited aluminum nanodiscs.32 We speculate that the modification of the emission
spectrum observed in ref (32) is due to both mechanisms, but it will require a detailed
study to separate the contribution of each mechanism. It is also observed
from Figure 4A that
the spectral width of the emission from ZnO is reduced when the photons
are resonantly coupled to the surface plasmon modes in the presence
of a Ag thin film because the spontaneous emission from the off-resonant
modes does not recombine radiatively as effectively as the resonant
modes via the surface plasmon channel. The spectral width of ZnO with
Ag and Ni thin films is influenced by a contribution from dissipation
due to the interface phonon modes that can lead to inhomogeneous broadening.
However, as the areal density of the ZnO surface covered by the metal
decreases, as in the case of the metal nanoparticles, the inhomogeneous
broadening decreases and the photoluminescence spectral width is comparable
to that of the emission from bare ZnO (Figure 4B). Because of the relatively higher concentration
of Ni nanoparticles on the surface of ZnO, as shown in Figure 1d, an increase in the spectral
line width is observed.

We have demonstrated a strong spontaneous
emission enhancement
from semiconductor light emitters that may be explained by the proposed
electrostatic mechanism. From the point of view of outgoing energy
and the device fabrication process, this mechanism is more efficient
than the well-known plasmonic mechanism. It not only enhances the
intensity of emission but also extends the time of the enhanced luminescence.
The latter property is due to the nondissipative nature of electrostatic
interactions. Being universal in the sense that this does not depend
on the type of the metal inclusion, it provides a nonresonant enhancement
of emission over a wide range of frequencies that makes it very attractive
for applications in white-light sources. The enhancement is observed
only in systems that exhibit some form of in-plane inhomogeneity in
the electric field. The in-plane attractive component of the electric
field is responsible for increasing the carrier concentration near
the nanoparticle, which produces the enhancement observed. Therefore,
a uniform metallic film, such as that studied on ZnO (results depicted
in Figure 4B), has
no in-plane component and hence produces a uniform carrier concentration
and does not exhibit any enhancement, whereas metal nanoparticles
on similar ZnO or a GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well result in inhomogeneous
charge distribution and enhanced photoluminescence.

Experimental
Section
Growth and Nanofabrication
GaAs Growth
GaAs/AlGaAs
quantum wells with liquid droplets
having a plasmon frequency off-resonant to the emission light of the
underlying quantum well is thereby chosen as a system for studying
the image charge effect. The samples were grown by molecular beam
epitaxy on a semi-insulating GaAs (100) substrate. The samples were
fabricated by depositing a 500 nm GaAs buffer layer and a 20 nm thick
Al0.33Ga0.67 layer, followed by the growth of
a single GaAs layer with a width of 10 nm, bound by a barrier of 10
nm Al0.33Ga0.67As. The single GaAs/AlGaAs quantum
well was capped with a 5 nm layer of GaAs, followed by the deposition
of Ga and the formation of Ga droplets at a substrate temperature
of 550 °C with the arsenic source being fully closed. The total
amount of Ga deposited was equal to an amount that would normally
result in 5.0–7.0 monolayers of GaAs growth. After growth,
the surface morphology of the QDP samples was characterized using
AFM under ambient conditions.33

The
structural properties of the samples were also characterized by TEM.
For TEM, platinum is usually deposited on the surface of the dielectric
to achieve a better resolution. Figure 1 merely indicates that the interface is smooth between
the Ga droplet and the GaAs cap layer facilitated by the Pt metal.
This sample, coated with Pt, was not used for optical characterization.
It shows only the structure of the GaAs quantum well with a Ga nanodroplet
on the top. Ga nanodroplets are being increasingly used for UV plasmonic
material systems.36,37 However, there is a long-wavelength
IR plasmon mode in bulk Ga metal that can shift further down in energy
for Ga droplets38 on GaAs. Ga has a low
melting point, and the transition temperature is further decreased
in the case of nanodroplets. It forms an oil droplet similar to hemispherical
droplets due to epitaxial droplet growth, as modeled in the this section.

The quantum well samples in our experiments were composed of 33%
Al in Ga1–xAlxAs alloy and are exactly lattice matched to the GaAs substrate
over which the entire heterostructure quantum well was grown. The
TEM image presented also clearly indicates that the quantum wells
are very high quality and does not show the presence of quantum dots.
The photoluminescence line width is very narrow compared to that of
quantum dots, which suffer from an inhomogeneous dot size distribution,
providing another indication that there was no quantum dot formation
in this system. As the nucleation of the Ga metal droplet is a top
down process, formed within the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system
after the GaAs cap layer attains thermal equilibrium, there is no
strain modification in the quantum well or on the surface. The interface
at the Ga droplet and GaAs is atomically flat and is not expected
to suffer from surface recombination or Fermi-pinning effects. The
electrostatic enhancement is sensitive to the concentration of Ga
nanodroplets. For too large a concentration of the droplets on the
surface, the image charge effect is saturated, whereas for very few
droplets on the surface, the Coulomb force is not strong enough to
modify the carrier density for enhanced photoemission.

ZnO Growth
ZnO thin films were grown by MBE on a sapphire
substrate. ZnO growth was carried out at 550 °C following the
deposition at 200 °C and annealing up to 650 °C of a low-temperature
ZnO buffer layer under oxygen-rich conditions. The homogeneous thin
films of Au, Ag, and Al were deposited using thermal vapor deposition
on the MBE grown thin film with atomic layer flatness. The Au and
Ag metal nanoparticles were formed on the ZnO surface by a combination
of thermal evaporation and rapid thermal annealing techniques. To
form the droplets, the thin films of metal on ZnO were heated in vacuum
at 400 °C for 30 min. As Ni atoms interact with the ZnO lattice
at high temperature to form the nonradiative carrier recombination
center, the annealing techniques could not be used for the formation
of Ni nanoparticles. Ni nanoparticles formed using the rapid thermal
annealing technique lead to a quenching of photoluminescence emission.
The Ni nanoparticles were instead commercially procured, and the sample
was heated at about 130 °C to achieve a better dispersion of
the nanoparticles on the surface of ZnO.

Optical Characterization
The GaAs/AlGaAs quantum well
has lower exciton binding energy (∼20 meV) and ZnO has a stronger
exciton binding energy (∼60 meV) compared to the thermal energy
at room temperature (∼26 meV). So that the excitons dissociate
at room temperature in the GaAs system, the emission spectra was measured
at low temperatures (10–15 K), whereas ZnO was measured at
room temperature. For the Ga/GaAs system, both a 532 nm laser diode
and 633 nm HeNe laser were used for excitation. The photoluminescence
spectra were collected on a JY Triax 550 spectrometer with a TE-cooled
CCD. The temperature was controlled during the temperature-dependent
measurement using a closed-cycle liquid He cryostat. For the spectra
shown in the figure, photoluminescence was measured using a CW HeNe
laser that had an average power of 100 mW at 633 nm. For the UV-based
ZnO samples, a HeCd laser was used for excitation. The wavelength
of this laser was 325 nm with the power at 45 mW. The photoluminescence
from the nanodroplet-covered samples was collected in the forward
scattering geometry, where the excitation light provided illumination
from the side of the active layer. For ZnO thin films coated with
metals, the pump laser was used for excitation from the substrate
side to avoid any absorption or reflection of the pump photon by the
metal layer. Excitation for the time-resolved measurements was performed
using an 80 fs pulse width and an 80 MHz Ti:sapphire laser at 730
nm for Ga/GaAs, which was doubled to 350 nm in the case of Au/InGaN.
The excitation power was between 0.06 and 2.92 mW/cm2.
The decay lifetime was measured using a spectrophotometer-based photon-counting
Hamamatsu Streak camera system.

Computational Method
Modeling of geometrical effect
of the electrostatic image charge effect in hemispherical nanodroplets
on a dielectric:

Solution of the Electrostatic Problem for
a Conducting Cut Sphere
The structure of the droplets formed
on GaAs was modeled from the
TEM images shown in Figure 1A,B. It can be seen that there is a 36° angle that was
formed at the interface. Therefore, for the theoretical analysis,
the following geometry was used.

The electrostatic field produced
by a point probe charge e placed near a conducting
cut sphere (spherical segment) in Figure 5 is approximated by the field of a conducting
wedge tangent to the cut sphere. This approximation is valid since
the field beneath any conducting flat surface coincides with the field
of a homogeneous metal plane away from the edge of the segment. Close
to the edge, both objects, the cut sphere and the wedge, induce the
same distribution of the electrostatic field, which is determined
by the sharpness of angle α. To calculate the electric field,
we use the well-known result (see, e.g., ref (19)) for the Green function
of a conducting wedge. The position of the probe charge e is given by the polar coordinates (a, γ).
Then, the electrostatic potential at the observation point with coordinates
(R, θ) is determined by the following integral 4  Here 5  This potential vanishes at the conducting
surfaces θ = 0 and θ = α.

Figure 5 Cross-section of the
cut sphere and tangent wedge. Polar coordinates
of the probe charge e and the observation point are
(a, γ) and (R, θ), respectively.

We are interested in the potential
at the location of the charge
itself, so we let θ = γ and R = a + δ. Since we want to calculate the attractive force eE(a, γ) of charge e to the wedge, we must exclude the potential of the charge
itself from eq 4, giving 6  Calculating the limits in eq 6, we use the relation δ
= Rη, which follows from eq 5. In numerical calculations of the electric
field E, we take α = 36°, i.e., the wetting
angle measured using the image in Figure 1A. The radius of the base of the cut sphere
is 30 nm. The result for the distribution of the radial (in-plane Er) and vertical (out-of-plane Ez) components of the electric field is shown in Figure 6A for an electron displaced 15 nm below the surface, z = 0. The component Er, which
is the source of the emission enhancement, is different from zero
within a wide range, 15 nm < r < 100 nm. It
becomes practically zero at r = 0, as it should be
for a system with cylindrical symmetry. The vertical component Ez saturates for r < 30 nm,
approaching the value for a homogeneous conducting plane. The reduced
field, due to Debye screening, is shown by a dashed line. It was calculated
self-consistently using Poisson eq 3 and diffusion eq 2 with ∂n/∂t = 0 (continuous wave excitation). For metal inclusion in the form
of a cut sphere, the thickness of the enriched layer is different
along the vertical and radial directions. Figure 6B shows how carrier concentration increases
toward the center, r = 0. This increase strongly
depends on temperature.

Figure 6 Calculated electric field and carrier concentrations
near Ga nanodroplets
in a GaAs system. (A) Distribution of the out-of-plane, Ez, and in-plane, Er, components
of the electric field exerted on an electron displaced 15 nm below
a metal cut sphere with a radius of 30 nm. The center of the cut sphere
is at r = 0, and its edge coincides with the dashed
vertical line at r = 30 nm. Here, we used the analytical
solution of the electrostatic problem for a metal wedge.19 The dashed lines represent the self-consistent
calculations for the reduced electric field due to electrostatic screening
used in calculating the concentrations in B. (B) Radial distributions
of the carrier concentration at varying temperatures obtained from
the diffusion (eq 2)
with the image charge field shown in panel A.

Author Present Address
∇ (A.L.)
Department of Electrical Engineering, Duke University, Durham,
North Carolina, United States.

Author Contributions
¶ K.G. and
A.L. contributed equally to this work.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
QWquantum well

TEMtransmission electron microscopy

AFMatomic force microscopy
==== Refs
References
Purcell E. 
Spontaneous
emission probabilities at radio frequencies . Phys. Rev. 
1946 , 69 , 681 –685 .
Hecker N. E. ; Hopfel R. A. ; Sawaki N. ; Maier T. ; Strasser G. 
Surface plasmon-enhanced
photoluminescence from a single quantum well . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1999 , 75 , 1577 –1579 . 10.1063/1.124759 .
Neogi A. ; Lee C. W. ; Everitt H. O. ; Kuroda T. ; Tackeuchi A. ; Yablonovitch E. 
Enhancement of spontaneous recombination rate in a
quantum well by resonant surface plasmon coupling . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2002 , 66 , 153305 10.1103/PhysRevB.66.153305 .
Okamoto K. ; Niki I. ; Shvartser A. ; Narukawa Y. ; Mukai T. ; Scherer A. 
Surface- plasmon-enhanced
light emitters based on InGaN
quantum wells . Nat. Mater. 
2004 , 3 , 601 –605 . 10.1038/nmat1198 .15322535 
Andersen M. L. ; Stobbe S. ; Sörensen A. S. ; Lodahl P. 
Strongly modified plasmon-
matter interaction with mesoscopic quantum emitters . Nat. Phys. 
2011 , 7 , 215 –218 . 10.1038/nphys1870 .
Cho C.-H. ; Aspetti C. O. ; Park J. ; Agarwal R. 
Silicon coupled with
plasmon nanocavities generates bright visible hot luminescence . Nat. Photonics 
2013 , 7 , 285 –289 . 10.1038/nphoton.2013.25 .23710256 
Gazzano O. ; de Vasconcellos S. M. ; Gauthron K. ; Symonds C. ; Bloch J. ; Voisin P. ; Bellessa J. ; Lemaitre A. ; Senellart P. 
Evidence for
confined Tamm plasmon modes under metallic microdisks and application
to the control of spontaneous optical emission . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2011 , 107 , 247402 10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.247402 .22243024 
Choy J. T. ; Hausmann B. J. M. ; Babinec T. M. ; Bulu I. ; Khan M. ; Maletinsky P. ; Yacoby A. ; Loncar M. 
Enhanced single-photon
emission from a diamond-silver aperture . Nat.
Photonics 
2011 , 5 , 738 –743 . 10.1038/nphoton.2011.249 .
Hayashi S. ; Maekawa A. ; Kim S. C. ; Fujii M. 
Mechanism of enhanced
light emission from an emitting layer embedded in metal-insulator-metal
structures . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater.
Phys. 
2010 , 82 , 035441 10.1103/PhysRevB.82.035441 .
Russell K. J. ; Liu T.-L. ; Cui S. ; Hu E. L. 
Large spontaneous
emission enhancement in plasmonic nanocavities . Nat. Photonics 
2012 , 6 , 459 –462 . 10.1038/nphoton.2012.112 .
Liu J. S. Q. ; Brongersma M. L. 
Omni-directional light emission via
surface plasmon-polaritons . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2007 , 90 , 091116 10.1063/1.2437053 .
Kim J. ; Drachev V. P. ; Jacob Z. ; Naik G. V. ; Boltasseva A. ; Narimanov E. E. ; Shalaev V. M. 
Improving the radiative decay rate
for dye molecules with hyperbolic metamaterials . Opt. Express 
2012 , 20 , 8100 –8106 . 10.1364/OE.20.008100 .22453481 
Krishnamoorthy H. N. S. ; Jacob Z. ; Narimanov E. ; Kretzschmar I. ; Menon V. M. 
Topological transitions in metamaterials . Science 
2012 , 336 , 205 –209 . 10.1126/science.1219171 .22499943 
Shalaginov M. Y. ; Ishii S. ; Liu J. ; Liu J. ; Irudayaraj J. ; Lagutchev A. ; Kildishev A. V. ; Shalaev V. M. 
Broadband enhancement
of spontaneous emission from nitrogen- vacancy centers in nanodiamonds
by hyperbolic metamaterials . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2013 , 102 , 173114 –173116 . 10.1063/1.4804262 .
Naik G. V. ; Saha B. ; Liu J. ; Saber S. M. ; Stach E. A. ; Irudayaraj J. M. K. ; Sands T. D. ; Shalaev V. M. ; Boltasseva A. 
Epitaxial
superlattices with titanium nitride as a plasmonic component for optical
hyperbolic metamaterials . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 
2014 , 111 , 7547 –7551 . 10.1073/pnas.1319446111 .
Lang N. D. ; Kohn W. 
Theory of metal surfaces: work function . Phys.
Rev. B 
1971 , 3 , 1215 –1223 . 10.1103/PhysRevB.3.1215 .
Llopis A. ; Lin J. ; Pereira S. M. S. ; Trindade T. ; Martins M. A. ; Watson I. M. ; Krokhin A. A. ; Neogi A. 
Electrostatic mechanism
of strong enhancement of light emitted by semiconductor quantum wells . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2013 , B87 , 201304 10.1103/PhysRevB.87.201304 .
Takeuchi T. ; Sota S. ; Katsuragawa M. ; Komori M. ; Takeuchi H. ; Amano H. ; Akasaki I. 
Quantum-confined
Stark effect due
to piezoelectric fields in GaInN strained quantum wells . Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
1997 , 36 , L382 –L384 . 10.1143/JJAP.36.L382 .
Kuroda T. ; Tackeuchi A. 
Influence of free carrier screening on the luminescence
energy shift and carrier lifetime of InGaN quantum wells . J. Appl. Phys. 
2002 , 92 , 3071 –3074 . 10.1063/1.1502186 .
Sturman B. ; Podivilov E. ; Gorkunov M. 
Universal plasmonic properties of
two- dimensional nanoparticles possessing sharp corners . Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2013 , 87 , 115406 10.1103/PhysRevB.87.115406 .
Landau L. D. ; Lifshitz E. M. ; Pitayevskii L. P.  Electrodynamics of
Continuous Media , 2 nd ed.; Pergamon Press : Oxford , 1984 .
Okamoto K. ; Niki I. ; Scherer A. ; Maltezos G. ; Narukawa Y. ; Mukai T. ; Kawakami Y. 
Scherer, Surface
plasmon enhanced
spontaneous emission rate of InGaN/GaN quantum wells probed by time-resolved
photoluminescence spectroscopy . Appl. Phys.
Lett. 
2005 , 87 , 071102 10.1063/1.2010602 .
Chen T. ; Xing G. Z. ; Zhang Z. ; Chen H. Y. ; Wu T. 
Tailoring
the photoluminescence of ZnO nanowires using Au nanoparticles . Nanotechnology 
2008 , 19 , 435711 10.1088/0957-4484/19/43/435711 .21832715 
Pillai S. ; Catchpole K. R. ; Trupke T. ; Zhang G. ; Zhao J. ; Green M. A. 
Enhanced emission from Si-based light-emitting diodes
using surface plasmons . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2006 , 88 , 161102 10.1063/1.2195695 .
Lai C. W. ; An J. ; Ong H. C. 
Surface-plasmon-mediated
emission from metal-capped
ZnO thin films . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2005 , 86 , 251105 –251107 . 10.1063/1.1954883 .
Abiyasa A. P. ; Yu S. F. ; Lau S. P. ; Leong E. S. P. ; Yang H. Y. 
Enhancement
of ultravi- olet lasing from Ag-coated highly disordered ZnO films
by surface-plasmon resonance . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2007 , 90 , 231106 –231108 . 10.1063/1.2746940 .
You J. B. ; Zhang X. W. ; Fan Y. M. ; Yin Z. G. ; Cai P. F. ; Chen N. F. 
Effects of the morphology
of ZnO/Ag interface on the
surface-plasmon-enhanced emission of ZnO films . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2008 , 41 , 205101 –205106 . 10.1088/0022-3727/41/20/205101 .
Aubry A. ; Lei D. Y. ; Fernández-Domínguez A. I. ; Sonnefraud Y. ; Maier S. A. ; Pendry J. B. 
Plasmonic light-harvesting
devices over the whole visible spectrum . Nano
Lett. 
2010 , 10 , 2574 –2579 . 10.1021/nl101235d .20518545 
Chettiar U.
K. ; Nyga P. ; Thoreson M. D. ; Kildishev A. V. ; Drachev V. P. ; Shalaev V. M. 
FDTD modeling
of realistic semicontinuous
metal films . Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 
2010 , 100 , 159 –168 . 10.1007/s00340-010-3985-y .
Gramotnev D. K. ; Bozhevolnyi S. I. 
Nanofocusing
of electromagnetic radiation . Nat. Photonics 
2013 , 8 , 13 –22 . 10.1038/nphoton.2013.232 .
Thoreson M. D. ; Fang J. ; Kildishev A. V. ; Prokopeva L. J. ; Nyga P. ; Chettiar U. K. ; Shalaev V. M. ; Drachev V. P. 
Fabrication
and realistic modeling of three-dimensional metal-dielectric composites . J. Nanophotonics 
2011 , 5 , 051513 .
Lawrie B.
J. ; Kim K.-W. ; Norton D. P. ; Haglund R. F. Jr.
Plasmon-exciton
hybridization in ZnO quantum-well Al nanodisc heterostructures . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 6152 –6157 . 10.1021/nl3029784 .23171302 
Pomraenke R. ; Lienau Ch. ; Mazur Yu. ; Wang Z. M. ; Liang B. ; Tarasov G. ; Salamo G. 
Near-field optical spectroscopy of
GaAs/AlyGa1–yAs quantum dot pairs grown
by high-temperature droplet epitaxy . Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 
2008 , 77 , 075314 10.1103/PhysRevB.77.075314 .
Gryczynski K. G. ; Vemuri P. R. ; Watson I. ; Neogi A. 
Influence of localized
electric field on the bandedge emission of hybrid Au-GaN/InGaN quantum
wells . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2011 , 99 , 121905 10.1063/1.3640492 .
Lin J. ; Llopis A. ; Krokhin A. ; Pereira S. ; Watson I. ; Neogi A. 
Comparison of electrostatic and localized plasmon induced light enhancement
in hybrid InGaN/GaN quantum wells . Appl. Phys.
Lett. 
2014 , 104 , 242106 10.1063/1.4884075 .
Wu P. C. ; Losurdo M. ; Kim T. H. ; Giangregorio M. ; Bruno G. ; Everitt H. O. ; Brown A. S. 
Plasmonic
gallium
nanoparticles on polar semiconductors: interplay between nanoparticle
wetting, localized surface plasmon dynamics, and interface charge . Langmuir 
2009 , 25 , 924 –930 . 10.1021/la802678y .19105600 
Wu P. ; Kim T. H. ; Brown A. ; Losurdo M. ; Bruno G. ; Everitt H. O. 
Real-time plasmon resonance tuning of liquid Ga nanoparticles
by in situ spectroscopic ellipsometry . Appl.
Phys. Lett. 
2007 , 90 , 103119 –103121 . 10.1063/1.2712508 .
Cleary J.
W. ; Esfahani N. N. ; Vangala S. ; Guo J. ; Hendrickson J. R. ; Leedy K. D. ; Thomson D. ; Look D. C. 
Long-wavelength
infrared surface plasmons on Ga-doped ZnO films excited via 2D hole
arrays for extraordinary optical transmission . Proc. SPIE 
2013 , 88090L 10.1117/12.2022278 .

