
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02203ArticleSynthesis, Characterization, and Stability Studies of Ge-Based Perovskites
of Controllable Mixed Cation Composition, Produced with an Ambient
Surfactant-Free Approach Yue Shiyu †McGuire Scott C. †Yan Hanfei ‡Chu Yong S. ‡Cotlet Mircea §Tong Xiao §Wong Stanislaus S. *†† Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-3400, United States‡ National Synchrotron Light Source II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, United States§ Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, Building 735, Upton, New York 11973, United States* E-mail: stanislaus.wong@stonybrook.edu.22 10 2019 05 11 2019 4 19 18219 18233 16 07 2019 08 10 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In
this report, we have applied a facile, ligand-free, ambient synthesis
protocol toward the fabrication of not only a series of lead-free
Ge-based perovskites with the general formulation of MA1–xFAxGeI3 (where x was changed from 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, to 1) but also CsGeI3. Specifically, our methodology for producing ABX3 systems is generalizable, regardless of the identity of either the
A site cation or the X site halide ion. Moreover, it incorporates
many advantages, including (i) the possibility of efficiently generating
pure Ge-based perovskite particles of any desired chemical composition,
(ii) the use of readily available, commercial precursors and comparatively
lower toxicity solvents, (iii) the practicality of scale up, and (iv)
the elimination of the need for any superfluous organic surface ligands
or surfactants. In addition to providing mechanistic insights into
their formation, we have examined the chemical composition, crystallite
size, morphology, surface attributes, oxidation states, and optical
properties of our as-prepared perovskites using a combination of diffraction,
microscopy, and spectroscopy techniques. Specifically, we noted that
the optical band gap could be reliably tuned as a function of chemical
composition, via the identity of the A site cation. Moreover, we have
probed their stability, not only under standard storage conditions
but also, for the first time, when subjected to both e-beam- and X-ray-induced
degradation, using cumulative data from sources such as synchrotron-based
scanning hard X-ray microscopy. Importantly, of relevance for the
potential practical incorporation of these Pb-free perovskites, our
work has emphasized the possibility of controlling the chemical composition
within Ge-based perovskites as a means of rationally tuning their
observed band gaps and optical behavior.

document-id-old-9ao9b02203document-id-new-14ao9b02203ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Solar
cell technology is an attractive, promising avenue of research, in
part because sunlight is free and abundant, and unlike fossil fuels
is fundamentally renewable and clean.1,2 In this context,
hybrid organic–inorganic halide perovskites have shown very
promising performance for energy conversion applications.3 Several factors appear to play a role in this
behavior, with one of the most important ones being ascribed to the
capability of tuning band gaps4 through
externally controlled variables such as chemical composition. However,
traditional Pb-based perovskites are relatively unstable in the presence
of air and moisture.5 Hence, the major
challenge has been to seek viable and practical alternatives to Pb
without necessarily compromising upon the intrinsically high efficiency
and favorable photophysical properties of this class of materials.
There are many potential chemically diverse solutions to this problem,
which we discuss in detail in the Supporting Information.

Nonetheless,
we are primarily focused on Ge-based perovskites herein. What is our
motivation? Ge-based perovskites possess an attractive direct band
gap of 1.88 eV, which is comparable in magnitude with the 1.48 eV
value reported for conventional Pb-based perovskites. Moreover, as
compared with elements such as Pb, Sn, Cd, and Be, which possess similarly
narrow band gaps, Ge is less toxic and more earth-abundant. Therefore,
in light of these considerations, our approach in this study herein
has been to substitute Pb with Ge.

Based on the prior literature,
it is evident that Ge-based perovskites are especially promising to
consider because of their following advantages.(i) Ge-based perovskites maintain a proper,
direct band gap, which can be tuned by changing the A and the X sites.
Specifically, CsGeI3, MAGeI3, and FAGeI3 evince experimentally measured band gaps of 1.6, 1.9, and
2.2 eV,6 respectively, while CsGeCl3 and CsGeBr3 possess corresponding band gaps of
3.67 and 2.32 eV,7,8 respectively. Indeed, with band
gaps capable of being tailored to values lower than 2.0 eV, Ge-based
perovskites have the potential to absorb light energy with wavelengths
smaller than 610 nm (i.e., orange).

(ii) As compared with Sn-based perovskites, theoretical
calculations suggest that Ge-based perovskites are characterized by
a more negative (i.e., more favorable) free energy of formation, thereby
implying a greater stability of MAGeI3 versus MASnI3, for instance.9

(iii) Ge-based perovskites possess high
ionic conductivity7,10 and good electronic properties.7,11

(iv) Ge is earth-abundant
and evokes comparatively little toxicity or environmental concerns,
thereby overcoming a major drawback of either Pb or Sn-based perovskites.

(v) Ge is much lighter than
both Pb and Sn, a factor which should improve upon the power density
of Ge-containing materials. Overall, Ge-based perovskites deserve
further attention and effort.



It is worth
pointing out that the majority of work on Ge-based perovskites is
based on theoretical considerations of their stability, band gap,
orbital charge density, electronic character, and second-harmonic
generation properties. Fewer papers regarding their experimental synthesis
exist. Many of these studies either employ complicated methods or
have limited practical applicability. In the initial synthesis of
hybrid Ge iodide perovskites, for example,6 a rather complicated hot coprecipitation method was utilized in
the presence of H3PO2 and concentrated HI, which
are both relatively hazardous; in addition, H3PO2 resides in the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency list of controlled substances.
Although this procedure has subsequently been utilized to produce
Ge-iodide perovskites incorporating different representative A site
cations, including Cs+, MA+, FA+,
CH3C(NH2)2+, C(NH2)3+, (CH3)3NH+, and (CH3)2CHNH3+, the reaction remains a multistep process, requiring elevated operating
temperatures and an inert reaction atmosphere. Moreover, the isolated
morphology consists of inhomogeneous, micron-sized crystals. A second
strategy was associated12 with combining
MAI, MABr, and GeI2 precursors together in dry DMF followed
by a reaction within an inert atmosphere at room temperature. Though
inherently simpler, only MAGeBrxI3–x could be readily synthesized in
this process, which nevertheless took more than 24 h to complete.
A third protocol, focused on producing CsGeI3 colloidal
nanocrystals alone,13 used a hot-injection
technique, relying on relatively high temperatures, and necessitated
operation under vacuum.

Hence, given this relatively limited
existing body of prior work, we have sought to develop a generalized
and flexible way of generating Ge-based perovskites, preferably using
a relatively simple, room-temperature reaction, which could be meaningfully
expanded to fabricating more than one type of Ge-based perovskite.
Specifically, in this study, we have modified and adapted traditional
ligand-assisted reprecipitation methods for Pb-based perovskite synthesis14,15 with notable variations. Indeed, we provide a facile and efficient
synthesis method that in theory can be applied to families of Ge-based
perovskites incorporating different cation A sites and anion X sites,
so as to generate a range of important candidate materials, such as
but not limited to cesium germanium iodide, methylammonium (MA+) germanium iodide, and formamidinium (FA+) germanium
iodide. Moreover, our protocol is capable of enabling the synthesis
of more compositionally variable series of perovskites, such as MA1–xFAxGeI3 (with x altering from 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75,
to 1) in addition to MA/FAGeBrxI3–x (with x = 1 and 2).

Significantly,
we could tune the optical performance, especially the band gap, of
our materials by creating a mixed MA+ and FA+ cation Ge-based perovskite in which the relative ratios between
the two cations were systematically varied. By analyzing modifications
in our X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns and photoluminescence (PL)
spectra, we concluded that, indeed, we could systematically tune and
presumably optimize the chemical compositions and the band gaps of
not only our Ge-based perovskites in general but also, more specifically,
our family of mixed cation Ge-based perovskites. As evidence of this
accomplishment, we were able to produce a series of Ge perovskites,
possessing a well-defined range of different discrete colors and absorption
wavelengths.

To summarize the extent of the contributions emanating
from our efforts, we have synthesized and characterized (i.e., through
the prism of tailorable parameters, such as but not limited to morphology,
monodispersity, and chemical purity) a number of Ge-based perovskites,
prepared using a relatively facile, reasonable, and generalizable
synthesis process. In particular, we have analyzed (i) morphology
through the mediation of transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), and high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM), (ii) chemical composition and stability using
a combination of XRD, scanning hard X-ray microscopy (SHXM), and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), (iii) surface chemistry with Fourier
Transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and XPS, and (iv) optical
properties using UV–visible (UV−vis) and photoluminescence
(PL) spectroscopies. In so doing, we have achieved structure–property
relationships that correlate chemical composition (especially with
respect to stoichiometrically mixed cation perovskites) with optical
properties, for example. Moreover, we have investigated the key roles
of solvent–precursor interactions in the context of acquiring
useful understanding of the growth mechanism of these materials. Indeed,
it is worth emphasizing that the focus of our paper is on investigating
the chemistry of the materials themselves as opposed to measuring
their device characteristics, which is beyond the scope of the present
work.

We were particularly interested in analyzing the evolution
of physical structure and chemical composition as a function of varying
irradiation conditions. The results of this series of stability tests
under ambient environment and inert atmosphere conditions attest to
their degradation behavior and potential for long-term use in optoelectronic
applications. Electron-beam-induced degradation under high energy
electron irradiation conditions has been previously observed not only
for Pb-based perovskites16 but also for
CsGeI3.13 It should be emphasized
that, whereas the corresponding X-ray-induced degradation has been
noted and studied for Pb-based perovskites, comparable experiments
have yet to be carried out for their Ge-based analogues.

As
such, we undertook similar types of experiments herein. To highlight
the comprehensive nature of our efforts to understand the potential
susceptibility to radiation of our Ge-based perovskites, we probed
their stability and durability through a series of X-ray-based measurements
spanning from the macroscopic to nanoscopic range, involving X-ray
diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and scanning X-ray
microscopy studies, incorporating high-resolution 2D elemental and
morphological mapping. These complementary X-ray-based analyses seek
to generate data on morphology, crystallite structure, surface properties,
and elemental distribution within our samples. By means of comparison,
we have also analyzed the stability of these materials, when subjected
to analogous complementary electron-beam-based irradiation associated
with TEM, HRTEM, and SEM. Moreover, as a relatively new characterization
technique,17−21 synchrotron-based SHXM imaging with a sub-15 nm probe size has not
been previously applied as a means of spatially identifying bulk and
surface distributions of different elements within solar perovskite-based
materials. Our reported data therefore represent a demonstration of
principle for the promising potential of this unique characterization
method.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Composition
and Structural Characterization
By following a facile synthesis
procedure, we were able, with relative ease, to generate a series
of Ge-based perovskites with variable A site cation occupancy. Hence,
in the absence of any organic ligand, a series of Ge-based perovskites,
including MA1–xFAxGeI3 with x = 0.25, 0.5, and
0.75; MAGeI3 (x = 0); FAGeI3 (x = 1); and CsGeI3, were readily synthesized.
We found that, with different A+ cations, the isolated
perovskites evinced a corresponding set of varied coloration. Specifically,
representative samples of MAGeI3, FAGeI3, and
CsGeI3 were dark red, yellow, and black, respectively,
in color. Furthermore, within the series of MA1–xFAxGeI3 with x = 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75, the as-generated perovskites possessed
individual characteristic hues and became more yellow with increasing x values, or conversely, decreasing MA+ content
(Figure S1). As such, our studies demonstrated
that the identity of the A site cation could indeed alter band gaps,
affect the amount of light absorbed, and ultimately determine the
observed color of as-prepared perovskites.

To confirm the formation
of our as-prepared samples, we obtained XRD patterns so as to verify
the crystal structure and crystallinity, as shown in Figures 1 and 2. All germanium perovskites, including CsGeI3, MAGeI3, and FAGeI3, ought to exhibit a trigonal structure
with a space group of R3m. Based
upon previously reported XRD patterns of MAGeI3 and FAGeI3 (Figure 1A,G),
our data (Figure 1B,F)
are consistent with this prior study.6 The
most intense peaks located at 14.79, 25.97, and 29.58° for MAGeI3 could be potentially assigned to the (101), (20-1), and (202)
planes, respectively. In addition, peaks situated at 14.37, 25.62,
and 28.9° for FAGeI3 could be identified with their
(101), (20-1), and (202) planes, respectively.

Figure 1 Collected XRD patterns
of as-prepared (B) MAGeI3 (black), (C) MA0.75FA0.25GeI3 (red), (D) MA0.5FA0.5GeI3 (blue), (E) MA0.25FA0.75GeI3 (magenta), and (F) FAGeI3 (olive) by comparison
with (A) the standard diffraction pattern for MAGeI3 (black)
and (G) the standard diffraction pattern for FAGeI3 (olive).
Peaks are labeled with the presumed plane orientation. The yellow
square highlights the area associated with the most intense (202)
peak, a region that is magnified and shown in detail. Red arrows point
to the (10-5) peak for each sample, whereas the blue arrows can be
ascribed to the (220) peak.

Figure 2 (A) Standard
diffraction pattern (red) for CsGeI3 and (B) the collected
XRD pattern (black) of as-prepared CsGeI3. The peak labeled
with a star in panel (B) can be assigned to CsI impurities.

Furthermore, XRD patterns associated with MA1–xFAxGeI3 with x = 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75, respectively
(Figure 1C–E)
yield features with similar profile shapes to those of the parent
compounds of MAGeI3 and FAGeI3, respectively.
However, the peaks within the as-collected XRD patterns do shift toward
lower angles with increasing x. The trend is particularly
evident when analyzing magnifications
of the XRD patterns (obtained at an energy of 8.04 keV, corresponding
to Cu Kα radiation) in the region from 25 to 30° (Figure S2). In that example, the most intense
peak of the (202) plane shifted from 29.58, 29.44, 29.19, 29.14, and
ultimately to 28.9° with increasing x. Nonetheless,
in Figure 1B–F,
we noted that the peak located at 43.02°, corresponding to, the
(10-5) plane (designated by the red arrow), reduced in size with increasing x values (i.e., lower MA+ content) to 0.5, relative
to the peak associated with the (220) plane (highlighted by the blue
arrow). Indeed, the (10-5) peak intensity keeps decreasing with a
corresponding increase in x, thereby suggesting that
the crystal structure alters upon substitution at the A+ cation site.

With respect to MAGeI3 and FAGeI3, based upon Bragg’s equation, whereas the peak shifted
to lower angles, the corresponding interplanar distance d likely increased, indicative of crystal lattice expansion. Moreover,
the FA+ cation is larger in size than the MA+ cation, again consistent with the trend in the peak shift noted
within the diffraction patterns. Hence, assuming reasonable sample
crystallinity, we calculated the crystallite size for each of our
series of MA1–xFAxGeI3 perovskites (with x = 0,
0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1) to be 45.7, 24.4, 36.4, 39.5, and 52.6 nm,
respectively, using the Debye–Scherrer equation. Hence, upon
mixing MA+ with FA+ cations, the apparent crystallite
size was reduced.

It is also worth noting that the XRD pattern
of our as-prepared CsGeI3 also corresponds well with a
reported database pattern (Figure 2).22 However, because CsGeI3 is relatively unstable in air and easily decomposes into
its constituent CsI and GeI2 building blocks, we found
that our isolated XRD pattern showed a tiny peak located at around
27.72° (labeled by a star), which could be likely ascribed to
CsI. The most intense peaks are situated at 25.2, 26.0, and 29.9°
and correspond to the (003), (20-1), and (202) planes, respectively.
Moreover, the computed crystallite size for CsGeI3 is 57.6
nm, which is comparable in magnitude with those of both MAGeI3 and FAGeI3. This result highlights that, in general,
the mixed cation perovskites yield a relatively lower crystallite
size (i.e., 24.4, 36.4, and 39.5 nm) than the parent single cation
perovskites of MAGeI3, FAGeI3, and CsGeI3, respectively (i.e., 45.7, 52.6, and 57.6 nm).

We subsequently
characterized the corresponding morphologies of these as-prepared
samples, using both SEM and TEM analysis (Figure 3). From the SEM images (Figure 3A,D,G,J,M), we noted that the
MA1–xFAxGeI3 (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1)
samples yielded composition-dependent morphologies in terms of size
and shape. Specifically, when x = 0, the SEM image
(Figure 3A) suggests
that the MAGeI3 sample maintains a cubic shape with a roughened
external surface. The sizes of the cubic particles measured ∼1.488
± 0.468 μm. The corresponding TEM data were consistent
with and corroborated the SEM image of cubes, nominally characterized
by a coarse outer layer. The presence of a roughened surface, as noted
in both the SEM and TEM images, coupled with the observation of a
solid inner core by TEM, indicates that (i) the roughened surface
is likely a product of the air-sensitive decomposition process (Section 2.5) and that (ii)
the as-generated micron-scale cubes are not porous.

Figure 3 SEM images (A,D,G,J,M,P),
TEM images (B,E,H,K,N,Q), and high-resolution TEM images (C,F,I,L,O,R)
of as-prepared samples: MAGeI3 (A–C), MA0.75FA0.25GeI3 (D–F), MA0.5FA0.5GeI3 (G–I), MA0.25FA0.75GeI3 (J–L), FAGeI3 (M–O), and
CsGeI3 (P–R). The inset image in panel (F) represents
the FFT image of MA0.75FA0.25GeI3. The red lines with the arrows highlight indices of the Ge-containing
perovskite within each HRTEM image. In panel (R), the green circle
can be ascribed to CsI, whereas the yellow circle can be assigned
to amorphous Ge.

Upon the incorporation
of more FA+ cation content, the edges of the discrete and
reasonably well-defined cubic shape were systematically blunted, eventually
yielding a rounder, more circular structure. Indeed, the SEM images
for MA1–xFAxGeI3 (x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and
1) suggest that, with increasing x values, the samples
evolve into more irregularly shaped particulate motifs, possessing
average sizes in the range of 1.337 ± 0.363, 2.311 ± 0.747,
1.932 ± 0.972, and 1.641 ± 0.639 μm, respectively.
Upon the addition of a second cation, the sizes of the particles increased
in magnitude and the isolated size distribution widened, as the particles
became more polydisperse in nature. The corresponding TEM images (Figure 3B,E,H,K,N) corroborated
the presence of a crystalline particulate motif, in agreement with
the SEM data.

HRTEM images (Figure 3C,F,I,L,O) were acquired to provide more
nuanced insights into the structure of our Ge-based perovskites. To
the best of our knowledge, no HRTEM data have been reported on organic-cation-containing
Ge-based perovskites to date. From the HRTEM images of individual
particles of MAGeI3, MA0.75FA0.25GeI3, MA0.5FA0.5GeI3,
MA0.25FA0.75GeI3, and FAGeI3, all of these five samples appear to possess a high degree of crystallinity,
regardless of chemical composition, with measured lattice d spacing values of 0.356, 0.362, 0.386, 0.394, and 0.395
nm, respectively. An FFT image of the diffraction pattern of one of
the products has been inserted as an inset to Figure 3F so as to highlight the high crystallinity
of our product. The 0.356 nm TEM-based lattice d spacing
corresponds to the MAGeI3 (20-1) plane with a calculated d spacing of 0.352 nm, based upon the indexing of our XRD
pattern. Moreover, the TEM-based d spacing of FAGeI3 with 0.395 nm is in agreement with the XRD-derived d spacing associated with the (003) plane of 0.391 nm. The
systematic increase in the measured lattice d spacing
values as a function of chemical composition (i.e., increasing x in MA1–xFAxGeI3) is consistent with the corresponding
incorporation and facet exposure of more FA+ cationic content
within the underlying MAGeI3 lattice.

With respect
to CsGeI3 in particular, it evinced a particulate morphology
with smaller, measured sizes in the range of 263 ± 100 nm (Figure 3P), as corroborated
by the corresponding TEM image (Figure 3Q). In particular, an evident amorphous feature was
noted especially on its surface, coupled with a polycrystalline region
near the center of the particle, an observation we can ascribe to
an electron-beam-induced degradation of CsGeI3 to its GeI2, Ge, and CsI precursors. This observation will be further
discussed in Section 2.6 in the context of XPS and SHXM results. As shown in the HRTEM
image in Figure 3R,
the yellow circle highlights an amorphous surface region, which can
likely be attributed to the formation of Ge0, created upon
interaction with irradiation. By contrast, the green circle can be
ascribed to an area with larger measured d spacings
of ∼0.323 and 0.285 nm, which can be assigned to the CsI (110)
plane and CsGeI3 (202) plane, respectively, of the XRD
pattern (Figure 2 B).
Overall, these high-resolution lattice data further correlate with
and corroborate our XRD pattern results, which demonstrate that we
have been definitely able to prepare pure and highly crystalline Ge-based
perovskites.

2.2 Surface Characterization
(IR and XPS)
In terms of better understanding the surface
properties and chemistry of our different Ge-based perovskites, a
series of characterization techniques were applied onto these samples,
including FT-IR spectroscopy (Figure S3) and XPS (Figures 4 and 5). We noted that the presence and
identity of exposed surface functional groups are important, as these
help to determine the nature of exciton transport, especially with
respect to electron and hole transfer toward relevant adjacent layers
in direct contact with these materials. If the surface were to be
capped by either organic surfactants or relatively insulating ligands
possessing long alkyl chains, electron transfer efficiency in addition
to conductivity would be reduced. Methylammonium and formamidinium
cations both incorporate organic groups. The IR spectrum was taken
to not only confirm the chemical compositions of as-prepared samples
but also provide information about the nature of the surface pendant
groups. Overall, these spectra suggested that the mixed MA1–xFAxGeI3 perovskites
had indeed formed as a stable entity and that the two cations were
well incorporated within the underlying lattice. With respect to CsGeI3, we did not find evidence for either the presence of organic
ligands or pendant hydroxyl groups adsorbed on its surface, all of
which were consistent with expectations.

Figure 4 XPS spectra of as-prepared
MAxFA1–xGeI3 samples: (A–C) MAGeI3; (D–F)
MA0.75FA0.25GeI3; (G–I) MA0.5FA0.5GeI3; (J–L) MA0.25FA0.75GeI3, and (M–O) FAGeI3, with different energy regions highlighted. Peaks are associated
with (A,D,G,J,M) Ge 2p, (B,E,H,K,N) Ge 3d, and (C,F,I,L,O) I 3d.

Figure 5 XPS spectra of an as-prepared CsGeI3 sample,
associated with different elemental regions: (A) Cs 3d; (B) I 3d;
(C) Ge 2p; (D) Ge 3d.

The surface chemistries
of these perovskites were further analyzed using XPS. Initially, survey
spectra were collected to confirm the purity of as-prepared samples
(Figure S4). In Figure 4, magnified areas of specific peak regions
corresponding to different discrete elements have been plotted for
samples of MA1–xFAxGeI3 with x = 0, 0.25,
0.5, 0.75, and 1. Figure 4A,D,G,J,M corresponds to data for the Ge 2p orbital. Figure 4B,E,H,K,N is indicative
of results for the Ge 3d orbital. Figure 4C,F,I,L,O denotes data associated with the
I 3d orbital.

It is worth noting that, for these mixed perovskites,
within the Ge 3d region of the spectrum, two peaks were noted in the
region from 28 to 34 eV and these could be assigned to Ge0 3d and Ge2+ 3d, respectively; the coexistence of both
oxidation states suggests that Ge2+ was being reduced to
Ge under X-ray irradiation. This scenario was also reported for Pb-containing
perovskites characterized using XPS. Specifically, with longer X-ray
exposure times, it was noted that more Pb2+ species were
found to have reduced to Pb0.16 A similar phenomenon was detected under hard X-ray nanoprobe irradiation
conditions, as will be discussed later. Furthermore, with respect
to MA1–xFAxGeI3 samples as a function of increasing x, with x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1, the Ge2+ 3d peak (shown in blue) shifted in energy from 31.4, 32.67,
33.38, 33.52, and 34.51 eV, as x correspondingly
increased from 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and finally to 1. All spectra were
calibrated with respect to the O peak located at 531.0 eV, whose somewhat
unexpected presence may have arisen from absorbed O2 upon
exposure to air.

Interestingly, we found that the peak area
ratio between the Ge2+ and Ge0 3d peaks varied
considerably as a function of X-ray exposure time, a finding which
is consistent with the results of a previous analogous study on Pb-containing
perovskites.16 The corresponding peak area
ratio between the Ge2+ and Ge0 2p peaks (i.e.,
olive and pink colors, indicative of satellite peaks present) also
evinced a similar behavioral pattern. In particular, there is a clear
trend regarding the Ge 3d peak position for both Ge0 and
Ge2+ because, as x increases, the peak
position shifts to a higher energy. This observation suggests that,
with greater FA+ cation content, the corresponding electron
density surrounding Ge will be lower. In other words, FA+ and MA+ behave perceptibly differently with respect to
Ge. That is, MA+ maintains a reduced electron affinity
as compared with FA+ with respect to the adjacent Ge-I3– complex.

As for the I 3d region,
all samples gave rise to I 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 peaks,
consistent with only a single oxidation state. While analyzing and
comparing the peak areas and sensitivity factors associated with these
two elements, we obtained relative elemental ratios between Ge and
I of 1:3.5 for x = 0, 1:3.2 for x = 0.25, 1:3.7 for x = 0.5, 1:3 for x = 0.75, and 1:3.6 for x = 1. These results are
all within the experimental error of the actual expected ratio between
Ge and I of 1:3.

In Figure 5, we performed an identical XPS analysis for CsGeI3, which has no C but contains Cs instead. We found that Cs
yielded a similar Ge reduction behavior under X-ray irradiation, with
the Ge 3d region highlighting two peaks, located at 38.06 and 35.20
eV, which could be ascribed to Ge0 and Ge2+,
respectively. In addition, the I 3d region was composed of two peaks,
designated as I 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, denoting findings
indicative of only one oxidation state. The Cs 3d area also included
two signals that could be ascribed to 3d5/2 and 3d3/2. By performing a quantitative analysis, the elemental ratio
between Cs:Ge:I was found to be 1:1.1:2.9, a result which closely
approximated the expected formulaic stoichiometric ratio of our desired
perovskites.

To summarize, the XPS results do not show the presence
of an obvious impurity element. In fact, these cumulative data corroborate
our previous XRD and IR findings, indicative of perovskites with the
correct expected chemical composition and oxidation states with no
extraneous surface ligands present. In essence, the Ge2+ 3d peak position varies in a predictable manner, consistent with
corresponding variations in the FA+ cation content x. However, what is certainly worth noting is that the XPS
measurement process itself (i.e., under X-ray irradiation) likely
tended to reduce the amount of Ge present, as manifested in a decrease
in the Ge0 3d peak intensity. In effect, the perovskite
invariably decomposed, a phenomenon we will discuss in further detail
in Section 2.6.

2.3 Optical Performance (PL and UV–Visible Spectroscopies)
The UV–visible spectra were collected to further investigate
the optical properties of our as-prepared Ge-based perovskites, as
shown in Figure 6A.
In this figure, we show five spectra, corresponding to our five MA1–xFAxGeI3 solid-state samples, wherein x = 0, 0.25,
0.5, 0.75, and 1. Upon comparing these five spectra, it is evident
that there is a blue shift of the band edge with decreasing MA/increasing
FA content. The movements of the positions of these absorption edges
correspond well to the observed color changes of these five samples
in progressing from red to yellow (i.e., MAGeI3 to FAGeI3). These data also indicate that there might be a corresponding
and consistent (though potentially nonlinear) alteration in the measured
band gap as a function of chemical composition, an issue which was
further explored with accompanying photoluminescence (PL) data. By
calculating a series of corresponding associated Tauc plot curves
(Figure 6B), our data
indicate that systematically changing chemical composition, as defined
by the magnitude of x from 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and
finally to 1 within a series of MA1–xFAxGeI3 samples, can
correspondingly tune the band gap from 1.90, 2.03, 2.10, 2.19, and
finally to 2.29 eV. Overall, the band gaps could be increased by introducing
more FA+ within the structure, thereby corroborating our
initial idea and concomitant novelty of our work that the band gaps
of Ge-based perovskites could be rationally tuned and optimized through
predictive variation of the A site cation identity.

Figure 6 Optical band gap measurements.
UV–visible spectra (A) and corresponding Tauc plots (B) of
as-prepared samples of MAGeI3 (black curve), MA0.75FA0.25GeI3 (red curve), MA0.5FA0.5GeI3 (blue curve), MA0.25FA0.75GeI3 (pink curve), and FAGeI3 (green curve).

In addition, we acquired a PL emission spectrum
using an excitation wavelength at 350 nm with the results presented
in Figure 7. From the
curves herein, we noted that there is an obvious trend for the PL
emission peak position with increasing FA+ cation amount x. In particular, the peak position for MA1–xFAxGeI3 could
be systematically tailored from 626, 606, 593, 570, and finally to
548 nm by altering the corresponding value of x from
0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and eventually to 1. With higher FA+ incorporation (i.e., larger x), the major PL peak
appears to have experienced a blue shift toward lower wavelengths.
Moreover, based upon the PL emission of the Ge-based perovskite, we
can correspondingly calculate the band gap energy of our materials,
and the results herein are consistent with the band gaps reported
from the literature,23 which we have previously
discussed in the Introduction. To underscore
the connections between the UV–visible absorption and the photoluminescence
emission data, we have plotted the two characterization curves together
for each sample in Figure S5.

Figure 7 Normalized
photoluminescence spectra of MAGeI3 (black curve), MA0.75FA0.25GeI3 (red curve), MA0.5FA0.5GeI3 (blue curve), MA0.25FA0.75GeI3 (pink curve), and FAGeI3 (green
curve). All five of these samples were acquired with an excitation
wavelength of 350 nm with a 420 nm long-pass filter.

Overall, to summarize our efforts in probing the optical
properties of our as-prepared Ge-based perovskites, we acquired UV–visible
absorption and photoluminescence spectral data. The Ge-based perovskites
evinced an absorption edge located in the visible light range from
520 to 620 nm. The photoluminescence profile of the Ge-based perovskites
yielded emission peaks in the range of 548 to 626 nm with corresponding
measured band gaps spanning from 2.26 to 1.98 eV. That is, to highlight
structure–property correlations, we found that we could tune
the observed band gaps of Ge-based perovskites through systematic
variations in FA+ content from 0 to 1 within MA1–xFAxGeI3.

2.4 Solvent Effect and Growth Mechanism
We
selected representative solvents (i.e., acetonitrile, tetrahydrofuran
(THF), ethanol, and dimethylformamide (DMF)), which have been commonly
used in the conventional synthesis of Pb perovskites. Upon dissolving
the MAI and GeI2 precursors within the solvents, variously
colored solutions were obtained. Specifically, a clear yellow solution
was generated in the presence of anhydrous ethanol. However, when
THF and acetonitrile were used, dark red solutions were achieved.
In the case of DMF, a clear yellow solution, similar to that observed
when using anhydrous ethanol, was isolated with a high concentration
of GeI2; however, upon dilution of this solution, we noted
that it became clear and colorless, which was necessary to accurately
measure its resulting UV–visible absorption spectral profile.
A series of different antisolvents, based on expected product miscibility
within these poor solvent additives, were introduced to precipitate
the perovskites from solution. Hence, hexane was used as the antisolvent
for ethanol, DMF, and THF, whereas toluene was utilized in the presence
of acetonitrile.

Upon addition of the antisolvent, a precipitate
was indeed formed from each solution, and the resulting product in
every case was subsequently characterized by XRD. As such, with ethanol,
we isolated a red solid, which was later determined to be pure MAGeI3 (i.e., its trigonal phase). With THF, we collected an orange
precipitate that we hypothesize may consist of either a combination
of MAI and GeI2 or possibly MAGeI3·xH2O, as it is difficult to clearly differentiate
between these two possibilities. When employing DMF as the solvent,
as implied, concentration plays a crucial role. Specifically, when
the GeI2 concentration was 0.5 M, we generated a red precipitate
of MAGeI3, whereas when the GeI2 concentration
was 0.1 M, no precipitate perceptibly formed. Finally, with acetonitrile,
a yellow-white precipitate was produced of the initial MAI precursor.

These results were subsequently correlated with data obtained from
absorption spectra taken from each of the individual solutions. Not
surprisingly, all of these data imply an interaction between the precursors
and the underlying solvent environment. Specifically, UV–visible
absorption spectroscopy was utilized to probe interactions between
GeI2 and the various solvents, as shown in Figure S6 and summarized in Table S1. In particular, with ethanol, peaks appeared at 291
and 360 nm, whereas with THF, these peaks shifted slightly in position
to 294 and 367 nm. With acetonitrile, we observed peaks located at
251, 281, and 328 nm. A single peak situated at 268 nm was found when
using a dilute solution of DMF.

These differences in the absorption
spectra, coupled with the synthesis data, can be rationalized as follows.
Acetonitrile clearly coordinates strongly onto Ge, as our absorption
spectra indicate, so it is likely that the solvent inhibits the necessary
formation of an intermediate GeI2 layer and that, as a
result, MAGeI3 cannot readily crystallize. By analogy,
it is evident that, in the presence of an excess of DMF, this solvent
strongly coordinates onto Ge when present in excess quantity and as
such, essentially completely displaces and replaces the iodide ions.
We would expect that spectra similar to that of anhydrous ethanol
would be obtained at much higher concentrations of GeI2 in DMF. This assertion is further corroborated by prior work in
the literature, describing the synthesis of Ge perovskite films, derived
from concentrated 1 M solutions of GeI2 in DMF.12 Indeed, the spectra from the ethanol and THF
solutions were only slightly different, although it should be emphasized
that the reaction in ethanol did indeed yield pure MAGeI3. By contrast, with THF, we presume that the iodide was replaced
but to a lesser degree as compared with acetonitrile, because it is
likely that the GeI2 intermediate and subsequently MAGeI3 both formed. Nevertheless, given our data, it is certainly
conceivable that the MAGeI3 emanating from THF likely contained
a number of X site vacancies, which would have increased its overall
potential to degrade.

Overall, these results indicate that the
identity of the good solvent plays a key role in the generation of
Ge-based perovskites. Solvents such as DMF and acetonitrile can coordinate
strongly onto the GeI2 precursors, thereby inhibiting the
formation of constituent GeI6 building blocks, which are
crucial for the subsequent production of Ge-based perovskites. In
particular, the synthesis of crystals with either residual solvent
molecules attached on the surface or a high number of local defects
can potentially lead to a fast rate of degradation. Such insights
can be used to identify additional solvents and conditions that can
be used to generate other types of pure Ge-based perovskites with
a relatively low amount of defects and a correspondingly improved
stability.

2.5 Stability Test
As a means of testing the durability of our as-prepared materials,
we conducted a series of stability tests by comparing the XRD patterns
of the MAGeI3 and FAGeI3 under different environmental
conditions. Specifically, we measured the patterns of samples (i)
that were stored in an ambient environment in air versus analogous
samples (ii) stored in a glovebox, saturated in an inert argon atmosphere
containing <20 ppm oxygen and <0.2% moisture. These samples
were both kept under room temperature conditions without either external
heating or cooling, a condition which more likely approximates a realistic
environment in which the final device would be used. XRD data were
collected after exposure times of 1, 3, 6, 24, 48, 72, 100, and 168
h, equivalent in total to a period lasting about a week with the data
plotted on a log 10 timescale, so as to achieve a greater appreciation
for any time-dependent variations.35

Figure 8A corresponds
to the XRD data taken for MAGeI3 stored in a glovebox.
It is evident that there was little change up to 6 h and that, even
after 24 h, only a slightly broadened peak at ∼20° associated
with the (10-2) plane was apparent. The key point is that, overall,
the MAGeI3 sample was notably stable with only the appearance
of small features at 26.2°, which could likely be ascribed to
a GeO2 impurity (indicated by a blue arrow), as confirmed
by its standard diffraction pattern.24 By
contrast, the data for the MAGeI3 sample exposed to air
were very different (Figure 8B). Specifically, after as little as 24 h of reaction, the
diffraction peaks within the XRD pattern associated with MAGeI3 had completely disappeared and were replaced with those of
GeO2.

Figure 8 Stability test of as-prepared MAGeI3 and FAGeI3. (A) XRD patterns obtained at different reaction times for
MAGeI3 stored inside a glovebox with an inert gas environment;
(B) XRD patterns collected at discrete reaction intervals for MAGeI3 stored under air; (C) XRD patterns acquired at different
reaction times for FAGeI3 stored inside a glovebox with
an inert gas atmosphere; (D) XRD patterns obtained at various reaction
times for FAGeI3 stored under air. The timescale shown
is presented logarithmically.

A similar scenario played out with FAGeI3. We present
the FAGeI3 XRD patterns in Figure 8C,D for samples stored in glovebox and air
environments, respectively. In Figure 8C, we find that FAGeI3 retained its chemical
integrity even after a week since peak positions did not discernibly
change; hence, its stability under inert conditions was confirmed.
However, corresponding alterations in peak shape and profile reflected
a reduction in crystallite size. By contrast, in Figure 8D, a GeO2 peak located
at 26.2° appeared as early as 1 h of exposure. After 24 h, no
FAGeI3 was apparent, as it likely had fully decomposed
to GeO2. Indeed, both of these germanium perovskites were
likely to be very stable when kept under an inert atmosphere, since
our samples of MAGeI3 and FAGeI3 retained their
native red and yellow colors even after 7 days of storage. By contrast,
these identical perovskites were unstable and decomposed in as little
as a day in moist air. This net outcome likely included the formation
of not only crystalline GeO2 but also amorphous by-products
in a process accompanied by perceptible coloration changes to a yellow-brown
hue coupled with a structural transformation from a powder to a more
gel-like substance.

To mechanistically account for our data,
we put forth a plausible explanation for our observations, as follows.
The degradation reaction is likely to be a combinatorial effect involving
both oxygen and moisture in the air. With the resulting yellow-brown,
gel-like amorphous degradation product exhibiting an XRD pattern,
which likely indicates the formation of GeO2, we propose
a decomposition mechanism, as shown below in reactions 1 and 2.

Herein, we use MAGeI3 as an illustrative
example with which to discuss the degradation reaction pathway. Initially,
as per reaction 1, the
as-prepared MAGeI3 perovskite adsorbs H2O onto
its surface upon exposure to air; the H atom within the water bonds
to the I atom, so as to form a hydrated perovskite structure. Additional
water molecules will likely interact with and ultimately displace
the MA+ cation, likely through the mediation of the amine
group.25 The remaining Ge complex subsequently
decomposes to GeI2 while releasing HI and H2O in the process. This part of the decomposition pathway has been
fully explored and is consistent with simulated results, explaining
how a MAGeI3 (101) surface can interact with H2O molecules.26 Nevertheless, the as-produced
GeI2 itself is also unstable under an oxygen-rich environment. Reaction 2 suggests that, in
the presence of air and oxygen, the iodide can rapidly generate GeO2, which coincidentally is the final product noted in the XRD
pattern of Figure 8B. A similar pathway is expected to explain the decomposition of
an analogous FAGeI3 sample with MA+ being replaced
with FA+.5 Overall, our results
underline the fact that storage considerations are crucial when engineering
devices that incorporate in these Pb-free perovskites. In principle,
this problem could be potentially mediated by integrating and incorporating
different additive materials, a strategy that has been used in the
past to improve upon the stability of both Pb and Sn perovskites.27 1   2  

In order to
acquire an improved understanding and more profound insights with
respect to the stability of these materials, thermogravimetric analysis
(TGA) was employed to investigate the decomposition of these Ge-based
perovskites under controlled, high-temperature conditions in different
reactive environments. As shown in Figure 9, samples of MAGeI3 (Figure 9A) and FAGeI3 (Figure 9B) under a flow of (i) air and (ii) nitrogen gas, respectively, were
heated from room temperature to 600 °C.

Figure 9 TGA curves of as-prepared
(A) MAGeI3 as well as (B) FAGeI3 under (i) air
(black curve) and (ii) nitrogen-based (red curve) atmospheres.

The decomposition pathway under a nitrogen-containing
atmosphere has been reported for both MAGeI3 and FAGeI3. In particular, for MAGeI3, the decomposition
follows a single-step weight-loss process28 in which MAGeI3 starts to decompose at 300 °C into
MAI and GeI2 with the sublimation process accounted for
by the apparent sharp weight loss observed. By contrast, FAGeI3 appears to necessitate two steps for decomposition. The first
stage is associated with the production of organic amine molecules,
escaping at ∼210 °C,29 accompanied
by a subsequent steep weight loss in a second step, ascribable to
the sublimation of GeI2, HI, and methane. In theory, there
should be nothing left over. In practice, as can be observed from Figure 9B, the residue measures
∼4.2%, likely due to either weighting errors or the presence
of unknown impurities.

In the presence of air, MAGeI3 still appears to give rise to a single-step weight loss with the
decomposition, occurring at a much lower temperature of 120 °C.
Specifically, MAGeI3 decomposes into MAI and GeI2, with the GeI2 subsequently oxidized to GeO2. After the heating process, the residue appears to consist of a
white powder, determined to be GeO2 via XRD analysis. Indeed,
under an air-based atmosphere, the decomposition process happens at
lower temperatures, very likely associated with an oxidation process.
It should be noted that FAGeI3 gives rise to a lower decomposition
temperature (∼100 °C) than MAGeI3. For FAGeI3, the observed weight loss process likely consists of two
steps with the first step attributable to the decomposition and loss
of both CH(NH)2 and 1/2 I2, contributing to
a net 44% weight loss in theory (49%, as experimentally shown in Figure 9B). At 150 °C,
the as-produced GeI2 is further oxidized to GeO2 with the concurrent formation of I2 gas, accounting for
the observed weight loss. Nevertheless, the residue still consists
of GeO2, which is postulated to account for the remaining
weight percent of 12% isolated at the end of the process, a value
which is very close in magnitude to the experimentally measured 14%
quantity, as shown in Figure 9B.

The results from Figure 9 are comparable with previously reported
TGA data for both MAGeI3 and FAGeI3 in a nitrogen-filled
atmosphere; we note that no air-based TGA experiments have been reported
to date.30 Overall, our results indicate
that our Ge-based perovskites may be less stable than both Sn- and
Pb-based perovskites, especially under an air atmosphere.29,31,32 Nonetheless, because mixed Sn-Ge
and Sn-Pb perovskites are well known for evincing better stability,
our data may provide significant insights for enhancing the intrinsic
stability of Ge-based perovskites.

2.6 X-ray
Degradation Study (Comparative Analysis of XRD, SEM, TEM, XPS, and
SHXM)
As implied earlier, the practical utility of a material
is a function to some extent of its inherent stability. Hence, with
respect to our as-generated Ge-based perovskites, we chose to analyze
this point in a more systematic manner by comparing their behavior
when subjected to a broad swath of different irradiation conditions,
so as to gain insights into correlations between size, shape, and
composition with respect to degradation. The significance of this
problem has been addressed to some degree for Pb halide perovskites,
whose structural and chemical integrity were impacted by electron-beam-
and X-ray-induced decomposition.33,34 However, as
a relatively new material, for Ge-based perovskites, only electron-beam-induced
degradation experiments on CsGeI3 have been reported.13 As such, herein, we have tackled the basic issue
associated with how five distinctive, complementary characterization
techniques, employing sources of either X-ray or electron beam irradiation,
can, in and of themselves, induce perceptible and measurable material
transformations within Ge-containing perovskites. In this regard,
as one of these methods, we have specifically featured the unique
(to the best of our knowledge) use and application of the synchrotron-based
scanning hard X-ray microscopy (SHXM) technique to this critical problem.

Indeed, as a means of understanding the durability, stability,
and structure of Ge iodide perovskites, synthesized via our facile
ligand free coprecipitation method, we employed a relatively new characterization
technique, in particular SHXM, with which to study these materials.
SHXM affords the opportunity to acquire ultrahigh-resolution X-ray
images with a spatial resolution as low as 10 nm, simultaneously coupled
with the capability of imaging with chemical sensitivity.21 Specifically, we conducted fluorescence elemental
mapping of MA1–xFAxGeI3 samples, with x =
0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1; the resulting images are shown in Figure 10. In the far-left
column, we present a number of differential phase contrast (DPC) images,
highlighting the heterogeneity and nuanced substructure of our samples.
In the next two columns, we observe elemental signals due to the Ge K-edge and the I L-edge. These signals
clearly spatially overlap with the DPC data. However, the distribution
and intensity map of I are dissimilar from those of Ge. In particular,
the signal from I appears to be more concentrated within the middle
central region of the images, whereas the Ge signal is more diffuse
and consequently spread out across the entire structure. This phenomenon
is more apparent in the far-right column, wherein RGB images of the
Ge K-edge and the I L-edge are presented
in red and green, respectively. The pattern of spatial segregation
of elements suggests that our Ge perovskites were likely to have degraded
under strong X-ray irradiation conditions with Ge2+ reducing
to Ge0, coupled with the formation of MAI, FAI, or both.
This assertion is corroborated by the detection of Ge0 with
our XPS measurements. Furthermore, the Ge perovskite sample shown
here appears to be perceptibly larger in size than its nonirradiated
counterparts, an observation that can likely be ascribed to the particles
melting as a result of intense X-ray beam induced exposure and subsequent
degradation.

Figure 10 Nanoscale X-ray images obtained using HXN for MAxFA1–xGeI3: (A–D) MAGeI3; (E–H) MA0.75FA0.25GeI3; (I–L) MA0.5FA0.5GeI3; (M–P) MA0.25FA0.75GeI3, and (Q–T) FAGeI3. DPC images (A,E,I,M,Q)
measure morphology (or electron density) of the sample. Images (B,F,J,N,R)
denote the elemental signals associated with the Ge K-edge and (C,G,K,O,S) for I L-edge. Images (D,H,L,P,T)
suggest overlap of signals ascribable to Ge K-edge
(red) and I L-edge (green). Image (Q) illustrates
a central hole feature within the DPC image, with a correspondingly
intense Ge signal in panel (R) coupled with a diminished I signal
in panel (S).

With respect to the remaining
elements, it is plausible that I– may have oxidized
into I2 vapor, which was subsequently evacuated from the
system, in a process offset by the simultaneous reduction of Ge2+ into Ge0. Indeed, a very similar scenario involving
the conversion of Pb2+ into Pb0 accompanied
by the complementary oxidation of I– into I2 has been reported for MAPbI3 upon exposure to
X-ray beams.34 Whereas the elemental signatures
of the C, H, and N elements associated with the MA+ and
FA+ cations are not conclusively detectable using SHXM,
our complementary XRD and IR results provide strong evidence for the
correct stoichiometry of our as-generated perovskites. Within the
DPC image in Figure 10Q, there is a small hole localized at the center, which was likely
induced by X-ray beam damage. To account for this, we note that, within
this specified spatial area, there is an apparent and evident Ge signal
(i.e., the Ge L-edge) from Figure 10R overlapping with a correspondingly diminished
and weakened I signal (i.e., the I L-edge) from Figure 10S. These data are
consistent with the proposed formation and aggregation of Ge0 coupled with the concomitant oxidation of I– to
gaseous I2, ultimately yielding an I-deficient hole.

In terms of obtaining a much closer look at the overall elemental
distribution, we conducted a quantitative analysis of the collected
data; our results are shown in Figure S8. From this set of processed Ge/I images (with noise reduction),
we can clearly visualize the elemental distribution of these two elements,
because these types of images purposely emphasize differences or asymmetries
in spatial localization. For example, not surprisingly, the Ge/I images
will yield a very intense signal if the Ge amount is significantly
larger than that of I. Because we observed a relatively low signal
intensity within the center of materials, these data implied that
the central core possessed a relatively equal quantity of Ge and I.
By contrast, the outer shells evinced a much more considerable signal,
suggestive of a notably high concentration of Ge as compared with
I in that area. As a result, the Ge tends to be more spatially distributed
within the outer shell, whereas I is more localized in the midsection.
Moreover, the I/Ge images also corroborate the assertion that the
presence of Ge is much less dense in the center area, whereas I is
more concentrated in the central core region. This prevailing trend,
which was observed within all five samples tested, is consistent with
the idea that the X-ray beam induced degradation of our Ge-based perovskites
leads to a spatial separation and segregation of constituent components,
wherein the Ge melts and flows out to the exterior of the material
in a process caused by the reduction of Ge2+ to Ge0.

Therefore, our parallel study of CsGeI3 is put forth in Figure 11. While the DPC image in Figure 11A implies a structurally heterogeneous sample,
the elemental mapping data of the Cs L-edge, the
Ge K-edge, and the I L-edge are
provided in Figure 11B–D, respectively. Whereas the Cs and I data overlap very
well with each other, the spatial distribution of Ge is clearly different
and appears to be more diffuse. The RGB image in Figure 11E is again consistent with
the idea that our Ge perovskites may have decomposed under strong
X-ray exposure with Ge2+ reducing to Ge0, concomitant
with the formation of MAI, FAI, CsI, or a combination of these species.
Similarly, Figure S9 is associated with
more quantitative analysis of these images and data. The apparent
overlap of Cs and I is consistent with the decomposition of this material
into CsI. Furthermore, it should be noted that our Ge/I and I/Ge images
yielded similar types of behavior for the set of MA1–xFAxGeI3 samples.
In particular, the Ge component spatially propagated and localized
to the outer shell, whereas the Cs and I elements concentrated within
the central core.

Figure 11 Nanoscale X-ray images, obtained using HXN, for CsGeI3. (A) Differential contrast phase image. (B) Elemental Cs L-edge; (C) Ge K-edge; (D) I L-edge, and (E) corresponding overlap of all of the three elements
associated with Cs L-edge (red), Ge K-edge (green), and I L-edge (blue).

In terms of understanding and rationalizing our collective
data, it is worth referring to the prior literature. For instance,
with respect to MAPbI3 analyzed with hard X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (hard-XPS),34 the Pb 4f region
evinced signs that the perovskite phase had decomposed into PbI2 coupled with the X-ray-induced reduction of Pb2+ to Pb0. A similar study of CsPbBr3 subjected
to high energy (i.e., 80 to 200 keV) electron irradiation found that
the as-prepared CsPbBr3 nanocrystals underwent a radiolysis
process in which not only Pb2+ was reduced to Pb0 but also Pb0 subsequently diffused and aggregated.16 Indeed, these prior literature observations
are consistent with our own findings of a Ge0 peak herein,
apparent in both the Ge 2p and Ge 3d regions from our XPS data (Figures 4 and 5). This X-ray induced decomposition phenomenon
is somewhat different from what has been observed in air under ambient
storage conditions (i.e., oxidation to GeO2 alone). Indeed,
our X-ray-induced degradation noted herein likely proceeds through
a stimulated desorption mechanism, wherein I– is
oxidized to I0 in the form of I2, thereby leading
to the desorption of gaseous I2, in a process accompanied
by the reduction of Ge2+ to Ge0.13,16 The desorption of I0 would account for the lack of any
detectable I signal from the XPS measurements, which were collected
under ultrahigh vacuum conditions because volatile I2 would
not have been present on the surfaces of our perovskites.

Nevertheless,
it is worth highlighting that the situation is somewhat more nuanced.
Specifically, the quantitative degree of Ge2+ reduction
is likely different when using SHXM versus either XPS or XRD, for
example, because we did not observe the formation of exactly the same
species spanning all three of these characterization methods, which
is likely due to a difference in factors, such as the incident X-ray
energy, photon flux, focus area, and the flux rate, with the approximate
magnitude of each parameter listed for the different X-ray-based techniques
tested, as shown in Table S2. A higher
flux rate would invariably imply a correspondingly larger degree of
X-ray-induced degradation. Not surprisingly, since SHXM combined a
high photon flux used (i.e., 109 photons/s) with the smallest
focal area probed (i.e., 156 nm2) to yield the largest
flux density (i.e., 1024 photons/s·m2,
a measure of the number of photons or electrons impinging upon a sample
per given unit area over a set period of time) incident upon the sample,
this technique gave rise to the highest amount of sample degradation
observed.

Furthermore, these results from X-ray-based techniques
are also dissimilar from those noted with TEM and HRTEM, which both
involve exposure to focused high-energy electrons. These particular
data are presented in Figure S7. We found
that a combination of both increasing the brightness/intensity and
narrowing the focal region of the electron beam could induce not only
the reduction of Ge2+ to Ge0 but also the spatial
movement and segregation of this element to the central region within
the area of irradiation. The phenomenon is consistent with observations
from a recent in situ TEM investigation of CsGeI3.13 By analogy, the observed degree of degradation
under these electron microscopy conditions can be potentially rationalized
in the context of different irradiation scenarios, as summarized in Table S3. Yet, unlike the X-ray induced degradation,
the corresponding electron-beam-induced degradation cannot be explained
solely by the dose rate, because TEM and SEM maintain very similar
dosing values. An alternative key contributing factor is the acceleration
voltage since operating voltages are typically 10 and 80–200
kV for SEM and TEM/HRTEM, respectively. However, relying on this explanation
alone may be similarly inadequate. In particular, the situation is
likely to be more complex, given that with analogous lead-based perovskites,
it has been reported that increased ionization damage was actually
observed at the lower acceleration voltage of 80 kV than at 200 kV.16

Based on this precedence, one would have
expected more damage with SEM than with TEM, but herein, with our
Ge-based perovskites, the degree of degradation was higher with TEM
as opposed to SEM. As such, to account for our data herein, we hypothesize
that, with TEM, the higher acceleration voltages enabled electrons
to more readily penetrate through the sample bulk, whereas with SEM,
the lower energy electrons mainly impacted the external surface.36 Therefore, the observed destruction in TEM was
greater because the high energy electrons interacted with, permeated,
and degraded the entire sample, whereas with SEM, the degree of damage
was more spatially confined and therefore limited to the outer surface.
In terms of the relevant prior literature, we note that, within a
localized beam, associated with even moderate e-beam currents and
acceleration voltages, significant degradation for analogous MAPbI3 was observed,33 again consistent
with what we have found herein for our Ge-based perovskites.

3 Conclusions
We should emphasize that we have not attempted
to engineer a series of functional solar cell devices and to optimize
their performance. Our work described herein presupposes that insights
into the chemistry of these materials are more relevant. In particular,
we have proposed and demonstrated the feasibility of a facile, one-step,
ambient, ligand-free reprecipitation process for Ge-containing perovskites.
This is significant and novel in itself not only because (i) there
is a strong motivation to develop sustainable, less-toxic alternatives
to Pb-based perovskites for solar applications but also because (ii)
most analogous methods, used to synthesize similar types of materials,
have tended to be either ligand-mediated or involve multistep, high-temperature
operations in inert atmospheres. We have shown that this synthesis
protocol is flexible, generalizable, and potentially scalable for
ABX3 systems, regardless of the identity of either the
A site cation or the X site halide ion. Moreover, our work has emphasized
the significance of controlling chemical composition within perovskites
as a means of rationally tuning their observed band gaps.

As
tangible examples of our efforts in this regard, we have reported
herein on the successful production of chemically pure crystalline
particulate motifs of not only MAxFA1–xGeI3, MAGeI3, FAGeI3, and CsGeI3 but also MAGeBrxI3–x and
FAGeBrxI3–x. We have provided detailed structural information (i.e., microscopy
and diffraction) by utilizing TEM, SEM, and HRTEM coupled with XRD
for yielding information about crystallinity, morphology, purity,
and the nature (i.e., indexing) of exposed lattice planes. Surface
properties of our products were analyzed using IR and XPS, so as to
confirm their elemental composition, oxidation state, and the nature
of their pendant functional groups. Moreover, we performed optical
characterization using UV–visible and PL spectral data to highlight
that the band gaps of our Ge-containing materials could be systematically
varied by altering the ratio between MA+ and FA+ within the A site. Specifically, the photoluminescence profile of
our as-prepared Ge-based perovskites yielded emission peaks in the
range of 548 to 626 nm with corresponding measured band gaps spanning
2.26 to 1.98 eV, which is well within the favorable absorptive visible
region of the solar spectrum. Moreover, to better understand the formation
of our materials, we analyzed the effect of good versus poor solvents
on the crystallization process. These results indicated that the identity
of the good solvent (such as DMF) in particular plays a key role in
reliably generating reasonably pure Ge-based perovskites.

To
probe the stability of our as-prepared materials, we conducted an
XRD-based series of experiments in which the effect of various storage
environments was analyzed as a function of exposure time. We deduced
that our perovskites are thermally stable under an inert atmosphere
but, on the other hand, they may decompose under air. Finally, for
the first time with these systems, we were able to compare the effects
of electron versus X-ray-induced degradation on our Ge-based perovskites
with a particular emphasis on SHXM. Indeed, our SHXM data yielded
insights into the evolution of the elemental distribution within the
material especially after X-ray exposure. Our data imply that the
very act of probing a material may lead to its inadvertent destruction.
Indeed, we found a realistic risk of irreversibly degrading Ge-based
perovskite species into their constituent components through beam-induced
irradiation damage.

4 Experimental Synthesis Section
Ge-based perovskites have been generated using a facile, room-temperature
method based on reprecipitation. Specifically, in this process, germanium
(II) iodide (GeI2, Aldrich, ≥99.8%) serves as the
Ge source. Conversely, cesium iodide (CsI, Aldrich, 99.999%), methylammonium
iodide (MAI, Aldrich, 98%), and formamidinium iodide (FAI, Aldrich,
≥98%) denote precursors incorporating the respective cations,
which were investigated. After significant testing, anhydrous ethanol
(denatured, HPLC grade, Alfa Aesar, 90%) and n-hexane
(spectrophotometric grade, Alfa Aesar, 95+ %) were found to be particularly
useful solvents for this family of perovskites.

In a typical
reaction, 0.1 mmol of GeI2 and 0.1 mmol of AI (with A =
methylammonium, formamidinium, and cesium) precursors were dissolved
within 1 mL of anhydrous ethanol so as to form a clear yellow solution.
Subsequently, 1 mL of hexane was added as a nonsolvent to precipitate
out the desired Ge perovskite. The as-generated variously colored
(depending on the perovskite) products (Figure S1) were centrifuged at 9000 rpm for 3 min, collected, and
washed with hexane three consecutive times. All of these experimental
processes were run under ambient atmosphere and temperature conditions.
The final as-prepared sample was stabilized in a hexane solution,
placed within a closed container, and finally stored in a glovebox
under an Ar atmosphere.

We have systematically analyzed a number
of solvent effects. In particular, we replaced the good solvent, that
is, anhydrous ethanol, with methanol (CH3OH, Aldrich, 70%), N,N-dimethylformamide (C3H7NO, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%), tetrahydrofuran (C4H8O, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.5+ %), acetonitrile (C2H3N, Fisher Scientific, 99.9%), and acetone (C3H6O, Alfa Aesar, 99.5+ %), respectively, in successive experiments.
In parallel, we substituted the poor solvent of hexane with toluene
(C7H8, Alfa Aesar, 99.5%), carbon tetrachloride
(CCl4, Fisher Scientific, 99%), and dichloromethane (CH2Cl2, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) in succeeding runs.
The as-generated product was subsequently characterized in terms of
both structure and chemical composition using a number of different,
distinctive, and complementary techniques, described in detail in
the Supporting Information.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of
charge on the ACS Publications
website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02203.Expanded Introduction,
Solvent Effects, Characterization, IR Discussion, and Additional Synthesis
Experiments and Insights sections, coupled with Figures S1–S10,
showing zoomed in XRD patterns, IR spectra, UV–visible and
PL spectra for MA1–xFAxGeI3, survey XPS spectra for MA1–xFAxGeI3 and
CsGeI3, UV–visible spectra for analyzing the solvent
effect, TEM images showing electron beam damage, normalized SHXM images,
and XRD patterns for Ge-Br/I perovskites, in addition to Tables S1–S3
(PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02203_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Research funding for the work, performed by the Stony Brook authors
and started a number of years ago, was initially provided by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials
Sciences and Engineering Division. S.C.M. acknowledges financial support
from the GAANN program (U.S. Department of Education Grant number,
P200A160163), based in Stony Brook University. Experiments for this
manuscript were performed in part at the Center for Functional Nanomaterials,
located at Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is supported by the
U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-SC-00112704. This
research used the Hard X-ray Nanoprobe Beamline at 3-ID of the National
Synchrotron Light Source II, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office
of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by
Brookhaven National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-SC0012704. We
thank Luyao Li for assistance with FT-IR data acquisition. Moreover,
we acknowledge the work and efforts of Sha Tan, Kenna Salvatore, Nathaniel
Hurley, and Luyao Li in taking SHXM scans.
==== Refs
References
Noel N. K. ; Stranks S. D. ; Abate A. ; Wehrenfennig C. ; Guarnera S. ; Haghighirad A.-A. ; Sadhanala A. ; Eperon G. E. ; Pathak S. K. ; Johnston M. B. ; Petrozza A. ; Herz L. M. ; Snaith H. J. 
Lead-Free Organic–Inorganic
Tin Halide Perovskites for Photovoltaic Applications . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2014 , 7 , 3061 –3068 . 10.1039/C4EE01076K .
Yang Z. ; Guo Y. ; Li H. ; Zhou Y. ; Zuo X. ; Yu Y. ; Pan C. ; Strzalka J. ; Nam C.-Y. ; Rafailovich M. H. 
Roles of
Interfacial Tension in Regulating Internal Organization of Low Bandgap
Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells by Polymer Additives . Adv. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 5 , 1800435 10.1002/admi.201800435 .
Duong T. ; Wu Y. ; Shen H. ; Peng J. ; Fu X. ; Jacobs D. ; Wang E.-C. ; Kho T. C. ; Fong K. C. ; Stocks M. ; Franklin E. ; Blakers A. ; Zin N. ; McIntosh K. ; Li W. ; Cheng Y.-B. ; White T. P. ; Weber K. ; Catchpole K. 
Rubidium Multication
Perovskite with Optimized Bandgap for Perovskite-Silicon Tandem with
over 26% Efficiency . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2017 , 7 , 1700228 10.1002/aenm.201700228 .
Kojima A. ; Teshima K. ; Shirai Y. ; Miyasaka T. 
Organometal Halide
Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 6050 –6051 . 10.1021/ja809598r .19366264 
Yun J. S. ; Kim J. ; Young T. ; Patterson R. J. ; Kim D. ; Seidel J. ; Lim S. ; Green M. A. ; Huang S. ; Ho-Baillie A. 
Humidity-Induced
Degradation via Grain Boundaries of HC(NH2)2PbI3 Planar Perovskite Solar Cells . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2018 , 28 , 1705363 10.1002/adfm.201705363 .
Stoumpos C. C. ; Frazer L. ; Clark D. J. ; Kim Y. S. ; Rhim S. H. ; Freeman A. J. ; Ketterson J. B. ; Jang J. I. ; Kanatzidis M. G. 
Hybrid Germanium Iodide Perovskite
Semiconductors: Active Lone Pairs, Structural Distortions, Direct
and Indirect Energy Gaps, and Strong Nonlinear Optical Properties . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 6804 –6819 . 10.1021/jacs.5b01025 .25950197 
Lin Z.-G. ; Tang L.-C. ; Chou C.-P. 
Infrared Properties of CsGe(BrxCl1–x)3, Nonlinear Optical Rhombohedral Semiconductor . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2007 , 19 , 476209 10.1088/0953-8984/19/47/476209 .
Tang L.-C. ; Chang Y.-C. ; Huang J.-Y. ; Lee M.-H. ; Chang C.-S. 
First Principles Calculations of
Linear and Second-Order Optical Responses in Rhombohedrally Distorted
Perovskite Ternary Halides, CsGeX3(X = Cl, Br, and I) . Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
2009 , 48 , 112402 10.1143/JJAP.48.112402 .
Sun P. P. ; Li Q. S. ; Yang L. N. ; Li Z. S. 
Theoretical Insights into a Potential Lead-Free Hybrid Perovskite:
Substituting Pb2+ with Ge2+ . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 1503 –1512 . 10.1039/C5NR05337D .26673960 
Barboza C. A. ; Henriques J. M. ; Albuquerque E. L. ; Caetano E. W. S. ; Freire V. N. ; da Costa J. A. P. 
CdXO3 (X = C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb) Electronic Band Structures . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2009 , 480 , 273 –277 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2009.09.035 .
Fuh H.-R. ; Liu Y.-P. ; Chen S.-H. ; Wang Y.-K. 
Electronic Structures of Compensated Magnetism in Double
Perovskites A2CrRu(Os)O6 (A=Si, Ge, Sn, and
Pb) from ab initio Calculations . J. Alloys Compd. 
2013 , 547 , 126 –131 . 10.1016/j.jallcom.2012.08.066 .
Kopacic I. ; Friesenbichler B. ; Hoefler S. F. ; Kunert B. ; Plank H. ; Rath T. ; Trimmel G. 
Enhanced Performance of Germanium Halide Perovskite
Solar Cells through Compositional Engineering . ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 
2018 , 1 , 343 –347 . 10.1021/acsaem.8b00007 .
Wu X. ; Song W. ; Li Q. ; Zhao X. ; He D. ; Quan Z. 
Synthesis of Lead-Free
CsGeI3 Perovskite Colloidal Nanocrystals and Electron Beam-Induced
Transformations . Chem. Asian J. 
2018 , 13 , 1654 –1659 . 10.1002/asia.201800573 .29700979 
Kirakosyan A. ; Yun S. ; Yoon S. G. ; Choi J. 
Surface Engineering
for Improved Stability of CH3NH3PbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals . Nanoscale 
2018 , 10 , 1885 –1891 . 10.1039/C7NR06547G .29313038 
Du X. ; Wu G. ; Cheng J. ; Dang H. ; Ma K. ; Zhang Y.-W. ; Tan P.-F. ; Chen S. 
High-Quality CsPbBr3 Perovskite
Nanocrystals for Quantum Dot Light-Emitting Diodes . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 10391 –10396 . 10.1039/C6RA27665B .
Dang Z. ; Shamsi J. ; Palazon F. ; Imran M. ; Akkerman Q. A. ; Park S. ; Bertoni G. ; Prato M. ; Brescia R. ; Manna L. 
In Situ Transmission
Electron Microscopy Study of Electron Beam-Induced Transformations
in Colloidal Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals . ACS Nano 
2017 , 11 , 2124 –2132 . 10.1021/acsnano.6b08324 .28122188 
Nazaretski E. ; Yan H. ; Lauer K. ; Bouet N. ; Huang X. ; Xu W. ; Zhou J. ; Shu D. ; Hwu Y. ; Chu Y. S. 
Design and performance of an X-ray
scanning microscope at the Hard X-ray Nanoprobe beamline of NSLS-II . J. Synchrotron Radiat. 
2017 , 24 , 1113 –1119 . 10.1107/S1600577517011183 .29091054 
Schroer C. G. ; Kurapova O. ; Patommel J. ; Boye P. ; Feldkamp J. ; Lengeler B. ; Burghammer M. ; Riekel C. ; Vincze L. ; van der Hart A. ; Küchler M. 
Hard X-ray Nanoprobe Based on Refractive
X-ray Lenses . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2005 , 87 , 124103 10.1063/1.2053350 .
Bleuet P. ; Cloetens P. ; Gergaud P. ; Mariolle D. ; Chevalier N. ; Tucoulou R. ; Susini J. ; Chabli A. 
A Hard X-ray Nanoprobe
for Scanning and Projection Nanotomography . Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
2009 , 80 , 056101 10.1063/1.3117489 .19485538 
Shi J. L. ; Xiao D. D. ; Ge M. ; Yu X. ; Chu Y. ; Huang X. ; Zhang X. D. ; Yin Y. X. ; Yang X. Q. ; Guo Y. G. ; Gu L. ; Wan L. J. 
High-Capacity
Cathode Material with High Voltage for Li-Ion Batteries . Adv. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 1705575 10.1002/adma.201705575 .
Yan H. ; Bouet N. ; Zhou J. ; Huang X. ; Nazaretski E. ; Xu W. ; Cocco A. P. ; Chiu W. K. S. ; Brinkman K. S. ; Chu Y. S. 
Multimodal hard
X-ray imaging with resolution approaching 10 nm for studies in material
science . Nano Futures 
2018 , 2 , 011001 10.1088/2399-1984/aab25d .
Thiele G. ; Rotter H. W. ; Schmidt K. D. 
Kristallstrukturen und Phasentransformationen
von Caesiumtrihalogenogermanaten(II) CsGeX3 (X = Cl, Br,
I) . Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1987 , 545 , 148 –156 . 10.1002/zaac.19875450217 .
Cho S. ; Ma J. ; Kim Y. ; Sun Y. ; Wong G. K. ; Ketterson J. B. 
Photoluminescence and ultraviolet lasing of polycrystalline
ZnO thin films prepared by the oxidation of the metallic Zn . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1999 , 75 , 2761 –2763 . 10.1063/1.125141 .
Walz L. ; Thiery D. ; Peters E.-M. ; Wendel H. ; Schonherr E. ; Wojnowski M. 
Crystal Structure
of GeI4 at 100K and 297K . Z. Kristallogr.
Cryst. Mater 
1993 , 208 , 207 –211 .
Mosconi E. ; Azpiroz J. M. ; De Angelis F. 
Ab InitioMolecular
Dynamics Simulations of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Degradation
by Water . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 4885 –4892 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b01991 .
Sun P. P. ; Chi W. J. ; Li Z. S. 
Effects of Water
Molecules on the Chemical Stability of MAGeI3 Perovskite
Explored from a Theoretical Viewpoint . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 24526 –24536 . 10.1039/C6CP04344E .27539944 
Wang K. ; Jin Z. ; Liang L. ; Bian H. ; Bai D. ; Wang H. ; Zhang J. ; Wang Q. ; Liu S. 
All-inorganic cesium lead iodide
perovskite solar cells with stabilized efficiency beyond 15% . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 4544 10.1038/s41467-018-06915-6 .30382108 
Xu W. ; Liu L. ; Yang L. ; Shen P. ; Sun B. ; McLeod J. A. 
Dissociation of
Methylammonium Cations in Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Perovskite Solar
Cells . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 4720 –4725 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b02307 .27337149 
Wang M. 
Exploring stability of formamidinium lead trihalide for solar cell
application . Sci. Bull. 
2017 , 62 , 249 –255 . 10.1016/j.scib.2017.01.025 .
Krishnamoorthy T. ; Ding H. ; Yan C. ; Leong W. L. ; Baikie T. ; Zhang Z. ; Sherburne M. ; Li S. ; Asta M. ; Mathews N. ; Mhaisalkar S. G. 
Lead-free
germanium iodide perovskite materials for photovoltaic applications . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 23829 –23832 . 10.1039/C5TA05741H .
Smecca E. ; Numata Y. ; Deretzis I. ; Pellegrino G. ; Boninelli S. ; Miyasaka T. ; La Magna A. ; Alberti A. 
Stability of solution-processed MAPbI3 and
FAPbI3 layers . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 13413 –13422 . 10.1039/C6CP00721J .27123601 
Leijtens T. ; Prasanna R. ; Gold-Parker A. ; Toney M. F. ; McGehee M. D. 
Mechanism of Tin Oxidation and Stabilization
by Lead Substitution in Tin Halide Perovskites . ACS Energy Lett. 
2017 , 2 , 2159 –2165 . 10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00636 .
Yuan H. ; Debroye E. ; Janssen K. ; Naiki H. ; Steuwe C. ; Lu G. ; Moris M. ; Orgiu E. ; Uji I. H. ; De Schryver F. ; Samori P. ; Hofkens J. ; Roeffaers M. 
Degradation
of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Structures through Light
and Electron Beam Driven Ion Migration . J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 
2016 , 7 , 561 –566 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02828 .26804213 
Philippe B. ; Park B.-W. ; Lindblad R. ; Oscarsson J. ; Ahmadi S. ; Johansson E. M. J. ; Rensmo H. 
Chemical and Electronic Structure Characterization
of Lead Halide Perovskites and Stability Behavior under Different
Exposures—A Photoelectron Spectroscopy Investigation . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 1720 –1731 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b00348 .
Dang Z. ; Shamsi J. ; Akkerman Q. A. ; Imran M. ; Bertoni G. ; Brescia R. ; Manna L. 
Low-Temperature
Electron Beam-Induced Transformations of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite
Nanocrystals . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 5660 –5665 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b01009 .28983524 
Egerton R. F. ; Li P. ; Malac M. 
Radiation damage in
the TEM and SEM . Micron 
2004 , 35 , 399 –409 . 10.1016/j.micron.2004.02.003 .15120123

