
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American
Chemical
Society 3145734110.1021/acsomega.7b01241ArticleEffect of the Addition
of a Cross-Linker and the Water
pH on the Physical Properties of Films of pH-Responsive Polymer Particles
at Air/Water Interfaces Azakami Yuka †Kappl Michael ‡Fujii Syuji §Yusa Shin-ichi ∥McNamee Cathy E. *†† Department
of Chemistry and Materials, Faculty of Textile Science and Technology, Shinshu University, Tokida 3-15-1, Ueda, Nagano 386-8567, Japan‡ Max
Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany§ Department
of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka Institute of Technology, 5-16-1 Omiya, Asahi-ku, Osaka 535-8585, Japan∥ Department
of Applied Chemistry, University of Hyogo, 2167 Shosha, Himeji, Hyogo 671-2280, Japan* E-mail: mcnamee@shinshu-u.ac.jp. Phone: +81-(0)268-21-5585 (C.E.M.).13 11 2017 30 11 2017 2 11 7837 7848 28 08 2017 01 11 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We investigated how
the stiffness and physical properties of films
of pH-responsive polystyrene nanoparticles with poly(2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethylmethacrylate) hairs (PDMA–PS
particles) at air/water interfaces could be varied by using the cross-linker
of 1,2-bis-(2-iodoethoxy)ethane (BIEE) and by varying the water pH.
The physical properties of the film were investigated by using a Langmuir
trough, atomic force microscope, and monolayer particle interaction
apparatus. Films without large (μm-sized) holes were prepared
by reacting BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles in the ethanol
spreading solution for times ≤6 h and then by spreading this
solution on a pH 5.8 water surface. Longer reaction times or a pH
9.0 water surface gave films with large holes. The holes were the
result of the presence of aggregates of various sizes, which could
not efficiently pack in the film. The aggregates were formed by interparticle
adhesions because of the BIEE presence and physical attractive forces.
The pH 5.8 water gave less aggregation than the pH 9.0 water because
of the stronger interparticle electrostatic repulsions that resulted
from the higher particle charge in pH 5.8 water than pH 9.0 water.
The holes in the films could be decreased by reacting BIEE with the
PDMA–PS particles on the pH 5.8 or 9.0 water surface, while
the film was compressed to give a close packing density. The stiffness
of the film of PDMA–PS particles increased, when BIEE was reacted
with the PDMA–PS particles in the spreading solution for 1
h and was then spread on a pH 5.8 water surface. The film stiffness,
however, did not increase, when BIEE was reacted with PDMA–PS
particles on the pH 5.8 or 9.0 water surface for 1 h. This stiffness
difference was explained by the fact that the former method gave a
thicker film than the latter method.

document-id-old-9ao7b01241document-id-new-14ao-2017-01241yccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Polymer particles adsorbed
at air/liquid interfaces are used in
various nanotechnical and environmental applications. For example,
polymer particles have been adsorbed at air/aqueous interfaces to
stabilize foams without the use of surfactants.1,2 Ordered
monolayers of latex particles formed at air/water interfaces have
been transferred to substrates to create photonic crystals.3 The physical properties of the films formed by
the particles at the air/water interface help define the effectiveness
of the applications of the films. A hard (stiff) film would be less
damaged than a soft film, if another object came into contact with
it. A soft film, however, has the advantage of being able to deform
to the desired shape, when being transferred to another material.
Many industrial and technological applications require the films to
show some degree of stiffness and some degree of softness. For example,
organic composite-coated sheets of steel can be made by coating the
steel with an organic film. That film must be strong enough to resist
mechanical damage when the coated steel sheets are used in moving
parts, but the film must be soft enough to allow the film to press
and deform well.4 It is therefore important
to be able to control the stiffness and physical properties of a film
of particles at the air/water interface.

If the particles in
a film at the air/water interface are not connected
to each other, then they are capable of moving laterally within the
film. As a result, the particles can move within the film when another
material contacts the film from above or below. The ability of the
particles to move in the film would give a film that can be easily
deformed, that is, a deformable or soft film. Control over the degree
to which the particles can move in the film would give a film whose
stiffness and physical properties could be adjusted to suite the desired
applications, where a reduced particle movement would give a less
deformable film. The stiffness of a film of polystyrene particles
with poly(2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethylmethacrylate)
hairs (PDMA–PS particles) at an air/water interface has been
increased by embedding the particles in a matrix of poly(2-hydroxyethyl
methacrylate) (PHEMA).5 This was achieved
by forming mixed Langmuir monolayers of PDMA–PS particles and
PHEMA at the air/water interface. An additional way to decrease the
movement of the particles in a film is to increase the interparticle
attractions within the film. Reducing the charge of the particles
would reduce the interparticle electrostatic repulsions and thereby
increase the magnitude of the attractive forces acting between the
particles. The charge of PDMA–PS particles at air/water interfaces
can be adjusted via the pH of water, where the charge of the particles
has been reported to decrease as the water pH is increased from pH
2.0 to 9.0.6 The physical properties of
PDMA–PS particles at air/water interfaces of different pH values
have been investigated.7 The particles
tended to aggregate more at the air/water interface when the pH of
water was 9.0 than when it was 5.8. In spite of this, the stiffness
of the film of PDMA–PS particles on the pH 9.0 water subphase
did not appear to be greater than the stiffness of the film formed
by the particles on the pH 5.8 subphase. Thus, the increased magnitude
of the attractive forces between the particles caused by the particle
charge decrease was concluded to be insufficient to increase the stiffness
of the film of particles. Thus, an additional method is needed to
decrease the movement of the particles in the film at the air/water
interface to be able to increase the stiffness of the film and to
be able to better control the physical properties of the film.

A possible way to decrease the movement of the polymer particles
in a film at an air/water interface is to react the PDMA–PS
particles with a cross-linker. The shells of a partially quaternized
2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate-N-(morpholino)ethyl methacrylate diblock copolymer micelle
have been cross-linked by reacting these micelles with the bifunctional
quaternizing agent of 1,2-bis-(2-iodoethoxy)ethane (BIEE) in aqueous
solution at 60 °C.8 BIEE was seen
to cross-link the unquarternized 2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate groups in the micelles. The reaction
was carried out at high dilution, that is, a solution with a low micellar
volume fraction was used to cross-link the shells of the micelles
and to avoid intermicellar cross-linking.9 The structure of the 2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate groups is the same as that of the poly(2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethylmethacrylate) hairs in the
PDMA–PS particles. Thus, adhesions between PDMA–PS particles
may be induced, if we use BIEE to cross-link the PDMA hairs on the
PDMA–PS particles. As a result, a film with different physical
properties, such as different particle packing and stiffness, may
be achieved.

BIEE has predominately been used to internally
cross-link a micelle
in water or a methanol/water mixture at high dilutions.8−12 In this study, we aimed to determine if BIEE could be used to link
PDMA–PS particles in a film at an air/water interface, and
whether this reaction could (1) change the packing of the particles
in a film of PDMA–PS particles at the air/water interface and
(2) increase the stiffness of that film. To achieve interparticle
cross-linking, the cross-linking reaction was performed in the particle
spreading solution and at the air/water interface when the film was
compressed to give a close particle packing. As a film of PDMA–PS
particles can be formed at the air/water interface by spreading PDMA–PS
particles in ethanol solution at the air/water interface,5 BIEE was added to the PDMA–PS particles
in the ethanol spreading solution and reacted for a specified time
in the ethanol solution or at the air/water interface after the particle
monolayer was formed and compressed to give a close particle packing.
The effect of the PDMA–PS particle charge on the properties
of the film, after the BIEE reaction, was investigated by varying
the pH of the water subphase. Water subphases with a pH of 5.8 or
9.0 were used, so as to give partially charged particles or almost
negligibly charged particles, respectively. Particles of different
charges were used to test if the physical properties of the film were
affected by the additional presence of interparticle electrostatic
repulsions. We aimed to determine if the addition of BIEE and the
utilized water pH could change the physical properties of a film of
PDMA–PS particles at the air/water interface. We also aimed
to determine which conditions should be varied to give a film with
the desired physical properties.

2 Results
and Discussion
2.1 Physical Properties of
Films of PDMA–PS
Particles at Air/Water Interfaces in the Absence of BIEE
The physical properties of films of PDMA–PS particles on a
pH 5.8 and a pH 9.0 water surface were first determined by measuring
the surface pressure–area per PDMA–PS particle isotherms
of the particle films (see Figure 1). A lower pH, such as pH 2.5, could not be used as
the particles became too hydrophilic and sank into water after spreading.7Figure 1 shows that the surface pressure increased slowly from 0 to
2 or 5 mN/m for the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water surfaces, respectively, as
the area/particle was decreased from 1.90 × 10–1 μm2 to approximately 8.86 × 10–2 μm2. This regime is assigned to a loose packing
regime. Decreasing the area of the film further by compressing the
film caused the surface pressure to steeply increase over a small
decrease in the area. This steep pressure increase resembles the surface
pressure–area relationship of a close packing monolayer.13 Further compression of the film to areas smaller
than those measured at a surface pressure of approximately 20 mN/m
resulted in a plateau being observed in the surface pressure–area
isotherm. This plateau is explained by the wrinkling in the monolayer.7 The wrinkling is thought to be formed by the
ejection of the particles from the air/water interface to the air
phase because of the lack of space for the particles at the air/water
interface and the hydrophobicity of the particles.

Figure 1 Surface pressure (Π)–area/particle
isotherms of films
of PDMA–PS particles on a water surface, which were prepared
without BIEE and with BIEE, when BIEE was reacted with the PDMA–PS
particles in the ethanol spreading solution. A volume of 220 μL
of approximately 1.8 w/w particles in ethanol solution was spread
on the water surfaces in each case. The concentration of BIEE in the
spreading solutions was 0.541 mM. (A) pH 5.8 water subphase; (B) pH
9.0 water subphase. Black line, (1): no BIEE; red line, (2): reaction
time of BIEE = 0 h; green line, (3): reaction time of BIEE = 1 h;
blue line, (4): reaction time of BIEE = 6 h; pink line, (5): reaction
time of BIEE = 1 day; olive line, (6): reaction time of BIEE = 6 days.
The gray dashed lines show the area/particle corresponding to a value
of 8.55 × 104 nm2, the calculated value of the area
occupied by the PDMA–PS particles with a radius of 165 nm.
The gray solid line is the extrapolation of the surface pressure–area/molecule
isotherm to Π = 0 and approximates the size of a particle in
the close packing region of the film of PDMA–PS particles on
the pH 5.8 or 9.0 water subphases.

The PDMA–PS particles we used in this experiment had
a radius
of 165 ± 85 nm. The area of these particles can be estimated
from πR2 to be 8.55 × 10–2 ± 2.27 × 10–2 μm2. The gray dashed lines in Figure 1 show the area/particle corresponding to
a value of 8.55 × 10–2 μm2. The size of the PDMA–PS particles in the close packing region
of the particles on the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water subphases were approximated
by extrapolating the surface pressure–area/particle isotherm
in the close packing region to Π = 0; see the gray solid line
in Figure 1. Values
of 8.04 × 10–2 and 8.75 × 10–2 μm2 were obtained for the pH 5.8 and 9.0 subphases,
respectively. These values are less than 5% different from the value
estimated using πR2, indicating
that the isotherms were reasonable.

The surface pressure–area
isotherms suggested that the PDMA–PS
particles formed a closely packed film for 5 < Π < 20
mN/m and a film with wrinkling for Π > 20 mN/m, when the
water
subphase was pH 5.8 or 9.0. To further verify that the particles were
closely packed at Π = 10 mN/m and that wrinkling was present
in the films at Π > 20 mN/m, the PDMA–PS particle
films
prepared on a pH 5.8 water surface were transferred to mica substrates,
when the surface pressure was Π = 10, 25, and 30 mN/m, that
is, surface pressures that corresponded to the close packing and wrinkling
regimes. Figure 2A–C
shows the 5 × 5 μm2 atomic force microscopy
(AFM) height images of the transferred PDMA–PS particle films
at Π = 10, 25, and 30 mN/m, respectively. A closely packed film
is seen at Π = 10 mN/m. The film, however, was not uniformly
flat. This result is explained by the non-negligible size distribution
of the synthesized PDMA–PS particles. The higher surface pressures
of 25 and 35 mN/m showed lines of particles above a flatter film of
particles. These lines are designated as wrinkles. The number of wrinkles
increased as the surface pressure increased.

Figure 2 AFM height images (5
× 5 μm2) of a film of
PDMA–PS particles prepared on a pH 5.8 water surface, which
was transferred to a mica substrate in the absence of BIEE. (A–C)
Images of the films that were compressed to Π = 10, 25, and
35 mN/m, respectively.

The effect of the water pH on the aggregation of the PDMA–PS
particles at the air/water interface can be seen by imaging films
of PDMA–PS particles that were compressed to Π = 10 mN/m
and then transferred to mica substrates. Figures 3A and 4A show the
5 × 5 μm2 height images of the transferred films
of PDMA–PS particles, which were prepared on the pH 5.8 and
9.0 water surfaces, respectively. The average sizes of the particles
in the films on the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water surfaces were determined
by measuring the size of each individual particle that was distinguishable
in the images shown in Figures 3A and 4A by using the PhotoRuler Software
(Version 1.13.0, The Genus Inocybe in Hyogo). The histograms of the
sizes of the PDMA–PS particles on the pH 5.8 and 9 water surfaces
are shown in Figure 5. The average size of the particles was obtained by performing a
Gaussian fit to the histogram data (see Table 1). The average sizes of the PDMA–PS
particles on the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water surfaces were 324 ± 112
and 308 ± 101 nm2, respectively. These sizes are within
the range of the sizes of the synthesized particles, that is, 330
± 170 nm. The area per particle obtained from the AFM images
(ANP_AFM) was also calculated from the
number of particles counted in the AFM image (NP_AFM) and the size of the AFM image (2.50 × 107 nm2) (see Table 1). The values of ANP_AFM calculated
from the AFM images and the size of the PDMA–PS particles in
the close packing region of the particles on the pH 5.8 or 9.0 water
subphases determined from the surface pressure–area/particle
were approximately 24% different. This difference can be explained
by the presence of tip convolution and the possibility that some of
the particles were inside the film and not on the surface, causing
the number of particles within the film to be underestimated.

Figure 3 AFM height
images (5 × 5 μm2 and 15 ×
15 μm2) of films of PDMA–PS particles compressed
to Π = 10 mN/m on a pH 5.8 water surface and transferred to
mica substrates. A–E show the 5 × 5 μm2 images and F–J show the 15 × 15 μm2 images. (A,F) Films without BIEE. (B–E,G–J) Films
obtained after BIEE was reacted with the PDMA–PS particles
in the ethanol spreading solution for 0 h, 1 h, 6 h, and 6 days, respectively.
The white circle highlights a hole formed in the film.

Figure 4 AFM height images (5 × 5 μm2 and
15 ×
15 μm2) of films of PDMA–PS particles compressed
to Π = 10 mN/m on a pH 9.0 water surface and transferred to
mica substrates. A–E show the 5 × 5 μm2 images and F–J show the 15 × 15 μm2 images. (A,F) Films without BIEE. (B–E,G–J) Films
obtained after BIEE was reacted with the PDMA–PS particles
in the ethanol spreading solution for 0 h, 1 h, 6 h, and 6 days, respectively.
The white circles highlights holes formed in the films.

Figure 5 Histogram showing the size of each individual particle
that was
distinguishable in the 5 × 5 μm2 AFM height
images of Figures 3 and 4. A and B show the results for the pH
5.8 and 9.0 water surfaces, respectively. The PDMA–PS particles
in this film were reacted with BIEE in the ethanol spreading solution.
The average size of the particles was obtained by performing a Gaussian
fit to the particle size histogram; see Table 1 for the average particle sizes.

Table 1 Average Size of Each Individual Particle
that was Distinguishable in the Film Formed at the Air/Water Interface
after the PDMA–PS Particles were Reacted with BIEE in the Ethanol
Spreading Solutiona
pH	BIEE presence	reaction time	NP_AFM	Nagg (%)	⟨NP_AFM⟩
(nm)	ANP_AFM (nm2)	
5.8	no	 	221	 	324 ± 112	1.13 × 105	
 	yes	0 h	209	5.4	339 ± 115	1.20 × 105	
 	 	1 h	160	27.6	351 ± 116	1.56 × 105	
 	 	6 h	160	27.6	368 ± 137	1.56 × 105	
 	 	6 days	137	38.0	398 ± 125	1.82 × 105	
9.0	no	 	241	 	308 ± 101	1.04 × 105	
 	yes	0 h	196	18.7	339 ± 113	1.28 × 105	
 	 	1 h	178	26.1	341 ± 119	1.40 × 105	
 	 	6 h	161	33.2	374 ± 108	1.55 × 105	
 	 	6 days	100	58.5	462 ± 174	2.50 × 105	
a The average
particle size was obtained
by performing a Gaussian fit to the particle size histogram in Figure 5, which was calculated
using the 5 × 5 μm2 AFM height images shown
in Figures 3 and 4. The number of particles counted in the AFM image
(NP_AFM), the percentage of aggregates
in the film (Nagg), the average particle
size (⟨NP_AFM⟩), the area
per particle (ANP_AFM) calculated from NP_AFM, and the size of the AFM image (2.50 ×
107 nm2) are given.

Comparison of the particles seen in Figures 3A and 4A and the average
size of the particles shown in Table 1 also show that the PDMA–PS particles appeared
to aggregate more on the pH 9.0 water surface than on the pH 5.8 water
surface. PDMA–PS particles are reported to be more charged
in pH 5.8 water than in pH 9.0 water.6 A
higher particle charge would cause the electrostatic repulsions between
the PDMA–PS particles on the water surface to be stronger.
The forces acting between the particles at the interface include the
electrostatic repulsions and the attractive van der Waals, hydrophobic,
and capillary forces. Thus, the interparticle forces would be more
attractive for the pH 9.0 water surface than the pH 5.8 water surface,
as the interparticle electrostatic repulsions would be weaker. As
a result, the PDMA–PS particles would aggregate more on the
pH 9.0 water surface than on the pH 5.8 water surface.

2.2 Effect of the Presence of BIEE on the Physical
Properties of a Film of PDMA–PS Particles at Air/Water Interfaces:
Reaction of BIEE with the PDMA–PS Particles in the Ethanol
Spreading Solution
The effects of addition of BIEE to the
PDMA–PS particle film and the reaction time of BIEE with the
particles on the physical properties of the particle film at the air/water
interfaces were determined by measuring the surface pressure–area
isotherms of the particle films and by transferring the particle films
to mica substrates and observing them using AFM. The effect of water
pH on the properties of the films was determined by using pH 5.8 and
9.0 water.

In this section, the films of PDMA–PS particles
at the air/aqueous interfaces in the presence of BIEE were prepared
by adding BIEE to the PDMA–PS particle in the ethanol spreading
solution and waiting for a specified time. That particle solution
was then spread at the air/aqueous interface, and 10 min was allowed
for the solvent to evaporate. Next, the film was compressed, and the
surface pressure–area isotherm was measured. The same volume
of particles in ethanol solution was spread at the air/aqueous interface
for each system, allowing the effect of the BIEE reaction time to
be determined from the change in the isotherms.

Figure 1A,B shows
the surface pressure–area/particle isotherms of the films of
PDMA–PS particles that contained BIEE, when the water subphase
was pH 5.8 and 9.0, respectively. In the case of the pH 5.8 water
surface, the isotherms of the PDMA−PS particle film measured
in the presence of BIEE appeared at lower areas than the isotherm
measured for the PDMS–PS film in the absence of BIEE, when
the same nonzero surface pressures were compared. The isotherms of
the PDMS–PS particle film containing BIEE continued to shift
to lower area/particle values as the BIEE reaction time increased
from 0 to 6 h. The isotherm with the minimum area/particle value was
measured for the PDMA−PS particle film containing BIEE, whose
BIEE reaction time was 6 h. An increase in the BIEE reaction time
from 6 h to 1 day and 6 days caused the isotherm to shift to higher
area/particle values. These area/particle values were, however, still
lower than that of the PDMA−PS particle film that did not contain
BIEE. In the case of the pH 9.0 water surface, the isotherms measured
in the presence of BIEE appeared at higher area/particle values than
the isotherm measured in the absence of BIEE, when the area/particle
value corresponding to the same nonzero surface pressure was compared.
Increasing the reaction time of BIEE caused the isotherm to shift
to larger area/particle values.

To determine whether the apparent
particle sizes were changing
because of the addition of BIEE to the PDMA–PS particle spreading
solution, the PDMA–PS particle films that were prepared at
the air/water interface were compressed to a surface pressure of 10
mN/m, transferred to a mica substrate, and then imaged using AFM.
Films of the PDMA–PS particles without and with BIEE were imaged.
The effects of the subphase pH and BIEE reaction time were also determined
by transferring films, which were prepared on pH 5.8 and 9.0 water
subphases and reacted with BIEE for different times. Figures 3 and 4 show the 5 × 5 μm2 and 15 × 15 μm2 height images of the transferred particle films, which were
prepared on a pH 5.8 water subphase and a pH 9.0 water subphase, respectively. Figures 3A,F and 4A,F show the films of PDMA–PS particles in
the absence of BIEE. Figures 3B–E, 3G–J, 4B–E, and 4G–J show the
films of the PDMA–PS particles in the presence of BIEE, when
the BIEE reaction was allowed to proceed for 0 h, 1 h, 6 h, and 6
days.

Information concerning the change in the particle size
and aggregation
within the film upon the addition of BIEE to the film and its reaction
time was obtained by comparing the 5 × 5 μm2 images. The sizes of each individual particle that was distinguishable
in the 5 × 5 μm2 images shown in Figures 3 and 4 were measured using the PhotoRuler Software. The histograms showing
the sizes of the PDMA–PS particles on the pH 5.8 water and
pH 9 water surfaces are shown in Figure 5. The average size of the particles was obtained
by performing a Gaussian fit to the histogram data (see Table 1). The average size of the particles
increased for both the pH 5.8 and 9.0 subphases after BIEE was added
to the PDMA–PS particle spreading solution and also as the
BIEE reaction time was increased. These larger particles are thought
to be aggregates of PDMA–PS particles caused by the presence
of BIEE. The percentage of aggregates in the film (Nagg) was approximated from the decrease in the NP_AFM values using 1  Here, NP_AFM[no BIEE] and NP_AFM[BIEE]
are the NP_AFM values calculated for the
film without BIEE and the value calculated for the film containing
BIEE, respectively. The values of Nagg are given in Table 1 and can be seen to increase with the BIEE reaction time and the
water pH. The ANP_AFM values were also
calculated (see Table 1) and were seen to increase with an increase in the BIEE reaction
time. The pH 9.0 water also gave larger ANP_AFM values than the pH 5.8 water. A decrease in the number of particles
on the surface would cause the value of ANP_AFM to increase. The presence of aggregates would cause the number of
particles inside the film to increase, while the number of particles
on the surface increased. The surface pressure–area per particle
isotherms showed that in the case of pH 5.8 water, the minimum surface
area/particle at which the film broke down (collapsed) decreased as
the cross-linking reaction time was increased from 0 to 6 h. This
decrease is explained by the aggregation of the particles in the film,
causing the thickness of the film to increase with the increase in
the reaction time. Comparison of the size of the aggregates seen in Figure 3B–E with that
in Figure 4B–E
and also the average particle sizes shown in Table 1 allows us to see that the aggregates were
larger for the pH 9.0 water subphase than the pH 5.8 water subphase.

Information concerning the change in the particle packing within
the film upon the addition of BIEE to the film and its reaction time
was obtained by imaging the above transferred films using an image
size of 15 × 15 μm2. The larger size of 15 ×
15 μm2 allowed the particle packing to be seen more
clearly. In the case of the pH 5.8 water subphase, the particles can
be seen to have packed closely for BIEE reaction times ≤6 h.
Longer reaction times, such as 6 days, resulted in films with worse
packing and holes (see the white circle in Figure 3J). In the case of the pH 9.0 water subphase,
the particle packing became worse as the BIEE reaction time was increased.
The particles tended to aggregate more on the pH 9 water surface than
on the pH 5.8 water surface. Large detectable holes (see white circles
in Figure 4I,J) were
observed in the case of the pH 9.0 water subphase and BIEE reaction
times ≥6 h. The thickness of each hole seen in an image was
approximately the same. Additionally, no particles could be seen in
the hole when the hole was magnified and the height scale was changed.
A variation in the depth of the holes would have suggested that the
holes were a deep wrinkle in the film. Thus, the holes in the film
are concluded to be a channel that went through the film.

The
particle size appeared to increase with the BIEE reaction time
for both the pH 5.8 and 9 subphases. However, in the absence of BIEE,
the size of the particles in the film at the air/water interface did
not increase, if the PDMA–PS particles were immersed in ethanol
for periods of time longer than 6 days before they were spread at
the air/water interface. Thus, the presence of BIEE is thought to
cause the particles to aggregate, appearing to make the particle size
increase with the BIEE reaction time for both the pH 5.8 and 9 subphases.
Previous studies that aimed to internally cross-link the shells of
micelles reported that the cross-linking reactions needed to be performed
under highly diluted conditions, so as to avoid intermicellar cross-linking.14 The fact that we observed interparticle aggregation
under our experimental conditions suggests that the weight fraction
of the PDMA–PS particles in ethanol solution was concentrated
enough to allow the particles to interact and aggregate.

The
size of the aggregates formed by the PDMA–PS particles
in the presence of BIEE was larger for the pH 9.0 water subphase than
for the pH 5.8 water subphase. Although the reaction of BIEE would
have caused the PDMA hairs on the particles to have become more charged
because of the quaternization, the PDMA–PS particles at pH
9.0 would still have been less charged than those at pH 5.8. A higher
particle charge would have resulted in a stronger interparticle electrostatic
repulsion. The interparticle electrostatic repulsion for the pH 9.0
water subphase would therefore have been less than that of the pH
5.8 water subphase, resulting in the effect of the interparticle physical
attractions (van der Waals, hydrophobic, and capillary forces) being
more dominant for the pH 9.0 water subphase than for the pH 5.8 water
subphase. As a result, the PDMA–PS particles would have aggregated
more on the pH 9.0 water subphase than on the pH 5.8 water subphase,
causing the size of the aggregates to have appeared larger for the
pH 9.0 water subphase than for the pH 5.8 water subphase. The PDMA–PS
particles therefore appear to have aggregated on water surfaces because
of the BIEE presence and the interparticle attractions resulting from
the van der Waals, capillary, and hydrophobic forces. The magnitude
of the interparticle attraction can be controlled by the charge of
the particles and therefore the pH of water.

The images of the
PDMA–PS particle films in the presence
of BIEE shown in Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate that the sizes of
the aggregates were not homogeneous. The variation in the sizes of
the aggregates is thought to be related to the difference in the magnitude
of the attractive forces that act between the particles and aggregates.
As the size of the particles was only 333 nm, the magnitude of the
capillary forces between single particles was small and is therefore
thought not to have contributed to the interactions acting between
the particles at the air/water interface.15 However, the magnitude of the capillary force would have increased
as the size of the aggregates increased, causing the magnitude of
the capillary forces acting between the aggregates to increase. An
increase in the size of the aggregates would also have increased the
magnitude of the van der Waals and hydrophobic attractions that could
act between the aggregates. The increased attractive forces would
therefore have promoted the aggregates to aggregate further, causing
the size of the aggregates to increase.

The effects of the BIEE
reaction times and the subphase pH on the
particle packing abilities are thought to be related to the size of
the aggregates and the attractions acting between these aggregates.
The varied sizes of the aggregates and particles would cause the aggregates
and particles to pack inefficiently at the air/water interface, resulting
in holes being formed in the film of PDMA–PS particles at the
air/water interface. The presence of holes in the film would cause
the isotherm of the film of PDMA–PS particles to appear to
be more expanded, that is, the isotherm would shift to higher area/particle
values. The particles tended to form larger aggregates in the PDMA–PS
particle film at shorter BIEE reaction times on the pH 9 water surface
than on the pH 5.8 surface. Larger and more holes were observed in
the images of the PDMA–PS particle films shown in Figure 4 for reaction times
of 6 h and 6 days, when the films were prepared on the pH 9.0 water
surface than on the pH 5.8 water surface. The difference in the hole
formation in the films is explained by the fact that the electrostatic
repulsions that act between the particles and aggregates on the pH
5.8 water surface were stronger than those present when pH 9.0 water
was used. The repulsions would reduce the aggregation of the particles
and/or aggregates, resulting in a smaller size distribution of the
particles and aggregates and a better ability of the particles to
pack at the air/water interface. However, the particles would aggregate
to form holes in the film, when the sizes of the aggregates became
large enough that the magnitude of the attractive forces (capillary,
van der Waals, and hydrophobic) acting between the particles and aggregates
in the film was larger than the magnitude of these electrostatic repulsions.
These holes were seen (Figure 3) to have appeared in the films formed on the pH 5.8 water
surface, when the BIEE reaction time was 6 days. The fact that large
holes appeared in the films formed on the pH 9.0 water surface at
shorter BIEE reaction times than in the case of the films formed on
the pH 5.8 water surface indicates that the interparticle electrostatic
repulsive force helped form a film of PDMA–PS particles without
large holes.

The effect of the presence of BIEE in the films
of PDMA–PS
particles and the subphase pH on the strength of the films was next
determined by measuring the forces between a hydrophilpos probe in water and the particle films at the air/water interface.
As the hydrophilpos probe was positively charged
and the PDMA–PS particles were positively charged in pH 5.8
water and almost negligibly charged in pH 9.0 water, there would have
been an electrostatic repulsion between the probe and the film. This
repulsion would hinder the transfer of the particle film to the probe
during a force–distance curve measurement, allowing the stiffness
of the film to be measured. Force–distance curves showing a
steeper force–distance slope in the region where the probe
contacted the film indicates a stronger (stiffer) film.16Figure 6 shows example force–distance curves measured for the
PDMA–PS films in the absence of BIEE and PDMA–PS films
in the presence of BIEE, which were prepared by allowing the particles
to react with BIEE for 1 h in the spreading solution before the particles
were spread at the air/water interface and later compressed to a surface
pressure of 10 mN/m. The surface pressure of 10 mN/m was chosen as
it corresponds to a closely packed film in the absence of BIEE. The
time of 1 h was chosen because no large holes were observed in the
film of PDMA–PS particles containing BIEE on either the pH
5.8 water surface or the pH 9.0 water surface for this reaction time.
The force–distance curves for the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water subphases
are shown in Figure 6A,B, respectively. The estimated elastic moduli of the film of particles
at the air/water surfaces are shown in Figure 7. The force curves and estimated elastic
moduli values show that the addition of BIEE to the PDMA–PS
particles gave a stronger film for the pH 5.8 water subphase. The
strength of the film formed on the pH 9.0 water surface appeared to
have been the same in the absence or presence of BIEE. In the presence
of BIEE, the pH 5.8 water subphase gave a stronger film than the one
obtained using a pH 9.0 water subphase.

Figure 6 Approach force–distance
curves measured between a film of
PDMA–PS particles compressed to Π = 10 mN/m on a water
surface and a hydrophilpos probe in the water. (A)
pH 5.8 water subphase; (B) pH 9.0 water subphase. Black squares: film
of PDMA–PS particles without BIEE on the water surface, which
was compressed to Π = 10 mN/m; red circles: film of PDMA–PS
particles with BIEE prepared by mixing BIEE with the particles in
the spreading solution for 1 h, spreading the particles on the water
surface, and compressing the film to Π = 10 mN/m.

Figure 7 Elastic modulus of mica and estimated elastic modulus
of a film
of particles at the air/water interface. Row number: 1, mica; 2 and
5, film of PDMA–PS particles spread on the water surface and
compressed to Π = 10 mN/m; 3 and 6, film prepared by reacting
BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles in the ethanol spreading solution
for 1 h and then spread on the water surface and compressed to Π
= 10 mN/m; 4 and 7, film prepared by reacting BIEE with the PDMA–PS
particles on the water surface for 1 h, while the film was continually
compressed to Π = 10 mN/m. The data for the pH 5.8 water surfaces
are given in row numbers 2, 3, and 4. The data for the pH 9.0 water
surfaces are given in row numbers 5, 6, and 7.

The force–distance curves show that the reaction of
BIEE
with the PDMA–PS particles for 1 h increased the strength of
the film at the air/water interface, when the water was pH 5.8. The
BIEE reaction, however, did not increase the film strength for the
pH 9.0 water subphase. The AFM images showed that the addition of
BIEE to the film of PDMA–PS particles caused the size of the
particle aggregates to increase for both the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water
subphases. The images also showed, however, that the reaction of BIEE
tended to cause the particles to pack worse in the film and for more
holes to form in the film when the water was adjusted to pH 9.0 than
when it was pH 5.8. The tendency of the particles in the film to pack
badly and for holes to form in the film is therefore thought to contribute
to the weakness of the film.

The packing density of particles
at the interface and the presence
of holes are thought to affect the stiffness of the film of particles
at the air/water interface. This reasoning agrees with the facts known
about the relation between the volume density of particles in a lattice
of spheres and the flow of spheres in that lattice. Spheres have been
reported to be incapable of flowing in a lattice of spheres with a
maximum volume density of closely packed particles of 0.74 or 0.64,
that is, close packing or randomly close packing. These spheres, however,
can flow in a lattice of spheres when the maximum volume density of
closely packed particles is reduced to 0.55, that is, random loose
packing.17 A bad particle packing ability
and/or the presence of holes in a film of particles at the air/water
interface would reduce the maximum volume density of closely packed
particles, allowing the particles to laterally flow in the film. The
ability of particles to flow in such a film would cause the film of
particles to appear more deformable. The particles and aggregates
in a film with bad particle packing ability and/or holes would be
capable of moving laterally more, when the hydrophilpos probe in the water contacted the monolayer from beneath during a
force–distance measurement. The film of particles whose particles
could move in a lateral direction more would result in a force curve
with a lower slope than a film of particles whose particles could
move less. As a result, the former film would be more deformable than
the latter film.

2.3 Effect of the Method Used
to React BIEE with
the PDMA–PS Particle Films on the Physical Properties of the
PDMA–PS Films at Air/Water Interfaces: Reaction of BIEE with
the PDMA–PS Particles at the Air/Water Interface
The
stiffness of a Langmuir film of particles at an air/aqueous interface
may be increased, if we improve the particle packing ability in the
film and therefore reduce the number of holes in the film. This may
be achieved, if we modify the procedure used to react the PDMA–PS
particles with BIEE and to prepare the film of PDMA–PS particles
on the water surface. In this section, we tested if the strength of
the films at the air/water interface could be improved by allowing
the BIEE reaction to occur in the film of particles at the air/water
interface, while the particles were continually compressed to give
a closely packed film. In this way, the aggregates and particles would
be forced to adhere to each other, causing the particle packing in
the film to improve and thereby help prevent the formation of holes
in the film. In this section, the films of PDMA–PS particles
containing BIEE were therefore prepared by adding BIEE to the PDMA−PS
particles in ethanol spreading solution, after which the solution
was mixed for 30 s. That solution was then spread on a pH 5.8 water
surface or a pH 9.0 water surface; 10 min was allowed for ethanol
to evaporate, and the particles were compressed to a surface pressure
of 10 mN/m. This compression was continued throughout the reaction
of BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles, so as to maintain the surface
pressure of 10 mN/m. A surface pressure of 10 mN/m was chosen as this
surface pressure corresponds to a surface pressure that can give a
close particle packing. The films were transferred to mica substrates
after BIEE had reacted with the PDMA–PS particles for 1 h.
The substrates were then imaged using AFM. The reaction time of 1
h was chosen, so as to be able to compare the effect of changing the
method of reacting BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles on the physical
properties of the film.

Figures 8A,B and 7C,D show the 5 ×
5 μm2 image of the film of PDMA–PS particles
without BIEE and the films of the PDMA–PS particles with BIEE
that were prepared by reacting BIEE at the air/water interface, respectively. Figure 8A,C and 8B,D shows the films formed at the pH 5.8 water surface
and the pH 9.0 water surface, respectively. The sizes of each individual
particle that were distinguishable in the 5 × 5 μm2 images shown in Figure 8 were also measured using the PhotoRuler Software.
The histograms showing the sizes of the individual PDMA–PS
particles on the pH 5.8 water and pH 9.0 water surfaces are shown
in Figure 9. The average
size of the particles was obtained by performing a Gaussian fit to
the histogram data (see Table 2). On comparison of the average sizes of the particles seen
in the absence of BIEE with the sizes of the particles seen in the
presence of BIEE, we can observe that the sizes of the particles formed
in the presence of BIEE were on average larger than the sizes of the
particles imaged in the absence of BIEE, regardless of the water pH.
The percentage of aggregates in the film after the BIEE reaction at
the air/water interface can be seen from Table 2 to be approximately 27.1 and 26.1% for the
pH 5.8 water and pH 9.0 water surfaces. The ANP_AFM values were also calculated (Table 2) and show that the values of ANP_AFM increased after the BIEE reaction for both the
pH 5.8 water and pH 9.0 water surfaces. A decrease in the number of
particles on the surface because of the formation of aggregates would
cause the value of ANP_AFM to increase.
On comparison, the size of the aggregates formed by the individual
particles can be seen (Figure 8) to be larger when the film was formed in the presence of
BIEE than in the absence of BIEE. Thus, the larger particle and aggregate
sizes indicate that BIEE could interact with the PDMA–PS particles
at the air/water interface. Additionally, the size of the aggregates
formed by the individual particles can be seen (Figure 8) to be larger when the film was formed on
the pH 9.0 water surface in the presence of BIEE than when it was
formed on the pH 5.8 water surface in the presence of BIEE.

Figure 8 AFM height
images (5 × 5 μm2 and 15 ×
15 μm2) of transferred films of particles compressed
to Π = 10 mN/m, which show the effect of preparing the film
of PDMA–PS particles by reacting BIEE with the PDMA–PS
particles on the water surface for 1 h. (A,B) Film of PDMA–PS
particles without BIEE prepared on the water surface. (C–F)
Films of PDMA–PS particles with BIEE, when BIEE was reacted
with the PDMA–PS particles on the water surface for 1 h. (A,C,E)
pH 5.8 water subphase. (B,D,E) pH 9.0 water subphase.

Figure 9 Histogram showing the size of each individual particle
that was
distinguishable in the 5 × 5 μm2 AFM height
images of Figure 7.
A and B show the results for the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water surfaces, respectively.
The PDMA–PS particles in this film were reacted with BIEE at
the air/water interface, while the surface pressure was maintained
at 10 mN/m. The average size of the particles was obtained by performing
a Gaussian fit to the particle size histogram; see Table 2 for the average particle sizes.

Table 2 Average Size of Each
Individual Particle
that was Distinguishable in the Film Formed at the Air/Water Interface
after the PDMA–PS Particles were Reacted with BIEE at the Air/Water
Interface while the Surface Pressure was Maintained at 10 mN/ma
pH	BIEE presence	reaction
time (h)	NP_AFM	Nagg (%)	⟨NP_AFM⟩
(nm)	ANP_AFM (nm2)	
5.8	no	 	221	 	324 ± 112	1.13 × 105	
 	yes	1	161	27.1	349 ± 121	1.55 × 105	
9.0	no	 	241	 	308 ± 101	1.04 × 105	
 	yes	1	178	26.1	349 ± 109	1.40 × 105	
a The average particle
size was obtained
by performing a Gaussian fit to the particle size histogram in Figure 8, which was calculated
using the 5 × 5 μm2 AFM height images shown
in Figure 7. The number
of particles counted in the AFM image (NP_AFM), the percentage of aggregates in the film (Nagg), the average particle size (⟨NP_AFM⟩), area per particle (ANP_AFM) calculated from NP_AFM,
and the size of the AFM image (2.50 × 107 nm2) are given.

The fact that
the sizes of the aggregates were larger on a pH 9
water surface than on a pH 5.8 surface can be explained by the difference
in the magnitude of the interparticle electrostatic repulsions. As
the PDMA–PS particles are more charged in the pH 5.8 water
than in the pH 9.0 water, the interparticle electrostatic repulsions
would be stronger for the particles on the pH 5.8 water surface than
those on the pH 9.0 water surface. These electrostatic repulsions
would have decreased the aggregation of the particles. However, the
sizes of the aggregates formed with BIEE were in general larger than
the sizes formed without BIEE for both the pH 9.0 and 5.8 water subphases.
Thus, some of the aggregation must have been due to the presence of
BIEE. This result signifies that BIEE could react with the PDMA–PS
particles on the pH 5.8 water surface or on the pH 9.0 water surface.
The formation of the aggregates on the pH 9.0 water surface is therefore
explained by BIEE-related adhesions and attractions because of physical
forces, such as van der Waals, capillary, and hydrophobic forces.
The aggregates formed on the pH 5.8 water surface, however, are thought
to be largely due to the BIEE presence.

Figure 8E,F shows
the 15 × 15 μm2 images of the films of BIEE
particles that were prepared by reacting BIEE on the pH 5.8 water
surface and the pH 9.0 water surface, respectively. A closely packed
film with no large holes was observed. This result suggests that this
method could be used to prepare a film with closely packed particles
and no large holes.

The effect of the film preparation method
on the strength of the
films at the air/aqueous interfaces was determined by measuring the
forces between a hydrophilpos probe in the water
and films of particles at air/water interfaces. Figure 10 shows that in the case of
both the pH 5.8 and 9.0 water subphases, the reaction of BIEE with
the PDMA–PS particles on the water surface for 1 h at Π
= 10 mN/m gave a film with approximately the same strength as a film
of PDMA–PS particles prepared on a water surface in the absence
of BIEE with Π = 10 mN/m. The estimated elastic moduli of these
films of particles are shown in Figure 7. On comparison of the forces and estimated elastic
moduli values measured using the films formed by reacting BIEE in
the PDMA–PS particle spreading solution for 1 h and Π
= 10 mN/m (Figure 6) with the forces and estimated elastic moduli values measured using
the films formed by reacting BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles
on the water surface for 1 h at Π = 10 mN/m (Figure 10), we see that the steepest
force curve was obtained when BIEE was reacted in the PDMA–PS
particle spreading solution for 1 h, spread on a pH 5.8 water surface,
and then compressed to Π = 10 mN/m.

Figure 10 Approach force–distance
curves measured between a film of
PDMA–PS particles compressed to Π = 10 mN/m on a water
surface and a hydrophilpos probe in the water. (A)
pH 5.8 water subphase; (B) pH 9.0 water subphase. Black squares: film
of PDMA–PS particles without BIEE on the water surface, which
was compressed to Π = 10 mN/m; green triangles: film of PDMA–PS
particles with BIEE prepared by reacting BIEE with the particles on
the water surface for 1 h, while the film was compressed to Π
= 10 mN/m.

A stronger film was
obtained when BIEE was reacted with the PDMA–PS
particles in the ethanol spreading solution than when BIEE was reacted
with the PDMA–PS particles on a pH 5.8 water surface, even
though both films were compressed to the same surface pressure, and
both films did not show holes detectable by AFM imaging. The difference
in the strength of the films can be explained by the difference in
the number of directions with which a particle can react with another
particle via BIEE. In the case that BIEE was reacted with the particles
in the ethanol spreading solution, a PDMA–PS particle may have
bound to another PDMA–PS particle that was above or below it
(vertical plane) or that was next to it (in-plane), that is, there
were three binding dimensions. As the aggregates increased in size,
they could have bound with other aggregates or particles in three
possible dimensions. As a result, the aggregates would have become
bigger in both width and height. However, in the case that BIEE was
reacted with the PDMA–PS particles on the water surface, a
PDMA–PS particle could have bound with other particles that
were next to it (in-plane), that is, there were only two binding dimensions.
As the aggregates increased in size, they could have bound with other
aggregates or particles in two possible dimensions, causing the aggregates
to have become bigger in width. The film formed by the particles reacting
in three possible dimensions would therefore have appeared thicker
due to the larger size (height) of the aggregates. This would have
caused the film to be stronger than the film with smaller particles.

The thickness of the film formed by reacting BIEE with the particles
in the ethanol spreading solution or the film formed by reacting BIEE
with the PDMA–PS particles on the water surface was determined
by scratching a hole or line in the transferred film and then imaging
that area. Figure 11A shows the 5 × 5 μm2 height image of a hole
in a film, which was formed by reacting BIEE with the particles in
the ethanol spreading solution and then by spreading that solution
on a pH 5.8 water surface. Figure 11B shows the 5 × 5 μm2 height
image of a line scratched in a film, which was formed by reacting
BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles on a pH 5.8 water surface.
The height profiles of the white lines shown in Figure 11A,B are shown in Figure 11C. The film formed
by reacting BIEE with the particles in the ethanol spreading solution
gave larger height difference values than the film formed by reacting
BIEE with the particles at the air/water interface. Thus, the film
formed by reacting BIEE with the particles in the ethanol spreading
solution can be concluded to be thicker than the film formed by reacting
BIEE with the particles at the air/water interface. This film thickness
difference is thought to contribute to the difference in the strength
of the films.

Figure 11 AFM height images (5 × 5 μm2) of
holes or
lines that were scratched in the transferred films of PDMA–PS
containing BIEE prepared on the pH 5.8 water surface, when the films
were prepared in two different methods. The height profiles of the
white line in the images show the thicknesses of the films. Figure 10A and the black
solid line in 10C: Film prepared by reacting
BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles in the ethanol spreading solution
for 1 h and then spread on the pH 5.8 water surface and compressed
to Π = 10 mN/m. Figure 10B and the gray dash-dot line in 10C:
Film prepared by reacting BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles on
the pH 5.8 water surface for 1 h, while the film was continually compressed
to Π = 10 mN/m.

3 Conclusions
The packing of the PDMA–PS
particles in the film at the
air/water interface was affected by the BIEE reaction time with the
PDMA–PS particles when the reaction was performed in the ethanol
spreading solution, pH of the water subphase, and the method of reacting
BIEE with the PDMA–PS particles (reaction in the ethanol spreading
solution or at the air/water interface). Particle films that did not
have large holes could be prepared by reacting BIEE with the PDMA–PS
particles in the spreading solution for times ≤6 h and then
by spreading this solution on a pH 5.8 water surface. Larger reaction
times or a pH 9.0 water surface gave films with large holes. The holes
in the films could be decreased if BIEE was reacted with the PDMA–PS
particles on the pH 5.8 or 9.0 water surface, while the film was constantly
compressed. The stiffness of the film of PDMA–PS particles
increased, when BIEE was reacted with the PDMA–PS particles
in the spreading solution for 1 h and then spread on a pH 5.8 water
surface. The film stiffness, however, did not increase, when BIEE
was reacted with the PDMA–PS particles on the water surface
for 1 h. Control of the BIEE reaction conditions and the water pH
can therefore result in a film of particles with the desired particle
packing and film stiffness.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
The following materials
were used in this experiment: N-trimethoxysilylpropyl-N,N,N-trimethylammomium
chloride (hydrophilpos, 50% in methanol, ABCR, Germany),
chloroform (CHCl3, 99.0% purity, Wako Pure Chemical Industries,
Japan), methanol (MeOH, HPLC grade, Fisher Scientific, Germany), ethanol
(EtOH, JIS Special Grade, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Japan), aqueous
ammonia solution [NH3(aq), 25 wt %, analytical grade, WTL
Laborbedarf GmbH, Kastellaun, Germany], BIEE (96% purity, Sigma-Aldrich),
and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 97.0% purity, Wako Pure Chemical Industries,
Japan). Ultrapure water (Direct-Q 3 UV, Millipore, USA) with a specific
resistivity of 18.2 MΩ cm–1 was used in this
study. The PDMA−PS particles had 3.21 wt % poly(2-(N,N-dimethylamino)ethylmethacrylate) loading.
The diameter of the PDMA–PS particles was 333 ± 128 nm.
The details of the synthesis and preparation can be found elsewhere.7,18 The pH 5.8 and 9.0 aqueous solutions used as the subphases of the
particle films in this study were pure water and water adjusted to
pH 9.0 by the addition of NaOH. These subphases are referred to as
“pH 5.8 water” and “pH 9.0 water” throughout
this study.

4.2 Preparation of the PDMA–PS
Particle
Spreading Solution
The PDMA–PS particles were first
dispersed in ethanol to give a weight percentage of 18.4. This solution
was then diluted with ethanol to give an approximate weight percentage
of 1.8. This dilution was performed so as to avoid the particles aggregating
and becoming stuck in the syringe used to spread the PDMA–PS
particle spreading solution at the air/water interface. This diluted
PDMA–PS particles in ethanol solution was used to prepare all
PDMA–PS films reported in this study. Ethanol acted as the
solvent to spread the particles at the air/water interface. Organic
solvents commonly used to spread and prepare insoluble Langmuir monolayers
at air/water interfaces, such as chloroform and toluene, could not
be used in this study as polystyrene dissolves in chloroform and toluene.19 Ethanol, however, did not dissolve the PDMA–PS
particles and also allowed the PDMA–PS particles to be well-dispersed.
Ethanol also has a positive spreading coefficient,20 which enables it to spread at the air/water interface and
form monolayers of the PDMA–PS particles.

The cross-linker
of BIEE was added to 1 mL of PDMA–PS particles in ethanol solution
to give a BIEE/PDMA–PS particles in ethanol solution ratio
of 1:10. The concentration of BIEE in the PDMA–PS particles
in ethanol solution was calculated to be 0.541 mM. As the same volume
of PDMA–PS particles in ethanol solution (1.0 mL) and BIEE
in ethanol solution (1.0 μL) was used to prepare each PDMA–PS
particles in ethanol solution containing BIEE, the weight fraction
of the PDMA–PS particles in the ethanol spreading solution
was the same for each of the BIEE-containing systems. Assuming the
weight percentage of the PDMA–PS particles in ethanol was 1.8,
the weight fraction of the PDMA–PS particles in the ethanol
solution containing BIEE can be calculated to have been reduced by
less than 0.2%.

The BIEE reaction with the PDMA–PS particles
was performed
in two ways. The first method was to allow BIEE to react with the
particles in the ethanol solution for a specified period of time,
before the particle solution containing BIEE was spread at the air/water
interface to form the particle film. The second method was to add
BIEE to the particle solution and mix that solution for 30 s. The
particle solution containing BIEE was then spread at the air/water
interface, and BIEE was allowed to react for a specified period of
time. The BIEE reaction was not quenched after its addition to the
PDMA–PS particle solution. Thus, the cross-linking reaction
could occur in the spreading solution containing the PDMA–PS
particles and ethanol and also at the air/water interface after the
particles were spread.

4.3 Preparation of the Colloidal
Probe Used in
the Monolayer Particle Interaction Apparatus (MPIA) Force Studies
A light microscope (BX51, Olympus) and a micromanipulator (model
MMO-202D, Narishige) were used to attach a silica particle (nominal
diameter = 6.84 μm, Bangs Laboratory, Fishers, USA) to a gold-plated
Si3N4 cantilever (V-shaped, nominal spring constant k = 0.15 N/m, OTR8–PS-W, Olympus) with an epoxy resin
(Araldite Rapid). The silica probe was next modified with hydrophilpos using the method reported elsewhere.5

4.4 Measurement of the Surface
Pressure–Area
Langmuir Isotherms
The particle films were prepared using
a Langmuir–Blodgett trough (large microscopy Langmuir trough,
Nima Technology Ltd, Coventry, UK), which was made from poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
(PTFE) and equipped with two PTFE barriers that compressed around
the center of the trough. The maximum surface area of the trough was
290 cm2. The surface pressure was measured using a Wilhelmy
plate of wet filter paper21 (no. 2 240
mm, Toyo, Japan), which was suspended from a strain gauge (Nima PS4
surface pressure sensor, Nima Technology Ltd, Coventry, UK).

Before the surface pressure–area isotherms were measured,
the Langmuir trough was cleaned with chloroform and then with ethanol.
To eliminate any remaining solvent, water was then added to the trough
and then removed. The subphase solution was next added to the trough,
the barriers were compressed to a maximum, and the subphase surface
was cleaned by suctioning the water surface between the two barriers.
The barriers were subsequently fully expanded. The temperature of
the subphase was maintained at 20 °C. Next, 220 μL of the
PDMA–PS particles in ethanol solution or the PDMA–PS
particles in ethanol solution that contained BIEE was spread drop-wise
onto the subphase by using a 100 μL syringe (Hamilton, Switzerland).
The same volume was spread for each system, allowing the isotherms
of the different systems to be directly compared. Approximately 10
min was allowed for the solvent to evaporate. The particle films were
then compressed with a speed of 80 cm2 min–1, during which time the surface pressure–area isotherm was
recorded. Each isotherm was measured for a minimum of three times
to ensure that the results were reproducible.

The surface pressure
(Π)–area isotherms were converted
to Π–area per PDMA–PS particle (APDMA–PS) isotherms by calculating the number of
PDMA–PS particles spread at the air/water interface (NPDMA–PS), using the weight fraction of
the PDMA–PS particles in the ethanol spreading solution (0.018),
the volume spread at the air/water interface (220 μL), the density
of ethanol (0.789 g/mL), and the weight of one particle (WPDMA_PS). WPDMA_PS was calculated
using the density of polystyrene (1.05 g/cm3) and the radius
of one particle.

4.5 Langmuir–Blodgett
Deposition
The particle films were transferred to a 1 ×
2 cm2 mica substrate (Grade V-5 Muscovite 01804-CA, Structure
Probe, Inc,
USA) via a Langmuir–Blodgett deposition. Briefly, the Langmuir
trough was cleaned in the manner described above. The liquid to be
used as the subphase was then added to the trough. The mica substrate
was next cleaned by using a sticky tape, which removed the outer layers
of the mica. The surface of the subphase was then suctioned and cleaned.
The mica substrate was next attached to a minidipper (DC-20 small,
Nima Technology Ltd, UK) and immersed into the subphase so that only
a few millimeters of the substrate remained in the air. The particle
film was then spread, and a waiting time of 10 min was allowed for
the spreading solvent to evaporate. The monolayer was subsequently
compressed to the desired surface pressure. Once the surface pressure
stabilized, the wafer was moved out of the subphase using the dipper
at a speed of 1 mm/min (the slowest speed available on the dipper).

4.6 AFM Imaging
The particle films that
were transferred to mica substrates were imaged with an atomic force
microscope (Multimode 3, Veeco, USA) in the tapping mode by using
a silicon nitride cantilever coated with aluminum (Si-DF20, SII, Japan,
nominal spring constant = 16 N m–1). The substrate
was attached to the piezo using a double-sided tape (NW-15SF, Nichiban,
Japan) and was then imaged with a scan size of 5 × 5 μm2 and 15 × 15 μm2. The number of lines
and the resolution of data points per line were both 512. The AFM
images were unmodified (i.e., nonfiltered), except for a first-order
flattening along the scan lines.

4.7 MPIA
Force–Distance Curves
The forces between a particle
film at an air/water interface and
a colloidal probe in the water were measured using the MPIA. The MPIA
combines a Langmuir trough (Riegler & Kirstein GmbH, Potsdam,
Germany) and a force measurement unit. Detailed information about
the MPIA can be found elsewhere.22−24

The Langmuir trough
was cleaned using CHCl3 and EtOH. Water was next added
and subsequently removed, so as to remove any remaining solvent. The
colloidal probe was then attached to the cantilever holder. Water
was next added to the trough, and its surface was suctioned and cleaned.
The temperature of the subphase was maintained at 20.0 ± 0.1
°C by using a circulation system (C25P, ThermoHaake, Karlsruhe,
Germany) that ran thermostated water through the base of the trough.
The calibration factor (CFmica) that was required to convert
the raw force curves (force [V] vs piezo position [nm] curves) to
calibrated force curves (force [nN] vs piezo position [nm] curves)
was obtained by first measuring the forces between the probe and a
clean mica substrate that was placed across the edges of the Langmuir
trough filled with water. The water in the trough was removed after
calibration, new water was added, and its surface was cleaned. The
particle film was next spread at the air/water interface, and 10 min
was allowed for ethanol to evaporate. The films were then compressed
to a surface pressure of 10 mN/m, and the forces were measured between
that film and the same probe that was used to measure CFmica. At least 50 force curves were measured at each surface pressure.
CFmica was used to convert the raw force curves (force
[V] vs piezo position [nm] curves) measured between the particle film
and the probe to calibrated force curves (force [nN] vs piezo position
[nm] curves). Zero force was defined at large cantilever-film separations,
where no surface forces acted on the cantilever. Zero distance was
defined at the onset of the linear contact region; the contact region
was defined as the area where the probe was in contact with the mica
substrate or with the particle film at the air/aqueous interface.

The effective stiffness (SN) of the film of particles at the air/aqueous interface was
determined from a linear fit of the repulsion seen in the contact
region of the force curves. The slope of the linear contact region
recorded for the film at the air/water interface (S1) was divided by the slope measured with the mica substrate
(S2), giving SN. If SN = 1, then the film had a stiffness equivalent of mica. As mica has
an elastic modulus of 62 ± 2 GPa,25 the elastic modulus of the film was estimated by SN × 62 ± 2 GPa.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This study was partially performed
through the JSPS
KAKENHI Scientific Research C (General) research grant entitled “Determination
and control of the forces at deformable interfaces and the effect
of particle adsorption”. This work was also supported by the
JSPS-DAAD (Germany) Bilateral Joint Research Projects.
==== Refs
References
Fujii S. ; Nakamura Y. 
Stimuli-Responsive Bubbles and Foams Stabilized with
Solid Particles . Langmuir 
2017 , 33 , 7365 –7379 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b01024 .28478676 
Lobos J. ; Iasella S. ; Rodrigurz-Perez M. A. ; Velankar S. S. 
Improving the Stability
of Polylactic Acid Foams by Interfacially Adsorbed Particles . Polym. Eng. Sci. 
2016 , 56 , 9 –17 . 10.1002/pen.24185 .
Goldenberg L. M. ; Wagner J. ; Stumpe J. ; Paulke B.-R. ; Görnitz E. 
Diffraction
properties of ordered arrays of large latex particles . Mater. Sci. Eng., C: Biomimetic Supramol. Syst. 
2002 , 22 , 233 –237 . 10.1016/s0928-4931(02)00171-6 .
Miyoshi T. ; Okuma T. ; Yamashita M. 
Effect of
organic film composition
on performance of organic coated steel sheet with excellent lubrication . Tetsu to Hagane 
1996 , 82 , 754 –759 . 10.2355/tetsutohagane1955.82.9_754 .
McNamee C. E. ; Fujii S. ; Yusa S.-i. ; Kappl M. 
Physical properties
of mixed Langmuir monolayers of polystyrene particles with poly(N,N-dimethyl-aminoethylmethacrylate) hairs
and a poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylates) polymer at an air/water interface . Soft Matter 
2017 , 13 , 1583 –1593 . 10.1039/c6sm02529c .28127612 
Fujii F. ; Mochizuki M. ; Aono K. ; Hamasaki S. ; Murakami R. ; Nakamura Y. 
pH-responsive
aqueous forms stabilized by hairy latex
particles . Langmuir 
2011 , 27 , 12902 –12909 . 10.1021/la203062b .21910465 
McNamee C. E. ; Fujii S. ; Yusa S.-i. ; Azakami Y. ; Butt H.-J. ; Kappl M. 
The forces and physical properties of polymer particulate monolayers
at air/aqueous interfaces . Colloids Surf., A 
2015 , 470 , 322 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2014.12.035 .
Bütün V. ; Billingham N. C. ; Armes S. P. 
Synthesis of shell cross-linked micelles
with tunable hydrophilic/hydrophobic cores . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1998 , 120 , 12135 –12136 . 10.1021/ja981932u .
Huang H. ; Kowalewski T. ; Remsen E. E. ; Gertzmann R. ; Wooley K. L. 
Hydrogel-Coated
Glassy Nanospheres: A Novel Method
for the Synthesis of Shell Cross-Linked Knedels . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 11653 –11659 . 10.1021/ja9717469 .
Bütün V. ; Lowe A. B. ; Billingham N. C. ; Armes S. P. 
Synthesis of Zwitterionic
Shell Cross-linked Micelles . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1999 , 121 , 4288 –4289 . 10.1021/ja9840596 .
Liu S. ; Armes S. P. 
The Facile One-Pot Synthesis of Shell Cross-Linked
Micelles in Aqueous Solution at High Solids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2001 , 123 , 9910 –9911 . 10.1021/ja011206i .11583561 
Liu S. ; Weaver J. V. M. ; Tang Y. ; Billingham N. C. ; Armes S. P. ; Tribe K. 
Synthesis of Shell
Cross-Linked Micelles
with pH-Responsive Cores Using ABC Triblock Copolymers . Macromolecules 
2002 , 35 , 6121 –6131 . 10.1021/ma020447n .
Bresme F. ; Oettel M. 
Nanoparticles at fluid
interfaces . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2007 , 19 , 413101 10.1088/0953-8984/19/41/413101 .28192311 
Huang H. ; Kowalewski T. ; Remsen E. E. ; Gertzmann R. ; Wooley K. L. 
Hydrogel-Coated
Glassy Nanospheres: A Novel Method
for the Synthesis of Shell Cross-Linked Knedels . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1997 , 119 , 11653 –11659 . 10.1021/ja9717469 .
McNamee C. E. ; Kappl M. 
Forces and physical
properties of Langmuir monolayers of TiO2 particles at
air/water interfaces after collisions by a particle
in the water . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 54440 –54448 . 10.1039/c6ra09499f .
McNamee C. E. ; Kappl M. ; Butt H.-J. ; Higashitani K. ; Graf K. 
Interfacial Forces between a Silica Particle and Phosphatidylcholine
Monolayers at the Air–Water Interface . Langmuir 
2010 , 26 , 14574 –14581 . 10.1021/la1019839 .20731469 
Israelachvili J. N.  Intermolecular
and Surface Forces ; Academic Press : Amsterdam , 2011 ; pp 142 –144 .
Fujii S. ; Akiyama K. ; Nakayama S. ; Hamasaki S. ; Yusa S.-i. ; Nakamura Y. 
pH- and temperature-responsive aqueous foams stabilized
by hairy latex particles . Soft Matter 
2015 , 11 , 572 –579 . 10.1039/c4sm02236j .25426611 
García M. T. ; Gracia I. ; Duque G. ; de Lucas A. ; Rodríguez J. F. 
Study of
the solubility and stability of polystyrene wastes in a dissolution
recycling process . Waste Manage. 
2009 , 29 , 1814 –1818 . 10.1016/j.wasman.2009.01.001 .
Barnes G. T. ; Gentle I. R.  Interfacial Science
An Introduction ; Oxford University Press : Oxford , 2005 ; p 85 .
Barnes G. T. ; Gentle I. R.  Interfacial Science
An Introduction ; Oxford University Press : Oxford , 2005 ; p 86 .
Gillies G. ; Büscher K. ; Preuss M. ; Kappl M. ; Butt H.-J. ; Graf K. 
Contact angles
and wetting behaviour of single micron-sized particles . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2005 , 17 , S445 –S464 . 10.1088/0953-8984/17/9/011 .
Graf K. ; Büscher K. ; Kappl M. ; Moreno-Flores S. ; Pum D. ; Sleytr U. B. ; Toca-Herrera J. L.  Biomimetics in Biophysics: Model Systems,
Experimental Techniques and Computation ; Toca-Herrera J. L.  , Ed.; Research
Signpost , 2010 ; pp 109 –125 , ISBN: 978-81-308-0385-2.
McNamee C. E. ; Graf K. ; Butt H.-J. ; Higashitani K. ; Kappl M. 
Interaction between a silica particle and the underside of a polymer
monolayer at the air/water interface in the presence of an anionic
surfactant . Colloids Surf., A 
2011 , 383 , 32 –40 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2010.11.030 .
McGuiggan P. M. ; Wallace J. S. ; Smith D. T. ; Sridhar I. ; Zheng Z. W. ; Johnson K. L. 
Contact mechanics
of layered elastic materials: experiment
and theory . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2007 , 40 , 5984 –5994 . 10.1088/0022-3727/40/19/031 .

