
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3002389610.1021/acsomega.8b00419ArticlePorphyrin–Gold Nanomaterial for Efficient Drug
Delivery to Cancerous Cells Bera Kaushik †§Maiti Samarpan ‡§Maity Mritunjoy †Mandal Chitra *‡Maiti Nakul C. *††Structural
Biology and Bioinformatics Division and ‡Cancer Biology & Inflammatory
Disorder Division, CSIR-Indian Institute
of Chemical Biology, 4, Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Kolkata 700032, India* E-mail: chitra_mandal@yahoo.com. Tel: +91-33-2429-8861. Fax: +91-33-2473-5197 (C.M.).* E-mail: ncmaiti@iicb.res.in. Phone: +91-33-2499-5940. Fax: +91-33-2473-5197 (N.C.M.).26 04 2018 30 04 2018 3 4 4602 4619 06 03 2018 17 04 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

With an aim to overcome multidrug
resistance (MDR), nontargeted
delivery, and drug toxicity, we developed a new nanochemotherapeutic
system with tetrasodium salt of meso-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin
(TPPS) armored on gold nanoparticles (TPPS-AuNPs). The nanocarrier
is able to be selectively internalized within tumor cells than in
normal cells followed by endocytosis and therefore delivers the antitumor
drug doxorubicin (DOX) particularly to the nucleus of diseased cells.
The embedment of TPPS on the gold nanosurface provides excellent stability
and biocompatibility to the nanoparticles. Porphyrin interacts with
the gold nanosurface through the coordination interaction between
gold and pyrrolic nitrogen atoms of the porphyrin and forms a strong
association complex. DOX-loaded nanocomposite (DOX@TPPS-AuNPs) demonstrated
enhanced cellular uptake with significantly reduced drug efflux in
MDR brain cancer cells, thereby increasing the retention time of the
drug within tumor cells. It exhibited about 9 times greater potency
for cellular apoptosis via triggered release commenced by acidic pH.
DOX has been successfully loaded on the porphyrin-modified gold nanosurface
noncovalently with high encapsulation efficacy (∼90%) and tightly
associated under normal physiological conditions but capable of releasing
∼81% of drug in a low-pH environment. Subsequently, DOX-loaded
TPPS-AuNPs exhibited higher inhibition of cellular metastasis, invasion,
and angiogenesis, suggesting that TPPS-modified AuNPs could improve
the therapeutic efficacy of the drug molecule. Unlike free DOX, drug-loaded
TPPS-AuNPs did not show toxicity toward normal cells. Therefore, higher
drug encapsulation efficacy with selective targeting potential and
acidic-pH-mediated intracellular release of DOX at the nucleus make
TPPS-AuNPs a “magic bullet” for implication in nanomedicine.

document-id-old-9ao8b00419document-id-new-14ao-2018-004193ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Current cancer treatments
are mainly based on radiation and chemotherapeutic
agents, which have several side effects including severe damage to
epithelial surfaces, infertility, swelling of soft tissues, and other
side effects.1 Multidrug resistance (MDR)
is another primary limitation to the success of chemotherapy.2 Furthermore, many effective drugs are hydrophobic
or if soluble, it is difficult for them to reach their targets.3 The development of highly efficient therapeutics
to reverse MDR is still a challenging task. In a similar tune, several
antiviral drugs have showed low potency because many of these drug
molecules fail to effectively cross the blood–brain barrier.
Several reports suggested that nanoparticles (NPs), particularly from
gold, could be a choice that has a strong potential to deliver a drug
inside cancer cells. Nanosized gold particles possess distinctive
shape and size and unique chemical properties that rendered them to
be used as a drug delivery cargo.4−6 To make them a better
choice as a delivery system, modifications of the nanosurface are
often made with ligands that preferentially bind to a specific receptor
of the target cells.7−9 Such modification enhanced the permeability and retention
of drug molecules, which were then preferably localized to tumor sites
with a high concentration level and thus enhanced the drug effect.
Some of the modifications also enhanced the drug loading capacity,
thereby reducing the large dose and the toxic effect of the drug molecules.10 Doxorubicin (DOX) is a common drug used in a
wide range of cancers, and DOX-functionalized gold nanoparticles (AuNPs)
exhibited significantly higher efficacy compared to that of free DOX
in a biological environment.11−14 DOX loaded with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-AuNPs
could significantly overcome MDR in MCF-7/ADR breast cancer cells
compared with free doxorubicin.15 Suarasan
et al. showed that DOX-loaded gelatin-coated AuNPs can be used as
a nanochemotherapeutic system for the treatment of MCF-7 cells.16 Elbialy et al. demonstrated higher accumulation
of drug with DOX-loaded magnetic AuNPs compared to that by passive
targeting.17 Lee et al. prepared DOX-loaded
oligonucleotide-conjugated gold nanoparticles as a promising in vivo
drug delivery system for colorectal cancer.18 Dual activity including chemotherapy and photothermal treatment
using AuNPs coated with DOX-loaded fucoidan was also observed in eye
tumors.19 In the current article, we developed
tetrasodium salt of meso-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin-modified
gold nanoparticles (TPPS-AuNPs) that efficiently delivered the loaded
doxorubicin (DOX) molecule within the nucleus of tumor cells and thereby
improved the therapeutic efficacy of the drug.

Porphyrins are
highly conjugated aromatic molecules and show interesting
spectroscopic and electronic properties. They have immense applications
in the field of photodynamic and photothermal therapy.20−23 Porphyrin-stabilized gold nanoparticles using different porphyrins
are reported.24,25 Structural analysis of the gold
nanocomposite of thioester derivatives of tetrakis-5,10,15,20-(2-acetylthiophenyl)porphyrin
showed that all four pyrrole nitrogen atoms of the porphyrin ring
may participate in coordination with the gold nanosurface.26 The coupling of TPPS and magnetic nanoparticles
possibly has wider applications in modern medicine.27 Porphyrins are reported to form hybrid nanostructures in
the presence of different nanomaterials such as gold, graphene, tin
oxide, etc.28−30 Several porphyrin analogs were also conjugated with
gold nanoparticles for better use in photodynamic therapy because
of high triplet states and singlet oxygen quantum yield efficiency
of porphyrin molecules.31−34

Here, we showed that the water-soluble tetrasodium
salt of meso-tetrakis(4-sulphonatophenyl)porphyrin-modified
gold
nanoparticles (TPPS-AuNPs) has high efficiency to bind with doxorubicin
and effectively delivered the loaded DOX within the nucleus of tumor
cells. Our results established that TPPS-AuNPs can significantly reduce
the dose of DOX and thereby showed improved therapeutic efficacy toward
killing of brain cancer cells, which is a challenging task because
of the fast development and poor prognosis of this tumor.

Results and Discussion
Porphyrin and its derivatives are often used in making important
hybrid materials and assembly of gold nanoparticles.26,29,35−39 It contains a flat and planar electron-rich conjugated
aromatic ring and facilitates interaction with metal nanosurfaces. Scheme 1 represents the molecular
structure of TPPS and DOX. We utilized a simple reduction method to
prepare bare gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) using aqueous solution of
sodium borohydride (NaBH4). Porphyrin-coated gold nanoparticles
(TPPS-AuNPs) were subsequently prepared by incubating the freshly
prepared AuNPs with TPPS via a continuous stirring method (Scheme 2, discussed in the Experimental Section). Figure 1A depicts the absorption behavior of a water
suspension of freshly prepared TPPS-AuNPs. The surface plasmon resonance
(SPR) peak of TPPS-AuNPs appeared at 523 nm, and for the bare gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs) in aqueous suspension, the peak was at 515 nm.40 Thus, an ∼8 nm shift in the peak position
was observed. The presence of porphyrin also resulted in the broadening
of the plasmonic band, indicating a strong association of TPPS with
the gold nanosurface. The Soret absorption peak in the UV–vis
spectrum of free TPPS (aqueous solution, pH ∼ 9.0) appeared
at ∼412 nm (Figure 1A, inset).41 The peak was quite
broadened in TPPS-AuNPs, and a visible hump appeared at ∼420
nm.Scheme 1 Molecular Structure of Tetrasodium salt of meso-Tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin
(TPPS) (A) and Doxorubicin (DOX) (B) Used in the Preparation of Complexes


Figure 1 (A) UV–vis absorption spectra of
TPPS-modified gold nanoparticles
prepared at pH 9.0 and dispersed in high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) water (red trace) along with bare AuNPs (black trace). The
arrows at 412 and 420 nm are the Soret absorption peaks of porphyrin
and those at 515 and 523 nm are for the SPR band of AuNPs. The inset
figure shows the UV–vis absorption spectrum of free TPPS in
the same aqueous basic medium. (B) High-resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM) images of TPPS-AuNPs with a scale bar of 20 nm.
(C) Size distribution histogram and the fitted normal distribution
curve of the nanoparticles. (D) Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern
of TPPS-AuNPs. The sample was drop-cast on a glass slide and dried
at 60 °C. The peaks are assigned based on JCPDS card no. 03-065-2870.

Scheme 2 Schematic Representation of the Possible
Mechanism of Formation of
TPPS-Conjugated AuNPs and Subsequent Loading of DOX on Their Surface
The SPR band is a key to envisage
the size, shape, and interaction
pattern of metal nanoparticles with other molecules. Several investigators
observed a shift in the plasmonic band in nanocomposites because of
coating with other molecules and in some cases because of agglomeration
of the particles. Shaikh et al. observed a large shift (525–570
nm) in the AuNP plasmon band when treated it with porphyrin and purified
it by passing through a specific column.37 However, agglomeration of the particles in the purification process
could be the possible reason of the formation of bigger particles
and the red shift in the SPR band. They also observed a small shift
(515–528 nm) in the SPR band of the freshly prepared gold nanoparticles
in the presence of porphyrin and purified it by a different method.
Kanehara et al. prepared porphyrin-stabilized gold nanoparticles from
citrate-protected gold nanomaterials, and only small changes in the
SPR band were observed.26 They found that
the Soret (from porphyrin ring) absorption peak shifted by 4–11
nm depending on the gap between the metal surface and the porphyrin
ring. Ohyama et al. also developed a “lunar-lander-like”
porphyrin ligand that can stabilize the gold nanosurface with face-to-face
parallel geometry.24 They observed a broad
SPR band for the nanosurface and a bathochromic shift of ∼4
nm in the Soret absorption. The peak was broadened compared to that
of free porphyrin in water. In our TPPS-armored gold nanoparticles,
the Soret peak was broadened and a hump was observed at ∼420
nm compared to those of its monomer in solution (∼412 nm).
The broadening and red shifting of the SPR band and the TPPS Soret
absorption indicated that TPPS was involved in strong interaction
with the gold nanosurface.37

Figure 1B shows
the high-resolution transmission electron micrograph (HRTEM) of TPPS-AuNPs,
which revealed that the particles were largely spherical in shape
and were uniformly distributed. The transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) image also confirmed low level of particle aggregation. Figure 1C shows the size
distribution histogram of the nanoparticles and the fitted normal
distribution curve. About 30 particles were randomly chosen from the
enlarged TEM images to obtain the plot. The distribution analysis
found that the average particle diameter was ∼10 nm. The hydrodynamic
size and ζ potential of the nanoparticles were also measured
by dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis in aqueous suspension.
The distribution plots are shown in Figures S1 and S2. The average hydrodynamic diameter was ∼10 nm.
The measured surface potential of TPPS-AuNPs was ∼−41
mV, whereas for bare AuNPs, it was ∼−19 mV. The significant
increase in the negative ζ-potential value was due to surface
modification caused by negatively charged sulphonated groups of TPPS.

The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was also used to determine
the crystalline nature of the synthesized particles. Figure 1D shows the powder X-ray diffraction
pattern of TPPS-AuNPs in the 2θ range 32–90°. It
exhibited intense peaks at ∼38.10, 44.30, 64.50, 77.60, and
81.70 that correspond to diffraction from (111), (200), (220), (311),
and (222) crystal planes, indicating that the synthesized gold nanoparticles
were in the form of a face-centered cubic lattice in its solid state.
The peaks were assigned using standard literature data based on JCPDS
card no. 03-065-2870. The XRD peak patterns suggested nanocrystaline
nature of the particles with Fm3m symmetry.

Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) is a sensitive
technique
that provides several thermodynmical parameters pertinent to binding
of small molecules to the nanosurface and other macromolecular systems.
It measures parameters such as the binding constant (Ka), change of Gibbs free energy (ΔG°), and entropy change (ΔS°) for
the association processes. Figure 2A shows the calorimetric profile of TPPS interaction
with AuNPs at 25 °C. The top panel shows the change in heat as
a function of time for successive injection of TPPS. The heats of
dilution obtained from control experiments of injecting identical
amounts of the TPPS solution into the aqueous medium alone were subtracted
to get corrected values of heat (shown at the top portion of the upper
panels, curve). The lower panel shows the corrected integrated heats
(black squares) plotted against the molar ratio of the association
of TPPS with the gold nanoparticles, and the data were fitted to a
single-site binding model. The calculated binding constant, standard
molar enthalpy change, entropy contribution, and standard molar Gibbs
energy change were 3.13 × 105 M–1, −11.22 kcal/mol, −12.5 cal/mol deg, and −7.5
kcal/mol, respectively. The negative enthalpy and negative entropy
values suggested the presence of possible electrostatic interactions
between porphyrin and the metal nanosurface. The binding constant
was similar to that for the binding of nonfunctional porphyrin to
the gold nanosurface, as investigated by Shaikh et al., and for the
interaction of TPPS to magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles and other
nanosystems.27,37,42−44 It is likely that porphyrin got adsorbed on the AuNP
surfaces through the coordination interaction between gold and pyrrolic
nitrogen atoms of the porphyrin ring and formed a strong association
complex.

Figure 2 ITC profile for the binding of TPPS to AuNPs. The top panel presents
raw heat effects for the titration of AuNP suspension with 1.8 mM
TPPS at 25 °C in aqueous basic medium (pH ∼ 9.0). The
bottom panel shows the integrated heat effects after correction of
heat of dilution against the molar ratio of AuNPs to TPPS.

Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) analysis also
suggested ample
interaction of the metal surfaces with the porphyrin molecules. Figure S3 shows the FT-IR spectra of TPPS and
TPPS-AuNPs. Some of the prominent FT-IR bands of TPPS appeared at
639, 738, 804, 1009, 1039, 1125, 1190, 1221 (shoulder), and 1395 cm–1. The bands were assigned based on the available literature.6,45,46 TPPS contains a π-conjugated
porphyrin ring and four negatively charged sulphonated groups (SO3–) connected
to the phenyl moiety of the molecule. Many of the observed bands were
linked to the phenyl moiety of the molecule.46,47 The bands at 1221 and 1190 cm–1 could be assigned
to the vibrations of SO3– groups of TPPS. Most of the vibration bands of TPPS
also appeared in TPPS-AuNPs, however, with weak signals. The bands
for the SO3– groups were also present in the TPPS-AuNPs and shifted slightly.
This indicated porphyrin interaction with the metal nanosurface. The
bands at 1470, 1009, and 804 cm–1 were linked to
the vibrations of bonds connected to ring nitrogens, and associated
bond vibrations were more affected and some changes in the frequency
position were observed. The ring nitrogen atoms might be involved
in coordination with the metal nanosurface and perturbed the ring
vibrations to a certain extent, causing changes in some of these vibrational
frequencies.46

We tested the stability
of TPPS–AuNPs under high salt concentration
conditions. Figure 3 shows the optical absorption spectra of TPPS-AuNPs in several ionic
buffers at high ionic strength (∼100 mM) after incubating for
30 min at 37 °C. The SPR band remained at 523 nm, and no significant
change was observed. The porphyrin Soret absorption peak was also
found to be less affected. These two observations suggest an excellent
colloidal stability of the nanoparticles. A charged nanosurface is
usually prepared through surface coating with specific molecules.
The charge over the nanoparticle surface creates a potential difference
(ζ potential) and stabilizes the colloidal nanoparticle suspension
in solutions by repulsive electrostatic interactions. However, electrostatically
stabilized nanoparticles are prone to aggregation in different chemical
or biological media because of neutralization of the surface charge
by ionic species present in the media. The prolonged colloidal stability
experienced by TPPS-AuNPs in different media (Figure 3) may be due to the presence of stable TPPS
embedment. Highly hydrophilic TPPS coatings have been shown to resist
ion adsorption and also provide steric hindrance, thus preventing
aggregation and coagulation to form bigger particles.

Figure 3 UV–visible absorption
spectra of the TPPS-AuNPs in different
ionic buffer mediums (100 mM), namely, N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (black), KCl (red),
NaCl (blue), phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (dark cyan), phosphate
(magenta), Tris–HCl (dark yellow), and water (navy) under normal
physiological conditions (pH ∼ 7.4, 37 °C).

Porphyrin molecules can form stable molecular junctions,
and addition
of anchoring groups to the porphyrin backbone increases the stability
of the junctions.48 It was observed that
porphyrin with four amino groups binds strongly to AuNPs compared
with porphyrin having less number of/no functional amino groups. With
no functional amino groups, the porphyrin fluorescence intensity is
quenched because of the standard face-on and face-off interactions
of porphyrin with gold nanoparticles. Time-resolved fluorescence measurements
indicated that the quenching of the fluorescence of porphyrin by AuNPs
is of static type.37 Furthermore, it was
established that the thiol functional groups have a higher affinity
to the gold surface and showed strong binding to gold nanoparticles.49 Porphyrins with diamino groups and thiols show
similar binding constants. Some groups studied the formation of Au
and tetrapyridyl porphyrin complexes and suggested that Au atoms and
small Au clusters can form dative bonds with the lone electron pair
on a nitrogen atom; hence, the Au clusters are likely to bond to one
of the pyridyl nitrogen atoms.50−52 Bhaumik et al. developed porphyrin–gold
nanoconjugates as biocompatible photosensitizers and showed that the
porphyrin with a carboxyl tether was successfully attached to the
surface of the bioinspired metal nanoparticles (rich in −OH
group) via covalent ester bond formation.53 Nada et al. reported that π-conjugated phthalocyanine rings
can serve as stabilizing ligands for gold nanoparticles through van
der Waals interaction between parallel-adsorbed phthalocyanine ligands
and the gold nanoparticle surface.54 Evdokimova
et al. found that porphyrin with four bromine groups has a stronger
affinity for the surfaces of gold nanoparticles than that of porphyrin
without functional groups.55 Zhang et al.
suggested that porphyrin monomers are first adsorbed on the gold nanosurfaces
through the coordination interaction between gold and pyrrolic nitrogen
atoms, followed by the formation of linear or necklace chain assemblies
of the gold nanospheres via the π–π stacking interaction
between porphyrin monomers.35 Kanehara
et al. showed that all of the ring nitrogen atoms of porphyrin are
involved in binding to the nanosurface and aligned the porphyrin rings
quite parallel to the gold nanosurface.26 The additional study established a very close face-on configuration
that may generate a strong coupling between the π orbital of
the porphyrin ring and the 6s orbital of gold.56

TPPS, used in our investigation, contained no sulfhydryl
or −NH2 functional groups that could easily bind
to the nanosurfaces.
However, it contained a highly electron rich π-conjugated macrocyclic
ring with two pyrrolic nitrogen (−NH) atoms. The four sulphonated
groups render the porphyrin molecule water-soluble but not stably
functionalizing the AuNPs. However, pyrrolic nitrogen atoms have strong
propensities to be involved in coordination with the metal surface.27 It could be a strong association complex. ITC
measurements established the binding/association constant for binding
of TPPS to gold nanoparticles to be about 3 × 105 M–1. The adherence of TPPS to the nanosurface was further
confirmed by the ζ potential measurement of both AuNPs and TPPS-AuNPs.
A significant increase in the negative ζ potential value (from
−19 mV of AuNPs to −41 mV of TPPS-AuNPs) could be attributed
to the presence of TPPS (SO3– groups) on the gold nanosurface. FT-IR
investigation (Figure S3) also showed the
presence of TPPS on the gold nanosurface. This investigation also
showed that some of the vibration bands are associated particularly
with the macrocyclic ring (that contains nitrogen atoms) of the molecule
affected, and not much difference was observed in the vibration of
sulphonated groups. We further performed dialysis of the nanocomposite
for 2 days in aqueous medium (pH ∼ 7.0) and observed that the
porphyrin Soret absorption peak remained at ∼412 nm; however,
the peak was broadened. Steady-state fluorescence investigation (not
shown) also suggested very strong binding of TPPS molecules to the
nanoparticles. Upon repeated washing, some loss of porphyrin from
the nanosurface was possible that could cause agglomeration of the
nanostructures.37

The efficient delivery
and release of a drug molecule to a targeted
cell are a crucial challenge to improve therapies for a range of human
diseases. We have selected tetrasodium salt of meso-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin (TPPS) to modify the gold nanosurface.
Its unique conductivity properties due to the conjugated π-system,
structural flexibility, and several possible architectural modifications
make it attractive for use in nanocomposites and the modulation of
conductive properties of gold nanoparticles. TPPS is water-soluble.
In vivo tumor localization potential of the porphyrin was found to
be reasonably high. Furthermore, it has four −SO3– groups
that may interact with −NH2 groups of DOX through
hydrogen bonding. These hydrogen bonds are very sensitive to pH. In
an acidic environment (cancer cells), the hydrogen bonding interactions
become weak, resulting in the release of DOX from the nanosurface
and thus making it available to kill the cells effectively. Here,
we used a commonly used clinically approved anticancer drug (DOX)
as a model system and embedded it on TPPS-AuNPs to make a ternary
nanochemotherapeutic system, DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (Scheme 2). Loading of DOX was monitored by UV–vis
spectroscopy, ζ potential, DLS, TEM, and fluorescence measurements. Figure 4A shows the UV–vis
spectra associated with the SPR band of DOX-loaded and free TPPS-AuNPs.
The inset in the figure shows the time-dependent doping of DOX on
the porphyrin-coated gold nanosurface. We found that after 1 h incubation
of DOX with TPPS-AuNPs at pH 7.0, ∼60% of DOX was entrapped.
It increases slowly thereafter and reached a plateau, upto ∼90%
encapsulation, at 24 h. However, AuNPs entrapped only ∼25%
of DOX for 1 h of incubation (Figure S4). The weight ratio of DOX to AuNPs/TPPS-AuNPs was 1:7. The reason
of enhanced encapsulation by TPPS-AuNPs could be the favorable interactions
between −SO3– groups of TPPS on the gold nanosurface and −NH2 groups of DOX. The binding interaction between the two groups
was highly possible, and it was reported earlier.45 Upon DOX loading, the size of the nanoparticles increased,
as confirmed by the large bathochromic shift of the SPR band from
523 to 584 nm (Figure 4A). The TEM micrograph also confirms the increased particle size
upon DOX loading (Figure 4B). Figure 4C illustrates the usual fluorescence emission spectrum of DOX (30
μM) in water. On addition of TPPS-AuNPs to the solution, mainly
the bright fluorescence of DOX was substantially quenched, and it
strongly suggested the encapsulation of DOX on TPPS-AuNPs. Thus, a
novel ternary complex (DOX@TPPS-AUNPs) was formed. ζ potential
and DLS measurements further supported the fact that DOX was sufficiently
loaded in TPPS-AuNPs (Figure S5). The ζ
potential value of TPPS-AuNPs was −41.1 mV, and it was increased
to −34.3 mV for DOX-loaded TPPS-AuNPs. The hydrodynamic diameter
also increased from 10 to 26 nm after DOX loading.

Figure 4 (A) Optical absorption
spectra of TPPS-AuNPs and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
in water. The inset shows the encapsulation efficiency (EE) of DOX
as a function of time on the surface of TPPS-AuNPs in aqueous medium
at pH ∼ 7.0. (B) TEM micrograph of TPPS-AuNPs loaded with doxorubicin
(scale bar 100 nm). (C) Fluorescence spectrum of DOX (30 μM)
in water (black trace) and fluorescence spectrum of the supernatant
obtained upon adding TPPS-AuNPs to the DOX solution followed by filtration
(red trace with reduced intensity). (D) Fluorescence spectrum of DOX
released from the TPPS-AuNPs nanosurface after incubating DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
at pH = 5.0 (citrate buffer) at 37 °C for 40 h. The inset shows
the corresponding UV–vis spectrum. (E) Release of DOX from
DOX@TPPS-AuNPs at 37 °C incubated under three different solution
conditions (pHs varies) with time. The calculations of encapsulation
efficiency and release % are explained in the Materials
and Methods section.

The flat porphyrin ring can possibly cradle and facilitate
the
incorporation of doxorubicin in the porphyrin–gold nanocomposite.
Interactions (electrostatic and H-bonding) among the polar and ionic
groups (SO3–) of TPPS and −NH2 groups of DOX or π–π
staking between the conjugated structure of the TPPS moiety and DOX
could provide ample stabilization in the binding processes (Scheme 3).57 This kind of interaction was already observed between DOX
and graphene oxide (containing electron-rich π-orbital substituted
with the CO2– group).58,59 Therefore, DOX was noncovalently loaded
on TPPS-AuNPs and the electrostatic/hydrogen bonding interaction was
the major force in the association processes. The ζ potential
of TPPS-AuNPs was −41.1 mV at neutral pH (pH = 7.4), AuNPs
being covered with the anionic TPPS porphyrin. The ζ potential
of DOX-loaded TPPS-AuNPs was −34.3 mV. The decrease in the
ζ potential is attributed to the charge neutralization of suphonated
groups. This also justified a large quenching of fluorescence of DOX
(Figure 4C) in DOX@TPPS-AuNPs,
and both the facts supported the formation of a strong and stable
ternary complex.

Scheme 3 Schematic Representation of Electrostatic Interaction
and Hydrogen
Bonding between Adsorbed TPPS and Adsorbed DOX Molecules on AuNP Surfaces
TPPS molecules attached on the
AuNP surface through coordination interaction.

For efficient drug delivery, the biocompatibility of drug nanocarriers
and controlled release of the drug at the pathological site are essential
and important requirements. As we showed above, the DOX@TPPS-AuNP
complex was formed by the adsorption of DOX on the surface of TPPS-AuNP
and the bonding was very strong at neutral pH and caused inefficient
release.58 Once DOX was loaded, its fluorescence
signal significantly quenched. However, when the DOX@TPPS-AuNPs system
was dispersed in acidic buffers, the chances of pyrrolic nitrogen
(−NH) protonation increased and the −NH2 group
(pKa ∼ 7.2) of DOX also got protonated.
This caused instability in the binding interaction of porphyrin/DOX
with the metal nanosurface and resulted in the release of both DOX
and porphyrin molecules from the metallic surface. The absorption
spectrum (Figure 4D,
inset) shows the Soret absorption peak of diprotonated porphyrin at
433 nm under acidic conditions (pH ∼ 5.0).60 However, the spectrum was dominated with the DOX absorption
band.

To measure the pH-triggered uncapping efficiency of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
nanoparticles in greater detail, the drug release experiments were
performed by varying the pH of the solutions. A small amount of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
was incubated with different buffers of varying pHs and maintained
at 37 °C under gentle shaking. The amount of DOX released at
different time intervals was measured based on the absorbance of the
released DOX in the medium. Absorbance at 480 nm was recorded and
plotted as a function of time to generate a release profile. Figure 4D shows the fluorescence
emission spectrum of released DOX from the TPPS-AuNP surface after
incubating the solution for 40 h at pH 5.0 and at 37 °C. It showed
strong fluorescence emission at 592 nm, which is a characteristic
emission wavelength of DOX. This observation also suggested that the
molecular structure of DOX remained intact upon binding and subsequent
release from TPPS-AuNPs and thus it can be available in the tumor
environment (acidic pH) to act effectively. A pH-dependent DOX release
profile has been shown in Figure 4E. This shows much less (∼25%) DOX releases
after 40 h under normal physiological conditions (pH 7.4 and 37 °C).
At the end of 40 h, the amount of DOX released was ∼64% at
pH 6, ∼81% at pH 5 at 37 °C. Thus, it was found that most
of the DOX remained in the composite for a considerable length of
time in the plasma under physiological conditions (pH 7.4). Hence,
a reduction in the release of DOX to the normal tissue was observed
as the pH of body fluids is around pH 7.4. The release of DOX was
linked to the pH of the microenvironment surrounding the nanocomposite
and the protonation of both the ring nitrogen of TPPS and the −NH2 group of DOX. Protonation of the ring nitrogens causes instability
in the binding interaction of porphyrin with the metal nanosurface
and protonation of the −NH2 group causes instability
to the electrostatic interaction between the TPPS and DOX. Chances
of protonation of the pyrrolic nitrogens/–NH2 of
DOX increase with a decrease in the pH of the solution. The absorption
spectrum at pH ∼ 5.0 (Figure 4D, inset) shows the strong Soret absorption peak of
diprotonated porphyrin at 433 nm. However, the pKa of porphyrin pyrrolic nitrogen is ∼4.9 and that
of the cellular environment in cancerous cells is ∼6.0. The
change of pH from 7.4 to 6.0 may not result in a drastic change what
we observed at pH ∼ 5.0; however, the medium is sufficiently
acidic to weaken the binding interaction of TPPS with AuNPs. At pH
6.0, however, the −NH2 groups of DOX (pKa ∼ 7.2) may be protonated to a greater extent.
It could make the interaction of DOX and TPPS on the nanosurface very
unstable. We found that DOX was released more at acidic pH (Figure 4E). Taken together,
the pH-dependent release may help improve the efficiency of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
as an efficient delivery system, where the normal cells are less affected.

Multidrug resistances resulting from the expression of the mdr-1
and mrp-1 gene products are the major barriers for the successful
chemotherapy in cancer.61−63 Overexpression of MDR gene-encoded
P-glycoproteins and MDR-associated proteins is responsible for quick
drug efflux from cancer cells, which reduces the effective drug concentrations
within the cells and thus decreases its sensitivity. LN229 cells express
both mdr1 and mrp1 and also higher P-glycoprotein levels.64 We examined if TPPS-AuNPs could overcome the
lower drug accumulation and retention in LN229 cells. Accordingly,
LN229 cells were incubated with free DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs separately
at different time intervals and the quantity of DOX inside the cells
was determined by flow cytometry (Figure 5A). The fluorescence intensity was ∼5-fold-enhanced
when the cells were incubated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs compared to that
with free DOX even after 2 h incubation, suggesting higher amount
of DOX internalization, which reached plateau after 6 h. In contrast,
cells treated with free DOX took a longer time to reach the plateau
because of its poor uptake in LN229 cells. Thus, it may be stated
that DOX-loaded NPs elicit their effect more prominently by increasing
the cellular uptake within a short span of time and could be beneficial
to reduce the drug toxicity as well as efficient delivery.

Figure 5 (A) Accumulation
of total DOX in DOX- and DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated
MDR brain cancer cells (GBM, LN229). (B) DOX- and DOX@TPPS-AuNP-pretreated
(6 h) LN229 were cultured in a complete medium without any drug. The
concentration of DOX inside cells was measured at different time points
by flow cytometry. (C, D) U87MG cells treated with free DOX or DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
for 48 h. The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay showed DOX@TPPS-AuNPs having half-maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) ∼9-fold lower than that of
free DOX (C). Inverted light microscopy showed morphological changes
(D). (E) Higher annexin V/propidium iodide (PI)-positive U87MG in
the upper right quadrant indicating more apoptosis when treated with
DOX@TPPS-AuNPs compared to that with free DOX. (F) Western blots showing
upregulation of proapoptotic (Bax/Bid) and downregulation of anti-apoptotic
(Bcl2) proteins in DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated U87MG.

We further determined the retention time of DOX in LN229
cells
when the drug was delivered as doxorubicin-tethered AuNPs. Accordingly,
cells were incubated with either free DOX or DOX@TPPS-AuNPs for 4
h. They were subsequently washed with PBS to remove uninternalized
free drug or DOX@TPPS-AuNPs. The cells were further incubated in fresh
complete medium for different periods of time (1–4 h). We maintained
the initial dose (500 nM) of doxorubicin during treatments with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs.
However, we intentionally increased the initial concentration of doxorubicin
to 4 μM when free DOX was used for treatment to increase the
initial cellular concentration of this drug. As shown in Figure 5B, a fast decrease
in the intracellular doxorubicin level was observed in LN229 cells
preincubated with free doxorubicin because of rapid drug efflux. However,
the amount and the efflux rate of doxorubicin were significantly lower
when the cells were preincubated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs, indicating that
the efflux of drug was decreased upon its coupling with TPPS-AuNPs.
These results demonstrated that doxorubicin is protected against efflux
when attached with TPPS-AuNPs and thus the nanoparticles increased
the cellular retention of doxorubicin in LN229 cells. As porphyrins
are essential cofactors of many human proteins including hemoglobin
and myoglobin, we expect that TPPS-modified gold nanoparticles can
escape their uptake by macrophages and may retain in the system for
a longer time and thus could be useful in vivo.

The successful
delivery of doxorubicin into the cancer cell is
reflected by monitoring the cell viability. The range of concentrations
selected was that which was frequently used for biomedical applications
of AuNPs, where 200 μg/mL or 400 nM (100 μg/mL) was used
for in vitro and 151 μg/mL for in vivo biodistribution studies.65,66 The cytotoxic effect depends on the size, shape, surface coating,
and charge of gold nanoparticles.67−70 Regarding the size of the AuNPs,
citrate-stabilized AuNPs of 5 nm have been shown to be cytotoxic at
a concentration higher than 50 μM with Balb/3T3 cells.71 However, Vijayakumar et al. found that citrate-capped
AuNPs having diameters 5, 6, 10, 17, and 45 nm did not decrease the
cell viability of MCF-7 and PC-3 cells.69 Furthermore, TAT-modified AuNPs having diameters 3.8 and 22.1 nm
showed very low toxicity in HepG2 cells.70 AuNPs with 15–150 nm diameters are also biocompatible,
and only certain 150 nm PEG-functionalized particles reduced the viability
at high concentrations.72 Huo et al. showed
that nanoparticles smaller than 10 nm (2 and 6 nm) could preferentially
enter the nucleus of the MCF-7 breast cancer cell.73 The size-dependent gold nanoparticle interaction at the
nano–micro interface showed that smaller AuNPs had a lower
uptake compared to that of larger NPs at a monolayer cell level. However,
the order was reversed at a tissuelike multilayer level. The smaller
NPs penetrated better compared with larger NPs in tissuelike materials.74 Cytotoxicity studies including 3, 10, 25, and
50 nm of AuNPs into the HEp-2 cells indicated that after 1 h incubation
3 and 10 nm particles entered the nucleus, whereas 25 and 50 nm particles
accumulated around the nucleus.75 Furthermore,
the shape of the nanoparticles has a marked effect on AuNP toxicity.
Rod-shaped AuNPs demonstrate more toxicity than their spherical counterparts.
Gold nanorods are more toxic to human keratinocyte cells compared
with spherical gold nanomaterials.4 Properly
functionalized AuNPs not only can serve as a drug reservoir but also
can increase the circulation time of the drug in the blood stream.76−78 Therefore, suitable modification of the AuNP surface can reduce
cellular toxicity, which is associated with chemical surfactants used
during the synthesis of the NPs.79,80 The ζ
potential on the surface of nanoparticles can also influence AuNP
toxicity. Cationic AuNPs are moderately toxic compared with anionic
AuNPs; however, toxicity of both cationic and anionic AuNPs toward
cells is also reported.

Considering all of these points, first,
we addressed whether the
nanoparticle itself has any toxic effect or not. Accordingly, we treated
the normal lung fibroblast (WI38) and nonsmall-cell lung cancer (A549)
with different doses of TPPS-AuNPs for 72 h in complete medium (Figure S6). Even upto 200 μM concentrations,
the empty nanoparticle showed no toxicity toward both the normal and
cancer cells, as determined by the MTT assay. These results shows
that TPPS-coated 10 nm diameter AuNPs do not induce any acute cytotoxic
effects in the cells, which provides new opportunities for the safe
application in drug delivery.

Previously, we showed an acid-responsive
release of the drug from
the nanoparticle surface (Figure 4E). The core of the tumor is acidic, and many drugs
fail to reach that place; therefore, delivery of DOX by DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
may rapidly increase the concentration of the free drug in cancer
cells and will enhance the cytotoxicity. Accordingly, we incubated
various doses of free DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs with two representative
cancer cells having various mutations, namely, A549 and glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) cell lines (U87MG), and determined the half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of doxorubicin by the MTT
assay. Both free DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs were used with the same concentration
of DOX. They exhibited a significant cytotoxic effect in a dose-dependent
manner (Figures 5C
and S7). The IC50 values were
80 and 94 nM for DOX@TPPS-AuNPs and 560 and 840 nM for free DOX in
A549 and U87MG cells, respectively, after 48 under similar conditions.
We found that DOX@TPPS-AuNPs showed ∼7- and ∼9-fold
better efficacies in A549 and U87MG cells compared with free DOX.
Furthermore, drastic morphological changes in these cells treated
with an equal concentration (100 nM) of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs compared to
those with free DOX for 48 h were visualized under light microscopy
(Figure 5D). The DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated
cells exhibited more cell shrinkage. These cells appeared as round
or oval and smaller in size. The cytoplasm of these cells was dense,
and the organelles were more tightly packed. All of these morphological
changes are the sign of cell death. Only DOX at the similar dose and
time point did not show such an effect, indicating that TPPS-AuNPs
can even reduce the time span of treatment. Thus, the reduction of
doses using TPPS-AuNPs would be beneficial. In addition, we similarly
treated normal cells (WI38 and SVG) at IC50 doses at different
time points. We found that these cells were not at all affected with
DOX@TPPS-AuNPs even after 72 h incubation, whereas free DOX showed
toxicity to normal cells at IC50 concentration (Figures S8 and S9).

We also investigated
whether the nanoparticle-encapsulated DOX
is showing the programed cell death (apoptosis) or necrosis.81 The detection of apoptosis was assessed by the
binding of annexin V/PI with the externalized phosphotidylserine to
the outer surface of plasma membrane. Here, we observed loss of membrane
integrity of DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated U87MG cells, as indicated by both
annexin V and PI (29.57%) positivity compared to that in free doxorubicin
treatment (1.1%), indicating late apoptosis as shown in Figure 5E. This data demonstrated that
DOX@TPPS-AuNPs are capable of killing cancer cells via programmed
cell death. For further validation, we checked two proapoptotic (Bax
and Bid) and one representative anti-apoptotic (Bcl2) molecules in
their protein level (Figure 5F). We found enhanced levels of Bid and Bax and a decrease
of Bcl2 in DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated cells, confirming induction of apoptosis.
These results proved that DOX@TPPS-AuNPs have a higher therapeutic
effect than that of free doxorubicin. Consequently, TPPS-AuNPs could
improve the therapeutic effect of DOX and served as a good drug carrier.

Metastasis is one of the major problems through which cancer cells
travel to different organs of body and thereby generate secondary
tumor. Invasion and migration of cancer cells are the two main properties
for establishing metastasis. Angiogenesis is another process through
which cancer cells generate new blood vessels for their emerging necessity
of nutrients. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce metastasis and
angiogenesis to inhibit the growth of tumor. Accordingly, we checked
the ability of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs to reduce migration, invasion, and angiogenesis
properties of cancer cells. Scratch wounds were made through the >80%
confluent U87MG cells in a six-well plate. They were incubated with
free DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs separately for 36 h. We found that cells
treated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs were unable to migrate to that scratch
area, whereas untreated and free DOX-treated cells were able to migrate
(Figure 6A,B). We further
determined the invasion ability of cells treated with free DOX and
DOX-loaded TPPS-AuNPs using matrigel-coated insert systems. Cells
that invaded the membrane and adhered to the lower surface are considered
for invading tissues. Three randomly selected fields on the lower
side of the insert were photographed, and the migrated cells were
counted (Figure 6C,D).
The DOX-TPPS-AuNP-treated cells showed reduced invasion in comparison
to that from free DOX. In addition, we compared both DOX-TPPS-AuNP-
and DOX-treated cells for their capacity to form a connective tube,
which is a signature of angiogenesis. U87MG cells form threadlike
connective tubes between cellular colonies. However, at similar doses
of free DOX and DOX-TPPS-AuNPs, treated cells showed weak connective
tube formation ability (Figure 6E), which helps kill the cells easily. Therefore, free DOX
when conjugated with TPPS-AuNPs exhibited reduction in migration,
invasion, and angiogenesis properties compared to those of free DOX
alone. Thus, the nanoparticle-conjugated doxorubicin cells can halt
metastasis and angiogenesis of cancer cells at a much lower dose.

Figure 6 (A, B)
Scratch wound assay performed by making similar scratches
on plates of confluent U87MG cells and the cells treated with free
DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs separately for 36 h. DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated
U87MG showed lower scratch-wound closure, indicating lower migration.
(C, D) DOX@TPPS-AuNPs/DOX-treated U87MG cells kept in an upper chamber
of matrigel-coated insert systems to check the invasion ability. Cells
that invade the membrane were counted. DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated cells
showed lower invasion ability to the membrane compared to that of
free DOX. (E) DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated U87MG cells showing a weaker threadlike
structure compared to that of free DOX (red arrow), indicating inhibition
of angiogenesis.

We also investigated
whether doxorubicin could be released from
DOX@TPPS-AuNPs in response to the intracellular acidic microenvironment.
We mixed DOX-tethered AuNPs with the culture medium at pH 5.0 for
1 h and adjusted the pH back to pH 7.4. This medium was then added
to MDR brain cancer cells (LN229), and the cells were cultured for
another 2 h. For comparison, we treated these cells with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
in regular complete medium. Pretreated (at acidic pH) DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
exhibited a significantly lower uptake of DOX compared to that for
DOX@TPPS-AuNPs at physiological pH, as measured by flow cytometry
(Figure 7A). This is
because the extracellular pretreatment at pH 5.0 led to partial release
of doxorubicin. This extracellular doxorubicin could not be effectively
retained in LN229 cells without carrier. In addition, confocal microscopy
provided visible evidence of acid-responsive intracellular release
of doxorubicin from DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (Figure 7B). Cells incubated with free DOX for 12
h showed only faint red fluorescence signals, whereas more fluorescence
was observed in DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated cells, indicating enhanced entry
of doxorubicin into the nucleus. Doxorubicin, being a DNA intercalator,
should accumulate in the nucleus. The interaction of doxorubicin with
DNA by intercalation is one of the major modes of action. Therefore,
the accumulation of doxorubicin in the nucleus is a necessary prerequisite.
Close scrutiny of the images revealed that the fluorescence signal
from cells treated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs was significantly stronger
than that from the control groups which were more dispersed in the
perinuclear region. In cancer cells, the nucleus is more acidic, whereas
in normal cells, the nucleus is more alkaline than the cytoplasm.
That is why in cancer cells, there is release of more doxorubicin
from the conjugates, playing a crucial role in the growth inhibition
of cancer cells. The lower fluorescence signal within the nucleus
was observed when the cells were incubated with free DOX, indicating
that the release of doxorubicin is lower.

Figure 7 (A) Uptake of DOX in
LN229 with/without preincubation against DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
at pH 5.0 (1 h). (B) Confocal microscopy of U87MG counterstained with
DAPI (blue) and CellMask Deep Red (green) showing higher accumulation
of DOX (red) in the nucleus (indicated in merged orange) of DOX@TPPS-AuNP-treated
cells (12 h). (C) Sodium azide-pretreated LN229 cells incubated with
DOX@TPPS-AuNPs at 4 and 37 °C. (D) Cells pretreated with 0.45
M sucrose and K+-depleted medium separately and cultured
with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs in complete medium. In all of the experiments,
the concentration of DOX was determined by flow cytometry.

In addition, we addressed the internalization mechanism
of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
into LN229 cells. Endocytosis is known to be one of the important
entry mechanisms for various extracellular materials. This is an energy-dependent
mechanism and can be hampered at low temperatures (e.g., 4 °C
instead of 37 °C) or under adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP)-depleted
conditions. Treatment with NaN3 is known to perturb ATP
production in cells, thus affecting the endocytotic pathway. As shown
in Figure 7C, incubation
of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs at 4 °C for 2 h and with NaN3 (ATP-depleted)-pretreated
cells showed significantly reduced internalization compared to that
under regular culture conditions. This result suggested that DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
entered into the cells via energy-dependent endocytosis. Receptor-mediated
endocytosis occurs through clathrin-dependent invagination of the
plasma membrane.79 To prove further, we
either pretreated the cells with sucrose (hypertonic treatment) or
a K+-depleted medium prior to exposure to the DOX@TPPS-AuNPs.
These conditions are known to disrupt the formation of clathrin-coated
vesicles on the cell membrane. These pretreatments drastically reduced
the level of cellular uptake of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs, as deduced by flow
cytometry (Figures 7D and S10). These observations suggested
the clathrin pathway for endocytotic cellular uptake of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs.
As the endocytic compartments are acidic, an efficient release of
DOX occurs when DOX@TPPS-AuNPs are taken up by the cancer cells via
endocytosis. Therefore, a sufficiently high concentration of DOX can
be released from the NP surface when it is taken up by the tumor cell
through an endocytosis mechanism, thereby greatly improving the efficacy
of targeted cancer therapy and enhancing the cell cytotoxicity.

Conclusions
Except a few reports, the ability of porphyrin-conjugated AuNPs
to deliver the drug to the tumor cells has not been investigated thoroughly.
Majority of the studies focused on the optical properties of porphyrin
nanoclusters and their photosensitizing behavior for photodynamic
therapy. We have developed a porphyrin-based gold nanocarrier, which
can efficiently bind to doxorubicin and effectively release the drug
molecules inside cancer cells. The embedment of TPPS on the gold nanosurface
through coordination interaction via porphyrin pyrrolic nitrogens
resulted in an increase in the stability and solubility of the nanosystem.
We further validated its in vitro internalization using different
cancer cells, which showed enhanced efficacy of known cancer drugs
by enhanced drug delivery. DOX@TPPS-AuNPs exhibited strong tumor growth
inhibition and more effective apoptosis of cancer cells compared to
those of free DOX. DOX-loaded nanoparticles reduced angiogenesis and
metastasis of cancer cells to a higher degree than free DOX. TPPS-AuNPs
reduced the effective drug concentration to a certain level, at which
normal cells were less affected. Thus, TPPS-AuNPs served dual roles:
first, they reduced the concentration/dose level and second, they
help in the accumulation of the loaded drug molecule preferentially
in the nucleus of the diseased cell and therefore became capable of
overcoming the drug resistance. Therefore, TPPS-AuNPs with a higher
drug encapsulation efficacy and release of drug at the nucleus of
tumor cells act as a “magic bullet” and may have an
immense implication in cancer therapy.

Experimental Section
Materials
and Methods
All chemicals used were of analytical
grade or of highest purity available and used as received. Hydrogen
tetrachloroaurate(III) hydrate (HAuCl4·3H2O), tetrasodium salt of meso-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin
(C44H26N4Na4O12S4·xH2O), HEPES buffer,
antibiotic–antimycotic mixture, annexin V, and propidium iodide
(PI) matrigel were from Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and
sodium borohydride (NaBH4) were from Merck Millipore. The
glassware was carefully cleaned with aqua regia (3:1 HCl/HNO3) and then rinsed several times with HPLC water prior to use under
sonication. HPLC water was used to prepare all of the solutions. Iscove’s
modified Dulbecco’s medium (IMDM), fetal bovine serum (FBS),
Super Signal West Pico imaging system, and CellMask Deep Red Plasma
membrane Stain were from Thermo Fisher Scientific. All of the antibodies
were from Cell Signaling Technology. Protease and phosphatase inhibitor
cocktails were from Calbiochem. Cell cultures insert and flasks were
from BD Bioscience.

Synthesis of TPPS-AuNPs
Preparation
of simple gold
nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes is reported earlier in
different contexts.80,82−85 A few studies showed formation
of gold nanoparticles and nanoclusters using functionalized porphyrin
molecules.26,30,39,86,87 We utilized
a simple protocol to prepare gold nanoparticles armored with an electron-rich
porphyrin macrocyclic ring. Bare gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were prepared
using the standard sodium borohydride (NaBH4) reduction
method. Gold chloride solution (10 μL; 1.47 M) was added to
30 mL of water in a round bottom flask, and the pH of the solution
was adjusted to ∼9.0 by dropwise addition of 0.5 M NaOH solution.
The final concentration of Au3+ was 0.5 mM. The solution
was stirred for 15 min. Subsequently, the reaction mixture was placed
on an ice bath and 50 mM NaBH4 solution in water was slowly
added to the reaction mixture. The molar ratio of Au3+ to
BH4– was
1:2. The reaction mixture turned pinkish red, indicating the formation
of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs). To avoid coagulation of particles,
the reaction mixture was placed on an ice bath. The reaction mixture
was continuously stirred for additional 4 h to complete the reaction.
The resulting mixture was centrifuged for 10 min at 15 000
rpm and gold nanoparticles were collected in a pellet form, as precipitated.

To prepare porphyrin-embedded gold nanoparticles (TPPS-AuNPs),
600 μM aqueous solution of the tetrasodium salt of meso-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin (TPPS) (Scheme 1A) was prepared in a falcon tube and covered
with aluminum foil. This solution (5 mL) was added to AuNP suspension
(5 mg in 5 mL H2O) in a round bottom flask in one addition,
and the pH of the solution was adjusted to ∼9.0 by adding 0.01
M NaOH solution. The solution was stirred continuously (1100 rpm)
for 24 h under dark conditions (covered with aluminum foil). The weight
ratio of AuNPs to TPPS was 1.7:1. The TPPS-conjugated gold nanoparticles
(TPPS-AuNPs) were collected by centrifugation (rpm of 15 000,
15 min). The sample was washed once/twice to remove most of the unbound
TPPS molecules. Multiple washing was avoided to prevent coagulation.
The embedment of the porphyrin into the nanosurface was reflected
in the broadening of the SPR band (discussed in the Results and Discussion section). The collected nanocomposite
remained pinkish red in aqueous suspension. The purified nanoparticles
were re-dispersed in water and used for further characterization,
and their ability to deliver doxorubicin into the cancer cells was
tested.

Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
The size distribution
and morphology of TPPS-AuNPs were characterized by high-resolution
transmission electron micrograph (HRTEM). For HRTEM imaging, the drop-casting
method was used, in which an aqueous suspension of the prepared gold
nanoparticles (TPPS-AuNPs) and the nanochemotherapeutic system (DOX@TPPS-AuNPs)
were placed on a carbon-coated 300-mesh copper grid (Allied Scientific
Product), and it was dried in a dust-free atmosphere. The electron
microscopy images of the sample were taken using a JEOL JEM 2100 HR
with electron energy loss spectroscopy instrument followed by an acceleration
voltage of 200 kV.

DLS and ζ Potential Study
The mean hydrodynamic
diameter and charge of the nanoparticles were determined using a Nano-ZS
(Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, U.K.) at 25 °C (5 mW, He–Ne
laser, λ = 632 nm). The operating procedure was programmed using
DTS software supplied with the instrument to record the average of
20 runs. Every run was collected for 30 s, and an equilibration time
of 5 min was used.

Isothermal Calorimetric Titration
The binding of AuNPs
to TPPS was studied by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) using
a MicroCal VP-ITC unit (MicroCal, Inc., Northampton, MA, Now Malvern
Instruments, Malvern, U.K.). To avoid air bubble formation during
the course of titration, TPPS and nanoparticles solution were degassed
on MicroCal’s Thermovac unit before loading. The calorimeter
syringe was filled with the TPPS solution (1.8 mM), and the calorimeter
cell, with 1.42 mL of the AuNP suspension (100 μg/mL). Successive
injections (10 μL aliquots) of the TPPS solution into the AuNP
suspension were performed by the rotating syringe (416 rpm). Control
experiments were performed to determine the heat of dilution of the
TPPS solution, and these values were subtracted from the integrated
data before curve fitting. The area under each heat burst curve was
determined by integration using Origin software to provide the heat
associated with the injections. The resulting corrected injection
heats were plotted as a function of the molar ratio, fit with a “single-site
binding model”, and analyzed to give the binding affinity (Ka) and the standard molar enthalpy change (ΔH°) of the binding. The standard molar Gibbs free energy
(ΔG°) and the entropy contribution to
the binding (TΔS°) were
subsequently calculated by the following equation 1  where T is the temperature
in kelvin. The calorimeter was periodically calibrated electrically;
the mean energy per injection was ≤1.30 μcal, and the
standard deviation was ≤0.015 μcal. The experimental
data were analyzed by dedicated Origin 7.0 software.

FT-IR Investigation
A Bruker TENSOR27 spectrometer
was used to record the FT-IR spectra of the samples using the KBr
pellet technique. The solid sample (TPPS/TPPS-AuNPs) was mixed with
KBr under pressure, and a solid and thin pellet was obtained. The
spectra were recorded in the frequency range of 400–4000 cm–1. For each sample, background spectra were obtained
with only KBr pellet. The experimental data were processed using Bruker
software.

Synthesis of DOX-Loaded TPPS-AuNPs
A doxorubicin-loaded
nanochemotherapeutic system (DOX@TPPS-AuNPs) was prepared by mixing
TPPS-AuNPs with doxorubicin (Scheme 1B) in aqueous medium. Freshly prepared TPPS-AuNPs (∼2
mg) were dispersed in 15 mL of water taken in a round bottom flask.
The DOX solution (150 μL; 3 mM) at pH 7.4 was added to the above
solution so that the final DOX concentration was ∼30 μM.
The weight ratio of DOX to TPPS-AuNPs was 1:7. The color of the solution
changed from pinkish red to violet, confirming the association of
DOX with the TPPS-AuNPs, forming the DOX@TPPS-AuNPs nanocomposite.
The color change also indicated some increase in the size of the nanocomposite.
The mixed solution was allowed to stir for 30 h at room temperature
and centrifuged once at 10 000 rpm for 10 min to remove the
unbound drug. The DOX@TPPS-AuNPs were collected in a pellet form.
To calculate the DOX encapsulation efficiency (EE), the unloaded DOX
remaining in the supernatant was quantified using a calibration curve
for DOX as obtained by measuring the absorption of the free drug molecules
of known concentration at 480 nm.

The encapsulation efficiency
(EE) of the process was measured as a function of time using the following
equation.88,89 2  where Ctotal DOX is the total concentration
of DOX (∼30 μM) measured
from a standard calibration curve for DOX at 480 nm and Cfree DOX is the concentration of unloaded DOX measured
from the same calibration curve. The DOX@TPPS-AuNPs were again redispersed
in 1 mL of HPLC water for further investigation.

DOX Release
Study
To quantify the drug release, small
aliquots (30 μL) of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs from the stock suspension
(1 mL) were rapidly added to equal volumes (1 mL) of different buffer
solutions with varying the pHs and thermo stating at 37 °C. For
each pH buffer solution, we made six sets, and total 18 sets were
prepared for three different pH buffers, each containing 1 mL of buffer
solution and 30 μL of stock DOX@TPPS-AuNPs. The solutions were
gently shaken at 350 rpm. The different pH buffers (10 mM) chosen
for the investigation were pH 5.0, 6.0, and 7.4. Sodium citrate was
used to make buffer at pH 5.0, and sodium phosphate was used to make
buffers at pH 6.0 and 7.4.

At defined time intervals, each buffer
solution was centrifuged with an rpm of 10 000 for 10 min,
and the absorbance of the supernatant part was measured at 480 nm
to determine the amount of DOX released. The percent of DOX released
was calculated from absorbance of the solution and fitted them to
the following equation 3  where At is the
absorbance of released DOX at 480 nm, measured at specific time intervals
(between 0 and 40 h), and A0 is the absorbance
of total DOX loaded onto TPPS-AuNPs at the same wavelength.

Absorption
Spectroscopy
The optical absorption spectra
of the synthesized TPPS-AuNPs and other solutions were recorded using
a JASCO V-630 Spectrophotometer (JASCO International Co. Ltd., Japan)
within the wavelength range of 300–700 nm, and a high-quality
quartz cuvette was used as a sample holder.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy
The steady-state fluorescence
measurement of doxorubicin was performed by a Cary Eclipse fluorescence
Spectrophotometer from Agilent Technologies. The machine was equipped
with a Xenon lamp. DOX fluorescence measurement for the encapsulation/release
study was carried out at a fixed excitation wavelength of 480 nm,
and the emission maximum was at 592 nm. Both the excitation and emission
slit widths were kept at 5 nm, and a quartz cuvette of path length
1 cm was used for the fluorescence measurement. All of the experiments
were carried out at room temperature (25 °C). Fluorescence quenching
of DOX in the presence TPPS-AuNPs indicated interaction and loading
of the drug molecules to the nanoparticle. Fluorescence spectra of
30 μM DOX (total) were recorded, and it was allowed to load
on the TPPS-AuNP surface. After centrifugation, the fluorescence spectrum
of unloaded DOX as present in the supernatant part was recorded. The
fluorescence of DOX was found to be almost completely quenched in
the presence of the nanocomposite. For DOX release measurements, DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
are dispersed in citrate buffer, pH ∼ 5.0 for 40 h, and centrifuged
(10 000 rpm, 10 min) and the fluorescence spectrum of the supernatant
part was recorded upon excitation at 480 nm and the emission intensity
was measured at 592 nm.

Cell Lines and Culture Conditions
WI 38 (normal lung
fibroblast), SVG (normal astrocytes), A549 (nonsmall-cell lung carcinoma),
U87MG and LN229 (glioblastoma multiforme) cell lines were from ATCC,
cultured in IMDM/minimum essential medium supplemented with 10% FBS
and 1% antibiotic–antimycotic (complete medium), and maintained
at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in a carbon dioxide incubator.

Cell Viability Assay
WI 38 and A549 cells were treated
with different doses of TPPS-AuNPs for 48 h. We also tested the effect
on U87MG, A549, SVG, and WI 38 cell lines when exposed to different
doses of DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs separately for 48 h. Cell viability
was determined by the MTT assay.90,91 The culture
media were discarded, and MTT (1 mg/mL, 100 μL/well) was added
to the wells, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 4 h. The supernatant
was removed. Dimethyl sulfoxide (150 μL/well) was added to dissolve
the formazan crystals produced by the viable cells, the plates were
shaken for an additional 5 min, and the absorbance of the purple color
was recorded on a microplate reader (Thermo Scientific) at a wavelength
of 550 nm. The intensity of color indicates the number of viable cells.

Drug Uptake
LN229 cells (1 × 106/2
mL/well) in complete medium were seeded in six-well plates and incubated
overnight. The medium was then replaced with fresh medium with the
absence and presence of DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs separately followed
by incubation for 4 h. The medium was removed. Cells were then washed
two times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with pH ∼ 7.2.
The amount of DOX inside the cells was immediately analyzed by a FACS
Calibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA). Data were
collected and analyzed using CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson)
as we did earlier.92,93

Cellular uptake of DOX
and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs was determined by growing the cells (5 × 105) on coverslips in a six-well tissue culture plate for 24
h. They were cultured in the presence of doxorubicin and doxorubicin-loaded
TPPS-AuNPs at a concentration of 100 nM separately for 12 h. They
were washed with PBS and fixed with 5% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Canadian
Balsam was dropped on the slides to seal the cell samples. Cells were
then washed with PBS, and the coverslips stained with the CellMask
Deep Red Plasma Membrane Stain were imaged using confocal laser scanning
microscopy (Olympus FV1000).

Apoptosis Assay
Externalizations of phosphatidylserine
were verified as described earlier.94,95 Briefly, U87MG
cells (1 × 106) were treated with either DOX or DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
for 48 h. Washed cells were resuspended in the annexin V binding buffer
and kept for 45 min in the dark at 25 °C followed by incubation
with fluorescein isothiocyanate–annexin V and PI (5 μg/mL)
for 20 min at 4 °C in the dark according to the manufacturer’s
instruction. Cells were acquired and analyzed by flow cytometry, as
described above.

Immunoblotting
U87MG cells (1 ×
106) were cultured to >80% confluency in six-well plate.
Untreated and
treated cells (1 × 106) with DOX and DOX@TPPs-AuNPs
(for 24 h) were detached using a trypsin–ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA) solution and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min. They were
washed and lysed in ice-cold PBS with sonication (Qsonica-LLC, XL-2000
series). Cell lysates were centrifuged by cold centrifugation at 10 000
rpm. The supernatants were used for western blotting.96−98

The proteins were quantified with the Bio-Rad protein assay
kit and loaded equally onto sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gels (10%). They were electrophoretically transferred to poly(vinylidene
difluoride) membranes, as described earlier.99 After blocking with bovine serum albumin, the membranes were incubated
with respective primary antibodies overnight under cold conditions.
This was followed by incubation with appropriate secondary antibodies
labeled with horseradish peroxidase. The signal was visualized using
chemiluminescence detection. Developed bands were detected by a X-ray
plate.

Migration Assay
The migration assay was done as described
earlier.100 In brief, U87MG cells (1 ×
106) were cultured to >80% confluency in a six-well
plate.
Three separate scratch wounds were made through the confluent cells
and washed thrice to remove cell debris. They were incubated with
DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs for 36 h. The cell-free scratched area was
calculated and represented as percent closure of area compared to
that of untreated cells. Images were taken using inverted light microscopy.

Invasion Assay
The invasion assay was carried out as
described earlier.100 In brief, U87MG cells
(1 × 106) were cultured to >80% confluency in a
12-well
plate. Cells were detached using the trypsin–EDTA solution
and centrifuged at 1500g for 10 min. Washed cells
(1 × 106) were treated with DOX and DOX@TPPs-AuNPs
for overnight. Treated or untreated U87MG or LN229 cells (5 ×
104) were suspended in a medium without FBS (100 μL)
and added to the upper chamber of an insert (6.5 mm diameter, 8 μm
pore size). The insert was placed in a 24-well plate containing the
medium (700 μL) with or without 10% FBS. DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
were added to both the upper and the lower chambers. The invasion
was monitored after 36 h, and cells were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde.
They were stained with crystal violet solution. Cells on the upper
side of the insert were removed with a cotton swab. Three randomly
selected fields (10 objectives) on the lower side of the insert were
photographed, and the migrated cells were counted. The invasion was
expressed as an average number of invaded cells in a field.

Angiogenesis
Assay
The angiogenesis assay was carried
out as described earlier.101 In brief,
a thin layer of matrigel in IMDM (1:3) was formed in a 12-well plate.
U87MG cells (4 × 104) were layered over matrigel in
a serum-free medium in a six-well plate. These cells have potentiality
to form connective tissues in between cells. Cells were cultured for
48 h to form connective tissues. These cells were treated with DOX
and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs separately and kept for another 48 h. Images of
connective tubes were recorded by inverted light microscopy.

Endocytosis
of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
Experiments for cellular
endocytosis study were carried out as described earlier.102−104 Cells were incubated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (100 nM) under different
conditions to inhibit the endocytosis mechanism as described below
using representative drug-resistant GBM cells (LN229) followed by
monitoring the entry of DOX by FACS.

Low-Temperature Incubation
LN229 cells were incubated
with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (100 nM) in complete medium at 4 °C, instead
of at the physiological 37 °C temperature, to keep them in a
metabolically less active condition, and the uptake was determined.

ATP Depletion
Cells were preincubated with 10 mM NaN3 and 50 mM 2-deoxy-d-glucose in PBS buffer for 30
min at 37 °C followed by incubation in a solution of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
(100 nM).

Hypertonic Incubation
Cells were
preincubated with
0.45 M sucrose in PBS buffer for 30 min at 37 °C before exposure
to the DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (100 nM).

Potassium Depletion
The K+ depletion was
achieved as described earlier.104 Briefly,
cells were washed once with a potassium-free buffer containing 140
mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mg/mL d-glucose. Subsequently, the cells
were alternatively washed three times with the potassium-free buffer
diluted with water (1:1; hypotonic buffer) and the potassium-free
buffer. Then, the cells were incubated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (100 nM)
in a potassium-free buffer or complete medium for 90 min at 37 °C.
Control cells were treated similarly.

Statistical Analysis
All of the data were from at least
three independent experiments, and statistical analysis was performed
using Graph Pad Prism 5. The differences between the groups were analyzed
by the two-tail student t-test or Mann–Whitney U-test. Standard error bars represent the standard deviation
(SD) of the mean (±SD), and *p < 0.05 denoted
the significant differences between the means of the untreated and
treated cells or two test groups.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00419.ζ potentials
of AuNPs and TPPS-AuNPs (Figure S1),
hydrodynamic diameter of TPPS-AuNPs (Figure S2), FT-IR spectra of
TPPS and TPPS-AuNPs (Figure S3), kinetics of encapsulation efficiency
of DOX on AuNPs (Figure S4), hydrodynamic diameter and ζ potential
of DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (Figure S5), cell viability of A 549 and WI-38 cells
after treatment with TPPS-AuNPs (Figure S6), cell viability of A549
cells after treatment with DOX and DOX@TPPS-AuNPs (Figure S7), inverted
light microscopy images of WI-38 and SVG cells treated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
(Figure S8), cell viability of WI-38 and SVG cells treated with DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
(Figure S9), and flow cytometry analysis of the cells using DOX@TPPS-AuNPs
in sucrose and K+-depleted medium (Figure S10) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00419_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
§ K.B. and S.M. contributed equally.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
S.M. and
K.B., senior research fellows, are thankful to the
University Grant Commission and Department of Science and Technology,
respectively, for providing fellowship. C.M. is grateful to the financial
support by Sir J.C. Bose National Fellowship, DST, Government of India
and DBT-Distinguished Biotechnology Research Professorship award.
The work is supported in part by CSIR (ESC 0103), DST (GAP 336 and
GAP 339), DBT (GAP 346), DBT (GAP 299), and CSIR (BSC 0115, 0113 and
0121). The Director (CSIR-IICB) is kindly acknowledged for providing
all institutional facilities. We also thank CRNN—University
of Calcutta for providing the HRTEM facility for this study.

Abbreviations
SPRsurface plasmon
resonance

HRTEMhigh-resolution transmission
electron microscopy

TPPStetrasodium salt of meso-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin

DOXdoxorubicin

AuNPsgold nanoparticles

DLSdynamic light scattering
==== Refs
References
Chabner B. A. ; Roberts T. G. 
Chemotherapy and
the War on Cancer . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2005 , 5 , 65 –72 . 10.1038/nrc1529 .15630416 
Gottesman M. M. ; Fojo T. ; Bates S. E. 
Multidrug Resistance in Cancer: Role
of ATP-Dependent Transporters . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2002 , 2 , 48 –58 . 10.1038/nrc706 .11902585 
Ferrari M. 
Cancer Nanotechnology:
Opportunities and Challenges . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
2005 , 5 , 161 –171 . 10.1038/nrc1566 .15738981 
Chithrani B. D. ; Ghazani A. A. ; Chan W. C. W. 
Determining the Size and Shape Dependence
of Gold Nanoparticle Uptake into Mammalian Cells . Nano Lett. 
2006 , 6 , 662 –668 . 10.1021/nl052396o .16608261 
Lu W. ; Singh A. K. ; Khan S. A. ; Senapati D. ; Yu H. ; Ray P. C. 
Gold Nano-Popcorn-Based
Targeted Diagnosis, Nanotherapy
Treatment, and In Situ Monitoring of Photothermal Therapy Response
of Prostate Cancer Cells Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 18103 –18114 . 10.1021/ja104924b .21128627 
Mitra P. ; Chakraborty P. K. ; Saha P. ; Ray P. ; Basu S. 
Antibacterial
Efficacy of Acridine Derivatives Conjugated with Gold Nanoparticles . Int. J. Pharm. 
2014 , 473 , 636 –643 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2014.07.051 .25087507 
Shan J. ; Tenhu H. 
Recent Advances in
Polymer Protected Gold Nanoparticles: Synthesis,
Properties and Applications . Chem. Commun. 
2007 , 4580 –4598 . 10.1039/b707740h .
Niikura K. ; Iyo N. ; Matsuo Y. ; Mitomo H. ; Ijiro K. 
Sub-100 Nm Gold Nanoparticle
Vesicles as a Drug Delivery Carrier Enabling Rapid Drug Release upon
Light Irradiation . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 3900 –3907 . 10.1021/am400590m .23566248 
Shiao Y.-S. ; Chiu H.-H. ; Wu P.-H. ; Huang Y.-F. 
Aptamer-Functionalized
Gold Nanoparticles As Photoresponsive Nanoplatform for Co-Drug Delivery . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 21832 –21841 . 10.1021/am5026243 .24949657 
Singh R. ; Lillard J. W. 
Nanoparticle-Based Targeted Drug Delivery . Exp. Mol. Pathol. 
2009 , 86 , 215 –223 . 10.1016/j.yexmp.2008.12.004 .19186176 
Dhamecha D. ; Jalalpure S. ; Jadhav K. ; Jagwani S. ; Chavan R. 
Doxorubicin
Loaded Gold Nanoparticles: Implication of Passive Targeting on Anticancer
Efficacy . Pharmacol. Res. 
2016 , 113 , 547 –556 . 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.09.037 .27693276 
Chaudhary A. ; Dwivedi C. ; Gupta A. ; Nandi C. K. 
One Pot
Synthesis
of Doxorubicin Loaded Gold Nanoparticles for Sustained Drug Release . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 97330 –97334 . 10.1039/C5RA12892G .
Mirza A. Z. ; Shamshad H. 
Preparation and Characterization
of Doxorubicin Functionalized
Gold Nanoparticles . Eur. J. Med. Chem. 
2011 , 46 , 1857 –1860 . 10.1016/j.ejmech.2011.02.048 .21411194 
Du Y. ; Xia L. ; Jo A. ; Davis R. M. ; Bissel P. ; Ehrich M. F. ; Kingston D. G. I. 
Synthesis
and Evaluation of Doxorubicin-Loaded Gold
Nanoparticles for Tumor-Targeted Drug Delivery . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2018 , 29 , 420 –430 . 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.7b00756 .
Wang F. ; Wang Y.-C. ; Dou S. ; Xiong M.-H. ; Sun T.-M. ; Wang J. 
Doxorubicin-Tethered
Responsive Gold Nanoparticles Facilitate Intracellular
Drug Delivery for Overcoming Multidrug Resistance in Cancer Cells . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 3679 –3692 . 10.1021/nn200007z .21462992 
Suarasan S. ; Focsan M. ; Potara M. ; Soritau O. ; Florea A. ; Maniu D. ; Astilean S. 
Doxorubicin-Incorporated
Nanotherapeutic
Delivery System Based on Gelatin-Coated Gold Nanoparticles: Formulation,
Drug Release, and Multimodal Imaging of Cellular Internalization . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 22900 –22913 . 10.1021/acsami.6b07583 .27537061 
Elbialy N. S. ; Fathy M. M. ; Khalil W. M. 
Doxorubicin Loaded Magnetic Gold
Nanoparticles for in Vivo Targeted Drug Delivery . Int. J. Pharm. 
2015 , 490 , 190 –199 . 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.05.032 .25997662 
Lee C.-S. ; Kim H. ; Yu J. ; Yu S. H. ; Ban S. ; Oh S. ; Jeong D. ; Im J. ; Baek M. J. ; Kim T. H. 
Doxorubicin-Loaded
Oligonucleotide Conjugated Gold Nanoparticles: A Promising in Vivo
Drug Delivery System for Colorectal Cancer Therapy . Eur. J. Med. Chem. 
2017 , 142 , 416 –423 . 10.1016/j.ejmech.2017.08.063 .28870452 
Kim H. ; Nguyen V. P. ; Manivasagan P. ; Jung M. J. ; Kim S. W. ; Oh J. ; Kang H. W. ; Kim H. ; Nguyen V. P. ; Manivasagan P. ; et al. Doxorubicin-Fucoidan-Gold
Nanoparticles Composite for Dualchemo-Photothermal
Treatment on Eye Tumors . Oncotarget 
2017 , 8 , 11371910.18632/oncotarget.23092 .29371941 
Ogawa K. ; Kobuke Y. 
Two-Photon Photodynamic Therapy by
Water-Soluble Self-Assembled
Conjugated Porphyrins . BioMed Res. Int. 
2013 , 2013 , 1 –11 . 10.1155/2013/125658 .
Kim W. J. ; Kang M. S. ; Kim H. K. ; Kim Y. ; Chang T. ; Ohulchanskyy T. ; Prasad P. N. ; Lee K.-S. 
Water-Soluble
Porphyrin-Polyethylene
Glycol Conjugates with Enhanced Cellular Uptake for Photodynamic Therapy . J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 
2009 , 9 , 7130 –7135 . 10.1166/jnn.2009.1641 .19908743 
Kuimova M. K. ; Collins H. A. ; Balaz M. ; Dahlstedt E. ; Levitt J. A. ; Sergent N. ; Suhling K. ; Drobizhev M. ; Makarov N. S. ; Rebane A. ; et al. Photophysical Properties
and Intracellular Imaging of Water-Soluble Porphyrin Dimers for Two-Photon
Excited Photodynamic Therapy . Org. Biomol. Chem. 
2009 , 7 , 889 –896 . 10.1039/b814791d .19225671 
Zou Q. ; Abbas M. ; Zhao L. ; Li S. ; Shen G. ; Yan X. 
Biological Photothermal Nanodots Based on Self-Assembly of Peptide–Porphyrin
Conjugates for Antitumor Therapy . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2017 , 139 , 1921 –1927 . 10.1021/jacs.6b11382 .28103663 
Ohyama J. ; Hitomi Y. ; Higuchi Y. ; Shinagawa M. ; Mukai H. ; Kodera M. ; Teramura K. ; Shishido T. ; Tanaka T. 
One-Phase Synthesis of Small Gold
Nanoparticles Coated
by a Horizontal Porphyrin Monolayer . Chem. Commun. 
2008 , 6300 –6302 . 10.1039/b815100h .
Beer P. D. ; Cormode D. P. ; Davis J. J. 
Zinc Metalloporphyrin-Functionalised
Nanoparticle Anion Sensors . Chem. Commun. 
2004 , 414 –415 . 10.1039/b313658b .
Kanehara M. ; Takahashi H. ; Teranishi T. 
Gold(0) Porphyrins on Gold Nanoparticles . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2008 , 47 , 307 –310 . 10.1002/anie.200703943 .
Magno L. N. ; Bezerra F. C. ; Freire L. E. S. ; Guerra R. A. ; Bakuzis A. F. ; Gonçalves P. J. 
Use of
Spectroscopic Techniques for Evaluating the
Coupling of Porphyrins on Biocompatible Nanoparticles. A Potential
System for Photodynamics, Theranostics, and Nanodrug Delivery Applications . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2017 , 121 , 1924 –1931 . 10.1021/acs.jpca.6b10314 .28209060 
Conklin D. ; Nanayakkara S. ; Park T.-H. ; Lagadec M. F. ; Stecher J. T. ; Therien M. J. ; Bonnell D. A. 
Electronic Transport in Porphyrin
Supermolecule-Gold Nanoparticle Assemblies . Nano Lett. 
2012 , 12 , 2414 –2419 . 10.1021/nl300400a .22545580 
Yang A. ; Xue Y. ; Zhao H. ; Li X. ; Yuan Z. 
One-Pot Synthesis of
Ternary Hybrid Nanomaterial Composed of a Porphyrin-Functionalized
Graphene, Tin Oxide, and Gold Nanoparticles, and Its Application to
the Simultaneous Determination of Epinephrine and Uric Acid . Microchim. Acta 
2015 , 182 , 341 –349 . 10.1007/s00604-014-1328-0 .
Trapani M. ; De Luca G. ; Romeo A. ; Castriciano M. A. ; Scolaro L. M. 
Spectroscopic Investigation on Porphyrins
Nano-Assemblies
onto Gold Nanorods . Spectrochim. Acta, A. 
2017 , 173 , 343 –349 . 10.1016/j.saa.2016.09.025 .
Boni L. D. ; Franzen P. L. ; Gonçalves P. J. ; Borissevitch I. E. ; Misoguti L. ; Mendonça C. R. ; Zilio S. C. 
Pulse Train Fluorescence
Technique for Measuring Triplet State Dynamics . Opt. Express 
2011 , 19 , 10813 –10823 . 10.1364/OE.19.010813 .21643338 
Dąbrowski J. M. ; Arnaut L. G. 
Photodynamic Therapy
(PDT) of Cancer: From Local to
Systemic Treatment . Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 
2015 , 14 , 1765 –1780 . 10.1039/C5PP00132C .26219737 
Penon O. ; Marín M. J. ; Russell D. A. ; Pérez-García L. 
Water Soluble,
Multifunctional Antibody-Porphyrin Gold Nanoparticles for Targeted
Photodynamic Therapy . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2017 , 496 , 100 –110 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2017.02.006 .28214620 
Khaing
Oo M. K. ; Yang Y. ; Hu Y. ; Gomez M. ; Du H. ; Wang H. 
Gold Nanoparticle-Enhanced and Size-Dependent Generation
of Reactive Oxygen Species from Protoporphyrin IX . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 1939 –1947 . 10.1021/nn300327c .22385214 
Zhang L. ; Chen H. ; Wang J. ; Li Y. F. ; Wang J. ; Sang Y. ; Xiao S. J. ; Zhan L. ; Huang C. Z. 
Tetrakis(4-Sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin-Directed
Assembly of Gold Nanocrystals: Tailoring the Plasmon Coupling Through
Controllable Gap Distances . Small 
2010 , 6 , 2001 –2009 . 10.1002/smll.201000354 .20715071 
Düring J. ; Gröhn F. 
ZnO Nanorods Assembled with Different
Porphyrins –
Size-Tunable Hybrid Particles . RSC Adv. 
2017 , 7 , 3321 –3330 . 10.1039/C6RA26964H .
Shaikh A. J. ; Rabbani F. ; Sherazi T. A. ; Iqbal Z. ; Mir S. ; Shahzad S. A. 
Binding Strength of Porphyrin–Gold Nanoparticle
Hybrids Based on Number and Type of Linker Moieties and a Simple Method
To Calculate Inner Filter Effects of Gold Nanoparticles Using Fluorescence
Spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2015 , 119 , 1108 –1116 . 10.1021/jp510924n .25611751 
Horiuchi H. ; Kuribara R. ; Hirabara A. ; Okutsu T. 
pH-Response Optimization
of Amino-Substituted Tetraphenylporphyrin Derivatives as pH-Activatable
Photosensitizers . J. Phys. Chem. A 
2016 , 120 , 5554 –5561 . 10.1021/acs.jpca.6b05019 .27340737 
Katsonis N. ; Vicario J. ; Kudernac T. ; Visser J. ; Pollard M. M. ; Feringa B. L. 
Self-Organized Monolayer of Meso-Tetradodecylporphyrin
Coordinated to Au(111) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 15537 –15541 . 10.1021/ja065823o .17132021 
Maity M. ; Das S. ; Maiti N. C. 
Stability and Binding Interaction of Bilirubin on a
Gold Nano-Surface: Steady State Fluorescence and FT-IR Investigation . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 20013 –20022 . 10.1039/C4CP02649G .25123491 
Maiti N. C. ; Mazumdar S. ; Periasamy N. 
J- and H-Aggregates
of Porphyrin–Surfactant
Complexes: Time-Resolved Fluorescence and Other Spectroscopic Studies . J. Phys. Chem. B 
1998 , 102 , 1528 –1538 . 10.1021/jp9723372 .
Borissevitch I. E. ; Parra G. G. ; Zagidullin V. E. ; Lukashev E. P. ; Knox P. P. ; Paschenko V. Z. ; Rubin A. B. 
Cooperative Effects in CdSe/ZnS-PEGOH
Quantum Dot Luminescence Quenching by a Water Soluble Porphyrin . J. Lumin. 
2013 , 134 , 83 –87 . 10.1016/j.jlumin.2012.09.008 .
Kathiravan A. ; Anbazhagan V. ; Jhonsi M. A. ; Renganathan R. 
Fluorescence
Quenching of Meso-Tetrakis (4-Sulfonatophenyl) Porphyrin by Colloidal
TiO2 . Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 
2008 , 70 , 615 –618 . 10.1016/j.saa.2007.08.007 .
Kathiravan A. ; Kumar P. S. ; Renganathan R. ; Anandan S. 
Photoinduced Electron
Transfer Reactions between Meso-tetrakis(4-Sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin
and Colloidal Metal-Semiconductor Nanoparticles . Colloids Surf., A 
2009 , 333 , 175 –181 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2008.09.042 .
Rong Y. ; Chen P. ; Liu M. 
Self-Assembly
of Water-Soluble TPPS
in Organic Solvents: From Nanofibers to Mirror Imaged Chiral Nanorods . Chem. Commun. 
2013 , 49 , 10498 –10500 . 10.1039/c3cc46467a .
Zhang Y.-H. ; Chen D.-M. ; He T. ; Liu F.-C. 
Raman and Infrared
Spectral Study of Meso-Sulfonatophenyl Substituted Porphyrins (TPPSn,
n = 1, 2A, 2O, 3, 4) . Spectrochim. Acta, Part
A 
2003 , 59 , 87 –101 . 10.1016/S1386-1425(02)00124-5 .
Rahimi R. ; Shokraiyan J. ; Rabbani M. ; Fayyaz F. 
Enhanced Photobactericidal
Activity of ZnO Nanorods Modified by Meso-tetrakis(4-Sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin
under Visible LED Lamp Irradiation . Water Sci.
Technol. 
2015 , 71 , 1249 –1254 . 10.2166/wst.2015.098 .25909737 
Perrin M. L. ; Prins F. ; Martin C. A. ; Shaikh A. J. ; Eelkema R. ; van Esch J. H. ; Briza T. ; Kaplanek R. ; Kral V. ; van Ruitenbeek J. M. ; et al. Influence of the Chemical Structure on
the Stability and Conductance of Porphyrin Single-Molecule Junctions . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 11223 –11226 . 10.1002/anie.201104757 .
Nath S. ; Jana S. ; Pradhan M. ; Pal T. 
Ligand-Stabilized Metal
Nanoparticles in Organic Solvent . J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 
2010 , 341 , 333 –352 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2009.09.049 .19880134 
Feng C. ; Latimer E. ; Spence D. ; Hindawi A. M. A. A. A. ; Bullen S. ; Boatwright A. ; Ellis A. M. ; Yang S. 
Formation
of Au and Tetrapyridyl Porphyrin Complexes in Superfluid Helium . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 17 , 16699 –16704 . 10.1039/C5CP01844G .26059415 
Xu J. ; Yu H. ; Hu Y. ; Chen M. ; Shao S. 
A Gold Nanoparticle-Based
Fluorescence Sensor for High Sensitive and Selective Detection of
Thiols in Living Cells . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2016 , 75 , 1 –7 . 10.1016/j.bios.2015.08.007 .26278044 
Contino A. ; Maccarrone G. ; Fragalà M. E. ; Spitaleri L. ; Gulino A. 
Conjugated Gold-Porphyrin
Monolayers Assembled on Inorganic
Surfaces . Chem. – Eur. J. 
2017 , 23 , 14937 –14943 . 10.1002/chem.201703523 .28837244 
Bhaumik J. ; Gogia G. ; Kirar S. ; Vijay L. ; Thakur N. S. ; Banerjee U. C. ; Laha J. K. 
Bioinspired Nanophotosensitizers:
Synthesis and Characterization of Porphyrin–noble Metal Nanoparticle
Conjugates . New J. Chem. 
2016 , 40 , 724 –731 . 10.1039/C5NJ02056E .
Noda Y. ; Noro S. ; Akutagawa T. ; Nakamura T. 
Gold Nanoparticle Assemblies
Stabilized by bis(phthalocyaninato)lanthanide(III) Complexes through
van Der Waals Interactions . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 375810.1038/srep03758 .24441566 
Evdokimova M. G. ; Konev A. S. ; Povolotckaia A. V. ; Kolesnikov I. E. ; Kazakova A. V. ; Povolotskiy A. V. 
Determining the Mechanism of Interaction
between Molecules of Porphyrin and Fullerene and Gold Nanoparticles,
Based on Luminescence Spectroscopy Data . Bull.
Russ. Acad. Sci. Phys. 
2017 , 81 , 1391 –1395 . 10.3103/S1062873817120103 .
Tanaka D. ; Inuta Y. ; Sakamoto M. ; Furube A. ; Haruta M. ; So Y.-G. ; Kimoto K. ; Hamada I. ; Teranishi T. 
Strongest
Π–metal Orbital Coupling in a Porphyrin/gold Cluster
System . Chem. Sci. 
2014 , 5 , 2007 –2010 . 10.1039/C3SC53460J .
Carbone M. 
Bi-Verse Relationship
between Gold Nanoparticles and Intracellular pH . J. King Saud Univ., Sci. 
2017 , 29 , 284 –290 . 10.1016/j.jksus.2016.12.007 .
Yang X. ; Zhang X. ; Liu Z. ; Ma Y. ; Huang Y. ; Chen Y. 
High-Efficiency Loading and Controlled
Release of Doxorubicin Hydrochloride
on Graphene Oxide . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008 , 112 , 17554 –17558 . 10.1021/jp806751k .
Mahdavi M. ; Rahmani F. ; Nouranian S. 
Molecular Simulation of pH-Dependent
Diffusion, Loading, and Release of Doxorubicin in Graphene and Graphene
Oxide Drug Delivery Systems . J. Mater. Chem.
B 
2016 , 4 , 7441 –7451 . 10.1039/C6TB00746E .
Hanyż I. ; Wróbel D. 
The Influence
of pH on Charged Porphyrins Studied by
Fluorescence and Photoacoustic Spectroscopy . Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 
2002 , 1 , 126 –132 . 10.1039/b108837h .12659128 
Gottesman M. M. ; Pastan I. ; Ambudkar S. V. 
P-Glycoprotein
and Multidrug Resistance . Curr. Opin. Genet.
Dev. 
1996 , 6 , 610 –617 . 10.1016/S0959-437X(96)80091-8 .8939727 
Szakács G. ; Paterson J. K. ; Ludwig J. A. ; Booth-Genthe C. ; Gottesman M. M. 
Targeting Multidrug Resistance in
Cancer . Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 
2006 , 5 , 219 –234 . 10.1038/nrd1984 .16518375 
Liscovitch M. ; Lavie Y. 
Cancer Multidrug Resistance: A Review of Recent Drug Discovery Research . IDrugs 
2002 , 5 , 349 –355 .15565517 
Bähr O. ; Rieger J. ; Duffner F. ; Meyermann R. ; Weller M. ; Wick W. 
P-Glycoprotein
and Multidrug Resistance-Associated
Protein Mediate Specific Patterns of Multidrug Resistance in Malignant
Glioma Cell Lines, but Not in Primary Glioma Cells . Brain Pathol. 
2003 , 13 , 482 –494 . 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2003.tb00479.x .14655754 
Raoof M. ; Corr S. J. ; Kaluarachchi W. D. ; Massey K. L. ; Briggs K. ; Zhu C. ; Cheney M. A. ; Wilson L. J. ; Curley S. A. 
Stability of Antibody-Conjugated
Gold Nanoparticles in the Endo-Lysosomal Nanoenvironment: Implications
for Non-Invasive Radiofrequency-Based Cancer Therapy . Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 
2012 , 8 , 1096 –1105 . 10.1016/j.nano.2012.02.001 .
Kumar A. ; Ma H. ; Zhang X. ; Huang K. ; Jin S. ; Liu J. ; Wei T. ; Cao W. ; Zou G. ; Liang X.-J. 
Gold Nanoparticles
Functionalized with Therapeutic and Targeted Peptides for Cancer Treatment . Biomaterials 
2012 , 33 , 1180 –1189 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.10.058 .22056754 
Pan Y. ; Neuss S. ; Leifert A. ; Fischler M. ; Wen F. ; Simon U. ; Schmid G. ; Brandau W. ; Jahnen-Dechent W. 
Size-Dependent
Cytotoxicity of Gold Nanoparticles . Small 
2007 , 3 , 1941 –1949 . 10.1002/smll.200700378 .17963284 
Vijayakumar S. ; Ganesan S. 
In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assay on Gold
Nanoparticles with
Different Stabilizing Agents . J. Nanomater. 
2012 , 2012 , 1 –9 . 10.1155/2012/734398 .
Vijayakumar S. ; Ganesan S. 
Size-Dependent in Vitro Cytotoxicity
Assay of Gold
Nanoparticles . Toxicol. Environ. Chem. 
2013 , 95 , 277 –287 . 10.1080/02772248.2013.770858 .
Wang R.-H. ; Bai J. ; Deng J. ; Fang C.-J. ; Chen X. 
TAT-Modified Gold Nanoparticle
Carrier with Enhanced Anticancer Activity and Size Effect on Overcoming
Multidrug Resistance . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9  (7 ), 5828 –5837 . 10.1021/acsami.6b15200 .28124900 
Coradeghini R. ; Gioria S. ; García C. P. ; Nativo P. ; Franchini F. ; Gilliland D. ; Ponti J. ; Rossi F. 
Size-Dependent Toxicity
and Cell Interaction Mechanisms of Gold Nanoparticles on Mouse Fibroblasts . Toxicol. Lett. 
2013 , 217 , 205 –216 . 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.11.022 .23246733 
Chhour P. ; Kim J. ; Benardo B. ; Tovar A. ; Mian S. ; Litt H. I. ; Ferrari V. A. ; Cormode D. P. 
Effect of Gold Nanoparticle Size
and Coating on Labeling Monocytes for CT Tracking . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2017 , 28 , 260 –269 . 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00566 .
Huo S. ; Jin S. ; Ma X. ; Xue X. ; Yang K. ; Kumar A. ; Wang P. C. ; Zhang J. ; Hu Z. ; Liang X.-J. 
Ultrasmall
Gold Nanoparticles as Carriers for Nucleus-Based Gene Therapy Due
to Size-Dependent Nuclear Entry . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 5852 –5862 . 10.1021/nn5008572 .24824865 
Yohan D. ; Cruje C. ; Lu X. ; Chithrani D. B. 
Size-Dependent
Gold Nanoparticle Interaction at Nano–Micro Interface Using
Both Monolayer and Multilayer (Tissue-Like) Cell Models . Nano–Micro Lett. 
2016 , 8 , 44 –53 . 10.1007/s40820-015-0060-6 .
Boyoglu C. ; He Q. ; Willing G. ; Boyoglu-Barnum S. ; Dennis V. A. ; Pillai S. ; Singh S. R. 
Microscopic
Studies of Various Sizes of Gold Nanoparticles
and Their Cellular Localizations . ISRN Nanotechnol. 
2013 , 2013 , 1 –13 . 10.1155/2013/123838 .
Pissuwan D. ; Niidome T. ; Cortie M. B. 
The Forthcoming
Applications of Gold
Nanoparticles in Drug and Gene Delivery Systems . J. Controlled Release 
2011 , 149 , 65 –71 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2009.12.006 .
Simpson C. A. ; Huffman B. J. ; Gerdon A. E. ; Cliffel D. E. 
Unexpected Toxicity
of Monolayer Protected Gold Clusters Eliminated by PEG-Thiol Place
Exchange Reactions . Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
2010 , 23 , 1608 –1616 . 10.1021/tx100209t .20715858 
Alkilany A. M. ; Murphy C. J. 
Toxicity and Cellular Uptake of Gold Nanoparticles:
What We Have Learned so Far? . J. Nanopart. Res. 
2010 , 12 , 2313 –2333 . 10.1007/s11051-010-9911-8 .21170131 
Doherty G. J. ; McMahon H. T. 
Mechanisms of Endocytosis . Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 
2009 , 78 , 857 –902 . 10.1146/annurev.biochem.78.081307.110540 .19317650 
Dasary S. S. R. ; Singh A. K. ; Senapati D. ; Yu H. ; Ray P. C. 
Gold Nanoparticle
Based Label-Free SERS Probe for Ultrasensitive and Selective Detection
of Trinitrotoluene . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 13806 –13812 . 10.1021/ja905134d .19736926 
Jain S. ; Webster T. J. ; Sharma A. ; Basu B. 
Intracellular Reactive
Oxidative Stress, Cell Proliferation and Apoptosis of Schwann Cells
on Carbon Nanofibrous Substrates . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 4891 –4901 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.03.055 .23570716 
Dasgupta P. ; Bhattacharya A. ; Pal R. ; Dasgupta A. K. ; Bandyopadhayay S. S. 
Synthesis
of Diallyl Disulfide (DADS) Induced Gold Nanoparticles: Characterization
and Study of Its Biological Activity in Human Leukemic Cell-Lines . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 18429 –18437 . 10.1039/C4RA15388J .
Zhang Q. ; Large N. ; Wang H. 
Gold Nanoparticles
with Tipped Surface
Structures as Substrates for Single-Particle Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy: Concave Nanocubes, Nanotrisoctahedra, and Nanostars . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 17255 –17267 . 10.1021/am505245z .25222940 
Huang Y. ; Dai L. ; Song L. ; Zhang L. ; Rong Y. ; Zhang J. ; Nie Z. ; Chen T. 
Engineering Gold Nanoparticles in Compass Shape with
Broadly Tunable Plasmon Resonances and High-Performance SERS . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 27949 –27955 . 10.1021/acsami.6b05258 .27700031 
Ma N. ; Wu F.-G. ; Zhang X. ; Jiang Y.-W. ; Jia H.-R. ; Wang H.-Y. ; Li Y.-H. ; Liu P. ; Gu N. ; Chen Z. 
Shape-Dependent Radiosensitization Effect of Gold Nanostructures
in Cancer Radiotherapy: Comparison of Gold Nanoparticles, Nanospikes,
and Nanorods . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 13037 –13048 . 10.1021/acsami.7b01112 .28338323 
Xue C. ; Birel O. ; Li Y. ; Ma X. ; Gao M. ; Urbas A. ; Li Q. 
Porphyrin Metal Complex Monolayer-Protected
Gold Nanorods: A Parallel Facile Synthesis and Self-Assembly . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2013 , 398 , 1 –6 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2013.02.014 .23489614 
Canitez F. K. ; Yavuz M. S. ; Ozturk R. 
One-Pot Synthesis of
Gold Nanoparticles
Using Tetradentate Porphyrins . J. Nanopart.
Res. 
2011 , 13 , 7219 –7228 . 10.1007/s11051-011-0636-0 .
Papadimitriou S. ; Bikiaris D. 
Novel Self-Assembled
Core-Shell Nanoparticles Based
on Crystalline Amorphous Moieties of Aliphatic Copolyesters for Efficient
Controlled Drug Release . J. Controlled Release 
2009 , 138 , 177 –184 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2009.05.013 .
Pandey S. ; Oza G. ; Mewada A. ; Shah R. ; Thakur M. ; Sharon M. 
Folic Acid
Mediated Synaphic Delivery of Doxorubicin Using Biogenic Gold Nanoparticles
Anchored to Biological Linkers . J. Mater. Chem.
B 
2013 , 1 , 1361 –1370 . 10.1039/c2tb00168c .
Bhattacharya K. ; Bag A. K. ; Tripathi R. ; Samanta S. K. ; Pal B. C. ; Shaha C. ; Mandal C. 
Mahanine,
a Novel Mitochondrial Complex-III
Inhibitor Induces G0/G1 Arrest through Redox Alteration-Mediated DNA
Damage Response and Regresses Glioblastoma Multiforme . Am. J. Cancer Res. 
2014 , 4 , 629 –647 .25520856 
Das R. ; Bhattacharya K. ; Samanta S. K. ; Pal B. C. ; Mandal C. 
Improved Chemosensitivity
in Cervical Cancer to Cisplatin: Synergistic Activity of Mahanine
through STAT3 Inhibition . Cancer Lett. 
2014 , 351 , 81 –90 . 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.05.005 .24831030 
Sarkar S. ; Mandal C. ; Sangwan R. ; Mandal C. 
Coupling G2/M Arrest
to the Wnt/β-Catenin Pathway Restrains Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma . Endocr.-Relat. Cancer 
2014 , 21 , 113 –125 . 10.1530/ERC-13-0315 .24402132 
Bhattacharya K. ; Chandra S. ; Mandal C. 
Critical Stoichiometric
Ratio of
CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ Regulatory T Cells and CD4+ CD25– Responder
T Cells Influence Immunosuppression in Patients with B-Cell Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukaemia . Immunology 
2014 , 142 , 124 –139 . 10.1111/imm.12237 .24354800 
Bhattacharya K. ; Samanta S. K. ; Tripathi R. ; Mallick A. ; Chandra S. ; Pal B. C. ; Shaha C. ; Mandal C. 
Apoptotic Effects of
Mahanine on Human Leukemic Cells Are Mediated through Crosstalk between
Apo-1/Fas Signaling and the Bid Protein and via Mitochondrial Pathways . Biochem. Pharmacol. 
2010 , 79 , 361 –372 . 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.09.007 .19751707 
Das R. ; Bhattacharya K. ; Sarkar S. ; Samanta S. K. ; Pal B. C. ; Mandal C. 
Mahanine Synergistically
Enhances Cytotoxicity of 5-Fluorouracil
through ROS-Mediated Activation of PTEN and p53/p73 in Colon Carcinoma . Apoptosis 
2014 , 19 , 149 –164 . 10.1007/s10495-013-0907-6 .24052409 
Bhattacharya K. ; Maiti S. ; Mandal C. 
PTEN Negatively
Regulates mTORC2
Formation and Signaling in Grade IV Glioma via Rictor Hyperphosphorylation
at Thr1135 and Direct the Mode of Action of an mTORC1/2 Inhibitor . Oncogenesis 
2016 , 5 , e22710.1038/oncsis.2016.34 .27239959 
Sarkar S. ; Dutta D. ; Samanta S. K. ; Bhattacharya K. ; Pal B. C. ; Li J. ; Datta K. ; Mandal C. ; Mandal C. 
Oxidative Inhibition of Hsp90 Disrupts
the Super-Chaperone
Complex and Attenuates Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma in Vitro and in Vivo . Int. J. Cancer 
2013 , 132 , 695 –706 . 10.1002/ijc.27687 .22729780 
Mandal C. ; Dutta A. ; Mallick A. ; Chandra S. ; Misra L. ; Sangwan R. S. ; Mandal C. 
Withaferin
A Induces Apoptosis by
Activating p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Signaling Cascade
in Leukemic Cells of Lymphoid and Myeloid Origin through Mitochondrial
Death Cascade . Apoptosis 
2008 , 13 , 1450 –1464 . 10.1007/s10495-008-0271-0 .18987975 
Mandal C. ; Tringali C. ; Mondal S. ; Anastasia L. ; Chandra S. ; Venerando B. ; Mandal C. 
Down Regulation of
Membrane-Bound Neu3 Constitutes a New Potential Marker for Childhood
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia and Induces Apoptosis Suppression of
Neoplastic Cells . Int. J. Cancer 
2010 , 126 , 337 –349 . 10.1002/ijc.24733 .19588508 
Maiti S. ; Mondal S. ; Satyavarapu E. M. ; Mandal C. 
mTORC2 Regulates Hedgehog Pathway Activity by Promoting
Stability to Gli2 Protein and Its Nuclear Translocation . Cell Death Dis. 
2017 , 8 , e292610.1038/cddis.2017.296 .28703798 
Mandal C. ; Sarkar S. ; Chatterjee U. ; Schwartz-Albiez R. ; Mandal C. 
Disialoganglioside GD3-Synthase over
Expression Inhibits Survival and Angiogenesis of Pancreatic Cancer
Cells through Cell Cycle Arrest at S-Phase and Disruption of Integrin-β1-Mediated
Anchorage . Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 
2014 , 53 , 162 –173 . 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.05.015 .24842107 
Rejman J. ; Bragonzi A. ; Conese M. 
Role of Clathrin-
and
Caveolae-Mediated Endocytosis in Gene Transfer Mediated by Lipo- and
Polyplexes . Mol. Ther. 
2005 , 12 , 468 –474 . 10.1016/j.ymthe.2005.03.038 .15963763 
Fielding A. B. ; Willox A. K. ; Okeke E. ; Royle S. J. 
Clathrin-Mediated
Endocytosis Is Inhibited during Mitosis . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2012 , 109 , 6572 –6577 . 10.1073/pnas.1117401109 .22493256 
Kam N. W. S. ; Liu Z. ; Dai H. 
Carbon Nanotubes as
Intracellular Transporters for Proteins and DNA: An Investigation
of the Uptake Mechanism and Pathway . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
2006 , 45 , 577 –581 . 10.1002/anie.200503389 .

