
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3041106210.1021/acsomega.8b00993ArticleTuning the Balance between Fibrillation and Oligomerization of α-Synuclein
in the Presence of Dopamine Saha Shivnetra Khan Mohammad Ashhar
Iqbal †Mudhara Deepak Deep Shashank *Department of Chemistry, Indian
Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016, India* E-mail: sdeep@chemistry.iitd.ac.in (S.D.).26 10 2018 31 10 2018 3 10 14213 14224 14 05 2018 02 10 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The aggregates of
α-synuclein bear a close connection with Parkinson’s
disease, which is largely characterized by the loss of the dopaminergic
neurons. Dopamine promotes the formation of undesirable sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS)-resistant oligomers of α-synuclein. In this study,
we have shown that the inhibition of fibrillation by an additive may
not always be the ultimate deciding factor in the context of its potential
as a successful additive. Copper promotes the fibrillation of α-synuclein
in buffer alone but inhibits the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers
in the presence of dopamine. Glycerol, on the other hand, increases
the population of such dopamine-mediated SDS-resistant oligomers.
We speculate such an effect to be a manifestation of the distinct
oxidation pathway of dopamine in the presence of copper.

document-id-old-9ao8b00993document-id-new-14ao-2018-00993kccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Parkinson’s
disease (PD), a debilitating neurodegenerative disease, is associated
with the impairment of motor neurons such as bradykinesia, resting
tremors, and rigidity.1 Ordered aggregates
of proteins, more commonly known as the amyloid fibrils, have been
found to be a major contributor in this and many other neurodegenerative
diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s, and Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. A plethora of studies have shown that it is not
these fibrils, but the precursors of these fibrils, that is, the prefibrillar
aggregates and the oligomers, that are toxic to the cellular system.

The symptoms of PD are attributed to the loss of the dopaminergic
neurons [the main source of dopamine (DA)] in the substantia nigra
of the midbrain. DA is an important neurotransmitter in the physiological
system which sends signals to other nerve cells and plays a significant
role in the motor movements, release of various hormones, and reward-motivated
behavior. DA is structurally a catecholamine having a very low oxidation
potential. Thus, it is highly prone to oxidation and is unstable under
the cytosolic environment. Its oxidation leads to the generation of
reactive oxygen species such as superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and
also DA-reactive dopaminoquinones and dopaminochromes, which prove
toxic to the cellular system.2−6 Given the sensitivity of DA to oxidation, it is believed that DA
oxidation must have a major contribution to the disease.7

The neurons in the substantia nigra of
the midbrain region of PD patients contain Lewy bodies, which are
essentially the aggregates of a small, intrinsically disordered protein,
α-synuclein.4,8 It has been found that the dopaminochrome
formed as a result of the autooxidation of cytosolic DA forms a covalent
adduct with α-synuclein and promotes the formation of a specific
type of oligomers—those that are resistant to sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS).3,5,6,9,10 DA stabilizes
the oligomers and prevents the further growth of these oligomers into
mature fibrils. These SDS-resistant oligomers are responsible for
imparting toxicity to the physiological system.2,3 The
oligomers in DA are in contrast to the commonly observed oligomers
which are soluble in SDS. The effect of DA is so strong that it can
even interact with the fibrils to disintegrate them into the SDS-resistant
oligomers. In addition, these SDS-resistant oligomers formed in DA
are found to be more toxic than the oligomers formed in the absence
of DA. A plethora of studies exists, which have examined the mechanism
of the action of DA on α-synuclein and its aggregation. In this
study, however, we have made an attempt to assess the factors which
can modulate the population of these SDS-resistant oligomers formed
in DA.

Decoding the routes to modulate the toxic species remains
an integral part in the therapeutics of many diseases, and a broad
spectrum of studies exist, which have used external additives to do
so. Additives ranging from osmolytes, polyphenols, small organic compounds,
metal ions, pesticides, and nanoparticles have been tested on the
different aspects of proteins such as their stability, activity, and
aggregation. Here, we have examined the effect of a metal ion, copper,
and an osmolyte, glycerol, on the aggregation of α-synuclein
in the presence of DA. Copper, in particular, is a well-known enhancer
of the fibrillation of α-synuclein, which initiates the process
by binding to the monomeric protein.11−14 On the other hand, glycerol has
been long known to inhibit or suppress the aggregation of a number
of proteins.15−18 The origin of the choice of additives was aimed with the idea to
investigate the effect of an aggregation enhancer and a suppressor
on the population of these DA-mediated SDS-resistant oligomers. A
wide range of studies exist, which have individually explored the
effect of different additives or DA on the aggregation of α-synuclein.
However, to the best of our knowledge, not many studies have been
carried out on a combined behavior of the additives and DA on the
protein—a scenario which would resemble the physiological system
more closely.

Interestingly, our study shows that copper (generally
an enhancer of fibrillation) mitigates the formation of the SDS-resistant
oligomers which are formed in the presence of DA, whereas glycerol
(generally an inhibitor of fibrillation), on the other hand, promotes
the formation of these DA-mediated oligomers. This is in contrast
to the behavior of copper or glycerol in the absence of DA where they
are found to enhance or inhibit, respectively, the oligomerization
and fibrillation. Our analysis suggests that the kinetics and the
nature of the chemical interaction of copper with DA modify the later
in such a way that it is not able to interact with the protein. The
absence of this interaction allows the aggregation to proceed further,
thus decreasing the population of the SDS-resistant oligomers.

Results
and Discussion
Glycerol Inhibits Fibrillation of α-Synuclein
in the Absence of DA
The effect of copper and glycerol on
the fibrillation of α-synuclein in the absence of DA was monitored
by thioflavin T (ThT), which is capable of binding to fibrils. Despite
the fact that both copper and glycerol accelerated the onset of fibrillation,
the former enhanced the extent of fibrillation, whereas the latter
reduced the same (Figure 1A). Fluorescence microscopy of the aggregates also showed
the presence of fibrils in both the additives, although fewer fibrils
could be seen in glycerol than in copper or buffer alone (Figure 1B–D), which
was in sync with the reduced ThT fluorescence in glycerol. This suggested
that glycerol could be an effective inhibitor of the fibrillation
of α-synuclein in the absence of DA. The decrease in the extent
of fibrillation by glycerol may not be unexpected in the first place
as it has been widely proven as an aggregation suppressor and a promoter
of the folded state of the protein. In fact, glycerol has also been
found to rectify the misfolded conformations of the protein inside
the endoplasmic reticulum,19,20 in which case, it is
worth exploring for a positive role under in vivo conditions. Aggregation
in the presence of DA, however, did not show any change in the ThT
fluorescence (Figure 1A), and this phenomenon is well documented in the literature.21

Figure 1 (A) Aggregation of 35 μM α-synuclein in 20
mM Tris buffer, 0.1 M NaCl (pH 7.5), in the presence and absence of
different additives at 37 °C, 250 rpm, monitored by ThT fluorescence.
Fluorescence microscopy images of the aggregates of α-synuclein
formed (B) in the absence of any additive, (C) in the presence of
copper, and (D) in the presence of glycerol.

Association States of α-Synuclein in DA in the Presence of
Copper and Glycerol
Because of the absence of any ThT fluorescence
in the presence of DA, the various species populated under the conditions
of aggregation were studied using size exclusion chromatography. The
size exclusion chromatograms of α-synuclein aggregated in the
presence of DA showed a significant presence of oligomers around elution
volume of 9.9 and 13 mL (Figure 2A), indicating that although no ThT fluorescence could
be detected, the protein did associate into higher-order species in
the presence of DA. A combination of copper and DA (copper–DA)
was found to increase the population of the oligomers eluting around
9.9 mL, whereas it decreased the population of the oligomers eluting
around 13 mL (Figure 2B). The population of monomers was also greatly reduced in copper–DA,
suggesting that copper could deplete the monomers from the solution
with a much faster kinetics. In the presence of glycerol and DA (glycerol–DA),
the population of oligomers around 13 mL was similar, whereas that
around 9.9 mL was slightly higher than that in DA alone (Figure 2C). The monomer content
remaining in the glycerol–DA system was considerably low as
compared to that in DA alone. The transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) images of the aggregates in copper–DA and glycerol–DA
exhibit a wormlike morphology, as shown in Figure 2D,E.

Figure 2 Size exclusion
profiles of 200 μM α-synuclein after its aggregation in
DA (A) without any additive (B) with copper and (C) with glycerol.
TEM images of the aggregates of α-synuclein formed in DA in
the presence of (D) copper and (E) glycerol.

Oligomers Formed in Copper–DA Are Soluble in SDS, Whereas
Those Formed in DA or Glycerol–DA Are Resistant to SDS
Studies have shown that a catechol moiety (which is also present
in DA) is essential for the inhibition of fibrillation and promotion
of SDS-resistant oligomers in α-synuclein.5,9 The
most convenient technique of detecting these SDS-resistant oligomers
is SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). The aggregation
of α-synuclein in buffer alone, copper, and glycerol, in the
absence of DA did not show the presence of any oligomers in SDS-PAGE
but showed a thick band corresponding to the monomer (Figure 3A, lanes 1, 3, and 5). It is
already known that the aggregation of α-synuclein in the absence
of DA proceeds via the formation of oligomers, but the absence of
any oligomers in SDS-PAGE showed that such oligomers are strictly
the ones that are soluble in SDS. However, oligomeric species could
be clearly detected in SDS-PAGE when α-synuclein was aggregated
in the presence of DA (Figure 3A, lane 2). It is also evident from the figure that the oligomers
were more predominant in the aggregation in the presence of glycerol
and DA, suggesting that glycerol increases the formation of SDS-resistant
oligomers (Figure 3A, lane 6).

Figure 3 (A): SDS-PAGE of the aggregates of α-synuclein formed
in buffer alone (lane 1), copper (lane 3), glycerol (lane 5), DA (lane
2), DA and copper (lane 4), and DA and glycerol (lane 6). (B): Quantification
of monomers and oligomers from the SDS-PAGE in panel A.

Surprisingly, only a minute amount of oligomers
could be seen in the presence of copper and DA (Figure 3A, lane 4), suggesting that copper did not
promote or stabilize the SDS-resistant oligomers. In order to get
a more confirmatory conclusion, the bands in the gels were quantified.
The analysis clearly suggests that the population of the SDS-resistant
oligomers decreased by about 64% in the presence of copper and DA,
whereas they increased by nearly 8% in the presence of glycerol and
DA, as compared to that in DA alone (Figure 3B).

The effect of copper and glycerol
was further confirmed by aggregating α-synuclein in the presence
of DA, with different concentrations of copper and glycerol. It could
be seen that increasing concentrations of copper gradually decreased
the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers (Figure 4A). Subsequently, the residual monomer in
the presence of 0.5 mM copper was also slightly less, suggesting that
although monomers are consumed, they are incorporated into the insoluble
aggregates, and not the SDS-resistant oligomers. The scenario was
reversed in the glycerol–DA system, and the amount of SDS-resistant
oligomers increased at higher glycerol concentrations (Figure 4A). Consequently, the amount
of monomers left at the end of aggregation also decreased with increasing
concentrations of glycerol. This demonstrates that glycerol (in the
presence of DA) shifts the aggregation toward the SDS-resistant oligomers
from the monomers. The relative amounts of monomers left or the oligomers
formed have been quantified from the gel images and correlate well
with the visual inspection (Figure 4B,C). The oligomers formed in the presence of DA alone
or glycerol–DA as seen in size exclusion chromatography (Figure 2) were relatively
lower than that formed in copper–DA. This is in contrast to
that observed in SDS-PAGE. We reach an important conclusion here.
The oligomers formed in the copper–DA system are different
from those formed in the presence of DA alone or in the glycerol–DA
system. Although the oligomers formed in copper–DA can be disintegrated
by SDS, those formed in DA alone or glycerol–DA are built up
of interactions that cannot be disrupted by SDS. That is to say, the
oligomers are perhaps chemically different.

Figure 4 (A) SDS-PAGE analysis
of the aggregation of 200 μM α-synuclein in the presence
of DA alone (lane 1), in the presence DA and 0.1 mM copper (lane 2),
0.3 mM copper (lane 3), 0.5 mM copper (lane 4), 1 M glycerol (lane
5), 2 M glycerol (lane 6), and 3 M glycerol (lane 7). Quantification
of the monomers and oligomers detected in SDS-PAGE at the end of aggregation
of α-synuclein in DA in the presence of copper (B) and glycerol
(C).

Oligomers Formed in Copper–DA
Are Structurally Different from Those Formed in DA Alone or in Glycerol–DA
Previous investigations have shown that the oligomers of α-synuclein
formed in buffer alone have a beta sheet structure.2,22 On
the contrary, oligomers formed in DA are essentially unfolded.2 Interestingly, it was found that the oligomers
formed in copper–DA have a beta sheet structure (similar to
that found in the absence of DA), whereas those formed in glycerol–DA
were unfolded in nature (Figure 5). This again suggests that copper can nullify the
presence of DA all together, as DA does not seem to have any impact
on the aggregation when copper is present. The behavior in copper–DA
is the same as that observed in buffer alone, in the absence of DA.
This holds well both in terms of the effect of SDS on the oligomers
and also the structure of the oligomers.

Figure 5 CD spectra of the oligomers
remaining after the aggregation of α-synuclein at 37 °C,
250 rpm, in the presence of different additives.

Glycerol Increases the Population of α-Synuclein–DA
Adduct, whereas Copper Completely Suppresses the Adduct Formation
Conway et al.5 had reported that an
adduct of monomeric α-synuclein with DA shows a unique fluorescence
at 450 nm upon excitation at 360 nm. Such was also true in our case
(Figure 6A, red curve). The natively unfolded protein exposes
a number of residues such as lysine, methionine, and tyrosine, which
are capable of interacting with DA and its oxidation products (Scheme 1). On the basis of
these possibilities, the observed fluorescence was attributed to a
covalent, tyrosine-derived radical coupling adduct.5 The adduct can be ascribed to be formed from the hydroxyl
radical in tyrosine and the hydroxyl radical in DA. That the fluorescence
was a consequence of the interaction of DA with the protein was further
confirmed by the fact that freshly prepared DA in buffer alone did
not show any fluorescence in this region (Figure 6A, black curve) in the absence of protein.
It has been shown that a derivative of DA covalently binds to 5–10%
of α-synuclein, which inhibits the further fibrillation of the
remaining protein, and promotes SDS-resistant oligomerization instead.
Even otherwise, the protein–DA adduct is formed only with a
certain fraction of the α-synuclein present in the medium.5,23 Our study shows that the fluorescence from the protein–DA
adduct is largely enhanced in the presence of glycerol, suggesting
a larger population of the adduct in the presence of this additive
(Figure 6A, blue curve).
Interestingly, the fluorescence was completely lost in the system
containing protein, DA and copper, which meant that the protein–DA
adduct was not formed at all in the presence of this metal (Figure 6A, green curve).
The enhanced adduct fluorescence in glycerol–DA and the absence
of any fluorescence in copper–DA might hold the clue to the
increased and the suppressed formation of the SDS-resistant oligomers
in glycerol and copper, respectively. The absence of any adduct in
the copper–DA system (unlike that in DA alone or glycerol–DA
system) suggests a different starting point and hence a different
pathway of aggregation of α-synuclein in this system. It was
due to this distinct pathway that the formation of stable SDS-resistant
oligomers did not take place in the copper–DA system.

Figure 6 (A) Fluorescence
spectra of the protein–DA adduct in the presence of different
additives. Fluorescence spectra of DA during the aggregation of 35
μM α-synuclein in 20 mM Tris buffer, 0.1 M NaCl (pH 7.5)
at 37 °C, 250 rpm, at different time points in the (B) absence
and (C) presence of glycerol. (D) Fluorescence spectra of DA in buffer
at different time points without any additives.

Scheme 1 Different Species in the Oxidation Pathway of DA
Freshly prepared DA (in buffer
alone) did
not show any remarkable change in the fluorescence signal with increasing
time at shorter time scales (data not shown). However, the fluorescence
from the protein–DA adduct under the conditions of aggregation
(37 °C, 250 rpm) showed a concomitant decrease with increasing
time (Figure 6B). Size
exclusion profiles and SDS-PAGE studies have already confirmed that
oligomers are populated under this condition. Thus, this decrease
of the adduct fluorescence can be considered to be a direct consequence
of the formation of the DA-bound SDS-resistant oligomers. The rate
of decrease was found to be much faster in the presence of glycerol
(Figure 6C), which
perhaps corresponds to a greater extent of oligomerization at a particular
time point. This is also in good agreement with our SDS-PAGE results,
which show that glycerol promotes the formation of the SDS-resistant
oligomers. Our speculation about the decreasing intensity of the adduct
might be supported by the fact that pure α-synuclein at 25 °C
incubated under quiescent conditions in the presence of DA does not
show any remarkable change in the fluorescence (Figure S1).

That the decrease in the fluorescence of
the adduct was indeed due to the interaction of DA and α-synuclein
oligomers was completely ascertained from the fact that prolonged
incubation of DA (for 47 h) in buffer leads to a sharp increase in
its fluorescence intensity, with the fluorescence maxima around 490
nm (Figure 6D). This
can be attributed to the formation of 5,6-dihydroxyindole, which is
the resultant soluble product of DA oxidation.3 No corresponding increase in fluorescence could be seen in the aggregating
solution containing DA and the protein, suggesting that the oxidation
products formed in DA do interact with α-synuclein, resulting
in species which are incapable of fluorescing.

Oxidation of DA in Buffer/Glycerol
Exhibits Exponential Kinetics
The oxidation of DA at 25 °C
was monitored using UV–visible spectroscopy. The absorbance
spectra of DA (2 mM) upon immediate dissolution in buffer did not
show any significant spectrum in the visible region. However, with
increasing time, a prominent broad absorption band at around 453 nm
could be seen emerging (Figure 7A). With increasing time, the intensity of absorption increased
remarkably. This was also accompanied by an increased intensity of
the baseline and a significant change in the shape of the spectrum,
which almost lost its signature at longer times. The emergence of
a distinct peak, blue-shifted toward 405 nm, a small shoulder region
red-shifted toward 475 nm, and the loss of signature of the spectra
with increasing time clearly pointed toward the formation of new products
in the system. The survey of the literature suggests that the shoulder
around 475 nm is due to the formation of dopaminochrome,2,24,25 whereas the peak observed close
to 405 nm is due to the formation of dimers, which ultimately leads
to the formation of insoluble melanin. This is reasonable because
the emergence of the new peak around 405 nm occurs later during the
reaction and correlates with the increase in scattering from the solution,
indicated by an increased intensity of the baseline.

Figure 7 (A) UV absorbance spectra
of DA with increasing time in buffer (20 mM Tris, 0.1 M NaCl, pH 7.5).
The arrow points toward increasing time. Change in the absorbance
of the DA solution at different wavelengths with increasing time in
the absence (B) and presence (C) of 35 μM α-synuclein.
Continuous red lines in (B,C) are the exponential fits to the data
points.

In order to account for the formation
of a range of oxidation products, the absorbance spectra were analyzed
at three different wavelengths of 405, 453, and 475 nm. The kinetics
of oxidation was exponential at all the three wavelengths, with minute
changes in their rate (Figure 7B). The deconvolution of the spectra could not be successful
because of the complexity of the curves, because of which we resorted
to the analysis at multiple wavelengths. The overall signature of
the spectra of the oxidation products did not change in the presence
of α-synuclein (data not shown). The kinetics was still exponential
(Figure 7C), although
α-synuclein was found to retard the overall oxidation of DA.
This could be attributed to a possible interaction of the oxidation
products with the monomeric protein. Besides, no precipitation of
DA occurred in the presence of α-synuclein, whereas DA alone
formed an insoluble precipitate in the same time scale, suggesting
that the monomeric protein also interacts with the oxidation products
of DA (Figure S2). Very similar trends
were observed in glycerol too (Figure S3). However, the oxidation of DA in the presence of glycerol was slower
than that in its absence. Additionally, the presence of protein further
reduced the rate of DA oxidation in glycerol. Such inhibition (or
enhancement) of the kinetics is usually believed to occur because
of an interference in the usual pathway by the external agents (here,
α-synuclein or glycerol). In our case, we speculate that both
glycerol and α-synuclein interact with the oxidation products
of DA.

DA Forms Widely Different Oxidation Products in the Presence
of Copper and Exhibits Linear Kinetics
In the presence of
copper, the spectrum of DA was remarkably sharper (as compared to
buffer alone) and showed a significant red shift with increasing time
(Figure 8A). This is
in contrast to the blue-shifted peak or the red-shifted shoulder observed
in the absence of copper (Figure 7A). A peak of lower intensity at 650 nm could also
be observed in these spectra, which corresponded to the copper–water
complex. It can be seen that the kinetics of oxidation of DA was linear
in the presence of copper (Figure 8B, square), whereas it was exponential in its absence
(Figure 7B,C). Moreover,
the absence of new peaks at 405 or 475 nm indicates that the common
oxidation products of DA such as dopaminoquinone or dopaminochrome
are either not formed to any significant extent in the presence of
copper or are involved in complexation with copper. The IR spectra
of DA also exhibited a significant change in the presence of copper
(Figure S4), suggesting that the metal
drastically affects the prominent vibrations in the molecule. The
different oxidation products formed in the presence of copper or the
changes brought about in DA because of the presence of copper may
have a close connection with the suppressed formation of the SDS-resistant
oligomers in copper–DA.

Figure 8 (A) Absorbance spectra of DA in the presence
of copper in buffer (20 mM Tris, 0.1 M NaCl, pH 7.5). The arrow points
toward increasing time. Change in the absorbance of the DA–copper
system with increasing time at different wavelengths in the absence
(B) and presence (C) of 35 μM α-synuclein. Continuous
red lines in (B,C) through the squares are the linear fits, and through
the triangles are the exponential fits to the data points.

Plausible Mechanism of Inhibition of Oligomerization
in the Presence of Copper
The oxidation of DA via a large
number of intermediates such as dopaminochromes, dopaminoquinone,
or dihydroxyindole is accompanied by the simultaneous liberation of
reactive oxygen species such as superoxides and peroxides.3,26 Although copper catalyzes the oxidation of DA, it does so in terms
of the formation of hydrogen peroxide. In the presence of copper,
DA takes a different route altogether for its oxidation, wherein the
formation of common oxidation products such as dopaminochrome or dopaminoquinone
are significantly suppressed, as discussed previously. Most importantly,
DA instantaneously forms a complex with copper to form a copper catecholate-type
complex—a step which will be absent in the absence of copper.26,27 The formation of copper–DA complex is also a major route
for the elimination of DA from the medium, thereby preventing the
oxidation reaction to proceed further. Conway et al. had screened
a number of compounds and had inferred that the presence of catechol
moiety was essential in the prevention of the fibrillation of α-synuclein.
As the catechol moiety of DA is involved in complexation with copper,
the former is not able to interact with α-synuclein, because
of which no adduct with the protein is formed in the presence of DA
and copper (Figure 6A), and hence, no SDS-resistant oligomers are formed. Using the mechanism
provided by Pham et al.,26 a comparison
of the routes of the DA mediated aggregation of α-synuclein
in the absence and presence of copper is presented in Scheme 2.

Scheme 2 Modulation in the
DA-Mediated Aggregation of α-Synuclein by Copper
In Scheme 2, H2A is the leukoaminochrome, Q is the
quinone, while A is the aminochrome. It has been suggested that the
copper–DA complex disintegrates via an electron-transfer process
between the metal center and DA. The electron transfer, and the subsequent
reduction and oxidation of Cu(II) and Cu(I), respectively, becomes
the predominant reactions in the decomposition, as opposed to the
formation of dopaminochrome and dopaminoquinone.26 Even the formation of dopaminoquinone in the presence of
the metal requires the oxidized state (Cu(II)) of the metal. However,
as already mentioned, the metal center is continuously undergoing
an exchange between the oxidized and reduced state, with the oxidized
state being less populated.26 As a result,
such intermediates do not get formed to a large extent. Even so, the
minute amount of oxidation products such as semiquinone that are formed
are also capable of complexation with copper.28 As a result, these intermediates too, if any, do not get a chance
to bind to the oligomeric species in the aggregation pathway, thereby
inhibiting the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers in the copper–DA
system.

Suppressing the oxidation of DA has been drastically
found to reduce the presence of SDS-resistant oligomers. Pham et al.3 have shown that the formation of SDS-resistant
oligomers may be completely inhibited even in the presence of DA if
antioxidants are present in the medium. The formation of SDS-resistant
oligomers is inhibited in the presence of copper, not because of inhibition
of oxidation but because of the complexation of DA and its oxidation
products with copper. These two independent observations prove to
be a good support for the fact that prevention/modification of the
oxidation of DA from its intrinsic pathway can help in overcoming
the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers.

Sequestration of Copper
Ions Reverts the Oxidation Pathway of DA to Its Usual Route
In order to clarify whether our speculation regarding the complexation
of copper with DA is appropriate or not, the oxidation of the copper–DA
system was studied in the presence of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA). The UV–visible spectra in the presence of EDTA were
found to be similar to those observed in buffer alone and were blue-shifted
with time (Figure 9A). This is because of the sequestration of copper by EDTA, which
is indicated by the shift in the peak of the copper complex from 650
nm (in buffer) to nearly 700 nm (in EDTA). The complexation of copper
with EDTA prevented the interaction of copper with DA, and hence,
the oxidation proceeded in its usual route (similar to that in DA
alone). In order to see whether the sequestration of copper had a
similar effect on the aggregation of α-synuclein, the aggregation
was carried out in the presence of DA, copper, and EDTA. The combination
resulted in an increase of the SDS-resistant oligomers (Figure 9B) by about 18% (Figure 9C), suggesting that the sequestration
of copper by EDTA does not allow the copper–DA complex to be
formed. As a result, DA oxidizes itself in its usual manner forming
dopaminochrome and dopaminoquinones, which further interacts with
the protein to form the SDS-resistant oligomers. The quantification
of the amount of monomers and oligomers from SDS-PAGE is presented
in Figure 9C. Thus,
our speculation that the modified oxidation pathway of DA in the presence
of copper is responsible for the diminished formation of SDS-resistant
oligomers seems correct.

Figure 9 (A) UV spectra of DA in buffer (20 mM Tris,
0.1 M NaCl, pH 7.5) in the presence of copper and EDTA. (B) SDS-PAGE
of α-synuclein after its aggregation in DA in the presence of
1 mM copper (lane 2), 0.5 mM copper (lane 3), and 0.5 mM copper +
0.5 mM EDTA (lane 4). Lane 1 shows the monomeric protein before aggregation.
(C) Quantification of the amount of monomers and oligomers as detected
in the SDS-PAGE in (B).

Copper Stabilizes the Aggregates in the Presence of DA, Whereas
Glycerol Destabilizes Them
In order to check whether copper
and glycerol were effective in preventing the dissolution of the fibrils
by DA or not, the aggregation was first carried out with and without
copper or glycerol (in the absence of DA), and DA was added to them
after 24 h of aggregation. DA is already known to disintegrate preformed
fibrils (formed in buffer alone) into SDS-resistant oligomers, and
this can also be confirmed from SDS-PAGE (Figure 10, lane 1). However, the affinity of copper
and DA toward each other is so strong that the presence of the former
does not allow the latter to interact with preformed fibrils (in copper)
to disintegrate them. As a result, the SDS-PAGE did not show any traces
of oligomers or monomers, suggesting that the fibrils formed in copper
remained intact even in the presence of DA (Figure 10, lane 2). On the other hand, the addition
of DA to the fibrils formed in glycerol led to the noticeable formation
of the SDS-resistant oligomers (Figure 10, lane 3). The overall behavior can be described
as shown in Scheme 3.

Figure 10 SDS-PAGE of the DA-induced disaggregation of the fibrils formed in
buffer alone (lane 1), copper, (lane 2), and glycerol (lane 3).

Scheme 3 Behavior of DA during the Aggregation
of α-Synuclein in the Presence of Glycerol/Copper
The overall study can be summarized
as shown in Scheme 4. Scheme 4 represents
five different conditions of aggregation, numbered from 1 through
5. The first condition (1) represents the situation when α-synuclein
is aggregated in the presence of buffer alone. In buffer alone, α-synuclein
initially builds up an oligomeric population (multicolored spheres),
which further proceeds to form the insoluble fibrils. These aspects
are already known from the previous studies and are discussed only
briefly here. The second condition (2) shows the pathway of aggregation
in the presence of DA. DA and its oxidation products bind to α-synuclein
via various modifications of the amino acid residues as discussed
previously and lead to the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers (green
spheres). These interactions prevent the other interactions that are
necessary to form fibrils. The interactions of DA and its oxidation
products with the fibrils are strong enough to even disintegrate the
fibrils. This is shown by an arrow between routes (1) and (2). The
third scenario (3) is the aggregation in the presence of DA and glycerol.
The overall pathway is same as that in DA alone, expect for the fact
that glycerol increases the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers (green
spheres) and also increases the interaction of DA and its oxidation
product with the side chains of the protein. As a result, the degradation
of fibrils in the presence of glycerol also results in an increased
amount of the SDS-resistant oligomers, as compared to that in DA alone.
This is shown by an arrow between routes (1) and (3). The fourth scenario
(4) represents the aggregation in the presence of copper and DA. The
overall pathway is different from that observed in DA (or glycerol–DA),
but similar to that in buffer alone [route (1)]. Oligomers formed
in the presence of copper and DA are soluble in SDS, unlike those
observed in route (2) or (3). The effect of DA on the protein is largely
overpowered by the strong kinetics of the complexation between copper
and DA. As a result of the complexation, DA does not interact with
the protein and hence do not form SDS-resistant oligomers. That the
presence of copper does not let DA act on the protein is also clarified
from the absence of any fibril disintegration in the presence of copper
and DA (Figure 10).
In order to further confirm that complexation was indeed the reason
behind the unresponsive behavior of DA in the presence of copper,
the aggregation was carried out in the presence of copper, EDTA, and
DA (route 5). Indeed, the addition of EDTA reverted the route back
to the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers. Effectively, any strategy
that can prevent the formation of the protein–DA adduct can
prevent the formation of the SDS-resistant oligomers.

Scheme 4 Overall
Aggregation Pathway of α-Synuclein in the Presence of Different
Additives or Combination of Additives
Effect of Curcumin and Baicalein on Aggregation in DA, Copper–DA,
and Glycerol–DA
It was worth examining whether the
effect imparted by copper or glycerol was universal or not, and this
was confirmed using polyphenols. Polyphenols are widely known to modulate
the aggregation of many proteins, including α-synuclein, and
this class of compounds is being largely considered from the view
point of drugs for many neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, the
aggregation of α-synuclein was carried out with baicalein and
curcumin, in the presence of DA, copper–DA, and glycerol–DA.
Baicalein has been already shown to promote the oligomerization of α-synuclein
from its monomeric as well as fibrillar form.29,30 Curcumin on the other hand is known to prevent both the oligomerization
and fibrillation of α-synuclein.22,31 The aggregation
was studied using SDS-PAGE, and the gels were quantified to get an
estimate of the effect of these polyphenols. Unlike in the absence
of any additive, curcumin was capable of forming some SDS-resistant
oligomers, while such oligomers were quite insignificant in baicalein
(Figure 11A, lanes
1 and 5). DA increased the formation of these SDS-resistant oligomers
in curcumin by 5.2%, whereas in the presence of baicalein, these oligomers
increased up to 9.4% (Figure 11A, lanes 2 and 6). However, the oligomers were lesser in baicalein–DA
system than in the curcumin–DA system. Copper, in the presence
of DA, was indeed able to prevent the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers
of α-synuclein in both baicalein and curcumin (Figure 11A, lane 3 and 7). Glycerol
was able to decrease the DA-induced oligomers in curcumin by 3.4%,
whereas such oligomers were promoted by glycerol in baicalein by 1.3%.
Nevertheless, the monomeric content was far lesser in curcumin–DA
system than in the baicalein–DA system for all the conditions
tested. The quantification of the gel is presented in Figure 11B. All the observations are
summarized in Table 1 in order to provide a better picture of the effect of different
additives. To summarize, it can be concluded that copper can still
act to reduce the population of the SDS-resistant oligomers that are
formed in DA in the presence of curcumin or baicalein.

Figure 11 (A) Effect
of 100 μM of curcumin (Cur) and 100 μM of baicalein (Baic)
on the DA-mediated aggregation of α-synuclein in the presence
of different additives. The concentrations of copper and glycerol
are 0.1 mM and 2 M, respectively. (B) Quantification of monomers and
oligomers from SDS-PAGE in (A) for the different combinations of additives.

Table 1 Presence of Oligomers
and Monomers/SDS-Soluble Species in the Presence of Different Additives
system	SDS-resistant oligomers	monomers/SDS-soluble species	
no additive	–ve	+ve	
DA	+ve	+ve	
DA–Gly	+ve (high)	+ve	
DA–copper	–ve (very low)	+ve (low)	
curcumin	+ve	+ve (high)	
DA–curcumin	+ve (high)	+ve (low)	
DA–curcumin–Gly	+ve (nearly same)	+ve (low)	
DA–curcumin–Cu	–ve (very low)	+ve (low)	
baicalein	+ve (very low)	+ve (high)	
DA–baicalein	+ve (low)	+ve (high)	
DA–baicalein–Gly	+ve (high)	+ve (low)	
DA–baicalein–Cu	–ve (very low)	+ve (high)	
Conclusions
The study shows that
the commonly known enhancers/inhibitors of protein aggregation may
behave differently under some cases. For the case of this natively
unfolded protein, both copper and glycerol could expedite the onset
of aggregation in buffer alone, but one of them enhanced the extent
of aggregation, whereas the other decreased the same. During the aggregation
in DA, no SDS-resistant oligomers could be detected in copper, whereas
such oligomers were found to be promoted in the presence of glycerol.

It is known that inhibition of fibrillation is not the only process
that needs to be considered in an aggregation process. Glycerol is
a well-known stabilizer of proteins, and for the particular case of
α-synuclein too, glycerol was able to reduce the extent of fibrillation.
Copper, on the other hand, enhanced the fibrillation of the protein.
In a closer physiological scenario, where DA is also present, glycerol
was found to promote the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers, whereas
copper reduced the same. This is because DA is not able to assist
in the formation of SDS-resistant oligomers in the presence of copper,
thus driving the aggregation toward the less harmful fibrils. Glycerol,
on the other hand, blocks the aggregation at the more detrimental
oligomeric state promoted by DA. Our study reveals a very crucial
aspect. Successful attempts to suppress the aggregation of α-synuclein,
particularly by the use of additives/drugs, might indeed be a step
toward curbing PD; however, it is equally important to check whether
those additives still respond in the same manner even in an environment
which has DA. This is because of the fact that α-synuclein and
DA are tightly regulated in the presynaptic terminal, and the response
of an additive toward the aggregation of α-synuclein might be
drastically inversed in the presence of DA.

Materials and Methods
Materials
The plasmid of α-synuclein was received as a kind gift from
Dr. Monica Sundd, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi, India.
Tris buffer and copper sulfate pentahydrate were purchased from Merck.
ThT, DA hydrochloride, curcumin, and baicalein were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. Glycerol was purchased from SD Fine Chemicals, India,
whereas SDS was purchased from Sisco Research Laboratory, India. All
the solutions, except otherwise stated, were prepared in 20 mM Tris,
pH 7.5, and 0.1 M NaCl. Stock solutions of curcumin and baicalein
were prepared in 100% ethanol procured from Merck.

Protein Expression
and Purification
The Escherichia coli strain BL21-DE3 was used for the expression of human α-synuclein,
whose gene is encoded in the pET 21a vector. The expression of the
protein was induced by the addition of 1 mM IPTG for 4 h, once the
optical density of the bacterial culture was 0.6 at 600 nm. The harvested
cells were dissolved and lysed in 20 mM Tris, 0.1 M NaCl, pH 7.5.
The protein was isolated using the pH precipitation method and then
further purified using a NaCl gradient on a Source Q column attached
to a GE AKTA purifier FPLC system. The purity of the protein was checked
using SDS-PAGE.

UV–Visible Spectroscopy
The
concentration of the protein was checked using a molar extinction
coefficient of 5600 M–1 cm–1 at
276 nm in a Shimadzu 2600 UV–visible spectrophotometer. The
concentration of ThT was checked using a molar extinction coefficient
of 35 000 M–1 cm–1 at 412
nm. For the absorption studies of DA, the compound was dissolved
in the required additives immediately before taking the measurement.

Aggregation Assay
α-Synuclein at the required concentration
was prepared in the absence and presence of additives and put into
aggregation at 37 °C in an incubator, with shaking at 250 rpm.
Aliquots were collected at the required intervals and diluted with
20 mM Tris buffer. ThT was added to it, and the ThT fluorescence was
checked at 482 nm, upon excitation at 450 nm in a Varian Cary Eclipse
fluorescence spectrophotometer.

Fluorescence Microscopy
The aggregated solutions (2 μL) were diluted in 1:1 ratio,
and ThT was added to it. The samples (4 μL) were put on a glass
slide and allowed to dry. The samples were then viewed using a Nikon
Eclipse Ni H600L fluorescence microscope.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
The aggregated solution of α-synuclein (2 μL) in the
presence of additives was put on a copper grid. The excess solution
was soaked, and the grid was stained with uranyl acetate solution.
This was allowed to dry for 30 min and then viewed with an FEI Tecnai
TF20 transmission electron microscope.

Circular Dichroism
The supernatant left after the aggregation in the presence of different
additives or a combination of additives was separated by centrifuging
the aggregated solution at 12 000 rpm. The supernatant was
diluted 10-folds, and the circular dichroism (CD) spectrum was collected
in an AVIV Sx-420 CD spectrophotometer. The resultant spectra are
an average of five scans.

Size Exclusion Chromatography
The
aggregated samples of 200 μM α-synuclein (1 mL) in DA
in the presence and absence of additives was centrifuged at a high
speed to separate out any insoluble particles. The supernatant was
collected and loaded onto a Superdex 200 increase 10/300 GL size exclusion
column connected to a GE AKTA purifier FPLC system using a 1 mL loop,
injecting 800 μL of the sample into the column. The elution
was carried out isocratically using 20 mM Tris buffer, 0.1 M NaCl,
pH 7.5. The absorbance from the sample at 280 and 215 nm was recorded.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at
DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00993.Fluorescence spectra
of DA in the presence of α-synuclein under quiescent condition,
final appearance of the DA solution after 3 days of incubation, change
in the absorbance spectrum of DA during its oxidation in the presence
of glycerol, and IR spectra of DA in the presence of buffer alone
and copper at two time points (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00993_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
† University
of North Carolina, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
S.D. thanks the Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India, for the generous
funding to carry out the above research. S.S. thanks the CSIR, Government
of India, for the fellowship. M.A.I.K. thanks the UGC, Government
of India, for the fellowship. S.S. thanks Sandeep Kumar Rai, Department
of Chemistry, IIT—Delhi, for his help during the revision of
the manuscript. S.S. thanks Dr. Pramit Kumar Choudhury, Department
of Chemistry, IIT—Delhi, for the usage of the UV–visible
spectrophotometer.
==== Refs
References
Fahn S. ; Sulzer D. 
Neurodegeneration and
Neuroprotection in Parkinson Disease . NeuroRx 
2004 , 1 , 139 –154 . 10.1602/neurorx.1.1.139 .15717014 
Li J. ; Zhu M. ; Manning-Bog A. B. ; Di Monte D. A. ; Fink A. L. 
Dopamine
and L-dopa disaggregate amyloid fibrils: implications for Parkinson’s
and Alzheimer’s disease . Faseb. J. 
2004 , 18 , 962 –964 . 10.1096/fj.03-0770fje .15059976 
Pham C. L. L. ; Leong S. L. ; Ali F. E. ; Kenche V. B. ; Hill A. F. ; Gras S. L. ; Barnham K. J. ; Cappai R. 
Dopamine and
the Dopamine Oxidation Product 5,6-Dihydroxylindole Promote Distinct
On-Pathway and Off-Pathway Aggregation of α-Synuclein in a pH-Dependent
Manner . J. Mol. Biol. 
2009 , 387 , 771 –785 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.02.007 .19361420 
Lee H.-J. ; Baek S. M. ; Ho D.-H. ; Suk J.-E. ; Cho E.-D. ; Lee S.-J. 
Dopamine promotes formation and secretion
of non-fibrillar alpha-synuclein oligomers . Exp. Mol. Med. 
2011 , 43 , 216 –222 . 10.3858/emm.2011.43.4.026 .21415592 
Conway K. A. ; Rochet J.-C. ; Bieganski R. M. ; Lansbury P. T. Jr.
Kinetic Stabilization of the alpha
-Synuclein Protofibril by a Dopamine-alpha -Synuclein Adduct . Science 
2001 , 294 , 1346 –1349 . 10.1126/science.1063522 .11701929 
Leong S. L. ; Cappai R. ; Barnham K. J. ; Pham C. L. L. 
Modulation of α-Synuclein Aggregation by Dopamine:
A Review . Neurochem. Res. 
2009 , 34 , 1838 –1846 . 10.1007/s11064-009-9986-8 .19444607 
Fink A. L. 
The Aggregation and Fibrillation of α-Synuclein . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2006 , 39 , 628 –634 . 10.1021/ar050073t .16981679 
Outeiro T. F. ; Klucken J. ; Bercury K. ; Tetzlaff J. ; Putcha P. ; Oliveira L. M. A. ; Quintas A. ; McLean P. J. ; Hyman B. T. 
Dopamine-Induced Conformational Changes
in Alpha-Synuclein . PloS One 
2009 , 4 , e690610.1371/journal.pone.0006906 .19730729 
Rochet J.-C. ; Outeiro T. F. ; Conway K. A. ; Ding T. T. ; Volles M. J. ; Lashuel H. A. ; Bieganski R. M. ; Lindquist S. L. ; Lansbury P. T. 
Interactions Among α-Synuclein,
Dopamine, and Biomembranes: Some Clues for Understanding Neurodegeneration
in Parkinson’s Disease . J. Mol. Neurosci. 
2004 , 23 , 023 –034 . 10.1385/jmn:23:1-2:023 .
Bisaglia M. ; Tosatto L. ; Munari F. ; Tessari I. ; de Laureto P. P. ; Mammi S. ; Bubacco L. 
Dopamine quinones interact
with α-synuclein to form unstructured adducts . Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
2010 , 394 , 424 –428 . 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.044 .20226175 
Paik S. R. ; Shin H.-J. ; Lee J.-H. ; Chang C.-S. ; Kim J. 
Copper(II)-induced self-oligomerization of α-synuclein . Biochem. J. 
1999 , 340 , 821 –828 . 10.1042/0264-6021:3400821 .10359669 
Uversky V. N. ; Li J. ; Fink A. L. 
Metal-triggered
Structural Transformations, Aggregation, and Fibrillation of Human
α-Synuclein . J. Biol. Chem. 
2001 , 276 , 44284 –44296 . 10.1074/jbc.m105343200 .11553618 
Rasia R. M. ; Bertoncini C. W. ; Marsh D. ; Hoyer W. ; Cherny D. ; Zweckstetter M. ; Griesinger C. ; Jovin T. M. ; Fernandez C. O. 
Structural characterization of copper(II)
binding to -synuclein: Insights into the bioinorganic chemistry of
Parkinson’s disease . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
2005 , 102 , 4294 –4299 . 10.1073/pnas.0407881102 .15767574 
Rose F. ; Hodak M. ; Bernholc J. 
Mechanism
of copper(II)-induced misfolding of Parkinson’s disease protein . Sci. Rep. 
2011 , 1 , 11 10.1038/srep00011 .22355530 
Vagenende V. ; Yap M. G. S. ; Trout B. L. 
Mechanisms
of protein stabilization and prevention of protein aggregation by
glycerol . Biochemistry 
2009 , 48 , 11084 –11096 . 10.1021/bi900649t .19817484 
Gekko K. ; Timasheff S. N. 
Mechanism of protein stabilization by glycerol: preferential
hydration in glycerol-water mixtures . Biochemistry 
1981 , 20 , 4667 –4676 . 10.1021/bi00519a023 .7295639 
Saha S. ; Deep S. 
Glycerol inhibits the primary pathways
and transforms the secondary pathway of insulin aggregation . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2016 , 18 , 18934 –18948 . 10.1039/c6cp02906j .27353748 
Shukla D. ; Schneider C. P. ; Trout B. L. 
Molecular level insight into intra-solvent interaction
effects on protein stability and aggregation . Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 
2011 , 63 , 1074 –1085 . 10.1016/j.addr.2011.06.014 .21762737 
Brown C. R. ; Hong-Brown L. Q. ; Welch W. J. 
Correcting temperature-sensitive
protein folding defects . J. Clin. Invest. 
1997 , 99 , 1432 –1444 . 10.1172/jci119302 .9077553 
Yang D.-S. ; Yip C. M. ; Huang T. H. J. ; Chakrabartty A. ; Fraser P. E. 
Manipulating the Amyloid-β Aggregation Pathway
with Chemical Chaperones . J. Biol. Chem. 
1999 , 274 , 32970 –32974 . 10.1074/jbc.274.46.32970 .10551864 
Cappai R. ; Leck S.-L. ; Tew D. J. ; Williamson N. A. ; Smith D. P. ; Galatis D. ; Sharples R. A. ; Curtain C. C. ; Ali F. E. ; Cherny R. A. ; Culvenor J. G. ; Bottomley S. P. ; Masters C. L. ; Barnham K. J. ; Hill A. F. 
Dopamine promotes
α-synuclein aggregation into SDS-resistant soluble oligomers
via a distinct folding pathway . Faseb. J. 
2005 , 19 , 1377 –1379 . 10.1096/fj.04-3437fje .15946991 
Ahmad B. ; Lapidus L. J. 
Curcumin Prevents Aggregation in
α-Synuclein by Increasing Reconfiguration Rate . J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 9193 –9199 . 10.1074/jbc.m111.325548 .22267729 
Norris E. H. ; Giasson B. I. ; Hodara R. ; Xu S. ; Trojanowski J. Q. ; Ischiropoulos H. ; Lee V. M.-Y. 
Reversible Inhibition of α-Synuclein
Fibrillization by Dopaminochrome-mediated Conformational Alterations . J. Biol. Chem. 
2005 , 280 , 21212 –21219 . 10.1074/jbc.m412621200 .15817478 
Li N. ; Wang H.-B. ; Thia L. ; Wang J.-Y. ; Wang X. 
Enzymatic-reaction
induced production of polydopamine nanoparticles for sensitive and
visual sensing of urea . Analyst 
2015 , 140 , 449 –455 . 10.1039/c4an01900h .25422832 
Klosterman L. ; Bettinger C. J. 
Calcium-Mediated Control of Polydopamine Film Oxidation
and Iron Chelation . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2016 , 18 , 14 10.3390/ijms18010014 .
Pham A. N. ; Waite T. D. 
Cu(II)-catalyzed oxidation of dopamine in aqueous solutions:
mechanism and kinetics . J. Inorg. Biochem. 
2014 , 137 , 74 –84 . 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2014.03.018 .24815905 
Balla J. ; Kiss T. ; Jameson R. F. 
Copper(II)-catalyzed
oxidation of catechol by molecular oxygen in aqueous solution . Inorg. Chem. 
1992 , 31 , 58 –62 . 10.1021/ic00027a012 .
Thompson J. S. ; Calabrese J. C. 
Copper-catechol
chemistry. Synthesis, spectroscopy, and structure of bis(3,5-di-tert-butyl-o-semiquinato)copper(II) . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1986 , 108 , 1903 –1907 . 10.1021/ja00268a031 .
Zhu M. ; Rajamani S. ; Kaylor J. ; Han S. ; Zhou F. ; Fink A. L. 
The Flavonoid
Baicalein Inhibits Fibrillation of α-Synuclein and Disaggregates
Existing Fibrils . J. Biol. Chem. 
2004 , 279 , 26846 –26857 . 10.1074/jbc.m403129200 .15096521 
Hong D.-P. ; Fink A. L. ; Uversky V. N. 
Structural Characteristics
of α-Synuclein Oligomers Stabilized by the Flavonoid Baicalein . J. Mol. Biol. 
2008 , 383 , 214 –223 . 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.039 .18775438 
Singh P. K. ; Kotia V. ; Ghosh D. ; Mohite G. M. ; Kumar A. ; Maji S. K. 
Curcumin Modulates
α-Synuclein Aggregation and Toxicity . ACS Chem. Neurosci. 
2013 , 4 , 393 –407 . 10.1021/cn3001203 .23509976

