
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3022123410.1021/acsomega.8b00606ArticleVirtual Screening of Chemical Compounds for Discovery of Complement C3 Ligands Mohan Rohith
R. †Wilson Mark ‡Gorham Ronald D. Jr.†§Harrison Reed E. S. †Morikis Vasilios A. †∥Kieslich Chris A. †⊥Orr Asuka A. ‡Coley Alexis V. ‡Tamamis Phanourios ‡Morikis Dimitrios *†† Department
of Bioengineering, University of California,
Riverside, 900 University
Avenue, Riverside, California 92521, United States‡ Artie
McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University, 3122 TAMU, College Station, Texas 77843, United
States* E-mail: dmorikis@ucr.edu. Tel: 951-827-2696.15 06 2018 30 06 2018 3 6 6427 6438 29 03 2018 04 06 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
complement system is our first line of defense against foreign
pathogens, but when it is not properly regulated, complement is implicated
in the pathology of several autoimmune and inflammatory disorders.
Compstatin is a peptidic complement inhibitor that acts by blocking
the cleavage of complement protein C3 to the proinflammatory fragment
C3a and opsonin fragment C3b. In this study, we aim to identify druglike
small-molecule complement inhibitors with physicochemical, geometric,
and binding properties similar to those of compstatin. We employed
two approaches using various high-throughput virtual screening methods,
which incorporate molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, pharmacophore
model design, energy calculations, and molecular docking and scoring.
We have generated a library of 274 chemical compounds with computationally
predicted binding affinities for the compstatin binding site of C3.
We have tested subsets of these chemical compounds experimentally
for complement inhibitory activity, using hemolytic assays, and for
binding affinity, using microscale thermophoresis. As a result, although
none of the compounds showed inhibitory activity, compound 29 was
identified to exhibit weak competitive binding against a potent compstatin
analogue, therefore validating our computational approaches. Additional
docking and MD simulation studies suggest that compound 29 interacts
with C3 residues, which have been shown to be important in binding
of compstatin to the C3c fragment of C3. Compound 29 is amenable to
physicochemical optimization to acquire inhibitory properties. Additionally,
it is possible that some of the untested compounds will demonstrate
binding and inhibition in future experimental studies.

document-id-old-9ao8b00606document-id-new-14ao-2018-00606fccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
The complement system,
consisting of over 40 soluble and cell-bound proteins, is integral
to innate immunity.1−5 In the event of pathogen exposure or injury, cascading complement
response occurs resulting in opsonization, chemotaxis, phagocytosis,
and lysis.6,7 Complement activity is also double-edged
as a lack of regulation or balance in its response can be observed
in numerous autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, including age-related
macular degeneration, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis,
Sjögren syndrome, scleroderma, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, ischemia reperfusion injuries, and rare diseases such as
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome,
and C3 glomerulopathy, among others.8−10 Currently, there are
clinically available drugs for only two targets within the complement
cascade, variations of the natural protein inhibitor C1-INH and a
C5 inhibiting monoclonal antibody eculizumab, both of them being protein-based
therapeutics.9,10

Compstatin11 is a cyclic peptide capable
of inhibiting complement response through C3,12 originally discovered using a phage-displayed peptide library screening,13 subsequently reaching clinical trials for age-related
macular degeneration and other complement-related diseases.14,15 We have been involved in structure- and computation-based optimization
of compstatin family peptides, originally using a major structural
conformer of free compstatin from solution NMR studies (reviewed in
refs (16−21)) and subsequently using bound structures from computational de novo
design studies and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, on the basis
of the crystal structure of a compstatin analogue bound to C3c22 (e.g., see refs (23−28)). Although our most recent design has led to overcoming solubility/aggregation
issues of the previously most potent compstatin analogues,26,28 peptides in general suffer from low stability and bioavailability
in vivo and often require intravenous administration. Chemical compounds
are typically orally administered and are more cost effective for
scaled-up industrial production. Therefore, there is a need for the
development of nonpeptidic low-molecular-mass inhibitors. Toward this
goal, we launched a pharmacophore-based virtual screening study, described
here, to identify druglike chemical compounds with the geometric and
physicochemical characteristics of compstatin, which are capable of
binding to the compstatin binding site of target protein C3.

Virtual screening has proven to be a valuable methodology for identifying
potential therapeutic candidates29 and
an alternative to fragment-based chemical compound design30 or rational peptide design.31−33 Virtual screening
has the benefit of being a high-throughput method and can be used
to screen millions of chemical compounds, while being more time and
resource efficient than experimental high-throughput screening methods,
thanks to the advances in computer hardware architecture and drug
design-related algorithms.34−36 Small druglike compounds are
desirable because they typically exhibit better pharmacological properties,
but at the expense of lower specificity, compared with peptide- or
protein-based therapeutics. In this study, we utilize virtual screening
with the objective to identify novel druglike compounds capable of
binding in the compstatin binding site of C3 and potentially inhibiting
complement response. We use a molecular dynamics structure of a potent
compstatin analogue bound to C3c as the basis for the development
of pharmacophore models and docking of molecules. Our virtual screening
framework is similar to that used in a recent identification of 11
druglike ligands of complement fragment C3d, 10 of which are fluorescent
markers of complement activation.37

Methods
Primary
Approach
Pharmacophore Models
A pharmacophore model is represented
by a framework of features corresponding to the spatial distribution
of physicochemical properties (aromaticity, hydrophobicity, hydrogen
bond donor/acceptor capability, and positive/negative charge) of an
active ligand. During screening, a database of molecules is compared
against the pharmacophore model and if the molecule contains matching
pharmacophore features, then it is considered a positive hit.

The workflow of the primary approach procedure is shown in Figure 1. Pharmacophore models
were developed using a molecular dynamics (MD) trajectory of the complex
between C3c and the RSI-compstatin analogue with sequence Ac-RSI[CVWQDWGAHRC]T-NH2 (brackets denote cyclization through a disulfide bridge).26 Pharmacophore features were primarily selected
from earlier molecular dynamics data of C3c-bound compstatin analogues,27,38 with the aid of prior knowledge from MD studies24,39 and optimization studies23−25,27 of C3c-bound compstatin analogues and optimization studies of free
compstatin analogues.16 All MD simulations
were based on the crystal structure of C3c with the W4A9 analogue
of compstatin.22

Figure 1 Flowchart of the primary
virtual screening approach.

Mechanistic binding analysis of compstatin structure throughout
the MD trajectory was performed using the R package Bio3D, the Python
library MDTraj, and Chimera40−43 to identify significant physicochemical properties
and nonpolar contacts at the binding site. In addition, free-energy
contributions of individual amino acids and hydrogen bond occupancies
from previous studies27,38 informed the selection of pharmacophore
features. Mean positions of centers of mass were calculated for the
atoms identified in each selected feature. The tolerance radii of
each pharmacophore feature were defined by calculating the conformational
flexibility of the feature from the MD trajectory. In the first round
of screening, 473 pharmacophore models were developed using subsets
of 3–5 features identified to be of interest. The purchasable
subset of the ZINC 12 database,44 consisting
at the time of the study of ∼19 million molecules (190 million
conformers) in stock or to be made-to-order, was screened using ZINCPharmer45 with each of the 473 pharmacophore models. A
molecule was a positive hit during screening if its chemical moieties
were spatially distributed such that there was overlap with the tolerance
radii of the specific features of the pharmacophore model.

In
the second round of screening, 40 new pharmacophore models consisting
of subsets of 3–6 features were developed with iterative improvements
over the initial 473 models. A set of ∼7 million molecules
with ∼1.1 billion conformers that was used in one of our previous
virtual screening studies37 was used for
screening of these 40 pharmacophore models using Phase.46,47 This set of molecules was from the Drugs Now subset of the ZINC
12 database, consisting of molecules that were in stock at the time
of the study, and the conformers were generated using Phase.

Docking
Molecules identified to fulfill the selection
criteria of the pharmacophore models as positive hits during the pharmacophore
screening were docked to C3c in the binding region of RSI-compstatin.
In the first round of pharmacophore screening and docking, the molecules
were docked to a single conformation of C3c (acquired from the final
frame of the MD trajectory of the C3c/RSI-compstatin complex). In
the second round of screening, representative conformational states
of the binding site of C3c were extracted from the MD trajectory of
the C3c/RSI-compstatin complex to accurately capture the conformational
variations of the binding site. The conformational states of C3c observed
in each frame of the MD trajectory were superimposed on the basis
of Cα atoms and hierarchical clustering was performed
on the basis of the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of C3c amino
acids identified to be involved in the interaction with RSI-compstatin.27 Five clusters were calculated, corresponding
to five representative structures of C3c. Molecular docking was performed
using AutoDock Vina48 with preprocessing
of structures using AutoDock Tools. Each molecule was docked to the
representative structures of C3c within a box (with dimensions of
28 Å × 28 Å × 28 Å), encompassing the entire
RSI-compstatin binding site of C3c. The exhaustiveness parameter of
AutoDock Vina was set to 20 to improve docking accuracy, and the top
20 docked poses of each molecule, based on predicted binding energies,
were returned.

Scoring
Each of the docked poses
were scored using
the Vina scoring function, and the predicted binding energies were
reported. Mean predicted binding energies were calculated for docked
poses to each of the five representative structures of C3c. The predicted
solubility of the molecules was calculated using the partition coefficient
(log P) using the ChemmineR package in R.49 Molecules were also evaluated using ChemmineR,
visually inspected with Chimera, and verified through the ZINC 12
database for adherence to Lipinski’s Rule of Five.50 A combination of the above scoring methods,
in addition to visual inspection of the molecules for geometric properties
and occurrence of specific pharmacophore features, were utilized to
select 58 compounds for ordering and experimental testing.

Alternative Approach
Pharmacophore Models
In an alternative
approach, two
stages of additional searches were performed. In stage 1, two distinct
pharmacophore searches (search A and search B) were performed. In
stage 2, an additional search was performed on the basis of the structures
of the most promising molecules identified in stage 1. The pharmacophore
features and the targeted C3c residues used in this approach are shown
in Appendix S8, Table S2. All searches
were performed using ZINCPharmer.45 The
workflow of the alternative approach procedure is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Flowchart of the alternate
virtual screening approach.

Stage 1
Two separate searches were performed in the
first stage. The two separate searches differ in constraints to the
allowable molecular weight of the selected molecules. In search A,
the results were limited to molecules with a molecular weight less
than 500. In search B, the results were limited to molecules with
a molecular weight greater than 500. It has been shown that molecules
with a molecular weight less than 500 have a greater bioavailability,50 but due to the size and complexity of the compstatin
binding site, molecules with a molecular weight greater than 500 were
also considered in this study.

For both search A and search
B, pharmacophore models were generated on the basis of the resolved
crystal structure of compstatin bound to human C3c (PDB code 2QKI(22)) as well as docked structures we produced from C3c in complex
to cmp-5 (ZINC61197239), a compound recently shown to significantly
inhibit the cleavage of C5,51 a downstream
process of the complement system. The pharmacophore models based on
the binding of compstatin to C3c were developed using subsets of four
features, each of which target an amino acid within one of four amino
acid sectors of human C3c (sector I: 344–349, sector II: 388–393,
sector III: 454–462, and sector IV: 488–492). In this
way, molecules encompassing the pharmacophore features were expected
to bind to each of the four aforementioned C3c sectors. Amino acids
within these sectors have been shown to be in direct contact with
compstatin,1−3,22 and previous studies
identified individual amino acids within these sectors to be key to
compstatin binding.24,38 To create the additional pharmacophore
models, cmp-5 was first docked to the compstatin binding site (PDB: 2QKI(22)) using AutoDock Vina. The generated docked poses of cmp-5
binding to C3c were then clustered on the basis of RMSD. The docked
poses acquiring the most favorable binding energies within separate
clusters were selected to generate the pharmacophore models based
on cmp-5 binding to C3c. Only molecules containing less than 10 rotatable
bonds were considered for investigation. Molecules that fit the tolerance
radii of each pharmacophore feature were analyzed further on the basis
of charge complementarity, RMSD, and a visual inspection of each molecules’
structure-based interactions with C3c to determine the potential of
the molecule as a possible C3 inhibitor. In the case that a pharmacophore
model had over 500 matches, the first 500 molecules, ranked by the
number of rotatable bonds from least to greatest, were considered.
Molecules with a negative net charge were excluded from further investigation
because the most potent compstatin analogues, including those used
in this study, have positive or neutral net charge. In the case that
a molecule had multiple conformations fitting a pharmacophore model,
the conformation with the lowest RMSD to the pharmacophore model was
selected. Molecules were visually inspected for structural interactions
with the compstatin binding site. Only molecules within the purchasable
subset of the ZINC 12 database44 were considered
for further analysis.

Single MD simulations were conducted for
the molecules identified
by each of the two searches and the computationally derived binding
affinity of the molecules was assessed on the basis of average binding
energies estimated by the Vina scoring function.48 The top five computationally derived molecules with the
lowest average binding energies were used to develop an additional
set of pharmacophore models for the second stage of searches (described
below).

Stage 2
In the second stage of the alternative approach,
the top five molecules with the lowest average binding energies estimated
by the Vina scoring function48 out of all
of the molecules from the two searches in stage 1 were selected to
develop an additional set of pharmacophore models for the second stage
of searches. From the simulations of the selected five molecules in
complex with C3c, the lowest binding energy snapshot was extracted
and used to generate additional pharmacophore models. The additional
pharmacophore models consisted of at least three features and target
at least three of the four compstatin binding sectors. Additional
single molecular dynamics simulations were conducted for the molecules
identified in this stage, and the computational binding affinity of
the molecules was assessed on the basis of the average binding energies
from the simulation snapshots (described below).

Molecular
Dynamics Simulations
Molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations were conducted for the selected molecules fulfilling the
selection criteria described above in complex with C3c independently.
The MD simulations were employed to refine receptor ligand conformations,
assess the energetic favorability of the molecules binding to C3c,
and determine structural stability of the molecules within the compstatin
binding site of human C3c.

The initial coordinates for C3c were
obtained from the PDB 2QKI.22 To decrease computational
demand, the protein was truncated for the simulations.38 The simulated system included the entire MG4
and MG5 domains of the compstatin binding site (amino acids 329–534)
and segment 607–620, which is proximal to MG4 and MG5. The
initial docked position of the molecules in complex with C3c corresponded
to the coordinates of the molecule oriented by ZINCPharmer45 during the pharmacophore search. CHARMM version
c39b252 was used to set up and perform
all simulations.

The MD simulations were performed using the
CHARMM36 topology and
parameters.53 Initial energy minimization
steps were performed on each individual molecule/C3c complex by sequentially
performing 200 steps of steepest decent minimization, 200 steps of
adopted basis Newton–Raphson minimization, and 200 steps of
steepest decent minimization. During the two energy minimization steps,
the ligand, excluding hydrogens, was subjected to 0.5 kcal/(mol Å2) harmonic constraints and the protein, excluding hydrogens,
was subjected to 1.5 kcal/(mol Å2) harmonic constraints.

For each of the explicit-solvent MD simulations, the molecule/C3c
complex was solvated in a truncated octahedral water box with a length
of 100 Å and a volume of approximately 769 800 Å3. For example, as a representative of all simulation systems,
in the explicit-solvent MD simulations of compound 29, discussed later
on, in complex with C3c, 22 895 water molecules were used to
solvate the complex and the simulation system contained a total of
72 357 atoms. Because of the size of the simulation systems,
the duration of all simulations was limited to 20 ns except for the
best binding mode (see Refined Docking and MD
Simulation Investigation of the Compound 29/C3c Complex Structure) of compound 29, which was simulated for 50 ns (see Results and Discussion). The potassium chloride concentration
in the water box was set to 0.15 M, and additional potassium and chloride
ions were added to neutralize the charge of the system. The ions were
placed through 2000 steps of Monte Carlo simulations.54,55 An energy minimization of 100 steps of steepest decent minimization,
100 steps of adopted basis Newton–Raphson minimization, and
100 steps of steepest decent minimization were sequentially performed
on the solvent molecules.

The system was subsequently equilibrated
for 1 ns with 1 kcal/(mol
Å2) harmonic constraints on the protein backbone and
ligand heavy atoms and 0.2 kcal/(mol Å2) harmonic
constraints on the protein side-chain heavy atoms. After the equilibration
stage, all constraints were released and amino acids greater than
20 Å away from any atom in compstatin according to the crystal
structure22 as well as truncated termini
were subjected to 0.5 kcal/(mol Å2) of harmonic constraints
for backbone atoms and 0.1 kcal/(mol Å2) for side-chain
heavy atoms. At this stage, the system was simulated for 20 ns and
frames were extracted every 20 ps. The first 10 ns of this stage were
treated as further equilibration to allow the energy and ligand conformation
to converge. The last 10 ns of the final stage were treated as the
production stage. Upon completion of the simulations, the water molecules
and ions were removed and the trajectory was analyzed as follows.
Triplicate simulations were performed for the five molecules with
the lowest average binding energy values across both stages of the
alternative approach to ensure reproducibility. All simulations were
performed using the Leapfrog Verlet integrator at isothermal and isobaric
conditions. The temperature of the simulations was held at 300 K using
the Hoover thermostat. Fast table lookup routines were applied to
nonbonded interactions, and the SHAKE algorithm was implemented to
constrain the bond lengths to hydrogen atoms.56,57 Periodic boundary conditions were applied in each simulation.

Upon completion of the MD simulations, the binding of the candidate
molecules from both stages of the alternative approach to human C3c
was assessed using the average binding energy estimated by the Vina
scoring function.48 Each simulation snapshot
extracted in increments of 20 ps from the last 10 ns of the MD simulation
for each molecule/C3c complex was scored using the Vina scoring function,48 and the binding energies were averaged over
the total number of simulation snapshots analyzed. The average RMSD
of the simulated molecules from both stages of the alternative approach
in complex with C3c was also calculated to estimate their stability
within the binding site. The RMSD calculations were performed using
the heavy atoms of the molecules and with respect to the average structure
of the last 10 ns as a basis through Wordom.58 The RMSD of the molecules within their respective simulations was
calculated for each simulation snapshot in increments of 20 ps for
the final 10 ns of the MD simulation and averaged over the total number
of snapshots analyzed. Molecules with an average RMSD value larger
than 3.0 Å were discarded and omitted from further investigation.

The six compounds
(see Results and Discussion) with the lowest
average binding energies that exhibit stable binding throughout their
simulations (having average RMSD values with respect to their average
simulation structure of less than 3.0 Å) that were also readily
available for purchase were evaluated using hemolytic assays and microscale
thermophoresis (MST) described in the following sections.

Experimental Validation
Hemolytic Assays
Selected compounds
were obtained from
ChemBridge (compounds 1–55), Asinex (compounds 57 and 58),
MolPort (compounds 56, A–C, E, and F), and Specs (compound
D). Stock solutions were prepared by dissolving each compound in dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) to concentrations of 4 mM.

Rabbit erythrocytes
(Complement Technology, Inc.) were washed in phosphate-buffered saline
and resuspended in a veronal-buffered saline solution containing 5
mM MgCl2 and 10 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA)
(VBS-MgEGTA). Each compound was diluted in VBS-MgEGTA to end up with
a final concentration of 1% DMSO and was added to round-bottom 96-well
plates. Normal human serum (NHS) diluted in VBS-MgEGTA was added to
each well, and the plates were incubated at room temperature for 15
min. Thirty microliters of rabbit erythrocytes at a concentration
of 1.25 × 108 cells/mL were then added to each well.
Positive controls for lysis included rabbit erythrocytes in deionized
water and rabbit erythrocytes in NHS diluted in VBS-MgEGTA, whereas
negative controls included rabbit erythrocytes in VBS-MgEGTA and VBS-EDTA
(20 mM EDTA). Following the addition of rabbit erythrocytes, the plates
were incubated at 37 °C for 20 min and then quenched with ice-cold
VBS with 50 mM EDTA. After centrifugation at 1000g for 5 min, the supernatant from the plates was diluted 1:1 with
deionized water in flat-bottom 96-well plates and the lysis was quantified
spectrophotometrically at 405 nm. The assays were performed in triplicate
to ensure reproducibility.

Microscale Thermophoresis
The binding
affinity for
C3c of the top 10 compounds identified in the primary approach and
the top 6 compounds identified in the secondary approach were evaluated
in a competitive microscale thermophoresis (MST) assay, using a Monolith
NT.115 instrument (NanoTemper Technologies GmbH, Munich, Germany).
Competition was performed against a competition peptide, synthesized
by ELIM Biopharm (Hayward, CA). The competition peptide was labeled
with the cyanine fluorophore CY5, which was attached at the side chain
of the preceding lysine, and had sequence Ac-I[CVWQDWGAHRC]TAGK-(CY5)-NH2. The peptide was cyclized by a disulfide bridge between the
two cysteine amino acids and acetylated at the N-terminus and amidated
at the C-terminus. A 1:1 serial dilution series of each of the selected
compounds was performed in MST buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, 150
mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 0.05% Tween 20) with 5% DMSO.
Each dilution series started with a final concentration of 500 μM
and ended in a final concentration of 15.3 nM. To each dilution series
of a compound, purified C3c (Complement Technology) and the competition
peptide (labeled with Cy5) were dissolved to a final concentration
of 20.4 nM (C3c) and 50 nM (competition peptide). The resulting mixture
was incubated for 15 min in the dark at room temperature. Following
incubation, the samples were loaded into standard capillary tubes
and the thermophoretic response of the fluorescently labeled marker
was measured. Each dilution series was performed in triplicate and
estimation of the IC50 was performed through nonlinear
regression.

The fragment C3c that was chosen for the MST assay
binds compstatin but it does not contain the thioester domain. The
choice of C3c for the MST assay is because the only cocrystal structure
of a compstatin family peptide bound to C3/C3 fragment reported in
the literature is with C3c,22 and the sequence
of the peptide is Ac-I[CVWQDWGAHRC]T-NH2. The bound compstatin
analogue of the crystal structure is the parent peptide of the competition
peptide.

We utilized MST to determine protein–ligand
binding affinities.59,60 MST measures binding that occurs
in a bulk solution, avoiding artifacts
encountered in methods similar to surface plasmon resonance where
one binding partner must be immobilized onto a chip. Although other
methods such as isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and fluorescent
polarization (FP) can also be used to measure binding in solution,
these methods are not as suitable for our application as MST. ITC
is a low-throughput method that compensates for low sensitivity by
increasing the amount of sample measured. This strategy is prohibitive
in cost for evaluating multiple protein–ligand pairs. FP, on
the other hand, can be performed in a high-throughput manner but would
require fluorescent labeling of small molecules to detect changes
in polarization of emitted light when binding occurs. As our molecules
have small molecular weight, less than 500 Da, labeling is likely
to perturb protein–ligand interactions. In contrast to ITC
and FP, MST is more sensitive, requiring minimal sample volume (20
μL for a dilution series), and detects changes in surface area,
hydration entropy, and net charge. Our MST instrument requires fluorescent
labeling of one binding partner; labeling is less likely to perturb
binding of a small molecule as the target protein with a large molecular
weight can be labeled. Although not strictly a high-throughput device,
our MST device is relatively fast and can determine a dissociation
constant for a single protein–ligand interaction within the
period of an hour.

Results and Discussion
Primary Approach
Virtual High-Throughput
Screening
The objective for
our study was to identify low-molecular mass molecules that are capable
of binding complement protein C3 or its activation fragments, C3b/C3c,
in the binding site of compstatin. Our study was based on previous
knowledge of the structure of free and bound compstatin and many computational
and experimental studies, which pointed to key structural and physicochemical
features of compstatin that are important for binding to C3/C3b/C3c
and for inhibiting the complement system. Our approach involved the
development of pharmacophore models, pharmacophore-based virtual screening
of conformationally flexible molecules, docking of pharmacophore-matched
molecules to multiple conformations of the C3/C3b/C3c binding site,
and scoring of docking poses using energetics, lipophilicity, and
Lipinski’s rule of five criteria. Figure 3 shows a schematic flowchart of our approach.

Figure 3 Diagram
outlining an example of the pharmacophore model generation
and docking output. (A) Molecular graphics showing the binding interaction
between compstatin and C3c. (B) A pharmacophore model generated through
selection of features identified from the C3c–compstatin interaction.
(C) One of the molecules identified through the pharmacophore model
superimposed on the structure of compstatin. (D) The same molecule
as in (C) docked on C3c.

In the first round of virtual screening with the initial
473 pharmacophore
models (Appendices S1 and S2), we were
able to identify specific combinations of features that were likely
to yield molecules of interest. The screening of the purchasable subset
of the ZINC 12 database with the pharmacophore models suggested that
features corresponding to R(−1), V3, W4, Q5, W7, A9, and H10
on RSI-compstatin were necessary as those features resulted in positive
hits that had favorable predicted binding affinities as well as a
proper docked fit when visually inspected. A positive charge pharmacophore
feature was chosen at the position of R(−1). The R(−1)-S0
N-terminal modification was chosen to improve solubility and was found
to retain inhibitory activity.26,27 The addition of the
R(−1) side chain introduced an ionic interaction with E372
of C3c (Figure 4A),
which contributed in the binding affinity and stability of the C3/RSI-compstatin
complex.26,27 The hydrophobic character of V3 was included
as a pharmacophore feature, as V3 inserts into a hydrophobic subcavity
in C3c (Figure 4A).
The amino acids W4 and W7 were observed in the MD trajectory to participate
in highly conserved hydrogen bonds with C3c (Appendix S3) and as a result, hydrogen bond donor and acceptor features
at their corresponding positions were included in pharmacophore models.
Additionally, the aromatic and hydrophobic properties of W4 and W7
were utilized as pharmacophore features due to the pervasiveness of
these features in druglike molecules and their role in favorable interactions
with C3c (Figure 4A).
Amino acids Q5, A9, and H10 are participating in hydrogen bonds (Appendix S3) and were included as pharmacophore
features. The specific locations of A9 and H10 elongate the pharmacophore
models, therefore increasing the screening diversity.

Figure 4 Molecular graphics of
(A) compstatin bound to C3c and (B–K)
the top 10 compounds (of the selected 58 from the primary approach)
docked to the corresponding representative conformation of C3c. In
(A), three main features of compstatin, V3, W4, and W7, important
to the interaction with C3c are identified with dashed circles.

On the other hand, specific features
or combinations of features
were identified to be either too lenient as screening parameters or
unlikely to exist in drug molecules. For example, pharmacophores that
included more than one hydrophobic feature resulted in too many molecules
matched. Features such as the hydrogen bond donor/acceptor capability
of D6 in compstatin were found to result in positive hits (∼10 000)
during the pharmacophore screen but did not result in viable predicted
binding energies (>−6.5 kcal/mol) during docking.

After screening, docking and scoring, features identified to result
in potentially viable molecules were used to iteratively improve upon
the initial pharmacophore models, resulting in 40 new pharmacophore
models. Upon screening the conformers generated from the Drugs Now
subset of ZINC and docking the resulted hits to C3c, we identified
∼81 000 docked conformer poses. We refined the list
of molecules by applying a threshold value of <−7 kcal/mol
in predicted binding energies and a log P threshold
of 5. In a few cases, molecules exhibiting log P values >5 but significantly favorable predicted binding energies
were considered as well. Further filtering was performed by evaluating
the molecules using Lipinski’s rule of five and visual inspection
for physicochemical and geometric properties. A final list of 167
molecules were identified (Appendix S4),
out of which 58 (Appendices S5 and S6)
were purchased and tested experimentally. Figure 4B–K shows the top 10 compounds out
of the selected 58 and displays the variety in physicochemical properties
and spatial placement when docked. The top 10 compounds are ZINC72382898
(compound 58), ZINC72382894 (compound 57), ZINC67742743 (compound
29), ZINC29862046 (compound 56), ZINC14995377 (compound 6), ZINC67881194
(compound 41), ZINC12000754 (compound 1), ZINC67605047 (compound 14),
ZINC12079160 (compound 2), and ZINC67974289 (compound 51). Compstatin
has three main features of importance to the interaction with C3c:
the V3 interaction with a smaller hydrophobic subcavity, the W4 interaction
with a steric wall-like structural feature, and the W7 interaction
with a larger hydrophobic subcavity (Figure 3A). A few of the top 10 compounds (compounds
56, 6, and 51) match all three of these features, whereas the other
compounds match at least one of these features. The other compounds
in the selected 58 (Appendix S7) also match
at least one of the main features of compstatin, except for two compounds
(compounds 28 and 16) that were docked to another region.

Alternative Approach
Initial Screening Based on Pharmacophore
Models
A total
of 107 molecules were selected from both stages of the alternative
approach and further investigated using MD simulations and energy
calculations (Appendix S4). From the first
stage of the alternative approach, a total of 84 molecules were selected
for MD simulations and binding energy calculations (Appendix S4, stage 1), of which 50 originated from search
A and 34 originated from search B. The targeted C3c amino acids and
the pharmacophore features used to target them are listed in Appendix S8, Table S2. Of these 84 molecules,
the 5 molecules acquiring the lowest average binding energy were selected
to generate additional sets of pharmacophore models. The selected
molecules are ZINC64623185, ZINC1060630, ZINC39961116, ZINC08437931,
and ZINC12558945, of which the first three listed molecules originated
from search A and the last two listed molecules originated from search
B. From each of the MD simulations of these five molecules binding
to C3c, the lowest binding energy snapshot was extracted and used
to develop additional pharmacophore models used for the second stage
of the alternative approach. From the second stage of the alternative
approach, a total of 23 additional molecules were selected for MD
simulations and energy calculations (Appendix S4, stage 2).

The six compounds that were readily available
for purchase, with the lowest average binding energies across all
other molecules from both stages in complex with C3c and average RMSD
values less than 3.0 Å, were selected for experimental testing.
The six selected compounds are ZINC64623185 (compound A), ZINC63743940
(compound B), ZINC08437931 (compound C), ZINC01060630 (compound D),
ZINC13688614 (compound E), and ZINC13628667 (compound F). Compounds
A–C were selected from the first stage of the alternative approach,
and compounds D–F were selected from the second stage of the
alternative approach. Molecular graphics images of the six purchased
compounds, in complex with C3c, and their simulation-based conformations
within the compstatin binding pocket of C3 are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 Molecular graphics images
from the MD simulations of the six compounds
(compounds A–F, shown respectively in panels A–F) discovered
in the alternative approach, which were selected for experimental
testing. The images show representative snapshots of the compounds’
simulation-based conformations during the final 10 ns of the triplicate
MD simulations. The compounds are shown in licorice representation.
C3c is shown in tube representation, with key interacting amino acids
shown in thin licorice representation. The colored amino acids represent
the four compstatin binding sectors. From left to right the sectors
are: VI (gray), III (yellow), I (blue), and II (orange). The dotted
black lines represent hydrogen bonds present throughout the MD simulations.

Compound A was selected using
pharmacophore features targeting
C3c amino acids R459, H392, M346, and D491. These pharmacophore features
used for the selection and initial orientation of compound A in the
compstatin binding site were a hydrophobic feature targeting M346,
an aromatic feature targeting H392, a negative charge targeting D491,
and a hydrogen bond donor targeting R459. During all three MD simulations,
interactions of compound A to M346, R459, and D491 are maintained,
whereas the interaction to H392 is not. During the simulations, the
aromatic ring of compound A, originally targeting H392, moves to form
a cation−π interaction with R456; thus, compound A cannot
maintain interactions to any amino acid of sector I (Figure 5A).

Compound B was selected
using pharmacophore features targeting
C3c amino acids R456, N390, M346, and D491. These pharmacophore features
used for the selection and initial orientation of compound B in the
compstatin binding site were a hydrogen bond acceptor targeting R456,
a hydrogen bond acceptor targeting N390, a hydrophobic feature targeting
M346, and a hydrogen bond donor targeting D491. Within all three MD
simulations, interactions between compound B and R456, N390, and M346
are not maintained while a hydrogen bond to D491 is formed and maintained.
The aromatic ring of compound B originally positioned to target N390
shifts to form cation−π interactions with both R459 and
R456 as the simulations progress; thus, interactions to M346 and N390,
as well as to any amino acid of sectors I or II are lost (Figure 5B).

Compound
C was selected using pharmacophore features targeting
C3c amino acids R459, N390, H392, M346, and D491. The pharmacophore
features used for the selection and initial orientation of compound
D in the compstatin binding site were a hydrophobic feature targeting
M346, a hydrogen bond donor targeting N390, an aromatic feature targeting
H392, a hydrogen bond acceptor targeting D491, and an aromatic interaction
targeting R459. During all three MD simulations, all interactions
were maintained except for the interaction targeting D491 (Figure 5C).

Compound
D was selected using pharmacophore features targeting
C3c amino acids M346, R456, and N390. These pharmacophore features
used for the selection and initial orientation of compound C in the
compstatin binding site were a hydrophobic feature targeting M346,
a hydrogen bond acceptor targeting R456, and a hydrogen bond acceptor
targeting N390. During the MD simulation, the compound maintains a
hydrogen bond to N390, a hydrogen bond to R456, and hydrophobic interactions
targeting M346. All interactions from the initial docking were conserved;
however, the compound does not strongly interact with any amino acid
of sector VI (Figure 5D).

Compound E was selected using pharmacophore features targeting
C3c amino acids R456, N390, M346, and D491. The pharmacophore features
used for the selection and initial orientation of compound E in the
compstatin binding site were a hydrophobic feature targeting M346,
a hydrogen bond donor targeting N390, a hydrogen bond donor targeting
D491, and a hydrogen bond acceptor targeting R456. During all three
MD simulations, interactions of compound E to M346, R456, and N390
are maintained, whereas the interaction to D491 is not. In addition,
the compound forms a weak cation−π interaction to R459
(Figure 5E).

Compound F was selected using pharmacophore features targeting
C3c amino acids R459, N390, M346, and L492. The pharmacophore features
used for the selection and initial orientation of compound F in the
compstatin binding site were a hydrophobic feature targeting M346,
an aromatic feature targeting N390, a hydrophobic feature targeting
L492, and a hydrogen bond acceptor targeting R459. During all three
MD simulations, interactions from compound F to M346 and R459 are
maintained, whereas the interaction to L492 and N390 are not. During
the simulations, the aromatic ring of compound F, originally targeting
L492, moves to form a cation−π interaction with R456
(Figure 5F).

Experimental Validation and Analysis
Hemolytic Assay
A standard rabbit erythrocyte assay
was used to initiate complement activation and to evaluate possible
inhibitory effects of the virtual screening chemical compounds. In
this assay, complement, as part of normal human serum, is activated
by the foreign rabbit erythrocyte cells, resulting in cell lysis by
the membrane attack complex. Addition of chemical compounds with potential
inhibitory activities would result in decreased lysis, compared with
experiments without inhibitors, as shown before in the case of compstatin
analogues.26−28

Despite demonstrating good predicted binding
properties, none of the 58 selected compounds from the primary approach
and the 6 selected compounds from the alternative approach exhibited
inhibitory activity in the hemolytic assays (Figure 6). Compstatin analogues are fairly long,
cyclic, and bulky peptides (13–15 amino acids of 1500–1900
Da molecular weight), so it may be unlikely for a single druglike
compound (<500 Da molecular weight) to retain the needed intermolecular
contacts necessary for inhibition. It is possible, however, that the
identified compounds are capable of binding to C3c, without demonstrating
inhibition of hemolytic activity. In such a case, possible combination
of compounds using chemical synthesis methods could result in a larger
molecule with potential binding affinity for C3c and complement inhibitory
activity. Also, compound 29, and perhaps additional experimentally
untested compounds from the library, may be used as a scaffold to
design new and larger molecules with favorable binding and inhibitory
properties.

Figure 6 Evaluation of hemolytic assay results. The results of the hemolytic
assays are represented as a comparison of means using one-way analysis
of variance between the controls and the drug compounds. The bottom
row of the figure shows the comparison between the two controls for
lysis (averaged from both types of positive controls for lysis) and
no lysis (see Methods), demonstrating a significant
difference in means. The other rows show that the difference between
lysis and the inhibitory effects of the compounds is negligible. The
means are for data acquired through triplicate hemolytic assays.

Microscale Thermophoresis
Binding Assay
We measured
direct binding of the top 10 compounds identified in the primary approach
and the top 6 compounds identified in the secondary approach 2 to
C3c using the microscale thermophoresis assay, as described in Methods. Of the selected compounds, only compound
29 demonstrated binding to C3c. Figure 7 shows competitive binding of compound 29 to the C3c–competition
peptide complex, where the competition peptide was labeled with the
fluorophore Cy5 for detection of the thermophoresis signal. This competitive
binding experiment shows that compound 29 binds to C3c, albeit with
a low affinity. An accurate measurement KD was not possible because the dose–response binding curve
requires additional data points to reach a plateau at higher concentrations,
and this was limited by the stock concentration of the compound.

Figure 7 Concentration-dependent
binding curve of compound 29 to C3c in
competition with the competition peptide. Thermophoretic data is plotted
as mean ± standard error of the mean (as error bars) from three
replicate experiments, together with the fitted binding curve in red
and the 95% confidence interval of the fitted binding curve represented
as blue dots.

Refined Docking and MD
Simulation Investigation of the Compound
29/C3c Complex Structure
As compound 29 demonstrated binding
to C3c, a refined docking study was performed, in conjunction with
MD simulations, to elucidate the structural features of the complex
between compound 29 and C3c. Compound 29 was redocked to C3c using
AutoDock Vina with a larger search space and higher exhaustiveness
compared with our original docking studies, to decrease the probability
of not finding the docked pose at the global minimum according to
the Vina scoring function.48 The generated
docked poses were clustered, and from the clustering analysis, two
clusters of poses were identified, of which one was oriented in a
fashion similar to that shown in Figure 4D and the other was flipped along the short
axis of compound 29. From each of the two clusters, the pose with
the most favorable binding energy was extracted and selected for further
investigation. An in-house docking protocol61,62 was used to produce additional poses with variable orientations,
using the two poses extracted from AutoDock Vina (see above) as initial
structures for further MD-based refined docking investigation. As
a result, an additional 48 poses (24 for each of the two initial structures)
were generated. Values of 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0 Å roffset were used for docking simulations using both the
harmonic spherical potential and the quartic spherical potential.

Explicit-solvent 10 ns MD simulations were performed on the two selected
poses generated by AutoDock Vina as well as the 48 docked poses generated
from the docking protocol.61,62 The molecular mechanics-generalized
Born surface area (MM-GBSA) association free energy63 was calculated in accordance to the docking protocol,61,62 and the simulation with the docked pose generated by AutoDock Vina
originating from the cluster of poses flipped along the short axis
of compound 29 was identified as containing the most energetically
favorable binding pose. Nevertheless, both poses may occur naturally.
The “one-trajectory” MM-GBSA approximation was used,
which assumes that the protein and ligand have identical structures
in the complex and free (dissociated) states. On the other hand, it
also eliminates contributions from intramolecular energies (bonded,
intramolecular van der Waals, and Coulombic), which are taken into
account in the “three-trajectory approximation”. However,
the “three-trajectory approximation” may introduce large
uncertainties in the relative affinities;24,64,65 in the “one-trajectory approximation”,
these contributions cancel out. Thus, given its limitations and advantages
and analogous to our previous studies,61,62,66−69 the “one-trajectory approximation”
is useful in evaluating the difference of binding affinities between
different poses of the same ligand-receptor and to identify the energetically
most favorable binding pose.

The simulation containing the most
energetically favorable binding
pose was extended for a total of 50 ns to refine the interactions
occurring between C3c and compound 29. The average RMSD of the compound,
on the basis of the initial docked structure, across the entire simulation,
is 6.13 Å, and the average RMSD with respect to the average structure
of the compound excluding the initial 10 ns is 0.83 Å. The former
value denotes that MD simulations enable the compound to adapt its
binding and optimize its interactions with C3, whereas the latter
value denotes that its binding is stable within the simulation trajectory.
According to the 50 ns trajectory simulation, compound 29 maintains
many polar and hydrophobic interactions to C3c residues that have
been shown to be key to compstatin binding24,38 (Figure 8C,D). The
compound maintains at least one interaction to each of the four sectors
of the compstatin binding site and polar interactions to three sectors
(sectors I, III, and VI). Compound 29 maintains polar interactions
to the side chain of R459, the side chain of R491, and the backbone
oxygen of M457. In addition, the compound maintains a polar interaction
to E462, which helps anchor the compound inside the binding pocket.
Polar interactions between the compound and C3c are shown in panel
A. Interactions between compound 29 and sectors III and IV of the
compstatin binding site are overwhelmingly governed by polar interactions
(Figure 8A). In contrast,
interactions between compound 29 and sectors I and II are governed
mainly by hydrophobic interactions (Figure 8B). A cation−π interaction between
the compound and R456 expands a favorable hydrophobic region inside
the compstatin pocket to include Y433, a hydrophobic residue on a
sector outside of the compstatin binding pocket. This new sector is
shown in green in Figure 8.

Figure 8 Molecular graphics images of the C3c–compstatin binding
site in complex with compound 29 (A, B) and compstatin (C, D). The
images of C3c in complex with compound 29 are taken from the explicit-solvent
MD simulations. The images of C3c in complex with compstatin are taken
from the crystal structure of C3c in complex with compstatin (PDB: 2QKI(22)). The compstatin binding sectors VI, III, I, and II are
shown in gray, yellow, blue, and orange, respectively. The green sector
represents a region that is not part of the compstatin binding site
but which interacts with compound 29. Important hydrogen bond interactions
that occur in both the C3c/compound 29 and C3c/compstatin complexes
are indicated using black dotted lines (A, C). The nonpolar binding
pockets formed by C3c in complex with compound 29 and compstatin are
shown in surface representation.

Comparison to a Recent Virtual Screening Study
A recent
study utilized virtual screening and a variety of binding, inhibition,
competitive inhibition, and functional assay approaches to identify
ligands binding at the C3b binding sites of factor B, Staphylococcus aureus complement inhibitor SCIN,
and compstatin, with potential complement inhibitory activities.51 This study identified seven binding ligands,
but only one of them, called cmp-5, exhibited a rather weak complement
inhibitory activity. Interestingly, although cmp-5 and its structural
analogues bind on the C3-binding site of compstatin, its mechanism
of inhibition differs from that of compstatin. Instead of inhibiting
the cleavage of C3 to C3a and C3b by the C3 convertases, cmp-5 inhibits
the cleavage of C5 to C5a and C5b by the C5 convertases. The authors
of this study suggested that cmp-5 influences the interaction of C3b,
when part of C5 convertases, with C5, thus affecting MAC, but not
C3b or C4b, deposition. Altogether, this and our study demonstrate
the difficulty, but potential promise, for use of virtual screening
approaches, on the basis of the large amount of structural data, to
identify low-molecular mass ligands with potential to inhibit the
complement system activation.

Conclusions
In
this manuscript, we provide a library of 274 molecules that
were identified by pharmacophore-based virtual screening and were
computationally predicted to have binding affinities for the compstatin
binding site of C3c. These molecules comply with pharmacophore properties
that are derived from the binding characteristics of compstatin with
C3c and are expected to follow a compstatin-like mechanism of binding
to C3. A subset of 64 chemical compounds from these 274 molecules
was experimentally tested using hemolytic assays and although they
were not found to have inhibitory effects, compound 29 demonstrated
binding to C3c, thus establishing a proof-of-concept for this methodology.

Despite complement being implicated in various autoimmune and inflammatory
diseases, very few complement-targeted therapeutics are currently
in the clinic, such as Cinryze (Shire Plc)70 and Soliris (Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc.).71 Both of them are protein-based therapeutics, and they are
two of the most expensive drugs in the market, an aspect that makes
them cost-prohibitive for most patients. Protein-based therapeutics
are typically administered intravenously and often suffer from low
stability and bioavailability and high production costs. On the other
hand, low-molecular-mass chemical compound therapeutics are typically
orally available, have better stability and bioavailability properties,
and are less costly for industrial production. Although the virtual
screening chemical compounds selected for experimental evaluation
in this study did not demonstrate complement inhibitory activity,
it is possible that several of them retain binding capabilities. Future
binding and inhibitory activity studies are needed to further explore
the entirety of the library of 274 virtual screening molecules. If
binding can be experimentally observed in future studies, chemical
combination of two or more C3-binding compounds may be sufficient
to reproduce the binding contacts of the long and bulky compstatin
family peptides and produce a molecule with compstatin-like complement
inhibitory activity.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00606.Explanation of
pharmacophore feature abbreviations (Appendix
S2); intermolecular interaction analysis (Appendix S3); two-dimensional
structures of experimentally tested chemical compounds (Appendix S6);
molecular graphics of the top 11–58 molecules docked to corresponding
representative conformations of C3c (continuation of Figure 4) (Appendix S7); pharmacophore
models utilized in stages 1 and 2 of the alternative approach (Appendix
S8) (PDF)

Database of pharmacophore models utilized in the primary
approach (Appendix S1); molecule identifiers and SMILES structures
of top 274 molecules, including those excluded from experimental testing
(Appendix S4); molecule identifiers (both ZINC and vendor) and SMILES
structures of experimentally tested chemical compounds (Appendix S5)
(XLSX)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00606_si_001.pdf

 ao8b00606_si_002.xlsx

 Author Present Address
⊥ Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Georgia
Institute of Technology, 313 Ferst Dr. NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30332,
United States (C.A.K.).

Author Present Address
∥ Department
of Biomedical Engineering, University of California,
Davis, 451 E. Health Sciences Drive, Davis, California 95616, United
States (V.A.M.).

Author Present Address
§ Department
of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center,
G04-614, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands (R.D.G.).

Author Contributions
R.R.M. performed
the virtual screening, docking, and evaluation of molecules of the
primary approach. M.W. performed the virtual screening, docking, and
evaluation of molecules of the alternative approach. R.D.G. generated
the database of conformers used in the primary approach and assisted
with initial virtual screening studies. R.R.M. and R.E.S.H. performed
the hemolytic assays. V.A.M. and C.A.K. performed initial virtual
screening studies. A.A.O. and A.V.C. contributed to the alternative
approach study. M.W., A.A.O, and P.T. wrote the alternative approach-related
portion of the article. P.T. conceived and supervised the alternative
approach study. R.R.M. and D.M. wrote the majority of the article,
and all authors edited and approved the manuscript. D.M. conceived
the project and supervised the primary approach study and the overall
project.

This
work was
supported by grant M2013106 from the BrightFocus Foundation (D.M.).
The alternative approach work was also supported by startup funding
from the Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering at Texas
A&M University (P.T.). We acknowledge graduate student fellowships
from the Tobacco-Related Disease Research Program (C.A.K.) and the
Texas A&M University Graduate Diversity Fellowship, TAMU Office
of Graduate and Professional Studies (A.A.O.).

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): D.M., P.T.,
R.D.G., R.R.M., and R.E.S.H. are coinventors in a patent and/or patent
application(s) for compstatin family peptides.

Acknowledgments
Computational studies
of the primary approach were performed
using the Hercules and Muses computing clusters and workstations of
the BioMoDe Lab (D.M.) and the multipurpose computing cluster of the
UCR High Performance Computing Center. Computational studies of the
alternative approach were performed on the Ada supercomputing cluster
at the Texas A&M High Performance Research Computing Facility.
==== Refs
References
Walport M. J. 
Advances
in Immunology: Complement (First of Two Parts) . N. Engl. J. Med. 
2001 , 344 , 1058 –1066 . 10.1056/NEJM200104053441406 .11287977 
Walport M. J. 
Advances
in Immunology: Complement (Second of Two Parts) . N. Engl. J. Med. 
2001 , 344 , 1140 –1144 . 10.1056/NEJM200104123441506 .11297706 
Merle N. S. ; Church S. E. ; Fremeaux-Bacchi V. ; Roumenina L. T. 
Complement
system part I – molecular mechanisms of activation and regulation . Front. Immunol. 
2015 , 262 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00262 .26082779 
Merle N. S. ; Noe R. ; Halbwachs-Mecarelli L. ; Fremeaux-Bacchi V. ; Roumenina L. T. 
Complement system part II: role in
immunity . Front. Immunol. 
2015 , 6 , 257 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00257 .26074922 
Freeley S. ; Kemper C. ; Le Friec G. 
The “ins
and outs”
of complement-driven immune responses . Immunol.
Rev. 
2016 , 274 , 16 –32 . 10.1111/imr.12472 .27782335 
Zewde N. ; Gorham R. D. Jr.; Dorado A. ; Morikis D. 
Quantitative
Modeling of the Alternative Pathway of the Complement System . PLoS One 
2016 , 11 , e015233710.1371/journal.pone.0152337 .27031863 
Zewde N. ; Morikis D. 
A Computational Model for the Evaluation of Complement
System Regulation under Homeostasis, Disease, and Drug Intervention . bioRxiv 
2017 , 22502910.1101/225029 .
Ricklin D. ; Lambris J. D. 
Complement in Immune and Inflammatory Disorders: Pathophysiological
Mechanisms . J. Immunol. 
2013 , 190 , 3831 –3838 . 10.4049/jimmunol.1203487 .23564577 
Morgan B. P. ; Harris C. L. 
Complement, a target for therapy
in inflammatory and
degenerative diseases . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2015 , 14 , 857 –877 . 10.1038/nrd4657 .26493766 
Ricklin D. ; Lambris J. D. 
Complement in Immune and Inflammatory Disorders: Therapeutic
Interventions . J. Immunol. 
2013 , 190 , 3839 –3847 . 10.4049/jimmunol.1203200 .23564578 
Morikis D. ; Assa-Munt N. ; Sahu A. ; Lambris J. D. 
Solution
structure
of Compstatin, a potent complement inhibitor . Protein Sci. 
1998 , 7 , 619 10.1002/pro.5560070311 .9541394 
Sahu A. ; et al. Binding Kinetics, Structure-Activity Relationship,
and Biotransformation
of the Complement Inhibitor Compstatin . J. Immunol. 
2000 , 165 , 2491 –2499 . 10.4049/jimmunol.165.5.2491 .10946275 
Sahu A. ; Kay B. K. ; Lambris J. D. 
Inhibition
of human complement by a C3-binding peptide
isolated from a phage-displayed random peptide library . J. Immunol. 
1996 , 157 , 884 –891 .8752942 
Ricklin D. ; Lambris J. D.  Compstatin:
A Complement Inhibitor on its Way to Clinical Application . In Current Topics in Complement II. Advances in Experimental
Medicine and Biology ; Lambris J.  , Ed.; Springer : New York, NY , 2008 ; Vol. 632 , pp 262 −281 
Mastellos D. C. ; et al. Compstatin: a C3-targeted complement inhibitor reaching its prime
for bedside intervention . Eur. J. Clin. Invest. 
2015 , 45 , 423 –440 . 10.1111/eci.12419 .25678219 
Morikis D. ; Lambris J.  Structure, Dynamics,
Activity, and Function of Compstatin and Design of More Potent Analogues . Structural Biology of the Complement System ; CRC Press , 2005 ; pp 317 –340 .
Morikis D. ; et al. Improvement of the anti-C3 activity of compstatin using rational
and combinatorial approaches . Biochem. Soc.
Trans. 
2004 , 32 , 28 –32 . 10.1042/bst0320028 .14748706 
Morikis D. ; Floudas C. A. ; Lambris J. D.  Structure-Based Integrative Computational and Experimental Approach
for the Optimization of Drug Design . In Computational
Science – ICCS 2005 ; Sunderam V. S. , van Albada G. D. , Sloot P. M. A. , Dongarra J. J.  , Eds.; Lecture Notes
in Computer Science ; Springer : Berlin, Heidelberg , 2005 ; Vol. 3515 , pp 680 –688 .
Morikis D. ; Lambris J. D. 
Structural aspects
and design of low-molecular-mass
complement inhibitors . Biochem. Soc. Trans. 
2002 , 30 , 1026 –1036 . 10.1042/bst0301026 .12440966 
Morikis D. ; et al. The Structural Basis of Compstatin Activity Examined by Structure-Function-based
Design of Peptide Analogs and NMR . J. Biol.
Chem. 
2002 , 277 , 14942 –14953 . 10.1074/jbc.M200021200 .11847226 
Soulika A. M. ; et al. Studies of Structure-Activity
Relations of Complement Inhibitor Compstatin . J. Immunol. 
2003 , 171 , 1881 –1890 . 10.4049/jimmunol.171.4.1881 .12902490 
Janssen B. J. C. ; Halff E. F. ; Lambris J. D. ; Gros P. 
Structure of Compstatin
in Complex with Complement Component C3c Reveals a New Mechanism of
Complement Inhibition . J. Biol. Chem. 
2007 , 282 , 29241 –29247 . 10.1074/jbc.M704587200 .17684013 
Bellows M. L. ; et al. New Compstatin Variants through Two De Novo
Protein Design Frameworks . Biophys. J. 
2010 , 98 , 2337 –2346 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.01.057 .20483343 
Tamamis P. ; et al. Molecular Dynamics in
Drug Design: New Generations of Compstatin
Analogs: New Generations of Compstatin Analogs . Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 
2012 , 79 , 703 –718 . 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2012.01324.x .22233517 
López
de Victoria A. ; et al. A New Generation of Potent Complement Inhibitors of the Compstatin Family . Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 
2011 , 77 , 431 –440 . 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2011.01111.x .21352502 
Gorham R. D. Jr.; et al. New Compstatin Peptides Containing N-Terminal
Extensions and Non-Natural Amino Acids Exhibit Potent Complement Inhibition
and Improved Solubility Characteristics . J.
Med. Chem. 
2015 , 58 , 814 –826 . 10.1021/jm501345y .25494040 
Gorham R. D. Jr.; et al. Novel compstatin family peptides inhibit complement
activation by drusen-like deposits in human retinal pigmented epithelial
cell cultures . Exp. Eye Res. 
2013 , 116 , 96 –108 . 10.1016/j.exer.2013.07.023 .23954241 
Mohan R. R. ; et al. Peptide redesign for inhibition of the complement system: Targeting age-related macular
degeneration . Mol. Vis. 
2016 , 22 , 1280 –1290 .27829783 
Lavecchia A. ; Di Giovanni C. 
Virtual screening strategies in drug
discovery: a critical
review . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 20 , 2839 –2860 . 10.2174/09298673113209990001 .23651302 
Loving K. ; Alberts I. ; Sherman W. 
Computational approaches
for fragment-based
and de novo design . Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 
2010 , 10 , 14 –32 . 10.2174/156802610790232305 .19929832 
Zhou P. ; Wang C. ; Ren Y. ; Yang C. ; Tian F. 
Computational
peptidology: a new and promising approach to therapeutic peptide design . Curr. Med. Chem. 
2013 , 20 , 1985 –1996 . 10.2174/0929867311320150005 .23317161 
Mallik B. ; et al. Design and NMR Characterization of Active Analogues of Compstatin
Containing Non-Natural Amino Acids . J. Med.
Chem. 
2005 , 48 , 274 –286 . 10.1021/jm0495531 .15634022 
Klepeis J. L. ; et al. Integrated Computational
and Experimental Approach for Lead Optimization
and Design of Compstatin Variants with Improved Activity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125 , 8422 –8423 . 10.1021/ja034846p .12848533 
Song C. M. ; Lim S. J. ; Tong J. C. 
Recent
advances in computer-aided
drug design . Briefings Bioinf. 
2009 , 10 , 579 –591 . 10.1093/bib/bbp023 .
Lionta E. ; Spyrou G. ; Vassilatis D. K. ; Cournia Z. 
Structure-based virtual
screening for drug discovery: principles, applications and recent
advances . Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 
2014 , 14 , 1923 –1938 . 10.2174/1568026614666140929124445 .25262799 
Michel J. 
Current and
emerging opportunities for molecular simulations in structure-based
drug design . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2014 , 16 , 4465 –4477 . 10.1039/C3CP54164A .24469595 
Gorham R. D. Jr.; et al. Discovery of Small Molecules for Fluorescent
Detection of Complement Activation Product C3d . J. Med. Chem. 
2015 , 9535 –9545 . 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01062 .26613117 
Tamamis P. ; Morikis D. ; Floudas C. A. ; Archontis G. 
Species specificity
of the complement inhibitor compstatin investigated by all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations . Proteins: Struct., Funct.,
Bioinf. 
2010 , 78 , 2655 –2667 . 10.1002/prot.22780 .
Tamamis P. ; et al. Design of a modified
mouse protein with ligand binding properties
of its human analogue by molecular dynamics simulations: The case
of C3 inhibition by compstatin . Proteins: Struct.,
Funct., Bioinf. 
2011 , 79 , 3166 –3179 . 10.1002/prot.23149 .
Grant B. J. ; Rodrigues A. P. C. ; ElSawy K. M. ; McCammon J. A. ; Caves L. S. D. 
Bio3d:
an R package for the comparative analysis of protein structures . Bioinformatics 
2006 , 22 , 2695 –2696 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btl461 .16940322 
Pettersen E. F. ; et al. UCSF Chimera? A visualization system for exploratory research and
analysis . J. Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 1605 –1612 . 10.1002/jcc.20084 .15264254 
R Core
Team . R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing ; R Foundation for Statistical Computing , 2014 .
McGibbon R.
T. ; et al. MDTraj:
A Modern Open Library for the Analysis of Molecular Dynamics
Trajectories . Biophys. J. 
2015 , 109 , 1528 –1532 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.08.015 .26488642 
Irwin J. J. ; Sterling T. ; Mysinger M. M. ; Bolstad E. S. ; Coleman R. G. 
ZINC: A
Free Tool to Discover Chemistry for Biology . J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2012 , 52 , 1757 –1768 . 10.1021/ci3001277 .22587354 
Koes D. R. ; Camacho C. J. 
ZINCPharmer: pharmacophore
search of the ZINC database . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , W409 –W414 . 10.1093/nar/gks378 .22553363 
Dixon S. L. ; Smondyrev A. M. ; Rao S. N. 
PHASE: A Novel Approach to Pharmacophore
Modeling and 3D Database Searching . Chem. Biol.
Drug Des. 
2006 , 67 , 370 –372 . 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2006.00384.x .16784462 
Dixon S. L. ; et al. PHASE: a new engine
for pharmacophore perception, 3D QSAR model development,
and 3D database screening: 1. Methodology and preliminary results . J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 
2006 , 20 , 647 –671 . 10.1007/s10822-006-9087-6 .17124629 
Trott O. ; Olson A. J. 
AutoDock Vina: improving the speed
and accuracy of
docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization and multithreading . J. Comput. Chem. 
2010 , 31 , 455 –461 . 10.1002/jcc.21334 .19499576 
Cao Y. ; Charisi A. ; Cheng L.-C. ; Jiang T. ; Girke T. 
ChemmineR:
a compound mining framework for R . Bioinformatics 
2008 , 24 , 1733 –1734 . 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn307 .18596077 
Lipinski C. A. ; Lombardo F. ; Dominy B. W. ; Feeney P. J. 
Experimental and
computational approaches to estimate solubility and permeability in
drug discovery and development settings . Adv.
Drug Delivery Rev. 
1997 , 23 , 3 –25 . 10.1016/S0169-409X(96)00423-1 .
Garcia B. L. ; et al. Identification of C3b-Binding
Small-Molecule Complement Inhibitors
Using Cheminformatics . J. Immunol. 
2017 , 3705 –3718 . 10.4049/jimmunol.1601932 .28298523 
Nilsson L. 
Efficient
table lookup without inverse square roots for calculation of pair
wise atomic interactions in classical simulations . J. Comput. Chem. 
2009 , 30 , 1490 –1498 . 10.1002/jcc.21169 .19072764 
Best R. B. ; et al. Optimization of the
additive CHARMM all-atom protein force field
targeting improved sampling of the backbone φ, ψ and side-chain
χ(1) and χ(2) dihedral angles . J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 
2012 , 8 , 3257 –3273 . 10.1021/ct300400x .23341755 
Lee J. ; et al. CHARMM-GUI Input Generator
for NAMD, GROMACS, AMBER, OpenMM, and
CHARMM/OpenMM Simulations Using the CHARMM36 Additive Force Field . J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2016 , 12 , 405 –413 . 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00935 .26631602 
Jo S. ; Kim T. ; Iyer V. G. ; Im W. 
CHARMM-GUI: a web-based graphical
user interface for CHARMM . J. Comput. Chem. 
2008 , 29 , 1859 –1865 . 10.1002/jcc.20945 .18351591 
Ryckaert J.-P. ; Ciccotti G. ; Berendsen H. J. C. 
Numerical integration of the cartesian
equations of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics
of n-alkanes . J. Comput. Phys. 
1977 , 23 , 327 –341 . 10.1016/0021-9991(77)90098-5 .
Brooks B. R. ; et al. CHARMM: The Biomolecular Simulation Program . J. Comput. Chem. 
2009 , 30 , 1545 –1614 . 10.1002/jcc.21287 .19444816 
Seeber M. ; et al. Wordom: a user-friendly
program for the analysis of molecular structures,
trajectories, and free energy surfaces . J. Comput.
Chem. 
2011 , 32 , 1183 –1194 . 10.1002/jcc.21688 .21387345 
Seidel S. A. I. ; et al. Microscale thermophoresis
quantifies biomolecular interactions
under previously challenging conditions . Methods 
2013 , 59 , 301 –315 . 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.12.005 .23270813 
Wienken C. J. ; Baaske P. ; Rothbauer U. ; Braun D. ; Duhr S. 
Protein-binding
assays in biological liquids using microscale thermophoresis . Nat. Commun. 
2010 , 1 , 10010.1038/ncomms1093 .20981028 
Cheng Y. ; et al. Editor’s Highlight:
Microbial-Derived 1,4-Dihydroxy-2-naphthoic
Acid and Related Compounds as Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Agonists/Antagonists:
Structure-Activity Relationships and Receptor Modeling . Toxicol. Sci. 
2017 , 155 , 458 –473 . 10.1093/toxsci/kfw230 .27837168 
Orr A. A. ; Jayaraman A. ; Tamamis P. 
Molecular Modeling of Chemoreceptor:Ligand
Interactions . Methods Mol. Biol. 
2018 , 1729 , 353 –372 . 10.1007/978-1-4939-7577-8_28 .29429104 
Genheden S. ; Ryde U. 
The MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA
methods to estimate ligand-binding affinities . Expert Opin. Drug Discovery 
2015 , 10 , 449 –461 . 10.1517/17460441.2015.1032936 .
Gohlke H. ; Case D. A. 
Converging free
energy estimates: MM-PB(GB)SA studies
on the protein–protein complex Ras–Raf . J. Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 238 –250 . 10.1002/jcc.10379 .14648622 
Page C. S. ; Bates P. A. 
Can MM-PBSA calculations
predict the specificities
of protein kinase inhibitors? . J. Comput. Chem. 
2006 , 27 , 1990 –2007 . 10.1002/jcc.20534 .17036304 
Tamamis P. ; Floudas C. A. 
Molecular Recognition of CXCR4 by a Dual Tropic HIV-1
gp120 V3 Loop . Biophys. J. 
2013 , 105 , 1502 –1514 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.07.049 .24048002 
Tamamis P. ; Floudas C. A. 
Molecular Recognition of CCR5 by
an HIV-1 gp120 V3
Loop . PLoS One 
2014 , 9 , e9576710.1371/journal.pone.0095767 .24763408 
Tamamis P. ; Floudas C. A. 
Elucidating a Key Anti-HIV-1 and
Cancer-Associated
Axis: The Structure of CCL5 (Rantes) in Complex with CCR5 . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 544710.1038/srep05447 .24965094 
Tamamis P. ; et al. Insights into the mechanism
of C5aR inhibition by PMX53 via implicit
solvent molecular dynamics simulations and docking . BMC Biophys. 
2014 , 7 , 5 10.1186/2046-1682-7-5 .25170421 
Cocchio C. ; Marzella N. 
Cinryze, a Human Plasma-Derived
C1 Esterase Inhibitor for Prophylaxis Of Hereditary
Angioedema . Pharm. Ther. 
2009 , 34 , 293 –328 .
Kim J. S. ; Lee J. W. ; Kim B. K. ; Lee J.-H. ; Chung J. 
The use of
the complement inhibitor eculizumab (Soliris) for treating Korean
patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria . Korean J. Hematol. 
2010 , 45 , 269 –274 . 10.5045/kjh.2010.45.4.269 .21253430

