
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3041101410.1021/acsomega.8b01591ArticleGold Nanorod-Based Nanohybrids for Combinatorial Therapeutics Villar-Alvarez Eva *†Cambón Adriana †Pardo Alberto †Mosquera Víctor X. ‡Bouzas-Mosquera Alberto ‡Topete Antonio §Barbosa Silvia †Taboada Pablo *†Mosquera Víctor †† Grupo
de Física de Coloides y Polímeros, Departamento de Física
de Partículas, Facultad de Física e Instituto de Investigaciones
Sanitarias (IDIS), Universidad de Santiago
de Compostela, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain‡ Departamento
de Cirugía Cardíaca, Complexo
Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña, Instituto
de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), A Coruña, Spain§ Departamento
de Fisiología, Centro Universitario
de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Sierra Mojada 950, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico* E-mail: eva.mailbox1@gmail.com (E.V.-A.).* E-mail: pablo.taboada@usc.es (P.T.).04 10 2018 31 10 2018 3 10 12633 12647 10 07 2018 20 09 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society2018American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

In
this work, multifunctional nanocarriers consisting of poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate)
(PSS)/doxorubicin (DOXO)/poly-l-lysine hydrobromide (PLL)/hyaluronic
acid (HA)-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated gold nanorods
were assembled by the layer-by-layer technique with the aims of coupling
the plasmonic photothermal properties of the metal nanoparticles for
plasmonic hyperthermia and the chemoaction of drug DOXO for potential
intended combinatorial cancer therapeutics in the future as well as
providing different strategies for the controlled and sustained release
of the cargo drug molecules. To do that, DOXO could be successfully
loaded onto the hybrid nanoconstructs through electrostatic interactions
with high efficiencies of up to ca. 78.3 ± 6.9% for the first
formed drug layer and 56 ± 13% for the second one, with a total
efficiency for the whole system [(PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
NRs] of ca. 65.7 ± 1.4%. Nanohybrid internalization was observed
to be enhanced by the outer HA layer, which is able to target the
CD44 receptors widely overexpressed in some types of cancers as lung,
breast, or ovarian ones. Hence, these nanohybrid systems might be
versatile nanoplatforms to simultaneously deliver sufficient heat
for therapeutic plasmonic hyperthermia and the anticancer drug. Two
controlled mechanisms were proposed to modulate the release of the
chemodrug, one by means of the enzymatic degradable character of the
PLL layer and another by the modulation of the interactions between
the polymeric layers through the exploitation of the optical properties
of the hybrid particles under near infrared (NIR) laser irradiation.
The combination of this bimodal therapeutic approach exerted a synergistic
cytotoxic effect on both HeLa and MDA-MB-231 cancer cells in vitro.
Cell death mechanisms were also analyzed, elucidating that plasmonic
photothermal therapy induces cell necrosis, whereas DOXO activates
the cell apoptotic pathway. Therefore, the present NIR laser-induced
targeted cancer thermo/chemotherapy represents a novel targeted anticancer
strategy with easy control on demand and suitable therapeutic efficacy.

document-id-old-9ao8b01591document-id-new-14ao-2018-015912ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Cancer is a disease characterized
by the uncontrolled growth and
spread of abnormal cells originated from inherited DNA damage or induced
by environmental factors and is the second cause of death worldwide.
For example, 1 688 780 new cancer cases and 600 920
cancer deaths were estimated in 2017 only in USA.1 Current cancer treatments include surgery, chemotherapy,
and/or radiation. Surgical extirpation is highly effective in primary
tumors, but it is limited to surgically recognizable and accessible
tumors and thus cancer cells may not be completely removed. Radiation
(X-rays, gamma rays, or electrons) is often used to destroy diseased
cell and tissues at the molecular level as a complementary approach
to eradicate remaining cancer cells after surgery. However, it may
cause damages to healthy tissues located close to cancerous cells
or within the pathway of the radiation beam. On the other hand, the
systematic administration of chemical drugs to kill malignant cells
(chemotherapy) is sometimes effective for complete tumor elimination
and subsequent patient recovery, but it possesses numerous drawbacks
and adverse side effects, for example, (i) side toxicity in healthy
tissues as a result of its nonspecificity; (ii) development of drug
resistances; (iii) achievement of suboptimal therapeutic concentrations
in the diseased cells/tissues as a consequence of poor drug diffusion
and accumulation conditioned by tumor structure and vascularization;
and so forth. In addition, the impossibility of an early detection
of very small tumors or blood circulating malignant cells also decreases
the probability of success of current cancer therapies. Therefore,
alternative treatments/therapies are largely required.

A strategy
to overcome the aforementioned drawbacks can be the
combination of antitumor drugs with colloidal nanoparticles (NPs)
used as nanocarriers or nanoreservoirs, which emerges as an interesting
area of research to overcome the limitations, for example, of current
chemotherapies.2 Drug nanocarriers possess
several advantages over free drugs, including (i) their nanometer
size, which can exploit the physiological abnormalities of tumoral
cells/tissues to favor their selective accumulation in the diseased
areas through the enhanced permeation and retention effect;3 (ii) their capability to transport high drug
payloads with prolonged half-life and reduced toxicity, thus significantly
lowering the therapeutic dose required for effective treatment (IC50);4 (iii) their ability to evade
the immune system;4,5 and (iv) their potential for selective
targeting cancer cells and tissues thanks to their potential high
surface density to attach specific ligands which can bind to overexpressed
receptors in cancerous cells (the so-called active targeting).5

Several types of NPs have been already
proved for effective anticancer
therapies including micelles;6 liposomes;7 polymeric NPs;8 dendrimers;9 carbon-based nanostructures as carbon nanotubes;10 gold,11 silver,12 and iron oxide NPs;13 semiconductor quantum dots;14 and viral
capsids.15 Among all these types of particles,
gold (Au) NPs (nanospheres, nanorods, nanoshells, nanocages, and nanostars)
are gaining great importance for several reasons as follows: (i) Au
NPs are considered to be relatively nontoxic and nonreactive and are
therefore suitable for in vivo applications;16 (ii) they exhibit outstanding optical properties, for example, the
generation of localized surface plasmons;17 (iii) their nature allows the facile addition of new surface functionalities;18 and (iv) their size, morphology, and monodispersity
can be easily controlled during the synthesis process, allowing the
fine-tuning of their optical properties from the visible to the near-infrared
region (NIR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum.19

Compared with other available Au NPs, Au nanorods
(GNRs) are especially
attractive as a consequence of their anisotropic structure. This morphology
allows the collective coherent oscillation of conduction electrons
on the particle surface upon interaction with light of suitable wavelength
to occur mainly in two directions, that is, along the short and long
axes of the NP, resulting in the generation of the so-called transverse
and longitudinal localized surface plasmon bands (LPSRs).20 The subsequent main relaxation process usually
involves a high conversion of light into heat, which is released to
the medium. The GNR transverse LPSR band usually appears in the visible
region of the electromagnetic spectrum, whereas the longitudinal one
usually appears in the NIR, that is, within the so-called first biological
window, which makes this type of particles really interesting for
biological applications.21 GNRs also exhibit
the most suitable NIR absorption cross sections if compared with other
Au NPs,22 demonstrating extremely efficient
NIR photothermal heat conversion while reducing both the energy required
for phototreatment ( thus minimizing the affectation of surrounding
healthy tissues) and photobleaching.23 The
generated thermal energy can induce temperature increases of more
than 20 °C (i.e., hyperthermia), which can thereby induce therapeutic
tumor/cell tissue ablation (above 43–45 °C) or thermal
tissue sensitization (below 43 °C) to optimize the efficacy of
complementary therapies such as chemo- or radiotherapies.24,25 In this regard, NIR plasmonic photothermal therapy (PPTT) using
GNRs was first demonstrated by El-Sayed’s group, who showed
the destruction of cancer cells after exposure to a focused NIR light
beam without affectation of healthy ones.26 Other researchers also demonstrated the same great feasibility of
tumor photothermal ablation using different types of gold, other metal,
and organic NPs.25,27−29 Moreover, it
is worth noting that GNRs possess much larger surface areas per volume
than that of, for example, spherical Au NPs, which make them an attractive
nanocarrier with large payload capability for codelivering several
types of therapeutical agents as antibodies,30 chemotherapeutic drugs,31 or nucleic
acids.32 To do this, suitable modification
of the particle surfaces by different strategies such as ligand exchange,33 hydrophobic/electrostatic adsorption,34 layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly,35 or silica coating36 is required,
which also enables the controlled release of the payloads either by
internal (pH, enzymes, temperature, etc) or external (light, ultrasounds,
electric and magnetic fields, etc.) stimuli without compromising the
particle stability in biological fluids. Then, it is expected that
the combination of PPTT provided by the plasmonic properties of GNRs
and chemotherapy would be able to provide synergistic therapeutic
benefits in the treatment of tumoral cells and a way to overcome multidrug
resistances.37

For these reasons,
in this work, we developed a therapeutical nanocarrier
based on the exploitation of the plasmonic properties of GNRs and
their easy surface modification by the LbL assembly technique to allow
the loading of large amounts of the chemodrug doxorubicin (DOXO),
while ensuring a high colloidal stability in biological fluids, a
controlled and sustained release of the cargo, and high cell uptake
and internalization levels. DOXO is an anthracycline antibiotic widely
used to treat a wide range of cancers by intercalating DNA and inhibiting
macromolecular biosynthesis. Like other anticancer drugs, several
drawbacks are associated to its periodical administration such as
poor selectivity,38 dose-dependent cardiotoxicity,39 and/or the induction of multidrug resistances
in cancer cells40 so that new forms of
administration are largely required.

Here, GNRs were obtained
by a wet seed-mediated chemical reduction
method.26 The resulting particles were
coated with alternating layers of the anionically charged poly(styrene
sulfonate) (PSS) and the cationically charged poly(lysine) (PLL) polymers
to mask the toxic hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) layer
resulting from the synthesis process after a preliminary washing step.34,35 DOXO was introduced in the assembled surface coating in the form
of one or two layers by exploiting the electrostatic interactions
with the underlying PSS layer. Finally, hyaluronic acid (HA) was used
as the outer external polymeric layer thanks to their ability to avoid
nonspecific interactions with serum components41 as well as to target and bind overexpressed CD44 receptors
in some types of cancerous cells, such as cervical HeLa and breast
MDA-MB-231, allowing an active targeting strategy to localize the
hybrid particles within the diseased cells/tissues.42 Thanks to the clever choice of the coating polymers, drug
release could be triggered either by means of the enzymatically biodegradable
character of the PLL polymer and/or by exploitation of the NIR optical
properties of GNRs, which enable the modulation of the attraction
between the polymeric layers at the surface particle coating under
NIR light irradiation by controlling the size of the illuminated area,
exposure time, and light fluency. Additionally, the combination of
the generated NIR-induced hyperthermia and the controlled and sustained
release of the chemodrug might allow the obtention of combinatorial
synergistic therapeutical effects provided by the cell-internalized
hybrid nanoplatforms as elucidated from transmission electron microscopy
(TEM), flow cytometry, and fluorescence microscopy in vitro experiments.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 DOXO Entrapment
GNRs were prepared
through the well-established two-step seed-mediated growth method
with slight modifications (see Experimental Section).26 The resulting GNRs exhibit a size
of 33 nm × 9 nm. To mask the CTAB layer and avoid their associated
toxicity as well as the provide the obtained metallic NPs with sufficient
colloidal stability, triggered controlled cargo release, and active
targeting abilities, NP surfaces were modified by means of the LbL
assembly technique. In this manner, using the LbL method, multilayers
of the polyelectrolyte (PE) anionic PSS, cationic PLL, and anionic
HA as well as the chemodrug DOXO were successfully deposited onto
the GNR surfaces.

Herein, CTAB facilitated the electrostatic
adsorption of the anionic PSS PE. The same interactions were further
used for the subsequent adsorption of the positively charged DOXO
by exploiting the protonation of the amino group in the sugar base
moiety of its molecular structure.43 To
achieve complete charge reversal, an additional cationic PLL layer
was deposited. Finally, a last layer of HA was associated to decrease
the net positive electrical charge of the hybrid nanoconstruct to
avoid potential toxic effects and to provide specific targeting to
CD44 receptors commonly overexpressed in the membrane surfaces of
several types of malignant stem and cancerous cells.42

Next, we evaluated the maximum amount of antineoplasic
able to
be adsorbed within the particle coating in the form of a single drug
layer. To do that, different amounts of DOXO were assembled via LbL
to PSS-coated GNRs previously prepared. The successful loading of
the cargo onto the metallic NPs was confirmed by UV–vis spectrophotometry. Figure S1 confirms the presence of the characteristic
absorption peak of DOXO at ca. 490 nm, which becomes more intense
as more DOXO is adsorbed onto the metallic NPs. Moreover, a progressive
red shift of the longitudinal LPSR band of GNRs is also observed as
a consequence of changes in the local dielectric environment of the
NPs as more drug is located near the metal surface.

The loading
capacities (LCs) and entrapment efficiencies (EEs)
of DOXO on PSS-coated GNRs at different initial fed DOXO (IFD) concentrations
are displayed in Table 1. From 150 μg of initial fed drug, the loaded DOXO amount is
almost constant, suggesting that the saturation of the particle surface
was achieved, with averaged LCs of ca. 65% (∼80 μg DOXO
in 1 mL GNRs at 1 × 1011 NP/mL) and EEs of ca. 80%.
This is in agreement with the progressive increase in the observed
negative particle ζ-potential values up to ca. 150 μm
fed drug and their subsequent leveling off at larger DOXO concentrations
(Figure S1b). Thus, for further experiments,
we decided to use 150 μg as the IFD.

Table 1 DOXO EE
and LC on PSS-Coated GNRs
(∼1 × 1011 NP/mL) through the LbL Assembly
Technique as a Function of the IFD Mass
IFD (μg)	loaded drug (μg)	EE (%)	LC (%)	
50	2.70 ± 0.81	5.4	5.9	
100	33.5 ± 4.6	16.8	43.8	
150	76.3 ± 1.0	76.3	64.0	
200	86.6 ± 1.2	57.7	66.9	
300	78.6 ± 3.6	26.2	64.7	
2.2 Characterization of DOXO-Loaded
GNRs
Once the ability of DOXO to self-assemble on the GNR
surfaces by
the LbL technique was confirmed, then, the construction of DOXO-loaded
GNRs bearing one (denoted as PSS/DOXO-PLL/HA-coated GNRs) or two DOXO
[denoted as (PSS/DOXO-PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs] coating layers
was afforded (see Scheme 1). The latter nanoconstruct was designed to additionally enhance
the loaded DOXO concentration in the nanoplatform. These coated GNRs
were characterized by UV–vis spectroscopy, ζ-potential
measurements, dynamic light scattering (DLS), and TEM.

Scheme 1 Schematic
Representation of PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-Coated (Left) and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-Coated GNRs (Right)
Figure 1a,b shows
the UV–vis spectra after each deposition step for (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs. It was observed that the longitudinal plasmon
absorption peak of GNRs shifts after PE adsorption as a consequence
of the extreme sensitivity of the particles to the dielectric properties
of the surrounding environment,43 thus
confirming the successful layer adsorption. Any coating onto the NP
surfaces involves a change in the dielectric properties of the particle
surroundings, giving rise to a similar effect as immersing the particles
in a continuous medium of different refractive indexes (RIs) and hence
shifting the position of the longitudinal LSPR maximum (see below).
DOXO absorption was confirmed by the enhancement of the band located
at 490 nm, which increases with the number of DOXO layers (Figure 1b). Moreover, a relative
small broadening of the absorption bands after layer depositions was
noted, particularly after the first lysine deposited layer, which
suggests the presence of some minimal particle aggregation after the
successive coating steps.

Figure 1 (a) UV–vis absorbance spectra for each
PE layer deposited
onto GNRs for (a) (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs. (b) Longitudinal
LSPR shifts (black ●), longitudinal (red ■) and transversal
(red □) absorbance decays, and (c) ζ-potentials (black
■) after each coating step for (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs. The LSPR shift of coated GNRs with layer i is
defined as Δλ = λ(i) – λ(CTAB).
Longitudinal and transversal decays are constructed as the ratio between
the optical absorbance in layer i regarding that
of the CTAB layer: decay(SPR) = abs(i)/abs(CTAB).
The lines are only to guide the eye.

For DOXO, PLL, and HA coating layers, a red shift in the
longitudinal
LSPR band is observed; particularly, for PLL, this red shift might
be also influence by some interparticle coupling resulting from the
slight observed particle aggregation. In contrast, a blue shift is
observed for the PSS coating (see Figure 1b). Blue shifts of the plasmon bands after
polymer deposition have been related to polymer unwrapping,44 but this is not the case as observed from the
change from positive to negative of ζ-potential values (Figure 1c). Hence, the observed
variations can be ascribed to the different RIs of the PEs compared
to that of the CTAB surfactant.45 On the
other hand, a certain damping of the longitudinal LPSR peak progressively
took place as more polymeric layers are added on the GNR surfaces
(see Figure 1a,b).
This effect can be the result of a reduction of (i) the adsorption
of part of the incoming light and/or (ii) the electronic oscillations
on the metallic surface.46 Conversely,
the absorbance corresponding to the transversal plasmon band is barely
constant except when DOXO is adsorbed, where a certain increment is
noted (Figure 1b) as
a consequence of the contribution of the drug absorption peak at ca.
490–495 nm.

ζ-Potential data (Figure 1c) revealed a reversal in the
electrical surface charge
of GNRs after the deposition of each adsorbed layer except for DOXO
one, as mentioned above. The characteristic zig-zag profile corroborates
the layering of alternatively charged PEs with two intermediate drug
layers. The assembly of the last HA layer was designed taking into
consideration that slightly positively charged NPs should be more
effective in interacting with the negatively charged cell membranes,
as mentioned in previous chapters.35,47 Therefore,
the amount of HA incorporated was such to decrease the net positive
surface charge of the NPs while avoiding complete charge reversal.

Figure 2 shows the
population hydrodynamic size distributions measured by DLS for PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated
and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs. Here, it is necessary
to bear in mind that DLS data are calculated on the assumption of
spherical geometries so the obtained hydrodynamic radii should be
taken as a bare approximation. The hydrodynamic dimensions of the
hybrid nanoplatforms increased as the number of wrapped layers did
(e.g., a single PSS layer led to a size increase of ca. 5 nm), and
particle sizes increased up to ca. 77.0 ± 4.5 and 151.3 ±
7.1 nm for PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated ones, respectively. These size increments might be especially
related to the swelling of the outer HA layer in aqueous environments,48 but some little clusterization of the nanoplatforms
cannot be completely disregarded. To note some potential contribution
from particle aggregation or bridging between GNRs, TEM images were
also acquired. Almost negligible signs of aggregation and/or bridging
were noted. The coating layers were hardly observed, provided that
they did not offer enough contrast.

Figure 2 Hydrodynamic radii for (a) CTAB-coated
(black), PSS-coated (red),
PSS/DOXO/PLL-HA-coated (blue), and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2-HA-coated
(green) GNRs. (b) Scanning TEM image of (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs.

Next, the EE for a chosen
initial feed of 150 μg of DOXO
in 1 mL of PSS-coated GNRs at OD ≈ 1 (ca. 5 × 1014 NP/mL) was estimated to be ca. 78.3 ± 6.9% for the first layer
of the adsorbed drug and 56 ± 13% for the second one, with a
total EE of ca. 65.7 ± 1.4% for (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs. Similar decreases in EE upon sequential entrapment of drugs
in several layers have been also reported elsewhere.49 The LCs were 41.5 ± 7.9 and 39.4 ± 5.4% for the
first and second drug layers, respectively, with a whole LC of 51
± 13%, which highlights the outstanding capacity of these hybrid
nanoplatforms to entrap DOXO in the polymeric surface layers.

2.3 DOXO Release from Hybrid GNRs
We
next determined the in vitro cumulative DOXO release profiles from
PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs
at different conditions, in particular, at physiological pH 7.4 and
pH 5.5, which correspond to the acidic microenvironment of the cell
cytoplasm, in the presence of 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS).
Moreover, the influence of both endogenous and exogenous triggers
as enzymes (proteases) and NIR light in the drug release profiles
and rates was also analyzed.

2.3.1 Enzymatic-Assisted Drug
Release
The biodegradability of the PLL polymer by endogenous
proteases such
as lysosomal cathepsin B, often upregulated in cancerous and inflamed
cells, and trypsin may confer a slow degradation of the polymeric
layer inside the cells and enable a gradual triggered DOXO release
from the particles, which might result in a sustained therapeutic
effect at much lower doses than that of the administered free drug.

To study DOXO release from both PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs, the hybrid particles were incubated at 37
°C in the presence and absence of trypsin at both pHs 7.4 and
5.5 supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS for 4 days (Figure 3). The release profiles initially displayed
a burst phase followed by a much slower release pattern for both types
of drug-loaded particles at both solution conditions. At pH 7.4 in
the absence of the enzyme, PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs released ca.
50% of the loaded cargo in 96 h, whereas (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated ones only released ca. 35% (Figure 3a), in agreement with the much slower drug
diffusion from the inner coating layer. In the presence of trypsin,
PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs released ca. 85% of the cargo, whereas
(PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated ones released ca. 50%, which
agrees with (i) the degradation of PLL when the protease is present,
thus facilitating drug diffusion out of the particles and (ii) the
larger resistance of the (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA coating layer
to enzymatic degradation, offering an enhanced cargo protection and
lowering the release rate.50,51 An additional contribution
to drug diffusion at physiological pH might also stem from the reduced
ionization state of the drug (pKa of DOXO
ca. 8.2), which results in a weakening of electrostatic interactions
with the underlying anionic PSS polymeric layer.51

Figure 3 DOXO cumulative release profiles at (a) pH 7.4 and (b) pH 5.5 for
PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated (squares) and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs (circles) in the absence (black ■, red ●) and presence
(black □, red ○) of trypsin. The lines are only to guide
the eye. The relative standard deviation (SD) was found less than
10.0%. Error bars were not included for clarity.

Under acidic conditions (see Figure 3b), DOXO cumulative releases from the hybrid
particles
were much slower. For example, in the presence of trypsin, DOXO released
after 96 h reached ca. 40 and 20% for PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs, respectively, in contrast to 85 and 50% at
physiological pH. In addition, differences in DOXO release rates and
extents from PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs in the presence and absence of the enzyme were much
smaller. Several factors may contribute to the observed behavior.
At pH 5.5, PLL is more densely charged and adopts a random coil conformation,52 which should facilitate the establishment of
electrostatic interactions and entanglements with the underlying PSS
layer, compacting the PE coating and thus reducing drug diffusion.
Moreover, DOXO molecules are positively charged at acidic pH, favoring
the attraction with the PSS layer/s. This effect is specially noted
for (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs, in which the accessibility
of the enzyme to the PE coating within the time range analyzed seemed
to be largely precluded. In summary, the release rates were generally
faster in the presence of the degrading enzyme as a consequence of
PLL degradation, and the amount of released drug depended on the number
of layers covering the particles and the solution conditions.53

2.3.2 NIR Light-Induced Release
The possibility
of triggering DOXO release from the hybrid NPs by using NIR light
irradiation matching the longitudinal LPSR peak of GNRs was also explored.
Hence, in vitro cumulative DOXO release profiles at acidic conditions
(pH 5.5) in the presence of 10% (v/v) FBS under NIR laser irradiation
of 808 nm and fluencies of 0.5 and 3.0 W/cm2 applied for
5 min at 6 and 24 h of incubation were obtained (Figure 4).

Figure 4 NIR-induced DOXO release
from (a) PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (b)
(PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs. The laser powers were 3.0
(green ▼) and 0.5 (blue ▲) W/cm2. Simple
drug diffusion (black ■, red ●) and enzymatic-assisted
release (black □, red ○) are also shown for comparison.
The relative SD was found to be less than 10.0%. Error bars were not
included for clarity. The lines are only to guide the eye.

Similar to enzymatic-assisted release, NIR-induced
DOXO release
profiles displayed a burst phase at short incubation times (within
ca. 12–20 h of incubation) followed by a more sustained release
phase. The release extent was observed to be greatly enhanced in the
presence of NIR light irradiation compared to protease-assisted and
diffusion-only cumulative releases for both types of hybrid particles
(Figure 4). For example,
meanwhile the PLL coating was hardly degraded by trypsin at short
incubation times (<24 h), laser irradiation achieved a much faster
destabilization of the PE layers through localized heating around
each NP and the potential generation of hot electrons, which modifies
PE–drug interactions and allows DOXO release.54 For PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs (Figure 4a), the release extent and rate were slightly
larger under NIR illumination of 3 W/cm2 than those at
0.5 W/cm2, with ca. 65 and 60% of drug release after 96
h of incubation, respectively. Light-induced DOXO release from (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs was ca. 37% with no influence of the applied
light intensity and lower than those obtained for the former types
of particles (Figure 6b). We hypothesized that light absorption by the multilayered structure
(see above) might involve the used fluencies to be insufficient to
correctly modulate the PE interactions (Figure 6b).

2.4 Particle
Uptake and DOXO Release in Vitro
The uptake and cellular
distribution of PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated
and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs were analyzed by fluorescence
microscopy in the absence and presence of NIR light irradiation (0.5
W/cm2, 5 min) for 24 h by taking advantage of the intrinsic
fluorescent properties of DOXO. As an additional control, PSS/PLL/HA-coated
GNRs were used to disregard any potential interference from light
reflection originated by the hybrid particles. In this manner, the
red fluorescence could be solely assigned to the presence of the drug.

Figure 5 shows that
both PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs were internalized by HeLa cells, as observed for the red fluorescence
corresponding to DOXO released inside the cells, similar as that observed
for the administered free drug used as the reference. In the absence
of NIR light irradiation, free DOXO is able to penetrate the cell
nuclei within 4 h of incubation. Fluorescent signals of DOXO released
from PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs were less intense at this time point and mainly located in the
cell cytoplasm, which agrees with the slower and sustained release
of the drug from the NPs (see Figure 3). It is known that DOXO can be quickly transported
into cells, entering the active site (nuclei) by passive diffusion.
In contrast, DOXO-loaded GNRs are internalized in cells by an endocytosis-related
mechanism and are too large to cross the membrane of cell nuclei so
only released DOXO from particles can diffuse into.55 This fact was corroborated through three-dimensional (3D)
image reconstruction of cells upon incubation with (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs for 6 h (see Figure S2 in Supporting Information).

Figure 5 Fluorescence microscopy images of (from
top to bottom): bare HeLa
cells, bare PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs, free DOXO, PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated
GNRs, and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs after 4 h of internalization.
The blue channel shows the fluorescence from cell nuclei stained with
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; λex =
355 nm); the red channel shows the DOXO fluorescence signal; the TL-BF
channel displays the optical direct bright field images; and the merged
images show the combination of the three previous channels. Scale
bars are 10 μm.

On the other hand, at longer incubation times (>6 h),
DOXO released
from particles reached the cell nuclei and its fluorescence became
more important than that of free DOXO, particularly after 24 h of
incubation (see Figure S3 in Supporting Information). This was especially noted for PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs; for
(PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated ones, the observed intensity
was slightly lower, in agreement with their more sustained release
pattern, as observed previously (see Figure 3). Nonetheless, the presence of DOXO in the
cell cytoplasms at 24 h for both types of hybrid nanoplatforms confirmed
the sustained DOXO release from the nanoconstructs.

Fluorescence
images of cancerous cells with internalized DOXO-loaded
nanohybrids under laser light irradiation suggested that NIR light
exposure enhanced particle uptake and drug release by modulating the
electrostatic interactions between DOXO and the polymeric layers.56 The presence of DOXO in cell nuclei was observed
faster under laser exposure, as noted by the stronger red signals
in nuclei at shorter incubation times (6 h) and which was maintained
at longer times. No important differences in fluorescence signals
between PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs after 24 h of incubation under NIR irradiation were observed.
Here, it is necessary to bear in mind that (PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated
and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs released ca. 40 and
25% of the total drug at 24 h, respectively, but the bilayered nanohybrid
is able to encapsulate more drug; thus, the DOXO concentration administered
to cells under irradiation should be relatively similar in both cases.

2.5 In Vitro Cell Cytotoxicity of DOXO-Loaded
GNRs
The cytotoxicity of the two different DOXO-loaded GNRs
was assessed by means of the CCK-8 proliferation assay. Incubation
of free DOXO, PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs, (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs, and PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs (control) was done for
24 and 48 h in cervical HeLa and breast MDA-MB-231 tumoral cell lines
at different NP concentrations (see also Table S1 in Supporting Information).

Control PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs
were observed to be safe and nontoxic, with cell viabilities above
95% for MDA-MB-231 cells at 24 and 48 h and HeLa ones at 24 h (Figure 6a,c,d) at concentrations up to 2.5 × 1010 NP/mL.
At larger particle concentrations, cell viabilities decrease but were
still above 50%, an accepted limit to consider a material as biocompatible.
For HeLa cells after 48 h of incubation (Figure 6b), cell viability hardly remained above
50% at the most diluted concentrations (below 2.5 × 1010 NP/mL).35 This larger cell toxicity would
be related to a larger particle uptake mediated by a receptor-endocytosis
process, in which CD44 receptors largely overexpressed on the membrane
surfaces of HeLa cells would interact with the HA coating of the hybrid
NPs, which might compromise cell function and viability (see Figure
S4 in Supporting Information).35,57 On the other hand, DOXO-loaded GNRs exhibited a stronger cell toxicity,
which can be ascribed exclusively to the drug action. Specifically,
PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
ones (Figure 6a,b)
exhibited similar concentration-dependent toxicity profiles in HeLa
cells, with the former nanoconstructs being more toxic in agreement
with their observed faster drug release rates (see Figure 3). In addition, survival cell
rates in the presence of DOXO-loaded hybrid particles were smaller
than those for the free drug, suggesting that a sustained drug release
pattern from the NPs is much more effective for a therapeutic action,
that is, similar cell toxicities can be achieved using much lower
drug concentrations (Table 2).

Figure 6 Cellular viability of PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated (black ■),
(PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated (red ●), and PSS/PLL/HA-coated
GNRs (blue ▲) and free DOXO (green ▼) in (a,b) HeLa
and (c,d) MDA-MB-231 cells after 24 and 48 h of incubation.

Table 2 IC50 Values
for Free DOXO,
PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-Coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-Coated GNRs
in HeLa, and MDA-MB-231 Cell Lines at 24 and 48 ha
 	HeLa
IC50 (μM)b	MDA-MB-231 IC50 (μM)b	
 	24 h	48 h	24 h	48 h	
free DOXO	4.2	0.2	7.0	1.6	
DOXO-loaded GNRs	<12.4	<14.4	4.9	1.3	
(DOXO)2-loaded GNRs	4.1	<6.5	2.1	1.2	
a Uncertainties are estimated to be
less than 10%.

b IC50 concentrations obtained
from DOXO-loaded GNRs and (DOXO)2-loaded GNRs were calculated
taking into account the percentage of drug released at 24 or 48 h
(see Figure 3).

On the other hand, MDA-MB-231 cells
seemed to be less sensitive
to DOXO at 24 and 48 h as suggested by the larger IC50 values
compared to those of HeLa cells. At low NP concentrations (below 2.5
× 1010 NP/mL), similar concentration-dependent toxicity
profiles were observed for both nanocarriers and the free drug. At
higher NP concentrations, PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs again displayed
larger cell toxicities, as observed for HeLa cells.

2.6 In Vitro Potential Combined Effects of Chemo-
and Photothermal Therapies
To analyze the combinatorial effect
of PPTT and DOXO, CCK-8 viability assays were also carried out in
the presence of NIR light illumination. Free DOXO and PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated,
(PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated, and PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs (as
control) were administered to HeLa and MDA-MB-231 cells in the presence
of NIR laser illumination (808 nm) at different intensities (0.5,
1, 3 W/cm2) after 6 h of incubation for 5 min, and the
cell viabilities were analyzed after 24 and 48 h of incubation (Figure 7). The NP concentration
was set up at 2.5 × 1010 NP/mL.

Figure 7 Photothermal-induced
toxicity of PSS/PLL/HA-coated (bare), PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated
(monolayer), and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated (bilayer) GNRs
and free DOXO (DOXO) in (a) HeLa and (b) MDA-MB-231 cells. The cells
were irradiated with a continuous-wave (CW) laser at 808 nm at 0 (blue),
0.5 (light blue), 1 (light red), and 3 W/cm2 (red) for
5 min. The dotted (50%) and dashed lines (100%) are only to guide
the eye.

First, it was noted that cell
toxicity induced by free DOXO slightly
increases as the irradiation intensity does after 24 h. This effect
was related to small macroscopic temperature increases under NIR light
illumination (see Figure S5 in Supporting Information), which would promote more efficient drug diffusion inside cells
by increasing tissue permeability and sensitivity to the drug therapeutic
action.58 At longer incubation times, these
changes were largely diminished as a consequence of the saturation
of the cytostatic activity of the chemotherapeutic drug.

As
shown previously, bare PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs were completely
nontoxic in the absence of NIR irradiation at the selected concentration.
In comparison, NIR laser illumination of these NPs led to a noticeable
increase in cell toxicity because of local temperature increments
generated by the plasmonic hyperthermic effect (see Figure S5).59 Also, HeLa cells
exhibited lower cell viabilities than MDA-MB-231 ones as a result
of their larger particle uptakes as a consequence of the larger overexpression
of the HA receptor of the former type of cells, as mentioned above.

Both PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs gave rise to NIR light intensity-dependent cell toxicities, these
being larger than those in the absence of light illumination. This
highlights a potential synergetic effect between PPTT and chemotherapy,
for example, increments in cell toxicity from 80% to almost 100% for
PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated NPs and from 62 to 83% for (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated nanocarriers at 3 W/cm2 in HeLa cells
after 48 h of incubation. Despite the evident influence of light,
PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs displayed again a faster toxic activity
compared to (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated ones as a consequence
of their quicker cargo release. Besides, the attenuated light absorption
observed in (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs by the presence
of a thicker polymeric shell would additionally screen both drug release
and light-to-heat conversion, contributing to their lower cell cytotoxicities.

2.7 Cell Death
To determine by which
pathway (either necrosis or apoptosis) the present multifunctional
nanoplatforms cause toxicity to cells, an Annexin V (AnnV)/7-Aminoactinomycin
D (7AAD) dead cell assay was performed. AnnV is a protein that specifically
binds to phosphatidyl serine, a phospholipid that becomes exposed
on the cell surface as a result of apoptosis. 7AAD, on the other hand,
is a fluorophore that intercalates with DNA and is used to analyze
loss of membrane integrity during necrosis. HeLa and MDA-MB-231 cells
were treated with PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated, (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated, and PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs and free DOXO used as a positive
control for apoptosis. Untreated cells were the negative (live) control.
After 6 h of incubation with the hybrid NPs or the free drug, cells
were illuminated with a CW NIR laser light at several power intensities
(0, 0.5, 1, and 3 W/cm2) for 5 min. The proportion of live,
dead, and apoptotic cells was quantified by flow cytometry after 24
h of incubation. Here, it is considered that necrosis and apoptosis
are different mechanisms of cell death, according to Kerr et al,60 so both processes can be present simultaneously,
that is, 7-ADD fluorescence will only appear when the membrane is
disrupted and the Annexin V signal will be always present in apoptotic
cells. We did not focus on the molecular mechanisms involved in the
observed processes, which will be the subject of a future study.

Cell death in free DOXO-treated cells was dominated by apoptosis
(ranging from 80 to 90%) both in the absence and presence of NIR laser
irradiation (Figure 8), denoting that irradiation does not have an influence on the DOXO-induced
cell mechanism. A much smaller signal from 7-ADD was also noted, but
the percentage of gathered cells was always below ca. 10–15%,
which may be associated to secondary necrosis, that is, the loss of
membrane integrity by late apoptotic cells.61 Thus, it can be safely considered that the action of the chemodrug
is mainly through apoptosis. On the other hand, PSS/PLL/HA-coated
GNR-induced cell death in the absence of light irradiation was similar
as that of control cells, corroborating their low toxicity. In the
presence of NIR irradiation and as the light fluency is increased,
the extent of necrotic cells was largely enhanced as a consequence
of the photothermal effect, especially at fluencies above 1 W/cm2 (under 5 min of illumination), which is characterized by
extensive membrane blebbing, budding, and endosome expansion (see
below). Similar necrotic-induced cell death was also previously noted
for other NIR-irradiated GNR-based nanosystems for PPTT applications.62,63 Conversely, very recently, NIR illumination for short times (2–4
min) of gold nanoplates using a 1064 nm laser light was shown to induce
cell death by apoptosis, which is mediated by nuclear encoded proteins
Bak and Bax through the activation of the BH3-only protein BID.61 Hence, it can be considered that the type of
predominant programmed cell death mechanism may depend on different
inter-related factors such as the illumination conditions, cellular
internalization and location, particle type and concentration, and
so forth.

Figure 8 Ann V/7AAD death cell assay in (a) HeLa and (b) MDA-MB-231 cells.
The percentage of cells displaying Annexin V fluorescence is shown
in dark orange, and the percentage of necrotic ones stained with 7-ADD
is shown in light orange. PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated (monolayer), (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated (bilayer), and PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs were irradiated
at several power intensities with a CW NIR laser (808 nm). DOXO was
used as a positive control for apoptotic cells. The untreated cells
were used as a negative control. The dotted and dashed lines are only
to guide the eye.

In addition, experimental
data confirmed that cell death caused
by PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated and (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated
GNRs in the absence of NIR irradiation is mainly driven through apoptosis
thanks to the chemodrug action. As NIR irradiation is applied and
the fluency progressively increased, cell apoptotic-induced mortalities
(generally between ca. 60–80% for HeLa and ca. 80–90%
for MDA-MB-231 cells up to 1 W/cm2) are also observed as
occurred, for example, for Au nanoshells,64 and necrosis is progressively enhanced and added to the apoptotic
effect of DOXO.

From Figure 8, it
can be also appreciated that the level of necrotic cells in HeLa cells
was higher than that in MDA-MB-231 ones. For instance, at 3 W/cm2, HeLa cells exhibited a 7-ADD fluorescence of ca. at 80%
compared to ca. 60% for MDA-MB-231 cells. This was probably a consequence
of the larger particle uptake by the former cell line, as mentioned
before: a larger GNR concentration into cells would lead to higher
temperatures and then to cell death through a necrotic pathway.

The type of induced cell death and the confirmation of cell particle
internalization were also monitored by TEM imaging. PSS/PLL/HA-coated
and PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated GNRs were incubated in HeLa cells for 6
h at standard conditions. Some cells were also irradiated with an
808 nm CW laser for 5 min at 1 W/cm2.

PSS/PLL/HA-coated
GNRs were observed to internalize inside HeLa
cells without any sign of associated cell toxicity (see Figure S6a,b
in Supporting Information). These particles
were located at the cell cytoplasm inside endosomal vesicles, which
agrees with a receptor-mediated endocytosis process promoted by the
binding between HA and membrane surface-expressed CD44 receptors.
Some membrane blebs related to the dehydration process undergone by
cells during sample preparation were also observed, and neither shrinking
nor cell swelling was noted. In comparison, internalization of PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated
GNRs was accompanied by budding and cellular separation in apoptotic
bodies (see Figure S6c,d in Supporting Information) related to the beginning of an apoptotic process associated to
the DOXO chemotherapeutic activity, further corroborating the flow
cytometry data. The hybrid particles were also observed inside vesicles,
and some membrane blebs were noted, as occurred for PSS/PLL/HA-coated
particles.

Conversely, when PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs were internalized
inside
HeLa cells and irradiated at a fluency of 1 W/cm2 for 5
min, mitochondrial swelling and more membrane blebs, characteristic
of a necrotic process were observed65 in
agreement with the Annexin V/7AAD dead Cell assay (Figure 9a,b). The hybrid particles
were localized inside vesicles and their morphology appeared altered,
that is, some of them partially lost their typical cylindrical morphology
to become more spherical as a consequence of melting due to the relatively
high temperatures reached under laser exposure.65 These particle-loaded vesicles have larger sizes than those
observed in nonirradiated cells, probably associated to an increase
in the inner pressure upon light-induced heating. No evident signs
of budding, shrinking, or presence of apoptotic bodies were observed.

Figure 9 TEM images
of HeLa cells after 6 h of incubation with (a,b) PSS/PLL/HA-coated
GNRs and (c,d) (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated GNRs under irradiation
with an 808 nm CW laser for 5 min at 1 W/cm2. Scale bars
are 2 μm.

Finally, the combination
of DOXO and PPTT after PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated
GNRs internalization and subsequent NIR irradiation involved simultaneous
signs of both apoptosis and necrosis in cells such as the observation
of cell dehydration (shrinkage), budding, and the presence of apoptotic
bodies and blebs inside and around cell membranes corresponding to
the chemotherapeutic activity of DOXO and PPTT effect, respectively,
which is also in agreement with the Annexin V/7AAD dead data (Figure 9c,d.). Most part
of the observed particle-containing vesicles appeared expanded with
some melted GNRs present inside.

3 Conclusions
In this work, we successfully designed and obtained GNR-based hybrid
nanoplatforms as a potential tool for the controlled delivery of the
therapeutic cargo by different internal and external triggers and
to get potential combined chemo- and photothermal therapeutic outcomes
by making use of the photothermal activity provided by the metal NPs
under NIR light illumination and the presence of a chemotherapeutic
agent (DOXO) assembled in the particle polymeric coating layer. In
this manner, GNRs were surface-functionalized with PSS, PLL, DOXO,
and HA by means of the LbL assembly technique. HA was used as the
final outer coating layer to provide particle colloidal stabilization
as well as to serve as a targeting moiety to bind CD44 receptors overexpressed
on the surface of different types of cancerous cells. Single and dual
DOXO layers could be formed within the surface-assembled PE layers
of GNRs (PSS/PLL/DOXO/HA-coated and (PSS/PLL/DOXO)2/HA-coated
GNRs, respectively). Drug release from the hybrid particles could
be either enzymatically and/or light-triggered thanks to the biodegradability
of PLL in the presence of proteases and the modulation of interactions
in the PE coating layer by light, respectively. In vitro microscopy
fluorescence and TEM imaging confirmed the successful cell internalization
of the hybrid nanoplatforms. The simultaneous combination of chemotherapy
and photothermal activity within this single nanoplatform increased
cell cytotoxicity significantly. This fact might potentially help
to overcome drug resistances to chemotherapeutic agents by allowing
the use of much lower drug concentrations. Moreover, it was noted
that HA-ligand targeting enhanced the photothermal effect as a result
of NP accumulation in cells to greater extents. The type of cell death
mechanism was evaluated by the Annexin V/7AAD dead cell assay and
TEM. It was noted that PPTT caused necrosis to cells, as observed
by mitochondrial swelling and membrane blebs by TEM, whilst DOXO activated
apoptosis. The present GNR-based nanohybrids might additionally be
optimized for other multimodal cancer therapies, and their optical
properties might be exploited for therapy monitorization and preliminary
diagnosis, making these nanosystems ideal nanomaterials for theranosis.

4 Experimental Section
4.1 Materials
CTAB
for molecular biology,
tetrachloroauric acid (HAuCl4·3H2O), silver
nitrate (AgNO3), sodium borohydride (NaBH4),
PSS, PLL, HA, and trypsin (0.25×) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Ascorbic acid was purchased from Fluka. DOXO hydrochloride was purchased
from Calbiochem. All other reagents were of analytical grade and/or
suitable for cell culture, as corresponding. All chemicals were used
as received.

4.2 Synthesis of GNRs
GNRs were synthesized
using a seed-mediated growth method. First, CTAB-capped Au seeds were
obtained. To do that, 7.5 mL of a 0.2 M CTAB solution was gently mixed
with 0.25 mL of 0.01 M HAuCl4 in a water bath at 27 °C.
Next, a 0.01 M NaBH4 solution was prepared in ice-cold
water. This solution was left to rest for 2–3 min to ensure
a good dispersion of the reductant. Afterward, 0.6 mL of ice-cold
0.01 M NaBH4 was added to the Au–CTAB solution under
stirring at 200 rpm in one pull, after which the mixed solution turned
brownish yellow. This was mixed gently by hand for 2 min and then
left undisturbed in a water bath at 27 °C for 1 h to allow the
excess sodium borohydride to be decomposed.

For the growth of
GNRs, 425 μL of a 0.01 M HAuCl4 solution was added
to 10 mL of 0.2 M CTAB in a water bath at 27 °C, after which
the solution turned yellow bright while stirred at 500 rpm. Then,
a 0.01 M a AgNO3 solution was prepared in the dark. Different
volumes of the silver solution (ranging from 63 to 143 μL) were
added to the Au growth solution followed by gentle mixing by hand.
Then, 68 μL of a 0.1 M ascorbic acid solution was added followed
by gentle stirring at 500 rpm until the solution turned colorless
and left it in this way for 4 min in a water bath at 27 °C. Finally,
110 μL of the Au seed solution was gently added to the Au growth
solution while stirring for 2 min and then stopped. The resulting
solution was left undisturbed in a water bath overnight at 27 °C,
and the solution turned reddish pink. The formed GNRs were centrifuged
at least twice at 27 °C for 20 min and resuspended in 10 mL of
deionized water. The UV–visible absorption spectra of the obtained
GNRs were measured using a Cary Bio 100 UV–Vis spectrophotometer
(Agilent Technologies, USA). The sizes and aspect ratios of GNRs were
measured using a JEOL JEM 1011 (Japan) TEM microscope operating at
an accelerating voltage of 120 kV.

4.3 Preparation
of PE Multilayers onto GNRs
4.3.1 PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-Coated
GNRs
Using
the LbL method, multilayers of PSS, DOXO, PLL, and HA were successfully
deposited on the GNR surfaces. For PSS coating, a solution of PSS
(10 mg/mL) in 12 mM NaCl was prepared. When this PE was completely
dissolved, 1 mL of this PE solution was mixed with 1 mL of a 12 mM
NaCl solution, and the resulting mixture was stirred at 500 rpm. Then,
the latter solution was added dropwise to 1 mL of a GNR solution (OD
≈ 1) while stirring. After 1 h of adsorption, the mixture was
centrifuged twice at 15 000 rpm for 20 min and resuspended
in 1 mL of Milli-Q water. Next, a solution of DOXO (1 mM) was prepared
in an acetic acid buffer at pH 4.166 to
protonate the drug amino groups for a more efficient LbL electrostatic-based
deposition. DOXO (typically 100 μg) was diluted in 700 μL
of water and stirred at 500 rpm for 5 min. Next, 1 mL of the PSS-coated
GNRs was added dropwise to the DOXO solution under stirring. After
1 h, the mixture was centrifuged once at 15 000 rpm for 20
min and redispersed in 1 mL of Milli-Q water. As the PSS/DOXO-coated
GNR particles have a negative surface charge, a subsequent cationic
PLL layer can be used to coat the hybrids. Thus, 100 μL of a
PLL solution (5 mg/mL) was added to 1 mL of Milli-Q water and stirred
for 5 min. Then, 1 mL of PSS/DOXO-coated GNRs was added dropwise.
After 1 h, the NPs were centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 15 min
and resuspended in 1 mL of Milli-Q water. The deposition of the final
HA layer was made by preparing 60 μL of a HA concentrated solution
(1 mg/mL), which was mixed with 1 mL of Milli-Q water and stirred
at 500 rpm for 5–10 min. The former PSS/DOXO/PLL-coated GNRs
were added dropwise to the former HA solution. After 1 h, the final
coated GNRs were centrifuged at 15 000 rpm for 10 min and redispersed
in 1 mL of Milli-Q water.

4.3.2 (PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-Coated GNRs
For these particles, the first three layers
corresponding to PSS,
DOXO, and PLL were obtained as previously explained. Next, a second
new PSS layer was formed by mixing 250 μL of the PSS solution
with 750 μL of 12 mM NaCl and stirring at 500 rpm. Then, 1 mL
of PSS/DOXO/PLL-coated GNRs (OD ≈ 1) was added dropwise while
stirring. After 1 h, the mixed solution was centrifuged once at 15 000
rpm for 20 min and redispersed in 1 mL of Milli-Q water. Next, 100
μg of DOXO (1 mM) was mixed with 1 mL of acetic acid buffer
and stirred at 500 rpm for 5 min. (PSS)2/DOXO/PLL-coated
GNRs were added to this solution dropwise under stirring. After 1
h, the mixture was centrifuged once at 15 000 rpm for 20 min
and redispersed in 1 mL of water. Then, 50 μL of a 5 mg/mL PLL
solution was mixed with 1 mL of water and stirred at 500 rpm for 5
min. Again, 1 mL of (PSS/DOXO)2/PLL-coated GNRs was added
to this PLL solution dropwise under stirring. After 1 h, the mixture
was centrifuged once at 15 000 rpm for 20 min and redispersed
in 1 mL of MilliQ water. The final HA layer implied the dilution of
60 μL of HA in 1 mL of water and stirred at 500 rpm for 5–10
min. (PSS/DOXO/PLL/)2-coated GNRs were then added drop
by drop at 500 rpm. After 1 h, the final hybrid NPs were centrifuged
at 15 000 rpm for 10 min and redispersed in 1 mL of deionized
Milli-Q water.

4.4 Dynamic Light Scattering
DLS measurements
were performed using an ALV-5000 digital correlator system (ALV 5000/E,
ALV GmbH, Germany) equipped with a temperature controller set at 25
± 0.1 °C. The scattered light was vertically polarized with
a 488 nm solid-state laser (2 W). The hydrodynamic radius, RH, was obtained for diluted samples from DLS
measurements at an incidence angle of 90° by analysis of the
DLS data by means of the CONTIN algorithm developed by Provencher67 and the Stokes–Einstein equation, RH = kBT/6πηD, where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature,
η is the solution viscosity, and D is the diffusion
coefficient of the particles. Measurements were performed at least
in triplicate with a sampling time of 60 s each and averaged.

4.5 Electrophoretic Mobilities
ζ-Potentials
of bare and PE-coated GNRs were measured using Nano ZS (Nanoseries,
Malvern Instruments, UK). The instrument measures the electrophoretic
mobility of the particles and converts it into ζ-potential data
using the classical Smoluchowski equation 1  where α,
ε, ζ, and η
denote the electrophoretic mobility, permittivity of the medium, ζ-potential
of the particles, and viscosity, respectively. Each sample was fed
into a folded capillary, clear, disposable cell. Measurements were
initiated after thermal equilibration at 25 °C. The number of
runs was automatically determined by the software, and measurements
were performed in triplicate. The results were reported as the mean
± SD.

4.6 Quantitative Analysis of
DOXO Loading
To determine the EE and LC of DOXO within PSS/PLL/DOXO/HA-coated
and (PSS/PLL/siRNA)2/HA-coated GNRs, the hybrid NPs were
centrifuged at 15 000 rpm at 20 °C for 20 min. The DOXO
content in the supernatant was measured by means of UV–vis
and fluorescent spectroscopies. Previously, a calibration curve with
free DOXO was obtained, and the absorbance/fluorescence of supernatants
of bare GNR solutions was also considered as an additional blank.
UV–vis measurements were made at 488 nm. The fluorescence standard
curves were set at λex = 480 nm and collected at
λem = 560–590 nm. UV–vis spectra were
measured in a Cary Bio 100 UV–vis spectrophotometer (Agilent
Technologies, USA). Fluorescence spectra were monitored in a Cary
Eclipse spectrophotometer (Agilent Technologies, USA). Each sample
was measured in triplicate for three different batches. The EE and
LC were calculated by the following expressions 2a   2b  

4.7 Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry
The Au concentration in solution or in cells was determined by
inductively coupling plasma mass spectrometry in a Varian 820-MS equipment
(Agilent Technologies, USA). One milliliter of 1 × 1011 GNRs/mL (or 100 000 cells with NPs where corresponding) was
dissolved in 0.3 mL of HCl [37% (v/v)] and 0.1 mL of HNO3 [70% (v/v)]. The solutions were diluted with deionized water until
reaching a final volume of 2 mL. The intensity of the emission wavelength
was measured and compared to a standard solution.

4.8 In Vitro Release Experiments
DOXO
cumulative release profiles from the hybrid NPs were measured in vitro
at a constant temperature of 37 °C at 300 rpm magnetic stirring
for several days at pHs 7.4 and 5.5. To obtain the release profiles,
1 mL of hybrid GNRs was placed into dialysis tubes (SpectraPore, MWCO
3500) and immersed into 50 mL of buffer supplemented with 10% (v/v)
FBS at the pH of interest. The released DOXO concentration was determined
at different time intervals for each solution pH. At each sampling
time, 1 mL of the medium was withdrawn and replaced with the same
volume of fresh buffer to maintain the required sink conditions. The
DOXO content was measured by means of UV–vis and fluorescence
using previously established calibration curves in the corresponding
buffers. UV–vis spectra were measured in a Cary Bio 100 UV–vis
spectrophotometer (Agilent Technologies, USA), and the fluorescence
spectra were monitored in a Cary Eclipse spectrophotometer (Agilent
Technologies, USA). Assays were carried out in triplicate.

4.8.1 Protease-Assisted DOXO Release
The enzyme-triggered
DOXO release from GNRs (1 mL, 1 × 1011 NP/mL) was
measured in vitro at a constant temperature of
37 °C under moderate magnetic stirring (300 rpm) for several
days at pHs 7.4 and 5.5 in the presence and absence of trypsin–ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (50 μL per 40 mL of buffer). Hybrid GNRs (1 mL) were placed
into dialysis tubes (SpectraPore, MWCO 3500) and immersed into 50
mL of buffer supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS and the suitable amount
of trypsin at the pH of interest. The released DOXO concentrations
were determined as explained above.

4.8.2 NIR
Light-Triggered DOXO Release
To analyze the effect of the
laser exposure on DOXO release from
GNRs, 1 mL (1 × 1011 NP/mL) of these hybrid NPs was
incubated at 37° C under moderate stirring at pH 5.5. The experimental
conditions were similar as those previously stated in the absence
of trypsin, except for after 6 and 24 h of incubation GNRs, which
were exposed to NIR light irradiation of 0.5 and 3 W/cm2 for 5 min. Irradiation was performed using a CW fiber-coupled diode
laser source at 808 nm wavelength (50 W, Oclaro, Inc., San Jose, CA).
The laser was powered by a Newport 5700-80 laser diode driver (Newport
Corporation, Irvine, CA). A 200 μm core optical fiber was used
to transfer the laser power from the laser unit to the particle solution
and connected with a lens telescope mounting accessory at the output,
which allowed for fine-tuning the laser spot size in the range of
1–10 mm. The output power was independently calibrated using
an optical power meter (Newport 1916-C) and the laser spot size was
previously measured with a laser beam profiler (Newport LBP-1-USB),
which was placed at the same distance (8 cm) between the lens telescope
output and the sampling cuvette.

4.9 Tumor
Cells
Cervical HeLa and breast
MDA-MB-231 cancer cells from Cell Biolabs (San Diego, CA) were grown
at standard culture conditions (5% CO2 at 37 °C) in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented
with 10% (v/v) FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine, 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin,
1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 0.1 mM MEM nonessential amino acids.

4.10 Cellular Uptake by TEM
HeLa cells
were seeded in 6-well plates (2 mL, 5 × 104 cells
per well) and grown for 24 h at standard culture conditions. Then,
200 μL (2.5 × 1010 NP/mL) was added to cells.
After 6 h of incubation, the NP-containing cells were washed three
times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), trypsinized, and centrifuged
at 1500 rpm for 4 min. The cell pellets were fixed with 500 μL
of 2.5% (w/v) glutaraldehyde and then included in an agar pellet,
post-fixed with osmium tetraoxide in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer at 1%
(w/v), and, finally, pelletized with Eponate (Ted Pella Inc, Redding,
CA, USA). Ultrathin cuts were obtained with an ultramicrotome (UltraCut
S, Leica Microsystems GmbH) and analyzed with a TEM microscope (JEOL
JEM 1011, Japan).

4.11 Cellular Uptake and DOXO
Release by Fluorescence
Microscopy
Particle uptake and DOXO release inside cells
were also followed by fluorescence microscopy. HeLa cells were seeded
on poly-l-lysine coated glass coverslips (12 × 12 mm2, Sigma-Aldrich) placed inside 6-well plates (2 × 105 cells per well) with 2 mL of DMEM and grown for 24 h at standard
culture conditions. Then, PSS/PLL/DOXO/HA-coated and (PSS/PLL/DOXO)2/HA-coated GNRs (2.5 × 1010 NP/mL, 250 μL)
were added to cells. After 6 h of incubation, the cells were washed
three times with PBS and fresh medium was added. Next, some cells
were irradiated with a CW 808 nm fiber-coupled diode laser source
(50 W, Oclaro Inc., San Jose, CA) for 5 min at 0.5 W/cm2. After the desired incubation time (4, 6, 8, 12, and 24 h), the
cells were washed three times with PBS, fixed with 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde
for 10 min, washed again with PBS, treated with Triton X-100 for 10
min, and, finally, washed again with PBS. Then, the coverslips were
mounted on glass slides, stained with DAPI (Invitrogen, USA) and cured
for 24 h at −20 °C. The samples were visualized at 63×
using a wide field fluorescence inverted microscope (Leica DMI6000B,
Leica Microsystems, Germany) using the blue channel for DAPI (λex = 350 nm), the red channel for DOXO (λex = 520 nm), and transmitted light in differential interference contrast
mode.

4.12 In Vitro Cell Cytotoxicity
The cytotoxicity
of the present DOXO-loaded GNRs was tested in vitro by the CCK-8 proliferation
assay. Cervical HeLa and breast MDA-MB-231 cancer cells at an optical
confluence of 80–90% were seeded into 96-well plates (100 μL,
1.0 × 104 cells/well) and grown for 24 h at standard
culture conditions in 100 μL of the growth medium. After 24
h of incubation at 37 °C and 5% CO2, 100 μL
of a 2.5 × 1010 NP/mL solution of PSS/PLL/DOXO/HA-coated
and (PSS/PLL/DOXO)2/HA-coated GNRs were diluted in the
corresponding cell culture medium and then injected into the wells
and incubated for 6 h. Free DOXO was used as a control at a molar
concentration equivalent to the total drug loaded in PSS/PLL/DOXO/HA-coated
GNRs. After the corresponding incubation period (24 or 48 h), the
culture medium was discarded, cells were washed with PBS (pH 7.4)
and fresh culture medium (100 μL) was added, the culture medium
was discarded, the cells were washed again with 10 mM PBS, and new
culture medium (100 μL) was added containing 10 μL of
the CCK-8 reagent to each well. After 2 h of incubation, the absorbance
at 450 nm of cell samples was measured with a UV–vis microplate
absorbance reader (Bio-Rad model 689). The cell viability was calculated
as follows 3  where Abs sample
is the absorbance at 450
nm for samples with NPs and Abs blank is the absorbance for controls
without NPs.

In addition, some of the wells were also irradiated
with a CW fiber-coupled diode laser source at 808 nm (50 W, Oclaro,
Inc., San Jose, CA). The used power fluencies were 0.5, 1.0, and 3.0
W/cm2 for 5 min. After 18 and 42 h, the cells were washed
again and new fresh culture medium (100 μL) was added with 10
μL of the CCK-8 reagent to each well and measured as specified
above.

4.13 Annexin V/Dead Cell Apoptosis Assay
HeLa and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with PSS/DOXO/PLL/HA-coated,
(PSS/DOXO/PLL)2/HA-coated, and PSS/PLL/HA-coated GNRs and
with 2 μg/mL of free DOXO as a positive control for apoptosis.
Untreated cells were used as a negative control. After 6 h of incubation
with the hybrid NPs or free DOXO, the culture medium was changed by
fresh one and cells were illuminated with an 808 nm CW laser at several
power intensities (0, 0.5, 1, and 3 W/cm2) for 5 min. After
24 h, the cells were trypsinized and redispersed in 500 μL of
fresh medium (7.5 × 104 cells/mL). Then, 100 μL
of cells was mixed with 100 μL of the Annexin V/Dead cell reagent
(Muse Annexin V & Dead Cell Assay Kit, Millipore, USA) and incubated
for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Finally, flow cytometry
was perfomed using a Millipore Muse cell analyzer (Merck-Millipore,
USA).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b01591.UV–vis
spectra of DOXO-loaded GNRs; 3D reconstructed
fluorescence microscopy image of cell-internalized particles; fluorescence
microscopy images of GNR uptake and DOXO release at different time
points; quantification of DOXO concentration within the hybrid particles;
quantitative estimation of hybrid particles inside cells; temperature
increases upon illumination of hybrid particles with NIR light; and
TEM images of particle internalization (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b01591_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Authors thank
AIE for funding through Project MAT2016-80266-R.
FEDER funds are also greatly acknowledged. E.V.A. and A.P. are grateful
to the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad for their FPU
fellowships. Authors also especially thank staff of Instituto de Ortopedia
y Banco de Tejidos Musculoesqueléticos of the Universidade
de Santiago de Compostela for facilities to perform some of the in
vitro cell experiments.
==== Refs
References
Siegel R. L. ; Miller K. D. ; Jemal A. 
Cancer statistics, 2017 . Ca-Cancer J. Clin. 
2017 , 67 , 7 –30 . 10.3322/caac.21387 .28055103 
Alexis F. ; Pridgen E. M. ; Langer R. ; Farokhzad O. C.  Nanoparticle
technologies for cancer therapy . In Handbook
of Experimental Pharmacology ; Schafer-Korting M.  , Ed.; Springer-Verlag: Berlin-Heidelberg , 2010 ; pp 55 –86 .
Brigger I. ; Dubernet C. ; Couvreur P. 
Nanoparticles in cancer therapy and
diagnosis . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2002 , 54 , 631 –651 . 10.1016/s0169-409x(02)00044-3 .
Banerjee D. ; Sengupta S. 
Nanoparticles in cancer chemotherapy . Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci. 
2011 , 104 , 489 –507 . 10.1016/b978-0-12-416020-0.00012-7 .22093227 
Davis M. E. ; Chen Z. ; Shin D. M. 
Nanoparticle
therapeutics: an emerging
treatment modality for cancer . Nat. Rev. Drug
Discovery 
2008 , 7 , 771 –782 . 10.1038/nrd2614 .18758474 
Kwon G. S. ; Naito M. ; Yokoyama M. ; Okano T. ; Sakurai Y. ; Kataoka K. 
Physical entrapment
of adriamycin in AB block copolymer
micelles . Pharm. Res. 
1995 , 12 , 192 –195 . 10.1023/a:1016266523505 .7784332 
Gabizon A. ; Shiota R. ; Papahadjopoulos D. 
Pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution
of doxorubicin encapsulated in stable liposomes with long circulation
times . J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
1989 , 81 , 1484 –1488 . 10.1093/jnci/81.19.1484 .2778836 
Missirlis D. ; Kawamura R. ; Tirelli N. ; Hubbell J. A. 
Doxorubicin encapsulation
and diffusional release from stable, polymeric, hydrogel nanoparticles . Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2006 , 29 , 120 –129 . 10.1016/j.ejps.2006.06.003 .16904301 
Gillies E. ; Frechet J. 
Dendrimers and dendritic
polymers in drug delivery . Drug Discov. Today 
2005 , 10 , 35 –43 . 10.1016/s1359-6446(04)03276-3 .15676297 
Chaudhuri P. ; Paraskar A. ; Soni S. ; Mashelkar R. A. ; Sengupta S. 
Fullerenol–Cytotoxic Conjugates
for Cancer Chemotherapy . ACS Nano 
2009 , 3 , 2505 –2514 . 10.1021/nn900318y .19681636 
Barbosa S. ; Topete A. ; Alatorre-Meda M. ; Villar-Alvarez E. M. ; Pardo A. ; Alvarez-Lorenzo C. ; Concheiro A. ; Taboada P. ; Mosquera V. 
Targeted combinatorial therapy using
gold nanostars as theranostic platforms . J.
Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 26313 –26323 . 10.1021/jp505979e .
Azizi M. ; Ghourchian H. ; Yazdian F. ; Bagherifam S. ; Bekhradnia S. ; Nyström B. 
Anti-cancerous effect of albumin
coated silver nanoparticles on MDA-MB 231 human breast cancer cell
line . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 5178 10.1038/s41598-017-05461-3 .28701707 
Reichardt W. ; Hu-Lowe D. ; Torres D. ; Weissleder R. ; Bogdanov A. Jr.
Imaging of VEGF
receptor kinase inhibitor-induced
antiangiogenic effects in drug-resistant human adenocarcinoma model . Neoplasia 
2005 , 7 , 847 –853 . 10.1593/neo.05139 .16229807 
Mulder W. J. M. ; Koole R. ; Brandwijk R. J. ; Storm G. ; Chin P. T. K. ; Strijkers G. J. ; de Mello Donegá C. ; Nicolay K. ; Griffioen A. W. 
Quantum
dots with a paramagnetic coating as a bimodal
molecular imaging probe . Nano Lett. 
2006 , 6 , 1 –6 . 10.1021/nl051935m .16402777 
Manchester M. ; Singh P. 
Virus-based nanoparticles (VNPs): Platform technologies for diagnostic
imaging . Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 
2006 , 58 , 1505 –1522 . 10.1016/j.addr.2006.09.014 .
Lewinski N. ; Colvin V. ; Drezek R. 
Cytotoxicity
of nanoparticles . Small 
2008 , 4 , 26 –49 . 10.1002/smll.200700595 .18165959 
Tong L. ; Wei Q. ; Wei A. ; Cheng J.-X. 
Gold nanorods as contrast agents
for biological imaging: optical properties, surface conjugation and
photothermal effects . Photochem. Photobiol. 
2009 , 85 , 21 –32 . 10.1111/j.1751-1097.2008.00507.x .19161395 
DeLong R. ; Adam Wanekaya C. M. ; Chris Reynolds Y. ; Schaeffer A. ; Severs T. ; Wanekaya A. 
Functionalized
gold nanoparticles
for the binding, stabilization, and delivery of therapeutic DNA, RNA,
and other biological macromolecules . Nanotechnol.,
Sci. Appl. 
2010 , 3 , 53 –63 . 10.2147/nsa.s8984 .24198471 
Kim C.-k. ; Ghosh P. ; Rotello V. M. 
Multimodal
drug delivery using gold
nanoparticles . Nanoscale 
2009 , 1 , 61 –67 . 10.1039/b9nr00112c .20644861 
Chen H. ; Shao L. ; Li Q. ; Wang J. 
Gold nanorods and their
plasmonic properties . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2013 , 42 , 2679 –2724 . 10.1039/c2cs35367a .23128995 
Weissleder R. 
A clearer
vision for in vivo imaging . Nat. Biotechnol. 
2001 , 19 , 316 –317 . 10.1038/86684 .11283581 
Hu M. ; Chen J. ; Li Z.-Y. ; Au L. ; Hartland G. V. ; Li X. ; Marquez M. ; Xia Y. 
Gold nanostructures: Engineering
their plasmonic properties for biomedical applications . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2006 , 35 , 1084 –1094 . 10.1039/b517615h .17057837 
Jin S. ; Ma X. ; Ma H. ; Zheng K. ; Liu J. ; Hou S. ; Meng J. ; Wang P. C. ; Wu X. ; Liang X.-J. 
Surface
chemistry-mediated penetration and gold nanorod thermotherapy in multicellular
tumor spheroids . Nanoscale 
2013 , 5 , 143 –146 . 10.1039/c2nr31877f .23154390 
Dreaden E. C. ; Mackey M. A. ; Huang X. ; Kang B. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Beating
cancer in multiple ways using nanogold . Chem.
Soc. Rev. 
2011 , 40 , 3391 –3404 . 10.1039/c0cs00180e .21629885 
Dickerson E. B. ; Dreaden E. C. ; Huang X. ; El-Sayed I. H. ; Chu H. ; Pushpanketh S. ; McDonald J. F. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Gold nanorod assisted
near-infrared plasmonic photothermal therapy (PPTT) of squamous cell
carcinoma in mice . Cancer Lett. 
2008 , 269 , 57 –66 . 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.04.026 .18541363 
Huang X. ; El-Sayed I. H. ; Qian W. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Cancer
cell imaging
and photothermal therapy in the near-infrared region by using gold
nanorods . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006 , 128 , 2115 –2120 . 10.1021/ja057254a .16464114 
O’Neal D. P. ; Hirsch L. R. ; Halas N. J. ; Payne J. D. ; West J. L. 
Photothermal
Tumor Ablation in mice using near infrared absorbing nanoshells . Cancer Lett. 
2004 , 209 , 171 –176 . 10.1016/j.canlet.2004.02.004 .15159019 
Choi J.-H. ; Hwang H.-J. ; Shin S. W. ; Choi J.-W. ; Um S. H. ; Oh B.-K. 
A novel albumin
nanocomplex containing both small interfering RNA
and gold nanorods for synergetic anticancer therapy . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 9229 –9237 . 10.1039/c5nr00211g .25928110 
Yang J. ; Choi J. ; Bang D. ; Kim E. ; Lim E.-K. ; Park H. ; Suh J.-S. ; Lee K. ; Yoo K.-H. ; Kim E.-K. ; Huh Y.-M. ; Haam S. 
Convertible
Organic
Nanoparticles for Near-Infrared Photothermal Ablation of Cancer Cells . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2011 , 50 , 441 –444 . 10.1002/anie.201005075 .
Huang X. ; El-Sayed I. H. ; Qian W. ; El-Sayed M. A. 
Cancer cells assemble
and align gold nanorods conjugated to antibodies to produce highly
enhanced, sharp, and polarized surface Raman spectra: A potential
cancer diagnostic marker . Nano Lett. 
2007 , 7 , 1591 –1597 . 10.1021/nl070472c .17474783 
Xiao Y. ; Hong H. ; Matson V. Z. ; Javadi A. ; Xu W. ; Yang Y. ; Zhang Y. ; Engle J. W. ; Nickles R. J. ; Cai W. ; et al. Gold nanorods conjugated with doxorubicin and cRGD
for combined anticancer drug delivery and PET imaging . Theranostics 
2012 , 2 , 757 –768 . 10.7150/thno.4756 .22916075 
Guo S. ; Huang Y. ; Jiang Q. ; Sun Y. ; Deng L. ; Liang Z. ; Du Q. ; Xing J. ; Zhao Y. ; Wang P. C. ; et al. Enhanced gene delivery
and siRNA silencing by gold
nanoparticles coated with charge-reversal polyelectrolyte . ACS Nano 
2010 , 4 , 5505 –5511 . 10.1021/nn101638u .20707386 
Grabinski C. ; Schaeublin N. ; Wijaya A. ; D’Couto H. ; Baxamusa S. H. ; Hamad-Schifferli K. ; Hussain S. M. 
Effect of gold nanorod
surface chemistry on cellular response . ACS
Nano 
2011 , 5 , 2870 –2879 . 10.1021/nn103476x .21405102 
Ding H. ; Yong K.-T. ; Roy I. ; Pudavar H. E. ; Law W. C. ; Bergey E. J. ; Prasad P. N. 
Gold nanorods
coated with multilayer
polyelectrolyte as contrast agents for multimodal imaging . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2007 , 111 , 12552 –12557 . 10.1021/jp0733419 .
Alkilany A.
M. ; Nagaria P. K. ; Hexel C. R. ; Shaw T. J. ; Murphy C. J. ; Wyatt M. D. 
Cellular
uptake and cytotoxicity of gold nanorods:
Molecular origin of cytotoxicity and surface effects . Small 
2009 , 5 , 701 –708 . 10.1002/smll.200801546 .19226599 
Pastoriza-Santos I. ; Pérez-Juste J. ; Liz-Marzán L.
M. 
Silica-coating and hydrophobation
of CTAB-stabilized gold nanorods . Chem. Mater. 
2006 , 18 , 2465 –2467 . 10.1021/cm060293g .
Ren F. ; Bhana S. ; Norman D. D. ; Johnson J. ; Xu L. ; Baker D. L. ; Parrill A. L. ; Huang X. 
Gold nanorods carrying
paclitaxel for photothermal-chemotherapy of cancer . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2013 , 24 , 376 –386 . 10.1021/bc300442d .
Fuks J. Z. ; Wadler S. ; Wiernik P. H. 
Phase-I
and phase-II in cancer therapy-2
cisplatin analogs and high-sode cisplatin in hypertonic saline or
with thiosulfate protection . J. Clin. Pharmacol. 
1987 , 27 , 357 –365 . 10.1002/j.1552-4604.1987.tb03031.x .3320104 
Singal P. K. ; Iliskovic N. ; Li T. ; Kumar D. 
Adriamycin cardiomyopathy:
pathophysiology and prevention . FASEB J. 
1997 , 11 , 931 –936 . 10.1096/fasebj.11.12.9337145 .9337145 
Gottesman M. M. 
Mechanisms
of cancer drug resistance . Annu. Rev. Med. 
2002 , 53 , 615 –627 . 10.1146/annurev.med.53.082901.103929 .11818492 
Ito T. ; Iida-Tanaka N. ; Niidome T. ; Kawano T. ; Kubo K. ; Yoshikawa K. ; Sato T. ; Yang Z. ; Koyama Y. 
Hyaluronic
acid and its derivative as a multi-functional gene expression enhancer:
Protection from non-specific interactions, adhesion to targeted cells,
and transcriptional activation . J. Controlled
Release 
2006 , 112 , 382 –388 . 10.1016/j.jconrel.2006.03.013 .
Aruffo A. ; Stamenkovic I. ; Melnick M. ; Underhill C. B. ; Seed B. 
CD44 is the principal
cell surface receptor for hyaluronate . Cell 
1990 , 61 , 1303 –1313 . 10.1016/0092-8674(90)90694-a .1694723 
Manocha B. ; Margaritis A. 
Controlled
release of doxorubicin from doxorubicin/γ-polyglutamic
acid ionic complex . J. Nanomater. 
2010 , 2010 , 1 –9 . 10.1155/2010/780171 .
Vial S. ; Pastoriza-Santos I. ; Pérez-Juste J. ; Liz-Marzán L. M. 
Plasmon
coupling in layer-by-layer assembled gold nanorod films . Langmuir 
2007 , 23 , 4606 –4611 . 10.1021/la063753t .17367179 
Kekicheff P. ; Spalla O. 
Refractive index of
thin aqueous films confined between
two hydrophobic surfaces . Langmuir 
1994 , 10 , 1584 –1591 . 10.1021/la00017a043 .
Mulvaney P. ; Giersig M. ; Henglein A. 
Surface chemistry of
colloidal gold:
deposition of lead and accompanying optical effects . J. Phys. Chem. 
1992 , 96 , 10419 –10424 . 10.1021/j100204a056 .
Fröhlich E. 
The role of
surface charge in cellular uptake and cytotoxicity of medical nanoparticles . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2012 , 7 , 5577 –5591 . 10.2147/ijn.s36111 .
Lapcík L. Jr.; Lapcík L. ; De Smedt S. ; Demeester J. ; Chabrecek P. 
Hyaluronan: Preparation, structure, properties, and
applications . Chem. Rev. 
1998 , 98 , 2663 –2684 . 10.1021/cr941199z .11848975 
Blomberg E. ; Poptoshev E. ; Claesson P. M. ; Caruso F. 
Surface interactions
during polyelectrolyte multilayer buildup. 1. interactions and layer
structure in dilute electrolyte solutions . Langmuir 
2004 , 20 , 5432 –5438 . 10.1021/la049636k .15986683 
Zhu Y. ; Shi J. ; Shen W. ; Dong X. ; Feng J. ; Ruan M. ; Li Y. 
Stimuli-Responsive Controlled Drug Release from a Hollow Mesoporous
Silica Sphere/Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Core-Shell Structure . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2005 , 117 , 5213 –5217 . 10.1002/ange.200501500 .
Pechenkin M. A. ; Möhwald H. ; Volodkin D. V. 
pH- and salt-mediated response of
layer-by-layer assembled PSS/PAH microcapsules: fusion and polymer
exchange . Soft Matter 
2012 , 8 , 8659 –8665 . 10.1039/c2sm25971k .
Burke S. E. ; Barrett C. J. 
pH-Responsive Properties of Multilayered Poly(l-lysine)/Hyaluronic
Acid Surfaces . Biomacromolecules 
2003 , 4 , 1773 –1783 . 10.1021/bm034184w .14606908 
Lee S. K. ; Han M. S. ; Asokan S. ; Tung C.-H. 
Effective gene silencing
by multilayered siRNA-coated gold nanoparticles . Small 
2011 , 7 , 364 –370 . 10.1002/smll.201001314 .21294265 
Huschka R. ; Zuloaga J. ; Knight M. W. ; Brown L. V. ; Nordlander P. ; Halas N. J. 
Light-induced release
of dna from gold nanoparticles:
nanoshells and nanorods . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 12247 –12255 . 10.1021/ja204578e .21736347 
Cui C. ; Xue Y.-N. ; Wu M. ; Zhang Y. ; Yu P. ; Liu L. ; Zhuo R.-X. ; Huang S.-W. 
Cellular uptake, intracellular trafficking,
and antitumor efficacy of doxorubicin-loaded reduction-sensitive micelles . Biomaterials 
2013 , 34 , 3858 –3869 . 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.01.101 .23452389 
Zhang Z. ; Wang J. ; Nie X. ; Wen T. ; Ji Y. ; Wu X. ; Zhao Y. ; Chen C. 
Near infrared
laser-induced targeted
cancer therapy using thermoresponsive polymer encapsulated gold nanorods . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 7317 –7326 . 10.1021/ja412735p .24773323 
Qhattal H.
S. S. ; Liu X. 
Characterization
of CD44-mediated cancer cell uptake
and intracellular distribution of hyaluronan-grafted liposomes . Mol. Pharm. 
2011 , 8 , 1233 –1246 . 10.1021/mp2000428 .21696190 
Rowe-Horwege R. W.  Systemic Hyperthermia . In Encyclopedia of
Medical Devices and Instrumentation ; Webster J. G.  , Ed.; John
Wiley and Sons : New York, USA , 2006 ; pp 42 –62 .
Hanahan D. ; Weinberg R. A. 
The hallmarks of
cancer . Cell 
2000 , 100 , 57 –70 . 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81683-9 .10647931 
Kerr J. F. R. ; Wyllie A. H. ; Currie A. R. 
Apoptosis: A Basic
Biological Phenomenon
with Wideranging Implications in Tissue Kinetics . Br. J. Cancer 
1972 , 26 , 239 –257 . 10.1038/bjc.1972.33 .4561027 
Pérez-Hernández M. ; del Pino P. ; Mitchell S. G. ; Moros M. ; Stepien G. ; Pelaz B. ; Parak W. J. ; Gálvez E. M. ; Pardo J. ; de la Fuente J. M. 
Dissecting the molecular mechanism
of apoptosis during photothermal therapy using gold nanoprisms . ACS Nano 
2015 , 9 , 52 –61 . 10.1021/nn505468v .25493329 
Fernández-Cabada T. ; Lopez de
Pablo C. S. ; Serrano A. M. ; del Pozo-Guerrero F. P. ; Serrano-Olmedo J. J. ; Gómez M. R. 
Induction of cell death in a gliblastome
line by hyperthermis therapy based on gold nanorods . Int. J. Nanomed. 
2012 , 7 , 1511 –1523 . 10.2147/ijn.s28470 .
von
Maltzahn G. ; Park J. H. ; Agrawal A. ; Bandaru N. K. ; Das S. K. ; Sailor M. J. ; Bhatia S. N. 
Computationally
guided photothermal tumor therapy using long-circulating nanorod antennas . Cancer Res. 
2009 , 69 , 3892 –3900 . 10.1158/0008-5472.can-08-4242 .19366797 
Topete A. ; Alatorre-Meda M. ; Iglesias P. ; Villar-Alvarez E. M. ; Barbosa S. ; Costoya J. A. ; Taboada P. ; Mosquera V. 
Fluorescent
drug-loaded, polymeric-based, branched gold nanoshells for localized
multimodal therapy and imaging of tumoral cells . ACS Nano 
2014 , 8 , 2725 –2738 . 10.1021/nn406425h .24571629 
Huff T. B. ; Tong L. ; Zhao Y. ; Hansen M. N. ; Cheng J.-X. ; Wei A. 
Hyperthermic effects
of gold nanorods on tumor cells . Nanomedicine 
2007 , 2 , 125 –132 . 10.2217/17435889.2.1.125 .17716198 
Perrin D. D. 
Buffers
of low ionic strength for spectrophotometric pK determinations . Aust. J. Chem. 
1963 , 16 , 572 –578 . 10.1071/ch9630572 .
Provencher S. W. ; Štêpánek P. 
Global analysis
of dynamic light
scattering autocorrelation functions . Part.
Part. Syst. Charact. 
1996 , 13 , 291 –294 . 10.1002/ppsc.19960130507 .

