
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3149768210.1021/acsomega.9b00807ArticleHighly Sensitive and Selective Detection of Arsenic
Using Electrogenerated Nanotextured Gold Assemblage Babar Noor-Ul-Ain †Joya Khurram Saleem *†Tayyab Muhammad Arsalan †Ashiq Muhammad Naeem ‡Sohail Manzar §† Department
of Chemistry, University of Engineering
and Technology (UET), G.T Road, Lahore 54890, Pakistan‡ Institute
of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya
University (BZU), Bosan Road, Multan 60000, Punjab, Pakistan§ Department
of Chemistry, School of Natural Sciences (SNS), National University of Science and Technology (NUST), H-12, Islamabad 46000, Pakistan* E-mail: khurram.joya@gmail.com.14 08 2019 27 08 2019 4 9 13645 13657 23 03 2019 17 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under a Creative Commons Non-Commercial No Derivative Works (CC-BY-NC-ND) Attribution License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article, and creation of adaptations, all for non-commercial purposes.

Arsenic is considered as a toxic
heavy metal which is highly detrimental
to ecological systems, and long-term exposure to it is highly dangerous
to life as it can cause serious health effects. Timely detection of
traces of active arsenic (As3+) is very crucial, and the
development of simple, cost-effective methods is imperative to address
the presence of arsenic in water and food chain. Herein, we present
an extensive study on chemical-free electrogenerated nanotextured
gold assemblage for the detection of ultralow levels of As3+ in water up to 0.08 ppb concentration. The gold nanotextured electrode
(Au/GNE) is developed on simple Au foil via electrochemical oxidation–reduction
sweeps in a metal-ion-free electrolyte solution. The ultrafine nanoscale
morphological attributes of Au/GNE substrate are studied by scanning
electron microscopy. Square wave anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV)
response for different concentrations of arsenites is determined and
directly correlated with As3+ detection regarding the type
of electrolyte solution, deposition potential, and deposition time.
The average of three standard curves are linear from 0.1 ppb up to
9 ppb (n = 15) with a linear regression coefficient R2 = 0.9932. Under optimized conditions, a superior
sensitivity of 39.54 μA ppb–1 cm–2 is observed with a lower detection limit of 0.1 ppb (1.3 nM) (based
on the visual analysis of calibration curve) and 0.08 ppb (1.06 nM)
(based on the standard deviation of linear regression). Furthermore,
the electrochemical Au/GNE is also applicable for arsenic detection
in a complex system containing Cu2+, Ni2+, Fe2+, Pb2+, Hg2+, and other ions for the
selective and sensitive analysis. Au/GNE substrate also possesses
remarkable reproducibility and high stability for arsenic detection
during repeated analysis and thus can be employed for prolonged applications
and reiterating analyses. This electrochemically generated nanotextured
electrode is also applicable for As3+ detection and analysis
in a real water sample under optimized conditions. Therefore, fabrication
conditions and analytical and electroanalytical performances justify
that because of its low cost, easy preparation method and assembly,
high reproducibility, and robustness, nanosensor Au/GNE can be scaled
up for further applications.

document-id-old-9ao9b00807document-id-new-14ao-2019-008073ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Contamination
of water with heavy metals poses severe threat to
ecological systems and human health because of their extreme toxicity
which remains a great challenge for global sustainability.1 Arsenic (As) is considered to be one of the most
carcinogenic and toxic elements that exist in earth’s crust
and groundwater. Active arsenic in the form of arsenic cations (Asn+) is tremendously fatal and has long been
an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) priority pollutant.1,2 Because of its extreme toxicity, it has been considered as a seriously
hazardous element even at the parts per billion (ppb) level to a broad
spectrum of living organisms.2a Long-term
exposure to contaminated water with arsenic can lead to serious health
problems and different forms of skin cancers.2b Therefore, timely and effective sensing of the trace levels of arsenic
in contaminated water has gained considerable attention among scientific
communities and is considered as a great threat to environmental sustainability.3 Generally, arsenic exists in water as organic
and inorganic arsenic. Inorganic arsenic exists in four oxidation
states, where As3+ is about 60–70 times more toxic
than As5+, and organoarsenic compounds have the capability
to react with enzymes in both humans and animals.4 Despondently, arsenic adulteration in drinking water causes
several diseases such as skin lesions, keratosis, lung cancer, and
bladder cancer and are evidently associated with adverse dermal effects
such as hyperkeratosis, depigmentation, and so forth.5

All these harmful effects compelled the US EPA to
establish a lower
endurable standard for arsenic from 50 to 5 ppb.6 Thus, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the US EPA
recommends a maximum contamination limit of below 0.1 μg L–1 (10 ppb) of arsenic in water.7 Inappropriately, the adverse climatic changes and numerous industrial
processes such as metal smelting, semiconductor industries, and power
generation houses are continuously causing increased accumulation
of arsenic in the environment.8 Consequently,
the groundwater in many countries such as America, Thailand, England,
Oregon, Bangladesh, India, Inner Mongolia, Taiwan, Vietnam, Pakistan,
Canada, and so forth has been reported with a certain level of arsenic
that is well above the guideline value level (10 ppb/0.1 μg
L–1) specified by WHO.9 About 44 districts in Bangladesh are affected with a high arsenic
concentration, and it is reported that about 35–80 million
people in Bangladesh are at a risk of arsenic toxicity.10 According to a survey, about 50–60 million
people in Pakistan are using contaminated water. Thus, it is estimated
that about 150 million people around the globe are at risk because
of arsenic contamination.11

Although
the presence of arsenic in drinking water and food above
a certain level is a serious threat to life and subsequently a plausible
solution for its on-site steadfast detection, the development of highly
sensitive, time-effective, and reliable analytical or electroanalytical
methods is mandatory.12 Various analytical
techniques such as hydride generation atomic fluorescence spectrometry,
inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES),
ICP mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), hydride generation atomic absorption
spectroscopy (HGAAS), graphite furnace AAS, and fluorescence spectrometry
have been used for the detection of metals including arsenic in various
samples.13 However, all these techniques
can detect low-levels of arsenic but require expensive, ponderous,
and sophisticated instrumentation and a well-established laboratory
set up. They are also time-intensive, vastly expensive, not easily
accessible, and are not suitable for on-the-spot analysis.14a Moreover, with these methods, the cost of analyses
can be as high as $8–10 per sample.14b Researchers are striving hard to develop simple, portable, and cost-effective
sensing approaches for a rapid and reliable As3+ detection/analysis
in the environmental samples, especially in developing countries and
in areas with insufficient infrastructure and technical facilities.15a

Electrochemical methods, on the other
hand, are advantageous as
they are cost-effective, time-effective, and easy to implement. Various
electroanalytical tools such as cyclic voltammetry (CV), linear sweep
voltammetry (LSV), and more particularly stripping voltammetry including
differential pulse ASV and square wave ASV (SWASV) can be employed
to detect low concentration of arsenic with good sensitivity and reliability.15b Furthermore, stripping voltammetry techniques
are adaptable for successful and rapid field screening, high accuracy,
and enhanced sensitivity and demonstrate a very low detection limit.16 Employing the highly sensitive stripping voltammetry
technique, researchers have detected arsenic to a low detection limit
and significant sensitivity using various electrode materials under
optimized experimental conditions.17−19

Arsenic detection
by electrochemical methods is investigated using
mercury electrodes20a such as hanging mercury
drop electrodes (HMDE) because they provide a wider potential window
for redox reaction of various metals, and regeneration of a clean
surface is quite easier via simply creating a new mercury drop. However,
because of obvious toxicity considerations, it is very difficult to
discard used mercury and clean the whole electrochemical setup after
each measurement.20b Furthermore, various
metals such as Au, Ag, and Hg could not be potentially detected on
HMDE.20a,20b Therefore, they have been significantly
replaced by a number of solid electrodes such as platinum,21 silver, boron-doped diamond electrode,22 gold microwire electrode,23 gold microdisk,24 and iridium
oxide-modified boron-doped diamond electrodes.25 Researchers investigated the platinum NP-modified glassy
carbon electrode for electrochemical sensing of arsenic in 1 M aqueous
HClO4 electrolyte solution. After optimization, a lower
detection limit (LOD) of 2.1 ppb was obtained.26 Further, an iridium-modified boron-doped diamond electrode
is generated by ion implantation method and exploited directly for
electrochemical detection of arsenic to an LOD of 1.5 ppb. The aforementioned
sensor was favorably able to selectively sense spiked arsenic in tap
water containing a substantial amount of various other elements as
well.27 However, these materials are expensive,
thus making As3+ detection not feasible for long-term applications.

The successful large-scale implication of the electrochemical sensor
merely depends on careful designing and fabrication of desired materials,
which can facilitate adequate accumulation and subsequent oxidation
of the analyte from its surface under optimized electrochemical conditions.
Among many other solid electrode-based sensors, gold-centered materials
have demonstrated enhanced electrochemical activity because of their
advanced characteristic features in the field of catalysis, electroanalysis,
and nanoscale devices.28 They have excellent
electronic, optical, and electrical characteristics which merely depend
on the surface morphology and size of gold particles.29 Therefore, microstructured/nanostructured gold electrodes
have been exploited largely for application in the detection of arsenic
in water. They are superior to the commercially available metal electrodes
because of the presence of more electroactive sites, much enhanced
electron-transfer rate, and favorable electrochemical kinetics.30 Gold-based nanoscale materials can be fabricated
by chemical synthesis, UV light or electron beam irradiation, and
electrochemical methods.31 Electrochemical
methods are much facile and easy to use relative to other methods.32

Gold nanoparticles can be electrodeposited
on the electrode from
0.1 mM HAuCl4 solution, which show good sensing for arsenic
at few parts per billion levels.33 Gold
nanoelectrodes also enable simultaneous detection of arsenic, mercury,
and copper.34 Furthermore, gold NP-modified
indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass electrodes were prepared by direct
electrodeposition method from 0.5 M H2SO4 solution
containing HAuCl4 solution. The Au-based films were nanostructured
and detected arsenic to an LOD of 5.0 ppb using the LSV technique.35 Another study shows the electrodeposited gold
NP-modified glassy carbon electrode for sensing of arsenic in 0.1
M HNO3 electrolyte solution. After optimizing various electrochemical
parameters, they were able to detect arsenic to an LOD of 0.25 ppb
using the flow analysis electrochemical system via the ASV technique.36 In short, electrodeposition approach has been
widely exploited for in situ fabrication of nanoscale Au-based electrodes
for As3+ detection. However, it is a tedious method, and
during deposition, subsequent accumulation of Au ions on cathodic
sites also poses a challenge. To invade this issue, separators are
employed, which make the system more complex and thereby increasing
the cost for analyses.37

Hence, apart
from the advancement in the field of Au-based nanoscale
electrochemical sensors for As3+ detection, there is a
high need to fabricate an electrochemical nanotextured sensor using
much simpler and facile electrochemical methods with enhanced activity
and stability. It is noteworthy that sensitivity, linearity, selectivity,
and limit of detection are some of the crucial parameters governing
the successful implication of an electrochemical sensor which can
be modified by carefully engineering the nanoscale-dimensional features
of electrode materials.38,39 We show here a unique
and facile, electrochemically made, highly efficient, selective, and
sensitive electrogenerated gold nanoelectrode for As3+ detection
at ultralow levels comprising nanotextured Au assemblage on a simple
gold foil (gold nanotextured electrode, Au/GNE). The gold nanoelectrodes
are electrogenerated by oxidation–reduction-controlled potential
anodization of the gold foil via multiscan CV (MSCV) in a simple near-neutral
0.1 M KCl solution containing no metal ions. The characteristic nanotexturing
on gold surface enhances the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) and
generates more surface-active sites, consequently facilitating the
adsorptivity of arsenic on Au/GNE for highly sensitive detection.
The proposed method also allows much reliable, selective, and sensitive
detection of arsenic using SWASV as illustrated in Scheme 1. Advantageously, the method
is successfully employed in a real water sample for efficient arsenic
analysis of trace levels.

Scheme 1 Electro-Assisted Nanotextured Gold Assemblage
on a Simple Gold Foil
for Arsenic Detection
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Chemical Reagents
All the chemicals
and reagents were of analytical grade, obtained from Aldrich, and
used as received without following any purification step, unless otherwise
noted. All the solutions and subsequent dilutions are made using Milli-Q
water. The arsenic solution is prepared by gently dissolving the compound
in a minimum volume of 0.1 M nitric acid solution and diluting with
ultrapure water up to a certain level.

2.2 Analytical
Instruments
Scanning electron
microscopy images for the surface morphology of Au/GNE were evaluated
by a field emission scanning electron microscope (Lyra3, Tescan, Czech
Republic) at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. The elemental stoichiometry
and composition of film electrodes were investigated by energy-dispersive
X-ray (EDX, INCA Energy 200, Oxford Inst.) spectroscopy. Qualitative
and quantitative analysis of various metal constituents in real water
samples is conducted via AAS and HGAAS using a PerkinElmer PinAAcle
900T atomic absorption spectrophotometer.

2.3 Electrochemical
Depictions
All the
electrochemical measurements such as CV, electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy (EIS), and SWASV were carried out in a standard three-electrode
glass cell covered with an airtight Teflon cap on a computer-controlled
potentiostat (Autolab PG-Stat 10). A spiral-shaped platinum wire was
used as a counter electrode, also known as the auxiliary electrode.
Before engaging into experimentations, the platinum wire was annealed
and cleaned in 20% of HNO3 solution and washed several
times with deionized water as described previously.40 Electrogenerated gold nanoelectrodes comprising gold nanoparticles
(NPs) assembled on the solid gold surface were used as the working
electrode, also known as an indicator electrode and a saturated silver/silver
chloride (sat. Ag/AgCl) reference electrode completing the assembly.
The reference was calibrated against a standard before placing into
the cell. CV was conducted in 0.1 M nitric acid electrolyte solution
with pH ≈ 1. SWASV was employed as a sensitive technique for
detection of arsenic3+ using Au/GNE. All the measurements
were carried out at room temperature.

2.4 Fabrication
of a Gold Nanoelectrode (Au/GNE)
by Controlled Potential Anodization: Electrochemical Sensor
Prior to the electrochemical surface enhancement, gold strips were
gently polished on velvet cloth with alumina powder (50 nm) and then
sequentially cleaned by immersing in methanol and acetone for 10 min
each and rinsed several times with Milli-Q water. Finally, the pretreated
gold strips were electrochemically cleaned by cycling the potential
between −0.3 and 1.8 VAg/AgCl in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte solution for about 15 min. The electrochemically
cleaned electrode is rinsed many times with ultrapure water and placed
in an electrochemical cell for further experimentation. In order to
make electrochemically enhanced Au/GNE, surface anodization is performed
via MSCV under the controlled potential window in 0.1 M KCl electrolyte
solution. The gold surface was roughened by intentionally keeping
the conductor under controlled potential from −0.25 to 1.25
VAg/AgCl for 25 consecutive oxidation–reduction
sweeps at a scan rate of 20 mV s–1. After electroanodization,
the gold electrode was rinsed softly by ultrapure water and subsequently
dried by nitrogen flow as reported previously.41aBefore electrochemical testing, Au/GNE was activated in
0.2 M H2SO4 electrolyte solution using CV by
cycling from −1.0 to 1.0 VAg/AgCl at a scan rate
of 50 mV s–1 until a stable curve is obtained. Surface
characterization was carried out using CV mode (0.1 M HNO3 and 0.1 M H2SO4). The stability of the electrode
is investigated via accelerated degradation experiments, measuring
about 500 concurrent CV cycles. The ECSA or microscopic surface area
is calculated from the integrated reduction charge of gold oxide and
assuming a conversion factor of about 400 μC cm–2. The roughness factor (Rf) is calculated
as the ratio of the microscopic surface area to the geometrical area
of the electrode. EIS is undertaken to comparatively examine the charge-transfer
resistance at various applied potentials of bare gold surface and
electrogenerated Au/GNE sample.

2.5 Electrochemical
Sensing of Arsenic
SWASV was employed for the ultrasensitive
detection of arsenic under
the following optimized conditions: frequency, 25 Hz; amplitude, 25
mV; potential increment, 4 mV; deposition potential, 0 VAg/AgCl; and deposition time (300 s for lower concentration of arsenic and
120 s for higher concentration of arsenic). At the end of each electrochemical
test, the electrode is maintained at a constant potential of 0.3 VAg/AgCl for 120 s to remove the memory effect and to ascertain
the reusability of the electrode. For all measurements, freshly prepared
0.1 mM arsenic solution was used. Optimization studies were performed
under the following square wave parameters: frequency (5–25
Hz), reduction potential (−0.7Ag/AgCl to 0.0 VAg/AgCl), and deposition time (60–300 s). Aq nitric
acid (0.1 M), 0.1 M aq hydrochloric acid, and 0.1 M aq sulfuric acid
were used as electrolyte solutions to see which electrolyte gives
best results. In order to find the detection limit, the calibration
plot was established. Following the abovementioned experimental conditions,
arsenic detection in a real water sample is also carried out using
Au/GNE.

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Preparation of GNE (Au/GNE)
The Au
nanotextured electrode for arsenic sensing is fabricated via in situ
MSCV on the simple gold substrate under near-neutral conditions in
0.1 M KCl (Figure S1a). The chloride electrolyte
has some reactive features that aid in the dissolution–redeposition
process of Au and facilitating roughness on gold surface (Scheme S1).41b MSCV
results in the microscale to the nanoscale controlled dissolution
of the top surface of gold substrate with a few micron thickness with
onset occurring at 0.88 VAg/AgCl (Figure S1b). This cycling initiates the formation of AuCl4– and subsequent redeposition commencing at 0.3Ag/AgCl to 0.66 VAg/AgCl of nanotextured gold on
the substrate, consequently generating an enhanced gold surface demonstrating
large electroactive sites.41b It is also
recognized that during MSCV with an increase in the cycle number,
the amplitude of irreversible reduction peak continuously increases,
and a linear increase in peak current is also observed sequentially
and can be ascribed to the formation of more electroactive nanoscale
gold attributes on a simple gold substrate with cumulative CV scans
(Figure S1b). However, it was observed
that after consecutive 25 CV cycles, the magnitude of the reduction
peak starts to stabilize with increasing cycle number and current
saturation occurs (Figure S1c). The voltammograms
recorded initially and after 17 and 24 successive positive–negative
excursions show that all the voltammograms are quite similar, the
chief difference is that the latter two demonstrated 20–30%
higher peak current and shifting of onset potential toward the negative
potential vertex (Figure S1d). This behavior
is consistent with the moderate changes in the microscopic surface
area of the gold surface because of the formation of nanoparticulate-type
structures as shown by structural and electrochemical characterizations.41a,41b

3.2 Morphological Characterization of Au/GNE
For morphological observation, the scanning electron microscopy
images for bare gold electrode and electrogenerated Au/GNE are taken
and presented in Figure 1. It is obvious that the Au/GNE obtained by controlled electrochemical
etching reveals crackled and highly rough surface features comprising
a nanotextured pattern and nanoparticulate-type erections grown relatively
smoothly on the simple gold surface (Figure 1a). The enlarged view represents the spongy
texture of the top film having porous, rough structure and enhanced
surface features (Figure 1b). The cross-sectional view shows the thickness of the nanotextured
film to be 7.17 μm (Figure 1c) comprising gold nanoparticulate assemblage on the
simple gold surface (thickness = 84.74 μm, overall thickness
= 92.26 μm) (Figures S2 and S3).
Conclusively, the results demonstrate that the MSCV employed here
is an appropriate method to electrochemically enhance the surface
feature of a simple gold substrate to fabricate the nanoscale Au/GNE
(Figure S4) for electrochemical and electroanalytical
investigations. Nevertheless, these types of structural nanolandscapes
are not observed for the bare gold surface (Figure 1d).

Figure 1 Scanning electron micrography images for surface
view of Au/GNE:
(a) overview image; (b) enlarged view; (c,d) cross-sectional view
for Au/GNE; and (d) surface view for bare gold electrode.

The elemental constituent analysis of the simple gold substrate
and Au/GNE clearly suggests the presence of Au as a dominating metal
in the bare gold substrate along with some carbon background signatures.
However, the electrogenerated gold electrode shows some minor contribution
from oxygen along with the Au matrix, which might have originated
from adsorbed water on the Au surface and some leftover AuOx structures during redeposition (Figures S5 and S6).

3.3 Preliminary Electrochemical
Investigation
of Au/GNE and Simple Au Substrate
The thus-obtained Au/GNEs
are tested electrochemically to investigate their electrochemical
properties via CV and impedance spectroscopy, and the results are
compared with the commercially available bare gold strips electrodes.
The forward potential sweep for Au/GNE sample in 0.1 M HNO3 electrolyte solution represents preoxidative features that appeared
after 1.0 VAg/AgCl, following a current decline at 1.32
VAg/AgCl, ascribed to the formation of AuOx-type material.42 This
is followed by initiation of catalytic peak at 1.58 VAg/AgCl, which quickly rises and reached >2000 μA current at 1.81
VAg/AgCl (Figure 2a). Likewise, during the reverse sweep, a broad reduction
peak is also observed at 0.88 VAg/AgCl because of the surface
reduction of AuOx. However, the commercially
available gold strips having the same geometrical area did not show
any well-pronounced oxidative and catalytic behavior during steady-state
CV measurements as shown in Figure 2a inset. This is a preindication of large surface area
and efficient electron transfer at the Au/GNE material because of
the formation of ultrafine nanoparticulate-type structures on the
Au surface as revealed by SEM. The stability of any sensing material
is another crucial factor for determining its implication for large-scale
exploitations. NPs often suffer from sintering and agglomeration,
which results in loss of activity. Therefore, it is highly desirable
to introduce some facilely synthesized durable materials in the field
of catalysis and sensing for ensuring long-term applications and stability.
Here, after having good electrochemical activity of Au/GNE, the durability
of electrode is also examined in aq HNO3 via repetitive
CV scans.

Figure 2 Electroanalysis: (a) typical CV of bare Au strips and electrogenerated
Au/GNE in 0.1 M HNO3 electrolyte solution at a scan rate
of 50 mV s–1 (inset presents enlarged view of CV
for bare Au electrode); (b) Nyquist plot for Au/GNE at 1.09, 1.6,
1.7, and 1.8 VAg/AgCl in the frequency range of 100 K to
0.1 Hz.

The electrogenerated Au/GNE shows
much improved electrocatalytic
activity during the 500 consecutive CV measurements without undergoing
any loss of electrochemical activity (Figure S7). The enhanced current value obtained during 500th CV cycle is indicative
of highly stable electroactive nature of the nanoscale Au/GNE confirming
that more and more electroactive sites are being generated during
the course of electrolysis. Moreover, the CVs recorded at different
scan rates such as 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100 mV s–1 show an increase in current response and magnitude of redox peak
with scan rate (Figure S8). The electrochemical
activity of Au/GNE is also assessed in 0.1 M H2SO4 electrolyte solution. Forward potential sweep using electrogenerated
Au/GNE and simple gold strips in 0.1 M H2SO4 is conducted by cycling the potential from −0.3 to 1.8 VAg/AgCl. The oxidative peak appeared beyond 1.3 VAg/AgCl and is followed by an increase in the catalytic current at the onset
of 1.58 VAg/AgCl (Figure S9).
A marked reduction peak is also observed during reverse CV scan. These
redox peaks can obviously be attributed to the redox reaction of the
catalytic gold layer, which was not obvious for simple gold strips
in H2SO4 solution (Figure S9).

Next, EIS is commenced to support the argument regarding
low charge-transfer
resistance for electrogenerated Au/GNE relative to bare gold strip
at the electrode–electrolyte interphase using various potentials
in the faradaic region such as 1.09, 1.6, 1.7, and 1.8 VAg/AgCl. The corresponding Nyquist plots for Au/GNE and simple gold trips
are also illustrated in Figure 2b (also see Figure S10). To obtain
the precise results, the data were fitted using the simplest Randles
circuit and the Rct value is presented
in Table S1. The results reveal that Au/GNE
favorably shows very low charge-transfer resistance evidenced by the
smaller diameter of the semicircle as compared to simple gold strips,
which show the considerably large value of Rct. All these features are owing to the much improved conductivity
and promising kinetics of electron transfer on Au/GNE. From CVs and
impedance data, it can be concluded that the electroactive sites and
the charge-transfer capacity of the gold surface can be enhanced electrochemically
by electro-anodization under controlled potential range by means of
much simpler electrochemical setup.

The real surface area of
Au/GNE electrode is determined by calculating
the area under the reduction peak in the polarization curve considering
optimized potential window (0.559–1.0 VAg/AgCl)
as illustrated in Figure S11. Usually,
the calculation of real surface area commonly known as the roughness
factor is based on the assumption that a monolayer of chemisorbed
oxygen with a gold atom in a ratio of 1:1 has been formed. In order
to indicate the monolayer coverage, the minimum current observed at
the decline of redox peak is considered. The exact value of the corresponding
charge needed for the reduction of gold oxide depends on the composition
and structural features of the gold electrode.43 Trasatti and Petrii mentioned a value of 400 μC cm–2 for the polycrystalline gold electrode.44 Although oxygen measurement procedure appears
to be a slightly arbitrary procedure for calculating real surface
area, it is a widely used method.

ECSA for Au/GNE is calculated
as  Here, the term QAu,O ascribes the charge associated with Au/GNE,
whereas QAu,S describes the charge calculated
for the polycrystalline
gold surface. Consequently, the real surface area of 5.8 cm2 is estimated for the electrode which is higher than those reported
previously.33 An advantageously high roughness
factor (AECSA/AGEO) of 11.6 is calculated for Au/GNE owing to its remarkable catalytic
activity and stability. Furthermore, the number of electroactive gold
atoms formed on the simple gold substrate due to electrochemical etching
is calculated via considering the charge passed under reduction peak
from potential versus current curve, which is 0.00235 Coulombs. Then,
the number of electrons is calculated as (0.00235 C/1.602 × 10–19 C) 1.466 × 1016 electrons. The surface
concentration of the active Au atom on the electrode is estimated
by diving with the number of electrons involved in the redox reaction,
which is 2 for Au2+/0+; therefore, the surface concentration
of atoms is determined to be 7.34 × 1015 atoms. All
these features provide compelling remarks presenting the superiority
of Au/GNE sample for arsenic sensing prepared by a very simple and
facile procedure.

3.4 Electrochemical Detection
of Arsenic via CV
and EIS
After observing the structural and electrochemical
characteristics of Au/GNE, we directly employed the nanoelectrode
for electrochemical sensing of arsenic in water. CV and impedance
spectroscopy are applied for electrochemical arsenic analysis on a
freshly fabricated Au/GNE and the results are compared with bare gold
strips as well. These measurements are based on the arsenic accumulation/deposition
(As3+ to As0) and then the subsequent stripping
off (As0 to As3+) in 0.1 M HNO3 electrolyte.
First, the electrode potential is held at 0.0 VAg/AgCl for
300 s to deposit arsenic from HNO3 solution containing
100 ppb As3+ under stirring condition. Then, the CVs of
the above Au/GNE samples with and without arsenic deposition are measured
by applying the vertex potential within a controlled potential window
at a scan rate of 50 mV s–1. During the forward
potential sweep, the characteristic peak of As0 oxidation
to As3+ is observed at 0.25 VAg/AgCl, matching
well with the literature values.36,45 This current
is then followed by a large reduction peak during reverse sweep because
of As deposition (Figure 3a). However, no such redox behavior is observed in the arsenic-free
electrolyte solution on Au/GNE. Usually, anodic stripping peak for
arsenic appears in the potential range from 0.07 to 0.3 VAg/AgCl (Table S2). The appearance of the anodic
peak for arsenic stripping at +0.25 VAg/AgCl is also indicative
of its efficient affinity with Au/GNE relative to other materials,
and hence, it is less likely to oxidize arsenic easily, therefore
needs some more potential input for complete stripping off. The special
nanoscale structural features grown on Au/GNE having large active
sites favorably accumulate and deposit the arsenic on them, thereby
presenting enhanced Au–As0 affinity (Figure 3a).

Figure 3 Electroanalysis: (a)
CV for Au/GNE with (red line) and without
(black line) 100 ppb arsenic in 0.1 M HNO3 solution at
a scan rate of 50 mV s–1; (b) Nyquist plots for
Au/GNE with (red line) and without (black line) 100 ppb arsenic in
solution at potential E/V 0.25 VAg/AgCl; (c) CV for simple gold electrode with (red line) and
without (black line) 100 ppb arsenic in 0.1 M HNO3 solution
at a scan rate of 50 mV s–1; (d) Nyquist plots for
simple gold electrode with (red line) and without (black line) 100
ppb arsenic in solution at potential E/V 0.25 VAg/AgCl. (Arsenic was deposited at 0.0 VAg/AgCl for 5 min under continuous stirring.)

EIS commenced with and without arsenic also illustrates the low
charge-transfer resistance at 0.25 VAg/AgCl, where no faradaic
current relevant to the electrocatalytic behavior of Au/GNE is observed
(Figure 3b). This possibly
associated with successful deposition and subsequent electron-transfer
reaction of arsenic on Au/GNE surface. The impedance measured without
arsenic shows a very large value of charge-transfer resistance, demonstrating
a very limiting or no electron-transfer reaction under this potential
regime. This proves that Au/GNE is very suitable for accumulation,
deposition, and subsequent stripping of arsenic during sensing applications.
For a simple gold electrode, the CVs do not show any redox peak for
arsenic in the polarization curve (Figure 3c) and the value of charge-transfer resistance
during EIS remained the same when evaluating for a simple gold electrode
with and without arsenic. This might be associated with the fact that
no arsenic from the solution is accumulated/deposited on the simple
gold substrate under the employed conditions because of the very small
number of electroactive catalytic sites on Au (Figure 3d). It is notable that the As0–Au affinity of a certain strength is crucial for electrochemical
interconversion of arsenic from zero oxidation state to +3 oxidation
state on nanoscale gold electrodes. The remarkable affinity of Au/GNE
may be attributed to high electroactive sites on the electrode with
nanotextured porous structural features as shown by SEM. Therefore,
after evaluating the successful implication of Au/GNE for arsenic
sensing via CV and EIS analysis, the highly sensitive SWASV technique
for trace level detection of arsenic is also applied.

3.5 Electrochemical Arsenic Detection via Stripping
Analysis: Calibrating Various Testing Parameter
SWASV technique
is investigated for ultratrace sensing of arsenic on electrogenerated
Au/GNE under the optimized electrochemical parameters. In order to
get maximum sensitivity for arsenic detection on Au/GNE, careful optimization
of various voltammetry parameters such as choice of supporting electrolyte,
accumulation/deposition potential, deposition time, and frequency
range using the 3 ppb concentration of arsenic in the aqueous nitric
acid electrolyte solution is undertaken. Furthermore, several samples
are tested three times under similar conditions. Measuring errors
that are obtained in the range of 3–15%, which are marked by
error bars on points, are presented in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Typical SWASV response of fixed arsenic (3 ppb)
and corresponding
plots of analysis of stripping current (squares) and peak area (columns)
as a function of (a) electrolyte; (b) preconcentration potential;
(c) preconcentration time; and (d) frequency. The error bars are obtained
by performing the parallel measurements three times.

3.6 Supporting Electrolyte
The voltammetry
behavior of arsenic is strongly influenced by the type and pH of the
supporting electrolyte.35,36 Therefore, the electrolyte
selection must be carefully considered. Figure S12 illustrates the SWASV response of arsenic on Au/GNE in
a variety of electrolyte solutions such as aq KCl (pH ≈ 7),
aq NaOH (pH ≈ 13), phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH ≈
6.2), borate buffer solution (BBS, pH ≈ 9.2), carbonate electrolyte
solution (pH ≈ 8.3), and aq HNO3 (pH = 1). The cathodic
accumulation and anodic stripping of arsenic are successfully observed
in all the electrolyte solutions, thus demonstrating the favorable
activity of the electrode for arsenic detection under a wide pH range.
However, the low detection limit is strongly dependent on the type
of electrolyte solution. In 0.1 M NaOH, no significant arsenic signals
were obtained even up to 1000 ppb arsenic concentration. This might
be due to the large number of hydroxide ions that can disrupt the
electrode surface and limit the sensing of low concentration of analyte.
However, Au/GNE was able to detect arsenic in 0.1 M borate buffer
solution (pH ≈ 9.2), 0.1 M carbonate buffer solution (pH ≈
8.3), 0.1 M KCl (pH ≈ 7), and 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution
(pH ≈ 6.2) with LODs of 350, 100, 35, and 35 ppb, respectively
(the limit of detection is based on the visual analysis of voltammetry
response obtained during SWASV analysis). In 0.1 M KCl, appearance
of an additional peak in the vicinity of 0.4–0.6 VAg/AgCl is ascribed to the adsorbed chloride ions on the electrode surface.17 In contrast, highly reproducible electroanalytical
response for arsenic detection is observed in 0.1 M nitric acid solution,
as shown in Figure S12f. The low sensitivity
in detection under high pH condition may be due to the valency change,
hydrolysis of arsenic, and presence of other interfering ions of electrolytes,
which may interact with the electrode surface and make the arsenic
interaction with the electrode at its ultralow concentration quite
difficult.33 Further, pronounced stripping
response for arsenic on Au/GNE in 0.1 M HNO3 can also be
ascribed to the fact that gold-based materials offer a wide potential
range for subsequent cathodic preconcentration and anodic oxidation
of analytes under acidic conditions, where not any significant faradaic
reaction of gold itself takes place as presented in the CVs of gold
conducted in nitric acid and sulfuric acid (Figures 2a and S9).28

After having highly sensitive results
in 0.1 M nitric acid solution further, experiments were performed
under acidic conditions and aq HNO3, aq H2SO4, and aq HCl are also tested as supporting electrolytes for
arsenic detection. The electrolyte solution of varying concentrations
from 0.1 to 1 M are compared in respect of response at Au/GNE toward
3 ppb As3+ concentration using square wave stripping analysis.
SWASV response for arsenic reveals that the magnitude of the current
response due to the stripping of arsenic is strongly dependent on
the choice of the supporting electrolyte (Figures 5 and S13). The
stripping of arsenic in HCl generates a peak in the vicinity of 0.16
VAg/AgCl, which can be ascribed to the electrooxidation
of arsenic.46 However, an additional peak
was also observed at a slightly more positive potential, thereby masking
the electrochemical response from arsenic stripping at an ultralow
concentration (Figure S12). This behavior
was also observed previously for arsenic sensing in HCl.36

Figure 5 SWASV response of 3 ppb arsenic in different supporting
electrolytes,
0.1 M H2SO4, 0.1 M HNO3, and 0.1
M HCl, on Au/GNE.

Although the reason for
the appearance of two peaks in 0.1 M HCl
electrolyte solution was not clearly understood previously,36 in this study, the origin and position of stripping
peaks strongly depend on the electrochemical properties of the electrode
materials. Au/GNE is highly porous and demonstrates large electroactive
sites as observed by SEM and surface area calculation analysis. Because
of high surface area, Cl1– ions from aq HCl electrolyte
solution having strong affinity for gold may be adsorbed on Au/GNE
and cover the electrode surface and ultimately limits the availability
of active site for arsenic adsorption.17 The appearance of additional peak is ascribed to the adsorbed chloride
ions. Furthermore, to confirm the above statement, SWASV experiments
are performed in 0.1 M HCl electrolyte solution in the presence and
absence of added arsenic. Without arsenic, a broad peak at 0.4–0.6
VAg/AgCl might appear from adsorbed Cl1– ions.46b However, in the presence of
a low concentration of arsenic, this peak remained intact and its
intensity decreased by increasing arsenic concentration in solution
because of favorable cathodic preconcentration of arsenic on Au/GNE
at 0 VAg/AgCl. The additional peak caused by adsorbed Cl1– ions can be completely masked in the presence of
high arsenic content in solution as shown in Figure S14. Because of poor reproducibility and appearance of the
additional peak, HCl was not well considered for arsenic detection
in this study. However, the peak area and peak current while using
the same concentration of arsenic (3 ppb) are enhanced in 0.1 M H2SO4 electrolyte solution, and a more sensitive
response for arsenic detection with significantly Gaussian shape peak
is observed in 0.1 M HNO3 electrolyte solution. In this
respect, 0.1 M HNO3 solution is selected and used as an
electrolyte medium for the further electrochemical studies.

3.7 Accumulation/Deposition Potential
A very important
parameter in stripping analysis methods toward the
electrochemical detection for the favorable accumulation and deposition
of arsenic on the electrode surface is the application of preconcentration
potential.47 Arsenic was deposited by favorably
choosing the deposition potential range from −0.7 to 0.0 VAg/AgCl. Previously, researchers disclosed that by applying
much negative deposition potential, cathodic preconcentration of electron-insulating
As0 on gold electrode could be enhanced probably because
of electrogenerated H2, as studied via CVs.48 However, on Au/GNE, the phenomenon is quite
opposite for ultralow detection of arsenic using SWASV technique. Figure 6 represents the electrochemical
response by depositing arsenic at a much negative preconcentration
potential from −0.6 to −0.4 VAg/AgCl. It
is notable that in the absence of arsenic, very intense peak observed
roughly centering at −0.6 to −0.1 VAg/AgCl. This peak can be ascribed to the anodic stripping of H atom adsorbing
on highly electroactive gold surface during application of negative
potential for a specified time.48 However,
in the presence of very low concentration of arsenic such as 1 ppb,
the anodic stripping peak of hydrogen becomes less intense and a well
Gaussian-shaped peak observed roughly at about 0.25 VAg/AgCl attributed to the oxidation of As0 to As3+. Furthermore, by increasing the analyte concentration, the current
intensity of the arsenic stripping peak is increasing linearly and
an ultimate decrease was observed in the intensity of hydrogen desorption
peak (Figures S15–S17). This behavior
provides compelling evidence about strong competitive adsorption of
arsenic species on Au/GNE, having much enhanced electroactive sites.
Moreover, oxidative signatures for arsenic stripping are not observed
at an ultralow concentration, such as 0.1 ppb, due to complete coverage
of hydrogen atoms on catalytic gold. At a further negative preconcentration
potential of −0.7 VAg/AgCl, no arsenic could be
detected even at 10 ppb level because of intense hydrogen evolution.

Figure 6 SWASV
response of various concentrations of arsenic on Au/GNE applying
an accumulation potential of (a) −0.4; (b) −0.5; and
(c) −0.6 VAg/AgCl of arsenic stripping. Insets show
an enlarged view of arsenic stripping region in 0.1 M HNO3.

Nevertheless, at further positive
preconcentration potential such
as −0.3 to 0.0 VAg/AgCl, no additional peak for
hydrogen desorption appeared in the voltammogram (Figure S18). Eventually, arsenic species are less likely to
compete with adsorbing hydrogen ion, and electroactive sites of gold
are entirely available for arsenic accumulation/deposition, meanwhile
making ultralow (0.1 ppb) detection of arsenic possible under the
specified potential region. Additionally, it is notable that because
of positive ongoing of potential from −0.6 to −0.3 VAg/AgCl than to 0.0 VAg/AgCl, the anodic stripping
peak potential of arsenic is further shifting toward positive potential
range, indicating the formation of more As0 deposits on
Au/GNE accompanied with increased current response for arsenic stripping
(Figure 6). Therefore,
the above discussed experimental results justify that the oxidation
peak potential and current are strongly dependent on preconcentration
potential. Because of these observations, and keeping in view the
sensitivity of the arsenic detection on gold electrode at −0.6
VAg/AgCl (6.24 μA ppb–1 cm–2), −0.5 VAg/AgCl (6.85 μA
ppb–1 cm–2), −0.4 VAg/AgCl (5.57 μA ppb–1 cm–2), and at 0.0 VAg/AgCl (39.54 μA ppb–1 cm–2 discussed in later section), the preconcentration
potential falling in the positive region far away from hydrogen adsorption/desorption
region is selected.

Results reveal that by accumulating the
3 ppb arsenic at −0.3
and −0.2 VAg/AgCl, a relatively small peak appeared
during stripping at 0.25 VAg/AgCl; moreover, a very clear
peak was observed by accumulating at −0.1 VAg/AgCl. The deposition/accumulation potential of 0.0 VAg/AgCl gave a clear peak of arsenic with a higher current response, as
illustrated in Figure 6. Consequently, 0.0 VAg/AgCl is then selected as an optimal
preconcentration potential for the arsenic detections. However, previously,
it was shown that the arsenic electrooxidation peak is increasing
when preconcentration potential became more negative from 0.1Ag/AgCl to −0.6 VAg/AgCl.48 From the detailed discussion in the literature, it is concluded
that the electrochemical response of any analyte on concerned material
depends on careful optimization of various electrochemical parameters
and fabrication of sensing electrode material under the employed conditions. Table S2 illustrates the optimal electrochemical
parameters under stripping analysis adopted by researchers for the
particular sensing of various analytes. We, however, believe that
the optimal electrochemical parameters setting for the successful
implication of electroanalytical methods merely depend on precise
engineering of micro to nanoscale electrode materials and one should
optimize them with great care to have sensitive and precise outcomes.

3.8 Preconcentration Time
Deposition
time is an important parameter affecting the sensitivity and detection
limit for analyte detection in stripping analysis. Different deposition
times of 60, 120, 180, 240, and 300 s are chosen using SWASV to evaluate
the deposition time effect on arsenic sensing signals (shape and response)
using 3 ppb solution. It is observed that by increasing the preconcentration
time from 60 to 300 s, a linear increase in current response is perceived,
indicating more effective deposition with time from only a 3 ppb As3+ solution and subsequent stripping of arsenic (Figure S19). However, to generate the reaction,
the effective deposition time was not further increased. At a much
lower concentration of As3+, we choose 300 s as the optimal
deposition time, whereas to avoid the saturation effect, at a relatively
high concentration of the analyte, 120 s was used as the optimal deposition
time.

3.9 Frequency
Finally, the SWASV parameter
for frequency is also optimized by evaluating the response of arsenic
on Au/GNE in 0.1 M aq HNO3 electrolyte using 3 ppb As3+ solution. It was observed that the frequency range does
not affect the shape and potential of the peak, which remains the
same by changing the frequency range from 5 to 25 Hz while keeping
other parameters constant such as deposition potential (0.0 VAg/AgCl) and deposition time (120–300 s). However, a
proportional increase in current response and peak area is observed
by linearly increasing the frequency and highest response toward arsenic
detection is obtained at 25 Hz (Figure S20). However, by further increasing the frequency range to 30 Hz, there
is a drop in the value of the current response. Therefore, the frequency
parameter of 25 Hz is used for the arsenic detection experiments.

3.10 Complete Test Analyses for Arsenic Detection
on Au/GNE System: Calibration, Linearity, Sensitivity, and LOD
Employing the carefully augmented electrochemical parameters discussed
above, the SWASV response of Au/GNE in 0.1 M aq HNO3 electrolyte
containing different concentrations of arsenic is presented in Figure 7a. In Figure 7a, the analyte ion concentration
is increased in sequence from 0.1 ppb (1.3 nM) to 9 ppb (120 nM),
where a = 0.1 ppb, b = 0.5 ppb, c = 1 ppb, d = 1.5 ppb, e = 2 ppb, f = 2.5 ppb, g = 3 ppb, h = 3.5 ppb, i = 4 ppb, j = 4.5ppb, k = 5 ppb, l = 5.5 ppb, m = 6 ppb, n = 7.5 ppb, and o = 9 ppb (120 nM), from bottom to top. Black line presents SWASV
response of GNE/Au without arsenic in solution. The peak current obtained
at E/V 0.26 ± 0.05 is indicative
of oxidation stripping of arsenic. It is obvious that at a much lower
concentration of arsenic, the responsive current peak is observed
at a slightly negative potential and the current maxima is shifted
to a more positive potential by increasing the concentration of arsenic.
This might have originated from increasing the concentration of the
reactant and subsequently more deposition of arsenic on Au/GNE, which
is the oxidizable species on the electrode. This is also related to
an ultimate decrease in the activity coefficient by more deposits
of metal as stated by Debye–Hückel theory, and ultimately,
the required signals are observed at slightly higher applied potentials.48

Figure 7 (a) Typical SWASV response of Au/GNE toward the different
concentrations
of arsenic in the 0.1 M HNO3 electrolyte solution arsenic
is deposited at 0.0 VAg/AgCl, applying an accumulation
time of 300 and 120 s, amplitude of 0.004 V, frequency 25 Hz; and
(b) corresponding calibration plot (initial arsenic 0.1 ppb). The
error bars are obtained by performing the parallel measurements three
times.

The calibration plots for a peak
current of arsenic are also shown
in Figure 7b. To obtain
a calibration curve, the background current or the peak area of blank
(black line) is subtracted from the peak area at each arsenic concentration.
A plot was constructed between the concentration of the analyte and
the current response. The same measurements are performed three times
and error bars are also shown. The linearization equation is attained
by fitting and stated as i (μA) = 19.77x (ppb) + 33.107. These results reveal that the average
of the three standard curves was linear up to 9 ppb (where n = 15) with a correlation coefficient R2 = 0.9952. The remarkable sensitivity of electrode is
determined to be 39.54 μA ppb–1 cm–2 with the theoretical limit of detection of 0.08 ppb (1.06 nM) (based
on the standard deviation of linear regression).49 The limit of detection is much lower than those reported
earlier for other gold nanomaterial samples (Table 1) and is well below the guideline value of
arsenic level in drinking water as specified by WHO.38,39 Therefore, the reported method in this study can be successfully
employed for real water sample analysis for arsenic. It is notable
that the Au/GNE generated by controlled potential anodization process
from metal-ion-free electrolyte solution is the first example to be
employed as an electrochemical sensing electrode for ultralow detection
of arsenic and thus obtained sensing performance is favorably well
adequate for practical applications.

Table 1 Comparison
of Electrochemical Activity
of Different Gold-Based Sensors for Arsenic Detectiona
sensor	electrolyte	method (ASV)	oxidation
peak	sensitivity (μA μM–1)	LOD (ppb)	refs	
Au-disk	1 M HNO3	SWV	As0–As3+	13.1	0.861	(28)	
nano Au-(CRV)	PBS	DPV	As0–As3+	0.8075	14.92	(50)	
AuNPs/BPPG	1 M HCl	LSV	As0–As3+	3.52	17.52	(51)	
sub-BT/Au	0.1 M PBS	SWV	As0–As3+	0.548	0.281	(17)	
Au/GNE	0.1M HNO3	SWV	As0–As3+	39.54*	0.083	TW	
a “Au-NPs,
gold nanoparticles;
CRV, crystal violet films; sub-BT/Au, Au(111)-like poly-Au electrode/n-butyl thiol (n-BT); AuNPs/BPPG, gold
nanoparticles/basal plane pyrolytic graphite; GCE, glassy carbon electrode;
ITO, indium tin oxide; Au/GNE, electro-generated gold nanoelectrode
on simple gold surface; ASV, anodic stripping voltammetry; DPV, differential
pulse voltammetry; LSV, linear sweep voltammetry; SWASV, square wave
anodic stripping voltammetry; * = sensitivity is in μA ppb–1; LOD is based on 1S/N = 3 ratio method, 23σ method, 3standard deviation of regression
line.”

3.11 Reusability and Stability
Stability,
good shelf life, and reusability of the electrochemical sensor for
heavy metal contaminant detection are the decisive features in determining
its broad-spectrum and long-term applications. The stability, reproducibility,
and reusability of Au/GNE are assessed by subjecting the same Au/GNE
to 3 ppb arsenic-containing solution for 10 days successively. The
results reveal that no observable changes in the electrochemical response
of arsenic are observed after repeated analysis and relative standard
deviation is 2.17%, confirming the high reproducibility and reusability
of the electrogenerated Au/GNE system (Figure 8a). The inset shows that the position and
current response of arsenic almost remain the same owing to its high
stability for the long-term application (Figure 8a). Furthermore, the reusability of the Au/GNE
system is also investigated by using the same electrode for the voltammetric
response of 3 ppb arsenic repeatedly 10 times. After each measurement,
the reusability is confirmed by keeping the electrode at 0.3 V for
2–5 min to remove memory effects and to strip off impurities
from the electrode surface. Figure 8b shows the SWASV response of the electrode toward
arsenic sensing with an RDS of 3.12%, and the inset shows that there
is no change in the position of the characteristic peak. All these
features suggest that the electrogenerated Au/GNE can be advantageously
employed for direct sensing of arsenic in water under the employed
electrochemical condition with remarkable stability and reusability.

Figure 8 (a) Stability
measurements of Au/GNE with repeated analysis of
3 ppb arsenic consecutively using the same Au/GNE electrode for different
days; (b) stability measurements of Au/GNE with repeated analysis
of 3 ppb arsenic. Data were collected from an SWASV response of 3
ppb spiked arsenic in 0.1 M HNO3 electrolyte solution.
The inset shows the typical SWASV responses of Au/GNE under the conditions
as mentioned in Figure 7. The error bars are obtained by performing the parallel measurements
three times.

3.12 Study
of Foreign Ion Interference and Selectivity
of Au/GNE for Traces of Arsenic Detection
The effect of various
foreign ion interferences on the detection of arsenic using the abovementioned
protocol on Au/GNE is also studied. A range of possible interfering
cations such as Ni2+, Co2+, Fe2+,
Pb2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Hg2+, Cr2+, and Zn2+ have been
deployed in the test solution containing As3+. The electroanalytical
performance of Au/GNE is evaluated by SWASV analysis of arsenic in
the presence of 5–50-fold concentration of the abovementioned
metal cations. The effect on the peak height of arsenic with a 50-fold
concentration of interfering metal ions is presented in Figure 9. Results are remarkable and
reveal that the current response of arsenic does not change in the
presence of 5–50-fold concentration of Ni2+, Co2+, Fe2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, and Hg2+ ions and other interfering
cations under optimized experimental conditions. From these data,
it can be deduced that no apparent interference is observed with commonly
interfering ions, particularly copper ions in the acidic media under
the controlled potential window with optimized parameters for arsenic
detection on Au/GNE. This also shows that Au/GNE presented here is
highly sensitive and selective for arsenic detection in water samples.

Figure 9 Typical
SWASV response of Au/GNE toward the arsenic detection in
0.1 M HNO3 electrolyte solution in the presence of 50-fold
concentration of various interfering metal cations (Ni2+, Co2+, Fe2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Hg2+, Cr2+, and Zn2+) under the conditions as mentioned in Figure 7.

3.13 Application to a Real-Life Matrix
In order to see the validity of the Au/GNE electrode using a chosen
method, the analysis is also performed for few real water samples
collected from different areas of Lahore, Pakistan. The sample is
diluted with 0.1 M aq HNO3 electrolyte solution (1:19)
and tested directly for arsenic sensing. In the case of real water
samples, a minute oxidation peak appeared at the vicinity of E/V = 0.27 ± 0.03 VAg/AgCl can be attributed clearly to arsenic stripping. To further demonstrate
the practical use of the present electrode, the water samples were
spiked with arsenic solution and subsequent linear increase in the
current response is observed by increasing the arsenic amount (Figure S21a,c,e). The linear calibration curve
is plotted and illustrates a linear relationship between the peak
current and increasing arsenic concentration (Figure S21b,d,f). The concentration of arsenic in real water
samples is calculated to be 40 ppb in sample a, 19 ppb in sample b,
and 30 ppb in sample c, which is already very high and alarming. These
values are in satisfactory agreements with results 38, 20.5, and 29.58
ppb, respectively, conducted on HGAAS from Pakistan Council of Research
in Water Resources (PCRWR Pakistan). This indicates that the proposed
method is highly accurate, precise, and reproducible and can be applied
for real-life sample analysis for arsenic sensing. Furthermore, to
ascertain the selectivity of the proposed method, analyses of various
interfering ions (Table S3) such as Fe2+, Ni2+, Co2+, Pd2+, Cu2+, and Zn2+ are conducted in real water samples
that are not shown to produce any electroanalytical signals using
Au/GNE under employed electrochemical conditions.

4 Summary and Outlook
Highly electroactive nanotextured gold
electrode (Au/GNE) assemblage
is presented here with advantageously enhanced electrocatalytic features
for highly sensitive and selective electrochemical detection of trace
levels of arsenic in water. Au/GNE also exhibits much improved electronic
transfer traits because of unique nanostructure and thereby facilitates
the electrooxidation of arsenic for its ultralow sensing/detection
in water up to 0.08 ppb concentration. Gold NPs immobilized on the
conductor surface are made decent electrochemical sensors for metal
ion detection. However, lack of durability, reproducibility, and agglomeration
of Au-NPs remains the main challenge. In future, this needs more optimization
in terms of preventing the abovementioned disadvantages. The proposed
Au/GNE assemblage is exceedingly stable with promising reproducibility
maintaining highly active nanoscale surface features by repeating
the analyses several times and allows very reliable, selective, and
highly sensitive detection of arsenic using CV and SWASV. This method
is also successfully employed in real water samples for arsenic analysis.
The GNE is developed on a simple Au foil via a straightforward electrochemical
method from a metal-ion-free electrolyte solution and having an ultrafine
nanoscale surface morphology. For arsenic analyses, SWASV responses
under the optimized conditions show remarkable sensitivity for metal
detection with the LOD of 0.1 ppb (1.3 nM) (based on the visual analysis
of calibration curve) and 0.08 ppb (1.06 nM) (based on the standard
deviation of linear regression). In the complex system containing
Cu2+, Ni2+, Fe2+, Pb2+, Hg2+, and other ions, Au/GNE is amazingly applicable
for highly selective and sensitive detection of arsenic in water.
Next, the experiments are under process to scale up the Au/GNE-based
electrochemical sensors for real-time applications owing to its simple
fabrication and assembly, high reproducibility and robustness, and
electroanalytical performance for arsenic sensing.

Supporting Information Available
The
Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00807.SEM, EDS, Nyquist
plot, and additional electrochemical
data (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b00807_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
K.S.J. acknowledges the contribution from
Dr. Ashi
Rashid and Dr. Amir Ikhlaq from UET—Lahore and for funding
from HEC and technical support from Syed Abdul Majid Kazmi from PCRWR
Lahore, Pakistan.
==== Refs
References
Li S.-S. ; Zhou W.-Y. ; Jiang M. ; Guo Z. ; Liu J.-H. ; Zhang L. ; Huang X.-J. 
Surface Fe (II)/Fe
(III) Cycle Promoted
Ultra-Highly Sensitive Electrochemical Sensing of Arsenic (III) with
Dumbbell-Like Au/Fe3O4 Nanoparticles . Anal.
Chem. 
2018 , 90 , 4569 –4577 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04981 .29557638 
a Tan Z.-Q. ; Liu J.-F. ; Yin Y.-G. ; Shi Q.-T. ; Jing C.-Y. ; Jiang G.-B. 
Colorimetric Au
nanoparticle probe
for speciation test of arsenite and arsenate inspired by selective
interaction between phosphonium ionic liquid and arsenite . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 19833 –19839 . 10.1021/am5052069 .25335190  b Lace A. ; Ryan D. ; Bowkett M. ; Cleary J. 
Arsenic Monitoring
in Water by Colorimetry Using an Optimized Leucomalachite Green Method . Molecules 
2019 , 24 , 339 10.3390/molecules24020339 .
Musil S. ; Pétursdóttir Á. H. ; Raab A. ; Gunnlaugsdóttir H. ; Krupp E. ; Feldmann J. 
Speciation without chromatography
using selective hydride generation: inorganic arsenic in rice and
samples of marine origin . Anal. Chem. 
2014 , 86 , 993 –999 . 10.1021/ac403438c .24354293 
Kempahanumakkagari S. ; Deep A. ; Kim K.-H. ; Kumar Kailasa S. ; Yoon H.-O. 
Nanomaterial-based electrochemical sensors for arsenic
- A review . Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2017 , 95 , 106 –116 . 10.1016/j.bios.2017.04.013 .28431363 
Bolisetty S. ; Reinhold N. ; Zeder C. ; Orozco M. N. ; Mezzenga R. 
Efficient
purification of arsenic-contaminated water using amyloid-carbon hybrid
membranes . Chem. Commun. 
2017 , 53 , 5714 –5717 . 10.1039/C7CC00406K .
a Morita M. ; Edmonds J. S. 
Determination of arsenic species
in biological and environmental samples (Technical Report) . Pure Appl. Chem. 
1992 , 64 , 575 –590 . 10.1351/pac199264040575 . b Smith A. H. ; Hopenhayn-Rich C. ; Bates M. N. ; Goeden H. M. ; Hertz-Picciotto I. ; Duggan H. M. ; Wood R. ; Kosnett M. J. ; Smith M. T. 
Cancer risks from arsenic in drinking water . Environ. Health Perspect. 
1992 , 97 , 259 –267 . 10.1289/ehp.929725910.2307/3431362 .1396465 
Rager J. E. ; Auerbach S. S. ; Chappell G. A. ; Martin E. ; Thompson C. M. ; Fry R. C. 
Benchmark Dose Modeling
Estimates of the Concentrations
of Inorganic Arsenic That Induce Changes to the Neonatal Transcriptome,
Proteome, and Epigenome in a Pregnancy Cohort . Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
2017 , 30 , 1911 –1920 . 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.7b00221 .28927277 
Singh P. ; Sharma S. ; Chauhan K. ; Singhal R. K. 
Fabrication of Economical
Thiol-Tethered Bifunctional Iron Composite as Potential Commercial
Applicant for Arsenic Sorption Application . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 
2018 , 57 , 12959 –12972 . 10.1021/acs.iecr.8b03273 .
Bhowmick S. ; Pramanik S. ; Singh P. ; Mondal P. ; Chatterjee D. ; Nriagu J. 
Arsenic in groundwater of West Bengal, India: a review
of human health risks and assessment of possible intervention options . Sci. Total Environ. 
2018 , 612 , 148 –169 . 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.08.216 .28850835 
Giacomino A. ; Abollino O. ; Lazzara M. ; Malandrino M. ; Mentasti E. 
Determination of As (III) by anodic
stripping voltammetry
using a lateral gold electrode: Experimental conditions, electron
transfer and monitoring of electrode surface . Talanta 
2011 , 83 , 1428 –1435 . 10.1016/j.talanta.2010.11.033 .21238732 
Welch A. H. ; Lico M. S. ; Hughes J. L. 
Arsenic
in ground water of the western
United States . Groundwater 
1988 , 26 , 333 –347 . 10.1111/j.1745-6584.1988.tb00397.x .
Wen S.-H. ; Liang R.-P. ; Zhang L. ; Qiu J.-D. 
Multimodal Assay
of Arsenite Contamination in Environmental Samples with Improved Sensitivity
through Stimuli-Response of Multiligands Modified Silver Nanoparticles . ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
2018 , 6 , 6223 –6232 . 10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b04934 .
Le X. C. ; Yalcin S. ; Ma M. 
Speciation of submicrogram
per liter
levels of arsenic in water: On-site species separation integrated
with sample collection . Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2000 , 34 , 2342 –2347 . 10.1021/es991203u .
a Hu S. ; Lu J. ; Jing C. 
A novel colorimetric
method for field arsenic speciation analysis . J. Environ. Sci. 
2012 , 24 , 1341 10.1016/s1001-0742(11)60922-4 .b Jones E. M.  Arsenic
2000: An Overview of the Arsenic Issue in Bangladesh ; WaterAid Bangladesh : Dhaka, Bangladesh , 2000 .
a Shen L.-L. ; Zhang G.-R. ; Li W. ; Biesalski M. ; Etzold B. J. M. 
Modifier-Free Microfluidic Electrochemical
Sensor for Heavy-Metal Detection . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 4593 –4603 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b00611 .28884162  b Li S.-S. ; Zhou W.-Y. ; Li Y.-X. ; Jiang M. ; Guo Z. ; Liu J.-H. ; Huang X.-J. 
Noble-Metal-Free Co0. 6Fe2. 4O4 Nanocubes
Self-Assembly Monolayer for Highly Sensitive Electrochemical Detection
of As (III) Based on Surface Defects . Anal.
Chem. 
2017 , 90 , 1263 –1272 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04025 .29235342 
Cavicchioli A. ; La-Scalea M. A. ; Gutz I. G. R. 
Analysis and speciation of traces
of arsenic in environmental, food and industrial samples by voltammetry:
a review . Electroanalysis 
2004 , 16 , 697 –711 . 10.1002/elan.200302936 .
Rahman M. R. ; Okajima T. ; Ohsaka T. 
Selective detection of As (III) at
the Au (111)-like polycrystalline gold electrode . Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82 , 9169 –9176 . 10.1021/ac101206j .20973517 
a Kopanica M. ; Novotný L. 
Determination
of traces of arsenic (III) by anodic stripping voltammetry in solutions,
natural waters and biological material . Anal.
Chim. Acta 
1998 , 368 , 211 –218 . 10.1016/S0003-2670(98)00220-7 . b Yang M. ; Chen X. ; Jiang T.-J. ; Guo Z. ; Liu J.-H. ; Huang X.-J. 
Electrochemical detection of trace
arsenic (III) by nanocomposite of nanorod-like α-MnO2 decorated
with∼ 5 nm Au nanoparticles: considering the change of arsenic
speciation . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 9720 –9728 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b02629 .27610632 
Wang D. ; Zhao Y. ; Jin H. ; Zhuang J. ; Zhang W. ; Wang S. ; Wang J. 
Synthesis of Au-decorated
tripod-shaped
Te hybrids for applications in the ultrasensitive detection of arsenic . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 5 , 5733 –5740 . 10.1021/am401205w .23725383 
a Yun K.-S. ; Kim H.-J. ; Joo S. ; Kwak J. ; Yoon E. 
Analysis of heavy-metal ions using
mercury microelectrodes and a solid-state reference electrode on a
Si wafer . Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
2000 , 39 , 7159 10.1143/JJAP.39.7159 . b Yantasee W. ; Lin Y. ; Hongsirikarn K. ; Fryxell G. E. ; Addleman R. ; Timchalk C. 
Electrochemical sensors
for the detection of lead and other toxic heavy metals: the next generation
of personal exposure biomonitors . Environ. Health
Perspect. 
2007 , 115 , 1683 –1690 . 10.1289/ehp.10190 .18087583 
Forsberg G. ; O’Laughlin J. W. ; Megargle R. G. ; Koirtyihann S. R. 
Determination
of arsenic by anodic stripping voltammetry and differential pulse
anodic stripping voltammetry . Anal. Chem. 
1975 , 47 , 1586 –1592 . 10.1021/ac60359a057 .
Simm A. O. ; Banks C. E. ; Compton R. G. 
The Electrochemical
Detection of
Arsenic(III) at a Silver Electrode . Electroanalysis 
2005 , 17 , 1727 –1733 . 10.1002/elan.200503299 .
Liu Z.-G. ; Chen X. ; Jia Y. ; Liu J.-H. ; Huang X.-J. 
Role of
Fe(III) in preventing humic interference during As(III) detection
on gold electrode: Spectroscopic and voltammetric evidence . J. Hazard. Mater. 
2014 , 267 , 153 –160 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2013.12.054 .24440655 
Simm A. O. ; Banks C. E. ; Compton R. G. 
Sonically
assisted electroanalytical
detection of ultratrace arsenic . Anal. Chem. 
2004 , 76 , 5051 –5055 . 10.1021/ac049331a .15373441 
Salimi A. ; Hyde M. E. ; Banks C. E. ; Compton R. G. 
Boron doped diamond
electrode modified with iridium oxide for amperometic detection of
ultra trace amounts of arsenic(iii) . Analyst 
2004 , 129 , 9 –14 . 10.1039/B312285A .
Dai X. ; Compton R. G. 
Detection of As(iii) via oxidation to As(v) using platinum
nanoparticle modified glassy carbon electrodes: arsenic detection
without interference from copper . Analyst 
2006 , 131 , 516 –521 . 10.1039/B513686E .16568168 
Ivandini T. A. ; Sato R. ; Makide Y. ; Fujishima A. ; Einaga Y. 
Electrochemical Detection of Arsenic(III) Using Iridium-Implanted
Boron-Doped Diamond Electrodes . Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 6291 –6298 . 10.1021/ac0519514 .16970300 
Simm A. O. ; Banks C. E. ; Compton R. G. 
Sonoelectroanalytical Detection of
Ultra-Trace Arsenic . Electroanalysis 
2005 , 17 , 335 –342 . 10.1002/elan.200403110 .
Feeney R. ; Kounaves S. P. 
On-site analysis of arsenic in groundwater
using a
microfabricated gold ultramicroelectrode array . Anal. Chem. 
2000 , 72 , 2222 –2228 . 10.1021/ac991185z .10845367 
Welch C. M. ; Nekrassova O. ; Dai X. ; Hyde M. E. ; Compton R. G. 
Fabrication,
characterisation and voltammetric studies of gold amalgam nanoparticle
modified electrodes . ChemPhysChem 
2004 , 5 , 1405 –1410 . 10.1002/cphc.200400263 .15499857 
Tan Y. ; Li Y. ; Zhu D. 
Fabrication of gold nanoparticles
using a trithiol
(thiocyanuric acid) as the capping agent . Langmuir 
2002 , 18 , 3392 –3395 . 10.1021/la011612f .
Fukushima M. ; Yanagi H. ; Hayashi S. ; Suganuma N. ; Taniguchi Y. 
Fabrication
of gold nanoparticles and their influence on optical properties of
dye-doped sol-gel films . Thin Solid Films 
2003 , 438-439 , 39 –43 . 10.1016/S0040-6090(03)00750-8 .
a Dai X. ; Nekrassova O. ; Hyde M. E. ; Compton R. G. 
Anodic stripping voltammetry of arsenic
(III) using gold nanoparticle-modified electrodes . Anal. Chem. 
2004 , 76 , 5924 –5929 . 10.1021/ac049232x .15456316  b Xu X. ; Duan G. ; Li Y. ; Liu G. ; Wang J. ; Zhang H. ; Dai Z. ; Cai W. 
Fabrication
of gold nanoparticles by laser ablation in liquid and their application
for simultaneous electrochemical detection of Cd2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Hg2+ . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2013 , 6 , 65 –71 . 10.1021/am404816e .24341613 
Kumar
Jena B. ; Retna Raj C. 
Gold nanoelectrode ensembles for the simultaneous electrochemical
detection of ultratrace arsenic, mercury, and copper . Anal. Chem. 
2008 , 80 , 4836 –4844 . 10.1021/ac071064w .18444693 
Dai X. ; Compton R. G. 
Direct electrodeposition
of gold nanoparticles onto
indium tin oxide film coated glass: application to the detection of
arsenic (III) . Anal. Sci. 
2006 , 22 , 567 –570 . 10.2116/analsci.22.567 .16760599 
Majid E. ; Hrapovic S. ; Liu Y. ; Male K. B. ; Luong J. H. T. 
Electrochemical
determination of arsenite using a gold nanoparticle modified glassy
carbon electrode and flow analysis . Anal. Chem. 
2006 , 78 , 762 –769 . 10.1021/ac0513562 .16448049 
Joya K. S. ; de Groot H. J. M. 
Controlled surface-assembly of nanoscale leaf-type
Cu-oxide electrocatalyst for high activity water oxidation . ACS Catal. 
2016 , 6 , 1768 –1771 . 10.1021/acscatal.5b02950 .
Finot M. O. ; Braybrook G. D. ; McDermott M. T. 
Characterization of electrochemically
deposited gold nanocrystals on glassy carbon electrodes . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1999 , 466 , 234 –241 . 10.1016/S0022-0728(99)00154-0 .
El-Deab M. S. ; Okajima T. ; Ohsaka T. 
Electrochemical
reduction of oxygen
on gold nanoparticle-electrodeposited glassy carbon electrodes . J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2003 , 150 , A851 –A857 . 10.1149/1.1574806 .
Joya K. S. ; Ul Ain Babar N. ; Gilani S. R. ; Yasmeen F. ; Sarfaraz M. ; Ikram S. ; Colak S. G. ; Ocakoglu K. ; Ince M. 
Heterogeneous
Electrocatalysts for Efficient Water Oxidation Derived from Metal
Phthalocyanine . ChemistrySelect 
2018 , 3 , 11357 –11366 . 10.1002/slct.201802089 .
a Joya K. S. ; de Groot H. J. M. 
Electrochemicalin
situsurface enhanced Raman spectroscopic characterization of a trinuclear
ruthenium complex, Ru-red . J. Raman Spectrosc. 
2013 , 44 , 1195 –1199 . 10.1002/jrs.4329 . b Gao P. ; Gosztola D. ; Leung L.-W. H. ; Weaver M. J. 
Surface-enhanced
Raman scattering at gold electrodes: dependence on electrochemical
pretreatment conditions and comparisons with silver . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1987 , 233 , 211 –222 . 10.1016/0022-0728(87)85017-9 .
Kato D. ; Kamata T. ; Kato D. ; Yanagisawa H. ; Niwa O. 
Au nanoparticle-embedded carbon films
for electrochemical As3+ detection with high sensitivity
and stability . Anal. Chem. 
2016 , 88 , 2944 –2951 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b00136 .26829010 
Yeo B. S. ; Bell A. T. 
Enhanced activity of gold-supported
cobalt oxide for
the electrochemical evolution of oxygen . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 5587 –5593 . 10.1021/ja200559j .21413705 
a Angerstein-Kozlowska H. ; Conway B. E. ; Hamelin A. ; Stoicoviciu L. 
Elementary
steps of electrochemical
oxidation of single-crystal planes of Au Part II. A chemical and structural
basis of oxidation of the (111) plane . J. Electroanal.
Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 
1987 , 228 , 429 –453 . 10.1016/0022-0728(87)80122-5 . b Trasatti S. ; Petrii O. A. 
Real surface area measurements in
electrochemistry . Pure Appl. Chem. 
1991 , 63 , 711 –734 . 10.1351/pac199163050711 .
Wei J. ; Li S.-S. ; Guo Z. ; Chen X. ; Liu J.-H. ; Huang X.-J. 
Adsorbent assisted in situ electrocatalysis: An ultra-sensitive
detection of As (III) in water at Fe3O4 nanosphere densely decorated
with Au nanoparticles . Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 88 , 1154 –1161 . 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02947 .26694876 
a Zhang Q.-X. ; Yin L.-B. 
Electrochemical
performance of heterostructured Au–Pd bimetallic nanoparticles
toward As (III) aqueous media . Electrochem.
Commun. 
2012 , 22 , 57 –60 . 10.1016/j.elecom.2012.05.025 . b Hezard T. ; Laffont L. ; Gros P. ; Behra P. ; Evrard D. 
Hg (II) trace electrochemical detection on gold electrode:
Evidence for chloride adsorption as the responsible for the broad
baseline . J. Electroanal. Chem. 
2013 , 697 , 28 –31 . 10.1016/j.jelechem.2013.03.009 .
Moghimi N. ; Mohapatra M. ; Leung K. T. 
Bimetallic nanoparticles for arsenic
detection . Anal. Chem. 
2015 , 87 , 5546 –5552 . 10.1021/ac504116d .25938763 
Bu L. ; Gu T. ; Ma Y. ; Chen C. ; Tan Y. ; Xie Q. ; Yao S. 
Enhanced cathodic preconcentration of As (0) at Au and Pt electrodes
for anodic stripping voltammetry analysis of As (III) and As (V) . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2015 , 119 , 11400 –11409 . 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b01435 .
Hubaux A. ; Vos G. 
Decision and detection limits for calibration curves . Anal. Chem. 
1970 , 42 , 849 –855 . 10.1021/ac60290a013 .
Rajkumar M. ; Thiagarajan S. ; Chen S.-M. 
Electrochemical detection of arsenic
in various water samples . Int. J. Electrochem.
Sci. 
2011 , 6 , 3164 –3177 .
Dai X. ; Compton R. G. 
Gold nanoparticle
modified electrodes show a reduced
interference by Cu (II) in the detection of As (III) using anodic
stripping voltammetry . Electroanalysis 
2005 , 17 , 1325 –1330 . 10.1002/elan.200403246 .

