
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02439ArticleEfficient Bayesian
Function Optimization of Evolving
Material Manufacturing Processes Rubín de Celis Leal David *†‡Nguyen Dang †Vellanki Pratibha †Li Cheng †Rana Santu *†Thompson Nathan ‡Gupta Sunil †Pringle Keiran ‡Subianto Surya ‡Venkatesh Svetha †Slezak Teo ‡Height Murray §Sutti Alessandra *‡†Applied
Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2I2) and ‡Institute for
Frontier Materials (IFM), Deakin University, Waurn
Ponds, Victoria 3216, Australia§ HeiQ
Australia, Pty Ltd, Geelong, Victoria 3216, Australia* E-mail: rubindcl@deakin.edu.au (D.R.d.C.L.).* E-mail: santu.rana@deakin.edu.au (S.R.).* E-mail: asutti@deakin.edu.au (A.S.).18 11 2019 10 12 2019 4 24 20571 20578 31 07 2019 04 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.The scale-up of laboratory procedures to industrial production
is the main challenge standing between ideation and the successful
introduction of novel materials into commercial products. Retaining
quality while ensuring high per-batch production yields is the main
challenge. Batch processing and other dynamic strategies that preserve
product quality can be applied, but they typically involve a variety
of experimental parameters and functions that are difficult to optimize
because of interdependencies that are often antagonistic. Adaptive
Bayesian optimization is demonstrated here as a valuable support tool
in increasing both the per-batch yield and quality of short polymer
fibers, produced by wet spinning and shear dispersion methods. Through
this approach, it is shown that short fiber dispersions with high
yield and a specified, targeted fiber length distribution can be obtained
with minimal cost of optimization, starting from sub-optimal processing
conditions and minimal prior knowledge. The Bayesian function optimization
demonstrated here for batch processing could be applied to other dynamic
scale-up methods as well as to cases presenting higher dimensional
challenges such as shape and structure optimization. This work shows
the great potential of synergies between industrial processing, material
engineering, and machine learning perspectives.

document-id-old-9ao9b02439document-id-new-14ao9b02439ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The superior material
properties accessed through recent advances
in nanotechnology result in an increasing range of commercial products
and devices with performances strongly dependent on features in the
sub-micron scale. A drive to strictly control morphology and features
is, though, often challenged by the need to produce at scale and at
market-sustainable costs and rates. The great advantages of the expanded
scale of product manufacture go hand in hand with complex production
challenges related to the scaling up of laboratory-scale methodologies
and boundary condition-sensitive manufacturing.1−5 Typically, laboratory-scale manufacturing puts a
higher priority on retaining “stable and pure” manufacturing
conditions, than it does on maximizing materials production per production
batch: the latter is not a major driver at the laboratory scale, while
the former enables greater scientific understanding of processes.
The industrial paradigm is instead typically biased toward the opposite
situation, with higher importance given to high per-batch yield and
low production costs (time and materials). Scaling-up of laboratory
technologies therefore often requires a major shift in processing
conditions, with a trade-off between purity and yield.3

Innovation of industrial processes is also often
hindered by the
inherent inertia in industrial processes, as changes to an established
process incur significant costs and investments, resulting in the
lack of exploration of complex experimental spaces at scale. These
main factors are recognized impediments to the translation of novel
techniques to large-scale conditions and to the innovation of current
industrial manufacturing of high-value materials. Overcoming these
limitations will therefore greatly improve the adaptability and efficiency
of various industrial batch processes.

This work aims to demonstrate
that the scaling up of techniques
from the lab-scale to commercial-scale production can be most efficiently
driven with the use of adequate machine learning algorithms.

The industrial production of short polymer fibers (SPF) by wet
spinning is an ideal system for deploying artificial intelligence
because of the complexity of its experimental space and the cost benefit
of increasing per-batch production yield. SPF are fibers of micron-size
(or below-micron) diameter and finite length.6,7 Produced
by a liquid-in-liquid coagulation process, they are stored and used
as colloidal dispersions in a variety of fields. They have received
strong interest for applications in filter production, cell growth,
3D printing, and especially innovative textile treatments.

Already
commercialized at the 1000 L scale, the production of SPF
involves inducing the coagulation of a polymer-containing liquid filament
under shear. For this purpose, a polymer solution is introduced into
a laminar flow device (Figure 1). A liquid filament is formed, which is then stretched and
broken while coagulating under shear. The main forces acting in this
process are the relative forces of fluid drag, fluid inertia, osmosis,
and interfacial tension. The elongation and solidification rates of
the filament can be controlled through the selection of polymer, solvent,
and coagulant, while the design of the fluidic channel and the flow
rates determine the shear forces that stretch the polymer jet before,
during, and after gelation. Within a narrow window, the combination
of parameters can be balanced such that filaments are formed and broken
prior to complete solidification, resulting in the formation of SPF.
In a single-pass run, these physical and chemical process conditions
can be tuned to obtain fibers with controlled length, diameter, and
overall quality.8 However, because of the
large ratio of the coagulant to polymer solution in the shear system,
these optimized conditions yield a low concentration suspension of
fibers, which is not economical for industrial uptake because of the
large consumption of the coagulant. In this type of system, batch
processing is commonly used in industry, driven to maximize effective
yield per processed batch, using methods such as recirculation and
progressive enrichment of a coagulant.9

Figure 1 Laminar
flow SPF production system. The polymer solution jets out
of the nozzle into the coagulant and is subjected to shear forces
that stretch it during and after solidification. The design (h, d, and α) and flow (vC, vP) parameters determine
the conditions of the solidification and can be tuned to produce fibers
with target length and diameter. Bold underlined settings were used
for the optimization of fiber production by recirculation.

This work tackles this scale-up problem by utilizing
an SPF-manufacturing
setup, where the produced fiber dispersion is recirculated as the
coagulant for the formation of new fibers (Materials
and Methods). Recirculation is effective from a commercial
SPF manufacturing perspective because the same volume of the coagulant
will be progressively enriched with fibers as it is repeatedly circulated
through a device. However, utilizing this approach in the SPF manufacturing
paradigm presents two main challenges: (i) the purity of the coagulant
varies during the recirculation cycle as more polymer solution is
injected, affecting fiber formation and stability, and (ii) circulation
through a pumping system can damage the fibers dispersed in the coagulant.
The combined effect of coagulant contamination and repeated exposure
to shear is particularly difficult to predict, making this technique
difficult to scale without the aid of advanced optimization methods.
The effects of recirculation on fiber formation and degradation are
initially investigated here separately. The outcomes of these preliminary
tests are then used to determine a suitable experimental space, which
can then be optimized using artificial intelligence approaches to
maximize yield while targeting a specific length distribution.

The optimization of such complex experimental spaces is typically
driven by the urge to find absolute maxima while spending a minimum
amount of time and resources in the process. Bayesian optimization
methodologies have been developed for the design of experiments that
consider both the expected outcome of the experiments and also the
information they provide about the experimental space.10−14 An adequate balance in this duality between the exploration of the
unknown space and exploitation of the best known results ensures the
highest value per experiment and therefore low experimental cost.12,14,15 This strategy has also been adapted
for experiments where some variables are hard to change. In this approach,
a group of suggestions where such variables are kept constant for
time convenience is known as the optimization batch.16 Moreover, adaptive optimization can be performed using
information obtained from the outcomes to update the limits or conditions
of the experimental search space along the process.11 Advances in the evaluation of outcomes have also been published
that combine objective measurements and subjective evaluations to
provide efficient and reliable feedback for the optimization.

Recently, a new technique has been developed, with the goal to
find functions, instead of variable values, that provide optimal results
in a dynamic process, providing dynamic control of the function’s
shape and variability.17 These methodologies
are utilized here for the optimization of high yield SPF production
by recirculation, a suitable real-world challenge with strong commercial
and research potential.

2 Results and Discussion
2.1 Characterization of the Recirculation Process
In the SPF system, a fluid filament is injected in an outer flowing
coagulant, forming fibers that are collected as a dispersion. If the
fiber dispersion is collected directly in the coagulant volume and
this is recirculated through a device to increase its solid content,
two main effects are to be considered: breakage due to high mechanical
shear and contamination of the coagulant that affects the formation
of new fibers. These effects will be investigated and the system optimized
for targeted fiber length and maximum yield using machine learning.

Recirculation experiments with fixed settings were performed to
characterize the fiber production system. These settings were selected
to produce fibers of different morphologies based on previous single-pass
experiments with identical settings.8

In the first minutes of recirculation, all tested conditions produced
fibers similar to those from prior single-pass experiments. This is
to be expected because the coagulant is still relatively pure. However,
the quality of the fibers drastically dropped at a time inversely
proportional to the polymer flow rate, suggesting that water content,
which increases as a function of the injected polymer solution, has
a major effect on fiber formation, likely by affecting solvent/coagulant
diffusion kinetics, and therefore affecting the solidification kinetics.
This notion is consistent with the osmotic nature of the coagulation
process, with solvent exhaustion driving the solidification of the
polymer solution jet. As water from the polymer solution is dissolved
in the coagulant, the osmotic pressure driving this flow is reduced
and so is solvent exhaustion. Initially, this slows down the solidification
of the polymer-rich jet, resulting in irregular-shaped fibers and
debris. As the coagulant reaches saturation (∼8% V/Vtotal), solidification appears inhibited
because of the inability of the coagulant to absorb more water and
further injection of polymer solution appears to result in the re-dissolution
of previously formed fibers. The evolution of fiber morphology in
such cases can be observed in the images from three continuous-injection
recirculation samples shown in Figure 2a. These experiments revealed effective boundaries
for recirculation with static production parameters, indicating that
a hard limit of the maximum volume ratio of aqueous polymer solution
to coagulant exists, for the solvent and coagulant used. To test the
effects of water content on fiber formation, a series of separate
experiments was performed using the coagulant tainted with different
percentages of de-ionized water in a single-pass setup. The results
shown in Figure 2b
show consistent fiber production up to 10% V/Vtotal water content and no fibers produced beyond
that ratio. Figure 3 shows sample quality evolution in several recirculation experiments
(as color lines) along with the controlled water content series (as
red dots). Quality in this plot is based on the quick-scoring user
guide (Appendix 1). A reduction in fiber
quality can be observed in all experiments, related to increasing
the water content of the coagulant. This appears as the main boundary
condition to be set for successful recirculation and will be taken
into account during the optimization of fiber production.

Figure 2 Effect of coagulant
contamination on fiber morphology. (a) Evolution
of fiber morphology as a function of recirculation time at three different
settings and equal recirculation volume VR = 400 mL. The first two settings produced shorter fibers compared
to the third, and it was observed that the quality dropped for all
samples as recirculation time increased. (b) Fiber samples produced
separately in a single-pass (no recirculation) using the coagulant
tainted with different amounts of de-ionized water. Water contamination
in the coagulant reduces the solvent exhaustion from the polymer jet,
slows down solidification, and is the main limitation for fiber yield
in the recirculation system.

Figure 3 Consistent reduction of fiber quality as water content
in the coagulant
increases. Eight samples produced by recirculation are shown (color
lines), including three recirculation samples also shown in Figure 2 (marked with *).
A series of samples produced adding different proportions of water
to the coagulant is also shown as red dots (also in Figure 2). It can be seen that the
quality of the fibers consistently drops for water contents above
10% V/Vtotal. Saturation
of the coagulant avoids further water (solvent) exhaustion from the
polymer solution thus stopping fiber formation. Fiber quality score
values shown in this plot are evaluated by an expert user based on
the scoring guide (see Appendix 1).

The second effect that can be observed in recirculation
samples
is the reduction of fiber length as recirculation time increases (see Figure 2a).

The series
of experiments performed with different starting water
contents (Figure 2b)
in a single-pass setup shows no significant effect of initial water
content on fiber length. This suggests that tensile and bending stresses
caused by the drag forces during recirculation are a more likely cause
of fiber breakage than water content alone. This is a good example
of new complexities that can arise in the scale-up of methodologies,
and which are difficult to predict or control. It can be deduced that
avoiding recirculation in production would be ideal from a product
consistency perspective. While this is possible at the laboratory-scale,
by using a pristine coagulant, it would be too costly for industrial-scale
production.

The degradation of fibers by mechanical stress was
studied using
two samples, with short and long fibers, produced by single-pass and
then recirculated under different conditions. The length of the produced
fibers was observed to be determined by the choice of production parameters,
as described by a previous study.8 A set
volume (200 mL) of each of these two fiber samples was passed only
once through the recirculation setup with a high coagulant speed (vC = 92 cm/s) and without adding any further
polymer solution. The device geometry selected for this experiment
is chosen to produce the highest acceleration of the coagulant and
therefore the highest fluid drag forces in the constriction (h = 9 mm, d = 0 mm, α = 25°).
The fiber length distribution in the sample with short fibers showed
a non-statistically significant change in the average length (+1.9%)
after the cycle, which is comparable to the uncertainty of the measuring
methods. However, the long fiber sample showed a reduction of 43%
in the average fiber length (Figure 4) and a clear shift in the distribution. These results
suggest that the breakage of the fibers is also a function of their
initial length and can be explained by the proportionality of drag
forces to fiber length and the likelihood to exceed the maximum tension
withstood by the fibers, which is, instead, a function of fiber thickness.
Longer fibers are therefore more prone to breakage than shorter ones
for comparable diameters. The magnitude of this non-linear aspect
of fiber breakage makes the prediction of the final fiber length distributions
very difficult and is of utmost importance for the resulting fiber
length distribution of the product.

Figure 4 Effects of recirculation on the length
of short and long fibers.
Two samples of fiber dispersion were circulated through the SPF system
containing short and long fibers, respectively.

The effect of coagulant speed alone on fiber breakage
was also
studied using a single-pass setup. For this purpose, 200 mL of the
dispersion containing long fibers was subjected to one cycle through
the setup at a lower coagulant speed (vC = 43 cm/s) resulting in a much smaller reduction in length (−4.6%
average, Figure 5)
compared to what was obtained at a higher speed (92 cm/s). This confirms
that the coagulant speed also affects the fiber breakage rates, as
expected, likely due to its direct impact on drag forces in the recirculation
loop. It is important to notice that coagulant speed affects the dimensions
of the produced fibers and simultaneously the rate at which they are
broken. Moreover these two effects might have completely different
causes. The former is a result of drag forces in laminar flow especially
designed for the purpose. The latter is an unplanned effect of this
upscaling methodology and needs to be further examined.

Figure 5 Effects of
coagulant speed on the length of circulated fibers.
Two samples of dispersion with long fibers were circulated only once
through the SPF system at low (vC = 43
m/s) and high (vC = 92 cm/s) coagulant
speeds, respectively. The resulting samples show a very small reduction
of length (4.6%) for the low shear compared to the almost ten times
higher for the high shear. This effect is expected because shear forces
causing breakage are determined by flow speeds. Fibers in the SPF
system can pass through the system tens of times during a regular
recirculation process.

The mechanism of fiber breakage was studied by
circulating 200
mL of the dispersion with long fibers through the setup without the
device at a high coagulant speed (vC =
92 cm/s). This was done to clarify whether fiber breakage is caused
by known shear fields in the laminar flow device or in the rest of
the equipment, that is, the tubing and the lobe pump. The resulting
fiber length distribution does not deviate from that obtained with
the device as part of the loop (Figure 6). This suggests that most of the post-formation fiber
breakage happens in the tubing and lobe pump as opposed to the laminar
flow device. It is relevant to consider that laminar flow devices
were designed to control the magnitude of shear forces, and that the
length of the fibers, as produced through coagulation, is a direct
consequence of these forces. Such forces are sufficient to induce
breakage of the filaments of polymer-rich phase while in a “plasticized”
or “semi-plasticized” state. It is not expected, therefore, that
seconds after being produced, a more solidified, stronger, filament
would break further by passing through a similar field of shear. On
the other hand, the tubing and pump are expected to cause turbulent
flow and high shear forces, the magnitude of which is likely greater
than those in the device. In summary, the characterization of the
recirculation system demonstrated two main effects on fiber morphology:
(1) coagulant saturation induced worsening of fiber quality and (2)
continuous breakage of fibers is strongly dependent on coagulant speed
and particularly affects longer fibers. The first effect resulted
in an imposed hard limit at 10% V/Vtotal polymer solution. The potential of the recirculation
system to produce fiber dispersions with high yields can be more efficiently
exploited with this information.

Figure 6 Comparison of fiber breakage mechanisms.
The presence or absence
of the laminar flow device in the recirculation setup seems to have
no significant effect on the distribution of fiber length. This suggests
that turbulent flow and inhomogeneous shear forces in the tubing and
lobe pump are the main causes of fiber breakage during recirculation.

2.2 Optimization
The main requirements
for the scaling up of fiber production include achieving the maximum
fiber yield and a controlled fiber length distribution. The recirculation
setup was designed to achieve the highest yield and the characterization
shows that this can be achieved by setting a final polymer solution
content at 10% V/Vtotal. However, controlling the size of the fibers in a dynamic (evolving)
recirculation system is not a trivial task, especially considering
the complex evolution of the fiber length, as shown by the experiments
described above.

Fiber length will reduce as a function of the
time spent in the recirculation system, resulting in broader fiber
length distributions with increasing time. It has been shown that
parameters such as coagulant speed affect the final length distribution
simultaneously in several ways including the size of formed fibers
and rates of breakage. Higher homogeneity of fiber lengths can, therefore,
be expected if the length of fibers being formed were continuously
matched to that of the fibers already within the system, with their
continuous breakage being considered. Such a strategy requires continuous
adjustment of production parameters within recirculation time.

Coagulant speed can be tuned dynamically during production in the
SPF system even at larger scale production facilities. It is also
the most relevant parameter for controlling the formation of fibers
in this system because it is directly related to shear forces that
determine fiber formation and breakage. Coagulant speed has been therefore
chosen as the main dynamic variable to consider and optimize as a
function of recirculation time. The full range of the coagulant speed
was made available for optimization (10 ≤ vC ≤ 110 cm/s). A monotonic in-batch increase of
coagulant speed was chosen to secure the production of fibers with
decreasing length, as is required to obtain the homogeneous distribution
of length. Even when simple functions of time are used for this purpose,
a multitude of profiles can be designed with monotonic increase.

However, tailored length distributions necessary for the upscaled
production of SPF dispersions require an efficient method to discriminate
the corresponding coagulant speed profiles.

The batch volume
(VR) for the optimization
experiments was fixed at 400 mL in order to reduce solvent usage while
maintaining sample reproducibility. The speed at which the polymer
is injected (vP) determines the water
content in the coagulant at any given time of recirculation. Because
of the limit of 10% V/Vtotal water content, this results in a total recirculation time (t) inversely roportional to polymer speed (vP). Therefore, a high polymer solution speed was selected
(vP = 10.5 cm/s) that minimizes the recirculation
time (t = 9 min). Design parameters in the SPF system
can be changed only after a laborious procedure (involving reassembling
the setup) and have even lower variability in the industrial size
machinery. Therefore, these parameters were fixed for the optimization
experiments as follows: h = 9 mm, d = 0 mm, and α = 25°.

The optimization of SPF production
by recirculation is therefore
equivalent to finding the coagulant speed profiles that result in
a desired fiber length distribution while keeping other settings fixed.
Vellanki’s approach17 was used to
design and optimize coagulant speed profiles aiming to achieve high
yield fiber dispersions with a target length of 30 to 80 μm.
The Bernstein polynomials used in this approach are a series of smooth
functions with both domain and range from 0 to 1 that add up to produce
a variable curve (cfr. Figure 7). Similarly to other polynomials, their order determines
the amount of functions added together and thus the variability of
the resulting curve. For a polynomial of order n,
the amount of functions used corresponds to n + 1.
Five functions (4th order) were used initially for the design of the
coagulant speed profiles. The coefficients of each function (Bernstein
coefficients) can be tuned to determine the shape of the curve. A
monotonic increase of the curve can simply be established by a monotonic
increase of such coefficients.

Figure 7 Design of the coagulant speed profiles
based on Bernstein polynomials
as described by Vellanki et al. The curve produced by the polynomial
function basis depends on a number of so-called Bernstein coefficients
(seven in this example). This shape is then scaled to fit the experimental
limits of coagulant speed (vC) as a function
of recirculation time (t) to produce a unique coagulant
speed profile. The setting of the coagulant pump and therefore the
coagulant speed was adjusted every minute according to this function.

By scaling the range (0–1) of these functions
to the range
of the coagulant speed and the domain to the 9 minutes of recirculation,
coagulant speed settings at every minute of the recirculation process
are determined.

Bayesian optimization is then used to find the
Bernstein coefficients
and therefore the coagulant flow profile that produces the best fiber
samples. Thompson sampling is used to generate six coagulant speed
profile recommendations per optimization batch.

This strategy
selects the first recommendation as the one with
the highest expected outcome and then speculates such an expected
outcome in order to produce a second recommendation. In doing so for
the six samples of each optimization batch, the algorithm ensures
the necessary balance between exploration and exploitation.

Bayesian optimization methods, as the one used in this investigation,
require the value or quality of the experimental outcomes to be reflected
by a numerical value known as the objective function. However, capturing
every property by a single number is not a trivial task. Some aspects
of the product can be directly measured by automated methodologies
and therefore can be standardized. On the other hand, some quality
requirements might be difficult or impractical to implement in an
efficient optimization process. Our target is the highest number of
fibers possible (compared with debris) and with measured lengths falling
within a desired range. For this purpose, the objective function is
related to fiber quality and is evaluated considering two factors 1  where L% is the
proportion of fibers within the targeted length range (30–80
μm) and P% is the perceived proportion
of the polymer content that is forming fibers as opposed to debris
and spheres (Figure 8). The former is calculated considering all fiber measurements per
sample and the latter is evaluated by an expert user with base on
the polymer yield factor guide (cfr. Appendix 2). In this manner, the quality of the samples is directly
related to the proportion of the polymer solution that ends up as
fibers of a desired length.

Figure 8 Elements of the fiber quality factor (F%—eq 1). This
factor is designed to capture overall sample quality based on the
proportion of polymer that is formed in fibers (P%) and proportion of fibers within the target length range
(L%): (a) proportion of polymer that is
formed in fibers (P%) is estimated by
an expert user based on a scoring guide (Appendix 2) with five possible outcomes (0.0, 0.4, 0.7, 0.9, and 1.0);
(b) proportion of fibers within the target length range (L%) is calculated considering the measured fibers in the
sample that fall within the region of interest (ROI: 30 to 80 μm).
The fiber length distribution of sample B1–S1 is shown as an
example.

The settings for the first group of experiments
were selected randomly
in order to provide an unbiased initial dataset. The defining procedure
for an adaptive optimization is to analyze the new recommendations
of the optimizer in light of the previous results, in order to update
any relevant findings in the optimization limits and methodology.

The first sample of the second optimization batch (B2–S1)
showed high amounts of debris and few fibers, much longer than the
target range (Figure 9). The coagulant speed profile for this sample ran at the lowest
coagulant flow for 8 min and increased slightly for the last minute,
suggesting that no fibers could be produced at the lowest coagulant
speed. This was confirmed in a single-pass experiment run at a coagulant
speed vC = 10 m/s which resulted in no
fibers, and therefore the lower limit of the optimization range for
coagulant speed was doubled starting from optimization batch number
3 onward. This was done by adjusting the equivalence of the lowest
limit of the function basis (0) to the new lower limit of the coagulant
speed (vC = 20 m/s).

Figure 9 (a) Coagulant speed profiles,
(b) fiber length distributions, and
(c) microscopy images of significant optimization samples. Six samples
are shown including three that achieved best-so-far (B1–S3,
B2–S5 and B5–S5), two close calls (B3–S3 and
B6–S5), and the worst sample (R2–S1, red), which provided
information about the functional limits of the coagulant speed used
to update the optimization limits. Good samples have more fibers in
the targeted length range. It can be observed that profiles starting
at low coagulant speed and finishing toward the middle levels deliver
good results. Fiber length distributions shown in part (b) are calculated
with a fixed bandwidth of 5 μm to ease comparison.

It was also noticed that the coagulant profiles
recommended by
the optimizer for the six samples of the third batch had similar shapes.
The order of the Bernstein polynomials was therefore increased to
6 (7 coefficients) for the following batches, in order to increase
the variability of the coagulant speed profiles. This was done following
the procedures described by Vellanki et al. that maintain equivalence
of the previous and new profile recommendations.17

Seven optimization batches were carried out (Figure 10), with two adaptations
applied
before the third batch as explained above. Each optimization batch
presented coagulant speed profiles similar to previous high-score
samples and others that investigated innovative shapes, demonstrating
a good balance between exploration and exploitation. After seven batches,
a variety of profiles were investigated that spanned throughout the
experimental space. High scoring samples had similar coagulant speed
profiles starting at low coagulant speed settings, with a slow increase
and finishing in the middle range (see Figure 9).

Figure 10 Evolution of sample quality along the 7 batches
of the optimization
process. Each optimization batch consists of 6 samples. Total fiber
score (F%) is shown on the top in yellow,
followed by the two combining factors: polymer yield (P%) in red and length distribution (L%) in green. Samples that resulted best-so-far are marked with
a blue triangle.

The optimization process was stopped after the
seventh batch of
experiments due to the similarity of high-scoring profiles and the
spread out sampling of the experimental space, signals of an accomplished
optimization. Further trials are unlikely to improve outcomes or provide
new information and could result in a lower gain per experiment.

Undesired polymer clusters can be observed in the first batches
that make up a considerable amount of the polymer and reduce sample
quality (see Figure 9c). These clusters can be formed by sticking the previously formed
fibers with newly injected polymer solution. They can also be formed
because of the agglomeration of small particles caused by convection
currents during the drying process in the surface of the microscope
slide. However, the cause of cluster formation in these samples is
not deemed relevant to this work. More importantly, it can be observed
that those clusters were eliminated through the optimization process,
leading to high quality samples with cleaner fibers. This achievement
of the optimization is highly convenient for industrial applications
and would be much more difficult to reach using traditional methodologies
for the design of experiments.

The knowledge obtained from the
optimization is not limited to
the best scoring profiles. It can be observed in Figure 10 that most of the fibers produced
even in the high scoring samples fall below the region of interest.

Considering that single-pass experiments have been shown to consistently
produce fibers in this range,8 such low
performance illustrates the magnitude of the up-scaling challenges.

3 Conclusions
The characterization and
optimization of a recirculation system
for the production of high yield fiber dispersions with targeted length
distribution has been successfully carried out.

It has been
shown that fiber formation has a consistent plateau
upon recirculation until it suddenly drops as the water content in
the coagulant reaches ∼10% V/Vtotal. Analysis of fiber measurements shows that long
fibers are more prone to be broken by turbulence in the pump and tubing.
These findings suggest that higher homogeneity in samples can be achieved
using a variable coagulant flow within a time limit. Adaptive Bayesian
optimization was used to find the coagulant speed profiles that produced
high quality fiber samples with the targeted length.

The fine-tuning
of dynamic processes using adaptive Bayesian optimization
has been demonstrated here on batch-enriching production of SPFs.
This strategy has strong potential for the optimization of the evolving
manufacturing processes, such as those in batch reactions, fermentation,
and other batch production systems which are inherently difficult
to optimize because of their evolving state. Approaches of this nature,
combining industrial processing, materials science, and machine learning
perspectives, offer strong opportunities for accelerating discovery,
research translation, and process improvement.

4 Materials and Methods
The SPF samples
were produced with the strategy presented by Sutti
et al.6 and implemented in the production
system described in a previous article.8 This SPF system (Figure 1) consists of a nozzle that injects the polymer solution into
a channel of variable width (h = 3, 6 or 9 mm) where
the coagulant flows. The channel width remains constant for a variable
distance (d = 0, 15, or 30 mm) after the injection
nozzle allows fiber gelation and is then constricted to 1 mm at a
variable angle (α = 10 or 25°) causing an increase in shear
forces that affects fiber morphology. Shear forces are also dependent
on the initial velocity of the polymer (vP) and especially on the coagulant speed (vC). In contrast to the original SPF system where only the pristine
coagulant is used, the setup presented here delivers the fiber suspension
back into the coagulant container (Figure 11) to be used for further fiber production.
This setup involves two new experimental parameters: the coagulant
volume used for recirculation (VR) and
the running time of the experiments (t).

Figure 11 Recirculation
setup for the SPF system. The coagulant is circulated
by a lobe pump into the laminar flow device where the polymer solution
is injected forming the fibers. The resulting fiber dispersion is
returned to the coagulant container and reused as the coagulant, increasing
the fiber yield. This updated setup results in two new experimental
variables: initial coagulant volume (VR) and the recirculation time (t).

A 16.5% w/v polymer solution was prepared by adding
poly(ethylene-co-acrylic acid) (Dow Primacor 5990I)
into ammonia solution
and stirring overnight at 110 °C. 1-Butanol (>99%, Chem Supply)
stored at ∼4 °C was circulated as the coagulant using
a lobe pump (UNIBLOC LABTOP 200). The channel was flushed with 400
mL of the coagulant before starting the polymer and coagulant flows
at adequate speeds. The polymer solution was injected in the device
using 50 mL plastic syringes (Becton Dickinson) and a Legato 270 syringe
pump. The fiber dispersion/coagulant vessel was stirred at low speed
for recirculation experiments. The water content percentage in the
samples was calculated by dividing the injected volume of the polymer
solution by the total volume of the coagulant plus solution.

Fiber dispersions were collected from the recirculation beaker
using a 10 mL syringe and diluted with ethanol 1:100 V/Vtotal.

The diluted dispersion
was then spread on a microscope slide and
left to dry in air. Optical microscopy images were taken using an
Olympus BX51 microscope with a DP71 camera. An adequate magnification
was selected, at which the fibers could be clearly seen and measured
depending on their size. Brightness, contrast, and background were
adjusted on the images and the length and diameter of the fibers was
measured using the Fiber Separation app on Image Pro Premiere 9.2
software. This measuring method automatically detects fiber-like objects
in a calibrated image and measures both length and width based on
search parameters that can be tuned for optimal results. This method
avoids clusters and irregular-shaped objects, resulting in the efficient
characterization of the fibers. An average of 340 and a minimum of
53 individual fibers were measured per sample.

The quality of
the fiber samples used for the plot in Figure 5 was estimated using
a quick-scoring guide (cfr. Appendix 1).
This guide is an aid developed by the SPF research group to help users
to visually evaluate fiber samples as a function of fiber homogeneity
and in the absence of debris. Fiber length distributions are plotted
for visualization purposes with a standard normal kernel using the
Silverman’s rule of thumb bandwidth: h = 1.06σn(−1/5) where σ is the standard
deviation and n is the amount of measurements per
sample.

It is to be noted that fiber diameter distributions
are typically
more uniform than those of length. This is a result of the dependence
of fiber breakage (during and after formation) on fiber thickness
and ensures that generally, if the length of the fibers is adequate,
the width will also fall into a convenient range. For this reason,
the width of the fibers has not been separately considered on this
work.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.9b02439.Quality scoring guide produced and polymer yield scoring
guide (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b02439_si_001.pdf

 Author Contributions
D.R.d.C.L.,
D.N., and P.V. are equivalent first authors of this manuscript. D.R.d.C.L.,
N.T., and S.S. ran the fiber production experiments, analyzed the
data, and prepared the manuscript. K.P. had the leading role in the
design and manufacture of the SPF devices. S.R., S.G., and C.L. designed
the optimizer, P.V. designed the function optimization algorithms,
and D.N. ran the optimization trials. S.V. led the artificial intelligence
aspects of this research and the development of the optimization algorithms
at A2I2. T.S. assisted with experiments and
design. M.H. co-designed the recirculation experiments and guided
the experimental approach. A.S. co-designed the devices, led the SPF
research and development of AEO processes at IFM and the present study.
All authors contributed to the drafting and revising of this manuscript.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported under the Australian
Research Council’s Industrial Transformation and Linkage Programme
funding schemes: projects number IH140100018 and LP140100287. Prof.
Venkatesh is the recipient of an ARC Australian Laureate Fellowship
(FL170100006). This work was performed in part at the Deakin node
of the Australian National Fabrication Facility, a company established
under the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy
to provide nano and microfabrication facilities for Australia’s
researchers. Deakin University’s Advanced Characterization
Facility is acknowledged for the use of the Electron Microscopy facility.
HeiQ Australia Pty Ltd is acknowledged for use of its equipment.
==== Refs
References
Bell T. A. 
Challenges
in the scale-up of particulate processes—an industrial perspective . Powder Technol. 
2005 , 150 , 60 –71 . 10.1016/j.powtec.2004.11.023 .
Muthu M. S. ; Wilson B. 
Challenges posed by
the scale-up of nanomedicines . Nanomedicine 
2012 , 7 , 307 –309 . 10.2217/nnm.12.3 .22385192 
Zhong Y. L. ; Tian Z. ; Simon G. P. ; Li D. 
Scalable production
of graphene via wet chemistry: progress and challenges . Mater. Today 
2015 , 18 , 73 –78 . 10.1016/j.mattod.2014.08.019 .
Zurutuza A. ; Marinelli C. 
Challenges
and opportunities in graphene commercialization . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 9 , 730 10.1038/nnano.2014.225 .25286257 
Crater J. S. ; Lievense J. C. 
Scale-up of industrial
microbial processes . FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 
2018 , 365 , fny138 10.1093/femsle/fny138 .
Sutti A. ; Lin T. ; Wang X. 
Shear-Enhanced Solution Precipitation: A Simple Process
to Produce Short Polymeric Nanofibers . J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol. 
2011 , 11 , 8947 10.1166/jnn.2011.3489 .22400285 
Sutti A. ; Lin T. ; Kirkland M. A.  Fibre-forming process and fibres
produced by the process . WO2013056312A1 , 2013 .
Li C. ; Rubín de Celis
Leal D. ; Rana S. ; Gupta S. ; Sutti A. ; Greenhill S. ; Slezak T. ; Height M. ; Venkatesh S. 
Rapid Bayesian
optimisation for synthesis of short
polymer fiber materials . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 5683 10.1038/s41598-017-05723-0 .28720869 
Barrett P. ; Smith B. ; Worlitschek J. ; Bracken V. ; O’Sullivan B. ; O’Grady D. 
A review of
the use of process analytical technology
for the understanding and optimization of production batch crystallization
processes . Org. Process Res. Dev. 
2005 , 9 , 348 –355 . 10.1021/op049783p .
Gzara M. ; Essabri A. 
Balanced Explore-Exploit Clustering based Distributed
Evolutionary Algorithm for Multi-objective Optimisation . Stud. Inf. Control 
2011 , 20 , 97 –106 . 10.24846/v20i2y201102 .
Gopakumar A. M. ; Balachandran P. V. ; Xue D. ; Gubernatis J. E. ; Lookman T. 
Multi-objective Optimization
for Materials Discovery
via Adaptive Design . Sci. Rep. 
2018 , 8 , 3738 10.1038/s41598-018-21936-3 .29487307 
Martinez-Cantin R. ; De Freitas N. ; Brochu E. ; Castellanos J. ; Doucet A. 
A Bayesian exploration-exploitation approach for optimal
online sensing and planning with a visually guided mobile robot . Aut. Robots 
2009 , 27 , 93 –103 . 10.1007/s10514-009-9130-2 .
Sa A. A. R. ; Andrade A. O. ; Soares A. B. ; Nasuto S. J.  Exploration
vs exploitation in differential evolution . AISB 2008 ; AISB : Aberdeen, U.K. , 2008 .
Zhang Y. ; Xu W. ; Callan J.  Exploration and Exploitation
in Adaptive Filtering Based on Bayesian Active Learning . Proceedings, Twentieth International Conference on Machine
Learning , 2003 ; pp 896 –903 .
Berk J. ; Nguyen V. ; Gupta S. ; Rana S. ; Venkatesh S.  Exploration enhanced expected improvement
for bayesian optimization . Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) , 2019 ; Vol. 11052 LNAI , pp 621 –637 .
Vellanki P. ; Rana S. ; Gupta S. ; Rubin de Celis Leal D. ; Sutti A. ; Dorin T. ; Height M. ; Sandars P. ; Venkatesh S.  Process-constrained batch Bayesian Optimisation, Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems : Long Beach, CA, USA, Long Beach, CA, USA , 2017 ; p 10 .
Vellanki P. ; Rana S. ; Gupta S. ; de Celis Leal D. R. ; Sutti A. ; Height M. ; Venkatesh S.  Bayesian functional optimisation with
shape prior . Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence , 2019 ; pp 1617 –1624 .

