
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03244Mini-ReviewMechanisms of Photosensitized
Lipid Oxidation and Membrane Permeabilization Bacellar Isabel
O. L. †Baptista Mauricio S. *Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto
de Química, Universidade de São
Paulo, Avenida Prof. Lineu Prestes 748, São
Paulo, SP 05508-000, Brazil* E-mail: baptista@iq.usp.br.12 12 2019 24 12 2019 4 26 21636 21646 01 10 2019 28 11 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical
Society2019American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Lipid oxidation encompasses chemical transformations
affecting animals and plants in many ways, and light is one of the
most common triggers of lipid oxidation in our habitat. Still, the
molecular mechanisms and biological consequences of photoinduced lipid
oxidation were only recently understood at the molecular level. In
this review, we focus on the main mechanisms of photosensitized lipid
oxidation and membrane permeabilization, dissecting the consequences
of both singlet oxygen and contact-dependent pathways and discussing
how these reactions contribute to chemical and biophysical changes
in lipid membranes. We aim to enable scientists to develop novel and
more efficient photosensitizers in photomedicine, as well as better
strategies for sun protection.

document-id-old-9ao9b03244document-id-new-14ao9b03244ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Photosensitized oxidations are involved
in a multitude of phenomena triggered by the excitation of photosensitizer
molecules by light, yielding excited states and other reactive species
that ultimately elicit oxidative reactions. Because photosensitizers
occur naturally in cells and biological structures, photosensitized
oxidations are largely responsible for the detrimental effects of
excessive sunlight in the skin and hair.1 In contrast, photosensitized oxidations are increasingly employed
to treat diseases, such as cancer and bacterial infections, in the
clinical modality named photodynamic therapy (PDT) (Figure 1).2 From the mechanistic perspective, extensive interaction between
photosensitizers and lipid membranes often correlates with enhanced
photodynamic efficiency, consistently with lipid bilayers surrounding
the cell itself and many organelles. Since membranes are mostly composed
of proteins and lipids, these biomolecules are the major targets of
photoinduced cell inactivation.3

Figure 1 Photosensitized
oxidations have both detrimental and therapeutic effects. Detrimental
effects occur in damage to skin cells and hair exposed to excessive
sunlight and due to the presence of natural photosensitizers. In contrast,
artificial light sources and synthetic photosensitizers are used in
photodynamic therapy (PDT) to selectively inactivate cancer cells,
bacteria, and fungi. Both detrimental and therapeutic effects share
the same basic mechanism, which results in biomolecule oxidation and
cytotoxicity.

In this mini-review, we focus exclusively on lipid
damage and especially on membrane permeabilization, which compromises
cell homeostasis and is cytotoxic. Indeed, many of the cell death
routes operating in photosensitized oxidation conditions involve leakage
of organelle content, resulting in regulated cell death pathways or—in
the extreme case—disruption of the plasma membrane, leading
to unregulated necrosis.2 Early studies
on liposome permeabilization already attempted to assess membrane
oxidation using colorimetric assays as general indicators of lipid
oxidation.4 Even though the progress in
the chemical analysis of oxidized lipids is clear, only recent studies
described the molecular-level mechanisms of photoinduced lipid oxidation
in conditions associated with membrane permeabilization.5,6

Given the prominent role of membrane permeabilization in biological
photosensitized oxidations, we aim to review the molecular mechanisms
involved in this transformation and apply this knowledge to discuss
ways of controlling the outcomes of PDT and skin photodamage. Even
though the research on lipid oxidation extends beyond photosensitized
oxidations, being broadly investigated in the contexts of food waste
and disease (e.g., atherosclerosis),7 we
limit our discussion to a variety of reactions elicited by photosensitizers.
In addition to that, we constrain our discussion to monounsaturated
lipids, which have been used in most of the mechanistic and biophysical
studies on photosensitized oxidations. These lipids depend on external
agents to be oxidized and generate fewer products than polyunsaturated
lipids, which have bisallylic hydrogens and undergo auto-oxidation.8

Photosensitized Oxidations in the Context of Lipid Oxidation
and Membrane Permeabilization
Photosensitized oxidations
start with light absorption by a photosensitizer, which is converted
into an excited singlet state. This species may be converted to its
lower excited triplet state by intersystem crossing, yielding a longer-lived
species that has a higher probability of engaging in an electron or
energy transfer process with molecules nearby. The latter mechanism
is responsible for generating singlet oxygen [O2(1Δg)], an excited state of molecular oxygen that
usually has a lifetime in the microsecond range and that is highly
reactive against unsaturated lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids.9 In addition, both singlet and triplet excited
states of photosensitizers are generally better reductants and oxidants
than the ground-state photosensitizer, meaning that photosensitizers
may engage in novel redox reactions after the absorption of light.2 The probability of excited states effectively
engaging in biologically relevant redox reactions depends on their
generation in the proximity of biological targets, given that their
diffusion range is limited by their lifetimes. Moreover, these reactions
face strong competition from singlet oxygen generation by excited
triplet states: while photosensitizers usually have high singlet oxygen
generation quantum yields and singlet oxygen is often considered a
major player in PDT, the generation of superoxide radicals by direct
electron transfer from excited triplet states to oxygen is believed
to seldom occur. For this reason, superoxide radicals are unlikely
to play a significant cytotoxic role if compared with singlet oxygen
or photosensitizer excited state themselves.2,10

Several definitions were proposed to classify the mechanism of photosensitized
oxidations, the most famous one being the classification in Type I
and Type II originally proposed by C. S. Foote. This classification
sorted processes depending on specific interactions of the excited
state of the photosensitizer with a substrate or solvent (Type I)
or with oxygen (Type II).11 This definition
and others have been interpreted and employed in different ways in
the literature (e.g., often the term “Type I” is used
to describe electron-transfer reactions solely).10 In order to discuss the molecular details of photosensitized
oxidation mechanisms with clarity, here we classify the first steps
of photosensitized oxidations in the (i) contact-dependent pathway,
in which the excited state of the photosensitizer directly reacts
with the biological target, and (ii) contact-independent pathway,
in which the excited state of the photosensitizer generates a mediator
species (usually singlet oxygen), which diffuses and then reacts with
the target (Figure 2). This definition shares similarities with the original classification
by Foote, while emphasizing whether the oxidation of the biological
target relies directly or not on an effective collision (i.e., direct
reaction) with the excited state of the photosensitizer itself.

Figure 2 Excited states
of photosensitizers oxidize substrates by contact-dependent or contact-independent
pathways. (A) The photoexcitation of a photosensitizer (PS) in the
ground singlet state (S0) results in an excited singlet
state (S1), which may undergo intersystem crossing (ISC)
and originate an excited triplet state (T1). In the contact-dependent
pathway (B), the excited photosensitizer directly reacts with the
target substrate. In contrast, in the contact-independent pathway
(C), a mediator species is first formed by interaction or reaction
with the excited photosensitizer. This mediator species, commonly
singlet oxygen, may diffuse over hundreds of nanometers before reacting
with the target substrate.

Contact-dependent pathways rely on the occurrence
of an effective collision of the excited photosensitizer with the
biological target (e.g., unsaturated lipids), triggering reactions
such as initiation of lipid peroxidation by hydrogen abstraction.
The effective collision needs to happen within the diffusion pathway
of the excited state of the photosensitizer, which is limited by the
excited state lifetime. Therefore, contact-dependent pathways clearly
depend on the affinity and close proximity of the photosensitizer
to its target (e.g., interaction with lipid bilayers). In contrast,
contact-independent pathways rely on the formation of a mediator species
(e.g., singlet oxygen) via interactions or reactions involving the
excited photosensitizer. In this case, it is not the excited photosensitizer,
but this mediating, diffusive species that undergoes an effective
collision with the biological target. Note that the mediator species
may also be an excited state and have a limited diffusion length;
however, the average diffusion length of singlet oxygen, which is
the main agent in contact-independent pathways, is at least 1 order
of magnitude larger than the thickness of lipid membranes. As a result,
the effective collision between singlet oxygen and unsaturated lipids
may happen considerably far from the original location where the photosensitizer
excited state was generated, meaning that contact-independent pathways
have a potentially larger action range if compared with contact-dependent
ones and may still be biologically relevant even for photosensitizers
that remain in aqueous solution instead of tightly interacting with
biomolecules.

The overall contribution of each mechanism depends
on specific properties of the photosensitizer (e.g., oxidation and
reduction potentials) and on the available substrates for electron
or energy transfer. From the kinetics point of view, the outcome of
the photosensitization event is governed by the relative rate constant
for each process and by the relative concentration of molecular oxygen
and substrates for direct reactions.12 As
mentioned above, since excited states have a limited lifetime, substrates
must be available within the diffusion range of the excited photosensitizer.
As a result, membrane binding is a prerequisite for contact-dependent
pathways.5 This factor is especially relevant
when contact-dependent processes elicited by singlet and triplet excited
states are compared. Given that for organic molecules the former may
live more than 1 order of magnitude less than the latter, excited
singlet states may need to be generated already in molecular contact
with the biological target. Instead, longer-lived excited species
may have time to reach the target through diffusion. In addition to
that, other factors such as photosensitizer aggregation and interaction
with proteins also modulate the photosensitization mechanism,2 while the membrane itself additionally affects
excited triplet state lifetimes.13

The distinction between contact-dependent and contact-independent
pathways applies solely to the initial steps of photooxidation. Once
primary reaction products are formed (e.g., lipid radicals or reduced
photosensitizer species), subsequent chemical reactions ensue according
to the available species and their reactivity. These steps often do
not directly involve excited photosensitizers or do not happen directly
after photosensitizer excitation, meaning that at this stage the classification
in contact-dependent and contact-independent mechanisms is no longer
appropriate or obvious. Yet, these reactions may be of biological
relevance and generate highly oxidant species such as hydroxyl radicals
or even excited states. One example of such processes is the combination
and ensuing decomposition of two peroxyl radicals, yielding singlet
oxygen or excited carbonyls.9 Likewise,
semireduced photosensitizer radicals may generate superoxide radicals
by one-electron reduction of oxygen,10 demonstrating
that the initial photosensitization step may trigger a variety of
reactions that proceed without direct photon absorption.

Below,
we first review studies describing the mechanisms and consequences
of the contact-independent pathway. Next, we provide a detailed discussion
of the primary processes involved in the contact-dependent pathway,
followed by a review of the critical role of truncated lipid aldehydes
in membrane permeabilization.

Contact-Independent Pathway: Singlet Oxygen as a Mediator
Singlet oxygen reacts via the ene reaction with unsaturated lipids,
being those sterols or lipids bearing fatty acyl chains. Allylic hydrogens
are required for the ene reaction to occur, meaning that saturated
lipids have low reactivity toward singlet oxygen. The ene reaction
yields allylic lipid hydroperoxides solely in the E (trans) configuration, with the number of positional
isomers increasing for polyunsaturated lipids. For example, the oxidation
of oleic acid (18:1 Δ9), which has a single unsaturation
in the Z configuration, yields two positional isomers
with a single unsaturation in the E configuration:
18:1 Δ10 and 18:1 Δ8, bearing −OOH
groups in positions 9 and 10, respectively.9

When singlet oxygen is the only oxidizing agent, oxidation
of monounsaturated lipids exclusively yields lipid hydroperoxides.12,14 Lipid hydroperoxides accumulate in the membranes, being stable in
the absence of high temperatures, acids, or transition metal ions.7,12 In addition to that, there is no evidence of the occurrence of a
second ene reaction event involving the newly formed double bond in
monounsaturated lipid hydroperoxides. In contrast, tandem singlet
oxygen additions have been reported for polyunsaturated substrates
(including lipids) in both the case of the ene reaction and other
types of reactions carried out by singlet oxygen.15,16

To assess the role of singlet-oxygen-mediated reactions compared
with other processes elicited by photosensitizers, it is essential
to consider the magnitude of the rate constant for the ene reaction
between singlet oxygen and lipids. This parameter is usually determined
by monitoring (i) the characteristic near-infrared (NIR) luminescence
of singlet oxygen or (ii) changes in the concentration of products
and reagents. The former method allows for direct measurements of
the singlet oxygen lifetime, which is the reciprocal of its first-order
decay constant. By varying the concentration of quenchers (e.g., lipids)
and employing the Stern–Volmer relationship, bimolecular rate
constants for singlet oxygen quenching (kq) may be obtained.17 Nevertheless, kq encompasses both chemical and physical quenching,
which cannot be separately determined by NIR luminescence. This fact
is a significant limitation of this methodology, given that many compounds
suppress singlet oxygen via both mechanisms. Instead, chemical quenching
constants may be independently measured by monitoring changes in the
chemical composition of samples, such as the formation of specific
hydroperoxide isomers. The most significant drawback of this methodology
is the interference of competing reactions (e.g.,
contact-dependent pathways), yielding common or similar products to
ene reaction products, perhaps super estimating the singlet oxygen
chemical quenching constant.

While saturated lipids quench singlet
oxygen only physically, both chemical and physical deactivation channels
are relevant for unsaturated lipids. For instance, a singlet oxygen
luminesce study employing fatty acids in carbon tetrachloride solution
showed that kq ranged from 103 to 104 M–1 s–1 for
saturated fatty acids, depending on the number of hydrogen atoms.
For unsaturated fatty acids, the magnitude of kq additionally depended on the number of allylic and especially
bisallylic hydrogens, as expected for chemical quenching. For oleic
acid (18:1), the presence of one double bond led to a kq value of 1.7 × 104 M–1 s–1, which is twice as high as for stearic acid
(18:0). For the polyunsaturated linoleic (18:2) and linolenic (18:3)
acids, the measured quenching constants were even higher than for
oleic acid. Indeed, whereas for oleic acid the chemical quenching
deactivation channel was estimated to have a 60% contribution to the
overall quenching, this figure increased to 95% for arachidonate.18

The determination of singlet oxygen quenching
constants directly in lipid membranes is challenging. For NIR luminescence
studies, data analysis in microheterogeneous systems requires models
that are much more complex than the models usually employed for isotropic
solutions since diffusion and partition of singlet oxygen must be
considered. Moreover, the best available models for membrane systems
are fairly irresponsive to variations of singlet oxygen lifetime in
membranes: because membranes are only a few nanometers thick, singlet
oxygen diffuses to the aqueous medium within nanoseconds. As a result,
shortly after the excitation pulse, the luminescence signal has a
greater contribution originating from the membrane, while the luminescence
resulting from the decay in aqueous medium dominates most of the ensuing
luminescence kinetics. Nevertheless, even the brief contribution coming
from the membrane translates poorly the suppression of singlet oxygen
by lipids, given that the diffusion of singlet oxygen out of the membrane
contributes to the signal as the main deactivation channel.19 Therefore, the literature lacks precise determinations
of the singlet oxygen lifetime in membranes by NIR luminescence and,
consequently, of the effect of lipid composition on this parameter.
As an approximation for membrane-based environments, singlet oxygen
lifetimes have been determined in phosphatidylcholine films. The measured
values are in the range of ca. 5–20 μs, falling in the
lower end for hydrated films and on the higher end for dry films.13,20

Methods based on quantification of photooxidation products
have also been employed to determine the rate constant for the reaction
of singlet oxygen with lipids in membranes. By monitoring spectral
changes caused by the formation of hydroperoxide conjugated dienes,
a value of 7.5 × 105 M–1 s–1 was measured in egg yolk phosphatidylcholine liposomes.21 Paying attention to biophysical changes to the
membrane, Weber et al. exploited the increase in membrane surface
area caused by lipid hydroperoxides to derive the rate of lipid hydroperoxide
formation in 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC) giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) containing a membrane-anchored
photosensitizer. The authors calculated a rate constant value of 3
× 106 M–1 s–1 and
estimated that ca. one in every five singlet oxygen molecules undergo
chemical quenching under these conditions.14

Since the singlet oxygen generation quantum yield of photosensitizers
is usually high, lipid hydroperoxides tend to be the major lipid oxidation
product and accumulate in the membranes.5 Lipid hydroperoxides have different properties compared with their
nonoxidized lipid counterparts and adopt a distinct conformation when
inserted in the bilayer. Due to its capability of forming hydrogen
bonds with water and lipid polar heads, the hydroperoxide group migrates
to the polar head region of the bilayer, introducing a bend in the
oxidized lipid chain. Computational and experimental studies show
that the bending of the fatty acyl chain results in a 15–20%
increase in membrane surface area upon full conversion of POPC or
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC) to
hydroperoxides (Figure 3A), which is accompanied by a 15–20% decrease in membrane
thickness.5,22 Even though several other transformations
were reported to occur due to the formation of lipid hydroperoxides
(e.g., changes in lipid lateral phase separation behavior23 and a ca. 4-fold decrease in the membrane stretching
modulus14), full conversion of monounsaturated
lipids to hydroperoxides does not permeabilize the membrane toward
sugars or cause pore opening, as observed in experiments with GUVs
and also in computational simulations of membranes (Figure 3B).5,14,24,25 Furthermore,
the formation of hydroperoxides was shown by molecular dynamics simulations
to be insufficient to explain the dramatic increase in permeability
of electroporated membranes.26

Figure 3 (A) Snapshots
of a 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC)
giant unilamellar vesicle irradiated with 4 μM methylene blue
and observed by phase-contrast microscopy. Note that the initially
tense vesicle first gains surface area, then recovers the tense state,
and finally gets permeabilized. (B) Snapshots from molecular dynamics
simulations of a single-component 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC) hydroperoxide membrane, showing
(i) lipids with oxidized groups highlighted in red (van der Waals
spheres), with water molecules omitted for simplicity, and (ii) water
molecules only, with lipids omitted. The molecular structure of the
simulated lipid hydroperoxide is additionally provided. (C) Snapshots
from molecular dynamics simulations of a single-component 1-palmitoyl-2-(9′-oxo-nonanoyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (ALDOPC) membrane, showing (i) lipids with oxidized groups highlighted in
red (van der Waals spheres), with water molecules omitted for simplicity,
and (ii) water molecules only, with lipids omitted. The molecular
structure of the simulated lipid aldehyde is additionally provided.
Panels (B) and (C) were adapted with permission from Bacellar, I.
O. L.; Oliveira, M. C.; Dantas, L. S.; Costa, E. B.; Junqueira, H.
C.; Martins, W. K.; Durantini, A. M.; Cosa, G.; Di Mascio, P.; Wainwright,
M; Miotto, R.; Cordeiro, R. M.; Miyamoto, S.; Baptista M. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140 (30), 9606–9615.
Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.

Contact-Dependent Pathway: Radical-Mediated Lipid Oxidation
Lipid peroxidation initiated by contact-dependent reactions starts
with a direct reaction between a lipid and the excited state of a
photosensitizer, being followed by radical-mediated reactions. Differently
from singlet-oxygen-mediated lipid oxidation, which proceeds via a
single type of reaction, the contact-dependent pathway involves many
classes of reactions and yields different kinds of products depending
on the photosensitizer and subtracts. For this reason, a significant
part of the topics covered in this section is derived from general
studies on lipid peroxidation, whenever possible relating to specific
features of photosensitized oxidation. The discussion mainly focuses
on monounsaturated lipids since we are mainly interested in the initial
oxidation processes triggered by light.

Classically, lipid peroxidation
is divided into three phases, which are initiation, propagation, and
termination. Initiation refers to the creation of lipid carbon-centered
radicals. These radicals quickly react with oxygen, forming peroxyl
radicals. In the propagation step, peroxyl radicals abstract hydrogen
atoms from nonoxidized lipids, forming lipid hydroperoxides and new
carbon-centered radicals, which may engage in further propagation
reactions and extend lipid oxidation. Nevertheless, the continuation
of the propagation sequence may be interrupted if two peroxyl radicals
react and form a nonradical species, which is considered a termination
step.

Under photosensitized oxidation conditions, initiation
may happen via a direct reaction between a nonoxidized lipid and the
excited state of the photosensitizer. Excited states may abstract
hydrogen atoms from lipids, forming lipid carbon-centered radicals
(Figure 4, reaction
2). The ease of hydrogen abstraction and the initiation rate depend
on the proximity between the photosensitizer and the target and on
the bond dissociation energy (BDE) of the C–H bond.8,27 The BDE of allylic hydrogens was calculated as being 79 kcal mol–1 for methyl oleate acid. For bisallylic hydrogens,
the value is lower (e.g., 70 kcal mol–1 for methyl
linoleate),28 while for alkyl hydrogens
the value is estimated to be ca. 10 kcal mol–1 higher.29 For this reason, saturated lipids are resistant
to oxidation.

Figure 4 Chemical pathways for photoinduced membrane permeabilization.
The map distinguishes between contact-independent and contact-dependent
processes, which rely on singlet oxygen or on direct reactions between
PSs and lipids, respectively. PS(S0), PS(T1):
PS ground and excited triplet states; 3O2,1O2: ground and excited singlet states of oxygen;
R•: generic radical species; LH: nonoxidized lipid;
L•, LOO•, LO•: lipid-carbon-centered, peroxyl and alkoxyl radicals; LOOH, LOH,
LO, LO*: lipid hydroperoxide, alcohol, ketone, and excited state ketone.
A snapshot of a simulated aldehyde membrane, showing pore opening,
is also provided. Reprinted with permission from Bacellar, I. O. L.;
Oliveira, M. C.; Dantas, L. S.; Costa, E. B.; Junqueira, H. C.; Martins,
W. K.; Durantini, A. M.; Cosa, G.; Di Mascio, P.; Wainwright, M; Miotto,
R.; Cordeiro, R. M.; Miyamoto, S.; Baptista M. S. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2018, 140 (30), 9606–9615.
Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.

The excited triplet state of riboflavin was shown
to abstract hydrogens from polyunsaturated methyl esters with rate
constants larger than 105 M–1 s–1 but with values of the magnitude of 104 M–1 s–1 or smaller for the monounsaturated methyl
oleate.28 The latter value is orders of
magnitude smaller than the quenching rate of excited triplet states
by oxygen,9 suggesting that singlet oxygen
generation may be the major triplet deactivation route unless in oxygen-deprived
samples or if the photosensitizer is in close contact with subtracts
for direct reactions. Excited triplet states of other classes of photosensitizers
have also been shown to abstract hydrogen atoms of lipids in homogeneous
solutions and in micelles, as is the case of urocanic acid, vitamin
K, and benzophenone.30,31 Specifically in the latter case,
the rate of hydrogen abstraction was shown to depend on the number
of available allylic and bisallylic hydrogens.31 A recent publication by us additionally showed that the
bleaching rate of the amphiphilic photosensitizer DO15 increases in
the presence of unsaturated lipids and depends on the concentration
of double bonds, suggesting the occurrence of direct reactions between
photosensitizers and lipids.5

Lipid-carbon-centered
radicals react with oxygen with rates of at least 109 M–1 s–1, yielding lipid peroxyl radicals.7,8 This reaction is reversible and, together with radical stabilization
by resonance structures, accounts for radical isomerization and the
formation of a higher number of hydroperoxide isomers than formed
through the ene reaction.8,27 Indeed, radical-mediated
oxidation of oleic acid yields isomers in both the E and Z configurations, with the oxygenated group
attached to carbon numbers 8, 9, 10, or 11.32 The differences in number and type of positional isomers of hydroperoxides
formed via radical- and singlet-oxygen-mediated oxidations are commonly
employed to distinguish between these mechanisms. For example, by
analyzing positional isomers of oxidized phenyl esters of oleic and
linoleic acid, Chacon et al. concluded that riboflavin had the most
significant contribution of radical chemistry among a group of photosensitizers
including MB, erythrosine, and hematoporphyrin.33 Oxidation products of cholesterol are also often employed
for this purpose, as its oxidation product 3β-hydroxy-5α-cholest-6-ene-5-hydroperoxide
is considered a biomarker of singlet-oxygen-mediated oxidation.12

The conversion of lipid peroxyl radicals
into lipid hydroperoxides requires the abstraction of a hydrogen atom,
usually from a nonoxidized lipid. This process yields a new carbon-centered
radical, which may react with molecular oxygen and propagate lipid
oxidation. The hydrogen abstraction step is usually the rate-limiting
step of lipid oxidation, and for this reason, peroxyl radicals tend
to accumulate and are considered the prevailing chain carriers during
lipid oxidation.27,34 In solution, propagation rate
constants vary from 10–1 to 103 M–1 s–1,8 with a 5-fold decrease being reported for 1,2-dilinoleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DLPC) in lipid bilayers if
compared with tert-butyl alcohol solutions.35 Since the bond dissociation energy (BDE) of
OO–H bonds is relatively independent of the peroxyl radical
structure, the rate constant of the propagation step depends mostly
on the BDE of the available C–H bonds.27 Note that for methyl oleate there is not a substantial difference
between the C–H BDE (79 kcal mol–1) and the
value reported for the OO–H BDE for a small organic substrate
(85 kcal mol–1).28,29 Standard one-electron
reduction potential values (E0′,
pH = 7) are also commonly used to predict the spontaneity of lipid
oxidation reactions. This analysis confirms that lipids may be possible
substrates for hydrogen abstraction by peroxyl radicals (E0′ = ∼0.77–1.44 V for alkylperoxyl
radical ROO•, H+/ROOH) at allylic sites
(E0′ = 0.96 V for allyl•, H+/allyl–H in propene) and specially at bisallylic
sites (E0′ = 0.60 V for PUFA•, H+/PUFA–H, for bisallylic hydrogens
in polyunsaturated fatty acids, PUFA), even though it should be noted
that peroxyl radicals have a wide range of reduction potentials34 and that biological conditions may be far off
from the standard condition.

At later stages of lipid oxidation,
lipid hydroperoxides formed through radical-mediated pathways or via
the ene reaction (Figure 4, reaction 1) may start to accumulate and also undergo direct
reactions with excited states of photosensitizers (Figure 4, reaction 3). Two different
possibilities may occur: breakage of the O–OH bond (BDE = 47
kcal mol–1) or the OO–H bond (BDE = 85 kcal
mol–1), leading to alkoxyl and peroxyl radicals,
respectively.29 While most of the studies
on quenching of photosensitizer excited states by hydroperoxides report
on ultraviolet-absorbing molecules that are likely nonrepresentative
of common drugs employed in PDT, there is evidence that excited states
of metallophthalocyanines36 and phenothiazines
react with hydroperoxides.5,37 Tanielian and Mechin
showed that the excited triplet state of methylene blue (MB) is quenched
by tert-butyl hydroperoxide with a bimolecular rate
constant of 106 M–1 s–1 in deoxygenated chloroform. The authors concluded that a hydrogen
atom transfer occurs from the hydroperoxide to the excited triplet
state of MB via electron transfer, forming a peroxyl radical and the
protonated semireduced MB radical.37 The
phenothiazine photosensitizer DO15 was additionally shown to be photobleached
by lipid hydroperoxides in lipid bilayers, in conditions in which
oxygenated lipid radicals were also detected.5

The possible production of alkoxyl radicals by excited states
of photosensitizers opens additional reaction channels for photoinduced
membrane damage. Even though it is challenging to distinguish peroxyl
and alkoxyl radicals experimentally, alkoxyl radicals usually have
higher reaction rates and are less selective than peroxyl radicals.8 Indeed, alkoxyl radicals may abstract hydrogens
both from nonoxidized lipids and from the −OOH group of hydroperoxides,34 forming lipid alcohols that may also accumulate
in membranes. Alkoxyl radicals may additionally be obtained by one-electron
reduction of lipid hydroperoxides by reductants or metal ions.12 For instance, phosphatidylethanolamine alcohols
and hydroperoxides were detected by mass spectrometry in bacteria
irradiated with positively charged porphyrins.38

Lipid hydroperoxides, peroxyl radicals, and alkoxyl
radicals may all yield nonradical products through reactions specific
to each class of products. Hydroperoxides, for example, may undergo
two-electron reduction to their corresponding alcohols.12 Lipid radicals may undergo termination reactions
forming lipid dimers, which may be stable and detectable in cell membranes.39 Nevertheless, the termination reaction of two
peroxyl radicals forms an unstable linear tetroxide dimer, which decomposes
into a lipid ketone, a lipid alcohol, and molecular oxygen.9 This mechanism is known as the Russell mechanism
(Figure 4, reaction
4) and has been suggested to occur under photosensitized oxidation
conditions, as indicated by the detection of lipid alcohol and ketones
in equimolar concentrations.5 Interestingly,
either the ketone or oxygen is produced as an excited state, making
the Russell mechanism a clear example of how later steps of lipid
oxidation may yield reactive species that further contribute to the
complexity of lipid oxidation processes.

Phospholipid aldehydes
with truncated carbon chains were detected in DOPC lipid films irradiated
with rhodamine-DPPE,40 in DLPC liposomes
irradiated with a pterin derivative41 and
recently detected and related to membrane permeabilization in POPC
liposomes irradiated with the phenothiazine photosensitizers MB and
DO15. The literature often proposes Hock cleavage42 as the mechanism of formation of truncated lipid aldehydes
directly from lipid hydroperoxides.43 Nevertheless,
this mechanism was never demonstrated for monounsaturated lipids and
is supposed to involve acid catalysis.42 We recently showed that GUVs made from POPC hydroperoxides are impermeable
to sugars and are as stable in low pH (pH > 3.5) as pristine POPC
vesicles. The observation that not even membranes made of polyunsaturated
lipid hydroperoxides are unstable at low pH refutes the hypothesis
that the acid-catalyzed Hock cleavage plays a role in photosensitized
membrane permeabilization.5

In contrast,
there is significant evidence that truncated lipid aldehydes may instead
be formed through alkoxyl radical β-scission (Figure 4, reaction 5), a reaction in
which the C–C bond adjacent to the carbon bearing the −O• group undergoes homolytic cleavage. This reaction
yields a lipid aldehyde and a short-chain carbon-centered radical,
which may determine the major products being formed (e.g., the formation
of alkyl radicals is more favored than that of vinyl radicals).44 Tanielian et al. showed that irradiation of
MB in a benzene/methanol mixture introduced hydroperoxide groups in
the polymer cis-1,4-polybutadiene, a process that
was followed by oxygen-independent polymer chain scission and photobleaching
of MB. The authors attributed this result to MB converting hydroperoxides
to alkoxyl radicals, which subsequently fragment via alkoxyl radical
β-scission.45 More recently, we showed
that the structures of truncated lipid aldehydes detected during membrane
permeabilization were entirely consistent with their exclusive formation
through alkoxyl radical β-scission, in conditions in which the
formation of oxygenated lipid radicals was signaled by the fluorogenic
probe H2B-PMHC.5

In summary,
contact-dependent mechanisms may generate a large variety of products,
which are expected to increase for polyunsaturated lipids. Yet, the
role of contact-dependent mechanisms and the kinetics of membrane
permeabilization were shown to follow similar trends for both monounsaturated
and polyunsaturated lipids, suggesting the existence of common fundamental
mechanisms and product classes.5 Lipid
hydroperoxides and, additionally, lipid alcohols and lipid ketones
do not seem to increase membrane permeability on their own.5,14 On the contrary, truncated lipid aldehydes were shown to have profound
effects on bilayer permeability, as will be discussed in the following
section.

The fact that the formation of aldehydes by alkoxyl
radical β-scission invariably requires contact-dependent mechanisms
reinforces the idea that singlet-oxygen-mediated oxidation is not
enough for membrane permeabilization, even though photosensitizers
typically have high singlet oxygen generation quantum yields and despite
singlet oxygen being able to react up to hundreds of nanometers away
from its original generation site. This is the case of the aforementioned
photosensitizers MB and DO15, which lead to very different degrees
of membrane oxidation in conditions in which both molecules deliver
a similar flux of singlet oxygen molecules to the membrane. When added
to a liposome solution, MB stays mostly in the aqueous phase (i.e.,
mostly in the form of freestanding molecules), while a higher fraction
of DO15 molecules partitions in the membrane. In the conditions tested,
MB takes much longer irradiation times to permeabilize membranes than
DO15, and this results from the smaller number of effective collisions
between the lipid double bonds and the excited triplet states of MB,
which mostly need to diffuse from the aqueous solution. In contrast,
many DO15 triplet excited states are generated within molecular contact
with the biological target, allowing for higher efficiency of initiation
of lipid oxidation and showcasing that extensive partitioning of photosensitizers
in membrane systems is a key factor governing photodynamic activity.
Because contact-dependent pathways require physical proximity of the
photosensitizer and the right conformation and geometry for reactions
with the target to occur, contact-dependent pathways may be very inefficient
if compared with singlet oxygen generation in solution. This idea
is reinforced by photosensitizer photobleaching quantum yields in
the order of 10–4 to 10–5 in the
presence of membranes;6 however, these
contact-dependent events are the ones that cause actual damage in
membranes.

Lipid Truncated Aldehydes and Membrane Permeabilization
Most of the progress toward unraveling the permeabilization effects
of photosensitizers in membranes results from three different approaches:
microscopy observation of GUVs, permeability assays with liposomes,
and computational studies. Around a decade ago, Caetano et al. reported
the first systematic study of photoinduced membrane permeabilization
in GUVs. Using DOPC vesicles, the authors showed that irradiation
of membranes under high concentrations of MB caused vesicle explosion.43 Several studies then followed, providing a closer
look at the transformations suffered by GUVs at milder oxidation conditions.
At the onset of the experiments, GUVs are usually spherical and tense.
The formation of hydroperoxides increases membrane surface area, which
is often accompanied by an intensification of thermal fluctuations
and fast changes of GUV shape. The GUV then recovers its spherical
shape while accommodating the excess area in buds and strings (Figure 3A). Depending on
the photosensitizer used, this stage is followed by membrane permeabilization.46

Membrane permeabilization is typically
detected through observation of GUVs by phase-contrast microscopy.
For this application, GUVs are produced in sucrose solutions and diluted
in glucose solutions, resulting in increases in membrane permeability
that reduce the refraction index difference between the inner and
the outer solutions (Figure 3A). GUVs containing 100% POPC or DOPC hydroperoxides can maintain
sugar asymmetry to the same levels as nonoxidized lipids,5,14 while GUVs treated with light and photosensitizers such as MB gradually
lose contrast.46 In photooxidized GUVs,
transient micrometric-sized pores are commonly observed during irradiation.40,46 Their lifetime increases from less than a second to 3–4 s
when the viscosity of the medium is raised by addition of glycerol.40 Yet, it is likely that nanometric pores also
formed under these conditions and that they would be sufficient for
sugar transport, although their size renders imaging and lifetime
determination challenging. Even though pores cannot be observed in
submicrometric-sized liposomes, these membrane systems provide insight
into the chemical properties of pores and on their formation pathways.
Indeed, the extent of the photoinduced permeabilization effect was
shown to depend on the nature of the transported solute, being more
significant for species with smaller charge density (e.g., 5(6)-carboxyfluorescein),
as opposed to monatomic ions. Membrane permeabilization was also reported
to be accompanied by an increase in lipid flip-flop rates, suggesting
that the permeation of amphiphilic solutes would initially depend
on water defects, which later evolve into open and less selective
pores.47

In contrast to lipid hydroperoxides,
alcohols and ketones,5 lipid aldehydes
with truncated chains were shown to increase membrane permeability.
The permeabilization effect of aldehydes and its concentration dependence
was thoroughly characterized in liposomes, employing membranes already
formed in the presence of these oxidized lipids. Ytzhak and Ehrenberg
studied the permeabilization effect of 1-palmitoyl-2-glutaryl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (PGPC) and 1-palmitoyl-2-(9′-oxo-nonanoyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (ALDOPC) in liposomes of phosphatidylcholine from egg yolk. Using a potentiometric
dye, they showed that 2 mol % of any of these oxidized lipids was
enough to promote dissipation of a K+ electric diffusion
potential in liposomes. Leakage was accelerated by increasing aldehyde
concentrations up to 16 mol %, at which point membranes became unstable.
When the oxidized lipids were substituted by l-α-lysophosphatidylcholine
from egg yolk, no dissipation effects were observed up to 20 mol %,
with membrane destabilization occurring above 25 mol %.48 Runas and co-workers also investigated the effect
of low levels of aldehydes on membrane permeability, employing GUVs
with fixed percentages of 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DMPC) and cholesterol and with variable levels of 1-palmitoyl-2-linoleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (PLPC) and its oxidized product
ALDOPC. Using a microfluidic approach, they observed that increasing
the amount of ALDOPC from 0 to 2.5 mol % enhanced in 1 order of magnitude
the membrane permeability to the hydrophilic and uncharged molecule
PEG12-NBD. Only above 12.5 mol % of ALDOPC, membranes became permeable
(yet still stable) to fluorescein-dextran of 40 or 2000 kDa, suggesting
the opening of pores larger than 55 nm.49

Molecular dynamics simulations provide fundamental mechanistic
insight into the permeabilization effects of lipid aldehydes. These
studies show that pore opening develops from randomly distributed
lipids, which aggregate and form water defects. Similarly to lipid
hydroperoxides, the carbonyl group of the aldehyde chain was shown
to migrate to the polar head region of the lipid bilayer, where it
establishes hydrogen bonds with the polar heads themselves and also
with water molecules. In average, the oxidized carbon chains lay flat
and parallel to the bilayer, in the so-called “extended conformation”.
Nonetheless, the aldehyde chains experience an angular distribution
that is wider than that of hydroperoxide chains, due to a lower average
number of hydrogen bonds and due to their shorter length, enabling
them to access more free volume.24,50,51 Occasionally, the truncated chains populate the hydrophobic
region of the bilayer and even interact with the oxidized groups from
the opposing leaflet, increasing the dielectric constant inside the
membrane and decreasing membrane thickness. Not only that, hydrogen-bonded
water molecules are also carried inside the bilayer by the mobile
aldehyde chains, originating transient water bridges that may progress
into pores.24 Depending on the degree of
membrane oxidation, the resulting membrane pores may be stable for
hundreds of nanoseconds and often remain open for the remainder of
the simulation.5,51

The extended conformation
of lipid aldehydes additionally increases the lipid–lipid distance
and favors water penetration,51 as supported
by experimental measurements, showing increased membrane hydration
in oxidized membranes.52 Simulations revealed
that increasing fractions of 1-palmitoyl-2-(5′-oxo-valeroyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POVPC) (15–66 mol %)
in DOPC membranes altered water permeation across the membrane from
the passage of single-water molecules to the passage of small clusters,
with transient water defects occurring solely in the headgroup region.
In the range of 75–100 mol % of POVPC, larger water defects
appeared, some of which evolved into transmembrane water-filled pores.
The opening of pores, which occurred at shorter times at higher aldehyde
concentrations, increased the number of transported water molecules
by 2 orders of magnitude if compared with transport across intact
membranes.51 Moreover, the overall conical
shape of lipid aldehydes (packing parameter ≈0.5) is also believed
to contribute to the stabilization of pore edges and micelle-like
structures, in contrast to the cylindrical shape of hydroperoxides
and nonoxidized lipids (packing parameter ≈1).24

Therefore, it is clear that the permeabilization
effects of lipid aldehydes result from a precise combination of properties,
including molecular conformation, chain mobility, and hydrogen bonding
capabilities. Interestingly, the truncated lipid carboxylic acid 1-palmitoyl-2-azelaoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (PAzePC) was shown to adopt
the extended conformation when in the protonated form, similarly to
its aldehyde counterpart ALDOPC. Nonetheless, experiments in POPC
multilamellar vesicles in a broad pH range revealed solely an increase
in the disorder of the hydrophobic region of the bilayer, yet without
the opening of pores.53 Even in the case
of aldehydes, membrane permeability was shown to be influenced by
additional molecules present in the membrane. For instance, both aldehyde
fragments produced as a result of lipid chain break and cholesterol
were shown to reduce the susceptibility of membranes to pore opening.25 Therefore, it should be expected that other
oxidized species formed in the membrane may modulate the permeabilization
effect of aldehydes, evidencing the need for studying the permeabilization
of membranes oxidized in situ.

Only recently,
truncated lipid aldehydes were quantified during lipid membrane permeabilization,
by derivatization with the probe 1-pyrenebutyric hydrazide (PBH) and
analysis by mass spectrometry. Phospholipids with aldehyde chains
containing 8-, 9-, and 10-carbon atoms were detected in very low concentrations
(ca. 1 mol %) exclusively in POPC membranes undergoing permeabilization.
Remarkably, the photosensitizer MB was unable to permeabilize membranes
or form aldehydes in conditions in which the more hydrophobic photosensitizer
DO15 promoted both effects. Nonetheless, 40-fold more prolonged irradiation
of samples with MB reproduced the results obtained with DO15, indicating
a correlation between membrane permeabilization and aldehyde formation.
In addition to that, molecular dynamics simulations showed that only
lipid aldehydes promoted pore opening and significantly decreased
(ca. 2-fold) the permeation free energy barrier of water if compared
with pristine POPC membranes (Figure 3C). Lipid hydroperoxides, alcohols, and ketones did
not enhance membrane permeability in any manner,5 suggesting that the membrane permeabilization effect is
caused exclusively by very low percentages of truncated lipid aldehydes.

Simulations typically require higher concentrations of oxidized
lipids for pores to be observed in comparison to experimental studies.
One possible cause of this discrepancy is the fact that membranes
may exhibit lipid phase separation,23 having
nano- or microsized domains that may concentrate oxidized lipids to
levels more compatible with simulations. Discrepancies could also
arise from the membranes oxidized in situ being under
nonequilibrium conditions and susceptible to forces that may contribute
to pore opening. For instance, Yusupov et al. showed that applying
a constant electric field perpendicularly to the membrane plane favored
pore opening in simulated oxidized membranes. Higher aldehyde concentrations
decreased the time needed for pore formation and the threshold electric
field required for pore opening, while hydroperoxides did not exhibit
a clear concentration dependence or enhanced pore formation significantly
if compared with a nonoxidized bilayer.54 In photooxidized GUVs, the opening of pores was also associated
with the tension created by reducing membrane area at constant volume,
given that the membrane surface area decreases at later oxidation
stages due to the formation of truncated lipid species.40,46

Controlling Lipid Oxidation in the Contexts of Skin Care and
PDT
Recent mechanistic studies on photosensitized oxidations
have demonstrated the importance of contact-dependent pathways in
order to irreversibly damage biological structures and provided a
molecular-level explanation of why photosensitizer efficiency often
correlates with membrane binding.5 Contact-dependent
processes are expected to have enhanced chemical and spatial specificity
compared with contact-independent ones, given that they do not rely
on the diffusion of a mediator species (i.e., singlet oxygen) and
that they depend on specific reactions between the photosensitizer
and its targets. Direct reactions involving photosensitizers have
also been shown to be fundamental for generating vascular damage in
a new modality of treatment of prostate cancer, which has already
received approval in several countries.55 In this case, the photosensitizer is incorporated into human serum
albumin, where it undergoes a fast electron transfer reaction yielding
radical species in the protein hydrophobic pocket.56

The formation of excited states and their effective
collision with a target are the crucial steps in determining photosensitizer
efficiency. Even though singlet oxygen oxidizes lipids through the
ene reaction and the resulting lipid hydroperoxides make the membrane
thinner, this transformation is insufficient for membrane permeabilization.
The decisive step toward pore opening occurs when excited states of
photosensitizers directly react with unsaturated lipids, starting
a multistep process that ultimately generates truncated lipid aldehydes
and permeabilizes membranes.5 The fact
that the most relevant reaction requires direct involvement of the
photosensitizer indicates that the initial damage may be confined
to the nanometer scale. Therefore, strategies to control the transformations
happening in the skin during sunlight exposition should likely consist
of a combination of excited state and lipid radical quenching. For
example, polyunsaturated lipids with bisallylic hydrogens replaced
by deuterium atoms have been shown to inhibit lipid oxidation reactions
depending on hydrogen abstraction;57 hence,
one could envision the incorporation of these modified lipid species
in sunscreen formulations aiming at preventing contact-dependent processes.
The development of such strategies would likely also benefit from
accompanying lipidomic studies, in order to unravel the main reactions
and lipid oxidation products that must be prevented.

Since contact-dependent
reactions require direct involvement of photosensitizers, it remained
an open question whether photobleaching of photosensitizers was correlated
with membrane permeabilization. Tasso and co-workers answered this
question by testing membrane permeabilization by a series of porphyrazins
that suffer photobleaching by an electron abstraction reaction in
the excited singlet state. Even though all the studied photosensitizers
had similar singlet oxygen generation quantum yields and membrane
binding efficiencies, the ones with higher photobleaching rates permeabilized
membranes to a greater extent. This result proves that one-electron
reactions are essential to lipid oxidation processes and that photobleaching
is not necessarily as detrimental as usually portrayed in the literature
but a consequence of efficient membrane damage.6 Therefore, developing strategies for photosensitizer regeneration
should become a priority when designing new drugs and protocols for
PDT, in addition to aiming for photosensitizers whose excited states
selectively engage in direct reactions with unsaturated lipids and
perhaps lipid hydroperoxides. Moreover, targeting photosensitizers
to specific insertion depths and domains of lipid membranes may also
significantly improve the efficiency of contact-dependent reactions.

Author Present Address
† Département
de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128, Succursale
Centre-ville, Montréal, QC, H3C 3J7, Canada.

The authors declare
no competing financial interest.



Isabel O. L. Bacellar studied Chemistry and Biochemistry
at the University of São Paulo (Brazil). She carried out both
her undergraduate and graduate research under the supervision of Prof.
Mauricio S. Baptista, studying the effects of photosensitizers on
lipid membranes, with emphasis on membrane permeabilization. Since
concluding her doctoral studies in 2017, Isabel is a postdoctoral
fellow at the University of Montreal (Canada).



Mauricio S. Baptista is a professor of Biochemistry at
the University of São Paulo (Brazil). He earned Bachelor (1990)
and Master (1992) degrees in Biochemistry from USP and holds a doctoral
degree (1996) in Chemistry from Marquette University (USA). He did
his postdoctoral training at UW-Madison (1997) and was visiting professor
(2006) at the Université Joseph Fourier (Grenoble-France).
His main interests are photochemistry/photobiology, membranes/interfaces,
and mechanisms of cell death, where he published over 180 papers.
He serves as Associate Editor of the Photochemical & Photobiological
Sciences (RSC) and is part of the editorial board of Scientific Reports
(Nature).

Acknowledgments
Fundação
de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP,
grants 2013/11640-0 and CEPID Redoxoma 2013/07937-8), Conselho Nacional
de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq),
and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal
de Nível Superior (CAPES – Finance Code 001) are acknowledged
for financial support.
==== Refs
References
Chiarelli-Neto O. ; Pavani C. ; Ferreira A. ; Uchoa A. F. ; Severino D. ; Baptista M. S. 
Generation and Suppression of Singlet Oxygen in Hair
by Photosensitization of Melanin . Free Radical
Biol. Med. 
2011 , 51  (6 ), 1195 –1202 . 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.06.013 .21723388 
Bacellar I. O. L. ; Tsubone T. M. ; Pavani C. ; Baptista M. S. 
Photodynamic Efficiency: From Molecular Photochemistry
to Cell Death . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2015 , 16  (9 ), 20523 –20559 . 10.3390/ijms160920523 .26334268 
Alves E. ; Moreirinha C. ; Faustino M. A. ; Cunha Â. ; Delgadillo I. ; Neves M. G. ; Almeida A. 
Overall Biochemical Changes in Bacteria
Photosensitized with Cationic Porphyrins Monitored by Infrared Spectroscopy . Future Med. Chem. 
2016 , 8  (6 ), 613 –628 . 10.4155/fmc-2015-0008 .27073984 
Anderson S. M. ; Krinsky N. I. 
Protective Action
of Carotenoid Pigments against Photodynamic Damage to Liposomes . Photochem. Photobiol. 
1973 , 18  (5 ), 403 –408 . 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1973.tb06440.x .4756386 
Bacellar I. O. L. ; Oliveira M. C. ; Dantas L. S. ; Costa E. B. ; Junqueira H. C. ; Martins W. K. ; Durantini A. M. ; Cosa G. ; Di Mascio P. ; Wainwright M. ; et al. Photosensitized Membrane Permeabilization Requires Contact-Dependent
Reactions between Photosensitizer and Lipids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2018 , 140  (30 ), 9606 –9615 . 10.1021/jacs.8b05014 .29989809 
Tasso T. T. ; Schlothauer J. C. ; Junqueira H. C. ; Matias T. A. ; Araki K. ; Liandra-Salvador É. ; Antonio F. C. T. ; Homem-de-Mello P. ; Baptista M. S. 
Photobleaching Efficiency Parallels the Enhancement
of Membrane Damage for Porphyrazine Photosensitizers . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2019 , 141  (39 ), 15547 –15556 . 10.1021/jacs.9b05991 .31490678 
Halliwell B. ; Gutteridge J. M. C.  Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine , 5 th ed.; Oxford University Press : Oxford , 2015 .
Yin H. ; Xu L. ; Porter N. A. 
Free Radical Lipid Peroxidation:
Mechanisms and Analysis . Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 111  (10 ), 5944 –5972 . 10.1021/cr200084z .21861450 
Di Mascio P. ; Martinez G. R. ; Miyamoto S. ; Ronsein G. E. ; Medeiros M. H. G. ; Cadet J. 
Singlet Molecular Oxygen
Reactions with Nucleic Acids, Lipids, and Proteins . Chem. Rev. 
2019 , 119  (3 ), 2043 –2086 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00554 .30721030 
Baptista M. S. ; Cadet J. ; Di Mascio P. ; Ghogare A. A. ; Greer A. ; Hamblin M. R. ; Lorente C. ; Nunez S. C. ; Ribeiro M. S. ; Thomas A. H. ; et al. Type
I and Type II Photosensitized Oxidation Reactions: Guidelines and
Mechanistic Pathways . Photochem. Photobiol. 
2017 , 93  (4 ), 912 –919 . 10.1111/php.12716 .28084040 
Foote C. S. 
Definition of Type I and Type II
Photosensitized Oxidation . Photochem. Photobiol. 
1991 , 54  (5 ), 659 –659 . 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1991.tb02071.x .1798741 
Girotti A. W. 
Photosensitized
Oxidation of Membrane Lipids: Reaction Pathways, Cytotoxic Effects,
and Cytoprotective Mechanisms . J. Photochem.
Photobiol., B 
2001 , 63  (1–3 ), 103 –113 . 10.1016/S1011-1344(01)00207-X .11684457 
Bacellar I. O. L. ; Cordeiro R. M. ; Mahling P. ; Baptista M. S. ; Röder B. ; Hackbarth S. 
Oxygen Distribution in the Fluid/Gel
Phases of Lipid . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2019 , 1861  (4 ), 879 –886 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2019.01.019 .30716292 
Weber G. ; Charitat T. ; Baptista M. S. ; Uchoa A. F. ; Pavani C. ; Junqueira H. C. ; Guo Y. ; Baulin V. A. ; Itri R. ; Marques C. M. ; et al. Lipid Oxidation Induces Structural Changes
in Biomimetic Membranes . Soft Matter 
2014 , 10  (24 ), 4241 –4247 . 10.1039/c3sm52740a .24871383 
Neff W. E. ; Frankel E. N. ; Weisleder D. 
Photosensitized
Oxidation of Methyl Linolenate. Secondary Products . Lipids 
1982 , 17  (11 ), 780 –790 . 10.1007/BF02535354 .
Ghogare A. A. ; Greer A. 
Using Singlet Oxygen
to Synthesize Natural Products and Drugs . Chem.
Rev. 
2016 , 116  (17 ), 9994 –10034 . 10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00726 .27128098 
Nonell S. ; Braslavsky S. E. 
Time-Resolved Singlet Oxygen Detection . Methods Enzymol. 
2000 , 319 , 37 –49 . 10.1016/S0076-6879(00)19006-8 .10907497 
Krasnovsky A. A. ; Kagan V. E. ; Minin A. A. 
Quenching of Singlet
Oxygen Luminescence by Fatty Acids and Lipids . FEBS Lett. 
1983 , 155  (2 ), 233 –236 . 10.1016/0014-5793(82)80610-8 .
Hackbarth S. ; Röder B. 
Singlet Oxygen Luminescence Kinetics
in a Heterogeneous Environment – Identification of the Photosensitizer
Localization in Small Unilamellar Vesicles . Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 
2015 , 14  (2 ), 329 –334 . 10.1039/C4PP00229F .25407651 
Baier J. ; Maier M. ; Engl R. ; Landthaler M. ; Bäumler W. 
Time-Resolved Investigations of Singlet
Oxygen Luminescence in Water, in Phosphatidylcholine, and in Aqueous
Suspensions of Phosphatidylcholine or HT29 Cells . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2005 , 109 , 3041 –3046 . 10.1021/jp0455531 .16851318 
Dearden S. J. 
Kinetics
of O2(1Δg) Photo-Oxidation Reactions in Egg-Yolk Lecithin Vesicles . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1 
1986 , 82  (5 ), 1627 10.1039/f19868201627 .
Rosa R. De ; Spinozzi F. ; Itri R. 
Hydroperoxide
and Carboxyl Groups Preferential Location in Oxidized Biomembranes
Experimentally Determined by Small Angle X-Ray Scattering: Implications
in Membrane . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2018 , 1860  (11 ), 2299 –2307 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2018.05.011 .29852123 
Tsubone T. M. ; Baptista M. S. ; Itri R. 
Understanding Membrane Remodelling
Initiated by Photosensitized Lipid Oxidation . Biophys. Chem. 
2019 , 254 , 106263 10.1016/j.bpc.2019.106263 .31629920 
Boonnoy P. ; Jarerattanachat V. ; Karttunen M. ; Wong-ekkabut J. 
Bilayer Deformation,
Pores, and Micellation Induced by Oxidized Lipids . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2015 , 6  (24 ), 4884 –4888 . 10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02405 .26673194 
Van der Paal J. ; Neyts E. C. ; Verlackt C. C. W. ; Bogaerts A. 
Effect of Lipid Peroxidation on Membrane Permeability
of Cancer and Normal Cells Subjected to Oxidative Stress . Chem. Sci. 
2016 , 7  (1 ), 489 –498 . 10.1039/C5SC02311D .28791102 
Rems L. ; Viano M. ; Kasimova M. A. ; Miklavčič D. ; Tarek M. 
The Contribution of Lipid Peroxidation to Membrane Permeability in
Electropermeabilization: A Molecular Dynamics Study . Bioelectrochemistry 
2019 , 125 , 46 –57 . 10.1016/j.bioelechem.2018.07.018 .30265863 
Pratt D. A. ; Mills J. H. ; Porter N. A. 
Theoretical
Calculations of Carbon–Oxygen Bond Dissociation Enthalpies
of Peroxyl Radicals Formed in the Autoxidation of Lipids . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2003 , 125  (19 ), 5801 –5810 . 10.1021/ja034182j .12733921 
Huvaere K. ; Cardoso D. R. ; Homem-De-Mello P. ; Westermann S. ; Skibsted L. H. 
Light-Induced Oxidation of Unsaturated
Lipids as Sensitized by Flavins . J. Phys. Chem.
B 
2010 , 114  (16 ), 5583 –5593 . 10.1021/jp9121744 .20377218 
Blanksby S. J. ; Ellison G. B. 
Bond Dissociation Energies of Organic Molecules . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2003 , 36  (4 ), 255 –263 . 10.1021/ar020230d .12693923 
Barclay L. R. ; Basque M. C. ; Stephenson V. C. ; Vinqvist M. R. 
Photooxidations Initiated or Sensitized by Biological
Molecules: Singlet Oxygen versus Radical Peroxidation in Micelles
and Human Blood Plasma . Photochem. Photobiol. 
2003 , 78  (3 ), 248 –255 . 10.1562/0031-8655(2003)078<0248:PIOSBB>2.0.CO;2 .14556311 
Marković D. Z. ; Patterson L. K. 
Radical
Processes in Lipids. Selectivity of Hydrogen Abstraction from Lipids
by Benzophenone Triplet . Photochem. Photobiol. 
1989 , 49  (5 ), 531 –535 . 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1989.tb08421.x .2755988 
Frankel E. N. 
Chemistry
of Free Radical and Singlet Oxidation of Lipids . Prog. Lipid Res. 
1984 , 23  (4 ), 197 –221 . 10.1016/0163-7827(84)90011-0 .6100997 
Chaon J. N. ; Jamieson G. R. ; Sinclair R. S. 
Dye Sensitised Photo-Oxidation
of the Methyl and Phenyl Esters of Oleic and Linoleic Acids . Chem. Phys. Lipids 
1987 , 43  (2 ), 81 –99 . 10.1016/0009-3084(87)90028-4 .
Buettner G. R. 
The Pecking Order of Free Radicals
and Antioxidants: Liperoxidation, a-Tocopherol, Ascorbate . Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 
1993 , 300  (2 ), 535 –543 . 10.1006/abbi.1993.1074 .8434935 
Barclay L. R. C. 
1992 Syntex Award Lecture Model Biomembranes:
Quantitative Studies of Peroxidation, Antioxidant Action, Partitioning,
and Oxidative Stress . Can. J. Chem. 
1993 , 71  (1 ), 1 –16 . 10.1139/v93-001 .
Gantchev T. G. ; Sharman W. M. ; van Lier J. E. 
Metallophthalocyanines
Photosensitize the Breakdown of (Hydro)Peroxides in Solution to Yield
Hydroxyl or Alkoxyl and Peroxyl Free Radicals via Different Interaction
Pathways . Photochem. Photobiol. 
2003 , 77  (5 ), 469 –479 . 10.1562/0031-8655(2003)0770469MPTBOH2.0.CO2 .12812287 
Tanielian C. ; Mechin R. 
Alkyl Hydroperoxides
as Electron Donors in Photochemical Reactions . J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 
1997 , 107  (1–3 ), 291 –293 . 10.1016/S1010-6030(97)00027-0 .
Alves E. ; Santos N. ; Melo T. ; Maciel E. ; Dõria M. L. ; Faustino M. A. F. ; Tomé J. P. C. ; Neves M. G. P. M. S. ; Cavaleiro J. A. S. ; Cunha Â. ; et al. Photodynamic Oxidation of Escherichia
Coli Membrane Phospholipids: New Insights Based on Lipidomics . Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 
2013 , 27  (23 ), 2717 –2728 . 10.1002/rcm.6739 .24591033 
Frank H. ; Thiel D. ; MacLeod J. 
Mass Spectrometric
Detection of Cross-Linked Fatty Acids Formed during Radical-Induced
Lesion of Lipid Membranes . Biochem. J. 
1989 , 260  (3 ), 873 –878 . 10.1042/bj2600873 .2764908 
Sankhagowit S. ; Wu S. H. ; Biswas R. ; Riche C. T. ; Povinelli M. L. ; Malmstadt N. 
The Dynamics of Giant Unilamellar Vesicle Oxidation
Probed by Morphological Transitions . Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2014 , 1838  (10 ), 2615 –2624 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2014.06.020 .
Vignoni M. ; Urrutia M. N. ; Junqueira H. C. ; Greer A. ; Reis A. ; Baptista M. S. ; Itri R. ; Thomas A. H. 
Photo-Oxidation of Unilamellar Vesicles by a Lipophilic
Pterin: Deciphering Biomembrane Photodamage . Langmuir 
2018 , 34  (50 ), 15578 –15586 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.8b03302 .30457340 
Brinkhorst J. ; Nara S. J. ; Pratt D. A. 
Hock Cleavage of
Cholesterol 5α-Hydroperoxide: An Ozone-Free Pathway to the Cholesterol
Ozonolysis Products Identified in Arterial Plaque and Brain Tissue . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2008 , 130  (37 ), 12224 –12225 . 10.1021/ja804162d .18722442 
Caetano W. ; Haddad P. S. ; Itri R. ; Severino D. ; Vieira V. C. ; Baptista M. S. ; Schröder A. P. ; Marques C. M. 
Photo-Induced Destruction of Giant Vesicles in Methylene
Blue Solutions . Langmuir 
2007 , 23  (3 ), 1307 –1314 . 10.1021/la061510v .17241051 
Gardner H. W. 
Oxygen Radical Chemistry of Polyunsaturated
Fatty Acids . Free Radical Biol. Med. 
1989 , 7  (1 ), 65 –86 . 10.1016/0891-5849(89)90102-0 .2666279 
Tanielian C. ; Mechin R. ; Shakirullah M. 
Origin of Dye Bleaching and Polymer
Degradation in the Methylene Blue-Sensitized Photo-Oxygenation of
Polybutadiene . J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 
1992 , 64  (2 ), 191 –199 . 10.1016/1010-6030(92)85106-5 .
Mertins O. ; Bacellar I. O. L. ; Thalmann F. ; Marques C. M. ; Baptista M. S. ; Itri R. 
Physical Damage on Giant Vesicles Membrane as a Result of Methylene
Blue Photoirradiation . Biophys. J. 
2014 , 106  (1 ), 162 –171 . 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.11.4457 .24411248 
Kotova E. A. ; Kuzevanov A. V. ; Pashkovskaya A. A. ; Antonenko Y. N. 
Selective
Permeabilization of Lipid Membranes by Photodynamic Action via Formation
of Hydrophobic Defects or Pre-Pores . Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2011 , 1808  (9 ), 2252 –2257 . 10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.05.018 .
Ytzhak S. ; Ehrenberg B. 
The Effect
of Photodynamic Action on Leakage of Ions through Liposomal Membranes
That Contain Oxidatively Modified Lipids . Photochem.
Photobiol. 
2014 , 90  (4 ), 796 –800 . 10.1111/php.12266 .24588634 
Runas K. A. ; Malmstadt N. 
Low Levels of Lipid Oxidation Radically Increase the
Passive Permeability of Lipid Bilayers . Soft
Matter 
2015 , 11  (3 ), 499 –505 . 10.1039/C4SM01478B .25415555 
Wong-Ekkabut J. ; Xu Z. ; Triampo W. ; Tang I.-M. ; Tieleman D. P. ; Monticelli L. 
Effect of
Lipid Peroxidation on the Properties of Lipid Bilayers: A Molecular
Dynamics Study . Biophys. J. 
2007 , 93  (12 ), 4225 –4236 . 10.1529/biophysj.107.112565 .17766354 
Lis M. ; Wizert A. ; Przybylo M. ; Langner M. ; Swiatek J. ; Jungwirth P. ; Cwiklik L. 
The Effect of Lipid Oxidation on the Water Permeability
of Phospholipids Bilayers . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2011 , 13  (39 ), 17555 10.1039/c1cp21009b .21897935 
Beranova L. ; Cwiklik L. ; Jurkiewicz P. ; Hof M. ; Jungwirth P. 
Oxidation Changes Physical Properties of Phospholipid
Bilayers: Fluorescence Spectroscopy and Molecular Simulations . Langmuir 
2010 , 26  (9 ), 6140 –6144 . 10.1021/la100657a .20387820 
Mendes Ferreira T. ; Sood R. ; Barenwald R. ; Carlstrom G. ; Topgaard D. ; Saalwachter K. ; Kinnunen P. K. J. ; Ollila O. H. S. 
Acyl Chain Disorder and Azelaoyl
Orientation in Lipid Membranes Containing Oxidized Lipids . Langmuir 
2016 , 32  (25 ), 6524 –6533 . 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b00788 .27260273 
Yusupov M. ; Van der Paal J. ; Neyts E. C. ; Bogaerts A. 
Synergistic Effect of Electric Field
and Lipid Oxidation on the Permeability of Cell Membranes . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 
2017 , 1861  (4 ), 839 –847 . 10.1016/j.bbagen.2017.01.030 .28137619 
Azzouzi A.-R. ; Vincendeau S. ; Barret E. ; Cicco A. ; Kleinclauss F. ; van der Poel H. G. ; Stief C. G. ; Rassweiler J. ; Salomon G. ; Solsona E. ; et al. Padeliporfin Vascular-Targeted
Photodynamic Therapy versus Active Surveillance in Men with Low-Risk
Prostate Cancer (CLIN1001 PCM301): An Open-Label, Phase 3, Randomised
Controlled Trial . Lancet Oncol. 
2017 , 18  (2 ), 181 –191 . 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30661-1 .28007457 
Vakrat-Haglili Y. ; Weiner L. ; Brumfeld V. ; Brandis A. ; Salomon Y. ; Mcllroy B. ; Wilson B. C. ; Pawlak A. ; Rozanowska M. ; Sarna T. ; Scherz A. ; et al. The Microenvironment Effect on the Generation of Reactive Oxygen
Species by Pd-Bacteriopheophorbide . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2005 , 127  (17 ), 6487 –6497 . 10.1021/ja046210j .15853357 
Firsov A. M. ; Fomich M. A. ; Bekish A. V. ; Sharko O. L. ; Kotova E. A. ; Saal H. J. ; Vidovic D. ; Shmanai V. V. ; Pratt D. A. ; Antonenko Y. N. ; et al. Threshold Protective Effect of Deuterated Polyunsaturated
Fatty Acids on Peroxidation of Lipid Bilayers . FEBS J. 
2019 , 286  (11 ), 2099 –2117 . 10.1111/febs.14807 .30851224

