
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145763710.1021/acsomega.7b00489ArticleWater-Reprocessable, Reformable, and Ecofriendly Sustainable
Material Based on Disulfide-Cross-Linked Polyethyleneimine Subianto Surya †§Dutta Naba Kumar †‡Choudhury Namita Roy *†‡† Future
Industries Institute, University of South
Australia, Adelaide, South Australia 5001, Australia‡ School
of Chemical Engineering, The University
of Adelaide, North Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia* E-mail: Namita.choudhury@unisa.edu.au, Namita.roychoudhury@adelaide.edu.au.28 06 2017 30 06 2017 2 6 3036 3042 20 04 2017 09 06 2017 Copyright © 2017 American Chemical Society2017American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A reformable polymer gel material has been developed based on the
disulfide cross-linking of low-molecular-weight polyethylenimine (PEI)
that can be synthesized through a facile thiolation method and reprocessed
through an aqueous method without the use of solvents or additional
chemicals. Despite being made with water-soluble PEI, the cross-linked
gel shows good mechanical integrity and its properties can be controlled
through the fabrication parameters, maintaining the hydrophilic nature
of PEI while being sufficiently robust to form a free-standing film
that does not dissolve in water. The properties of the gel have been
characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, thermogravimetry,
and dynamic mechanical analyses, showing the effect of parameters
such as the degree of thiolation and thermal curing. The reformability
of the gel comes from the disulfide cross-links, which can be disrupted
and reformed through a simple, aqueous processing method utilizing
ultrasonication, creating an aqueous dispersion, which can be recast
multiple times with minimal loss in physical properties.

document-id-old-9ao7b00489document-id-new-14ao-2017-00489uccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
In recent years, there have been increasing
interest in smart sustainable
materials based on reversible intramolecular interactions, which provide
additional properties such as self-healing or remoldability.1,2 Such materials capable of autonomous healing of damage are suitable
for a variety of applications, such as membranes for lithium batteries,
self-healing coatings for corrosion protection and biomedical
applications, and for multiple remoldings as an ecofriendly material.
Self-healing is a natural phenomenon in living organisms but very
challenging to embed in synthetic materials. An ideal self-repairing
behavior of materials refers to the ability to theoretically heal
themselves endlessly, if the right healing mechanism is applied. Thus,
the requisite reversibility can be obtained in such a system either
through intrinsic or extrinsic self-healing or rebuilding mechanisms.
An intrinsic system could be inbuilt in a material through incorporation
of reversible covalent bonds or weaker noncovalent interactions, whereas
an extrinsic system would involve external carriers, such as micro/nanocapsules
and nanotubes to act as a carrier for active ingredients, which can
be released on demand. One of the candidates for such materials is
polymeric materials containing disulfide bonds,3 which have enabled the reformation of damaged polymers
under various stimuli such as light and heat. The chemically reversible
cross-linking through disulfide bonds is advantageous due to the stability
of the disulfide bonds under normal conditions and the fact that the
thiol–disulfide exchange reaction proceeds without significant
heat effects.

Currently, there are some explorations of polymeric
materials containing
disulfide bonds in the literature.4 Disulfide
cross-links have been applied to materials such as polyester5 and poly(ethylene glycol)-based rubber networks.6 In these materials, the disulfide cross-linking
provides reversible covalent bonds, which can impart a degree of self-healing
property to the material through the thiol–disulfide exchange
reaction. The current studies are mostly aimed at imparting a self-healing
property onto polymeric materials; however, such reformable cross-links
may also impart recyclability to a polymer material. Most recyclable
polymers are thermoplastics; thus, their recycling process involves
significant amount of energy required for heating and processing.
Using reformable bonds such as disulfides could potentially simplify
the recycling process and result in a material that can be recycled
at a low cost.

Polymers such as polyethyleneimines (PEIs) are
interesting as they
are potentially biodegradable, have low toxicity, and possess antibacterial
property. Whereas linear PEI is solid at room temperature, branched
PEI is liquid at all molecular weights. Nevertheless, PEI does not
possess suitable mechanical properties for applications requiring
mechanical stability; because of their hydrophilic nature they are
water-soluble and thus generally find applications derived from its
polycationic character.7−9 In some studies,10,11 chemical modification
of PEI has been carried out, and in this regard, disulfide cross-linking
has also been applied to PEI12 for gene
delivery applications. However, there are comparatively less studies
on the use of branched PEI as building blocks for a mechanically stable,
bulk polymer material. Wang et al. used a PEI–copper complex
as a basis for a supramolecular polymer that is UV-healable;13 however, because of the hydrophilic nature of
PEI, such a supramolecular approach may result in a material whose
mechanical integrity can be compromised due to excess moisture. In
this regard, an approach based on covalent bonds such as disulfides
may provide a more robust, mechanically stable material.

PEIs
have several advantages as a base material for disulfide cross-linkings
because they are widely available and can be readily thiolated through
their amine functionalities, which will provide facile, low-cost fabrication
of such materials. The amine groups of PEI also form hydrogen bonds
between the polymer chains, which would complement the disulfide cross-links
in providing strength to the material as a gel. In this contribution,
we investigate the potential use of disulfide-cross-linked PEIs as
a reformable gel through the disruption and reformation of the disulfide
bonds. The cross-linked polymers show good mechanical properties,
which would enable their use as bulk material; whereas at the same
time, they can be recycled by simple, low-cost methods using only
water and ultrasonication and recast into films with minimal loss
in physical integrity, resulting in a material with a longer life
cycle due to this recyclability.

Results and Discussion
Synthesis
of Disulfide-Cross-Linked PEI
In this study,
the disulfide-cross-linked PEI was obtained by direct thiolation using
ethylene sulfide, and by increasing the amount of the thiolating agent,
it produces a sticky, yellow solid, which is water-dispersible but
which can be cast and cured to produce a solid, water-insoluble film (Figure 1). To achieve
this, it was necessary to use a larger quantity of ethylene sulfide
(1:5 ratio of the ethylene sulfide to amine units in PEI) in the thiolation
reaction. Use of a lower amount of thiolating agent (ethylene sulfide)
resulted in a sticky, soft material, which does not cure into a mechanically
robust film. This observation indicates that due to the low molecular
weight of the starting PEI, sufficient cross-linking needs to exist
to obtain a robust film.

Figure 1 Synthesis of the disulfide-cross-linked PEI.

When a 1:5 ratio of the ethylene
sulfide to amine units was used,
a sticky yellow solid is obtained, which can be dispersed in water/methanol
(50:50) and cast into a solid, flexible film. The film was soft but
did not show self-healing at room temperature, which indicates that
the cross-linking of the PEI prevents significant intramolecular movements
of the PEI chains and thus the gel does not flow. Photoacoustic Fourier
transform infrared (PA-FTIR) analysis of the material shows peaks
attributed to PEI at 3388 cm–1 (N–H stretching),
2945 cm–1 (C–H stretching), 1653 cm–1 (N–H bending), 1426 cm–1 (C–H bending),
and 1100–1300 cm–1 (C–N stretching).
In addition, there was also a peak at around 2046 cm–1, indicative of S–H groups in both the cured and uncured samples
(Figure 2). After curing,
a new peak can be observed at 1197 cm–1, which is
likely due to the cross-linking resulting in a shift of the C–N
stretching peak, and this is accompanied by a slight shift in most
of the other peaks. The bands due to C–H and C–N also
increased in intensity, whereas there was a decrease in intensity
in the amine peak at 3388 cm–1, which indicates
reduced hydrogen bonding as the cured sample would have a more rigid
structure compared with the uncured sample. The peak due to S–H
at 2046 cm–1 shows a reduction after curing but
is still present, which indicates that some free S–H still
exists in the material after curing; however, its intensity has decreased,
indicating the formation of disulfide bonds. The presence of remaining
thiol groups may be beneficial for reforming the material as it provides
additional cross-linking points when the material is redispersed and
recast. The expected peak due to disulfide (S–S) bonds is at
around 500–550 cm–1 and is very broad, and because of the
broadness of the peak in this area, no single peak has been isolated.
Despite this, there was an increase in intensity around the area,
which indicates the presence of an S–S peak within the broad
peak.

Figure 2 PA-FTIR spectra of the thiolated PEI before and after thermal and
UV curing.

Effect of the Ratio of
Ethylene Sulfide/Ethylene Imine Units
As previously mentioned,
varying the amount of ethylene sulfide
in thiolation resulted in materials with differing physical appearance.
At low thiolation levels with the ratio of the ethylene sulfide to amine units of below 1:7, a
viscous, sticky soft solid is obtained, which does not cure into a
solid film upon thermal curing. Increasing the amount of ethylene
sulfide, with the ratio of the ethylene sulfide/ethylene imine units
of 1:5, resulted in a sticky, glue-like solid, which can be thermally
cured into a solid, flexible film. Further increasing the ethylene
sulfide/ethylene imine ratio to 1:4 also resulted in a sticky solid,
which can be cured into a film, but the film was noticeably stiffer.
This shows that the physical properties of the material can be controlled
through the amount of thiolating agent, as higher amounts of thiol
groups would mean a more solid material due to the higher number of
disulfide cross-links. Furthermore, a PA-FTIR comparison of the samples
made with the 1:4 and 1:5 ratios (after curing) in Figure 3 shows an increase in the peak
due to thiols at 2039 and 1435 cm–1 due to the C–N
stretching, which indicates a greater degree of thiolation in the
sample.

Figure 3 PA-FTIR spectra of disulfide-cross-linked PEI with the 1:5 and
1:4 ratios of the ethylene sulfide/ethylene imine units.

This is supported by the degree of thiolation calculated
from elemental
analysis (based on the sulfur/carbon ratio, assuming two carbons per
ethylene imine unit) in Figure 4, which shows an increase in the sulfur content of the polymer
with the increasing ratio of ethylene sulfide. However, the degree
of thiolation obtained from elemental analysis (based on the sulfur/carbon
ratio) seems to be higher than what would be expected based on the
ratio of the initial reagent. Because the yield of thiolation was
around 65–75%, this indicates that the reaction led to partial
thiolation (with some PEI molecules not thiolated); however, it is
likely that the unmodified PEIs were more soluble and thus removed
during precipitation and washing, and thus the thiolated PEIs that
were retained contain a higher degree of thiolation.

Figure 4 Degree of thiolation
of the disulfide-cross-linked PEI.

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the cured films in Figure 5 shows that the thermal
stability of the material is not affected by the degree of thiolation.
Both samples at thiolation ratios of 1:4 and 1:5 (which are able to
be cast into solid films) show the same main degradation temperature
at around 245 °C; however, the sample with higher thiolation
(38%) shows a higher amount of residue due to the higher sulfur content.
In addition, the mass loss below 150 °C (which is likely due
to water adsorbed by the hydrophilic PEI) is greater for the sample
with lower thiolation (1:5 ratio) at around 15% mass, whereas the
sample with higher thiolation (1:4 ratio) shows lower amount of water
content of around 10%. The gradual nature of this mass loss also indicates
that the water is bound to the PEI by hydrogen bonding, as the mass
loss continues beyond 100 °C up to 160–170 °C. Differential
scanning calorimetric (DSC) analysis of the films did not show any
distinct transitions in the sample. On the basis of the literature,14 branched PEI is expected to have a Tg of around −47 °C; however, the disulfide-cross-linked
gels did not show any clear Tg within
the temperature range analyzed. This may be due to variation in the
number of cross-links between the PEI molecules, resulting in a broader
transition, which could not be accurately determined from the DSC
result. Both samples show a slight transition at around 42 °C;
however, because the samples are soft and rubbery at room temperature,
this is unlikely due to Tg and thus may
be attributed to a cluster transition which indicates a loss in long-range
ordering.15 There is also a small endothermic
peak at 100 °C, which is likely due to water; however, in the
sample with higher thiolation (1:4), this peak has been shifted to
around 124 °C, which indicates that the higher cross-linked sample
may retain water more strongly.

Figure 5 TGA and DSC analyses of the disulfide-cross-linked
PEI with 1:5
and 1:4 ratios of the ethylene sulfide/ethylene imine units.

Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA)
at 25 °C and under varying
relative humidity (RH) conditions in Figure 6 shows that the disulfide-cross-linked PEIs
have good mechanical properties comparable to those of ionomer gels
and are strongly affected by water. For this analysis, the samples
have been thermally cured for 1 h at 90 °C prior to the analysis
to induce cross-linking of thiol groups. It is likely that at a low
RH the disulfide-cross-linked PEI is very rigid due to the combination
of disulfide cross-linking and hydrogen bonding between the amines,
and because of the hydrophilicity of PEI, the presence of water significantly
plasticizes the material with a significant reduction of storage modulus
with increasing humidity. From the experiment, it was observed that
more significant changes in the mechanical properties of the material
occur at a higher RH, with relatively little change between 0 and
25% RH, even for the sample with the lowest degree of thiolation.
However, at a higher RH of 50% and above, a significant difference
can be observed between the samples depending on the amount of the
thiolating agent. A comparison of PEI samples with different ratios
of ethylene sulfide/amine units shows that at 1:6 ratio (lowest degree of thiolation) the
material obtained was mechanically weak and susceptible to breakage
at 50% RH and above but those with an ethylene sulfide/amine ratio
of 1:5 or higher show sufficient mechanical integrity at 80% RH with
little difference between samples made with the 1:5 and 1:4 ratios
of the thiolating agent. This obeservation confirms that increasing
the amount of thiolating agent resulted in an increased storage modulus,
as can be expected due to the increased amounts of disulfide cross-links.

Figure 6 DMA analysis
of the disulfide-cross-linked PEI.

However, it was also noted that although the gel with 1:5
ratio
retained its mechanical integrity at 80% RH when subjected to immersion
in water for prolonged periods it was not able to retain its shape
and was susceptible to breakup. This is likely due to the hydrophilic
nature of the PEI resulting in a very high water uptake, causing the
disruption of the gel structure. However, the gel with 1:4 ratio was
sufficiently robust to immersion in water and did not disrupt, indicating
this ratio to be an optimum degree of thiolation with improved stability
and high degree of cross-linking. Because of the highly hydrophilic
nature of the PEI, the gel shows a very high water uptake of 180%.

Effect of Cross-Linking
The thiolated PEI obtained
after synthesis was a soft, sticky solid resembling adhesives in physical
appearance. This material can then be dispersed in water/methanol
and cast, and after thermal curing at 90 °C for 1 h, a solid,
flexible gel is obtained. DMA of the film in Figure 7 shows that this thermal treatment needed
to be done under dry conditions to improve the mechanical properties
of the film, as shown by isothermal DMA at 0 and 25% RH. At 0% RH,
the storage modulus and loss modulus of the gel increase linearly
over time; however, at 25% RH, there was no visible increase in the
storage and loss moduli over the same time period. This may be due
to the plasticizing effect of water in this material as the gel remains
very hygroscopic due to its PEI building blocks.

Figure 7 Storage modulus and loss
modulus of the gels when held isothermally
at 80 °C and at 0 and 25% RH.

Furthermore, the result in Figure 7 is consistent with that obtained previously
in FTIR analysis. Analysis of uncured samples shows a very low modulus,
which indicates that little cross-linking occurs during thiolation;
thus, cross-linking has to be performed postsynthesis via thermal
curing. Holding the sample isothermally at an elevated temperature
and under anhydrous conditions resulted in an increase in the modulus
over time, which indicates the formation of cross-links in the sample.
The samples with a higher degree of thiolation show a more rapid increase
in modulus upon thermal treatment; however, they still show the presence
of un-crosslinked thiol after 1 h of thermal curing at 80 °C.
This means that the thermal curing can be carried out for a longer
period to further improve the mechanical properties of the gel. PEIs
with higher thiolation ratio (1:4) show a greater increase in the
storage and loss moduli upon further thermal treatment, whereas those
with lower thiolation (1:5) show only a marginal increase, which is
consistent with FTIR analysis showing a larger excess of unreacted
thiol in the higher thiolation sample. This observation indicates
that the degree of cross-linking increases linearly with time and
although 1 h was sufficient to cross-link the sample with a lower
degree of thiolation ratio, the sample with a higher degree of thiolation
can be treated further to improve its mechanical properties, whereas
beyond the optimal treatment time, further annealing will result in
increasing stiffness, as indicated by the increase in the loss modulus
in the sample with 1:5 thiolation ratio. Thus, the longer thermal
treatment time should result in a more highly cross-linked material
that retains its mechanical properties better at increased humidity
or temperature, with a noticeable increase in the storage and loss
moduli with the thermal treatment time. However, on the basis of the
results shown in Figure 8, it appears that for the 1:4 ratio sample after 2 h there was no
longer a significant gain in mechanical properties; instead, the film
became more brittle and thus showed lowered mechanical properties
at a high RH, as it is more susceptible to cracking when swollen.

Figure 8 Effect
of the thermal treatment time on the mechanical properties
of the gel (1:4 thiolation ratio).

Mechanical analysis also shows that UV curing can also be
used
to induce cross-linking to improve the mechanical properties of the
film. As can be seen from Figure 9, the use of UV curing (after 1 h of thermal curing
at 80 °C) enhances the mechanical properties of the gel. The
hydrophilic nature of PEI is retained in the disulfide-cross-linked
PEI regardless of the curing method, with the modulus decreasing in
the similar fashion with increasing RH due to the plasticizing effect
of water.

Figure 9 Effect of UV curing (at room temperature) on the disulfide-cross-linked
PEI (1:4 thiolation ratio).

Reformability of the Disulfide-Cross-Linked PEI
In
this study, a disulfide-cross-linked PEI was formed by thermal curing,
which changes the material from a sticky glue-like material to a solid
film. Despite its sensitivity to RH, when sufficiently cross-linked,
the PEI retains its solid form even after being immersed in water
due to the presence of the disulfide cross-links. Other studies with
disulfide-bonded materials have shown the possibility of self-healing;6 however, the disulfide-cross-linked gel did not
seem to show fusion or self-healing when treated with heat or UV light.
This may indicate that in these gels the high amounts of disulfide
cross-linking may prevent sufficient molecular movements to allow
some flow to occur for the material to fuse. However, when the gel
was put in water, vigorous shear (by ultrasonication) appears to be
able to break the material and resolubilize the disulfide-cross-linked
PEI into an aqueous dispersion (Figure 10). This indicates that although after curing
the material was sufficiently cross-linked to hold the low-molecular-weight
PEI units in place, ultrasonication in water appears to break the
disulfide cross-linking and resulted in a dispersion similar to that of the material
prior to the initial casting into film. Furthermore, more vigorous
shearing (longer time and larger amplitude of ultrasonication) is
needed to redisperse the sample with higher thiolation, as would be
expected with the sample contains more disulfide cross-links. Through
this facile process, a dispersion can be obtained, which is highly
stable, with no signs of precipitation or separation after prolonged
storage at room temperature.

Figure 10 Schematic of the redispersion and recasting
process and the physical
appearance of the film after multiple casting.

This aqueous dispersion can then be recast into a solid film,
and
this process was repeatable multiple times without an apparent decline
in the film’s physical properties. DMA analysis of the films
made by subsequent casting shows that under dry conditions (Figure 11) the films made
from repeated casting become stiffer but also appear to be more sensitive
to increased humidity. This observation indicates that ultrasonication
did not completely break the disulfide bonds and thus recast films
contain a more highly cross-linked material. It is likely that the
structures of the recast films contain domains of denser, higher cross-linked
areas, which did not fully solubilize from the previous cast film
during ultrasonication. These domains would be bound together by the
solubilized PEI upon curing, resulting in a stiffer material due to
the domains but with greater sensitivity to moisture due to the less
cross-linked matrix between these domains. Although there was a slight
darkening of the film upon multiple recasting (which is likely due
to the thermal curing step after each recast), PA-FTIR analysis of
the recast film (Figure 12) shows very little differences between the films after multiple
casting indicating the chemical structure of the films does not change
upon recasting as the process is affected mainly by breaking and reformation
of the disulfide bonds.

Figure 11 DMA analysis of multiple casting of the disulfide-cross-linked
PEI film.

Figure 12 PA-FTIR spectra of the thiolated PEI
after multiple casting.

Conclusions
We have shown the fabrication of a mechanically
stable gel based
on disulfide cross-linking of low-molecular-weight PEIs. Because of
the nature of the gel, it can be reformed into a dispersion via a
facile, aqueous-based process with no additional chemical reaction
and recast directly from this dispersion to obtain a gel film with
no discernible loss in mechanical properties. Elemental analysis and
PA-FTIR analysis show that the degree of thiolation can be controlled
through the amount of thiolating agent, and DMA analyses confirm that
the mechanical properties of the gel are affected by the curing conditions,
degree of thiolation, and RH. Although the gel exhibits the hydrophilic
nature of PEI (and thus shows a very large water uptake), it retained
its mechanical integrity under high humidity conditions and was sufficiently
robust to remain solid when immersed in water. The use of disulfide
cross-linking enables the gel to be redispersed by a facile ultrasonication
method in water and recast into a gel again with minimal loss in physical
properties. This approach allows the fabrication of a mechanically
stable polymer from low-molecular-weight components, which is recyclable
through multiple cycles, potentially allowing significant advantage
in waste management. With further improvement in its stability to
water sorption and barrier properties, such recyclable and ecofriendly
materials offer an attractive option for applications, such as short-term
packaging, where current recycling techniques are less cost-effective
due to the low cost of conventional materials.

Experimental Section
Materials
Branched PEI (MW 700), ethylene sulfide,
tetrahydrofuran (THF), hydrochloric acid (HCl), and methanol were
purchased from Aldrich and used as received. Deionized water was obtained
using a Milli-Q system.

Thiolation of PEI
Prior to thiolation,
PEI was neutralized
by diluting it in deionized water and titrating with a solution of
0.1 M HCl until the pH of the solution was neutral. The water was
then removed by evaporation under reduced pressure to yield a viscous
yellow liquid. In a typical thiolation procedure, the neutralized
PEI (4.2 g of 0.1 mol ethylene imine units) was then added to 20 mL
of dry methanol and transferred to a round bottom flask and flushed
with nitrogen. Ethylene sulfide (1.2 g, 0.02 mol) was then added dropwise
with stirring, and the solution was stirred at room temperature under
nitrogen for 72 h. Upon completion, the polymer was precipitated in
THF and then reprecipitated with methanol and THF to remove unreacted
ethylene sulfide. The polymer was then dried under reduced pressure
to obtain a sticky yellow solid (yield: 4.06 g, 75%).

Casting of
Thiol-Functionalized PEI
The thiolated PEI
was then dispersed in deionized water by ultrasonication with a QSonica
ultrasonic processor to produce an aqueous dispersion. The dispersion
was then cast in a Teflon mold and dried slowly at room temperature
to produce a film. The dried film was then thermally treated at 90
°C for 1 h to induce cross-linking and produce a solid, clear
yellow film. In the case of UV-cured films, the thermally cured film
was further cured by UV irradiation under a UV lamp (254 nm) for 1
h.

To investigate the reversibility of disulfide bonds and for
subsequent recasting, the cast film was cut into small pieces and
put into deionized water. A polymer dispersion was obtained by subjecting
the polymer in water to ultrasonication (3 × 20 min ultrasonication
with a 20/10 s on/off pulse), which can then be recast into film using
the same method as previously described.

Analysis of Disulfide-Cross-Linked
PEI
PA-FTIR analysis
was carried out by a Nicolet Magna-IR Spectrometer 750 equipped with
a photoacoustic cell using a carbon black reference. DSC measurement
was conducted using TA Instruments Discovery DSC. The instrument was
calibrated for baseline and cell constant prior to running the experiments.
The samples were sealed in hermetic aluminum pans for use in the DSC
experiment, and an empty pan was used as the reference. The temperature
range for the experiment was from −70 to 200 °C, with
a heating rate of 10 °C/min and under a controlled nitrogen gas
flow rate of 50 mL/min. For kinetic study, the samples were held isothermally
at 125, 135, and 145 °C for 45 min under a flow of nitrogen.
TGA was performed using a
TA Instruments Discovery TGA with an aluminum pan. The samples were
subjected to a 10 °C/min ramp rate from 100 to 550 °C under
a nitrogen atmosphere. DMA was conducted using the TA Instruments
Q800 DMA equipped with a humidity accessory. The storage and loss
moduli of the gel samples were determined under controlled humidity
between 0 and 80% RH, with 30 min equilibration time upon changing
the RH. The polymer films were cut into strips of around 5 ×
20 mm2 and measured at an amplitude of 10 μm and
a preload force of 0.0100 N. Elemental analysis was performed at University
of Queensland Microanalytical Services.

Author Present Address
§ Institute of Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Geelong Waurn
Ponds, Victoria 3216, Australia (S.S.).

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This research has been financially supported by the Australian
Research Council (ARC) through Linkage Grant funding.

Abbreviations
PEIpolyethyleneimine

DMAdynamic mechanical
analysis

PA-FTIRphotoacoustic infrared
spectroscopy
==== Refs
References
An S. Y. ; Arunbabu D. ; Noh S. M. ; Song Y. K. ; Oh J. K. 
Recent Strategies to Develop Self-Healable Crosslinked Polymeric
Networks . Chem. Commun. 
1305 , 51 , 13058 –13070 . 10.1039/C5CC04531B .
Yan L. ; Gou S. ; Ye Z. ; Zhang S. ; Ma L. 
Self-Healing and Moldable
Material with the Deformation Recovery Ability from Self-Assembled
Supramolecular Metallogels . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 12847 –12850 . 10.1039/c4cc06154c .
Gyarmati B. ; Némethy Á ; Szilágyi A. 
Reversible Disulphide Formation in
Polymer Networks: A Versatile Functional Group from Synthesis to Applications . Eur. Polym. J. 
2013 , 49 , 1268 –1286 . 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2013.03.001 .
Billiet S. ; Hillewaere X. K. D. ; Teixeira R. F. A. ; Du Prez F. E. 
Chemistry of Crosslinking
Processes for Self-Healing Polymers . Macromol.
Rapid Commun. 
2013 , 34 , 290 –309 . 10.1002/marc.201200689 .23255325 
Otsuka H. ; Nagano S. ; Kobashi Y. ; Maeda T. ; Takahara A. 
A Dynamic
Covalent Polymer Driven by Disulfide Metathesis under Photoirradiation . Chem. Commun. 
2010 , 46 , 1150 –1152 . 10.1039/B916128G .
Canadell J. ; Goossens H. ; Klumperman B. 
Self-Healing
Materials Based on Disulfide
Links . Macromolecules 
2011 , 44 , 2536 –2541 . 10.1021/ma2001492 .
Gao B. ; Zhang X. ; Sheng Y. 
Studies on Preparing and Corrosion
Inhibition Behaviour of Quaternized Polyethyleneimine for Low Carbon
Steel in Sulfuric Acid . Mater. Chem. Phys. 
2008 , 108 , 375 –381 . 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2007.10.033 .
Finšgar M. ; Fassbender S. ; Hirth S. ; Milošev I. 
Electrochemical
and XPS Study of Polyethyleneimines of Different Molecular Sizes as
Corrosion Inhibitors for AISI 430 Stainless Steel in near-Neutral
Chloride Media . Mater. Chem. Phys. 
2009 , 116 , 198 –206 . 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2009.03.010 .
Yang W. J. ; Neoh K.-G. ; Kang E.-T. ; Teo S. L.-M. ; Rittschof D. 
Polymer Brush
Coatings for Combating Marine Biofouling . Prog.
Polym. Sci. 
2014 , 39 , 1017 –1042 . 10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2014.02.002 .
Wen S. ; Zheng F. ; Shen M. ; Shi X. 
Surface Modification
and PEGylation of Branched Polyethyleneimine for Improved Biocompatibility . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2013 , 128 , 3807 –3813 . 10.1002/app.38444 .
Kim S. ; Choi J. S. ; Jang H. S. ; Suh H. ; Park J. 
Hydrophobic Modification of Polyethyleneimine
for Gene Transfectants . Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 
2001 , 22 , 1069 –1075 .
Peng Q. ; Zhong Z. ; Zhuo R. 
Disulfide
Cross-Linked Polyethylenimines
(PEI) Prepared via Thiolation of Low Molecular Weight PEI as Highly
Efficient Gene Vectors . Bioconjugate Chem. 
2008 , 19 , 499 –506 . 10.1021/bc7003236 .
Wang Z. ; Urban M. W. 
Facile UV-Healable Polyethylenimine-Copper (C2H5N-Cu)
Supramolecular Polymer Networks . Polym. Chem. 
2013 , 4 , 4897 –4901 . 10.1039/C2PY20844J .
Harris C. S. ; Ratner M. A. ; Shriver D. F. 
Ionic Conductivity in Branched Polyethyleneimine-Sodium
Trifluoromethane Sulfonate Complexes. Comaprisons to Analogous Complexes
Made with Linear Polyethyleneimine . Macromolecules 
1987 , 20 , 1778 –1781 . 10.1021/ma00174a012 .
Subianto S. ; Choudhury N. R. ; Dutta N. K. 
Palladium-Catalyzed
Phosphonation
of SEBS . J. Polym. Sci., Part A-1: Polym. Chem. 
2008 , 46 , 5431 –5441 . 10.1002/pola.22862 .

