
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3145814710.1021/acsomega.8b02638ArticleComparative Computational Approach To Study Enzyme
Reactions Using QM and QM-MM Methods Yildiz Ibrahim *†Yildiz Banu Sizirici ‡Kirmizialtin Serdal §†Chemistry
Department and ‡CIVE Department, Khalifa
University, P.O. Box 127788, Abu
Dhabi, UAE§ Chemistry
Program, New York University at Abu Dhabi, P.O. Box 129188, Abu Dhabi, UAE* E-mail: ibrahim.yildiz@ku.ac.ae. Tel: +971 (0)2 401 8208.02 11 2018 30 11 2018 3 11 14689 14703 03 10 2018 19 10 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Choline oxidase catalyzes oxidation of choline into glycine betaine through a two-step reaction
pathway employing flavin as the cofactor. On the light of kinetic
studies, it is proposed that a hydride ion is transferred from α-carbon
of choline/hydrated-betaine aldehyde to the N5 position of flavin
in the rate-determining step, which is preceded by deprotonation of
hydroxyl group of choline/hydrated-betaine aldehyde to one of the
possible basic side chains. Using the crystal structure of glycine
betaine–choline oxidase complex, we formulated two computational
systems to study the hydride-transfer mechanism including main active-site
amino acid side chains, flavin cofactor, and choline as a model system.
The first system used pure density functional theory calculations,
whereas the second approach used a hybrid ONIOM approach consisting
of density functional and molecular mechanics calculations. We were
able to formulate in silico model active sites to study the hydride-transfer
steps by utilizing noncovalent chemical interactions between choline/betaine
aldehyde and active-site amino acid chains using an atomistic approach.
We evaluated and compared the geometries and energetics of hydride-transfer
process using two different systems. We highlighted chemical interactions
and studied the effect of protonation state of an active-site histidine
base on the energetics of transfer. Furthermore, we evaluated energetics
of the second hydride-transfer process as well as hydration of betaine
aldehyde.

document-id-old-9ao8b02638document-id-new-14ao-2018-02638jccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Glucose–methanol–choline oxidoreductase (GMC oxidoreductase)
superfamily are flavin cofactor-containing enzymes that catalyze the
oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols into corresponding aldehydes
and ketones.1−5 GMC oxidoreductase enzymes are of value in biotechnology as they
were utilized in various bio-related applications such as in biosensing,6 organic synthesis,7 and biocatalysis.3 In this family, choline
oxidase (EC 1.1.3.17) is an exception that it catalyzes the oxidation
of choline first into the aldehyde, betaine aldehyde, and then into
the carboxylate, glycine betaine through a two-step reaction mechanism.8 In each oxidation step, flavin is reduced by
a two-electron transfer process and then reoxidized by molecular oxygen
yielding glycine betaine and hydrogen peroxide as final products (Figure 1). Since high cellular
concentration of glycine betaine is responsible for normal functioning
of some bacterial and plant cells in hyperosmotic and low-temperature
conditions,9,10 chemical inhibition of choline
oxidase bears importance in the design of therapeutics. Mechanistic
studies of choline oxidase, in principle, might offer invaluable insights
into the design of novel inhibitors. Most importantly, any progress
in the elucidation of the oxidation mechanism of choline into glycine
betaine might lead to better understanding of the mechanisms of related
enzymes including alcohol oxidases and flavo-enzymes.

Figure 1 Oxidation of choline
to glycine betaine through two redox cycles.

The mechanism of choline oxidation has been studied extensively
by Gadda et al., and a great deal of mechanistic information have
been obtained from numerous studies.8,11−15 Based on these studies, oxidation of choline to glycine betaine
was proposed to occur via hydride-transfer mechanism as opposed to
radical and carbanion mechanisms (Figure 2). Accordingly, oxidation of choline is initiated
with the removal of the alcohol proton (O–H) from choline (step
1 in Figure 2) by an
active-site base to generate an activated alkoxide species. In the
next step (step 2 in Figure 2), a hydride ion transfers from α-carbon of choline
(C–H) to flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), leading to betaine
aldehyde and reduced flavin. In the following step, the hydrated gem-diol form of betaine aldehyde is further oxidized to
glycine betaine through a second hydride-transfer step to FAD yielding
reduced FAD (step 3 in Figure 2). Since betaine aldehyde can act as both an intermediate
and a substrate toward choline oxidase, steady-state kinetic studies
using choline and betaine aldehyde pointed out that the kcat values for choline are about 2 times lower than those
for betaine aldehyde, indicating that a kinetic step involving the
oxidation of choline into aldehyde should be partially the rate-limiting
step.11 The rate-limiting step was elaborated
by means of studies involving kinetic isotope effects of substrate
and solvent.8 It was observed that the
rate of FAD reduction decreased 9 times upon switching to the deuterated
choline substrate, and the rate did not change appreciably upon switching
to the deuterated solvent. These two observations led to the conclusions
that the hydride-transfer and proton-transfer steps are not occurring
simultaneously, and because of the considerable primary isotope effect,
hydride transfer should be indeed the limiting factor in the enzyme
turnover. In another study, the pH dependence of initial reaction
rates for the oxidation of choline to betaine aldehyde suggested that
a base with a pKa value of 7.5 should
be responsible for the deprotonation of the O–H group of choline
for the catalytic activity.16 To identify
this catalytic base, the histidine site chain, His466, was replaced
by alanine17 on the ground that His466
is conserved in the GMC superfamily, and its equivalent side chain,
His548,18 in aryl alcohol oxidase was shown
to act as the catalytic base. Even though a 60-fold decrease in kcat was observed, the pH dependence of kcat/Km indicated
that another base is still acting for the catalytic activity. It was
also argued that His466 should stay protonated during the hydride-transfer
process on the basis of the observation that partial recovery of kcat occurred for the alanine variant in the
presence of imidazolium cation rather than neutral imidazole. In another
study, His351 side chain was mutated to alanine and it gave rise to
similar observations to the His466 variant.19 Based on these two mutagenesis studies, it was suggested that both
His351 and His466 contribute to the catalysis, but another active-site
base should act as the main source of proton acceptor. However, the
resolution of the crystal structure of choline oxidase with the glycine
betaine20 as the enzyme–product
complex (PC) led to the revisiting of the concept of His351 and His466
as the possible active-site bases for the deprotonation of O–H
as a result of the close interaction of these residues with the glycine
betaine.15 Genetic modification of His466
with glutamine led to the conclusion that His466 is the probable catalytic
base. A plausible scenario was offered to explain why alanine variant
could not verify the role of His466 in the catalysis process. In the
alanine variant, it is suggested that there is enough space for an
external hydroxide base to diffuse due to switching from histidine
to alanine, which is smaller than histidine. However, in the glutamine
variant, due to its larger size compared to alanine, it is likely
that there is not enough room for an external molecule, which can
act as a base. This explanation agrees with the observed lack of any
enzymatic activity in the alanine variant.

Figure 2 Proposed mechanism for
oxidation of choline to glycine betaine
through two hydride-transfer processes employing histidine as a catalytic
base.

Mechanistic insights into the
oxidation of choline entail invaluable
importance in the elucidation of mechanism of alcohol oxidation with
the similar enzymes. Computational methods, in principle, could furnish
supplementary mechanistic interpretations, which might be difficult
to obtain in vitro. There are a number of computational studies related
to the oxidation of alcohols by different enzymes such as liver alcohol
dehydrogenase,21 aryl alcohol oxidase,22,23 and galactose oxidase.24 Among computational
methods, density functional theory (DFT)-based quantum mechanical
(QM) calculations can provide a variety of qualitative and quantitative
information pertaining to the enzymatic reactions, such as binding
energies, noncovalent interactions, probing different proposed mechanisms,
calculations of activation barriers, and rate constants.25 Conclusions and reasoning deduced from experimental
studies could be probed with the calculations involving DFT methods,
and novel insights could be gained into interpreting the enzyme mechanism.
One prominent drawback of DFT calculations in the mechanistic enzyme
studies is related to its expensive calculations, and as a result,
smaller and simplified active-site models should be used. Therefore,
this might bring about an inevitable question related to how much
realistic can be the structure of an active site based on DFT calculations
without the three-dimensional presence and constraints of all surrounding
residues. To circumvent this issue, hybrid approaches utilizing quantum
mechanics and molecular mechanics (MM) such as ONIOM in the calculations
might be employed.26−31 The species directly taking part in the enzymatic reactions could
be portrayed with DFT methods, and the surrounding residues could
be treated with molecular mechanics methods to include noncovalent
interactions as well as provide a realistic framework around the active
sites.

Choline oxidase is an ideal model system to study the
reaction
mechanism due to a number of reasons. First of all, the crystal structure
of reaction product, glycine betaine, in complex with the enzyme is
available, and it reveals a number of noncovalent interactions between
active-site residues and glycine betaine.20 These interactions between the same residues and the substrate,
choline, might be employed to study the hydride-transfer processes
computationally. Besides, it is expected that DFT methods might portray
a reasonable picture of active site with the substrate, choline, by
means of its ability to recognize multiple noncovalent interactions
of active-site residues with the substrate. Second, the proposed reaction
mechanism involves proton and hydride-transfer steps from the substrate,
and experimental studies suggests that proton transfer is not synchronous
with the hydride transfer in a similar enzyme.32 It is possible to study the energetics of these processes
computationally in different order to gain a better understanding
of the oxidation mechanism. Finally, since it is proposed that His466
is the catalytic base deprotonating choline,15 and it is also proposed that His466 stays protonated during the
hydride-transfer step,17 DFT calculations
might probe the protonation status of His466 energetically.

2 Computational Details and Methodology
In this study,
the proposed hydride-transfer step (step 2 in Figure 2) from choline/betaine
aldehyde to FAD was evaluated with two different approaches. In the
first case, model systems were developed based on pure DFT functionals,
B3LYP33 and M06-2X,34 using Gaussian 09 package.35 B3LYP functional is one of the mostly utilized DFT functionals providing
complementary results to the experimental studies in the mechanistic
studies of enzymes.26,36 To include dispersion correction
to B3LYP functional, D3 version of Grimme’s dispersion term
was utilized.37 The reasoning to utilize
M06-2X functional is that this functional gives better results compared
to B3LYP in the main-group chemistry.38 The geometries of reactants, products, and transition states (TSs)
were optimized in the gas phase using 6-31g basis set, and then optimizations
with a larger basis set, 6-31+g(d,p), were performed for some selected
models. Transition states (TSs) are validated with the frequency calculations
requiring one negative eigenvalue, and reactants and products were
validated without any negative eigenvalues. Thermodynamic analyses
were performed with the frequency calculations at 25 °C and 1
atm. Optimized TS structures were subjected to intrinsic reaction
coordinate (IRC) calculations to confirm that reactants and products
could be connected through the TS while moving in forward and backward
pathways.39 Potential energy surface (PES)
scans were run to locate the TS structures using optimized reactant
complex (RC) by scanning bond coordinates, and then the structures
corresponding to the maximum energy points in the scans were optimized
using the Berny algorithm.40 In the second
approach, a two-layer ONIOM27 method—comprising
DFT functionals, B3LYP or M06-2X, for the substrate and active-site
residues, and AMBER force field41 for the
other residues located in a radius of 10 Å around the substrate—was
adopted. N-terminal and C-terminal residues were capped with acetyl
and N-methyl groups to preserve the electrostatic
environment of the model active site. Capping the terminals prevents
inclusion of any unnatural charged residues or H-bonding interactions
around the model active site, which might radically alter the chemical
interactions. To locate and characterize reactants, products, and
TS structures, similar PES to those in the first approach were employed.
Since D3 dispersion correction is not available for ONIOM method for
B3LYP functional, all of the ONIOM results with this functional do
not include any correction term.

For the first approach, the
crystal structure of choline oxidase
complexed with glycine betaine20 was used
to generate the model systems for the pure DFT calculations. An initial
model structure was extracted from crystal structure including main
active-site amino acids having electrostatic, H-bonding, hydrophobic,
and cation−π interactions with glycine betaine and FAD
(Figure 3). In this
structure, all amino acids and FAD were simplified to have a reasonable
number of atoms that could be handled in the calculations. The main
active-site amino acids in our calculations comprised His466, His351,
Glu312, and Trp331. Since the optimized model systems did not reveal
any considerable H-bonding interactions for Ser101 and Asn510 with
choline, these two residues were not included in the model systems.
Furthermore, Trp61 and Tyr465 were also excluded from the model systems
based on their lack of any appreciable interaction with the choline
in the optimized model geometries.

Figure 3 Crystal structure of active site of choline
oxidase complexed with
the product, glycine betaine, with the main amino acid residues. FAD,
and all residues were simplified to generate a model system for the
calculations.

To model the initial
hydride-transfer step (step 2 in Figure 2) from choline to
FAD in the first approach, the carboxylate group of glycine betaine
in Figure 3 was modified
to the alkoxy functionality to generate an initial reactant complex
(RC) between FAD and the deprotonated choline while excluding all
amino acid residues. This structure was subjected to the geometry
optimization producing RC between FAD and choline. So as to locate
the TS structure corresponding to the hydride-transfer process, a
PES scan using the distance between H atom connected to α-C
in choline and N atom in FAD was performed. This calculation was run
on the basis of the fact that hydride-transfer process entails the
breaking of α-C–H bond in choline and requires the formation
of N–H bond in FAD. The geometry corresponding to the highest
energy point in the PES scan was selected to optimize the TS structure.
Product complex (PC) of the hydride-transfer process corresponding
to the reduced FAD and betaine aldehyde was optimized using an appropriate
downhill geometry in the PES scan. RC and PC obtained with the PES
scans were validated with the IRC calculation on the optimized TS
structure. More PES scans were performed to locate the TS structures
in the presence of main amino acid residues forming the active site
His466, His351, Trp331, and Glu312 to the RC between choline and FAD.
Amino acid residues were placed around the RC based on their locations
in the crystal structure of choline oxidase with glycine betaine.
Calculations involving the second approach utilizing the ONIOM method
adopted a similar strategy to the first approach. However, the model
system included all of the residues around the substrate in a radius
of 10 Å. FAD and choline were kept all of the time in the quantum
mechanics (QM) region, and main active-site residues—His466,
His351, Trp331, and Glu312—were incorporated one by one to
the QM region while placing all other residues into molecular mechanics
(MM) region. Our second approach to model the hydride-transfer process
did not utilize simplified versions of residues. Simply, FAD, choline,
and essential residues, His466, His351, Glu312, and Trp331, around
active site were included in the QM region, while the rest of the
residues in a radius of 10 Å around choline were placed in the
MM region in the ONIOM calculations. A total of 93 atoms were placed
in the DFT region with a net negative charge and 83 residues totaling
1073 atoms were placed in the MM region with an overall negative charge.

3 Results and Discussion
In this study, we aimed at evaluating
the proposed hydride-transfer
mechanism for choline oxidase first with pure DFT calculations, and
then with a hybrid method involving two later ONIOM (QM-MM) calculations.
In this sense, we tried to address several key features involving
the details of the reaction mechanism, noncovalent interactions, and
the energetics of the hydride-transfer processes. The main objective
was to formulate a model active site including main amino acids that
has considerable chemical interactions with the substrate, choline,
and then to study the hydride-transfer process from choline to FAD.
After analyzing the crystal structure of choline oxidase in complex
with glycine betaine, there are a number of prominent interactions
between active-site residues and glycine betaine (Figure 3). One of the carboxylate O
atom in glycine betaine is in close proximity to the two histidine
residues, His466 and His351, Ser101, and Asn510, suggesting that choline
might display H-bonding interactions with these residues during the
hydride-transfer process. Calculations involving Ser101 and Asn510
did not reveal any H-bonding interaction with choline’s O atom
with either QM or QM-MM approach. It is visible that the negatively
charged Glu312 is in close proximity to glycine betaine’s positively
charged tetrasubstituted N atom, suggesting that an electrostatic
interaction between choline and this residue might exist during the
hydride-transfer process. Moreover, the tetramethyl ammonium portion
of the glycine betaine faces Trp331 closely, and this interaction
is very similar to cation−π interaction occurring between
tetramethylated lysines and aromatic amino acids.42 Another observation is that Tyr465 is in close proximity
to methyl groups on FAD and choline, and this suggests possible van
der Waals interactions.

3.1 Formulation of Enzyme–Substrate
Complex
The initial geometry of model enzyme–substrate
complex,
termed as the reactant complex (RC), between choline and choline oxidase
for the calculations was derived from the crystal structure of enzyme
complexed with the glycine betaine (Figure 3). Glycine betaine was converted to choline
by transforming the carboxylate group into alkoxy functionality considering
that the hydride-transfer step occurs after the deprotonation of the
alcohol group in the choline. All amino acid residues and FAD were
simplified in the DFT calculations for the first approach, termed
as QM approach (Figure 3). Histidines were kept as neutral, and glutamate was kept as negatively
charged. Optimization of the model geometry including choline, FAD,
and all amino acid residues, including His466, His351, Glu312, and
Trp331, failed to converge in a reasonable time using 6-31g basis
set. It is more likely that the initial geometry extracted from crystal
structure is far from an ideal starting point for the optimization
process. We did not utilize any semiempirical or molecular mechanical
methods to obtain a better initial geometry since the accuracy of
DFT methods is expected to provide more reliable initial structures.
To circumvent initial convergence problems, we adopted an atomistic
approach to reach the optimized geometries in a reasonable time for
the model active site together with choline and FAD. In the first
step, the hydride-transfer process from choline to FAD was studied
in the absence of all amino acid residues. After excluding all residues,
we were able to obtain an optimized structure of FAD–choline
complex (Figure 4).

Figure 4 Structure
of optimized reactant complex, RC, formed between FAD
and choline (model active site for QM-1) using M06-2X functional with
6-31+g(d,p) basis set including H atoms using tube model. Numbering
of C4a is based on the systematic numbering of isoalloxazine ring.

To generate model enzyme–substrate
complexes, amino acid
residues—His466, His351, Trp331, and Glu312—were incorporated
into the optimized complex between FAD and choline (Figure 4) in four steps in a successive
manner one by one at the positions roughly similar to their positions
in the crystal structure (Figure 3), and in each step, geometry optimization process
was repeated without any constraints. Thus, we were able to reach
five optimized geometries for the model enzyme–substrate complexes
in a systematic way. Five model systems will be discussed in the rest
of text as follows: QM-1 including only FAD and choline; QM-2 including
FAD, choline, and His461; QM-3 including FAD, choline, His461, and
His351; QM-4 including FAD, choline, His461, His351, and Trp331; and
QM-5 including FAD, choline, His461, His351, Trp331, and Glu312.

Figure 5, the optimized
geometry of RC for QM-5, reveals two close H-bonding interactions
between deprotonated choline and two histidine residues. H atoms connected
to N3 atoms at His351 and His466 residues interacts with O atom in
choline. The H-bonding distance for His466, 1.50 Å, is shorter
than the distance for His351, 1.76 Å. Another visible interaction
exists in between Trp331 and choline’s two methyl group attached
to the positively charged N atom. This type of interaction is caused
by the electrostatic interaction between the positively charged N
atom and the electron cloud of aromatic Trp331. One more prominent
interaction is the electrostatic interaction between Glu312 and choline’s
positively charged N atom. The distances between O atoms in Glu312
and two closest H atoms in the choline are around 2.00 Å, and
this suggests that there is a considerable electrostatic interaction
between choline and Glu312. The importance of Glu312 in choline’s
oxidation process was verified in a study in which Glu312 was replaced
with an alanine residue.43 According to
this study, the engineered variant was inactive and had considerably
lower kcat and kcat/Km values with respect to wild
type. This indicates the importance of Glu312 in the positioning and
binding of choline in the active site.

Figure 5 Structure of optimized
model active site in the presence of choline,
four amino acid residues, and FAD (model QM-5) obtained with using
M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis set using tube models excluding
H atoms except the ones shown in green.

The relative positions of residues with respect to FAD and
each
other in our optimized model complex (Figure 5) are very similar to their positions—with
the exception of their orientations—in the crystal structure
(Figure 3), in which
glycine betaine is in complex with the active-site residues. It has
to be noted that our model active site could only be optimized in
the presence of substrate, choline. It should be also noted that the
model QM systems for the enzymatic reactions entail simplified, flexible,
and isolated active-site residues in the calculations. However, in
real cases, the flexibility of residues is limited, and the contribution
of the other residues is grossly ignored. It is the recognition of
the noncovalent interactions between each residue and choline by the
QM methods that yields an optimized model active site, which is similar
to the crystal structure. Without choline, optimization might not
converge or might converge to a totally unrelated structure. Another
consideration might involve a possible noncovalent interaction between
FAD and choline. The distance between the O atom in choline and C4a
atom in FAD is 2.56 Å in the RC in Figure 5 and 2.15 Å in the RC in Figure 4. This observation suggests
that there might be a dipole interaction between negatively charged
O atom in choline and the electropositive C4a atom in FAD. This observation
is supported by the formation of C4a–OH and C4a–OOH
adducts during the oxidation of reduced FAD in the presence of H2O and O2.44

To
address the limitations of model active sites obtained through
QM calculations, we adopted a hybrid approach, ONIOM, incorporating
not only more residues around active site but also rigidity and three
dimensionality. In addition, this may eliminate the need to incorporate
a protein solvation model into QM calculations. In the same fashion,
this approach might, in principle, provide a better snapshot of the
active site. To generate model systems, FAD and choline were kept
always in QM region, while four amino acid residues—His466,
His351, Trp331, and Glu312—were incorporated into QM region
one by one in four steps in a successive manner, and in each step,
geometry optimization process was repeated. In total, 83 residues
were always kept in the MM region. Thus, we were able to reach optimized
geometries for the model enzyme–substrate complexes, RC, in
a systematic way leading to five model systems. Similar to QM models,
five model systems will be discussed in the rest of the text as follows:
QM-MM-1 including only FAD and choline in QM region while confining
all residues to MM region; QM-MM-2 including FAD, choline, and His461
while confining all residues to MM region; QM-3 including FAD, choline,
His461, and His351 while confining all residues to MM region; QM-4
including FAD, choline, His461, His351, and Trp331 while confining
all residues to MM region; and QM-5 including FAD, choline, His461,
His351, Trp331, and Glu312 while confining all residues to MM region.
The geometries of each model enzyme–substrate complexes were
included in the supporting document.

The optimized geometry
of RC for QM-MM-5 (Figures 6 and 7) displays similar
interactions as in the case of QM-5 model system. Relative positions
of residues with respect to FAD and choline are similar to QM-5 system.
As expected, the orientation of residues is different from QM-5, which
is imposed by the MM restriction; the orientations and locations of
residues bear more similarity with the crystal structure. A notable
difference exists for the FAD cofactor between QM and QM-MM models.
In the QM-5 model, the isoalloxazine ring is nearly planar. However,
in the QM-MM-5 model, an obvious bent is apparent between benzene
and pyrimidine moieties. In a previous study, this case was observed
for a flavo-enzyme, cholesterol oxidase, in the presence of its native
substrate, cholesterol.45 The crystal structures
of bacterial cholesterol oxidase in the presence and absence of cholesterol
indicated that binding of substrate to the active site causes bending
of isoalloxazine ring through N5–N10 axis as a result of interaction
between three aromatic residues, flavin, and cholesterol. Our second
computational approach, QM-MM model, corroborates this finding, and
this particular observation is actually a computational verification
of an experimental result. In future studies, we are planning to reserve
more focus on this subject.

Figure 6 Structure of optimized model active site in
the presence of choline,
four amino acid residues, and FAD while excluding all residues to
MM region (model QM-MM-5) obtained with M06-2X functional with 6-31g
basis set using tube models excluding H atoms except the ones shown
in green.

Figure 7 Structure of optimized model enzyme–substrate
complex including
choline, four amino acid residues, and FAD while excluding all residues
to MM region (model QM-MM-5) obtained with M06-2X functional with
6-31g basis set using tube models. MM region residues are shown with
line-bond models.

It is also noteworthy
to point out that QM-MM-1 model system, which
places all residues into MM region except FAD and choline, did not
furnish appreciably H-bonding distances between choline and His466–351
(4.32 and 3.67 Å, respectively, between O atom in choline and
N3 in His residues), whereas placement of His466 and His351 into QM
region resulted in a H-bonding distance in the range of 1.70–2.62
Å. For Trp331 and Glu312 residues, both QM and MM methods predicted
similar interactions with choline based on their distances.

3.2 Formulation of the Transition State for the
Hydride-Transfer Process
According to the proposed oxidation
mechanism, a hydride ion is transferred from the deprotonated choline
to FAD yielding betaine aldehyde and reduced FAD (step 2 in Figure 2). To study the energetics
of hydride transfer, a PES scan was employed using the reactant complex,
RC, for QM-1 model in Figure 4. Considering that the α-C–H bond in choline
will break and a new N–H bond will form in FAD, a PES scan
was run by decreasing the distance between H connected to α-C
of choline and N atom in FAD over a number of steps to a reasonable
N–H bond length distance. The geometry of the highest energy
point in the PES scan was used to locate the TS structure (Figure 8) corresponding to
the hydride transfer.

Figure 8 Distance between N and H atoms was scanned with M06-2X
functional
using reactant complex, RC, for QM-1 model to locate the TS structure
corresponding to hydride-transfer process. Optimization of the highest
point in PES scan with 6-31+g(d,p) basis set generated above TS structure.

The PES scan process was repeated
four more times to include all
of the main amino acid residues, His466, His351, Trp331, and Glu312,
in the active site to locate the TS structure corresponding to the
hydride-transfer step. The structure of TS in the presence of all
amino acid residues is given in Figure 9. The structures of RC, TS, and PC with all model systems
are provided in the Supporting Information.

Figure 9 Structure of optimized TS structure in the presence of choline,
four amino acid residues, and FAD (QM-5) obtained with M06-2X functional
with 6-31g basis set using tube models excluding H atoms except the
ones shown in green.

Both IRC calculation and PES scan resulted in similar PC
and RC
structures for the hydride-transfer process. A closer analysis of
TS structure (Figure 9) reveals similar noncovalent interactions as in the case of RC in Figures 6 and 7. The two histidine residues are in H-bonding interactions
with the choline’s O atom in the TS structure with the distances
of 1.89 and 1.75 Å between O atom in choline and H atoms attached
to N3 positions of histidines. It was also observed that the H-bonding
distances between His466 and His351 with O atom in choline increased
from RC (Figure 6)
to TS (Figure 9). This
illustrates that H-bonding interactions in the RC is stronger than
in the TS, which is a quite expected phenomenon for a negatively charged
O atom in RC compared to a neutral aldehyde-like TS. Both O atoms
in Glu312 are around 2.00 Å away from the H atoms on the methyl
groups of the choline, suggesting that an electrostatic interaction
exists between choline’s positively charged N atom and Glu312’s
O atoms in the TS. It is also visible that Trp331 has cation−π
interaction with the quaternary N atom in choline.

The optimized
geometry of the TS for QM-MM-5 (Figure 10) reveals similar interactions
as in the case of QM-5 model. As clearly visible, the isoalloxazine
ring is also distorted, and the increase in the H-bonding distances
from RC to TS between His residues and O atom in choline is more prominent.
In addition, the H-bonding distances in TS structures for QM-5 and
QM-MM-5 reveal that the distances are longer for QM-MM-5 models (2.27
vs 1.89 Å for His351, and 1.94 vs 1.75 Å for His466) pointing
out that molecular mechanics restricted the mobility of residues.

Figure 10 Structure
of optimized TS in the presence of choline, four amino
acid residues, and FAD while excluding all residues to MM region (model
QM-MM-5) obtained with M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis set using
tube models excluding H atoms except the ones shown in green.

3.3 Energy
Profile of the Hydride-Transfer Process
The energetics of
the initial hydride-transfer process are summarized
in Table 1 in terms
of Gibbs free-energy change (ΔG) between TS
and RC/PC for forward and reverse processes for all model systems.
For QM calculations, adding amino acid residues of His466 and His351
to the model systems increased the activation barriers for forward
process, whereas Glu312 caused a considerable decrease. A reasonable
interpretation might be related to the positive charge density on
the α-C atom of choline in the TS structure. Hydride transfer
from choline to FAD involves transfer of the negatively charged H
ion, and it is expected that the positive charge density on the α-C
atom of the choline during the flight of hydride ion will increase.
The deprotonated negatively charged O atom in choline is expected
to stabilize this positive charge density. Inclusion of His466, which
forms QM-2 (Table 1), increased the activation barrier by 5.40 kcal/mol for B3LYP functional
and by 7.93 kcal/mol for M06-2X functional. Since His466 forms H-bonding
interaction with the negatively charged O atom in choline, the negative
charge density on the O atom is expected to decrease. This, in turn,
leads to decrease in the stabilization of the developing positive
charge density on the α-C atom of choline in the TS structure.
The effect, despite being moderate, could be stated for the QM-MM-2
model having 2.60 kcal/mol more energy than QM-MM-1. In the same fashion,
addition of Glu312 to QM-5 model, which forms QM-5 (Table 1), exert a similar effect on
the activation barrier. Since Glu312 carries a net negative charge
and has an electrostatic interaction with choline, it is expected
that it might decrease the positive charge density on the α-C
atom of the choline, thereby leading to a decrease in the activation
barrier. Indeed, 6–7 kcal/mol decreases were observed upon
the introduction of Glu312 for QM-5 models, and 3.07 kcal/mol for
QM-MM-5. This observation aligns with the study reporting lack of
choline oxidase activity in the mutant enzyme in which Glu312 was
replaced with alanine.43 Inclusion of Tyr465
and Asn510 did not affect the activation barrier to a significant
extent. Furthermore, the corresponding RC structure with these two
residues did not reveal any prominent chemical interaction with either
FAD or choline. For that reason, we did not include these two residues
in the QM region for the ONIOM calculations.

Table 1 Energy
Profile for the Hydride-Transfer
Process for the Different Model Systems with B3LYP, M06-2X, and Hybrid
ONIOM Calculations along with the Imaginary Frequencies for the Transition
Statesa
functional	model system	ΔGf‡	ΔGr‡	Δ(ΔGf‡)	imaginary frequency (i)	
B3LYP (QM)	1	FAD + choline	11.18	27.83	 	–1184.38	
1*	 	13.10	26.70	 	–1272.35	
2	1 + His466	16.58	16.99	5.40	–792.15	
2#	 	27.88	11.80	 	–718.48	
3	2 + His351	22.22	21.87	5.64	–658.77	
4	3 + Trp331	23.01	14.92	0.79	–701.38	
5	4 + Glu312	16.62	17.11	–6.39	–1236.73	
M06-2X (QM)	1	 	12.93	30.95	 	–999.40	
1*	14.56	33.88	 	–1083.27	
2	20.86	17.87	7.93	–966.92	
2#	33.94	24.83	 	–958.73	
3	21.64	26.92	0.78	–781.86	
4	24.67	20.56	3.03	–773.41	
5	18.10	22.35	–6.57	–1207.78	
B3LYP/AMBER (QM-MM)	1	 	13.55	6.78	 	–849.79	
1*	10.95	6.08	 	–993.16	
1@	13.39	6.78	 	–910.11	
2	16.15	10.88	2.60	–489.15	
3	15.02	20.53	–1.13	–547.00	
4	15.76	31.99	0.74	–315.89	
5	12.69	27.36	–3.07	–1060.79	
5@	19.46	28.68	 	–1127.52	
a ΔGf‡: Gibbs
free energy of activation for the forward
reaction in kcal/mol; ΔGr‡: Gibbs free energy of activation for the reverse reaction in in
kcal/mol; Δ(ΔGf‡): difference of the Gibbs free energy of activation for the forward
reaction in kcal/mol between each consecutive model active site in
the first column. * Denotes calculations with 6-31+g(d,p) basis set, # denotes calculations with protonated His466, and @ denotes ONIOM calculations for QM-MM models with M06-2X functional.
All results, except * models, were obtained with 6-31g basis set.

There was not any notable trend
in the activation barrier of the
reverse hydride-transfer process for QM models. However, inclusion
of first residue causes a significant decrease in the activation energy,
and further addition of residues causes erratic increases or decreases
for both QM models, B3LYP and M06-2X. This might be due to the absence
of any constraints to preserve the geometry of model active site.
A careful analysis of PC structures through QM-1 to QM-5 models with
both functionals (Figures S1–S8)
supports this reasoning. Even though mobility of residues in the RC
and TS models are limited, PC structures through QM-1–5 show
considerable mobility and variability in terms of positions of residues
and substrate. In contrast, ONIOM calculations (QM-MM models) gave
a clear trend in the reverse activation barrier. Inclusion of residues
to QM region steadily increased the activation barrier. This observation
suggests that the interaction between betaine aldehyde and active-site
residues including FAD is tighter than the interaction with choline.
To understand the extra stability of PC between betaine aldehyde and
other components, we analyzed the optimized structure of PC obtained
through ONIOM PES scan (Figure 11). The structure of PC reveals that the H-bonding distances
for His351 and His466 in PC are longer than (Figure 11) those in RC (Figure 6). However, Trp331 and Glu312 are closer
to betaine aldehyde than choline. This might explain part of the stability
conferred to PC. Moreover, a considerable interaction exists between
reduced FAD and betaine aldehyde to such an extent that a distance
of 2.36 Å between O4 in the isoalloxazine and the carbonyl C
of aldehyde suggests a strong dipole–dipole interaction. In
addition, it is clear that negative charge on FAD can be stabilized
and delocalized through ring system (Figure 11). One more consideration has to be kept
in mind that the transition from RC to TS does not entail any major
shift in the relative position of choline with respect to FAD. However,
the transition from TS to PC brings about considerable shifts of betaine
aldehyde and the surrounding residues relative to FAD in QM-MM models.
As we switch more residues from MM region to QM region, a significant
decrease in the energies of PC models is visible through QM-1 to QM-5-models
presumably as a result of rearrangement of active site causing favorable
interactions between reduced FAD, betaine aldehyde, and surrounding
residues.

Figure 11 Structure of optimized PC in the presence of choline, four amino
acid residues, and FAD while excluding all residues to MM region (model
QM-MM-5) obtained with M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis set using
tube models excluding all H atoms except the ones shown in green.

To test the reliability of 6-31g
basis set results, we compared
its efficiency with a larger basis set, 6-31+g(d,p), with three model
systems (* models in Table 1). The optimized geometries were very close to each other
obtained with these two basis sets, and the difference in the forward
and backward activation barriers was in the range of 0.70–2.93
kcal/mol for M06-2X and B3LYP functionals. This observation indicates
that calculations with 6-31g basis set can provide proper quantitative
and qualitative mechanistic information for the hydride-transfer process.

3.4 Protonation State of His466 during Hydride-Transfer
Process
His466 was suggested to be the most plausible catalytic
base, which is responsible for the deprotonation of choline’s
hydroxyl group before the hydride-transfer process15 (step 1 in Figure 1). Furthermore, during the hydride-transfer step, it was also
suggested that His466 stays protonated based on a study in which His466
was replaced with alanine.17 The mutant
form did not show any appreciable enzymatic activity, and a partial
recovery of activity was observed in the presence of imidazolium cation.
However, addition of neutral imidazole did not contribute any recovery
to the enzymatic activity.

In the previous model systems, which
were formulated for the hydride-transfer step, His466 was kept neutral
and all of the calculated activation energies were based on the assumption
that His466 is neutral during the hydride-transfer process. To study
the effect of protonation state of His466 on the energetics of hydride-transfer
process, His466 N1 position was protonated. Simply, a H atom was added
to N1 position of His466 to produce an RC for a model system (QM-2#) described in Table 1 and Figure 12. Then, the resulting systems were subjected to geometry optimizations,
followed by PES scans to locate TS structures representing hydride-transfer
process in the presence of protonated His466.

Figure 12 Optimized structures
of RC and TS for the hydride-transfer process
for the model active site QM-2# in the presence of protonated
His466 obtained with the M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis set using
tube models excluding all H atoms except the ones shown in green.

The optimized RC (Figure 12) revealed a striking observation
with respect to the location
of proton originally placed at N3 position of His466. Instead of N3
position of His466, the proton is attached to O atom in choline. This
observation is not surprising considering the pKa values of choline, 13.9, and the conjugate acid of histidine’s
imidazole ring, 6.46 Considering that the
microenvironment of the active site does not alter the pKa values of acidic groups significantly, if there is a
proton placed between choline’s O and histidine’s N3
position, it will prefer to be attached to O atom due to choline’s
being less acidic and more basic than imidazole. The same phenomenon
was observed for the model active sites QM-2 with B3LYP functional.
These results highlight that His466 group, which is in close proximity
of a deprotonated choline molecule, cannot stay protonated at the
N3 position, and that proton prefers to be attached to choline’s
O atom.

Another interesting observation was revealed for the
TS structure
for the hydride-transfer process from protonated choline to FAD for
the model represented in Figure 12. The optimized TS structure (Figure 12) corresponds to the flight of hydride ion
from the deprotonated choline to FAD, indicating that the proton should
have been already transferred from O atom in choline to the N3 position
of His466 somewhere before the TS geometry. Indeed, the analysis of
PES scan, which was obtained by scanning the bond coordinate between
α-C and H as the C–H distance was increased, showed the
transfer of the proton connected to choline’s O atom to N3
position of His466 before the highest energy point in the PES scan.
According to this model, it could be concluded that the deprotonation
of choline and the hydride transfer are coupled and the deprotonation
happens on the way while the hydride ion moves from choline. Furthermore,
as the alcohol transforms to an aldehyde group as the hydride ion
transfers, it is normal that the proton connected to O atom in a semialdehyde
(pKa around −6 for a protonated
aldehyde) would transfer to much more basic His466 (pKa around 6 for the conjugate acid of imidazole ring of
the histidine). However, a collection of experimental studies indicated
that the deprotonation of choline and the transfer of hydride steps
are decoupled and deprotonation should occur in a separate step before
the hydride transfer.8

The activation
barrier for the hydride-transfer step from protonated
choline to FAD was found to be always 10–15 kcal more than
the deprotonated models (QM-2# models vs QM-2 in Table 1). These results clearly
point out that energetically the hydride transfer is more favorable
when choline is deprotonated and His466 is neutral. It is quite likely
that His466 is indeed responsible for the deprotonation of choline
along with a couple of residues who might accept proton from His466
in a cascade of proton-transfer steps.

3.5 Hydration
of Betaine Aldehyde
According
to the proposed mechanism, the second hydride-transfer process is
preceded by the hydration of betaine aldehyde into gem-diol (step 2 in Figure 1).13 It has been established that
a water molecule should exist in the active site toward this end,
and hydration of betaine aldehyde should occur in a kinetically fast
step.8 Hydration of aldehydes occurs via
three general routes such as uncatalyzed, general acid-catalyzed,
and general base-catalyzed.47 We formulated
a model system consisting of water, betaine aldehyde, and FAD to test
uncatalyzed and base-catalyzed hydration of betaine aldehyde.

By means of exploiting PES scan calculations, we located a TS structure
corresponding to addition of one water molecule to betaine aldehyde
using M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis set (TS-1H2O in Figure 13). Following PES
scan, we obtained optimized structures of RC and PC, neutral gem-diol, for the hydration process. The activation energy
turned out to be a very high value, 40.39 kcal/mol. A closer analysis
of TS-1H2O structure reveals the apparent reason for this
high value. The TS structure looks like a highly strained four-membered
ring, which is expected to have a high ring strain. We envisaged that
a second water molecule might decrease the activation barrier through
forming less strained six-membered ringlike TS structure (TS-2H2O in Figure 13). Indeed, the calculated activation energy turned out to be 12.74
kcal/mol. The energetics of these two models can be compared to QM-1
models (QM-1 for M06-2X in Table 1) for the initial hydride-transfer step since they
do not contain any residue. The hydride-transfer process requires
12.93 kcal/mol activation energy, and a value of 12.74 kcal/mol activation
energy for the hydration step seems not very probable given that the
overall turnover number did not change in deuterated solvent.8 It is also possible that there might not be enough
room for a second water molecule. We also tested these two model systems
with QM-MM calculations and we observed similar high activation energies
for a kinetically fast step.

Figure 13 Optimized structures of RC, TS-1H2O, TS-2H2O (for two water molecules), and PC for the hydration
of betaine
aldehyde in the presence of one water molecule obtained with the M06-2X
functional with 6-31g basis set using tube models excluding all H
atoms except the ones shown in green.

From this observation, it seems more logical that a general
base-catalyzed
water addition should be operative in the hydration of betaine aldehyde
considering similar enzymatic processes involving aldehyde/ketone
hydration as an intermediate step.48,49 To this end,
instead of a water molecule, we placed a hydroxide molecule for the
PES scan to study the energetics of hydration process. Without any
activation barrier as in a downhill process, hydration occurs through
bond formation between O atom at hydroxide ion and α-C of betaine
aldehyde. It is likely that His466 or His351 residues might act as
base catalyst deprotonating water molecule and forming hydroxide ion.
It should not be also ruled out that a hydroxide anion might diffuse
to active site. We tried to locate a TS structure through PES scans
for a model system including a hydroxide ion, a protonated His residue,
FAD, and betaine aldehyde to simulate a model system as if His residue
was the basic residue that deprotonated the water molecule. However,
the protonated His residue could not hold its proton, and it was transferred
to hydroxide ion forming water molecule. Through the PES scan, we
could not locate a TS structure forming gem-diol
form of aldehyde. Interestingly, if we employ the same model system
with a neutral His residue, again a downhill energy profile leading
to gem-diol formation was obtained. This observation
suggests that one of the His residues might still act as the basic
residue that deprotonates the water molecule provided that the proton
on the His residue subsequently needs to be transferred to another
residue or group.

3.6 Hydride Transfer from Hydrated-Betaine
Aldehyde
Following the hydration of betaine aldehyde, it
was proposed that
a second hydride transfers to FAD, leading to the formation of glycine
betaine and reduced FAD (step 3 in Figure 2). Since betaine aldehyde acts also as a
good substrate for choline oxidase, much of the mechanistic information
was obtained through kinetic and spectroscopic studies.13 It has been shown that a residue with a pKa value of ∼6.7 should be involved in
the oxidation of betaine aldehyde as unprotonated based on pH dependence
of kcat/Km value. It was argued that this residue, more likely His466, acts
as a catalytic base deprotonating one of the hydroxyl group of hydrated-betaine
aldehyde. Furthermore, this activated deprotonated hydrated-betaine
aldehyde loses its hydride at the α-C position forming final
products. Overall, it is expected that the second hydride-transfer
process should be very similar to the first hydride-transfer process
on the grounds that both processes happen at the same active site,
and the substrates are chemically similar, one is alcohol and the
other is gem-diol.

To study the energetics
of second hydride transfer, we formulated a model system including
hydrated-betaine aldehyde, and FAD using M06-2X functional with 6-31g
basis set. We run PES scans to locate TS structure corresponding to
the transfer of hydride at α-C from hydrated-betaine aldehyde
to N5 position at FAD. We tested three different formulations. In
the first instance, we kept OH groups of hydrated-betaine aldehyde
with their protons and run PES scan varying the distance between hydride
at α-C at hydrated-betaine aldehyde and N5 position at FAD.
The bond-making process between hydride ion and N5 atom was accompanied
with a continuous uphill energy profile without a TS structure candidate.
This finding suggests that hydride transfer is not energetically favorable
when the OH groups in the gem-diol are neutral. In
the second case, we used a gem-diol with one of the
OH deprotonated. The ensuing PES scan produced RC, TS, and PC for
the hydride-transfer process (Figure 14).

Figure 14 Optimized geometries of RC, TS, and PC for the second
hydride transfer
from hydrated-betaine aldehyde to FAD obtained with the M06-2X functional
with 6-31g basis set using tube models excluding all H atoms except
the ones shown in green.

Based on the Gibbs free-energy calculations, the activation
energy
is 13.66 kcal/mol for the forward step and 42.18 kcal/mol for the
reverse step. Clearly, incorporating deprotonated gem-diol (O1 deprotonated in Figure 14) into the model system had such a dramatic effect
that an energetically unfavorable uphill process became an energetically
feasible process with a considerable exergonic character. In parallel,
QM-MM version of this model predicted activation energies of 14.01
kcal/mol for forward steps and 29.11 kcal/mol for reverse steps. The
PC reveals an interesting observation such that N5 atom in FAD accepts
carboxylic proton of glycine. The difference of activation energy
between the first hydride-transfer step and the second hydride-transfer
step is very small (12.93 kcal/mol for the first hydride transfer,
QM-1 for M06-2X in Table 1, versus 13.66 kcal/mol for the second hydride transfer, Figure 14). To gain more
insight into geometries and energetics of the second hydride-transfer
process, we formulated QM-5 version of this process including His351,
His466, and Glu312 (Figure 15) using M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis set.

Figure 15 Optimized
geometries of RC, TS, and PC for the second hydride transfer
from hydrated-betaine aldehyde to FAD in the presence of four amino
acid residues obtained with the M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis
set using tube models excluding all H atoms except the ones shown
in green. The distances are in the table in angstrom unit.

Figure 15 reveals
that the second hydride transfer has indeed very similar RC, TS, and
PC structures to the first hydride-transfer process (Figures 6, 9, and S8). It is obvious that similar
noncovalent interactions can be seen in all three structures. Carboxylic
proton did not transfer to N5 as in the case of QM-1 version of second
hydride transfer without any residue (Figure 14). This might be presumably as a result
of tight interaction of residues with betaine aldehyde preventing
proton transfer electronically and sterically. Furthermore, this process
is accompanied with a 21.75 kcal/mol forward and 33.08 kcal/mol reverse
activation barriers. The initial hydride transfer had 18.10 kcal/mol
forward and 22.35 kcal/mol reverse activation barriers for the similar
QM-5 model (QM-5 for M06-2X in Table 1). There is 3.65 kcal/mol for the forward and ∼10
kcal/mol for the reverse process. However, as discussed previously,
QM-5 model might not also portray the geometry and energetics of second
hydride transfer in a suitable way given that residues are free to
move to find more stable geometries without any physical constraint.
For this reason, we formulated an ONIOM model corresponding to QM-MM-5
version for the second hydride-transfer process including four amino
acid residues that have considerable chemical interactions with substrate
(Figure 16).

Figure 16 Optimized
geometries of RC, TS, and PC for the second hydride transfer
from hydrated-betaine aldehyde to FAD in the presence of four amino
acid residues obtained with the ONIOM method employing AMBER as MM
method and M06-2X functional with 6-31g basis set as QM method using
tube models excluding all H atoms except the ones shown in green.
The distances are in the table in angstrom unit.

Similar interactions for RC and TS structures were observed
in Figure 16 as in
the case
of QM-5 version (Figure 15) of the second hydride-transfer process. His351 and His466
have H-bonding interactions with the O atom in hydrated-betaine aldehyde
(H2–O1 and H3–O1 in Figure 16). Glu312 has electrostatic interaction,
and Trp312 has cation−π interaction with tetramethyl
ammonium cation portion of the hydrated-betaine aldehyde. However,
PC converged to a somewhat different geometry than its counterpart
in the first hydride-transfer process (Figure 11 as QM-MM-5 formulation), and its counterpart
in the second hydride-transfer process in QM-5 formulation (PC in Figure 15). The first striking
difference is the transfer of carboxylic proton from glycine betaine
to reduce FAD. This case had already been witnessed in the QM-1 version
of second hydride-transfer process (Figure 14). Furthermore, the H-bonding interaction
of His351 with the carboxylate O atom in glycine betaine is disrupted
(O1–H2 distance in Figure 16), whereas His466 still continues to have this interaction.
Finally, Trp331 in PC does not have any more cation−π
interaction as it moved away from positively charged N atom. Proton
transfer from carboxylic group to FAD, presumably, changed the electronic
interactions of product, glycine betaine, with the FAD and with surrounding
residues to a great extent, and then the active-site residues were
reorganized. The resulting negatively charged carboxylate anion and
positively charged N5 atom in FAD interact to a significant extent
that the PC in this model was stabilized more than its PC counterpart
in the QM-5 version of second hydride-transfer process (PC in Figure 15). This could be
deduced from the comparison of activation energy of the reverse steps
(41.79 vs 33.08 kcal/mol). The role of this strong electrostatic interaction
can be also verified from the QM-1 version of the second hydride-transfer
process (Figure 14). Also in this model, carboxylic proton was transferred to N5 position
of FAD, leading to a high value of reverse activation barrier, 42.18
kcal/mol. Since this model does not contain any residue, the apparently
high value of activation barrier confirms the role of PC stabilization
through this particular electrostatic interaction.

Comparison
of energetics of first hydride transfer from choline
(QM-MM-5@ with M06-2X functional having 19.46 kcal/mol activation
energy, Table 1) with
similar model of the second hydride transfer from hydrated-betaine
aldehyde (16.59 kcal/mol in Figure 16) reveals that the contribution of the first and second
hydride-transfer steps to the overall turnover of the choline oxidase
are considerable. A ∼3 kcal/mol difference of the activation
barrier based on QM-MM-5 models between the first and second hydride-transfer
processes agrees with the measured kcat values of 93 s–1 for choline and 135 s–1 for betaine aldehyde.13 It has to be
regarded that inclusion of MM region into calculations portrays and
give more quantitative description of the activation energy difference
between the first and second hydride transfers.

As the last
model system, we tested the protonation state of a
His residue in a formulation in which we included a deprotonated gem-diol and positively charged protonated His466 at N3
positions. In this formulation, we probed the protonation status of
His466 during the flight of the hydride as well as the possible base
catalyst role of His466 to deprotonate the gem-diol.
As we run the PES scan, it was found that the proton transfers from
His466 to gem-diol, and the model system turns into
the first model system we tested earlier. This trial suggests that
as the hydride ion moves from α-C of gem-diol
to FAD, His466 cannot stay protonated, which is a similar case to
the first hydride ion transfer from choline to FAD. We tested this
approach with the QM-MM formulation and obtained similar results.

Conclusions
In this study, we employed some computational
approaches analyzing
hydride-transfer processes from choline and betaine aldehyde to FAD
as well as the hydration process of betaine aldehyde prior to second
hydride transfer. Two major model sets, QM and QM-MM, were utilized
to analyze geometries and energetics of the reactions. QM models offered
guidelines to determine the residues interacting with the substrates
and cofactor, and as a result, more plausible active-site geometries
were estimated through QM-MM models. Through QM-MM models, we were
able to include a considerable number of residues around active site
to impose a real rigid protein environment. It was found that four
amino acid residues, choline/betaine aldehyde, and FAD form a very
stable preorganized reactant complex that have strong chemical interactions.
In these complexes, a hydride ion transfers from choline/betaine aldehyde
to FAD. According to our calculations, hydride-transfer process is
more energetically feasible from deprotonated choline and gem-diol. Furthermore, it is also found that His466 cannot
stay protonated during the hydride-transfer processes. Through QM-MM
calculations, it was suggested that the isoalloxazine ring of FAD
is distorted.

Our models might be adapted to study other alcohol
and aldehyde
oxidases in specific and in general to all enzyme reactions, and invaluable
mechanistic information and interpretations might be obtained. In
future studies, we are planning to extend our calculations toward
the deprotonation mechanism of choline and FAD planarity.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b02638.Model systems
(Figures S1–S13); Gibbs free energy,
enthalpy, and zero-point corrected electronic energies of each species
(Tables S1–S29); and Cartesian coordinates of all species (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b02638_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by Khalifa University Internal Research
Fund (KUIRF) Level 1 Award (Award # 210080). The authors acknowledge
the contribution of High-Performance Computing Facility (DALMA Cluster)
at NYU Abu Dhabi.
==== Refs
References
Dijkman W. P. ; de Gonzalo G. ; Mattevi A. ; Fraaije M. W. 
Flavoprotein Oxidases:
Classification and Applications . Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 
2013 , 97 , 5177 –5188 . 10.1007/s00253-013-4925-7 .23640366 
Wongnate T. ; Chaiyen P. 
The Substrate Oxidation
Mechanism of Pyranose 2-Oxidase
and Other Related Enzymes in the Glucose–Methanol–Choline
Superfamily . FEBS J. 
2013 , 280 , 3009 –3027 . 10.1111/febs.12280 .23578136 
Bankar S. B. ; Bule M. V. ; Singhal R. S. ; Ananthanarayan L. 
Glucose Oxidase
— an Overview . Biotechnol. Adv. 
2009 , 27 , 489 –501 . 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2009.04.003 .19374943 
Goswami P. ; Chinnadayyala S. S. R. ; Chakraborty M. ; Kumar A. K. ; Kakoti A. 
An Overview
on Alcohol Oxidases and Their Potential Applications . Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2013 , 97 , 4259 –4275 . 10.1007/s00253-013-4842-9 .23525937 
Romero E. ; Gadda G. 
Alcohol Oxidation by Flavoenzymes . Biomol.
Concepts 
2014 , 5 , 299 10.1515/bmc-2014-0016 .25372761 
Wu Q. ; Wang L. ; Yu H. ; Wang J. ; Chen Z. 
Organization
of Glucose-Responsive Systems and Their Properties . Chem. Rev. 
2011 , 111 , 7855 –7875 . 10.1021/cr200027j .21902252 
Winter R. T. ; Fraaije M. W. 
Applications of
Flavoprotein Oxidases in Organic Synthesis:
Novel Reactivities That Go Beyond Amine and Alcohol Oxidations . Curr. Org. Chem. 
2012 , 16 , 2542 –2550 . 10.2174/138527212804004661 .
Fan F. ; Gadda G. 
On the Catalytic
Mechanism of Choline Oxidase . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 2067 –2074 . 10.1021/ja044541q .15713082 
Peddie B. A. ; Wong-She J. ; Randall K. ; Lever M. ; Chambers S. T. 
Osmoprotective
Properties and Accumulation of Betaine Analogues by Staphylococcus aureus . FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 
1998 , 160 , 25 –30 . 10.1111/j.1574-6968.1998.tb12885.x .9495008 
Hayashi H. ; Alia M. L. ; Deshnium P. ; Ida M. ; Murata N. 
Transformation
of Arabidopsis thaliana with the Coda
Gene for Choline Oxidase; Accumulation of Glycinebetaine
and Enhanced Tolerance to Salt and Cold Stress . The Plant J. 
1997 , 12 , 133 –142 . 10.1046/j.1365-313X.1997.12010133.x .9263456 
Gadda G. 
Kinetic Mechanism
of Choline Oxidase from Arthrobacter Globiformis . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Proteins Proteomics 
2003 , 1646 , 112 –118 . 10.1016/S1570-9639(03)00003-7 .
Gadda G. 
Hydride Transfer
Made Easy in the Reaction of Alcohol Oxidation Catalyzed by Flavin-Dependent
Oxidases . Biochemistry 
2008 , 47 , 13745 –13753 . 10.1021/bi801994c .19053234 
Fan F. ; Germann M. W. ; Gadda G. 
Mechanistic Studies of Choline Oxidase
with Betaine Aldehyde and Its Isosteric Analogue 3,3-Dimethylbutyraldehyde . Biochemistry 
2006 , 45 , 1979 –1986 . 10.1021/bi0517537 .16460045 
Gannavaram S. ; Gadda G. 
Relative Timing of
Hydrogen and Proton Transfers in the Reaction
of Flavin Oxidation Catalyzed by Choline Oxidase . Biochemistry 
2013 , 52 , 1221 –1226 . 10.1021/bi3016235 .23339467 
Smitherman C. ; Rungsrisuriyachai K. ; Germann M. W. ; Gadda G. 
Identification of the
Catalytic Base for Alcohol Activation in Choline Oxidase . Biochemistry 
2015 , 54 , 413 –421 . 10.1021/bi500982y .25478900 
Gadda G. 
Ph and Deuterium
Kinetic Isotope Effects Studies on the Oxidation of Choline to Betaine-Aldehyde
Catalyzed by Choline Oxidase . Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, Proteins Proteomics 
2003 , 1650 , 4 –9 . 10.1016/S1570-9639(03)00188-2 .
Ghanem M. ; Gadda G. 
On the Catalytic Role
of the Conserved Active Site Residue His466
of Choline Oxidase . Biochemistry 
2005 , 44 , 893 –904 . 10.1021/bi048056j .15654745 
Hernández-Ortega A. ; Lucas F. ; Ferreira P. ; Medina M. ; Guallar V. ; Martínez A. T. 
Role of Active Site Histidines in the Two Half-Reactions
of the Aryl-Alcohol Oxidase Catalytic Cycle . Biochemistry 
2012 , 51 , 6595 –6608 . 10.1021/bi300505z .22834786 
Rungsrisuriyachai K. ; Gadda G. 
On the Role of Histidine
351 in the Reaction of Alcohol Oxidation
Catalyzed by Choline Oxidase . Biochemistry 
2008 , 47 , 6762 –6769 . 10.1021/bi800650w .18540638 
Salvi F. ; Wang Y. F. ; Weber I. T. ; Gadda G. 
Structure of Choline
Oxidase in Complex with the Reaction Product Glycine Betaine . Acta Crystallogr., Sect. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 
2014 , 70 , 405 –13 . 10.1107/S1399004713029283 .24531474 
Agarwal P. K. ; Webb S. P. ; Hammes-Schiffer S. 
Computational
Studies of the Mechanism
for Proton and Hydride Transfer in Liver Alcohol Dehydrogenase . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2000 , 122 , 4803 –4812 . 10.1021/ja994456w .
Hernández-Ortega A. ; Borrelli K. ; Ferreira P. ; Medina M. ; Martínez A. T. ; Guallar V. 
Substrate Diffusion and Oxidation in GMC Oxidoreductases:
An Experimental and Computational Study on Fungal Aryl-Alcohol Oxidase . Biochem. J 
2011 , 436 , 341 –350 . 10.1042/BJ20102090 .21375505 
Hernández-Ortega A. ; Ferreira P. ; Merino P. ; Medina M. ; Guallar V. ; Martínez A. T. 
Stereoselective
Hydride Transfer by Aryl-Alcohol Oxidase,
a Member of the Gmc Superfamily . ChemBioChem 
2012 , 13 , 427 –435 . 10.1002/cbic.201100709 .22271643 
Verma P. ; Pratt R. C. ; Storr T. ; Wasinger E. C. ; Stack T. D. P. 
Sulfanyl
Stabilization of Copper-Bonded Phenoxyls in Model Complexes and Galactose
Oxidase . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2011 , 108 , 18600 –18605 . 10.1073/pnas.1109931108 .22065750 
Voth G.  Computational Approaches
for Studying Enzyme Mechanism ; Academic Press , 2016 ; Vol. 577 .
Lonsdale R. ; Harvey J. N. ; Mulholland A. J. 
A Practical Guide to Modelling Enzyme-Catalysed
Reactions . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2012 , 41 , 3025 –3038 . 10.1039/c2cs15297e .22278388 
Vreven T. ; Byun K. S. ; Komáromi I. ; Dapprich S. ; Montgomery J. A. ; Morokuma K. ; Frisch M. J. 
Combining Quantum Mechanics Methods
with Molecular Mechanics Methods in ONIOM . J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 
2006 , 2 , 815 –826 . 10.1021/ct050289g .26626688 
Chen J. ; Wang J. ; Zhang Q. ; Chen K. ; Zhu W. 
Probing Origin
of Binding Difference of Inhibitors to Mdm2 and Mdmx by Polarizable
Molecular Dynamics Simulation and QM/MM-GBSA Calculation . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 1742110.1038/srep17421 .26616018 
Chen J. ; Wang J. ; Zhang Q. ; Chen K. ; Zhu W. 
A Comparative
Study of Trypsin Specificity Based on QM/MM Molecular Dynamics Simulation
and QM/MM GBSA Calculation . J. Biomol. Struct.
Dyn. 
2015 , 33 , 2606 –2618 . 10.1080/07391102.2014.1003146 .25562613 
Chung L. W. ; et al. The Oniom Method and
Its Applications . Chem.
Rev. 
2015 , 115 , 5678 –5796 . 10.1021/cr5004419 .25853797 
Lundberg M. ; Morokuma K.  The Oniom Method
and Its Applications to Enzymatic Reactions . In Multi-Scale Quantum Models for Biocatalysis: Modern Techniques and
Applications ; York D. M. , Lee T.-S.  , Eds.; Springer : Netherlands , 2009 ; pp 21 –55 .
Menon V. ; Hsieh C. T. ; Fitzpatrick P. F. 
Substituted
Alcohols as Mechanistic
Probes of Alcohol Oxidase . Bioorg. Chem. 
1995 , 23 , 42 –53 . 10.1006/bioo.1995.1004 .
Becke A. D. 
Density-Functional
Thermochemistry. III. The Role of Exact Exchange . J. Chem. Phys. 
1993 , 98 , 5648 –5652 . 10.1063/1.464913 .
Zhao Y. ; Truhlar D. 
The M06 Suite of Density
Functionals for Main Group
Thermochemistry, Thermochemical Kinetics, Noncovalent Interactions,
Excited States, and Transition Elements: Two New Functionals and Systematic
Testing of Four M06-Class Functionals and 12 Other Functionals . Theor. Chem. Acc. 
2008 , 120 , 215 –241 . 10.1007/s00214-007-0310-x .
Frisch M. J.  Gaussian
09 ; Gaussian, Inc. : Wallingford, CT , 2009 .
Meunier B. ; de Visser S. P. ; Shaik S. 
Mechanism of Oxidation Reactions
Catalyzed by Cytochrome P450 Enzymes . Chem.
Rev. 
2004 , 104 , 3947 –3980 . 10.1021/cr020443g .15352783 
Grimme S. ; Antony J. ; Ehrlich S. ; Krieg H. 
A Consistent and Accurate
Ab Initio Parametrization of Density Functional Dispersion Correction
(Dft-D) for the 94 Elements H-Pu . J. Chem. Phys. 
2010 , 132 , 15410410.1063/1.3382344 .20423165 
Zhao Y. ; Truhlar D. G. 
Applications and Validations of the Minnesota Density
Functionals . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2011 , 502 , 1 –13 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2010.11.060 .
Hratchian H. P. ; Schlegel H. B.  Finding Minima,
Transition States, and Following Reaction Pathways on Ab Initio Potential
Energy Surfaces A2 - Dykstra, Clifford E . In Theory and Applications of Computational Chemistry ; Frenking G. , Kim K.
S. , Scuseria G. E.  , Eds.; Elsevier : Amsterdam , 2005 ; Chapter
10, pp 195 –249 .
Peng C. ; Ayala P. Y. ; Schlegel H. B. ; Frisch M. J. 
Using Redundant
Internal Coordinates to Optimize Equilibrium Geometries and Transition
States . J. Comput. Chem. 
1996 , 17 , 49 –56 . 10.1002/(SICI)1096-987X(19960115)17:1<49::AID-JCC5>3.0.CO;2-0 .
Hornak V. ; Abel R. ; Okur A. ; Strockbine B. ; Roitberg A. ; Simmerling C. 
Comparison
of Multiple Amber Force
Fields and Development of Improved Protein Backbone Parameters . Proteins 
2006 , 65 , 712 –25 . 10.1002/prot.21123 .16981200 
Yildiz I. 
A Computational
Insight into the Interaction of Methylated Lysines with Aromatic Amino
Acid Cages . J. Phys. Org. Chem. 
2016 , e366010.1002/poc.3660 .
Quaye O. ; Lountos G. T. ; Fan F. ; Orville A. M. ; Gadda G. 
Role of Glu312
in Binding and Positioning of the Substrate for the Hydride Transfer
Reaction in Choline Oxidase . Biochemistry 
2008 , 47 , 243 –256 . 10.1021/bi7017943 .18072756 
Orville A. M. ; Lountos G. T. ; Finnegan S. ; Gadda G. ; Prabhakar R. 
Crystallographic,
Spectroscopic, and Computational Analysis of a Flavin C4a–Oxygen
Adduct in Choline Oxidase . Biochemistry 
2009 , 48 , 720 –728 . 10.1021/bi801918u .19133805 
Lyubimov A. Y. ; Heard K. ; Tang H. ; Sampson N. S. ; Vrielink A. 
Distortion
of Flavin Geometry Is Linked to Ligand Binding in Cholesterol Oxidase . Protein Sci. 
2007 , 16 , 2647 –2656 . 10.1110/ps.073168207 .18029419 
Wood E. J. 
Data for
Biochemical Research (Third Edition) by R M C Dawson, D CElliott,
W H Elliott and K M Jones, Pp 580. Oxford Science Publications, OUP,
Oxford, 1986. £35/$59. Isbn 0-19-855358-7 . Biochem. Educ. 
1987 , 15 , 97 10.1016/0307-4412(87)90110-510.1016/0307-4412(87)90110-5 .
Sander E. G. ; Jencks W. P. 
Equilibria for Additions
to the Carbonyl Group . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1968 , 90 , 6154 –6162 . 10.1021/ja01024a038 .
Fleming S. M. ; Robertson T. A. ; Langley G. J. ; Bugg T. D. H. 
Catalytic
Mechanism
of a C–C Hydrolase Enzyme: Evidence for a Gem-Diol Intermediate,
Not an Acyl Enzyme . Biochemistry 
2000 , 39 , 1522 –1531 . 10.1021/bi9923095 .10684634 
Li J.-J. ; Li C. ; Blindauer C. ; Bugg T. D. H. 
Evidence for a gem-Diol Reaction Intermediate in Bacterial C–C Hydrolase Enzymes
BphD and MhpC from 13C NMR Spectroscopy† . Biochemistry 
2006 , 45 , 12461 –12469 . 10.1021/bi0612519 .17029401

