
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3153813310.1021/acsomega.9b01135ArticleLattice Boltzmann Method Modeling of Flow Structures
and Level Fluctuations in a Continuous Casting Process Zhao Peng *†‡Yang Bin *†Piao Rongxun ‡† National
Engineering Laboratory for Vacuum Metallurgy, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, P. R. China‡ Panzhihua
School of Vanadium and Titanium, Panzhihua
University, Panzhihua 61700, Sichuan, P. R. China* E-mail: zhaopeng@research.neu.edu.cn.* E-mail: kgyb2005@126.com.08 08 2019 20 08 2019 4 8 13131 13142 19 04 2019 25 07 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Transient flow and level fluctuations in
the mold were simulated
using the three-dimensional Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM). The LBM
model was verified by measured data from the literature. The transient
flow field and the free surface fluctuations in the mold were simulated.
The distributions of the coherent structures were also investigated.
The results showed that the behavior of the jets with oscillating
characteristics on both sides of the submerged entry nozzle (SEN)
played an essential role in the development of the turbulent flow
in the mold. During jet diffusion, the coherent vortex ring and vortex
rib structures were generated. The vortices at the narrow wall were
asymmetrical in the mold, accompanied by the development, dissipation,
and extinction of the coherent structures in the turbulent flow. The
asymmetric flow affected the free surface fluctuations at the top
of the mold. The peak and trough fluctuations on both sides of the
SEN alternated thereon. The distributions of the free surface fluctuations
were quantified at different casting speeds and SEN immersion depths.
As the casting speed was increased, the variations and the velocities
of the free surface increased; as the SEN immersion depth increased,
the fluctuations and the velocities thereof decreased.

document-id-old-9ao9b01135document-id-new-14ao-2019-01135gccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Flow phenomena are widely
present in the continuous casting process:
molten steel, with innate transient flow characteristics, directly
affects the free surface fluctuation at the top of the mold. Molten
steel with multiphase and multiscale features exiting the SEN could
form three mold flow patterns:1 “double
roll”, “unstable roll”, and “single roll”,
which result from various combinations of casting speed, slab width,
argon flow rate, and SEN design (immersion depth), etc. The molten
steel impinges onto the narrow wall of the mold at a high velocity
and then is split into two streams: one stream impacts the slag layer
and the other moves toward the deep pool along the wall, generating
a large-scale recirculation accompanied by small-scale vortices. Thus,
a “double roll” pattern, consisting of upper and lower
circulation zones, is formed. The flow pattern could change from a
“double roll” to a “single roll” pattern
due to a higher argon flow rate, narrower casting, and shallow SEN
immersion depths. The molten steel would first arrive at the meniscus
and move toward the deep mold along the narrow wall, hence forming
a “single roll” pattern. In practice, steel flow patterns
would be neither “double roll” nor “single roll”
inside the mold as a result of various casting conditions. Casting
plant observations2 suggest that transient
flow patterns with specific behavior in a continuous casting process
are associated with the quality of the final product, such as the
incidence of slip cracks, pinholes, “pencil pipe” slivers,
and blisters. These nonuniform internal and surface defects are mainly
related to the transient flow patterns, vortex distributions, and
free surface fluctuations in the mold. Therefore, an in-depth understanding
of the flow behavior, especially transient flow structures and free
surface fluctuations, is significant when aiming to improve the operating
conditions and the quality of cast slab products formed during a continuous
casting process.

Researchers have developed many mathematical
models of transient
flow fields to predict level fluctuations in the mold. To simulate
various macroscopic flow phenomena, the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes
(RANS) method is widely used in turbulent flows, including the k-ε,
k-ω, and Reynolds stress models;3,4 however, the
RANS model cannot capture transient turbulence and only provides time-averaged
variables. A direct numerical simulation (DNS) settles this problem
by predicting turbulence at all scales; however, it is almost impossible
to simulate such a flow system at a Reynolds number Re > 105 because of the massive amount of computations required. A
compromise
between RANS and DNS modeling is to employ the LES model. Thomas et
al.5 compared PIV measurements and LES
calculated results, indicating that the LES results were consistent
with experimental measurements. Liu et al.6 reproduced various transient flow phenomena in the mold and obtained
the asymmetric flow field and corresponding vortices inside the mold
using a single-phase LES model (albeit for a free surface that was
assumed to be a fixed plane); however, ignoring the interaction between
the internal flow and level fluctuations was impractical. With the
development of a flow simulation inside the mold, it has gradually
been recognized that the relationship between the mesoscopic and macroscopic
processes plays an essential role in the asymmetrical distribution
of internal defects in the slab-cast products; however, a macroscopic
model (RANS or LES) cannot fully explain the multiscale flow, which
can be better described using the LBM method that has attracted increasing
interest among those modeling the micro and complicated flow systems.
This mesoscopic method combines the advantages of the macroscopic
model and the molecular dynamics model. The LBM model could provide
a new perspective from which to simulate a multiscale flow in the
mold.

In recent years, more attention has been paid to the application
of LBM models. Shen et al.7 simulated the
two-dimensional flow in a continuous mold using the incompressible
Lattice Bhatnager–Gross–Krook (LBKG) model. It was found
that the flow patterns were asymmetrical at Re > 3000. In addition,
to improve the applicability of the LBM in describing the turbulent
flow at a high Re, the LBM model can be coupled with a large eddy
simulation (LES) for various turbulent simulations. The advantage
of the LBM-LES is that the local strain can be calculated from the
second-order moment of the nonequilibrium distribution function,8 thus rendering the calculation more efficient.
Yu et al.9 simulated the turbulence at
a high Re and compared the LBM-LES with a DNS simulation. The results
showed that the LBM-LES model could capture large-scale flows. Pirker
et al.10 predicted that bubble accumulation
inside the SEN was related to secondary vortices within the SEN, showing
the potential application of the LBM model to the prediction of a
complex flow. In addition, for interface problems, such as level interface
fluctuations during a continuous casting process, the LBM method can
also provide more possibilities for simulating real free interface
fluctuations. Thürey et al.11 proposed
a single-phase LBM model for a free surface flow using mass and momentum
fluxes throughout the interface to replicate the evolution of metal
foams. In particular, it is easy to track the free boundary in the
LBM method where the dynamics of the gas phase can be neglected and
only the single-phase free boundary is solved. The LBM coupled with
the treatment scheme of the free surface boundary is more efficient;
however, it is difficult to model using a single-phase macroscopic
continuous paradigm. Thus, the LBM method with a free surface scheme
can provide a deeper understanding of the transient flow field, vortices,
and free surface fluctuation at a mesoscopic level to improve the
quality of slab products.

Flow phenomena are widely present
in the continuous casting process.
The molten steel from a submerged entry nozzle (SEN) causes complex
flow patterns, oscillating jets, and corresponding coherent vortices
inside the continuous casting mold. These complex phenomena have multiphase
and multiscale characteristics, resulting in the asymmetric distribution
of interior defects of the final casting slab. With the development
of the mesoscopic model, it is gradually recognized that the mesoscopic
fluid plays a significant role in the formation and distribution of
the circulations, coherent vortices in the turbulent flow, and other
vortices inside the mold. The macroscopic model (RANS) cannot, however,
fully explain the multiscale interactions in the mold, such as the
relationship between the mesoscopic and macroscopic systems. The multiscale
flow can be better described by the LBM model at the mesoscale. The
LBM model can bridge the gap between the continuous and discrete flow
and also show the potential advantages of describing associated complicated
flow behaviors at very small scales in the continuous mold, which
is also of practical concern (when aiming to achieve a high quality
of casting steel); however, at present, research into multiscale systems
regarding the interaction between the mesoscopic and macroscopic phenomenon
is insufficient. There are few studies on the application of the mesoscopic
LBM on the transient flow patterns, the jet behaviors, and coherent
vortices inside the mold, especially the flow patterns and free surface
fluctuations inside the mold under different conditions in the mesoscopic
model.

As ongoing work to apply the LBM model for the continuous
casting
process, the objective of the present study is to investigate the
effect of varying operating conditions on the flow patterns and level
fluctuations in the mold. The simulation results were also compared
with other published measurements to verify the accuracy of the LBM
model. The behaviors of the jets affecting the asymmetric flow patterns
were simulated under steady-state operating conditions. The evolution
of coherent vortices and corresponding vortex structures within the
turbulent jets was also investigated. Finally, the effects of operating
conditions on flow structures and level fluctuations were quantified.

2 Model Establishment
2.1 LBM Model
The
governing equation
of the Lattice Boltzmann Method is given by12 1  where ci represents the discrete lattice velocities, δ is
the time step, fi(x, t) is the discretized distribution function, τLB is the dimensionless relaxation time, F⃗ is the gravitational force as proposed by Buick,13fieq (x,t) is the Maxwell distribution
equilibrium function 2  where Cs is the speed
of sound, , and wi is
the weight according to the lattice discretization, given by 3  

A D3Q19 model14 was adopted in
this study where D3 denotes three
dimensions and Q19 is the number of discrete velocities (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Three-dimensional lattice
geometry and discretized velocity vectors
in the D3Q19 model.

The macroscopic quantities
are simulated using the moments of the
distribution functions 4   5  where ρ is the macroscopic
density and u is the macroscopic velocity.

2.2 LES Model
The subgrid scale stresses
τij is given by the Smagorinsky
subgrid model15 6  where δij is the Kronecker delta function and S̅ij is expressed as the large-scale strain-rate tensor.
The viscosity υ in the Smagorinsky model is defined as 7   8  where υ0 is
the kinematic viscosity, υeddy is the eddy viscosity
given by υeddy = CΔ2|S̅|, Δ is expressed as the minimum
size, and C is the Smagorinsky constant, which depends
on the size of the grid, such that 0.1 ≤ C ≤ 0.2.

The relaxation time τLB can
be expressed as 9   10   11  where |S̅| is the
intensity of the local filtered stress tensor and Π̅i, j is the local nonequilibrium
stress tensor.

2.3 Free Surface Model
The single-phase
LBM model is used here to simulate the liquid–gas interface
in the mold. The evolution of the single-phase LBM model occurs only
at the fluid nodes, and dynamic effects arising in the gas phase can
be ignored. The free interface between the two phases is solved using
the filled fraction α. When α is 0 or 1, it is expressed
as an empty cell or a full cell; when α is close to 1 or 0,
it indicates that the lattice changes between the interface, the liquid,
and the gas cell. The interface is tracked by calculating the change
in mass between adjacent cells. The mass of the liquid phase at the
interface is defined by16 12  

The mass balance between the liquid phase and interface lattice
is given by17 13  

The mass exchange between the two interface lattices should
satisfy
the strictures of conservation of mass as follows: 14  

The equation governing
the mass exchange across the interface is
defined by 15  

When m < 0 or m > 0, the interface
lattice is transformed into a gas-phase or a liquid-phase lattice,
respectively, so that a new interface lattice is formed. The liquid
phase of the interface lattice is uniformly dispersed to the new interface
lattice to ensure conservation of mass as soon as possible.

The distribution function cannot migrate directly from the liquid
phase to the gas phase, and vice versa, thus only liquid-phase flows
were calculated. The momentum exchange at the interface of the gas
phase is expressed as the sum of the equilibrium distribution functions
pointing to the direction of the interface lattice and in the opposite
direction 16  where ĩ is contrary to direction i, ci is the velocity at position x, and ρA is related to the atmospheric pressure.

3 Calculation and Validation
3.1 Calculation Details
The computational
domain included the original mold and SEN with a bifurcated nozzle
and a bottom well. Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram of the geometry and boundary conditions
in the mold. The lattice spacing was set to 2 mm, and the resolved
scale was 0.005 m. Approximately 600,000 elements were used in the
LBM model. The initial time-step for these simulations was 0.002 s.
The inlet boundary conditions were based on the bounce-back condition
for the nonequilibrium portion of the distribution functions. A constant
velocity was adopted at the inlet according to the actual casting
speed. The pressure outlet condition was used in the bottom of the
calculation to represent steady-state casting. Table 1 lists all simulation conditions and operating
parameters considered in the simulation.

Figure 2 Schematic diagram of
the geometry and boundary conditions in the
mold.

Table 1 Simulation Conditions
Considered in
the Simulation
parameter	value	
mold model width (mm)	1700	
mold model thickness (mm)	230	
SEN port height (mm)	40	
SEN port width (mm)	30	
SEN nozzle angle (°)	15	
casting speed (m·min–1)	1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 1.7	
SEN immersion depth
(mm)	120	
3.2 Model Validation
3.2.1 Flow
Field
In a previous study,
an LBM model was verified by comparing different models and measurements
from a water-based experiment. Here, the accuracy of the model for
the flow velocity in the mold was qualitatively validated by using
analytical data from a water experiment.18 In that water model, the velocity distributions at distances of
51, 102, 460, and 921 mm from the mold SEN were measured by a hot-wire
anemometer. Figure 3 shows a comparison of the simulated and experimental results. As
can be seen from the figure, both qualitatively and quantitatively,
the predicted velocities were in good agreement with measured data.
There were some minor differences in the region from 0.2 to 0.25 m
below the meniscus at a distance of 102 mm from the SEN. This might
be due to uncertainties in the experimental measurements or the averaged
results thereof.

Figure 3 Comparison of calculated velocities in the LES model and
measurements
in the water model at distances of (a) 51, (b) 102, (c) 460, and (d)
921 mm from the mold SEN.18

3.2.2 Free Surface Fluctuation
Free surface
behaviors are significant with regard to the formation of defects
in continuously cast slabs.20 The fluctuation
and shape of the level fluctuations determine the accuracy of the
mathematical model. We investigated free surface fluctuations inside
the mold from previous experimental results under two different conditions,
as shown in Figure 4a,b. The free surface fluctuations were considered in the comparison
based on the measurements by Kalter et al.19 at different velocities of 1 and 1.5 m/s. Figure 4a shows the model predictions corresponding
to free surface fluctuations at different velocities. From the figure,
the model predictions and experimental results generally agreed well
with each other. The level fluctuated more as the velocity increased.
Also, the model predictions for free surface fluctuations were also
validated through measurements by Kalter et al.19 at different SEN immersion depths of 150 and 250 mm. Figure 4b shows the model
predictions corresponding to free surface fluctuations at different
SEN immersion depths. It was also seen that the prediction of free
surface fluctuations was consistent with measured data. The results
show that level fluctuation amplitudes decreased as the SEN immersion
depth increased.

Figure 4 Comparison of measured and calculated level fluctuations
at different
conditions: (a) velocities and (b) SEN immersion depths.

4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Flow Structures
4.1.1 Flow Field
It
is necessary to investigate
the transient flow field and jet patterns in the mold. Figure 5 shows the temporary movement
of mesoscopic fluid particles at a casting speed of 1.3 m/min and
an SEN immersion depth of 120 mm at the same time. Figure 5a–c represent the entire,
half, and central plane of the mold, respectively. It was apparent
from the figure that the high-speed jet exiting the SEN impacted the
narrow wall of the mold, and two separate streams then moved toward
the free surface or the deep pool along the narrow wall of the mold.

Figure 5 Transient
movement of mesoscopic fluid particles in the mold: (a)
the entire mold, (b) a half mold, (c) a central plane of the mold
at the same time.

Here, it is also worthwhile
investigating
the behavior of jets
and their effects on the flow field in the mold. Figure 6 shows the jets at a central
plane of the mold at 40, 55, and 70 s. As can be seen from the figure,
the high-speed jets entrained surrounding fluid particles. The jets
near the wall of the mold oscillated, thus accelerating the onset
of and exacerbating flow field instability. To better analyze the
behavior of these jets in the mold, the upper left area of the mold
was selected to illustrate the transient behavior of the oscillating
jets in the mold at different times. At 40 s, the jets directly impacted
the narrow wall of the mold and generated two recirculation zones;
at 55 s, the jets near the narrow wall oscillated upward to the free
surface; however, the jets oscillated downward to the deep pool at
70 s. It was also found that the upward flow of the jet occurs randomly
during jet diffusion. The jets’ patterns with turbulent characteristics
on both sides of the SEN showed an asymmetric distribution at different
times.

Figure 6 Transient mesoscopic fluid at a central plane of the mold at different
times of (a) 40, (b) 55, and (c) 70 s.

4.1.2 Vortex Structures
The composition
and distribution of the coherent vortices exert an essential influence
on the development of turbulence in the mold. In this simulation,
the Q criterion was used to identify coherent vortices
inside the mold21,22 17  where Q is
the invariant of the velocity gradient tensor ∇u = S + Ω where Sij and Ωij are the symmetrical and
antisymmetric components of the system ∇u,
respectively. Q represents the balance between the
rate of rotation ∥Ωij∥2 = ΩijΩij and strain rate ∥Sij∥2 = SijSij. The evolution of coherent vortices around the jet in the mold at
different times was investigated using the Q criterion,
as shown in Figure 7. It can be seen from the figure that the jets on both sides of the
SEN in the mold generated the vortex ring structures during jet diffusion.
It was also found that the braided region connected with the vortex
rings until they moved together along the jets, as seen in Figure 7a,b. The evolution
of coherent vortices mainly included the jets impinging on the wall,
the vortex rings breaking into more small vortices whereafter some
coherent vortices moved toward the free surface, and the remainder
diffused along the narrow wall of the mold, as shown in Figure 7c,d. The evolution of these
coherent vortices revealed the oscillating behavior of the jets in
the mold.

Figure 7 Evolution of coherent structures of the jets in the mold at different
times of (a) 0.2, (b) 0.4, (c) 0.6, and (d) 0.8 s.

The turbulent pulsations at the wall of the mold result in
complex
vortex structures near the wall of the mold. Figure 8 shows the evolution of turbulent vortex
structures near the narrow wall of the mold at different times. As
shown in the figure, the development of the coherent structure in
the mold was divided into the following stages: at 40 s, the coherent
vortices at the left-hand side of the mold developed along with the
narrow wall and diffused from the narrow wall to the center of the
mold (Figure 8a). At
50 s, the coherent vortices were concentrated near the right-hand
narrow wall, and they then moved downward (Figure 8b). It was noted that the development, dissipation,
and extinction of these coherent vortices also occurred in the mold.
The interactions of coherent structures caused more for a complex
turbulence regime to develop. The asymmetric coherent structures formed
near the wall of the mold also reflected the periodical changes in
the flow field in the mold.

Figure 8 Evolution of coherent structures in the turbulent
flow near the
narrow wall of the mold at different times of (a) 40 and (b) 50 s.

4.2 Field Variations
4.2.1 Effect of Casting Speed
The macroscopic
flow field can be statistically inferred from the movement of the
mesoscopic fluid particles in the mold. Here, the effect of the casting
speed on the time-averaged velocity of the mesoscopic flow in the
mold was quantified. Figure 9 shows the mesoscopic fluid particles at different casting
speeds of 1.1, 1.4, and 1.7 m/min during a given period of 30 s. As
can be seen from the figure, the velocity of the mesoscopic fluid
with its high momentum exiting from SEN increased with increasing
casting speed, and the impact point near the wall moved downward accordingly.

Figure 9 Time-averaged
movement of the mesoscopic fluid at the central plane
of the mold at different casting speeds of (a) 1.1, (b) 1.4, and (c)
1.7 m/min.

To quantify the time-averaged
velocity of this mesoscopic fluid
motion, Figure 10 shows
the time-averaged velocity at the central plane of the mold at a distance
of 5 mm from the left-hand wall under the same conditions. The results
showed that the velocity first increased and then decreased below
the meniscus, while the velocity increased again and then decreased
at the impingement point near the wall (within 0.4 m below the meniscus).
The trend in the velocity distribution was consistent at different
casting speeds, which reflected the aforementioned “double
roll” patterns inside the mold. It can be seen from the figure
that the time-averaged velocity on the vertical line increased with
the casting speed increasing from 1.1 to 1.7 m/min, and the maximum
value was 0.65 m/s. The influence of the casting speed on the time-averaged
velocity of the flow field in the mold was significant.

Figure 10 Distribution
of the time-averaged velocity at a distance of 5 mm
from the left wall at different casting speeds.

4.2.2 Effect of SEN Immersion Depth
The
effect of different SEN immersion depths on the time-averaged motion
of the mesoscopic flow in the mold was elucidated. Figure 11 shows the mesoscopic flow
particle motion in the mold at different SEN immersion depths of 90,
120, and 160 mm. It can be seen from the figure that the range of
upper circulations in the mold gradually increased with increasing
depth of SEN immersion, and the impact point moved down accordingly.
When the immersion depth of the SEN was increased from 90 to 160 mm,
the distances traveled upward by the fluid increased, and the circulation
paths had an increased radius in the mold, resulting in a slower flow
velocity in the upper circulatory gyre.

Figure 11 Time-averaged motion
of fluid particles at the center of the mold
at different SEN immersion depths of (a) 90, (b) 120, and (c) 160
mm.

To quantify the flow velocity
in the mold, Figure 12 shows the time-averaged velocity at the
center plane at a distance of 5 mm from the narrow wall of the mold
at different SEN immersion depths of 90, 120, and 160 mm. The influence
of the SEN immersion depth on the position of the impact point was
also obvious. It can be seen from the figure that the maximum velocity
and corresponding impact point increased with the SEN immersion depth.
The maximum velocity was found between 0.3 and 0.4 m below the meniscus,
and the maximum average speed increased from 0.3 to 0.5 m/s. In addition,
the effect of the SEN immersion depth affected the velocity at the
bottom of the flow field in the mold (albeit only slightly). When
the immersion depth of the SEN increased from 90 to 160 mm, the velocity
at the bottom thereof was increased from 0.11 to 0.15 m/s.

Figure 12 Time-averaged
velocities at a distance of 5 mm from the narrow
wall of the mold at different SEN immersion depths.

4.3 Free Surface
4.3.1 Free
Surface Vortices
Many researchers
have predicted the level fluctuations and vortices inside the mold
using mathematical models that often simplified the free surface as
a plane. Differing from these studies, we simulated the movement of
the mesoscopic fluid particles in the free surface under steady-state
operating conditions using a single-phase LBM coupled with a free
surface and statistically calculated the macroscopic morphology of
free surface fluctuations. Figure 13 shows the three-dimensional movements of the mesoscopic
fluid in the free surface at a casting speed of 1.4 m/min. In the
figure, the solid and dotted circles indicated clockwise and counterclockwise
vortices, respectively. At 40 s, the two vortices generated were located
on both sides of the SEN. At 55 s, one vortex was found near the left-hand
side of the SEN, and the other two vortices were located to the right
of the SEN; at 70 s, the two vortices were on the right-hand side
of the SEN. Vortices were found near the SEN because the higher-speed
fluid and the lower-speed fluid flowed in opposite directions near
the SEN. Furthermore, a vortex, appearing randomly at a lower position
between the SEN and the narrow wall, was also found. The vortices
may be formed at a lower region between the SEN and the narrow wall.
The position, size, and distribution of the vortices were related
to fluctuations of the free surface, as predicted by the LES model
when coupled with the free surface method; however, macroscopic models
(RANS/LES) were less well able to capture this phenomenon.

Figure 13 Free surface
fluctuations and the three-dimensional vortices generated
at the top of the mold at different times of (a) 40, (b) 55, and (c)
70.

4.3.2 Free
Surface Fluctuations
To quantify
the transient changes in the free surface fluctuations, Figure 14 shows the variation
in the free surface in the mold at different times. It can be seen
from the figure that the free surface was asymmetrical: peak and trough
fluctuations thereon alternated between corresponding values of 15
and 10 mm, respectively. It can be seen that the level fluctuation
near the left-hand narrow wall was higher than that on the right-hand
side thereof, as shown in Figure 14a,c. The higher position appeared near the narrow wall
of the mold due to the upward jet inside the mold. The results show
that the single-phase LBM model coupled with a free surface model
could provide a new method with which to study free surface fluctuations
in the mold, simulate the movement of mesoscopic fluid particles,
and thus ascertain the macroscopic morphology of surface fluctuations
in the mold. This also explains practical effects observed in a steel
plant: although there was no sliding nozzle opening or closing, SEN
internal blockages, or any change in operating parameters, the free
surface fluctuations remained asymmetrical.

Figure 14 Top views of the macromorphology
of level fluctuations in the mold
at different times of (a) 40, (b) 55, and (c) 70 s.

4.3.3 Effect of Casting Speed
Here, the
macroscopic topography of the free surface fluctuations was also studied. Figure 15 shows the time-averaged
free surface fluctuations at different casting speeds of 1.1, 1.4,
and 1.7 m/min, respectively. The red (near the narrow wall) and blue
zones (between the narrow wall and the SEN wall) represented the higher
and lower positions of the free surface. It was apparent from the
top view of the fluctuation that as the casting speed increased, the
time-averaged fluctuation gradually increased.

Figure 15 Top aspects of macroscale
time-averaged free surface fluctuations
in the mold at different casting speeds of (a) 1.1, (b) 1.4, and (c)
1.7 m/min.

The effect of different casting
speeds on the time-averaged fluctuations
was quantified. Figure 16 shows the time-averaged variation of the surface free on
both sides of the SEN at different casting speeds over a period of
30 s. It can be seen from the figure that the free surface fluctuations
gradually decreased in the middle position between the narrow wall
and the SEN. As the casting speed was increased from 1.1 to 1.7 m/min,
the fluctuations near the narrow wall increased in amplitude to a
significant extent. The casting speed also had a significant effect
on the morphology and the free surface fluctuations.

Figure 16 Time-averaged free surface
fluctuations at the centerline on both
sides of the SEN at different casting speeds.

The fluctuating velocity of the free surface at the top of the
mold also exhibited transient characteristic level fluctuations. To
study the effect of the casting speed on the changes in the free surface
velocity, Figure 17 shows the macroscopic fluctuating velocity of the free surface at
different casting speeds under the same conditions. It was apparent
from the top view that, as the casting speed increased, the fluctuating
velocity between the SEN and the narrow wall gradually increased.

Figure 17 Top
view of the macro velocity field of the free surface in the
mold at different casting speeds: (a) 1.1, (b) 1.4, and (c) 1.7 m/s.

The fluctuating velocity of the free surface at
the centerline
on both sides of the SEN was quantified at different casting speeds,
as shown in Figure 18. The maximum fluctuating velocity in the mold was at a distance
between (x = −0.4 m to x =
−0.3 m) and (x = 0.3 to x = 0.4 m) from the SEN. As the casting speed was increased from 1.1
to 1.7 m/min, the fluctuating velocity of the free surface increased,
and the locus of the peak velocity moved from the narrow wall toward
the SEN. The fluctuating velocity of the free surface between the
SEN and the narrow wall was 0.35 m/s when the casting speed was 1.7
m/min. The results showed that the effect of the casting speed on
the maximum fluctuating velocity of the free surface in the mold was
significant. Thus, increasing the casting speed can significantly
increase the fluctuating velocity in the mold.

Figure 18 Time-averaged velocities
of the free surface at the centerline
on both sides of SEN in the mold at different casting speeds.

4.3.4 Effect of SEN Immersion
Depth
It
is also necessary to study the effect of the SEN immersion depth on
the level fluctuations in the mold. Figure 19 illustrates the macroscopic average fluctuations
of the free surface at different SEN immersion depths of 90, 120,
and 160 mm. The red area (near the narrow wall) indicated the higher
level position, and the blue area (between the narrow wall and the
SEN wall) shows the lower level position. It was apparent from the
top view that the smallest fluctuations appeared in the middle position
on both sides of the mold when the SEN immersion depth was relatively
small (90 mm). This was because the shallow immersion depth of the
SEN caused an increase in the upward flow near the narrow wall, and
a fluctuating trough was then formed in the middle position between
the SEN and narrow wall of the mold.

Figure 19 Top view of macrofluctuations of the
free surface in the mold at
different SEN immersion depths: (a) 90, (b) 120, and (c) 160 mm.

Figure 20 shows
the time-averaged level fluctuations on both sides of the SEN at different
immersion depths. It can be seen from the figure that the maximum
fluctuations also appeared at the narrow walls on both sides of the
mold. The effect of SEN immersion depth on the maximum fluctuation
was obvious: as the immersion depth was increased from 90 to 160 mm,
the average fluctuation amplitude near the narrow wall was reduced
to 6 mm. The effect of SEN immersion depth on the morphology and variations
of the free surface was also apparent. As the SEN immersion depth
was increased, the free surface fluctuation amplitude gradually decreased.

Figure 20 Time-averaged
fluctuation of the free surface in the centerline
on both sides of SEN in the mold at different SEN immersion depths.

To study the effect of SEN immersion depth on the
fluctuating velocity
in the mold, Figure 21 shows the fluctuating velocity of the free surface at different
SEN immersion depths under the same conditions. It is apparent from
the top view that, as the SEN immersion depth increased, the fluctuating
velocity of the liquid level at the middle position gradually decreased.

Figure 21 Top
view of the macro-velocity field of the free surface in the
mold at different SEN immersion depths: (a) 90, (b) 120, and (c) 160
mm.

The time-averaged velocity of
the free surface on both sides of
the SEN at different SEN immersion depths was also quantified, as
shown in Figure 22. The maximum fluctuating velocity in the mold was also found between
(x = −0.4 m to x = −0.3
m) and (x = 0.3 m to x = 0.4 m).
As the SEN immersion depth increased from 90 to 160 mm, the fluctuating
velocity was significantly reduced. As the SEN immersion depth increased,
the velocity peak moved toward the SEN direction. When the SEN immersion
depth was 60 mm, the fluctuating velocity of the free liquid surface
reached a maximum of 0.32 m/s at the middle position between the SEN
and the narrow wall. The depth of SEN immersion also had a significant
effect on the fluctuating velocity in the mold; therefore, increasing
the SEN immersion depth can reduce the fluctuating velocity of the
free surface.

Figure 22 Time-averaged velocities of the free surface at the centerline
on both sides of SEN in the mold at different SEN immersion depths.

In summary, casting speed and SEN immersion depth
affect flow structures
and surface fluctuations in the actual casting process. The molten
steel emerging from the bifurcated SEN may cause “single roll”
and “double roll” patterns. The “double roll”
flow pattern does not occur every time. Due to a slow casting speed
and shallow SEN immersion depths, the molten steel would travel up
to the free surface then to the narrow faces and finally flow into
the deep pool along the narrow surface, resulting in a “single
roll” pattern arising from a “double roll” pattern.
In practice, flow patterns change throughout the casting process,
and the flow would exhibit neither a “double roll” nor
“single roll” pattern inside the mold due to temporary
variations in casting conditions. Also, casting speed and SEN immersion
depth also affect surface fluctuations, which are closely related
to slag entrainment in the actual process. In this case, the larger
casting velocity and shallower SEN immersion depth can make the onset
of the slag entrainment more likely to occur inside the mold and vice
versa. Practice in a steel plant indicated that flow patterns with
specific behavior and a free surface fluctuation could affect the
surface and internal defects of the final casting slab.

5 Conclusions
The three-dimensional LBM model coupled
with the free surface was
used to simulate the flow field and level fluctuations in the mold.
The vortex structures were investigated and the variation processes
of the free surface under different operating conditions were examined.
The main conclusions are as follows:

(1) Comparing the calculated
results with measurements from a water
model, the accuracy of the LBM model for predicting the transient
flow structures and free surface fluctuations inside the mold was
verified. The single-phase LBM model coupled with the free surface
model not only provided a new method with which to simulate the flow
pattern and oscillating jets in the mold but also revealed more information
about the behavior of the free surface fluctuations, such as the effects
of random vortices and level fluctuations in the top of the mold.

(2) Jets with oscillating characteristics result in the asymmetrical
flow patterns on both sides of the SEN in the mold. Vortex ring and
vortex rib structures were generated and moved together during jet
diffusion. The vortex ring and vortex rib structures were broken into
smaller vortices, accompanied by the development, dissipation, and
extinction of the vortices near the wall of the mold. The coherent
vortices near the wall of the mold showed an asymmetrical distribution,
which reflected the periodical change in the flow field inside the
mold.

(3) Casting speed and SEN immersion depth exerted a significant
influence on the behaviors of the free surface in the mold. The alternative
occurrence of peak and trough fluctuations also showed asymmetric
distributions. The random vortices generated between the SEN and the
narrow wall, and vortices adjacent to the SEN were also found. The
position, size, and distribution of the vortices generated were related
to free surface fluctuations in the mold. As the casting speed increased,
the variations and the velocities of the free surface increased; as
the SEN immersion depth increased, the fluctuations and the velocities
thereof decreased.

This research
was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
no. 51174122), Key Laboratories of Fine Chemicals and Surfactants
in Sichuan Provincial Universities, and Key Laboratory of Comprehensive
Utilization of Vanadium and Titanium Resources in Sichuan Province.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.
==== Refs
References
Yuan Q. ; Vanka S. P. ; Thomas B. G. ; Sivaramakrishnan S. 
Computational
and experimental study of turbulent flow in a 0.4-scale water model
of a continuous steel caster . Metall. Mater.
Trans. B 
2004 , 35 , 967 –982 . 10.1007/s11663-004-0091-8 .
Knoepke J. ; Hubbard M. ; Kelly J. ; Kittridge R. ; Lucas J.  Steelmaking Conference
Proceedings ; Warrendale : PA , 1994 , 381 –88 .
Liu H. ; Yang C. ; Zhang H. ; Zhai Q. ; Gan Y. 
Numerical
simulation of fluid flow and thermal characteristics of thin slab
in the funnel-type molds of two Casters . ISIJ
Int. 
2011 , 51 , 392 –401 . 10.2355/isijinternational.51.392 .
Torres-Alonso E. ; Morales R. D. ; García-Hernández S. 
Cyclic Turbulent
Instabilities in a Thin Slab Mold. Part II: Mathematical Model . Metall. Mater. Trans. B 
2010 , 41 , 675 –690 . 10.1007/s11663-010-9363-7 .
Yuan Q. ; Thomas B. G. ; Vanka S. P. 
Study of
transient flow and particle
transport in continuous steel caster molds: Part I. Fluid flow . Metall. Mater. Trans. B 
2004 , 35 , 685 –702 . 10.1007/s11663-004-0009-5 .
Liu Z. ; Li B. ; Jiang M. 
Transient
Asymmetric flow and bubble transport inside
a slab continuous-casting Mold . Metall. Mater.
Trans. B 
2014 , 45 , 675 –697 . 10.1007/s11663-013-9972-z .
Zhang X. J. ; Shen H. F. 
Lattice BGK model
simulation of asymmetric flow inside
a continuous slab casting mold . J Hydrodyn.
Ser. B 
2006 , 18 , 431 –435 . 10.1016/S1001-6058(06)60116-9 .
Hou S. ; Sterling J. ; Chen S.
A. ; Doolen G.
D.  A Lattice boltzmann
subgrid model for high Reynolds number flows . arXiv preprint comp-gas/9401004 , 1994 .
Yu H. ; Girimaji S. S. 
Near-field turbulent simulations of rectangular jets
using lattice Boltzmann method . Phys. Fluids 
2005 , 17 , 239 –283 . 10.1063/1.2140021 .
Pirker S. ; Kahrimanovic D. ; Schneiderbauer S. 
Secondary vortex formation in bifurcated
submerged entry nozzles: numerical simulation of gas bubble entrapment . Metall. Mater. Trans. B 
2015 , 46 , 953 –960 . 10.1007/s11663-014-0250-5 .
Thürey N. ; Körner C. ; Rüde U.  Interactive
free surface fluids with the lattice Boltzmann method ; University of Erlangen-Nuremberg : Germany , 2005 .
He X. ; Luo L. S. 
Theory of the lattice Boltzmann method: From the Boltzmann
equation to the lattice Boltzmann equation . Phys. Rev. E 
1997 , 56 , 6811 10.1103/PhysRevE.56.6811 .
Buick J. ; Greated C. 
Gravity in a lattice Boltzmann model . Phys. Rev. E 
2000 , 61 , 5307 10.1103/PhysRevE.61.5307 .
Qian Y. H. ; D’Humières D. ; Lallemand P. 
Lattice BGK
models for Navier-Stokes equation . Europhys.
Lett. 
1992 , 17 , 479 10.1209/0295-5075/17/6/001 .
Smagorinsky J. 
General circulation
experiments with the primitive EQUATIONS . Mon.
Weather Rev. 
1963 , 91 , 99 –164 . 10.1175/1520-0493(1963)091<0099:GCEWTP>2.3.CO;2 .
Anderl D. ; Bogner S. ; Rauh C. ; Rüde U. ; Delgado A. 
Free surface lattice Boltzmann with
enhanced bubble
model . Comput. Math. Appl. 
2014 , 67 , 331 –339 . 10.1016/j.camwa.2013.06.007 .
Körner C. ; Thies M. ; Hofmann T. ; Thürey N. ; Rüde U. 
Lattice Boltzmann model for free surface flow for modeling
foaming . J. Stat. Phys. 
2005 , 121 , 179 –196 . 10.1007/s10955-005-8879-8 .
Thomas B. G. ; Huang X. ; Sussman R. C. 
Simulation of argon
gas flow effects
in a continuous slab caster . Metall. Mater.
Trans. B 
1994 , 25 , 527 –547 . 10.1007/BF02650074 .
Kalter R. ; Tummers M. J. ; Kenjereš S. ; Righolt B. W. ; Kleijn C. R. 
Oscillations
of the fluid flow and the free surface in a cavity with a submerged
bifurcated nozzle . Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 
2013 , 44 , 365 –374 . 10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2013.07.007 .
McDavid R. M. ; Thomas B. G. 
Flow and thermal
behavior of the top surface flux/powder
layers in continuous casting molds . Metall.
Mater. Trans. B 
1996 , 27 , 672 –685 . 10.1007/BF02915666 .
Green S. I. ; Sheldon I.  Fluid Mechanics and its
Applications . Kluwer Academic Publisher ; 1995 , 427 , 470 .
Hunt J. C. ; Wray A. A. ; Moin P.  Eddies, streams,
and
convergence zones in turbulent flows . 1988 .

