
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 3008794010.1021/acsomega.8b00664ArticleMultifunctional CdSNPs@ZIF-8: Potential Antibacterial
Agent against GFP-Expressing Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus and Efficient
Photocatalyst for Degradation of Methylene Blue Malik Ankur †Nath Mala *†Mohiyuddin Shanid ‡Packirisamy Gopinath ‡†Department
of Chemistry and ‡Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand 247667, India* E-mail: malanfcy@iitr.ernet.in, malanfcy@iitr.ac.in, malanfcy@gmail.com. Tel: +91 1332 285797. Fax: +91 1332 73560.25 07 2018 31 07 2018 3 7 8288 8308 06 04 2018 25 06 2018 Copyright © 2018 American Chemical
Society2018American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Multifunctional novel core–shell
composites, CdSNPs@ZIF-8,
have been synthesized by in situ encapsulation of different amounts
of CdSNPs (150, 300, and 500 μL suspension of CdSNPs in methanol)
in ZIF-8 at room temperature. These composites have been characterized
by powder X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
field emission scanning electron microscopy, high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy (HRTEM), and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
techniques and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface analysis.
XPS and HRTEM indicate the encapsulation of CdSNPs within ZIF-8 crystal
without disturbing the crystal order of ZIF-8. The average size of
embedded CdSNPs (determined by the particle size distribution from
HRTEM) is found to be 16.34 nm. CdSNPs@ZIF-8 showed potential to be
used as an antibacterial agent against the broad spectrum of bacterial
strains such as Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-negative green fluorescent protein-expressing Escherichia coli in aqueous medium, as evident by
various biophysical experiments, viz., 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide assay, optical density and fluorescence spectroscopic studies,
fluorescence and optical microscopic image analysis, disk diffusion
assay, field emission scanning electron microscopy, and flow cytometry
for reactive oxygen species induction assay. Further, the composite
has been used as an efficient photocatalyst for the degradation of
organic pollutants, such as methylene blue dye, in aqueous medium
and found that the core–shell composite, CdSNPs@ZIF-8 (150
μL) (abbreviated as NC-1) (5 mg), exhibited higher photocatalytic
activity (≈1.8 times) than CdSNPs for degradation of 90% of
methylene blue (10 mL of 10 ppm) at pH ≥ 7 due to the synergetic
effect. Therefore, in situ encapsulation of CdSNPs in ZIF-8 provides
an easy executable measure for purification of wastewater effluents
for the effective photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants
as well as to remove the bacterial contamination under sunlight.

document-id-old-9ao8b00664document-id-new-14ao-2018-00664gccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Microporous metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs), a class of newly developed
inorganic–organic hybrid materials, which consist of metal-containing
nodes connected by organic linkers, have attracted significant research
interest in recent years due to their diverse and easily tailorable
structures as well as many attractive applications in gas storage,
catalysis, selective adsorption and separation, carbon dioxide capture,
and drug delivery.1 MOFs can be synthesized
under mild conditions and have tunable pore size, high pore volume,
high specific surface area, and highly ordered crystalline porous
networks, which allow systemic engineering of different physical and
chemical properties by modification of their counterparts.1 Recently, there has been a significant research
interest to explore new applications of MOFs as potential photocatalysts
when exposed to light because it is easy to modify MOFs with tailorable
functionality having capacity to absorb light, thereby inducing desirable
photocatalytic activity for degradation of organic pollutants.2−10

In recent years, much effort has been devoted to encapsulate
nanoparticles
(NPs) of metals,11−14 metal oxides,15−22 metal oxide composites,23−26 organic polymers,27,28 polyoxometalates,29,30 and MOFs31,32 into MOFs to form hybrid core–shell
composites/structures. These hybrid core–shell materials possess
not only the intrinsic properties of the NPs and MOFs but also synergistic
properties that explore their more new applications (Table 1) in various fields, such as
selective photocatalysis/catalysis,12−16,18,19,29,33,34 therapy,35,36 and gas storage
and sensing37,38 and as supercapacitors and carriers
for electrode materials.17,21 NPs@MOFs core–shell
composites have been prepared either by using MOFs as templates to
generate and embed nanoparticles within their cavities39−41 or by encapsulating presynthesized nanoparticles stabilized with
certain surfactants, capping agents, or even ions,11,15,19,42−44 and usually it has been observed that nanoparticles do not occupy
the MOF cavities (because their hydrodynamic radius is much larger
than the size of cavity of MOFs), but instead are surrounded by grown
MOF particles. Despite a significant amount of research on NPs@MOFs
have been reported, many challenges still remain, such as control
of size, composition, dispersed nature, spatial distribution, and
confinement of the incorporated nanoparticles within the matrices
of MOFs. Therefore, new encapsulation strategies will be developed,
but as yet are not well developed and understood. Further, to preserve
the catalytic and optical properties of encapsulated nanoparticles
in MOFs matrices, their agglomeration should be controlled and minimized.
The agglomeration of nanoparticles is a commonly observed42−44 phenomenon during the encapsulation of NPs within MOFs.

Table 1 List of MOF-Based Core–Shell
Composites
s. r.	material	advantage/application	disadvantage	ref	
1.	MIL-53 (Fe, Cr, Al)	used for photocatalytic
degradation of methylene blue (MB)	carboxylate-based MOFs are unstable in aqueous medium, and release of Cr in water
may cause health problem	(9)	
2.	Au@ZIF-8, Pt@ZIF-8, and Fe3O4@ZIF-8	used for N2 uptake,
hydrogenation, and study of magnetic properties, respectively	PVP surfactant was needed	(11)	
3.	single-/multi-core–shell Au@ZIF-8	used for photocatalytic
oxidation of benzyl alcohol	CTAB used in the synthesis
of Au NPs, which may not be completely
replaced by PVP	(12)	
4.	AgPd@ZIF-8	dehydrogenation of formic
acid	 	(14)	
5.	TiO2@ZIF-8	simple method of preparation;
highly recyclable efficient catalyst for photodegradation of methylene
blue	 	(15, 45)	
6.	ZnO@ZIF-8	used for photocatalytic
degradation of methylene blue	additional oxidant, H2O2 was
added to methylene blue. Size of ZnO core
is large (300 nm)	(16)	
7.	SnO2 quantum dots@ZIF-8	higher supercapacitance (931 F/g) compared to either SnO2 QD or ZIF-8	its characterization and
other applications were not carried out	(17)	
8.	Fe3O4@MOF magnetic microspheres	cheap and green catalyst
for Claisen–Schmidt condensation
reaction	 	(18)	
9.	Fe3O4@MIL-100 (Fe)	magnetically separable
photocatalyst
for decolorization of methylene blue	H2O2 is required for higher
degradation efficiency. Fe3O4@MIL-100 (Fe) and MIL-100 (Fe) have almost same efficiency	(19)	
10.	Keggin-type polyoxometalate (POM), [CuPW11O39]5– in the pores of MOF-199	increased stability of both
POM and MOF due to synergistic effect. Conversion of TICs (H2S, mercaptans) to non-TICs (S8, H2O, disulfides)	 	(29)	
11.	IRMOF-3 (shell/core)-@MOF-5 (core/shell)	novel structures	no specific application
was discussed	(32)	
12.	Zn/Co ZIF particles	semihydrogenation of acetylene	 	(33)	
13.	hollow ZIF-8 nanospheres and Pd nanocubes@ZIF-8	size-selective hydrogenation reactions of 1-hexene, trans-stilbene, and teteraphenyl-ethylene	 	(34)	
14.	g-C3N4 nanosheets@ZIF-8; (DOX) loaded on ZIF-8 of g-C3N4 nanosheets@ZIF-8	dual-color imaging, red fluorescence of doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX), and
blue fluorescence of g-C3N4 nanosheets provide the additional function for monitoring the drug
release behavior	 	(35)	
15.	Fe3O4/ZIF-8-Au25	Fe3O4 produced hyperthermal effect and also
had targeting and MRI imaging
capabilities. Au25(SR18)-produced singlet oxygen (1O2), which further causes
photodynamic effect. This nanoplatform exhibits high biocompatibility
and an enhanced synergistic therapeutic effect superior to any single
therapy	 	(36)	
16.	Au@MOF-5	highly selective sensing
for CO2	 	(37)	
17.	bio-MOF-11/14 mixed core@bio-MOF-14	selective for CO2 capture. Core–shell composite
exhibits 30% higher CO2 uptake than bio-MOF-14 and less N2 uptake than core	 	(38)	
18.	CdS@ZIF-8	photocatalytic H2 generation from formic acid	its characterization was
not thoroughly carried out and other photocatalytic and biocidal applications
were not studied	(46)	
With growing concerns worldwide about
a green and clean environment,
water bodies, and human health, immense efforts have been made to
develop new high-efficiency and cost-effective technologies for the
degradation and removal of the organic pollutants of wastewater. The
major pollutants in wastewater include organic dyes, phenol and its
various derivatives, fertilizers, pesticides, polyaromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH), detergents, carbohydrates, etc. The organic dyes are widely
used as coloring agents in various industries, particularly, textiles,
leather, food, plastics, cosmetics, and other industries, and they
are usually toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, and have low biodegradability.1 Their discharge into water bodies misbalances
the aquatic ecosystem. Therefore, their efficient removal prior to
the discharge of wastewater has become a hot research area due to
its ecological and environmental pollution points of view. Traditional
common physiochemical and biological methods fail to completely destroy
them, and are slow and thus can lead to secondary pollution. Therefore,
other alternative technologies with more efficiency and less energy
consumption have been developed, such as advanced oxidation processes
based on the generation of hydroxyl radicals using photocatalysts
that oxidize a broad range of organic pollutants quickly and selectively.
To date, several semiconductor nanoparticles based on transition-metal
oxides and sulfides (e.g., ZnO, Fe2O3, TiO2, SnO2, CdS, ZnS, GaP, etc.) due to their size
(quantum size effect)-dependent optical and electronic properties
have been extensively used in heterogeneous photocatalysis processes
for this purpose.1 These processes have
some advantages, such as ambient operating temperature and pressure,
complete mineralization, and low operating cost. But semiconductor
photocatalysts used are not very stable under light in aqueous medium
and thus can lead to corrosion, thereby causing metal toxicity, and
the typical examples are low-band-gap transition-metal sulfides.1

Among transition-metal sulfides, CdS is
an excellent semiconductor
material with a direct band gap of 2.42 eV with many outstanding physical
and chemical properties, as well as diverse applications in multiple
technical fields, including photochemical catalysis, gas sensor, detectors
for laser and infrared, solar cells, nonlinear optical materials,
various luminescence devices, and optoelectronic devices.47−51 However, the difficulties due to postseparation, agglomeration,
and low solar energy conversion efficiency due to high recombination
rate of photogenerated electron–hole pairs of CdS nanoparticles
have limited the large-scale applications of CdS nanoparticles. Therefore,
to overcome these problems, CdS nanoparticles are immobilized on different
types of matrix, e.g., cellulose, polymers, zeolites, porous alumina,
carbon materials, and microporous MOFs.52−57 However, there is a plenty of scope to explore the fabrication strategy
and multiple potential applications of CdS-based photocatalysts. So
far, there has been no report to describe the antibacterial and photocatalytic
activities (for degradation of methylene blue) of CdSNPs@MOF hybrid
structures. Herein, we report, for the first time, an encapsulation
strategy that allows CdS bare nanoparticles (average size ≈
16.34 nm) without any capping agent to be incorporated within matrices
of a readily synthesized zeolitic imidazolate framework material ZIF-8
by in situ successive addition of the suspension of CdS nanoparticles
in methanol during continuous formation of surfaces of the growing
ZIF-8 crystals. ZIF-8 has been chosen as a host to encapsulate semiconductor
CdS nanoparticles due to its known chemical robustness and thermal
stability,11,15 and it has sodalite zeolite-type
structure with large cavities (11.6 A°) and small apertures (3.4
A°). However, core–shell CdS@ZIF-8 structures have been
very recently prepared46 by a two-step
method, in which poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP)-stabilized CdSNPs (average
size ≈70–210 nm) were presynthesized and ZIF-8 shells
were grown on the surfaces of the CdS cores, and ZIF-8 has been selectively
used for photocatalytic H2 generation from formic acid. The main limitation of this report is that it does not deal with
many important parameters of composite, such as optical band gap,
thermal and chemical stabilities, surface area and binding energy
of various constituents by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
studies, and other potential applications of ZIF-8 in the biological
field, where none of such type of core–shell composites has
been tested against microbes so far (Table 1).

The present study provides a simple
and efficient route for the
preparation of CdSNPs@ZIF-8 multi-core–shell nanocomposites
by in situ encapsulation of different amounts of CdS nanoparticles
within ZIF-8. These nanocomposites have been characterized by Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD),
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), field emission scanning electron
microscopy (FE-SEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(HRTEM), and UV diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS). For the first
time, we report herein photoinduced antibacterial activity against
green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing Escherichia
coli and Staphylococcus aureus and the photocatalytic efficiency of CdSNPs@ZIF-8 against methylene
blue (organic dye) at different conditions by varying parameters such
as pH, initial dye concentration, and photocatalyst amount under UV–visible
light irradiation.

Results and Discussion
Characterization of CdSNPs,
ZIF-8, and CdSNPs@ZIF-8 Composites
Three core–shell
composites have been synthesized by in situ encapsulation of different amounts
of CdSNPs (NC-1: 150 μL suspension; NC-2: 300 μL suspension;
NC-3: 500 μL suspension) in ZIF-8 matrices at room temperature.
All of the composites are chemically stable as well as in air, as
evident in Figure S1 in the Supporting Information. These composites have
been characterized by PXRD, FTIR, FE-SEM, HRTEM, and diffuse reflectance
spectrophotometric techniques. Since NC-1 (prepared by using 150 μL
suspension of CdSNPs) exhibited maximum photocatalytic efficiency,
its XPS image was recorded and analyzed, and NC-1 was also used to
study the effects of all parameters for photodegradation of methylene
blue dye. The crystalline phase of the as-synthesized CdSNPs was examined
by PXRD (Figure 1a).
The PXRD pattern of CdSNPs having major peaks at 2θ = 26.69°
(111), 44.03° (220), and 51.82° (311) was indexed with CdS
cubic with space group F4̅3m (JCPDS No. 00-042-1411). The mean particle size of CdSNPs was calculated
using the Scherrer equation (eq 1) to be 3.4 nm. 1  where τ is the mean particle size, λ
is the X-ray wavelength, β is the full width at half-maximum
intensity in radians, and θ is the Bragg angle in degrees.

Figure 1 PXRD patterns
of (a) CdSNPs and (b) ZIF-8, NC-1 (CdSNPs@ZIF-8 (150
μL)), NC-2 (CdSNPs@ZIF-8 (300 μL)), and NC-3 (CdSNPs@ZIF-8
(500 μL)).

The PXRD patterns of
synthesized ZIF-8 and multi-core–shell
composites prepared by in situ encapsulation of 150, 300, and 500
μL suspensions of CdSNPs are shown in Figure 1b. The peaks in the diffraction patterns
of ZIF-8 and all three composites at 7.08, 10.15, 12.49, 14.48, 16.25,
and 17.77° correspond to the planes (011), (022), (112), (022),
(013), and (222).46 It was observed that
the crystallinity of ZIF-8 remains unchanged in the composites and
characteristic peaks of CdS nanoparticles are not observed in their
PXRD patterns, which indicates the proper encapsulation of CdS nanoparticles
within the ZIF-8 matrix. Further, the PXRD pattern of the composite
prepared by 150 μL suspension of CdSNPs after its use (say five
cycles) also remains unchanged, indicating its remarkable stability
and reusability (Figure S1).

Analysis
of the XPS image of CdSNPs@ZIF-8 (150 μL) (NC-1:
prepared by using 150 μL suspension of CdSNPs) indicates the
presence of electronic states of constituents58 (Figure 2a). The
expanded XPS images of the close fitting of each metal with their
orbital position, viz., Cd 3d5/2, Zn 2p3/2,
C 1s, N 1s, and S 2p, are shown in Figure 2b. The XPS peaks of Zn 2p3/2 and
Zn 2p1/2 are very intense and narrow, having binding energies
of 1020.82 and 1043.95 eV, respectively, whereas Zn 3s, Zn 3p3/2, and Zn 3d3/2 or Zn 3d5/2 peaks are
less intense and narrow, having low binding energies of 138.6, 88.08,
and 9.62 eV, respectively. The XPS peaks of Cd 3d5/2 and
N 1s are narrow, having very close binding energies of 398.08 and
398.02 eV, respectively. But Cd 3p1/2 with binding energy
of 652.0 eV is broad and very less intense. The C 1s and S 2p1/2 XPS peaks correspond to binding energies of 284.89 and
163.96 eV (with respect to metal sulfide).58

Figure 2 (a)
XPS image of CdSNPs@ZIF-8 (150 μL) (NC-1). (b) Expanded XPS images corresponding
to Zn 2p3/2 (i), N 1s (ii), C 1s (iii), Cd 3d5/2 (iv), and S 2p1/2 (v) of NC-1.

Almost similar stretching frequency characteristics of the
imidazole
ring are observed in the FTIR spectra of ZIF-8 and CdSNPs@ZIF-8 composites
(Figure S2).59,45 The FTIR spectrum
of CdSNPs shows stretching bands at 600–750, 750–1000,
1430, and 1620 cm–1 corresponding to C–C,
C–O, C–H (O–H bending), and CO2. The
hydrogen-bonded stretching at 3200–3600 cm–1 is due to intermolecular hydrogen bonds of water due to moisture.
The Cd–S stretching vibration should be found at 410 cm–1 but could not be observed here. The encapsulation
of CdSNPs within ZIF-8 did not shift any of the ZIF-8 peaks in notable
extent from its position. In the Raman spectrum of CdSNPs (Figure 3a), peaks with decreasing
order of intensity at 303, 604, and 904 cm–1 are
observed due to the first-, second-, and third-order longitudinal
optical phonon vibrational modes, respectively. But these are not
observed in NC-1 due to the very small amount of encapsulated CdSNPs
within ZIF-8, which may affect the phonon spectra due to confinement
of both optical phonons and acoustic phonons.60 The probable coupling of phonon vibrational modes of CdS with those
of ZIF-8 may be assumed to be another important reason of its nonexistence
in the spectrum.

Figure 3 Raman spectra of (a) CdSNPs and (b) ZIF-8 and NC-1.

The morphological investigations
of CdSNPs, ZIF-8, and NC-1 were
carried out by FE-SEM (Figure S3) and HRTEM
(Figure 4). Smooth
and round-shaped agglomerated nanoparticles of CdS can be seen from
its FE-SEM and TEM images (Figures S3a and 4a). The average particle size of CdS calculated
using ImageJ software from HRTEM images was 7.2 ± 1.59 nm (particle
size distribution plot is shown in Figure S4a). The crystals of ZIF-8 and NC-1 have hexagonal morphology. It is
observed that the morphology of ZIF-8 crystal is not affected by the
encapsulation of CdS nanoparticles and also that there is no CdS nanoparticle
on the surface of ZIF-8, which suggests the proper encapsulation of
CdSNPs within the ZIF-8 matrix. Further, encapsulated CdSNPs are clearly
evidenced as dark spots within the ZIF-8 crystal in HRTEM images.
Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of NC-1 (Figure 4f) indicates polycrystalline
rings, which correspond to the planes of CdSNPs (Figure 4c) and further support the
encapsulation of CdSNPs within the ZIF-8 matrix/crystal. Elemental
mapping of NC-1 (Figure S5) shows the concentration
and distribution of elements indicating multicores of CdS into ZIF-8.
The average particle size of encapsulated core CdS nanoparticles into
the ZIF-8 matrix calculated using ImageJ software from HRTEM images
was 16.34 nm (plot is shown in Figure S4b). FE-SEM (Figure S6a) and HRTEM (Figure S6b) images of NC-1 after its use in photocatalytic
reaction remain unchanged, which further indicates its remarkable
stability and reusability.

Figure 4 (a) TEM image, (b) HRTEM image, and (c) SAED
pattern of CdSNPs.
(d, e) TEM images of NC-1 at different magnifications and (f) SAED
pattern of NC-1.

The energy band gap plays
a key role in determining the optical
properties of materials, which was determined by the UV-DRS spectra
of CdSNPs, ZIF-8, NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3 (Figure 5a). The indirect band gap values of CdSNPs,
ZIF-8 and NC-1 were determined by the Tauc method (Figure 5b) to be 2.20 and 5.24 eV for
CdSNPs and ZIF-8, respectively. Further, the Tauc plot of NC-1 showed
two band gaps, one at 2.95 eV due to encapsulated CdSNPs in ZIF-8
and the other at 5.10 eV of shell material (ZIF-8). Furthermore, in
the case of NC-1, the absorption of light was also increased in the
visible range. Reflectance spectra of CdSNPs, ZIF-8, NC-1, NC-2, and
NC-3 are also shown in Figure S7.

Figure 5 (a) UV–visible
DRS spectra of CdSNPs (inset), ZIF-8, NC-1,
NC-2, and NC-3. (b) Typical Tauc plots of CdSNPs, ZIF-8, and NC-1
(CdS@ZIF-8 (150 μL)) by indirect method.

Thermal stabilities of ZIF-8 and NC-1 are compared by thermogravimetric
analysis (Figure S8a,b). Both compounds
were found to be highly stable in nitrogen up to 450 °C and decompose
to give a plateau at 700–800 °C (wt % remained at 35.10–34.96
and 36.30–35.62%, respectively). The slightly higher wt % in
NC-1 is due to encapsulated CdSNPs. On the other hand, both were found
to be comparatively less stable under air, and decomposition started
at 350 °C (wt % remained at 96.92 and 95.82%, respectively).
Further, NC-1 decomposed slightly faster than ZIF-8 and both reached
a plateau at 635 °C (wt % remained at 35.87 and 35.22%, respectively)
(Figure S8b). The faster decomposition
of composite may be due to CdS cores, which may oxidize to CdO at
lower temperature than the breakdown temperature of ZIF-8.

Surface
analysis was performed by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
(BET) N2 adsorption–desorption studies (Figure 6). It is observed
that as-synthesized CdSNPs have surface area of 34.51 m2/g, pore volume of 0.005 cm3/g, and average pore size
of 29.83 Å. Further, it is evident that both ZIF-8 and NC-1 have
an almost same surface area, which suggests that CdS nanoparticles
are not actually inside the pores of the ZIF-8 framework but ZIF-8
shell is grown over the CdSNPs core. There is a large decrease in
the pore size of NC-1 (11.62 Å) compared to ZIF-8 (36.27 Å),
but a slight increase in pore volume in NC-1 is observed (Table S1 in the Supporting Information).

Figure 6 BET surface
area and average pore size distribution of (a) CdSNPs,
(b) ZIF-8, and (c) NC-1.

Photodegradation Studies of Methylene Blue
Effect of CdSNPs Encapsulation
The photocatalytic performance
of the catalysts, including CdSNPs, ZIF-8, and all three composites,
i.e., NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3, for degradation of methylene blue (MB)
(10 ppm) at pH 6.85, has been investigated spectrophotometrically,
and the results (% adsorption for time length: 60 min and % photodegradation
after 120 min and total dye removal) are given in Table S2, and the plot of (C/C0) versus time is shown in Figure 7. There is no major difference in % photodegradation
of MB using three different composites, which indicates that the amount
of encapsulated CdSNPs in the ZIF-8 matrix has not a significant effect
on its photodegradation efficiency. There is ca. 2–3% decrease
with an increase in the encapsulated amount of CdSNPs, which may be
attributed to a small degree of agglomeration of CdSNPs. At higher
CdS concentration, deactivation of CdSNPs may also occur through collision
to some extent, which may also decrease degradation rate (CdS* + CdS →
CdS# + CdS, where CdS* and CdS# are activated
and deactivated species, respectively).45 Further, % adsorption remains almost unchanged with an increase
in the amount of encapsulated CdSNPs within ZIF-8. Detailed studies
by varying the amount of photocatalysts, pH, and the initial concentration
of MB were carried out using the composite prepared by adding 150
μL suspension of CdSNPs (NC-1), which are discussed in the following
subsections.

Figure 7 Photocatalytic performance of all catalysts, i.e., CdSNPs,
ZIF-8,
NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3; [MB] = 10 ppm; pH, 6.85; photocatalyst amount,
10 mg.

Effect of Initial pH
To study the effect of variation
of pH, the photocatalytic degradation experiment was carried out at
pHs 3.0, 6.85 (already reported in the previous section), and 11.0
(Figure 8), and the
results are reported in Table S3. The initial
pH of the dye is an important factor that influences its adsorption
and photodegradation reactions due to change in the surface charge
properties of the photocatalyst, size of aggregates formed, and also
the ions formed, which are responsible for photodegradation.45 It can be clearly seen that as the initial pH
of dye solution increases, both adsorption and total % of dye removal
increase. It is well established that hydroxyl radical (•OH) is the major reactive species in oxidative degradation of MB.2 Therefore, at higher pH (say 11.0), the increased
OH– concentration is the possible reason for higher
degradation efficiency of all of the catalysts studied. Further, there
is a marginal difference in the total % of dye removal at pH 11 using
ZIF-8 and NC-1, but at pH 6.85, NC-1 (83.2%) is a better photocatalyst
than ZIF-8 (76.6%), whereas no change is observed using NC-1 at pHs
6.85 and 11.0.

Figure 8 Effect of pH for adsorption and photodegradation of [MB]
= 10 ppm:
(a) at pH 3.0 and (b) at pH 11.0.

Effect of Catalyst Amount
The influence of catalyst
dosage on the degradation of methylene blue at pH 11.0 is shown in Figure 9, and the results
are depicted in Table S4. The total % degradation
of MB is almost same for 5 mg (83%) and 10 mg (84%) of the catalyst
and then it decreases to 78% for 15 mg of the catalyst. This decrease
may occur due to the interaction between the particles (agglomeration
and sedimentation), which can form clusters of catalyst particles,
thus reducing the overall surface area and number of active sites
for catalytic performance. This study concludes that 5 mg of photocatalyst
(NC-1) is optimum for degradation of 10 mL of MB (10 ppm) at pH 11.0.

Figure 9 Effect
of catalyst (NC-1) amount on photodegradation of [MB] =
10 ppm at pH 11.0.

Effect of Initial Concentration
of MB
The initial dye
concentration is another important parameter in the degradation study
of MB. The corresponding results are presented in Table S5 and Figure 10. It was observed that the color disappeared and photocatalytic
degradation was 93.2% for the initial concentration of MB = 5 ppm
by using NC-1, and the % dye degradation decreased as the initial
dye concentration increased to 10 and 15 ppm. This can be attributed
to the fact that at higher concentration, the dye molecules are adsorbed
on the surface of the catalyst, which hinders the direct interaction
of light with photocatalyst to generate comparatively less reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and hence decreases the efficiency of the photocatalyst.
UV–visible spectra for various experiments are shown in Figures S9.1–S9.6.

Figure 10 Effect of initial concentration
of MB: (a) [MB] = 5 ppm and (b)
[MB] = 15 ppm; catalyst amount = 5 mg.

Mechanism of Photodegradation of MB
The mechanism of
photocatalysis of multi-core–shell composite NC-1 comprises
the synergetic effect of CdSNPs core and microporous ZIF-8 shell.
Upon the absorption of visible light, e– and h+ pairs are generated in the conduction band (CB) and valance
band (VB) of CdSNPs, which can either recombine or undergo interfacial
electron-transfer processes. CdSNPs are good visible-light absorbents,
but rapid recombination of e– and h+ is
a problem, which is solved here by encapsulating them within the ZIF-8
matrix, which acts as a co-catalyst. The e– can
transfer to the surface of the ZIF-8 shell, thus reducing the recombination
rate. Further, the e– and h+ combine
with O2 and OH–, respectively, giving
rise to reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as •OH, •O2–, and H2O2, for degradation of MB. Photoluminescence (PL)
spectra of ZIF-8, NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3 were obtained with an excitation
wavelength of 240 nm. All of the compounds show broad emission spectra
(456–506 nm) with maximum intensity around 482 nm (Figure 11). It is a well-established
fact that PL intensity is a gauge of electron–hole recombination
rate. A high PL intensity indicates higher recombination rate, causing
electron–hole separation for less time, and a lower intensity
suggests low recombination rate, i.e., higher electron–hole
separation time, which is a major factor for photocatalytic reactions. As it can be seen from Figure 11, NC-2 has the highest PL intensity, suggesting higher
electron–hole recombination rate and the corresponding values
of ZIF-8 and NC-3 are comparable and quite higher than that of NC-1,
which shows the lowest PL intensity, indicating longer electron–hole
separation time, which provides evidence for its higher photocatalytic
efficiency.

Figure 11 Photoluminescence spectra of ZIF-8, NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3
at room
temperature (excitation wavelength, 240 nm).

At pH ≥ 7, the active species responsible for degradation
of MB are the hydroxyl radicals (•OH), which mainly
influence the efficiency of photocatalysts and can be determined by
fluorescence intensity measurements of terephthalic acid (0.5 mM)
excited at 315 nm. The fluorescence spectral changes have been recorded
in the presence and absence of photocatalysts under visible light
(Figure 12). It has
been observed that ZIF-8 and NC-1 favor the formation of •OH because there is a sharp increase in the fluorescence intensity
with time, whereas there is almost negligible change when CdSNPs are
used. It can clearly be seen that NC-1 produced •OH more effectively, suggesting its greater photocatalytic efficiency
compared to ZIF-8. The probable photodegradation mechanism of MB is
shown in Figure 13.

Figure 12 Fluorescence spectral changes of terephthalic acid (0.5 mM; NaOH
2 mM) (a) without catalyst; (b) in the presence of CdSNPs; (c) in
the presence of ZIF-8; and (d) in the presence of NC-1 (excitation
at 315 nm, under visible light).

Figure 13 Mechanism of photocatalytic activity of CdSNPs@ZIF-8 composite
for degradation of MB.

A scavenger study was performed to investigate the role of
active
oxygen species, which further leads to evaluation of possible degradation
pathway of MB. p-Benzoquinone (BQ, 2 mL of 2 mM solution),
ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) (33 mg), and t-BuOH (500 μL) were added to the photocatalytic system at pH
7 for trapping the active species •O2–, h+, and •OH, respectively
(Figure S10). The photodegradation of MB
significantly decreased in case of EDTA and t-BuOH,
whereas the addition of p-benzoquinone had apparently
no effect, suggesting that •O2– radical is readily reduced by H+ and e– to •OH free radicals. This experiment concluded
that h+ and •OH free radicals played
major role in photocatalysis.61

After
the photodegradation experiment, the byproducts and their
potential fragments were separated and analyzed by gas chromatography
(GC)–mass spectrometry (MS). The molecular ion peaks of degraded
intermediates are very small, indicating that their very small fraction
remained (after an irradiation period of 120 min) as they further
degraded into simpler molecules. Four major intermediates (Table S6 and Figures S11.1–S11.4) were
detected and analyzed, and the possible degradation pathway of MB
using NC-1 is depicted in Scheme 1. MB remained in ionized form in solution, and in the
next step, breaking of N–CH3 bonds occurs owing
to its low dissociation energy, and the methyl group is oxidized to
HCHO and HCOOH. Further, C–S and C–N bonds are dissociated
during the action of reactive oxygen species (O3, •OH, •O2).62 However, the complete mineralization of organic dye into
inorganic ions (CO2, NO3–,
SO42–, and NH4+ as ultimate end products) could take place after a long period of
irradiation as reported (say 1000 min).

Scheme 1 Proposed Photocatalytic
Degradation Pathway of MB Using NC-1
Antibacterial Studies
Optical Density (OD) Study
The growth
rate and cell
division upon the incubation of NC-1, NC-2, NC-3, ZIF-8, and CdSNPs
were readily revealed by optical density measurement at 600 nm for
both Gram-negative (GFP-expressing ampicillin resistant GFP) E. coli and Gram-positive S. aureus. Decreased viability was found in the NC-1 formulation-treated GFP E. coli cells compared to its contender. The lowest
concentration (150 μg/mL) of NC-1 showed 2.53 optical density
(OD), whereas its highest concentration of 700 μg/mL gave OD
0.3298 (Figure 14C)
upon its cellular uptake. The results indicate that the photocatalytic
activity of the NC-1 resulted in its bactericidal activity. The mechanistic
antibacterial potency of NC-1 may be due to the light-excited CdSNPs,
which eventually generate electrons and holes in the conduction band
(CB) and valence band (VB), respectively,63 and these activated holes and electrons react with intracellular
water molecules generating reactive oxygen species (ROS). This overproduced
intracellular ROS can detrimentally affect the cellular metabolism
and growth by increasing the oxidative stress, thereby affecting the
normal physiological functions of the cells. With 700 μg/mL
treatment of NC-2 and NC-3, we found the decrement in the OD up to
0.9696 and 0.6414, respectively. This clearly indicates that CdSNPs
addition above 150 μL within the ZIF-8 matrix does not increase
the efficiency. This might be due to the saturation of MOF against
CdS addition or the aggregation of CdSNPs to bigger ones, thereby
reducing effective surface area, and probably the molecular sieves
were well occupied upon 150 μL addition. Furthermore, the resulting
core–shell formulation reduces the dose of the CdS in the antibacterial
application. The optical density after incubation of the core–shell
composite resulted in less viability of Gram-negative GFP E. coli compared to Gram-positive S. aureus (Figure 14D). To determine that the cytotoxicity of the core–shell
composite is due to the light-illuminated CdS photocatalysis, we performed
a parallel set of both bacterial strains with the same concentration
of all composites and limited the light illumination by providing
a dark environment. This yields insignificant
cytotoxicity and even higher concentration of composites, which showed
the same viability as untreated control (data not shown).

Figure 14 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT)-based
cytotoxicity assessment of (A) GFP E. coli and (B) S. aureus. Optical density
measurement of (C) GFP E. coli and
(D) S. aureus against different concentrations
of NC-1, NC-2, NC-3, ZIF-8, and CdSNPs cells treated for 10 h. Tukey’s
multiple comparisons were used to analyze the statistical significance
between the groups (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.005, ***p < 0.001; NS, nonsignificant).
The values are represented as mean ± standard error of the mean
(S.E.M.) (n = 3).

MTT Assay
To critically evaluate the cytotoxicity of
composites quantitatively, MTT-based cytotoxic examination of both
GFP E. coli and S. aureus was carried out. The actively respiring cells after the treatment
provide viable results for the assay. As a result of optical density
measurements, significant cytotoxicity of the GFP E.
coli was fairly found with NC-1. The IC50 values of NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3 were obtained as 450, 600, and 550
μg/mL, respectively (Figure 14A). The light-induced bactericidal properties of all
three composites were quantitatively determined by this assay, which
indicates that NC-1 exhibits the best efficacy compared to the other
two. Furthermore, the MOF carrier (ZIF-8) shows insignificant toxicity
in the GFP E. coli because around 88%
of the cells were viable after higher-concentration (700 μg/mL)
treatment. The high biocompatibility of the MOF carrier (ZIF-8) suggests
that good characteristic carrier features are found in ZIF-8 for delivering
CdSNPs intracellularly. On the other hand, the CdS nanoparticles alone
cannot induce any mechanistic photodynamic bactericidal activity with
an 85% viability of the GFP E. coli in 700 μg/mL treatment. This is due to the poor aqueous solubility
of CdS nanoparticles (Figure S12 as reference)
and hence reduces its bare uses in the bacterial system directly.
The encapsulation of CdS nanoparticles within the ZIF-8 matrix increases
the efficacy of the antibacterial approach. The cytotoxicity was found
to be higher in Gram-negative GFP E. coli compared to Gram-positive S. aureus (Figure 14B). This
might be due to the Gram-negative bacteria holding a thin peptidoglycan
layer (7–8 nm thickness), whereas Gram-positive bacteria composed
of a thick peptidoglycan layer (20–80 nm)64 allow considerably better cellular uptake of the nanoparticles
into Gram-negative cells.

Fluorescence Spectroscopic
Analysis
Since the better
antibacterial activity of the composites was found in the GFP E. coli system, we further evaluated the GFP expression
by fluorescence spectroscopic studies. With the incubation of NC-1,
NC-2, and NC-3, a concentration-dependent decrement in the fluorescence
intensity of the GFP fluorescence clearly indicates the direct effect
of the photocatalysis of CdSNPs on cellular metabolism and division
(Figure 15ii–iv,
respectively) compared to untreated control (Figure 15i). Among all of the composites, NC-1 possesses
better activity by reduced GFP fluorescence. In the limelight of the
previous report,65 green fluorescent protein
(GFP) expression will be directly proportional to the number of healthy
and viable cells,66 and the assay further
confirms the photocatalytic activity of the composites. Again, the
carrier and bare CdSNPs do not significantly influence reduction in
the toxicity (Figure 15v,vi, respectively).

Figure 15 Fluorescence intensity estimation of GFP in GFP E. coli cells after 10 h incubation of (i) untreated
control; (ii–iv) NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3, respectively; (v) ZIF-8;
and (vi) CdSNPs with varying concentration.

Fluorescence and Optical Microscopic Imaging
Since
the cytotoxic activity of light-illuminated core–shell composites
was quantitatively depicted by optical density and MTT assay, the
qualitative antibacterial efficacy of the same on the GFP E. coli was measured by fluorescence microscopy of
GFP. On the counterpart, a Gram-stained optical microscopic study
was conducted on pretreated S. aureus (Figure S13). In the course of treatment,
considerable growth inhibition was microscopically evaluated by GFP
fluorescence and reduction in the number of cells. Figure 16 shows the untreated control
with bright green fluorescence of GFP, which gets reduced in a concentration-dependent
manner with NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3 incubation. But, ZIF-8 and bare CdSNPs
showed less or insignificant reduction in the GFP fluorescence and
cell number. According to our previous reports,67,68 reduction in GFP fluorescence and cell number indicates the cytotoxicity
upon treatment of the composites. In the Gram-staining of S. aureus, similar results during intersample comparison
(Figure 17) were obtained,
which further confirmed that cytotoxicity occurs in both Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria, which indicates the broad spectrum of
antibacterial activity of the composites.

Figure 16 Fluorescence micrographs
of GFP E. coli after 10 h treatment
of (i) untreated control; (ii–v) NC-1;
(vi–ix) NC-2; (x–xiii) NC-3; (xiv–xvii) ZIF-8;
and (xviii–xxi) CdSNPs with different concentrations of 150,
300, 500, and 700 mg/mL. The scale bar is 20 μm.

Figure 17 Gram-stained S. aureus cells
after
10 h treatment of (i) untreated control; (ii–v) NC-1; (vi–ix)
NC-2; (x–xiii) NC-3; (xiv–xvii) ZIF-8; and (xviii–xxi)
CdSNPs with different concentrations of 150, 300, 500, and 700 mg/mL.
The scale bar is 200 μm.

Disk Diffusion Assay
For the qualitative determination
of the antibacterial activity of the as-prepared composites against
the actively growing lawn of Gram-negative GFP E. coli and Gram-positive S. aureus bacteria,
disk diffusion assay was followed. Figure 18A shows that the GFP expression under the
UV illumination was found to be inhibited around the zone where the
composite diffuses circularly. NC-1 and NC-3 showed zones of inhibition
of 18.8 and 18.9 mm, respectively (Figure 18B), which correspondingly reestablish the
initial data of MTT and OD analysis. Lower zones of inhibition were
found for CdSNPs and ZIF-8. However, with S. aureus, we found lesser activity as expected. Figure 18C shows the zones of inhibition upon the
treatment of NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3 along with bare CdSNPs and carrier
ZIF-8 on S. aureus. Figure 18D reveals that the disk diffusion
results of S. aureus are the same as
those of GFP E. coli bacteria. While
comparing the activities of GFP E. coli and S. aureus, GFP E. coli showed maximum activity on NC-1. The more
zone of inhibition was considered as a better antibacterial strategic
inference.69

Figure 18 (A) UV-illuminated GFP E. coli cells
and (C) digital photograph of S. aureus cells in agar plate after 10 h incubation of (i) untreated control;
(ii–iv) NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3, respectively; (v) ZIF-8; and
(vi) CdSNPs and their respective zone of inhibition diameters of (B)
GFP E. coli and (D) S. aureus cells. The values are represented as mean
± S.E.M. (n = 3).

Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM) Analysis
The damage of bacterial cell membrane after the progression of
all of the samples was micrographed by FE-SEM to extend the proof
for material-induced bacterial killing. This assay enables us to understand
the cellular uptake and the interactions of composite particles with
GFP E. coli and S. aureus cells. Figure 19A indicates that after the exposure of all three composites, ZIF-8,
CdSNPs, and most of GFP E. coli cells
lost their cellular integrity and achieved a burst structure, which
dictates the cellular death upon treatment70 with respect to control. The irreversible destruction found on bacterial
cells due to direct interaction with NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3 relates
material-induced toxicity,71 whereas CdSNPs
and ZIF-8 carriers showed no such characteristic changes. With S. aureus cells, less cytotoxicity compared to GFP E. coli was obtained, similar to previous results.
Furthermore, elemental analysis through energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX) of FE-SEM revealed
the presence of cadmium (Cd) and sulfur (S) in GFP E. coli and S. aureus cell surfaces (Figure S14).

Figure 19 Field emission
scanning electron micrograph of (A) GFP E. coli cells and (B) S. aureus cells with
10 h incubation of (i) untreated control; (ii–iv)
NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3, respectively; (e) ZIF-8; and (f) CdSNPs. The
scale bar is 1 μM.

Flow Cytometry for ROS Induction Assay
Intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) induction was considered as the main
mechanistic cytotoxicity evaluating factor in the light-induced photocatalysis
of the composites.72 Upon light excitation,
the band gap of CdS resulted in the generation of holes/electrons,
which further react with intracellular water and oxygen molecules
to yield highly dynamic reactive oxygen species (•OH, •O2–).73 The latter induce offense to the bacterial cells by interfering
with the genomic and plasmid DNA replication, protein interaction,
cell membrane disintegration, and so on.74 The intracellular generation of ROS upon treatment with all three
composites was determined quantitatively by CellROX Deep Red fluorescence
intensity in a flow cytometer and qualitatively by fluorescent microscopy.
Also, we conducted a same study on the carrier (ZIF-8) and CdSNPs
alone to evaluate the ROS induction upon incubation of both. Initially,
CellROX Deep Red will result in no or insignificant fluorescence in
the reduced state. During the ROS generation, the CellROX Deep Red
will eventually be oxidized by the ROS molecules, which result in
the increased red fluorescence of the same.

So, more fluorescence
can eventually confirm more ROS production.74Figure 20A-i,B-i
shows the flow cytometry data and red fluorescence microscopic image,
respectively, for the untreated control. Less red fluorescence undoubtedly
suggests no significant ROS generation during the culture condition.
Furthermore, flow cytometry data revealed only 1.05% of the ROS generated
population, which can be negated due to some intracellular oxidizing
agents as a noise. Figure 20A-ii suggests an increment of 17.62 times with respect to
the control in the fluorescence intensity using NC-1, while Figure 20B-ii indicates
the ROS generated by NC-1 with bright red fluorescence of oxidized
CellROX Deep Red. Likewise, Figure 20A-iii,B-iii dictates ROS generated by NC-2, showing
a 6.44 times increment, while Figure 20A-iv,B-iv shows 3.64 times increment in fluorescence
intensity using NC-3. ZIF-8 displayed around 2.38 (Figure 20A-v,B-v) and finally 1.71
times escalation in the fluorescence intensity (Figure 20A-vi,B-vi) for CdSNPs alone.
The results readily confirm that the ROS induction occurred by CdS
photocatalysis.

Figure 20 (A) CellROX Deep Red Fluorescence quantification by flow
cytometer
and (B) fluorescence microscopic images of (i) untreated control;
(ii–iv) NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3, respectively; (e) ZIF-8; and
(f) CdSNP-treated samples. The scale bar is 20 μm.

Conclusions
Multifunctional core–shell
composites CdSPNs@ZIF-8 prepared
by in situ encapsulation of different amounts of CdSNPs are thermally
and chemically stable and retained the same crystal structure and
morphology of ZIF-8. The composite (NC-1) prepared using 150 μL
suspension of CdSNPs in methanol exhibits higher photocatalytic activity
for the degradation of methylene blue under UV–visible light
irradiations and can be reused successfully after five cycles. Further,
NC-1, NC-2, and NC-3 showed a broad spectrum of photoinduced bactericidal
activity against both GFP E. coli and S. aureus, as evident by various biophysical methods.
It has been found that NC-1 exhibited the highest antibacterial activity
compared to NC-2 and NC-3, and also, it is more effective in killing
the GFP E. coli than S. aureus. Further, ZIF-8 and CdSNPs alone do not
exhibit significant antibacterial activity, which clearly suggests
that photoinduced bactericidal activity of the core–shell composite
is due to the synergetic effect. These results emphasized the potential
use of CdSPNs@ZIF-8 for the removal/degradation of organic pollutants
and the decontamination of wastewater contaminated by Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria utilizing UV–visible irradiations.
And it can provide a better solution to environmental problems by
industries, especially water pollution.

Experimental Section
Materials
Cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate, sodium hydroxide,
methanol, sodium sulfide, acetone, 2-methylimidazole, anhydrous zinc
chloride, and methylene blue were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and
used without further purification. Bacterial culture media including
Luria–Bertani (LB) and nutrient broth were procured from HiMedia
(India). Ampicillin was obtained from SRL (India). CellROX Deep Red
was obtained from Invitrogen. All other chemicals used were of analytical
grade and dissolved in Milli-Q water unless otherwise stated.

Synthesis
of CdS Nanoparticles
A mixture of aqueous
solution of sodium hydroxide (50 mL, 0.1 M) and methanol (50 mL) was
added dropwise to an aqueous solution of Cd(NO3)2·4H2O (0.085 M in 50 mL) with stirring, which was
continued for 3 h. To this, an aqueous solution of sodium sulfide
(0.1 M, 100 mL) was added dropwise with vigorous stirring, and the
solution was stirred for additional 5 h to obtain a yellowish-green
solution. It was kept overnight, and the yellow precipitate thus obtained
was washed three to four times with water and acetone and dried in
an oven at 70 °C for 4 h.75

Synthesis
of ZIF-8 and CdSNPs@ZIF-8 Composites by Encapsulation
of Different Amounts of CdSNPs
ZIF-8 was synthesized at room
temperature using the previously reported method15,59 by interacting zinc chloride (anhydrous) and 2-methylimidazole.
Zinc chloride (anhydrous: 0.341 g; 2.5 mmol) and 2-methylimidazole
(1.642 g; 20 mmol) were dissolved separately in methanol (20 mL).
The solution of 2-methylimidazole was taken in a narrow stationary
reaction vial, to which zinc chloride solution was added very slowly
without disturbing the interface. The reaction mixture was allowed
to stand for 24 h and then centrifuged, washed several times with
methanol, and dried in vacuo at 70 °C. A white crystalline product
was collected and stored in an air-tight glass container.

A
similar protocol was followed for the synthesis of three different
CdSNPs@ZIF-8 core–shell composites by in situ encapsulation
of different amounts of as-synthesized CdSNPs during the formation
of ZIF-8. During careful mixing of methanol solutions of zinc chloride
anhydrous (0.341 g, 2.5 mmol) and 2-methylimidazole (1.642 g, 20 mmol)
at room temperature, 150 μL of the suspension of CdSNPs (10
mg), sonicated in 10 mL of methanol for 1 h, was added to the above
reaction mixture at certain intervals of time in smaller volume. A
white turbidity appeared instantly, and the reaction mixture was allowed
to stand for 24 h without disturbing the interface. The solution was
centrifuged, washed with methanol several times, and dried in vacuo
at 70 °C for 6 h. The composite was collected and stored in an
air-tight container. A similar procedure was adopted for the encapsulation
of different amounts of CdSNPs using 300 and 500 μL suspensions
of CdS nanoparticles.

Characterization of CdSNPs, ZIF-8, and CdSNPs@ZIF-8
Composites
Infrared spectra were recorded in the range of
400–4000
cm–1 on an FTIR Nicolet 6700 Nexus spectrometer
using KBr disks. The thermal behaviors of ZIF-8 and CdSNPs@ZIF-8 were
studied using a PerkinElmer Pyris Diamond TGA/DTA 6300 instrument.
First, 5–10 mg of sample was heated under nitrogen and air
separately with a flow rate of 200 mL/min, in the temperature range
of 30–1000 °C, and at a heating rate of 10 °C/min.
Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of CdS, ZIF-8, and CdSNPs@ZIF-8
were obtained using Bruker D8 Advance with Cu Kα (λ =
1.54056 A°) between 2θ values of 5 and 80° at a scan
rate of 1°/min. A Carl Zeiss ULTRA Plus field emission scanning
electron microscope operating at 15 kV was used for the morphological
analysis of the samples. The samples were prepared by sonicating in
methanol for 2 h. Then, 20 μL of the suspension was taken on
a very small and well-cleaned glass slide. The slide was dried in
vacuum for 30 min at 50 °C. TEM analysis was carried out on a
FEI Tecnai G2 20S-TWIN electron microscope operating at an acceleration
voltage of 200 kV. A very small amount of sample (1 mg) was dispersed
in ethanol by sonication for 30 min. A drop of each of the suspensions
was put on carbon-coated copper grid and dried in air. The crystalline
nature of the samples was analyzed by selected area electron diffraction
(SAED). The optical properties of the samples were analyzed by UV–vis
diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS). The DRS spectra were recorded
on a Shimadzu UV-2450 UV–vis spectrophotometer in the wavelength
range of 200–800 nm with powder samples, and BaSO4 was used as a reference. Electronic absorbance spectra for the study
of the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue aqueous solution
were recorded on a Shimadzu 2450 UV–vis spectrophotometer in
the wavelength range of 200–800 nm. The surface area, pore
size, and pore volume of the samples were analyzed by a Nova Station
A instrument at 77 K using liquid N2 as the coolant. The
surface area of the samples was calculated by observing BET adsorption
and desorption isotherms. The fluorescence and photoluminescence studies
were performed on a HORIBA Scientific FluoroMax-4 spectrofluorometer.

Adsorption and Photocatalytic Degradation of Methylene Blue
To study the adsorption and photodegradation of aqueous solution
of methylene blue (10 mL; 10 ppm), 10 mg of CdS, ZIF-8, or CdSNPs@ZIF-8
composite was added to the dye solution, which was first kept and
sonicated in the dark for 1 h to establish the adsorption–desorption
equilibrium and then exposed to constant UV–visible radiations
emitted from a 500 W halogen discharge lamp at room temperature. During
the photodegradation reaction, stirring was continued to keep the
catalyst in suspension, which was kept at a distance of 20 cm from
the light source. At regular intervals, a small aliquot of solution
was taken out and centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 10 min, followed
by recording of the absorbance of MB at 663 nm. The percentage degradation
of the dye was calculated using the following equation (eq 2) 2  where C is the concentration
at a given interval of time and C0 is
the initial concentration of the dye.

To investigate the effects
of various parameters, such as the initial pH of the dye solution,
photocatalyst amount, amount of CdSNPs encapsulated within ZIF-8,
and the initial concentration of the dye, only one parameter was varied
at a time in the experiments while keeping others constant.

Fluorescence
Study and Role of •OH
Hydroxyl radicals
(•OH) are very important and
crucial active species for degradation of organic pollutants (dyes,
PAH, etc.) generated by light in the aqueous medium. Terephthalic
acid can be used as •OH quencher, which effectively
and selectively combines with •OH, yielding 2-hydroxy
terephthalic acid (35%), which produces fluorescence at 425 nm when
excited at 315 nm. Thus, the yield of generated •OH can be determined by fluorescence spectral changes.45 The experimental procedures were similar to
those used for the measurement of the above photocatalytic experiments.
An aqueous solution containing 0.5 mM terephthalic acid and 2 mM NaOH
in 100 mL of double-distilled water was prepared and used instead
of MB solution. A small aliquot was extracted every 20 min up to 2
h, and fluorescence spectra were recorded using a HORIBA Scientific
FluoroMax-4 fluorescence spectrophotometer in the wavelength range
of 200–800 nm using excitation wavelength of 315 nm.

Antibacterial
Study: Bacterial Culture
For the antibacterial
study, green fluorescent protein (GFP)-integrated recombinant strain
of E. coli was developed as described76 and cultured in ampicillin-controlled LB medium.
Also, S. aureus (MTCC 737) was procured
from IMTECH, India. All of the bacterial assays were performed at
exponential phase only. The bacterial suspensions were grown in an
incubator provided with 37 °C and 220 rpm. During the nanoformulation
treatment procedure, two external light-emitting diode lamps (825
lumens each) were provided for photocatalytic reaction to take place.

Optical Density (OD) Studies
In vitro evaluation of
light-induced antibacterial activity of the nanoformulations (typically,
CdSNPs@ZIF-8 (150 μL) (abbreviated as NC-1), CdSNPs@ ZIF-8 (300
μL) (abbreviated as NC-2), CdSNPs@ZIF-8 (500 μL) (abbreviated
as NC-3), ZIF-8, and CdSNPs) after a course of 10 h incubation was
conducted in Gram-positive S. aureus and Gram-negative GFP-expressing E. coli and the optical density (OD) was measured at 600 nm. Briefly, the
secondary culture of the bacterial cells was treated with the nanoformulations
at various concentrations (150, 300, 500, and 700 μg/mL) along
with an untreated control for 10 h. The OD was measured in a UV–visible
spectrophotometer (Lasany double-beam L1 2800) at 600 nm.

MTT Assay
The cytotoxicity due to nanoformulations
treatment was colorimetrically quantified with mitochondrial probe
MTT on bacterial cells.77 In a typical
reaction, 50 μL of different concentrations of nanoformulations
preincubated with bacteria was transferred into a 96-well plate. This
was followed by addition of 10 μL of yellow MTT and incubation
for 3 h. The formation of purple formazan was confirmed by microscopic
visualization. Later, 100 μL of dimethyl sulfoxide was added
to each well to solubilize the crystals. The absorbance at 570 nm
was measured in a multimode microplate reader (BioTek, Cytation 3).
The cell viability was calculated by the following equation (eq 3) 3  

Fluorescence Spectroscopic Analysis
The GFP fluorescence
of E. coli was quantified using a fluorescence
spectrophotometer (Hitachi F-4600) with an excitation wavelength of
410 nm, emission wavelength range of 465–800 nm, and a scan
speed of 240 nm/min.

Fluorescence and Optical Microscopic Image
Analyses
Concentration-dependent cytotoxicity upon treatment
with nanoformulations
was qualitatively determined by fluorescence microscopy. Typically,
5 μL of the nanoformulation (NC-1, NC-2, NC-3, ZIF-8, and CdSNPs)
and treated and untreated control GFP E. coli bacteria were taken and smeared over microscopic glass slides. This
smear was later visualized under a fluorescence microscope (Nikon
Eclipse LV100) having B-2A filter for GFP excitation at a wavelength
of 450–490 nm. Similarly, S. aureus was heat-fixed and Gram-stained to capture the image under bright
field.

Disk Diffusion Assay
The antibacterial potential of
nanoformulations was further qualitatively determined by the Kirby–Bauer
disk diffusion method. Initially, overnight-grown agar culture lawn
of both GFP E. coli (ampicillin-positive)
and S. aureus was prepared. This was
incubated with 500 μg of nanoformulations impregnated in a sterile
Whatman No. 1 filter paper with a disk diameter of 13 mm over the
culture lawn. After 10 h incubation, the plates were UV-illuminated
for GFP fluorescence of GFP E. coli and photographed by Bio-Rad Gel Doc XR+ apparatus. On the other
hand, direct digital imaging was done for S. aureus. These photographs were used for measuring the zone of inhibition.

Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM) Analysis
The morphological changes after the course of incubation of nanoformulations
on the bacterial cells were visualized by field emission microscopy.
After treatment, 10 μL of different nanoformulations-treated
and GFP E. coli and S. aureus cells were drawn on a square-shaped glass
slide. Further, gold was sputtered in a Denton gold sputtering unit
and visualized by a Carl Zeiss ULTRA Plus field emission scanning
electron microscope (FE-SEM) operating at 10 kV.

Flow Cytometry
for Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Induction Assay
Intracellular
ROS induction upon incubation with nanoformulations
was quantitatively estimated by flow cytometry of CellROX Deep Red
fluorescence intensity. First, the preincubated cells of E. coli and S. aureus were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline and allowed for incubation
of CellROX Deep Red following the manufacturer’s protocol (5
μM working concentration of CellROX Deep Red). This was followed
by fixation of cells with 3% paraformaldehyde. Flow cytometry was
performed in Amnis FlowSight. The obtained results were analyzed using
IDEAS software.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00664.PXRD patterns
of ZIF-8 and NC-1 after five cycles of
photocatalysis and NC-1 after keeping it in water for 1 year; FTIR
spectra of CdS, ZIF-8, NC-1, NC-2, NC-3, and NC-1 after photocatalysis;
FE-SEM images of CdSNPs, ZIF-8, and NC-1; particle size distribution
plot; elemental mapping of NC-1; FE-SEM and TEM images of NC-1 after
photocatalysis; reflectance spectra; TGA plots; UV–visible
spectra for photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) by varying various
parameters; scavenger study; GC–MS spectra of possible fragments
of MB after its photodegradation; visual image for the aqueous dispersibilty
of nanoformulations; UV-illuminated GFP fluorescence photograph and
digital photograph of GFP E. coli cells
and S. aureus, respectively, treated
with NC-1, NC-2, NC-3, CdSNPs, and ZIF-8; scanning electron micrograph
of NC-1-treated GFP E. coli cells and S. aureus along with EDAX; surface area, pore volume,
and average pore size (Table S1); effect of the amount of CdSNPs encapsulated
in ZIF-8 for adsorption and photodegradation of MB (Table S2); effect
of pH (Table S3); effect of catalyst (NC-1) amount (Table S4); effect
of initial dye concentration (Table S5); and GC–MS analysis
of possible fragments of MB after its degradation (Table S6) (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao8b00664_si_001.pdf

 The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
A.M. and
S.M. acknowledge the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Government of India, for financial support (Grant number: MHR-02-23-104-429).
==== Refs
References
Wang C.-C. ; Li J.-R. ; Lv X.-L. ; Zhang Y.-Q. ; Guo G. 
Photocatalytic
organic pollutants degradation in metal–organic frameworks . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2014 , 7 , 2831 –2867 . 10.1039/C4EE01299B .
Jing H.-P. ; Wang C.-C. ; Zhang Y.-W. ; Wang P. ; Li R. 
Photocatalytic
degradation of methylene blue in ZIF-8 . RSC
Adv. 
2014 , 4 , 54454 –54462 . 10.1039/C4RA08820D .
Zhang T. ; Lin W. 
Metal–organic
frameworks for artificial photosynthesis and
photocatalysis . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014 , 43 , 5982 –5993 . 10.1039/C4CS00103F .24769551 
Li S.-L. ; Xu Q. 
Metal-organic frameworks as platforms for clean energy . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2013 , 6 , 1656 –1683 . 10.1039/c3ee40507a .
Horiuchi Y. ; Toyao T. ; Takeuchi M. ; Matsuoka M. ; Anpo M. 
Recent advances
in visible-light-responsive photocatalysts for hydrogen production
and solar energy conversion – from semiconducting TiO2 to MOF/PCP photocatalysts . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 13243 –13253 . 10.1039/c3cp51427g .23760469 
Laurier K. G. M. ; Vermoortele F. ; Ameloot R. ; De Vos D. E. ; Hofkens J. ; Roeffaers M. B. J. 
Iron(III)-based
metal-organic frameworks as visible
light photocatalysts . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 14488 –14491 . 10.1021/ja405086e .24015906 
Horiuchi Y. ; Toyao T. ; Saito M. ; Mochizuki K. ; Iwata M. ; Higashimura H. ; Anpo M. ; Matsuoka M. 
Visible-light-promoted
photocatalytic hydrogen production by using an amino-functionalized
Ti(IV) metal-organic framework . J. Phys. Chem.
C 
2012 , 116 , 20848 –20853 . 10.1021/jp3046005 .
Long J. ; Wang S. ; Ding Z. ; Wang S. ; Zhou Y. ; Huang L. ; Wang X. 
Amine-functionalized
zirconium metal–organic
framework as efficient visible-light photocatalyst for aerobic organic
transformations . Chem. Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 11656 –11658 . 10.1039/c2cc34620f .
Du J. J. ; Yuan Y. P. ; Sun J. X. ; Peng F. M. ; Jiang X. ; Qiu L. G. ; Xie A. J. ; Shen Y. H. ; Zhu J. F. 
New photocatalysts
based on MIL-53 metal–organic frameworks for the decolorization
of methylene blue dye . J. Hazard. Mater. 
2011 , 190 , 945 –951 . 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.04.029 .21531507 
Silva C. G. ; Corma A. ; García H. 
Metal–organic
frameworks as
semiconductors . J. Mater. Chem. 
2010 , 20 , 3141 –3156 . 10.1039/b924937k .
Lu G. ; Li S. ; Guo Z. ; Farha O. K. ; Hauser B. G. ; Qi X. ; Wang Y. ; Wang X. ; Han S. ; Liu X. ; Duchene J. S. ; Zhang H. ; Zhang Q. ; Chen X. ; Ma J. ; Loo S. C. J. ; Wei W. D. ; Yang Y. ; Hupp J. T. ; Huo F. 
Imparting functionality to a metal-organic framework material by
controlled nanoparticle encapsulation . Nat.
Chem. 
2012 , 4 , 310 –316 . 10.1038/nchem.1272 .22437717 
Chen L. Y. ; Peng Y. ; Wang H. ; Gu Z. Z. ; Duan C. Y. 
Synthesis
of Au@ZIF-8 single- or multi-core–shell structures for photocatalysis . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 8651 –8654 . 10.1039/C4CC02818J .
Li S. ; Huo F. 
Hybrid crystals comprising
metal-organic frameworks and functional
particles: synthesis and applications . Small 
2014 , 10 , 4371 –4378 . 10.1002/smll.201303564 .25048076 
Dai H. M. ; Xia B. Q. ; Wen L. ; Du C. ; Su J. ; Luo W. ; Cheng G. Z. 
Synergistic catalysis of AgPd@ZIF-8
on dehydrogenation
of formic acid . Appl. Catal., B 
2015 , 165 , 57 –62 . 10.1016/j.apcatb.2014.09.065 .
Chandra R. ; Mukhopadhyay S. ; Nath M. 
TiO2@ZIF-8:
A novel approach
of modifying micro-environment for enhanced photo-catalytic dye degradation
and high usability of TiO2 nanoparticles . Mater. Lett. 
2016 , 164 , 571 –574 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2015.11.018 .
Yu B. ; Wang F. ; Dong W. ; Hou J. ; Lu P. ; Gong J. 
Self-template synthesis of core-shell
ZnO@ZIF-8 nanospheres and the
photocatalysis under UV irradiation . Mater.
Lett. 
2015 , 156 , 50 –53 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2015.04.142 .
Gao Y. ; Wu J. ; Zhang W. ; Tan Y. ; Zhao J. ; Tang B. 
The electrochemical
performance of SnO2 quantum dots@zeolitic imidazolate frameworks-8
(ZIF-8) composite material for supercapacitors . Mater. Lett. 
2014 , 128 , 208 –211 . 10.1016/j.matlet.2014.04.175 .
Ke F. ; Qiu L.-G. ; Zhu J. F. 
Fe3O4@MOF Core–shell
magnetic microspheres as excellent catalysts for the Claisen–Schmidt
condensation reaction . Nanoscale 
2014 , 6 , 1596 –1601 . 10.1039/C3NR05051C .24336813 
Zhang C.-F. ; Qiu L.-G. ; Ke F. ; Zhu Y.-J. ; Yuan Y.-P. ; Xu G.-S. ; Jiang X. 
A novel magnetic recyclable photocatalyst
based on a core–shell metal–organic framework Fe3O4@MIL-100(Fe) for the decolorization of methylene
blue dye . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2013 , 1 , 14329 –14334 . 10.1039/c3ta13030d .
Zhang T. ; Zhang X. ; Yan X. ; Kong L. ; Zhang G. ; Liu H. ; Qiu J. ; Yeung K. L. 
Synthesis of Fe3O4@ZIF-8 magnetic core-shell microspheres and their potential
application in a capillary microreactor . Chem.
Eng. J. 
2013 , 228 , 398 –404 . 10.1016/j.cej.2013.05.020 .
Zhan W. W. ; Kuang Q. ; Zhou J. Z. ; Kong X. J. ; Xie Z. X. ; Zheng L. S. 
Semi-conductor@metal-organic
framework core-shell heterostructures:
a case of ZnO@ZIF-8 nanorods with selective photoelectrochemical response . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 1926 –1933 . 10.1021/ja311085e .23339400 
Ke F. ; Qiu L.-G. ; Yuan Y.-P. ; Jiang X. ; Zhu J.-F. 
Fe3O4@MOF core–shell
magnetic microspheres
with a designable metal–organic framework shell . J. Mater. Chem. 
2012 , 22 , 9497 –9500 . 10.1039/c2jm31167d .
Momeni M.
M. ; Mirhosseini M. ; Chavoshi M. 
Growth and characterization of Ta2O5 nanorod and WTa2O5 nanowire
films on the tantalum substrates by a facile one-step hydrothermal
method . Ceram. Int. 
2016 , 42 , 9133 –9138 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2016.03.002 .
Momeni M. M. ; Mozafari A. A. 
The effect of number
of silar cycles on morphological,
optical and photocatalytic properties of cadmium sulfide–titania
films . J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron. 
2016 , 27 , 10658 –10666 . 10.1007/s10854-016-5163-4 .
Momeni M. M. ; Ghayeb Y. ; Davarzadeh M. 
Electrochemica
construction of different
titania–tungsten trioxide nanotubular composite and their photocatalytic
activity for pollutant degradation: a recyclable photocatalysts . J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron. 
2015 , 26 , 1560 –1567 . 10.1007/s10854-014-2575-x .
Momeni M. M. ; Ghayeb Y. ; Gheibee S. 
Silver nanoparticles
decorated titanium
dioxide-tungsten trioxide nanotube films with enhanced visible light
photocatalytic activity . Ceram. Int. 
2017 , 43 , 564 –570 . 10.1016/j.ceramint.2016.09.195 .
Li A.-L. ; Ke F. ; Qiu L.-G. ; Jiang X. ; Wang Y.-M. ; Tian X.-Y. 
Controllable
synthesis of metal–organic framework hollow nanospheres by
a versatile step-by-step assembly strategy . Cryst. Eng. Commun. 
2013 , 15 , 3554 –3559 . 10.1039/c2ce26636a .
Lee H. J. ; Cho W. ; Oh M. 
Advanced fabrication
of metal–organic frameworks:
template-directed formation of polystyrene@ZIF-8 core–shell
and hollow ZIF-8 microspheres . Chem. Commun. 
2012 , 48 , 221 –223 . 10.1039/C1CC16213F .
Song J. ; Luo Z. ; Britt D. K. ; Furukawa H. ; Yaghi O. M. ; Hardcastle K. I. ; Hill C. L. 
A multiunit catalyst with synergistic stability and
reactivity: a polyoxometalate-metal organic framework for aerobic
decontamination . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 16839 –16846 . 10.1021/ja203695h .21913693 
Sun C.-Y. ; Liu S.-X. ; Liang D.-D. ; Shao K.-Z. ; Ren Y.-H. ; Su Z.-M. 
Highly stable crystalline catalysts based on a microporous metal-organic
framework and polyoxometalates . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2009 , 131 , 1883 –1888 . 10.1021/ja807357r .19146450 
Zhuang J. ; Chou L. Y. ; Sneed B. T. ; Cao Y. ; Hu P. ; Feng L. ; Tsung C. K. 
Surfactant-mediated
conformal overgrowth
of core-shell metal-organic framework materials with mismatched topologies . Small 
2015 , 11 , 5551 –5555 . 10.1002/smll.201501710 .26344934 
Koh K. ; Wong-Foy A. G. ; Matzger A. J. 
MOF@MOF:
microporous core–shell
architectures . Chem. Commun. 
2009 , 6162 –6164 . 10.1039/b904526k .
Yang J. ; Zhang F. J. ; Lu H. Y. ; Hong X. ; Jiang H. ; Wu Y. ; Li Y. D. 
Hollow
Zn/Co ZIF particles derived from core–shell
ZIF-67@ZIF-8 as selective catalyst for the semi-hydrogenation of acetylene . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2015 , 54 , 10889 –10893 . 10.1002/anie.201504242 .
Yang Y. ; Wang F. ; Yang Q. ; Hu Y. ; Yan H. ; Chen Y. Z. ; Liu H. ; Zhang G. ; Lu J. ; Jiang H. L. ; Xu H. 
Hollow metal-organic framework nanospheres
via emulsion-based interfacial synthesis and their application in
size-selective catalysis . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 18163 –18171 . 10.1021/am505145d .25247890 
Chen R. ; Zhang J. F. ; Wang Y. ; Chen X. F. ; Zapien J. A. ; Lee C.-S. 
Graphitic carbon nitride nanosheet@metal–organic
framework core–shell nanoparticles for photo-chemo combination
therapy . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 17299 –17305 . 10.1039/C5NR04436G .26287769 
Yang D. ; Yang G. X. ; Gai S. L. ; He F. ; An G. H. ; Dai Y. L. ; Lv R. C. ; Yang P. P. 
Au25 cluster
functionalized metal–organic nanostructures for magnetically
targeted photodynamic/photothermal therapy triggered by single wavelength
808 nm near-infrared light . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 19568 –19578 . 10.1039/C5NR06192J .26540558 
He L. ; Liu Y. ; Liu J. ; Xiong Y. ; Zheng J. ; Liu Y. ; Tang Z. 
Core-shell noble-metal@metal-organic-framework nanoparticles with
highly selective sensing property . Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 
2013 , 52 , 3741 –3745 . 10.1002/anie.201209903 .
Li T. ; Sullivan J. E. ; Rosi N. L. 
Design
and preparation of a core-shell
metal-organic framework for selective CO2 capture . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2013 , 135 , 9984 –9987 . 10.1021/ja403008j .23795996 
Gu X. ; Lu Z. H. ; Jiang H. L. ; Akita T. ; Xu Q. 
Synergistic
catalysis of metal-organic framework-immobilized Au-Pd nanoparticles
in dehydrogenation of formic acid for chemical hydrogen storage . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 11822 –11825 . 10.1021/ja200122f .21761819 
Park T. H. ; Hickman A. J. ; Koh K. ; Martin S. ; Wong-Foy A. G. ; Sanford M. S. ; Matzger A. J. 
Highly
dispersed palladium(II) in
a defective metal-organic framework: application to C-H activation
and functionalization . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2011 , 133 , 20138 –20141 . 10.1021/ja2094316 .22122560 
Ameloot R. ; Roeffaers M. B. J. ; De Cremer G. ; Vermoortele F. ; Hofkens J. ; Sels B. F. ; De Vos D. E. 
Metal-organic framework
single crystals as photoactive matrices for the generation of metallic
microstructures . Adv. Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 1788 –1791 . 10.1002/adma.201100063 .21491511 
Buso D. ; Nairn K. M. ; Gimona M. ; Hill A. J. ; Falcaro P. 
Fast synthesis
of MOF-5 microcrystals using Sol-Gel SiO2 nanoparticles . Chem. Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 929 –934 . 10.1021/cm101519s .
Sugikawa K. ; Furukawa Y. ; Sada K. 
SERS-active
metal-organic frameworks
embedding gold nanorods . Chem. Mater. 
2011 , 23 , 3132 –3134 . 10.1021/cm200737c .
Tsuruoka T. ; Kawasaki H. ; Nawafune H. ; Akamatsu K. 
Controlled self-assembly
of metal-organic frameworks on metal nanoparticles for efficient synthesis
of hybrid nanostructures . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2011 , 3 , 3788 –3791 . 10.1021/am200974t .21919504 
Chandra R. ; Nath M. 
Multi-core-shell TiO2@ZIF-8
composite for enhanced photocatalytic degradation and adsorption of
methylene blue and rhodamine-B . ChemistrySelect 
2017 , 2 , 7711 –7722 . 10.1002/slct.201701195 .
Zeng M. ; Chai Z. ; Deng X. ; Li Q. ; Feng S. ; Wang J. ; Xu D. 
Core–shell CdS@ZIF-8
structures
for improved selectivity in photocatalytic H2 generation
from formic acid . Nano Res. 
2016 , 9 , 2729 –2734 . 10.1007/s12274-016-1161-3 .
Li H. ; Wang X. ; Xu J. ; Zhang Q. ; Bando Y. ; Golberg D. ; Ma Y. ; Zhai T. 
One-dimensional CdS
nanostructures: a promising candidate for optoelectronics . Adv. Mater. 
2013 , 25 , 3017 –3037 . 10.1002/adma.201300244 .23629853 
Zhang Y. ; Zhang N. ; Tang Z.-R. ; Xu Y.-J. 
Transforming CdS
into an efficient visible light photocatalyst for selective oxidation
of saturated primary C–H bonds under ambient conditions . Chem. Sci. 
2012 , 3 , 2812 –2822 . 10.1039/c2sc20603j .
Pan Z. ; Zhang H. ; Cheng K. ; Hou Y. ; Hua J. ; Zhong X. 
Highly efficient inverted type-I
CdS/CdSe core-shell structure QD-sensitized
solar cells . ACS Nano 
2012 , 6 , 3982 –3991 . 10.1021/nn300278z .22509717 
Khan Z. R. ; Zulfequar M. ; Khan M. S. 
Chemical synthesis of CdS nanoparticles
and their optical and dielectric studies . J.
Mater. Sci. 
2011 , 46 , 5412 –5416 . 10.1007/s10853-011-5481-0 .
Wang H. ; Sun Z. ; Lu Q. ; Zeng F. ; Su D. 
One-pot synthesis of
(Au nanorod)-(metal sulfide) core-shell nanostructures with enhanced
gas-sensing property . Small 
2012 , 8 , 1167 –1172 . 10.1002/smll.201102287 .22334591 
Liu S. ; Ke D. ; Zeng J. ; Zhou J. ; Peng T. ; Zhang L. 
Construction
of inorganic nanoparticles by micro-nano-porous structure of cellulose
matrix . Cellulose 
2011 , 18 , 945 –956 . 10.1007/s10570-011-9556-5 .
Salcher A. ; Nikolic M. S. ; Casado S. ; Velez M. ; Weller H. ; Juarez B. H. 
CdSe/CdS nanoparticles immobilized
on pNIPAm-based
microspheres . J. Mater. Chem. 
2010 , 20 , 1367 –1374 . 10.1039/b917022g .
White J. C. ; Dutta P. K. 
Assembly of nanoparticles in zeolite Y for the photocatalytic
generation of hydrogen from water . J. Phys.
Chem. C 
2011 , 115 , 2938 –2947 . 10.1021/jp108336a .
Hirai T. ; Bando Y. ; Komasawa I. 
Immobilization
of CdS nanoparticles
formed in reverse micelles onto alumina particles and their photocatalytic
properties . J. Phys. Chem. B 
2002 , 106 , 8967 –8970 . 10.1021/jp020386v .
Lin R. ; Shen L. ; Ren Z. ; Wu W. ; Tan Y. ; Fu H. ; Zhang J. ; Wu L. 
Enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen
production activity via dual modification of MOF and reduced graphene
oxide on CdS . Chem. Commun. 
2014 , 50 , 8533 –8535 . 10.1039/C4CC01776E .
Zhou J.-J. ; Wang R. ; Liu X.-L. ; Peng F.-M. ; Li C.-H. ; Teng F. ; Yuan Y.-P. 
In situ growth of
CdS nanoparticles on UiO-66 metal-organic framework octahedrons fore
enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production under visible light irradiation . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2015 , 346 , 278 –283 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.03.210 .
Abidov A. ; Allabergenov B. ; Lee J. ; Jeon H. W. ; Jeong S. W. ; Kim S. 
X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy characterization of Fe doped TiO2 photocatalyst . Int. J. Mater., Mech.
Manuf. 
2013 , 3 , 294 –296 . 10.7763/IJMMM.2013.V1.63 .
Lai Q. ; Zhao Y. ; Liang Y. ; He J. ; Chen J. 
In
situ confinement pyrolysis transformation of ZIF-8 to nitrogen-enriched
meso-microporous carbon frameworks for oxygen reduction . Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 8334 –8344 . 10.1002/adfm.201603607 .
Mir F. A. ; Chattarjee I. ; Dar A. A. ; Asokan K. ; Bhat G. M. 
Preparation
and characterizations of cadmium sulfide nanoparticles . Optik 
2015 , 126 , 1240 –1244 . 10.1016/j.ijleo.2015.03.022 .
Xu Y.-S. ; Zhang W.-D. 
Monodispersed Ag3PO4 nanocrystals
loaded on the surface of spherical Bi2MoO6 with
enhanced photocatalytic performance . Dalton
Trans. 
2013 , 42 , 1094 –1101 . 10.1039/C2DT31634J .23131725 
Huang F. ; Chen L. ; Wang H. ; Yan Z. 
Analysis of the degradation
mechanism of methylene blue by atmospheric pressure dielectric barrier
discharge plasma . Chem. Eng. J. 
2010 , 162 , 250 –256 . 10.1016/j.cej.2010.05.041 .
Yan X. ; Liu K. ; Shi W. 
Facile synthesis
of CdS/MnWO4 heterojunction
with enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity and mechanism
investigation . Colloids Surf., A 
2017 , 520 , 138 –145 . 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2017.01.065 .
Nanda S. S. ; Yi D. K. ; Kim K. 
Study of antibacterial
mechanism
of graphene oxide using Raman spectroscopy . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 2844310.1038/srep28443 .27324288 
Li W. ; Houston K. D. ; Houston J. P. 
Shifts
in the fluorescence lifetime
of EGFP during bacterial phagocytosis measured by phase-sensitive
flow cytometry . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 4034110.1038/srep40341 .28091553 
Matai I. ; Sachdev A. ; Dubey P. ; Kumar S. U. ; Bhushan B. ; Gopinath P. 
Antibacterial activity and mechanism of Ag-ZnO nanocomposite
on S. aureus and GFP-expressing antibiotic
resistant E. coli . Colloids Surf., B 
2014 , 115 , 359 –367 . 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.12.005 .
Bhargavi G. ; Matai I. ; Sachdev A. ; Kumar S. U. ; Gopinath P. 
Microwave
assisted synthesis of chitosan nanorods and assessment of its antibacterial
activity against GFP-expressing antibiotic resistant E. coli . J. Chitin Chitosan
Sci. 
2013 , 1 , 167 –172 . 10.1166/jcc.2013.1027 .
Pal N. ; Dubey P. ; Gopinath P. ; Pal K. 
Combined effect of
cellulose nanocrystal and reduced graphene oxide into poly-lactic
acid matrix nanocomposite as a scaffold and its anti-bacterial activity . Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2017 , 95 , 94 –105 . 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2016.11.041 .27856322 
Liu S. ; Zeng T. H. ; Hofmann M. ; Burcombe E. ; Wei J. ; Jiang R. ; Kong J. ; Chen Y. 
Antibacterial activity
of graphite, graphite oxide, graphene oxide, and reduced graphene
oxide: membrane and oxidative stress . ACS Nano 
2011 , 5 , 6971 –6980 . 10.1021/nn202451x .21851105 
Zhou Y. ; Kong Y. ; Kundu S. ; Cirillo J. D. ; Liang H. 
Antibacterial
activities of gold and silver nanoparticles against Escherichia coli and bacillus calmette-guérin . J. Nanobiotechnol. 
2012 , 10 , 19 10.1186/1477-3155-10-19 .
Waiskopf N. ; Ben-Shahar Y. ; Galchenko M. ; Carmel I. ; Moshitzky G. ; Soreq H. ; Banin U. 
Photocatalytic reactive oxygen species
formation by semiconductor-metal hybrid nanoparticles. Toward light-induced
modulation of biological processes . Nano Lett. 
2016 , 16 , 4266 –4273 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01298 .27224678 
Jia H. ; He W. ; Wamer W. G. ; Han X. ; Zhang B. ; Zhang S. ; Zheng Z. ; Xiang Y. ; Yin J.-J. 
Generation of reactive
oxygen species, electrons/holes, and photocatalytic degradation of
rhodamine B by photoexcited CdS and Ag2S micro-nano structures . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014 , 118 , 21447 –21456 . 10.1021/jp505783y .
Rajavel K. ; Gomathi R. ; Manian S. ; Kumar R. T. R. 
In vitro bacterial
cytotoxicity of CNTs: reactive oxygen species mediate cell damage
edges over direct physical puncturing . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 592 –601 . 10.1021/la403332b .24358980 
Santos M. A. ; Faryabi R. B. ; Ergen A. V. ; Day A. M. ; Malhowski A. ; Canela A. ; Onozawa M. ; Lee J. E. ; Callen E. ; Gutierrez-Martinez P. ; Chen H. T. ; Wong N. ; Finkel N. ; Deshpande A. ; Sharrow S. ; Rossi D. J. ; Ito K. ; Ge K. ; Aplan P. D. ; Armstrong S. A. ; Nussenzweig A. 
DNA-damage-induced
differentiation of leukaemic cells as an anti-cancer barrier . Nature 
2014 , 514 , 107 –111 . 10.1038/nature13483 .25079327 
Qutub N. ; Pirzada B. M. ; Umar K. ; Sabir S. 
Synthesis of CdS nanoparticles
using different sulphide ion precursors: formation mechanism and photocatalytic
degradation of acid blue-29 . J. Environ. Chem.
Eng. 
2016 , 4 , 808 –817 . 10.1016/j.jece.2015.10.031 .
Gogoi S. K. ; Gopinath P. ; Paul A. ; Ramesh A. ; Ghosh S. S. ; Chattopadhyay A. 
Green fluorescent
protein-expressing Escherichia coli as a model system for investigating
the antimicrobial activities of silver nanoparticles . Langmuir 
2006 , 22 , 9322 –9328 . 10.1021/la060661v .17042548 
Das B. ; Dash S. K. ; Mandal D. ; Ghosh T. ; Chattopadhyay S. ; Tripathy S. ; Das S. ; Dey S. K. ; Das D. ; Roy S. 
Green synthesized silver
nanoparticles destroy multidrug resistant
bacteria via reactive oxygen species mediated membrane damage . Arabian J. Chem. 
2017 , 10 , 862 –876 . 10.1016/j.arabjc.2015.08.008 .

