
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02349ArticleSurface Ordering in Molecular Clusters by Interactions of Well-Defined
Parity Multipoles Cannavacciuolo Luigi *Hulliger Jürg Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, Bern 3012, Switzerland* E-mail: luigi.cannavacciuolo@dcb.unibe.ch. Phone: +41 (0)31 6314361. Fax: +41 (0)31 6314272.09 10 2019 22 10 2019 4 17 17511 17518 25 07 2019 20 08 2019 Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society2019American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The spontaneous alignment
of dipoles in patterns tangential or transversal to the interface
of molecular clusters is studied by molecular dynamics simulations
throughout the entire aggregation process. Tangential ordering (TANGO)
is found to rely on dispersion forces driven by dipolar fluctuations.
Transversal ordering (TRANSO) results from the interplay of two conditions:
the broken translational invariance at the cluster interface and the
interactions of multipoles of opposite parity. In this case, the orientational
order parameter at the interface follows a universal scaling law behavior.
In the limiting case of strongly interacting particles, a sharp structural
transition from a disordered into an ordered state is observed at
a critical distance inside the cluster and at a critical magnitude
of the dipole moment.

document-id-old-9ao9b02349document-id-new-14ao9b02349ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Molecular clusters have attracted considerable
interest in the past years1 as important
prototypes of the so-called small thermodynamic systems2 which, under special conditions, can undergo
phase transitions.3 Relying on their ability
to well reproduce ad incipio thermodynamic processes, they have been
proposed as generic models for soft matter4 and precursors for functional materials.5

Clusters of polar molecules can well reproduce the general
process of aggregation and other more complex processes such as nucleation,
solvation, and interface formation. The establishment of order at
an interface is perhaps the most basic effect in determining the macroscopic
properties of molecular clusters, such as polarization, surface entropy,
and surface tension.

The present work aims at understanding
the basic physics driving surface ordering and especially the tendency
of polar molecules to align with respect to an interface. We perform
large-scale molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of two-dimensional
systems of biatomic molecules whose atoms are coupled by the Lennard-Jones
(LJ) and the Coulomb potential in multipole expansion up to the second
order. The molecules are neutral, so, at the lowest order, only the
dipole and quadrupole moments enter the electrostatic force. Starting
from an arbitrary initial configuration, molecules assemble in clusters.
Parameters in the forces can be tailored so that the system evolves
in a single cluster. The possibility of tuning the force field and
the substantial freedom in choosing the initial condition, compatibly
with the equilibrium temperature, open up an exciting research area
where, in principle, the self-assembly of molecules can be engineered
in such a way that the final nanocrystal has the desired physical
properties. The choice of this very force field is motivated by the
sound evidence that transversal ordering (TRANSO), that is, dipoles
aligned transversally to the interface, results from the interactions
of multipoles of different parity.6−8 In this respect, our
work differs from the vast majority of previous studies restricted
to van der Waals and dipolar interactions only.9 From a formal standpoint, it can rigorously be proven10 that a volume distribution of dipoles (resp.
quadrupoles) generates a surface density of charge (resp. dipoles)
at the boundary, giving a sound basis to our assumptions.

The
other possible pattern of orientational ordering exhibits molecules
oriented tangentially to the interface and organized into end-to-end
or end-to-tail shaped chains, which is the other major object of this
study. We do not limit the analysis to the external interface of the
system but attempt to explore the surface order well inside the system,
at distances where the effect of the interface fades out but a bulk
regime is not yet entered in a limiting sense. As a result, very specific
length scales appear making molecular clusters very peculiar.

From an experimental standpoint, several techniques are able to resolve
orientational order at the interface. Optical second harmonic (SH),
sum-frequency generation (SH),11 and X-ray
reflectivity12 are very established methods
and have extensively been employed.

Model
We restrict
ourselves to two-dimensional systems of NM biatomic, rigid, neutral molecules. As such, they
are modeled as a rigid body with an inertial moment  arising
from the two identical atomic masses in a dumbbell-like arrangement
and with an intrinsic (point) electric dipole and quadrupole.

The kinematics of a molecule is thus described by the position of
its center of mass (cm) and by a unit vector e giving
the orientation. Even if we assume the two atoms to have identical
physical properties in the model, it is useful for our discussion
to distinguish them on the basis of the molecular orientation. We
therefore label them as type “I” and type “II”
if e points from “II” toward “I”.

Intermolecular interactions are modeled by the LJ and Coulomb potential.
The latter is given in a multipolar expansion up to the second order.
To fully understand how the different nature of the interactions may
affect the results, the code developed is capable to selectively include
or exclude each of the electrostatic forces in a way that will be
clarified later.

The electrostatic energy of two molecules with
the center of mass located in rh and rk is, at the
second-order expansion, given by 1  where the terms on the right-hand side are the dipole–dipole,
dipole–quadrupole, quadrupole–dipole, and quadrupole–quadrupole
potential energies, respectively, given by 2   3   4  where rh,k = rk – rh, rh,k = |rh,k|, θh (resp.
θk) is the angle between rh,k and the h-coordinate (resp. k-coordinate) direction,
and γh,k is the
angle between rh and rk. We emphasize that the following
treatment is not restricted to any specific potential as long as it
can be expanded in a series of functions of well-defined parity. The
electrostatic force on molecule k due to h is given by13,14 5  and the corresponding torque is given by13,14 6  

The LJ potential energy of the two
molecules in rh and rk is the superposition of the
atom–atom contributions given by 7  where rhi and rkj are the positions of atom i of molecule h and of atom j of molecule k, respectively. The two empirical parameters ϵ and σ
that set the minimum energy and the range of the interaction, respectively,
are given by15,16 8   9  

We assume ϵI = ϵII and, if not otherwise specified, σI = σII.

The resultant force on molecule k is given by 10  where FLJ(rh,k) = −∇|rkVLJ. The resultant torque is given by 11  

The general equation of motion of a rigid body reads 12  where F and τ are the resultant force and torque,
respectively,  is
the inertia tensor relative to the center of mass, m is the mass of the molecule, and ω and α are its angular
velocity and acceleration, respectively. If we are considering a planar
motion, rotations can only occur around an axis orthogonal to the
plane; consequently, the above equations simplify considerably. Let
us assume, for instance, the motion to be confined in the xy plane, then only the z-component of
ω and α is nonzero and eq 12 for molecule k can be written as 13   14  where  is
now the moment of inertia about an axis orthogonal to the plane and
through the center of mass of the molecule. For linear molecules,
the equations of motion can be further simplified because one of the
components of the principal inertia moment vanishes and the other
two are equal, specifically, in our configuration, Ixx = Iyy ≡ I and Izz = 0. Although the equations of the translational
motion of the center of mass (eq 13) can be straightforwardly integrated by conventional
finite difference method,17 the rotational
ones require some additional manipulation to transform the second-order
differential equations into a first-order system, given by18 15  where ek is the orientation
vector of molecule k, g⊥ is the component of the torque (in the cm frame of reference) orthogonal
to e, and λ is a Lagrange multiplier which constrains
the dynamics to preserve the bond length. Equation 15 can numerically be solved, for instance,
by the Fincham algorithm.19 The dynamics
of the system is, finally, completely defined by the set of 6N equations, eqs 13 and 15, with the initial conditions 16   17   18   19  

The initial positions in eq 16 are assigned by placing
the cm of each molecule at the site of a two-dimensional lattice of
size d ± δd, where δd is a random number different at each site and d is an input parameter which gives the initial average
distance of the molecules, fixing, in this way, the strength of the
initial force field. The initial orientations in eq 18 are assigned by further rotating
each molecule around an axis through the cm by a random angle. The
center of mass initial velocity field is approximated by a Maxwellian
distribution at absolute temperature T given by 20  where v0,ik is the i-component of the velocity
of the center of mass of molecule k, and 21  where kB is the Boltzmann constant. The temperature T has been chosen to be close to the melting point of the system,
by preliminary numerical calculations. In the same way, we assign
the magnitude of the angular velocities in eq 19, whereas the corresponding directions are
defined by choosing a random three-dimensional vector.20 To ensure the mechanical insulation from the
exterior, the total momentum of the system has been subtracted. In
order to guarantee thermal stability, the velocities are periodically
rescaled so that the resulting kinetic energy consistently matches
the temperature T within thermal fluctuations. In
this way, the system can be considered in contact with a virtual thermal
bath. Equation 15 with
the initial conditions, eqs 16–19, has been integrated as described
above providing the molecular trajectories 22  

In order to sample a significant
region of the phase space, simulations have been performed at different
initial conditions and the quantities of interest averaged.

Results
and Discussion
We have simulated the trajectories of systems
composed of NM molecules,
ranging from 100 to 256, with many different initial conditions. The
dipole and quadrupole have been varied from 0 to 17 D and −15
to 0 B, respectively, thus covering the range of the experimental
values of real molecules.21,22 By preliminary trials,
we have succeeded in choosing a set of free force field parameters
such that, after a transient initial time t0, molecules aggregate into a single cluster lasting for the whole
simulation, for all initial conditions considered.

For each
set of trajectories, we have numerically determined the time evolution
of the geometric boundary Γ0(t)
of the cluster at each time t, t ≥ t0 by reconstruction techniques
based on the alpha shapes,23 and computed
the number of atoms of type I (N0I) and II (N0II) on Γ0(t) as well as the number of molecules M0I,II having both atoms on the boundary. These are the key quantities
in our study. To analyze the ordering deeper inside the system, we
have removed from the data all the molecules having at least one atom
on the boundary, evaluated the new boundary Γ1(t), and computed a new set {N1I,N1II, M1I,II}. This procedure is repeated until no more statistically significant
internal atoms are present (see Figure 1). At the end, a sequence of curves Γl(t), alongside a set of numbers
{NlI(t),NlII(t)),MlI,II} l = 0, ...,nmax, is generated at each
time step. In the following, we refer to l as the
level of boundary, with zero level denoting the outermost curve, also
denoted as the interface. The following two-order parameters (OP)
have been introduced to quantitatively assess the two possible patterns
of orientational order 23   24  

Figure 1 Snapshot of
a cluster comprising 164 molecules (328 atoms) after 7 × 109 MD steps. The system separates into embedded domains delimited
by a well-defined set of boundary atoms. As an example, the outermost
boundary (l = 0) and an inner boundary (l = 8) are drawn (full line).

Accordingly, Ol varies
from Ol = 0 [no tangential
ordering (TANGO)] to Ol = 1 (full TANGO) and Sl varies from Sl = 0
(no TRANSO) if the same number of type I and type II atoms lie on
Γl to Sl = ±1 where only one type does (full TRANSO
in the brackets). For each representation of the system (computer
run), the OPs have been averaged over the time t0 < t ≤ tmax, where tmax ranges from 7 × 109 to 1010 MD steps. After a suitable number of runs
have been performed, the overall weighed average ⟨Ol⟩ and ⟨Sl⟩ with their respective variance
have been calculated.

Tangential Ordering
Figure 2 shows the TANGO order parameter
⟨O⟩ versus the radius r of the boundary for a cluster of molecules interacting through van
der Waals forces only. It is striking to observe that ⟨Ol⟩ ≠ 0, ∀l being both dipole and quadrupole moments zero. TANGO appears
to be driven by dispersion forces only, originated by intrinsic fluctuations
inside the system, which reveals an inherent geometrical nature24 of TANGO. On increasing the strength of the
nonelectrostatic forces, a higher degree of order is observed. This
is clearly shown by the upper curve in Figure 2, which refers to simulations with σ
increased by a factor of 1.7 in eq 9. A more exhaustive analysis would require simulations
over a broad range of σ which, even if feasible, is beyond the
scope of the present work. It is nevertheless clear that the origin
and the magnitude of TANGO is determined by dispersion forces. We
remark that the possibility of building superficial ordered structures
without electrostatic forces is a peculiarity of TANGO and is excluded
in TRANSO, where both multipoles are needed, as will be seen in the
next section.

Figure 2 TANGO (both atoms of a molecule on the boundary) resulting
from the van der Waals interactions only: the overall order increases
for larger ratio σII/σI in eq 9, that is, for larger ratio
of the effective atomic radii. For the same reason, the upper curve
is shifted to the right. No electrostatic interaction is explicitly
present.

Tangential order is found to be
quantitatively independent of the cluster size. Figure 2 also contains the data of a larger cluster
(225 molecules). It is noticeable that the data lie on the same curve
as the smaller system. This result also rules out that our conclusions
might hide some finite size effect.

In the presence of electrostatic
forces with one of the two moments being vanished, that is, μ
= 0 or Θ = 0, a new important effect is apparent, as shown in Figure 3: the curve ⟨O0(r)⟩ coincides with
⟨OlvdW(r)⟩ of the
pure dispersive case, indicating that the dipole–dipole or
quadrupole–quadrupole interaction is not able to change the
picture. This result further suggests that the dipole and quadrupole
moments should enter the functional form of Ol through their product, in the form 25  

Figure 3 TANGO at zero dipole: all curves for all quadrupole
moments overlap, demonstrating the independence of O on the nonvanishing multipole moment. For clarity, only Θ
= 0 and Θ = −15 B are plotted. An analogous behavior
is found for Θ = 0, μ finite.

A systematic study of the curves O(r) for many values of μ and Θ shows the existence of critical
values μc and Θc such that in the
rectangle ΓvdW = [0,μc] × [0,|Θc|], all curves ⟨O⟩(r,μ,Θ), plotted as a function of r, overlap, showing TANGO to be insensitive to electrostatics in ΓvdW (data not shown).

As a general rule, TANGO increases
over the innermost boundaries, that is, toward regions where the translational
invariance tends to be restored. This effect is clearly seen in Figure 4, where the curves
⟨Ol(μ)⟩
are plotted at various boundary levels, from the cluster interface l = 0 up to the most internal core which, for a system size NM = 100, corresponds to l = 8. The dipole magnitude does not change this general
picture, consistently with the geometrical nature of the TANGO. As
expected from eq 25,
the same qualitative behavior is found if the quadrupole is varied
and the dipole is kept constant (data not shown). Inside the system,
the ordering tends to be less affected by the dipole magnitude. This
is especially evident on the innermost boundary (upper curve in Figure 4), where the order
parameter turns out to be basically independent of μ. On the
more external layers, the dipole tends to disrupt the order, and,
interestingly, this happens above a certain critical value. From eq 25, it follows that the
above results should hold by swapping μ and Θ. In respect
to TANGO, we can thus conclude that the effect of the electrostatic
interactions is destructive, affecting the outer layers more than
the inner ones. At the cluster interface (l = 0),
the greatest order is achieved for μΘ = 0. Figure 5 shows this effect in more
detail. Deep inside the cluster, the curves ⟨O(r)⟩ at various μ all overlap and,
at larger r, separate the pure vdW on the top followed
by those with lower μ. The separation occurs at a critical distance
of about one-fourth of the total cluster size.

Figure 4 Tangential order parameter
vs dipole moment at different levels of boundary, from top to bottom l = 8, ...,0. The lowermost curve (l =
0) corresponds to the cluster interface. Notice the increased ordering
inside the cluster at all dipole moments. Quadrupole is kept fixed
at Θ = −5 B.

Figure 5 Destructive
effect of electrostatics on tangential order affecting the system
at all lengths but the inner core.

In the limiting case of strongly interacting molecules, it has been
possible to depict a complete phase diagram, for instance, in the
(r, μ) plane as shown in Figure 6. Inside, the cluster is disordered up to
a critical distance rc from the center.
At larger distances, the destructive effect of the dipole becomes
important, and above a critical dipole moment, the system is disordered.
Of course, order and disorder are referred to the specific TANGO considered
here. Note that, in this context, the phase diagram should be understood
bearing in mind that the dipole and quadrupole moments are structural
quantities pertinent to the molecules and not environmental parameters
as in a conventional one.

Figure 6 Phase diagram of the TANGO in the (r,μ) plane for a system of NM = 100 molecules. Above a critical dipole moment, disorder
prevails in the outer regions (DIS) in contrast to the internal (W), where van der Waals forces order the system.

Transversal Ordering
In a previous study,8 it has been established that in a pure LJ system with all
atoms having the same value of σ in eq 7, no TRANSO ordering at any boundary level
is achieved. We use this condition in the simulations to “switch
off” the LJ interaction, thus disabling any effect on TRANSO,
yet keeping both the attractive and repulsive features of the potential
which ultimately propel the molecular aggregation. In this way, we
can analyze the specific effect of the Coulomb force, excluding any
other contribution.

The degree of transversal order at the external–internal
interface (l = 0) is shown in Figure 7 as a function of the dipole moment, at various
magnitudes of the quadrupole moment. As expected,8 no ordering is found if either Θ = 0 or μ =
0. In all other cases, the probability of finding a molecule aligned
to a direction not tangential to the boundary depends on both the
dipole and quadrupole moment. At high values of |Θ|, the functions
⟨S0⟩(μ,Θ) have
a very narrow support and approach a delta function. In this regime,
a small variation of the dipole moment can change dramatically the
order at the interface. At lower values of |Θ|, the transition
is less sharp and higher dipole moments are required to achieve comparable
values of ⟨S0⟩. The dipole
can, however, compensate the lower quadrupole, and for |Θ| as
low as about 5 B, complete ordering can still be established, with
⟨S0⟩ = −1.

Figure 7 Order parameter
⟨S0⟩ relative to the outermost
boundary (l = 0) as a function of μ, at various
quadrupole moments: from top Θ = −0.5, −1, −2,
−3, −5, −7.2, −10, and −15 B. Under
these settings, ⟨S0⟩ spans
from −1 (perfect ordering) to zero (no order). Full lines are
fits with Gaussians.

Scaling Behavior at the
Interface
From the above considerations, it is clear that
the magnitude of the dipole and quadrupole is, to some extent, interchangeable,
that is, one can compensate the other as already noticed for TANGO.
To examine the point in a more formal way, a model is needed to approximate
the functional form of ⟨S0⟩(μ).
To this aim, we have fitted the family of Gaussians 26  to ⟨S⟩(μ,Θ) in the whole
range of parameters used in the simulations, with satisfactory results,
as shown in Figure 7. We remark that the choice of a Gaussian as a fitting function is
purely empirical with no implication other than its ability to approximate
a δ-function. As a result, a single parameter is found to be
sufficient to fit the order parameter for all combinations of dipole
and quadrupole strengths. This fact again suggests that μ and
Θ should not enter S both as independent variables.
Going a step ahead, the analysis of the fit parameters shows σ(Θ)
to closely follow a power law behavior 27  with ν = −1.45 ±
0.02, as shown in Figure 8. The order parameter can, therefore, be written as 28  that is, as a function of the sole independent variable 29  with c being
a characteristic length so that λ is a dimensionless quantity.
The relevant variable entering the TRANSO order parameter is therefore
λ. It sets the scale of the ordering process and ultimately
determines the range of validity of our results. This remarkable result
is shown by the data collapsing obtained when plotting ⟨S⟩ versus λ reported in Figure 9. In the limit μ → ∞,
Θ finite, and Θ → ∞, μ finite deviations
from the scaling are observed. This can be intuitively understood
considering such an asymptotic limit as to the lack of one of the
multipoles, and we know that such a condition prevents the TRANSO.
Such an asymptotic behavior has a merely academic relevance as it
can never be reached in a real experiment. Therefore, it will not
be considered further in this study. The power law behavior of σ
in eq 26 breaks down
in the internal layers and should be regarded as a symmetry property
of the interface.

Figure 8 Fit parameter σ(Θ) for the data of Figure 7 vs quadrupole moment.
The full line represents a power law fitting curve.

Figure 9 Data collapsing of the interface order parameter ⟨S0⟩ on a single master curve after proper
rescaling of the multipoles. The error bars on the abscissa are smaller
than the symbol size.

Internal Ordering
The order inside the cluster is shown in Figure 10 by the typical set of curves ⟨Sl⟩(μ) at fixed
Θ ≠ 0 and l = 0, ...,8. At all levels l, one can highlight an ordered and a disordered region
separated by a transition zone. On increasing μ, the systems
are more and more ordered. Such a general behavior is observed at
all lengths inside. However, on the internal boundaries, the disordered
region becomes wider. Well inside the system, the monotonic behavior
of ⟨S(μ)⟩ breaks down, and further
increase of the dipole reduces the order due, again, to the predominance
of one multipole over the other. By analyzing all curves of this kind
in the limit of large Θ, it has been possible to depict the
phase diagram in the plane (r,μ) shown in Figure 11. Deep inside (low r) the cluster is dominated by a disorder and the dipole
is not able to change this state irrespective of the strength. This
situation changes at a critical distance rc. Above rc, a very unstable region is
entered in which a slightly higher dipole generates an ordered system
but a further increase would disorder the cluster. This region of
instability decreases on increasing r and vanishes
at the interface where a critical dipole μc exists
such that molecules having μ < μc will generate
clusters with a disordered interface and vice versa for μ >
μc (see Figure 11).

Figure 10 Typical behavior of ⟨Sl⟩(μ) at fixed Θ = –10 B
and at various boundary levels, from left to right, l = 0 (interface) to l = 8 (innermost boundary).

Figure 11 Phase diagram of the transversal order in the (r,μ) plane, at (a) Θ = −15 B in the limit
of strongly interacting molecules. At the interface (l = 0), a slight increase of μ is sufficient to generate an
ordered system. At lower distances, r order is only
possible for values of the dipole moment such that the point (r,μ) lies in the ordered region (ORD). Deep inside
the system (l < 6), no ordering is achieved.

From the above considerations, it is clear that
the TRANGO and TRANSO are complementary, each may prevail over the
other for different regions inside the cluster. In the limit of strongly
interacting molecules, on the external interface, TRANSO is the only
order possible, whereas TANGO dominates in the interior. This is clearly
seen in Figure 12.
As a result, there must be a length where the two orders are of comparable
magnitude. In our case, this happens approximately in the center of
the cluster and corresponds to the intersection of the two curves
shown in Figure 12.

Figure 12 Comparison of the tangential and TRANSO for strongly interacting
particles (Θ = −15 B, μ = 5 D). On the outermost
boundary (l = 0), all molecules are oriented with
their type I atoms toward the outside (⟨S0⟩ = −1), and no molecule has both atoms on the
boundary (⟨O0⟩ = 0). On
the innermost boundary, the situation is reversed. Note that at distances r about halfway of the system length, there is the same
probability to find a molecule pointing outside and parallel to the
corresponding boundary.

Conclusions
We
have investigated the formation of ordered structures in molecular
clusters by MD simulations. Two basic patterns of order, with molecules
oriented tangential or transversal to the boundary, have been considered,
which encompass all possible molecular alignment to a boundary, each
being measured by an appropriate order parameter. The force field
employed has an electrostatic contribution consisting of molecular
dipole and quadrupole coupling and a dispersive contribution given
by the van der Waals potential. The peculiarity of the force field
and the size scale of the observations determine the prevalence of
one type of order over the other or their coexistence. For both of
them, a phase diagram has been depicted.

From a fundamental
standpoint, it is found that TANGO is driven by dispersive forces
and is observed even in the absence of electrostatic interactions
at all length scales. When present, however, only the dipole–quadrupole
interaction is effective and it acts in a destructive manner against
TANGO. At the cluster interface, TANGO is greater in the absence of
electrostatics and independent of the cluster size. More generally,
it is found that the influence of the electrostatic interactions in
the ordering process occurs in regions where the translational invariance
is broken. In the internal regions where the invariance tends to be
restored, electrostatics is irrelevant and the curves ⟨O(r)⟩ overlap for all couples of
multipoles considered. For strongly interacting molecules, the general
features of TANGO have been summarized in a phase diagram. Inner regions
of the cluster are dominated by an order up to a critical length above
which systems with a dipole higher than a critical value are disordered.
Deep inside the cluster is disordered irrespective of the intensity
of the electrostatic forces. Above a critical distance, systems with
dipoles higher than a critical value turn out to be ordered.

Transversal order is found to be the result of the broken translational
symmetry at the cluster interface and the interaction of multipoles
of different parity which, in our second-order simulations, are the
molecular dipole and quadrupole. In the absence of electrostatics,
the order can still be established, provided the atoms have different
σ in the van der Waals potential, so that the required asymmetry
can, also in this case, be established. The universality of TRANSO
at the interface is revealed by the scaling behavior of the order
parameter. This is defined by a scaling exponent and by a characteristic
length, which also sets the length scale. In the limit of strongly
interacting molecules, a phase diagram can be drawn for TRANSO as
well.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The support of the Swiss
National Science Foundation, project no. 200020_159231, is gratefully
acknowledged.
==== Refs
References
Johnston R. L.  Atomic and molecular
clusters ; Taylor & Francis : New York, USA , 2002 .
Hill T. L.  Thermodynamics of Small Systems ; Dover Publications : New York, USA , 2013 .
Gross D. H. E.  Microcanonical Thermodynamics: Phase Transitions in “Small”
Systems ; World Scientific Pub. Co. Inc. : Singapore , 2001 .
Weis J.-J. ; Levesque D.  Advanced Computer
Simulation Approaches for Soft Matter Sciences II .
In Advances in Polymer Science ; Holm C. , Kremer K.  , Eds.; Springer : Berlin, Heidelberg , 2005 ; Vol. 185 , pp 163 –225 .
Pinkard A. ; Champsaur A. M. ; Roy X. 
Molecular Clusters: Nanoscale Building Blocks for Solid-State Materials . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2018 , 51 , 919 –929 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.8b00016 .29605996 
Cannavacciuolo L. ; Hulliger J. 
Polarity Formation
in Molecular Crystals as a Symmetry Breaking Effect . Symmetry 
2016 , 8 , 10 10.3390/sym8030010 .
Cannavacciuolo L. ; Hulliger J. 
Three-dimensional Ising
model of polarity formation in molecular crystals . Phys. A 
2017 , 484 , 499 –505 . 10.1016/j.physa.2017.04.161 .
Cannavacciuolo L. ; Hulliger J. 
Spontaneous ordering
at the free surface of molecular clusters . Chem.
Phys. Lett. 
2018 , 692 , 364 –366 . 10.1016/j.cplett.2017.12.022 .
Teixeira P. I. C. ; Tavares J. M. ; Gama M. M. T. d. 
The
effect of dipolar forces on the structure and thermodynamics of classical
fluids . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2000 , 12 , R411 10.1088/0953-8984/12/33/201 .
Owen G. E.  Introduction to Electromagnetic
Theory ; Courier Dover Publications : New York, USA , 2013 .
Shen Y. R. 
Surface Properties Probed by Second-Harmonic
and Sum-Frequency Generation . Nature 
1989 , 337 , 519 10.1038/337519a0 .
Braslau A. ; Pershan P. S. ; Swislow G. ; Ocko B. M. ; Als-Nielsen J. 
Capillary
waves on the surface of simple liquids measured by x-ray reflectivity . Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 
1988 , 38 , 2457 –2470 . 10.1103/physreva.38.2457 .
Cheung P. S. Y. 
On the efficient evaluation of torques and forces for
anisotropic potentials in computer simulation of liquids composed
of linear molecules . Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1976 , 40 , 19 –22 . 10.1016/0009-2614(76)80110-8 .
Price S. L. ; Stone A. J. ; Alderton M. 
Explicit formulae
for the electrostatic energy, forces and torques between a pair of
molecules of arbitrary symmetry . Mol. Phys. 
1984 , 52 , 987 –1001 . 10.1080/00268978400101721 .
Berthelot D. 
Sur le mélange des gaz . C. R. Acad. Sci. Hebd. Seances 
1898 , 126 , 1703 –1855 .
Lorentz H. A. 
Uber die
Anwendung des Satzes vom Virial in der kinetischen Theorie der Gase . Ann. Phys. 
1881 , 248 , 127 –136 . 10.1002/andp.18812480110 .
Allen M. P. ; Tildesley D. J.  Computer Simulation of Liquids ; Clarendon Press : Oxford, United Kingdom , 1996 .
Singer K. ; Taylor A. ; Singer J. V. L. 
Thermodynamic
and structural properties of liquids modelled by “2-Lennard-Jones
centres” pair potentials . Mol. Phys. 
1977 , 33 , 1757 –1795 . 10.1080/00268977700101451 .
Fincham D. 
Leapfrog Rotational Algorithms . Mol. Simul. 
1992 , 8 , 165 –178 . 10.1080/08927029208022474 .
Marsaglia G. 
Choosing a point from the surface
of a sphere . Ann. Math. Stat. 
1972 , 43 , 645 –646 . 10.1214/aoms/1177692644 .
NIST Standard Reference Database Number 101 ; National Institute of Standards and Technology : Gaithersburg, MD . http://cccbdb.nist.gov/(retrieved April 19, 2018 ).
Khristenko S. V. ; Maslov A. I. ; Shevelko V. P.  Molecules and Their Spectroscopic Properties ; Springer Science & Business Media , 2012 ; Vol. 21 , p 81 .
Guo B. ; Menon J. ; Willette B. 
Surface reconstruction using alpha
shapes . Comput. Graph. Forum 
1997 , 16 , 177 –190 . 10.1111/1467-8659.00178 .
Ruppeiner G. 
Riemannian
geometry in thermodynamic fluctuation theory . Rev. Mod. Phys. 
1995 , 67 , 605 –659 . 10.1103/revmodphys.67.605 .

