
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b04078Mini-ReviewChemical Targeting of Membrane
Transporters: Insights
into Structure/Function Relationships Scalise Mariafrancesca Console Lara Galluccio Michele Pochini Lorena Indiveri Cesare *Department of DiBEST (Biologia,
Ecologia, Scienze della Terra) Unit of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biotechnology, via Bucci 4C, University
of Calabria, 87036 Arcavacata di Rende, Italy* Tel.: +39-0984-492939. Fax: +39-0984-492911. E-mail: cesare.indiveri@unical.it.28 01 2020 11 02 2020 5 5 2069 2080 30 11 2019 16 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Chemical modification
of proteins is a vintage strategy that is
still fashionable due to the information that can be obtained from
this approach. An interesting application of chemical modification
is linked with membrane transporters. These proteins have peculiar
features such as the presence of hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains,
which show different degree of accessibility to chemicals. The presence
of reactive residues in the membrane transporters is at the basis
of the chemical targeting strategy devoted to investigating structure/function
relationships; in particular, information on the substrate binding
site, regulatory domains, dimerization domains, and the interface
between hydrophilic loops and transmembrane domains has been obtained
over the years by chemical targeting. Given the difficulty in handling
membrane transporters, their study experienced a great delay, particularly
concerning structural information. Chemical targeting has been applied
with reasonable success to some membrane transporters belonging to
the families SLC1, SLC6, SLC7, and SLC22. Furthermore, some data on
the potential application of chemical targeting in pharmacology are
also discussed.

document-id-old-9ao9b04078document-id-new-14ao9b04078ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
1.1 Relevance of Studying Membrane Transporters
As in the
case of the widely studied soluble enzymes, chemical
targeting of membrane transport proteins can be considered a physiological
mimicking strategy. Indeed, chemical modifications known as post-translational
modifications (PTMs) occur in cells for regulating protein functions,
driving protein localization, and accomplishing signaling phenomena.
Even though in the case of membrane transporters the information on
PTMs is not as large as for soluble proteins, it is well acknowledged
that PTMs cause changes in function and structure of membrane transporters,
as well. However, the size of such a phenomenon is unpredictable since
the transporter proteome is still poorly defined. Rough data, available
in databases together with some more extensive studies, indicate that
threonine, serine, tyrosine, asparagine, lysine, arginine, and cysteine
are the residues involved in PTMs of membrane transporters.1 However, only some of the above listed amino
acids are exploited for chemical targeting approaches. One of the
reasons is that the suitability of an amino acid residue is limited
by its intrinsic reactivity, while the physiological PTM process often
involves the action of enzymes, thus allowing targeting of any residue
even under mild conditions of pH and temperature. Moreover, the intrinsic
reactivity of each residue in a protein can be influenced by the neighboring
amino acids, which modulate the responsiveness to the administered
reagent. Finally, the size and the hydrophilicity of a reagent may
affect its ability to interact at a specific site of the target protein.
The hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance of a reagent has to be considered
in particular when the target is a membrane protein in which hydrophobic
and hydrophilic moieties coexist and can influence the reactivity.
Therefore, by exploiting the features of reactants and their accessibility
to protein residues, insights into the structure/function relationships
of membrane transporters can be obtained. This issue is very important
owing to the delay of the knowledge on membrane transporters with
respect to that of soluble proteins.2 Indeed,
the interest in studying membrane transporters increased in the past
decade due to their well-assessed role in cell homeostasis and potential
pharmacological implications. Indeed, these proteins regulate the
flux of metabolites and ions from the extracellular to the intracellular
milieu and vice versa and, within a cell, among different organelles,
allowing compartmentalized metabolic pathways to occur.2 A great variety of membrane transporters are
necessary to regulate the very intricate traffic of compounds. Then,
it is not a surprise that roughly 10% of the human genome encodes
for proteins related to transport function. After genome annotation,
membrane transporters of human cells have been classified in ABC (ATP
binding cassette) and SLC (solute carrier) superfamilies. In the first
case, the superfamily includes seven families whose members exploit
ATP hydrolysis as the driving force for transport (https://www.genenames.org/data/genegroup/#!/group/417). The SLC superfamily includes, to date, 65 families whose members
gain energy by the concentration gradient of the transported substrate
or by coupling the vectorial reaction of a substrate to the cotransport
or counter-transport of another molecule or ion (http://slc.bioparadigms.org/). These transport mechanisms are called uniport, symport, or antiport,
respectively. The crucial role of membrane transporters in maintaining
cell homeostasis is demonstrated by the occurrence of pathologies,
with a wide range of severity, due to inherited defects of genes encoding
these proteins. Further proofs come from human diseases characterized
by metabolic alterations, such as cancer and diabetes, in which the
expression of some membrane transporters is changed for accomplishing
the different nutritional needs of cells.

1.2 Chemical
Targeting of Membrane Proteins: An
Overview
Chemical targeting for function/structure relationship
investigations has been widely used for membrane transporters as testified
by several papers published since the beginning of transport studies.3 The main challenge in performing chemical targeting
on membrane transporters resides in the difficulty of handling these
hydrophobic proteins. At the same time, the advantage of chemical
targeting is the possibility to explore and recognize the boundary
between hydrophobic and hydrophilic protein moieties. As an example,
using selective hydrophobic or hydrophilic chemical reagents, it is
possible to map the substrate path or to reveal the relationships
among the protein and the membrane. In summary, an accurate use of
chemical targeting approaches can give a lot of information on both
the protein surface and the protein interior3 (Figure 1). The purposes
of using a chemical targeting strategy changed over the years.

Figure 1 Chemical targeting
of membrane transporters. The sketch depicts
a typical asymmetric transporter that, upon conformational changes,
exposes the substrate site alternatively to the external or internal
side of the membrane. The reagent, depicted as a starred “R”,
can have different size as well as degree of hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity.
The target, indicated by T, can be any lateral group of an amino acid
such as a thiol residue (SH) of cysteine as well as a NH2 of lysine, etc. The T group exhibits four different typical exposures:
(1) T facing the hydrophilic protein exterior (blue) that can be targeted
by large hydrophilic reagents; (2) T facing the internal hydrophilic
transport path (purple) that can be targeted by small hydrophilic
reagents; (3) T facing the intracellular hydrophilic surface (green)
that can be targeted by hydrophobic membrane permeant reagents; and
(4) T facing the hydrophobic protein moiety in contact with the membrane
(red) that can be targeted by hydrophobic small reagents. Effects
observed upon targeting can then be ascribed to the targeting of a
specific protein moiety based on the type of reagent.

Some alkylating, reducing, or oxidizing reagents have been
used
initially only for inhibiting the activity of membrane transporters
in cells, in vesicles, or in isolated organelles as a control for
identifying the activity of transporters. Later on, the achievement
of methodologies for purifying membrane transporters from cells, tissues,
or heterologous host expression enlarged the information inferable
from chemical targeting such as the accessibility of water, substrates,
or effectors to specific protein domains; the role of key residues
for transport reaction or for transport regulation; the identification
of protein–protein interactions; and the study of protein trafficking
to the membrane surface. It is worth noting that few 3D structures
of mammalian membrane transporters are available so far; thus, the
chemical targeting approaches cannot be disregarded when investigating
the structural and/or functional roles of specific residues or domains
as well as for validating structures and topologies obtained by computational
analyses. Interestingly, the knowledge acquired by chemical targeting
very often anticipated crucial and key findings demonstrated only
much later by the 3D structure of the transporters, confirming the
suitability of this strategy.4 Nowadays,
the chemical targeting is still largely used to obtain information
that cannot be derived by the sole 3D structure, such as conformational
changes underlying the transport cycle or the functional role of single
amino acid residues.4 For all the mentioned
reasons, a sizable number of chemical reagents, more or less specific
for an amino acid, harboring a different degree of hydrophobicity
and different size, have been made available over the years [(Table 1) and see ref (5) for a comprehensive list
of reagents].

Table 1 Chemical Reagents Commonly Used to
Target Amino Acid Residues of Membrane Transport Proteins
reagent	type	target AA	
N-ethylmaleimide (NEM)	maleimides	Cys	
N-pyrene maleimide	 	 	
N-pyrroloisomaleimide	 	 	
N,N′-phenylene-bismaleimides	 	 	
N-(4-dimethylamino-3,5-dinitrophenyl)-maleimde	 	 	
N,N′-hexamethylene-bismaleimide	 	 	
4-chloroacetylphenylmaleimide	 	 	
4-azidophenylmaleimide	 	 	
iodoacetate	alkylating reagents	Cys	
iodoacetamide	 	 	
bromoacetate	 	 	
chloroacetate	 	 	
bromopyruvate	 	 	
ethylene oxide and -imine	 	 	
methyl iodide	 	 	
dimethylsulfate	 	 	
fluorodinitrobenzene (FDNB)	arylating reagents	Cys	
chlorodinitrobenzene
(CDNB)	 	 	
Ag +, Cu+, Au+,
Hg2+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Sb3+	metal
ions	Cys	
p-chloromercuribenzoate (pCMB)	organic mercurials	Cys	
p-chloromercuriphenylsulfonate (pCMBS)	 	 	
phenylmercuryacetate	 	 	
methylmercury iodide	 	 	
methylmercury bromide	 	 	
O-(3-hydroxymercuri-2-methoxypropyl)carbamylphenoxyacetate
(mersalyl)	 	 	
chloromercurinitrophenols	 	 	
S-mercuric N-dansyl cysteine	 	 	
arsenite	arsenic reagents	Cys	
arsenoxides	 	 	
iodine	oxidizing
reagents	Cys	
ferricyanide	 	 	
tetrathionate	 	 	
Na2S406	 	 	
H2O2	 	 	
sulfoxides	 	 	
benzofuroxan	 	 	
dansyl chloride	 	 	
thiocyanogen	 	 	
(SCN)2	 	 	
tetranitromethane	 	 	
1,1′-azobis(N,N-dimethylformamide) (diamide)	 	 	
5,5′-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB)	disulfides	Cys	
n-propyl-2-pyridyl disulfide	 	 	
N-succinimidyl-3-(2-pyridyldithio)proprionate (SPDP)	 	 	
β-hydroxyethyl-2,4-dinitrophenyl disulfide	 	 	
oxidized glutathione
(GSSG)	 	 	
cystamine	 	 	
cystamine monosulfoxide	 	 	
di-N-(2-nitro-4-azidophenyl)-cystamine-S,S-dioxide (DNCO)	 	 	
sodium (2-sulfonatoethyl)methanethiosulfonate (MTSES)	methanethiosulfonates	Cys	
2-aminoethyl methanethiosulfonate
hydrobromide (MTSEA)	 	 	
(2-(trimethylammonium)ethyl)methanethiosulfonate bromide (MTSET)	 	 	
methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS)	 	 	
1-ethyl-3-(3′-dimethylan1inopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC)	various	Asp/Glu	
2-hydroxy-5-nitrobenzyl bromide
(Koshland’s Reagent)	 	Trp	
sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin	 	Lys	
4,4′-diisothiocyanatostilbene-2,2′-disulfonate (DIDS)	 	Lys	
4-acetamido-4′-isothiocyanato-stilben-2,2′-disulfonate (SITS)	 	Lys	
pyridoxal phosphate
(PLP)	 	Lys	
Woodward’s reagent K (2-ethyl-5-phenylisoxazolium-3′-sulfonate)	 	Asp/Glu	
phenylglyoxal	 	Arg	
phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride (PMSF)	 	Ser	
diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)	 	His	
N-bromosuccinimide (NBS)	 	Trp	
The most exploited amino acid in chemical
targeting of transporters
is cysteine and, in a few cases, lysine or others.6 Indeed, cysteine abundance in proteins increased during
evolution, but it is still one of the least abundant, thus being a
favorable residue for specific targeting. Moreover, the side group
of cysteine may give rise to different kinds of reactions at physiological
pH, making this residue one of the most employed in the study of structure/function
relationships of transporters [refs (7 and 8) and refs therein]. Thus, many reagents have been developed with
different reaction mechanisms, such as alkylation (maleimides), the
formation of mixed disulfides (methane thiosulfonates), or the formation
of metal–S bonds (simple or derivatized heavy metals).3 All these classes of reagents include a lot of
different compounds characterized by different properties of hydrophilic/hydrophobic
balance and size. Moreover, bifunctional, fluorescent reagents and
high molecular mass reagents are available for exploring protein–protein
interactions and identifying exposed residues using a simple SDS-PAGE
analysis.5,8 Differently, lysine is relatively more abundant,
thus being a good candidate for extensive or unspecific targeting,
as in the case of some cross-linking strategies.6 Currently, two major approaches are used in handling reagents:
(i) the canonical chemical targeting and (ii) the chemical targeting
coupled to site-directed mutagenesis (Figure 2A and B). The first mostly gives predictions
on the location and exposure of protein moieties; in this respect,
a parallel computational analysis may improve the accuracy of the
results. The second gives more precise information on the structure/function
relationships of specific residues or more defined protein moieties.
However, the site-directed mutagenesis approach is based on the availability
of a recombinant transporter and on a method for assaying transport in vitro such as in proteoliposomes.9 In principle, the recent and up to date CRISPR/Cas9 technology could
also allow in vivo site-directed mutagenesis, but
this strategy does not yet have a wide application in structure/function
relationship studies. A peculiar and classical example of chemical
targeting coupled to site-directed mutagenesis is the methodology
known as Cys-scanning mutagenesis.10 Similar
chemical targeting approaches have been employed to study a huge number
of different transporters from plasma and organelle membranes, with
a special focus on those from an inner mitochondrial membrane.11 Therefore, a systematic dissertation cannot
be here afforded. In this mini-review, a compact overview of the use
of chemical targeting for gaining insights into structure/function
relationships of plasma membrane transporters will be given. The described
strategies have been chosen because they have a general application
in the field of membrane transporters. A special focus on the widely
used cysteine targeting will be proposed. Besides cysteine, two examples
of a peculiar targeting approach based on tryptophan and lysine will
also be provided. The proteins dealt with are members of the SLC1,
SLC6, and SLC7 families responsible for the transport of amino acids
and the SLC22 family responsible for the transport of organic cations
and carnitine. The choice of these proteins derives from their relevance
in human pathologies and pharmacology for drug design, thus representing
a future perspective on the use of chemical targeting also in the
pharmaceutical field.7 Indeed, the targeted
covalent inhibitors (TCIs) approach applied on a transport protein
was revealed to be already fruitful in the case of the largely used
drug, omeprazole.

Figure 2 Chemical targeting coupled to site-directed mutagenesis.
The sketch
depicts a typical asymmetric transporter inserted in a cell membrane.
Targetable residues (T) or their mutants (M) are exposed to the reagent
(R). (A) In the wild-type transporter, after the interaction with
the reagent, a measurable effect called “ON” is observed.
(B) In the mutant protein, in which one of the targetable residues
(T) is substituted by a nontargetable residue (M), the effect observed
in (A) disappears (“OFF”), if the mutated residue is
actually the target of the reagent.

2 Canonical Chemical Targeting
As stated in
the Introduction, chemical
targeting has been employed for specifically inhibiting the transport
activity of membrane transporters. This strategy allowed identifying
a single transporter or a class of transporters characterized by reactivity
toward a specific reagent. Indeed, the first classification of membrane
transporters, in the pregenomic era, has been performed based on sensitivity
to inhibitors of two different types: covalent inhibitors which form
bonds with specific amino acid residues or noncovalent inhibitors
which interact via weak bonds such as hydrogen bonds. The canonical
chemical targeting is intended as covalent modification of an amino
acid residue of a protein. Later on, information on structure/function
relationships has been collected by combining chemical targeting data
with topology predictions. The information on protein topology derived
by hydropathy plots or by refined 3D homology models was obtained
based on template 3D structures with enough similarity with the unknown
protein. In the next paragraph, examples of using canonical chemical
targeting on some amino acid transporters are reported together with
basic information on the function and relevance of each transporter.

2.1 Rat Amino Acid Transporters SLC1A5 and SLC6A19:
Targeting Cysteine Residues by Mercurial Reagents
SLC1A5
and SLC6A19 are transporters for neutral amino acids with different
specificity, transport mechanism, and structural folds. SLC1A5, known
as ASCT2, shows high specificity for glutamine, alanine, serine, asparagine,
and threonine and obeys a peculiar transport mechanism that is an
obligatory antiport that is strictly sodium dependent [ref (12) and refs therein]. Based
on the transport mode and the substrate specificity, ASCT2 has been
proposed as a harmonizer of amino acid pools in cells. The studies
on murine ASCT2 began in the ‘90s with the annotation of the
rat gene and the study of tissue distribution of the protein. Then,
the development of methodologies for the transport assay in intact
cells allowed the study of substrate specificity and kinetics. Later,
an in vitro model for the transport assay of the
rat ASCT2 based on the proteoliposome technology was set up. This
model is suitable for the structure/function relationship studies
because proteoliposomes are artificial vesicles in which a single
protein, derived from homogenized tissue(s) or by recombinant production,
is inserted with the same orientation as in the native cell membranes,
and transport activity can be measured by reducing or abolishing the
interferences derived from other transporters or metabolic pathways
present in intact cells; this feature may represent also a limitation
of the system that lacks potential physiological regulator(s) of the
protein under investigation; indeed, the most comprehensive studies
are conducted by combining transport assays in proteoliposomes with
those in the intact cell system.9 The proteoliposome
model allowed us to investigate the functional properties of ASCT2.
As an example, the rat protein was revealed to be competent also for
glutamate transport, besides neutral amino acids. This feature links
ASCT2 to the glutamine/glutamate cycle between astrocytes and neurons
that are responsible for reducing glutamate toxicity during neurotransmission.12 SLC6A19, known as B0AT1, is a Na+-dependent transporter with high specificity for glutamine, leucine,
cysteine, valine, isoleucine, methionine, phenylalanine, alanine,
serine, and asparagine. Other amino acids are transported with lower
affinity, while cationic and anionic amino acids are not substrates.
The transport reaction mediated by B0AT1 is an electrogenic cotransport
Na+: neutral amino acid. The first studies on murine B0AT1
have been performed in intact cells, and some information on the molecular
mechanism of transport and stoichiometry has been collected.13 Later on, as for ASCT2, the proteoliposome assay
model has been set up for B0AT1, as well. Owing to this experimental
tool, some basic properties of B0AT1 have been confirmed, and some
controversies, regarding the regulatory properties and the transport
mechanism, have been solved such as the allosteric modulation by K+, the mechanism of transport, and the lack of involvement
of ACE2 (angiotensin converting enzyme 2) and collectrin in the intrinsic
transport function of B0AT1.

After the functional characterization,
chemical targeting has been applied to rat ASCT212 and rat B0AT1.9 This kind of
study has been designed in the absence of 3D structures of ASCT2 and
B0AT1 for which only homology models have been built based on bacterial
homologues. Both ASCT2 and B0AT1 were revealed to be sensitive to
the cysteine targeting by metal–S bonds using mercurial reagents
and some other heavy metals. Starting from the assumption that the
binding of a metal to the protein impairs its function, the interactions
have been evaluated as the extent of transport inhibition in proteoliposomes
harboring ASCT2 or B0AT1 extracted from a rat kidney. Inhibition by
HgCl2, methyl-Hg, and mersalyl unveiled structure/function
relationships of both B0AT1 and ASCT2. Indeed, the mercurial targeting
is linked to the presence, in both proteins, of a metal-binding domain,
namely, CXXC, that is accessible to the hydrophilic reagents. Rat
B0AT1 contains an additional CXXXC motif that is also acknowledged
as a metal target. The more hydrophilic and larger compound mersalyl
was revealed to be an inhibitor of ASCT2 and B0AT1 with the same mechanism
of HgCl2 and methyl-Hg but with lower affinity explained
by a different degree of accessibility of the compound to the reactive
domain of the proteins (Figure 1). In line with the specificity of the metal–transporter
interaction (metal–S bond), some differences in the ability
of chemical or physiological antioxidants to reverse the effect of
metals have been highlighted between ASCT2 and B0AT1. In the first
case, the inhibition is fully reversed, while in the second case,
the reversal of B0AT1 inhibition is revealed to be less efficient,
indicating that some additional mechanism rather than merely a covalent
one should take place in the interaction with metals. As a proof of
this hypothesis, in the case of B0AT1, the inhibition by the hydrophilic
mersalyl is prevented to some extent by the presence of the natural
substrate of the transporter, i.e., glutamine. This indicates that
the binding site for mersalyl is close to, or is part of, the substrate
binding site that forms an aqueous cavity exposed toward the extracellular
milieu as predicted by a homology model. Taken together, the data
of cysteine targeting allowed gaining insights into the structure/function
relationships of ASCT2 and B0AT1, probing the exposure of some hydrophilic
domains of these proteins. The collected results represent typical
examples of the canonical chemical targeting coupled to structure
predictions (homology modeling) to investigate the role of protein
moieties in the transport function. Such an application of the canonical
chemical targeting can be employed with relatively simple procedures
for a large variety of membrane transporters thanks to the availability
of a huge number of SH reagents with very different features.5,8 In the case of ASCT2 and B0AT1, the data obtained with the mercury
compounds HgCl2 and methyl–Hg also had relevance
to toxicology: the two compounds are, indeed, well-known pollutants
often spread in the environment by industry activities, and the measured
IC50 values are in the micromolar range, i.e., that are
normally present in the environment. Concerning the rat ASCT2, besides
mercury, Cu2+ also showed inhibitory effect. Other divalent
cations such as Zn2+ and Cd2+ are weaker inhibitors,
indicating that the mere presence of a binding motif does not guarantee
an efficient interaction, but the surrounding amino acid environment
influences the binding and inhibition.

2.2 Human
Amino Acid Transporter SLC1A5: A Peculiar
Targeting Tryptophan Residue by the Koshland’s Reagent
The chemical targeting of tryptophan residues has been rarely used
for membrane transporters (Table 1). In the case of human ASCT2, this strategy allowed
us to probe the sites of the interaction of cholesterol with the transporter.
A brief history of the human ASCT2 will be given for introducing its
relevance to human health. The human gene coding for ASCT2 has been
annotated after the initial studies on the murine isoforms, and then
the protein has been identified [ref (12) and refs therein]. The relevance of ASCT2 to
human health emerged after the discovery of its strong overexpression
in virtually all human cancers, boosting the efforts for deepening
the knowledge of this protein [ref (12) and refs therein]. One of the major aspects
dealt with is the biological significance of the overexpression and
the structure/function relationships that could help to improve the
design of new potential drugs able to specifically target the protein.
Regarding the first aspect, it is now well accepted that the overexpression
of ASCT2 in cancers is linked to the glutamine addiction of cancer
cells. This amino acid is used for energy production thanks to a modification
of the terminal energy metabolism consisting of a truncation of the
tricarboxylic acid cycle. Thanks to this metabolic rewiring, the carbon
skeleton of glutamine can be converted, by one carbon atom catabolism,
into ATP using a low amount of oxygen. This allows cancer cells to
sustain their high rate of proliferation by furnishing metabolites
for anaplerotic reactions.14 The ASCT2
has been studied in intact cell systems and proteoliposomes, harboring
the recombinant protein obtained by overexpression in the methylotrophic
yeast P. pastoris. The functional properties described
in cell systems overlapped those obtained with the recombinant protein,
while some differences have been highlighted in terms of substrate
specificity and the molecular mechanism of transport with respect
to the rat protein: one distinctive difference is that human ASCT2
does not recognize cysteine as a substrate, and this amino acid, possibly
by binding to an allosteric site of the protein, can modulate the
human ASCT2 transport function.12 Very
importantly, a relevant difference between the human and the rat isoforms
exists in a stretch of 31 amino acids in which the local identity
is lower than 15%. This is concurrent to the significant difference
in the abundance of cysteine residues between the two orthologues;
rat ASCT2 harbors 16 cysteine residues and human ASCT2 only 8. These
findings indicate that the results collected with a protein from a
model organism cannot always be considered fully valid also for the
human orthologue protein. An accurate evaluation of the similarity
of the proteins between the human and model organism must be performed
before drawing any conclusions. Recently, using the protein produced
in P. pastoris,12 the
3D structure of the human ASCT2 has been solved by CryoEM; interestingly,
it has been demonstrated that the protein is organized in a trimeric
structure as hypothesized by previous functional and kinetics data.12 Moreover, allosteric sites for cholesterol have
been predicted, based on patches of densities found in the solved
trimer that we have confirmed by computational docking analysis [ref (15) and references therein].
In this respect, chemical targeting has been employed to validate
such predicted areas of interaction and to obtain novel structure/function
information. A peculiar strategy based on targeting tryptophan residues
in the vicinity of a cholesterol molecule has been used. In this approach,
the Koshland’s reagent that is specific for tryptophan residues
at pH 7.0 has been employed to treat the functionally active human
ASCT2 (Figure 1). Upon
the treatment, the protein was revealed to be less sensitive to cholesterol
modulation, validating the predicted interaction of cholesterol with
tryptophan residues. The same strategy has been applied using SH reagents
able to target cysteine residues lying on the interface with cholesterol;15 in that case, additional information has been
obtained owing to the availability of some specific cysteine mutants
as described in the next paragraph. This peculiar type of chemical
targeting strategy to probe the site of interaction of cholesterol
assumes great importance due to the emerging role of cholesterol for
membrane transporter function and structure. These aspects find a
biological explanation also in the localization of membrane transporters
in lipid rafts of the membrane where other lipids, besides cholesterol,
play a regulatory function as recently demonstrated for ASCT2. The
ganglioside GD2 is responsible for the malignant phenotypes of several
human cancers through the interaction with ASCT2.16

3 Chemical Targeting Coupled
with Site-Directed
Mutagenesis
The availability of site-directed mutants of
membrane transporters
enlarges a lot the range of structure/function relationship information
that can be derived from chemical targeting. Even though some pitfalls
may arise, such as the difficulty in the production of recombinant
membrane transporters and their mutants, a sizable number of papers
deal with the combination of chemical targeting with site-directed
mutagenesis. Indeed, the on–off switch of the effect of a chemical
reagent observable between the WT protein and a site-directed mutant
(see Figure 2) is a
straightforward proof of concept to demonstrate the role of a specific
protein residue. An important step in this experimental strategy is
the right choice of the substituting residue. Taking into account
that the most used site-directed mutagenesis tool is that of cysteine,
this residue can be substituted by at least two amino acids that are
alanine and serine. The first substitution results in the simple removal
of the thiol group from the amino acid side chain. Since the role
of a residue also depends on the amino acid surroundings, the use
of alanine can be deleterious for the activity of the protein when
the cysteine residue is involved in some hydrogen bonds or other hydrophilic
interactions. In this case, serine is a better substitution since
it harbors a hydrophilic −OH residue. Generally, it is not
trivial to consult a PAM (or Blosum) matrix before deciding which
amino acid has to be used for changes.17 Some examples will follow for highlighting how a specific targeting
approach coupled to mutagenesis and to mass spectrometry gave detailed
information on the structure/function relationships.

3.1 Human
Amino Acid Transporter SLC1A5: Targeting
Cysteine Mutants by Thiol Reagents
As described above, the
interest around SLC1A5 (ASCT2) increased due to the relevance to human
health. Then, the identification of critical residues in terms of
function and reactivity to reagents has been a primary objective in
the last 10 years. These strategies are still in progress, even after
the ASCT2 3D structure resolution, to identify moieties of the protein
responsible for allosteric modulation and conformational changes occurring
during the transport cycle. A big piece of this work has been performed
employing proteoliposome transport assays.12,18 Given the presence of 8 cysteine residues in the ASCT2 structure,
the targeting of SH groups has been one of the first attempts of investigation.
The induction of S–S/SH (or vice versa) conversion revealed
that human ASCT2 is fully active in its thiol-reduced state, while
it is inactive in the oxidized state. This phenomenon has been demonstrated
by using some chemical and physiological reducing or oxidizing reagents
with the capacity to convert disulfides into thiols or thiols into
disulfides, respectively. Among these reagents, the most commonly
used are the reducing agents DTE (DiThioErythritol) and β-mercaptoethanol
(chemical reagents), GSH (reduced glutathione), and H2S
(physiological reagents); the oxidizing are Cu2+-phenanthroline
and diamide (chemical reagents), GSSG (oxidized glutathione), and
H2O2 (physiological reagents). Moving from this
premise, further aspects of cysteine reactivity have been dealt with,
and chemical reagents with different degrees of hydrophobicity, such
as methyl-Hg (hydrophobic) and MTSES (hydrophilic membrane impermeant
and 2-sulfonatoethylmethanethiosulfonate sodium salt) have been used.
Interestingly, the compounds can block the transport activity of ASCT2
with different potency, methyl-Hg being more effective than MTSES.
The different extent of inhibition suggested that the cysteine residues
underlying this phenomenon are easily accessible to methyl-Hg and
less accessible to MTSES. The identification of the cysteine residue
responsible for the effect has been straightforward using the site-directed
mutagenesis approach. Each of the eight cysteine residues has been
replaced by alanine constructing eight single cysteine mutants. The
substituting residue alanine has been chosen because it is the simplest
one in which only the thiol group is missing. The identification strategy
is based on the lack (on–off switch) or reduction of the effects
of the targeting reagents in a specific cysteine mutant (Figure 2). This residue is
the C467, thus identified as the main target of the SH reagents. With
a more sophisticated approach of kinetic analysis, the mapping of
the substrate-binding site has been completed, revealing that C467
is crucial also for the recognition of the substrate glutamine. Noteworthy,
soon after, the 3D structure of human ASCT2 was solved in complex
with the substrate that mapped exactly in the same area identified
by the targeting/mutagenesis approach.18 The chemical targeting coupled to site-directed mutagenesis revealed
to be useful to describe the mechanism of redox regulation of the
protein. Two cysteine residues, namely, C308 and C309, can form a
disulfide with the C467 explaining the inhibition of transport activity
under oxidizing conditions. The chemical targeting coupled to site-directed
mutagenesis has also been applied to validate the interaction between
cholesterol and a specific moiety of ASCT2. As stated above, cholesterol
can stimulate transport activity mediated by ASCT2 by physical interaction
with the protein; interestingly, in the presence of cholesterol the
well-known inhibitor HgCl2 was revealed to be less efficient
in blocking transport activity; in other words, cholesterol can protect
from the inhibition exerted by HgCl2. This finding is in
line with the possible presence of a cholesterol molecule in a domain
of the protein surrounded by the residues C308 and C309, according
to molecular docking predictions. Then, two cysteine-alanine mutants,
namely C308A and C309A, have been constructed, and their sensitivity
to HgCl2 in the presence of cholesterol has been tested.
In good agreement with the mentioned hypothesis, the addition of cholesterol
did not exert the protection phenomenon observed in the wild-type
protein when treated with HgCl2. This strategy definitively
allowed us to validate the presence of other binding sites for cholesterol
close to the mentioned cysteine residues as predicted by computational
analysis and by the 3D structure of ASCT2.15

3.2 Human Amino Acid Transporter SLC1A5: A Peculiar
Targeting Strategy of Lysine Residues
Besides cysteine, lysine
is another residue employed in the chemical targeting of human ASCT2
for a more complex structure/function relationship study. Indeed,
lysine targeting by biotinylation has been employed in cell systems
to obtain information on the role of N-glycosylation moieties in the
trafficking and stabilization of ASCT2 to the plasma membrane Therefore,
a peculiar approach involving site-directed mutagenesis and transfection
into human cells has been used in which the mutated amino acid is
different from the targeted one. In particular, the substituted residues
are those responsible for N-glycosylation, i.e., asparagine, while
the targeted ones are lysine residues according to the biotinylation
protocol. This approach allowed us to definitively assess the role
of N-glycosyl moieties in stabilizing the protein
at the plasma membrane [ref (12) and refs therein].

3.3 Human
Histidine/Essential Amino Acid Transporter
SLC7A5: Targeting Substrate Site Cysteine by Thiol Reagents
SLC7A5, known as LAT1, is a membrane transporter responsible for
the exchange across the cell membrane of neutral amino acids by a
Na+- and pH-independent mechanism. The protein is mainly
localized in basolateral membranes of polarized epithelia and peculiar
body districts such as the blood–brain barrier and the placental
barrier. LAT1 is one of the few examples of a heterodimeric transporter
constituted by two subunits linked via a covalent bond between two
conserved cysteine residues of each subunit, i.e., LAT1 and CD98 (SLC3A2).
The interest in LAT1 increased over the years due to its well-documented
overexpression in human cancers [ref (19) and refs therein]. As in the case of ASCT2,
the phenomenon of the overexpression has been linked to the metabolic
rewiring typical of cancer cells which become addicted to some nutrients
for both energy production and signaling. Very recently, a link of
LAT1 with a familiar form of autism spectrum disorder has been proposed,
confirming the importance of LAT1 for brain homeostasis [ref (19) and refs therein]. In
this frame, understanding the molecular mechanism of LAT1 is fundamental
for both basic and applied research in terms of designing new drugs.
The first studies on human LAT1 have been conducted in cell systems,
and the specificity toward neutral amino acids has been assessed.
A further contribution to the field has been provided by employing
the proteoliposomes harboring the recombinant protein produced in E. coli. In this experimental setup, it has been demonstrated
that LAT1 is the sole competent transport unit of the heterodimer
and that histidine is one of the favorite substrates, besides almost
all the essential amino acids. It has been demonstrated that the companion
CD98 does not play any role in the intrinsic transport function of
the heterodimer, but it should be involved in routing LAT1 to the
definitive location into the plasma membrane [ref (19) and refs therein].

LAT1 harbors 12 cysteine residues that must be in a reduced state
for full transport function. This feature correlates well with the
sensitivity toward mercury compounds, which is also responsible for
the toxicity exerted by these pollutants in the brain and placenta
where LAT1 is expressed. As in the case of ASCT2, the cysteine reactivity
has been exploited for chemical targeting approaches devoted to gain
information on the substrate binding site and residues critical for
transport function. At first, by combining computational analysis
and site-directed mutagenesis, the presence of four critical residues
for histidine binding has been revealed; in particular, the residue
F252, analogue of the tryptophan residue in the arginine/agmatine
transporter AdiC of E. coli, was revealed to be crucial
for substrate gating. Interestingly, also two cysteine residues are
required for substrate recognition. The presence of these two exposed
thiol groups allowed us to investigate their role in the reactivity
toward small, large, hydrophobic, or hydrophilic SH reagents. Therefore,
cysteine to alanine site-directed mutants have been generated, namely,
C335A and C407A: proteins lacking one or both residues did not lose
their reactivity toward the tested SH reagents. This indicated that
the substrate binding site of LAT1 is not easily accessible to molecules
very different from the natural substrate. This information is in
line with data on the minimal structural requirement for a molecule
to be considered a substrate of LAT1 and with the recently solved
3D structure of human LAT1 in complex with hCD98.20

3.4 Human Organic Cation Transporter
SLC22A4:
Targeting Cysteine Mutants by Thiol Reagents
SLC22A4, known
as OCTN1, is a plasma membrane transporter that, together with OCTN2
(SLC22A5) and OCTN3, constitutes the OCTN subfamily, a small group
of proteins responsible for the traffic of organic cations and carnitine
in cells. Surprisingly, OCTN3 has been lost in humans, thus no human
SLC classification is currently present for this protein [ref (15) and refs therein]. While
OCTN2 and OCTN3 are unequivocally identified as carnitine transporters,
OCTN1 has low affinity for carnitine and is responsible for the Na+-independent transport of organic cations, experimentally
represented by the prototype TEA (tetraethylammonium). This suggested
that, physiologically, OCTN1 might be involved in the traffic of organic
cations but not of carnitine. The transporters belonging to the SLC22
family are very interesting for their involvement in drug disposition
and interaction. Indeed, these proteins have been listed by the ITC
(International Transporter Consortium) as those to be considered when
designing new drugs.15 The human isoform
of OCTN1 has been studied in intact cells and in proteoliposomes harboring
the recombinant protein overexpressed in E. coli.
In proteoliposomes, as well as HeLa cells, it has been demonstrated
that OCTN1 can mediate the transport of acetylcholine.15 This molecule, known as a neurotransmitter,
has a relevant, even though less famous, role also in non-nervous
districts. Despite this lack of knowledge, the presence of acetylcholine
in non-neuronal tissues is an evolutionary old function that remained
also in higher organisms where it can play the autocrine role of regulating
cell growth, cell proliferation, and also the regulation of inflammatory
responses [ref (15) and refs therein]. Concerning this last aspect, a natural variant
of human OCTN1 has been related to inflammatory bowel disease, Crohn’s
disease, and is less efficient in mediating the efflux of acetylcholine
from proteoliposomes. The 3D structure of this protein is not available;
only incomplete homology models have been built, in which the large
cytosolic loop, a typical feature of the OCTN subfamily, is not solved
(Figure 3). Therefore,
the chemical targeting approach coupled to site-directed mutagenesis
was revealed to be very helpful to define structure/function relationships
of this protein and to validate the model. Indeed, four cysteine residues
are in the extracellular hydrophilic loop, and three cysteine residues
are in the hydrophobic transmembrane domain of this protein (Figure 3) [ref (15) and refs therein]. This
is a typical case of employing chemical targeting for obtaining information
on two different regions of the protein. Then, single cysteine to
alanine mutants have been generated, and their sensitivity toward
both hydrophilic and hydrophobic SH reagents has been tested. The
strategy has been based on the on–off switch of chemical reagent
effects for identifying those responsible for targeting a single cysteine
residue and identifying the hydrophilic/hydrophobic environment in
which the residues are located (Figure 2). In this experimental setup, it has been shown that
cysteine residues present in the large extracellular loop are the
most relevant for the interaction with mercurial reagents HgCl2, methyl-Hg, and ethyl-Hg. The same information has been derived
by using MTSEA (2-aminoethylmethanethiosulfonate hydrobromide), a
prototype thiol reagent that confirmed the results obtained with mercurial
reagents. From the results collected with site-directed mutants, information
on the degree of exposure of the studied cysteine residues and, hence,
on the exposure of a specific protein domain has been derived. The
main residue responsible for the inhibition exerted by mercury compounds
was revealed to be the residue C50. Another residue, namely, C136,
can also react even though with different sensitivity when comparing
the HgCl2, methyl-Hg, and ethyl-Hg. In particular, the
reactivity decreased while increasing the size and the hydrophobicity
of the reagent, suggesting that this residue may be in a small hydrophilic
pocket that cannot be reached by the three reagents with the same
feasibility. The data have been further confirmed by using MTSEA toward
which C50 and C136 mutants behaved as in the case of mercury compounds.
A double mutant C50A/C136A has been also produced, and the complete
lack of reactivity toward mercury compounds proved that these two
residues are the most relevant for the described interaction. The
higher hydrophilicity of MTSEA allowed us to conclude that another
cysteine residue, namely, C81, might be close to a hydrophilic core
accessible to MTSEA but not to the mercury compounds, explaining the
different reactivity of the C81A mutant toward these molecules. It
could be speculated that such a residue may come close to the substrate
path and that the interaction with MTSEA, bigger than HgCl2 and methyl-Hg, will affect substrate translocation. Therefore, the
site-directed mutagenesis approach allowed us to validate the homology
model built for human OCTN1. In line with this, the cysteine residues
embedded in the transmembrane residues are not accessible to hydrophilic
compounds added in the external compartment during transport assay.
This strategy also allowed us to validate a homology structural model
of OCTN1.15 According to the relevance
of the SLC22 family in drug disposition, other studies on members
of this family have been performed. A strategy similar to that described
for OCTN1 has been indeed used for the OCT2 (SLC22A2) to define the
topology of the protein.21

Figure 3 Prediction of the hOCTN1
structure. Topology 2D model obtained
using the Kyte–Doolittle algorithm for hydropathy analysis
of the hOCTN1 protein. Light blue barrels indicate 12 hydrophobic
transmembrane spanning domains. Hydrophilic loops connecting transmembrane
domains are depicted in green. The seven cysteine residues are numbered
and depicted as yellow ovals. The N- and C-termini of the protein
face toward the intracellular side. From the 2D model, the 3D homology
model of the hOCTN1 protein is built. The transmembrane domains are
represented as a light blue ribbon, while the loops connecting the
domains are in green. The 3D model has been built using a Phyre2 Server
on the structure of the eukaryotic phosphate transporter from P. indica (4J05) as a template. The side chains of the 7 Cys residues are highlighted
by numbered balls and sticks.

3.5 Cys-Scanning Mutagenesis Approach, a Summary
A peculiar type of chemical targeting approach that has been widely
used in membrane protein study is that of cysteine-scanning mutagenesis
coupled to chemical targeting. This strategy consists of inserting
a cysteine residue in each position of the tested protein starting
from the cysteineless, that is, a protein in which all cysteine residues
have been substituted by alanine or serine (or other residues). Then,
the sensitivity of each mutant containing a single cysteine residue
toward SH reagents with different degree of hydrophilicity is tested.
The main advantage of this strategy is that of solving the topology
of extensive domains of the proteins; the disadvantages are being
time-consuming due to performing many mutants (scanning mutagenesis),
the high costs, and the pitfalls caused by some unaccepted substitution
of key residues that cause protein inactivation. A major problem that
may arise at the beginning of the procedure is an inactive cysteineless
protein that cannot be used as a control. This approach has been deeply
employed for: mapping the substrate binding site; studying the exposure
of extracellular loops; defining the relationship of the hydrophobic
domains with the membrane; and determining the secondary structure
of a protein domain or an allosteric region. Eminent examples of the
employment of such a strategy are at the forefront of studies on lactose
permease of E. coli and the more recent ones on glutamate
transporter EAAT1.20,22 Noteworthy, many other papers
have been published in which the approach has been applied to other
membrane transporters.

3.6 Site-Directed Mutagenesis
Coupled to Spectroscopy,
a Summary
An innovative strategy for studying protein dynamics
or protein oligomerization is the double electron–electron
resonance (DEER) method. This is a spectroscopic technique based on
nitroxide spin labeling at a specific cysteine residue that can also
be introduced by site-directed mutagenesis. Fine structural transition
could be measured in a range of 10 Å; for this reason, such an
approach has been employed in the study of membrane transporters to
evaluate transition between facing monomers and, within a monomer,
between different structural domains. An interesting example of application
of this strategy is that of the aspartate transporter of P.
horikoshii known as GltPh. This protein represents the bacterial
counterpart of the SLC1 family of proteins. It has, indeed, a homotrimeric
structure, and the introduction of cysteine residues at predicted
sites allowed understanding that the binding of the substrate to one
monomer does not have a cooperative effect on the binding of another
substrate to the adjacent monomer(s). This kinetic feature has been
conserved during evolution, and the eukaryotic counterpart ASCT2 (SLC1A5),
that has a trimeric assembly, does not show cooperativity phenomena
as well.12 The DEER approach has been employed
also in the case of other bacterial membrane transporters and channels.23 Mass spectrometry measurements are also very
useful for unveiling structural aspects of membrane transporters,
which are difficult to properly study with NMR and X-ray strategies.
In this respect, covalent reagents able to specifically target amino
acid residues are widely used to modify proteins, which undergo mass
spectrometry analyses as previously reviewed.24

4 Application of the Chemical Targeting to Drug
Design
A specific application of the chemical targeting in
the study of
membrane transporters is that of covalent drug design. This approach
is not the most common in pharmacology; in fact, the majority of drugs
is designed as noncovalent interactors, so far. On the contrary, covalent
drugs are much fewer and are normally inhibitors of target proteins;
eminent examples of this strategy are acetylsalicylate and penicillin,
two blockbuster drugs which act by reacting with serine residues of
the cyclo-oxygenases and DD-transpeptidase, respectively. Interestingly,
membrane proteins have also been selected as targets of covalent drugs;
in this case, cysteine residues of the purinoceptor P2Y12 and the
gastric proton pump have been used as a target of other commonly used
drugs, i.e., clopidogrel and omeprazole (and derivatives), respectively.
Later on, this covalent approach has been upgraded to the currently
known as targeted covalent inhibitors (TCIs). In such a strategy,
a noncovalent interaction occurs between the drug and a target protein,
followed by the covalent binding of an electrophilic group (warheads)
of the drug to a specific amino acid residue of the target [refs (6 and 7) and refs therein]. In this respect,
the SH group of cysteine is a very good candidate due to the sizable
number of possible reactions occurring under physiological conditions.8 Moreover, the localization of membrane proteins
at the boundary between the exterior and interior of a cell makes
the covalent approach an attractive possibility for improving the
efficacy/potency of pharmacological treatments. The drug design is
a high-cost process in terms of both laboratory and animal tests with
several challenges due to the detection of compound toxicity sometimes
after completion of the costly phases of the experimentation. In this
scenario, the possibility of in silico predictions
by molecular docking analysis, before experimental testing, is one
of the best approaches for reducing the number of molecules to be
assayed experimentally with a drastic reduction of the costs. This
issue becomes particularly important for transporters considered a
“hot spot” in drug development; this is the case of
ASCT2 and LAT1 dealt with in this mini-review, due to their wide overexpression
in virtually all human cancers. These proteins are, indeed, eminent
druggable targets, and plenty of studies arose with the scope of finding
specific, potent, and efficient inhibitors able to reduce cancer cell
growth and proliferation.12,19 The majority of the
studies has been focused, for both ASCT2 and LAT1, on identifying
substrate analogues able to compete with the natural substrates in
a noncovalent fashion. One of the drawbacks of noncovalent inhibitors
is the possibility of being displaced by the natural substrate(s)
whose concentration may rise over the affinity of the transporter(s)
toward the used inhibitors. This is the reason behind the choice of
studying covalent inhibitors able to chemically knock out the transport
activity of both ASCT2 and LAT1, exploiting the presence of reactive
cysteine residues [ref (7) and refs therein]. In both cases, a library of 100 compounds with
a dithiazole moiety has been tested on the transport activity mediated
by ASCT2 and LAT1 [refs (12 and 19) and references herein]. The mechanism of inhibition is that of forming
mixed disulfide with cysteine residues of the protein(s). At first,
proteoliposomes harboring the rat isoform of ASCT2 have been used
for measuring the inhibition exerted by dithiazole-based molecules
differing in electronic, lipophilic, and steric properties of substituents.
From this study, six compounds with high inhibitory potency have been
proposed, characterized by the presence of halogen substituents of
the dithiazole scaffold (Figure 4A). Computational analysis revealed that these molecules
could be able to interact with the CXXC motif present in the rat sequence.
Noteworthy, as highlighted above, this portion of the protein is the
one with the lowest sequence identity with the human ASCT2. This feature
makes the collected results not transferable in a straightforward
fashion to the human ASCT2; indeed, these data can give only suggestions
on a prototype scaffold molecule able to trigger covalent binding
to ASCT2 that need, however, refinements to be adapted to the human
isoform. Later on, a more advanced work has been performed using proteoliposomes
harboring the human isoform of LAT1 for testing the inhibitory potency
of dithiazole- and dithiazine-based molecules with different electrophilic
and electron-donor substituents. In this case, eight compounds have
been identified as a good inhibitor with IC50 lower than
1 μM in vitro. Importantly, information on
the SAR trend could be obtained by the analyses of these results:
in fact, electron withdrawal substituents increase the interaction
with the protein, while electron donors and bulky substituents are
revealed to be less effective. Therefore, in this case, a scaffold
compound of the best inhibitor could be designed and hypothesized.
Interestingly, kinetic analysis has been conducted on the two most
potent inhibitors (Figure 4B) revealing that the type of inhibition is mixed, i.e., competitive
and noncompetitive at the same time. This suggested that, besides
a covalent type of inhibition due to the disulfide formation between
molecule and cysteine residues of LAT1, there is the possibility of
forming also a noncovalent interaction. Intriguingly, given the structure
of the dithiazole moiety, i.e., similar to that of histidine, it could
be argued that these molecules interact with the substrate binding
site by noncovalent binding. Interestingly, as described above, the
substrate binding site of LAT1 includes two cysteine residues; therefore,
cysteine to alanine mutants have been generated. In this condition,
it has been shown that the two most effective inhibitors lost the
efficacy to block the transport activity of LAT1 when one of the two
cysteine residues, namely, C407, was missing. These results confirmed
that dithiazole-based drugs can target LAT1 at the binding site via
interaction with the thiol group of an exposed cysteine residue. Interestingly,
the best inhibitors can also reduce the growth of cancer cells harboring
high expression of LAT1. Noteworthy, very recently a study showing
the effect of triazoles on LAT1 has been performed, confirming the
reactivity of this protein toward this class of molecules.25

Figure 4 Dithiazole molecules. (A) The scaffold molecule responsible
for
interaction with rat ASCT2 and a list of substituents used for the
most potent inhibitors. (B) Structures of the two most potent inhibitors
able to block human LAT1 with highlighted substituents (in red) of
the scaffold dithiazole.

5 Conclusions
After decades of studies with different methodologies, the pivotal
role played by membrane transporters in human cells is definitively
assessed. This important achievement is grounded on plenty of in silico, in vitro, in vivo, and clinical pieces of evidence. In this respect, the approach
of amino acid chemical targeting gave a big contribution to all the
steps of membrane protein studies from the identification to the regulatory
studies and the application in the pharmacology of a membrane transporter.
Therefore, given the versatility of this approach, a lot of work will
still be done using new-generation reagents on orphan or poorly known
membrane transporters, to enlarge the information about these proteins
and their fundamental role in cell homeostasis.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Mariafrancesca Scalise is a researcher of Biochemistry at
the University
of Calabria (Italy). She earned a Master’s degree in Biology,
summa cum laude, Universty of Calabria (2007), and holds a doctoral
degree in Cell Biology and activity of drugs in oncology from the
University of Calabria (2011). She worked at the World Health Organization-Lyon
(2009–2010) in the Infection and Cancer Biology group where
she learned to manipulate oncogenic viruses. Her scientific interests
are membrane transporters of nutrients, such as amino acids and carnitine,
from plasma and organelle membranes using recombinant DNA technology,
protein purification, and transport assays in proteoliposomes and
in intact cell systems. She published more than 40 papers. She serves
as an Associate Editor of Frontiers in Cellular Biochemistry and is part of the Editorial Board of SLAS Discovery. She led a special issue on membrane proteins for SLAS Discovery, and she is a co-guest editor of one special issue on membrane transport
and metabolism of amino acids in the International Journal
of Molecular Sciences.

Lara Console is a
Post Doc at the University of Calabria (Italy).
She earned a Master’s degree in Cell and Molecular Biology
at the University of Bari (2008) and holds a doctoral degree in Biochemical
and Pharmacological Sciences at the University of Bari (2012). She
worked at York University (Toronto) for one year (2013) to study the
role of N-glycosylation in the membrane trafficking of ASCT2. Her
scientific interests are membrane transporters of nutrients from plasma
membrane and mitochondria using recombinant DNA technology, protein
purification, and transport assays in proteoliposomes. Moreover, she
is involved in the study of post translational modification of membrane
transporters. Recently, she focused her interest on the identification
and characterization of transport proteins of exosomes. She has published
28 papers and is a co-guest editor of the special issue “Carnitine:
An Interesting Molecule in Metabolism, Pathophysiology, and Nutrition”
in Molecules.

Michele Galluccio
is an Associate Professor of Biochemistry at
the University of Calabria (Italy). He earned a Master’s degree
in Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology, summa cum laude (2001),
and achieved a doctoral degree in Cell Biology and activity of drugs
in oncology from the University of Calabria (2006). He worked at the
World Health Organization-Lyon (2008–2009) in the Infection
and Cancer Biology group where he was involved in monitoring membrane
transporter expression in cancer cell lines. His research interests
are membrane transporters of nutrients, such as amino acids and carnitine,
from plasma and organelle membranes using bioinformatics, recombinant
DNA technology, and protein purification. He is involved in the study
of FAD synthase isoforms and pathologies linked to their alterations.
He has published 49 papers, and he is a guest editor of the special
issue “Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide (FAD): Biosynthesis and
Function” in the International Journal of Molecular
Sciences.

Lorena Pochini is a researcher
in Biochemistry since 2006 at the
University of Calabria (Italy). She earned a Master’s degree
in Pharmacy, summa cum laude, University of Calabria (2000), and holds
a doctoral degree in Cell Biology and Activity of Drugs in Oncology
from the University of Calabria (2004). She spent some periods in
Frankfurt (Germany) during her PhD program and the following post-doc
period and recently spent a period in Goteborg (Sweden) to acquire
expertise in the field of protein overexpression in the yeast P. pastoris. In 2017, she obtained an ASN as an Associate
Professor in Biochemistry and in 2018 an ASN as Full Professor in
Biochemistry. Her scientific interests are membrane transporters of
organic cations and nutrients: human proteins overexpressed in recombinant
systems (E. coli, P. pastoris) or
extracted from cellular membranes (mitochondria and plasma membrane)
then purified and reconstituted in an artificial membrane (liposome)
for transport assays (functional and kinetics studies). She has published
more than 40 papers. She has been a member of the editorial board
of Hindawi and serves as a Review Editor in Cancer Metabolism
for Frontiers and MDPI journals (i.e., International
Journal of Molecular Sciences). At the moment she is also
a Guest Associate Editor in “Molecular and Cellular Oncology”,
leading a special issue for Frontiers.

Cesare Indiver is a Full Professor of Biochemistry at the University
of Calabria (Italy). He earned a Master’s degree in Pharmacy,
summa cum laude, University of Bari (1981), and holds a doctoral degree
in Biochemical Sciences (1988) from the University of Napoli and Bari
(Italy). He spent some periods in Munich (Germany) during his PhD
program. He was a researcher for the National Council of Research
in Italy (CNR) from 1988 to 2000. Then, he became an Associate Professor
in Biochemistry and then Full Professor in Biochemistry at the University
of Calabria (Italy). His main interests are membrane transporters
of nutrients, such as amino acids and carnitine, from plasma and organelle
membranes, using recombinant DNA technology, bacterial and yeast overexpression,
and transport assays in proteoliposomes and in intact cell systems.
A special focus is given to membrane transporters whose expression
is altered in human pathologies such as cancer, diabetes, and autism.
Moreover, he is involved in the study of FAD-synthesizing enzyme(s)
and pathologies linked to their alterations. where he published over
140 papers. He served as an Associate Editor of Frontiers
in Cellular Biochemistry; he is a member of the Editorial
Board of Frontiers in Physiology—Mitochondrial Research and of International Journal of Molecular Sciences (Section of Biochemistry, Molecular, and Cellular Biology); and
he led three special issues on membrane proteins.

Acknowledgments
This work was in part supported by PRIN (Progetti di Ricerca
di Interesse Nazionale) project no. 2017PAB8EM to CI and in part by
PON (Programma Operativo Nazionale) project no. 01_00937 to CI. Both
projects are granted by MIUR (Ministry of Education, University and
Research), Italy.
==== Refs
References
Hornbeck P. V. ; Zhang B. ; Murray B. ; Kornhauser J. M. ; Latham V. ; Skrzypek E. 
PhosphoSitePlus, 2014: mutations,
PTMs and recalibrations . Nucleic Acids Res. 
2015 , 43  (D1 ), D512 –D520 . 10.1093/nar/gku1267 .25514926 
Cesar-Razquin A. ; Snijder B. ; Frappier-Brinton T. ; Isserlin R. ; Gyimesi G. ; Bai X. ; Reithmeier R. A. ; Hepworth D. ; Hediger M. A. ; Edwards A. M. ; Superti-Furga G. ; Call A. 
for Systematic Research
on Solute Carriers . Cell 
2015 , 162  (3 ), 478 –87 . 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.022 .26232220 
van
Iwaarden P. R. ; Driessen A. J. ; Konings W. N. 
What we can learn
from the effects of thiol reagents on transport proteins . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Biomembr. 
1992 , 1113  (2 ), 161 –70 . 10.1016/0304-4157(92)90037-B .
Weinglass A. B. ; Whitelegge J. P. ; Hu Y. ; Verner G. E. ; Faull K. F. ; Kaback H. R. 
Elucidation of substrate
binding interactions in a
membrane transport protein by mass spectrometry . EMBO journal 
2003 , 22  (7 ), 1467 –77 . 10.1093/emboj/cdg145 .12660154 
deGruyter J. N. ; Malins L. R. ; Baran P. S. 
Residue-Specific Peptide Modification:
A Chemist’s Guide . Biochemistry 
2017 , 56  (30 ), 3863 –3873 . 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00536 .28653834 
Mukherjee H. ; Grimster N. P. 
Beyond cysteine: recent developments in the area of
targeted covalent inhibition . Curr. Opin. Chem.
Biol. 
2018 , 44 , 30 –38 . 10.1016/j.cbpa.2018.05.011 .29857316 
Scalise M. ; Console L. ; Galluccio M. ; Pochini L. ; Tonazzi A. ; Giangregorio N. ; Indiveri C. 
, Exploiting Cysteine Residues of
SLC Membrane Transporters as Targets for . Drugs.
SLAS Discov 
2019 , 24  (9 ), 867 –881 . 10.1177/2472555219856601 .31251685 
Gunnoo S. B. ; Madder A. 
Chemical Protein Modification through
Cysteine . ChemBioChem 
2016 , 17  (7 ), 529 –53 . 10.1002/cbic.201500667 .26789551 
Scalise M. ; Pochini L. ; Giangregorio N. ; Tonazzi A. ; Indiveri C. 
Proteoliposomes
as tool for assaying membrane transporter functions and interactions
with xenobiotics . Pharmaceutics 
2013 , 5  (3 ), 472 –97 . 10.3390/pharmaceutics5030472 .24300519 
Sahin-Toth M. ; Kaback H. R. 
Cysteine scanning
mutagenesis of putative transmembrane
helices IX and X in the lactose permease of Escherichia coli . Protein Sci. 
1993 , 2  (6 ), 1024 –33 . 10.1002/pro.5560020615 .8318887 
Palmieri F. 
The mitochondrial
transporter family SLC25: identification, properties and physiopathology . Mol. Aspects Med. 
2013 , 34  (2–3 ), 465 –84 . 10.1016/j.mam.2012.05.005 .23266187 
Scalise M. ; Pochini L. ; Console L. ; Losso M. A. ; Indiveri C. 
The Human
SLC1A5 (ASCT2) Amino Acid Transporter: From Function to Structure
and Role in Cell Biology . Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 
2018 , 6 , 96 10.3389/fcell.2018.00096 .30234109 
Bohmer C. ; Broer A. ; Munzinger M. ; Kowalczuk S. ; Rasko J. E. ; Lang F. ; Broer S. 
Characterization
of
mouse amino acid transporter B0AT1 (slc6a19) . Biochem. J. 
2005 , 389 , 745 –51 . 10.1042/BJ20050083 .15804236 
Kaback H.
R. ; Bibi E. ; Roepe P. D. 
Beta-galactoside transport in E.
coli: a functional dissection of lac permease . Trends Biochem. Sci. 
1990 , 15  (8 ), 309 –14 . 10.1016/0968-0004(90)90020-C .2204157 
Pochini L. ; Galluccio M. ; Scalise M. ; Console L. ; Indiveri C. 
OCTN: A Small
Transporter Subfamily with Great Relevance to Human Pathophysiology,
Drug Discovery, and Diagnostics . SLAS Discov 
2019 , 24  (2 ), 89 –110 . 10.1177/2472555218812821 .30523710 
Esaki N. ; Ohkawa Y. ; Hashimoto N. ; Tsuda Y. ; Ohmi Y. ; Bhuiyan R. H. ; Kotani N. ; Honke K. ; Enomoto A. ; Takahashi M. ; Furukawa K. 
ASC amino acid transporter 2, defined
by enzyme-mediated activation of radical sources, enhances malignancy
of GD2-positive small-cell lung cancer . Cancer
science 
2018 , 109  (1 ), 141 –153 . 10.1111/cas.13448 .29151270 
Mount D. W. 
Comparison
of the PAM and BLOSUM Amino Acid Substitution Matrices . CSH Protoc 
2008 , 2008 , ip59 10.1101/pdb.ip59 .
Garaeva A. A. ; Oostergetel G. T. ; Gati C. ; Guskov A. ; Paulino C. ; Slotboom D. J. 
Cryo-EM
structure of the human neutral amino acid transporter
ASCT2 . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2018 , 25  (6 ), 515 –521 . 10.1038/s41594-018-0076-y .29872227 
Scalise M. ; Galluccio M. ; Console L. ; Pochini L. ; Indiveri C. 
The Human
SLC7A5 (LAT1): The Intriguing Histidine/Large Neutral Amino Acid Transporter
and Its Relevance to Human Health . Front. Chem. 
2018 , 6 , 243 10.3389/fchem.2018.00243 .29988369 
Lee Y. ; Wiriyasermkul P. ; Jin C. ; Quan L. ; Ohgaki R. ; Okuda S. ; Kusakizako T. ; Nishizawa T. ; Oda K. ; Ishitani R. ; Yokoyama T. ; Nakane T. ; Shirouzu M. ; Endou H. ; Nagamori S. ; Kanai Y. ; Nureki O. 
Cryo-EM structure
of the human L-type amino acid transporter 1 in complex with glycoprotein
CD98hc . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
2019 , 26  (6 ), 510 –517 . 10.1038/s41594-019-0237-7 .31160781 
Pelis R. M. ; Zhang X. ; Dangprapai Y. ; Wright S. H. 
Cysteine accessibility
in the hydrophilic cleft of human organic cation transporter 2 . J. Biol. Chem. 
2006 , 281  (46 ), 35272 –80 . 10.1074/jbc.M606561200 .16990275 
Zhang W. ; Zhang X. ; Qu S. 
Cysteine Scanning
Mutagenesis of
TM4b-4c Loop of Glutamate Transporter EAAT1 Reveals Three Conformationally
Sensitive Residues . Mol. Pharmacol. 
2018 , 94  (1 ), 713 –721 . 10.1124/mol.117.111245 .29654220 
Riederer E. A. ; Focke P. J. ; Georgieva E. R. ; Akyuz N. ; Matulef K. ; Borbat P. P. ; Freed J. H. ; Blanchard S. C. ; Boudker O. ; Valiyaveetil F. I. 
A facile
approach for the in vitro
assembly of multimeric membrane transport proteins . eLife 
2018 , 10.7554/eLife.36478 .
Mendoza V. L. ; Vachet R. W. 
Probing protein structure by amino acid-specific covalent
labeling and mass spectrometry . Mass Spectrom.
Rev. 
2009 , 28  (5 ), 785 –815 . 10.1002/mas.20203 .19016300 
Hall C. ; Wolfe H. ; Wells A. ; Chien H. C. ; Colas C. ; Schlessinger A. ; Giacomini K. M. ; Thomas A. A. 
l-Type amino acid
transporter 1 activity of 1,2,3-triazolyl analogs of l-histidine and
l-tryptophan . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
2019 , 29  (16 ), 2254 –2258 . 10.1016/j.bmcl.2019.06.033 .31248771

