
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03764Mini-ReviewEmpowering Clinical Diagnostics with Mass Spectrometry Banerjee Shibdas *Department of Chemistry, Indian
Institute of Science Education and Research
Tirupati, Karakambadi
Road, Tirupati 517507, India* E-mail: shibdas@iisertirupati.ac.in.30 01 2020 11 02 2020 5 5 2041 2048 06 11 2019 21 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
unmet need for highly accurate methods of disease diagnosis
poses new challenges for developments in laboratory medicine. Advances
in mass spectrometry (MS)-based disease biomarker discoveries are
continuously expanding the clinical diagnostic landscape. Although
a number of MS-based in vitro diagnostics are already
adopted in routine clinical practices, more are expected to undergo
transition from bench to bedside in the near future. The ultrahigh
sensitivity, specificity, and low turnaround time in molecular detection
by MS make this technology highly powerful in disease detection and
therapy monitoring. This mini-review highlights how MS has created
a new paradigm in clinical diagnosis, which is growing in importance
for public health.

document-id-old-9ao9b03764document-id-new-14ao9b03764ccc-price
==== Body
Accurate and rapid performance
of medical diagnostic tests is greatly desired to foster clinical
decision making and improve human healthcare. The continuous development
of new analytical methods and techniques over the last five decades
has made a dramatic impact on disease detection and therapeutic treatments.
While the majority of in vitro diagnostics involves
immunoassays to detect the target analyte, some limitations of this
method (cross-reactivity, low sensitivity, limited dynamic range,
and often expensive and time-consuming processing) make us pay attention
to better solutions with alternative approaches, which should be highly
sensitive and specific and offer high throughput. Lately, much excitement
has met the news that mass spectrometry (MS) can outperform traditional
chemical/biochemical measurements in diagnostic molecular pathology
with its ultrahigh sensitivity that can go up to the femtomolar range.1 MS technologies are continuously evolving with
new ion source design, enhancement of resolution and sensitivity,
and miniaturization over more than a hundred years since its first
invention by J. J. Thomson. Increased automation and reduced architectural
complexity, size, and cost of different types of MS instruments also
promise easy housing and operation. Introduction of electrospray ionization
(ESI) and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass
spectrometry in the late 1980s had laid the foundation for large protein
detection. Coupling liquid chromatography with ESI mass spectrometry
(LC-MS) added another dimension to the analysis of the crude biological
mixture in less time. Since then, enormous success in accurate measurement
and identification of endogenous biomolecules helped in deciphering
the biological mechanism of disease progression and pinpointing the
potential biomarkers associated with a disease. MS-based discoveries
of new diagnostic biomarkers have played increasingly important roles
in disease risk assessment, screening, prognosis, therapy selection,
and monitoring. The recent development of ambient ionization mass
spectrometry has enabled direct analysis of biological samples (blood,
urine, tissue, saliva, sweat, skin, and exhaled breath gases) with
little or no sample pretreatment, providing the increased utility
of the MS through rapid in situ approaches. This
also opens opportunities to invoke MS as a point-of-care (POC) device
in the clinical setting for rapid detection of biomarkers, while the
patient is on the site, enabling early-stage diagnosis and quick medical
decision-making. In this context, miniature MS systems are highly
desired for their easy implementation in the field (e.g., in ambulances
and health camps) and at the bedside, expanding the use of biomarkers
for POC diagnostics. Indeed, recent developments of hand-held/palm-portable
(weight ∼1.5 kg) and several other types (weight <15 kg)
of miniature MS systems equipped with different types of mass analyzers
(quadrupole, cylindrical, rectilinear, and toroidal ion traps) drive
their potential for clinical integration at the POC.2,3 Though clinical implementations of these miniature MS devices are
at the early stage, assessment of their POC performance needs to be
evaluated in terms of their reduced cost and size, improved detection
limit and ranges, automation, robustness, versatility, and integration
with ambient ionization sources.

The nature of ionization also
plays a crucial role in discovering
disease biomarkers of various sizes and polarities (Figure 1). After the introduction of
electron ionization (EI) by Arthur J. Dempster in 1918, several types
of other ionization methods have been developed in the last hundred
years for mass spectrometric sampling. The classic methods, which
have been used for several years, are EI and chemical ionization (CI).
However, these techniques are not found to be used much for clinical
diagnostics in modern days because of their limitations in analyzing
a wide range of polar biomolecules. Most of the mass-spectrometry-based
clinical applications nowadays use MALDI, ESI, atmospheric pressure
chemical ionization (APCI), and different types of ambient ionization
(AI) sources. Figure 1 shows application ranges of different types of ionization techniques
in discovering biomarkers of different sizes and polarities. For example,
MALDI and ESI provide excellent coverage of a wide range of molecules,
especially the large biomolecules (e.g., proteins), whereas APCI and
AI generally examine small metabolites and lipids in the biological
sample.

Figure 1 Portrayal ranges of different ionization techniques in the discovery
of biomarkers of various molecular weights and polarity.

MALDI- and LC-MS in Clinical Laboratories
The recent “omics
revolution” for biomarker discovery
is largely being influenced by the robust performance of soft ionization
MS techniques, such as MALDI- and LC-ESI-MS. An enormous amount of
work on biological and clinical mass spectrometry, particularly in
the last three decades, is unleashing the power of these MS techniques
for their ubiquitous role in healthcare. Figure 2 shows the workflow, which is often followed
in clinical diagnostics based on MALDI- or LC-MS (often through the
ESI interface). Indeed, in the past ten years, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) has approved a number of these MS-based in vitro diagnostic methods for the identification of microbes,
newborn screening (NBS), quantification of therapeutic drugs in the
circulation, and vitamin D assay.

Figure 2 Schematic overview of the workflow in
clinical diagnosis based
on mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS or LC-ESI-MS).

The microbial recognition by a benchtop MS (Bruker MALDI Biotyper
CA) has revolutionized the way the pathogenic microbes are identified
from the culture of human specimens.4 This
MS device intercepts characteristic proteome fingerprints of the microorganism
colonies and matches them against the reference library spectra to
detect it. Thus, the system has gained the ability to identify more
than 400 clinically relevant bacteria and yeast species covering nearly
98% of typical bacterial identification tests done conventionally.
This has also attained accuracy comparable to that of a nucleic acid
sequencing method, but speed, easy operation, robustness, and cost-effectiveness
of the MS method can achieve widespread implementation of this technique
in microbial testing in the near future.

Likewise, liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
has emerged as a powerful technique for the simultaneous detection
of multiple amino acids, free carnitine, and acylcarnitines from the
dried blood spot, providing critical information about inborn errors
of metabolism.5 This MS-based method can
successfully screen more than 50 different metabolic disorders in
one rapid test. This is strikingly different from the conventional
enzyme- or immunoassays, which required one test to detect one disorder.
Thus, LC-MS/MS has invoked a radical change in newborn screening (NBS),
which is routinely being used in many counties. This has significantly
contributed to the prevention and medical intervention of many metabolic
disorders before they become symptomatic.

Another success of
the LC-MS/MS technique in clinical diagnosis
is therapeutic drug monitoring, especially the quantification of immunosuppressant
drugs in blood, which have a narrow therapeutic index.6 Often this method is applied to estimate the concentration
of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, sirolimus, and mycophenolic acid to control
their levels in the blood to avoid toxicity and organ rejection during
the transplantation. Although immunoassays can be performed here,
MS is preferred because of its greater specificity.

Analysis
of vitamin D levels in serum by LC-MS/MS is now a gold
standard method in clinical laboratories.7 While immunoassays cannot distinguish between 25-hydroxy vitamins
D2 and D3, the MS method can separately quantify them with high accuracy.
Information on a person’s vitamin D status is important as
the deficiency of the same is linked to several skeletal disorders
and other diseases. Furthermore, the mass spectrometric study of vitamin
D metabolism is tremendously contributing to unraveling the pathophysiology
of vitamin D related diseases as well.

The well-documented superiority
of the LC-MS/MS technique over
traditional immunoassays is often noticed in the literature, which
investigates steroids for diagnosing several endocrine disorders.1 Immunoassays often result in the overestimation
of those steroids because of cross-reactivity. In contrast, the high
specificity of the LC-MS/MS method can successfully analyze steroid
hormones with high accuracy. Assessment of thyroid function is crucial
in endocrinology. Similarly, the LC-MS/MS technique allows rapid evaluation
of thyroid hormones following the isotope dilution method, which can
outperform the conventional gold standard equilibrium dialysis method
by its speed and sensitivity. These impressive diagnostic capabilities
of MS in endocrinology should find potential routine applications
in clinics soon. However, many such MS-based endocrinology tests can
be found as laboratory-developed tests (LDT) in several companies/institutes
in the US.

It is also important to note that the choice of MS
instrument varies
depending on the clinical application. For example, a triple-quadrupole
mass spectrometer coupled to LC is often the choice for quantitative
analysis of most of the small molecules for NBS, therapeutic drug
monitoring, vitamin D, and steroid assays. A MALDI-TOF (time-of-flight)
mass spectrometer is generally used for clinical microbiology as mentioned
above.

Although the above selected MS applications in disease
diagnosis
are followed in several hospitals and clinical settings across the
world, there are many more potential MS-based diagnostic tests, which
show great promise for the future of laboratory medicine and pathology.
The discovery of several diagnostic biomarkers through omics study
of blood and tissue samples using MS technology has opened up a new
avenue in clinical diagnosis. Several tumor biomarkers, thus, have
been identified through intensive research and are awaiting their
validation in cohort studies and clinical trials. Evaluation of endogenous
metabolic profiles by MS has also demonstrated the usefulness of this
technique in disease detection.

In the last two decades, significant
trends have been observed
in succeeding with artificial intelligence (machine learning) to recognize
the complex pattern of omics data recorded by MS for classifying disease
and healthy states. In this method, often a training set is first
constructed by mining complex MS data (supervised learning) from samples
with known pathology (e.g., unhealthy vs healthy) to develop a statistical
classifier, which can be further tested with a cross-validation process
to access the predictive accuracy within the training set. The performance
of the classifier is also judged by applying that to the independent
validation set of samples, propelling the discovery of MS diagnostic
patterns and therapeutic targets from the omics data. This machine
learning approach typically includes (a) dimensionality reduction
by decreasing the number of random variables (ion signals), (b) clustering
classification to organize ion signals with common characteristics
into different groups, (c) density estimation which analyzes ion signals
in specific space, and (d) regression analysis to recognize the ion
signal patterns for developing the predictive model. More details
of the method can be found somewhere else in the literature.8 This pattern recognition approach avoids the
tedious job of finding a single or a few biomarkers. Rather, evaluating
all MS ion signals (hundreds to thousands) as biomarkers in this process
lends much more predicting power of the data, accurately providing
the diagnostic information. These types of artificial intelligence-based
bioinformatics systems are also found to be vigilant, adaptive, and
appropriate to handle the huge dimensionality of omics data, and they
also remain open to gain experience through the constant flow of information
from the training samples. This MS-based omics pattern diagnosis is
also thought to have important implications in detecting diseases
at a very early stage when slight but significant molecular dysregulation
cascades, and crosstalk specific to a disease is set off.

Ambient Ionization
MS: The Future of POC Diagnostics
The development of ambient
ionization mass spectrometry (AIMS)
is another game-changing invention for rapid disease diagnosis with
almost no sample pretreatment.9,10 This ionization probe
can be directly applied to live organs, skins, tissues, biological
fluids, and volatiles open to the air (ambient conditions), aiding
instantaneous capture of molecular fingerprints from those samples.
Different variants of AIMS have been developed after its first introduction
as desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (DESI-MS)
in 2004.11Figure 3 represents some of the most promising AIMS,
which could ignite a revolution in disease detection. Table 1 summarizes the emerging applications
of these AIMS in humans for gaining crucial diagnostic information
in a very short time at a much lower cost.

Figure 3 Schematic diagrams of
(a) desorption electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry (DESI-MS), (b) paper spray ionization mass spectrometry
(PSI-MS), (c) touch spray ionization mass spectrometry (TSI-MS), (d)
extractive electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (EESI-MS), (e)
rapid evaporative ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS) or iKnife,
(f) MassSpec Pen, (g) direct analysis in real-time mass spectrometry
(DART-MS), and (h) matrix-assisted laser desorption electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry (MALDESI-MS).

Table 1 Use of Some Ambient Ionization Mass
Spectrometry Techniques (Figure 3) for the Diagnostic Study in Humans
technique	year of inception	type of diagnosis	references	
DESI-MS	2004	distinguishing cancer and normal specimens, determining cancer
aggressiveness and grades, molecular typing of cancer, identifying
cancer biomarkers, intraoperative cancer margin assessment, visualizing
dermal penetration of sodium channel modulator, acquiring personal
information (genders, ethnicities, and ages) from latent fingerprints.	(9, 10, 12, 13, 17, 21)	
PSI-MS	2010	therapeutic drug monitoring and newborn
screening from dried
blood spot	(10, 14, 15)	
TSI-MS	2014	therapeutic drug monitoring from blood,
cancer diagnosis, identification
of bacteria from throat swab	(10, 16, 17)	
EESI-MS	2006	skin and breath
metabolite detection	(10, 18)	
REIMS/iKnife	2009	intraoperative tissue identification, classification of the
tumor and healthy specimens from different organs	(10, 19, 20)	
MassSpec Pen	2017	rapid discrimination
of cancer from normal specimens	(3)	
DART-MS	2005	metabolic fingerprinting
and quantification	(10, 22)	
MALDESI-MS	2006	mapping the distribution of endogenous and exogenous (drugs)
compounds in tissue specimens	(23)	
DESI-MS (Figure 3a) uses a stream of high-speed charged microdroplets
to strike the
sample (say tissue) surface extracting and transferring molecular
species from the sample to the splashed microdroplets, which subsequently
undergo evolution to form charged gaseous species to be detected by
the MS.11 The DESI experiment can be performed
in seconds with minimal or no sample preparation. These characteristics
of DESI enable high-throughput analysis of varieties of samples like
biopsy specimens, pharmaceutical formulations (tablets, ointments,
etc.), and biofluids spotted onto filter paper. DESI-MS can also be
operated in two dimensions by scanning the tissue surface in x and y directions, allowing detailed biochemical
(lipids, metabolites, etc.) mapping of the tissue.9,12,13 The remarkable success of this label-free
molecular imaging technique in rapidly evaluating biopsy specimens
promises to employ DESI-MSI as a next-generation histopathology technique
(discussed later).

Paper spray ionization mass spectrometry
(PSI-MS) is another variant
of AIMS (Figure 3b).14 PSI-MS is often used for analyzing a dried sample
(e.g., biofluid) spot on a small triangular filter paper, which is
clipped to a high-voltage power supply in front of a mass spectrometer.
Upon dispensing a spray solvent, analytes are electrosprayed from
the sample spot followed by their detection by the mass spectrometer.
Thus, human blood, urine, and tissues can be sampled rapidly through
this technique under ambient conditions for mass spectrometric analysis
(Table 1). These characteristics
could make PSI-MS an ideal point of care device for disease detection
and clinical diagnosis as the whole workflow, starting from loading
the sample to reporting the result, merely takes a few minutes.10 To date, however, the most widespread clinical
use of PSI-MS has been for qualitative and quantitative detection
of therapeutic drugs in blood, which can be useful in pharmacokinetics
and toxicokinetics studies.10,15

Touch spray ionization
mass spectrometry (TSI-MS) is a minor modification
of PSI-MS, where instead of a paper generally a metallic teasing needle
is used for sample loading (Figure 3c).10,16,17 Simple touching of the needle tip with the sample (tissue, blood,
throat swab, etc.) causes absorption of analytes in the needle tip,
which is then clipped to a high-voltage power source, and the rest
of the operation is similar to the PSI source as described above.
This convenient and rapid sampling makes TSI-MS remarkably attractive
for having low invasiveness and high-throughput performance in blood
and tissue analysis (Table 1).

Extractive electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
(EESI-MS)
works by the fusion of two streams of aerosols, one of which is generated
by ESI (Figure 3d).10,18 The sample (urine, serum, exhaled breath, etc.) is nebulized to
form aerosol droplets, which are bombarded with the electrospray (ES)
droplets, causing coalescence through liquid–liquid extraction.
Subsequent droplet evolution by the ES process produces gaseous charged
analytes for mass spectrometric detection (Table 1). Rapid in vivo analysis
of living objects (e.g., skin) using EESI-MS has been shown to have
potential applications in clinical diagnosis and homeland security.10

Rapid evaporative ionization mass spectrometry
(REIMS) is another
breakthrough in AIMS (Figure 3e).19,20 In REIMS, generally, a heated
electrosurgical probe is applied to a tissue to generate a smoke of
gaseous ions (generally lipid ions), which are afterward transferred
to a mass spectrometer through a flexible tube and Ventury air jet
pump. This allows REIMS to provide us in vivo and ex vivo diagnostic information in real time.20 The recent innovation of intelligent knife (iKnife)
for cancer surgery is based on REIMS technology. iKnife helps surgeons
in determining the cancer resection margin intraoperatively, while
the same is applied for cancer ablation simultaneously. The groundbreaking
success of iKnife in distinguishing cancer and normal tissues provides
a strong platform for its clinical adoption in cancer surgery soon.

The latest invention of a MassSpec pen (Figure 3f) also has huge promise in rapid discrimination
of cancer from normal tissues by reading the biochemical signature
within ten seconds.3 A MassSpec pen is
a hand-held 3D-printed pen consisting of three ports: the incoming
port for the delivery of a water droplet, a central port for gas delivery,
and the outgoing port for transporting the water droplet containing
a biochemical cocktail to the mass spectrometer. Once the pen tip
is in contact with the tissue for a few seconds, the water droplet
can extract and transfer biomolecules from the tissue to the mass
spectrometer. Two important characteristics, e.g., speed and sensitivity,
make this pen highly promising to identify the cancer margin rapidly
and intraoperatively for complete resection of the tumor.21

DART (direct analysis in real-time) is
another versatile ambient
ionization technique (Figure 3g), which can ionize species directly desorbed from the sample
surface (tablets, biofluids, living organisms, etc.), followed by
their mass spectrometric detection. The electrical discharge in the
DART ion source delivers excited-state gaseous atoms (e.g., metastable
helium), which ionize the surrounding (atmospheric) gases and eventually
the analyte species through ion–molecule reaction. As DART
can be used in the open environment to analyze samples in their native
states (solid, liquid, and gases), this technique promises its widespread
implementation for clinical and pharmacological analysis (Table 1) or as a POC device.22

Matrix-assisted laser desorption electrospray
ionization (MALDESI)
is the hybrid ambient ionization technique combining laser ablation
and electrospray post ionization as illustrated in Figure 3h. Upon laser irradiation,
the neutral analyte species are desorbed from the sample surface.
The plume of these desorbed analytes is allowed to interact with an
orthogonal electrospray plume in front of a mass spectrometer. This
causes analyte charging by the ESI-like process followed by their
mass spectrometric detection. Originally UV laser was used in this
ionization, but recently the use of a mid-infrared (IR) laser has
been invoked (IR-MALDESI).23 The most common
clinical application of MALDESI is the assessment of the distribution
of endogenous and exogenous species in the tissue specimens (Table 1). If no matrix is
applied for the above ionization, the technique is called electrospray-assisted
laser desorption/ionization (ELDI) when UV laser is used or laser
ablation electrospray ionization (LAESI) when IR laser is used. Both
of these techniques have been used for ex vivo tissue
imaging.

Imaging Mass Spectrometry for Disease Diagonsis
Mass
spectrometry imaging (MSI) is a powerful emerging analytical
technique that allows simultaneous visualization of the spatial distribution
of hundreds of biomolecules (metabolites, lipids, peptides, proteins,
etc.) across the tissue specimen without labeling them. DESI and MALDI
are the most common ionization techniques used in MSI to desorb analyte
species from the tissue surface.9,13,23 Thus, the imaging experiment is performed by scanning the tissue
surface in 2D followed by the pixel-to-pixel recording of the mass
spectral data, which are plotted finally to construct the ion images.
Thus, one MSI scan enables the visualization of hundreds of biomolecules,
whatever detected. MSI has great implication in the disease pathology.
For example, MSI can be used to pinpoint the biomarker localization
in the tissue section for discriminating cancer and normal specimens,
evaluating tumor margins from the excision biopsies and diagnosing
several other diseases.9,12,13,17,21 While DESI-MSI
has the ability to map the distribution of small molecules (metabolites,
lipids, etc.), MALDI-MSI can image the distribution of relatively
large molecules (peptides, lipids, etc.) and proteins in the tissue.
However, DESI has a major advantage over MALDI, particularly because,
unlike MALDI, DESI requires minimal sample preparation and does not
need a vacuum chamber or an enclosure for ionization. DESI can be
operated under ambient conditions (open-air sampling) rapidly to acquire
the molecular information in almost real-time. DESI-MSI can be applied
to a fresh tissue section or even live organ/skin without any pretreatment.
Being less destructive (when the appropriate solvent spray is used),
the same section can be evaluated by conventional histopathology (H&E)
after its DESI-MSI study. The H&E images can be overlaid with
the metabolite/lipid ion map to empower DESI-MSI in understanding
the metabolic signature of the healthy and unhealthy tissue. Figure 4 presents an example
of diagnosing prostate cancer using DESI-MSI. A typical surgically
resected prostate specimen (Figure 4a) was evaluated by a genitourinary pathologist to
delineate the areas of cancerous (red outline) and normal (black outline)
tissue. DESI-MSI of the adjacent section (Figure 4b) shows the differential distributions of
PS(18:0/18:1) (m/z 788.5409) and
PA(20:4/17:0) (m/z 709.4778) in
cancer and normal cells. While the former (PS) was found to be downregulated,
the later (PA) was upregulated in the cancerous area of the tissue.21 Our recent study also revealed that the DESI-MS
measurement of glucose and citrate levels can accurately predict the
prostate cancer margin rapidly (Figure 4c).24 Further, the application
of unsupervised or supervised statistical methods in MSI data pattern
recognition can perform well in discriminating the healthy and unhealthy
tissues with a very high agreement with the conventional gold standard
histopathology (H&E and immune histopathology, etc.).9 Although much of the studies on humans using
DESI-MSI focused on cancer,9 the performance
of this technique in other diseases (renal, infectious, skin, fertility,
transplantation, and metabolic diseases), where tissue analyses are
involved, needs to be evaluated in the future. It should be noted
that the spatial resolution of DESI-MS images is ∼150–200
μm, which compares well with the thickness of a surgical knife.
However, much lower spatial resolution (∼20 μm) can be
achieved using MALDI-MSI. Indeed, MALDI-MSI also emerged as a valuable
tool with several clinical applications like localizing proteins,
mapping the distribution of lipids and neuropeptides at both organ
and cellular levels in the context of biomarker discovery, diagnosis,
and prognosis of different diseases.23,25 Overall, great
sensitivity, chemical specificity, fairly high spatial resolution,
and multiplex molecular information make MSI a powerful medical imaging
technique, which could serve as a useful adjunct to histology for
disease diagnosis.

Figure 4 (a) H&E of a prostate tissue specimen that contains
both normal
(black outline) and cancer (red outline) areas. (b) Negative ion mode
DESI-MSI of the adjacent section (15 μm thickness) mapping the
differential distribution of a phosphatidic acid (m/z 709.4778) and a phosphatidylserine (m/z 788.5409) throughout the tissue (overlaid image
in bicolor), distinguishing the areas of cancer and normal. (c) Extracted
ion chronograms of glucose and citrate over a line scan of a typical
prostate tissue specimen (H&E shown in the inset) that contains
both normal (black outline) and cancer (red outline) areas.24

Excitements, Challenges,
and Limitations to Overcome
All told, mass spectrometry has
opened a new window in the clinical
laboratory with its remarkable sensitivity and specificity, which
is often not produced by other analytical techniques. Although MS
is still underutilized in various clinical settings, it has the potential
to extend the current capabilities of disease detection with its high
level of accuracy, precision, and reproducibility. Continuous advancements
in making MS more robust with various types of automation and robotics
also warrant its high-throughput performance with affordable cost-to-benefit
balance. From the NBS study, this is now well understood that a single
MS test can detect multiple diseases. Therefore, MS can be viewed
as a next-generation pathology technique for acquiring multiple pathological
information, characteristic of various diseases, in a single test,
reducing the financial and technical drain on hospital resources.
The development of AIMS has brought a revolution, which is anticipating
progression from the time-consuming LC-MS approach to the rapid spatially
resolved in situ approach. The use of artificial
intelligence in pattern recognition of a huge data set recorded by
AIMS lends much more predictive power than that in evaluating the
signal of a few diagnostic biomarkers. AIMS has been particularly
useful in rapid cancer margin analysis intraoperatively, which is
critically needed to augment the success rate of frozen section analysis
and to circumvent the need for time in extensive sample processing
in conventional histopathology during surgery. The near-future availability
of low-cost miniature or hand-held mass spectrometers is likely to
play an important role in clinics for the development of POC devices.
Taming MS software packages by machine learning algorithms to read
the MS data as a “barcode of the disease” should aid
the smooth transition of the MS from bench to bedside. Considering
all those capabilities, mass spectrometry is appearing as a technique
of obvious public health importance, although there could be mixed
feelings and anxieties in the clinical diagnostic community as MS
could outperform several traditional diagnostic methods. However,
cohort studies and clinical trials of many MS-based diagnostic methods
should be undertaken on different populations (countries) for their
transition from discovery-based approaches to standard clinical practices.
Despite the remarkable promise, one of the major limitations of the
clinical MS to date is the identification of blood biomarkers for
the detection of a disease (say cancer) at a very early stage, when
a few maker molecules are released in circulation. So far, most of
the MS-based clinical studies have been conducted when the disease
is well manifested. This limitation needs to be overcome by appropriate
subject selection for the clinical study at the onset of the disease.
A biomarker can also present the epiphenomena of a disease, or it
could also be found in a similar presentation of a disease. This also
needs to be clarified before the clinical practice with the biomarker.
Therefore, there are still challenges to overcome in this aspect though
we can be optimistic that there should be several MS-based clinical
assays approved soon by healthcare regulatory authorities.

The author
declares no competing financial interest.



Shibdas Banerjee completed his M.Sc in chemistry at the
Indian
Institute of Technology (IIT), Roorkee, India, in 2008 and Ph.D. in
chemistry at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Mumbai,
India, in 2014. He worked as a postdoctoral research associate in
the laboratory of Prof. Richard N. Zare, Stanford University, USA,
from 2014 to 2017. He is currently an assistant professor in the Department
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER),
Tirupati, India.

Acknowledgments
The author is thankful to the Science
and Engineering
Research Board, Department of Science and Technology, Government of
India, for providing a Ramanujan Fellowship Research Grant (SB/S2/RJN-130/2017)
and Early Career Research Award (ECR/2018/001268).

Dedication
Dedicated to Richard
N. Zare on the occasion of his 80th birthday.
==== Refs
References
Yan Z. ; Cheng C. ; Liu S.  Applications of Mass Spectrometry
in Analyses of Steroid Hormones . In LC-MS
in Drug Bioanalysis ; Xu Q. A. , Madden T. L.  , Eds.; Springer US : Boston, MA , 2012 ; pp 251 –286 .
Ferreira C.
R. ; Yannell K. E. ; Jarmusch A. K. ; Pirro V. ; Ouyang Z. ; Cooks R. G. 
Ambient
Ionization Mass Spectrometry for Point-of-Care
Diagnostics and Other Clinical Measurements . Clin. Chem. 
2016 , 62  (1 ), 99 –110 . 10.1373/clinchem.2014.237164 .26467505 
Zhang J. ; Rector J. ; Lin J. Q. ; Young J. H. ; Sans M. ; Katta N. ; Giese N. ; Yu W. ; Nagi C. ; Suliburk J. ; Liu J. ; Bensussan A. ; DeHoog R. J. ; Garza K. Y. ; Ludolph B. ; Sorace A. G. ; Syed A. ; Zahedivash A. ; Milner T. E. ; Eberlin L. S. 
Nondestructive
tissue analysis for ex vivo and in vivo cancer diagnosis using a handheld
mass spectrometry system . Sci. Transl. Med. 
2017 , 9  (406 ), eaan396810.1126/scitranslmed.aan3968 .28878011 
Kostrzewa M. 
Application
of the MALDI Biotyper to clinical microbiology: progress and potential . Expert Rev. Proteomics 
2018 , 15  (3 ), 193 –202 . 10.1080/14789450.2018.1438193 .29411645 
Ombrone D. ; Giocaliere E. ; Forni G. ; Malvagia S. ; la Marca G. 
Expanded newborn
screening by mass spectrometry: New tests, future perspectives . Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2016 , 35  (1 ), 71 –84 . 10.1002/mas.21463 .25952022 
Jannetto P. J.  Chapter 8 -
Therapeutic drug monitoring using mass spectrometry . In Mass Spectrometry for the Clinical Laboratory ; Nair H. , Clarke W.  , Eds.; Academic Press : San Diego , 2017 ; pp 165 –179 .
Volmer D. A. ; Mendes L. R. B. C. ; Stokes C. S. 
Analysis of vitamin D metabolic markers
by mass spectrometry: Current techniques, limitations of the “gold
standard” method, and anticipated future directions . Mass Spectrom. Rev. 
2015 , 34  (1 ), 2 –23 . 10.1002/mas.21408 .24318020 
Perakakis N. ; Yazdani A. ; Karniadakis G. E. ; Mantzoros C. 
Omics, big
data and machine learning as tools to propel understanding of biological
mechanisms and to discover novel diagnostics and therapeutics . Metab., Clin. Exp. 
2018 , 87 , A1 –A9 . 10.1016/j.metabol.2018.08.002 .30098323 
Banerjee S. 
Ambient ionization
mass spectrometry imaging for disease diagnosis: Excitements and challenges . J. Biosci. 
2018 , 43  (4 ), 731 –738 . 10.1007/s12038-018-9785-y .30207318 
Li L.-H. ; Hsieh H.-Y. ; Hsu C.-C. 
Clinical Application
of Ambient Ionization
Mass Spectrometry . Mass Spectrom. 
2017 , 6  (2 ), S0060 –S0060 . 10.5702/massspectrometry.S0060 .
Takáts Z. ; Wiseman J. M. ; Gologan B. ; Cooks R. G. 
Mass Spectrometry
Sampling Under Ambient Conditions with Desorption Electrospray Ionization . Science 
2004 , 306  (5695 ), 471 –473 . 10.1126/science.1104404 .15486296 
Eberlin L. S. ; Dill A. L. ; Golby A. J. ; Ligon K. L. ; Wiseman J. M. ; Cooks R. G. ; Agar N. Y. R. 
Discrimination
of Human Astrocytoma
Subtypes by Lipid Analysis Using Desorption Electrospray Ionization
Imaging Mass Spectrometry . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
2010 , 49  (34 ), 5953 –5956 . 10.1002/anie.201001452 .
Eberlin L. S. ; Ferreira C. R. ; Dill A. L. ; Ifa D. R. ; Cooks R. G. 
Desorption
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry for lipid characterization
and biological tissue imaging . Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, Mol. Cell Biol. Lipids 
2011 , 1811  (11 ), 946 –960 . 10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.05.006 .
Liu J. ; Wang H. ; Manicke N. E. ; Lin J.-M. ; Cooks R. G. ; Ouyang Z. 
Development, Characterization,
and Application of Paper
Spray Ionization . Anal. Chem. 
2010 , 82  (6 ), 2463 –2471 . 10.1021/ac902854g .20158226 
Chiang S. ; Zhang W. ; Ouyang Z. 
Paper spray
ionization mass spectrometry:
recent advances and clinical applications . Expert
Rev. Proteomics 
2018 , 15  (10 ), 781 –789 . 10.1080/14789450.2018.1525295 .30223684 
Kerian K. S. ; Jarmusch A. K. ; Cooks R. G. 
Touch spray
mass spectrometry for
in situ analysis of complex samples . Analyst 
2014 , 139  (11 ), 2714 –2720 . 10.1039/C4AN00548A .24756256 
Ifa D. R. ; Eberlin L. S. 
Ambient Ionization
Mass Spectrometry for Cancer Diagnosis
and Surgical Margin Evaluation . Clin. Chem. 
2016 , 62  (1 ), 111 –123 . 10.1373/clinchem.2014.237172 .26555455 
Gu H. ; Xu N. ; Chen H. 
Direct analysis of biological samples using extractive
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (EESI-MS) . Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 
2012 , 403  (8 ), 2145 –2153 . 10.1007/s00216-012-5874-1 .22434271 
Balog J. ; Sasi-Szabó L. ; Kinross J. ; Lewis M. R. ; Muirhead L. J. ; Veselkov K. ; Mirnezami R. ; Dezso B. ; Damjanovich L. ; Darzi A. ; Nicholson J. K. ; Takáts Z. 
Intraoperative
Tissue Identification Using Rapid Evaporative Ionization Mass Spectrometry . Sci. Transl. Med. 
2013 , 5  (194 ), 194ra93 –194ra93 . 10.1126/scitranslmed.3005623 .
Takats Z. ; Denes J. ; Kinross J. 
Identifying
the margin: a new method
to distinguish between cancerous and noncancerous tissue during surgery . Future Oncol. 
2012 , 8  (2 ), 113 –116 . 10.2217/fon.11.151 .22335574 
Banerjee S. ; Manna S.
K.  Assessment of Metabolic
Signature for Cancer Diagnosis Using Desorption Electrospray Ionization
Mass Spectrometric Imaging . In Cancer Metabolism:
Methods and Protocols ; Haznadar M.  , Ed.; Springer New York : New York, NY , 2019 ;
pp 275 –297 .
Li Y.  Application of
DART-MS in Clinical and Pharmacological Analysis .
In Direct Analysis in Real Time Mass Spectrometry ; Dong Y.  , Ed.; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA : 2017 ; pp 223 –240 .
Barry J. A. ; Robichaud G. ; Bokhart M. T. ; Thompson C. ; Sykes C. ; Kashuba A. D. M. ; Muddiman D. C. 
Mapping antiretroviral drugs in tissue
by IR-MALDESI MSI coupled to the Q Exactive and comparison with LC-MS/MS
SRM assay . J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 
2014 , 25  (12 ), 2038 –2047 . 10.1007/s13361-014-0884-1 .24744212 
Banerjee S. ; Zare R. N. ; Tibshirani R. J. ; Kunder C. A. ; Nolley R. ; Fan R. ; Brooks J. D. ; Sonn G. A. 
Diagnosis of prostate cancer by desorption
electrospray ionization mass spectrometric imaging of small metabolites
and lipids . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
2017 , 114  (13 ), 3334 –3339 . 10.1073/pnas.1700677114 .28292895 
Ucal Y. ; Durer Z. A. ; Atak H. ; Kadioglu E. ; Sahin B. ; Coskun A. ; Baykal A. T. ; Ozpinar A. 
Clinical applications
of MALDI imaging technologies in cancer and neurodegenerative diseases . Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Proteins Proteomics 
2017 , 1865  (7 ), 795 –816 . 10.1016/j.bbapap.2017.01.005 .28087424

