
==== Front
ACS Omega
ACS Omega
ao
acsodf
ACS Omega
2470-1343 American Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsomega.9b03695
Mini-Review
Small-Molecule Inhibition of Bacterial Biofilm
Ghosh Anirban *† Jayaraman Narayansaswamy ‡ Chatterji Dipankar † †Molecular
Biophysics Unit and ‡Department of Organic Chemistry, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
* E-mail: ganirban@iisc.ac.in.
12 02 2020 
25 02 2020 
5 7 3108 3115
01 11 2019 30 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Antibiotic
resistance is a massive and serious threat to human
welfare and healthcare. Apart from being genetically resistant to
antibiotics, the other important mechanism by which bacteria can evade
antibiotics is multidrug tolerance. Here cells enter into a transiently
nongrowing phase, and as a result, latent infection remains inside
the host, causing disease recurrence. Biofilm-derived antibiotic tolerance
and persister formation of the pathogenic bacteria inside the host
remain a serious issue of
treatment failure and recurrent chronic infection in the case of all
major pathogens. As a result, new chemotherapeutic agents are sought
that specifically inhibit biofilm formation or maturation as well
as cause the dispersion of mature biofilms, thus allowing the conventional
drugs to kill sensitive cells residing inside. This mini-review attempts
to analyze different small-molecule-based chemical approaches that
have been used to enable bacterial biofilm inhibition at different
steps of maturation.

document-id-old-9ao9b03695document-id-new-14ao9b03695ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Bacterial biofilms, which are a self-synthesized,
matrix-enclosed,
surface-attached cell mass, harbor a large proportion of drug-tolerant
population (Figure 1). Pathogenic bacteria residing inside the biofilm survive antibiotic
treatment by three different, yet inter-related, mechanisms: (i) The
outer thick layer of the biofilm extracellular matrix which consists
of polysaccharide, proteins, extracellular DNA, lipids, complex sugars,
etc.1 that physically blocks the penetration
of the antibiotics, (ii) biofilm components sequester antibiotics,
and (iii) the inner hostile environment of the biofilm which lacks
nutrients and oxygen promotes bacteria to become metabolically inactive
and thus survive the low dose of antibiotics. As most of the antibiotics
are designed to target pathways such as DNA replication, cell wall
biogenesis, and protein synthesis, these processes are either partly
or completely absent in the biofilm-grown bacterial population (Figure 2). Unlike antibiotics,
most designed antibiofilm agents should target auxiliary pathways
without affecting bacterial survival and hence exert less selection
pressure for the development of resistant mutants. In many instances,
a combination of such compounds with front line drugs has proved to
possess a superior therapeutic effect.

Figure 1 Different steps of bacterial
biofilm formation.

Figure 2 (A) Metabolic activity
of cells within biofilm is a function of
depth, and (B) the biofilm enables partial penetration and killing
by antibiotics.

Bacterial Biofilm: Clinical Relevance
Bacteria can form biofilms on living surfaces such as host tissue
and nonliving surfaces such as medical devices and implants which
are of the utmost clinical relevance. In humans, 80% of all the bacterial
infections can be related to biofilm-derived pathogens. The most common
biofilm-forming bacteria include Staphylococcus epidermidis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus
aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterococcus
faecalis, Streptococcus viridans, Escherichia coli, and Proteus mirabilis. Bacterial cells within the biofilm have proved to be a thousand
times more resistant against standard antibiotics compared to the
planktonic population and are resistant to host immune response, making
them extremely difficult to eliminate. S. epidermidis is considered to be one of the most common bacteria associated with
medical-device-related biofilm and leads to the spread of antibiotic
resistance and treatment failure. Nosocomial pathogen P. aeruginosa is an efficient biofilm former and thus becomes difficult to treat
in patients suffering from cystic fibrosis and ventilator-associated
pneumonia (VAP). S. aureus and S. epidermidis biofilms are known to be responsible for 40–50% of prosthetic
heart valve infections and 50–70% of catheter infections. In
the case of K. pneumoniae, it has been reported that
50% of the time carbapenem-resistant strains have strong biofilm phenotype.
Similarly, the opportunistic pathogen E. faecalis forms a biofilm on different medical devices such as catheters and
heart valves, thereby promoting pathogenicity and antibiotic resistance.
Clinical isolates of endocarditis-causing S. viridans strains have been shown to form dense biofilm in vitro and able to tolerate high concentration, as much as 128 times the
minimum inhibition concentration of drugs compared to planktonic cells. P. mirabilis strains readily form biofilms in different
abiotic surfaces such as glass, polystyrene, and silicon and are often
associated with urinary tract infection. A recent study involving A. baumanii demonstrates the resistance profile of a bacterial
population linked directly to the complex evolutionary dynamics of
its biofilm lifestyle, hence impacting the treatment outcome. Uropathogenic
strains of E. coli (UPEC) are reported to be involved
in biofilm formation and the severity of catheter-based urinary tract
infections in hospital. Thus, it is evident from a clinical point
of view that biofilm plays a huge role in several important infectious
diseases.

Biofilm Inhibition
Understanding the necessity of the
development of antibiofilm compounds,
many research groups around the world focus on various domain-specific
approaches. Biofilm inhibition can be potentially targeted by either
natural products or synthetic analogues. There are advantages in both
of these approaches, which can be classified broadly as (i) inhibition
of biofilm formation and (ii) disruption of preformed biofilm. There
are different therapeutic applications for both, as the former approach
could be useful to prevent biofilm formation after surgery or on medical
devices, whereas the latter approach could be used in combination
with standard drugs, specifically targeting the biofilm-forming population
within infection sites.

Biofilm inhibition can be achieved in
different steps: (i) the
inhibition of bacterial surface adhesion or the initiation step; (ii)
interference with the quorum-sensing system; (iii) modulation with
the second nucleotide messenger signaling molecules; (iv) chemical
inhibition of biofilm maturation; and (v) disruption of mature biofilms.
Small organic compounds can inhibit the bacterial surface adhesion
and interfere with the quorum-sensing system. On the other hand, modulation
with the second nucleotide messenger-signaling molecules, chemical
inhibition of biofilm maturation, and disruption of mature biofilms
can be achieved with specific pathway inhibitors.

I Inhibition
of Bacterial Surface Adhesion
The first step of successful
biofilm formation is attachment of the
bacterial cells to the surface or substratum. This line of research
is considered to be the nonspecific approach where surface modifications
of the biomaterials are necessary with the help of antibiotics, metal
ions, and other synthetic compounds. Bactericidal antibiotics are
commonly used to coat medical devices in order to kill any pathogenic
bacteria which come in contact with the outer surface. Vancomycin
has been shown to prevent S. epidermidis biofilm
formation when it is covalently bound to titanium alloy. Other bactericidal
compounds that are in practice are zinc oxide nanoparticle coating
on glass and iodine-coated titanium implants. Copper ion implantation
is shown to have antibacterial property against S. aureus.2 Furanones are used widely as coating
on medical devices in order to prevent biofilm formation by different
pathogenic bacteria. Covalently coupled 3-(trimethoxysilyl)-propyldimethyloctadecyl
ammonium chloride (QAS) is also shown to prevent biofilm formation
due to its antimicrobial property. Antiadhesion surface coating is
a similar approach to prevent initial bacterial attachment with host
and device surfaces. Here, chemical compounds are used, in order to
change hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity, surface roughness, and texture
of the surface.

ii Interference with the Quorum-Sensing
System
Quorum sensing (QS) refers to the bacterial communication
system
at the molecular level by which bacteria responds to different environmental
signals and translates the message by up-regulating and/or down-regulating
a set of genes involved in stress tolerance, virulence, and biofilm
formation. QS is composed of density-dependent synthesis and sensing
of certain extracellular small molecules called “autoinducers”
which can vary across different bacterial species. The main class
of autoinducers (AIs) studied in many Gram (-ve) bacteria such as Pseudomonas spp, Burkholderia spp, and Acinetobacter spp is acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs) (Figure 3). AHLs have been
broadly classified as traditional and noncanonical signal types in
both Gram (+ve) and Gram (-ve) bacteria. Traditional AHLs such as
C4–C8 and 3OC4–3OC18 are shown to be associated with
biofilm formation, virulence, and swarming motility, whereas very
few of the noncanonical AHLs could be linked to a distinct phenotype. p-Coumaroyl-HSL from Rhodopseudomonas palustris and N-carboxyl-acyl-HSL from Methanothrix
harundinacea has been discovered to be involved in global
gene expression and filamentous growth, respectively.3 Other types of autoinducers reported to date are quinolones
in the case of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, ketone-based
autoinducer-1 (CAI-1) for Vibrio spp and Legionella spp; fatty acids in Xanthomonas spp and Burkholderia spp known as diffusible signal
factors (DSF); epinephrine; and AI-3. Similarly, indole is shown to
be involved in intercellular signaling and modulate certain pathogenic
bacterial phenotypes such as biofilm formation and virulence.4 In Gram (+ve) bacteria, species-specific autoinducer
peptides (AIPs) play the crucial role of QS activation. In the case
of Staphylococcus aureus, a broad range of AIPs from
AIP-1 to AIP-4 have been described. Similarly, AIP Se-1,2,3 has been
reported in a clinically relevant biofilm of Staphylococcus
epidermidis. AI-2 acts as a QS stimulator in both Gram (+ve)
and Gram (-ve) bacteria, and some bacteria are equipped to respond
to multiple QS stimulators simultaneously in a definite order of a
complex regulatory network.

Figure 3 (A) Chemical structures of few Gram (-ve) bacterial
quorum-sensing
molecules. (B) Different reactions catalyzed by quorum-sensing molecule-degrading
enzymes.

The molecular mechanism to hamper
QS is called quorum quenching
(QQ), which was first discovered in Erwinia carotovara. There are several naturally occurring and synthetic quorum-sensing
inhibitors (QSIs) by which bacteria block these chemical messengers
in different ways. Extracellular enzymatic hydrolysis of AIs by lactonases,
acylases, and oxidoreductase enzymes have been reported by Fetzner
and co-workers (Figure 3),5 whereas synthetic small molecules
have shown to interfere with the production of AIs. Since almost all
AI-2s are synthesized by LuxS enzyme, LuxS inhibition was targeted
by different substrate and intermediate analogues. One such notable
inhibitor is the SRH analogue 3,5,6-trideoxy 6-fluorohex-5-enofuranose,
where the C3 hydroxyl group is absent, which is necessary for conversion.6 The phage display method was used to find a peptide
inhibitor of LuxS, and one peptide, TNRHNPHHLHH,
has shown promising activity with ∼25% reduction in catalytic
activity of the LuxS enzyme. Another attracting target to inhibit
QS in E. coli, S. pneumoniae, and V.cholerae is MTAN (methylthioadenosine nucleosidase), which
is directly involved in AHL and AI-2 production. Though some MTAN
inhibitors have shown antimicrobial activity, largely they are very
specific to inhibit QS-derived biofilm formation without any effect
on the bacterial growth profile, highlighting the importance in terms
of preventing selection of resistant mutants.7 In E. faecalis and other Gram (+ve) bacteria, amburic
acid has been shown to inhibit the production of signaling peptides
with an unknown mechanism. The scavenging mechanism of the AIs by
cyclodextrins and antibodies has been described as an alternative
approach. QS antagonistic peptides have shown promising results to
inhibit AI-2 and other QS molecules in both Gram (+ve) and Gram (-ve)
bacteria. Several natural compounds have been studied to possess anti-QS
properties like eugenol from clove, polyphenols from tea or honey,
and ajoene from garlic. Synthetic small molecules like azithromycin
and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) were also studied extensively to demonstrate
the QS control mechanism. Combination therapy of different QQs with
standard antibiotics has been explored and shown to have synergistic
effects in most occasions. Aminoglycosides and quinolones have been
shown to have greater antimicrobial activity against Pseudomonas
aeruginosa biofilm. Similarly, cephalosporin, glycopeptide,
and polypetide antibiotics have been shown to have enhanced potency
in the presence of different QSIs against P. aeruginosa. Brackman and co-workers have shown that the QSI compound baicalin
hydrate and hamamelitannin has a definite synergistic effect with
tobramycin against P. aeruginosa and with vancomycin
against S. aureus both in vitro and in vivo (Figure 4).8 A benzimide–benzimidazole
compound having a strong inhibitory effect on the QS regulator MvrF
in P.aeruginosa thus plays a prominent role in reduced
biofilm formation and increased susceptibility. Penicillic acid, patulin,
and furanone C30 are known to have a synergistic effect against P. aeruginosa when combined with antibiotics
or immune system-based killing.9 In general,
coadministration of QSI along with antibiotics to disrupt biofilm
formation and reduce virulence of the pathogenic bacteria seems to
be an exciting approach as the biofilm harbors a large amount of drug-tolerant
population. Thus, QSI helps to lower the dose of antibiotics with
shorter treatment period and reduced toxicity as well as enhanced
activity of the host innate immunity.

Figure 4 Quorum-sensing inhibitors increase the
antibiotic susceptibility
of P. aeruginosa, S.aureus, and B. cenocepacia biofilms (reproduced with permission from
Brackman and co-workers, 2011).

iii Modulation with the Second Nucleotide Messenger
Signaling
Accumulation of the nucleotide second messenger
molecules under certain nonoptimal growth conditions remodels cellular
metabolism and often translates into visible phenotypic changes. One
of the most well-studied second messenger molecules, guanosine tetraphosphate
(ppGpp) and guanosine pentaphosphate (pppGpp) (known collectively
as (p)ppGpp), plays a critical role in a large number of biological
processes to ensure survival under nutrient-limiting conditions. Intracellular
(p)ppGpp levels appear to have a definite link with quorum sensing
and biofilm formation and biofilm dispersion in many bacteria such
as Vibrio cholarae, Enterococcus faecalis, and Bordetella pertussis, where the absence of
ppGpp results in reduced biofilm formation. On the other hand, the
ppGpp null mutant forms more biofilm than wild type in Francisella
novicida and Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. In the case of E. coli, a relA-spoT deletion mutant forms more biofilm in the LB medium and less biofilm
in minimal medium. Some recent reports by Liu et al.10 and Ge and co-workers suggested (p)ppGpp-driven biofilm
regulation in P. putida and H. pylori, respectively.

Another
important second messenger bis(3′,5′)-cyclic diguanylic
acid (c-di-GMP) is known for regulating different physiological processes
in response to environmental stimuli. c-di-GMP has been reported to
contribute a “lifestyle transition” in many bacteria
including Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, where
generally low and high c-di-GMP concentration favors the motile and
sessile states, respectively. In Mycobacterium smegmatis c-di-GMP has been shown to play a key role in quorum sensing and
biofilm formation. This nucleotide messenger is synthesized by enzymes
called diguanylate cyclases (DGCs) which convert 2 GTP molecules to
c-di-GMP and are degraded by phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzymes into
5′-phosphoguanylyl-(3′-5′)-guanosine (pGpG) and/or
GMP. The rate of synthesis and degradation dictates the intracellular
c-di-GMP level which contributes to slow growth, biofilm formation,
and drug tolerance.

Both (p)ppGpp and c-di-GMP signaling pathways
directly contribute
to antimicrobial resistance development and hence can act as a promising
therapeutic approach to reduce biofilm population, leading to increased
susceptibility to standard drugs. The two second messenger synthetase
enzymes, namely, Rel and DGC, are considered to be the most rational
drug targets in order to reduce the intracellular concentration of
(p)ppGpp and c-di-GMP, respectively. Syal and co-workers previously
reported that vitamin C possesses structural similarity with Rel enzyme
substrate guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and inhibits ppGpp biosynthesis
by directly binding to Rel enzyme in M. smegmatis and subsequently prevents biofilm formation. Another study from
the same group has shown that synthetic (p)ppGpp analogues directly
inhibit ppGpp biosynthesis and can act as a potential biofilm inhibitor
in mycobacteria.11 Recently, Dutta and
co-workers described the compound screening approach and identified
a lead compound X9 specifically targeting RelMtb and hence
eliminating nutrient-starved persisters (Figure 5).12

Figure 5 Structures
of (p)ppGpp inhibitors: (A) vitamin C; (B) GSK-X9; and
(C and D) acetylated and benzoylated nucleoside compounds.

c-di-GMP is considered to be one of the master regulators
of biofilm
phenotype and has been shown to contribute biofilm formation in different
bacteria. An organic synthetic molecule terrain (Figure 6) has been reported to reduce
both QS and c-di-GMP concentration in P. aeruginosa.13 Glycosylated triterpenoid
saponin has been reported as a DGC enzyme inhibitor, and more recently
Sambanthamoorthy and co-workers described a high-throughput screening
approach to identify several small molecules (Figure 6) inhibiting the DGC enzyme in V. cholerae and P. aeruginosa and subsequent reduction in biofilm formation.14 The immunosuppressive drug azathioprine has been reported
to reduce biofilm formation in E. coli cells harboring P. aeruginosa DGC,
WspR (wrinkly spreader phenotype regulator), by interfering with the
nucleotide pool availability.15 Other notable
approaches include the development of catechol-containing sulfonohydrazide
compounds to inhibit DGC PleD from Caulobacter crescentus and repurposing of antioxidant drug ebselen to inhibit WspR and
check the intracellular c-di-GMP level. The designed neutral small
molecule, which selectively targets DGC, is one of the novel chemical
approaches to block c-di-GMP synthesis, hence preventing bacterial
biofilm formation.

Figure 6 Chemical structures of (A) novel small molecule inhibiting
DGC
and (B) natural product terrain.

The emerging bacterial second messenger cyclic-di-AMP (c-di-AMP)
also plays a role in biofilm formation in certain bacteria. Peng and
co-workers showed that c-di-AMP binds to its receptor CabPA and promotes
the biofilm formation in S. mutans.16 DAC (diadenylate cyclase) enzymes
convert two ATP molecules into c-di-AMP and are considered to be one
of the obvious targets to reduce c-di-AMP concentration. Bromophenol-TH
was the first reported DisA synthetase (c-di-AMP synthesizing enzyme)
inhibitor with limited therapeutic value.17 Temeng and co-workers have shown that the antiparasitic drug suramin
could act as a potent inhibitor of DisA with IC50 1.1 μM.
A similar work also identified polyphenols, such as tannic acid and
theaflavin-3,3′-gallate as a DisA inhibitor in B. subtilis.

iv Interference
with Biofilm Maturation
Several natural and synthetic antibiofilm
agents have been studied
to control the biofilm formation and maturation primarily by interfering
with the surface properties in both Gram (+ve) and Gram (-ve) bacteria.
Deacylated lipopolysaccharide (dLPS) has been studied to show antibiofilm
activity in the early stage of biofilm development in several Gram
(-ve) bacteria by competing with the naturally occurring LPS in the
cell wall, resulting in poor adherence and stability. Naturally occurring
group II exopolysaccharide from E. coli uropathogenic strain CFT073 has been found to be a potent inhibitor
of different bacterial biofilms including P. aeruginosa, E. coli, S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and K. pneumoniae. Rendueles and co-workers described the source of different exopolysccharides
in terms of their broad application as an antibiofilm agent. Arabinomannan-containing
glycolipids have been shown to possess potent antibiofilm activity
against M. smegmatis biofilm and
potentiate isoniazid killing (Figure 7).18 Similar studies with
synthetic glycolipids and arabinofuranosides were found to interfere
with biofilm formation and maturation in M. smegmatis (Figure 7).19 The synthetic compound 4-hydroxy-2-pyridone
is effective against M. smegmatis in biofilm formation. Different antibiotics and bacteriocins are
also potent agents to reduce biofilm formation and maturation against S. aureus, L. monocytogenes, P. aeruginosa, S. mutans, and E. faecalis.

Figure 7 Molecular structures of (A) mannanglycolipids (1–3) and
arabinomannan glycolipid (4) and (B) synthetic oligoarabinan glycolipids.

v Disruption of Mature Biofilms
A large
number of bacterial infections are associated with biofilm formation
which serves as a reservoir of drug-tolerant population protected
from antimicrobials and host defense. In order to overcome this physical
obstacle, compounds need to be specifically designed to target mature
biofilms. Year-long research has identified and elucidated the structural
complexity of a biofilm and identification of key components responsible
for its maintenance and robustness. There have been multiple approaches
taken to disrupt preformed biofilms both in vitro and in vivo. Exopolysaccharides being an important
component of the clinically relevant P. aeruginosa biofilm, Ray and co-workers have shown that human monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) targeting the biofilm exopolysaccharide Psl (a pentasaccharide
composed of d-glucose, d-mannose, and l-rhamnose) within infected tissue could be a promising approach in
combination therapy.20 Alginate oligosaccharide
OligoG (CF-5/20) isolated from the marine algae Laminaria
hyperborea has been shown to be active against established
mucoid P. aeruginosa biofilms.21 Dispersin B is effective in hydrolyzing biofilm exopolysaccharide
poly-b-1,6-N-acetyl-d-glucosamine
(PNAG/PIA) of wound bacteria S. epidermidis, Acinetobacter baumanii, and Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).22P. aeruginosa exopolysaccharide
processing enzymes PelAh and PslGh have been
used as a successful tool to disrupt the established biofilm by Howell
and co-workers. These two glycoside hydrolase enzymes are noncytotoxic
and are known to potentiate antibiotics and neutrophil-mediated killing.
Synthetic arabinomannan glycolipids (Figure 8) were found to be effective against a mature
biofilm of Mycobacterium smegmatis as well as sliding
motility possibly by interfering with the cell wall components.23 Synthetic Araf-Manp-containing heptasaccharide
glycolipids were also found to be active against a preformed biofilm
of M. smegmatis, resulting in significant
dispersal particularly in the presence of isoniazid (synergistic effect)
and hence effectively bringing down minimum biofilm inhibitory concentration
(MBIC) of the drug.24

Figure 8 (A) Chemical structures
of arabinomannan glycolipids (1, 2) and
the corresponding oligosaccharides (3, 4). (B) Disruption of preformed
mature biofilm with compounds 1 and 2 (reproduced
with permission from Syal and co-workers, 2016).

Surface-associated and secreted proteins also play a crucial role
in biofilm development. Extracellular released cysteine proteases
Staphopain A and Staphopain B of S. aureus are known
to have a detrimental effect on the integrity of established biofilm.
A similar study by Park and co-workers showed that protease released
from Streptomyces sp. and Kribbella sp. exhibits antibiofilm activity against the preformed biofilm of S. aureus. Sugimoto and co-workers have
shown that the extracellular serine protease Esp from S. epidermidis can degrade specific proteins in S. aureus biofilm, resulting in structural
disintegration both in vitro and in vivo.25 Similarly, lysostaphin from S. simulans, endopeptidase from S. marcescens, and extracellular protease
released from B. bacteriovorus have
been reported to have good biofilm dispersion potential. Commercially
available proteases such as neutrase, flavourzyme, and alcalase have
shown antibiofilm activity against S. aureus and S. epidermidis.

Extracellular
DNA (eDNA) is an essential matrix component of most
biofilms and therefore serves as an attractive target for crumbling
of biofilm. DNase treatment can disperse an established biofilm up
to a threshold limit in both Gram (+ve) and Gram (-ve) bacteria, and
after that, it becomes inaccessible for the enzyme. Dnase Dornasealfa
is one of the most common enzymes in clinical use to disrupt P. aeruginosa biofilms. Other alternate
approach to target eDNA could be to weaken the interaction with other
matrix components, such as polysaccharide. Understanding such interactions
in molecular detail will help researchers to design potential inhibitors.

Conclusion
Understanding the complex biology of biofilms,
selected approaches
have shown promising results in terms of getting better eradication
of the pathogen, especially in combination with conventional drugs.
The major shortcoming remaining is the lack of in vivo data, and in many cases, the mechanisms of action of the inhibitors
are not clear and hence prevent precise structure–activity
studies. However, in a clinical scenario, by the time any biofilm-related
infection is diagnosed, the pathogen must have had progressed at a
very advanced stage of biofilm formation or might have already formed
a mature biofilm. In that case, knowing the organism-specific biology
and molecular mechanism behind biofilm formation would not help much
in order to control that. In addition, the fact that there are multiple
genes and pathways involved in biofilm formation in a single organism
makes it extremely difficult to inhibit biofilm formation by targeting
one such protein in the first place. Rather, a precise small-molecule-based
chemical approach should be taken in order to disperse in
vivo biofilms irrespective of which bacteria forms. Future
research should be carefully directed to gain greater insights about
such interesting compounds that possess “drug”-like
chemical property and the least probability of developing resistant
mutants. A nanoparticle-based approach enhancing better penetration
of drugs into the biofilm matrix and new technologies such as “on-demand
activation” and “smart release” of bioactive
compounds would significantly change the treatment outcome. The multidisciplinary
approach of developing such antibiofilm compounds to the clinical
studies would be a significant step forward in the fight against antimicrobial
resistance.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Dr. Anirban Ghosh completed his Master’s
degree (Msc.) in
Microbiology and worked as a research scientist in the AstraZeneca
India Research and Development (R&D) center, Bangalore, primarily
working on mycobacterial genetics. There he worked on developing different
infection models of M. tuberculosis (M. tb) and compound
efficacy testing in a BSL-3 facility with an aim to develop novel
drugs for M. tb and remains a significant contributor for the pre-clinical
development of the anti-TB compound AZD5847 which eventually progressed
to human clinical trials. Later he went on to pursue doctoral studies
at the University of Leuven, Belgium, where he exclusively worked
on elucidating novel stress response pathways in E. coli and subsequently received his Ph.D. in December 2014. In January
2015, he moved to Sweden and started his Post-Doctoral research career
in the Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University.
There he worked on a novel inter-bacterial communication system called
Contact Dependent Inhibition (CDI) and deciphered the role of CDI
in the formation of drug-tolerant persister cells, in a clonal population
of bacteria. Later in 2019, He joined the Molecular Biophysics Unit,
Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, as a Ramalingaswamy
faculty fellow and established his own research group. His primary
research interest at the moment is investigating the role of a c-di-AMP
second messenger, in several clinically relevant phenotypes in mycobacteria
such as antibiotic tolerance and biofilm formation. Other than that,
his group also works on biophysical characterization enzymes responsible
for maintaining intracellular c-di-AMP levels, as well as enzymatic
regulation. Currently, Dr. Ghosh has more than 15 publications in
International peer-reviewed journals. He is also the recipient of
several prestigious International and National awards like the Erasmus-Mundus
fellowship (for Ph.D.), Wenner-Gren fellowship (for Post-Doctoral
training), and Ramalingaswamy re-entry fellowship by Govt. of India
to start his career as a Principal Investigator in India.

Prof. Narayansaswamy Jayaraman joined in the faculty
roll of the
Department of Organic Chemistry in December 1999 and is a Professor
and Chairman of the department currently. He completed his early studies,
B.Sc. (University of Madras) and M.Sc. (Annamalai University), and
conducted his doctoral research at the Indian Institute of Technology,
Kanpur, under the supervision of Professor S. Ranganathan. He was
a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Professor Sir J. F. Stoddart
at the University of Birmingham, UK, and at the University of California
Los Angeles, USA. His research group is working in the areas of carbohydrates
and dendrimers. He was honored with a Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize
in 2009 and is an elected Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences.

Prof. Dipankar Chatterji started his career
as a biophysical chemist
and received his Ph.D. from the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
during 1977. Later he served as an Assistant Professor at the University
of Hyderabad and then went to USA for postdoctoral research. After
returning to India during 1983, he established a group at CCMB, Hyderabad,
to work on the regulation of gene expression in bacteria. Apart from
mapping the active site of the enzyme, which controls gene expression,
his group was one of the first to show how intradomain interaction
in different proteins regulates the maturation of this enzyme RNA
polymerase. Later, Prof. Chatterji shifted his attention to the survival
strategies of a bacterium, E. coli, under nutritional
stress, called “stringent response”, and showed through
a series of publications that RNA polymerase is the target for the
stringent factor. Upon moving to the Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, at the beginning of 1999 and here again, he and his group
established the stringent response pathway in M. smegmatis. Recently, he has started working on another phenomenon connected
with the persistence infection by microorganisms, called biofilm formation
and quorum sensing. Certain unique leads that he has on the inhibitors
of biofilms will go a long way. Prof. Chatterji has to his credit
more than 180 original publications and several reviews and has guided
around 31 students for a Ph.D. degree. He has served as an Honorary
Professor at the National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan, and
a Visiting Scientist at the Johns Hopkins University, USA. He is a
member of the editorial board of many international journals. Prof.
Chatterji has received several awards like the S S Bhatnagar award,
Ranbaxy award, UGC Hari Om Ashram award, and Homi Bhabha Fellowship
amongst others. He is currently an Honorary Professor of the Molecular
Biophysics Unit of the Indian Institute of Science and Honorary Professor
of Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR),
at Bangalore. He is a fellow of all major science academies of India
and a fellow of the World Academy of Sciences (TWAS).

Acknowledgments
A.G. thanks the
Department of Biotechnology, Government
of India, New Delhi, and N.J. thanks the Science and Engineering Research
Board, Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi, for generous
financial support.
==== Refs
References
Flemming H. C. ; Wingender J. 
Relevance of microbial extracellular polymeric substances
(EPSs)--Part I: Structural and ecological aspects
. Water Sci. Technol. 
2001 , 43 , 1 –8
. 10.2166/wst.2001.0326 .
Wan Y. Z. ; Xiong G. Y. ; Liang H. ; Raman S. ; He F. ; Huang Y. 
Modification of medical metals by ion implantation of copper
. Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2007 , 253 , 9426 –9429
. 10.1016/j.apsusc.2007.06.031 .
Tang K. ; Zhang X. H. 
Quorum quenching agents: resources
for antivirulence
therapy
. Mar. Drugs 
2014 , 12 , 3245 –3282
. 10.3390/md12063245 .24886865 
Lee J. H. ; Lee J. 
Indole as an intercellular
signal in microbial communities
. FEMS Microbiol.
Rev. 
2010 , 34 , 426 –444
. 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2009.00204.x .20070374 
Fetzner S. 
Quorum quenching
enzymes
. J. Biotechnol. 
2015 , 201 , 2 –14
. 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.09.001 .25220028 
Wnuk S. F. ; Lalama J. ; Garmendia C. A. ; Robert J. ; Zhu J. ; Pei D. 
S-Ribosylhomocysteine
analogues with the carbon-5 and sulfur atoms
replaced by a vinyl or (fluoro)vinyl unit
. Bioorg.
Med. Chem. 
2008 , 16 , 5090 –5102
. 10.1016/j.bmc.2008.03.028 .18375129 
Gutierrez J. A. ; Crowder T. ; Rinaldo-Matthis A. ; Ho M. C. ; Almo S. C. ; Schramm V. L. 
Transition state analogs of 5′-methylthioadenosine
nucleosidase disrupt quorum sensing
. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 
2009 , 5 , 251 –257
. 10.1038/nchembio.153 .19270684 
Brackman G. ; Cos P. ; Maes L. ; Nelis H. J. ; Coenye T. 
Quorum sensing inhibitors
increase the susceptibility of bacterial biofilms to antibiotics in
vitro and in vivo
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2011 , 55 , 2655 –2661
. 10.1128/AAC.00045-11 .21422204 
Hentzer M. ; Wu H. ; Andersen J. B. ; Riedel K. ; Rasmussen T. B. ; Bagge N. ; Kumar N. ; Schembri M. A. ; Song Z. ; Kristoffersen P. ; Manefield M. ; Costerton J. W. ; Molin S. ; Eberl L. ; Steinberg P. ; Kjelleberg S. ; Høiby N. ; Givskov M. 
Attenuation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa virulence by quorum sensing inhibitors
. EMBO
J. 
2003 , 22 , 3803 –3815
. 10.1093/emboj/cdg366 .12881415 
Liu H. ; Xiao Y. ; Nie H. ; Huang Q. ; Chen W. 
Influence
of (p)ppGpp on biofilm regulation in Pseudomonas putida KT2440
. Microbiol. Res. 
2017 , 204 , 1 –8
. 10.1016/j.micres.2017.07.003 .28870288 
Syal K. ; Flentie K. ; Bhardwaj N. ; Maiti K. ; Jayaraman N. ; Stallings C. L. ; Chatterji D. 
Synthetic (p)ppGpp Analogue Is an
Inhibitor of Stringent Response in Mycobacteria
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2017 , 61 , e00443–1710.1128/AAC.00443-17 .28396544 
Dutta N. K. ; Klinkenberg L. G. ; Vazquez M. J. ; Segura-Carro D. ; Colmenarejo G. ; Ramon F. ; Rodriguez-Miquel B. ; Mata-Cantero L. ; Porras-De Francisco E. ; Chuang Y. M. ; Rubin H. ; Lee J. J. ; Eoh H. ; Bader J. S. ; Perez-Herran E. ; Mendoza-Losana A. ; Karakousis P. C. 
Inhibiting the stringent response
blocks Mycobacterium tuberculosis entry into quiescence
and reduces persistence
. Science Advances 
2019 , 5 , eaav210410.1126/sciadv.aav2104 .30906866 
Kim B. ; Park J. ; Choi H. ; Yoon S. ; Kim W. 
Terrein is
an inhibitor of quorum sensing and c-di-GMP in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa: a connection between quorum sensing and c-di-GMP
. Sci. Rep. 
2018 , 8 , 8617 10.1038/s41598-018-26974-5 .29872101 
Sambanthamoorthy K. ; Sloup R. ; Parashar V. ; Smith J. ; Kim E. ; Semmelhack M. ; Neiditch M. ; Waters C. 
Identification of small
molecules that antagonize diguanylatecyclase enzymes to inhibit biofilm
formation
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2012 , 56 , 5202 –5211
. 10.1128/AAC.01396-12 .22850508 
Antoniani D. ; Rossi E. ; Rinaldo S. ; Bocci P. ; Lolicato M. ; Paiardini A. ; Raffaelli N. ; Cutruzzolà F. ; Landini P. 
The immunosuppressive
drug azathioprine inhibits biosynthesis
of the bacterial signal molecule cyclic-di-GMP by interfering with
intracellular nucleotide pool availability
. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2013 , 97 , 7325 –7336
. 10.1007/s00253-013-4875-0 .23584245 
Peng X. ; Zhang Y. ; Bai G. ; Zhou X. ; Wu H. 
Cyclic di-AMP
mediates biofilm formation
. Mol. Microbiol. 
2016 , 99 , 945 –959
. 10.1111/mmi.13277 .26564551 
Zheng Y. ; Zhou J. ; Sayre D. ; Sintim H. 
Identification of bromophenolthiohydantoin
as an inhibitor of DisA, a c-di-AMP synthase, from a 1000 compound
library, using the coralyne assay
. Chem. Commun.
(Cambridge, U. K.) 
2014 , 50 , 11234 –11237
. 10.1039/C4CC02916J .
Mahapa A. ; Samanta G. ; Maiti K. ; Chatterji D. ; Jayaraman N. 
Mannopyranoside Glycolipids Inhibit Mycobacterial and
Biofilm Growth and Potentiate Isoniazid Inhibition Activities in M. smegmatis
. ChemBioChem 
2019 , 20 , 1966 –1976
. 10.1002/cbic.201900040 .30951240 
Naresh K. ; Bharati B. ; Avaji P. ; Chatterji D. ; Jayaraman N. 
Synthesis, biological studies of
linear and branched
arabinofuranoside-containing glycolipids and their interaction with
surfactant protein A
. Glycobiology 
2011 , 21 , 1237 –1254
. 10.1093/glycob/cwr068 .21596824 
Mathur H. ; Field D. ; Rea M. ; Cotter P. ; Hill C. ; Ross R. 
Fighting biofilms with
lantibiotics and other groups of bacteriocins
. NPJ. Biofilms Microbiomes 
2018 , 10.1038/s41522-018-0053-6 .
Powell L. C. ; Pritchard M. F. ; Ferguson E. L. ; Powell K. A. ; Patel S. U. ; Rye P. D. ; Sakellakou S. M. ; Buurma N. J. ; Brilliant C. D. ; Copping J. M. ; Menzies G. E. ; Lewis P. D. ; Hill K. E. ; Thomas D. W. 
Targeted disruption of the extracellular polymeric
network of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms by alginate
oligosaccharides
. NPJ. BiofilmsMicrobiomes. 
2018 , 4 , 13 10.1038/s41522-018-0056-3 .
Gawande P. ; Leung K. ; Madhyastha S. 
Antibiofilm
and antimicrobial efficacy
of DispersinB®-KSL-W peptide-based wound gel against
chronic wound infection associated bacteria
. Curr. Microbiol. 
2014 , 68 , 635 –641
. 10.1007/s00284-014-0519-6 .24445333 
Syal K. ; Maiti K. ; Naresh K. ; Avaji P. ; Chatterji D. ; Jayaraman N. 
Synthetic arabinomannan glycolipids
impede mycobacterial
growth, sliding motility and biofilm structure
. Glycoconjugate J. 
2016 , 33 , 763 –77
. 10.1007/s10719-016-9670-6 .
Maiti K. ; Syal K. ; Chatterji D. ; Jayaraman N. 
Synthetic
ArabinomannanHeptasaccharide Glycolipids Inhibit Biofilm Growth and
Augment Isoniazid Effects in Mycobacterium smegmatis
. ChemBioChem 
2017 , 18 , 1959 –1970
. 10.1002/cbic.201700247 .28771901 
Sugimoto S. ; Iwamoto T. ; Takada K. ; Okuda K. ; Tajima A. ; Iwase T. ; Mizunoe Y. 
Staphylococcus
epidermidis Esp degrades specific proteins associated with Staphylococcus
aureus biofilm formation and host-pathogen interaction
. J. Bacteriol. 
2013 , 195 , 1645 –1655
. 10.1128/JB.01672-12 .23316041

