
==== Front
ACS Omega
ACS Omega
ao
acsodf
ACS Omega
2470-1343 American Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsomega.9b03866
Article
Evaluation of a Biocomposite Mesh Modified with Decellularized
Human Amniotic Membrane for Intraperitoneal Onlay Mesh Repair
Liu Zhengni † Zhu Xiaoqiang † Zhu Tonghe ‡ Tang Rui *† † Department
of Hernia and Abdominal Wall Surgery, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University, 150 Ji Mo Road, Shanghai 200120, P. R. China
‡ Department
of Sports Medicine, Medicine and Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s
Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, P. R. China
* E-mail: kevintown@126.com. Tel: +86 21 34204695. Fax: +86 21 34205072.
13 02 2020 
25 02 2020 
5 7 3550 3562
13 11 2019 31 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Various
materials and approaches have been used to optimize the
biocompatibility of mesh to reduce the implant-induced host response
in intraperitoneal onlay mesh (IPOM) repair. Ineffective host integration,
limited resistance to contamination, and untargeted administration
hinder the wider application of the currently available clinical options.
In this study, human amniotic membrane (HAM) was decellularized, fully
characterized, and compared with porcine small intestinal submucosa
(SIS) in terms of its structure, components, and bioactivity. In an
in vivo study, HAM was reinforced with silk fibroin (SF) membrane,
which was fabricated as a biodegradable submicroscale template by
electrospinning, to construct a bilayer composite mesh. The independent
SF membrane, associated with HAM and SIS, was evaluated for tissue
remodeling in vitro. The HAM–SF and SIS meshes were then characterized
morphologically and implanted intraperitoneally into Sprague–Dawley
rats for 28 days for macroscopic investigation of their integration
into the host via interactions of regulatory factors. After decellularization,
HAM formed a bioagent-rich collagen-based acellular structure. HAM
was superior to SIS in concurrently suppressing the expression of
transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) and proangiogenic
proliferation. When HAM, SF, and SIS were used as regenerative scaffolds,
they showed qualified biocompatibility, cell infiltration, and degradation
in vitro. Comparatively, macroscopic observation after implantation
indicated that HAM–SF induced less-intensive intraperitoneal
adhesion and weaker inflammatory responses at the interface but greater
angiogenesis in the explant than SIS. Analysis of the expression of
regulatory factors showed a greater quantity of hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) in HAM, which partly inhibited the expression of TGF-β1
and promoted vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-induced angiogenesis.
This bioactive interaction appeared to be responsible for the better
host integration, making HAM more biocompatible than SIS in IPOM repair.
When combined with SF, HAM displayed similar mechanical properties
to SIS. In conclusion, HAM displayed better bioactivity and biocompatibility
than SIS. After its reinforcement with SF, HAM–SF is a promising
biocomposite mesh for IPOM repair.

document-id-old-9ao9b03866document-id-new-14ao9b03866ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The intraperitoneal onlay
mesh (IPOM) technique has been used extensively
in ventral hernia repair to restore the abdominal wall structure with
sufficient mechanical support. The development of laparoscopic techniques
has markedly alleviated intra-abdominal harassment during IPOM, reducing
the complication rate. Whereas meshes used in certain condition induce
acute or chronic immune responses, inflammation, and adhesion because
they are foreign bodies, and this remains an unsolved problem.1−3 Researchers have continued to optimize the meshes used for intraperitoneal
application to minimize the risks of these common postoperative complications.
Current clinically feasible strategies, including using a sheetlike
barrier such as expanded poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (ePTFE), or degradable
compounds, such as hyaluronic acid gel, aim to provide a smooth interface
to shield the injured peritoneum and mesh from the viscera. However,
undegradable ePTFE is associated with poor host integration and may
cause mesh shrinkage, migration, infection, and even explantation,
while the efficiency and endurance of hyaluronic acid gel, which is
considered a rapidly degraded partial protector, remains controversial.4 Various innovative approaches have recently been
explored, including nanoparticle coating, drug release, and stem cell
loading, and appear to be promising techniques for modifying off-the-shelf
meshes.5,6 However, in terms of their clinical applicability,
they fall far short of standards for contamination resistance with
full degradation, targeting ability, safety, cost-effectiveness, and
handling.7−9 Based on these prerequisites, a modified, naturally
derived mesh with inherent biocompatibility and that offers appropriate
mechanical support is an admissible alternative.10

Allografts of human amniotic membrane (HAM), an avascular
collagen
matrix in the innermost layer of the placenta, have anti-inflammatory,
antifibrotic, and antiadhesive properties and accelerate wound healing.
Because the extracellular matrix (ECM) contains cytokines and growth
factors and displays low immunogenicity after decellularization, the
HAM possesses excellent biocompatibility and has been used as a tissue-engineering
template in various fields.11−13 Although the exact mechanism
of the remodeling behavior of HAM remains unclear, it is thought to
be partly mediated by the downregulation of transforming growth factor
β1 (TGF-β1) in the TGF-β/SMAD signaling pathway.14 With this modulation, host cells play essential
roles in synthesizing collagen and establishing the dynamic balance
between the restoration and overdeposition of the ECM, which can be
followed by adhesion. Several studies of hernia repair have reported
that an HAM-integrated polypropylene mesh reduced adhesion during
intraperitoneal repair.15,16 However, the polypropylene
may cause long-term complications after the degradation of HAM. HAM
is expected to be superior to prosthetic mesh in avoiding adhesion
and to modify the application of polypropylene interperitoneally depending
on its inherent properties. But whether it is more favorable than
clinical biological meshes for IPOM repair remains unclear. Moreover,
the mechanism of bioactive action is not well understood because the
diversity of structures and bioagents present depends upon the preparation
of the HAM.

To overcome these limitations of HAM-based mesh
in intraperitoneal
applications, electrospun silk fibroin (SF) was introduced instead
of polypropylene to reinforce the HAM. SF, a biodegradable polymer
derived from silkworm cocoons, can be fabricated into an ECM-mimicking
structure with electrospinning and has been shown to be a good engineered
candidate for tissue regeneration.17 In
the scenario, the bioactivity from HAM and reinforced mechanical supports
from SF were integrated in the HAM–SF biocomposite mesh, which
was evaluated and compared with a biological mesh after its intraperitoneal
placement. Decellularized porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS)
mesh is a clinically available biological mesh used for IPOM repair
that is prepared from the porcine jejunum by removing the host cells,
after which it retains its three-dimensional, collagen-rich, bioagent-containing
ECM structure.18 It was selected as the
control in our study. Because their decellularized ECM structures
are similar, the structure and components of HAM were first compared
to those of SIS. A macroporous electrospun SF membrane was then prepared
as a strengthening support. The cytocompatibility, bioactivity, cell
infiltration, and degradation of HAM and SF were compared to those
of SIS before their direct contact with the parietal and visceral
peritoneum in IPOM repair. The differences between HAM and SIS were
compared to clarify the relevance of the structures and components
to their behavior in vitro. The HAM–SF mesh was compared with
the SIS mesh after they were implanted in Sprague–Dawley rats
for 28 days in terms of the effect of repair, host response, integration,
and mechanical performance. The expression of bioactive regulatory
factors by the explants was also measured to investigate the interactions
and coordination of the processes involved. The aims of this work
were to determine the suitability of an innovative biocomposite mesh
for IPOM repair and to gain an insight into the interactions of the
bioactive components affecting the integration of HAM with the host
tissues.

2 Results
2.1 Decellularization and Characterization
To visualize decellularization, HAM and SIS were histologically
characterized
with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Masson’s trichrome
(Figure 1A,B). The
observations indicated that the host cells and cell fragments were
removed from the matrix with no evident residual nucleic, whereas
the integral collagenous structures were maintained. The quantification
of residual DNA indicated that the decellularized HAM and SIS contained
much less DNA than the native tissues (P < 0.05; Figure 1C,D), satisfying
the minimal criterion for decellularized native tissues (<50 ng
double-stranded DNA/mg ECM dry weight).19 Transmission electron micrographs of the treated HAM confirmed the
complete removal of the epithelial layer, fibroblast layer, and spongy
layer, leaving only the acellular basal membrane and the compact layer,
which were composed of loose collagenous fibrils and had a thickness
of 20–35 μm. The thickness of the denser fibrous structure
of SIS was 60–95 μm (Figure 1E,F). The two-photon microscopy images clearly
confirmed the distribution of collagen I and elastin fibrils, which
were mainly localized in the matrices and dominated the mechanical
properties of the membranes. They showed a relatively finer fibrous
structure in HAM, but bundles of fibers were aggregated in SIS (Figure 1G). Consistent with
this, quantitative analysis confirmed that there was more collagen
I but less elastin in SIS than in HAM (Figure 1H).

Figure 1 After decellularization, HAM and SIS were evaluated
with hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) and Masson’s trichrome staining (A, B).
The residual DNA was quantified and compared (C, D). The structures
were characterized with transmission electron microscopy (E, F). Collagen
I and elastin were stained and compared between samples (G, H). Data
are represented as mean ± standard deviation, n = 3, *P < 0.05.

2.2 Chemical Analysis of Components
The
total proteins and regulatory growth factors at detectable levels
in HAM and SIS were analyzed comparatively and are listed in Table 1. According to the
quantity of hydroxyproline produced, SIS had more than 2 times more
total protein than HAM (P < 0.05). Of the growth
factors identified, the amounts of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) were much higher
in HAM than in SIS (P < 0.05), whereas TGF-β1,
tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), epidermal growth factor
(EGF), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), and platelet-derived
growth factor BB (PDGF-BB) were maintained at similar levels (P > 0.05). Intriguingly, there was no detectable hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) in SIS, but high quantities in HAM (P < 0.05), which may reflect the differences in specific signaling
molecules in the dynamic host incorporation.

Table 1 Components
of Total Collagen and Varied
Detectable Growth Factors in HAM and SISa
concentration
(pg/mg dry weight)	HAM	SIS	
total
collagen	(370.5 ± 40.0) × 103	(860.2 ± 108.6) × 103	
VEGF	10.7 ± 1.2*	1.91 ± 0.4	
TGF-β1	9.0 ± 2.6	14.5 + 4.0	
bFGF	31.65 ± 13.30*	16.05 ± 6.10	
PDGF-BB	30.9 ± 12.8	36.6 ± 12.7	
HGF	120.6 ± 42.8*	 	
TNF-α	6.15 ± 1.8	5.24 ± 1.2	
EGF	4.5 ± 1.1	3.0 ± 1.0	
IGF-1	6.54 ± 1.5	6.36 ± 1.4	
IL-6	4.95 ± 0.9	3.29 ± 0.7	
a n = 5, * P < 0.05.

2.3 Preparation and Characterization of Biocomposite
Meshes
2.3.1 Preparation and Structure
An overview
of the prepared samples indicated that HAM had a more transparent
and homogeneous appearance than SIS, and SF was fabricated into a
macroporous prototype with a pore diameter of 2.0 mm (Figure 2A). Representative scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) images also showed that both HAM and SIS
had similar smooth, dense surfaces on the epithelial/mucosal side,
with loose and porous networks on the stromal side. SF had an ECM-mimicking
nanofibrous structure after electrospinning (Figure 2B–D), which appeared to be similar
to the stromal side of HAM. An Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis
showed that untreated SF (USF) displayed the typical absorption bands
in the amide I (1685 cm–1), amide II (1545 cm–1), and amide III (1235 cm–1) regions,
indicating that an α-helix and random coil conformation dominated
the amorphous regions of the protein. After treatment, the characteristic
absorption band shifted from 1641 to 1627 cm–1,
confirming the transformation to stable β-sheet structures in
the crystalline region (Figure 2E).20 There were no significant
differences in pore size (98.0 ± 30.9 vs 88.7 ± 66.9 μm,
respectively; P > 0.05) or porosity (90 ±
4
vs 84 ± 5%, respectively; P > 0.05) between
HAM and SIS. However, the large standard deviations for the pore sizes
reflected the inherent heterogeneous demerits of porous structure.
The electrospun SF had smaller pores (8.0 ± 3.2 μm) and
lower porosity (46 ± 10%) with a more homogeneous structure (P < 0.05; Figure 2F). After integration, the compact HAM–SF was 86.0
± 5.4 μm thick, with no obvious delamination in cross section.
The corresponding value for the diversiform SIS was 88.0 ± 5.3
μm (P > 0.05; Figure 2G,H).

Figure 2 Overview of the prepared HAM, SF, and
SIS (A). Representative SEM
images show the structures of HAM and SIS, on both the epithelial/mucosa
and serosal sides, associated with electrospun SF (B–D). Scale
bar = 20 μm in (B)–(D), including for the inserted images.
The electrospun SF was analyzed by FTIR spectroscopy before and after
treatment (E). The pore sizes and porosity of the scaffolds were measured
independently (F). Cross sections of HAM–SF and SIS (G, H).

2.3.2 Biocompatibility and
Bioactivity
The biocompatibility of the meshes was determined
in terms of cellular
adhesion and proliferation after incubation for 72 h. SEM images showed
spindle-shaped fibroblasts with stretched-out pseudopods scattered
on the surfaces of SF. A confluent monolayer of cells formed on and
covered SIS and presented a more well-oriented appearance than those
on HAM (Figure 3A1–A3). The skeleton of human dermal fibroblasts
(HDFs) stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated phalloidin
confirmed the cell-friendly microstructures of the various scaffolds
(Figure 3B1–B3). The results of the cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8)
assay indicated that there were no significant differences in cell
viability between the HAM and SIS samples, which was similar to the
cell viability on tissue culture plate (TCP) (P >
0.05). However, the value for SF was lower than that for SIS (P < 0.05; Figure 3C).

Figure 3 HDFs were seeded on different scaffolds, and their morphology,
immunofluorescence, and proliferation were evaluated after incubation
for 72 h (A–C). Scale bar = 200 μm in (A) and (B). TGF-β1
expression was detected and quantified in terms of the total protein
(D, E). Scale bar = 50 μm in (D1)–(D3). The morphology, immunofluorescence, and proliferation of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) that proliferated on the
different scaffolds were evaluated after incubation for 7 days (F–H).
Scale bar = 200 μm in (F1)–(F3).
Scale bar = 50 μm in (G1)–(G3).
Cell infiltration on the scaffold surfaces was characterized with
SEM, and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining (bright
white) of the cross sections using laser confocal scanning microscopy
(I1–I3). Scale bar = 100 μm in
(I1)–(I3). The degradation of the various
scaffolds was calculated and compared (J). Data are presented as mean
± standard deviations in (C), (E), (H), and (J); n = 3, *P < 0.05 in (C), (E), and (H). *P < 0.05 vs HAM in (J).

Under similar conditions, the expression of TGF-β1 by the
HDFs on HAM and SIS was detected with immunofluorescent staining (Figure 3D1–D3). Compared to the stained cells on TCP, the HDFs on HAM and
SIS both displayed weaker fluorescence, although the cells on SIS
showed greater fluorescence than those on HAM. In the quantitative
analysis (Figure 3E),
the amount of TGF-β1 secreted by the cells on HAM was 7.5 ±
1.7 pg/μg, which was approximately half as much as that secreted
on SIS (13.0 ± 2.2 pg/μg, P < 0.05).
In contrast, the highest concentration of TGF-β1 in all of the
groups was secreted by the cells on TCP (21.5 ± 2.5 pg/μg, P < 0.05).

The bioactive features of the meshes
were also evaluated based
on the morphology, immunofluorescence, and proliferation of the HUVECs
on the various scaffolds. SEM images showed a fully confluent layer
of adherent HUVECs on HAM, whereas the cells on SIS formed an almost
confluent monolayer. Following the interactions with the scaffolds,
HUVECs secreted rounded matrices. However, there were fewer HUVECs
scattered on SF (Figure 3F1–F3). CD31 staining confirmed that
HAM promoted greater CD31 expression than SF or SIS, providing a microenvironment
for exquisite endothelialization and potential vascularization. Compared
to SIS, SF showed inferior bioactive CD31 expression, which was attributed
to the properties of the biopolymer after electrospinning and subsequent
treatment (Figure 3G1–G3). This was also reflected in the
level of HUVEC proliferation on scaffolds at different density (Figure 3H). Consistent with
this, HAM showed the highest proliferate value of all of the groups
(P < 0.05). The behavior of SIS was statistically
similar to that of TCP (P > 0.05), whereas SF
showed
a relatively weaker performance (P < 0.05).

2.3.3 Cell Infiltration and Enzyme Degradation
An infiltration test was performed to evaluate the remodeling potential
of the scaffolds (Figure 3I1–I3). On day 7, all of the
scaffolds presented biocompatible interfaces being completely covered
with a monolayer of smooth muscle cells (SMCs). By day 28, the cross
sections of the scaffolds confirmed different degrees of infiltration
of distinct nuclei-stained cells. Although the electrospun scaffold
was originally developed to retard cell infiltration in nanoscale
structures, the SF fabricated under our conditions had a submicroscale
structure that allowed cell penetration after static incubation for
28 days.

Enzymatic degradation was tested to evaluate the biodegradability
of the scaffolds, especially of the recrystallized electrospun SF,
before their implantation (Figure 3J). After the first week, all of the scaffolds showed
relatively rapid degradation, with no significant difference in the
weight lost (P > 0.05). Thereafter, the scaffolds
changed at a much slower rate, as the soluble components decreased.
By the end of week 4, the residual weight of HAM (62.0 ± 2.8%)
had decreased significantly more than that of SIS (70 ± 2.5%, P < 0.05) in response to the nature of the ECM, which
was a loose structure in HAM that tended to collapse after losing
its integrity. SF degraded more slowly, consistent with the response
of the polymer to aqueous treatment (78.0 ± 2.2%, P < 0.05).

2.4 Macroscopic Observation
Macroscopic
observation at 28 days after surgery showed that there were no apparent
signs of hematoma, microabscess, bulge, or herniation on the abdominal
wall side in any of the 10 rats in the HAM–SF or SIS groups.
Only one rat in the HAM group displayed mild seroma (Figure 4A,B). After laparotomy, observation
of the peritoneal side revealed that one of the HAM-implanted rats
had developed an adhesion of the cecum to the abdominal wall, while
severe adhesive agglutination of the colon and great omentum was found
in two rats in the SIS group (Figure 4C1–C4). After resection
of the abdominal wall, an overview of the explants showed that most
of the HAM group had regenerated a smooth and intact protected parietal
layer, except in one rat, in which the SF membrane was exposed, without
effective integration. In contrast, several labeled adhesive sites
were observed in the SIS explants, with partial exposure of the mesh
(Figure 4D1–D8). We recorded varying degrees of adhesion involving
the epididymal fat pad and liver, which were not displayed, but scored
according to the criteria described above. A comparative analysis
of the tenacity and surface areas of the adhesions indicated that
HAM triggered weaker and localized adhesion than SIS (P < 0.05; Figure 4E). The change in the thickness of the explants was 0.11 ± 0.02
mm for HAM and 0.17 ± 0.03 mm for SIS (Figure 4F, P < 0.05), providing
indirect evidence that SIS elicited more aggressive reactions than
HAM.

Figure 4 Macroscopic images of the intraperitoneal sides of the meshes from
the HAM–SF and SIS groups after implantation for 28 days (A–C).
The white arrows indicate the organs adhered to explants. The explants
were retrieved to detect the partial peritoneal integration (D1–D8). The dashed boxes show the sites of
induced adhesion. The tenacity and surface areas of the adhesions
were analyzed according to the criteria described in Section 5.6 (E). The changes in the
thickness of the meshes were measured (F). Data are presented as mean
± standard deviations in (E) and (F); n = 3,
*P < 0.05.

2.5 Histological Analysis
Histological
staining and immunostaining were performed to detect the host response
and the integration of the mesh 28 days after implantation.

2.5.1 Adhesion Formation
Representative
images of H&E-stained tissues confirmed that SIS formed adhesions
of dense granulating tissue infiltrated by mononuclear inflammatory
cells, whereas HAM showed a slightly thickened sublayer with matrix
deposition and cell infiltration in the various stages of remodeling
(Figure 5A,B). Masson’s
trichrome staining showed that HAM contained more regularly arranged
collagen than SIS. However, when SF was integrated into the mesh,
HAM–SF showed less incorporation than SIS (Figure 5C,D). The explants were also
stained to detect the expression of collagen I and fibronectin at
the interface, at which the predominant adhesions tended to form.
The images confirmed that more collagen 1 and fibronectin were deposited
at the adhesive interface of SIS, whereas the expression in HAM was
fairly low (Figure 5E–H).

Figure 5 Host responses to the explants were analyzed with H&E
staining,
and matrix incorporation was analyzed with Masson’s trichrome
staining (A–D). Scale bar = 100 μm in (A)–(D).
Collagen I and fibronectin were detected at the sites of adhesion
with immunostaining (E–H). Scale bar = 50 μm in (E)–(H).
The inflammatory responses, represented by CD54 and CD68, were detected
with immunohistochemical staining (I–L). The total areas of
positive staining were quantified as percentages (Q, R). Angiogenesis
was detected in the HAM–SF and SIS explants with CD31 immunostaining
and analyzed as the percentage mean area of vascularity (M–P,
S). Scale bar = 100 μm in (I)–(P). Data are presented
as mean ± standard deviation in (Q), (R), and (S); n = 3, *P < 0.05.

2.5.2 Inflammatory Response
Immunohistochemical
staining was used to quantify the inflammatory response to the explants
(Figure 5I–L,Q,R).
The images of CD54 expression showed rare leukocyte infiltration in
the HAM and SIS groups after 30 days. There was no difference in the
positive staining percentage between the two groups (0.50 ± 0.10
vs 0.70 ± 0.20%, respectively; P > 0.05).
Macrophages
were detected by immunostaining for CD68, which confirmed that they
were mainly located on the connected interfaces of the explants. The
SIS explants showed more positive staining for CD68 than the HAM explants
(5.30 ± 0.90 vs 2.53 ± 0.50%, respectively; P < 0.05), indicating that they induced a stronger host immune
response and more inflammation-induced fibrosis.

2.5.3 Angiogenesis
When angiogenesis
was detected (Figure 5M–P,S), the HAM explants showed notably greater CD31 immunofluorescence
and had formed mature vascularized networks, whereas the SIS explants
contained fewer branched vessels that were loosely connected. The
HAM explants showed greater percentage vascularity (8.99 ± 1.02%)
than the SIS explants (5.17 ± 0.90%; P <
0.05).

2.6 Regulatory Factors
To estimate the
potential interactions and coordination of the regulatory factors
involved in the integration of the explants, we identified and quantified
those that participated fully in the host response and the integration
process. TGF-β1-positive staining was much weaker in the HAM
explants than in the SIS explants. Conversely, more pronounced HGF
staining was observed in the HAM explants (Figure 6A–D). Consistent with this, western
blotting revealed faint expression of TGF-β1 but the prominent
expression of HGF in HAM (Figure 6E), combining with the opposite trends in SIS, confirming
that the inhibition of TGF-β1 was at least partly mediated by
the high quantity of HGF in HAM.

Figure 6 Explants were analyzed with immunostaining
for TGF-β1 and
HGF (A–D). The proteins were also quantified with western blotting
(E). In the peritoneal fluid, inflammatory cytokines represented by
TNF-α and interleukin 6 (IL-6) were measured with enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) (F, G). Scale bar = 50 μm in (A)–(D).
Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation in (F)–(G); n = 3, *P < 0.05.

The inflammatory regulators in the explants were measured in terms
of the concentrations of TNF-α and IL-6 in the peritoneal fluid.
The concentrations of TNF-α (110.0 ± 20.8 pg/mL) and IL-6
(21.0 ± 13.3 pg/mL) were lower in the HAM group than in the SIS
group (270.0 ± 30.2 and 69.0 ± 21.2 pg/mL, respectively; P < 0.05), indicating that intraperitoneal inflammation
was milder in the HAM group (Figure 6F,G).

2.7 Mechanical Properties
The mechanical
properties of the HAM–SF implants before and after their integration
were measured and compared to those of the SIS implants in vitro.
The maximum load, tensile strength, and Young’s modulus were
similar between HAM and SF and between HAM–SF and SIS (P > 0.05, Figure 7A–D). With respect to the above mechanical terms, we
found a comparative tendency in their performances. Before integration,
both HAM and SF clearly showed less mechanical support than SIS (P < 0.05), but it increased to a level similar to that
of SIS after integration (P > 0.05). Stiffness
was
greatest for SF (5.03 ± 1.6 N/mm) than for the other materials
tested (Figure 7D, P < 0.05), implying that SF was less compliant as the
intra-abdominal pressure fluctuated, which profoundly affected the
HAM–SF. Integrating SF with HAM compromised the stiffness of
HAM from 0.93 ± 0.03 to 3.90 ± 0.40 N/mm and ultimately
exceeding that of the SIS mesh (2.54 ± 0.26 N/mm; P < 0.05). The values of the explants on the tensile strength test,
which measured the failure at the interface between the mesh and the
host abdominal wall, reflect the strength of the integrated abdominal
wall. With the rapid degradation of ECM after implantation, they all
underwent some extent of dropping when limited incorporation formed
initially. After remodeling for 28 days, the mechanical support of
the explants was not significantly lower than that of the implants.
The strength terms of maximum load, tensile strength, and Young’s
modulus in stabilizing this overlapping area did not differ between
HAM–SF and SIS, although the HAM explants were stiffer (P < 0.05).

Figure 7 Mechanical properties of HAM–SF before
and after integration,
compared to those of SIS, were evaluated as implants and explants
(A–D). Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation
in (A)–(D); n = 4, *P <
0.05.

3 Discussion
The human amniotic membrane is an avascular membrane with a thickness
of 35–60 μm. It has been used in a variety of surgical
strategies to promote epithelialization and tissue remodeling, as
well as to prevent tissue adhesion, with a low inflammatory response.22,23 However, the bioactive features of HAM are dependent on a diversity
of preparation techniques, and no consensus on these has been reached
or conflicts resolved.24,25 Other than their intrinsic characteristics,
various preparatory processes, including denudation, deepithelialization,
and decellularization, together with dehydration or frozen storage
and various irradiation techniques, determine the bioactivity of HAM.26,27 In this study, the epithelial layer, fibroblast layer, and spongy
layer were fully removed by the decellularization of HAM to minimize
its immunogenicity and antigenicity, which is considered to be a “double-edged
sword” leading to the loss of bioactive modules and the intact
structure simultaneously.28 In this study,
we confirmed that HAM maintained an acellular, collagen-abundant structure
with thin, loosely arranged fibrils compared to SIS histologically
and morphically. In the analysis of the ECM components, collagen I
of HAM, which provides the primary fibrous skeleton for the amnion
by mainly localizing to the basement membrane and compact layer, was
looser in appearance than in the structure of SIS. Accordingly, finer
elastin fibers remained in the HAM as the determinants of membrane’s
compliance, providing resilience and elasticity to the scaffold.29 Western blotting confirmed that there was less
collagen I but more elastin subunits in HAM than in SIS. These findings,
combined with the lower proportion of total collagen in HAM, may explain
why the mechanical properties of HAM were inferior to those of SIS,
which justified the subsequent introduction of electrospun SF to HAM.

HAM and SIS showed the expected biocompatibility naturally, which
is an essential precondition for their intraperitoneal application.
After enzymatic and irradiation treatments, a wide variety of growth
factors still remained in the HAM that are known to regulate host
response in a coordinated manner. One of these bioagents, TGF-β1,
is a multifunctional growth factor that is probably responsible for
the clinical benefits of HAM, including its antifibrosis and anti-inflammatory
and antiadhesion properties, through downregulating the expression
of its receptor.30 Although similar amounts
of TGF-β1 were detected in HAM and SIS in this study, as for
other soluble signals, such as TNF-α, EGF, IGF-1, and PDGF-BB,
higher quantities of TGF-β1-mediated factors were detected in
HAM, including HGF, VEGF, and bFGF. HGF is a therapeutic agent that
antagonizes the profibrotic action of TGF-β1, and it appeared
to be abundant in HAM but undetectable in SIS, which is capable of
modulating the bioactivity of HAM.31

In the preparation of the SF membrane, aqueous electrospinning
and post-treatment with water vapor were used to improve its biocompatibility
by avoiding the use of organic solvents, resulting in the biocompatible
interface to serve as the reinforced outer surface of the biocomposite
mesh. Because the biopolymer structure was prepared without stimulating
agents, the bioactivity of SF was inferior to that of SIS or HAM,
as expected. The weaker staining of TGF-β1 in the HDFs cultured
on HAM confirmed the TGF-β1-suppressing property of HAM. In
contrast, HAM contained much more VEGF and bFGF than SIS, indicating
its superiority in promoting endothelial cell proliferation, migration,
and potential angiogenesis. Furthermore, the practical benefits of
HAM may also be amplified because HGF enhances VEGF-induced angiogenesis.32 Although the complex interacting signaling pathways
involved were not clarified in this study, the accelerated proliferation
of HUVECs on HAM, with elevated CD31 expression, supports our speculations
and provides a clue to the exact mechanism involved.33

The pore size, porosity, and degradation of the structure
of HAM,
SF and SIS were examined, especially because the electrospun nanoscale
structure of SF used to limit cellular infiltration.34 With the water vapor treatments, the SF was transformed
from an α-helix and random coil conformation to a partly stable
β-sheet structure, avoiding the full conformation induced by
methanol/ethanol and following inactive degradation. We showed that
the SF scaffold degraded by approximately 22% within 4 weeks. By using
the SF membrane with 2.0 mm porous structure, we intend to mimic the
macroporous mesh used clinically, aim to provide sufficient mechanical
support and promote the cell infiltration following sufficient host
integration, and avoid forming adhesion simultaneously.35 We confirmed the SMC infiltrated through pores
of about 10 μm in diameter. Similar results were observed when
cells were grown on electrospun mats with an average pore size of
8 μm.36,37 HAM and SIS had comparatively
heterogeneous and bigger pore sizes, facilitating cell infiltration
and rapid degradation.

Macroscopic observation showed that the
postoperative performance
of the HAM–SF group was better than that of the SIS group,
presenting with timely parietal peritoneal recovery, a moderate host
response, and only slight intraperitoneal adhesions. After the intraperitoneal
implantation of the mesh, the success of repair mainly depends on
the dynamic processes of host integration, including cell infiltration,
neoangiogenesis, ECM restoration/deposition, and the formation of
neoperitoneum, which were subsequently interpretated historically.

In this study, the different integration processes of HAM–SF
and SIS were attributed to the interactions of the bioagents involved.
With CD31 staining, we showed that the dominant angiogenic factors
in HAM included VEGF, bFGF, and HGF. Kwon et al. reported that combined
treatment with HGF and VEGF was superior to treatment with either
factor alone in enhancing therapeutic angiogenesis while avoiding
inflammation.38 This coordinated effect
was confirmed in the HAM explants. HAM also induced more HGF-stained
cells with lower TGF-β1 expression, together with less intraperitoneal
adhesion and inflammation compared to the SIS explants. HGF stimulates
the proliferation and migration of various cell types by phosphorylating
tyrosine in c-Met. The mechanism is considered to partly involve the
prevention of peritoneal thickening by HGF and downregulation of TGF-β1
and collagen I. This inhibits intraperitoneal adhesion by regulating
IFN-γ and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, which play essential
roles in maintaining the reciprocal balance with tissue plasminogen
activator.39 In the comparison of HAM explants
with SIS explants on regulating TGF-β1, SF membrane actually
participated in the process. The result indicates that SF has not
reversed the superiority of HAM to SIS on inhibiting TGF-β1
and on antiadhesion. To testify whether SF enhances the suppression
of TGF-β1 or not in the process, the expression of TGF-β1
on the abdominal side of mesh and the exploration of its mechanism
need to be further evaluated. The faint immunohistochemical staining
of CD54 and CD68, associated with the low concentrations of IL-6 and
TNF-α in the peritoneal fluid, confirmed the anti-inflammatory
function of HAM. In addition to inducing growth factors, HAM exerts
its anti-inflammatory activity by entrapping inflammatory cells for
apoptosis, reducing the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, and
enhancing the secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-4,
IL-10, and IL-1α, glycosaminoglycan, and matrix metalloproteinases,
some of which were not investigated in this study.40,41

With the 28 day remodeling, the mechanical support afforded
by
the HAM–SF explant was similar to that of SIS statistically.
It was consistent with our previous study that the tensile strength
of non-cross-linked ECM-abundant scaffold usually reached a nadir
2 weeks following implantation and reinforced from 4 weeks.42 At this point, the mechanical support of the
HAM explant, in terms of its tensile strength and Young’s modulus,
slightly exceeded that of SIS, which was reversed in vitro. This implies
that the subsistent support of the slow-remodeling SF and the host
integration of HAM together contributed to ensure its excellent performance.
The electrospun SF membrane that was fabricated as a macroporous prototype
with biocompatible interface also promoted the integration with the
abdominal wall and increased the stiffness of the explant. In our
scenario, the two-layer HAM–SF was designed to have a similar
thickness and mechanical strength to the one-layer SIS, to optimize
the comparative analysis of their bioactivity. To match the strength
of the natural abdominal wall, the mechanical properties of HAM–SF
could be increased by using a multilayered structure in future studies.

It is well known that implants are essential for IPOM repair. Despite
extensive efforts to identify the bioactivity of naturally derived
meshes, we could not draw any definite conclusions. The host integration
of bio-implants depends on many factors, including bioactive modules,
dose-dependent interactions, ECM components, and targeted cell responses
in specific pathways, for example, and these still remain largely
unclear. In the comparisons with SIS in this study, HAM was shown
to suppress the TGF-β1- and VEGF-induced properties of the host
tissue, probably mediated by HGF, which sheds light on the exact interactions
involved. The specifically designed SF was introduced to construct
a bilayer HAM–SF mesh. Our in vivo results confirm that the
composite mesh has the bioactive features of HAM and is reinforced
by SF, facilitating IPOM repair with antiadhesive, anti-inflammatory,
and proangiogenic effects. Our attempt to construct a biocomposite
mesh for intraperitoneal hernia repair extends the possible applications
of HAM. However, further studies are required to explore and fully
characterize the mechanism(s) involved.

4 Conclusions
In this study, we prepared a biocomposite mesh by integrating decellularized
HAM with electrospun SF. This novel structure takes advantage of the
superior bioactivity of HAM and the reinforced mechanical support
of SF, and it is therefore preferable to SIS for IPOM repair. The
preponderance of various bioagents in HAM was shown to be responsible
for its benefits in terms of the host responses and mesh integration.

5 Experimental Section
5.1 Materials
Bombyx mori silkworm cocoons were obtained from the
Second Silk Company (Zhejiang,
China). Recombinant human vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), and hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) quantikine ELISA kits were obtained from R&D
Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Human angiogenesis ELISA strip I and II
for profiling eight cytokines kits were obtained from Signosis, Inc.
(Santa Clara, CA). Cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) was from Dojindo Molecular
Technologies, Inc. (Kumamoto, Japan). Mouse monoclonal anti-CD31 antibody,
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated phalloidin, rabbit anti-collagen
I, and mouse anti-elastin antibodies with glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO). Mouse polyclonal anti-TGF-β1, anti-CD68, and anti-CD54
antibodies and the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit were
obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (Dallas, TX). Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), endothelial cell growth basal
medium-2 (EBM-2), fetal bovine serum (FBS), 0.25% trypsin–ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA), and other supplements for cell culture were obtained
from Invitrogen Corp. (Carlsbad, CA).

5.2 Decellularization
and Characterization
To obtain the optimal HAM, the donors
were selected based on the
following requirements: (i) pregnancy period of at least 35 weeks;
(ii) no malformation of the baby; (iii) screened during pregnancy
for Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis C virus, Human immunodeficiency virus,
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1, and syphilis. Placentas were
obtained from five donors, who had undergone cesarean section, with
prior informed consent. All procurement procedures were approved by
the Institutional Review Boards at both Shanghai TongJi University
School of Medicine (Shanghai, China) and the Affiliated Shanghai East
Hospital (Shanghai, China). In the decellularization process, the
HAM was separated from its underlying chorionic membrane by blunt
dissection and then rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and
immersed in 1% Triton X-100 with agitation at 100 rpm for 24 h to
remove the spongy layer of the amniotic tissue. The HAM was then treated
with 0.25% trypsin + 0.02% EDTA for 4 h at 37 °C to completely
remove the epithelial monolayer and fibroblast layer, including the
host cells. Residual nucleic acid sequences were removed by incubation
in 50 U/mL DNase (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in Tris base at 37 °C
for 2 h. After lyophilization, the HAM was cut into 5 × 5 cm2 pieces for packaging. The decellularized SIS product was
prepared using a process described previously.43 All samples were sterilized with γ-rays (30 kGy, 60Co; Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Shanghai, China) and stored at −80 °C before
use.

For the histological analysis, the HAM and SIS monolayers
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and modified Masson’s
trichrome to confirm decellularization and collagen preservation,
respectively. The ECM structure was characterized in detail with transmission
electron microscopy (Carl Zeiss GmbH, Oberkochen, Germany). To quantify
DNA, round pieces (10 mm diameter) were punched from the samples and
digested with 250 pg/mL papain (Sigma) at 60 °C for 4 h. The
DNA was then extracted and collected from the mixtures according to
a purification protocol20 and quantified
with a Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA assay kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham,
MA).

The distribution and quantity of collagen I and elastin,
which
typically dominate the mechanical behavior of the natural ECM, were
visualized by two-photon laser scanning microscopy (Fluoview FV1000
MPE, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and analyzed by western blotting (ChemoCam
Imager 8.3, Intas), respectively. For immunostaining, a rabbit anti-collagen
I antibody (diluted 1:100; Sigma) and labeled with Alex Fluor 488
(1:400; Sigma) was used for primary staining, and a mouse anti-elastin
antibody (1:100; Sigma) labeled with Alex Fluor 594 (1:400; Sigma)
was used for secondary staining. For the western blotting analysis
of collagen I, the protein was extracted from the samples with acidified
pepsin digestion (2 mg/mL pepsin; Sigma-Aldrich) for 72 h at 4 °C.
For the western blotting analysis of elastin, the samples were extracted
with 5 M guanidinium chloride containing 0.02% (w/v) NaN3 (pH 7.0) for 24 h. The insoluble residues were incubated for 48
h at 37 °C with a similar enzyme digestion process for further
extraction. All of the collected proteins were dialyzed, purified,
lyophilized, and separated with sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After the proteins were transferred
to membranes, the membranes were incubated with antibodies directed
against GAPDH (diluted 1:1000, Sigma), collagen I, and elastin (diluted
1:1000; Sigma) at 4 °C overnight and then with horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies (diluted 1:2000; Cell Signaling Technology, Europe)
for 1 h at room temperature. The immunoblotted protein bands were
observed using a Prime enhanced chemiluminescence kit (Sigma, St.
Louis, MO).

5.3 Chemical Analysis of Components
The
dominant collagens and growth factors that are the major components
of the ECM were quantified to explain the bioactive merits of HAM
and SIS. To measure the total collagen in the materials, micronized
samples were digested in 125 μg/mL papain with acid hydrolysis
and reacted with chloramine T solution (Mallinckrodt Baker, Phillipsburg,
NJ), followed by an incubation in p-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde
(Sigma-Aldrich) to determine the quantity of hydroxyproline present
(pg/mg), which reflects the amount of total collagen when multiplied
by a constant of 7.25.44

To quantify
the various regulatory growth factors contained in HAM and SIS, the
samples were cut into small pieces and ground in liquid nitrogen.
The micronized samples were weighed, mixed (100 mg tissue/mL) with
proteinase inhibitors dissolved in ice-cold lysis buffer (Promega,
Madison, WI), and gently rotated at 4 °C for 48 h. The extracts
were clarified by centrifugation at 12 000g for 30 min at 4
°C and quantified with specific single factor (R&D Systems)
and multiplex ELISA kits (Signosis).

5.4 Preparation
and Characterization of Biocomposite
Mesh
5.4.1 Preparation of Electrospun Silk Fibroin
Membrane
The SF was first extracted from B.
mori cocoons as previously described.21 In this study, a 30 wt % aqueous SF solution was used for
electrospinning. The process was as follows: 30 × 30 cm2 nonwoven, porous fabric was wrapped around a panel to collect the
nanofibers. The SF solution was loaded into a 2 mL syringe and electrospun
through a blunt stainless steel needle (outer diameter, 0.8 mm). The
flow rate was optimized to remain at 0.4 mL/h with a syringe pump
(KD Scientific, Holliston, MA) at a voltage of 15 kV (VC100, Glass
Mann, Japan). A distance of 12 cm was maintained between the needle
tip and the collector. The room temperature and humidity were maintained
at 25–28 °C and >60%, respectively, during the whole
process.
The collected membranes were treated with water vapor at 70 °C
for 60 min in vacuum to stabilize the structure for further characterization.
The membranes were also analyzed by attenuated total reflection Fourier
transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy to investigate the changes
in the secondary structure of SF after treatment. The FTIR data were
gathered on a Nicolet 5700 spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Each spectrum was acquired in the transmittance mode by the accumulation
of 256 scans at a resolution of 2 cm–1 and a spectral
range of 4000–400 cm–1.

5.4.2 Preparation and Characterization of Mesh
To prepare
the bilayer structure, an 8 wt % SF gel was used as
a water–solvent binder to combine the electrospun SF with HAM,
with the stromal side positioned outward. The composite was immersed
in PBS at 4 °C for 2 h and then lyophilized. An SIS mesh of the
same size was also prepared as the control for comparison. The morphology
of the HAM and SF layers in the composite mesh showed an integrated
cross section, and they were characterized and compared to those of
SIS by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; ESEM XL 30, Philips, Eindhoven,
the Netherlands). Examination of the porosity and pore size of the
independent layers of five samples was conducted using a mercury porosimetry
device (AutoPoreV, Micromeritics, GA) under a tightly controlled pressure.

5.4.3 Biocompatibility
To determine the
biocompatibility of the scaffolds, 1.0 cm2 samples were
punched and preconditioned with 1 mL of DMEM for 2 h before cell seeding.
Human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs, 50 μL) were cultured in DMEM
containing 10% FBS, 1% 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 U/mL streptomycin
at 37 °C under 5% CO2 and then seeded on the scaffolds
in 24-well plates at a density of 1 × 104 cells per
well. After the cells were allowed to attach for 2 h, 450 μL
of medium was added. The cell-seeded scaffolds were transferred into
new 24-well plates and cultured for another 72 h, during which time
the medium was not refreshed. The attachment of the HDFs to the various
scaffolds was observed with SEM, and the cytoskeletons of the HDFs
were stained with phalloidin–FITC (diluted 1:50; Invitrogen
Corp.) and observed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (LSM 710,
Carl Zeiss GmbH). HDF proliferation was detected with CCK-8 (Dojindo),
and the absorbance of the cells was measured at a wavelength of 450
nm (BioTek Instruments, Inc., Winooski, VT). HDFs seeded on a polystyrene
tissue culture plate (TCP) were used as a positive control.

5.4.4 Bioactivity
Under the conditions
used in the biocompatibility test, the HDFs cultured on HAM or SIS
were immunostained to determine TGF-β1 production. In brief,
the scaffolds were fixed, blocked, and then incubated overnight with
an anti-TGF-β1 antibody (diluted 1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
at 4 °C and then with an Alexa-Fluor-488-conjugated goat anti-mouse
IgG antibody (diluted 1:400; Sigma) for 2 h at room temperature. Cell
nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33258 (0.5 mg/mL; Sigma). The supernatant
(150 μL) of the culture medium was collected from each well.
The actual amount of TGF-β1 secreted by the HDFs was calculated
by measuring the amount in the culture medium with an ELISA kit (R&D
Systems). The total cellular protein from the different scaffolds
after lysis was measured with a BCA protein assay kit (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology). The concentration of TGF-β1 protein in the culture
supernatant was normalized to the corresponding total cellular protein
content to accommodate differences in the number of cultured cells.

The bioactive features of angiogenesis were evaluated by seeding
the various scaffolds with human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs). HUVECs were cultured in EBM-2 containing 5% FBS and 1% 100
U/mL penicillin and 100 units/mL streptomycin at 37 °C under
5% CO2. Aliquots (50 μL) of HUVECs were seeded in
24-well plates at a density of 1 × 104 or 5 ×
104 cells per well. After cell attachment, 450 μL
of medium was added and the cells were incubated at 37 °C. The
medium was refreshed every 3 days. After proliferation for 7 days,
the cells were morphologically characterized. CD31 expression was
verified with an anti-CD31 antibody (diluted 1:50; Sigma), an Alexa-Fluor-594-conjugated
goat anti-mouse IgG antibody (diluted 1:400; Sigma), and Hoechst 33258
labeling. To measure the cell metabolic activities at different densities,
a CCK-8 assay was performed after 7 days to compare the cells with
the control cells seeded on TCP.

5.4.5 Cell
Infiltration and Enzyme Degradation
To detect the cellular
infiltration of the scaffolds in vitro,
human umbilical vein smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were seeded on the
membranes (1.0 cm diameter) in six-well plates at 1 × 104 cells per well and statically incubated for 28 days. The
medium was changed every 3 days. On day 7, cell attachment and the
coverage of the surfaces of the scaffolds were observed with SEM.
On day 28, the samples were collected and prepared on 5 mm slides
for 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining.

A
part (80 mg) of each scaffold was added to 50 mL of PBS containing
0.02% bacteriostatic sodium azide and 0.2 mg/mL papain (Sigma-Aldrich)
and incubated in a concussion incubator (25 rpm, 15°) at 37 °C
for 4 weeks. Samples were retrieved every 7 days, rinsed with deionized
water, and lyophilized. The change of mass in percentage loss was
analyzed by comparing the mass with that of the samples before immersion.
The enzymatic solution was changed every 7 days within the degradation.

5.5 Operative Procedure and Postoperative Care
This study was performed in strict accordance with the National
Institutes of Health’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals (NIH Publication N01-OD-4-2139, Rev. 2). Twenty male Sprague–Dawley
rats, weighing 250–300 g, were obtained from SLAC National
Rodent Laboratory Animal Resources (Shanghai, China). The Institutional
Review Committee of Shanghai Tongji University School of Medicine
approved all of the animal study protocols. The meshes were implanted
as follows: under anesthesia induced with an intraperitoneal injection
of 10% chloral hydrate solution, a midline skin incision was made
and the subcutaneous tissue was dissected. A 30 × 20 cm2 full defect was created. The rats were randomly assigned to the
HAM–SF or SIS group (n = 10). An HAM–SF
or SIS mesh, measuring 40 × 30 mm2, was implanted
into each rat, with the stromal side facing the peritoneal cavity,
overlapping the edges of the defect by 5 mm. During surgery, the intestines
were protected with moistened abdominal cloths. The mesh was fixed
by suturing it intermittently with 3-0 polypropylene (Ethicon), and
the skin was closed with 5-0 Vicryl interrupted sutures (Ethicon).
Antibiotic prophylaxis [20 mg/(kg day) cefalexinum monohydricum] was
diluted in water and administered orally for 3 days after surgery.
After 28 days, the rats were sacrificed randomly with an intravenous
injection of thiopental.

5.6 Macroscopic Observation
Signs of
infection, dehiscence, hematoma, seroma, bulge, or herniation were
recorded throughout the 28 day experiments. Visceral adhesion, including
its tenacity and area, was scored by two investigators blinded to
the group assignment, according to the following criteria: 0, no adhesion;
1, surface area <25%, freed with blunt dissection; 2, surface area
<50%, freed with aggressive dissection; 3, surface area <75%,
freed with sharp dissection; and 4, surface area ≥75%.45 The explants, including the muscular abdominal
wall, were then retrieved from the repair site for observation of
the parietal side. The thickness of 10 random sites over the central
area of the explant was measured to calculate the proportional change
in thickness, and then the explants were collected for further examination.

5.7 Histological Analysis
The collected
explants were embedded in paraffin, cut into 3.5 μm sections,
mounted on slides, and stained with H&E to observe the general
host response on the parietal side of the mesh. Masson’s trichrome
staining was performed to detect the incorporation of the matrices,
in terms of the organization and deposition of collagen. The samples
were immunostained for collagen I (1:100; Sigma) and fibronectin (1:100;
Sigma), which mainly indicate the development of adhesion, and visualized
at the interface of mesh and peritoneum. The host inflammatory and
immune responses, represented by leukocyte and macrophage infiltration,
were evaluated by immunohistochemical staining with anti-CD54 (diluted
1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and anti-CD68 antibodies (diluted
1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), respectively. Anti-CD31 immunofluorescent
staining (1:100; Sigma) was used to assess explant vascularization.
Positively stained vessels were quantified by counting them in 10
microscopic fields per sample. The results are expressed as the mean
percentage of positively stained vessels (%) in the total number of
sections for each explant. The data were analyzed by two blinded investigators
with ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD).

5.8 Regulatory
Factor Expression
To verify
the expression of regulatory factor, including with anti-TGF-β1
antibody (1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and anti-HGF antibody (1:200;
Sigma), immunofluorescent staining was visualized in the explants.
To further quantify the specific regulatory factors related to the
development of intraperitoneal adhesion, the proteins were extracted
from the homogenates and western blotting was performed to determine
their expression levels and determine potential interactions. The
proteins were probed with antibodies directed against TGF-β1
(1:200; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), HGF (1:500; Sigma), and GAPDH (1:1000;
Sigma) and detected as described above. Peritoneal fluid was collected
from each rat to assess the extent of the intra-abdominal inflammatory
response by measuring the levels of tumor necrosis factor α
(TNF-α) and interleukin 6 (IL-6) with ELISA kits (R&D Systems).

5.9 Mechanical Properties
The in vitro
implants and in vivo explants were cut into 50 × 10 mm2 strips (n = 5) for mechanical testing using a previously
described method.19 The following mechanical
properties were determined at room temperature after immersing the
samples in PBS for 2 h to ensure their wettability before the tests:
maximum load, Young’s modulus, tensile strength, and stiffness.
In brief, the length of the sample held between two grips was set
at 20 mm. The samples were stretched along their longitudinal axes
at a speed of 10 mm/min until failure, and the maximum load in Newtons
(N) was recorded with a uniaxial tensile testing machine (model 5542,
Instron, Norwood, MA). Young’s modulus (MPa) was calculated
from the linear slope of the stress–strain curve, and the tensile
strength was calculated as the maximal load divided by the cross-sectional
area (MPa). Stiffness (N/mm) was determined by calculating the slope
of the load (linear portion) vs displacement plot.

5.10 Statistical Analysis
Continuous
variables are presented as mean ± standard deviation and analyzed
with two-tailed Student’s t test or one-way
analysis of variance followed by the Student–Newman–Keuls
post hoc test. Ranked data were analyzed with the Kruskal–Wallis
test. SPSS version 22.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL) was used
for all statistical analyses. P < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

Author Contributions
Z.L.: experimental
design, photo taken, animal surgery, data collection, data analysis
and interpretation, and manuscript writing; X.Z. and T.Z.: animal
surgery, tissue histological staining, mechanical testing, and manuscript
editing; R.T.: conception and experimental design, data collection
and assembly, and manuscript writing. The manuscript was written through
contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the
final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was
supported by the Natural Science Foundation
for youth project of Jiangxi Province (Grant No. 2017BAB215009).
==== Refs
References
Brown C. N. ; Finch J. G. 
Which mesh for hernia
repair?
. Ann. R. Coll. Surg. Engl. 
2010 , 92 , 272 –278
. 10.1308/003588410X12664192076296 .20501011 
Pierce R. A. ; Perrone J. M. ; Nimeri A. ; Sexton J. A. ; Walcutt J. ; Frisella M. M. ; Matthews B. D. 
120-day
comparative analysis of adhesion
grade and quantity, mesh contraction, and tissue response to a novel
omega-3 fatty acid bioabsorbable barrier macroporous mesh after intraperitoneal
placement
. Surg. Innov. 
2009 , 16 , 46 –54
. 10.1177/1553350608330479 .19124448 
Raptis D. A. ; Vichova B. ; Breza J. ; Skipworth J. ; Barker S. 
A comparison of woven versus nonwoven polypropylene
(PP) and expanded versus condensed polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)
on their intraperitoneal incorporation and adhesion formation
. J. Surg. Res. 
2011 , 169 , 1 –6
. 10.1016/j.jss.2009.12.014 .20400113 
Schreinemacher M. H. ; van Barneveld K. W. ; Dikmans R. E. ; Gijbels M. J. ; Greve J. W. ; Bouvy N. D. 
Coated
meshes for hernia repair provide comparable
intraperitoneal adhesion prevention
. Surg. Endosc. 
2013 , 27 , 4202 –4209
. 10.1007/s00464-013-3021-5 .23749270 
Deng Y. ; Yang F. ; Cocco E. ; Song E. ; Zhang J. ; Cui J. ; et al. Improved
i.p. drug delivery with bioadhesive nanoparticles
. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2016 , 113 , 11453 –11458
. 10.1073/pnas.1523141113 .27663731 
Maciver A. H. ; McCall M. ; James Shapiro A. M. 
Intra-abdominal adhesions: cellular
mechanisms and strategies for prevention
. Int.
J. Surg. 
2011 , 9 , 589 –594
. 10.1016/j.ijsu.2011.08.008 .21964216 
Kelly M. E. ; Behrmann S. W. 
The safety and efficacy
of prosthetic hernia repair
in clean-contaminated and contaminated wounds
. Am. Surg. 
2002 , 68 , 528 –529
.
Shulman A.
P. ; Amid P. K. ; Lichtenstein I. L. 
The safety of mesh repair for primary
inguinal hernias: results of 3,019 operations from five diverse surgical
sources
. Am. Surg. 
1992 , 58 , 255 –257
.1586085 
McCormack K. ; Wake B. ; Perez J. ; Fraser C. ; Cook J. ; McIntosh E. ; et al. Laparoscopic surgery
for inguinal hernia repair:
systematic review of effectiveness and economic evaluation
. Health Technol. Assess. 
2005 , 9 , 1 –203
. 10.3310/hta9140 .
Kalaba S. ; Gerhard E. ; Winder J. S. ; Pauli E. M. ; Haluck R. S. ; Yang J. 
Design strategies and
applications of biomaterials and devices for
hernia repair
. Bioact. Mater. 
2016 , 1 , 2 –17
. 10.1016/j.bioactmat.2016.05.002 .28349130 
Iranpour S. ; Mahdavi-Shahri N. ; Miri R. ; Hasanzadeh H. ; Bidkhori H. R. ; Naderi-Meshkin H. ; et al. Supportive properties
of basement membrane layer of human amniotic membrane enable development
of tissue engineering applications
. Cell Tissue
Banking 
2018 , 19 , 357 –371
. 10.1007/s10561-017-9680-z .29313189 
Ganjibakhsh M. ; Mehraein F. ; Koruji M. ; Aflatoonian R. ; Farzaneh P. 
Three-dimensional decellularized
amnion membrane scaffold
as a novel tool for cancer research; cell behavior, drug resistance
and cancer stem cell content
. Mater. Sci. Eng.,
C 
2019 , 100 , 330 –340
. 10.1016/j.msec.2019.02.090 .
Niknejad H. ; Peirovi H. ; Jorjani M. ; Ahmadiani A. ; Ghanavi J. ; Seifalian A. M. 
Properties
of the amniotic membrane
for potential use in tissue engineering
. Eur.
Cells Mater. 
2008 , 7 , 88 –99
. 10.22203/eCM.v015a07 .
Clark R. A. F. ; McCoy G. A. ; Folkvord J. M. ; McPherson J. M. 
TGF-β1
stimulates cultured human fibroblasts to proliferate and produce tissue-like
fibroplasia: A fibronectin matrix-dependent event
. J Cell Physiol. 
1997 , 170 , 69 –80
. 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4652(199701)170:1<69::AID-JCP8>3.0.CO;2-J .9012786 
Di
Loreto F. P. ; Mangione A. ; Palmisano E. ; Cerda J. I. ; Dominguez M. J. ; Ponce G. ; et al. Dried
human amniotic membrane as an antiadherent layer for intraperitoneal
placing of polypropylene mesh in rats
. Surg.
Endosc. 
2013 , 27 , 1435 –1440
. 10.1007/s00464-012-2604-x .23392973 
Szabo A. ; Haj M. ; Waxsman I. ; Eitan A. 
Evaluation of seprafilm and amniotic
membrane as adhesion prophylaxis in mesh repair of abdominal wall
hernia in rats
. Eur. Surg. Res. 
2000 , 32 , 125 –128
. 10.1159/000008751 .10810219 
Zhang X. ; Reagan M. R. ; Kaplan D. L. 
Electrospun silk biomaterial scaffolds
for regenerative medicine
. Adv. Drug Delivery
Rev. 
2009 , 61 , 988 –1006
. 10.1016/j.addr.2009.07.005 .
Liu Z. ; Yang Z. ; Zhou Z. ; Song Z. ; Wang H. ; Yang J. 
Host tissue integration
process in abdominal wall defect repair:
a comparison of two porcine-derived grafts in a long-term study
. Expert Opin. Biol. Ther. 
2014 , 14 , 883 –892
. 10.1517/14712598.2014.907783 .24707915 
Gilbert T. W. ; Freund J. M. ; Badylak S. F. 
Quantification of
DNA in biologic
scaffold materials
. J. Surg. Res. 
2009 , 152 , 135 –139
. 10.1016/j.jss.2008.02.013 .18619621 
Magoshi J. ; Magoshi Y. ; Nakamura S. ; Kasai N. ; Kakudo M. 
Physical properties
and structure of silk. V. Thermal behavior of silk fibroin in the
random-coil conformation
. J. Polym. Sci., Polym.
Phys. Ed. 
1977 , 15 , 1675 –1683
. 10.1002/pol.1977.180150915 .
Rockwood D. N. ; Preda R. C. ; Yucel T. ; Wang X. ; Lovett M. L. ; Kaplan D. L. 
Materials fabrication from Bombyx mori silk fibroin
. Nat. Protoc. 
2011 , 6 , 1612 –1631
. 10.1038/nprot.2011.379 .21959241 
Ueno M. ; Matsumura M. ; Watanabe K. ; Nakamura T. ; Osakada F. ; Takahashi M. ; Kawasaki H. ; Kinoshita S. ; Sasai Y. 
Neural conversion of ES cells by an inductive activity on human amniotic
membrane matrix
. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2006 , 103 , 9554 –9559
. 10.1073/pnas.0600104103 .16766664 
Jin C. Z. ; Park S. R. ; Choi B. H. ; Lee K. Y. ; Kang C. K. ; Min B. H. 
Human amniotic membrane as a delivery
matrix for articular
cartilage repair
. Tissue Eng. 
2007 , 13 , 693 –702
. 10.1089/ten.2006.0184 .17269856 
Koob T. J. ; Lim J. J. ; Massee M. ; Zabek N. ; Rennert R. ; Gurtner G. ; Li W. W. 
Angiogenic properties of dehydrated
human amnion/chorion allografts: therapeutic potential for soft tissue
repair and regeneration
. Vasc. Cell 
2014 , 6 , 10 10.1186/2045-824X-6-10 .24817999 
Niknejad H. ; Yazdanpanah G. 
Opposing effect of amniotic membrane on angiogenesis
originating from amniotic epithelial cells
. J. Med. Hypotheses Ideas 
2014 , 8 , 39 –41
. 10.1016/j.jmhi.2013.08.002 .
Ramuta T. Ž. ; Kreft M. E. 
Human amniotic membrane
and amniotic membrane-derived
cells: How far are we from their use in regenerative and reconstructive
urology?
. Cell Transplant. 
2018 , 27 , 77 –92
. 10.1177/0963689717725528 .29562770 
Gholipourmalekabadi M. ; Mozafari M. ; Salehi M. ; Seifalian A. ; Bandehpour M. ; Ghanbarian H. ; Urbanska A. M. ; Sameni M. ; Samadikuchaksaraei A. ; Seifalian A. M. 
Development of a cost-effective and
simple protocol for decellularization and preservation of human amniotic
membrane as a soft tissue replacement and delivery system for bone
marrow stromal cells
. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 
2015 , 4 , 918 –926
. 10.1002/adhm.201400704 .
Tehrani F. A. ; Ahmadiani A. ; Niknejad H. 
The effects of preservation
procedures
on antibacterial property of amniotic membrane
. Cryobiology 
2013 , 67 , 293 –298
. 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2013.08.010 .23988559 
Row S. ; Liu Y. ; Alimperti S. ; Agarwal S. K. ; Andreadis S. T. 
Cadherin-11
is a novel regulator of extracellular matrix synthesis and tissue
mechanics
. J. Cell Sci. 
2016 , 129 , 2950 –2961
. 10.1242/jcs.183772 .27311482 
Hopkinson A. ; McIntosh R. S. ; Tighe P. J. ; James D. K. ; Dua H. S. 
Amniotic
membrane for ocular surface reconstruction: donor variations and the
effect of handling on TGF-β content
. Invest.
Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 
2006 , 47 , 4316 –4322
. 10.1167/iovs.05-1415 .17003421 
Dai C. ; Liu Y. 
Hepatocyte
growth factor antagonizes the profibrotic action of TGF-β1
in mesangial cells by stabilizing Smad transcriptional corepressor
TGIF
. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 
2004 , 15 , 1402 –1412
. 10.1097/01.ASN.0000130568.53923.FD .15153551 
Xin X. ; Yang S. ; Ingle G. ; Zlot C. ; Rangell L. ; Kowalski J. ; Schwall R. ; Ferrara N. ; Gerritsen M. E. 
Hepatocyte
growth factor enhances vascular endothelial growth factor-induced
angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo
. Am. J. Pathol. 
2001 , 158 , 1111 –1120
. 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64058-8 .11238059 
Flanders K. C. ; Burmester J. K. 
Medical
applications of transforming growth factor-β
. Clin. Med. Res. 
2003 , 1 , 13 –20
. 10.3121/cmr.1.1.13 .15931280 
Jun I. ; Han H. S. ; Edwards J. R. ; Jeon H. 
Electrospun fibrous
scaffolds for tissue engineering: viewpoints on architecture and fabrication
. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2018 , 19 , 74510.3390/ijms19030745 .
Bury K. ; Smietański M. ; Justyna B. ; Gumsiela P. ; Smietańska A. I. ; Owczuk R. ; Naumiuk L. ; Samet A. ; Paradziej-Łukowi J. 
Effects of
macroporous monofilament mesh on infection in a contaminated field
. Langenbecks Arch. Surg. 
2014 , 399 , 873 –877
. 10.1007/s00423-014-1225-3 .25168297 
Li W. J. ; Laurencin C. T. ; Caterson E. J. ; Tuan R. S. ; Ko F. K. 
Electrospun
nanofibrous structure: a novel scaffold for tissue engineering
. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
2002 , 60 , 613 –621
. 10.1002/jbm.10167 .11948520 
Bhattarai S. R. ; Bhattarai N. ; Yi H. K. ; Hwang P. H. ; Cha D. I. ; Kim H. Y. 
Novel biodegradable
electrospun membrane: scaffold
for tissue engineering
. Biomaterials 
2004 , 25 , 2595 –2602
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2003.09.043 .14751745 
Min J. K. ; Lee Y. M. ; Kim J. H. ; Kim Y. M. ; Kim S. W. ; Lee S. Y. ; Gho Y. S. ; Oh G. T. ; Kwon Y. G. 
Hepatocyte
growth factor suppresses vascular endothelial growth factor-induced
expression of endothelial ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 by inhibiting the nuclear
factor-κB pathway
. Circ. Res. 
2005 , 96 , 300 –307
. 10.1161/01.RES.0000155330.07887.EE .15637298 
Giannoni P. ; Fais F. ; Cutrona G. ; Totero D. 
Hepatocyte growth factor:
a microenvironmental resource for leukemic cell growth
. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2019 , 20 , 29210.3390/ijms20020292 .
Arulselvan P. ; Fard M. T. ; Tan W. S. ; Gothai S. ; Fakurazi S. ; Norhaizan M. E. ; Kumar S. S. 
Role of antioxidants and natural
products in inflammation
. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longevity 
2016 , 2016 , 527613010.1155/2016/5276130 .
Navas A. ; Magana-Guerrero F. S. ; Dominguez-Lopez A. ; Chavez-Garcia C. ; Partido G. ; Graue-Hernandez E. O. ; Sanchez-Garcia F. J. ; Garfias Y. 
Anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic
effects of human
amniotic membrane mesenchymal stem cells and their potential in corneal
repair
. Stem Cells Transl. Med. 
2018 , 7 , 906 –917
. 10.1002/sctm.18-0042 .30260581 
Liu Z. ; Feng X. ; Wang H. ; Ma J. ; Liu W. ; Cui D. ; Gu Y. ; Tang R. 
Carbon nanotubes as VEGF carriers
to improve the early vascularization of porcine small intestinal submucosa
in abdominal wall defect repair
. Int. J. Nanomed. 
2014 , 9 , 1275 –1286
. 10.2147/IJN.S58626 .
Tang R. ; Wang X. ; Zhang H. ; Liang X. ; Feng X. ; Zhu X. ; et al. Promoting early neovascularization of SIS-repaired
abdominal wall by controlled release of bioactive VEGF
. RSC Adv. 
2018 , 8 , 4548 –4560
. 10.1039/C7RA11954B .
Goll D. E. ; Bray R. W. ; Hoekstra W. G. 
Age-associated
changes in muscle
composition. The isolation and properties of a collagenous residue
from bovine muscle
. J. Food Sci. 
1963 , 28 , 503 –509
. 10.1111/j.1365-2621.1963.tb00234.x .
Iyyanki T. S. ; Dunne L. W. ; Zhang Q. ; Hubenak J. ; Turza K. C. ; Butler C. E. 
Adipose-derived
stem-cell-seeded non-cross-linked porcine
acellular dermal matrix increases cellular infiltration, vascular
infiltration, and mechanical strength of ventral hernia repairs
. Tissue Eng., Part A 
2015 , 21 , 475 –485
. 10.1089/ten.tea.2014.0235 .25156009

