
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03451ArticleOptimizing Lignosulfonic Acid-Grafted Polyaniline as a Hole-Transport
Layer for Inverted CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite
Solar Cells Al-Dainy Gailan A. *†Watanabe Fumiya †Kannarpady Ganesh K. †Ghosh Anindya ‡Berry Brian ‡Biris Alexandru S. *†Bourdo Shawn E. *†† Center for Integrative
Nanotechnology Sciences, University of Arkansas
at Little Rock, 2801 S. University Ave., Little Rock, Arkansas 72204, United States‡ Department of Chemistry, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, 2801 S. University Ave., Little Rock, Arkansas 72204, United States* E-mail: gaaldainy@ualr.edu; gaaldainy@gmail.com (G.A.A.-D.).* E-mail: asbiris@ualr.edu (A.S.B.).* E-mail: sxbourdo@ualr.edu (S.E.B.).21 01 2020 04 02 2020 5 4 1887 1901 16 10 2019 23 12 2019 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical
Society2020American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

A conducting polymer of lignosulfonic
acid-grafted, polyaniline-doped camphorsulfonic acid (LS-PANI-CSA),
created via a low-temperature solution process, has been explored
as an efficient hole-transport layer (HTL) for inverted single cation–anion
CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells.
The performance of the solar cell was optimized in this study by tuning
the morphology and work function of LS-PANI-CSA films using dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO) as a solvent in treatment. Results showed that DMSO washing
enhanced the electronic properties of the LS-PANI-CSA film and increased
its hydrophobicity, which is very important for perovskite growth.
The perovskite active layer deposited onto the DMSO-treated LS-PANI-CSA
layer had higher crystallinity with large grain sizes (>5 μm),
more uniform and complete surface coverage, and very low pinhole density
and PbI2 residues compared to untreated LS-PANI-CSA. These
enhancements result in higher device performance and stability. Using
DMSO-treated LS-PANI-CSA as an HTL at 15 nm of thickness, a maximum
10.8% power conversion efficiency was obtained in ITO/LS-PANI-CSA/MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag inverted-device configurations. This was a significant
improvement compared to 5.18% for devices based on untreated LS-PANI-CSA
and a slight improvement over PEDOT:PSS-based devices with 9.48%.
Furthermore, the perovskite based on treated LS-PANI-CSA showed the
higher stability compared to both untreated LS-PANI-CSA and PEDOT:PSS
HTL-based devices.

document-id-old-9ao9b03451document-id-new-14ao9b03451ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Due to its high efficiency,
solution processability, and easy and low-cost fabrication, hybrid
organic/inorganic perovskite is frequently investigated for use in
thin-film solar cells. Perovskite has outstanding optoelectronic properties
such as a long carrier diffusion length, broad light absorption throughout
the visible wavelength region, and controllable band gap.1−3 The traditional mesoscopic perovskite architecture utilizes a high-temperature-processed
mesoporous metal oxide scaffold (titanium oxide and zinc oxide) as
the electron transport layer (ETL), which is incompatible for flexible
and tandem solar cells. Moreover, the relatively high cost of 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene
(spiro-OMeTAD), which is used as the hole-transport layer (HTL) in
the traditional mesoscopic architecture, has limited the practical
development of perovskite solar cells. Therefore, it is important
to find a new HTL for planar perovskite devices that has a suitable
work function to make ohmic contacts with the perovskite active layer.
Inverted-type planar architectures with low-temperature processing
have emerged as an alternative to traditional mesoscopic architectures.
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)
is often used as an HTL in both organic4 and perovskite5−7 solar cells. However, PEDOT:PSS has poor long-term
stability due to its hygroscopic and acidic nature.8 In the case of inverted perovskite architecture, several
inorganic p-type semiconductors have been used as HTLs to improve
the device efficiency, such as CuSCN, CuO, Cu2O, Cu-doped
NiO, NiOx, CuS, CuOx, Mg-doped NiO, and CuI.9−19 However, small organic molecule-based HTLs have been developed for
high-performance perovskite devices; they require an easier solution
process, and their optical and electrochemical properties can be relatively
easily tuned by changing certain functionalities.20−22 Moreover, most
polymeric HTLs contain nitrogen and sulfur, which are electron-rich
atoms that help improve the performance of a device.22,23

Thus, new low-temperature, solution-processed organic HTLs
for perovskite-based solar cells are needed. Among various conducting
polymers, polyaniline (PANI) is one of the most intriguing conjugated
polymers because of its tunable conductivity upon doping and simple
low-cost method required to synthesize.24 PANI has been used as an alternative HTL in various electronic devices,
including light-emitting diodes25 and organic26 and traditional mesoscopic perovskite27,28 solar cells. Alternative HTL-based PANI has shown high transmittance
compared to PEDOT29 and high stability
compared to PEDOT:PSS.30 Conventional PANI
is limited by its processability, and it becomes insoluble in common
organic solvents when doped with most acids. However, several methods
have been used to improve its processability. PANI-doped poly(sodium
4-styrenesulfonate) (PANI:PSS)21,31 showed increased dispersion
in water. However, some PANI:PSS composite particles have limited
applications due to their lack of stability when dispersed in water;
therefore, work has been done to improve dispersibility by modifying
particle size.32

Similar to the PANI:PSS,
lignosulfonic acid-doped polyaniline (LS-PANI) has shown high polymer
dispersion due to the solubility of the lignosulfonate counterion.33 Lignosulfonates are commercially available as
sodium or ammonium salts, and the latter can be made into lignosulfonic
acid simply by utilizing proton-exchange resins. An extremely water-soluble
polymeric acid, lignosulfonic acid is able to be a template for polyaniline
polymerization.34 Although LS-PANI exhibits
good dispersibility in water and higher dispersibility in polar aprotic
solvents such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) or
dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), its conductivity is still low for some applications.35 Therefore, additional acid doping is needed
to increase its conductivity. Additional LS-PANI acid doping increases
the electron delocalization on the polyaniline backbone, leading to
more chain–chain interaction and, thus, higher conductivity.
The degree of protonation or “doping” in PANI can be
adjusted by changing the molar ratio of the protonic acid to an imine
nitrogen atom. It has been mentioned in the literature that increasing
the acid doping level increases not only the conductivity but the
work function of the PANI as well. The work function was 4.78 ±
0.13 eV at a full doping level36 because
the high acid doping level of the polymer caused the Fermi level to
increase toward the highest occupied molecular orbital. Spectroscopy
showed that the PANI protonated by sulfonic acid had higher dispersibility
and conductivity in m-cresol than those of other
polar and nonpolar solvents. This is due to the expanded coil conformation
of the protonated polymer chain, which leads to removal of the twist
defects between aromatic rings and allows for a more extensive conjugation
of the π orbitals.37 Therefore, m-cresol was not only a solvent but also a secondary dopant
for protonated PANI because its strong interaction with the polymer
chain led to increased molecular conformation from a compact coil
to an extended coil.38

In this work,
LS-PANI was synthesized and employed for the first time as an HTL
for an inverted planar CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite device after protonation with camphorsulfonic acid. Camphorsulfonic
acid (CSA) plays an important role in tuning the work function of
the polymer to enable ohmic contact with the perovskite valance band.
Therefore, fully protonated LS-PANI with CSA was processed, and the
effect of film thickness on the device performance was examined. Additionally,
the morphology and hydrophobicity of the LS-PANI-CSA films were studied,
which are very important factors for the growth and stability of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite-based solar cells.
It is known that perovskite film quality, including grain size, grain
boundaries, and crystalline structure and orientation, can be controlled
through preparation methods,39−41 solvent engineering,42−45 mixed antisolvents,46−48 or additive materials.49 Perovskite film quality is also influenced by the surface energy
properties (e.g., solvent wettability) of the HTL/ETL underlayers.50 The morphology and optoelectronic properties
of the perovskite active layer and HTL underneath are crucial to the
resulting high-performance inverted-architecture device. Multiple
characterization techniques, including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM),
atomic force microscopy (AFM), Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM)
techniques, Raman spectroscopy, and UV–vis spectrometry, were
implemented to investigate the processing and fabrication of the device
layers.

Results and Discussion
Structure and Morphology of the HTL and Active
Layers of the Device
In the beginning of the study, several
organic sulfonic acids were utilized as additional protonic acid dopants
for LS-PANI, including p-toluenesulfonic acid
(p-TSA), dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (DBSA), and
CSA. The LS-PANI films protonated by the three sulfonic acids were
analyzed by AFM, and the results showed that the CSA produced the
highest quality film with a lower surface roughness than that of p-TSA and DBSA films. The root mean square (RMS) of the
LS-PANI-CSA surface was 3.39 nm, in contrast to 14.7 and 8.49 nm for
the LS-PANI-p-TSA and LS-PANI-DBSA films, respectively
(Figure S2). To further improve the quality
of the LS-PANI-CSA films, three high-polarity solvents, NMP, dimethylformamide
(DMF), and DMSO, were used to wash the films. NMP and DMF solvents
removed some polymers from the surface, resulting in increased surface
roughness (Figure S2), but DMSO produced
a high-quality uniform film with lower surface roughness than that
of the untreated pristine LS-PANI-CSA films. Throughout the article
and in the figures, films may be referred to as UT-LS-PANI-CSA (untreated/no
solvent treatment) or as T-LS-PANI-CSA (solvent treated).

In
the AFM images of the UT-LS-PANI-CSA (Figure 1a) and DMSO-treated LS-PANI-CSA (Figure 1b), distinct agglomeration
of polymer grains was visible in the pristine samples, while in the
solvent-treated films, the accumulated polymer grains were diminished.
The RMS of the DMSO-treated LS-PAN-CSA film at a 10 μm scan
size was 1.23 nm, which is lower than the untreated LS-PAN-CSA film’s
RMS of 4.87 nm. As can be seen in Figure 1a, the polymer grains, which have numerous
features, were distributed over the surface, resulting in a nonuniform
film with high roughness compared to the DMSO-treated film. Upon washing
the samples, these features were removed, leading to a smoother surface,
which become similar to those of the PEDOT:PSS morphology that has
a 0.93 nm RMS (Figure 1c). Therefore, LS-PANI-CSA with and without DMSO solvent treatment
was focused on as an HTL for an inverted perovskite device.

Figure 1 AFM images
of (a) untreated (UT-) LS-PANI-CSA, (b) DMSO-treated (T-) LS-PANI-CSA,
and (c) PEDOT:PSS films on the ITO/glass substrate. (d) UV–vis
transmittance spectra of untreated (UT-) and treated (T-) LS-PANI-CSA
films at different thicknesses on a glass substrate. (e) Raman spectra
of 15 nm-thick untreated (UT-) and treated (T-) LS-PANI-CSA films
deposited on silicon substrates (632.8 nm laser).

The XPS survey scans of pure LS-PANI and LS-PANI-CSA with and without
DMSO washing are plotted in Figure S3a.
The figure shows peaks at binding energies of 168.23, 284.99, 400.10,
and 531.95 eV, which correspond to the four elements of interest:
sulfur (S 2p), carbon (C 1s), nitrogen (N 1s), and oxygen (O 1s),
respectively. The sulfur peak was only evident in protonated samples,
disappearing in the unprotonated LS-PANI sample. Using DMSO as a washing
solvent did not show any negative side effects on the LS-PANI-CSA
materials with the four elemental peaks remaining the same after treatment.
The S/N atomic and weight ratios were determined from XPS measurements
of LS-PANI-CSA before and after DMSO washing, in addition to the pure
LS-PANI films where the film was etched for 10 s by an ion beam. The
S/N atomic ratio was reduced from ∼0.5:1 to ∼0.2:1 after
DMSO treatment because it removed some big particles from the film’s
surface, as confirmed by AFM, and reduced the m-cresol
content from the film surface.

To investigate the influence
of solvent treatment on the primary (CSA) and secondary (m-cresol) doping, UV–vis spectroscopic analysis was employed
(Figure 1d). The untreated
LS-PANI-CSA film showed the typical absorption spectrum of PANI where
the polaron−π* transition is evident at approximately
450 nm and a delocalized π–polaron band is evidenced
by the free-carrier tail rising at wavelengths of >800 nm.37,55,56 The UV–vis transmittance
spectra of treated LS-PANI-CSA films showed lower transmittance, specifically
at wavelength intervals between 550 and 750 nm, than that of the spectra
of the pristine film. As can be seen in Figure 1d, after DMSO treatment, peaks at 330 and
740 nm, associated with π–π* and localized π–polaron
bands, respectively, were present in the spectrum, which indicates
the removal of the dopant (e.g., CSA) and two residues of m-cresol solvent by the treatment process. Even though the
treatment process reduced the transmittance spectra of the polymer,
the 15 nm treated films showed good transparency in the visible region
from a maximum (94.2%T) wavelength of 504 nm to a minimum (89.2%T)
of 692 nm. While both treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA films had
lower transmittance than that of ITO (shown as reference in Figure 1c), the HTLs of interest
in this study can still be considered a good window to allow the visible
spectrum to reach the active layer. UV–vis analysis proved
that the LS-PANI-CSA chains kept some expanded coil formation due
to the existence of a free carrier tail after the treatment process.
The transmittance spectra of untreated LS-PANI-CSA showed lower transparency
than that of the PEDOT:PSS film at the interval wavelength from 600
nm toward the ultraviolet region and higher transparency from 600
nm toward the infrared region, while treated LS-PANI-CSA showed lower
transparency than that of PEDOT:PSS over much of the spectral region
of interest.

The Raman spectra of 15 nm-thick untreated and
DMSO-treated LS-PANI-CSA films were recorded using a 632.8 nm laser
to further examine structural changes. Results indicated that the
treated LS-PANI-CSA film (Figure 1e) peaks shifted, and peak intensities were reduced
for the C–N+ quinoid ring (∼1337 cm–1) and delocalized polaron vibrations (∼1383 and ∼1642
cm–1) in the extended polymeric conformation. A
small shift of the primary quinoid rings’ C–H occurred
at 1168 cm–1 in treated LS-PANI-CSA, compared to
1178 cm–1 in untreated LS-PANI-CSA; this shift is
attributed to the same mode in the benzoid segments.57 Furthermore, the band at 1465 cm–1, assigned
to the C=C stretching vibration of the quinoid ring, was strong
in the DMSO-treated film spectra but not as evident in the untreated
film, which likely still had m-cresol on the surface.
These changes can be attributed to the polymer having a more quinoid-like
character55,58 and, as was stated in the section on UV–vis,
the removal of the dopant (e.g., CSA) and residual m-cresol solvent by treatment.

Because the HTL influences the
deposition and growth of perovskite in inverted device architectures,
we characterized the perovskite layer after deposition on the untreated
and treated LS-PANI-CSA HTLs. Top-view SEM images (Figure 2a–c) of perovskite films
deposited on the HTLs make it clear that the HTLs influenced the perovskite
films. The perovskite film had large grain sizes when deposited onto
treated LS-PANI-CSA, reaching ∼5 μm (and low variation
in sizes), whereas, when deposited onto the untreated LS-PANI-CSA
film, the grains were less than 1 μm (with random variation)
and some unclear grain sizes were observed (Figure S4). The grain boundaries of perovskite deposited onto the
untreated and PEDOT:PSS films were not perpendicular to the substrate
due to the polymer’s low hydrophobicity leading to unclear
grain boundaries of perovskite films. Furthermore, untreated LS-PANI-CSA
exhibited higher surface roughness (Figure 1a), which facilitates nucleation in small
cavities, thus limiting the grain boundary mobility of the perovskite.
The increased coverage and smoothness of the perovskite film on the
solvent-washed LS-PANI-CSA suggests that DMSO treatment can induce
homogenous nucleation by modifying the perovskite/HTL interfacial
energy, which, in turn, allows the perovskite crystals to grow evenly
and have optimal contact with the LS-PANI-CSA surface. Additionally,
the perovskite film becomes a darker black and shiny when deposited
on the treated LS-PANI-CSA, which indicates good crystalline orientation.
The larger grain size compared to the film thicknesses (a 6-fold difference)
will greatly enhance the charge extraction process since the photogenerated
charges would not need to go through a prohibitive amount of grain
boundaries before being collected by the electrodes.

Figure 2 (a–c) Top-view
SEM images of MAPbI3 deposited onto untreated (UT-) LS-PANI-CSA,
treated (T-) LS-PANI-CSA, and PEDOT:PSS, respectively. (d–f)
Representative image from the contact angle (average value ±
standard deviation of four measurements noted in the image) of water
droplets onto UT-LS-PANI-CSA, T-LS-PANI-CSA, and PEDOT:PSS layers
respectively. (g) XRD patterns of MAPbI3 deposited onto
ITO with UT- and T-LS-PANI-CSA and PEDOT:PSS after annealing at 100
°C for 10 min. (h) Absorption coefficients of MAPbI3 deposited onto ITO/LS-PANI-CSA before and after treatment and PEDOT:PSS
layers and (i) optical band gap (Eg) estimation
of MAPbI3 deposited onto the ITO/LS-PANI-CSA before and
after treatment.

The contact angles of
water on these polymers are shown in Figure 2d–f. As can be seen, LS-PANI-CSA after
DMSO treatment had a larger contact angle of 80 ± 2° than
that of the untreated LS-PANI-CSA (50 ± 2°) and PEDOT:PSS
(30 ± 4°) due to the lower acidity (i.e., surface energy)
of the treated surface.59 These results
confirm that treated LS-PANI-CSA is more resistant to wetting than
untreated and PEDOT:PSS films. Increasing the hydrophobicity of the
polymer reduces the surface tension and, hence, the dragging force
when the perovskite precursor is used; this allows for growth of larger
grain boundaries than those on the untreated polymer surface.50 As can be seen in Video S1, the treated LS-PANI-CSA film was highly wettable by the
perovskite precursor solution (mixture of 4:1 v/v of DMF:DMSO) compared
to the untreated film shown in Video S2; this allowed the solution to spread rapidly on the polymer surface
and lead to a uniform perovskite layer with better coverage over the
HTL. The increased hydrophobicity of LS-PANI-CSA after DMSO washing
was also considered evidence of surface modification because it indicates
reduced acidity of the dopant/m-cresol on the film
surface.50,59

Surface energy studies complement
findings from X-ray diffraction patterns (Figure 2g) that were sharper and more intense for
perovskite films on the treated LS-PANI-CSA HTLs. The XRD patterns
were recorded for MAPbI3 films deposited onto the glass/ITO/untreated
LS-PANI-CSA and glass/ITO/treated LS-PANI-CSA substrates in ambient
conditions at room temperature and 23–25% relative humidity.
The films were annealed at 100 °C for 10 min, and the patterns
are shown in Figure 2e. Strong peaks at 14.05°, 19.95°, 23.51°, 24.56°,
28.48°, 30.99°, 31.94°, 40.47°, 42.51°, and
43.24° are visible, which correspond to the reflections from
the 110, 112, 211, 202, 220, 310, 312, 224, 411, and 330 planes, respectively.
This finding indicates that the perovskite layers produced from the
cosolvents DMF and DMSO had highly crystalline (tetragonal) structures
and no impurity peaks. The impurities that could result from lead
iodide (PbI2) and methylammonium iodide CH3NH3I (MAI) were not observed.60−65 Using the cosolvent approach, DMSO functioned both as a solvent
and as a coordination reagent because it has a stronger ability to
coordinate with PbI2 than that of DMF, while DMF only functions
as a solvent, with a relatively higher evaporation rate than that
of DMSO.66 Furthermore, forming a PbI2–MAI–DMSO intermediate-phase film hampered the
fast reaction between PbI2 and MAI during the DMF evaporation.63 It has been reported that using only DMF as
a solvent for the precursor solution results in additional peaks of
unreacted PbI2 at 12.99° and 38.98°, even when
the films are annealed at 100 °C. This residual PbI2 would reduce the performance of the devices due to its poor light
absorption.63,66 The grain size of the perovskite
was estimated using the Scherrer equation;67 the average crystallite sizes were approximately 44, 35, and 37
nm for perovskite deposited onto treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA
and PEDOT:PSS, respectively. As displayed in Figure 2g, the strong and narrow peak width confirmed
that perovskite films exhibit better orientation on the treated LS-PANI-CSA
surface than on the untreated or PEDOT:PSS surfaces.

According
to the literature, the binding energies of the elements in perovskite
can shift depending on the ETL/HTL that the perovskite layer is deposited
on and on the thickness of the active layer.68−70 Therefore,
the XPS survey spectra were recorded for MAPbI3 deposited
onto treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA and PEDOT:PSS layers to identify
all elemental species present in the composition of the MAPbI3 film. Figure S3b shows the XPS
spectra of MAPbI3 perovskite films deposited onto LS-PANI-CSA
with or without solvent treatment and PEDOT:PSS films. The electron
photoemission peaks of the elements O (1s), N (1s), and C (1s) are
located at binding energies ca. 532, 402, and 285 eV, respectively,
while the doublet peaks of I (3d) and Pb (4f) elements with their
associated spin–orbit splitting are located at around 619 and
138 eV, respectively. The elemental composition of both untreated
and treated samples was mostly similar with no significant shifts
in binding energies. Moreover, the results showed no other obvious
elements in the sample other than those associated with the perovskite.

In order to evaluate the generation of charge carriers in the active
layer over the untreated and treated HTLs, optical absorption coefficients
(α) of the perovskite films were estimated. Using the absorption
spectrum (A), optical absorption coefficients (α)
can be derived as α = A ln 10/L where L is the sample thickness.71 Compared to perovskite deposited on untreated LS-PANI-CSA
and PEDOT:PSS, the perovskite films deposited on treated LS-PANI-CSA
had higher absorption coefficients along all the wavelengths except
at absorption edges where perovskite films had a sharp discontinuity
in decreasing of the absorption coefficients at absorption edges.
It is clear from Figure 2h that the absorption coefficient of perovskite becomes lower after
the wavelength of 580 nm until the absorption edge when perovskite
is deposited onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. Furthermore, the energy band
gap (Eg) was estimated using the power
law of Tauc:72 1  where B is a constant related to the electrical conductivity and the energy
level separation, q, depends on the type of electronic
transition. Theoretically, q equals 1/2 or 2 for
a direct or indirect allowed transition, respectively.73,74 For direct allowed transition, the band gap of the MAPbI3 thin film deposited on treated and untreated ITO/LS-PANI-CSA was
1.567 eV, approximately the same for the deposited perovskite onto
treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA films (Figure 2i). This result is close to the theoretical
value of 1.55 eV that was reported by Baikie.75 The deposition of perovskite onto treated LS-PANI-CSA without tuning
the perovskite band gap76 is evidence that
a high-quality, uniform, superior crystalline perovskite film leads
to increasing the absorption coefficients.46,77,78

Electronic Properties of the Device Interface
Layers
XPS was used to further analyze the untreated and
treated LS-PANI-CSA surfaces without etching (as would be done in
the KPFM measurement). The results demonstrate that the films treated
with DMSO have a lower S/N ratio, approximately half, with no deviation
compared to the untreated films, which have the higher S/N ratio with
higher deviation, especially at 10 and 20 nm thicknesses, as shown
in Figure 3a. As discussed
earlier, the treated samples exhibit optical absorption and Raman
spectra that is consistent with slight dedoping of the polymer backbone.
Therefore, the conductivity and mobilities were investigated using I–V curves and a space charge-limited
model (Figures S5 and S6) to determine
the effect of treatment on electronic properties. The treated LS-PANI-CSA
had similar conductivity and mobility to that of the untreated samples
at the same film thickness (Figure 3b,c). This finding is quite unexpected as conductivity
is known to decrease with the doping level and may be attributed to
other modifications to the electronic properties, such as work function.
A film of PEDOT:PSS at 34 nm of thickness exhibited a conductivity
and mobility similar to those of the 10 nm LS-PANI-CSA films.

Figure 3 Results of
the (a) S/N ratio, (b) conductivity, (c) mobility, (d) CPD, (e) roughness,
and (f) work function for the HTLs [pure unprotonated (UP-UT), treated
LS-PANI-CSA (T), and untreated LS-PANI-CSA (UT) at different thicknesses
in a nanometer scale; PEDOT:PSS at a 34 nm thickness is shown as reference].

In order to assess the efficiency of the charge
transfer process, we performed work function (WF) analysis using Kelvin
probe force microscopy (KPFM) on the transport layers of our device.
Height and surface potential images of the treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA
films at three different thicknesses are shown in Figures S8 and S9. Potential histograms were fitted with Gaussian
curves to find the mean value of the contact potential difference
(CPD) for the sample; this is a good method to find the mean CPD with
high accuracy.79 Between the treated and
untreated samples, the change in the CPD was more than 131 mV, while
it was less than 20 mV at different thicknesses of the same material,
as shown in Figures S8 and S9. The slight
deviation in the CPD in four different spots on the same samples might
be attributed to the sample’s contamination, solvent residuum,
or tip wearing; otherwise, surface roughness is the main reason for
this deviation, which was observed in the mirror topography.79−84 To avoid issues in CPD measurement due to surface contamination
or tip wear, the CPD measurement procedure was repeated many times
using new tips and freshly prepared samples. The results consistently
showed the same behavior, indicating that the deviation in the CPD
might be due to the morphology or S/N atomic ratio of the surface
films. On the other hand, the PEDOT:PSS sample showed a lower CPD
with an average value of 54 mV compared to treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA
(Figure S10a), while unprotonated LS-PANI
samples showed the higher CPD compared to treated and untreated protonated
LS-PANI-CSA due to the lack of extra doping of the polymer by camphorsulfonic
acid (Figure S10b). The KPFM results of
the CPD and roughness for all samples are plotted in Figure 3d,e, respectively. It is clear
from Figure 3b that
the lower thickness results in a wider range of surface roughness
before solvent treatment, which also increases the deviation in the
CPD, but it can be overcome by solvent treatment. Without extra doping,
the films are rougher and have a higher CPD. To convert the measured
CPD of the samples to the absolute surface work function, eq S2 (found
in the Supporting Information) can be modified in case of tip routing
as follows:85 2  

Using eq 2, the absolute WF values were plotted
(Figure 3f). The WF
shifted at a specific thickness due to the variation in the roughness
of that film.82−84 As has been reported in the literature, as surface
roughness features grow smaller, the electron binding by the surrounding
atoms gets weaker; therefore, the electrons are more able to escape
from the surface, which leads to a lower WF. Likewise, when the surface
roughness is reduced and the topography peaks become smoother, the
surface electrons become more bound by the surrounding atoms, making
it less easy for them to escape and, thus, increasing the WF of the
surface.83,84

It is clear from Figure 3 that the 15 nm-thick film
showed the lowest roughness and highest WF of −4.86 eV compared
to the other thicknesses of LS-PANI-CSA films, while PEDOT:PSS showed
lower roughness with a slightly higher WF of −4.88 eV compared
to all other investigated HTL films. As mentioned earlier, the solvent-treated
film had a highly uniform surface with low roughness because the agglomerated
LS-PANI-CSA had been removed. Moreover, the CPD of the ITO glass substrate,
which is used here as the device anode, was measured and averaged
for four different spots, resulting in an average CPD of 274.25 mV
(Figure S8c) and a WF of −4.66 eV.
The ITO WF results were in excellent agreement with previous reports.86

Device Performance and Stability
An inverted perovskite photovoltaic (PV) device based on the structure
depicted in Figure 4a, an indium-tin oxide (ITO)/LS-PANI-CSA with and without solvent
treatment or PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/phenyl-C61-butyric
acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag, was fabricated. The
device architecture of the solar cell is illustrated in Figure 4b, and the energy level values
of perovskite, BCP, and PCBM considered according to Troughton et
al.87 and measured WF of the device layer
are illustrated in Figure 4c. The device substrate has six individual cells, each with
an individual 2.56 mm2 active area. The fabrication processes
were the same except for the HTLs in which three groups of perovskite
solar cells based on untreated and DMSO-treated LS-PANI-CSA at different
thickness were compared with each other and with the performance and
stability of the PEDOT:PSS perovskite-based device. To investigate
the influence of LS-PANI-CSA thickness on device performance, three
different thicknesses (10, 15, and 20 nm) of treated and untreated
LS-PANI-CSA were tested. The AFM tapping mode was used to measure
the thickness of films (Figures S11 and S12). Using the SEM cross section, the thicknesses of all device layers
are shown in Figure S13. The current density–voltage
(J–V) curves are shown in Figure 5, and the performance
parameters derived from the J–V curves, including a forward and reverse scan direction of power
conversion efficiency (PCE), short-circuit current density (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF), are summarized in Table 1 for treated LS-PANI-CSA;
the device performance for untreated LS-PANI-CSA is summarized in Table S1.

Figure 4 (a) Schematic of the LS-PANI-CSA-based
perovskite solar cell; (b) real solid-state image of the perovskite
device; and (c) energy band level and WF of the solar cell.

Figure 5 J–V characteristics
of forward scan (FS) and reverse scan (RS) measurements under standard
AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm–2) of the best perovskite
devices deposited onto untreated (UT) and treated (T) LS-PANI-CSA
at different thickness: (a) 10, (b) 15, and (c) 20 nm. (d) J–V curves for treated LS-PANI-CSA
at 15 nm and PEDOT:PSS based on perovskite devices for forward scans
(FS) only. (e) EQE spectra and integrated current density calculation
from EQE of the device (ITO/HTL/ MAPbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag) with
treated and untreated HTLs at different thicknesses. (f) Normalized
PCE under storage and simulated sunlight illumination for treated
T-LS-PANI-CSA, untreated UT-LS-PANI-CSA, and PEDOT:PSS-based perovskite
solar cell devices.

Table 1 Photovoltaic
Performance Parameters Taken from the J–V Measurements of the Best Performing Device under Standard
AM 1.5 Illumination (100 mW cm–2) for Treated (T-)
LS-PANI-CSA HTLs at Different Thicknesses
 	 	Jsc (mA cm–2)	 	 	 	 	
HTLs	scan direction	EQEa	J–V	Voc (V)	FF (%)	PCE (%)	RS (Ω cm2)	
T-LS-PANI-CSA (10
nm)	forward	16.44	18.7	0.60	68	7.62	0.95	
reverse	18.4	0.60	73	8.05	 	
T-LS-PANI-CSA (15 nm)	forward	17.21	19	0.816	68	10.54	0.83	
reverse	19.5	0.816	68	10.82	 	
T-LS-PANI-CSA
(20 nm)	forward	15.19	16	0.536	65	5.57	1.287	
reverse	15.9	0.572	65	5.90	 	
PEDOT:PSS(control device)	forward	 	18.1	0.860	57	8.87	182	
reverse	18	0.864	61	9.48	 	
a Estimated based on equation found in ref (96).

When
LS-PAN-CSA was treated with DMSO, we observed a significant increase
in its photovoltaic performance, mainly due to the formation of a
more uniform and pinhole-free perovskite layer with large grains (Figure 2b). Moreover, the
KPFM study showed that the untreated LS-PANI-CSA had a lower work
function, even with full protonation by CSA (Figure 3d). Increasing the WF of LS-PANI-CSA from
−4.74 to −4.86 eV after DMSO treatment at the HTL/perovskite
interface resulted in a better energy alignment between the ITO and
perovskite active layer. This led to a more effective carrier transport,
thus minimizing potential energy loss at the LS-PANI-CSA/perovskite
(ca. −5.4 eV for MAPbI3) interface, which is beneficial
to device performance.88

The champion
untreated (UT) solar cells showed a lower device performance, resulting
in a relatively low PCE of 5.18% with a JSC of 14.4 mA cm–2, Voc of 0.548 V, and FF of 65% at a reverse scan (Table S1). Compared to the untreated HTL, the treated HTL-based
device showed a significant increase in photovoltaic performance:
up to 10.82% PCE at 15 nm thickness with a Jsc of 19.5 mA cm–2, VOC of 0.816
V, and FF of 68% at a reverse scan (Table 1). Furthermore, the untreated LS-PANI-CSA
showed high RMS (Figure 1a and Figure S8), which can result in
an imperfect contact between the polymer and perovskite interface.88 Therefore, treatment of the hole extraction
interface can increase the electric field within the HTL/perovskite
device as well as the photocurrent and, as a result, the PCE of the
solar cell.89−91 Even though the perovskite device based on PEDOT:PSS
as HTL showed better VOC compared to treated
LS-PANI-CSA, the high series resistance with this device leads to
a drop in the fill factor and device performance as can be seen clearly
in the Figure 5d.

The VOC is dependent on the built-in
potential (Vbi) of the HTL, which is determined
by its WF. Increasing the WF of the HTL would increase the Vbi and, thus, the Voc.90,92 In an inverted perovskite architecture,
the thickness of the HTL has a direct impact on the device performance;
the ideal thickness has been found to be less than 10 nm.93 In this study, the ideal LS-PANI-CSA film thickness
was ∼15 nm, which may be attributed to the lower surface roughness
compared to thinner (∼10 nm) or thicker (∼20 nm) HTLs.
Moreover, it was noted that reducing the film’s thickness to
less than 10 nm did not allow enough coverage of the ITO/glass substrate
by the polymer, and many spots of ITO were clearly visible via AFM
after solvent treatment.

A reduction of the LS-PANI-CSA thickness
to 10 nm improved the device FF up to 73%. However, the conductivity
and mobility of the polymer decreased at ∼10 nm of thickness,
leading to poorer device performance. Increasing the LS-PANI-CSA thickness
up to 20 nm reduced all the key parameters of the perovskite device,
raising the hysteresis in the J–V curves (Figure 5c).
All the perovskite devices did not show significant hysteresis during
the voltage scans of the p-i-n solar cells (Figure 5), but the hysteresis grew when the LS-PANI-CSA
thickness was increased up to 20 nm because the hysteresis phenomenon
in a perovskite-based device depends not only on the characteristics
of the perovskite active layer but also on the selective contacts.90,91 The best perovskite device was obtained when the treated HTL was
15 nm thick due to the minimized potential energy loss at the HTL/perovskite
interface.

The series resistance (Rs) of a device refers to the integral conductivity of all its layers,
which is connected to the internal carrier mobility of the device
layers.92 Shunt resistance (Rsh) is the loss of photocurrent through carrier recombination
at the interface of each layer of a device.92 The untreated LS-PANI-CSA in three p-i-n solar cells showed high Rs values with the maximum value reaching 109
Ω cm2 at 20 nm of thickness, while the treated LS-PANI-CSA
showed lower Rs values, less than 1 Ω
cm2 at 15 nm of thickness, which indicates good interphase
contact with high-conductivity device layers, leading to increased Jsc values.89 The
perovskite device based on PEDOT:PSS has a higher Rs with a value of 182 Ω cm2 compared
to the treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA. The untreated LS-PANI-CSA
device showed poor Rsh, which indicates
current leakage arising from low perovskite coverage on the HTL.94,95 However, in a planar structure, the pinhole within the perovskite
allows direct contact between the device layers, leading to a decrease
in shunt resistance and finally a drop in the fill factor of the device.
We believe that the high roughness and low electrical properties of
untreated LS-PANI-CSA were the main reasons for the reduced surface
coverage by the perovskite and weaker device performance.

Figure 5e shows the external
quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement for the devices between 300 and
800 nm, which was applied to confirm the higher Jsc that was harvested from the device with the treated
LS-PANI-CSA. Even though transparency of the treated film decreased
slightly at a wavelength interval of 550–750 nm compared to
the spectra of the untreated film, it is clear that the EQE increased
in the visible spectrum overall. It is most clearly explained by the
peak at approximately 650 nm in EQE for the untreated films. This
peak is not present in the treated films because of the π–polaron
absorption band in PANI as a result of some undoping of the polymer
backbone. Obviously, the EQE values in the entire range are significantly
enhanced by the HTL treatment (Figure 5e). Moreover, it is possible to use the EQE data to
perform a check on the validity of the measured solar cell performance
and specifically the Jsc values. The calculated Jsc values from EQE integration over the AM 1.5
solar spectrum are consistent with the measured Jsc value, less than 11% difference (Table 1 for treated and Table S1 for untreated HTL devices). This low mismatch has been noted
as a good measure of confidence in the measured Jsc and hence efficiency values.96

In order to gain a broader understanding
of the results from the perovskite devices, 15 p-i-n solar cells were
analyzed to provide statistical data for three thicknesses of both
untreated and treated HTLs. The performances of all the p-i-n solar
cells were plotted in Figure S16, ignoring
a device that has fabrication defects. As can be seen, devices with
untreated 20 nm-thick HTLs displayed an average Jsc of 12 mA cm–2, Voc of 0.39 V, and FF of 44.8%, resulting in a relatively
low PCE of 1.94%, while the untreated 15 nm-thick devices had an average Jsc, Voc, and FF
of 14.8 mA cm–2, 0.52 V, and 52%, respectively,
with a PCE of 3.59%. Reducing the thickness of the untreated LS-PANI-CSA
down to 10 nm increased the average FF to 57.3% and lowered the Voc and PCE to 0.41 V and 3.22%, respectively.
The photovoltaic performance of the devices was largely improved after
the LS-PANI-CSA film was treated with the DMSO solvent. It is clear
in Figure S15 that the devices showed high
performance with average PCEs of 6.32, 9.64, and 5.41% for 10, 15,
and 20 nm thicknesses, respectively.

To avoid interface loss
between the cathode and ETL, a thin interlayer of bathocuproine (BCP)
was inserted between the PCBM and the metal electrode (Ag) in our
inverted device using a solution process. The film thickness of the
BCP, calculated using Horiba Jobin Yvon UVISEL ellipsometry, was 5.035
± 1.533 nm (Figure S14), which is
an ideal thickness for use in inverted perovskite devices to prevent
charge accumulation at the PCBM/BCP/Ag interfaces.79 It was impossible to use AFM or SEM to measure BCP thickness
because of the highly transparent layer.

For perovskite solar
cells, a high-efficiency device may have poor long-term stability
due to gradual deterioration under operational conditions or the interface/active
layer contact effects. Therefore, stability testing is required to
evaluate perovskite device performance. The PCEs of our p-i-n devices
with treated LS-PANI-CSA as the HTL showed very good long-term stability
when stored in a glovebox for 240 days and exposed periodically to
ambient environmental conditions during the test process compared
to both untreated and PEDOT:PSS based on perovskite p-i-n devices.
As can be seen in Figure 5f, the normalized PCE under simulated sunlight illumination
with AM 1.5 G (100 mW cm–2) light for untreated
LS-PANI-CSA decreased dramatically after half of the stored time compared
to the treated LS-PANI-CSA device, while the PEDOT:PSS device showed
a shorter lifetime than that of the other devices. XRD (Figure 2g) showed no PbI2 residue97 when perovskite was deposited
onto all HTLs. Therefore, the low stability of the PEDOT:PSS and untreated
LS-PANI-CSA perovskite-based device can be attributed to (1) the low
hydrophobicity of the HTL (surface properties of HTLs) and (2) undesirable
perovskite properties when deposited onto untreated and PEDOT:PSS
HTLs. Disregarding the effect of the ferroelectric nature of perovskite
materials,98 treatment of LS-PANI-CSA by
DMSO was necessary to increase the hydrophobicity of the HTL and increase
the device stability.

Conclusions
We have reported a low-cost,
facile, low-temperature, processible LS-PANI-CSA as a new hole-transport
layer for inverted planar MAPbI3 solar cells. The HTL’s
morphology was improved and work function tuned using DMSO solvent
treatment. It was found that the solvent treatment process on the
pristine LS-PANI-CSA film can increase polymer hydrophobicity, which
is very important for micrometer perovskite grain growth with minimal
grain boundaries and the lowest pinhole, compared to the perovskite
deposited onto the untreated layer. The thickness of the LS-PANI-CSA
was investigated, and the results showed that the ideal LS-PANI-CSA
film thickness in this study was ∼15 nm; an increase or decrease
in thickness resulted in poorer photovoltaic device performance. Moreover,
the DMSO-treated LS-PANI-CSA leads to improvement of the stability
of the perovskite device due the treatment process by modifying the
surface properties of the LS-PANI-CSA layer with high hydrophobicity.
The treatment of LS-PANI-CSA as an HTL can be further developed for
large-area or flexible-substrate, high-quality perovskite films in
solar cells and other electronic device applications. While the current
PCE may be low compared to commercially available HTLs, such as PTAA,
and Spiro-OMeTAD, the cost to produce polyaniline-based materials
is generally much lower. This is a reason to continue the development
of new HTLs, such as LS-PANI to further improve the characteristics
for use in PV devices.

Experimental Details
Materials and Methods
Unless stated otherwise, all materials in this study were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received.

Synthesis of LS-PANI
The synthesis of LS-PANI using oxidative polymerization has been
described elsewhere.35 In brief, 0.5 g
of sodium lignosulfonate (Reax 825E, complimentary sample from Ingevity)
was dissolved in 50 mL of deionized water, then the solution was constantly
stirred for 15 min in an ice bath. To reduce the pH of the protonated
sodium solution to 4, concentrated sulfuric acid was added dropwise
to the solution. Two milliliters of freshly distilled aniline (weight
ratio of aniline to sodium lignosulfonate: 4:1) were then added to
the reaction mixture.35 Adding the monomer
to the reaction mixture increased the initial pH. To bring the pH
back to 4, H2SO4 was dropped in the reaction
mixture again. Next, 2.62 g of sodium persulfate (Na2S2O8) as the oxidant was added dropwise to the reaction
mixture and continuously stirred in an ice bath at 0 °C. The
color of the mixture changed over a period of 30 min. The solution
was constantly stirred in the 0 °C ice bath overnight. The resulting
precipitate (light blue) was vacuum-filtered through a Whatman #4
filter paper. The wet cake was washed with distilled water until the
filtrate was clear then partially dedoped by washing with 15 mL of
1 M ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH). To complete the dedoping
process, the polymer was suspended in 50 mL of 0.1 M ammonium hydroxide
and stirred overnight. Finally, the product was vacuum-filtered through
a Whatman #4 filter paper and washed with distilled water until the
filtrate became colorless and had a pH close to 7. The final solid
product of lignosulfonate-doped polyaniline was dried under a vacuum
at room temperature and stored in a closed vial until use. The pure
PANI was synthesized in a similar way but without lignosulfonates
to compare to lignosulfonate-doped PANI.

Protonation and Dispersion
of LS-PANI
Camphorsulfonic acid (CSA) was used to protonate
LS-PANI using solid-state synthesis. Fully protonated LS-PANI was
prepared by mixing the powder of 0.062 g of LS-PANI with 0.0750 g
of CSA. After grinding, the mixed powder was dissolved in 1:1 w/w
of m-cresol:xylene mixed solvents with a final concentration
of 2 wt %. The fully protonated solution of LS-PANI-SA was then immediately
homogenized at 20,000 rpm for 5 min using a high-speed mixer (IKA
T 18 Basic ULTRA-TURRAX disperser with S 18 N-10G attachment). After
that, the solution was stirred for 72 h then centrifuged at 3200 rpm
for 30 min to remove any insoluble components that stuck in the bottom
of tube. For protonated LS-PANI with DBSA and p-TSA, the same process above was repeated.

Perovskite Precursor Solutions
The single halide perovskite precursor solutions (MAPbI3) were prepared by an equal molar ratio of lead(II) iodide (PbI2, Alfa Aesar) and methylammonium iodide (MAI, Ossila 99.99%)
with a final concentration of 1.25 M. The solution was stirred in
a mixture of anhydrous DMF and DMSO (4:1 v/v, Acros) at 60 °C.
Upon dissolution, the solution was filtered through a 0.2 μm
PTFE syringe filter before use.

Material Characterization
Conductivity
and Space Charge-Limited Current Measurement
Devices for
conductivity measurement and mobility measurement (space charge-limited
current (SCLC)) were fabricated by coating the LS-PANI-CSA at different
thicknesses onto cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrates,
and then 100 nm of silver electrodes was thermally deposited onto
the LS-PANI-CSA/ITO-glass using a shadow mask with three different
active areas of 0.105 cm2. The conductivity and SCLC data
were collected using two mechanical probes and a Keithley 2400 source
meter. LabView software was used to sweep voltages from −1
to +1 V and from 2 to 7 V for conductivity and SCLC measurements,
respectively.

Surface Topography and Device Layer Thickness
Measurements
Surface morphology and film thickness were measured
using AFM (Bruker Dimension 3100 Icon FastScan). The tapping mode
was applied with a 1 Hz scan rate and different scan sizes (10 μm
× 10 μm or 5 μm × 5 μm). The data from
the scanned surface was collected using a silicon tip connected to
a cantilever (resonance freq.: 300 KHz; force constant: 40 N m–1) moving in three directions. To measure its morphology,
LS-PANI-CSA was deposited onto a cleaned glass substrate, and each
film was scanned in different locations with a 10 μm ×
10 μm scan size. For thickness measurements, the LS-PANI-CSA
films were wiped with a wet acetone cotton swab (compressed cotton
cleanroom swabs) to get a highly sharp edge over the film surface
with a 5 μm × 5 μm scan size at the glass–film
interface, and then Nano Scope analysis (version 1.5, Bruker) was
utilized for image analyses. All AFM measurements were taken at room
temperature with the microscope covered by an acoustic hood to protect
it from any vibrational noise. To study the surface topography of
perovskite films and a cross section of the device layer, SEM (JEOL
JSM 7000F) was used on the area where the perovskite films were deposited
onto the treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA/glass substrate.

To measure the BCP film thickness, Horiba Jobin Yvon UVISEL ellipsometry
was used. Note that it is impossible to use AFM or SEM to measure
BCP thickness because of the tranparent layer. The thickness of the
device layers was measured using the SEM cross section.

Tip Calibration
and Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy Measurements
To measure
work function of the samples, the treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA
films were deposited on the ITO substrate and then grounded onto the
AFM stage using silver paste, which helps reduce the error signal
and charge build-up phenomena. All the samples were measured in one
system run over one set, and the CPD measurements were taken at four
random surface spots on each sample to rule out the effects of surface
contamination or defects. The dual-pass amplitude-modulated of the
Kelvin probe force microscopy (AM-KPFM) or so-called lift mode was
performed for surface potential measurement. Using this technique,
the surface topography was obtained by the standard tapping mode in
the first pass. The line profile is lifted to a set height above the
surface for minimizing interference between the tip and the sample
(in our case, the lift scan height was 100 nm). In the second pass,
the tapping drive piezo was turned off while an oscillating voltage VAC sin(ωt) was applied to the probe. If
there is a VDC voltage difference between
the probe tip and sample, then the cantilever will oscillate at the
frequency ω due to the attractive and repulsive electrostatic
interaction (Fes) between the probe and
sample. Therefore, the total electrostatic force (attractive and repulsive)
(Fes) in a capacitor between tip and samples
can be expressed by the following equation:99,100 3  where VDC is the dc bias
voltage and CPD is the contact potential difference between the probe
and sample.

When the VDC voltage
is applied between the tip and sample, the output signal of the lock-in
amplifier is nullified, and Fes becomes
equal to zero. To obtain the value of VDC for each point on the sample surface, a map of the work function
of the whole sample surface area can be composed by monitoring VDC = CPD, which is then recorded as a surface
potential image (contact potential difference between the tip and
sample).80 Here, the measurements were
performed in ambient conditions at room temperature and 30–40%
relative humidity. Bruker’s SCM-PIT-V2 electrically conductive
probe with a platinum-iridium-coated tip with a nominal spring constant
was used in the range of 3–6 N m–1 with a
resonant frequency of 75 KH after calibrating with freshly cleaved,
highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). Treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA
were deposited onto glass/ITO substrates after the substrates had
been cleaned and treated with ozone-ultraviolet treatment for 10 min.
To measure the work function by KPFM, the glass/ITO/LS-PANI-CSA films
were grounded onto the AFM stage using silver paste. To avoid any
mistake in CPD results due to surface contamination or tip wear, the
CPD measurement procedure was repeated many times using different
tips on four surface area spots. The Z range (shaker
piezo) was set to 13.7 μm for all measurements with a 5 μm
scan size.

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
The elemental composition of the HTLs (treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA)
and perovskite as a thin film on an ITO-coated glass substrate/HTLs
was studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (Kα, Thermo
Scientific, Waltham, MA) with a monochromatic Al Kα (hυ = 1436.6 eV) X-ray source. The X-ray beam was 36
W and 400 μm in diameter. Survey scans (0–1350 eV) were
done on each sample at a pass energy (CAE) of 200 eV and a 1 eV step
size, and the relative abundance of elements of interest was found
using Avantage software.

Raman Spectroscopy
Raman measurements
were taken for 15 nm-thick HTL films (treated and untreated LS-PANI-CSA)
deposited onto the silicon substrate (for calibration with the 521
cm–1 silicon peak) using a Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRam
800 Micro-Raman (Edison, NJ). The spectra were collected using a 632.8
nm laser and a 100× objective lens. The rate of exposure was
2 s, acquisition time was 20 s, and two scans were done for each spot.
The spot size was 4 μm × 4 μm, and the square rastering
duo scan mode was utilized. Two different spots were analyzed on the
sample for repeatability, and the data was collected without a baseline
process.

Surface Energy
The contact angle
of the HTLs was measured using an EasyDrop (DSA1) system (Kruss Co.)
with the sessile drop method. To measure the sample contact angle,
5 μL of deionized water or DMF/DMSO mixed solvent were dispensed
gently via a computer-controlled syringe on four different surface
locations of the HTLs/ITO/glass substrates, and then a CCD camera
was used to capture images of the droplets on the surface. All the
contact angles were measured at room temperature.

Optical Properties
of the HTLs and Perovskite Active Layer
To study the optical
properties of the LS-PANI-CSA and perovskite active layer, transmittance
and absorption spectra were recorded using UV–vis–NIR
spectroscopy (Shimatzu 3600) at wavelengths ranging from 300 to 1000
nm.

Device Fabrication and Characterization
Inverted Perovskite Device
Fabrication
Pre-patterned 20 × 15 mm ITO pixelated cathode
(6 Pixel) glass substrates with a sheet resistance of 20 Ω s
q–1 and 1.1 mm thickness were purchased from Ossila
Ltd. The ITO glass substrates were cleaned by sequential sonication
in 1% warm Hellmanex in water, deionized water, and isopropyl alcohol
(IPA) before being rinsed in deionized water and dried with compressed
nitrogen. The last traces of organic residues were removed by ozone-ultraviolet
treatment for 10 min. LS-PANI-CSA solution was spin-coated onto the
clean ITO glass substrates at different speeds to obtain 10, 15, and
20 nm-thick films. The untreated films were deposed onto the ITO substrate
at 6500, 7100, and 7600 rpm (revolutions per minute) for 30 s to create
films with a thickness of 20, 15, and 10 nm, respectively, while the
treated films were spin-coated at 3400, 4200, and 5300 rpm for 40
s to achieve those corresponding thicknesses. After annealing at 65
°C
for 30 min on a hotplate, the treated films received a drop of 0.120
mL of DMSO as static deposition then were directly spun without a
standing time at 3000 rpm for 1 min then annealed again on a hotplate
at 65 °C for 30 min. Finally, all the films were annealed again
by vacuum oven at 78 °C for 12 h. PEDOT:PSS (Al 4083 Ossila)
was deposited onto ITO at 6000 rpm for 40 s and then annealed on hotplate
at 120 °C for 15 min in ambient air.

Before deposition
of the perovskite active layer, the HTL films were wiped from the
cathode strip using a wet-acetone cotton swab and covered with captain
tape. To deposit the MAPbI3 perovskite, 50 μL of
the solution was spin-coated onto the preheated LS-PANI substrates
by a one-step method at 5000 rpm for 25 s. After 8 s of spinning time,
100 μL of the chlorobenzene antisolvent was poured onto the
substrate in one shot to wash out the surplus DMF solvent, which helps
promote fast crystallization of the perovskite layer. The substrates
were then moved to a hotplate under the same environmental conditions
as the spin-coater and annealed for 10 min at 100 °C. The spin-coating
process was performed in a static way, which means that the solution
is dropped onto the substrate before rotation begins. The perovskite
deposition was performed at 25–27% relative humidity (RH) controlled
through a clean nitrogen-filled glovebox to dry the air within 24–25
°C. Afterward, the LS-PANI-CSA/perovskite substrates were transferred
to another nitrogen-filled glovebox (0 ppm of oxygen and moisture)
to sequentially deposit both electron transport PC60BM (20 mg mL–1 in chlorobenzene, Acros) and interface layers of
bathocuproine (BCP, 0.5 mg mL–1 in anhydrous ethanol,
Acros) by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 30 s and 6000 rpm for 10 s,
respectively. Finally, 100 nm-thick silver counter electrodes were
evaporated using an Angstrom thermal evaporator at 10–6 Torr and deposited at a low deposition rate (0.1 Å s–1) to avoid penetrating the device layers. After electrode deposition,
one drop of UV-curable epoxy (E131, Ossila Ltd.) was deposited onto
the center of the device. A glass slide (C181, Ossila Ltd.) was then
placed onto the epoxy droplet, and the epoxy was cured under a UV
light source.

Device Characterization
Devices
were tested under ambient conditions (65% RH ± 5%), and the current–voltage
(J–V) measurements were performed
under a 1.5 AM sunlight simulator with incident light power of 100
mW cm–2 (PV Measurements, Inc.). An NREL-certified
silicon reference cell was used to calibrate the integrated light
output from the simulator to 100 mW cm–2 at 25 °C,
and a Keithley 2400 source meter was used for electrical measurements.
An aperture mask (0.0256 cm2) was placed over each solar
cell to accurately define the device area and minimize absorption
of stray light. LabView software was used to sweep voltages from −1
to +1 V for the forward scan and from +1 to −1 V for the reverse
scan at a rate of 0.4 V/s then Igor software was used to analyze the J–V curve. External quantum efficiency
measurements were performed using a spectral-responsive system (Bentham
model PVE 300).

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b03451.Detailed information and
further characterization of the HTLs used in perovskite devices, including
the chemical structure of LS-PANI, FTIR spectrum, morphology (by AFM)
of LS-PANI films after being protonated with different organic sulfonic
acids, XPS survey scans of HTL and perovskite, variation of perovskite
grain size, I–V curves of
HTLs, SCLC curves of HTLs, CPD maps with heights for all types of
HTLs and ITO, AFM thickness measurements of HTLs, SEM cross section
of the device layers, ellipsometry simulation data of BCP/glass film,
and statistical distribution of the solar cell parameters (Jsc, FF, Voc, and
PCE) (PDF)

Drop of the perovskite precursor solution (DMF/DMSO mixed solvent
in 4:1 v/v) onto the untreated LS-APANI-CSA HTLs (MP4)

Drop of the perovskite precursor
solution (DMF/DMSO mixed solvent in 4:1 v/v) onto the treated LS-APANI-CSA
HTLs (MP4)



Supplementary Material
ao9b03451_si_001.pdf

 ao9b03451_si_002.mp4

 ao9b03451_si_003.mp4

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge partial support from the National Science Foundation
(award nos. 1003970 and 1457888) and the Arkansas EPSCoR Program,
ASSET II & III. We also acknowledge editorial support from Emily
Davis.
==== Refs
References
Al-Dainy G. A. ; Bourdo S. E. ; Saini V. ; Berry B. C. ; Biris A. S. 
Hybrid Perovskite Photovoltaic Devices:
Properties, Architecture, and Fabrication Methods . Energy Technol. 
2017 , 5 , 373 –401 . 10.1002/ente.201600486 .
Jeon N. J. ; Noh J. H. ; Yang W. S. ; Kim Y. C. ; Ryu S. ; Seo J. ; Seok S. I. 
Compositional
Engineering of Perovskite Materials for High-Performance Solar Cells . Nature 
2015 , 517 , 476 –480 . 10.1038/nature14133 .25561177 
Liu X. ; Cheng Y. ; Liu C. ; Zhang T. ; Zhang N. ; Zhang S. ; Chen J. ; Xu Q. ; Ouyang J. ; Gong H. 
20.7% Highly Reproducible Inverted
Planar Perovskite Solar Cells With Enhanced Fill Factor and Eliminated
Hysteresis . Energy Environ. Sci. 
2019 , 12 , 1622 –1633 . 10.1039/c9ee00872a .
Rafique S. ; Abdullah S. M. ; Shahid M. M. ; Ansari M. O. ; Sulaiman K. 
Significantly
Improved Photovoltaic Performance in Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar
Cells with Graphene Oxide /PEDOT:PSS Double Decked Hole Transport
Layer . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 1 –10 . 10.1038/srep39555 .28127051 
Zhao D. ; Sexton M. ; Park H. Y. ; Baure G. ; Nino J. C. ; So F. 
High-Efficiency Solution-Processed
Planar Perovskite Solar Cells with a Polymer Hole Transport Layer . Adv. Energy Mater 
2015 , 5 , 1 –5 . 10.1002/aenm.201401855 .26190957 
Luo H. ; Lin X. ; Hou X. ; Pan L. ; Huang S. ; Chen X. 
Efficient and Air-Stable Planar Perovskite
Solar Cells Formed on Graphene-Oxide-Modified PEDOT:PSS Hole Transport
Layer . Nano-Micro Lett. 
2017 , 9 , 39 10.1007/s40820-017-0140-x .
Jahandar M. ; Khan N. ; Lee H. K. ; Lee S. K. ; Shin W. S. ; Lee J. C. ; Song C. E. ; Moon S. J. 
High-Performance CH3NH3PbI3 -Inverted Planar Perovskite Solar Cells with Fill Factor
over 83% via Excess Organic/Inorganic Halide . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 35871 –35879 . 10.1021/acsami.7b11083 .28948770 
Ma S. ; Qiao W. ; Cheng T. ; Zhang B. ; Yao J. ; Alsaedi A. ; Hayat T. ; Ding Y. ; Tan Z. A. ; Dai S. 
Optical-Electrical-Chemical
Engineering of PEDOT:PSS by Incorporation of Hydrophobic Nafion for
Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 10 , 3902 –3911 . 10.1021/acsami.7b19053 .29308652 
Ye S. ; Sun W. ; Li Y. ; Yan W. ; Peng H. ; Bian Z. ; Liu Z. ; Huang C. 
CuSCN-Based Inverted Planar Perovskite Solar Cell with an Average
PCE of 15.6% . Nano Lett. 
2015 , 15 , 3723 –3728 . 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b00116 .25938881 
You J. ; Meng L. ; Song T.-B. ; Guo T.-F. ; Yang Y. M. ; Chang W.-H. ; Hong Z. ; Chen H. ; Zhou H. ; Chen Q. ; Liu Y. ; et al. Improved Air Stability
of Perovskite Solar Cells via Solution-Processed Metal Oxide Transport
Layers . Nat. Nanotechnol 
2016 , 11 , 75 –81 . 10.1038/nnano.2015.230 .26457966 
Yu Z. K. ; Fu W. F. ; Liu W. Q. ; Zhang Z. Q. ; Liu Y. J. ; Yan J. L. ; Ye T. ; Yang W. T. ; Li H. Y. ; Chen H. Z. 
Solution-Processed CuOx as an Efficient Hole-Extraction
Layer for Inverted Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells . Chin Chem. Lett. 
2017 , 28 , 13 –18 . 10.1016/j.cclet.2016.06.021 .
Zuo C. ; Ding L. 
Solution-Processed
Cu2O and CuO as Hole Transport Materials for Efficient Perovskite
Solar Cells . Small 
2015 , 11 , 5528 –5532 . 10.1002/smll.201501330 .26312602 
Rao H. ; Sun W. ; Ye S. ; Yan W. ; Li Y. ; Peng H. ; Liu Z. ; Bian Z. ; Huang C. 
Solution-Processed CuS NPs as an
Inorganic Hole-Selective Contact Material for Inverted Planar Perovskite
Solar Cells . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 8 , 7800 –7805 . 10.1021/acsami.5b12776 .26964478 
Li G. ; Jiang Y. ; Deng S. ; Tam A. ; Xu P. ; Wong M. ; Kwok H.-S. 
Overcoming the Limitations of Sputtered
Nickel Oxide for High-Efficiency and Large-Area Perovskite Solar Cells . Adv. Sci. 
2017 , 4 , 1 –8 . 10.1002/advs.201700463 .
Chen W.-Y. ; Deng L.-L. ; Dai S.-M. ; Wang X. ; Tian C.-B. ; Zhan X.-X. ; Xie S.-Y. ; Huang R.-B. ; Zheng L.-S. 
Low-cost solution-processed copper
iodide as an alternative to PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer for efficient
and stable inverted planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 19353 –19359 . 10.1039/C5TA05286F .
Kim J. H. ; Liang P. W. ; Williams S. T. ; Cho N. ; Chueh C. C. ; Glaz M. S. ; Ginger D. S. ; Jen A. K. Y. 
High-Performance
and Environmentally Stable Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar
Cells Based on a Solution-Processed Copper-Doped Nickel Oxide Hole-Transporting
Layer . Adv. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 695 –701 . 10.1002/adma.201404189 .25449020 
Islam M. B. ; Yanagida M. ; Shirai Y. ; Nabetani Y. ; Miyano K. 
NiOx Hole
Transport Layer for Perovskite Solar Cells with Improved Stability
and Reproducibility . ACS Omega 
2017 , 2 , 2291 –2299 . 10.1021/acsomega.7b00538 .31457579 
Christians J. A. ; Fung R. C. M. ; Kamat P. V. 
An Inorganic Hole
Conductor for Organo-Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. Improved
Hole Conductivity with Copper Iodide . J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2014 , 136 , 758 –764 . 10.1021/ja411014k .24350620 
Sun W. ; Ye S. ; Rao H. ; Li Y. ; Liu Z. ; Xiao L. ; Chen Z. ; Bian Z. ; Huang C. 
Room-Temperature and Solution-Processed Copper Iodide as the Hole
Transport Layer for Inverted Planar Perovskite Solar Cells . Nanoscale 
2016 , 8 , 15954 –15960 . 10.1039/c6nr04288k .27538053 
Du T. ; Xu W. ; Daboczi M. ; Kim J. ; Xu S. ; Lin C.-T. ; Kang H. ; Lee K. ; Heeney M. J. ; Kim J.-S. ; et al. P-Doping of Organic
Hole Transport Layers in p–i–n Perovskite Solar Cells:
Correlating Open-Circuit Voltage and Photoluminescence Quenching . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2019 , 18971 10.1039/c9ta03896e .
Lim K. G. ; Ahn S. ; Kim H. ; Choi M. R. ; Huh D. H. ; Lee T. W. 
Self-Doped
Conducting Polymer as a Hole-Extraction Layer in Organic-Inorganic
Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells . Adv. Mater. Interfaces 
2016 , 3 , 1 –7 . 10.1002/admi.201500678 .
Vivo P. ; Salunke J. K. ; Priimagi A. 
Hole-Transporting Materials for Printable
Perovskite Solar Cells . Materials (Basel). 
2017 , 10 , 1 –45 . 10.3390/ma10091087 .
Gheno A. ; Vedraine S. ; Ratier B. ; Bouclé J. 
π-Conjugated
Materials as the Hole-Transporting Layer in Perovskite Solar Cells . Metals (Basel). 
2016 , 6 , 21 10.3390/met6010021 .
Kaitsuka Y. ; Goto H. 
UV Light Induces Dedoping
of Polyaniline . Polymer 
2016 , 8 , 34 10.3390/polym8020034 .
Choi M. R. ; Woo S. H. ; Han T. H. ; Lim K. G. ; Min S. Y. ; Yun W. M. ; Kwon O. K. ; Park C. E. ; Kim K. D. ; Shin H. K. ; et al. Polyaniline-Based
Conducting Polymer Compositions with a High Work Function for Hole-Injection
Layers in Organic Light-Emitting Diodes: Formation of Ohmic Contacts . ChemSusChem 
2011 , 4 , 363 –368 . 10.1002/cssc.201000338 .21265026 
Zhao W. ; Ye L. ; Zhang S. ; Fan B. ; Sun M. ; Hou J. 
Ultrathin Polyaniline-Based Buffer
Layer for Highly Efficient Polymer Solar Cells with Wide Applicability . Sci. Rep. 
2014 , 4 , 1 –7 . 10.1038/srep06570 .
Xiao Y. ; Han G. ; Chang Y. ; Zhou H. ; Li M. ; Li Y. 
An All-Solid-State
Perovskite-Sensitized Solar Cell Based on the Dual Function Polyaniline
as the Sensitizer and p-Type Hole-Transporting Material . J. Power Sources 
2014 , 267 , 1 –8 . 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.05.053 .
Ameen S. ; Akhtar M. S. ; Seo H.-K. ; Shin H. S. 
Photocurrent Induced by Conducting Channels of Hole
Transporting Layer to Adjacent Photoactive Perovskite Sensitized TiO2 Thin Film: Solar Cell Paradigm . Langmuir 
2014 , 30 , 12786 –12794 . 10.1021/la502398x .25296009 
Jang J. ; Ha J. ; Kim K. 
Organic Light-Emitting Diode with Polyaniline-Poly(Styrene
Sulfonate) as a Hole Injection Layer . Thin Solid
Films 
2008 , 516 , 3152 –3156 . 10.1016/j.tsf.2007.08.088 .
Abdulrazzaq O. ; Bourdo S. E. ; Woo M. ; Saini V. ; Berry B. C. ; Ghosh A. ; Biris A. S. 
Comparative
Aging Study of Organic Solar Cells Utilizing Polyaniline and PEDOT:PSS
as Hole Transport Layers . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015 , 7 , 27667 –27675 . 10.1021/acsami.5b08000 .26584398 
Lee K. ; Cho K. H. ; Ryu J. ; Yun J. ; Yu H. ; Lee J. ; Na W. ; Jang J. 
Low-Cost and Efficient Perovskite
Solar Cells Using a Surfactant-Modified Polyaniline:Poly(Styrenesulfonate)
Hole Transport Material . Electrochim. Acta 
2017 , 224 , 600 –607 . 10.1016/j.electacta.2016.12.103 .
Li L. ; Ferng L. ; Wei Y. ; Yang C. ; Ji H. F. 
Effects of Acidity on the Size of
Polyaniline-Poly(Sodium 4-Styrenesulfonate) Composite Particles and
the Stability of Corresponding Colloids in Water . J. Colloid Interface Sci. 
2012 , 381 , 11 –16 . 10.1016/j.jcis.2012.05.004 .22647343 
Roy S. ; Fortier J. M. ; Nagarajan R. ; Tripathy S. ; Kumar J. ; Samuelson L. A. ; Bruno F. F. 
Biomimetic Synthesis of a Water Soluble Conducting
Molecular Complex of Polyaniline and Lignosulfonate . Biomacromolecules 
2002 , 3 , 937 –941 . 10.1021/bm0255138 .12217038 
Hrehorova E. ; Wood L. 
The Properties of Conducting
Polymers and Substrates for Printed Electronics . NIP Digit. Fabr. Conf 
2005 , 3 , 197 –202 .
Berry B.C. ; Viswanathan T.  Lignosulfonic
Acid-Doped Polyaniline (Ligno-PaniTM) — A Versatile
Conducting Polymer . In Chemical Modification,
Properties, and Usage of Lignin ; Hu T. Q.  , Ed.; Springer : Boston, MA , 2002 ; pp 21 –40 .
Abdulrazzaq O. ; Bourdo S. E. ; Saini V. ; Watanabe F. ; Barnes B. ; Ghosh A. ; Biris A. S. 
Tuning the Work Function of Polyaniline
via Camphorsulfonic Acid: An X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Investigation . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 33 –40 . 10.1039/c4ra11832d .
Xia Y. ; Wiesinger J. M. ; Macdiarmid A. G. ; Epstein A. J. 
Camphorsulfonic Acid Fully Doped
Polyaniline Emeraldine Salt: Conformations in Different Solvents Studied
by an Ultraviolet/Visible/Near-Infrared Spectroscopic Method . Chem. Mater. 
1995 , 7 , 443 –445 . 10.1021/cm00051a002 .
MacDiarmid A. G. ; Epstein A. J. 
The Concept of Secondary
Doping as Applied to Polyaniline . Synth. Met. 
1994 , 65 , 103 –116 . 10.1016/0379-6779(94)90171-6 .
Adnan M. ; Lee J. K. 
All Sequential Dip-Coating
Processed Perovskite Layers from an Aqueous Lead Precursor for High
Efficiency Perovskite Solar Cells . Sci. Rep. 
2018 , 8 , 2168 10.1038/s41598-018-20296-2 .29391423 
Burschka J. ; Pellet N. ; Moon S. J. ; Humphry-Baker R. ; Gao P. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. ; Grätzel M. 
Sequential
Deposition as a Route to High-Performance Perovskite-Sensitized Solar
Cells . Nature 
2013 , 499 , 316 –319 . 10.1038/nature12340 .23842493 
Im J. H. ; Jang I. H. ; Pellet N. ; Grätzel M. ; Park N. G. 
Growth of CH3NH3PbI3 Cuboids with Controlled Size for High-Efficiency Perovskite Solar
Cells . Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2014 , 9 , 927 –932 . 10.1038/nnano.2014.181 .25173829 
Son D. Y. ; Lee J. W. ; Choi Y. J. ; Jang I. H. ; Lee S. ; Yoo P. J. ; Shin H. ; Ahn N. ; Choi M. ; Kim D. ; et al. Self-Formed Grain Boundary Healing Layer for Highly
Efficient CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar
Cells . Nat. Energy 
2016 , 1 , 1 –8 . 10.1038/nenergy.2016.81 .
Ahn N. ; Son D. Y. ; Jang I. H. ; Kang S. M. ; Choi M. ; Park N. G. 
Highly Reproducible Perovskite Solar Cells with Average
Efficiency of 18.3% and Best Efficiency of 19.7% Fabricated via Lewis
Base Adduct of Lead(II) Iodide . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2015 , 137 , 8696 –8699 . 10.1021/jacs.5b04930 .26125203 
Lee J. W. ; Kim H. S. ; Park N. G. 
Lewis Acid-Base
Adduct Approach for High Efficiency Perovskite Solar Cells . Acc. Chem. Res. 
2016 , 49 , 311 –319 . 10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00440 .26797391 
Zhu L. ; Xu Y. ; Zhang P. ; Shi J. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhang H. ; Wu J. ; Luo Y. ; Li D. ; Meng Q. 
Investigation on the Role of Lewis Bases in the Ripening
Process of Perovskite Films for Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar
Cells . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2017 , 5 , 20874 –20881 . 10.1039/c7ta05378a .
Gedamu D. ; Asuo I. M. ; Benetti D. ; Basti M. ; Ka I. ; Cloutier S. G. ; Rosei F. ; Nechache R. 
Solvent-Antisolvent
Ambient Processed Large Grain Size Perovskite Thin Films for High-Performance
Solar Cells . Sci. Rep 
2018 , 8 , 12885 10.1038/s41598-018-31184-0 .30150702 
Yu Y. ; Yang S. ; Lei L. ; Cao Q. ; Shao J. ; Zhang S. ; Liu Y. 
Ultrasmooth
Perovskite Film via Mixed Anti-Solvent Strategy with Improved Efficiency . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2017 , 9 , 3667 –3676 . 10.1021/acsami.6b14270 .28098441 
Liu J. ; Li N. ; Jia J. ; Dong J. ; Qiu Z. ; Iqbal S. ; Cao B. 
Perovskite Films Grown with Green Mixed Anti-Solvent for Highly Efficient
Solar Cells with Enhanced Stability . Sol. Energy 
2019 , 181 , 285 –292 . 10.1016/j.solener.2019.02.020 .
Li T. ; Pan Y. ; Wang Z. ; Xia Y. ; Chen Y. ; Huang W. 
Additive Engineering for Highly Efficient
Organic-Inorganic Halide Perovskite Solar Cells: Recent Advances and
Perspectives . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2017 , 5 , 12602 –12652 . 10.1039/c7ta01798g .
Bi C. ; Wang Q. ; Shao Y. ; Yuan Y. ; Xiao Z. ; Huang J. 
Non-Wetting Surface-Driven High-Aspect-Ratio Crystalline Grain Growth
for Efficient Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells . Nat. Commun. 
2015 , 6 , 7747 10.1038/ncomms8747 .26190275 
Yao Q. ; Wang Q. ; Wang L. ; Wang Y. ; Sun J. ; Zeng H. ; Jin Z. ; Huang X. ; Chen L. 
The Synergic
Regulation of Conductivity and Seebeck Coefficient in Pure Polyaniline
by Chemically Changing the Ordered Degree of Molecular Chains . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014 , 2 , 2634 –2640 . 10.1039/c3ta14008c .
Hopkins A.
R. ; Rasmussen P. G. ; Basheer R. A. 
Characterization of Solution and Solid State Properties
of Undoped and Doped Polyanilines Processed from Hexafluoro-2-Propanol . Macromolecules 
1996 , 29 , 7838 –7846 . 10.1021/ma9606519 .
Da Silva J.
E. P. ; De Torresi S. I. C. ; Temperini M. L. A. 
Redox Behavior of Crosslinked Polyaniline
Films . J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 
2000 , 11 , 91 –94 . 10.1590/S0103-50532000000100016 .
Pereira Da Silva J. E. ; Temperini M. L. A. ; Córdoba De Torresi S. I. 
Secondary Doping of Polyaniline Studied
by Resonance Raman Spectroscopy . Electrochim.
Acta 
1999 , 44 , 1887 –1891 . 10.1016/S0013-4686(98)00330-2 .
Blinova N. V. ; Stejskal J. ; Trchová M. ; Prokeš J. 
Control of ´ Polyaniline Conductivity and Contact
Angles by Partial Protonation . Polym. Int. 
2008 , 57 , 66 –69 . 10.1002/pi.2312 .
Mali S. S. ; Shim C. S. ; Park H. K. ; Heo J. ; Patil P. S. ; Hong C. K. 
Ultrathin Atomic Layer Deposited TiO2 for Surface Passivation
of Hydrothermally Grown 1D TiO2 Nanorod Arrays for Efficient
Solid-State Perovskite Solar Cells . Chem. Mater. 
2015 , 27 , 1541 –1551 . 10.1021/cm504558g .
Zhang C. ; Luo Y. ; Chen X. ; Chen Y. ; Sun Z. ; Huang S. 
Effective
Improvement of the Photovoltaic Performance of Carbon-Based Perovskite
Solar Cells by Additional Solvents . Nano-Micro
Lett. 
2016 , 8 , 347 –357 . 10.1007/s40820-016-0094-4 .
Mali S. S. ; Hong C. K. ; Inamdar A. I. ; Im H. ; Shim S. E. 
Efficient Planar n-i-p Type Heterojunction Flexible
Perovskite Solar Cells with Sputtered TiO2 Electron Transporting
Layers . Nanoscale 
2017 , 9 , 3095 –3104 . 10.1039/c6nr09032j .28195297 
Tong X. ; Lin F. ; Wu J. ; Wang Z. M. 
High Performance Perovskite Solar
Cells . Adv. Sci. 
2016 , 3 , 1500201 10.1002/advs.201500201 .
Wang P. ; Zhang X. ; Zhou Y. ; Jiang Q. ; Ye Q. ; Chu Z. ; Li X. ; Yang X. ; Yin Z. ; You J. 
Solvent-Controlled
Growth of Inorganic Perovskite Films in Dry Environment for Efficient
and Stable Solar Cells . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 2225 10.1038/s41467-018-04636-4 .29884815 
Xu L. ; Dai Y. ; Zhang H. ; Huang W. 
Efficient, High Yield
Perovskite/Fullerene Planar-Heterojunction Solar Cells Via One-Step
Spin-Coating Processing . RSC Adv. 
2016 , 6 , 48449 –48454 . 10.1039/c6ra07068j .
Zhang Z. ; Yue X. ; Wei D. ; Li M. ; Fu P. ; Xie B. ; Song D. ; Li Y. 
DMSO-based PbI2 precursor
with PbCl2 additive for highly efficient perovskite solar
cells fabricated at low temperature . RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 104606 –104611 . 10.1039/C5RA25160E .
Ahmad Z. ; Najeeb M. A. ; Shakoor R. A. ; Alashraf A. ; Al-Muhtaseb S. A. ; Soliman A. ; Nazeeruddin M. K. 
Instability in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells Due to Elemental Migration
and Chemical Composition Changes . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 15406 10.1038/s41598-017-15841-4 .29133834 
Lindblad R. ; Bi D. ; Park B.-w. ; Oscarsson J. ; Gorgoi M. ; Siegbahn H. ; Odelius M. ; Johansson E. M. J. ; Rensmo H. 
Electronic Structure of TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cell Interfaces . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
2014 , 5 , 648 –653 . 10.1021/jz402749f .26270831 
Ha J. ; Kim H. ; Lee H. ; Lim K. G. ; Lee T.-W. ; Yoo S. 
Device Architecture
for Efficient, Low-Hysteresis Flexible Perovskite Solar Cells: Replacing
TiO2 with C60 Assisted by Polyethylenimine Ethoxylated
Interfacial Layers . Sol. Energy Mater. Sol.
Cells 
2017 , 161 , 338 –346 . 10.1016/j.solmat.2016.11.031 .
Bi D. ; Li X. ; Milić J. V. ; Kubicki D. J. ; Pellet N. ; Luo J. ; LaGrange T. ; Mettraux P. ; Emsley L. ; Zakeeruddin S. M. ; et al. Multifunctional Molecular Modulators for Perovskite Solar Cells with
over 20% Efficiency and High Operational Stability . Nat. Commun. 
2018 , 9 , 4482 10.1038/s41467-018-06709-w .30367070 
Li Y. ; Yan W. ; Li Y. ; Wang S. ; Wang W. ; Bian Z. ; Xiao L. ; Gong Q. 
Direct Observation of Long Electron-Hole Diffusion Distance in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Thin Film . Sci. Rep. 
2015 , 5 , 14485 10.1038/srep14485 .26416186 
Fan P. ; Gu D. ; Liang G. X. ; Luo J. T. ; Chen J. L. ; Zheng Z. H. ; Zhang D. P. 
High-Performance
Perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 Thin Films
for Solar Cells Prepared by Single-Source Physical Vapour Deposition . Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 29910 10.1038/srep29910 .27426686 
Zeyada H. M. ; Makhlouf M. M. ; Ismail M. I. M. ; Salama A. A. 
Thermal Behavior, Structure Formation and Optical Characteristics
of Nanostructured Basic Fuchsine Thin Films . Mater. Chem. Phys. 
2015 , 163 , 45 –53 . 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2015.07.013 .
Kim H.-S. ; Lee C.-R. ; Im J.-H. ; Lee K.-B. ; Moehl T. ; Marchioro A. ; Moon S.-J. ; Humphry-Baker R. ; Yum J.-H. ; Moser J. E. ; et al. Lead Iodide Perovskite Sensitized All-Solid-State Submicron Thin
Film Mesoscopic Solar Cell with Efficiency Exceeding 9% . Sci. Rep. 
2012 , 2 , 1 –7 . 10.1038/srep00591 .
Baikie T. ; Fang Y. ; Kadro J. M. ; Schreyer M. ; Wei F. ; Mhaisalkar S. G. ; Graetzel M. ; White T. J. 
Synthesis and Crystal Chemistry of
the Hybrid Perovskite(CH3NH3)PbI3 for Solid-State Sensitised Solar Cell Applications . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2013 , 1 , 5628 –5641 . 10.1039/c3ta10518k .
Zhang Z. ; Wang M. ; Ren L. ; Jin K. 
Tunability of Band Gap and Photoluminescence in CH3NH3PbI3 Films by Anodized Aluminum Oxide Templates . Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 1918 10.1038/s41598-017-02144-x .28507326 
Lan C. ; Zhao S. ; Zhang C. ; Liu W. ; Hayase S. ; Ma T. 
Concentration Gradient-Controlled
Growth of Large-Grain CH3NH3PbI3 Films
and Enhanced Photovoltaic Performance of Solar Cells Under Ambient
Conditions . CrystEngComm 
2016 , 18 , 9243 –9251 . 10.1039/c6ce02151d .
Rong Y. ; Tang Z. ; Zhao Y. ; Zhong X. ; Venkatesan S. ; Graham H. ; Patton M. ; Jing Y. ; Guloy A. M. ; Yao Y. 
Solvent Engineering towards Controlled Grain Growth in Perovskite
Planar Heterojunction Solar Cells . Nanoscale 
2015 , 7 , 10595 –10599 . 10.1039/c5nr02866c .26037081 
Hu Z. ; Miao J. ; Li T. ; Liu M. ; Murtaza I. ; Meng H. 
Reduced Interface Losses in Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells by Using
a Simple Dual-Functional Phenanthroline Derivative . Nano Energy 
2018 , 43 , 72 –80 . 10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.11.014 .
Melitz W. ; Shen J. ; Kummel A. C. ; Lee S. 
Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy and Its Application . Surf. Sci. Rep. 
2011 , 66 , 1 –27 . 10.1016/j.surfrep.2010.10.001 .
Odaka A. ; Satoh N. ; Katori S. 
Surface Potential
Measurement of N-Type Organic Semiconductor Thin Films by Mist Deposition
via Kelvin Probe Microscopy . Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 
2017 , 56 , 08LB04 10.7567/JJAP.56.08LB04 .
Sharma A. ; Untch M. ; Quinton J. S. ; Berger R. ; Andersson G. ; Lewis D. A. 
Nanoscale Heterogeniety and Workfunction Variations
in ZnO Thin Films . Appl. Surf. Sci. 
2016 , 363 , 516 –521 . 10.1016/j.apsusc.2015.11.190 .
Wan Y. ; Li Y. ; Wang Q. ; Zhang K. ; Wu Y. 
The Relationship of Surface Roughness
and Work Function of Pure Silver by Numerical Modeling . Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
2012 , 7 , 5204 –5216 .
Wang R. J. ; Li J. X. ; Su Y. J. ; Qiao L. J. ; Volinsky A. A. 
Changes
of Work Function in Different Deformation Stage for 2205 Duplex Stainless
Steel by SKPFM . Procedia Mater. Sci. 
2014 , 3 , 1736 –1741 . 10.1016/j.mspro.2014.06.280 .
Melitz W. ; Shen J. ; Lee S. ; Lee J. S. ; Kummel A. C. ; Droopad R. ; Yu E. T. 
Scanning
Tunneling Spectroscopy and Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy Investigation
of Fermi Energy Level Pinning Mechanism on InAs and InGaAs Clean Surfaces . J. Appl. Phys. 
2010 , 108 , 023711 10.1063/1.3462440 .
Peres L. ; Bou A. ; Cornille C. ; Barakel D. ; Torchio P. 
Work Function Measurement of Multilayer
Electrodes Using Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
2017 , 50 , 13LT01 10.1088/1361-6463/aa5f4a .
Troughton J. ; Hooper K. ; Watson T. M. 
Humidity
Resistant Fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells and Modules . Nano Energy 
2017 , 39 , 60 –68 . 10.1016/j.nanoen.2017.06.039 .
Wang S. ; Sakurai T. ; Wen W. ; Qi Y. 
Energy Level Alignment at Interfaces in Metal Halide Perovskite Solar
Cells . Adv. Mater. Interfaces 
2018 , 5 , 1800260 10.1002/admi.201800260 .
Yang L. ; Yan Y. ; Cai F. ; Li J. ; Wang T. 
Poly(9-Vinylcarbazole)
as a Hole Transport Material for Efficient and Stable Inverted Planar
Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells . Sol.
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
2017 , 163 , 210 –217 . 10.1016/j.solmat.2017.01.040 .
Lim K.-G. ; Kim H.-B. ; Jeong J. ; Kim H. ; Kim J. Y. ; Lee T.-W. 
Boosting the Power Conversion Efficiency
of Perovskite Solar Cells Using Self-Organized Polymeric Hole Extraction
Layers with High Work Function . Adv. Mater. 
2014 , 26 , 6461 –6466 . 10.1002/adma.201401775 .25123592 
Jo J. W. ; Seo M.-S. ; Park M. ; Kim J.-Y. ; Park J. S. ; Han I. K. ; Ahn H. ; Jung J. W. ; Sohn B.-H. ; Ko M. J. ; et al. Improving Performance
and Stability of Flexible Planar-Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells
Using Polymeric Hole-Transport Material . Adv.
Funct. Mater. 
2016 , 26 , 4464 –4471 . 10.1002/adfm.201600746 .
Sung H. ; Ahn N. ; Jang M. S. ; Lee J.-K. ; Yoon H. ; Park N.-G. ; Choi M. 
Transparent
Conductive Oxide-Free Graphene-Based Perovskite Solar Cells with over
17% Efficiency . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2016 , 6 , 1501873 10.1002/aenm.201501873 .
Saliba M. ; Correa-Baena J. P. ; Wolff C. M. ; Stolterfoht M. ; Phung N. ; Albrecht S. ; Neher D. ; Abate A. 
How to Make
over 20% Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells in Regular (n-i-p) and Inverted
(p-i-n) Architectures . Chem. Mater. 
2018 , 30 , 4193 –4201 . 10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b00136 .
Bi D. ; El-Zohry A. M. ; Hagfeldt A. ; Boschloo G. 
Improved Morphology Control Using a Modified Two-Step
Method for Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells . ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2014 , 6 , 18751 –18757 . 10.1021/am504320h .25317666 
Venkatesan S. ; Hasan M. ; Kim J. ; Rady N. R. ; Sohal S. ; Neier E. ; Yao Y. ; Zakhidov A. 
Tailoring Nucleation and Grain Growth by Changing the
Precursor Phase Ratio for Efficient Organic Lead Halide Perovskite
Optoelectronic Devices . J. Mater. Chem. C 
2017 , 5 , 10114 –10121 . 10.1039/c7tc02928d .
Zimmermann E. ; Ehrenreich P. ; Pfadler T. ; Dorman J. A. ; Weickert J. ; Schmidt-Mende L. 
Erroneous Efficiency Reports Harm Organic Solar Cell
Research . Nat. Photonics 
2014 , 8 , 669 –672 . 10.1038/nphoton.2014.210 .
Bu T. ; Wu L. ; Liu X. ; Yang X. ; Zhou P. ; Yu X. ; Qin T. ; Shi J. ; Wang S. ; Li S. ; et al. Synergic Interface Optimization with Green Solvent Engineering in
Mixed Perovskite Solar Cells . Adv. Energy Mater. 
2017 , 7 , 1700576 10.1002/aenm.201700576 .
Song J. ; Zheng E. ; Bian J. ; Wang X.-F. ; Tian W. ; Sanehira Y. ; Miyasaka T. 
Low-temperature SnO2-Based
Electron Selective Contact for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar
Cells . J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015 , 3 , 10837 –10844 . 10.1039/c5ta01207d .
Panchal V. ; Pearce R. ; Yakimova R. ; Tzalenchuk A. ; Kazakova O. 
Standardization of Surface Potential Measurements of
Graphene Domains . Sci. Rep. 
2013 , 3 , 2597 10.1038/srep02597 .24008915 
Li Y. ; Xu C. Y. ; Zhen L. 
Surface Potential
and Interlayer Screening Effects of Few-Layer MoS2 Nanoflakes . Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2013 , 102 , 143110 10.1063/1.4801844 .

