
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical
Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b02865ArticleHydrate Nucleation,
Growth, and Induction Kvamme Bjørn *†Aromada Solomon Aforkoghene ‡Saeidi Navid §Hustache-Marmou Thomas ∥Gjerstad Petter ‡† State
Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation, Southwest Petroleum University, Xindu Road No.8, Chengdu, Sichuan 610500, China‡ Department
of Physics and Technology, University of
Bergen, Allegaten 55, 5007 Bergen, Norway§ Department
of Environmental Engineering, University
of California Irvine, Henry Samueli School of Engineering, 4200 Engineering Gateway Building, Irvine, California 92697-3975, United States∥ Department
of Fluid Mechanics, E.N.S.E.E.I.H.T Engineering
School, 2 rue Charles
Camichel, 31500 Toulouse, France* E-mail: kvamme_uib@outlook.com.04 02 2020 18 02 2020 5 6 2603 2619 04 09 2019 06 12 2019 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical
Society2020American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The first stage of any phase transition is a dynamic
coupling of
transport processes and thermodynamic changes. The free energy change
of the phase transition must be negative and large enough to also
overcome the penalty work needed for giving space to the new phase.
The transition from an unstable situation over to a stable growth
is called nucleation. Hydrate formation nucleation can occur along
a variety of different routes. Heterogeneous formation on the interface
between gas (or liquid) and water is the most commonly studied. A
hydrate can also form homogeneously from dissolved hydrate formers
in water, and the hydrate can nucleate toward mineral surfaces in
natural sediments or a pipeline (rust). A hydrate particle’s
critical size is the particle size needed to enter a region of stable
growth. These critical sizes and the associated nucleation times are
nanoscale processes. The dynamics of the subsequent stable growth
can be very slow due to transport limitations of hydrate-forming molecules
and water across hydrate films. Induction times can be defined as
the time needed to reach a visible hydrate. In the open literature,
these induction times are frequently misinterpreted as nucleation
times. Additional misunderstandings relate to the first and second
laws of thermodynamics and the number of independent thermodynamics
variables. It is not possible to reach thermodynamic equilibrium in
systems where hydrates form in a pipeline or in sediments. Finally,
there are common misconceptions that only one type of hydrate will
form. In a non-equilibrium situation, several hydrates will form,
depending on which phases the hydrate formers and water come from.
In this paper, we utilize a simple nucleation theory to illustrate
nucleation and growth of some simple hydrates in order to illustrate
the non-equilibrium nature of hydrates and the fast nucleation times.
To illustrate this, we apply thermodynamic conditions for a real pipeline
transporting natural gas from Norway to Germany. This specific example
also serves as a case for illustration of the possible impact of rusty
pipeline surfaces in kicking out water from the gas. Specifically,
we argue that the tolerance limit for water concentration according
to current industrial hydrate risk practice might overestimate the
tolerance by a factor of 20 as compared to tolerance concentration
based on adsorption on rust.

document-id-old-9ao9b02865document-id-new-14ao9b02865ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
The possible formation
of hydrates is always a concern in natural
gas processing and transport. During processing of natural gas, the
conditions may be down to −22 ° C at around 70 bar, like
in the processing of gas from the Troll offshore, Norway. However,
temperatures may be as low as −70 °C in plants with significant
amounts of components from ethane and higher hydrocarbons. Transport of natural
gas in the North Sea is normally at temperatures higher than 0 °
C but typically below 6 °C. Pressures during transport can be
very high but are normally below 300 bar. Common to all these situations
is that the conditions are well within hydrate-forming conditions
in terms of temperature and pressure. Also, since both temperature
and pressure are always given locally by process control and/or hydrodynamic
flow, the system can never reach thermodynamic equilibrium. Even for
the simplest system of pure methane in contact with water, this is
easy to verify by summing up all independent thermodynamic variables
and subtracting conservation laws and conditions of equilibrium. This
ends up with a maximum of one thermodynamic variable that can be specified
for equilibrium to be achieved. This is of course well known to all
since the methane equilibrium curve is always measured by keeping
either P or T fixed and then monitoring
the hydrate phase transition through slow variation of the other variable.
A typical result comes out as plotted in Figure 1 below.

Figure 1 (a) Methane hydrate stability limits as
a function of temperature
and pressure. Solid curve is calculated; asterisks (*) are experimental
data from Nakamura et al.,1 and circles
are experimental data from De Roo et al.2 (b) Chemical potential for methane along the stability limit curve
in panel (a) (dashed dotted line), chemical potential of water (solid
line), and molar free energy (dashed line).

There is nothing unique about this figure, and
there are numerous
hydrate equilibrium codes worldwide that can calculate that curve.
The reason for plotting it in the context of this paper is actually Figure 1b, which illustrates
the chemical potential of water and the hydrate former as well as
the free energy along the hydrate equilibrium curve. In general, in
a non-equilibrium system, there is no rule that controls the chemical
potential of each component to be equal across phase boundaries. On
the contrary, it is minimum free energy under constraints of mass
and energy conservation that controls the distribution of phases and
phase compositions. Then, since chemical potentials of hydrate formers
in various phases can be different, various routes to hydrates can
result in different forms. In the simple system of a hydrate forming
from water and methane, in the absence of solid surface effects, hydrate
formation will then be on the interface as formulated in eq 1 below in terms of free energy change. 1  where μ denotes the chemical potential.
Subscripts H2O and j denote water and
hydrate formers, respectively. The superscript H1 is the hydrate phase, the superscript water is the liquid
water phase, and the superscript gas is a separate hydrate former
phase (gas, liquid, or supercritical). Mole fractions in the liquid
are denoted as x, and mole fractions in the hydrate
are denoted as x with a superscript H. y is the mole fraction in the separate hydrate former phase. For all
of these mole fractions, the arrow on top means a vector of mole fractions. T and P are the temperature and pressure,
respectively, and G is the molar free energy. The
Δ symbol denotes a change in free energy. The hydrate formed
through this particular route is denoted as H1. This interface
hydrate will rapidly grow to a solid membrane with low diffusivity
for transporting gas molecules toward contact with water on the lower
side of the hydrate film. Parallel to this mass transport-limited
continuation of the H1 hydrate, another hydrate can grow
from the dissolved hydrate former in water. 2  

The chemical potential of methane in
various phases (gas, dissolved
in water) is not necessarily the same in a non-equilibrium situation.
In a non-equilibrium situation, the equilibrium conditions are replaced
by local minimum free energy under constraints of mass conservation.
The composition of this hydrate, H2, will be different.
This will be discussed in more detail later, but it is trivially given
by the difference in cavity partition functions. For hydrate modeling
tools using the fugacity of the hydrate-forming molecule times the
Langmuir constant, this will appear through the difference in the
fugacity of the hydrate former. In the formulations of Kvamme &
Tanaka,3 it appears through the chemical
potential of the hydrate former in the cavity partition function.

Another possibility is that dissolved methane up-concentrates as it adsorbs toward the initial hydrate film H1 and
forms a hydrate heterogeneously there.

Theoretically, another
possible route is from water dissolved in
gas as given by eq 3 below. 3  

Mass transport will be a substantial
limitation for this particular
route, and transporting hydrate formation heat through non-polar gas
is also a substantial rate limitation. A limited amount of hydrate
can, however, be formed from water dissolved in gas if water condenses
out on the already existing hydrate film. It is possible to estimate
the theoretical amount of water that can condense out in this way
by assuming a quasi-equilibrium situation. This calculation involves
an estimation of how much water in the gas can be in quasi-equilibrium
with hydrate water in H1. A mass balance between the actual
water content in gas and the quasi-equilibrium content of water in
gas (with reference to water in H1) will give a theoretical
maximum hydrate film for water in gas.

Some solid surfaces,
for instance, stainless steel, consist of
neutral atoms and will not have any significant thermodynamic effect
on the water structure. Pipelines for transport of hydrocarbons are
typically rusty even before they are installed. Ordinary rust is a
mixture of iron oxide, FeO, hematite, Fe2O3,
and magnetite, Fe3O4. These three minerals will
have different charges on the oxygens and irons and, correspondingly,
different structuring effects on adsorbed water. The density of the
first layer of adsorbed water on hematite may be three times higher
than that of liquid water. The chemical potential of adsorbed water
on hematite is substantially lower than that of liquid water. A typical
industrial example is the impact of rusty pipeline walls on hydrate
formation, as discussed in the next section for a relevant pipeline
transporting natural gas from Norway to Germany.

However, even
for the simple system of one hydrate former and water,
we now end up with three different hydrates, so the number of degrees
of freedom is −1 and the conditions of both temperature and
pressure are highly over-determined in terms of the possibility for
equilibrium.

Kinetic models for phase transitions are implicit dynamic
couplings
between mass transport of building blocks, associated heat transport,
and thermodynamic control. This is also the case for the various routes
to hydrate formation. In the classical nucleation theory, these couplings
are very transparent. Multicomponent diffuse interface theory (MDIT)4,5 reduces to the classical nucleation theory when the interface thickness
approaches zero. Classical nucleation theory (CNT) can be expressed
as 4  where J0 is the
mass transport flux supplying building blocks for the hydrate growth.
For the phase transition in eq 1, it will be the supply of methane to the interface growth.
In eq 2, it will be the
diffusion rate for dissolved methane to crystal growth from aqueous
solution. Lastly, in eq 3, the rate-limiting mass transport is the supply of water by diffusion
through gas. For eqs 1 and 2, transport through the structured water
interface between the hydrate and surrounding liquid water will normally
be the rate-limiting mass transport. The original classical nucleation
theory is limited by a classical prefactor J0 for single pure-component transport. As such, it is mainly
limited to gas/liquid systems with very small or theoretically not
significant interfaces.

The meaning of J0 is still the same
as in other systems, but it will be the limiting mass transport flux
through the interface between the old phase and the new phases. In
the case of hydrate nucleation and growth, a hydrate core will always
be covered with water. For heterogeneous nucleation on the liquid
water/gas interface, the capillary waves as well as capillary forces
between hydrate water and liquid water will ensure that the hydrate
core during nucleation is covered by liquid water. The actual rate-limiting
transport in J0 is therefore the transport
of hydrate-forming molecules across an interface of gradually more
structured water from the liquid side toward the hydrate side. The
units of J0 are mol/m3 s for
homogeneous hydrate formation in eqs 2 and 3 and mol/m2 s
for heterogeneous hydrate formation in eq 1. J has the same units as J0. β is the inverse of the gas constant
times the temperature, and ΔGTotal is the molar free energy change of the phase transition. This molar
free energy consists of two contributions. The phase transition free
energy as described by eqs 2 to 3, as examples, and the penalty
work of pushing aside old phases. Since the molar densities of liquid
water and hydrate are reasonably close, it is a fair approximation
to multiply the molar free energy of the phase transition with the
molar density of the hydrate times the volume of the hydrate core.
The push work penalty term is simply the interface free energy times
the surface area of the hydrate crystal. Lines below the symbols were
used to indicate extensive properties (unit, Joules) 5  

For the simplest possible geometry
of a crystal, which is a sphere,
with radius R, we then get 6  where ρNH is the molar density
of the hydrate and γ is the interface free energy between the
hydrate and surrounding phase. A small methane hydrate core growing
on the surface of water is floating since the density of methane hydrate
is lower than that of liquid water. Crystals below the critical size
(and likely larger) will also be covered with water toward the gas
side due to capillary forces and water adsorption.

The solution
for maximum free energy and transition over to stable
growth is found by differentiation of eq 6 with respect to R. The critical core
size is indicated by the superscript * on R 7  

For formation of the methane hydrate
at various pressures inside
the hydrate-forming regions, the critical hydrate core radius is typically
between 18 and 22 Å for temperatures in the range of 274 and
278 K and pressures above 150 bar (see Figures 4 and 7 for examples
of interface hydrate nucleation according to phase transition (eq 1)).

The implicit
coupling to heat transport goes through the relationship
between enthalpy changes and free energy changes. Equations 4 and 5 give a direct connection to the enthalpy change through the standard
thermodynamic relationship 8  where ΔHTotal is the enthalpy change due to the phase transition and the associated
push work penalty. 9  

Figure 2 illustrates
the enthalpy of hydrate formation as calculated from the thermodynamic
models for free energy based on residual thermodynamics and the use
of eq 8. For details,
see the studies of Kvamme33 and Kvamme
et al.34

Figure 2 Calculated enthalpies of hydrate formation,
in dimensionless units,
along the pressure–temperature hydrate stability limit curve
for CH4. Solid line was obtained using eq 8. Circles are data from Nakamura
et al.1 for the CH4 hydrate
as calculated using a Clapeyron approach. The point (*) is a measured
point from calorimetry experiments from Kang et al.35 Dashed curve is the calculated enthalpy of hydrate formation
from eq 8 for the CO2 hydrate in dimensionless units. The plus symbol (+) is measured
by calorimetry by Kang et al.35

Heat is mainly transported by conduction, convection,
and radiation.
Heat transport through liquid water and hydrate is 2 to 3 orders of
magnitude faster than mass transport.15 The details of eq 9 are not important in this work since the heat transport is not kinetically
rate-limiting for the systems discussed here. The heat transport is
of course proportional to the heat release (associated with the phase
transitions), as expressed through eq 9 and coupled to eq 8 for the various hydrate formation routes in eqs 1–3. For phase transitions according to eqs 1 and 2, the heat transport
is very fast and there is no rate-limiting factor in the phase transition
kinetics. For eq 3, as
mentioned above, there are limitations in mass transport due to low
concentrations of water in the gas. However, the heat transport limitations
of getting rid of the heat of hydrate formation given by eq 8 and various transport mechanisms
through a non-polar gas in eq 8 are also critical.

This brings the discussion over
to the title of the paper. There
appears to be a lot of confusion in terms of the physical meaning
of nucleation, growth, and induction. Equation 7 above defines the transition over to steady
growth in classical nucleation theory. Onset of massive growth, as
observed by induction times, is a function of many factors, but normally
simple mass transport limitations. The purpose of this paper is to
shed more light on this, and that is also why a simple theory is chosen.
We use mostly more advanced concepts6−8 in which the three components
are much more implicitly integrated. However, classical nucleation
theory provides a more visible distinction between the various contributions
and serves better to illustrate that hydrate nucleation is really
a nanoscale phenomenon and that the observed long induction times
are a result of mainly mass transport limitations through hydrate
films and/or a non-equilibrium situation that leads to dissociation
of hydrates through contact with under-saturated phases.

The
paper is organized as follows. Various routes to hydrate nucleation
are discussed in the next section. This is followed by a section where
a specific pipeline for transport of natural gas from Norway to Germany,
Europipe II, is discussed in terms of hydrate risk evaluation based
on the different routes to hydrate nucleation. The following section
contains numerical calculations of the most relevant hydrate nucleation
and growth paths. The final sections are a discussion of the results
and the various stages of hydrate formation kinetics followed by our
conclusions.

2 Routes to Hydrate Formation If Water Drops out
Thermodynamically, three routes to hydrate formation based on the
modes by which water is made available have been identified.9−11 The first route is the dew-point route, which is the classical route
currently considered and used for examining the risk of hydrate formation
in industrial systems like during natural gas processing and pipeline
transport. In this approach, the first step is calculation of the
water dew-point concentration for the actual gas mixture at local
conditions of pressure and temperature. If the actual water content
in the gas is higher than the calculated dew-point concentration of
water and the temperature and pressure are inside hydrate formation
conditions, then there is a risk of hydrate formation. In this case,
the gas is normally dried to below dew-point concentration.

Adding methanol, glycols, or other thermodynamic inhibitors at
critical points for possible hydrate formation is frequently used.
These thermodynamic inhibitors will change the hydrate stability region
in the temperature–pressure projection of independent thermodynamic
variables. Methanol will to a larger degree dissolve in gas as compared
to glycols. This will shift the dew point, which is now a water/methanol
dew point. Condensation of water/methanol droplets will therefore
have a unique hydrate stability limit for the specific mole fraction
of methanol in water that is shifted to higher pressures for hydrate
formation. Injection of glycols are frequently preferred because glycols
also have a corrosion-inhibiting effect and they are efficient in
preventing hydrates from forming toward pipeline walls, as discussed
below.

Water wetting solid surfaces gives rise to a second route
toward
hydrate formation. Stainless steel is neutral since it consists of
uncharged atoms. However, normally, stainless steel is far too expensive
for long transport limes. Plastic-covered pipelines are also neutral
in terms of water adsorption. Any form for rust will be water-wetted
due to the atomic charge distributions in the rust surface. Steel
pipelines are normally stored outside before they are eventually transported
and mounted together. The first rust that forms will normally be dominated
by magnetite (Fe3O4) because of ready access
to oxygen from air. Then, hematite (Fe2O3) and
iron oxide (FeO)9 will also form. Hematite
is the thermodynamically most stable of these, and the other rust
forms will gradually reorganize over to a dominating fraction of hematite.
In this work, we therefore use hematite as a model for rust. The distribution
of charged oxygens and irons in the hematite surface helps in making
the surface very efficient for water adsorption. The average chemical potential for water adsorbed on hematite is
very low8,12,28 and far lower
than the liquid water chemical potential. A hydrate can therefore
not form from the first adsorbed water layers. The density of this
first water layer is in the order of three times the liquid water
density.28 This is very typical for water
adsorption on minerals, and experimental data are available for a
variety of minerals like calcite and kaolinite, but we could not find
experimental data for water adsorbed on hematite. Beyond the first
layer, the density oscillates and the density minima outside of roughly
five water molecules serve as traps for adsorbing hydrate formers
in structured water.

Some minerals, like calcite and kaolinite,
can adsorb CO2 directly, but there is no evidence that
CO2 adsorbs directly
on hematite, in competition with water. However, CO2, CH4, and other small molecules that form gas can up-concentrate
in structured water and/or condense on water films that have been
generated by adsorption on hematite. From a mathematical point of
view, an adsorbed water film represents an infinite number of phases
because the density and structure of water change continuously. However,
even if we only consider the adsorbed water as one phase, it is obvious
that the number of independent thermodynamic variables is significantly
higher than those obtained from conservation laws and conditions of
equilibrium. Water drops out as a liquid or is adsorbed, and subsequent
hydrate formation leads to systems that can never lead to equilibrium
since the number of phases will never change in a continuous flow
situation with a new supply of mass to all phases. In summary, the
alternative route to hydrate formation involves water adsorbing on
hematite, and the water layers beyond roughly five water molecules
forming on the hematite surface can trap hydrate formers, or liquids
like water further from the hematite surface make hydrate with hydrate
formers from gas in the usual way like any liquid water phase. It should be kept in mind that the visible rust on pipelines that
are being shipped out for mounting onto an offshore (or onshore) pipeline
has rugged surfaces with visible peaks of rust heights. The relative adsorption surface per geometric pipeline surface
is therefore huge on a molecular adsorption scale.

It is thermodynamically
possible to form hydrates directly8,12 from water
dissolved in gas. The mass and heat transport limitation
of this “direct route” is, however, substantial. Collecting
in the order of 150 water molecules from a very dilute non-polar solution
is a mass transport challenge. Re-structuring water molecules around
non-polar solvent molecules releases heat. A second challenge is to
get rid of the released heat. Heat transport through non-polar gas
is extremely slow. It is much faster to redistribute the released
heat through the structured water, and a re-dissociation of the hydrate
cluster is a likely result.

If surface stresses from flow do
not have any influence on the
water/hydrocarbon system, then the hydrate formation occurs rapidly
on the water/gas interface. Further transport of hydrate formers and
water through the hydrate film will therefore be very slow, as discussed
in more detail related to hydrate H1 above. Formation of
H2 (see discussion above) will proceed until a quasi-equilibrium
between water and methane in solution and the same components in hydrate
occurs. In a flowing system with turbulent shear forces blocking the
hydrate, films (membranes) will likely be broken and reformed continuously. The exceptions to this might be the shielded regions close to the
pipeline walls. The rust in a pipeline will, as mentioned above, appear
as a rugged surface in which peak heights are normally visible and, as such, which is several orders of magnitudes larger than
the nanoscale size from a hydrate phase transition. In valleys between
the high rust peaks, the effects of hydrodynamic stresses from outside
flow decrease proportional to the distance from the rust peaks, toward
the depth of the valleys. Also, unlike hydrate nucleation on a water/hydrate
former interface, the hydrates formed toward hematite surfaces can
only be bridged by structured water to the hematite surface. This
opens up the potential of hematite surfaces to act as dynamic sites
for nucleation of hydrates that will eventually detach from the surface
and give room for new nucleation processes.

3 Limits of Water Content in Hydrocarbon for Pipeline
Transport
In this subsection, we have investigated the safety
limit of water
in gas pipeline systems based on the three routes of making water
available as discussed in the previous section. Europipe II (EP II)
is selected for this study because the temperature–pressure
conditions are favorable for hydrate nucleation and growth. The EP
II pipeline is around 660 km13,14 long, out of which
627 km of the pipeline is offshore and goes through the Norwegian,
Danish, and German parts of the North Sea. It is an export gas pipeline
for transporting 65.9 mega standard cubic meters of gas per day13,14 from the Kårstø processing plant in Norway to the Europipe
receiving facilities (ERF) reception center at Dornum in Germany.
This pipeline is laid on the seafloor of the North Sea where temperatures
are generally low; they can be as low as −1 °C and seldom
exceed +6 °C.9,11,12 At the landfall in Germany, the temperature of the gas is expected
to be as low as −5 °C.13 The
transport operation involves high pressures. The gas is sent from
Norway at 190 bar, and it is received in Germany at 90 bar. These
conditions of temperature and pressure are favorable for hydrate nucleation
if water condenses out from the gas.

This practical industrial
system is appropriate for our study of
the limit of water content in natural gas to prevent water from dropping
out to lead to hydrate nucleation. Therefore, our study covers a temperature
range of −5 to +6 °C and a pressure range of 90 to 210
bar. The export natural gas is predominantly methane, so pure methane
is assumed in this subsection. The usual criterion for avoiding hydrate
formation in the pipeline is to make sure that water will not condense
out from the gas. Molecular dynamics studies28 indicate that the average chemical potential of adsorbed water on
rust may be 3.4 kJ/mol lower than the chemical potential of liquid
water. A more novel tolerance limit for water in natural gas will
therefore be the maximum mole fraction of water in the hydrate former
phase before water can drop out and adsorb on rust.

In classical
hydrate risk evaluation, the formation of a separate
liquid water phase through condensation will then be followed by hydrate
formation if the local pressure and temperature are inside the hydrate
stability curve. In the case of water adsorption on the pipeline walls,
the hydrate will essentially form heterogeneously between water molecules
slightly outside (roughly five water layers) of the rust surface where
the water chemical potential is close to that of liquid water. In
this region, there are still some density minima in the water structure
that can dynamically trap hydrate formers and lower the energy barrier
for the hydrate phase transition. Water droplets that follow the gas
flow will be subjected to substantial surface stresses. The interface
stress between the hydrate film covered by water droplets and surrounding
flow can lead to hydrate film breakup. This might end up in a continuous
chain of hydrate film breaking and heterogeneous formation of new
hydrate films. As discussed above, hydrate films generated toward
rust may be more shielded by roughness while at the same time having
different dynamics in the formation and detachments of new hydrate
nuclei toward rust. This roughness may be as large as that in visible
hydrates (millimeter range) and creates pockets of shielded regions. In this case, dissolved
natural gas in the water films on the solid surface can give rise
to homogeneous hydrate formation as well as to two types of heterogeneous
hydrate formations. The former is the initial hydrate film on the
interface between natural gas and water, and the latter are the subsequently
heterogeneous hydrate formation from dissolved methane and water from
below. Even though
both water and methane come from the same liquid water phase, the
real hydrate formation toward the initial hydrate film utilizes water,
which is structured by the hydrate.

The results of our study
of the Europipe II range of conditions
are presented in Figures 3–5 and Table 1. The trends for the maximum amount of water
allowable in the gas system without the risk of liquid water dropping
out and/or hydrate formation for the three different routes to hydrate
nucleation are the same. The difference is in absolute values. The
maximum mole fraction of water that can be permitted without condensation
of water or a hydrate forming directly from dissolved water in gas
decreases with increasing pressures as can be observed in Figures 3 and 4. However, comparing
values computed based on the different routes, the dew-point method
estimates are in the order of 18 to 20 times higher than that of adsorption
of water on hematite (rusty surfaces). This indicates that the presence
of rust in pipelines makes it ∼20 times riskier for water to
drop out through an adsorption process. The dew-point estimates are
also 9 to 40% higher than those of the route of direct nucleation
of hydrates where the highest difference occurs at the highest pressure
and lowest temperature, while the least difference occurs at the lowest
pressure and highest temperature (see Table 1). However, practically, hydrate nucleation
through this direct route is highly unlikely as discussed above.

Figure 3 (a). Maximum
water content before liquid water drops out of the
transport gas. (b) Maximum water content before adsorption of water
onto hematite. (c) Maximum water content before hydrate formation
directly from water in the gas phase.

Figure 4 (a) Maximum water content before liquid water drops out
of the
export gas with a variety of hydrate formers. (b) Maximum water content
before adsorption of water onto hematite (system with a variety of
hydrate formers). (c) Maximum water content before hydrate formation
directly from water in the gas phase (system with a variety of hydrate
formers).

Table 1 Maximum Water Content To Prevent Hydrate
Formation during Transport of Export Gas [Pure Methane] from Kårstø
in Norway to Dornum in Germany
 	 	maximum
allowable mole fraction at different temperatures and pressures	
temperature	route to hydrate formation	90 bar	130 bar	170 bar	210 bar	
268 K	dew point	0.000466	0.000384	0.000359	0.000354	
hematite	0.000024	0.000020	0.000018	0.000018	
direct	0.000371	0.000289	0.000261	0.000252	
274 K	dew point	0.000758	0.000620	0.000572	0.000558	
hematite	0.000040	0.000032	0.000030	0.000029	
direct	0.000632	0.000488	0.000435	0.000415	
280 K	dew point	0.001155	0.000936	0.000855	0.000826	
hematite	0.000065	0.000053	0.000048	0.000046	
direct	0.001058	0.000811	0.000714	0.000674	
For defined pressure, temperature, and hydrocarbon
composition,
the water dew point is calculated by iteration of the mole fraction
of water in the gas that will result in a water chemical potential
in the gas equal to the liquid water chemical potential. Water adsorbed
on hematite has a lower chemical potential than liquid water. Our
estimates indicate that the chemical potential for water adsorbed
on hematite may be 3.6 kJ/mol lower than the chemical potential for
liquid water at 278 K. The mole fraction of water in the hydrocarbon
phase before adsorption is solved in the same way as the dew point
but now using the water chemical potential on hematite. For direct
hydrate formation, the solution is using the water content in gas
that results in zero for eq 3 above.

The pipeline gas may also contain more variety
of hydrate formers.
Some amount of higher hydrocarbons like ethane and propane might be
present in Europipe II as given in Table 2, a report of composition data of export
gas from Norway16 published in 2012. This
indicates that some amount of structure II hydrate are expected to
form due to propane but this would be a very small amount as a consequence
of the limited amount of propane in the reported gas mixture.16 Therefore, different hydrates having different
compositions of hydrate formers and different densities are expected
in this situation. Hydrate risk analysis for this gas mixture was
performed as done for the pure methane above. Figure 4a–c represents the results of the
dew-point method, the method of adsorption of water onto rust, and
the route of direct formation of hydrates from dissolved water in
the gas mixtures, respectively. We can observe the impact of the heavier
hydrocarbons on the upper limit of water allowable in the pipeline
system by comparing Figure 3a–c with Figure 4a–c and Table 1 with Table 3. The maximum content of water permitted in the gas mixture reduces
a bit by the presence of the higher hydrocarbons.

Figure 5 (a) Critical nuclei size for methane hydrate at three different
temperatures for various supersaturations in pressure. Solid curve
is for 274 K (equilibrium pressure of 28.4 bar). Dashed curve is for
276 K (equilibrium pressure of 34.7 bar). Dashed dotted curve is for
278 K (equilibrium pressure of 42.5 bar). All calculations were conducted
using 30 × 10–6 kJ/m2 for interface
free energy between liquid water and the hydrate in eq 6. (b) Natural logarithm of nucleation
time as a function of various pressures with different diffusion coefficients
at a constant temperature of 274 K. (c) Nucleation time as a function
of pressure for the CH4 hydrate formed on the gas/water
interface. Temperature is 274 K. The methane diffusivity on the hydrate
side of the 10 Å-thick interface is 10–11 m2/s. (d) Nucleation time as a function of pressure for the
CH4 hydrate formed on the gas/water interface. The methane
diffusivity on the hydrate side of the 10 Å-thick interface is
10–12 m2/s. Equilibrium pressure for
274 K is 28.4 bar.

Table 2 Composition of Export Gas from Norway16
[mole
fractions]	
methane	ethane	propane	n-butane	nitrogen	
0.9203	0.0575	0.0131	0.0045	0.0046	
Table 3 Maximum Water Content To Prevent Hydrate
Formation during Transport of Export Gas with a Variety of Hydrate
Formers
 	 	maximum
allowable mole fraction at different temperatures and pressures	
temperature	route to hydrate formation	90 bar	130 bar	170 bar	210 bar	
268 K	dew point	0.000450	0.000376	0.000360	0.000362	
hematite	0.000023	0.000019	0.000018	0.000018	
direct	0.000270	0.000209	0.000192	0.000188	
274 K	dew point	0.000736	0.000607	0.000573	0.000570	
hematite	0.000038	0.000032	0.000030	0.000030	
direct	0.000495	0.000379	0.000341	0.000330	
280 K	dew point	0.001125	0.000919	0.000855	0.000841	
hematite	0.000063	0.000052	0.000048	0.000047	
direct	0.000866	0.000659	0.000586	0.000560	
4 Hydrate Nucleation and Hydrate Growth Limitations
Oxygens and hydrogens in hydrate water molecules are almost fixed,
except from limited vibrations from energy minimum.3 Coulomb interactions between partial charges on oxygen
and hydrogen are long-range. The phase transition occurs over a very
thin interface of gradually changing water structure.15,17,18 In earlier studies,15,17,18 we used a 90% confidence interval
for the distance from liquid water structure toward the hydrate water
structure. This corresponds to a 1 nm interface thickness.

In
classical nucleation theory (CNT), the prefactor is based on
a single-molecule constant diffusional transport. Diffusional mass
transport of two different types of molecules across the interface
is involved in the hydrate formation dynamics. While the hydrate former
is transported toward the hydrate core, the water closer to the hydrate
core will expand and reform to cavity structures. Dynamically, this
will be like a domino effect that leads to continuous renewal of the
interface structure between the hydrate core and the liquid water
outside. For mixtures, there will be diffusional transport of different
hydrate formers, and in a dynamic situation, this can contribute in
determining the hydrate composition. A hydrate core floating on liquid
water can even be supplied with different hydrate formers from the
gas side and the liquid water side (dissolved hydrate formers). Thermodynamically,
CNT does not contain an interface thickness. However, the prefactor
accounts for the transport across the interface to supply growth.
In this work, we estimate diffusional transport and concentration
gradients. These values are used in a Fick’s type of approach
for estimation of a realistic average value for J0 in eq 4. It will still end up with a diffusional transport flux for every
different size of a growing hydrate nucleus, and we can make use of
sampled data from molecular dynamics simulations for concentration
profiles across the interface from the liquid to hydrate interface.

The maximum hydrate filling will be below 100%, which would correspond
to a methane hydrate mole fraction in the hydrate of 0.148. On the
liquid side of the interface, it would be expected to be close to
a value corresponding to the mole fraction of methane in water in
equilibrium with the hydrate and lower than liquid water solubility.
A second order fit of 0.14 for z equals to zero at
the hydrate side and a liquid-side mole fraction 10 Å outside
of that can be formulated as 10  where the brackets denote average.

For
a given stage of the growth, at size R, the
average mole fraction of methane in the surrounding interface toward
liquid water is estimated by 11   12  where   13   14  

Diffusivity coefficient gradients for
CH4 across the
interface between liquid water and the hydrate surface cannot be measured
experimentally. Theoretical estimates for transport of CH4 through the solid hydrate are available from various open sources,
but the relevance is questionable. Most estimated diffusivity coefficients
are based on Monte Carlo studies for model systems of hydrate and
guest molecules jumping between cavities.19−21 The assumption
is that a solid-state diffusion occurs when the hydrate guest jumps
from an occupied cage to the neighboring empty cage through hexagonal
or pentagonal faces of the water ring of structure I or II hydrate.20−22 There is no verified mechanism involved in this cavity jumping mechanism.
Molecular dynamics simulations3 indicate
that water molecules between filled and empty cavities have larger
vibration amplitudes from minimum energy positions. These less stable
boundary water molecules may be easier to be pushed temporarily out
of position to let molecules pass from the filled cavity to the empty
cavity.

The diffusivity coefficient of CH4 at the
surface of
a hydrate is now denoted as DH. The diffusivity
coefficient of the liquid side of the interface is denoted as DL. Since this is the 90% confidence interval
of the interface structure, DL should
be somewhat lower than the diffusivity of CH4 through “bulk”
liquid water. DH should be higher than
the diffusivities through hydrates. Molecular dynamics studies3 give substantially higher values for the diffusivity
of CH4 through hydrates than the Monte Carlo studies referenced
above. As discussed above, we approximate the interface thickness
to 10 Å and model the change in diffusion of CH4 across
the interface by a linear logarithmic approximation. 15  

For every radius R of a growing spherical hydrate
particle, a volumetric average diffusivity in the interface layer
surrounding the core is then estimated as 16  whereb0 = ln DL and  and coefficients in eq 14 are given as follows  

Then, we substitute X and D in
Fick’s second law equation 17  

Since X is now only
a function of R and t, we can substitute
the integration variable X in eq 17 using 18  which when inserted into eq 15 results in 19  or 20  where R0 is the
starting size for the evaluation and the corresponding time appears
on the left-hand side. Equation 19 is most conveniently integrated numerically.

The liquid-side concentration of methane in eq 10 is highly temperature- and pressure-dependent.
It is beyond the scope of this work to do an extensive study of various
liquid-side concentrations as a sensitivity analysis of surface concentration
of methane. For this reason, we fix these parameters for a specific
example. Parameters of a0 = 0.14, a1 = −0.015, and a2 = 2 × 10–4 result in a mole fraction
of methane equal to 0.14 at the hydrate surface. On the other side
of the interface, 10 Å outside of the hydrate surface, the concentration
of CH4 is expected to be supersaturated relative to the
solubility of CH4 at specific temperature and pressure.
For pipeline transport with pressure ranges in the order of 50 to
250 bar, a mole fraction of CH4 equal to 0.01 10 Å
outside the hydrate surface can be one example (see for instance Figures 6 and 7 below for bulk solubility
as a function of temperatures and pressures).

Figure 6 (a) Calculated solubility
of CH4 in water for four different
temperatures. Top solid curve is for a temperature of 275.11 K, the
next is for 278.65 K, then for 282.65 K, and the lowest solid curve
is for 283.13 K. Experimental data from Chapoy et al.24 are marked with solid diamonds and x marks, and experimental
data from Servio and Englezos25 are marked
with asterisks and solid circles. (b) Chemical potential for CH4 in aqueous solutions as a function of mole fraction along
the solubility curves in panel (a). Top solid curve is for a temperature
of 275.11 K, the next is for 278.65 K, then for 282.65 K, and the
lowest solid curve is for 283.13 K.

Figure 7 (a) Solubility of methane in water as a function of temperature
and pressure. (b) Minimum methane in water for hydrate stability as
a function of temperature and pressure. Solid line is estimated, and
solid black dots are experimental data from Yang et al.26

4.1 Heterogeneous Hydrate Nucleation on Water/Gas
Interface
There is only one degree of freedom in heterogeneous
hydrate formation from liquid water and a single-component hydrate
former phase. Equilibrium can therefore not be achieved when two independent
thermodynamic variables are given. In any industrial situation of
hydrate formation or any situation of hydrates in nature, both temperature
and pressure are given locally. A first-order Taylor expansion from
the stability limit can be written as 21  

The reference state is the pressure–temperature
stability limit curve for the actual gas composition. Any temperature
on the equilibrium curve can be chosen freely. The last term in eq 21 therefore vanishes.
The non-equilibrium free energy needed for eqs 5 and 6 can therefore
be evaluated for eq 1 based on eq 21.

In Figure 5, we
calculated the critical radius for hydrate formation from methane
gas and liquid water on the interface according to eq 1. As in all other nucleation calculations,
we have used a constant interface thickness between the hydrate and
liquid water of 10 Å. We expect the nucleation to happen in the
liquid water interface (10 Å). The applied value for interface
free energy is 30 × 10–6 kJ/m2,23 and this value comes from experimental results
for liquid water/ice. Except for very low driving forces, the critical
nuclei radius is small.

4.2 Homogeneous Hydrate Nucleation from Dissolved
Methane
The lowest limit of hydrate stability in terms of
the surrounding water can be calculated from a quasi-equilibrium consideration.
For the actual temperature and pressure, the chemical potentials of
water and methane in the hydrate and in the solutions of water in
contact are then the same. This will give a contour map of concentrations
of methane in the surrounding water needed to keep the hydrate stable.
The solubility of methane in water gives another contour map, which
is calculated by the methane chemical potential in gas (or liquid
or supercritical) being equal to the chemical potential of dissolved
methane in water. Methane dissolved in water will be able to form
a hydrate between the solubility of methane in liquid water and the
minimum concentration for hydrate stability. Hydrate growth from methane dissolved in water is also dominated
by heterogeneous hydrate formation. The reason is that methane dissolved
in water will benefit from a heterogeneous growth toward the existing
hydrate film. In order to calculate the kinetics of this nucleation
process, we need the thermodynamic properties of methane adsorbed
on the existing hydrate film and/or secondary adsorbed as trapped
in water structures caused by the hydrate crystal. Separate studies are in progress using molecular dynamics simulations.
The goal of these studies is to be able to quantify thermodynamic
properties (chemical potentials and energies) as well as diffusivities
related to the structurally trapped methane. Homogeneous nucleation
of the hydrate inside the water phase is also possible. This is the
type of hydrate formation discussed in this work. As for the thermodynamic
aspects related to the heterogeneous formations toward the hydrate
film versus the homogeneous hydrate formation from solution, we may
assume that the methane chemical potential toward the hydrate film
is in quasi-equilibrium with the outside methane dissolved in water.

Guest chemical potentials in Figure 1b for methane in the gas phase as compared to chemical
potentials of methane in solution in Figure 6b illustrate the variations in the resulting
hydrate compositions through eqs 22–24 below. The associated
differences in free energies for the various hydrates formed through
different routes and “parent” phases (the phase where
the molecule comes from) for the guest molecules are given by eq 25. The statistical mechanical
equilibrium theory derived by Kvamme and Tanaka3 differs from the classical methods in the sense that it
gives the possibility of either a rigid lattice, like those used in
other codes, or the use of a harmonic oscillator guest movement model
in a molecular dynamics simulation for evaluation of the cavity partition
functions. The canonical partition hij for a guest molecule j in cavity-type i evaluated by the latter option can be expressed as 22  

In molar units, β is the inverse
of the universal gas constant
times the temperature. In molecular units, β is the inverse
of Boltzmann’s constant times the temperature. At equilibrium
or at the stability limit for a non-equilibrium situation, the chemical
potential of guest molecules j in hydrate cavity i is equal to the chemical potential of molecules j in the co-existing phase it comes from. For Figure 1, the hydrate former comes
from a gas phase, while in Figure 6, it is the chemical potential for CH4 in
aqueous solution.

The corresponding filling fractions and mole
fractions of methane
in the hydrate are given by 23  where θij is the filling fraction of component j in cavity
type i 24  where ν is the fraction of the cavity
per water for the actual cavity type (indicated by subscripts). The
corresponding mole fraction of water is then given by 25  The associated hydrate free energy is then 26  

Superscript H refers to the hydrate.
CH4 chemical potentials
for the heterogeneous formation from methane and liquid water in Figure 1 are different from
CH4 chemical potentials for homogeneous hydrate formation
from water solutions in Figures 6b. From eq 26 and eqs 22–25, each of these hydrates will, by thermodynamic
definition, be a unique phase because the composition, density, and
free energy are different. Furthermore, as seen from Figure 6b, every different concentration
of CH4 between the solubility limit and hydrate stability
limit will result in a unique hydrate. Mathematically, this means
that an infinite number of hydrate phases can be formed from CH4 in solution. The impact of the combined first and second
laws of thermodynamics will, however, lead to reorganization of hydrates
when the supply of new CH4 is limited.

The experimental
data referred to in the caption to Figure 6b are not directly comparable.
Since there is free gas in the cell, there will be combinations of
H1 and H2. Also, when CH4 from solution
is converted over to a hydrate, then new CH4 will be dissolved
from the free gas phase. It is therefore expected that the experimental
values should be higher than what we calculated based on homogeneous
hydrate formation from solution only. In view of this, the agreement
is strikingly good.

Nucleation time decreases when the mole
fraction of CH4 in water increases, as illustrated in Figure 8. This is of course
expected since the maximum
thermodynamic driving force is when the concentration is at the solubility
limit. For the concentration at the hydrate stability limit, the driving
force is zero, and the closer we get to this limit, the higher the
nucleation times become. Comparing different diffusivity coefficients
shows that nucleation time is substantially faster for the example
with a diffusivity of 10–11 m2/s than
the example with a diffusivity coefficient of 10–12 m2/s. The expected range of limiting transport diffusivities
based on comparison between experiments and results derived from phase
field theory (PFT) modeling7 is in agreement
with this diffusivity coefficient.

Figure 8 (a) Mole fraction of CH4 dissolved
in liquid water with
respect to nucleation time at a temperature of 274 K and pressure
of 200 bar with different diffusion coefficients. (b) Critical size
as a function of mole fraction of CH4 in water at constant
temperature (274 K) and pressure (200 bar).

4.3 Induction Times
As discussed in the
previous sections, critical nucleation size is on the nanoscale order
for the systems discussed in this work. As mentioned above, this is
in accordance with the nano- to-mesoscale modeling published earlier
from our research group17 using phase field
theory (PFT). Induction times, or times for “onset of massive
growth”, are frequently delayed by several factors. Mass transport
limitations are frequently the most important.

As an example
we may consider the reported result from an experiment in a stationary
cell without stirring or other induced hydrodynamic effects.9 The result is plotted in Figure 9 below. The reader is directed to ref (7) for more complete details
on the experiment. The experimental cell is constructed by cutting
a plastic cylinder of a diameter of 4 cm and length of 10 cm into
two half cylinders. These two half cylinders are then squeezed together
against a 4 mm-thick plastic spacer. The resulting empty space for
fluids is then surrounded by a cooling medium. For monitoring, a magnetic
resonance imaging system is utilized. For the applied frequencies,
the hydrogen proton spin in hydrate water and methane hydrogen spin
will be invisible. Liquid water spin is visible. Massive hydrate growth
is then detected by the time when liquid water regions turn invisible
due to hydrate conversion. Resolution of the experiment is limited
to 300 μm. This number is different than the 100 μm resolution
indicated by Kvamme et al.7 and based on
a more critical review of the experimental setup for this special
experiment with a plastic container. The only thing that can be detected
with this monitoring system is the transition over to rapid massive
hydrate growth, as seen from Figure 9. The induction time (“time for onset of massive
hydrate growth”) was recorded to 100 h at conditions of 4 °C
and a pressure of 1200 psig (84 bar). This level of induction time
of 3.6 × 105 s is far beyond any possible value for
nucleation times. Water and methane are both readily available on
both sides of the interface between methane and water. Phase field
theory modeling7,15,27 reproduces the experimental observations with a diffusivity coefficient
in the order of 10–12 m2/s. For this
particular setup, the plastic walls are methane-wetted. Capillary
migration of methane along the plastic wall is one reason for accumulation
of methane that is in contact with water along the wall. Another reason
for the onset of massive growth is the rearrangements of the initial
hydrate film between the gas and liquid water. The combined first
and second laws of thermodynamics will lead to rearrangements of the
hydrate film. When there is a lack of new hydrate building blocks,
then the most stable regions of the hydrate film will consume building
blocks from less stable neighboring regions of the film. Eventually,
this will lead to holes in the hydrate film. This latter effect is
something that happens on all scales—from nano7,15,17,27 to the visible scale as observed in experiments.32

Figure 9 Experimental data for
methane hydrate formation from water and
methane at 1200 psia (83 bar) and 3 °C.7

5 Discussion
Nucleation of hydrates can
happen along a variety of routes. For
natural gas hydrates in sediments or formation of hydrates in a rusty
pipeline, the two most important routes are formation on the water/hydrate
former phase and toward mineral surfaces. The relative importance
of hydrate nucleation and growth from dissolved hydrate formers is
related to the solubility of the hydrate former. In all cases, nucleation
is a nanoscale phenomenon in time and space. Mass transport through
a hydrate is very slow, and the time needed for a hydrate to grow
to a visible size can be substantial, unless shear forces die to flow
or other factors break the kinetically rate-limiting hydrate films.
The time needed for a hydrate to reach a massive size to a visible
hydrate is called the induction time. This time is frequently misinterpreted
as nucleation time because the resolution of the monitoring device
(magnetic resonance imaging, microscope, etc.) is not able to detect
the presence of any hydrate.

Hydrates can never reach equilibrium
in nature or industry. Even
without the impact of solid surfaces, it is straightforward to verify
that equilibrium of a single hydrate former and water distributed over three phases
(water, hydrate, and hydrate former phases) is mathematically over-determined
by one independent thermodynamic variable when temperature and pressure
are both defined/given. Also, the situation does not improve if more
hydrate formers are added since the first and second laws of thermodynamics
will drive the phase transitions to a variety of different hydrate
phases (different compositions). In a non-equilibrium system, the
chemical potentials for a hydrate former in different phases are different
because the first and second laws determine distribution of masses
over the various possible phases. The result is that there are many
different hydrates (different compositions and free energies). This
variety is further enhanced for mixtures since the relative ability
to adsorb on water is one part of the mass transport that brings water
and hydrate formers in contact.

The most important routes to
hydrate formation in sediments or
industrial pipelines are via the water/hydrate former phase interface
and toward mineral surfaces. The reason that the latter route is important
is that the atomic charges on the mineral surface will dominate the
structuring of water. The density of water in the first layer on a
mineral surface can be three times the density of liquid water.28 The associated chemical potential is substantially
lower than the liquid water chemical potential.8,28 The
subsequent variations in water density as a function of distance from
the mineral surface also involve regions of low water density that
will be able to trap hydrate formers.29−31

Natural gas being
transported in pipelines always contains water.
It can be because of the equilibrium water saturation amount from
the time the hydrocarbon system entered separation and processing
units and finally ended up in a pipeline for transport. Normally,
hydrodynamics will also distribute water into the hydrocarbon phases.

The low chemical potential of adsorbed water on rust implies that
the rusty surface acts like a magnet for extracting water out from
the gas. Hydrate formation toward rusty pipeline walls can therefore
be substantially more important than water condensing as droplets
and the formed hydrate with gas. As discussed above, the hydrate is
unable to stick to the rust surface. The hydrate formed toward rusty
pipeline walls will also nucleate on hydrate films generated by dropped
out water, roughly 6 water molecules distance (2 nm) from the surface
of hematite.

For mixtures of various hydrate formers, the accessibility
to hydrate
formers on the water surface depends on the thermodynamic state for
the various guest molecules and the attraction to the water surface.
If we think about mixtures of CH4 and CO2 as
one example, then CH4 is supercritical in the liquid water
hydrate range and does not have a tendency to condense. CO2 is subcritical and has a favorable attraction to liquid water compared
to CH4. These aspects are illustrated by Kvamme36 using a 2D adsorption theory. The average availability
for hydrate formation on the liquid water surface and the associated
average adsorption mole fraction on the liquid water surface are therefore
very different from the gas mole fraction.

Another aspect that
will also lead to a variety of different hydrates
forming from CH4 and CO2 mixtures is the effect
of the combined first and second laws of thermodynamics. The most
stable hydrates will form first, under constraints of mass and heat
transport. There are a number of common misunderstandings about hydrate
stability. The stability limit in a temperature pressure projection
is not the proper way to discuss stability. Since residual energy
is used for all phases and all components, the molar free energy of
each phase is the actual measure of the relative stability. In Figure 10a, we show a logarithmic
plot of the temperature and pressure regions in which hydrates of
CH4 and CO2 can form. For CO2, the
range of temperatures includes a phase transition to a lower density.
In some published work, this transition is smoothened out. Still in
other publications, it is discussed as a discontinuity.

Figure 10 (a) Temperature–pressure
stability limits for the CH4 hydrate (solid) and CO2 hydrate (dashed). (b)
Dimensionless free energies of the CH4 hydrate (solid line)
and CO2 hydrate (dashed line) along their corresponding
hydrate stability limits in a pressure–temperature projection.
(c) Dimensionless free energies of the CH4 hydrate (solid
line) and CO2 hydrate (dashed line) along their corresponding
hydrate stability limits in the temperature projection of the pressure–temperature
space.

However, the most important misunderstanding is
in the discussion
of stability in which it is frequently argued that the CH4 hydrate is more stable above a certain temperature. This is not
the case. If we plot the free energies of the two hydrates along the
hydrate formation curves in Figure 10a, we can compare directly the stability of the two
hydrates in Figure 10b,c. The stability limits of the CH4 hydrate are compared
to experimental data in Figure 1a, while those of the CO2 hydrate are compared
to experimental data elsewhere.36,37 The free energy of
the two hydrates in the three-dimensional plot in Figure 10b is hard to read in terms
of specific numbers and only serves the purpose of showing the very
different pressure dependencies for the two components after the temperature
of the phase transition to higher density for CO2. Figure 10c is easier to
read and shows that the CO2 hydrate is more stable than
the CH4 hydrate over the entire range of temperatures and
pressures of the two P–T stability
curves in Figure 10a. These features are not directly visible in the old-fashion hydrate P–T stability limit curves because
they are based on semi-empirical fitting of the liquid water chemical
potential minus the empty hydrate chemical potential.

In this
work, we have utilized a numerically very simple theory,
but it is still a theory with roots in physics as opposed to empirical
fitting equations. The relative importance of the mass transport,
the heat transport, and the thermodynamic control for each different
system in consideration is easy to visualize. It is easy to implement
as extensions of existing hydrate risk evaluation tools. This approach
can save industries money in terms of chemical additives because there
may be situations that are in favor of hydrate formation from a pure
thermodynamic analysis, while a more complete dynamic analysis may
reveal that there are substantial kinetic limitations in mass transport
or heat transport associated with the hydrate formation.

6 Conclusions
Misconceptions about hydrate
nucleation times and hydrate induction
times are frequently found in the open literature. In order to illustrate
this, we have utilized a simple nucleation theory, CNT. Thermodynamic
properties related to the phase transitions in this model are calculated
using classical thermodynamics. Hydrate properties are derived from
available results from molecular modeling in order to obtain a consistent
and transparent reference level for all components in all phases.
Except for situations of extremely low thermodynamic driving forces
in terms of temperature and pressure, then the typical smallest hydrate
cores (critical size) that enter growth regions are around 2 nm in
radius. In the liquid water region, there is no experimental method
that can detect such small hydrate cores and this is likely the reason
that many researchers wrongly assume that there is no hydrate. The
slow transport of hydrate formers through a hydrate film can cause
substantial delays before hydrates of a visible size can be detected.

The influence of solid surfaces will often play a role in the transition
to massive hydrate growth (induction time), but there are also several
other factors related to thermodynamics. When there is no new material
available for hydrate growth, the combined first and second laws will
lead to a situation in which more stable regions of the hydrate film
(regions of lower free energy) will consume neighboring regions of
the hydrate film with higher free energy. Eventually, this can lead
to holes in the hydrate film at a stage where massive hydrate growth
is feasible due to the existing hydrate.

Minerals contain charged
atoms that structure water to extreme
densities compared to liquid water. Rust is a mix of various combinations
of iron and oxygen, but the most stable is hematite. Pipelines for
transporting hydrocarbons are rusty even from the point when they
were welded together into a pipeline. The low chemical potential of
water as adsorbed on hematite makes water substantially more favorable
to adsorb on hematite rather than condensing out as liquid droplets
during transport of hydrocarbon systems containing water. The first
step in a hydrate risk evaluation analysis is a calculation of the
water dew-point concentration for a local temperature and pressure
in the pipeline. If this concentration is considered as the maximum
amount of water to be permitted, then our calculations show that 18
to 20 times higher concentrations of water might be permitted as compared
to a criterion based on the maximum concentration before adsorption
on rust.

Another assumption that frequently occurs in the open
literature
is that only one hydrate structure forms. A variety of hydrates will
form because industrial and natural systems of hydrates can never
reach equilibrium. The chemical potentials of water and hydrate formers
are therefore subjected to local free energy minimum as a function
of mass and heat transport constraints. Cavity partition functions
in the statistical mechanical theory for hydrates will therefore vary
with local chemical potentials for guest molecules.

Hydrates
forming from dissolved hydrate formers in water can come
in many forms, depending on the concentration of the hydrate former
versus solubility concentration and concentration at the limit of
hydrate stability. Even though most of the focus in this paper has
been on the CH4 hydrate, we have also pointed out that
comparison of hydrate formers need to be based on two levels of analysis.
In a dynamic situation, subcritical components will have a stronger
driving force to adsorb on liquid water than super critical components.
Various components have their individual average attractions to liquid
water prior to nucleation. In addition to these aspects, there will
also be a selectivity based on gradients in free energy that directs
the system toward the formation of most stable hydrates first. In
real situations of mixtures of hydrate formers, many hydrates can
form initially.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Support from the University
of California, Irvine
and from Hyzen Energy is highly appreciated.

Nomenclature
ÅAngstrom

δpartial charge

Ppressure

Pnumber of phases
(Gibbs phase rule)

Ttemperature

TRactual
temperature divided by the critical temperature

T0, R273 K divided by the actual temperature

Runiversal
gas constant

Rradius of hydrate
core

R*critical radius
for the hydrate core

ρNHmolar density of hydrate

γinterface free energy

γiactivity coefficient of a component

γi∞activity of a component
at infinite dilution

μchemical potential

μiHchemical potential of
component i in the hydrate cavity

μigaschemical potential of
component i in the hydrate former phase

μiwaterchemical potential
of component i in liquid/gas or solid water

μH2OWaterchemical potential
of water
in liquid/gas or solid water

μH2O0, Hchemical potential of
water in an empty hydrate cavity

μi∞chemical potential
of a component at infinite dilution

GiΨGibbs free
energy of a component at phase ψ

ΔGchange in
Gibbs free energy

ΔGTotaltotal change in Gibbs free
energy

ΔgikincImpact
on hydrate water from the inclusion of guest i in
cavity k

Hhydrate

Henthalpy

HikRresidual enthalpy
of a component inside the cavity

ΔHchange in
enthalpy

ΔSchange in
entropy

xiHmole fraction of
component i in the hydrate

xikHmole fraction of
component i in cavity k

xH2OHmole
fraction of
water in the hydrate

yigasmole fraction
of component i in the hydrate former phase

Jmass transport
rate

J0mass
transport flux

βinverse of Boltzmann’s
constant multiplied with temperature

mmass

c and ceqsupersaturated and equilibrium concentration

Cnumber
of components
(Gibbs phase rule)

Fdegree of freedom

Asurface area of a
crystal

Koverall transfer
coefficient

Kddiffusion
coefficient

Krreaction
coefficient

KBBoltzmann’s
constant

Uinternal energy

Uikresidualresidual
contribution of energy for the guest in the cavity

Sentropy

Njinumber of particles
of component j in phase i

nhydration/occupation
number

ΔUordUchange in energy
==== Refs
References
Nakamura T. ; Makino T. ; Sugahara T. ; Ohgaki K. 
Stability boundaries
of gas hydrates helped by methane—structure-H hydrates of methylcyclohexane
and cis-1, 2-dimethylcyclohexane . Chem. Eng.
Sci. 
2003 , 58 , 269 –273 . 10.1016/S0009-2509(02)00518-3 .
De
Roo J. L. ; Peters C. J. ; Lichtenthaler R. N. ; Diepen G. A. M. 
Occurrence of methane hydrate in saturated and unsaturated
solutions of sodium chloride and water in dependence of temperature
and pressure . AIChE J. 
1983 , 29 , 651 –657 . 10.1002/aic.690290420 .
Kvamme B. ; Tanaka H. 
Thermodynamic stability of hydrates for ethane, ethylene,
and carbon dioxide . J. Phys. Chem. 
1995 , 99 , 7114 –7119 . 10.1021/j100018a052 .
Kvamme B.  Kinetics of Hydrate
Formation from Nucleation Theory . Int. J.
Offshore Polar Eng. 2002 , 12 .
Kvamme B.  Droplets of Dry
Ice and Cold Liquid CO2 for Self-Transport of CO2 to Large Depths . Int. J. Offshore Polar Eng. 2003 , 13 .
Kvamme B. ; Qasim M. ; Baig K. ; Kivelä P.-H. ; Bauman J. 
Hydrate phase transition kinetics
from Phase Field
Theory with implicit hydrodynamics and heat transport . Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control 
2014 , 29 , 263 10.1016/j.ijggc.2014.08.003 .
Kvamme B. ; Graue A. ; Buanes T. ; Kuznetsova T. ; Ersland G. 
Storage of CO2 in natural
gas hydrate reservoirs
and the effect of hydrate as an extra sealing in cold aquifers . Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control 
2007 , 1 , 236 –246 . 10.1016/S1750-5836(06)00002-8 .
Kvamme B. ; Kuznetsova T. ; Kivelæ P.-H. ; Bauman J. 
Can hydrate form in
carbon dioxide from dissolved water? . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2013 , 15 , 2063 –2074 . 10.1039/C2CP43061D .23264960 
Kvamme B. ; Aromada S. A. 
Risk of Hydrate
Formation during the Processing and
Transport of Troll Gas from the North Sea . J.
Chem. Eng. Data 
2017 , 62 , 2163 –2177 . 10.1021/acs.jced.7b00256 .
Kvamme B. ; Aromada S. A. 
Alternative Routes
to Hydrate Formation during Processing
and Transport of Natural Gas with a Significant Amount of CO2: Sleipner Gas as a Case Study . J. Chem. Eng.
Data 
2018 , 63 , 832 –844 . 10.1021/acs.jced.7b00983 .
Kvamme B. ; Kuznetsova T. ; Bauman J. M. ; Sjöblom S. ; Avinash Kulkarni A. 
Hydrate Formation
during Transport of Natural Gas Containing
Water and Impurities . J. Chem. Eng. Data 
2016 , 61 , 936 –949 . 10.1021/acs.jced.5b00787 .
Aromada S. A.  New Concept
for Evaluating the Risk of Hydrate Formation during Processing and
Transport of Hydrocarbons . Master’s Thesis,
Department of Physics and Technology, University of Bergen: Norway, 2017 .
Schuchardt D. ; Krause D.-G. G. ; Kulp D.  Environmental
Impact Assessment Europipe II in Germany: Offshore and Onshore Section ; Bioconsult Schuchardt & Scholle : Bremen, Germany , 1998 .
Gassco  . Europipe II . Available: http://www.gassco.no/hva-gjor-vi/ror-plattformer/europipe-II/ (Acessed on April 5, 2018).
Svandal A.  Modeling hydrate
phase transitions using mean-field approaches . Dissertation
for the Degree Philosophiae Doctor (PhD), University of Bergen: 2006 .
Denys F. ; de Vries W.  Gas Composition Transition
Agency Report 2013 ; Gas Composition Transition
Agency : Assen, The Netherlands , 2013 .
Tegze G. ; Pusztai T. ; Tóth G. ; Gránásy L. ; Svandal A. ; Buanes T. ; Kuznetsova T. ; Kvamme B. 
Multiscale approach to CO2 hydrate formation
in aqueous solution: Phase field theory and molecular dynamics. Nucleation
and growth . J. Chem. Phys. 
2006 , 124 , 234710 10.1063/1.2207138 .16821944 
Svandal A. ; Kuznetsova T. ; Kvamme B. 
Thermodynamic properties and phase
transitions in the H2O/CO2/CH4 system . Fluid Phase Equilib. 
2006 , 246 , 177 –184 . 10.1016/j.fluid.2006.06.003 .
Falenty A. ; Salamatin A. N. ; Kuhs W. F. 
Kinetics of CO2-hydrate
formation from ice powders: Data summary and modeling extended to
low temperatures . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2013 , 117 , 8443 –8457 . 10.1021/jp310972b .
Salamatin A. N. ; Falenty A. ; Hansen T. C. ; Kuhs W. F. 
Guest migration
revealed in CO2 clathrate hydrates . Energy Fuels 
2015 , 29 , 5681 –5691 . 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.5b01217 .
Peters B. ; Zimmermann N. E. R. ; Beckham G. T. ; Tester J. W. ; Trout B. L. 
Path sampling
calculation of methane diffusivity in natural gas hydrates from a
water-vacancy assisted mechanism . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
2008 , 130 , 17342 –17350 . 10.1021/ja802014m .19053189 
Davies S. R. ; Sloan E. D. ; Sum A. K. ; Koh C. A. 
In situ studies
of the mass transfer mechanism across a methane hydrate film using
high-resolution confocal raman spectroscopy . J. Phys. Chem. C 
2009 , 114 , 1173 –1180 . 10.1021/jp909416y .
Tuckerman M. E.  Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Molecular Simulation ; Oxford University
Press : 2010 .
Chapoy A. ; Mohammadi A. H. ; Richon D. ; Tohidi B. 
Gas solubility measurement
and modeling for methane–water and methane–ethane–n-butane–water
systems at low temperature conditions . Fluid
Phase Equilib. 
2004 , 220 , 111 –119 . 10.1016/j.fluid.2004.02.010 .
Servio P. ; Englezos P. 
Measurement of dissolved
methane in water in equilibrium
with its hydrate . J. Chem. Eng. Data 
2002 , 47 , 87 –90 . 10.1021/je0102255 .
Yang S. O. ; Cho S. H. ; Lee H. ; Lee C. S. 
Measurement and
prediction of phase equilibria for water+ methane in hydrate forming
conditions . Fluid Phase Equilib. 
2001 , 185 , 53 –63 . 10.1016/S0378-3812(01)00456-3 .
Buanes T.  Mean-field
approaches
applied to hydrate phase transition . Ph.D. Thesis,
University of Bergen: 2006 .
Kvamme B. ; Kuznetsova T. ; Kivelæ P.-H. 
Adsorption of water and carbon dioxide
on hematite and consequences for possible hydrate formation . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2012 , 14 , 4410 –4424 . 10.1039/c2cp23810a .22354372 
Austrheim M. H.  Evaluation
of Methane and Water Structure at a Hematite Surface - A Hydrate Prevention
Perspective . MSc Thesis, Department of Physics and
Technology, University of Bergen: Norway, September 2017 .
Nesse Knarvik A. B.  Examination of water and methane structuring at a
hematite surface
in the presence of MEG . MSc Thesis, Department of
Physics and Technology University of Bergen, Norway, September 2017 .
Mohammad N.  Heterogeneous
Hydrate Nucleation on Calcite [1014] and Kaolinite [001] Surfaces:
A Molecular Dynamics Simulation Study . Master’s
Thesis, Department of Physics and Technology University of Bergen:
Norway, June 2016 .
Makogon I. F. ; Makogon Y. F.  Hydrates of Hydrocarbons ; 1 st Ed.; Penn Well : Tulsa , ISBN-0-87814-618-7, 1997 , 189 –197 .
Kvamme B. 
Enthalpies
of hydrate formation from hydrate formers dissolved in water . Energies 
2019 , 12 , 1039 10.3390/en12061039 .
Kvamme B. ; Aromada S. A. ; Gjerstad P. B. 
Consistent
Enthalpies of the Hydrate
Formation and Dissociation Using Residual Thermodynamics . J. Chem. Eng. Data 
2019 , 64 , 3493 –3504 . 10.1021/acs.jced.9b00276 .
Kang S.-P. ; Lee H. ; Ryu B.-J. 
Enthalpies of Dissociation of Clathrate Hydrates of
Carbon Dioxide, Nitrogen, (Carbon Dioxide + Nitrogen), and (Carbon
Dioxide + Nitrogen + Tetrahydrofuran) . J. Chem.Thermodyn. 
2001 , 33 , 513 –521 . 10.1006/jcht.2000.0765 .
Kvamme B. 
Thermodynamic
limitations of the CO2/N2 mixture injected into
CH4 hydrate in the Ignik Sikumi field trial . J. Chem. Eng. Data 
2016 , 61 , 1280 –1295 . 10.1021/acs.jced.5b00930 .
Kvamme B. ; Aromada S. A. ; Saeidi N. 
Heterogeneous and homogeneous hydrate
nucleation in CO2/water systems . J. Cryst. Growth 
2019 , 522 , 160 –174 . 10.1016/j.jcrysgro.2019.06.015 .

