
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03744ArticleStudy
on the Mechanism of Nanoemulsion Removal of Water Locking Damage and
Compatibility of Working Fluids in Tight Sandstone Reservoirs Wang Jie †‡Li Yafei †‡Zhou Fujian *†‡Yao Erdong †‡Zhang Le †‡Yang Hong §† The Unconventional
Natural Gas Institute, China University
of Petroleum, Beijing 102249, China‡ State Key Laboratory
of Petroleum Resource and Prospecting, China
University of Petroleum, Beijing 102249, China§ Exploration
& Development Research Center Yanchang Petroleum Group Co. Ltd, Shan’xi 710075, China* E-mail: zhoufj@cup.edu.cn.05 02 2020 18 02 2020 5 6 2910 2919 05 11 2019 27 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The invasion of external fluids, because
of hydraulic fracturing for tight sandstone gas reservoirs, will cause
the decrease of fracture conductivity and rock matrix permeability
and decrease the flow of oil and gas. The nanoemulsion has a smaller
molecular size and is used in combination with the fracturing fluid.
After entering the formation, it can reduce the surface tension of
gas/water, change the wettability of the rock surface, and improve
the flowback rate of the fracturing fluid. In
this study, a set of systematic evaluation methods was established
in the laboratory to evaluate the mechanism and effect of removal
of water locking additive in tight sandstone gas reservoirs. The adsorption
experimental results of the nanoemulsion on the rock surface show
that the adsorption of the nanoemulsion on the solid-phase particle
surface is from strong to weak in the order of smectite, kaolinite,
DB105X well rock powder, quartz sand, illite, chlorite, and ceramsite
proppant. The experiment on the influence of the nanoemulsion on the
spontaneous imbibition of reservoir rocks shows that when the gas
permeability of reservoir rocks is Kg <
5.0 mD, adding a nanofluid in the working fluid to change the wettability
of reservoir rocks can effectively reduce the imbibition and retention
of external fluids in reservoir rocks, thus reducing the “water
locking damage”. When the gas permeability of reservoir rocks
is 5.0 mD < Kg ≤ 1.0 D, the
effect of changing the reservoir wettability to prevent the “water
locking damage” is reduced. At the same time, the nanoemulsion
has good compatibility with different types of fracturing fluid and
is beneficial for improving the flowback rate.

document-id-old-9ao9b03744document-id-new-14ao9b03744ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
As the global demand for oil and gas increases,
developers strive to maximize the production through more advanced
technologies, such as horizontal well and high-temperature well drilling,
whereas more and more technologies are being applied to the exploitation
of unconventional oil and gas resources. Unconventional natural gas
resources have played an increasingly important role in the current
energy supply. At present, unconventional natural gas production accounts
for more than 43% of the current energy supply in the United States,
whereas tight sandstone natural gas accounts for approximately 70%
of unconventional production, and most of the reserves are not developed.1,2 In the process of the hydraulic fracturing of tight oil and gas
reservoirs, a large amount of water is pumped into the formation,
and only 5–50% of the water can flow back.3−6 Most of the
water will remain in the fractures and tight reservoirs formed after
fracturing7 and the water remaining in
the fracture network will reduce the fracture conductivity, whereas
the invasion of water in the reservoir matrix will cause “water
locking damage” and decrease the flow of hydrocarbons.8,9 In order to improve the flowback rate in the process of fracturing,
new chemical agents need to be added to the fracturing fluid to reduce
“water locking damage”. From fracturing to the completion
of the flowback, the formation of “water locking damage”
in the whole process can be divided into the following two stages.(1) It is a common phenomenon
that the initial water saturation Swi is
lower than the irreducible water saturation Swirr in the tight sandstone reservoir.10 At this time, the reservoir is in the state of ultralow water cut,
and there is excess capillary pressure in the reservoir. The external
fluid is easily sucked into the pores when in contact with the reservoir.
The injected fluid in the process of fracturing will penetrate into
the formation and reduce the relative permeability of the invading
gas, and the gas permeability near the fracture is reduced to 0 mD.
It can be known from the capillary force, Formula 1, that when the surface tension σ of
the inflow fluid and the gas phase is reduced and the triphase contact
angle θ of the rock/inflow fluid/gas is close to 90°, the
initial excess capillary force can be reduced, thus reducing the initial
self-priming water volume and the “water locking damage”.11,12

 1  

In the formula, Pcap—capillary
force, σ—surface tension of inflow fluid and gas phase,
θ—triphase contact angle of rock/inflow fluid/gas, r—capillary radius.(2) After the completion of fracturing, the untimely flowback
of the fracturing fluid and other external fluids and the capillary
resistance of the tight sandstone pore throat will cause a large amount
of fracturing fluid to remain in the reservoirs and form “water
locking damage”. Formula 2 is the time required for discharging a liquid column of length L from a capillary of radius r.

 2  

In the formula, r-capillary
radius, L-liquid column length, P-drive pressure, μ-viscosity of the external fluid, σ-surface
tension of the inflow fluid and gas phase, and θ-triphase contact
angle of rock/inflow fluid/gas. It can be seen that the smaller the
capillary radius r is, the longer the drainage time
will be. With the flowback processing, the liquid is gradually discharged
from the large to small capillary, and the discharge speed decreases
afterward. The tight gas reservoir has a small throat radius, obvious
pore tortuosity, tremendous specific surface area, outstanding liquid
adsorption capacity, and extremely difficult drainage, and it is difficult
to effectively remove the water phase trap damage, which is serious.13−16

To sum up, keeping the capillary radius constant while making the
surface tension between the inflow fluid and the gas phase reduced
and the tri-phase contact angle of the rock/inflow fluid/gas close
to 90° is the most effective way to remove the “water
locking damage” caused by fracturing or other operations. σ
and θ are parameters related to capillary force.12,13 Li and Firoozabadi (2000) first used fluorine-containing chemicals
to change the wettability of the reservoir rocks to gas phase wettability,
and studied the effect of wettability transformation on reducing the
core liquid phase saturation through the experiments of the wettability
angle test, self-priming, and core flow.16 Since then, Noh and Firoozabadi used alcohol-based surfactants to
induce reservoir rocks to have gas phase wettability.17 Sharifzadeh, Hassanajili et al. respectively developed
polymer surfactants containing fluorine groups to make the rock surface
hydrophobic/hydrophobic.18 Karandish, Rahimpour
et al. used anionic fluorochemicals to improve the wettability of
carbonate reservoirs19 and combined scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) with the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) method
to analyze the absorption of chemical agents on the rock surface.
Aminnaji, Fazeli et al. and Gahrooei and Ghazanfari used water-based
fluorinated nanofluids to wet and change carbonate and sandstone reservoir
rocks. The results show that nanofluids make the rock surface hydrophobic/hydrophobic
while increasing the liquid fluidity.20,21

Because
of the high price and environmental protection problems of fluorocarbon
surfactants, they have not been widely promoted and applied, and they
are still in the stage of indoor experiments. Therefore, it is particularly
necessary to develop and apply nonfluorocarbon nanosurfactants for
tight sandstone gas reservoirs. In this study, a set of systematic
evaluation methods was established in the laboratory to evaluate the
mechanism and effect of removal of water locking additive in tight
sandstone gas reservoirs. The environmentally friendly removal of
water locking damage nanoemulsion CNDAD1# was synthesized by the nanodispersion
emulsion method, and then the basic physical and chemical properties
of the nanoemulsion were evaluated, including surface tension reduction,
wettability improvement, static, dynamic, and microscopic adsorption
properties, and so forth. In order to clarify “water locking
damage” reduced by a nanoemulsion in reservoir rocks, the influence
of different permeability core wettabilities on a self-priming amount
was studied through the core spontaneous imbibition experiment. Finally,
the nanoemulsion is mixed with the slick water and the guar fracturing
fluid to determine the compounding performance of the additive and
the ability to reduce the “water locking damage”.

2 Results and Discussions
2.1 Surface Tension Test
In the process of hydraulic fracturing of tight sandstone gas reservoirs,
when the external liquid is in the initial contact with the reservoir
rocks, the nanoemulsion in the solution is not completely adsorbed
on the rock surface. Therefore, according to the capillary force formula,
the lower the gas–liquid surface tension is, the smaller the
resistance of the liquid into the reservoir will be, which is conducive
to the fluid flowing into the deep part of the gas reservoirs and
releasing the nanoemulsion in the solution to achieve the deep improvement
effect. Therefore, it is particularly important whether the nanoemulsion
can reduce the surface tension of the injected liquid. As shown in Figure 1, when no chemical
agent was added to the distilled water, the surface tension of “air–water”
measured in the laboratory is 72.71 mN/m. When the concentration of
the nanoemulsion in the solution increases from 0.05 to 0.5 wt %,
the surface tension of “air–water” decreases
from 31.08 to 28.14 mN/m, which is not a significant decrease. But
compared with water, when the concentration is 0.05 wt %, the surface
tension of the solution decreases by 43.67 mN/m, which significantly
reduces the “air–water” surface tension.

Figure 1 Surface tension test
of different concentrations of the nanosolution.

2.2 Static Contact Angle Measurements
From the above experimental results, the liquid containing the
nanoemulsion will preferentially enter the reservoir, but the efficient
flowback of the external fluid after the completion of the fracturing
is also one of the factors to evaluate the low damage of the external
fluid to the reservoir. In the process of the flowback of the fracturing
fluid, the gas in the gas reservoirs displaced the liquid in the reservoir
into the fracture and the wellbore, and changed the water phase wettability
on the rock surface into a nonwetting phase, which is not only conducive
to stripping the water phase off the rock surface, but also changed
the capillary force during the gas driving water phase into power.
In order to clarify the influence of the amount of nanoemulsion on
the wettability of the reservoir rocks, the wettability reversal effect
and the optimal amount of the chemical agent on the solid surface
were determined. After the same soaking time of 24 H, the “air–water”
contact angle of the rock surface after soaking in different concentrations
of nanoemulsion was measured. As shown in Figure 2, the “air–water” contact
angle of the solid phase surface without the nanoemulsion is 38.5°,
whereas with the increase of the nanoemulsion, the “air–water”
contact angle of the rock surface increased to 112.9°, indicating
that the water phase completely changed from the wetting phase to
the nonwetting phase in the solid phase. Therefore, the nanoemulsion
of 0.5 wt % concentration is the optimal amount.

Figure 2 Static contact
angle
measurement of a core soaked in different concentrations of nanofluid
(“air–water” contact angle, soaked for 24 H).

Figure 3 shows the air–water
static contact angle measured after soaking of the rock slice in the
0.5 wt % nanoemulsion for different time periods. The measurement
time was 0, 6, 12, 24, 48 H, respectively, corresponding to the average
contact angle of 38.5, 95.3, 104.4, 112.9, and 126.0°. According
to the experimental results, with the increase of the soaking time,
the contact angle of air–water on the sandstone surface increases
gradually. When the immersion time is 6 H, the average contact angle
changes the most, from 38.5° at the initial time to 95.3°
with the increase of 56.8°, the water phase changes to the nonwetting
phase; with the increase of soaking time, the contact angular variation
gradually decreases, indicating that the adsorption amount of the
chemical agent on the sandstone surface gradually reaches the dynamic
equilibrium.

Figure 3 Relation
curve between soaking time of the rock in a chemical agent and the
contact angle.

2.3 Macroscopic
Adsorption Experiments
Based on the above studies, it can
be known that the nanoemulsion solution and the gas phase have lower
surface tension and can preferentially enter the deep part of the
reservoir, and change the rock water phase wettability into a nonwetting
phase. However, the adsorption capacity of the nanoemulsion on the
rock surface is the key to determine whether nanoemulsion can enter
the deep part of the reservoir and play a role. The following two
studies were conducted to study the static and dynamic adsorption
capacity of the nanoemulsion on the surface of the reservoir rock
and different clay minerals.

2.3.1 Static Adsorption Experiment
Wang et al. studied the
static adsorption performance of the DB105X well rock powder with
different meshes on the 0.5 wt % CNDAD1# nanosolution, and found that
the larger the mesh of the rock powder is, the stronger the adsorption
performance of chemical agents will be.23 Also, the signal of the chemical agent decreased the most in the
initial 20 min, and basically tends to a balance at 60 min. In addition
to quartz sand, the tight sandstone reservoir rocks also contain other
kinds of clay minerals, which are the main adsorbing substances of
chemical agents. Therefore, it is necessary to further study the adsorption
strength of different kinds of clay minerals on chemical agents.

Figure 4 shows the
results of static adsorption experiments of different types of clay
minerals and solid phase particles with a 100/120 mesh on nanoemulsions.
According to the experimental results, most of the clay minerals and
solid phase particles have the highest adsorption capacity when the
nanoemulsion is statically adsorbed at 20 min, and reach the adsorption
equilibrium at 60 min. The adsorption capacity of different substances
to nanoemulsions is from strong to weak in the order montmorillonite,
kaolinite, DB105X well rock powder, quartz sand, illite, chlorite,
and ceramsite proppant. It was measured by a spectrophotometer that
the signal strength of the solution after immersion in the ceramsite
proppant did not change with the increase of soaking time. The results
showed that the adsorption amount of ceramsite proppant to the nanoemulsion
is small, which was conducive to the imbibition of more effective
components of the nanosolution into the formation after fracturing
and the interaction with reservoir rocks. The adsorption capacity
of nanoemulsions on different mineral surfaces is different, which
is related to mineral composition and surface morphology, including
monolayer adsorption and multilayer adsorption.

Figure 4 Signal strength curve of the nanosolution with
time after
immersion in different clay minerals.

According to
the results, if the content of montmorillonite and kaolinite in the
rocks is high, the adsorption amount of the nanoemulsion is large,
and the effect of the deep part of the nanosolution is weakened. The
content of quartz sand in DB105X rock powder is 68.8%, and the adsorption
amount of the nanoemulsion is relatively small, which is conducive
to the nanosolution to have more effective content into the deep part
of the formation. The combined effect of different mineral compositions
in the reservoir rocks ensures the nanoemulsion absorbed on their
surface and has a deep effect.

2.3.2 Dynamic Adsorption Experiment
Different
from the static adsorption experiment of the nanoemulsion, the dynamic
adsorption experiment is mainly to evaluate the dynamic adsorption
capacity of the nanoemulsion during deep migration. When the nanoemulsion
is injected into the formation together with the fracturing fluid
for reservoir stimulation, the nanoemulsion will adsorb on the rock
surface, and the concentration of the nanoemulsion will decrease,
corresponding to the surface tension change of the outlet production
fluid. The initial concentration of the solution was 0.5 wt % CNDAD1#
nanosolution, the corresponding surface tension was 28.14 mN/m, and
the surface tension of 2 wt % KCl brine solution was 69.82 mN/m. Figure 5 shows the solution
surface tension curves of different types of solid phase particles
and the injected PV number. It can be seen from the diagram that the
adsorption strength of the different solid phase particles on the
nanoemulsion is consistent with the results of the static adsorption
experimental results. When injected into 6 PV, the surface tension
of the outlet liquid of montmorillonite and kaolinite still has a
decreasing trend, whereas that of other solid phase particles tends
to be stable when injected into 3 PV. Therefore, the more components
of montmorillonite and kaolinite there are in the reservoirs, the
less effective the content of the injected liquid will be deep in
the reservoir.

Figure 5 Relation of
surface tension
and PV number at different types of solid phase particles.

2.4 Microscopic Adsorption Experiment
The microscopic effects
of nanoemulsions on the surface of different types of solid phase
particles are studied below to further explain the wettability improvement
mechanism of nanoemulsions. The change of surface morphology can be
observed by SEM imaging technology. Figure 6a–d is the SEM scans of the surface
of the main clay minerals and rock powder in the reservoir rocks before
the nanoemulsion treatment. Compared with the change of surface morphology
before and after the treatment shown in Figure 7a–d, it can be known that after the
nano-emulsion treatment, the surface roughness of different types
of solid phase particles increased, and the surface roughness of montmorillonite
and DX105X rock powder changed the most. Gahrooei and Ghazanfari believe
that the gas-wetting reversal agent achieves a hydrophobic effect
mainly by adsorbing on the surface of the solid phase, increasing
its roughness and reducing the free energy of the solid surface.21 Therefore, after adsorbing on the surface of
different types of solid phase particles, the nanoemulsion can change
the roughness of the solid phase surface and reduce the free energy
of the solid phase surface material to achieve the effect of wettability
change.

Figure 6 SEM scans of
different solid phase particles before treatment with a nanowetting
agent.

Figure 7 SEM scans of different solid phase particles
after treatment
with a nanowetting agent.

2.5 Influence
of Nanoemulsion on the Spontaneous Imbibition of Reservoir Rocks
From Section 2.1–2.4, it is known that the nanoemulsion
preferentially enters the reservoir by reducing the gas/liquid surface
tension, and adsorbs on the rock surface to change the rock wettability
of rock surface to a non-water-wetting phase. The following rock spontaneous
imbibition experiment is used to study the influence of the change
of rock surface wettability on water absorption volume. In this experiment,
the DB105X well core was selected with permeability distributed in
three ranges (gas permeability Kg ≤
0.1 mD, 0.1 mD < Kg ≤ 5.0 mD,
5.0 mD < Kg ≤ 1.0 D). The core
was 2.5 cm in diameter and 1.5–2.0 cm in length. The core surface
was treated with different concentrations of nanosolutions to obtain
different wettability cores distributed in three permeability ranges. Figures 8–10 shows the corresponding spontaneous
imbibition amount relation curves when the core wettability of different
gas permeabilities changes.

Figure 8 When Kg ≤
0.1 mD, the influence of permeability and wettability on core imbibition
quantity. (a) Influence of permeability on imbibition quantity. (b)
Influence of wettability on imbibition quantity.

Figure 9 When 0.1 mD
< Kg < 5.0 mD, the influence of
permeability
and wettability on core imbibition quantity. (a) Influence of permeability
on imbibition quantity. (b) Influence of wettability on imbibition
quantity.

Figure 10 Influence of permeability and wettability
on core self-priming
amount. (a) Influence of permeability on imbibition quantity. (b)
Influence of wettability on imbibition quantity.

As shown in Figure 8a,b, when the core gas permeability is Kg ≤ 0.1 mD, the correlation coefficients R2 obtained by the fitting curve are 0.4021 and
0.5421, respectively. It indicates that when Kg < 0.1 mD, the core self-priming amount is affected by
both the gas permeability and the wetting angle. However, the wettability
correlation coefficient is higher than the permeability, so in this
range, the influence of wettability on the imbibition quantity is
greater than permeability. According to the results, the larger the
“air–water” wetting angle is, the smaller the
imbibition quantity will be; the lower the permeability is, the larger
the imbibition quantity will be.

As shown in Figure 9a,b, when the core gas permeability
is 0.1 mD < Kg < 5.0 mD, the correlation
coefficients R2 obtained by the fitting
curve are 0.5619 and 0.5832, respectively. It indicates that when
0.1 mD < Kg < 5.0 mD, the core self-priming
amount is affected by both the gas permeability and the wetting angle
and the difference between them is small. According to the results,
the larger the “air–water” wetting angle is,
the smaller the imbibition quantity will be; the lower the permeability
is, the larger the imbibition quantity will be.

As shown in Figure 10a,b, when the core
gas permeability is 5.0 mD < Kg <
1.0 D, the correlation coefficients R2 obtained by the fitting formula are 0.8549 and 0.1086, respectively.
As the correlation coefficient between core imbibition quantity and
permeability is much higher than that of wettability, it indicates
that the core imbibition quantity is mainly affected by gas permeability
when 0.1 mD < Kg < 5.0 mD, whereas
the wetting angle has relatively less influence on imbibition quantity.
Similarly, the larger the “air–water” wetting
angle is, the smaller the imbibition quantity will be; the lower the
permeability is, the larger the imbibition quantity will be.

Analysis of the above three cases shows that when the gas permeability
of reservoir rock is Kg ≤ 0.1 mD
and 0.1 mD < Kg < 5.0 mD, adding
nanofluid to the working fluid to change the wettability of the reservoir
rock can effectively reduce the imbibition and retention of external
fluid in the reservoir rock, thus reducing “water locking damage”.
When the gas permeability of the reservoir rock is 5.0 mD < Kg ≤ 1.0 D, the effect of reducing the
“water locking damage” by changing the reservoir wettability
will be reduced.

2.6 Study on Compatibility of the Nanoemulsion with Different Working
Fluids
The interaction mechanism between the nanoemulsion,
gas, and reservoir rock as well as the effect of reducing the imbibition
quantity of the reservoir rock were studied above. However, in the
practical application of the nanoemulsion, it is often used in combination
with slick water, guar gum fracturing fluid, and other working fluids.
Therefore, it is necessary to study the compatibility between nanoemulsions
and different working fluids. The compatibility of the nanoemulsion
with slick water, guar gum fracturing fluid, and other working fluids
was studied.

2.6.1 Study
on Compatibility of Nanoemulsion and Slickwater Fracturing Fluid
The main performance indexes of the slick water fracturing fluid
include solution surface tension, kinematic viscosity, drag reduction
rate, and residual liquid flowback rate after fracturing. The surface
tension of the slick water solution was prepared by using 0.05 wt
% DR800 drag reducing agent to be 53.43 mN/m, the surface tension
of the solution was reduced to 32.88 mN/m after adding a 0.5 wt %
nanofluid into the mix with the slick water solution, indicating that
the nanofluid has the effect of reducing the surface tension of the
slick water, and the lower capillary force is conducive for the flowback
of the slick water after the completion of fracturing. Before and
after the addition of the nanofluid, the kinematic viscosity of the
slick water fracturing fluid was 1.383 and 1.331 mm2/s,
respectively, and the difference between the two was not significant,
and the kinematic viscosity of the slick water was not affected.

The drag reduction rate of different concentrations of nanoemulsions
was measured by the loop method.24 The
result is shown in Figure 11. According to the test results, when the nanoemulsion is
added to the slick water solution at a relatively high flow rate,
the difference is small. When the linear flow rate is lower than 3
m/s, the nanoemulsion is conducive to improving the drag reduction
rate of the slip water solution, reducing the frictional energy consumption
in the process of fracturing, and improving the fracturing effect. Figure 12 shows the experimental
results of the flowback rate of the sand filling pipe after the compatibility
of slick water and different concentrations of the nanoemulsion. The
sand filling pipe is uniformly filled with 100/120 mesh quartz sand
with a length of 50 cm, and the permeability of the four groups of
sand filling pipe is about 1 D, which is used to simulate the flowback
rate of slick water in the fracture with high conductivity formed
after fracturing. According to the results, with the increase of the
concentration of the nanoemulsion in the slick water, the flowback
rate of the slick water in the sand filling tube gradually increases.
When the concentration of the nanoemulsion is 0.5 wt %, the flowback
rate of the slick water can be increased by more than 15%. Therefore,
the mixing of the nanoemulsion with the slick water fracturing fluid
can not only improve the performance parameters of the slick water,
but also improve the flowback after fracturing and reduce the “water
locking damage” of the reservoir.

Figure 11 Experimental
results
of drag reduction rate after the compatibility of slick water and
different concentrations of the nanoemulsion.

Figure 12 Experimental
results
of the flowback rate of the sand filling pipe after the compatibility
of slick water and different concentrations of the nano-emulsion.

2.6.2 Study on Compatibility of the Nanoemulsion
and the Guar Fracturing Fluid
The main performance indexes
of the guar fracturing fluid include shear resistance, gel breaking
performance, residue content, surface tension, viscosity, and flowback
rate of the gel breaking fluid. In this study, a high-temperature-resistant
guar fracturing fluid formula was adopted: 0.5 wt % guar gum +0.3%
wt YC-150 stabilizer +0.4 wt % YP-150 cross-linker +0.1 wt % gel breaker.
Different concentrations of the nanoemulsion were added to the fracturing
fluid, and the relevant properties of the guar gum fracturing fluid
before and after the addition were tested.

Different concentrations
of the nanoemulsion were mixed with the guar fracturing fluid and
put into a beaker, and then the beaker was placed in an 80 °C
water bath. After 4 H, all the guar fracturing fluids with different
concentrations of the nanoemulsion were broken. The concentration
of CNDAD1# was 0.0, 0.10, 0.25, and 0.50 wt %, respectively; the corresponding
residue content of the guar fracturing fluid was 0.01407, 0.01199,
0.01105, and 0.01155 wt %; the kinematic viscosity was 1.053, 1.008,
0.988, 0.937 mm2/s; surface tension was 31.97, 31.83, 31.42,
30.93 mN/m. Under the action of the nanoemulsion, the guar fracturing
fluid is more thoroughly broken, which has the effect of reducing
the residue content of the guar fracturing fluid. At the same time,
the nanoemulsion also has the effect of reducing the kinematic viscosity
and surface tension of the gel breaking fluid.

Figure 13 shows the shear resistance
of the guar fracturing fluid under different concentrations of the
nanoemulsion. According to the results, when the concentration of
the nano-emulsion in the guar gum fracturing fluid is different, shearing
at 170 S–1, 150 °C for 60 min, the viscosity
of the fracturing fluid remains above 100 mPa.s, and the nano-emulsion
does not affect the shear resistance of the guar fracturing fluid. Figure 14 shows the results
of the flowback rate of the sand filling pipe after the compatibility
of the guar fracturing fluid and the different concentrations of the
nanoemulsion. With the increase of the concentration of the nano-emulsion
in the gel-breaking fracturing fluid, the flowback rate of the gel-breaking
fluid in the sand filling pipe gradually increased, and when the concentration
of the nanoemulsion is 0.5 wt %, the flowback rate of the gel breaking
fluid can reach more than 16%.

Figure 13 Shear
resistance of the guar fracturing fluid under different concentrations
of the nanoemulsion.

Figure 14 Flowback rate of the
sand filling pipe
after the compatibility of the guar fracturing fluid and different
concentrations of the nanoemulsion.

According to the experimental
study on the compatibility of the nanoemulsion and different working
fluids, it can be known that the original properties of the solution
will not be changed when the nano-emulsion is mixed with the slick
water and the guar fracturing fluid. The experiment of the sand filling
tube shows that the nano-emulsion can effectively reduce the surface
tension of the solution. At the same time, combining with the results
of the wetting reversal experiment, it can be known that the nanoemulsion
in the flowback liquid adsorbed on the surface of the sandstone and
improved the flowback efficiency of the working fluid by changing
the wettability of the solid phase medium and reducing the capillary
resistance of the gas phase displacement liquid, and so forth.

3 Conclusions
During hydraulic fracture of tight sandstone reservoirs, a large
amount of water is filtered to the formation, and nanoemulsion CNDAD1#
can be added as an additive into the fracturing fluid to alleviate
the “water locking damage” caused by the invasion of
external water. The nanofluid synthesized by the microemulsion method
has a particle size as low as 160 nm, which solves the injectivity
problem of chemical agents in tight sandstone reservoirs. The main
conclusions are as follows:(1) The nanoemulsion has an effect of reducing the surface tension
of the solution and changing the surface wettability of the solid
phase particles. The surface tension of the gas–liquid of 0.5
wt % nanosolution is as low as 28.14 mN/m, and the contact angle of
the water surface of the rock surface can be changed to 126.0°.

(2) Static and dynamic adsorption
experiments show that the adsorption of nanoemulsion on the surface
of solid phase particles is from strong to weak in order to be montmorillonite,
kaolinite, DB105X well rock powder, quartz sand, illite, chlorite,
and ceramsite proppant. The static adsorption has the fastest adsorption
speed in the initial 20 min and tends to balance in about 60 min;
montmorillonite and kaolinite still did not reach the dynamic adsorption
equilibrium when injected at 6 PV, whereas other solid phase particles
reached dynamic adsorption equilibrium when injected at 3 PV.

(3) Experiments on the influence
of wettability and permeability on the spontaneous imbibition of rock
show that when the gas permeability of the reservoir rock is Kg < 5.0 mD, adding nanoemulsion into the
working fluid to change the wettability of the reservoir rock can
effectively reduce the imbibition and retention of external fluid
in reservoir rock, thus reducing “water locking damage”.
While the gas permeability of reservoir rock is 5.0 mD < Kg ≤ 1.0 D, the effect of preventing “water
locking damage” will be reduced by changing the wettability
of the reservoirs.

(4) According to the experimental study on the compatibility between
nanoemulsion and different working fluids, it can be known that the
original properties of the solution will not be changed when the nanoemulsion
is mixed with the slick water and the guar fracturing fluid. The experiment
of the sand filling tube shows that the nanoemulsion can improve the
flowback rate of the slick water and the working fluid after fracturing.
Therefore, in the actual fracturing operation, the nanoemulsion can
be added into the fracturing fluid to improve the flowback rate of
the low-permeability reservoir fracturing fluid, so as to reduce the
invasion damage of the external fluid to the reservoir.



4 Experiment Discussions
4.1 Experimental Material and
Equipment
4.1.1 Synthesis
Method of Waterproof Lock nanoemulsion CNDAD1#
The nanoemulsion
CNDAD1# was synthesized by the nanodispersion emulsion method in the
laboratory, mainly composed of water phase, oil phase, and surfactant.
The selected nanofluid (CNDAD1#) is formed by a dilute suspension
of nanoscale oil droplets (i.e., nanomicelles) in brine. CNDAD1# consists
of approximately 10 wt % alkane and/or olefin as the oil core of the
micelle, 30–50 wt % nonionic surfactant (e.g., alcohol ethoxylate)
to stabilize the micelle, and 20–40 wt % alcohol as the cosolvent.
To prepare the CNDAD1# auxiliary fracturing fluid, the stock solution
was diluted to 0.00–0.50 wt % and mixed with 2 wt % KCl in
distilled water. As CNDAD1# is a microemulsion, it has long-term stability
at room temperature.22 This method is conducive
to fluid preparation and transportation. The synthesis method is shown
in Figure 15.

Figure 15 Nanowetting
fluid synthesis
composite map.

The Zetasizer Nanolaser nanoparticle size analyzer is used to measure
its particle size and the results are shown in Figure 16. The two measured nanoparticle sizes were
160.8 and 160.9 nm, respectively. Because of the small pore throat
size of the tight sandstone reservoir, the gas wetting chemical agent
has nanometer size and is one of the prerequisites for achieving its
injectability.

Figure 16 Nanometer particle test diagram of the
0.5 wt % CNDAD1#
solution.

4.1.2 Core & Clay Mineral Sample Preparation
The core of the
experiment was taken from the natural core of the DB105X well in Tarim
Oilfield at the depth of 4762.79 m. The mineral composition obtained
through X-ray diffraction (XRD) mineral analysis is shown in Table 1, which belongs to
the sandstone core. Then, the natural core was washed with a Soxhlet
extractor and dried in an oven at 80 °C for 48 H for the next
experiment. Different types of clay minerals (montmorillonite, kaolinite,
quartz sand, illite, chlorite) with a mesh number of 100/120 mesh
were selected for the adsorption performance test.

Table 1 DB105X Well Core
XRD Mineral Composition
types of minerals	quartz	albite	titanomagnetite	illite	chlorite	
mol %	68.80	10.10	3.20	8.60	9.30	
The experiments
mainly include the particle size measurement of the CNDAD1# nanoemulsion,
the effect evaluation of the nanoagent on reducing the solution surface
tension and wetting revise, the macro- and microadsorption performance
evaluation of the nanoemulsion on the clay mineral surface, core spontaneous
imbibition experiment, the compatibility test of the nanofluid and
different working fluids, and so forth. The main experimental equipment
includes a UK Zetasizer Nanolaser nanometer particle size analyzer,
Japan XRD-6000 X-ray diffractometer, China JYW-200A automatic table
interface tension meter, China JY-PHb contact angle tester, China
L5 UV–visible spectrophotometer, spontaneous imbibition experimental
device, sand filling tube, and so forth. The experimental process
is shown in Figure 17, drawn by the first author Jie Wang.

Figure 17 Flow chart of the experimental study
on the mechanism
of the CNDAD1# nanoemulsion.

4.2 Mainly Experimental Section
4.2.1 Surface Tension Test
First, distilled water and alcohol were used to calibrate interface
tension meter; then, CNDAD1# nanosolutions of different concentrations
were prepared, and the surface tension between the solution and air
is tested by the lifting ring method five times for each concentration,
and then the arithmetic mean value was taken.

4.2.2 Static Contact Angle Measurements
The dry rock pieces were placed on the stage of the contact angle
tester, and 10 μL of 2 wt % KCL brine solution was dropped onto
the surface with a micropipette. The droplet image was taken with
a digital microscope, and the contact angle of “air–brine”
was measured and calculated by the analysis software; then, the rock
was dried in an 80 °C oven for 24 H, and the rock pieces were
placed in different concentrations of the CNDAD1# nanosolution. After
soaking at room temperature, the rock pieces were taken out in different
time periods and dried in an 80 °C oven for 24 H. The same method
was used to test the wetting angle of the dried rock pieces after
the chemical treatment.

4.2.3 Macroscopic Adsorption Experiments
First, the optimal
wavelength of the CNDAD1# nanosolution was determined by a spectrophotometer
and it was set as the test wavelength of the static adsorption experiment.
Wang et al. found that the optimal wavelength of the CNDAD1# nanosolution
is 213.4 nm, corresponding to the signal strength of 3.771 A (as shown
in Figure 18) and
obtained the standard concentration measurement curve of the CNDAD1#
nanosolution, as shown in Figure 19.23

Figure 18 Optimal
wavelength measurement curve
of nanosolution CNDAD1#.

Figure 19 Standard CNDAD1# concentration
measurement
curve.

4.2.3.1 Static Adsorption Experiment
In addition to quartz sand, the tight sandstone reservoir rocks also
contain montmorillonite, illite, kaolinite, chlorite and other ingredients.
In order to study whether there are differences between different
components on the adsorption properties of nanoemulsion, different
types of clay minerals with the same mesh number (100/120) were selected,
respectively, and the signal strength of the nanosolutions after the
immersion of different clay minerals was tested to determine the adsorption
capacity of different clay minerals on the nanoemulsion, whereas the
fluid passed through the ceramsite proppant during fracturing. Therefore,
the adsorption performance of the proppant surface also needs to be
considered. The main experimental steps are as follows: weigh respectively
six parts of 1 g of 100/120 mesh, different kinds of clay minerals,
and solid particles (including DB105X well reservoir rock powder,
pure quartz sand, ceramsite proppant, montmorillonite, illite, kaolinite,
chlorite) into a beaker; weigh 20 g of 0.5 wt % CNDAD1# nanosolution
and pour it into another beaker; soak them for different time periods
at room temperature and make the centrifuge rotate for 30 min under
3000 rpm to separate the solid phase and the liquid; take the supernatant
liquid to measure the spectrophotometric values of 20, 40, 60 min,
3, 6, and 24 h. The spectrophotometric curves of different numbers
of rock powders at different times were drawn. The adsorption speed
and strength of nano-emulsion on different components were determined
by spectrophotometric values.

4.2.3.2 Dynamic Adsorption Experiment
For a
100/120 mesh, different
kinds of clay minerals and proppant were uniformly mixed according
to 3:7, and then filled in different sand filling glass tubes. As
the nanosolution adsorbed on the mineral surface after flowing through
the sand filling tube, the surface tension of the outflow liquid changed.
By testing the surface tension value of the 0.5 wt % CNDAD1# nanosolution
before and after flowing through the sand filling tube, the adsorption
strength of different clay minerals on the nanoemulsion was determined.
At the same time, the surface tension values of 1 PV, 2 PV, 3 PV,
4 PV, 5 PV, and 6 PV outflow solutions were measured to determine
the number of injected PV when the clay mineral reached the dynamic
adsorption equilibrium.

4.2.4 Microscopic Adsorption Experiment
SEM imaging technique
was used to characterize the surface characteristics of clay minerals
before and after CNDAD1# treatment. Different types of clay minerals
were first washed with 2 wt % KCl brine and dried at 80 °C for
24 h, then washed with ethanol and dried again. The cleaned rock powder
was soaked in 0.5 wt % CNDAD1#l nanosolution for aging for 2 days
at room temperature, and the solid phase and liquid were separated
by rotating under 3000 rpm for 30 min in a centrifuge, the supernatant
was poured out, and the solid phase powder was put into an oven at
80 °C for 24 h for drying, and then the solid phase powder was
coated on the sampler for SEM testing.

4.2.5 Spontaneous Imbibition Experiment
The imbibition quantity of core samples is affected by multiple factors
such as core permeability, wettability, lithology, and temperature.
However, for a fixed reservoir, the lithology and temperature are
basically similar. Therefore, the changes of reservoir heterogeneity
and surface wettability are the main factors leading to the great
differences in core imbibition quantity. In order to study the influence
of permeability and wettability on the spontaneous imbibition of the
core, different permeability cores were selected and treated with
nanoemulsions of different concentrations to obtain cores with different
wettabilities for experimental studies on spontaneous permeability
of the core. The main test indexes include the imbibition quantity
of brine into the saturated air in the dry core.

4.2.6 Compatibility of the Nanoemulsion
with Different Working Fluids
In the process of hydraulic
fracturing, the retention of the flowback fluid in the reservoirs
after the completion of fracturing is one of the main reasons for
the formation of external fluid “water locking damage”.
Whether the mixture of nanoemulsion and fracturing fluid can reduce
the “water locking damage” is one of the prerequisites
for its commercial application. The 0.5 wt % nanoemulsion was mixed
with slick water or guar fracturing fluid, and the influence of the
nanoemulsion on the performance of the fracturing fluid and the improvement
of flowback rate after fracturing were determined. The test indexes
of mixing the nanoemulsion with slick water fracturing fluid include
solution surface tension, kinematic viscosity, drag reduction rate,
and residual liquid flowback rate after fracturing; the test indexes
of mixing the nanoemulsion with guar fracturing fluid include shear
resistance of guar fracturing fluid, gel breaking performance, residue
content, surface tension of the breaker, viscosity, and flowback rate
of the gel breaking fluid.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work is
financially supported by the National Science Foundation of China
(grant no. 51804033), China Postdoctoral Science and Foundation (grant
no. 2018M641254), the National Science and Technology Major Projects
of China (grant nos. 2016ZX05051, 2016ZX05014-005, and 2017ZX05030).
==== Refs
References
Clouser G. ; Wagman D. 
East Texas Thrives: One of the world’s
most heavily drilled regions thrives as unconventional gas plays take
off . Oil Gas Investor Tight Gas 
2006 , 8 –10 .
Khlaifat A. L. ; Qutob H. ; Barakat N.  Tight
gas sands development is critical to future world energy resources . SPE Middle East Unconventional Gas Conference and Exhibition , Muscat, Oman , 31 Jan–2 Feb, 2011 .
Asadi M. ; Woodroof R. A. ; Himes R. E. 
Comparative
study of flowback analysis using polymer concentrations and fracturing-fluid
tracer methods: a field study . SPE Prod. Oper. 
2008 , 23 , 147 –157 . 10.2118/101614-pa .
Zelenev A. ; Ellena L.  Microemulsion
technology for improved fluid recovery and enhanced core permeability
to gas . SPE 8th European Formation Damage
Conference, 27–29 May , Scheveningen,
The Netherlands , 2009 .
King G. E.  Hydraulic fracturing
101: what every representative, environmentalist, regulator, reporter,
investor, university researcher, neighbor and engineer should know
about estimating frac risk and improving frac performance in unconventional
gas and oil wells . SPE Hydraulic Fracturing
Technology Conference, 6-8 February , The Woodlands,
Texas, USA , 2012 .
Dong X. ; Trembly J. ; Bayless D. 
Techno-Economic Analysis of Hydraulic
Fracking Flowback and Produced Water Treatment in Supercritical Water
Reactor . Energy 
2017 , 133 , 777 –783 . 10.1016/j.energy.2017.05.078 .
Sharma M. M. ; Manchanda R.  The role of induced un-propped (IU) fractures in
unconventional oil and gas wells . SPE Annual
Technical Conference and Exhibition, 28-30 September , Houston, Texas, USA , 2015 .
Liang T. ; Gu F. ; Yao E. ; Zhang L. ; Yang K. ; Liu G. ; Zhou F. 
Formation damage due
to drilling and fracturing fluids and its solution for tight naturally
fractured sandstone reservoirs . Geofluids 
2017 , 2017 , 1 –9 . 10.1155/2017/9350967 .
Liang T. ; Luo X. ; Nguyen Q. ; DiCarlo D. A. 
Computed-tomography measurements
of water block in low-permeability rocks: scaling and remedying production
impairment . SPE J. 
2018 , 23 , 0762 –0771 . 10.2118/189445-pa .
Zhang L. ; Zhou F. ; Mou J. ; Xu G. ; Zhang S. ; Li Z. 
A new method to improve long-term
fracture conductivity in acid fracturing under high closure stress . J. Pet. Sci. Technol. 
2018 , 171 , 760 –770 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2018.07.073 .
Bahrami H. ; Reza R.. M. ; Nazhat D. ; Ostojic J. ; Clennell B. ; Jamili A.  Effect of water blocking damage on flow efficiency and productivity
in tight gas reservoirs . SPE Production and
Operations Symposium , Oklahoma City, Oklahoma , 27–29 Mar, 2011 .
Lu H. ; Guo J. ; Wang Y. ; Yang M. ; Nan W.  Trapping Damage Analysis of Water Locking/Aqueous
Phase of Tight Sandstone Gas Reservoir in Ke Keya Structure . SPE IADC/SPE Asia Pacific Drilling Technology Conference
and Exhibition, 9–11 July , Tianjin,
China , 2012 .
Cheng Y.  Impact of water
dynamics in fractures on the performance of hydraulically fractured
wells in gas shale reservoirs . SPE International
Symposium and Exhibition on Formation Damage Control , Lafayette, Louisiana , 10-12 Feb, 2010 .
Holditch S. A. 
Factors Affecting water blocking
and gas flow from hydraulically fractured gas wells . J. Pet. Technol. 
1979 , 31 , 1515 –1524 . 10.2118/7561-pa .
Parekh B. ; Sharma M. M.  Cleanup of water blocks in depleted low-permeability
reservoirs . SPE Annual Technical Conference
and Exhibition , Houston, Texas , 26-29 Sep, 2004 .
Li K. ; Firoozabadi A. 
Phenomenological
modeling of critical condensate saturation and relative permeabilities
in gas/condensate systems . SPE J. 
2000 , 5 , 138 –147 . 10.2118/56014-pa .
Noh M. H. ; Firoozabadi A. 
Wettability alteration in gas-condensate reservoirs
to mitigate well deliverability loss by water blocking . SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 
2008 , 11 , 676 –685 . 10.2118/98375-pa .
Sharifzadeh S. ; Hassanajili S. ; Rahimpour M. R. 
Wettability alteration of gas condensate reservoir
rocks to gas wetness by sol–gel process using fluoroalkylsilane . J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2013 , 128 , 4077 –4085 . 10.1002/app.38632 .
Karandish G. R. ; Rahimpour M. R. ; Sharifzadeh S. ; Dadkhah A. A. 
Wettability alteration in gas-condensate
carbonate reservoir using anionic fluorinated treatment . Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 
2015 , 93 , 554 –564 . 10.1016/j.cherd.2014.05.019 .
Aminnaji M. ; Fazeli H. ; Bahramian A. ; Gerami S. ; Ghojavand H. 
Wettability alteration of reservoir
rocks from liquid wetting to gas wetting using nano fluid . Transport Porous Media 
2015 , 109 , 201 –216 . 10.1007/s11242-015-0509-6 .
Gahrooei H. R. E. ; Ghazanfari M. H. 
Application
of a water based nanofluid for wettability alteration of sandstone
reservoir rocks to preferentially gas wetting condition . J. Mol. Liq. 
2017 , 232 , 351 –360 . 10.1016/j.molliq.2017.02.097 .
Eastoe J. ; Robinson B. H. ; Steytler D. C. 
Influence
of pressure and temperature on microemulsion stability . J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 
1990 , 86 , 511 –517 . 10.1039/ft9908600511 .
Wang J. ; Zhou F. ; Xue Y. ; Yao E. ; Zhang L. ; Fan F. ; Wang R. 
The adsorption properties of a novel ether nanofluid
for gas wetting of tight sandstone reservoir . Pet. Sci. Technol. 
2019 , 37 , 1436 –1454 . 10.1080/10916466.2019.1590402 .
Liang T. ; Li Q. ; Liang X. ; Yao E. ; Wang Y. ; Li Y. ; Chen M. ; Zhou F. ; Lu J. 
Evaluation of liquid nanofluid as fracturing fluid additive on enhanced
oil recovery from low-permeability reservoirs . J. Pet. Sci. Technol. 
2018 , 168 , 390 –399 . 10.1016/j.petrol.2018.04.073 .

