
==== Front
ACS OmegaACS OmegaaoacsodfACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical Society 10.1021/acsomega.9b03668Mini-ReviewMetabolomics to Characterize Adaptive and Signaling
Responses in Legume Crops under Abiotic Stresses Bueno Paula
C. P. †‡Lopes Norberto P. *†† Faculty
of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto (FCFRP-USP), Department
of Physics and Chemistry, University of
São Paulo, Avenida do Cafe′ s/n, 14040-903 Ribeirão Preto/SP, Brazil‡ Max-Planck
Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology (MPI-MP), Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany* E-mail: npelopes@fcfrp.usp.br.24 01 2020 04 02 2020 5 4 1752 1763 30 10 2019 14 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical
Society2020American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Legume species are an important source
of protein and other nutrients
for human and livestock consumption, playing a central role in food
security. Besides, legumes benefit agriculture because of their ability
to establish symbiotic interactions with nitrogen-fixing bacteria,
providing nitrogen for subsequent crops, which is very much appreciated
for sustainable agricultural practices. However, like other food crops,
legumes are highly vulnerable to climate variations, water stresses
being the main constraint that negatively affects both crop quality
and productivity. Because of this, the development of strategies to
improve the tolerance of such cultivars against water stresses, as
well as the study of effective approaches to monitor these improvements,
have gained special attention during the last years. Among these strategies,
metabolomics has been considered one of the most promising approaches
for the detection and/or quantification of primary and secondary stress-responsive
metabolites in abiotic stresses. In plant science, many research groups
have been using metabolomics to evaluate the success of genetic modifications
by the analysis of chemical markers that can be altered in breeding
programs. In addition, metabolomics is a powerful tool for the evaluation
and selection of wild specimens with desirable traits that can be
used in the development of improved new cultivars. Therefore, the
aim of the present paper is to review the recent progress made in
the field of metabolomics and plant breeding, especially concerning
the adaptive responses of legume species to abiotic stresses as well
as to point out the key primary and secondary metabolites involved
in the adaptation and sensing mechanisms.

document-id-old-9ao9b03668document-id-new-14ao9b03668ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
One of the major challenges
of the modern world is to deal with
the sustainable production of food to feed an increasing population.
To meet the global demand for food and nutrition, the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) estimates that crop productivity must double by
2050. However, due to climate and environmental stress constraints,
the productivity scenario of available crops is not promising. By
2080, the productivity of many crops is expected to decrease around
50% in many parts of the world.1,2

The pressures
on our current food system include the combination
of nonclimate stressors, such as population growth and demand for
animal-sourced products and climate change. Climate change is characterized
by increased CO2 concentration in the atmosphere, increasing
average temperature, and more frequent extreme events including drought
periods, heat waves, and flooding. The unpredictable and dynamic nature
of changing global climatic conditions impacts food security and,
consequently, human health by two main different routes: (i) by affecting
the amount of food through direct impact on crop yields and indirectly
by impacts on water availability and quality, pests, and disease and
pollination services and (ii) by changing CO2 concentration
in the atmosphere, affecting plant biomass and nutritional quality.1

Although both biotic and abiotic stressors
are challenging for
the sustainability of crop production, the agricultural productivity
of crops such as wheat, soybean, maize, and potato is more negatively
impacted due to abiotic stresses, when compared to biotic agents.
Indeed, common climate-related factors, such as water, temperature,
and soil salinity, cause significant loss of crop productivity throughout
the world.3

For that reason, the
development of sustainable agricultural practices,
as well as more productive and stress-resistant crop varieties containing
genetic traits associated with environmental change adaptation (or
greater tolerance to abiotic stresses), will either alone or together
be essential to sustainably grow high-yielding crops under increasingly
stressful environmental conditions.4

2 Legume Crops and Food Security
The legume family (Fabaceae
or Leguminosae) is the third-largest
flowering family with over 20 000 species and 750 genera distributed
around the globe.5,6 Traditionally, the family is classified
into three subfamilies (Caesalpinioideae, Mimosoideae, and Papilionoideae).
However, a recent taxonomic revision provided the division of the
legume family into six subfamilies (Caesalpinioideae, Cercidoideae,
Detarioideae, Duparquetioideae, Dialioideae, and Papilionoideae).2 The family is characterized by its ability to
fix nitrogen due to symbiotic nitrogen-fixing associations with bacteria,
which is very much appreciated for sustainable crop systems since
it provides nitrogen for subsequent crops, with the potential to minimize
future nitrogen fertilizer usage.4,5

After
the cereals, legumes are the most agriculturally important
crop family, playing a central role in food security. Unlike other
crops, these species are a rich source of plant-based protein. From
the subfamily Papilionoideae, important grain and forage legume species
are recognized, mainly because of their economical and nutritional
importance.6 Soybean (Glycine max L. Merr.), a warm-season representative, is one of the most important
food crops in the world since the grains are a primary and rich source
of vegetable oil and protein for human and animal consumption.5

Other warm-season crops such as common
bean (Phaseolus
vulgaris L.), cowpea (Vigna unguiculata L.
Walp), and several Lupines (Lupinus spp. L.), together
with cool-season legumes such as lentil (Lens culinaris Medik), chickpea (Cicer arietnum L.), and fava
bean (Vicia faba L.), play an important role in the
context of food and nutrition security, poverty alleviation, and agricultural
sustainability.6 In addition to other legume
species, they are also referred to as pulses. Pulses are defined as
the dried and edible seeds of certain Leguminosae plants such as dry
peas, lentils, beans, and chickpeas. They are characterized by a very
high content of protein and fiber and are low in fat. Forage crops
such as alfafa (Medicago sativa L.) and Lotus
japonicus (Regel) K. Larsen (which are very well-studied
model plants) are not considered pulses. Likewise, soybeans and peanuts,
which present much higher fat content (oil crops), are not considered
pulses either.7

In general, besides
proteins and fats, grain legumes are also rich
sources of carbohydrates, dietary fibers, vitamins, and minerals,
which are essential for both livestock feed and human nutrition.4,5,7,8 From
the phytochemical point of view, legumes show a unique pattern compared
to other plant species. Besides polyphenols and flavonoids, which
are widespread compounds in the plant kingdom, legumes are a rich
source of health-promoting compounds such as isoflavones, triterpenoid
saponins, and inositol phosphates, among others (Chart 1).2,7,9 Interestingly, during the domestication process of
some of these species, the selection of some agricultural traits resulted
in an unintended accumulation of some of these compounds (such as
some phenolics, flavonoids, and saponins), which also confers resilience
to environmental stresses.2

Chart 1 3 Assisted Breeding for the Development of New
Cultivars
Essentially, the natural genetic variation observed
in modern cultures,
including both intraspecific and interspecific variability, is the
result of spontaneous mutations and subsequent selection during the
evolution of ancestral forms of plants. After many thousands of years
of successive selection and cultivation improvements (considering
both domestication and breeding activities), the species that compose
our current food system retained only a small part of their original
genetic variation. That being said, the wild relatives of such cultures,
including those conserved in germplasm collections, are essential
resources to retrieve the genetic information lost along the centuries.
As repositories of ancestral genes, with rich genetic diversity, they
conserve a plethora of desirable traits, such as greater resistance
to climate changes and better adaptation to biotic and abiotic stresses.11

With this regard, the development of genetically
engineered technologies,
such as Agrobacterium-mediated transformation or
genome-editing technologies, such as clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR/Cas), zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs),
and transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENS), has
provided precise and efficient introduction of desirable traits in
crop improvements.10 Concomitantly, several
technical advances in plant breeding and related techniques also allowed
the development of approaches capable of elucidating the associations
between genetic and phenotypic variations in plants as well as the
identification of molecular markers related with the desirable and/or
acquired traits.11

In the last decades,
the combination between genomics, transcriptomics,
proteomics, and metabolomics has been used to enhance the studies
in plant breeding, e.g., to explore processes such as epigenetic regulation,
post-transcriptional and post-translational modifications, and other
molecular interactions concerned with the genotype–phenotype
relationship. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) on metabolic
traits (mGWASs) and metabolomic quantitative trait locus (mQTL) mapping,
for example, are modern tools used to link the metabolic phenotypes
with the genetic background observed for many complex traits, especially
those associated with abiotic stress tolerance.10,12

Metabolomics-assisted breeding, together with other omics,
are
invaluable tools to facilitate the selection and evaluation of the
efficiency of insertion of relevant and desirable metabolic traits,
as required by the modern breeding processes. Targeted metabolic profiling,
for example, can be used for the identification of plant varieties
or individuals that biosynthesize desirable levels of nutraceuticals
or secondary metabolites associated with health benefits. The same
approach can be used for the identification of molecular markers associated
with putative genes and proteins overexpressed by the impact of environmental
stressors such as light, temperature, water, or biological agents.
Finally, it can be a powerful resource to guide breeding programs,
alerting researchers to positive or detrimental traits, and to assist
in the elucidation of the regulatory mechanisms.10

In this context, several studies have been reported
concerning
metabolomics as a tool to explore different aspects in plant breeding,
the regulatory mechanisms related to plant growth and development
(including those related to crop productivity and performance), adaptation
to biotic and abiotic stresses, nutritional improvement, and selection
of cultivars for agriculture. Kumar and collaborators (2017)13 reviewed the most recent research and achievements
made in the field. For cereal crops, different varieties of maize,
rice, potato, and wheat had their metabolites associated with plant
tolerance against abiotic stresses, plant signaling, or enhanced nutritional
composition. The quality and taste of fruits as well as the relationship
between chemical composition and health benefits were also reviewed.
Different cultivars of apple, orange, tomato, strawberry, and grape,
among others, have been studied and selected for further breeding.
The invaluable information includes sugar concentration and diversification,
as well as the presence of markers related to ripening, postharvest
modifications, and plant infection. Also, information regarding vitamins,
phenolic compounds, volatiles, and organic acids, most of them related
to taste, quality, and nutritional benefits, has been used for the
analysis and selection of cultivars.

4 Metabolomics
Approaches for the Study of Crops
Similarly to genomics,
proteomics, and transcriptomics (which are
approaches used for the high-throughput study of genes, proteins,
and transcripts, respectively), metabolomics is a multidisciplinary
field of research related to the study of metabolomes of biological
systems (e.g., a single cell, a tissue, or an organ, in a given physiological
or developmental state).12

The metabolome
comprises a pool of low-molecular-weight primary
and secondary metabolites (usually <1500 Da), including their precursors
and intermediates of the corresponding biosynthetic pathways. Such
compounds are considered the end products of gene expression and protein
activity, modulating processes between the genome and environment
and indicating the functional status of the organism. Moreover, they
are an indispensable part of the plant metabolism, influencing all
biological processes, such as plant biomass and architecture, and
those involved in plant defense or adaptation to biotic and abiotic
stresses.12,14

As a high-throughput technology, metabolomics
has the fundamental
goal to provide a comprehensive view of all metabolites participating
in the cellular processes, which requires the use of nonselective,
universally applicable, and comprehensive analytical approaches for
the identification and quantitation of metabolites. However, due to
the enormous existing chemical diversity in nature, there is no single
analytical method or protocol capable of furnishing a complete picture
of the whole metabolome of an organism.12,15

The
plant kingdom may contain from 200 000 to 1 000 000
distinct metabolites, which may be present in a wide range of concentrations
(estimated to span 12 orders of magnitude) and vary according to their
chemical structures, classes, physicochemical properties, and polarities.15 These particularities make the extraction, measurement,
and identification (or even the putative annotation) of such compounds
a challenge. For that reason, the identification of both major and
minor compounds presented in a plant extract is a complex task. The
metabolite profiling methods have to be able to separate and detect
a large dynamic range of metabolite classes and concentrations and
generate enough spectral information to allow their full or partial
identification.12

With this regard,
the research involving metabolomics and the study
of plant species subjected or better adapted to abiotic stresses require
different expertise and multidisciplinary knowledge. To make it possible,
different protocols and approaches are demanded to accomplish the
intended study. It includes the best design of cultivation experiments
(under controlled or field conditions), the standardization of robust
protocols for sample harvesting, extraction, and chemical analysis,
and the establishment of the most suitable workflow for data analysis,
data integration (with other metadata or omics results, for example),
and biological interpretation of results (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Schematic representation of the suggested experimental
workflow
for the metabolomics-assisted study of crops and abiotic stresses.
The process starts with the cultivation experiments, which must include
at least two different conditions (e.g., stress and control) and a
representative number of biological replicates. Depending on the study,
different genotypes, varieties, or mutants, susceptible or tolerant,
can be arranged and exposed to the experimental conditions. As pointed
out by Sanchez and collaborators (2012),19 more than two tolerant and sensitive species/cultivars should be
included to avoid a misunderstanding between natural variation and
metabolic tolerance. During this phase, the physiological parameters
can be monitored and registered. The next step is the harvesting.
The plant material (shoots, roots, seed, flowers, stems, or others)
is harvested and promptly frozen in liquid nitrogen to avoid enzymatic
reactions and degradations. In the sequence, the samples can be stored
in a freezer at −80 °C, dried (usually freeze-dried),
or directly extracted from the fresh tissue. Before extraction, the
samples must be powdered, homogenized, and weighted. The best extraction
protocol must be chosen according to the desired purpose (for example,
considering targeted metabolomics analysis or metabolic profiling/fingerprinting)
and also considering the different classes of metabolites that can
be extracted. Usually, internal standardization is required for subsequent
normalizations and data analysis. Then, samples are subjected to the
chemical analysis (using different analytical platforms). In general,
most of the metabolomics protocols include a separation step (by LC
or GC, mainly) hyphenated to the detection technique of choice (usually
MS or NMR in different arrays). After data acquisition, the raw files
are exported for data analysis. The high-throughput process considers
several steps such as the conversion to suitable formats, preprocessing,
normalizations, data cleaning, alignment, and corrections, among others.
Multivariate data analysis methods can be used to evaluate the quality
of the acquired data. Additionally, compounds can be annotated by
comparing the obtained spectra with those available in mass spectral
reference libraries. Still, if necessary, the compounds can be identified
by complete structural elucidation (which requires, most of the time,
isolation and purification). During this process, the information
can be analyzed by different statistical, univariate, or multivariate
data analysis tools. Finally, the metabolomics results can be integrated
with transcriptomics or proteomics data and/or with the corresponding
physiological data for biological interpretation.

By untargeted metabolomic analysis, such as metabolomic profiling
and metabolomic fingerprinting, the simultaneous measurement of a
large number of metabolites from each sample can be achieved, without
establishing a prior specific hypothesis on a particular set of metabolites.
As a result, the analysis of the global metabolome expression is performed.
Consequently, a large quantity of data is generated, requiring bioinformatics
tools to assist in data analysis. In an opposite way, targeted metabolomic
analysis is characterized by the measurement of predefined sets of
metabolites with a higher level of precision and accuracy.12,16

For that, several analytical separation and detection techniques
are usually combined to visualize the metabolome of an organism. Currently,
the two main analytical techniques used for the generation of metabolic
spectral data are nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass spectrometry
(MS). In the same way, state-of-the-art separation techniques such
as gas chromatography (GC), liquid chromatography (LC), and capillary
electrophoresis (CE) allow the separation of hundreds of compounds
in a single analysis, which is very much appreciated due to the high
sample complexity. The hyphenation between these high-resolution separation
techniques and accurate tandem mass spectrometry (such as LC-MS/MS,
UHPLC-TOF-MS, and CE-MS/MS), or with nuclear magnetic resonance (LC-NMR
or LC-DAD-SPE-NMR-MS/MS), together with bioinformatics tools, enabled
great advances in the study of plant natural products, providing a
more comprehensive view of the metabolome.12,17 In general, LC and GC coupled to accurate tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS and GC-MS) are the most employed metabolomics platforms
due to their unparalleled sensitivity; combined, they also provide
an extensive metabolite coverage, which is very much appreciated in
metabolomics studies.17 The literature
has innumerous papers bringing detailed information and application
of such analytical techniques in metabolomics. For that reason, the
most common ones will be briefly explained in the following sections.

Gas Chromatography–Mass
Spectrometry
Gas chromatography–mass
spectrometry (GC-MS) stands out in the analysis of volatile and thermally
stable compounds and primary metabolites, including sugars, amino
acids, organic acids, and polyamines, as well as biosynthetic pathway
precursors. The polar compounds extracted from the plant tissues are
first subjected to a derivatization step, making them volatile for
further separation into the GC capillary column. Usually, it consists
of a two-step derivatization process, which involves a methoxyamination
reaction in the carbonyl groups, followed by silylation with N-methyl-trimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (MSTFA) or N-O-bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (BSTFA), under anhydrous
conditions.18 Afterward, samples are subjected
to a separation step (using capillary columns, which allow high chromatographic
resolving power) and then to the electron impact (EI) fragmentation
(a hard ionization method, in which the energy typically applied is
set at 70 eV). This robust interface between GC and MS results in
a very reproducible fragmentation pattern, which allows the comparison
of results with mass spectral databases, boosting peak annotation
and compound identification. Among the several metabolite databases
available, curated compound reference libraries such as NIST and the
Golm Metabolome Database (GMD) stand out for metabolomics studies.
Concerning mass detection, time-of-flight (TOF-MS) has become the
method of choice because of advantages such as fast scan times, improved
deconvolution, and high mass accuracy.15 However, a major advantage of GC-TOF-MS systems is their enhanced
software capability, which supports automated and comprehensive extraction
of all mass spectra from a chromatogram, in-built mass-spectral correction
for coeluting metabolites, calculation of retention-time indices,
and automated picking of a suitable fragment mass for selective quantification.
Moreover, GC-TOF-MS has the potential to be truly nonbiased and fully
automated with respect to metabolite identification, although it still
requires expert inputs to correct inappropriate assignments.18

Liquid Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry
Despite
the outstanding GC-MS capacity to separate, resolve, and detect a
wide range of metabolites from complex matrices, one of its limitations
is the inability to ionize thermolabile or high molecular mass metabolites.
For that reason, LC-MS is the technique of choice for the analysis
of thermolabile unstable compounds, polar and relatively nonpolar
compounds, and mainly secondary metabolites and phytohormones, without
any derivatization step. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
is a very versatile analytical platform and can be found in different
arrays. A plethora of available chromatographic columns, differing
in length, diameter, resolution, and stationary phases, together with
a vast combination of mobile phases, allow the separation of the plant
natural compounds according to their chemical properties.15 Electrospray ionization (ESI), a soft-ionization
method, is the most used technique since it allows the direct analysis
of compounds from the liquid phase. Detailed structural information
can be achieved by collision-induced dissociation (CID), which is
generally carried out on a tandem MS instrument (allowing tandem MSn experiments).16 After the ionization step, the fragments are driven to the analyzer.
Different types of analyzers are commercially available. It includes
(i) tandem-in-time instruments, such as quadrupole ion traps (QIT-MS),
orbitrap, and Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR)-MS
and (ii) tandem-in-space instruments, such as triple quadrupoles (QqQ)
and quadrupole time-of-flight (qTOF). The choice depends on the sensitivity,
mass resolution, and dynamic range required.15

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) is a highly reproducible and universal (nonselective) spectroscopic
technique. The resonances recorded in an NMR spectrum provide compound
identification through the interpretation of the chemical shifts and
coupling constants. Moreover, it can differentiate compounds with
identical masses but different spatial configuration. In addition,
the spectral peak areas generated by the signals can be used for the
determination of compound concentration, which provides an advantage
over the MS-based techniques due to its higher accuracy and reproducibility.
In general, the main compounds covered by NMR in metabolome analysis
are carbohydrates, amino acids, and organic acids. However, the sensitivity
of NMR is much lower than that of MS-based techniques, which restrains
its application in the analysis of low-abundant plant metabolites.
While 1D NMR (mainly 1H NMR) is the most commonly used
method in high-throughput metabolomics studies, 2D NMR is often used
for the characterization of those compounds that cannot be identified
with 1D NMR spectra. For the structural elucidation of isolated natural
product compounds, further NMR experiments may include the acquisition
of 13C NMR data, as well as (1H,1H)-COSY, (1H,1H)- TOCSY, (1H,1H)-NOESY, (1H,1H)-ROESY, (1H,13C)-HSQC, and (1H,13C)-HMBC,
among others.12

Analysis and Interpretation
of the Metabolomic Data
The high-throughput metabolite profiling
strategies applied in metabolomics
generate a great amount of raw data, which must be extracted, converted,
deconvoluted, aligned, and organized into a matrix size of N × M (where N is
the number of biological and technical replicates and M is the metabolites or signals). Afterward, and prior to the statistical
analysis, it is often necessary to perform additional data preprocessing
steps such as normalizations, noise filtering, baseline correction,
smoothing, scaling, replacement of missing values, elimination of
outliers, and data reduction, if necessary.16

Typically, both multivariate and univariate methods are used
for the analysis of the metabolomics data. Multivariate statistical
methods, including unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA)
or supervised partial least-squares (PLS, OPLS, PLS-DA, etc.), allow
exploration and visualization of metabolomics datasets through simultaneous
analysis of multiple variables. Univariate methods, such as ANOVA,
Student’s, Tukey, and Welch’s t-test,
are especially interesting for the precise identification of down-
and upregulated metabolic traits. If the information concerning the
identity of the detected compounds is not available, the analysis
can be done considering specific classes of metabolites.10

Indeed, only a small fraction of the detected
metabolites can be
identified, which requires, most of the time, the isolation and acquisition
of unambiguous results. Regarding any technique of choice, metabolite
identification is one of the bottlenecks in metabolomics.10,16 Depending on the instrumentation, availability of reference standards,
and consistent databases, only the partial assignments or putative
identification is possible. In this case, compounds are annotated
and not always identified.

However, different levels of confidence
of metabolite annotation
can be achieved, ranging from Level 0 (or identified compound, including
full 3D structure and stereochemistry), Level 1 (the most common,
achieved by two orthogonal parameters, such as retention time and
MS/MS spectrum), Levels 2 and 3 (putatively annotated compounds and
compound classes; accurate mass measurement and isotope abundance
ratios are also possible), to Level 4 (unidentified or unclassified
metabolites that can be differentiated based on analytical data).17

In general, the different levels of annotations
can be achieved
with the assistance of MS- (or NMR-) based spectral databases and
in silico spectral prediction algorithms. Among the most important
databases, the following can be highlighted: NIST (https://www.nist.gov), Wiley (https://www.sisweb.com/software/ms/wiley.htm), MassBank (https://massbank.eu/MassBank/), GMD (http://gmd.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/), MoNA (https://mona.fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu), and METLIN (https://metlin.scripps.edu), which contain tens of thousands of verified experimental mass
spectra, and the Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking
- GNPS database (https://gnps.ucsd.edu), which also allows us to upload and share experimental spectra.10,16,17

In silico prediction algorithms
assist compound annotation by predicting
the most likely chemical structure that corresponds to a given experimental
mass spectrum, using the information obtained from known compounds
stored in chemical databases.10 For that,
four general methods can be distinguished (quantum chemistry, machine
learning, heuristic-based methods, and chemical-reaction-based methods),
and the available algorithms use EI-MS and/or CID-MS/MS data.10,17

Finally, it is important to point out that even if the compound
annotation or identification is not possible the untargeted metabolomics
results are still able to reveal up- and down-regulated metabolites
in a given sample group relative to controls. Depending on the results,
compound identification can be carried out by traditional phytochemical
methods, including the isolation, purification, and complete structural
elucidation.10,16

5 Plant Responses
to Environmental Stresses
Many responses to environmental
stresses such as excessive light,
water stresses, salinity, extreme temperatures, nutrient deficiency,
metal toxicity, or UV–B radiation are common among plants.
To counteract the adverse environmental conditions, plants need to
develop mechanisms for adaptation and acclimatization, which requires
a new state of cellular homeostasis. While adaptation is related to
an evolutionary process (considering populations over many generations),
acclimation involves reprogramming of their development, physiology,
and metabolism, enabling their survival.19 Abiotic stresses are directly related to changes in several cellular
metabolic pathways, such as carbohydrates, amino acid, and peptide
metabolism. However, if the metabolic homeostasis is disrupted, there
might be a reduction in growth, development, and, consequently, yield.14

The alterations in plant metabolism are
an important part of early
stress responses and occur in all plant species. They include the
accumulation of compatible solutes for the retention of water in the
cell and antioxidants for protection against the oxidative damage
to cellular components, for example. During a drought, soluble compounds,
such as oligosaccharides, polyhydric alcohols, sucrose, mannose, trehalose,
amino acids, and polyamines, assist with maintaining turgor, membrane
integrity, and stabilizing macromolecules,20 thus contributing to keeping cell homeostasis. Obata and Fernie15 reviewed and compared metabolic fingerprints
of Arabidopsis leaves when subjected to stresses
such as dehydration, salt, temperature, light, ultraviolet (UV) light,
and low nitrogen amounts, among others. They reported that specific
compounds such as sucrose, raffinose, proline, other branched chain
amino acids, and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) are generally accumulated
in different levels during most of the abiotic stresses, showing that
the stress-specific plant response is the result of an inhibition
or activation of a defined metabolic pathway (Figure 2).

Figure 2 Schematic representation of plant biosynthetic
pathways involved
in the biosynthesis of primary and secondary metabolites in plants.
Some of the represented compounds and precursors have their concentrations
altered in response to biotic and abiotic stresses. The understanding
of the dynamics and mechanisms of such alterations, as well as their
biological functions, is fundamental to support the development of
new cultivars, more tolerant or resistant to adverse environmental
conditions. In this context, metabolic profiling strategies are invaluable
tools to access the information concerning these metabolic alterations.

Although all environmental stresses are challenging
for plants,
a drought is by far the most complex and unpredictable abiotic stress
that affects plant growth, development, survival, and crop productivity
at a global level. Plants subjected to a drought have essential physiological
functions disturbed. In the cellular level, damages in the photosynthetic
apparatus, alterations in the carbon assimilation rate, increased
oxidative damage, alterations on enzyme activities, and ion imbalance,
among others, can be highlighted. Consequently, plants show deficiencies
in water, nitrogen and mineral acquisition, and reduced germination.
Altogether, these alterations cause considerable yield reduction.
From the molecular point of view, in general, water stresses can significantly
change both the transcriptomic and metabolic profiles, which include
compatible solute accumulation and the production of antioxidants
and hormones for physiological regulation, among others.20

6 Metabolic Response of Legumes
to Drought
Similarly to other plant species, stressful environments
negatively
impact legume production, decreasing the yield and quality. Moreover,
the biological nitrogen fixation is impaired in dehydrated tissue,
which happens when plants are subjected to drought. The consequent
yield loss is caused by inadequate oxygen supply, carbon shortage,
nitrogen feedback, oxidative stress, and sulfur metabolism modifications.4

Despite the relevance of legumes for agriculture
and human health
and nutrition, the increases in grain legume yields are around 0–2%
per year, which is much lower when compared with cereals. To sustain
the production growth, productivity improvements will be necessary,
as these recorded production rates are due to increases in the land
planted area and not due to the performance of the cutivars.5 Considering this scenario, the productivity could
be considerably improved by the introduction of new varieties better
adapted to water stresses. For legumes, many wild species grow in
arid regions, which make them good models for understanding the tolerance
mechanisms. Besides, these wild relatives can furnish novel alleles
for crop improvement using various biotechnological approaches. It
may include abiotic stress tolerance, biotic stress resistance, improvement
on yield, and better nutritional composition, among others.2

One of the mechanisms described for plant
drought stress tolerance
is the production and accumulation of organic solutes. These compounds
may act as osmolytes for the osmostic adjustment and turgor maintenance
in the cytosol or as osmoprotectants to stabilize cellular components.
Therefore, the regulation of these compounds constitutes one of the
most promising alternatives for the improvement of drought tolerance
in legume crops. Consequently, a deeper understanding about the metabolic
pathways that produce commonly regulated osmolytes is essential for
the success of the plant breeding approaches.19,21

Given the importance for a better understanding about how
legumes
respond and adapt to drought conditions, the metabolic responses of
legume species have been reported in several studies. In these and
in others involving various plant species and crops, some key primary
and secondary metabolites have been associated with the drought responses
(Chart 2, Figure 3). For that, different
analytical platforms and design of experiments have been used.

Figure 3 Primary and
secondary metabolites that had their concentrations
altered in legume species subjected to water stresses (as pointed
out in Chart 2). Representative
compounds were organized according to their biosynthetic pathways
as shown in Figure 2. In blue, sugars; in light blue, antioxidants; in light orange,
polyamines; in bright yellow, amino acids; in pink, phytohormones;
in green, phenolic compounds; in yellow, tricarboxylic acid TCA-derived
compounds.

Chart 2 (24,25)

Goufo
and collaborators21 used GC-TOF-MS
and LC-DAD for the metabolomic profiling of cowpea (Vigna
unguiculata L. Walp.) when subjected to drought (for 6 or
12 days) and rewatered for 6 days after 6 days of stress. Although
cowpea is considered a drought-resistant crop for presenting desirable
physiological traits, drought still impacts its productivity. By GC-MS,
the authors were able to identify 41 primary metabolites, including
5 sugars, 4 polyols, 24 amino acids and/or their derivatives, and
8 organic acids. By LC-DAD, 35 peaks were assigned based on their
spectral features. It included the annotation of 15 phenolic acids,
17 flavonoids, and 3 proanthocyanidins. Therefore, by coupling two
complementary analytical platforms, not only primary metabolites were
assigned as resistance markers or part of an adaptive response to
drought stress but also secondary metabolites were indicated. Quercetin
3-O-6″-malonylglycoside, kaempferol 3-O-diglycoside, quercetin, galactinol, and proline were identified
as having the most significant responses to drought.

Coutinho
and collaborators22 analyzed
the leaves and roots from two different soybean cultivars (one sensitive
and one moderately tolerant) by 1H NMR and multivariate
data analysis. The analysis of the chemical shifts and coupling constants
allowed them to assign the signals of 26 primary and 11 secondary
metabolites. The authors showed that alanine, GABA, sucrose, acetate,
citrate, and succinate were accumulated in the roots when plants were
subjected to flooding. Interestingly, most of the levels of these
compounds decreased in the leaves.

The differential accumulation
of metabolites was also described
for two varieties of chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.),
one tolerant and one sensitive, both exposed to drought stress. The
UPLC-HRMS-based untargeted metabolic profiling approach allowed the
separation of 691 peaks, from which 175 were identified as known metabolites,
including amino acids, organic acids, sugars, polyamines, nitrogenous
compounds, and polyphenols. Proline, arginine, histitine, isoleucine,
and tryptophan were highly accumulated in the leaves of the tolerant
variety after drought stress induction, while compounds such as GABA,
alanine, α-ketoglutaric acid, choline, phenylalanine, tyrosine,
glucosamine, adenosine, guanine, and aspartic acid were decreased
in the two varieties.23

In another
study, the nodules of two varieties of peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) with contrasting tolerance to drought
(one sensitive and one more tolerant) were analyzed by GC-MS after
being subjected to drought stress.4 From
the 58 identified metabolites, amino acids, organic acids, carbohydrates,
and some precursors showed significant changes. The nodules of the
tolerant cultivar accumulated trehalose, proline, and GABA, while
the sensitive cultivar had the levels of asparagine and glutamine
decreased. Besides, this cultivar was unable to recover the metabolism
similarly to well-watered plants.

Finally, a study concerning
the drought acclimation process in
six Lotus species showed that the responses are accompanied
by increases in the cellular concentration of many small hydrophilic
metabolites (or osmolytes, such as amino acids, sugars, and TCA cycle
metabolites), which can vary according to the studied species. In
their study, 198 mass spectral tags were manually annotated from the
GC-MS profiling data set, representing known and still unknown metabolites.
From those, 90 were altered by the drought treatment (76 increased
and 14 decreased). Significant increases were observed for organic
acids (succinic and malic acid), sugars (fructose, glucose galactose,
and maltose) and polyols (arabitol, ononitol, and galactitol). Considering
the amino acids, proline, leucine, and isoleucine increased, while
serine, glycine, and threonine decreased. Asparagine, lysine, and
valine showed no significant change. Finally, the authors point out
that robust changes involved in the acclimation across a genus must
be analyzed using more than two tolerant versus sensitive species/cultivars
to avoid a misunderstanding between natural variation and metabolic
tolerance.19

7 Conclusions
and Future Research Perspectives
Our current food system is based on a finite
number of domesticated
species, which were selected over the centuries. Consequently, only
part of the natural original genetic variation was retained. Although
the domestication processes allowed the selection of the most interesting
varieties in terms of yield, the productivity of many crops has already
been impacted by the global climate change. Considering the increasing
demand for food to support an increasing population, as well as the
negative projections concerning climate changes, the development of
new cultivars capable of adapting to abiotic events is essential for
the protection of plantations, increase of quality and productivity,
and reduction of production costs. It is especially important for
legume crops, as they constitute one of the most promising crop families
for food security, given their significant nutritional value. Moreover,
their ability to perform symbiotic nitrogen fixation is crucial for
the development of sustainable agricultural practices.

For that
reason, in the last decades, many efforts have been made
aiming at the development and characterization of more tolerant plant
genotypes for agriculture. However, the development of abiotic stress-resilient
crops requires a deep knowledge about plant development and the biological
processes that enable plants to survive in stressful environments.
Genomics and transcriptomics have been extensively used for the development
and characterization of more tolerant plant genotypes. More recently,
studies concerning plant genetic and epigenetic control, post-transcriptional
and post-translational modifications, biochemical interactions, and
metabolic changes, among others, have been carried out in order to
understand the genotype–phenotype relationship. Modern approaches
such as mGWASs and mQTL mapping have been used in plant science to
associate metabolic phenotypes with genotypes which show desirable
traits for plant breeding.

However, the identification of molecular
traits that vary in response
to stress events remains a challenge. In this context, metabolic profiling
can be used to characterize the molecular traits involved in such
processes, providing valuable information to guide the breeding programs
(Figure 1). Indeed,
metabolomics is a powerful tool to measure the biological or physiological
responses to environmental changes, especially when it is integrated
with other profiling technologies such as transcriptomics and proteomics.

For that, state-of-the-art analytical technologies and approaches
are in constant development. They include: (i) the standardization
and validation of protocols for sample extraction and preparation,
(ii) improvements in resolution power and sensitivity of equipments,
(iii) advancements in the application and integration of multiple
analytical platforms (such as NMR, GC-MS, and LC-MS/MS or LC-SPE-NMR-MS),
and (iv) developments of algorithms, bioinformatics, and chemoinformatics
tools for deconvolution and data analysis, among others. Besides,
open-access natural chemical compound databases (derived from both
model and nonmodel organisms) have been considered an invaluable resource
for the annotation of the metabolites.

To understand the responsible
mechanisms that plants use for biotic
and abiotic stress adaptation, the metabolomics approaches include
the identification and quantitation of the stress-responsive specialized
metabolites produced by plants when subjected to adverse envionmental
conditions. In water stresses, alterations in the biosynthesis of
osmolytes, antioxidants, hormones, polyamines, and other signaling
molecules have been described for many species, including both model
plants and crops. Although the up- or down-regulation of some compounds
is common among many species (e.g., glucose, raffinose, proline, and
phytohormones), the mechanisms and dynamics of these alterations are
still very much incomplete. Moreover, alterations in the production
of some secondary metabolites seem to be specific and related to the
genetic background of each species. Interestingly, most of the secondary
metabolites reported so far have a close relationship with antioxidant
properties. It is interesting to point out that, while changes in
the primary metabolism are one of the first responses to several biotic
and abiotic stresses, the secondary metabolism is less restricted
and could configure the end points for storing the information acquired
during the adaptation process. For that reason, we believe that special
attention has to be given to the integration between primary and secondary
metabolism, which can certainly contribute to the elucidation of the
tolerance mechanisms involved in plant adaptations to environmental
stresses.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Paula
Carolina Pires Bueno is a postdoctoral research scientist,
specializing in Natural Products Chemistry. She has a B.Sc. degree
in Pharmaceutical Sciences and Biochemistry (University of São
Paulo, Brazil), a M.Sc. degree in Pharmaceutical Sciences, with a
concentration area of Synthetic and Natural Products (University of
São Paulo, Brazil), and a Ph.D. in Chemistry (São Paulo
State University, Brazil). She also conducted part of her activities
as a guest researcher at the Institut für Biologie and Biotechnologie
der Pflanzen (Westfälische Wilhelms Universität Münster,
Germany), at the Institute of Biology of Leiden (University of Leiden,
Netherlands), and she is currently a guest postdoctoral researcher
at the Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology (MPI-MP,
Germany). Her research, conducted in the last 14 years, is focused
on the field of plant metabolomics, analytical chemistry, and plant
and food chemistry.

Norberto Peporine
Lopes obtained a B.Sc. and M.Sc. degree in Pharmacy
and a Ph.D. in Chemistry at the University of São Paulo and
a Post-Doc at Cambridge University, UK. At present, he is a Full Professor
of Organic Chemistry at the University of São Paulo at the
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto –
University of São Paulo. Currently, he is President of the
Brazilian Chemical Society, Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry,
Member of the American Chemical Society, Member of GA, and Advisor
of the Brazilian Society of Mass Spectrometry. He was elected in 2017
as a member of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences. His research deals
with organic chemistry, with emphasis on natural products chemistry
and mass spectrometry.

Acknowledgments
The authors
acknowledge the support of the São Paulo
Research Foundation (FAPESP grants #2017/19702-6 and #2019/08477-7
(PCPB) and #2014/50265-3 (NPL)). This study was financed in part by
the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal
de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001 and CNPq
(305297/2017-1 and 408931/2016-7). We are also grateful to Dr. Joachim
Kopka and Alexander Erban from Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Plant
Physiology for the fruitful discussions and support.
==== Refs
References
Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  . Climate Change and Land: Summary for Policymakers . An IPCC Special Report on climate change, desertification,
land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and
greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems ; 2019 . 10.4337/9781784710644 .
Zhang H. ; Yasmin F. ; Song B. H. 
Neglected treasures in the wild —
legume wild relatives in food security and human health . Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 
2019 , 49 , 17 –26 . 10.1016/j.pbi.2019.04.004 .31085425 
Ciura J. ; Kruk J. 
Phytohormones as targets for improving
plant productivity and stress
tolerance . J. Plant Physiol. 
2018 , 229 , 32 –40 . 10.1016/j.jplph.2018.06.013 .30031159 
Furlan A. L. F. ; Bianucci E. ; Castro S. ; Dietz K. 
Metabolic features
involved in drought stress tolerance mechanisms in peanut nodules
and their contribution to biological nitrogen fixation . Plant Sci. 
2017 , 263 , 12 –22 . 10.1016/j.plantsci.2017.06.009 .28818367 
Foyer C. H. ; Lam H. ; Nguyen H. T. ; Siddique K. H. M. ; Varshney R. K. ; Comer T. D. ; Cowling W. ; Bramley H. ; Mori T. A. ; Hodgson J. M. ; Cooper J. W. ; Miller A. J. ; Kunert K. ; Vorster J. ; Cullis C. ; Ozga J. A. ; Wahlqvist M. L. ; Liang Y. ; Shou H. ; Shi K. ; Yu J. ; Fodor N. ; Kaiser B. N. ; Wong F. ; Valliyodan B. ; Considine M. J. 
Neglecting legumes has compromised
human health and
sustainable food production . Nat. Plants 
2016 , 2 , 1 –10 . 10.1038/nplants.2016.112 .
Mousavi-Derazmahalleh M. ; Bayer P. E. ; Hane J. K. ; Valliyodan B. ; Nguyen H. T. ; Nelson M. N. ; Erskine W. ; Varshney R. K. ; Papa R. ; Edwards D. 
Adapting legume
crops to climate
change using genomic approaches . Plant, Cell
Environ. 
2019 , 42 , 6 –19 . 10.1111/pce.13203 .29603775 
Singh B. ; Singh J. P. ; Singh N. ; Kaur A. 
Saponins in pulses
and their health promoting activities: A review . Food Chem. 
2017 , 233 , 540 –549 . 10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.04.161 .28530610 
Singh B. ; Singh J. P. ; Kaur A. ; Singh N. 
Phenolic composition
and antioxidant potential of grain legume seeds: A review . Food Res. Int. 
2017 , 101 , 1 –16 . 10.1016/j.foodres.2017.09.026 .28941672 
Muzquiz M. ; Varela A. ; Burbano C. ; Cuadrado C. ; Guillamon E. ; Pedrosa M. M. 
Bioactive compounds in legumes: Pronutritive
and antinutritive
actions, implications for nutrition and health . Phytochem. Rev. 
2012 , 11 , 227 –244 . 10.1007/s11101-012-9233-9 .
Christ B. ; Pluskal T. ; Aubry S. ; Weng J. K. 
Contribution
of
untargeted metabolomics for future assessment of biotech crops . Trends Plant Sci. 
2018 , 23 , 1047 –1056 . 10.1016/j.tplants.2018.09.011 .30361071 
Fernie A. R. ; Schauer N. 
Metabolomics-assisted breeding: a
viable option for
crop improvement? . Trends Genet. 
2009 , 25 , 39 –48 . 10.1016/j.tig.2008.10.010 .19027981 
Brunetti A. E. ; Carnevale Neto F. ; Vera M. C. ; Taboada C. ; Pavarini D. P. ; Bauermeister A. ; Lopes N. P. 
An integrative omics perspective
for the analysis of chemical signals in ecological interactions . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2018 , 47 , 1574 –1591 . 10.1039/C7CS00368D .29114668 
Kumar R. ; Bohra A. ; Pandey A. K. ; Pandey M. K. ; Kumar A. 
Metabolomics
for plant improvement: Status and prospects . Front. Plant Sci. 
2017 , 8 , 1 –27 . 10.3389/fpls.2017.01302 .28220127 
Das A. ; Rushton P. J. ; Rohila J. S. 
Metabolomic profiling of soybeans
(Glycine max L.) reveals the importance of sugar and nitrogen Metabolism
under Drought and Heat Stress . Plants 
2017 , 6 , 21 10.3390/plants6020021 .
Obata T. ; Fernie A. R. 
The use of metabolomics
to dissect plant responses
to abiotic stresses . Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 
2012 , 69 , 3225 –3243 . 10.1007/s00018-012-1091-5 .22885821 
Aksenov A. A. ; Da Silva R. ; Knight R. ; Lopes N. P. ; Dorrestein P. C. 
Global
chemical analysis of biology by mass spectrometry . Nat. Rev. Chem. 
2017 , 1 , 1 –20 . 10.1038/s41570-017-0054 .
Blaženović I. ; Kind T. ; Ji J. ; Fiehn O. 
Software tools and
approaches for compound identification of LC-MS/MS data in metabolomics . Metabolites 
2018 , 8 , 31 10.3390/metabo8020031 .
Jorge T. F. ; Rodrigues J. A. ; Caldana C. ; Schmidt R. ; van Dongen J. T. ; Thomas-Oates J. ; Antonio C. 
Mass spectrometry-based plant metabolomics:
metabolite responses to abiotic stress . Mass
Spectrom. Rev. 
2016 , 35 , 620 –649 . 10.1002/mas.21449 .25589422 
Sanchez D. H. ; Schwabe F. ; Erban A. ; Udvardi M. K. ; Kopka J. 
Comparative
metabolomics of drought acclimation in model and forage legumes . Plant, Cell Environ. 
2012 , 35 , 136 –149 . 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02423.x .21902697 
Nadeem M. ; Li J. ; Yahya M. ; Sher A. ; Ma C. ; Wang X. ; Qiu L. 
Research Progress
and Perspective on Drought Stress in Legumes: A
Review . Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
2019 , 20 , 2541 10.3390/ijms20102541 .
Goufo P. ; Moutinho-Pereira J. M. ; Jorge T. F. ; Correia C. M. ; Oliveira M. T. ; Rosa E. A. S. ; Antonio C. ; Trindade H. 
Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata
L. Walp.) metabolomics: Osmoprotection as a physiological strategy
for drought stress resistance and improved yield . Front. Plant Sci. 
2017 , 8 , 1 –22 . 10.3389/fpls.2017.00586 .28220127 
Coutinho I. D. ; Henning L. M. M. ; Dopp S. A. ; Nepomuceno A. ; Moraes L. A. C. ; Marcolino-Gomes J. ; Richter C. ; Schwalbe H. ; Colnago L. A. 
Flooded soybean metabolomic analysis reveals important
primary and secondary metabolites involved in the hypoxia stress response
and tolerance . Environ. Exp. Bot. 
2018 , 153 , 176 –187 . 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2018.05.018 .
Khan N. ; Bano A. ; Rahman M. A. ; Rathinasabapathi B. 
UPLC-HRMS-based
untargeted metabolic profiling reveals changes in chickpea (Cicer
arietinum) metabolome following long-term drought stress . Plant, Cell Environ. 
2019 , 42 , 115 –132 . 10.1111/pce.13195 .29532945 
Fàbregas N. ; Fernie A. R. 
The metabolic response to drought . J. Exp. Bot. 
2019 , 70 , 1077 –1085 . 10.1093/jxb/ery437 .30726961 
Pál M. ; Szalai G. ; Janda T. 
Speculation: Polyamines are important
in abiotic stress signaling . Plant Sci. 
2015 , 237 , 16 –23 . 10.1016/j.plantsci.2015.05.003 .26089148

