
==== Front
ACS Omega
ACS Omega
ao
acsodf
ACS Omega
2470-1343 American Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsomega.9b03914
Article
Relative Position and Relative Rotation in Supramolecular
Systems through the Analysis of the Principal Axes of Inertia: Ferrocene/Cucurbit[7]uril
and Ferrocenyl Azide/β-Cyclodextrin Case Studies
Anconi Cleber P. A. * Laboratório de Química
Fundamental (LQF), Departamento de Química, Universidade Federal de Lavras, 37200-900 Lavras, MG, Brazil
* E-mail: cleberanconi@ufla.br. Phone: +55 35 3829-1974.
06 03 2020 
17 03 2020 
5 10 5013 5025
15 11 2019 25 02 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Parameters
comprising the relative position and relative rotation
of molecules can be evaluated when the principal axes of inertia of
the entities in a supramolecular association are employed as reference.
Such information applies to the characterization and identification
of experimental and theoretical nonbonded systems. The parameters
are relevant to geometric comparison (for theory and experiment) and,
for instance, to monitoring structures by theoretical simulations.
This work introduces a software developed to obtain such parameters
through the discussion of some intriguing host–guest systems,
the ferrocene/cucurbit[7]uril and ferrocenyl azide/β-cyclodextrin.
The ideas within this contribution naturally apply to the study of
other nonbonded associations beyond host–guest chemistry. A
modified version of the software discussed herein serves to obtain
user-defined spatial arrangements for two nonbonded entities. Therefore,
with a given geometry, for instance, from X-ray data, the parameters
can be derived, and with the parameters, from a theoretical perspective,
a spatial arrangement can be obtained.

document-id-old-9ao9b03914document-id-new-14ao9b03914ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
There
are many ways to describe the geometry of a given supramolecular
system. Also, for each experimental or theoretical contribution in
this field, the authors can provide the Cartesian coordinates of all
arrangements under investigation as the Supporting Information. On
the other hand, as will be discussed herein, it may be useful to establish
a simple set of geometric descriptors easy to evaluate and reproduce,
applicable for identification and discussion of methodology, and to
avoid the need to make available all of the Cartesian coordinates
within a contribution. In the field of host–guest chemistry,
we regularly face issues related to the identification of the systems
under study.

According to an impressive contribution of Jeon
and co-workers,1 the crystallographic data
of the host–guest
system formed between ferrocene (Fc) and a cucurbituril,2 specifically CB[7], attest the existence of two
independent arrangements for the compound identified as Fc@CB[7] in
the solid state. According to X-ray data, the guest molecule resides
inside the host cavity with iron atoms close to the geometric center
with distinct inclinations.1 After the
publication of the experimental work, the Fc@CB[7] host–guest
systems, among others, were theoretically investigated by Pinjari
and Gejji.3 In their important contribution,
the distinct spatial arrangements were identified as parallel or perpendicular.

The theoretical investigation attested the reliability of Lee,
Yang, and Parr’s (B3LYP) correlation functional4,5 since the predicted geometries of these inclusion compounds agree
well with the crystal structures.1 Inspired
by the experimental1 and theoretical3 contributions, we can additionally suppose the
existence of other distinct spatial arrangements for the Fc inside
the CB[7] cavity. In this sense, how can we expand the classification
(parallel or perpendicular) to account for other spatial arrangements
for the Fc@CB[7] host–guest system?

In another interesting
host–guest study, Walla and co-workers6 investigated the system formed by ferrocenyl
azide (FcN3) and β-cyclodextrin (β-CD).7 According to the authors, the FcN3 acquires two distinct overall arrangements named equatorial or axial,
depending on its relative position inside the β-CD cavity. The
stability of such spatial arrangements, in solution, varies depending
on the solvent and the temperature.6 Again,
we face a very intriguing system. A theoretical study can be conducted
to define an appropriate approach to model such a type of system that
will result in the identification of the Cartesian coordinates of
the most favorable arrangement (equatorial or axial) in distinct conditions.
However, due to the flexibility of a host–guest system, equatorial
or axial refers to a set of supramolecular systems. Within this context,
how to address the representative geometries compatible with the proposed
experimental identifications?

The excellent processor capacity
of modern computers allows us
to explore the complex potential energy surface (PES) of a particular
host–guest system under study. In host–guest chemistry,
this can be done through docking,8 molecular
dynamics (MD),9 quantum mechanics (QM),10 or hybrid methods such as QM/molecular mechanics
(MM) simulations11 or ONIOM,12 among others. The methodologies can be applied
in isolation or in conjunction. For instance, the docking approach
can provide some starting association to carry out a molecular dynamics
simulation. Among such methods, it is well established that quantum
mechanics gives accurate geometries and thermodynamic quantities for
the molecular systems under investigation.

The choice of a particular
methodology depends on several factors
and, fundamentally, the computational cost related to the study of
a specific type of system. The flexibility of the host–guest
compounds implies several starting associations in modeling. Besides,
for cyclodextrin-based host–guest systems, the existence of
distinct rims (head and tail) implies additionally at least two inclusion
modes in the study. The considerable number of starting arrangements
to be considered in a theoretical investigation gives rise to a challenging
issue related to the identification of each one and the reproducibility
of a given contribution. This issue may not depend on the chosen methodology
(docking, molecular dynamics, QM/MM simulations, ONIOM, or other molecular
approaches).

Within this work, the ferrocene/cucurbit[7]uril
and ferrocenyl
azide/β-cyclodextrin systems were employed as case studies.
The main idea of this paper is to discuss general spatial descriptors
to account for the geometry of noncovalently bonded associations.
Additionally, this work also introduces a software written in Fortran
programing language (available for any researcher) designed to obtain
such geometric descriptors for a given supramolecular system. A modified
version of the software discussed herein applies to get Cartesian
coordinates of a user-defined supramolecular association. The ideas
discussed herein improve the discussion in the field of supramolecular
chemistry because with a given geometry, for instance, from X-ray
data, the parameters can be obtained, and with the parameters, from
a theoretical perspective, a spatial arrangement can be obtained.

Computational
Methods
Fortran Implementation
The parameters discussed herein
take into account the relative position and the relative rotation
between two molecular entities in a supramolecular system. The written
code in Fortran language reads a simple text file containing the Cartesian
coordinates of two molecules: the host, the heavier, and the guest,
the lighter. The coordinates of the center of mass of each molecule
determine their relative distance (r). The definition
of two right-handed Cartesian systems, each one mounted over the center
of the mass of each molecular unit, determines the θ polar angle;
the φ azimuthal angle; and the α, β, and γ
Euler rotation angles for the guest with respect to the host molecule.
The first step in the implementation consists of the construction
of two tensors of the moment of inertia, one for each molecule of
the supramolecular system under investigation. For each unit (host
and guest), with an internal coordinate system centered in its center
of mass, the diagonal elements of the tensor of the moment of inertia
are evaluated by eqs 1–3, for which mi accounts for the mass of the ith atom. 1   2   3  The nondiagonal elements of the tensors for
each molecule are evaluated by eqs 4–6. 4   5   6  The diagonalization of the tensor
gives the
principal inertial axes for each molecule.13 In this procedure, the LAPACK14 diagonalization
subroutine DSYEV was applied to obtain the eigenvectors of the tensor
of the moment of inertia. The eigenvectors define the principal A, B, and C inertial axes.
The related eigenvalues correspond to the inertial moments IA, IB, and IC employed, for instance, in the evaluation of the rotational constants
for each molecule, with IC > IB > IA. The parameters related to the
angular characterization of the supramolecular system depend on the
coordinate systems mounted in the center of the mass of each molecule.

Within this work, the Fortran implementation evaluates the parameters
assuming the existence of two coordinate systems, X, Y, Z, and x, y, z, named herein the reference system
and derived system, respectively. The reference system (X, Y, and Z) corresponds to the
coordinate system mounted over the center of the mass of the heavier
molecule (the host). The derived system (x, y, and z) corresponds to the coordinate
system mounted over the center of the mass of the lighter molecule
(the guest). For the host molecule, the Z-axis coincides
with the eigenvectors associated with the higher inertial moment (IC). For the guest molecule,
the z-axis corresponds to the eigenvectors associated
with the smaller inertial moment (IA). Both Z- and z-axes and
the corresponding right-handed coordination systems were mounted over
each center of mass.

At this point, a discussion concerning
the definition of the positive
direction of both reference and derived systems is required. The diagonalization
procedure of the tensor of the moment of inertia gives the eigenvectors
and the corresponding eigenvalues (moments of inertia for each principal
axis). Three eigenvectors are promptly obtained through the application
of the diagonalization procedure.14 It
is noticeable that the opposite eigenvectors are also solutions to
the eigenvalue problem related to the diagonalization of the inertial
tensor. Therefore, six eigenvectors are evaluated through the diagonalization
procedure. The principal axes of inertia do not determine any preferable
direction. Consequently, it is not possible at first glance to determine,
in a positive mathematical sense, instructions to construct the X, Y, and Z right-handed
reference system. The same is valid for the derived system (x, y, and z).

Some
molecules such as CB[7] are highly symmetric, and there is
no preference for the evaluation of a particular positive direction
coherent with a right-handed X, Y, and Z reference system. Other molecules, such
as cyclodextrins (CDs), are not so symmetric. Such class of carbohydrates
presents two rims, one comprising the primary hydroxyl groups (tail)
and another containing the secondary hydroxyl groups (head). There
is a distinction between the inclusion through the head or tail portion.
How to differentiate such an association from a geometric perspective?

Heteroatomic molecules possess a center of mass for a given group
of atoms (atoms with the same atomic number). Native CDs are heteroatomic
molecules constructed with hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen atoms. The
center of mass of the group of atoms with the higher atomic number,
the oxygen atoms, can be employed as a reference to determine some
preferable directions to mount the reference system. The convention
adopted and implemented within the Fortran software APARM15 introduced in this work assumes a positive direction
in a mathematical sense for the one compatible with the small angle
evaluated between a particular eigenvector along an inertial axis
and the center of mass for the set of atoms with the higher atomic
number.

Within this work, the following colors were used: blue
for the IA axis (or eigenvector direction),
green for
the IB axis (or eigenvector direction),
and red for the IC axis (or eigenvector
direction), with IA, IB, and IC being the moments
of inertia of a molecule. Within this convention, for an asymmetric
top, IC > IB > IA. For the hosts CB[7] and β-CD and
the guests Fc and
FcN3, Figure 1 shows the corresponding eigenvectors (with their proper colors)
for each compound. Due to their symmetry, the eigenvector directions
for CB[7] and Fc may vary, assuming supplementary angles. It is noticeable
that the eigenvector point toward the smaller moment of inertia (IA, blue vector) for FcN3 is not precisely passing through the geometric center of
the two rings of the molecule such as for the Fc (Figure 1).

Figure 1 Eigenvectors employed
in the construction of the reference system
(XYZ) for the hosts CB[7] and β-CD and the
derived system (xyz) for the guests, Fc and FcN3. Cartesian coordinates and arrows.bild (file with axes) obtained
from the Fortran software UD-APARM.15 Colors
adopted herein: blue for IA, green for IB, and red for IC eigenvectors
assuming that IC > IB > IA for an asymmetric top. The three-dimensional
(3D) molecular models were obtained from UCSF Chimera.16

All possible combinations
of the eigenvectors of the tensor of
the moment of inertia with the corresponding vector pointing from
the origin of the reference system (X, Y, and Z) toward the center of mass of the set of
atoms with a higher atomic number (higher-Z-CM) are
considered in the Fortran implementation. A similar analysis is also
implemented for the derived system (x, y, and z). This procedure is not quite simple and
is responsible for roughly 2700 lines of code in the Fortran implementation.
Such a distinction is attributed to a comparison between the angle
formed by one eigenvector and the higher-Z-CM direction
and the opposite eigenvector and the higher-Z-CM
direction. When a difference between those angles is greater than
10°, the flag “Y” is attributed to that particular
axis of inertia. For the three Cartesian axes, eight possibilities
can be addressed: NNN, YNN, NYN, NNY, YYN, YNY, NYY, and YYY. For
an axis with “Y” attribution, the smaller difference
in degrees between one eigenvector and the higher-Z-CM direction will determine the positive Z- or z-axis for both the reference and the derived systems, respectively,
which guarantees the evaluation of the Z or z positive direction independently of the spatial orientation
of the reference molecule (the host), for instance.

This analysis
is crucial to establish universal parameters to characterize
the association of a particular class of molecules. For instance,
such evaluation will determine the positive Z-axis
for CDs essential to distinguish the inclusion by the head or by the
tail cavity portion of such a type of molecule. No matter the orientation
of the CD, the positive Z direction will always point
toward the secondary hydroxyl groups, the head portion of the cavity
of the standard CDs (Figure 1). Attribution of the “Y” flag is also printed
in the output “LOG-PARAM-ONLY.txt” after the execution
of the APARM Fortran software.15 The output
contains much other information, such as the determination of the
higher-Z-CM, evaluation of the moments of inertia,
and the rotational constants for each of two molecules in a supramolecular
system.

As discussed, a similar procedure is carried out for
the construction
of the derived system. Once the reference (X, Y, and Z) and the derived system (x, y, and z) are defined,
the parameters are evaluated. When not applicable, the right-handed
coordinate system is mounted through the use of the eigenvectors obtained
along with the LAPACK implementation without the mass distribution
analysis, which takes place for highly symmetric molecules such as
CB[7]. To allow reproducibility, for highly symmetric molecules such
as CB[7], the definitive evaluation of the preferable axes to mount
the reference system takes place after the alignment of the principal
axes of inertia of the molecule under study and the Cartesian axes.
The center of mass of each molecule is used to determine the relative
position parameters related to distance (r) and polar
(θ) and azimuth angles (φ). Within this work, the positive
sign for the azimuth angle (φ) is measured in the counterclockwise
sense from the reference direction X on the reference
plane XY mounted over the center of mass of the host
molecule (the origin). The modification of such parameters, from a
supramolecular perspective, is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Eigenvectors employed in the construction of
the reference and
derived systems for the association of β-CD and phenol showing
the variation in the supramolecular parameters for relative positions
(r, θ, and φ). Cartesian coordinates
and arrows.bild (file with axes) obtained from the Fortran software
UD-APARM.15 The 3D molecular models were
obtained from UCSF Chimera.16

The relative Euler angles (α, β, and γ)
are evaluated
after the definition of the derived system. The definition of the
relative rotation though Euler angles is not unique. Within this work,
as implemented in APARM and UD-APARM,15 the rotation matrix defined in the Arfken textbook17 was used, assuming, as explained, two right-handed coordinate
systems mounted in each center of mass of the molecules in a given
supramolecular association. The Euler angles (α, β, and
γ) employed within this work are shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3 Eigenvectors employed in the construction of
the reference and
derived systems for the association of β-CD and phenol showing
the variation in the supramolecular parameters for Euler angles (α,
β, and γ). Cartesian coordinates and arrows.bild (file
with axes) obtained from the Fortran software UD-APARM.15 The 3D molecular models were obtained from UCSF
Chimera.16

The flowchart for the evaluation of the supramolecular parameters
for relative positions (r, θ, and φ)
and relative rotations (α, β, and γ) implemented
in APARM is illustrated in Figure 4.

Figure 4 Flowchart for the evaluation of the supramolecular parameters
for
relative positions and rotations implemented in the APARM15 Fortran software.

To evaluate the Euler angles, the eigenvectors of the reference
system (X, Y, Z), mounted over the center of mass of the host (the heavier molecule),
rotate to coincide with the eigenvectors of the derived system (x, y, z) mounted over
the center of mass of the guest (the lighter molecule). The Z–Y–Z order
of rotation was adopted. The same rotation matrix implemented in the
WSolid 1 (solid-state NMR simulations) software17 and described in the Arfken textbook18 was used within such procedure.

As also pointed out
by Prof. Klaus Eichele, the developer of the
WSolid 1, the Z–Y–Z rotation order is adopted in many essential references
such as Arfken,18 Spiess,19 Mehring,20 Narita et al.,21 Freude and Haase,22 and Dye et al.23 The data concerning
the supramolecular parameters were obtained through the APARM Fortran
software15 introduced in this work. Other
Euler angle conventions may be adopted in future implementations.
One of the critical ideas of this work consists of the use of the
axes of inertia of the molecules to construct the reference and derived
system in a supramolecular system. The implementation may vary. There
are many variations to treat Euler angles. Therefore, the present
work is not exhaustive.

Quantum Mechanical Calculations
All host–guest
systems investigated herein were fully optimized without any constraint
with Lee, Yang, and Parr’s (B3LYP) correlation functional.4,5 In all quantum mechanical calculations, the 6-31G(d) basis set24 was employed. All calculations were carried
out with the Gaussian-09 computational chemistry software package.25 All studied associations were subjected to high-computational-cost
harmonic frequency calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory.
The starting geometries for Fc@CB[7] were constructed from the crystallographic
data previously reported.1 The associations
for FcN3@β-CD were constructed with the crystallographic
information for FcN36 and β-CD.26 Within this work, the two modes of inclusion
were investigated as starting associations for the inclusion compound
formed with β-CD. Therefore, four supramolecular FcN3@β-CD starting associations were investigated. All quantum
mechanical calculations were performed in vacuum conditions.

Within this work, the two crystallographic structures were initially
subjected to unconstrained optimization with the LOOSE keyword. According
to the Gaussian-09 manual, the use of such a keyword is appropriate
for initial optimizations of large molecules using density functional
theory (DFT) methods. Due to some difficulty in the optimization with
systems comprising CB[7] molecules, the LOOSE keyword was employed
initially. In a subsequent step, the optimized spatial arrangements
constructed from the crystallographic information were resubjected
to another optimization without the use of the LOOSE keyword. At this
stage, two modifications of the crystal arrangements were also subjected
to unconstrained optimizations. The starting Fc@CB[7] associations
were identified herein as 1, 2, 3, and 4, and the corresponding optimized
geometries (the derived geometries) were identified as 1′,
2′, 3′, and 4′. For the supramolecular system
formed with FcN3 and β-CD, four inclusion compounds
identified herein as 5, 6, 7, and 8 were subjected to unconstrained
optimization. For such structures, the LOOSE keyword was not applied.
Axial and equatorial arrangements compatible with tail and head inclusion
modes were investigated. The optimized associations (the derived structures)
were identified herein as 5′, 6′, 7′, and 8′.
After the optimization, the 5′ association was not addressed
as an inclusion compound due to the distance between the host and
guest.

Results and Discussion
Relative Energy Analysis
According to the experimental
finding, Fc@CB[7] was identified only with two spatial arrangements
in the solid state.1 The theoretical investigations
of the systems formed with Cucurbit[n]urils (n = 5–8), ferrocene (Fc), and their complexes,3 specifically for Fc@CB[7], focused their discussion
only on two such possibilities named parallel and perpendicular. For
the CB[5] and CB[6] associations with Fc, other spatial arrangements
beyond such arrangements were investigated.3 Beyond the parallel or perpendicular identifications, other associations
were found as stationary points on the potential surface at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
level of theory, as attested by the data reported herein. The absolute
(E), the relative energies (ΔE), and the corresponding first three harmonic frequencies for Fc@CB[7]
associations are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Electronic Energies (E), Relative Energies (ΔE), and Three Smaller
Harmonic Frequencies (ω1, ω2, and ω3) Evaluated
at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) Level of Theory for the Fully Unconstrained
Optimized Fc/CB[7] and FcN3/β-CD Associations
system	ID starting identification	E (hartrees)	ΔE (kcal mol–1)	ω1 (cm–1)	ω2 (cm–1)	ω3 (cm–1)	
Fc/CB[7]	1′
crystal (parallel)	–5862.9562283	6.40	15.8145	16.1764	21.5964	
 	2′ other parallel	–5862.9664331	0.00	11.9238	16.0264	18.6967	
 	3′ crystal (perpendicular)	–5862.9613383	3.20	17.8381	20.0143	26.1076	
 	4′ other perpendicular	–5862.9612184	3.27	22.9483	26.8588	32.2308	
FcN3/β-CD	5′ axial (head)	–6089.4803391	0.13	9.4693	12.8956	14.6314	
 	6′ axial (tail)	–6089.4756953	3.04	8.5941	12.3381	16.7330	
 	7′ equatorial
(head)	–6089.4805410	0.00	8.6073	14.1233	15.0274	
 	8′ equatorial (tail)	–6089.4791489	0.87	5.9839	11.0637	13.1312	
The data in Table 1 for Fc/CB[7] attests that all optimized
associations correspond
to true minima in the potential energy surface at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
level of theory (all frequencies are positive real numbers). Furthermore,
the absolute values in hartrees (E) attest that all
Fc/CB[7] host–guest compounds are distinct, which is also supported
by a set of frequencies in Table 1. It is noticeable that the most stable arrangement
in vacuum conditions, the association 2′, was not derived from
the optimization of some experimental X-ray structure. Interestingly,
both structures derived from the solid-state arrangement present relatively
higher energies of 3.20 and 6.40 kcal mol–1 greater
than that of the most stable association 2′. As will be discussed
in the Geometrical Analysis section, such
a stable arrangement was not previously reported for Fc/CB[7] and
surprisingly corresponded to a type of parallel association. The comparison
between the stability of a particular arrangement in the solid state
and gas phase can be debatable, and such analysis is beyond the scope
of this work. For the FcN3/β-CD optimized supramolecular
systems, the harmonic frequencies in Table 1 also attest that all optimized associations
correspond to true minima in the potential energy surface at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
level of theory. Frequency and energy values (E)
indicate that all optimized associations are distinct spatial arrangements,
as will also be discussed in the Geometrical Analysis section. According to Table 1, the most favorable arrangement in the vacuum condition corresponds
to the association 7′, which is an arrangement slightly more
favorable than association 5′. We conclude that the equatorial
starting mode gives the corresponding FcN3/β-CD the
most favorable association in vacuum conditions at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
level of theory. The comparison between the energy data for both distinct
associations, Fc/CB[7] and FcN3/β-CD, indicates smaller
differences in relative energies for FcN3/β-CD associations.
Finally, the energy values (E) in Table 1, in conjunction with the overall
geometries (as will be discussed), attest that 1′ and 4′
correspond to the inclusion compounds previously reported by Pinjari
and Gejji.3

Weak Interaction Analysis
To analyze the weak interactions
that stabilize the supramolecular compounds studied herein, the most
stable associations named 2′ Fc@CB[7] and 7′ FcN3@β-CD (see Table 1) were investigated through the calculation of quantum theory
of atoms in molecules (QTAIM),27 noncovalent
interaction (NCI),28 and natural bond orbital
(NBO).29−31 The data were obtained through the Gaussian-09 computational
chemistry software package24 in conjunction
with Multiwfn, a multifunctional wave function analyzer.32

The relevant interactions that stabilize
the most stable systems under investigation can be visualized in terms
of the molecular graphs that include the (3,–1) critical points
(CPs) and bond paths, as obtained from QTAIM analysis (Figures S1 and S2, Supporting Information). As
illustrated in Figure S1, for 7′
FcN3@β-CD, intramolecular and intermolecular hydrogen
bonds are promptly identified due to the atoms involved along the
bond paths. Other intermolecular interactions can also be identified
in Figure S1. For 2′ Fc@CB[7], the
(3,–1) critical points and bond paths also suggest the existence
of many intermolecular interactions between the host and guest. Due
to the type of atoms, such interactions cannot be regarded as hydrogen
bonds. Topological parameters for both inclusion compounds 2′
Fc@CB[7] and 7′ FcN3@β-CD were also tabulated
(Tables S1 and S2, Supporting Information).
The values in Tables S1 and S2 correspond
to electron density, ρ(r); Laplacian, ∇2ρ(r); and total electron energy densities, H(r) at some selected bond critical points
(BCPs).

According to Nakanishi and co-workers,33 the stronger the interactions, the larger the ρ(r) and more negative will be the ∇2ρ(r) (Laplacian) and H(r). The data in Table S1 identified for
covalent bonds (for β-CD and FcN3) is coherent with
such criteria (exception for iron–carbon BCPs of FcN3, with positive Laplacian). Weak interactions such as van der Waals
present positive values for ∇2ρ(r) (Laplacian) and H(r) at critical
points. Furthermore, ρ(r) lies between 0.00
and 0.01 au,33 which is coherent with some
weak interactions in Table S1. For hydrogen
bonds, the typical ranges were addressed at CPs:33 0.01 < ρ(r) < 0.04; 0.04 <
∇2ρ(r) < 0.12, and −0.004
< H(r) < 0.002. All β-CD
intramolecular hydrogen bondings fulfill such criteria. The intermolecular
hydrogen bond formed between the N2 atom of the guest (FcN3) and the H68 of the host (β-CD) presents a slightly smaller
value for H(r). The other values
are coherent with the ranges. The data for the inclusion compound
2′ Fc@CB[7] (Table S2, Supporting
Information) are coherent with the ranges defined for weak interaction
and were identified between oxygen and nitrogen atoms from the host
CB[7] and hydrogen atoms from the guest, the Fc, as illustrated by
the paths and CPs in Figure S2.

CDs
and CBs have a fundamental difference in host–guest
interactions, with the OH groups in CDs usually responsible for the
formation of host–guest intermolecular hydrogen bonds that
contribute to the guest binding. For CBs, the carbonyl groups in the
cavity allow charge–dipole interactions as well as, depending
on the guest, hydrogen bonding.2 The regions
around carbonyl oxygens in CB[7] are found to be significantly negative,
which accounts for the stability in the formation of host–guest
systems with positively charged guests.2 However, in this study, the Fc guest is neutral and, according to
the type of atoms and data in Table S2,
does not form any hydrogen bond with the CB[7] host. The formation
of an intermolecular hydrogen bond in 7′ FcN3@β-CD
explains its estimated more favorable interaction energy when compared
to 2′ Fc@CB[7], in the gas phase, at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level
of theory (data not shown). The comparison of the NCI plots also attests
the existence of the hydrogen bond in 7′ FcN3@β-CD
(Figure S3, Supporting Information, marked
according to the Multiwfn manual).32

The NBO data for 7′ FcN3@β-CD (Table S3, Supporting Information) suggests that
the intermolecular interaction formed between the host and guest is
important in the stabilization of the host–guest system. The
stabilization energy E(2) from second-order
perturbation theory in natural bond orbital population analysis associated
with the intermolecular hydrogen in such an inclusion compound is
high when compared to the values for intramolecular hydrogen bonds
in β-CD. It is noticeable that the use of NBO data to study
hydrogen bonding is debatable. According to Stone,34 the charge-transfer component of the energy of interaction
between molecules, a controversial issue, cannot be addressed based
on NBO analysis that gives values larger than those obtained by other
methods. In this sense, one alternative consists of the use of the
QTAIM topological parameters obtained through the Multiwfn.32 In a very interesting contribution of Lu and
collaborators,35 a new classification for
the intermolecular hydrogen bond was proposed, and on the basis of
a correlation analysis, it was discussed that the ρ(r) at the bond critical point (BCP) could be employed for
quick and reliable prediction of the bond energy (BE) associated with
hydrogen bonds for neutral and charged complexes. The BEs associated
with intermolecular and intramolecular hydrogen bonds in 7′
FcN3@β-CD were evaluated as proposed by Lu and collaborators
(Table S4, Supporting Information). According
to Table S4, the BE for the intermolecular
hydrogen bond formed by N2 and H68 corresponds to −5.43 kcal
mol–1, a hydrogen bond with strength classified
in the range “weak to medium” (BE varying from −2.5
to −14.0 kcal mol–1) with electrostatics
as major nature.35 Finally, the application
of such an approach to determine the BE for the intramolecular hydrogen
bond belt in β-CD gives values varying from −4.50 to
−5.62 kcal mol–1 (Table S4, Supporting information). Such values are coherent with
the stability of the intramolecular hydrogen bond in β-CD.

Geometrical Analysis
All starting associations and
the corresponding unconstrained optimized geometries at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
level of theory are depicted in Figures 5 and 6 for the Fc/CB[7]
and FcN3/β-CD systems, respectively. The associations
in such figures were obtained as an output for the APARM Fortran software.15

Figure 5 Starting associations for the Fc/CB[7] system (1–4)
and
the corresponding fully unconstrained optimized geometries (1′–4′)
at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory. When applicable, some identifications
of the arrangements are shown. For the sake of clarity, the hydrogen
atoms are not shown.

Figure 6 Starting associations
for the FcN3/β-CD system
(5–8) and the corresponding fully unconstrained optimized geometries
(5′–8′) at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory.
When applicable, some identifications of the arrangements are shown.
For the sake of clarity, the hydrogen atoms are not shown.

The data comprising the relative position (r,
θ, and φ) and relative rotation (α, β, and
γ Euler angles) evaluated through the APARM software are collected
in Table 2.

Table 2 Relative Position (r, θ, and
φ) and Relative Rotation (α, β,
and γ Euler Angles) Evaluated before and after Optimization
of the Fc/CB[7] and FeN3/β-CD Supramolecular Systemsa
system	ID	r (Å)	θ (deg)	φ (deg)	α (deg)	β
(deg)	γ (deg)	
Fc/CB[7]	1	0.3	20	329	227	24	10	
1′	0.3	17	270	270	32	90	
2	0.3	20	329	214	4	22	
2′	2.2	0	281	180	180	270	
3	0.1	12	345	342	79	92	
3′	0.1	90	0	90	76	90	
4	0.1	14	26	256	91	221	
4′	0.4	15	180	87	90	90	
FcN3/β-CD	5	1.5	17	134	101	133	86	
5′	5.6	20	346	23	80	147	
6	0.6	42	95	300	49	65	
6′	2.8	15	244	62	16	313	
7	1.0	14	91	261	141	305	
7′	2.3	13	88	108	134	248	
8	0.5	146	43	78	29	280	
8′	2.6	4	233	103	19	270	
a Data evaluated through the APARM
Fortran software.15

The software does not modify any
of the geometries. Along with
the evaluation of the principal axes of inertia and other data, the
system position is modified to put the origin of the Cartesian system
in the center of mass of the host molecule, followed by the alignment
of the axes. Therefore, the Cartesian coordinate system coincides
with the XYZ reference system. This procedure facilitates
the discussion related to the visualization and comparison between
spatial arrangements. All arrangements in Figures 5 and 6 are depicted
keeping the same view concerning the XYZ reference
system. Initially, we will focus on the arrangements that correspond
to the starting (1–4) and optimized (1′–4′)
associations for the Fc/CB[7] system.

According to Figure 5, the optimized associations
are quite similar to the corresponding
starting associations. The 2′ structure is an exception. We
can see from the analysis of the geometries (Figure 5) that the Fc molecule does not keep its
original position along with the optimization procedure of the system
2. The data in Table 2 also attest such a modification. For such a system, the distance
of the center of mass (the r parameter) is modified
from 0.3 to 2.2 Å. Interestingly, such an arrangement (2′)
in vacuum conditions at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory corresponds
to the most favorable one (see Table 1).

Using the A@B[r θ φ](α
β
γ) notation comprising the position and rotation for an inclusion
compound formed by the A guest and B host, we can state that the most
stable association in vacuum conditions corresponds to the inclusion
compound Fc@CB[7][2.2 0 281](180 180 270), an arrangement not previously
reported at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory.

The starting
associations 1 and 3 correspond to experimental X-ray
structures.1 According to the experimental
report, the inclination of the guest Fc inside the CB[7] host molecule
corresponds to 22 and 79° for 1 and 3, respectively.1 Such data can be interpreted as the angle between
some of the principal axes of inertia of the host and the guest. For
CB[7], a highly symmetric host, one of the principal axes of inertia
associated with the higher moment of inertia (IC), passes through the center of the CB[7] cavity. For the
Fc molecule, a highly symmetric guest, the axis associated with the
smaller moment of inertia (IA), passes
through the center of mass and the geometric center of the two cyclopentadienyl
rings, as illustrated in Figure 1. Therefore, as IC > IB > IA, experimental
guest inclination inside the host cavity for the Fc@CB[7] system corresponds
to the angle between the IA axis from
Fc and the IC axis from CB[7]. The angle
formed by such axes of inertia as implemented in APARM corresponds
to the β Euler angles in Table 2. Due to symmetry, two supplementary angles can be
attributed to such inclination in a mathematical sense. For the sake
of comparison, just one of such solutions was collected. The current
implementation of the APARM does not search for all possible solutions
in the case of highly symmetric molecules.

According to the
data in Table 2, the
APARM found 24 and 79° for the experimental
X-ray crystallographic inclinations for the Fc@CB[7] host–guest
compounds 1 and 3, respectively. The method employed in the evaluation
of such data in the experimental work was not clearly described.1 What is interesting is that when the distance
of the center of mass between the host and guest is almost negligible
(0.1 Å), we found an agreement between the inclination angles
(79°). When such a difference corresponds to 0.3 Å, the
inclination angles differ by 2°. Due to the accuracy in the implementation
of the Fortran software discussed herein (and other geometrical assumptions),
24° will be assumed as the reference for the experimental inclination.
In this sense and based on other data in Table 2, we can state that the geometry of the Fc@CB[7]
compound in the parallel form (structure 1 in Figure 5) is well predicted by the B3lYP\6-31G(d)
level of theory, as also pointed out by Pinjari and Gejji3 who obtained the same spatial arrangement at
this level, the structure 1′ in Figure 3.

For the perpendicular X-ray structure,
with an inclination of 79°,
Pinjari and Gejji3 found the very similar
structure 4′ (undoubtedly addressed based on the data in Table 1). The association
parameter found an inclination corresponding to 90°. It is noticeable
that the distance of the center of mass between the host and guest
(r) corresponds to 0.4 Å for the optimized association
4′. Probably, this accounts for some difference in the inclination
reported previously and evaluated by the APARM Fortran software. Interestingly,
compound 3′ was found by the optimization procedure. The distance
of the center of mass (r) corresponding to 0.1 Å
and the inclination of 76° suggests that such a supramolecular
association corresponds to the better theoretical geometry predicted
at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory for the experimental perpendicular
Fc@CB[7] compound (compound 3). Furthermore, such an association is
slightly favorable than 4′ (Table 1). Based on Figure 5 and the data in Table 2, we can state that 3′ association,
the compound identified as Fc@CB[7][0.1 90 0](90 76 90), an association
not previously reported, is very close in geometry to the X-ray compound
3, identified as Fc@CB[7][0.1 12 345](342 79 92).

Now, we focus
on the FcN3/β-CD system. The starting
associations (5–8) and the corresponding optimized associations
(5′–8′) are depicted in Figure 6. Within this study, some representative
starting FcN3@β-CD associations with the axial-head
(5), axial-tail (6), equatorial-head (7), and equatorial-tail (8)
general identification were subjected to unconstrained optimization
at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory.

According to Figure 6, the FcN3 inside the β-CD cavity does not keep
its original position along with the optimization procedure. The association
5′ probably cannot be considered a real host–guest system.
The analysis of the r parameter in Table 2 also attests the changes in
the position of the FcN3 guest inside the β-CD cavity.
According to Table 2, the differences in r for starting and optimized
associations correspond to 4.1 Å (5–5′), 2.2 Å
(6–6′), 1.3 Å (7–7′), and 2.1 Å
(8–8′). For the 5′, the FcN3@β-CD
overall notation should be replaced by FcN3···β-CD.
The distance of the center of mass between the host and guest for
such an optimized system corresponds to 5.6 Å. Therefore, the
5′ association probably cannot be addressed as an inclusion
compound. Usually, the notation for the starting association cannot
be transferred for the optimized one. Cyclodextrin-based host–guest
systems, in general, are flexible, which implies that a well-defined
starting association with its general or specific identification probably
cannot be identified after the optimization with a similar notation.
The data evaluated from the APARM software can aid in the identification
of complex geometries, as will be discussed. Only based on the visual
comparison (Figure 6), the 6′ association resembles 8′. Finally, based
on the overall arrangement depicted in Figure 6, we can suppose that the optimized association
7′ is quite similar to the starting association 5. A more detailed
analysis can be achieved with the data in Table 2.

For associations 5 and 5′, Table 2 indicates, beyond
the increase in the distance
between the host and guest (growth in r) with the
maintenance of the relative polar angle (slight difference in θ
from 17 to 20°) and a difference in the azimuth angle (φ
from 134 to 345°), the change in the rotation along the IA axis (α Euler angle changes from 101
to 23°) and the difference in the inclination of FcN3 inside the β-CD cavity (β Euler angle changes from 33
to 80°), followed by another rotation along the Z axis (γ Euler angle changes from 86 to 147°). The rotation
along the Z axis for the FcN3 molecule
may be challenging to visualize due to the asymmetric nature of such
a molecule (as illustrated in Figure 1). It is noticeable that the 5′ arrangement
is one of the most stable FcN3/β-CD associations
in vacuum conditions at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory (see Table 1).

Except for
the difference in energy (Table 1), associations 6′ and 8′ seem
to be similar not only visually but also compared to the data in Table 2. We see the close
distance between the host and guest (2.8 Å for 6′ and
2.6 Å for 8′) and close values for the polar (θ)
and azimuth (φ) angles with a difference of approximately 10°.
The inclinations of the guest inside the cavity are also similar (β
Euler angles 16° for 6′ and 19° for 8′). Here,
we attest the lack of the use of general identification for such a
flexible system. Visually, 6′ and 8′ could be identified
by the same general term, for instance (for the analogy), an “expanded
equatorial tail” association. However, their apparent similarity
does not reflect in their difference of ΔE of 2.17 kcal mol–1, according to Table 1. Therefore, instead of using a general identification,
we can identify most adequately 6′ with the undoubted notation
FcN3@β-CD[2.8 15 244](62 16 313) and the corresponding
8′ with its similar notation FcN3@β-CD[2.6
4 233](103 19 270). 7′ is the most stable association for FcN3@β-CD identified in vacuum conditions at the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
level of theory (see Table 1). In general terms, it can be classified as the axial-head
association due to the general orientation of the guest inside the
β-CD cavity. The host–guest distance is close (1.5 Å
for 5 and 2.3 Å for 7′), similar to the inclination of
the guest inside the β-CD cavity (β Euler angle 133°
for 5 and 134° for 7′). Finally, the rotation along the IA axis as illustrated by the difference in the
rotation of the guest inside the CD cavity (see Figure 6) seems not to be defined by the α
Euler angle (101° for 5 and 108° for 7′) but by the
γ Euler angle (86° for 5 and 248° for 7′).
As recommended and discussed herein, the 7′ host–guest
system can be identified more precisely as FcN3@β-CD[2.3
13 88](108 134 248).

Finally, bearing in mind the structures
for which experimental
X-ray crystallographic data was reported, empty CB[7]36 and the Fc@CB[7] compound,1 it
is worth noting that the geometries of the CB[7] host when comprising
in its cavity the Fc guest are not significantly distorted (Figure S4, Supporting Information). Therefore,
the inclusion of the Fc guest does not change the CB[7] geometry considerably.

Related Works
The use of information related to the
molecular axes of inertia and Euler rotation angles can be found in
the literature in several relevant contributions. Without being exhaustive,
some papers can be addressed here and have some relation to this work
or had inspired the conducted research.

Foot and Raman37 discussed the relation between the principal
axes of inertia and ligand binding. Based on crystallographic data,
they explain that with some frequency, at least one of the principal
axes of inertia of a protein penetrates the region used for ligand
binding, an interesting observation. Another creative contribution
related to the study of principal axes for molecules corresponds to
the Galek use of moments of inertia to study crystal packing.38 Within the paper, a new method to compare the
crystal pack based on moments of inertia tensor is presented. According
to the author, the developed method allows the comparison of any two
crystal structures irrespective of chemical connectivity.

Concerning
the Euler angles and their application to the study
of molecular systems, many relevant and inspiring contributions can
be addressed. For instance, we have the work of Zannoni39 concerning simulations of novel mesophases for
which attractive–repulsive models of the Gay–Berne40 potential type, relevant to the study of liquid
crystals, are discussed. This potential comprises a term (a strength
parameter) that is a function of the orientation vectors of two particles
and their separation vector. As discussed by Zannoni and co-workers
previously,41 the biaxial order parameter,
a function of the set of Euler angles defining the orientation of
a molecule, is the most convenient one for the monitoring phase biaxiality.
As mentioned, Euler angles are essential in the study of liquid crystals.
Within this context, experimental techniques such as polarized Raman
spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction allow the evaluation of orientation
order parameters.42

Another exciting
application of Euler angles can be understood
in terms of the work of van Gurp43 related
to the use of rotation matrices for the description of molecular orientation.
Within his contribution, orientational distributions are discussed
after the definition of a direction of a molecule element (molecule,
chain segment, or crystal) as being the spatial position of such element
relative to a right-handed macroscopy system of axes, unambiguously
defined by three Euler angles. According to van Gurp,43 the discussed mathematical formalism applies to several
experimental techniques used to measure the degree of orientation
in polymers.

The use of Euler angles to describe the crystal
orientation and
the issues related to the lack of standard definitions for the unit
cell reference settings and specimen axes are well discussed in a
recent contribution of Nolze.44 According
to the author, the application of Euler angles is still widespread
nowadays for crystal orientation descriptions from an experimental
perspective. However, the use of Euler angles instead of quaternions
requires standardization, at least in fields such as electron backscatter
diffraction (EBSD). Within Nolze contribution,44 Euler rotation angles related to the crystal coordinate
system (crystal basis vectors) and the sample coordinate system used
in EBSD orientation mapping were discussed.

In another interesting
and experimental applicable contribution,
the quantitative determination of the spatial orientation of graphene
(G) sheets by polarized Raman spectroscopy is discussed.45 Within such a work, the local graphene flake
orientation inside a specimen is characterized by the surface normal
vectors. Such an orientation is related to the coordinate system of
the specimen by Euler angles. The orientation distribution function
(ODF) is defined in terms of the local orientation of the graphene
sheet within the specimens under analysis and the specimen relative
to experimental polarized Raman spectroscopy measurement parameters.
Polarized Raman spectroscopy is a powerful technique. Another interesting
example of the application of such a method is related to the quantification
of the alignment of single-wall nanotubes (SWNTs) in a polymer matrix.46

Focusing on specific contributions to
the field of host–guest
chemistry, one of the principal discussions of this work is related
to the identification of starting associations and the characterization
of resulting arrangements evaluated after the optimization procedure.
Many interesting contributions, in this sense, can be discussed and
addressed. One effective strategy, possible today due to the enormous
processor capacity, consists of the analysis of several optimized
starting arrangements through the use of a low-cost computational
method before subjecting a representative spatial arrangement to the
optimization through the application of a more robust and high-cost
computation approach, as reported by Yahia and co-workers.47

Within the Yahia and co-workers’
contribution,47 the modification of the
distance of the center
of the mass between the host and guest followed by a rotation along
the axis of inclusion was responsible for the generation of several
starting host–guest arrangements. Such associations were subjecting
to unconstrained optimization in a low-cost computational method,
the PM6.48 In a subsequent step, a high-cost
computational methodology was applied, in which the conventional exchange–correlation
B3LYP functional, the Coulomb-attenuating method (CAM-B3LYP),49 and Minnesota functionals that take into account
the dispersion (M05-2X and M06-2X)50,51 were used.
The methodology applied, as also pointed out by the authors, followed
the Liu and Guo procedure.52

Within
such a method,52 glycosidic oxygen
atoms of CDs are used to define an XY plane. The
center of such a plane is used as the center of the coordination system.
The guest molecule is then placed along the Z-axis
of the coordination system, and a different orientation of the guest
relative to CD must be taken. Finally, the guest is allowed to enter
and pass through the CD molecule in steps. The optimization of each
step corresponds to a search method to find out a global minimum host–guest
arrangement.52

The Liu and Guo Z-axis is geometrically analogous
to the principal axis of inertia related to the CD higher moment of
inertia (IC), the Z-axis,
defined in this work (see Figure 1). Such an axis passes through the cavity of the CD.
What is fundamental at this point is to bear in mind that to each
step of the widespread applied Liu and Guo procedure,52 we can attribute a set of the association parameters discussed
herein. Therefore, we will have for each of Guo and Liu steps an arrangement
that can be identified by the [r θ φ](α
β γ) notation. The coordination system defined herein,
which uses the principal axes of inertia of CD, through the aid of
a user-defined version of APARM, the UD-APARM software,15 can be applied to generate steps along the IC axis (Z-axis of the described XYZ reference system), analogous to the Liu and Guo procedure.
We now cannot address whether the optimization of steps defined along
the principal axes of inertia IC produces
the same global minimum arrangement that can be found with the original
Liu and Gue procedure.52 Such a discussion
is beyond the scope of this work.

Focusing again on the Yahia
and co-workers’ contribution,47 the
visual inspection of the global minimum
is made through the identification of some relevant distances, a traditional
identification usually present in host–guest theoretical studies.53−55 The use of a set of parameters discussed herein can serve as an
additional tool in the discussion of the principal arrangements focused
on a specific study. Beyond any identification, as proposed and discussed
herein, the authors always have the option to address the complete
coordinates of each arrangement investigated as the Supporting Information.56

In summary, the critical idea of this
work is the construction
of a reference system (X, Y, and Z) over the principal axes of the host molecule. The additional
development of the derived system (x, y, and z) over the principal axes of the guest allows
us to evaluate a set of parameters accounting for the relative position
and rotation between a pair of molecules. The central idea is simple.
The implementation comprises some tricky steps, such as the evaluation
among some possibilities of adequate vectors to represent the right-handed
coordination systems mounted over each molecule. The notation and
ideas do not have the intent to replace the traditional identification
and visual analysis related to host–guest chemistry but improve
the discussion related to such systems. Finally, the principle discussed
herein naturally applies to other supramolecular systems beyond host–guest
chemistry, as will be discussed in the next section.

Beyond Host–Guest
Chemistry
The applicability
of the developed approach to other supramolecular systems beyond host–guest
chemistry will be illustrated through the analysis of a preliminary
study concerning the interaction of the indigo carmine (IC) dye, one
of the oldest and most importantly used dyes,57 and a graphene (G)58 model comprising
708 atoms. Such a supramolecular system has been studied recently
in my research group through molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.

After an initial minimization, the simulations were carried out through
the use of the Amber 18 package59 with
the general AMBER force field (GAFF)60 in
implicit solvent (water) at 300 K (100 ps of length). Structures of
the systems with energy close to the average were collected at 4,
59, and 97 ps and were analyzed by the APARM software discussed herein.15 The supramolecular associations collected by
the MD simulations with the corresponding parameters defined and discussed
herein are depicted in Figure 7.

Figure 7 Geometries of the supramolecular system formed with the indigo
carmine (IC) dye and a 708-atom graphene (G) model collected by MD
simulations carried out in water (implicit model) at 300 K. Force
field: GAFF, length of simulation: 100 ps. The parameters discussed
in this work were shown (APARM15 data).
For the sake of clarity, hydrogen atoms are not shown.

According to the geometries depicted in Figure 7, we can see that the dye molecule,
based
on the right-handed XYZ reference system mounted
over the graphene (G), was placed in a negative Z position (below the surface in the figure), which justifies the
θ parameter (polar angle) greater than 90°. The position
of the IC dye changes throughout the MD simulation, which can be understood
in terms of the difference in the r values (4.9,
18.3, and 11.1 Å at 4, 59, and 97 ps, respectively).

According
to the geometries in Figure 7, the distance between the plane of carbon
atoms and the plane of the IC dye molecule (a plane that passes through
the IA axis for IC) does
not change considerably during the MD simulation. The distance between
those planes can be evaluated for this system as r cos(180 – θ). Such values correspond to 3.6,
3.0, and 4.0 Å for geometries at 4, 59, and 97 ps, respectively.
We also see the rotation of the IC molecule in the surface of the
graphene (variation of the φ parameter). The dye molecule keeps
its inclination concerning the plane of carbon atoms, as indicated
by the small change in the β parameter along the trajectory
(90–94° from 4 to 97 ps). The rotation of the dye in the
surface of the graphene can also be interpreted by the variation of
the γ parameter because the α Euler angle does not change
a lot. The very distinct value for γ at 59 ps (163°) accounts
for the relative rotation of the dye molecule in such collected geometry.
The γ values for 4 and 97 ps are the same (253°), which
can be interpreted through the visual analysis of the geometries in Figure 7. Without being exhaustive,
the discussion concerning the supramolecular system formed by a dye
molecule and a graphene model attests that the developed software
and the parameters evaluated apply naturally for other systems beyond
host–guest chemistry.

Conclusions
In
this work, the Fc/CB[7] and the FeN3/β-CD intermolecular
associations were investigated at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory.
QTAIM analysis for the most stable arrangements obtained theoretically
suggests the existence of many intermolecular interactions responsible
for the stabilization of the inclusion compounds. NCI and NBO calculations
attest the existence of an intermolecular hydrogen bond in the most
favorable inclusion compound formed between FeN3 and β-CD.
For such a host–guest system, the hydrogen bond energy evaluated
through the use of QTAIM data corresponds to −5.43 kcal mol–1. According to the investigation of the B3LYP/6-31G(d)
potential energy surface (PES) for the Fc@CB[7] and the FeN3@β-CD host–guest starting arrangements, it can be stated
that overall identifications such as parallel, perpendicular, axial,
or equatorial correspond to a set of supramolecular structures. Within
this context, a collection of parameters to improve the spatial arrangement
description was introduced. Through the analysis of the principal
axes of inertia of each molecule, the Fortran software discussed in
this contribution, named APARM, systematically generates the six parameters
accounting for the relative position (r, θ,
and φ) and relative
rotation (α, β, and, γ Euler angles) of a given
supramolecular system. The immediate gain in the discussion of a given
experimental or theoretical supramolecular arrangement corresponds
to the substitution of the general identification guest@host for the
more complete one guest@host[r θ φ](α
β γ). Additionally, the parameters discussed herein apply
to other nonbonded associations beyond host–guest chemistry
for which the notation A···B[r θ
φ](α β γ) comprises a more complete description
of the supramolecular system formed by the molecules A and B. It is
worth noting that a modified version of the APARM, the UD-APARM software,
serves to obtain user-defined spatial arrangements for two nonbonded
entities. Therefore, with a given geometry, for instance, from X-ray
data, the parameters can be derived, and with the parameters, from
a theoretical perspective, a geometry can be obtained. Specifically,
in theoretical works, the descriptors apply to monitoring of the spatial
association of a supramolecular system during an optimization procedure
or a molecular dynamics simulation and also apply in the specification
of starting spatial arrangements, the additional information that
contributes to reproducibility. The last versions of the software
discussed herein, along with instructions and other implementations
(in a distinct programming language), will be available for download
at http://www.dqi.ufla.br/portal/anconi-group-homepage.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.9b03914.QTAIM molecular graphs
for 7′ FcN3@β-CD′ and 2′ Fc@CB[7];
QTAIM topological parameters
for 7′ FcN3@β-CD and 2′ Fc@CB[7]; NCI
plots for 2′ Fc@CB[7] and 7′ FcN3@β-CD;
NBO relevant data for 7′ FcN3@β-CD; electron
density at BCP and BE for HB in 7′ FcN3@β-CD;
and X-ray crystallographic geometries of CB[7] for comparison (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao9b03914_si_001.pdf

 The author declares no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The author thanks the Brazilian agencies FAPEMIG
and CNPq
for financial support and also thanks Professor Helio Ferreira dos
Santos for the access to the Nucleo de Estudos em Quımica Computacional
(NEQC, UFJF, Brazil) computer facility.
==== Refs
References
Jeon W. S. ; Moon K. ; Park S. H. ; Chun H. ; Ko Y. H. ; Lee J. Y. ; Lee E. S. ; Samal S. ; Selvapalam N. ; Rekharsky M. V. ; Sindelar V. ; Sobransingh D. ; Inoue Y. ; Kaifer A. E. ; Kim K. 
Complexation of ferrocene
derivatives by the cucurbit[7]uril host: a comparative study of the
cucurbituril and cyclodextrin host families
. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2005 , 127 , 12984 –12989
. 10.1021/ja052912c .16159293 
Lee J. W. ; Samal S. ; Selvapalam N. ; Kim H. ; Kim K. 
Cucurbituril
homologues and derivatives: new opportunities in supramolecular chemistry
. Acc. Chem. Res. 
2003 , 36 , 621 –630
. 10.1021/ar020254k .12924959 
Pinjari R. V. ; Gejji S. P. 
Electronic Structure,
Molecular Electrostatic Potential,
and NMR Chemical Shifts in Cucurbit[n]urils (n = 5–8), Ferrocene,
and Their Complexes
. J. Phys. Chem. A 
2008 , 112 , 12679 –12686
. 10.1021/jp807268v .19007192 
Becke A. D. 
Density-functional
exchange-energy approximation with correct asymptotic behavior
. Phys. Rev. A 
1988 , 38 , 3098 –3100
. 10.1103/PhysRevA.38.3098 .
Lee C. ; Yang W. ; Parr R. G. 
Development
of the Colle-Salvetti
correlation-energy formula into a functional of the electron density
. Phys. Rev. B 
1988 , 37 , 785 –789
. 10.1103/PhysRevB.37.785 .
Walla P. ; Arion V. B. ; Brinker U. H. 
Solvent-and
temperature-tuned orientation
of ferrocenyl azide inside β-cyclodextrin
. J. Org. Chem. 
2006 , 71 , 3274 –3277
. 10.1021/jo060102t .16599628 
Crini G. 
A history
of cyclodextrins
. Chem. Rev. 
2014 , 114 , 10940 –10975
. 10.1021/cr500081p .25247843 
Srinivasan K. ; Stalin T. ; Sivakumar K. 
Spectral and electrochemical study
of host-guest inclusion complex between 2, 4-dinitrophenol and β-cyclodextrin
. Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 
2012 , 94 , 89 –100
. 10.1016/j.saa.2012.03.066 .
Sangpheak W. ; Khuntawee W. ; Wolschann P. ; Pongsawasdi P. ; Rungrotmongkol T. 
Enhanced stability of a naringenin/2,6-dimethyl
β-cyclodextrin
inclusion complex: Molecular dynamics and free energy calculations
based on MM- and QM-PBSA/GBSA
. J. Mol. Graphics
Modell. 
2014 , 50 , 10 –15
. 10.1016/j.jmgm.2014.03.001 .
Snor W. ; Liedl E. ; Weiss-Greiler P. ; Viernstein H. ; Wolschann P. 
Density functional calculations on
meloxicam−β-cyclodextrin
inclusion complexes
. Int. J. Pharm. 
2009 , 381 , 146 –152
. 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2009.05.012 .19446616 
Lambert A. ; Yeguas V. ; Monard G. ; Ruiz-López M. F. 
What is
the effective dielectric constant in a β-cyclodextrin cavity?
Insights from Molecular Dynamics simulations and QM/MM calculations
. Comput. Theor. Chem. 
2011 , 968 , 71 –76
. 10.1016/j.comptc.2011.05.008 .
Djemil R. ; Khatmi D. 
Quantum mechanical
study of complexation of dopamine
and epinephrine with β-Cyclodextrin using PM6, ONIOM, and NBO
analysis
. J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 
2012 , 9 , 1571 –1576
. 10.1166/jctn.2012.2246 .
Kraitchman J. 
Determination
of molecular structure from microwave spectroscopic data
. Am. J. Phys. 
1953 , 21 , 17 –24
. 10.1119/1.1933338 .
Anderson E. ; Bai Z. ; Bischof C. ; Blackford S. ; Demmel J. ; Dongarra J. ; Du Croz J. ; Greenbaum A. ; Hammarling S. ; McKenney A. ; Sorensen D.  LAPACK Users’
Guide , 3 rd ed.; Society
for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics : Philadelphia,
PA , 1999 .
APARM: Association
Parameters, version 1.13.8, Fortran code to obtain
the relative position (r, θ, φ) and relative
rotation (α, β, and γ Euler angles) between two
non-bonded molecular entities. The software employed in the present
work to obtain the data in Table 2 and Figure 7. UD-APARM: User-Defined
Association Parameters, version 1.11, Fortran code to obtain a spatial
arrangement from a user-defined set of supramolecular association
parameters (r, θ, φ, α, β,
γ). UD-APARM is the Fortran software employed in the present
work to obtain cartesian coordinates of the associations depicted
in Figures 1–3. Current implementations and new versions of
the programs discussed herein (alternative to Fortran programing language)
will be available for download at http://www.dqi.ufla.br/portal/anconi-group-homepage. Developer: Anconi, C. P. A.
Pettersen E. F. ; Goddard T. D. ; Huang C. C. ; Couch G. S. ; Greenblatt D. M. ; Meng E. C. ; Ferrin T. E. 
UCSF Chimera, a visualization system
for exploratory research and analysis
. J. Comput.
Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 1605 –1612
. 10.1002/jcc.20084 .15264254 
Eichele K.  WSolids1—Solid
State NMR Simulations, User Manual , version 1.21.3; Universitat Tubingen , 2015 .
Arfken G. ; Weber H.
J.  Mathematical Methods for
Physicists , 6 th ed.; Academic
Press : New York , 2005 ; pp 202 –205
.
Spiess H. W.  Rotation of
Molecules and Nuclear Spin Relaxation
. In Dynamic NMR Spectroscopy. NMR Basic Principles and Progress/Grundlagen
und Fortschritte ; Springer : Berlin, Heidelberg , 1978 ; Vol. 15 .
Mehring M.  , Principles of High-Resolution
NMR in Solids ; 2 nd ed.; Springer-Verlag : Berlin , 1983 .
Narita K. ; Umeda J.-I. ; Kusumoto H. 
Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance Powder
Patterns of the Second-Order Nuclear Quadrupole Interaction in Solids
with Asymmetric Field Gradient
. J. Chem. Phys. 
1966 , 44 , 2719 –2723
. 10.1063/1.1727118 .
Freude D. ; Haase J.   In NMR Basic Principles and Progress ;Diehl P. ; Fluck E. ; Guenther H. ; Kosfeld R. ; Seelig J.  , Eds.; Springer
Verlag : Berlin , 1993 ; Vol. 29 .
Dye J. L. ; Ellaboudy A. S. ; Kim J.  Solid-State NMR
of Quadrupolar Nuclei
. In Modern NMR Techniques
and Their Application in Chemistry ;Popov A. I. ; Hallenga K.  , Eds.; Practical Spectroscopy
Series ; Marcel Dekker, Inc. : New York , 1991 ; Vol. 11 , pp 217 –322
.
Hariharan P. C. ; Pople J. A. 
The influence of polarization functions
on molecular
orbital hydrogenation energies
. Theor. Chim.
Acta 
1973 , 28 , 213 –222
. 10.1007/BF00533485 .
Frisch M. J. ; Trucks G. W. ; Schlegel H. B. ; Scuseria G. E. ; Robb M. A. ; Cheeseman J. R. ; Scalmani G. ; Barone V. ; Mennucci B. ; Petersson G. A. ; Nakatsuji H. ; Caricato M. ; Li X. ; Hratchian H. P. ; Izmaylov A. F. ; Bloino J. ; Zheng G. ; Sonnenberg J. L. ; Hada M. ; Ehara M. ; Toyota K. ; Fukuda R. ; Hasegawa J. ; Ishida M. ; Nakajima T. ; Honda Y. ; Kitao O. ; Nakai H. ; Vreven T. ; Montgomery J. A. ; Peralta J. E. ; Ogliaro F. ; Bearpark M. ; Heyd J. J. ; Brothers E. ; Kudin K.
N. ; Staroverov V. N. ; Kobayashi R. ; Normand J. ; Raghavachari K. ; Rendell A. ; Burant J. C. ; Iyengar S. S. ; Tomasi J. ; Cossi M. ; Rega N. ; Millam J. M. ; Klene M. ; Knox J. E. ; Cross J. B. ; Bakken V. ; Adamo C. ; Jaramillo J. ; Gomperts R. ; Stratmann R. E. ; Yazyev O. ; Austin A. J. ; Cammi R. ; Pomelli C. ; Ochterski J. W. ; Martin R. L. ; Morokuma K. ; Zakrzewski V. G. ; Voth G. A. ; Salvador P. ; Dannenberg J. J. ; Dapprich S. ; Daniels A. D. ; Farkas O. ; Foresman J. B. ; Ortiz J. V. ; Cioslowski J. ; Fox D. J.  . Gaussian09 , revision D.01; Gaussian Inc. : Wallingford, CT , 2009 .
Seidel R. W. ; Koleva B. B. 
β-Cyclodextrin 10.41-hydrate
. Acta Crystallogr., Sect. E: Struct. Rep. Online 
2009 , E65 , o316210.1107/S160053680904865X .
Bader R. W. F.  Atoms in Molecules.
A Quantum Theory ; International Monographs on Chemistry ; Clarendon Press : Oxford , 1990 ; Vol. 22 , pp 1 –438
.
Johnson E. R. ; Keinan S. ; Mori-Sánchez P. ; Contreras-García J. ; Cohen A. J. ; Yang W. 
Revealing Noncovalent Interactions
. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010 , 132 , 6498 –6506
. 10.1021/ja100936w .20394428 
Foster J.
P. ; Weinhold F. 
Natural hybrid
orbitals
. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
1980 , 102 , 7211 –7218
. 10.1021/ja00544a007 .
Reed A. E. ; Weinhold F. 
Natural bond orbital
analysis of near-Hartree-Fock
water dimer
. J. Chem. Phys. 
1983 , 78 , 4066 –4073
. 10.1063/1.445134 .
Weinhold F.  Natural Bond Orbital
Methods
. In Encyclopedia of Computational
Chemistry ; Schleyer P. v. R. ; Allinger N. L. ; Clark T. ; Gasteiger J. ; Kollman P. A. ; Schaefer H. F. III; Schreiner P. R.  , Eds.; John
Wiley & Sons : Chichester, U.K. , 1998 ; Vol. 3 , pp 1792 –1811
.
Lu T. ; Chen F. 
Multiwfn:
A Multifunctional Wavefunction Analyzer
. J.
Comput. Chem. 
2012 , 33 , 580 –592
. 10.1002/jcc.22885 .22162017 
Nakanishi W. ; Hayashi S. ; Narahara K. 
Atoms-in-Molecules
Dual Parameter
Analysis of Weak to Strong Interactions: Behaviors of Electronic Energy
Densities versus Laplacian of Electron Densities at Bond Critical
Points
. J. Phys. Chem. A 
2008 , 112 , 13593 –13599
. 10.1021/jp8054763 .19053566 
Stone A. J. 
Natural
bond orbitals and the nature of the hydrogen bond
. J. Phys. Chem. A 
2017 , 121 , 1531 –1534
. 10.1021/acs.jpca.6b12930 .28151685 
Emamian S. ; Lu T. ; Kruse H. ; Emamian H. 
Exploring Nature and Predicting Strength
of Hydrogen Bonds: A Correlation Analysis Between Atoms-in-Molecules
Descriptors, Binding Energies, and Energy Components of Symmetry-Adapted
Perturbation Theory
. J. Comput. Chem. 
2019 , 40 , 2868 –2881
. 10.1002/jcc.26068 .31518004 
Kim J. ; Jung I.-S. ; Kim S.-Y. ; Lee E. ; Kang J.-K. ; Sakamoto S. ; Yamaguchi K. ; Kim K. 
New Cucurbituril Homologues:
Syntheses, Isolation, Characterization, and X-ray Crystal Structures
of Cucurbit[n]uril (n = 5, 7, and 8)
. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 
2000 , 122 , 540 –541
. 10.1021/ja993376p .
Foot J. ; Raman A. 
A relation between
the principal axes of inertia and ligand binding
. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
2000 , 97 , 978 –983
. 10.1073/pnas.97.3.978 .10655470 
Galek T. A. 
Novel comparison
of crystal packing by moments of inertia
. CrystEngComm 
2011 , 13 , 841 –849
. 10.1039/C0CE00408A .
Zannoni C. 
Molecular
design and computer simulations of novel mesophases
. J. Mater. Chem. 
2001 , 11 , 2637 –2646
. 10.1039/b103923g .
Gay J. G. ; Berne B. J. 
Modification of
the overlap potential to mimic a linear
site–site potential
. J. Chem. Phys. 
1981 , 74 , 3316 –3319
. 10.1063/1.441483 .
Biscarini F. ; Chiccoli C. ; Pasini P. ; Semeria F. ; Zannoni C. 
Phase diagram
and orientational order in a biaxial lattice model: A Monte Carlo
study
. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1995 , 75 , 1803 –1806
. 10.1103/PhysRevLett.75.1803 .10060395 
Sanchez-Castillo A. ; Osipov M. A. ; Jagiella S. ; Nguyen Z. H. ; Kaspar M. ; Hamplova V. ; Maclennan J. ; Giesselmann F. 
Orientational
order parameters of a de Vries–type ferroelectric liquid crystal
obtained by polarized Raman spectroscopy and x-ray diffraction
. Phys. Rev. E 
2012 , 06170310.1103/PhysRevE.85.061703 .
van
Gurp M. 
The use of rotation matrices in the mathematical description of molecular
orientations in polymers
. Colloid Polym. Sci. 
1995 , 273 , 607 –625
. 10.1007/BF00652253 .
Nolze G. 
Euler angles,
and crystal symmetry
. Cryst. Res. Technol. 
2015 , 50 , 188 –201
. 10.1002/crat.201400427 .
Li Z. ; Young R. J. ; Kinloch I. A. ; Wilson N. R. ; Marsden A. J. ; Raju A. P. A. 
Quantitative determination of the spatial orientation
of graphene by polarized Raman spectroscopy
. Carbon 
2015 , 88 , 215 –224
. 10.1016/j.carbon.2015.02.072 .
Pérez R. ; Banda S. ; Ounaies Z. 
Determination
of the orientation
distribution function in aligned single wall nanotube polymer nanocomposites
by polarized Raman spectroscopy
. J. Appl. Phys. 
2008 , 103 , 07430210.1063/1.2885347 .
Yahia H. A. ; Yahia O. A. ; Khatmi D. ; Belghiche R. ; Bouzitouna A. 
Quantum chemical investigations on hydrogen bonding
interactions established in the inclusion complex β-cyclodextrin/benzocaine
through the DFT, AIM, and NBO approaches
. J.
Inclusion Phenom. Macrocyclic Chem. 
2017 , 89 , 353 –365
. 10.1007/s10847-017-0753-1 .
Stewart J. J. P. 
Optimization
of parameters for semiempirical methods V: modification of NDDO approximations
and application to 70 elements
. J. Mol. Model. 
2007 , 13 , 1173 –1213
. 10.1007/s00894-007-0233-4 .17828561 
Yanai T. ; Tew D. P. ; Handy N. C. 
A new hybrid
exchange-correlation
functional using the Coulomb-attenuating method (CAM-B3LYP)
. Chem. Phys. Lett. 
2004 , 393 , 51 –57
. 10.1016/j.cplett.2004.06.011 .
Zhao Y. ; Schultz N. E. ; Truhlar D. G. 
Design
of Density Functionals by
Combining the Method of Constraint Satisfaction with Parametrization
for Thermochemistry, Thermochemical Kinetics, and Noncovalent Interactions
. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
2006 , 2 , 364 –382
. 10.1021/ct0502763 .26626525 
Zhao Y. ; Truhlar D. G. 
The M06 suite of
density functionals for main group
thermochemistry, thermochemical kinetics, noncovalent interactions,
excited states, and transition elements: two new functionals and systematic
testing of four M06-class functionals and 12 other functionals
. Theor. Chem. Acc. 
2008 , 120 , 215 –241
. 10.1007/s00214-007-0310-x .
Liu L. ; Guo Q. X. 
Use of quantum chemical
methods to study cyclodextrin
chemistry
. J. Inclusion Phenom. Macrocyclic
Chem. 
2004 , 50 , 95 –103
. 10.1007/s10847-003-8847-3 .
Yang L. ; Chang Q. ; Zhou S. ; Yang Y. ; Xia F. ; Chen W. ; Li M. ; Yang X. 
Host–guest interaction
between brazilin and hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin: preparation,
inclusion mode, molecular modeling and characterization
. Dyes Pigm. 
2018 , 150 , 193 –201
. 10.1016/j.dyepig.2017.12.010 .
Bezzina B. ; Djémil R. ; Khatmi D. E. ; Humbel S. ; Carissan Y. 
Computational
insights about the dynamic behavior for the inclusion process of deprotonated
and neutral aspirin in β-cyclodextrin
. J. Inclusion Phenom. Macrocyclic Chem. 
2018 , 92 , 115 –127
. 10.1007/s10847-018-0822-0 .
Venkataramanan N. S. ; Suvitha A. ; Kawazoe Y. 
Unraveling the nature
of binding
of cubane and substituted cubanes within cucurbiturils: A DFT and
NCI study
. J. Mol. Liq. 
2018 , 260 , 18 –29
. 10.1016/j.molliq.2018.03.071 .
Iglesias V. ; Avei M. R. ; Bruna S. ; Cuadrado I. ; Kaifer A. E. 
Binding
Interactions between a Ferrocenyl guanidinium Guest and Cucurbit[n]uril
Hosts
. J. Org. Chem. 
2017 , 82 , 415 –419
. 10.1021/acs.joc.6b02508 .27983848 
Vautier M. ; Guillard C. ; Herrmann J.-M. 
Photocatalytic degradation of dyes
in water: case study of indigo and of indigo carmine
. J. Catal. 
2001 , 201 , 46 –59
. 10.1006/jcat.2001.3232 .
Novoselov K. S. ; Geim A. K. ; Morozov S. V. ; Jiang D. ; Zhang Y. ; Dubonos S. V. ; Grigorieva I. V. ; Firsov A. A. 
Electric field effect
in atomically thin carbon films
. Science 
2004 , 306 , 666 –669
. 10.1126/science.1102896 .15499015 
Case D. A. ; Ben-Shalom I. Y. ; Brozell S. R. ; Cerutti D. S. ; Cheatham T. E. ; Cruzeiro V. W. D. ; Darden T. A. ; Duke R. E. ; Ghoreishi D. ; Gilson M. K. ; Gohlke H. ; Goetz A.
W. ; Greene D. ; Harris R. ; Homeyer N. ; Izadi S. ; Kovalenko A. ; Kurtzman T. ; Lee T. S. ; LeGrand S. ; Li P. ; Lin C. ; Liu J. ; Luchko T. ; Luo R. ; Mermelstein D. J. ; Merz K. M. ; Miao Y. ; Monard G. ; Nguyen C. ; Nguyen H. ; Omelyan I. ; Onufriev A. ; Pan F. ; Qi R. ; Roe D. R. ; Roitberg A. ; Sagui C. ; Schott-Verdugo S. ; Shen J. ; Simmerling C. L. ; Smith J. ; Salomon-Ferrer R. ; Swails J. ; Walker R. C. ; Wang J. ; Wei H. ; Wolf R. M. ; Wu X. ; Xiao L. ; York D. M. ; Kollman P. A.  AMBER 2018 ; University
of California : San Francisco , 2018 .
Wang J. ; Wolf R. M. ; Caldwell J. W. ; Kollman P. A. ; Case D. A. 
Development
and testing of a general amber force field
. J. Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 1157 –1174
. 10.1002/jcc.20035 .15116359

