
==== Front
ACS Omega
ACS Omega
ao
acsodf
ACS Omega
2470-1343 American Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsomega.9b03307
Article
In Vitro and Ex Vivo Efficacy of Novel Trp-Arg Rich
Analogue of α-MSH against Staphylococcus
aureus
Singh Jyotsna † Mumtaz Sana † Joshi Seema  Mukhopadhyay Kasturi * Antimicrobial Research Laboratory,
School of Environmental Sciences, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi 110067, India
* E-mail: kasturim@mail.jnu.ac.in.
17 02 2020 
25 02 2020 
5 7 3258 3270
06 10 2019 17 01 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical
Society2020American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), an essential component of innate
immunity, are very important resources for human therapeutics to counter
the current threat of drug resistance. We have previously established
that one such AMP, α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH),
an endogenous neuropeptide, and its derivatives have potent antimicrobial
activity against Staphylococcus aureus, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). However, the immense potential of α-MSH for therapeutic
development against staphylococcal infections is marred by its reduced
efficacy in the presence of standard microbiological culture medium.
To overcome this issue, in this study, we designed a series of five
novel analogues of the C-terminal fragment of α-MSH, i.e., α-MSH(6–13),
by replacing uncharged and less hydrophobic residues with tryptophan
and arginine to increase the hydrophobicity and cationic charge of
the peptide, respectively. While all of the peptides showed a preferential
interaction with negatively charged phospholipid vesicles, the most
hydrophobic and cationic peptide, i.e., Ana-5, exhibited the highest
activity against S. aureus cells while
maintaining cell selectivity. Moreover, Ana-5 could retain its activity
even in complex media like the Mueller Hinton broth and displayed
rapid bactericidal activity in the presence of serum. Ana-5 also caused
rapid bacterial membrane depolarization, permeabilization, and cell
lysis and was able to bind to polyanionic plasmid DNA suggesting a
possible dual mode of action of the peptide. Importantly, Ana-5 was
able to eradicate intracellular S. aureus in fibroblast cells similar to conventional antibiotics. Collectively,
in the present study, we obtained a potent α-MSH-based analogue
with excellent staphylocidal potency in microbial growth medium and
ex vivo efficacy, which may translate into therapeutic application.

document-id-old-9ao9b03307document-id-new-14ao9b03307ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Staphylococcus aureus is a major
etiological agent of skin, soft tissue, device-related infections
as well as threatening diseases such as bacteremia, pneumonia, and
infective endocarditis contributing significantly to morbidity and
mortality in nosocomial infections.1,2 Over the last
few decades, S. aureus has equipped
itself with multiple drug resistance (MDR) and a plethora of virulence
factors that allow this deadly pathogen to avoid immune clearance
and thrive inside human hosts.3 In the
face of escalating MDR, membrane disruptive cationic antimicrobial
peptides (CAMPs) with nonspecific multitargeting potential have emerged
as lucrative candidates. CAMPs are ubiquitous, naturally occurring
host defense peptides (11–60 residues) serving as the first
line of defense in almost all life forms.4 A number of peptide hormones and neuropeptides that share cationic
and amphipathic structures have been shown to modulate immune response,
thereby protecting the host against microbial invasion and infection.5 Several neuropeptides such as α-melanocyte
stimulating hormone (α-MSH), substance P, and neuropeptide Y
show direct anti-infective properties regulated through spatial specificity
and delivery at the site of infection.6,7 α-MSH
is an endogenous trideca-neuropeptide (Ac-Ser1-Tyr2-Ser3-Met4-Glu5-His6-Phe7-Arg8-Trp9-Gly10-Lys11-Pro12-Val13-NH2) produced through cleavage of precursor polypeptide pro-opiomelanocortin
(POMC). It primarily induces melanogenesis and also exerts antipyretic,
anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective, and immunomodulatory effects by
interacting with various melanocortin receptors.8,9

Over the past decade, our group has established the rapid and potent
activity of α-MSH and its shorter C-terminal fragments against
various clinical strains of S. aureus, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA).10−12 We also demonstrated that α-MSH primarily acts
through membrane permeabilization and depolarization in S. aureus and also hampers DNA replication and protein
synthesis without compromising cell selectivity.11,13 Encouragingly, α-MSH showed synergistic activity with different
classes of antibiotics and effective in vivo activity against S. aureus.13,14 Further, we showed
that α-MSH has a better affinity toward anionic membrane environment,
and therefore the de novo α-MSH designed analogues with enhanced
cationic charge promoted the staphylocidal efficacy.15,16 In our previous study, we also demonstrated the C-terminal region
of α-MSH, i.e., α-MSH(6–13), to be equally potent
against S. aureus as the entire peptide.11 However, α-MSH-based peptides have shown
little antimicrobial activity in standard bacterial growth media like
Mueller Hinton broth (MHB).10−17 It might be due to the complex formed by these cationic analogues
with components present in MHB like carbohydrates and proteins.18,19 Therefore, in this study, we aimed to design analogues that could
overcome the barrier of α-MSH inactivity in media. Several natural
antimicrobial peptides, e.g., cathelicidins (indolicidin and tritrpticin),
lactoferricin B, and defensin, and successful synthetic CAMPs have
shown potent antimicrobial activity due to the presence of Arg and
Trp residues or domains.20 Being shorter
in length, the analogues of α-MSH(6–13) may also cost
less for pharmaceutical production. Keeping these points in mind,
we selected this truncated region of α-MSH to design novel analogues
and modified the pharmacophore region His6-Phe7-Arg8-Trp9 to diminish their melanogenic activity
and other downstream effects. Thus, we designed a series of five novel
analogues by increasing the cationic charge and hydrophobicity of
the peptides by substituting Arg and Trp residues in the primary sequence
of α-MSH(6–13), respectively. To understand the basis
of antibacterial activity of the designed analogues, we first evaluated
their secondary structure and interaction with artificial bacterial
mimic lipid vesicles by employing circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy,
dynamic light scattering (DLS), and Trp fluorescence studies. Next,
we determined the antibacterial efficacy of the designed analogues
against S. aureus cells and their toxicity
toward mammalian cells. The active analogues were then investigated
for their mode of action using membrane perturbation assay, lipid
binding assay, and DNA gel retardation assay. Among them, the most
active analogue was further assessed for the peptide-membrane interaction
by employing flow cytometric and microscopic tools. Finally, the potency
of the most active analogue was evaluated under ex vivo conditions
against intracellular S. aureus.

Results
Peptide
Design
Based on the mounting repertoire of
biologically active α-MSH-based peptides, we designed five novel
analogues of α-MSH by incorporating basic (Arg) and hydrophobic
(Trp, Phe) residues in the sequence of α-MSH(6–13), as
shown in Table 1. Arg
and Trp/Phe are known to enhance the ability of the peptide to interact
with and insert into the bacterial membrane, respectively.21 Therefore, maintaining the charge (+2) of the
parent peptide, in Ana-1, we replaced Phe7 with Trp residue
to alter its hydrophobicity (Table 1). Next, in Ana-2, the Gly10 residue of
Ana-1 was replaced with Trp to enhance its hydrophobicity further.
As expected, the reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography
(RP-HPLC) retention time data indicated no change and an ∼11%
increase in % hydrophobicity of Ana-1 and Ana-2 relative to the parent
peptide, respectively (Table 1). Further, in both Ana-1 and Ana-2, His6 residue
was replaced with Arg to increase their cationic charge to +3, giving
rise to Ana-3 and Ana-4, respectively. Interestingly, it has also
been reported that replacement of Pro12 with Phe/Tyr in
α-MSH(6–13) affords conformational stabilization through
aromatic interactions, which in turn improves the antifungal activity
of the peptide.22 Keeping this in mind,
we designed Ana-5 by replacing the Pro12 residue with Phe
in Ana-4. Ana-5, therefore, showed maximum charge (+3) and hydrophobicity
(∼20% increase from parent peptide) among the designed peptides
(Table 1). The retention
time of the analogues was ascertained through RP-HPLC for all peptides.

Table 1 Sequence and Physicochemical Properties
of α-MSH(6–13) and the Designed Analogues
 	 	mass (Da)	 	 	
peptide	sequence	Calc.	Obs.	charge	% Ha	
α-MSH(6–13)	Ac-H6-F7-R8-W9-G10-K11-P12-V13-CONH2	1067.25	1067.27	+2	46.4	
Ana-1	Ac-H6-W7-R8-W9-G10-K11-P12-V13-CONH2	1106.29	1106.88	+2	46.4	
Ana-2	Ac-H6-W7-R8-W9-W10-K11-P12-V13-CONH2	1235.43	1235.60	+2	51.7	
Ana-3	Ac-R6-W7-R8-W9-G10-K11-P12-V13-CONH2	1125.33	1125.98	+3	46.9	
Ana-4	Ac-R6-W7-R8-W9-W10-K11-P12-V13-CONH2	1254.49	1254.52	+3	51.3	
Ana-5	Ac-R6-W7-R8-W9-W10-K11-F12-V13-CONH2	1304.55	1304.58	+3	55.6	
a % hydrophobicity
calculated on the
basis of percentage of acetonitrile at RP-HPLC elution.

Secondary Structure of Designed Peptides
CD spectra
of the designed peptides were acquired in a 5 mM sodium phosphate
buffer (PB) and bacterial membrane mimic DMPC/DMPG (7:3, w/w) and
DMPC/DMPG (1:1, w/w) small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs). In this study,
we also used Trp-Arg rich indolicidin as a control due to the availability
of its detailed structural characterization in different environments
in the literature.23 As the designed sequences
are short and contain multiple numbers of aromatic side chains (Trp
and Phe residues), there might be a strong influence of aromatic side
chains on the peptide backbone signals.23

In buffer, spectra of all of the peptides were consistent
with an unordered/turn conformation except Ana-5, which showed a tendency
toward structuring with double minima at 205 and 227 nm (Figure 1a). Further, in both
the bacterial mimic SUVs (7:3, w/w and 1:1, w/w, DMPC/DMPG),16,24 Ana-5 showed a very prominent minimum at ∼230 nm coupled
with a maximum at 212 nm. This enhancement in the minimum at ∼230
nm in Ana-5 in the presence of lipids indicates further induction
of ordered conformation. Similarly, the appearance of a double minima
was also observed for Ana-2 and Ana-4 (Trp-Trp domain-containing peptides
like Ana-5) in the presence of negatively charged lipid vesicles,
whereas Ana-1 and Ana-3 did not show any ordered structure in the
same environment. Similar to earlier reports, indolicidin, a standard
Trp-Trp domain-containing peptide, exhibited a double minima at 207
and ∼230 nm coupled with a positive peak at ∼220 nm
(characteristic of a turn conformation) in the presence of both studied
SUVs but not in buffer.25 The CD spectra
of the designed analogues containing a Trp-Trp domain, i.e., Ana-2,
Ana-4, and Ana-5, as well as the standard peptide indolicidin are
governed through exciton coupling between bulky indole rings and the
formation of intramolecular H-bonding effect upon partitioning into
bacterial membrane mimic vesicles.26

Figure 1 Structural
characterization of the designed peptides. (a) Circular
dichroism spectra of α-MSH(6–13) and its analogues in
5 mM PB (blue), DMPC/DMPG (7:3, w/w) SUVs (green), and DMPC/DMPG (1:1,
w/w) SUVs (pink). (i) α-MSH(6–13), (ii) Ana-1, (iii)
Ana-2, (iv) Ana-3, (v) Ana-4, (vi) Ana-5, and (vii) indolicidin, at
peptide and lipid concentrations of 35 and 1453 μM, respectively
(L/P molar ratio, 41.5:1). The spectrum of each peptide represents
an average of three scans and was plotted as mean residue ellipticity
(in deg cm2 dmol–1) against wavelength
(nm). (b) Dynamic light scattering profile expressed as relative intensity
vs radius (nm) for DMPC/DMPG (1:1, w/w) SUVs alone (yellow), peptides
dissolved in water (blue), and with added DMPC/DMPG (1:1, w/w) SUVs
(pink). Size distribution of the peptides (i) Ana-2, (ii) Ana-4, and
(iii) Ana-5, at peptide and lipid concentrations of 35 and 1453 μM,
respectively (L/P molar ratio of 41.5:1). Experiments were performed
twice, and representative spectra are shown here.

Further, as our peptides Ana-2, Ana-4, and Ana-5 exhibited enhanced
hydrophobicity (Table 1) and ordered structure (Figure 1a) in lipid environment compared to the parent peptide
and other analogues, we tried to ascertain that these peptides did
not form aggregates, as more hydrophobic peptides have been previously
shown to have greater tendency for aggregation, which may adversely
affect their activity.27,28 For this, we determined the hydrodynamic
size of the peptides in water and the presence of DMPC/DMPG (1:1,
w/w) SUVs through DLS. The study revealed the average hydrodynamic
radius of Ana-2, Ana-4, and Ana-5 to be 86.9, 86.9, and 62.3 nm, respectively,
in water, whereas, the same was 52.8, 62.3, and 62.3 nm, respectively,
in the presence of the SUVs (Figure 1b). Though Ana-5 is the most hydrophobic analogue,
its lower hydrodynamic radius compared to Ana-2 and Ana-4 in water
may indicate that unlike Ana-5, both these analogues have a slight
tendency to display aggregation in water. This tendency appears to
be lost in a lipid environment as implied by the reduced radius of
Ana-2 and Ana-4 in the presence of SUVs. Interestingly, a similar
radius of Ana-5 in water, as well as in the presence of SUVs, may
suggest that it did not undergo aggregation in both the environments.

Trp Fluorescence Emission Spectrum of the Peptides
We monitored
the extent of Trp side-chain insertion of peptides into
the bacterial and mammalian membrane mimic vesicles. In buffer (10
mM 2-[tris(hydroxymethyl)-methylamine]-1-ethanesulfonic acid (TES),
pH 7.4), all of the peptides showed an emission maximum at 357 nm
characteristic of the Trp residue in a free aqueous environment (Table 2 and Figure 2). While in mammalian mimic
zwitterionic DMPC SUVs, the emission maximum, as well as the emission
intensity of the peptides, remained almost unchanged, in bacterial
mimic SUVs, appreciable blue shifts were observed for all of the peptides
(9−12 nm) with a concomitant 3- to 6-fold increase in fluorescence
intensity. Such preferential interaction with anionic vesicles compared
to neutral vesicles has been previously reported for cationic analogues
of α-MSH16 and Trp rich peptides.21,29

Figure 2 Tryptophan
fluorescence emission spectra of peptides in different
milieus: in buffer (blue), DMPC (red), and DMPC/DMPG (7:3, w/w) (green)
SUVs. (a) α-MSH(6–13), (b) Ana-1, (c) Ana-2, (d) Ana-3,
(e) Ana-4, (f) Ana-5, and (g) indolicidin. Peptide and lipid concentrations
were 14.5 and 726 μM, respectively, i.e., L/P molar ratio was
50:1.

Table 2 Tryptophan Fluorescence
Emission Maxima
of α-MSH(6–13) and Its Analogues
 	emission
maxima (in nm)	
peptides	TES buffer	DMPC	DMPC/DMPG (7:3, w/w)	
α-MSH(6–13)	357	357	348	
Ana-1	357	357	348	
Ana-2	357	357	345	
Ana-3	357	357	348	
Ana-4	357	357	346	
Ana-5	357	354	346	
indolicidin	357	353	346	
Staphylocidal
Efficacy of α-MSH(6–13) and Its Designed
Peptides in Physiological Buffer
To assess the effect of
enhanced charge and hydrophobicity on the relative potency of the
designed peptides, we determined their bactericidal efficacy against S. aureus (ATCC 29213). As evident from Figure 3, compared to the
parent peptide α-MSH(6–13) at 10 μM concentration,
all of the designed analogues apart from Ana-1 showed better killing
efficacy. After 2 h of incubation, though α-MSH(6–13)
and Ana-1 did not exert any observable effect on the bacterial cells,
Ana-3 reduced the viable cell count by 2 ± 1 log. Remarkably,
all of the Trp-Trp domain-containing peptides, i.e., Ana-2, Ana-4,
and Ana-5, demonstrated bactericidal action against the S. aureus cells and resulted in 3 ± 1, 5 ±
1, and 6 ± 1 log reduction in viability, respectively, under
identical conditions. The considerable enhancement in the activity
of Ana-4 compared to Ana-2 also highlights the significance of increased
charge as both these peptides possessed similar hydrophobicities (Table 1). The standard peptide
indolicidin also showed potent activity and caused >5 log reduction
in bacterial cell viability.

Figure 3 Antibacterial activity of α-MSH(6–13)
and designed
analogues against the mid-log phase of S. aureus. Cell viability was observed after 2 h incubation with 10 μM
α-MSH(6–13) and its analogues in 5 mM N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES)-20 mM glucose buffer, pH 7.4. Experiments were done on
three different days and presented as mean ± standard deviation
(SD) (***P < 0.001).

Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) of the Designed Peptides
Previously, α-MSH and its synthetic analogues have been shown
to exhibit potent antibacterial activity in physiological buffers
but not in the standard growth medium, which is a major limitation
toward their clinical use.10−17 Thus, in this study, we examined whether the most potent peptides
Ana-4 and Ana-5 would retain their activity in standard medium. For
this purpose, we employed two microbiological media: (i) a less complex
minimal essential medium (MEM) and (ii) a nutrient-rich MHB. Both
the analogues that exhibited the highest activity against S. aureus cells in physiological buffer, Ana-4 and
Ana-5, also showed potent growth inhibition with MIC values of 11.3–22.7
and 1.4 μM, respectively, against MSSA as well as MRSA in complex
MEM (Table 3).

Table 3 MIC of the Potent Analogues against
MSSA (ATCC 29213) and MRSA (ATCC 33591) in MHB and MEM Growth Media
 	MIC (in μM)	
MHB	MEM	
peptides	MSSA	MRSA	MSSA	MRSA	
Ana-4	>90.8	>90.8	11.3–22.7	11.3–22.7	
Ana-5	11.3	11.3	1.4	1.4	
indolicidin	1.4	1.4	0.3	0.3	
In the more complex and rich medium,
such as MHB, Ana-4 did not
show any growth inhibition up to the tested concentration of 90.8
μM. However, Ana-5 remained active even in MHB exhibiting an
MIC value of 11.3 μM against both MSSA and MRSA. Thus, the most
hydrophobic peptide among the designed series, Ana-5 was also the
most potent with the ability to retain its antistaphylococcal activity
even in complex growth medium. The standard peptide indolicidin also
showed high efficacy with an MIC value of 1.4 μM against both
the tested strains in MHB medium, while in the MEM, the MIC value
was further reduced to 0.3 μM.

Bacterial Killing Kinetics
of the Most Potent Peptide in Growth
Media
The time dependence of the staphylocidal potency of
the most active peptide, Ana-5, was evaluated in MHB medium and compared
to the activity of standard comparator peptides indolicidin and vancomycin
at 4 × MIC of the peptides. As seen in Figure 4, Ana-5 exhibited potent rapid bactericidal
activity, i.e., 3 log reduction, within 30 min of incubation itself
and was able to completely eradicate the viable S.
aureus cells within only 1 h of incubation. Under
similar circumstances, indolicidin and vancomycin showed much slower
killing kinetics, as indolicidin required 3 h for the eradication
of the cells while vancomycin even after 24 h was only able to cause
3 log reduction and not complete eradication of the bacterial cells.
The results observed for indolicidin and vancomycin are in accordance
with earlier reports.30,31

Figure 4 In vitro bacterial killing kinetics of
log phase cells of S. aureus in culture
medium. The cells were treated
with Ana-5, vancomycin, and indolicidin at their 4 × MIC in MHB
media for 24 h. The experiments were repeated on three different days,
and similar data were obtained. Representative data are shown here.

Serum Stability of the Most Potent Peptide
In general,
many AMPs are able to exert potent in vitro activity against bacterial
cells, but in the presence of a complex biomatrix like serum, i.e.,
more realistic physiological condition, their antibacterial activity
is often inhibited or even completely lost.32 Therefore, next, we determined the activity of Ana-5 in the presence
of serum, which is known to diminish the antimicrobial activity of
most CAMPs through proteolysis. The bactericidal kinetics of Ana-5,
indolicidin, and vancomycin at their 4 × MIC in the presence
of MHB with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) is shown in Figure 5. Under these conditions, while
the comparator peptides indolicidin and vancomycin were able to cause
only 3 and 1 log reductions in cell viability, respectively, even
after 3 h exposure, Ana-5 exhibited bactericidal action within only
1 h of treatment and completely cleared the bacterial cells in 2 h.
Thus, Ana-5 was found to be highly effective against S. aureus cells even under physiologically relevant
conditions like the presence of serum, and it was able to maintain
its potent bactericidal activity, unlike the standard peptides.

Figure 5 Antibacterial
activity against S. aureus in the presence
of 10% serum. Log phase bacterial cells were treated
with Ana-5, vancomycin, and indolicidin at their 4 × MIC in MHB
media with 10% serum for 3 h. The experiments were repeated on three
different days, and similar data were obtained. Representative data
are shown here.

Toxicity against Mammalian
Cells
Another major limitation
toward the translational potential and commercial development of AMPs
is their likely toxicity.33 Earlier reports
have established α-MSH and its analogues to be nontoxic toward
mammalian cells.11,13,16 Therefore, in this study, we also investigated the toxicity of designed
peptides toward mammalian cells by determining the % hemolysis of
murine red blood cells (RBCs) upon 1 h incubation with various concentrations
of the peptides. Encouragingly, the results showed very minimal hemolysis,
i.e., <5%, for all designed peptides up to 200 μM, while
the standard peptide indolicidin caused 65 and 75% hemolysis at 100
and 200 μM, respectively, under identical conditions (Figure 6a).

Figure 6 Toxicity studies of α-MSH(6–13)
and its analogues
against mammalian cells. (a) % Hemolysis of mouse RBCs upon 1 h treatment
with different concentrations of the peptides. (b) % Cytotoxicity
observed in 3T3 murine fibroblast cell line on treatment with the
peptides at 15, 30, and 60 μM concentrations for 2 h. Each assay
was done in triplicate on two different days.

Additionally, the cytotoxicity of the designed peptides was also
evaluated using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay by incubating 3T3 murine fibroblast cell line
in serum-free medium with different concentrations of the peptides.
As seen in Figure 6b, at 15 and 30 μM concentrations, α-MSH(6–13)
and the designed analogues did not exhibit any toxicity, and on increasing
the concentration to 60 μM, they showed very minimal toxicity
(≤22 ± 4%). At the same concentrations, standard peptide
indolicidin exhibited a much higher toxicity, i.e., at 60 μM,
it caused 66 ± 4% toxicity toward 3T3 fibroblast cells.

Ability
of the Most Potent Peptide to Depolarize the Bacterial
Membrane
Following our previous reports, which established
a membranolytic mode of action of α-MSH(6–13),11 toward the delineation of the mechanism of staphylocidal
action of Ana-5, we determined its effect on the membrane potential
of S. aureus cells using the potentiometric
dye DiSC3(5). As all of the mechanistic studies have been
carried out in buffer, for comparison, we also included Ana-4, another
peptide from the designed series with potent activity in the presence
of a physiological buffer, and the Trp-Arg rich peptide indolicidin
in this study. In Figure 7a, we observed that the addition of 30 μM concentration
of the peptides to dye-loaded bacterial cells resulted in instant
depolarization of the bacterial membrane, and the fluorescence intensity
observed was higher for Ana-5 compared to the parent peptide α-MSH(6–13)
as well as Ana-4. The membrane-depolarizing ability of both Ana-4
and Ana-5 was found to be concentration-dependent, and their effect
was almost comparable to that of indolicidin (Figure 7b). Of note, unlike Ana-4, Ana-5 was able
to dissipate the membrane potential appreciably at a concentration
as low as 2 μM. The results of the corresponding killing assay
of the dye-loaded cells at 30 μM concentration of the peptides
also corroborated with the membrane depolarization study (Figure 7c). It appears that
there exists a disparity between the high membrane depolarizing ability
of indolicidin in this study (Figure 7a,b) and its slower killing kinetics compared to Ana-5,
as shown in Figure 4. This may have resulted due to the difference in the concentration
of the peptides used in both these experiments, and as the MIC of
indolicidin is much lower compared to Ana-5 (Table 3), it is pertinent to consider that a relatively
higher concentration of indolicidin is required to achieve the same
order of bactericidal kinetics as Ana-5.30

Figure 7 Membrane
depolarization efficacy of the peptides. (a) Depolarization
kinetics measured at a fixed concentration of 30 μM of α-MSH(6–13),
Ana-4, Ana-5, and indolicidin for 15 min. (b) Concentration-dependent
effect of the peptides on the membrane potential of S. aureus measured by fluorescence intensity of the
dye. (c) Corresponding cell viability of the DiSC3(5)-loaded
cells after immediate exposure to 30 μM of the peptides in 5
mM HEPES-20 mM glucose buffer, pH 7.4.

Lipid Binding Affinity toward Artificial Bacterial Membrane
Mimics
Further, to better understand the enhanced membrane
activity of Ana-5 compared to Ana-4 and the parent peptide α-MSH(6–13),
we evaluated their relative binding affinity to bacterial mimic liposomes
(DMPC/DMPG, 7:3, w/w) and indolicidin was used as a positive control
(Figure 8). After the
addition of increasing concentrations of bacterial membrane mimetic
SUVs to a fixed concentration of the peptide (10 μM) resulted
in an increase in the fluorescence intensity, which reached a saturation
value, the dissociation constant was calculated by plotting a fraction
of bound peptide [(F – F0)/(Fmax – F0)] versus lipid concentration, and the data were fitted
to a hyperbolic curve by Origin 8 (2015) software. During fitting
of the curve, it was observed that while a hyperbola curve fit the
data best for Ana-4, Ana-5, and indolicidin, in the case of α-MSH(6–13),
the curve appeared to be sigmoidal. While a hyperbolic curve has been
earlier attributed to a noncooperative binding model, a sigmoidal
binding curve may suggest that the peptide does not oligomerize upon
binding.34,35 The binding constant observed for Ana-4
and Ana-5 was 27 000 and 47 000 M–1, respectively, while for indolicidin, the binding constant observed
was 21 000 M–1. Thus, Ana-5 clearly showed
better binding to bacterial mimic liposomes compared to Ana-4 and
the standard control indolicidin, i.e., 1.7- to 2.2-fold.

Figure 8 Binding isotherms
derived by plotting fractions of the membrane-bound
peptide (F – F0)/(Fmax – F0) as a function of the concentration of the lipid. The Trp
fluorescence intensity at 295 nm was recorded by titrating 10 μM
of the peptides with increasing molar concentrations of SUVs in 10
mM TES buffer (pH 7.4). Data were fitted (OriginLab Corp.) with the
hyperbolic saturation curve for DMPC/DMPG (7:3, w/w) in the case of
Ana-4 (pink, ●), Ana-5 (green, ▲), and indolicidin (red,
▼), whereas for the parent peptide α-MSH(6–13)
(blue, ■), due to weak initial binding, the data points could
not be fitted with the same. The data acquired are presented (mean
± SD) after background subtraction and dilution correction.

Bacterial Membrane Permeabilization and Morphological
Changes
The membrane damaging ability of Ana-5 was further
validated through
membrane permeabilization assay and visualization of the damaged bacterial
cell through scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The extent of membrane
permeabilization of S. aureus cells
in the presence of Ana-5 was determined through calcein leakage study
by incubating the calcein-loaded cells with 30 μM concentration
of the peptide for 2 h. As evident from the histogram of calcein-loaded
cells (Figure 9a),
compared to the parent peptide α-MSH(6–13), exposure
to Ana-5 caused a large shift in the dye fluorescence from higher
to lower values, indicating the release of calcein from the bacterial
cells with damaged membrane.11,30 The percentage reduction
in the observed fluorescence for Ana-5-treated cells was 74 ±
9% (P < 0.01, compared to α-MSH(6–13))
(Figure 9b). The corresponding
killing assay also performed at 30 μM concentration of the peptides
(Figure 9c) corroborated
with the membrane damage as the percentage survival of S. aureus cells treated with Ana-5 was 3 ± 1%,
whereas 30 ± 4% of the cells were still viable after α-MSH(6–13)
treatment.

Figure 9 S. aureus membrane perturbation
by Ana-5. Membrane permeabilization measured by the percentage of
calcein leakage from calcein-AM-loaded 106 CFU mL–1 bacterial cells after 2 h treatment with α-MSH(6–13)
and Ana-5. (a) Histograms (from left to right) for calcein-loaded
mid-log phase cells that were (i) untreated, (ii) treated with α-MSH(6–13),
and (iii) treated with Ana-5. (b) % Calcein leakage from S. aureus cells after treatment with α-MSH(6–13)
and Ana-5 at 30 μM concentration. (c) Corresponding % survival
of cells after treatment with the same concentration of peptides for
2 h (**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001).
(d) Scanning electron micrographs of S. aureus: (i) untreated control, treated with 50 μM of (ii) α-MSH(6–13)
and (iii) Ana-5 at 50 000× magnification.

The morphological changes in the staphylococcal membrane
upon treatment
with Ana-5 and α-MSH(6–13) were also visualized through
SEM (Figure 9d). The
untreated control showed cells with an intact membrane, whereas bacterial
cells treated with 50 μM of Ana-5 or α-MSH(6–13)
for 2 h exhibited membrane perturbation. The peptide treatments resulted
in damaged cells with membrane abnormalities, including the collapse
of the cell membrane and oozing out of cellular content. However,
compared to α-MSH(6–13), the extent of S. aureus membrane disruption was much more pronounced
in the case of Ana-5-treated cells.

DNA Binding Affinity of
the Most Potent Peptide
We
further investigated whether apart from the bacterial membrane, Ana-5
had another target, i.e., an intracellular target like DNA. For this,
we evaluated the ability of the two potent peptides, Ana-4 and Ana-5,
to bind to plasmid DNA through electrophoretic mobility shift assay
by incubating different concentrations of peptides with plasmid DNA
(pBluescriptII SK(+)) for 1 h and measuring the inhibition of DNA
migration in 1% (w/v) agarose gel. The results showed that although
Ana-4 and Ana-5 have similar cationic charge, the latter bound more
strongly to polyanionic plasmid DNA as Ana-5 completely retarded DNA
migration at a concentration ≥25 μM, whereas Ana-4 inhibited
the migration of DNA at much higher concentrations, i.e., ≥100
μM (Figure 10). Thus, at comparable concentrations, Ana-5 exhibited better DNA
binding ability than Ana-4. This suggests that apart from the interaction
of cationic residues with phosphodiester bonds, the aromatic residues
of Ana-5 might also have stacked between the nucleotide bases of each
DNA strand.36 Indolicidin, the standard
peptide, was able to inhibit DNA migration at a concentration of 12.5
μM.

Figure 10 Binding of Ana-4, Ana-5, and indolicidin with plasmid DNA assessed
through gel retardation assay. Peptide interaction with plasmid DNA
(pBluescriptII SK(+)) was determined via inhibition of DNA migration
in 1% (w/v) agarose gel. Different peptide concentrations were incubated
with 100 ng of plasmid DNA for 1 h. Lane 1 contains plasmid DNA, and
lanes 2–5, 6–9, and 10–13 contain Ana-4, Ana-5,
and indolicidin, respectively. The four lanes of each peptide are
in decreasing order of peptide concentration, i.e., 100, 50, 25, and
12.5 μM, respectively.

Killing of Intracellular S. aureus in a Coculture Model by Ana-5
During infection, the uptake
of S. aureus cells by neutrophils (phagocytic
cells) often results in an incomplete clearance of the pathogen, leading
to the dissemination of the bacteria to nonphagocytic host cells,
including epithelial cells, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, endothelial
cells, and keratinocytes.3,37 Therefore, considering
the importance of the capability of antimicrobial agents to eradicate
internalized bacterial cells, we evaluated the ability of Ana-5 to
clear intracellular S. aureus infection
and compared it to the activity of conventional antibiotics like rifampicin
and the glycopeptide vancomycin. For this, the murine fibroblast cell
line was infected with S. aureus cells
at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) 10:1, followed by treatment with
antibiotics and Ana-5 at their 5 × MIC (Figure 11). While rifampicin exhibited the most effective
intracellular killing causing ∼4 log reduction in the viable
cell count compared to the untreated control, Ana-5 also resulted
in ≥3 log reduction, which was similar to the effect of linezolid
and even better than vancomycin, which remains a drug of choice for
the treatment of critical MRSA infections and caused ≥2 log
reduction. Thus, the results established the ability of Ana-5 to target
intracellular S. aureus with similar
efficacy to clinically relevant antibiotics and AMPs.

Figure 11 Ex vivo efficacy of
Ana-5, vancomycin, linezolid, and rifampicin
at their 5 × MIC in a coculture model of S. aureus and 3T3 murine fibroblast cell line at MOI 10:1. The log reduction
of intracellular S. aureus cells upon
24 h incubation with Ana-5 and the antibiotics is shown here. Data
were acquired on three different days in duplicates and represent
mean ± SD (***P < 0.001).

Discussion
Considering the increasing burden of antibiotic
resistance in bacteria
and other microorganisms, cationic AMPs have been extensively explored
for the last 3 decades to find AMPs with potential as effective therapeutics.
Over the years of investigative studies with respect to its antimicrobial
potential, α-MSH, with its widespread pleiotropic expression
and ability to regulate biological and physiological response in an
organism, has emerged as an effective AMP against S.
aureus. We established the staphylocidal potency of
α-MSH and its C-terminal fragments and designed α-MSH-based
analogues with enhanced cationicity against S. aureus, including MRSA strains.11,16 However, a major limitation
of these peptides is their inactivation in the presence of bacterial
growth medium. Recently, a study by Grieco et al. in 2013 described
analogues of NDP-MSH, a biologically active analogue of α-MSH
with broad-spectrum activity against microorganisms in standard culture
media, but they also displayed a detrimental effect against mammalian
cell line.17

Toward overcoming the
constraint of inactivity in culture media,
we systematically designed novel analogues of α-MSH(6–13)
by increasing its cationic charge and hydrophobicity through the incorporation
of Arg, Trp, and Phe residues. Arg residues were incorporated as they
have guanidine group, which facilitates perturbation of the headgroup
region in the lipid bilayer through its bidentate functionality while
also engaging in hydrogen bond formation with negatively charged phosphate
groups.21 Similarly, we incorporated aromatic
hydrophobic residues Trp and Phe as they can partition into the membrane
interface and lead to membrane perturbation.38 RP-HPLC of the designed analogues revealed that the increase in
percentage hydrophobicity was in accordance with substituting hydrophobic
residues Trp and Phe. The analysis of the CD data demonstrated that
all of the designed peptides remained unstructured in buffer solution
except the most hydrophobic analogue, Ana-5, which not only included
a Trp9-Trp10 domain but also possessed a Phe12 residue. Previous studies have shown that the presence of
aromatic residue (Phe12/Tyr12) in the 10–13
turn region of α-MSH(6–13) stabilizes the π-stacking
interactions, which are more prominent in the presence of multiple
Trp residues and may be responsible for the stability of the native
fold of Ana-5.22,39 Additionally, all of the designed
analogues exhibited a similar ability to interact with artificial
membranes as there were no appreciable differences in the blue shift
of the emission maximum of the peptides in the presence of bacterial
membrane mimic SUVs. A similar result was observed by Cho et al. in
2012, in which the designed analogues of a CAMP, pleurocidin, despite
substitution with hydrophobic amino acids such as Trp and Phe, showed
a similar blue shift in a membrane mimetic environment.40 Additionally, the designed analogues did not
show any considerable interaction with mammalian membrane mimic SUVs,
suggesting that the peptides possessed negligible toxicity, which
was later confirmed through the hemolytic and cytotoxicity assays.

Next, as anticipated, in the antistaphylococcal assay, the killing
activity increased upon the simultaneous increase in cationicity and
hydrophobicity of the designed analogues. From our systematically
designed set of analogues, two analogues having the highest charge
(+3) and hydrophobicity showed a substantial improvement in activity
compared to the parent peptide, further validating that both cationicity
and hydrophobicity are required for enhanced antimicrobial activity.
The high antistaphylococcal activity of Ana-4 and Ana-5 may also be
attributed to the particular cation-π orbital interaction between
cationic residues (Arg) and aromatic residues (Trp and Phe), which
assist the peptide in inserting deeper into the bacterial membrane.20,41 Importantly, the most hydrophobic analogue of α-MSH(6–13),
i.e., Ana-5, was able to retain its antibacterial activity against
MSSA and MRSA cells in the presence of rich and complex growth media,
which is extremely important for the realistic use of this molecule
for therapeutic purpose. This enhanced activity of Ana-5 compared
to Ana-4 may be attributed to the substitution of Pro12 of Ana-4 with Phe12 in Ana-5. A similar observation was
also reported for [d-Nal7,Phe12]-α-MSH(6–13),
an analogue of α-MSH(6–13) designed by Grieco et al.,
which showed maximum candidacidal activity.42 Apart from this, Ana-5 exhibited rapid bactericidal kinetics against S. aureus cells, which remained almost unchanged
in the presence of 10% serum. Low serum stability is often a limiting
factor toward the development of AMPs as therapeutic agents, e.g.,
human serum components like mono/divalent cations and serum proteins
strongly inhibit the bactericidal activity of human β-defensin
3.32 Therefore, the potent antistaphylococcal
efficacy of Ana-5 in the presence of clinically relevant conditions
like the presence of serum further validates its development for therapeutic
application. This enhanced potential of Ana-5 may in part be explained
by the CD data where Phe12 substitution in Ana-5 stabilized
the π-stacking interactions, leading to a more ordered structure.22,39

In this study, we also established that similar to the parent
peptide
α-MSH(6–13),11 the most potent
analogue Ana-5 was membrane active. The mechanistic studies revealed
that Ana-5 was not only able to instantly depolarize the staphylococcal
membrane but also, compared to the parent peptide, the effect of Ana-5
was much more pronounced, suggesting that membrane depolarization
was a lethal event for this active analogue. Similar studies showing
the correlation between peptides having augmented cationicity and
hydrophobicity and enhanced cytoplasmic membrane depolarization and
antibacterial activity have been reported earlier.31 The markedly superior membrane activity of Ana-5 was also
evident from its higher affinity to bind to artificial bacterial membrane
compared to the other designed analogue as well as the standard indolicidin.
Though previous studies reported that enhanced binding of peptides
which is governed by nonspecific electrostatic interactions with anionic
vesicles depends on their cationic charge,16 the nearly 2-fold better binding of Ana-5 than the less hydrophobic
analogue Ana-4, having the same charge, may be attributed to its improved
hydrophobicity43 and its ordered conformation
in buffer.44 Local structure formation
in an aqueous environment in the case of short peptides is considered
to be important in their binding properties. During binding, the formation
of local structure is often accompanied by the reduction in conformational
entropy. Additionally, these local structures, being complementary
in shape and electrostatic properties, enable the peptide to bind
to the target molecule.45 As such, the
ability of Ana-5 to acquire an ordered structure in buffer as well
as in the presence of bacterial membrane mimic SUVs might have facilitated
its binding with the phospholipid bilayer. The membrane disruptive
mode of action of the most potent peptide Ana-5 was further validated
through calcein leakage assay and SEM studies, which showed substantial
membrane damage by Ana-5 with leakage of entrapped dye and oozing
out of cellular content. Apart from membrane disruption, Ana-5 was
also able to bind to DNA and inhibit its mobility in a gel retardation
assay, suggesting that after penetrating the cell membrane, Ana-5
may further attack an intracellular target like DNA, leading to the
death of the staphylococcal cells. Thus, Ana-5 with its dual mode
of action may act as a “double-edged sword” against
staphylococcal infections and also be less prone to resistance development.

An important consideration while designing antimicrobials against S. aureus is the ability of the pathogen to infect
and survive inside mammalian cells, which often results in the moderate
activity of the antimicrobials in eliminating intracellular S. aureus probably due to their limited intracellular
penetration or reduced stability inside mammalian cells.46 Therefore, we also examined the ex vivo ability
of Ana-5 to eradicate intracellular bacterial cells in a coculture
model of S. aureus and mammalian host
cells. In this study, Ana-5 was found to be either equally or more
potent compared to conventional antibiotics, especially the peptide
antibiotic vancomycin, which, despite its toxicity and poor bioavailability,
continues to serve as the cornerstone for anti-MRSA therapy. The effective
intracellular killing shown by rifampicin, which was only slightly
more efficacious than Ana-5, has been previously attributed to its
capability to cross mammalian cell membrane.47 The high potency of Ana-5 to clear internalized bacterial cells
was in line with the previous literature which report that some Trp-Arg
peptides readily penetrate and get internalized into mammalian cells
due to the electrostatic and bidentate H-bonding of Arg residue with
sulfates and hydrophobic interactions of Trp moiety with the sugar
rings present on the mammalian cell membrane.48

Conclusions
In light of the reduced effectiveness of antibiotics
owing to the
current resistance situation, AMPs with their broad-spectrum activity,
rapid onset of activity, and relatively low possibility of development
of resistance appear as potential therapeutic sources.4 In this study, we described the design of a novel analogue
of α-MSH(6–13), Ana-5, with enhanced cationic charge
and hydrophobicity, having potent efficacy against the opportunistic
pathogen S. aureus. Importantly, not
only was Ana-5 able to retain its staphylocidal efficacy even in the
presence of complex microbiological medium, thereby overcoming one
of the major limitations of α-MSH-based peptides, but it was
also active in the presence of serum. Furthermore, in addition to
being a membrane-active peptide, the preliminary studies presented
here suggest that Ana-5 may also have a secondary intracellular target
like DNA unlike conventional antibiotics, which mostly target a single
specific cellular activity, and thus it may be less prone to the development
of resistance. Remarkably, Ana-5 was also able to significantly clear
intracellular bacterial cells in a coculture model of S. aureus with mammalian cells. Therefore, the successful
design of Ana-5 in this study provides an impetus for the continued
development of α-MSH-based peptides toward combating the menace
of antibiotic resistance in S. aureus.

Experimental Section
Materials
Brain heart infusion media
(BHI), Mueller
Hinton broth (MHB), Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM), 2-[tris(hydroxymethyl)-methylamine]-1-ethanesulfonic acid
(TES buffer), and [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide] (MTT) were purchased from HiMedia Laboratories, India. 3,3′-Dipropylthiadicarbocyanine
iodide (DiSC3(5)), calcein acetoxymethyl ester (calcein-AM),
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DMPC),
and 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-rac-(1-glycerol) sodium salt (DMPG) were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich. Trypsin (2.5%), FBS, and MEM were purchased from Gibco,
India. Plasmid DNA (pBluescriptII SK(+)) was obtained from Agilent
Technologies.

α-MSH(6–13) and its analogues (HPLC
purity > 98%) were custom synthesized by BioChain Incorporated,
India.
Indolicidin was purchased from AnaSpec, Inc. The concentration of
peptides was determined by UV absorbance of Trp and Tyr residues at
280 nm, with εTrp = 5690 M–1 cm–1 and εTyr = 1280 M–1 cm–1.

Two American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC) S. aureus strains were used
in the present study, namely, ATCC 29213 (MSSA)
and ATCC 33591 (MRSA). The stock cultures were stored at −80
°C in 15% (v/v) glycerol until subcultured onto BHI agar plate.
The S. aureus strains were grown at
37 °C in BHI, MHB, or MEM broth with shaking till mid-log phase
and adjusted to an optical density (OD600) of ∼0.5,
which corresponds to 108 CFU mL–1 for
staphylococcal strains.

Preparation of Small Unilamellar Vesicles
(SUVs)
Artificial
bacterial membrane mimic (DMPC/DMPG, 1:1, w/w and 7:3, w/w) and mammalian
membrane mimic (DMPC) SUVs were prepared by probe sonication after
direct hydration of phospholipid films, as previously described.15 Briefly, the desired amount of lipids was dissolved
in chloroform and methanol, and the solvents were evaporated to dryness
under nitrogen flux. After overnight incubation at −20 °C,
the dried lipid film was rehydrated in the buffer (either 10 mM TES,
pH 7.4 or 5 mM PB, pH 7.4). The suspension was then sonicated using
a titanium tip sonicator with burst and halt times of 30 and 10 s,
respectively, in an ice bath. Titanium debris was removed by centrifugation
at 10 000 rpm for 2 min.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Spectroscopy
CD measurements
were performed using an Applied PhotoPhysics Chirascan (Surrey, U.K.)
instrument set at a Peltier temperature of 37 °C.15 The spectra of the peptides were acquired in
the presence of two different environments, namely, 5 mM PB and bacterial
mimic SUVs (DMPC/DMPG, 7:3 and 1:1 w/w). In the far-UV region (190–260
nm), scans were recorded at a step size of 0.2 nm, bandwidth of 1
nm, path length of 2 mm, and time per point of 0.2 s. Three CD spectra
scans of peptides were first averaged, then subtracted from their
respective medium. The representative spectrum was converted from
millidegree to molar ellipticity (deg cm2 dmol–1), as mentioned below and plotted against wavelength.49  

Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)
The hydrodynamic radius
and size distribution of peptides were measured by DLS using the instrument
Xtal (Spectrosize300, Germany). Samples were filtered using a 0.22
μm syringe filter, and two separate DLS measurements were acquired
at 25 °C. Each measurement consisted of 10 subruns with 20 s
duration. A representative run was selected and provided. Peptides
(35 μM) were dissolved in either water or DMPC/DMPG (1:1, w/w)
SUVs (1453 μM).27

Trp Fluorescence
of Peptides
All fluorescence measurements
were done with quartz cuvettes with 1 cm path length on a Shimadzu
RF-5301 spectrofluorimeter. Briefly, peptides were added to either
10 mM TES buffer, pH 7.4, or SUVs solutions at a fixed lipid to peptide
ratio. The excitation wavelength was 295 nm, and the emission was
recorded from 310 to 450 nm. The excitation and emission slit widths
were set at 1.5 and 3 nm, respectively. Each peptide in the lipid
spectrum was subtracted with their respective blank, and an emission
maximum of peptides in the presence of lipids was compared to peptides
in buffer to calculate the blue shift (nm).15,16

In Vitro Bactericidal Assay in Physiological Buffer
To determine
the staphylocidal activity of peptides, S. aureus was grown in BHI broth and resuspended
and diluted to the desired cell densities in a 5 mM HEPES-20 mM glucose
buffer (pH 7.4), as mentioned elsewhere.11 The bacterial cells were incubated with desired concentrations of
the peptides at 37 °C for 2 h. Aliquots were then serially diluted
in the buffer, and 15 μL of each dilution was plated in triplicate
on BHI agar and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Afterward, the
viable cell count was determined by counting the colony forming units
(CFU) and comparing it with the untreated control. The mean ±
standard deviation (SD) for surviving S. aureus cells was plotted in terms of log10 CFU mL–1.

Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) Determination
The
MIC of peptides was determined by the serial broth microdilution
method with slight modifications, as reported previously,30 in MEM and MHB media. Briefly, the peptides
were serially 2-fold diluted in 0.01% acetic acid containing 0.2%
bovine serum albumin (BSA) in sterile polypropylene 96-well microtiter
plates (Corning, Inc.). To 10 μL of the serially diluted peptide,
100 μL of initial bacterial inoculum of 5 × 105 CFU mL–1 in MHB or MEM was added. The medium without
cells was considered as a negative control. The microtiter plate was
read at 600 nm using an ELISA plate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale,
CA) after overnight incubation with shaking at 180 rpm at 37 °C.
The experiments were carried out in duplicate on at least three different
days. The lowest concentration of peptide, which completely inhibited
the growth of bacteria, was taken as the MIC.

Time-Kill Kinetics of the
Peptides
The active peptide
in the standard medium was further evaluated for its time-dependent
staphylocidal activity in MHB alone or with 10% serum, as described
previously.50 Briefly, mid-logarithmic S. aureus cells grown in MHB were adjusted to an
OD600 of ∼0.5 and were further diluted to ∼105 CFU mL–1 in MHB to which peptides/antibiotics
were added at their 4 × MIC values obtained in MHB and incubated
at 37 °C with shaking at 180 rpm. Aliquots were removed at fixed
time intervals, diluted in 10 mM PBS (sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl,
pH 7.4), and 15 μL were plated in triplicate on BHI agar plates.
After overnight incubation at 37 °C, bacterial colonies were
enumerated and compared to those of the untreated control. To study
the effect of serum, bacterial suspension in MHB containing 10% FBS
and peptides at 4 × MIC were incubated for 3 h at 37 °C
with shaking at 180 rpm. The experiment was repeated on three different
days, and representative data from one set are shown.

Hemolytic Activity
of the Peptides
The hemolytic activity
of the peptides was determined using a protocol as described previously
with slight modifications.30,51 Fresh blood from mice
was washed twice with 35 mM PBS (pH 7.4) via centrifugation at 1500
rpm for 10 min to remove the plasma and buffy coat. The red blood
cells (RBCs) pellet was resuspended to 4% v/v in PBS and 100 μL
of this suspension was dispensed into a 96-well plate already containing
100 μL of previously serially diluted peptides in PBS. After
1 h incubation at 37 °C, the plates were centrifuged at 1500
rpm for 10 min and 20 μL of the supernatant was added to 80
μL of PBS in a fresh 96-well plate. Absorbance was measured
at 414 nm using an ELISA plate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale,
CA) to determine the hemoglobin release. 0.1% Triton X-100 (v/v) was
used as a positive control (100% hemolysis), and the percentage of
hemolysis was calculated using the following equation  The experiment was conducted following the
“Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments
on Animals” (CPCSEA) guidelines and Institutional Animal Ethics
Committee (IAEC-02/2014) of JNU, New Delhi, India.

Measuring
Cytotoxicity by MTT Assay
The viability of
3T3 murine fibroblast cells was determined through the MTT assay to
evaluate the cytotoxicity of peptides, as described previously.13,16 The cell line was propagated in 24-well plates (∼5 ×
105 cells per well) in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and
antibiotics at 37 °C in 5% CO2. After 24 h, the spent
media was aspirated and various concentrations of peptides, i.e.,
15, 30, and 60 μM, dissolved in DMEM without serum were added
to each well (in triplicate). The medium without peptide and with
2% Triton X-100 was set as negative control and positive control,
respectively. The plate was incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. The MTT
solution (1 mL, 0.1 mg mL–1) was added to each well,
and the plates were again incubated for 2 h at 37 °C in the dark.
Subsequently, after removal of the supernatants, 200 μL of dimethyl
sulfoxide was then added to each well and kept for 5 min in the incubator
to dissolve the formazan crystals formed, and absorbance was measured
at 570 nm. The assay was done in triplicate on three different days,
and the percentage of cytotoxicity was determined using the following
equation  

Membrane Depolarization Assay using DiSC3(5) Fluorescent
Dye
S. aureus (ATCC 29213)
membrane depolarization was monitored through the cationic membrane
potential-sensitive fluorescent probe DiSC3(5), as mentioned
elsewhere.30,31,51 Briefly, mid-logarithmic S. aureus cells were washed and resuspended in 5 mM HEPES-20 mM glucose buffer
(pH 7.4) at an OD600 of 0.05, which corresponds to ∼107 CFU mL–1. To each 1 mL of this bacterial
suspension, 2 μM DiSC3(5) was added and incubated
for 1 h at room temperature to get a stable reduction in fluorescence
intensity. Next, the dye-loaded cells were treated with increasing
peptide concentrations from 2 to 40 μM in a quartz cuvette.
The increase in fluorescence was monitored after 2 min of peptide
incubation in a Shimadzu RF-5301 PC spectrofluorimeter, which was
set at λexcitation and λemission of 622 and 670 nm, respectively, with a slit width of 5 nm at 37
°C. The spectrum mode was changed to kinetics mode in the instrument
to measure depolarization kinetics for up to 15 min after the addition
of peptides at 30 μM concentration. The effect of depolarization
on the viability of S. aureus was measured
through the corresponding killing assay where the dye-loaded cells
were treated with 30 μM peptides, and the aliquots were immediately
plated onto BHI agar, which was incubated overnight at 37 °C,
and the viable cells were enumerated by counting the colonies.

Membrane
Permeabilization Assay using Calcein-AM Dye
The extent of S. aureus (ATCC 33591)
membrane permeabilization upon exposure to the active peptide was
measured through flow cytometry (BD FACSverse, San Jose, CA), as mentioned
elsewhere.11,30,51 Briefly, mid-logarithmic S. aureus cells were adjusted to an OD600 value of 1.0 (∼109 CFU mL–1) in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4. These cells
were incubated with calcein-AM (2 μg mL–1)
supplemented with 10% MHB at 37 °C with shaking at 180 rpm for
2 h. The cells were washed once with PBS, diluted to 106 CFU mL–1, and incubated with 30 μM of the
peptides for 2 h at 37 °C in the dark. After 2 h, 10 000
cells were acquired for each treated and untreated sample using a
flow cytometer to determine the extent of release of the preloaded
fluorophore calcein and the cells were gated using unloaded cells.
The experiment was conducted on three different days, and the percentage
of calcein leakage was plotted as mean ± SD. The corresponding
viability of calcein-loaded S. aureus was also determined by the drop plate method after an incubation
of 2 h at 37 °C.

Measurements of Binding of the Peptide with
Lipid through Fluorescence
Titration
Binding of the peptides to bacterial membrane mimic
SUVs (DMPC/DMPG, 7:3, w/w) was assessed through monitoring the changes
in intrinsic Trp fluorescence intensity of the peptides. The lipids
were titrated by adding SUVs suspension to a fixed peptide concentration
(10 μM) and varying the lipid to peptide ratio from 3.3 to 75.6.
Fluorescence spectra were measured with excitation at 295 nm and a
slit width of 3 nm. The spectra were corrected by subtracting the
blank spectra (without peptide) to account for light scattering. The
fraction of peptide bound to the lipid vesicles, i.e., (F – F0)/(Fmax – F0), where F is the peptide fluorescence intensity in the presence
of lipid, F0 is its intensity in buffer
alone, and Fmax is its intensity in the
presence of the highest lipid concentration tested, was plotted against
the lipid concentrations to determine the binding constant.16 The Origin 8 (2015) software was used to fit
the obtained data to a hyperbolic curve.

Scanning Electron Microscopy
(SEM)
For this experiment,
a procedure, as described previously, was followed with slight modifications.11,16 Briefly, mid-log phase S. aureus (ATCC
29213) cells were grown in BHI broth, washed thrice, and resuspended
in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.4, to remove any traces of media. OD600 was adjusted to 1.0 (∼109 CFU mL–1), and 50 μM concentration of the peptides was added to the
cells in PBS (pH 7.4) for 2 h. After incubation, the cells were pelleted
down at 6000 rpm for 10 min and washed with 10 mM PB (pH 7.4) thrice
to remove any salt traces and fixed overnight in 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde
at 4 °C. The next day, fixative was removed by washing with PB
(pH 7.4), the samples were dehydrated in a series of graded ethanol
solutions (30–100%), and dried in a vacuum desiccator. The
specimens were then viewed via a scanning electron microscope (EVO
40; Carl Zeiss, Germany) after coating them with 20 nm gold particles
using an automatic sputter coater (Polaron OM-SC7640).

Gel Retardation
Assay
The electrophoretic mobility
shift assay was performed by incubating different concentrations of
peptides with plasmid DNA (pBluescriptII SK(+)) for 1 h at room temperature,
as described previously.30 Briefly, reaction
mixtures containing 100 ng of plasmid DNA with increasing concentrations
of peptide in 20 μL of binding buffer (5% glycerol, 10 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 8.0, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 1 mM dithiothreitol,
20 mM KCl, and 50 μg mL–1 BSA) were incubated
at 37 °C for 1 h. Next, 4 μL of native loading buffer (10%
Ficoll 400, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM EDTA, 0.25% bromophenol
blue, and 0.25% xylene cyanol) was added to this reaction mixture
and a 20 μL aliquot of this mix was then subjected to 1% agarose
gel electrophoresis in 0.5× Tris-borate-EDTA buffer (45 mM Tris-borate
and 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0). The gel was visualized under a UV transilluminator.

Inhibition of Intracellular Staphylococcal Infection by Peptides
in Mammalian Cells by Coculture Method
Infection of 3T3 fibroblast
cells with S. aureus was done as described
previously with slight modifications.37,46 Initially,
a monolayer of the mammalian cells was grown in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1× anti-anti at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Nearly 106 cells (semiconfluence) in a 24-well tissue
culture plate were preincubated in DMEM for 24 h. Mid-logarithmic
phase cells (∼107 CFU mL–1) were
used to infect 3T3 cells at MOI 10:1 (i.e., the ratio of S. aureus to fibroblast cells) in DMEM with 10% FBS.
The infected monolayers were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C at 5%
CO2. The medium was aspirated, and subsequently, fresh
DMEM with 10% FBS containing 100 μg mL–1 of
gentamycin was added to kill the extracellular bacteria for 2 h. The
coculture was washed with PBS and treated with peptide or antibiotics
in DMEM with 10% FBS for 16 h at 37 °C. The cells were maintained
at 4 μg mL–1 of gentamycin to prevent extracellular
bacteria growth.52 The cells were then
lysed by adding 100 μL of 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS. The bacterial
suspensions were diluted and plated on BHI agar to quantify the number
of viable intracellular bacteria by CFU count.

Statistical
Analysis
Data were analyzed using one-way
analysis of variance, and the significance of the experiment among
the groups was determined by Bonferroni’s post hoc test using
GraphPad Prism 8 software. Data are expressed as mean ± standard
deviation (SD) for at least three different measurements.

Author Contributions
† J.S. and S.M. contributed equally to this
work.

Author Contributions
S.J. and
K.M. conceived and designed the peptides. J.S. performed the experiments.
J.S., S.J., and K.M. analyzed the data. J.S., S.M., S.J., and K.M.
wrote the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported
by grants from Department of Science
and Technology (DST-SERB, EMR/2016/001708), Department of Biotechnology
(DBT, BT/PR27737/MED/29/1265/2018), DST-PURSE (PAC-JNU-DST-PURSE-462
(Phase-II)), and University Grants Commission (UGC) (UPE-II, JNU)
to K.M. J.S., S.M., and S.J. are thankful to funding agencies ICMR
and UGC, and to Dr. D. S. Kothari for their research fellowships,
respectively. The authors also acknowledge DBT for funding AIRF (BT/PR3130/INF/22/139/2011)
in JNU for instrumentation facilities. They thank Dr. Ruchita Pal
and Dr. Manish in AIRF, JNU, for their help in SEM experiment and
CD experiments, respectively. The authors thank Prof. Rupesh Chaturvedi
and his research scholar Rohit Tiwari (School of Biotechnology, JNU)
for providing biosafety level-II (BSL-2) facility and assisting in
mammalian cell culture technique, respectively.

Abbreviations
α-MSHα-melanocyte stimulating
hormone

MSSAmethicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus

MRSAmethicillin-resistant S. aureus

CAMPcationic
antimicrobial peptide

POMCpro-opiomelanocortin

RP-HPLCreversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography

TFE2,2,2-trifluoroethanol

MICminimum inhibitory
concentration

SUVssmall unilamellar vesicles

DMPC1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

DPMG1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-rac-(1-glycerol)
==== Refs
References
Tong S. Y. C. ; Davis J. S. ; Eichenberger E. ; Holland T. L. ; Fowler V. G. 
Staphylococcus aureus infections: epidemiology, pathophysiology,
clinical manifestations, and management
. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 
2015 , 28 , 603 –661
. 10.1128/CMR.00134-14 .26016486 
Thomer L. ; Schneewind O. ; Missiakas D. 
Pathogenesis of Staphylococcus
aureus bloodstream infections
. Annu. Rev. Pathol.: Mech. Dis. 
2016 , 11 , 343 –364
. 10.1146/annurev-pathol-012615-044351 .
Foster T. J. ; Geoghegan J. A. ; Ganesh V. K. ; Höök M. 
Adhesion,
invasion and evasion: the many functions of the surface proteins of Staphylococcus aureus
. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 
2014 , 12 , 49 10.1038/nrmicro3161 .24336184 
Mahlapuu M. ; Håkansson J. ; Ringstad L. ; Björn C. 
Antimicrobial
peptides: an emerging category of therapeutic agents
. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 
2016 , 6 , 194 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00194 .28083516 
Gonzalez-Rey E. ; Ganea D. ; Delgado M. 
Neuropeptides:
keeping the balance
between pathogen immunity and immune tolerance
. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 
2010 , 10 , 473 –481
. 10.1016/j.coph.2010.03.003 .20399708 
Augustyniak D. ; Nowak J. ; T Lundy F. 
Direct and
indirect antimicrobial
activities of neuropeptides and their therapeutic potential
. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 
2012 , 13 , 723 –738
. 10.2174/138920312804871139 .23305360 
Brogden K. A. ; Guthmiller J. M. ; Salzet M. ; Zasloff M. 
The nervous
system
and innate immunity: the neuropeptide connection
. Nat. Immunol. 
2005 , 6 , 558 10.1038/ni1209 .15908937 
Catania A. ; Gatti S. ; Colombo G. ; Lipton J. M. 
Targeting melanocortin
receptors as a novel strategy to control inflammation
. Pharmacol. Rev. 
2004 , 56 , 1 –29
. 10.1124/pr.56.1.1 .15001661 
Singh M. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
Alpha-melanocyte
stimulating hormone: an emerging anti-inflammatory
antimicrobial peptide
. BioMed Res. Int. 
2014 , 87461010.1155/2014/874610 .25140322 
Madhuri ; Shireen T. ; Venugopal S. K. ; Ghosh D. ; Gadepalli R. ; Dhawan B. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
In vitro antimicrobial
activity of alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone against major human
pathogen Staphylococcus aureus
. Peptides 
2009 , 30 , 1627 –1635
. 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.06.020 .19560499 
Singh M. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
C-terminal
amino acids of alpha-melanocyte stimulating
hormone are requisite for its antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus
. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 
2011 , 55 , 1920 –1929
. 10.1128/AAC.00957-10 .21282427 
Shireen T. ; Singh M. ; Dhawan B. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
Characterization
of cell membrane parameters of clinical isolates of Staphylococcus aureus with varied susceptibility
to alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone
. Peptides 
2012 , 37 , 334 –339
. 10.1016/j.peptides.2012.05.025 .22835936 
Singh M. ; Gadepalli R. ; Dhawan B. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
Combination
of alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone with conventional antibiotics
against methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus
. PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e7381510.1371/journal.pone.0073815 .24040081 
Singh M. ; Shireen T. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
Susceptibility
of clinical isolates
of Staphylococcus aureus to alpha-melanocyte stimulating
hormone and its in vivo efficacy
. Am. J. Clin.
Microbiol. Antimicrob. 
2018 , 1 , 1 –6
.
Shireen T. ; Basu A. ; Sarkar M. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
Lipid composition
is an important determinant of antimicrobial activity of alpha-melanocyte
stimulating hormone
. Biophys. Chem. 
2015 , 196 , 33 –39
. 10.1016/j.bpc.2014.09.002 .25282663 
Singh J. ; Joshi S. ; Mumtaz S. ; Maurya N. ; Ghosh I. ; Khanna S. ; Natarajan V. T. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
Enhanced cationic
charge is a key factor in promoting staphylocidal activity of α-melanocyte
stimulating hormone via selective lipid affinity
. Sci. Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 3149210.1038/srep31492 .27526963 
Grieco P. ; Carotenuto A. ; Auriemma L. ; Limatola A. ; Di Maro S. ; Merlino F. ; Mangoni M. L. ; Luca V. ; Di Grazia A. ; Gatti S. ; Campiglia P. ; et al. Novel α-MSH peptide
analogues with broad spectrum antimicrobial activity
. PLoS One 
2013 , 8 , e6161410.1371/journal.pone.0061614 .23626703 
Schwab U. ; Gilligan P. ; Jaynes J. ; Henke D. 
In vitro activities
of designed antimicrobial peptides against multidrug-resistant cystic
fibrosis pathogens
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
1999 , 43 , 1435 –1440
. 10.1128/AAC.43.6.1435 .10348766 
Turner J. ; Cho Y. ; Dinh N. N. ; Waring A. J. ; Lehrer R. I. 
Activities of LL-37,
a cathelin-associated antimicrobial peptide of human neutrophils
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
1998 , 42 , 2206 –2214
. 10.1128/AAC.42.9.2206 .9736536 
Chan D. I. ; Prenner E. J. ; Vogel H. J. 
Tryptophan-and arginine-rich antimicrobial
peptides: structures and mechanisms of action
. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2006 , 1758 , 1184 –1202
. 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.04.006 .
Torcato I. M. ; Huang Y. H. ; Franquelim H. G. ; Gaspar D. ; Craik D. J. ; Castanho M. A. ; Henriques S. T. 
Design
and characterization of novel
antimicrobial peptides, R-BP100 and RW-BP100, with activity against
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria
. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2013 , 1828 , 944 –955
. 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.12.002 .
Masman M. F. ; Somlai C. ; Garibotto F. M. ; Rodríguez A. M. ; de la Iglesia A. ; Zacchino S. A. ; Penke B. ; Enriz R. D. 
Structure–antifungal
activity relationship of His-Phe-Arg-Trp-Gly-Lys-Pro-Val-NH2 and analogues
. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2008 , 16 , 4347 –4358
. 10.1016/j.bmc.2008.02.072 .18346897 
Ladokhin A. S. ; Selsted M. E. ; White S. H. 
CD spectra
of indolicidin antimicrobial
peptides suggest turns, not polyproline helix
. Biochemistry 
1999 , 38 , 12313 –12319
. 10.1021/bi9907936 .10493799 
Cheng J. T. ; Hale J. D. ; Elliot M. ; Hancock R. E. ; Straus S. K. 
Effect
of membrane composition on antimicrobial peptides aurein 2.2 and 2.3
from Australian southern bell frogs
. Biophys.
J. 
2009 , 96 , 552 –565
. 10.1016/j.bpj.2008.10.012 .19167304 
Andrushchenko V. V. ; Vogel H. J. ; Prenner E. J. 
Solvent-dependent
structure of two
tryptophan-rich antimicrobial peptides and their analogs studied by
FTIR and CD spectroscopy
. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, Biomembr. 
2006 , 1758 , 1596 –1608
. 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.07.013 .
Nichols M. ; Kuljanin M. ; Nategholeslam M. ; Hoang T. ; Vafaei S. ; Tomberli B. ; Gray C. G. ; DeBruin L. ; Jelokhani-Niaraki M. 
Dynamic turn
conformation of a short tryptophan-rich cationic antimicrobial peptide
and its interaction with phospholipid membranes
. J. Phys. Chem. B 
2013 , 117 , 14697 –14708
. 10.1021/jp4096985 .24195729 
Kumar P. ; Pletzer D. ; Haney E. F. ; Rahanjam N. ; Cheng J. T. ; Yue M. ; Aljehani W. ; Hancock R. E. ; Kizhakkedathu J. N. ; Straus S. K. 
Aurein-derived antimicrobial
peptides formulated with
pegylated phospholipid micelles to target methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus skin infections
. ACS Infect. Dis. 
2019 , 5 , 443 –453
. 10.1021/acsinfecdis.8b00319 .30565465 
Yin L. M. ; Edwards M. A. ; Li J. ; Yip C. M. ; Deber C. M. 
Roles of
hydrophobicity and charge distribution of cationic antimicrobial peptides
in peptide-membrane interactions
. J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 7738 –7745
. 10.1074/jbc.M111.303602 .22253439 
Saravanan R. ; Li X. ; Lim K. ; Mohanram H. ; Peng L. ; Mishra B. ; Basu A. ; Lee J. M. ; Bhattacharjya S. ; Leong S. S. J. 
Design of short membrane selective
antimicrobial peptides
containing tryptophan and arginine residues for improved activity,
salt-resistance, and biocompatibility
. Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 
2014 , 111 , 37 –49
. 10.1002/bit.25003 .23860860 
Joshi S. ; Mumtaz S. ; Singh J. ; Pasha S. ; Mukhopadhyay K. 
Novel miniature
membrane active lipopeptidomimetics against planktonic and biofilm
embedded methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
. Sci. Rep. 
2018 , 8 , 102110.1038/s41598-017-17234-z .29348589 
Friedrich C. L. ; Moyles D. ; Beveridge T. J. ; Hancock R. E. 
Antibacterial action
of structurally diverse cationic peptides on gram-positive bacteria
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2000 , 44 , 2086 –2092
. 10.1128/AAC.44.8.2086-2092.2000 .10898680 
Maisetta G. ; Di Luca M. ; Esin S. ; Florio W. ; Brancatisano F. L. ; Bottai D. ; Campa M. ; Batoni G. 
Evaluation of the inhibitory
effects of human serum components on bactericidal activity of human
beta defensin 3
. Peptides 
2008 , 29 , 1 –6
. 10.1016/j.peptides.2007.10.013 .18045738 
Bradshaw J. P. 
Cationic
antimicrobial peptides
. BioDrugs 
2003 , 17 , 233 –240
. 10.2165/00063030-200317040-00002 .12899640 
Kowalczykowski S. C. ; Paul L. S. ; Lonberg N. ; Newport J. W. ; McSwiggen J. A. ; Von Hippel P. H. 
Cooperative
and noncooperative binding of protein ligands
to nucleic acid lattices: experimental approaches to the determination
of thermodynamic parameters
. Biochemistry 
1986 , 25 , 1226 –1240
. 10.1021/bi00354a006 .3486003 
Middleton E. R. ; Rhoades E. 
Effects of curvature and composition
on α-synuclein
binding to lipid vesicles
. Biophys. J. 
2010 , 99 , 2279 –2288
. 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.07.056 .20923663 
Lee J. K. ; Park S. C. ; Hahm K. S. ; Park Y. 
Antimicrobial HPA3NT3
peptide analogs: placement of aromatic rings and positive charges
are key determinants for cell selectivity and mechanism of action
. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr. 
2013 , 1828 , 443 –454
. 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.09.005 .
Lehar S. M. ; Pillow T. ; Xu M. ; Staben L. ; Kajihara K. K. ; Vandlen R. ; DePalatis L. ; Raab H. ; Hazenbos W. L. ; Morisaki J. H. ; Kim J. ; et al. Novel antibody–antibiotic
conjugate eliminates intracellular S. aureus
. Nature 
2015 , 527 , 323 10.1038/nature16057 .26536114 
Saint
Jean K. D. ; Henderson K. D. ; Chrom C. L. ; Abiuso L. E. ; Renn L. M. ; Caputo G. A. 
Effects of hydrophobic amino acid
substitutions on antimicrobial peptide behavior
. Probiotics Antimicrob. Proteins 
2018 , 10 , 408 –419
. 10.1007/s12602-017-9345-z .29103131 
Carotenuto A. ; Saviello M. R. ; Auriemma L. ; Campiglia P. ; Catania A. ; Novellino E. ; Grieco P. 
Structure–function
relationships and conformational properties of α-MSH (6–13)
analogues with candidacidal activity
. Chem.
Biol. Drug Des. 
2007 , 69 , 68 –74
. 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2007.00473.x .17313459 
Cho J. ; Choi H. ; Lee D. G. 
Influence
of the N-and C-terminal
regions of antimicrobial peptide pleurocidin on antibacterial activity
. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2012 , 22 , 1367 –1374
. 10.4014/jmb.1205.05040 .23075787 
Hao Y. ; Yang N. ; Wang X. ; Teng D. ; Mao R. ; Wang X. ; Li Z. ; Wang J. 
Killing of Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella
enteritidis and neutralization of lipopolysaccharide
by 17-residue bovine lactoferricins: improved activity of Trp/Ala-containing
molecules
. Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 4427810.1038/srep44278 .28287172 
Grieco P. ; Rossi C. ; Colombo G. ; Gatti S. ; Novellino E. ; Lipton J. M. ; Catania A. 
Novel α-melanocyte stimulating
hormone peptide analogues with high candidacidal activity
. J. Med. Chem. 
2003 , 46 , 850 –855
. 10.1021/jm0204338 .12593664 
Caesar C. E. ; Esbjörner E. K. ; Lincoln P. ; Nordén B. 
Membrane interactions
of cell-penetrating peptides probed by tryptophan fluorescence and
dichroism techniques: correlations of structure to cellular uptake
. Biochemistry 
2006 , 45 , 7682 –7692
. 10.1021/bi052095t .16768464 
Dong W. ; Mao X. ; Guan Y. ; Kang Y. ; Shang D. 
Antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory
activities of three chensinin-1 peptides containing mutation of glycine
and histidine residues
. Sci. Rep. 
2017 , 7 , 4022810.1038/srep40228 .28054660 
Nardi F. ; Worth G. A. ; Wade R. C. 
Local interactions of aromatic residues
in short peptides in aqueous solution: a combined database and energetic
analysis
. Folding Des. 
1997 , 2 , S62 –S68
. 10.1016/S1359-0278(97)00066-7 .
Mohamed M. F. ; Abdelkhalek A. ; Seleem M. N. 
Evaluation of short
synthetic antimicrobial
peptides for treatment of drug-resistant and intracellular Staphylococcus aureus
. Sci.
Rep. 
2016 , 6 , 2970710.1038/srep29707 .27405275 
Krut O. ; Sommer H. ; Krönke M. 
Antibiotic-induced persistence of
cytotoxic Staphylococcus aureus in
non-phagocytic cells
. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 
2004 , 53 , 167 –173
. 10.1093/jac/dkh076 .14729736 
Bechara C. ; Sagan S. 
Cell-penetrating peptides: 20 years later, where do we stand?
. FEBS Lett. 
2013 , 587 , 1693 –1702
. 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.04.031 .23669356 
Greenfield N. J. 
Using circular
dichroism spectra to estimate protein secondary structure
. Nat. Protoc. 
2006 , 1 , 2876 10.1038/nprot.2006.202 .17406547 
Mohamed M. F. ; Hamed M. I. ; Panitch A. ; Seleem M. N. 
Targeting methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus with short salt-resistant synthetic
peptides
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2014 , 58 , 4113 –4122
. 10.1128/AAC.02578-14 .24798285 
Kumar P. ; Kandi S. K. ; Manohar S. ; Mukhopadhyay K. ; Rawat D. S. 
Monocarbonyl curcuminoids with improved stability as
antibacterial agents against Staphylococcus aureus and their mechanistic studies
. ACS Omega 
2019 , 4 , 675 –687
. 10.1021/acsomega.8b02625 .
Marathe S. A. ; Sen M. ; Dasgupta I. ; Chakravortty D. 
Differential
modulation of intracellular
survival of cytosolic and vacuolar pathogens by curcumin
. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 
2012 , 56 , 5555 –5567
. 10.1128/AAC.00496-12 .22890770

