
==== Front
ACS Omega
ACS Omega
ao
acsodf
ACS Omega
2470-1343 American Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsomega.9b04422
Mini-Review
Biodegradable Polymeric Materials: Synthetic Approach
Panchal Siddhi
S.  Vasava Dilip V. * Department of Chemistry,
School of Sciences, Gujarat University, Ahmedabad 380009, Gujarat, India
* Phone: +91 9913275906. Email: dilipvasava20@gmail.com.
25 02 2020 
10 03 2020 
5 9 4370 4379
23 12 2019 18 02 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Polymeric
materials obtained from petroleum resources are nonbiodegradable.
Defying degradation, they damage the environment as a result of their
ending up in the landfills. Synthesized biodegradable polymeric materials
(BPMs) have received increasing interest owing to the difficulty in
procuring reproducibility when using natural polymeric materials.
Through the modification of natural polymeric materials or materials
via chemical, microbiological, enzyme-mediated, and chemo-enzymatic
synthesis, a comprehensive range of variegated BPMs can be reaped.
Amended natural polymeric materials such as starch, cellulose, and
chitin have enhanced properties, while synthetic BPMs such as PLA,
PGA, PCL, PDS, and PLGA are explicitly designed to pursue coveted
applications in multifarious domains such as whole diagnostics and
therapeutics. Synthesized BPMs can be embedded with tailored characteristics
to justify the neoteric entails of mankind.

document-id-old-9ao9b04422document-id-new-14ao9b04422ccc-price
==== Body
1 Introduction
Upsurge prevailing in
developing countries regarding the ecological
detriment due to pollution has stretched to perilous heights as a
result of the use of polymeric materials. Similar durability characteristics
of this type of polymeric material for varied execution in packaging
supplies, structure materials, and basic commodities can remedy disposal
snags for traditional petroleum-derived polymers, which are not readily
biodegradable. Being resistant to biodegradation, they accumulate
in the environment. This is the primary reason for the interest in
biodegradable polymeric materials.1

Biodegradable polymeric materials (BPMs) represent a growing field.
Owing to their wide-ranging properties, both synthetic and natural
polymeric materials perform a vital and ubiquitous role in everyday
life. Having a period of effectiveness, BPMs divulge the phenomenon
of biodegradation. It is valuable to distinguish between BPMs on the
basis of their origin: native or synthetic. Native BPMs represent
the synthesis developed during a long course of evolution in nature,
while synthetic BPMs are the result of a mere century of research
and development, both resulting in materials possessing tailored characteristics
for diverse applications. They include proteins (collagen, gelatin,
and albumin), polysaccharides (cellulose, chitin, and alginate), nucleic
acids, and lipids, which illustrate totally diverse characteristics
reliant on the conditions under which they are used. Synthesized BPMs
have received increasing interest owing to the difficulty in obtaining
reproducibility when using natural polymeric materials. Although first
introduced in the 1980s, synthetic BPMs have been attracting attenention
in the last two decades, primarily due to ecological fouling and the
realization that our natural resources are finite.1

As for all synthetic polymeric materials, BPMs can
be produced
with reproducible quality and indigenous purity with no immunogenicity
concerns and can be fabricated into a variety of forms in the required
bulk with desired morphology. The aptness to tailor the degradation
kinetics and mechanical properties while synthesizing BPMs contributes
to their multifarious applications by inducing biocompatibility, making
them more predictable with respect to polymers isolated from natural
sources.2

BPMs can be devised broadly
via either modification of natural
polymeric materials or through diversified routes used to synthesize
BPMs comprising chemical synthesis, microbiological synthesis, enzyme-mediated
synthesis, and chemo-enzymatic synthesis.2

Synthetic BPMs such as poly(lactic acid) (PLA), poly(glycolic
acid)
(PGA), poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), poly(butylene
succinate) (PBA), polycaprolactone (PCL), poly(ethylene adipate) (PEA),
poly(p-dioxanone) (PDS), and their copolymers play
an imperative role in clinical applications such as nonviral gene
delivery vectors, drug-delivery systems,2 resorbable sutures, biosensors, tissue engineering scaffolds, regenerative
medicine including implants, and orthopedic fixation devices such
as pins, rods, and screws. With respect to the varied applications,
research on synthetic BPMs has been focused on the simulation of different
biopolymeric materials or polymeric materials with degradable backbones,
for instance, polyanhydrides, polycarbonates, and polylactones.

This review focuses on the synthesis methods of BPMs. It also briefly
summarizes the applications to heighten future research advances in
the field of BPMs.

2 Synthesis Methods for the
Preparation of BPMs
2.1 Modification of Natural
Polymeric Materials
Being readily biodegradable in nature,
polysaccharide polymeric
materials such as chitosan, chitin, starch, and cellulose can be modified
into new BPMs by coblending.

Natural polymers can be modified
via various chemical modifications, in particular, nitration, hydroxylation,
sulfonation, acylation, alkylation, phosphorylation, thiolation, xanthation,
quaternization, and graft copolymerization, of which graft copolymerization
is the most promising approach leading to a wide variety of molecular
designs.3

2.1.1 Modification
of Chitin and Chitosan
Among several methods, graft copolymerization
is an influential method
used to enhance the antibacterial, chelating, and complexation properties
of chitosan. The grafting of chitin and chitosan by covalently binding
a molecule onto the backbone enables the synthesis of functional derivatives.

Chitosan contains two reactive groups that can act as grafting
sites: the free amino groups (on deacetylated units of chitin) and
the hydroxyl groups (on the C3 and C6 carbons on acetylated and deacetylated
units of chitin, respectively) (Figure 1).4

Figure 1 Structures of (a) chitin
and (b) chitosan.

Molatlhegi et al.4 showed that chitosan-grafted
polyacrylamide (CGP) was a better flocculant than pure chitosan (Figure 2). Furthermore, the
existence of an extremely high adsorption affinity of CGP toward kaolin
surfaces was also demonstrated.

Figure 2 Synthesis of acrylamide-grafted chitosan.

Dong et al.5 formed
and stabilized nanometric-sized
epichlorohydrin cross-linked chitosan magnetic particles by adding
sodium hydroxide to the mixture of chitosan/Fe(II)/Fe(III) dropwise
with constant stirring (Figure 3). The hydroxyl groups are preferentially reacted with a cross-linking
agent in the presence of iron salts (Fe(II) and Fe(III) ions) in the
chitosan solution, suggesting the possible interaction of these ions
with the protected amino groups. The protection of amino groups due
to weak interaction with iron, resulted in the cross-linking of epichlorohydrin-grafted
chitosan with the following:(a) –NH2, in the case
of alanine, where the −CH3 group is poorly reactive,

(b) –NH2 and −CH2OH groups in the case of serine, and

(c) –NH2 and −CH2SH groups in the case of cysteine



Figure 3 Synthesis of alanine-functionalized epichlorohydrin-grafted
magnetic
chitosan.

2.1.2 Modification
of Starch
The large
number of hydroxyl groups on starch molecules provide the active sites
for chemical modification. The chemical modification involves introducing
various functional groups, such as carboxyl, acetyl, and hydroxypropyl,
into starch structure (Figure 4). The properties of modified starch are greatly impacted
by the source of starch, reaction conditions, and methods used for
its modification. Table 1(6) shows some properties of starch prepared
via different modifications.

Table 1 Modifications of
Starch and Their
Propertiesa
modification	properties	
cross-linking	better freeze–thaw	
 	granule stability	
 	higher heat	
 	shear stabilities	
 	lower
swelling power	
 	decreased solubility	
 	reduced enthalpy of gelatinization	
grafting	better biodegradability	
 	enhanced stability	
 	stronger water absorbency	
 	larger hydrodynamic radius and volume	
 	film making	
esterification	more moisture-resistant and thermoplasticity	
 	better compatibility	
 	lower biodegradability and thermal stability	
etherification	better thermal stability	
 	enhanced solubility	
 	better flowability	
 	improved permeability	
 	good strength	
oxidization	higher solubility	
 	better
viscosity	
 	enhanced gelatinization
temperature	
 	better water absorbency	
 	lower enthalpy value	
acidification	better recovery	
 	enhanced solubility	
 	lower pasting viscosity	
 	reduced gelatinization enthalpy	
dual	combination of properties	
a Reproduced from
ref (6) with permission
from the
Royal Society of Chemistry.

Figure 4 Structure of
starch.

Starch-graft-poly(lactic
acid) (SGPLA), starch-graft poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid)
(SGPLGA), and starch-graft poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid-co-e-caprolactam) (SGPLGC)
copolymers were yielded through the direct polycondensation of starch
with lactic acid, glycolic acid, and e-caprolactam sequentially in
aqueous media using stannous chloride (SnCl2) as the catalyst
at 120–170 °C (Figure 5).7a

Figure 5 Graft polymerization
of starch with lactic acid, glycolic acid,
and e-caprolactum.

The synthesis of SGPLA
was performed in the presence of NH3·H2O with urea as the solvent (Figure 6). The effect of urea and NH3·H2O dosage concentration on the graft copolymerization
of starch with lactic was obvious. The reason was proposed that the
dissolution of starch was boosted because of its hydrogen bond with
urea to attain homogeneous conditions and favor the esterification
of starch with lactic acid. Being easily available and reaction-friendly,
ammonia–water was selected as the catalyst to promote the above
reaction. It is found that the grafting degree of starch increases
with the increase in the amount of ammonia–water in 12 initial
stages, but because it is a reversible reaction, excess ammonia–water
could promote the hydrolysis of ester, which would decrease the grafting
degree of starch.7b

Figure 6 Synthesis of SGPLA.

Misman et al.7c etherified
sago starch
by reacting it with benzyl chloride in sodium hydroxide and found
that the product resulting from solvent-based etherification had a
higher degree of substitution, good thermal stability, and a better
ability to flow (Figure 7).

Figure 7 Etherification of starch.

Sometimes when single modification does not impart the desired
properties, further modification is used to meet the requirements
for the better application of such a modified starch. Sukhija et al.7d performed the dual modification of elephant
foot yam starch in two different ways to yield modified starches,
i.e., oxidized cross-linked starch (OCS) and cross-linked oxidized
starch (COS), to check the change in the physiochemical properties
because of chemical modification. The oxidation of starch in the presence
of sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) followed by its cross-linking with
sodium trimetaphosphate (STMP) (Na3P3O9) produced OCS, whereas the cross-linking of starch with STMP followed
by its oxidation through NaOCl yielded COS. OCS possessed improved
gel clarity, solubility, and thermal characteristics with respect
to COS. The oxidation and cross-linking reactions of starch are shown
in Figure 8.

Figure 8 (a) Oxidation
of starch and (b) cross-linking of starch.

2.1.3 Modification of Cellulose
Naturally
obtained cellulose can be chemically modified by treating it via esterification,
etherification, or deacylation.

Baiardo et al.8 modified the surface fibers of cellulose without appreciably
altering their native structure and morphology. By the simple esterification
and etherification reactions, the high-polarity and high-hydrophilicity
properties of natural cellulose fibers were suppressed such that the
surface property qualities of the most common thermoplastics are fulfilled.
Esterification reactions were carried out using acyl chloride and
pyridine, while for performing the etherification of cellulose hydroxyls
with ethyl groups, alkylation was carried out in two different alkaline
media. Mild reaction conditions were employed in order to maintain
the reinforcement properties and preserve the biodegradability of
the cellulose fibers.

The acetate groups suffered cleavage during
the deprotection of
silylated cellulose acetate with TBAF·3H2O/THF or
TBAF·3H2O/DMSO. Further investigations revealed regioselective
deacetylation (Figure 9) at C2 and C3 carbon positions of the aminoguanidine (AGU). Here,
TBA+ acts as a general-acid catalyst, whereas F– induces deacetylation via a ketene intermediate. The formation of
the latter was inferred from a kinetic isotope which affects the experiment.

Figure 9 Deacetylation
of cellulose.

2.2 Chemical
Synthesis of BPMs
Polymeric
materials are chemically synthesized with their structures resembling
natural polymeric materials. The polymeric materials containing chains
of ester, amide, and peptide bonds are readily biodegradable. The
process where many small molecules, called monomers or repeating units,
combine to form a covalently bonded chain or network is coined polymerization.
The loss of some chemical groups from each monomer may occur during
the process. A few synthetic BPMs accompanied by their structures
and applications are shown in Table 2.9

Table 2 Some Synthetic
Biodegradable Polymers
Synthetic polymerization reactions can be carried
out with or without
the help of a catalyst. BPMs synthesized in the laboratory are an
area of intensive research.

2.2.1 Ring-Opening Polymerization
(ROP)
Polymerization where an acyclic monomeric unit is produced
from a
cyclic monomer is ROP. It is a form of chain-growth polymerization
where the terminal end of a polymer chain acts as a reactive center
to form a longer polymer chain by opening the ring system of cyclic
monomers. There can be three propagating centers: radical, anionic,
or cationic. ROP continues to be the most versatile method for the
synthesis of major groups of biopolymers to procure product in large
quantities.10a

PLA is synthesized
either by the polycondensation of lactic acid or by the chain growth
ROP of lactide (Figure 10). Several catalysts and initiators can be used to carry out
the ROP of lactide. A commonly used robust catalyst/initiator is Sn(Oct)2.10a

Figure 10 ROP of lactide.

High-molecular-weight PLGA is produced by the ROP
of lactide and
glycolide, the cyclic diesters of lactic acid and glycolic acid, respectively,
under catalyst Sn(Oct)2 (Figure 11).10a

Figure 11 ROP of glycolide
and lactide.

PCL is synthesized via ROP of
e-caprolactone with Sn(Oct)2 as a catalyst (Figure 12).10a

Figure 12 ROP of e-caprolactone.

ROP of p-dioxanone produces PDS (Figure 13), a relatively weak, rapidly
biodegrading polymer which was introduced to the market in the 1980s
as a new degradable material to be used for suturing. It generates
degradation products that are less acidic than PGA and PLA.10b

Figure 13 ROP of p-dioxanone.

Gou et al.10c synthesized
three novel
pentablock (PB) copolymers by the bulk ROP method:a. poly(glycolic acid)-poly(caprolactone)-poly(ethylene
glycol)-poly(caprolactone)-poly(glycolic acid) (PGA-PCL-PEG-PCL-PGA,
i.e., PB-A) (Figure 14),

b. poly(lactic acid)-poly(caprolactone)-poly(ethylene
glycol)-poly(caprolactone)-poly(lactic acid) (PLA-PCL-PEG-PCL-PLA,
i.e., PB-B),

c. poly(ethylene
glycol)-poly(caprolactone)-poly(lactic
acid)-poly(caprolactone)-poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-PCL-PLA-PCL-PEG,
i.e., PB-C)



Figure 14 Synthesis scheme for the PB-A (PGA-PCL-PEG-PCL-PGA)
copolymer.

2.2.2 Free-Radical
Polymerization (FRP)
The consecutive addition of building
blocks as free radicals, formed
by several mechanisms involving separate initiator molecules, to produce
polymers is termed FRP. The newly generated initiating free radicals
add monomer units to the polymer chain, resulting in its growth. Owing
to the nonspecific nature of free-radical chemical interactions, FRP
is the most versatile forms of polymerization which allows facile
reactions of polymeric free-radical chain ends with other chemicals
or substrates.11

2.2.3 Condensation
A condensation reaction
is a class of organic addition reaction that typically proceeds in
a stepwise fashion, occurring under acidic or basic conditions or
in the presence of a catalyst and yielding the addition product in
equilibrium. As the name suggests, condensation produces a water molecule.
The reaction may also involve the functional groups of the molecule
to form a small molecule such as ammonia, ethanol, or acetic acid
instead of water. These reactions are a vital part of life as they
play an essential role in the generation of peptide bonds between
amino acids and the biosynthesis of fatty acids.12

Figure 15 shows different techniques such as direct condensation polymerization,
azeotropic dehydrative condensation, and polymerization through lactide
formation to produce high-molecular-weight PLA. However, currently
most of them are produced by lactide ROP.12

Figure 15 Synthesis of PLA from l- and d-lactic acids.

However, the required synthesis conditions were
harsh, which resulted
in many byproducts, making this method less cost-efficient for the
synthesis of BPMs.

2.3 Microbiological Synthesis
of BPMs
Microorganisms use organic matter such as glucose
and starch as food
sources to synthesize a series of complex polymeric materials. These
polymeric materials cover a varied sort of silk, polysaccharides,
polyesters including poly(hydroxyalkanoates) (PHAs) such as poly(hydroxybutyrate)
(PHB) and poly(hydroxy-butyrate-hydroxy-valerate) (PHBV), and PCL.
The similarity in their chemical properties makes the separation of
these products difficult. Table 3(13) shows the list of the
few bacterial polyester PHAs mentioned with the respective radicals
as shown in Figure 16.

Figure 16 General structure of PHA.

Table 3 Types of Bacterial Polyester PHAs
with Their Specified Radicalsa
polymer	–R group	applications	
poly(hydroxylbutyrate) PHB	–CH3	seam threads for the healing of wounds
and blood vessels, creating
bioplastics	
poly(hydroxylvalerate) PHV	–CH2–CH3	controlled release of drugs, clinical repairs, orthopedic devices	
poly(hydroxyhexanoate) PHHex	–(CH2)2–CH3	medical implants, adhesion barriers, stents, vein
valves	
poly(hydroxyloctanoate) PHO	–(CH2)4–CH3	biomedical grafting, bone marrow scaffolds	
poly(hydroxyldecanoate) PHD	–(CH2)6–CH3	drug delivery	
poly(hydroxy phenylvalerate) PHPV	–CH2–C6H5	surgical implants,
biofuels	
a Reproduced with permission from
ref (13).

2.3.1 Poly(hydroxyalkanoates)
PHAs are
a class of intracellular biopolymers that are produced by the bacterial
fermentation of sugar or lipids to store carbon and energy. Bacterially
synthesized PHAs are highly biocompatible and have renewable sources.
PHAs are formed mainly from saturated and unsaturated hydroxyalkanoic
acids (HAA). The monomer of PHA can be branched or unbranched 3-HAA,
and those with substituted side chains are 4- and 5-HAA. PHA can be
a homo-, co-, or terpolymer depending on the kind of monomer.14

2.3.1.1 Poly(hydroxybutyrate)
PHB is
a member of the bioderived and biodegradable polyesters that were
synthesized from bacteria Bacillus megaterium by
Lemoigne in 1925.15 The generalized chemical
structure of PHB is  Takehara16 biosynthesized
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (P3HB) through the formation of 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA
and then polymerized it in the presence of enzyme PHB synthase (Figure 17). Microbially
produced PHAs have molecular weights of 500 000 to >1 000 000,
much higher than that achieved by conventional polycondensation involving
hydroxy acid monomers. PHAs typically possess a natural ability to
make high-molecular-weight condensation polymers such as proteins,
starch, cellulose, and nucleic acids.

Figure 17 Microbial synthesis
of PHB.

Degli et al.17 studied bone tissue regeneration
scaffolds made from PHB, which was obtained by a thermally induced
phase separation (TIPS) technique, and the osteoinductivity and osteoconductivity
were enhanced through the incorporation of HA to form a block copolymer.

2.3.1.2 Poly(hydroxy-butyrate-hydroxy-valerate)
Ma et al.18 synthesized high levels
of PHBV with a 3-hydroxyvalerate fraction through l-isoleucine
producing Corynebacterium glutamicum recombinant
strain WM001.

2.4 Enzyme-Mediated Synthesis
of BPMs
Enzyme-mediated polymerization is an emerging approach
which can
compete against conventional chemical synthesis methods and physical
modification techniques. Some enzymes show different properties by
catalyzing specific polymerizations. The products can be separated
easily as these reactions do not produce any byproducts due to the
high specificity of enzymes.19

Via
enzyme-mediated synthesis, BPMs such as polyamide, polysaccharide,
and polyester can be produced. Furthermore, enzymes can be recycled.
Because the catalytic reaction conditions while using enzymes are
mild (generally room temperature and atmospheric pressure), the processing cost can be reduced significantly.20

Table 4 Enzymes and Typical
Examples of Their
Use in Polymer Synthesis and Typical Polymers Synthesized via Enzymatic
Polymerizationa
a Reproduced with
permission from
ref (19).

Lipase-catalyzed polymerization
(LCP) has become an important method
for the synthesis of aliphatic polyesters. Itaconic anhydride (IAn)
derived from renewable starting materials was used in a ring-opening
addition condensation polymerization (ROACP) monomer to undergo LCP
and produce good-to-high yields of reactive polyesters possessing
vinylidene double bonds (Figure 18).21

Figure 18 ROACP using IAn and
diol.

Cheng et al.22 investigated the bulk
LCP of diamines and diesters (Figure 19), which resulted in aliphatic polyamides having around
a 3000–15 000 g/mol molecular weight. This is the first
report showing that high-molecular-weight polyamides can be produced
via LCP.

Figure 19 LCP for aliphatic polyamides.

2.5 Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of BPMs
Enzymatic
synthesis adjusts the polymer molecular weight and endows
the polymer with both high specificity and stereoselectivity. The
chemoenzymatic synthesis method combines conventional polymerization
with a highly efficient enzymatic approach. Hence, it can be coined
as an attractive strategy for the preparation of high-molecular-weight
BPMs.

Researchers have fabricated some optically active polymeric
prodrugs as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory substrates having high
molecular weights by using an efficient chemoenzymatic route.

Gutman et al.23 investigated the lipase-catalyzed
ROP of ε-caprolactone (ε-CL) in n-hexane
to successfully produce PCL having up to a 4400 g/mol molecular weight
(Figure 20).

Figure 20 Lipase-catalyzed
ROP of caprolactone.

3 Conclusions
and Future Perspectives
This review summarizes the synthetic
preparations for biodegradable
polymeric materials. Time was needed for the endangered possibility
of the survival of mankind to ensue through nonbiodegradable polymers,
and vanishing off-the-shelf natural BPMs have led to increased interest
in the synthesis of BPMs. Synthetic BPMs have progressed and touched
new heights of synergistic research. Scientists, engineers, biologists,
and physicians have tailored their efforts to the properties of synthesized
materials, which certainly possess potential. They not only have a
dynamically regulated structure and morphology but also show their
discrete functions to offer a flexible and robust platform for the
design and synthesis of smart BPMs with tailored specifications.

The future prospect of synthetic BPMs seems promising. Current
drifts have transposed the focus toward biology in order to understand
and then mimic the physiological interactions and signaling. Functional
BPMs are a concept which has become crucial in biomedical utilization.
The well-defined structure, biodegradability/biostability, mechanical
properties, multiple functionalities, stimuli-responsiveness, biocompatibility,
and minimum cytotoxicity of these BPMs make them suitable candidates
for multifarious applications comprising the development of potential
drug/gene delivery systems along with combination therapies, biotemplates,
wound healing materials, orthopedic and dental sutures, fixatures
and implants, and antimicrobial surfaces; in tissue engineering, cryopreservation,
food packaging; and as polymeric biocides and herbicides, biofuels,
and superabsorbent polymers.

Owing to the advancement of nanotechnology,
particularly when consolidating
it with the utilization of BPMs, one can envision this cutting-edge
technology as one of the most powerful tools in modern society. BPM-based
nanovehicles provide a stable platform for bioimaging and diagnosis
as they can potentially survive diverse external stimuli in vitro
and in vivo. Due to their tailored self-assembly behavior, BPMs can
disperse in aqueous media to retain their nanosized distribution for
bioapplications. As the old saying goes, “opportunity always
sides with challenges”. Although BPMs provide perfect platforms
for biomedical applications, this area still faces several crucial
challenges. Many BPMs have been used for in vitro studies, thus one
can contemplate a protracted course of action to be explored prior
to their application in clinical theragnostic for attaining rehabilitation
in the future to avail a revolutionary influence on every aspect of
human life.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.



Siddhi S. Panchal received
her bachelor’s degree in chemistry
(2013–2016) from Gujarat University and her master’s
degree in organic chemistry (2016–2018) from the Department
of Chemistry, School of Sciences, Gujarat University. Now she is pursuing
her doctoral degree in biodegradable polymeric nanomaterials under
the guidance of Dr. Dilip V. Vasava in the Department of Chemistry
at Gujarat University.



Dilip V. Vasava, B.Ed., Ph.D.,
assistant professor, Department
of Chemistry, School of Sciences, Gujarat University, received his
doctoral degree in polymer chemistry from the Veer Narmad South Gujarat
University, Surat, Gujarat, India. He has been working on high-performance
fluorescent polymers, biodegradable polymers, nanoparticles and nanocomposites,
green chemistry, and drug design. He served at St. Xaviers’
College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India, for 8 years (2007–2015)
and has been at his current affiliation since 2015.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the Department
of Chemistry, School
of Sciences, Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India 380009,
for basic infrastructural facilities. The authors also appreciate
all lab mates for their support.

Abbreviations
BPMsbiodegradable polymeric materials

PGApoly(glycolic acid)

PLApoly(lactic acid)

PLGApoly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)

PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)

PBApoly(butylene succinate)

PCLpolycaprolactone

PEApoly(ethylene adipate)

PDSpoly(p-dioxanone)

PVLpoly(valerolactone)

CGPchitosan-grafted-polyacrylamide

(NH4)2S2O8ammonium persulfate

Fe3O4iron oxide

EtOHethanol

SGPLAstarch-graft-poly(lactic acid)

SGPLGAstarch-graft-poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid)

SGPLGCstarch-graft-poly(lactic acid-co-glycolic acid-co-e-caprolactam)

OCSoxidized cross-linked starch

COScross-linked oxidized starch

STMPsodium trimetaphosphate

TBAFtetra-n-butylammonium fluoride

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

AGUaminoguanidine

ROPring-opening polymerization

PBpentablock

FRPfree-radical polymerization

PHBpoly(hydroxybutyrate)

PHBVpoly(hydroxy-butyrate-hydroxy-valerate)

PHHexpoly(hydroxyhexanoate)

PHOpoly(hydroxyloctanoate)

PHDpoly(hydroxyldecanoate)

PHPVpoly(hydroxy phenylvalerate)

HAAhydroxyalkanoic
acids

TIPSthermally
induced phase separation

IAnitaconic anhydride

ROACPring-opening addition condensation polymerization
==== Refs
References
Vasava D. V. ; Shah T. V. 
A glimpse of biodegradable
polymers and their biomedical
applications
. e-Polym. 
2019 , 19  (1 ), 385 –410
. 10.1515/epoly-2019-0041 .
Rodrigues P. R. ; Vieira R. P. 
Advances in atom-transfer
radical polymerization for
drug delivery applications
. Eur. Polym. J. 
2019 , 115 , 45 –58
. 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2019.03.023 .
El-magied M. O. A. ; Galhoum A. A. ; Maize M. S. ; Vincent T. ; Guibal E. ; Atia A. A. ; Tolba A. A. 
Cellulose
and chitosan derivatives
for enhanced sorption of erbium (III)
. Colloids
Surf., A 
2017 , 529 , 580 –593
. 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2017.05.031 .
Molatlhegi O. ; Alagha L. 
Adsorption characteristics of chitosan grafted copolymer
on kaolin
. Appl. Clay Sci. 
2017 , 150 , 342 –353
. 10.1016/j.clay.2017.09.032 .
Dong C. ; Chen W. ; Liu C. ; Liu Y. ; Liu H. 
Synthesis
of magnetic chitosan nanoparticle and its adsorption property for
humic acid from aqueous solution
. Colloids Surf.,
A 
2014 , 446 , 179 –189
. 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2014.01.069 .
Chen Q. ; Yu H. ; Wang L. ; ul Abdin Z. ; Chen Y. ; Wang J. ; Zhou W. ; Yang X. ; Khan R. U. ; Zhang H. ; Chen X. 
Recent progress
in chemical modification of starch and its applications
. RSC Adv. 
2015 , 5 , 67459 –67474
. 10.1039/C5RA10849G .
a Lu D. ; Duan P. ; Guo R. ; Yang L. ; Zang H. 
Synthesis and characterization of starch graft biodegradable polyester
and polyesteramide by direct polycondensation
. Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng. 
2013 , 52 , 200 –205
. 10.1080/03602559.2012.735313 . b Hu Y. ; Tang M. 
Synthesis of starch-g-lactic acid copolymer with high grafting degree
catalyzed by ammonia water
. Carbohydr. Polym. 
2015 , 118 , 79 –82
. 10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.11.011 .25542110  c Misman M. A. ; Azura A. R. ; Hamid Z. A. 
The Physical and
Degradation Properties of Starch-graft-acrylonitrile/Carboxylated
Nitrile Butadiene Rubber Latex Films
. Ind. Crops
Prod. 
2015 , 65 , 397 –405
. 10.1016/j.indcrop.2014.11.009 . d Sukhija S. ; Singh S. ; Riar C. S. 
Effect of oxidation, cross-linking and dual modification
on physicochemical, crystallinity, morphological, pasting and thermal
characteristics of elephant foot yam (Amorphophallus paeoniifolius)
starch
. Food Hydrocolloids 
2016 , 55 , 56 –64
. 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2015.11.003 .
Baiardo M. ; Frisoni G. ; Scandola M. ; Licciardello A. 
Surface chemical
modification of natural cellulose fibers
. J.
Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2002 , 83 , 38 –45
. 10.1002/app.2229 .
Kim J. A. ; Van A. D. 
Neocollagenesis in human tissue injected with a polycaprolactone-based
dermal filler
. Journal of Cosmetic and Laser
Therapy 
2015 , 17 , 99 –101
. 10.3109/14764172.2014.968586 .25260139 
a Viness P. ; Ahmed S. ; Choonara Y. E. , du Toit L. C. ; Valence P. K. ; Ndesendo M. K.  AAPS PharmSciTech 2013 , 14 , 2 .b Modjarrad K.  , Ed. Handbook of Polymer
Applications in Medicine and Medical Devices ; Ebnesajjad S.  , Eds; Elsevier ; 2013 ; p 318319 .c Gou M. ; Gong C. ; Zhang J. ; Wang X. ; Gu Y. ; Guo G. ; Chen L. ; Luo F. ; Zhao X. ; Wei Y. 
Polymeric
matrix for drug delivery: Honokiol-loaded PCL-PEG-PCL nanoparticles
in PEG-PCL-PEG thermosensitive hydrogel
. J.
Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 
2010 , 93 , 219 –226
. 10.1002/jbm.a.32546 .
Patel S. P. ; Vaishya R. ; Mishra G. P. ; Tamboli V. ; Pal D. ; Mitra A. K. 
Tailor-made pentablock copolymer-based formulation
for sustained ocular delivery of protein therapeutics
. J. Drug Delivery 
2014 , 2014 , 1 10.1155/2014/401747 .
Zeng S. H. ; Duan P. P. ; Shen M. X. ; Xue Y. J. ; Wang Z. Y.  Preparation
and degradation mechanisms of biodegradable polymer: a review
. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2016 , 137 , 12003 .
Yao Y. C. ; Zhan X. Y. ; Zhang J. ; Zou X. H. ; Wang Z. H. ; Xiong Y. C. ; Chen J. ; Chen G. Q. 
A specific drug
targeting system based on polyhydroxyalkanoate granule binding protein
PhaP fused with targeted cell ligands
. Biomaterials 
2008 , 29 , 4823 –4830
. 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2008.09.008 .18824258 
Arrieta M. P. ; Lopez J. ; Hernandez A. ; Rayon E. 
Ternary PLA–PHB–Limonene
blends intended for biodegradable food packaging applications
. Eur. Polym. J. 
2014 , 50 , 255 –270
. 10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2013.11.009 .
Nair A. B. ; Sivasubramanian P. ; Balakrishnan P. ; Kumar K. A. ; Sreekala M. S.  Environmental
Effects, Biodegradation, and Life Cycle Analysis of Fully Biodegradable
‘‘Green’’Composites
. In Polymer Composites ; Sabu T. , Kuruvilla J. , Malhotra S. K.  , Eds.; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA , 2014 .
Takehara T.  Regulation of molecular
weight of biopolyesters produced by bacteria . NIST 2005  Young Investigator Research
Grant http://www.nisr.or.jp/englishHP/report2005/NISR05tsuge.pdf.
Esposti M. D. ; Chiellini F. ; Bondioli F. ; Morselli D. ; Fabbri P. 
Highly porous
PHB-based bioactive scaffolds for bone tissue engineering by in situ
synthesis of hydroxyapatite
. Mater. Sci. Eng.,
C 
2019 , 100 , 286 –296
. 10.1016/j.msec.2019.03.014 .
Ma W. ; Wang J. ; Li Y. ; Yin L. ; Wang X. 
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)
co-produced with l-isoleucine in Corynebacterium glutamicum WM001
. Microb. Cell Fact. 
2018 , 17 , 93 10.1186/s12934-018-0942-7 .29907151 
Jiang Y. ; Loos K. 
Enzymatic Synthesis of Biobased Polyesters and Polyamides
. Polymers 
2016 , 8 , 243 10.3390/polym8070243 .
Pellis A. ; Comerford J. W. ; Weinberger S. ; Guebitz G. M. ; Clark J. H. ; Farmer T. J. 
Enzymatic
synthesis of lignin derivable pyridine-based
polyesters for the substitution of petroleum derived plastics
. Nat. Commun. 
2019 , 10 , 1762 10.1038/s41467-019-09817-3 .30992443 
Cheng H. N. ; Gu Q.
M. ; Maslanka W. W.  ; inventors; Hercules
Inc, assignee . Enzyme-catalyzed polyamides
and compositions and processes of preparing and using the same
. United States patent US 6,677,427 . Jan 13, 2004.
Qu-Ming G. ; Maslanka W. W. ; Cheng H. N.  Enzyme-catalyzed
polyamides and their derivatives
. In Polymer
Biocatalysis and Biomaterials II ; American
Chemical Society : Washington, D.C. , 2008 ; Vol 999  pp 309 –319
.
Gutman A. L. ; Knani D. ; Kohn D. H. 
Enzymatic polyesterification in organic
media. Enzyme-catalyzed synthesis of linear polyesters. I. Condensation
polymerization of linear hydroxyesters. II. Ring-opening polymerization
of ϵ-caprolactone
. J. Polym. Sci., Part
A: Polym. Chem. 
1993 , 31 , 1221 –1232
. 10.1002/pola.1993.080310518 .

