
==== Front
ACS Omega
ACS Omega
ao
acsodf
ACS Omega
2470-1343 American Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsomega.0c00178
Article
Impact of Diversion on Acid Fracturing of Laminated
Carbonate Formations: A Modeling Perspective
Aljawad Murtada Saleh * College of Petroleum Engineering
& Geosciences, King Fahd University of Petroleum
& Minerals, Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia
* E-mail: mjawad@kfupm.edu.sa.
10 03 2020 
24 03 2020 
5 11 6153 6162
14 01 2020 28 02 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical
Society2020American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Acid-fracturing treatment schedules
usually contain diversion stages
either to reduce fluid loss or equally stimulate pay zones. Near-wellbore
diversion employs solid or mechanical diverters to direct acid to
less-stimulated zones. This study focuses on the impact of near-wellbore
diversion on the acid fracturing of calcite/dolomite laminated formations.
The study was performed using an integrated acid fracture and productivity
model. Simulations showed that when acid preferentially etches more
reactive lamina, channels with infinite conductivity can be achieved.
Nevertheless, deploying diverters to equally stimulate pay zones can
result in less conductive but equally stimulated zones. The productivity
model showed that the preferential etching that naturally occurs when
injecting acid results in better well performance, if a continuous
pay zone is assumed. This study also shows that the optimum acid fracture
design conditions in laminated formations are similar to those of
calcite-dominated formations.

document-id-old-9ao0c00178document-id-new-14ao0c00178ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Acid
fracture is a common well stimulation method that is applied
specifically to carbonate formations to enhance productivity. Acid
etches the fracture walls in nonuniform patterns, causing the fracture
to prop itself open and eliminating the need for proppant. The acid
fracture roughness is larger near the wellbore as compared with far-field
based on large block triaxial experiments.1 A treatment schedule consists of different stages that are usually
repeated in three or four cycles. Commonly, each cycle consists of
a concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCl) stage and diverter. The treatment
begins with a viscous nonreactive fluid to open the fracture and ends
with a flush to push the acid from the tubular near-wellbore region.

Acid fracture is usually compared to matrix acidizing, which is
a similar stimulation method but performed below the fracture extension
pressure. Matrix acidizing is frequently performed for damage removal
or productivity enhancement through wormhole generation. Choosing
whether acid fracture or matrix acidizing is the most suitable stimulation
method can be tricky. Palharini Schwalbert et al.2 showed that acid fracture results in better productivity
than does matrix acidizing when the reservoir permeability is lower
than 1.0 md, providing a methodology for estimating the cutoff permeability
at which matrix acidizing is the preferred stimulation method. This
methodology is based on information about the formation depth, rock
type and strength, and treatment volume. Acid fracturing can be a
less favorable option in weakly contained pay zones surrounded by
water aquifers or gas caps.

A propped fracture is an alternative
stimulation technique wherein
acid is replaced with proppant slurry. Abbas et al.3 and Suleimenova et al.4 showed
that a propped fracture is better at sustaining conductivity at higher
closure stresses. Nevertheless, acid fracturing is a cheaper option
that does not suffer from screenout complications. Acid fracture is
usually preferred in shallow heterogeneous formations where conductivity
can be created and sustained. Also, it is preferred in naturally fractured
formations, especially if proppant screenout is a common operational
challenge.

Acid fracture productivity depends on the resulting
conductivity
and penetration length. These two parameters can be optimized through
a well-designed acid fracture job. Several models were developed to
simulate acid reaction in a fractured well; some are three-dimensional
(3D) models.5 Nevertheless, limited research
has pursued optimizing acid fracture design parameters. Sevougian
et al.6 provided an analytical formula
for estimating the optimum conductivity and penetration length, based
on Nierode and Kruk’s7 conductivity
model and Raymond and Binder’s8 productivity
equation. These researchers concluded that a Peclet number of 4 should
be targeted to create uniform conductivity. Ravikumar et al.9 applied the concept of unified fracture design
(UFD) to optimize acid fracture design. Recently, Aljawad et al.10 showed that the optimum acid fracture design
depends on reservoir permeability, depth, rock mineralogy and strength,
and acid treatment volume. For instance, a lower injection rate is
usually required in high rather than low permeability formations.
The optimum design is not unique and can be achieved through different
combinations of design conditions. Increasing the acid treatment volume
results in a higher optimum acid injection rate. Also, dolomite rocks
with lower levels of reactivity have much lower optimum injection
rates than calcite rocks.

Diversion operations have been introduced
in acid fracturing to
optimize the design. Diverters can be mechanical (e.g., coil tubing)
or chemical; they are also categorized as solid or liquid.11,12 Conventionally, diversion is applied to reduce the fluid loss rate
to enhance acid penetration and keep the fracture open during operation.
Recently, diversion has been applied to equally stimulate laminated
pay zones and perforation clusters in multistage hydraulic fracturing.13,14 Although diversion is heavily applied in acid-fracturing operations,
it was rarely considered when modeling the process.

Carbonate
formations are normally heterogeneous and in many cases
contain both calcite and dolomite minerals that are sequentially laminated.15 Because of differences in reactivity and stress,
acid preferentially etches the calcite layers and leaves the dolomite
layers understimulated. Hence, near-wellbore diversion is applied
to equally stimulate the pay zone. The present research discusses
the importance of near-wellbore diversion from a modeling perspective,
an approach that was not considered before. It also considers the
optimum design conditions for laminated carbonate formations.

Methodology
The model presented by Aljawad et al.10,16 was used to produce acid fracture outcomes and productivity enhancement
in a layered formation. The detailed mathematical formulations can
be found in the above-mentioned research; a brief description of the
model is introduced in this study. The model consists of integrated
acid fracture and reservoir productivity models, as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1 Integrated acid fracture
and productivity model flow chart.

The acid fracture model consists of a fracture propagation model
that considers multiple fluid injections and a layered formation.
The fracture propagation model was integrated with acid and heat transfer
models (see the blue dashed rectangle in Figure 1). The acid transfer model is used to find
the distribution of acid concentration inside a fracture during propagation.
The acid model can be mathematically described as 1  where CA is the
acid concentration, DA is the effective
acid diffusion coefficient, the vector u is the velocity, and t is the time. The first term
in eq 1 represents acid
accumulation, the second is acid convection, and the third is acid
diffusion. The acid/rock reaction occurs at the boundary of the domain
and in the present research was handled as a boundary condition. Modeling
acid transport can achieve better accuracy when coupled with a heat
transfer model because acid reactivity is temperature-sensitive, especially
in dolomite rocks. The heat transfer model is described as 2  where ρ is the fluid density, T is the temperature, κ is the fluid’s thermal
conductivity, and cp is
the fluid’s heat capacity. The first term in eq 2 represents the heat accumulation,
the second is the heat convection, and the third is the heat conduction.
In the present research, the heat of reaction and reservoir heat flux
were considered at the boundary of the domain.

The dissolution
profile of the fracture surface is then obtained
and converted to a fracture conductivity distribution, wkf, based on Nierode and Kruk’s7 correlation presented as 3  where α and β are constants and
σc is the formation closure stress.

The productivity
model consists of a reservoir simulator that simulates
fluid flow in a fractured wellbore. This is done by solving the diffusivity
equation, presented as 4  where k is the
permeability tensor, p is the pressure, ϕ is
the reservoir porosity, μr is the reservoir fluid
viscosity, and ct is the reservoir’s
total compressibility. The fracture permeability distribution along
the fracture surface is imported from the acid fracture model. The
diffusivity equation is then solved ultimately to obtain the dimensionless
pseudo steady state productivity index. The higher the productivity
index, the better the acid fracture treatment for a given treatment
volume. The dimensionless productivity index used in this study is
defined as 5  where JD is the
dimensionless productivity index, q is the production
rate, Δpreservoir is the reservoir
drawdown, B is the formation volume factor of the
fluid produced, μ is the produced fluid’s viscosity, kH is the effective horizontal permeability, h is the net pay (i.e., permeable formation thickness),
and J is the productivity index (q/Δpreservoir).

Model Validation
The model was used to study the impact of acid fracturing a laminated
calcite/dolomite formation. To validate the model, it was compared
to an acid fracture job performed on a laminated formation. Rahim
et al.15 provided a temperature profile
after an acid-fracturing job in a Middle Eastern laminated formation.
They showed the lithology distribution where a calcite layer existed
in the middle of a dolomite pay zone. The model was used to match
the impacts of different types of mineralogy to the temperature profile.
It was assumed that a fracture was created in the entire pay zone.
Nevertheless, most of the acid volume reacted in the calcite layer
according to the cool anomaly. Although the field data were not available,
the temperature behavior in the laminated formation was reproduced
by the model. This indicates that the model was able to capture the
impact of acid fracture in calcite/dolomite laminated formations.
Aljawad provided the detailed validation and match of the model.17

Results and Discussion
This section
discusses the importance of diversion in laminated
formations, from the perspective of productivity. It also describes
design parameters that can help to create an equal acid distribution.
Finally, acid-fracturing design optimization in laminated formations
is discussed.

The model assumed a vertical wellbore drilled
through a calcite/dolomite
laminated pay zone. The pay zone was assumed to be continuous and
not separated by shale or nonproductive layers. A gelled acid was
simulated, which is commonly used in acid-fracturing operations. It
was assumed that the pay zone was made of dolomite, with a thin streak
of calcite in the middle acting as a thief zone. It was also assumed
that the acid was injected into an open-hole section. The properties
of the reservoir, wellbore, and fracture fluids are shown in Tables 1–4.

Table 1 Input Data for the Simulations
input data	SI unit	field unit	
wellbore property	
wellbore radius, rw	0.104 m	0.34 ft	
inner casing radius, r1	0.0628 m	2.475 in.	
outer casing radius, r2	0.0699 m	2.75 in.	
overall heat transfer coefficient, Ut	0.8 kJ/(s·m2·°C)	0.039 Btu/(h·ft2·°F)	
ambient temperature, Tb	25 °C	77 °F	
reservoir/formation
property	
reservoir pressure, Pr	2.0684 × 107 Pa	3000 psi	
bottomhole pressure, Pw	1.0342 × 107 Pa	1500 psi	
formation fluid density, ρf	850 kg/m3	54 lbm/ft3	
reservoir length, Lx	500 m	3280 ft	
reservoir width, Ly	500 m	3280 ft	
formation fluid viscosity, μf	0.0008 kg/(m·s)	0.8 cp	
formation volume factor, B	1.3 volume at reservoir conditions/volume
at standard conditions	
total compressibility, ct	2.26 × 10–9 Pa–1	1.56 × 10–5 psi–1	
reservoir temperature, TR	100 °C	212 °F	
formation rock density, ρma	2700 kg/m3	168.5 lbm/ft3	
formation specific heat capacity, cma	0.879 kJ/(kg·°C)	0.2099 Btu/(lb·°F)	
formation thermal conductivity, kma	1.57 × 10–3 kJ/(s·m·°C)	0.907 Btu/(h·ft·°F)	
acid property	
density, ρ	1070 kg/m3	66.8 lbm/ft3	
spurt loss, Sp	0 m	0 gal/ft2	
opening time distribution factor, κ	1.5	 	
acid initial concentration, Ci	0.15 mass HCl/mass solution	 	
acid heat capacity, cp	4.13 kJ/(kg·°C)	0.964 Btu/(lbm·°F)	
acid thermal conductivity, κ	6 × 10–4 kJ/(s·m·°C)	0.347 Btu/(h·ft·°F)	
acid temperature at injection, Ti	27 °C	80.6 °F	
grid blocks and
time step size	
size of x-direction grids, Dx	1 m	3.28 ft	
number of y-direction
grids, Ny	100	 	
number of z-direction
grids, Nz	9	 	
number of time steps, Nt	100	 	
Table 2 Layer Input Data
for the Simulations
layer number	top of layer (ft)	layer thickness (ft)	stress (psi)	perforation	mineralogy	
1	0	7900	6000	no	nonreactive	
2	7900	100	6000	no	nonreactive	
3	8000	40	4000	yes	dolomite	
4	8040	20	4000	yes	calcite	
5	8060	40	4000	yes	dolomite	
6	8100	100	6000	no	nonreactive	
7	8200	500	6000	no	nonreactive	
Table 3 Reaction
Kinetics Constants for the
Reaction between HCl–Calcite/HCl–Dolomite and Heat of
Reaction18
mineral	nr				
calcite	0.63	7.314 × 107	7.55 × 103	7.5	
dolomite		4.48 × 105	7.9 × 103	6.9	
Table 4 Properties of the
Acid Systems
acid	T (°F)	n	K (lb/ft2·sn)	DA (cm2/s)	references	
straight	84	1	0.00002	1.00 × 10–4	Roberts and Guin19	
retarded gelled	84	0.55	0.0082	8.00 × 10–6	De Rozieres20	
emulsified	83	0.675	0.0066	2.66 × 10–8	De Rozieres20	
Productivity and Acid Placement
Hydrochloric (HCl)
acid reacts faster with calcite than dolomite at low to moderate reservoir
temperatures. This causes the acid to preferentially react with calcite
layers, causing understimulation of the dolomite layers. Moreover,
the dissolving power of HCl with calcite is larger than with dolomite,
resulting in a higher dissolution volume, even at a similar reaction
rate. Other reasons for the differential etching would be the differences
in layers’ permeabilities and geomechanical properties. It
was assumed in the present research that the formation analyzed was
made of dolomite, with a thin layer of calcite in the middle. The
analysis below utilized only the productivity model, in which various
dissolution scenarios were assumed. For the sake of simplicity, it
was also assumed that the acid etching linearly decreased across the
fracture’s 400 ft half-length. This was to show if a uniform
etching across the pay zone was desirable from a productivity perspective.

In this section, a 20 wt % acid was assumed to create the dissolution
across the fracture length and height. It was also assumed that the
fracture height was 100 ft, which was equal to the pay zone’s
thickness. Three cases were applied, with the first representing a
uniform acid distribution across the pay zone; the second, a moderate
acid preferential to the calcite layer, and the third, a case in which
the thin calcite layer acted as a thief zone. Figure 2 shows the acid-fractured well productivity
levels of the three scenarios at different isotropic reservoir permeabilities.
The blue curve represents the case in which the near-wellbore diversion
is effective, resulting in a similar acid volume per foot for each
layer. The red and yellow curves illustrate the other two scenarios,
where the acid is not being diverted. The results show that the preferential
etching in the calcite layer is favorable in terms of productivity
when the reservoir permeability is higher than 0.1 md. This is because
creating high conductivity is more favorable than creating a large
fracture in moderate reservoir permeability. It is of note that the
equal stimulation of the pay zone did not show a significant advantage,
even at a low reservoir permeability (see Figure 2). This outcome can be explained by the fact
that fracture conductivity is related to the cube of the rock’s
etched width.7,21 Hence, acid concentrated in a
thin layer results in an infinite conductivity fracture, producing
a much higher overall average fracture conductivity as compared with
the case of uniform acid distribution. For instance, viscous fingering
is a technique applied in acid fracturing to create narrow channels
with high conductivity. A similar scenario naturally occurs when a
more reactive thin zone exists. Different acid volumes were simulated,
and the same conclusion was drawn. The smaller the acid treatment
volume, the higher is the range of permeability at which preferential
etching is favorable. A similar exercise was performed assuming thicker
(40 ft) and thinner (10 ft) calcite layers, and similar results were
observed.

Figure 2 Acid fracture productivity performances in different dissolution
scenarios and isotropic reservoir permeabilities.

Figure 3 shows the
productivity outcomes when the formation is anisotropic. The x-axis shows the horizontal reservoir permeabilities while
the vertical ones were assumed to be 10 times smaller (kh/kv = 10). In that case,
the uniform acid distribution gave roughly 10% higher productivity
when the reservoir permeability was less than 0.1 md. Nevertheless,
differential etching gave significantly higher productivity at higher
reservoir permeabilities. Figure 4 illustrates the case when the middle layer (20 ft)
is assumed to be permeable. Notice that the x-axis
represents the permeabilities of the permeable layer. That layer is
bounded by 100 times lower permeabilities of layers, wherein each
layer is 40 ft thick. The figure shows that the differential etching
gave better productivity at all studied reservoir permeabilities.
Moreover, the productivity of that case was higher than that in previous
cases of similar layer permeabilities (comparing Figure 4 to Figures 2 and 3). Although
the differential etching resulted in better productivity, this does
not mean that this will result in better sweep efficiency when the
reservoir is water flooded. Notice that the fracture half-length was
assumed to be 400 ft for all cases as the acid fracture model was
decoupled in this section.

Figure 3 Acid fracture productivity performances in different
dissolution
scenarios and anisotropic reservoir permeabilities.

Figure 4 Acid fracture productivity performances in different dissolution
scenarios and reservoir permeabilities, assuming the thin permeable
layer is surrounded by impermeable layers.

Design Parameters and Acid Zonal Distribution
The previous
section assumed different acid distributions to assess the importance
of near-wellbore diversion. In this section, the acid distribution
was simulated using the acid fracture model. The model did not simulate
near-wellbore solid diverters; however, sensitivity analyses of the
impacts of different design parameters on acid distribution were conducted.
It was assumed that the pay zone consisted of 20 ft of calcite placed
in the middle of two 40 ft dolomite layers. The simulated acid was
15 wt % of 1200 bbl HCl injected into an open-hole section. For simplicity,
the fracture height was assumed to be constant and equal to the pay
zone thickness.

Acid Type
In all cases, the simulations
of acid injection
ran for 30 min at a 40 bpm injection rate and the acid temperature
at sandface was 77 °F. Different acid types showed different
reactivity behaviors. Straight HCl is very reactive and does not reach
long distances inside a fracture, especially compared with the more
retarded gelled, foamed, or emulsified HCl acids. This impacts the
way the acid is distributed among layers with different levels of
reactivity. Straight acid was simulated as shown in Figure 5, where most of the reactions
occurred in the calcite formation (the middle layer in Figure 5a) and near the wellbore. Figure 5b shows a 1D etched-width
profile in the middle of the calcite and dolomite sections. One observation
was that dolomite had a bell-curved etched-width profile, while the
calcite had maximum etching near the wellbore, a phenomenon studied
previously by Ben Naceur and Economides22 and Aljawad et al.16 The magnitude difference
in dissolution between the calcite and dolomite layers was significant. Figure 6 shows the etched-width
profile when using the more retarded gelled acid. It can be observed
that the gelled acid traveled a longer distance than did the straight
acid. Also, the etched-width magnitude difference between the different
layers was lower. Similarly, Figure 7 shows the etched-width profile of an emulsified acid
where the difference in the etched-width profile was negligible as
compared with previous cases. It is observed that the total fracture
surface dissolution by emulsified acid was lower than that of the
gelled acid. Emulsified acid is two orders of magnitude less reactive,
and hence a large volume of live acid will be lost to the formation
creating wormholes instead of etching the fracture surface. Notice
that the scale used for the 2D etched-width figures was different
to make etching visualization possible. Using more retard acid resulted
in a lower difference in etched width between the calcite and dolomite
rocks. Hence, retarded acid systems can act as near-wellbore diverters,
providing better acid zonal distribution.

Figure 5 Etched-width profiles
(1D and 2D) of a laminated formation, considering
a straight acid injection.

Figure 6 Etched-width
profiles (1D and 2D) of a laminated formation, considering
a gelled acid injection.

Figure 7 Etched-width profiles
(1D and 2D) of a laminated formation, considering
an emulsified acid injection.

Injection Rate
Significant differences in acid fracture
outcomes arise from different injection rates. Usually, higher injection
rates correspond to larger fracture sizes and better acid distributions. Figure 8 shows the etched-with
profile when the acid injection of gelled acid was reduced from 40
bpm (see Figure 6)
to 10 bpm for the same treatment volume. This resulted in a larger
dissolution near the wellbore for both the calcite and dolomite layers,
as compared with the higher injection rate case. The magnitude of
difference of the calcite and dolomite etched widths was also larger
in the lower injection rate scenario. The higher injection rate resulted
in better acid distribution across different formation layers.

Figure 8 Etched-width
profiles (1D and 2D) of a laminated formation, considering
a gelled acid injection at 10 bpm for 120 min.

Acid Temperature
The temperature at which an acid encounters
a formation has a significant impact on reactivity. Dolomite is more
sensitive to temperature, and the reaction at low temperatures is
described as reaction rate limited. At high temperatures, however,
the reaction is described as diffusion limited. The reaction rate
between HCl and calcite can be described as diffusion limited, even
at low temperatures. Figure 9 shows the etched-with profile of a gelled acid that encountered
the formation at 122 °F. This resulted in the most uniform etched-width
profile between the calcite and dolomite layers. This can be compared
to the case in Figure 6 where the gelled acid temperature was 77 °F, resulting in a
larger difference in dissolution magnitude between the layers. The
higher the reservoir and injected acid temperatures, the less the
reactivity difference between the calcite and dolomite rocks.

Figure 9 Etched-width
profiles (1D and 2D) of a laminated formation, considering
a gelled acid injection at 122 °F.

Figure 10 shows
the fluid temperature profiles along the fracture length and height
of the two different acid temperature cases. As the figure shows,
the acid temperature kept increasing while penetrating the fracture,
until reaching the reservoir temperature. Injecting at a higher temperature
resulted in a significantly higher fracture temperature, increasing
the reactivity in the dolomite section. This prevented the preferential
etching that would otherwise be created in the calcite layer.

Figure 10 Fracture
temperature profiles after acid injection, assuming different
acid temperatures.

Optimum Design Conditions
In this section, the design
conditions (e.g., acid type, injection rate, pad volume) that maximize
productivity are studied. An analysis of this sort can be complex
because it depends on the rock type and strength, reservoir permeability
and depth, and acid treatment volume. The heterogeneity of carbonate
formations and existence of natural fractures can further complicate
the problem. This portion of the research tested the optimum design
conditions at different reservoir permeabilities and acid treatment
volumes, offering a comparison of the optimum design conditions when
the formation was made of pure calcite, pure dolomite, and a laminated
formation. The data from Tables 1–4 were also used in
this section.

Tight Formation (0.01 md)
Both straight and retarded
acids (gelled) were simulated for this study. In Figure 11, a productivity map was generated
based on the injection rate and amount of pad. The amount of pad is
shown as a fraction, according to the equation below 6  where Npad is
the pad number. Here, pad is any viscous nonreactive fluid injected
either to initiate the fracture or reduce fluid loss during different
injection cycles. First, the optimum design conditions for pure calcite
and dolomite rocks are shown and then compared with those of the laminated
formation. Figure 11 indicates that the optimum design conditions for both the straight
and retarded acid injected into the calcite rock were achieved at
the maximum injection rate and pad volume. Straight acid could not
achieve the same magnitude of productivity that was attained with
the retarded acid because long acid penetration should be pursued
in tight formations; this target could not be accomplished with straight
acid.

Figure 11 Dimensionless productivity map of acid fracture in a calcite formation
at different injection rates and pad volumes in the case of low permeability.

The optimum design conditions for tight dolomite
were similar to
those of calcite, as shown in Figure 12. The maximum injection rate and pad volume also needed
to be targeted for both acids. The straight and retarded acids achieved
similar levels of productivity because the diffusion of the acid did
not control the acid/rock reactivity at moderate to low dolomite temperatures
(i.e., reaction rate limited). Also, the maximum productivity of the
dolomite (i.e., 0.66) was lower than that of calcite (i.e., 0.76)
because a lower rock volume is dissolved when acid fracturing a dolomite
formation, resulting in overall lower conductivity.

Figure 12 Dimensionless productivity
map of acid fracture in a dolomite formation
at different injection rates and pad volumes in the case of low permeability.

Since the optimum design conditions were the same
for pure calcite
and dolomite, the optimum design conditions in a laminated calcite/dolomite
formation should also have been similar. As expected, the optimum
design conditions were achieved at the maximum injection rate and
pad volume (see Figure 13). Interestingly, straight acid could not achieve maximum
productivity. The maximum productivity achieved simulating gelled
acid was 0.76, which perfectly matched the results from the pure calcite
case. The existence of a thin calcite layer produced results similar
to those of the pure calcite formation. The thin calcite layer (20
ft) resulted in a channel with infinite conductivity, an outcome that
could not be achieved in pure dolomite formation. This makes the overall
conductivity of the laminated formation within the same order of magnitude
as pure calcite. Hence, high productivity similar to pure calcite
was achieved.

Figure 13 Dimensionless productivity map of acid fracture in a laminated
formation at different injection rates and pad volumes in the case
of low permeability.

Moderate Formation Permeability
(10 md)
Fracture design
in moderate permeability formations favors the creation of high conductivity
fractures, even at the expense of fracture length. It also favors
creating an infinite conductivity channel in the thin calcite layer
over equally stimulating the pay zone. Similar to the analysis above,
a calcite-dominant formation was investigated first. Figure 14 illustrates that the maximum
productivity was achieved in a wide range of design conditions. Importantly,
the pad was not needed to maximize productivity. From a statistical
perspective, a narrow range of optimum injection rates was realized
when the design considered a large amount of pad fluid (see Figure 14b). Nevertheless,
the minimum amount of pad that can keep the fracture open should be
used. Straight acid was also able to achieve the optimum design but
at much higher injection rates. A safe window would be injecting at
30 bpm or higher for straight acid and 10 bpm for retarded acid.

Figure 14 Dimensionless
productivity map of acid fracture in a calcite formation
at different injection rates and pad volumes in the case of relatively
high permeability.

The maximum productivity
achieved in the dolomite was slightly
lower, as shown in Figure 15. It is of note that the optimum design conditions occurred
at a much narrower injection rate. Hence, from a statistical point
of view, achieving the optimum design in a dolomite-dominated formation
is more challenging. This could be the reason why acid fracture in
dolomite rocks is not always successful. Similar to the calcite case,
pad was not needed to increase productivity. The optimum conditions
were achieved between 15 and 25 bpm for the straight acid and between
5 and 20 bpm for the retarded acid. A low injection rate was needed
to improve conductivity near the wellbore, which is desirable in moderate
permeability formations.

Figure 15 Dimensionless productivity map of acid fracture
in a dolomite formation
at different injection rates and pad volumes in the case of relatively
high permeability.

The existence of a thin
calcite layer made the optimum design condition
of the laminated formation similar to that of the calcite-dominated
formation, although the formation was comprised of 80% dolomite. The
optimum design conditions occurred in a wide range of injection rates.
The existence of calcite lamina enhanced the possibility of achieving
the optimum design, as compared with what would have occurred with
pure dolomite. It is of note that the productivity map in Figure 16 follows a similar
trend to what is illustrated in Figure 14.

Figure 16 Dimensionless productivity map of acid fracture
in a laminated
formation at different injection rates and pad volumes in the case
of relatively high permeability.

Treatment Volume
A large treatment volume of 1800 bbl
of acid was simulated in this case. The optimum design conditions
for low permeability were similar to the outcomes outlined above,
where the maximum injection rate and pad volumes needed to be targeted.
For the case of relativity high permeability, the range of optimum
injection rates increased, especially in the dolomite scenario. In
general, increasing the treatment volume resulted in larger optimum
injection rates, as longer acid penetration should be targeted.

Conclusions
The study provided insight on acid-fracturing
design enhancement
of a laminated (calcite/dolomite) carbonate formation. Applying near-wellbore
diverters to equally stimulate the pay zone is not desirable from
a well productivity perspective. It, however, gives a slight productivity
advantage in tight anisotropic formations. The uneven acid distribution
due to the existence of more reactive or high-permeability lamina
enhances the acid-fractured well productivity. The impact is more
significant in moderate to relatively high permeability formations.
Therefore, an engineer should study the economical outcome of near-wellbore
diversion more carefully before field deployment.

The author declares no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to acknowledge KFUPM for supporting
this study under grant# SR181004.

Nomenclature
Bformation volume
factor, dimensionless

CAacid
concentration (mass fraction), kg HCl/kg solution

cpfluid
heat capacity, MLt–3 T–1, Btu/(ft2·h·°F) [kJ/(m2·s·°C)]

ctreservoir
total compressibility, 1/(M/Lt2), 1/psia [1/Pa]

Jproductivity
index,
M2Lt, bbl/day/psia

JDdimensionless
productivity index, dimensionless

hnet pay, L, ft [m]

kpermeability
tensor, L2, md [m2]

kHeffective
horizontal permeability, L2, md [m2]

qproduction
(or injection)
rate, L3/t, bbl/min [m3/s]

Npadpad
number, dimensionless

ppressure, M/Lt2, psia [Pa]

ttime, t, day [second]

Ttemperature, T, °F [°C]

uvelocity
vector, L/t, ft/min [m/s]

wkffracture
conductivity, L3, md·ft [m3]

αNierode–Kruk
correlation’s
constant, L3, md·ft [m3]

βNierode–Kruk correlation’s
constant, Lt2/M, psia–1 [Pa–1]

Δpreservoirreservoir drawdown, M/Lt2, psia [Pa]

μviscosity, M/Lt, cp

ϕporosity, dimensionless

κthermal conductivity, MLt–3 T–1, Btu/(ft·h·°F)
[kJ/(m·s·°C)]
==== Refs
References
Hou B. ; Zhang R. ; Chen M. ; Kao J. ; Liu X. 
Investigation
on acid fracturing treatment in limestone formation based on true
tri-axial experiment
. Fuel 
2019 , 235 , 473 –484
. 10.1016/j.fuel.2018.08.057 .
Palharini
Schwalbert M. ; Aljawad M. S. ; Hill A. D. ; Zhu D.  Decision
Criterion for Acid Stimulation Method in Carbonate Reservoirs: Matrix
Acidizing or Acid Fracturing?
. In SPE International
Conference and Exhibition on Formation Damage Control ; Society of Petroleum Engineers , February 2020 .
Abass H. H. ; Al-Mulhem A. A. ; Alqam M. H. ; Khan M. R.   In Acid Fracturing
or Proppant Fracturing in Carbonate Formation? A Rock Mechanics View , SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition; Society of Petroleum Engineers , January 2006 .
Suleimenova A. ; Wang X. ; Zhu D. ; Hill A. D.   In Comparative study
of acid fracturing
and propped hydraulic fracturing for a tight carbonate formation , SPE Europec featured at 78th EAGE Conference and Exhibition; Society of Petroleum Engineers , May 2016 .
Zhu D. ; Oeth C.
V. ; Hill A.
D.   In Acid fracturing: fully
3D simulation and performance prediction , SPE Hydraulic Fracturing
Technology Conference; Society of Petroleum Engineers , February 2013 .
Sevougian S. D. ; Schechter R. S. ; Sepehrnoori K.   In Optimization of Vertical
Acid Fractures in Steady-State Flow , SPE International Symposium
on Oilfield Chemistry; Society of Petroleum Engineers , January 1, 1987 .
Nierode D. E. ; Kruk K. F.   In An Evaluation of
Acid Fluid Loss Additives Retarded Acids, and Acidized Fracture Conductivity , Fall Meeting of the Society of Petroleum Engineers of AIME; Society of Petroleum Engineers , January 1, 1973 .
Raymond L. R. ; Binder G. G. Jr.
Productivity of Wells in Vertically
Fractured, Damaged Formations
. J. Pet. Technol. 
1967 , 19 , 120 –130
. 10.2118/1454-PA .
Ravikumar A. ; Marongiu-Porcu M. ; Morales A.   In Optimization of Acid
Fracturing with Unified Fracture Design , Abu Dhabi International
Petroleum Exhibition and Conference; Society of Petroleum
Engineers , November 9, 2015 .
Aljawad M. S. ; Palharini Schwalbert M. ; Zhu D. ; Hill A. D. 
Optimizing Acid
Fracture Design in Calcite Formations: Guidelines Using a Fully Integrated
Model
. SPE Prod. Oper. 
2019 , 161 –177
. 10.2118/198912-PA .
McCartney E. ; Al-Othman M. ; Alam A. ; Nino-Penaloza A. ; Pirogov A. ; Nagarkoti M. ; Mendez A.   In Enhanced
Acid Fracturing with Improved
Fluid Loss Control and Near Wellbore Diversion Increases Production
in Kuwait , SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition; Society of Petroleum Engineers , October 2017 .
Zhang L. ; Zhou F. ; Mou J. ; Pournik M. ; Tao S. ; Wang D. ; Wang Y. 
Large-scale
true tri-axial fracturing
experimental investigation on diversion behavior of fiber using 3D
printing model of rock formation
. J. Pet. Sci.
Eng. 
2019 , 181 , 10617110.1016/j.petrol.2019.06.035 .
Al-Ismail M. I. ; Al-Harbi M. M. ; Al-Harbi A. K. ; Ramanathan V.   In Field Trials of Fiber
Assisted Stimulation in Saudi Arabia: An Innovative Non-Damaging Technique
for Achieving Effective Zonal Coverage During Acid Fracturing , SPE Saudi Arabia Section Young Professionals Technical Symposium; Society of Petroleum Engineers , January 2008 .
Liang T. ; Wei D. ; Zhou F. ; Li X. ; Yuan L. ; Wang B. ; Lu J. 
Field experiments on
multi-stage chemical diversion in low-permeability
HPHT reservoirs
. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2020 , 187 , 10673810.1016/j.petrol.2019.106738 .
Rahim Z. ; Al-Kanaan A. A. ; Kayumov R. ; Al-Jalal Z.   In Sequenced
Fracture
Degradable Diverters Improve Efficiency of Acid Fracturing in Multiple
Perforated Intervals Completion Assembly , Abu Dhabi International
Petroleum Exhibition & Conference; Society of
Petroleum Engineers , November 2017 .
Aljawad M. S. ; Schwalbert M. P. ; Zhu D. ; Hill A. D. 
Improving
acid fracture
design in dolomite formations utilizing a fully integrated acid fracture
model
. J. Pet. Sci. Eng. 
2020 , 184 , 10648110.1016/j.petrol.2019.106481 .
Aljawad M. S. 
Identifying
Formation Mineralogy Composition in Acid Fracturing From Distributed
Temperature Measurements
. SPE Reservoir Eval.
Eng. 
2019 , 200 –211
. 10.2118/195537-PA .
Schechter R. S.  Oil Well Stimulation ; Prentice-Hall, Inc. : Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey , 1992 .
Roberts L. D. ; Guin J. A. 
A New Method for Predicting Acid
Penetration Distance
. Soc. Pet. Eng. J. 
1975 , 15 , 277 –286
. 10.2118/5155-PA .
De Rozieres J.  Measuring
Diffusion Coefficients in Acid Fracturing Fluids and Their Application
to Gelled and Emulsified Acids . Paper SPE 28552 presented
at the SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, New Orleans,
Louisiana, September 25–28, 1994 .
Deng J. ; Mou J. ; Hill A. D. ; Zhu D. 
A New Correlation of Acid-Fracture
Conductivity Subject to Closure Stress
. SPE
Prod. Oper. 
2011 , 27 , 158 –169
. 10.2118/140402-PA .
Ben-Naceur K. ; Economides M. J.   In The
Effectiveness of Acid Fractures and Their Production Behavior , SPE Eastern Regional Meeting; Society of Petroleum
Engineers , January 1, 1988 .

