
==== Front
ACS Omega
ACS Omega
ao
acsodf
ACS Omega
2470-1343 American Chemical Society 

10.1021/acsomega.0c00205
Article
Homology Modeling of Human Uridine-5′-diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase
1A6 Reveals Insights into Factors Influencing Substrate and Cosubstrate
Binding
Smith Alexander
D.  Page Brent D. G.  Collier Abby C.  Coughtrie Michael W. H. * Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of British Columbia, 2405 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver BC V6T 1Z3, Canada
* Email: michael.coughtrie@ubc.ca.
20 03 2020 
31 03 2020 
5 12 6872 6887
15 01 2020 11 03 2020 Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society2020American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The elimination of
numerous endogenous compounds and xenobiotics
via glucuronidation by uridine-5′-diphosphate glycosyltransferase
enzymes (UGTs) is an essential process of the body’s chemical
defense system. UGTs have distinct but overlapping substrate preferences,
but the molecular basis for their substrate specificity remains poorly
understood. Three-dimensional protein structures can greatly enhance
our understanding of the interactions between enzymes and their substrates,
but because of the inherent difficulties in purifying and crystallizing
integral endoplasmic reticulum membrane proteins, no complete mammalian
UGT structure has yet been produced. To address this problem, we have
created a homology model of UGT1A6 using I-TASSER to explore, in detail,
the interactions of human UGT1A6 with its substrates. Ligands were
docked into our model in the presence of the cosubstrate uridine-5′-diphosphate-glucuronic
acid, interacting residues were examined, and poses were compared
to those cocrystallized with various plant and bacterial glycosyltransferases
(GTs). Our model structurally resembles other GTs, and docking experiments
replicated many of the expected UGT-substrate interactions. Some bias
toward the template structures’ protein–substrate interactions
and binding preferences was evident.

document-id-old-9ao0c00205document-id-new-14ao0c00205ccc-price
==== Body
Introduction
Uridine-5′-diphosphate
glycosyltransferases (UGTs) belong
to the glycosyltransferase (GT) superfamily and are responsible for
the metabolism and detoxification of numerous natural compounds and
xenobiotics.1 They make up a family of
phase 2 conjugation enzymes that act to catalyze the covalent addition
of sugars to lipophilic substrates and have been estimated to perform
approximately 35% of all phase 2 conjugation reactions in the human
body.2,3 In humans, the UGTs are divided into four
subfamilies: UGT1, 2, 3, and 8, with the most important drug-conjugating
UGTs belonging to the 1 and 2 subfamilies.4,5 The
UGT1A subfamily is composed of 13 members generated from alternate
splicing of a single gene on chromosome 2q37, four of which are nonfunctional
pseudogenes. Exons 2–5 are common to all UGT1 members, with
exon 1 and its associated promoter region unique to each member.6 The UGT2 subfamily is located on chromosome 4q13
and is divided into the 2A and 2B subfamilies containing 3 and 12
(7 functional) genes, respectively. The UGT3 subfamily contains two
genes encoded on chromosome 5p13 that are expressed at low levels
in the body and are primarily involved in the endogenous metabolism
rather than the xenobiotic metabolism.2,7,8 The UGT8 subfamily consists of a single gene encoding
uridine-5′-diphosphate (UDP)-galactose ceramide galactosyltransferase
on chromosome 4q26 that catalyzes the formation of galactosylceramides,
but it is also able to catalyze the galactosidation of bile acids.2,9−11

UGTs are widely expressed throughout the body,
with the majority
of the 1A and 2B enzymes highly expressed in the liver. The UGT1A
and UGT2B enzymes use UDP-glucuronic acid (UDPGA) as their preferred
cosubstrate and sugar donor, with each member of the family having
different but overlapping preferred substrates.12 UGT1A6 principally glucuronidates small phenolic substances
using UDPGA as a donor, including a number of phenol containing chemical
classes such as flavonoids, stilbenes, and coumarins.12 Other phenolic compounds such as acetaminophen, 1-naphthol,
and 4-nitrophenol are also metabolized by UGT1A6.13−15 Many compounds
are substrates for multiple UGTs; however, some are preferentially
glucuronidated using a single isoform, for example, bilirubin (UGT1A1)
and serotonin (UGT1A6).16,17

There is extensive
evidence, suggesting that UGTs form quaternary
structures. Multiple studies have demonstrated homodimerization of
individual isoforms, including the entire UGT1A family, UGT2B1, and
UGT2B7.18−22 Heterodimerization between different UGT1A enzymes, as well as between
UGT1A subfamily members and both UGT2B1 and UGT2B7 has also been observed.18,23,24 A putative dimerization region
has been identified in UGT2B7, with a signature sequence FPPSYVPVVMS
(residues 189–199) that is able to stabilize protein–protein
interactions via proline brackets and π–π interactions.22 The analogous region in the UGT1A subfamily
also contains a dimerization signature motif (PXPXSY[V/I]PXXX), with
approximately half of the UGT1A subfamily containing an isoleucine
at the seventh position (UGT1A3-6), and the remainder having a valine
at this site. In UGT1A6, the dimerization motif is PDPVSYIPRCY (residues
186–196). Oligomerization has been shown to influence substrate
specificities, reaction rates, and the end products. For example,
UGT1A1 dimers produce bilirubin monoglucuronide, but the homotetramer
forms bilirubin diglucuronide.25 Heteromerization
of UGT2B7 and UGT1A6 decreased glucuronidation of zidovudine and morphine
in Sf9 cells but increased serotonin glucuronidation.26 Although UGT1A1 is the only UGT to efficiently glucuronidate
bilirubin, heteromers of UGT1A1 and UGT1A4 or UGT1A1 and UGT1A6 have
been shown to increase formation of bilirubin glucuronide compared
to UGT1A1 alone.27 Additionally, heteromers
of UGT1A4 and UGT1A6 increase trifluoperazine and serotonin glucuronide
formation compared to UGT1A4 or UGT1A6 alone.27 In addition to the interactions between UGTs, there is also some
evidence that UGTs are able to directly interact with other proteins,
including cytochromes P450, thereby affecting their functions.28,29

GTs are currently classified into 106 families on the basis
of
amino acid similarity and the sugar donor ligand type.30,31 Despite low levels of sequence identity, GTs share a high degree
of structural conservation and fall into GT-A, GT-B, or GT-A-like
fold families.32,33 The GT-A fold consists of an
α/β/α sandwich which resembles a Rossman fold, contains
a DxD motif, and requires a divalent metal cation (commonly Mn2+) that is important for donor ligand binding. The GT-B fold
comprises two α/β/α Rossman-like folds that associate
to form a catalytic cleft at their interface and lacks both the DxD
motif and requirement for a divalent metal. The GT-A-like fold is
made up of an α/β/α sandwich with a different β-sheet
arrangement and lacks the DxD motif.32 Unlike
bacterial, fungal, and plant GTs studied and crystallized to date,
mammalian UGTs are membrane proteins with a single transmembrane (TM)
domain anchoring them into the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). The bulk of the protein resides within the ER lumen (and likely
interacts with the membrane itself) with only a short C-terminal region
present on the cytoplasmic side. Purifying and crystallizing membrane-bound
proteins are inherently difficult, and therefore, there are no complete
X-ray crystal structures of any mammalian UGTs available. The crystal
structure of the C-terminal UDPGA binding domain of the human UGT2B7
was published in 2007 and, until very recently, was the only human
UGT structure available.33,34 This structure confirmed
that human UGTs belong to the GT-B fold family of GTs and that they
show a high degree of structural similarity to other plant, bacterial,
and fungal GT crystal structures. In 2020, a second partial crystal
structure for a human UGT was released, the C-terminal UDPGA binding
domain of the human UGT2B15, whose structure closely matches that
of UGT2B7.35

X-ray structures can
provide numerous insights into protein functions,
associations, and substrate selectivity. In the absence of a full
crystal structure, homology modeling approaches can generate 3D protein
structures to assist in answering questions about protein structure–function
relationships. Several attempts have been made to produce UGT homology
models, with models of UGT1A1, 1A3, 1A8, 1A9, 1A10, 2B7, and the C-terminal
domains of UGT1, UGT2A1/2A2, UGT2A3, UGT2B4, UGT2B10, UGT2B11, UGT2B15,
UGT2B17, and UGT2B28 having been produced.36,37 Despite the enzyme’s importance in drug metabolism, there
has been only a single UGT1A6 homology model produced to date, which
was used to assess inhibitory properties of a number of compounds
against UGT1A6, with support vector machine classification and 3D
quantitative structure–activity relationship methods used to
build predictive models of glucuronidation inhibition.38

In this study, we aimed at producing a
new homology model of UGT1A6
to further examine features involved in the enzyme function and substrate
binding. We chose to model UGT1A6 because of the enzyme’s critical
role in metabolism of a wide array of endogenous and exogenous compounds,
including many popular analgesics, as well as the relative paucity
of information available about the UGT1A6 structure and key residues
important for substrate binding and specificity. By producing this
model, we hope to obtain additional information about its structure
and key features to better understand the role of this enzyme in the
glucuronidation of endogenous compounds and xenobiotics. To achieve
this, we generated our initial homology model of UGT1A6 using the
online I-TASSER (Iterative Threading ASSEmbly Refinement) server,
with additional refinements and energetic minimizations performed
using the BIOVIA Discovery Studio. The UGT1A6 co-substrate, UDPGA,
as well as a number of compounds known to be metabolized by UGT1A6,
the template GTs, or not metabolized by UGT1A6 as negative controls,
were docked into the completed model and key binding residues examined.
Mutated versions of UGT1A6 with important binding residues converted
to alanine were produced and docked with the cosubstrate and substrate
molecules to investigate the importance of these residues. Molecular
dynamics simulations were conducted on the model docked with both
UDPGA and the top scoring substrate.

Results and Discussion
UGTs are structurally and functionally complex, with high levels
of similarity in the amino acid sequence and function. Despite this,
various isoforms have very different, but overlapping substrate specificities
because of small differences in the composition of the N-terminal
substrate binding domain. Because of the difficulty in generating
membrane protein crystal structures, no complete crystal structures
of mammalian UGTs have been produced to date. We produced a homology
model of UGT1A6 using I-TASSER, a hierarchical approach to the protein
structure and function prediction, which has been ranked as the top
server for protein structure prediction in the Community Wide Experiment
on the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction
(CASP) since 2006.

UGT1A6 Model Generation
The I-TASSER
server produced
five potential models for each of the four input conditions: with
or without the 26-amino acid N-terminal signal peptide (normally absent
in the mature enzyme) and with or without the specification of the
UGT2B7 C-terminal crystal structure as a guiding template (Figure S1). I-TASSER evaluated each model and
provided a confidence score (C-score) to estimate the model quality
based on the significance of threading template alignments and convergence
parameters of structure assembly simulations, typically ranging from
−5 to 2, with higher scores indicating increased confidence
in the model. The expected template modeling score (TM-Score) and
root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of atomic positions values were
also calculated for the model with the highest C-score.39 Models with TM-Scores greater than 0.5 are considered
to have correct topology, whereas models with scores less than 0.17
are due to random similarities. The no-signal peptide and with a guiding
template (NSWT) and with signal peptide and no guiding template (WSNT)
models had the highest C-score (−1.65) and TM-score (0.51 ±
0.15), with predicted rmsd values of 11.2 ± 4.6 and 11.4 ±
4.5 Å, respectively (Table S1).

The normalized discrete optimized protein energy (DOPE) score and
the verify score for each model were calculated (Table S2). Positive DOPE scores indicate a poor model quality,
with scores lower than −1, indicating that the model is likely
accurate. Verify scores higher than the expected high score indicate
that the structure is likely to be correct, and proteins with scores
that are between the high and low reference values may have some of
the structure being incorrect. The NSWT model had the best normalized
DOPE (−0.60) and verify scores (173.76), although neither were
as good as those of the partial human UGT2B7 (2O6L, DOPE: −1.99,
verify: 161.43) or the Medicago truncatula UGT71G1 (2ACW, DOPE: −2.12, verify: 256.69) crystal structures. Structural
alignments with 30 GT crystal structures indicated that the models
generated using the UGT2B7 crystal structure as a guiding template
[with signal peptide and with a guiding template (WSWT) and NSWT]
had the smallest rmsds from these structures (Table S3).

The major C-terminal and N-terminal domains
are connected by a
central linker, and two C-terminal envelope helices that fold back
over both domains, which in mammalian UGTs, connect with the TM domain
(Figure 1). The C-terminal
domain was broadly conserved between models, with the largest divergences
observed between the NSWT and no signal peptide and no guiding template
(NSNT) models. Specifically, K316 in helix Cα1 differed by 2.8
Å between models, and the T337 residue located between the Cβ2
and Cβ3 sheets differed by 4.2 Å in these models. The inclusion
or exclusion of the N-terminal signal peptide had minor effects on
the C-terminal domain, showing only small differences in some of the
flexible loop regions. A high degree of variability was observed at
the C-terminal TM helix and envelope helix (EH) 2.

Figure 1 Structure of UGT1A6.
(A) Final refined homology model of UGT1A6.
Helices are shown as spirals, and β-sheets are shown as broad
ribbons. The C-terminal domain (blue) is shown at the top, with the
N-terminal domain (green) shown at the bottom of the image. The envelope
helices (magenta) are shown to the left, with the TM domain (purple)
at the bottom. The putative dimerization domain (PDPVSYIPRCY) of UGT1A6
is highlighted in orange. (B) Schematic diagram of the UGT1A6 structure.
Colors are the same as in (A), with α-helices shown as cylinders
and β-sheets shown as arrows. The predicted Nα2 and Nα6
helices were not present in the final model and have been rendered
as transparent cylinders in the diagram as a reference as to where
they would be expected to form.

The N-terminal domain was more variable between models (Figure 2). Although key catalytic
residues such as H38 and D150 differed by a maximum of 1.4 and 2.3
Å between the NSNT and NSWT structures, respectively, other regions
differed more substantially. The expected Nα2 helix was not
present in the NSWT/WSWT models, replaced by a disordered loop, but
was present in the NWNT/WSNT models. The Nα3-1 helix extended
for only 8 amino acids in the NSWT model, but 14 residues in the WSWT
model and 17 residues in the NSNT model. The positions of the Nα3-1,
Nα3-2, and Nα3-3 helices also differed substantially between
the four models, with the Nα3-3 helix being absent in the NSWT
model. The Nα5-1 and Nα5-4 helices were absent in the
NSNT and WSNT models, and the Nα5-3 helix in these models was
in a substantially different location compared to the NSWT and WSWT
models, the F226 residue being located 11.9 Å apart in these
models. A number of additional differences were seen in the loop regions,
or helices within larger loop regions, and may be due to the modeling
process rather than the inclusion or exclusion of the signal peptide.

Figure 2 Comparison
of initial I-TASSER generated homology models. The models
generated without the use of the 2B7 crystal as a guide are shown
in teal (without the signal peptide, NSNT) and green (with the signal
peptide, WSNT). The models generated using the 2B7 structure as a
guide are shown in blue (with the signal peptide, WSWT) and purple
(without the signal peptide, NSWT). (A) Key catalytic residues H38
and D150 in the NSNT and NSWT models differ by only a minute amount
between the models. (B) Nα2 helix is not present in the NSWT
and WSWT models but does appear in the NSNT and WSNT models. (C) Orientation,
length, and positioning of the Nα3 helices differed substantially
between models. (D) Nα5 helices also were substantially different
between models, with the Nα5-2 positions of the NSWT/WSWT and
NSNT/WSNT in different locations and orientations, and the Nα5-3
helix shifted down in the NSNT/WSNT models compared to the NSWT/WSWT
model, as demonstrated by the position of the highlighted F226 residue
(yellow).

Based on these results, the NSWT
model was selected for further
refinement and docking studies. Following refinements, the model had
a normalized DOPE score of −0.891 and a verify score of 176.15
(high: 231.22, low: 104.05). The final model had an ERRAT score of
88.76, and 94.5% of residues were within the outer bounds of the Ramachandran
plot (Figure S2). Because of the fact that
there are no GT crystal structures available containing the C-terminal
TM domain that anchors mammalian UGTs into the ER membrane, it was
not possible to properly constrain the models for the presence of
the membrane, and the TM and C-terminal domains could not be accurately
localized. Compared to the template UGT2B7 structure, the final model
had an rmsd of 1.71 Å over the aligned sequence, with only short
loop regions deviating by more than 2 Å from the template (Figure S3). In contrast, when the final structure
was compared to the two other template structures (2ACV and 5TME), there was a greater
deviation between the model and the templates, principally in various
loops and regions connecting the α-helices and β-sheets
(Figure S4). The C-terminal UDPGA binding
domain was generally similar with a large number of conserved amino
acids, whereas the N-terminal domain was more variable with fewer
conserved residues. The putative dimerization region corresponding
to residues P186–Y196 in UGT1A6 (PDPVSYIPRCY) was present on
the exterior surface of the model in a flexible loop region (Figure 1).22

Our best model was generated using plant GTs—the M. truncatula triterpene UDP-glucosyltransferase
and an Oryza sativa UDP-glucosyltransferase—with
the C-terminal region guided using the human UGT2B7 X-ray crystal
structure. Although there were some differences between the models
produced using the four differing input conditions, only minute differences
in the loop and helix placement were seen in the highly conserved
C-terminal sugar binding domain, although the TM and EH regions of
the C-terminal domain were more variable. This is not unexpected because
all of the template GTs are cytosolic proteins, and the human UGT2B7
C-terminal fragment was crystallized without the TM domain; thus,
there are no templates onto which the extreme C-terminal end of the
protein can be based. Because of the lack of template structures,
the TM region must be modeled ab initio each time, resulting in highly
variable placement of the residues. This also limits our ability to
examine interactions of the model with the ER membrane, as it cannot
be properly localized in this space. The N-terminal domain is responsible
for binding the enzyme’s substrate, and because of the variety
of substrates bound using the template structures, it is not surprising
that this region was also quite variable. Many regions in the N-terminal
domain consist of loops or helices within larger loop regions and
are inherently disordered, making it difficult to crystallize or model
these areas. It is likely that in the native state, these regions
are flexible, allowing binding of different substrates, with the protein
conformation shifting, depending on which substrate is bound.

UGT1A6 is strongly associated with the luminal ER membrane surface.
In addition to being targeted to the ER via the N-terminal signal
peptide, UGT1A6 possesses an internal ER-targeting signal located
between E141 and D240 that is sufficient to allow entry and association
with the ER membrane in the absence of the N-terminal signal peptide
and the C-terminal TM and cytoplasmic domains.40 This region roughly corresponds to Nβ4 through Nα5-3
regions of the protein, with much of it buried in the protein core.
Because of the lipophilic nature of many of the drugs that UGTs metabolize,
it has been proposed that hydrophobic helices may serve as routes
to allow for the lipophilic aglycone substrates to reach the active
site following diffusion through the lipid bilayer. Examining the
hydrophobicity of each residue of the region in the context of our
homology models shows that while the inner regions of the protein
surface helices and loops are hydrophobic, the external, lumen-facing
sides are generally hydrophilic. It is possible that these residues
are able to interact with the hydrophilic phosphate head groups of
the lipid bilayer to stabilize the protein on the membrane surface.
Other exterior α helices, including the Nα3-3 helix and
the C-terminal EH1 helix, possess larger hydrophobic regions flanked
by more hydrophilic residues, allowing for the possibility that they
embed more deeply into the lipid bilayer to firmly anchor the protein
to the luminal ER surface. However, similar regions are present in
the soluble plant and bacterial GT proteins that lack the TM domain
found in mammalian UGTs, so the exact role of these regions and nature
of the protein–membrane interaction remain unclear.

Comparison
of our final UGT1A6 model with the UGT1A6 model produced
by Ghemtio et al. (2014) showed a high degree of alignment in the
C-terminal region, with both of the models having been produced using
the UGT2B7 (2O6L) C-terminal crystal structure as a guide for the C-terminal end
(Figure S5).38 The rmsds between the models increased as they near EH2, the TM
domain not being present in the Ghemtio et al. model. Although the M. truncatula UGT71G1 (2ACV) and the O. sativa subsp. Japonica UGT79 GT (5TME) were used as the
templates for building both models, Ghemtio et al. also used the M. truncatula UGT78G1 (3HBF), UGT85H2 (2PQ6), and Vitis vinifera UFGT (2C1X) crystal structures. The N-terminal region showed a greater degree
of variability between the models, particularly in the Nα2–Nα3-1
and Nα5-2–Nβ7 regions, which correspond to regions
with poor structural homology to the template structures in both our
model and the Ghemtio et al. model (Figure S5).

Molecular Docking
The most likely UDPGA binding pose
was determined via a comparison of 24 GT crystal structures that had
been crystallized with their cosubstrate or cosubstrate analogue [UDP,
UDP-glucose, UDP-2-deoxy-2-fluoro-α-d-glucose (U2F),
or thymidine-5′-diphosphate (TDP)] present in the cosubstrate
binding site to determine which residues were important for interacting
with the constituent groups of the nucleotides (Table S4). Structural alignment of all structures with the
UGT1A6 homology model allowed for the determination of which UGT1A6
residues would likely be important in binding UDPGA, with the caveat
that a number of residues that are known to interact with the cosubstrate
in other GT structures fall within flexible loop regions of the UGT1A6
model, making exact determination of the corresponding interacting
residues difficult.

Residues W353 and L354 (all positions listed
relative to the UGT1A6 sequence) interacted with the pyrimidine group
in the vast majority of all templates (70.8 and 95.8%, respectively),
with R335 (33.5%), P355 (25%), and Q356 (25%) also being fairly common.
Additional residues were found to interact with pyrimidine in one
or more models, specifically S37 (20.8%), R282 (8.3%), K283 (4.2%),
S305 (16.7%), and N357 (12.5%). The most common residue to interact
with the (deoxy)ribose ring was E379 (66.7%), with S37 (8.3%), L40
(4.2%), and N357 (12.5%) also interacting in some structures. The
α phosphate group commonly interacted with G376 (95.8%), H375
(83.3%), and H371 (62.5%), with some structures also showing interactions
with S37 (37.5%), G307 (4.2%), S308 (4.2%), G373 (16.7%), and S374
(25%). The residues interacting with β phosphate were located
in a loop region of the 1A6 protein: S308 (87.5%) and S37 (79.2%).
G36 (20.8%), G307 (16.7%), M309 (8.3%), G373 (12.5%), H375 (4.2%),
G376 (4.2%), and F393 (16.7%). Only five of the crystal structures
contained a cosubstrate with a hexose moiety, but S374, D395, and
Q396 interacted with this group in all five structures. H38 interacted
with the group in the three structures, and G36 and R172 had interactions
in one structure each.

UDPGA was docked into the cosubstrate
binding site using CDOCKER,
with the top pose having a negative CDOCKER energy score of 59.9849
kcal mol–1. This score, which is used to rank the
binding of compounds, consists of the CHARMm receptor–ligand
interaction energy (H-bonds, van der Waals, and electrostatic interactions)
and the internal ligand strain energy. BIOVIA Discovery Studio reports
the negative of the CDOCKER energy score determined using the algorithm;
thus, a higher score indicates poses that are more favorable to binding.
Many of the interactions expected from analysis of other GT structures
were observed in this model. Apart from van der Waals interactions
between UDPGA and nearby residues, the majority of interactions were
either classical or nonclassical hydrogen bonds (Figure 3). The commonly observed interactions
between the pyrimidine group, W353 (hydrophobic π–π
stacking interaction), and L354 (hydrogen bonding) were recapitulated
in our model. Classical hydrogen bonding interactions were also seen
between the pyrimidine and N357, Q356, and R335, with nonclassical
hydrogen bonds to E379 and P355. A hydrophobic π–alkyl
interaction was also present between K281 and the pyrimidine ring.
Residues G276–S286 are located in the flexible linker joining
the N- and C-terminal domains which could allow for variability in
the residues available to interact with the cosubstrate, depending
on the conformation of the enzyme at the time of crystallization or
modeling. Although the expected Q356 interaction with the ribose group
was seen, the expected interaction with E379 was not observed, the
hydroxyl groups of the ribose being rotated away from the glutamate
residue in this pose. As expected, hydrogen bond interactions between
G376, H375, G373, H371, S308, G307, R172, S37, and the α and/or
β phosphate groups were seen. An electrostatic interaction between
R256 and α phosphate, not seen in other GT structures, was also
observed. The conserved Q396 interaction with the hexose group was
observed, but no direct interaction was observed between this group
and S374. Hydrogen bond interactions between the hexose and S308 and
R172 were present, as was an electrostatic interaction with F393.
Although D395 and the hexose group interacted in our model, it was
as an unfavorable donor–donor interaction between the protein
backbone and the protonated glucuronic acid backbone. As this docking
algorithm is not able to account for receptor flexibility, or for
changes in the local micro-environment, it is possible that in vivo
interactions are slightly different, with additional water bonding
and side-chain flexibility allowing for more favorable interactions.

Figure 3 UDPGA
interacts with multiple residues in the C-terminal domain
as well as three residues in the N-terminal domain (S37, R172, and
R256). (A) UDPGA docked into the cleft located between the C-terminal
(blue ribbons) and N-terminal domains with several interacting residues
indicated. (B) 2D schematic diagram of all non-van der Waals UDPGA–UGT1A6
interactions. Classical hydrogen bonds are shown in dark green, nonclassical
hydrogen bonds, in which the donor is a polarized carbon atom, are
shown in pale green, electrostatic interactions are shown in orange,
hydrophobic interactions in pink, with π–π stacking
interactions in dark pink and π–alkyl interactions in
light pink, and unfavorable donor–donor interactions are shown
in red.

In silico mutagenesis was performed
to eliminate a number of amino
acids that were identified as important for binding or may be of physiological
importance (Table S5). When residues S37,
G376, or W353 were changed to the nonpolar alanine, normal UDPGA docking
was abolished, with the majority of poses having UDPGA bound in the
reverse orientation, with the UDP group closest to the substrate binding
site, and rmsds greater than 10 Å compared to the pose in the
wild-type protein (Figure S6). Mutation
of residues H38, R172, S308, and H375 also negatively affected UDPGA
binding, resulting in nonstandard ligand conformations. Mutation of
residues D150, T181, R184, L354, or F393 had no effect on UDPGA binding,
with similar interactions between the enzyme and cosubstrate seen
in the wild-type enzyme, and rmsds of <0.4 Å.

Docking
the cosubstrate UDPGA into our structure identified many
of the same interactions in the C-terminal domain that have been previously
identified as being crucial for sugar binding in other GTs and UGT
homology models. Interaction with these residues, many of which are
highly conserved and previously identified as being required for glucuronidation,
such as H371 and E379, indicated that our model was a reasonable approximation
of the UGT structure. In silico mutagenesis of multiple binding residues
confirmed the importance of these amino acids for UDPGA binding, with
normal binding being abolished or negatively impacted when these residues
were lost. Accurately modeling the N-terminal region of UGTs is far
more difficult because of higher variability in both the sequence
and substrate specificity.

Ligands were docked into the model
in the presence of the cosubstrate
UDPGA using CDOCKER. All compounds, with the exception of bilirubin
diglucuronide, one of our negative controls, were able dock into the
model. Bilirubin is metabolized exclusively by UGT1A1, and the fully
glucuronidated diglucuronide is produced by a UGT1A1 homotetramer
and is highly unlikely to be bound by UGT1A6. The top five docked
ligands quercetin, kaempferol, apigenin, prunetin, and galangin, were
all flavonoids (Figure 4, Table S6). It is known that the scores
provided by docking algorithms are affected by the ligand size and
flexibility, with larger molecules often receiving higher scores,
although the exact degree of effect varies between different docking
algorithms.41−43 We compared the -CDOCKER energy scores obtained with
the compound molecular weight, molecular volume, number of rotatable
bonds, number of hydrogen donors and acceptors, total number of atoms,
and the number of O and N atoms present (Table S7). When all compounds were evaluated, as the -CDOCKER energy
score increased, there was a negative correlation with the total number
of atoms and a slight negative correlation with molecular weight and
volume. When restricted to just those compounds that can be metabolized
using UGT1A6 (27 compounds, Table S6),
there is a slight negative correlation between -CDOCKER energy, molecular
volume, total number of atoms, the number of rotatable bonds, as well
as a slight positive correlation with the number of H acceptors. If
only those compounds with known Km values
are examined (13 compounds), only a slight negative correlation between
-CDOCKER energy and both total number of atoms and molecular volume
remains.

Figure 4 Top scoring compounds were all small flavonoids with a limited
number of direct interactions. (A) 3D view of quercetin docked into
the receptor (-CDOCKER energy: 73.3885 kcal mol–1), (B) kaempferol (72.648 kcal mol–1), (C) apigenin
(64.9334 kcal mol–1), (D) prunetin (61.2897 kcal
mol–1), (E) galangin (60.0664 kcal mol–1). Interaction colors are as shown in Figure 3.

Several residues frequently interacted favorably with the bound
substrate. In 96% of compounds, K228 interacted with the substrate
predominantly through ionic or hydrogen-bond interactions, with cis-resveratrol and codeine being the only compounds that
did not interact with this residue. Other residues commonly involved
in substrate binding included R172 (58% of compounds), R184 (53%),
F393 (22%), and H180 (20%). Approximately, 46% of compounds also formed
direct interactions with the co-substrate UDPGA.

To determine
if the obtained poses resembled those seen in actual
GTs, the substrate-GT interactions in several available GT crystal
structures were examined for quercetin (PDB: 2C9Z), kaempferol (PDB: 2C1Z, 4REL), and 2,4,5-trichlorophenol
(TCP) (PDB: 2VCE). All three compounds were docked in the same general area; however,
the orientation of the substrate and the interacting residues were
quite different (Figure 5).

Figure 5 Comparison of three docked substrates and the same substrates cocrystallized
in plant GTs. Residue-substrate interactions are colored as shown
in Figure 3. (A) Quercetin
(QUE) docked with UDPGA in UGT1A6 (B) Quercetin cocrystallized with
UDP in the V. vinifera flavonoid 3-O
glucosyltransferase UFGT (PDB: 2C9Z). (C) Chemical structure of quercetin/kaempferol
with common glucuronidation sites indicated with arrows. The circled
3′-OH group is absent in kaempferol. (D) Kaempferol (KMP) docked
into UGT1A6 with UDPGA. (E) Kaempferol cocrystallized with U2F in
the V. vinifera UFGT (PDB: 2C1Z). F. Kaempferol
crystallized in the Clitoria ternatea anthocyanidin GT (PDB: 4REL) in the absence of a cosubstrate. (G) TCP docked in
UDPGA. (H) TCP cocrystallized with U2F in the Arabidopsis
thaliana hydroquinone glucosyltransferase UGT72B1
(PDB: 2VCE).
(I) Chemical structure of TCP with the glucuronidation site indicated
with an arrow.

Although some of the docked compounds
had hydroxyl groups in close
proximity to both the UDPGA and H38 residues to make glucuronidation
possible, the docked compounds had greater distances between their
hydroxyl groups and catalytic H38 (average 8.97 ± 2.63 Å, n = 27) than was observed in the plant GT crystal structures,
in which the closest hydroxyl group was an average of 3.38 ±
1.24 Å (n = 7, Table S8). Similarly, the distance between the closest hydroxyl and C1′
of glucuronic acid was 9.64 ± 1.63 Å (n = 27) in the docked compounds but only 4.02 ± 0.34 Å in
the two plant structures that were crystalized with both a substrate
and cosubstrate (UDP-glucose) or cosubstrate analogue (U2F). In 2C9Z, which has UDP bound
in the cosubstrate binding region, all interactions were either conventional
(S18, Q84, H150, and Q188) or nonclassical (H20 and S146) hydrogen
bonds, whereas in our model, quercetin docked in a different orientation
with an rmsd of 7.2869 Å and primarily used charged interactions
between itself and R172, H180, R184, and K228, which are not the equivalent
residues to 2C9Z when the structures are aligned (Table S9). The distances between the Nε2 of the catalytic H38 residue
and the closest normally glucuronidated OH group of quercetin also
differed, being 5.046 Å in our model but only 3.387 Å from
the equivalent H20 residue in 2C9Z. Similarly, our docked kaempferol was
bound in a substantially different orientation compared to 2C1Z (rmsd 7.265 Å)
but only in a moderately different position compared to 4REL (rmsd 3.888 Å).
In both 2C1Z and 4REL,
most binding interactions were either π–π or conventional
hydrogen bonds, whereas in our model, only charged interactions were
seen. Distances between the atoms involved in the glucuronidation
reaction were again larger in our model compared to either 2C1Z or 4REL, with 7.455 Å
between the C1′ of the glucuronic acid group and 3-OH of kaempferol
in our model, but only 4.263 Å in 2C1Z, and 4.588 Å between the 3-OH and
Nε2 of H38 in UGT1A6 compared with 2.696 and 2.492 Å in 2C1Z and 4REL, respectively. Although
UGT1A6 is able to glucuronidate the 3-OH position of kaempferol, the
7-OH position is preferentially glucuronidated in humans, indicating
that the binding pocket in our model may more closely resemble the
plant templates than the human enzyme.44 Comparison of TCP binding showed only a single structurally overlapping
interaction between UGT1A6 and 2VCE, a π–π interaction
between F393 (A387 in 2VCE) and the TCP ring. There were a total of 10 π–π
or π–alkyl bonds in 2VCE, as well as a conventional hydrogen bond
to the cocrystallized U2F. Comparatively, in UGT1A6, TCP (rmsd 3.989
Å), exhibited only a single π–π (F393), π–alkyl
bond (L225), and electrostatic interaction (K228). The distance from
the C1′ and 1-OH was 9.557 Å in UGT1A6 and 3.779 Å
in 2VCE and
8.552 Å between the 1-OH and Nε2 of the catalytic H38 in
UGT1A6, and 2.324 Å in 2VCE.

In silico mutagenesis was performed on commonly
interacting, or
otherwise important, residues to examine their importance in substrate
binding. Specifically, H38, D150, R172A, H180A, T181A, R184A, R184S,
K228A, and F393A were produced. None of the mutations made had a major
effect on which compounds had the highest docking scores (Table S10). Quercetin, kaempferol, and apigenin
were always in the top three bound compounds, with galangin or prunetin
generally as either the fourth or fifth. This varied only in the R172A
and K228A mutations where the fifth best compound was genistein (ranked
eighth in the wild-type docking) and in the R184A and R184S mutations
where dopamine and norepinephrine had the fourth and fifth best docking
scores, respectively. Similarly, although there were a number of alterations
in the number and type of interactions with the surrounding residues,
the majority of interactions with each compound were the same as were
seen when docking into the nonmutated model. The R172A and K228A mutants
showed the largest change in the compound binding location within
the substrate binding pocket with the top five docked compounds all
having rmsds > 2 Å compared to the WT docked poses (Figure S7). Mutation of R172 caused the appearance
of unfavorable anion–anion interactions between UDPGA and both
quercetin and kaempferol, with quercetin changing its binding position
such that the 3′-OH was closer to the glucuronic acid C1′
than the 3-OH, as seen in the wild-type structure. Quercetin is not
a preferred substrate of UGT1A6, only 3% being glucuronidated, and
is preferentially glucuronidated in the order 4′-OH (32%) >
7-OH (30%) > 3′-OH (22%) > 3-OH (16%).45 Despite this, neither the 4′-OH nor 7-OH positions
were ever
in the closest position to the catalytic H38 or glucuronic acid C1′;
instead, the 3′-OH or 3-OH tended to have the closest proximity
in the wild-type and all mutants. Although the identity of the residues
interacting with apigenin did not change, its binding position altered
such that the 7-OH was closer to the glucuronic acid. Genistein also
moved closer to the glucuronic acid group and catalytic H38, as well
as showing a substantial change in the identity of interacting residues
and the type of interactions seen, with more π–π
and π–alkyl interactions observed in the mutant. The
K228A mutation also resulted in the appearance of unfavorable anion–anion
interactions between UDPGA and quercetin, apigenin, and genistein.
Kaempferol was docked in a substantially different position such that
interactions with UDPGA were not possible (Figure S7). Substrates docked into our model generally showed plausible
interactions and conformations; however, when compared to the plant
GT templates, the docked substrates were bound further away from the
catalytically important H38 residue and UDPGA, which would negatively
affect glucuronidation. In silico mutagenesis of nine residues identified
as potentially being important for substrate binding had a relatively
little effect on substrate binding, and the loss of one interacting
residue was not sufficient to completely disrupt binding, the other
interactions still allowing binding in a similar position.

UGT1A6
is subject to several genetic polymorphisms, and examination
of the T181A and R184 mutations present in the UGT1A6*2 (S7A, T181A,
R184A), UGT1A6*4 (S7A, R184A), and UGT1A6*5 (T181A) genetic polymorphisms
revealed a minimal effect on substrate binding. The S7 residue, located
in the ER targeting sequence, is not present in our model, but examination
of both T181A and R184S showed only mild effects on the binding of
the top compounds (Table S10). We specifically
examined the binding of 4-nitrophenol, serotonin, and acetaminophen,
as the T181A and R184S mutations are known to affect the metabolism
of these compounds in recombinant cell lines, with R184S lowering
the Km and T181A increasing the Vmax, however, only when both S7A and T181A mutations
were present in the gene.46 Although these
mutations are known to affect glucuronidation in combination, on their
own, they have little effect, with only serotonin moving closer to
H38 and the glucuronic acid group in the T181A mutation (Figure S8). It has been hypothesized that T181
may act to enhance catalysis via active site interactions, but not
directly influencing substrate affinity, whereas R184 may play a role
in defining substrate specificity.46 This
matches our modeling data which showed relatively minor effects on
the binding of any substrates. The loss of R172 and K228 had the greatest
effect on substrate binding, but their loss was not necessarily negative.
Apigenin, prunetin, and genistein were bound in more favorable positions
for glucuronidation in the R172 mutant, and both quercetin and galangin
were bound in positions closer to UDPGA and the catalytic H38 residue
in the K228 mutant. This may indicate that protein flexibility is
important in substrate binding. The docking algorithm held both the
sidechains and main chain protein backbone relatively inflexible during
binding, mimicking a lock and key model of substrate binding. However,
many drug-metabolizing enzymes, such as the cytochromes P450 and the
sulfotransferases, show a great deal of flexibility in their protein
structures, allowing for the metabolism of a diverse range of substrates.4 It is well-known that the binding of substrate
triggers a conformational change in many enzymes, and this is also
the case in other human GTs, where binding of the co-substrate prompts
an induced fit conformational change in the enzyme structure.47−49 In GT-A type inverting GTs, such as β4Gal-T1, GnT I, GlcAT-I,
and GlcAT-P, the binding of a divalent metal cation and the sugar
donor co-substrate prompts restructuring of a nearby flexible loop
region that acts to cover the buried donor, creating a region that
is more favorable for binding the acceptor substrate.49 Despite the high level of structural conservation among
the GT superfamily, this particular loop is not present in the GT-B
type UGT2B7 or plant GT template structures, but other flexible linker
regions are present. It is reasonable to postulate that some of these
regions of UGTs may undergo a conformational change upon cosubstrate
binding, allowing increased solvent accessibility to the substrate
binding pocket and allowing for the formation of a more optimized
substrate binding site. Structural analyses of various plant GTs indicate
that the flexible loops in both the N- and C-terminal regions, as
well as the loop linking the two domains may also play a role in the
binding of both the sugar donor and acceptor molecules.50 It is possible that the lack of a bound cosubstrate
in the partial human UGT2B7 crystal structure used as a guide during
model creation could have adversely affected the substrate binding
site in our model, but both other crystal structure templates had
UDP bound in the cosubstrate binding site, potentially mitigating
this issue. Although it is possible that binding of the substrate
may induce further conformational changes in the enzyme, because of
the relatively solvent accessible location of the substrate binding
site, and analyses of structurally similar plant GTs, it is unlikely
that any major conformational changes would be required to allow for
substrate binding.49,51 It is possible that additional
allosteric interactions between UGT1A6 and other compounds may also
affect substrate binding. Calmodulin has been shown to allosterically
enhance the glycosylation activity of the woodland strawberry Fragaria vesca FvUGT1 toward its major substrate,
the anthocyanin pelargonidin, and a number of endogenous, and exogenous
compounds have been shown to allosterically affect mammalian UGT metabolism.52,53 Additionally, UGT homo- and hetero-oligomers have been shown to
change substrate specificity and enzyme kinetics, but the mechanisms
by which these effects are accomplished is still unclear, and it is
possible that allosteric interactions between UGTs may play a role
in substrate binding and metabolism.

Poses with the highest
-CDOCKER energy scores were compared with
available enzyme kinetic parameters for these compounds. Previously
reported kinetic data for 13 compounds is shown in Table S6, and the average value for each compound (μM)
was compared to the CDOCKER scores. No correlation was observed between
binding scores and enzyme kinetic data (Figure 6).

Figure 6 Comparison of the average Km equivalent
(μM) with the -CDOCKER score for 13 compounds with available
enzyme kinetics data. There was no correlation between the enzyme
kinetics data and -CDOCKER energy scores for these compounds, 4-MU,
4-methylumbelliferone.

Although it is tempting
to seek a correlation between binding affinity
and substrate docking scores, there is no guarantee that binding affinity
is an accurate measure of glucuronidation activity. As has been seen
in other studies, Km values do not necessarily
correlate well with Vmax or Clint values, and there is little reason to believe that docking scores
would necessarily correlate any better.54 The UGT-substrate interaction is complex, with many compounds having
multiple sites of glucuronidation with different affinities, as well
as altered affinities and kinetics based on whether the UGT has formed
a homo- or hetero-oligomer. There are multiple viable poses in which
a compound can bind the active site, this being how compounds such
as quercetin, kaempferol, or cis-resveratrol can
have glucuronide added to multiple possible hydroxyl groups, the hydroxyl
closest to the catalytic site being glucuronidated. A particular hydroxyl
group is usually preferred over the others, likely due to optimal
binding interactions, but the other sites may be used depending on
the local micro-environment, protein conformation, post-translational
modifications, oligomerization, and cosubstrate binding status at
the time of substrate binding.

The compounds with the highest
docking scores were all flavonoids,
and although it is possible for UGT1A6 to metabolize certain flavonoids,
they are not the preferred substrate. Typically, UGTs 1A1, 1A3, 1A7,
1A8, 1A9, 1A10, and 2B7 are the major contributors to flavone glucuronidation
in humans.12 Scoring functions are typically
biased toward molecules with higher molecular weights generally because
of the fact that they offer a larger surface area for protein interaction
and increased opportunities for hydrogen bonding.41,55 We did not see a correlation between increased molecular weight
and higher docking scores, rather there was a slight correlation between
smaller ligands and increased docking scores, and the accuracy of
the CDOCKER algorithm is minimally affected by molecular weight and
ligand flexibility.43 The preference towards
smaller ligands makes sense physiologically, as it has been hypothesized
that the UGT1A6 substrate binding pocket may be smaller and more closed
than in plant and bacterial UGTs because of its preference for metabolizing
relatively small molecules such as simple phenols.4

Our homology model was principally derived from two
plant GTs,
possibly explaining the high docking scores for plant UGT substrates.
Quercetin is the preferred substrate of the M. truncatula triterpene/flavonoid GT UGT71G1, which glycosylates the 3′-OH
preferentially, followed by 3-OH, and 4′-OH, with the 7-OH
and 5-OH positions also glycosylated to a small extent.56 The other template, the O. sativa trichothecene GT OsUGT79 preferentially glycosylates trichothecene
mycotoxins such as deoxynivalenol, and has no activity toward flavonoids
such as quercetin.57,58 Despite the high degree of structural
conservation, particularly around the active site, small changes in
the amino acid composition result in substantially different substrate
specificities and the regioselectivity of the glycosylation site.
It seems likely that if other GT structures were chosen as initial
templates, the resulting models would be biased toward resembling
those enzymes, with similar preferred substrates.

Unfortunately,
no complete mammalian GT crystal structures are
available, with only plant and bacterial GTs crystalized to date.
The bias toward resembling the template structure is not unique to
our model. Docking the 56 prepared compounds into the Ghemtio et al.
model (2014), which was produced using five plant GT templates, gave
similar results to our model, with all of the top 5 docked compounds
being flavonoids, despite their poor metabolism by UGT1A6 (Table S11). As in our model, bilirubin diglucuronide
failed to dock, as did biochannin A, oleandomycin, irinotecan, and
bilirubin monoglucuronide, all compounds that are not metabolized
by UGT1A6. The residues that interacted with the docked compounds
differed substantially between the two models, as did the distances
between the catalytic H38 residue and the C1′ of the cosubstrate.
This was not entirely unexpected as the N-terminal domains of the
two models differed substantially (Figure S5). Using plant GTs as the primary templates for the structure, the
UGT1A6 models may have been forced into a non-native conformation,
increasing the size and shape of the binding pocket and allowing for
preferred docking of larger substrates, thus causing the docking position
of small phenolic molecules to be less favorable and farther away
from the catalytic site. This may also explain the relatively minor
effects of mutations in the substrate binding site on substrate binding.
This is a concern for any UGT homology models that might be used for
drug discovery or substrate specificity studies. Results more likely
reflect the plant UGT templates than the actual human UGTs when using
homology models, leading to the failure of in silico-led drug discovery
studies because of inherent bias. Only the future production and description
of a true mammalian UGT structure can substantially move structure-based
design and modeling efforts forward in this field.

Molecular Dynamics
Simulations
The aim of this study
was to analyze the importance of residues in the NTD of UGT1A6 for
substrate specificity. In order to better understand the UGT1A6 structure
and ligand interactions, it is important to consider not only the
static structure but also the dynamic state and internal motions that
could occur under physiological conditions. To examine the role of
substrate binding residues, the best docked pose of quercetin, the
top scoring compound, in the UGT1A6 model was subjected to molecular
dynamics simulations for an in-depth binding interaction study, with
the stability of the binding conformation in the dynamic state analyzed.
The rmsd of the protein backbone, bound cosubstrate UDPGA, and bound
substrate were plotted and analyzed with respect to the initial model
(Figure 7). The model
backbone showed a gradual increase in rmsd over the run time, with
the rmsd between the initial and final structure after 50 ns being
5.795 Å (Table S12). The largest and
most frequent changes in rmsd from the average model over time (root-mean-square
fluctuation, RMSF) were in the N-terminal regions, primarily in the
solvent accessible regions of the protein, with some short C-terminal
regions also showing some fluctuations (Figure S9). UDPGA fluctuated within its binding pocket, with 2 Å
fluctuations occurring between 4 and 12 ns, stabilizing at about 18
ns but fluctuating further between 33 and 50 ns. Quercetin showed
smaller fluctuations, appearing to stabilize within a range of 1 Å
after 17 ns.

Figure 7 rmsd of the UGT1A6 model and bound cosubstrate and substrate
over
the course of the molecular dynamics simulation. The UGT1A6 protein
backbone rmsd is shown in black, UPDGA in blue, and quercetin in pink.

To assess the secondary structure’s stability,
the simulation
trajectory was examined every 5 ns from 0 to 50 ns, showing that the
overall structure appeared to spread out compared to the initial state
(Figure S10). The majority of the CTD remained
relatively stable during the simulation run, with an rmsd of 4.515
Å from the initial model. The loop linking the NTD and CTD moved
substantially over the run, as did the Cα0 helix, the linker
having an rmsd of 8.327 Å by the end of the run. The Cα0
helix had a large rmsd of 8.225 Å at the starting Q287 residue,
but by the final residue, G297, it differed by only 2.328 Å.
The Cβ2–Cα3 region also differs after 50 ns, the
location of the Cβ3 sheet and Cα3 helix altered in the
50 ns model, with Cα3 shifting upward and increasing in length
by two amino acids (Q356–H362) in the final structure (Figure S11). This shift altered the positions
of several key UDPGA binding residues, including W353 (rmsd 9.927
Å), affecting UDPGA binding. UDPGA moved 6.895 Å relative
to its initial position, preventing the formation of the highly conserved
π–π stacking interaction between W353 and the uridine
group of UDPGA (Figure S12). The loss of
this interaction is part of a substantial shift in the positioning
of the UDPGA molecule, contributing to the further decrease in protein–UDPGA
interactions. Because of the large number of other changes in the
protein structure, and interacting residues, it is difficult to determine
the significance of the loss of this specific interaction, although
given its conserved nature, the loss is likely detrimental. The uridine
ring previously had 8 interactions with the UGT1A6 protein, but after
simulation, only 3 interactions to T337, R335, and Y336 remained,
plus an additional three water–hydrogen bonds. Following the
simulation, the previously unfavorable D395 interaction with the glucuronic
acid disappeared, leaving seven water–hydrogen interactions
and a hydrogen bond/electrostatic interaction with R172 as the only
interaction between the protein and the UDPGA glucuronic acid group
(Table S13).

The NTD exhibited significant
structural deviation from the initial
model by the end of the simulation (Figure S13). The Nβ2–Nβ3 region differed by 6.132 Å,
causing a deviation in the location of Nβ2, the Nα2 loop,
and Nβ3. The Nα3 helices also differed substantially by
the end of the simulation, Na3-1 was shortened by four amino acids
(N96–E101 compared to Y91–E101 initially; rmsd 8.936
Å). The Nα3-2 helix had the highest deviation by the end
of the simulation (rmsd 9.647 Å), mostly because of being lengthened
by three amino acids and being shifted down compared to the initial
structure. The Nα3-3 helix was essentially missing in the initial
structure, but by the end of the simulation, a clear helix had formed
immediately following the Nα3-2 helix (rmsd 6.041 Å). The
region surrounding the Nα5-2 helix, which includes the dimerization
domain, also showed a high level of variation (rmsd 9.903 Å).
The starting model had an initial helix (R194–K198) followed
by a loop connecting to a second helical turn (S206–A210),
but all helical structures were abolished by the end of the 50 ns
of simulation. The Nα5-3 helix (E218–V236) following
the simulation was longer than in the initial model (E218–E230),
but the model converged at the Nα5-4 helix (rmsd 1.951 Å).
Although the externally facing regions showed a high level of variance,
the internal Nβ4–Nβ5 region (F144–R172)
showed relatively little deviation within the structure (rmsd 1.691
Å), despite the lengthening of the Nβ4 sheet (F144–D150)
in the final model compared to the initial structure (L147–D150).

The position of the docked quercetin molecule shifted by 6.895
Å relative to its initial position, causing a shift in the interacting
residues (Figure S14 and Table S14). By
the end of the simulation, none of the original interactions had been
preserved from the initial state, three different residue interactions,
and 10 water–hydrogen interactions appearing because of the
shift in the quercetin position within the substrate binding pocket.
The distances between the potentially glucuronidated hydroxyls of
quercetin and both the catalytic Nε2 residue of H38, and the
C1′ of the glucuronic acid group, increased over the course
of the simulation (Figure S15). The distance
between quercetin and the glucuronic acid C1′ was particularly
large, ranging from 16.670 to 22.626 Å by the end of the simulation
compared to the initial measurements of 7.513–11.743 Å
(Table S15).

Molecular dynamics simulations
revealed a large amount of flexibility
in the UGT1A6 protein backbone, as well as in the bound cosubstrate
and substrate. This flexibility was seen in both the NTD and CTD and
affected the interactions of both UDPGA and quercetin with the protein.
A high degree of flexibility in substrate binding is physiologically
consistent, as UGT1A6 can produce multiple glucuronidated forms of
quercetin, with specific hydroxyl groups being preferred over others.45 In order for these various products to be formed,
it is necessary for the substrate to be able to bind the enzyme in
a variety of different orientations, moving the target hydroxyl group
closest to the catalytic H38 residue and the UDPGA sugar group. Unlike
the cytosolic plant GTs, the human UGT1A6 is intimately associated
with the ER membrane.40 It is likely that
this association confers some degree of additional stability or constraint
to the protein structure, and simulating protein movement in the absence
of this influence may not accurately reflect physiologically relevant
conformational changes. Some of the observed shifts in protein helices,
sheets, and loops may not occur when the protein is anchored in the
membrane, and the highly conserved CTD would probably show a smaller
degree of conformational change. Protein–protein interactions
in UGT homo- and hetero-oligomers may also provide additional protein
stability, but it is currently infeasible to model these interactions
in silico because of the localization of the dimerization motif within
a variable loop region, which is inherently disordered and substantially
more difficult to model compared to more ordered α-helix or
β-sheet secondary structures. The majority of protein–protein
docking algorithms available are not optimized for detecting associations
between disordered loop regions, and elucidation of these interactions
will need to await the production of a complete crystal structure.
Because of the high level of structural conservation between GTs in
the C-terminal sugar binding domain, one might expect to see fewer
shifts in protein interactions and helix positions than were observed
following the molecular dynamics simulations. The high degree of flexibility
observed in the protein structure does lend support to the idea that
the protein may undergo a conformational shift upon cosubstrate and/or
substrate binding, as it is at least able to make a number of energetically
favorable conformational changes. The lack of true system stabilization
following 50 ns of simulation may be due to the absence of appropriate
membrane or protein–protein interactions. Although it is possible
that the system would stabilize with additional simulation time, any
increased biological relevance of the resulting structure would be
questionable. This is because as simulations progressed, the derived
structure increasingly deviated, particularly in the highly conserved
C-terminal domain, which differed from the UGT2B7 crystal structure
by 4.672 Å (Table S12). Similarly,
most conserved interactions between the cosubstrate and protein were
abolished with extended simulation time, and the substrate and cosubstrate
became so far apart as to make transfer of the glucuronide (the biological
imperative of this enzyme) impossible.

Post-translational modifications
may also contribute to protein
flexibility, substrate binding, and metabolism. Multiple UGTs have
been shown to be phosphorylated by protein kinase C (PKC) and inhibition
of PKC resulting in significant loss of activity.59 UGT1A6 is predicted to have four PKC sites (S/TXK/R) at
S41, S50, T74, and S206, as well as one tyrosine phosphorylation site
at Y191, with PKC-δ specifically implicated in UGT1A6 phosphorylation.60 The mechanism by which phosphorylation affects
protein function is currently unclear, although it has been suggested
that it may stabilize the protein, slowing protein degradation, and
affect both catalysis and substrate specificity.59,60 Glycosylation plays a role in UGT folding and has been shown to
affect enzyme activity.61,62 Although UGT1A6 possesses
two glycosylation sites at N294 and N346, it is unclear how glycosylation
specifically affects the UGT function. Both phosphorylation and glycosylation
may play important roles in protein stability and function, but it
is not possible to account for their effects in current homology models,
which likely affects the results obtained.

Conclusions
Because
of extensive functional and structural conservation within
the GT superfamily, homology modeling may provide insight into the
structure and function of UGTs in the absence of high-resolution crystal
structures. We have produced a UGT1A6 model that closely resembles
the crystal structures of other plant, bacterial, and fungal GTs,
which is able to bind the cosubstrate UDPGA as well as many compounds
known to be metabolized by UGT1A6, with the majority of expected interactions
represented. This, and other UGT homology models, have a number of
limitations. Because of the small number of available GT templates,
all UGT homology models are based on the same pool of plant and bacterial
GTs, and our data indicate that this biases the model toward closely
resembling the template structures, particularly in their substrate
specificities, which makes interpretation with respect to human and
other mammalian systems more difficult. The limitations of currently
available homology modeling software, and biological information,
make modeling ER membrane constraints difficult at best, so the inherent
instability of loops and disordered regions of the protein cannot
be accurately predicted. Post-translational modifications, and protein–protein
interactions (for which there is increasing evidence in the literature18−29,59−63) also cannot be accurately predicted nor their effects
on substrate binding quantified. Despite these limitations, our model
was able to recapitulate many of the expected UGT–substrate
and UGT–cosubstrate interactions, highlighting a number of
residues that may be critical for binding. Because of the dynamic
nature of the protein, it is expected that many of the sidechains,
loops, helices, and sheets can move to allow for better access and
binding of both co-substrates and substrates, as well as to allow
for homo- and hetero-oligomerization. This was supported by the high
level of protein flexibility observed in our molecular dynamics simulations.
Elucidating how these regions and interactions affect substrate binding
and enzyme kinetics is a difficult problem, and will likely not be
solved even with the elucidation of the UGT1A6 crystal structure,
as crystals cannot capture the dynamic movement of the protein. It
is possible that with multiple crystal structures produced with bound
substrates, we will be able to obtain a more clear picture of how
the loops and helices move to accommodate different substrates, although
careful biochemical experiments will also be necessary to elucidate
dynamic processes. With these data, and advances in structural modeling
and docking algorithms, it may be possible to construct new models
and molecular dynamics simulations to better understand the parameters
informing enzyme specificity and kinetics.

Computational Methods
In Silico
Modeling of UGT1A6
Homology models of the
human UGT1A6 protein (GenBank accession #: NP_001063.2, Uniprot: P19224) were produced using the I-TASSER server.64−66 UGT1A6 possesses
a 26-amino acid N-terminal signal peptide which acts to target the
immature protein to the ER.40 Once inserted
into the ER, this signal sequence is removed to form the mature protein,
and it is thus unlikely to contribute to the function of the mature
protein. We produced four initial models: with and without this targeting
sequence, using the human UGT2B7 C-terminal end crystal structure
(PDB: 2O6L)
as a template to guide the I-TASSER modeling (WSNT); with the signal
peptide and with the UGT2B7 crystal template (WSWT); without the signal
peptide and without the UGT2B7 template (NSNT); and without the signal
peptide and with the UGT2B7 template (NSWT).34

I-TASSER begins modeling of the submitted sequence by automatically
retrieving templates with similar folds or secondary structures from
the PDB database using LOMETS (Table S16).67 It then assembles continuous fragments
taken from the PDB templates into full-length models using Monte Carlo
simulations with unaligned regions built using ab initio modeling.
The clustering algorithm SPICKER is then used to identify low free-energy
states, and then, the fragment assembly simulation is repeated using
the SPICKER cluster results with spatial restraints obtained from
LOMETS and the template PDB structures.68 The final full-atomic models are built from selected I-TASSER decoys
via optimization of the hydrogen bond network. Models produced without
the use of UGT2B7 were constructed using four crystal templates: 5GL5 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae ugt51), 2IYA (Streptomyces antibioticus OleI), 2IYF (S. antibioticus OleD), and 2PQ6 (M. truncatula UGT85H2). The WSNT model also used 4M83 (an alternative
model of the data from 2IYF). The models produced using UGT2B7 as a guide were
primarily based on 2ACV (M. truncatula UGT71G1) and 5TME (O. sativa subsp. Japonica UGT79) pdb structures.

The I-TASSER server automatically constructed
five models for each
set of input conditions, and the top 10 structural analogues for each
set of models were determined (Table S17). Structural alignments with other GT crystal structures available
in the RCSB database were produced to evaluate differences between
the homology models and available crystal structures (Table S18).69 The
first model for each input condition, which generally corresponded
to the structure with the highest C-score and largest number of decoys
made, was imported into BIOVIA Discovery Studio 4.5 (Dassault Systèmes,
Courbevoie, France) for continued analysis. The models for all four
input conditions were assessed using the tools Verify Protein (MODELER)
to generate DOPE scores, and Verify Protein (Profiles-3D) to evaluate
the compatibility of an amino acid sequence within a 3D protein structure.

The model with the best scores (no signal peptide, using the UGT2B7
guide structure) was selected to undergo further energetic minimizations
using CHARMm.70 Two rounds of smart minimization
(1000 steps of steepest descent with a root mean square (rms) gradient
tolerance of 3, followed by conjugate gradient minimization) were
performed followed by further two rounds of adopted basis Newton–Raphson
minimization. The model then underwent side-chain refinement using
the ChiRotor algorithm for CHARMm energy minimization.71 CHARMm-based loop refinement was performed on
loop regions not present in UGT2B7 that had substantial structural
variation compared with other aligned GTs, specifically amino acids
F182–L217 and G275–S286; F182–L217 refinement
was split into four groups for optimization because of algorithm constraints
on the loop length: F182–D201, T197–A210, R208–P219,
and M203–L217.72 Loop refinement
was followed by a final round of side-chain optimization and smart
minimization. All minimizations were performed using a generalized
Born with molecular volume implicit solvent model. The side-chain
rotamer for W353 was manually adjusted to match the rotation of the
homologous tryptophan residue present in multiple crystal structures
cocrystalized with UDP, UDP-glucose, U2F, or TDP, as the specific
ring–ring interactions are important in UDPGA binding.36 The final model was evaluated using the SAVES
server (http://servicesn.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES/) to determine the ERRAT score, with BIOVIA used to generate a Ramachandran
plot.73 Structural alignments with other
GT crystal structures available in the RCSB database were produced
to evaluate differences between the homology models and available
crystal structures, and to identify important residues.69

In Silico Mutagenesis
To examine
the importance of
specific residues to cosubstrate and substrate binding, selected residues
were mutated from their initial composition to alanine, and the resulting
mutant structure used for additional molecular docking studies. A
total of 15 mutant structures were made, 6 of which were used to specifically
investigate cosubstrate binding, 5 of which were used to examine substrate
binding, and the remaining 4 used to examine binding of both (Table S19). Residues were selected based on observed
cosubstrate and substrate binding in other GT crystal structures (Table S4), as well as those identified in our
own docking experiments.

Molecular Docking
Structures of
all ligands selected
for docking were obtained from PubChem. A total of 56 compounds were
selected for docking comprising 13 compounds known to be metabolized
by UGT1A6 with available Km or S50 values, 14 compounds that are poorly metabolized
by UGT1A6, 7 compounds whose
ability to be metabolized by UGT1A6 are unknown, and 22 compounds
that either cannot be metabolized by UGT1A6 or are metabolized at
levels below the level of detection (Table S6). Of these, approximately half are substrates for plant UGTs, including
quercetin and kaempferol, substrates bound in several available GT
crystal structures. With the exception of three compounds (irinotecan,
warfarin, and tamoxifen), which require additional processing before
they are able to be glucuronidated, or bilirubin diglucuronide, which
is already fully glucuronidated and cannot be further glucuronidated,
all the other included compounds can be metabolized by UGT1A6, other
human UGTs, plant GTs, or bacterial GTs (oleandomycin). All ligands
were prepared for docking in BIOVIA Discovery Studio 4.5 and canonical
tautomers generated. Cosubstrate and substrate docking spheres in
the UGT1A6 homology model were defined using the locations of the
bound co-substrate or substrate molecules present in GT crystal structures
following alignment with our final UGT1A6 model. The UDPGA docking
sphere was defined using the locations of bound UDP-2-deoxy-2-fluoro-α-d-glucose or UDP-glucose present in available GT crystal structures,
and the substrate binding sphere was defined using the locations of
several bound planar molecules (Table S8). The final cosubstrate docking sphere had a radius of 9.46 Å,
whereas the substrate docking sphere had a 7.80 Å radius.

Both the cosubstrate UDPGA and the substrate ligands were docked
into the wild-type and mutant UGT1A6 models using CDOCKER, a grid-based
molecular docking method that allows for flexible ligands to be docked
into a rigid protein receptor.74 The substrate
ligands were only docked into the models in the presence of docked
UDPGA. Ten random ligand conformations were generated for each compound
by translating the ligand center within the receptor docking sphere
and performing a series of 1000 random rotations. Each orientation
was then subjected to 2000 rounds of simulated annealing molecular
dynamics where the temperature is increased to 700 K followed by cooling
to the target temperature of 300 K, ending with final minimization
of the ligand within the rigid receptor.

The prepared substrate
ligands were also docked into the UGT1A6
model produced by Ghemtio et al. (2014). This model contains U2F in
the cosubstrate binding position, and the ligands were docked into
this model using the same settings as described above, with the substrate
binding sphere placed in the same location as in our UGT1A6 model.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molecular dynamics simulations
were performed on the enzyme complexed with both UDPGA and quercetin,
the ligand with the highest docking score, to analyze the stability
of binding conformation using BIOVIA Discovery Studio 4.5.

Terminal
residues G469–H532 of the models corresponding to the C-terminal
TM domain, which did not align with any of the template structures,
were removed to reduce the computational burden, as they were not
implicated in the cosubstrate or substrate docking and physiologically
would not be available to interact with ligands because of their position
within the ER membrane. Models and docked ligands were typed with
a CHARMM36 forcefield, then solvated using an explicit periodic boundary
with an orthorhombic cell shape and a minimum of 7 Å from the
periodic boundary. The completely solvated system contained 37,373
atoms including water molecules (10,030 atoms), cosubstrate, ligand,
receptor, and counter-ions (28 sodium, 27 chloride). Minimization
of the protein–ligand complex was carried out in two steps:
a maximum of 1000 steps of steepest descent with an rms gradient of
1.0, followed by a maximum of 2000 steps of adopted basis Newton–Raphson
with a 0.1 rms gradient. The system was gradually heated from 50 to
310 K over 50 ps using 2 fs time steps, followed by equilibration
for 20 ps at 310 K. The final production phase was performed using
constant temperature dynamics using the Berendsen weak coupling method
(NVT) at a temperature of 310 K for a total of 50
ns. The step size was kept at 2 fs, with trajectories saved every
10 ps. During the run, SHAKE constraints were applied to all bonds
containing hydrogen atoms. The nonbond lower cut-off distance was
set to 8 Å, the higher cut-off distance set to 12 Å, and
the nonbond list radius set to 14 Å. Trajectory analysis was
performed using the trajectory analysis tool in BIOVIA Discovery Studio.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.0c00205.SMILES of all chemicals
used in docking experiments
(XLSX)

Cover
sheet; substrate_docking; UGT1A6_UGT2B7_alignment;
UGT1A6_all_alignments; UGT1A6_homology_model; alignments_for_threading;
and I-TASSER aligned models (ZIP)

Five models produced by I-TASSER; Ramachandran
plot;
alignment of the final UGT1A6 model; structural alignments of the
final UGT1A6 model; comparison of UDPGA top docking positions; comparison
of the docking of selected substrates; comparison of the docking of
three small planar phenolic compounds; RMSF for each residue; snapshots
from the molecular dynamics simulation trajectory; shifts in the CTD;
changes in the UDPGA–UGT1A6 interacting residues; shifts in
the NTD; changes in the quercetin–UGT1A6 interacting residues;
distances between the Nε2 group of the catalytic H38, the glucuronic
acid C1′, and the potentially glucuronidated hydroxyl groups
of the bound quercetin ligand; confidence scores for each model; DOPE
and verify protein scores for I-TASSER-produced models; rmsd between
UGT1A6 models and GT crystal structures; residues important for cosubstrate
binding in multiple GT structures; UDPGA docking site mutagenesis;
substrates, docking scores, and enzyme kinetic data; correlation of
ligand properties with the -CDOCKER energy score; crystal structures;
comparison of substrate binding residues; interactions with selected
bound substrates; docking scores and residue distances; change in
structures over the course of molecular dynamics simulations; change
in UDPGA interacting residues over time; change in quercetin interacting
residues over time; distances between potential quercetin glucuronidation
sites and important enzyme and cosubstrate atoms over time; top 10
I-TASSER threading alignments; top 10 identified structural analogues;
GT crystal structures; and mutant UGT1A6 structures (PDF)



Supplementary Material
ao0c00205_si_001.xlsx

 ao0c00205_si_002.zip

 ao0c00205_si_003.pdf

 Author Contributions
Study design:
A.D.S. and M.W.H.C.; performed experiments/modeling: A.D.S.; data
interpretation: A.D.S., B.D.G.P., A.C.C., and M.W.H.C.; wrote and/or
edited manuscript: A.D.S., B.D.G.P., A.C.C., and M.W.H.C. All authors
have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Notes
Authors will release the atomic coordinates
and experimental data upon article publication.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported
in part by the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, grant 17-003808
to A.C.C.

Abbreviations
C-scoreconfidence score

DOPEdiscrete optimized protein
energy

ERendoplasmic
reticulum

GTglycosyltransferase

I-TASSERIterative
Threading ASSEmbly Refinement

NSNTno signal peptide and no guiding template

NSWTno signal peptide and
with a guiding template

PKCprotein kinase C

TCP2,4,5-trichlorophenol

TDPthymidine-5′-diphosphate

U2Furidine-5′-diphosphate-2-fluoro-α-d-glucose

UDPuridine-5′-diphosphate

UDPGAuridine-5′-diphosphate-glucuronic acid

UGTuridine-5′-diphosphate-glycosyltransferases

WSNTwith signal peptide
and no guiding template

WSWTwith signal peptide and with a guiding template
==== Refs
References
Oda S. ; Fukami T. ; Yokoi T. ; Nakajima M. 
A Comprehensive Review
of UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase and Esterases for Drug Development
. Drug Metab. Pharmacokinet. 
2015 , 30 , 30 –51
. 10.1016/j.dmpk.2014.12.001 .25760529 
Meech R. ; Miners J. O. ; Lewis B. C. ; Mackenzie P. I. 
The Glycosidation
of Xenobiotics and Endogenous Compounds: Versatility and Redundancy
in the UDP Glycosyltransferase Superfamily
. Pharmacol. Ther. 
2012 , 134 , 200 –218
. 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.01.009 .22322248 
Evans W. E. ; Relling M. V. 
Pharmacogenomics:
Translating Functional Genomics into
Rational Therapeutics
. Science 
1999 , 286 , 487 –491
. 10.1126/science.286.5439.487 .10521338 
Dong D. ; Ako R. ; Hu M. ; Wu B. 
Understanding Substrate Selectivity
of Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases through QSAR Modeling and Analysis
of Homologous Enzymes.
. Xenobiotica 
2012 , 42 , 808 –820
. 10.3109/00498254.2012.663515 .22385482 
Liu Y. ; Coughtrie M. 
Revisiting the Latency of Uridine Diphosphate-Glucuronosyltransferases
(UGTs)—How Does the Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Influence
Their Function?
. Pharmaceutics 
2017 , 9 , 32 10.3390/pharmaceutics9030032 .
Mackenzie P. I. ; Walter Bock K. ; Burchell B. ; Guillemette C. ; Ikushiro S.-i. ; Iyanagi T. ; Miners J. O. ; Owens I. S. ; Nebert D. W. 
Nomenclature Update for the Mammalian Udp Glycosyltransferase
(Ugt) Gene Superfamily
. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 
2005 , 15 , 677 –685
. 10.1097/01.fpc.0000173483.13689.56 .16141793 
Meech R. ; Mackenzie P. I. 
UGT3A:
Novel UDP-Glycosyltransferases of the UGT Superfamily
. Drug Metab. Rev. 
2010 , 42 , 45 –54
. 10.3109/03602530903205823 .19814657 
Meech R. ; Rogers A. ; Zhuang L. ; Lewis B. C. ; Miners J. O. ; Mackenzie P. I. 
Identification
of Residues That Confer Sugar Selectivity
to UDP-Glycosyltransferase 3A (UGT3A) Enzymes
. J. Biol. Chem. 
2012 , 287 , 24122 –24130
. 10.1074/jbc.M112.343608 .22621930 
Bosio A. ; Binczek E. ; Le Beau M. M. ; Fernald A. A. ; Stoffel W. 
The Human
Gene CGT Encoding the UDP-Galactose Ceramide Galactosyl Transferase
(Cerebroside Synthase): Cloning, Characterization, and Assignment
to Human Chromosome 4, Band Q26
. Genomics 
1996 , 34 , 69 –75
. 10.1006/geno.1996.0242 .8661025 
Sprong H. ; Kruithof B. ; Leijendekker R. ; Slot J. W. ; van Meer G. ; van der Sluijs P. 
UDP-Galactose:Ceramide
Galactosyltransferase Is a Class
I Integral Membrane Protein of the Endoplasmic Reticulum
. J. Biol. Chem. 
1998 , 273 , 25880 –25888
. 10.1074/jbc.273.40.25880 .9748263 
Meech R. ; Mubarokah N. ; Shivasami A. ; Rogers A. ; Nair P. C. ; Hu D. G. ; McKinnon R. A. ; Mackenzie P. I. 
A Novel
Function for UDP Glycosyltransferase 8: Galactosidation of Bile Acids
. Mol. Pharmacol. 
2015 , 87 , 442 –450
. 10.1124/mol.114.093823 .25519837 
Wu B. ; Kulkarni K. ; Basu S. ; Zhang S. ; Hu M. 
First-Pass
Metabolism via UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase: A Barrier to Oral Bioavailability
of Phenolics
. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2011 , 100 , 3655 –3681
. 10.1002/jps.22568 .21484808 
Miners J. O. ; Bowalgaha K. ; Elliot D. J. ; Baranczewski P. ; Knights K. M. 
Characterization of Niflumic Acid as a Selective Inhibitor
of Human Liver Microsomal UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase 1A9: Application
to the Reaction Phenotyping of Acetaminophen Glucuronidation
. Drug Metab. Dispos. 
2011 , 39 , 644 –652
. 10.1124/dmd.110.037036 .21245288 
Soars M. G. ; Ring B. J. ; Wrighton S. A. 
The Effect
of Incubation Conditions
on the Enzyme Kinetics of Udp-Glucuronosyltransferases
. Drug Metab. Dispos. 
2003 , 31 , 762 –767
. 10.1124/dmd.31.6.762 .12756209 
Luukkanen L. ; Taskinen J. ; Kurkela M. ; Kostiainen R. ; Hirvonen J. ; Finel M. 
Kinetic Characterization
of the 1a
Subfamily of Recombinant Human Udp-Glucuronosyltransferases
. Drug Metab. Dispos. 
2005 , 33 , 1017 –1026
. 10.1124/dmd.105.004093 .15802387 
Bosma P. J. ; Seppen J. ; Goldhoorn B. ; Bakker C. ; Elferink R. P. O. ; Chowdhury J. R. ; Chowdhury N. R. ; Jansen P. L. 
Bilirubin UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
1 Is the Only Relevant Bilirubin Glucuronidating Isoform in Man
. J. Biol. Chem. 
1994 , 269 , 17960 –17964
.8027054 
Krishnaswamy S. ; Duan S. X. ; Von Moltke L. L. ; Greenblatt D. J. ; Sudmeier J. L. ; Bachovchin W. W. ; Court M. H. 
Serotonin (5-Hydroxytryptamine)
Glucuronidation in Vitro : Assay Development, Human Liver Microsome
Activities and Species Differences
. Xenobiotica 
2003 , 33 , 169 –180
. 10.1080/0049825021000048809 .12623759 
Operaña T. N. ; Tukey R. H. 
Oligomerization
of the UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
1A Proteins: Homo- and Heterodimerization Analysis by Fluorescence
Resonance Energy Transfer and Co-Immunoprecipitation
. J. Biol. Chem. 
2007 , 282 , 4821 –4829
. 10.1074/jbc.M609417200 .17179145 
Ghosh S. S. ; Sappal B. S. ; Kalpana G. V. ; Lee S. W. ; Chowdhury J. R. ; Chowdhury N. R. 
Homodimerization of Human Bilirubin-Uridine-Diphosphoglucuronate
Glucuronosyltransferase-1 (UGT1A1) and Its Functional Implications
. J. Biol. Chem. 
2001 , 276 , 42108 –42115
. 10.1074/jbc.M106742200 .11546782 
Kurkela M. ; García-Horsman J. A. ; Luukkanen L. ; Mörsky S. ; Taskinen J. ; Baumann M. ; Kostiainen R. ; Hirvonen J. ; Finel M. 
Expression and Characterization of
Recombinant Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs). UGT1A9 Is More
Resistant to Detergent Inhibition than Other UGTs and Was Purified
as an Active Dimeric Enzyme
. J. Biol. Chem. 
2003 , 278 , 3536 –3544
. 10.1074/jbc.M206136200 .12435745 
Meech R. ; Mackenzie P. I. 
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase, the
Role of the Amino
Terminus in Dimerization
. J. Biol. Chem. 
1997 , 272 , 26913 –26917
. 10.1074/jbc.272.43.26913 .9341125 
Lewis B. C. ; Mackenzie P. I. ; Miners J. O. 
Homodimerization
of UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
2B7 (UGT2B7) and Identification of a Putative Dimerization Domain
by Protein Homology Modeling
. Biochem. Pharmacol. 
2011 , 82 , 2016 –2023
. 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.09.007 .21930117 
Ikushiro S.-i. ; Emi Y. ; Iyanagi T. 
Protein–Protein
Interactions between UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
Isozymes in Rat Hepatic Microsomes
. Biochemistry 
1997 , 36 , 7154 –7161
. 10.1021/bi9702344 .9188715 
Fujiwara R. ; Nakajima M. ; Oda S. ; Yamanaka H. ; Ikushiro S.-i. ; Sakaki T. ; Yokoi T. 
Interactions between Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
(UGT) 2B7 and UGT1A Enzymes
. J. Pharm. Sci. 
2010 , 99 , 442 –454
. 10.1002/jps.21830 .19475557 
Peters W. H. ; Jansen P. L. ; Nauta H. 
The Molecular Weights of UDP-Glucuronyltransferase
Determined with Radiation-Inactivation Analysis. A Molecular Model
of Bilirubin UDP-Glucuronyltransferase
. J. Biol.
Chem. 
1984 , 259 , 11701 –11705
.6480579 
Kurkela M. ; Patana A.-S. ; Mackenzie P. I. ; Court M. H. ; Tate C. G. ; Hirvonen J. ; Goldman A. ; Finel M. 
Interactions with Other
Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases Attenuate the Consequences of the
Y485D Mutation on the Activity and Substrate Affinity of UGT1A6
. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 
2007 , 17 , 115 –126
. 10.1097/FPC.0b013e328011b598 .17301691 
Fujiwara R. ; Nakajima M. ; Yamanaka H. ; Katoh M. ; Yokoi T. 
Interactions
between Human UGT1A1, UGT1A4, and UGT1A6 Affect Their Enzymatic Activities
. Drug Metab. Dispos. 
2007 , 35 , 1781 –1787
. 10.1124/dmd.107.016402 .17620344 
Ishii Y. ; Koba H. ; Kinoshita K. ; Oizaki T. ; Iwamoto Y. ; Takeda S. ; Miyauchi Y. ; Nishimura Y. ; Egoshi N. ; Taura F. ; et al. Alteration of the Function
of the UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase 1A Subfamily by Cytochrome P450
3A4: Different Susceptibility for UGT Isoforms and UGT1A1/7 Variants
. Drug Metab. Dispos. 
2014 , 42 , 229 –238
. 10.1124/dmd.113.054833 .24255116 
Fujiwara R. ; Itoh T. 
Extensive Protein-Protein
Interactions Involving UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
(UGT) 2B7 in Human Liver Microsomes
. Drug Metab.
Pharmacokinet. 
2014 , 29 , 259 –265
. 10.2133/dmpk.DMPK-13-RG-096 .24366439 
Campbell J. A. ; Davies G. J. ; Bulone V. ; Henrissat B. 
A Classification
of Nucleotide-Diphospho-Sugar Glycosyltransferases Based on Amino
Acid Sequence Similarities
. Biochem. J. 
1997 , 326 , 929 –939
. 10.1042/bj3260929u .9334165 
Coutinho P. M. ; Deleury E. ; Davies G. J. ; Henrissat B. 
An Evolving
Hierarchical Family Classification for Glycosyltransferases
. J. Mol. Biol. 
2003 , 328 , 307 –317
. 10.1016/S0022-2836(03)00307-3 .12691742 
Breton C. ; Šnajdrová L. ; Jeanneau C. ; Koča J. ; Imberty A. 
Structures and Mechanisms
of Glycosyltransferases
. Glycobiology 
2006 , 16 , 29R –37R
. 10.1093/glycob/cwj016 .16049187 
Radominska-Pandya A. ; Bratton S. M. ; Redinbo M. R. ; Miley M. J. 
The Crystal
Structure
of Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 C-Terminal End Is the First
Mammalian UGT Target to Be Revealed: The Significance for Human UGTs
from Both the 1A and 2B Families
. Drug Metab.
Rev. 
2010 , 42 , 133 –144
. 10.3109/03602530903209049 .19821783 
Miley M. J. ; Zielinska A. K. ; Keenan J. E. ; Bratton S. M. ; Radominska-Pandya A. ; Redinbo M. R. 
Crystal Structure of the Cofactor-Binding Domain of
the Human Phase II Drug-Metabolism Enzyme UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
2B7
. J. Mol. Biol. 
2007 , 369 , 498 –511
. 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.03.066 .17442341 
Zhang L. ; Zhu L. ; Qu W. ; Wu F. ; Hu M. ; Xie W. ; Liu Z. ; Wang C. 
Insight into Tartrate
Inhibition Patterns in Vitro
and in Vivo Based on Cocrystal Structure with UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
2B15
. Biochem. Pharmacol. 
2020 , 172 , 113753 10.1016/j.bcp.2019.113753 .31837310 
Nair P. C. ; Meech R. ; Mackenzie P. I. ; McKinnon R. A. ; Miners J. O. 
Insights
into the UDP-Sugar Selectivities of Human UDP-Glycosyltransferases
(UGT): A Molecular Modeling Perspective
. Drug
Metab. Rev. 
2015 , 47 , 1 –11
. 10.3109/03602532.2015.1071835 .
Fujiwara R. ; Yokoi T. ; Nakajima M. 
Structure
and Protein–Protein
Interactions of Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases
. Front. Pharmacol. 
2016 , 7 , 388 10.3389/fphar.2016.00388 .27822186 
Ghemtio L. ; Soikkeli A. ; Yliperttula M. ; Hirvonen J. ; Finel M. ; Xhaard H. 
SVM Classification
and CoMSIA Modeling of UGT1A6 Interacting
Molecules
. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2014 , 54 , 1011 –1026
. 10.1021/ci400577a .24588678 
Zhang Y. ; Skolnick J. 
Scoring Function for Automated Assessment of Protein
Structure Template Quality
. Proteins: Struct.,
Funct., Bioinf. 
2004 , 57 , 702 –710
. 10.1002/prot.20264 .
Ouzzine M. ; Magdalou J. ; Burchell B. ; Fournel-Gigleux S. 
An Internal
Signal Sequence Mediates the Targeting and Retention of the Human
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 to the Endoplasmic Reticulum
. J. Biol. Chem. 
1999 , 274 , 31401 –31409
. 10.1074/jbc.274.44.31401 .10531341 
Kirchmair J. ; Markt P. ; Distinto S. ; Wolber G. ; Langer T. 
Evaluation
of the Performance of 3D Virtual Screening Protocols: RMSD Comparisons,
Enrichment Assessments, and Decoy Selection—What Can We Learn
from Earlier Mistakes?
. J. Comput.-Aided Mol.
Des. 
2008 , 22 , 213 –228
. 10.1007/s10822-007-9163-6 .18196462 
Chen H. ; Lyne P. D. ; Giordanetto F. ; Lovell T. ; Li J. 
On Evaluating
Molecular-Docking Methods for Pose Prediction and Enrichment Factors
. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 
2006 , 46 , 401 –415
. 10.1021/ci0503255 .16426074 
Erickson J. A. ; Jalaie M. ; Robertson D. H. ; Lewis R. A. ; Vieth M. 
Lessons in
Molecular Recognition: The Effects of Ligand and Protein Flexibility
on Molecular Docking Accuracy
. J. Med. Chem. 
2004 , 47 , 45 –55
. 10.1021/jm030209y .14695819 
Singh R. ; Wu B. ; Tang L. ; Hu M. 
Uridine Diphosphate Glucuronosyltransferase
Isoform-Dependent Regiospecificity of Glucuronidation of Flavonoids
. J. Agric. Food Chem. 
2011 , 59 , 7452 –7464
. 10.1021/jf1041454 .21413806 
Boersma M.
G. ; van der Woude H. ; Bogaards J. ; Boeren S. ; Vervoort J. ; Cnubben N. H. P. ; van Iersel M. L. P. S. ; van Bladeren P. J. ; Rietjens I. M. C. M. 
Regioselectivity of Phase II Metabolism of Luteolin
and Quercetin by UDP-Glucuronosyl Transferases
. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 
2002 , 15 , 662 –670
. 10.1021/tx0101705 .12018987 
Krishnaswamy S. ; Hao Q. ; Al-Rohaimi A. ; Hesse L. M. ; von Moltke L. L. ; Greenblatt D. J. ; Court M. H. 
UDP Glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)
1A6 Pharmacogenetics: II. Functional Impact of the Three Most Common
Nonsynonymous UGT1A6 Polymorphisms (S7A, T181A, and R184S)
. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
2005 , 313 , 1340 –1346
. 10.1124/jpet.104.081968 .15761113 
Sigrell J. A. ; Cameron A. D. ; Mowbray S. L. 
Induced fit on sugar binding activates
ribokinase
. J. Mol. Biol. 
1999 , 290 , 1009 –1018
. 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2938 .10438599 
Ito S. ; Fushinobu S. ; Jeong J.-J. ; Yoshioka I. ; Koga S. ; Shoun H. ; Wakagi T. 
Crystal Structure of an ADP-Dependent
Glucokinase from Pyrococcus Furiosus: Implications for a Sugar-Induced
Conformational Change in ADP-Dependent Kinase
. J. Mol. Biol. 
2003 , 331 , 871 –883
. 10.1016/S0022-2836(03)00792-7 .12909015 
Qasba P. K. ; Ramakrishnan B. ; Boeggeman E. 
Substrate-Induced Conformational
Changes in Glycosyltransferases
. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 
2005 , 30 , 53 –62
. 10.1016/j.tibs.2004.11.005 .15653326 
Osmani S. A. ; Bak S. ; Møller B. L. 
Substrate
Specificity of Plant UDP-Dependent
Glycosyltransferases Predicted from Crystal Structures and Homology
Modeling
. Phytochemistry 
2009 , 70 , 325 –347
. 10.1016/j.phytochem.2008.12.009 .19217634 
Offen W. ; Martinez-Fleites C. ; Yang M. ; Kiat-Lim E. ; Davis B. G. ; Tarling C. A. ; Ford C. M. ; Bowles D. J. ; Davies G. J. 
Structure
of a Flavonoid Glucosyltransferase Reveals the Basis for Plant Natural
Product Modification
. EMBO J. 
2006 , 25 , 1396 –1405
. 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600970 .16482224 
Peng H. ; Yang T. ; Whitaker B. D. ; Shangguan L. ; Fang J. 
Calcium/Calmodulin Alleviates Substrate Inhibition in a Strawberry
UDP-Glucosyltransferase Involved in Fruit Anthocyanin Biosynthesis
. BMC Plant Biol. 
2016 , 16 , 197 10.1186/s12870-016-0888-z .27609111 
Riches Z. ; Collier A. C. 
Posttranscriptional
Regulation of Uridine Diphosphate
Glucuronosyltransferases
. Expert Opin. Drug
Metab. Toxicol. 
2015 , 11 , 949 –965
. 10.1517/17425255.2015.1028355 .25797307 
Wu B. ; Morrow J. K. ; Singh R. ; Zhang S. ; Hu M. 
Three-Dimensional
Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship Studies on UGT1A9-Mediated
3-O-Glucuronidation of Natural Flavonols Using a Pharmacophore-Based
Comparative Molecular Field Analysis Model
. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
2011 , 336 , 403 –413
. 10.1124/jpet.110.175356 .21068207 
Verdonk M. L. ; Berdini V. ; Hartshorn M. J. ; Mooij W. T. M. ; Murray C. W. ; Taylor R. D. ; Watson P. 
Virtual Screening
Using Protein–Ligand
Docking: Avoiding Artificial Enrichment
. J.
Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 
2004 , 44 , 793 –806
. 10.1021/ci034289q .15154744 
He X.-Z. ; Wang X. ; Dixon R. A. 
Mutational
Analysis of the Medicago
Glycosyltransferase UGT71G1 Reveals Residues That Control Regioselectivity
for (Iso)Flavonoid Glycosylation
. J. Biol. Chem. 
2006 , 281 , 34441 –34447
. 10.1074/jbc.M605767200 .16982612 
Wetterhorn K. M. ; Newmister S. A. ; Caniza R. K. ; Busman M. ; McCormick S. P. ; Berthiller F. ; Adam G. ; Rayment I. 
Crystal Structure
of
Os79 (Os04g0206600) from Oryza Sativa: A UDP-Glucosyltransferase Involved
in the Detoxification of Deoxynivalenol
. Biochemistry 
2016 , 55 , 6175 –6186
. 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00709 .27715009 
Michlmayr H. ; Varga E. ; Malachová A. ; Fruhmann P. ; Piątkowska M. ; Hametner C. ; Šofrová J. ; Jaunecker G. ; Häubl G. ; Lemmens M. ; et al. UDP-Glucosyltransferases
from Rice, Brachypodium, and Barley: Substrate Specificities and Synthesis
of Type A and B Trichothecene-3-O-β-d-Glucosides
. Toxins 
2018 , 10 , 111 10.3390/toxins10030111 .
Basu N. K. ; Kole L. ; Basu M. ; Chakraborty K. ; Mitra P. S. ; Owens I. S. 
The Major Chemical-Detoxifying
System
of UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases Requires Regulated Phosphorylation
Supported by Protein Kinase C
. J. Biol. Chem. 
2008 , 283 , 23048 –23061
. 10.1074/jbc.M800032200 .18556656 
Volak L. P. ; Court M. H. 
Role for Protein Kinase C Delta in
the Functional Activity
of Human UGT1A6: Implications for Drug-Drug Interactions between PKC
Inhibitors and UGT1A6.
. Xenobiotica 
2010 , 40 , 306 –318
. 10.3109/00498251003596817 .20196639 
Nakajima M. ; Koga T. ; Sakai H. ; Yamanaka H. ; Fujiwara R. ; Yokoi T. 
N-Glycosylation Plays a Role in Protein
Folding of Human UGT1A9
. Biochem. Pharmacol. 
2010 , 79 , 1165 –1172
. 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.11.020 .19951703 
Nagaoka K. ; Hanioka N. ; Ikushiro S. ; Yamano S. ; Narimatsu S. 
The Effects
of N-Glycosylation on the Glucuronidation of Zidovudine and Morphine
by UGT2B7 Expressed in HEK293 Cells
. Drug Metab.
Pharmacokinet. 
2012 , 27 , 388 –397
. 10.2133/dmpk.DMPK-11-RG-135 .22240840 
Lampe J. N. 
Advances
in the Understanding of Protein-Protein Interactions in Drug Metabolizing
Enzymes through the Use of Biophysical Techniques
. Front. Pharmacol. 
2017 , 8 , 521 10.3389/fphar.2017.00521 .28848438 
Zhang Y. 
I-TASSER:
Fully Automated Protein Structure Prediction in CASP8
. Proteins 
2009 , 77 , 100 –113
. 10.1002/prot.22588 .19768687 
Roy A. ; Yang J. ; Zhang Y. 
COFACTOR:
An Accurate Comparative
Algorithm for Structure-Based Protein Function Annotation
. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2012 , 40 , W471 –W477
. 10.1093/nar/gks372 .22570420 
Yang J. ; Zhang Y. 
I-TASSER Server: New
Development for Protein Structure and Function
Predictions
. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2015 , 43 , W174 –W181
. 10.1093/nar/gkv342 .25883148 
Wu S. ; Zhang Y. 
LOMETS: A Local Meta-Threading-Server for Protein Structure Prediction
. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2007 , 35 , 3375 –3382
. 10.1093/nar/gkm251 .17478507 
Zhang Y. ; Skolnick J. 
SPICKER: A Clustering
Approach to Identify near-Native
Protein Folds
. J. Comput. Chem. 
2004 , 25 , 865 –871
. 10.1002/jcc.20011 .15011258 
Shen M.-y. ; Sali A. 
Statistical Potential for Assessment and Prediction of Protein Structures
. Protein Sci. 
2006 , 15 , 2507 –2524
. 10.1110/ps.062416606 .17075131 
Brooks B. R. ; Brooks C. L. ; Mackerell A. D. ; Nilsson L. ; Petrella R. J. ; Roux B. ; Won Y. ; Archontis G. ; Bartels C. ; Boresch S. ; et al. CHARMM:
The Biomolecular
Simulation Program
. J. Comput. Chem. 
2009 , 30 , 1545 –1614
. 10.1002/jcc.21287 .19444816 
Spassov V. Z. ; Yan L. ; Flook P. K. 
The Dominant Role of Side-Chain Backbone Interactions
in Structural Realization of Amino Acid Code. ChiRotor: A Side-Chain
Prediction Algorithm Based on Side-Chain Backbone Interactions
. Protein Sci. 
2007 , 16 , 494 –506
. 10.1110/ps.062447107 .17242380 
Spassov V. Z. ; Flook P. K. ; Yan L. 
LOOPER: A
Molecular Mechanics-Based
Algorithm for Protein Loop Prediction
. Protein
Eng., Des. Sel. 
2008 , 21 , 91 –100
. 10.1093/protein/gzm083 .18194981 
Colovos C. ; Yeates T. O. 
Verification of
Protein Structures: Patterns of Nonbonded
Atomic Interactions
. Protein Sci. 
1993 , 2 , 1511 –1519
. 10.1002/pro.5560020916 .8401235 
Wu G. ; Robertson D. H. ; Brooks C. L. ; Vieth M. 
Detailed Analysis of
Grid-Based Molecular Docking: A Case Study of CDOCKER-A CHARMm-Based
MD Docking Algorithm
. J. Comput. Chem. 
2003 , 24 , 1549 –1562
. 10.1002/jcc.10306 .12925999

