
==== Front
BiologicsBiologicsBiologics: Targets & TherapyBiologics : Targets & Therapy1177-54751177-5491Dove Medical Press 2241985910.2147/BTT.S25507btt-6-037ReviewLocal pulmonary administration of factor VIIa (rFVIIa) in diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) – a review of a new treatment paradigm Heslet Lars 1Nielsen Jørn Dalsgaard 2Nepper-Christensen Steen 31 Serendex ApS, Parkovsvej 20, Gentofte, DK 2820 Denmark2 Department of Hematology, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, Denmark3 Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, DenmarkCorrespondence: Steen Nepper-Christensen, Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital of Copenhagen Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 København Ø Denmark, Tel +45 2646 5091, Fax +45 3545 2629, Email nepper@dadlnet.dk2012 2012 06 3 2012 6 37 46 © 2012 Heslet et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.2012This is an Open Access article which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.Background
Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) is a clinical syndrome with typical symptoms dyspnea and hemoptysis. DAH is a complication of specific diseases, in some cases with acute catastrophic hemoptysis, while other patients present low grade alveolar bleeding with a need of chronic transfusion as in pulmonary hemosiderosis.

Methods
Current literature in the PubMed database and other sources was reviewed in order to evaluate the current treatment recommendations, efficacy of this treatment, and finally the risk of complications after off-label use of rFVIIa in respect to DAH.

Objectives
(i) To elucidate the clinical aspects of alveolar hemorrhage, (ii) to develop a simple diagnostic algorithm in order to separate DAH from other important pulmonary diseases with similar clinical picture and comparably high mortality. Such an algorithm has important therapeutic consequences because these diseases: acute lung injury (ALI), acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) have different therapies, (iii) to evaluate and discuss whether local pulmonary administration may improve outcome and reduce mortality in DAH, and (iv) to suggest a treatment schedule.

Results
Hitherto the diagnosis and treatment of DAH has been based on anecdotal reports. The treatment has relied on different unspecific treatment modalities based on a mixture of treatment of the underlying disease and treatment without evidence targeted to stop the alveolar bleeding. However, recently a number of publications have advocated the use of intrapulmonary rFVIIa. Even in severe bleeding DAH has been shown to respond promptly without thromboembolic complication when FVIIa was administered locally via the air side, because the FVIIa does not penetrate the alveolo-capillary membrane to the blood-side. The incidence of DAH (in the US and Europe is 100,000–150,000, and 50,000 patients annually are at risk of developing DAH following hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) and autoimmune diseases. Finally 50,000–100,000 patients may be falsely categorized as having acute respiratory distress syndrome/acute lung injury (ARDS/ALI) because DAH and ARDS cannot be separated clinically. A new treatment paradigm of DAH is proposed as no other intervention has been able to ensure pulmonary hemostasis in DAH. The diagnosis of DAH is simple, a series of broncho-alveolar washes which become increasingly bloody. This test should be performed in all patients with pulmonary opacities in order to separate ARDS/ALI from DAH. FVIIa administrated via pulmonary route is “drug of choice”, because it stops bleeding in the life-threatening syndrome DAH. Hemostasis is obtained after only one to two small doses of FVIIa (50 μg/kg body weight per dose) and after hemostasis the oxygen transport quickly improves.

Conclusion
Intrapulmonary administration of rFVIIa is recommended as the treatment of choice for DAH and blast lung injury (BLI) because the treatment has been shown to be successful and uncomplicated in spite of the fact that only a small series of DAH has been documented.

coagulation factor FVIIadiffuse alveolar hemorrhagehemosiderosisblast lung injurylocal pulmonary treatmentbiologicsbronchoalveolar lavagediagnosisalgorithmnew treatment recommendation
==== Body
Introduction
There is a general lack of understanding of the gap between, on the one hand, the “air side”, where the effective drug-related receptors are located and, on the other hand, the vascular compartment. When administered intravenously biological drugs like FVIIa do not reach the receptors in the alveoli, because they do not pass the alveolo-capillary membrane. “Biologics” refer to biologically manufactured drugs, similar to endogenously key signaling proteins, like FVIIa.

Traditionally, biologics are administered intravenously with the hope that a sufficient concentration of the drug reaches the specific receptors. This requires a high systemic concentration of the drug and is associated with a higher risk of adverse systemic effects than local application at the target site.

The syndrome of diffuse bleeding DAH
The diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) syndrome has a number of clinical characteristics similar to a number of well-pulmonary documented conditions like acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), acute lung insufficiency (ALI), and bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) (Table 1).

Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage related to pulmonary receptors in perspective
For many years it has been known that even the air side of the lung has receptors. Rose et al made a functional study of the granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) receptor, documenting that it was necessary to inhale the drug in order to reach the receptor on the air side (Figure 1). Intravenous administration of GM-CSF had no effect on the alveolar macrophages whereas the inhaled drug increased the number of macrophages with no interference with systemic monocytes.1

In the normal airspace the hemostatic balance is skewed toward anticoagulation due to increased expression of plasminogen activator and low expression of tissue factor (TF). As soon as the lungs are exposed to an inflammatory process, the anticoagulatory state will swiftly be turned into a procoagulatory state – a primitive host defense reaction in order to stop the invasiveness of bacteria and to hinder bacterial multiplication and dissemination.2

On the air side a whole host of receptors are placed. The complex cross talk between the dynamic receptor expression and the overall effect is hard to predict. It is known that pulmonary receptors ensure pulmonary host defense, ie, the TF and GM-CSF-receptors, both placed on the airside isolated from the blood side.3,4 The different biologics must fulfill certain qualities in order to be able to penetrate the biological membranes. First of all the molecular size must be small, most likely smaller than 15–20 kDa, like insulin with a molecular size of 8 kDa. Secondly, the drug must be lipophilic in order to cross the alveolo-capillary membrane to reach the peripheral airways. However, no newly developed therapeutic recombinant drug fulfills the low size criteria in as much as all the wild type proteins are all hydrophilic FVIIa and GM-CSF.

Pathophysiology of DAH
DAH is characterized by damage to the alveolar-capillary basement membrane allowing red blood cells to enter the alveolar spaces. Most frequently DAH is a symptom of pulmonary capillaritis as seen in autoimmune diseases or after hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). DAH may also occur as a result of diffuse alveolar damage in acute respiratory distress syndrome/acute lung injury (ARDS/ALI). Further the damage may be the result of physicochemical factors like blast lung injury (BLI), toxic drug effects (eg, cytotoxic drugs, crack cocaine inhalation), and radiation therapy (Figure 2).

Epidemiology of DAH
In hematological stem cell transplantation (HSCT) recipients, DAH is an infrequent cause of death both in early and late phases after transplantation.5,6 DAH after HSCT is a devastating complication that carries an overall mortality of 16%–70%.7,8 As a result of life-threatening multiple organ dysfunctions, 15%– 40% of HSCT recipients receive intensive care unit support, the majority of whom require mechanical ventilation.9–11 The mortality rate of HSCT recipients receiving invasive ventilation used to exceed 90%.10,12 Although more recent studies have shown improvement in outcome, the mortality rate of HSCT recipients receiving mechanical ventilation is still high.10,13–15 It is estimated that 50,000 HSCT procedures took place in 2007 in the USA, and 80,000 worldwide, and that 25%–40% of HSCT recipients are admitted to the medical intensive care unit (ICU) for the management of pulmonary complications to HSCT.7,11,16,17

A considerable number of patients will also develop DAH due to other causes than HSCT, eg, infections, bronchoscopy, autoimmune diseases, HIV (Kaposi’s sarcoma), and transplantations, ie, DAH has been reported in 75% of patients with Kaposi’s sarcoma,18 in 66% of patients with SLE,19 5%–10% of patients with Goodpasture syndrome.20 Fatal DAH has been reported in approximately 10%–41% of lung autopsies of HSCT patients that succumbed to HSCT related complications.6,21 Further, DAH is reported to develop in 40% of patients admitted to the ICU for respiratory failure (ARDS/ALI). The annual incidence of ARDS/ ALI in the USA and EU admitted to ICU is over 500,000 patients.

The syndrome of DAH
The multiple causes of DAH are shown in Table 222 together with the treatment of the underlying cause of DAH and symptomatic treatment of the ongoing alveolar bleeding. Formerly, the management strategy was limited to the optimization of each of the specific diseases and underlying disorders as a prophylactic measure toward prevention of DAH syndrome. Most of such prophylactic interventions have been treatment with steroids, anti-infective measures, eg, anti-cytomegalovirus pneumonia therapy, plasmapheresis, platelet transfusion, and coagulation factors. These interventions are alone focused on prophylaxis of the stereotype syndrome alveolar bleeding.

The diagnosis of DAH
The algorithmic scheme is depicted in Figure 3, based on the fact that the signs and symptoms are a common denominator of DAH, ARDS and BOOP: acute pulmonary insufficiency with reduced O2 transport capacity and confluent opacities on chest film. It is imperative to distinguish between the specific diagnoses of these conditions, and in as much as they have a very high mortality, it is of utmost importance to diagnose correctly because the specific therapies are different. The key to the diagnosis, as it appears in Figure 3, is the finding of (i) a macroscopically progressively hemorrhagic aliquot in a series of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) findings that denote a severe DAH syndrome, or (ii) measurements of an increased hemoglobin concentration in the BALF corresponding to a slow bleeding (pulmonary hemosiderosis), or (iii) absence of bloody return in the BALF excluding the DAH diagnosis. The remaining two conditions are separated by a simple flow-cytometry (FC) on the BALF, where the BOOP is characterized by abundant inflammatory cells, and the ARDS diagnosis is based on a BALF without inflammatory cells and without bloody return.

DAH in childhood and adolescence
DAH occurs in any age group secondary to the same underlying diseases and conditions. However, the major difference is that the DAH syndrome is characterized by microscopic alveolar bleeding with chronic transfusion need. Hemoptysis is seldom. The chronic erythrocyte intraalveolar bleeding often surpasses the metabolic clearance of iron originating from the erythrocyte metabolism of the alveolar macrophage. This leads to an alveolar iron overload. These patients don’t have a considerable acute mortality, but a severely reduced long term life-expectancy due to pulmonary fibrosis secondary to accumulated iron in the alveolar space.

Pulmonary hemosiderosis
The idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis syndrome (IPH) is a DAH condition, however, without known underlying cause, ie, the incidence and prevalence of IPH is unknown. There are approximately 500 cases reported in the literature, primarily in children (80%). The etiology of IPH is not clear, in spite of many theories. Clinically, the signs and symptoms of IPH are identical to other microalveolar bleedings like the acquired pulmonary hemosiderosis secondary to known underlying diseases, ie, exacerbations concomitantly with cough, dyspnea to fulminant respiratory failure. The chronic state is accompanied with variable degrees of iron deficiency anemia, present in most patients. Spirometry shows a restrictive pattern due to pulmonary fibrosis in the chronic condition. Lung biopsies from both IPH and secondary pulmonary hemosiderosis patients often show severe thickening of the alveolar wall and hemosiderin-loaded alveolar macrophages that also appear in sputum.

The blast lung injury – a dynamic process with a “window of opportunity”
A blast lung injury (BLI) is based on the disruption of the alveolo-capillary membrane after an explosion, with a significant pressure wave entailing diffuse alveolar bleeding (Table 3).23

Based on the pathophysiology, BLI can be characterized into distinct phases of a dynamic process (Table 4).24–26 This leads to (i) diffuse bleeding and (ii) hemolysis which quantitatively surpasses the clearance rate of free iron (Fe++) from the alveoli unless the diffuse alveolar bleeding is stopped early.

It seems that there is a “window of opportunity” of 3 hours in which the BLI is reversible (Table 5). If the hemorrhage is not brought to a halt, the severity of the pulmonary dysfunction increases over the next 4 days into irreversible BLI and fatal pulmonary failure. The BLI occurs when soldiers in the battlefield or the civilian population are exposed to bomb attacks. Inhalation of FVIIa is an obvious measure to treat the BLI within the window of opportunity, which could be an indication for use of FVIIa in respect to the military and homeland use, because BLI affects soldiers in the battlefield as well as victims of terror attacks.

BLI – signs, symptoms and outcome
BLI secondary to high explosives causes life-threatening dysfunction of the lungs of soldiers exposed to a blast. The incidence of BLI is not known, but may be as high as 1000–5000 persons annually.

There are to date no reports of the prevalence of DAH in blast lungs because it is a military secret. BLI may occur in the absence of any external signs of trauma, as seen in a series of 517 blast casualties, where approximately 20% were immediately fatal.23

Treatment of DAH
Hitherto the separation between symptomatic intervention towards life threatening DAH and the optimization of the underlying disease has not been properly addressed – a fact which has caused confusion concerning the discussion of the best way to administer FVIIa as an intravenous infusion or as an airway deposition, ie, as a BALF administration or as an inhalation (Figure 4).

A common denominator for these studies is that the trials generally have only a very small number of patients included, thereby evading proper statistical evaluation.27,28 In 2006 a study was published with a sufficient number of patients to reach a statistical significant effect of local FVIIa. Before this time treatment was a mixed intervention of questionable effect with steroids, anti-infective measures, plasmapheresis, platelet transfusion, and intravenous infusion of FVlla and other procoagulation factors in spite of the fact that DAH bleeding is not due to factor deficiency.29,30

As late as in 2011 it is still suggested that treatment of DAH should be based “on the underlying cause of hemorrhage, with corticosteroids as a mainstay of therapy in most cases”,22 despite of the first series of a systematic treatment of DAH with local intrapulmonary FVIIa in 2006.31 This study documented an effect of administering a small intrabronchial dose of FVIIa. The effect of intrabronchial lavage with a simple saline solution of FVIIa demonstrated (i) that no patient succumbed after the treatment due to alveolar bleeding, (ii) a significantly improved oxygen gas exchange (P = 0.024), and (iii) a balanced hemostasis (P = 0.031). These findings were subsequently reproduced by three later publications from three independent centers using the identical treatment protocol, however, each study had only a few patients included.32–34 None of the four studies adverse effects (AE) were reported, probably because there was no detectable transmembraneous FVIIa passage from the air side into the blood as evaluated by the prothrombin time. The pathophysiological understanding of the mechanism of action, the marked effect, and the fact that no patients died or were encountering adverse effects as a consequence of the local treatment with FVIIa was most likely the reason for being granted the orphan drug (OD) designation in both Europe (European Medicines Agency [EMEA]), Canary Wharf, London and secondly in the USA (Food and Drug Administration [FDA], Virginia, USA) in spite of the theoretical risk of intra-alveolar thrombotic complications, when treating DAH with FVIIa as a pulmonary deposition.22

However, the systemic administration of FVIIa for off-label use for the treatment of uncontrollable life-threatening hemorrhage has been increasing since the introduction of FVIIa (NovoSeven®, Novo Nordisk A/S, Bagsværd, Denmark),35 but concomitantly a concern for potential thromboembolic complications has equally been increasing, especially after the publication of several meta-analyses recommending caution due to ongoing reports of fatal complications.36,37

A suggestion for the treatment of the three conditions, DAH, pulmonary hemosiderosis and blast lung injury, is shown in Table 531–34 based on published documentation.

Patients suffering from chronic DAH as IPH, often children, are at present generally placed on high-dose steroids, and then weaned to the lowest dose that keeps them from having exacerbations. The use of chronic high dose steroids is problematic because the treatment induces multiple adverse effects both in children but also in the adolescent. The 5-year mortality rate in pediatric patients ranges from 24% to 60%.38 Since no treatment is known at present to be effective, clinical trials with inhaled FVIIa are warranted. It is suggested that the end point could be a fall in numbers of hemosiderin-loaded macrophages in sputum combined with reduced transfusion need. Since FVIIa has a very high degree of efficacy in DAH and is without adverse effects, inhaled FVIIa in a small low daily dose will most likely serve as a prophylactic measure. Such a treatment scheme could make invasive procedures like single-lung transplantation superfluous as this treatment has shown no lasting effect because IPH recurred.38

However, to date no information on treatment of pulmonary hemosiderosis and BLI has been published. In as much as pulmonary hemosiderosis and BLI share the same pathophysiological background alveolar bleeding, treatment suggested in Table 5 is an extrapolation from the published effective dose in DAH.

Every time the clinician encounters a condition where no documentation exists it should be considered whether the disease is worse than the treatment. In the case of using air side treatment of FVIIa in microalveolar bleeding, inhalation by a simple inhalation device seems to be the treatment of choice, ensuring swift deposition of FVIIa into the alveolar space, without the need for invasive procedures such as bronchoscopy. Using a micropump nebulizer ensures that there will not be any interference with the active site of the FVIIa molecule. The only documented case of inhalation of FVIIa by a micropump where the DAH has been treated with success was a patient with Wegener’s granulomatosis.31 The patient had been extubated a few hours earlier after a bout of hemoptysis and had presented with recurrence of the DAH through bloody tinged expectorate. Instead of reintubation she was treated with an FVIIa dose of 50 μg/kg BWT inhaled via a jet nebulizer. After 5 minutes the patient spontaneous exclaimed that the dyspnea had defervesced, and there were no further episodes of DAH.

Discussion
Biologics are relatively new approaches to treat hitherto untreatable diseases like the DAH syndrome. The immediate and positive effect of local FVIIa administered from the air side is due to the fact that the combined FVIIa and its receptor tissue factor (TF) will bring about a balanced hemostasis, ie, with both durable hemostasis for a remarkably small dose of FVIIa, and an improvement in oxygen transport capacity. These facts also explain the lack of systemic adverse effects (Figure 5).

DAH is a syndrome, not a disease, with three subsets. It is easily conceived that the acute macroscopic hemorrhage has a very high mortality >75%. The microscopic DAH subset has on the contrary a small acute mortality; however, with a severely reduced life expectancy. Lastly the DAH subset associated with blast injuries has anecdotally been successfully treated with inhaled FVIIa (pers comm; Danish Medical Center in Helmand province, Afghanistan and Lars Heslet, 2009).

The clinical picture, “white lungs” on chest film and severely reduced oxygen transport capacity, is a common denominator of the high mortality pulmonary diseases DAH, ARDS and BOOP. Diagnostically they may be separated by a simple algorithm: when an aliquot series of BAL fluid washes shows increasingly bloody return, irrespective of whether it is frons macro- or microscopic bleeding.

Therapy of the DAH syndrome seems to be simple because DAH is the common denominator of multiple underlying diseases and conditions. It is most important to separate the treatment of the alveolar bleeding from the optimization of underlying disease like plasmaferesis, steroids, and antibiotics. Administration of FVIIa into the airways via local administration is suggested as an adjuvant therapy to treatment of the underlying disease (Figure 5). Taking into consideration the adverse effects of high-dose steroids often used in children with DAH or IPH and further the risk of acquiring irreversible pulmonary fibrosis due to insufficient iron clearance, a trial with inhaled FVIIa seems to be far less risky in spite of such an intervention.34

Conclusions
The documented therapy from four independent centers of instillation of FVIIa or inhalation of the drug into the airways has demonstrated a sustained and immediate hemostatic effect in DAH, however, still only in a small number of patients.

There is an obvious indication for this treatment in patients with the syndrome DAH and with BLI, being the first line intervention to treat the catastrophic high mortality of DAH. This treatment is also safe because the drug does not penetrate from ‘air’ to ‘blood’.

Lastly, patients with confluent opacities on chest film and reduced oxygenation capacity like DAH, ARDS and BOOP, may according to a simple algorithm BALF wash test be categorized into distinctive groups and treated accordingly. It has been estimated that ARDS is likely to be over-diagnosed in 20%, an important issue because the treatments are different.

Larger, however, not necessarily placebo-controlled studies are warranted, taking into account the high mortality when utilizing the above mentioned treatment recommendations and based on the simple diagnostic algorithm to systematically separate the DAH syndrome from the conditions ARDS/ALI and BOOP.

Disclosures

SNC and JDN declare that they have no competing financial or other interests related to the preparation or the content of the manuscript. LH has shares in the pharmacompany Serendex, Copenhagen, Denmark that holds a patent in pulmonary treatment with rFVIIa, but has not received reimbursements, fees, funding, or salary from any organization relating to the content or the preparation of the manuscript. LH declares that he has no other competing interests.

Figure 1 Local pulmonary administration of FVIIa into the airways ensures that the drug reaches its alveolar receptor TF. However, most importantly, taking into account the separation between the two compartments the “air side” and the “systemic side”, there will not be systemic adverse effects in as much as the alveolo-capillary membrane does not allow the transmembranous passage of FVIIa, when inhaled. FVIIa does not pass through the alveolo-capillary membrane either from the (A) alveolus or (B) the blood side.

Abbreviation: TF, tissue factor.

Figure 2 The DAH syndrome is the common denominator of multiple diseases and conditions. DAH is the general alveolar response to multiple underlying diseases and conditions. The syndrome DAH manifests itself in three subsets: the acute catastrophic DAH, the chronic DAH and finally as the instant blast lung injury. The acute DAH has been treated with local intrapulmonary FVIIa administration. The two other subsets could potentially also be treated from the air side, an intervention which remains to be shown.

Abbreviation: DAH, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage.

Figure 3 The diagnostic algorithm for DAH, BOOP and ARDS. The clinical signs and symptoms of DAH, ALI/ARDS and BOOP are identical, ie, chest film with confluent opacities, acute pulmonary insufficiency with reduced O2 transport capacity. It is imperative to separate between the specific diagnoses of each of these conditions, in as much as they all have a high mortality; it is of utmost importance to diagnose correctly because the specific therapies are different. The simple algorithmic separation is based on progressively hemorrhagic aliquot of a series of BALF’s either macroscopically which denote a severe DAH syndrome or measurements of an increased hemoglobin concentration in the BALF which corresponds to a slow bleeding DAH like in IPH. Provided there is no bloody return at the BALF the DAH diagnosis is excluded. The remaining two conditions are separated by a simple flow-cytometry on the BALF, where the BOOP is characterized by abundant inflammatory cells, and the ARDS diagnosis is based on a BALF without inflammatory cells or bloody return.

Abbreviations: ALI, acute lung injury; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; BALF, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; BOOP, bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia; DAH, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, FC, flow cytometry; IPH, idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis.

Figure 4 It is essential to separate cause and the effect of DAH. It is important to separate the treatment of multiple underlying causes of DAH from the common complicating denominator DAH syndrome, because the latter is simply treated with local pulmonary FVIIa.

Abbreviations: BLI, blast lung injury; DAH, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage; HSTC, hematopoietic stem cell transplant.

Figure 5 Rationale for local pulmonary treatment of DAH with FVIIa. Intravenous rFVIIa does not reach the alveoli (1) in contrast to the airway route (2) where a direct access to the receptor TF is obtained. The TF-FVIIa complex activates coagulation factor IX and X. Finally the activated TF-FVIIa complex induces a perfect “balanced” hemostasis ie, sufficient fibrin deposition without interference with the oxygen transport. The TFPI are constitutively expressed in the airspace in inflammatory conditions, secondary to alveolar inflammation. The TFPI is usually of less importance as compared to the procoagulatory factors. However, this might be the explanation for the balanced hemostasis.

Abbreviations: DAH, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage; TF, tissue factor; TFPI, tissue factor inhibitors.

Table 1 DAH – the key points

Clinical picture
DAH is characterized clinically by alveolar bleeding, from mild with chronic transfusion need to the catastrophic alveolar bleeding with hemoptysis.

	
The DAH presents with three subsets
Macroscopic bleeding – mortality of >70%.

Chronic microscopic alveolar bleeding, falling hematocrit, sputum filled with hemosiderin laden macrophages. The mortality is low, however, the life expectancy is reduced due to pulmonary fibrosis.

Blast lung injury after a major blast. The subset seemingly has a “window of opportunity” of 3 hours.

	
The diagnosis of DAH
Bronchoalveolar lavage with aliquot with successive lavage fluid bloodier macro/microscopically than the previous one. In this way DAH may be separated from ARDS/ALI and BOOP.

	
Treatment of DAH
Alveolar bleeding may be treated successfully provided the DAH syndrome is treated locally intrapulmonarily, by lavage or inhalation.

Prophylaxis of DAH is only based on the specific optimization of the multiple underlying diseases and conditions.

	
Abbreviations: ALI, acute lung injury; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; BOOP, bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia; DAH, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage.

Table 2 Overview of diseasesyndromes and other causes leading to DAH and the classical options of treatment

Syndromes	Clinical presentations	Classic options of treatment22	
Pulmonary capillaritis or autoimmune diseases	Systemic lupus erythematosus	Immunosuppressants
Steroids

Methotrexate

Retuximab

Removal of autoantibodies
Plasmapheresis

Procoagulation
Plasma

Tranexamic acid

Platelet transfusion

Coagulation factors

	
Goodpasture’s syndrome	
Antiphospholipid syndrome	
Wegner’s granulomatosis	
Scleroderma rheumatoid arthritis	
Henoch Schönlein purpura	
Acute lung allograft rejection	
Bone marrow transplantation	
Diffuse alveolar damage	Radiation therapy	
Cytotoxic drugs	
ARDS	
Traumatic alveolocapillary membrane	Blast lung injury		
Mixed	Multiple myeloma		
Subacute bacterial endocarditis		
Negative pressure pulmonary edema		
Mitral stenosis		
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis		
Coagulation disorders		
Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease		
Drug induced alveolocapillary membrane	Warfarin		
Isocyanates	+ Discontinuation of treatment	
Nitrofurantoin		
Propylthiouracil		
Clopidogrel		
Fibrinolytics		
Aspirin		
Amiodarone		
Phenytoin		
Infections	Bacteria		
Pseudomonas aeruginosa	+ Broad spectrum antibiotics and antiviral therapy	
Leptospirosis		
Mycoses		
Aspergillus spp.		
Virus infections		
CMV and herpes pneumonitis		
Abbreviations: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; CMV, cytomegalovirus; DAH, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage.

Table 3 Overview of BLI – a dynamic condition23

Definition and pathogenesis	The traumatic DAH secondary to primary blast BLI is a special form of DAH but triggered
By a “blast wave” secondary to a high explosive detonation. The expanding high pressure wave induces destructive interaction between the pressure wave, the lung tissue and pulmonary vasculature leading to a disruption of tissues at the air-blood interface.

Wth a subsequent resonance inducing hemolysis of the intra-alveolar space.

	
Natural course of BLI	From the early phase with bleeding over mild hemolysis to the end stage with irreversible lung injury based on insufficient iron clearance. Reversible provided therapy is initiated within the first 3 hours – “the window of opportunity.	
Treatment window	The blast injury secondary to high-explosives is life-threatening and the window of opportunity is narrow which means that time for treatment is of essence.
The time window for intervention is only 3 hours. Preemptive* inhalation of FVIIa can eliminate the risk of mortality or permanent lung dysfunction secondary to BLI.	
Battlefield and homeland security	Inhalation of FVIIa implies that BLI casualties may be evacuated from the war zone by helicopter and ensure a safe home transport to acquire final treatment in an allied hospital.	
Note:

* Preemptive is predefined prophylaxis based on (i) a major blast exposure within the 3 hours open window, most preferably 30 minutes after the exposure.

Abbreviations: BLI, blast lung injury; DAH, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage.

Table 4 After a major blast the three phases have their own distinct problems24–26

Timing	Pathophysiology of the post blast pulmonary injury phases	
Phase 1
0–3 hours	Hemorrhagic phase
Transmigration of inflammatory leucocytes, inflammatory stress and destruction of integrity

Window of opportunity

	
Phase 2
4–12 hours	Alveolar inflammation
Extravasation of blood with transmigration of inflammatory leucocytes into the hemorrhagic

Subsequent biodegradation of hemoglobin with deposition of iron in alveoli accompanied by degranulation of neutrophils

	
Phase 3
13–56 hours	Pulmonary destruction
Increased transferrin – bound Fe (3+) and non-transferrin complexes of Fe (3+)

Subsequently disruption of alveolar capillary network and necrotic changes in the pulmonary epithelial cells

	
Table 5 Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage – the treatment paradigm

DAH subtype	Clinical signs and symptoms	Route of administration	Effective dose	
Macroscopic alveolar bleeding	Hemoptysis and severely reduced oxygen transport capacity and confluent opacities on chest films	Bronchoalveolar lavage with 25 mL saline via each main bronchusa	75 μg/kg FVIIa31–34	
Microscopic alveolar bleeding or hemosiderosis	Chronic transfusion requirement and hemosiderin laden macrophages in expectorate	Inhaled FVIIab	75 μg/kg FVIIa31	
Blast lung injury	Initial dyspnea after the blast	No information	–	
	Increasing symptoms and eventually leading to hemoptysis or microscopic DAH	Animal proof of concept at DSTL		
	Window of opportunity of 3 hours	Most likely the intervention would be inhalation of FVIIa, at least as a prehospital treatment		
Notes:

a The total effective dose is dissolved in 50 mL;

b Using a micropump nebulizer interference with the two active sites of FVIIa is avoided. This treatment option was effectively administered in one patient who presented with recurrent bleeding after extubation; no further published experience exists. Note that the treatment regime is based on a limited number of patients.

Abbreviation: DSTL, British Defence Science and Technology Laboratory.
==== Refs
References
1 Rose RM  Kobzik L  Dushay K    The effect of aerosolized recombinant human granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor on lung leukocytes in nonhuman primates Am Rev Respir Dis 1992 146 5 Pt 1 1279 1286 1443885 
2 Choi G  Vlaar APJ  Schouten M    Natural anticoagulants limit lipopolysaccharide-induced pulmonary coagulation but not inflammation Eur Respir J 2007 30 3 423 428 17537762 
3 Heslet L  Andersen JS  Sengeløv H  Dahlbäck B  Dalsgaard-Nielsen J   Inhalation of activated protein C: A possible new adjunctive intervention in acute respiratory distress syndrome Biologics 2007 1 4 465 472 19707316 
4 Heslet L   Look on the “air side” in pneumonia Crit Care Med 2009 37 2 774 775 19325384 
5 Afessa B  Tefferi A  Litzow MR    Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002 166 5 64 645 
6 Agustí C  Ramirez J  Picado C    Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. A postmortem study Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995 151 4 1006 1010 7697223 
7 Afessa B  Tefferi A  Litzow MR  Peters SG   Outcome of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002 166 10 1364 1368 12406834 
8 Majhail NS  Parks K  Defor TE  Weisdorf DJ   Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage and infection-associated alveolar hemorrhage following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: related and high-risk clinical syndromes Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2006 12 10 1038 1046 17067910 
9 Afessa B  Tefferi A  Hoagland HC  Letendre L  Peters SG   Outcome of recipients of bone marrow transplants who require intensive-care unit support Mayo Clin Proc 1992 67 2 117 122 1545573 
10 Afessa B  Tefferi A  Dunn WF  Litzow MR  Peters SG   Intensive care unit support and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation III performance in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients Crit Care Med 2003 31 6 1715 1721 12794410 
11 Jackson SR  Tweeddale MG  Barnett MJ    Admission of bone marrow transplant recipients to the intensive care unit: outcome, survival and prognostic factors Bone Marrow Transplant 1998 21 7 697 704 9578310 
12 Crawford SW  Petersen FB   Long-term survival from respiratory failure after marrow transplantation for malignancy Am Rev Respir Dis 1992 145 3 510 514 1546828 
13 Khassawneh BY  White P Jr  Anaissie EJ  Barlogie B  Hiller FC   Outcome from mechanical ventilation after autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation Chest 2002 121 1 185 188 11796449 
14 Scott PH  Morgan TJ  Durrant S  Boots RJ   Survival following mechanical ventilation of recipients of bone marrow transplants and peripheral blood stem cell transplants Anaesth Intensive Care 2002 30 3 289 294 12075635 
15 Rubenfeld GD  Crawford SW   Withdrawing life support from mechanically ventilated recipients of bone marrow transplants: a case for evidence-based guidelines Ann Intern Med 1996 125 8 625 633 8849146 
16 Torrecilla C  Cortés JL  Chamorro C    Prognostic assessment of the acute complications of bone marrow transplantation requiring intensive therapy Intensive Care Med 1988 14 4 393 398 3042827 
17 Crawford SW  Schwartz DA  Petersen FB  Clark JG   Mechanical ventilation after marrow transplantation. Risk factors and clinical outcome Am Rev Respir Dis 1988 137 3 682 687 3278664 
18 Fouret PJ  Touboul JL  Mayaud CM  Akoun GM  Roland J   Pulmonary Kaposi’s sarcoma in patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome: a clinicopathological study Thorax 1987 42 4 262 268 3616983 
19 Zamora MR  Warner ML  Tuder R  Schwarz MI   Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage and systemic lupus erythematosus. Clinical presentation, histology, survival, and outcome Medicine (Baltimore) 1997 76 3 192 202 9193454 
20 Teague CA  Doak PB  Simpson IJ  Rainer SP  Herdson PB   Good-pasture’s syndrome: an analysis of 29 cases Kidney Int 1978 13 6 492 504 362037 
21 Wojno KJ  Vogelsang GB  Beschorner WE  Santos GW   Pulmonary hemorrhage as a cause of death in allogeneic bone marrow recipients with severe acute graft-versus-host disease Transplantation 1994 57 1 88 92 8291120 
22 Newsome BR  Morales JE   Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage South Med J 2011 104 4 269 274 21606695 
23 Mackenzie IM  Tunnicliffe B   Blast injuries to the lung: epidemiology and management Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2011 366 1562 295 299 21149366 
24 Elsayed NM  Gorbunov NV  Kagan VE   A proposed biochemical mechanism involving hemoglobin for blast overpressure-induced injury Toxicology 1997 121 1 81 90 9217317 
25 Gorbunov NV  Asher LV  Ayyagari V  Atkins JL   Inflammatory leukocytes and iron turnover in experimental hemorrhagic lung trauma Exp Mol Pathol 2006 80 1 11 25 16137675 
26 Elsayed NM  Gorbunov NV   Pulmonary biochemical and histological alterations after repeated low-level blast overpressure exposures Toxicol Sci 2007 95 1 289 296 17060374 
27 Henke D  Falk RJ  Gabriel DA   Successful treatment of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage with activated factor VII Ann Intern Med 2004 140 6 493 494 15023729 
28 Dabar G  Harmouche C  Jammal M   Efficacy of recombinant activated factor VII in diffuse alveolar haemorrhage Rev Mal Respir 2011 28 1 106 111 [Article in French.] 21277485 
29 Hicks K  Peng D  Gajewski JL   Treatment of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage after allogeneic bone marrow transplant with recombinant factor VIIa Bone Marrow Transplant 2002 30 12 975 978 12476294 
30 Pastores SM  Papadopoulos E  Voigt L  Halpern NA   Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage after allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation: treatment with recombinant factor VIIa Chest 2003 124 6 2400 2403 14665531 
31 Heslet L  Nielsen JD  Levi M  Sengeløv H  Johansson PI   Successful pulmonary administration of activated recombinant factor VII in diffuse alveolar hemorrhage Crit Care 2006 10 6 R177 17184515 
32 Estella A  Jareño A  Perez-Bello Fontaiña L   Intrapulmonary administration of recombinant activated factor VII in diffuse alveolar haemorrhage: a report of two case stories Cases J 2008 1 1 150 18789132 
33 Grochova M  Kalnasova B  Firment J    Pulmonary administration of activated recombinant factor VII Bratisl Lek Listy 2011 112 1 29 33 21452776 
34 Colin AA  Shafieian M  Andreansky M   Bronchoscopic instillation of activated recombinant factor VII to treat diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in a child Pediatr Pulmonol 2010 45 4 411 20187104 
35 Logan AC  Yank V  Stafford RS   Off-label use of recombinant factor VIIa in US hospitals: analysis of hospital records Ann Intern Med 2011 154 8 516 522 21502649 
36 Levi M  Levy JH  Andersen HF  Truloff D   Safety of recombinant activated factor VII in randomized clinical trials N Engl J Med 2010 363 19 1791 1800 21047223 
37 Stanworth SJ  Birchall J  Doree CJ  Hyde C   Recombinant factor VIIa for the prevention and treatment of bleeding in patients without haemophilia Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007 2 CD005011 17443565 
38 Fan LL  Deterding RR  Langston C   Pediatric interstitial lung disease revisited Pediatr Pulmonol 2004 38 5 369 378 15376335
