
==== Front
BiologicsBiologics: Targets & TherapyBiologics : Targets & Therapy1177-54751177-5491Dove Medical Press 10.2147/BTT.S19099btt-5-071ReviewGut microbiota: next frontier in understanding human health and development of biotherapeutics Prakash Satya Rodes Laetitia Coussa-Charley Michael Tomaro-Duchesneau Catherine Biomedical Technology and Cell Therapy Research Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Engineering and Artificial Cells and Organs Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, CanadaCorrespondence: Satya Prakash, Biomedical Technology and Cell Therapy Research Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Engineering and Artificial Cells and Organs Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, 3775 University Street, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 2B4, Canada, Tel +1 514 398 3676, Fax +1 514 398 7461, Email satya.prakash@mcgill.ca2011 2011 11 7 2011 5 71 86 8 7 2011 © 2011 Prakash et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.2011This is an Open Access article which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.The gut microbiota is a remarkable asset for human health. As a key element in the development and prevention of specific diseases, its study has yielded a new field of promising biotherapeutics. This review provides comprehensive and updated knowledge of the human gut microbiota, its implications in health and disease, and the potentials and limitations of its modification by currently available biotherapeutics to treat, prevent and/or restore human health, and future directions. Homeostasis of the gut microbiota maintains various functions which are vital to the maintenance of human health. Disruption of the intestinal ecosystem equilibrium (gut dysbiosis) is associated with a plethora of human diseases, including autoimmune and allergic diseases, colorectal cancer, metabolic diseases, and bacterial infections. Relevant underlying mechanisms by which specific intestinal bacteria populations might trigger the development of disease in susceptible hosts are being explored across the globe. Beneficial modulation of the gut microbiota using biotherapeutics, such as prebiotics, probiotics, and antibiotics, may favor health-promoting populations of bacteria and can be exploited in development of biotherapeutics. Other technologies, such as development of human gut models, bacterial screening, and delivery formulations eg, microencapsulated probiotics, may contribute significantly in the near future. Therefore, the human gut microbiota is a legitimate therapeutic target to treat and/or prevent various diseases. Development of a clear understanding of the technologies needed to exploit the gut microbiota is urgently required.

gut microbiotahuman healthdysbiosisbiotherapeuticsprobioticsmicroencapsulation
==== Body
Introduction
The human gastrointestinal tract houses a huge microbial ecosystem, the gut microbiota. This intestinal ecosystem is partially responsible for maintaining human health. However, particular changes in the ecosystem might contribute to the development of certain diseases. With this in mind, there is a need for an exhaustive review on the functions of the gut microbiota, occurrence of gut dysbiosis (alteration of the microbiota), mechanisms by which intestinal bacteria can trigger development of disease, how this ecosystem can be exploited for understanding human health, development of biotherapeutics, expert opinion on current biotherapeutics, and future perspectives. This review presents a descriptive and comprehensive analysis on “the good, the bad, and the ugly” of the gut microbiota, and methods to study these and their modulation of human health.

Composition
The human gut microbiota represents the trillions of microorganisms located in our intestines. Collectively, the number of intestinal microbial cells is 10 times greater than the number of human body cells.1 It was recently demonstrated that the microbiome, which represents the collective genomes of the gut microbiota, is approximately 150 times larger than the human gene complement, with an estimated set of 3.3 million microbial genes.2 Seven bacterial divisions constitute the gut microbiota, ie, Firmicutes, Bacteroides, Proteobacteria, Fusobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, Cyanobacteria, and Actinobacteria, with Firmicutes and Bacteroides being the most abundant species.3 Bacterial communities exhibit quantitative and qualitative variations along the length of the gastrointestinal tract due to host factors (eg, pH, transit time, bile acids, digestive enzymes, and mucus), nonhost factors (eg, nutrients, medication, and environmental factors), and bacterial factors (eg, adhesion capacity, enzymes, and metabolic capacity).4

Acquisition
It is generally accepted that humans are born with a sterile gut. However, new evidence suggests that colonization of the gastrointestinal tract starts before birth, with the fetus ingesting amniotic fluid containing microbes.5 Subsequently, intestinal colonization is acquired during the first months of life, with aerobic and facultative anaerobic colonization, followed by obligate anaerobes and Bifidobacteria.6 Establishment of the gut microbiota is recognized as a complex process influenced by factors at the level of the host and of the microbes themselves.3

Exploration
Study of the composition of human colonic microbiota and metabolism has methodological and ethical limitations. Attempts to circumvent these limitations have led to the development of models. In vitro models are of interest for ecological, fermentation, and metabolic studies.7 These provide reproducible results and controlled mechanistic studies (Table 1). Fecal inocula are most often utilized as a representation of the intestinal microbiota.2 In vivo models for the exploration of the gut microbiota encompass various species of laboratory animals. Effects of the indigenous microbiota on the host have been determined by gnotobiology, ie, selective colonization of germ-free animals with defined organisms.8

Analysis
Until recently, the analysis of bacterial ecosystems was performed by growth on defined media, which has some limitations because this method is labor-intensive and, more importantly, only 80% of stool bacteria can be cultivated.6,8 As a consequence, new molecular techniques have been developed. In terms of qualitative measurements of the microbiota, techniques such as fingerprinting (denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis), terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism, ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis, and 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing are widely used.8–11 Specifically, genome sequencing has provided tremendous information in the microbial world, spearheading technologies such as microarrays.8 New automated parallel sequencing technologies, based on the 16S ribosomal RNA gene present in all prokaryotes, can offer a cost-effective solution for rapid sequencing and identification of bacterial species of the gut. Prominent high-throughput sequencing technologies include 454 Life Sciences’ Genome Sequencer™, Applied Biosystems’ SOLiD™ 3 Plus system, Illumina’s Genome Analyzer IIx, and other technologies developed by Affymetrix, Helicos, Qiagen, and Microchip. For quantitative measurements of the gut microbiota, fluorescence in situ hybridization, catalyzed reporter deposition-fluorescence in situ hybridization, quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and scanning electron microscopy in situ hybridization, can be useful.8,10–12 Fluorescence in situ hybridization allows for the visualization of microorganisms in their natural environment using labeled probes specific for selected bacteria. This method has been used for the determination of changes in the bacterial populations of fecal homogenates and in tissue sections from individuals with certain diseases. Catalyzed reporter deposition-fluorescence in situ hybridization is a modified method of fluorescence in situ hybridization which allows for in situ amplification using horseradish peroxidase, enhancing bacterial cell detection in samples where ribosomal RNA is insufficient for fluorescence in situ hybridization.12 Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction is a recent and widely used technique for exploration of the roles of gut microflora in health and disease, based on the presence of specific RNA sequences. There is also scanning electron microscopic in situ hybridization which uses deposition of nanogold particles to enable detection12 (Table 2). Finally, metagenomics is an approach to analyze the genomic content of microbial communities living in a particular niche, such as the gut, and for identifying and quantifying the bacterial species present.8

The good
The gut microbiota performs essential functions in maintenance of health, including having protective, structural, and metabolic roles.

Essential metabolic functions
Metabolic functions of the gut microbiota include production of vitamin, amino acid synthesis, and bile acid biotransformation. Bile acid biotransformations, performed by microbial enzymes, have implications for cholesterol and glucose metabolism.13 Importantly, the microbiome provides biochemical pathways required for the fermentation of nondigestible substrates and endogenous mucus. Through fermentation, bacterial growth is stimulated, producing short-chain fatty acids and gases.14 The major short-chain fatty acids produced are acetate, butyrate, and propionate. Other bacterial end products include lactate, ethanol, succinate, formate, valerate, caproate, isobutyrate, 2-methyl-butyrate, and isovalerate. Bacterial fermentation is present in the cecum and colon, where the short-chain fatty acids are absorbed, stimulating the absorption of salts and water. One property of short-chain fatty acids is their trophic effect on the intestinal epithelium.14 Butyrate is the preferred energy source for epithelial cells, and is almost entirely cleared by the colonic epithelium. Acetate is the principal short-chain fatty acid in the colon and the primary substrate for cholesterol synthesis. Finally, propionate supplementation in the diet was shown to reduce cholesterol levels in vivo.15,16 Clinical trials have yet to confirm these observations. Therefore, the metabolic activities performed by the gut microbiota are various and essential for host metabolism (Figure 1).

Ensures protection
Pathogen displacement or “colonization resistance” is an accepted function of the gut microbiota. Commensal organisms prevent pathogenic colonization by competing for attachment sites and nutrients, and also through the production and secretion of antimicrobials. Those mechanisms are relevant for reducing the level of lipopolysaccharides, peptidoglycans, bacterial CpG-DNA motifs, and superantigens, which can all be detrimental to the host.17 The indigenous microbiota is also essential for development of the immune system.18 Germ-free mice display underdeveloped lymphatic systems, with fewer Peyer’s patches and isolated lymphoid follicles.19,20 Moreover, intestinal dendritic cells are fewer in germ-free animals, and there is evidence to support a role for bacterial signals in B cell development.21,22 Furthermore, signals from intestinal bacteria appear important for the development of regulatory T, T helper type 1 and 2 cells, and T helper 17 cells.23–25 The first commensal microorganism molecule shown to influence an immune response beneficially was capsular polysaccharide A, produced by Bacteroides fragilis.26 Short-chain fatty acids, such as butyrate, may also exert potent immunomodulatory effects by suppressing nuclear factor-kB activation and/or by acting on G-coupled receptors, as demonstrated with acetate.27,28 These concepts illustrate a dynamic relationship between the immune system and the microbiota. The intestinal mucosa averts threats by signaling to the innate immune system through pattern recognition receptors, such as toll-like receptors. Pattern recognition receptors recognize and bind to specific microbial macromolecules, referred to as microbial-associated molecular patterns. These include lipopolysaccharide, flagellin, peptidoglycan, and N-formylated peptides. In the intestinal mucosa, activation of pattern recognition receptors initiates nuclear factor-kB pathways, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and caspase-dependent signaling cascades. These lead to the production and release of protective peptides, cytokines, chemokines, and phagocytes. The result can be a protective response to commensal bacteria, an inflammatory response to pathogenic organisms, or a trigger of apoptosis. Therefore, commensal bacteria of the gastrointestinal tract play active roles in the development and homeostasis of the immune system, as shown in Figure 1.

Structural and histological function
The microbiota ensures intestinal structure and function. Firstly, the mucus layer, which reflects the balance between mucus secretion and bacterial degradation, constitutes an obstacle to the uptake of antigens and proinflammatory molecules.29 There is evidence indicating that butyrate reinforces the colonic defense barrier by inducing the secretion of mucins, trefoil factors, and antimicrobial peptides.30 Secondly, some bacterial communities may strengthen the barrier at the level of the tight junctions, ie, protein clusters that form a barrier between the lumen and the lamina propria. Moreover, the gut microbiota is involved in cell and tissue development. Butyrate regulates cell growth and differentiation, inhibiting transformed cell growth while encouraging reversion of cells from a neoplastic to a non-neoplastic phenotype.31 The cecum villi are longer and wider, while the colonic crypts are shorter and contain fewer cells in germ-free than conventionally reared animals, possibly due to an altered rate of epithelial cell turnover or to anatomical changes arising from a reduction in bacterial count.32 Moreover, indigenous microbes shape the development of the villus microvasculature, as demonstrated in germ-free animals colonized during or after completion of postnatal gut development.33 Therefore, most of the structural and morphological development of the gut contributes to and manages the gut bacterial system (Figure 1).

The bad
Dysbiosis is a state in which the microbiota becomes altered as a consequence of an alteration in the composition of the microbiota, a change in bacterial metabolic activity, and/or a shift in local distribution of communities. Many factors can alter the gastrointestinal ecosystem, including antibiotics, psychological and physical stresses, radiation, altered peristalsis, and dietary changes.34 At present, the focus is on the description of dysbiosis in a plethora of human disorders.

Autoimmune disease
Autoimmune diseases occur when the body’s immune system attacks and destroys healthy cells and tissues, as is the case in type 1 diabetes mellitus, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel diseases, and allergic asthma. Most often, the immune response is initiated by unknown factors. Alteration of the gut microbiota as a result of modern lifestyles is an attractive hypothesis to explain the rise in prevalence of celiac disease, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and inflammatory bowel diseases.

Celiac disease is an inflammatory disease of the small intestine that is triggered and maintained by the storage proteins of wheat, barley, and rye. Studies have investigated the composition of the microbiota in patients with celiac disease. Fecal samples from patients with celiac disease had reduced the proportions of Bifidobacterium, Clostridium histolyticum, Clostridium lituseburense, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and increased proportions of Bacteroides/Prevotella.35 In addition, increased proportions of total and Gram-negative bacteria, with an increase in Bacteroides and Escherichia coli in biopsies of patients with celiac disease in the active as compared with inactive disease state and control individuals, was shown by fluorescence in situ hybridization coupled with flow cytometry.36

Type 1 diabetes mellitus, characterized by insulin deficiency resulting from immune-mediated destruction of pancreatic β cells, is thought to be triggered by environmental factors in genetically susceptible individuals. Given that antibiotics prevented type 1 diabetes mellitus in biobreeding diabetes-prone rats and in nonobese diabetic mice, alteration of the microbiota has been associated with progression of type 1 diabetes mellitus.37,38 Moreover, evidence shows that bacterial communities from biobreeding diabetes-prone and diabetes-resistant rats differ, marked by a higher abundance of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium in diabetes-resistant rats.39

Inflammatory bowel diseases include ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. Crohn’s disease is characterized by patchy and transmural inflammation that may affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract, while ulcerative colitis is a chronic episodic inflammatory condition that involves only the large bowel.40 There is evidence that species belonging to the normal gut microbiota are involved in the etiology and/or maintenance of inflammatory processes. Reduced microbial diversity, increased Bacteroidetes and Enterobacteriaceae, and decreased Firmicutes were all observed in patients with inflammatory bowel diseases.41 Another clinical study observed that Eubacterium rectale, B. fragilis, Bacteroides vulgatus, Ruminococcus albus, R. callidus, R. bromii, and F. prausnitzii were 5–10-fold more abundant in healthy subjects than in patients with Crohn’s disease, while Enterococcus spp, C. difficile, E. coli, Shigella flexneri, and Listeria spp were more abundant in the Crohn’s disease group.42 Thus, inflammatory bowel diseases, celiac disease, and type 1 diabetes mellitus are autoimmune diseases marked by an alteration of the gut microbiota. Autoimmune regulation may be linked with the disruption of the intestinal ecosystem.

Allergic disease
The etiology of allergic diseases is ambiguous. They may be initiated and maintained by environmental factors associated with a change in gut microbiota. Correlations between allergic disease and altered fecal microbiota, antibiotic use, and dietary changes have been made.43–45 Studies of the microbiota in allergic patients have shown decreased intestinal Bifidobacteria counts, an increased prevalence of B. fragilis, and higher counts of Staphylococcus aureus and E. coli.46–48 A study reported higher levels of Bifidobacterium adolescentis and Lactobacilli Group I (Lactobacillus rhamnosus, L. paracasei, L. casei) in fecal samples of nonallergic compared with allergic children.43 Hence, it is clear that differing gut microbial communities have been observed in allergic patients. Further clinical studies are required on several age-matched groups of allergic versus control individuals classified with short age intervals.

Irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome is characterized by abdominal pain, bloating, and changes in bowel habit, in the absence of any overt mucosal abnormality. Observations have directed attention towards the gut microbiota, identifying a postinfectious variant of the syndrome, ie, evidence that antibiotics induced a reduction in the microbiota which may be a risk factor, and the proposal that some patients may have bacterial overgrowth in the small bowel.49 Studies have demonstrated that patients with irritable bowel syndrome have fewer intestinal Bifidobacteria, Collinsella aerofaciens, Coprococcus eutactus, and Clostridium cocleatum, and an increase in Veillonella and Enterobacteriaeae.50–52 Thus, irritable bowel syndrome is associated with abnormal intestinal communities, but their significance in the pathogenesis of irritable bowel syndrome remains unclear.

Metabolic disease
There are genetic and environmental factors that influence obesity, with the impact of the gut microbiota being well documented. Research on the microbiota of obese mice establishes the link between obesity, weight gain, and intestinal dysbiosis. Findings indicate that a high-fat diet modulates the microbiota independently of obesity.53 Mice genetically predisposed to develop obesity (ob/ob) harbor more Firmicutes and fewer Bacteroidetes.54 Studies in human twins concordant for obesity have demonstrated that the fractional representation of Bacteroidetes is directly correlated with leanness.55 Moreover, microbiota transplantation from normal chow-fed ob/ob and Western diet-fed wild-type to germ-free wild-type mice caused an adiposity increase greater than that caused by transplantation from wild-type donors fed standard chow.56,57 This demonstrates a causal effect of intestinal bacteria on development of obesity. Aberrant development of the microbiota might precede obesity, because the childhood representation of Bifidobacteria and S. aureus has been suggested to predict the development of adulthood obesity in an inverse and direct manner.58 In light of these findings, a study was initiated which demonstrated that total short-chain fatty acids were higher in an obese group and individual short-chain fatty acid proportions shifted towards propionate in overweight subjects.59 It is assumed that gut dysbiosis may contribute to the development of obesity.

Type 2 diabetes is characterized by defects in insulin secretion and action. Research has characterized the fecal microbiota composition of adults with type 2 diabetes and showed reduced proportions of Firmicutes and Clostridia.60 The ratios of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes, as well as Bacteroides/Prevotella to Clostridium coccoides and E. rectale groups correlated positively with plasma glucose concentration. Similarly, class β-Proteobacteria was highly enriched in diabetic individuals and positively correlated with plasma glucose. Other authors have demonstrated that Prevotella was associated with healthy groups, while Bacteroides and Parabacteroides were prevalent in diabetic patients, who also had fewer counts of fecal B. vulgatus and Bifidobacteria.61 The evidence demonstrates that metabolic diseases are associated with a shift in the balance of the microbiota. Confirmation of gut dysbiosis in type 2 diabetes patients requires additional clinical trials.

Alcoholic liver disease
Alcoholic liver disease, arising from excessive ingestion of alcohol, is the primary cause of liver failure in the Western world. It has been demonstrated in one study that daily alcohol consumption affects composition of the colonic microbiota.62 The authors pointed to a specific fingerprint of dysbiotic microbiota which could potentially identify susceptible heavy drinkers at high risk for alcoholic liver disease. Further examination is required to support fully the link between gut dysbiosis and alcoholic liver disease.

Bacterial infection
It is well established that a disruption in the commensal microbiota increases susceptibility to enteric infections. Antibiotic-treated mice are particularly useful for studying colitis induced by Salmonella spp, Shigella spp, and E. coli infections. In addition, in murine Citrobacter rodentium infections, pathogen colonization is associated with a reduced total density and a relative increase in γ-Proteobacteria.63 Furthermore, elderly patients with C. difficile-associated diarrhea demonstrate reduced numbers of Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Bifidobacteria, and a greater diversity of facultative species, ie, Lactobacilli and Clostridia.64 The evidence suggests an association between disruption of the gut microbiota and bacterial infections, further accentuating the dysbiosis.

Colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer is a disease of the Western world, with the most common type being adenocarcinomas which develop from glandular cells lining the wall of the bowel.65 Genetic and induced models of intestinal neoplasia have shown that, under germ-free conditions, colitis and tumor formation are reduced compared with monoassociated and conventional animals.66–68 In addition, in vivo colonization of enterotoxigenic B. fragilis a human colonic commensal bacteria, has been linked to the development of colorectal cancer.69 Furthermore, colorectal cancer patients demonstrate decreased levels of E. rectale and F. prausnitzii compared with healthy volunteers, and increased populations of E. faecalis.70 Recently, a clinical trial showed that patients with colorectal cancer had significant elevation of the Bacteroides-Prevotella population.71 Therefore, studies that have examined the gut microbiota in colorectal cancer have reported an association between microbiota and pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. The abnormal profile of bacterial communities, activities, and metabolites in human disease is summarized in Table 3.

The ugly
Altered composition of the human gastrointestinal ecosystem can lead to physiological changes in the intestinal environment, disrupting the functions of the microbiota and having serious consequences for human health.

Altered gut microbiota may trigger serious immune deregulation
The hygiene hypothesis predicts that increased hygiene, use of antibiotics, and sterile food preparation result in isolation of the immune system from positive microbial exposure, favoring susceptibility to immune-mediated disorders.72 Epidemiological studies have linked a decreasing burden of infection with a rising incidence of immunological disorders.73,74 The presence of environmental viral agents are also associated with the incidence of spontaneous type 1 diabetes.75 Furthermore, the microbiota of nonobese diabetic mice deficient for the myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) signaling molecule protects mice against developing diabetes.76 Inactivation of MyD88 leads to gut dysbiosis, further inhibiting the autoimmunity occurring in MyD88−/− germ-free nonobese diabetic mice. These findings support a causal inverse relationship between microbial exposure and immunological disorders.

There are several underlying mechanisms of the hygiene hypothesis, ie: lack of microbial burden in childhood, predisposing the host to allergic disorders due to a T helper type 1/type 2 deviation; defective maturation of regulatory T cells as a consequence of modern lifestyles; antigenic competition from infectious agents inhibiting responses to weak antigens; protection from allergic diseases through mechanisms independent of their constitutive antigens, leading to stimulation of nonantigen-specific receptors; and development of an aggressive immune response caused by genetic hyperimmunoreactivity triggered by dysbiosis.72 Therefore, the disruption of cross-talk between the commensal microbiota and the immune system, as a result of modern lifestyles, may lead to development of allergic, autoimmune, and autoimmune-associated diseases (Figure 2A).

Specific gut dysbiosis can engender metabolic endotoxemia
Obesity and type 2 diabetes are associated with chronic low-grade inflammation and endotoxemia. Lipopolysaccharide administration and a high-fat diet lead to an increase in adipose tissue, impaired glucose tolerance, and insulin resistance, while dietary modulation reverses this phenotype.77,78 Chronic inflammation, elicited by endotoxemia, may cause activation of the immune system. The importance of gut-derived endotoxins in alcoholic liver disease has also been supported.79 Circulating endotoxin levels were increased in mice and rats following chronic alcohol ingestion, while antibiotic treatment provided protection from alcoholic liver disease. In addition, plasma endotoxins were augmented in patients with alcoholic liver disease. The evidence also suggests that endotoxins contribute to the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, considered to be a hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome and obesity. Indeed, plasma endotoxins are higher in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and are associated with intestinal overgrowth and induction of hepatic toll-like receptor 4.80,81 Gut permeability, which influences the systemic distribution of endotoxins, may further induce metabolic endotoxemia. Mice fed a high-fat diet demonstrate increased gut permeability and metabolic endotoxemia, associated with disruption of tight junction proteins.82 Furthermore, an increase in Bifidobacteria induced by nutritional supplements is correlated with an improved gut barrier, lower portal lipopolysaccharide levels, and lower inflammatory tone in ob/ob mice.83 Taken together, we suggest that gut dysbiosis, characterized by decreased Bifidobacteria and increased lipopolysaccharide release, disrupts the epithelial barrier, resulting in a leaky gut and leading to colonic and systemic inflammation which contributes to alcoholic liver disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, obesity, and type 2 diabetes (Figure 2B). It remains unclear which Gram-negative bacteria are responsible for the increase in lipopolysaccharide.

Bacterial infection might be promoted by gut dysbiosis
Pathogenic bacteria can invade the gastrointestinal tract and infect the body, producing sepsis, shock, multisystem organ failure, and death of the host. The mechanisms by which pathogens overcome obstacles to achieve successful infection are uncertain. Pathogenic infections might be facilitated by disruption of the intestinal ecosystem by environmental factors. A mechanism based on the triggering of the host’s immune defenses was elucidated using models of C. rodentium (mimicking diarrheal pathogen-associated inflammation), Campylobacter jejuni infection, and chemically and genetically induced models of intestinal inflammation are used for altered microbiota investigations.63 An overgrowth of Enterobacteriaceae was observed in all models, indicating that inflammation-induced microbiota changes support colonization by aero-tolerant bacteria. The inflammatory response, triggered by the invading pathogen, may function to enhance its colonization, further facilitating its virulence. Thus, alteration of the gut microbiota, initiated by host and environmental factors, may participate in the initiation of diseases caused by infectious agent (Figure 3A).

Abnormal bacterial metabolite levels may trigger cancer
Many etiological bacterial mechanisms have been hypothesized to promote carcinogenesis. Amongst those, hydrogen sulfide, a product of bacterial sulfate reduction, appears to be linked to the incidence of chronic disorders, such as ulcerative colitis and colorectal cancer. Because DNA strand breaks are associated with mutation and promotion of carcinogenesis, bacterial hydrogen sulfide may be responsible for the induction of mutations in the development of sporadic colorectal cancer.84 Reactive oxygen intermediates also cause DNA damage, and their numbers are higher in chronic inflammation and colorectal cancer, as observed in the fecal matrix.85 In addition, hydrophobic bile acids have been shown to promote colorectal carcinogenesis by inducing micronuclei formation, mitotic perturbations, and decreases in spindle checkpoint proteins.86 Intestinal bacteria may also function as promoters of carcinogenesis by increasing the progression of chemically induced aberrant crypt foci.87,88 Therefore, despite limited studies on the occurrence of gut dysbiosis and tumorigenesis, we bring to a close the mechanisms that support the implication of detrimental intestinal bacteria in promoting carcinogenesis (Figure 3B).

Gut microbiota alters energy and lipid metabolism
Gordon et al investigated the influence of microbiota on fat and lipid metabolism, demonstrating that reared mice have more body and gonadal fat than germ-free mice, despite reduced chow consumption. The increase in fat was accompanied with increased fasting glucose and insulin levels and an insulin-resistant state.89 Transplantation of the microbiota from ob/ob mice to germ-free mice resulted in a greater increase in body fat than from lean donors.56 Two mechanisms are suggested. First, colonization of the gut may suppress expression of fasting-induced adipose factor, increasing the activity of lipoprotein lipase, leading to an increased uptake of fatty acids and triglyceride storage. The second mechanism is based on the processing of dietary polysaccharides by bacteria that may increase hepatic lipogenesis through expression of sterol response element binding protein 1 and carbohydrate response element binding protein. Other authors suggest that the complex formed by short-chain fatty acids and G protein-coupled receptor 41 may increase circulating levels of peptide YY, which may further increase energy extraction from the diet.90 It was also demonstrated that in the absence of gut microbiota, AMP-activated protein kinase activity is constitutively higher in muscle, leading to higher phosphorylation of its specific target, acetyl CoA carboxylase, promoting mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation.91 Finally, the microbiota may affect insulin resistance and steatosis by regulating choline metabolism.92 Thus, alteration of the gut microbiota causes defective energy and lipid metabolism leading to the development of metabolic disease (Figure 4).

Alter the gut microbiota to favor human health
The relationship between health and the gastrointestinal system is established. Due to the inherent plasticity of microbiota, one can consider exploiting it to develop biotherapeutics.

Probiotics
Probiotics are “live microorganisms, which, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host”.93 Probiotics have been shown to have effects on irritable bowel diseases, metabolic syndromes, enterocolitis, immunomodulation, pathogen defense, and urogenital infections.94–96 Mechanisms of probiotics include remodeling of microbial communities and suppression of pathogens, suppression of proinflammatory factors, effects on epithelial cell differentiation, and proliferation and promotion of the intestinal barrier.97

Microencapsulation and other methods for targeted delivery
Microencapsulation, which provides living cells with a physical protection barrier, is primarily used to improve probiotic activity during gastrointestinal transit, while allowing the diffusion of metabolites and substrates into and out of the capsule. Secondly, it offers a bacterial delivery system targeted to a specific part of the gastrointestinal tract. Thirdly, microencapsulation ensures immunomodulation by preventing interaction between the host immune system and entrapped probiotic bacterial cells.98,99 In addition, there are other excellent formulations available for delivery of probiotic cells to achieve optimal clinical benefits.

Prebiotics
Prebiotics are “nondigestible food ingredients that beneficially affect the host by selectively stimulating the growth and/or the activity of one or a limited number of bacteria in the colon, and thus improves host health”.100 A prebiotic should not be hydrolyzed by human intestinal enzymes, but selectively fermented by bacteria, benefiting the host. Effects of prebiotic administration include reduced triglyceride levels, improved postprandial glucose levels, and reduced intestinal permeability and inflammation.100–102 In addition to prebiotics, known foods and drugs are also being developed to enhance the growth of health-promoting bacterial cell populations in the gastrointestinal tract, with the aim of preventing or treating a number of diseases.

Symbiotic association of probiotics and prebiotics
It has been hypothesized that in combining probiotics and prebiotics, one would not only achieve the combined effects of the two components, but also a synergistic effect. This is the principle on which symbiotics are based.103

Antibiotics combined with probiotics
The evidence suggests that probiotic bacteria suppress gastrointestinal pathogens and potentiate antibiotic efficacy by production of antibacterial factors, including bacteriocins.97 With the use of antibiotic drugs, bacterial overgrowth can be controlled, and translocation in specific conditions of increased risk can be prevented.83 In brief, strong evidence is available that probiotics, prebiotics, and antibiotics can successfully exploit the natural microbial composition of the gut to treat and/or prevent diseases for improving human health and well being.

Future directions
Advances in exploring and modeling the microbiota are generating a wealth of knowledge about human health and disease, and contributing to the development of new biotherapeutics. Significant advances have been made in the selection and characterization of specific probiotic cultures and/or prebiotics and subsequent substantiation of health claims relating to their consumption. However, there is still much skepticism in the medical community with respect to the effects demonstrated. Firstly, the disease model used affects the results significantly. Secondly, there is a lack of large, controlled, randomized human trials supporting the beneficial claims. Thirdly, the harsh conditions of the gastrointestinal tract can impede the delivery of probiotic bacterial cells. One significant advantage of using prebiotics as opposed to probiotics is that they overcome the viability issue. Prebiotics are, by definition, not hydrolyzed by enzymes during gastrointestinal transit and, therefore end up being available to stimulate selective growth of gut microbiota. Nevertheless, it is hardly possible to demonstrate the selectivity criterion of prebiotics. On the contrary, microencapsulation of probiotic bacteria is a delivery method that overcomes the viability issue and is also selective.

Therefore, it is easy to envisage that microencapsulated probiotics may soon be available on the market, and research in the long term may focus on developing formulations combining microencapsulated probiotics, prebiotics and/or antibiotics. The main challenge is developing suitable models to characterize and understand the microbiota, and developing effective treatment formulations, such as targeted delivery of probiotics within the gastrointestinal tract.

Towards new models of human gut microbiota
In vitro models of the human microbiota are essential to screen, characterize, develop, and perform mechanistic studies under controlled parameters. To test the therapies being developed effectively, special attention has to be directed to the development and optimization of in vitro models of the microbiota, given that these are rare. Models to mimic the whole gastrointestinal tract and specific compartments are essential. The challenge is to create a fermentation system featuring microbial diversity similar to that in the human gastrointestinal tract. Due to sampling complications, the microbiota of a fecal inoculum is assumed to be representative of the intestinal microbiota.104 The computer-controlled dynamic human gastrointestinal model consists of a succession of five vessels: the stomach, the small intestine, and the ascending, transverse, and descending colon (Figures 5A and 5B).105,106 Temperature, pH, and anaerobic parameters are all controlled using Labview® software. The system is equipped with portholes for the addition of medium, the removal of spent culture, and the administration of therapeutics. Attention is also needed to simulate the bacterial microhabitat of the intestines, because the metabolism and functioning of the mucosal-associated microbiota differ from those free-living in the lumen.106 Efforts should be made to understand the effect of gastrointestinal tract adhesion of bacterial cells on bacterial metabolism by designing a model to investigate adhesion of probiotics for gut microbiota modulation.

Microencapsulation to boost efficacy of probiotic treatment
There are many methods for microencapsulation of bacterial cells available, and these can be effectively used in boosting probiotic oral delivery and clinical efficacy. Our research interest is mainly focused on the customization of a myriad of microencapsulated probiotic formulations using polyelectrolyte complexation, a widely used technique based on the interaction of oppositely charged polymers that form a physical membrane around the probiotic.99,105–111 The physicochemical properties of the capsules are engineered to guarantee survival of the bacteria, appropriate diffusion of metabolites and substrates, and targeted delivery. In gastrointestinal tract simulators, the enzymatic activity, stability, and viability of microencapsulated probiotics have been demonstrated.105–109 Results confirm the potential of orally delivered microencapsulated bacteria to manage hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and colon cancer.108,111 For microencapsulated probiotics to be marketable, research must be directed at developing structural and functional models of the microbiota to test the therapeutic formulations. Finally, in vivo models should evaluate the efficacy of microencapsulated probiotic formulations while characterizing preclinical cellular and tissue responses. The potential of microencapsulated Lactobacillus fermentum to lower cholesterol and triglycerides in Bio F(1)B hamsters fed a hypercholesterolemic diet was investigated.108 Treatment with the bacterial formulation reduced total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglycerides, and also reduced the progression of atherosclerotic lesions. The antitumorigenic properties of microencapsulated probiotics in multiple intestinal neoplasia were also investigated in mice carrying a germline APC mutation.111 Oral administration of microencapsulated Lactobacillus acidophilus resulted in suppression of colon tumor incidence, multiplicity, and size. Preclinical trials confirm the potential of orally delivered microencapsulated probiotics for managing hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and colon cancer.

Conclusion
This is an extensive and timely review of the gut microbiota and its role in human health and disease. First described are the key players among the microbiota, how they develop into a network in the gastrointestinal tract, their roles in various gastrointestinal and other diseases, methods to study human gut microbiota, and associated health benefits and limitations. Interest in the microbiota arose after the realization that an altered balance in the gut could lead to disease. By using probiotics, prebiotics, and antibiotics, one can tune the composition of the gut to improve the health of the host. Optimization of methods to modulate and characterize the microbiota and probiotics still remains to be done. The microbiota itself can allow for the analysis of health, and biomarkers of a given microbiota can be indicative of disease. Although preliminary, two animal models have shown that microbial metabolism is correlated with specific patterns of metabolites excreted in urine.112 This could potentially be a significant breakthrough in the new realm of personalized medicine.

Gut microbiota is an area of research with potential for pure scientific exploration with significant biotherapeutic applications. It remains largely unexplored. This is due to the complexity of the microbiota and the difficulties in collection and analysis of data. In addition, lack of understanding of the role of bacterial cells in human health and lack of well defined clinical trials on known beneficial probiotics, other bacterial cells, and associated systems, such as delivery systems, are seriously hampering this very important area of biological therapy. Development of cutting-edge technologies for understanding human gut microbiota, their manipulations, and screening and development of cutting edge formulations for probiotic delivery, such as micro-encapsulation, are strongly needed, along with accurate in vitro models.

Highlights
The human gut microbiota is an asset for human homeostasis.

The human gut microbiota, which resides within the gastrointestinal tract system, is composed of trillions of microorganisms with tremendous diversity and complexity

The gut microbiota should be considered as a vital organ, carrying essential metabolic, protective, and structural/histological functions in maintaining body homeostasis, human health and other manifestations

An altered composition of the intestinal ecosystem, a state called gut dysbiosis, can lead to physiological changes in the intestinal environment, disrupting the functions of the gut microbiota, autoimmune, allergic, metabolic and alcoholic liver diseases, irritable bowel syndrome, colorectal cancer, and bacterial infections have all been linked to gut dysbiosis

Bacterial imbalances can be responsible for immunological deregulation, breakdown of colonization resistance, induction of systemic endotoxemia, production of carcinogenic compounds and alteration of energy and lipid metabolism

Due to the inherent plasticity of the gut microbiota, therapeutics such as probiotics, prebiotics, and antibiotics are used to modulate the human intestinal ecosystem to obtain better human health

Major efforts should be directed towards development of in vitro and in vivo models to understand the human gut microbiota and explore development of biotherapeutic possibilities and methods, such as microencapsulation, for suitable delivery of beneficial bacterial cells to the gastrointestinal tract and other systems for human health.

This work is supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, research operating grant MOP-64308 (to SP), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (to CTD), the Fonds Québécois de la Recherche sur la Nature et les Technologies (to MCC), and Micropharma Limited (to SP).

Disclosure

The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.

Figure 1 Main beneficial functions of the human gut microbiota. Circles represent the three principal classes of functions performed by the bacteria that inhabit the gut. Arrows represent causal relationships.

Abbreviation: SCFA, short chain fatty acid.

Figure 2 Proposed mechanisms whereby an altered microbial balance in the gut can lead to A) an increase in immune mediated disorders and B) chronic low-grade inflammation.

Abbreviations: Th, T helper type; CD14, cluster of differentiation 14; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; TLR4, toll-like receptor 4.

Figure 3 Proposed mechanism whereby an altered microbial balance in the gut can A) be driven by foreign pathogenic invasion and further increase the likelihood of future infections, and B) lead to the promotion of carcinogenesis.

Abbreviations: H2S, hydrogen sulfide; ROI, reactive oxygen intermediate.

Figure 4 Proposedmechanisms by which an altered balance of the gut microbiota can lead to dysfunctional energy and lipid metabolism.

Abbreviations: AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; ChREBP, carbohydrate regulatory element binding protein; FIAF, fasting-induced adipose factor; GPR41, G protein-coupled receptor 41; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; PYY, protein YY; SCFA, short-chain fatty acid; SREBP1, sterol regulatory element binding protein 1.

Figure 5 Computer-controlled dynamic human gastrointestinal (GI) model used for studies on the human gut microbiota. A) Schematic representation, B) photograph. vessels in series representing stomach, small intestine, ascending colon, transverse colon, and descending colon. All vessels can be continuously magnetically stirred; temperature can be controlled by the flow of hot water in the double jacketed vessel. Food can be given at a time interval and samples can be collected from any GI part at any time (eg, spent removal of the spent culture at defined intervals). This also allows for the administration of biotherapeutics, control of pH, enzyme, anerobic atmosphere and other GI parameters effecting gut microbiota.

Table 1 In vitro and in vivo models of the human gut microbiota and their potentials and limitations

Models	Description	Main use	Limitations	References	
In vitro					
Static batch system	Fresh feces or colonic contents suspended in buffer solution	Short-term metabolic and enzymatic studies	Rapid change in ecosystem composition	7	
Semicontinuous batch system	Chemostat culture system of semicontinuous flow
Inoculated with defined bacteria, feces, or colonic content	Long-term studies on metabolic, ecologic, and dietary fermentation	Host factors are ignored
Stability of ecosystem is assumed	7	
Continuous batch system	Chemostat culture system of continuous flow
Inoculated with defined bacteria, feces, or colonic content	Long-term studies on metabolic, ecologic, and dietary features of GI microbiota	Host factors are ignored
Complex system to set up
Stability of ecosystem is assumed	7,105,106	
In vivo					
Laboratory animals	Fresh feces or colonic contents from conventional microbiota animals	Metabolic, ecological, and preclinical studies	Differences between animals and humans gut microbiota composition	7,109,112	
Gnobiotic animals	Germ-free laboratory animals colonized with defined organisms or transferred microbiota from a laboratory animal or a human volunteer	Host-bacterial and bacterial-bacterial interaction studies	Alteration of bacterial interactions	7,10,49	
Human volunteers	Fresh feces or colonic contents from human volunteers	Metabolic, ecological, chemical, and clinical studies	Ethical issues
Relevance of feces/colonic contents to represent the overall GI microbiota	7,36,42	
Abbreviation: GI, gastrointestinal.

Table 2 Available techniques for human gut microbiota characterization

Techniques	Description	Main use	Limitations	Reference	
Culture-based	Defined media used to isolate bacterial populations	Quantification/characterization of isolated colonies	Bacteria uncultivable
Species/strains level hardly detected
Labor-intensive	8,6	
16S rRNA sequencing	Species/strains level sequencing	Bacterial identification	Extensive data analysis	8,9–11	
DGGE	Denaturation of small PCR amplicons from extracted community DNA and gel migration	Comparative studies	PCR amplicons too small to sequence information	8,11	
Terminal RFLP	Denaturation of full-length 16S rRNA PCR amplicons from extracted community DNA and gel migration	Communities comparison	Limited taxonomic resolution	8,11	
RIS analysis	PCR amplification of IS region between 16S–23S rRNA genes hybridized to fluorescently labeled primers	Characterization of complex bacterial communities	Complex bacterial identification
Lack of extensive database	8,11	
FISH	Hybridization of fluorescently labeled oligonucleotide probes to 16S rRNA specific of targeted bacteria	Quantification of targeted bacterial groups/species unidentified	Novel species/strains unidentified	8,10,11	
CARD-FISH	Modified FISH method: in situ amplification using horseradish peroxidase	Bacteria quantification if FISH inadequate	Novel species/strains unidentified	12	
SEM in situ hybridization	Combination of in situ hybridization and SEM	Quantification of targeted bacterial groups/species unidentified	Novel species/strains	12	
Quantitative PCR	Specific bacterial groups/species targeted from a mix culture by quantitative PCR primers	Quantitative studies of complex system	Novel species/strains unidentified
Strain required for standard curve	8,10,11	
DNA microarray	Set of regular arranged spots of DNA recognition elements positioned on microscopic slides	Screening of human gut microbial communities	Low detection limit
Hybridization biases
Novel species/strains unidentified	8	
Abbreviations: CARD, catalyzed reporter deposition; DGGE, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; ISR, intergenic spacer; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RFLP, restriction fragment length polymorphism; R, ribosomal; SEM, scanning electron microscopy.

Table 3 Imbalances of human gastrointestinal bacterial communities in human disease

Imbalance of human gastrointestinal bacterial communities		
Specific overabundance	
Specific shortage	
Health status	
	
Increase in	Human disease	Decrease in	
	
Gram negative, Bacteroides-Prevotella, Escherichia coli	Celiac disease	Gram-positive Bifidobacteria, Clostridium histolyticum and C. liteseburense, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii	
Enterobacteriaceae, Bacteroidetes, Enterococci, Clostridium difficile, E. coli, Shigella flexneri, and Listeria spp	Inflammatory bowel diseases	Firmicutes, Eubacterium rectale, Bacteroides fragilis, B. vulgatus, Ruminococcus albus, R. callidus, R. bromii, and F. prausnitzii	
Veillonella, Enterobacteriaceae	Irritable bowel syndrome	Bifidobacteria, Collinsella aerofaciens, Coprococcus eutactus, Clostridium cocleatum	
Staphylococcus aureus, E. coli, Bifidobacterium adolescentis, Lactobacilli, B. fragilis	Allergic diseases	Bifidobacteria	
Firmicutes	Obesity	Bacteroidetes, Bifidobacteria, Staphylococcus aureus	
β-Proteobacteria, Bacteroides, Parabacteroides	Type 2 diabetes	Firmicutes, Clostridia, Bifidobacteria, Bacteroides vulgatus	
Bacteroides, Prevotella, Enterococcus faecalis.	Colorectal cancer	E. rectale and F. prausnitzii.	
Note: Each bacteria group has been shown to be related to the disease, independently of one another.
==== Refs
References
1. Savage DC   Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract Annu Rev Microbiol 1977 31 107 133 334036 
2. Qin J  Li R  Raes J    A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing Nature 2010 464 59 65 20203603 
3. Backhed F  Ley RE  Sonnenburg JL  Peterson DA  Gordon JI   Host-bacterial mutualism in the human intestine Science 2005 307 1915 1920 15790844 
4. McConnell EL  Fadda HM  Basit AW   Gut instincts: Explorations in intestinal physiology and drug delivery Int J Pharm 2008 364 213 226 18602774 
5. Mshvildadze M  Neu J   The infant intestinal microbiome: Friend or foe? Early Hum Dev 2010 86 Suppl 1 67 71 20116944 
6. Adlerberth I  Wold AE   Establishment of the gut microbiota in Western infants Acta Paediatr 2009 98 229 238 19143664 
7. Rumney CJ  Rowland IR   In vivo and in vitro models of the human colonic flora Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 1992 31 299 331 1581008 
8. Sekirov I  Russell SL  Antunes LC  Finlay BB   Gut microbiota in health and disease Physiol Rev 2010 90 859 904 20664075 
9. Dethlefsen L  Eckburg PB  Bik EM  Relman DA   Assembly of the human intestinal microbiota Trends Ecol Evol 2006 21 517 523 16820245 
10. Blaut M  Collins MD  Welling GW  Dore J  Van LJ  de Vos W   Molecular biological methods for studying the gut microbiota: The EU human gut flora project Br J Nutr 2002 87 Suppl 2 S203 211 12088520 
11. McCartney AL   Application of molecular biological methods for studying probiotics and the gut flora Br J Nutr 2002 88 Suppl 1 S29 S37 12215179 
12. Peter H  Sommaruga R   An evaluation of methods to study the gut bacterial community composition of freshwater zooplankton J Plankton Res 2008 30 997 1006 
13. Lefebvre P  Cariou B  Lien F  Kuipers F  Staels B   Role of bile acids and bile acid receptors in metabolic regulation Physiol Rev 2009 89 147 191 19126757 
14. Wong JM  de SR  Kendall CW  Emam A  Jenkins DJ   Colonic health: Fermentation and short chain fatty acids J Clin Gastroenterol 2006 40 235 243 16633129 
15. Chen WJ  Anderson JW  Jennings D   Propionate may mediate the hypocholesterolemic effects of certain soluble plant fibers in cholesterol-fed rats Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1984 175 215 218 6320209 
16. Berggren AM  Nyman EM  Lundquist I  Bjorck IM   Influence of orally and rectally administered propionate on cholesterol and glucose metabolism in obese rats Br J Nutr 1996 76 287 294 8813902 
17. Tlaskalova-Hogenova H  Stepankova R  Hudcovic T    Commensal bacteria (normal microflora), mucosal immunity and chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases Immunol Lett 2004 93 97 108 15158604 
18. Round JL  Mazmanian SK   The gut microbiota shapes intestinal immune responses during health and disease Nat Rev Immunol 2009 9 313 323 19343057 
19. Cebra JJ  Periwal SB  Lee G  Lee F  Shroff KE   Development and maintenance of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT): The roles of enteric bacteria and viruses Dev Immunol 1998 6 13 18 9716901 
20. Bouskra D  Brezillon C  Berard M    Lymphoid tissue genesis induced by commensals through NOD1 regulates intestinal homeostasis Nature 2008 456 507 510 18987631 
21. Haverson K  Rehakova Z  Sinkora J  Sver L  Bailey M   Immune development in jejunal mucosa after colonization with selected commensal gut bacteria: A study in germ-free pigs Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2007 119 243 253 17643495 
22. Hapfelmeier S  Lawson MA  Slack E    Reversible microbial colonization of germ-free mice reveals the dynamics of IgA immune responses Science 2010 328 1705 1709 20576892 
23. Atarashi K  Tanoue T  Shima T    Induction of colonic regulatory T cells by indigenous Clostridium species Science 2011 331 337 341 21205640 
24. Mazmanian SK  Liu CH  Tzianabos AO  Kasper DL   An immunomodulatory molecule of symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system Cell 2005 122 107 118 16009137 
25. Ivanov II  Atarashi K  Manel N    Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria Cell 2009 139 485 498 19836068 
26. Mazmanian SK  Round JL  Kasper DL   A microbial symbiosis factor prevents intestinal inflammatory disease Nature 2008 453 620 625 18509436 
27. Luhrs H  Gerke T  Muller JG    Butyrate inhibits NF-kappaB activation in lamina propria macrophages of patients with ulcerative colitis Scand J Gastroenterol 2002 37 458 466 11989838 
28. Maslowski KM  Vieira AT  Ng A    Regulation of inflammatory responses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant receptor GPR43 Nature 2009 461 1282 1286 19865172 
29. Kleessen B  Blaut M   Modulation of gut mucosal biofilms Br J Nutr 2005 93 Suppl 1 S35 S40 15877893 
30. Hamer HM  Jonkers D  Venema K  Vanhoutvin S  Troost FJ  Brummer RJ   Review article: The role of butyrate on colonic function Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2008 27 104 119 17973645 
31. Salminen S  Bouley C  Boutron-Ruault MC    Functional food science and gastrointestinal physiology and function Br J Nutr 1998 80 Suppl 1 S147 S171 9849357 
32. Hill DA  Artis D   Intestinal bacteria and the regulation of immune cell homeostasis Annu Rev Immunol 2010 28 623 667 20192812 
33. Stappenbeck TS  Hooper LV  Gordon JI   Developmental regulation of intestinal angiogenesis by indigenous microbes via Paneth cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 99 15451 15455 12432102 
34. Hawrelak JA  Myers SP   The causes of intestinal dysbiosis: A review Altern Med Rev 2004 9 180 197 15253677 
35. De PG  Nadal I  Medina M    Intestinal dysbiosis and reduced immunoglobulin-coated bacteria associated with coeliac disease in children BMC Microbiol 2010 10 63 20181275 
36. Nadal I  Donat E  Ribes-Koninckx C  Calabuig M  Sanz Y   Imbalance in the composition of the duodenal microbiota of children with coeliac disease J Med Microbiol 2007 56 1669 1674 18033837 
37. Brugman S  Klatter FA  Visser JT    Antibiotic treatment partially protects against type 1 diabetes in the bio-breeding diabetes-prone rat. Is the gut flora involved in the development of type 1 diabetes? Diabetologia 2006 49 2105 2108 16816951 
38. Schwartz RF  Neu J  Schatz D  Atkinson MA  Wasserfall C   Antibiotic treatment partially protects against type 1 diabetes in the bio-breeding diabetes-prone rat. Is the gut flora involved in the development of type 1 diabetes? Diabetologia 2007 50 220 221 17119915 
39. Roesch LF  Lorca GL  Casella G    Culture-independent identification of gut bacteria correlated with the onset of diabetes in a rat model ISME J 2009 3 536 548 19225551 
40. MacFarlane S  Steed H  MacFarlane GT   Intestinal bacteria and inflammatory bowel disease Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 2009 46 25 54 19107650 
41. Walker AW  Sanderson JD  Churcher C    High-throughput clone library analysis of the mucosa-associated microbiota reveals dysbiosis and differences between inflamed and non-inflamed regions of the intestine in inflammatory bowel disease BMC Microbiol 2011 11 7 21219646 
42. Kang S  Denman SE  Morrison M    Dysbiosis of fecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease patients as revealed by a custom phylogenetic microarray Inflamm Bowel Dis 2010 16 2034 2042 20848492 
43. Sjogren YM  Jenmalm MC  Bottcher MF  Bjorksten B  Sverremark-Ekstrom E   Altered early infant gut microbiota in children developing allergy up to 5 years of age Clin Exp Allergy 2009 39 518 526 19220322 
44. Watanabe J  Fujiwara R  Sasajima N  Ito S  Sonoyama K   Administration of antibiotics during infancy promoted the development of atopic dermatitis-like skin lesions in NC/Nga mice Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 2010 74 358 363 20139606 
45. Gruber C  van Stuijvenberg M  Mosca F    Reduced occurrence of early atopic dermatitis because of immunoactive prebiotics among low-atopy-risk infants J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010 126 791 797 20832848 
46. Penders J  Stobberingh EE  Thijs C    Molecular fingerprinting of the intestinal microbiota of infants in whom atopic eczema was or was not developing Clin Exp Allergy 2006 36 1602 1608 17177684 
47. Vael C  Nelen V  Verhulst SL  Goossens H  Desager KN   Early intestinal Bacteroides fragilis  colonisation and development of asthma BMC Pulm Med 2008 8 19 18822123 
48. Watanabe S  Narisawa Y  Arase S    Differences in fecal microflora between patients with atopic dermatitis and healthy control subjects J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003 111 587 591 12642841 
49. Quigley EM   Bacterial flora in irritable bowel syndrome: Role in pathophysiology, implications for management J Dig Dis 2007 8 2 7 17261128 
50. Si JM  Yu YC  Fan YJ  Chen SJ   Intestinal microecology and quality of life in irritable bowel syndrome patients World J Gastroenterol 2004 10 1802 1805 15188510 
51. Kassinen A  Krogius-Kurikka L  Makivuokko H    The fecal microbiota of irritable bowel syndrome patients differs significantly from that of healthy subjects Gastroenterology 2007 133 24 33 17631127 
52. Tana C  Umesaki Y  Imaoka A  Handa T  Kanazawa M  Fukudo S   Altered profiles of intestinal microbiota and organic acids may be the origin of symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome Neurogastroenterol Motil 2010 22 512 515 19903265 
53. Hildebrandt MA  Hoffmann C  Sherrill-Mix SA    High-fat diet determines the composition of the murine gut microbiome independently of obesity Gastroenterology 2009 137 1716 1724 19706296 
54. Ley RE  Backhed F  Turnbaugh P  Lozupone CA  Knight RD  Gordon JI   Obesity alters gut microbial ecology Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 102 11070 11075 16033867 
55. Turnbaugh PJ  Hamady M  Yatsunenko T    A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins Nature 2009 457 480 484 19043404 
56. Turnbaugh PJ  Ley RE  Mahowald MA  Magrini V  Mardis ER  Gordon JI   An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest Nature 2006 444 1027 1031 17183312 
57. Turnbaugh PJ  Backhed F  Fulton L  Gordon JI   Diet-induced obesity is linked to marked but reversible alterations in the mouse distal gut microbiome Cell Host Microbe 2008 3 213 223 18407065 
58. Kalliomaki M  Collado MC  Salminen S  Isolauri E   Early differences in fecal microbiota composition in children may predict overweight Am J Clin Nutr 2008 87 534 538 18326589 
59. Schwiertz A  Taras D  Schafer K    Microbiota and short-chain fatty acid in lean and overweight healthy subjects Obesity (Silver Spring) 2010 18 190 195 19498350 
60. Larsen N  Vogensen FK  van den Berg FW    Gut microbiota in human adults with type 2 diabetes differs from non-diabetic adults PLoS One 2010 5 e9085 20140211 
61. Wu X  Ma C  Han L    Molecular characterisation of the faecal microbiota in patients with type II diabetes Curr Microbiol 2010 61 1 69 78 20087741 
62. Mutlu E  Keshavarzian A  Engen P  Forsyth CB  Sikaroodi M  Gillevet P   Intestinal dysbiosis: A possible mechanism of alcohol-induced endotoxemia and alcoholic steatohepatitis in rats Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2009 33 1836 1846 19645728 
63. Lupp C  Robertson ML  Wickham ME    Host-mediated inflammation disrupts the intestinal microbiota and promotes the overgrowth of Enterobacteriaceae Cell Host Microbe 2007 2 119 129 18005726 
64. Hopkins MJ  Macfarlane GT   Changes in predominant bacterial populations in human faeces with age and with Clostridium difficile infection J Med Microbiol 2002 51 448 454 11990498 
65. Snover DC   Update on the serrated pathway to colorectal carcinoma Hum Pathol 2011 42 1 10 20869746 
66. Vannucci L  Stepankova R  Kozakova H  Fiserova A  Rossmann P  Tlaskalova-Hogenova H   Colorectal carcinogenesis in germ-free and conventionally reared rats: Different intestinal environments affect the systemic immunity Int J Oncol 2008 32 609 617 18292938 
67. Kado S  Uchida K  Funabashi H    Intestinal microflora are necessary for development of spontaneous adenocarcinoma of the large intestine in T-cell receptor beta chain and p53 double-knockout mice Cancer Res 2001 61 2395 2398 11289103 
68. Uronis JM  Muhlbauer M  Herfarth HH  Rubinas TC  Jones GS  Jobin C   Modulation of the intestinal microbiota alters colitis-associated colorectal cancer susceptibility PLoS One 2009 4 e6026 19551144 
69. Wu S  Rhee KJ  Albesiano E    A human colonic commensal promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of T helper type 17 T cell responses Nat Med 2009 15 1016 1022 19701202 
70. Balamurugan R  Rajendiran E  George S  Samuel GV  Ramakrishna BS   Real-time polymerase chain reaction quantification of specific butyrate-producing bacteria, Desulfovibrio and Enterococcus faecalis in the feces of patients with colorectal cancer J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008 23 1298 1303 18624900 
71. Sobhani I  Tap J  Roudot-Thoraval F    Microbial dysbiosis in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients PLoS One 2011 6 e16393 21297998 
72. Okada H  Kuhn C  Feillet H  Bach JF   The ‘hygiene hypothesis’ for autoimmune and allergic diseases: An update Clin Exp Immunol 2010 160 1 9 20415844 
73. Roduit C  Wohlgensinger J  Frei R    Prenatal animal contact and gene expression of innate immunity receptors at birth are associated with atopic dermatitis J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011 127 179 185 21112617 
74. Phipatanakul W  Celedon JC  Raby BA    Endotoxin exposure and eczema in the first year of life Pediatrics 2004 114 13 18 15231902 
75. Like AA  Guberski DL  Butler L   Influence of environmental viral agents on frequency and tempo of diabetes mellitus in BB/Wor rats Diabetes 1991 40 259 262 1899407 
76. Wen L  Ley RE  Volchkov PY    Innate immunity and intestinal microbiota in the development of Type 1 diabetes Nature 2008 455 1109 1113 18806780 
77. Cani PD  Amar J  Iglesias MA    Metabolic endotoxemia initiates obesity and insulin resistance Diabetes 2007 56 1761 1772 17456850 
78. Cani PD  Neyrinck AM  Fava F    Selective increases of bifidobacteria in gut microflora improve high-fat-diet-induced diabetes in mice through a mechanism associated with endotoxaemia Diabetologia 2007 50 2374 2383 17823788 
79. Szabo G  Bala S   Alcoholic liver disease and the gut-liver axis World J Gastroenterol 2010 16 1321 1329 20238398 
80. Thuy S  Ladurner R  Volynets V    Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in humans is associated with increased plasma endotoxin and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 concentrations and with fructose intake J Nutr 2008 138 1452 1455 18641190 
81. Sabate JM  Jouet P  Harnois F    High prevalence of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in patients with morbid obesity: A contributor to severe hepatic steatosis Obes Surg 2008 18 371 377 18286348 
82. Cani PD  Bibiloni R  Knauf C    Changes in gut microbiota control metabolic endotoxemia-induced inflammation in high-fat diet-induced obesity and diabetes in mice Diabetes 2008 57 1470 1481 18305141 
83. Cani PD  Possemiers S  Van de Wiele T    Changes in gut microbiota control inflammation in obese mice through a mechanism involving GLP-2-driven improvement of gut permeability Gut 2009 58 1091 1103 19240062 
84. Attene-Ramos MS  Nava GM  Muellner MG  Wagner ED  Plewa MJ  Gaskins HR   DNA damage and toxicogenomic analyses of hydrogen sulfide in human intestinal epithelial FHs 74 Int cells Environ Mol Mutagen 2010 51 304 314 20120018 
85. Hope ME  Hold GL  Kain R  El-Omar EM   Sporadic colorectal cancer – role of the commensal microbiota FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005 244 1 7 15727814 
86. Payne CM  Crowley-Skillicorn C  Bernstein C  Holubec H  Moyer MP  Bernstein H   Hydrophobic bile acid-induced micronuclei formation, mitotic perturbations, and decreases in spindle checkpoint proteins: Relevance to genomic instability in colon carcinogenesis Nutr Cancer 2010 62 825 840 20661832 
87. Onoue M  Kado S  Sakaitani Y  Uchida K  Morotomi M   Specific species of intestinal bacteria influence the induction of aberrant crypt foci by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine in rats Cancer Lett 1997 113 179 186 9065820 
88. Ellmerich S  Scholler M  Duranton B    Promotion of intestinal carcinogenesis by Streptococcus bovis Carcinogenesis 2000 21 753 756 10753212 
89. Backhed F  Ding H  Wang T    The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101 15718 15723 15505215 
90. Samuel BS  Shaito A  Motoike T    Effects of the gut microbiota on host adiposity are modulated by the short-chain fatty-acid binding G protein-coupled receptor, Gpr41 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 16767 16772 18931303 
91. Backhed F  Manchester JK  Semenkovich CF  Gordon JI   Mechanisms underlying the resistance to diet-induced obesity in germ-free mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 104 979 984 17210919 
92. Dumas ME  Barton RH  Toye A    Metabolic profiling reveals a contribution of gut microbiota to fatty liver phenotype in insulin-resistant mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 12511 12516 16895997 
93. Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization  Health and nutritional properties of probiotics in food including powder milk with live lactic acid bacteria Report of a joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on evaluation of health and nutritional properties of probiotics in food including powder milk with live lactic acid bacteria Basel, Switzerland World Health Organization 2001 
94. Falagas ME  Betsi GI  Athanasiou S   Probiotics for prevention of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis: A review J Antimicrob Chemother 2006 58 266 272 16790461 
95. Mshvildadze M  Neu J   Probiotics and prevention of necrotizing enterocolitis Early Hum Dev 2009 85 S71 S74 19781874 
96. Reiff C  Kelly D   Inflammatory bowel disease, gut bacteria and probiotic therapy Int J Med Microbiol 2010 300 25 33 19800289 
97. Preidis GA  Versalovic J   Targeting the human microbiome with antibiotics, probiotics, and prebiotics: Gastroenterology enters the metagenomics era Gastroenterology 2009 136 2015 2031 19462507 
98. Prakash S  Jones ML   Artificial cell therapy: New strategies for the therapeutic delivery of live bacteria J Biomed Biotechnol 2005 4 56 
99. Prakash S  Martoni C   Toward a new generation of therapeutics: Artificial cell targeted delivery of live cells for therapy Appl Biochem Biotechnol 2006 128 1 22 16415477 
100. Gibson GR  Roberfroid MB   Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota: Introducing the concept of prebiotics J Nutr 1995 125 1401 1412 7782892 
101. Cani PD  Lecourt E  Dewulf EM    Gut microbiota fermentation of prebiotics increases satietogenic and incretin gut peptide production with consequences for appetite sensation and glucose response after a meal Am J Clin Nutr 2009 90 1236 1243 19776140 
102. Strowski MZ  Wiedenmann B   Probiotic carbohydrates reduce intestinal permeability and inflammation in metabolic diseases Gut 2009 58 1044 1045 19592687 
103. Rafter J  Bennett M  Caderni G    Dietary synbiotics reduce cancer risk factors in polypectomized and colon cancer patients Am J Clin Nutr 2007 85 488 496 17284748 
104. Gill SR  Pop M  Deboy RT    Metagenomic analysis of the human distal gut microbiome Science 2006 312 1355 1359 16741115 
105. Martoni C  Bhathena J  Jones ML  Urbanska AM  Chen H  Prakash S   Investigation of microencapsulated BSH active lactobacillus in the simulated human GI tract J Biomed Biotechnol 2007 13684 
106. Martoni C  Bhathena J  Urbanska AM  Prakash S   Microencapsulated bile salt hydrolase producing Lactobacillus reuteri for oral targeted delivery in the gastrointestinal tract Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2008 81 225 233 18719901 
107. Bhathena J  Kulamarva A  Urbanska AM  Martoni C  Prakash S   Microencapsulated bacterial cells can be used to produce the enzyme feruloyl esterase: Preparation and in-vitro analysis Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2007 75 1023 1029 17483939 
108. Bhathena J  Martoni C  Kulamarva A  Urbanska AM  Malhotra M  Prakash S   Orally delivered microencapsulated live probiotic formulation lowers serum lipids in hypercholesterolemic hamsters J Med Food 2009 12 310 319 19459731 
109. Chen H  Ouyang W  Jones M  Haque T  Lawuyi B  Prakash S   In-vitro analysis of APA microcapsules for oral delivery of live bacterial cells J Microencapsul 2005 22 539 547 16361197 
110. Ouyang W  Chen H  Jones ML    Novel multi-layer APPPA microcapsules for oral delivery: Preparation condition, stability and permeability Indian J Biochem Biophys 2009 46 491 497 20361712 
111. Urbanska AM  Bhathena J  Martoni C  Prakash S   Estimation of the potential antitumor activity of microencapsulated Lactobacillus acidophilus yogurt formulation in the attenuation of tumorigenesis in Apc(Min/+) mice Dig Dis Sci 2009 54 264 273 18633708 
112. Li M  Wang B  Zhang M    Symbiotic gut microbes modulate human metabolic phenotypes Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 2117 2122 18252821
