
==== Front
BioDrugs
BioDrugs
Biodrugs
1173-8804 1179-190X Springer International Publishing Cham 

19894777
23060341
10.2165/11315650-000000000-00000
Review Article
Strategies for Targeting Tetraspanin Proteins
Potential Therapeutic Applications in Microbial InfectionsHassuna Noha 1 Monk Peter N. 2 Moseley Gregory W. 3 Partridge Lynda J. l.partridge@sheffield.ac.uk 1 1 grid.11835.3e0000000419369262Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Krebs Institute, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK 
2 grid.11835.3e0000000419369262Department of Biomedicine and Medicine, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK 
3 grid.1002.30000 0004 1936 7857Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Monash, Victoria Australia 
4 grid.11835.3e0000000419369262Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN UK 
22 8 2012 
2009 
23 6 341 359
© Adis Data Information BV 2009This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.The identification of novel targets and strategies for therapy of microbial infections is an area of intensive research due to the failure of conventional vaccines or antibiotics to combat both newly emerging diseases (e.g. viruses such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and new influenza strains, and antibiotic-resistant bacteria) and entrenched, pandemic diseases exemplified by HIV. One clear approach to this problem is to target processes of the host organism rather than the microbe. Recent data have indicated that members of the tetraspanin superfamily, proteins with a widespread distribution in eukaryotic organisms and 33 members in humans, may provide such an approach.

Tetraspanins traverse the membrane four times, but are distinguished from other four-pass membrane proteins by the presence of conserved charged residues in the transmembrane domains and a defining ‘signature’ motif in the larger of the two extracellular domains (the EC2). They characteristically form promiscuous associations with one another and with other membrane proteins and lipids to generate a specialized type of microdomain: the tetraspanin-enriched microdomain (TEM). TEMs are integral to the main role of tetraspanins as ‘molecular organizers’ involved in functions such as membrane trafficking, cell-cell fusion, motility, and signaling. Increasing evidence demonstrates that tetraspanins are used by intracellular pathogens as a means of entering and replicating within human cells. Although previous investigations focused mainly on viruses such as hepatitis C and HIV, it is now becoming clear that other microbes associate with tetraspanins, using TEMs as a ‘gateway’ to infection.

In this article we review the properties and functions of tetraspanins/TEMs that are relevant to infective processes and discuss the accumulating evidence that shows how different pathogens exploit these properties in infection and in the pathogenesis of disease. We then investigate the novel and exciting possibilities of targeting tetraspanins for the treatment of infectious disease, using specific antibodies, recombinant EC2 domains, small-molecule mimetics, and small interfering RNA. Such therapies, directed at host-cell molecules, may provide alternative options for combating fast-mutating or newly emerging pathogens, where conventional approaches face difficulties.

Keywords
Severe Acute Respiratory SyndromeFeline Immunodeficiency VirusCanine Distemper VirusSevere Acute Respiratory SyndromeCholesterol Depletionissue-copyright-statement© Adis Data Information BV 2009
==== Body
1. Tetraspanin Functions
The tetraspanins constitute a diverse superfamily of trans-membrane protein, with 33 members in mammalian cells.[1] The family is ancient, with the first member having appeared some 570 million years ago, and is widespread amongst Eukaryota.[2] In accordance with the conservation of the family during evolution, the tetraspanins are involved in basic cell functions such as motility, fusion, and membrane trafficking,[3,4] and play roles in a range of physiological processes including sperm-egg fusion, antigen presentation, and tissue differentiation.[4–6] Tetraspanins are widely expressed with most cells having several members on their surface and/or on internal membranes. Whilst some tetraspanins (e.g. CD9 [TSPAN29], CD63 [TSPAN30], CD81 [TSPAN28], CD82 [TSPAN27], and CD151 [TSPAN24]) have a broad tissue distribution, others show restricted expression and are involved in more specialized functions (e.g. peripherin/rds [TSPAN22] and ROM-1 [TSPAN23] in photoreceptor rod cells[7]). Broadly, tetraspanins appear to act as molecular organizers by virtue of their propensity to interact as homo- or het-erodimers and form a novel type of microdomain known as tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs).[8] As components of TEMs, tetraspanins maintain a network of interactions with other membrane proteins (e.g. integrins, signaling molecules), regulating the assembly of multi-molecular signaling platforms.

Tetraspanins are relatively small membrane proteins (200–350 a.a.) and share common structural features: four transmembrane domains, two extracellular loops (EC1 and EC2), a small intracellular loop and two short intracytoplasmic termini.[9–12] Conserved charged amino acids within the transmembrane domains distinguish tetraspanins from other four-pass membrane proteins. In addition, the large extracellular domain (EC2, 70–140 amino acids) contains ‘signature motifs’ that are conserved amongst all tetraspanins, in particular Cys-Cys-Gly (figure 1). Disulfide bonding between the conserved cysteines in the EC2 produces a sub-loop structure; this region shows greatest variability between family members and between individual tetraspanin species homologues.[9] Some tetraspanins have additional two-to-four cysteines within this sub-loop that may also participate in disulfide bonding. The remainder of the EC2 region, comprising three alpha helices, shows greater sequence conservation. Based on x-ray crystallographic data for CD81, the tetraspanin EC2s are predicted to have a mushroom-like structure, where the relatively conserved ‘stalk’ supports a ‘head’ domain, which includes the variable sub-loop structure.[14] Unsurprisingly, the EC2 appears to represent the main site of functional specificity in tetraspanins[9] and most tetraspaninspecific monoclonal antibodies (mAb) bind to this region.[4]
Fig. 1 The tetraspanin CD63. The primary sequence of CD63 (single-letter amino acid code) is shown in the context of its membrane architecture. Key residues that are conserved in the tetraspanin superfamily are highlighted, including charged transmembrane residues and canonical cysteines. The sites of potential modification by N-glycosylation and palmitoylation are highlighted. The C-terminal residues GYEVM constitute a lysosomal targeting/internalization motif.[13] EC1= extracellular loop 1; EC2 = extracellular loop 2; N=asparagine; X = any amino acid except proline; S=serine; T=threonine.




There is increasing evidence that tetraspanins are involved in intracellular microbial infections. The tetraspanin CD151, also a blood group antigen, shows a high degree of pathogen-driven selection indicative of a role in host defence or vulnerability to infection.[15] Several infectious agents appear to have evolved to exploit tetraspanins at the level of pathogen entry, subsequent intracellular trafficking, replication or egress. Whilst associations of tetraspanins with the major human pathogens hepatitis C virus (HCV) and HIV are well documented,[16,17] the past few years have produced increasing evidence for their involvement in other types of infections, including those by Plasmodium species that cause malaria,[18] certain types of bacteria,[19] and even prions.[20] This has lead to interest in the possibility of targeting tetraspanins for the treatment of infectious disease. Here we will review recent advances in our understanding of the roles of tetraspanins in microbial disease, with emphasis on the effects of modulating tetraspanins/TEMs on pathogen infectivity and the potential application to therapies. Such therapies offer an alternative to antiviral drugs, antibiotics or vaccination, since they are directed at host-cell processes upon which the microbe is dependent (such as cell-cell fusion and intracellular trafficking) rather than the microbe itself. Targeting of tetraspanins may therefore provide new or complementary treatments for pathogens that are refractory to conventional approaches.

1.1 Tetraspanin Enriched Microdomains (TEMs)
In a few cases, tetraspanins have been shown to act as receptors, but most of the functions ascribed to them do not appear to require the binding of specific ligands. Instead, tetraspanins have been described as ‘molecular organizers’, forming structures called TEMs by the lateral association of tetraspanins with other tetraspanin and non-tetraspanin membrane proteins.[8] This network is also referred to as the tetraspanin web.[21] Examples of the >30 non-tetraspanin membrane proteins so far found in TEMs are members of the immunoglobulin and integrin super-families, MHC proteins, growth factors such as heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF), structural proteins such as claudins, intracellular adaptor molecules such as syntenin, and signaling molecules, such as phosphatidylinositol (PI)-4-kinase. The ability to form these associations helps explain the involvement of tetraspanins in so many interand intracellular functions.[22] The nature of the lateral interactions has been probed using panels of detergents to dissociate the TEM components. On this basis, different levels of interactions have been observed, ranging from strong associations (e.g. between CD151 and α3β1 integrin, stable even in 1% Triton X-100[23]) to much weaker associations (e.g. between CD9 and α3β1 integrin) stable only in less hydrophobic detergents such as Brij97.[24] TEMs are recoverable in low-density sucrose gradient fractions and are enriched in certain lipids (e.g. cholesterol and ganglioside GM3).[24] The palmitoylation of juxtamembrane cysteine residues of tetraspanins (figure 1) is critical for the assembly of TEM[25] and is necessary for tetraspanin/tetraspanin interactions, probably stabilized by membrane cholesterol.[26] Some integrins are also palmitoylated and this appears to promote their association with TEMs.[25] By comparison, lipid rafts have different biophysical properties, are more sensitive to cholesterol depletion and contain different arrays of membrane proteins.[27] Visualization of TEMs by fluorescence and electron microscopy[28] have suggested that cells contain many hundreds of TEMs, each ∼0.2 µm2 in area and containing multiple tetraspanins. Single-molecule analysis of CD9 in living cells has also recently shed light on tetraspanin dynamics in TEMs and the plasma membrane.[29] These studies indicate that tetraspanins can form stable interaction platforms that are distinct from lipid rafts and in permanent exchange with the rest of the membrane. CD9 mobility and partitioning into these platforms were shown to be palmitoylation and cholesterol dependent.

The functions of TEMs are becoming clearer. A subset of MHC II molecules have been shown to partition into TEMs rather than lipid rafts; this subset binds a distinct set of peptides that are preferentially displayed for T-cell recognition.[30] In T cells themselves, CD82-containing TEMs promote actin cytoskeleton associations that may lead to more efficient signaling.[31] CD81 is involved in the formation of the immune synapse in both partner cells and has been suggested to facilitate antigen presentation or signaling.[32] EGF receptor signaling can be attenuated by tetraspanin-mediated inhibition of receptor dimerization.[33] Leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells is partly dependent on the clustering of adhesion molecules in tetraspanin-containing structures termed adhesion platforms.[34] The selective enrichment of tetraspanins in B cell intracellular structures and exosomes suggests a role for TEMs in the formation and trafficking of vesicles.[35] Thus, it seems that a major role for TEMs is the organization of membrane proteins into functional units.

The localization of tetraspanins in TEMs has paradoxically made it difficult to define the functions of individual family members. Reagents such as antibodies that cross-link specific tetraspanins may also perturb the organization and functions of interacting molecules, giving misleading information.[36] Some investigators, including ourselves, have tried to address this by using soluble recombinant EC2 domains as alternative tools for investigating the role of specific tetraspanins. Recombinant EC2s appear to fold correctly and have been shown to have biological activity in a number of systems.[6,37–39] The interactions of tetraspanins with one another in TEMs may also explain the apparent ‘functional redundancy’ of the family. Of those reported to date, tetraspanin knockout mice are viable and show relatively mild defects, suggesting a capacity for different members of the family to compensate for one another.[4,40] Nonetheless, knockouts clearly demonstrate that particular cellular functions (e.g. T-cell proliferation,[41] sperm-egg fusion[6]) can be affected by the modulation of a specific tetraspanin. Thus, targeting of individual tetraspanins may provide a therapeutic means to modulate cellular processes without a global detrimental effect on the organism.

1.2 Role of Tetraspanins in Trafficking
Although tetraspanins were first identified as cell surface markers, it is now clear that some are also associated with the endosomal pathway (i.e. early and late endosomes, multivesicular bodies [MVBs] and lyzosomes) and with various types of secretory vesicles.[3,42] Tetraspanins on the plasma membrane can be internalized via endocytosis and traffic to intracellular vesicles; conversely, on cell stimulation, secretory vesicles containing tetraspanins may fuse with the plasma membrane. Late endosomes and MVBs can also fuse with the plasma membrane and release ‘exosomes’ that are enriched in certain tetraspanin proteins. Exosomes released from cells infected with intracellular pathogens, including mycobacteria, are potent stimulators of inflammation in uninfected cells (reviewed in Schorey and Bhatnagar[43]) and can present antigens to T cells.[44] Thirteen of the 33 mammalian tetraspanins contain potential tyrosine-based sorting motifs.[3] These are based on the sequence YXXØ (where X is any amino acid and Ø is a bulky hydrophobic residue), which is recognized by a family of adaptor protein (AP) complexes that determine the cellular localization of proteins they interact with.[13] Other tetraspanins (CD231 [TSPAN7], oculospanin [TSPAN10] and TSSC6 [TSPAN32]) carry potential dileucine sorting motifs.[3] However, in most cases, the functionality of these motifs in tetraspanins is not known.

The intracellular trafficking of tetraspanin CD63 has been best characterized.[3,42] It has a conserved GYEVM motif at its C-terminus, which interacts primarily with AP-2 complexes, linking the protein to clathrin-mediated endocytosis pathways, and with AP-3 complexes for trafficking from endososmes to lysosomes, although the protein may also be targeted to lysosomes directly from the trans Golgi network.[45] CD63 can interact directly through its C-terminus with syntenin,[46] which may compete with AP-2 and AP-3 to alter the trafficking of this protein. It has also been recently suggested that CD63 may internalize from the plasma membrane by endocytosis of caveolae.[3,42]

One of the roles of CD63 related to trafficking appears to be in regulating the functions of molecules it associates with on the plasma membrane by inducing their internalization. Experimental evidence for this comes from investigations on its association with, and effects on, members of the H+, K+-ade-nosine triphosphatase family of proton pumps,[47] membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase,[48] and integrins.[49] Other tetraspanins that possess internalization motifs may display similar activities, although these have been less extensively studied.[3] A role for CD63 in intracellular targeting was recently shown by the demonstration that it cooperates in the delivery of the enzyme elastase to secretory vesicles of neutrophils.[50]

1.3 Role of Tetraspanins in Fusion
Tetraspanins have been implicated in various cell-cell fusion processes. Most notably, studies using knockout mice have shown that CD9 and CD81 are required for sperm-egg fusion, since oocytes from CD9−/− or CD9−/−, CD81−/− mice are unable to fuse with sperm, resulting in partial or complete infertility, respectively (reviewed in Sutovsky[51]). Studies using antibodies and tetraspanin over-expression have also implicated CD9 and CD81 in muscle cell fusion.[52] Investigations using knockout mice and antibodies have identified a role for CD9 and CD81 in the fusion of monocytes/macrophages to form multinucleated giant cells (MGCs).[53] Using soluble recombinant EC2 domains, we confirmed roles for CD9 and CD81 in MGC formation and additionally demonstrated the involvement of CD63.[39] In contrast to their requirement for sperm-egg fusion, the evidence suggests that CD9 and CD81 act as negative regulators of MGC formation, whereas CD63 appears to be positively involved.[39,53] MGCs are a feature of granulomatous inflammation, formed in response to chronic infections with hard-to-clear pathogens (e.g. tubercle bacilli, schistosomes).[54] Some viruses (e.g. HIV, human T-cell leukemia virus [HTLV]) have the capacity to induce cell-cell fusion resulting in the formation of giant cells or virus syncitia that contribute to spread of infection. Various tetraspanins including CD9, CD81, and CD82 have been linked with virus-induced syncitium formation (reviewed in Martin et al.[16]) and discussed in this review.

2. Role of Tetraspanins in Infections
2.1 Viral Infections
Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites, relying on host-cell functions for most aspects of their life-cycle. To initiate this cycle, viruses must first form a stable attachment to the host-cell surface and then gain access to the cytoplasm. In the case of enveloped viruses, this involves fusion of the lipid envelope with the host plasma membrane, or after endocytosis and trafficking, the envelope may fuse with the membranes of intracellular vesicles. Following virus uncoating, the viral genome that is released into the cytosol must gain access to an appropriate site where replication can proceed, using the host-cell biosynthetic machinery. Assembled mature virus particles then exit the cell to spread the infection. Whilst this can be mediated by cell lysis, enveloped viruses can also bud out through the host-cell plasma membrane and increasing evidence suggests that they may also exploit vesicular trafficking to be released via exosomes.[55] Some viruses are also transmitted directly from infected cells to uninfected cells via an ‘infective’ or ‘virological synapse’[56] or through fusion of infected cells with uninfected cells to form viral syncitia.[16] Tetraspanins, particularly in the context of TEMs, are involved in many of these functions and unsurprisingly have been increasingly linked to crucial events in the life-cycle of a variety of viruses.[40]

2.1.1 Family Flaviviridae: Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)
The best characterized physical interaction of a tetraspanin with a virus is that of CD81 with HCV. The flaviviridae are enveloped, positive single-stranded RNA viruses. HCV infects approximately 180 million patients worldwide.[57] It affects liver tissue almost exclusively, resulting in hepatitis, which may become chronic, progressing to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. As well as showing marked tropism for liver, HCV shows strict species specificity, infecting only humans and chimpanzees.[58] Two glycoproteins, E1 and E2, that assemble as a heterodimer, are embedded in the HCV envelope and are essential for virus binding and entry into host cells.[59] CD81 was the first protein ligand identified for HCV[60] and interacts directly with the E2 protein as demonstrated by inhibition of binding by anti-CD81 mAbs and soluble CD81 EC2 domains.[60,61] However, whilst expression of human CD81 is sufficient for E2 binding, accumulated evidence has shown that it is not in itself sufficient for infection by HCV.[37] CD81 has thus been identified as a required co-receptor for HCV.[62]

Role of CD81 in HCV Entry
In addition to CD81, three other host-cell molecules have now been shown to be essential for HCV entry: scavenger receptor BI (SR-B1),[63] the tight junction protein claudin-1 (CLDN1)[64] and most recently, human occludin.[65] Entry of HCV into host cells is complex and involves multiple steps; the exact role of the co-receptors in this process remains to be determined. Following binding to host cells, HCV is internalized by clathrin-dependent endocytosis and acid-dependent fusion probably occurs in early endosomes[66] (reviewed in Helle and Dubuisson[17]). Antibodies to CD81 that inhibit infection appear to act post-attachment and CD81 is not essential for virus binding.[67] SR-B1 also binds to HCV E2 proteins[68] and there is evidence that it may act cooperatively with CD81 in HCV entry at a post-binding stage.[69] Studies on the kinetics of antibody inhibition suggest that SR-B1 and CD81 act concomitantly (half maximal inhibition ∼17 minutes[70,71]). Claudin, by contrast, is required for a later stage in the entry of the virus (half maximal inhibition of entry by antibody ∼73 minutes[64]). Interestingly, fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis has shown that CD81 can interact with claudin on the surface of susceptible hepatocytes.[72] Claudin and occludin are both components of tight junctions, structures that form seals between adjacent cells and allow cells to become polarized.[65] Other viruses have been shown to exploit tight junctions as a means of entering cells, e.g. coxsackie virus B, which also requires occludin for entry.[73] Recent work has shown that engagement of CD81 by antibodies or HCV proteins results in guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-dependent actin rearrangement allowing lateral movement of ligated CD81 to tight junctions where claudin and occludin are localized.[74] This has suggested a model where following binding to the apical surface of hepatocytes, HCV associates with SR-B1 then CD81, which then traffics HCV to tight junctions.[65,74] Consistent with this, disruption of tight junctions and/or polarization of hepatocytes appeared to reduce HCV infectivity.[75]

Other Roles of CD81 in HCV Infection
CD81 engagement activates the Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling cascade; inhibitors of this pathway significantly reduced HCV infection efficiency, indicating that this pathway affects post-entry events of the virus life-cycle.[74] There is also evidence that CD81 may affect trafficking of HCV envelope proteins, directing their incorporation into exosomes where it associates with them.[76] Exosomes containing HCV RNA have been isolated from the plasma of HCV patients and it is suggested that this may represent a route of infection. As discussed in section 2.1.2 below, exosomes have also been suggested as a route of infection for HIV.

At least in vitro, it has been demonstrated that HCV infection can also occur via cell-cell contact and it is speculated that this may contribute to its spread in vivo. However, CD81 does not appear to be required for this mode of infection.[77]

CD81 is widely expressed, particularly on cells of the immune system. It is still uncertain whether HCV infects these cells, but binding of HCV proteins to CD81 may have pleiotropic effects, including downregulation of natural killer cell functions,[78] priming and activation of T cells,[79,80] and hyper-mutation of the immunoglobulin genes in B cells.[81] In addition, E2 binding to CD81, on hepatic stellate cells, upregulates matrix metalloproteinase-2 possibly increasing inflammation and liver damage in vivo.[82]

2.1.2 Family Retroviridae
HIV-1
HIV-1 is an enveloped lentivirus, the main causative agent of AIDS. Whilst combinations of drugs have helped control the disease in developed countries, the expense of this treatment has hindered its use worldwide. So far, an effective vaccine has not been developed to prevent AIDS, in large part because of the high mutation rate of the virus.

Tetraspanins have been implicated in various stages of the HIV life-cycle in different cell types. The virus is known to enter and multiply in macrophages, as well as CD4+ T lymphocytes, although it replicates more slowly in the former, which may act as a ‘reservoir’ of infection.[83] Dendritic cells are also involved in the pathogenesis of HIV[84] by either passing the virus into CD4+ T cells without themselves becoming infected (trans-infection)[85] or, more rarely, by acting as a host for virus replication (cis-infection).[86] Infection is initiated when the viral envelope glycoprotein gp120 binds to the CD4 receptor[87] on target cells, which induces conformational changes leading to binding of gp120 to the CCR5 or CXCR4 co-receptors. In T cells, a fusion event between host plasma membrane and the viral envelope mediated by viral gp41 follows, culminating in the delivery of the virus into the cell. In macrophages and cis-infected dendritic cells, it has been suggested that HIV virus may be endocytosed prior to fusion.

Role of Tetraspanins in the HIV Virion
Early reports that CD63 is selectively incorporated into the envelope of the HIV-1 virion[88–90] suggested a role for this tetraspanin in infection. Perhaps surprisingly, however, virus particles derived from macrophages where CD63 expression has been knocked down showed no decrease in infectivity.[91] Interestingly, another recent report shows that increased incorporation of CD63 into the viral envelope correlates with decreased viral infectivity.[92] This effect is strain-dependent, appearing to relate to differences in the Env protein, and affects a post-attachment step, which results in decreased fusion with T cells. A similar decrease in infectivity was observed with increased viral envelope incorporation of other tetraspanin proteins (CD9, CD81, CD82, and CD231) but not L6, a non-tetraspanin four-span membrane protein. As well as modulating HIV-1 infectivity, these findings suggest a role for tetraspanins in HIV-1 entry.

Role of Tetraspanins in Early HIV Infection
A role for CD63 in early stages of HIV-1 infection was also indicated by its inhibition by anti-CD63 antibodies,[93] although the effect here was CCR5 dependent, specific for macrophages and not observed with antibodies to other cell surface tetraspanins CD9, CD81, and CD82. The authors speculated that the effects were post-fusion; however, this was based on lack of effects of CD63 overexpression or anti-CD63 antibodies on a cell-line model of macrophage syncitium formation, rather than virus-cell fusion. Our group demonstrated that macrophage HIV-1 infection could also be inhibited by soluble recombinant tetraspanin EC2 domains.[38] Although the CD63 EC2 was most potent, other tetraspanins (CD9, CD81, and CD151) were also inhibitory for both CCR5- and CXCR4-dependent infection of macrophages. At higher doses, these tetraspanin EC2s also inhibited CCR5-, but not CXCR4-dependent T-cell infection. Since effects were observed with a range of tetraspanin EC2s, we speculated that they disrupted cell surface TEMS, interfering with binding to TEM-dependent complexes or with TEM-dependent membrane fusion events.

As mentioned in section 1.3, tetraspanins CD9, CD63 and CD81 have known roles in fusion events. Gordon-Alonso and co-workers[94] showed that mAbs against CD81 enhanced HIV-1 infection of T lymphoblasts and mAbs to CD9 and CD81 enhanced HIV-1 envelope-induced syncytia formation. The same effect was obtained by knockdown of the two proteins, while their over-expression decreased both entry and syncytia formation.[94] The effects observed here, indicating a negative role for CD9 and CD81 in syncitium formation, has parallels with the effects of antibodies and CD9 and CD81 knockout on macrophage fusion leading to the formation of giant cells.[39,53]

Role of Tetraspanins in HIV-1 Trafficking and Egress
In trans-infection of dendritic cells, it has been reported that infectious particles are taken up into a non-conventional, non-lysosomal, tetraspanin-rich compartment, similar to MVBs, and may then be transferred to T cells via the ‘infective synapse’[56] or by exocytosis and capture.[55] This has clear analogies with the tetraspanin-enriched compartments involved in antigen presentation[30,32] and the role of tetraspanins in formation/organization of the immunological synapse.[32,95] Replicating virus seems to reside in a similar compartment in cis-infection of dendritic cells.[96]

In macrophages, HIV-1 has also been reported to accumulate in compartments resembling multivesicular endosomal bodies that are enriched for tetraspanins.[97–100] It was speculated that the virus budded into this compartment and was then released via the exosomal pathway. However, more recent data indicate that this compartment is, in fact, a deep invagination of the plasma membrane, also observed in non-infected cells, that may be related to patocytotic compartments involved in the uptake of aggregated cholesterol.[101] Such structures have also been observed in non-infected dendritic cells and they resemble the compartments in dendritic cells where HIV accumulates. In uninfected macrophages, this compartment contains tetraspanins CD81, CD9, and CD53 (TSPAN25), but not CD63; CD63 was recruited into the compartment in infected cells and subsequently incorporated into the viral envelope.[101]

Experiments designed to examine the role of CD63 in HIV-1 infection of macrophages using small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown have produced contradictory results. Whilst one group found no effect of CD63 knockdown on virus assembly or infectivity of macrophage-derived virus,[91] another reported that this treatment inhibited viral replication in both primary macrophages and a macrophage cell line.[102] The reasons for this apparent discrepancy are unclear, but the inhibitory effects of anti-CD63 antibodies[93] and CD63 EC2 proteins[38] argue that this tetraspanin is involved in at least the initial stages of macrophage infection by HIV-1.

HIV-1 buds from the plasma membrane of CD4+ T cells. As mentioned above, CD63 is specifically enriched in HIV particles, despite its low abundance at the surface of T lymphocytes.[89] To address this apparent contradiction, Nydegger and co-workers[28] used fluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy to examine the distribution of tetraspanins in HeLa cells transiently transfected with HIV-1 provirus or with plasmids expressing Gag or Env proteins. In untransfected HeLa cells, they observed that CD63 clustered at discrete sites in the plasma membrane with CD9, CD81 and CD82 to form TEMs. In transfected cells, these CD63-enriched TEMs co-localized in the plasma membrane with Gag, the major structural protein that directs viral assembly and release, together with Env. Components of the host-cell extra-vesiculation system utilized by HIV-1 for budding were also recruited to CD63-enriched TEMs in these cells, suggesting that TEMs may act as ‘gateways’ for HIV-1 exit. HIV-1 also co-localized with CD63 and CD9 in Jurkat T cells, indicating that TEMs are used for virus egress by T lymphocytes. Other groups have also found that HIV-1 buds from the plasma membrane of T cells in exosomes or microdomains that are enriched for tetraspanins.[103,104] It was also reported that CD63, CD81, and, to a lesser extent, CD9 were recruited to the infective/virological synapse formed between infected and non-infected T cells and that antibodies to these tetraspanins inhibited synapse formation.[103] In addition to co-localizing with TEMs, co-immunoprecipitation of CD81 and HIV-1 Gag from a chronically infected T cell line indicated direct or indirect interactions of these proteins in TEMs.[105] Furthermore, anti-CD81 antibodies and siRNA knockdown of CD81 inhibited HIV-1 release and impaired virus infectivity, correlating with redistribution of Gag at the cell surface on CD81 silencing. Taken together, this suggests a critical role for TEMs, and CD81 in particular, in the late stages of HIV-1 infection of T cells.

Other Roles of Tetraspanins in HIV Infection
A role for CD81 ligation in increasing HIV-1 transcription in infected T cells has been reported.[106] This might have significance where HIV-positive patients are co-infected with HCV, the only known direct ‘ligand’ for CD81.

A possible role for CD63 in trafficking of the CXCR4 co-receptor for HIV-1 in T cells is indicated by recent work.[107] A mutated version of CD63, lacking the last 81 N-terminal residues, caused mislocalization of CXCR4 to late endosomes/lysosomes, blocking HIV-1 entry. Wild-type CD63 also has some effects on CXCR4 trafficking, but was much less potent.

Finally, a role for tetraspanin-enriched exosomes derived from CD8+ cytotoxic T cells in defence against HIV-1 infection has recently been reported.[108] These exosomes were shown to suppress CCR5-tropic and CXCR4-tropic replication of HIV through a noncytotoxic mechanism involving an as yet unidentified protein moiety. This finding may have parallels with inhibitory effects of envelope-embedded tetraspanins referred to above.[92]

Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus
HTLV-1 or primate T-lymphotropic virus is the infectious agent associated with adult human T-cell leukemia and HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis.[109] It belongs to the Deltaretrovirus genus and resembles other retroviruses in having an envelope that plays an important role in viral adhesion and fusion. The virus infects CD4+ and CD8+ T cells; free virus particles are not highly infective and virus spread is mainly due to cell-to-cell transmission.[110,111] The tetraspanin CD82 is abundant on the surface of T cells, increases after T-cell activation[112] and its engagement leads to increased cell-cell adhesion mediated by lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1). CD82 can also couple cell surface complexes to the cytoskeleton.[95] CD82 was originally identified as the protein target of mAbs that inhibited T-cell syncytium formation induced on co-culture with HTLV-1 in vitro,[113,114] and so was suggested to have a negative regulatory role in the HTLV-1 life cycle. In addition, co-expression of CD82 with HTLV-1 envelope proteins in COS-1 cells decreased virus-induced syncytium formation as well as cell-cell transmission.[115] Co-immunoprecipitation and co-capping experiments showed that CD82 and HTLV-1 envelope proteins were associated, both inside cells and at the cell surface. Gag, which is essential for viral assembly and release,[116] is targeted to the plasma membrane by its matrix (MA) domain. Gag protein was shown to co-localize with CD82 and other tetraspanins (CD53, CD81, and CD231) on the plasma membrane of T leukemia cell-line cells and co-segregated with CD82 on immune synapse formation with B cells. When expressed alone, the MA domain also co-immunoprecipitated with CD82 from cells lysed using mild detergent.[117] Further studies using site-specific mutagenesis have revealed that CD82 and CD81 inner loops are essential for their interaction with HTLV-I Gags.[118] Taken together, this suggests an essential role for CD82-enriched TEMs in the transmission of the budding virus to intercellular adhesion loci that form the infectious synapse. This has clear analogies with the reported involvement of TEMS in HIV-1 release.[28] Finally, tetraspanin CD151 associates with α5β1 in HTLV-1 infected T cells and enhanced the α5β1-mediated adhesion of infected cells to fibronectin, further supporting a role for tetraspanins in HTLV1 infection.[119]

Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
Tetraspanin CD9 also appears to be involved in infection by feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), which, like HIV, is a lentivirus and is responsible for an AIDS-like disease in cats.[120] An antibody that blocked FIV infection of target cells was shown to recognize CD9, suggesting it as a possible receptor for FIV.[121] However, cells that are negative for CD9 can be infected by FIV[122] and the anti-CD9 antibody was subsequently shown to act after viral entry, affecting virus assembly or release.[123,124] Cells ectopically expressing CD9 showed enhanced infectivity for FIV, suggesting a direct role for this protein in virus trafficking or assembly that was disrupted by the anti-CD9 antibody.[123]

2.1.3 Paramyxoviridae: Canine Distemper Virus
Canine distemper virus (CDV) is an enveloped, negative-stranded RNA morbillivirus causing a measles-like infection in carnivores with a high incidence of encephalitis.[125] A relationship with tetraspanins was first demonstrated by the finding that a mAb against CD9 bound to the surface of target cells inhibiting CDV infection, whereas ectopic expression of CD9 rendered cells susceptible to infection and increased virus production.[126] There was no direct interaction between CD9 and CDV and the anti-CD9 mAb did not affect virus entry, but inhibited virus release and syncytium formation, indicating an effect on trafficking and cell-cell fusion.[126,127] Susceptibility to CD9 antibodies was shown to be specifically dependent on the extracellular domain of CDV haemagglutinin protein.[128] This suggests that CD9 is involved in regulating the activity or membrane configuration of an unknown receptor for CDV haemagglutin that is involved in cell-cell fusion. Most recently, it was shown that specific anti-CD9 antibodies induced CD9 clustering and the formation of CD9-enriched microvilli-like protrusions at areas of cell-cell contact.[129] Clustering was not induced by all anti-CD9 antibodies or by Fab fragments and this correlated with an inability to inhibit CDV-induced cell fusion, implying dependence on cross-linking and/or epitope specificity. The clusters also contained other tetraspanins (CD63, CD81, and CD82) indicating that anti-CD9 antibodies can alter the overall surface organization of TEMs. CDV proteins, but not related measles virus (MV) proteins, were specifically excluded from these clusters, suggesting that anti-CD9 antibodies act in this case by effectively removing the viral fusion machinery from cell contact areas.

Intriguingly, CD9 is reported to associate with CD46, the human receptor for MV,[130] and forms a complex with α3β1 integrin and the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 during induced differentiation of monocytes to macrophages.[131] Formation of the complex correlates with increased permissiveness for MV infection; however, no direct role for CD9 in MV infection has been reported.[128–130]

2.1.4 Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is an enveloped single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus belonging to the Arteriviridae family, which causes respiratory and reproduction disease in swine. The virus primarily targets alveolar macrophages. Porcine CD151 was recently shown to interact specifically with the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of PRRSV RNA.[132] Ectopic expression of CD151 rendered cells sensitive to PRRSV infection and siRNA knockdown of CD151 reduced viral replication, whereas an antibody to CD151 completely blocked infection. The significance of the interaction of CD151 with the 3′-UTR of PRRSV RNA is not clear. However, CD151 is known to be involved in intracellular trafficking[3] and the authors speculate that it may be involved in the localization of ribonucleoprotein complexes to the site of viral replication.[132]

2.1.5 Papillomaviridae
Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are non-enveloped DNA viruses associated mainly with benign warts on infection of epithelia.[133] However, some types, notably HPV16, are directly related to the development of cancers of the lower female genital tract, especially cervical carcinoma.[134] HPVs bind to modified heparin sulphate proteoglycans on host cells and are taken up following a conformational change in capsid proteins.[135] Transfer to transient ‘receptors’ including α6 integrin and laminin 5 is thought to occur prior to uptake.[136] Clathrin-mediated endocytosis was previously implicated in HPV16 uptake.[137] However, a recent report using specific inhibitors indicated that uptake of this virus is clathrin-, caveolaeand lipid-raft independent, and is mediated by a mechanism involving TEMs.[138] HPV16 pseudovirions were found to co-localize with CD63 and CD151 on the surface of HeLa cells and mAbs against CD63, CD81, and CD151 inhibited virus uptake and infection, with anti-CD151 antibodies showing greatest potency. CD151 siRNA knockdown also inhibited HPV16 uptake.[138] CD151 is highly expressed on epithelial cells and the authors propose that TEMs enriched for CD151 may act as entry platforms for HPV16. Antibodies may cause internalization of TEM components and knockdown may disrupt TEMs, inhibiting viral uptake. CD151 is known to interact with α4β6 integrin, but siRNA knockdown of CD151 did not affect a6 expression on HeLa cells. This suggests that binding of the virus to this integrin alone is not sufficient for viral entry, although CD151 silencing may affect the interaction of α4β6 integrin with TEMs. The subsequent mechanism of viral uptake is unknown, but, as mentioned previously, CD63 can associate with syntenin and could thereby mediate clathrin-independent endocytosis.[3] There is also evidence that CD151 may internalize by alternative mechanisms.[3] TEM-dependent internalization might serve as a general alternative entry route for other viruses e.g. HIV-1 and possibly other pathogens.

2.2 Protozoal Infection: Plasmodium Species
Malaria remains one of the most common parasitic diseases causing millions of fatalities annually.[139] Infection with Plasmodium spp. is initiated by transfer of sporozoites following a bite by an infected female Anopheles mosquito. The sporozoites quickly invade hepatocytes and reside in a parasitophorous vacuole where they differentiate into the merozoites that invade erythrocytes causing the symptoms of malaria.[140] CD81 has been shown to be necessary for infection of human and rodent hepatocytes, but not erythrocytes, with Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium yoelii, respectively.[18] Sporozoites were unable to infect hepatocytes from CD81 knockout mice in vivo and in vitro and anti-CD81 antibodies inhibited sporozoite development in both rodent and human hepatocytes. By contrast, CD81−/− hepatocytes were infected with another rodent parasite, Plasmodium berghei, demonstrating that it can use CD81-independent pathways of invasion. No inhibition of infection of susceptible hepatocytes was observed with soluble CD81 EC2s, indicating that the tetraspanin does not act as a direct receptor for sporozoites but may be involved in their internalization or in the mechanism of parasitophorous vacuole formation.

A role for membrane cholesterol in the CD81-dependent infection of hepatocytes has been indicated, as cholesterol depletion inhibited Plasmodium yoelii and Plasmodium falciparum infection of hepatocytes whereas Plasmodium berghei infection was unaffected.[141] Certain tetraspanins have been shown to associate with cholesterol,[142] and cholesterol depletion reduces the binding of an anti-CD81 antibody that specifically recognizes CD81 when it is associated with other tetraspanins. These results suggest that cholesterol depletion disrupts the organization of CD81 within TEMs, which is key to its role in facilitating Plasmodium spp. entry. Cholesterol depletion has also been reported to affect HCV infectivity, in this case by increasing CD81 internalization;[69] however, in the hepatocyte/malaria studies, Silvie and co-workers[141] reported no effects on CD81 cell surface expression.

Plasmodium infection is independent of CD9, but CD9 is thought to have a similar overall folding pattern to CD81 and has 45% identity at the amino acid level. Attempts have been made to define the region on CD81 that is critical for Plasmodium spp. infection using CD9/CD81 chimeras.[143] These studies highlighted a stretch of 21 amino acids in the structurally conserved sub-domain of the EC2 of CD81 as being important for infectivity. This corresponds to the junction of A and B alpha helices in the intact protein, which is quite distinct from the site in the variable sub-domain of the EC2 involved in HCV E2 binding.[14] Mutagenesis confirmed the importance of this region and of residue D137 in particular. Surprisingly, an antibody recognizing this region did not block infection with Plasmodium spp.,[143] in contrast to other antibodies, e.g. 1D6, which is known to bind to a peptide corresponding to residues 179–193 in the variable sub-domain of the EC2 region.[144] This suggests that inhibitory antibodies may perturb the interaction of CD81 with partner molecule(s) or otherwise disrupt its organization within TEMS, whereas the non-inhibitory antibodies may fail to recognize certain functionally important TEM-associated pools of CD81. Mutations in the EC1 also affected Plasmodium infectivity, but this is thought to reflect its role in stabilizing the conformation of the EC2 region.[143]

It is clear that CD81 is not the only molecule involved in the CD81-dependent entry of Plasmodium spp. into hepatocytes. Expression of human CD81 in CD81-knockout mouse hepatocytes confers susceptibility to P. yoelii but not P. falciparum sporozoite infection. Also, expression of CD81 in a human hepatocarcinoma cell line is sufficient to promote the formation of parasitophorous vacuoles by P. yoelii but not P. falciparum sporozoites.[145] Intriguingly, host scavenger receptor SR-BI, which together with CD81 is required for HCV infection of hepatocytes, has also been shown to be important in infection by Plasmodium spp., affecting both sporozoite invasion and intracellular parasite development.[146]

2.3 Bacterial Infections
Tetraspanins have been implicated in the pathogenesis of numerous bacterial species, including direct roles in bacterial growth/infection and in the pathogenesis caused by bacterial products.

2.3.1 Diphtheria
Diphtheria is an acute illness caused by the bacterium Corynebacterium diptheriae releasing diphtheria toxin (DT), an inhibitor of cellular protein synthesis, at the site of infection and in the circulation.[147] CD9 was identified as a protein that associates with the diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR),[148] which is identical to the membrane anchored form of the HB-EGF.[149] Overexpression of CD9 increases DT binding to the surface of cells rendering them more susceptible to DT. A co-receptor function for CD9 has been suggested by the finding that it increases the affinity of the DTR for DT and interacts with the receptor through its EC2.[150,151]

2.3.2 Uropathogenic Escherichia coli
Urinary tract infections are amongst the most common infectious diseases and >80% are caused by Escherichia coli that bind to the bladder epithelia through adhesive pili, also known as type I fimbriae.[152] Of the four types of uroplakins that are the major protein constituents of the plaques that cover the apical surface of the urothelium, two (uroplakin 1a [TSPAN21] and uroplakin 1b [TSPAN20]) are tetraspanins.[153] Following a demonstration that fimbriated E. coli bound to uroplakin 1a and/or uroplakin 1b in vitro,[154] uroplakin 1a was confirmed as a receptor for Fim H, the lectin found at the tip of type I fimbriae.[155] Binding has been attributed to high levels of terminally exposed mannose residues that are present in uroplakin 1a, but not uroplakin 1b.[156] Uroplakin 1a is associated in bladder epithelial cells with lipid rafts, and E. coli have recently been shown to invade these cells in a caveolin lipid raft-dependent manner.[157] Internalized E. coli may cause quiescent infections that are resistant to antibiotic treatment, host immune defences and release during bladder voiding.[158] A recent report has shown that internalized E. coli reside in CD63+ vacuoles within the bladder epithelium. Treatment with agents that induced exocytosis reduced the number of internalized bacteria.[159]

2.3.3 Chlamydiae
Chlamydia cause a number of human diseases, including the common sexually transmitted infection caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. C. trachomatis is also the main cause of infectious blindness worldwide.[160] Chlamydiae are obligate intracellular pathogens that can only replicate within a vacuole known as the inclusion body. Within the inclusion, the bacterium acquires the host-cell derived components required for its survival. A recent study investigating the interaction between the chlamydial inclusion body and MVBs showed that CD63, which is strongly expressed in MVBs, was selectively delivered to the inclusion. Exogenously applied antibodies to CD63 trafficked to the inclusion and appeared to disrupt chlamydial development and reduced the number of infective progeny produced.[19] However, a more recent study showed that siRNA-mediated CD63 knockdown had no effect on the interaction of MVB with the inclusion, cholesterol accumulation or chlamydial development. An effect of whole antibodies, but not Fab fragments was seen, indicating that CD63 itself is not involved in these processes, but the binding of divalent antibody may affect the function of adjacent membrane components.[161]

2.4 Prions
There have been recent reports that tetraspanins are involved in the interactions and trafficking of the normal version of the prion protein, PrP(c). An altered form of the prion protein, PrP(Sc), is the infective agent associated with the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (e.g. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease [CJD]). PrP(c) associates with lipid rafts and in some cells is endocytosed through caveolae, whereas in others, such as neurons, it translocates out of the rafts and is endocytosed via clathrin-coated pits.[162] In human erythroblasts, PrP(c) has been shown to co-localize in the plasma membrane with CD81.[20] Cross-linking with antibodies to PrP(c) or CD81 causes clustering of the two proteins, suggesting that they reside in the same microdomain, possibly TEMs. PrPc is rapidly internalized by the endocytic pathway in erythroblasts, where it co-localizes with CD63. The authors speculated that release of PrP(Sc) in exosomes formed via the endocytic recycling pathway could contribute to the spread of infective prions in blood. Furthermore, using a yeast two-hybrid system, bovine CD231 (TSPAN7) was identified as a partner for PrP(c) and shown to co-localize with the prion protein.[163] CD9 has also been reported to show elevated expression in the brains of prioninfected mice and in CJD patients,[164] although no discernible difference in prion replication was observed between wild type and CD9−/− mice.[165]

2.5 Tetraspanins Expressed by Vectors/Pathogens
Since tetraspanins are widely expressed in eukaryotic organisms, they are also expressed by some pathogens or pathogen vectors, where they may provide further therapeutic targets.

2.5.1 Dengue Fever
Dengue virus is transmitted between humans by mosquito vectors, mainly Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus and causes Dengue fever, an acute self-limited disease that may progress to Dengue haemorrhagic fever. Dengue fever is the most common arthropod-borne viral infection in humans[166] with >50 million cases per year. Whilst mammalian cells usually undergo apoptotic cell death on infection,[167] the Dengue virus may result in permissive infection in mosquito cells, although the infected cells may form syncytia.[168] Using subtractive hybridization techniques, C1 89 was recently identified as a mosquito tetraspanin that is upregulated ∼4-fold after Dengue virus infection.[169] Although knockdown of C189 expression using RNA interference (RNAi) had no apparent effect on virus growth, the tetraspanin was shown to co-localize with viral proteins in the intracellular membranes and especially the plasma membrane of infected cells. It would be interesting to determine if C189 plays any role in cell-cell spread or virus release, as appears to be the case for mammalian tetraspanins.[56] However, C189 was not identified as an insect host factor in a recent genome-wide RNAi screen.[170]

2.5.2 Tetraspanins in Schistosomes
One of the first members of the tetraspanin family to be identified was the antigen Sm23, expressed by the blood-dwelling helminth, Schistosoma mansoni.[171] Although Schistosomes are not microbes, these pathogens infect 200 million people worldwide and schistosomiasis kills hundreds of thousands annually. Tetraspanins are expressed abundantly on the tegument of Schistosomes and recombinant versions of S. mansoni tetraspanins TSP-1 and TSP-2 have been shown to be protective in a mouse model.[172] Infestation of water buffalo by S. japonicum, a helminth transmitted to humans mainly from infected animals, was also reduced by a DNA vaccine based on the tetraspanin SjC23.[173]

3. Targeting Tetraspanins
From the preceding sections it is clear that tetraspanins are involved in infections caused by diverse pathogens (table I) and that their roles can be broadly divided into two groups. First, there are effects via direct interactions of tetraspanins with the pathogen/specific pathogen-expressed proteins (e.g. CD81 with HCV E2 and uroplakin Ia with E. coli Fim H). Secondly, there are indirect effects by host-cell functions that are dependent on TEMs. These may include the organization of host-cell receptor complexes or processes such as endocytosis, trafficking, fusion, or exocytosis (table I). These groups overlap, as it is likely that direct pathogen-tetraspanin interaction reflects a requirement of the pathogen to interface with TEMs. Many pathogens are thought to have evolved strategies to exploit or ‘highjack’ lipid rafts.[174] TEMs represent a more specialized microdomain, which may similarly have been targeted by certain microbes. In this way, TEMs may provide various pathogens with ‘gateways’ to enter, as well as to leave, host cells.[28]
Table I Pathogens that exploit tetraspanins during infective processes




Instances where tetraspanins interact directly with pathogen proteins provide clear strategies for therapeutic targeting of specific diseases (i.e. by designing antagonists of host tetra-spanin-microbe interactions). A more intriguing possibility, however, is an approach that modulates TEM-dependent host-cell functions to provide a more broadly active type of therapy. This is of interest for several reasons:
It would target fundamental cellular processes in pathogen pathology that the microbe would not be able to surmount by mutagenesis of its own genome.

By targeting cellular processes (e.g. fusion, trafficking) rather than the antigenic/mechanistic idiosyncrasies of a specific pathogen, tetraspanin therapies may be able to provide inhibition with broader specificity.

Importantly, the viability of tetraspanin knockout mice indicates that modulation of one or two tetraspanins can affect specific cellular functions without affecting viability. Thus, the targeting of tetraspanins may provide a viable approach to inhibit the pathogenicity of infectious organisms with minimal adverse effects on the host.




The necessity for the development of such approaches is becoming increasingly clear with the failure of traditional approaches to viral infection (vaccination) for diseases such as HIV, and their limited usefulness for influenza, of which the emergence of novel strains (e.g. avian and swine flu) in human populations are of great concern.[175] Furthermore, it has become evident that the emergence of zoonotic viruses in new animal hosts/human populations is one of the greatest potential threats to human health, as highlighted by the recent outbreaks of the bat viruses Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and Nipah/Hendra in human populations via agriculturally/economically important livestock.[176,177] Such outbreaks, accompanied by panic in the human population and mass culling of livestock, also highlight the potential of viral application to bioterrorism.[178] In cases encountering novel viruses, vaccination is impractical, and a broad specificity rapid-response strategy is required. Therapies targeting host-cell functions may provide such an approach. In addition, although there is currently less evidence for a role for tetraspanins in bacterial infections, with increasing concerns over antibiotic resistance, alternative tetraspanin-based therapies may provide valuable antibacterial strategies in the future.

3.1 Interfering with Tetraspanin Binding by Pathogens
There are relatively few examples of direct interactions of pathogen molecules with specific tetraspanins and the best characterized is that of HCV E2 with CD81. As mentioned in section 2.1.1, recombinant CD81 EC2 domains inhibit HCV,[179] and such proteins, or smaller representative derivatives thereof, might prove useful for treatment of HCV infection. The binding site of HCV E2 on CD81 EC2 has been mapped to a hydrophobic patch in the variable sub-loop region of the tetraspanin[14,180] with residues Leu 162, Ile 182, Asn 184 and Phe 186 highlighted as important by mutagenesis. A small peptide analogue comprising residues 176–189 can inhibit E2 binding[181] and small-molecule inhibitors of the interaction between CD81 and HCV E2 have also been designed.[182]

However, recent work has indicated that recombinant CD81 EC2s are unable to prevent infection by serum-derived HCV, whereas anti-CD81 antibodies or siRNA downregulation of CD81 were very effective.[183] Antibodies to CD81 have recently been shown to be protective in vivo in a SCID (severe combined immunodeficiency) mouse model.[184] This suggests that anti-CD81 may be useful prophylactically, for example, in preventing reinfection of allografts after liver transplantation in HCV-infected patients. Mouse mAbs would obviously need to be humanized. Interestingly, we recently probed the human combinatorial library HuCal[185] with recombinant CD81 EC2 regions and obtained a panel of human bivalent minibodies that bound to native CD81 and inhibited HCV infection (unpublished observations).

Another CD81-dependent inhibitor of HCV infection has recently been identified as EWI-2wint, which is expressed by several cell lines but not hepatocytes.[186] EWI-2wint is a cleavage product of the ectodomain of the transmembrane protein EWI-2, a direct interaction partner of CD81 belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily.[187] Ectopically expressed EWI-2wint blocked HCV infection of a hepatocarcinoma cell line, most likely by inhibiting the interaction between CD81 and the E2 envelope protein.

3.2 Strategies to Disrupt TEMs
Apart from direct interference of HCV E2 –CD81 binding, most of the biological activities of soluble tetraspanin EC2 domains are likely to be mediated by disruption of lateral interactions between membrane-embedded tetraspanins and their interacting partners in TEMS. This likely explains why EC2s representing several different tetraspanins all inhibited HIV uptake by macrophages.[38] However, CD63 EC2 showed the strongest effect here, and this, together with the finding that only antibodies to CD63 inhibited HIV macrophage uptake, suggests a more direct role for this tetraspanin. Soluble tetraspanin EC2 regions may therefore have a broad range of direct and indirect effects.

In many infections it appears that antibodies also act by disrupting TEMS. Interestingly, even for HCV, antibodies that inhibit E2 binding vary considerably in their efficacy to prevent HCV infection, indicating they may act in different ways,[70] with some additionally affecting lateral CD81 interactions with other membrane proteins. Mutagenesis has also highlighted the importance of residues in the transmembrane and cytoplasmic regions of CD81 in HCV entry, which presumably relate to the intramolecular interactions mediated by this tetraspanin that are crucial to entry.[70] Also, in HIV, antibodies to multiple tetraspanins seem to have similar effects at various stages of infection (e.g. syncytium formation, virus release) indicating the involvement of TEMs in these processes. Papilloma virus entry into epithelial cells also involves multiple tetraspanins, although CD151 appears to have a more direct role. It is therefore possible that these infective processes could be targeted not just by antibodies, but by reagents based on soluble tetraspanin EC2 or other agents that disrupt TEMs.

The palmitoylation of tetraspanins is known to be important in TEM assembly,[188] and an acyl transferase, which promotes tetraspanin palmitoylation,[189] could conceivably provide another target for microbial infections.[40]

3.3 Downregulation of Tetraspanins
Where they are involved in pathogen entry, downregulation of the tetraspanins by antibodies that induce internalization (e.g. antibodies to CD63 or CD151) may have therapeutic benefit. However, the most efficient method of downregulating tetraspanin expression is by using siRNA-mediated knockdown. This is most likely to be useful where a particular tetraspanin has been shown to have a more direct role in infection e.g. CD81 knockdown in HCV or malaria. An efficient method of targeting siRNA in vivo is still needed. Encouragingly, a very recent paper has demonstrated the efficient uptake of siRNA by macrophages in vivo.[190] This might be useful for achieving knockdown of CD63 in macrophages in HIV patients, although the controversy over the effects of CD63 modulation (see section 2.1.2) on viral infection must obviously first be resolved.

3.4 Using Tetraspanins to Target Drugs
Finally, exogenously applied antibodies to tetraspanins that internalize could be used to target antibiotics or other drugs to intracellular pathogens that reside in vesicles. CD63 has previously been identified as a target for this type of approach in cancer treatment.[191] Hope that this might also be effective in treating microbial infections comes from the studies on chlamydial infections[19] where CD63 antibodies were shown to traffic inclusions.

4. Conclusions
Tetraspanins are being increasingly linked to infectious disease caused by a variety of intracellular pathogens. Such pathogens utilize the normal cellular processes that involve tetraspanins/TEMs, such as fusion, endocytosis, intracellular trafficking, and exocytosis, to enter host cells, replicate and spread infection. Tetraspanins therefore constitute an attractive novel target for alternative, host-cell-based antimicrobial therapies. The tetraspanin superfamily has, however, received little attention from the scientific community compared with other membrane proteins, e.g. integrins. For the full potential of tetraspanins for therapeutics to be realized, more research tools are required, such as specific antibodies and recombinant, soluble EC2 domains targeting all 33 mammalian tetraspanins. More information on the 3-dimensional structure of tetraspanins is also required, along with further investigations on the effects of knockdown or knockout in cells and model organisms, to determine the functions of individual tetraspanins. Finally, there is a need for sophisticated live-cell imaging techniques to investigate the contribution of TEMs to the fundamental cellular activities that pathogens exploit.

Noha Hassuna is supported by a PhD studentship from the Egyptian Ministry of Education. No sources of funding were used to assist in the preparation of this review. The authors have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the content of this review.
==== Refs
References
1. Huang S.  Yuan S.  Dong M.    The phylogenetic analysis of tetraspanins projects the evolution of cell-cell interactions from unicellular to multicellular organisms Genomics 2005 86 6 674 84 10.1016/j.ygeno.2005.08.004 16242907 
2. Garcia-Espana A.  Chung P.J.  Sarkar I.N.    Appearance of new tetraspanin genes during vertebrate evolution Genomics 2008 91 4 326 34 10.1016/j.ygeno.2007.12.005 18291621 
3. Berditchevski F.  Odintsova E.   Tetraspanins as regulators of protein trafficking Traffic 2007 8 2 89 96 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2006.00515.x 17181773 
4. Hemler M.E.   Tetraspanin functions and associated microdomains Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 6 10 801 11 10.1038/nrm1736 16314869 
5. Levy S.  Shoham T.   Protein-protein interactions in the tetraspanin web Physiology (Bethesda) 2005 20 218 24 10.1152/physiol.00015.2005 16024509 
6. Rubinstein E.  Ziyyat A.  Wolf J.P.    The molecular players of sperm-egg fusion in mammals Semin Cell Dev Biol 2006 17 2 254 63 10.1016/j.semcdb.2006.02.012 16574441 
7. Boesze-Battaglia K.  Dispoto J.  Kahoe M.A.   Association of a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein, ROM-1, with triton X-100-resistant membrane rafts from rod outer segment disk membranes J Biol Chem 2002 277 44 41843 9 10.1074/jbc.M207111200 12196538 
8. Hemler M.E.   Tetraspanin proteins mediate cellular penetration, invasion, and fusion events and define a novel type of membrane microdomain Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2003 19 397 422 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.19.111301.153609 14570575 
9. Stipp C.S.  Kolesnikova T.V.  Hemler M.E.   Functional domains in tetraspanin proteins Trends Biochem Sci 2003 28 2 106 12 10.1016/S0968-0004(02)00014-2 12575999 
10. Seigneuret M.  Delaguillaumie A.  Lagaudriere-Gesbert C.    Structure of the tetraspanin main extracellular domain: a partially conserved fold with a structurally variable domain insertion J Biol Chem 2001 276 43 40055 64 10.1074/jbc.M105557200 11483611 
11. Boucheix C.  Duc G.H.  Jasmin C.    Tetraspanins and malignancy Expert Rev Mol Med 2001 2001 1 17 14987371 
12. Boucheix C.  Rubinstein E.   Tetraspanins Cell Mol Life Sci 2001 58 9 1189 205 10.1007/PL00000933 11577978 
13. Bonifacino J.S.  Dell'Angelica E.C.   Molecular bases for the recognition of tyrosine-based sorting signals J Cell Biol 1999 145 5 923 6 10.1083/jcb.145.5.923 10352010 
14. Kitadokoro K.  Bordo D.  Galli G.    CD81 extracellular domain 3D structure: insight into the tetraspanin superfamily structural motifs Embo J 2001 20 1-2 12 8 10.1093/emboj/20.1.12 11226150 
15. Fumagalli M.  Cagliani R.  Pozzoli U.    Widespread balancing selection and pathogen-driven selection at blood group antigen genes Genome Res 2009 19 2 199 212 10.1101/gr.082768.108 18997004 
16. Martin F.  Roth D.M.  Jans D.A.    Tetraspanins in viral infections: a fundamental role in viral biology? J Virol 2005 79 17 10839 51 10.1128/JVI.79.17.10839-10851.2005 16103137 
17. Helle F.  Dubuisson J.   Hepatitis C virus entry into host cells Cell Mol Life Sci 2008 65 1 100 12 10.1007/s00018-007-7291-8 17914604 
18. Silvie O.  Rubinstein E.  Franetich J.F.    Hepatocyte CD81 is required for Plasmodium falciparum  and Plasmodium yoelii  sporozoite infectivity Nat Med 2003 9 1 93 6 10.1038/nm808 12483205 
19. Beatty W.L.   Trafficking from CD63-positive late endocytic multivesicular bodies is essential for intracellular development of Chlamydia trachomatis  J Cell Sci 2006 119 350 9 10.1242/jcs.02733 16410552 
20. Griffiths R.E.  Heesom K.J.  Anstee D.J.   Normal prion protein trafficking in cultured human erythroblasts Blood 2007 110 13 4518 25 10.1182/blood-2007-04-085183 17827389 
21. Rubinstein E.  Le Naour F.  Lagaudriere-Gesbert C.    CD9, CD63, CD81, and CD82 are components of a surface tetraspan network connected to HLA-DR and VLA integrins Eur J Immunol 1996 26 11 2657 65 10.1002/eji.1830261117 8921952 
22. Levy S.  Shoham T.   The tetraspanin web modulates immune-signalling complexes Nat Rev Immunol 2005 5 2 136 48 10.1038/nri1548 15688041 
23. Yauch R.L.  Berditchevski F.  Harler M.B.    Highly stoichiometric, stable, and specific association of integrin alpha3beta1 with CD151 provides a major link to phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase, and may regulate cell migration Mol Biol Cell 1998 9 10 2751 65 9763442 
24. Charrin S.  Manie S.  Billard M.    Multiple levels of interactions within the tetraspanin web Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003 304 1 107 12 10.1016/S0006-291X(03)00545-X 12705892 
25. Yang X.  Kovalenko O.V.  Tang W.    Palmitoylation supports assembly and function of integrin-tetraspanin complexes J Cell Biol 2004 167 6 1231 40 10.1083/jcb.200404100 15611341 
26. Claas C.  Stipp C.S.  Hemler M.E.   Evaluation of prototype transmembrane 4 superfamily protein complexes and their relation to lipid rafts J Biol Chem 2001 276 11 7974 84 10.1074/jbc.M008650200 11113129 
27. Le Naour F.  Andre M.  Boucheix C.    Membrane microdomains and proteomics: lessons from tetraspanin microdomains and comparison with lipid rafts Proteomics 2006 6 24 6447 54 10.1002/pmic.200600282 17109380 
28. Nydegger S.  Khurana S.  Krementsov D.N.    Mapping of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains that can function as gateways for HIV-1 J Cell Biol 2006 173 5 795 807 10.1083/jcb.200508165 16735575 
29. Espenel C.  Margeat E.  Dosset P.    Single-molecule analysis of CD9 dynamics and partitioning reveals multiple modes of interaction in the tetraspanin web J Cell Biol 2008 182 4 765 76 10.1083/jcb.200803010 18710926 
30. Kropshofer H.  Spindeldreher S.  Rohn T.A.    Tetraspan microdomains distinct from lipid rafts enrich select peptide-MHC class II complexes Nat Immunol 2002 3 1 61 8 10.1038/ni750 11743588 
31. Delaguillaumie A.  Harriague J.  Kohanna S.    Tetraspanin CD82 controls the association of cholesterol-dependent microdomains with the actin cyto-skeleton in T lymphocytes: relevance to co-stimulation J Cell Sci 2004 117 5269 82 10.1242/jcs.01380 15454569 
32. Mittelbrunn M.  Yanez-Mo M.  Sancho D.    Cutting edge: dynamic redistribution of tetraspanin CD81 at the central zone of the immune synapse in both T lymphocytes and APC J Immunol 2002 169 12 6691 5 12471100 
33. Odintsova E.  Sugiura T.  Berditchevski F.   Attenuation of EGF receptor signaling by a metastasis suppressor, the tetraspanin CD82/KAI-1 Curr Biol 2000 10 16 1009 12 10.1016/S0960-9822(00)00652-7 10985391 
34. Barreiro O.  Zamai M.  Yanez-Mo M.    Endothelial adhesion receptors are recruited to adherent leukocytes by inclusion in preformed tetraspanin nanoplatforms J Cell Biol 2008 183 3 527 42 10.1083/jcb.200805076 18955551 
35. Escola J.M.  Kleijmeer M.J.  Stoorvogel W.    Selective enrichment of tetraspan proteins on the internal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes and on exosomes secreted by human B-lymphocytes J Biol Chem 1998 273 32 20121 7 10.1074/jbc.273.32.20121 9685355 
36. Moseley G.W.   Tetraspanin-Fc receptor interactions Platelets 2005 16 1 3 12 10.1080/09537100400004363 15763890 
37. Flint M.  Thomas J.M.  Maidens C.M.    Functional analysis of cell surface-expressed hepatitis C virus E2 glycoprotein J Virol 1999 73 8 6782 90 10400776 
38. Ho S.H.  Martin F.  Higginbottom A.    Recombinant extracellular domains of tetraspanin proteins are potent inhibitors of the infection of macrophages by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 J Virol 2006 80 13 6487 96 10.1128/JVI.02539-05 16775336 
39. Parthasarathy V.  Martin F.  Higginbottom A.    Distinct roles for tetra-spanins CD9, CD63 and CD81 in the formation of multinucleated giant cells Immunology 2009 127 2 237 48 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02945.x 19489128 
40. Hemler M.E.   Targeting of tetraspanin proteins: potential benefits and strategies Nat Rev Drug Discov 2008 7 9 747 58 10.1038/nrd2659 18758472 
41. Sheng K.C.  van Spriel A.B.  Gartlan K.H.    Tetraspanins CD37 and CD151 differentially regulate Ag presentation and T-cell co-stimulation by DC Eur J Immunol 2009 39 1 50 5 10.1002/eji.200838798 19089816 
42. Pols M.S.  Klumperman J.   Trafficking and function of the tetraspanin CD63 Exp Cell Res 2009 315 9 1584 92 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.09.020 18930046 
43. Schorey J.S.  Bhatnagar S.   Exosome function: from tumor immunology to pathogen biology Traffic 2008 9 6 871 81 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00734.x 18331451 
44. Raposo G.  Nijman H.W.  Stoorvogel W.    B lymphocytes secrete antigenpresenting vesicles J Exp Med 1996 183 3 1161 72 10.1084/jem.183.3.1161 8642258 
45. Rous B.A.  Reaves B.J.  Ihrke G.    Role of adaptor complex AP-3 in targeting wild-type and mutated CD63 to lysosomes Mol Biol Cell 2002 13 3 1071 82 10.1091/mbc.01-08-0409 11907283 
46. Latysheva N.  Muratov G.  Rajesh S.    Syntenin-1 is a new component of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains: mechanisms and consequences of the interaction of syntenin-1 with CD63 Mol Cell Biol 2006 26 20 7707 18 10.1128/MCB.00849-06 16908530 
47. Duffield A.  Kamsteeg E.J.  Brown A.N.    The tetraspanin CD63 enhances the internalization of the H,K-ATPase beta-subunit Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 26 15560 5 10.1073/pnas.2536699100 14660791 
48. Takino T.  Miyamori H.  Kawaguchi N.    Tetraspanin CD63 promotes targeting and lysosomal proteolysis of membrane-type 1 matrix metallo-proteinase Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003 304 1 160 6 10.1016/S0006-291X(03)00544-8 12705901 
49. Mantegazza A.R.  Barrio M.M.  Moutel S.    CD63 tetraspanin slows down cell migration and translocates to the endosomal-lysosomal-MIICs route after extracellular stimuli in human immature dendritic cells Blood 2004 104 4 1183 90 10.1182/blood-2004-01-0104 15130945 
50. Kallquist L.  Hansson M.  Persson A.M.    The tetraspanin CD63 is involved in granule targeting of neutrophil elastase Blood 2008 112 8 3444 54 10.1182/blood-2007-10-116285 18669870 
51. Sutovsky P.   Sperm-egg adhesion and fusion in mammals [letter] Expert Rev Mol Med 2009 11 e11 10.1017/S1462399409001045 19335925 
52. Tachibana I.  Hemler M.E.   Role of transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) proteins CD9 and CD81 in muscle cell fusion and myotube maintenance J Cell Biol 1999 146 4 893 904 10.1083/jcb.146.4.893 10459022 
53. Takeda Y.  Tachibana I.  Miyado K.    Tetraspanins CD9 and CD81 function to prevent the fusion of mononuclear phagocytes J Cell Biol 2003 161 5 945 56 10.1083/jcb.200212031 12796480 
54. Anderson J.M.   Multinucleated giant cells Curr Opin Hematol 2000 7 1 40 7 10.1097/00062752-200001000-00008 10608503 
55. Wiley R.D.  Gummuluru S.   Immature dendritic cell-derived exosomes can mediate HIV-1 trans infection Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 3 738 43 10.1073/pnas.0507995103 16407131 
56. Garcia E.  Pion M.  Pelchen-Matthews A.    HIV-1 trafficking to the dendritic cell-T-cell infectious synapse uses a pathway of tetraspanin sorting to the immunological synapse Traffic 2005 6 6 488 501 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00293.x 15882445 
57. Shepard C.W.  Finelli L.  Alter M.J.   Global epidemiology of hepatitis C virus infection Lancet Infect Dis 2005 5 9 558 67 10.1016/S1473-3099(05)70216-4 16122679 
58. Seeger C.   Salient molecular features of hepatitis C virus revealed Trends Microbiol 2005 13 11 528 34 10.1016/j.tim.2005.08.011 16154356 
59. Op De Beeck A.  Voisset C.  Bartosch B.    Characterization of functional hepatitis C virus envelope glycoproteins J Virol 2004 78 6 2994 3002 10.1128/JVI.78.6.2994-3002.2004 14990718 
60. Pileri P.  Uematsu Y.  Campagnoli S.    Binding of hepatitis C virus to CD81 Science 1998 282 5390 938 41 10.1126/science.282.5390.938 9794763 
61. Petracca R.  Falugi F.  Galli G.    Structure-function analysis of hepatitis C virus envelope-CD81 binding J Virol 2000 74 10 4824 30 10.1128/JVI.74.10.4824-4830.2000 10775621 
62. Cormier E.G.  Tsamis F.  Kajumo F.    CD81 is an entry coreceptor for hepatitis C virus Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101 19 7270 4 10.1073/pnas.0402253101 15123813 
63. Grove J.  Huby T.  Stamataki Z.    Scavenger receptor BI and BII expression levels modulate hepatitis C virus infectivity J Virol 2007 81 7 3162 9 10.1128/JVI.02356-06 17215280 
64. Evans M.J.  von H. T.  Tscherne D.M.    Claudin-1 is a hepatitis C virus co-receptor required for a late step in entry Nature 2007 446 7137 801 5 10.1038/nature05654 17325668 
65. Ploss A.  Evans M.J.  Gaysinskaya V.A.    Human occludin is a hepatitis C virus entry factor required for infection of mouse cells Nature 2009 457 7231 882 6 10.1038/nature07684 19182773 
66. Meertens L.  Bertaux C.  Dragic T.   Hepatitis C virus entry requires a critical postinternalization step and delivery to early endosomes via clathrin-coated vesicles J Virol 2006 80 23 11571 8 10.1128/JVI.01717-06 17005647 
67. Sasaki M.  Yamauchi K.  Nakanishi T.    In vitro binding of hepatitis C virus to CD81-positive and -negative human cell lines J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2003 18 1 74 9 10.1046/j.1440-1746.2003.02925.x 12519228 
68. Scarselli E.  Ansuini H.  Cerino R.    The human scavenger receptor class B type I is a novel candidate receptor for the hepatitis C virus Embo J 2002 21 19 5017 25 10.1093/emboj/cdf529 12356718 
69. Kapadia S.B.  Barth H.  Baumert T.    Initiation of hepatitis C virus infection is dependent on cholesterol and cooperativity between CD81 and scavenger receptor B type I J Virol 2007 81 1 374 83 10.1128/JVI.01134-06 17050612 
70. Bertaux C.  Dragic T.   Different domains of CD81 mediate distinct stages of hepatitis C virus pseudoparticle entry J Virol 2006 80 10 4940 8 10.1128/JVI.80.10.4940-4948.2006 16641285 
71. Zeisel M.B.  Koutsoudakis G.  Schnober E.K.    Scavenger receptor class B type I is a key host factor for hepatitis C virus infection required for an entry step closely linked to CD81 Hepatology 2007 46 6 1722 31 10.1002/hep.21994 18000990 
72. Harris H.J.  Farquhar M.J.  Mee C.J.    CD81 and claudin 1 coreceptor association: role in hepatitis C virus entry J Virol 2008 82 10 5007 20 10.1128/JVI.02286-07 18337570 
73. Coyne C.B.  Bergelson J.M.   Virus-induced Abl and Fyn kinase signals permit coxsackievirus entry through epithelial tight junctions Cell 2006 124 1 119 31 10.1016/j.cell.2005.10.035 16413486 
74. Brazzoli M.  Bianchi A.  Filippini S.    CD81 is a central regulator of cellular events required for hepatitis C virus infection of human hepatocytes J Virol 2008 82 17 8316 29 10.1128/JVI.00665-08 18579606 
75. Brazzoli M.  Crotta S.  Bianchi A.    Intracellular accumulation of hepatitis C virus proteins in a human hepatoma cell line J Hepatol 2007 46 1 53 9 10.1016/j.jhep.2006.09.009 17107733 
76. Masciopinto F.  Giovani C.  Campagnoli S.    Association of hepatitis C virus envelope proteins with exosomes Eur J Immunol 2004 34 10 2834 42 10.1002/eji.200424887 15368299 
77. Timpe J.M.  McKeating J.A.   Hepatitis C virus entry: possible targets for therapy Gut 2008 57 12 1728 37 10.1136/gut.2007.141630 19022929 
78. Tseng C.T.  Klimpel G.R.   Binding of the hepatitis C virus envelope protein E2 to CD81 inhibits natural killer cell functions J Exp Med 2002 195 1 43 9 10.1084/jem.20011145 11781364 
79. Serra A.  Nuti S.  Tavarini S.    Coligation of the hepatitis C virus receptor CD81 with CD28 primes naive T lymphocytes to acquire type 2 effector function J Immunol 2008 181 1 174 85 18566382 
80. Nattermann J.  Nischalke H.D.  Feldmann G.    Binding of HCV E2 to CD81 induces RANTES secretion and internalization of CC chemokine receptor 5 J Viral Hepat 2004 11 6 519 26 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2004.00545.x 15500552 
81. Machida K.  Kondo Y.  Huang J.Y.    Hepatitis C virus (HCV)-induced immunoglobulin hypermutation reduces the affinity and neutralizing activities of antibodies against HCV envelope protein J Virol 2008 82 13 6711 20 10.1128/JVI.02582-07 18417597 
82. Mazzocca A.  Sciammetta S.C.  Carloni V.    Binding of hepatitis C virus envelope protein E2 to CD81 up-regulates matrix metalloproteinase-2 in human hepatic stellate cells J Biol Chem 2005 280 12 11329 39 10.1074/jbc.M410161200 15611113 
83. Gartner S.  Markovits P.  Markovitz D.M.    Virus isolation from and identification of HTLV-III/LAV-producing cells in brain tissue from a patient with AIDS JAMA 1986 256 17 2365 71 10.1001/jama.1986.03380170081023 3490587 
84. Piguet V.  Blauvelt A.   Essential roles for dendritic cells in the pathogenesis and potential treatment of HIV disease J Invest Dermatol 2002 119 2 365 9 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.01840.x 12190858 
85. Cameron P.U.  Freudenthal P.S.  Barker J.M.    Dendritic cells exposed to human immunodeficiency virus type-1 transmit a vigorous cytopathic infection to CD4+ T cells Science 1992 257 5068 383 7 10.1126/science.1352913 1352913 
86. Granelli-Piperno A.  Shimeliovich I.  Pack M.    HIV-1 selectively infects a subset of nonmaturing BDCA1-positive dendritic cells in human blood J Immunol 2006 176 2 991 8 16393985 
87. Dalgleish A.G.  Beverley P.C.  Clapham P.R.    The CD4 (T4) antigen is an essential component of the receptor for the AIDS retrovirus Nature 1984 312 5996 763 7 10.1038/312763a0 6096719 
88. Meerloo T.  Parmentier H.K.  Osterhaus A.D.    Modulation of cell surface molecules during HIV-1 infection of H9 cells: an immunoelectron microscopic study AIDS 1992 6 10 1105 16 10.1097/00002030-199210000-00007 1466841 
89. Meerloo T.  Sheikh M.A.  Bloem A.C.    Host cell membrane proteins on human immunodeficiency virus type 1 after in vitro infection of H9 cells and blood mononuclear cells: an immuno-electron microscopic study J Gen Virol 1993 74 129 35 10.1099/0022-1317-74-1-129 8093711 
90. Orentas R.J.  Hildreth J.E.   Association of host cell surface adhesion receptors and other membrane proteins with HIV and SIV AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1993 9 11 1157 65 10.1089/aid.1993.9.1157 8312057 
91. Ruiz-Mateos E.  Pelchen-Matthews A.  Deneka M.    CD63 is not required for production of infectious human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in human macrophages J Virol 2008 82 10 4751 61 10.1128/JVI.02320-07 18321974 
92. Sato K.  Aoki J.  Misawa N.    Modulation of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infectivity through incorporation of tetraspanin proteins J Virol 2008 82 2 1021 33 10.1128/JVI.01044-07 17989173 
93. von Lindern J.J.  Rojo D.  Grovit-Ferbas K.    Potential role for CD63 in CCR5-mediated human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection of macrophages J Virol 2003 77 6 3624 33 10.1128/JVI.77.6.3624-3633.2003 12610138 
94. Gordon-Alonso M.  Yanez-Mo M.  Barreiro O.    Tetraspanins CD9 and CD81 modulate HIV-1-induced membrane fusion J Immunol 2006 177 8 5129 37 17015697 
95. Delaguillaumie A.  Lagaudriere-Gesbert C.  Popoff M.R.    Rho GTPases link cytoskeletal rearrangements and activation processes induced via the tetraspanin CD82 in T lymphocytes J Cell Sci 2002 115 433 43 11839793 
96. Garcia E.  Nikolic D.S.  Piguet V.   HIV-1 replication in dendritic cells occurs through a tetraspanin-containing compartment enriched in AP-3 Traffic 2008 9 2 200 14 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00678.x 18034776 
97. Raposo G.  Moore M.  Innes D.    Human macrophages accumulate HIV-1 particles in MHC II compartments Traffic 2002 3 10 718 29 10.1034/j.1600-0854.2002.31004.x 12230470 
98. Pelchen-Matthews A.  Kramer B.  Marsh M.   Infectious HIV-1 assembles in late endosomes in primary macrophages J Cell Biol 2003 162 3 443 55 10.1083/jcb.200304008 12885763 
99. Ono A.  Freed E.O.   Cell-type-dependent targeting of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 assembly to the plasma membrane and the multivesicular body J Virol 2004 78 3 1552 63 10.1128/JVI.78.3.1552-1563.2004 14722309 
100. Kramer B.  Pelchen-Matthews A.  Deneka M.    HIV interaction with endosomes in macrophages and dendritic cells Blood Cells Mol Dis 2005 35 2 136 42 10.1016/j.bcmd.2005.06.006 16087369 
101. Deneka M.  Pelchen-Matthews A.  Byland R.    In macrophages, HIV-1 assembles into an intracellular plasma membrane domain containing the tetraspanins CD81, CD9, and CD53 J Cell Biol 2007 177 2 329 41 10.1083/jcb.200609050 17438075 
102. Chen H.  Dziuba N.  Friedrich B.    A critical role for CD63 in HIV replication and infection of macrophages and cell lines Virology 2008 379 2 191 6 10.1016/j.virol.2008.06.029 18682304 
103. Jolly C.  Sattentau Q.J.   Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 assembly, budding, and cell-cell spread in T cells take place in tetraspanin-enriched plasma membrane domains J Virol 2007 81 15 7873 84 10.1128/JVI.01845-06 17522207 
104. Booth A.M.  Fang Y.  Fallon J.K.    Exosomes and HIV Gag bud from endosome-like domains of the T cell plasma membrane J Cell Biol 2006 172 6 923 35 10.1083/jcb.200508014 16533950 
105. Grigorov B.  Attuil-Audenis V.  Perugi F.    A role for CD81 on the late steps of HIV-1 replication in a chronically infected T cell line [letter] Retrovirology 2009 6 28 10.1186/1742-4690-6-28 19284574 
106. Tardif M.R.  Tremblay M.J.   Tetraspanin CD81 provides a costimulatory signal resulting in increased human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gene expression in primary CD4+ T lymphocytes through NF-kappaB, NFAT, and AP-1 transduction pathways J Virol 2005 79 7 4316 28 10.1128/JVI.79.7.4316-4328.2005 15767432 
107. Yoshida T.  Kawano Y.  Sato K.    A CD63 mutant inhibits T-cell tropic human immunodeficiency virus type 1 entry by disrupting CXCR4 trafficking to the plasma membrane Traffic 2008 9 4 540 58 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00700.x 18182005 
108. Tumne A.  Prasad V.S.  Chen Y.    Noncytotoxic suppression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transcription by exosomes secreted from CD8+ T cells J Virol 2009 83 9 4354 64 10.1128/JVI.02629-08 19193788 
109. Manns A.  Hisada M.  La Grenade L.   Human T-lymphotropic virus type I infection Lancet 1999 353 9168 1951 8 10.1016/S0140-6736(98)09460-4 10371587 
110. Yamamoto N.  Hinuma Y.   Viral aetiology of adult T-cell leukaemia J Gen Virol 1985 66 1641 60 10.1099/0022-1317-66-8-1641 2991434 
111. Weiss R.A.  Clapham P.  Nagy K.    Envelope properties of human T-cell leukemia viruses Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1985 115 235 46 10.1007/978-3-642-70113-9_15 2983944 
112. Shibagaki N.  Hanada K.  Yamaguchi S.    Functional analysis of CD82 in the early phase of T cell activation: roles in cell adhesion and signal transduction Eur J Immunol 1998 28 4 1125 33 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199804)28:04<1125::AID-IMMU1125>3.0.CO;2-C 9565351 
113. Imai T.  Fukudome K.  Takagi S.    C33 antigen recognized by monoclonal antibodies inhibitory to human T cell leukemia virus type 1-induced syncytium formation is a member of a new family of transmembrane proteins including CD9, CD37, CD53, and CD63 J Immunol 1992 149 9 2879 86 1401919 
114. Fukudome K.  Furuse M.  Imai T.    Identification of membrane antigen C33 recognized by monoclonal antibodies inhibitory to human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-induced syncytium formation: altered glycosylation of C33 antigen in HTLV-1-positive T cells J Virol 1992 66 3 1394 401 1738199 
115. Pique C.  Lagaudriere-Gesbert C.  Delamarre L.    Interaction of CD82 tetraspanin proteins with HTLV-1 envelope glycoproteins inhibits cell-to-cell fusion and virus transmission Virology 2000 276 2 455 65 10.1006/viro.2000.0538 11040136 
116. Heidecker G.  Lloyd P.A.  Fox K.    Late assembly motifs of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 and their relative roles in particle release J Virol 2004 78 12 6636 48 10.1128/JVI.78.12.6636-6648.2004 15163754 
117. Mazurov D.  Heidecker G.  Derse D.   HTLV-1 Gag protein associates with CD82 tetraspanin microdomains at the plasma membrane Virology 2006 346 1 194 204 10.1016/j.virol.2005.10.033 16325219 
118. Mazurov D.  Heidecker G.  Derse D.   The inner loop of tetraspanins CD82 and CD81 mediates interactions with human T cell lymphotrophic virus type 1 Gag protein J Biol Chem 2007 282 6 3896 903 10.1074/jbc.M607322200 17166843 
119. Hasegawa H.  Nomura T.  Kishimoto K.    SFA-1/PETA-3 (CD151), a member of the transmembrane 4 superfamily, associates preferentially with alpha 5 beta 1 integrin and regulates adhesion of human T cell leukemia virus type 1-infected T cells to fibronectin J Immunol 1998 161 6 3087 95 9743375 
120. Hoffmann-Fezer G.  Thum J.  Ackley C.    Decline in CD4+cell numbers in cats with naturally acquired feline immunodeficiency virus infection J Virol 1992 66 3 1484 8 1310760 
121. Willett B.J.  Hosie M.J.  Jarrett O.    Identification of a putative cellular receptor for feline immunodeficiency virus as the feline homologue of CD9 Immunology 1994 81 2 228 33 8157271 
122. Hohdatsu T.  Hirabayashi H.  Motokawa K.    Comparative study of the cell tropism of feline immunodeficiency virus isolates of subtypes A, B and D classified on the basis of the env gene V3-V5 sequence J Gen Virol 1996 77 93 100 10.1099/0022-1317-77-1-93 8558132 
123. de Parseval A.  Lerner D.L.  Borrow P.    Blocking of feline immunodeficiency virus infection by a monoclonal antibody to CD9 is via inhibition of virus release rather than interference with receptor binding J Virol 1997 71 8 5742 9 9223460 
124. Willett B.  Hosie M.  Shaw A.    Inhibition of feline immunodeficiency virus infection by CD9 antibody operates after virus entry and is independent of virus tropism J Gen Virol 1997 78 611 8 9049412 
125. Mamaev L.V.  Visser I.K.  Belikov S.I.    Canine distemper virus in Lake Baikal seals (Phoca sibirica ). Vet Rec 1996 138 18 437 9 10.1136/vr.138.18.437 8735261 
126. Loffler S.  Lottspeich F.  Lanza F.    CD9, a tetraspan transmembrane protein, renders cells susceptible to canine distemper virus J Virol 1997 71 1 42 9 8985321 
127. Schmid E.  Zurbriggen A.  Gassen U.    Antibodies to CD9, a tetraspan transmembrane protein, inhibit canine distemper virus-induced cell-cell fusion but not virus-cell fusion J Virol 2000 74 16 7554 61 10.1128/JVI.74.16.7554-7561.2000 10906209 
128. Singethan K.  Topfstedt E.  Schubert S.    CD9-dependent regulation of canine distemper virus-induced cell-cell fusion segregates with the extracellular domain of the haemagglutinin J Gen Virol 2006 87 1635 42 10.1099/vir.0.81629-0 16690928 
129. Singethan K.  Muller N.  Schubert S.    CD9 clustering and formation of microvilli zippers between contacting cells regulates virus-induced cell fusion Traffic 2008 9 6 924 35 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00737.x 18363777 
130. Lozahic S.  Christiansen D.  Manie S.    CD46 (membrane cofactor protein) associates with multiple beta1 integrins and tetraspans Eur J Immunol 2000 30 3 900 7 10.1002/1521-4141(200003)30:3<900::AID-IMMU900>3.0.CO;2-X 10741407 
131. Kurita-Taniguchi M.  Hazeki K.  Murabayashi N.    Molecular assembly of CD46 with CD9, alpha3-beta1 integrin and protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 in human macrophages through differentiation by GM-CSF Mol Immunol 2002 38 9 689 700 10.1016/S0161-5890(01)00100-6 11858824 
132. Shanmukhappa K.  Kim J.K.  Kapil S.   Role of CD 151, A tetraspanin, in porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus infection [letter] Virol J 2007 4 62 10.1186/1743-422X-4-62 17572908 
133. Doorbar J.   Molecular biology of human papillomavirus infection and cervical cancer Clin Sci (Lond) 2006 110 5 525 41 10.1042/CS20050369 16597322 
134. Munoz N.  Bosch F.X.  de Sanjose S.    Epidemiologic classification of human papillomavirus types associated with cervical cancer N Engl J Med 2003 348 6 518 27 10.1056/NEJMoa021641 12571259 
135. Giroglou T.  Florin L.  Schafer F.    Human papillomavirus infection requires cell surface heparan sulfate J Virol 2001 75 3 1565 70 10.1128/JVI.75.3.1565-1570.2001 11152531 
136. McMillan N.A.  Payne E.  Frazer I.H.    Expression of the alpha6 integrin confers papillomavirus binding upon receptor-negative B-cells Virology 1999 261 2 271 9 10.1006/viro.1999.9825 10497112 
137. Day P.M.  Lowy D.R.  Schiller J.T.   Papillomaviruses infect cells via a clathrin-dependent pathway Virology 2003 307 1 1 11 10.1016/S0042-6822(02)00143-5 12667809 
138. Spoden G.  Freitag K.  Husmann M.    Clathrin- and caveolin-independent entry of human papillomavirus type 16: involvement of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains (TEMs) [letter] PLoS ONE 2008 3 10 e3313 10.1371/journal.pone.0003313 18836553 
139. Craft J.C.   Challenges facing drug development for malaria Curr Opin Microbiol 2008 11 5 428 33 10.1016/j.mib.2008.09.003 18824124 
140. Prudencio M.  Rodriguez A.  Mota M.M.   The silent path to thousands of merozoites: the Plasmodium liver stage Nat Rev Microbiol 2006 4 11 849 56 10.1038/nrmicro1529 17041632 
141. Silvie O.  Charrin S.  Billard M.    Cholesterol contributes to the organization of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains and to CD81-dependent infection by malaria sporozoites J Cell Sci 2006 119 1992 2002 10.1242/jcs.02911 16687736 
142. Charrin S.  Manie S.  Thiele C.    A physical and functional link between cholesterol and tetraspanins Eur J Immunol 2003 33 9 2479 89 10.1002/eji.200323884 12938224 
143. Yalaoui S.  Zougbede S.  Charrin S.    Hepatocyte permissiveness to Plasmodium infection is conveyed by a short and structurally conserved region of the CD81 large extracellular domain [letter] PLoS Pathog 2008 4 2 e1000010 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000010 18389082 
144. Higginbottom A.  Quinn E.R.  Kuo C.C.    Identification of amino acid residues in CD81 critical for interaction with hepatitis C virus envelope glycoprotein E2 J Virol 2000 74 8 3642 9 10.1128/JVI.74.8.3642-3649.2000 10729140 
145. Silvie O.  Franetich J.F.  Boucheix C.    Alternative invasion pathways for Plasmodium b erghei sporozoites Int J Parasitol 2007 37 2 173 82 10.1016/j.ijpara.2006.10.005 17112526 
146. Rodrigues C.D.  Hannus M.  Prudencio M.    Host scavenger receptor SR-BI plays a dual role in the establishment of malaria parasite liver infection Cell Host Microbe 2008 4 3 271 82 10.1016/j.chom.2008.07.012 18779053 
147. Pappenheimer A.M. Jr   Diphtheria toxin Annu Rev Biochem 1977 46 69 94 10.1146/annurev.bi.46.070177.000441 20040 
148. Mitamura T.  Iwamoto R.  Umata T.    The 27-kD diphtheria toxin receptor-associated protein (DRAP27) from vero cells is the monkey homologue of human CD9 antigen: expression of DRAP27 elevates the number of diphtheria toxin receptors on toxin-sensitive cells J Cell Biol 1992 118 6 1389 99 10.1083/jcb.118.6.1389 1522113 
149. Iwamoto R.  Higashiyama S.  Mitamura T.    Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor, which acts as the diphtheria toxin receptor, forms a complex with membrane protein DRAP27/CD9, which up-regulates functional receptors and diphtheria toxin sensitivity EMBO J 1994 13 10 2322 30 8194524 
150. Cha J.H.  Brooke J.S.  Ivey K.N.    Cell surface monkey CD9 antigen is a coreceptor that increases diphtheria toxin sensitivity and diphtheria toxin receptor affinity J Biol Chem 2000 275 10 6901 7 10.1074/jbc.275.10.6901 10702250 
151. Hasuwa H.  Shishido Y.  Yamazaki A.    CD9 amino acids critical for upregulation of diphtheria toxin binding Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001 289 4 782 90 10.1006/bbrc.2001.6053 11735113 
152. Capitani G.  Eidam O.  Glockshuber R.    Structural and functional insights into the assembly of type 1 pili from Escherichia coli  Microbes Infect 2006 8 8 2284 90 10.1016/j.micinf.2006.03.013 16793308 
153. Yu J.  Lin J.H.  Wu X.R.    Uroplakins Ia and Ib, two major differentiation products of bladder epithelium, belong to a family of four transmembrane domain (4TM) proteins J Cell Biol 1994 125 1 171 82 10.1083/jcb.125.1.171 8138569 
154. WuXR S. T.  Medina J.J.   In vitro binding of type 1-fimbriated Escherichia coli to uroplakins Ia and Ib: relation to urinary tract infections Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 93 18 9630 5 10.1073/pnas.93.18.9630 8790381 
155. Zhou G.  Mo W.J.  Sebbel P.    Uroplakin Ia is the urothelial receptor for uropathogenic Escherichia c oli: evidence from in vitro FimH binding J Cell Sci 2001 114 4095 103 11739641 
156. Xie B.  Zhou G.  Chan S.Y.    Distinct glycan structures of uroplakins Ia and Ib: structural basis for the selective binding of FimH adhesin to uroplakin Ia J Biol Chem 2006 281 21 14644 53 10.1074/jbc.M600877200 16567801 
157. Duncan M.J.  Li G.  Shin J.S.    Bacterial penetration of bladder epithelium through lipid rafts J Biol Chem 2004 279 18 18944 51 10.1074/jbc.M400769200 14976212 
158. Mulvey M.A.  Schilling J.D.  Hultgren S.J.   Establishment of a persistent Escherichia c oli reservoir during the acute phase of a bladder infection Infect Immun 2001 69 7 4572 9 10.1128/IAI.69.7.4572-4579.2001 11402001 
159. Bishop B.L.  Duncan M.J.  Song J.    Cyclic AMP-regulated exocytosis of Escherichia c oli from infected bladder epithelial cells Nat Med 2007 13 5 625 30 10.1038/nm1572 17417648 
160. Schachter J.   The intracellular life of Chlamydia  Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1988 138 109 39 3058387 
161. Beatty W.L.   Late endocytic multivesicular bodies intersect the chlamydial inclusion in the absence of CD63 Infect Immun 2008 76 7 2872 81 10.1128/IAI.00129-08 18426873 
162. Taylor D.R.  Hooper N.M.   Role of lipid rafts in the processing of the pathogenic prion and Alzheimer's amyloid-beta proteins Semin Cell Dev Biol 2007 18 5 638 48 10.1016/j.semcdb.2007.07.008 17822928 
163. Guo M.  Huang T.  Cui Y.    PrPC interacts with tetraspanin-7 through bovine PrP154-182 containing alpha-helix 1 Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008 365 1 154 7 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.10.160 17981143 
164. Doh-ura K.  Mekada E.  Ogomori K.    Enhanced CD9 expression in the mouse and human brains infected with transmissible spongiform encephalopathies J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2000 59 9 774 85 11005258 
165. Tamguney G.  Giles K.  Glidden D.V.    Genes contributing to prion pathogenesis J Gen Virol 2008 89 1777 88 10.1099/vir.0.2008/001255-0 18559949 
166. Bente D.A.  Rico-Hesse R.   Models of dengue virus infection Drug Discov Today Dis Models 2006 3 1 97 103 10.1016/j.ddmod.2006.03.014 18087566 
167. Courageot M.P.  Catteau A.  Despres P.   Mechanisms of dengue virus-induced cell death Adv Virus Res 2003 60 157 86 10.1016/S0065-3527(03)60005-9 14689694 
168. Chen Y.R.  Hwang J.S.  Guo Y.J.   Ecology and control of dengue vector mosquitoes in Taiwan Gaoxiong Yi Xue Ke Xue Za Zhi 1994 10 S78 87 7844855 
169. Lin C.C.  Yang C.F.  Tu C.H.    A novel tetraspanin C189 upregulated in C6/36 mosquito cells following dengue 2 virus infection Virus Res 2007 124 1-2 176 83 10.1016/j.virusres.2006.11.002 17156880 
170. Sessions O.M.  Barrows N.J.  Souza-Neto J.A.    Discovery of insect and human dengue virus host factors Nature 2009 458 7241 1047 50 10.1038/nature07967 19396146 
171. Wright M.D.  Henkle K.J.  Mitchell G.F.   An immunogenic Mr 23,000 integral membrane protein of Schistosoma m ansoni worms that closely resembles a human tumor-associated antigen J Immunol 1990 144 8 3195 200 2324498 
172. Tran M.H.  Pearson M.S.  Bethony J.M.    Tetraspanins on the surface of Schistosoma m ansoni are protective antigens against schistosomiasis Nat Med 2006 12 7 835 40 10.1038/nm1430 16783371 
173. Da'dara A.A.  Li Y.S.  Xiong T.    DNA-based vaccines protect against zoonotic schistosomiasis in water buffalo Vaccine 2008 26 29-30 3617 25 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.04.080 18524429 
174. Manes S.  del Real G.  Martinez A.C.   Pathogens: raft hijackers Nat Rev Immunol 2003 3 7 557 68 10.1038/nri1129 12876558 
175. Butler D.   Swine flu goes global Nature 2009 458 7242 1082 3 10.1038/4581082a 19407756 
176. Wang L.F.  Eaton B.T.   Bats, civets and the emergence of SARS Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2007 315 325 44 10.1007/978-3-540-70962-6_13 17848070 
177. Eaton B.T.  Broder C.C.  Middleton D.    Hendra and Nipah viruses: different and dangerous Nat Rev Microbiol 2006 4 1 23 35 10.1038/nrmicro1323 16357858 
178. Lam S.K.   Nipah virus-a potential agent of bioterrorism? Antiviral Res 2003 57 1-2 113 9 10.1016/S0166-3542(02)00204-8 12615307 
179. Flint M.  von Hahn T.  Zhang J.    Diverse CD81 proteins support hepatitis C virus infection J Virol 2006 80 22 11331 42 10.1128/JVI.00104-06 16943299 
180. Drummer H.E.  Wilson K.A.  Poumbourios P.   Identification of the hepatitis C virus E2 glycoprotein binding site on the large extracellular loop of CD81 J Virol 2002 76 21 11143 7 10.1128/JVI.76.21.11143-11147.2002 12368358 
181. Dhanasekaran M.  Baures P.W.  VanCompernolle S.    Structural characterization of peptide fragments from hCD81-LEL J Pept Res 2003 61 2 80 9 10.1034/j.1399-3011.2003.00038.x 12492902 
182. VanCompernolle S.E.  Wiznycia A.V.  Rush J.R.    Small molecule inhibition of hepatitis C virus E2 binding to CD81 Virology 2003 314 1 371 80 10.1016/S0042-6822(03)00406-9 14517089 
183. Molina S.  Castet V.  Pichard-Garcia L.    Serum-derived hepatitis C virus infection of primary human hepatocytes is tetraspanin CD81 dependent J Virol 2008 82 1 569 74 10.1128/JVI.01443-07 17942559 
184. Meuleman P.  Hesselgesser J.  Paulson M.    Anti-CD81 antibodies can prevent a hepatitis C virus infection in vivo Hepatology 2008 48 6 1761 8 10.1002/hep.22547 19030166 
185. Knappik A.  Ge L.  Honegger A.    Fully synthetic human combinatorial antibody libraries (HuCAL) based on modular consensus frameworks and CDRs randomized with trinucleotides J Mol Biol 2000 296 1 57 86 10.1006/jmbi.1999.3444 10656818 
186. Rocha-Perugini V.  Montpellier C.  Delgrange D.    The CD81 partner EWI-2wint inhibits hepatitis C virus entry [letter] PLoS ONE 2008 3 4 e1 866 10.1371/journal.pone.0001866 
187. Stipp C.S.  Kolesnikova T.V.  Hemler M.E.   EWI-2 is a major CD9 and CD81 partner and member of a novel Ig protein subfamily J Biol Chem 2001 276 44 40545 54 10.1074/jbc.M107338200 11504738 
188. Charrin S.  Manie S.  Oualid M.    Differential stability of tetraspanin/tetraspanin interactions: role of palmitoylation FEBS Lett 2002 516 1-3 139 44 10.1016/S0014-5793(02)02522-X 11959120 
189. Sharma C.  Yang X.H.  Hemler M.E.   DHHC2 affects palmitoylation, stability, and functions of tetraspanins CD9 and CD151 Mol Biol Cell 2008 19 8 3415 25 10.1091/mbc.E07-11-1164 18508921 
190. Aouadi M.  Tesz G.J.  Nicoloro S.M.    Orally delivered siRNA targeting macrophage Map4k4 suppresses systemic inflammation Nature 2009 458 7242 1180 4 10.1038/nature07774 19407801 
191. Barrio M.M.  Portela P.  Mordoh J.   Monoclonal antibody FC-5.01, directed against CD63 antigen, is internalized into cytoplasmic vesicles in the IIB-BR-G human breast cancer cell line Hybridoma 1998 17 6 517 25 10.1089/hyb.1998.17.517 9890707

