
==== Front
BJGP OpenBJGP OpenbjgpoabjgpoaBJGP Open2398-3795Royal College of General Practitioners 10.3399/bjgpopen17X101133bjgpoaPractice & PolicyQuality circles to identify barriers, facilitating factors, and solutions for high-quality primary care for asylum seekers Straßner Cornelia MD1*Gewalt Sandra Claudia MSc, MD2Becker von Rose Peta MD3Lorenzen Detlef MD3Szecsenyi Joachim MSSc, MD4Bozorgmehr Kayvan MSc, MD51 GP & Researcher, Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany2 Researcher, Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany3 GP, Werkstatt Gesundheit e.V, Heidelberg, Germany4 GP & Head of Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany5 Senior Researcher, Department of General Practice and Health Services Research, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany*For correspondence: cornelia.strassner@med.uni-heidelberg.de04 10 2017 10 2017 1 3 bjgpopen17X10113323 2 2017 10 4 2017 Copyright © The Authors, 20172017The AuthorsThis article is Open Access: CC BY-NC 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)quality circleasylum seekerprimary carereception centrenumber-line-figures2.5number-colour-figures2.5editor2.5file_permissions2.5
==== Body
Background
In 2015 Germany received more than 476 600 asylum applications.1 Incoming asylum seekers are accommodated in reception centres (RCs) for up to 6 months before they are dispersed to other federal states or districts. Due to the high immigration since the end of 2014, many federal states established new RCs to expand their capacities in hosting asylum seekers. Baden Württemberg, for example, one of the largest federal states receiving about 13% of incoming asylum seekers, expanded its capacity from one RC up until 2014 to five RCs thereafter. Since there are no nationwide standards in place, healthcare provision in RCs is highly heterogeneously organised and fragmented.2 In Heidelberg, former barracks of the US army were reorganised as an RC in August 2015 and hosted about 6500 asylum seekers. The concentration of asylum seekers in the RC, linked with insufficient provision of primary health care, led to an unmanageable number of consultations in emergency departments of nearby hospitals. Asylum seekers have specific healthcare needs due to exposure to pre-, peri-, and postmigration health risks. These include traumatic events,3 endemic infectious diseases in the countries of origin or transit,4 and chronic conditions which may have been exacerbated during the migration process. They are also at higher risk of developing psychological distress5 and acquiring infectious diseases in the host country due to mass accommodation.6

To address both the shortcomings in primary care provision and the special needs, a walk-in clinic jointly led by the university hospital, the public health services, and the local physicians’ association was established in the RC with funds from the state government and the university hospital. The clinic provides general medicine as well as gynecological, paediatric, and psychiatric and psychosomatic health care.

The aim of this article is to report challenges and solutions of establishing high-quality primary health care for asylum seekers and meeting their specific needs in the particular setting of a large RC.

Although other countries may not have similar RCs, the situation may change as the contemporary migration flows are very dynamic. Thus, this report may be useful for GPs to gain an insight into possible ways of managing these highly vulnerable people whose complex health needs often present a challenge in conventional healthcare settings.

Analysis of current care
After a negotiation and planning period of 8 months, medical services were initiated in February 2016. In July 2016 a group discussion among 24 healthcare professionals working in the clinic was organised to conduct a situation analysis and to identify barriers and solutions for the provision of high-quality care. Emerging issues could be assigned to 10 major themes (Box 1). The cooperation of different professions in the clinic was seen as advantage but due to a high turnover of staff assuring continuity of care was challenging. In this context, the need for improved documentation of medical data was raised. Medical treatment was perceived more difficult than usual due to high numbers of patients with special needs (for example, drug-addicted patients or patients with infectious diseases such as tuberculosis or hepatitis) and lack of country-specific diagnostic algorithms. A lack of resources, especially of assistants, interpreters, and medical supplies, affected the provision of care. Yet the general infrastructure of the clinic including the in-door-pharmacy was considered an advantage. Legal aspects were also mentioned as aggravating factors: The German Asylum Seekers Benefits Act limits the provision of care to acute and painful conditions, maternity care services, preventive medical checkups, vaccinations, and so called 'indispensable services'.7 This vague definition created uncertainties among providers about the scope of care provided in the clinic: acute and emergency care or continuous primary and specialised care. Thus, the scope of care provided was highly dependent on the personal attitude of the individual physician. However, the strong commitment of all staff who perceived their tasks as being meaningful was considered a facilitating factor.

Box 1. Barriers, enablers and strategies for assuring high-quality care for asylum seekers in a German reception centre
Theme	Barriers	Facilitators	Solutions	
Cooperation	Lack of exchange of relevant information between providers

	Trustful interprofessional cooperation of university and local resident physicians in one clinic

	Consequent use of a previously introduced paper-based patient health record11

	
Documentation	Loss of information due to insufficient documentation/poor readability

Dual documentation in two record systems (one of the university hospital, one of the local resident doctors)

Unclear how to archive medical and laboratory results

	Availability of a previously introduced paper-based personal health record11

	Clarification with the university hospital’s administration to only use one documentation software

Design of a pattern to standardise documentation in the software

Software training for resident physicians was performed

Installation of a software module to import laboratory results and training of staff how to use it

	
Medical treatment	Unclear how to handle patients with psychotropic dependency

Shortcomings in assuring follow-up visits and continuity of care

Lack of guidelines or standards for frequent reasons of consultation and infectious diseases

Lack of time to address psychosocial causes of symptoms

	Interprofessional, interdisciplinary team

	Composition of a detoxification contract in various languages that all patients with psychotropic dependency have to sign

Exchange with staff of advisory services for asylum seekers for social and legal issues during a quality circle meeting

Guideline for diagnostics of infectious diseases will be elaborated in cooperation with the Department of Tropical Medicine

	
Human resources	Lack of interpreters

Lack of support staff for medical and administrative tasks

	Support by medical students

	Employment of interpreters for frequent languages

Employment of nurses

	
Material resources	Lack of drug supplies and vaccinations

Shortage and lacking standardisation of necessary equipment

Lack of well-functioning soft- and hardware (such as record system and printers)

	Existence of an in-house pharmacy

Adequate facility

	Design of a checklist and implementation of a daily tour through the facility by a designated person to assure availability of equipment

	
Politics and legislation	Uncertainties among healthcare professionals about the scope of care covered by Asylum Seekers’ Benefits Act

Uncertainties related to issuing medical certificates with relevance for the asylum procedure

		Invitation of an advocate specialised in asylum law is planned

	
Motivation/attitudes	Unclear self-concept of the walk-in clinic: emergency department versus primary care practice

	Work is considered a meaningful task

Work is considered interesting because of wide range of cases

High level of commitment from all staff

		
Patient behaviour	High number of family members attending consultations

Cultural differences in communication and behaviour

	Thankful patients

	Workshop on cultural competence was offered

	
Healthcare providers’ behaviour	Lack of discretion (staff comes in without knocking)

		Room divider was bought

	
Organisational processes	Registration: lack of triage mechanisms to identify patients with acute conditions

Registration: previous healthcare provision is not considered leading to redundancies in diagnostics and channeling to wrong specialisation

Emergency case is not complete

		Checklist for content of emergency case and a responsible person for regular controls were defined

	
Solutions to address barriers and facilitating factors
The findings of the situation analysis led to the joint agreement to introduce a quality circle (QC). QCs can be defined as autonomous peer groups of healthcare professionals who meet on a regular basis and aim at assessment and improvement of quality of care in their own practices.8 They are characterised by a result-oriented approach identifying quality problems and strategies to address these problems.9 QCs have become a globally recognised instrument for quality improvement in Europe8,9 and are partly even obligatory for GPs in South Germany.

Two measures were undertaken to support the implementation of a regular and effective QC for clinic staff: the participants themselves decided on the frequency, the course and content of the meetings (bottom-up approach). The QC was accredited and the participants received credits for their continuous medical education.

Four QC meetings were held so far in intervals of 6–8 weeks. Each took approximately 2 hours and was marked by vivid discussions. With, on average, 24 participants from different professions and disciplines participation was continuously high. Although we did not conduct a systematic evaluation of the QC, we monitored the target achievements as this is part of the QC concept. Several solutions have been elaborated and implemented so far (Box 1). Measures on an organisational level such as creating checklists for the equipment and standardising procedures were implemented successfully. Difficulties were faced when barriers on a legal, political, or national level had to be addressed; for example, to create guidelines for frequent reasons for counselling in accordance with national guidelines and the entitlements covered by the Asylum Seekers’ Benefits Act.

Discussion
When establishing healthcare services for asylum seekers many quality issues —﻿ partly similar, partly distinct from usual care —﻿ arise. Our experiences show that QCs, which have proved a suitable instrument for quality improvement in German primary care over years, are also helpful to foster quality improvements in special settings such as RCs for asylum seekers. However, structural barriers such as legal restrictions, financial limitations, or a lack of national clinical guidelines for the specific setting of RCs limit the full potential of QCs to improve care. Beside local initiatives national endeavours are necessary to assure high standards of health care for asylum seekers and to avoid harm, as the medical code of ethics demands. Health care for asylum seekers in Germany is currently characterised by an overwhelming heterogeneity due to decentralised organisation and responsibilities.1,10 We argue that measures to assure high quality standards should be enforced in healthcare services for asylum seekers just as in regular care. QCs may be an effective instrument for quality improvement beyond conventional audit approaches. We recommend to establish QCs in respective institutions.

Funding
Kayvan Bozorgmehr receives grants by the Federal Ministry of Research and Education (BMBF) in the scope of the research programme 'Strukturaufbau in der Versorgungsforschung' (grant number: FKZ 01GY1611). No funding was received for performing quality circles or writing this article.

Provenance
Freely submitted; externally peer reviewed.

Acknowledgment
We are grateful to all staff of the walk-in clinic and all collaborating departments for the continuous commitment and good cooperation.

Competing interests
CS: Cornelia Straßner and Joachim Szecsenyi moderated the quality circles.

JS: Cornelia Straßner and Joachim Szecsenyi moderated the quality circles.

The other authors declare that no competing interests exist.
==== Refs
References
1. Federal Office for Migration and Refugees  Das Bundesamt in Zahlen 2015 Asyl, Migration und Integration, Germany https://www.bamf.de/SharedDocs/Anlagen/DE/Publikationen/Broschueren/bundesamt-in-zahlen-2015.pdf?__blob=publicationFile accessed 15 8 2017  
2. Bozorgmehr K  Nöst S  Thaiss HM  et al  Health care provisions for asylum-seekers: a nationwide survey of public health authorities in Germany [in German] Bundesgesundheitsblatt, Gesundheitsforschung, Gesundheitsschutz 2016 59 5 545 555 10.1007/s00103-016-2329-4 27072501 
3. Reed RV  Fazel M  Jones L  et al  Mental health of displaced and refugee children resettled in low-income and middle-income countries: risk and protective factors The Lancet 2012 379 9812 250 265 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60050-0 
4. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control  Infectious diseases of specific relevance to newly-arrived migrants in the EU/EEA – 19 November 2015 http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/Infectious-diseases-of-specific-relevance-to-newly-arrived-migrants-in-EU-EEA.pdf accessed 14 8 2017  
5. Porter M  Haslam N   Predisplacement and postdisplacement factors associated with mental health of refugees and internally displaced persons: a meta-analysis JAMA 2005 294 5 602 612 10.1001/jama.294.5.602 16077055 
6. Kühne A  Gilsdorf A   Infectious disease outbreaks in centralized homes for asylum seekers in Germany from 2004–2014 [in German] Bundesgesundheitsblatt, Gesundheitsforschung, Gesundheitsschutz 2016 59 5 570 577 10.1007/s00103-016-2332-9 27072500 
7. Bozorgmehr K  Razum O   Effect of restricting access to health care on health expenditures among asylum-seekers and refugees: a quasi-experimental study in Germany, 1994–2013 Plos One 2015 10 7 e0131483 10.1371/journal.pone.0131483 26201017 
8. Beyer M  Gerlach FM  Flies U  et al  The development of quality circles/peer review groups as a method of quality improvement in Europe. Results of a survey in 26 European countries Fam Pract 2003 20 4 443 451 12876119 
9. Munck A  Damsgaard J  Hansen DG,  et al  The Nordic method for quality improvement in general practice Qual Prim Care 2003 11 73 78 
10. Wahedi K  Nöst S  Bozorgmehr K   Health examination of asylum seekers: a nationwide analysis of state policies in Germany : § 62 of the asylum law [in German] Bundesgesundheitsblatt, Gesundheitsforschung, Gesundheitsschutz 2017 60 1 1 10 10.1007/s00103-016-2489-2 27933332 
11. University Hospital Heidelberg  A patient-held health-record for asylum-seekers in reception centres to improve continuity of care, Germany. http://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN13212716 accessed 15 8 2017

