
==== Front
BJGP OpenBJGP OpenbjgpoabjgpoaBJGP Open2398-3795Royal College of General Practitioners 10.3399/bjgpopen17X10107300929ResearchProcess evaluation of integrated early child development care at private clinics in poor urban Pakistan: a mixed methods study Khan Muhammad Amir DHA, MPH, PhD, FFPH1Owais Syeda Somyyah MSPH2*Ishaq Sehrish MSPH, PGD Community Health and Nutrition3Walley John MComH, FFPH, MRCGP4Khan Haroon Jehangir BSc, MA HMPP, MPH, FRIPH5Blacklock Claire MRCP, MRCGP, DTM&H, PGDip6Khan Muhammad Ahmar MBBS7Azeem Muhammad Waqar MD, DFAACAP, DFAPA81 Chief Coordinating Professional, Association for Social Development, Islamabad, Pakistan2 Project Manager, Association for Social Development, Islamabad, Pakistan3 Project Coordinator, Association for Social Development, Islamabad, Pakistan4 Professor of Internal Public Health, Nuffield Centre for International Health and Development, Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK5 Provincial Coordinator (Non-Communicable Diseases & Mental Health), Directorate General of Health Services, Lahore, Pakistan6 Lecturer in International Public Health, Nuffield Centre for International Health and Development, Leeds Institute for Health Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK7 Research Associate, Association for Social Development, Islamabad, Pakistan8 Chair of the Department of Psychiatry, Sidra Medical and Research Center/Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, Doha, Qatar*For correspondence:somyyah@gmail.com04 10 2017 10 2017 1 3 bjgpopen17X10107304 1 2017 31 3 2017 Copyright © The Authors, 20172017The AuthorsThis article is Open Access: CC BY-NC 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)Background
In poor urban Pakistan, private GP clinics lack adequate services to promote early child development (ECD) care. A clinic-based contextualised ECD intervention was developed for quarterly tool-assisted counselling of mothers.

Aim
To explore the experience and implementation of ECD intervention by the private care providers and clients, for further adaptation for scaling of quality ECD care, at primary level private healthcare facilities in Pakistan.

Design & setting
A mixed methods approach using quantitative records review and qualitative interviews at poor urban clinics in Rawalpindi and Lahore, Pakistan.

Method
Quantitative data from study-specific records were reviewed for 1242 mother–child pairs registered in the intervention. A total of 18 semi-structured interviews with clinic staff, mothers, and research staff were conducted at four clinics. The interviews were audiorecorded and transcribed verbatim.

Results
District Health Office (DHO) support allowed transparent and effective selection and training of clinic providers. Public endorsement of ECD care at private clinics and the addition of community advocates promoted ECD care uptake. Clinic settings were found feasible for clinic assistants, and acceptable to mothers, for counselling sessions. Mothers found ECD counselling methods more engaging compared to the usual care provided.

Conclusion
In poor urban settings where public health care is scarce, minimal programme investment on staff training and provision of minor equipment can engage private clinics effectively in delivering ECD care.

primary health careprivate facilitiespublic-private partnershipsPakistanchild development
==== Body
How this fits
Most ECD promotion in Pakistan has been focused through community-based interventions. The implemented trial investigated clinic-based, integrated ECD delivery at private GP clinics. Process evaluation of the intervention care components will inform the mechanism for scaling up of ECD programmes under public–private partnership.

Background
ECD delay is a grossly neglected public health problem. During the initial 36 months of life, the brain is highly responsive to the surrounding environment which requires appropriate nourishment and stimulation to reach full developmental potential.1 Lack of stimulation, attachment issues, recurrent infections, poverty, and inability of the parents to provide appropriate care can impede a child’s subsequent emotional, social, communication, and cognitive development contributing significantly to delayed achievement of early childhood developmental milestones.2–6

In poor urban areas of Pakistan, private GP clinics are the usual providers of primary care, due to the lack of public services. The usual maternal and child health services provided by these facilities do not adequately support and promote ECD. Consequently, integrated educational counselling for mothers is lacking, mainly due to unavailability of contextualised clinical tools, and inadequate skills and engagement of clinic staff. However, district-led public–private partnership initiatives do exist for delivering tuberculosis, malaria, diabetes, and hypertension care in Pakistan.7–9

A contextualised ECD intervention was developed through a programme-led technical working group. The intervention and trial design are fully described in the published trial protocol.10 In brief, the core intervention was a structured clinic-based, quarterly tool-assisted counselling session for mother–child pairs (Box 1). Clinic assistants in the intervention arm offered each mother a structured 10-minute counselling session when her child was <6 weeks old, and again at 3 months, 6 months, and 9 months of age. Each counselling session covered age-appropriate activities to promote early child nutrition and stimulation, and maternal mental health. Public–private partnership and community advocate activities were undertaken in both arms of the trial.Box 1. Early child development care in private GP clinics (adapted from the published protocol).10
	Intervention clinics	
Mother–child carea	Standard counselling session using pictorial flipbook:childhood nutrition

development

maternal mental health



Assessment and treatment (including referral to specialist) of childhood nutrition, development, or maternal depression.

Follow-up of mother–child pairs in clinic at 3, 6 and 9 months (including SMS or telephone reminder, if required)

	
Training of private doctors and clinic assistants	Clinic assistants training:Conducting a standardised counselling session using the flipbook

Measurement and recording child length and weight



Private GPs training:Clinical management of children with malnutrition and developmental delays in the private clinic setting.

How to assess the mother–child pair for a specialist referral, when required, to the appropriate public tertiary care facility.



	
aControl clinics continued with usual routine care.



The structured counselling intervention was aimed at enhancing maternal skills, by performing a set of specific activities with the child at home to achieve age-appropriate developmental milestones to reduce the incidence of developmental delays in early childhood. It also promoted childhood nutrition in the home, and maternal mental health. It was evaluated using a randomised controlled study design, in 16 intervention clinics clusters and 16 control clinics, in poor urban settlements of districts, Lahore and Rawalpindi, Pakistan. A total of 2327 mother–child pairs were registered in the trial. The intervention was found effective in achieving reduction in the development delays (at 12 months of child age) among registered children (results are currently being submitted for publication).

During the process of developing the intervention, certain assumptions were made about the circumstances and behaviour of health facility staff and mothers, which may or may not have been experienced in practice (Box 2). Evaluating the experiences of trial implementation and fidelity identifies contextual factors and causal mechanisms for variations and further adaptations.11 A process evaluation was therefore designed, and conducted alongside the main trial, to: a) allow better understanding of on-the-ground intervention delivery experiences (such as, feasibility and acceptability for both facility staff and mothers); b) explore any deviations in care practices from trial protocol by clinic staff (such as, design or implementation failure); and c) inform future scaling of the intervention.Box 2. Logic model summary (adapted from the published protocol).10
	Inputs	Processes and actions	Intended	
Changes	Outputs	Outcomes	
Intervention	Contextualised counselling tool

Training of private GPs and clinic assistants – technical and practical training

	Quarterly counselling for mothers (child development, child nutrition, maternal mental health)

Assessment and treatment of child developmental delays (may include referral)

	Clinic staff knowledge, skills, and resources

	ECD care delivered, as per protocol, at the clinics

ECD care uptake by mothers

	Reduced child developmental delays at 12 months of age

	
Both intervention and control arms	District endorsement

Community advocates

Child Growth Cards

Infant weighing scale and infantometer

	Recruitment of mother–﻿child pairs referred by community advocates

	
	Adequate participant recruitment and recording data

	
	
ECD = early child development.



The main aims of the process evaluation were therefore:

to explore how intended intervention components were implemented and experienced by the private care providers and clients, at poor urban private GP clinics; and

to identify how intervention components could be further adapted for scaling of quality ECD care, at primary level private healthcare facilities in Pakistan.

(The process evaluation of nutrition and maternal mental health components has not been reported in this article and will be published separately).

Method
Study design
A mixed methods design was used to explore the implementation of the ECD intervention, combining both quantitative records review, and qualitative interviews.12 Quantitative records of mother–﻿child pairs registered in the intervention arm, were reviewed mainly to learn about the coverage and delivery of ECD care tasks including child physical measurements, follow-up, and record keeping. Qualitative interviews were used for in-depth enquiry into the fidelity of the intervention components, including the role of individual and contextual factors. In addition, certain aspects of the trial which were implemented in both arms (for example, public–private partnership and community advocates) were also explored in interviews.

Participants
Quantitative data were reviewed for all 1242 mother–child pairs registered at the 16 intervention clinics. Participating clinics fulfilled trial eligibility criteria, which included years of experience and current patient load.

The intervention clinics in both districts were divided into high-performing or low-performing groups, based on client registration volume, client adherence to follow-up visits, and clinic performance indicators (for example, record keeping) during the follow-up visits. In each of the two districts, one high-performing and one low-performing clinic was randomly selected for qualitative data collection by drawing from a hat at random. At each of the four selected clinics, two staff members (a doctor and a clinic assistant) and two mothers (every first and last mother coming for outcome measurement) were interviewed. Two members of the field implementation team (that is, one in each district), with hands-on experience of monitoring ECD care at the clinics, were also interviewed. This led to a total of 18 semi-structured interviews with clinic staff, mothers, and research staff. The number of individuals interviewed, in various responder categories, reflected an acceptable balance between scientific and feasibility considerations.

Data collection
Quantitative data
Study-specific child growth cards, maintained by staff at each participating clinic (from May 2015 to September 2016) were used as the source of quantitative data for selected indicators. At the completion of trial, the paper records (cards) maintained for each child were collected from the respective clinic.

Qualitative data
Semi-structured interviews were conducted at selected clinics, by two trained female researchers. A standard topic guide was used in all interviews. Each interview was conducted at the time of trial outcome measurement (at 12 months), after verbal consent, and lasted no more than 30 minutes. The interviews, conducted in national/local language (Urdu), were audiorecorded. Some responders were also subsequently called by telephone, when needed, to clarify or elaborate on their initial responses.

The collected data were further supplemented by review of project implementation and monitoring records.

Data analysis
Quantitative
Quantitative data were entered directly into SPSS (version 17) and frequencies were analysed for each selected indicator.

Qualitative
A Framework Approach to qualitative analysis was used.13,14 The same two researchers conducted and transcribed all interviews. Transcripts were anonymised, and identifiable participant information was stored separately and securely. After repeated reading of the transcribed data, the researchers were familiarised with the data and identified iterative codes. These emergent codes were added to a pre-defined coding framework considerations (organisational, case management, continuity of care (Box 3), and the modified framework was applied to the rest of the data. Themes were analysed and interpreted through back-checking transcripts for consistency; triangulation of data collected from different participant groups (for example, providers and clients) and ongoing discussion within the research team on the relevance to programmatic scaling.Box 3. ECD task categories, indicators and data collection methods. 
Task categories	Process indicators and data collection methods	
Quantitative	Qualitative	
Organisational	
Provider engagement and public–private partnership	Number of clinics reviewed and short-listed for selection

Number of clinic doctors and clinic assistants trained

	Types of clinics suitable for ECD care

Objectivity and transparency of clinic selection

	
Community engagement through community advocates	Number of community advocates recruited for ECD care promotion

Number/proportion of mother–child pairs referred by community advocates

	Types of advocates engaged

Enabling of advocates

	
Other	Attrition of clinics form ECD care intervention

Number of monitoring visits

	Any subsidy (by private clinics) on ECD care visits

	
Case management	
Care delivery by private clinic assistant (structured counselling)	Number of mothers counseled

	Integrating ECD counselling in routine care

Use of pictorial tool for mother counselling

	
Care delivery by private clinic doctor	Number of children identified with development delays

	Child development assessment and recording

	
Continuity of care	
Follow-up by private clinic	Number of mother–child pair attending quarterly follow-ups

Relationship between adherence and child development

	Mothers adherence to follow-up visits

Clinic staff action for better follow-up adherence

	
Referral by private clinic	Children referred for specialist care

	Referral arrangements: access and cost

Referral experiences of clinic staff and mothers

	
ECD = early child development.



Integration of mixed methods data
Quantitative process evaluation findings were used to inform the interpretation of qualitative results, and vice versa. Integration of quantitative and qualitative findings was done at the analysis and interpretation phase.

Ethical considerations
Through facilitation of the two respective DHOs, consent of the selected clinics was obtained. At the time of registration, each mother was informed about the trial and consent (written) was obtained including use of their records. At the time of outcome measurement, consent was obtained from each of the eight mothers interviewed for process evaluation exercise. Data management procedures were followed to ensure confidentiality of recorded quantitative and qualitative data sets.

Results
Organisational
Provider engagement and public–private partnership
Three clinics in each selected cluster (union council) were initially shortlisted based on number of years since established, patient load, set of services offered, and willingness to participate in ECD care activity. One clinic in each union council was then selected on the basis of surveyed indicators, district official inputs and clinic consent to participate. A few initially shortlisted clinics were unwilling to participate because of heavy patient load and shortage of time to commit to the proposed ECD care. The transparent and objective selection of private clinics, with support of the DHO, helped credibility by limiting potential personal influences/preferences:

'Surveying and scored-based selection of clinics has helped minimising individual biases in the selection process.' (Field coordinator [FC]1)

Planning the timing of the training session according to the private clinics’ working schedules was important for effective training and to ensure attendance. The providers preferred attending a session during their off-time for no longer than 2 hours. The venue and date for the training event were decided in consultation with the respective district health official and the institution staff. A formal invitation letter from the respective DHO and reminder calls by the project staff helped achieving more than 90% (58 out of 64) attendance of the invitees. The utilisation of trainers from public psychiatry or child development institutions, and the district level training setup (District Health Development Center), also helped in encouraging invitees, maintain quality and build district-level capacity. The trainees found the programme-endorsed training, with its concise content and focus on application of care tools, helpful in their learning:

'We enjoyed learning new skills; made it simple for us to deliver ECD care in real-life situation.' (Clinic assistant [CA] 4)

No financial incentive was offered for the clinics to participate in the trial; however, most private doctors showed interest in their clinic getting branded for ECD care by the district, because of the perceived advantage of being a public-recognised service provider:

'Public branding gives us competitive advantage over other clinics.' (Clinic doctor [CD] 3)

However, an official government branding was not feasible for an early-stage innovation (that is, the intervention being piloted and evaluated for generating evidence); instead a poster with public-endorsed ECD care information was developed and displayed at each clinic. Due to multiple challenges (including space, legal requirement, and tax implications), almost all clinics displayed the ECD posters inside their premises.

Community engagement through community advocates
About one-quarter (570 out of 2327) of total mother–child registration for ECD care at private clinics were found to be advocate-referred (that is, the advocate informed and encouraged the parents to access ECD care). The process of selection of institution-based advocates (for example, grocery shop, drug store, or mosque) was challenging due to lack of existing data on these outlets, and less clear criteria to select one out of the few existing. The selection of position-based community advocates (for example, vaccinator or community worker) was found to be relatively easier (due to existing data) and helpful because of their frequent interactions with mothers and families:

'Addition of advocates with a healthcare background supplements the working of non-healthcare community advocates.' (FC 2)

Case management
Care delivery by private clinic assistant
The clinic settings were found workable for clinic assistants and acceptable to mothers, for a counselling session. The choice of clinic seemed to indicate a perceived match between women's expectation (of health care) and the specific clinic setting. Except for a few participants with conservative social backgrounds, most mothers attended the clinics unaccompanied.

Using pictorial counselling tool was found helpful and acceptable. Mothers found this method more engaging as compared to the usual 2-minute verbal interactions at clinics. The pictures helped mothers understand and remember the advice more clearly. Some women reported that the take-home leaflet was a helpful memory aid which helped in sharing the messages with other family members. Some also mentioned using the brochure for child care during the subsequent months, even when they were not able to attend the clinic:

'Simple pictures helped me perform the actions recommended for my child.' (Mother 1, Clinic 3)

The clinic assistants found mothers with few years of formal schooling more receptive and engaged during the counselling. However, the staff found it difficult to counsel a mother whose native language was different; in such cases the accompanying person would aid in the counselling process:

'Sometimes a person accompanying mother helped in overcoming the language barrier.' (CA 3)

Care delivery by private clinic doctor
Doctors were found inclined to focus on carrying out the clinical tasks (for example, child clinical assessment in case of a reported delay) and delegate other care tasks to clinic assistants. This was done to achieve efficiency through delegation of the care load:

'Shifting the patient education task to clinic staff enables me to pay more attention to the clinical care.' (CD 2)

The provision of infantometers and weighing machines for active child growth monitoring in the trial created a ripple effect at these clinics, as other mothers (not registered in the trial) also started requesting for their children to be measured; this indicated a general interest of mothers to know more about their child’s wellbeing:

'Mothers bringing child to the clinic generally asks how their child is growing.' (CD 4)

Recording of child development milestones was not a requirement of ECD care delivery in the trial. Therefore, it was not possible to assess the providers’ adherence to care protocols and child referrals.

Other
Most clinics waivered their consultation fee for the ECD care follow-up visits, on request of the district coordinator from respective DHOs. This was a good-intention gesture, but seemed to have also been a considered decision to build rapport and promote business-satisfied clients referring their friends to the clinic:

'Offering subsidised care is a recognised approach to build clinic rapport.' (CD 2)

The continued engagement of the DHO, especially during trouble-shooting clinics deviating from care protocols, was acceptable and feasible for both DHOs and private clinics. Although the performance level (case registration and follow-up) varied across clinics, none of the initially included clinics left the intervention.

Continuity of care
Follow-up by private clinic
The review of 1242 child intervention records showed that about one-third (34%) of mother–child pairs made three or more follow-up visits (maximum recommended visit: four), more than half (54%) came for one or two follow-up visits, and about one-tenth (12%) did not attend any follow-up visit. The clinic staff calling to remind the due follow-up visit, on a mutually agreed phone number, was found feasible for the clinic staff and acceptable to the families:

'No problem in contacting a mother on her family mobile, preferably when her husband is at home.' (CA 2)

The clinic staff reported only occasional difficulty in making contact on the given phone numbers for example, found not in operation. The main reasons for mothers’ non-adherence to the ECD care follow-up visits were lack of perceived need, such as the child is doing fine and/or family knows what to do for child care, and mothers’ difficulty in managing time for the follow-up visits, for example clinic timing not convenient for her to attend. Geographical and financial accessibility were not mentioned as challenges for mothers to adhere to the follow-up visit schedule for ECD care:

'My mother in-law believes that her on-hand experience of decades is enough for taking good care of our child.' (Mother 5, Clinic 1)

Referral by private clinic
The experience of establishing a referral link between the private clinics and public specialist institutions faced multiple challenges including:

institutional procedural requirements and lack of desired flexibility to entertain referrals differently (as per clinic and or client expectation);

clinic ignorance and/or reluctance to refer clients for specialised care;

client reluctance (due to social acceptance and financial apprehension); and

client inability (due to geographic and resource constraints) to attend the specialised ECD care at a distant institution.

'Some of my clients show reluctance to get specialist care from a public institution because they feel uncertain about the access and cost of care.' (CD 1)

Discussion
Summary
The process evaluation allowed insight in to the mechanisms for public–private partnership for delivering ECD care at GP private clinics. The intervention components were feasible for both providers (private clinics) and clients (mothers). The existing clinic set up was feasible (with minimal input of child measurement equipment) for conducting an ECD counselling session; clinic assistants found the pictorial counselling tool a helpful aid in delivering comprehensible care.

DHO involvement proved to be beneficial for:

transparent and effective appointment selection of private clinics;

training facilitated by public specialists in ECD care;

endorsement to promote uptake of ECD care uptake by mothers; and 

engagement of community advocates for promotion of ECD uptake at specified clinics.

The continued engagement of the DHO not only minimised deviation from care protocols but also encouraged clinics to waive follow-up fees for mothers seeking ECD counselling. However, adherence to care protocols for child development screening at follow-up visit could not be accounted for due to less emphasis on recording keeping on child development achievement. Mothers were consistent in returning for their follow-up visits; moreover, referral for specialist consultation could not be streamlined due to challenges posed by provider and client perceptions and expectations along with difficulty in setting up a pathway in the respective referral institutions.

Strengths and limitations
The approach to learn about both the provider and the consumer experiences of each care task has been helpful to assess if the operational strategies for ECD care delivery were kept sensitive to the provider and the consumer circumstances and preferences.

However, the key study limitations include the available clinical record limited the choice of quantitative indicators, a sample of retrievable mothers was interviewed, so experiences of mothers that could not be retrieved are not represented, mother interviews focused more on their access and use of clinic-based ECD care, with limited data on their household circumstances and practices related to ECD care.

This early experience indicates that with a minimal programme investment, to train staff and provide minor equipment, the private clinics can be effectively engaged in delivering clinic-based ECD care in poor urban settings; where coverage of public health care is known to be scant.

Comparison with existing literature and implications
Public–private partnerships have proven to be effective in improving quality and provision of maternal child services in various low- and middle-income countries, including Guatemala, Bolivia and Haiti.15–17 A combination of objective information (clinic survey) and experience-wisdom (district officials) helped identifying suitable clinics for inclusion in a public–private partnership intervention. In the partnership (rather than regulation) approach, it is important for the district health office and the identified clinics to take informed decisions about their participation in an intervention. This approach to transparent selection and recruitment of private clinics is also being implemented for scaling the communicable disease (such as tuberculosis and malaria) interventions in Pakistan.7–8,18 The public endorsement of private clinics is an important consideration; the provincial government has formed an independent body, Punjab Health Care Commission, to assess and certify public and private healthcare facilities for delivering various healthcare packages. In the future, offering programme-endorsed care would become more important for the clinics to qualify their certification.19

The private clinics were interested and able to deliver health promotion care within their respective settings. The compatibility of ECD care with their settings and business model indicates the potential of expanding the scope of health promotion activities at private clinics. The public support seems important for the private providers to get updated about best prevention and treatment practices.20 Public sector training of private healthcare providers has been successfully modelled in other countries of the region including India, Nepal, and Bangladesh.21–24

The engagement of community advocates was useful in promoting the uptake of ECD care at the clinics, as found in other community-based interventions.25–27 With about one-quarter of registration attributed to community advocates’ referrals, the clinic regular clientele seemed to have played much important role in the uptake of ECD care at the respective clinic. Thus, prioritising the clinics with higher number of existing mother and child clients can potentially increase the efficiency of programme/district investment in public–private partnership for ECD care.

Mothers’ acceptance of clinic-based ECD care indicates that an intervention kept sensitive to the cultural preferences can help overcoming possible cultural barriers implied in similar health programmes.28–30 A take-home brochure, with the key recommended actions included, seems to have supplemented the clinic-based counselling. It also helped ECD care at home, regardless of mother being adherent or less adherent to the quarterly clinic visits. Experiences in other projects also report similar usefulness of a pictorial tool to promote home-based care practices.31–34

Establishing an effective and potentially replicable referral arrangement for specialist ECD care was found rather challenging. Consistent with research, the complex undertaking of establishing a referral linkage between private clinic and public institution needs more concerted efforts to understand and address the political, social, administrative, and financial challenges.35

Funding
This project was funded by Grand Challenges Canada, Saving Brains, and was implemented by the Association for Social Development, Pakistan. The views expressed and the information contained in this manuscript are not necessarily endorsed by Grand Challenges Canada, Saving Brains.

Ethical approval
National Bioethics Committee (NBC) Pakistan granted ethical approval for the project (Reference number NBC 154). Informed consent was taken from both, clinic clusters and individual participants. Technical support by University of Leeds staff was approved by the University of Leeds SoMREC (MREC15-094).

Trial registration
The trial has been registered with the Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN48032200.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the support of our partners, Institute of Child Health and The Children Hospital, The Institute of Psychiatry Rawalpindi, and Directorate General of Health Services Punjab, Pakistan for their technical guidance.

Provenance
Freely submitted; externally peer reviewed.

Competing interests
The authors declare that no competing interests exist.
==== Refs
References
1. Grantham-McGregor S  Cheung YB  Cueto S  et al  Developmental potential in the first 5 years for children in developing countries The Lancet 2007 369 9555 60 70 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60032-4 
2. Black MM  Walker SP  Wachs TD  et al  Policies to reduce undernutrition include child development The Lancet 2008 371 9611 454 455 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60215-9 
3. WHO Department of Child and Adolescent Health and Development  A critical link: interventions for physical growth and psychological development: a review Geneva  WHO,  1999. 
4. Hirani SA   Malnutrition in young Pakistani children JAMC 2012 24 2 150 153 24397079 
5. Murray L  Cooper P   Effects of postnatal depression on infant development Arch Dis Child 1997 77 2 99 101 10.1136/adc.77.2.99 9301345 
6. Patel V  Rahman A  Jacob KS  et al  Effect of maternal mental health on infant growth in low income countries: new evidence from South Asia BMJ 2004 328 7443 820 823 10.1136/bmj.328.7443.820 15070641 
7. National TB control programme Pakistan, Technical Assistance Management Agency  Situation analysis, public–private partnership models, operational and monitoring and evaluation guidelines for national TB control programme Pakistan http://ntp.gov.pk/uploads/ntp_1369819747_Finalreport_ppp_NTP08_09_06.pdf  ( accessed 26 7 2017  ). 
8. Directorate of Malaria Control, Pakistan. Ministry of National Health Services, Regulation & Coordination.   Pakistan Malaria Programme Review (MPR) http://dmc.gov.pk/documents/pdfs/4MPR%20Pakistan.pdf  ( accessed 26 7 2017  ). 
9. Khan MA  Javed W  Ahmed M  et al  Delivering enhanced cardiovascular (hypertension) disease care through private health facilities in Pakistan BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2013 13 76 10.1186/1471-2261-13-76 24066730 
10. Khan MA  Owais SS  Blacklock C  et al  Delivering integrated child development care in Pakistan: protocol for a clustered randomised trial BJGP Open 2017 10.3399/bjgpopen17X100677 
11. Moore GF  Audrey S  Barker M  et al  Process evaluation of complex interventions: Medical Research Council guidance BMJ 2015 350 h1258 10.1136/bmj.h1258 25791983 
12. Creswell JW  Klassen AC  Plano VL  et al  Best practices for mixed methods research in the health sciences Bethesda, MD National Institutes of Health 2011 
13. Craig P  Dieppe P  Macintyre S  et al  Developing and evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance BMJ 2008 a1655 10.1136/bmj.a1655 18824488 
14. Gale NK  Heath G  Cameron E  et al  Using the framework method for the analysis of qualitative data in multi-disciplinary health research BMC Med Res Methodol 2013 13 1 117 10.1186/1471-2288-13-117 24047204 
15. Danel I  La Forgia FM  La Forgia GM   . Contracting for basic health services in rural Guatemala — comparison of performance of three delivery models, Health system innovations in Central America: lessons and impact of new approaches. World Bank Technical Paper No. 54.  Washington, DC: World Bank, 2005 
16. Lavadenz F  Schwab N  Straatman H   [Public, decentralized and community health networks in Bolivia] Rev Panam Salud Publica 2001 9 3 182 189 11349354 
17. Eichler R  Auxila P  Pollack J   Performance-based payment to improve the impact of health services: evidence from Haiti. http://www1.paho.org/hq/dmdocuments/2010/44-Performance_Based_Reimbursement_Improve_Impact-Haiti.pdf  ( accessed 3 8 2017  ) 
18. Baloch NA  Pai M   Tuberculosis control: business models for the private sector Lancet Infect Dis 2012 12 8 579 580 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70122-6 22704777 
19. Punjab Healthcare Commission  Clinical governance 2013 http://www.phc.org.pk/introClinicalGov.aspx  ( accessed 26 7 2017  ). 
20. Smith E  Brugha R  Zwi A   Working with private sector providers for better health care: an introductory guide. London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine http://www.who.int/management/partnerships/private/privatesectorguide.pdf  ( accessed 26 7 2017  ). 
21. Khan MS  Salve S  Porter JD   Engaging for-profit providers in TB control: lessons learnt from initiatives in South Asia Health Policy Plan 2015 30 10 1289 1295 10.1093/heapol/czu137 25605652 
22. USAID  Private Sector Mobilization for family health — Phase 2 (PRISM2) Project 2015 http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00K9HD.pdf  ( accessed 26 7 2017  ). 
23. Mash R  Almeida M  Wong WC  et al  The roles and training of primary care doctors: China, India, Brazil and South Africa Human Resources for Health 2015 13 1 93 10.1186/s12960-015-0090-7 26637305 
24. Newell JN  Pande SB  Baral SC  et al  Control of tuberculosis in an urban setting in Nepal: public–private partnership Bulletin of the World Health Organization 2004 82 2 92 98 15042230 
25. UNICEF  Early childhood — advocacy and partnerships for early childhood development UNICEF 2012 https://www.unicef.org/earlychildhood/index_40753.html (accessed 26 7 2017 ) 
26. McPherson RA  Tamang J  Hodgins S  et al  Process evaluation of a community-based intervention promoting multiple maternal and neonatal care practices in rural Nepal BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 2010 10 1 31 10.1186/1471-2393-10-31 20529251 
27. Farnsworth SK  Böse K  Fajobi O  et al  Community engagement to enhance child survival and early development in low- and middle-income countries: an evidence review J Health Commun 2014 19 Suppl 1 67 88 10.1080/10810730.2014.941519 
28. Winch PJ  Alam MA  Akther A  et al  Local understandings of vulnerability and protection during the neonatal period in Sylhet District, Bangladesh: a qualitative study The Lancet 2005 366 9484 478 485 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66836-5 
29. Nichter M   Cultural dimensions of hot, cold and sema in Sinhalese health culture Soc Sci Med 1987 25 4 377 387 10.1016/0277-9536(87)90276-0 3686087 
30. Darmstadt GL  Saha SK   Traditional practice of oil massage of neonates in Bangladesh J Health, Popul Nutr 2002 20 2 184 188 12186200 
31. WHO, UNICEF  Integrating early childhood development (ECD) activities into nutrition programmes in emergencies: why, what and how http://www.who.int/mental_health/emergencies/ecd_note.pdf  (accessed 26 7 2017 ) 
32. Edward-Raj A  Phiri R   . Assessing the functionality of job aids in supporting the performance of IMCI providers in Zambia http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnacs120.pdf (accessed 26 7 2017 ) 
33. Leshabari S  Koniz-Booher P  Burkhalter B  et al  . Testing a PMTCT infant-feeding counseling program in Tanzania. Operations research results.  2007 https://www.usaidassist.org/sites/assist/files/orrtztestingjobaids.pdf  (accessed 26 7 2017 ) 
34. Zaman S  Ashraf RN  Martines J   Training in complementary feeding counselling of healthcare workers and its influence on maternal behaviours and child growth: a cluster-randomized controlled trial in Lahore, Pakistan Journal of Health, Population, and Nutrition 2008 26 2 210 222 
35. Ministry of Health, Kenya.   The State of the Health Referral System in Kenya: results from a baseline study on the functionality of the health referral system in eight counties.  2013.  https://www.measureevaluation.org/pima/baseline-assessments/the-state-of-the-health-referral-system-in-kenya-results-from-a-baseline-study-on-the-functionality-of-the-health-referral-system-in-eight-counties/view (accessed 26 7 2017 )

