
==== Front
Br J NutrBr. J. NutrBJNThe British Journal of Nutrition0007-11451475-2662Cambridge University Press Cambridge, UK 10.1017/S0007114516002786S000711451600278600278EditorialThe Nutrition Society journals: vive la différence! EditorialEditorial† Editor-in-Chief of the Br J Nutr and the J Nutr Sci

†† Editor-in-Chief of Public Health Nutr

* Honorary Publications Officer, The Nutrition Society

Graham C. Burdge and Marilyn Tseng are joint authors.

Burdge Graham C. 1†Tseng Marilyn 2††Trayhurn Paul 345*1 The University of SouthamptonSouthamptonUK2 California Polytechnic State UniversityUSA3 University of BuckinghamBuckinghamUK4 University of LiverpoolLiverpoolUK5 King Saud UniversityRiyadhSaudi Arabiaemail: g.burdge@nutritionsociety.org28 8 2016 116 4 571 572 © The Authors 20162016The AuthorsThis is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/), which permits
non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the same
Creative Commons licence is included and the original work is properly cited. The
written permission of Cambridge University Press must be obtained for commercial
re-use.
==== Body
The Nutrition Society currently publishes five academic journals that encompass the broad
range of research in nutritional science: 1.  British Journal of Nutrition (Br J Nutr) publishes mainly primary research, including
systematic reviews and meta-analyses, and short, topical reviews across the range of
nutrition disciplines.

 2.  Public Health Nutrition (Public Health Nutr) publishes articles related to nutrition
and nutrition policy at a population level, including work on assessment, communication,
implementation and sustainability.

 3.  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society (Proc Nutr Soc) publishes articles that arise
from the meetings of the Society.

 4.  Nutrition Research Reviews (Nutr Res Rev) publishes in-depth narrative reviews in all
areas of nutritional science.

 5.  Journal of Nutritional Science (J Nutr Sci) is our newest journal, launched in 2012,
which publishes primary research and reviews through a Gold Open Access model.




One continuing aim of the Society is to develop the individual identity of each journal in
order to help provide a clear platform for authors and a focus for the readership. Towards
this goal, we are clarifying the scope of the Br J Nutr. Specifically, from 1
August 2016, the Br J Nutr will no longer accept articles that fall within
the remit of Public Health Nutr. These include articles on the following
topics. 1 Assessment of public health nutrition problems:


a papers on monitoring/surveillance of nutritional health status of populations or of the
quality of nutritional environments;

b. papers that analyse psychosocial/behavioural determinants of dietary and nutritional
outcomes (behavioural nutrition), and dietary and nutritional factors as determinants of
health outcomes (nutritional epidemiology), including structural and societal-level
determinants (economics and environment) in population-based samples; and

c. papers describing development and evaluation of methodology for the above (assessment
of diet, nutritional status and anthropometry) in relation to the study of
population-based samples.


 2.  Communication of nutrition-related information to the public.

 3.  Assurance of population-wide access to environments that promote public health
nutrition:


a. public health nutrition workforce development/capacity building; and

b. evaluation of the effectiveness of nutrition-related public policies.


 4.  Interventions and community nutrition programmes and efforts.

 5.  Diet/nutrition as related to the environment and sustainability (studies related to
agricultural practice and animal production will continue to be published in the
Br J Nutr and the J Nutr Sci).




Studies in these areas will be published exclusively in Public Health Nutr.
Manuscripts submitted to the Br J Nutr that fall within these areas will be
transferred automatically to Public Health Nutr, with the consent of the
authors. Manuscripts from authors who decline the offer of transfer will be rejected.

We expect that this change in the remit of the Br J Nutr will provide a
useful delineation in scope across these Nutrition Society journals, increase the visibility
of articles in public health nutrition to the research community, and guide authors towards
the most appropriate platform for their research.

Open Access policy
We would like to remind the nutrition research community of the Open Access publishing
options available to authors of articles in the Nutrition Society journals. All Nutrition
Society journals offer Gold Open Access as an option but, with the exception of the
J Nutr Sci, they rely chiefly on traditional, subscription-based
publication. These ‘traditional’ journals also offer authors the option of making their
accepted manuscripts and version of record freely available to readers at the time of
acceptance through the Society’s Green Open Access Policy, subject to the restrictions
summarised in Table 1. This is compliant with the
Higher Education Funding Council of England’s Open Access requirements for research
outputs(

1

).Table 1 Nutrition Society Green Open Access Policy

	Personal webpage	Departmental/ institutional repository	Non-commercial subject repository	Commercial repository/social media
sites	
Author’s original	At any time	At any time	At any time	Abstract only in PDF or HTML format	
Submitted manuscript under review	At any time	At any time	At any time	Abstract only in PDF or HTML format	
Accepted manuscript*
	On acceptance for publication	On acceptance for publication	On acceptance for publication	Abstract only in PDF or HTML format no
sooner than the first publication of the full article	
Version of record	On publication	12 months after first publication	12 months after first publication	Abstract only in PDF or HTML format no
sooner than the first publication of the full article	
* The version that was accepted by the journal that has not been subjected to
typesetting or other modification by the publisher.
==== Refs
Reference
1. 
Higher Education for England  (2015 ) Policy for open access
in the post-2014 Research Excellence Framework: Updated July 2015. http://www.hefce.ac.uk/media/HEFCE,2014/Content/Pubs/2014/201407/HEFCE2014_07_updated%20July%202015.pdf
(accessed May 2015).
