
==== Front
AORN J
AORN J
Aorn Journal
0001-2092 1878-0369 Published by Elsevier B.V. 

S0001-2092(06)61137-X
10.1016/S0001-2092(06)61137-X
Article
Earn valuable contact hours by attending education sessions and viewing posters at AORN Congress
Saturday, March 20, to Thursday, March 25, 200423 8 2006 
1 2004 
23 8 2006 
79 1 29 62
© 2004 2004Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.
==== Body
The AORN 51st Congress in San Diego provides perioperative nurses an opportunity to come together to continue life-long learning, have fun, and reenergize. Review this education program and select the educational content that best meets your needs to update information in your current practice area or to gain knowledge in a new area. You will leave Congress with concepts and actions that you can implement immediately in your work setting.

The Congress Education Planning Committee members, appointed by President Betty J. Shultz, RN, CNOR, conducted a blind review of more than 300 proposals and selected the programs that they identified as the most important, according to various needs assessments and the latest trends. The committee members also reviewed all Clinical Improvement/Innovation abstracts and Hot Topic proposals. The committee has identified an exciting and stimulating education program, and AORN would like to thank the committee members for their commitment to this process. Committee members are
• Barbara Diomede, RN, MSN, CNOR, Chair;

• William J. Duffy, RN, BSN, MJ, CNOR;

• Althea R. Dunscombe, RN, PhD, CNOR, CRNFA;

• Claire R. Everson, RN, CNOR, CCAP;

• Nanette L. Hamley-Hanauer, RN, BS, CNOR;

• Vivian E. Pierce, RN, BSN, CNOR; and

• Penny J. Smalley, RN.




AORN also would like to thank representatives of the specialty assemblies for conducting reviews of proposals related to their specialty areas. These representatives and the assemblies they represent are listed below:
• Nancy M. Boutte, RN, MSN, CNOR—Perioperative Nursing Informatics;

• Linda L. Bowen, RN, BSN, CNOR— Cardiothoracic;

• Judith A. Eagan, RN, BSN, CNOR— Nurses in Business, Industry, & Consulting;

• Deborah L. Galante, RN, MSN, CNOR—Neurosurgery;

• Peter B. Graves, RN, BSN, CNOR— Nurses in Business, Industry, & Consulting;

• Stella M. Harrington, RN, BSN, CNOR—Pediatric;

• Judy Hawkins, RN, CNOR—Nurse Educator/Clinical Nurse Specialist;

• Darin M. Prescott, RN, CNOR, C—Rural/Small Hospital;

• Donna A. Pritchard, RN, MSN, MA, CNOR—Leadership;

• Ruth S. Reid, RN, CNOR, CRNFA—RN First Assistant;

• Donna Stanbridge, RN—Minimally Invasive Surgery & Lasers;

• Janet Strong, RN, BSN, CNOR—Orthopedic; and

• Sandra L. Thompson, RN—Ambulatory Surgery.




Education tracks are designated for each education session. The track identifies the broad content area for each session. Most sessions have content that applies to more than one track. To help make your selections, review the description of each session. The following definitions are used to identify broad content areas.


C	Clinical	
I	Informatics	
L/M	Leadership/management	
L/MO	Management focus on operations	
L/MWF	Management focus on work force	
P	Professional development/issues	



The letter “R” after a session number denotes a repeat session. The letters “CH” denote contact hours. Specific sessions qualify for AORN risk management credit. These are denoted by a “+.” Earning four contact hours of AORN risk management credit annually qualifies AORN members to receive a 10% insurance premium credit. For details, call AORN's endorsed insurance administrator, Marsh Affinity Group Services, a service of Seabury and Smith, at (800) 621–3008.

Several sessions are referred to as “Hot Topics.” These topics will be listed on AORN's web site at http://www.aorn.org/congress by February 2004, and will be included in the February chapter presidents' mailing. Four Congress sessions will be presented in Spanish specifically for international Spanish-speaking attendees. Many sessions will provide information and insight into perioperative safety trends. These sessions cross track designations and are noted with the Patient Safety First logo.

Continuing education on the exhibit floor is a mainstay of AORN Congress, and AORN and HealthStream are continuing their partnership to bring AORN members this benefit at the 2004 Congress. HealthStream will award contact hours to Congress attendees for participation. Exhibitors have the choice of presenting a 30-minute live workshop or distributing independent study modules consisting of a 50-minute, self-contained study guide or CD-ROM. These formats allow members to enjoy the exhibit floor while learning about current topics and gaining valuable continuing education contact hours.

Pre-Congress
The annual Pre-Congress program will take place Saturday, March 20, 2004. Pre-Congress sessions provide in-depth information critical to your career development. For 2004, there are two all-day Pre-Congress sessions and eight half-day Pre-Congress sessions. All Pre-Congress sessions will be held at the San Diego Convention Center. Depending on session selection, participants can earn between 3.4 and 7.8 contact hours per session. Registration for Pre-Congress will not be processed if session selection has not been completed.


8 AM to 4 PM (7.2 CH)



P 7756



The Ultimate Workshop in Competency Assessment—Donna Wright, RN, MS


This all-day session will provide creative ways to assess competency and show how to use the competency process to motivate and manage employees every day. Join us on this creative and humorous journey through some very innovative strategies. Take away proven tools that have been successful in other health care organizations, and learn strategies necessary for successful application to your setting. Discover ways to create a dynamic, realistic, and creative competency process. Do not miss this fun-filled day.


8 AM to 4:30 PM (7.8 CH)



P 7757+



Human Factors Training—Michael Leonard, MD; William Taggart


This all-day session will explore the critical importance of effective communication and teamwork in ensuring safety for providers and patients. Five key teamwork skills—adapted from other high-reliability industries—that have produced improvements in high-risk health care settings will be discussed. Today's clinical care environment is so complex and challenging that improved operational teamwork now is a prerequisite for detecting threats to patient safety, avoiding errors, and ensuring safe care. You will leave this session with practical skills you can implement immediately.


8 to 11 AM (3.4 CH)



P 7760



Effective Program Design and Presentation Skills—Judith Eagan, RN, BS, CNOR; Mark Phippen, RN, MS, CNOR


This program will provide a review of effective slide designs, program organization, presentation skills, and methods to decrease anxiety related to public speaking. Principles of adult learning will be incorporated into the content. This session is targeted to professionals who speak to groups in the workplace or a professional/clinical environment.


8:30 to 11:30 AM (3.4 CH)



C 7758+



Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery— Charlotte Guglielmi, RN, BSN, CNOR; Daniel Jones, MD; Stephanie Jones, MD


This session is designed to present an overview of the rapidly growing application of minimally invasive technology to surgical management of obesity. Current trends in laparoscopic banding will be discussed, including patient selection, surgical management, and advanced technology. Anesthetic management unique to this patient population will be explored. Issues in competency assessment and staff development of perioperative staff members also will be presented.


L/M 7759



Preparing for an Accreditation Site Visit by JCAHO—Linda K. Groah, RN, MS, CNOR, CNAA, FAAN


The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) has made numerous changes in direction during the past few years. In this session, you will learn what you need to have in place and how you can be sure that your facility always is meeting the necessary standards and elements of performance, thus ensuring that your facility is ready for accreditation every day. This will be important as JCAHO moves toward unannounced accreditation visits. Come with your questions.


P 7761



Workplace Safety: Part I—Lowell Price, RN, CNOR; Carolyn Twomey, RN, BSN


The first segment of this session will explore the role of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) in prioritizing the health and safety of workers. You will learn the firsthand experience of an OSHA response to a complaint. The second segment will explore occupational exposure to hepatitis as a significant health care concern. The nation is focused on workplace safety, and this program will address the key issues associated with hepatitis, including currently recognized hepatitis types, their prevalence rates, and current statistics, with a common sense approach to occupational risk reduction.


1 TO 4 PM (3.4 CH)



L/M 7762



Negotiating the ASC Regulatory Maze: From Concept to Completion—Regina Boore, RN, BSN, MS; Ann Geier, RN, MS, CNOR


The ambulatory surgery center (ASC) is a highly regulated health, care environment. This session will review the regulatory implications in the development phase and in clinical operations management. The differences between requirements necessary to achieve licensure, certification, and accreditation also will be discussed.


L/M 7763



The Basics of Finance—Pam Hunt, RN, MSN


The skills needed in nursing leadership have changed dramatically during the past few years. Today's nursing leaders are faced with complex justifications—staffing predictions, hours per patient day, full-time employee calculations, and predicted cost savings, to list a few. This presentation will give step-by-step examples of how to calculate and justify staffing levels, equipment, and supplies to ensure that your department provides quality care. This presentation also will discuss matching human resource indicators to clinical indicators for effective quality outcome tracking. Participants will return to their work environments with knowledge that they can use immediately.


P 7764



Emergency Preparedness: The Latest from the Joint Commission—Speaker Invited


In January 2003, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) instituted new management standards, building on its long-standing disaster preparedness requirements. The JCAHO standards have undergone a major revision for 2004. These standards represent an important evolution in the concept of managing emergencies. They identify four specific phases of emergency management, direct health care organizations to conduct hazard vulnerability analyses in collaboration with their communities, and explore the specifics of emergency management planning. This program is designed to assist you in preparing for the new JCAHO standards, meeting the mission of your health care organization while addressing real world demands.


P 7765



Workplace Safety: Part II—Steven K. Howard, MD; Speaker Invited


We all know fatigue affects our effectiveness, but have you considered the impact of fatigue on patients and team members? Leave this session with a better understanding of the global impact of fatigue on safety and fatigue as a health care and community issue, and learn from studies that have been undertaken to document the impact of fatigue. Learn how you can implement a fatigue management program to decrease fatigue and increase workplace safety. The second component of this session will explore some of the critical ergonomic factors that are important in the surgical setting.

Congress Weeklong Activities

Sunday through Wednesday, 7 AM to 5 PM; Thursday, 7 AM to 1 PM



P 7601 (1.2 CH)



Research/Evidence-Based Practice Poster Display # 1


This poster display session will consist of research and evidence-based practice studies applicable to perioperative nursing practice. Review these posters and learn more about the latest research findings on a variety of clinical topics. On Monday, March 22, from 11:30 AM to 1 PM, you will have an opportunity to meet with the poster presenters and learn about their research and evidence-based practice projects.


P 7602 (1.2 CH)



Research/Evidence-Based Practice Poster Display #2



P 7604 (1.2 CH)



Clinical Improvement/Innovation Poster Display #1


These posters show the clinical improvements or innovations that your colleagues have initiated. Review what perioperative nurses are doing around the country and glean ideas that may be successful in your setting. On Monday, March 22, from 11:30 AM to 1 PM, you will have an opportunity to meet with the poster presenters and learn about their clinical improvement and innovation projects.


P 7605 (1.2 CH)



Clinical Improvement/Innovation Poster Display #2


Please note that the total number of poster sessions will be determined by the number of proposals submitted and accepted.

General Sessions

Sunday, March 21, 3:30 to 4:45 PM



P 7630 Keynote Session (1.5 CH)



Maximizing Individual and Team Effectiveness—Bob Moawad






In this dynamic presentation, Bob Moawad will introduce you to these exciting, potential-releasing concepts: how to maximize your potential, how to develop the right attitude, how to enhance relationships with others, how to create a winning team, how to develop group unity, and how to build individual and team esteem. This session will provide the tools needed to help you foster perioperative partnerships.


Sunday, March 21, 5 to 6:30 PM



P 7631 General Session (1.8 CH)



The Soul of Time: A Transformation to Mindfulness—John Izzo






How we use our time and experience the moments of our lives determines the level of soul fulfillment we experience. Time has become a pressing issue for many of us. In this powerful and profound presentation, discover how to live in the moment and how to gain more fulfillment from the time you have. This presentation will include wit, wisdom, and humor. You will leave this session filled with practical ideas for experiencing more soul in your life.


Monday, March 22, 3 to 4:30 PM



P 7667 General Session (1.8 CH)



You Can't Quit, It's A League Rule—Dan Clark Endorsed by the AORN Foundation






Attending this program is a must for anyone who wants to know how to work more effectively with his or her colleagues to become an effective team. Dan Clark has played and starred on championship teams and has interviewed extraordinary coaches, players, and chief executive officers. He knows success is not just about the team—teams can lose. It is about winning. Winning has two Is, and teams that win have the greatest number of “I” players on them. Together Everyone Achieves More.


Tuesday, March 23, 3:30 to 5 PM



P 7690 Jerry G. Peers Lectureship (1.8 CH)



Gaining the Edge: Inspiring People to Take Action and Make a Difference—Chip Eichelberger







Sponsored by the AORN Exhibitors' Advisory Committee


How can you achieve greater results with fewer resources? Chip Eichelberger will challenge you to clarify and raise your standards, adopt new empowering beliefs, and integrate simple strategies that will create lasting improvement. With each clinical encounter, perioperative nurses confront a variety of challenges. Staying at your best emotionally and physically, can be difficult. Gaining the edge inspires accountability, a long-term view to success, and a drive to better take care of yourself so you can improve patient care. This captivating, involved presentation will fire you up.


Wednesday, March 24, 3:30 to 4:30 PM



P 7711 General Session (1.2 CH)



Embracing the Journey—Steve Rizzo






Life is a journey filled with unexpected twists and turns. How we deal with challenges throughout our journey will determine the quality of our success, happiness, and inner peace, both personally and professionally. This high-impact, entertaining session is designed to knock down the walls of negativity and fear and replace them with pillars of hope and optimism. Everyone is guaranteed to walk away with a healthy attitude and usable tools to enjoy a more fulfilling life on all levels.


Thursday, March 25, 4:30 to 5:20 PM



P 7755 Closing General Session (1.0 CH)



The Inspired Heart of Perioperative Nurses—Vivian Watson, RN, CNOR






Inspiring others costs nothing, but produces high returns on your investment. We, the members of AORN, must keep in mind how we can inspire each other and the surgical team. Our confidence, enthusiasm, leadership, and loyalty are positive behaviors that contribute to high productivity, morale, and positive patient outcomes. Learn how to use your energy wisely to influence others in a positive manner, and thus, inspire the morale of the team and improve the workplace. Learn methods and tools to maintain your ability to inspire others.

Education Session Overviews

Sunday, March 21



11:30 AM to 1 PM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


P 7608+



Creating a Culture of Patient Safety and Efficiency—Diane Cwirka, RN; Ena Williams, RN


This presentation will provide participants with a process to identify, plan, and implement systems and tools for patient safety initiatives. The discussion will provide suggestions for developing a strong collaborative team that will effectively influence the culture of patient safety. The areas of focus will include Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations standards and ways to develop, implement, and monitor different standards in perioperative services. The presentation will include a number of tools that have been very effective in standardizing and maintaining consistency.


L/M 7609



Show Me the Money!—Debbie Poole, RN, BSN, CNOR


This presentation will show how an incentive program can improve productivity and efficiency in surgical start times and physician downtimes. Information will be presented on using a multidisciplinary, collaborative approach to develop a highly productive surgical services team throughout the perioperative phases of care.


P 7610+



Environmental Surveillance in the Operating Room—Janice Neil, PhD; Pam Nye, RN, BSN


A basic principle of perioperative nursing care is surgical asepsis. Perioperative nurses have an ethical obligation to provide patients with safe and effective care throughout the surgical experience. Regulatory agencies continuously focus on safety and efficacy that involves monitoring and evaluating. An instrument that allows perioperative nurses to monitor the environment in the OR would contribute to patient safety positive outcomes, and ultimately, to a reduction in surgical infection rates. This session will provide information and practical suggestions that support creating an optimal surgical environment for patients.


C 7611



Advances in Technology: Robotic Radical Prostatectomy—JoAnn Adkins, RN, MHA, AACHE; Ram Dasari, MD; Sandy Miller, RN, CNOR


In this session, a surgeon will discuss technical aspects of the surgical procedure, including improved patient outcome data. A perioperative nurse will address patient and staff members' educational needs, including the planned continuum of care for the patient. A surgical services director will discuss using advanced technologies to identify cost changes and implications.


P 7612



Who Says Learning Can't Be Fun?—Jacquelyn Lofton, RN, BSN; Carol S. Maragos, RN, MSN, CNOR


This session will present creative teaching strategies while reviewing basic nursing practice and promoting education for perioperative staff members. Game shows, grand rounds, and clinical scenarios can be used to help staff members learn in fun, nontraditional ways. Staff members enjoy creating the teaching strategies, developing the content, and participating in delivery of the presentations. In addition, staff members have expressed how meaningful these forms of education have been to their learning and practice. Videotaped clips of these teaching strategies in action will be shared.


P 7613



At Face Value: My Struggle With a Disfiguring Cancer—Terry Healey, BA


Terry Healey, a head and neck cancer survivor of 16 years, was left disfigured by a fibrosarcoma of the right maxilla. Healey has overcome great obstacles and accomplished many goals, both personally and professionally. This session will highlight the nursing care he received during his struggle and how it had a huge impact on his recovery and wellness. Nursing care was critical to Healey's recovery. He will share his story and experiences so others can hear the unique approaches his nurses used.


P 7614



Feng Shui for Everyday—Patricia B. Frasher, RN, BGS, CNOR


It is important to have fun in your life outside of work. There are simple ways to rearrange items you already have in your home to help you get the most from life. Ways to achieve this are through use of color and shapes and composition of decoration accessories. You will learn exciting techniques to achieve prosperity and enhance your career, creativity, family life, health, and relationships.


P 7615



Greening the Operating Room: What Can Nurses Do?—Ann Melamed, RN, MA; Susan Q. Wilburn, RN, BSN, MPH


Since 1995, the health care waste stream has doubled and is becoming increasingly toxic. Neurotoxic mercury and other contaminants in waste and medical products entering the environment threaten ecosystems, as well as human health. Developing fetuses, pregnant women, and young children are especially vulnerable. Learn the many ways that perioperative nurses can reduce health care's environmental impact.


C 7616+



Dietary Supplements: What You Don't Know Can Hurt Your Patients—Alan P. Agins, PhD


It is estimated that nearly 50% of US patients take some form of herbal or natural supplement on a regular basis. This session will discuss the basic pharmacology of a number of popular dietary supplements, examine possible detrimental interactions between supplements and conventional medications, and evaluate the potential effect of supplements on certain diseases, as well as wellness states.


L/M 7617



Singing Off the Same Song Sheet: The Creation of a Shared Vision—Pam Hunt, RN, MSN


Read any leadership, management, or staff development literature written in the past five years, and you will find that one of the top management competencies needed is the ability to create a shared vision among staff members. How do you get your staff members to think about the future and be a part of the plan for improvement? This presentation, targeted at all nurse leaders, will discuss a specific, successful method to realize a vision that is developed by the entire team. Learn how to plan, justify, develop, and present a program to your staff members that will spark their involvement. The presentation includes methods to continue the essential follow-up needed to keep the vision alive.


C 7618+



Perioperative Considerations When the Patient Is a Diabetic—John R. Ammon, MD


From this session you will learn the critical patient safety issues to consider when a patient is diabetic. Some of the topics to be discussed are the best time for the patient who is diabetic to be scheduled for surgery, the determination of insulin coverage, and the effect of dehydration. This expert will provide you with critical information you need to deliver excellent care to surgical patients who are diabetic.


1:30 to 3 PM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


P 7619R+



Creating a Culture of Patient Safety and Efficiency—Diane Cwirka, RN; Ena Williams, RN



L/M 7620R



Show Me the Money!—Debbie Poole, RN, BSN, CNOR



P 7621R



Environmental Surveillance in the Operating Room—Janice Neil, PhD; Pam Nye, RN, BSN



C 7622R



Advances in Technology: Robotic Radical Prostatectomy—JoAnn Adkins, RN, MHA, AACHE; Ram Dasari, MD; Sandy Miller, RN, CNOR



P 7623R



Who Says Learning Can't Be Fun?—Jacquelyn Lofton, RN, BSN; Carol S. Maragos, RN, MSN, CNOR



P 7624R



At Face Value: My Struggle With a Disfiguring Cancer—Terry Healey, BA



P 7625R



Feng Shui for Everyday—Patricia B. Frasher, RN, BGS, CNOR



P 7626R



Greening the Operating Room: What Can Nurses Do?—Ann Melamed, RN, MA; Susan Q. Wilburn, RN, BSN, MPH



C 7627R+



Dietary Supplements: What You Don't Know Can Hurt Your Patients—Alan P. Agins, PhD



L/M 7628R



Singing Off the Same Song Sheet: The Creation of a Shared Vision—Pam Hunt, RN, MSN



C 7629R+



Perioperative Considerations When the Patient Is a Diabetic—John R. Ammon, MD



3:30 to 4:45 PM


Keynote Session (see page 32 in this Journal)


5 to 6:30 PM


General Session (see page 36 in this Journal)


Monday, March 22



8 to 9:30 AM



7632


First Forum—one contact hour will be awarded for attending both Forums.


8 to 9:30 AM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


L/M 7633



Presentation 101: Creating Powerful Presentations—Evelyn Eckberg-Farruggia, RN, MSN, PHN


Creating presentations is an art form in which many professionals have not been trained. There are critical steps in creating an effective and powerful presentation. Included in this discussion will be examples of what to do and what not to do visually, verbally, and physically. Different types of slides—the good, the bad, and the ugly—will be analyzed for color, content, and fonts. Additionally, different types of presentation formats will be discussed, as well as how to adapt a presentation to different media.


C 7634



Stuck on You: Assessment and Management of Adhesion Formation—Evangeline (Vangie) Dennis, RN, CNOR; Beth Grimes, RN, BSN, CNOR


Postoperative adhesions often form in women after reproductive pelvic surgery. Adhesions can distort normal anatomy, leading to clinical manifestations that require multiple office visits, hospitalizations, and surgeries. This session will describe adhesion-formation assessment and management in detail, while highlighting the perioperative role in the patient care plan.


L/M 7635



Nuts and Bolts of Project Management— Sandy Petersen, RN, MBA; Christine Ruygrok, RN, MBA


Today's dynamic health care environment requires nursing leaders to develop refined project management skills to advance their organization in a cost-effective and quality-driven direction. This presentation will focus on project management's three distinct work phases and fundamental steps, including identification of strategic actions for successful project completion and illustration of common mistakes made by inexperienced project managers.


C 7636



Updates in Colorectal Surgery—Joe Eyring, MD


This session will provide the latest diagnostics and surgical procedures to treat colorectal conditions. Discussion will include treatment of fecal incontinence using an artificial bowel sphincter, treatment of hemorrhoids using a hemorrhoid stapler, surgical treatment of rectal cancer, and the genetics of colon and rectal cancer.


C 7637+



What Are the Facts in Musculoskeletal Allograft Tissue Safety, Infectious Disease Testing, and Regulation?—Joel C. Osborne, MLT, CTBS


Use of musculoskeletal allograft tissue in reconstructive orthopedic procedures has increased significantly during the past decade. Knowledge of tissue bank practices in donor giving, screening, serology testing, and processing is important to the graft selection process for the patient, the surgeon, and nursing staff members. At the completion of this session, the audience will have a general understanding of infectious disease testing and an awareness of the risks and benefits of implanting allograft tissue.


P 7638+



A Nursing Team's Emotional Response to a Widely Publicized Sentinel Event—Gregory Horn, RN


Perioperative nurses who work in a demanding, high-acuity, cardiothoracic specialty in a teaching hospital where the transplantation service is very busy experience a great deal of stress. A traumatic and highly publicized transplant mismatch could have led to total personal and professional devastation, demoralization, disarray, and disenchantment. In this session, learn how one nursing team pulled together to deal with a sentinel event, the support they received to survive, and what they learned from the experience.


C 7640



Minimally Invasive Hip Surgery—Alberto Bolanos, MD


Minimally invasive hip surgery has changed the entire perspective of hip arthroplasty. You will learn the protocol for patient selection for this approach, including expected patient outcomes and length of recovery. The types of instrumentation required for this approach, including light sources, will be explored. The role of the assistant and a comparison of the minimally invasive approach to standard total hip arthroplasty also will be discussed.


P 7641+



Taking a Stand: Strategies for Dealing With Disruptive Behavior in the OR—Randy Cook, RN, MBA, CNOR; Katherine Stackpoole, MAOM


Strong, collaborative, and respectful relationships between nurses and physicians positively affect the quality of care and are the leading satisfiers for perioperative nurses. In the OR, however, most nurses have encountered disruptive behaviors. This session will provide the skills to give powerful, effective feedback directly to surgeons, either one-on-one or in a group setting. You will leave this session understanding the dynamics of any conflict, the role of perception, and how to take a stand in any conflict situation.


C 7642



Cardiovascular Pharmacology—Alan P. Agins, PhD


This session will provide an overview of recently updated treatment guidelines and pharmacotherapy in the management of hypertension, angina, heart failure, hyperlipidemia, and thromboembolic disorders. It will include explanations of the Joint National Committee VII hypertension guidelines and the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III guidelines for cholesterol and lipids. The role of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and beta blockers in congestive heart failure, the role for low molecular weight heparin, and a review of the basic and clinical pharmacology of oral anticoagulants and antiplatelet drugs also will be discussed.


10 to 11:30 AM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


C 7644



Hot Topic: Innovations and Advances in Minimally Invasive Cardiothoracic Surgery—John McDowell, RN; Lillian H. Nicolette, RN, MSN, CNOR


The focus of this presentation will involve the innovations surrounding minimally invasive cardiothoracic surgery and significant positive patient outcomes. Gain full appreciation and understanding of the current approaches to valvular surgery—both aortic and mitral valve replacement. Learn how the advent of off-pump bypass procedures and the use of robotics to enhance these procedures have added both continued complexity and innovation to the practice arena.


P 7645



Happy 50th Anniversary AORN!—Laurie K. Glass, RN, PhD, FAAN; Ellen K. Murphy, RN, MS, JD, FAAN


The history of AORN is documented in a book titled AORN—Emergence and Growth. This session will explore the historical accomplishments and activity of your Association. Photographs from the first 49 AORN Congresses will present a visual review of the activities and people who attended these exciting events. A review of the education sessions will show that AORN consistently provided the latest in cutting edge issues and technology.


C 7646



A Team Approach to Skull Base Surgery: Part I—Perry Mansfield, MD; Brian Weeks, MD; Margaret Fisher, RN, BSN


This session will include an introduction to skull base surgery and a discussion of the collaborative efforts of head and neck surgery, neurosurgery, neurotology, and reconstructive surgery. Interrelated problems of head and neck surgeries associated with skull base diagnoses will be addressed. Discussion of preoperative preparation, continuity of care in the hospital, and postoperative care each patient receives specific to his or her diagnosis and surgical intervention also will be included. Part II of this session will be held from 5 to 6:30 PM.


L/M 7647R



Presentation 101: Creating Powerful Presentations—Evelyn Eckberg-Farruggia, RN, MSN, PHN



P 7648



Economic Power of the Perioperative Nurse and Its Influence on Patient and Staff Safety—Dan Sandel


Efforts to capture every cost-saving opportunity have resulted in perioperative environments with lean thinkers. The differences in lean thinking and safe thinking have resulted in adverse, preventable outcomes that should be changed. When the approach to making decisions shifted, perioperative nurses no longer believed they had the power to make a difference. Using the invaluable knowledge and experience of perioperative nurses is essential to bring about vital changes and improvements in patient and staff member safety in the OR.


P 7649



Advocacy at AORN—Review and Preview—Burke Beu; Frederick P. Franko, MPIA


This session will provide you with an update of state and federal legislation relative to AORN's legislative priorities. A summary of opportunities for perioperative nurses to get involved in legislative activity and public policy during this important election year will be given.


L/M 7650+



Using the Perioperative Dashboard/PNDS to Demonstrate the RN's Impact on Outcomes—Renae Battié, KN, MN, CNOR; Annette Dopp, RN, BSN, CNOR


The perioperative dashboard was developed as a tool to provide a balanced look at perioperative business, including outcomes in clinical, financial, operational, and institutional areas. The Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) language is linked to each area to develop a framework for gathering data. A trial database has been developed using these outcomes and affiliated data fields to test the impact of perioperative nurses on various tracked outcomes.


P 7651



You Too Can Write—Kathleen B. Gaberson, RN, PhD, CNOR; Nancy J. Girard, RN, PhD, FAAN; Barbara J. Gruendemann, RN, MS, CNOR, FAAN


This presentation is designed to motivate and equip participants to write for any publication. Content includes an overview of the writing process, factors that encourage or discourage writing, what editors look for in an article submission, and ethical and legal issues related to writing. This session also will review the major types of manuscripts published in the AORN Journal. Criteria for writing a research paper will be discussed, as well as a comparison of research reports to quality improvement project reports and clinical articles. This presentation also will cover aspects to be considered in writing a book or chapters for a book and how this process differs from writing a journal article.


L/M 7652



Group Leadership Skills: Working and Playing—Rhonda L. Anders, RN, BSN, CNOR; Michelle M. Byrne, RN, MS, PhD, CNOR; Jane H. Flowers, RN, MSN, CNOR; Armando Riera, RN, BSN, CNOR; Deborah G. Spratt, RN, MPA, CNOR, CNAA


This interactive presentation will explore three leadership styles and how they are exemplified in group settings. Perioperative nurses interact in groups in their employment settings, as well as in their professional organizations. The many roles that group leaders and members enact will be illustrated to enable participants to differentiate between positive and negative behaviors. Suggestions will be offered to enhance leadership skills for task completion and group cohesiveness.


P 7653+



Incident Reports: Can They Improve Patient Safety?—Debra Dunn, RN, MBA, CNOR


People in all lines of work make mistakes, and accidents are a part of life. It is possible, however, to diminish or even eradicate specific types of errors when nurses focus on patient safety and administrative personnel and managers facilitate the reporting of such incidents. Risk containment and control can be achieved when people are allowed to learn from past errors. To prevent future occurrences, it is imperative for health care workers to take a proactive stance and question what could be learned from an incident. Although it is human nature to make mistakes, it also is human nature to create solutions and meet future challenges.


L/M 7654R



Nuts and Bolts of Project Management—Sandy Petersen, RN, MBA; Christine Ruygrok, RN, MBA



C 7655R



Cardiovascular Pharmacology—Alan P. Agins, PhD



11:30 am TO 1 PM


Authors available at Clinical Improvement/Innovation and Research/Evidence-Based Practice Poster Displays. See page 32 of this Journal for a detailed description.


1 to 2:30 PM


First House of Delegates


1 to 2:30 PM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


C 7656R



Updates in Colorectal Surgery—Joe Eyring, MD



C 7657



The Who, What, When, and Where of Endovascular Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Surgery—Gaye Currier, RN, MS


Endovascular grafting is becoming a part of everyday routine in ORs across the country. It is such a new frontier that little is known about the procedure, outcomes, who qualifies for the procedure, and why an endovascular procedure is chosen over an open procedure. You will leave this session with a better understanding of endovascular grafting.


P 7658+



Malignant Hyperthermia Simulation Improves Safety—W. Bosseau Murray, MD; Karin Underberg, RN, BSN, CNOR


In the way that flight simulators are used in the aircraft industry, a full human simulator can be used to educate perioperative nurses. Using a simulator, perioperative nurses can experience and practice hands-on interventions during perioperative crisis scenarios, such as malignant hyperthermia. The experience of recognizing physiologic changes while concurrently performing the necessary interventions enhances realism, learning, and retention of information. This practice increases nurses' confidence and competence because they are exposed to serious crisis scenarios without jeopardizing a real patient.


C 7659



Slings and Things: Managing Stress Incontinence—Evangeline (Vangie) Dennis, RN, CNOR; Beth Grimes, RN, BSN, CNOR


The American Urological Association's clinical guidelines recognize slings as the most effective procedure for long-term treatment of female urinary stress incontinence. This educational offering will address various treatment options, intraoperative procedures, the perioperative role in patient care, and the statistical outcomes.


L/M 7660+



AAMI Standards for Protective Barriers— Peter Brown; Fran Koch, RN, MSN, CNOR


The Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) standard for protective barriers of gowns and drapes can be used to evaluate products. In this session, learn how to select gowns and drapes that protect the caregiver from exposure to patients' blood and body fluids and the patient from exposure to microorganisms that could cause infection.


C 7661R+



What Are the Facts in Musculoskeletal Allograft Tissue Safety, Infectious Disease Testing, and Regulation?—Joel C. Osborne, MLT, CTBS



P 7662



Operation Iraqi Freedom and Surgery in an Austere Field Setting—Cindy A. Davis, RN, CNOR, LTC; Adrienne Grant Hartgerink, RN, MSN, MAJ


This session is about the set-up and operations of a medical facility from bare base. Starting with an overview of a three-month deployment to Saudi Arabia, this session will include slides and a description of how the medical facility was built from the ground up. It will include the challenges of operating and running a war-ready hospital with particular attention to the OR suite, equipment required, and issues of surgery in a field setting.


L/M 7663+



The Human Side of Surgical Counts: Human Factors Theory, Failure Mode and Effects Analysis to Improve Patient Safety—Susan Elaine Brown, RN, BSN; Rebecca Sue Hansbrough, RN, BSN, CNOR


Prevention of medical errors requires that we look at the systems and processes we use to provide perioperative care. Staff members at a multifacility medical center used a failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) process and human factors theory to revise and merge their surgical count procedure and minimize the risk of a retained foreign body. The speakers will present an overview of the FMEA process and human factors theory and demonstrate its use in drafting a new or revised procedure.


L/M 7664



Leadership = (R+C÷T+P) × C + V—Inez Tenzer, RN, MS, CNOR, CNAA


The leadership formula is defined as leadership (L) equals relationships (R) + communication (C) divided by timing (T) + perseverance (P) × competency (C) + values (V). Theory is necessary to frame one's understanding; experience is essential to frame actions. The elements of this formula are seen as contributing factors to successful leadership. Each element will be described using personal experience with reference to appropriate theories. Interaction with participants will provide situations to create strategies to address the experience.


C 7665



The Nuss Procedure: Minimally Invasive Correction of Pectus Excavatum—Lori M. Crowder, RN, BSN; Donald Nuss, MD, FAAP, FACS


Pectus excavatum is an anterior chest wall deformity that can be corrected with a minimally invasive technique known as the Nuss procedure. Patient criteria and assessment for this new surgical procedure are defined clearly to ensure the need for surgical intervention. A multidisciplinary team approach has been established at Children's Hospital of The King's Daughters, Norfolk, Va. Team members work cooperatively throughout the perioperative cycle, addressing the surgical procedure, pain management, and postoperative recovery to ensure a successful outcome for the patient.


P 7666+



Against All Odds: Practical Approaches to Implement Best Practices in the OR—Lisa Rowen, RN, DNSc; Laurie Saletnik, RN, BSN


Learn to translate existing knowledge of best practices in perioperative nursing into real, practical, and workable solutions for the OR. Discussion will focus on how The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, implemented, measured, and evaluated best practice changes in the clinical environment. Practical strategies, working policies, and audit tools will be shared.


3 to 4:30 PM


General Session (see page 36 in this Journal)


5 to 6:30 PM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


C 7668



HOT TOPIC


This session will explore a hot topic in perioperative nursing. The topic will be identified and listed on AORN's web site in February 2004 and included in the February chapter presidents' mailing.


C 7669+



Validating the RNFA Using the PNDS—Cecil A King, RN, MS, CNOR


This presentation will report the results of a validation study identifying the data elements in the Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) that are sensitive to the practice of first assisting. The RN first assistant (RNFA) can use this information to demonstrate the value and impact they have on achieving positive patient, operational, institutional, and financial outcomes.


C 7670R



The Who, What, When, and Where of Endovascular Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Surgery—Gaye Currier, RN, MS



P 7671R+



Malignant Hyperthennia Simulation Improves Safety—W. Bosseau Murray, MD; Karin Underberg, RN, BSN, CNOR



C 7672R



The Nuss Procedure: Minimally Invasive Correction of Pectus Excavatum—Marilyn A. Kirsh, RN, CNOR; Donald Nuss, MD, FAAP, FACS



L/M 7673



Holes in the “Glass Ceiling”—Sheila Allen, RN, BSN, CNOR, CRNFA; Karen Kilgore, RN, BSN, CNOR


Leadership is not an innate ability; it is a set of skills and qualities that can be learned and enhanced during the course of your career. Whether you are a staff nurse or the vice president of nursing, it is vital to be self-confident, have high professional self-esteem, and be a visionary. Learn how to lead, how to follow, and how to use your knowledge and experience to act powerfully and to find the holes in the glass ceiling.


P 7674R+



A Nursing Team's Emotional Response to a Widely Publicized Sentinel Event—Gregory Horn, RN



P 7675R+



Operation Iraqi Freedom and Surgery in an Austere Field Setting—Cindy A. Davis, RN, CNOR, LTC; Adrienne Grant Hartgerink, RN, MSN, MAJ



L/M 7676R



The Human Side of Surgical Counts: Human Factors Theory, Failure Mode and Effects Analysis to Improve Patient Safety—Susan Elaine Brown, RN, BSN; Rebecca Sue Hansbrough, RN, BSN, CNOR



L/M 7677R



Leadership = (R+C%T+P) × C+ V—Inez Tenzer, RN, MS, CNOR, CNAA



C I 7678



A Team Approach to Skull Base Surgery: Part II— Corinne Kamer, RN, CNOR; Sanjay Ghosh, MD; Michael O'Leary, MD


This presentation addresses the RN's role in the intraoperative management of skull base surgery patients with discussion of informatics and technology and how they can interact with total patient care. Neurological aspects of skull base surgery will be presented, including in-depth descriptions of minimally invasive concepts of cranial surgery. The concept of the team approach, tying multiple disciplines to a successful outcome, and provision of the highest quality of life obtainable will be evaluated. Part I of this session will be held from 10 to 11:30 AM.


P 7679R+



Against All Odds: Practical Approaches to Implement Best Practices in the OR—Lisa Rowen, RN, DNSC; Laurie Saletnik, RN, BSN



Tuesday, March 23



7:30 AM to 3 PM


Managers' Program (see page 56 in this Journal)


8 to 9:30 AM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


7680 HOT TOPIC


This session will explore a hot topic in perioperative nursing. The topic will be identified and listed on AORN's web site in February 2004 and included in the February chapter presidents' mailing.


C 7681



Transmyocardial Laser Revascularization—Altagracia M. Chavez, MD


Laser transmyocardial revascularization (TMR) is a new tool in the armamentarium of cardio-thoracic surgeons treating patients with severe coronary artery disease. This session will provide an overview of the technology and techniques used. Patient selection and use of laser TMR as sole therapy or combined with coronary artery bypass grafting will be discussed Follow-up studies focusing on patient outcomes will be reviewed.


C 7682+



Minimizing Risk and Ensuring Safety—Kay Ball, RN, BSN, MSA, CNOR, FAAN; Evangeline (Vangie) Dennis, RN, CNOR


Advancements in technology continue to launch new energy sources into the surgical environment. Accidents can occur when the perioperative nurse does not fully understand the use and safety parameters associated with a specific energy source. This session, will describe energy sources, potential hazards, and safety considerations for various energy sources (eg, electrosurgery, argon-enhanced electrosurgery, ultrasonic energy, cryasurgery). Energy source accidents, whether they occur during open or endoscopic procedures can be prevented with the appropriate knowledge, skill, and proficiency.


L/M I 7683+



Patient Safety in the Ambulatory Setting—Catherine (Kate) M. Moses, RN, CNOR, CPHQ


The hot topic of patient safety has everyone hopping. There are national patient safety goals, sentinel event alerts, and revised Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations standards with a new survey process. In the ambulatory setting, which allows limited patient interface, it is imperative that we document how we achieve the elements of performance related to safe patient care. The old tenet is, “If you did not document it, it was not done.” AORN's Perioperative Nursing Data Set and a few simple tools can help you successfully provide the documentation that shows you are practicing in a safe environment without adding to the paperwork burden of caregivers.


L/M 7684



Can We Talk? OR and SPD?—Nancy Chobin, RN; Barbara Trattler, RN, CNOR


This session will describe the key components of a collaborative relationship between the OR and sterile processing department (SPD) to successfully develop effective procedures for instrument processing. The ability to strategically align the goals of these two departments is critical to enhance efficiency, productivity, and staff member and physician satisfaction. The elements of change management, effective communication, and staff shortages will be presented. Recommendations for staff member recruitment, retention, orientation, and training will be identified. The financial implications of missing instruments, procedure delays, and procedure cancellations also will be discussed.


I P 7685



Mapping the PNDS to the Patient Record— Susan V. M. Kleinbeck, RN, PhD, CNOR; Kathie Shea, RN, BSN, CNOR


Integrating the Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) into perioperatiye documentation requires mapping perioperative nursing interventions and patient outcomes to the patient record. This session will describe the systematic process of mapping the PNDS, as well as discuss a computerized patient record currently in use.


C 7686



Cutting Edge Therapies in Trauma to Brain, Spine, and Peripheral Nerves—Linda Littlejohns, RN, MSN, CCRN, CNRN


This session will cover management of trauma patients in the OR as it pertains to neurology issues. Cutting edge therapies for reconnection of peripheral nerves, transplantation, and regeneration studies on patients who have a spinal cord injury and monitoring oxygen in patients who have traumatic brain injury will be discussed. Evidence-based interventions and improved outcomes will be demonstrated with case studies.


C 7687



MRI in Planning for the Treatment of Breast Cancer—Michael Fenoglio, MD


Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been used as a powerful tool for several years, its use with breast cancer is a fairly recent development. This session will provide insight into the use of MRI in the treatment of breast cancer.


P 7688+



What Next? Current Issues in Epidemiology—Peggy Prinz Luebbert, MS, MT, CIC, CHSP


Daily, perioperative nurses are faced with the dilemma created by issues of epidemiology, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, HIV, the West Nile virus, and smallpox. A knowledgeable perioperative nurse needs to have a basic understanding of the issues presented by these epidemiological threats. During this presentation, epidemiology information for professional and personal use will be presented, along with information resources for patients, members of the public, other health care professionals, family members, and ourselves.


3:30 to 5 PM


Jerry G. Peers Lectureship (see page 36 in this Journal)


Wednesday, March 24



8 AM to 3 PM


Student Program (see page 60 in this Journal)


8:20 to 11:40 AM


Faculty Program (see page 61 in this Journal)


8 to 9:30 AM



7699


Second Forum—one contact hour will be awarded for attending both Forums.


8 to 9:30 AM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


P 7700+



High-Alert Medications: A Case-Based Approach to Understanding the Problems and Designing Solutions—Suzanne Beyea, RN, PhD, FAAN; Rodney Hicks, RN, MPA, MSN, ARNP


Medication errors involving high-alert medications are a recurring problem and have been implicated in adverse patient outcomes in day surgery units, holding areas, ORs, and postanesthesia care units. Using actual cases, this presentation will review the most recent medication-error data involving high-alert products in perioperative settings and emphasize strategies to eliminate patient risk. The session will address meeting the intent of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations' national patient safety goals and medication management standards.


C 7701+



Don't Be Left Out in the Cold—Debra Malina, RN, MS, MBA, CRNA; Jan Odom, RN, MS, CPAN, FAAN


This presentation will emphasize the importance of maintaining normothermia for perioperative patients. The session will include definitions of normothermia and hypothermia as stated in the guideline approved by AORN. The speakers will discuss causes of hypothermia and a collaborative approach to prevention of hypothermia, as well as the clinical effects of mild hypothermia to patients, costs of hypothermia, and methods of maintaining body heat. There will be discussion on how to help institutions implement these guidelines with a collaborative approach to a best practice model.


P 7702



Complementary Medicine's Use in the Operating Room—Debra J. Bebell, RN, BSN, AP


This session will describe and present a variety of modalities used in practice, including acupuncture, acupressure, guided imagery, and Koryo hand therapy.


C 7703+



Massive Transfusion—Managing Hemorrhage in the Trauma Patient—Dana Kyles, RN, BSN


Nurses and physicians receive an average of 1.5 hours of transfusion medicine education in college or medical school. The clinical implications of massive blood loss and transfusion of large volumes of allogenic blood components in a severe trauma setting are wide-ranging and complex. This session presents an overview of blood component therapy, laboratory value interpretation, and current approaches to managing urgent transfusion. Principles of massive transfusion will be discussed. Frequent complications will be reviewed, including hypothermia, metabolic abnormalities, and related coagulopathies.


C 7704+



Flash: What Do I Need to Know about Sterilization Process Monitoring—Martha Young, MS


This presentation will discuss the recommended practices from the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, the American Society for Healthcare Central Service Professionals of the American Hospital Association, and AORN. The use of mechanical, chemical, and biological indicators, including the use of biological indicators with enzyme-based early rapid readout capability and record keeping, will be discussed so participants can use these indicators appropriately and follow the recommended practices.


C 7705



Image-Guided Surgery: From the Basics to the Future—Paul Ogilvie, RN


This presentation will cover the basic principles and history of image-guided surgery (IGS). There will be descriptions of the various uses of IGS through case studies and future areas where it may have applicability.


L/M 7706



Chart Readiness in Day-of-Surgery Patients: A Six Sigma Project—Katie Chapp, RN, BSN; Debra Runyan, RN, MS; Kathryn Schroeter, RN, MS, MA, CNOR


Surgical delays are an ongoing problem. While their existence has been reported and quantified for years, it is apparent that a methodology must be implemented to prevent delays rather than merely detect them. This program will demonstrate the Six Sigma Process in the analysis and resolution of this problem in one perioperative setting. The tools used include process maps, failure mode and effects analysis, descriptive statistics, normality plots, and process capability analysis. The problem-solving method and steps involved in the Six Sigma Process will be described using an actual case study that has been implemented in a perioperative environment.


P 7707



A Surgical Journey into Mexico with the Mercy Outreach Surgical Team—Kimberly McEvoy-Dodson, RN, MBA, CNOR; Mary (Molly) Rowan Schmeltzer, RN, BSN, CNOR; Stacey Ann Schultz, RN, PHN, CNOR


This session is designed to provide information to perioperative RNs regarding volunteer field surgery programs in Mexico. It will include the clinical overview of deformities common to the region visited. It also will include preparation and planning strategies, as well as hands-on clinical cases that were encountered.


L/M 7708



Mastering the Chargemaster—Kathy A. Crummey, RN, BSN, CNOR


Understanding the revenue process for a perioperative program can be overwhelming. By developing a collaborative relationship with finance and business services, the savvy manager can ensure the optimal capture of revenue for his or her facility. A manager's nursing skills and in the pursuit of data about chargemasters, coding, reimbursement, compliance, and revenue capture. With the perception and knowledge brought to the relationship by the finance and business service professionals, this team can make the needed enhancements in the organization's revenue capture and bottom line.


L/M 7709+



Ambulatory Update: Another Look at HIPAA—Barbara Ann Harmer, RN, BSN, MHA


This session will examine the characteristics and requirements of the three standards of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)—transaction and code sets, the privacy rule, and the security rule. Tips on how to conduct a risk assessment audit of your organization will be shared, A “to do list” with implementation strategies to meet HIPAA compliance will be provided.


10:15 AM to 3 PM


Managers' Program (see page 56 in this Journal)


3:30 to 4:30 PM


General Session (see page 36 in this Journal)


5 to 6:30 PM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


P 7713R+



High-Alert Medications: A Case-Based Approach to Understanding the Problems and Designing Solutions—Suzanne Beyea, RN, PhD, FAAN; Rodney Hicks, RN, MPA, MSN, ARNP



L/M 7714R



Chart Readiness in Day-of-Surgery Patients: A Six Sigma Project—Katie Chapp, RN, BSN; Debra Runyan, RN, MS; Kathryn Schroeter, RN, MS, MA, CNOR



P 7715R



Complementary Medicine's Use in the Operating Room—Debra J. Bebell, RN, BSN, AP



C 7716R+



Flash: What Do I Need to Know about Sterilization Process Monitoring—Martha Young, MS



I P 7717



Computers Are Coming: How Do I Train My Staff?—Rhonda L. Anders, RN, BSN, CNOR; Diana Sullivan, RN, MSN, CNOR


Most perioperative areas have converted to computerized documentation or will convert in the near future. Much has been said about the development and implementation of the soft ware, but little has been said about how to train staff members. In this session, learn how to train a large number of people in a short time.


C 7718R+



Massive Transfusion—Managing Hemorrhage in the Trauma Patient—Dana Kyles, RN, BSN



L/M 7719+



Achieving Magnet Hospital Status—Sherry S. Hardee, RN, MSN, CNOR; Marion S. McCall, RN, BS, CNOR, CIC


Along with the nursing shortage, there is an increased public concern regarding medical errors and quality of care in health care facilities. How can hospitals and surgical centers address public concerns while attracting and retaining expert clinical staff members? The American Nurses Credentialing Centers Magnet Nursing Services Recognition Program provides a vehicle for recognizing hospitals that provide superior, quality nursing care by attracting and retaining excellent nurses. This presentation will assist managers and clinical leaders in preparing for and achieving Magnet status for their facility.


I P 7720+



Charting Beyond the Legal Limits—A. E. Lyn Ames, RN, MS, CNOR, CNAA; Maria Jaskela


Results of charting can have a great impact on illustrating compliance with standards of practice, outcomes, quality, cost, and regulatory requirements. Incorporating the Perioperative Nursing Data Set, a universally recognized vocabulary documentation system, is not difficult. This session will provide innovative techniques and concepts in documentation with fundamental and advanced charting ideas. Compliance with charting techniques will be demonstrated using a paper record or automated documentation system to enhance opportunities to improve.


L/M 7721R+



Ambulatory Update: Another Look at HIPAA—Barbara Ann Harmer, RN, BSN, MHA



L/M 7722



Best of the Best: Knowledge Transfer and Learning from a 34-Hospital Collaborative Effort—Girard F. Senn, RN, MS, CNAA; Gay Wayland, RN, MBA


Thirty-four hospitals joined forces to identify, measure, and reduce perioperative supply costs during a nine-month period. Selected top performers' story boards will be presented, including the metrics and specific actions implemented to improve their performance.


P 7723+



Disaster Preparedness—Anthony Dawson, RN, MSN


This session will explore emergent response required for casualties of mass destruction. Participants will learn how a major teaching hospital in the New York metropolitan area responded to the Sept 11, 2001, crisis and the lessons they learned. Leave with an understanding of how to implement a decontamination process, how to determine staffing levels during a disaster, how to identify all staff members involved, and how to keep your institution safe in a disaster.


Thursday, March 25



8 to 9:30 AM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


7733 HOT TOPIC


This session will explore a hot topic in perioperative nursing. The topic will be identified and listed on AORN's web site in February 2004 and included in the February chapter presidents' mailing.


C 7734+



Road to Implementation: Translating SIP into Daily Practice—Jan Fitzgerald, RN, MS; Gary Kanter, MD; Diane Skorupski, RN, MS, CNOR


This presentation will give a broad approach to the problem of surgical infection, which drove the surgical infection prevention (SIP) project national collaboration sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and the Institute for Healthcare Improvement. An overview of the background, rationale, evidence, scope of the SIP project, and strategies for successfully integrating SIP interventions into daily clinical practice, as well as dealing with barriers and roadblocks to change, will be included.


C 7735



Current Trends in Bariairic Surgery—Gregg H. Jossart, MD, FACS


This session will discuss the laparoscopic and minimally invasive surgery program at California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco, which provides a variety of unique surgical services using laparoscopic techniques. Learn the latest technology and surgical advancements.

P 7736+

Responding to the Unthinkable: Duke University Hospital's Experience with a Transplant Sentinel Event—Alicia C. Arvidson, RN; Rebecca J. McKenzie, RN; Gail Shulby, RN, MA, C


This presentation provides an overview of a blood group systems incompatible organ transplantation sentinel event, including detailed root cause analysis, corrective action plans, and review of evaluative outcomes. Discussion will include multifaceted scenarios that unfolded following the incredulous event and valuable lessons learned from a multidisciplinary panel session. At the conclusion of the presentation, a varied team of experts will respond to audience discussion.


P 7737



Beyond Knowles: Secret of Instruction—Susan Wilson, RN, BSN, MA, MS


Educators are called to diagnosis learning problems and educate staff members. This presentation will share the secrets of instructional design. Course objectives, content, methods of instruction, and evaluation must be consistent with the desired performance. This presentation also will assist participants in developing teaching plans structured to achieve desired performance. To ensure effective teaching, participants will learn to categorize the type of information to be taught as a skill, fact, concept, or principle and the appropriate method to teach each category. They will learn to structure teaching to ensure all components are covered.


C 7738+



Chemical and Infectious Agents: Are You Safe?—Cynthia Spry, RN, MA, MSN, CNOR


This session will identify infectious and chemical agents that pose a risk or potential risk to OR personnel and surgical patients. Chemical agents used in surgery, instrument processing, and housekeeping will be discussed. Infectious agents, including bloodborne pathogens, prions, multiple-medication resistant organisms, and agents of bioterrorism, will be described. Safe work practices and techniques to protect staff members and patients will be explored.


L/M 7739



The Digital Age and the Integrated OR—Trudy Kenyan, RN


In the development of the minimally invasive surgery (MIS) suite, the video cart is replaced with ceiling-mounted columns on articulating arms. The arms allow the video monitors open access around the surgical field. The monitors receive the video signal via a video network by a computer-based operating platform, which integrates devices to create an OR environment controlled by a touch screen interface. This session will focus on critical design elements, digital technology, and ergonomic considerations in designing an MIS suite.


L/M 7740



Process Redesign: An OR/MM Success Story—James Lawrence, BS, CPHM; Judy Trufant, RN, BSN, MBA


This presentation will communicate the outcomes of a two-year OR/materials management (MM) process improvement initiative at Via Christi Regional Medical Center, Wichita, Kan. During the project, emphasis was placed on redesigning resource management to; nclude productivity, flow, logistics, and value analysis. The outcome of this initiative demonstrates that through a collaborative nursing and MM approach to managing resources, successful and cost-effective implementation can be accomplished.


P 7741R+



Incident Reports: Can They Improve Patient Safety?—Debra Dunn, RN, MBA, CNOR



P 7742



Application of PNDS Across the Perioperative Continuum—Cecil A. King, RN, MS, CNOR; Cindy Ripplinger, RN, BSN, CPAN


This presentation will discuss how a surgical services department collaborated with a perioperative/perianesthesia nursing team to develop a standard of patient care. There also will be discussion of how the team documented patient care using the Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) to demonstrate compliance with Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations' Standard Tx5, showing how the PNDS applies to all phases of the surgical experience.


P 7743



Perceived Value of Certification—Michelle Byrne, RN, MS, PhD, CNOR; Kathryn Sapnas, RN, PhD, CNOR, CCRN


Today's managers are charged with employing competent nurses in the perioperative setting. Certification, one indication of competent professional nursing practice and commitment to the profession, has been linked to recruitment and retention. The Certification Board Perioperative Nursing designed a research program to investigate issues facing perioperative nurses and the credentialing environment. Studies indicate that there are three distinct dimensions of the perceived value of certification by nurses and administrators. The findings of this research study will be presented with an emphasis from the nurse administrator sample.


1:30 to 3 PM


Second House of Delegates


1:30 to 3 PM (1.8 CH)


Concurrent Education Sessions


C 7745R



Current Trends in Bariatric Surgery—Gregg H. Jossart, MD, FACS



P 7746R+



Responding to the Unthinkable: Duke University Hospital's Experience With a Transplant Sentinel Event—Alicia C. Arvidson, RN; Rebecca J. McKenzie, RN; Gail Shulby, RN, MA, C



P 7747



The Operating Room Team: Collaborating With Health Care Industry Representatives—C. Elizabeth (Beth) Fitzgerald, RN, MSN, CNOR


Increasingly sophisticated surgical equipment, products, and technology have created a need for additional expertise in the OR. In most situations, hospitals can best meet this need by granting permission for well-trained industry representatives to be present in the OR while new products are being used. Position statements issued by AORN and others clearly define the need for preparing these individuals to be present in the surgical environment. This session will discuss partnerships with industry representatives, defining their roles and expected behaviors, and how the establishment of policies monitoring their presence will fulfill these requirements.


L/M 7748R



The Digital Age and the Integrated OR—Trudy Kenyan, RN



L/M 7749R



Process Redesign: An OR/MM Success Story—James Lawrence, BA, CPHM; Judy Trufant, RN, BSN, MBA



L/M 7750R



Best of the Best: Knowledge Transfer and Learning From a 34-Hospital Collaborative Effort—Girard F. Senn, RN, MS, CNAA; Gay Wayland, RN, MBA



C 7751



Minimally Invasive Pediatric Surgery—Andre Hebra, MD; Beverly McGuire, RN, BSN, CNOR


This presentation will focus on the process of developing a minimally invasive pediatric surgery program, as well as the current and future applications of this technology for diseases of infants and children. This presentation will describe uses of laparoscopic and thoracoscopic surgery. It also will address the use of robot-assisted surgery and future trends.


I L/M 7752



Optimizing Your OR Software through Selection, Implementation, and Project Management—Stephen Nelson, BS, MBA


This session will assist you in understanding the concept of software selection, including requests for proposals and necessary management support. In addition, learn the steps of the implementation process, including the hospital-wide impact and necessary functional interfaces. Understand the differences between system integration and system interfaces. Experience the impact of an effective project management team on the outcome.


I L/M 7753+



Your Journey through Perioperative Charting—Amy Jo Encinas; Myra Schultz, RN, MSM, CNOR


Operating rooms are moving to computerized perioperative documentation. This is a legal record, so it is imperative that the design and function meet the regulatory requirements and legal issues and that it is user friendly to ease completion and compliance. A perioperative record is required for every surgical event and must include defined case elements, along with nursing diagnoses and interventions that measure and evaluate patient care outcomes. Leave this session with solid knowledge about how to build a computerized perioperative record for your facility.


4:30 to 5:20 PM


Closing General Session (see page 36 in this Journal)

Managers' Program
The management-focused education sessions will take place on Tuesday, March 23, and Wednesday, March 24. There are two tracks of advanced management content. The Work Force track is designated by L/MWF, and the Operations track is designated by L/MO. You may design your own program by selecting sessions from either track to meet your specific needs.


Tuesday, March 23



7:30 to 9 AM (1.8 CH)



L/MO 7691



Health Care and Nursing Economics: A Primer for Nurse Managers—Charlene Anne Weigel, RN, BSN, MBA


Cost/benefit, supply and demand, market equilibrium, creative destruction, moral hazard—although these terms are part of the everyday language of economists, they form everyday reality for nurse managers. Health care is one of the largest drivers of our nation's gross domestic product and the focus for thousands of economists and analysts, and yet, few nurses have had exposure to the basic concepts and tools that these economists use to study our industry. This session is designed to level that playing field, to provide nurse managers with a working understanding of the key economic principles influencing and driving our profession.


L/MWF 7692



Developing Nursing's Future: Mentoring New Managers—Anne Fairchild, RN, MS, CNOR; Janet A. Lewis, RN, MA, CNOR


Many factors have been stated about the nursing shortage we are facing. Much effort is being placed on programs to recruit new people to enter nursing career programs. At the same time, there is a need to prepare new nurses for leadership roles. Current managers need to adopt skills to nurture and develop their successors. The strength of nursing's future depends not only on increasing numbers, but also on increasing the knowledge and skills of well-prepared nursing leaders to ensure patient safety.


9:15 to 10:45 AM (1.8 CH)



L/MO 7693



Constructing the State-of-the-Art Operating Room, Lessons Learned—Jacqueline Thompson, RN, CNOR


As technological advances in surgical equipment evolve, the construction of new ORs becomes more complex. Specialty areas require extensive planning. A multidisciplinary team at the University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, designed 12 state-of-the-art ORs, including cardiac, vascular, thoracic, angiography, neurology, and trauma. Each room uses computer technology and advanced medical equipment. One year later, they continue to educate and revise construction plans as prototype equipment evolves with US Food and Drug Administration approval for equipment revisions. The team members reflect on changes and lessons learned as they plan two more ORs specifically designed for spine surgery.


L/MWF 7694



Win/Win Relations With Physicians—David S. Kaczmarek; Laura Wood, RN


Any successful OR manager must develop techniques for gaining physician support. This session reviews proven techniques to do just that. It starts with an introduction to win/win negotiation principles, one of the most powerful tools available today. Discussion will include incorporating those tools into the special relationship between physicians and clinicians.


11 AM to 12:30 PM (1.8 CH)



L/MO 7695



The Power of Sensitive OR Data—Barbara Robinson, RN, MSN, CNOR; Tracey Stierer, MD


A descriptive design will be used to share the significance of how to use powerful and sensitive OR data regarding surgeons' procedure times to re-engineer your daily OR schedule for positive outcomes. The pitfalls will be examined, as well as the power of collaborative relationships with department of anesthesia staff members and posting clerks. Overcoming barriers to achieve cooperation with all the players is key to the success of communicating OR data favorably. Recommendations will be given on approaches to communicate sensitive information to surgeons.


L/MWF 7696



What You Need to Consider Prior to Hiring Nurses Educated in Other Countries—Barbara Nichols, RN, MS, DHL, FAAN


Nurses trained in other countries can be recruited to help the nursing shortage in your facility. Sound simple? What information do you need to know and what types of support programs must you consider before starting an international recruitment program? This speaker has heard it all and will provide insight on working with nurses educated in other countries.


1:30 to 3 PM (1.8 CH)



L/MO 7697



Managing Cost in a High-Tech Environment—Linda K. Groah, RN, MS, CNOR, CNAA, FAAN; Lillian H. Nicolette, RN, MSN, CNOR


Administrators still consider the surgeon their number one customer, making their voices heard when it comes to allocation of resources, both capital and consumable. This presentation will focus on the need for new technology to advance surgical care, the impact of supply acquisition, and the impact on controlling costs. The speakers will discuss targeted procedures and specialties, along with a decision-making methodology for both new and advanced procedures and products. Criteria-based product selection, enhancements to health care facility revenue streams, and the associated clinical outcomes also will be discussed.


L/MWF 7698



How to Have More Fun and Become an Even Better Team—Louis Benson, PhD


People spend too much time at work not to have fun and enjoy themselves. The surgical workplace that provides a supportive, fun environment will be the OR that easily can recruit and retain staff members. People who are having fun get more out of work and play, have greater confidence, and have a life. By attending this session, you will learn the value of good humor when working with the different personalities and priorities that you face each day. Attend this session and enjoy an uplifting, content-rich, motivational, humorous, entertaining, and fun experience.


5:15 to 6:15 PM


Managers' networking reception


Solely sponsored by the Tyco Healthcare group of companies



Wednesday, March 24



8:30 to 10 AM


Exclusive Managers' Exhibit Hours


10:15 TO 11:45 AM (1.8 CH)



L/MO 7729



Expediting Perioperative Patient Throughput—Marita Parks, RN, MHA


The hospital has placed the emergency department on divert because of boarders. There are no critical care or telemetry beds available. The OR is running behind schedule with surgeries delayed because of holding in the postanesthesia care unit. Surgical cases are canceled or delayed because of bed availability. How can this capacity issue be bridged? How can the OR more effectively move patients through the system?


L/MWF 7730+



Legal Issues—Janine Fiesta, RN, BSN, JD


There are legal issues related to patient care, workforce issues, or regulatory issues that must be dealt with every minute of the day. This nationally known speaker will provide the information you need to function confidently in your leadership role.


1:30 TO 3 PM (1.8 CH)



L/MO 7731



Managing the Unmanageable: Scheduling as the First Line of Defense in the Battle of Operational Efficiency—Tracey Aegerter, BS, MHA; Elizabeth A. Murphy, RN, BSCN, MSBN; Patrick Voight, RN, BSN, MSA, CNOR


Managing today's OR is a complex task that requires planning and collaboration among OR staff members, hospital administrators, and physicians. Effectiveness of operations in all perioperative areas is dependent on the ability to develop scheduling policies that allow predictability in the day. The first line of defense is a clear policy, which balances the OR's needs with the needs of OR physicians and patients. The second line of defense is strong administrative and physician leadership at the highest levels in the organization. The position of an “OR czar,” a schedule management team, and a grievance process must be established to handle physician disputes and issues.


L/MWF 7732



Creating a Culture of Retention—Jo Manion, RN, PhD, CNAA, FAAN


Workforce shortages continue to grow, and with an even more dire prediction for the future, organizations are seeking the “magic bullet” to reverse these trends. No matter how glitzy the new recruitment or retention program, the truth is that the manager is the primary source for creating a culture of retention in the department. This session is based on best practices research involving nurse leaders who have been successful in creating a culture of engagement in their areas of responsibility. Concrete and distinct ways that leaders recruit and retain their best and brightest employees will be shared.


Thursday, March 25



8:30 to 10 AM


Exclusive Managers' Exhibit Hours

Student Program
AORN is excited to offer student nurses free registration to the AORN 51st Congress. Come just for the special one-day student program or join us all week. Whether you have chosen to pursue a career in the surgical field or just want to see what it is all about, you can benefit from the student-focused program designed to introduce you to the OR. A one-day program will be offered especially for you on Wednesday, March 24, 2004, but stay all week and attend education sessions and exhibits while making valuable connections with experienced perioperative professionals from across the country.

Registration.
Registration is available to individuals pursuing education leading to eligibility to sit for the RN licensing examination. To register over the telephone or to request the student registration form, call customer service at (800) 755–2676 × 1. You also may register online by visiting http://www.aorn.org/congress and click on “Registration.”


Wednesday, March 24



7 to 7:55 AM



Continental Breakfast and Networking


Join other student nurses and faculty members at an informal networking breakfast. Take this opportunity to meet others who face the same challenges you do.


8 to 11:25 AM



Understanding the OR


This session will feature exceptional speakers, well-known in the field of perioperative nursing. Items presented include aseptic techniques (eg, gowning, gloving, skin prep); positioning techniques; and patient safety.


11:30 AM to 1 PM



Exhibits and Lunch on Your Own


Visit the largest surgical product trade show in the country. More than 550 exhibitors will be displaying the latest in surgical products and services. You also will want to stop by the CareerFair, an exciting area of the floor dedicated to career training and development with lots of job opportunities.


1 to 3 PM



Hands-on Learning


Apply what you have learned. Spend the afternoon practicing the principles you learned in the morning session with help from experienced perioperative educators. Visit learning stations to practice prepping, gowning, and gloving using aseptic technique and view how electrosurgery is used in surgery.

Faculty Members
AORN invites full-time faculty members of schools of nursing to a one-day education program designed just for you with a concurrent session for your students, all free of charge. Free registration for Wednesday is available to all full-time, regular faculty members of schools of nursing. If you are planning to attend Congress for the entire week, Wednesday's registration fee will be subtracted from the weekly registration fee. Other days are offered at a discounted rate of $85 per day if registration is received on or before Feb 6, 2004. Registrations received after Feb 6, 2004, will be $105 per day. To register over the telephone or to request the faculty registration form, call customer service at (800) 755–2676 × 1. Online registration is not available.


Wednesday, March 24



7 to 7:55 AM



Continental Breakfast and Networking


Join other faculty members and student nurses at an informal networking breakfast.


8:20 to 9:30 AM (1.2 CH)



7724



Breaking the Traditional Mold: Utilizing the Perioperative Arena for a Med-Surg Learning Experience—Debra L. Fawcett, RN, MS, PhD; Julie Teague, RN


Through the collaborative efforts of Indiana University, Kokomo, Ind, and St Vincents Hospital, Indianapolis, a perioperative practice model was designed for the use of the OR as a clinical rotation for a traditional medical/surgical experience. This session will offer insights into how the perioperative arena can provide skills, meet academic objectives, and provide critical thinking and organizational learning.


9:40 to 11:40 AM (2.4 CH)



7725



Integrating The PNDS into a Perioperative Clinical Setting—Susan V. M. Kleinbeck, RN, PhD, CNOR


In this session, get an introduction to the Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS), a standardized nursing vocabulary. You will learn how the language of the PNDS can simplify the application of the nursing process in the OR clinical experience.


11:40 AM to 1 PM



Exhibits


More than 550 exhibitors will be displaying the latest in surgical products and services. Be sure to stop by the CareerFair.

Spanish Sessions

Tuesday, March 23



8 to 9:30 AM (1.8 CH)



C 7689



Segufidad en el Trabajo—Henna Fernández-Delgado, RN, BAS, MSN, LTC-USAR


Esta presentatión será en espanol y cubrira los multiples peligros ocupacionales en el ambiente del quirófano. Aspectos que cubrirá pero no se limitara a, biológicos, ergonomicos, químicos, físicos, sicosociales, y culturales que afectan empleados, pacientes, y miembros de la familia.


Wednesday, March 24



8 to 9:30 AM (1.8 CH)



C 7710



Metas Nacionales para la Seguridad del Paciente—Ileana Ferndndez-Delgado, RN, BAS, MSN, LTC-USAR


Nacionalmente la seguridad del paciente está en el pensamiento de todos. En esta sesión, conoceremos las metas utilizadas para demostrar metodos de identificar la calidad de cuidado al paciente.


Thursday, March 25



8 to 9:30 AM (1.8 CH)



C 7744



Proteger al Paciente al Posicionarlo—Barbara Sanchez, RN, BSN


Posicionar al paciente para cirugia puede sonar sencillo, pero si fuera tan sencillo, no ocurririan tantos incidentes a la piel anualmente en cirigia. Esta session proveerá lo básico de seguridad al posicionar a su paciente para poveer el mejor resultado.


1:30 to 3 PM (1.8 CH)



C 7754



Prevencion de Accidentes de Espalda—Marisol Feliciano, RN, BSN


Accidentes de la espalda es uno de los mayores riesgos de todo el personal de enfermería. Desafortunadamente, cuando un individuo experimenta algún accidente a la espalda, piensa que volverá a tener problemas recurrentes de espalda. Al terminar la sesión, conocera como proteger su espalda cuando mueva cuidadosamente los paciente.

Session Verification/Evaluation
Preregistered active AORN members have two options from which to select to submit the sessions they attend for contact hours and session evaluation. Information may be submitted on paper scan sheets found at the back of Congress Resources distributed to attendees on-site or submitted via online documentation forms. Directions for either method can be found in Congress Resources.

Independent Study
Independent studies will be available for delegates and alternate delegates involved in the business of the Association during Congress. Delegates and alternate delegates can earn approximately eight contact hours by successfully completing the online self-directed continuing nursing education activities. These contact hours take the place of the contact hours delegates and alternate delegates cannot earn during education sessions because they attend and participate in both Forums, House of Delegates' meetings, and Candidates' Forum Part I and II. A card with the web site address for access to the independent studies will be distributed as you leave the voting area.

