
==== Front
ApoptosisApoptosis1360-81851573-675XSpringer US Boston 2014052146910.1007/s10495-010-0469-9Clearance of Dead Cells: Mechanisms, Immune Responses and Implication in the Development of DiseasesApoptotic cell-based therapies against transplant rejection: role of recipient’s dendritic cells Morelli Adrian E. +1-412-6242193+1-412-6241172morelli@imap.pitt.edu 123Larregina Adriana T. 341 T.E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, E1546 Biomedical Science Tower, 200 Lothrop St., Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2582 USA 2 Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA 3 Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA 4 Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA 6 2 2010 6 2 2010 9 2010 15 9 1083 1097 © The Author(s) 2010One of the ultimate goals in transplantation is to develop novel therapeutic methods for induction of donor-specific tolerance to reduce the side effects caused by the generalized immunosuppression associated to the currently used pharmacologic regimens. Interaction or phagocytosis of cells in early apoptosis exerts potent anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects on antigen (Ag)-presenting cells (APC) like dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages. This observation led to the idea that apoptotic cell-based therapies could be employed to deliver donor-Ag in combination with regulatory signals to recipient’s APC as therapeutic approach to restrain the anti-donor response. This review describes the multiple mechanisms by which apoptotic cells down-modulate the immuno-stimulatory and pro-inflammatory functions of DC and macrophages, and the role of the interaction between apoptotic cells and APC in self-tolerance and in apoptotic cell-based therapies to prevent/treat allograft rejection and graft-versus-host disease in murine experimental systems and in humans. It also explores the role that in vivo-generated apoptotic cells could have in the beneficial effects of extracorporeal photopheresis, donor-specific transfusion, and tolerogenic DC-based therapies in transplantation.

Keywords
TransplantationToleranceApoptotic cellsDendritic cellsExtracorporeal photopheresisissue-copyright-statement© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010
==== Body
Introduction
Transplantation of organs, tissues or cells has become a common surgical procedure that frequently serves as the only life-saving treatment available for end-stage organ disorders. Allogeneic (allo) grafts are defined as organs/tissues/cells transplanted between totally or partially Major Histocompatibility (MHC) antigen (Ag)-mismatched individuals of the same species. According to the timing of onset, there are three main types of allograft rejection: hyperacute, acute and chronic. Hyperacute rejection takes place within minutes or hours after transplantation and is caused by deposition of pre-formed circulating antibodies (Ab) on the endothelium of the graft vasculature and the consequent complement cascade activation. This type of rejection is in general preventable and rarely occurs. Acute rejection occurs within weeks or months after transplantation surgery, is caused by innate and adaptive immune responses, the latter mediated by donor-reactive T cells and anti-donor allo-antibodies (alloAb), and is treatable by pharmacologic immuno-suppression. Chronic rejection takes place months or in general years after transplantation, is caused by immune and non-immune mechanisms, and does not respond to the currently employed immunosuppressive agents.

The development of nonspecific immunosuppressive agents and the better management of their therapeutic application and synergistic effects have decreased significantly the incidence of acute allograft rejection in the clinics. However, the currently used immunosuppressive drugs have shown little or no impact on chronic rejection and therefore on overall long-tern allograft survival. Importantly, long-term pharmacological immunosuppression is associated with toxicity and increased incidence of malignancies and infectious and metabolic diseases. Therefore, there is a need for the development of new donor-specific immunosuppressive therapies to control the mechanisms of allo-recognition that lead to graft rejection, and to reduce harmful side-effects of generalized immunosuppression. The finding that apoptotic cells exert potent anti-inflammatory and immunoregulatory effects on Ag-presenting cells (APC) of the immune system has paved the way for the development of novel apoptotic cell-based therapies that have been used successfully in delaying transplant rejection and treating T cell-mediated autoimmune disorders in murine experimental models.

Role of APC in initiation of allograft rejection
One of the critical mechanisms of acute rejection is the T cell response mounted against donor MHC Ag. T cells recognize antigenic peptides presented by MHC molecules with the help of professional APC such as dendritic cells (DC), or amateur APC like monocyte, macrophages and B cells. Among professional APC, mature/activated DC are the most efficient at priming naïve T cells which exhibit a higher threshold of activation than memory T cells.

Transplanted organs are populated by immature DC that are phagocytic with high capability for Ag internalization and processing, but that exhibit weak stimulatory capacity for naïve T cells due to the low levels of Ag-presenting and costimulatory molecules on the DC surface. Pro-inflammatory mediators released following transplant surgery and due to the effects of ischemia–reperfusion injury on the graft are sufficient to trigger the mechanisms of maturation/activation of graft-resident and graft-infiltrating DC. These maturing DC migrate as passenger leukocytes out of the graft into secondary lymphoid tissues of the recipient, where they activate donor-specific naïve and memory T cells. However, besides their role in elicitation allo-immunity and as initiators of graft rejection, DC are critical to induce and maintain T cell peripheral tolerance, in particular following interaction with apoptotic cells.

Immunoregulatory effects of apoptotic cells on APC
It was originally assumed that the rapid clearance of apoptotic cells in vivo, before cell lysis and leakage of intracellular toxic mediators take place, was the reason by which phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by macrophages or immature DC does not elicit inflammatory or immune responses in steady-state conditions. Voll et al. [1] were the first to realize that apoptotic cells exert an active and potent immunosuppressive effect on monocytes, promoting secretion of interleukin (IL)-10 and decreasing release of the pro-inflammatory cytokines Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)-α, IL-1β and IL-12. They also demonstrated that the immunoregulatory effect of apoptotic cells on APC is conserved between mammalian species and is independent of the apoptosis-inducing stimulus [1]. This profound down-regulatory effect of apoptotic cells on immunity occurs in professional and non-professional phagocytes and in non-phagocytic cells [2]. Accumulated evidence has shown that interaction and/or internalization of apoptotic cells by immature DC does not induce expression of the DC maturation-markers MHC class-II, CD40, CD80, CD86 and CD83 in vitro or in vivo, even after challenge with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), CD40-signaling, TNF-α or monocyte-conditioned medium [3–8]. By contrast, phagocytosis of cells undergoing primary necrosis or dying cells derived from virally-infected, activated or stressed cells promote DC maturation [3, 4, 9–11]. Besides the intrinsic characteristics of the dying cells, the pattern of opsonins deposited on the surface of apoptotic cells, the microenvironment where apoptotic cells die, and the efficiency of apoptotic cell clearance by phagocytes are critical factors that determine the outcome of the innate and adaptive immune responses [12].

It was initially assumed that, unlike early apoptotic cells which retain membrane integrity and exert immunosuppressive effects, late apoptotic cells (also known as secondarily necrotic cells) similarly to cells undergoing primary necrosis promote inflammation and immunity, since in both cases cells lose their membrane integrity and release potential pro-inflammatory mediators. However, Patel et al. [13] have shown in vitro that the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling events triggered in macrophages by early apoptotic cells (inhibition of ERK1/2 and activation c-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38) are similar to those induced by late apoptotic cells and that, in both cases, were dominant over those triggered by necrotic cells. The inhibitory activity of late apoptotic cells on macrophages required the presence of the plasma membrane of the dying cells, and did not depend on soluble mediators released by the late apoptotic cells [13]. These results contradict the established paradigm that states that delayed clearance of apoptotic cells in vivo leads to accumulation of cells in late apoptosis that, by releasing pro-inflammatory mediators, promote auto-immunity. By contrast, they suggest that in those experimental models of autoimmunity associated to impaired clearance of apoptotic cells due to deficient expression of receptors or opsonins necessary for recognition of apoptotic cells, autoimmunity could be triggered, to some extent by the inability of the apoptotic cells to deliver inhibitory signals to APC, and not by the continuous release of pro-inflammatory mediators by non-internalized late apoptotic cells accumulated in the extracellular space [13].

DC that internalize cells in early apoptosis exhibit a selective decrease in the levels of mRNA and secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12p70 and TNF-α, while secreting normal or increased amounts of immunosuppressive Transforming Growth Factor (TGF)-β1 and IL-10, even in the presence of LPS [4, 14–16]. Phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils decreases DC secretion of IL-23, a cytokine involved in differentiation of Th17 lymphocytes and maintenance of Th1 memory [17]. The immunoregulatory effects are restricted to those DC that phagocytose apoptotic cells and not to bystander cells, indicating that the mechanism of DC inhibition involves cell-to-cell contact since it (1) requires recognition of ligands on the apoptotic cell surface through receptors expressed by the APC, and (2) is not caused by release of anti-inflammatory mediators into the extracellular milieu [6, 18]. Similarly, monocytes and macrophages exposed to apoptotic cells decrease secretion of IL-1β, IL-12p70, IL-23 and TNF-α, while maintaining or increasing the release of TGF-β1, IL-10, and prostaglandin E2 [1, 17, 19–21]. Soluble mediators released by phagocytes during apoptotic cell clearance, not only prevent the inflammatory response, but also contribute to the resolution of inflammation and tissue restoration. During bacterial pneumonia in mice, alveolar macrophages that phagocytosed apoptotic neutrophils secrete Hepatocyte Growth Factor, a mediator that promotes proliferation of lung epithelial cells [22].

DC that acquire Ag from apoptotic cells present efficiently apoptotic cell-derived peptides to CD4 T cells and cross-present the internalized Ag to MHC class-I-restricted CD8 cytotoxic T cells [9, 23–25]. However, DC exposed to apoptotic cells decrease their ability to stimulate T cells, a phenomenon that seems to be related to the inhibitory effect of apoptotic cells on the amount of expression of MHC and co-stimulatory molecules, rather than to a defect in the Ag-processing function of the APC [3–6].

How do apoptotic cells control the immunostimulatory function of APC?
During the build up of the phagocytic synapse between the apoptotic cell and the phagocyte, a series of Apoptotic-Cell-Associated Molecular Patterns (ACAMP) present on the surface of apoptotic cells bind to Pattern-Recognition Receptors (PRR) expressed by the phagocytes. Membrane receptors like MerTK, TIM-1, -3 and -4, the integrins αvβ3 and αvβ5, complement receptors (CR) 3 and 4, lectins, scavenger receptors (i.e. CD14, CD36, CD68, SR-A and LOX-1) and receptors for α2 macroglobulin (CD91), and β2-glycoprotein I participate in apoptotic cell binding and/or ingestion by immature DC or macrophages [26–29]. In addition, a number of soluble proteins, including the complement fractions C1q and iC3b, milk fat globule protein-E8 (also known as lactadherin), growth arrest-specific gene-6 (GAS-6), protein S, collectins (i.e. mannose-binding lectin, surfactant proteins A and D), pentraxins, thrombospondin-1, and serum β2-glycoprotein I function as opsonins, forming molecular bridges between ligands on the membrane of apoptotic cells and PRR on the surface of the phagocytes [26–29].

Apoptotic cells down-regulate inflammation and the immunostimulatory function of APC via PRR-dependent and—independent mechanisms. The relative contribution of each PRR and the signaling pathways involved in the immunoregulatory effects of apoptotic cells on APC are beginning to be elucidated. Engagement of the thrombospondin receptor CD36 inhibited maturation and function of DC, that became unable to release IL-12 and secrete high levels of IL-10 in response to DC-activation stimuli [5]. Similarly, signaling via phosphatidylserine (PS) receptors using liposomes containing PS prevented maturation and reduced IL-12p70 secretion and T cell stimulatory function in human DC [30].

MerTK, a member of the Axl/Mer/Tyro3 receptor tyrosine kinase expressed by DC and macrophages, is a ligand for GAS-6, which binds to externalized PS on apoptotic cells [31–34]. Signaling of DC via MerTK by co-incubation with apoptotic cells activates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway, which negatively regulates NF-κB activation and the consequent DC maturation [35]. Indeed, DC lacking MerTK expression or treated with PI3K inhibitors became refractory to the down-regulatory effect of apoptotic cells on LPS-induced secretion of TNF-α and IL-12p70 [35].

The surface of apoptotic cell binds the complement components C1q and iC3b. Macrophages and DC interact with apoptotic cells via CR. Human monocyte-derived DC generated in the presence of C1q display impaired maturation, reduced secretion of IL-6, TNF-α and IL-12p70, and decreased T cell allo-stimulatory function following non-cognate (LPS) or cognate (CD40-signaling) stimulation [36]. Interaction with iC3b-opsonized apoptotic cells prevented up-regulation of MHC class-II Ag, CD86, CC chemokine receptor (CCR)2, CCR5, and β2 integrins, but increased expression of CCR7 in human DC [7]. Thus, DC that uptake of iC3b-opsonized apoptotic cells in peripheral tissues remain immature/semi-mature, but capable of migrating in response to CCR7 ligands to secondary lymphoid organs and initiate or maintain T cell peripheral tolerance. Incubation of mouse and human immature DC with erythrocytes iC3b-opsonized or covered with Ab against the iC3b-binding domain of CR3 (CD11b/CD18), mimicked the down-regulatory effect of apoptotic cells on secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, without affecting release of TGF-β1 [14, 37]. Human DC exposed to surrogate apoptotic cells capable of signaling exclusively through CR3, processed and presented normally exogenous Ag, but became impaired to prime efficiently naïve T cells into effector cells [37]. By contrast, Behrens et al. [38] have shown that the absence of iC3b in serum does not alter the immunoregulatory effects of apoptotic cells on DC in vitro, a phenomenon likely due to redundancy in the apoptotic cell receptor system.

Apoptotic cells also modulate the function of DC through more indirect mechanisms. Co-culture of DC with apoptotic cells promoted secretion of interferon (IFN)-γ that up-regulated via autocrine and paracrine loops the DC content of the active form of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, an enzyme that degrades the essential amino acid tryptophan into metabolites that inhibit T cell function [15]. DC exposed to apoptotic cells released large amounts of nitric oxide that impairs the T cell response [16].

Some of the inhibitory effects of apoptotic cells on APC take place at the mRNA transcription level. In macrophages, signals derived from the contact with apoptotic cells, likely via interaction of externalized PS with its receptors, reduced the level of tyrosine phosphorylation of the transcription repressor factor GC-BP, enhancing its ability to bind the IL-12p35 promoter and selectively repressing transcription of the IL-12p35 gene [21].

Besides their potent immunoregulatory effects mediated indirectly through phagocytes, apoptotic cells by themselves down-modulate inflammation and immunity. T cells undergoing apoptosis released IL-10 and the latent and active forms of TGF-β into the extracellular milieu [39, 40]. In T lymphocytes, programmed cell death promoted synthesis of IL-10, whereas TGF-β secretion resulted from release of existing cytokine pools stored in intracellular membrane-bound compartments like mitochondria [39, 40]. In addition, apoptosis triggered de novo synthesis and release of thrombospondin 1 in monocytes and neutrophils, a protein that binds avidly to immature DC enhancing engulfing of apoptotic cells and preventing DC maturation in response to LPS stimulation [41]. Ariel et al. [42] have shown that the chemokine receptor CCR5 is mobilized to the cell surface of neutrophils and T cells undergoing apoptosis. CCR5 expressed on the surface of apoptotic leukocytes remained functional and sequestered efficiently its ligands CCL3 and CCL5 from sites of inflammation, constituting a mechanism of resolution of the inflammatory response [42]. The mechanisms by which early apoptotic cells down-regulate inflammation and the function of DC are summarized in Fig. 1.Fig. 1 Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive mechanisms of apoptotic cells. Leukocytes undergoing apoptosis release the immunosuppressive cytokines IL-10 and TGF-β1, and soluble thrombospondin 1 which functions as a bridge between apoptotic cells and phagocytic APC and down-regulates the immunostimulatory function of DC. Apoptotic leukocytes increase surface expression of CCR5 that sequesters the inflammatory chemokines CCL3 and CCL5, facilitating the resolution of inflammation. Following interaction or phagocytosis of apoptotic cells, DC (i) become resistant to maturation/activation in response to pro-inflammatory stimuli; (ii) increase IL-10 and TGF-β1 secretion, release nitric oxide, and augment their intracellular content of functional indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO); and (iii) up-regulate CCR7 expression, which allows peripheral tissue-resident DC that engulfed apoptotic cells to migrate to secondary lymphoid organs. Some of the immunosuppressive effects of apoptotic cells on APC occur at the level of mRNA transcription or processing



Apoptotic cells and maintenance of T cell peripheral tolerance
Self-reactive T cells that escape central (thymic) deletion migrate to secondary lymphoid organs. Therefore, an efficient mechanism of peripheral tolerance must monitor and de-activate, delete or regulate auto-reactive T cell clones in periphery to prevent autoimmunity [43, 44]. Elegant experiments in mice expressing transgenic Ag controlled by tissue-specific promoters have shown that, in normal conditions, constitutive migration of APC from peripheral tissues to draining lymphoid organs, results in presentation of tissue-derived Ag to T cells [45, 46]. However, migration of peripheral APC carrying the transgenic self-Ag acquired from neighboring parenchymal cells resulted in suppression of Ag-specific CD4 and CD8 T cells [45, 46]. These findings, together with results obtained from experiments of in situ-targeting of DC in vivo [47, 48], led to the hypothesis that during induction/maintenance of peripheral T cell tolerance, semi-mature DC mobilized from peripheral tissues or resident in secondary lymphoid organs, present self-Ag in a pro-tolerogenic fashion to down-regulate those auto-reactive T cell clones that escaped thymic deletion [43].

Every day, billions of tissue cells die by apoptosis as part of the physiologic mechanism of cell turn-over. These apoptotic cells constitute an excellent source of self-Ag for immature DC in periphery. DC with engulfed apoptotic bodies or cellular fragments derived from neighboring parenchymal cells have been reported within or in the vicinity of epidermis, and intestine, gastric or vaginal epithelia [49–52]. Importantly, although interaction or engulfment of apoptotic cells prevents DC activation/maturation, it does not affect the ability of immature/semi-mature DC to migrate to secondary lymphoid organs. DC that engulf apoptotic cells, although remain immature, increase their surface expression of CCR7, a chemokine receptor required for peripheral DC to migrate to secondary lymphoid organs in response to the chemokines CCL19 and CCL21 [7, 53]. Indeed, DC with internalized apoptotic cell fragments derived from intestinal epithelial cells and gastric parietal cells have been detected in Peyer’s patches and mesenteric lymph nodes, and in stomach-draining lymph nodes, respectively [50, 51].

The presence of DC with internalized apoptotic cells in secondary lymphoid organs is not always due to migration of peripheral DC. In mice, spleen-resident CD11chi CD8− or CD8α+ DC, unlike CD11cint plasmacytoid DC, capture efficiently blood-borne apoptotic leukocytes [18]. Similarly, in humans, it has been shown that myeloid DC, unlike plasmacytoid DC, internalize apoptotic cells [54].

Experiments of adoptive transference of TCR transgenic T cells in mice have shown that both types of conventional CD11chi DC (tissue-migratory and secondary lymphoid organ-resident) are capable of presenting apoptotic cell-derived peptides to T cells [51]. In vivo, under steady-state conditions, presentation by splenic DC of apoptotic cell-derived peptides loaded in MHC class-I or -II molecule leads to clonal deletion of Ag-specific CD8 or CD4 T cells, respectively, and generation of Ag-specific regulatory T cells (Treg) [55–58]. Recent evidence indicates that apoptotic cells may exert immunosuppressive effects via generation of CD19+ regulatory B cells, which influence the function of effector T cells [59].

Together, the accumulated evidence indicates that internalization of endogenous apoptotic cells by immature/semi-mature APC, through an extremely efficient mechanism of apoptotic cell clearance, is followed by deletion and/or regulation of self-reactive lymphocytes and therefore, prevention of autoimmunity. Indeed, mice with deficiencies in molecules critical for recognition, internalization, or lysosomal DNA degradation of apoptotic cells, including C1q, C4, IgM, the pentraxin Serum Amyloid P, MerTK, milk fat globule protein-E8, class A scavenger receptors, or lysosomal DNase II develop systemic autoimmune disorders [60–68]. In humans, systemic lupus erythematosus is associated with genetic deficiencies in complement factors [69, 70], and with defective phagocytosis of apoptotic cells [71, 72].

Apoptotic cells as therapeutic tools in transplantation
The concept that processing of endogenous apoptotic cells by quiescent APC in secondary lymphoid organs is necessary for induction and/or maintenance of peripheral self-tolerance in the steady-state [73], led to the idea that systemic (i.v.) administration of donor leukocytes undergoing apoptosis could be used to deliver in situ the entire repertoire of donor allo-Ag together with immunoregulatory signals to recipient’s APC, to induce donor-specific immunosuppression in transplantation [reviewed in 74–76]. Since internalization of apoptotic cells prevents APC maturation/activation, presentation of apoptotic cell-derived allo-peptides by recipient’s quiescent APC expressing a low ratio of T cell co-stimulatory versus co-regulatory molecules, could be employed therapeutically to promote deletion, anergy and/or regulation of donor-reactive T cells and therefore, to prolong allograft survival.

Apoptotic cell therapies restrain allo-immunity and acute rejection in cardiac transplantation
Therapies based on administration of donor-derived apoptotic leukocytes have been proven to exert beneficial effects in murine models of cardiac transplantation. I.v. administration of a single dose of donor splenocytes in early apoptosis, 7 days before transplantation, prolonged significantly survival of heterotopic (abdomen) vascularized cardiac allografts in mice and rats [57, 77]. The beneficial effect of apoptotic cells was donor-specific, took place in different donor and recipient strain combinations, and depended on the biological properties of the apoptotic cells, since i.v. injection of donor splenocytes undergoing primary necrosis (induced by freezing-thawing) did not affect graft survival [57, 77]. Prolongation of cardiac allograft survival was independent on the method employed to induce apoptosis, as similar results were obtained with apoptotic cells generated by UV-B- or γ-irradiation [77]. However, the therapeutic effect depended critically on the timing of administration of apoptotic cells, with optimal results achieved when donor apoptotic splenocytes were injected 7 days prior to transplantation [77].

Trafficking studies have demonstrated that allogeneic apoptotic splenocytes injected i.v. are internalized within a few hours by red pulp macrophages and by specialized phagocytes and DC of the marginal zone of the spleen [14, 18, 57, 78]. In mice, splenic CD11chi DC (mainly the CD8α+ DC of the marginal zone), unlike the CD11cint plasmacytoid DC, internalized in vivo early apoptotic cells administered i.v. [18, 79]. At later time points, these marginal zone DC containing phagocytosed apoptotic cell fragments migrated to the T cell areas of the splenic follicles for cross-presentation of the apoptotic cell-derived Ag [14, 79].

Since phagocytosis of apoptotic cells prevents APC maturation in vivo, DC that internalize and process donor apoptotic cells present apoptotic cell-derived allopeptides to donor-reactive T cells in the context of low co-stimulation [57]. This sequence of events leads to deficient activation, followed by transient proliferation and deletion of donor-reactive T cells, as demonstrated in vivo by injecting systemically allogeneic apoptotic splenocytes into host mice previously reconstituted with allo-reactive TCR transgenic CD4 T cells [57]. In this model, presentation of donor apoptotic cell-derived allopeptides by immature/semi-mature DC in the spleen promoted transient proliferation of anti-donor CD4 T cells unequipped for homeostatic survival. These unfitted CD4 T cells expressed lower levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-XL and the cytokine receptors IL-7Rα (CD127), IL-15Rα and the common cytokine receptor gamma chain (γc or CD132), than control T cells fully activated [57]. I.v. injection of BALB/c apoptotic splenocytes into C57BL/6 J hosts adoptively transferred with 1H3.1 TCR transgenic CD4 T cells (specific for the BALB/c IEα52–68 peptide presented by C57BL/6J IAb MHC class-II molecules) was associated 14 days later, with (1) increased percentage of splenic 1H3.1 T cells expressing the Treg marker FoxP3 and (2) increased IL-10 and reduced IFN-γ secretion of splenocytes in response to ex vivo re-stimulation with the BALB/c (donor) IEα52–68 peptide [18]. Similarly, donor apoptotic cell therapy decreased drastically cross-priming of donor-reactive 2C TCR transgenic CD8 T cells in vivo in the same mouse model [18]. These results explain why, 7 days post-transplant, recipient mice and rats pre-treated with donor apoptotic cells reduced drastically the systemic anti-donor type 1 T cell response, and exhibited minimal parenchymal damage and decreased leukocyte infiltration in the allografts, compared to untreated controls [57, 77].

It is likely that, for clinical application in transplantation, apoptotic cell therapies will be administered in combination with reduced levels of pharmacological immunosuppression, to enhance the beneficial effects of apoptotic cells and minimize the side-effects caused by the immunosuppressive regimen. In this regard, infusion of donor apoptotic splenocytes, plus a single suboptimal dose of anti-CD40 ligand blocking Ab (to prevent the stimulatoy effect of CD40-signaling on recipient’s APC) prolonged indefinitely (>100 days) survival of cardiac allografts in mice [57]. Interestingly, the long-term allografts showed minimal tissue damage and were infiltrated by small foci of leukocytes composed mainly of CD4+ FoxP3+ T cells with intracellular content of IL-10 and TGF-β1 [57]. The fact that transference of splenic T cells from long-term C57BL/10J recipients pre-treated with donor apoptotic splenocytes, into naïve (untreated) C57BL/10J mice prolonged significantly survival of cardiac allografts from the same donor, but not third-party grafts, indicates that in that model donor apoptotic cell therapy promoted generation/expansion of donor-specific Treg [57].

Donor apoptotic splenocytes have also been used indirectly in combination with tolerogenic DC therapies. Intra-portal administration, 7 days prior to transplantation, of recipient’s bone marrow-derived maturation-resistant DC loaded in vitro with donor apoptotic splenocytes prolonged significantly survival of heart allografts in otherwise non-immunosuppressed mice [80].

Recipient’s APC mediate immunoregulatory effects of apoptotic cell therapies in cardiac transplantation
There is evidence that the effect of apoptotic cell therapy on cardiac allograft survival is mediated, at least in part, through recipient’s APC. Adoptive transference of freshly-isolated splenic CD11c+ DC of C57BL/10J mice, pre-treated (i.v., 24–36 h earlier) with BALB/c apoptotic splenocytes, into naïve C57BL/10J, prolonged significantly survival of BALB/c hearts transplanted 7 days later [57]. This effect required the presence of the subset of CD8α+ DC in the transferred inoculum [57], and agrees with similar findings reported in a mouse model of adoptive transfer of inhibition of contact hypersensitivity induced by i.v. injected haptenated apoptotic cells [56].

In a cardiac transplantation model in mice, transient depletion of CD11chi DC without affecting the subset of CD11cint plasmacytoid DC, at the time of i.v. administration of allogeneic apoptotic splenocytes was followed by lack of proliferation of allo-reactive TCR transgenic CD4 T cells in the spleen [18]. Together, these results suggest that the beneficial effect of donor apoptotic cell therapies on cardiac allograft survival are mediated by recipient’s CD11chi DC (likely the CD8α+ DC subset in mice) resident in secondary lymphoid organs. In this model, splenic CD11chi DC that capture donor apoptotic splenocytes from circulation remained quiescent in vivo and resistant to maturation in response to DC-activating stimuli [18]. However, their ability to present allo-peptides from blood-borne apoptotic cells is short-lived, reaching a plateau 3 days after apoptotic cell i.v. administration [18]. Presentation of donor apoptotic cell peptides by recipient’s quiescent DC was critical for prolongation of cardiac allograft survival, since the effect was abrogated by induction of DC maturation in situ through CD40-signaling [57].

Sun et al. [77] have shown that blockade of phagocytosis with gadolinium chloride, before i.v. injection of apoptotic splenocytes, abrogates their therapeutic effect on cardiac allograft survival in rats. This finding indicates that immature DC and/or macrophages via (1) phagocytosis, processing and presentation of apoptotic cell-derived allo-Ag, and/or (2) secretion of anti-inflammatory/immuno-suppressive mediators, are critical for the immunoregulatory effects of exogenous apoptotic cells in cardiac transplantation. Indeed, the same group [77] demonstrated indirectly that donor apoptotic splenocytes infused i.v. exert their immunoregulatory effects by interacting with PRR expressed by recipient’s APC. In this study, blockade of externalized PS by incubation with soluble annexin-V reduced drastically the ability of donor apoptotic splenocytes to prolong heart allograft survival in rats, compared to controls injected with untreated apoptotic cells [77].

In other transplantation models, recipient’s macrophages, instead of DC, seem to mediate the therapeutic effect of apoptotic cells. Transient deletion of CD11chi DC in transgenic mice encoding for the diphtheria toxin receptor driven by the CD11c promoter, did not affect the graft-facilitating effect of apoptotic cells on bone marrow transplantation [78]. By contrast, depletion of host’s macrophages by infusion of clodronate-loaded liposomes reduced significantly apoptotic cell-induced donor bone marrow engraftment [78]. In a mouse model of induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, in which i.v. administration of apoptotic cells containing the self-Ag myelin olygodendrocyte glycoprotein prevented autoimmunity, splenic marginal zone macrophages were critical for the beneficial effect of the injected apoptotic cells [81]. These macrophages controlled the clearance of the exogenous apoptotic cells and their selective engulfment by splenic CD8α+ DC, which were likely the final responsible cells for the tolerogenic effect [81].

Apoptotic cell therapies in chronic rejection
Chronic rejection of solid allografts, in particular kidney, heart and lung, is a major problem that prevents long-term graft survival in an elevated percentage of recipients. Importantly, currently employed immunosuppressive regimens fail to prevent chronic rejection. One of the key pathological features of chronic rejection is the presence, in medium and small size arteries of the graft, of chronic allograft vasculopathy (CAV). Vessels affected by CAV develop endothelialitis, intimal thickening, elastic fiber disruption, adventitial fibrosis and leukocyte infiltration, which together lead to progressive reduction of the vascular lumen and its obstruction by thrombosis. CAV is caused by non-immune and by innate and adaptive immune mechanisms, the latter ones through donor-reactive T cells and alloAb.

The adaptive immune response that in part causes chronic rejection is elicited via the indirect pathway of allorecognition, a mechanism by which donor-reactive T cells recognize donor allo-peptides presented by self (recipient’s)-MHC molecules. Indirect pathway T cells are also critical to provide help to donor-reactive B cells, which then differentiate into the plasma cells that secrete alloAb. Since i.v. injected donor apoptotic cells are processed by recipient’s APC for presentation to indirect pathway T cells, apoptotic cell therapies can be used as a therapeutic approach to (1) down-regulate the indirect pathway T cell response; (2) reduce the level of cognate interaction and cooperation between indirect pathway T cells and allo-reactive B cells, which is critical for generation of alloAb; and (3) prevent, delay or ameliorate signs of chronic rejection.

In mice, administration of donor apoptotic splenocytes 7 days prior to transplant, minimized substantially the histopathological features of CAV in fully-mismatched aortic allografts, an established experimental model of CAV [18]. The effect was donor- and apoptotic cell-specific, since third-party apoptotic cells, or donor splenocytes alive or undergoing primary necrosis (induced by freezing-thawing) did not prevent development of CAV in the same model. Sixty days after transplant, those recipients that received donor apoptotic splenocytes exhibited a drastic decrease in: (1) the number of indirect pathway (polyclonal) T cells secreting IFN-γ and (2) the amount of circulating alloAb, compared to controls [18].

Nouri-Shirazi and Guinet [82] have shown in vitro that human immature DC incubated with allogeneic apoptotic cells promote allo-specific CD4 T cell anergy via the indirect pathway. This finding suggests that systemic administration of donor apoptotic cells or alternatively, immature DC loaded with donor apoptotic cells, could restrain the indirect T cell response during the chronic phase of organ transplantation in humans.

Apoptotic cell therapies in bone marrow transplantation
The therapeutic potential of allogeneic bone-marrow or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for treatment of malignant and genetic hematologic disorders has been limited by immunologic complications. The presence of remaining functional donor-reactive T cells and NK cells, resistant to the conditioning regimen in the recipient, triggers allograft rejection and prevents engraftment of donor bone marrow cells. On the donor’s side, T cells that recognize recipient’s MHC Ag and adoptively transferred with the bone marrow allograft are the cause of graft-versus-host-disease (GvHD). Apoptotic cell therapies have been used to facilitate bone marrow cell engraftment and prevent GvHD.

In a restrictive model of bone marrow transplantation in mice, co-administration of apoptotic cells (i.v.) the day of the transplant enhanced bone marrow engraftment and prevented GvHD in different donor-recipient strain combinations [83]. Prevention of GvHD was associated to the in vivo expansion of donor-derived CD4+ CD25+ Treg, which somehow restrained the anti-recipient response to peripheral tissues that leads to GvHD [78]. The therapeutic effect of apoptotic cells was independent of the stimulus employed to trigger cell death, and interestingly, was unspecific since it occurred following administration of third-party or xenogeneic (human) apoptotic leukocytes [83]. However, this apparent lack of allo-specificity could be due to the fact that the bone marrow allograft and the bolus of apoptotic cells were administered simultaneously, providing recipient’s APC with donor Ag and at the same time with bystander immunoregulatory signals supplied by the injected apoptotic cells regardless their origin. Importantly, in this model, addition of apoptotic cells to the bone marrow allografts also reduced Ab-mediated anti-donor responses [84], and increased the percentage of donor-derived CD4 T cells with phenotype (CD25+ FoxP3+ CD62Lhi CTLA-4hi) and function of Treg [78]. The ability of apoptotic cell therapy to promote bone marrow engraftment, down-regulate alloAb secretion, and augment the percentage of Treg was mediated through TGF-β released likely by phagocytes during their interaction with the injected apoptotic cells and/or directly by the apoptotic cells [78].

Role of apoptotic cells in extracorporeal photopheresis in transplantation
Extracorporeal photopheresis (ECP) is a technique in which a fraction of the patient’s peripheral blood is transiently removed and separated by leukapheresis into leukocyte-depleted blood and leukocyte-enriched plasma. The former is returned into the patient without further treatment, whereas the mononuclear cell-enriched fraction is incubated ex vivo with the photosensitizing drug 8-methoxypsoralen and exposed to UV-A radiation (350 nm), and then reinfused in a close-loop, patient-connected system. In the presence of UV-A light, 8-methoxypsoralen covalently binds to DNA pyrimidine bases, cell-surface and cytoplasmic molecules, priming the target leukocytes for apoptosis. The ability of ECP to down-regulate the T cell response in vivo has been demonstrated in auto-, allo- and xeno-immunity [85–87]. In humans, addition of ECP to conventional pharmacologic immunosuppression decreased the risk of acute rejection in recipients of cardiac allografts [88] and was effective for treatment of ongoing episodes of acute heart rejection during the first year after transplantation [89, 90]. ECP has been also tested with success in patients with kidney, lung, liver or face allograft rejection [91–95], or GvHD [96, 97], in particular in cases refractory to conventional pharmacologic immunosuppression.

Despite the promising results in the clinics, the mechanism(s) by which ECP down-regulates the immune response in vivo remains unclear. The beneficial effect of ECP in transplantation can not be attributed simply to the induction of apoptosis in donor-reactive lymphocytes, since less than 10% of the peripheral leukocytes are exposed ex vivo to 8-methoxypsoralen and UV-A radiation. Interestingly, patients treated for long-term with ECP do not exhibit higher incidence of infections or malignancies [98] and respond normally to novel and recall Ag [99], suggesting that treatment with ECP does not cause generalized immunosuppression. These observations have led to the conclusion that the therapeutic effects of ECP are mediated via systemic Ag-specific immunoregulation.

Among the cells irradiated during ECP, circulating lymphocytes, monocytes and DC are sensitive to apoptosis [100–105], generating apoptotic bodies and blebs with immunoregulatory properties [106]. Even before dying, human DC treated with 8-methoxypsoralen and UVA, promote Th2-biased responses and decrease drastically their ability to drive Th1 polarization [107, 108]. Once reinfused, the ECP-treated leukocytes are retained primarily in the spleen and liver [100, 101], likely by internalization by tissue-resident macrophages and immature DC, as shown for UV-B-irradiated splenocytes injected i.v. [14]. In humans, immature DC internalized efficiently ECP-treated leukocytes [104], and incubation with ECP-treated leukocytes increased IL-10 secretion and prevented up-regulation of co-stimulatory molecules in DC, and augmented the IL-10 and IL-1R antagonist mRNA content in peripheral leukocytes, even in presence of LPS [102, 109]. In one study, ECP-treated leukocytes increased their release of HLA-G molecules which play an important role in down-regulation of T cell immunity [103]. Together, these findings suggest that the reinfused ECP-treated leukocytes enhance the pro-tolerogenic function of those quiescent DC (and likely macrophages) that interact with them. In this regard, transference of ECP-treated splenocytes from mice sensitized with dinitrofluorobenzene into naïve mice caused inhibition of contact hypersensitivity in a hapten-specific way, and the inhibition was lost when the transferred splenocytes were depleted of CD4+ or CD25+ lymphocytes [100, 101]. This latter finding suggests that ECP exerts immunoregulatory effects, at least partly, via Ag-specific Treg.

There is evidence that the regulatory effect of ECP on allo-immunity is also mediated, to some extent, through of allo-specific Treg. Transference of splenic CD4+ CD25+ T cells from ECP-treated mice transplanted with fully-mismatched hearts, prolonged survival of cardiac allografts from the same donor strain in naïve recipients [110]. In vivo depletion of Treg prevented the beneficial effect of ECP in a mouse model of GvHD [111]. In humans, recipients of heart, lung, or kidney allografts or with GvHD treated with ECP in addition to conventional immunosuppression, exhibited a higher frequency of peripheral T cells with Treg phenotype (CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ CD69−) and function [104, 112–114]. Treatment with ECP also augments the regulatory function of peripheral CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ Treg by increasing their CD39-mediated production of adenosine, a soluble immunosuppressive mediator of T cell activation [115]. Further studies will reveal the specificity of the CD4+ Treg generated following ECP.

Role of apoptotic cells in living cell-therapies and Ab-based immunosuppression in transplantation
In recent years, there has been increasing evidence that the beneficial effects achieved with living cell-based therapies (i.e. blood transfusion, tolerogenic DC administered systemically), or anti-CD3 Ab-induced immunosuppression are mediated through generation of apoptotic cells in vivo (Fig. 2).Fig. 2 Summary of the role of apoptotic cells in different immunosuppressive therapies. Apoptotic cell therapy, ECP, DST, tolerogenic DC therapies and anti-CD3 Ab immunotherapy likely modulate Ag-specific immune responses and inflammation in transplantation by a common mechanism: in vivo generation of apoptotic cells. Therapeutically-administered (i.v.) or -induced apoptotic cells deliver potent immunosuppressive signals plus the entire repertoire of donor Ag (the latter in apoptotic cell therapy, DST and tolerogenic DC therapies) to quiescent APC of secondary lymphoid organs. Presentation of donor Ag by these quiescent APC induces defective activation of indirect pathway CD4 T cells followed by T cell deletion and generation of Treg. As a consequence of the regulatory effects of apoptotic cells on donor-reactive T lymphocytes, allo-specific B cells do not receive adequate help from indirect pathway CD4 T cells and therefore, are unable to differentiate into the plasma cells that secrete alloAb



One of the first cell-based therapies employed to restrain the anti-donor response and prolong solid allograft survival consisted in administration of randomly selected, haplotype-shared or donor-specific transfusions (DST), in most cases in combination with pharmacological immunosuppression [116–121]. It was initially assumed that the immunosuppressive effect of DST was mediated through direct interaction of the transfused leukocytes expressing donor MHC Ag with anti-donor T cells in secondary lymphoid organs [reviewed in 122]. However, different laboratories [123–125] have independently shown that the DST effect requires presentation of donor allopeptides in the context of recipient’s MHC molecules to anti-donor T cells via the indirect pathway. Importantly, once injected i.v., non-self leukocytes have a limited life-span since they become targets of recipient’s NK cells. These finding suggest that, as soon as the transfused leukocytes become apoptotic in vivo, they are internalized by recipient’s quiescent APC, which then present the apoptotic cell-derived donor allopeptides to indirect pathway T cells. Since the transfused leukocytes are likely engulfed by phagocytic APC as soon as they show early signs of apoptosis, it is expected that internalization of apoptotic cells will deliver a potent immunoregulatory signal plus donor Ag to recipient’s APC, leading to down-modulation of the anti-donor response.

The use of DST as clinical therapy was discontinued in the early 80s due to the risk of sensitization and the advent of new immunosuppressive agents. More recently, tolerogenic DC-based therapies based on i.v. administration of in vitro-generated donor or recipient-derived DC have been used with relative success to delay or prevent solid allograft rejection or GvHD in murine models [reviewed in 126]. In tolerogenic DC-based therapies, immature, maturation-resistant, or alternatively-activated DC are generated in vitro by different culture, pharmacologic or genetic methods and then administered i.v. into graft recipients, with optimal results in murine models when the DC are administered 7 days prior to transplantation.

As originally assumed for the DST effect, the general idea is that the injected DC interact directly with anti-donor T cells in vivo, leading to anergy, deletion and/or regulation. To our knowledge this concept has never been tested in vivo, since all studies have examined the capacity of the therapeutic DC to down-modulate the anti-donor T cell response in vitro, or in ex vivo assays after transplantation. Another possibility is that, as demonstrated in DST, recipient’s APC present donor alloAg acquired from the therapeutic DC injected i.v.. In agreement with that idea, in certain mouse strain combinations, repetitive i.v. injection of UV-B irradiated allogeneic immature DC prevented development of alloAb following allo-immunization [127], intranasal administration of apoptotic DC in mice suppressed LPS-induced lung inflammation, inhibited host’s DC maturation, and inducted Ag-specific CD4 Treg [128], and i.v. infusion of chemically-fixed immature DC prolonged significantly survival of cardiac allografts in mice [129]. Together, these findings strongly suggest that the exogenous DC do not have to be alive to down-regulate the anti-donor response in vivo. Interestingly, in mouse allo-specific TCR transgenic models, donor-derived tolerogenic DC injected i.v. in prospective graft recipients did not interact directly with donor-reactive CD4 or CD8 T cells in vivo [130]. Instead, the injected DC were short-lived, internalized as apoptotic cells by recipient’s quiescent CD11chi DC in the spleen, which presented the donor allopeptides in the context of recipient’s MHC molecules to indirect pathway T cells. This phenomenon led to donor-specific T cell deletion and increased percentage of donor-reactive T cells expressing the Treg marker FoxP3. These findings strongly suggest that systemic administration of tolerogenic DC and DST could function indirectly as apoptotic cell-based therapies, by delivering donor Ag in combination with potent regulatory signals to those recipient’s APC that phagocyte the injected cells as soon as they become apoptotic in vivo.

Administration of CD3-specific monoclonal Ab results in rapid depletion of T cells, generation of CD4 Treg, and induction of long-term immune tolerance. Although therapy with anti-CD3 monoclonal Ab has been employed to treat autoimmune disorders and transplant rejection, its mechanism of action in vivo has been unveiled recently. In a mouse model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, Perruche et al. [131] have shown that apoptotic T cells induced by the CD3 Ab are internalized by macrophages and immature DC in secondary lymphoid organs. In response to the apoptotic cell interaction, these APC up-regulated secretion of TGF-β, which induced CD4 FoxP3 Treg that together with the T cell depletion promoted immune tolerance. In fact, in vivo depletion of macrophages and immature DC by administration of clodronate liposomes abrogated the beneficial effects of CD3 Ab on prevention and treatment of the autoimmune disease, linking the effect of CD3 Ab to the potent immunoregulatory effect of the therapeutically generated apoptotic cells on phagocytic APC [131].

Concluding remarks
Since the initial observation that apoptotic cells exert potent regulatory effects on phagocytes of the immune system, in particular APC, numerous laboratories have employed apoptotic cell-based therapies to promote donor-specific immunosuppression in transplantation. Most of the work has being focused in: (1) unveiling the molecular mechanisms behind the immunosuppressive effect; (2) developing practical methods for generation of pro-tolerogenic and clinical-grade apoptotic cells; (3) augmenting their regulatory capacity, by modifying the apoptotic cells or by using them in combination with suboptimal pharmacologic immunosuppression; and (4) finding the optimal route for their delivery.

We have learnt that the use of non-stressed leukocytes undergoing apoptosis, administered i.v., in doses that do not saturate the physiologic mechanisms of apoptotic cell clearance are critical factors to be considered to down-regulate inflammatory and immune responses with apoptotic cells. We have also started to connect the dots and realize that other (living) cell-based therapies previously used, currently employed, or under development in transplantation may function simply through generation of apoptotic cells in the graft recipients. However, as in any other scientific field, novel findings lead to new questions. In this regard, it would be interesting to know: what is the probability of triggering autoimmunity or causing allo-sensitization in transplant recipients following single or repetitive administration of apoptotic cells? How could apoptotic cells be preserved or their immunosuppressive effects enhanced for therapeutic applications? Could the immunoregulatory effect of apoptotic cells be mimicked by administering artificial liposomes bearing ACAMP on their surface? Since previous studies have been conducted in unprimed animals, what is the immunosuppressive potential of apoptotic cell therapies in recipients with high numbers of allo-reactive memory T cells? What is the therapeutic potential of apoptotic cell therapies in non-human primate models of transplantation, a transitional model that should be tested before embarking in clinical trials? Some of the questions are currently being investigated. Only time and more experiments will tell us whether the peculiar biological properties of apoptotic cells could be employed more efficiently for treatment of transplant rejection or autoimmune disorders.

Supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health: R01 HL077545 (A.E.M.) and R01 CA100893 and R01 AI077511 (A.T.L.).

Conflict of interest statement The authors declare they have no conflict of interest.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
==== Refs
References
1. Voll RE Herrmann M Roth EA Stach J Kalden R  Immunosuppressive effects of apoptotic cells Nature 1997 390 350 351 9389474 
2. Cvetanovic M Mitchell JE Patel V Avner BS Su Y Saag PT Witte PL Fiore S Levine JS Ucker DS  Specific recognition of apoptotic cells reveals a ubiquitous and unconventional innate immunity J Biol Chem 2006 281 20055 20067 16707494 
3. Gallucci S Lolkema M Matzinger P  Natural adjuvants: endogenous activators of dendritic cells Nat Medicine 1999 5 1249 1255 
4. Sauter B Albert M Francisco L Larsson M Somersan S Bhardwaj N  Consequences of cell death: exposure to necrotic tumor cells, but not primary tissue cells or apoptotic cells, induces the maturation of immunostimulatory dendritic cells J Exp Med 2000 191 423 433 10662788 
5. Urban BC Willcox N Roberts DJ  A role for CD36 in the regulation of dendritic cell function Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 2001 98 8750 8755 11447263 
6. Stuart LM Lucas M Simpson C Lamb J Savill J Lacy-Hulbert A  Inhibitory effects of apoptotic cell ingestion upon endotoxin-driven myeloid dendritic cell maturation J Immunol 2002 168 1627 1635 11823490 
7. Verbovetski I Bychkov H Trahtemberg U Shapira I Hareuveni M Ben-Tal O Kutikov I Gill O Mevorach D  Opsonization of apoptotic cells by autologous iC3b facilitates clearance by immature dendritic cells, down-regulates DR and CD86, and up-regulates CC chemokine receptor 7 J Exp Med 2002 196 1553 1561 12486098 
8. Takahashi M Kobayashi Y  Cytokine production in association with phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by immature dendritic cells Cell Immunol 2003 226 105 115 14962498 
9. Albert ML Sauter B Bhardwaj N  Dendritic cells acquire antigen from apoptotic cells and induce class I-restricted CTLs Nature 1998 392 86 89 9510252 
10. Johansson U Walther-Jallow L Smed-Sorensen A Spetz A-L  Triggering of dendritic cell responses after exposure to activated, but not resting, apoptotic PBMCs J Immunol 2007 179 1711 1720 17641037 
11. Gurung P Kucaba TA Ferguson TA Griffith TS  Activation-induced CD154 expression abrogates tolerance induced by apoptotic cells J Immunol 2009 183 6114 6123 19841180 
12. Albert M  Death-defying immunity: do apoptotic cells influence antigen processing and presentation? Nat Rev Immunol 2004 4 223 231 15039759 
13. Patel VA Longacre A Hsiao K Fan H Meng F Mitchell JE Rauch J Ucker DS Levine JS  Apoptotic cells, at all stages of the death process, trigger characteristic signaling events that are divergent from and dominant over those triggered by necrotic cells. Implications for the delayed clearance model of autoimmunity J Biol Chem 2006 281 4663 4670 16377620 
14. Morelli AE Larregina AT Shufesky WJ Zahorchack A Logar A Papworth GD Wang Z Watkins SC Falo LD JrThomson AW  Internalization of circulating apoptotic cells by splenic marginal zone dendritic cells: dependence on complement receptors and effect on cytokine production Blood 2003 101 611 620 12393562 
15. Williams CA Harry RA McLeod JD  Apoptotic cells induce dendritic cell-mediated suppression via interferon-γ-induced IDO Immunology 2007 124 89 101 18067553 
16. Ren G Su J Zhao X Zhang L Zhang J Roberts AI Zhang H Das G Shi Y  Apoptotic cells induce immunosuppression through dendritic cells: critical roles of IFN-γ and nitric oxide J Immunol 2008 181 3277 3284 18713999 
17. Stark MA Huo Y Burcin TL Morris MA Olson TS Ley K  Phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils regulates granulopoiesis via IL-23 and IL-17 Immunity 2005 22 285 294 15780986 
18. Wang Z Shufesky WJ Montecalvo A Divito SJ Larregina AT Morelli AE  In situ-targeting of dendritic cells with donor-derived apoptotic cells restrains indirect allorecognition and ameliorates allograft vasculopathy PLoS ONE 2009 4 3 e4940 19333400 
19. Fadok VA Bratton DL Konowal A Freed PW Westcott JY Henson PM  Macrophages that have ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit proinflammatory cytokine production through autocrine/paracrine mechanisms involving TGF-beta, PGE2, and PAF J Clin Invest 1998 101 890 898 9466984 
20. Huynh M-LN Fadok VA Henson PM  Phosphatidylserine-dependent ingestion of apoptotic cells promotes TGF-β1 secretion and the resolution of inflammation J Clin Invest 2002 109 41 50 11781349 
21. Kim S Elkon KB Ma X  Transcriptional suppression of interleukin-12 gene expression following phagocytosis of apoptotic cells Immunity 2004 21 643 653 15539151 
22. Morimoto K Amano H Sonoda F Baba M Senba M Yoshimime H Yamamoto H Ii T Oishi K Nagatake T  Alveolar macrophages that phagocytose apoptotic neutrophils produce hepatocyte growth factor during bacterial pneumonia in mice Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2001 24 608 615 11350831 
23. Inaba K Turlev S Yamaide F Iyoda T Mahnke K Inaba M Pack M Subklewe M Sauter B Sheff D Albert M Bhardwaj N Mellman I Steinman RM  Efficient presentation of phagocytosed cellular fragments on the major histocompatibility complex class II products of dendritic cells J Exp Med 1998 11 2163 2173 9841929 
24. Albert ML Pearce SFA Francisco LM Sauter B Roy P Silverstein RL Bhardwaj N  Immature dendritic cells phagocytose apoptotic cells via αvβ5 and CD36, and cross-present antigens to cytotoxic T lymphocytes J Exp Med 1998 188 1359 1368 9763615 
25. Iyoda T Shimoyama S Liu K Omatsu Y Akiyama Y Maeda Y Takahara K Steinman RM Inaba K  The CD8+ dendritic cell subset selectively endocytoses dying cells in culture and in vivo J Exp Med 2002 195 1289 1302 12021309 
26. Ross A Xu W Castellano G Nauta AJ Garred P Daha MR Kooten C  A pivotal role for innate immunity in the clearance of apoptotic cells Eur J Immunol 2004 34 921 929 15048702 
27. Larregina AT Morelli AE  Lutz M Romani N Steinkasserer A  Interaction between dendritic cells and apoptotic cells Handbook of dendritic cells, biology, diseases and therapies 2006 Weinheim Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA 591 618 
28. Ravichandran KS Lorenz U  Engulfment of apoptotic cells: signals for a good meal Nat Rev Immunol 2007 7 964 974 18037898 
29. Erwig L-P Henson PM  Clearance of apoptotic cells by phagocytes Cell Death Differ 2008 15 243 250 17571081 
30. Chen X Doffek K Sugg SL Shilyansky J  Phosphatidylserine regulates the maturation of human dendritic cells J Immunol 2004 173 2985 2994 15322157 
31. Scott RS McMahon EJ Pop SM Reap EA Caricchio R Cohen PL Earp HS Matsushima GK  Phagocytosis and clearance of apoptotic cells is mediated by MER Nature 2001 411 207 211 11346799 
32. Nagata K Ohashi K Nakano T Arita H Zong C Hanafusa H Mizuno K  Identification of the product of the growth arrest-specific gene 6 as a common ligand for Axl, Sky, and Mer receptor tyrosine kinases J Biol Chem 1996 271 30022 30027 8939948 
33. Nakano T Ishimoto Y Kishimo J Umeda M Inoue K Nagata K Ohashi K Mizumo K Arita H  Cell adhesion to phosphatidylserine mediated by a product of growth arrest-specific gene 6 J Biol Chem 1997 272 29411 29414 9367994 
34. Behrens EM Gadue P Gong S Garret S Stein G Cohen PL  The mer receptor tyrosine kinase: expression and function suggest a role in innate immunity Eur J Immunol 2003 33 2160 2167 12884290 
35. Sen P Wallet MA Yi Z Huang Y Henderson M Mathews CE Earp HS Matsushima G Baldwin AS JrTisch RM  Apoptotic cells induce Mer tyrosine kinase-dependent blockade of NF-κB activation in dendritic cells Blood 2007 109 653 660 17008547 
36. Castellano G Woltman AM Schlagwein N Xu W Schena FP Daha MR Kooten C  Immune modulation of human dendritic cells by complement Eur J Immunol 2007 37 2803 2811 17899552 
37. Skoberne M Somersan S Almodovar W Truong T Petrova K Henson PM Bhardwaj N  The apoptotic-cell receptor CR3, but not αvβ5, is a regulator of human dendritic-cell immunostimulatory function Blood 2006 108 947 955 16614246 
38. Behrens EM Ning Y Muvarak N Zoltick PW Flake AW Gallucci S  Apoptotic cell-mediated immunoregulation of dendritic cells does not require iC3b opsonization J Immunol 2008 181 3018 3026 18713972 
39. Gao Y Herndon JM Zhang H Griffith TS Ferguson TA  Antiinflammatory effects of CD95 ligand (FasL)-induced apoptosis J Exp Med 1998 188 887 896 9730890 
40. Chen W Frank ME Jin W Wah SM  TGF-beta released by apoptotic T cells contributes to an immunosuppressive milieu Immunity 2001 14 715 725 11420042 
41. Krispin A Bledi Y Atallah M Trahtemberg U Verbovetski I Nahari E Zelig O Linial M Mevorach D  Apoptotic cell thrombospondin-1 and heparin-binding domain led to dendritic-cell phagocytic and tolerizing states Blood 2006 108 3580 3589 16882710 
42. Ariel A Fredman G Sun Y-P Kantarci A Dyke TE Luster AD Serhan CN  Apoptotic neutrophils and T cells sequester chemokines during immune response resolution through modulation of CCR5 expression Nat Immunol 2006 7 1209 1216 17013391 
43. Steinman RM Nussenzweig MC  Avoiding horror autotoxicus: the importance of dendritic cells in peripheral T cell tolerance Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 2002 99 351 358 11773639 
44. Steinman RM Hawiger D Nussenzweig MC  Tolerogenic dendritic cells Annu Rev Immunol 2003 21 685 711 12615891 
45. Adler AJ Marsh DW Yochum GS Guzzo JL Nigam A Nelson WG Pardoll DM  CD4+ T cell tolerance to parenchymal self-antigens requires presentation by bone marrow-derived antigen-presenting cells J Exp Med 1998 187 1555 1564 9584134 
46. Kurts C Kosaka H Carbone FR Miller JF Heath WR  Class I-restricted cross-presentation of exogenous self-antigens leads to deletion of autoreactive CD8(+) T cells J Exp Med 1997 186 239 245 9221753 
47. Hawiger D Inaba K Dorsett Y Guo M Mahnke K Rivera M Ravetch JV Steinman RM Nussenzweig MC  Dendritic cells induce peripheral T cell unresponsiveness under steady state conditions in vivo J Exp Med 2001 194 769 779 11560993 
48. Bonifaz L Bonnyay D Mahnke K Rivera M Nussenzweig MC Steinman RM  Efficient targeting of protein antigen to the dendritic cell receptor DEC-205 in the steady state leads to antigen presentation on major histocompatibility complex class I products and peripheral CD8+ T cell tolerance J Exp Med 2002 196 1627 1638 12486105 
49. Mishima Y  Melanosomes in phagocytic vacuoles in Langerhans cells. Electron microscopy of keratin-stripped human epidermis J Cell Biol 1966 30 417 423 5968978 
50. Huang F-P Platt N Wykes M Major JR Powell TJ Jenkins CD MacPherson GG  A discrete subpopulation of dendritic cells transports apoptotic intestinal epithelial cells to T cell areas of mesenteric lymph nodes J Exp Med 2000 191 435 443 10662789 
51. Scheinecker C McHugh R Shevach EM Germain RN  Constitutive presentation of a natural tissue autoantigen exclusively by dendritic cells in the draining lymph node J Exp Med 2002 196 1079 1090 12391019 
52. Parr MB Kepple L Parr EL  Langerhans cells phagocytose vaginal epithelial cells undergoing apoptosis during the murine estrous cycle Biol Reprod 1991 45 252 260 1786290 
53. Ip WK Lau Y-L  Distinct maturation of, but not migration between, human monocyte-derived dendritic cells upon ingestion of apoptotic cells of early or late phases J Immunol 2004 173 189 196 15210774 
54. Dalgaard J Beckstrom KJ Jahnsen FL Brichmann JE  Differential capacity for phagocytosis of apoptotic and necrotic leukemia cells by human peripheral blood dendritic cell subsets J Leukoc Biol 2005 77 689 698 15728242 
55. Liu K Iyoda T Saternus M Kimura Y Inaba K Steinman RM  Immune tolerance after delivery of dying cells to dendritic cells in situ J Exp Med 2002 196 1091 1097 12391020 
56. Ferguson TA Herndon J Elzey B Griffith TS Schoenberger S Green DR  Uptake of apoptotic antigen-coupled cells by lymphoid dendritic cells and cross-priming of CD8(+) T cells produce active immune unresponsiveness J Immunol 2002 168 5589 5595 12023355 
57. Wang Z Larregina AT Shufesky WJ Perone MJ Montecalvo A Zahorchack AF Thomson AW Morelli AE  Use of the inhibitory effect of apoptotic cells on dendritic cells for graft survival via T-cell deletion and regulatory T cells Am J Transplant 2006 6 1297 1311 16686754 
58. Luckashenak N Schroeder S Endt K Schmidt D Mahnke K Bachmann MF Marconi P Deeg CA Brocker T  Constitutive crosspresentation of tissue antigens by dendritic cells controls CD8+ T cell tolerance in vivo Immunity 2008 28 521 532 18387832 
59. Gray M Miles K Salter D Gray D Savill J  Apoptotic cells protect mice from autoimmune inflammation by induction of regulatory B cells Proc Natl Acad Sci (USA) 2007 104 14080 14085 17715067 
60. Botto M Dell’Agnola C Bygrave AE Thompson EM Cook HT Petry F Loss M Pandolfi PP Walport MJ  Homozygous C1q deficiency causes glomerulonephritis associated with multiple apoptotic bodies Nat Genet 1998 19 56 59 9590289 
61. Chen Z Koralov SB Kelsoe G  Complement C4 inhibits systemic autoimmunity through a mechanism independent of complement receptors CR1 and CR2 J Exp Med 2000 192 1339 1352 11067882 
62. Bickerstaff MC Botto M Hutchinson WL Herbert J Tennent GA Bybee A Mitchell DA Cook HT Butler PJ Walport MJ Pepys MB  Serum amyloid P component controls chromatin degradation and prevents antinuclear autoimmunity Nat Med 1999 5 694 697 10371509 
63. Ehrenstein MR Cook HT Neuberger MS  Deficiency in serum immunoglobulin (Ig)M predisposes to development of IgG autoantibodies J Exp Med 2000 191 1253 1258 10748243 
64. Cohen PL Caricchio R Abraham V Camenisch TD Jennette JC Roubey RA Earp HS Matsushima G Reap EA  Delayed apoptotic cell clearance and lupus-like autoimmunity in mice lacking the c-mer membrane tyrosine kinase J Exp Med 2002 196 135 140 12093878 
65. Wallet MA Sen P Flores RR Wang Y Yi Z Huang Y Mathews CE Earp HS Matsushima G Wang B Tisch R  MerTK is required for apoptotic cell-induced T cell tolerance J Exp Med 2008 205 219 232 18195070 
66. Hanayama R Tanaka M Miyasaka K Aozasa K Koike M Uchiyama Y Nagata S  Autoimmune disease and impaired uptake of apoptotic cells in MFG-E8-deficient mice Science 2004 304 1147 1150 15155946 
67. Wermeling F Chen Y Pikkarainen T Scheynius A Winqvist O Izui S Ravetch JV Tryggvason K Karlsson MC  Class A scavenger receptors regulate tolerance against apoptotic cells, and autoantibodies against these receptors are predictive of systemic lupus J Exp Med 2007 204 2259 2265 17893199 
68. Nagata S  Autoimmune diseases caused by defects in clearing dead cells and nuclei expelled from erythroid precursors Immunol Rev 2007 200 237 250 17979851 
69. Truedsson L Bengtsson AA Sturfelt G  Complement deficiencies and systemic lupus erythematosus Autoimmunity 2007 40 560 566 18075790 
70. Taylor PR Carugati A Fadok V Cook HT Andrews M Carroll MC Savill JS Henson PM Botto M Walport MJ  A hierarchical role for classical pathway complement proteins in the clearance of apoptotic cells in vivo J Exp Med 2000 192 359 366 10934224 
71. Baumann I Kolowos W Voll RE Manger B Gaipl U Neuhuber WL Kirchner T Kalden JR Herrmann M  Impaired uptake of apoptotic cells into tingible body macrophages in germinal centers of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus Arth Rheum 2002 46 191 201 11817590 
72. Shoshan Y Shapira I Toubi E Frolkis I Yaron M Mevorach D  Accelerated Fas-mediated apoptosis of monocytes and maturing macrophages from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: relevance to in vitro impairment of interaction with iC3b-opsonized apoptotic cells J Immunol 2001 167 5963 5969 11698475 
73. Steinman RM Turley S Mellman I Inaba K  The induction of tolerance by dendritic cells that have captured apoptotic cells J Exp Med 2000 191 411 416 10662786 
74. Morelli AE  The immune regulatory effect of apoptotic cells and exosomes on dendritic cells: its impact on transplantation Am J Transplant 2006 6 254 261 16426309 
75. Saas P Bonnefoy F Kury-Paulin S Kleinclauss F Perruche S  Mediators involved in the immunomodulatory effects of apoptotic cells Transplantation 2007 84 S31 S34 17632410 
76. Divito SJ, Morelli AE (2009) Apoptotic cells for therapy of transplant rejection. In: Krysko DV, Vandenabeele P (eds) Phagocytosis of dying cells: from molecular mechanisms to human diseases. Springer Netherlands, pp 319–346
77. Sun E Gao Y Chen J Roberts A Wang X Chen Z Shi Y  Allograft tolerance induced by donor apoptotic lymphocytes requires phagocytosis in the recipient Cell Death Differ 2004 11 1258 1264 15375386 
78. Kleinclauss F Perruche S Masson E Carvalho Bittencourt M Biichle S Remy-Martin J-P Ferrand C Martin M Bittard H Chalopin J-M Seilles E Tiberghien P Saas P  Intravenous apoptotic spleen cell infusion induces a TGF-β-dependent regulatory T-cell expansion Cell Death Differ 2006 13 41 52 15962005 
79. Qiu CH Miyase Y Kaise H Kitamura H Ohara O Tanaka M  Novel subset of CD8α+ dendritic cells localized in the marginal zone is responsible for tolerance to cell-associated antigens J Immunol 2009 182 4127 4136 19299710 
80. Xu DL Liu Y Tan J-M Li B Zhong C-P Zhang XH Wu C-Q Tang X-D  Marked prolongation of murine cardiac allograft survival using recipient immature dendritic cells loaded with donor-derived apoptotic cells Scand J Immunol 2004 59 536 544 15182248 
81. Miyake Y Asano K Kaise H Uemura M Nakayama M Tanaka M  Critical role of macrophages in the marginal zone in the suppression of immune responses to apoptotic cell-associated antigens J Clin Invest 2007 117 2268 2278 17657313 
82. Nouri-Shirazi M Guinet E  Direct and indirect cross-tolerance of alloreactive T cells by dendritic cells retained in the immature stage Transplantation 2002 74 1035 1044 12394851 
83. Carvalho Bittencourt M Perruche S Contassot E Fresnay S Baron MH Angonin R Aubin F Herve P Tiberghien P Saas P  Intravenous injection of apoptotic leukocytes enhances bone marrow engraftment across major histocompatibility barriers Blood 2001 98 224 230 11418484 
84. Perruche S Kleinclauss F Carvalho Bittencourt M Paris D Tiberghien P Saas P  Intravenous infusion of apoptotic cells simultaneously with allogeneic hematopoietic grafts alters anti-donor humoral immune responses Am J Transplant 2004 4 1361 1365 15268741 
85. Ludvigsson J Samuelsson U Ernerudh J Johansson C Stenhammar L Berlin G  Photopheresis at onset of type 1 diabetes: a randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial Arch Dis Child 2001 85 149 154 11466190 
86. Perez M Edelson R Laroche L Berger C  Inhibition of antiskin allograft immunity by infusions with syngeneic photoactivated effector lymphocytes J Invest Dermatol 1989 92 669 676 2523941 
87. Pepino P Berger CL Fuzesi L Panza A Pierson RN Gutierrez C Marboe CC Smith CR Reemtsma K Rose EA  Primate cardiac allo- and xeno-transplantation: modulation of the immune response with photochemotherapy Eur Surg Res 1989 21 105 113 2670578 
88. Barr ML Meisner BM Eisen HJ Roberts RF Ugolino L Dall’Amico R Dorent R Rogers JG Radovancevic B Taylor DO Jeevanandam V Marboe CC  Photopheresis for the prevention of rejection in cardiac transplantation New Eng J Med 1998 339 1744 1751 9845709 
89. Costanzo-Nordin MR Hubbell EA O’Sullivan EJ Johnson MR Mullen GM Heroux AL Kao WG McManus BM Pifarre R Robinson JA  Photopheresis versus corticosteroids in the therapy of heart transplant rejection. Preliminary clinical report Circulation 1992 86 (Suppl II) 242 250 
90. Costanzo-Nordin MR Hubbell EA O’Sullivan EJ Johnson MR Mullen GM Heroux AL Kao WG McManus BM Pifarre R Robinson JA  Successful treatment of heart transplant rejection with photopheresis Transplantation 1992 53 808 815 1566346 
91. Horina JH Mulleger RR Horn S Holzer H Halwachs G Kerl H Wolf P  Photopheresis for renal allograft rejection Lancet 1995 346 61 7603177 
92. Bhandari JMJ Wyburn KR Misra AK McKenzie PR Eris JM  Photopheresis therapy for problematic renal allograft rejection J Clin Apher 2009 24 161 169 19536814 
93. Speich BC Hofbauer GF Irani S Eich-Wanger C Russi EW Weder W Boehler A  Extracorporeal photopheresis after lung transplantation: a 10-year single-center experience Transplantation 2008 86 1625 1627 19077900 
94. Urbani L Mazzoni A Colombatto P Biancofiore G Bindi L Tascini C Menichetti F Brunetto M Filipponi F  Potential applications of extracorporeal photopheresis in liver transplantation Transplant Proc 2008 40 1175 1178 18555142 
95. Hivelin M Siemionow M Grimbert P Lantieri L  Extracorporeal photopheresis: from solid organs to face transplantation Transpl Immunol 2009 21 117 128 19409991 
96. Greinix HT Volc-Platzer B Kalhs P Fischer G Rosenmayr A Keil F Honigsmann H Knobler RM  Extracorporeal photochemotherapy in the treatment of severe steroid-refractory acute graft-versus-host disease: a pilot study Blood 2000 96 2426 2431 11001894 
97. Flowers ME Apperley JF Besien K Elmaagacli A Grigg A Reddy V Bacigalupo A Kolb HJ Bouzas L Michallet M Prince HM Knobler R Parenti D Gallo J Greinix HT  A multicenter prospective phase 2 randomized study of extracorporeal photopheresis for treatment of chronic graft-versus-host disease Blood 2008 112 2667 2674 18621929 
98. Lim HW Edelson RL  Photopheresis for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1995 9 1117 1126 8522488 
99. Suchin KR Cassin M Washko R Nahass G Berkson M Stouch B Vowels BR Rook AH  Extracorporeal photochemotherapy does not suppress T- or B-cell responses to novel or recall antigens J Am Acad Dermatol 1999 41 980 986 10570384 
100. Maeda A Schwarz A Kernebeck K Gross N Aragane Y Peritt D Schwarz T  Intravenous infusion of syngeneic apoptotic cells by photopheresis induces antigen-specific regulatory T cells J Immunol 2005 174 5968 5976 15879089 
101. Maeda A Schwarz A Bullinger A Morita A Peritt D Schwarz T  Experimental extracorporeal photopheresis inhibits the sensitization and effector phases of contact hypersensitivity via two mechanisms: generation of IL-10 and induction of regulatory T cells J Immunol 2008 181 5956 5962 18941184 
102. Craciun LI Stordeur P Schandene L Duvillier H Bron D Lambermont M Goldman M Dupont E  Increased production of interlukin-10 and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist after extracorporeal photochemotherapy in chronic graft-versus-host disease Transplantation 2002 74 995 1000 12394844 
103. Rizzo R Melchiorri L Tazzari PL Tassi C Soli M Lunghi M Belloni M Conte R Baricordi OR  Increased production of soluble HLA-G molecules in stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells following extracorporeal photopheresis: is it a mechanisms involved in the therapeutic effect of the procedure? J Clin Apher 2005 20 222 224 16265629 
104. Lamioni A Parisi F Isacchi G Giordia E Di Cesare S Landolfo A Cenci F Bottazzo GF Carsetti R  The immunological effects of extracorporeal photopheresis unraveled: Induction of tolerogenic dendritic cells in vitro and regulatory T cell in vivo Transplantation 2005 79 846 850 15818329 
105. Rao V Saunes M Jorstad S Moen T  In vitro experiments demonstrate that monocytes and dendritic cells are rendered apoptotic by extracorporeal photochemotherapy, but exhibit unaffected surviving and maturing capacity after 30 Gy gamma irradiation Scand J Immunol 2008 68 645 651 19055700 
106. Stadler K Frey B Munoz LE Finzel S Rech J Fietkau R Herrmann M Hueber A Gaipl US  Photopheresis with UV-A light and 8-methoxypsoralen leads to cell death and to release of blebs with anti-inflammatory phenotype in activated and non-activated lymphocytes Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2009 386 71 76 19501044 
107. Holtick U Marshall SR Wang XN Hilkens CM Dickinson AM  Impact of psoralen/UVA-treatment on survival, activation, and immunostimulatory capacity of monocyte-derived dendritic cells Transplantation 2008 83 757 766 18337671 
108. Gerner M Holig K Wehner R Zhao S Schakel K Bachmann MP Rieber EP Bornhauser M Schmitz M  Extracorporeal photopheresis efficiently impairs the proinflammatory capacity of human 6-sulfo LacNac dendritic cells Transplantation 2009 87 1134 1139 19384158 
109. Di Renzo M Sbano P Aloe G Pasqui AL Rubegni P Ghezzi A Auteri A Fimiani M  Extracorporeal photopheresis affects co-stimulatory molecule expression and interleukin-10 production by dendritic cells in graft-versus-host disease patients Clin Exp Immunol 2008 151 407 413 18234053 
110. George JF Gooden CW Guo WH Kirklin JK  Role for CD4+ CD25+ T cells in inhibition of graft rejection by extracorporeal photopheresis J Heart Lung Transplant 2008 27 616 622 18503960 
111. Gatza E Rogers CE Clouthier SG Lowler KP Tawara I Liu C Reddy P Ferrara JLM  Extracorporeal photopheresis reverses experimental graft-versus-host disease through regulatory T cells Blood 2008 112 1515 1521 18411417 
112. Meloni F Cascina A Miserere S Perotti C Vitulo P Fietta AM  Peripheral CD4(+)CD25(+) TREG cell counts and the response to extracorporeal photopheresis in lung transplant recipients Transplant Proc 2007 39 213 217 17275508 
113. Lamioni A Carsetti R Legato A Landolfo A Isacchi G Emma F Bottazzo GF Dello Strologo L  Induction of regulatory T cells after prophylactic treatment with photopheresis in renal transplant recipients Transplantation 2007 83 1393 1396 17519793 
114. Di Biaso I Di Maio L Bugarin C Gaipa G Dander E Balduzzi A Parma M D’Amico G Perseghin P Biondi A Biagi E  Regulatory T cells and extracorporeal photochemotherapy: correlation with clinical response and decreased frequency of proinflammatory T cells Transplantation 2009 87 1422 1425 19424046 
115. Schmitt S Johnson TS Karakhanova S Naher H Mahnke K Enk AH  Extracorporeal photopheresis augments function of CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ regulatory T cells by triggering adenosine production Transplantation 2009 15 411 416 19667946 
116. Newton WT Anderson CB  Planned preimmunization of renal allograft recipients Surgery 1973 74 430 436 4269174 
117. Opelz G Serger DPS Mickey MR Terasaki PI  Effect of blood transfusion on subsequent kidney transplants Transplant Proc 1973 5 253 259 4572098 
118. Salvatierra O Vicenti F Amed W  Deliberate donor-specific blood transfusion prior to living related renal transplantation. A new approach Ann Surg 1980 192 543 552 6448588 
119. Madsen JC Superina RA Wood KJ Morris PJ  Immunological unresponsiveness induced by recipient cells transfected with donor MHC genes Nature 1988 332 161 164 3279318 
120. Wood ML Gottschalk R Monaco AP  Comparison of immune responsiveness in mice after single or multiple donor-specific transfusions J Immunol 1984 132 651 655 6197472 
121. Persijn CG Cohen B Lansbergen Q Rood JJ  Retrospective and prospective studies on the effect of blood transfusions in renal transplantation in The Netherlands Transplantation 1979 28 396 401 392834 
122. Brennan DC Mohanakumar T Flye MW  Donor-specific transfusion and donor bone marrow infusion in renal transplantation tolerance: a review of efficacy and mechanisms Am J Kidney Dis 1995 26 701 715 7485121 
123. Niimi M Roelen DL Witzke O Rood JJ Claas FHJ Wood KJ  The importance of H2 haplotype sharing in the induction of specific unresponsiveness by pretransplant blood transfusions Transplantation 2000 69 411 417 10706052 
124. Quezada SA Fuller B Jarvinen LZ Gonzalez M Blazar BR Rudensky AY Strom TB Noelle RJ  Mechanisms of donor-specific transfusion tolerance: preemptive induction of clonal T-cell exhaustion via indirect presentation Blood 2003 102 1920 1926 12750162 
125. Kishimoto K Yuan X Auchincloss H Sharpe AH Mandelbrot DA Sayegh MH  Mechanisms of action of donor-specific transfusion in inducing tolerance: role of donor MHC molecules, donor co-stimulatory molecules, and indirect antigen presentation J Am Soc Nephrol 2004 15 2423 2428 15339991 
126. Morelli AE Thomson AW  Tolerogenic dendritic cells and the quest for transplant tolerance Nat Rev Immunol 2007 7 610 621 17627284 
127. Xia C-Q Kao K-J  Induction of immune tolerance across major histocompatibility complex barrier by transfusion of ultraviolet B-irradiated immature dendritic cells Transfusion 2005 45 181 188 15660825 
128. Kushwah R Oliver JR Zhang J Siminovitch KA Hu J  Apoptotic dendritic cells induce tolerance in mice through suppression of dendritic cell maturation and induction of antigen-specific regulatory T cells J Immunol 2009 183 7104 7118 19917707 
129. Oh BC Lee HM Lim DP Cho JJ Lee G Lee DS Lee JR  Effect of immature dendritic cell injection before heterotopic cardiac allograft Transplant Proc 2006 38 3189 3192 17175218 
130. Divito SJ Shufesky WJ Wang Z Montecalvo A Morelli AE  Donor-derived tolerogenic dendritic cells are reprocessed into and presented as alloAg by recipient dendritic cells to down-regulate anti-donor T cells and prolong allograft survival Am J Transplant 2008 8 Suppl 2 226 
131. Perruche S Zhang P Liu Y Saas P Bluestone JA Chen W  CD3-specific antibody-induced immune tolerance involves transforming growth factor-β from phagocytes digesting apoptotic T cells Nat Immunol 2007 14 528 535
