
==== Front
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
1360-8185 1573-675X Springer US Boston 

18322800
187
10.1007/s10495-008-0187-8
Original Paper
Secondary necrosis in multicellular animals: an outcome of apoptosis with pathogenic implications
Silva Manuel T. +351-226074970+351-226099157mtsilva@ibmc.up.pt  do Vale Ana  dos Santos Nuno M. N.  grid.5808.50000000115037226Fish Immunology and Vaccinology, IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre 823, Porto, 4150-180 Portugal 
6 3 2008 
2008 
13 4 463 482
21 1 2008 14 2 2008 © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2008This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.In metazoans apoptosis is a major physiological process of cell elimination during development and in tissue homeostasis and can be involved in pathological situations. In vitro, apoptosis proceeds through an execution phase during which cell dismantling is initiated, with or without fragmentation into apoptotic bodies, but with maintenance of a near-to-intact cytoplasmic membrane, followed by a transition to a necrotic cell elimination traditionally called “secondary necrosis”. Secondary necrosis involves activation of self-hydrolytic enzymes, and swelling of the cell or of the apoptotic bodies, generalized and irreparable damage to the cytoplasmic membrane, and culminates with cell disruption. In vivo, under normal conditions, the elimination of apoptosing cells or apoptotic bodies is by removal through engulfment by scavengers prompted by the exposure of engulfment signals during the execution phase of apoptosis; if this removal fails progression to secondary necrosis ensues as in the in vitro situation. In vivo secondary necrosis occurs when massive apoptosis overwhelms the available scavenging capacity, or when the scavenger mechanism is directly impaired, and may result in leakage of the cell contents with induction of tissue injury and inflammatory and autoimmune responses. Several disorders where secondary necrosis has been implicated as a pathogenic mechanism will be reviewed.

Keywords
Apoptotic secondary necrosisApoptosisNecrosisClearanceAutoimmunityInfectionissue-copyright-statement© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2008
==== Body
Introduction
“Life is uncertain, death is certain”. All cells are doomed to die. Cell death processes can be passive or active. Passive cell death is the direct, acute killing of a cell by an exterior aggression damaging enough to produce irreversible alterations; these occur without the participation of the cell and can be prevented only by the absence of the aggression. This is the case, among others, of cell death due to exposure to high concentrations of detergents or antiseptics, extreme heat or repeated freeze-thawing, that is, situations without biological relevance. In this mode of cell death there is immediate, extensive and irreparable damage to the cytoplasmic membrane and this damage affects the membrane from without.

In contrast, active cell death is a suicidal process that is carried out by the doomed cell using molecules and pathways that are endogenous to the cell. The term “programmed cell death”, coined by Lockshin and Williams to qualify developmental cell death [1], has gained wide use to characterize active cell deaths. However, the term “programmed” has been used in two distinct senses to characterize either (i) cell death processes that occur at a precise local and time according to a developmental program (for example in morphogenesis) or (ii) cell deaths that, once triggered (as part of a developmental program or occasionally as in some pathologies), follow cell-intrinsic biochemical programs controlled by the doomed cell. Therefore, we will use the term “active” instead of “programmed” when referring to cell death processes that, once triggered, unroll following a course of biochemical events processed and controlled by the dying cell.

Cell death is followed by cell elimination. In multicellular animals, cell elimination is essential for development and homeostasis, and is mainly carried out by apoptosis. The initial report by Kerr, Wyllie and Currie, introducing the concept of apoptosis [2] was based on in vivo observations in mammalian tissues and described that process as comprising a terminal cell elimination stage through the removal of the apoptosing cell by phagocytosis and degradation by a scavenger cell. However, it was soon recognized by Kerr and collaborators that in vivo [3, 4] and in vitro [5, 6], when removal by scavengers does not occur, the apoptotic process continues until a transition to necrosis ensues leading to cell elimination by cell disruption. This terminal disruption of apoptotic cells was initially called “secondary degeneration” [5], a designation later changed to “secondary necrosis” [7]. This designation achieved widespread acceptance and is now part of the glossary of cell death terms, although it is prone to some confusion. Indeed, necroses that can be also labeled as secondary can occur in diverse situations; for example, necrosis following ischemia due to vascular occlusion has been frequently called secondary necrosis, as in necrotizing fasciitis.

Secondary necrosis was viewed in the initial reports as a separate process occurring after completion of apoptosis [5, 6] and, thus, it has frequently been called post-apoptotic necrosis. An alternative view is to consider that necrotic outcome as part of the apoptotic program of cell elimination, in which case it has been called late apoptosis.

Secondary necrosis also terminates the apoptotic process in eukaryotic unicellular organisms like yeasts [8, 9]. A terminal necrotic elimination can occur at the end of other active cell death processes besides apoptosis [10, 11]. Therefore, the term apoptotic secondary necrosis is used in this review to refer the terminal cell disruption that may follow apoptotic cell death.

After being initially seen as a mere biological curiosity, apoptotic secondary necrosis was soon recognized as an event with pathogenic relevance when occurring in multicellular animals. The pro-inflammatory and cytotoxic consequences of lysis of cells under secondary necrosis due to the lack of removal by scavengers have initially been repeatedly predicted or assumed, but supporting evidence for the pathogenic potential of that outcome of apoptosis has been progressively gathered as will be here reviewed.

Apoptosis as the prelude of secondary necrosis
Secondary necrosis is a process that affects cells under advanced apoptosis; thus, the characteristics of secondary necrotic cells are influenced by alterations previously occurred during the execution of apoptosis.

After the initial concept that apoptosis was the mechanism behind active cell death, advances in the knowledge in this area revealed that active cell death may assume several genetically defined programs (reviewed in Ref. [12]). In typical situations, these diverse programs dictate different phenotypes which can be used as a basis for the classification of active cell death modes [13, 14]. The presently known clear-cut forms of active cell death include, besides apoptosis, autophagic cell death [10, 15], primary necrosis (also known as programmed necrosis) [11, 16–18], mitotic catastrophe [19], and caspase 1-dependent pyroptosis [20]. These paradigmatic modes of cell death have been observed in multicellular organisms, but less clear-cut, intermediate or hybrid cell death modes have also been described as indicated by the use of terms as apoptosis-like or necrosis-like cell deaths [12], necrapoptosis [21] and necroptosis [22].

In multicellular organisms, apoptosis is a major physiological cell killing process used during embryonic morphogenesis and in adult life in tissue homeostasis and immune responses for the elimination of unnecessary, unwanted or dangerous cells [23, 24].

When a cell isolated from a metazoan and maintained in vitro responds to an apoptotic death stimulus it activates a sequence of molecular events [25] that proceeds through two phases which ultimately culminates in cell disruption [5, 25]. In the first phase, molecular alterations produce the classical apoptotic morphotype (see Table 1 and Figs. 1b, 2b and 4) that is used to identify this mode of cell death. During this phase the apoptosing cells may or may not fragment into apoptotic bodies, and, in contrast with necrosis, the membrane enveloping the apoptosing cells or the apoptotic bodies remains near-to-intact, that is, except for some structural alterations like externalization of phosphatidylserine and exposition of other “eat-me” signals for phagocytosis by scavengers, it is normal including in regards to selective permeability [7, 33, 34]. The terminal phase is secondary necrosis during which necrotic molecular alterations produce a new morphotype (see Table 1) which is more typical when there is no fragmentation into apoptotic bodies; this secondary necrotic morphotype is a mixture of alterations produced in the apoptotic phase (like nuclear fragmentation and intense chromatin condensation) and necrotic alterations (swelling of the cell and damage to the cytoplasmic membrane) [7]. Ultimately the cytoplasmic membrane ruptures and the cell (or the apoptotic bodies) is dismantled to cell debris (Fig. 1c, d). This experiment shows that the apoptotic death of an isolated cell, once triggered, is self-sufficient and leads to self-elimination by secondary necrosis.
Table 1 Morphotypes in apoptosis, apoptotic secondary necrosis and primary necrosis

Apoptosis (see Figs. 1b, 2b and 4)	Cell rounding and shrinking	
Loss of microvilli	
Membrane blebbing	
Nuclear fragmentation and/or	
Intense chromatin condensation	
Mitochondrial “thread-grain” transition	
Production of apoptotic bodies	
Impermeability of the cytoplasmic membrane to PI 	
Apoptotic secondary necrosis (see Figs. 1c, 1d, 2c and 4)	
Nuclear fragmentation
	

Intense chromatin condensation
	

Cytoplasmic swelling
	

Intense mitochondria swelling
	

Damaged cytoplasmic membrane (revealed by PI-positive staining and release of LDH)
	
Primary necrosis	No nuclear fragmentation	
Moderate chromatin condensation	
Cytoplasmic swelling	
Intense mitochondrial swelling	
Damaged cytoplasmic membrane (revealed by PI-positive staining and release of LDH)	
Main morphological alterations that allow the identification of cells in the execution phase of apoptosis, in apoptotic secondary necrosis and in primary necrosis (reviewed in Refs. [7, 14, 26–29])

The apoptotic alterations of secondary necrosis are in bold; in italic are the necrotic alterations


Fig. 1 Apoptotic cell death in vitro. Hemacolor staining of sea bass peritoneal phagocytes exposed in vitro to the apoptogenic exotoxin AIP56 of the gram-negative pathogen Photobacterium damselae ssp. piscicida [30]. (a) Normal phagocyte. (b) Phagocyte under apoptosis, showing cell rounding and shrinkage, nuclear fragmentation and intense chromatin condensation. (c) Phagocyte under apoptotic secondary necrosis, showing nuclear apoptotic changes (fragmentation and intense chromatin condensation) and a lysed cytoplasm. (d) A more advanced secondary necrosis with chromatolysis and cell swelling. Technical details in Ref. [30]


Fig. 2 Apoptotic cell death in vivo. Transmission electron microscopy of peritoneal sea bass phagocytes that where induced to enter apoptotic death by the exotoxin AIP56 secreted by intraperitoneally injected Photobacterium damselae ssp. piscicida [31, 32]. (a) A normal looking phagocyte. (b) A phagocyte under apoptosis, showing cell shrinkage, loss of microvilli, nuclear fragmentation and intense chromatin condensation and a continuous cytoplasmic membrane. (c) A phagocyte under apoptotic secondary necrosis showing an apoptotic (hyper-condensed) nuclear fragment together with rupture of the cytoplasmic membrane and leakage of cell components. Technical details in Ref. [32]




When incorporated in the multicellular organism, that same cell will respond to an apoptotic death stimulus again by activating its endogenous apoptotic mechanism but the outcome may well be quite different from that occurring in vitro because now the cell is part of the social context of the multicellular organism [35]. Indeed, the apoptotic program triggers a mechanism for cell elimination that calls for the cooperation of a scavenger cell to engulf and digest by heterolysis the apoptosing cell before transition to secondary necrosis, that is, while the apoptosing cell still is enveloped by a near-to-intact membrane. This process of cell elimination, described in the initial report by Kerr, Wyllie and Currie as the second stage of apoptosis in mammals and as the physiological mechanism for elimination of apoptosing cells or apoptotic bodies [2] is activated in the in vitro setting but cannot operate because of the lack of the scavenger.

Biochemical events that are behind the apoptotic morphotype may include caspase activation, PARP-1 inactivation, mitochondrial permeability transition with loss of membrane potential (Δψ), release of AIF, EndoG or cytochrome c from the mitochondrial intermembrane space, moderate increased production of ROS, moderate cytosolic Ca2+ overload and internucleosomal DNA degradation (reviewed in Refs. [25, 36, 37]. There is proteolytic degradation of many substrates mainly effected by activated effector caspases [36] but caspase-independent effector mechanisms may also participate [38], and may have the participation of autophagy [39]. The degradative events occurring during the execution of apoptosis produce a partial cell dismantling which confers to apoptosis an autolytic character and is the basis of the apoptotic morphotype. This initial autolytic degradation is significantly increased when apoptosing cells are phagocytosed and heterolytically digested by scavengers or when apoptosis transits to secondary necrosis where further, extensive, autolytic degradation leads to cell disruption.

For the normal progress of the apoptotic pathways energy is required, and an initial increase in cytosolic ATP in apoptosing cells has been reported [40, 41]. ATP is required for cell shrinkage, bleb formation, caspase activation, enzymatic hydrolysis of macromolecules, chromatin condensation, DNA internucleosomal fragmentation, nuclear fragmentation, exposure of engulfment signals and apoptotic body formation (reviewed in Refs. [25, 37, 41, 42].

Apoptotic bodies may be formed during the degradation phase by the fragmentation of apoptosing cells as already described in the initial report of Kerr, Wyllie and Currie [2]. Although formation of apoptotic bodies is frequently considered as constant during apoptosis, in some otherwise typical apoptotic processes occurring in vitro or in vivo apoptotic bodies are not produced or are rare (see for example [6, 7, 26–28, 43, 44]), so that the elimination of apoptosing cells frequently affects non-fragmented cells. The non-fragmented, shrunken, apoptosing cell can be considered a single apoptotic body [45], as in the case of the so-called sunburn cells, apoptotic keratinocytes induced by UV irradiation of the skin [46]. Apoptotic bodies are produced while the apoptosing cell still has a near-to-normal cytoplasmic membrane and they are as well enveloped by a near-to-intact membrane [2, 47]. Like apoptosing cells, they express signals for engulfment and are phagocytosed by scavengers [2] or undergo secondary necrosis if not engulfed [7, 47].

In multicellular animals the timely removal of apoptosing cells through phagocytosis by scavengers is the clue for the physiological outcome of apoptosis because it prevents the occurrence of secondary necrosis [23, 48, 49]. In higher multicellular animals, phagocytosis is mainly accomplished by monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils, the professional phagocytes [50], which constitute up to 10–15% of cells in most mammalian tissues [23]. Typically, the professional scavenger of dying/dead cells is the macrophage [51, 52], which is located in all body territories and is highly phagocytic [53]. When macrophages are not available, for example due to a particular location of the dying/dead cells, neutrophils [54], or neighbor cells functioning as surrogate “amateur” phagocytes, may fulfill the role of removal of dying/dead cells; most cell types, including dendritic, epithelial, endothelial, and glomerular mesangial cells, fibroblasts, myocytes, and tumor cells, are able to perform this task [7, 49, 51, 52, 55]. This situation is the rule in simple multicellular animals, like Caenorhabditis elegans, where professional phagocytes are not present and apoptosing cells are removed by neighbor cells [56].

Although less efficiently than macrophages [49, 57–59], dendritic cells may engulf apoptosing cells, mainly when extensive apoptosis overwhelms the macrophage availability [60–62] or in territories where dendritic cells outnumber macrophages [63]. It has been reported that dendritic cells are more prone than macrophages to develop a pro-inflammatory response following the uptake of apoptosing or secondary necrotic cells [61, 62]. This point will be further discussed in ‘‘Pathogenic consequences of apoptotic secondary necrosis’’ section.

Like molecules involved in cell death processes, molecules involved in the removal by scavengers of dying/dead cells are present, and are in part similar, in worms, flies and mammals [64], indicating that such a clearance represents a crucial mechanism that has been conserved through evolution. Encounter of apoptosing cells with phagocytes may require attraction of phagocytes; specific attraction signals released by apoptosing cells in a caspase 3-dependent manner have been described [65, 66]. The recognition and engulfment of dying/dead cells by phagocytes involves the interaction between a number of molecules (reviewed in Refs. [67–70]). “Eat me” signals are exposed on the surface of apoptosing cells and are recognized by receptors on the surface of scavengers. The interactions between the engulfment signals and the receptors are facilitated by bridging molecules present in serum such as β2 glycoprotein, milk fat globule protein (MFG-E8), protein S, growth arrest-specific 6 (Gas6), thrombospondin, pentraxins and complement factors. This mechanism of attraction between apoptosing cells and scavengers is complemented by the loss by the apoptosing cells of expression of “don’t eat me” signals that normally prevent engulfment of living cells.

Much less is known about how scavengers recognize cells under active primary necrosis as compared to apoptosing cells, but it has been reported that some of the engulfment signals in necrosing cells are different from those exposed by apoptosing cells [68]. In this context, it is of note that many studies on this topic (and on the immunological effects of necrotic cells) used cells made necrotic by physical methods like heating, or exposure to detergents or fixatives. These methods produce passive necrotic cells with protein inactivation that consequently cannot be representative of cells dying in vivo due to active necrotic processes which induce proteolytic alterations and exposure of engulfment signals. It is therefore important that more studies be conducted on the process of recognition of necrosing cells by scavengers and on the pathogenic effects of necrosis using cells under active necrosis.

Elimination of apoptosing cells by a scavenger involves the degradation by the hydrolytic enzymes of the phagolysosomes of the scavenger (heterolysis). This heterolytic degradation superimposes on the autolysis ongoing in the apoptosing cell [2, 4]. Several results indicate that the role of macrophages in removal of apoptosing cells is not solely to eliminate cell corpses, but rather to degrade those cells to harmless and largely re-utilizable molecules; this dismantling can be extensive when the dying/dead cells are engulfed very early in the apoptotic process [71, 72]. Indeed, uptake of apoptosing cells can occur with different timings after death triggering, depending on the timing of exposition of surface engulfment signals and on the availability of scavengers. Therefore, the extension of the executed apoptotic curriculum can vary, manifesting different morphologies. Apoptosing cells can be engulfed so early that the typical morphological changes or DNA fragmentation have not yet occurred [73–75] which would explain why under physiological conditions cells with apoptotic indicators are rarely seen in tissues [7, 76]. The swift removal of apoptosing cells is particularly advantageous in embryogenesis.

There are important differences in the processes of removal of cells under apoptosis or under active necrosis: (i) Apoptosing and necrosing cells are phagocytosed by macrophages through different mechanisms [77, 78]. (ii) Engulfment of cells under active necrosis is delayed and quantitatively and kinetically less efficient as compared to the uptake of apoptosing cells [77, 79]. (iii) Engulfment of apoptosing cells by scavengers normally occurs before the transition to secondary necrosis, that is when the dying/dead cells or the apoptotic bodies still have a near-to-normal cytoplasmic membrane [7, 33] (Fig. 3). In contrast, engulfment of necrosing cells usually occurs after cytoplasmic membrane damage and cell rupture so that cell fragments are engulfed [77, 78, 80] (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3 Schematic representation of the two cell elimination processes that can operate in active primary necrosis and apoptosis (heterolysis after removal by scavengers or cell burst due to autolysis). The cytoplasmic membrane of the cells under death processes is normal in the green area and damaged in the red area. A central issue is that, in apoptosis, in contrast with primary necrosis, the timely removal by scavengers of dying/dead cells is carried out before occurrence of damage to the cytoplasmic membrane. Leakage of cell contents is most extensive and involves large molecules when there is cell disruption (large blue arrows). See text in “Apoptotic secondary necrosis” section for details




Although the macrophage response to the phagocytosis of apoptosing cells may occasionally be pro-inflammatory (see discussion in Refs. [14, 52, 68], that phagocytosis typically fails to induce an inflammatory response [81] due to active inhibition of the release of pro-inflammatory mediators and to generation of anti-inflammatory factors such as transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and anti-inflammatory eicosanoids [82–84]. This contrasts with the effect of necrotic cell engulfment, which usually, but not always [77, 85], induces pro-inflammatory responses by the engulfing phagocytes [68, 69, 86, 87]. The prevailing view is that the delayed and deficient removal mechanism of cells under primary necrosis allows the persistence of leaky cells and necrotic debris which leads to activation of pro-inflammatory and immuno-stimulatory responses [11, 16] (see “Pathogenic consequences of apoptotic secondary necrosis” section). Necrotic cells may induce an inflammatory response not only by spilling their contents after lysis, but also by actively secreting inflammatory molecules, including cytokines (reviewed in Ref. [68]). However, there are reports of occurrence of extensive necrotic processes in vivo in the absence of important inflammatory responses [79, 80, 85, 88]. It is also of note that necrosis-associated inflammation, when not excessive, can be beneficial for the organism, for example during a protective immune response [17]. The removal by phagocytosis of cells under secondary necrosis will be discussed in “Pathogenic consequences of apoptotic secondary necrosis” section.

Central for the topic of this review is that, in multicellular animals, the physiological removal of apoptosing cells by scavengers may fail allowing the occurrence of secondary necrosis with potential pathogenic consequences. Failure of this process may be due to defects of the scavengers (insufficient number or functional incapacity) or of molecules involved in the recognition and engulfment of apoptosing cells, as will be reviewed later.

Apoptotic secondary necrosis
As already recognized in the initial reports on apoptosis [3, 4], when removal by scavengers fails in vivo, the apoptotic process fully unrolls and apoptosis transits to the self-elimination by secondary necrosis. A paradigmatic example is provided by apoptosis of cartilage chondrocytes; due to the avascular nature of articular cartilage and the lack of direct cell-cell contacts, apoptotic chondrocytes, induced for example in poly-arthritis [89], cannot be removed by scavenger cells and are eliminated by secondary necrosis [90]. Occurrence of in vivo secondary necrosis associated with pathology will be reviewed in “Pathogenic consequences of apoptotic secondary necrosis” section.

Contrary to the heterolytic degradation that dismantles apoptotic cells within scavengers, the hydrolytic processes of secondary necrosis involve autolytic enzymes. The available scant data regarding the molecular events in secondary necrosis suggest that this is an active necrotic process with biochemical and structural features common to those of active primary necrosis.

Recent advances in the knowledge of signaling and biochemical events in active primary necrosis are reviewed in Refs. [11, 17, 18, 91, 92]. During the degradation phase of active necrosis several biochemical alterations have been described including mitochondrial dysfunction, high production of ROS, serious ATP depletion, intense ionic imbalance, and activation of non-caspase proteases; these alterations ultimately converge in extensive lysosome rupture, which assumes a decisive role in active necrosis [93]. ATP depletion, ROS production and Ca2+ fluxes involve complex feedback and feed-forward interactive loops, some of them self-amplifying, as comprehensively reviewed by Brookes [94]. The important Ca2+ overload [95–97] induces enhanced activation of hydrolysing enzymes, including calpains [98], and leads to exaggerated energy consumption and impairment of energy production [99]; ATP depletion and activated calpains were shown to induce lysosome rupture [93, 100, 101], and released lysosomal cathepsins contribute to cytoplasmic membrane damage [102, 103], a hallmark of necrosis [7]. Thus, contrary to what happens in passive necrosis, cytoplasmic membrane damage in active necrosis is produced from within. This damage is due to the cumulative activity of hydrolytic enzymes and of ROS, and to serious energy failure; these events result in progressive membrane permeabilization to molecules of increasing size until the rupture of the membrane. This rupture is a consequence of the continuous cell swelling (oncosis or necrotic volume increase [104]) due to the maintenance within the cell of large molecules, including proteins and nucleic acids (Gibbs–Donnan effect [105–108]). Thus, the progressive deterioration of the cytoplasmic membrane of necrosing cells leads to initial leakage of small ions like K+, then leakage of small macromolecules and finally leakage of large macromolecules [105].

The essential events occurring in active primary necrosis, culminating in cytoplasmic membrane rupture, are likely to operate in secondary necrosis. As discussed, the development of apoptosis requires energy. When apoptosis progresses without engulfment of apoptosing cells, the progression eventually leads to a late depletion of the intracellular ATP pool [109–111] likely due to early ATP-consuming apoptotic reactions together with a late complete loss of mitochondrial function [109]. This endogenously originated late serious energy depletion has been considered the trigger for the transition from the end of a fully developed execution phase of apoptosis to secondary necrosis [21, 101, 112, 113]. It is known that serious ATP depletion provoked during early apoptosis induces a switch to necrosis (see below).

On the other hand, occurrence of secondary necrosis in caspase 3-dependent apoptosis induced by ultra-sounds has been found to be inhibited by the antioxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine, suggesting the involvement of ROS in the transition to secondary necrosis [114].

During apoptosis, caspase 3 cleaves proteins involved in intracellular Ca2+ regulation including the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger, the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (IP3Rs), and the plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPases (PMCA) (reviewed in Ref. [115]). Caspase cleavage of the IP3R1 and of the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger has been shown to result in cytosolic Ca2+ overload [115]. On the other hand, two groups have shown that the PMCA 4b isoform is cleaved by caspase 3 during apoptosis [116, 117], but there is discrepancy regarding the reported functional consequence of that cleavage. While the results from Nicotera’s group suggest inactivation leading to a decreased rate of Ca2+ efflux from the cells and consequent cytosolic Ca2+ overload [116], the results form Enyedi’s group suggest that the cleavage product remains functionally active and would not contribute to Ca2+ overload [117–119]. An intense rise in intracellular Ca2+ was observed prior to the transition of apoptosis to secondary necrosis in prostate and bladder cancer cell lines [120], human B cell line FMO [121] or chicken B-lymphocytes [115]. In two of these studies [115, 121], the dramatic Ca2+ cytosolic overload was considered to be involved in that transition.

As in active primary necrosis, serious energy depletion, high Ca2+ cytosolic overload and high ROS production will lead to activation of calpains and to lysosome rupture, two events which have been suggested to participate in the cytoplasmic membrane damage in secondary necrosis [101, 122]. That lysosomal enzymes participate in secondary necrosis is also suggested by the observation that, in apoptosis induced in vitro in the epithelial cell line LLC-PK1 by S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine, inhibition of cathepsin B resulted in inhibition of secondary necrosis [123]. In support of this interpretation, recent results with caspase 3-associated apoptosis induced in Jurkat cells by treatment with anti-Fas showed that the terminal cell lysis due to secondary necrosis was concomitant with lysosome rupture [124].

Two frequently used assays to evaluate the cytoplasmic membrane condition during cell death processes are vital staining with the membrane impermeant propidium iodide (PI) and quantification of release of the intracellular enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Permeability to PI (molecular mass about 0.67 kD) indicates a relatively initial cytoplasmic membrane damage [106, 108], while leakage of LDH (molecular mass about 140 kD) indicates terminal membrane rupture [107]. When apoptosing cells enter the secondary necrosis process those two assays change from negative to positive [33, 125, 126], revealing the ensuing of cytoplasmic membrane damage. Like in primary necrosis, in secondary necrosis PI-positivity precedes release of LDH and of other large molecules like activated caspase 3 (about 19 kD) (see Figs. 1D and 3C in Ref. [126]). As will be discussed in “Pathogenic consequences of apoptotic secondary necrosis” section, these observations are relevant in the context of the potential pathogenic role of secondary necrotic cells, since it is likely that only ruptured secondary necrotic cells will release large molecules like DNA, RNA and proteins including high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein (about 30 kD) with inflammatory and immunogenic capacities.

The necrotic degradation in secondary necrosis affects cells that already were partially dismantled during the execution phase of the apoptotic process. The cell degradation during apoptosis involves proteolysis due to the activity of proteinases, mainly of effector caspases. During secondary necrosis there is additional proteolysis in a caspase-independent manner [127]. This late proteolysis, that contributes to the final dismantling of the apoptotic cell, may originate autoantigens that, when released by the lysing cell, send danger signals to the immune system and stimulate autoantibody responses [62, 128–130].

Serious energy failure provoked during early apoptosis by mechanisms external to the apoptotic process induces a switch to necrosis [131–133]. This switch occurs earlier than the spontaneous transition to secondary necrosis triggered by the endogenous failure of ATP associated with the complete progression of the apoptotic process. Indeed, the switch induced by ATP depletion from without interrupts the normal progression of apoptosis preventing the occurrence of biochemical events, like caspase activation, that produce the typical apoptotic morphotype. Consequently, cells under necrosis due to the switch apoptosis–necrosis do not exhibit the mixed secondary necrotic morphotype previously discussed (see Table 1 and Figs. 1c, 2c and 4) but rather that of active primary necrosis. This “switched necrosis” does not comply with the classical definition of apoptotic secondary necrosis discussed in the beginning of this review. However, it may lead to similar pathological consequences since the cells undergoing this switched necrosis autolyse and release cytotoxic or immunogenic molecules.
Fig. 4 A group of enterocytes of sea bass under detachment-induced apoptosis (anoikis). Cells incubated ex vivo and viewed by phase contrast (panel a) and by fluorescence after double vital Hoechst 33342 and PI stainings (merged in panel b). Apoptosis is identified by the presence of fragmented and/or hyper-condensed, PI-negative nuclei in panel b. The cells labeled with asterisks in panel a are lysed as shown by the reduction in cytosol density; these cells have PI-positive fragmented and hyper-condensed nuclei (panel b), indicating that they are under apoptotic secondary necrosis. Reproduced from [134] with permission of the publisher




Apoptotic secondary necrosis was initially described in in vitro experiments [5, 6]. The frequent lack of consideration of the fact that induction of apoptosis in vitro (usually in the absence of scavengers) inevitably results in secondary necrosis can lead to misleading interpretations of induction of active primary necrosis, or of a switch from apoptosis to necrosis, when the actual event was the natural transition of an ongoing apoptosis to secondary necrosis. Confusion between the occurrence of active primary or secondary necrosis in vitro is particularly frequent when no kinetic studies are carried out, preventing the observation of apoptosis preceding secondary necrosis. The same problem arises when studying apoptosis of unicellular eukaryotic cells like yeasts because also in this case apoptosis is always followed by secondary necrosis [8, 9].

Identification of apoptotic secondary necrosis
Detailed morphological descriptions of apoptotic secondary necrosis are available [26, 27, 134].

Since typically secondary necrosis is a necrotic event affecting late apoptosing cells, the secondary necrotic morphotype (see Table 1) is characterized by the co-existence in the same cell of some apoptotic alterations (like nuclear fragmentation and/or intense chromatin condensation) and some necrotic alterations (like a damaged cytoplasmic membrane). As already discussed, before they are cleared by scavengers or enter secondary necrosis, apoptotic cells exclude membrane impermeant stains like PI [33] (it is of note that the exclusion of membrane impermeant stains is only observed when these stains are used in low concentrations and for short periods [135] as in the protocol in reference [136]). PI positivity in secondary necrotic cells can be detected after combined vital staining with Hoechst 33342/PI (see Fig. 4 and Ref. [134]). Also typical of apoptotic secondary necrotic cells is the association of nuclear apoptotic alterations and cytoplasmic membrane rupture detected by transmission electron microscopy (Fig. 2c), depicting the terminal stage of secondary necrosis. Particularly informative is the time-lapse observation by phase contrast and fluorescence microscopy of Hoechst 33342/PI stained preparations [134]. This continuous scrutiny of the same cell allows the observation of the apoptotic morphotype (with apoptotic nuclear alterations, cell shrinkage, blebbing, and production of apoptotic bodies (when it occurs) and PI-negativity) followed by entrance into the secondary necrotic process as indicated by the change to PI-positivity, followed by cell swelling with reduction in cytoplasm density (Fig. 4), chromatolysis, and finally cell burst.

Like LDH and other large molecules, activated caspases are released at the end of apoptotic secondary necrosis when membrane rupture occurs, while only procaspases are released in the case of cytolysis due to caspase-independent death processes [126]. Furthermore, the procaspases released by primary necrotic cells are not significantly processed extracellularly by proteolysis despite the presence of released proteases [126]. Therefore, when the cell death process has been characterized as caspase-dependent apoptosis, occurrence of relevant apoptotic secondary necrosis can be detected in vivo by the presence of increased levels of extracellular activated caspases which can be quantified in the blood [31, 137–139].

Non-pathogenic apoptotic secondary necrosis
Lack of removal by engulfment of apoptosing cells can occur in vivo without serious consequences. This is the case when those cells are shed into ducts or into territories topologically outside the organism (like the gut and airways lumen) where the chances of encountering or attracting scavengers are small but where release of cell contents is not critical.

For example, prostate apoptosing cells induced by castration detach and are shed in the lumina of the acini where they undergo secondary necrosis [3]. During the first days of involution of lactating breast after weaning, abundant apoptosis of epithelial cells occurs; many of these apoptosing cells are shed into the alveolar lumen [140, 141] and undergo secondary necrosis [140].

In a mechanism of clearance, neutrophils and eosinophils in lung tissue can be removed through egression across the epithelial lining into the airway lumen where they may undergo apoptosis with engulfment by scavengers or progress to secondary necrosis [142, 143]. These granulocytes or their remnants are eventually eliminated with airway mucus and expectoration.

Pathogenic consequences of apoptotic secondary necrosis
Introduction
In physiological situations, the apoptotic mode of cell elimination is useful since it is triggered when appropriate, is silent, induces a safe mechanism for cell disposal by scavengers, and, although spending energy, is economical in terms of re-utilization of the products of this disposal [2]. Implicit in that perspective of apoptosis in multicellular organisms is that “the individual cellular fate is sacrificed for the benefit of a higher order of life—the organism” [144]. However, this perspective of apoptosis as a physiological, and sometimes programmed, process is restrictive since this mode of cell elimination can be subverted, leading to pathological situations that are harmful to the organism where it occurs. Apoptosis turns pathological when the killed cells are necessary and functional, for example when pathogens evade phagocytic defense mechanisms by inducing apoptotic destruction of macrophages, neutrophils or both, or in neurodegenerative disorders with apoptotic elimination of functional neurons. Or, within the frame of this review, pathological apoptosis may also result when the timely elimination of apoptosing cells by scavengers fails in vivo and secondary necrosis ensues.

The acquisition during evolution of the apoptotic cell death process [145], with the inherent mechanism for the elimination of cell corpses through removal by scavengers before damage to the cytoplasmic membrane, represented a crucial step forward for multicellular organisms because it avoids the potentially dangerous secondary necrosis. However, the normally efficient and non-pathogenic mechanism of assisted cell elimination associated with apoptosis can be overridden in vivo in pathological situations with the occurrence of secondary necrosis. The constraint associated with the process of removal by scavengers is that it is not self-sufficient: depending on a functional scavenger cell, that process fails if this cell is not available despite exposition of engulfment signals, as is known to occur in several pathological situations to be reviewed below.

Failure of timely removal of apoptosing cells with occurrence of secondary necrosis may lead to two types of pathological consequences: (i) progress of secondary necrosis until cell disruption will result in leakage of cell contents which may be cytotoxic and induce tissue injury or (ii) secondary necrotic cells or their debris may be taken up by antigen presenting cells, mainly dendritic cells, and induce inflammation and autoimmunity. As discussed in “Apoptosis as the prelude of secondary necrosis” section, when macrophages fail to clear apoptosing cells, a second route can operate for the uptake using dendritic cells. Macrophages completely degrade ingested cells without antigen presentation, but when that uptake is by dendritic cells, these present antigens and activate the immune system, which may lead to autoimmunity [57, 58, 60, 146]. Phagosomes containing phagocytosed cells mature more rapidly in macrophage than in dendritic cells; in these cells, low levels of lysosomal proteases and a decreased ability to degrade internalized protein favors their ability to present antigen [69, 147].

Removal by scavengers of apoptotic secondary necrotic cells in vivo does not usually occur because those cells typically originate due to lack of functional scavengers or of molecules involved in the removal process. If engulfment does occur, for example because secondary necrosis resulted from delayed instead of absent clearance, or because dendritic cells replace the lacking macrophages as scavengers, the engulfment affects cells with damaged cytoplasmic membranes or even ruptured cells and involves mechanisms that would be similar to those operating with cells under active primary necrosis. It has been suggested that efficient removal of apoptosing cells versus deficient removal of primary or secondary necrosing cells depends on the presence of an intact or a damaged cytoplasmic membrane, respectively [77]. When injected into the peritoneal cavity of mice, cells under apoptotic secondary necrosis were found to be phagocytosed by macrophages [148]. Removal of secondary necrotic cells co-cultured with macrophages in vitro was found to be less efficient and slower than removal of apoptosing cells [77]. It is thus likely that, in the in vivo situations, if engulfment of cells under apoptotic secondary necrosis occurs, it would be a deficient process as in the case of primary necrotic cells. Moreover, as discussed in “Apoptosis as the prelude of secondary necrosis” section, phagocytosis of necrosing cells, in contrast to phagocytosis of apoptosing cells, usually results in pro-inflammatory and pro-immunogenic responses with potential to induce autoimmunity, as will be reviewed later.

Disruption of non-engulfed cells under apoptotic secondary necrosis may therefore ensue in vivo and it may aggravate the consequences of the generalized, irreparable cytoplasmic membrane damage that occurs during the secondary necrotic process previous to cell rupture, because it causes the additional release of larger molecules with higher cytotoxic or immunogenic potential. Release of toxic molecules like elastase, myeloperoxidase and HMGB1 protein from cells under secondary necrosis has been demonstrated [149–154]. Although some reports suggest that phagocytosis by macrophages of secondary necrotic cells, like phagocytosis of early apoptosing cells, is not pro-inflammatory [59, 86, 87, 155], there are several publications showing that engulfment of secondary necrotic cells may be pro-inflammatory and immunogenic [60, 62, 129, 156–160]. The discrepant results may be explained by the use of secondary necrotic cells at early (non-ruptured cytoplasmic membrane) or terminal (ruptured cytoplasmic membrane) phases and/or by the use of different types of engulfing cells (macrophages, dendritic cells or other cell types).

As it will be reviewed in this section, the available data furnishes compelling evidence indicating that extensive or persistent in vivo secondary necrosis may have relevant pathogenic consequences.

Several mechanisms may lead to relevant in vivo secondary necrosis [76]. One regards situations of induction of excessive apoptosis that overwhelms the available scavenging capacity; this may occur in hyper-inflammation associated or not with infection. Other possibility is when the scavenging capacity is directly impaired by intrinsic defects in the phagocytic function of scavengers or by extrinsic defects in signaling molecules involved in the engulfment process; in this case accumulation of apoptotic cells and transition to secondary necrosis may occur even in situations of normal levels of apoptosis. Observation of high numbers of apoptosing cells in tissues implies a deficiency in their removal [7, 161, 162] with the likely occurrence of secondary necrosis. Examples of pathological situations generated by these different ways of induction of secondary necrosis will be now reviewed.

Deficiency in the clearance of apoptosing cells due to extensive apoptosis occurs particularly in solid organs [163]. Secondary necrosis of hepatocytes resulting in severe hepatitis has been described in rodents with extensive hepatocyte apoptosis induced by LPS [164], Fas antibody [138, 165], galactosamine [166] or carbon tetrachloride [137]. Apoptotic secondary necrosis was also reported in brains subjected to focal ischemia [167], in hepatic [112] and renal [168] ischemia-reperfusion, in acute myocardial infarction [169, 170], and in other heart pathologies [171].

Failure of removal of cells that entered an apoptotic process can also occur in vivo because of lack of exposure of engulfment signals when the ongoing apoptotic process is interrupted by lack of activation of effector caspases before the caspase-dependent exposure of engulfment signals on the apoptosing cell [172, 173]. This interruption can be induced by impairment of energy metabolism [131–133], by defects due to genetic alterations or by generation of inhibitors in injured areas [173], and, as already discussed, leads to a switch to necrosis. These non-cleared, necrosing cells undergo lysis that may have pathogenic implications [174] as in the case of apoptotic secondary necrosis. The switch apoptosis–necrosis has been reported in several ischemic pathologies including in the brain [173–175] and heart [170, 176]. ATP dependence of apoptosis and (almost) independence of active necrosis [37, 40, 177] might explain the frequent appearance of necrotic and apoptotic cells in pathological areas in vivo, such as the center of solid tumors and ischemic regions in solid organs; indeed, limitation of blood flow in those areas leads to ATP exhaustion due to insufficient oxygenation and reduced glycolysis by lack of glucose [178] and may result in the switch apoptosis–necrosis.

In neurodegenerative disorders there is an increased rate of neuronal apoptosis [179]. As in other pathologies discussed above, this apoptosis may be blocked and switched to necrosis [173], again with possible pathogenic implications.

Secondary necrosis of monocytes/macrophages, eosinophils and neutrophils in acute and chronic inflammation
Tissue injury due to secondary necrosis of apoptosing cells may be particularly serious when it involves cells rich in cytotoxic molecules like monocytes/macrophages, eosinophils and mainly neutrophils, in situations of intense inflammation.

In the protective inflammatory response there is migration of neutrophils from the reserve pools to infectious and noninfectious inflammatory foci, where they accumulate in large numbers for in situ elimination of invading microorganisms or damaged tissues [180]. For these activities, neutrophils use phagocytosis and are stimulated to release effector molecules upon exposure to various cytokines and chemoattractants [181]. Neutrophils are very rich in inflammatory mediators and in proteases and oxidants which, if released in high amounts, can damage many types of cells, with the potential to produce tissue injury [182–184]. Released neutrophil contents also induce the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines which may amplify leukocyte infiltration and associated tissue injury [185, 186]. Release of noxious neutrophil components may occur during neutrophil degranulation in inflammatory foci and after lysis due to apoptotic secondary necrosis.

Under normal conditions, neutrophil activities at inflammatory foci are tightly controlled. Mobilization of neutrophil cytoplasmic granules and secretory vesicles is regulated, minimizing the risk of externalization of excessive amounts of cytotoxic molecules [187]. Additionally, under physiological conditions, neutrophil cytotoxic proteases, including elastase, one of the most tissue destructive enzymes known [185], have their potentially dangerous activity tightly regulated by endogenous protease inhibitors [188]. Moreover, neutrophils have a short lifespan and are constitutively programmed to undergo apoptosis, which induces the exposure of engulfment signals and leads to their rapid recognition and removal by macrophages; this limits their pro-inflammatory and tissue injury potential and leads to resolution of inflammation with restitution of tissue homeostasis soon after the neutrophils have accomplished their task [76, 189, 190]. Pneumococcal pneumonia is a paradigm for complete resolution of inflammation without relevant subsequent lung injury indicating that, in some situations, extensive neutrophil accumulation can be adequately resolved [76]. Neutrophil apoptosis with timely removal of apoptosing neutrophils by lung macrophages was shown to be a mechanism for that resolution in a murine model of pneumococcal pneumonia [191]. However, this control of neutrophil activity and physiological resolution of inflammation by clearance of apoptotic neutrophils can fail and release of cytotoxic components by neutrophils accumulated at inflammatory foci can occur with the potential to produce collateral tissue damage; for instance, elimination of alveolar macrophages in the above model of pneumococcal pneumonia affected the clearance of accumulated neutrophils and resulted in extensive apoptotic secondary necrosis of neutrophils and in an exaggerated lung inflammation and increased lethality [191].

Several mechanisms can delay neutrophil apoptosis at inflammatory foci as has been observed in acute and chronic inflammatory diseases [192, 193]. This delay extends the time frame of neutrophil intervention but at the same time increases the chances of tissue injury. When accumulation of activated neutrophils at the inflammatory foci is massive, as is the case in several diseases, release of cytotoxic neutrophil molecules due to degranulation or lysis can be extensive [149, 150], overcoming the activity of the endogenous inhibitors [181, 188, 194]. Consequently, tissue injury ensues [195–197]. Removal by scavengers of accumulated apoptosing neutrophils can be deficient leading to neutrophil secondary necrosis. This occurs when neutrophil accumulation is massive and disproportionate compared to the availability of scavengers or when neutrophil apoptosis is accelerated by microbial products [198, 199]. Impairment of scavenger macrophages by bacterial products [31] or by functional defects (see later) also causes excessive neutrophil secondary necrosis.

The bypass of the balanced, physiological control of neutrophil pro-inflammatory activities due to extensive degranulation or secondary necrosis switches to pathogenic a beneficial defense mechanism. Neutrophil-mediated tissue injury can affect several organs like the liver [200, 201], the brain [202, 203], and the lung (see below).

A variety of severe infectious and noninfectious insults can result in the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) [204]. Frequent complications of SIRS are the development of acute lung injury (ALI) and its more severe form acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) [205, 206]. Neutrophil accumulation has been associated with the above serious clinical situations [206], and released phagocyte proteinases have been implicated in the development of MODS [207].

Severe ALI with extensive accumulation of neutrophils can complicate human and experimental infection by the most virulent strains of influenza virus, including H1N1 [208] and H5N1 [209, 210]. However, no studies on the possible occurrence of neutrophil secondary necrosis in these infections have been conducted.

In patients with chronic lung inflammatory disorders like obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) [211, 212], emphysema [213], chronic bronchitis [214], severe asthma [215, 216] or cystic fibrosis [217] there is accumulation of leukocytes including high numbers of neutrophils; there is evidence that these granulocytes release excessive amounts of proteinases including elastase [218, 219], a variety of inflammatory cytokines, and reactive oxygen species [212], which may cause airway tissue injury. Released proteinases overcome the activity of natural anti-proteases [194] and impair the anti-microbial activity of neutrophils [220]. Besides egression to the airway lumen [142, 143], an efficient mechanism for removal of neutrophils accumulated in the inflamed lung is through neutrophil apoptosis and removal by macrophages [76, 191]. Alveolar macrophages from patients with COPD are deficient in the capacity to engulf apoptotic cells [221], deficiency that is aggravated by smoking [222]. This clearance defect contributes to the accumulation of apoptotic cells in the lungs of COPD patients and in animal models of COPD [223], and the occurrence of pathogenic neutrophil apoptotic secondary necrosis associated with lung neutrophil accumulation has been considered in chronic lung inflammatory diseases including COPD and cystic fibrosis [186, 219, 220]. Secondary necrosis of neutrophils was also implicated in human [198, 199] and murine [224] lung infections by gram-negatives and in a mouse model of lung inflammation induced by nasal instillation of LPS [225, 226].

In accordance with a role of released neutrophil cytotoxic molecules in the above reviewed situations, the level of plasma neutrophil elastase or of products of elastase activity were found to be significantly elevated in patients with SIRS and even more when this was complicated with ALI/ARDS [227, 228]. Active neutrophil elastase was also detected in increased levels in the blood of fish with massive neutrophil accumulation and neutrophil apoptotic secondary necrosis in advanced septicemic pasteurellosis [31].

Liu et al. [149] showed that neutrophils undergoing apoptotic secondary necrosis release active elastase with cytotoxic activity, indicating that this potent proteinase is not destroyed by the apoptotic and secondary necrotic proteolysis and directly demonstrating that neutrophil apoptotic secondary necrosis is prone to induce tissue damage. Moreover, topical or systemic administration of neutrophil elastase produced lung injury in rodents [185]. There is evidence in cystic fibrosis that neutrophil elastase, released by accumulated neutrophils possibly through apoptotic secondary necrosis, can impair apoptotic cell clearance [229] thus leading to a vicious circle that promotes further neutrophil secondary necrosis.

The effect of elastase inhibitors has been investigated in several situations with lung hyper inflammation, and some reports described beneficial results in patients with ALI/ARDS or in rodent models of ALI further supporting the pathogenic role of released elastase (see for example [230–232] and references herein).

Accumulation of eosinophils in airways occurs in patients with asthma or COPD (reviewed in Ref. [143]), and secondary necrosis of these leukocytes has been found in airways in patients with asthma [143] and in lung tissue of mouse models of the disease [233]. Eosinophil granules contain cytotoxic molecules [234] and apoptotic secondary necrosis of eosinophils was shown to induce inflammatory responses [156].

Although to a lesser degree as compared with neutrophils and eosinophils, monocytes/macrophages also contain tissue-damaging molecules including several proteases [235], which are released upon cell disruption due to secondary necrosis. Pathogenic macrophage secondary necrosis has been described in several situations including infection [31]. Besides inducing pro-inflammatory responses and tissue injury, macrophage secondary necrosis is a self-amplifying process with accumulation of apoptotic cells and further secondary necrosis because macrophages are the main scavenger cell [31].

Secondary necrosis in bacterial infection
Acute fish pasteurellosis is a lethal septicemic infection due to Photobacterium damselae ssp. piscicida (Phdp) and characterized by massive extracellular multiplication of the pathogen with extensive tissue necrosis [31]. One mechanism of the necrotic alterations typical of the advanced phase of this septicemia is systemic secondary necrosis of accumulated neutrophils and macrophages induced by an apoptogenic exotoxin (AIP56) secreted by virulent Phdp [30, 31]. The AIP56-induced fish phagocyte apoptosis involves activation of caspase 8, 9 and 3, and mitochondrial dysfunction with loss of Δψm and cytochrome c translocation to the cytosol [30, 31, 236] (C. Costa-Ramos et al. unpublished results). That the AIP56-induced phagocyte apoptosis proceeds to secondary necrosis and cytolysis is directly demonstrated by the occurrence of lysing phagocytes with apoptotic nuclear alterations in advanced infection (Fig. 2c; see also Fig. 3b, c in Ref. [32]). The simultaneous apoptotic destruction of macrophages and neutrophils by AIP56 leads to reduction in the number of available phagocytes that accumulated during the initial phase of the infection and efficient evasion of the pathogen from the host phagocytic defense; moreover, that destruction seriously decreases the host capacity to clear apoptosing cells. This phagocyte destruction has additional pathogenic consequences for the host: AIP56 exotoxin secreted by Phdp in infected fish is systemically distributed and induces disseminated phagocyte apoptosis that proceeds to secondary necrosis with extensive lysis of the phagocytes and release of cytotoxic molecules including neutrophil elastase [31]. Two concurrent mechanisms operate in the induction of the secondary necrotic outcome of the apoptotic process induced in phagocytes by AIP56: first, the exotoxin-induced phagocyte apoptosis is extensive leading to the production of great numbers of apoptosing leukocytes and, most importantly, it affects the principal scavenger cell, the macrophage, thus impairing the capacity to clear apoptosing cells by a self-amplifying process. This is an example of cell elimination adding more pathogenic consequences to those associated with the loss of function accompanying cell death. The “clever” nature of this pathogenicity mechanism is that it uses the intrinsic apoptotic machinery of the host cells, which is put at work by the pathogen to its own advantage.

Extensive phagocyte secondary necrosis was also described in the skin of mice with experimental infection by Mycobacterium ulcerans [237]. This pathogen, agent of the human disease Buruli ulcer, secretes an apoptogenic exotoxin, mycolactone, which is a key virulence factor [238]. As in fish pasteurellosis, the secondary necrosis observed in M. ulcerans infection was considered as resulting from the mycolactone-induced apoptotic destruction of both neutrophils and macrophages and to contribute to the tissue necrosis typical of this mycobacteriosis [237].

Other acute and serious infections with necrotic lesions and destruction of host phagocytes have been reported. For example, septicemic plague is a rapidly fatal septicemia, with massive accumulations of extracellular Yersinia pestis and occurrence of apoptotic cell destruction with cell lysis and tissue necrosis [239]. The finding that in septicemic plague, Y. pestis targets macrophages and neutrophils [240] suggests the possibility of occurrence of apoptotic secondary necrosis of phagocytes as in acute fish pasteurellosis, but such a possibility has not been assessed.

In a mouse model of lung infection by pyocyanin-producing Pseudomonas aeruginosa with extensive pulmonary accumulation of neutrophils and occurrence of neutrophil apoptotic secondary necrosis, a defect in the macrophage phagocytosis of apoptosing cells was recently described [224]; this defect was shown to be mediated by a non-apoptogenic effect of pyocyanin on macrophage phagocytic function.

In vivo studies on the role of apoptotic secondary necrosis of macrophages and neutrophils in the pathogenesis of infectious diseases have been neglected. New in vivo studies on bacteria-induced apoptotic phagocyte destruction may well reveal other situations where the pathogens use virulence mechanisms based on the induction of apoptotic secondary necrosis as in acute fish pasteurellosis and Buruli ulcer. In particular, infections caused by bacteria that, like Phdp and M. ulcerans, are known to produce apoptogenic molecules that target host phagocytes [241, 242], should be studied under this perspective.

Secondary necrosis in autoimmune diseases
Another possible consequence of in vivo occurrence of secondary necrosis due to increased rates of apoptosis [243, 244] and, mainly, failure of clearance of apoptotic cells is induction of autoimmune responses associated with disease. Several factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders, including altered apoptosis [245]. Although autoimmunity may not follow impaired clearance of apoptosing cells [70, 246, 247], many studies show that such an impairment may result in immunogenicity and autoimmune disorders. There is a large body of evidence for the existence of a deficiency in clearance of apoptotic cells in autoimmune disorders including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), both in mouse models [61, 248] and in humans [58, 129, 244, 249–253]. Several genetically modified mice with defective apoptotic cell clearance have been developed and most of them show signs of autoimmune disease [52, 159, 254–256]. The defect in clearance of apoptosing cells in SLE and likely in other autoimmune disorders may have several mechanisms, including intrinsic impairment of engulfment capacity of phagocytes combined with extrinsic defects in bridging molecules involved in the recognition and engulfment of apoptosing cells by scavengers, like complement factors [61, 129, 253, 257, 258].

Apoptosis and secondary necrosis of neutrophils from blood of patients with SLE cultivated in vitro were found to be increased as compared to neutrophils from controls; moreover, a poor ability of macrophages from patients with SLE to phagocytose apoptotic neutrophils was observed [251]. Although an alternative has been proposed [87], apoptotic secondary necrosis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders including SLE through the release of autoantigens and cytotoxic molecules which induce pro-inflammatory and autoimmune responses [48, 62, 129, 159, 244, 259].

One important molecule involved in cytolysis-associated pro-inflammatory situations is HMGB1 protein, a prototypical alarmin [260]. This non-histone nuclear protein with a role in transcriptional regulation, functions as a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine when released in the extracellular space [261]. This protein is released during primary necrosis [262] and, contrary to initial reports, was found to be also released during secondary necrosis of several cell types [11, 151–154] and has been considered to participate in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases [151, 152]. HMGB1 is a protein of about 30 kD, and its release during secondary necrosis follows a kinetics similar to that of LDH release [152, 154], suggesting that progress of secondary necrosis until cell lysis is required for its externalization (see in “Apoptotic secondary necrosis” section discussion on membrane damage in secondary necrosis).

Autoantigens cleaved during the execution phase of apoptosis [263] undergo an additional wave of caspase-independent proteolysis during secondary necrosis, with the production of lower molecular weight products [127]. If released during secondary necrosis, these products might induce inflammation and stimulate pathogenic autoimmune responses [127].

Nucleosomes produced during the apoptotic death process by internucleosomal DNA degradation can be released when secondary necrosis occurs [244]. Nucleosomes are present in increased amounts in the circulation of patients with SLE and are targets of anti-DNA and anti-histone autoantibodies (reviewed in Ref. [257]). Serum levels of nucleosomes were found to be increased in various autoimmune diseases besides SLE [139]; the fact that blood caspase levels were increased together with nucleosomes in those diseases, favors the interpretation that apoptotic secondary necrosis is involved in the release of nucleosomes. Autoantigens in SLE patients are composed of or are intimately associated with RNA and DNA sequences that are endogenous ligands, respectively, for toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 and/or TLR9 present in plasmacytoid dendritic cells and B lymphocytes, contributing to autoimmune disease [159, 264, 265]. TLR9 activation by DNA-containing immune complexes was found to require an interaction of the complexes with HMGB1 [265].

Conclusions
Active suicidal death programs are intrinsic to cells in unicellular and multicellular organisms. Activation of these programs not only kills cells but additionally promotes mechanisms for elimination of the dying/dead cells. In multicellular animals, cells under apoptotic death can be eliminated by two processes with contrasting physiopathological consequences. One is the safe, physiological clearance by phagocytosis of the dying/dead cell or of apoptotic bodies through the timely assistance of a partner cell (the scavenger); this intervention of the scavenger removes the apoptosing cells or the apoptotic bodies while they still have a near-to-intact cytoplasmic membrane thus preventing leakage of dangerous molecules. However, this physiologically convenient mechanism is not self-sufficient because it depends on the participation of other cell and can be overridden in vivo when the scavenging mechanism fails. In this situation cell elimination is by transition of full-blown apoptosis to secondary necrosis that leads to cytoplasmic membrane damage and cell disintegration. This has potential pathogenic consequences and available data provides evidence suggesting that secondary necrosis is implicated in the pathogenesis of several diseases including autoimmune and neurodegenerative disorders, ischemia, and infection. The pathogenic consequences of extensive or persistent apoptotic secondary necrosis result from (i) the leakage of cytotoxic molecules (mainly when involving neutrophils) that induce tissue injury and pro-inflammatory responses; (ii) the uptake by macrophages and dendritic cells of secondary necrotic cell debris and released autoantigens, which may be pro-inflammatory and immunogenic. Apoptotic secondary necrosis may therefore produce acute and chronic pathology, thus being a mechanism for apoptosis turning pathogenic. It is important to recognize that cell disruption due to a necrotic process can be an outcome of apoptosis in vivo so that pathological consequences of this outcome may be inhibitable by anti-apoptotic interventions, prompting the use of (and research on) therapeutic interventions based on anti-apoptotic drugs. Contrasting with the available extensive studies on apoptosis and on the clearance of apoptosing cells by scavengers, the study of apoptotic secondary necrosis has been largely neglected and is much needed to better understand the full potential of this outcome of apoptosis in promotion of pathology.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Drs. Andrew H. Wyllie, Richard A. Lockshin, Luisa Minghetti, Ágnes Enyedi, David S. Pisetsky, Yasunobu Okada and in particular L. Felipe Barros for helpful discussions, to Drs. Frank Madeo, Paula Ludovico and Manuela Côrte-Real for helpful discussions and for reviewing the text and to Anabela Costa for editorial assistance. This work was supported by FCT project POCI/MAR/56111/2004 funded by POCI 2010 and co-funded by FEDER, and grant SFRH/BPD/26816/2006.
==== Refs
References
1. Lockshin RA  Williams CM   Programmed cell death. I. Cytology of degeneration in the intersegmental muscles of the Pernyi Silkmoth J Insect Physiol 1965 11 123 133 10.1016/0022-1910(65)90099-5 14287218 
2. Kerr JF  Wyllie AH  Currie AR   Apoptosis: a basic biological phenomenon with wide-ranging implications in tissue kinetics Br J Cancer 1972 26 239 257 4561027 
3. Kerr JF  Searle J   Deletion of cells by apoptosis during castration-induced involution of the rat prostate Virchows Arch 1973 13 87 102 
4. Searle J  Lawson TA  Abbott PJ  Harmon B  Kerr JFR   An electron-microscopic study of the mode of cell death induced by cancer-chemotherapeutic agents in populations of proliferating and neoplastic cells J Pathol 1975 116 129 138 10.1002/path.1711160302 1195050 
5. Don MM  Ablett G  Bishop CJ    Death of cells by apoptosis following attachment of specifically allergized lymphocytes in vitro Aust J Exp Biol Med Sci 1977 55 407 417 10.1038/icb.1977.38 414708 
6. Robertson AM  Bird CC  Waddell AW  Currie AR   Morphological aspects of glucocorticoid-induced cell death in human lymphoblastoid cells J Pathol 1978 126 181 187 10.1002/path.1711260307 745025 
7. Wyllie AH  Kerr JF  Currie AR   Cell death: the significance of apoptosis Int Rev Cytol 1980 68 251 306 7014501 
8. Silva RD  Sotoca R  Johansson B    Hyperosmotic stress induces metacaspase- and mitochondria-dependent apoptosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  Mol Microbiol 2005 58 824 834 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04868.x 16238630 
9. Ludovico P  Madeo F  Silva M   Yeast programmed cell death: an intricate puzzle IUBMB Life 2005 57 129 135 16036575 
10. Bursch W   The autophagosomal-lysosomal compartment in programmed cell death Cell Death Differ 2001 8 569 581 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400852 11536007 
11. Festjens N  Vanden Berghe T  Vandenabeele P   Necrosis, a well-orchestrated form of cell demise: signalling cascades, important mediators and concomitant immune response Biochim Biophys Acta 2006 1757 1371 1387 10.1016/j.bbabio.2006.06.014 16950166 
12. Leist M  Jaattela M   Four deaths and a funeral: from caspases to alternative mechanisms Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 2 589 598 10.1038/35085008 11483992 
13. Kroemer G  El-Deiry WS  Golstein P    Classification of cell death: recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death Cell Death Differ 2005 12 Suppl 1463 1467 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401724 16247491 
14. Galluzzi L  Maiuri MC  Vitale I    Cell death modalities: classification and pathophysiological implications Cell Death Differ 2007 14 1237 1243 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402148 17431418 
15. Gozuacik D  Kimchi A   Autophagy and cell death Curr Top Dev Biol 2007 78 217 245 17338918 
16. Proskuryakov SY  Konoplyannikov AG  Gabai VL   Necrosis: a specific form of programmed cell death? Exp Cell Res 2003 283 1 16 10.1016/S0014-4827(02)00027-7 12565815 
17. Zong WX  Thompson CB   Necrotic death as a cell fate Genes Dev 2006 20 1 15 10.1101/gad.1376506 16391229 
18. Golstein P  Kroemer G   Cell death by necrosis: towards a molecular definition Trends Biochem Sci 2007 32 37 43 10.1016/j.tibs.2006.11.001 17141506 
19. Castedo M  Perfettini JL  Roumier T  Andreau K  Medema R  Kroemer G   Cell death by mitotic catastrophe: a molecular definition Oncogene 2004 23 2825 2837 10.1038/sj.onc.1207528 15077146 
20. Fink SL  Cookson BT   Pyroptosis and host cell death responses during Salmonella infection Cell Microbiol 2007 9 2562 2570 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.01036.x 17714514 
21. Lemasters JJV   Necrapoptosis and the mitochondrial permeability transition: shared pathways to necrosis and apoptosis Am J Physiol 1999 276 G1 G6 9886971 
22. Degterev A  Huang Z  Boyce M    Chemical inhibitor of nonapoptotic cell death with therapeutic potential for ischemic brain injury Nat Chem Biol 2005 1 112 119 10.1038/nchembio711 16408008 
23. Henson PM  Hume DA   Apoptotic cell removal in development and tissue homeostasis Trends Immunol 2006 27 244 250 10.1016/j.it.2006.03.005 16584921 
24. Domingos PM  Steller H   Pathways regulating apoptosis during patterning and development Curr Opin Genet Devel 2007 17 294 299 10.1016/j.gde.2007.05.009 17629474 
25. Kroemer G  Petit P  Zamzami N  Vayssiere JL  Mignotte B   The biochemistry of programmed cell death FASEB J 1995 9 1277 1287 7557017 
26. Payne CM  Glasser L  Tischler ME    Programmed cell death of the normal human neutrophil: an in vitro model of senescence Microsc Res Tech 1994 28 327 344 10.1002/jemt.1070280408 7919520 
27. Hebert MJ  Takano T  Holthofer H  Brady HR   Sequential morphologic events during apoptosis of human neutrophils. Modulation by lipoxygenase-derived eicosanoids J Immunol 1996 157 3105 3115 8816421 
28. Hacker G   The morphology of apoptosis Cell Tissue Res 2000 301 5 17 10.1007/s004410000193 10928277 
29. Skulachev VP  Bakeeva LE  Chernyak BV    Thread-grain transition of mitochondrial reticulum as a step of mitoptosis and apoptosis Mol Cell Biochem 2004 256–257 341 358 10.1023/B:MCBI.0000009880.94044.49 14977193 
30. do Vale A  Silva MT  dos Santos NM    AIP56, a novel plasmid-encoded virulence factor of Photobacterium damselae  subsp. piscicida  with apoptogenic activity against sea bass macrophages and neutrophils Mol Microbiol 2005 58 1025 1038 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04893.x 16262788 
31. do Vale A  Costa-Ramos C  Silva A    Systemic macrophage and neutrophil destruction by secondary necrosis induced by a bacterial exotoxin in a Gram-negative septicaemia Cell Microbiol 2007 9 988 1003 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00846.x 17381431 
32. do Vale A  Marques F  Silva MT   Apoptosis of sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax  L.) neutrophils and macrophages induced by experimental infection with Photobacterium damselae  subsp. piscicida  Fish Shellfish Immunol 2003 15 129 144 10.1016/S1050-4648(02)00144-4 12834617 
33. Darzynkiewicz Z  Bruno S  Del Bino G    Features of apoptotic cells measured by flow cytometry Cytometry 1992 13 795 808 10.1002/cyto.990130802 1333943 
34. Zamai L  Canonico B  Luchetti F    Supravital exposure to propidium iodide identifies apoptosis on adherent cells Cytometry 2001 44 57 64 10.1002/1097-0320(20010501)44:1<57::AID-CYTO1082>3.0.CO;2-O 11309809 
35. Raff MC   Social controls on cell survival and cell death Nature 1992 356 397 400 10.1038/356397a0 1557121 
36. Hengartner MO   The biochemistry of apoptosis Nature 2000 407 770 776 10.1038/35037710 11048727 
37. Skulachev VP   Bioenergetic aspects of apoptosis, necrosis, mitoptosis Apoptosis 2006 11 473 485 10.1007/s10495-006-5881-9 16532373 
38. Hail N Jr  Carter BZ  Konopleva M  Andreeff M   Apoptosis effector mechanisms: a requiem performed in different keys Apoptosis 2006 11 889 904 10.1007/s10495-006-6712-8 16547589 
39. Maiuri MC  Zalckvar E  Kimchi A  Kroemer G   Self-eating and self-killing: crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 8 741 752 10.1038/nrm2239 17717517 
40. Atlante A  Giannattasio S  Bobba A    An increase in the ATP levels occurs in cerebellar granule cells en route to apoptosis in which ATP derives from both oxidative phosphorylation and anaerobic glycolysis Biochim Biophys Acta 2005 1708 50 62 10.1016/j.bbabio.2005.01.009 15949983 
41. Zamaraeva MV  Sabirov RZ  Manabe K  Okada Y   Ca(2+)-dependent glycolysis activation mediates apoptotic ATP elevation in HeLa cells Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007 363 687 693 10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.09.019 17897621 
42. Nicotera P  Melino G   Regulation of the apoptosis–necrosis switch Oncogene 2004 23 2757 2765 10.1038/sj.onc.1207559 15077139 
43. Majno G  Joris I   Apoptosis, oncosis, and necrosis. An overview of cell death Am J Pathol 1995 146 3 15 7856735 
44. Sladek Z  Rysanek D   Tissue pool neutrophils of the bovine mammary gland: ultrastructural features during in vitro senescence Anat Histol Embryol 2005 34 159 166 10.1111/j.1439-0264.2005.00586.x 15929730 
45. Orlando KA  Stone NL  Pittman RN   Rho kinase regulates fragmentation and phagocytosis of apoptotic cells Exp Cell Res 2006 312 5 15 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.09.012 16259978 
46. Sheehan JM  Young AR   The sunburn cell revisited: an update on mechanistic aspects Photochem Photobiol Sci 2002 1 365 377 10.1039/b108291d 12856704 
47. Sheridan JW  Bishop CJ  Simmons RJ   Biophysical and morphological correlates of kinetic change and death in a starved human melanoma cell line J Cell Sci 1981 49 119 137 7309802 
48. Savill J  Fadok V   Corpse clearance defines the meaning of cell death Nature 2000 407 784 788 10.1038/35037722 11048729 
49. Fadok VA   Clearance: the last and often forgotten stage of apoptosis J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 1999 4 203 211 10.1023/A:1011384009787 10426399 
50. Rabinovitch M   Professional and non-professional phagocytes: an introduction Trends Cell Biol 1995 5 85 87 10.1016/S0962-8924(00)88955-2 14732160 
51. Parnaik R  Raff MC  Scholes J   Differences between the clearance of apoptotic cells by professional and non-professional phagocytes Curr Biol 2000 10 857 860 10.1016/S0960-9822(00)00598-4 10899007 
52. Gregory CD  Devitt A   The macrophage and the apoptotic cell: an innate immune interaction viewed simplistically? Immunology 2004 113 1 14 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2004.01959.x 15312130 
53. van Furth R   Current view of the mononuclear phagocyte system Haematol Blood Transfus 1981 27 3 10 7327435 
54. Rydell-Tormanen K  Uller L  Erjefalt JS   Neutrophil cannibalism–a back up when the macrophage clearance system is insufficient Respir Res 2006 7 143 10.1186/1465-9921-7-143 17166290 
55. Wiegand UK  Corbach S  Prescott AR  Savill J  Spruce BA   The trigger to cell death determines the efficiency with which dying cells are cleared by neighbours Cell Death Differ 2001 8 734 746 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400867 11464218 
56. Mangahas PM  Zhou Z   Clearance of apoptotic cells in Caenorhabditis elegans  Semin Cell Dev Biol 2005 16 295 306 10.1016/j.semcdb.2004.12.005 15797839 
57. Albert ML  Sauter B  Bhardwaj N   Dendritic cells acquire antigen from apoptotic cells and induce class I-restricted CTLs Nature 1998 392 86 89 10.1038/32183 9510252 
58. Rovere P  Sabbadini MG  Fazzini F    Remnants of suicidal cells fostering systemic autoaggression. Apoptosis in the origin and maintenance of autoimmunity Arthritis Rheum 2000 43 1663 1672 10.1002/1529-0131(200008)43:8<1663::AID-ANR1>3.0.CO;2-1 10943854 
59. Sauter B  Albert ML  Francisco L  Larsson M  Somersan S  Bhardwaj N   Consequences of cell death: exposure to necrotic tumor cells, but not primary tissue cells or apoptotic cells, induces the maturation of immunostimulatory dendritic cells J Exp Med 2000 191 423 434 10.1084/jem.191.3.423 10662788 
60. Rovere P  Vallinoto C  Bondanza A    Bystander apoptosis triggers dendritic cell maturation and antigen-presenting function J Immunol 1998 161 4467 4471 9794367 
61. Taylor PR  Carugati A  Fadok VA    A hierarchical role for classical pathway complement proteins in the clearance of apoptotic cells in vivo J Exp Med 2000 192 359 366 10.1084/jem.192.3.359 10934224 
62. Ip WK  Lau YL   Distinct maturation of, but not migration between, human monocyte-derived dendritic cells upon ingestion of apoptotic cells of early or late phases J Immunol 2004 173 189 196 15210774 
63. Albert ML   Death-defying immunity: do apoptotic cells influence antigen processing and presentation? Nat Rev 2004 4 223 231 10.1038/nri11308 
64. Franc NC   Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells in mammals, Caenorhabditis elegans  and Drosophila melanogaster : molecular mechanisms and physiological consequences Front Biosci 2002 7 d1298 d1313 10.2741/franc 11991836 
65. Lauber K  Bohn E  Krober SM    Apoptotic cells induce migration of phagocytes via caspase-3-mediated release of a lipid attraction signal Cell 2003 113 717 730 10.1016/S0092-8674(03)00422-7 12809603 
66. Mueller RB  Sheriff A  Gaipl US  Wesselborg S  Lauber K   Attraction of phagocytes by apoptotic cells is mediated by lysophosphatidylcholine Autoimmunity 2007 40 342 344 10.1080/08916930701356911 17516225 
67. Lauber K  Blumenthal SG  Waibel M  Wesselborg S   Clearance of apoptotic cells: getting rid of the corpses Mol Cell 2004 14 277 287 10.1016/S1097-2765(04)00237-0 15125832 
68. Krysko DV  D’Herde K  Vandenabeele P   Clearance of apoptotic and necrotic cells and its immunological consequences Apoptosis 2006 11 1709 1726 10.1007/s10495-006-9527-8 16951923 
69. Erwig LP  Henson PM   Clearance of apoptotic cells by phagocytes Cell Death Differ 2008 15 243 250 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402184 17571081 
70. Ravichandran KS  Lorenz U   Engulfment of apoptotic cells: signals for a good meal Nat Rev 2007 7 964 974 
71. Aliprantis AO  Diez-Roux G  Mulder LC  Zychlinsky A  Lang RA   Do macrophages kill through apoptosis? Immunol Today 1996 17 573 576 10.1016/S0167-5699(96)10071-2 8991289 
72. Diez-Roux G  Lang RA   Macrophages induce apoptosis in normal cells in vivo Development (Cambridge, England) 1997 124 3633 3638 
73. Durrieu F  Belloc F  Lacoste L    Caspase activation is an early event in anthracycline-induced apoptosis and allows detection of apoptotic cells before they are ingested by phagocytes Exp Cell Res 1998 240 165 175 10.1006/excr.1997.3918 9596989 
74. McIlroy D  Tanaka M  Sakahira H    An auxiliary mode of apoptotic DNA fragmentation provided by phagocytes Genes Dev 2000 14 549 558 10716943 
75. Kurosaka K  Takahashi M  Watanabe N  Kobayashi Y   Silent cleanup of very early apoptotic cells by macrophages J Immunol 2003 171 4672 4679 14568942 
76. Haslett C   Granulocyte apoptosis and its role in the resolution and control of lung inflammation Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999 160 S5 S11 10556161 
77. Brouckaert G  Kalai M  Krysko DV    Phagocytosis of necrotic cells by macrophages is phosphatidylserine dependent and does not induce inflammatory cytokine production Mol Biol Cell 2004 15 1089 1100 10.1091/mbc.E03-09-0668 14668480 
78. Krysko DV  Denecker G  Festjens N    Macrophages use different internalization mechanisms to clear apoptotic and necrotic cells Cell Death Differ 2006 13 2011 2022 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401900 16628234 
79. Chung S  Gumienny TL  Hengartner MO  Driscoll M   A common set of engulfment genes mediates removal of both apoptotic and necrotic cell corpses in C. elegans  Nat Cell Biol 2000 2 931 937 10.1038/35046585 11146658 
80. Hirt UA  Gantner F  Leist M   Phagocytosis of nonapoptotic cells dying by caspase-independent mechanisms J Immunol 2000 164 6520 6529 10843710 
81. Meagher LC  Savill JS  Baker A  Fuller RW  Haslett C   Phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils does not induce macrophage release of thromboxane B2 J Leukoc Biol 1992 52 269 273 1522386 
82. Voll RE  Herrmann M  Roth EA  Stach C  Kalden JR  Girkontaite I   Immunosuppressive effects of apoptotic cells Nature 1997 390 350 351 10.1038/37022 9389474 
83. Fadok VA  Bratton DL  Konowal A  Freed PW  Westcott JY  Henson PM   Macrophages that have ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit proinflammatory cytokine production through autocrine/paracrine mechanisms involving TGF-beta, PGE2, and PAF J Clin Invest 1998 101 890 898 10.1172/JCI1112 9466984 
84. Freire-de-Lima CG  Xiao YQ  Gardai SJ  Bratton DL  Schiemann WP  Henson PM   Apoptotic cells, through transforming growth factor-beta, coordinately induce anti-inflammatory and suppress pro-inflammatory eicosanoid and NO synthesis in murine macrophages J Biol Chem 2006 281 38376 38384 10.1074/jbc.M605146200 17056601 
85. Hirt UA  Leist M   Rapid, noninflammatory and PS-dependent phagocytic clearance of necrotic cells Cell Death Differ 2003 10 1156 1164 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401286 14502239 
86. Fadok VA  Bratton DL  Guthrie L  Henson PM   Differential effects of apoptotic versus lysed cells on macrophage production of cytokines: role of proteases J Immunol 2001 166 6847 6854 11359844 
87. Patel VA  Longacre A  Hsiao K    Apoptotic cells, at all stages of the death process, trigger characteristic signaling events that are divergent from and dominant over those triggered by necrotic cells: Implications for the delayed clearance model of autoimmunity J Biol Chem 2006 281 4663 4670 10.1074/jbc.M508342200 16377620 
88. Chautan M  Chazal G  Cecconi F  Gruss P  Golstein P   Interdigital cell death can occur through a necrotic and caspase-independent pathway Curr Biol 1999 9 967 970 10.1016/S0960-9822(99)80425-4 10508592 
89. Polzer K  Schett G  Zwerina J   The lonely death: chondrocyte apoptosis in TNF-induced arthritis Autoimmunity 2007 40 333 336 10.1080/08916930701356721 17516222 
90. Redman SN  Khan IM  Tew SR  Archer CW   In situ detection of cell death in articular cartilage Methods Mol Med 2007 135 183 200 17951659 
91. Xu Y  Huang S  Liu ZG  Han J   Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 signaling to mitochondria in necrotic cell death requires RIP1/TRAF2-mediated JNK1 activation J Biol Chem 2006 281 8788 8795 10.1074/jbc.M508135200 16446354 
92. Festjens N  Vanden Berghe T  Cornelis S  Vandenabeele P   RIP1, a kinase on the crossroads of a cell’s decision to live or die Cell Death Differ 2007 14 400 410 10.1038/sj.cdd.4402085 17301840 
93. Artal-Sanz M  Samara C  Syntichaki P  Tavernarakis N   Lysosomal biogenesis and function is critical for necrotic cell death in Caenorhabditis elegans  J Cell Biol 2006 173 231 239 10.1083/jcb.200511103 16636145 
94. Brookes PS  Yoon Y  Robotham JL  Anders MW  Sheu SS   Calcium, ATP, and ROS: a mitochondrial love-hate triangle Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2004 287 C817 C833 10.1152/ajpcell.00139.2004 15355853 
95. Orrenius S  Zhivotovsky B  Nicotera P   Regulation of cell death: the calcium-apoptosis link Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003 4 552 565 10.1038/nrm1150 12838338 
96. Castro J  Bittner CX  Humeres A  Montecinos VP  Vera JC  Barros LF   A cytosolic source of calcium unveiled by hydrogen peroxide with relevance for epithelial cell death Cell Death Differ 2004 11 468 478 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401372 14726961 
97. Castro J  Ruminot I  Porras OH    ATP steal between cation pumps: a mechanism linking Na+ influx to the onset of necrotic Ca2+ overload. Cell Death Differ 2006 13 1675 1685 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401852 16410794 
98. Syntichaki P  Tavernarakis N   Death by necrosis. Uncontrollable catastrophe, or is there order behind the chaos? EMBO Rep 2002 3 604 609 10.1093/embo-reports/kvf138 12101090 
99. Nicotera P  Orrenius S   The role of calcium in apoptosis Cell Calcium 1998 23 173 180 10.1016/S0143-4160(98)90116-6 9601613 
100. Yamashima T  Kohda Y  Tsuchiya K    Inhibition of ischaemic hippocampal neuronal death in primates with cathepsin B inhibitor CA-074: a novel strategy for neuroprotection based on ‘calpain-cathepsin hypothesis’ Eur J Neurosci 1998 10 1723 1733 10.1046/j.1460-9568.1998.00184.x 9751144 
101. Ono K  Kim SO  Han J   Susceptibility of lysosomes to rupture is a determinant for plasma membrane disruption in tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced cell death Mol Cell Biol 2003 23 665 676 10.1128/MCB.23.2.665-676.2003 12509464 
102. Zahrebelski G  Nieminen AL  al-Ghoul K  Qian T  Herman B  Lemasters JJ   Progression of subcellular changes during chemical hypoxia to cultured rat hepatocytes: a laser scanning confocal microscopic study Hepatology (Baltimore, MD) 1995 21 1361 1372 
103. Brunk UT  Dalen H  Roberg K  Hellquist HB   Photo-oxidative disruption of lysosomal membranes causes apoptosis of cultured human fibroblasts Free Radic Biol Med 1997 23 616 626 10.1016/S0891-5849(97)00007-5 9215807 
104. Barros LF  Hermosilla T  Castro J   Necrotic volume increase and the early physiology of necrosis Comp Biochem Physiol 2001 130 401 409 
105. Buja LM  Eigenbrodt ML  Eigenbrodt EH   Apoptosis and necrosis. Basic types and mechanisms of cell death Arch Pathol Lab Med 1993 117 1208 1214 8250690 
106. Chen J  Liu X  Mandel LJ  Schnellmann RG   Progressive disruption of the plasma membrane during renal proximal tubule cellular injury Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2001 171 1 11 10.1006/taap.2000.9105 11181106 
107. Nishimura Y  Lemasters JJ   Glycine blocks opening of a death channel in cultured hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells during chemical hypoxia Cell Death Differ 2001 8 850 858 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400877 11526438 
108. Liu X  Schnellmann RG   Calpain mediates progressive plasma membrane permeability and proteolysis of cytoskeleton-associated paxillin, talin, and vinculin during renal cell death J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003 304 63 70 10.1124/jpet.102.043406 12490576 
109. Bossy-Wetzel E  Newmeyer DD  Green DR   Mitochondrial cytochrome c  release in apoptosis occurs upstream of DEVD-specific caspase activation and independently of mitochondrial transmembrane depolarization EMBO J 1998 17 37 49 10.1093/emboj/17.1.37 9427739 
110. Gleiss B  Gogvadze V  Orrenius S  Fadeel B   Fas-triggered phosphatidylserine exposure is modulated by intracellular ATP FEBS Lett 2002 519 153 158 10.1016/S0014-5793(02)02743-6 12023035 
111. Zamaraeva MV  Sabirov RZ  Maeno E  Ando-Akatsuka Y  Bessonova SV  Okada Y   Cells die with increased cytosolic ATP during apoptosis: a bioluminescence study with intracellular luciferase Cell Death Differ 2005 12 1390 1397 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401661 15905877 
112. Jaeschke H  Lemasters JJ   Apoptosis versus oncotic necrosis in hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury. Gastroenterology 2003 125 1246 1257 10.1016/S0016-5085(03)01209-5 14517806 
113. Kim JS  He L  Lemasters JJ   Mitochondrial permeability transition: a common pathway to necrosis and apoptosis Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003 304 463 470 10.1016/S0006-291X(03)00618-1 12729580 
114. Honda H  Kondo T  Zhao QL  Feril LB Jr  Kitagawa H   Role of intracellular calcium ions and reactive oxygen species in apoptosis induced by ultrasound Ultrasound Med Biol 2004 30 683 692 10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2004.02.008 15183235 
115. Assefa Z  Bultynck G  Szlufcik K    Caspase-3-induced truncation of type 1 inositol trisphosphate receptor accelerates apoptotic cell death and induces inositol trisphosphate-independent calcium release during apoptosis J Biol Chem 2004 279 43227 43236 10.1074/jbc.M403872200 15284241 
116. Schwab BL  Guerini D  Didszun C    Cleavage of plasma membrane calcium pumps by caspases: a link between apoptosis and necrosis Cell Death Differ 2002 9 818 831 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401042 12107825 
117. Paszty K  Verma AK  Padanyi R  Filoteo AG  Penniston JT  Enyedi A   Plasma membrane Ca2+ATPase isoform 4b is cleaved and activated by caspase-3 during the early phase of apoptosis J Biol Chem 2002 277 6822 6829 10.1074/jbc.M109548200 11751908 
118. Paszty K  Antalffy G  Penheiter AR    The caspase-3 cleavage product of the plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase 4b is activated and appropriately targeted Biochem J 2005 391 687 692 10.1042/BJ20051012 16080782 
119. Paszty K  Antalffy G  Hegedus L    Cleavage of the plasma membrane Ca+ATPase during apoptosis. Ann NY Acad Sci 2007 1099 440 450 10.1196/annals.1387.003 17446484 
120. Tombal B  Denmeade SR  Gillis JM  Isaacs JT   A supramicromolar elevation of intracellular free calcium ([Ca(2+)](i)) is consistently required to induce the execution phase of apoptosis Cell Death Differ 2002 9 561 573 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400999 11973614 
121. Oshimi Y  Miyazaki S   Fas antigen-mediated DNA fragmentation and apoptotic morphologic changes are regulated by elevated cytosolic Ca2+ level J Immunol 1995 154 599 609 7529280 
122. Neumar RW  Xu YA  Gada H  Guttmann RP  Siman R   Cross-talk between calpain and caspase proteolytic systems during neuronal apoptosis J Biol Chem 2003 278 14162 14167 10.1074/jbc.M212255200 12576481 
123. Zhan Y  van de Water B  Wang Y  Stevens JL   The roles of caspase-3 and bcl-2 in chemically-induced apoptosis but not necrosis of renal epithelial cells Oncogene 1999 18 6505 6512 10.1038/sj.onc.1203060 10597253 
124. Wattiaux R  Wattiaux-de Coninck S  Thirion J  Gasingirwa MC  Jadot M   Lysosomes and Fas-mediated liver cell death Biochem J 2007 403 89 95 10.1042/BJ20061738 17129211 
125. Vermes I  Haanen C  Reutelingsperger C   Flow cytometry of apoptotic cell death J Immunol Methods 2000 243 167 190 10.1016/S0022-1759(00)00233-7 10986414 
126. Denecker G  Vercammen D  Steemans M    Death receptor-induced apoptotic and necrotic cell death: differential role of caspases and mitochondria Cell Death Differ 2001 8 829 840 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400883 11526436 
127. Wu X  Molinaro C  Johnson N  Casiano CA   Secondary necrosis is a source of proteolytically modified forms of specific intracellular autoantigens: implications for systemic autoimmunity Arthritis Rheum 2001 44 2642 2652 10.1002/1529-0131(200111)44:11<2642::AID-ART444>3.0.CO;2-8 11710720 
128. Mahoney JA  Rosen A   Apoptosis and autoimmunity Curr Opin Immunol 2005 17 583 588 10.1016/j.coi.2005.09.018 16214321 
129. Gaipl US  Munoz LE  Grossmayer G    Clearance deficiency and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) J Autoimmun 2007 28 114 121 10.1016/j.jaut.2007.02.005 17368845 
130. Berg CP  Stein GM  Keppeler H    Apoptosis-associated antigens recognized by autoantibodies in patients with the autoimmune liver disease primary biliary cirrhosis Apoptosis 2008 13 63 75 10.1007/s10495-007-0157-6 18060504 
131. Eguchi Y  Shimizu S  Tsujimoto Y   Intracellular ATP levels determine cell death fate by apoptosis or necrosis Cancer Res 1997 57 1835 1840 9157970 
132. Leist M  Single B  Castoldi AF  Kuhnle S  Nicotera P   Intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentration: a switch in the decision between apoptosis and necrosis J Exp Med 1997 185 1481 1486 10.1084/jem.185.8.1481 9126928 
133. van der Toorn M  Slebos DJ  de Bruin HG    Cigarette smoke-induced blockade of the mitochondrial respiratory chain switches lung epithelial cell apoptosis into necrosis Am J Physiol 2007 292 L1211 L1218 
134. do Vale A  Costa-Ramos C  Silva DS    Cytochemical and ultrastructural study of anoikis and secondary necrosis in enterocytes detached in vivo Apoptosis 2007 12 1069 1083 10.1007/s10495-006-0040-x 17245641 
135. Vitale M  Zamai L  Mazzotti G  Cataldi A  Falcieri E   Differential kinetics of propidium iodide uptake in apoptotic and necrotic thymocytes Histochemistry 1993 100 223 229 10.1007/BF00269095 8244773 
136. Belloc F  Dumain P  Boisseau MR    A flow cytometric method using Hoechst 33342 and propidium iodide for simultaneous cell cycle analysis and apoptosis determination in unfixed cells Cytometry 1994 17 59 65 10.1002/cyto.990170108 7528124 
137. Sun F  Hamagawa E  Tsutsui C  Ono Y  Ogiri Y  Kojo S   Evaluation of oxidative stress during apoptosis and necrosis caused by carbon tetrachloride in rat liver Biochim Biophys Acta 2001 1535 186 191 11342007 
138. Hentze H  Schwoebel F  Lund S    In vivo and in vitro evidence for extracellular caspase activity released from apoptotic cells Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001 283 1111 1117 10.1006/bbrc.2001.4918 11355887 
139. Holdenrieder S  Eichhorn P  Beuers U    Nucleosomal DNA fragments in autoimmune diseases Ann NY Acad Sci 2006 1075 318 327 10.1196/annals.1368.043 17108227 
140. Walker NI  Bennett RE  Kerr JF   Cell death by apoptosis during involution of the lactating breast in mice and rats Am J Anat 1989 185 19 32 10.1002/aja.1001850104 2782275 
141. Baxter FO  Neoh K  Tevendale MC   The beginning of the end: death signaling in early involution J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2007 12 3 13 10.1007/s10911-007-9033-9 17340185 
142. Erjefalt J   Transepithelial migration, necrosis and apoptosis as silent and pro-inflammatory fates of airway granulocytes Curr Drug Targets 2005 4 425 431 10.2174/1568010054526241 
143. Uller L  Persson CG  Erjefalt JS   Resolution of airway disease: removal of inflammatory cells through apoptosis, egression or both? Trends Pharmacol Sci 2006 27 461 466 10.1016/j.tips.2006.07.006 16876880 
144. Huettenbrenner S  Maier S  Leisser C    The evolution of cell death programs as prerequisites of multicellularity Mut Res 2003 543 235 249 12787815 
145. Golstein P  Kroemer G   Redundant cell death mechanisms as relics and backups Cell Death Differ 2005 12 Suppl 2 1490 1496 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401607 15818403 
146. Albert ML  Pearce SF  Francisco LM    Immature dendritic cells phagocytose apoptotic cells via alphavbeta5 and CD36, and cross-present antigens to cytotoxic T lymphocytes J Exp Med 1998 188 1359 1368 10.1084/jem.188.7.1359 9763615 
147. Erwig LP  McPhilips KA  Wynes MW  Ivetic A  Ridley AJ  Henson PM   Differential regulation of phagosome maturation in macrophages and dendritic cells mediated by Rho GTPases and ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 103 12825 12830 10.1073/pnas.0605331103 16908865 
148. Misawa R  Kawagishi C  Watanabe N  Kobayashi Y   Infiltration of neutrophils following injection of apoptotic cells into the peritoneal cavity Apoptosis 2001 6 411 417 10.1023/A:1012406121993 11595830 
149. Liu CY  Liu YH  Lin SM    Apoptotic neutrophils undergoing secondary necrosis induce human lung epithelial cell detachment J Biomed Sci 2003 10 746 756 10.1007/BF02256327 14631114 
150. Naylor EJ  Bakstad D  Biffen M    Haemophilus influenzae induces neutrophil necrosis: a role in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2007 37 135 143 10.1165/rcmb.2006-0375OC 17363778 
151. Bell CW  Jiang W  Reich CF III  Pisetsky DS   The extracellular release of HMGB1 during apoptotic cell death Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2006 291 C1318 C1325 10.1152/ajpcell.00616.2005 16855214 
152. Jiang W  Bell CW  Pisetsky DS   The relationship between apoptosis and high-mobility group protein 1 release from murine macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide or polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid J Immunol 2007 178 6495 6503 17475879 
153. Apetoh L  Ghiringhelli F  Tesniere A    The interaction between HMGB1 and TLR4 dictates the outcome of anticancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy Immunol Rev 2007 220 47 59 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2007.00573.x 17979839 
154. Ito N  DeMarco RA  Mailliard RB    Cytolytic cells induce HMGB1 release from melanoma cell lines J Leukoc Biol 2007 81 75 83 10.1189/jlb.0306169 16968820 
155. Ren Y  Stuart L  Lindberg FP    Nonphlogistic clearance of late apoptotic neutrophils by macrophages: efficient phagocytosis independent of beta 2 integrins J Immunol 2001 166 4743 4750 11254736 
156. Stern M  Savill J  Haslett C   Human monocyte-derived macrophage phagocytosis of senescent eosinophils undergoing apoptosis. Mediation by alpha v beta 3/CD36/thrombospondin recognition mechanism and lack of phlogistic response Am J Pathol 1996 149 911 921 8780395 
157. Rovere P  Sabbadini MG  Vallinoto C    Delayed clearance of apoptotic lymphoma cells allows cross-presentation of intracellular antigens by mature dendritic cells J Leukoc Biol 1999 66 345 349 10449179 
158. Gough MJ  Melcher AA  Ahmed A    Macrophages orchestrate the immune response to tumor cell death Cancer Res 2001 61 7240 7247 11585761 
159. Viorritto IC  Nikolov NP  Siegel RM   Autoimmunity versus tolerance: can dying cells tip the balance? Clin Immunol (Orlando, FL) 2007 122 125 134 10.1016/j.clim.2006.07.012 
160. Kim HS  Han MS  Chung KW    Toll-like receptor 2 senses beta-cell death and contributes to the initiation of autoimmune diabetes Immunity 2007 27 321 333 10.1016/j.immuni.2007.06.010 17707128 
161. Scott RS  McMahon EJ  Pop SM    Phagocytosis and clearance of apoptotic cells is mediated by MER Nature 2001 411 207 211 10.1038/35075603 11346799 
162. Tuder RM  Petrache I  Elias JA  Voelkel NF  Henson PM   Apoptosis and emphysema: the missing link Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2003 28 551 554 10.1165/rcmb.F269 12707010 
163. Maher JJ  Gores GJ   Apoptosis: silent killer or neutron bomb? Hepatology (Baltimore, MD) 1998 28 865 867 10.1002/hep.510280338 
164. Farghali H  Canova N  Kucera T  Martinek J  Masek K   Nitric oxide synthase inhibitors modulate lipopolysaccharide-induced hepatocyte injury: dissociation between in vivo and in vitro effects Int Immunopharmacol 2003 3 1627 1638 10.1016/S1567-5769(03)00185-1 14555288 
165. Ogasawara J  Watanabe-Fukunaga R  Adachi M    Lethal effect of the anti-Fas antibody in mice Nature 1993 364 806 809 10.1038/364806a0 7689176 
166. Gujral JS  Farhood A  Jaeschke H   Oncotic necrosis and caspase-dependent apoptosis during galactosamine-induced liver injury in rats Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2003 190 37 46 10.1016/S0041-008X(03)00154-6 12831781 
167. Unal-Cevik I  Kilinc M  Can A  Gursoy-Ozdemir Y  Dalkara T   Apoptotic and necrotic death mechanisms are concomitantly activated in the same cell after cerebral ischemia Stroke 2004 35 2189 2194 10.1161/01.STR.0000136149.81831.c5 15256676 
168. Daemen MA  van’t Veer C  Denecker G    Inhibition of apoptosis induced by ischemia-reperfusion prevents inflammation J Clin Invest 1999 104 541 549 10.1172/JCI6974 10487768 
169. James TN   Apoptosis in cardiac disease Am J Med 1999 107 606 620 10.1016/S0002-9343(99)00308-3 10625030 
170. Scarabelli TM  Gottlieb RA   Functional and clinical repercussions of myocyte apoptosis in the multifaceted damage by ischemia/reperfusion injury: old and new concepts after 10 years of contributions Cell Death Differ 2004 11 Suppl 2 S144 S152 10.1038/sj.cdd.4401544 15608693 
171. Goldspink DF  Burniston JG  Tan LB   Cardiomyocyte death and the ageing and failing heart Exp Physiol 2003 88 447 458 10.1113/eph8802549 12719770 
172. Leist M  Single B  Naumann H    Inhibition of mitochondrial ATP generation by nitric oxide switches apoptosis to necrosis Exp Cell Res 1999 249 396 403 10.1006/excr.1999.4514 10366439 
173. Nicotera P  Leist M  Fava E  Berliocchi L  Volbracht C   Energy requirement for caspase activation, neuronal cell death Brain Pathol (Zurich, Switzerland) 2000 10 276 282 
174. Nicotera P   Molecular switches deciding the death of injured neurons Toxicol Sci 2003 74 4 9 10.1093/toxsci/kfg109 12730614 
175. Benchoua A  Guegan C  Couriaud C    Specific caspase pathways are activated in the two stages of cerebral infarction J Neurosci 2001 21 7127 7134 11549723 
176. Veinot JP  Gattinger DA  Fliss H   Early apoptosis in human myocardial infarcts Hum Pathol 1997 28 485 492 10.1016/S0046-8177(97)90039-3 9104950 
177. Ankarcrona M  Dypbukt JM  Bonfoco E    Glutamate-induced neuronal death: a succession of necrosis or apoptosis depending on mitochondrial function Neuron 1995 15 961 973 10.1016/0896-6273(95)90186-8 7576644 
178. Denecker G  Vercammen D  Declercq W  Vandenabeele P   Apoptotic and necrotic cell death induced by death domain receptors Cell Mol Life Sci 2001 58 356 370 10.1007/PL00000863 11315185 
179. Bredesen DE  Rao RV  Mehlen P   Cell death in the nervous system Nature 2006 443 796 802 10.1038/nature05293 17051206 
180. Lehrer RI  Ganz T  Selsted ME  Babior BM  Curnutte JT   Neutrophils and host defense Ann Intern Med 1988 109 127 142 3289431 
181. Lee WL  Downey GP   Leukocyte elastase: physiological functions and role in acute lung injury Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001 164 896 904 11549552 
182. Henson PM  Johnston RB Jr   Tissue injury in inflammation. Oxidants, proteinases, and cationic proteins J Clin Invest 1987 79 669 674 10.1172/JCI112869 3546374 
183. Weiss SJ   Tissue destruction by neutrophils N Engl J Med 1989 320 365 376 10.1056/NEJM198902093200606 2536474 
184. Smith JA   Neutrophils, host defense, and inflammation: a double-edged sword J Leukoc Biol 1994 56 672 686 7996043 
185. Kawabata K  Hagio T  Matsuoka S   The role of neutrophil elastase in acute lung injury Eur J Pharmacol 2002 451 1 10 10.1016/S0014-2999(02)02182-9 12223222 
186. Stockley RA   Neutrophilic inflammation: “don’t you go to pieces on me! Eur Respir J 2006 28 257 258 10.1183/09031936.06.00053906 16880362 
187. Faurschou M  Borregaard N   Neutrophil granules and secretory vesicles in inflammation Microbes Infect 2003 5 1317 1327 10.1016/j.micinf.2003.09.008 14613775 
188. Owen CA  Campbell EJ   The cell biology of leukocyte-mediated proteolysis J Leukoc Biol 1999 65 137 150 10088596 
189. Savill JS  Wyllie AH  Henson JE  Walport MJ  Henson PM  Haslett C   Macrophage phagocytosis of aging neutrophils in inflammation. Programmed cell death in the neutrophil leads to its recognition by macrophages J Clin Invest 1989 83 865 875 10.1172/JCI113970 2921324 
190. Brazil TJ  Dagleish MP  McGorum BC  Dixon PM  Haslett C  Chilvers ER   Kinetics of pulmonary neutrophil recruitment and clearance in a natural and spontaneously resolving model of airway inflammation Clin Exp Allergy 2005 35 854 865 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2005.02231.x 16008670 
191. Knapp S  Leemans JC  Florquin S    Alveolar macrophages have a protective antiinflammatory role during murine pneumococcal pneumonia Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003 167 171 179 10.1164/rccm.200207-698OC 12406830 
192. Simon HU   Neutrophil apoptosis pathways and their modifications in inflammation Immunol Rev 2003 193 101 110 10.1034/j.1600-065X.2003.00038.x 12752675 
193. Bianchi SM  Dockrell DH  Renshaw SA  Sabroe I  Whyte MK   Granulocyte apoptosis in the pathogenesis and resolution of lung disease Clin Sci (Lond) 2006 110 293 304 10.1042/CS20050178 16464171 
194. Stockley RA   Neutrophils and protease/antiprotease imbalance Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999 160 S49 S52 10556170 
195. Konstan MW  Berger M   Current understanding of the inflammatory process in cystic fibrosis: onset and etiology Pediatr Pulmonol 1997 24 137 142 10.1002/(SICI)1099-0496(199708)24:2<137::AID-PPUL13>3.0.CO;2-3 9292910 
196. Fujie K  Shinguh Y  Inamura N  Yasumitsu R  Okamoto M  Okuhara M   Release of neutrophil elastase and its role in tissue injury in acute inflammation: effect of the elastase inhibitor, FR134043 Eur J Pharmacol 1999 374 117 125 10.1016/S0014-2999(99)00268-X 10422648 
197. Bank U  Ansorge S   More than destructive: neutrophil-derived serine proteases in cytokine bioactivity control J Leukoc Biol 2001 69 197 206 11272269 
198. Usher LR  Lawson RA  Geary I    Induction of neutrophil apoptosis by the Pseudomonas aeruginosa  exotoxin pyocyanin: a potential mechanism of persistent infection J Immunol 2002 168 1861 1868 11823520 
199. Watt AP  Courtney J  Moore J  Ennis M  Elborn JS   Neutrophil cell death, activation and bacterial infection in cystic fibrosis Thorax 2005 60 659 664 10.1136/thx.2004.038240 16061707 
200. Jaeschke H  Smith CW   Mechanisms of neutrophil-induced parenchymal cell injury J Leukoc Biol 1997 61 647 653 9201255 
201. Jaeschke H   Mechanisms of Liver Injury. II. Mechanisms of neutrophil-induced liver cell injury during hepatic ischemia-reperfusion and other acute inflammatory conditions Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006 290 G1083 G1088 10.1152/ajpgi.00568.2005 16687579 
202. Barone FC  Feuerstein GZ   Inflammatory mediators and stroke: new opportunities for novel therapeutics J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1999 19 819 834 10.1097/00004647-199908000-00001 10458589 
203. Feuerstein G   Inflammation and stroke: therapeutic effects of adenoviral expression of secretory Leukocyte Protease Inhibitor Front Biosci 2006 11 1750 1757 10.2741/1920 16368553 
204. Bone RC  Balk RA  Cerra FB    Definitions for sepsis and organ failure and guidelines for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. The ACCP/SCCM Consensus Conference Committee. American College of Chest Physicians/Society of Critical Care Medicine Chest 1992 101 1644 1655 10.1378/chest.101.6.1644 1303622 
205. Vincent JL  Zambon M   Why do patients who have acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome die from multiple organ dysfunction syndrome? Implications for management Clin Chest Med 2006 27 725 731 10.1016/j.ccm.2006.06.010 17085258 
206. Wheeler AP  Bernard GR   Acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome: a clinical review Lancet 2007 369 1553 1564 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60604-7 17482987 
207. Jochum M  Gippner-Steppert C  Machleidt W  Fritz H   The role of phagocyte proteinases and proteinase inhibitors in multiple organ failure Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 150 S123 S130 7952647 
208. Tumpey TM  Garcia-Sastre A  Taubenberger JK    Pathogenicity of influenza viruses with genes from the 1918 pandemic virus: functional roles of alveolar macrophages and neutrophils in limiting virus replication and mortality in mice J Virol 2005 79 14933 14944 10.1128/JVI.79.23.14933-14944.2005 16282492 
209. Shinya K  Hamm S  Hatta M  Ito H  Ito T  Kawaoka Y   PB2 amino acid at position 627 affects replicative efficiency, but not cell tropism, of Hong Kong H5N1 influenza A viruses in mice Virology 2004 320 258 266 10.1016/j.virol.2003.11.030 15016548 
210. Rimmelzwaan GF  van Riel D  Baars M    Influenza A virus (H5N1) infection in cats causes systemic disease with potential novel routes of virus spread within and between hosts Am J Pathol 2006 168 176 183 10.2353/ajpath.2006.050466 16400021 
211. Stockley RA   Neutrophils and the pathogenesis of COPD Chest 2002 121 151S 155S 10.1378/chest.121.5_suppl.151S 12010844 
212. Barnes PJ   New concepts in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Annu Rev Med 2003 54 113 129 10.1146/annurev.med.54.101601.152209 12359824 
213. Shapiro SD  Ingenito EP   The pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: advances in the past 100 years Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2005 32 367 372 10.1165/rcmb.F296 15837726 
214. Stockley RA   The role of proteinases in the pathogenesis of chronic bronchitis Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 150 S109 S113 7952644 
215. Ordonez CL  Shaughnessy TE  Matthay MA  Fahy JV   Increased neutrophil numbers and IL-8 levels in airway secretions in acute severe asthma: Clinical and biologic significance Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000 161 1185 1190 10764310 
216. Palmqvist C  Wardlaw AJ  Bradding P   Chemokines and their receptors as potential targets for the treatment of asthma Brit J Pharmacol 2007 151 725 736 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707263 17471178 
217. Doring G   The role of neutrophil elastase in chronic inflammation Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 150 S114 S117 7952645 
218. Birrer P  McElvaney NG  Rudeberg A    Protease-antiprotease imbalance in the lungs of children with cystic fibrosis Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 150 207 213 7912987 
219. Taggart CC  Greene CM  Carroll TP  O’Neill SJ  McElvaney NG   Elastolytic proteases: inflammation resolution and dysregulation in chronic infective lung disease Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005 171 1070 1076 10.1164/rccm.200407-881PP 15695494 
220. Hartl D  Latzin P  Hordijk P    Cleavage of CXCR1 on neutrophils disables bacterial killing in cystic fibrosis lung disease Nat Med 2007 13 1423 1430 10.1038/nm1690 18059279 
221. Hodge S  Hodge G  Scicchitano R  Reynolds PN  Holmes M   Alveolar macrophages from subjects with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are deficient in their ability to phagocytose apoptotic airway epithelial cells Immunol Cell Biol 2003 81 289 296 10.1046/j.1440-1711.2003.t01-1-01170.x 12848850 
222. Hodge S  Hodge G  Ahern J    Smoking alters alveolar macrophage recognition and phagocytic ability: implications in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Amer J Resp Cell Mol Biol 2007 37 748 755 10.1165/rcmb.2007-0025OC 
223. Vandivier RW  Henson PM  Douglas IS   Burying the dead: the impact of failed apoptotic cell removal (efferocytosis) on chronic inflammatory lung disease Chest 2006 129 1673 1682 10.1378/chest.129.6.1673 16778289 
224. Bianchi SM  Prince LR  McPhillips K    Impairment of apoptotic cell engulfment by pyocyanin, a toxic metabolite of Pseudomonas aeruginosa  Amer J Resp Crit Care Med 2008 177 35 43 10.1164/rccm.200612-1804OC 17916805 
225. Medan D  Wang L  Yang X  Dokka S  Castranova V  Rojanasakul Y   Induction of neutrophil apoptosis and secondary necrosis during endotoxin-induced pulmonary inflammation in mice J Cell Physiol 2002 191 320 326 10.1002/jcp.10105 12012327 
226. Rydell-Tormanen K  Uller L  Erjefalt JS   Direct evidence of secondary necrosis of neutrophils during intense lung inflammation Eur Respir J 2006 28 268 274 10.1183/09031936.06.00126905 16510453 
227. Kodama T  Yukioka H  Kato T  Kato N  Hato F  Kitagawa S   Neutrophil elastase as a predicting factor for development of acute lung injury Intern Med (Tokyo, Japan) 2007 46 699 704 
228. Fujishima S, Morisaki H, Ishizaka A et al (2007) Neutrophil elastase and systemic inflammatory response syndrome in the initiation and development of acute lung injury among critically ill patients. Biomed Pharmacother. Available online July 31 2007
229. Vandivier RW  Fadok VA  Hoffmann PR    Elastase-mediated phosphatidylserine receptor cleavage impairs apoptotic cell clearance in cystic fibrosis and bronchiectasis J Clin Invest 2002 109 661 670 11877474 
230. Zeiher BG  Matsuoka S  Kawabata K  Repine JE   Neutrophil elastase and acute lung injury: prospects for sivelestat and other neutrophil elastase inhibitors as therapeutics Crit Care Med 2002 30 S281 S287 10.1097/00003246-200205001-00018 12004249 
231. Sakashita A  Nishimura Y  Nishiuma T    Neutrophil elastase inhibitor (sivelestat) attenuates subsequent ventilator-induced lung injury in mice Eur J Pharmacol 2007 571 62 71 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.05.053 17599828 
232. Uchida Y  Kaibori M  Hijikawa T    Protective effect of neutrophil elastase inhibitor (FR136706) in lethal acute liver failure induced by d -galactosamine and lipopolysaccharide in rats J Surg Res 2008 145 57 65 10.1016/j.jss.2007.04.001 17936791 
233. Uller L  Rydell-Tormanen K  Persson CG  Erjefalt JS   Anti-Fas mAb-induced apoptosis and cytolysis of airway tissue eosinophils aggravates rather than resolves established inflammation Respir Res 2005 6 90 10.1186/1465-9921-6-90 16086832 
234. Walsh GM   Eosinophil granule proteins and their role in disease Curr Opin Hematol 2001 8 28 33 10.1097/00062752-200101000-00006 11138623 
235. Campbell EJ  Cury JD  Shapiro SD  Goldberg GI  Welgus HG   Neutral proteinases of human mononuclear phagocytes. Cellular differentiation markedly alters cell phenotype for serine proteinases, metalloproteinases, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases J Immunol 1991 146 1286 1293 1991967 
236. Reis MI  do Vale A  Pinto C    First molecular cloning and characterisation of caspase-9 gene in fish and its involvement in a gram negative septicaemia Mol Immunol 2007 44 1754 1764 10.1016/j.molimm.2006.07.293 16989898 
237. Oliveira MS  Fraga AG  Torrado E    Infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans  induces persistent inflammatory responses in mice Infect Immun 2005 73 6299 6310 10.1128/IAI.73.10.6299-6310.2005 16177301 
238. George KM  Chatterjee D  Gunawardana G    Mycolactone: a polyketide toxin from Mycobacterium ulcerans  required for virulence Science 1999 283 854 857 10.1126/science.283.5403.854 9933171 
239. Sebbane F  Gardner D  Long D  Gowen BB  Hinnebusch BJ   Kinetics of disease progression and host response in a rat model of bubonic plague Am J Pathol 2005 166 1427 1439 15855643 
240. Marketon MM  DePaolo RW  DeBord KL  Jabri B  Schneewind O   Plague bacteria target immune cells during infection Science (New York, NY) 2005 309 1739 1741 
241. Narayanan SK  Nagaraja TG  Chengappa MM  Stewart GC   Leukotoxins of gram-negative bacteria Vet Microbiol 2002 84 337 356 10.1016/S0378-1135(01)00467-9 11750142 
242. DeLeo FR   Modulation of phagocyte apoptosis by bacterial pathogens Apoptosis 2004 9 399 413 10.1023/B:APPT.0000031448.64969.fa 15192322 
243. Kaplan MJ   Apoptosis in systemic lupus erythematosus Clin Immunol (Orlando, FL) 2004 112 210 218 10.1016/j.clim.2004.04.007 
244. Decker P   Nucleosome autoantibodies Clin Chim Acta 2006 366 48 60 10.1016/j.cca.2005.11.009 16364274 
245. Mackay IR  Leskovsek NV  Rose NR   Cell damage and autoimmunity: a critical appraisal J Autoimmun 2008 30 5 11 10.1016/j.jaut.2007.11.009 18194728 
246. Devitt A  Parker KG  Ogden CA    Persistence of apoptotic cells without autoimmune disease or inflammation in CD14−/− mice J Cell Biol 2004 167 1161 1170 10.1083/jcb.200410057 15611337 
247. Stuart LM  Takahashi K  Shi L  Savill J  Ezekowitz RA   Mannose-binding lectin-deficient mice display defective apoptotic cell clearance but no autoimmune phenotype J Immunol 2005 174 3220 3226 15749852 
248. Asano K  Miwa M  Miwa K    Masking of phosphatidylserine inhibits apoptotic cell engulfment and induces autoantibody production in mice J Exp Med 2004 200 459 467 10.1084/jem.20040342 15302904 
249. Herrmann M  Voll RE  Zoller OM  Hagenhofer M  Ponner BB  Kalden JR   Impaired phagocytosis of apoptotic cell material by monocyte-derived macrophages from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus Arthritis Rheum 1998 41 1241 1250 10.1002/1529-0131(199807)41:7<1241::AID-ART15>3.0.CO;2-H 9663482 
250. Baumann I  Kolowos W  Voll RE    Impaired uptake of apoptotic cells into tingible body macrophages in germinal centers of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus Arthritis Rheum 2002 46 191 201 10.1002/1529-0131(200201)46:1<191::AID-ART10027>3.0.CO;2-K 11817590 
251. Ren Y  Tang J  Mok MY  Chan AW  Wu A  Lau CS   Increased apoptotic neutrophils and macrophages and impaired macrophage phagocytic clearance of apoptotic neutrophils in systemic lupus erythematosus Arthritis Rheum 2003 48 2888 2897 10.1002/art.11237 14558095 
252. Hanayama R  Tanaka M  Miyasaka K    Autoimmune disease and impaired uptake of apoptotic cells in MFG-E8-deficient mice Science (New York, NY) 2004 304 1147 1150 
253. Gaipl US  Voll RE  Sheriff A  Franz S  Kalden JR  Herrmann M   Impaired clearance of dying cells in systemic lupus erythematosus Autoimmun Rev 2005 4 189 194 10.1016/j.autrev.2004.10.007 15893710 
254. Mitchell DA  Pickering MC  Warren J    C1q deficiency and autoimmunity: the effects of genetic background on disease expression J Immunol 2002 168 2538 2543 11859149 
255. Cohen PL  Caricchio R  Abraham V    Delayed apoptotic cell clearance and lupus-like autoimmunity in mice lacking the c-mer membrane tyrosine kinase J Exp Med 2002 196 135 140 10.1084/jem.20012094 12093878 
256. Nagata S   Autoimmune diseases caused by defects in clearing dead cells and nuclei expelled from erythroid precursors Immunol Rev 2007 220 237 250 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2007.00571.x 17979851 
257. Munoz LE  Gaipl US  Franz S    SLE—a disease of clearance deficiency? Rheumatology (Oxford, England) 2005 44 1101 1107 10.1093/rheumatology/keh693 
258. Gaipl US  Kuhn A  Sheriff A    Clearance of apoptotic cells in human SLE Curr Dir Autoimmun 2006 9 173 187 16394661 
259. Gaipl US  Sheriff A  Franz S    Inefficient clearance of dying cells and autoreactivity Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2006 305 161 176 10.1007/3-540-29714-6_8 16724805 
260. Oppenheim JJ  Yang D   Alarmins: chemotactic activators of immune responses Curr Opin Immunol 2005 17 359 365 10.1016/j.coi.2005.06.002 15955682 
261. Yang H  Wang H  Czura CJ  Tracey KJ   The cytokine activity of HMGB1 J Leukoc Biol 2005 78 1 8 10.1189/jlb.1104648 15734795 
262. Scaffidi P  Misteli T  Bianchi ME   Release of chromatin protein HMGB1 by necrotic cells triggers inflammation Nature 2002 418 191 195 10.1038/nature00858 12110890 
263. Hall JC  Casciola-Rosen L  Rosen A   Altered structure of autoantigens during apoptosis Rheum Dis Clin North Am 2004 30 455 471, vii 10.1016/j.rdc.2004.04.012 15261336 
264. Marshak-Rothstein A   Toll-like receptors in systemic autoimmune disease Nature Rev 2006 6 823 835 10.1038/nri1957 
265. Krieg   Toll-like receptors 7, 8, and 9: linking innate immunity to autoimmunity Immunol Rev 2007 220 251 269 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2007.00572.x 17979852

