
==== Front
AutismAutismAUTspautAutism1362-36131461-7005SAGE Publications Sage UK: London, England 10.1177/136236131878672110.1177_1362361318786721Original ArticlesMaking the future together: Shaping autism research through
meaningful participation https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2688-1734Fletcher-Watson Sue 1Adams Jon 2Brook Kabie 3Charman Tony 4https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4161-3490Crane Laura 5Cusack James 6Leekam Susan 7Milton Damian 89Parr Jeremy R 10Pellicano Elizabeth 111 The University of Edinburgh, UK2 Flow Observatorium, UK3 Autism Rights Group Highland, UK4 King’s College London, UK5 University College London, UK6 Autistica, UK7 Cardiff University, UK8 Participatory Autism Research
Collective, UK9 University of Kent, UK10 Newcastle University, UK11 Macquarie University, AustraliaSue Fletcher-Watson, Patrick Wild Centre,
The University of Edinburgh, Kennedy Tower, Morningside Terrace, Edinburgh EH10
5HF, UK. Email: sue.fletcher-watson@ed.ac.uk10 8 2018 5 2019 23 4 943 953 © The Author(s) 20182018The National Autistic Society, SAGE
PublicationsThis article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 License (http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) which
permits any use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further
permission provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE
and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).Participatory research methods connect researchers with relevant communities to
achieve shared goals. These methods can deliver results that are relevant to
people’s lives and thus likely to have a positive impact. In the context of a
large and growing body of autism research, with continued poor implementation,
and some evidence of community dissatisfaction, there is a powerful case for
participatory autism research. In order to develop a framework for such
collaborative working, a UK seminar series was organised and co-produced by
autistic and non-autistic people with academic, practitioner and lived
expertise. This article reports on the outcomes from the series, identifying
five topics relevant to building a community of practice in participatory
research: Respect, Authenticity, Assumptions, Infrastructure and Empathy. Each
topic is connected to a specific example from within and beyond research, to
inspire new practices in the field. We call for the development of participatory
research skills among the autism research community and the facilitation of
greater autistic leadership of, and partnership in, research. Such work, if
delivered to a high standard, is likely to lead to better translation into
practice and improved outcomes for autistic people and those who support
them.

autismcommunitydisability rightsinvolvementmethodsparticipatory researchEconomic and Social Research Councilhttps://doi.org/10.13039/501100000269ES/M00225X/1Leverhulme Trusthttps://doi.org/10.13039/501100000275Philip Leverhulme Prize
==== Body
Introduction
Autism research has seen tremendous growth over the last decade (Interagency Autism Coordinating
Committee (IACC), 2013; Pellicano et al., 2013). This research has
the potential to transform the lives of autistic people1 and their families, when it is relevant, valued and effectively implemented.
Yet, efforts to apply research findings in public services and professional support
have not always been forthcoming, raising serious questions about the utility of
past and existing models of practice in autism research (Milton and Bracher, 2013; Pellicano et al., 2014b;
Pellicano and Stears,
2011). Participatory research enables meaningful input from autistic
people in autism research. It is one important way to overcome barriers to effective
translation and to ensure that research yields relevant benefits (Long et al., 2017).

By participatory research, we mean incorporating the views of
autistic people and their allies about what research gets done, how it is done and
how it is implemented (Cornwall
and Jewkes, 1995). A key principle of participatory research is the
recognition, and undermining, of the traditional power imbalance between researcher
and participant (Nelson and
Wright, 1995). One way to conceptualise this power imbalance is using
Arnstein’s ladder of participation – a visual metaphor which
explicitly illustrates different types of participation in terms of increasing power
(Arnstein, 1969).
These range from no power (e.g. recipient of therapy), through tokenism (e.g.
informing and consultation), to devolved power (e.g. partnership and citizen
control). This influential model has been critiqued, among others, for its failure
to recognise that participation itself can be a goal and that
process and diversity of experience matter as
much as outcome (Tritter and McCallum, 2006). While these
comments have clear relevance to autism, especially when considering ways to include
autistic people with learning disabilities, the ladder remains a useful shorthand.
We would currently conceptualise much of autism research as involving no power, or
only tokenistic forms of power, for the autistic community and their allies (Nicolaidis et al.,
2011).

Specific manifestations of participatory research might include
leadership by autistic researchers,
partnership with autistic people or allies as co-creators of
knowledge, engagement with the community in general (e.g. via
social media) and consultation with relevant individuals or
community organisations. Another key feature of participatory research is
inclusiveness including adapting the research environment,
methodology and dissemination routes to permit the widest and most accessible
engagement, or engagement from specific groups (e.g. non-speaking autistic people
and people with additional intellectual disabilities – see Long and Clarkson, 2017). Participatory
research is ethically informed by the values of the community, for example, in the
selection of research questions and study objectives. Moreover, input from this
community can improve the quality of research methods, contextualise findings within
real-world settings and thereby enhance the translation of findings into practice
(Carrington et al.,
2016; Grinker et al.,
2012; Parr,
2016; Parsons and
Cobb, 2013). However, there is evidence that this engagement is not yet
prevalent in the field.

The UK report A Future Made Together (Pellicano et al., 2013) sought the views of
autistic people and their families, researchers and practitioners (including people
identifying with multiple such categories) about their experiences of being involved
in research. One key finding from the report was that research funding and output in
the United Kingdom does not align with the views of autistic people, family members
and practitioners on what research questions should be prioritised – a clear barrier
to translation. Views on the prevalence of participatory research were contrasting –
while researchers perceived themselves to be engaged with the autism community in
both dissemination and discussions about their research, community members, most
notably autistic people and their families, did not share this view (Pellicano et al.,
2014b).

Successful participatory research requires both cultural and structural changes
(Raymaker and Nicolaidis,
2013). Cultural issues include the fact that non-autistic researchers and
funders in the field have traditionally seen the primary role of autistic people as
participants in research studies (the ‘subjects’ of research). Involving autistic
people in active and powerful research roles may be seen to compromise the
scientific integrity of the project. Structural issues include the combined effect
of general barriers to autistic employment (Lorenz et al., 2016) together with the
competitive funding and job market of academia. For example, skilled mentoring and
support, essential to post-graduate study and career development for autistic
researchers, may be in short supply (Ridout, 2018; Ridout and Edmondson, 2017). For autistic
people and family members who are not researchers, there are few opportunities to
have meaningful input into decisions about what research gets funded. Put bluntly,
the traditional autism research culture – in common with many fields of scientific
enquiry (Nicolaidis and
Raymaker, 2015) – is inadequate regarding the extent to which autistic
people have been able to shape the research agenda, its implementation and
dissemination of its findings.

Fortunately, there has been increasing recognition internationally that this
situation needs to change, with autistic advocates, academics and activists being
some of the strongest voices to speak to these issues (Michael, 2016; Milton, 2014; Nicolaidis et al., 2011; Pellicano et al., 2011).
There are signs of a much-needed improvement, from openly discussing these issues
(Wright et al.,
2014), to communities of researchers and autistic people beginning to enact
change (Stahmer et al.,
2017). In this article, we report on a seminar series, jointly developed
and hosted by people from the autistic and research communities, which aimed to move
the field forward by identifying barriers to, and solutions for, participatory
autism research. The series itself also provided an opportunity to develop models of
good practice in co-creation of knowledge.

The shaping autism research seminar series
We received funding from the UK’s Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) to
hold a series of seminars to discuss these very issues and determine how
autistic people and their allies could shape the future of autism research and
practice (Table 1).
Seminars were organised, hosted, attended and led by a wide and diverse group.
This included researchers (autistic and non-autistic), stakeholders from the
autistic community (i.e. autistic people including those
with an autism spectrum diagnosis and those who self-identify) and their allies
– the broader autism community – including family members,
education and healthcare professionals; third-sector organisations,
commissioners and policy-makers; and autism research funders. Many people fell
into multiple categories: for example, autistic parents of autistic children;
autistic education, healthcare or social care practitioners (Table 1).

Table 1. The seminars.

	Topic	Title	Location	
1	Autism practice	Developing and sharing approaches to research informed
practice for children and young people	Edinburgh	
2	Public services	Developing more effective health and social care services in
partnership with the autism community	Newcastle	
3	Public services	Developing more effective public services in partnership
with the autism community	Cardiff	
4	Autism and society	Doing autism research well – building a participatory
framework for autism research	London	
5	Autism and society	Autistic well-being	London	
6	Autism practice	Learning and sharing lessons on how to conduct autism
research well	London	
During the series, our overarching goal was to examine how autism research could
become more participatory in nature (Israel et al., 2005). One result of
participatory research should be that research activities and findings are more
meaningful – that is, relevant to the community, consistent
with their values, and not tokenistic in delivery. Thus, the seminars strove to
identify, highlight and embody models of best practice, sharing examples of real
and meaningful participatory research from which others could learn. We also
sought to identify both barriers to, and possibilities of, more inclusive models
of working between autistic people and researchers.

Across 3 years, we held six seminars on three overlapping research areas:
Autism Practice, Public Services and Autism and
Society (Table
1). These areas had been identified in A Future Made
Together (Pellicano et al., 2013) as needing further attention from the
research community, relative to more basic science areas and, critically, were
also highlighted as priorities for the autism community. At each seminar, we
included autistic people (researchers and community leaders) in the planning,
organisation and delivery of the seminars, and featured a mixture of local,
national and international speakers. We also had a special emphasis on the next
generation of autistic and non-autistic early career researchers with the aim of
capacity building and improving the future research landscape in the United
Kingdom. In total, approximately 200 people were involved in some way in the
series with further reach orchestrated via social media (#shapeARUK). Across the
seminars, there was remarkable consistency of opinion among delegates about the
need for, barriers to, and best practice models for, participatory autism
research. The resulting key considerations in effective participatory working
for autism research are presented here, grouped under five topic headings.

Key topics in participatory autism research
The final seminar in the series was a 1-day meeting to discuss methods and forms
of participatory working. While the first five seminars were large open events,
the final seminar meeting was for a small group of seminar leaders, and selected
community representatives and academics. It was attended by 12 people, including
5 who were autistic, 3 who were parents of autistic children, 3 who were working
practitioners from clinical and community services and 10 who were academics –
with substantial overlap between categories in all combinations. The five topics
described below emerged from an iterative discussion process at the meeting,
supported by an additional three facilitators. A sub-set of the original group,
including autistic and non-autistic people from within and outside academia, are
now co-authors on this article.

The discussion concentrated on complex issues in participatory research, aiming
to challenge the thinking even of those who are already supportive of the
participatory research agenda. Thus, topics selected for elaboration here (see
Figure 1) aim to
move the debate forward, rather than repeating those (noted elsewhere) which
motivated the series (e.g. need for adapted sensory environments; avoidance of
deficit models and terminology – see Nicolaidis et al. (2011) and Pellicano and Stears
(2011), for an expansion of these topics). Nevertheless, we recognise
that some researchers new to participatory working may wish to read more around
the background debates that motivated us to propose the seminar series. With
such individuals in mind, many relevant resources have been developed and
collected at the series website: www.shapingautismresearch.co.uk.

Figure 1. Current topics in participatory autism research.

Each topic section includes a single case study (Boxes 1 to 5) highlighting an example from
research or practice relevant to the point under discussion. While the first
five seminars themselves were organised around domains of working relevant to
research, such as practice and public services, the headings emerging from this
meeting were based on discussion of ways of working which
transcend academic disciplines or research targets. Our goal is also to share
potential solutions to enable collaborative working, not just to identify
barriers. Thus, our chosen exemplars describe methods of participatory working
(e.g. autistic leadership and supportive infrastructures) but not necessarily
research activities.

Box 1. Respect – how to respectfully represent lived experience in research
(www.knowyournormal.co.uk).

In the Know Your Normalproject,
a team of autistic volunteers from the UK charity Ambitious
about Autism approached academics from the Centre for
Research in Autism and Education, University College London,
to co-produce research on a topic that they identified as a
priority issue – mental health in young autistic people. The
team worked in partnership to design the study, conduct the
research, and analyse and interpret the data, and write-up
and disseminate the results; with the academic researchers
ensuring that the research was methodologically and
ethically sound, and the autistic volunteers ensuring that
the research was relevant and meaningful to the autistic
community, representing their lived experience (Crane et
al., 2018).	
Strengths of this approach	Limitations of this approach	
● Focus on a priority area for autistic people and
involvement of autistic co-researchers facilitated
recruitment into the study and engagement with
findings
● Autistic co-researchers obtained hands-on
experience of conducting a research project to
completion	● Autistic researchers limited from data collection due to
time constraints and personal relationships with
participants
● Relied on an approach from an autistic
group to get the project off the ground – project would not
have happened without their confidence and
resourcefulness	
Box 2. Authenticity – how autism communities can shape a research agenda
(www.autistica.co.uk/our-research/your-research-priorities).

Autistica and a consortium of partners launched
a James Lind Alliance Priority Setting Partnership to define
the top 10 autism research questions. This was an
independently facilitated and validated process, which
surveyed a representative sample of autistic people,
caregivers and professionals before bringing them together
to reach agreement on the top 10 through a final workshop.
Importantly, the process deliberately excluded researchers
from the final workshop so that the top 10 is a genuinely
community-led, authentic list (Cusack and Sterry,
2016).	
Strengths of this approach	Limitations of this approach	
● Independent facilitation achieved consensus across groups
and ensured power balance between groups
● Impact
includes increased likelihood of major autism research
funding from government and charitable organisations	● Merging perspectives of a diverse group into homogeneous
outcomes can result in under-specified priority research
topics
● It remains challenging to fully include
everyone on the spectrum (e.g. those with additional
intellectual disabilities and limited spoken
communication)	
Box 3. Assumptions – best practice in autistic leadership and community advocacy
(www.arghighland.co.uk).

Autism Rights Group Highland (ARGH) is a
collective of Autistic Adults based in Scotland. They work
together to lobby, campaign and educate. Recent activities
include a successful campaign to remove puzzle piece imagery
from the journal Autism. They are now
focused on securing continued funding for a local service –
the Highland One Stop Shop – providing support to local
autistic people and their families encompassing diagnosis
and post-diagnostic support, social activities and clubs,
and guidance on benefits, housing and employment.	
Strengths of this approach	Limitations of this approach	
● Many voices working together add strength and weight to a
campaign
● Elected spokespeople are responsible to,
and scrutinised by, the membership. They can be removed from
post if the membership so wish	● Reaching consensus between diverse members is
difficult
● Communication between members is time
consuming and effortful: multiple methods are used and equal
weight must be given to all voices regardless of their
method of engagement	
Box 4. Infrastructure – how to support and encourage autistic academics and
activists (participatoryautismresearch.wordpress.com/).

The Participatory Autism Research Collective
(PARC) was set up to bring autistic people, including
scholars and activists, together with researchers and
practitioners who work with autistic people. Their aim is to
build a community network, where those who wish to see more
significant involvement of autistic people in autism
research can share knowledge and expertise.	
Strengths of this approach	Limitations of this approach	
● While it is autistic-led, the group is inclusive of
autistic and non-autistic academics
● The group
specifically aims to support early career researchers and
practitioners	● Autistic-led groups like PARC, operating independently of
a host institution, may struggle to secure
funding
● The membership is widely distributed across
the United Kingdom, making collaboration and collective
action difficult at times	
Box 5. Empathy – how to build effective working partnerships (www.artscatalyst.org/jon-adams-konfirm).

Konfirmation Systemisation: Rethinking
Autistic Thinking was an artist residency
within the ARC Cambridge in collaboration with The Arts
Catalyst, London and artist Jon Adams. Supported by Wellcome
Trust funding, this residency led to poetry, image and a
series of musical compositions made from fMRI machine
noise.	
Strengths of this approach	Limitations of this approach	
● Independent funding expands the range of opportunities for
people involved
● The research group were influenced
by the autistic artist’s presence, leading to a
reconsideration of their views of autism	● To be successful, this requires investment of time on both
sides and a willingness to challenge existing ‘knowledge’ or
assumptions
● Independent funding may be hard to
secure	
Topic 1: respect
One clear and consistent message from the autistic community and their allies was
the need for autistic voices (incorporating all types of communication) to be
heard and taken seriously at all stages of the research process. Seminar
delegates reported that the lived experiences of autistic people – their
‘experiential expertise’ (Collins and Evans, 2002) – is rarely apparent in the context of
autism research, though notable exceptions were identified (see Box 1). Perhaps,
related to this, non-autistic academics at the seminars often had similar
concerns about whether their expertise and perspectives would be respected by
autistic delegates, especially those from outside academia. Indeed, a crucial
component of engagement is to ensure that community representatives understand
the context in which research (and indeed service delivery) takes place. Setting
expectations about the limitations and timelines of research is essential to
allow both partners work towards a shared goal. During the series, through
dialogue, listening to one another’s viewpoints, recognising differences and
accepting that there was not always agreement, mutual respect between autistic
and non-autistic members grew from meeting to meeting.

How was this achieved? During the series, members of the autistic and autism
communities played prominent roles in every event, including as co-applicants
for funding, co-convenors, speakers, panellists and discussion group leaders.
Community representation was visible, and in sufficiently high numbers (from
about one-third to half of all in attendance) to give confidence to delegates
from these groups. Moreover, substantial energy was put in to making each
seminar as autism-enabling as possible by creating a suitable sensory
environment and providing a quiet space. We reduced power inequalities between
autistic and non-autistic contributors by including clear terms of reference for
participation in the seminar programme, so that all delegates had a shared
expectation of what the seminar would involve.2 In all seminar series materials, presentation titles and so on, language
was selected which characterised autism in neutral terms – for example, we
neither refer to autistic people as patients nor to autism as a disease or
misfortune.

In this way, respect was made overt, allowing seminar delegates to move beyond
traditional barriers and instead focus on both a need and an opportunity for
working together to deliver benefits to autistic people and their allies. The
result was that the series itself had become an example of participatory
practice and the foundation for a community of informed, mutually-engaged and
respectful stakeholders (within and beyond academia) building interactional
expertise for autism research (Collins and Evans, 2002; Milton, 2014; Pellicano and Stears,
2011). This experience gave rise to three core principles of
participatory research, which have formed the basis of a starter pack for
researchers (Pellicano et
al., 2017).

Topic 2: authenticity
The seminars attracted many people who started from the point of view that
participatory research is both morally right and practically beneficial. For
this reason, much of the discussion quickly moved from a focus on basic barriers
to participation (e.g. failure to provide an accessible environment) to more
complex dimensions of high-quality engagement. The first key issue identified by
delegates was tokenistic involvement, in which people’s input does not influence
the outcomes. Engagement such as this, which serves only the purpose of ‘ticking
a box’ – for example to meet a funder or ethics review board requirement – is
not authentic engagement. At best, such approaches may fail to deliver useful
results; at worst, they are insulting and excluding to autistic people and their
allies, damaging the relationship between autistic people and researchers, and
leading to non-participation in future research. It was agreed that to avoid
tokenism, researchers should collaborate with community representatives who have
expertise and experiences relevant to the specific topic under discussion;
engage in open dialogue; listen and be prepared to learn from this expertise,
make changes in response to feedback; and acknowledge the imbalance of power in
most research scenarios.

Addressing an unequal power balance was the second key issue in quality
engagement. Sometimes researchers using quantitative methods incorporate
qualitative components into their project (to seek/reflect the views of autistic
people) and assume that this constitutes good engagement. Yet, when conducting
interviews or focus groups, the researcher still has almost total control –
selecting participants, scripting questions, hosting the meeting, pooling data
and drawing conclusions. Participatory working, including engagement prior to
designing a study or seeking funding (see Box 2), is distinct from qualitative
methods to answer a research question, in that it provides an opportunity for
community members to shape the focus of the research itself. Continued
consultation as research progresses can have a similar impact on research
interpretation, dissemination and implementation.

A power imbalance may still apply when autistic and non-autistic academics work
together: a clear message from the autistic academics at the seminar was about
the disadvantages they face working in a high-expectation environment that often
fails to recognise needs and provide suitable support (see
Infrastructure below). To address power imbalances, people
agreed that non-autistic researchers should consider meeting autistic people in
places of their choosing, and opening up a dialogue that is not constrained by
specific research questions. By spending time with autistic people, without an
agenda or specific idea of what the researcher wants to do, we can build
research questions on autistic input from the very outset. This argument aligns
closely with the ‘slow science’ movement (Alleva, 2006), which emphasises
investment of time and resources in the thoughtful consideration and selection
of ideas before data collection. Even without such investment, attending
autistic-led events such as Autscape in the United Kingdom or
Autreat in the United States and reading the work of
autistic bloggers are both ways to engage without imposing a priori assumptions
and with only modest resources required.

Topic 3: assumptions
The seminars addressed assumptions about autism that need to be challenged.
Diagnostic criteria for autism include descriptions about ‘deficits’ of
social-emotional reciprocity, non-verbal communication and relationships.
Understanding of autism has largely moved on from attempts to characterise
autism in terms of a single, universal ‘deficit’ and now recognises the diverse
pattern of features. Nevertheless, in the context of community engagement, a
belief that autism is characterised by – for example – an inability to
understand others has been used as an excuse not to engage with autistic people
(Pellicano et al.,
2014a). Autistic delegates at the seminars reported that often an
autistic person may not be considered a legitimate spokesperson for their wider
community, even when acting as an elected representative of a community group.
This phenomenon is probably exacerbated by the wide variety of autistic
dispositions: there is concern that verbally and cognitively able autistic
adults cannot speak on behalf of those who have intellectual disabilities and/or
significant barriers to communication.

In contrast, our experience demonstrates the opposite. The seminars heard from
multiple examples of autistic people supporting their peers, such as autistic
advocates aiding members of their community to access health and social care
(see Box 3). That
said, some autistic people may (understandably) object to being expected to
advocate on behalf of ‘their community’ – we should not mistake a drive towards
a participatory research agenda for a pressure on individual autistic people to
become advocates and activists. In addition, during the seminars, aspects such
as recognition of intersectionality (the overlapping disadvantageous influence
of multiple characteristics subject to discrimination – such as race, sexuality
and neurodiversity3), and consideration of the needs of other neurodivergent people (e.g.
people with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), depression,
dyspraxia, epilepsy or non-speaking autistic people) was consistently flagged by
autistic delegates when sometimes overlooked by the non-autistic people
present.

Topic 4: infrastructure
One of the key requirements for effective participatory research is supportive
infrastructure. Delegates from within and outside academia at the seminars were
united in their perception that the basic infrastructure of research –
especially scientific research – is not conducive to participatory working. For
example, some academics, working from a traditional notion of objectivity, were
concerned that the scientific endeavour could be biased by engagement with
autistic partners. To those, we offer that serious biases – for example, towards
maintenance of the status quo – can occur when research takes place without
community influence. One example might be the interpretation of both increased
and decreased activation of brain regions in an functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) study as reflecting autistic ‘deficits’ (Dawson and Mottron, 2011). Critical
reflection on the meaning of experimental tasks used in research, and
involvement of autistic people in interpretation of data, can help to avoid the
automatic attribution of deficits to data that are, in and of themselves,
value-neutral.

One manifestation of this culture is that funder priorities do not normally
include community participation, or if they do, this is rarely more than
tokenistic. Funding strategies are highly influential on the direction of
research and the methods used. Engaged funders could help to effect culture
change by requiring evidence of relevant community consultation on all submitted
proposals, incorporating lay reviewers into their evaluation process, and
following up on researcher ‘Impact’ statements to check that proposed
dissemination and implementation plans have been delivered. These measures
require academic and non-academic reviewers to be sufficiently skilled to
evaluate the quality of proposed participatory activities. Without funder
endorsement, individual researchers attempting to build in high-quality
engagement may be demotivated to do so. It is true that quality engagement takes
time and costs money, which may make proposals less competitive if the
engagement component is not valued by the funding body. Researchers may be able
to influence funder attitudes by persistently incorporating participatory
methods into their proposals and by requiring these when asked to review
proposals.

Where engagement is supported by funders, researchers need to ensure that they
cost consultancy fees for individuals and/or contributions to autistic-led
organisations into their proposals. Suitable payment, recognising the
professional and personal expertise required for the role, and the associated
level of responsibility in relation to project aims, is a key way to demonstrate
respect and address the power imbalance. However, we also note that even when
the funding is available the administrative logistics of making a payment to a
‘lay consultant’ can be very challenging. Involve – a UK organisation for
‘patient and public involvement’ in health research – has published useful guidelines4 though in some cases, academics may find these conflict with their grant
reporting requirements or University procedures.

Autistic researchers are significantly disadvantaged by institutional and wider
research infrastructure, which has historically failed to recognise
neurodiversity and often serves to promote research by already privileged
groups. Current attempts to improve equality and diversity in the United Kingdom
higher education sector (e.g. Equality Challenge Unit5) should be extended to incorporate the issues faced by neurodivergent
academics. Some universities are already making steps in this regard, since
disability is a protected characteristic under law in the United Kingdom and
many other countries 6. Nevertheless, partners in the seminar series described ‘institutional
ableism’ built into university systems and difficulty finding appropriate
post-graduate supervision that recognised their needs in relation to the work
(Martin, 2010).
Best practice in this area has often been led by the neurodivergent community,
as in the founding of the open-access journal Autonomy (Arnold, 2012). Despite
these strides, a change to academic infrastructure is a necessary, but not
sufficient, step if we wish to achieve higher rates of autistic leadership of
research projects relating to autism.

Topic 5: empathy
The double empathy problem (Milton, 2012) highlights the issue of ‘mutual incomprehension’ that
exists between some autistic and non-autistic people, in all walks of life.
Indeed, there is a growing body of evidence which demonstrates empirically that
non-autistic people may fail to comprehend autistic people (Sheppard et al., 2016),
or negatively judge them based on minimal evidence (Sasson et al., 2017). If not addressed,
this lack of shared understanding presents a significant barrier to effective
research collaboration. Thus, even those researchers who feel motivated to
engage with the autistic community may find themselves unsure about where, or
how, to start. In particular, autism researchers may be fearful that autistic
people will say something they disagree with or ask them to do something in a
project that they cannot easily do. The irony of this should be obvious:
researchers have been asking autistic people to put up with both of these for
decades.

Nevertheless, it is true that sometimes autistic people will be very frank in
their judgements about research plans and processes, and fail to conform to
social norms. This can be challenging for non-autistic researchers, but should
also be viewed as an opportunity. Open dialogue about the focus and methods of
research, with autistic people and their allies who are not researchers, can not
only help to contextualise the work but also educate communities about the
realities of the research process. This is true knowledge exchange, in which
both parties gain new insights from the interaction. While consensus will not
always be achieved, the process of dialogue and engagement remains valuable as a
source of mutual learning. Building up trusting professional relationships
between researchers and community members makes this learning more direct and
easier for both parties. Over the course of the seminar series, we have been
able to facilitate such relationships, leading to the beginnings of a new,
engaged ‘community of practice’ in autism research in the United Kingdom (Hart et al., 2013).
Crucially, such dialogue will not necessarily result in consensus, but mutual
learning is a process rather than an outcome.

Next steps for participatory autism research
This report of themes emerging from the Shaping Autism Research
seminar series aimed to focus on solutions rather than barriers to participatory
research. Nonetheless, there is still much work to be done. We characterise this
work as falling into two categories: supportive environments
and methodological challenges. The first category describes
various activities already touched on above, which are necessary to build a
culture where autistic people and their allies can take on active, meaningful
roles in research. These include: changing the language we use to describe
autism (Gernsbacher,
2017; Kenny et
al., 2016); modifying or identifying physical spaces to enable
autistic participation; and adapting the structures and bureaucracy of academia
to facilitate autistic involvement and leadership in research. In so doing, we
should draw on the experiences of pioneers within (Frauenberger et al., 2013; Gillespie-Lynch et al.,
2017; Mason et
al., submitted; McConachie et al., 2018; Nicolaidis et al., 2013; Parsons et al., 2013)
and outside (Brett et al.,
2014; Rose,
2003) autism research. Showcasing these examples may help to draw in
community representatives who are sceptical about the capacity for improvement
in the research establishment. Another way to create a supportive environment is
to improve the research literacy of the community by sharing insights into the
research process and enabling access to the scientific literature.

Supportive environments can also be applied to making a space in
which to welcome those academics who may feel that the participatory research
agenda does not recognise the constraints and priorities of their research. Some
– such as those engaged in basic biological research – may feel that their
laboratory-based projects are far removed from community concerns and thus that
engagement is not required. Early career researchers may identify with the
agenda, but lack the skills, resources or support to develop this aspect of
their work. Expanding our scientific ideologies to make room for participation
is a challenge, but we must reach beyond the small, but growing, network of
autism researchers who do incorporate engagement as a matter of course in their
research.

Methodological challenges encompass those issues which are not
addressed by current roadmaps for participatory research. A prominent example is
the question of how to capture the voices of autistic people who are not easily
integrated into even the fledgling participatory research structures available
at this time. This includes autistic children, those with intellectual
disabilities and those who do not speak. While innovative practices are being
developed (Gaudion et al.,
2014; McDonald
and Stack, 2016; Ridout, 2014 see also Pellicano, 2018), we remain far from
achieving meaningful, let alone routine, integration of these voices into
research.

Another difficulty, not restricted to the autism field, is how to balance
individual and collective opinion, including how to respond to disagreements
within and between groups (Fletcher-Watson et al., 2017a; Milton, 2016). Historically, parents of
autistic children have been listened to somewhat (Silverman and Brosco, 2007), and
autistic people less so. Parents, like practitioners and third-sector workers,
can advocate on behalf of their children and may often be stakeholders in
research themselves – they should be included in the participatory agenda (Fletcher-Watson et al.,
2017b). For this reason, we have referred throughout to engagement
with both the autistic and the broader autism community. Nevertheless,
consultation with parents of children on the autism spectrum should not happen
to the exclusion of autistic people themselves. Moreover, when consulting with,
for example, both autistic adults and parents regarding a study with
pre-schoolers, how should researchers handle any conflicting advice from these
groups?

Even within a stakeholder category – for example, among autistic people – there
will be a broad diversity of views. A particular challenge may be the case when
an individual from within the autistic community is advocating for a position
which reflects their own view, but is not well supported by a broader
constituency of autistic people. That said, it is misleading to suggest that
consultation with members of the autistic community gives non-autistic
researchers access to a consistent ‘community view’. One way to address this is
to ensure that any focused consultation with a specific individual is
complemented by wider engagement – perhaps via social media or at events (while
recognising the bias that can arise from these engagement methods too).
Ultimately, despite the challenges described here, it is hoped that the growing
autistic rights movement and increasing prevalence of participatory research
will enable people to recognise and respect differences rather than attempting
to force a consensus (Milton
et al., 2012).

In addressing methodological challenges, and building supportive environments, we
encourage researchers and others with relative influence and power (e.g. senior
practitioners, policy-makers and funders) to work with autistic-led
organisations in the United Kingdom, such as the Participatory Autism
Research Collective, All Wales People First and Autism
Rights Group Highland (Chown et al., 2017). Such groups may
have elected representatives who can reliably speak for a larger community.
Moreover, by raising their profile, we can provide a focus for autistic
individuals who wish to be heard. In fact, it is worth noting the leadership
role which has been played by autistic advocates and activists in pioneering the
neurodiversity movement. The number of autistic-led organisations, publications
(e.g. Autonomy; Beardon,
2017; Lawson et
al., 2017; Murray, 2005), online communities (e.g. wrongplanet.net) and events (e.g. Autistic Pride, Autreat and
Autscape) is a testament to the energy and dedication of this community. Such
initiatives provide opportunities for researchers to make connections which may
yield significant benefit to all involved.

Limitations
The report presented here should be viewed as a way to open up further discussion
about the role, and delivery, of participatory methods in autism research. One
limitation is that this discussion focused often on social sciences and
psychological methods, rather than on biological and neurological research.
There may be specific barriers that apply in this content, not discussed here,
such as the technical knowledge required to engage in a productive partnership
with members of the autistic community. In the medical research field, the work
of groups such as Involve7 could provide a model to follow, though the mapping between engagement
with patients and research with autistic people may be inadequate.

We do not present a series of empirically-derived recommendations but instead
report on the intensive considerations of a small but diverse group, drawing on
the broader discussions across an entire seminar series. The seminar series was
not fully inclusive to people with a learning disability, and no non-speaking
autistic people took part. These key demographics were not represented, though
parents and other allies of such individuals did take part – including in
co-authorship of this publication. While there is guidance on how to start out
in participatory research (Pellicano et al., 2017), materials to enable this burgeoning
community of practice to extend and improve their work, and specifically to
include a wider diversity of autistic perspectives, remain lacking (though see
Scott-Barrett et al.,
2018).

Conclusion
While our seminar series was created around a series of research areas, the topics
which emerged from the six events concern the why and
how, more than the what of research. Differing
perspectives from the autism community and research community were expressed,
enabling institutional assumptions to be challenged, and ultimately articulating a
common vision for mutual and equal engagement. Our collective hope is that the
foundations laid throughout the Shaping Autism Research seminar
series will lead to a greater, co-created knowledge base for the better integration
of community perspectives in research. This will not come easily and can only happen
with considerable effort from relevant communities and stakeholders, as well as
evaluation of the effectiveness of participatory methods. The opportunity is to
create a burgeoning, merged community of research practice, including autistic and
non-autistic people and other partners who work collaboratively to create
facilitative environments and resolve important, relevant questions. The research
evidence developed in this context should then be implemented, providing structures
to support autistic people and their allies, and is more likely to achieve this goal
having been co-created. Meaningful participation in autism research can help us make
a better future for autistic people, together.

Supplemental Material
AUT786721_Lay_Abstract – Supplemental material for Making the future
together: Shaping autism research through meaningful participation
Click here for additional data file.

Supplemental material, AUT786721_Lay_Abstract for Making the future together:
Shaping autism research through meaningful participation by Sue Fletcher-Watson,
Jon Adams, Kabie Brook, Tony Charman, Laura Crane, James Cusack, Susan Leekam,
Damian Milton, Jeremy R Parr and Elizabeth Pellicano in Autism

 This work was authored by a sub-set of the Shaping Autism Research
seminar series leaders, including the original co-applicants for funding and those
who played an active role in shaping the text of this article. The content of the
article, however, was built on discussions between all seminar participants, and
especially the small working group who met for Seminar 6. We are particularly
grateful to these additional working group members: Melissa Bovis, Katie Gaudion,
Lorcan Kenny, Joe Long and Susy Ridout.

Funding: The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was
supported by a grant from the UK’s Economic and Social Research Council
(ES/M00225X/1). E.P. was supported by a Philip Leverhulme Prize awarded by the
UK’s Leverhulme Trust.

ORCID iDs: Sue Fletcher-Watson 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2688-1734

Laura Crane 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4161-3490

1. Identity-first language (e.g. autistic people) is the preferred language of
many people on the autism spectrum (see Sinclair, 2013) and their parents
(Kenny et al.,
2016). It is also the preferred language of the autistic
co-authors of this report. We, therefore, use identity-first terminology in
this article.

2. A template programme for autism-enabling events is available on www.shapingautismresearch.co.uk.

3. Neurodiversity is defined as the range of differences in individual brain
function and behavioural traits, regarded as part of normal variation in the
human population, encompassing diagnostic categories such as autism.

4. 
http://www.invo.org.uk/posttypepublication/involve-policy-on-payments-and-expenses-for-members-of-the-public-including-involve-group-members-february-2016/


5. 
https://www.ecu.ac.uk/


6. 
http://www.ncl.ac.uk/diversity/assets/documents/equality_strategy_2014-16-jh.pdf


7. 
http://www.invo.org.uk/
==== Refs
References

Alleva L   (2006 ) Taking time to savour the
rewards of slow science . Nature 
443 (7109 ): 271 .

Arnold L   (2012 ) Introduction to
Autonomy: The Critical Journal of Interdisciplinary Autism
Studies . Autonomy: The Critical Journal
of Interdisciplinary Autism Studies 
1 (1 ): 1 .

Arnstein SR   (1969 ) A ladder of citizen
participation . Journal of the American Institute of
Planners 
35 (4 ):
216 –224 .

Beardon L   (2017 ) Autism and Asperger Syndrome in
Adults . London ,
Sheldon Press .

Brett J Staniszewska S Mockford C et al  (2014 ) Mapping the impact of
patient and public involvement on health and social care research: a
systematic review . Health Expectations 
17 (5 ):
637 –650 .22809132 

Carrington SJ Uljarević M Roberts A et al  (2016 ) Knowledge acquisition and
research evidence in autism: researcher and practitioner perspectives and
engagement . Research in Developmental
Disabilities 
51 : 126 –134 .26826464 

Chown N Robinson J Beardon L et al  (2017 ) Improving research about us,
with us: a draft framework for inclusive autism research .
Disability & Society 
32 : 1 –15 .

Collins HM Evans R   (2002 ) The third wave of science
studies: studies of expertise and experience . Social
Studies of Science 
32 (2 ):
235 –296 .

Cornwall A Jewkes R   (1995 ) What is participatory
research? 
Social Science & Medicine 
41 (12 ):
1667 –1676 .8746866 

Crane L Adams F Harper G et al  (2018 ) ‘Something needs to change’:
Mental health experiences of young autistic adults in
England . Autism . Epub ahead of print 7
February 2018. doi: 10.1177/1362361318757048 .

Cusack J Sterry R   (2016 ) Your Questions: Shaping Future
Autism Research . London :
Autistica .

Dawson M Mottron L   (2011 ) Do autistics have cognitive
strengths? Should ASC be defined as disorders?  In:
Bolte S Hallmayer J   (eds) Autism Spectrum Conditions: FAQs on Autism,
Asperger Syndrome and Atypical Autism Answered by International
Experts . Gottingen :
Hogrefe ,
pp.32 –34 .

Fletcher-Watson S Apicella F Auyeung B et al  (2017 a) Attitudes of the autism
community to early autism research . Autism 
21 (1 ):
61 –74 .26975669 

Fletcher-Watson S Larsen K Salomone E et al  (2017 b) What do parents of children
with autism expect from participation in research? A community survey about
early autism studies . Autism . Epub ahead of
print 1 November. DOI: 10.1177/1362361317728436 .

Frauenberger C Good J Alcorn A et al  (2013 ) Conversing through and about
technologies: design critique as an opportunity to engage children with
autism and broaden research(er) perspectives .
International Journal of Child-Computer Interaction 
1 (2 ):
38 –49 .

Gaudion K Hall A Myerson J et al  (2014 ) Design and wellbeing:
bridging the empathy gap between neurotypical designers and autistic
adults . Design for Sustainable Wellbeing and
Empowerment 
2014 : 61 –77 .

Gernsbacher MA   (2017 ) Editorial perspective: the
use of person-first language in scholarly writing may accentuate
stigma . Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry 
58 (7 ):
859 –861 .28621486 

Gillespie-Lynch K Kapp SK Brooks PJ et al  (2017 ) Whose expertise is it?
Evidence for autistic adults as critical autism experts .
Frontiers in Psychology 
8 : 438 .28400742 

Grinker RR Chambers N Njongwe N et al  (2012 ) ‘Communities’ in community
engagement: lessons learned from autism research in South Korea and South
Africa . Autism Research 
5 (3 ):
201 –210 .22566396 

Hart A Davies C Aumann K et al  (2013 ) Mobilising knowledge in
community−university partnerships: what does a community of practice
approach contribute? 
Contemporary Social Science 
8 (3 ):
278 –291 .

Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee  (2012 )
IACC/OARC autism spectrum disorder publications analysis: the
global landscape of autism research .
Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee, US Department of
Health and Human Services , Washington,
DC , 7 .

Israel BA Parker EA Rowe Z et al  (2005 ) Community-based
participatory research: lessons learned from the Centres for Children’s
Environmental Health and Disease Prevention Research .
Environmental Health Perspectives 
113 (10 ): 1463 .

Kenny L Hattersley C Molins B et al  (2016 ) Which terms should be used
to describe autism? Perspectives from the UK autism
community . Autism 
20 (4 ):
442 –462 .26134030 

Lawson W Turner T Wilkinson A et al  (2017 ) Love, Partnership, or Singleton on
the Autism Spectrum . London :
Jessica Kingsley
Publishers .

Long J Clarkson A   (2017 ) Towards meaningful
participation in research and support practice: effecting change in autism
services . In: Milton D Martin N   (eds) Autism and Intellectual Disability in
Adults , vol. 2 
Hove : Pavilion
Publishing ,
pp.41 –45 .

Long J Panese J Ferguson J et al  (2017 ) Enabling voice and
participation in autism services: using practitioner research to develop
inclusive practice . Good Autism Practice 
18 (2 ):
6 –14 .

Lorenz T Frischling C Cuadros R et al  (2016 ) Autism and overcoming job
barriers: comparing job-related barriers and possible solutions in and
outside of autism-specific employment . PLoS
ONE 
11 (1 ): e0147040 .26766183 

McDonald KE Stack E   (2016 ) You say you want a
revolution: an empirical study of community-based participatory research
with people with developmental disabilities .
Disability and Health Journal 
9 (2 ):
201 –207 .26838472 

Martin N   (2010 ) Minimising the stress of the
PhD viva for students with Asperger syndrome . Good
Autism Practice 
11 (1 ):
52 –57 .

Mason D McConachie H Garland D et al  (2018 ) Predictors of quality of
life for autistic adults . Autism Research .
Epub ahead of print 7 May 2018. DOI: 10.1002/aur.1965 .

McConachie H Mason D Parr JR et al  (2018 ). Enhancing the validity of a
quality of life measure for autistic people . Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
48 (5 ):
1596 –1611 .29188584 

Michael C   (2016 ) Why we need research about
autism and ageing . Autism 
20 : 515 –516 .27141078 

Milton D Mills R Pellicano L   (2012 ) Ethics and autism: where is
the autistic voice? Commentary on Post et al .
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
44 (10 ):
2650 –2651 .

Milton DE   (2012 ) On the ontological status of
autism: the ‘double empathy problem’ . Disability
& Society 
27 (6 ):
883 –887 .

Milton DE   (2014 ) Autistic expertise: a
critical reflection on the production of knowledge in autism
studies . Autism 
18 (7 ):
794 –802 .24637428 

Milton DE Bracher M   (2013 ) Autistics speak but are they
heard? 
Journal of the BSA Medsoc Group 
7 : 61 –69 .

Milton DEM   (2016 ) Educational Discourse and the
Autistic Student: A Study Using Q-sort Methodology . PhD
Dissertation, University of Birmingham ,
Birmingham .

Murray D   (Ed.) (2005 ) Coming Out Asperger .
London : Jessica Kingsley
Publishers .

Nelson N Wright S   (1995 ) Power and Participatory Development:
Theory and Practice . London :
ITDG Publishing .

Nicolaidis C Raymaker DM   (2015 ) Community based participatory
research with communities defined by race, ethnicity, and disability:
translating theory to practice . In: Bradbury H   (ed.) The SAGE Handbook of Action Research .
Thousand Oaks, CA :
SAGE ,
pp.167 –179 .

Nicolaidis C Raymaker D McDonald K et al  (2011 ) Collaboration strategies in
non-traditional community-based participatory research partnerships: lessons
from an academic – community partnership with autistic
self-advocates . Progress in Community Health
Partnerships 
5 (2 ): 143 .21623016 

Nicolaidis C Raymaker D McDonald K et al  (2013 ) Comparison of healthcare
experiences in autistic and non-autistic adults: a cross-sectional online
survey facilitated by an academic-community partnership .
Journal of General Internal Medicine 
28 (6 ):
761 –769 .23179969 

Parr JR   (2016 ) How can we learn more about
the lives of adults on the autism spectrum from across the age range, and
their relatives?  In: Wright S   (ed.) Autism Spectrum Disorder in Mid and Later
Life . London :
Jessica Kingsley Publishers ,
pp.288 –296 .

Parsons S Cobb S   (2013 ) Who Chooses What I Need? Child Voice
and User-involvement in the Development of Learning Technologies for
Children with Autism . Swindon :
EPSRC Observatory for Responsible Innovation in
ICT .

Parsons S Charman T Faulkner R et al  (2013 ) Commentary – bridging the
research and practice gap in autism: the importance of creating research
partnerships with schools . Autism 
17 (3 ):
268 –280 .23614936 

Pellicano E   (2018 ) Engaging ‘seldom heard’
individuals in participatory autism research . In:
Milton D Martin N   (eds) Autism and Learning Disability Annual ,
vol. 2 
London :
Pavilion Publishing ,
pp.29 –34 .

Pellicano E Stears M   (2011 ) Bridging autism, science and
society: moving towards an ethically informed approach to autism
research . Autism Research 
4 (4 ):
271 –282 .21567986 

Pellicano E Crane L Gaudion K et al  (2017 ) Participatory Autism Research: A
Starterpack . London :
UCL Institute of
Education .

Pellicano E Dinsmore A Charman T   (2014 a) Views on
researcher-community engagement in autism research in the United Kingdom: a
mixed-methods study . PLoS ONE 
9 (10 ): e109946 .25303222 

Pellicano E Dinsmore A Charman T   (2014 b) What should autism research
focus upon? Community views and priorities from the United
Kingdom . Autism 
18 (7 ):
756 –770 .24789871 

Pellicano E Ne’eman A Stears M   (2011 ) Engaging, not excluding: a
response to Walsh et al . Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 
12 (12 ):
769 –769 .

Pellicano L Dinsmore A Charman T   (2013 ) A Future Made Together: Shaping
Autism Research in the UK . London :
Institute of Education .

Raymaker D Nicolaidis C   (2013 ) Participatory research with
autistic communities: shifting the system . In: Davidson J Orsini M   (eds) Worlds of Autism: Across the Spectrum of
Neurological Difference . Minneapolis,
MN : University of Minnesota
Press ,
pp.169 –190 .

Ridout S   (2014 ) More than picture-making:
reflecting on collage as a narrative tool for opening discourse on the
involvement of autistics in autism research .
Autonomy: The Critical Journal of Interdisciplinary Autism
Studies 
1 (3 ). Available at: http://www.larry-arnold.net/Autonomy/index.php/autonomy/article/view/AR14/html

Ridout S   (2018 ) Autism and Mental Well-being in
Higher Education: A Practical Resource for Students, Mentors and Study
Skills Support Workers . Hove :
Pavilion Publishing and
Media .

Ridout S Edmondson M   (2017 ) Cygnet mentoring project:
combined experiences from a mentor and a mentee .
Autonomy: The Critical Journal of Interdisciplinary Autism
Studies 
1 (5 ). Available at: http://www.larry-arnold.net/Autonomy/index.php/autonomy/article/view/AR20/html

Rose D   (2003 ) Collaborative research
between users and professionals: peaks and pitfalls .
The Psychiatrist 
27 (11 ):
404 –406 .

Sasson NJ Faso DJ Nugent J et al  (2017 ) Neurotypical peers are less
willing to interact with those with autism based on thin slice
judgements . Scientific Reports 
7 : 40700 .28145411 

Scott-Barrett J Cebula K Florian L   (2018 ) Listening to young people
with autism: learning from researcher experiences .
International Journal of Research & Method in
Education . Epub ahead of print 16 April. DOI: 10.1080/1743727X.2018.1462791 .

Sheppard E Pillai D Wong GTL et al  (2016 ) How easy is it to read the
minds of people with autism spectrum disorder? 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
46 (4 ):
1247 –1254 .26603886 

Silverman C Brosco JP   (2007 ) Understanding autism: parents
and paediatricians in historical perspective .
Archives of Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 
161 (4 ):
392 –398 .

Sinclair J   (2013 ) Why I dislike ‘person first’
Language . Autonomy, The Critical Journal Of
Interdisciplinary Autism Studies ,
1 (2 ). Retrieved from http://www.larry-arnold.net/Autonomy/index.php/autonomy/article/view/OP1

Stahmer AC Aranbarri A Drahota A et al  (2017 ) Towards a more collaborative
research culture: extending translational science from research to community
and back again . Autism 
21 : 259 –261 .28262037 

Tritter JQ McCallum A   (2006 ) The snakes and ladders of
user involvement: moving beyond Arnstein . Health
Policy 
76 (2 ):
156 –168 .16006004 

Wright CA Wright SD Diener ML et al  (2014 ) Autism spectrum disorder and
the applied collaborative approach: a review of community based
participatory research and participatory action research .
Journal of Autism 
1 (1 ):
1 –11 .

