
==== Front
Adv Immunol
Adv. Immunol
Advances in Immunology
0065-2776 1557-8445 Elsevier Inc. 

S0065-2776(06)92006-9
10.1016/S0065-2776(06)92006-9
Article
Antigen Presentation and the Ubiquitin‐Proteasome System in Host–Pathogen Interactions
Loureiro Joana  Ploegh Hidde L.  Whitehead Institute, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts
2 12 2006 
2006 
2 12 2006 
92 225 305
Copyright © 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.2006Elsevier Inc.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.Relatively small genomes and high replication rates allow viruses and bacteria to accumulate mutations. This continuously presents the host immune system with new challenges. On the other side of the trenches, an increasingly well‐adjusted host immune response, shaped by coevolutionary history, makes a pathogen's life a rather complicated endeavor. It is, therefore, no surprise that pathogens either escape detection or modulate the host immune response, often by redirecting normal cellular pathways to their advantage. For the purpose of this chapter, we focus mainly on the manipulation of the class I and class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigen presentation pathways and the ubiquitin (Ub)‐proteasome system by both viral and bacterial pathogens. First, we describe the general features of antigen presentation pathways and the Ub‐proteasome system and then address how they are manipulated by pathogens. We discuss the many human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)‐encoded immunomodulatory genes that interfere with antigen presentation (immunoevasins) and focus on the HCMV immunoevasins US2 and US11, which induce the degradation of class I MHC heavy chains by the proteasome by catalyzing their export from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)‐membrane into the cytosol, a process termed ER dislocation. US2‐ and US11‐mediated subversion of ER dislocation ensures proteasomal degradation of class I MHC molecules and presumably allows HCMV to avoid recognition by cytotoxic T cells, whilst providing insight into general aspects of ER‐associated degradation (ERAD) which is used by eukaryotic cells to purge their ER of defective proteins. We discuss the similarities and differences between the distinct pathways co‐opted by US2 and US11 for dislocation and degradation of human class I MHC molecules and also a putatively distinct pathway utilized by the murine herpes virus (MHV)‐68 mK3 immunoevasin for ER dislocation of murine class I MHC. We speculate on the implications of the three pathogen‐exploited dislocation pathways to cellular ER quality control. Moreover, we discuss the ubiquitin (Ub)‐proteasome system and its position at the core of antigen presentation as proteolysis and intracellular trafficking rely heavily on Ub‐dependent processes. We add a few examples of manipulation of the Ub‐proteasome system by pathogens in the context of the immune system and such diverse aspects of the host–pathogen relationship as virus budding, bacterial chromosome integration, and programmed cell death, to name a few. Finally, we speculate on newly found pathogen‐encoded deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) and their putative roles in modulation of host–pathogen interactions.
==== Body
1 Host–Pathogen Interactions
The vertebrate immune system is equipped to deal with invading pathogens, whether by means of mechanical barriers such as the skin and other epithelial surfaces or by means of innate immunity. Innate immunity comprises the phagocytic and inflammatory systems, with phagocytes like macrophages and neutrophils, dendritic cells (DCs), and natural killer (NK) cells, as well as soluble mediators such as cytokines and complement. Phagocytes are the immune system's first line of defense: they recognize, engulf, and clear the pathogen and are the main cellular component of the innate antibacterial response. NK cells can directly recognize and kill pathogen‐infected cells that fail to express MHC molecules and secrete cytokines that affect the immune response. NK cells are the main cellular effectors of the innate response against viruses. The complement system can lyse infected cells or simply coat the surface of the pathogen or pathogen‐derived material, resulting in its neutralization and opsonization. To counteract pathogen infection, host cells also have extracellular and intracellular pathogen recognition receptors to alert the immune system, such as toll‐like receptors (TLRs) at the cell surface, and protein kinase R (PKR) and nucleotide‐binding oligomerization domain (NOD) proteins in the cytosol (Akira 2006, Inohara 2005) that can detect pathogen‐associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) such as bacterial peptidoglycan or viral dsRNA. These “danger” signals initiate the synthesis of cytokines like interferons to induce inflammation, a crucial component of the innate defense against pathogens. Because innate immunity is not always successful at recognizing or eliminating the infectious agents, a more sophisticated line of defense, adaptive immunity, is also in place.

The adaptive immune system includes cells originated in the thymus, the T lymphocytes, and the bone marrow–derived B lymphocytes (B cells), DCs, and macrophages. The two subsets of T lymphocytes, CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, possess distinct T cell receptors (TCRs), CD8 and CD4, respectively, that interact with their coreceptors on the surface of the target cell, the polymorphic class I and class II MHC molecules (Ploegh, 1998). Class I MHC molecules are expressed by nearly all nucleated cells, whereas class II MHC molecules are constitutively expressed only by professional antigen‐presenting cells (APCs), such as macrophages, B cells, and DCs. Class II MHC expression however, can be induced in many cells, in particular by IFN‐γ treatment. APCs can endocytose, process, and display antigen in the context of class II MHC products at their cell surface to activate CD4+ T cells. In the presence of antigen displayed by the APC and the appropriate lymphocyte costimulatory molecules, CD4+ T helper (TH) cells produce cytokines that “help” activate other cells: TH1 (or inflammatory T cells) activate macrophages to kill the phagocytosed pathogens; TH2 cells (or helper T cells) trigger T and B cell proliferation and activate the B cell differentiation program into antibody‐producing plasma cells. Furthermore, activation of CD4+ TH cells is carefully regulated by a small subset of T cells, the regulatory T cells (Tregs). Regulatory T cells play an important role in downregulation of the host immune response, limiting the immunopathology resultant from antipathogen reactions, and preventing autoimmune disease (Beissert 2006, Mills 2004). In addition to making antibodies, B cells are a special kind of APCs. Unlike DCs and macrophages, B cells are not actively phagocytic. However, stimulation of the membrane immunoglobulin (mIg) antigen‐recognition component of their B cell receptor (BCR) with cognate antigen triggers the B cell to capture and deliver the antigen to class II MHC compartments, culminating with antigen presentation for activation of T cells. Bone marrow–derived professional APCs include macrophages and DCs. Macrophages are phagocytic APCs with a low basal antigen‐presenting capacity—owing to low surface expression of class II MHC and costimulatory molecules—that is induced on macrophage activation, for instance, by IFN‐γ. Macrophages reside in (or are recruited to) peripheral tissues, where they phagocytose and clear pathogens. Phagocytosis, in turn, induces release of proinflammatory cytokines like IFN‐γ that turn macrophages into potent APCs, resulting in initiation of CD4+ T cell activation.

Dendritic cells, the consummate professional APCs, travel through the periphery, sampling all tissues for prospective invaders. Immature DCs phagocytose pathogens and home to the nearest lymphoid organ to “educate” (prime) naïve CD8+ T cells by cross‐presenting antigen in the context of class I MHC molecules—a process described in more detail later. Mature DCs can also prime naïve CD4+ T cells. Like resting macrophages, immature DCs have very low antigen‐presenting capability, and only on exposure to maturation signals [such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on bacterial surfaces] does internalized antigen get loaded into class II MHC products and get displayed at the cell surface to CD4+ T cells (Bryant 2004, Stockwin 2000). “Educated” (antigen‐specific) CD8+ T lymphocytes survey all cells in the body, ready to destroy any that displays signs of the presence of cellular alterations (such as viral and tumor peptides) within their surface class I MHC molecules (Andersen 2006, Castelli 2000). Antigen‐specific CD4+ T lymphocytes can coordinate macrophage bactericidal properties, activation of T and B lymphocytes, and antibody production.

Not only do the cells of the adaptive immune system provide a more elaborate defense, but also an increased level of protection from a subsequent reinfection with the same pathogen, the bedrock principle of vaccine strategies (Crotty 2004, Pulendran 2006). Adding to the complexity of the immune system is the cross talk between innate and adaptive immunity, which is crucial in eliciting an effective immune response (Zingoni et al., 2005). As mentioned, phagocytes release cytokines that stimulate the adaptive response. Conversely, on activation by antigen recognition, T cells synthesize and secrete cytokines that activate macrophages, increasing their ability to kill ingested microbes, an innate immune response (Munz 2005, Salazar‐Mather 2003). The vertebrate immune system, therefore, is the appropriate battleground for microbial pathogens, selecting for those that devise successful strategies to avoid detection and elimination (Hilleman 2004, Ploegh 1998).

2 Manipulation of the Host Response by Pathogens: Some General Considerations
Intracellular pathogens have evolved sophisticated mechanisms to subvert host processes to ensure their own replication and transmission. The initial hurdle is entry into the host cell, which poses great challenges for avoiding immune detection before establishing infection. To promote entry into host cells without alerting the immune system, bacteria possess capsular surfaces that have evolved to minimize antibody and complement deposition while in circulation through the body. On the other hand, filamentous adhesins (like fimbriae and pili) that protrude through the bacteria's capsule enable binding to host cell receptors, which enables secretion systems to deliver bacterial effectors to modulate uptake and invasion (Finlay 2006, Galan 1999). Virus particles are very often coated with highly variable capsid (nonenveloped viruses) or envelope (enveloped viruses) proteins to avoid detection and clearance by antibody‐mediated responses. These capsids or envelopes can also be studded with immunomodulatory molecules of viral or even host origin and promote attachment to the host cell membrane, fusion and delivery of the virus internal core. Alternatively, they may act as signaling devices and induce intracellular cascades required for virus uptake. Ultimately, intracellular release of the viral DNA or RNA occurs (Marsh 2006, Skehel 2000). The establishment of an infection critically depends on bacterial and viral genes dedicated to manipulation of host functions. A number of reviews have covered the bacterial and viral genes involved in manipulation of the host immune system, from control of apoptosis, cytokine signaling, to the antibody response, so the reader is referred to Alcami 2003, Alcami 2000, Bowie 2004, Finlay 2006, Hengel 2005, Hilleman 2004, Tortorella 2000. For the purpose of this chapter, we will focus on pathogen manipulation of antigen presentation pathways and the Ub‐proteasome system.

3 Antigen Presentation
Antigen presentation involves the conversion of protein antigens into peptide ligands that can bind to MHC products that are displayed at the cell surface for recognition by T cells. In a simplified view of antigen presentation, the class I and class II MHC pathways have evolved to sample different sources of antigen to which they have access: the class I MHC pathway usually deals with cytosolic antigens and is crucial for activation of CD8+ T cells, whereas the class II MHC pathway deals with exogenous antigens and the activation of CD4+ T cells (Bryant 2004, Cresswell 2005, Pamer 1998). Antigen presentation is, of course, not as simple and clear‐cut, as we shall discuss later. There are, however, common principles that apply to the discrete steps of antigen processing and presentation by class I and class II MHC molecules: antigen must be acquired, it is subjected to proteolysis, delivered to MHC+ compartments, and properly assembled with the MHC product. The complex is then subject to sorting through the secretory pathway and delivered to the cell surface (Fig. 1
). Because each of these steps affords a target for interference by pathogens, we shall survey them for each pathway.Figure 1 Common principles in antigen processing and presentation by class I and class II MHC molecules. In the class I pathway, endogenous antigens are derived from cytosolic proteolysis and delivered to the ER lumen, where loading onto class I MHC products takes place. The assembled complex is then sorted to the cell surface. In the class II pathway, exogenous material is internalized from the extracellular space and delivered to the lysosome, where processing and loading onto MHC products occur. Sorting through the secretory pathway then delivers the class II complex to the cell surface.



4 Class I MHC Antigen Presentation
The class I MHC is a trimeric complex composed of the class I MHC heavy chain (HC), the β2‐microglobulin (β2m) or light chain, and the antigenic peptide. The structure of the fully assembled complex and its interactions with antigen‐specific receptors on T cells have been extensively reviewed (Alam 1996, Rudolph 2002, von Boehmer 2006). The class I MHC HC is inserted into the ER membrane and N‐glycosylated and binds in its course of synthesis to the membrane‐associated chaperone calnexin (CNX), at which point folding and intrachain disulfide bond formation take place. Once dissociated from CNX, the HC binds its soluble partner subunit, β2m, and enters the peptide‐loading complex (PLC). The PLC is composed of two MHC‐encoded components, TAP and tapasin, and two “housekeeping” ER proteins, calreticulin and ERp57. The transporter associated with antigen presentation (TAP) is an ATP‐dependent pump with two subunits, TAP1 and TAP2 that transports peptides into the ER. Tapasin, a transmembrane glycoprotein, mediates the interaction between the TAP transporter and peptide‐free HC/β2m dimers. The soluble calreticulin and ERp57, a chaperone and a thiol oxidoreductase, respectively, normally involved in folding of nascent glycoproteins, promote assembly of the class I MHC complex. The peptide antigen cargo for class I MHC originates from proteasomal proteolysis in the cytosol. The array of proteasome‐generated peptides is subject to trimming by cytosolic endopeptidases and delivered to the ER lumen by the TAP transporter. Further trimming by ER‐resident endopeptidases can also occur to guarantee a custom‐fit of the peptide antigens, typically 8–10 amino acids long, into the peptide‐binding groove on the HC/β2m dimer associated with the PLC. Empty HC molecules are detained in the ER by virtue of interaction with tapasin, until assembly with β2m and peptide takes place, at which point the HC/β2m/peptide trimeric complex is released from the PLC and allowed to exit the ER and enter the secretory pathway. Once displayed at the cell surface, the antigen‐loaded class I MHC complex is ready for inspection by the T cell receptor (TCR) on circulating cytotoxic CD8+ T cells (Cresswell 2005, Heemels 1995, Rammensee 2002, Rammensee 2004).

5 Pathogen Recognition by CD8+ T Cells and NK Cells
Class I MHC products on most cells present exclusively “self” peptides, derived from the cell's own proteins, the majority of which results from protein synthesis on free ribosomes in the cytoplasm. Because of the intrinsic error‐prone nature of protein synthesis and folding, a sizable fraction of translation products (estimated at up to ∼30%) may never result in a finished product. These defective ribosomal products (DRIPs) are destroyed within 30 min of their synthesis by the cytosolic proteasomal pathway and enter the class I MHC antigen presentation pathway (Yewdell et al., 2001). In tumor cells or cells infected by a virus, mutated forms of endogenous proteins or viral proteins will compete with the host's own proteins for presentation by class I MHC products. As “non‐self” (tumor‐ or virus‐derived) peptides displayed in the context of class I MHC products accumulate at the cell surface, their chance of triggering activation of CD8+ T cells with a cognate receptor increases. The activated cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes will then lyse the target cell by releasing perforin and granzymes or by Fas ligand engagement. Secretion of IFN‐γ and tumor necrosis factor‐α (TNF‐α) also aids in elimination of infected and tumor cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) (Andersen 2006, Castelli 2000).

The selective pressure imposed by immune surveillance has made loss of class I MHC expression a hallmark of some tumors and virus‐infected cells, as this allows them to be invisible to CTLs. There is, however, a backup system for when lack of class I MHC expression impairs the CD8+ T cell cytotoxic response: NK cells. NK cells display both activating and inhibitory receptors at their surface, which recognize different ligands at the surface of target cells. NK cell activity is ultimately determined by the integration of signals that are perceived by the NK cell surface receptors (Lanier, 2005). All NK cells express at least one inhibitory receptor, which engages class I MHC molecules on the surface of the target cell, resulting in downregulation of NK cell effector functions. Low levels or absence of class I MHC products on the surface of the target cell relieve the inhibitory signals and lead to NK cell cytotoxicity, resulting in clearance of the virus‐infected or tumor cells. NK cell recognition has been extensively revised and the reader is referred to Backstrom 2004, Kumar 2005, Lanier 2005.

There is an exception to the rule that the class I MHC pathway is devoted to display of peptide antigens from endogenously generated proteins: the so‐called professional APCs, DCs, and macrophages can acquire and process exogenous material and present it at the cell surface in class I MHC products, a process called cross‐presentation. Cross‐presentation allows noninfected professional APCs to prime naïve T cells with pathogen‐ or tumor‐derived peptides acquired through endocytosis of infected cells/cell remnants. This “cross‐priming” is essential for development of CD8+ T cell immunity to viruses and tumors in vivo, since only professional APCs can present viral/tumor antigens in the context of class I MHC products without being themselves infected/tumorigenic. There is considerable controversy as to the exact nature of the antigen acquired and modes of antigen acquisition, as well as the intracellular mechanisms leading to cross‐presentation and the subsets of APCs endowed with this property (Cresswell 2005, Groothuis 2005, Guermonprez 2005, Jutras 2005, Shen 2006). This controversy is, however, beyond the scope of this discussion.

6 Class II MHC Antigen Presentation
The class II MHC antigen presentation pathway deals with antigens that reside in extracellular space and are internalized into the endolysosomal pathway. All mammalian cells internalize their own cell surface proteins by constitutive endocytosis. In class II MHC+ cells, this allows class II MHC access to self‐proteins as a source of peptides. Professional APCs, such as B cells, macrophages, and DCs, also engage in receptor‐mediated endocytosis to acquire extracellular antigen: the antigen from the extracellular milieu is bound by cell surface receptors, internalized, and delivered to the class II MHC antigen processing machinery. Antibodies, complement system factors, and common bacterial or viral components that coat the surface of pathogens or their toxic products bind receptors on APCs that allow them to recognize and internalize this foreign material. Of the many receptors used by professional APCs for this purpose, the mannose receptor, which recognizes mannose residues and glycoproteins on viral and bacterial products, and the scavenger receptor, which recognizes very promiscuously many different classes of macromolecules, are among the most important. Professional APCs also have complement receptors and receptors for the Fc region of antibodies, the Fc receptors, which can assist in the acquisition of opsonized antigen and in its delivery to the proper intracellular destination. B cells can also use their surface immunoglobulin or BCR, to acquire antigen (Bryant 2004, Cresswell 1994, Kim 2006c).

Class II MHC loading with antigenic peptides takes place mostly in the endocytic vesicles of professional APCs. Class II MHC αβ dimers assemble in the ER and associate with the chaperone invariant chain (Ii), which inserts its class II MHC‐associated Ii peptide (CLIP) portion in the peptide‐binding groove of the αβ dimer, preventing its premature (prelysosomal) loading. Ii is also important for correct assembly and transport of class II MHC in the endocytic pathway. Further class II MHC maturation and peptide loading takes place in acidified compartments of the endolysosomal pathway of APCs, since low pH favors an “open” conformation of the class II MHC molecule and hence peptide exchange, as well as the action of specific cysteine proteases that displace Ii from the class II MHC–Ii complex, and that of the class II MHC‐like molecule HLA‐DM which facilitates peptide loading. The many hydrolase activities present in the endolysosomal compartments of APCs, such as the IFN‐γ‐inducible lysosomal thiol reductase (GILT), numerous cysteine proteases of the cathepsin (Cat) family, like CatB, CatS, CatL, and asparaginyl endopeptidase (AEP), produce the peptide ligands that are loaded onto class II MHC products. Peptides bound by class II MHC molecules are usually 13–25 residues long. The end result is a mature class II MHC–peptide complex at the cell surface, consisting of a class II MHC αβ dimer loaded with peptide, which interacts with the TCR on CD4+ T cells. The result of this interaction is dependent on class II MHC–TCR contacts and also on the context provided by lymphocyte costimulatory molecules at the immunological synapse. The CD4+ T cell response may be cytolytic, but generally these antigen‐specific CD4+ T lymphocytes function as helper cells, releasing cytokines to enhance the overall immune response by inducing macrophage activation, T and B cell proliferation, and B cell differentiation to produce antigen‐specific antibodies and different immunoglobulin isotypes with different effector functions (Bryant 2004, Chapman 2006, Cresswell 1994, Honey 2003, Hsing 2005, Stern 2006, Villadangos 1999).

7 Ubiquitin‐Proteasome System
All cellular proteins, regardless of their half‐life, are subject to turnover. The main pathway for degradation of short‐lived proteins in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells is the Ub‐proteasome system (Hershko and Ciechanover, 1992). Since the discovery of Ub and Ub‐dependent proteolysis in the late 1970s, it has become increasingly clear that the Ub‐proteasome system is pivotal to numerous cellular processes: cell cycle control, transcriptional regulation, signal transduction, antigen presentation and induction of the inflammatory response, degradation from the ER, membrane trafficking, receptor endocytosis and downregulation, apoptosis, and development (Hershko 1992, Pickart 2001).

8 The Ubiquitin Conjugation Cascade
Ubiquitin is a small 76‐amino acid protein, synthesized as a precursor that is processed by deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) to expose the glycine–glycine sequence at the Ub C‐terminus, its site of attachment to target molecules. ATP‐dependent Ub activation is catalyzed by the E1 (Ub‐activating) enzyme, which adenylates the Ub C‐terminus, allowing the subsequent formation of a high‐energy thioester bond between the glycine residue of Ub and the cysteine residue on the E1 active site. Ub is then transferred from the E1 cysteinyl side chain to a cysteinyl group on one of several E2 (Ub‐conjugating) enzymes. Finally, one of hundreds of E3 (Ub‐ligase) enzymes, binds the Ub–E2 complex and the substrate, thus facilitating the transfer of Ub to a lysine residue in the substrate via an amide (isopeptide) bond (Hershko and Ciechanover, 1992). The functions of E3 ligases, in particular, are tightly regulated by signal‐induced mechanisms, such as localization, oligomerization, degradation, and posttranslational modifications, which makes E3s the master orchestrators of specificity in the Ub conjugation cascade. This multistep mechanism, much like phosphorylation, endows protein ubiquitination with a high degree of specificity and flexibility, which is paramount to its important biological functions (Haglund 2005, Hershko 1998, Pickart 2001, Pickart 2004, Varshavsky 2005) (Fig. 2A
).Figure 2 Overview of the Ub‐proteasome system. (A) Ubiquitin‐conjugation cascade and how Ub chain linkage type and length influence substrate fate. E1, Ub‐activating enzyme; E2, Ub‐conjugating enzyme; E3, Ub‐ligase enzyme; and DUB, deubiquitinating enzyme. (B) Diversity in E3 ligases. E3s play crucial roles in substrate selection and can be regulated by localization, oligomerization, associated E2s, posttranslational modifications, and degradation. Hrd1p and Doa10p are yeast E3 ligases that are multispanning membrane proteins of the ER and, in the case of Doa10p, nuclear envelope. The mammalian SCF family of E3 ligases are mainly cytosolic and can recruit substrate adaptor proteins, the F‐boxes, with very diverse substrate specificities.



9 Ubiquitin Ligases
We elaborate on Ub E3 ligases to some extent, as they are key players in several aspects of the immune system, including immune evasion (Liu, 2004) and also in ER quality control and degradation (Hirsch 2004, Kostova 2003, Romisch 2005), that yields to some of the ligands on class I MHC products. E3 ligases can be divided into two broad classes: the homologous to E6‐AP carboxyl terminus (HECT)‐domain ligases or the really interesting new gene (RING)‐like domain ligases. The first HECT E3 described, E6‐associated protein (E6‐AP), was shown to be required for ubiquitination and degradation of p53, mediated by the human papillomavirus protein E6 (Scheffner et al., 1993). In HECT E3s, Ub is transferred from the E2 to a conserved cysteine residue in the HECT domain, followed by attack of this thioester by a lysine on the substrate (Pickart, 2001). The RING‐CH domain is a ring finger motif with a cysteine residue in the fourth zinc‐coordinating position and a histidine residue in the fifth. RING‐type E3s are more abundant and do not form an obligatory thioester intermediate with Ub; rather they bring the Ub‐loaded E2s and the substrate into proximity, thus facilitating the Ub transfer from the E2 to the substrate (Pickart, 2001). RING‐type E3s can be single subunit E3s, which have both a RING‐finger domain and substrate recruitment domain(s) on the same protein, like MDM2, a key regulator of p53. Multisubunit E3s include the very diverse Cullin‐RING ligases (CRLs) (Petroski and Deshaies, 2005). CRLs are composed of a catalytic core that recruits the Ub‐loaded E2—formed by a nucleating Cullin protein and a RING finger protein—as well as a substrate recognition complex. The archetypal CRLs are the Skp‐1‐Cullin‐1‐F‐box protein complexes or SCF E3s. The Cullin subunit (any one of Cullin‐1, ‐2, ‐3, ‐4A, ‐4B, ‐5, or ‐7) forms an elongated bent backbone for the multisubunit ligase. The Cullin N‐terminus binds the S‐phase kinase‐related protein‐1 (Skp‐1), an adaptor that recruits any one of a number of substrate‐specific adaptor subunits called F‐box proteins. The F‐box protein is the main determinant in substrate specificity, as it binds the substrate through its particular substrate recognition domain (Jin et al., 2004a), although the RING box protein may participate (Jin and Harper, 2002). The Cullin N‐terminus binds the catalytic core composed of the RING‐box (Rbx) protein with its associated Ub‐loaded E2 (Zheng et al., 2002). This arrangement allows the F‐box protein to bring its bound substrate close to the ubiquitination machinery of the complex (Fig. 2B). Phosphorylation of the substrate very often regulates the F‐box protein–substrate interaction, converting the substrate into a form susceptible to E3 activity, adding an extra layer of control to the process (Joazeiro 2000, Schulman 2000, Zheng 2002).

CRLs assemble with numerous substrate receptors. Cullins 2 and 5, for example, recruit substrates through suppressor of cytokine signaling/elongin‐BC (SOCS/BC) boxes and form the so‐called SCF2s and SCF5s complexes. In SCF2s and SCF5s, Skp‐1 is substituted by the Skp‐1‐like protein elongin C which binds the Ub‐like elongin B that binds the substrate adaptor subunit (Petroski and Deshaies, 2005). Many of these E3 complexes have important roles in the immune system (Liu 2004, Liu 2005). The nuclear factor‐κB (NF‐κB) transcription factor is a master organizer of both innate and adaptive immunity. NF‐κB is activated in response to TLR signaling on recognition of pathogen‐associated molecules like bacterial peptidoglycan (Liu et al., 2005) in a process that is crucially dependent on ubiquitination. One of the steps requires the cytosolic SCFβ‐TrCP E3 complex. The SCFβ‐TrCP substrate adaptor component is the F‐box protein β‐transducin repeat‐containing protein (β‐TrCP) that possesses WD repeats that bind to phosphorylated inhibitor of NF‐κB (IκB), inducing its ubiquitination and degradation. NF‐κB is thus released from the IkB‐NF‐κB dimer and translocates into the nucleus, activating downstream transcription. The elongin‐C‐elongin‐B‐Cullin‐5‐SOCS (ECS) complex uses SOCS proteins as the substrate adaptors. SOCS boxes bind Janus kinases (JAKs), which are recruited and activated in response to IFN and cytokine signaling, promoting ubiquitination and degradation of JAKs by the ECS complex. This, in turn, inhibits phosphorylation and activation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family of transcription factors that are crucial for the immune response following IFN and cytokine signaling and following viral infections (Liu et al., 2005). There are other families of E3s with noncanonical RING‐domains, like the K3 homologues and the Ufd2‐homologous box (U‐box) E3s (which we discuss in more detail later). For a more comprehensive review of HECT and RING E3s and different classifications read (Ardley 2005, Coscoy 2003, Hatakeyama 2001, Petroski 2005, Sharrocks 2006).

10 Ubiquitin Chains and Ubiquitin‐Like Modifiers (Ubls)
Originally believed to always deliver a “kiss of death” and target the substrate for proteasomal degradation, the much more wide‐ranging effects of Ub conjugation are beginning to be appreciated. Chain length and linkage type also influence the outcome of the Ub‐conjugated substrate. The multiple Ub moieties in a polyUb chain (chains of 4 or more Ub moieties) are linked to one another by an isopeptide bond between a lysine residue on one Ub molecule (usually on Lys48) and the C‐terminal carboxyl group of the next Ub on the chain. At times, extension of a polyUb chain on a substrate conjugated with 1–3 “initiator” Ub moieties requires a special subclass of E3s, the UFD2‐homology box (U‐box) E3s (once called E4s) (Hoppe, 2005). Targeting of proteins for proteasomal proteolysis generally requires polyubiquitination in a lysine (Lys) 48‐type linkage. By contrast to polyUb, substrate monoubiquitination or attachment of noncanonical Ub chains—Ub chains with non‐Lys48 linkages such as Lys63 and Lys29 linkages—usually have nonproteolytic functions in DNA repair, endocytosis, signal transduction, transcriptional regulation, and ribosomal function (d'd'Azzo 2005, Pickart 2004).

Monoubiquitination can occur on a single lysine residue or on several lysine residues in a substrate (multiubiquitination). Monoubiquitination is extremely important as a sorting signal in the endocytic pathway. For example, monoUb attachment is sufficient to induce endocytosis of growth hormone receptor and sorting to the lysosome for degradation (Hicke 2001, Hicke 2003). Direct modification of the cargo (cis‐regulation) or modification of the protein‐trafficking machinery (trans‐regulation) by monoUb could have many consequences for antigen presentation, as these processes rely heavily on events that take place in endolysosomal compartments. Noncanonical ubiquitin chains play many diverse roles in signaling pathways, in DNA replication and postreplication DNA repair, and modulating protein–protein interactions. For instance, activation of NF‐κB is tightly regulated by a balance between Lys48‐ and Lys63‐mediated ubiquitination of different components of the NF‐κB pathway. Triggering of many cell‐surface receptors leads to assembly of signaling complexes that recruit tumor necrosis factor receptor‐associated factor 6 (TRAF6), an E3 ligase that binds UBC13, promoting Lys63‐linked polyubiquitination of the γ subunit of the inhibitor of NF‐κB kinase (IKK) complex, IKKγ. This leads to activation of the IKK complex, which in turn results in IkB phosphorylation. Phosho‐IkB then recruits the SCF complex that catalyzes Lys48‐linked polyubiquitination of IkB and consequently activates NF‐κB (Karin and Ben‐Neriah, 2000). For comprehensive reviews see (Finley 2004, Pickart 2004, Varshavsky 2005).

Ubiquitin‐like molecules or modifiers (Ubls) share structural homology with Ub and can also be conjugated onto protein substrates, mostly with outcomes other than proteasomal degradation. Ubls like the small ubiquitin‐like modifier SUMO, neuronal precursor cell‐expressed developmentally down‐regulated 8 (NEDD8) or IFN‐stimulated gene product of 15 kDa (ISG15), to name but a few, are implicated in important physiological processes like nuclear transport, maintenance of chromosome integrity, transcriptional regulation, cell cycle control, signaling and regulation of proteolysis (Hochstrasser 2001, Schwartz 2003). Ubls may regulate Ub‐mediated proteolysis or signaling through comodification of a substrate, thus modulating the effects of Ub conjugation (Lamsoul 2005, Sobko 2002) or by regulating the activity, specificity, localization, or stability of enzymes in the Ub‐conjugating cascade, as is the case for NEDD8 modification of Cullin‐RING E3s (Kawakami 2001, Petroski 2005, Wu 2005).

11 Deubiquitinating Enzymes
Deubiquitinating enzymes can cleave isopeptide bonds to remove Ub from the substrate or from polyubiquitin chains. There are about 100 DUBs in the human genome, organized in five classes according to their catalytic domain structure: the ubiquitin‐specific proteases (USPs), the ubiquitin C‐terminal hydrolases (UCHs), the Machado‐Joseph disease proteases (MJDs), the ovarian tumor proteases (OTUs), and the JAB1/MPN/Mov34 proteases (JAMMs). The first four classes comprise cysteine‐type proteases, whereas JAMMs are metalloproteases. For a more detailed inventory of DUBs, read Nijman et al. (2005). DUBs have very diverse specificity properties, in terms of the ubiquitin or Ubl moiety itself (substrate specificity), in terms of the target protein to which the Ub or Ubl is attached (target specificity), and possibly in terms of the context provided by target and attached modification. DUB specificity in vivo can be further regulated by subcellular localization or association with different binding partners (Amerik 2004, Li 2003, Reyes‐Turcu 2006, Soboleva 2004). DUB functions are therefore also extremely diverse, ranging from regulation of proteasome function, to regulation of chromatin structure, to membrane protein trafficking, and with obvious implications in processes such as cancer and neurodegeneration (Amerik 2004, Nijman 2005, Soboleva 2004).

12 The Proteasome
The proteasome, very abundant in the cytosol, is a multisubunit protease composed of the 20S and 19S proteasome complexes. The 20S proteasome (or central core particle) has the general architecture of a barrel, formed by four stacked rings of seven subunits each, the outer two rings being composed of α subunits and the innermost two rings of β subunits (Groll et al., 1997). The β subunits, which line the proteasome's inner cavity, carry out the catalytic activity. For mammalian proteasomes, only three of the seven β subunits in each ring are catalytically active. Access to this cavity occurs through narrow pores (with a diameter on the order of 10–15 Å) at both ends of the barrel, so it is usually assumed that protein substrates must be unfolded prior to their delivery to the catalytic chamber (Groll 2000, Groll 1997, Kohler 2001). Also at both ends of the core particle there is the 19S cap complex, whose functions range from recognition of poly‐Ub chains on target proteins, to unfolding of the substrate to facilitate entry into the catalytic cavity, to deubiquitination activity (Adams 2003, Heinemeyer 2004, Rivett 1997, Schmidt 2005, Seeger 1997).

As mentioned earlier, the proteasome plays an instrumental role in class I MHC antigen presentation and activation of peptide‐specific CD8+ T cell responses. This process requires not only generation of peptides of the right quality—that is, right size and sequence to allow a correct fit into the peptide‐binding cleft—but also in the right quantity to trigger a successful response, which is no small endeavor due to many destructive aminopeptidase activities in the cytosol (Shastri 2005, Strehl 2005). IFN‐γ, a crucial component of the innate and adaptive antiviral immune responses, affords the immune system a competitive edge. IFN‐γ induces expression of auxiliary β subunits, β1i, β5i, and β2i [also known as low molecular weight protein 2 (LMP2), LMP7 and multicatalytic endopeptidase‐like complex 1 (MECL1), respectively], as well as synthesis of the proteasome activator PA28, and of the proteasome maturation protein (POMP) (Strehl et al., 2005). The immunosubunits LMP2, LMP7, and MECL1 are incorporated into nascent proteasomes, replacing their endogenous counterparts and constituting the so‐called immunoproteasome. The proteasome activator PA28 (or 11S proteasome) binds to the outer rings of the 20S proteasome, thereby opening the central gate and facilitating substrate entry. POMP is important for assembly and maturation of the proteasome (Strehl et al., 2005). This IFN‐γ‐induced proteolytic cascade, mediated by immunoproteasomes and PA28, might be induced to respond to a demand for high proteasome activity when the constitutive cascade is no longer sufficient, altering the proteolytic activity of the proteasome for maximal efficiency in production of the class I MHC peptide repertoire. IFN‐γ treatment also activates a transcriptional program that increases the synthesis of class I MHC molecules themselves and that of components of the peptide‐loading complex, thus increasing cell surface presentation (Kloetzel 2004, Kloetzel 2004, Kruger 2003, Rivett 2004, Van den Eynde 2001). Therefore, even though class I MHC presentation is constitutive, it can be modulated in the course of an immune response, with a proposed role in the early stages of a cytotoxic response. It is thus not surprising that viruses have targeted the IFN‐γ signaling cascade so aggressively (Alcami 2000, Hengel 2005, Salazar‐Mather 2006).

13 ER Quality Control and Degradation
Although tightly controlled, ER protein synthesis is not always successful. Proteins may sustain damage or fail to complete their synthesis early during biogenesis, or be trapped in an irreversible nonnative conformation, or a mutation may result in a structural alteration that leads to misfolding, as is the case for the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator (CFTR) (Jensen 1995, Ward 1995), mutant plasma α1‐antitrypsin (Teckman and Perlmutter, 1996), or tyrosinase (Halaban et al., 2000). They may also be expressed in the absence of their cognate subunits, as is the case for unassembled subunits of TCRα (Huppa 1997, Yang 1998). ER quality control is a homeostatic process that involves an elaborate machinery that recognizes and retains newly synthesized misfolded or misassembled proteins and targets many of them for degradation by the Ub‐proteasome system (Ellgaard and Helenius, 2003). This mode of degradation therefore samples sets of proteins otherwise targeted to extracellular space, where the degradation products are available as peptide ligands for class II MHC products. In addition to its role in ER quality control, this ER‐associated degradation (ERAD) can also be employed in the physiological regulated proteolysis of normal ER proteins whose degradation is subject to metabolic cues, such as hydroxymethylglutaryl‐coenzyme A reductase (HMGR) (Hampton 2002, Hampton 1997).

A feature of this ER‐associated protein degradation is the spatial separation between targeting of substrates and their proteolysis, which requires substrate export from the ER lumen or membrane to the cytoplasm by a process termed dislocation (also called retrograde translocation or retrotranslocation) (Werner et al., 1996). Dislocation is a complicated multistep process that involves substrate recognition, targeting for dislocation, removal from the ER membrane, deglycosylation, ubiquitination, and finally proteolysis (Kostova 2003, Meusser 2005, Romisch 2005). The proteasome is usually considered to be a nonselective degradation apparatus, with selection of ERAD substrates being mediated mostly by the Ub ligases. However, the ER quality control E3 enzymes are mostly cytosolic or membrane‐associated and thus are separated from their substrates at least by the ER membrane. This invokes the existence of mechanisms, present in E3 ligases themselves or in upstream factors, which facilitate coupling of ERAD substrate recognition to ubiquitination by E3 ligases in the cytoplasm.

14 ERAD Substrate Recognition
Owing to the extremely diverse nature of proteins that must be examined by the ER quality control machinery, a unifying model for how recognition of ERAD substrates takes place remains intractable. Nonetheless, misfolded proteins cleared from the ER enter the class I MHC‐processing pathway, and hence this route of degradation is an important aspect of the generation of class I MHC epitopes. Instead, ERAD is likely to be custom‐fitted to the client protein in question.

For glycoproteins, a possible mechanism is the recognition of terminally misfolded proteins by the calnexin/calreticulin (CNX/CRT) lectin‐type chaperones, which retain immature glycoproteins in the ER until productive folding takes place (Ellgaard 2003, Hammond 1994, Helenius 2004). Terminally misfolded proteins—that is, proteins that after extensive CXN/CRT cycle folding attempts still fail to acquire their native conformation—are trimmed by ER mannosidase I, leading to recognition by ER degradation‐enhancing alpha‐mannosidase‐like protein (EDEM), which presumably targets them for degradation (Eriksson 2004, Jakob 2001, Molinari 2003). Most ER lumenal proteins require the lumenal chaperone BiP for degradation, while transmembrane proteins with large cytosolic domains usually rely on cytosolic chaperone systems, like the heat shock protein (HSP) complexes Hsp70/Hsp90 and Hsp40/Hsp70 (Ellgaard 2003, Romisch 2005). Yet it appears that a protein's lumenal or ER membrane localization matters less than the localization of the folding alteration within the polypeptide itself. CFTR whose cytoplasmic domains are recognized first by the Hsp70/Hsp90 cytoplasmic chaperone system may be targeted for degradation by the cytosolic Hsp70/Hsp90‐interacting CHIP E3 ligase cochaperone (Connell 2001, Murata 2001), even if the protein also has a misfolded lumenal domain (which might also target it to a BiP‐dependent degradation pathway). If the cytoplasmic domain is properly folded, then the lumenal domains are inspected, and if then the protein is recognized as misfolded, it is degraded in a process that involves BiP (Connell 2001, Meacham 2001, Vashist 2004). This suggests that ER quality control uses sequential checkpoints to select degradation substrates and target them to the appropriate degradation pathway.

In the case of nonglycosylated substrates, protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), one of a large number of ER‐resident oxidoreductases that catalyze disulfide bond formation and isomerization, can play a role in ER quality control by unfolding certain substrates prior to degradation. Another oxidoreductase, ERp57, interacts with CNX and CRT to facilitate folding, but in the event of a terminally misfolded protein may aid in transfer of proteins with improper disulfide bonds to the EDEM pathway (Hirsch et al., 2004). Another possibility, at least in yeast, is that misfolded proteins actually escape to the Golgi and are then recycled to the ER (Taxis 2002, Vashist 2001). This ER–Golgi shuttling model was proposed because mutations in several secretory pathway genes (like Ufe1p, Sec23p, and Erv29p) compromise degradation of ERAD substrates (Taxis 2002, Vashist 2001), invoking a functional secretory pathway for efficient degradation of misfolded proteins from the ER. The Golgi apparatus could presumably endow misfolded proteins with a signal for destruction, but such a modification has not been found. Since the Ufe1p and Sec23p have since been shown to be required for maintenance of proper ER structure (Prinz et al., 2000), the effects on protein degradation may simply be pleiotropic consequences of perturbing the normal arquitecture of the ER (Hammond 1994, Romisch 2005). Ubiquitination at the ER membrane is yet another mode of ERAD substrate selection.

15 ERAD E3 Ligases
Most ERAD E3s are at the ER membrane, as is the case for the yeast Hrd1p/Der3p and Doa10p, or can be brought to the ER membrane on demand, as is the case for cytosolic SCF complexes and CHIP, for example (Kostova 2003, Meusser 2005, Romisch 2005). An E3 ligase can recruit distinct E2 Ub‐conjugating enzymes and/or distinct adaptor proteins (as we have seen for the SCF and ECS E3 complexes and will discuss later for ERAD E3s), thus conferring specificity in substrate selection. The yeast Hrd1p/Der3p E3 ligase was first discovered in a genetic screen for Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes involved in HMG‐CoA reductase degradation (Hrp) (Hampton et al., 1996) and is an ER‐resident protein with six predicted transmembrane domains and a C‐terminal RING‐finger motif facing the cytosol. Hrd1p can act in a complex with Ubc7p and Ubc6p to ubiquitinate substrate proteins (Fig. 2B). Ubc7p is a soluble protein that becomes active only when tethered to the ER membrane by the Ubc7p cofactor Cue1p membrane protein. Degradation of transcription factor Matα2–10 protein (Doa10p) is a transmembrane protein of the ER/nuclear envelope, which participates in yeast ERAD (Swanson et al., 2001). Doa10p is predicted to span the membrane 14 times (Kreft et al., 2006) and, like Hrd1p, uses Cue1p/Ubc7p and Ubc6p to ubiquitinate its substrates (Fig. 2B). However, the two ligases target different sets of substrates for degradation (Bays 2001, Swanson 2001).

Hrd1p ubiquitination activity can be directed to a specific subset of ER degradation substrates, by virtue of its association of Hrd1p with Hrd3p and Der1p. Hrd3p is a single‐spanning ER membrane protein with a large ER luminal domain that can recognize misfolded proteins, thus possibly functioning as a substrate recruitment factor for the Hrd1p ligase complex (Gauss et al., 2006). The degradation from the ER‐1 protein (Der1p) spans the ER membrane four times and is required for degradation of some misfolded glycoproteins (Knop et al., 1996). Der1p may function as a substrate adaptor protein or even as a channel for ejection of degradation substrates from the ER membrane. Hrd3p can associate with Der1p, presumably enabling substrate delivery to downstream components. Hrd3p can even regulate Hrd1p activity, which is necessary for substrate extraction from the membrane and delivery to the proteasome (Gauss et al., 2006) (Fig. 3
). These multifunctional protein complexes can therefore function in substrate selection in the ER lumen or membrane and even facilitate subsequent steps that lead to proteasomal degradation. Similarly, Doa10p can catalyze ubiquitination of both membrane and soluble proteins, yet the mechanisms of subsequent proteasome targeting differ (Ravid et al., 2006), presumably due to association with other regulatory proteins. The many layers of E3‐mediated regulation of ERAD substrate selection are most likely just emerging.Figure 3 The yeast Hrd1p/Der3p‐Hrd3p E3 ligase participates in multiple steps of ERAD, from substrate selection in the ER membrane or lumen to ubiquitination in the cytosol. PNGase, peptide‐N‐glycanase; Ub, ubiquitin. See text for details.



16 Mammalian ERAD E3s
In mammals, there are two predicted homologues of Hrd1p/Der3p, the HRD1 and the gp78 E3 ligases. Like its yeast counterpart, human HRD1 is involved in degradation from the ER (Kikkert et al., 2004). HRD1 may associate with UBC7 to catalyze ubiquitination of a subset of substrates, like TCRα and CD3δ. HRD1 is not involved in the regulated degradation of the mammalian HMGR (Kikkert et al., 2004). HRD1 may also associate with SEL1L, a homologue of Hrd3p, as well as other ER membrane and ER membrane‐associated proteins, including Cdc48p(p97)/NPL4/UFD1, forming multisubunit complexes that seem to coordinate steps that range from substrate selection to delivery to the proteasome for at least a subset of ER degradation substrates (Lilley 2005a, Ye 2005). gp78 was identified as the tumor autocrine motility factor receptor (AMFR) (Nabi et al., 1992) and later as an E3 ligase due to its homology to Hrd1p and involvement in degradation of CD3δ and apoliprotein B100 (Fang 2001, Liang 2003). gp78 is an ER‐resident protein, predicted to span the membrane five times, with a C‐terminal cytosolic RING‐domain and an additional UBC7 E2‐binding site, the Cue domain, arranged in tandem. While Hrd1p recruits UBC7 through the transmembrane Cue1p protein, it seems that convergent evolution has made the E3‐ and the E2‐docking protein come together in a single human protein. Curiously, gp78 is involved in sterol‐regulated Ub–dependent degradation of HMGR (Song et al., 2005), suggesting it constitutes the true functional homologue of yeast Hrd1p.

Homocysteine‐induced endoplasmic reticulum protein (HERP) is a single‐spanning ER membrane protein that is induced by the unfolded protein response (UPR) and also required for ERAD. HERP is proposed to improve ER protein folding and decrease protein load, protecting cells from ER‐stress–induced apoptosis (Kokame et al., 2000). Furthermore, HERP has an N‐terminal ubiquitin‐like domain (ULD) and is required for the degradation of conexin and CD3δ (Hori 2004, Sai 2002). It forms a complex with HRD1, p97, Derlin‐1, and VIMP (Schulze et al., 2005), a VCP (p97)‐interacting membrane protein, that recruits p97 to Derlin‐1 (Ye et al., 2004). HERP may function as another adaptor protein in these multiprotein complexes at the ER membrane, influencing substrate selection.

The Doa10p mammalian homologue, TEB4 (or MARCH‐VI), is a multiple‐transmembrane‐domain‐containing protein of the ER membrane that functions as an E3 ligase: it has an N‐terminal noncanonical RING‐domain in the cytosol that catalyzes Ub conjugation and TEB4 self‐ubiquitination and degradation (Hassink et al., 2005), but its regulation is poorly characterized. Parkin is a cytosolic E3 ligase with a C‐terminal noncanonical double‐RING‐finger (RING‐IBR‐RING), and an N‐terminal Ub‐binding domain, believed to mediate proteasomal degradation of aggregation‐prone proteins (Imai et al., 2000), typical of Parkinson's disease. Both phosphorylation (Yamamoto et al., 2005) and ER stress‐induced association with C‐terminus of Hsc70‐interacting protein (CHIP), involved in cytosolic chaperone‐dependent folding, regulate Parkin E3 ligase activity (Imai 2002, Sahara 2005), which could be beneficial for reduction of protein aggregates and cellular pathology.

How specificity in substrate selection is conferred can be illustrated by E3s involved in glycoprotein turnover. The F‐box proteins Fbs1 and Fbs2 bind high mannose N‐linked glycoproteins (Winston et al., 1999). By using Fbs1/Fbs2 as its substrate adaptor(s), the cytosolic SCFFbs1,Fbs2 E3 ligase is rendered specific for glycoproteins that have been dislocated from the ER (Yoshida 2002, Yoshida 2003) (Fig. 4A
). The CHIP U‐box E3 ligase which is involved in the degradation of CFTR (Meacham et al., 2001) and glucocorticoid hormone receptor (Meacham et al., 2001), can be “manipulated” to function in ER glycoprotein turnover. CHIP usually serves as a cochaperone for the cytosolic heat shock protein Hsp70/Hsp90 chaperone system. The CHIP N‐terminal TPR motif recruits Hsp chaperones loaded with misfolded proteins, whereas its C‐terminal U‐box RING domain recruits E2 enzymes (Murata et al., 2003) (Fig. 4B), effectively linking protein folding with ubiquitination. The CHIP E3 ligase activity can be directed to ER glycoprotein turnover by binding to Fbs2 (Nelson et al., 2006), through an interaction between its TPR motif and a PEST motif in Fbs2 (Fig. 4C). N‐linked glycans can, therefore, function in ER quality control not only to regulate ER retention in the folding cycle, but also to function in ERAD substrate selection and ubiquitination, adding an additional layer of complexity and specificity to glycoprotein quality control (Nelson 2006, Yoshida 2003).Figure 4 Substrate specificity in mammalian ERAD E3s involved in glycoprotein turnover. (A) The cytosolic SCF E3 ligase catalyzes ubiquitination of dislocated N‐linked glycoproteins when complexed with the F‐box proteins Fbs1 and Fbs2; Rbx, RING‐box domain. (B) CHIP, C‐terminus of Hsc70‐interacting protein, is usually a cochaperone for the heat shock protein (Hsp) chaperone system Hsp70/Hsp90, ubiquitinating misfolded proteins bound to Hsps. (C) When complexed with Fbs1 or Fbs2, CHIP ubiquitinates dislocated glycoproteins. E2, Ub‐conjugating enzyme; Ub, ubiquitin.



17 The Elusive Dislocon
Export of proteins through the ER membrane most likely takes place via an aqueous channel that allows the passage of polypeptides through the highly hydrophobic ER membrane environment while maintaining proper ionic balance between the ER and the cytoplasm. The Sec61 channel, the very same channel responsible for protein import into the ER, was initially thought to mediate transport in the reverse direction (hence the name retrograde translocation or retrotranslocation also coined for the dislocation process) (Pilon 1997, Plemper 1997, Plemper 1998, Wiertz 1996b), with accessory factors regulating directionality and specificity of the channel. The extent to which Sec61 is involved in ER dislocation or the identity of the “dislocon” are not without controversy, and the search for a dislocation channel(s) is a subject of intense research (Meusser 2005, Romisch 2005).

Mammalian Derlin‐1, a member of the Der1p‐Like (Derlin) family of yeast Der1p homologues, is involved in dislocation from the ER (Lilley 2004, Ye 2004) and was proposed to constitute a channel for protein export from the ER membrane to the cytosol (Lilley 2004, Ye 2004). Like their yeast homologue, Derlins 1, 2, and 3 are tetraspanning ER membrane proteins that can homo‐ and heteroligomerize and could presumably form higher order structures with channel‐like properties (Lilley 2004, Ye 2004). Conclusive evidence for a role of Derlin‐1 as a channel is still unavailable, and in any case, Derlin‐1 is unlikely to be the only channel, as turnover of some ERAD substrates does not rely on Derlin‐1 function (Kreft 2006, Lilley 2004). Derlins 2 and 3 are obvious candidates that could function in place of Derlin‐1. Alternatively, Derlins may act to deliver a particular substrate to a channel/another adaptor in its cognate dislocation pathway. In fact, Derlins form a large, multiprotein complex with p97 and the Hrd1p and Hrd3p mammalian homologues HRD1 and SEL1L, respectively (Lilley 2005a, Ye 2005), suggesting a very intimate connection between substrate recognition, export through the membrane, ubiquitination, and extraction into the cytoplasm. The existence of such a complex that would integrate all of these different functions, including formation of a channel or dislocon, would offer obvious advantages in terms of control of both specificity and directionality of the dislocation process. We shall return to this substrate “guidance” theme.

18 Driving Dislocation and the Ub‐Binding Route to the Proteasome
A cytosolic complex containing the AAA ATPase Cdc48p (yeast) [valosin‐containing protein (VCP)/p97 (in mammals)] and its cofactors nuclear protein localization 4 (Npl4p) and ubiquitin‐fusion degradation 1 (Ufd1p), was recently shown to participate in ER degradation (Lord 2002, Romisch 2005, Ye 2001). Cdc48p/p97 is an essential protein of the AAA ATPase (ATPases associated with various cellular activities) family, conserved from archaea to mammals, whose functions include mitotic spindle disassembly, membrane traffic and fusion, nucleic acid repair and replication, and Ub‐proteasome degradation (Woodman, 2003). Cdc48p/p97 is a motor protein that generates energy from ATP binding and hydrolysis; it forms a homohexameric barrel structure, with each subunit containing two AAA domains that contain the Walker motifs essential for ATPase activity, and the 6 subunits arranged in a ring with a pore in the center (Zhang et al., 2000).

Cdc48p/p97 interacts with many different adaptor proteins, which regulate its function (Dreveny et al., 2004). P97 can recognize denatured proteins nonspecifically (Thoms, 2002) and has an affinity for polyubiquitin chains (Ye et al., 2003). When complexed with the polyUb‐binding Ufd1p and Npl4p, Cdc48p/p97 activity is directed to ER degradation (Ye et al., 2001). Both in yeast and in mammals, the trimeric Cdc48p(p97)/NPL4/UFD1 complex is proposed to function in a postubiquitination, preproteasomal step (Bays 2002, Jarosch 2002), in one of two fashions: the ATP‐hydrolytic activity of the AAA ATPase p97 may provide the driving force to extract substrates through the ER membrane, or may be required to liberate already dislocated substrates from the cytosolic face of the ER membrane (Braun 2002, Flierman 2003, Hirsch 2004, Kostova 2003, Meusser 2005). The proteasome presumably interacts with the ER membrane (Hirsch and Ploegh, 2000), either directly or through a receptor that docks the proteasome to the ER membrane, perhaps Sec61 (Kalies et al., 2005). Notwithstanding, the Cdc48p(p97)/NPL4/UFD1 complex or other accessory factors might aid substrate feeding to the proteasome (Hartmann‐Petersen 2004a, Richly 2005).

Ubiquitin‐binding factors, such as Rad23p and Dsk2p (in yeast), have a ubiquitin‐associated (UBA) motif that binds polyubiquitin chains and a ubiquitin‐like (UBL) motif that binds to the 19S proteasome, and these are required for efficient degradation of a model ERAD substrate (Elsasser 2004, Schauber 1998, Wilkinson 2001). The yeast Ub regulatory X domain‐containing Ubx2p/Sel1p protein, an integral ER membrane protein, was recently shown to recruit the Cdc48p/Npl4p/Ufd1p complex to the ER membrane, thereby facilitating the transfer of polyubiquitinated substrates from the E3 ligases Hrd1p and Doa10p to Cdc48/p97 (Neuber 2005, Schuberth 2005). These dual function Ub‐binding factors effectively serve as bridges between the p97/NPL4/UFD1 complex and the proteasome. As more of these Ub‐ and proteasome‐binding proteins are discovered (Buschhorn 2004, Decottignies 2004, Medicherla 2004, Mullally 2006), a “guidance” model, in which ERAD substrates are escorted from a dislocation channel to the proteasome by a cascade of Ub‐binding factors, gains strength (Hartmann‐Petersen 2004b, Hartmann‐Petersen 2003, Hendil 2004, Richly 2005).

These interactions could be responsible for maintaining the substrate in a proteolysis‐competent state and protect it from premature deubiquitination, as well as contribute to directionality of dislocation (Hendil 2004, Meusser 2005, Romisch 2006). In fact, it seems Cdc48p/p97 may even be capable influencing substrate fate (Rumpf and Jentsch, 2006). Cdc48p/p97 can simultaneously bind Ufd2p, a U‐box E3 that catalyzes polyubiquitin chain extension, and one of two factors that can counteract its action: Otu1p, a DUB, and Ufd3p protein, a WD40 repeat protein of unknown function that has been shown to be required for Ub‐dependent proteolysis (Ghislain 1996, Johnson 1995). Otu1p can disassemble the polyUb chains, whereas Ufd3p competes with Ufd2p for the same docking site on Cdc48p/p97. Presumably, Cdc48p/p97 can selectively recruit different substrate processing cofactors and thus tip the balance toward substrate degradation or release from the degradation cascade (Rumpf and Jentsch, 2006), suggesting a very tight regulation of proteasomal proteolysis. These aspects are important not only to understand how these pathways contribute to class I MHC–peptide epitope presentation, but also how viruses manipulate these routes to avoid detection.

19 Peptide N‐Glycanase
PNGase is a cytosolic deglycosylating enzyme that presumably removes N‐linked glycan chains from misfolded substrates prior to proteasomal degradation (Hirsch 2003, Suzuki 2000). Both in yeast and mammals, there is generally a tightly knit relationship between PNGase and the proteasome: PNGase interacts with (at least) the S4 and S5 subunits of the mammalian 19S proteasome and the Ub‐binding factor Rad23p (HR23B in mammals), which seems to recognize only deglycosylated degradation substrates (Katiyar et al., 2004). This suggests that misfolded protein substrates may first be deglycosylated by ER‐associated or free PNGase, then identified by the HR23B adaptor protein, and subsequently targeted to the nearby proteasome (Katiyar et al., 2004). Mammalian PNGase also associates with the ER membrane gp78 E3 ligase and the cytosolic p97 and Y33K, a UBA/UBX domain protein (Li et al., 2006a). A gp78‐Y33K‐p97‐PNGase‐HR23B complex could therefore be formed that recruits PNGase to the cytosolic face of the ER membrane that couples the activities of dislocation, ubiquitination, and deglycosylation and escorts misfolded glycoproteins to the proteasome (Kim 2006a, Li 2005, Li 2006).

20 Viral Interference with Class I MHC Antigen Presentation
Viruses keep evolving and developing sophisticated immune evasion strategies. In particular, they have targeted virtually every step of the class I MHC antigen presentation pathway, inhibiting proteolysis and generation of the antigenic peptide [Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen‐1 or EBNA‐1, HCMV E protein pp65, and HIV Tat], inhibiting peptide loading and assembly in the ER (HSV ICP47, HCMV US6, bovine herpes‐virus‐1 UL49.5), retaining class I MHC molecules in the ER (adenovirus E3/19K and HCMV US3), blocking their exit from the ER‐to‐Golgi complex (ERGIC) (MCMV m152), misdirecting MHC complexes to lysosomal compartments (MCMV m06 and HHV‐7 U21), internalizing MHC complexes from the cell surface (KSHV K3 and K5 and HIV Nef), encoding homologues of class I MHC as decoys for NK cells (HCMV UL18 and UL142 and MCMV m04), and causing degradation of class I MHC products by the Ub‐proteasome system (HCMV US2 and US11 and MHV‐68 mK3) (Fig. 5
). Because these topics have been the subject of numerous reviews (Alcami 2000, Ambagala 2005, Hengel 1998, Hengel 1997, Hengel 1999, Lybarger 2003, Mocarski 2004, Yewdell 2002), we shall discuss only a few of these mechanisms in more detail, particularly those exploited by HCMV.Figure 5 HCMV interference with class I MHC antigen presentation. HCMV immunoevasins aimed at inhibition of cytotoxicity by CD8+ T cells and NK cells are in red. TCR, T cell receptor; PLC, peptide‐loading complex; TAP, transporter associated with antigen presentation; CRT, calreticulin.



21 Human Cytomegalovirus
The β‐herpesvirus HCMV is extremely successful in evolutionary terms: it is a ubiquitous, highly species‐adapted pathogen that is able to establish a life‐long persistent infection with minimal or no disease symptoms in the immunocompetent host. Prolonged latency periods (a dormant state with minimal production of viral proteins and absence of viral progeny) and controlled sporadic reactivation ensure transmission to a new host, and thus survival of both host and virus. Perturbation of this delicate balance leads to life‐threatening infections in immunocompromised patients, transplant recipients and infected newborns and illustrates how the outcome of this host–virus relationship is dependent on viral manipulation of the host immune response (Hengel 1998, Klenerman 2005). The several HCMV‐encoded immunoevasins (Jones et al., 1995) are presumably aimed primarily, but not solely, at control of the CD8+ T cell and NK cell responses (Falk 2002, Mocarski 2004, Pinto 2005, Yewdell 2002). Here we will discuss the HCMV immunoevasins that interfere with class I MHC antigen presentation, US3, US6, US10, US2, US11, UL16, UL18, UL40, UL141, and UL142. In light of our most recent findings, we will elaborate on the mechanism of ER dislocation co‐opted by the HCMV US2 and US11 immunoevasins. More specifically, we discuss the similarities and the differences between the two cellular ERAD pathways that US2 and US11 have allowed us to uncover and the possible implications for ER dislocation. We will extend this by comparing the HCMV US2‐ and US11‐mediated dislocation of human class I MHC HC molecules with dislocation of murine HCs by the MHV‐68 mK3 immunoevasin.

22 HCMV Interference with Class I MHC Antigen Presentation
If one goes back to the steps we depicted for antigen presentation (Fig. 1) and then examines the immunoevasins encoded by HCMV, we will find that this herpesvirus exploits many aspects of the antigen presentation pathway thus defined. The HCMV phosphoprotein pp65 tegument protein mediates the phosphorylation of the HCMV immediate early antigen‐1 (IE‐1) during HCMV infection. Phosphorylation of IE‐1 interferes with the presentation of IE‐1‐derived antigens (Gilbert et al., 1996). The US3 protein binds to and retains some class I MHC locus products in the ER membrane (Ahn 1996, Jones 1996). US3 is a type I membrane glycoprotein with an Ig‐like lumenal domain that is essential for its own retention, albeit transient, in the ER (Lee et al., 2003). US3 eventually travels to the lysosome where it is degraded (Gruhler et al., 2000). Some evidence suggests that ER retention of class I MHC complexes by US3 depends on the ER localization signal on US3 and perhaps the ability of the US3 luminal domain to oligomerize (Misaghi et al., 2004b) as determinants of retention of both molecules (Lee et al., 2003). Another model suggests that association of US3 with tapasin, which inhibits tapasin, is sufficient to mediate ER retention (Park et al., 2004). Class I MHC alleles that require peptide optimization by tapasin may be retained in the ER, whereas tapasin‐independent locus MHC products are spared from retention. In fact, there is a perfect correlation between tapasin‐dependence and US3 sensitivity (Park et al., 2004). Both mechanisms, tapasin inhibition and direct binding, may be in place, perhaps allowing US3 to retain a larger repertoire of class I MHC locus products.

US6 inhibits peptide loading of the class I MHC molecules by blocking the TAP transporter (Ahn 1997, Hengel 1997, Lehner 1997). US6 is an ER‐resident type I membrane glycoprotein with a bulky lumenal domain that binds the core transmembrane domains of the TAP subunits, TAP 1 and TAP 2, from within the ER lumen, inhibiting ATP binding (Hewitt 2001, Kyritsis 2001) and thus TAP‐mediated peptide translocation into the ER. The US6 luminal domain oligomerizes and may form a bridge between the TAP 1 and TAP 2 subunits to effectively block TAP activity (Halenius et al., 2006). US10 delays trafficking of class I MHC HCs and stalls them in the ER; although the block is not absolute and the mechanism is poorly characterized, US10 expression results in downregulation of class I MHC from the cell surface (Furman et al., 2002a). US2 and US11 catalyze destruction of class I MHC HCs from the ER membrane by targeting them to the Ub‐proteasome system (Wiertz 1996a, Wiertz 1996b), a process we discuss in detail in a later section. Expression of each individual immunoevasin results in reduction of cell surface expression of class I MHC peptide‐loaded complexes and evasion of CD8+ T cell‐mediated lysis (Ahn 1996, Jones 1995).

Besides CD8+ T cell recognition, HCMV can frustrate NK cell recognition (Orange et al., 2002). Protection of HCMV from NK cell‐mediated lysis can be mediated by several immunoevasins, HCMV UL16, UL40, UL18, UL141, UL142, and pp65 (Lodoen 2005, Orange 2002, Rajagopalan 2005, Reyburn 1997, Wills 2005). The activating receptor NKG2D on the NK cell recognizes divergent families of class I MHC‐related ligands, like the MIC and ULBP products. HCMV UL16 retains the ULBP 1, ULBP 2, and MIC‐B NKG2D ligands in the ERGIC compartment of the target cell, preventing NKG2D recognition and thus NK cell activation (Dunn et al., 2003). HCMV UL141 and pp65 act at the level of the NK effector cell rather than the APC. The result is, nevertheless, the same: prevention of NK cell activation. UL141 downregulates the NK cell‐activating receptors CD226 (DNAM‐1) and CD96 (TACTILE) (Tomasec et al., 2005). The pp65 tegument protein engages the activating receptor NKp30 and antagonizes its effects, dampening NK cell‐mediated cytotoxicity. How a tegument protein gains access to the receptor on the NK cell is unknown, but pp65 engagement of the NKp30 receptor causes dissociation of a receptor‐associated signaling module (Orange et al., 2002), disrupting the activating signaling pathway that would lead to NK cell activation (Arnon et al., 2005).

NK cell responses also rely on receptors that recognize class I MHC locus products. The killer cell immunoglobulin‐like receptor (KIR) genes encode a family of activating and inhibitory receptors that recognize human leukocyte antigen (HLA)‐A, ‐B, and ‐C. The CD94/NKG2 receptors recognize the nonclassical class I MHC molecule HLA‐E. HLA‐E presents fragments derived from the signal sequences of classical class I MHC molecules, which delivers an inhibitory signal to CD94/NKG2 receptors on NK cells. UL40 encodes a peptide whose sequence is exactly homologous to the HLA‐E binding leader peptide from HLA‐C locus products. UL40 therefore loads HLA‐E and maintains HLA‐E on infected cells (Tomasec 2000, Ulbrecht 2000) even when other class I MHC products are downregulated. UL18 encodes a class I MHC‐like molecule that engages the inhibitory CD85j/LIR‐1/ILT‐2 receptor on the NK cell, thus inhibiting NK cell effector functions (Cosman 1997, Reyburn 1997).

However, UL18 and UL40 expression may be insufficient to confer target cell protection (Falk 2002, Leong 1998). UL18 and UL40 may, in fact, be more relevant for control of viral infection by T cells, with HLA‐E‐restricted CD8+ T cells playing a role in lysis of cells expressing UL40, and non‐MHC‐restricted CD8+ T cells playing a role in lysis of UL18‐positive cells (Pietra 2003, Romagnani 2004, Saverino 2004). CD85j is an invariant receptor expressed by many T cells and responsible for transduction of inhibitory signals that downregulate antigen‐specific T cell functions (Merlo 2001, Saverino 2000). CD85j interaction with UL18 on CD8+ T cells occurs in a TCR‐independent manner and leads to activation (not inhibition) of non‐MHC‐restricted CD8+ T cells (Saverino et al., 2004). This expands the repertoire of T cell activation mechanisms and is probably a viral strategy of ensuring survival of the host, by allowing some level of protection from the initial wave of NK cell‐mediated antiviral response. In vivo HCMV‐infected APCs are faced with multiple immunoevasins displaying allelic preferences and expression patterns that are both spatially and temporally regulated. The many immunoevasins expressed by HCMV are thus likely to have both synergistic and antagonistic interactions (Ahn 1996, Farrell 2000, Klenerman 2005, Mocarski 2004, Reddehase 2002, Yewdell 2002), as has been experimentally verified for murine cytomegalovirus (Wagner et al., 2002).

23 Dislocation from the ER: HCMV US11 and US2
Evidence of ER‐to‐cytosol transport or dislocation, a crucial ER quality control step now considered of general importance in dispensing with misfolded or misassembled ER proteins, was initially provided by studying the mechanism of action of the HCMV US2 and US11 immunoevasins (Wiertz 1996a, Wiertz 1996b). The viral proteins appropriate this cellular quality control process to extract (dislocate) class I MHC HCs from the ER membrane. On arrival in the cytoplasm, the dislocated HC molecules are destroyed by the proteasome; destruction of the HC component of the class I MHC complex by US2 and US11 abolishes cell‐surface expression of class I MHC complexes and, consequently, presentation of viral peptides to CD8+ T cells, allowing HCMV to remain undetected (Wiertz 1996a, Wiertz 1996b).

US2‐ and US11‐mediated HC dislocation from the ER membrane is not only an ingenious viral immune evasion strategy, but also a useful case study in ER quality control and degradation. One theme that arises from the characterization of this process over the 10 years that have passed since its discovery is that HC dislocation is unique in many respects: HC molecules do not meet the requirement of being either misfolded or misassembled, yet their dislocation takes place by virtue of the presence of US2 or US11; the speed of HC degradation is unrivaled by that of any other ER‐associated degradation substrates: HC half‐life is reduced from hours to a mere 2–5 min in cells infected by HCMV or in cells expressing either US2 or US11 (Wiertz 1996a, Wiertz 1996b); both US2 and US11 have stringent requirements in terms of which HLA alleles (Barel 2003, Barel 2006, Machold 1997) or assembly, folding and ubiquitination status of the class I MHC complex (Blom 2004, Furman 2003, Gewurz 2001) either viral protein is able to target for dislocation and proteasomal destruction.

Notwithstanding the unique nature of this virus‐mediated process, knowledge from the US11 pathway, and in particular the identification of the Derlin proteins, has widened our understanding of the cellular factors involved in ER dislocation more generally (Lilley 2004, Lilley 2005a). The US11 transmembrane domain (TMD) is crucial for US11 function: more specifically, mutation of a polar amino acid, glutamine (Q) 192, within the US11 TMD to a hydrophobic leucine (L) residue renders this US11 Q192L mutant inactive in dislocating HCs from the ER membrane. In a screen for proteins that interact specifically with the active version of US11, work from our laboratory showed that the aforementioned Derlins, the mammalian Der1p homologues, are involved in HC dislocation mediated by US11, but not by US2 (Lilley and Ploegh, 2004). The fact that the dislocation mechanism used by US2 is not dependent on the Derlins prompted us to investigate what other ERAD pathway is being co‐opted by the HCMV US2 immunoevasin and allowed us to uncover an unexpected ERAD player.

24 Signal Peptide Peptidase Is Required for Dislocation from the ER
US2 is an ER‐resident type I membrane glycoprotein of only 199 amino acids, with a noncleavable signal sequence (Gewurz et al., 2002), a lumenal domain that dictates an allele‐specific association with the lumenal domain of HC (Gewurz et al., 2001), a transmembrane segment, and a short cytosolic tail of only 14 amino acids (residues 185–199), with no obvious sequence homology to known cellular proteins. The US2 tail is essential for dislocation: US2186, a cytosolic tail deletion mutant of US2, is dislocation incompetent (Furman et al., 2002b). By using an affinity purification approach similar to that used for US11 (Lilley and Ploegh, 2004), signal peptide peptidase (SPP) was found as a specific interacting partner for dislocation‐competent (active) US2 (Loureiro et al., 2006), an interaction that relies solely on the presence of the highly hydrophobic US2 tail. More importantly, reduction of SPP levels by RNA interference led to inhibition of class I MHC HC dislocation and to the discovery of SPP as a necessary factor for the US2‐mediated ER dislocation pathway.

SPP is an ER‐resident protein of approximately 45 kDa that is predicted to span the ER membrane seven to nine times (Friedmann et al., 2004), and a member of the presenilin (PS)/SPP‐Like (SPPL) superfamily of intramembrane‐cleaving aspartic proteases (Weihofen et al., 2002). These proteases are characterized by the ability to cleave substrate polypeptides within a transmembrane region and by possessing two active site aspartate (D) residues (italicized) within the conserved motifs YD and LGLGD in adjacent membrane‐spanning regions (Martoglio 2003, Wang 2006a, Weihofen 2002). There are seven related members of the PS/SPPL superfamily in the human genome: PS‐1, PS‐2, SPP and four SPP‐Like proteins, SPP2a, SPP2b, and SPP2c, and SPP3 (Martoglio and Golde, 2003). Presenilins 1 and 2 are the catalytic components of γ‐secretase, a tetrameric complex containing PS and three other subunits. PSs play a role in processing of the β‐amyloid precursor protein (APP) into Aβ40 and Aβ42, peptides that constitute the principal components of the β‐amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease (AD); PSs are also required for development due to processing of the Notch receptor by γ‐secretase (Selkoe and Kopan, 2003) and might be involved in intracellular trafficking (Sisodia 2002, Wang 2006c). The function of the four SPP‐like proteins is, at this point, unknown, but the role of intramembrane‐cleaving proteases is usually to liberate signaling molecules from membrane‐bound precursors with consequent activation or repression of signaling cascades (Fortini 2002, Kopan 2004, Martoglio 2003, Parent 2005, Xia 2003).

25 SPP and Generation of HLA‐E Epitopes
In humans, SPP performs an important immunological function as it generates the peptide ligands for the nonclassical class I MHC molecule HLA‐E. On insertion of secretory or type II membrane proteins into the ER, their signal sequence is cleaved by the ER luminal protein signal peptidase, leaving the signal peptide anchored in the ER membrane. The ER membrane–anchored signal peptide is subsequently cleaved by the intramembrane‐cleaving SPP within the transmembrane region. The resulting signal peptide fragments are released into the cytosol (N‐terminal portion) or into the ER lumen (C‐terminal portion). The latter peptides may easily bind to class I MHC molecules in the ER lumen. The HLA‐A2 molecule, for instance, is known to bind signal sequence‐derived peptides. The N‐terminal signal sequence fragments are TAP‐transported into the ER lumen and bind to HLA‐E (Lemberg et al., 2001). By presenting fragments derived from the signal sequences of classical class I MHC molecules, HLA‐E monitors the presence of classical class I MHC molecules. This is, as we discussed earlier, of crucial importance for NK cell recognition.

26 SPP and Processing of the Hepatitis C Virus Core Protein
SPP is involved in processing of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein (McLauchlan et al., 2002). HCV is a single‐stranded RNA virus with a single open reading frame encoding a large polyprotein. The N‐terminal portion of the HCV polyprotein encodes the structural components of the HCV virion, the core protein (thought to constitute the virion capsid), and the E1 and E2 envelope glycoproteins. The mature structural components of the HCV virion are produced through a series of cleavage events catalyzed by cellular proteases. The core protein is the most N‐terminal portion of the polyprotein and is followed by the signal sequence of the E1 envelope glycoprotein. The E1 signal sequence targets the polyprotein to the ER membrane and induces translocation of E1 into the ER lumen. Cleavage by signal peptidase liberates the N‐terminal end of E1, leaving the core protein anchored (by the E1 signal peptide) in the ER membrane. SPP‐mediated intramembrane proteolysis of the E1 signal sequence then results in release of the HCV core protein from the ER membrane, thus freeing the mature core protein for incorporation into lipid droplets (Martoglio and Golde, 2003). SPP‐mediated HCV core protein maturation and trafficking to lipid droplets and the outer mitochondrial membrane may be critical for viral assembly and life cycle (Ait‐Goughoulte et al., 2006) and may also affect cellular lipid metabolism and apoptosis, as HCV core protein‐transgenic mice display liver pathologies, mitochondrial injury, and enhanced oxidative stress (Chou 2005, Korenaga 2005, Meyer 2005, Okuda 2002, Omura 2005, Schwer 2004, Suzuki 2005). SPP‐mediated cleavage of the HCV core protein may thus modulate these important cellular functions of HCV.

27 SPP and Calmodulin Signaling
SPP may regulate the interaction of signal peptide remnants of HIV gp160 envelope protein and preprolactin (p‐Prl) with calmodulin. A characteristic feature of a signal sequence is its tripartite structure: a polar N‐terminal n‐region, a hydrophobic core (h‐region) of 7–15 residues, and a polar C‐terminal c‐region that contains the consensus sequence for signal peptide cleavage (von Heijne, 1985). The n‐region of most signal sequences comprises only a few residues. However, some signal sequences have extended n‐regions of up to 150 residues. The function of such long n‐regions is not known. Both the p‐Prl and the gp160 signal sequence have an extended basic n‐region that can potentially form a basic amphiphilic alpha‐helix, a feature of CaM‐binding domains (O'Neil and DeGrado, 1990), not found in the majority of signal sequences. SPP‐mediated cleavage releases this CaM‐binding domain on the N‐terminal fragment of the p‐Prl and gp160 signal peptides into the cytosol. The functional and physiological significance of an interaction between the p‐Prl and p‐gp160 signal peptide fragments that are released into the cytosol and calmodulin (CaM) could be due to a regulatory function of the signal peptide fragments. CaM‐dependent processes could be enhanced or inhibited depending on the amounts of CaM‐binding signal peptide fragments generated and released into the cytosol (Martoglio et al., 1997).

28 SPP Peptide Peptidase and Development
The SPP orthologues in Drosophila melanogaster, Spp, and in Caenorhabditis elegans, Imp‐2, play an essential role in development: SPP protease activity seems to be essential for larval development both in the fly and in the nematode (Casso 2005, Grigorenko 2004). Although the mechanism by which SPP mutations impairs developmental processes in the fly is currently unknown, in C. elegans the molting defect induced by imp‐2 deficiency was mimicked by cholesterol depletion and by deficiency in Irp‐1, a homologue of mammalian lipoprotein receptor‐related protein (LRP) receptors suggesting a role in cholesterol and lipid metabolism (Grigorenko et al., 2004).

29 SPP and ER Quality Control
The possibility of a role for SPP in ER quality control was first advanced by High and colleagues, who reported an association between SPP and a truncated version of a polytopic ER protein (opsin) in an in vitro system (Crawshaw et al., 2004) and proposed SPP to be implicated in the recognition of misassembled transmembrane domains during membrane protein quality control at the ER. US2‐mediated dislocation of class I MHC HC molecules presents the first functional evidence of such a role for the intramembrane‐cleaving protease SPP. The US2 tail is necessary and sufficient to recruit SPP, and structural predictions suggest that the US2 tail suggests may adopt a 310 helical conformation that could form a protein–protein interaction domain (Oresic et al., 2006). SPP is crucial for dislocation by US2, as reduction of its levels by RNA interference blocks HC degradation. The question remains as to the detailed mechanism of its involvement.

An obvious possibility is involvement of the catalytic activity of SPP. This would imply a cleavage event during dislocation, such as within the TMD of US2 or HC or another factor, unknown at this point; a postcleavage function of one of these protein fragments could play a regulatory role in the process. SPP‐mediated intramembrane proteolysis requires, among other things, a membrane protein substrate to have access to its catalytic core in a type II orientation (Lemberg 2002, Martoglio 2003). Both US2 and HC are type I membrane glycoproteins, so the topology of their transmembrane and tail segments is opposite to that of predicted SPP substrates. SPP‐mediated intramembrane cleavage within the HC TMD is inconsistent with the observed recovery of full length HC in the dislocation reaction (Blom 2004, Misaghi 2004a, Wiertz 1996a, Wiertz 1996b). For US2, while a suggested protein–protein interaction domain in the US2 tail (Oresic et al., 2006) may mediate binding to SPP, intramembrane cleavage of the US2 TMD by SPP in this inverted orientation would presumably not occur, as seen for other proteases (Roques 1983, Tarasova 2005). However, the proposed bent‐helix conformation on the US2 tail (Oresic et al., 2006) might allow US2 to conform to the requirements for SPP cleavage. Whether SPP‐mediated US2 cleavage takes place is unknown at this point. One can speculate that this putative processing of US2 by SPP, as for the HCV core protein (McLauchlan et al., 2002), could be necessary for “maturation” of US2 into a dislocation‐active form. Binding of US2 to SPP could still modulate SPP enzymatic activity and thus affect dislocation. The possibility remains that SPP mediates cleavage in trans of an unidentified factor whose function is important. Experiments with SPP inhibitors and catalytic mutants of SPP should allow an assessment of the contribution of the proteolytic properties of SPP to dislocation.

The involvement of SPP need not be related to its catalytic activity. Substrate recruitment and subsequent cleavage by SPP may be separable events, as shown for the related PS (Kornilova 2003, Lemberg 2004). Some intracellular cleavage products of γ‐secretase are proposed to be intermediates that are destined for degradation (Kopan 2004, Parent 2005). γ‐secretase‐mediated cleavage of a large number of type I transmembrane proteins releases their C‐terminal fragments (CTFs). PS1 deficiency causes delayed turnover and subsequent accumulation of some γ‐secretase substrates as full‐length proteins (Esselens 2004, Wang 2006c, Wilson 2004), suggesting cleavage of the CTFs as a prelude to degradation. Treatment with γ‐secretase inhibitors, however, does not phenocopy PS deficiency (Wang et al., 2006c), suggesting that this effect is independent of γ‐secretase activity. Therefore, SPP may be crucial for HC dislocation irrespectively of its catalytic properties. Binding of US2 to SPP could presumably modify the SPP structure in a way that affects dislocation. Alternatively, recruitment of SPP by US2 could perhaps nucleate assembly of a dislocation complex, much like US11 and the Derlins (Lilley and Ploegh, 2005a). SPP may be a component of an ERAD pathway for a subset of ER degradation substrates that includes misfolded transmembrane proteins, such as truncated opsin (Crawshaw et al., 2004), and that is recruited by US2 to dislocate HC (Fig. 6, A arrow
). Experiments to address the identity of SPP‐associated proteins may prove informative.Figure 6 The US2 dislocation pathway requires signal peptide peptidase. The US2 cytosolic tail recruits SPP (A), which is required for dislocation of class I MHC HC. An additional step critical for dislocation is dependent on interactions involving the US2 transmembrane domain (US2 TMD) and SPP (B) or other protein(s) so far unidentified (C). Ub, ubiquitin; TMD, transmembrane domain. PNGase, peptide‐N‐glycanase.



Curiously, another class of intramembrane‐cleaving proteases, the rhomboid serine proteases, share a homology domain of unknown function with the Derlins (Lemberg et al., 2005). It is tempting to speculate that our observations extend the connection from regulated intramembrane proteolysis to a direct involvement in ER dislocation. An involvement of SPP with the UPR is also a possibility. Cells deficient for the X‐box binding protein‐1 transcription factor (XBP‐1) show upregulated levels of SPP transcripts (Shaffer et al., 2004), but this aspect of the process remains to be explored. Although removal of signal peptide remnants from the ER membrane, assigned to SPP in animals and plants, is not a function exclusive to higher eukaryotes, a gene that encodes an orthologue of this enzyme is absent from the yeast genome (Martoglio 2003, Weihofen 2002). The role of SPP in higher eukaryotes might therefore not be limited to signal peptide processing but extend to processes such as protein dislocation from the ER. PS and the other SPP‐like members of the PS/SPPL superfamily of intramembrane‐cleaving aspartic proteases, so far of unknown function (Martoglio and Golde, 2003), and some of which may not reside in the ER (Krawitz et al., 2005), may likewise be involved in disposal of different degradation substrates. HCMV might just be exploiting a cellular degradation pathway that involves intramembrane‐cleaving proteases for disposal of class I MHC HC.

The US2 TMD, although dispensable for interaction with SPP, is also required for HC dislocation (Loureiro et al., 2006). HC dislocation is therefore dependent not just on (US2 tail‐mediated) recruitment of SPP, but also on additional (US2 TMD‐mediated) interactions within the plane of the membrane. The US2 TMD may be involved in further engagement of SPP (SPP‐mediated cleavage or otherwise) (Fig. 6, B arrow), or alternatively, in the recruitment or engagement of other protein(s) involved in dislocation (Fig. 6, C arrow). ER membrane E3s or their adaptor subunits are likely candidates. SPP is most certainly not the sole host‐derived component of the US2 dislocation pathway, and a putative multiprotein complex (cascade of adaptor proteins) analogous to that found for US11 is likely to be found that evokes many (complicated) links between the ERAD machineries at the level of the ER membrane and the cytosol. Uncovering the identity of the additional cellular partners of this HCMV US2 immunoevasin will certainly give us insight into the dislocation mechanism.

30 Three Routes of Pathogen‐Mediated ER Protein Disposal
A theme that arises from analysis of the US2‐ and US11‐mediated HC dislocation processes is that these are only superficially similar: although HC dislocation by US2 and US11 has the same outcome (proteasomal degradation) of HC and shares many if not all of the steps that take place after extraction of the HC from the ER membrane (such as deglycosylation and degradation kinetics), the differences between the pathways are rather striking in terms of the steps prior to dislocation. As we mentioned earlier, US2 and US11 have different allele and substrate folding, assembly, and ubiquitination requirements. Derlin‐1 is crucial for US11‐ but not US2‐mediated dislocation of HCs (Lilley 2004, Ye 2004), and, conversely, SPP is required by US2 but not by US11 (Loureiro et al., 2006). This suggests that the HCMV immunoevasins US2 and US11 are targeting HC molecules to distinct ER dislocation pathways, perhaps by serving as adaptor molecules aiding in recruitment and/or assembly of distinct multiprotein complexes at the ER membrane (Lilley 2004, Lilley 2005b).

The murine γ‐herpesvirus 68 (MHV‐68) mK3 also targets newly synthesized murine class I MHC HC for dislocation from the ER and proteasomal degradation (Boname 2001, Lybarger 2005, Wang 2005, Yu 2002). MHV‐68 mK3 belongs to a family of structurally related molecules, the K3 homologues, which have E3 ligase activity. K3 homologues are present in several different γ‐herpesviruses and poxviruses (Coscoy 2000, Ishido 2000, Mansouri 2003, Stevenson 2000). All K3 homologues possess a noncanonical RING‐finger domain with ubiquitin ligase (E3) activity [also called a plant homeodomain (PHD) or leukemia‐associated protein (LAP) domain], and a conserved integral membrane topology, with the transmembrane domains and cytosolic C‐terminal tails mediating interaction with the substrate (Coscoy and Ganem, 2003). The mK3 PHD/LAP‐family E3 is a type III ER membrane protein with the PHD/LAP RING‐related domain facing the cytosol (Boname 2001, Sanchez 2002). mK3‐mediated degradation of murine HCs is absolutely dependent on components of the PLC: association of mK3 with TAP and tapasin presumably imposes the necessary proximity and/or orientation of the mK3 RING domain that allows mK3 to specifically ubiquitinate class I MHC HC as they enter the PLC (Lybarger 2005, Wang 2004, Wang 2005).

mK3‐mediated dislocation of murine HCs is dependent on the ATPase activity of p97 and physical association with Derlin‐1 and VIMP (Wang et al., 2006d). This is reminiscent of the pathway that HCMV US11 is proposed to co‐opt for dislocation of mammalian class I MHC molecules. In a sense, it appears that mK3 may be a more evolved immunoevasin that can couple the ability to recruit other components of the dislocation machinery, like US11 and presumably US2, with E3 ligase activity, in one viral polypeptide. There are several mammalian K3 homologues, the membrane‐anchored RING‐CH (MARCH) proteins (Bartee 2004, Goto 2003), which are likely to be the cellular ancestors of MHV‐68 mK3.

mK3‐mediated ubiquitination of the murine class I MHC HC cytosolic tail, the portion of the HC molecule more likely to come into contact with the cytosolic RING‐CH domain of mK3, is not required for dislocation even though ubiquitination and presence of the cytosolic tail are essential for dislocation (Wang et al., 2005). In fact, like mK3, HCMV US2 and US11 also induce ubiquitination‐dependent degradation of class I MHC molecules in a cytosolic tail lysine‐independent fashion (Furman 2003, Shamu 1999). How, then, does mK3 access the luminal domain of HC molecules and trigger its ubiquitination? Access of the HC lumenal domain to the cytosol would invoke a “partial dislocation” model that has been proposed for HCMV US2 and US11 (Furman 2003, Shamu 1999): the HC luminal domain must begin to emerge in the cytosolic face of the ER so ubiquitination can take place. This would mean that the trigger for dislocation would reside upstream from tail ubiquitination. An alternative explanation would be that the class I MHC tail lysine mutant HC molecules are dislocated as a “bystander effect” of dislocation of wild type molecules by mK3, simply because they are in the proximity of the dislocation machinery that has been recruited by the viral protein for the wild type HC clientele.

The HCMV US2 and US11 and MHV‐68 mK3 immunoevasins all target nascent class I MHC HCs for degradation by inducing their dislocation from the ER membrane. The mechanisms used by US2, US11, and mK3, however, when analyzed in detail, are strikingly different. For instance, the stage of class I MHC HC biosynthesis that is targeted by each viral protein is distinct: US11 is the most promiscuous, targeting multiple class I MHC assembly intermediates, whereas US2 targets only properly folded class I MHC complexes and mK3 targets predominantly incompletely assembled HC while in association with the peptide‐loading complex. The main difference resides in the fact that mK3 encompasses ubiquitination activity (by means of its RING domain), substrate selection (by means of its association with the peptide‐loading complex), and recruitment of ER membrane and cytosolic factors necessary for dislocation (like Derlin‐1 and p97) all in one polypeptide. HCMV US2 and US11 do not possess E3 ligase activity and possess no obvious sequence similarity with known genes/proteins that would hint at their function. However, at least US11, and presumably also US2, are still able to induce assembly of a dislocation complex (Fig. 7
) that encompasses all the necessary ERAD activities.Figure 7 Three viral immunoevasins that co‐opt distinct ERAD pathways. The HCMV US11 immunoevasin delivers class I MHC HC molecules to Derlins for dislocation from the ER membrane and degradation, whereas HCMV US2 uses a pathway that is dependent on signal peptide peptidase. The MHV‐68 mK3 immunoevasin is an E3 ligase that uses the PLC as a platform to target murine class I MHC molecules for ubiquitination and degradation. Although the three pathways are superficially similar, the substrate selection and targeting steps at the ER membrane are very distinct. Ub, ubiquitin; E1, Ub‐activating enzyme; E2, Ub‐conjugating enzyme; E3, Ub‐ligase enzyme; PNGase, peptide‐N‐glycanase; SPP, signal peptide peptidase; TAP, transporter associated with antigen presentation; CRT, calreticulin.



The knowledge that the TMD of US11 is essential for its function (Lilley et al., 2003), led to the discovery of Derlins (Lilley and Ploegh, 2004) and of multiprotein complexes at the ER membrane that function in US11‐mediated dislocation of HCs and US11‐independent dislocation of a subset of ERAD substrates (Lilley 2005a, Oda 2006, Ye 2005). US2 uses its cytosolic tail to recruit SPP and its TMD for an additional step (so far unknown) also critical for HC dislocation (Loureiro et al., 2006), presumably resulting in recruitment of US2‐specific‐components of the ER dislocation machinery. The mechanism by which US2 operates will hopefully be clarified as we continue characterizing the structural and host cofactor requirements for its function in dislocation. The mechanistic details of dislocation catalyzed by the HCMV US2 and US11 and the MHV‐68 mK3 immunoevasins must be quite diverse and their study will most certainly keep providing new insights into ER dislocation. Furthermore, it is nothing short of remarkable how sequence and structurally unrelated herpesvirus proteins have converged into (although only superficially) similar mechanisms to dislocate newly synthesized class I MHC molecules from the ER membrane.

31 Pathogen Interference with Class II MHC Antigen Presentation
Class II MHC‐restricted CD4+ T cells are crucial for lymphocyte activation, antibody responses, and coordination of the immune response and rely on activation by the professional APCs. Immunoevasins aimed at interfering with class II MHC antigen presentation are not expected to block presentation of exogenous antigens to CD4+ T cells, unless the APC is infected by the virus (Yewdell and Hill, 2002). Class II MHC expression can, however, be modulated by IFN and receptor signaling through the CIITA transcription factor (Boss and Jensen, 2003). There are relatively few examples of viruses and bacteria that directly infect APCs and affect IFN‐induced class II MHC expression or directly interfere with class II MHC‐restricted antigen presentation (Hmama 1998, Hussain 1999, Miller 1998, Rinaldo 1994, Schuller 1998, Srisatjaluk 2002, Zhong 1999). It is likely that more examples will be found as this important question is being revisited. For viruses that do not infect professional APCs, the route to avoiding helper T cell and antibody‐mediated responses is to interfere with activation of CD4+ T cells by APCs. In this section, we present an overview of some of the mechanisms used mostly by viral pathogens to actively subvert class II MHC antigen presentation (Fig. 8
). The degree to which other pathogens, like bacteria and parasites, actively interfere with class II MHC antigen presentation, by encoding “immunoevasins” rather than passively, due to their residence in endocytic compartments, is difficult to discern.Figure 8 Pathogen interference with class II MHC antigen presentation. TCR, T cell receptor; PLC, peptide‐loading complex. Nef, HIV‐1 Nef; gp42, EBV glycoprotein 42; BPV E5, bovine papillomavirus protein E5; HPV E5, human papillomavirus protein E5; VacA, H. pylori VacA toxin; US2, HCMV US2; Vpu, HIV‐1 Vpu; gp160, HIV‐1 glycoprotein 160; MVB, multivesicular body; Ii, invariant chain. The immunoevasins and pathways depicted in red take place in the effector CD4+ T cell, whereas those in blue occur in the antigen‐presenting cell.



32 Inhibition of Recognition at the Surface of the APC
Epstein–Barr virus is an example of a virus that can infect and establish latency in B lymphocytes and is associated with a number of malignancies. The product of the BZLF2 EBV gene, gp42, is a bifunctional protein. First, it functions as the coreceptor for viral entry into B cells by binding to the HLA‐DR product. Second, gp42 is generated through proteolytic cleavage in the ER and matures into a secreted form that binds class II MHC molecules at the cell surface. gp42 bound to class II MHC molecules at the cell surface prevents TCR‐(peptide‐loaded class II MHC) interactions and CD4+ T cell activation (Li 1997, Ressing 2003, Ressing 2005, Spriggs 1996).

33 Class II MHC Downregulation from the Surface of the APC
The HIV‐1 Nef protein downregulates class II MHC molecules from the cell surface by restructuring the endocytic pathway such that invariant chain (Ii) degradation is impaired and immature class II MHC complexes (αβIi) are granted increased access to the cell surface (Stumptner‐Cuvelette et al., 2001). Nef induces a reduction of surface levels of peptide‐loaded class II MHC as well as a strong accumulation of surface‐displayed immature class II MHC complexes, still containing (and thereby blocked by) intact invariant chain (Ii). Nef expression results in accumulation of both class II MHC and invariant chain (Ii) in multivesicular bodies (MVBs) (Stumptner‐Cuvelette et al., 2003). MVBs are a specialized type of endosome that constitutes a major pathway of delivery of transmembrane proteins for lysosomal degradation (Hurley and Emr, 2006). Sequestering in MVBs suggests a reduced capacity of immature class II MHC complexes to reach lysosomes, either due to a defect in class II MHC sorting to the lysosomes or due to slower internalization of immature complexes. The mechanism is still unclear (Stumptner‐Cuvelette et al., 2003).

The HCMV US2 immunoevasin was proposed to downregulate class II MHC from the cell surface, presumably by targeting HLA‐DRα and HLA‐DMα for degradation by the proteasome, thus inhibiting antigen presentation to CD4+ T cells (Chevalier 2002, Hegde 2003, Tomazin 1999). This effect of US2, however, was only seen in cell lines in which induction of class II MHC was induced by stable transfection with the class II MHC trans‐activator (CIITA), but not in human DCs or several other cell lines, which express class II MHC endogenously (Rehm et al., 2002). Presumably the relative expression levels of class II MHC and/or US2 could account for the observed differences, and in fact, in CIITA‐transfected cells, even US3 was seen to downregulate class II MHC molecules (Hegde et al., 2002). HSV‐1 can downregulate surface expression of class II MHC complexes in B cells and inhibits the ability of B cells to stimulate CD4+ T cells. HSV‐1 inhibits synthesis of Ii and also encodes an envelope glycoprotein B (gB) that binds both HLA‐DR and HLA‐DM (Neumann 2003, Sievers 2002). By binding to HLA‐DR, gB affects trafficking of the molecule in the secretory pathway and by binding HLA‐DM it sequesters this peptide editor and thus prevents peptide loading of class II MHC molecules that may have escaped (Neumann et al., 2003).

34 CD4 Downregulation from the Surface of the CD4+ T Cell
The CD4 protein serves as the primary cellular receptor for HIV at the surface of CD4+ cells. However, its presence inhibits virus budding and interferes with incorporation of the gp120 protein into the budding virion, not to mention its crucial role in eliciting of a CD4+ T cell response (Keppler 2006, Lama 1999, Ross 1999). Not surprisingly, three HIV‐1 proteins, Nef, Vpu, and gp160 dramatically reduce the steady state levels of CD4 on the cell surface (Mangasarian 1999, Piguet 1999a, Piguet 1999b). One of the many mechanisms used by Nef involves acceleration of the constitutive endocytosis of CD4. In T cells, CD4 is stabilized at the cell surface by p56Lck, a Src‐family tyrosine kinase, which binds a dileucine motif in the CD4 cytoplasmic tail, preventing CD4 from being recruited into clathrin‐coated pits (Aiken 1994, Jin 2005). Nef can displace Lck by directly binding a dileucine sorting motif in the CD4 tail, overcoming the normal Lck phosphorylation‐dependent route of CD4 downregulation. Nef itself contains a C‐terminal dileucine motif that recruits a subunit of the tetrameric adaptor protein complex‐2 (AP‐2), a component of clathrin‐coated pits at the cell membrane. Thus, Nef connects CD4 to AP‐2 on clathrin‐coated pits, triggering rapid CD4 endocytosis (Jin 2004b, Jin 2005, Mangasarian 1999, Piguet 1998, Piguet 1999a). Nef can bind not only the AP‐2 components of clathrin‐coated pits, but also the regulatory V1H subunit of the vacuolar proton (H+) ATPase. V1H (also called NBP1 or Nef binding protein‐1) binds AP‐2 in clathrin‐coated vesicles. By binding V1H, Nef strengthens its weak direct interaction with AP‐2 (Geyer 2002, Mandic 2001). Again, by binding both CD4 (using the aforementioned dileucine motif in the cytoplasmic tail) and V1H, Nef directs internalization of CD4 from the cell surface.

The endocytosed CD4 accumulates in early endosomes from where it is sorted to lysosomes for degradation. Adaptor protein (AP) complexes mediate transport of proteins to numerous compartments within the cell. Whereas AP‐2 initiates early endocytic vesicle formation at the cell membrane, AP‐1 is involved in vesicle formation at the TGN and vesicle targeting to early endosomes and AP‐3 participates in vesicle formation at the TGN and targeting to late endocytic/lysosomal compartments (Bonifacino and Traub, 2003). The “coat” on vesicles in the endocytic pathway is composed of AP complexes and another set of coat proteins, clathrin in clathrin‐coated vesicles, and COP proteins, in COP‐coated vesicles. The COP proteins are involved in vesicle trafficking early in the secretory pathway between the ER and the Golgi (McMahon and Mills, 2004). Trafficking in the endocytic pathway can be targeted by HIV Nef by direct binding to AP complexes or by interference with the recruitment and release cycles of AP complexes from vesicle membranes.

AP complexes cycle from the cytosol to vesicles in a process dependent on the GTPase cycle of ADP‐ribosylation factor‐1 (ARF1). Nef can bind to and stabilize the small GTPase ARF1 on the endosomal membrane, preventing AP complexes from being released, affecting trafficking of host molecules (including CD4) along the endocytic pathway. Nef can also mediate the formation of a ternary complex composed of Nef, ARF1, and a component of the COP‐I coat, βCOP. COP‐I‐coated vesicles are mostly subject to retrograde transport within the Golgi and between the Golgi and the ER, but some are involved in transport from early to late endosomes (McMahon and Mills, 2004), and thus association of Nef with ARF1 and βCOP mediates targeting of CD4 for lysosomal degradation (Faure et al., 2004). Nef has a preference for AP‐1 and AP‐3 complexes in vitro (Janvier et al., 2003b), suggesting that the Nef modus operandi is mostly at the level of endosomal membranes. Downregulation from the cell surface by binding AP‐2 does not seem to be a major route for CD4 downregulation (Rose et al., 2005). Which one of these strategies—downregulation from the cell surface or intracellular retention—or what combinations of these strategies and adaptor protein complexes are used may allow the HIV‐1 Nef protein to downregulate cell surface expression of CD4 perhaps in different cell types (Mangasarian and Trono, 1997).

Vpu targets newly synthesized CD4 molecules in the ER for proteasomal degradation (Kerkau et al., 1997) by recruiting the cytosolic F‐box protein β‐TrCP, the receptor component of the SCFβ‐TrCP E3 ligase, to the ER membrane (Margottin et al., 1998). A motif in the Vpu C‐terminus binds a WD repeat on β‐TrCP, directing SCFβ‐TrCP E3 ligase activity to catalyze the ubiquitination of lysine residues on the CD4 tail, which serves as the trigger for CD4 degradation (Margottin 1998, Schubert 1998). gp160 retains newly synthesized CD4 molecules in the ER (Crise 1992, Kimura 1994). In the absence of CD4, HIV gp160 is posttranslationally cleaved into its gp120 and gp41 subunits at the level of the ER‐to‐Golgi compartment (ERGIC). In the presence of CD4, gp160 forms a complex with CD4 that mediates ER retention of both molecules and downregulation of CD4 from the cell surface. In the context of an HIV‐infected cell, coexpression of Vpu liberates gp160 from the complex, ensuring gp160 translocation to the ERGIC and ensuing maturation, and simultaneously accelerating CD4 turnover (Crise 1992, Rose 2005).

HIV downregulates class I MHC, class II MHC, CD4, and CD1d, a class I MHC‐like molecule that presents lipid antigens (Le Gall 1998, Piguet 1999b), from the cell surface by virtue of its Nef, Vpu, and gp160 proteins, reflecting its ability to manipulate various aspects of the immune response (Joseph 2005, Piguet 1999b). Furthermore, each of these mechanisms may be more far‐reaching than downregulation of each individual receptor. For instance, by directly associating with the proton (H+) ATPase, which is required for the acidification of lysosomes, Nef not only downregulates CD4 but may also interfere with the pH of class II MHC‐positive compartments, affecting antigen processing by lysosomal proteases and class II MHC antigen presentation. This strategy is used by other pathogens: the E5 protein from both human and bovine papillomavirus (Andresson et al., 1995) and the VacA toxin secreted by Helicobacter pylori (Molinari et al., 1998) actively manipulate acidification in the endocytic pathway, resulting in impaired CD4+ T cell‐mediated responses (Brodsky et al., 1999). By binding to AP complexes or to the small GTPase ARF1, Nef may interfere with trafficking and alter the fate of numerous host molecules in the endocytic pathway (Janvier et al., 2003a), affecting aspects that range from viral replication to modulation of the immune system (Lama 2000, Sol‐Foulon 2002, Swigut 2001).

35 Pathogen Manipulation of the Ubiquitin‐Proteasome System
Intracellular pathogens exploit the ubiquitin‐proteasome system mostly to destroy or avoid destruction of specific cellular proteins. This serves to create a more hospitable environment for themselves in the host cell, or to prevent destruction of their own proteins, and so to ensure replication or avoid detection by the immune system. Many events at the initial stage of infection, entry into the cell, are controlled by signaling pathways—for instance, those involved in cytoskeletal rearrangements or in receptor engagement—that rely heavily on the Ub‐proteasome system. The same is true for signaling cascades involved in cell survival, differentiation, and proliferation. Not surprisingly, pathogens have devoted much energy and coding capacity to interfere with cell signaling events through interference with the Ub‐proteasome system. An illustrative example is that of tumor viruses and degradation of cellular tumor suppressor proteins, like the retinoblastoma protein or p53, often resulting in malignant transformation (Shackelford and Pagano, 2005). There have been a number of recent reviews on viral interference with signaling pathways, so we will not describe this aspect in detail here. For comprehensive reviews, the reader is referred to Banks 2003, Shackelford 2004, Shackelford 2005.

In this chapter, we will focus on a few examples of viral and bacterial interference with the Ub‐proteasome system that illustrate how the latter is crucial for aspects of pathogen life cycles that are as distinct as integration into host chromosomes, exit from the host cell, or RNA interference, not to mention control of the immune response. As mentioned in the first section of this chapter, proteasome‐mediated degradation of cytoplasmic proteins as well as the proteolytic events in the endolysosomal system are important for class I and class II MHC presentation and cross‐presentation. Mounting of an immune response involves complicated signaling cascades like NF‐κB and JAK/STAT signaling, which are heavily dependent on the Ub‐proteasome system, and that can be manipulated from early events of cell‐surface receptor‐mediated signaling, for example, to later events of ubiquitination and deubiquitination of downstream targets. Certainly, because of the central role of the Ub‐proteasome system in many different aspects of cellular physiology, interference with this pathway will have pleiotropic effects, and which of the observed effects predominates may be difficult to discern.

It is not our intention to make the following a comprehensive list. We rather propose to provide an overview of the possibilities of manipulation of this system that have been described for pathogens (Fig. 9
). We discuss in more detail pathogen‐encoded modulators of the ubiquitin‐proteasome system, ranging from pathogen‐encoded proteolysis‐resistant peptides, to ubiquitin ligases and DUB, with obvious implications for the viral or bacterial life cycle or with consequences for the control of host immune responses. We elaborate on novel pathogen‐encoded DUBs and their putative functions.Figure 9 Pathogen interference with the Ub‐proteasome system. Pathogens interfere with the Ub‐proteasome system not only to manipulate antigen presentation and other aspects of the immune system, but for processes as distinct as chromosomal integration, virus budding, RNA interference, and many others. They may rely on hijacking of host E3 ligase activities or encode their own. Pathogens can manipulate host DUBs as well as encode DUB activities. The function of pathogen‐encoded DUBs remains a mistery.



36 Interference with Proteasomal Proteolysis
The classic example of a viral protein that interferes with proteasomal processing is the EBNA‐1. The EBNA‐1 protein contains an internal repeat exclusively composed of glycines and alanines, the Gly‐Ala repeat, which not only interferes with its own proteasomal proteolysis (Levitskaya et al., 1995), but also reduces its rate of translation, blocking viral DRIPs formation and inhibiting the presentation of EBNA‐1 class I MHC‐restricted T cell epitopes (Yin et al., 2003). A single residue change in the mouse leukemia virus (MuLV)‐derived CTL epitope (from KSPWFTTL to RSPWFTTL) can eliminate the proteolytic cleavage site required for its presentation (Ossendorp et al., 1996). As discussed earlier, phosphorylation of the HCMV IE‐1 by the HCMV pp65 tegument protein interferes with production of IE‐1‐derived peptides (Gilbert et al., 1996). The HIV‐1 transcriptional activator (Tat) protein manipulates 26S proteasome function by directly interacting with the LMP7 and MECL1 subunits of the proteasome and competing with the 11S proteasome for binding to the 20S proteasome (Andre 1998, Apcher 2003), leading to inhibition of proteolytic activity. Tat also acts at the transcriptional level by modifying proteasome composition by upregulating the LMP7 and MECL1 subunits and downregulating the LMP2 subunit, leading to an increased presentation of cryptic and subdominant CTL epitopes (Gavioli et al., 2004). By preventing display of viral peptides, these viral proteins interfere with cytotoxic T cell recognition.

37 Control of Infection

Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium is an important bacterial pathogen, the causative agent of food poisoning and typhoid fever. S. typhimurium temporally regulates the initial phase of bacterial internalization and host cell recovery after invasion through two type III secretion system (TTSS)‐delivered substrates, SptP and SopE with different proteasomal half lives (Kubori and Galan, 2003). SopE is a bacterial guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) delivered by a TTSS that mimics a host cell GEF for the small Rho GTPases Cdc42 and Rac1, involved in actin remodeling and formation of membrane extensions required for bacterial engulfment. SptP, delivered by another TTSS, is a Rho GTPase activating protein (GAP) factor for Cdc42 and Rac1, which accelerates GTP hydrolysis. SpT plays a role once bacterial internalization has taken place, inactivating the Rho GTPases, inhibiting actin polimerization, and assuring closure of the plasma membrane and recovery of the normal cellular architecture (Pizarro‐Cerda and Cossart, 2006). Salmonella initially delivers equal amounts of SopE and SptB to the host cell. However, 15–20 min after infection SopE is rapidly degraded, whereas SptB degradation occurs only slowly after 3 h, thereby efficiently timing the actin remodeling events that lead to the initial bacterial engulfment and the later host cell recovery. Both processes are proteasome‐dependent and catalyzed by the N‐terminus of the bacterial proteins, but the mechanism and the host factors involved are currently unknown (Kubori and Galan, 2003).

The HIV‐1 Vif protein targets the RNA editing protein APOBEC3G for degradation by a cellular E3 ligase to allow production of infectious viral progeny (Yu et al., 2003). The apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide‐like 3G (APOBEC3G) and related cytidine deaminases are involved in mRNA editing and in immunoglobulin gene class switching and hypermutation but are also potent antiretroviral enzymes. The cytosolic APOBEC3G is incorporated into budding virions, where on infection of new target cells, its cytidine deaminase activity induces G to A hypermutation on the minus‐strand viral DNA, resulting in abortive infection (Bishop 2004b, Zhang 2003). Vif hijacks the elongin‐C‐elongin‐B‐Cullin‐5‐E3 (ECS) complex. The ECS5 E3s recognize substrate receptor proteins containing a BC‐box. Vif possesses a BC‐box motif, through which it binds elongin C (Luo et al., 2005). Vif hijacks the E3 ligase complex and by bridging APOBEC3G and elongin C targets APOBEC3G for ubiquitination and degradation (Yu et al., 2003). This ultimately allows production of infectious virus progeny (Bieniasz 2004, Bishop 2004a, Harris 2004).

38 Virus Budding
The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) are highly conserved from yeast to mammals and consist of the ESCRT I, II, and III complexes. ESCRT complexes are composed of vacuolar protein sorting (VPS) proteins (in yeast), which are recruited from the cytoplasm to promote sorting of ubiquitinated proteins to MVBs (Katzmann et al., 2002). MVBs are formed by invagination of the late endosome membrane, which generates internal vesicles into which proteins destined to the lysosomes are sorted; they are critical for receptor downregulation and other normal and pathological cell processes (Hierro 2004, Hurley 2006, Kostelansky 2006), as well as for virus budding.

The tumor susceptibility gene TSG101, the mammalian homologue of yeast VPS23, is essential for sorting of ubiquitinated proteins to MVBs (Babst et al., 2000). TSG101 recruits hepatocyte growth factor–regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HRS), the mammalian homologue of yeast VPS27, to the endosomal membrane. HRS nucleates recruitment of the ESCRT‐1 complex, which in turn recruits ESCRT 2 and ‐3, leading to formation of the inner membranes of the MVB. TSG101 is a noncanonical Ub E2 variant (UEV) protein—it does not possess Ub‐conjugating activity, only an N‐terminal UEV domain that binds ubiquitin. Binding of the TSG101 UEV domain to a P(S/T)AP tetrapeptide motif on HRS recruits HRS to the endosomal membrane, triggering assembly of ESCRT complexes and genesis of the MVB (Clague 2003, Garrus 2001, Pornillos 2002, Pornillos 2003). Many viruses such as HIV‐1 and Ebola recruit this Ub‐dependent sorting machinery to the viral release sites at the plasma membrane to promote virus budding from host cells (Li 2005, Liu 2004), by making use of conserved P(S/T)AP, PPXY, or FPIV motifs, also called late budding domains (Bieniasz, 2006).

Retroviruses like HIV use the P(S/T)AP motif on the L‐domain contained in their GAG protein to mimic the TSG101‐recruiting activity of the HRS protein (Klinger 2005, Martin‐Serrano 2003, Sorin 2006, Stuchell 2004). Other viruses can also recruit neuronal precursor cell‐expressed developmentally downregulated 4 (NEDD4) and NEDD‐4‐like HECT E3 ligases to facilitate viral budding (Bieniasz 2006, Harty 2001, Sakurai 2004, Yasuda 2003). NEDD4 E3s ligases are a diversified group of orthologues of yeast Rsp5p and are involved in a wide range of processes such as receptor internalization and degradation (presumably through the endolysosomal pathway), maintenance of EBV latency, and regulation of cytokine signaling. NEDD4 E3s have a catalytic C‐terminal HECT domain, two or more central N‐terminal WW domains, and an N‐terminal C2 domain. The N‐terminal C2 domain seems to be responsible for membrane association and cellular localization of the protein. The WW domain is a protein–protein interaction module of about 35 amino acids with two crucial tryptophan (W) residues spaced 20–22 amino acids apart, which appears to mediate substrate selection. It binds mostly proline‐rich motifs, such as the PPXY motif present in many cellular proteins, targeting them for degradation (Ingham 2004, Ingham 2005). Viral proteins with the PPXY motif can therefore bind these WW domains on Nedd4 E3s, but the nature of these interactions and how they facilitate virus budding is so far unknown. Some viruses, like Ebola, have two different late budding motifs, PPXY and P(S/T)AP, and the Ebola late domain‐containing VP40 matrix protein can recruit both TSG101 and NEDD4 for effective budding (Licata 2003, Liu 2004, Yasuda 2003). The nonenveloped adenovirus possesses a PPXY motif on its penton base protein, which is essential for virus internalization that can interact with several NEDD4 HECT E3 ligases (Galinier et al., 2002). Whether or not this interaction or E3 ligase activity is required for adenovirus entry is currently unknown.

39 Bacterial Chromosome Integration

Agrobacterium tumefaciens exploits a host cell SCF E3 ligase for integration of its T‐DNA by encoding an F‐box protein (Tzfira et al., 2004b). Agrobacterium is a common phytopathogenic bacterium that induces “crown gall” disease in plants by transfer and integration of a segment of its tumor‐inducing (Ti) plasmid DNA into the plant genome. This process relies also on delivery of several virulence (Vir) proteins into the host cell, such as the bacterial VirE2 protein, which is thought to package and protect the transported T‐DNA molecule, and, together with the host plant VIP1 protein, assist its nuclear import (Tzfira et al., 2004a). However, disassembly of this VirE2/T‐DNA/VIP1 complex must occur before integration and involves intranuclear proteolysis of VirE2 and VIP1 induced by the VirF protein, an F‐box‐domain–containing protein. The bacterial VirF F‐box hijacks the SCF E3 plant homologue. The VirF‐containing SCFVirF then leads to degradation of VIP1 and VirE2, and integration of the Agrobacterium T‐DNA (Tzfira et al., 2004b). We consider it unlikely that this possibility has been exploited only by plant pathogens.

40 ISGylation and deISGylation
The host innate response triggered by type I interferon (IFN‐α and ‐β) innate response is crucial in early immunity against viruses, bacteria, and some parasites, acting to limit pathogen infection limiting replication of the pathogen and constraining cellular permissiveness to infection (Smith et al., 2005). Type I interferon receptor signaling occurs through the JAK/STAT pathway and leads to transcription of several IFN‐stimulated genes (ISGs), of which the gene encoding the Ub‐like modifier ISG15 is one of the most strongly induced (Farrell et al., 1979). ISG15 and protein modification by ISG15 (ISGylation) are induced by viral and bacterial infection or other stresses, suggesting important roles for the ISG15 system in innate immune responses (Liu 2005, Ritchie 2004). ISG15 is conjugated onto several signaling molecules with immunomodulatory functions, like JAK/STAT proteins (Giannakopoulos 2005, Malakhov 2003). The ISGylation cascade is initiated by ISG15 activation by an E1‐like enzyme, UBE1L, transfer to the ISG‐conjugating UBCH8 enzyme (Zhao et al., 2004), and incorporation into UBCH8‐compatible Ub E3 ligases (Dastur 2006, Zou 2006). A deISGylating enzyme, ubiquitin‐binding protein 43 (UBP43), also called USP18, specifically removes ISG15 from ISGylated substrates (Malakhov et al., 2002), and is regulated by ubiquitination by the SCFSkp2 E3 (Tokarz et al., 2004). USP18 is unlikely to be the sole enzyme capable of acting on ISG15 conjugates.

The role of ISG15 in orchestration of the innate antiviral response sets the ground for pathogen interference. Although the mechanism is unclear, viral replication in UBP43 knockout mice is impaired, a phenotype that was initially attributed to inhibition of deISGylation and deregulation of STAT signaling (Ritchie et al., 2002). There are conflicting views on this (Dao 2005, Kim 2006b, Knobeloch 2005) and UBP43 may in fact inhibit type I IFN signaling irrespectively of its ISG15 isopeptidase activity, by binding to the IFN receptor and blocking the interaction between JAK and the IFN receptor (Malakhova et al., 2006). IFN‐mediated inhibition of HIV replication and budding is dependent on ISG15 (Kunzi 1996, Pitha 1994, Poli 1989). Expression of ISG15 inhibits ubiquitination of the HIV‐1 Gag protein and TSG101, and disrupts the interaction of the Gag late budding domain with TSG101 (Okumura et al., 2006). Either of these ISG15 effects and/or additional mechanisms of action could lead to failure to recruit ESCRT complexes and inhibition of HIV budding. ISG15 is strongly induced by infection with influenza B virus. The exact cellular function and targets of ISG15 are not known, but the NS1 protein of influenza B viruses (NS1B) blocks its conjugation to target proteins: the NS1B N‐terminus binds ISG15, inhibiting activation of ISG15 by its E1 enzyme, UBE1L. Influenza A viruses also manipulate cellular ISGylation processes, through an even less well characterized mechanism: the influenza A virus NS1A protein does not directly bind the ISG15 protein, but little or no ISG15 protein is produced during infection (Yuan 2001, Yuan 2002). Whether this reflects ISGylation, deISGylation, and/or UBP43 ubiquitination‐mediated control of the IFN innate immune response is so far unknown.

41 Control of Inflammation
Suppression of NF‐κB signaling is a common theme for many viral as well as bacterial pathogens and can be certainly achieved through modulation of Ub‐dependent events in the NF‐κB cascade (Bowie 2004, Hiscott 2001, Mason 2004). The human enteric flora may influence intestinal epithelium inflammatory tolerance by inhibiting the NF‐κB pathway, which can be achieved by blocking any one of the many Ub‐dependent steps that control it. Shigella flexneri, which causes severe diarrhea in humans, injects TTSS‐effector proteins into host cells to induce their entry into epithelial cells or trigger apoptosis in macrophages. The OspG effector is a serine/threonine kinase that binds various E2s, including UbcH5, a component of the SCFβ‐TrCP E3 complex. OspG binding to UbcH5 inhibits the SCFβ‐TrCP complex and thereby phospho‐IkB degradation, blocking NF‐κB signaling in response to the bacterial infection. The Cullin subunit of the SCFβ‐TrCP complex is itself regulated by NEDD8 attachment (Pan et al., 2004). Certain enteric bacteria can lead to rapid deneddylation of Cullin‐1 and consequent repression of the NF‐κB pathway (Collier‐Hyams et al., 2005), but the bacterial activities responsible are still to be determined. In any case, because NF‐κB is crucial for both the initial innate inflammatory response and for coordination of the adaptive immune response, dampening of inflammation may endow Shigella and other enteric bacteria with the ability to invade and later colonize the gastrointestinal epithelium (Kim et al., 2005).

42 Posttranscriptional Gene Silencing
RNA interference (or posttranscriptional gene silencing) in plants and invertebrate animals is important for many regulatory processes and a primitive form of antiviral immunity that is nucleic acid based. Consequently, plant viruses have evolved proteins, the so‐called silencing suppressors, which directly bind to and inactivate the plant microRNAs (Ding 2004, Zamore 2004). Poleroviruses are small positive‐strand RNA viruses that cause leafroll phenotypes in many plant species. Poleroviruses encode a silencing suppressor P0, which is a viral F‐box protein (Barry and Fruh, 2006). P0 has a minimal conserved F‐box motif that can bind the plant Skp‐1 homologue and form a functional complex with the plant Cullin‐1 homologue. The P0 F‐box is required for polerovirus infectivity and its silencing suppressor function (Pazhouhandeh et al., 2006). P0 presumably binds the microRNAs and targets them for Cullin‐4A‐dependent degradation. This constitutes a remarkable finding, as degradation of RNA (and not protein) by an E3 ligase had not been documented before.

This primitive form of antiviral immunity, although widely used as a laboratory tool was only recently shown to occur in the context of a natural viral infection in jawed vertebrates (Browne et al., 2005). HIV‐1 encodes viral small interfering RNA (siRNA) precursors that provoke RNA silencing in human cells, so not surprisingly, the HIV‐1 Tat protein also contains a silencing suppressor function (Bennasser et al., 2005), that prevents Dicer from processing the precursor double‐stranded RNAs into siRNAs. Suppression of RNA silencing by other RNA viruses is likely to occur. It will be interesting to see whether the mechanism used by the plant poleroviruses is conserved and whether manipulation of the Ub‐proteasome system for suppressing RNA interference is more widely used by mammalian RNA viruses.

43 Downregulation of Cell Surface Receptors by Pathogen‐Encoded E3s
As mentioned earlier, several γ‐herpesviruses and poxviruses encode PHD/LAP E3s, the K3 homologues, that include the Kaposi's‐sarcoma‐associated herpesvirus (KSHV) kK3 and kK5 (also called modulator of immune recognition MIR‐1 and MIR‐2, respectively), the MHV‐68 mK3, and the rabbit myxoma virus M153R (Coscoy and Ganem, 2003). We discussed mK3 which catalyzes ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of nascent murine class I MHC HCs after dislocation from the ER membrane (Lybarger 2005, Wang 2005). KSHV kK3 and kK5 and myxoma virus M153R catalyze ubiquitination of cell surface class I MHC HC, thus providing the trigger for their internalization from the cell membrane, as well as for sorting through MVB formation to lysosomal degradation (Duncan et al., 2006). In addition to downregulation of class I MHC molecules, some of these K3 homologues target the lymphocyte costimulatory molecules CD86 (B7.2) and intercellular adhesion molecule ICAM‐1, CD1d, and CD4 (Coscoy 2003, Coscoy 2001, Lehner 2005, Mansouri 2003), as well as the Fas/CD95 death receptor (Collin 2005, Guerin 2002). By targeting not only class I MHC molecules, the viral K3 homologues are adding an extra layer of protection predicted to be important for viral escape after reactivation from latency (Lehner et al., 2005). The K3 homologues are most likely making use of old ideas: the mechanisms used by the viral Ub ligases have probably been “borrowed” from their mammalian counterparts, the MARCH proteins, and will certainly continue to yield insights into the Ub‐proteasome system.

44 Programmed Cell Death in Plants
A bacterial E3 ligase was recently shown to inactivate another type of immune response in plants (Janjusevic et al., 2006). Antipathogen responses in plants, although not as sophisticated as those afforded by the vertebrate immune system, are nevertheless quite efficient. One mechanism, immunity‐induced programmed cell death (PCD), is a response that sacrifices a limited portion of the plant to limit spread of the infection. The Pseudomonas syringae bacterium, which causes disease in tomato and Arabidopsis, delivers its AvrPtoB protein into plant cells through a type III secretion system. AvrPtoB can inhibit PCD in susceptible hosts, allowing Pseudomonas to cause systemic infection and disease. The AvrPtoB C‐terminus encodes a U‐box E3 ligase activity necessary for the pathogenic role of AvrPtoB, since mutation of the putative E2‐recruitment sites abolishes the anti‐PCD and virulence activities of the AvrPtoB protein (Janjusevic et al., 2006). Determining the host targets of the Pseudomonas E3 will be crucial in clarifying its mechanism of action and might even explain plant susceptibility to infection. Such experiments may also assist in the identification of similar targets in mammalian species infected with comparable Gram‐negative microbes. Furthermore, it is rather striking that another pathogen uses a mimic of a host E3 ligase to encode an immunomodulatory function. There are bound to be others.

45 Cytokine Responses
Mumps virus and other Paramyxoviridae family members hijack the Cullin‐4A‐SCFβ‐TrCP E3 ligase to suppress IFN‐ as well as IL‐6‐mediated signaling (Ulane et al., 2003), important for control of inflammation and apoptosis during inflammation (Hodge et al., 2005). IFN and IL‐6 signaling activates their cognate STAT factors and transcription of genes involved in IFN and cytokine signaling. Some of these paramyxoviruses use their V protein to bind DDB1, the Cullin‐4A‐SCFβ‐TrCP E3 substrate adaptor that recruits STAT proteins to the E3 complex, targeting STATs for proteasome‐mediated degradation (Li 2006b, Ulane 2002, Ulane 2005). Many other viruses target STAT transcription factors for proteasomal degradation (Garcin 2002, Lin 2005, Ramaswamy 2004, Zimmermann 2005). Recruitment of Cullin E3s is likely to be a more widely used viral strategy of interfering with IFN and cytokine signaling.

The interleukin‐2 (IL‐2)‐inducible deubiquitinating enzyme DUB‐2 is induced by IL‐2 stimulation and may regulate IL‐2 signaling. The IL‐2‐inducible DUB‐2 is constitutively expressed in cells transformed by human T cell leukemia virus‐1 (HTLV‐1). Like other cytokines, IL‐2 is an important modulator of apoptosis in T cells that acts through the STAT pathway. Although the mechanism is not at all clear, DUB‐2 activity prolongs IL‐2‐stimulated phosphorylation and transcriptional activity of STAT5, inhibiting T cell apoptosis in the aftermath of the immune response (Migone 2001, Shackelford 2004) and possibly contributing to cell immortalization. Cytokine‐inducible DUBs could interfere with cytokine signaling, thereby playing an active role in modulation of the immune response. The IL‐1‐inducible DUB‐1 is specifically induced by interleukin 3 (IL‐3), GM‐CSF, and IL‐5, which suggests a role in responses mediated by these cytokines (D'Andrea and Pellman, 1998) and might constitute a target for pathogen modulation of the immune response through interference with the Ub‐proteasome system. Although a review of this rapidly expanding field is beyond the scope of this chapter, even this simple example suffices to demonstrate how both Ub addition and removal control immune physiology, and consequently are likely targets for interference by pathogens.

46 Pathogen‐Encoded DUBs
Bacteria of the Yersinia genus are the causal agents of plague, septicemia, and gastrointestinal syndromes. Enteropathogenic Yersinia species are extracellular multiplying Gram‐negative bacteria that make use of type III secretion systems to inject virulence factors into host cells. The Yersinia YopJ virulence factor encodes a protein reported to be a cysteine protease that can cleave Ub and SUMO. The YopJ DUB inhibits NF‐κB and mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, a function ascribed previously to its somewhat promiscuous deubiquitination of critical cellular proteins, such as TRAF2, TRAF6, and IkB. The MAPK/JUN pathway is involved in transcriptional control of several cytokine genes. The YopJ activity induces macrophage death and blocks their ability to activate these inflammatory pathways (Orth 2002, Orth 2000, Zhou 2005). However, recent reports show that the true function of YopJ is that of a serine/threonine acetyltransferase (Mukherjee et al., 2006). The way by which the functions assigned to YopJ have changed as the field advances demonstrates the complexity of assigning a function to proteins that lack obvious mammalian counterparts. Both Salmonella and the plant pathogen Xanthomonas secrete proteins with homology to YopJ, but their putative DUB activity or function in the host have not been assessed yet (Gurlebeck 2006, Hardt 1997).

A novel viral USP or deubiquitinating enzyme, UL36USP, was recently identified in herpes simplex virus‐1 (HSV‐1) by labeling with an Ub‐derived probe (Kattenhorn et al., 2005). The UL36USP is located at the N‐terminus of the UL36, the large tegument protein of HSV‐1, an α‐herpesvirus. Despite the overall low sequence homology—at the exception of almost only the amino acid residues composing the catalytic triad—the UL36USP activity is well conserved in all members of the Herpesviridae family, as the homologous proteins in murine cytomegalovirus (a β‐herpesvirus) and EBV (a γ‐herpesvirus) also exhibit DUB activity in vitro (Schlieker et al., 2005). One of the two severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) Coronavirus proteases responsible for cleavage of the replicase polyprotein, the SARS‐CoV papain‐like protease PLpro, is also a DUB (Barretto 2005, Lindner 2005), predicted to be structurally similar to human USP7 (Hu et al., 2002). The SARS‐CoV Plpro protease activity is involved in the processing of the viral polyprotein, thereby contributing to replication of the viral RNA genome. The function of the SARS virus deubiquitinating activity, which extends to ISG15‐removal activity (Lindner et al., 2005), is unknown at this point. The adenovirus proteinase (Avp) and the human cytomegalovirus UL48 protein also encode DUB activities, but the viral and/or cellular targets remain unidentified (Balakirev 2002, Wang 2006b). Chlamydia trachomatis, an obligate intracellular bacterium that causes a variety of diseases in humans has two genes, ChlaDub1 and ChlaDub2, whose products encode deubiquitinating and deNEDDylating activities (Misaghi et al., 2006). Unlike C. pneumoniae whose genome is devoid of ChlaDub genes, C. trachomatis is able to block NF‐κB signaling and thus the inflammatory response, as well as host cell apoptosis. Both processes could be modulated by the C. trachomatis DUBs.

These unexpected DUB activities encoded by pathogens suggest a novel strategy of modulation of host defense by manipulating the cellular ubiquitination machinery. Although the experimental evidence is at best tenuous, one can speculate that many of these other pathogen‐encoded DUBs may be important for modulation of the Ub‐proteasome system during the pathogen life cycle and/or in the context of immune evasion. The fact that these DUB activities are conserved suggests functional importance. They may be delivered to the host cell at the time of infection (for instance, by a bacterial type III secretion system or by a viral tegument protein) or may be transcribed early during infection. The pathogen‐encoded DUB could interfere with the levels of Ub‐ or Ubl‐conjugated proteins, thereby altering cellular processes ranging from signaling pathways, protein degradation, antigen presentation, vesicular trafficking, and many others.

47 Conclusions and Future Directions
We have elaborated on several examples of how the host immune system can be manipulated by a pathogen‐encoded E3 or pathogen hijacking of a host E3. Similarly—and although the sample pool is rather small at the moment—there is no reason to believe that encoding their own DUBs and/or hijacking of host DUBs has not “occurred” to pathogens. An attractive possibility is that some of these activities are aimed at manipulating the host immune system. Possible targets would include pathways involved in “housekeeping” processes like life and death of the cells of the immune system, and extend to, for example, interference with antigen presentation. These DUB activities could manipulate membrane trafficking in ways that would prevent MHC molecules from reaching the cell surface, or prevent proteasomal degradation of pathogen‐derived proteins. This initial window of deubiquitinating activity could help viruses escape detection. Bacterial pathogens could benefit from targeting of transcription factors and cytokine signaling networks that are crucial for coordination of macrophage effector functions. Other immune responses that could, in principle, be controlled by DUBs are IFN and NF‐NF‐κB signaling, and the posttranscriptional gene silencing “immune response” at least in plants. The possibilities are endless. Exploitation of the Ub‐proteasome system by pathogens to enhance their own survival is beginning to emerge as a central theme. The development of the appropriate genetic and biochemical tools will help place this subject in the realm of essential host–pathogen interactions.

Acknowledgments
We thank Howard C. Hang for help with the text and the figures and apologize to all colleagues whose work we may have not included. This work was supported by NIH grants to H.L.P.
==== Refs
References
Adams J.   The proteasome: Structure, function, and role in the cell Cancer Treat. Rev. 29 Suppl. 1 2003 3 9 
Ahn K.  Angulo A.  Ghazal P.  Peterson P.A.  Yang Y.  Fruh K.   Human cytomegalovirus inhibits antigen presentation by a sequential multistep process Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 20 1996 10990 10995 8855296 
Ahn K.  Gruhler A.  Galocha B.  Jones T.R.  Wiertz E.J.  Ploegh H.L.  Peterson P.A.  Yang Y.  Fruh K.   The ER‐luminal domain of the HCMV glycoprotein US6 inhibits peptide translocation by TAP Immunity 6 5 1997 613 621 9175839 
Aiken C.  Konner J.  Landau N.R.  Lenburg M.E.  Trono D.   Nef induces CD4 endocytosis: Requirement for a critical dileucine motif in the membrane‐proximal CD4 cytoplasmic domain Cell 76 5 1994 853 864 8124721 
Ait‐Goughoulte M.  Hourioux C.  Patient R.  Trassard S.  Brand D.  Roingeard P.   Core protein cleavage by signal peptide peptidase is required for hepatitis C virus‐like particle assembly J. Gen. Virol. 87 Pt. 4 2006 855 860 16528035 
Akira S.  Uematsu S.  Takeuchi O.   Pathogen recognition and innate immunity Cell 124 4 2006 783 801 16497588 
Alam S.M.  Travers P.J.  Wung J.L.  Nasholds W.  Redpath S.  Jameson S.C.  Gascoigne N.R.   T‐cell‐receptor affinity and thymocyte positive selection Nature 381 6583 1996 616 620 8637599 
Alcami A.   Viral mimicry of cytokines, chemokines and their receptors Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3 1 2003 36 50 12511874 
Alcami A.  Koszinowski U.H.   Viral mechanisms of immune evasion Trends Microbiol. 8 9 2000 410 418 10989308 
Ambagala A.P.  Solheim J.C.  Srikumaran S.   Viral interference with MHC class I antigen presentation pathway: The battle continues Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 107 1–2 2005 1 15 15978672 
Amerik A.Y.  Hochstrasser M.   Mechanism and function of deubiquitinating enzymes Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1695 1–3 2004 189 207 15571815 
Andersen M.H.  Schrama D.  Thor Straten P.  Becker J.C.   Cytotoxic T cells J. Invest. Dermatol. 126 1 2006 32 41 16417215 
Andre P.  Groettrup M.  Klenerman P.  de Giuli R.  Booth B.L. Jr.  Cerundolo V.  Bonneville M.  Jotereau F.  Zinkernagel R.M.  Lotteau V.   An inhibitor of HIV‐1 protease modulates proteasome activity, antigen presentation, and T cell responses Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 22 1998 13120 13124 9789051 
Andresson T.  Sparkowski J.  Goldstein D.J.  Schlegel R.   Vacuolar H(+)‐ATPase mutants transform cells and define a binding site for the papillomavirus E5 oncoprotein J. Biol. Chem. 270 12 1995 6830 6837 7896830 
Apcher G.S.  Heink S.  Zantopf D.  Kloetzel P.M.  Schmid H.P.  Mayer R.J.  Kruger E.   Human immunodeficiency virus‐1 Tat protein interacts with distinct proteasomal alpha and beta subunits FEBS Lett. 553 1–2 2003 200 204 14550573 
Ardley H.C.  Robinson P.A.   E3 ubiquitin ligases Essays Biochem. 41 2005 15 30 16250895 
Arnon T.I.  Achdout H.  Levi O.  Markel G.  Saleh N.  Katz G.  Gazit R.  Gonen‐Gross T.  Hanna J.  Nahari E.  Porgador A.  Honigman A.   Inhibition of the NKp30 activating receptor by pp65 of human cytomegalovirus Nat. Immunol. 6 5 2005 515 523 15821739 
Babst M.  Odorizzi G.  Estepa E.J.  Emr S.D.   Mammalian tumor susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101) and the yeast homologue, Vps23p, both function in late endosomal trafficking Traffic 1 3 2000 248 258 11208108 
Backstrom E.  Kristensson K.  Ljunggren H.G.   Activation of natural killer cells: Underlying molecular mechanisms revealed Scand. J. Immunol. 60 1–2 2004 14 22 15238069 
Balakirev M.Y.  Jaquinod M.  Haas A.L.  Chroboczek J.   Deubiquitinating function of adenovirus proteinase J. Virol. 76 12 2002 6323 6331 12021365 
Banks L.  Pim D.  Thomas M.   Viruses and the 26S proteasome: Hacking into destruction Trends Biochem. Sci. 28 2003 452 459 12932734 
Barel M.T.  Ressing M.  Pizzato N.  van Leeuwen D.  Le Bouteiller P.  Lenfant F.  Wiertz E.J.   Human cytomegalovirus‐encoded US2 differentially affects surface expression of MHC class I locus products and targets membrane‐bound, but not soluble HLA‐G1 for degradation J. Immunol. 171 12 2003 6757 6765 14662880 
Barel M.T.  Pizzato N.  Le Bouteiller P.  Wiertz E.J.  Lenfant F.   Subtle sequence variation among MHC class I locus products greatly influences sensitivity to HCMV US2‐ and US11‐mediated degradation Int. Immunol. 18 1 2006 173 182 16361314 
Barretto N.  Jukneliene D.  Ratia K.  Chen Z.  Mesecar A.D.  Baker S.C.   The papain‐like protease of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus has deubiquitinating activity J. Virol. 79 24 2005 15189 15198 16306590 
Barry M.  Fruh K.   Viral modulators of cullin RING ubiquitin ligases: Culling the host defense Sci. STKE 2006 335 2006 pe21 16705129 
Bartee E.  Mansouri M.  Hovey Nerenberg B.T.  Gouveia K.  Fruh K.   Downregulation of major histocompatibility complex class I by human ubiquitin ligases related to viral immune evasion proteins J. Virol. 78 3 2004 1109 1120 14722266 
Bays N.W.  Hampton R.Y.   Cdc48‐Ufd1‐Npl4: Stuck in the middle with Ub Curr. Biol. 12 10 2002 R366 R371 12015140 
Bays N.W.  Gardner R.G.  Seelig L.P.  Joazeiro C.A.  Hampton R.Y.   Hrd1p/Der3p is a membrane‐anchored ubiquitin ligase required for ER‐associated degradation Nat. Cell Biol. 3 1 2001 24 29 11146622 
Beissert S.  Schwarz A.  Schwarz T.   Regulatory T cells J. Invest. Dermatol. 126 1 2006 15 24 16417213 
Bennasser Y.  Le S.Y.  Benkirane M.  Jeang K.T.   Evidence that HIV‐1 encodes an siRNA and a suppressor of RNA silencing Immunity 22 5 2005 607 619 15894278 
Bieniasz P.D.   Intrinsic immunity: A front‐line defense against viral attack Nat. Immunol. 5 11 2004 1109 1115 15496950 
Bieniasz P.D.   Late budding domains and host proteins in enveloped virus release Virology 344 1 2006 55 63 16364736 
Bishop K.N.  Holmes R.K.  Sheehy A.M.  Davidson N.O.  Cho S.J.  Malim M.H.   Cytidine deamination of retroviral DNA by diverse APOBEC proteins Curr. Biol. 14 15 2004 1392 1396 15296758 
Bishop K.N.  Holmes R.K.  Sheehy A.M.  Malim M.H.   APOBEC‐mediated editing of viral RNA Science 305 5684 2004 645 15286366 
Blom D.  Hirsch C.  Stern P.  Tortorella D.  Ploegh H.L.   A glycosylated type I membrane protein becomes cytosolic when peptide: N‐glycanase is compromised EMBO J. 23 3 2004 650 658 14749736 
Boname J.M.  Stevenson P.G.   MHC class I ubiquitination by a viral PHD/LAP finger protein Immunity 15 4 2001 627 636 11672544 
Bonifacino J.S.  Traub L.M.   Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72 2003 395 447 12651740 
Boss J.M.  Jensen P.E.   Transcriptional regulation of the MHC class II antigen presentation pathway Curr. Opin. Immunol. 15 1 2003 105 111 12495741 
Bowie A.G.  Zhan J.  Marshall W.L.   Viral appropriation of apoptotic and NF‐kappaB signaling pathways J. Cell. Biochem. 91 6 2004 1099 1108 15048867 
Braun S.  Matuschewski K.  Rape M.  Thoms S.  Jentsch S.   Role of the ubiquitin‐selective CDC48(UFD1/NPL4)chaperone (segregase) in ERAD of OLE1 and other substrates EMBO J. 21 4 2002 615 621 11847109 
Brodsky F.M.  Lem L.  Solache A.  Bennett E.M.   Human pathogen subversion of antigen presentation Immunol. Rev. 168 1999 199 215 10399076 
Browne E.P.  Li J.  Chong M.  Littman D.R.   Virus‐host interactions: New insights from the small RNA world Genome Biol. 6 11 2005 238 16277756 
Bryant P.  Ploegh H.   Class II MHC peptide loading by the professionals Curr. Opin. Immunol. 16 1 2004 96 102 14734116 
Buschhorn B.A.  Kostova Z.  Medicherla B.  Wolf D.H.   A genome‐wide screen identifies Yos9p as essential for ER‐associated degradation of glycoproteins FEBS Lett. 577 3 2004 422 426 15556621 
Casso D.J.  Tanda S.  Biehs B.  Martoglio B.  Kornberg T.B.   Drosophila Signal peptide peptidase is an essential protease for larval development Genetics 170 1 2005 139 148 15716490 
Castelli C.  Rivoltini L.  Andreola G.  Carrabba M.  Renkvist N.  Parmiani G.   T‐cell recognition of melanoma‐associated antigens J. Cell. Physiol. 182 3 2000 323 331 10653598 
Chapman H.A.   Endosomal proteases in antigen presentation Curr. Opin. Immunol. 18 1 2006 78 84 16338127 
Chevalier M.S.  Daniels G.M.  Johnson D.C.   Binding of human cytomegalovirus US2 to major histocompatibility complex class I and II proteins is not sufficient for their degradation J. Virol. 76 16 2002 8265 8275 12134032 
Chou A.H.  Tsai H.F.  Wu Y.Y.  Hu C.Y.  Hwang L.H.  Hsu P.I.  Hsu P.N.   Hepatitis C virus core protein modulates TRAIL‐mediated apoptosis by enhancing Bid cleavage and activation of mitochondria apoptosis signaling pathway J. Immunol. 174 4 2005 2160 2166 15699147 
Clague M.J.  Urbe S.   Hrs function: Viruses provide the clue Trends Cell Biol. 13 12 2003 603 606 14624836 
Collier‐Hyams L.S.  Sloane V.  Batten B.C.  Neish A.S.   Cutting edge: Bacterial modulation of epithelial signaling via changes in neddylation of cullin‐1 J. Immunol. 175 7 2005 4194 4198 16177058 
Collin N.  Guerin J.L.  Drexler I.  Blanie S.  Gelfi J.  Boullier S.  Foucras G.  Sutter G.  Messud‐Petit F.   The poxviral scrapin MV‐LAP requires a myxoma viral infection context to efficiently downregulate MHC‐I molecules Virology 343 2 2005 171 178 16185739 
Connell P.  Ballinger C.A.  Jiang J.  Wu Y.  Thompson L.J.  Hohfeld J.  Patterson C.   The co‐chaperone CHIP regulates protein triage decisions mediated by heat‐shock proteins Nat. Cell Biol. 3 1 2001 93 96 11146632 
Coscoy L.  Ganem D.   Kaposi's sarcoma‐associated herpesvirus encodes two proteins that block cell surface display of MHC class I chains by enhancing their endocytosis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 14 2000 8051 8056 10859362 
Coscoy L.  Ganem D.   PHD domains and E3 ubiquitin ligases: Viruses make the connection Trends Cell Biol. 13 1 2003 7 12 12480335 
Coscoy L.  Sanchez D.J.  Ganem D.   A novel class of herpesvirus‐encoded membrane‐bound E3 ubiquitin ligases regulates endocytosis of proteins involved in immune recognition J. Cell Biol. 155 7 2001 1265 1273 11756476 
Cosman D.  Fanger N.  Borges L.  Kubin M.  Chin W.  Peterson L.  Hsu M.L.   A novel immunoglobulin superfamily receptor for cellular and viral MHC class I molecules Immunity 7 2 1997 273 282 9285411 
Crawshaw S.G.  Martoglio B.  Meacock S.L.  High S.   A misassembled transmembrane domain of a polytopic protein associates with signal peptide peptidase Biochem. J. 384 Pt. 1 2004 9 17 15373738 
Cresswell P.   Assembly, transport, and function of MHC class II molecules Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12 1994 259 293 8011283 
Cresswell P.  Ackerman A.L.  Giodini A.  Peaper D.R.  Wearsch P.A.   Mechanisms of MHC class I‐restricted antigen processing and cross‐presentation Immunol. Rev. 207 2005 145 157 16181333 
Crise B.  Rose J.K.   Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 glycoprotein precursor retains a CD4‐p56lck complex in the endoplasmic reticulum J. Virol. 66 4 1992 2296 2301 1548763 
Crotty S.  Ahmed R.   Immunological memory in humans Semin. Immunol. 16 3 2004 197 203 15130504 
D'Andrea A.  Pellman D.   Deubiquitinating enzymes: A new class of biological regulators Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 33 5 1998 337 352 9827704 
d'Azzo A.  Bongiovanni A.  Nastasi T.   E3 ubiquitin ligases as regulators of membrane protein trafficking and degradation Traffic 6 6 2005 429 441 15882441 
Dao C.T.  Zhang D.E.   ISG15: A ubiquitin‐like enigma Front Biosci. 10 2005 2701 2722 15970528 
Dastur A.  Beaudenon S.  Kelley M.  Krug R.M.  Huibregtse J.M.   Herc5, an interferon‐induced HECT E3 enzyme, is required for conjugation of ISG15 in human cells J. Biol. Chem. 281 7 2006 4334 4338 16407192 
Decottignies A.  Evain A.  Ghislain M.   Binding of Cdc48p to a ubiquitin‐related UBX domain from novel yeast proteins involved in intracellular proteolysis and sporulation Yeast 21 2 2004 127 139 14755638 
Ding S.W.  Li H.  Lu R.  Li F.  Li W.X.   RNA silencing: A conserved antiviral immunity of plants and animals Virus Res. 102 1 2004 109 115 15068886 
Dreveny I.  Pye V.E.  Beuron F.  Briggs L.C.  Isaacson R.L.  Matthews S.J.  McKeown C.  Yuan X.  Zhang X.  Freemont P.S.   p97 and close encounters of every kind: A brief review Biochem. Soc. Trans. 32 Pt. 5 2004 715 720 15493996 
Duncan L.M.  Piper S.  Dodd R.B.  Saville M.K.  Sanderson C.M.  Luzio J.P.  Lehner P.J.   Lysine‐63‐linked ubiquitination is required for endolysosomal degradation of class I molecules EMBO J. 25 8 2006 1635 1645 16601694 
Dunn C.  Chalupny N.J.  Sutherland C.L.  Dosch S.  Sivakumar P.V.  Johnson D.C.  Cosman D.   Human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein UL16 causes intracellular sequestration of NKG2D ligands, protecting against natural killer cell cytotoxicity J. Exp. Med. 197 11 2003 1427 1439 12782710 
Ellgaard L.  Helenius A.   Quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4 3 2003 181 191 12612637 
Elsasser S.  Chandler‐Militello D.  Muller B.  Hanna J.  Finley D.   Rad23 and Rpn10 serve as alternative ubiquitin receptors for the proteasome J. Biol. Chem. 279 26 2004 26817 26822 15117949 
Eriksson K.K.  Vago R.  Calanca V.  Galli C.  Paganetti P.  Molinari M.   EDEM contributes to maintenance of protein folding efficiency and secretory capacity J. Biol. Chem. 279 43 2004 44600 44605 15308654 
Esselens C.  Oorschot V.  Baert V.  Raemaekers T.  Spittaels K.  Serneels L.  Zheng H.  Saftig P.  De Strooper B.  Klumperman J.  Annaert W.   Presenilin 1 mediates the turnover of telencephalin in hippocampal neurons via an autophagic degradative pathway J. Cell Biol. 166 7 2004 1041 1054 15452145 
Falk C.S.  Mach M.  Schendel D.J.  Weiss E.H.  Hilgert I.  Hahn G.   NK cell activity during human cytomegalovirus infection is dominated by US2–11‐mediated HLA class I down‐regulation J. Immunol. 169 6 2002 3257 3266 12218145 
Fang S.  Ferrone M.  Yang C.  Jensen J.P.  Tiwari S.  Weissman A.M.   The tumor autocrine motility factor receptor, gp78, is a ubiquitin protein ligase implicated in degradation from the endoplasmic reticulum Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 25 2001 14422 14427 11724934 
Farrell H.  Degli‐Esposti M.  Densley E.  Cretney E.  Smyth M.  Davis‐Poynter N.   Cytomegalovirus MHC class I homologues and natural killer cells: An overview Microbes Infect. 2 5 2000 521 532 10865197 
Farrell P.J.  Broeze R.J.  Lengyel P.   Accumulation of an mRNA and protein in interferon‐treated Ehrlich ascites tumour cells Nature 279 5713 1979 523 525 571963 
Faure J.  Stalder R.  Borel C.  Sobo K.  Piguet V.  Demaurex N.  Gruenberg J.  Trono D.   ARF1 regulates Nef‐induced CD4 degradation Curr. Biol. 14 12 2004 1056 1064 15202998 
Finlay B.B.  McFadden G.   Anti‐immunology: Evasion of the host immune system by bacterial and viral pathogens Cell 124 4 2006 767 782 16497587 
Finley D.  Ciechanover A.  Varshavsky A.   Ubiquitin as a central cellular regulator Cell 116 Suppl. 2 2004 S29 S32 [2p following S32] 15055578 
Flierman D.  Ye Y.  Dai M.  Chau V.  Rapoport T.A.   Polyubiquitin serves as a recognition signal, rather than a ratcheting molecule, during retrotranslocation of proteins across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane J. Biol. Chem. 278 37 2003 34774 34782 12813030 
Fortini M.E.   Gamma‐secretase‐mediated proteolysis in cell‐surface‐receptor signalling Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3 9 2002 673 684 12209127 
Friedmann E.  Lemberg M.K.  Weihofen A.  Dev K.K.  Dengler U.  Rovelli G.  Martoglio B.   Consensus analysis of signal peptide peptidase and homologous human aspartic proteases reveals opposite topology of catalytic domains compared with presenilins J. Biol. Chem. 279 49 2004 50790 50798 15385547 
Furman M.H.  Dey N.  Tortorella D.  Ploegh H.L.   The human cytomegalovirus US10 gene product delays trafficking of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules J. Virol. 76 2002 11753 11756 12388737 
Furman M.H.  Ploegh H.L.  Tortorella D.   Membrane‐specific, host‐derived factors are required for US2‐ and US11‐mediated degradation of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules J. Biol. Chem. 277 5 2002 3258 3267 11717308 
Furman M.H.  Loureiro J.  Ploegh H.L.  Tortorella D.   Ubiquitinylation of the cytosolic domain of a type I membrane protein is not required to initiate its dislocation from the endoplasmic reticulum J. Biol. Chem. 278 37 2003 34804 34811 12832421 
Galan J.E.  Collmer A.   Type III secretion machines: Bacterial devices for protein delivery into host cells Science 284 5418 1999 1322 1328 10334981 
Galinier R.  Gout E.  Lortat‐Jacob H.  Wood J.  Chroboczek J.   Adenovirus protein involved in virus internalization recruits ubiquitin‐protein ligases Biochemistry 41 48 2002 14299 14305 12450395 
Garcin D.  Marq J.B.  Strahle L.  le Mercier P.  Kolakofsky D.   All four Sendai Virus C proteins bind Stat1, but only the larger forms also induce its mono‐ubiquitination and degradation Virology 295 2 2002 256 265 12033784 
Garrus J.E.  von Schwedler U.K.  Pornillos O.W.  Morham S.G.  Zavitz K.H.  Wang H.E.  Wettstein D.A.  Stray K.M.  Cote M.  Rich R.L.  Myszka D.G.  Sundquist W.I.   Tsg101 and the vacuolar protein sorting pathway are essential for HIV‐1 budding Cell 107 1 2001 55 65 11595185 
Gauss R.  Sommer T.  Jarosch E.   The Hrd1p ligase complex forms a linchpin between ER‐lumenal substrate selection and Cdc48p recruitment EMBO J. 25 9 2006 1827 1835 16619026 
Gavioli R.  Gallerani E.  Fortini C.  Fabris M.  Bottoni A.  Canella A.  Bonaccorsi A.  Marastoni M.  Micheletti F.  Cafaro A.  Rimessi P.  Caputo A.   HIV‐1 tat protein modulates the generation of cytotoxic T cell epitopes by modifying proteasome composition and enzymatic activity J. Immunol. 173 6 2004 3838 3843 15356131 
Gewurz B.E.  Wang E.W.  Tortorella D.  Schust D.J.  Ploegh H.L.   Human cytomegalovirus US2 endoplasmic reticulum‐lumenal domain dictates association with major histocompatibility complex class I in a locus‐specific manner J. Virol. 75 11 2001 5197 5204 11333901 
Gewurz B.E.  Ploegh H.L.  Tortorella D.   US2, a human cytomegalovirus‐encoded type I membrane protein, contains a non‐cleavable amino‐terminal signal peptide J. Biol. Chem. 277 13 2002 11306 11313 11790769 
Geyer M.  Yu H.  Mandic R.  Linnemann T.  Zheng Y.H.  Fackler O.T.  Peterlin B.M.   Subunit H of the V‐ATPase binds to the medium chain of adaptor protein complex 2 and connects Nef to the endocytic machinery J. Biol. Chem. 277 32 2002 28521 28529 12032142 
Ghislain M.  Dohmen R.J.  Levy F.  Varshavsky A.   Cdc48p interacts with Ufd3p, a WD repeat protein required for ubiquitin‐mediated proteolysis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  EMBO J. 15 18 1996 4884 4899 8890162 
Giannakopoulos N.V.  Luo J.K.  Papov V.  Zou W.  Lenschow D.J.  Jacobs B.S.  Borden E.C.  Li J.  Virgin H.W.  Zhang D.E.   Proteomic identification of proteins conjugated to ISG15 in mouse and human cells Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 336 2 2005 496 506 16139798 
Gilbert M.J.  Riddell S.R.  Plachter B.  Greenberg P.D.   Cytomegalovirus selectively blocks antigen processing and presentation of its immediate‐early gene product Nature 383 6602 1996 720 722 8878482 
Goto E.  Ishido S.  Sato Y.  Ohgimoto S.  Ohgimoto K.  Nagano‐Fujii M.  Hotta H.   c‐MIR, a human E3 ubiquitin ligase, is a functional homolog of herpesvirus proteins MIR1 and MIR2 and has similar activity J. Biol. Chem. 278 17 2003 14657 14668 12582153 
Grigorenko A.P.  Moliaka Y.K.  Soto M.C.  Mello C.C.  Rogaev E.I.   The Caenorhabditis elegans  IMPAS gene, imp‐2, is essential for development and is functionally distinct from related presenilins Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 41 2004 14955 14960 15469912 
Groll M.  Ditzel L.  Lowe J.  Stock D.  Bochtler M.  Bartunik H.D.  Huber R.   Structure of 20S proteasome from yeast at 2.4 A resolution Nature 386 6624 1997 463 471 9087403 
Groll M.  Bajorek M.  Kohler A.  Moroder L.  Rubin D.M.  Huber R.  Glickman M.H.  Finley D.   A gated channel into the proteasome core particle Nat. Struct. Biol. 7 11 2000 1062 1067 11062564 
Groothuis T.A.  Neefjes J.   The many roads to cross‐presentation J. Exp. Med. 202 10 2005 1313 1318 16287713 
Gruhler A.  Peterson P.A.  Fruh K.   Human cytomegalovirus immediate early glycoprotein US3 retains MHC class I molecules by transient association Traffic 1 4 2000 318 325 11208117 
Guerin J.L.  Gelfi J.  Boullier S.  Delverdier M.  Bellanger F.A.  Bertagnoli S.  Drexler I.  Sutter G.  Messud‐Petit F.   Myxoma virus leukemia‐associated protein is responsible for major histocompatibility complex class I and Fas‐CD95 down‐regulation and defines scrapins, a new group of surface cellular receptor abductor proteins J. Virol. 76 6 2002 2912 2923 11861858 
Guermonprez P.  Amigorena S.   Pathways for antigen cross presentation Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 26 3 2005 257 271 15592842 
Gurlebeck D.  Thieme F.  Bonas U.   Type III effector proteins from the plant pathogen Xanthomonas  and their role in the interaction with the host plant J. Plant Physiol. 163 3 2006 233 255 16386329 
Haglund K.  Dikic I.   Ubiquitylation and cell signaling EMBO J. 24 19 2005 3353 3359 16148945 
Halaban R.  Svedine S.  Cheng E.  Smicun Y.  Aron R.  Hebert D.N.   Endoplasmic reticulum retention is a common defect associated with tyrosinase‐negative albinism Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 11 2000 5889 5894 10823941 
Halenius A.  Momburg F.  Reinhard H.  Bauer D.  Lobigs M.  Hengel H.   Physical and functional interactions of the cytomegalovirus US6 glycoprotein with the transporter associated with antigen processing J. Biol. Chem. 281 9 2006 5383 5390 16356928 
Hammond C.  Braakman I.  Helenius A.   Role of N‐linked oligosaccharide recognition, glucose trimming, and calnexin in glycoprotein folding and quality control Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91 3 1994 913 917 8302866 
Hampton R.Y.   ER‐associated degradation in protein quality control and cellular regulation Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14 4 2002 476 482 12383799 
Hampton R.Y.  Bhakta H.   Ubiquitin‐mediated regulation of 3‐hydroxy‐3‐methylglutaryl‐CoA reductase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94 24 1997 12944 12948 9371780 
Hampton R.Y.  Gardner R.G.  Rine J.   Role of 26S proteasome and HRD genes in the degradation of 3‐hydroxy‐3‐methylglutaryl‐CoA reductase, an integral endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein Mol. Biol. Cell 7 12 1996 2029 2044 8970163 
Hardt W.D.  Galan J.E.   A secreted Salmonella protein with homology to an avirulence determinant of plant pathogenic bacteria Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94 18 1997 9887 9892 9275221 
Harris R.S.  Liddament M.T.   Retroviral restriction by APOBEC proteins Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4 11 2004 868 877 15516966 
Hartmann‐Petersen R.  Gordon C.   Integral UBL domain proteins: A family of proteasome interacting proteins Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 15 2 2004 247 259 15209385 
Hartmann‐Petersen R.  Gordon C.   Protein degradation: Recognition of ubiquitinylated substrates Curr. Biol. 14 18 2004 R754 R756 15380085 
Hartmann‐Petersen R.  Seeger M.  Gordon C.   Transferring substrates to the 26S proteasome Trends Biochem. Sci. 28 1 2003 26 31 12517449 
Harty R.N.  Brown M.E.  McGettigan J.P.  Wang G.  Jayakar H.R.  Huibregtse J.M.  Whitt M.A.  Schnell M.J.   Rhabdoviruses and the cellular ubiquitin‐proteasome system: A budding interaction J. Virol. 75 22 2001 10623 10629 11602704 
Hassink G.  Kikkert M.  van Voorden S.  Lee S.J.  Spaapen R.  van Laar T.  Coleman C.S.  Bartee E.  Fruh K.  Chau V.  Wiertz E.   TEB4 is a C4HC3 RING finger‐containing ubiquitin ligase of the endoplasmic reticulum Biochem. J. 388 Pt. 2 2005 647 655 15673284 
Hatakeyama S.  Yada M.  Matsumoto M.  Ishida N.  Nakayama K.I.   U box proteins as a new family of ubiquitin‐protein ligases J. Biol. Chem. 276 35 2001 33111 33120 11435423 
Heemels M.T.  Ploegh H.   Generation, translocation, and presentation of MHC class I‐restricted peptides Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64 1995 463 491 7574490 
Hegde N.R.  Johnson D.C.   Human cytomegalovirus US2 causes similar effects on both major histocompatibility complex class I and II proteins in epithelial and glial cells J. Virol. 77 17 2003 9287 9294 12915544 
Hegde N.R.  Tomazin R.A.  Wisner T.W.  Dunn C.  Boname J.M.  Lewinsohn D.M.  Johnson D.C.   Inhibition of HLA‐DR assembly, transport, and loading by human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein US3: A novel mechanism for evading major histocompatibility complex class II antigen presentation J. Virol. 76 21 2002 10929 10941 12368336 
Heinemeyer W.  Ramos P.C.  Dohmen R.J.   The ultimate nanoscale mincer: Assembly, structure and active sites of the 20S proteasome core Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 61 13 2004 1562 1578 15224181 
Helenius A.  Aebi M.   Roles of N‐linked glycans in the endoplasmic reticulum Annu. Rev. Biochem. 73 2004 1019 1049 15189166 
Hendil K.B.  Hartmann‐Petersen R.   Proteasomes: A complex story Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 5 3 2004 135 151 15180519 
Hengel H.  Koszinowski U.H.   Interference with antigen processing by viruses Curr. Opin. Immunol. 9 4 1997 470 476 9287180 
Hengel H.  Koopmann J.O.  Flohr T.  Muranyi W.  Goulmy E.  Hammerling G.J.  Koszinowski U.H.  Momburg F.   A viral ER‐resident glycoprotein inactivates the MHC‐encoded peptide transporter Immunity 6 5 1997 623 632 9175840 
Hengel H.  Brune W.  Koszinowski U.H.   Immune evasion by cytomegalovirus–survival strategies of a highly adapted opportunist Trends Microbiol. 6 5 1998 190 197 9614343 
Hengel H.  Reusch U.  Gutermann A.  Ziegler H.  Jonjic S.  Lucin P.  Koszinowski U.H.   Cytomegaloviral control of MHC class I function in the mouse Immunol. Rev. 168 1999 167 176 10399073 
Hengel H.  Koszinowski U.H.  Conzelmann K.K.   Viruses know it all: New insights into IFN networks Trends Immunol. 26 7 2005 396 401 15922665 
Hershko A.  Ciechanover A.   The ubiquitin system for protein degradation Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61 1992 761 807 1323239 
Hershko A.  Ciechanover A.   The ubiquitin system Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67 1998 425 479 9759494 
Hewitt E.W.  Gupta S.S.  Lehner P.J.   The human cytomegalovirus gene product US6 inhibits ATP binding by TAP EMBO J. 20 3 2001 387 396 11157746 
Hicke L.   A new ticket for entry into budding vesicles‐ubiquitin Cell 106 5 2001 527 530 11551499 
Hicke L.  Dunn R.   Regulation of membrane protein transport by ubiquitin and ubiquitin‐binding proteins Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 19 2003 141 172 14570567 
Hierro A.  Sun J.  Rusnak A.S.  Kim J.  Prag G.  Emr S.D.  Hurley J.H.   Structure of the ESCRT‐II endosomal trafficking complex Nature 431 7005 2004 221 225 15329733 
Hilleman M.R.   Strategies and mechanisms for host and pathogen survival in acute and persistent viral infections Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 Suppl. 2 2004 14560 14566 15297608 
Hirsch C.  Ploegh H.L.   Intracellular targeting of the proteasome Trends Cell Biol. 10 7 2000 268 272 10856929 
Hirsch C.  Blom D.  Ploegh H.L.   A role for N‐glycanase in the cytosolic turnover of glycoproteins EMBO J. 22 5 2003 1036 1046 12606569 
Hirsch C.  Jarosch E.  Sommer T.  Wolf D.H.   Endoplasmic reticulum‐associated protein degradation–one model fits all? Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1695 1–3 2004 215 223 15571817 
Hiscott J.  Kwon H.  Genin P.   Hostile takeovers: Viral appropriation of the NF‐kappaB pathway J. Clin. Invest. 107 2 2001 143 151 11160127 
Hmama Z.  Gabathuler R.  Jefferies W.A.  de Jong G.  Reiner N.E.   Attenuation of HLA‐DR expression by mononuclear phagocytes infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis  is related to intracellular sequestration of immature class II heterodimers J. Immunol. 161 9 1998 4882 4893 9794422 
Hochstrasser M.   SP‐RING for SUMO: New functions bloom for a ubiquitin‐like protein Cell 107 1 2001 5 8 11595179 
Hodge D.R.  Hurt E.M.  Farrar W.L.   The role of IL‐6 and STAT3 in inflammation and cancer Eur. J. Cancer 41 16 2005 2502 2512 16199153 
Honey K.  Rudensky A.Y.   Lysosomal cysteine proteases regulate antigen presentation Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3 6 2003 472 482 12776207 
Hoppe T.   Multiubiquitylation by E4 enzymes: ‘One size’ doesn't fit all Trends Biochem. Sci. 30 4 2005 183 187 15817394 
Hori O.  Ichinoda F.  Yamaguchi A.  Tamatani T.  Taniguchi M.  Koyama Y.  Katayama T.  Tohyama M.  Stern D.M.  Ozawa K.  Kitao Y.  Ogawa S.   Role of Herp in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response Genes Cells 9 5 2004 457 469 15147274 
Hsing L.C.  Rudensky A.Y.   The lysosomal cysteine proteases in MHC class II antigen presentation Immunol. Rev. 207 2005 229 241 16181340 
Hu M.  Li P.  Li M.  Li W.  Yao T.  Wu J.W.  Gu W.  Cohen R.E.  Shi Y.   Crystal structure of a UBP‐family deubiquitinating enzyme in isolation and in complex with ubiquitin aldehyde Cell 111 7 2002 1041 1054 12507430 
Huppa J.B.  Ploegh H.L.   The alpha chain of the T cell antigen receptor is degraded in the cytosol Immunity 7 1 1997 113 122 9252124 
Hurley J.H.  Emr S.D.   The ESCRT complexes: Structure and mechanism of a membrane‐trafficking network Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 35 2006 277 298 16689637 
Hussain S.  Zwilling B.S.  Lafuse W.P.   Mycobacterium avium infection of mouse macrophages inhibits IFN‐gamma Janus kinase‐STAT signaling and gene induction by down‐regulation of the IFN‐gamma receptor J. Immunol. 163 4 1999 2041 2048 10438942 
Imai Y.  Soda M.  Takahashi R.   Parkin suppresses unfolded protein stress‐induced cell death through its E3 ubiquitin‐protein ligase activity J. Biol. Chem. 275 46 2000 35661 35664 10973942 
Imai Y.  Soda M.  Hatakeyama S.  Akagi T.  Hashikawa T.  Nakayama K.I.  Takahashi R.   CHIP is associated with Parkin, a gene responsible for familial Parkinson's disease, and enhances its ubiquitin ligase activity Mol. Cells 10 1 2002 55 67 
Ingham R.J.  Gish G.  Pawson T.   The Nedd4 family of E3 ubiquitin ligases: Functional diversity within a common modular architecture Oncogene 23 11 2004 1972 1984 15021885 
Ingham R.J.  Raaijmakers J.  Lim C.S.  Mbamalu G.  Gish G.  Chen F.  Matskova L.  Ernberg I.  Winberg G.  Pawson T.   The Epstein‐Barr virus protein, latent membrane protein 2A, co‐opts tyrosine kinases used by the T cell receptor J. Biol. Chem. 280 40 2005 34133 34142 16087662 
Inohara C.  McDonald C.  Nunez G.   NOD‐LRR proteins: Role in host‐microbial interactions and inflammatory disease Annu. Rev. Biochem. 74 2005 355 383 15952891 
Ishido S.  Wang C.  Lee B.S.  Cohen G.B.  Jung J.U.   Downregulation of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules by Kaposi's sarcoma‐associated herpesvirus K3 and K5 proteins J. Virol. 74 11 2000 5300 5309 10799607 
Jakob C.A.  Bodmer D.  Spirig U.  Battig P.  Marcil A.  Dignard D.  Bergeron J.J.  Thomas D.Y.  Aebi M.   Htm1p, a mannosidase‐like protein, is involved in glycoprotein degradation in yeast EMBO Rep. 2 5 2001 423 430 11375935 
Janjusevic R.  Abramovitch R.B.  Martin G.B.  Stebbins C.E.   A bacterial inhibitor of host programmed cell death defenses is an E3 ubiquitin ligase Science 311 5758 2006 222 226 16373536 
Janvier K.  Craig H.  Hitchin D.  Madrid R.  Sol‐Foulon N.  Renault L.  Cherfils J.  Cassel D.  Benichou S.  Guatelli J.   HIV‐1 Nef stabilizes the association of adaptor protein complexes with membranes J. Biol. Chem. 278 10 2003 8725 8732 12486136 
Janvier K.  Kato Y.  Boehm M.  Rose J.R.  Martina J.A.  Kim B.Y.  Venkatesan S.  Bonifacino J.S.   Recognition of dileucine‐based sorting signals from HIV‐1 Nef and LIMP‐II by the AP‐1 gamma‐sigma1 and AP‐3 delta‐sigma3 hemicomplexes J. Cell Biol. 163 6 2003 1281 1290 14691137 
Jarosch E.  Taxis C.  Volkwein C.  Bordallo J.  Finley D.  Wolf D.H.  Sommer T.   Protein dislocation from the ER requires polyubiquitination and the AAA‐ATPase Cdc48 Nat. Cell Biol. 4 2 2002 134 139 11813000 
Jensen T.J.  Loo M.A.  Pind S.  Williams D.B.  Goldberg A.L.  Riordan J.R.   Multiple proteolytic systems, including the proteasome, contribute to CFTR processing Cell 83 1 1995 129 135 7553864 
Jin J.  Harper J.W.   RING finger specificity in SCF‐driven protein destruction Dev. Cell 2 6 2002 685 687 12062077 
Jin J.  Cardozo T.  Lovering R.C.  Elledge S.J.  Pagano M.  Harper J.W.   Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian F‐box proteins Genes Dev. 18 21 2004 2573 2580 15520277 
Jin Y.J.  Zhang X.  Boursiquot J.G.  Burakoff S.J.   CD4 phosphorylation partially reverses Nef down‐regulation of CD4 J. Immunol. 173 9 2004 5495 5500 15494497 
Jin Y.J.  Cai C.Y.  Zhang X.  Zhang H.T.  Hirst J.A.  Burakoff S.J.   HIV Nef‐mediated CD4 down‐regulation is adaptor protein complex 2 dependent J. Immunol. 175 5 2005 3157 3164 16116206 
Joazeiro C.A.  Weissman A.M.   RING finger proteins: Mediators of ubiquitin ligase activity Cell 102 5 2000 549 552 11007473 
Johnson E.S.  Ma P.C.  Ota I.M.  Varshavsky A.   A proteolytic pathway that recognizes ubiquitin as a degradation signal J. Biol. Chem. 270 29 1995 17442 17456 7615550 
Jones T.R.  Hanson L.K.  Sun L.  Slater J.S.  Stenberg R.M.  Campbell A.E.   Multiple independent loci within the human cytomegalovirus unique short region down‐regulate expression of major histocompatibility complex class I heavy chains J. Virol. 69 8 1995 4830 4831 7609050 
Jones T.R.  Wiertz E.J.  Sun L.  Fish K.N.  Nelson J.A.  Ploegh H.L.   Human cytomegalovirus US3 impairs transport and maturation of major histocompatibility complex class I heavy chains Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 21 1996 11327 11333 8876135 
Joseph A.M.  Kumar M.  Mitra D.   Nef: “Necessary and enforcing factor” in HIV infection Curr. HIV Res. 3 1 2005 87 94 15638726 
Jutras I.  Desjardins M.   Phagocytosis: At the crossroads of innate and adaptive immunity Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 21 2005 511 527 16212505 
Kalies K.U.  Allan S.  Sergeyenko T.  Kroger H.  Romisch K.   The protein translocation channel binds proteasomes to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane EMBO J. 24 13 2005 2284 2293 15973433 
Karin M.  Ben‐Neriah Y.   Phosphorylation meets ubiquitination: The control of NF‐[kappa]B activity Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18 2000 621 663 10837071 
Katiyar S.  Li G.  Lennarz W.J.   A complex between peptide: N‐glycanase and two proteasome‐linked proteins suggests a mechanism for the degradation of misfolded glycoproteins Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 38 2004 13774 13779 15358861 
Kattenhorn L.M.  Korbel G.A.  Kessler B.M.  Spooner E.  Ploegh H.L.   A deubiquitinating enzyme encoded by HSV‐1 belongs to a family of cysteine proteases that is conserved across the family Herpesviridae  Mol. Cells 19 4 2005 547 557 
Katzmann D.J.  Odorizzi G.  Emr S.D.   Receptor downregulation and multivesicular‐body sorting Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3 12 2002 893 905 12461556 
Kawakami T.  Chiba T.  Suzuki T.  Iwai K.  Yamanaka K.  Minato N.  Suzuki H.  Shimbara N.  Hidaka Y.  Osaka F.  Omata M.  Tanaka K.   NEDD8 recruits E2‐ubiquitin to SCF E3 ligase EMBO J. 20 15 2001 4003 4012 11483504 
Keppler O.T.  Tibroni N.  Venzke S.  Rauch S.  Fackler O.T.   Modulation of specific surface receptors and activation sensitization in primary resting CD4+ T lymphocytes by the Nef protein of HIV‐1 J. Leukoc. Biol. 79 3 2006 616 627 16365153 
Kerkau T.  Bacik I.  Bennink J.R.  Yewdell J.W.  Hunig T.  Schimpl A.  Schubert U.   The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV‐1) Vpu protein interferes with an early step in the biosynthesis of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules J. Exp. Med. 185 7 1997 1295 1305 9104816 
Kikkert M.  Doolman R.  Dai M.  Avner R.  Hassink G.  van Voorden S.  Thanedar S.  Roitelman J.  Chau V.  Wiertz E.   Human HRD1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in degradation of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum J. Biol. Chem. 279 5 2004 3525 3534 14593114 
Kim D.W.  Lenzen G.  Page A.L.  Legrain P.  Sansonetti P.J.  Parsot C.   The Shigella flexneri effector OspG interferes with innate immune responses by targeting ubiquitin‐conjugating enzymes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 39 2005 14046 14051 16162672 
Kim K.I.  Ahn J.  Liu C.  Tanabe K.  Apodaca J.  Suzuki T.  Rao H.   The Png1‐Rad23 complex regulates glycoprotein turnover J. Cell Biol. 172 2 2006 211 219 16401726 
Kim K.I.  Yan M.  Malakhova O.  Luo J.K.  Shen M.F.  Zou W.  de la Torre J.C.  Zhang D.E.   Ube1L and protein ISGylation are not essential for alpha/beta interferon signaling Mol. Cell. Biol. 26 2006 472 479 16382139 
Kim Y.M.  Pan J.Y.  Korbel G.A.  Peperzak V.  Boes M.  Ploegh H.L.   Monovalent ligation of the B cell receptor induces receptor activation but fails to promote antigen presentation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103 9 2006 3327 3332 16492756 
Kimura T.  Nishikawa M.  Ohyama A.   Intracellular membrane traffic of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope glycoproteins: Vpu liberates Golgi‐targeted gp160 from CD4‐dependent retention in the endoplasmic reticulum J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 115 5 1994 1010 1020 7961587 
Klenerman P.  Hill A.   T cells and viral persistence: Lessons from diverse infections Nat. Immunol. 6 9 2005 873 879 16116467 
Klinger P.P.  Schubert U.   The ubiquitin‐proteasome system in HIV replication: Potential targets for antiretroviral therapy Expert Rev. Anti Infect. Ther. 3 1 2005 61 79 15757458 
Kloetzel P.M.   The proteasome and MHC class I antigen processing Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1695 1–3 2004 225 233 15571818 
Kloetzel P.M.  Ossendorp F.   Proteasome and peptidase function in MHC‐class‐I‐mediated antigen presentation Curr. Opin. Immunol. 16 1 2004 76 81 14734113 
Knobeloch K.P.  Utermohlen O.  Kisser A.  Prinz M.  Horak I.   Reexamination of the role of ubiquitin‐like modifier ISG15 in the phenotype of UBP43‐deficient mice Mol. Cell Biol. 25 24 2005 11030 11034 16314524 
Knop M.  Finger A.  Braun T.  Hellmuth K.  Wolf D.H.   Der1, a novel protein specifically required for endoplasmic reticulum degradation in yeast EMBO J. 15 4 1996 753 763 8631297 
Kohler A.  Bajorek M.  Groll M.  Moroder L.  Rubin D.M.  Huber R.  Glickman M.H.  Finley D.   The substrate translocation channel of the proteasome Biochimie 83 3–4 2001 325 332 11295493 
Kokame K.  Agarwala K.L.  Kato H.  Miyata T.   Herp, a new ubiquitin‐like membrane protein induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress J. Biol. Chem. 275 42 2000 32846 32853 10922362 
Kopan R.  Ilagan M.X.   Gamma‐secretase: Proteasome of the membrane? Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 5 6 2004 499 504 15173829 
Korenaga M.  Wang T.  Li Y.  Showalter L.A.  Chan T.  Sun J.  Weinman S.A.   Hepatitis C virus core protein inhibits mitochondrial electron transport and increases reactive oxygen species (ROS) production J. Biol. Chem. 280 45 2005 37481 37488 16150732 
Kornilova A.Y.  Das C.  Wolfe M.S.   Differential effects of inhibitors on the gamma‐secretase complex. Mechanistic implications J. Biol. Chem. 278 19 2003 16470 16473 12644463 
Kostelansky M.S.  Sun J.  Lee S.  Kim J.  Ghirlando R.  Hierro A.  Emr S.D.  Hurley J.H.   Structural and functional organization of the ESCRT‐I trafficking complex Cell 125 1 2006 113 126 16615894 
Kostova Z.  Wolf D.H.   For whom the bell tolls: Protein quality control of the endoplasmic reticulum and the ubiquitin‐proteasome connection EMBO J. 22 10 2003 2309 2317 12743025 
Krawitz P.  Haffner C.  Fluhrer R.  Steiner H.  Schmid B.  Haass C.   Differential localization and identification of a critical aspartate suggest non‐redundant proteolytic functions of the presenilin in homologues SPPL2b and SPPL3 J. Biol. Chem. 280 47 2005 39515 39523 15998642 
Kreft S.G.  Wang L.  Hochstrasser M.   Membrane topology of the yeast endoplasmic reticulum‐localized ubiquitin ligase Doa10 and comparison with its human ortholog TEB4 (MARCH‐VI) J. Biol. Chem. 281 8 2006 4646 4653 16373356 
Kruger E.  Kuckelkorn U.  Sijts A.  Kloetzel P.M.   The components of the proteasome system and their role in MHC class I antigen processing Rev. Physiol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 148 2003 81 104 12687403 
Kubori T.  Galan J.E.   Temporal regulation of salmonella virulence effector function by proteasome‐dependent protein degradation Cell 115 3 2003 333 342 14636560 
Kumar V.  McNerney M.E.   A new self: MHC‐class‐I‐independent natural‐killer‐cell self‐tolerance Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5 5 2005 363 374 15841099 
Kunzi M.S.  Pitha P.M.   Role of interferon‐stimulated gene ISG‐15 in the interferon‐omega‐mediated inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus replication J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 16 11 1996 919 927 8938567 
Kyritsis C.  Gorbulev S.  Hutschenreiter S.  Pawlitschko K.  Abele R.  Tampe R.   Molecular mechanism and structural aspects of transporter associated with antigen processing inhibition by the cytomegalovirus protein US6 J. Biol. Chem. 276 51 2001 48031 48039 11606590 
Lama J.  Ware C.F.   Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef mediates sustained membrane expression of tumor necrosis factor and the related cytokine LIGHT on activated T cells J. Virol. 74 20 2000 9396 9402 11000208 
Lama J.  Mangasarian A.  Trono D.   Cell‐surface expression of CD4 reduces HIV‐1 infectivity by blocking Env incorporation in a Nef‐ and Vpu‐inhibitable manner Curr. Biol. 9 12 1999 622 631 10375528 
Lamsoul I.  Lodewick J.  Lebrun S.  Brasseur R.  Burny A.  Gaynor R.B.  Bex F.   Exclusive ubiquitination and sumoylation on overlapping lysine residues mediate NF‐kappaB activation by the human T‐cell leukemia virus tax oncoprotein Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 23 2005 10391 10406 16287853 
Lanier L.L.   NK cell recognition Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23 2005 225 274 15771571 
Le Gall S.  Erdtmann L.  Benichou S.  Berlioz‐Torrent C.  Liu L.  Benarous R.  Heard J.M.  Schwartz O.   Nef interacts with the mu subunit of clathrin adaptor complexes and reveals a cryptic sorting signal in MHC I molecules Immunity 8 4 1998 483 495 9586638 
Lee S.  Park B.  Ahn K.   Determinant for endoplasmic reticulum retention in the luminal domain of the human cytomegalovirus US3 glycoprotein J. Virol. 77 3 2003 2147 2156 12525649 
Lehner P.J.  Karttunen J.T.  Wilkinson G.W.  Cresswell P.   The human cytomegalovirus US6 glycoprotein inhibits transporter associated with antigen processing‐dependent peptide translocation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94 13 1997 6904 6909 9192664 
Lehner P.J.  Hoer S.  Dodd R.  Duncan L.M.   Downregulation of cell surface receptors by the K3 family of viral and cellular ubiquitin E3 ligases Immunol. Rev. 207 2005 112 125 16181331 
Lemberg M.K.  Martoglio B.   Requirements for signal peptide peptidase‐catalyzed intramembrane proteolysis Mol. Cells 10 4 2002 735 744 
Lemberg M.K.  Martoglio B.   On the mechanism of SPP‐catalysed intramembrane proteolysis; conformational control of peptide bond hydrolysis in the plane of the membrane FEBS Lett. 564 3 2004 213 218 15111098 
Lemberg M.K.  Bland F.A.  Weihofen A.  Braud V.M.  Martoglio B.   Intramembrane proteolysis of signal peptides: An essential step in the generation of HLA‐E epitopes J. Immunol. 167 11 2001 6441 6446 11714810 
Lemberg M.K.  Menendez J.  Misik A.  Garcia M.  Koth C.M.  Freeman M.   Mechanism of intramembrane proteolysis investigated with purified rhomboid proteases EMBO J. 24 3 2005 464 472 15616571 
Leong C.C.  Chapman T.L.  Bjorkman P.J.  Formankova D.  Mocarski E.S.  Phillips J.H.  Lanier L.L.   Modulation of natural killer cell cytotoxicity in human cytomegalovirus infection: The role of endogenous class I major histocompatibility complex and a viral class I homolog J. Exp. Med. 187 10 1998 1681 1687 9584146 
Levitskaya J.  Coram M.  Levitsky V.  Imreh S.  Steigerwald‐Mullen P.M.  Klein G.  Kurilla M.G.  Masucci M.G.   Inhibition of antigen processing by the internal repeat region of the Epstein‐Barr virus nuclear antigen‐1 Nature 375 6533 1995 685 688 7540727 
Li F.  Wild C.   HIV‐1 assembly and budding as targets for drug discovery Curr. Opin. Invest. Drugs 6 2 2005 148 154 
Li G.  Zhou X.  Zhao G.  Schindelin H.  Lennarz W.J.   Multiple modes of interaction of the deglycosylation enzyme, mouse peptide N‐glycanase, with the proteasome Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 44 2005 15809 15814 16249333 
Li G.  Zhao G.  Zhou X.  Schindelin H.  Lennarz W.J.   The AAA ATPase p97 links peptide N‐glycanase to the endoplasmic reticulum‐associated E3 ligase autocrine motility factor receptor Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103 22 2006 8348 8353 16709668 
Li Q.  Spriggs M.K.  Kovats S.  Turk S.M.  Comeau M.R.  Nepom B.  Hutt‐Fletcher L.M.   Epstein‐Barr virus uses HLA class II as a cofactor for infection of B lymphocytes J. Virol. 71 6 1997 4657 4662 9151859 
Li S.J.  Hochstrasser M.   The Ulp1 SUMO isopeptidase: Distinct domains required for viability, nuclear envelope localization, and substrate specificity J. Cell Biol. 160 7 2003 1069 1081 12654900 
Li T.  Chen X.  Garbutt K.C.  Zhou P.  Zheng N.   Structure of DDB1 in complex with a paramyxovirus V protein: Viral hijack of a propeller cluster in ubiquitin ligase Cell 124 1 2006 105 117 16413485 
Liang J.S.  Kim T.  Fang S.  Yamaguchi J.  Weissman A.M.  Fisher E.A.  Ginsberg H.N.   Overexpression of the tumor autocrine motility factor receptor Gp78, a ubiquitin protein ligase, results in increased ubiquitinylation and decreased secretion of apolipoprotein B100 in HepG2 cells J. Biol. Chem. 278 26 2003 23984 23988 12670940 
Licata J.M.  Simpson‐Holley M.  Wright N.T.  Han Z.  Paragas J.  Harty R.N.   Overlapping motifs (PTAP and PPEY) within the Ebola virus VP40 protein function independently as late budding domains: Involvement of host proteins TSG101 and VPS‐4 J. Virol. 77 3 2003 1812 1819 12525615 
Lilley B.N.  Ploegh H.L.   A membrane protein required for dislocation of misfolded proteins from the ER Nature 429 6994 2004 834 840 15215855 
Lilley B.N.  Ploegh H.L.   Multiprotein complexes that link dislocation, ubiquitination, and extraction of misfolded proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum membrane Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 40 2005 14296 14301 16186509 
Lilley B.N.  Ploegh H.L.   Viral modulation of antigen presentation: Manipulation of cellular targets in the ER and beyond Immunol. Rev. 207 2005 126 144 16181332 
Lilley B.N.  Tortorella D.  Ploegh H.L.   Dislocation of a type I membrane protein requires interactions between membrane‐spanning segments within the lipid bilayer Mol. Biol. Cell 14 9 2003 3690 3698 12972557 
Lin W.  Choe W.H.  Hiasa Y.  Kamegaya Y.  Blackard J.T.  Schmidt E.V.  Chung R.T.   Hepatitis C virus expression suppresses interferon signaling by degrading STAT1 Gastroenterology 128 4 2005 1034 1041 15825084 
Lindner H.A.  Fotouhi‐Ardakani N.  Lytvyn V.  Lachance P.  Sulea T.  Menard R.   The papain‐like protease from the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus is a deubiquitinating enzyme J. Virol. 79 24 2005 15199 15208 16306591 
Liu Y.C.   Ubiquitin ligases and the immune response Annu. Rev. Immunol. 22 2004 81 127 15032575 
Liu Y.C.  Penninger J.  Karin M.   Immunity by ubiquitylation: A reversible process of modification Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5 12 2005 941 952 16322747 
Lodoen M.B.  Lanier L.L.   Viral modulation of NK cell immunity Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3 1 2005 59 69 15608700 
Lord J.M.  Ceriotti A.  Roberts L.M.   ER dislocation: Cdc48p/p97 gets into the AAAct Curr. Biol. 12 5 2002 R182 R184 11882310 
Loureiro J.  Lilley B.N.  Spooner E.  Noriega V.  Tortorella D.  Ploegh H.L.   Signal peptide peptidase is required for dislocation from the endoplasmic reticulum Nature 441 7095 2006 894 897 16738546 
Luo K.  Xiao Z.  Ehrlich E.  Yu Y.  Liu B.  Zheng S.  Yu X.F.   Primate lentiviral virion infectivity factors are substrate receptors that assemble with cullin 5‐E3 ligase through a HCCH motif to suppress APOBEC3G Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 32 2005 11444 11449 16076960 
Lybarger L.  Wang X.  Harris M.  Hansen T.H.   Viral immune evasion molecules attack the ER peptide‐loading complex and exploit ER‐associated degradation pathways Curr. Opin. Immunol. 17 1 2005 71 78 15653314 
Lybarger L.  Wang X.  Harris M.R.  Virgin H.W., 4th  Hansen T.H.   Virus subversion of the MHC class I peptide‐loading complex Immunity 18 1 2003 121 130 12530981 
Machold R.P.  Wiertz E.J.  Jones T.R.  Ploegh H.L.   The HCMV gene products US11 and US2 differ in their ability to attack allelic forms of murine major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I heavy chains J. Exp. Med. 185 2 1997 363 366 9016885 
Malakhov M.P.  Kim K.I.  Malakhova O.A.  Jacobs B.S.  Borden E.C.  Zhang D.E.   High‐throughput immunoblotting. Ubiquitiin‐like protein ISG15 modifies key regulators of signal transduction J. Biol. Chem. 278 19 2003 16608 16613 12582176 
Malakhov M.P.  Malakhova O.A.  Kim K.I.  Ritchie K.J.  Zhang D.E.   UBP43 (USP18) specifically removes ISG15 from conjugated proteins J. Biol. Chem. 277 12 2002 9976 9981 11788588 
Malakhova O.A.  Kim K.I.  Luo J.K.  Zou W.  Kumar K.G.  Fuchs S.Y.  Shuai K.  Zhang D.E.   UBP43 is a novel regulator of interferon signaling independent of its ISG15 isopeptidase activity EMBO J. 25 11 2006 2358 2367 16710296 
Mandic R.  Fackler O.T.  Geyer M.  Linnemann T.  Zheng Y.H.  Peterlin B.M.   Negative factor from SIV binds to the catalytic subunit of the V‐ATPase to internalize CD4 and to increase viral infectivity Mol. Biol. Cell 12 2 2001 463 473 11179428 
Mangasarian A.  Trono D.   The multifaceted role of HIV Nef Res. Virol. 148 1 1997 30 33 9017830 
Mangasarian A.  Piguet V.  Wang J.K.  Chen Y.L.  Trono D.   Nef‐induced CD4 and major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC‐I) down‐regulation are governed by distinct determinants: N‐terminal alpha helix and proline repeat of Nef selectively regulate MHC‐I trafficking J. Virol. 73 3 1999 1964 1973 9971776 
Mansouri M.  Bartee E.  Gouveia K.  Hovey Nerenberg B.T.  Barrett J.  Thomas L.  Thomas G.  McFadden G.  Fruh K.   The PHD/LAP‐domain protein M153R of myxomavirus is a ubiquitin ligase that induces the rapid internalization and lysosomal destruction of CD4 J. Virol. 77 2 2003 1427 1440 12502858 
Margottin F.  Bour S.P.  Durand H.  Selig L.  Benichou S.  Richard V.  Thomas D.  Strebel K.  Benarous R.   A novel human WD protein, h‐beta TrCp, that interacts with HIV‐1 Vpu connects CD4 to the ER degradation pathway through an F‐box motif Mol. Cells 1 4 1998 565 574 
Marsh M.  Helenius A.   Virus entry: Open sesame Cell 124 4 2006 729 740 16497584 
Martin‐Serrano J.  Zang T.  Bieniasz P.D.   Role of ESCRT‐I in retroviral budding J. Virol. 77 8 2003 4794 4804 12663786 
Martoglio B.   Intramembrane proteolysis and post‐targeting functions of signal peptides Biochem. Soc. Trans. 31 Pt 6 2003 1243 1247 14641034 
Martoglio B.  Golde T.E.   Intramembrane‐cleaving aspartic proteases and disease: Presenilins, signal peptide peptidase and their homologs Hum. Mol. Genet. 12 Spec. No. 2 2003 R201 R206 12966028 
Martoglio B.  Graf R.  Dobberstein B.   Signal peptide fragments of preprolactin and HIV‐1 p‐gp160 interact with calmodulin EMBO J. 16 22 1997 6636 6645 9362478 
Mason N.J.  Artis D.  Hunter C.A.   New lessons from old pathogens: What parasitic infections have taught us about the role of nuclear factor‐kappaB in the regulation of immunity Immunol. Rev. 201 2004 48 56 15361232 
McLauchlan J.  Lemberg M.K.  Hope G.  Martoglio B.   Intramembrane proteolysis promotes trafficking of hepatitis C virus core protein to lipid droplets EMBO J. 21 15 2002 3980 3988 12145199 
McMahon H.T.  Mills I.G.   COP and clathrin‐coated vesicle budding: Different pathways, common approaches Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 16 4 2004 379 391 15261670 
Meacham G.C.  Patterson C.  Zhang W.  Younger J.M.  Cyr D.M.   The Hsc70 co‐chaperone CHIP targets immature CFTR for proteasomal degradation Nat. Cell Biol. 3 1 2001 100 105 11146634 
Medicherla B.  Kostova Z.  Schaefer A.  Wolf D.H.   A genomic screen identifies Dsk2p and Rad23p as essential components of ER‐associated degradation EMBO Rep. 5 7 2004 692 697 15167887 
Merlo A.  Saverino D.  Tenca C.  Grossi C.E.  Bruno S.  Ciccone E.   CD85/LIR‐1/ILT2 and CD152 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4) inhibitory molecules down‐regulate the cytolytic activity of human CD4+ T‐cell clones specific for Mycobacterium tuberculosis  Infect. Immun. 69 10 2001 6022 6029 11553539 
Meusser B.  Hirsch C.  Jarosch E.  Sommer T.   ERAD: The long road to destruction Nat. Cell Biol. 7 8 2005 766 772 16056268 
Meyer K.  Basu A.  Saito K.  Ray R.B.  Ray R.   Inhibition of hepatitis C virus core protein expression in immortalized human hepatocytes induces cytochrome c‐independent increase in Apaf‐1 and caspase‐9 activation for cell death Virology 336 2 2005 198 207 15892961 
Migone T.S.  Humbert M.  Rascle A.  Sanden D.  D'Andrea A.  Johnston J.A.   The deubiquitinating enzyme DUB‐2 prolongs cytokine‐induced signal transducers and activators of transcription activation and suppresses apoptosis following cytokine withdrawal Blood 98 6 2001 1935 1941 11535532 
Miller D.M.  Rahill B.M.  Boss J.M.  Lairmore M.D.  Durbin J.E.  Waldman J.W.  Sedmak D.D.   Human cytomegalovirus inhibits major histocompatibility complex class II expression by disruption of the Jak/Stat pathway J. Exp. Med. 187 5 1998 675 683 9480977 
Mills K.H.   Regulatory T cells: Friend or foe in immunity to infection? Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4 11 2004 841 855 15516964 
Misaghi S.  Pacold M.E.  Blom D.  Ploegh H.L.  Korbel G.A.   Structural and functional analysis of human cytomegalovirus US3 protein J. Virol. 78 1 2004 413 423 14671122 
Misaghi S.  Sun Z.Y.  Stern P.  Gaudet R.  Wagner G.  Ploegh H.   Using a small molecule inhibitor of peptide: N‐glycanase to probe its role in glycoprotein turnover Chem. Biol. 11 12 2004 1677 1687 15610852 
Misaghi S.  Balsara Z.R.  Catic A.  Spooner E.  Ploegh H.L.  Starnbach M.N.   Chlamydia trachomatis‐derived deubiquitinating enzymes in mammalian cells during infection Mol. Microbiol. 61 1 2006 142 150 16824101 
Mocarski E.S. Jr.   Immune escape and exploitation strategies of cytomegaloviruses: Impact on and imitation of the major histocompatibility system Cell. Microbiol. 6 8 2004 707 717 15236638 
Molinari M.  Calanca V.  Galli C.  Lucca P.  Paganetti P.   Role of EDEM in the release of misfolded glycoproteins from the calnexin cycle Science 299 5611 2003 1397 1400 12610306 
Molinari M.  Salio M.  Galli C.  Norais N.  Rappuoli R.  Lanzavecchia A.  Montecucco C.   Selective inhibition of Ii‐dependent antigen presentation by Helicobacter pylori  toxin VacA J. Exp. Med. 187 1 1998 135 140 9419220 
Mukherjee S.  Keitany G.  Li Y.  Wang Y.  Ball H.L.  Goldsmith E.J.  Orth K.   Yersinia YopJ acetylates and inhibits kinase activation by blocking phosphorylation Science 312 5777 2006 1211 1214 16728640 
Mullally J.E.  Chernova T.  Wilkinson K.D.   Doa1 is a Cdc48 adapter that possesses a novel ubiquitin binding domain Mol. Cell. Biol. 26 3 2006 822 830 16428438 
Munz C.  Steinman R.M.  Fujii S.   Dendritic cell maturation by innate lymphocytes: Coordinated stimulation of innate and adaptive immunity J. Exp. Med. 202 2 2005 203 207 16027234 
Murata S.  Minami Y.  Minami M.  Chiba T.  Tanaka K.   CHIP is a chaperone‐dependent E3 ligase that ubiquitylates unfolded protein EMBO Rep. 2 12 2001 1133 1138 11743028 
Murata S.  Chiba T.  Tanaka K.   CHIP: A quality‐control E3 ligase collaborating with molecular chaperones Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 35 5 2003 572 578 12672450 
Nabi I.R.  Watanabe H.  Raz A.   Autocrine motility factor and its receptor: Role in cell locomotion and metastasis Cancer Metastasis Rev. 11 1 1992 5 20 1324804 
Nelson R.F.  Glenn K.A.  Miller V.M.  Wen H.  Paulson H.L.   A novel route for F‐box protein mediated ubiquitination links CHIP to glycoprotein quality control J. Biol. Chem. 281 29 2006 20242 20251 16682404 
Neuber O.  Jarosch E.  Volkwein C.  Walter J.  Sommer T.   Ubx2 links the Cdc48 complex to ER‐associated protein degradation Nat. Cell Biol. 7 10 2005 993 998 16179953 
Neumann J.  Eis‐Hubinger A.M.  Koch N.   Herpes simplex virus type 1 targets the MHC class II processing pathway for immune evasion J. Immunol. 171 6 2003 3075 3083 12960333 
Nijman S.M.  Luna‐Vargas M.P.  Velds A.  Brummelkamp T.R.  Dirac A.M.  Sixma T.K.  Bernards R.   A genomic and functional inventory of deubiquitinating enzymes Cell 123 5 2005 773 786 16325574 
Oda Y.  Okada T.  Yoshida H.  Kaufman R.J.  Nagata K.  Mori K.   Derlin‐2 and Derlin‐3 are regulated by the mammalian unfolded protein response and are required for ER‐associated degradation J. Cell Biol. 172 3 2006 383 393 16449189 
Okuda M.  Li K.  Beard M.R.  Showalter L.A.  Scholle F.  Lemon S.M.  Weinman S.A.   Mitochondrial injury, oxidative stress, and antioxidant gene expression are induced by hepatitis C virus core protein Gastroenterology 122 2 2002 366 375 11832451 
Okumura A.  Lu G.  Pitha‐Rowe I.  Pitha P.M.   Innate antiviral response targets HIV‐1 release by the induction of ubiquitin‐like protein ISG15 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103 5 2006 1440 1445 16434471 
Omura T.  Yoshiyama M.  Hayashi T.  Nishiguchi S.  Kaito M.  Horiike S.  Fukuda K.  Inamoto S.  Kitaura Y.  Nakamura Y.  Teragaki M.  Tokuhisa T.   Core protein of hepatitis C virus induces cardiomyopathy Circ. Res. 96 2 2005 148 150 15618537 
O'Neil K.T.  DeGrado W.F.   How calmodulin binds its targets: Sequence independent recognition of amphiphilic alpha‐helices Trends Biochem. Sci. 15 2 1990 59 64 2186516 
Orange J.S.  Fassett M.S.  Koopman L.A.  Boyson J.E.  Strominger J.L.   Viral evasion of natural killer cells Nat. Immunol. 3 11 2002 1006 1012 12407408 
Oresic K.  Noriega V.  Andrews L.  Tortorella D.   A structural determinant of HCMV US2 dictates the down‐regulation of class I MHC molecules J. Biol. Chem 281 28 2006 19395 19406 16687410 
Orth K.   Function of the Yersinia effector Yop J. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 5 1 2002 38 43 
Orth K.  Xu Z.  Mudgett M.B.  Bao Z.Q.  Palmer L.E.  Bliska J.B.  Mangel W.F.  Staskawicz B.  Dixon J.E.   Disruption of signaling by Yersinia effector YopJ, a ubiquitin‐like protein protease Science 290 5496 2000 1594 1597 11090361 
Ossendorp F.  Eggers M.  Neisig A.  Ruppert T.  Groettrup M.  Sijts A.  Mengede E.  Kloetzel P.M.  Neefjes J.  Koszinowski U.  Melief C.   A single residue exchange within a viral CTL epitope alters proteasome‐mediated degradation resulting in lack of antigen presentation Immunity 5 2 1996 115 124 8769475 
Pamer E.  Cresswell P.   Mechanisms of MHC class I–restricted antigen processing Annu. Rev. Immunol. 16 1998 323 358 9597133 
Pan Z.Q.  Kentsis A.  Dias D.C.  Yamoah K.  Wu K.   Nedd8 on cullin: Building an expressway to protein destruction Oncogene 23 11 2004 1985 1997 15021886 
Parent A.T.  Barnes N.Y.  Taniguchi Y.  Thinakaran G.  Sisodia S.S.   Presenilin attenuates receptor‐mediated signaling and synaptic function J. Neurosci. 25 6 2005 1540 1549 15703408 
Park B.  Kim Y.  Shin J.  Lee S.  Cho K.  Fruh K.  Ahn K.   Human cytomegalovirus inhibits tapasin‐dependent peptide loading and optimization of the MHC class I peptide cargo for immune evasion Immunity 20 1 2004 71 85 14738766 
Pazhouhandeh M.  Dieterle M.  Marrocco K.  Lechner E.  Berry B.  Brault V.  Hemmer O.  Kretsch T.  Richards K.E.  Genschik P.  Ziegler‐Graff V.   F‐box‐like domain in the polerovirus protein P0 is required for silencing suppressor function Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103 6 2006 1994 1999 16446454 
Petroski M.D.  Deshaies R.J.   Function and regulation of cullin‐RING ubiquitin ligases Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 6 1 2005 9 20 15688063 
Pickart C.M.   Mechanisms underlying ubiquitination Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70 2001 503 533 11395416 
Pickart C.M.   Back to the future with ubiquitin Cell 116 2 2004 181 190 14744430 
Pickart C.M.  Eddins M.J.   Ubiquitin: Structures, functions, mechanisms Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1695 1–3 2004 55 72 15571809 
Pietra G.  Romagnani C.  Mazzarino P.  Falco M.  Millo E.  Moretta A.  Moretta L.  Mingari M.C.   HLA‐E‐restricted recognition of cytomegalovirus‐derived peptides by human CD8+ cytolytic T lymphocytes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 19 2003 10896 10901 12960383 
Piguet V.  Chen Y.L.  Mangasarian A.  Foti M.  Carpentier J.L.  Trono D.   Mechanism of Nef‐induced CD4 endocytosis: Nef connects CD4 with the mu chain of adaptor complexes EMBO J. 17 9 1998 2472 2481 9564030 
Piguet V.  Gu F.  Foti M.  Demaurex N.  Gruenberg J.  Carpentier J.L.  Trono D.   Nef‐induced CD4 degradation: A diacidic‐based motif in Nef functions as a lysosomal targeting signal through the binding of beta‐COP in endosomes Cell 97 1 1999 63 73 10199403 
Piguet V.  Schwartz O.  Le Gall S.  Trono D.   The downregulation of CD4 and MHC‐I by primate lentiviruses: A paradigm for the modulation of cell surface receptors Immunol. Rev. 168 1999 51 63 10399064 
Pilon M.  Schekman R.  Romisch K.   Sec61p mediates export of a misfolded secretory protein from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol for degradation EMBO J. 16 15 1997 4540 4548 9303298 
Pinto A.K.  Hill A.B.   Viral interference with antigen presentation to CD8+ T cells: Lessons from cytomegalovirus Viral Immunol. 18 3 2005 434 444 16212522 
Pitha P.M.   Multiple effects of interferon on the replication of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Antiviral Res. 24 2–3 1994 205 219 7526792 
Pizarro‐Cerda J.  Cossart P.   Bacterial adhesion and entry into host cells Cell 124 4 2006 715 727 16497583 
Plemper R.K.  Bohmler S.  Bordallo J.  Sommer T.  Wolf D.H.   Mutant analysis links the translocon and BiP to retrograde protein transport for ER degradation Nature 388 6645 1997 891 895 9278052 
Plemper R.K.  Egner R.  Kuchler K.  Wolf D.H.   Endoplasmic reticulum degradation of a mutated ATP‐binding cassette transporter Pdr5 proceeds in a concerted action of Sec61 and the proteasome J. Biol. Chem. 273 49 1998 32848 32856 9830032 
Ploegh H.L.   Viral strategies of immune evasion Science 280 5361 1998 248 253 9535648 
Poli G.  Orenstein J.M.  Kinter A.  Folks T.M.  Fauci A.S.   Interferon‐alpha but not AZT suppresses HIV expression in chronically infected cell lines Science 244 4904 1989 575 577 2470148 
Pornillos O.  Alam S.L.  Davis D.R.  Sundquist W.I.   Structure of the Tsg101 UEV domain in complex with the PTAP motif of the HIV‐1 p6 protein Nat. Struct. Biol. 9 11 2002 812 817 12379843 
Pornillos O.  Higginson D.S.  Stray K.M.  Fisher R.D.  Garrus J.E.  Payne M.  He G.P.  Wang H.E.  Morham S.G.  Sundquist W.I.   HIV Gag mimics the Tsg101‐recruiting activity of the human Hrs protein J. Cell Biol. 162 3 2003 425 434 12900394 
Prinz W.A.  Grzyb L.  Veenhuis M.  Kahana J.A.  Silver P.A.  Rapoport T.A.   Mutants affecting the structure of the cortical endoplasmic reticulum in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  J. Cell Biol. 150 3 2000 461 474 10931860 
Pulendran B.  Ahmed R.   Translating innate immunity into immunological memory: Implications for vaccine development Cell 124 4 2006 849 863 16497593 
Rajagopalan S.  Long E.O.   Viral evasion of NK‐cell activation Trends Immunol. 26 8 2005 403 405 15979408 
Ramaswamy M.  Shi L.  Monick M.M.  Hunninghake G.W.  Look D.C.   Specific inhibition of type I interferon signal transduction by respiratory syncytial virus Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 30 6 2004 893 900 14722224 
Rammensee H.G.   Survival of the fitters Nature 419 6906 2002 443 445 12368840 
Rammensee H.G.   Immunology: Protein surgery Nature 427 6971 2004 203 204 14724617 
Ravid T.  Kreft S.G.  Hochstrasser M.   Membrane and soluble substrates of the Doa10 ubiquitin ligase are degraded by distinct pathways EMBO J. 25 3 2006 533 543 16437165 
Reddehase M.J.   Antigens and immunoevasins: Opponents in cytomegalovirus immune surveillance Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2 11 2002 831 844 12415307 
Rehm A.  Engelsberg A.  Tortorella D.  Korner I.J.  Lehmann I.  Ploegh H.L.  Hopken U.E.   Human cytomegalovirus gene products US2 and US11 differ in their ability to attack major histocompatibility class I heavy chains in dendritic cells J. Virol. 76 10 2002 5043 5050 11967320 
Ressing M.E.  van Leeuwen D.  Verreck F.A.  Gomez R.  Heemskerk B.  Toebes M.  Mullen M.M.  Jardetzky T.S.  Longnecker R.  Schilham M.W.  Ottenhoff T.H.  Neefjes J.   Interference with T cell receptor‐HLA‐DR interactions by Epstein‐Barr virus gp42 results in reduced T helper cell recognition Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 20 2003 11583 11588 14504389 
Ressing M.E.  van Leeuwen D.  Verreck F.A.  Keating S.  Gomez R.  Franken K.L.  Ottenhoff T.H.  Spriggs M.  Schumacher T.N.  Hutt‐Fletcher L.M.  Rowe M.  Wiertz E.J.   Epstein‐Barr virus gp42 is posttranslationally modified to produce soluble gp42 that mediates HLA class II immune evasion J. Virol. 79 2 2005 841 852 15613312 
Reyburn H.T.  Mandelboim O.  Vales‐Gomez M.  Davis D.M.  Pazmany L.  Strominger J.L.   The class I MHC homologue of human cytomegalovirus inhibits attack by natural killer cells Nature 386 6624 1997 514 517 9087413 
Reyes‐Turcu F.E.  Horton J.R.  Mullally J.E.  Heroux A.  Cheng X.  Wilkinson K.D.   The ubiquitin binding domain ZnF UBP recognizes the C‐terminal diglycine motif of unanchored ubiquitin Cell 124 6 2006 1197 1208 16564012 
Richly H.  Rape M.  Braun S.  Rumpf S.  Hoege C.  Jentsch S.   A series of ubiquitin binding factors connects CDC48/p97 to substrate multiubiquitylation and proteasomal targeting Cell 120 1 2005 73 84 15652483 
Rinaldo C.R. Jr.   Modulation of major histocompatibility complex antigen expression by viral infection Am. J. Pathol. 144 4 1994 637 650 8160765 
Ritchie K.J.  Zhang D.E.   ISG15: The immunological kin of ubiquitin Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 15 2 2004 237 246 15209384 
Ritchie K.J.  Malakhov M.P.  Hetherington C.J.  Zhou L.  Little M.T.  Malakhova O.A.  Sipe J.C.  Orkin S.H.  Zhang D.E.   Dysregulation of protein modification by ISG15 results in brain cell injury Genes Dev. 16 17 2002 2207 2212 12208842 
Rivett A.J.  Hearn A.R.   Proteasome function in antigen presentation: Immunoproteasome complexes, peptide production, and interactions with viral proteins Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 5 3 2004 153 161 15180520 
Rivett A.J.  Mason G.G.  Murray R.Z.  Reidlinger J.   Regulation of proteasome structure and function Mol. Biol. Rep. 24 1–2 1997 99 102 9228289 
Romagnani C.  Pietra G.  Falco M.  Mazzarino P.  Moretta L.  Mingari M.C.   HLA‐E‐restricted recognition of human cytomegalovirus by a subset of cytolytic T lymphocytes Hum. Immunol. 65 5 2004 437 445 15172443 
Romisch K.   Endoplasmic reticulum‐associated degradation Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 21 2005 435 456 16212502 
Romisch K.   Cdc48p is UBX‐linked to ER ubiquitin ligases Trends Biochem. Sci. 31 1 2006 24 25 16316751 
Roques B.P.  Lucas‐Soroca E.  Chaillet P.  Costentin J.  Fournie‐Zaluski M.C.   Complete differentiation between enkephalinase and angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibition by retro‐thiorphan Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80 11 1983 3178 3182 6304695 
Rose J.J.  Janvier K.  Chandrasekhar S.  Sekaly R.P.  Bonifacino J.S.  Venkatesan S.   CD4 down‐regulation by HIV‐1 and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) Nef proteins involves both internalization and intracellular retention mechanisms J. Biol. Chem. 280 9 2005 7413 7426 15611114 
Ross T.M.  Oran A.E.  Cullen B.R.   Inhibition of HIV‐1 progeny virion release by cell‐surface CD4 is relieved by expression of the viral Nef protein Curr. Biol. 9 12 1999 613 621 10375525 
Rudolph M.G.  Wilson I.A.   The specificity of TCR/pMHC interaction Curr. Opin. Immunol. 14 1 2002 52 65 11790533 
Rumpf S.  Jentsch S.   Functional division of substrate processing cofactors of the ubiquitin‐selective Cdc48 chaperone Mol. Cells 21 2 2006 261 269 16682822 
Sahara N.  Murayama M.  Mizoroki T.  Urushitani M.  Imai Y.  Takahashi R.  Murata S.  Tanaka K.  Takashima A.   In vivo  evidence of CHIP up‐regulation attenuating tau aggregation J. Neurochem. 94 5 2005 1254 1263 16111477 
Sai X.  Kawamura Y.  Kokame K.  Yamaguchi H.  Shiraishi H.  Suzuki R.  Suzuki T.  Kawaichi M.  Miyata T.  Kitamura T.  De Strooper B.  Yanagisawa K.   Endoplasmic reticulum stress‐inducible protein, Herp, enhances presenilin‐mediated generation of amyloid beta‐protein J. Biol. Chem. 277 15 2002 12915 12920 11799129 
Sakurai A.  Yasuda J.  Takano H.  Tanaka Y.  Hatakeyama M.  Shida H.   Regulation of human T‐cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV‐1) budding by ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 Microbes Infect. 6 2 2004 150 156 14998512 
Salazar‐Mather T.P.  Hokeness K.L.   Calling in the troops: Regulation of inflammatory cell trafficking through innate cytokine/chemokine networks Viral Immunol. 16 3 2003 291 306 14583145 
Salazar‐Mather T.P.  Hokeness K.L.   Cytokine and chemokine networks: Pathways to antiviral defense Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 303 2006 29 46 16570855 
Sanchez D.J.  Coscoy L.  Ganem D.   Functional organization of MIR2, a novel viral regulator of selective endocytosis J. Biol. Chem. 277 8 2002 6124 6130 11751860 
Saverino D.  Fabbi M.  Ghiotto F.  Merlo A.  Bruno S.  Zarcone D.  Tenca C.  Tiso M.  Santoro G.  Anastasi G.  Cosman D.  Grossi C.E.   The CD85/LIR‐1/ILT2 inhibitory receptor is expressed by all human T lymphocytes and down‐regulates their functions J. Immunol. 165 7 2000 3742 3755 11034379 
Saverino D.  Ghiotto F.  Merlo A.  Bruno S.  Battini L.  Occhino M.  Maffei M.  Tenca C.  Pileri S.  Baldi L.  Fabbi M.  Bachi A.   Specific recognition of the viral protein UL18 by CD85j/LIR‐1/ILT2 on CD8+ T cells mediates the non‐MHC‐restricted lysis of human cytomegalovirus‐infected cells J. Immunol. 172 9 2004 5629 5637 15100307 
Schauber C.  Chen L.  Tongaonkar P.  Vega I.  Lambertson D.  Potts W.  Madura K.   Rad23 links DNA repair to the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway Nature 391 6668 1998 715 718 9490418 
Scheffner M.  Huibregtse J.M.  Vierstra R.D.  Howley P.M.   The HPV‐16 E6 and E6‐AP complex functions as a ubiquitin‐protein ligase in the ubiquitination of p53 Cell 75 3 1993 495 505 8221889 
Schlieker C.  Korbel G.A.  Kattenhorn L.M.  Ploegh H.L.   A deubiquitinating activity is conserved in the large tegument protein of the herpesviridae J. Virol. 79 24 2005 15582 15585 16306630 
Schmidt M.  Hanna J.  Elsasser S.  Finley D.   Proteasome‐associated proteins: Regulation of a proteolytic machine Biol. Chem. 386 8 2005 725 737 16201867 
Schubert U.  Anton L.C.  Bacik I.  Cox J.H.  Bour S.  Bennink J.R.  Orlowski M.  Strebel K.  Yewdell J.W.   CD4 glycoprotein degradation induced by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vpu protein requires the function of proteasomes and the ubiquitin‐conjugating pathway J. Virol. 72 3 1998 2280 2288 9499087 
Schuberth C.  Buchberger A.   Membrane‐bound Ubx2 recruits Cdc48 to ubiquitin ligases and their substrates to ensure efficient ER‐associated protein degradation Nat. Cell Biol. 7 10 2005 999 1006 16179952 
Schuller S.  Kugler S.  Goebel W.   Suppression of major histocompatibility complex class I and class II gene expression in Listeria monocytogenes ‐infected murine macrophages FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 20 4 1998 289 299 9626934 
Schulman B.A.  Carrano A.C.  Jeffrey P.D.  Bowen Z.  Kinnucan E.R.  Finnin M.S.  Elledge S.J.  Harper J.W.  Pagano M.  Pavletich N.P.   Insights into SCF ubiquitin ligases from the structure of the Skp1‐Skp2 complex Nature 408 6810 2000 381 386 11099048 
Schulze A.  Standera S.  Buerger E.  Kikkert M.  van Voorden S.  Wiertz E.  Koning F.  Kloetzel P.M.  Seeger M.   The ubiquitin‐domain protein HERP forms a complex with components of the endoplasmic reticulum associated degradation pathway J. Mol. Biol. 354 5 2005 1021 1027 16289116 
Schwartz D.C.  Hochstrasser M.   A superfamily of protein tags: Ubiquitin, SUMO and related modifiers Trends Biochem. Sci. 28 6 2003 321 328 12826404 
Schwer B.  Ren S.  Pietschmann T.  Kartenbeck J.  Kaehlcke K.  Bartenschlager R.  Yen T.S.  Ott M.   Targeting of hepatitis C virus core protein to mitochondria through a novel C‐terminal localization motif J. Virol. 78 15 2004 7958 7968 15254168 
Seeger M.  Ferrell K.  Dubiel W.   The 26S proteasome: A dynamic structure Mol. Biol. Rep. 24 1–2 1997 83 88 9228286 
Selkoe D.  Kopan R.   Notch and Presenilin: Regulated intramembrane proteolysis links development and degeneration Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 26 2003 565 597 12730322 
Shackelford J.  Pagano J.S.   Tumor viruses and cell signaling pathways: Deubiquitination versus ubiquitination Mol. Cell. Biol. 24 12 2004 5089 5093 15169876 
Shackelford J.  Pagano J.S.   Targeting of host‐cell ubiquitin pathways by viruses Essays Biochem. 41 2005 139 156 16250903 
Shaffer A.L.  Shapiro‐Shelef M.  Iwakoshi N.N.  Lee A.H.  Qian S.B.  Zhao H.  Yu X.  Yang L.  Tan B.K.  Rosenwald A.  Hurt E.M.  Petroulakis E.   XBP1, downstream of Blimp‐1, expands the secretory apparatus and other organelles, and increases protein synthesis in plasma cell differentiation Immunity 21 1 2004 81 93 15345222 
Shamu C.E.  Story C.M.  Rapoport T.A.  Ploegh H.L.   The pathway of US11‐dependent degradation of MHC class I heavy chains involves a ubiquitin‐conjugated intermediate J. Cell Biol. 147 1 1999 45 58 10508854 
Sharrocks A.D.   PIAS proteins and transcriptional regulation—more than just SUMO E3 ligases? Genes Dev. 20 7 2006 754 758 16600908 
Shastri N.  Cardinaud S.  Schwab S.R.  Serwold T.  Kunisawa J.   All the peptides that fit: The beginning, the middle, and the end of the MHC class I antigen‐processing pathway Immunol. Rev. 207 2005 31 41 16181325 
Shen L.  Rock K.L.   Priming of T cells by exogenous antigen cross‐presented on MHC class I molecules Curr. Opin. Immunol. 18 1 2006 85 91 16326087 
Sievers E.  Neumann J.  Raftery M.  SchOnrich G.  Eis‐Hubinger A.M.  Koch N.   Glycoprotein B from strain 17 of herpes simplex virus type I contains an invariant chain homologous sequence that binds to MHC class II molecules Immunology 107 1 2002 129 135 12225371 
Sisodia S.S.  St George‐Hyslop P.H.   Gamma‐secretase, Notch, Abeta and Alzheimer's disease: Where do the presenilins fit in? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3 4 2002 281 290 11967558 
Skehel J.J.  Wiley D.C.   Receptor binding and membrane fusion in virus entry: The influenza hemagglutinin Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69 2000 531 569 10966468 
Smith P.L.  Lombardi G.  Foster G.R.   Type I interferons and the innate immune response—more than just antiviral cytokines Mol. Immunol. 42 8 2005 869 877 15829276 
Sobko A.  Ma H.  Firtel R.A.   Regulated SUMOylation and ubiquitination of DdMEK1 is required for proper chemotaxis Dev. Cell 2 6 2002 745 756 12062087 
Soboleva T.A.  Baker R.T.   Deubiquitinating enzymes: Their functions and substrate specificity Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 5 3 2004 191 200 15180524 
Sol‐Foulon N.  Moris A.  Nobile C.  Boccaccio C.  Engering A.  Abastado J.P.  Heard J.M.  van Kooyk Y.  Schwartz O.   HIV‐1 Nef‐induced upregulation of DC‐SIGN in dendritic cells promotes lymphocyte clustering and viral spread Immunity 16 1 2002 145 155 11825573 
Song B.L.  Sever N.  DeBose‐Boyd R.A.   Gp78, a membrane‐anchored ubiquitin ligase, associates with Insig‐1 and couples sterol‐regulated ubiquitination to degradation of HMG CoA reductase Mol. Cells 19 6 2005 829 840 
Sorin M.  Kalpana G.V.   Dynamics of virus‐host interplay in HIV‐1 replication Curr. HIV Res. 4 2 2006 117 130 16611052 
Spriggs M.K.  Armitage R.J.  Comeau M.R.  Strockbine L.  Farrah T.  Macduff B.  Ulrich D.  Alderson M.R.  Mullberg J.  Cohen J.I.   The extracellular domain of the Epstein‐Barr virus BZLF2 protein binds the HLA‐DR beta chain and inhibits antigen presentation J. Virol. 70 8 1996 5557 5563 8764069 
Srisatjaluk R.  Kotwal G.J.  Hunt L.A.  Justus D.E.   Modulation of gamma interferon‐induced major histocompatibility complex class II gene expression by Porphyromonas gingivalis membrane vesicles Infect. Immun. 70 3 2002 1185 1192 11854199 
Stern L.J.  Potolicchio I.  Santambrogio L.   MHC class II compartment subtypes: Structure and function Curr. Opin. Immunol. 18 1 2006 64 69 16337363 
Stevenson P.G.  Efstathiou S.  Doherty P.C.  Lehner P.J.   Inhibition of MHC class I‐restricted antigen presentation by gamma 2‐herpesviruses Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 15 2000 8455 8460 10890918 
Stockwin L.H.  McGonagle D.  Martin I.G.  Blair G.E.   Dendritic cells: Immunological sentinels with a central role in health and disease Immunol. Cell Biol. 78 2 2000 91 102 10762408 
Strehl B.  Seifert U.  Kruger E.  Heink S.  Kuckelkorn U.  Kloetzel P.M.   Interferon‐gamma, the functional plasticity of the ubiquitin‐proteasome system, and MHC class I antigen processing Immunol. Rev. 207 2005 19 30 16181324 
Stuchell M.D.  Garrus J.E.  Muller B.  Stray K.M.  Ghaffarian S.  McKinnon R.  Krausslich H.G.  Morham S.G.  Sundquist W.I.   The human endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT‐I) and its role in HIV‐1 budding J. Biol. Chem. 279 34 2004 36059 36071 15218037 
Stumptner‐Cuvelette P.  Morchoisne S.  Dugast M.  Le Gall S.  Raposo G.  Schwartz O.  Benaroch P.   HIV‐1 Nef impairs MHC class II antigen presentation and surface expression Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 21 2001 12144 12149 11593029 
Stumptner‐Cuvelette P.  Jouve M.  Helft J.  Dugast M.  Glouzman A.S.  Jooss K.  Raposo G.  Benaroch P.   Human immunodeficiency virus‐1 Nef expression induces intracellular accumulation of multivesicular bodies and major histocompatibility complex class II complexes: Potential role of phosphatidylinositol 3‐kinase Mol. Biol. Cell 14 12 2003 4857 4870 13679518 
Suzuki R.  Sakamoto S.  Tsutsumi T.  Rikimaru A.  Tanaka K.  Shimoike T.  Moriishi K.  Iwasaki T.  Mizumoto K.  Matsuura Y.  Miyamura T.  Suzuki T.   Molecular determinants for subcellular localization of hepatitis C virus core protein J. Virol. 79 2 2005 1271 1281 15613354 
Suzuki T.  Park H.  Hollingsworth N.M.  Sternglanz R.  Lennarz W.J.   PNG1, a yeast gene encoding a highly conserved peptide: N‐glycanase J. Cell Biol. 149 5 2000 1039 1052 10831608 
Swanson R.  Locher M.  Hochstrasser M.   A conserved ubiquitin ligase of the nuclear envelope/endoplasmic reticulum that functions in both ER‐associated and Matalpha2 repressor degradation Genes Dev. 15 20 2001 2660 2674 11641273 
Swigut T.  Shohdy N.  Skowronski J.   Mechanism for down‐regulation of CD28 by Nef EMBO J. 20 7 2001 1593 1604 11285224 
Tarasova N.I.  Seth R.  Tarasov S.G.  Kosakowska‐Cholody T.  Hrycyna C.A.  Gottesman M.M.  Michejda C.J.   Transmembrane inhibitors of P‐glycoprotein, an ABC transporter J. Med. Chem. 48 11 2005 3768 3775 15916428 
Taxis C.  Vogel F.  Wolf D.H.   ER‐golgi traffic is a prerequisite for efficient ER degradation Mol. Biol. Cell. 13 6 2002 1806 1818 12058050 
Teckman J.H.  Perlmutter D.H.   The endoplasmic reticulum degradation pathway for mutant secretory proteins alpha1‐antitrypsin Z and S is distinct from that for an unassembled membrane protein J. Biol. Chem. 271 22 1996 13215 13220 8662752 
Thoms S.   Cdc48 can distinguish between native and non‐native proteins in the absence of cofactors FEBS Lett. 520 1–3 2002 107 110 12044880 
Tokarz S.  Berset C.  La Rue J.  Friedman K.  Nakayama K.  Zhang D.E.  Lanker S.   The ISG15 isopeptidase UBP43 is regulated by proteolysis via the SCFSkp2 ubiquitin ligase J. Biol. Chem. 279 45 2004 46424 46430 15342634 
Tomasec P.  Braud V.M.  Rickards C.  Powell M.B.  McSharry B.P.  Gadola S.  Cerundolo V.  Borysiewicz L.K.  McMichael A.J.  Wilkinson G.W.   Surface expression of HLA‐E, an inhibitor of natural killer cells, enhanced by human cytomegalovirus gpUL40 Science 287 5455 2000 1031 10669413 
Tomasec P.  Wang E.C.  Davison A.J.  Vojtesek B.  Armstrong M.  Griffin C.  McSharry B.P.  Morris R.J.  Llewellyn‐Lacey S.  Rickards C.  Nomoto A.  Sinzger C.   Downregulation of natural killer cell‐activating ligand CD155 by human cytomegalovirus Nat. Immunol. 6 2 2005 181 188 15640804 
Tomazin R.  Boname J.  Hegde N.R.  Lewinsohn D.M.  Altschuler Y.  Jones T.R.  Cresswell P.  Nelson J.A.  Riddell S.R.  Johnson D.C.   Cytomegalovirus US2 destroys two components of the MHC class II pathway, preventing recognition by CD4+ T cells Nat. Med. 5 9 1999 1039 1043 10470081 
Tortorella D.  Gewurz B.E.  Furman M.H.  Schust D.J.  Ploegh H.L.   Viral subversion of the immune system Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18 2000 861 926 10837078 
Tzfira T.  Li J.  Lacroix B.  Citovsky V.   Agrobacterium T‐DNA integration: Molecules and models Trends Genet. 20 8 2004 375 383 15262410 
Tzfira T.  Vaidya M.  Citovsky V.   Involvement of targeted proteolysis in plant genetic transformation by Agrobacterium Nature 431 7004 2004 87 92 15343337 
Ulane C.M.  Horvath C.M.   Paramyxoviruses SV5 and HPIV2 assemble STAT protein ubiquitin ligase complexes from cellular components Virology 304 2 2002 160 166 12504558 
Ulane C.M.  Kentsis A.  Cruz C.D.  Parisien J.P.  Schneider K.L.  Horvath C.M.   Composition and assembly of STAT‐targeting ubiquitin ligase complexes: Paramyxovirus V protein carboxyl terminus is an oligomerization domain J. Virol. 79 16 2005 10180 10189 16051811 
Ulane C.M.  Rodriguez J.J.  Parisien J.P.  Horvath C.M.   STAT3 ubiquitylation and degradation by mumps virus suppress cytokine and oncogene signaling J. Virol. 77 11 2003 6385 6393 12743296 
Ulbrecht M.  Martinozzi S.  Grzeschik M.  Hengel H.  Ellwart J.W.  Pla M.  Weiss E.H.   Cutting edge: The human cytomegalovirus UL40 gene product contains a ligand for HLA‐E and prevents NK cell‐mediated lysis J. Immunol. 164 10 2000 5019 5022 10799855 
Van den Eynde B.J.  Morel S.   Differential processing of class‐I‐restricted epitopes by the standard proteasome and the immunoproteasome Curr. Opin. Immunol. 13 2 2001 147 153 11228406 
Varshavsky A.   Regulated protein degradation Trends Biochem. Sci. 30 6 2005 283 286 15950869 
Vashist S.  Ng D.T.   Misfolded proteins are sorted by a sequential checkpoint mechanism of ER quality control J. Cell Biol. 165 1 2004 41 52 15078901 
Vashist S.  Kim W.  Belden W.J.  Spear E.D.  Barlowe C.  Ng D.T.   Distinct retrieval and retention mechanisms are required for the quality control of endoplasmic reticulum protein folding J. Cell Biol. 155 3 2001 355 368 11673477 
Villadangos J.A.  Bryant R.A.  Deussing J.  Driessen C.  Lennon‐Dumenil A.M.  Riese R.J.  Roth W.  Saftig P.  Shi G.P.  Chapman H.A.  Peters C.  Ploegh H.L.   Proteases involved in MHC class II antigen presentation Immunol. Rev. 172 1999 109 120 10631941 
von Boehmer H.   Shaping the T cell repertoire J. Immunol. 176 1 2006 3 4 16365387 
von Heijne G.   Signal sequences. The limits of variation J. Mol. Biol. 184 1 1985 99 105 4032478 
Wagner M.  Gutermann A.  Podlech J.  Reddehase M.J.  Koszinowski U.H.   Major histocompatibility complex class I allele‐specific cooperative and competitive interactions between immune evasion proteins of cytomegalovirus J. Exp. Med. 196 6 2002 805 816 12235213 
Wang J.  Beher D.  Nyborg A.C.  Shearman M.S.  Golde T.E.  Goate A.   C‐terminal PAL motif of presenilin and presenilin homologues required for normal active site conformation J. Neurochem. 96 1 2006 218 227 16305624 
Wang J.  Loveland A.N.  Kattenhorn L.M.  Ploegh H.L.  Gibson W.   High‐molecular‐weight protein (pUL48) of human cytomegalovirus is a competent deubiquitinating protease: Mutant viruses altered in its active‐site cysteine or histidine are viable J. Virol. 80 12 2006 6003 6012 16731939 
Wang R.  Tang P.  Wang P.  Boissy R.E.  Zheng H.   Regulation of tyrosinase trafficking and processing by presenilins: Partial loss of function by familial Alzheimer's disease mutation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103 2 2006 353 358 16384915 
Wang X.  Lybarger L.  Connors R.  Harris M.R.  Hansen T.H.   Model for the interaction of gammaherpesvirus 68 RING‐CH finger protein mK3 with major histocompatibility complex class I and the peptide‐loading complex J. Virol. 78 16 2004 8673 8686 15280476 
Wang X.  Connors R.  Harris M.R.  Hansen T.H.  Lybarger L.   Requirements for the selective degradation of endoplasmic reticulum‐resident major histocompatibility complex class I proteins by the viral immune evasion molecule mK3 J. Virol. 79 7 2005 4099 4108 15767411 
Wang X.  Ye Y.  Lencer W.  Hansen T.H.   The viral E3 ubiquitin ligase mK3 uses the Derlin/p97 endoplasmic reticulum‐associated degradation pathway to mediate down‐regulation of major histocompatibility complex class I proteins J. Biol. Chem. 281 13 2006 8636 8644 16446359 
Ward C.L.  Omura S.  Kopito R.R.   Degradation of CFTR by the ubiquitin‐proteasome pathway Cell 83 1 1995 121 127 7553863 
Weihofen A.  Binns K.  Lemberg M.K.  Ashman K.  Martoglio B.   Identification of signal peptide peptidase, a presenilin‐type aspartic protease Science 296 5576 2002 2215 2218 12077416 
Werner E.D.  Brodsky J.L.  McCracken A.A.   Proteasome‐dependent endoplasmic reticulum‐associated protein degradation: An unconventional route to a familiar fate Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 24 1996 13797 13801 8943015 
Wiertz E.J.  Jones T.R.  Sun L.  Bogyo M.  Geuze H.J.  Ploegh H.L.   The human cytomegalovirus US11 gene product dislocates MHC class I heavy chains from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol Cell 84 5 1996 769 779 8625414 
Wiertz E.J.  Tortorella D.  Bogyo M.  Yu J.  Mothes W.  Jones T.R.  Rapoport T.A.  Ploegh H.L.   Sec61‐mediated transfer of a membrane protein from the endoplasmic reticulum to the proteasome for destruction Nature 384 6608 1996 432 438 8945469 
Wilkinson C.R.  Seeger M.  Hartmann‐Petersen R.  Stone M.  Wallace M.  Semple C.  Gordon C.   Proteins containing the UBA domain are able to bind to multi‐ubiquitin chains Nat. Cell Biol. 3 10 2001 939 943 11584278 
Wills M.R.  Ashiru O.  Reeves M.B.  Okecha G.  Trowsdale J.  Tomasec P.  Wilkinson G.W.  Sinclair J.  Sissons J.G.   Human cytomegalovirus encodes an MHC class I‐like molecule (UL142) that functions to inhibit NK cell lysis J. Immunol. 175 11 2005 7457 7465 16301653 
Wilson C.A.  Murphy D.D.  Giasson B.I.  Zhang B.  Trojanowski J.Q.  Lee V.M.   Degradative organelles containing mislocalized alpha‐ and beta‐synuclein proliferate in presenilin‐1 null neurons J. Cell Biol. 165 3 2004 335 346 15123735 
Winston J.T.  Koepp D.M.  Zhu C.  Elledge S.J.  Harper J.W.   A family of mammalian F‐box proteins Curr. Biol. 9 20 1999 1180 1182 10531037 
Woodman P.G.   p97, a protein coping with multiple identities J. Cell Sci. 116 Pt. 21 2003 4283 4290 14514884 
Wu J.T.  Lin H.C.  Hu Y.C.  Chien C.T.   Neddylation and deneddylation regulate Cul1 and Cul3 protein accumulation Nat. Cell Biol. 7 10 2005 1014 1020 16127432 
Xia W.  Wolfe M.S.   Intramembrane proteolysis by presenilin and presenilin‐like proteases J. Cell Sci. 116 Pt 14 2003 2839 2844 12808018 
Yamamoto A.  Friedlein A.  Imai Y.  Takahashi R.  Kahle P.J.  Haass C.   Parkin phosphorylation and modulation of its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity J. Biol. Chem. 280 5 2005 3390 3399 15557340 
Yang M.  Omura S.  Bonifacino J.S.  Weissman A.M.   Novel aspects of degradation of T cell receptor subunits from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in T cells: Importance of oligosaccharide processing, ubiquitination, and proteasome‐dependent removal from ER membranes J. Exp. Med. 187 6 1998 835 846 9500786 
Yasuda J.  Nakao M.  Kawaoka Y.  Shida H.   Nedd4 regulates egress of Ebola virus‐like particles from host cells J. Virol. 77 18 2003 9987 9992 12941909 
Ye Y.  Meyer H.H.  Rapoport T.A.   The AAA ATPase Cdc48/p97 and its partners transport proteins from the ER into the cytosol Nature 414 6864 2001 652 656 11740563 
Ye Y.  Meyer H.H.  Rapoport T.A.   Function of the p97‐Ufd1‐Npl4 complex in retrotranslocation from the ER to the cytosol: Dual recognition of nonubiquitinated polypeptide segments and polyubiquitin chains J. Cell Biol. 162 1 2003 71 84 12847084 
Ye Y.  Shibata Y.  Yun C.  Ron D.  Rapoport T.A.   A membrane protein complex mediates retro‐translocation from the ER lumen into the cytosol Nature 429 6994 2004 841 847 15215856 
Ye Y.  Shibata Y.  Kikkert M.  van Voorden S.  Wiertz E.  Rapoport T.A.   Inaugural Article: Recruitment of the p97 ATPase and ubiquitin ligases to the site of retrotranslocation at the endoplasmic reticulum membrane Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 40 2005 14132 14138 16186510 
Yewdell J.W.  Hill A.B.   Viral interference with antigen presentation Nat. Immunol. 3 11 2002 1019 1025 12407410 
Yewdell J.W.  Schubert U.  Bennink J.R.   At the crossroads of cell biology and immunology: DRiPs and other sources of peptide ligands for MHC class I molecules J. Cell. Sci. 114 Pt 5 2001 845 851 11181168 
Yin Y.  Manoury B.  Fahraeus R.   Self‐inhibition of synthesis and antigen presentation by Epstein‐Barr virus‐encoded EBNA1 Science 301 5638 2003 1371 1374 12958359 
Yoshida Y.   A novel role for N‐glycans in the ERAD system J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 134 2 2003 183 190 12966065 
Yoshida Y.  Chiba T.  Tokunaga F.  Kawasaki H.  Iwai K.  Suzuki T.  Ito Y.  Matsuoka K.  Yoshida M.  Tanaka K.  Tai T.   E3 ubiquitin ligase that recognizes sugar chains Nature 418 6896 2002 438 442 12140560 
Yoshida Y.  Tokunaga F.  Chiba T.  Iwai K.  Tanaka K.  Tai T.   Fbs2 is a new member of the E3 ubiquitin ligase family that recognizes sugar chains J. Biol. Chem. 278 44 2003 43877 43884 12939278 
Yu X.  Yu Y.  Liu B.  Luo K.  Kong W.  Mao P.  Yu X.F.   Induction of APOBEC3G ubiquitination and degradation by an HIV‐1 Vif‐Cul5‐SCF complex Science 302 5647 2003 1056 1060 14564014 
Yu Y.Y.  Harris M.R.  Lybarger L.  Kimpler L.A.  Myers N.B.  Virgin H.W. Vth  Hansen T.H.   Physical association of the K3 protein of gamma‐2 herpesvirus 68 with major histocompatibility complex class I molecules with impaired peptide and beta(2)‐microglobulin assembly J. Virol. 76 6 2002 2796 2803 11861847 
Yuan W.  Krug R.M.   Influenza B virus NS1 protein inhibits conjugation of the interferon (IFN)‐induced ubiquitin‐like ISG15 protein EMBO J. 20 3 2001 362 371 11157743 
Yuan W.  Aramini J.M.  Montelione G.T.  Krug R.M.   Structural basis for ubiquitin‐like ISG 15 protein binding to the NS1 protein of influenza B virus: A protein‐protein interaction function that is not shared by the corresponding N‐terminal domain of the NS1 protein of influenza A virus Virology 304 2 2002 291 301 12504570 
Zamore P.D.   Plant RNAi: How a viral silencing suppressor inactivates siRNA Curr. Biol. 14 5 2004 R198 R200 15028237 
Zhang H.  Yang B.  Pomerantz R.J.  Zhang C.  Arunachalam S.C.  Gao L.   The cytidine deaminase CEM15 induces hypermutation in newly synthesized HIV‐1 DNA Nature 424 6944 2003 94 98 12808465 
Zhang X.  Shaw A.  Bates P.A.  Newman R.H.  Gowen B.  Orlova E.  Gorman M.A.  Kondo H.  Dokurno P.  Lally J.  Leonard G.  Meyer H.   Structure of the AAA ATPase p97 Mol. Cells 6 6 2000 1473 1484 
Zhao C.  Beaudenon S.L.  Kelley M.L.  Waddell M.B.  Yuan W.  Schulman B.A.  Huibregtse J.M.  Krug R.M.   The UbcH8 ubiquitin E2 enzyme is also the E2 enzyme for ISG15, an IFN‐alpha/beta‐induced ubiquitin‐like protein Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 20 2004 7578 7582 15131269 
Zheng N.  Schulman B.A.  Song L.  Miller J.J.  Jeffrey P.D.  Wang P.  Chu C.  Koepp D.M.  Elledge S.J.  Pagano M.  Conaway R.C.  Conaway J.W.   Structure of the Cul1‐Rbx1‐Skp1‐F boxSkp2 SCF ubiquitin ligase complex Nature 416 6882 2002 703 709 11961546 
Zhong G.  Fan T.  Liu L.   Chlamydia inhibits interferon gamma‐inducible major histocompatibility complex class II expression by degradation of upstream stimulatory factor 1 J. Exp. Med. 189 12 1999 1931 1938 10377188 
Zhou H.  Monack D.M.  Kayagaki N.  Wertz I.  Yin J.  Wolf B.  Dixit V.M.   Yersinia virulence factor YopJ acts as a deubiquitinase to inhibit NF‐kappa B activation J. Exp. Med. 202 10 2005 1327 1332 16301742 
Zimmermann A.  Trilling M.  Wagner M.  Wilborn M.  Bubic I.  Jonjic S.  Koszinowski U.  Hengel H.   A cytomegaloviral protein reveals a dual role for STAT2 in IFN‐{gamma} signaling and antiviral responses J. Exp. Med. 201 10 2005 1543 1553 15883169 
Zingoni A.  Sornasse T.  Cocks B.G.  Tanaka Y.  Santoni A.  Lanier L.L.   NK cell regulation of T cell‐mediated responses Mol. Immunol. 42 4 2005 451 454 15607797 
Zou W.  Zhang D.E.   The interferon‐inducible ubiquitin‐protein isopeptide ligase (E3) EFP also functions as an ISG15 E3 ligase J. Biol. Chem. 281 7 2006 3989 3994 16352599

