
==== Front
Adv TherAdv TherAdvances in Therapy0741-238X1865-8652Springer Healthcare Heidelberg 12310.1007/s12325-014-0123-yErratumErratum to: Impacts of Patient Characteristics on the Effectiveness of Landiolol in AF/AFL Patients Complicated with LV Dysfunction: Subgroup Analysis of the J-Land Study Kinugawa Koichiro kinugawa-tky@umin.ac.jp Nagai Ryozo Inoue Hiroshi Atarashi Hirotsugu Seino Yoshihiko Yamashita Takeshi Shimizu Wataru Aiba Takeshi Kitakaze Masafumi Sakamoto Atsuhiro Ikeda Takanori Imai Yasushi Daimon Takashi Fujino Katsuhiro Nagano Tetsuji Okamura Tatsuaki t.okamura@ono.co.jp Hori Masatsugu The J-Land Investigators  Department of Therapeutic Strategy for Heart Failure, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655 Japan  Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan  The Second Department of Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan  Department of Internal Medicine, Nippon Medical School Tama-Nagayama Hospital, Tokyo, Japan  Department of Cardiology, Nippon Medical School Chiba-Hokusoh Hospital, Chiba, Japan  The Cardiovascular Institute, Tokyo, Japan  Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan  Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Japan  Department of Anesthesiology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan  Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Toho University Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan  Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Japan  Department of Biostatistics, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan  Ono Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan  Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan 22 5 2014 2014 31 5 577 578 12 5 2014 © Springer Healthcare 2014issue-copyright-statement© Springer Healthcare 2014
==== Body
Erratum to: Adv Ther (2014) 31:426–439 DOI 10.1007/s12325-014-0111-2
The authors would like to make the following adjustment to the above mentioned article. The Acknowledgments section should be changed to:

This study was funded by Ono Pharmaceutical Co Ltd (Osaka, Japan). The authors thank all of the investigators and site staff who participated in this clinical trial. All named authors meet the ICMJE criteria for authorship for this manuscript, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given final approval for the version to be published.

Conflict of interest. K.K. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. R.N. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. H.I. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. H.A. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. Y.S. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. T.Y. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. W.S. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. T.A. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. M.K. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. A.S. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. T.I. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. Y.I. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. T.D. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. M.H. has received consulting fees from Ono Pharmaceutical. K.F. is an employee of Ono Pharmaceutical. T.N. is an employee of Ono Pharmaceutical. T.O. is an employee of Ono Pharmaceutical.

Compliance with ethics guidelines. The analysis included in this study is based on previously conducted studies and involves no new studies on animals or humans performed by any of the authors.

The summary slide should be changed to:Landiolol, an ultra-short-acting β-blocker, is rapidly metabolized to inactive forms in the blood and liver, resulting in a short half-life of approximately 4 min in human blood. In addition, it selectively binds to β1 receptors, with a β1 receptor selectivity (β1/β2) as high as 251.

The J-Land study was designed as a central registration, prospective, multicenter, single-blind, randomized, parallel-group study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of intravenous landiolol for achieving rapid control of tachycardia in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF)/atrial flutter (AFL) and left ventricular (LV) dysfunction. The primary efficacy endpoint was the percentage of patients with both a heart rate (HR) <110 beats/min (bpm) and ≥20 % decrease from baseline at 2 h after administration.

Two hundred patients with AF/AFL, HR ≥120 bpm, and LV ejection fraction (LVEF) 25–50 % were randomized to receive either landiolol (n = 93) or digoxin (n = 107).

This subgroup analysis of the J-Land study indicated that landiolol was more useful, regardless of patient characteristics, as compared with digoxin in AF/AFL patients complicated with LV dysfunction. Particularly, in patients with impaired renal function, landiolol should be preferred for the purpose of acute rate control of AF/AFL tachycardia.



The online version of the original article can be found under doi:10.1007/s12325-014-0111-2.
