
==== Front
BMJBMJbmjBMJ : British Medical Journal0959-81381756-1833BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. hina00418810.1136/bmj.e5793Research Methods & ReportingPrognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 4: Stratified medicine
research Hingorani Aroon D professor of genetic epidemiology1van Windt Daniëlle A professor in primary care epidemiology2Riley Richard D senior lecturer in medical statistics3Abrams Keith professor of medical statistics4Moons Karel G M professor of clinical epidemiology5Steyerberg Ewout W professor of medical decision making6Schroter Sara senior researcher7Sauerbrei Willi professor of medical biometry8Altman Douglas G professor of statistics in medicine9Hemingway Harry professor of clinical epidemiology1for the PROGRESS Group1 Department of Epidemiology and Public Health,
University College London, London WC1E 7HB, UK2 Arthritis Research UK Primary Care Centre, Primary
Care Sciences, Keele University, Keele ST5 5BG, UK3 School of Health and Population Sciences, University
of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK4 Centre for Biostatistics & Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Leicester,
Leicester LE1 7RH, UK5 Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care,
UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands6 Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands7 BMJ, BMA House, London WC1H 9JR, UK8 Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics,
University Medical Center Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany9 Centre for Statistics in Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX2 6UD, UKCorrespondence to: H Hemingway
h.hemingway@ucl.ac.uk2013 2013 5 2 2013 346 e579329 7 2012 © Hingorani et al 20132013Hingorani et alThis is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly
cited, the use is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the
license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.In patients with a particular disease or health condition, stratified medicine
seeks to identify those who will have the most clinical benefit or least harm
from a specific treatment. In this article, the fourth in the PROGRESS series,
the authors discuss why prognosis research should form a cornerstone of
stratified medicine, especially in regard to the identification of factors that
predict individual treatment response

Web Extra Extra material, as supplied by the author
Supplementary table: Recommendations of PROGRESS (PROGnosis RESearch
Strategy)

Click here for additional data file.
==== Body
A woman with newly diagnosed breast cancer is deciding on a course of therapy, guided by
her physician. Evidence on the average prognosis1 and effectiveness of therapeutic interventions is available from studies
of large groups of patients with breast cancer in observational studies and randomised
trials. But the patient and doctor are faced with making a decision in an individual
case, where the prognosis and response to treatment may deviate from average. One way to
select the optimal treatment is to consider a test that predicts treatment effect, such
as the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) status.2 The use of HER-2 status in breast cancer management is an
example of the translation of results from prognosis research toward improved patient
outcomes. The prognosis of breast cancer patients is highly variable,1 HER-2 was discovered as a prognostic
factor,3 which provided a specific target
for an intervention (trastuzumab), which was then evaluated in trials which recruited
women with HER-2 positive cancers (see fig 1). After
the success of these trials in improving clinical outcome, trastuzumab is now given to
the subgroup (stratum) of women who are HER-2 positive, but not to those testing
negative;4 this type of approach has been
termed stratified medicine.

Fig 1 Example of stratified medicines research, with translation
from discovery of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) status as a
prognostic factor for metastatic breast cancer5 to development of trastuzumab treatment and use in clinical
practice. Path element adapted from chart 7.1 in the Cooksey report (2006)
 (made available for use through the Open Government
License)

The aims of this fourth paper in our PROGRESS series (www.progress-partnership.org) are to describe the
rationale for stratified medicine, and to explain why prognosis research is pivotal for
this purpose; from identifying priority areas for stratification, to discovering
candidate factors that may predict treatment response, through to trials and health
technology assessment that examine the impact of stratified medicine approaches in
healthcare. We identify current challenges and deficiencies in such research and make
recommendations for improvement with examples across a variety of disease areas.

What is stratified medicine?
Stratified medicine refers to the targetting of treatments (including pharmacological
and non-pharmacological interventions) according to the biological or risk
characteristics shared by subgroups of patients. Stratified medicine is regarded as
central to the progress of healthcare according to the leaders of the National
Institutes of Health, and the Food and Drug Administration6 among others.7 In
contrast with “all comer” or “empirical” medicine, stratified medicine seeks to
target therapy and make the best decisions for groups of similar patients.8
9

One approach to stratifying the use of treatments is to consider absolute risks. In
the third article of our series10 we
described how prognostic models are used to estimate the absolute risk of an outcome
for an individual. Those people with the highest absolute risk will derive the
largest absolute benefit from a treatment (that is, the greatest reduction in
probability of the outcome) when the treatment effect expressed in relative terms is
the same for all patients. This is illustrated in the upper panel of fig 2, where the relative treatment effect on mortality
risk is estimated as 0.75 for all patients but the reduction in absolute probability
of death is 5% for low risk patients and 15% for high risk patients. In such
situations treatments could be restricted (or “personalised”) to those who will
benefit the most. Examples in common clinical practice include the decision to give
lipid lowering therapy to people above a certain threshold of cardiovascular risk
estimated from a prognostic model,11 the
use of bisphosphonates for women over the age of 50 considered to have an increased
risk of vertebral fractures, and the targeting of primary care management of back
pain.12

Fig 2 Estimated treatment effect in subgroups defined according
to (upper panel) risk from a prognostic model and (lower panel) a factor
that predicts differential treatment response. The prevalence of positive
factor and high risk is shown, arbitrarily, as 20%. The dotted vertical line
shows the overall treatment effect, the centre of each box shows the effect
estimate, and the horizontal lines show confidence intervals

By contrast, clinicians may also stratify medicine because the relative treatment
effect is inconsistent across patients (fig 2, lower panel). In this situation, at least one individual patient measure is
associated with changes in the treatment effect. In statistical terms there is an
interaction between a patient-level variable and the effect of treatment on the
outcome, and in biological terms there may be an underlying mechanism explaining the
interaction. In this situation, a stratified medicine approach seeks to test
patients for the presence of individual factors that are considered predictive of an
improved treatment response (more benefit, less harm, or both), as in the
aforementioned test for positive HER-2 status in breast cancer and the use of
trastuzumab. Other examples in clinical use include imatinib in patients with
chronic myeloid leukaemia targeted to those with the BCR-ABL mutation13 and gefitinib used to treat pulmonary
adenocarcinoma in patients with epidermal growth factor receptor mutations.14

An example of identifying patients with greater risk of harms include the
antiretroviral drug abacavir,15 where HLA
typing helps identify patients at high risk of abacavir toxicity. Thus a key part of
stratified medicine research is to identify suitable tests for predicting treatment
response from specific interventions.

The use of HER-2 status in breast cancer management illustrates how tests of
differential treatment response are often thought of as binary factors: a biomarker
is classed as positive or negative, or laboratory values are deemed low or high.
Such dichotomisation facilitates clinical decision making and is used in most
examples described in this paper. However, many tests have original values measured
on an ordinal or a continuous scale. Similarly if prognostic models10 are considered as tests, they usually
produce a continuous risk score for each individual; the same applies to gene
signatures or related indices derived from high dimensional data. Statistically,
there is more power and less potential for bias if such tests are evaluated on their
original scale (see later) rather than being dichotomised by means of a cut
point10; categorisation may then be
done after analysis to aid clinical strategies. For example, Flynn et al derived a
prognostic model to identify patients with back pain who would respond well to
manipulation rather than to other types of treatment such as exercise.16 Some trials randomising patients to these
treatments found that patients with positive scores from the model had greater
relative and absolute benefits from manipulation than those with negative
scores.17
18

Thus stratified medicine uses baseline information about a patient’s likely response
to treatment to tailor treatment decisions. This is different from stepped19 or adaptive20 models of care in which tailoring of treatment depends on
the patient’s actual response to previously offered treatment, with a sequence of
interventions (which may differ in intensity, duration, cost, or complexity) being
offered to those who have not responded sufficiently. Our focus here, though, is on
the initial stratification of treatment based on the predicted (rather than actual)
response to treatment.

Why is prognosis research important for stratified medicine?
Prognosis research is a fundamental component of stratified medicine because it
contributes evidence at multiple stages in translation (see fig 1 as an example). We now consider each of these stages
in turn.

Assessing priorities for stratified medicine
Targeting interventions at defined patient strata is likely to be more important
in some disease-treatment combinations than in others, and prognosis research
can help prioritise areas for research. Several questions arise. First, is there
clinically important variation in prognosis across individuals?1 For example, among people with
symptomatic severe aortic stenosis, one year survival is poor and valve
replacement or implementation is the default option. By contrast, among people
with aortic regurgitation, one year survival is better, and so tools to help
decide when and for which patients valve replacement would yield the greatest
benefit, and incur the least harm, would be a substantial advance. Second, is
the intervention in question associated with a substantial risk of harm or cost?
Third, for drug interventions, is there robust evidence of important individual
variation in metabolism or pharmacological effect? For example, it has been
claimed that some individuals have “clinical aspirin resistance” if they sustain
a cardiovascular event despite aspirin prophylaxis. However, because of the lack
of an optimal assay of platelet function and the paucity of high quality
epidemiological data, it is unclear to what extent this observation reflects
true pharmacological resistance to aspirin, non-adherence to medication,21 the expected reduction but not
abolition of cardiovascular risk from aspirin treatment, or some combination of
these factors.

Discovery and candidate approaches to developing new tests
Prognosis research is important to identify which factors to study as potential
predictors of differential treatment response, which might lead to a new
prototype test (left hand of translational pathway in fig 1). Prognostic factors, which were discussed in paper 2 of our
series,3 are characteristics
associated with a particular outcome even in the absence of specific treatment.
Prognostic factors with causal or mechanistically relevant effects are also
potential predictors of differential treatment response. For example, among
people with atrial fibrillation, age influences both response to warfarin and
risk of stroke, and so is a both a prognostic factor3 and a factor that predicts differential treatment
response.

However, most prognostic factors do not also predict differential treatment
response.22 That is, they identify
groups of patients with different absolute outcome risks, but not groups with
different relative risks for a particular treatment. Conversely, a factor that
predicts differential treatment response is not necessarily a prognostic factor.
That is, some factors (such as those that influence the metabolism or
elimination of a specific drug) may influence the response to treatment (that
is, they modify relative risk) without affecting prognosis in the absence of
treatment (that is, they do not change absolute risk). For example, the CYP2C9
and VKORC1 genotypes are associated with differential warfarin response but do
not influence the risk of stroke in the absence of warfarin treatment.23

DNA based, genome-wide association studies (genomics) and mRNA based gene
expression profiling (transcriptomics) of disease affected tissues are beginning
to uncover new and, in some cases, unanticipated disease mechanisms and factors
that potentially predict differential treatment response.

Evaluation in randomised trials
Once a factor potentially predicting differential treatment response has been
identified the next step is to evaluate it, ideally as an a priori primary
objective within a randomised trial of the specific therapy in question. Figure
2 illustrates such a comparison of outcomes
in treated and control groups, separately among factor positive and factor
negative individuals. However, few individual trials are large enough to assess
reliably whether a factor is truly predictive of treatment response as a primary
objective, so evidence may often appear gradually, from secondary analyses of
existing randomised trials and then their meta-analysis. This process was used
for examining whether tamoxifen treatment of breast cancer differed according to
the oestrogen receptor status of the breast cancer.24

Evaluations of factors that may predict differential treatment response become
more pressing when a drug fails in late stage trials after substantial research
investment; there is then intense interest in moving from targeting all people
to identifying those specific patients who may benefit. For example, gefitinib
in advanced non-small cell lung cancer failed to show a survival benefit among
all patients, and this stimulated exploratory analyses in relation to epidermal
growth factor receptor status.14 Even
in trials that do show a positive average effect of a drug, there may still be
some patients who hardly benefit from the drug, and it is clearly important to
identify this subgroup.25 However, it
is notoriously difficult to identify genuine predictors of differential
treatment from single trials, as such investigations are usually exploratory
with high potential for type I and type II errors (see later).

Assessment of tests as a health technology
Even seemingly robust evidence for the existence of a factor that predicts
differential treatment response does not guarantee that it will be effective
when used as a test in clinical practice to inform therapeutic decisions.
Consider the example of pharmacogenetic testing to guide warfarin dosing. Here
the testing, not the drug, is the technology being evaluated. In a high quality
meta-analysis of nine observational studies (2775 patients),26 CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 alleles were
associated with a requirement for a lower warfarin dose and an increased risk of
bleeding. Despite this clear association, which is unlikely to have arisen by
chance, a systematic review of three randomised controlled trials did not
provide evidence in favour of warfarin dosing based on genetic information in
comparison with standard clinical care with respect to bleeding rate or time
spent in the therapeutic range.27

Cost effectiveness evaluations
Decision analytic models are important for the evaluation of the cost
effectiveness of stratified therapeutic strategies.28
29
30 These models require valid estimates
of prognosis under different scenarios, based on treatment with and without
knowledge of the predictor of differential treatment response. Such models are
important for policy makers because they evaluate strategies which are unlikely
to be evaluated within trials. For example, decision analysis comparing
different strategies for assessing HER-2 status to decide on treating breast
cancer with trastuzumab found that fluorescent in situ hybridisation testing for
all patients, with one year of adjuvant treatment with trastuzumab for those who
were positive, was associated with the longest quality adjusted survival, with
an estimated cost per quality adjusted life year gained of €41 500 (£32 600,
$51 200).31
32

Healthcare policy and delivery
Health services research is required to examine variations in the uptake of using
tests to predict differential treatment response,33 the validity of these tests,34 and variations in treatments based on test results.
Prognosis research also examines endpoints in relation to these variations,
allowing, for example, national estimates to be made of the number of endpoints
averted by current levels of testing.35

Once incorporated in clinical practice guidelines4 and usual clinical care, tests that predict differential treatment
response may help define the disease and how it is characterised. This is termed
“back translation.” For example, in breast cancer, HER-2 and oestrogen receptor
status are predictors of differential treatment response, and so their
measurement is now integral to the definition of the disease upon diagnosis.

Premature implementation of stratified medicine approaches into clinical practice
may be harmful if people who might otherwise benefit from treatment are denied
access. For example, carriage of a variant of the KIF6 gene was associated with
a higher risk of coronary heart disease events and a smaller reduction in event
rate from statin treatment in a genetic substudy from a randomised trial.36 It would have been premature to
implement these findings; indeed, a later, larger meta-analysis of case-control
studies of myocardial infarction casts doubt on the role of this variant in
coronary heart disease and prediction of statin response,37 arguing that statins should be used according to
existing guidelines without any genetic testing

Recommendations for improving prognosis research for stratified medicine
Several methodological challenges and current research deficiencies need to be
addressed in this field. Currently we lack a systematic framework for guiding
research on stratified medicine, and standards must be raised. Many of the
recommendations highlighted across the PROGRESS series (see supplementary table on
bmj.com) are relevant. For example, integrated standards of design, analysis, and
reporting should be developed across the stages of discovery, replication, and
evaluation of factors that potentially predict differential treatment response38
39
40
41
42
43 (recommendation 10 in supplementary
table). Here we highlight four key areas, with recommendations for improvement.

False negative findings (type II errors)
There are important problems with statistical analyses, which should be addressed
by having a statistical analysis plan in the protocol and by a greater
appreciation of the potential for type I and II errors that may lead to
inappropriate conclusions (recommendation 13 in supplementary table).

Most randomised trials are not designed with the statistical power to detect a
factor truly predictive of differential treatment effect, should it exist, and
so may wrongly conclude that a particular factor is not useful as a predictive
test when actually it is.44
45 To increase power and reduce the
opportunity for false negatives, we recommend that meta-analyses based on
individual participant data from multiple trials are facilitated (recommendation
17).46 This approach was crucial in
establishing the role of oestrogen receptor status for the targeting of
tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer,24
and researchers can support its greater use by initiating collaborative groups
and data sharing.46 Another cause of
false negative findings is the aforementioned dichotomisation of continuous
factors that may predict treatment response, which reduces power further.
Statistical methods are available to screen a large number of continuous factors
on their original scale and identify their potential interactions with
treatment.47 Identified
interactions should be interpreted as hypothesis generating and replication
sought in other studies, and meta-analyses. Results for all interactions and
subgroups considered should be clearly reported regardless of their significance
(recommendation 15), and guidelines for such reporting need development.

False positive findings (type I errors)
Subgroup analyses can provide valuable, albeit predominately exploratory
information, about factors that potentially predict treatment response if they
are performed in accordance with recommendations and guidelines38
48 (recommendation 13). However,
inappropriate subgroup analysis of trial data can give spurious evidence for
stratified medicine. Firstly, because of the large number of potential factors
to consider, appropriate correction for multiple statistical testing is required
to reduce the risk of false positives arising by chance.45
49 Alternatively, we recommend that
such analyses should be recognised as exploratory and require replication using
new data from related studies and in meta-analysis of individual participant
data (recommendations 17 and 9). 

Secondly, the choice and handling of endpoints can influence interpretation of
evidence about whether a factor predicts treatment response. For example, in a
field synopsis of pharmacogenetic studies, there was evidence of bias in which
positive findings were more likely when examining surrogate markers of treatment
effects rather than the more clinically relevant endpoints such as a disease
complication or death.50


Thirdly, arbitrary or “data dredging” categorisation of continuous factors and
continuous outcomes can easily bias findings toward a significant result,
particularly if analyses are repeated for multiple cut-offs until a
categorisation is found that provides the most significant P value.51 Continuous factors should rather be
analysed on their continuous scale to avoid this. 

Fourthly, as Senn has argued, studies claiming to distinguish responders (say 70%
of people) and non-responders (30%) after a single exposure to a drug are also
consistent with an alternative explanation that 100% of patients respond 70% of
the time, which would indicate the absence of differential response to
treatment.52


Fifthly, a meta-analysis of summary data from trials may also give misleading
positive results, and a meta-analysis of individual participant data is
preferred. For example, fig 3 shows a
meta-analysis of summary data from 10 trials suggesting women experience a
greater and clinically important reduction in blood pressure from hypertension
treatment than men. By contrast, in a meta-analysis of individual participant
data from the same trials this apparent sex-treatment interaction was found to
be small and not clinically important.46
53 The discrepant findings were caused
by study level confounding when looking at aggregated relationships across
trials, rather than investigating patient level relationships within trials
using individual participant data.

Fig 3 Example of spurious finding in meta-analysis of
summary data refuted by meta-analysis of individual participant data:
whether antihypertensive treatment has a greater effect in women than
men (reproduced with permission from Riley et al46
53)

Away from trials, many consider molecular and microarray data are the key to
stratified medicine, but so far the high expectations have not been met, and a
more realistic view is important.3 The
large number of variables collected in a relatively small number of patients
results in severe methodological problems,3 and type I errors are again a particular concern.

Analyses restricted to just individuals testing positive for a factor, or
just individuals receiving treatment
Robust trial designs to identify factors that truly predict differential
treatment response should ideally involve the four groups of patients
illustrated in the lower panel of fig 2 so that
the difference in treatment effect between patients who are positive for the
factor and those who are negative can be estimated (recommendation 22). However,
such a design is often not carried out. 

Increasingly, drug trials are being undertaken exclusively among individuals who
test positive for a potential (but unproved) factor that predicts differential
treatment response (upper panel of fig 4). For
example, a randomised trial of heart rate lowering drug ivabradine failed to
show a benefit in primary outcome of events among people with stable coronary
disease, but subgroup analysis suggested a benefit among those with higher heart
rates.3 The subsequent trial was
confined to people with higher heart rates. 

Fig 4 Commonly used (but suboptimal) study designs in
assessment of a factor that potentially predicts differential treatment
response

Emerging trial designs even propose the integration of drug evaluation with the
discovery and evaluation of novel biomarker signatures in real time.3
54
55 Such studies are sometimes referred
to as enrichment trials because, by selecting people in whom the treatment
effect is hypothesised to be large, they provide a mechanism for reducing the
sample size of a trial. This is only a sensible approach as long as inferences
are restricted to the selected patients in the trial. In particular, such trials
cannot then compare outcomes between patients with positive and negative factor
values, and so cannot assess whether the relative treatment effect (or
differences in absolute risk) are indeed smaller in individuals with negative
values for the factor, let alone the differences in absolute risk.

Of much more concern are observational analyses (either within or outside the
framework of a trial) confined to just those who are treated, as then no
comparison can be made with control patients and thus the treatment effect
cannot be estimated. In this type of approach, to be able to conclude that a
factor truly predicts treatment response, one must assume that the factor does
not influence the outcome of interest in the absence of treatment (lower panel
of fig 4). If the factor is associated with
outcome in both treated and untreated individuals, then it may be a prognostic
factor (as discussed in paper 2 of our series3) but not predictive of treatment response. Thus, the approach is
more correctly interpreted as an evaluation of a prognostic factor among those
who are treated, but this is often not recognised.

Biological reasoning and prioritisation of funding areas
Statistical evidence of an interaction between a particular factor and treatment
response should ideally be explained by biological reasoning and by
understanding the mechanism by which response is modified. For instance, for
drug interventions, clinicians and policy makers are more likely to believe that
a factor truly modifies treatment response if there is a well reasoned
biological mechanism in addition to statistical significance. Indeed, stratified
medicine research may be entirely motivated by such a biological mechanism in
the first place, and funders should prioritise stratified medicine
investigations that have such plausibility. “Biological mechanism” should be
interpreted in a broad sense here, since behavioural and sociocultural factors
may be of equal importance (and have plausible mechanisms for their effects on
health outcomes) to biologically measured factors and pathways.

There should be rigorous evaluation of the impact of “personalised medicine”
approaches on health outcomes, including comparisons of approaches based on
targeting intervention (with prognostic models or factors that predict
differential treatment response) and “all comer” approaches (recommendation 23
in supplementary table). In certain situations subgroups with weaker treatment
effects on relative risk may have the greater potential benefit in terms of
absolute risk. Uncertainty about treatment effects is usually greater in low
risk groups, and adequately powered prognosis research is required.

Funders and policy makers should also recognise that a treatment may benefit all
patients even when there is a factor that predicts treatment response. In this
situation, patients testing negative for the factor will still benefit from the
treatment, and so treatment policies should not automatically exclude such
patients.

Industry interest (drug, device, biomarker, information technology) in prognosis
research including tests for stratified medicine (sometimes called “companion
diagnostics”), drug safety, outcomes research and real world evidence is
growing. Appropriate models of industry and publicly funded prognosis research
should be developed which allow unbiased inference. (recommendation 24 in
supplementary table). 

Conclusions
In this article we have illustrated and described how prognosis research contributes
important evidence in discovering, developing, evaluating, and implementing new
approaches in stratified medicine, especially in identifying factors that truly
predict differential treatment response. Such research faces many challenges, and
often current study designs and statistical analyses are substandard. We have
provided recommendations with the aim of accelerating the potential of prognosis
research in this context, and these build on others presented throughout our
PROGRESS series to improve the care, treatment, and clinical outcomes of individual
patients.

Summary points
The PROGRESS series (www.progress-partnership.org) sets out a framework
of four interlinked prognosis research themes and provides examples
from several disease fields to show why evidence from prognosis
research is crucial to inform all points in the translation of
biomedical and health related research into better patient outcomes.
Recommendations are made in each of the four papers to improve
current research standards

What is prognosis research? Prognosis research seeks to understand
and improve future outcomes in people with a given disease or health
condition. However, there is increasing evidence that prognosis
research standards need to be improved

Why is prognosis research important? More people now live with
disease and conditions that impair health than at any other time in
history; prognosis research provides crucial evidence for
translating findings from the laboratory to humans, and from
clinical research to clinical practice

Stratified medicine involves tailoring therapeutic decisions for
specific, often biologically distinct, individuals, the aim being to
maximise benefit and reduce harm from treatment, or to rescue a
treatment that fails to show overall benefit in unselected patients
but does benefit specific patients

Stratified medicine can use absolute risks. When a treatment effect
measured on a relative scale (such as relative risk) is the same for
all patients, those with the highest absolute risk will derive the
largest absolute benefit from the treatment

When the relative treatment effect is inconsistent across patients,
stratified medicine can use tests which measure factors (such as
biomarker levels or genotypes) that predict individual treatment
response. However, the clinical use of such tests is currently
small, and rigorous evidence of impact is sometimes lacking, with
flaws in study design, analysis, and reporting leading to
potentially spurious evidence either for or against a factor

Research to identify factors that truly predict treatment effect
could be improved by:

Labelling exploratory analyses as exploratory, to minimise
false positive findings

Increasing statistical power by designing trials with
adequate sample sizes, facilitating collaborations across
research groups and meta-analyses of individual participant
data from multiple trials, and by analysing continuous
factors on their original scale

Estimating, for a truly binary factor, the difference in
relative treatment effect between positive and negative
groups within randomised trials that include both factor
positive and factor negative patients in both control and
treatment groups

Considering biological or other mechanisms for modification
of treatment response, either to motivate new research or to
support statistical evidence that a factor interacts with
treatment

Prognosis research in general should play a more central role in
stratified medicine research: from identifying conditions with
clinically important differences in absolute risk of outcome across
patients, to identifying factors that predict individual treatment
response, and to examining the cost and impact of implementing
stratified medicine approaches in practice

The other papers in the series are:

PROGRESS 1: BMJ 2013, doi:10.1136/bmj.e5595

PROGRESS 2: PLoS Med 2013, doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001380

PROGRESS 3: PLoS Med 2013, doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001381

We thank John Scadding, emeritus dean at the Royal Society of Medicine for
his support of the PROGRESS Group, contributions to discussions, and helpful
comments on drafts of the manuscripts. We thank Ruzan Udumyan for assistance
in drawing figures and preparing manuscripts. We thank Virginia Barbour and
Trish Groves for contributing to the workshops and their support for the
series. We thank Lucy Chappell (King’s College London) for her valuable help
as guest editor on the PROGRESS series.

Contributors: HH, RDR, SS, and DGA initiated the PROGRESS Group, organised
the three workshops, coordinated the writing groups, and were the scientific
writing editors for all the papers in the PROGRESS series. HH, RDR, and DGA
are the guarantors for this paper. 

All members of PROGRESS Group contributed through workshops and discussions
to the development of the article series. AH wrote the first version, and
the other authors contributed to the conception of the paper and to revising
earlier versions, and approved the final version. RDR revised the document
in light of coauthor comments and restructured it to align with the other
PROGRESS papers. All members of PROGRESS Group contributed through workshops
and discussions to the development of the article series. 

Members of the PROGRESS Group: Keith Abrams (UK), Doug Altman (UK), Andrew
Briggs (UK), Nils Brunner (Denmark), Peter Croft (UK), Jill Hayden (Canada),
Aroon D Hingorani (UK), Harry Hemingway (UK), Panayiotis Kyzas (UK), Núria
Malats (Spain), Karel Moons (Netherlands), George Peat (UK), Pablo Perel
(UK), Richard Riley (UK), Ian Roberts (UK), Willi Sauerbrei (Germany), Sara
Schroter (UK), Ewout Steyerberg (Netherlands), Adam Timmis (UK), Daniëlle
van der Windt (UK).

Funding: This series had no explicit funding, but some of the authors were
supported by research grants: PROGRESS is supported by a Partnership grant
from the Medical Research Council (G0902393), involving University College
London (HH, AH), Oxford University (DGA), Birmingham University (RDR),
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (I Roberts, P Perel), Keele
University (P Croft, DAvdW), and Queen Mary University London (A Timmis).
DGA is supported by a programme grant from Cancer Research UK (C5529). HH is
supported by grants from the UK National Institute for Health Research
(RP-PG-0407-10314) and the Wellcome Trust (086091/Z/08/Z). The work of HH
and ADH is supported by the Health eResearch Centre Network (HERC-UK),
funded by the Medical Research Council in partnership with Arthritis
Research UK, the British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, the Economic
and Social Research Council, the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council, the National Institute of Health Research, the National Institute
for Social Care and Health Research (Welsh Assembly Government), the Chief
Scientist Office (Scottish Government Health Directorates) and the Wellcome
Trust (the views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health). EWS
was supported by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (grant
9120.8004) and the Center for Translational Molecular Medicine (PCMM
project, grant 03O-203). RDR is supported by the MRC Midlands Hub for Trials
Methodology Research (MRC Grant G0800808). DAvdW is supported by the
Arthritis Research UK Centre of Excellence in Primary Care.

Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure
form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from
the corresponding author) and declare: no support from any organisation for
the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organisations that
might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years, no
other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the
submitted work. SS is a full time employee of the BMJ Group but is not
involved in deciding which manuscripts are accepted for publication.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. In
order to disseminate the output widely, these papers are being published
jointly between BMJ (PROGRESS papers 1 and 4) and
PLoS Medicine (PROGRESS papers 2 and 3). As one of the
authors is a member of staff at BMJ Group, the handling editor at the BMJ
for the manuscripts was an external guest editor, Lucy Chappell (King’s
College London).

Cite this as: BMJ 2012;345:e5793
==== Refs
1 Hemingway H, Croft P, Perel P, Hayden JA, Abrams
K, Timmis A, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 1: a framework for
researching clinical outcomes.
BMJ 2013 ;346 :e5595 
2 Hudis CA. Trastuzumab—mechanism of action and use
in clinical practice. N Engl J
Med 2007 ;357 :39 -51.17611206 
3 Riley RD, Hayden JA, Steyerberg EW, Moons KGM,
Abrams K, Kyzas PA, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 2: Prognostic
factor research. PLoS Med 2013 , doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001380
4 Wolff AC, Hammond ME, Schwartz JN, Hagerty KL,
Allred DC, Cote RJ, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology/College of
American Pathologists guideline recommendations for human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 testing in breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 2007 ;25 :118 -45.17159189 
5 Slamon DJ, Clark GM, Wong SG, Levin WJ, Ullrich A,
McGuire WL. Human breast cancer: correlation of relapse and survival with
amplification of the HER-2/neu oncogene.
Science 1987 ;235 :177 -82.3798106 
6 Hamburg MA, Collins FS. The path to personalized
medicine. N Engl J
Med 2010 ;363 :301 -4.20551152 
7 House of Lords Science and Technology Committee.
Genomic medicine. Volume II: evidence . Stationery Office,
2009 
www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200809/ldselect/ldsctech/107/107ii.pdf
8 Trusheim MR, Berndt ER, Douglas FL. Stratified
medicine: strategic and economic implications of combining drugs and clinical
biomarkers. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2007 ;6 :287 -93.17380152 
9 Rothwell PM, Mehta Z, Howard SC, Gutnikov SA,
Warlow CP. Treating individuals 3: from subgroups to individuals: general
principles and the example of carotid endarterectomy.
Lancet 2005 ;365 :256 -65.15652609 
10 Steyerberg EW, Moons KGM, van der Windt DA, Hayden
JA, Perel P, Schroter S, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 3:
prognostic model research. PLoS Med 2013 ,
doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001381
11 Hingorani AD, Hemingway H. How should we balance
individual and population benefits of statins for preventing cardiovascular
disease?
BMJ 2011 ;342 :c6244 
12 Hill JC, Whitehurst DG, Lewis M, Bryan S, Dunn KM,
Foster NE, et al. Comparison of stratified primary care management for low back
pain with current best practice (STarT Back): a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2011 ;378 :1560 -71.21963002 
13 Capdeville R, Buchdunger E, Zimmermann J, Matter
A. Glivec (STI571, imatinib), a rationally developed, targeted anticancer drug.
Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2002 ;1 :493 -502.12120256 
14 Mok TS, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Yang CH, Chu DT,
Saijo N, et al. Gefitinib or carboplatin-paclitaxel in pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
N Engl J
Med 2009 ;361 :947 -57.19692680 
15 Mallal S, Nolan D, Witt C, Masel G, Martin AM,
Moore C, et al. Association between presence of HLA-B*5701, HLA-DR7, and HLA-DQ3
and hypersensitivity to HIV-1 reverse-transcriptase inhibitor abacavir.
Lancet 2002 ;359 :727 -32.11888582 
16 Flynn MR, Barrett C, Cosio FG, Gitt AK, Wallentin
L, Kearney P, et al. The Cardiology Audit and Registration Data Standards
(CARDS), European data standards for clinical cardiology practice. Eur
Heart
J 2005 ;26 :308 -13.15618029 
17 Brennan GP, Fritz JM, Hunter SJ, Thackeray A,
Delitto A, Erhard RE. Identifying subgroups of patients with acute/subacute
“nonspecific” low back pain: results of a randomized clinical trial.
Spine 2006 ;31 :623 -31.16540864 
18 Childs JD, Fritz JM, Flynn TW, Irrgang JJ, Johnson
KK, Majkowski GR, et al. A clinical prediction rule to identify patients with
low back pain most likely to benefit from spinal manipulation: a validation
study. Ann Intern
Med 2004 ;141 :920 -8.15611489 
19 Von KM, Moore JC. Stepped care for back pain:
activating approaches for primary care. Ann Intern
Med 2001 ;134 :911 -7.11346328 
20 Almirall D, Compton SN, Gunlicks-Stoessel M, Duan
N, Murphy SA. Designing a pilot sequential multiple assignment randomized trial
for developing an adaptive treatment strategy. Stat
Med 2012 ;31 :1887 -902.22438190 
21 Hankey GJ, Eikelboom JW. Aspirin resistance.
Lancet 2006 ;367 :606 -17.16488805 
22 Clark GM. Prognostic factors versus predictive
factors: examples from a clinical trial of erlotinib. Mol
Oncol 2008 ;1 :406 -12.19383314 
23 Klein TE, Altman RB, Eriksson N, Gage BF, Kimmel
SE, Lee MT, et al. Estimation of the warfarin dose with clinical and
pharmacogenetic data. N Engl J
Med 2009 ;360 :753 -64.19228618 
24 Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative
Group. Tamoxifen for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials.
Lancet 1998 ;351 :1451 -67.9605801 
25 Royston P, Sauerbrei W, Ritchie A. Is treatment
with interferon-alpha effective in all patients with metastatic renal carcinoma?
A new approach to the investigation of interactions. Br J
Cancer 2004 ;90 :794 -9.14970855 
26 Sanderson S, Emery J, Higgins J. CYP2C9 gene
variants, drug dose, and bleeding risk in warfarin-treated patients: a HuGEnet
systematic review and meta-analysis. Genet
Med 2005 ;7 :97 -104.15714076 
27 Kangelaris KN, Bent S, Nussbaum RL, Garcia DA,
Tice JA. Genetic testing before anticoagulation? A systematic review of
pharmacogenetic dosing of warfarin. J Gen Intern
Med 2009 ;24 :656 -64.19306050 
28 Henderson R, Keiding N. Individual survival time
prediction using statistical models. J Med
Ethics 2005 ;31 :703 -6.16319233 
29 Hlatky MA, Greenland P, Arnett DK, Ballantyne CM,
Criqui MH, Elkind MSV, et al. Criteria for evaluation of novel markers of
cardiovascular risk: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation 2009 ;119 :2408 -16.19364974 
30 Moons KG. Criteria for scientific evaluation of
novel markers: a perspective. Clin
Chem 2010 ;56 :537 -41.20133890 
31 Lidgren M, Jonsson B, Rehnberg C, Willking N,
Bergh J. Cost-effectiveness of HER2 testing and 1-year adjuvant trastuzumab
therapy for early breast cancer. Ann
Oncol 2008 ;19 :487 -95.18065409 
32 Williams AH, Cookson RA. Equity-efficiency
trade-offs in health technology assessment. Int J Technol Assess Health
Care 2006 ;22 :1 -9.16673674 
33 Woelderink A, Ibarreta D, Hopkins MM,
Rodriguez-Cerezo E. The current clinical practice of pharmacogenetic testing in
Europe: TPMT and HER2 as case studies. Pharmacogenomics
J 2006 ;6 :3 -7.16314885 
34 Nakhleh RE, Grimm EE, Idowu MO, Souers RJ,
Fitzgibbons PL. Laboratory compliance with the American Society of Clinical
Oncology/College of American Pathologists guidelines for human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 testing: a College of American Pathologists survey of 757
laboratories. Arch Pathol Lab
Med 2010 ;134 :728 -34.20441503 
35 Danese MD, Lalla D, Brammer M, Doan Q, Knopf K.
Estimating recurrences prevented from using trastuzumab in HER-2/neu-positive
adjuvant breast cancer in the United States.
Cancer 2010  15;116:5575-83.
36 Li Y, Iakoubova OA, Shiffman D, Devlin JJ,
Forrester JS, Superko HR. KIF6 polymorphism as a predictor of risk of coronary
events and of clinical event reduction by statin therapy. Am J
Cardiol 2010 ;106 :994 -8.20854963 
37 Assimes TL, Holm H, Kathiresan S, Reilly MP,
Thorleifsson G, Voight BF, et al. Lack of association between the Trp719Arg
polymorphism in kinesin-like protein-6 and coronary artery disease in 19
case-control studies. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2010 ;56 :1552 -63.20933357 
38 Fayers PM, King MT. How to guarantee finding a
statistically significant difference: the use and abuse of subgroup analyses.
Qual Life
Res 2009 ;18 :527 -30.19343540 
39 Guillemin F. Primer: the fallacy of subgroup
analysis. Nat Clin Pract
Rheumatol 2007 ;3 :407 -13.17599075 
40 Sauerbrei W, Royston P, Binder H. Selection of
important variables and determination of functional form for continuous
predictors in multivariable model building. Stat
Med 2007 ;26 :5512 -28.18058845 
41 Sun X, Briel M, Walter SD, Guyatt GH. Is a
subgroup effect believable? Updating criteria to evaluate the credibility of
subgroup analyses.
BMJ 2010 ;340 :c117 20354011 
42 Willett WC. The search for truth must go beyond
statistics.
Epidemiology 2008 ;19 :655 -6.18703930 
43 Sauerbrei W, Royston P. Modelling to extract more
information from clinical trials data: on some roles for the bootstrap.
Stat
Med 2007 ;26 :4989 -5001.17607706 
44 Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade M, Cook D. When to believe
a subgroup analysis. In: Users’ guides to the medical literature: a
manual for evidence-based clinical practice . 2nd ed. AMA Press,
2008 
45 Yusuf S, Wittes J, Probstfield J, Tyroler HA.
Analysis and interpretation of treatment effects in subgroups of patients in
randomized clinical trials.
JAMA 1991 ;266 :93 -8.2046134 
46 Riley RD, Lambert PC, Abo-Zaid G. Meta-analysis of
individual participant data: rationale, conduct, and reporting.
BMJ 2010 ;340 :c221 20139215 
47 Royston P, Sauerbrei W. A new approach to
modelling interactions between treatment and continuous covariates in clinical
trials by using fractional polynomials. Stat
Med 2004 ;23 :2509 -25.15287081 
48 Assmann SF, Pocock SJ, Enos LE, Kasten LE.
Subgroup analysis and other (mis)uses of baseline data in clinical trials.
Lancet 2000 ;355 :1064 -9.10744093 
49 Altman DG, Bland JM. Interaction revisited: the
difference between two estimates.
BMJ 2003 ;326 :219 12543843 
50 Holmes MV, Shah T, Vickery C, Smeeth L, Hingorani
AD, Casas JP. Fulfilling the promise of personalized medicine? Systematic review
and field synopsis of pharmacogenetic studies. PLoS
One 2009 ;4 :e7960 19956635 
51 Royston P, Altman DG, Sauerbrei W. Dichotomizing
continuous predictors in multiple regression: a bad idea. Stat
Med 2006 ;25 :127 -41.16217841 
52 Senn S. Individual response to treatment: is it a
valid assumption?
BMJ 2004 ;329 :966 -8.15499115 
53 Riley RD, Lambert PC, Staessen JA, Wang J,
Gueyffier F, Thijs L, et al. Meta-analysis of continuous outcomes combining
individual patient data and aggregate data. Stat
Med 2008 ;27 :1870 -93.18069721 
54 Mandrekar JN, Mandrekar SJ. Case-control study
design: what, when, and why? J Thorac
Oncol 2008 ;3 :1371 -2.19057257 
55 Mandrekar SJ, Sargent DJ. Predictive biomarker
validation in practice: lessons from real trials. Clin
Trials 2010 ;7 :567 -73.20392785
