
==== Front
BMJBMJbmjBMJ : British Medical Journal0959-81381756-1833BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. hemh00418510.1136/bmj.e5595Research Methods & ReportingPrognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 1: A framework for researching
clinical outcomes Hemingway Harry professor of clinical epidemiology1Croft Peter professor of epidemiology2Perel Pablo clinical senior lecturer3Hayden Jill A assistant professor4Abrams Keith professor of medical statistics5Timmis Adam professor of clinical cardiology6Briggs Andrew Lindsay chair in health policy & economic evaluation7Udumyan Ruzan research assistant1Moons Karel G M professor of clinical epidemiology8Steyerberg Ewout W professor of medical decision making9Roberts Ian professor of epidemiology and public health3Schroter Sara senior researcher10Altman Douglas G professor of statistics in medicine11Riley Richard D senior lecturer in medical statistics12for the PROGRESS Group1 Department of Epidemiology and Public Health,
University College London, London WC1E 7HB, UK2 Arthritis Research UK Primary Care Centre, Keele
University, Keele ST5 5BG, UK3 London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine,
London WC1E 7HT4 Department of Community Health and Epidemiology,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 1V75 Centre for Biostatistics & Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Leicester,
Leicester LE1 7RH, UK6 London Chest Hospital, London E2 9JX7 Health Economics & Health Technology Assessment,
Centre for Population & Health Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12
8RZ, UK8 Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care,
UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands9 Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam,
Netherlands10 BMJ, BMA House, London WC1H 9JR11 Centre for Statistics in Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX2 6UD, UK12 School of Health and Population Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UKCorrespondence to: H Hemingway
h.hemingway@ucl.ac.uk2013 2013 5 2 2013 346 e559529 7 2012 © Hemingway et al 20132013Hemingway et alThis is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly
cited, the use is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the
license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Understanding and improving the prognosis of a disease or health condition is a
priority in clinical research and practice. In this article, the authors
introduce a framework of four interrelated themes in prognosis research,
describe the importance of the first of these themes (understanding future
outcomes in relation to current diagnostic and treatment practices), and
introduce recommendations for the field of prognosis research

Web Extra Extra material, as supplied by the author
Supplementary figure: Basic elements of prognosis research

Click here for additional data file.

 Supplementary table 1: Recommendations of PROGRESS (PROGnosis RESearch
Strategy)

Click here for additional data file.

 Supplementary table 2: Glossary of terms used in the PROGRESS series

Click here for additional data file.
==== Body
In clinical medicine, the term prognosis refers to the risk of future health outcomes in
people with a given disease or health condition. Prognosis research is thus the
investigation of the relations between future outcomes (endpoints) among people with a
given baseline health state (startpoint) in order to improve health (see supplementary
figure on bmj.com). The study of prognosis has never been more important, as globally
more people are living with one or more disease or health impairing condition than at
any previous time.1 For this reason, governments
across the world are increasing their interest in the outcomes of healthcare currently
provided for people with disease.2 Similarly,
research funders and researchers are increasingly focused on translating new
interventions and technologies from the laboratory to clinical practice and then
healthcare policy in order to establish and implement new standards of high quality care
and improve patient outcomes.

Prognosis research findings should thus be integral to clinical decision making,
healthcare policy, and discovering and evaluating new approaches to patient management.
However, there is a concerning gap between the potential and actual impact of prognosis
research on health. Prognosis research studies too often fall a long way short of the
high standards required in other fields, such as therapeutic trials and genetic
epidemiology.

In the PROGnosis RESearch Strategy (PROGRESS) series (www.progress-partnership.org), we propose a framework
of four distinct but inter-related prognosis research themes:

(1) The course of health related conditions in the context of the nature and
quality of current care (fundamental prognosis research)

(2) Specific factors (such as biomarkers) that are associated with prognosis
(prognostic factor research)3

(3) The development, validation, and impact of statistical models that predict
individual risk of a future outcome (prognostic model research)4

(4) The use of prognostic information to help tailor treatment decisions to an
individual or group of individuals with similar characteristics (stratified
medicine research).5

Figure 1 illustrates these four prognosis research areas
for women with breast cancer (startpoint) and the endpoint of death or disease-free
survival. Part (a) shows country variations in age adjusted, five year survival
(fundamental prognosis research)6; part (b)
shows survival curves according to the value of extracellular domain of human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2 ECD), which is identified to be prognostic of disease
outcome (prognostic factor research)7; part (c)
shows the use of multiple clinical variables within a statistical model to estimate
individual risk of a particular endpoint (prognostic model research)8; and part (d) shows why a positive oestrogen
receptor status is used to identify those who will benefit from tamoxifen therapy
(stratified medicine research).9

Fig 1 Framework of four different types of prognosis research
question, illustrated for breast cancer. a) Fundamental prognosis research:
variations between countries in age adjusted, five year survival (with
permission from Cancer Research UK6). b)
Prognostic factor research: survival curves showing that patients with
“positive” values (>8.9 ng/mL) of the extracellular domain of human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2 ECD) have a worse survival than those with
negative values (≤8.9 ng/mL), and thus HER ECD is a potential prognostic factor
(from Tsai et al7). c) Prognostic model
research: use of multiple clinical variables in a model to estimate risk of
endpoint, and then combined with evidence of treatment effectiveness to inform
clinical decisions (ER=oestrogen receptor) (from Adjuvant! Online8). d) Stratified medicine research:
predictors of differential treatment response identified in randomised trials,
showing that the benefit of tamoxifen is confined to those with positive
oestrogen receptor (ER) status (based on data from Early Breast Cancer Trialists
Collaborative Group9)

The overarching aim of the PROGRESS series is to explain how each of these four prognosis
research themes provides important evidence that can be used at multiple (translational)
pathways toward improving clinical outcomes—from the discovery of new interventions,
through to their evaluation and implementation in the clinical management of individual
patients, and to examining the impact of interventions and healthcare policies on
patient outcomes. This contrasts with previous reviews of prognosis research which
consider impact at one end of the translational spectrum (such as clinical decision
making) or on just one type of prognosis question (such as prognostic models10). Whereas previous reviews focus on one
specific disease area (such as cancer),11
12 we include examples from cancer,
cardiovascular disease, musculoskeletal disorders, trauma, and other conditions. Our
series describes the current challenges and opportunities in the field and makes
recommendations for necessary improvements to move toward a clearer map for prognosis
research that ultimately improves patient outcomes (summarised in supplementary table 1
on bmj.com).

An important place to start is with research that aims to examine the outcomes of a
disease or health condition in the context of current clinical practice, and this we
term fundamental prognosis research. In this first article we consider what this
entails, explain its importance in pathways toward improving patient outcomes, and
outline a set of recommendations with the aim of improving the quality and impact across
all of the inter-related themes in prognosis research and which will be expanded in the
other articles in our series.

What is fundamental prognosis research?
Before carrying out research into novel prognostic factors, prognostic models, or
stratified medicine it is necessary to carry out research describing and explaining
future outcomes in people with a disease or health condition in relation to current
diagnostic and treatment practices. There is a close relation between the questions
“What is the prognosis of people with this condition?” and “What are the outcomes of
the care which people receive for this condition?” In order to improve the quality
of healthcare, evidence is required on how the specific patterns of care received
(such as investigation, treatment, support), and their variations (such as underuse,
overuse, misuse) have an impact on future endpoints.13 Such research has a broad remit. It spans, for example,
investigations into societal influences (inequitable variations in care and outcome
among older people, women, the socially disadvantaged, and ethnic minorities),
patient safety,14
15 unanticipated harms and benefits from
treatments, and screening research. Prognosis in the absence of care—which is
sometimes termed natural history—is an important parameter for judging the potential
impact of screening for asymptomatic disease (such as mammography for breast
cancer), as well as for case detection of symptomatic undiagnosed or unpresented
conditions such as back pain or angina.16
17

These relations may be expressed as an absolute risk (or rate) of one or more type of
endpoint among groups of people who share demographic and clinical characteristics;
some refer to this as an average prognosis in a particular group of interest, or as
a baseline risk. Here the research provides initial answers to the question “What is
the prognosis of people with a given disease?” For example, on average about 15% of
people aged 65 years or older, admitted in 2006 in the US died within 30 days of
admission to hospital with a heart attack compared with an average of 19% in
1995.18 Such a change in the average
mortality rate is illustrated in figure 2. This
shows the decreasing prognostic burden of heart attack and motivates inquiry into
new approaches to understand and reduce this risk further. This clinical scenario
also exemplifies that “the prognosis” of a disease or condition is a somewhat
misleading expression: what is observed is prognosis of people in particular
clinical contexts, defined by current clinical approaches in diagnosing,
characterising, and managing patients with a symptom or disease.

Fig 2 Example of use of fundamental prognosis research to
examine variations in outcomes from medical care: inter-hospital variation
in mortality per 100 population within 30 days of admission with acute
myocardial infarction (created using fictional data for illustration
purposes, but based on the findings of Krumholz et al18)

Such prognosis research is also concerned with describing and understanding the
variations around the average course.19
20 These variations may occur between
individual patients or between patients clustered, for example, within surgeons,
hospitals, or regions. The acute myocardial infarction example above demonstrates
striking variations between hospitals in prognosis, and similar variations are seen
in traumatic brain injury and other conditions.18
21 Indeed, for most hospitals the national
average is a poor guide to the mortality of their patients (fig 2).

Stephen J Gould, the evolutionary biologist, having survived 20 years after being
told the median survival of his abdominal mesothelioma was eight months, famously
remarked, “the median isn’t the message.”22
Describing and explaining the sources of variability in prognosis is a theme
throughout our PROGRESS framework.3
4
5 Fundamental prognosis research may help
explain Gould’s long survival in terms of the demographic and clinical context (for
example, his high educational status and the quality of care received), whereas
research into emerging prognostic factors may examine psychological, behavioural, or
biomarker factors associated with improved outcome (see paper 2 in our series3), or the extent to which his survival was
predictable from statistical models of individual risk prediction (paper 3 in our
series4), or whether particular
treatments had a larger beneficial effect for him than for others (paper 4 in our
series5).

Importance of fundamental prognosis research in the pathways toward improved
health outcomes
Healthcare professionals, people with a disease or health condition, funders, and
policy makers require valid, reliable evidence about the outcomes of diseases and
health conditions in order to make decisions. Here we review the potential impact of
such evidence across translational pathways in healthcare, starting from the
applied, healthcare delivery end (far right of pathways schema shown at bottom of
figs 2, 3, and
4) and working back to discovery and new
approaches (far left of schema).

Importance for public health policy
Public health policy makers need estimates of average prognosis to model the
population burden of diseases and assess the relative contribution of healthcare
delivery among those with disease (secondary prevention) and without disease
(primary prevention). For example, the public health objective of reducing
overall coronary heart disease mortality (a conflation of incidence of non-fatal
coronary disease and subsequent death) has been helped by modelling the impact
of population interventions aimed at early detection and primary and secondary
prevention.23
24
25 Such models use an average prognosis
of heart attack survival from the date of diagnosis among age and sex strata to
attribute quality adjusted life years (and health service costs of managing the
disease) which would be saved with successful prevention.

By contrast with the improvements over time in the prognosis of coronary disease,
for people with low back pain there is little evidence that the average
prognosis (based on symptom relief 26
27) has changed over the past 20 years,
nor does it differ between countries with different healthcare systems.28 This suggests that healthcare itself
is not a major influence on average symptomatic outcome in people with back
pain. However, when considering the outcome of sickness absence, there are
dramatic variations over time and between countries—suggesting the importance of
the broader public health context of working patterns and benefit payments for
chronic illness.29

Importance for comparative effectiveness and health services research
Insights into health and healthcare policy may come from comparing the prognosis
of specific conditions over time and place in order to assess the comparative
effectiveness of systems of care.30
31 For example, figure 1 shows that the five year survival from breast
cancer in 2000-03 varies widely from country to country (from about 70% in the
Czech Republic to 90% in Iceland). The UK seems to have worse cancer survival
than most other European countries,32
and the latter have worse survival for some cancers than the US. Such
international comparisons of average prognosis provide a motivation for
researchers to uncover explanations and for healthcare policy makers to improve
the quality of care and deliver better health outcomes.2 Policy makers seeking to improve national cancer
outcomes may consider a range of interventions, including: early detection (such
as mammography screening), population-wide guidance (such as encouraging self
examination),33
34 centralisation of services, and
systematic implementation of cost effective therapies. Ecological comparisons of
country-level factors (such as smoking prevalence or number of specialists per
capita population) can be related to outcomes. Such research may generate
hypotheses for prognostic factor research (see paper 2 in our series3) as well as helping to formulate service
and policy development.

Fundamental prognosis research is vital in addressing the “second gap” in
translation,35 in which evidence
from randomised trials of effective treatments may fail to be implemented in
usual clinical practice (far right of translational pathway toward improved
clinical outcomes). For example, the between hospital variations in outcome from
acute myocardial infarction (fig 2) may, in
part, stem from differing use of evidence based therapies. These findings have
profound implications for healthcare policy. It demonstrates a “normal
distribution” of mortality between hospitals; over time the whole distribution
of hospital mortality improves and shifts to the left and the variation between
hospitals in outcomes narrows. The policy implication is that improvements in
the quality of care in the population of all hospitals may have contributed to
the observed shift in the average prognosis. Thus the evidence did not support a
contrasting policy alternative of focusing on the identification of, and
remedial action in, outlying poor performers.36 Here prognosis research is contributing evidence about health
services and is managing knowledge generated from electronic health records.
Such evidence35 informs policy choices
which are themselves highly unlikely to be subjected to randomised trials.37

Importance for health technology assessment of imaging and other
tests
A key target for translational research is the development of new clinical
imaging and molecular markers which may identify patient phenotypes in such a
way as to lead to improved outcomes. Such new technologies may change the
spectrum of diagnosed disease, and the question is whether prognosis is the same
as with the use of standard tests and whether the balance of benefit and harm of
treatment remains the same. For example, for decades exercise
electrocardiography has been used in the characterisation of patients with
stable chest pain, and recent guidelines recommend the use of an emerging
technology, non-invasive computed tomographic coronary angiography, in some
patients.38 Since event powered
randomised trials of imaging remain rare, fundamental prognosis research
provides an important method of health technology assessment.39

Importance for trials and decision models
Estimates of average prognosis are also crucial for the rationale, design,
interpretation, and impact modelling of trials of an intervention to improve
prognosis. For example, prognosis research among people with angina shows that
50% of people with existing therapies have recurrent or persistent
symptoms,40 suggesting the need for
trials of new interventions. Reliable estimates of prognosis inform the
estimates of likely accrual of endpoints in the trial arms (such as expected
proportion experiencing an event by a particular time), and hence facilitate
statistical sample size calculations. They also contribute to the interpretation
in terms of generalisability of clinical trial results, as one can compare the
average prognosis of patients in the trial without treatment with the average
prognosis in particular populations.

Importantly, in order to translate relative treatment effects (such as relative
risks or hazard ratios) back to the absolute scale, one needs to know the
average prognosis (baseline risk) in the untreated group. One can then talk in
terms of the reduction in probability of a poor outcome (risk difference), which
leads to clinically informative measures such as the number needed to treat in
order to save one patient from a particular poor outcome. Absolute effects are
used within decision models and cost effectiveness analyses, which are highly
influential to decision makers such as the National Institute of Health and
Clinical Excellence (NICE). Such models combine parameters of average prognosis
along with estimates of treatment effects and costs. Conclusions from these
models are often particularly sensitive to the accuracy of the data on average
prognosis among those without the specific treatment of interest.

Importance for new approaches, mechanisms, and targets for trials
Fundamental prognosis research may provide insights beyond evaluating the status
quo of clinical care. Estimating the prospective associations between two
diseases has led to startling discoveries that have stimulated the development
of new interventions and new clinical trials that have ultimately changed
clinical practice. For example, few foresaw that a prognostic consequence of
Helicobacter pylori infection was peptic ulcer before the
Nobel prize winning work that established the link and subsequent antibiotic
trials.41 Importantly, the outcomes
of uncommon conditions may give insights into disease mechanisms of common
conditions. For example, the increased risk of coronary outcomes among people
with familial hypercholesterolaemia focused interest on the low density
lipoprotein cholesterol pathways which are important in coronary disease
experienced by people without this genetic disorder and contributed to the
development of lipid lowering therapy.

Taking a broad view of prognostic outcomes may generate new knowledge at the
start of translational pathways with (as yet) unknown implications for
developing new interventions. Consider the example of following up people with
Parkinson’s disease. The risk of cancer is not an endpoint that would
conventionally be considered. However, a meta-analysis found that the risk of
cancer was significantly reduced compared with people without Parkinson’s
disease (fig 3).42 This raises the question whether specific
characteristics of Parkinson’s disease that explain this apparent protective
effect can be identified, and whether this might lead to new intervention
targets. There are probably many prognostic associations between two or more
diseases that have yet to be uncovered. Some have proposed that approaches using
all available clinical data (so called phenome-wide scans), agnostic to any
prior theories about mechanism, might identify new associations between
conditions.43

Fig 3 Example of use of fundamental prognosis research to
discover new associations between diseases: cancer among non-smoking
people with Parkinson’s disease (drawn using data from Bajaj et al42). Path element adapted from
chart 7.1 in the Cooksey report (2006) http://bit.ly/Ro27rL (made available
for use through the Open Government License)

Importance for overcoming the limitations of diagnosis
The understanding of future outcome risk (prognosis) may be a more useful way of
formulating clinical problems than pursuing diagnosis for several reasons.
First, subjectively reported illness such as mental health problems and pain
syndromes is often managed more with prognostic than diagnostic labels.44 For example, a physician may
reasonably say to a person presenting with back pain, “I do not know what is
wrong, but I do know that this is the sort of back pain that is very likely to
get better quickly.” Evidence from prognosis research has helped to redefine low
back pain. Spinal radiography and magnetic resonance imaging contribute little
to understanding the average prognosis of most back pain,16
45 but the duration of symptoms at
presentation in primary care is strongly related to outcome. Figure 4 shows that the chance of reduced disability at
one year is about 70% in those with a shorter duration (<3 years) of symptoms
at presentation versus 40% in those with a longer duration.26
29
46 Clinical practice guideline
recommendations use symptom duration to guide management decisions.47 Symptom duration is associated with
clinical outcome and is thus a prognostic factor (see paper 2 in our series3), which has resulted in it being a
standard component of the clinical evaluation of back pain.

Fig 4 Example of use of fundamental prognosis research to
define clinically relevant subgroups: duration of low back pain at
presentation (<3 or ≥3 years) and the time to improvement of
disability disease (drawn using data from Dunn et al46). Path element adapted from
chart 7.1 in the Cooksey report (2006) http://bit.ly/Ro27rL (made available
for use through the Open Government License)

Second, fundamental prognosis research can take a holistic view of all
comorbidities that a person experiences, whereas diagnosis implies a focus on a
single organ system or pathology. The prognosis of some cancers, traumatic brain
injury, and back pain are importantly influenced by conditions not related to
the tumour, brain, and spine respectively. Third, diagnosis implies a dichotomy
(case v not at a single point in time), which may be a
misleading basis for clinical decision making. For example, in many countries
the decision to lower blood cholesterol is not based on a diagnosis of
hypercholesterolaemia but on thresholds of continuous risk, determined by age,
sex, smoking, blood pressure, and lipids (see paper 3 in our series4). Such observations have led to the
radical proposition that the dichotomous, cross sectional snapshot of diagnostic
practice may become redundant, as clinicians increasingly have access to
continuous measures of future risk.48
49

Importance for discovering new diseases
Fundamental prognosis research drives definitions of the diseases for which
interventions are sought.50 Such
research helps define our current view of what distinct clinical conditions
exist and what role new clinical tests might have in changing our classification
of disease entities (nosology). The question “what is the prognosis of this
condition?” is intimately related to the question “what is this condition?” For
example, the entity of non-fatal myocardial infarction was identified only after
many decades of clinical prognostic observation that symptoms of chest pain may
precede death, replacing the view that the disease of myocardial infarction was
inevitably and instantly fatal. More recently, prognosis research has helped to
redefine non-fatal acute myocardial infarctions51 based on the presence or absence of ST elevation, a predictor of
differential response to therapy, and serum troponin measurement. Figure 5 shows that examination of survival patterns
differentiates clinical phenotypes among people admitted with suspected
non-fatal myocardial infarction. An example of a newly recognised genetic
disorder discovered through prognostic observation is Brugada syndrome in which
an ST elevation pattern on resting electrocardiogram is associated with sudden
death.52

Fig 5 Example of use of fundamental prognosis research to
distinguish clinically relevant groups: people admitted with suspected
acute myocardial infarction (results based on an analysis of 180 000
patients in the Myocardial Ischaemia National Audit Project, A Timmis
and H Hemingway personal communication)

Recommendations for improving the quality and impact of prognosis
research
For each of the four themes of prognosis research to achieve its potential for
improving clinical outcomes, important challenges need to be addressed and
opportunities seized in prognosis research as a whole. The research community needs
to address serious flaws in the design, conduct, and reporting of prognosis studies
and to recognise the clinical value of reliable prognostic evidence. In the PROGRESS
series we thus make recommendations for progress in the field, and these are
summarised in supplementary table 1 on bmj.com. Here we introduce recommendations
that cut across the different research themes. In papers 2–4 in the PROGRESS
series,3
4
5 we discuss the other recommendations from
supplementary table 1. These recommendations add to, and further specify, those
which we have previously made in the BMJ.53

Fuelling changes in medicine and healthcare
As shown in the examples above, improvements in electronic health records,
clinical imaging, and “omic” technologies (genotyping and phenotyping) are
beginning to challenge current disease taxonomy, the focus of much healthcare
policy on process (rather than clinical outcomes), and the clinical
preoccupation with diagnosis (rather than risk). There should be a formative
shift in clinical practice, healthcare policy, and translational research based
on evidence from prognosis research—that is, the prospective relationships
between the phenotypic, genomic, and environmental assessment of people with a
given startpoint and subsequent endpoints (recommendation 1 in supplementary
table 1). Over their life course, individuals develop multiple diseases (both
distinct and related) that often do not respect the current organisation of
medical research or practice. There should be new programmes of prognosis
research that bridge multiple clinical specialties, health systems, pathological
mechanisms, and biological systems and that put the whole patient across his or
her “journey” as the central unit of concern (recommendation 2).

Electronic health records
The scope and impact of prognosis research and electronic health records research
(in primary and secondary care, and in disease and procedure registries) are
intimately related. There is increasing availability of electronic health
records in primary54 and secondary
care, and disease and procedure registries. Particularly where such sources can
be linked,55 there is the possibility
of examining the “patient journey” with repeated measures of risk and care in
larger populations than are feasible with bespoke, investigator led studies.
Population coverage, data quality, and the extent of blood, imaging, and other
diagnostic data are all improving. But concerted efforts are required to
harmonise data on startpoints, endpoints, and populations of interest in order
to make temporal and international comparisons in prognosis. There should be new
programmes of methodological and empirical prognosis research exploiting
electronic health records to define, phenotype, and follow up people with
different health related conditions (recommendation 3).

Visibility of the field
Prognosis research is currently fragmented and not visible as a distinct entity.
Prognosis research should be recognised as a field of inquiry important in
translational research and intrinsic to the practice of clinical medicine and
development of healthcare policy (recommendation 4). Efforts should be made to
establish prognosis research as a distinct branch of knowledge, with a set of
scientific methods aimed at understanding and improving health. Evidence about
prognosis is somewhat neglected; such as in medical textbooks, where the focus
is on the effectiveness of therapies, with only brief details given on average
prognosis,56 sometimes as if
therapies can be divorced from the context of clinical care.57
58

Fundamental prognosis research should compare the prognosis of clinical cohorts
with that of the healthy population (recommendation 5). Relative survival
methods are commonly applied in cancer, but less often in other disease areas.
Relative survival methods model the survival probability of people with a
condition relative to the expected survival without the condition (obtained from
national population life tables stratified by age, sex, calender year, and other
covariates). By comparing the observed and expected survival, one can estimate
the added risk of mortality due to having the condition rather than not having
it (that is, measure how prognosis is modified by onset of a disease). Such
methods help prognosis research prioritise which clinical cohorts require the
most attention and most translational research (that is, identify those cohorts
whose prognosis is most changed by disease onset).

The situation for cancer, where estimates of survival are readily available (such
as Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results, SEER59) is exceptional. Knowledge management in prognosis
seems somewhat chaotic in generation, dissemination, and accessibility.
Difficulties in identifying and accessing information about prognosis, and
evidence from prognosis research studies, hamper efforts to inform patients and
evaluate the impact of translational efforts to improve outcomes. Evidence from
prognosis research and information about prognosis should be systematically
collated, made easily accessible, and updated (recommendation 6).

Teaching and training
Undergraduate and postgraduate training do not currently provide instruction in
how to generate or use evidence from prognosis research. All healthcare
professionals should be trained in the generation and use of prognosis research
evidence; there should be an expansion of training and education opportunities
for those interested in methodological aspects of prognosis research
(recommendation 7).

Patient and public involvement
Questions of prognosis are among the most important to patients, but the level of
patient and public involvement in prognosis research is low. Patient reported
outcomes are important to clinical decision and policy making but are
understudied. For example, people with angina might reasonably ask “will my
symptoms get better?” yet a recent systematic review of 83 studies found none
that reported symptomatic status as an endpoint (favouring acute coronary events
instead).60 Symptom status is
acknowledged as a major determinant of the clinical decision to recommend
revascularisation.61 Prognosis
research using person focused endpoints may yield unanticipated results. For
example, people with rheumatoid arthritis may care more about fatigue than about
the joint pain, on which doctors tend to focus.62 Patients and the wider public should be more engaged in the goals
and value of prognosis research, appropriate use of their clinical data, and
better integration of patient reported outcome measures (recommendation 8).

Conclusion
In this first article in the PROGRESS series, we have introduced a framework of four
themes in prognosis research, and outlined the importance of initial, fundamental
prognosis research. This first theme is central to the practice of medicine; from
basic understanding of the categories we choose to call disease through to
understanding how variations in healthcare influence the risk of endpoints. As such,
it has a broad array of uses for policy makers, patients, and clinical decision
making and should be considered a core component of prognosis research. To maximise
the impact of each interrelated theme of prognosis research,3
4
5 we have begun outlining a set of
recommendations to enhance the prognosis field, including better use of electronic
health records, greater training and public involvement, and a wider appreciation of
the clinical value of prognosis research findings.

Summary points
The PROGRESS series (www.progress-partnership.org) sets out a framework
of four interlinked prognosis research themes and provides examples
from several disease fields to show why evidence from prognosis
research is crucial to inform all points in the translation of
biomedical and health related research into better patient outcomes.
Recommendations are made in each of the four papers to improve
current research standards

What is prognosis research? Prognosis research seeks to understand
and improve future outcomes in people with a given disease or health
condition. However, there is increasing evidence that prognosis
research standards need to be improved

Why is prognosis research important? More people now live with
disease and conditions that impair health than at any other time in
history; prognosis research provides crucial evidence for
translating findings from the laboratory to humans, and from
clinical research to clinical practice

This first article introduces the framework of four interlinked
prognosis research themes and then focuses on the first of the
themes—fundamental prognosis research, studies that aim to describe
and explain future outcomes in relation to current diagnostic and
treatment practices, often in relation to quality of care

Fundamental prognosis research provides evidence informing healthcare
and public health policy, the design and interpretation of
randomised trials, and the impact of diagnostic tests on future
outcome. It can inform new definitions of disease, may identify
unanticipated benefits or harms of interventions, and clarify where
new interventions are required to improve prognosis

The other papers in the series are:

PROGRESS 2: PLoS Med 2013, doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001380

PROGRESS 3: PLoS Med 2013, doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001381

PROGRESS 4: BMJ 2013, doi:10.1136/bmj.e5793

We thank John Scadding, emeritus dean at the Royal Society of Medicine, for
his support of the PROGRESS Group, contributions to discussions, and helpful
comments on drafts of the manuscripts. We thank Ruzan Udumyan for assistance
in drawing figures and preparing manuscripts. We thank Virginia Barbour and
Trish Groves for contributing to the workshops and their support for the
series. We thank Lucy Chappell (King’s College London) for her valuable help
as guest editor on the PROGRESS series.

Contributors: HH, RDR, SS, and DGA initiated the PROGRESS Group, organised
the three workshops, coordinated the writing groups, and were the scientific
writing editors for all the papers in the PROGRESS series. HH, RDR, and DGA
are the guarantors for this paper. HH wrote the first version, and PC, PP,
JAH, KA, AT, AB, KGMM, EWS, IR, SS, DGA, and RDR contributed to the
conception of the paper and to the revising of draft versions and approved
the final version. All members of PROGRESS Group contributed through
workshops and discussions to the development of the article series. 

Members of the PROGRESS Group: Keith Abrams (UK), Doug Altman (UK), Andrew
Briggs (UK), Nils Brunner (Denmark), Peter Croft (UK), Jill Hayden (Canada),
Aroon D Hingorani (UK), Harry Hemingway (UK), Panayiotis Kyzas (UK), Núria
Malats (Spain), Karel Moons (Netherlands), George Peat (UK), Pablo Perel
(UK), Richard Riley (UK), Ian Roberts (UK), Willi Sauerbrei (Germany), Sara
Schroter (UK), Ewout Steyerberg (Netherlands), Adam Timmis (UK), Daniëlle
van der Windt (UK).

Funding: This series had no explicit funding, but some of the authors were
supported by research grants: PROGRESS is supported by a Partnership grant
from the Medical Research Council (G0902393), involving University College
London (HH, AH), Oxford University (DGA), Birmingham University (RDR),
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (IR, PP), Keele University
(PC, D van der Windt), and Queen Mary University London (ADT). DGA is
supported by a programme grant from Cancer Research UK (C5529). HH is
supported by grants from the UK National Institute for Health Research
(RP-PG-0407-10314) and the Wellcome Trust (086091/Z/08/Z). The work of HH
and AT is supported by the Health eResearch Centre Network (HERC-UK), funded
by the Medical Research Council in partnership with Arthritis Research UK,
the British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, the Economic and Social
Research Council, the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council,
the National Institute of Health Research, the National Institute for Social
Care and Health Research (Welsh Assembly Government), the Chief Scientist
Office (Scottish Government Health Directorates) and the Wellcome Trust (the
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health). RDR is supported
by the MRC Midlands Hub for Trials Methodology Research. JAH is supported by
a New Investigator Award from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and
a grant from the Nova Scotia Health Research Foundation, and holds a
Dalhousie University/CCRF research professorship. KGMM is supported by The
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (ZON-MW 918.10.615 and
9120.8004). EWS was supported by The Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (grant 9120.8004). PC holds a UK National Institute of Health
Research Senior Investigator Award (NI-SI-0509-10183). KA holds a UK
National Institute of Health Research Senior Investigator Award
(NI-SI-0508-10061).

Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure
form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from
the corresponding author) and declare: no support from any organisation for
the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organisations that
might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years, no
other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the
submitted work. SS is a full time employee of the BMJ Group but is not
involved in deciding which manuscripts are accepted for publication.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. In
order to disseminate the output widely, these papers are being published
jointly between BMJ (PROGRESS papers 1 and 4) and
PLoS Medicine (PROGRESS papers 2 and 3). As one of the
authors is a member of staff at BMJ Group, the handling editor at the BMJ
for the manuscripts was an external guest editor, Lucy Chappell (King’s
College London).

Cite this as: BMJ 2012;345:e5595
==== Refs
1 Mathers CD, Loncar D. Projections of global
mortality and burden of disease from 2002 to 2030. PLoS
Med 2006 ;3 :e442 17132052 
2 Department of Health. White paper. Equity
and excellence: liberating the NHS . Stationery Office,
2010 

3 Riley RD, Hayden JA, Steyerberg EW, Moons KGM,
Abrams K, Kyzas PA, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 2: Prognostic
factor research. PLoS Med 2013 , doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001380
4 Steyerberg EW, Moons KGM, van der Windt DA, Hayden
JA, Perel P, Schroter S, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 3:
Prognostic model research. PLoS Med 2013 ,
doi:10.1371.journal/pmed.1001381
5 Hingorani AD, van der Windt DA, Riely RD, Abrams
K, Moons KGM, Steyerberg EW, et al. Prognosis research strategy (PROGRESS) 4:
stratified medicine research.
BMJ 2013 ;346 :e5793 
6 Cancer Research UK. CancerStats: cancer
statistics for the UK . Cancer Research UK, 2009. (Original data
source: Verdecchia et al.Recent cancer survival in Europe: a 2000-02 period
analysis of EUROCARE-4 data. Lancet Oncology
2007 ;8 :784 -96.)
7  Tsai H, Chen S, Chien H, Jan Y, Chao T, Chen M,
et al. Relationships between serum HER2 ECD, TIMP-1 and clinical outcomes in
Taiwanese breast cancer. World J Surg
Oncol 2012 ;10 :42 22339939 
8 Adjuvant! Online: Decision making tools for health
care professionals. www.adjuvantonline.com/index.jsp
9 Early Breast Cancer Trialists Collaborative Group.
Tamoxifen for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials.
Lancet 1998 ;351 :1451 -67.9605801 
10 Moons KG, Royston P, Vergouwe Y, Grobbee DE,
Altman DG. Prognosis and prognostic research: what, why, and how?
BMJ 2009 ;338 :b375 19237405 
11 Hlatky MA, Greenland P, Arnett DK, Ballantyne CM,
Criqui MH, Elkind MS, et al. Criteria for evaluation of novel markers of
cardiovascular risk: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation 2009 ;119 :2408 -16.19364974 
12 McShane LM, Altman DG, Sauerbrei W, Taube SE, Gion
M, Clark GM, et al. Reporting recommendations for tumor marker prognostic
studies (REMARK). J Natl Cancer
Inst 2005 ;97 :1180 -4.16106022 
13 Krumholz HM. Outcomes research: generating
evidence for best practice and policies.
Circulation 2008 ;118 :309 -18.18625906 
14 Nissen H, Rosnes JT, Brendehaug J, Kleiberg GH.
Safety evaluation of sous vide-processed ready meals. Lett Appl
Microbiol 2002 ;35 :433 -8.12390496 
15 Sipahi I, Debanne SM, Rowland DY, Simon DI, Fang
JC. Angiotensin-receptor blockade and risk of cancer: meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials. Lancet
Oncol 2010 ;11 :627 -36.20542468 
16 Chou R, Shekelle P. Will this patient develop
persistent disabling low back pain?
JAMA 2010 ;303 :1295 -302.20371789 
17 Hemingway H, Shipley M, Britton A, Page M,
Macfarlane P, Marmot M. Prognosis of angina with and without a diagnosis: 11
year follow up in the Whitehall II prospective cohort study.
BMJ 2003 ;327 :895 14563744 
18 Krumholz HM, Wang Y, Chen J, Drye EE, Spertus JA,
Ross JS, et al. Reduction in acute myocardial infarction mortality in the United
States: risk-standardized mortality rates from 1995-2006.
JAMA 2009 ;302 :767 -73.19690309 
19 Henderson R, Keiding N. Individual survival time
prediction using statistical models. J Med
Ethics 2005 ;31 :703 -6.16319233 
20 Royston P, Parmar MK, Altman DG. Visualizing
length of survival in time-to-event studies: a complement to Kaplan-Meier plots.
J Natl Cancer
Inst 2008 ;100 :92 -7.18182621 
21 Lingsma HF, Roozenbeek B, Li B, Lu J, Weir J,
Butcher I, et al. Large between-center differences in outcome after moderate and
severe traumatic brain injury in the international mission on prognosis and
clinical trial design in traumatic brain injury (IMPACT) study.
Neurosurgery 2011 ;68 :601 -7.21311293 
22 CancerGuide: Statistics. The median isn’t the
message. http://cancerguide.org/median_not_msg.html
(updated 2002).
23 Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, Critchley JA,
Labarthe DR, Kottke TE, et al. Explaining the decrease in US deaths from
coronary disease, 1980-2000. N Engl J
Med 2007 ;356 :2388 -98.17554120 
24 Hunink MG, Goldman L, Tosteson AN, Mittleman MA,
Goldman PA, Williams LW, et al. The recent decline in mortality from coronary
heart disease, 1980-1990. The effect of secular trends in risk factors and
treatment.
JAMA 1997 ;277 :535 -42.9032159 
25 Weinstein MC, Coxson PG, Williams LW, Pass TM,
Stason WB, Goldman L. Forecasting coronary heart disease incidence, mortality,
and cost: the Coronary Heart Disease Policy Model. Am J Public
Health 1987 ;77 :1417 -26.3661794 
26 Croft PR, Macfarlane GJ, Papageorgiou AC, Thomas
E, Silman AJ. Outcome of low back pain in general practice: a prospective study.
BMJ 1998 ;316 :1356 -9.9563990 
27 Von KM, Deyo RA, Cherkin D, Barlow W. Back pain in
primary care. Outcomes at 1 year.
Spine 1993 ;18 :855 -62.8316884 
28 Costa LC, Maher CG, McAuley JH, Hancock MJ,
Herbert RD, Refshauge KM, et al. Prognosis for patients with chronic low back
pain: inception cohort study.
BMJ 2009 ;339 :b3829 19808766 
29 Hestbaek L, Leboeuf-Yde C, Manniche C. Low back
pain: what is the long-term course? A review of studies of general patient
populations. Eur Spine
J 2003 ;12 :149 -65.12709853 
30 De Silva MJ, Roberts I, Perel P, Edwards P,
Kenward MG, Fernandes J, et al. Patient outcome after traumatic brain injury in
high-, middle- and low-income countries: analysis of data on 8927 patients in 46
countries. Int J
Epidemiol 2009 ;38 :452 -8.18782898 
31 Sox HC, Greenfield S. Comparative effectiveness
research: a report from the Institute of Medicine. Ann Intern
Med 2009 ;151 :203 -5.19567618 
32 Coleman MP, Quaresma M, Berrino F, Lutz JM, De AR,
Capocaccia R, et al. Cancer survival in five continents: a worldwide
population-based study (CONCORD). Lancet
Oncol 2008 ;9 :730 -56.18639491 
33 Buchbinder R, Jolley D, Wyatt M. Population based
intervention to change back pain beliefs and disability: three part evaluation.
BMJ 2001 ;322 :1516 -20.11420272 
34 Buchbinder R, Jolley D. Population based
intervention to change back pain beliefs: three year follow up population
survey.
BMJ 2004 ;328 :321 14764492 
35 Sung NS, Crowley WF Jr, Genel M, Salber P, Sandy
L, Sherwood LM, et al. Central challenges facing the national clinical research
enterprise.
JAMA 2003 ;289 :1278 -87.12633190 
36 Rose G. The strategy of preventive
medicine . Oxford University Press, 1993 
37 Stukel TA, Fisher ES, Wennberg DE, Alter DA,
Gottlieb DJ, Vermeulen MJ. Analysis of observational studies in the presence of
treatment selection bias: effects of invasive cardiac management on AMI survival
using propensity score and instrumental variable methods.
JAMA 2007 ;297 :278 -85.17227979 
38 National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence. Chest pain of recent onset: assessment and diagnosis of recent onset
chest pain or discomfort of suspected cardiac origin (clinical guideline 95).
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG95 (updated
2010).
39 Min JK, Shaw LJ, Devereux RB, Okin PM, Weinsaft
JW, Russo DJ, et al. Prognostic value of multidetector coronary computed
tomographic angiography for prediction of all-cause mortality. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2007 ;50 :1161 -70.17868808 
40 Griffin SC, Barber JA, Manca A, Sculpher MJ,
Thompson SG, Buxton MJ, et al. Cost effectiveness of clinically appropriate
decisions on alternative treatments for angina pectoris: prospective
observational study.
BMJ 2007 ;334 :624 17339236 
41 Malfertheiner P, Chan FK, McColl KE. Peptic ulcer
disease.
Lancet 2009 ;374 :1449 -61.19683340 
42 Bajaj A, Driver JA, Schernhammer ES. Parkinson’s
disease and cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer
Causes
Control 2010 ;21 :697 -707.20054708 
43 Hanauer DA, Rhodes DR, Chinnaiyan AM. Exploring
clinical associations using ‘-omics’ based enrichment analyses. PLoS
One 2009 ;4 :e5203 19365550 
44 Kroenke K, Harris L. Symptoms research: a fertile
field. Ann Intern Med 2001 ;134 (9
Pt 2):801 -2.11346313 
45 Von Korff M, Miglioretti DL. A prognostic approach
to defining chronic pain.
Pain 2005 ;117 :304 -13.16153772 
46 Dunn KM, Croft PR. The importance of symptom
duration in determining prognosis.
Pain 2006 ;121 :126 -32.16472916 
47 O’Neill CJ, Spence A, Logan B, Suliburk JW, Soon
PS, Learoyd DL, et al. Adrenal incidentalomas: risk of adrenocortical carcinoma
and clinical outcomes. J Surg
Oncol 2010 ;102 :450 -3.20734420 
48 Wiesemann C. The significance of prognosis for a
theory of medical practice. Theor Med
Bioeth 1998 ;19 :253 -61.9691787 
49 Vickers AJ, Basch E, Kattan MW. Against diagnosis.
Ann Intern
Med 2008 ;149 :200 -3.18678847 
50 Scadding JG. Diagnosis: the clinician and the
computer.
Lancet 1967 ;2 :877 -82.4168324 
51 Thygesen K, Alpert JS, White HD, Jaffe AS, Apple
FS, Galvani M, et al. Universal definition of myocardial infarction.
Circulation 2007 ;116 :2634 -53.17951284 
52 Probst V, Veltmann C, Eckardt L, Meregalli PG,
Gaita F, Tan HL, et al. Long-term prognosis of patients diagnosed with Brugada
syndrome: results from the FINGER Brugada Syndrome Registry.
Circulation 2010 ;121 :635 -43.20100972 
53 Hemingway H, Riley RD, Altman DG. Ten steps
towards improving prognosis research.
BMJ 2009 ;339 :b4184 20042483 
54 General Practice Research Database. www.gprd.com/home/default.asp (updated 2011).
55 Jernberg T, Attebring MF, Hambraeus K, Ivert T,
James S, Jeppsson A, et al. The Swedish Web-system for enhancement and
development of evidence-based care in heart disease evaluated according to
recommended therapies (SWEDEHEART).
Heart 2010 ;96 :1617 -21.20801780 
56 Gospodarowicz M, Henson D, Hutter R, O’Sullivan B,
Sobin L, Wittekind C. Prognostic factors in cancer . 2nd ed.
John Wiley & Sons, 2001 
57 Guyatt G, Rennie D, Meade M, Cook D. Users’
guides to the medical literature: a manual for evidence-based clinical
practice . 2nd ed. AMA Press, 2008 
58 Laupacis A, Wells G, Richardson WS, Tugwell P.
Users’ guides to the medical literature. V. How to use an article about
prognosis. Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group.
JAMA 1994 ;272 :234 -7.8022043 
59 National Cancer Institute. Surveillance Epidemiology
and End Results. http://seer.cancer.gov/ (updated
2012).
60 Hemingway H, Philipson P, Chen R, Fitzpatrick NK,
Damant J, Shipley M, et al. Evaluating the quality of research into a single
prognostic biomarker: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 83 studies of
C-Reactive protein in stable coronary artery disease. PLoS
Med 2010 ;7 :e1000286 20532236 
61 Fox K, Garcia MA, Ardissino D, Buszman P, Camici
PG, Crea F, et al. Guidelines on the management of stable angina pectoris:
executive summary: the Task Force on the Management of Stable Angina Pectoris of
the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart
J 2006 ;27 :1341 -81.16735367 
62 Repping-Wuts H, Uitterhoeve R, van RP, van AT.
Fatigue as experienced by patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): a qualitative
study. Int J Nurs Stud 2008;45:995-1002.
