
==== Front
BMJbmjBMJ : British Medical Journal0959-81381468-5833BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. 21852353thob86358910.1136/bmj.d4825ResearchRisk of bias from inclusion of patients who already have diagnosis of
                    or are undergoing treatment for depression in diagnostic accuracy studies of
                    screening tools for depression: systematic review Thombs Brett D associate professor of psychiatry1Arthurs Erin research assistant1El-Baalbaki Ghassan postdoctoral fellow1Meijer Anna doctoral student2Ziegelstein Roy C professor of medicine3Steele Russell J associate professor of mathematics and statistics41 Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish
                    General Hospital and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E42 Interdisciplinary Centre for Psychiatric
                    Epidemiology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, 9713
                    GZ, Netherlands3 Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
                    Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA4 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill
                    University, 805 Sherbrooke Ouest, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 2K6Correspondence to: B D Thombs
                    brett.thombs@mcgill.ca2011 2011 18 8 2011 343 d482523 5 2011 © Thombs et al 20112011Thombs et alThis is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
                        Commons Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution,
                        and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly
                        cited, the use is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the
                        license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Objectives To investigate the proportion of original studies
                    included in systematic reviews and meta-analyses on the diagnostic accuracy of
                    screening tools for depression that appropriately exclude patients who already
                    have a diagnosis of or are receiving treatment for depression and to determine
                    whether these systematic reviews and meta-analyses evaluate possible bias from
                    the inclusion of such patients.

Design Systematic review.

Data sources Medline, PsycINFO, CINAHL, Embase, ISI, SCOPUS, and
                    Cochrane databases were searched from 1 January 2005 to 29 October 2009.

Eligibility criteria for selecting studies Systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses in any language that reported on the diagnostic accuracy of
                    screening tools for depression.

Results Only eight of 197 (4%) unique publications from 17
                    systematic reviews and meta-analyses specifically excluded patients who already
                    had a diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for depression. No systematic
                    reviews or meta-analyses commented on possible bias from the inclusion of such
                    patients, even though 10 reviews used quality assessment tools with items to
                    rate risk of bias from composition of the sample of patients.

Conclusions Studies of the accuracy of screening tools for
                    depression rarely exclude patients who already have a diagnosis of or are
                    receiving treatment for depression, a potential bias that is not evaluated in
                    systematic reviews and meta-analyses. This could result in inflated estimates of
                    accuracy on which clinical practice and preventive care guidelines are often
                    based, a problem that takes on greater importance as the rate of diagnosed and
                    treated depression in the population increases.

Web Extra Extra material supplied by the author
Appendix 1: Characteristics of diagnostic accuracy studies
                        included in systematic reviews and meta-analyses

Click here for additional data file.

 Appendix 2: Estimate of screening results including and
                        excluding patients who already had diagnosis of depression

Click here for additional data file.
==== Body
Introduction
Depression is a common and disabling condition,1 and improving care has been prioritised. Routine screening for
                depression is one solution that has been proposed. Depression screening involves the
                use of screening tools to identify patients who might have depression but who are
                not seeking treatment for symptoms and whose depression is not otherwise recognised
                by their physicians so that they can be further assessed and, if appropriate,
                    treated.2
                3 Screening for depression has been
                recommended in several medical settings, including cardiovascular care,4 perinatal care,5
                6
                7 oncological care,8 and primary care,9
                although no clinical trial has found better depression outcomes for screened versus
                unscreened patients when the same treatment and care resources are potentially
                available to both groups.10
                11 Screening for depression can identify
                patients with depression who might otherwise go undetected, but it can also lead to
                misdiagnosis, the identification of patients as being depressed who are not, and
                overdiagnosis, which occurs when some patients with mild conditions are identified
                as depressed and exposed to the risk of labelling and treatment, even when the
                condition might not cause measurable morbidity or mortality. Recently, a report from
                the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE)11 noted a lack of evidence for benefit from
                depression screening and, rather than routine screening, recommended case
                identification strategies to identify depression among high risk groups of patients
                or patients otherwise identified by physicians as possibly having depression.

A great deal of research has been conducted to determine the diagnostic accuracy of
                depression screening tests in different clinical settings. Based on data from such
                studies, expert panels have considered the risks and benefits of screening and
                issued recommendations to screen for depression in various settings.9
                11 Diagnostic or screening tests, however,
                are useful only to the extent that they distinguish between disordered and
                non-disordered states that are not otherwise obvious to clinicians12 and if they are accurate across the
                spectrum of patients who will be assessed in clinical practice.12
                13
                14
                15
                16
                17
                18

The term “spectrum effect” has been used to describe variations in test performance
                that sometimes occur across subgroups of patients that differ in demographic or
                clinical features. Spectrum effects raise questions about the generalisability of
                study results to specific populations of patients that might differ in important
                ways from study samples.19 The term
                “spectrum bias” is related and also describes situations in which the accuracy of a
                test is heterogeneous across subgroups of patients. Spectrum bias is said to be
                present when a study samples preferentially from certain portions of the patient
                spectrum but provides a global estimate of accuracy that could misrepresent what
                would be experienced in actual practice.12
                13
                14
                15
                16
                17
                18
                19 Estimates of diagnostic accuracy that
                are based on case-control designs and whose samples include only obvious cases and
                healthy controls, for instance, have been shown to substantially overestimate
                diagnostic accuracy.13
                14
                18

Self reported depression questionnaires are used for various purposes (such as
                screening for unidentified cases, tracking severity of symptoms, detecting relapse).
                For the purpose of screening, which involves the identification of cases not
                previously recognised, if individuals who already have a diagnosis of depression are
                not specifically excluded from studies assessing the diagnostic accuracy of
                depression screening tools, examined cohorts will have a greater prevalence and
                severity of depression than if only individuals without clinically recognised
                depression were screened. Not excluding patients who already have a diagnosis would,
                in turn, lead to determinations of screening accuracy and new case yield that are
                inflated compared with what would be achieved if the instrument were used to screen
                patients in clinical practice.12
                13
                14
                15
                16
                17
                18

Systematic reviews and meta-analyses are highly cited and are prioritised in grading
                evidence for practice guidelines.20
                21 If studies of the diagnostic accuracy of
                depression screening tools that include patients who already have a diagnosis or are
                receiving treatment are included in systematic reviews and meta-analyses without
                adjustment for potential bias, these reviews could provide misleading accuracy
                estimates, thereby misleading calculations of risk-benefit by expert panels and,
                thus, clinicians. 

We evaluated the proportion of studies included in systematic reviews and
                meta-analyses of the diagnostic accuracy of depression screening tools that excluded
                patients who already had a diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for depression.
                We also assessed whether authors of systematic reviews and meta-analyses noted the
                possibility of spectrum bias from the inclusion of such patients in the original
                research studies they reviewed. We hypothesised that few studies of depression
                screening tools would exclude such patients and that systematic reviews and
                meta-analyses would not consider spectrum bias from their inclusion.

Methods
Selection of systematic reviews and meta-analyses
We searched Medline, PsycINFO, CINAHL, Embase, ISI, SCOPUS, and Cochrane
                    databases from 1 January 2005 to 29 October 2009 for systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses of the diagnostic accuracy of depression screening tools. We
                    restricted the search to this period to obtain recent systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses that reflect relatively current practice. The search terms used
                    were ((systematic review OR meta-analysis) AND (screening OR sensitivity OR
                    specificity) AND depression). Eligible articles included systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses in any language published in final form or on the internet before
                    final publication that reviewed the accuracy of screening tools for depression
                    compared with a diagnosis of depression. Depression screening tools included any
                    self report measure used to attempt to identify patients with depression. We
                    included systematic reviews and meta-analyses that reviewed diagnostic accuracy
                    and other psychometric characteristics of depression questionnaires (such as
                    validity and reliability) but extracted data only on diagnostic accuracy. We
                    excluded systematic reviews and meta-analyses that compared scores only on self
                    report screening tools with classifications of depression based on cut offs from
                    other self report screening tools but not a diagnosis of depression. Two
                    investigators reviewed systematic reviews and meta-analyses for eligibility
                    independently. If either reviewer deemed a systematic review or meta-analysis
                    potentially eligible based on a review of the title and abstract, we carried out
                    a full text review of the systematic review or meta-analysis. Any disagreement
                    between reviewers after full text review was resolved by consensus after
                    consultation with an independent third reviewer. Chance corrected agreement
                    between reviewers was assessed with Cohen’s κ.

Data extraction
Two investigators independently extracted and entered on a standardised
                    spreadsheet data items from the systematic reviews and meta-analyses, as well as
                    from the original studies included in the reviews, with discrepancies resolved
                    by consensus. For each systematic review or meta-analysis, they recorded whether
                    or not original studies mentioned possible bias because of the inclusion of
                    patients who already had a diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for
                    depression. Investigators also determined whether or not each systematic review
                    or meta-analysis included an assessment of the quality of included diagnostic
                    accuracy studies. If so, they recorded the tool that was used to do this and
                    whether or not the tool included an evaluation of the risk of spectrum bias.
                    Investigators also recorded the impact factor of the journal in which each
                    systematic review or meta-analysis was published, using the impact factor for
                    the year of publication.22 In addition,
                    they reviewed the introduction and discussion sections and recorded the
                    described purpose for which accuracy of the screening tool was being assessed
                    (such as screening or identification of new cases, monitoring progress of
                    treatment, detection of relapse).

Original diagnostic accuracy studies included in the systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses were classified as having excluded patients who already had a
                    diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for depression if the authors of the
                    study specifically indicated this in the exclusion criteria. If studies did not
                    specifically indicate that such patients were excluded they were classified as
                    having included them.

For each systematic review or meta-analysis, and overall, we determined the
                    number of unique publications on the diagnostic accuracy of depression screening
                    tools, as well as the number of unique cohorts of patients. We assessed the
                    number of publications and the number of cohorts because, in some cases, there
                    were multiple publications from the same cohort. This occurred, for instance,
                    when different publications reported results from different screening tools or
                    criterion standards with the same group of patients, when one or more
                    publications reported on a subset of the sample from another publication, or
                    when the same patients were assessed at different time points (such as during
                    pregnancy and after delivery). Identification of different publications from the
                    same cohort was done by cross referencing authors and coauthors, characteristics
                    of patients, and countries in which the research was conducted. Verification was
                    done by comparing information in the publications. Cohort status was coded
                    conservatively in that publications that seemed to be from the same cohort were
                    coded as such, even if this could not be confirmed with 100% certainty.

We did not publish or register a review protocol for this study. All methods were
                    determined a priori with the exception of reviewing the introduction and
                    discussion sections to record the described purpose for which the accuracy of
                    depression screening tool was being assessed. This additional step was added to
                    the study methods after data extraction and tabulation of results to clarify
                    whether the intention of the included systematic reviews and meta-analyses was
                    to assess diagnostic accuracy for identification of new cases versus other
                    possible uses of depression symptom questionnaires.

Results
Search results
The electronic database search yielded 1216 unique titles and abstracts for
                    review. Of these, 1160 were excluded after review of titles and abstracts
                    because they did not report results from a systematic review or meta-analysis or
                    because they reported data from a systematic review or meta-analysis that was
                    not related to the diagnostic accuracy of a depression screening tool. Of the 56
                    articles that underwent full text review, we excluded 39, leaving 17 eligible
                    systematic reviews and meta-analyses (figure).
                    Chance corrected agreement on inclusion and exclusion decisions between
                    reviewers, as assessed with the Cohen’s κ, was 0.95.

Selection of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of diagnostic accuracy
                            of screening tools for depression

Table 1 shows the characteristics of selected systematic reviews and
                        meta-analyses. Of the 17 systematic
                    reviews and meta-analyses included, 10 were systematic reviews,23
                    24
                    25
                    26
                    27
                    28
                    29
                    30
                    31
                    32 and seven were meta-analyses.33
                    34
                    35
                    36
                    37
                    38
                    39 The systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses included between two and 63 original studies and were published in
                    a wide range of journals in terms of impact factor. Two meta-analyses assessed
                    the nine item depression scale of the patient health questionnaire (PHQ-9)33
                    39; one systematic review23 and two meta-analyses37
                    38 evaluated the geriatric depression
                    scale; seven systematic reviews24
                    26
                    27
                    29
                    30
                    31
                    32 and one meta-analysis36 assessed depression screening tools,
                    generally, in defined medical populations; two systematic reviews assessed
                    specific screening tools, other than the patient health questionnaire or
                    geriatric depression scale, in defined patient populations25
                    28; and two meta-analyses assessed
                    brief screening tools (for example, fewer than five items) in primary care34 and palliative care.35 All 17 systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses described the purpose of the review as related to determining
                    diagnostic accuracy for new case detection by screening, and none discussed how
                    their results might apply to other uses of depression screening tools (such as
                    monitoring progress of treatment, detection of relapse).

Table 1  Systematic reviews (SR) and meta-analyses (MA) of diagnostic accuracy of
                            depression screening tools

Study	Journal
                                    impact factor*	Screening
                                    tool, patients/setting	Review
                                    type	Publications reviewed	Cohorts
                                    reviewed	Cohorts
                                    that excluded diagnosed or treated patients	Method of
                                    quality assessment	Quality
                                    assessment included spectrum bias†	Inclusion
                                    or exclusion of diagnosed or treated patients noted	
Gaynes,
                                        200524	NA	Depression
                                    screening tools in perinatal care	SR	23	20	1
                                    (5.0%)	Based on
                                    criteria from Cochrane working group	Yes	No‡	
Morse,
                                        200628	NA	HADS in
                                    patients with cancer 	SR	10	10	1
                                    (10.0%)	No	NA	No	
Wancata,
                                        200638	3.9	GDS in elderly
                                    patients	MA	42	37	0 (0%)	Ad hoc§	No	No	
Gilbody,
                                        200733	2.9	PHQ-9 in
                                    primary care and hospital settings	MA	18	15	0 (0%)	Ad hoc§	No	No	
Mitchell,
                                        200734	2.2	Short (<5
                                    items) screening tools in primary care patients	MA	12	10	3
                                    (30.0%)	Newcastle-Ottawa scale	Yes	No	
Thombs,
                                        200731	2.2	Depression
                                    screening tools in acute myocardial infarction patients	SR	2	2	0 (0%)	Based on AAN
                                    review guidelines	Yes	No	
Wittkampf,
                                        200739	2.1	PHQ-9 in
                                    primary care and hospital settings	MA	12	9	0 (0%)	QUADAS	Yes	No	
Mitchell,
                                        200835	4.8	1-2 questions
                                    in cancer and palliative care	MA	10	10	0 (0%)	Based on Pai
                                    et al48	Yes	No	
Thekkumpurath,
                                        200829	2.7	Depression
                                    screening tools in palliative care	SR	8	8	1
                                    (12.5%)	No	NA	No	
Thombs,
                                        200830	31.7	Depression
                                    screening tools in cardiovascular care	SR	11	11	0 (0%)	USPSTF	Yes	No	
Allen,
                                        200923	1.2	GDS in older
                                    adults or veterans in outpatient settings	SR	4	4	0 (0%)	Ad hoc§	No	No	
Gibson,
                                        200925	3.7	EPDS in
                                    perinatal care	SR	37	35	2
                                    (5.7%)	Based on York
                                    Centre for Reviews and Dissemination system	Yes	No	
Hewitt,
                                        200936	6.9	Depression
                                    screening tools in perinatal care	MA	63	56	4
                                    (7.1%)	QUADAS	Yes	No	
Kalpakjian,
                                        200926	1.4	Depression
                                    screening tools in spinal cord injury patients	SR	4	4	0 (0%)	No	NA	No	
Mirkhil,
                                        200927	3.0	Depression
                                    screening tools in patients with pain episode	SR	4	4	0 (0%)	Diagnostic
                                    test studies evaluation tool	Yes	No	
Williams,
                                        200932	4.7	Depression
                                    screening tools in children and adolescents	SR	9	9	0 (0%)	USPSTF	Yes	No	
Mitchell,
                                        2010¶37	3.8	GDS in older
                                    primary care patients	MA	13	12	0 (0%)	No	NA	No	
AAN=American Academy of Neurology; EPDS=Edinburgh postnatal depression
                            scale; GDS=geriatric depression scale; HADS=hospital anxiety and
                            depression scale; NA=not applicable; PHQ-9=patient health
                            questionnaire-9; QUADAS=quality assessment for diagnostic accuracy
                            studies; USPSTF=US Preventive Services Task Force.

*Impact factor from year systematic review or meta-analysis was
                            published.

†Includes quality items related to “representativeness” of samples.

‡In methods authors wrote “We excluded studies that included patients
                            with a known current depressive illness (for whom a screen would not
                            provide new information).” Of 23 studies included in systematic review,
                            however, 22 did not exclude patients who were already recognised as
                            depressed or treated for depression. Authors of review did not comment
                            on inclusion or exclusion of such patients in results or discussion.

§Reported extraction of one to two items related to study quality (for
                            example, blinding).

¶Article was epublication ahead of print at time of our search and was
                            subsequently published in 2010.

Inclusion or exclusion of patients who already had a diagnosis or were
                    receiving treatment
The 17 systematic reviews and meta-analyses included a total of 197 unique
                    publications on the diagnostic accuracy of screening tools for depression in 170
                    unique cohorts of patients. The diagnostic accuracy studies examined more than
                    25 different screening tools in a wide range of patients (see appendix 1 on
                    bmj.com). Only eight of 197 unique publications (4%) and eight of 170 cohorts
                    (5%) specifically excluded patients who already had a diagnosis of or were
                    receiving treatment for depression (see appendix 1). As shown in table 1,
                        1123
                    26
                    27
                    30
                    31
                    32
                    33
                    35
                    37
                    38
                    39 of the 17 systematic reviews or
                    meta-analyses did not examine a single cohort of patients that specifically
                    excluded those who already had a diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for
                    depression.

Table 2 shows that only four40
                    41
                    42
                    43 of the eight studies that excluded
                    such patients reported the number of patients who were excluded because of
                    pre-existing mental health treatment. The proportion of patients excluded for
                    this reason was 22% in a Veteran’s Affairs primary care setting in the United
                    States (published in 2004)43; 10% in a
                    2003 study of patients in general practice from New Zealand42; 2% in a 2004 study of postpartum women from
                        Turkey40; and 0.2% in a 1996 study
                    of postpartum women from Sweden.41

Table 2  Cohorts of diagnostic accuracy studies that excluded patients who
                            already had diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for depression

Study
                                    (review/s included in)	Country
                                    of original study	Population	Year(s)
                                    data collected	No (%)
                                    excluded	Exclusion
                                    criterion	
Arroll,
                                        200342 (Mitchell34)	New
                                    Zealand	General
                                    practice patients	NR	47/476
                                    (10%)	Taking
                                    psychotropic drugs	
Arroll,
                                        200569 (Mitchell34)	New
                                    Zealand	General
                                    practice patients	NR	NR	Receiving
                                    psychotropic drugs	
Aydin,
                                        200440 (Gibson,25
                                    Hewitt36)	Turkey	Postpartum
                                    women	2001	6/347
                                    (2%)	Psychiatric
                                    treatment history	
Beck,
                                        200570 (Hewitt36)	US	Postpartum
                                    women	NR	NR	Diagnosis of
                                    depression during current pregnancy	
Corson,
                                        200443 (Mitchell34)	US	Veteran’s
                                    Affairs primary care patients	2002-3	762/3466
                                    (22%)	Mental health
                                    appointment in chart within past 6 months	
Lloyd-Williams, 2000, 200171 72 (Morse,28
                                        Thekkumpurath29)	UK	Cancer
                                    patients in palliative care	NR	NR	Currently
                                    prescribed antidepressant medication	
Vittayanont,
                                        200673 (Hewitt36)	Thailand	Women 6-8
                                    weeks postpartum	2003-4	NR	Current
                                    diagnosis of and receiving treatment for psychiatric
                                    disorder	
Wickberg,
                                        199641 (Gaynes,24 Gibson,25
                                        Hewitt36)	Sweden	Women 2-3
                                    months postpartum	NR	4/1655
                                    (0.2%)	Already in
                                    contact with general practitioner or psychiatrist	
NR=not reported.

Treatment of spectrum bias in systematic reviews and meta-analyses
As shown in table 1, 1323
                    24
                    25
                    27
                    30
                    31
                    32
                    33
                    34
                    35
                    36
                    38
                    39 of the 17 systematic reviews and
                    meta-analyses conducted some form of quality assessment of included studies,
                    including two meta-analyses36
                    39 that used the quality assessment for
                    diagnostic accuracy studies (QUADAS) tool44; one systematic review27
                    that used the diagnostic test studies evaluation tool45; one meta-analysis34 that used the Newcastle-Ottawa scale46; two systematic reviews30
                    32 that used methods developed by the
                    US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)47
                    48; one systematic review31 that based quality review on
                    guidelines from the American Academy of Neurology49; one systematic review25 that evaluated quality items based on a system from
                    the York Centre for Reviews and Dissemination50; one systematic review24
                    that used a study specific tool based on criteria identified by the Cochrane
                    Methods Working Group on Systematic Review of Screening and Diagnostic
                        Tests51; one meta-analysis35 that based quality ratings on a
                    published article by Pai et al52; and
                    one systematic review23 and two
                        meta-analyses33
                    38 that used ad hoc procedures, such as
                    extracting data on one to two items related to study quality.

Of these, 10 systematic reviews or meta-analyses24
                    25
                    27
                    30
                    31
                    32
                    34
                    35
                    36
                    39 used quality assessment methods that
                    included an assessment of spectrum bias. The authors of one of these systematic
                        reviews24 noted study limitations
                    from the lack of non-white patients, and the authors of another32 reported that younger children were
                    poorly represented in studies of children and adolescents. The authors of one
                    meta-analysis reported that half of studies reviewed did not include
                    representative samples but did not provide a rationale for this conclusion.36 The authors of another noted the
                    possibility of a “disease progression bias” in one study of patients after
                    stroke and indicated that none of the other 11 studies reviewed had limitations
                    related to composition of patients.39
                    In one systematic review, one of four included studies was downgraded because of
                    the description of the sample, but an explanation was not provided.27 The authors of the five other
                    systematic reviews or meta-analyses that used quality assessment methods that
                    included an assessment of spectrum bias did not comment specifically on quality
                    ratings related to possible spectrum bias.21
                    26
                    27
                    30
                    31

Overall, none of the 17 systematic reviews or meta-analyses commented on possible
                    spectrum bias from the inclusion in studies of patients who already had a
                    diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for depression.

Discussion
We found that less than 5% of studies on the diagnostic accuracy of depression
                screening tools appropriately excluded patients who already had a diagnosis of or
                were receiving treatment for depression. The importance of this finding relates to
                the potential effect on assessments of the accuracy of depression screening
                instruments and the number of new cases they will uncover and, therefore, on their
                utility in clinical practice. The diagnostic accuracy of a screening test is often
                considered a fixed characteristic of a test, but it can vary substantially in
                populations with different clinical features.16 Studies that have examined accuracy of diagnostic tests consistently
                show that increased prevalence or severity of disease in the cohort of patients
                being examined inflates the reported sensitivity of the test being assessed.14 If the accuracy of screening tools for
                depression was studied in a group of patients, some of whom had already received a
                diagnosis for the condition, the assessments would be biased by the inclusion of
                individuals with a greater prevalence and severity of depression than if the
                instruments were used in clinical practice to screen patients without clinically
                recognised depression. This would, in turn, lead to inflated, and potentially
                misleading, estimates of accuracy on which clinical practice and preventive care
                guidelines are generally based.

Potential magnitude of problem
The potential magnitude of this problem grows as the prevalence of already
                    diagnosed and treated depression in the population increases.53
                    54 Estimates of the prevalence of
                    depression in primary care range from 5% to 13%, including 6% to 9% among adults
                    aged 55 or older.55 Rates are somewhat
                    higher in patients with chronic physical illness.1 Among adults aged 35 and older in the US, rates of
                    antidepressant use increased from 8% to 14% from 1996 to 2005, with a third to a
                    half of prescriptions specifically for psychiatric problems.53 Rates of prescriptions for
                    antidepressants might be even higher among patients with chronic physical
                    disease. Based on provincial data from Ontario, Canada, for instance, the rate
                    of antidepressant prescriptions within six months of an acute myocardial
                    infarction doubled from 8% in 1993 to 16% in 2002 among patients aged 65 and
                        older.56 In a more recent cohort of
                    more than 1200 outpatients with stable cardiovascular disease, just under 20%
                    were treated with an antidepressant at the time of enrolment in the study.57
                    58 In addition to patients who receive
                    treatment with antidepressants, a relatively small percentage of people receive
                    psychotherapy for depression without drug treatment,59 and some people are recognised by their physicians as
                    depressed but choose not to undergo treatment.

A recent meta-analysis found that general practitioners correctly identify about
                    50% of patients with depression without the assistance of a screening tool.60 Dichotomising a doctor’s
                    identification or non-identification of depressive disorders, however, could
                    underestimate the degree to which they recognise depression. A study of over 700
                    patients in primary care from the US and the Netherlands, for instance, found
                    that complete disagreement between physicians’ assessments and a diagnostic
                    interview for depression was much less common than is often thought.61 In that study, only 27% of false
                    negative cases based on physician assessments were true false negatives. In most
                    cases of false negatives, physicians recognised symptoms of depression but
                    underestimated severity compared with the diagnostic interview (40%) or gave
                    another psychiatric diagnosis (33%). Thus, in many settings, a substantial
                    proportion of depressed patients are recognised as depressed without screening,
                    either because they seek treatment for their depression or because a healthcare
                    professional otherwise recognises their symptoms. Based on reported rates of
                    prescriptions for antidepressants and estimates of physicians’ ability to
                    recognise depression, it could be that as many as half or more of patients who
                    are detected as cases in studies assessing the diagnostic accuracy of screening
                    tools would not even be screened in clinical practice.

Data are not available that would allow a precise calculation of the degree by
                    which studies that fail to exclude patients who already have a diagnosis of or
                    are receiving treatment for depression might overestimate diagnostic accuracy
                    and the number of new patients who would be identified through depression
                    screening. Two reviews, however, have reported that studies of other types of
                    diagnostic tests that have used case-control designs13 or case-control designs that compared severely
                    affected patients and healthy controls18 substantially overestimate diagnostic accuracy (relative
                    diagnostic odds ratios 3.013 and
                        4.9,18 respectively).

Even a relatively small increase in reported diagnostic accuracy resulting from
                    the inclusion of patients who already have a diagnosis or are receiving
                    treatment would result in a substantial overestimate of the positive predictive
                    value and new case yield from depression screening compared with what would be
                    expected in clinical practice. A systematic review of the diagnostic accuracy of
                    depression screening tools in primary care found a median sensitivity of 85% and
                    median specificity of 74%.62 Based on
                    this, in a primary care setting with a prevalence rate of 10%,55 32% of all patients would screen
                    positive for depression, of whom 27% would be true positive cases, equivalent to
                    9% of all patients screened. If existing studies overestimated the sensitivity
                    by even 10% because of the inclusion of patients with a diagnosis or being
                    treated (relative diagnostic odds ratio 1.9), and it is conservatively assumed
                    that physicians recognise 50% of depressed patients without screening, the rate
                    of screening with positive results would decrease only slightly, from 32% to
                    27%. Only 14% of these, however, would be true positives, and, overall, less
                    than 4% of patients screened would be newly identified cases of depression (see
                    appendix 2 on bmj.com).

We know of only one study, which was not included in any of the systematic
                    reviews or meta-analyses that we reviewed, that assessed the yield of screening
                    for depression with and without excluding patients with psychiatric disorders
                    already treated with psychotropic drugs.63 In that study of 113 women with breast cancer, the true positive
                    rate of screening for depression fell from 21% to 7% after exclusion of patients
                    who were already receiving treatment for depression before screening.

Our results should be considered in the context of studies that have assessed
                    whether screening for depression benefits patients. There are at least 11 trials
                    in primary care,10 as well as trials in
                    perinatal care,64
                    65 and cancer care,66 that have tested whether screening and
                    referral for depression treatment improves depression outcomes, and all have had
                    negative results. Reflecting this, the US Preventive Services Task Force
                    recommends screening for depression only when it is supported by integrated
                    staff assisted depression management programmes.9 To our knowledge, only one published research study has documented
                    an attempt to screen and provide collaborative care, as recommended by the task
                    force, in a clinical setting.67 In that
                    study, from the Netherlands, 1687 high risk patients were invited to enrol in a
                    screening trial, 780 participated, and 71 cases of major depression were
                    detected. Of the 71 patients identified, 36 were already receiving treatment for
                    depression and 18 additional patients refused treatment or did not attend their
                    scheduled appointment. Thus, only 17 people of 1687 potentially screened started
                    treatment for depression.

Strengths and limitations of review
One possible limitation of the current study is that we searched for systematic
                    reviews and meta-analyses, rather than for original studies, and there are
                    probably many original studies on the diagnostic accuracy of depression
                    screening tools that were not included. Our purpose, however, was to assess
                    whether original studies appropriately excluded patients who already had a
                    diagnosis or were receiving treatment and to determine whether systematic
                    reviews and meta-analyses reflected potential bias from the failure to do this,
                    which required a review of reviews. It is unlikely that including additional
                    studies that were not listed in recent systematic reviews or meta-analyses would
                    have substantively altered the results.

Another potential limitation is that the proportion of patients who already had a
                    diagnosis of or were receiving treatment for depression who were inappropriately
                    included in the diagnostic accuracy studies reviewed is unknown. Only four of
                    the studies that excluded such patients reported the proportion excluded for
                    this reason, and this varied widely depending on the setting and the time period
                    of the study. It was less than 2% in studies that collected data from 10 years
                    ago in Turkey40 and more than 15 years
                    ago in Sweden,41 but about 10% in a
                    2003 study of patients in general practice from New Zealand42 and just over 20% in a 2004 study of primary care
                    patients treated in a US Veteran’s Affairs setting.43 In addition, the small number and substantial
                    heterogeneity of studies that excluded patients who already had a diagnosis or
                    were receiving treatment did not allow for an assessment of the effect of
                    inclusion and exclusion decisions on diagnostic accuracy estimates. On the other
                    hand, numerous studies have found that the inclusion of established cases among
                    examined cohorts consistently inflates assessments of the accuracy of a
                    diagnostic test,14 and it is likely
                    that this would also be the case in studies of depression screening tools.

Conclusions and policy implications
The importance of our findings relates to the use of depression questionnaires
                    for screening, a procedure conducted to identify previously unrecognised
                        cases.2
                    3 In clinical practice, depression
                    questionnaires are sometimes used for purposes other than screening, including
                    monitoring the severity of symptoms in patients who already have a diagnosis of
                    depression and assessing patients for recurrence of symptoms while they are
                    being treated. The introduction and discussion sections of the 17 systematic
                    reviews and meta-analyses we reviewed indicate that all were intended to assess
                    the diagnostic accuracy and utility of depression questionnaires for the purpose
                    of screening—that is, for identification of new cases. None discussed how
                    findings might apply to other possible uses for the questionnaires (such as
                    monitoring progress of treatment or detection of relapse). In addition, the
                    recommendations that have been issued by expert panels regarding depression
                    screening in various settings discuss the use of screening instruments as a
                    means of identifying new cases.

Screening for depression is somewhat different from many other types of screening
                    in that a history or interview might not necessarily be part of the evaluation
                    before a screening tool is administered. To illustrate, the US Preventive
                    Services Task Force recommends screening for cervical cancer in women who have
                    been sexually active and have a cervix.68 On the other hand, such screening is not recommended for women
                    older than 65 or for women who have recently had a normal result on a smear
                    test. This approach to screening is predicated on some “filtering” to determine
                    the appropriate individuals or groups to be screened. On the other hand, the
                    task force’s recommendations regarding depression screening9 focus on issues in healthcare systems, such as the
                    availability of staff assisted depression care, rather than on any upstream
                    evaluation of patients before screening. In clinical settings, screening tools
                    for depression might be routinely administered to all patients in the waiting
                    room of a hospital, physician’s office, or clinic, as has been recommended by
                    expert panels.4 Regardless of whether
                    these screening tools are used with or without upstream “filtering” in clinical
                    practice, accurate determinations of test characteristics that reflect the
                    ability to detect previously unrecognised cases can be obtained only if this
                    upstream “filtering” is done in studies to exclude patients who already have a
                    diagnosis of depression. Our findings show that this is rarely done, and, as a
                    result, existing evidence on the accuracy and case yield of depression screening
                    tools could substantially overestimate their utility in clinical practice. Well
                    designed studies that exclude patients who already have a diagnosis of or are
                    receiving treatment for depression are needed to generate realistic
                    determinations of the accuracy of depression screening tools in clinical
                    settings to inform decisions about risks and benefits with screening.

What is already known on this topic
The results of studies on the accuracy of screening tools for
                                    depression are routinely used by expert panels to make decisions
                                    about the potential benefits of depression screening

What this study adds
Studies of the accuracy of screening tools for depression rarely
                                    exclude patients who already have a diagnosis or are receiving
                                    treatment, a potential bias that is not evaluated in systematic
                                    reviews and meta-analyses

This can result in inflated accuracy and estimates of the yield
                                    of new cases on which clinical practice and preventive care
                                    guidelines are often based, a problem that takes on greater
                                    importance as the rate of diagnosed and treated depression in
                                    the population increases

We thank Allison Leavens, Lisa R Jewett, and Brooke Levis, all of the Lady
                        Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal,
                        Quebec, Canada, for verification of referencing and study counts and
                        proofreading the manuscript. They were not compensated for their
                        contributions.

Contributors: BDT was responsible for the study concept and design, wrote the
                        review protocol, supervised and carried out the data extraction, and drafted
                        the manuscript with the input of the other authors. EA reviewed articles for
                        inclusion, carried out the data extraction, contributed to the analysis,
                        interpretation, and presentation of data, and conducted a critical revision
                        of the manuscript. GE-B and AM participated in the design of the study,
                        reviewed articles for inclusion, carried out the data extraction, and
                        contributed a critical revision of the manuscript. RCZ contributed to the
                        study design and contributed a critical revision of the manuscript. RJS
                        contributed to the study design and analysis and interpretation of the data
                        and contributed a critical revision of the manuscript. All authors had full
                        access to all of the data (including statistical reports and tables) and
                        take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
                        data analysis. BDT is guarantor.

Funding: This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in
                        the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. BDT is supported by a New
                        Investigator Award from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and an
                        Établissement de Jeunes Chercheurs award from the Fonds de la Recherche en
                        Santé Québec. RCZ is supported by the National Center for Complementary and
                        Alternative Medicine (grant No R24AT004641) and the Miller Family Scholar
                        Program of the Johns Hopkins Center for Innovative Medicine. The content is
                        solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
                        the official views of the National Center for Complementary and Alternative
                        Medicine or the National Institutes of Health.

Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure
                        form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from
                        the corresponding author) and declare: no support from any organisation for
                        the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organisations that
                        might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years; no
                        other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the
                        submitted work.

Ethical approval: Not required.

Data sharing: No additional data available.

Cite this as: BMJ 2011;343:d4825
==== Refs
1 Evans DL, Charney DS, Lewis L, Golden RN, Gorman
                    JM, Krishnan KR, et al. Mood disorders in the medically ill: scientific review
                    and recommendations. Biol
                        Psychiatry 2005 ;58 :175 -89.16084838 
2 UK National Screening Committee. Second report of
                    the UK National Screening Committee. Departments of Health for England,
                    Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, 2000.
3 Raffle A, Gray M. Screening: evidence and practice.
                    Oxford University Press, 2007.
4 Lichtman JH, Bigger JT Jr, Blumenthal JA,
                    Frasure-Smith N, Kaufmann PG, Lespérance F, et al. Depression and coronary heart
                    disease: recommendations for screening, referral, and treatment: a science
                    advisory from the American Heart Association Prevention Committee of the Council
                    on Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on
                    Epidemiology and Prevention, and Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care
                    and Outcomes Research.
                        Circulation 2008 ;118 :1768 -75.18824640 
5 Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. SIGN
                    60: postnatal depression and puerperal psychosis. SIGN, 2002.
6 Dell DL. Depression in women. In: Clinical updates
                    in women’s health. Vol 1. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
                    2002.
7 National Institute for Health and Clinical
                    Excellence. Antenatal and postnatal mental health: the NICE guideline on
                    clinical management and service guidance. NICE, 2007.
8 National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Distress
                    management. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology. 2011. www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/PDF/distress.pdf
9 US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for
                    depression in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
                        statement. Ann Intern
                        Med 2009 ;151 :784 -92.19949144 
10 Gilbody SD, Sheldon TD, House AD. Screening and
                    case-finding instruments for depression: a meta-analysis.
                        CMAJ 2008 ;178 :997 -1003.18390942 
11 National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. The
                    NICE guideline on the management and treatment of depression in adults (updated
                    edition). National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence,
                    2010.
12 Jaeschke R, Guyatt G, Sackett DL. Users’ guides to
                    the medical literature. III. How to use an article about a diagnostic test. A.
                    Are the results of the study valid? Evidence-based Medicine Working
                        Group.
                        JAMA 1994 ;271 :389 -91.8283589 
13 Lijmer JG, Mol BW, Heisterkamp S, Bonsel GJ, Prins
                    MH, van der Meulen JHP, et al. Empirical evidence of design-related bias in
                    studies of diagnostic tests.
                        JAMA 1999 ;282 :1061 -6.10493205 
14 Whiting P, Rutjes AW, Reitsma JB, Glas AS, Bossuyt
                    PM, Kleijnen J. Sources of variation and bias in studies of diagnostic accuracy:
                    a systematic review. Ann Intern
                        Med 2004 ;140 :189 -202.14757617 
15 Ransohoff DF, Feinstein AR. Problems of spectrum
                    and bias in evaluating the efficacy of diagnostic tests. N Engl J
                        Med 1978 ;299 :926 -30.692598 
16 Reid MC, Lachs MS, Feinstein AR. Use of
                    methodological standards in diagnostic test research. Getting better but still
                    not good.
                        JAMA 1995 ;274 :645 -51.7637146 
17 Willis BH. Spectrum bias—why clinicians need to be
                    cautious when applying diagnostic test studies. Fam
                        Pract 2008 ;25 :390 -6.18765409 
18 Rutjes AWS, Reitsma JB, Di Nisio M, Smidt N, van
                    Rijn JC, Bossuyt PMM. Evidence of bias and variation in diagnostic accuracy
                        studies.
                        CMAJ 2006 ;174 :469 -76.16477057 
19 Mulherin SA, Miller WC. Spectrum bias or spectrum
                    effect? Subgroup variation in diagnostic test evaluation. Ann Intern Med
                         2002 ;137 :598 -602.12353947 
20 Patsopoulos NA, Analatos AA, Ioannidis JP.
                    Relative citation impact of various study designs in the health sciences.
                        JAMA
                         2005 ;293 :2362 -6.15900006 
21 Harbour R, Miller J. A new system for grading
                    recommendations in evidence based guidelines. BMJ
                         2001 ;323 :334 -6.11498496 
22 Institute for Scientific Information. Journal
                    citation reports. 2011. www.isiknowledge.com/jcr/.
23 Allen J, Annells M. A literature review of the
                    application of the geriatric depression scale, depression anxiety stress scales
                    and post-traumatic stress disorder checklist to community nursing
                        cohorts. J Clin
                        Nurs 2009 ;18 :949 -59.19284431 
24 Gaynes BN, Gavin N, Meltzer-Brody S, Lohr KN,
                    Swinson T, Gartlehner G, et al. Perinatal depression: prevalence, screening
                    accuracy, and screening outcomes. Evid Rep Technol Assess
                    (Summ )
                    2005 ;119 :1 -8.15760246 
25 Gibson J, McKenzie-McHarg K, Shakespeare J, Price
                    J, Gray R. A systematic review of studies validating the Edinburgh postnatal
                    depression scale in antepartum and postpartum women. Acta Psychiatr
                        Scand 2009 ;119 :350 -64.19298573 
26 Kalpakjian CZ, Bombardier CH, Schomer K, Brown PA,
                    Johnson KL. Measuring depression in persons with spinal cord injury: a
                    systematic review. J Spinal Cord
                        Med 2009 ;32 :6 -24.19264045 
27 Mirkhil S, Kent PM. The diagnostic accuracy of
                    brief screening questions for psychosocial risk factors of poor outcome from an
                    episode of pain: a systematic review. Clin J
                        Pain 2009 ;25 :340 -8.19590484 
28 Morse R, Kendell K, Barton S. Screening for
                    depression in people with cancer: the accuracy of the hospital anxiety and
                    depression scale. Clin Eff
                        Nurs 2006 ;9 :188 -96.
29 Thekkumpurath P, Venkateswaran C, Kumar M, Bennett
                    MI. Screening for psychological distress in palliative care: a systematic
                        review. J Pain Symptom
                        Manage 2008 ;36 :520 -8.18495416 
30 Thombs BD, de Jonge P, Coyne JC, Whooley MA,
                    Frasure-Smith N, Mitchell AJ, et al. Depression screening and patient outcomes
                    in cardiovascular care: a systematic review.
                        JAMA 2008 ;300 :2161 -71.19001627 
31 Thombs BD, Magyar-Russell G, Bass EB, Stewart KJ,
                    Tsilidis KK, Bush DE, et al. Performance characteristics of depression screening
                    instruments in survivors of acute myocardial infarction: review of the
                        evidence.
                        Psychosomatics 2007 ;48 :185 -94.17478586 
32 Williams SB, O’Connor EA, Eder M, Whitlock EP.
                    Screening for child and adolescent depression in primary care settings: a
                    systematic evidence review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.
                        Pediatrics 2009 ;123 :e716 -35.19336361 
33 Gilbody S, Richards D, Brealey S, Hewitt C.
                    Screening for depression in medical settings with the patient health
                    questionnaire (PHQ): a diagnostic meta-analysis. J Gen Intern
                        Med 2007 ;22 :1596 -602.17874169 
34 Mitchell AJ, Coyne JC. Do ultra-short screening
                    instruments accurately detect depression in primary care? A pooled analysis and
                    meta-analysis of 22 studies. Br J Gen
                        Pract 2007 ;57 :144 -51.17263931 
35 Mitchell AJ. Are one or two simple questions
                    sufficient to detect depression in cancer and palliative care? A Bayesian
                        meta-analysis. Br J
                        Cancer 2008 ;98 :1934 -43.18506146 
36 Hewitt C, Gilbody S, Brealey S, Paulden M, Palmer
                    S, Mann R, et al. Methods to identify postnatal depression in primary care: an
                    integrated evidence synthesis and value of information analysis. Health
                        Technol
                        Assess 2009 ;13 :1 -145,147-230.
37 Mitchell AJ, Bird V, Rizzo M, Meader N. Diagnostic
                    validity and added value of the geriatric depression scale for depression in
                    primary care: a meta-analysis of GDS30 and GDS15. J Affect
                        Disord 2010 ;125 :10 -7.19800132 
38 Wancata J, Alexandrowicz R, Marquart B, Weiss M,
                    Friedrich F. The criterion validity of the geriatric depression scale: a
                    systematic review. Acta Psychiatr
                        Scand 2006 ;114 :398 -410.17087788 
39 Wittkampf KA, Naeije L, Schene AH, Huyser J, van
                    Weert HC. Diagnostic accuracy of the mood module of the patient health
                    questionnaire: a systematic review. Gen Hosp
                        Psychiatry 2007 ;29 :388 -95.17888804 
40 Aydin N, Inandi T, Yigit A, Hodoglugil NN.
                    Validation of the Turkish version of the Edinburgh postnatal depression scale
                    among women within their first postpartum year. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
                        Epidemiol 2004 ;39 :483 -6.15205733 
41 Wickberg B, Hwang CP. The Edinburgh postnatal
                    depression scale: validation on a Swedish community sample. Acta
                        Psychiatr
                        Scand 1996 ;94 :181 -4.8891084 
42 Arroll B, Khin N, Kerse N. Screening for
                    depression in primary care with two verbally asked questions: cross sectional
                        study.
                        BMJ 2003 ;327 :1144 -6.14615341 
43 Corson K, Gerrity MS, Dobscha SK. Screening for
                    depression and suicidality in a VA primary care setting: 2 items are better than
                    1 item. Am J Manag
                        Care 2004 ;10 :839 -45.15609737 
44 Whiting P, Rutjes AW, Reitsma JB, Bossuyt PM,
                    Kleijnen J. The development of QUADAS: a tool for the quality assessment of
                    studies of diagnostic accuracy included in systematic reviews. BMC Med
                        Res
                    Methodol 2003 ;3 :25 14606960 
45 NHS Public Health Resource Unit. 12 questions to
                    help you make sense of a diagnostic test study. 2011. www.sph.nhs.uk/
46 Wells GA, Shea B, O’Connell D, Peterson J, Welch V,
                    Losos M, et al. The Newcastle-Ottawa scale (NOS) for assessing the quality of
                    nonrandomized studies in meta-analyses. 2011. www.ohri.ca/programs/clinical_epidemiology/oxford.htm
47 Pignone M, Gaynes BN, Rushton JL, Mulrow CD, Orleans
                    CT, Whitener BL, et al. Screening for depression. Systematic evidence review No
                    6. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2001. 
48 Harris RP, Helfand M, Woolf SH, Lohr KN, Mulrow
                    CD, Teutsch SM, et al. Current methods of the US Preventive Services Task Force:
                    a review of the process. Am J Prev
                        Med 2001 ;20 :21 -35.
49 Edlund W, Gronseth G, Yuen S, Franklin G, eds.
                    American Academy of Neurology clinical practice guideline process manual.
                    American Academy of Neurology, 2004.
50 Khan KS, ter Riet G, Popay J, Nixon J, Kleijnen J.
                    Study quality assessment. In Khan KS, ter Riet G, Glanville J, Snowden AJ,
                    Kleijnen J, eds. Undertaking systematic reviews of research on
                    effectiveness:CRD’s guidance for carrying out or commissioning reviews. 2nd ed.
                    CRD Report 4. University of York. 2001.www.york.ac.uk/inst/crd/crdreports.htm
51 Cochrane Methods Working Group on Systematic Reviews
                    of Screening and Diagnostic Tests. Screening and diagnostic tests: recommended
                    methods. Cochrane Methods Working Group, 1996.
52 Pai M, McCulloch M, Enanoria W, Colford JM.
                    Systematic reviews of diagnostic test evaluations: what’s behind the
                        scenes? Evid Based
                        Med 2004 ;9 :101 -3.
53 Olfson M, Marcus SC. National patterns in
                    antidepressant medication treatment. Arch Gen
                        Psychiatry 2009 ;66 :848 -56.19652124 
54 Marcus SC, Olfson M. National trends in the
                    treatment for depression from 1998 to 2007. Arch Gen
                        Psychiatry 2010 ;67 :1265 -73.21135326 
55 O’Connor EA, Whitlock EP, Beil TL, Gaynes BN.
                    Screening for depression in adult patients in primary care settings: a
                    systematic evidence review. Ann Intern
                        Med 2009 ;151 :793 -803.19949145 
56 Benazon NR, Mamdani MM, Coyne JC. Trends in the
                    prescribing of antidepressants following acute myocardial infarction,
                        1993-2002. Psychosom
                        Med 2005 ;67 :916 -20.16314596 
57 Gehi A, Haas D, Pipkin S, Whooley MA. Depression
                    and medication adherence in outpatients with coronary heart disease: findings
                    from the Heart and Soul Study. Arch Intern
                        Med 2005 ;165 :2508 -13.16314548 
58 Whooley MA, de Jonge P, Vittinghoff E, Otte C,
                    Moos R, Carney RM, et al. Depressive symptoms, health behaviors, and risk of
                    cardiovascular events in patients with coronary heart disease.
                        JAMA 2008 ;300 :2379 -88.19033588 
59 Olfson M, Marcus SC. National trends in outpatient
                    psychotherapy. Am J
                        Psychiatry 2010 ;167 :1456 -63.20686187 
60 Mitchell AJ, Vaze A, Rao S. Clinical diagnosis of
                    depression in primary care: a meta-analysis.
                        Lancet 2009 ;374 :609 -19.19640579 
61 Tiemens BG, von Korff M, Lin EHB. Diagnosis of
                    depression by primary care physicians versus a structured diagnostic interview:
                    understanding discordance. Gen Hosp
                        Psychiatry 1999 ;21 :87 -96.10228888 
62 Williams JW Jr, Pignone M, Ramirez G, Perez
                    Stellato C. Identifying depression in primary care: a literature synthesis of
                    case-finding instruments. Gen Hosp
                        Psychiatry 2002 ;24 :225 -37.12100833 
63 Coyne JC, Palmer SC, Shapiro PJ, Thompson R,
                    DeMichele A. Distress, psychiatric morbidity, and prescriptions for psychotropic
                    medication in a breast cancer waiting room sample. Gen Hosp
                        Psychiatry 2004 ;26 :121 -8.15038929 
64 Webster J, Linnane J, Roberts J, Starrenburg S,
                    Hinson J, Dibley L. Identify, educate and alert (IDEA) trial: an intervention to
                    reduce postnatal depression.
                        BJOG 2003 ;110 :842 -6.14511967 
65 Yonkers KA, Smith MV, Lin H, Howell HB, Shao L,
                    Rosenheck RA. Depression screening of perinatal women: an evaluation of the
                    healthy start depression initiative. Psychiatr
                        Serv 2009 ;60 :322 -8.19252044 
66 Maunsell E, Brisson J, Deschenes L, Frasure-Smith
                    N. Randomized trial of a psychologic distress screening program after breast
                    cancer: effects on quality of life. J Clin
                        Oncol 1996 ;14 :2747 -55.8874336 
67 Baas KD, Wittkampf KA, van Weert HC, Lucassen P,
                    Huyser J, van den Hoogen H, et al. Screening for depression in high-risk groups:
                    prospective cohort study in general practice. Br J
                        Psychiatry 2009 ;194 :399 -403.19407268 
68 US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for
                    cervical cancer: recommendations and rationale. Am J
                        Nurs 2003 ;103 :101 -2,105-6,108-9.
69 Arroll B, Goodyear-Smith F, Kerse N, Fishman T,
                    Gunn J. Effect of the addition of a “help” question to two screening questions
                    on specificity for diagnosis of depression in general practice: diagnostic
                    validity study.
                        BMJ 2005 ;331 :884 16166106 
70 Beck CT, Gable RK. Screening performance of the
                    postpartum depression screening scale-Spanish version. J Transcult
                        Nurs 2005 ;16 :331 -8.16160195 
71 Lloyd-Williams M, Friedman T, Rudd N. Criterion
                    validation of the Edinburgh postnatal depression scale as a screening tool for
                    depression in patients with advanced metastatic cancer. J Pain Symptom
                        Manage 2000 ;20 :259 -65.11027907 
72 Lloyd-Williams M, Friedman T, Rudd N. An analysis
                    of the validity of the hospital anxiety and depression scale as a screening tool
                    in patients with advanced metastatic cancer. J Pain Symptom
                        Manage 2001 ;22 :990 -6.11738161 
73 Vittayanont A, Liabsuetrakul T, Pitanupong J.
                    Development of postpartum depression screening scale (PDSS): a Thai version for
                    screening postpartum depression. J Med Assoc
                        Thai 2006 ;89 :1 -7.16583573
