
==== Front
BMJBMJbmjBMJ : British Medical Journal0959-81381756-1833BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. 23241268bomm00347810.1136/bmj.e7396ResearchChristmas 2012: ResearchUsing a dog’s superior olfactory sensitivity to identify
Clostridium difficile in stools and patients: proof of
principle study Bomers Marije K consultant1van Agtmael Michiel A consultant1Luik Hotsche canine trainer and psychologist2van Veen Merk C resident3Vandenbroucke-Grauls Christina M J E professor4Smulders Yvo M professor11 Department of Internal Medicine, VU University
Medical Centre, PO Box 7057, 1007 MB Amsterdam, Netherlands2 Scent Detection Academy and Research, Animal
Behaviour and Cognition, HL&HONDEN, Edam, Netherlands3 Department of Internal Medicine, St Lucas Andreas
Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands4 Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection
Control, VU University Medical CentreCorrespondence to: M K Bomers m.bomers@vumc.nl2012 2012 13 12 2012 345 e739624 9 2012 © Bomers et al 20122012Bomers et alThis is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly
cited, the use is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the
license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Objective To investigate whether a dog’s superior olfactory
sensitivity can be used to detect Clostridium difficile in
stool samples and hospital patients.

Design Proof of principle study, using a case-control design. 

Setting Two large Dutch teaching hospitals.

Participants A 2 year old beagle trained to identify the smell of
C difficile and tested on 300 patients (30 with C
difficile infection and 270 controls).

Intervention The dog was guided along the wards by its trainer, who
was blinded to the participants’ infection status. Each detection round
concerned 10 patients (one case and nine controls). The dog was trained to sit
or lie down when C difficile was detected.

Main outcome measures Sensitivity and specificity for detection of
C difficile in stool samples and in patients.

Results The dog’s sensitivity and specificity for identifying
C difficile in stool samples were both 100% (95% confidence
interval 91% to 100%). During the detection rounds, the dog correctly identified
25 of the 30 cases (sensitivity 83%, 65% to 94%) and 265 of the 270 controls
(specificity 98%, 95% to 99%).

Conclusion A trained dog was able to detect C
difficile with high estimated sensitivity and specificity, both in
stool samples and in hospital patients infected with C
difficile.
==== Body
Introduction
Clostridium difficile infection is common, particularly in people in
healthcare facilities who have received antimicrobials. C difficile
causes toxin mediated intestinal disease, with symptoms ranging from mild diarrhoea
to severe pseudomembranous colitis and toxic megacolon. The bacterium can be
transmitted through either personal contact or the environment.1 Since 2000 more frequent and severe disease has emerged and
large outbreaks in hospitals have necessitated ward closures and extensive infection
control measures.2
3
4 Infection rates seem to be higher in North
America than in Europe.3
5 In the Netherlands the incidence of
nosocomial C difficile infection is comparable to that of other
European countries (mean incidence 17.5-23/10 000 admissions)6
7; the mean incidence in the United Kingdom
is 50/10 000 admissions.6

Early and rapid identification of C difficile infection is important
for the initiation of infection control measures and treatment to prevent
transmission.8 Several combinations of
tests are used to diagnose cases. The traditional standard is by cytotoxin assay,
which if C difficile toxins are present shows cytotoxicity of
faecal eluate on mammalian cells. This technique requires cell cultures, however,
and results take at least 1-2 days.9
10 Culture on selective media is very
sensitive but also time consuming and it lacks specificity because of possible
carriage of non-toxigenic isolates. Cultured strains can subsequently be tested for
the production of toxins, in which case this is referred to as a toxigenic
culture.4
10 Easy and rapid enzyme immunoassays to
detect C difficile toxins or antigens are often used, despite their
limited sensitivity or specificity.10
11 More recently, several nucleic acid
amplification tests have been developed that have a high diagnostic accuracy and
short turnaround time, although these tests are expensive and require specialised
equipment and expertise.4
10
11
12

In daily practice, several factors delay the identification of C
difficile infections. These include doctor’s delay (for example, the
doctor does not consider the possibility of a C difficile
infection, or decides to wait and see if the symptoms pass), inefficient sampling,
and time required to process samples in the laboratory.13
14 As a result the mean time from onset of
symptoms to start of treatment in studies ranges from 2.8 to 7.7 days.13
14 This can result in spread of C
difficile infection by delaying appropriate infection control measures
such as transferring patients to a single room. Screening all hospital patients at
regular intervals could theoretically prevent delays in diagnosis but this is costly
and impractical.

In the 1970s C difficile was identified as the cause of
pseudomembranous colitis.15
16 Since then, C difficile
associated diarrhoea has often been described as having a characteristic smell.17 Sensitivity and specificity of the
odiferous detection of C difficile by nursing staff are 55-82% and
77-83%, respectively.18
19 Dogs have a far superior sense of smell,
however, which is thought to exceed that of humans by a factor of 100.20 We hypothesised that it may be possible
for a dog to be trained to recognise the presence of C difficile in
stool samples, or even in patients. If so, this could prove a valuable screening
tool for C difficile infections in healthcare facilities.

Methods
The training process
The dog used in this study was a 2 year old male beagle (fig 1
). A professional detection dog instructor
(HL) trained the dog to identify C difficile in stool samples
and, if this proved possible, in patients. A reward based training method was
used in which the correct behaviour was reinforced, for instance by providing a
treat. The dog was taught to sit or lie down if a specific scent was detected.
He had not received previous training in detection.

Fig 1 Detection dog on hospital ward

Training began by introducing the dog to the specific odour of toxigenic
C difficile strains on culture plates. Wooden sticks were
placed over the sample to absorb the scent emanating from the culture plates
(often described as resembling horse manure9). Initially we left the sticks in this position overnight, but
eventually the exposure time was shortened to around five minutes to reduce the
strength of the scent. Early recognition of the scent was achieved by using
simple search and find games, which were gradually replaced by exercises of
increasing difficulty, for instance by using sticks with a fainter smell (that
had not been exposed to the scent as long). Also, the scent was presented to the
dog on materials other than the sticks, such as paper, fabric, and metal, and in
different environments such as a kitchen, forest, or petrol station to vary
background odours.

The next step of training concerned discrimination between stool samples that
were positive for toxin producing C difficile strains from
those that were negative. Again, rather than the dog having direct contact with
the stool sample, we presented the scent in various forms (absorbed on a wooden
stick or on fabric, sample contained in a plastic vial, etc).

After two months’ training we formally tested the diagnostic accuracy of the dog
on stool samples. Finally, we explored the dog’s abilities to detect C
difficile infection in patients admitted to hospital.

Samples and participants
C difficile on culture plates
For training purposes we used clinical isolates of toxigenic C
difficile strains, cultured on standard media under anaerobic
conditions.

Stool samples
We used stool samples that were sent to the microbiology laboratory to test
for C difficile and other infectious causes of diarrhoea.
Samples were considered positive for C difficile if toxin
was detected by enzyme immunoassay (VIDAS Clostridium
difficile A & B; BioMérieux, France) and culture revealed a
toxigenic strain of C difficile. Negative stool samples
were those that gave negative results in both tests. We excluded samples
with inconsistent results (for example, negative result for toxin by enzyme
immunoassay but positive culture result, or an undetermined toxin enzyme
immunoassay value).

Selection of participants
We further explored the dog’s ability to detect C difficile
infection on the wards of two hospitals in Amsterdam: VU University medical
centre (a tertiary clinical care centre) and St Lucas Andreas Hospital (a
large community hospital).

Between September 2010 and May 2011, we screened for inclusion consecutive
patients who had a positive result for toxin by enzyme immunoassay in their
stool sample. We aimed to include 30 patients in total. Both hospitals use
an enzyme immunoassay plus a toxigenic culture to diagnose C
difficile infection; however, the community hospital uses an
enzyme immunoassay by a different manufacturer (ImmunoCard Toxins A&B;
Meridian Bioscience, Cincinnati, OH).

Eligible cases had symptoms of diarrhoea and both a positive result for toxin
by enzyme immunoassay and a toxigenic C difficile strain
detected by culture (in a sample taken less than seven days before the
detection round). We defined diarrhoea as three or more loose or watery
stool passages a day. We excluded children and adults on intensive care
units or haematology wards. Patients with a first relapse after completing
treatment for a previous C difficile infection were
eligible but not those with subsequent relapses. Because the availability of
the dog and trainer could not be guaranteed every weekend we excluded
patients with positive test results during the weekend.

For each case we approached nine control patients. These patients were on the
same ward as and in close proximity to the index patient. Control patients
did not have diarrhoea, or had diarrhoea but a negative result for C
difficile toxin by enzyme immunoassay and culture (in a sample
taken less than seven days previously). All participants (n=300; 30 cases
plus 270 controls) gave informed consent.

Canine testing experiment
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting C difficile in stool samples
We formally tested the dog’s diagnostic accuracy on 50 stool samples with
known positivity for C difficile and 50 with known
negativity after completion of a two month practice period. To avoid the
possibility that the dog simply recognised the odour of the sample rather
than the odour being associated with the presence of C
difficile, we did not use the samples that had been used during
training. The scent of each sample was again absorbed onto different
materials, which were then repeatedly (10 times) presented to the dog in
different environments and at different concentrations. We considered a
result to be positive (or negative) when it consistently provoked the same
positive (or negative) response. If a sample provoked a mixed response
(≤8/10 consistency: for example, eight positive responses and two negative
ones), we classified it as an inconclusive result.

Diagnostic accuracy for detecting C difficile in patients
Next we evaluated the dog’s detection abilities in patients on the wards of
the two hospitals. We prospectively included 30 consecutive patients with
C difficile infection and 270 control patients. For
each case and corresponding nine controls on the ward we organised a
detection round as soon as possible, preferably before starting treatment or
within 36 hours. During this round the dog, trainer, and a member of the
research team simply walked past the beds of the 10 participants. The
trainer classified the dog’s response as either positive (dog sat down),
inconclusive (dog showed excitement, took extra time without actually
sitting down), or negative (dog showed no particular interest). We assumed
the dog would be able to identify the patient with a C
difficile infection by smelling the air surrounding the patient
(independent of a patient’s bowel movements or personal hygiene), so
physical contact was unnecessary and avoided. If there was any doubt, the
round was repeated once. The trainer was not aware of which patients had
C difficile infection.

Statistical analyses
In the primary analyses, we interpreted inconclusive responses as negative ones.
Secondary analysis was done with these responses interpreted as positive. We
calculated 95% confidence intervals using an approximation (according to the
efficient score method, corrected for continuity).21

Safety precautions
We consulted the hospital’s infection control committee to discuss the potential
hazards of allowing a dog in the hospital. In accordance with recent guidelines,
special attention was given to hand hygiene, making sure that staff and patients
washed their hands both before and after contact with the dog.22 During detection rounds, the dog had
no physical contact with patients, and contact with the environment (for
example, bed, chair) was avoided as much as possible. The dog was not allowed in
food preparation areas or on neonatal, haematology, or intensive care wards.

The dog receives a health evaluation by a licensed veterinarian four times a
year. He is not fed raw meat. He is trained solely for the purpose of
recognising C difficile. When at work, he neither barks nor
shows aggression, is easily recognised by his outfit (fig 1), and is always on a
leash. 

Results
Diagnostic accuracy for detecting C difficile in stool
samples
The dog was presented with a total of 100 stool samples: 50 were positive for
C difficile and 50 were negative. The dog gave a positive
response to all 50 positive samples and a negative response to 47 of the 50
negative samples, with the remaining three negative samples recorded as an
inconclusive response. In the primary analysis (interpreting inconclusive
responses as negative responses), sensitivity and specificity were both 100%
(95% confidence interval 91% to 100%). If an inconclusive response was
considered as a positive result (secondary analysis), the dog’s sensitivity and
specificity were 100% (91% to 100%) and 94% (83% to 98%), respectively.

Patients’ characteristics
The supplementary video illustrates how the detection rounds were carried out.
One round took place on a paediatric ward but the children became excitable by
having an animal on the ward and distracted the dog. For this reason the round
was not included and paediatric wards were excluded from the study.

Thirty patients with C difficile infection and 270 control
patients were included in the study. Table 1
shows the characteristics of those patients. On the day of the detection round
all 30 cases had diarrhoea compared with 16 (6%) of the controls. Stool samples
from 35 controls (13%) were tested for C difficile on clinical
grounds (presence of diarrhoea) in the week leading up to the detection round;
these all gave negative results, although a non-toxigenic C
difficile strain was cultured from two controls. All but three
cases formally met the definition for C difficile infection.
The first patient had symptoms of the infection and a positive result for toxin
by enzyme immunoassay, but a culture was mistakenly not done. The second patient
had symptoms and a positive result for toxin by enzyme immunoassay but an
initial negative culture result, which turned out to be positive when repeated.
The third patient had a relapse with recurring symptoms and a positive toxigenic
culture result but negative result for toxin by enzyme immunoassay.

Table 1  Characteristics of patients with Clostridium difficile
infection and controls. Values are numbers (percentages) unless stated
otherwise

Characteristics	Controls
(n=270)	Cases
(n=30)	Total
(n=300)	
Men	152
(56)	15 (50)	167
(57)	
Median
(interquartile range) age (years)	65
(54-78)	68
(51-75)	65
(54-78)	
Ward
type:				
 Medical	165
(61)	19 (63)	184
(61)	
 Surgical	105
(39)	11 (37)	116
(39)	
Diarrhoea on
day of detection round*	16 (6)	30
(100)	46 (15)	
Clinical
characteristics:				
 No test done
and no diarrhoea symptoms†	235
(87)	0 (0)	—	
 No infection,
confirmed by negative test result*†	35 (13)	0 (0)	—	
 Infection,
confirmed by diarrhoea and positive test result†	0 (0)	30
(100)	—	
 Treatment for
>36 hours on day of detection round	0 (0)	3 (10)	—	
*All controls with diarrhoea on day of detection round underwent
diagnostic testing for C difficile infection and are
included in group with no infection and confirmed by negative test
result.

†C difficile toxin enzyme immunoassay and culture done
on stool sample in seven days before detection round.

Diagnostic accuracy for detecting C difficile in
patients
Figure 2
 illustrates the diagnostic
accuracy of the dog. An inconclusive response was recorded in seven
participants: three cases and four controls. In the primary analysis
(interpreting inconclusive responses as negative results), the dog correctly
identified 25/30 cases (sensitivity 83%, 95% confidence interval 65% to 94 %)
and 265/270 controls (specificity 98%, 95% to 99%). If inconclusive responses
were considered as positive results (secondary analysis), the dog correctly
identified 28 cases (sensitivity 93%, 76% to 99%) and 261 controls (specificity
97%, 94% to 98%).

Fig 2 Diagnostic accuracy of dog for detecting
Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) 

Table 2 provides information on the occasions
that the dog and the laboratory gave discrepant results (inconclusive dog
responses, false positives, and false negatives). In some instances the dog was
clearly distracted by unrelated stimuli (for instance, by being offered a
treat). Other cases were less clear and it cannot be ruled out that the dog
responded to diarrhoea that was not caused by C difficile (for
example, control 7, table 2) or asymptomatic carriage of a non-toxigenic strain
(for example, control 8, table 2). Of all 16 participants with diarrhoea not
related to C difficile infection, the dog gave a negative
response in 13 controls and an inconclusive response in three controls.

Table 2  Participants with a discrepancy between laboratory results and dog
response

Variables	Dog
response	Laboratory tests*	Diarrhoea
on day of detection round	Comment	
Inconclusive
dog response:					
 Case 1	Inconclusive	Positive
result	Yes	Dog appeared
distracted by plastic cup on floor	
 Control
2	Inconclusive	Negative
result	Yes	During this
round there was a strong chlorine smell in several rooms, from
disinfection, which could have influenced the dog’s response.
Tests were done on participants with an inconclusive response in
this round	
 Case 3	Inconclusive	Positive
result	Yes	Chlorine
round, see comment for control 2	
 Control
4	Inconclusive	Not done	No	Case 5 had
just changed beds; the dog seemed to have difficulty choosing
between two neighbouring patients (control 4 and case 5) and the
third (empty) bed across the room; he sat in the middle	
 Case 5	Inconclusive	Positive
result	Yes	See comment
for control 4	
 Control
6	Inconclusive	Negative
result	Yes	On the ward
was a patient with Clostridium difficile
infection who refused to participate in the study. The dog was
not allowed to enter the patient’s room; however, the dog was
excited and tried to enter. When forced to move away, he
immediately sat down next to control 6, who was the first
participant he encountered. Because of symptoms, tests had been
done. The enzyme immunoassay gave a negative result; however,
stool culture showed non-toxigenic C
difficile	
 Control
7	Inconclusive	Negative
result	Yes	No apparent
explanation	
False
positives†:					
 Control
8	Positive	Negative
result	No	Chlorine
round, see comment for control 2. Enzyme immunoassay gave a
negative result; however, stool culture showed non-toxigenic
C difficile	
 Control
9	Positive	Not done	No	Participant
offered the dog a cookie 	
 Control
10	Positive	Not done	No	Participant
beckoned the dog	
Control
11	Positive	Negative
result	No	Dog appeared
distracted by urine on the floor from a broken catheter bag	
 Control
12	Positive	Negative
result	No	This
participant had been treated for C difficile
infection, diagnosed 11 days previously. Since symptoms resolved
on the day of the detection round, the patient was included as a
control. However, a week after the round symptoms returned and
retesting showed a relapse	
False
negatives‡:					
 Case 13	Negative	Positive
result	Yes	No clear
explanation	
 Case 14	Negative	Positive
result	Yes	The enzyme
immunoassay gave a positive result; culture was mistakenly not
done	
*Enzyme immunoassay+toxigenic culture.

†Participants with negative laboratory results but positive dog
response.

‡Participants with negative laboratory results but positive dog
response.

Discussion
It is feasible to use a dog to detect Clostridium difficile in stool
samples and in patients. The dog’s diagnostic accuracy with stool samples suggests
that immediate identification of C difficile is possible. Moreover,
our data suggest that the same may be true for the rapid diagnosis of C
difficile infection on clinical wards. For the purposes of detection
the dog did not need a stool sample or physical contact with patients. It would seem
dogs can detect C difficile in the air surrounding patients. In
addition, dogs are quick and efficient: patients in a hospital ward can be screened
for the presence of C difficile infection in less than 10
minutes.

This is the first report of animal assisted detection of C
difficile. There have been several studies and anecdotal reports on
olfactory detection in medicine, mostly using dogs—for example, to detect
malignancies of bladder, lung, breast, skin, prostate, ovary, and colon.23
24
25
26
27
28
29 In nearly all the studies, however, the
animals were exposed to biological samples obtained from patients and not to the
patients themselves.

Limitations of the study
Our study has several limitations. The small number of patients with C
difficile infection limits the precision with which we can
establish the dog’s sensitivity and specificity. The design of the study
consistently included one case per round of 10 patients. Anticipation of a
single positive result could have influenced the trainer’s behaviour, thereby
unintentionally influencing the dog’s response.30 Furthermore, two thirds of the cases had been moved to a single
room (to control transmission) when the dog arrived, and occupancy of a single
room might again have influenced the trainer and therefore the dog’s
response.30

In this study, culture was not routinely carried out on controls to screen for
asymptomatic carriage of toxigenic and non-toxigenic C
difficile. This is a limitation as consequently we do not know the
percentage of asymptomatic C difficile carriers in our
population and how the dog responded to them. Asymptomatic carriage of both
toxigenic and non-toxigenic strains occurs in up to 18-30% of patients in
hospital.31
32
33
34 This argues against a positive
response by the dog. As the clinical relevance of detecting C
difficile infection rather than carriage is far greater (both for
the patient and for the prevention of transmission1
31), this was the focus of our
study.

Another concern is that the results are not easily generalisable because we used
only one dog and one trainer. It could be that the findings would be less
convincing for another dog or trainer. Although unlikely, we cannot rule out the
possibility that our first and only experience was with an exceptional
dog-trainer combination. Should more dogs become available in the future for
detection of C difficile infection, trained animals would need
an individual assessment of performance and regular practice to maintain their
skills. A second limitation of using an animal as a diagnostic tool is that, as
with humans, behaviour is not fully predictable. The dog’s reaction to other
stimuli (for example, children’s play, being beckoned, being offered a treat)
illustrates that, despite a high level of training, dogs are still prone to
distraction.

Another limitation is that we trained the dog in the hospital setting. Outside
the research protocol we visited a few patients with C
difficile infection on long term care facility wards. These cases
spent much of the day in a shared living room and not in their beds. This proved
more difficult for the dog. We hypothesise that in the hospital setting the bed
is a strong source of smell because the patients are often bedridden and the
mattress is more likely absorb odours. Patients in the community setting are
often less confined to their room and bed. This could make odours more diffuse
and more difficult to pinpoint. Also, the dog may have been conditioned to
respond to the bacterium when a patient was in a hospital room (usually in bed).
This may mean that detection dogs are less suitable for other settings such as
nursing homes, at least without additional training.

The use of dogs in hospitals might pose a risk to the dogs themselves, hospital
staff, and patients. Dogs can be carriers of C difficile
strains and other pathogens. Similar to hospital staff, the dog could be a
source of transmission. This risk could be minimised by using strict preventive
measures such as avoiding physical contact with patients and their
surroundings.

Unanswered questions
Unanswered questions remain, such as what does the dog actually smell—is it a
certain quantity of bacteria, toxins, or other bacterial products? How does the
dog respond to stool samples that are negative for toxin by enzyme immunoassay
but positive by toxigenic culture, cytotoxicity assay, or nucleic acid
amplification tests? And how does the dog respond to patients early in the
course of the infection, or those with asymptomatic carriage of toxigenic and
non-toxigenic strains? Does a positive response by the dog to a patient without
symptoms predict disease? Can a persistent positive response by the dog after
symptoms have cleared predict relapse, as suggested by the response to one
participant (control 12, table 2)? Will the dog perform equally well in a high
incidence setting—that is, during an outbreak, when several patients in one room
could be affected? We intend to deal with these situations in future
studies.

How could a dog that detects C difficile infection be used in
daily practice? With regular surveillance rounds (for instance to screen all
wards in a hospital with a high incidence of infection several times a week, a
“pet scan”) C difficile might be detected earlier. Early
detection could overcome common diagnostic delays (lack of clinical suspicion,
delays in sampling stool, and laboratory procedures) and lead to prompt hygienic
measures and treatment. However, further studies will clearly have to examine
whether surveillance can actually limit transmission and reduce the incidence of
infection. For example, surveillance is principally different from the type of
case directed diagnosis in this study design, because the dog cannot immediately
receive a reward after a positive identification, potentially extinguishing the
trained alert.

In conclusion, in this proof of principle study a trained dog was able to detect
C difficile with high estimated sensitivity and
specificity, both in stool samples and in infected patients in a hospital
setting. This finding could have great potential for screening for C
difficile infection in healthcare facilities and thus contribute to
the control and prevention of outbreaks.

What is already known on this topic
Early and rapid identification of Clostridium
difficile infection (CDI) is important to prevent
transmission by initiating adequate isolation measures and
treatment

Studies have, however, shown that the mean time between the onset
of symptoms and treatment is about 3-8 days

Despite the availability of a wide range of diagnostic tests, CDI
is still a widespread healthcare related infection

What this study adds
A dog can be trained to identify C difficile
with high estimated sensitivity and specificity, both in stool
samples and in hospital patients with CDI 

The potential of using a dog for detection is the ability to
screen hospital wards for infected patients

Such screening could overcome common delays in diagnosis and thus
help to control and prevent CDI outbreaks

Supplementary Video
Cliff has been trained to sniff out the bacteria clostridium difficile


 Contributors: MKB, MvA, CvdB-G, and YMS developed the concept and outlined
the methods. HL trained the dog. MKB, HL, and MvV carried out the detection
rounds and collected the data. MKB analysed the data and drafted the paper.
MvA, CvdB-G, and YMS provided conceptual and technical guidance. All authors
critically appraised the paper, revised where appropriate and approved the
final version of the manuscript. MKB and YMS are the guarantors.

Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure
form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from
the corresponding author) and declare: HL is the owner and chairman of the
Animal Behaviour and Cognition, Scent Detection Research and Academy
HL&HONDEN, Edam, Netherlands; otherwise no support from any organisation
for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organisations
that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three
years; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have
influenced the submitted work.

Ethical approval: The research protocol was approved by the institutional
review boards of both hospitals.

Data sharing: No additional data available.

Cite this as: BMJ 2012;345:e7396
==== Refs
1 Samore MH, Venkataraman L, DeGirolami PC, Arbeit
RD, Karchmer AW. Clinical and molecular epidemiology of sporadic and clustered
cases of nosocomial Clostridium difficile diarrhea. Am J
Med 1996 ;100 :32 -40.8579084 
2 Loo VG, Poirier L, Miller MA, Oughton M, Libman
MD, Michaud S, et al. A predominantly clonal multi-institutional outbreak of
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea with high morbidity and mortality.
N Engl J
Med 2005 ;353 :2442 -9.16322602 
3 Freeman J, Bauer MP, Baines SD, Corver J, Fawley
WN, Goorhuis B, et al. The changing epidemiology of Clostridium difficile
infections. Clin Microbiol
Rev 2010 ;23 :529 -49.20610822 
4 Rupnik M, Wilcox MH, Gerding DN. Clostridium
difficile infection: new developments in epidemiology and pathogenesis.
Nat Rev
Microbiol 2009 ;7 :526 -36.19528959 
5 Kuijper EJ, Coignard B, Tull P. Emergence of
Clostridium difficile-associated disease in North America and Europe.
Clin Microbiol
Infect 2006 ;12 (Suppl
6):2 -18.
6 Bauer MP, Notermans DW, van Benthem BH, Brazier
JS, Wilcox MH, Rupnik M, et al. Clostridium difficile infection in Europe: a
hospital-based survey.
Lancet 2011 ;377 :63 -73.21084111 
7 Hensgens MP, Goorhuis A, van Kinschot CM, Crobach
MJ, Harmanus C, Kuijper EJ. Clostridium difficile infection in an endemic
setting in the Netherlands. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect
Dis 2011 ;30 :587 -93.21194003 
8 Muto CA, Blank MK, Marsh JW, Vergis EN, O’Leary
MM, Shutt KA, et al. Control of an outbreak of infection with the hypervirulent
Clostridium difficile BI strain in a university hospital using a comprehensive
“bundle” approach. Clin Infect
Dis 2007 ;45 :1266 -73.17968819 
9 Delmee M. Laboratory diagnosis of Clostridium
difficile disease. Clin Microbiol
Infect 2001 ;7 :411 -6.11591203 
10 Kufelnicka AM, Kirn TJ. Effective utilization of
evolving methods for the laboratory diagnosis of Clostridium difficile
infection. Clin Infect
Dis 2011 ;52 :1451 -7.21628487 
11 Crobach MJ, Dekkers OM, Wilcox MH, Kuijper EJ.
European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID): data
review and recommendations for diagnosing Clostridium difficile-infection (CDI).
Clin Microbiol
Infect 2009 ;15 :1053 -66.19929972 
12 Karre T, Sloan L, Patel R, Mandrekar J, Rosenblatt
J. Comparison of two commercial molecular assays to a laboratory developed
molecular assay for diagnosis of Clostridium difficile infection. J Clin
Microbiol 2011 ;49 :725 -7.21123537 
13 Frenz MB, McIntyre AS. Reducing delays in the
diagnosis and treatment of Clostridium difficile diarrhoea. Q J
Med 2003 ;96 :579 -82.
14 Scheurer D. Diagnostic and treatment delays in
recurrent Clostridium difficile-associated disease. J Hosp
Med 2008 ;3 :156 -9.18438792 
15 Bartlett JG, Onderdonk AB, Cisneros RL, Kasper DL.
Clindamycin-associated colitis due to a toxin-producing species of Clostridium
in hamsters. J Infect
Dis 1977 ;136 :701 -5.915343 
16 George RH, Symonds JM, Dimock F, Brown JD, Arabi
Y, Shinagawa N, et al. Identification of Clostridium difficile as a cause of
pseudomembranous colitis.
BMJ 1978 ;1 :695 630301 
17 Bartlett JG, Gerding DN. Clinical recognition and
diagnosis of Clostridium difficile infection. Clin Infect
Dis 2008 ;46 (Suppl
1):S12 -8.18177217 
18 Burdette SD, Bernstein JM. Does the nose know? The
odiferous diagnosis of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea. Clin
Infect
Dis 2007 ;44 :1142 17366472 
19 Johansen A, Vasishta S, Edison P, Hosein I.
Clostridium difficile associated diarrhoea: how good are nurses at identifying
the disease? Age
Ageing 2002 ;31 :487 -8.
20 Issel-Tarver L, Rine J. The evolution of mammalian
olfactory receptor genes.
Genetics 1997 ;145 :185 -95.9017400 
21 Newcombe RG. Two-sided confidence intervals for
the single proportion: comparison of seven methods. Stat
Med 1998 ;17 :857 -72.9595616 
22 Lefebvre SL, Golab GC, Christensen E, Castrodale
L, Aureden K, Bialachowski A, et al. Guidelines for animal-assisted
interventions in health care facilities. Am J Infect
Control 2008 ;36 :78 -85.18313508 
23 Willis CM, Church SM, Guest CM, Cook WA, McCarthy
N, Bransbury AJ, et al. Olfactory detection of human bladder cancer by dogs:
proof of principle study.
BMJ 2004 ;329 :712 15388612 
24 McCulloch M, Jezierski T, Broffman M, Hubbard A,
Turner K, Janecki T. Diagnostic accuracy of canine scent detection in early- and
late-stage lung and breast cancers. Integr Cancer
Ther 2006 ;5 :30 -9.16484712 
25 Ehmann R, Boedeker E, Friedrich U, Sagert J,
Dippon J, Friedel G, et al. Canine scent detection in the diagnosis of lung
cancer: revisiting a puzzling phenomenon. Eur Respir
J 2012 ;39 :669 -76.21852337 
26 Sonoda H, Kohnoe S, Yamazato T, Satoh Y, Morizono
G, Shikata K, et al. Colorectal cancer screening with odour material by canine
scent detection.
Gut 2011 ;60 :814 -9.21282130 
27 Horvath G, Andersson H, Paulsson G. Characteristic
odour in the blood reveals ovarian carcinoma. BMC
Cancer 2010 ;10 :643 21106067 
28 Cornu JN, Cancel-Tassin G, Ondet V, Girardet C,
Cussenot O. Olfactory detection of prostate cancer by dogs sniffing urine: a
step forward in early diagnosis. Eur
Urol 2011 ;59 :197 -201.20970246 
29 Williams H, Pembroke A. Sniffer dogs in the
melanoma clinic?
Lancet 1989 ;1 :734 
30 Lit L, Schweitzer JB, Oberbauer AM. Handler
beliefs affect scent detection dog outcomes. Anim
Cogn 2011 ;14 :387 -94.21225441 
31 McFarland LV, Mulligan ME, Kwok RY, Stamm WE.
Nosocomial acquisition of Clostridium difficile infection. N Engl J
Med 1989 ;320 :204 -10.2911306 
32 Samore MH, DeGirolami PC, Tlucko A, Lichtenberg
DA, Melvin ZA, Karchmer AW. Clostridium difficile colonization and diarrhea at a
tertiary care hospital. Clin Infect
Dis 1994 ;18 :181 -7.8161624 
33 Clabots CR, Johnson S, Olson MM, Peterson LR,
Gerding DN. Acquisition of Clostridium difficile by hospitalized patients:
evidence for colonized new admissions as a source of infection. J Infect
Dis 1992 ;166 :561 -7.1323621 
34 Shim JK, Johnson S, Samore MH, Bliss DZ, Gerding
DN. Primary symptomless colonisation by Clostridium difficile and decreased risk
of subsequent diarrhoea.
Lancet 1998 ;351 :633 -6.9500319
