
==== Front
BMJbmjBMJ : British Medical Journal0959-81381468-5833BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. kent58321110.1136/bmj.b12819204035ResearchPreserving professional credibility: grounded theory study of medical
                    trainees’ requests for clinical support Kennedy Tara J T research fellowdevelopmental paediatrician123Regehr Glenn Richard and Elizabeth Currie chair in health professions education
                        research and professor4scientist5associate director1Baker G Ross professor of health policy, management and evaluation4Lingard Lorelei scientist16associate professor7BMO financial group professor and education scientist81 Wilson Centre for Research in Education, Toronto, ON,
                    Canada 2 Bloorview Kids Rehab, Toronto, ON, Canada3 Stan Cassidy Centre for Rehabilitation, Fredericton,
                    NB, Canada4 Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
                    ON, Canada5 Toronto General Research Institute, University Health
                    Network, Toronto, ON, Canada6 SickKids Learning Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada7 Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto,
                    Toronto, ON, Canada 8 University Health Network, Toronto, ON, CanadaCorrespondence to: T Kennedy
                tara.kennedy@utoronto.ca2009 2009 09 2 2009 338 b1287 10 2008 © Kennedy et al 20092009Kennedy et alThis is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
                        Commons Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits unrestricted use,
                        distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
                        properly cited.

Objective To develop a conceptual framework of the influences on
                    medical trainees’ decisions regarding requests for clinical support from a
                    supervisor.

Design Phase 1: members of teaching teams in internal and emergency
                    medicine were observed during regular clinical activities (216 hours) and
                    subsequently completed brief interviews. Phase 2: 36 in depth interviews were
                    conducted using videotaped vignettes to probe tacit influences on decisions to
                    request support. Data collection and analysis used grounded theory methods.

Setting Three teaching hospitals in an urban setting in Canada.

Participants 124 members of teaching teams on general internal
                    medicine wards and in the emergency department, comprising 31 attending
                    physicians, 57 junior and senior residents, 28 medical students, and eight
                    nurses. Purposeful sampling to saturation was conducted.

Results Trainees’ decisions about whether or not to seek clinical
                    support were influenced by three issues: the clinical question (clinical
                    importance, scope of practice), supervisor factors (availability,
                    approachability), and trainee factors (skill, desire for independence,
                    evaluation). Trainees perceived that requesting frequent/inappropriate support
                    threatened their credibility and used rhetorical strategies to preserve
                    credibility. These strategies included building a case for the importance of
                    requests, saving requests for opportune moments, making a plan before requesting
                    support, and targeting requests to specific team members.

Conclusions Trainees consider not only clinical implications but
                    also professional credibility when requesting support from clinical supervisors.
                    Exposing the complexity of this process provides the opportunity to make changes
                    to training programmes to promote timely supervision and provides a framework
                    for further exploration of the impact of clinical training on quality of care of
                    patients.
==== Body
Introduction
A central tenet of medical education is that trainees must progressively assume more
                responsibility for care of patients to become independent practitioners.1
                2
                3
                4
                5
                6 In the course of assuming responsibility
                for such care, trainees regularly encounter situations that “exceed their confidence
                or skill to handle alone.”1 In such
                situations, they have an “obligation to secure direct assistance from faculty or
                appropriately experienced residents.”1 Thus
                quality of care in clinical training depends, to a large part, on communication
                between trainees and supervisors in the form of requests for clinical help when
                required.

This reliance on trainees’ requests works much of the time, but when it doesn’t the
                results can be devastating. One infamous example of a breakdown in the supervision
                request process is the 2001 case at Boston Children’s Hospital, where a state review
                determined that a 5 year old boy who died after a prolonged seizure did not receive
                optimal medical treatment.7 Two postgraduate
                medical trainees arrived soon after the seizure began, but a senior physician was
                not called to the bedside until an hour into the episode.

This case shows the link between quality of care and timely requests for clinical
                help. It is potentially dangerous to assume that trainees’ requests for support
                arise directly from clinical need, without complication. Ethnographic studies of
                medical education and research on case presentations have suggested that
                communication between trainees and their supervisors is not a straightforward
                transmission of clinical information but rather is complicated by issues such as
                evaluation, learning agendas, and professional socialisation.8
                9
                10
                11

If we are to continue to provide the educational benefit of clinical independence to
                    trainees,12 a critical examination of
                the process of requesting clinical support is required. We developed a conceptual
                framework of the influences on trainees’ decisions to request clinical help from a
                supervisor through exploration of teaching team practices.

Methods
We designed the study using grounded theory,13
                14
                15
                16 a research method intended to develop a
                theoretical explanation of a social phenomenon that is “grounded in” (that is,
                derived from) naturalistic data.17
                Participants in the study were 124 members of clinical teaching teams in general
                internal medicine and emergency medicine, including attending physicians (n=31),
                junior and senior residents (n=57), medical students (n=28), and nurses (n=8). We
                used purposeful sampling13 to ensure
                inclusion of participants of both sexes and of different levels of experience.
                Sampling continued until saturation of the data was reached (the point at which
                further sampling ceases to yield any new analytical concepts).18

In the Canadian medical education system, students complete an undergraduate
                university degree before entering medical school. Medical school programmes last
                three to four years, the final two years of which are spent training primarily in
                clinical settings. The medical students in this study were all in their third or
                fourth year of medical school. Graduates of Canadian medical schools then enter
                postgraduate training programmes, commonly called residencies, before undertaking
                the certification examinations required to practise as independent physicians. These
                last from two to five or more years, depending on the degree of subspecialisation
                undertaken. The junior resident participants were in their first or second year of
                postgraduate training. The senior residents were all late in their second year of
                specialty training after medical school or beyond.

The project took place in three academic health sciences centres associated with a
                Canadian medical school in a large urban setting. Sampling from the three centres
                was performed to provide a broad range of relevant perspectives and practices and to
                increase transferability of resultant analytic concepts. Settings included the
                emergency departments and the general internal medicine inpatient teaching wards of
                the three centres. We chose these areas of intense clinical teaching to represent
                different clinical supervisory structures. In the emergency medicine settings, all
                trainees, regardless of seniority, assessed patients on their own and then reported
                back to an in house attending physician. On the general internal medicine wards,
                trainees worked in teams with at least one medical student, one or two junior
                residents, a senior resident, and an attending physician. The attending physicians
                and senior trainees provided supervision for junior trainees in a hierarchical
                supervisory structure, with the senior resident running the day to day clinical
                activities. On the general internal medicine wards, the senior resident was
                generally the senior in house physician at night, while the attending physician
                could be contacted at home for support. In both settings, the amount of direct
                contact between attending physicians and trainees was determined by the individual
                attending physician (and depended on several variables in the specific clinical
                    context).19 Throughout the course of
                clinical training in Canada, attending physicians provide evaluation and feedback
                for all trainees under their supervision (with input from senior trainees when they
                are working in teams like in general internal medicine).

Phases of study
The study was designed in two phases. Phase 1 consisted of non-participant
                    observations and brief interviews. Phase 2 consisted of in depth interviews with
                    video vignette prompts. The principal investigator and a research assistant
                    collected all data; neither had any affiliation with the study sites or previous
                    knowledge of the participants.

Phase 1 involved non-participant observation20 of 12 teaching teams (seven in general internal medicine and five in
                    emergency medicine, with a total of 88 team members observed). Each team was
                    observed on six occasions over the course of one month (total of 216 hours of
                    observation). Observations were scheduled to sample the maximum possible variety
                    of clinical activities for each team. Detailed structured field notes were
                        kept.20 Observers initially
                    recorded, in as much detail as possible, any observed interactions between
                    supervising physicians and trainees (including the content of conversations, the
                    context, participants and intended audience for relevant comments, and the
                    non-verbal nuances involved in the interactions). In accordance with grounded
                    theory principles, the structure of the field notes evolved as the study
                    progressed to reflect emergent analytical concepts.13 As a source of triangulating data, 65 members of
                    teaching teams also completed a brief (15 minute) interview near the end of the
                    month of observations (we did not interview trainees whose rotation with the
                    team finished before the end of the observation period). The interviews were
                    used to explore the authenticity21 of
                    the observational data and to probe the intentions and rationales behind
                    observed behaviours. The interviews were audiotaped and were anonymised during
                    transcription.

We analysed the field notes, reflective notes, and interview transcripts for
                    emergent themes using grounded theory methods.17 Data collection and analysis proceeded simultaneously in an
                    iterative fashion, in which the results of the ongoing data analysis informed
                    subsequent data collection. Two researchers recursively read the dataset to
                    develop a preliminary coding structure.13 The research team, which included a paediatric clinician educator
                    (who had recently finished training), a qualitative education scientist, a
                    cognitive psychologist, and a health policy researcher, discussed, refined, and
                    confirmed this coding structure. Confirmability was ensured by maintaining an
                    audit trail of all analytical memos, minutes of the meetings, and revisions to
                    the coding structure. One coder applied the final coding structure to the
                    complete dataset, using NVivo software to facilitate cross referencing.22 Phase 1 generated a model of
                    supervision practices and an exploration of how supervisors make decisions about
                    the nature of the supervision to be provided to clinical trainees, which has
                    been published elsewhere.19 Phase 1
                    also produced a preliminary conceptual framework regarding decisions to request
                    supervision that was expanded in phase 2.

Phase 2 was designed to refine and expand the emerging conceptual framework,
                    through in depth interviews with video prompts (a technique effective at probing
                    unspoken behavioural influences).23
                    24 We developed a series of 10
                    videotaped vignettes (five set in general internal medicine and five in
                    emergency medicine), each crafted to present a dilemma relevant to decisions
                    about supervision. The vignettes were based on events that occurred during the
                    observations (with details altered to render the original participants
                    unidentifiable). For example, one vignette portrayed a junior resident
                    deliberating about whether or not she should call her attending physician before
                    giving a patient heparin in the middle of the night.

Phase 2 participants included 19 attending physicians, 13 residents, and four
                    medical students. Although the interviews with attending physicians provided
                    some contextual and confirmatory data that were relevant, we report here mainly
                    on phase 1 data and the trainee interviews from phase 2. During the interviews,
                    we asked participants to discuss their opinion of the appropriate response to
                    the dilemma presented in each video vignette and to articulate other possible
                    responses and their reasons for rejecting these (the discourse based interview
                        method).25 We analysed anonymised
                    interview transcripts for both emergent themes and pre-selected themes that had
                    emerged from the phase 1 data. We used an iterative and constant comparative
                    method, in the grounded theory tradition,13 in analysis as described above.

Results
Trainees’ decisions about whether or not to seek clinical support were influenced, as
                one would expect, by the nature of the clinical situation in question, but also by
                factors related to supervisors and to the trainees themselves (tables 1-3
                
                ). The more urgent the clinical situation or the
                more important the implications of the clinical decision to be made, the more likely
                trainees were to seek support from their supervisors. As one junior resident said:
                “I’ll use as an example chest pain . . . if chest pain is getting to a point where
                the patient might need a higher level of care then I’ll always ask for help earlier
                rather than later” (junior resident 14, general internal medicine). Trainees also
                considered whether or not the clinical question fell within the scope of practice
                that was expected of them at their level of training. They expressed reluctance to
                ask for help if the clinical situation was one that they perceived they should have
                mastered at their level. A senior resident explained: “If I want [attending
                physician] to watch me suture, then he probably would laugh at me because that is
                expected of me to know that” (senior resident 1, emergency medicine). On the other
                hand, trainees seemed to have an impression of the types of clinical situation that
                always warranted their contacting a supervisor. For example, one medical student
                relayed a situation where there was a question about a patient’s discharge status:
                “I contacted [attending physician] because . . . obviously I cannot make the call of
                whether or not [patient’s name] can stay in the hospital” (medical student 8,
                general internal medicine).

Table 1  Clinical factors affecting requests from medical trainees for clinical
                        support

Themes and
                                definitions	Representative transcript excerpts	
Clinical situation	
Refers to
                                influence of nature of clinical situation (such as urgency,
                                importance) on decisions about requests for clinical support	“The other day
                                when this guy came in short of breath . . . he just didn’t look
                                good, he was working so hard to breathe and I started to talk to
                                him, and at that point I was like ‘this guy could get really sick
                                really fast,’ so I just ran out and called the fifth year emerg
                                resident” (junior resident 13, emergency medicine)	
Scope of practice	
Refers to way
                                trainees’ judgments about whether or not required clinical action is
                                outside expected knowledge or responsibility for their programme and
                                level of training influences decisions about asking for clinical
                                support related to that action	“You are expected
                                to make certain decisions by yourself at a certain stage of training
                                and that you are really inconveniencing someone else by asking them,
                                that would be used to judge your level of competence I guess”
                                (medical student 4, emergency medicine)	
Table 2  Supervisor factors affecting requests from medical trainees for clinical
                        support

Themes and
                                definitions	Representative transcript excerpts	
Availability	
Refers to examples
                                of how physical proximity of supervisor and timing of clinical
                                situation affect likelihood that trainees will ask for clinical
                                support	“Especially if
                                they’re busy, if they’re running around, answering pages,
                                reassessing people, trying to deal with EMS calling on the patch
                                phone for example . . . it can make it tough to sort of stick your
                                head in and say ‘can we review a case’ or ‘I have a question’”
                                (junior resident 9, emergency medicine)	
Approachability	
Refers to
                                influence of trainees’ perceptions of their relationship with
                                supervisor on decisions about whether or not to ask for clinical
                                support	“There are certain
                                staff that are known for . . . they don’t like to be bothered, you
                                feel that if you call them they’ll feel it’s just a petty problem,
                                why didn’t you look after it yourself. They’ll think less of you as
                                a resident” (junior resident 14, general internal medicine)	
EMS=emergency medical services (dispatching service for ambulances, etc).
                    

Table 3  Trainee factors affecting requests from medical trainees for clinical
                        support

Themes and
                                definitions	Representative transcript excerpts	
Expertise	
Refers to
                                situations where trainees’ level of expertise has an impact on their
                                ability to know when it would be appropriate to ask for clinical
                                support	“I guess one of my
                                pet-peeves . . . there were sort of a bunch of things last year
                                where it wasn’t so much a problem of people didn’t know how to
                                manage patients, but they just didn’t know how or when to call for
                                help. And that’s sort of when bad things can happen” (senior
                                resident 8, general internal medicine)	
Desire for independence	
Refers to
                                instances where trainees’ desire to take on responsibility and
                                perform clinical activities independently might influence decisions
                                about requesting clinical support	“I think there is
                                some personal . . . satisfaction of getting a procedure done by
                                yourself especially when you are a junior, you know it is really
                                satisfying, so you might try not to ask for help” (senior resident
                                3, emergency medicine)	
Evaluation and assessment		
Refers to
                                instances where trainees make decisions about requesting clinical
                                support for evaluative or educational purposes	“I want to look
                                like I’m independent and I can handle questions on my own and I
                                don’t need to go to the attending for every little thing unless it’s
                                big . . . [because] you want to impress and you want to have good
                                things said about you at the end of your rotations” (junior resident
                                5, emergency medicine)	
Decisions about whether or not to seek clinical support were affected not only by the
                clinical implications of their question. Trainees also considered issues related to
                their supervisors (table 2). At a practical
                level, they considered their supervisor’s proximity and availability. When
                supervisors were perceived to be busy, or were not physically present and therefore
                potentially busy with something else, trainees thought that their clinical question
                had to be sufficiently important to warrant a call for help. One senior resident
                said: “it’s not so hard to ask anything if the staff is standing right there, but if
                it is 1.30 in the morning and your resident is asleep . . . I think that has a big
                impact” (senior resident 3, emergency medicine). The trainees also considered their
                relationship with the supervisor when deciding whether or not to ask for
                supervision. Trainees often used the term approachability to refer to their
                perception of the ease with which they could ask a particular supervisor for
                support. As a senior resident explained: “You get a vibe from your staff very
                quickly on when or when you shouldn’t ask for help. And some staff are very open and
                up-front: ‘call me for anything’—very approachable. And some staff you get the
                impression that if you call them in the middle of the night it’s going to be a huge
                deal and they’ll be talking in the morning and be sort of like ‘I can’t believe him.
                He called in the middle of the night’ . . .” (senior resident 10, general internal
                medicine).

Finally, trainees’ decisions about whether or not to seek clinical support were
                influenced by factors related to the trainees themselves (table 3). For example, trainees described how their desire
                for independence in clinical skills affected their decisions about seeking help from
                supervisors. As a junior resident said: “It is empowering when you know you can do
                that, empowering when you have a question and then you think about it and you make a
                decision and then you find out later if it is right” (junior resident 5, general
                internal medicine).

Trainees also discussed how their concern about evaluation and assessment could
                affect decisions, as in the following excerpt from an interview with a senior
                resident in general internal medicine: “Evaluations. They figure into it. To get
                into med school everyone has to love you and you have to have straight As. To get
                into a residency programme of your choice, everyone has to love you and you have to
                have straight As. And so when you go through residency you’re figuring you’re still
                in that mode: ‘Everyone has to love me and I have to get super high marks.’ And
                evaluations are all subjective right? So you piss off the guy by waking him up and
                he’s going to give you a bad evaluation. If that matters to you, you won’t wake him
                up” (senior resident 6, emergency medicine).

Trainees also realise that they might, in some cases, lack the expertise required to
                recognise when they cannot cope and need support from their supervisors. As one
                medical student put it: “Generally I won’t ask for advice unless it seems urgent,
                which I’m not sure if I’m the best judge of that” (medical student 1, general
                internal medicine).

Many factors other than the clinical implications are therefore involved in decisions
                about requests for clinical support. Furthermore, we saw that trainees struggle with
                (and sometimes, particularly in the middle of the night, agonise over) the decision
                of whether or not to call their supervisor to ask for help. What makes these
                decisions so difficult and so complicated? The issue of credibility emerged from our
                data as central to this question. Trainees perceive that their professional
                credibility could be at risk when they admit to a supervisor that they need help.
                Trainees perceive that asking for “appropriate” support aids credibility (akin to
                “knowing one’s limits”), but that asking too often or for too much support threatens
                their credibility as a practitioner. The fact that trainees use rhetorical
                strategies (persuasive arguments)26 to
                preserve their credibility when making requests for help supports this theory. We
                have used the term “rhetorical strategy” here in the theoretical sense to indicate
                language strategies that are purposeful, are targeted towards a particular audience,
                and serve a persuasive function.27 We do
                not intend to invoke the derogatory lay meaning of rhetoric involving artificiality
                or deception. Trainees used four main rhetorical strategies to preserve their
                credibility when requesting clinical support from a supervisor.

Building a case
Along with their request for help, trainees often emphasise details that support
                    the urgency or the importance of their clinical situation as a type of
                    justification for making the request. For example, in the following excerpt from
                    our observation field notes (box 1), a junior resident working in the emergency
                    department asked her attending physician to see a patient before she finished
                    taking the history, emphasising the patient’s level of pain.

Box 1 Transcript from field notes
JR [junior resident] comes in to the nursing station—AP [attending
                            physician] is talking to a nurse.

JR “Sorry . . . would you come see the guy in 12 with me? He’s in really
                            a lot of pain, writhing around on the bed, I didn’t think I should
                            wait.”

JR presents the case in a couple of sentences as they walk down the
                            hallway.

Saving questions
Trainees saved questions and asked them at times convenient to their supervisor.
                    Disturbing a supervisor for an “insignificant” question was perceived as a
                    threat to credibility, while asking the same question of a supervisor who was
                    close by and available did not have the same implications. Consider the excerpt
                    shown in box 2 from our observation notes, in which a trainee’s decision to
                    “save” her request for help in interpreting imaging results leads to a difficult
                    situation.

Box 2 Transcript from field notes
 JR3 [junior resident 3]: “Can we review some imaging? All mine are back
                            now.”

AP [attending physician] and JR3 look at a CXR [chest x ray picture].
                            They then review the old x ray together.

Nurse comes up and asks for nausea meds for the patient with
                            post-concussion syndrome.

JR3: “That’s my patient—I was going to order Gravol [dimenhydrinate] and
                            I forgot . . . I’ll do that [writes orders on the chart]. I got the x
                            ray of the spine and then the CT head.”

AP: “We were going to see the c-spine [cervical spine] x ray before the
                            CT to decide if we needed a CT [computed tomogram] of the spine.”

Junior resident 3: “Oops . . .” [with grimace].

AP looks at the c-spine xrays for a long time. (There is a sense that
                            they are on the borderline of being adequate to rule out a spine injury
                            and that AP might have gotten the CT spine if the patient hadn’t already
                            gone up for CT head).

Attending physician: “I think they’re OK.”

Junior resident 3: “Sorry I jumped the gun on the CT.”

Making a plan
Trainees preserved credibility by making plans and then checking with a
                    supervisor, rather than asking an open ended question about what to do. A senior
                    resident explained: “Sometimes when I’ve had questions, and really not been
                    familiar with the area that my question is on, I will often try to gather some
                    information before I approach my supervisor so I don’t seem like I don’t know
                    anything” (senior resident 3, emergency medicine).

Attending physicians confirmed the impact of this strategy on a trainee’s
                    assessment, as in the following representative excerpt: “A good trainee will say
                    ‘Here’s the information. Here’s my impression and my plan. Can you check this
                    before I implement it?’ And that’s the optimal trainee. That’s someone who’s
                    said ‘Here I go, I’ve made an effort to do everything I can, but because I’m not
                    100% comfortable I would like you to check and see if you agree.’ But not
                    everybody does. Some people either go ahead and do it and then ask you, and you
                    find out after or you see in the ward or written on the chart that they’ve done
                    something potentially dangerous. Or you have someone who doesn’t even make an
                    effort to come up with any plan, but just wants you to make a plan” (attending
                    physician 15, general internal medicine).

Targeted questions
Trainees often targeted questions to less “powerful” members of the team, such as
                    junior residents or allied health professionals, to avoid exposing a lack of
                    clinical knowledge or skill to a supervisor. In this example (box 3), a junior
                    resident asked for clinical information from a peer before speaking with her
                    senior resident.

Box 3 Transcript from field notes
As they are waiting for SR [senior resident], JR1 and JR2 discuss a lab
                            result from a patient on the floor (INR [international normalised ratio]
                            is very high). JR1 mentions that she will obviously hold the Coumadin
                            [warfarin] (the medication that caused the ratio to be raised) and asks
                            JR2 what else he would do. JR2 suggests giving vitamin K. They agree
                            that they would not give FFP [fresh frozen plasma] unless the patient
                            was bleeding actively. . . JR2 then leaves to go see his patient, and
                            JR1 waits for SR.

JR1: “The INR is 10.99.”

SR: “Wow!”

JR1 gives a couple of other pertinent lab results.

JR1: “I’ll hold the Coumadin.”

SR: “And my next question is . . .”

JR1: “Is she bleeding—no. I would give her vitamin K.”

SR: “Yes. I wouldn’t give FFP unless she bleeds.”

JR1 goes to take care of the situation.

Discussion
During clinical training, when trainees experience progressive independence in the
                care of patients, one of the main safety mechanisms is the trainees’ obligation to
                ask for clinical help from a supervisor when faced with problems that exceed their
                clinical knowledge and skills. We have shown the complexity of the process of
                requesting support and the strategies trainees use to maintain professional
                credibility when making such requests. Trainees consider the preservation of their
                professional credibility along with the clinical implications of their situation
                when deciding about whether and how to ask for support. Training programmes and
                clinical educators should not take for granted timely requests for clinical support.

The fact that trainees are concerned about their professional credibility during
                communication with their supervisors does not indicate that they are unconcerned
                about patients’ wellbeing. In fact, many trainees said that concerns about patients’
                care would trump concerns about credibility. As one junior resident in general
                internal medicine said: “you realise that if you make the wrong decision you can
                cause serious harm to someone. So you get over looking stupid really quickly and
                just ask for help” (junior resident 4, general internal medicine). Trainees’ concern
                about professional credibility also involves important learning issues. The desire
                to develop independence in clinical reasoning and the desire to promote an evolving
                identity as an independent clinician are both appropriate educational pursuits. Thus
                trainees’ consideration of professional credibility when making decisions about
                asking for help is not necessarily inappropriate, but it does raise issues of
                practical importance to the safety of patients on clinical teaching teams.

Implications for medical education practice
Many of our participants believed that patients’ safety in clinical teaching
                    situations could be improved by explicitly addressing the link between
                    credibility and asking for help. One attending physician stated: “I have to
                    break them . . . it’s hard, but by the end of the rotation they are getting it.
                    I say over and over, it’s ok to say I don’t know. . .” (attending physician 12,
                    emergency medicine).

We have provided a framework for several interventions that might improve
                    transparency in supervisor-trainee communication about supervision. Trainees
                    could be explicitly taught rhetorical strategies such as “planning before
                    asking” and “targeting questions” to increase their comfort with requesting
                    support from a supervisor. An explicit “scope of practice” could be defined for
                    trainees in a given context to promote a shared understanding of the types of
                    situation that would always warrant contacting a supervisor (such as end of life
                    discussions for junior trainees) or warrant seeking expert help (such as
                    clinical criteria for accessing a rapid response team).28
                    29 Requests for assistance could be
                    explicitly included in the clinical evaluation process, with feedback provided
                    on performance of this skill. The impact of such interventions on the teaching
                    team environment and quality of patients’ care will be important to evaluate.

Our results are also important for clinical supervisors who want to maximise the
                    quality of the clinical care provided by their teaching teams. An understanding
                    of the factors involved in trainees’ decisions about requesting support allows
                    the management of these factors to promote clinical supervision. To give a
                    simple example, consider the issue of availability of a supervisor. Our dataset
                    was filled with instances where trainees reported that they considered asking
                    for help but decided against it because their supervisor wasn’t close by, and
                    they thought that their question wasn’t important enough to warrant a phone call
                    to someone who might be busy with something else. Addressing the issue of
                    supervisor proximity by increasing the number of times supervisors and trainees
                    meet during the day might promote timely discussion about trainees’ clinical
                    concerns. An evaluation of the effects of such changes to supervision practices
                    on care outcomes would lay the groundwork for the necessary, but as yet largely
                    neglected, study of the links between supervision practices and quality of
                        care.12

Our study shows that asking for help from a supervisor involves a complex
                    decision making process for medical trainees. This leads to a question of key
                    importance to medical educators: how and why has a medical training culture
                    evolved in which asking for help can be so difficult? Medical anthropologists
                    such as Bosk30 and Sinclair11 have described how factors like
                    professional responses to error30 and
                    evaluation processes11 can contribute
                    to a lack of transparency in communication between medical trainees and their
                    supervisors. Further exploration of this phenomenon from a sociocultural
                    perspective will be required better to understand, and ultimately influence, the
                    multifactorial contributors to the generation of a medical training culture in
                    which asking for help is sometimes problematic for trainees.

Limitations
Our results should be interpreted with observer effect31 and transferability in mind.32 We took two important measures to minimise the impact
                    of observer effect on the results. Firstly, a consistent researcher (the
                    principal investigator or a research assistant, both unknown to participants
                    before the study) conducted observations for periods of three hours or more, so
                    that team members could get used to the observer’s presence. Secondly,
                    participants were not made aware of the specific focus on supervision until
                    after the observations were completed (participants consented to having all
                    discussions between attending physicians and trainees recorded) to prevent them
                    from altering this specific aspect of their work. With respect to
                    transferability, it is important to consider that these data were collected in
                    an urban setting and on medical services. The fact that the reported themes were
                    common across the two distinct clinical settings (general internal medicine and
                    emergency medicine), the three separate institutions with different supervision
                    policies and practices, and the broad range of participants within each setting
                    supports the transferability of the analysis. It remains to be tested, however,
                    whether the theory of credibility will be relevant in different settings (such
                    as surgical services or rural teaching practices).

Conclusions
Medical trainees consider not only clinical implications but many other factors
                    when requesting support from a supervisor. Requests for support are perceived by
                    trainees as potential threats to their professional credibility, and trainees
                    thus use several rhetorical strategies to preserve credibility during these
                    requests. The exposure of the complexity of this taken for granted process
                    provides the opportunity to make changes to training programmes that might
                    promote timely discussion of trainees’ clinical concerns and also provides a
                    framework for necessary further exploration of the impact of clinical training
                    practices on quality of patient care. 

What is already known on this topic
The quality of clinical care provided to patients by medical
                                    trainees depends on the assumption that trainees can and will
                                    request clinical support from their supervisors when
                                required

Communication between medical trainees and their supervisors is
                                    complicated by issues such as evaluations and learning
                                agendas

What this study adds
Interview and observational data from clinical teaching teams
                                    showed that trainees’ decisions about requesting support from
                                    clinical supervisors are complex

Trainees consider not only clinical implications but also
                                    personal credibility when making requests for clinical
                                support

Exposure of factors affecting medical trainees’ requests for
                                    clinical support provides the opportunity to make changes to
                                    clinical training programmes to promote timely clinical
                                    oversight by supervisors

We thank Douglas Buller of the Wilson Centre, University of Toronto, for his
                        technical expertise in the production of the videos, and Lisa Kitchen of the
                        University of Ontario Institute of Technology for her invaluable work in
                        data collection and study coordination.

Contributors: All authors contributed to the conception and design of the
                        study, the analysis and interpretation of the data, critical revision of the
                        manuscript, and obtaining funding for the study. They are all guarantors.
                        TJTK acquired the data and drafted the manuscript.

Funding: This study was supported by an operating grant from the Canadian
                        Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), which had no involvement in the
                        research process. LL is supported by a CIHR New Investigators Award.

Competing interests: None declared.

Ethical approval: This study was approved by the institutional review board,
                        and informed consent was given by all participants.

Field notes, emergency medicine team 5, day 1

Field notes, emergency medicine team 5, day 4

 Field notes, general internal medicine team 7, day 5

Cite this as:
                BMJ 2009;338:b128

Field notes, emergency medicine team 5, day 1

Field notes, emergency medicine team 5, day 4

 Field notes, general internal medicine team 7, day 5
==== Refs
1 American Association of Medical Colleges.
                        Compact between resident physicians and their teachers 
                        2006  www.aamc.org/meded/residentcompact/
2 AAMC policy guidance on graduate medical
                    education: assuring quality patient care and quality education. Acad
                        Med 2001 ;78 :112 -6.
3 Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.
                        General standards of accreditation  2002 
                        http://rcpsc.medical.org/publications/index.php
4 General Medical Council. The new
                    doctor  London: GMC, 1997 
5 General Medical Council. Standards of
                        training for the foundation programme  2007  www.gmc-uk.org/education/documents/Standards_for_Training_270307.pdf
6 Australian Medical Association. AMA position
                        statement: prevocational medical education and training 
                    2005  www.ama.com.au/web.nsf/doc/WEEN-6JVTW2
7 Pope J. Even top hospitals make mistakes.
                        CBS News 2003 , September 29. www.cbsnews.com/stories/2003/09/29/health/main575546.shtml
8 Lingard L, Garwood K, Schryer CF, Spafford MM. A
                    certain art of uncertainty: case presentation and the development of
                    professional identity. Soc Sci
                        Med 2003 ;56 :603 -16.12570977 
9 Sommers PS, Muller JH, Saba GW, Draisin JA, Shore
                    WB. Reflections-on-action: medical students’ accounts of their implicit beliefs
                    and strategies in the context of one-to-one clinical teaching. Acad
                        Med 1994 ;69 :S84 -6.7916839 
10 Konner M. Becoming a doctor  New
                    York: Viking Penguin, 1987 
11 Sinclair S. Making doctors  Oxford:
                    Oxford International Publishers, 1997 
12 Kennedy TJ, Regehr G, Baker GR, Lingard LA.
                    Progressive independence in clinical training: a tradition worth defending?
                        Acad
                    Med 2005 ;80 :S106 -11.16199447 
13 Glaser B, Strauss A. The discovery of
                        grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research  Chicago:
                    Aldine, 1967 
14 Kennedy TJ, Lingard LA. Making sense of grounded
                    theory in medical education. Med
                        Educ 2006 ;40 :101 -8.16451236 
15 Charmaz K. Grounded theory: objectivist and
                    constructivist methods. In: Denzin N, Lincoln Y, eds. Handbook of
                        qualitative research  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage,
                    2000 :509-35.
16 Charmaz K. Grounded theory in the 21st century:
                    applications for advancing social justice studies. In: Denzin N, Lincoln Y, eds.
                        The Sage handbook of qualitative research  Thousand Oaks,
                    CA: Sage, 2005 :507-36.
17 Strauss A, Corbin J. Basics of qualitative
                        research  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
                1998 
18 Morse JM. The significance of saturation.
                        Qual Health
                        Res 1995 ;5 :147 -9.
19 Kennedy TJ, Lingard L, Baker GR, Kitchen L, Regehr
                    G. Clinical oversight: conceptualizing the relationship between supervision and
                    safety. J Gen Intern
                        Med 2007 ;22 :1080 -5.17557190 
20 Hammersley M, Atkinson P. Ethnography:
                        principles in practice , London: Routledge,
                1995 
21 Denzin N, Lincoln Y. Introduction: the discipline
                    and practice of qualitative research. In: Denzin N, Lincoln Y, eds. The
                        Sage handbook of qualitative research  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage,
                        2005 :1-32.
22 Kelle U. Computer-aided qualitative data
                        analysis: theory, methods, and practice  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage,
                        2002 
23 Ginsburg S, Regehr G, Lingard L. To be and not to
                    be: the paradox of the emerging professional stance. Med
                        Educ 2003 ;37 :350 -7.12654120 
24 Ginsburg S, Regehr G, Stern D, Lingard L. The
                    anatomy of the professional lapse: bridging the gap between traditional
                    frameworks and students’ perceptions. Acad
                        Med 2002 ;77 :516 -22.12063195 
25 Odell L, Goswami D, Herrington A. The
                    discourse-based interview: a procedure for exploring the tacit knowledge of
                    writers in nonacademic settings. In: Odell L, Goswami D, eds. Writing in
                        nonacademic settings , New York: Guilford Press,
                1985 
26 Burke K. Language as symbolic action: essays
                        on life, literature, and method  Berkeley, CA: University of
                    California Press, 1966 
27 Lingard L, Haber RJ. Teaching and learning
                    communication in medicine: a rhetorical approach. Acad
                        Medcine 1999 ;74 :507 -10.
28 King E, Horvath R, Shulkin DJ. Establishing a
                    rapid response team (RRT) in an academic hospital: one year’s experience.
                        J Hosp
                    Med 2006 ;1 :296 -305.17219515 
29 Devita MA, Bellomo R, Hillman K, Kellum J, Rotondi
                    A, Teres D, et al. Findings of the first consensus conference on medical
                    emergency teams. Crit Care
                        Med 2006 ;34 :2463 -78.16878033 
30 Bosk CL. Forgive and remember: managing
                        medical failure  Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
                        2003 
31 Holden JD. Hawthorne effects and research into
                    professional practice. J Eval Clin
                        Pract 2001 ;7 :65 -70.11240840 
32 Lincoln Y, Guba EG. Naturalistic
                    inquiry  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1985
