
==== Front
BMJBMJBMJ-UKbmjThe BMJ0959-81381756-1833BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. 29789372rocb04397410.1136/bmj.k1920Practice2332Rapid RecommendationsAtraumatic (pencil-point) versus conventional needles for lumbar
puncture: a clinical practice guideline Rochwerg Bram chair, critical care clinician1 2Almenawer Saleh A neurosurgeon3Siemieniuk Reed A C general internist, methodologist2 4Vandvik Per Olav general internist5 6Agoritsas Thomas general internist2 7Lytvyn Lyubov patient partnership liaison2Alhazzani Waleed critical care clinician1 2Archambault Patrick emergency and critical care clinician8 9 10D’Aragon Frederick anesthesiologist and critical care clinician11 12Farhoumand Pauline Darbellay general internist7Guyatt Gordon general internist2Laake Jon Henrik anaesthesiologist, critical care clinician13Beltrán-Arroyave Claudia paediatric infectious disease clinician14McCredie Victoria critical care clinician4 15Price Amy patient and carer partner16 17Chabot Christian patient partner18Zervakis Tracy patient partner19Badhiwala Jetan neurosurgery resident20St-Onge Maude emergency clinician10 21 22Szczeklik Wojciech critical care clinician23Møller Morten Hylander anaesthesiologist and critical care clinician24 25Lamontagne Francois methods editor, critical care clinician11 12
1 Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada
2 Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence and Impact, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Canada
3 Division of Neurosurgery, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
4 Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
5 Institute of Health and Society, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway
6 Department of Medicine, Innlandet Hospital Trust-division, Gjøvik,
Norway
7 Division General Internal Medicine & Division of Clinical
Epidemiology, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
8 Department of Family Medicine and Emergency Medicine & Department
of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Université Laval, Québec City,
Canada
9 Centre intégré de santé et de services sociaux de
Chaudière-Appalaches, Centre hospitalier affilié universitaire Hôtel-Dieu de Lévis,
Lévis, Canada
10 CHU de Québec - Université Laval Research Center, CHU de Québec -
Université Laval, Université Laval, Québec City, Canada
11 Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Canada
12 Research Centre, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Canada
13 Department of Anaesthesiology, Division of Emergency and Critical
Care, Rikshospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
14 Department of Pediatrics, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin,
Colombia
15 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University Health Network, Toronto, Canada
16 
The BMJ (Research and Evaluation), London, UK
17 Department of Continuing Education, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK
18 McGill University, Montreal, Canada
19 Virginia, USA
20 Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
21 Centre intégré de santé et de services sociaux de la
Capitale-Nationale, Québec City, Canada
22 Department of Family and Emergency Medicine & Department of
Anesthesiology and Critical Care & Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Laval,
Canada
23 Department of Intensive Care and Perioperative Medicine,
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kraków, Poland
24 Department of Intensive Care, Copenhagen University Hospital
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
25 Centre for Research in Intensive Care (CRIC), Copenhagen,
DenmarkCorrespondence to: F Lamontagne francois.lamontagne@usherbrooke.ca2018 22 5 2018 361 k1920Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to
use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2018BMJThis is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative
Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their
derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited
and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.This BMJ Rapid Recommendation article is one of a series that
provides clinicians with trustworthy recommendations for potentially practice
changing evidence. BMJ Rapid Recommendations represent a
collaborative effort between the MAGIC group (www.magicproject.org) and
The BMJ. A summary is offered here and the full version
including decision aids is on the MAGICapp (www.magicapp.org), for all
devices in multilayered formats. Those reading and using these recommendations
should consider individual patient circumstances, and their values and preferences
and may want to use consultation decision aids in MAGICapp to facilitate shared
decision making with patients. We encourage adaptation and contextualisation of
our recommendations to local or other contexts. Those considering use or
adaptation of content may go to MAGICapp to link or extract its content or contact
The BMJ for permission to reuse content in this article.
==== Body
What you need to know
Post-dural-puncture headache is a common complication after lumbar puncture,
affecting up to 35% of patients

This headache results from sustained leakage of cerebrospinal fluid from a dural
tear; it can be debilitating and require return to hospital for narcotics or
invasive therapy

We issue a strong recommendation for use of atraumatic needles in all patients
(adults and children) undergoing lumbar puncture because they decrease
complications and are no less likely to work than conventional needles

Atraumatic needles are more expensive, but evidence suggests that they reduce
costs overall compared with conventional needles

Is the needle tip configuration important when performing a lumbar puncture for any
indication? A systematic review published in the Lancet in December 2017
suggests that it is. The review found that using atraumatic (pencil-point) lumbar puncture
needles instead of conventional lumbar puncture needles reduced the risk of
post-dural-puncture headache and of return to hospital for additional pain control.1 This guideline recommendation aims to promptly and
transparently translate this evidence to a clinical recommendation, following standards for
GRADE methodology and trustworthy guidelines.2 The
BMJ Rapid Recommendations panel makes a strong recommendation for the
use of atraumatic needles for lumbar puncture in all patients regardless of age (adults and
children) or indication instead of conventional needles.3
4
 Box 1 shows the article and evidence linked
to this Rapid Recommendation. The main infographic provides an overview of the absolute
benefits and harms (although none were present here) of atraumatic needles. Table 1 below
shows any evidence that has emerged since the publication of this guideline.

Box 1 Linked resources for this BMJ Rapid Recommendations
cluster
Rochwerg B, Almenawer SA, Siemieniuk RAC, et al. Atraumatic (pencil-point) versus
conventional needles for lumbar puncture: a clinical practice guideline.
BMJ 2018;361:k1920

Summary of the results from the Rapid Recommendation process

Nath S, Koziarz A, Badhiwala JH, et al. Atraumatic versus conventional lumbar
puncture needles: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
2018;391:1197-204

Review of all available randomised trials comparing the use of atraumatic
needles and conventional needles for any lumbar puncture indication

MAGICapp (www.magicapp.org/public/guideline/j7A5Gn)

Expanded version of the results from the Rapid Recommendation process with
multilayered recommendations, evidence summaries, and decision aids for use
on all devices

Current practice
Physicians perform lumbar punctures for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. Among the
complications associated with this procedure, post-dural-puncture headache is the most
common, affecting up to 35% of patients.5 This
complication can be debilitating, requiring return visits to the hospital for controlled
analgesia, invasive therapy, or increased hospital duration of stay.5
6


Post-dural-puncture headache, among other adverse effects of lumbar punctures, is
attributed to the leakage of cerebrospinal fluid from the dural defect into the epidural
space that is created by the spinal needle during puncture.

Conventional needles have a sharp tip (designed to cut through tissues) and a distal
opening. In comparison, atraumatic needles are more blunt with a closed pencil-point or
cone shaped tip and a side port for injection or collection.1


Cadaveric studies using histological examination have shown that, compared with
conventional needles, atraumatic needles more often separate and dilate surrounding
dural fibres rather than cutting through them. Subsequent contracture of the fibres
after needle removal results in a small pinpoint opening in the dura, as opposed to the
irregular and larger opening created by conventional needles.7 Use of atraumatic needles may therefore reduce the incidence of
post-dural-puncture headache by limiting the leakage of cerebrospinal fluid after lumbar
puncture. Surveys indicate that use of atraumatic needles in routine clinical practice
is limited.8
9
10


Although terminology varies, for the purposes of this guideline, we will refer to
atraumatic needles and conventional needles, which have a sharp tip to cut through
tissues with a distal tip opening.

How this recommendation was created
The recent publication of a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies comparing
atraumatic with conventional needles for any lumbar puncture triggered the following
guideline recommendation.1 The Rapid
Recommendations team believed that the results of this systematic review, which
considered the full body of evidence, had important clinical implications and might
change practice.2


Our international panel—including intensivists, neuro-intensivists, internists,
anaesthesiologists, neurologists, neurosurgeons, emergency physicians,
paediatricians, methodologists, and people with lived experience of lumbar puncture
and caring for those with lumbar puncture—decided on the scope of the recommendation
and the outcomes most important to patients (see appendix 1 on bmj.com). The panel
met to discuss the evidence and formulate a recommendation. No panel member had
financial conflicts of interest; intellectual and professional conflicts were
minimised and transparently described (appendix 2 on bmj.com). 

The panel followed the BMJ Rapid Recommendations procedures for
creating a trustworthy recommendation,2
11 including using the GRADE approach to
critically appraise the evidence and create recommendations (see appendix 3 on
bmj.com).3 The panel considered the
benefits, as well as any harms, and burdens of atraumatic needles, the certainty
(quality) of the evidence for each outcome, typical and expected variations in
patient values and preferences, acceptability, feasibility, and resource
implications.12 Following the GRADE based
approach, recommendations can be strong or weak (also known as conditional) for or
against a specific course of action.13


The panel identified 13 patient-important outcomes to inform the recommendation:
post-dural-puncture headache (severe or mild), any headache (including those not
meeting the exact definition of post-dural-puncture), backache, hearing disturbance,
nerve root irritation, traumatic tap, need to return to hospital for intravenous
fluids or controlled analgesia or for an epidural blood patch, failed lumbar
puncture, successful lumbar puncture on first attempt, and cerebrospinal fluid
drainage efficiency. There was disagreement among panel members whether to include
this last outcome (drainage efficiency), but it was specifically prioritised by one
of the patients. At least one of the included studies reported on all of these
outcomes except for drainage efficiency, although the number of participants included
in the analysis for each outcome varied. A few other patient-important outcomes such
as mortality, brain herniation, quality of life, and permanent paralysis were
considered, but their incidence after lumbar puncture was considered to be too rare
to be informative to the recommendation.

The evidence
The systematic review summarised the results of 110 randomised clinical trials (RCTs)
conducted between 1989 and 2017 in 29 countries (including both high and middle/low
income): it suggests that atraumatic needles consistently reduce the risk of major
adverse effects associated with lumbar puncture done for any indication compared with
conventional needles. More specifically, the risk of post-dural-puncture headache was
significantly reduced when atraumatic needles were used for lumbar puncture (relative
risk 0.40 (95% confidence interval 0.34 to 0.47)). Graphic 2 presents an overview of the
number and types of patients, as well as a summary of the benefits and harms (although
none were present here) of atraumatic needles for lumbar punctures.


Graphic 2. Characteristics of patients and trials included in
systematic review of the effects of needle type on the risk of major adverse
effects associated with lumbar puncture

Individuals who were included in the eligible studies underwent lumbar punctures for any
diagnostic or therapeutic indication. Baseline characteristics were similar between
atraumatic and conventional needle groups, with the exception of needle gauge, which was
larger in the conventional needle group (larger gauge equals smaller needle
diameter).

Only 1065 of the 31 412 participants were children (3%). The proportion of elderly
participants was unknown. The results were consistent across the pre-defined subgroups
including:

Age <18 v ≥18 years old

Males v females,

Bed rest after lumbar puncture v no bed rest

Prophylactic intravenous fluids v no prophylactic intravenous
fluids

Needle gauge (small v large)

Lateral v sitting position during lumbar puncture

Indication for lumbar puncture (anaesthesia v diagnosis
v myelography)

Clinical specialty of person doing the lumbar puncture (radiologist
v neurologist v anaesthesiologist).

Understanding the recommendation
The guideline panel makes a strong recommendation for the use of atraumatic over
conventional needles in lumbar puncture for any indication because the benefits are
perceived to be large with no associated harm.

The panel is confident that the recommendation applies to all patients (adults and
children) who require a lumbar puncture and all physicians as the results were
consistent across all predefined subgroups mentioned above.

In addition the panel agreed that there is minimal variability in patient preferences to
favour the use of atraumatic needles.1


Absolute benefits and harms
The main infographic explains the recommendation and provides an overview (GRADE
summary of findings) of the absolute benefits of atraumatic needles. Estimates of
baseline risk for effects are generated from the control arms of the included
trials.1 The infographic also leads to
point-of-care formats in the MAGICapp.14


The panel was confident that:

Use of atraumatic needles meaningfully decreases the risk of postdural puncture
headache (both severe and mild), any headache, hearing disturbance, nerve root
irritation, return to hospital for intravenous fluids and controlled analgesia
or need for epidural blood patch (GRADE high to moderate quality evidence)

Use of atraumatic needles has little or no effect on the risk of backache
(GRADE high quality evidence)

Use of atraumatic needles has little or no effect on the incidence of traumatic
tap, failed lumbar puncture, and probability of success on first attempt (GRADE
high to moderate quality evidence)

There are no differences in the effects of atraumatic versus conventional
needles between subgroups defined by age and sex of patients, the prescription
or use of prophylactic measures, needle gauge, position of the patient during
the lumbar puncture, the clinical specialty of the individual performing the
lumbar puncture, or the indication for the procedure

It is unlikely that new information will change interpretation for outcomes for
which the evidence is of high to moderate quality.

The panel was less confident about whether:

Use of atraumatic needles affects the efficiency of cerebrospinal fluid
drainage (that is, the time required to draw the necessary amount of
cerebrospinal fluid) regardless of the indication. It is likely there are other
more important factors that influence drainage efficiency than just needle
type. Also, this outcome is of varying importance depending on the context and
indication for lumbar puncture.

The panel believed that the recommendation is generalisable even to patients
who are unconscious, such as those who are mechanically ventilated and sedated
in the intensive care unit as data suggests that post-dural-puncture headache
can persist for several days and can be felt even under sedation. Increased
pain in this population may lead to undesirable indirect effects such as
increased heart rate and increased sedation or analgesic requirement.

Values and preferences
The panel placed high value on the large reduction in symptoms. The panel believes
that values and preferences regarding all important outcomes are unlikely to vary
greatly across patients, particularly given the lack of detectable harm from
atraumatic needles. We do not anticipate that patients would opt for lumbar puncture
needles associated with a greater risk of severe headaches. In contrast, the panel
believes that there is considerable variability in how much importance individual
patients and physicians attribute to traumatic taps (lumbar punctures contaminated
with red blood cells negatively affecting fluid analysis). Accordingly, this outcome
was considered to have limited importance in the recommendation.

The panel felt confident that atraumatic needles would be acceptable to patients,
although this was not measured in the systematic review. Most clinicians found
atraumatic and conventional needles similar to use. Some clinicians expressed
potential concern regarding puncturing of the skin with the blunter atraumatic
needle; however, this can be overcome by inserting the lumbar puncture needle through
the same skin hole used for local anaesthesia, by using an introducer needle, or by
spinning the atraumatic needle around its axis while advancing the needle.1


Practical issues and other considerations
Atraumatic needles do not eliminate the risk of complications entirely, and
clinicians should continue to discuss potential adverse consequences of the lumbar
puncture with their patients.

Costs and resources
The panel reviewed three published cost-effectiveness studies.15
16
17 In those studies, the per-unit cost of
atraumatic needles was greater than the cost of conventional needles, but atraumatic
needles were ultimately cost-reducing because of the decreased need for additional
care (perspective of the third-party payer) and lost working hours for patients
(perspective of the patients and society). Moreover, as with conventional needles,
the per-unit cost varies with the specific needle subtype and manufacturer.

Uncertainties
Addressing the following remaining knowledge gaps may inform decision makers and
future guideline recommendations:

Given the plausible greater risk of spinal stenosis and degenerative process in
elderly patients who require a lumbar puncture, is the success rate for
atraumatic and conventional needles similar in this population?

Are certain subtypes of atraumatic needles (such as Cappe-Deutsch, Eldor,
Gertie-Marx, Microtip, Sprotte, or Whitacre) associated with greater reduction
in adverse events than others?

Updates to this article
Table 1 shows evidence which has emerged since the publication of this article. As new
evidence is published, a group will assess the new evidence and make a judgment on to
what extent it is expected to alter the recommendation.

Table 1 New evidence which has emerged after initial publication

Date	New
evidence	Citation	Findings	Implications for recommendation(s)	
There are
currently no updates to the article.	
Education into practice
When performing a lumbar puncture, which needles do you use? Why?

Based on this article how do you think your personal practice might change? Is
there anything that you would say to a patient or do differently?

How might you share this information with your organisation or review local
policies on needle choice?

How patients were involved in the creation of this article
Two people with lived experience of lumbar punctures, and one person with experience
as a patient and a carer, were members of the guidance panel and authors. They
identified and rated outcomes, and led the discussion on values and preferences. The
patient partners rated all included outcomes as important to them. Although these
values may not be shared by all patients for all outcomes considered, the panel
expected little variation in how much importance other patients would place on the
main outcomes of severe post-dural-puncture headache and the need to return to the
hospital for an epidural blood patch. All panel members participated in the
teleconferences and email discussions and met all authorship criteria.

Web Extra Extra material supplied by the author

Main infographic: Summary of recommendations and evidence

 Appendix 1: List of panel members

 Appendix 2: Summary of authors’ declarations of interests

 Appendix 3: Methodology for development of BMJ Rapid
Recommendations

 Competing interests: All authors have completed the BMJ Rapid
Recommendations interests disclosure form, and a detailed description of all
disclosures is reported in appendix 2 on bmj.com. As with all BMJ
Rapid Recommendations, the executive team and The BMJ judged that
no panel member had any financial conflict of interest. Professional and academic
interests are minimised as much as possible, while maintaining necessary expertise
on the panel to make fully informed decisions. Three authors of the systematic
review were on the guideline panel (WA, SAA, JB).

Funding: This guideline was not funded.

Transparency: B Rochwerg affirms that the manuscript is an honest, accurate, and
transparent account of the recommendation being reported; that no important
aspects of the recommendation have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from
the recommendation as planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been
explained.
==== Refs
1 
Nath S Koziarz A Badhiwala JH  
Atraumatic versus conventional lumbar puncture
needles: a systematic review and meta-analysis .
Lancet 
2018 ;391 :1197 -204 .
10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32451-0  
29223694 
2 
Siemieniuk RA Agoritsas T Macdonald H Guyatt GH Brandt L Vandvik PO  
Introduction to BMJ Rapid
Recommendations . BMJ 
2016 ;354 :i5191 . 10.1136/bmj.i5191  
27680768 
3 
Guyatt GH Oxman AD Vist GE GRADE Working Group  
GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of
evidence and strength of recommendations . BMJ 
2008 ;336 :924 -6 . 10.1136/bmj.39489.470347.AD  
18436948 
4 Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Standards
for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines; eds. Graham R, Mancher M,
Miller Wolman D, et al. Clinical practice guidelines we can trust
National Academies Press, 2011. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK209539/.
5 
Lavi R Yarnitsky D Rowe JM Weissman A Segal D Avivi I  
Standard vs atraumatic Whitacre needle for diagnostic
lumbar puncture: a randomized trial . Neurology 
2006 ;67 :1492 -4 . 10.1212/01.wnl.0000240054.40274.8a  
17060584 
6 
Turnbull DK Shepherd DB  
Post-dural puncture headache: pathogenesis,
prevention and treatment . Br J Anaesth 
2003 ;91 :718 -29 . 10.1093/bja/aeg231  
14570796 
7 
Celleno D Capogna G Costantino P Catalano P  
An anatomic study of the effects of dural puncture
with different spinal needles . Reg Anesth 
1993 ;18 :218 -21 .
8398954 
8 
Birnbach DJ Kuroda MM Sternman D Thys DM  
Use of atraumatic spinal needles among neurologists
in the United States . Headache 
2001 ;41 :385 -90 . 10.1046/j.1526-4610.2001.111006385.x  
11318885 
9 
Davis A Dobson R Kaninia S Giovannoni G Schmierer K  
Atraumatic needles for lumbar puncture: why haven’t
neurologists changed? 
Pract Neurol 
2016 ;16 :18 -22 . 10.1136/practneurol-2014-001055  
26349834 
10 
Moisset X Ruet A Brochet B  
Who performs lumbar puncture, how many do they
perform, how and why? A retrospective study of 6,594 cases .
Eur Neurol 
2016 ;76 :8 -11 . 10.1159/000447452  
27336667 
11 
Vandvik PO Otto CM Siemieniuk RA  
Transcatheter or surgical aortic valve replacement
for patients with severe, symptomatic, aortic stenosis at low to intermediate
surgical risk: a clinical practice guideline . BMJ 
2016 ;354 :i5085 . 10.1136/bmj.i5085  
27680583 
12 
Andrews JC Schünemann HJ Oxman AD  
GRADE guidelines: 15. Going from evidence to
recommendation-determinants of a recommendation’s direction and
strength . J Clin Epidemiol 
2013 ;66 :726 -35 . 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.02.003  
23570745 
13 
Guyatt GH Oxman AD Kunz R GRADE Working Group  
Going from evidence to
recommendations . BMJ 
2008 ;336 :1049 -51 . 10.1136/bmj.39493.646875.AE  
18467413 
14 
Agoritsas T Heen AF Brandt L  
Decision aids that really promote shared decision
making: the pace quickens . BMJ 
2015 ;350 :g7624 . 10.1136/bmj.g7624  
25670178 
15 
Dakka Y Warra N Albadareen RJ Jankowski M Silver B  
Headache rate and cost of care following lumbar
puncture at a single tertiary care hospital .
Neurology 
2011 ;77 :71 -4 . 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318220abc0  
21593442 
16 
Engedal TS Ørding H Vilholm OJ  
Changing the needle for lumbar punctures: results
from a prospective study . Clin Neurol Neurosurg 
2015 ;130 :74 -9 . 10.1016/j.clineuro.2014.12.020  
25590665 
17 
Tung CE So YT Lansberg MG  
Cost comparison between the atraumatic and cutting
lumbar puncture needles . Neurology 
2012 ;78 :109 -13 . 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823efca9  
22205758

