
==== Front
Brain SciBrain ScibrainsciBrain Sciences2076-3425MDPI 10.3390/brainsci6020012brainsci-06-00012ReviewEpigenetic Mechanisms in Developmental Alcohol-Induced Neurobehavioral Deficits Basavarajappa Balapal S. 123*Subbanna Shivakumar 1Heaton Marieta B. Academic Editor1 Division of Analytical Psychopharmacology, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 140 Old Orangeburg Road, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA; SShivakumar@nki.rfmh.org2 New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY 10032, USA3 Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA* Correspondence: Basavaraj@nki.rfmh.org; Tel.: +1-845-398-3234; Fax: +1-845-398-545108 4 2016 6 2016 6 2 1203 2 2016 05 4 2016 © 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.2016This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons by Attribution (CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Alcohol consumption during pregnancy and its damaging consequences on the developing infant brain are significant public health, social, and economic issues. The major distinctive features of prenatal alcohol exposure in humans are cognitive and behavioral dysfunction due to damage to the central nervous system (CNS), which results in a continuum of disarray that is collectively called fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). Many rodent models have been developed to understand the mechanisms of and to reproduce the human FASD phenotypes. These animal FASD studies have provided several molecular pathways that are likely responsible for the neurobehavioral abnormalities that are associated with prenatal alcohol exposure of the developing CNS. Recently, many laboratories have identified several immediate, as well as long-lasting, epigenetic modifications of DNA methylation, DNA-associated histone proteins and microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis by using a variety of epigenetic approaches in rodent FASD models. Because DNA methylation patterns, DNA-associated histone protein modifications and miRNA-regulated gene expression are crucial for synaptic plasticity and learning and memory, they can therefore offer an answer to many of the neurobehavioral abnormalities that are found in FASD. In this review, we briefly discuss the current literature of DNA methylation, DNA-associated histone proteins modification and miRNA and review recent developments concerning epigenetic changes in FASD.

FASDSynaptic plasticityLearning and memoryFASDNA and histone modification
==== Body
1. Introduction
A change of gene expression evoked by mechanisms other than alterations in DNA sequence contributes to the advancement of cell and tissue development and significantly aids in the maintenance of a regular cell-specific function. Thus, dynamically regulated, epigenetic mechanisms differing throughout life and between various cell populations have been shown to contribute to the development of neuronal circuits and brain function. The major epigenetic alterations that are known to regulate gene expression in the brain are as follows: (1) DNA methylation of cytosine residues in promoter-rich cytosine phosphate guanine (CpG) islands; (2) acetylation, methylation and other covalent posttranslational modification (PMT) of DNA-associated histone proteins; (3) chromatin remodeling proteins that indirectly affect gene transcription; (4) pre-mRNA editing and splicing by non-coding, small nucleolar RNA (snoRNAs); (5) mRNA processing, translation, and stability of binding proteins, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs); and (6) mRNA translation that is controlled by cellular signaling molecules. These epigenetic mechanisms can selectively respond to environmental factors and alter transcriptional machinery leading to altered physiological and pathological processes in the brain. An increasing number of environmental factors, such as maternal care, stress, chemical agents, drugs of abuse, alcohol and nutritional disparity [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8], are undoubtedly shown to remodel epigenetics. However, the mechanism by which epigenetic remodeling events are linked to environmentally induced diseases is poorly understood. The review will provide a current understanding of epigenetic mechanisms and how alcohol exposure during development, as a type of environmental teratogen, can influence epigenetic programs to alter gene transcription and induce persistent early alcohol-associated abnormalities.

2. Epigenetic Mechanisms
2.1. DNA Methylation
Our modern understanding of epigenetic marks on DNA has provided insight into an additional regulatory system in the cell that operates to regulate when and where a particular gene should be expressed during development and normal cellular homeostasis. Historically, the presence of methylated DNA was identified in mammals as soon as DNA was recognized as the primary genetic material [9,10]. It was in 1948 when the presence of modified cytosine in the calf thymus and the existence of this modified cytosine naturally in DNA was established [11]. Later, studies have confirmed that methylation of cytosine (DNA methylation) regulate gene activity during development [12,13]. Currently, DNA methylation along with other remodeling factors is considered to be the major epigenetic remodeling event known to control gene activities (for references see [14,15]).

The methylation of cytosine (mC) is a covalent modification of DNA (Figure 1). A family of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) transfer a methyl group from S-adenyl methionine (SAM) to the cytosine residue to form 5-mC [16,17]. DNMT3a and -3b are characterized as de novo DNMTs partly because they can establish a new methylation pattern for unmodified DNA. Conversely, DNMT1 copies the DNA methylation pattern from the parental DNA strand onto the newly produced daughter DNA strand during DNA replication [18]. These unique functions of DNMTs supposedly ensure that the DNA methylation pattern is maintained and preserved in a tissue-specific manner across different individuals [19,20]. All three DNMTs are expressed extensively during embryo development, and a significant level is found in postmitotic neurons in the mature mammalian brain [21,22,23,24,25]. These observations suggest that DNMTs and DNA methylation patterns have an important novel role not only in early development but also in mature brain function [26,27]. Additionally, several recent studies have described at least two mechanisms that actively remove mC. One mechanism is through the activity of deaminases that catalyze the conversion of mC to thymidine [28]. A second mechanism is through the action of ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins (α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases). TET proteins oxidize 5-mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) using an oxygen- and α-ketoglutarate-dependent mechanism. This is then oxidized to 5-formylcytosine and finally to 5-carboxylcytosine (5-caC), which is then followed by the removal of the modified base through base excision repair and glycosylase activity [15,28]. DNA demethylation processes via 5-hmC were shown to operate in both developmental, as well as in an age-dependent manner in the mammalian brain [29], thereby providing the basis for an important epigenetic regulator of gene expression [30]. These discoveries suggest that external factors, such as environmental exposure/experiences, have the ability to modify the DNA methylation pattern. Indeed, research over the last decade suggests that DNA methylation responds to environmental exposure/experience, thereby resulting in stable phenotypes [31,32,33]. It has been suggested that these additional changes in DNA methylation that are due to environmental influences may then be inherited in a transgenerational manner [34,35]. The vast majority of recent data suggest that rapid and dynamic methylation and demethylation of specific genes in the brain have a direct role in synaptic plasticity, learning and memory formation [14,15,26,36,37,38,39,40].

Another group of proteins that work closely with methylated DNA to control gene transcription in the brain is the family of methyl-binding proteins. Methyl-binding proteins are persistently expressed in the adult brain and often act as gene repressors through binding to methylated cytosines [47,48]. The methyl-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is expressed at high levels in the brain, specifically in neurons, but not in glia, and correlates with neuronal maturation [49,50]. The MeCP2 recognizes and binds to DNA that contains single 5-mC sites. Additionally, the binding of MeCP2 to DNA further recruits transcriptional corepressor complexes, such as Sin3a and histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 2 [47]. During neuronal activity, the activity of MeCP2 often results in the release of promoters due to the removal of the methylation mark on the DNA [51]. Posttranslational modifications of MeCP2, such as its phosphorylation, affect its ability to bind to DNA and alter gene expression [52,53]. Inhibition of MeCP2 phosphorylation is associated with improved synapse formation, synaptic plasticity and learning and memory behavior [54,55]. This is partly because activity-dependent phosphorylation may release MeCP2 from promoters, thereby making the gene sequence available for demethylation process. Furthermore, approximately 95% of cases of neurodevelopmental disorders, such as Rett Syndrome, are due to MeCP2 mutations [56,57]. In an animal model, a 50% increase in MeCP2 in the brain induces impairments in motor coordination, anxiety, long-term potentiation (LTP), learning and memory [58]. Therefore, DNA methylation followed by the binding of MeCP2 appears to have a critical role in synaptic plasticity and cognitive function.

2.2. Post-Translational Modification of DNA-Associated Histone Proteins
Nuclear DNA does not appear in free straight strands. It is highly condensed and wrapped around nuclear proteins in the form of chromatin to accommodate chromosomes in the nuclei [59]. The chromatin consists of the nucleosomes. Each nucleosome core consists of two copies of each H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 proteins as well as 147 base pairs of superhelical DNA wrapped around this octamer [60,61]. These four histone proteins form a central structured globular domain that closely contact with the DNA and a less well-structured amino-terminal tail domain [62,63]. Specific amino acid residues of the N-terminal tail domain of these histone proteins undergo chemical modification through PTMs, including acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, and sumoylation [64]. This distinctive chemical posttranslational modification influences the overall chromatin structure and recruitment of DNA binding proteins and allows for the loosening or tightening of the chromatin around particular genetic loci, thereby resulting in the activation or repression of specific gene expression [64]. As these PTM can alter gene expression without changing the DNA sequence, they have frequently been termed “epigenetic” modifications, although many changes are not maintained across the cell cycle [65].

2.2.1. Histone Acetylation and Deacetylation
Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) transfer the acetyl group from acetyl-coA to the ε-amino group of lysine residues of histone proteins (Figure 2). Three main families of HATs, general control nonderepressible-5 (Gcn5), MYST, and p300/cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) binding protein (CBP), share a conserved acetyl-coA binding site and often work in large multi-protein complexes [66,67]. The acetylation of histone proteins affects histone-histone protein interactions between neighboring nucleosomes and also interactions between histones and transcription factors (for references see [67]). These alterations can influence the individual nucleosome structure as well as the higher-order chromatin structure, thereby causing a more open and permissive chromatin environment for transcription. While HATs are often not specific to individual lysine amino acid residues, they fulfill specific functions. The broad catalytic role of HATs means that its localization to the proper genomic loci is essential for its particular function. The non-catalytic domains of HATs direct the protein to the appropriate location [68]. Acetylated histones provide a more relaxed chromatin conformation due to hydrophobicity and reduced electrostatic interactions. Additionally, acetylated histones further recruit bromodomain-containing proteins, which are primarily transcription factors and cofactors, and facilitate gene expression [69]. Among the HATs, CBP/p300 is critically involved in development. Genetic mutations and deletions of either enzyme cause Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, which is characterized by intellectual disabilities, among other impairments [70]. The elevated expression of p300 mRNA was found in neural tissue and the genetic deletion of CBP or p300 resulted in an open neural tube through the impairment of paired box 3 (PAX3) and the activation of enhancer binding protein 2 (AP2) expression, thereby delaying embryo development [71,72]. Both Gcn5/Myc HATs co-regulate transcriptional programs in neural stem cells (NSCs) that are required for stem cell proliferation and brain development [73]. A number of memory tasks have been shown to enhance specific histone H3 and H4 acetylation immediately after memory performance through the enhanced expression and activity of several HATs (Taf1/Kat4, Gcn5/Kat2a, PCAF, Tip60, p300 and CBP) in rodents (for references see [74,75,76,77]). Recently, specific activators of HATs (SPV106, CSP-TTK21, etc.) [78,79] have been developed and used in certain neurological disorders for their beneficial function in augmenting neurodegeneration and cognitive function (for references see [80,81,82]). Thus, well-characterized HAT activators may be useful in treating cognitive dysfunction found in FASD children.

Histone lysine deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of chromatin remodeling enzymes that remove acetyl groups from proteins and restrict the access of transcription factors to the DNA, thereby inhibiting gene expression (Figure 2). There are 11 well-described HDACs that are grouped into the following four classes, based upon their sequence, subcellular distribution and function: Class I (HDAC1, 2, 3, and 8), Class IIa (HDAC4, 5, 7, 9), Class IIb (HDAC6, 10), and Class IV HDACs (HDAC11) [83]. These HDACs are zinc-dependent enzymes. Class I HDACs (1 to 3 and 8) are largely localized to the nucleus, but they can also be found in the cytoplasm. Class II HDACs (4 to 7, 9, and 10) and IV HDAC (11) are either found as nucleocytoplasmic shuttling enzymes or primarily cytoplasmic. Class IIa HDACs (4, 5, 7, and 9) have been shown to exhibit low intrinsic deacetylase activity [84]. A separate family of HDACs, which are referred to as sirtuins, are classified as Class III HDACs. These are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent enzymes, which have mechanisms of action that are distinct from those of other HDACs [85,86]. Not much is presently known about HDAC11, as more studies have yet to emerge about its role in the adult brain. Class I HDACs were expressed at more elevated levels throughout the adult brain in comparison with many other HDACs [87,88,89]. The precise localization and cell-specific expression of individual HDACs in the brain suggests that each HDAC may have a broader, yet specific, significant role in neuronal development and function. Indeed, studies of a conditional knockout of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 suggest that neuronal progenitors fail to differentiate into mature neurons and lead to cell death, thereby resulting in animal death by Postnatal Day 7 (P7) [90]. Additionally, HDAC2 was also critically required to suppress progenitor transcripts during neuronal differentiation of adult-generated neurons [91]. Furthermore, HDAC 1/2 support the stability of synaptic networks during early brain development by suppressing the maturation of excitatory synapses [92]. The genetic deletion of HDAC3 suppresses the translocation of thyroid hormone receptors (SMRT) that regulate the neurogenic pathway to the nucleus [93]. The class II HDAC5 has also been suggested to have an important role in neuronal differentiation [94]. HDAC10 has also been shown to interact with and maintain a deacetylated state of Pax3, a key transcription factor in stem cell maintenance and neurogenesis [95]. Together, these findings suggest that HDAC family members control gene expression and cell fate during brain development into adulthood. Some HDAC families function independently of their catalytic activity function in neurite formation, dendrite and axonal growth (for references see [96]). Methods that involve pharmacological (HDAC inhibitors) and genetic manipulations of HDACs have shown a role of an individual family of HDACs in learning and memory process (for references see [92]). The conditional, brain-specific genetic deletion of HDAC2 in the mouse brain display enhanced acquisition of associative fear learning, whereas the overexpression of HDAC2, but not HDAC1, in the brain led to deficits in fear learning and aversively motivated spatial memory performance in the Morris water maze task [97]. Administration of an HDAC inhibitor, in addition to improving learning and memory, also enhanced the induction and maintenance of LTP at hippocampal and amygdala synapses, two brain regions that are essential for associative learning [76,98,99,100]. It should be noted that many learning and memory studies have utilized trichostatin (TSA) or suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) as an HDAC inhibitor. In doing so, researchers have observed that they appear to exhibit specificity, as these drugs act on class I, but not class II, HDACs [101]. The preclinical use of HDAC inhibitors as therapeutic agents was effective in many animal models of neurological disorders and the study of the benefits of HDAC inhibition for treating several cognitive disorders is underway [102]. Therefore, well-characterized HDAC inhibitors may be valuable for the improvement of the cognitive function of FASD children.

2.2.2. Histone Methylation and Demethylation
The methylation of histones usually occurs at the arginine or lysine N-terminal region of histones, which causes multiple effects, including the activation or inhibition of gene transcription. Each arginine residue in histone proteins can be subjected to monomethylation and symmetric/asymmetric dimethylation. Similarly, each lysine residue can be monomethylated, dimethylated and trimethylated and also adjacent residues can form different methylation combinations [103,104,105,106]. Arginine residue methylation is catalyzed by the family of arginine methyltransferases (PRMT). PRMT1 catalyzes the monomethylation and asymmetric dimethylation of arginine residues, thereby resulting in gene activation. PRMT2 catalyzes monomethylation and symmetric dimethylation of arginine residues, which results in gene suppression. Furthermore, the cofactor-associated arginine methyltransferase (CARM1) catalyzes the formation of monomethylation and asymmetric dimethylation of arginine residues, which promotes gene expression.

Histone methyltransferases (HMTs) that methylate not only lysine amino acids of histone proteins but also other proteins, are called lysine methyltransferases (KMTs) [107] for their broad enzymatic activity and substrate specificity (Figure 3A). All KMTs, except for KMT4, contain a conserved Su (var)3-9, Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax (SET) domain that exhibits catalytic activity (for references see [108]). The presence of a characteristic homologous sequence [107,109] has helped to classify KMTs into distinct subcategories. Lysine methylation of histone H3K4 is catalyzed by a family (KMT2) of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) proteins, such as SET1A, SET1B, MLL1, MLL2, MLL3, MLL4 and ASH1 [110,111,112]. H3K4 methylation closely correlates with the activation of gene expression. H3K9 methylation is catalyzed by a group of methyltransferases (KMT1: SUV39H1, SUV39H2, Eu-HMTase/GLP, G9A and ESET/SETDB1; KMT8:RIZ1), whose catalyzing substrates and resulting products are different. The trimethylation of H3K9 is catalyzed by SUV39 and results in the formation of heterochromatin and transcriptional inhibition [113]. The dimethylation of H3K9 is catalyzed by G9a and results in a euchromatin structure and the suppression of gene expression [6,114]. G9a-like protein (GLP) can form a hetero polypeptide complex with G9a, and together they catalyze the formation of H3K9 dimethylation [115]. ESET/SETDB1 catalyze the trimethylation of H3K9 enzymes [116], which results in gene inhibition. H3K27 methylation is mediated by the EZH2 enzyme (KMT6) and results in the inhibition of gene transcription and has been shown to have a significant role in fetal development and cell differentiation [117,118]. H3K36 methylation activity is performed by (KMT3) SET2, SYMD2 and NSD1 enzymes and is associated with active transcription [119,120,121]. H3K4 methylation by SYMD1-3 enzymes is related to gene activation [122]. H3K79 di- and tri-methylation are performed by DOT1L enzymes (KMT4) and are universally associated with active transcription [123]. H4K20 mono- or tri-methylation is catalyzed by SET8 and SUV420H1/2 enzymes (KMT5), respectively, and have been linked with transcriptional repression [124].

Experimental data concerning enzymatic histone demethylation were not known until the discovery of the lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) (KDM1 family). LSD1 (KDM1A) is characterized as a component of the v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF)-histone deacetylase (HDAC) (or BHC) complex that contains the restrictive silencer factor (REST) co-repressor, CoREST. CoREST has been shown to function as a repressor of neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells [125,126,127]. LSD1, through its amine oxidase domain, has been shown to act as a transcriptional repressor and to demethylate K3K4, thereby providing the first evidence that histone methylation is a dynamic and reversible event [128]. LSD2 (KDM1B) was recently described as an additional H3K4 demethylase [129]. Similar to KDM1A, KDM1B was shown to demethylate the mono- and di-methylated histone H3K9 [130]. Soon after discovery of the KDM1 family, a protein containing a Fe2+ dioxygenase Jumonji-C (JmjC) domain (KDM2 family proteins) was characterized as a specific H3K36me1/2 demethylase (KDM2A and B), which does not demethylate H3K36me3 [131]. Now, accumulating evidence suggests the presence of specific demethylases for all of the major methylated histones that have so far been studied (Figure 3B), with the exception of methylated histone H3K79, despite its characterization as a reversible process [123]. The KDM3 family of proteins was characterized as the second family of JmjC histone demethylases (KDM3A/JHDM2A and KDM3B/JHDM2B) and was shown to demethylate mono- and di-methylated H3K9, thereby resulting in active gene expression [132]. The KDM4 family proteins consist four histone demethylases (KDM4A–4D or JMJD2A–2D, respectively). All KDM4 demethylases remove di- and tri-methylation from histone H3K9 and H3K36 proteins [133,134,135]. In addition to the JmjC domain, they all contain a conserved JmjN domain. All, except KDM4D, have tandem plant homeodomain (PHD) fingers and Tudor domains that help to recognize specific histone methylation marks [136,137]. These families of proteins were activated in response to hormonal activity. For example, KDM4A and KDM4D act as androgen receptor (AR) coactivators: estrogen receptor (ER) activation results in KDM4B-mediated demethylation of H3K9me3 proteins [138,139]. KDM5 (KDM5A–5D/JARID1A–1D) specifically catalyzed the demethylation of histone H3K4me2/3 proteins [140,141,142,143,144]. These proteins are characterized as multi domain-containing proteins and include a combination of JmjC/JmjN catalytic domains, with an AT-rich interaction domain (ARID) DNA-binding domain, a C5HC2 zinc finger and two to three PHD fingers. The PHD finger domains of KDM5A and KDM5C were shown to facilitate binding to methylated H3K4 or H3K9, respectively [141,145]. KDM6 family proteins contain KDM6A/UTX and KDM6B/JMJD3 demethylases. These enzymes catalyze the removal of di- and tri-methyl groups form histone H3K27me2/3 proteins [146,147,148,149,150] and result in transcriptional activation. KDM6A functions in development via its association with the KMT2/MLL proteins to regulate H3K4 methylation followed by HOX gene expression [149]. The KDM7 (PHF2) family enzymes contain three members (KDM7A/JHDM1D, KDM7B/PHF8, and KDM7C/PHF2). This enzyme family removes mono and di methyl group from histone H3K91/2 and H3K27me1/2 proteins [139,151,152,153,154,155,156,157]. Additionally, they regulate the expression of genes involved in X-linked mental retardation and expression of ribosomal RNA [154,155,157]. Additionally, PHF8 demethylates histone H4K20me1 proteins [155,157,158]. KDM7 family proteins have a PHD finger domain that helps to recognize and bind to histone the H3K4me3 mark. This ensures substrate specificity, genomic occupancy, and the regulation of target gene expression by KDM7 demethylases [152,156,159,160,161]. Few studies have explored the participation of histone demethylase in developmental alcohol studies, except in one study in which acute prenatal alcohol exposure at GD7 was shown to disrupt the transcripts that encoded KDM1A and KDM4A proteins [162] (see Section 3 for details).

2.3. MicroRNAs
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a family of small, non-coding RNA molecules that facilitate the degradation of untranslated regions of target mRNAs. Thus, miRNAs play a critical epigenetic function by inhibiting the translation and transcription of a network of genes encoding for proteins. MicroRNAs are generated from longer precursor miRNA (pre-miRNAs) in sequential biogenesis pathways (Figure 4). MicroRNA genes primarily bind to the imperfect complementary sequence that forms a secondary stem-loop structure within the pre-miRNAs. This structure, along with its guide strand [163,164], act as a substrate for two double-stranded RNases, Drosha (nucleus) and Dicer (cytoplasmic) [165]. This specific targeting occurs through a partial complementary association between the mRNA’s 3′UTR and 5′ end of the microRNA (a 6–8 nucleotides sequence long) regions. This partial association facilitates the targeting of a single miRNA to many mRNAs at the same time and vice versa. This provides a mechanism wherein a single mRNA can be influenced by diverse miRNAs [166,167]. To date, a few miRNAs have been shown to be expressed in mammalian brains and recent estimates suggest the presence of 1100 or more human miRNAs, which regulate the expression of nearly two-thirds of all genes [168]. Thus, they can control the expression of networks of genes and whole pathways and therefore are considered as master regulators of gene expression [169]. Therefore, miRNAs are critically essential for the proper development and functioning of the adult brain. Indeed, many recent studies suggest the involvement of several miRNAs in an array of cellular homeostatic processes, including developmental timing, cellular differentiation, neural patterning, apoptosis and synaptic plasticity [170,171,172,173].

Studies involving individual genetic deletion of miRNA have suggested that miR-124, miR-125b, miR-132, miR-134, miR-137, and miR-138 in neurons regulate synaptic development and dendritic branching (for references see [174]). The disruption of miRNA biogenesis pathways, such as Dicer, which affects the expression of all miRNAs, can induce impaired cell differentiation, reduction in neuronal size, loss of dendritic branching, disturbed axonal guidance [175], impairments in inhibitory synaptic transmission and cognitive dysfunction [176]. It should be noted that the activity-dependent regulation of gene expression is essential for synaptic plasticity and memory formation and similar neuronal activity was shown to regulate miR-132 expression in a CREB signaling pathway-dependent manner [177,178]. In a recent study, reduced miR-125a levels were found in synaptoneurosomes after activation of mGluR1/ 5 receptors, thereby indicating that neuronal activity may influence the miRNA turnover [179]. Additionally, miRNAs in neurons decay much faster than in non-neuronal cells, and their turnover rate is activity-dependent [180]. Therefore, similar to many learning and memory genes, miRNAs can be regulated in a neuronal activity-dependent manner. It has been suggested that neuronal activity is one mechanism for the high turnover rate of miRNAs in neurons. Consistent with their neuronal function, increasing evidence suggests that the activity of miRNAs is directly implicated in the pathogenesis of complex neuropsychiatric disorders (for references see [181]) that are linked to abnormalities in synaptic plasticity as well as in neurodegenerative diseases [182,183]. Limited studies have explored miRNA dysregulation in FASD animal models, as described later in this section. Therefore, an understanding of the signaling mechanisms that regulate the patterns and activity of miRNA expression have the potential to serve as potential targets for FASD treatment.

3. Alcohol’s Influence on Epigenetic Mechanisms in the Developing Brain
The presence of fetal alcohol syndrome was recognized after the initial study [184] suggesting series of deformities in the offspring of alcoholic mothers. Among the several possible consequences of developmental alcohol exposure, defects in brain maturation and the considerable lifelong behavioral impairments have been the most catastrophic. The most serious consequences of early developmental alcohol exposure are fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) [184], which is characterized by pre- and post-natal growth defects, craniofacial anomalies and persistent impairments of CNS function. FAS occur in 1–2 of every 1000 newborns. It has been acknowledged as an important cause of non-genetic intellectual disabilities and behavioral impairments in the world [185,186,187,188,189]. Nevertheless, now, it has become clear that FAS is not the only enduring defect that results from developmental alcohol exposure. Unquestionably, the term fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) [190] (estimated the prevalence of as high as 2%–5%) has been used to represent the persistent nature of developmental alcohol effects, with FAS on the stronger side of the spectrum. Though the behavioral profile of FASD is somewhat limited [191], the available literature suggests that FASD is associated with many neuropsychological impairments, such as verbal learning/recall abilities, learning and memory [187,192,193,194,195,196]. These neuropsychological deficits create many daily challenges for individuals with FASD and are also responsible for causing a majority of intellectual disability in the Western world [194,196,197,198]. The neurobehavioral outcome of FASD is also dependent on the amount [199,200], pattern (continuous vs. binge drinking) and developmental timing [201] of alcohol exposure. Additionally, the pattern of alcohol exposure can often undermine alcohol dose effects. For example, binge-like exposures result in more severe behavioral outcomes than does chronic exposure [202,203]. Furthermore, several other factors, such as maternal metabolism, genetic susceptibility, and variation in the vulnerability of different brain regions, may contribute to behavioral outcomes. Nonetheless, factors that alter the peak blood alcohol levels (BALs) experienced by the embryo or the fetus (e.g., maternal metabolism) are expected to affect the occurrence and severity of FASD. Unfortunately, this information is often hard to obtain, mainly in retrospectively recruited samples, and individual studies provide varying degrees of detail concerning the amount and patterns of exposure. These issues highlight the modifying variables that contribute to the vast range of phenotypes presented in FASD children.

Persistent data from all areas of biological science, such as epidemiology, genetics, epigenetics, neuroscience and neuroimaging studies, strongly suggest that many adult neuropsychiatric illnesses have a neurodevelopmental origin [204]. Recent technological advances and experimental evidence have provided more precise mechanistic insights on the developmental origin of adult diseases. Disturbance of brain development at sensitive and critical periods by adverse environmental exposure, along with genetic programming, results in the early or late manifestation of heterogeneous clinical conditions [205,206,207,208,209]. The range of developmental deficits varies from learning or cognitive functions to global impairments of social skills or intellect. To date, the etiological basis of the majority of developmentally related adult diseases, such as autism spectral disorder (ASD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and FASD conditions, are still unknown. Data from several studies support their polygenic and multifactorial, including epigenetic etiology [4,6,210,211,212,213].

Using animal models of FASD, several studies have reported epigenetics changes, including DNA methylation [214,215,216,217,218,219], DNA-associated histone modification [4,5,6,213,220,221,222,223,224] and miRNAs [225,226,227,228,229,230,231]. Acute alcohol exposure at Gestational Days (GD) 9 through 11 was found to induce hypomethylation of DNA in the fetus [215], and this study was the first one to indicate that DNA methylation may contribute to abnormalities found in FAS. In the prenatal alcohol model, alcohol was shown to significantly decrease astroglial-specific marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunoreactivity and its mRNA levels in both astrocytes in primary culture and brains of pups from alcohol-fed mothers. The reduced GFAP transcript found in fetal brains was due to the hypermethylated state of the GFAP DNA [232]. These findings suggest that alcohol-induced DNA hypermethylation, followed by impaired GFAP expression and astroglial development, may underlie the deficits in brain functions that are observed after prenatal alcohol exposure. In some instances, male alcohol exposure before breeding resulted in reduced cytosine methyltransferase mRNA levels in paternal sperm, thereby suggesting that distorted genomic imprinting caused by DNA hypomethylation leads to the expression of normally silent paternal alleles [233]. This phenomenon was also demonstrated between alcohol use in men and hypomethylation of paternally imprinted loci in sperm DNA in genomic regions that are essential for embryonic development, therefore providing a mechanism for paternal effects in the etiology of FASD [218].

The imprinted genes are expressed mainly from either the paternal or maternal allele and are important regulators of fetal growth and development [234]. Additionally, imprinted genes have been found to cause some birth defect syndromes in humans [235,236] and in animals [237,238,239]. In a whole-embryo culture, alcohol enhanced DNA methylation, particularly in genes on chromosome 7, 10 and X, and a neural tube defect phenotype. Enhanced DNA methylation was found in imprinted genes, genes that are essential for cell cycle, growth, apoptosis, cancer, and in a significant number of genes important for olfaction, and with associated changes in gene expression [217]. In monolayer cultures of NSCs, alcohol was shown to increase DNA methylation of multiple cell cycle genes and increased the expression and activity of DNA methyltransferases [240]. In another study, prenatal alcohol-exposed embryos exhibited decreased DNA methylation at insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) transcripts, which was reversed by methyl supplementation [214]. In NSC culture, alcohol exposure retarded the migration, neuronal formation, and growth processes of NSCs. Additionally, alcohol exposure prevented DNA methylation of specific genes related to neural development, eye development and developmental disorders, thereby suggesting that developmental alcohol alters DNA methylation of genes that are critical for regulating neural development [219]. Furthermore, in studies using a whole-embryo culture, alcohol delayed the DNA methylation program, which paralleled the developmental impediment of the neural tube in a spatial and temporal manner [241]. A delay in hippocampus development was also associated with altered 5-mC and 5-hmC in DG and CA region of the hippocampus in prenatally alcohol-exposed embryos or P7 mice [242]. Although these studies have demonstrated the presence of altered methylation program that correlated well with a developmental delay in the formation of the neuronal tube and the hippocampus, whether the abnormal DNA methylation is responsible for the developmental delay and behavioral deficits remains to be established in further studies. In another animal model of FASD (third-trimester equivalent pregnancy), studies have suggested a direct link of this phenomenon. Alcohol administration in Postnatal Days 2–10 (P2–10) mice significantly caused hypermethylation of DNA in the hippocampus (HP) and prefrontal cortex (PFC) at P21. Administration of choline (P2–20), a nutrient supplement that has been shown in a rat model to rescue some of the alcohol’s behavioral effects [243,244], prevented DNA methylation in alcohol-treated P21 mice HP and PFC tissues [245]. In a gestational alcohol model, alcohol increased the methylation of the proopiomelanocortin (Pomc) DNA in a gene- and cell-specific manner in the adult rat hypothalamus despite the exposure to alcohol having ended during the prenatal period [221]. Interestingly, the hypermethylated Pomc gene was found in the sperm of prenatal alcohol-exposed F1 offspring that was transmitted through the F3 generation through the male germline [221]. Global DNA methylation was found to be reduced by alcohol in an in vitro murine embryonic fibroblast (MEF) model. Reduction in DNA methylation was associated with alcohol-induced proteasomal-mediated degradation of DNA methyltransferases (DNMT-1, DNMT-3a, and DNMT-3b) [246]. In a neonatal animal model of FASD (third-trimester equivalent pregnancy), the administration of alcohol to P7 mice resulted in reduced global DNA methylation in neonatal HP and neocortical (NC) tissues [23] and impaired learning and memory in adult animals [4,213,247]. This reduction in DNA methylation was linked with alcohol-induced caspase-3 mediated degradation of DNMT-1, DNMT-3a proteins [23] and impaired learning and memory [4,213,247]. Combined pre-(GD1-21) and postnatal (P2–10) alcohol exposure resulted in a significant increase in DNA methyltransferase activity (DNMT), as well as Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a gene expression in the HP of P21 rats [248]. These studies warrant future investigation to understand how these events affect global or gene-specific DNA methylation and learning and memory. Prenatal alcohol exposure decreased DNA methylation in the solute carrier family 17 member 6 (SLC17A6) promoter region, which encodes vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2). In contrast to Slc17a6 mRNA levels, HP VGLUT2 protein levels were significantly reduced in adult alcohol-exposed offspring and suggest that DNA methylation-regulated glutamate neurotransmission in the hippocampus could contribute to the cognitive and behavioral phenotypes that are observed in FASD [249]. Another important observation was made using gestational alcohol exposure in epigenetically sensitive alleles (metastable epialleles) in the Agouti viable yellow (Avy) mice model [250]. The activity of Avy is changeable among genetically identical mice, thereby resulting in mice with a range of coat colors [from yellow to mottled to agouti (termed pseudoagouti)] [251]. In this model, exposure to alcohol increases the probability of transcriptional silencing of the Ayy locus through DNA methylation, thereby resulting in more mice with an agouti-colored coat [35]. A genome-wide DNA methylome analysis revealed widespread alcohol-induced alterations with significant hypermethylation of many differentiation-related genes in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) [252]. In a Japanese rice fish embryogenesis model, alcohol was shown to have the capacity to specifically alter the developmental pattern of DNA methylation machinery [253]. A genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation in adult mice exposed to prenatal alcohol using voluntary alcohol exposure paradigm indicated that a large number of gene promoter regions are differentially affected. Furthermore, network analysis of these promoter regions has suggested that behavior-, neurological disease-, and psychological disorder-associated networks are the most significantly affected ones [254]. Enrichment analysis using the genes that were up-methylated in FASD children from 5 to 18 years of age showed a significant enrichment in genes associated with neurodevelopment and diseases [255]. It is clear from the above-discussed studies that the alteration of global DNA methylation or methylation (Table 1) of specific genes/promoter regions is dependent upon several factors, including the specific gene or tissue, amount and pattern of alcohol exposure, as well as the developmental timing of exposure. DNA methylation or demethylation (5-hCm) can influence gene expression through enhancing or preventing the recruitment and binding of transcriptional regulatory proteins with decreased [256] or increased [257,258] transcription activity. Findings also suggest that increased DNA methylation in the gene body can lead to an increased transcription, thus implicating a bidirectional regulation of transcription, depending upon the site of the DNA methylation mark [259]. The mechanisms of the interplay between DNA methylation and transcription activity are therefore crucial. Furthermore, the signaling events that are responsible for DNA methylation-related chromatin remodeling are largely unknown and warrant future research in this line to develop potential therapeutic approaches to treat FASD.

Limited laboratories using many animal models of FASD have demonstrated the participation of DNA-associated histone proteins modifications in responses to alcohol exposure during the different sensitive period of brain development. The earliest report suggests that binge-like alcohol exposure reduces the level of histone H2A family proteins in endothelial caveolae cells [266]. Another study demonstrated the reduced expression of the CREB binding protein (CBP), a histone acetyltransferase, in the rat cerebellum exposed to alcohol during the third trimester-equivalent of human pregnancy. These studies also demonstrated the global reduction of both acetylated histone H3 and H4 proteins in the cerebellum [222]. In a prenatal alcohol model, alcohol was shown to affect the hypothalamus function, such as stress axis responsiveness, which may be due to reduced expression of Pomc gene and production of β-endorphin protein in the arcuate (ARC) nucleus of the hypothalamus. In the same arcuate nucleus, reduced staining of H3K4me2,3, acetylated H3K9 and increased H3K9me2 was also observed in alcohol-exposed male offspring. Consistent with acetylated or methylated histone H3 and H4 staining data, the transcriptional activity of enzymes responsible for methylation or acetylation of histone H3 and H4 proteins (G9a, Set7/9, Setdb1 and HDAC2) were also altered in alcohol-exposed offspring [221]. In another study, during the third-trimester equivalent human pregnancy animal model, alcohol was shown to enhance the expression of G9a mRNA and protein in NC and HP tissues. This resulted in enhanced dimethylation of H3K9 and H3K27 followed by caspase-3 mediated degradation of these proteins. Further studies using G9a (Bix 01294), as well as caspase-3 (Q-VD-Oph) inhibitors, have suggested that the activation of G9a results in robust neurodegeneration in neonatal mice and deficits in synaptic plasticity and learning and memory in adult mice [6,213] as observed in FASD children [193,195,198]. These neurobehavioral impairments were rescued by preventing the alcohol activated G9a [213]. Similarly, alcohol also enhanced the transcriptional activity of cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1R) through promoter (exon1) specific enrichment of H4K8ace protein in the mouse NC and HP. Transcriptional activation of CB1R results in impaired CB1R-mediated signal transduction (pERK1/2/pCREB/activity-regulated cytoskeletal protein (Arc)), resulting in neurodegeneration in neonatal mice and learning and memory deficits in adult mice [4,247]. These neurobehavioral deficits were prevented by CB1R antagonist or CB1R knockout mice [4,247]. Furthermore, a promoter specific analysis of histone H3 proteins using low dose alcohol (elicit mild neurodegeneration) showed an enhanced specific acetylation of H3K14 and no change in H3K9me2 or H4K8ace levels, as observed in the G9a exon1 region [5]. Transcriptional activation of G9a results in increased expression of the G9a gene and protein, thereby resulting in enhanced global dimethylation of H3K9 and H3K27 proteins without any significant degradation of H3 proteins due to the low activity of caspase-3, as found in a low-dose alcohol model [5]. In another prenatal alcohol model, alcohol was shown to enhance the expression of genes that have a role in the fetal heart through promoter-specific H3K14 acetylation in mice [267]. In a similar fetal heart study, alcohol increased global HAT activity without affecting global HDAC activity. Additionally, alcohol increased the binding of P300, CBP, PCAF, SRC1, but not GCN5, at the Gata4 promoter region in comparison to the saline-treated group. The increases in acetylation of H3K9, as well as in Gata4, α-myosin heavy chain (α-MHC) and cardiac troponin T (cTnT) mRNA levels, were also evident in these fetal hearts [268]. Studies in a prenatal alcohol model suggest that alcohol enhanced the enrichment of histone H3K4me3 at the Slc17a6 promoter, which encodes VGLUT2 [249]. Acute exposure to alcohol at GD 7 in mice exhibit significantly increased H3K9me2 and H3K9ace levels and reduced H3K27me3 levels at GD 17 and that these histone modifications strongly correlate with the development of craniofacial and CNS defects in this animal model. These observations indicate that an epigenetic signature persists long after the window of alcohol exposure and is mostly linked to alterations in a repressive chromatin structure, such as H3K9me2 [162].

The first evidence of histone acetylation modification by developmental alcohol was found in cardiac progenitor cells where alcohol enhanced H3K9ace and augmented the mRNA expression of heart development-related genes [224]. Exposure to alcohol during the third trimester-equivalent of human pregnancy reduces CBP levels, followed by reduced histones H3 and H4 acetylation in the neonatal cerebellum [222]. Prenatal alcohol exposure enhanced long-lasting H3K9ace marks and CBP mRNA levels in β-endorphin (BEP)-positive cells in the ARC of the hypothalamus of male rat offspring [221]. The transient exposure of immature P7 mice to alcohol, which is comparable with a time point within the third trimester of human pregnancy, enhances specific acetylation of H3K14 in the G9a exon1 gene, which results in enhanced G9a transcription [5]. In a similar mouse model, it was shown that alcohol enhances acetylation of H4K8 in the CB1R exon1 gene, thereby leading to enhanced CB1R expression and impaired synaptic plasticity, learning and memory in adult mice [4].

Prenatal alcohol exposure reduced both mRNA levels of KMT7/9 (Set7/9) and the number of H3K4me2, 3-positively stained BEP cells. Additionally, enhanced KMT1C (G9a) and KMT1F (Setdb1) mRNA, as well as H3K9me2-positively stained BEP cells, was observed in the ARC of the hypothalamus of rat offspring exposed to prenatal alcohol [221]. In another study, binge-like alcohol exposure in P7 mice, which is comparable with the third trimester of human pregnancy, enhanced KMT1C (G9a) expression, as well as in H3K9me2 and H3K27me2, in both neocortical and hippocampal tissues of neonatal mice [5]. This particular dimethylation of both histones marks them for proteolytic degradation by activated caspase-3 in this animal model [6]. The inhibition of KMT1C (G9a) activity before alcohol treatment not only rescued neurodegeneration in neonatal mice but also synaptic plasticity and learning memory in adult mice [213]. Gestational choline treatment, which has been shown to prevent pre/postnatal alcohol-induced learning and memory [244,269], also normalized the alcohol-suppressed hypothalamic levels of H3K4me3, as well as the NA levels of KMT7/9, and increased the H3K9me2 and mRNA levels of KMT1C and KMT1F in the hypothalamus of adult male offspring rats [220]. In another study, prenatal alcohol exposure enhanced SLC17A6 gene expression, which codes for VGLUT2 through the enrichment of H3K4me3 at the SLC17A6 promoter region in adult mice [249]. In another study, acute exposure of GD7 mice to alcohol significantly disrupts transcripts that encode for KMT1C (G9a), KMT6 (EzH2) and KMT7 (SETdB1) proteins [162]. Together, these findings suggest that these epigenetic mechanisms (Table 2) may have a direct role in cognitive dysfunction observed in FASD.

The first evidence to show that early alcohol alters miRNA (Table 3) was shown in NSCs using ex vivo fetal cerebral cortical neuroepithelium model [228]. In this study, alcohol, which was shown to promote cell proliferation and aberrant differentiation, did not cause the death of NSCs, but rather suppressed miR-9, -21, -153, and -335 levels [228]. Furthermore, it has been shown that the lack of cell death by alcohol in this study was due to the combined loss of miR-335 and miR-21 and the loss of miR-335 alone was responsible for the increased NSC proliferation in response to alcohol [228]. In another study using a prenatal mouse model, it has been shown that alcohol increased certain miRNAs (miR-10a, -10b, -9, -145, -30a-3p and miRNA-152) and decreased other miRNAs (miR-200a, -496, -296, -30e-5p, -362, -339, -29c and -154) in the fetal brain. This resulted in impaired task acquisition in the Morris water maze in P35 mice [231].

In another study, Zebrafish embryos were exposed to alcohol, which was then followed by the evaluation of miRNA levels and deformation. This study showed increases in miR-153a, -725, -30d, let-7k, -100, -738, and -732 and decreases in miR-128 and -193b and induced cell death along the dorsal axis of the embryo [229]. In another study, using P7 mouse model of FASD, alcohol was shown to enhance miR-26b levels in adult whole brain tissues [230]. MicroRNA-26b, which is implicated in the differentiation of NSCs [227], has also been shown to control the expression of genes that encode for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which is important for neurodevelopment [226,227]. Exposure of GD12.5 mouse fetal murine cerebral cortical-derived neurosphere cultures to alcohol suppressed the expression of several miRNAs, including miR-9, -21, -153, and -335, as well as miR-140-3p [225]. In Zebrafish embryos, alcohol suppresses miR-9 biogenesis. This early embryonic loss of miR-9 function recapitulates the severe range of teratology that is associated with early alcohol exposure [270]. In another study that uses an acute prenatal model (second-trimester equivalent), alcohol was shown to enhance miR-302c in the adult whole brain [271]. MicroRNA-302 is suggested to have a critical function in neural tube closure and embryonic survival [274]. Furthermore, rats treated with acute alcohol at GD 12 exhibit both upward and downward changes in several miRNAs in the amygdala and ventral striatum in association with decreased social motivation behavior at P42 [272]. Social enrichment of GD12 alcohol-exposed rats rescued both miRNA and social motivation behavior in P42 mice [272]. Furthermore, it has been shown that miR-125b can rescue alcohol-induced apoptosis in NCCs by decreasing the expression of Bcl-2 antagonist killer 1 (BAK1) and p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) genes (pro-apoptotic genes). Additionally, the microinjection of miR-125b mimic into cultured mouse embryos prevented alcohol-induced embryotoxicity [275]. Prenatal exposure of mice on GD1-8 resulted in enhanced miR-135a, -135b, -467b-5p and -487b in the P87 murine hippocampus. Additionally, miR-467b-5p and the 3′UTR of Slc17a6 exhibited specific interactions in vitro and suggested that a similar interaction in vivo may contribute to reduced HP VGLUT2 protein levels in alcohol-exposed adult males [249]. In this model, alcohol not only enhanced HP levels of miRNAs but also increased miRNAs, miR-135a, miR-135b and miR-467b-5p levels in the serum [249]. These findings suggest that miRNA may have an important role in HP dysfunction found in FASD and circulating miRNAs could be used as biomarkers of early developmental alcohol exposure [249]. A similar change in circulating miRNAs (miR-9, -15b, -19b, and -20a) was also found in pregnant ewes and in newborn lambs (GD 147) that were exposed to alcohol between GD 4 and GD 132 [273]. Alcohol exposure in P7 mice was shown to alter several miRNA transcripts and was found to be associated with genes that are important for neural connectivity [276] and may contribute to cognitive deficits, as found in FASD children.

4. Conclusions
In summary, several epigenetic mechanisms are suggested to contribute to the harmful consequences of alcohol abuse during pregnancy in the developing fetus (Figure 5). Epigenetic modifications, such as altered DNA methylation, specific histone protein modification and dysregulation of miRNA, in response to developmental alcohol exposure, can contribute to impaired neurogenesis, neuronal communication and neural circuit assembly. These alcohol-induced neuronal deficits can be long-lasting and could result in abnormalities in synaptic plasticity and cognitive function and can provide bases for many of the neurobehavioral abnormalities found in FASD. The broad role of DNA methylation and chromatin modification in learning and memory has not been fully understood. This is because learning and memory is regulated by a dynamic interplay between the various signaling molecules, enzymes and proteins that are capable of modifying the chromatin structure. Additionally, there is a lack of understanding of the mechanisms that both predicate and result from epigenetic modifications that regulate learning and memory process. Modulation of epigenetic marks using pharmacological and gene knock-in or knockout approaches support a role for the epigenetic process in learning and memory, therefore making it a promising target for the future development of potential therapeutic agents to treat FASD.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Institute of Alcohol and Alcoholism grant (RO1-AA019443) to Balapal S. Basavarajappa.

Author Contributions
Balapal S. Basavarajappa conceived, designed and wrote the sections on epigenetics and FASD. Shivakumar Subbanna contributed literature on alcohol’s influence on epigenetic mechanisms and provided tables for the review.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

FAS, fetal alcohol syndrome; FASD, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder; miRNA, microRNA; CpG, cytosine phosphate guanine islands; PMT, posttranslational modification; snoRNA, small nucleolar RNA; lncRNA, long non-coding RNA; DNMTs, DNA methyltransferases; SAM, S-adenyl methionine; TET, ten-eleven translocation; mC, methylcytosine; 5-hmC, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine; 5-caC, 5-carboxylcytosine; MeCP2, methyl-binding protein 2; HDACs, histone deacetylases; LTP, long-term potentiation; HAT, Histone acetyltransferases; Gcn5, general control nonderepressible-5; CREB, cAMP response element-binding protein; CBP, CREB binding protein; PAX3, paired box 3; AP2, activation of enhancer binding protein 2; TSA, trichostatin; SAHA, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid; PRMT, arginine methyltransferases; CARM1, cofactor-associated arginine methyltransferase; SET, Su (var)3-9, Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax; MLL, mixed lineage leukemia; GLP, G9A-like protein; KMTs, lysine methyltransferases; HMTs, Histone methyltransferases; KDM, lysine demethylase; BRAF, v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1; REST, restrictive silencer factor; PHD, plant homeodomain; AR, androgen receptor; ER, estrogen receptor; ARID, AT-rich interaction domain; BAL, blood alcohol level; ASD, autism spectral disorder; ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; GD, gestational day; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; NSC, neural stem cell; IGF2, insulin-like growth factor 2; HP, hioppocampus; NC, neocortex; PFC, prefrontal cortex; SLC17A6, solute carrier family 17 member 6; VGLUT2, vesicular glutamate transporter 2; hESCs, human embryonic stem cells; ARC, activity-regulated cytoskeletal protein; CB1R, cannabinoid receptor type 1; α-MHC, α-myosin heavy chain; cTnT, cardiac troponin T; BEP, β-endorphin; BAK1, Bcl-2 antagonist killer 1; PUMA, p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis; hGCN5, human general control of amino acid synthesis protein 5-like 2; PCAF, p300/CBP-associated factor; ELP3, elongation protein 3; TIP60, TAT interacting proteins 60; TFIIIC90, transcription factor IIIC 90kDa; TAF1, TATA Box Binding Protein-Associated Factor; SRC1, steroid receptor coactivator 1; ACTR, activator of thyroid receptor; p160, receptor coactivators proteins 160; CLOCK, Clock Circadian Regulator.

Figure 1 Graphic representation of DNA methylation and its regulation by enzymatic mechanisms. Methylation of DNA begins with the covalent addition of a methyl group from s-adenyl methionine (SAM) [41] to the fifth carbon of the cytosine pyrimidine ring to form 5-methylcytosine (5-mC), a process that is catalyzed by a family of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). The majority of DNA methylation usually occurs at genes on cytosines that precede a guanine nucleotide or CpG islands. De novo methyltransferases (e.g., DNMT3a/b) transfer methyl groups to naked DNA CpG pairs (e.g., CpG/GpC to mCpG/GpC) [42,43]. DNMT1 is the maintenance methyltransferase that transfers methyl groups to hemimethylated DNA strands (e.g., mCpG/GpC to mCpG/GpCm) and maintains the parental DNA methylation pattern during replication [44]. 5-mC undergoes sequential oxidation to 5-caC by TET1 activities. 5-caC, through base-excision-repair (BER) mechanisms, results in the regeneration of cytosine [39,45,46]. 5-methylcytosine (5-mC); 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC); 5-formylcytosine (5-fC); 5-carboxylcytosine (5-caC).

Figure 2 Schematic representation of DNA-associated histone protein acetylation and deacetylation by histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzyme families. The net acetylation at lysine residues of histone proteins of nucleosomes is decided by the interplay between acetylation and deacetylation processes through HAT and HDAC enzyme activities, respectively. The box provides different families and classes of HAT and HDAC enzymes. CBP, cyclic adenomonophosphate response element-binding (CREB) binding protein; GNAT, Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferases; hGCN5, human general control of amino acid synthesis protein 5-like 2; PCAF, p300/CBP-associated factor; ELP3, elongation protein 3; TIP60, TAT interacting proteins 60; TFIIIC90, transcription factor IIIC 90kDa; TAF1, TATA Box Binding Protein-Associated Factor; SRC1, steroid receptor coactivator 1; ACTR, activator of thyroid receptor; p160, receptor coactivators proteins 160; CLOCK, Clock Circadian Regulator.

Figure 3 DNA-associated histone protein lysine methylation (A) and demethylation (B) by histone methyltransferase (KMTs) and histone demethylase (KDMs) enzyme families. Histone H3 and H4 tails with known lysine methyltransferases (KMT1-8) and demethylases (KDM1-7) are shown under each specific lysine residue.

Figure 4 The schematic diagram of miRNA biogenesis and function. In the nucleus, RNA polymerase II (Pol II)-dependent transcription of a miRNA-encoding gene, which may include both intron- and exon-coding regions, results in the formation of a long primary miRNA transcript (pri-miRNA) that is 50-capped and 30-polyadenylated. This pri-miRNA transcript is subject to nuclear processing by the microprocessor complex, which includes DCGR8 and Drosha, into the precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA) transcript. Pre-miRNAs are transported out of the nucleus to the cytoplasm by Exp5 and Ran-GTP. Pre-miRNA can then be further cleaved by Dicer/TARBP to generate a mature miRNA. The mature miRNA is incorporated into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), which will select mRNA transcripts for the down-regulation of protein expression. In the synapses, miRNA can regulate the local down-regulation of protein expression. Certain conditions, such as neuronal activity, could affect the signaling events as well as miRNA formation. Additionally, genes regulated by miRNA can act on synaptic activity-dependent signaling pathways that promote the activation of epigenetic factors (e.g., CREB and MeCP2), which in turn can control miRNA transcription in the nucleus.

Figure 5 Graphical summary of developmental alcohol-induced epigenetic defects. Developmental alcohol exposure has been shown to affect DNA methylation, HATs/HDACs, KMTs and miRNAs, followed by several changes in genes and protein expression that are important for cognitive and other brain function.

brainsci-06-00012-t001_Table 1Table 1 Summary of the developmental alcohol-induced DNA methylation modifications.

Alcohol Exposure	Tissue Examined	Effects	
1. GD 9–11	GD 12 fetus	Reduced DNA methylation [215]	
2. GD	Cultured astrocytes	BDNF gene hypermethylation [260]	
3. GD 1–18	PD 10	Hypermethylation of the GFAP gene [232]	
4. Oryzias latipes embryos	2–6 dpf	No change in Aldh1A2 gene promoter methylation [261]	
5. Embryo (E8.25) cultures	Embryo cultures	Both hyper/hypomethylation of gene promoter [217]	
6. Neural stem cells in culture	NSCs culture	Hypermethylation of cell cycle genes [240]	
7. Neural stem cells in culture	NSCs culture	Hypomethylation of NSC genes [219]	
8. GD 9	E-15 and 17	Decreased Igf2 gene DNA methylation [214]	
9. PD 2–10	PD 21	Increased DNA methylation [245]	
10. GD 1–22	PD 21	Enhanced DNMTs activity [248]	
11. hESC	Cell lines	No change in gene methylation [262]	
12. hESC	Cell lines	Hypermethylation of many regions of chromosomes [252]	
13. GD 1–17	Cultured neural progenitor cells	Disrupt DNA methylation machinery and delays the maturation of dentate gyrus [242]	
14. Murine embryonic fibroblasts	Fibroblasts	Impaired DNA methylation and DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b proteins [246]	
15. GD 7–21	PD 60–65	Increased DNMT1protein and Pomc gene methylation [220]	
16. PD 7	PD 7	Reduced DNA methylation, DNMT1and DNMT3a proteins [23]	
17. GD 0.5–8.5	PD 28	Decreased mRNA levels of Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a genes [263]	
18. GD 0.5–8.5	PD 28	Both up/down regulation of DNA methylation [264]	
19. GD 0.5–8.5	PD 87	Decreased Slc17a6 gene promoter [249]	
20. Oryzias latipes embryos	2–6 dpf	Altered DNMT1 mRNA [265]	
dpf, day post fertilization; GD, gestational day; PD, postnatal day; NSCs, neuronal stem cells; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; Aldh1A2, aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family, member A2; Igf2, Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2; DNMT, DNA methyltransferase; hESC, human embryonic stem cells; Pomc, Proopiomelanocortin; Slc17a6, Solute Carrier Family 17 (Vesicular Glutamate Transporter), Member 6.

brainsci-06-00012-t002_Table 2Table 2 Influence of developmental alcohol on histone modifications.

Alcohol Exposure	Tissue Examined	Effects	
1. Gestational Day (GD) 7	GD 17	Increased H3K9me2, H3K9ace and decreased H3K27me3 [162]
 Altered G9a, Setdb1, Kdm1a, Kdm4c, Uhrf1, Ezh2 and Dnmt1 mRNA levels [162]	
2. Postnatal Days (PD) 2–12	PD 2–12	Decreased AcH3, AcH4, H3K23ace and increased HAT (CBP) [222]	
3. GD 7–21	PD 60–80 from F1–F3 generation	Decreased H3K4me2, H3K4me3, H3K9ace, pH3S10 and mRNA Set7/9 [220]; Increased mRNA G9a, setdb1 H3K9me2 [220]
 Decreased H3K4me2,H3K4me3, H3K9ace and
 Decreased mRNA levels of Set7/9; Increased G9a mRNA H3K9me2 and HDAC2 [221]	
4. GD 1–14.5	Embryonic days (ED) 7.0–14.5	Increased H3K14ace [267]	
5. PD 7	PD 7	Increased H4K8ace [4], H3K14ace [5]
 Decreased H3K9me2, H3K27me2 [4]
 Decreased H3K9me2, H3K27me2 [6],
 H3K9me2 [213]
 Increased G9a mRNA and Protein [6]	
6. ED 8.5–E16.5	ED14.5–PD 7	Increased p300 and SRC1 protein. No Change in HDAC.
 Increased HAT (CBP and PACF) [268]	
7. ED 8.5–16.5	ED 14.5–16.5	Increased H3K14ace [267]	
8. Days of post cotium (dpc) 0.5–8.5	PD 87	Increased H3K4me3 and Slcl7a6 gene expression [249]	
PD, Postnatal day; GD, Gestational day; ED, Embryonic day; dpc, days post coitum; H3K9me2, Histone3 lysine 9 methylation; H3K27me2, histone 3 lysine 27 dimethylation; H3K9ace, Histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation; H3K14ace, Histone 3 lysine14 acetylation; H4K8ace, Histone 4 lysine 8 acetylation; H3K4me2, Histone3 lysine4 dimethylation; H3K4me3, Histone3 lysine4 trimethylation; AcH3, Acetylated histone3; AcH4, Acetylated Histone 4; Uhrf1, Ubiquitin-like protein containing phd and ring finger domains 1; G9a, Histone methyltransferase; Ezh2, Enhancer of zeste 2 polycomb repressive complex 2 subunit; HAT, Histone acetyltransferases; Dnmt1, DNA methyltransferase 1; SRC-1, Steroid receptor coactivator-1; HDAC, Histone deacetylases; CBP, cAMP response element-binding protein binding protein; PACF, p300/CBP-associated factor; Set7/9, Set domain histone lysine methyltransferases; Setdb1, Set domain bifurcated1; pH3S10, phosphorylated H3 at serine 10; Slcl7a6, Solute Carrier Family 17 (Vesicular Glutamate Transporter), Member 6.

brainsci-06-00012-t003_Table 3Table 3 Summary of the developmental alcohol elicited changes in miRNAs.

Alcohol Exposure	Tissue Examined	Effects	
1. GD 12.5	Neurosphere cultures	Reduced the expression of miR-9, 21, 335 and -135 [228]	
2. GD 6–15	GD 17 embryo culture	Increased miR-10a, -9, -145, -30a-3p and -152. Also decreased miR-200a, -496, -296, -30e-5p, -362, -339, -29c and -154 [231]	
3. Zebrafish	Embryos (4–96 hpf)	Enhanced miR-153a, -30d, -736, -183 and reduced -23a [229]	
4. GD 12.5	Neurosphere cultures	Reduced the expression of miR-140-3p [225]	
5. PD 7	PD 60	Increased expression of miR-26b [230]	
6. Zebrafish	Embryos (24–72 hpf)	Suppressed miR-9a and increased the accumulation of pre-miR-9-3 [270]	
7. PD 7	PD 60	Enhanced miR-302c [271]	
8. GD 1–22	PD 42	Decreased miR-874-5p, 1843a-3p, -221-5p, -29c-3p, -384-5p, -412-3p, 129-1, -138-2, -322-2, -496, -9a-2. Increased miR-155, -34c, -let-7c-1, -let-7c-2-3p, -542-1 [272]	
9. GD 0.5–8.5	PD 87	Enhanced miR-135a, -135b, -467b-5b and -487b [249]	
10. GD 4–132 (Ewes)	Plasma (GD 147)	Decreased miR-572, -720, -9, -15b, -17-92 and increased miR-34b [273]	
hpf, hours post fertilization; GD, gestational day; PD, postnatal day.
==== Refs
References
1. Heijmans B.T.  Tobi E.W.  Stein A.D.  Putter H.  Blauw G.J.  Susser E.S.  Slagboom P.E.  Lumey L.H.   Persistent epigenetic differences associated with prenatal exposure to famine in humans Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008 105 17046 17049 10.1073/pnas.0806560105 18955703 
2. Kumar A.  Choi K.H.  Renthal W.  Tsankova N.M.  Theobald D.E.  Truong H.T.  Russo S.J.  Laplant Q.  Sasaki T.S.  Whistler K.N.    Chromatin remodeling is a key mechanism underlying cocaine-induced plasticity in striatum Neuron 2005 48 303 314 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.09.023 16242410 
3. Madrigano J.  Baccarelli A.  Mittleman M.A.  Wright R.O.  Sparrow D.  Vokonas P.S.  Tarantini L.  Schwartz J.   Prolonged exposure to particulate pollution, genes associated with glutathione pathways, and DNA methylation in a cohort of older men Environ. Health Perspect. 2011 119 977 982 10.1289/ehp.1002773 21385671 
4. Subbanna S.  Nagaraja N.N.  Umapathy N.S.  Pace B.S.  Basavarajappa B.S.   Ethanol exposure induces neonatal neurodegeneration by enhancing CB1R Exon1 histone H4K8 acetylation and up-regulating CB1R function causing neurobehavioral abnormalities in adult mice Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 10.1093/ijnp/pyu028 
5. Subbanna S.  Nagre N.N.  Shivakumar M.  Umapathy N.S.  Psychoyos D.  Basavarajappa B.S.   Ethanol induced acetylation of histone at G9a Exon1 and G9a-mediated histone H3 dimethylation leads to neurodegeneration in neonatal mice Neuroscience 2014 258 422 432 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.11.043 24300108 
6. Subbanna S.  Shivakumar M.  Umapathy N.S.  Saito M.  Mohan P.S.  Kumar A.  Nixonc R.A.  Verin A.D.  Psychoyos D.  Basavarajappa B.S.   G9a-mediated histone methylation regulates ethanol-induced neurodegeneration in the neonatal mouse brain Neurobiol. Dis. 2013 54 475 485 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.01.022 23396011 
7. Suderman M.  McGowan P.O.  Sasaki A.  Huang T.C.  Hallett M.T.  Meaney M.J.  Turecki G.  Szyf M.   Conserved epigenetic sensitivity to early life experience in the rat and human hippocampus Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012 109 17266 17272 10.1073/pnas.1121260109 23045659 
8. Zhang T.Y.  Hellstrom I.C.  Bagot R.C.  Wen X.  Diorio J.  Meaney M.J.   Maternal care and DNA methylation of a glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 promoter in rat hippocampus J. Neurosci. 2010 30 13130 13137 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1039-10.2010 20881131 
9. Avery O.T.  Macleod C.M.  McCarty M.   Studies on the chemical nature of the substance inducing transformation of pneumococcal types: Induction of transformation by a desoxyribonucleic acid fraction isolated from pneumococcus type III J. Exp. Med. 1944 79 137 158 10.1084/jem.79.2.137 19871359 
10. McCarty M.  Avery O.T.   Studies on the chemical nature of the substance inducing transformation on pneumococcal types; an improved method for the isolation of the transforming substance and its application to Pneumococcus Types II, III, and VI J. Exp. Med. 1946 83 97 104 10.1084/jem.83.2.97 21010047 
11. Hotchkiss R.D.   The quantitative separation of purines, pyrimidines, and nucleosides by paper chromatography J. Biol. Chem. 1948 175 315 332 18873306 
12. Compere S.J.  Palmiter R.D.   DNA methylation controls the inducibility of the mouse metallothionein-I gene lymphoid cells Cell 1981 25 233 240 10.1016/0092-8674(81)90248-8 6168387 
13. Holliday R.  Pugh J.E.   DNA modification mechanisms and gene activity during development Science 1975 187 226 232 10.1126/science.1111098 1111098 
14. Guo J.U.  Ma D.K.  Mo H.  Ball M.P.  Jang M.H.  Bonaguidi M.A.  Balazer J.A.  Eaves H.L.  Xie B.  Ford E.    Neuronal activity modifies the DNA methylation landscape in the adult brain Nat. Neurosci. 2011 14 1345 1351 10.1038/nn.2900 21874013 
15. Guo J.U.  Su Y.  Zhong C.  Ming G.L.  Song H.   Hydroxylation of 5-methylcytosine by TET1 promotes active DNA demethylation in the adult brain Cell 2011 145 423 434 10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.022 21496894 
16. Adams R.L.  Burdon R.H.  Gibb S.  McKay E.L.   DNA methylase during Xenopus laevis development Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1981 655 329 334 10.1016/0005-2787(81)90042-3 7284389 
17. Adams R.L.  McKay E.L.  Craig L.M.  Burdon R.H.   Mouse DNA methylase: Methylation of native DNA Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1979 561 345 357 10.1016/0005-2787(79)90143-6 427161 
18. Gruenbaum Y.  Cedar H.  Razin A.   Substrate and sequence specificity of a eukaryotic DNA methylase Nature 1982 295 620 622 10.1038/295620a0 7057921 
19. Razin A.  Riggs A.D.   DNA methylation and gene function Science 1980 210 604 610 10.1126/science.6254144 6254144 
20. Razin A.  Szyf M.   DNA methylation patterns. Formation and function Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1984 782 331 342 10.1016/0167-4781(84)90043-5 6383476 
21. Brown S.E.  Weaver I.C.  Meaney M.J.  Szyf M.   Regional-specific global cytosine methylation and DNA methyltransferase expression in the adult rat hippocampus Neurosci. Lett. 2008 440 49 53 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.05.028 18539393 
22. Feng J.  Chang H.  Li E.  Fan G.   Dynamic expression of de novo DNA methyltransferases DNMT3a and DNMT3b in the central nervous system J. Neurosci. Res. 2005 79 734 746 10.1002/jnr.20404 15672446 
23. Nagre N.N.  Subbanna S.  Shivakumar M.  Psychoyos D.  Basavarajappa B.S.   CB1-receptor knockout neonatal mice are protected against ethanol-induced impairments of DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNA methylation J. Neurochem. 2015 132 429 442 10.1111/jnc.13006 25487288 
24. Robertson K.D.  Uzvolgyi E.  Liang G.  Talmadge C.  Sumegi J.  Gonzales F.A.  Jones P.A.   The human DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) 1, 3a and 3b: Coordinate mRNA expression in normal tissues and overexpression in tumors Nucleic Acids Res 1999 27 2291 2298 10.1093/nar/27.11.2291 10325416 
25. Simmons R.K.  Stringfellow S.A.  Glover M.E.  Wagle A.A.  Clinton S.M.   DNA methylation markers in the postnatal developing rat brain Brain Res. 2013 1533 26 36 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.08.005 23954679 
26. Feng J.  Zhou Y.  Campbell S.L.  Le T.  Li E.  Sweatt J.D.  Silva A.J.  Fan G.   DNMT1 and DNMT3a maintain DNA methylation and regulate synaptic function in adult forebrain neurons Nat. Neurosci. 2010 13 423 430 10.1038/nn.2514 20228804 
27. Goto K.  Numata M.  Komura J.I.  Ono T.  Bestor T.H.  Kondo H.   Expression of DNA methyltransferase gene in mature and immature neurons as well as proliferating cells in mice Differentiation 1994 56 39 44 10.1046/j.1432-0436.1994.56120039.x 8026645 
28. Nabel C.S.  Kohli R.M.   Molecular biology. Demystifying DNA demethylation Science 2011 333 1229 1230 10.1126/science.1211917 21885763 
29. Szulwach K.E.  Li X.  Li Y.  Song C.X.  Wu H.  Dai Q.  Irier H.  Upadhyay A.K.  Gearing M.  Levey A.I.    5-hmC-mediated epigenetic dynamics during postnatal neurodevelopment and aging Nat. Neurosci. 2011 14 1607 1616 10.1038/nn.2959 22037496 
30. Kubiura M.  Okano M.  Kimura H.  Kawamura F.  Tada M.   Chromosome-wide regulation of euchromatin-specific 5mC to 5hmC conversion in mouse ES cells and female human somatic cells Chromosome Res. 2012 20 837 848 10.1007/s10577-012-9317-9 23111490 
31. Szyf M.   The early-life social environment and DNA methylation Clin. Genet. 2012 81 341 349 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01843.x 22236068 
32. Szyf M.   How do environments talk to genes? Nat. Neurosci. 2013 16 2 4 10.1038/nn.3286 23257925 
33. Szyf M.   DNA methylation, behavior and early life adversity J. Genet. Genom. 2013 40 331 338 10.1016/j.jgg.2013.06.004 23876773 
34. Daxinger L.  Whitelaw E.   Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: More questions than answers Genome Res. 2010 20 1623 1628 10.1101/gr.106138.110 21041414 
35. Kaminen-Ahola N.  Ahola A.  Maga M.  Mallitt K.A.  Fahey P.  Cox T.C.  Whitelaw E.  Chong S.   Maternal ethanol consumption alters the epigenotype and the phenotype of offspring in a mouse model PLoS Genet 2010 6 12 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000811 20084100 
36. Morris M.J.  Monteggia L.M.   Role of DNA methylation and the DNA methyltransferases in learning and memory Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 2014 16 359 371 25364286 
37. Rudenko A.  Dawlaty M.M.  Seo J.  Cheng A.W.  Meng J.  Le T.  Faull K.F.  Jaenisch R.  Tsai L.H.   TET1 is critical for neuronal activity-regulated gene expression and memory extinction Neuron 2013 79 1109 1122 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.08.003 24050401 
38. Bergman Y.  Cedar H.   DNA methylation dynamics in health and disease Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2013 20 274 281 10.1038/nsmb.2518 23463312 
39. He Y.F.  Li B.Z.  Li Z.  Liu P.  Wang Y.  Tang Q.  Ding J.  Jia Y.  Chen Z.  Li L.    TET-mediated formation of 5-carboxylcytosine and its excision by TDG in mammalian DNA Science 2011 333 1303 1307 10.1126/science.1210944 21817016 
40. Miller C.A.  Gavin C.F.  White J.A.  Parrish R.R.  Honasoge A.  Yancey C.R.  Rivera I.M.  Rubio M.D.  Rumbaugh G.  Sweatt J.D.   Cortical DNA methylation maintains remote memory Nat. Neurosci. 2010 13 664 666 10.1038/nn.2560 20495557 
41. Miranda T.B.  Jones P.A.   DNA methylation: The nuts and bolts of repression J. Cell. Physiol. 2007 213 384 390 10.1002/jcp.21224 17708532 
42. Okano M.  Bell D.W.  Haber D.A.  Li E.   DNA methyltransferases DNMT3a and DNMT3b are essential for de novo methylation and mammalian development Cell 1999 99 247 257 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81656-6 10555141 
43. Okano M.  Xie S.  Li E.   Cloning and characterization of a family of novel mammalian DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferases Nat. Genet. 1998 19 219 220 9662389 
44. Hermann A.  Goyal R.  Jeltsch A.   The DNMT1 DNA-(cytosine-C5)-methyltransferase methylates DNA processively with high preference for hemimethylated target sites J. Biol. Chem. 2004 279 48350 48359 10.1074/jbc.M403427200 15339928 
45. Ito S.  D’Alessio A.C.  Taranova O.V.  Hong K.  Sowers L.C.  Zhang Y.   Role of tet proteins in 5mC to 5hmC conversion, ES-cell self-renewal and inner cell mass specification Nature 2010 466 1129 1133 10.1038/nature09303 20639862 
46. Tahiliani M.  Koh K.P.  Shen Y.  Pastor W.A.  Bandukwala H.  Brudno Y.  Agarwal S.  Iyer L.M.  Liu D.R.  Aravind L.    Conversion of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mammalian DNA by mll partner tet1 Science 2009 324 930 935 10.1126/science.1170116 19372391 
47. Nan X.  Ng H.H.  Johnson C.A.  Laherty C.D.  Turner B.M.  Eisenman R.N.  Bird A.   Transcriptional repression by the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 involves a histone deacetylase complex Nature 1998 393 386 389 9620804 
48. Sarraf S.A.  Stancheva I.   Methyl-CpG binding protein MBD1 couples histone H3 methylation at lysine 9 by SETDB1 to DNA replication and chromatin assembly Mol. Cell 2004 15 595 605 10.1016/j.molcel.2004.06.043 15327775 
49. Akbarian S.  Chen R.Z.  Gribnau J.  Rasmussen T.P.  Fong H.  Jaenisch R.  Jones E.G.   Expression pattern of the Rett syndrome gene MeCP2 in primate prefrontal cortex Neurobiol. Dis. 2001 8 784 791 10.1006/nbdi.2001.0420 11592848 
50. Shahbazian M.D.  Antalffy B.  Armstrong D.L.  Zoghbi H.Y.   Insight into Rett syndrome: MeCP2 levels display tissue- and cell-specific differences and correlate with neuronal maturation Hum. Mol. Genet. 2002 11 115 124 10.1093/hmg/11.2.115 11809720 
51. Martinowich K.  Hattori D.  Wu H.  Fouse S.  He F.  Hu Y.  Fan G.  Sun Y.E.   DNA methylation-related chromatin remodeling in activity-dependent BDNF gene regulation Science 2003 302 890 893 10.1126/science.1090842 14593184 
52. Tao J.  Hu K.  Chang Q.  Wu H.  Sherman N.E.  Martinowich K.  Klose R.J.  Schanen C.  Jaenisch R.  Wang W.    Phosphorylation of MeCP2 at Serine 80 regulates its chromatin association and neurological function Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009 106 4882 4887 10.1073/pnas.0811648106 19225110 
53. Zhou Z.  Hong E.J.  Cohen S.  Zhao W.N.  Ho H.Y.  Schmidt L.  Chen W.G.  Lin Y.  Savner E.  Griffith E.C.    Brain-specific phosphorylation of MeCP2 regulates activity-dependent Bdnf  transcription, dendritic growth, and spine maturation Neuron 2006 52 255 269 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.09.037 17046689 
54. Cohen S.  Gabel H.W.  Hemberg M.  Hutchinson A.N.  Sadacca L.A.  Ebert D.H.  Harmin D.A.  Greenberg R.S.  Verdine V.K.  Zhou Z.    Genome-wide activity-dependent MeCP2 phosphorylation regulates nervous system development and function Neuron 2011 72 72 85 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.08.022 21982370 
55. Li H.  Zhong X.  Chau K.F.  Williams E.C.  Chang Q.   Loss of activity-induced phosphorylation of MeCP2 enhances synaptogenesis, LTP and spatial memory Nat. Neurosci. 2011 14 1001 1008 10.1038/nn.2866 21765426 
56. Amir R.E.  van den Veyver I.B.  Wan M.  Tran C.Q.  Francke U.  Zoghbi H.Y.   Rett syndrome is caused by mutations in X-linked MeCP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 Nat. Genet. 1999 23 185 188 10508514 
57. Na E.S.  Nelson E.D.  Kavalali E.T.  Monteggia L.M.   The impact of MeCP2 loss- or gain-of-function on synaptic plasticity Neuropsychopharmacology 2013 38 212 219 10.1038/npp.2012.116 22781840 
58. Na E.S.  Nelson E.D.  Adachi M.  Autry A.E.  Mahgoub M.A.  Kavalali E.T.  Monteggia L.M.   A mouse model for MeCP2 duplication syndrome: MeCP2 overexpression impairs learning and memory and synaptic transmission J. Neurosci. 2012 32 3109 3117 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6000-11.2012 22378884 
59. Luger K.  Dechassa M.L.  Tremethick D.J.   New insights into nucleosome and chromatin structure: An ordered state or a disordered affair? Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2012 13 436 447 10.1038/nrm3382 22722606 
60. Kornberg R.D.  Lorch Y.   Twenty-five years of the nucleosome, fundamental particle of the eukaryote chromosome Cell 1999 98 285 294 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81958-3 10458604 
61. Lorch Y.  Zhang M.  Kornberg R.D.   Histone octamer transfer by a chromatin-remodeling complex Cell 1999 96 389 392 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80551-6 10025404 
62. Goll M.G.  Bestor T.H.   Histone modification and replacement in chromatin activation Genes Dev. 2002 16 1739 1742 10.1101/gad.1013902 12130533 
63. Grant P.A.   A tale of histone modifications Genome Biol. 2001 2 10.1186/gb-2001-2-4-reviews0003 
64. Smolle M.  Workman J.L.   Transcription-associated histone modifications and cryptic transcription Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2013 1829 84 97 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.08.008 22982198 
65. Petruk S.  Sedkov Y.  Johnston D.M.  Hodgson J.W.  Black K.L.  Kovermann S.K.  Beck S.  Canaani E.  Brock H.W.  Mazo A.   TrxG and PcG proteins but not methylated histones remain associated with DNA through replication Cell 2012 150 922 933 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.046 22921915 
66. Marmorstein R.  Roth S.Y.   Histone acetyltransferases: Function, structure, and catalysis Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 2001 11 155 161 10.1016/S0959-437X(00)00173-8 11250138 
67. Roth S.Y.  Denu J.M.  Allis C.D.   Histone acetyltransferases Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2001 70 81 120 10.1146/annurev.biochem.70.1.81 11395403 
68. Yun M.  Wu J.  Workman J.L.  Li B.   Readers of histone modifications Cell Res. 2011 21 564 578 10.1038/cr.2011.42 21423274 
69. Zeng L.  Zhou M.M.   Bromodomain: An acetyl-lysine binding domain FEBS Lett. 2002 513 124 128 10.1016/S0014-5793(01)03309-9 11911891 
70. Kalkhoven E.  Roelfsema J.H.  Teunissen H.  den Boer A.  Ariyurek Y.  Zantema A.  Breuning M.H.  Hennekam R.C.  Peters D.J.   Loss of CBP acetyltransferase activity by PHD finger mutations in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome Hum. Mol. Genet. 2003 12 441 450 10.1093/hmg/ddg039 12566391 
71. Tanaka Y.  Naruse I.  Hongo T.  Xu M.  Nakahata T.  Maekawa T.  Ishii S.   Extensive brain hemorrhage and embryonic lethality in a mouse null mutant of CREB-binding protein Mech. Dev. 2000 95 133 145 10.1016/S0925-4773(00)00360-9 10906457 
72. Yao T.P.  Oh S.P.  Fuchs M.  Zhou N.D.  Ch’ng L.E.  Newsome D.  Bronson R.T.  Li E.  Livingston D.M.  Eckner R.   Gene dosage-dependent embryonic development and proliferation defects in mice lacking the transcriptional integrator p300 Cell 1998 93 361 372 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81165-4 9590171 
73. Martinez-Cerdeno V.  Lemen J.M.  Chan V.  Wey A.  Lin W.  Dent S.R.  Knoepfler P.S.   N-Myc and GCN5 regulate significantly overlapping transcriptional programs in neural stem cells PLoS ONE 2012 7 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0039456 22745758 
74. Bousiges O.  Vasconcelos A.P.  Neidl R.  Cosquer B.  Herbeaux K.  Panteleeva I.  Loeffler J.P.  Cassel J.C.  Boutillier A.L.   Spatial memory consolidation is associated with induction of several lysine-acetyltransferase (histone acetyltransferase) expression levels and H2B/H4 acetylation-dependent transcriptional events in the rat hippocampus Neuropsychopharmacology 2010 35 2521 2537 10.1038/npp.2010.117 20811339 
75. Gehrking K.M.  Andresen J.M.  Duvick L.  Lough J.  Zoghbi H.Y.  Orr H.T.   Partial loss of Tip60 slows mid-stage neurodegeneration in a spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) mouse model Hum. Mol. Genet. 2011 20 2204 2212 10.1093/hmg/ddr108 21427130 
76. Levenson J.M.  O’Riordan K.J.  Brown K.D.  Trinh M.A.  Molfese D.L.  Sweatt J.D.   Regulation of histone acetylation during memory formation in the hippocampus J. Biol. Chem. 2004 279 40545 40559 10.1074/jbc.M402229200 15273246 
77. Peleg S.  Sananbenesi F.  Zovoilis A.  Burkhardt S.  Bahari-Javan S.  Agis-Balboa R.C.  Cota P.  Wittnam J.L.  Gogol-Doering A.  Opitz L.    Altered histone acetylation is associated with age-dependent memory impairment in mice Science 2010 328 753 756 10.1126/science.1186088 20448184 
78. Chatterjee S.  Mizar P.  Cassel R.  Neidl R.  Selvi B.R.  Mohankrishna D.V.  Vedamurthy B.M.  Schneider A.  Bousiges O.  Mathis C.    A novel activator of CBP/p300 acetyltransferases promotes neurogenesis and extends memory duration in adult mice J. Neurosci. 2013 33 10698 10712 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5772-12.2013 23804093 
79. Wei W.  Coelho C.M.  Li X.  Marek R.  Yan S.  Anderson S.  Meyers D.  Mukherjee C.  Sbardella G.  Castellano S.    P300/CBP-associated factor selectively regulates the extinction of conditioned fear J. Neurosci. 2012 32 11930 11941 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0178-12.2012 22933779 
80. Johnson A.A.  Sarthi J.  Pirooznia S.K.  Reube W.  Elefant F.   Increasing Tip60 HAT levels rescues axonal transport defects and associated behavioral phenotypes in a Drosophila  Alzheimer’s disease model J. Neurosci. 2013 33 7535 7547 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3739-12.2013 23616558 
81. Pirooznia S.K.  Elefant F.   Targeting specific HATs for neurodegenerative disease treatment: Translating basic biology to therapeutic possibilities Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2013 7 10.3389/fncel.2013.00030 23543406 
82. Schneider A.  Chatterjee S.  Bousiges O.  Selvi B.R.  Swaminathan A.  Cassel R.  Blanc F.  Kundu T.K.  Boutillier A.L.   Acetyltransferases (HATs) as targets for neurological therapeutics Neurotherapeutics 2013 10 568 588 10.1007/s13311-013-0204-7 24006237 
83. Haberland M.  Montgomery R.L.  Olson E.N.   The many roles of histone deacetylases in development and physiology: Implications for disease and therapy Nature reviews. Genetics 2009 10 32 42 10.1038/nrg2485 19065135 
84. Lahm A.  Paolini C.  Pallaoro M.  Nardi M.C.  Jones P.  Neddermann P.  Sambucini S.  Bottomley M.J.  Lo Surdo P.  Carfi A.    Unraveling the hidden catalytic activity of vertebrate class IIa histone deacetylases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2007 104 17335 17340 10.1073/pnas.0706487104 17956988 
85. Finkel T.  Deng C.X.  Mostoslavsky R.   Recent progress in the biology and physiology of sirtuins Nature 2009 460 587 591 10.1038/nature08197 19641587 
86. Michan S.  Sinclair D.   Sirtuins in mammals: Insights into their biological function Biochem. J. 2007 404 1 13 10.1042/BJ20070140 17447894 
87. Morris M.J.  Monteggia L.M.   Unique functional roles for class I and class II histone deacetylases in central nervous system development and function Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 2013 31 370 381 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.02.005 23466417 
88. Yeh H.H.  Young D.  Gelovani J.G.  Robinson A.  Davidson Y.  Herholz K.  Mann D.M.   Histone deacetylase class II and acetylated core histone immunohistochemistry in human brains with Huntington’s disease Brain Res. 2013 1504 16 24 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.02.012 23419892 
89. Yoo J.Y.  Larouche M.  Goldowitz D.   The expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during cerebellar cortical development Cerebellum 2013 12 534 546 10.1007/s12311-013-0459-x 23436026 
90. Montgomery R.L.  Hsieh J.  Barbosa A.C.  Richardson J.A.  Olson E.N.   Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 control the progression of neural precursors to neurons during brain development Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009 106 7876 7881 10.1073/pnas.0902750106 19380719 
91. Jawerka M.  Colak D.  Dimou L.  Spiller C.  Lagger S.  Montgomery R.L.  Olson E.N.  Wurst W.  Gottlicher M.  Gotz M.   The specific role of histone deacetylase 2 in adult neurogenesis Neuron Glia Biol. 2010 6 93 107 10.1017/S1740925X10000049 20388229 
92. Morris M.J.  Karra A.S.  Monteggia L.M.   Histone deacetylases govern cellular mechanisms underlying behavioral and synaptic plasticity in the developing and adult brain Behav. Pharmacol. 2010 21 409 419 10.1097/FBP.0b013e32833c20c0 20555253 
93. Soriano F.X.  Hardingham G.E.   In cortical neurons HDAC3 activity suppresses RD4-dependent SMRT export PLoS ONE 2011 6 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0021056 21695276 
94. Schneider J.W.  Gao Z.  Li S.  Farooqi M.  Tang T.S.  Bezprozvanny I.  Frantz D.E.  Hsieh J.   Small-molecule activation of neuronal cell fate Nat Chem Biol 2008 4 408 410 10.1038/nchembio.95 18552832 
95. Lai I.L.  Lin T.P.  Yao Y.L.  Lin C.Y.  Hsieh M.J.  Yang W.M.   Histone deacetylase 10 relieves repression on the melanogenic program by maintaining the deacetylation status of repressors J. Biol. Chem. 2010 285 7187 7196 10.1074/jbc.M109.061861 20032463 
96. Cho Y.  Cavalli V.   HDAC signaling in neuronal development and axon regeneration Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2014 27 118 126 10.1016/j.conb.2014.03.008 24727244 
97. Guan J.S.  Haggarty S.J.  Giacometti E.  Dannenberg J.H.  Joseph N.  Gao J.  Nieland T.J.  Zhou Y.  Wang X.  Mazitschek R.    HDAC2 negatively regulates memory formation and synaptic plasticity Nature 2009 459 55 60 10.1038/nature07925 19424149 
98. Barrett R.M.  Wood M.A.   Beyond transcription factors: The role of chromatin modifying enzymes in regulating transcription required for memory Learn. Mem. 2008 15 460 467 10.1101/lm.917508 18583646 
99. Vecsey C.G.  Hawk J.D.  Lattal K.M.  Stein J.M.  Fabian S.A.  Attner M.A.  Cabrera S.M.  McDonough C.B.  Brindle P.K.  Abel T.    Histone deacetylase inhibitors enhance memory and synaptic plasticity via CREB:CBP-dependent transcriptional activation J. Neurosci. 2007 27 6128 6140 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0296-07.2007 17553985 
100. Yeh S.H.  Lin C.H.  Gean P.W.   Acetylation of nuclear factor-kappaB in rat amygdala improves long-term but not short-term retention of fear memory Mol. Pharmacol. 2004 65 1286 1292 10.1124/mol.65.5.1286 15102957 
101. Kilgore M.  Miller C.A.  Fass D.M.  Hennig K.M.  Haggarty S.J.  Sweatt J.D.  Rumbaugh G.   Inhibitors of class 1 histone deacetylases reverse contextual memory deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychopharmacology 2010 35 870 880 10.1038/npp.2009.197 20010553 
102. Didonna A.  Opal P.   The promise and perils of HDAC inhibitors in neurodegeneration Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 2015 2 79 101 10.1002/acn3.147 25642438 
103. Shi X.  Hong T.  Walter K.L.  Ewalt M.  Michishita E.  Hung T.  Carney D.  Pena P.  Lan F.  Kaadige M.R.    ING2 PHD domain links histone H3 lysine 4 methylation to active gene repression Nature 2006 442 96 99 10.1038/nature04835 16728974 
104. Shi X.  Kachirskaia I.  Walter K.L.  Kuo J.H.  Lake A.  Davrazou F.  Chan S.M.  Martin D.G.  Fingerman I.M.  Briggs S.D.    Proteome-wide analysis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae identifies several PHD fingers as novel direct and selective binding modules of histone H3 methylated at either lysine 4 or lysine 36 J. Biol. Chem. 2007 282 2450 2455 10.1074/jbc.C600286200 17142463 
105. Wysocka J.  Swigut T.  Xiao H.  Milne T.A.  Kwon S.Y.  Landry J.  Kauer M.  Tackett A.J.  Chait B.T.  Badenhorst P.    A PHD finger of NURF couples histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation with chromatin remodelling Nature 2006 442 86 90 10.1038/nature04815 16728976 
106. Xiao B.  Jing C.  Wilson J.R.  Walker P.A.  Vasisht N.  Kelly G.  Howell S.  Taylor I.A.  Blackburn G.M.  Gamblin S.J.   Structure and catalytic mechanism of the human histone methyltransferase SET7/9 Nature 2003 421 652 656 10.1038/nature01378 12540855 
107. Allis C.D.  Berger S.L.  Cote J.  Dent S.  Jenuwien T.  Kouzarides T.  Pillus L.  Reinberg D.  Shi Y.  Shiekhattar R.    New nomenclature for chromatin-modifying enzymes Cell 2007 131 633 636 10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.039 18022353 
108. Qian C.  Zhou M.M.   SET domain protein lysine methyltransferases: Structure, specificity and catalysis Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2006 63 2755 2763 10.1007/s00018-006-6274-5 17013555 
109. Aravind L.  Abhiman S.  Iyer L.M.   Natural history of the eukaryotic chromatin protein methylation system Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci. 2011 101 105 176 21507350 
110. Glaser S.  Schaft J.  Lubitz S.  Vintersten K.  van der Hoeven F.  Tufteland K.R.  Aasland R.  Anastassiadis K.  Ang S.L.  Stewart A.F.   Multiple epigenetic maintenance factors implicated by the loss of Mll2 in mouse development Development 2006 133 1423 1432 10.1242/dev.02302 16540515 
111. Goo Y.H.  Sohn Y.C.  Kim D.H.  Kim S.W.  Kang M.J.  Jung D.J.  Kwak E.  Barlev N.A.  Berger S.L.  Chow V.T.    Activating signal cointegrator 2 belongs to a novel steady-state complex that contains a subset of trithorax group proteins Mol. Cell. Biol. 2003 23 140 149 10.1128/MCB.23.1.140-149.2003 12482968 
112. Milne T.A.  Briggs S.D.  Brock H.W.  Martin M.E.  Gibbs D.  Allis C.D.  Hess J.L.   Mll targets SET domain methyltransferase activity to hox gene promoters Mol. Cell 2002 10 1107 1117 10.1016/S1097-2765(02)00741-4 12453418 
113. Peters A.H.  O’Carroll D.  Scherthan H.  Mechtler K.  Sauer S.  Schofer C.  Weipoltshammer K.  Pagani M.  Lachner M.  Kohlmaier A.    Loss of the Suv39h histone methyltransferases impairs mammalian heterochromatin and genome stability Cell 2001 107 323 337 10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00542-6 11701123 
114. Tachibana M.  Sugimoto K.  Nozaki M.  Ueda J.  Ohta T.  Ohki M.  Fukuda M.  Takeda N.  Niida H.  Kato H.    G9a histone methyltransferase plays a dominant role in euchromatic histone H3 lysine 9 methylation and is essential for early embryogenesis Genes Dev. 2002 16 1779 1791 10.1101/gad.989402 12130538 
115. Tachibana M.  Ueda J.  Fukuda M.  Takeda N.  Ohta T.  Iwanari H.  Sakihama T.  Kodama T.  Hamakubo T.  Shinkai Y.   Histone methyltransferases G9a and GLP form heteromeric complexes and are both crucial for methylation of euchromatin at H3-K9 Genes Dev. 2005 19 815 826 10.1101/gad.1284005 15774718 
116. Schultz D.C.  Ayyanathan K.  Negorev D.  Maul G.G.  Rauscher F.J. 3rd   SETDB1: A novel KAP-1-associated histone H3, lysine 9-specific methyltransferase that contributes to HP1-mediated silencing of euchromatic genes by KRAB zinc-finger proteins Genes Dev. 2002 16 919 932 10.1101/gad.973302 11959841 
117. Lund A.H.  van Lohuizen M.   Polycomb complexes and silencing mechanisms Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2004 16 239 246 10.1016/j.ceb.2004.03.010 15145347 
118. Otte A.P.  Kwaks T.H.   Gene repression by Polycomb group protein complexes: A distinct complex for every occasion? Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 2003 13 448 454 10.1016/S0959-437X(03)00108-4 14550408 
119. Huang J.  Perez-Burgos L.  Placek B.J.  Sengupta R.  Richter M.  Dorsey J.A.  Kubicek S.  Opravil S.  Jenuwein T.  Berger S.L.   Repression of p53 activity by Smyd2-mediated methylation Nature 2006 444 629 632 10.1038/nature05287 17108971 
120. Lu T.  Jackson M.W.  Wang B.  Yang M.  Chance M.R.  Miyagi M.  Gudkov A.V.  Stark G.R.   Regulation of NF-kappaB by NSD1/FBXL11-dependent reversible lysine methylation of p65 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010 107 46 51 10.1073/pnas.0912493107 20080798 
121. Saddic L.A.  West L.E.  Aslanian A.  Yates J.R. 3rd  Rubin S.M.  Gozani O.  Sage J.   Methylation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor by SMYD2 J. Biol. Chem. 2010 285 37733 37740 10.1074/jbc.M110.137612 20870719 
122. Kunizaki M.  Hamamoto R.  Silva F.P.  Yamaguchi K.  Nagayasu T.  Shibuya M.  Nakamura Y.  Furukawa Y.   The lysine 831 of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 is a novel target of methylation by SMYD3 Cancer Res. 2007 67 10759 10765 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1132 18006819 
123. Nguyen A.T.  Zhang Y.   The diverse functions of Dot1 and H3K79 methylation Genes Dev. 2011 25 1345 1358 10.1101/gad.2057811 21724828 
124. Karachentsev D.  Sarma K.  Reinberg D.  Steward R.   PR-SET7-dependent methylation of histone H4 lys 20 functions in repression of gene expression and is essential for mitosis Genes Dev. 2005 19 431 435 10.1101/gad.1263005 15681608 
125. Hakimi M.A.  Bochar D.A.  Chenoweth J.  Lane W.S.  Mandel G.  Shiekhattar R.   A core-BRAF35 complex containing histone deacetylase mediates repression of neuronal-specific genes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2002 99 7420 7425 10.1073/pnas.112008599 12032298 
126. Hakimi M.A.  Dong Y.  Lane W.S.  Speicher D.W.  Shiekhattar R.   A candidate X-linked mental retardation gene is a component of a new family of histone deacetylase-containing complexes J. Biol. Chem. 2003 278 7234 7239 10.1074/jbc.M208992200 12493763 
127. You A.  Tong J.K.  Grozinger C.M.  Schreiber S.L.   CoREST is an integral component of the CoREST-human histone deacetylase complex Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001 98 1454 1458 10.1073/pnas.98.4.1454 11171972 
128. Shi Y.  Lan F.  Matson C.  Mulligan P.  Whetstine J.R.  Cole P.A.  Casero R.A.   Histone demethylation mediated by the nuclear amine oxidase homolog LSD1 Cell 2004 119 941 953 10.1016/j.cell.2004.12.012 15620353 
129. Ciccone D.N.  Su H.  Hevi S.  Gay F.  Lei H.  Bajko J.  Xu G.  Li E.  Chen T.   KDM1B is a histone H3K4 demethylase required to establish maternal genomic imprints Nature 2009 461 415 418 10.1038/nature08315 19727073 
130. Van Essen D.  Zhu Y.  Saccani S.   A feed-forward circuit controlling inducible NF-kappaB target gene activation by promoter histone demethylation Mol. Cell 2010 39 750 760 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.08.010 20832726 
131. Tsukada Y.  Fang J.  Erdjument-Bromage H.  Warren M.E.  Borchers C.H.  Tempst P.  Zhang Y.   Histone demethylation by a family of JmjC domain-containing proteins Nature 2006 439 811 816 10.1038/nature04433 16362057 
132. Yamane K.  Toumazou C.  Tsukada Y.  Erdjument-Bromage H.  Tempst P.  Wong J.  Zhang Y.   JHDM2A, a JmjC-containing H3K9 demethylase, facilitates transcription activation by androgen receptor Cell 2006 125 483 495 10.1016/j.cell.2006.03.027 16603237 
133. Fodor B.D.  Kubicek S.  Yonezawa M.  O’Sullivan R.J.  Sengupta R.  Perez-Burgos L.  Opravil S.  Mechtler K.  Schotta G.  Jenuwein T.   Jmjd2b antagonizes H3K9 trimethylation at pericentric heterochromatin in mammalian cells Genes Dev. 2006 20 1557 1562 10.1101/gad.388206 16738407 
134. Klose R.J.  Yamane K.  Bae Y.  Zhang D.  Erdjument-Bromage H.  Tempst P.  Wong J.  Zhang Y.   The transcriptional repressor JHDM3A demethylates trimethyl histone H3 lysine 9 and lysine 36 Nature 2006 442 312 316 10.1038/nature04853 16732292 
135. Whetstine J.R.  Nottke A.  Lan F.  Huarte M.  Smolikov S.  Chen Z.  Spooner E.  Li E.  Zhang G.  Colaiacovo M.    Reversal of histone lysine trimethylation by the JMJD2 family of histone demethylases Cell 2006 125 467 481 10.1016/j.cell.2006.03.028 16603238 
136. Adams-Cioaba M.A.  Min J.   Structure and function of histone methylation binding proteins Biochem. Cell Biol. 2009 87 93 105 10.1139/O08-129 19234526 
137. Huang Y.  Fang J.  Bedford M.T.  Zhang Y.  Xu R.M.   Recognition of histone H3 lysine-4 methylation by the double tudor domain of JMJD2A Science 2006 312 748 751 10.1126/science.1125162 16601153 
138. Kawazu M.  Saso K.  Tong K.I.  McQuire T.  Goto K.  Son D.O.  Wakeham A.  Miyagishi M.  Mak T.W.  Okada H.   Histone demethylase JMJD2B functions as a co-factor of estrogen receptor in breast cancer proliferation and mammary gland development PLoS ONE 2011 6 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0017830 21445275 
139. Shi L.  Sun L.  Li Q.  Liang J.  Yu W.  Yi X.  Yang X.  Li Y.  Han X.  Zhang Y.    Histone demethylase JMJD2B coordinates H3K4/H3K9 methylation and promotes hormonally responsive breast carcinogenesis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011 108 7541 7546 10.1073/pnas.1017374108 21502505 
140. Christensen J.  Agger K.  Cloos P.A.  Pasini D.  Rose S.  Sennels L.  Rappsilber J.  Hansen K.H.  Salcini A.E.  Helin K.   RBP2 belongs to a family of demethylases, specific for tri-and dimethylated lysine 4 on histone 3 Cell 2007 128 1063 1076 10.1016/j.cell.2007.02.003 17320161 
141. Iwase S.  Lan F.  Bayliss P.  de la Torre-Ubieta L.  Huarte M.  Qi H.H.  Whetstine J.R.  Bonni A.  Roberts T.M.  Shi Y.   The X-linked mental retardation gene SMCX/JARID1C defines a family of histone H3 lysine 4 demethylases Cell 2007 128 1077 1088 10.1016/j.cell.2007.02.017 17320160 
142. Lee M.G.  Norman J.  Shilatifard A.  Shiekhattar R.   Physical and functional association of a trimethyl H3K4 demethylase and Ring6a/MBLR, a polycomb-like protein Cell 2007 128 877 887 10.1016/j.cell.2007.02.004 17320162 
143. Tahiliani M.  Mei P.  Fang R.  Leonor T.  Rutenberg M.  Shimizu F.  Li J.  Rao A.  Shi Y.   The histone H3K4 demethylase SMCX links REST target genes to X-linked mental retardation Nature 2007 447 601 605 10.1038/nature05823 17468742 
144. Yamane K.  Tateishi K.  Klose R.J.  Fang J.  Fabrizio L.A.  Erdjument-Bromage H.  Taylor-Papadimitriou J.  Tempst P.  Zhang Y.   PLU-1 is an H3K4 demethylase involved in transcriptional repression and breast cancer cell proliferation Mol. Cell 2007 25 801 812 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.03.001 17363312 
145. Wang G.G.  Song J.  Wang Z.  Dormann H.L.  Casadio F.  Li H.  Luo J.L.  Patel D.J.  Allis C.D.   Haematopoietic malignancies caused by dysregulation of a chromatin-binding PHD finger Nature 2009 459 847 851 10.1038/nature08036 19430464 
146. Agger K.  Cloos P.A.  Christensen J.  Pasini D.  Rose S.  Rappsilber J.  Issaeva I.  Canaani E.  Salcini A.E.  Helin K.   UTX and JMJD3 are histone H3K27 demethylases involved in HOX gene regulation and development Nature 2007 449 731 734 10.1038/nature06145 17713478 
147. De Santa F.  Totaro M.G.  Prosperini E.  Notarbartolo S.  Testa G.  Natoli G.   The histone H3 lysine-27 demethylase JMJD3 links inflammation to inhibition of polycomb-mediated gene silencing Cell 2007 130 1083 1094 10.1016/j.cell.2007.08.019 17825402 
148. Hong S.  Cho Y.W.  Yu L.R.  Yu H.  Veenstra T.D.  Ge K.   Identification of JmjC domain-containing UTX and JMJD3 as histone H3 lysine 27 demethylases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2007 104 18439 18444 10.1073/pnas.0707292104 18003914 
149. Lee M.G.  Villa R.  Trojer P.  Norman J.  Yan K.P.  Reinberg D.  di Croce L.  Shiekhattar R.   Demethylation of H3K27 regulates polycomb recruitment and H2A ubiquitination Science 2007 318 447 450 10.1126/science.1149042 17761849 
150. Xiang Y.  Zhu Z.  Han G.  Lin H.  Xu L.  Chen C.D.   Jmjd3 is a histone H3K27 demethylase Cell Res. 2007 17 850 857 10.1038/cr.2007.83 17923864 
151. Baba A.  Ohtake F.  Okuno Y.  Yokota K.  Okada M.  Imai Y.  Ni M.  Meyer C.A.  Igarashi K.  Kanno J.    PKA-dependent regulation of the histone lysine demethylase complex PHF2-ARID5B Nat. Cell. Biol. 2011 13 668 675 10.1038/ncb2228 21532585 
152. Feng W.  Yonezawa M.  Ye J.  Jenuwein T.  Grummt I.   PHF8 activates transcription of rRNA genes through H3K4me3 binding and H3K9me1/2 demethylation Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2010 17 445 450 10.1038/nsmb.1778 20208542 
153. Fortschegger K.  de Graaf P.  Outchkourov N.S.  van Schaik F.M.  Timmers H.T.  Shiekhattar R.   PHF8 targets histone methylation and RNA polymerase II to activate transcription Mol. Cell. Biol. 2010 30 3286 3298 10.1128/MCB.01520-09 20421419 
154. Kleine-Kohlbrecher D.  Christensen J.  Vandamme J.  Abarrategui I.  Bak M.  Tommerup N.  Shi X.  Gozani O.  Rappsilber J.  Salcini A.E.    A functional link between the histone demethylase PHF8 and the transcription factor ZNF711 in X-linked mental retardation Mol. Cell 2010 38 165 178 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.03.002 20346720 
155. Qiu J.  Shi G.  Jia Y.  Li J.  Wu M.  Dong S.  Wong J.   The X-linked mental retardation gene PHF8 is a histone demethylase involved in neuronal differentiation Cell Res. 2010 20 908 918 10.1038/cr.2010.81 20548336 
156. Wen H.  Li J.  Song T.  Lu M.  Kan P.Y.  Lee M.G.  Sha B.  Shi X.   Recognition of histone H3K4 trimethylation by the plant homeodomain of PHF2 modulates histone demethylation J. Biol. Chem. 2010 285 9322 9326 10.1074/jbc.C109.097667 20129925 
157. Zhu Z.  Wang Y.  Li X.  Xu L.  Wang X.  Sun T.  Dong X.  Chen L.  Mao H.  Yu Y.    PHF8 is a histone H3K9me2 demethylase regulating rrna synthesis Cell Res. 2010 20 794 801 10.1038/cr.2010.75 20531378 
158. Liu W.  Tanasa B.  Tyurina O.V.  Zhou T.Y.  Gassmann R.  Liu W.T.  Ohgi K.A.  Benner C.  Garcia-Bassets I.  Aggarwal A.K.    PHF8 mediates histone H4 lysine 20 demethylation events involved in cell cycle progression Nature 2010 466 508 512 10.1038/nature09272 20622854 
159. Horton J.R.  Upadhyay A.K.  Qi H.H.  Zhang X.  Shi Y.  Cheng X.   Enzymatic and structural insights for substrate specificity of a family of jumonji histone lysine demethylases Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2010 17 38 43 10.1038/nsmb.1753 20023638 
160. Qi H.H.  Sarkissian M.  Hu G.Q.  Wang Z.  Bhattacharjee A.  Gordon D.B.  Gonzales M.  Lan F.  Ongusaha P.P.  Huarte M.    Histone H4K20/H3K9 demethylase PHF8 regulates zebrafish brain and craniofacial development Nature 2010 466 503 507 10.1038/nature09261 20622853 
161. Yu L.  Wang Y.  Huang S.  Wang J.  Deng Z.  Zhang Q.  Wu W.  Zhang X.  Liu Z.  Gong W.    Structural insights into a novel histone demethylase PHF8 Cell Res. 2010 20 166 173 10.1038/cr.2010.8 20101266 
162. Veazey K.J.  Parnell S.E.  Miranda R.C.  Golding M.C.   Dose-dependent alcohol-induced alterations in chromatin structure persist beyond the window of exposure and correlate with fetal alcohol syndrome birth defects Epigenet. Chromatin 2015 8 10.1186/s13072-015-0031-7 26421061 
163. Denli A.M.  Tops B.B.  Plasterk R.H.  Ketting R.F.  Hannon G.J.   Processing of primary microRNAs by the microprocessor complex Nature 2004 432 231 235 10.1038/nature03049 15531879 
164. Han J.  Lee Y.  Yeom K.H.  Nam J.W.  Heo I.  Rhee J.K.  Sohn S.Y.  Cho Y.  Zhang B.T.  Kim V.N.   Molecular basis for the recognition of primary microRNAs by the Drosha-DGCR8 complex Cell 2006 125 887 901 10.1016/j.cell.2006.03.043 16751099 
165. Carmell M.A.  Hannon G.J.   RNase III enzymes and the initiation of gene silencing Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2004 11 214 218 10.1038/nsmb729 14983173 
166. Klein M.E.  Impey S.  Goodman R.H.   Role reversal: The regulation of neuronal gene expression by microRNAs Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2005 15 507 513 10.1016/j.conb.2005.08.011 16150590 
167. Kosik K.S.   The neuronal microRNA system Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2006 7 911 920 10.1038/nrn2037 17115073 
168. Krol J.  Loedige I.  Filipowicz W.   The widespread regulation of microRNA biogenesis, function and decay Nature Rev. Genet. 2010 11 597 610 10.1038/nrg2843 20661255 
169. Martinez N.J.  Gregory R.I.   MicroRNA gene regulatory pathways in the establishment and maintenance of esc identity Cell Stem Cell 2010 7 31 35 10.1016/j.stem.2010.06.011 20621047 
170. Kuwabara T.  Hsieh J.  Nakashima K.  Taira K.  Gage F.H.   A small modulatory dsRNA specifies the fate of adult neural stem cells Cell 2004 116 779 793 10.1016/S0092-8674(04)00248-X 15035981 
171. Poole R.J.  Hobert O.   Early embryonic programming of neuronal left/right asymmetry in C. elegans  Curr. Biol. 2006 16 2279 2292 10.1016/j.cub.2006.09.041 17141609 
172. Ronshaugen M.  Biemar F.  Piel J.  Levine M.  Lai E.C.   The Drosophila  microRNA iab-4 causes a dominant homeotic transformation of halteres to wings Genes Dev. 2005 19 2947 2952 10.1101/gad.1372505 16357215 
173. Schratt G.M.  Tuebing F.  Nigh E.A.  Kane C.G.  Sabatini M.E.  Kiebler M.  Greenberg M.E.   A brain-specific microRNA regulates dendritic spine development Nature 2006 439 283 289 10.1038/nature04367 16421561 
174. Olde Loohuis N.F.  Kos A.  Martens G.J.  van Bokhoven H.  Nadif Kasri N.  Aschrafi A.   MicroRNA networks direct neuronal development and plasticity Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2012 69 89 102 10.1007/s00018-011-0788-1 21833581 
175. Davis T.H.  Cuellar T.L.  Koch S.M.  Barker A.J.  Harfe B.D.  McManus M.T.  Ullian E.M.   Conditional loss of Dicer disrupts cellular and tissue morphogenesis in the cortex and hippocampus J. Neurosci. 2008 28 4322 4330 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4815-07.2008 18434510 
176. Stark K.L.  Xu B.  Bagchi A.  Lai W.S.  Liu H.  Hsu R.  Wan X.  Pavlidis P.  Mills A.A.  Karayiorgou M.    Altered brain microRNA biogenesis contributes to phenotypic deficits in a 22q11-deletion mouse model Nat. Genet. 2008 40 751 760 10.1038/ng.138 18469815 
177. Nudelman A.S.  DiRocco D.P.  Lambert T.J.  Garelick M.G.  Le J.  Nathanson N.M.  Storm D.R.   Neuronal activity rapidly induces transcription of the CREB-regulated microRNA-132, in vivo  Hippocampus 2010 20 492 498 10.1002/hipo.20646 19557767 
178. Wayman G.A.  Davare M.  Ando H.  Fortin D.  Varlamova O.  Cheng H.Y.  Marks D.  Obrietan K.  Soderling T.R.  Goodman R.H.    An activity-regulated microRNA controls dendritic plasticity by down-regulating p250GAP Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2008 105 9093 9098 10.1073/pnas.0803072105 18577589 
179. Muddashetty R.S.  Nalavadi V.C.  Gross C.  Yao X.  Xing L.  Laur O.  Warren S.T.  Bassell G.J.   Reversible inhibition of PSD-95 mRNA translation by miR-125a, FMRP phosphorylation, and mGluR signaling Mol. Cell 2011 42 673 688 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.006 21658607 
180. Krol J.  Busskamp V.  Markiewicz I.  Stadler M.B.  Ribi S.  Richter J.  Duebel J.  Bicker S.  Fehling H.J.  Schubeler D.    Characterizing light-regulated retinal microRNAs reveals rapid turnover as a common property of neuronal microRNAs Cell 2010 141 618 631 10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.039 20478254 
181. Wang W.  Kwon E.J.  Tsai L.H.   MicroRNAs in learning, memory, and neurological diseases Learn. Mem. 2012 19 359 368 10.1101/lm.026492.112 22904366 
182. Shafi G.  Aliya N.  Munshi A.   MicroRNA signatures in neurological disorders Can. J. Neurol. Sci. 2010 37 177 185 10.1017/S0317167100009902 20437927 
183. Xu B.  Karayiorgou M.  Gogos J.A.   MicroRNAs in psychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders Brain Res. 2010 1338 78 88 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.03.109 20388499 
184. Jones K.L.  Smith D.W.   Recognition of the fetal alcohol syndrome in early infancy Lancet 1973 2 999 1001 10.1016/S0140-6736(73)91092-1 4127281 
185. Alati R.  Al Mamun A.  Williams G.M.  O’Callaghan M.  Najman J.M.  Bor W.   In utero alcohol exposure and prediction of alcohol disorders in early adulthood: A birth cohort study Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 2006 63 1009 1016 10.1001/archpsyc.63.9.1009 16953003 
186. Autti-Ramo I.  Fagerlund A.  Ervalahti N.  Loimu L.  Korkman M.  Hoyme H.E.   Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders in Finland: Clinical delineation of 77 older children and adolescents Am. J. med. Genet. A 2006 140 137 143 10.1002/ajmg.a.31037 16353236 
187. Ceccanti M.  Alessandra Spagnolo P.  Tarani L.  Luisa Attilia M.  Chessa L.  Mancinelli R.  Stegagno M.  Francesco Sasso G.  Romeo M.  Jones K.L.    Clinical delineation of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) in Italian children: Comparison and contrast with other racial/ethnic groups and implications for diagnosis and prevention Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2007 31 270 277 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2006.06.024 17215042 
188. Spohr H.L.  Willms J.  Steinhausen H.C.   Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders in young adulthood J. Pediatr. 2007 150 175 179 10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.11.044 17236896 
189. Streissguth A.P.  Aase J.M.  Clarren S.K.  Randels S.P.  LaDue R.A.  Smith D.F.   Fetal alcohol syndrome in adolescents and adults JAMA 1991 265 1961 1967 10.1001/jama.1991.03460150065025 2008025 
190. Sokol R.J.  Delaney-Black V.  Nordstrom B.   Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder JAMA 2003 290 2996 2999 10.1001/jama.290.22.2996 14665662 
191. Burd L.  Klug M.G.  Martsolf J.T.  Kerbeshian J.   Fetal alcohol syndrome: Neuropsychiatric phenomics Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 2003 25 697 705 10.1016/j.ntt.2003.07.014 14624969 
192. Aragon A.S.  Kalberg W.O.  Buckley D.  Barela-Scott L.M.  Tabachnick B.G.  May P.A.   Neuropsychological study of FASD in a sample of American Indian children: Processing simple versus complex information Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 2008 32 2136 2148 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00802.x 18828799 
193. Green C.R.  Mihic A.M.  Nikkel S.M.  Stade B.C.  Rasmussen C.  Munoz D.P.  Reynolds J.N.   Executive function deficits in children with fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) measured using the Cambridge Neuropsychological Tests Automated Battery (CANTAB) J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 2009 50 688 697 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.01990.x 19175817 
194. Mattson S.N.  Crocker N.  Nguyen T.T.   Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: Neuropsychological and behavioral features Neuropsychol. Rev. 2011 21 81 101 10.1007/s11065-011-9167-9 21503685 
195. Mattson S.N.  Roesch S.C.  Fagerlund A.  Autti-Ramo I.  Jones K.L.  May P.A.  Adnams C.M.  Konovalova V.  Riley E.P.   Toward a neurobehavioral profile of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 2010 34 1640 1650 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01250.x 20569243 
196. May P.A.  Blankenship J.  Marais A.S.  Gossage J.P.  Kalberg W.O.  Joubert B.  Cloete M.  Barnard R.  de Vries M.  Hasken J.    Maternal alcohol consumption producing fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD): Quantity, frequency, and timing of drinking Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013 133 502 512 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.07.013 23932841 
197. Lebel C.  Mattson S.N.  Riley E.P.  Jones K.L.  Adnams C.M.  May P.A.  Bookheimer S.Y.  O’Connor M.J.  Narr K.L.  Kan E.    A longitudinal study of the long-term consequences of drinking during pregnancy: Heavy in utero alcohol exposure disrupts the normal processes of brain development J. Neurosci. 2012 32 15243 15251 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1161-12.2012 23115162 
198. Norman A.L.  O’Brien J.W.  Spadoni A.D.  Tapert S.F.  Jones K.L.  Riley E.P.  Mattson S.N.   A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of spatial working memory in children with prenatal alcohol exposure: Contribution of familial history of alcohol use disorders Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 2013 37 132 140 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2012.01880.x 23072431 
199. Sood B.  Delaney-Black V.  Covington C.  Nordstrom-Klee B.  Ager J.  Templin T.  Janisse J.  Martier S.  Sokol R.J.   Prenatal alcohol exposure and childhood behavior at age 6 to 7 years: I. dose-response effect Pediatrics 2001 108 E34 10.1542/peds.108.2.e34 11483844 
200. Streissguth A.P.  Bookstein F.L.  Sampson P.D.  Barr H.M.   Neurobehavioral effects of prenatal alcohol: Part III. PLS analyses of neuropsychologic tests Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 1989 11 493 507 10.1016/0892-0362(89)90026-3 2593988 
201. Guerri C.  Bazinet A.  Riley E.P.   Foetal alcohol spectrum disorders and alterations in brain and behaviour Alcohol Alcohol. 2009 44 108 114 10.1093/alcalc/agn105 19147799 
202. Bailey B.N.  Delaney-Black V.  Covington C.Y.  Ager J.  Janisse J.  Hannigan J.H.  Sokol R.J.   Prenatal exposure to binge drinking and cognitive and behavioral outcomes at age 7 years Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2004 191 1037 1043 10.1016/j.ajog.2004.05.048 15467586 
203. Bonthius D.J.  Goodlett C.R.  West J.R.   Blood alcohol concentration and severity of microencephaly in neonatal rats depend on the pattern of alcohol administration Alcohol 1988 5 209 214 10.1016/0741-8329(88)90054-7 3415765 
204. Levitt P.  Veenstra-VanderWeele J.   Neurodevelopment and the origins of brain disorders Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 1 3 25482168 
205. Giedd J.N.  Raznahan A.  Alexander-Bloch A.  Schmitt E.  Gogtay N.  Rapoport J.L.   Child psychiatry branch of the National Institute of Mental Health longitudinal structural magnetic resonance imaging study of human brain development Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 43 49 10.1038/npp.2014.236 25195638 
206. Hammock E.A.   Developmental perspectives on oxytocin and vasopressin Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 24 42 10.1038/npp.2014.120 24863032 
207. Hartley C.A.  Lee F.S.   Sensitive periods in affective development: Nonlinear maturation of fear learning Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 50 60 10.1038/npp.2014.179 25035083 
208. Ross E.J.  Graham D.L.  Money K.M.  Stanwood G.D.   Developmental consequences of fetal exposure to drugs: What we know and what we still must learn Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 61 87 10.1038/npp.2014.147 24938210 
209. Washbourne P.   Synapse assembly and neurodevelopmental disorders Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 4 15 10.1038/npp.2014.163 24990427 
210. Archer T.  Oscar-Berman M.  Blum K.   Epigenetics in developmental disorder: ADHD and endophenotypes J. Genet. Syndr. Gene Ther. 2011 2 10.4172/2157-7412.1000104 
211. Sakurai T.  Dorr N.P.  Takahashi N.  McInnes L.A.  Elder G.A.  Buxbaum J.D.   Haploinsufficiency of Gtf2i, a gene deleted in Williams Syndrome, leads to increases in social interactions Autism Res. 2011 4 28 39 10.1002/aur.169 21328569 
212. Schanen N.C.   Epigenetics of autism spectrum disorders Hum. Mol. Genet. 2006 15 R138 R150 10.1093/hmg/ddl213 16987877 
213. Subbanna S.  Basavarajappa B.S.   Pre-administration of G9a/GLP inhibitor during synaptogenesis prevents postnatal ethanol-induced LTP deficits and neurobehavioral abnormalities in adult mice Exp. Neurol. 2014 261 34 43 10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.07.003 25017367 
214. Downing C.  Johnson T.E.  Larson C.  Leakey T.I.  Siegfried R.N.  Rafferty T.M.  Cooney C.A.   Subtle decreases in DNA methylation and gene expression at the mouse Igf2 locus following prenatal alcohol exposure: Effects of a methyl-supplemented diet Alcohol 2011 45 65 71 10.1016/j.alcohol.2010.07.006 20705422 
215. Garro A.J.  McBeth D.L.  Lima V.  Lieber C.S.   Ethanol consumption inhibits fetal DNA methylation in mice: Implications for the fetal alcohol syndrome Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 1991 15 395 398 10.1111/j.1530-0277.1991.tb00536.x 1877725 
216. Haycock P.C.  Ramsay M.   Exposure of mouse embryos to ethanol during preimplantation development: Effect on DNA methylation in the H19 imprinting control region Biol. Reprod. 2009 81 618 627 10.1095/biolreprod.108.074682 19279321 
217. Liu Y.  Balaraman Y.  Wang G.  Nephew K.P.  Zhou F.C.   Alcohol exposure alters DNA methylation profiles in mouse embryos at early neurulation Epigenetics 2009 4 500 511 10.4161/epi.4.7.9925 20009564 
218. Ouko L.A.  Shantikumar K.  Knezovich J.  Haycock P.  Schnugh D.J.  Ramsay M.   Effect of alcohol consumption on CpG methylation in the differentially methylated regions of H19 and IG-DMR in male gametes: Implications for fetal alcohol spectrum disorders Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2009 33 1615 1627 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00993.x 19519716 
219. Zhou F.C.  Balaraman Y.  Teng M.  Liu Y.  Singh R.P.  Nephew K.P.   Alcohol alters DNA methylation patterns and inhibits neural stem cell differentiation Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2011 35 735 746 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01391.x 21223309 
220. Bekdash R.A.  Zhang C.  Sarkar D.K.   Gestational choline supplementation normalized fetal alcohol-induced alterations in histone modifications, DNA methylation, and proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene expression in beta-endorphin-producing pomc neurons of the hypothalamus Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 2013 37 1133 1142 23413810 
221. Govorko D.  Bekdash R.A.  Zhang C.  Sarkar D.K.   Male germline transmits fetal alcohol adverse effect on hypothalamic proopiomelanocortin gene across generations Biol. Psychiatry 2012 72 378 388 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.006 22622000 
222. Guo W.  Crossey E.L.  Zhang L.  Zucca S.  George O.L.  Valenzuela C.F.  Zhao X.   Alcohol exposure decreases CREB binding protein expression and histone acetylation in the developing cerebellum PLoS ONE 2011 6 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0019351 21655322 
223. Subbanna S.  Psychoyos D.  Shan X.  Basavarajappa B.S.   Postnatal ethanol exposure alters levels of 2-arachidonylglycerol-metabolizing enzymes and pharmacological inhibition of monoacylglycerol (MAGL) does not cause neurodegeneration in neonatal mice J. Neurochem. 2015 134 276 287 10.1111/jnc.13120 25857698 
224. Zhong L.  Zhu J.  Lv T.  Chen G.  Sun H.  Yang X.  Huang X.  Tian J.   Ethanol and its metabolites induce histone lysine 9 acetylation and an alteration of the expression of heart development-related genes in cardiac progenitor cells Cardiovasc. Toxicol. 2010 10 268 274 10.1007/s12012-010-9081-z 20811785 
225. Balaraman S.  Winzer-Serhan U.H.  Miranda R.C.   Opposing actions of ethanol and nicotine on microRNAs are mediated by nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in fetal cerebral cortical-derived neural progenitor cells Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2012 36 1669 1677 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2012.01793.x 22458409 
226. Caputo V.  Sinibaldi L.  Fiorentino A.  Parisi C.  Catalanotto C.  Pasini A.  Cogoni C.  Pizzuti A.   Brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression is regulated by microRNAs miR-26a and miR-26b allele-specific binding PLoS ONE 2011 6 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0028656 22194877 
227. Dill H.  Linder B.  Fehr A.  Fischer U.   Intronic miR-26b controls neuronal differentiation by repressing its host transcript, ctdsp2 Genes Dev. 2012 26 25 30 10.1101/gad.177774.111 22215807 
228. Sathyan P.  Golden H.B.  Miranda R.C.   Competing interactions between micro-RNAs determine neural progenitor survival and proliferation after ethanol exposure: Evidence from an ex vivo  model of the fetal cerebral cortical neuroepithelium J. Neurosci. 2007 27 8546 8557 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1269-07.2007 17687032 
229. Soares A.R.  Pereira P.M.  Ferreira V.  Reverendo M.  Simoes J.  Bezerra A.R.  Moura G.R.  Santos M.A.   Ethanol exposure induces upregulation of specific microRNAs in zebrafish embryos Toxicol. Sci. 2012 127 18 28 10.1093/toxsci/kfs068 22298809 
230. Stringer R.L.  Laufer B.I.  Kleiber M.L.  Singh S.M.   Reduced expression of brain cannabinoid receptor 1 (Cnr1) is coupled with an increased complementary micro-RNA (miR-26b) in a mouse model of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders Clin. Epigenet. 2013 5 10.1186/1868-7083-5-14 23915435 
231. Wang L.L.  Zhang Z.  Li Q.  Yang R.  Pei X.  Xu Y.  Wang J.  Zhou S.F.  Li Y.   Ethanol exposure induces differential microRNA and target gene expression and teratogenic effects which can be suppressed by folic acid supplementation Hum. Reprod. 2009 24 562 579 10.1093/humrep/den439 19091803 
232. Valles S.  Pitarch J.  Renau-Piqueras J.  Guerri C.   Ethanol exposure affects glial fibrillary acidic protein gene expression and transcription during rat brain development J. Neurochem. 1997 69 2484 2493 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69062484.x 9375681 
233. Bielawski D.M.  Zaher F.M.  Svinarich D.M.  Abel E.L.   Paternal alcohol exposure affects sperm cytosine methyltransferase messenger RNA levels Alcohol Clin. Exp. Res. 2002 26 347 351 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2002.tb02544.x 11923587 
234. Tycko B.  Morison I.M.   Physiological functions of imprinted genes J. Cell. Physiol. 2002 192 245 258 10.1002/jcp.10129 12124770 
235. Bliek J.  Terhal P.  van den Bogaard M.J.  Maas S.  Hamel B.  Salieb-Beugelaar G.  Simon M.  Letteboer T.  van der Smagt J.  Kroes H.    Hypomethylation of the H19 gene causes not only Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) but also isolated asymmetry or an SRS-like phenotype Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2006 78 604 614 10.1086/502981 16532391 
236. Reik W.  Walter J.   Genomic imprinting: Parental influence on the genome Nature Rev. Genet. 2001 2 21 32 10.1038/35047554 11253064 
237. Dean W.  Bowden L.  Aitchison A.  Klose J.  Moore T.  Meneses J.J.  Reik W.  Feil R.   Altered imprinted gene methylation and expression in completely ES cell-derived mouse fetuses: Association with aberrant phenotypes Development 1998 125 2273 2282 9584126 
238. Khosla S.  Dean W.  Brown D.  Reik W.  Feil R.   Culture of preimplantation mouse embryos affects fetal development and the expression of imprinted genes Biol. Reprod. 2001 64 918 926 10.1095/biolreprod64.3.918 11207209 
239. Sinclair K.D.  Young L.E.  Wilmut I.  McEvoy T.G.   In-utero overgrowth in ruminants following embryo culture: Lessons from mice and a warning to men Hum. Reprod. 2000 15 Suppl. 5 68 86 10.1093/humrep/15.suppl_5.68 11263539 
240. Hicks S.D.  Middleton F.A.  Miller M.W.   Ethanol-induced methylation of cell cycle genes in neural stem cells J. Neurochem. 2010 114 1767 1780 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06886.x 20626555 
241. Zhou F.C.  Chen Y.  Love A.   Cellular DNA methylation program during neurulation and its alteration by alcohol exposure Birth Defects Res. A Clin. Mol. Teratol. 2011 91 703 715 10.1002/bdra.20820 21630420 
242. Chen Y.  Ozturk N.C.  Zhou F.C.   DNA methylation program in developing hippocampus and its alteration by alcohol PLoS ONE 2013 8 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0060503 23544149 
243. Ryan S.H.  Williams J.K.  Thomas J.D.   Choline supplementation attenuates learning deficits associated with neonatal alcohol exposure in the rat: Effects of varying the timing of choline administration Brain Res. 2008 1237 91 100 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.048 18786517 
244. Thomas J.D.  Biane J.S.  O’Bryan K.A.  O’Neill T.M.  Dominguez H.D.   Choline supplementation following third-trimester-equivalent alcohol exposure attenuates behavioral alterations in rats Behav. Neurosci. 2007 121 120 130 10.1037/0735-7044.121.1.120 17324056 
245. Otero N.K.  Thomas J.D.  Saski C.A.  Xia X.  Kelly S.J.   Choline supplementation and DNA methylation in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of rats exposed to alcohol during development Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 2012 36 1701 1709 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2012.01784.x 22509990 
246. Mukhopadhyay P.  Rezzoug F.  Kaikaus J.  Greene R.M.  Pisano M.M.   Alcohol modulates expression of DNA methyltranferases and methyl CpG-/CpG domain-binding proteins in murine embryonic fibroblasts Reprod. Toxicol. 2013 37 40 48 10.1016/j.reprotox.2013.01.003 23395981 
247. Subbanna S.  Shivakumar M.  Psychoyos D.  Xie S.  Basavarajappa B.S.   Anandamide-CB1 receptor signaling contributes to postnatal ethanol-induced neonatal neurodegeneration, adult synaptic and memory deficits J. Neuosci. 2013 33 6350 6366 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3786-12.2013 23575834 
248. Perkins A.  Lehmann C.  Lawrence R.C.  Kelly S.J.   Alcohol exposure during development: Impact on the epigenome Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 2013 31 391 397 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.03.010 23542005 
249. Zhang C.R.  Ho M.F.  Vega M.C.  Burne T.H.  Chong S.   Prenatal ethanol exposure alters adult hippocampal VGLUT2 expression with concomitant changes in promoter DNA methylation, H3K4 trimethylation and miR-467b-5p levels Epigenet. Chromatin 2015 8 10.1186/s13072-015-0032-6 26421062 
250. Rakyan V.K.  Blewitt M.E.  Druker R.  Preis J.I.  Whitelaw E.   Metastable epialleles in mammals Trends Genet. 2002 18 348 351 10.1016/S0168-9525(02)02709-9 12127774 
251. Wolff G.L.   Influence of maternal phenotype on metabolic differentiation of agouti locus mutants in the mouse Genetics 1978 88 529 539 640377 
252. Khalid O.  Kim J.J.  Kim H.S.  Hoang M.  Tu T.G.  Elie O.  Lee C.  Vu C.  Horvath S.  Spigelman I.    Gene expression signatures affected by alcohol-induced DNA methylomic deregulation in human embryonic stem cells Stem Cell Res. 2014 12 791 806 10.1016/j.scr.2014.03.009 24751885 
253. Dasmahapatra A.K.  Khan I.A.   Modulation of DNA methylation machineries in Japanese rice fish (Oryzias latipes ) embryogenesis by ethanol and 5-azacytidine Comp. Biochemistry Physiol. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2016 179 174 183 10.1016/j.cbpc.2015.10.011 26510680 
254. Laufer B.I.  Mantha K.  Kleiber M.L.  Diehl E.J.  Addison S.M.  Singh S.M.   Long-lasting alterations to DNA methylation and ncRNAs could underlie the effects of fetal alcohol exposure in mice Dis. Models Mech. 2013 6 977 992 10.1242/dmm.010975 23580197 
255. Portales-Casamar E.  Mah S.M.  MacIsaac J.L.  Barhdadi A.  Provost S.  Dube M.P.  Reynolds J.N.  Pavlidis P.  Kobor M.S.   DNA methylation changes in fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 2015 47 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2015.04.336 
256. Wood M.A.  Attner M.A.  Oliveira A.M.  Brindle P.K.  Abel T.   A transcription factor-binding domain of the coactivator CBP is essential for long-term memory and the expression of specific target genes Learn. Mem. 2006 13 609 617 10.1101/lm.213906 16980541 
257. Eckhardt F.  Lewin J.  Cortese R.  Rakyan V.K.  Attwood J.  Burger M.  Burton J.  Cox T.V.  Davies R.  Down T.A.    DNA methylation profiling of human chromosomes 6, 20 and 22 Nat. Genet. 2006 38 1378 1385 10.1038/ng1909 17072317 
258. Weber M.  Hellmann I.  Stadler M.B.  Ramos L.  Paabo S.  Rebhan M.  Schubeler D.   Distribution, silencing potential and evolutionary impact of promoter DNA methylation in the human genome Nat. Genet. 2007 39 457 466 10.1038/ng1990 17334365 
259. Rishi V.  Bhattacharya P.  Chatterjee R.  Rozenberg J.  Zhao J.  Glass K.  Fitzgerald P.  Vinson C.   CpG methylation of half-CRE sequences creates C/EBPalpha binding sites that activate some tissue-specific genes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010 107 20311 20316 10.1073/pnas.1008688107 21059933 
260. Maier S.E.  Cramer J.A.  West J.R.  Sohrabji F.   Alcohol exposure during the first two trimesters equivalent alters granule cell number and neurotrophin expression in the developing rat olfactory bulb J. Neurobiol. 1999 41 414 423 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4695(19991115)41:3<414::AID-NEU9>3.0.CO;2-F 10526319 
261. Hu Y.  Willett K.L.  Khan I.A.  Scheffler B.E.  Dasmahapatra A.K.   Ethanol disrupts chondrification of the neurocranial cartilages in medaka embryos without affecting aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A2 (Aldh1A2) promoter methylation Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2009 150 495 502 10.1016/j.cbpc.2009.07.007 19651241 
262. Krishnamoorthy M.  Gerwe B.A.  Scharer C.D.  Sahasranaman V.  Eilertson C.D.  Nash R.J.  Usta S.N.  Kelly S.  Rose M.  Peraza R.    Ethanol alters proliferation and differentiation of normal and chromosomally abnormal human embryonic stem cell-derived neurospheres Birth Defects Res. B Dev. Reprod. Toxicol. 2013 98 283 295 10.1002/bdrb.21063 23696232 
263. Tyler C.R.  Allan A.M.   Prenatal alcohol exposure alters expression of neurogenesis-related genes in an ex vivo  cell culture model Alcohol 2014 48 483 492 10.1016/j.alcohol.2014.06.001 24954023 
264. Marjonen H.  Sierra A.  Nyman A.  Rogojin V.  Grohn O.  Linden A.M.  Hautaniemi S.  Kaminen-Ahola N.   Early maternal alcohol consumption alters hippocampal DNA methylation, gene expression and volume in a mouse model PLoS ONE 2015 10 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0124931 25970770 
265. Dasmahapatra A.K.  Khan I.A.   DNA methyltransferase expressions in Japanese rice fish (Oryzias latipes ) embryogenesis is developmentally regulated and modulated by ethanol and 5-azacytidine Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2015 176–177 1 9 10.1016/j.cbpc.2015.07.002 26183885 
266. Ramadoss J.  Liao W.X.  Chen D.B.  Magness R.R.   High-throughput caveolar proteomic signature profile for maternal binge alcohol consumption Alcohol 2010 44 691 697 10.1016/j.alcohol.2009.10.010 20053519 
267. Zhang W.  Peng C.  Zheng M.  Gao W.  Zhu J.  Lv T.  Liu L.  Liu Z.  Li H.  Xv Y.    Prenatal alcohol exposure causes the over-expression of dhand and ehand by increasing histone H3K14 acetylation in C57 BL/6 mice Toxicol. Lett. 2014 228 140 146 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.05.011 24857828 
268. Peng C.  Zhu J.  Sun H.C.  Huang X.P.  Zhao W.A.  Zheng M.  Liu L.J.  Tian J.   Inhibition of histone H3K9 acetylation by anacardic acid can correct the over-expression of Gata4 in the hearts of fetal mice exposed to alcohol during pregnancy PLoS ONE 2014 9 12 10.1371/journal.pone.0104135 25101666 
269. Thomas J.D.  Idrus N.M.  Monk B.R.  Dominguez H.D.   Prenatal choline supplementation mitigates behavioral alterations associated with prenatal alcohol exposure in rats Birth Defects Res. A Clin. Mol. Teratol. 2010 88 827 837 10.1002/bdra.20713 20706995 
270. Pappalardo-Carter D.L.  Balaraman S.  Sathyan P.  Carter E.S.  Chen W.J.  Miranda R.C.   Suppression and epigenetic regulation of miR-9 contributes to ethanol teratology: Evidence from zebrafish and murine fetal neural stem cell models Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 2013 37 1657 1667 10.1111/acer.12139 23800254 
271. Mantha K.  Laufer B.I.  Singh S.M.   Molecular changes during neurodevelopment following second-trimester binge ethanol exposure in a mouse model of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder: From immediate effects to long-term adaptation Dev. Neurosci. 2014 36 29 43 10.1159/000357496 24481079 
272. Ignacio C.  Mooney S.M.  Middleton F.A.   Effects of acute prenatal exposure to ethanol on microRNA expression are ameliorated by social enrichment Front. Pediatrics 2014 2 10.3389/fped.2014.00103 25309888 
273. Balaraman S.  Lunde E.R.  Sawant O.  Cudd T.A.  Washburn S.E.  Miranda R.C.   Maternal and neonatal plasma microRNA biomarkers for fetal alcohol exposure in an ovine model Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 2014 38 1390 1400 10.1111/acer.12378 24588274 
274. Parchem R.J.  Moore N.  Fish J.L.  Parchem J.G.  Braga T.T.  Shenoy A.  Oldham M.C.  Rubenstein J.L.  Schneider R.A.  Blelloch R.   MiR-302 is required for timing of neural differentiation, neural tube closure, and embryonic viability Cell Rep. 2015 12 760 773 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.074 26212322 
275. Chen X.  Liu J.  Feng W.K.  Wu X.  Chen S.Y.   MiR-125b protects against ethanol-induced apoptosis in neural crest cells and mouse embryos by targeting Bak 1 and PUMA Exp. Neurol. 2015 271 104 111 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.04.026 26024858 
276. Kleiber M.L.  Laufer B.I.  Stringer R.L.  Singh S.M.   Third trimester-equivalent ethanol exposure is characterized by an acute cellular stress response and an ontogenetic disruption of genes critical for synaptic establishment and function in mice Dev. Neurosci. 2014 36 499 519 10.1159/000365549 25278313
