
==== Front
AmbioAmbioAmbio0044-74471654-7209Springer Netherlands Dordrecht 111010.1007/s13280-018-1110-3ReviewEcological and functional consequences of coastal ocean acidification: Perspectives from the Baltic-Skagerrak System http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6721-7763Havenhand Jonathan N. jon.havenhand@marine.gu.se 1Jonathan N. Havenhand
is a senior researcher in the Department of Marine Sciences at the University of Gothenburg, Sweden. He is based at the Tjärnö Marine Laboratory, where he works on reproductive ecology and adaptations of marine organisms to rapid environmental change. In recent years his research has focussed on the impacts of ocean global change, especially the effects of ocean acidification on marine organisms and ecosystems.

Filipsson Helena L. helena.filipsson@geol.lu.se 2Helena L. Filipsson
is Professor of Quaternary Geology, with a focus on marine geology, at Lund University, Sweden. Her research interests include past and present marine environments and their relation to climate and climate change foremost over the last 130 000 years. She is particularly interested in coastal environments subjected to low oxygen conditions and human impact, and proxy development, i.e. improving the tools used to reconstruct past marine environments.

Niiranen Susa susa.niiranen@su.se 3Susa Niiranen
is a marine ecologist. Her research is focussed on marine food-web dynamics and she uses ecosystem modelling as her main research tool. She is also interested in social-ecological interactions in marine systems.

Troell Max max@beijer.kva.se 34Max Troell
is an Associate Professor and senior researcher at the Beijer Institute of Ecological Economics where he leads the programme on sustainable seafood. He is also leading research on global food systems and multifunctional land and seascapes at Stockholm Resilience Centre.

Crépin Anne-Sophie annesophie.crepin@beijer.kva.se 4Anne-Sophie Crépin
is an Associate Professor and the Deputy Director of the Beijer Institute of Ecological Economics at the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. She holds a PhD in economics from Stockholm University and is also a member of the strategic advisory board at the Stockholm Resilience Centre at Stockholm University. Her research interests include the complex links between biosphere and economic dynamics with focus on regime shifts, sustainability and resilience.

Jagers Sverker sverker.jagers@pol.gu.se 5Sverker Jagers
is a Professor in Political Science and Director of the Centre for Collective Action Research (CeCAR) at the University of Gothenburg. His research interests include survey and experimental studies of environmental public opinion and drivers of pro-environmental behaviour and country-comparative time-series analyses of environmental performance.

Langlet David david.langlet@law.gu.se 6David Langlet
holds the newly established chair in Ocean Governance Law at the School of Business, Economics and Law, University of Gothenburg. His research focuses primarily on the dynamics of multi-level regulation of ocean-related activities.

Matti Simon simon.matti@ltu.se 7Simon Matti
is Associate Professor of Political Science at Luleå University of Technology, and a senior researcher at the Centre for Collective Action Research, University of Gothenburg. His main research interests concern the intersect between public policy and public opinion in the environmental and natural resource management field.

Turner David david.turner@marine.gu.se 8David Turner
is Professor Emeritus of Marine Chemistry at the University of Gothenburg. His research interests include the development and application of chemical models for seawater, the development of accurate measurement methods for pH in low-salinity seawater, and understanding the consequences of smokestack emissions from shipping for the marine environment.

Winder Monika monika.winder@su.se 9Monika Winder
is a Professor in Marine Ecology at Stockhom University with particular interests in the causes and consequences of environmental change for food-web interactions and ecosystem functioning. Her research addresses questions in lakes, estuarine-coastal, and ocean ecosystems with a special emphasis on planktonic organisms.

de Wit Pierre pierre.de_wit@marine.gu.se 1P. de Wit
is a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Marine Sciences at the University of Gothenburg. He has a background in evolutionary biology and molecular ecology, and his current research focuses on the genomics of stress adaptation in marine invertebrates.

Anderson Leif G. leif.anderson@marine.gu.se 8Leif G. Anderson
is Professor Emeritus in Marine Chemistry at the University of Gothenburg. His research interest centres on the ocean carbon cycle with a focus on its role in the climate system.

1 0000 0000 9919 9582grid.8761.8Department of Marine Sciences, Tjärnö Marine Laboratory, University of Gothenburg, Strömstad, 45296 Gothenburg, Sweden 2 0000 0001 0930 2361grid.4514.4Department of Geology, Lund University, 22362 Lund, Sweden 3 0000 0004 1936 9377grid.10548.38Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, Kräftriket 2B, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden 4 0000 0001 0945 0671grid.419331.dBeijer Institute of Ecological Economics, Royal Swedish Academy of Science, Lilla Frescativägen 4, 10405 Stockholm, Sweden 5 0000 0000 9919 9582grid.8761.8Department of Political Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Box 711, Sprängkullsgatan 19, 40530 Gothenburg, Sweden 6 0000 0000 9919 9582grid.8761.8Department of Law, University of Gothenburg, Box 650, 40530 Gothenburg, Sweden 7 0000 0001 1014 8699grid.6926.bDepartment of Political Sciences, Luleå University of Technology, 97187 Luleå, Sweden 8 0000 0000 9919 9582grid.8761.8Department of Marine Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Box 461, 40530 Gothenburg, Sweden 9 0000 0004 1936 9377grid.10548.38Department of Ecology, Environment and Plant Sciences, Stockholm University, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden 1 12 2018 1 12 2018 8 2019 48 8 831 854 31 10 2017 21 5 2018 3 10 2018 © The Author(s) 2018Open AccessThis article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.Ocean temperatures are rising; species are shifting poleward, and pH is falling (ocean acidification, OA). We summarise current understanding of OA in the brackish Baltic-Skagerrak System, focussing on the direct, indirect and interactive effects of OA with other anthropogenic drivers on marine biogeochemistry, organisms and ecosystems. Substantial recent advances reveal a pattern of stronger responses (positive or negative) of species than ecosystems, more positive responses at lower trophic levels and strong indirect interactions in food-webs. Common emergent themes were as follows: OA drives planktonic systems toward the microbial loop, reducing energy transfer to zooplankton and fish; and nutrient/food availability ameliorates negative impacts of OA. We identify several key areas for further research, notably the need for OA-relevant biogeochemical and ecosystem models, and understanding the ecological and evolutionary capacity of Baltic-Skagerrak ecosystems to respond to OA and other anthropogenic drivers.


Keywords
BalticEcosystem servicesEutrophicationIndirect effectsOcean acidificationWarminghttp://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001862Svenska Forskningsrådet Formas210-2012-2140Linné Award (cemeb.science.gu.se)Havenhand Jonathan N. Filipsson Helena L. Hasselblad Foundationhttp://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100004785NordforskEbba & Sven Schwatrz Foundationissue-copyright-statement© Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2019
==== Body
Introduction
Globally, increasing emissions of anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) are causing warming of the oceans, melting of sea ice, glaciers and ice sheets, and ocean acidification.1 For the Baltic-Skagerrak System (Fig. 1), these processes are reflected in rising sea level, increased precipitation (leading to locally reduced salinity), increased flooding, coastal erosion, and flow of organic and inorganic matter into coastal waters. All of these add to the direct and indirect effects of ocean acidification in different ways. Anthropogenic ocean acidification arises when anthropogenic emissions of CO2 elevate atmospheric CO2 concentration, resulting in elevated partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2) in the oceans and a corresponding decrease in ocean pH. But pH also varies naturally in the oceans over diurnal and seasonal timescales. This arises due to biogeochemical drivers, such as temperature, salinity, and input of terrestrial organic matter and subsequent decay, as well as through biological processes such as primary production (which increases pH) and respiration (which decreases pH). While the effects of these drivers on marine life are relatively well understood individually, we know less about the effects of combinations of drivers on single species, and little about their effects on entire coastal ecosystems, communities, and society in general—especially for ocean acidification.Fig. 1 Map of the Baltic-Skagerrak System (Skagerrak, Kattegatt, Baltic Proper, Bothnian Sea, Bothnian Bay, Gulf of Finland). We use the term “Baltic-Skagerrak System” to refer to the entire region from the Skagerrak to the Bothnian Bay.

Modified from Rönnbäck et al. (2007)



Ocean acidification (hereafter, ‘OA’) is recognised in the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal 14.3 “Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification…”, and has been identified as a cause of substantial impacts on marine ecosystems (Gattuso et al. 2015; Riebesell and Gattuso 2015). Although OA is a global issue caused by rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations (Doney et al. 2009), the degree and effects of OA are geographically heterogeneous due to regional differences in air:sea fluxes and ocean chemistry (Steffen et al. 2015). Multiple recent reviews of OA have concluded that effects on species are generally negative, but that responses vary markedly among species (e.g. Kroeker et al. 2013), notably between field and the laboratory (e.g. Wahl et al. 2018), and that OA effects can be strongly modified by interactions with other drivers (Gunderson et al. 2016) and species (Kroeker et al. 2017). Much of this recent work highlights the importance of non-linear processes, especially when multiple environmental drivers interact (e.g. Albright et al. 2016a; Mostofa et al. 2016; Kroeker et al. 2017). For example, Gao et al. (2018) found that the interactive effects of OA and ocean warming on phytoplankton physiology could be synergistic, neutral, or antagonistic depending on species and prevailing environmental conditions. Equivalent responses have been reported at higher trophic levels (Harvey et al. 2013). At a broader scale, OA impacts on marine ecosystems have the potential to affect a wide range of ecosystem services (ESs). Although a general picture of OA effects on ESs is yet to emerge (Falkenberg and Tubb 2017), some specific OA-related dis-benefits have already been identified (e.g. oysters, Lemasson et al. 2017). Addressing these OA impacts directly may be difficult, however, manipulating non-OA drivers affecting ecosystem resilience or adaptation has been suggested as a viable management policy option to mitigate OA effects (Albright et al. 2016b).

The geological record provides an important environmental archive of past OA events and how past marine ecosystems have responded to changes in pH and ocean biogeochemistry (e.g. Harnik et al. 2012; Hönisch et al. 2012). The most recent global event occurred during the last deglaciation, when atmospheric CO2 increased 30% (from 189 to 265 μatm), leading to a ~ 0.15 unit drop in sea surface pH in the open ocean (e.g. Hönisch and Hemming, 2005). This change corresponded to a decrease of 0.002 units per 100 years, which is much slower than current rates (Zeebe et al. 2016). The coastal seas of the Baltic-Skagerrak System were subjected to considerable environmental changes during the deglaciation and disentangling the potential effect of a regional change in pH (and its magnitude) remains to be done.

The Baltic-Skagerrak System comprises one of the world’s largest permanent salinity gradients (Fig. 1) from the high salinity Skagerrak shores (salinity ~ 30)2 to the shallow, almost freshwater archipelagos of the northern Bothnian Bay (salinity ~ 3). This gradient not only contains multiple different ecosystems, but also creates differences in seawater chemistry that alter the process, and effects, of OA. Hence ocean acidification will impact various parts of the system very differently.

In addition to drivers3 such as OA and warming that are changing marine systems on a global scale, the Baltic-Skagerrak System is also subject to local pressures from eutrophication, freshening, and pollution, resulting from agriculture, tourism, fishing, aquaculture, etc. Local differences in the strength and timing of these drivers, and the natural heterogeneity of coastal seas, create far greater variability and change than that seen in the open ocean. Coastal marine ecosystems of the Baltic have changed markedly during the past 40 years, which is partly attributable to local and regional warming and freshening (Olsson et al. 2012), as well as eutrophication (Olsson et al. 2015). The role of OA in this context is poorly known, not least because most biologists were unaware of its importance until relatively recently (Gattuso and Hansson 2011).

Here we (i) outline the current state of knowledge related to OA in the Baltic-Skagerrak System, as an example of OA-related processes in a brackish coastal sea; (ii) identify knowledge gaps; and (iii) suggest priorities for future research. We focus on the mechanisms that underlie OA, its interactions with other coastal drivers, and its impacts on biogeochemical processes, marine species, and ecosystems. Unless stated otherwise, we consider the biological consequences of “near-future” OA (i.e. pCO2 levels up to ~ 1300 µatm, van Vuuren et al. 2011). Information summarised here was obtained from ISI Web of Science and EconLit databases using the search terms “ocean acidification” or “pCO2”, together with “Baltic, Kattegat, Skagerrak or Finland”. Additional examples, including non-OA examples, were searched for on an ad hoc basis. A companion manuscript (Jagers et al. 2018) addresses the socio-economic background to, and prospective societal solutions for, OA in Swedish coastal seas. Throughout, we use the term “Baltic-Skagerrak System” to refer to all waters from the Skagerrak to the Bothnian Bay, and the relevant regional terms for the different components of the Baltic system (Fig. 1).

Biogeochemical basis of ocean acidification in the Baltic-Skagerrak System
The surface ocean continuously exchanges CO2 with the atmosphere. When atmospheric partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2) is greater than that in the oceans, there is a flux of CO2 from the atmosphere into the oceans (and vice versa). This flux is influenced by primary production—which reduces seawater pCO2 in the summer, and by decomposition and biomineralisation—which cause the release of CO2 in the winter. These processes create a seasonal cycle of pCO2 both in the atmosphere and the ocean. However, as the atmosphere mixes much faster than the ocean, the atmospheric signal is diluted and far less pronounced: for instance the seasonal amplitude in atmospheric pCO2 at the latitude of Sweden is ~ 10 µatm, while that in the coastal ocean can be several hundred µatm (Fig. 2).Fig. 2 Seasonal changes in phytoplankton productivity absorb dissolved CO2 in the water (blue line) during spring and summer, creating “draw-down” relative to the level of CO2 in the overlying atmosphere (green line). Data from central Baltic Sea, taken from Schneider et al. (2015)



Since the onset of the industrial revolution, seasonally averaged global atmospheric pCO2 has risen from around 280 µatm to > 400 µatm today, and consequently the average pCO2 of the surface ocean has also increased (Bates et al. 2012). Seasonal fluctuations in pCO2 are superimposed on this mean increase, leading to greater extremes of pCO2. Increasing atmospheric pCO2 reduces ocean pH, but the extent of pH reduction depends not only on the pCO2 itself, but also on other properties of the seawater, notably the existing pH, the buffering capacity (the “alkalinity”) of the seawater, and to a small extent the temperature (see Box 1). The chemical buffer capacity, i.e. the change in pH for a given change in pCO2, is determined by the total concentration of all the bases in the seawater, measured as total alkalinity. In most of the world’s coastal oceans, alkalinity is broadly correlated with salinity, and therefore buffer capacity typically decreases with decreasing salinity. However, in the different basins of the Baltic-Skagerrak System, this alkalinity:salinity relationship is complicated by large differences in local geology that influence alkalinity independently (Omstedt et al. 2009; see Box 2). This results in the different low-salinity basins of the Baltic-Skagerrak System having different pHs despite having similar salinities; i.e. low pH in the northern Bothnian Bay and inner Gulf of Finland due to input of low alkalinity river runoff, and high pH in the Gulf of Riga resulting from inflow of high alkalinity runoff (Fig. 3).Box 1: Atmospheric CO2 and the acidification of seawater	
Unlike the other atmospheric gases, when CO2 dissolves in seawater it reacts chemically with the water:


CO2aq+H2O⇆H2CO3⇆H++HCO3-⇆2H++CO32-


The pH of the seawater determines which of these chemical species dominate. Higher pH drives the system farther to the right. At seawater pH’s typical of Swedish coastal waters (7.5–8.5) the carbonate system is dominated by the HCO3– terms, and hence dissolving CO2 in seawater leads to an increase in proton (H+) concentration, and hence increased acidity. Dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) buffers the dissolution of CO2 in seawater by the CO32– ion reacting with the CO2. Because DIC and alkalinity decline from the Swedish west-coast, through the Baltic Proper and into the Bothnian Bay, the effects of increasing pCO2 are greater in the Baltic than on the west coast (see main text).

	
Box 2: Salinity, alkalinity and pH in the Baltic	
In the Baltic, sea surface salinity is determined by the combination of runoff of freshwater together with limited exchange of seawater with the North Sea. In those parts of the Baltic system most distant from the North Sea (Bothnian Bay and eastern Gulf of Finland), the salinity is below 3, rises to around 7 in the Baltic Proper, and then rises rapidly from ~ 8 in the southern Danish straits to ~ 15 in the Kattegat just a hundred km or so to the north. Salinity continues to rise to the north and west, reaching 30 in the western Skagerrak (Fig. 1). The alkalinity of river runoff varies depending on the geology of the drainage basin. The northern Bothnian Bay, which is largely surrounded by granite bedrock, has relatively low alkalinity and pH because the alkalinity of the runoff is low. In contrast, the limestone bedrock that characterises the watersheds flowing into the Gulf of Riga has very high alkalinity, and thus pH in the Gulf of Riga is much higher (Fig. 3). Recent work shows increased weathering of bedrock, increases alkalinity and offsets the effects of ocean acidification (Müller et al. 2016).	
Fig. 3 Long-term mean surface water (0–20 m) pH in the Baltic-Skagerrak System, © Adam Ulfsbo. Data are interpolation of historical records collected during all seasons between 1911 and 2003, and therefore only show general patterns in pH distribution. For more information, including station positions, see Hjalmarsson et al. (2008)



Differences in alkalinity combine with differences in the extent of primary production to cause greater seasonal variability in pH in parts of the Baltic compared to the Kattegatt/Skagerrak (Fig. 4). This effect is amplified by the nutrient-rich conditions in the Baltic that cause a stronger “draw-down” of CO2 during the productive season, which results in higher pH during the summer (Fig. 4b). These data are for the open Baltic and Kattegat: in shallow coastal embayments, the processes contributing to this variation generate even stronger pH variation (e.g. Saderne et al. 2013; Wallace et al. 2014; Carstensen et al. 2018).Fig. 4 Time series of pH in the top 20 m of the water column showing seasonal fluctuations in the open Kattegat (a), Baltic Proper (b) and Bothnian Bay (c). Note that the observational frequency decreased substantially after 2000 in the Bothnian Sea (Data on pHNBS scale, measured at 25 °C from SMHI: http://sharkdata.se/about/)



Seasonal changes in CO2 uptake and release also have implications for other important chemical processes in coastal seas. Photosynthesis by micro- and macroalgae, and marine plants, consumes “acidic” CO2 and hydrogen ions (H+) (see Box 3). This causes pH to increase in summer while the decomposition of organic matter, produces hydrogen ions and lowers pH, reversing this process in winter (Fig. 2). Primary production occurs close to the surface in the surface-lit (photic) zone, but much of the decomposition occurs after this production has died and settled to the seafloor, i.e. deep in the water column or at the sediment surface. In waters with limited exchange, this can completely deplete the available oxygen near the seabed, resulting in bottom waters with very low oxygen (“hypoxic”, i.e. < 30% O2 saturation), or no oxygen (“anoxic”). This influences seawater chemistry resulting in increased solubility of some metals (notably manganese and iron), and in some cases the production of elemental sulphur, all of which influence seawater pH (see Box 3).Box 3: Chemical consequences of ocean acidification in the Baltic-Skagerrak System	
In the surface mixed layer of the oceans, the photosynthetic capture of light energy to combine CO2, macro-nutrients (such as nitrate and phosphate), and micro-nutrients in the form of trace metals (Me2+, such as iron(II)) to create organic matter and oxygen can be formulated as

140CO2+16 H++16 NO3-+HPO42-+Me2++123 H2O→(CH2O)91(CH2)16(NHCH2CO)16(CHPO4Me)+172 O2 (1)

Decomposition of sedimenting organic matter in deeper water runs in the opposite direction, releasing CO2 and H+. In the following formulation, this CO2 release is illustrated by balancing it to the bicarbonate ion, HCO3−, the dominating form of dissolved inorganic carbon at typical seawater pH (Box 1).

(CH2O)91(CH2)16(NHCH2CO)16(CHPO4Me)+172 O2+17 H2O→140HCO3-+156 H++16 NO3-+HPO42-+Me2+ (2)

Thus decomposition produces hydrogen ions, and hence lowers pH. This reaction normally occurs deep in the water column or at the sediment surface. In waters with limited exchange, the decomposition process (reaction 2) can sometimes completely deplete the available oxygen, resulting in strongly hypoxic or anoxic bottom water. Under these circumstances, other “electron acceptors” are needed to replace oxygen in the decomposition process. The most energetically favourable electron acceptor after oxygen is nitrate, and hence in hypoxic and anoxic areas, decomposition leads to denitrification:

(CH2O)91(CH2)16(NHCH2CO)16C(MeHPO4)+112 NO3-→140HCO3-+12 H++56 N2+16 NH4++HPO42-+Me2++23 H2O (3)

When comparing reactions (2) and (3), it can be seen that denitrification generates far fewer hydrogen ions per bicarbonate ion produced. If decomposition proceeds to deplete all the nitrate, then other electron acceptors step in. In seawater, these are (in order) manganese(IV), iron(III) and sulphate. When these are used as electron acceptors the following reactions (4–6) occur (here organic matter is simplified to “carbohydrates”; CH2O(org)):

CH2Oorg+2 MnIVO2+3 H+→HCO3-+2 H2O+2 MnII2+ (4)

CH2Oorg+4 FeIIIOOH+7 H+→HCO3-+6 H2O+4 FeII2+ (5)

CH2Oorg+0.5SO42-→HCO3-+0.5H++0.5HS-(6)

These reactions have very different impacts on pH as both manganese and iron reduction consume H+, whereas sulphate reduction produces H+. An important consequence of this is that the sulphide bottom-water that occurs in the Baltic Proper has close to constant pH, even if the sulphide concentration increases with depth (Fig. 5). Note that temperature affects these biogeochemical reactions as well as the solubility of gases, which results in lower pH (more CO2) in colder waters in equilibrium with the atmosphere.

These biochemical processes also occur in the sediment, especially in surface layers where “bioturbation” by the fauna causes mixing of interstitial water with deep waters in the water column. When anoxic water meets oxic water the reduced chemical species are oxidised in reactions that also involve hydrogen ions. For example, when iron(II) is oxidised H+ is produced:

Fe(II)2++2 H2O→FeIIIOOH+2 H+ (7)

But when hydrogen sulphide is oxidised to elemental sulphur H+ is consumed:

HS-+0.5O2+H+→H2O+S0 (8)

Or if iron sulphide precipitates H+ is produced:

FeII2++HS-→FeSs+H+(9)

	
Fig. 5 Profiles of pH and oxygen in the Gotland Basin for all months during 2008 (after Ulfsbo et al. 2011). Note that negative oxygen concentrations represent sulphide



In the Baltic-Skagerrak System, nutrient emissions from waste-water treatment and agricultural runoff have caused eutrophication, such that areas of hypoxia/anoxia have increased (Conley et al. 2009, 2011). Anoxia amplifies the effects of eutrophication through chemical reactions between iron (III) and phosphate, which in oxic sediments form precipitations that trap phosphate, but which is dissolved and released when the sediment becomes anoxic and iron(III) is reduced to iron(II). Thus, in anoxic waters phosphate is released back to the water column where, in time, it is mixed up to the surface where it stimulates primary productivity, leading to higher summer pH, as illustrated in the Baltic Proper (Fig. 4).

In addition to influencing alkalinity, river runoff also contains dissolved and particulate organic matter, some of which decays by microbial activity, adding to local deoxygenation and ocean acidification. The dissolved fraction has further impact on pH as these dissolved molecules contain carboxyl groups (organic acids) and thus can reduce pH further. Although uncertainty is large, climate model projections for the coming century show increased precipitation over northern Scandinavia, particularly in the winter months (Christiansen et al. 2015), which implies increased flux of terrestrial organic matter to the coastal seas, potentially adding to OA and deoxygenation.

Despite many years of monitoring data, seasonal variation and methodological issues preclude reliable detection of long-term trends in measurements of seawater pH in Baltic-Skagerrak System. Recent modelling, however, projects that the combination of this variation with increasing anthropogenic atmospheric CO2 will lead to greater pH variation and lower pH minima in the surface waters (Fig. 6). Importantly, although projected average pH in the scenario plotted in Fig. 6 reaches 7.8 in the last decade of this century, winter minimum pH already begins to fall below this value in the year 2040. Thus, for species that are sensitive to low pH, the seasonal effects of acidification may be felt far sooner than would be expected from the projected mean annual pH.

Direct effects of ocean acidification
Ocean acidification impacts the species of the Baltic-Skagerrak System directly, interactively (i.e. in combination with other drivers), and indirectly through competitive and trophic interactions in the ecosystem. In this section, we consider the direct effects of OA on species. The interactive and indirect effects of OA are considered in subsequent sections.Fig. 6 Daily pH values for surface water in the Eastern Gotland Basin projected from the ECHAM global climate model and the SRES A2 “business as usual” scenario. Note that due to increased nutrient load that stimulates photosynthetic uptake of CO2 from surface waters, summer maximum pH remains mostly constant until ~ 2090, whereas winter minimum pH declines almost linearly throughout the modelled period. (From Omstedt et al. 2012)



Responses of plankton in the Baltic-Skagerrak System to OA in the form of elevated pCO2 are highly variable, and often context dependent. This applies both among species/OTUs (operational taxonomic units), but also at the community level (Table 1). At the species/OTU level, bacterioplankton abundance typically shows no (or small) responses to OA (e.g. Baltic Proper, Lindh et al. 2013), but at the community level indirect responses can manifest as shifts in community composition, which can be linked to shifts in the phytoplankton community (western Baltic, Bergen et al. 2016; Gulf of Finland, Hornick et al. 2017). Responses of phytoplankton tend to be more variable. Cyanobacterial species in different functional groups display positive, negative, or no, responses to elevated pCO2 (western Baltic, Czerny et al. 2009; Eichner et al. 2014), and responses of spring-bloom diatoms and dinoflagellates also differ. For example, in the Skagerrak, growth rates of diatoms increased under OA (Kremp et al. 2012), but not growth of a toxic dinoflagellate (although toxin production increased, Kremp et al. 2012). Calcification and growth of coccolithophorids under OA varies among clones (multiple locations, Langer et al. 2009) and species (Meyer and Riebesell, 2015), illustrating the difficulties that intra- and interspecific variation create for making generalisations (Eichner et al. 2014; note that coccolithophorids are largely restricted to the higher salinity Kattegat and Skagerrak). At the community level, mesocosm studies show OA can influence phytoplankton community structure, with subtle shifts in dominant taxa such as diatoms, cryptophytes, and cyanobacteria, but stronger shifts in sub-dominant taxa (western Baltic, Sommer et al. 2015; Gulf of Finland, Paul et al. 2016a, b). Overall phytoplankton productivity seems to increase under OA, although there is also a strong seasonal component to this response (Skagerrak, Eberlein et al. 2017).Table 1 Summary of observed direct and indirect biological effects of ocean acidification (OA) and interactions with other key anthropogenic drivers in the Baltic-Skagerrak System [Effects and interactions relevant to the Baltic-Skagerrak System, but for which supporting examples come from other regions, are discussed in the main text. References in parentheses show mixed responses]



Among benthic macrophytes, macroalgae show negative, no, or positive, responses to increasing pCO2 (reviewed by Takolander et al. 2017). Elevated pCO2 stimulated growth of filamentous “opportunistic” green- and red-algae (eastern Baltic, Pajusalu et al. 2013), and of the brown alga Fucus, from the western Baltic and Baltic Proper (Al-Janabi et al. 2016a), and had small positive effects on fertilisation success in Fucus (western Baltic, Graiff et al. 2017). Other experiments with Fucus found no (or minor) effects of OA (Pajusalu et al. 2013; western Baltic, Werner et al. 2016; Raddatz et al. 2017). In contrast, seagrasses generally respond more uniformly, and positively, to elevated pCO2, although reported effects are relatively small (Skagerrak, Eklöf et al. 2012; Alsterberg et al. 2013; Portugal, Repolho et al. 2017). In cases where OA has been investigated in combination with warming, responses to OA are frequently overshadowed by the interactive effects of warming (see below).

Studies of zooplankton in the Baltic-Skagerrak System have focused on copepods, which show a high degree of phenotypic buffering to OA in a variety of traits such as body size, reproduction, and behaviour (e.g. Vehmaa et al. 2012, 2016; Almén et al. 2016, 2017; Lischka et al. 2017). Some of these responses have been shown to be enhanced by trans-generational inheritance of plasticity, whereby parental exposure to OA generates more OA-tolerant offspring (Kattegatt, Thor and Dupont, 2015; Baltic Proper, Vehmaa et al. 2016). This plasticity has limits, however, and high pCO2 still had negative effects (Acartia, 1230 µatm CO2, Vehmaa et al. 2016). Importantly, susceptibility of copepods to OA has been shown to vary with location and environmental history (Spitzbergen vs. Skagerrak, Thor and Oliva, 2015). This work also showed that different energetic functions (e.g. ingestion and respiration) can respond differently to OA, yielding non-linear responses at the whole-organism level (Thor and Oliva, 2015). Data for OA responses of gelatinous plankton in the Baltic-Skagerrak System are lacking, however, studies of relevant species from nearby regions indicate they are generally tolerant of OA (Aurelia, North Sea, Algueró-Muñiz et al. 2016), or respond positively (Oikopleura, North Sea, Winder et al. 2017; Bouquet et al. 2018). In summary, these data suggest that the impacts of OA on zooplankton species in the Baltic-Skagerrak System are likely to be small. Interactions among species and effects on the plankton community as a whole are considered in the following section.

In contrast to zooplankton, benthic animals in the Baltic-Skagerrak System generally respond either negatively or neutrally to OA (to date there is one report of a positive response; seastar, Skagerrak, Dupont et al. 2010). Negative responses include reduced embryonic and larval survival (brittle stars, Skagerrak, Dupont et al. 2008; bivalves, Baltic, Jansson et al. 2016; Skagerrak, Ventura et al. 2016; van Colen et al. 2018), delayed larval development (sea urchins, Skagerrak, Stumpp et al. 2011a), and immune suppression (crustaceans, Skagerrak, Wood et al. 2014; Hernroth et al. 2015; see Table 1 for full list). Reports of no, or minor, responses to OA include effects on fertilisation success (bivalves, Skagerrak, Havenhand and Schlegel 2009), adult growth (bivalves, Baltic, Thomsen and Melzner 2010), larval development (crustaceans, Skagerrak, Baltic, Pansch et al. 2012, 2013), and metabolic scaling (echinoderms, Skagerrak, Carey et al. 2014; see Table 1 for full list). Notably, bivalves from parts of the western Baltic that routinely experience strong upwelling/low pH events appear to be tolerant of extreme levels of OA (Thomsen and Melzner 2010; Thomsen et al. 2013), indicating that here too environmental history may be an important determinant of tolerance (Thomsen et al. 2017). As noted earlier for copepods, trans-generational acclimation to OA has also been reported for benthic invertebrates (e.g. Dupont et al. 2013; Hu et al. 2018), and here too, prior environmental history appears to influence tolerance (Hu et al. 2018). Dissecting the effects of trans-generational plasticity from other forms of plasticity is complex and more, targeted experimentation is required before generalisations can be made on the potential for trans-generational plasticity in benthic animals (Torda et al. 2017).

Two bivalve species in particular, Mytilus trossulus/edulis and Macoma baltica, are key components of Baltic-Skagerrak ecosystems, and fundamental to benthic ecosystem functioning in the region (Niiranen et al. 2013). In both cases, these species show few or no responses to OA: Mytilus from the Baltic-Skagerrak System tend to be highly insensitive to OA (Thomsen and Melzner 2010; Thomsen et al. 2010, 2013; Jakubowska and Normant 2015; Ventura et al. 2016), and this response appears to be heritable (Stapp et al. 2017; Thomsen et al. 2017). Although larvae of Macoma baltica from the eastern Baltic are negatively impacted by OA (Jansson et al. 2013, 2016; unlike the adjacent North Sea, van Colen et al. 2018), juvenile survival was positively impacted by OA (in combination with hypoxia, Jansson et al. 2015), and adult Macoma appear to be unaffected, even by very low pH (southern Baltic, Jakubowska and Normant-Saremba 2015). Thus, it seems unlikely that OA will have substantive impacts on these key bivalves—and hence on the primary benthic component of benthic-pelagic coupling—in the Baltic-Skagerrak system.

Commercially and ecologically important fish species in the Baltic-Skagerrak System show generally, but not exclusively, negative direct responses to OA. Growth of larval halibut, herring, and cod were all negatively impacted by OA (Baltic, Franke and Clemmesen 2011; Frommel et al. 2013; Skagerrak, Gräns et al. 2014; Stiasny et al. 2016), but OA had no effects on sperm motility or swimming performance of adult cod (Baltic, Melzner et al. 2009; Frommel et al. 2010). Incorporating the effects of OA in stock recruitment models led to a projected reduction in recruitment of western Baltic cod stocks by 90% (Stiasny et al. 2016). Work on non-commercial species has shown the potential for trans-generational effects that can increase offspring tolerance to OA (sticklebacks, North Sea, Schade et al. 2014), which may ameliorate these effects. The extent to which such effects operate in commercially important species in the Baltic-Skagerrak System is not yet known, however, and currently available data indicate that overall impacts of OA on commercially important fish stocks in the region will likely be negative.

Many of these findings come from coastal habitats, in which diurnal and seasonal pH variations can greatly exceed the shifts expected under OA (western Baltic, Saderne et al. 2013; Kattegat, Carstensen et al. 2018). However, the biological effects of such diurnal pH fluctuations in combination with OA have been investigated rarely (reviewed by Boyd et al. 2016). The only study to test these effects in the Baltic-Skagerrak System investigated responses of the euryhaline barnacle Balanus improvisus (Eriander et al. 2015). This study showed that diurnally fluctuating OA, mimicking future coastal seas, increased variance in growth more than tenfold, revealing strong “winner” and “loser” phenotypes that were not seen in conventional constant OA treatments, and which indicated the potential for adaptation to future OA. Similar differences in responses under constant vs fluctuating OA have been obtained in several other species (Boyd et al. 2016). Collectively, these findings indicate that tolerance to OA in situ may be far more variable than previously thought, and that projecting future impacts of OA from data obtained in experiments using constant OA treatments may be unreliable.

Interactive effects of ocean acidification: Species-level responses
OA does not operate in isolation, and interactive and indirect effects (Box 4) are common. Additional drivers such as warming, freshening, and nutrient input are changing simultaneously in the Baltic-Skagerrak System (Meier 2015), leading to concurrent shifts in eutrophication and hypoxia (Conley et al. 2009, 2011), which interact with the effects of OA. Identifying the consequences of these multiple simultaneous drivers is a complex task (Boyd et al. 2018), yet many investigators have begun to address these in the Baltic-Skagerrak System (Table 1). This section focuses on the species-level effects of these interactions. Indirect effects, which operate via the food-web are considered in the following section.Box 4 Direct, indirect, and interactive effects	
Anthropogenic drivers (including OA) rarely operate in isolation. Combinations of driver may have additive, synergistic, or antagonistic effects (Todgham and Stillman 2013). Additive effects are linear, and arise when the effects of multiple combined drivers equals the sum of their effects in isolation. In contrast, synergistic and antagonistic effects are non-linear and arise when the combined effects of multiple drivers is greater than (synergistic) or less than (antagonistic) the sum of those drivers in isolation (Todgham and Stillman 2013; Gunderson et al. 2016). Note that, these non-linear terms relate to the outcome of the interaction, not the effect itself: synergistic negative effects of temperature and OA on growth, for example, will create a greater decrease in growth than the sum of their single effects.

Drivers also have direct, and/or indirect, effects on the focal organism or process. Direct effects (of single or multiple drivers) operate directly, such as the impacts of temperature on metabolic rate. Indirect effects operate through chains of interactions, e.g. decreased growth of a filter-feeder due to acidification-induced reduction in nutritional value of its phytoplankton food. Indirect effects typically operate through the food-web, and can be at least as great as direct effects (Alsterberg et al. 2013).

	


Over the last 150 years, the Baltic has warmed by 0.4–1.5 °C (Gustafsson et al. 2012). Regional climate models project warming in this region will average + 2–3 °C by the end of this century (Meier 2015). This warming will have substantial direct impacts on marine organisms both independently (e.g. Boyd et al. 2013), and interactively with OA (Doney et al. 2012). Theoretical frameworks for the interaction between warming and acidification are well established (Pörtner and Farrell 2008), and recent work has confirmed this, showing that OA not only reduces the thermal tolerance window, but also can reduce peak performance at optimal temperature (larval cod, Kattegat, Dahlke et al. 2017), and modify intestinal physiology (adult cod, Kattegat, Hu et al. 2016). Other examples show, for example, reduced survival and growth under OA + warming (macroalgae, western Baltic, Al-Janabi et al. 2016b). Surprisingly, however, this pattern is far from uniform, and several investigations have found small, or no, interactive effects of OA + warming (e.g. crustaceans, western Baltic, Pansch et al. 2012; cod, western Baltic, Frommel et al. 2013), or additive effects that averaged the responses seen under each driver independently (e.g. copepods, Gulf of Finland, Vehmaa et al. 2012). Consequently, it is not possible to generalise the biological effects of this interaction (Table 1).

Interactions between OA and salinity are fundamental to the biogeochemistry of OA in the Baltic-Skagerrak System (Box 2, 3). Climate models project freshening by ~ 2 (≈ 10–20%) in the Belt-Seas around Denmark, and by 0.5–1 (≈ 15–30%) in the Bothnian Bay by 2100 (Christiansen et al. 2015; Meier 2015). This will drive species distributions further “out” toward the North Sea (Viitasalo et al. 2015). The likely combined biological effects of this freshening with OA in the Baltic-Skagerrak System have received relatively little attention to date. Available data indicate increased sensitivity to OA in low-salinity populations (crustaceans, Gulf of Bothnia, Wood et al. 2016), potential for freshening to counteract the positive effects of OA on reproductive success (Fucus, Baltic, Serraõ et al. Serrao et al. 1999; Graiff et al. 2017), and no substantive impacts of OA + freshening on microplankton community structure (Baltic Proper, Wulff et al. 2018; Table 1). This important research area requires further experimental investigation before patterns in responses to this interaction can be identified.

The increased precipitation that is projected to lead to freshening will also flush more inorganic and organic nutrients from land into the Baltic-Skagerrak System. The effects of this nutrient enrichment are well understood: it stimulates planktonic primary production, which contributes to increased sedimentation of organic matter to the sea-floor, where it decomposes, reducing O2 concentrations (creating hypoxia) and simultaneously generating CO2 and acidification (Conley et al. 2011; Meier et al. 2011; Meier 2015; Schneider et al. 2015; Box 3). The effects of hypoxia on marine organisms can be strong, and include behavioural changes, reduced performance, and loss of fitness (Gray et al. 2002), as well as reduced benthic productivity and biodiversity (Weigel et al. 2015). The combined effects of OA and hypoxia are now attracting renewed interest from the scientific community, and recent work in the Baltic-Skagerrak System has shown that OA + hypoxia can cause immune suppression in crustaceans (Skagerrak, Hernroth et al. 2015). Other workers, however, have found no effects of OA + hypoxia (Mytilus, southern Baltic, Jakubowska and Normant 2015), and even strong positive responses have been reported (Macoma, Gulf of Finland, Jansson et al. 2015; Table 1). The long-term prevalence of hypoxia in the Baltic-Skagerrak System (Conley et al. 2011) has almost certainly led to acclimation and adaption in many species, however, the extent to which this has also generated tolerance to OA is an exciting prospect that remains to be investigated.

Indirect effects of ocean acidification: Ecosystem responses
Indirect effects of OA—which operate through shifts in competition and trophic interactions—are common in experiments that expose ecological communities to elevated pCO2. The indirect effects of OA on plankton communities vary among systems, but are typically small and subtle. In bacterioplankton, indirect effects were generally small (Baltic Proper, Lindh et al. 2013; western Baltic, Bergen et al. 2016; Table 1), although one study reported substantial shifts in microbial community composition correlated with shifts in phytoplankton community structure (Gulf of Finland, Hornick et al. 2017). Similar, subtle responses were observed in other studies of OA on community composition of phytoplankton (western Baltic, Sommer et al. 2015; Baltic Proper, Paul et al. 2016a, b), although stronger effects were seen in sub-dominant and rare species of phytoplankton (Sommer et al. 2015). These small indirect effects of OA can depend on nutrient availability: when nutrients were not limiting, either through experimental addition or in situ remineralisation, increased pCO2 shifted phytoplankton community composition towards much smaller picophytoplankton (Spitzbergen, Schulz et al. 2013; Kattegat, Bach et al. 2016). This, in turn, indirectly stimulated the microbial loop, which reduced subsequent energy flow to zooplankton and fish (North Sea, Endres et al. 2014; Gulf of Finland, Bermúdez et al. 2016). At an ecosystem level, indirect effects among planktonic species generally lead to small or no effects of OA on community composition (Skagerrak, Horn et al. 2016; Algueró-Muñiz et al. 2017; Langer et al. 2017) and genetic composition (Skagerrak, Langer et al. 2017), although some studies have reported reduced zooplankton biomass (Skagerrak, Taucher et al. 2017), and reduced community respiration (Gulf of Finland, Spilling et al. 2016). Importantly, OA impacts on fatty acid (FA) content of phytoplankton led to radical shifts in FA content, and reduced reproductive output in grazing copepods, indicating the potential for strong OA effects to propagate up the food-web (western Baltic, Rossoll et al. 2012). Field observations of plankton communities also indicate warming-induced shifts toward smaller size composition, with consequent reduction in energy availability to planktivorous fish (Suikkanen et al. 2013). Given that shifts in copepod abundance, size-spectrum, and nutritional quality are likely to cascade to higher trophic levels—and potentially influence regime shifts between cod-dominated and sprat/herring-dominated states in the Baltic (Casini et al. 2009)—there is a clear need to better understand the consequences of indirect and interactive effects of OA in plankton communities of the Baltic-Skagerrak System.

In benthic ecosystems, indirect effects of OA have been reported to be at least as great as direct effects. For example, mesocosm experiments in the Skagerrak showed OA alone had few or no direct or indirect effects, but the combination of OA with warming strongly influenced community composition and productivity (Eklöf et al. 2012, 2015; Alsterberg et al. 2013). These results were similar, but not identical, to those seen in response to warming alone (Alsterberg et al. 2013). Indirect trophic effects were also important: warming together with the loss of a keystone consumer strongly promoted the growth of ephemeral algae (Alsterberg et al. 2013), and had additive positive effects on functional diversity of associated fauna (Eklöf et al. 2015), such that overall indirect effects were at least as strong as direct effects (Alsterberg et al. 2013). Dense stands of benthic macrophytes can also generate substantial diurnal and seasonal pH fluctuations (globally, Hofmann et al. 2011; western Baltic, Saderne et al. 2013), which indirectly impact associated flora and fauna. For example, Baltic macroalgal and seagrass communities generate sufficiently large fluctuations in pH that they can provide temporal refuges from OA stress for calcifying species such as the blue mussel, Mytilus edulis (Wahl et al. 2018). The potential for dense stands of benthic macrophytes to condition the water, and thereby mitigate the impacts of OA throughout the coastal photic zone is clearly considerable (Saderne et al. 2013; Wahl et al. 2018), and warrants further investigation.

Indirect effects of OA also impact benthic-pelagic coupling, which plays a key ecological role throughout the Baltic-Skagerrak System. Sedimentation of planktonic primary production transfers food-energy to the benthos, which—in sufficiently high quantities—can increase food supply to benthic macrofauna, thereby increasing their resilience to OA (western Baltic, Thomsen and Melzner 2010; Melzner et al. 2011; Thomsen et al. 2013; Pansch et al. 2014; Stapp et al. 2017). However, the observation that OA reduces the nutritional value of phytoplankton for copepods (western Baltic, Rossoll et al. 2012), indicates that indirect effects of OA in combination with other drivers are likely to negatively influence the food value of particulates reaching benthic filter-feeders. The extent to which this reduction in food quality is offset by any OA-induced increases in total planktonic primary production (Kremp et al. 2012; Eberlein et al. 2017) remains unclear. Benthic macrofauna in the Baltic-Sakgerrak System are nonetheless projected to be negatively impacted by other, non-OA, drivers such as eutrophication, hypoxia, warming, and freshening (Weigel et al. 2015), which may have cascading effects throughout the ecosystem (Bergström et al. 2015; Viitasalo et al. 2015; Vuorinen et al. 2015), potentially driving regime shifts similar to those seen in the pelagic (Casini et al. 2009).

Modelling shows that controlling eutrophication and fishing pressure is central to managing Baltic ecosystems—not least because responses are non-linear (Niiranen et al. 2013). To date, however, these models have not included direct or indirect effects of OA. In regions where ecosystem management models have included the effects of OA, additive, synergistic, and antagonistic effects of OA with other drivers have been found (e.g. SE Australia, Griffith et al. 2011; US West coast, Kaplan et al. 2010). Including the effects of OA in ecosystem modelling of the Baltic-Skagerrak System is an important, and currently lacking, step that will permit assessment of ecosystem sensitivity to OA. Doing this calls for: (i) improved empirical knowledge/data on the effects of OA on the physiology and demography of key species, and on ecosystem responses; and (ii) modelling that includes the effects of OA at individual, population, and ecosystem levels (e.g. Koenigstein et al. 2016).

In addition to the drivers discussed above, other anthropogenic drivers have specific interactions with OA that influence the chemistry—and potentially biological responses—of the Baltic-Skagerrak System. Among these, shipping contributes directly to OA through the release not only of CO2 but also of the acidic gases SOx and NOx (Omstedt et al. 2015), which dissolve in seawater to create sulphuric and nitric acids. Methods to reduce SOX emissions to the atmosphere include exhaust-gas scrubber systems that absorb the SOx in a counterflow of seawater spray, creating a saline solution of sulphuric acid. Open-loop scrubbers that lack effluent treatment systems release this acid direct to surface waters, causing further acidification. Although the effects of such release are small on a basin scale (Turner et al. 2018), in heavily trafficked areas the effects of releasing acidic scrubber effluent on local seawater pH can be as large as those of anthropogenic ocean acidification (Stips et al. 2016). The biological effects of additional effluent components such as organic microparticles are poorly known.

Warming is also causing marine species distributions to move poleward (so-called “climate tracking”; Pinsky et al. 2013; Hiddink et al. 2015; Molinos et al. 2016). This is projected to increase species turnover (gain of new species, loss of established species) in the coming decades (Molinos et al. 2016). Invasive species are already established throughout the Baltic-Skagerrak System (Hiddink and Coleby 2012; Katsanevakis et al. 2014), with both negative and positive impacts on marine biogeochemistry and ecosystems (reviewed by Katsanevakis et al. 2014) that can interact with OA (Box 3). Although there is strong uncertainty about the timing of further invasions, the establishment of invasive species—especially those tolerant of low pH—seems likely. At the time of writing, no published studies have investigated the effects of OA on warming-driven range shifts and ecosystem structure and function in the Baltic-Skagerrak System.

The role of biodiversity, evolution, and resilience
The impacts of OA and other anthropogenic drivers on marine ecosystems depend not only on the factors and processes considered above. Biodiversity (both genetic variation within species, as well as between species [i.e. richness]), functional diversity (the diversity of ecological functions within an ecosystem), and evolutionary capacity of the component species, are all central to determining the resilience of an ecosystem to disturbance and change (Doney et al. 2012; Loreau and Mazancourt 2013; Gamfeldt et al. 2015; Lefcheck et al. 2015), and hence to OA.

At a within-species-level, anthropogenic pressures are reducing population sizes and genetic diversity (Harley et al. 2006). In smaller populations, stochastic factors such as genetic drift can restrict the ability of populations to adapt to local conditions (Polechová and Barton 2015). Within-species genetic diversity in the Skagerrak and Kattegat is substantially greater than in populations of the same species in the Baltic (Johannesson and André 2006), and consequently we might expect the adaptive capacity of Baltic populations to OA to be less than that in the relatively diverse populations of the Skagerrak and Kattegatt. At present, there are no geographically comprehensive data with which we can test this prediction. Nonetheless, it is clear that some Baltic populations are strongly tolerant to extreme levels of OA (e.g. mussels, western Baltic, Thomsen et al. 2017), and that Baltic populations have adapted rapidly in the past to drivers such as salinity change (Pereyra et al. 2009; and see Johannesson et al. 2011). Experimental laboratory work has also shown that Baltic species can adapt rapidly to high pCO2 conditions (e.g. Lohbeck et al. 2012; Stapp et al. 2017). Although the greater complexity of the natural environment may lead to different outcomes (Bach et al. 2018), available evidence nonetheless suggests there is substantial adaptive capacity in Baltic populations.

At the level of ecological communities, loss of species reduces ecosystem functioning, leading to loss of productivity and greater sensitivity to disturbance (Campbell et al. 2011; Cardinale et al. 2012; Worm et al. 2006; Duffy et al. 2016). Thus, biodiversity is critical to the long-term sustainability of ecosystem functions in the face of environmental change (Loreau and Mazancourt, 2013; Oliver et al. 2015). Examples from marine ecosystems include genetic diversity enhancing the resilience of Baltic seagrass beds (Reusch et al. 2005), and species diversity enhancing the resilience of the California Current pelagic ecosystem (Lindegren et al. 2016). The extent to which resilience to OA is enhanced by biodiversity is less well understood, although work in Swedish seagrass beds indicates that OA + warming can have positive indirect impacts (Alsterberg et al. 2013), and warming (but not OA) reduces the insurance effect of biodiversity (Eklöf et al. 2012). Conversely, investigations of the effects of OA on genetic diversity of plankton communities in large mesocosms found no substantive impacts (Skagerrak, Langer et al. 2017). Unfortunately, comparable data from the Baltic Proper are not available. Nonetheless, it seems likely that the reduced biodiversity observed within and among species in the Baltic Sea will decrease ecosystem resilience to OA and other interacting drivers, rendering the Baltic particularly vulnerable.

Consequences for ecosystem services
The impacts of OA on marine ecosystems are likely to have pervasive consequences. The world’s coastal oceans, including the Baltic-Skagerrak System, generate numerous ecosystem services that are important for human welfare (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2005; TEEB 2010; Hattam et al. 2015). Identifying and forecasting the effects of OA on these services in the Baltic-Skagerrak System is, however, a challenging task for several reasons. First, attributing any given ecosystem change to an individual driver, such as OA, is rarely straightforward because multiple interacting drivers simultaneously cause ecosystem change. Shifts in ecosystem services driven by overfishing, eutrophication, habitat destruction, and OA, for example, have their origins in distal phenomena such as urbanisation, global consumption patterns, trade, etc. (Norström et al. 2017; Österblom et al. 2017). This is exemplified in the Baltic-Skagerrak System by eutrophication-driven ecosystem degradation, which has contributed to declines in marine ecosystem goods and services (Rönnbäck et al. 2007; Österblom et al. 2007). Second, these different impacts often have synergistic (reinforcing) or antagonistic (mitigating) effects on each other (Box 4). Ecosystem disturbances operating over long periods can result in small gradual changes in ecosystem structure and functions, yet can sometimes (and especially when disturbances are strong and synergistic) cause rapid shifts that change ecosystem structure, functions, and services (Scheffer et al. 2001; Österblom et al. 2007; Casini et al. 2009). Conversely, negative impacts on extant fisheries may be offset by positive impacts on new, alternate, fishery species (similar to the effects of ocean warming on fisheries catch, Cheung et al. 2010, but see Cheung et al. 2016), although such trade-offs have yet to be demonstrated for OA. Third, the diversity of ecosystem services implies that OA is likely to affect them in different ways. Among the provisioning ecosystem services alone there are multiple examples, such as the production of fish, which can be impacted by the negative effects of OA on coastal fish species (Baltic herring, Franke and Clemmesen 2011; Kattegatt cod, Stiasny et al. 2016); the negative effects of OA on aquaculture (e.g. mussel and oyster growth in the USA, Barton et al. 2012); and the possibility of indirect effects of OA on forage fish in distant waters that that are used for aquaculture feeds. Similar OA-driven shifts can also arise in supporting and cultural ecosystem services through impacts on coastal towns reliant on the fishing industry. Finally, people benefiting from these services may value them in very different ways and will be affected differently depending on their own vulnerability and whether or not replacement services exist.

The potential risks for economic losses can be illustrated by looking at just one key provisioning service, the Swedish fishery sector. In 2016, Swedish fisheries were conservatively estimated to be worth ~ SEK 7.5 billion (recreational = SEK 6.2 billion, SCB 2018; industrial = SEK 1.3 billion, HAV 2014), equivalent to ~ € 730 million. Including Swedish aquaculture (SEK 487 million; SCB 2017), pushes this total to ~ € 780 million. Of course, not all of this value will be lost as a result of OA impacts (and much aquaculture value is in freshwaters), but as outlined earlier, commercially valuable fish species in the Baltic-Skagerrak System respond negatively to OA, and therefore this key provisioning service could incur substantial financial costs. Currently, however, know too little to make valid quantitative assessments of the likely social and economic risks and vulnerabilities arising from biological responses to OA (Falkenberg and Tubb 2017). In order to make these assessments, we need to meet the relevant requirements (Hilmi et al. 2013): (i) accurate determination of the fraction of GNP that depends on provisioning ecosystem services such as fishing and aquaculture, and cultural services such as coastal tourism, that depend on OA sensitive ecosystems; (ii) identifying likely shifts in species composition, and hence food value, of seafood under OA; (iii) projecting changes in human populations dependent on the coastal zone; (iv) determining the vulnerability and sensitivity of these coastal populations to environmental change and assessing their capacity to adapt.

Conclusions
The Baltic-Skagerrak System is characterised by seasonal and diurnal cycles of temperature, primary production, and decomposition, which create strong cycles of pH variation. Interactions with local biogeochemistry and anthropogenic drivers modify these fluctuations, making the detection of decadal pH trends from field observations difficult. However, oceanographic models for the Baltic Proper that incorporate the marine carbonate system project increasing seasonal pH variability and clear long-term (multi-decadal) reductions in mean, and minimum, pH. The results of these models are consistent with projected global trends (Fig. 6; Omstedt et al. 2009, 2012).

The responses of marine organisms in the Baltic-Skagerrak System to levels of ocean acidification (OA) consistent with these trends (pCO2 ≤ 1300 µatm; pH decline ≤ 0.4 units) vary widely from strongly positive, through neutral, to strongly negative. In general, however, we detected a pattern in which species at higher trophic levels tended respond more negatively to OA. Negative responses to OA were more common in macrobenthos and fish than in plankton. Responses to OA were strongly modified by several factors, most prevalent of which was nutritional status (nutrients for primary producers, food for consumers), such that more nutrients/food led to greater resilience to OA. Investigations of the combined effects of OA with warming, freshening, nutrients, or hypoxia frequently showed strong interactions that overwhelmed (warming), or materially changed (hypoxia), responses in comparison to those seen under OA only. In many instances interactive effects of OA + other drivers were small or not detected, and responses to other drivers (notably warming) were greater than those to OA.

Responses to OA also vary widely among taxonomic levels: species-level responses were generally stronger (both positive and negative) than responses of communities or ecosystems—indicating the importance of indirect interactions in the ecosystem, which can mediate OA effects on individual taxa. Overall ecosystem (mesocosm) level effects of OA were generally small, although there was evidence for substantial shifts in genetic composition of some plankton communities.

Outlook and research priorities
The findings summarised here represent substantial advances in OA research in the Baltic-Skagerrak System in the last 6 years (cf Havenhand 2012). Nonetheless, our understanding of the interactive and indirect effects of OA remains constrained by our limited knowledge of several key processes, and we know woefully little about how Baltic-Skagerrak species and ecosystems will respond to OA under diurnally, and seasonally, fluctuating cycles (Eriander et al. 2015; Boyd et al. 2016). We echo the sentiments of recent reviews that have emphasised the importance of moving from single drivers, single species, and short timescales, to multiple drivers, ecological communities, and evolutionary responses (e.g. Wernberg et al. 2012; Riebesell and Gattuso 2015; Boyd et al. 2018). In particular, we recommend that future research in the Baltic-Skagerrak System region focus on:(i) How biogeochemical processes combine to impact the development of OA in brackish coastal seas, and the role of nutrient enrichment and eutrophication; in particular, develop models to project future levels of important drivers under different forcing.

(ii) Quantifying the additive, synergistic (reinforcing), and antagonistic (mediating) responses of keystone, and ecologically dominant, species to OA in combination with other important anthropogenic drivers (notably warming, eutrophication, hypoxia, biodiversity, and fishing).

(iii) Determining the extent of phenotypic plasticity and adaptive capacity of key Baltic-Skagerrak species over multiple generations in response to OA, in combination with other important drivers.

(iv) Quantifying the effects of intra- and interspecific biodiversity on ecosystem responses and resilience to OA in combination with other key drivers; in particular the capacity for OA responses to cascade through the food-web.

(v) Determining the effects of diurnal and seasonal environmental fluctuations, superimposed on OA and other key drivers, on responses of species and ecosystems

(vi) Developing holistic ecosystem modelling frameworks that incorporate the effects of OA with those of other drivers at large spatial scales

(vii) Evaluating the impacts these processes will have on socially and economically important ecosystem services.



1 Since the onset of industrialisation, global atmospheric CO2 levels have increased by ~ 45% (from ~ 270 to today’s 400 µatm), causing seawater pH to decrease by about 0.1 units. pH is projected to decrease by another 0.3 units by 2100. Because of the logarithmic nature of the pH scale, these changes equate to increases of ~ 30% and ~ 100% (respectively) in the hydrogen ion content of seawater (Box 1).

2 The practical salinity scale is dimensionless and therefore we refer to salinity throughout this document simply as a number.

3 Connell et al. 2018 note the duality of CO2 as both a resources and a stressor. Therefore, as far as practicable, we follow the DPSIR definition of “drivers” (“…complex phenomena governing the direction of ecosystem change, which could be of human and natural origin”), of Oesterwind et al. (2016).

Acknowledgements
This work stemmed from a series of workshops on Ocean Acidification sponsored by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Subsequent workshops, and work by the lead author, was supported by a grant from the Hasselblad Foundation. Earlier versions of the manuscript were improved substantially by comments from Wendy Broadgate, Per Nilsson, and three anonymous referees. We wish to express our gratitude to all. JNH was also supported by a Linnaeus Grant from the Swedish Research Councils VR and FORMAS, to the Centre for Marine Evolutionary Biology (www.cemeb.gu.se). HLF acknowledges funding from the Swedish Research Council FORMAS (Grant No. 210-2012-2140). SN has been supported by the Nordforsk-funded project Green Growth Based on Marine Resources: Ecological and Socio-Economic Constraints (GreenMAR). ASC acknowledges funding from the Ebba and Sven Schwartz foundation.
==== Refs
References
Al-Janabi B  Kruse I  Graiff A  Karsten U  Wahl M   Genotypic variation influences tolerance to warming and acidification of early life-stage Fucus vesiculosus  L. (Phaeophyceae) in a seasonally fluctuating environment Marine Biology 2016 163 15 
Al-Janabi B  Kruse I  Graiff A  Winde V  Lenz M  Wahl M   Buffering and amplifying interactions among OAW (ocean acidification and warming) and nutrient enrichment on early life-stage Fucus vesiculosus  L. (Phaeophyceae) and their carry over effects to hypoxia impact PloS ONE 2016 11 e0152948 27043710 
Albright R  Caldeira L  Hosfelt J  Kwiatkowski L  Maclaren JK  Mason BM  Nebuchina Y  Ninokawa A    Reversal of ocean acidification enhances net coral reef calcification Nature 2016 531 362 365 26909578 
Albright R  Anthony KR  Baird M  Beeden R  Byrne M  Collier C  Dove S  Fabricius K    Ocean acidification: Linking science to management solutions using the Great Barrier Reef as a case study Journal of Environmental Management 2016 182 641 650 27564868 
Algueró-Muñiz M  Meunier CL  Holst S  Alvarez-Fernandez S  Boersma M   Withstanding multiple stressors: Ephyrae of the moon jellyfish (Aurelia aurita , Scyphozoa) in a high-temperature, high-CO2  and low-oxygen environment Marine Biology 2016 163 185 
Algueró-Muñiz M  Alvarez-Fernandez S  Thor P  Bach LT  Esposito M  Horn HG  Ecker U  Langer JAF    Ocean acidification effects on mesozooplankton community development: Results from a long-term mesocosm experiment PLoS ONE 2017 12 21 
Almén A-K  Vehmaa A  Brutemark A  Bach L  Lischka S  Stuhr A  Furuhagen S  Paul A    Negligible effects of ocean acidification on Eurytemora affinis  (Copepoda) offspring production Biogeosciences 2016 13 1037 1048 
Almén AK  Brutemark A  Jutfelt F  Riebesell U  Engstrom-Ost J   Ocean acidification causes no detectable effect on swimming activity and body size in a common copepod Hydrobiologia 2017 802 235 243 
Alsterberg C  Eklof JS  Gamfeldt L  Havenhand JN  Sundback K   Consumers mediate the effects of experimental ocean acidification and warming on primary producers Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 2013 110 8603 8608 23630263 
Appelhans YS  Thomsen J  Opitz S  Pansch C  Melzner F  Wahl M   Juvenile sea stars exposed to acidification decrease feeding and growth with no acclimation potential Marine Ecology Progress Series 2014 509 227 239 
Bach LT  Lohbeck KT  Reusch TB  Riebesell U   Rapid evolution of highly variable competitive abilities in a key phytoplankton species Nature Ecology and Evolution 2018 2 611 29434348 
Bach LT  Taucher J  Boxhammer T  Ludwig A  Achterberg EP  Alguero-Muniz M  Anderson LG  Bellworthy J    Influence of ocean acidification on a natural winter-to-summer plankton succession: First insights from a long-term mesocosm study draw attention to periods of low nutrient concentrations PLoS ONE 2016 11 e0159068 27525979 
Barton A  Hales B  Waldbusser GG  Langdon C  Feely RA   The Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas , shows negative correlation to naturally elevated carbon dioxide levels: Implications for near-term ocean acidification effects Limnology and Oceanography 2012 57 698 710 
Bates N  Best M  Neely K  Garley R  Dickson A  Johnson R   Detecting anthropogenic carbon dioxide uptake and ocean acidification in the North Atlantic Ocean Biogeosciences 2012 9 2509 2522 
Bergen B  Endres S  Engel A  Zark M  Dittmar T  Sommer U  Jurgens K   Acidification and warming affect prominent bacteria in two seasonal phytoplankton bloom mesocosms Environmental Microbiology 2016 18 4579 4595 27690275 
Bergström U  Olsson J  Casini M  Eriksson BK  Fredriksson R  Wennhage H  Appelberg M   Stickleback increase in the Baltic Sea: A thorny issue for coastal predatory fish Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 2015 163 134 142 
Bermúdez JR  Riebesell U  Larsen A  Winder M   Ocean acidification reduces transfer of essential biomolecules in a natural plankton community Scientific Reports 2016 6 27749 27324057 
Bouquet JM  Troedsson C  Novac A  Reeve M  Lechtenborger AK  Massart W  Skaar KS  Aasjord A    Increased fitness of a key appendicularian zooplankton species under warmer, acidified seawater conditions Plos One 2018 13 19 
Boyd PW  Collins S  Dupont S  Fabricius K  Gattuso JP  Havenhand J  Hutchins DA  Riebesell U    Experimental strategies to assess the biological ramifications of multiple drivers of global ocean change—A review Global Change Biology 2018 24 2239 2261 29476630 
Boyd PW  Cornwall CE  Davison A  Doney SC  Fourquez M  Hurd CL  Lima ID  McMinn A   Biological responses to environmental heterogeneity under future ocean conditions Global Change Biology 2016 22 2633 2650 27111095 
Boyd PW  Rynearson TA  Armstrong EA  Fu F  Hayashi K  Hu Z  Hutchins DA  Kudela RM    Marine phytoplankton temperature versus growth responses from polar to tropical waters outcome of a scientific community-wide study PLoS ONE 2013 8 e63091 23704890 
Campbell V  Murphy G  Romanuk TN   Experimental design and the outcome and interpretation of diversity-stability relations Oikos 2011 120 399 408 
Cardinale BJ  Duffy JE  Gonzalez A  Hooper DU  Perrings C  Venail P  Narwani A  Mace GM    Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity Nature 2012 486 59 67 22678280 
Carey N  Dupont S  Lundve B  Sigwart JD   One size fits all: Stability of metabolic scaling under warming and ocean acidification in echinoderms Marine Biology 2014 161 2131 2142 
Carey N  Dupont S  Sigwart JD   Sea hare Aplysia punctata  (Mollusca: Gastropoda) can maintain shell calcification under extreme ocean acidification Biological Bulletin 2016 231 142 151 27820906 
Carstensen J  Chierici M  Gustafsson BG  Gustafsson E   Long-term and seasonal trends in estuarine and coastal carbonate systems Global Biogeochemical Cycles 2018 32 497 513 
Casini M  Hjelm J  Molinero J-C  Lövgren J  Cardinale M  Bartolino V  Belgrano A  Kornilovs G   Trophic cascades promote threshold-like shifts in pelagic marine ecosystems Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 2009 106 197 202 19109431 
Cheung WW  Lam VW  Sarmiento JL  Kearney K  Watson R  Zeller D  Pauly D   Large-scale redistribution of maximum fisheries catch potential in the global ocean under climate change Global Change Biology 2010 16 24 35 
Cheung WW  Reygondeau G  Frölicher TL   Large benefits to marine fisheries of meeting the 1.5 °C global warming target Science 2016 354 1591 1594 28008069 
Christiansen, O.B., E. Kjellström, and E. Zorita. 2015. Projected Change: Atmosphere. In Second assessment of climate change for the Baltic Sea Basin, ed. BACC II Author Team, 245–261. Heidelberg: Springer.
Conley DJ  Björck S  Bonsdorff E  Carstensen J  Destouni G  Gustafsson BG  Hietanen S  Kortekaas M    Hypoxia-related processes in the Baltic Sea Environmental Science and Technology 2009 43 3412 3420 19544833 
Conley DJ  Carstensen J  Aigars J  Axe P  Bonsdorff E  Eremina T  Haahti B-M  Humborg C    Hypoxia is increasing in the coastal zone of the Baltic Sea Environmental Science and Technology 2011 45 6777 6783 21770387 
Connell SD  Doubleday ZA  Foster NR  Hamlyn SB  Harley CD  Helmuth B  Kelaher BP  Nagelkerken I    The duality of ocean acidification as a resource and a stressor Ecology 2018 99 1005 1010 29714829 
Crawfurd KJ  Alvarez-Fernandez S  Mojica KDA  Riebesell U  Brussaard CPD   Alterations in microbial community composition with increasing fCO2 : A mesocosm study in the eastern Baltic Sea Biogeosciences 2017 14 3831 3849 
Czerny J  Ramos JBE  Riebesell U   Influence of elevated CO2  concentrations on cell division and nitrogen fixation rates in the bloom-forming cyanobacterium Nodularia spumigena  Biogeosciences 2009 6 1865 1875 
Dahlke FT  Leo E  Mark FC  Portner HO  Bickmeyer U  Frickenhaus S  Storch D   Effects of ocean acidification increase embryonic sensitivity to thermal extremes in Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua  Global Change Biology 2017 23 1499 1510 27718513 
Doney SC  Fabry VJ  Feely RA  Kleypas JA   Ocean acidification: The other CO2  problem Annual Review of Marine Science 2009 1 169 192 
Doney SC  Ruckelshaus M  Duffy E  Barry J  Chan F  English C  Galindo H  Grebmeier J    Climate change impacts on marine ecosystems Annual Review of Marine Science 2012 4 1 27 
Duffy JE  Lefcheck JS  Stuart-Smith RD  Navarrete SA  Edgar GJ   Biodiversity enhances reef fish biomass and resistance to climate change Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2016 113 6230 6235 
Dupont S  Havenhand J  Thorndyke W  Peck L  Thorndyke M   Near-future level of CO2 -driven ocean acidification radically affects larval survival and development in the brittlestar Ophiothrix fragilis  Marine Ecology-Progress Series 2008 373 285 294 
Dupont S  Lundve B  Thorndyke M   Near future ocean acidification increases growth rate of the lecithotrophic larvae and juveniles of the sea star Crossaster papposus  Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B-Molecular and Developmental Evolution 2010 314B 382 389 
Dupont S  Dorey N  Stumpp M  Melzner F  Thorndyke M   Long-term and trans-life-cycle effects of exposure to ocean acidification in the green sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis  Marine Biology 2013 160 1835 1843 
Eberlein T  Wohlrab S  Rost B  John U  Bach LT  Riebesell U  Van de Waal DB   Effects of ocean acidification on primary production in a coastal North Sea phytoplankton community PLoS ONE 2017 12 e0172594 28273107 
Eichner M  Rost B  Kranz SA   Diversity of ocean acidification effects on marine N2  fixers Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 2014 457 199 207 
Eklöf J  Alsterberg C  Havenhand JN  Sundbäck K  Wood H  Gamfeldt L   Experimental climate change weakens the insurance effect of biodiversity Ecology Letters 2012 15 864 872 22676312 
Eklöf JS  Havenhand JN  Alsterberg C  Gamfeldt L   Community-level effects of rapid experimental warming and consumer loss outweigh effects of rapid ocean acidification Oikos 2015 124 1040 1049 
Endres S  Galgani L  Riebesell U  Schulz K-G  Engel A   Stimulated bacterial growth under elevated pCO2 : Results from an off-shore mesocosm study PLoS ONE 2014 9 e99228 24941307 
Engel A  Piontek J  Grossart HP  Riebesell U  Schulz KG  Sperling M   Impact of CO2  enrichment on organic matter dynamics during nutrient induced coastal phytoplankton blooms Journal of Plankton Research 2014 36 641 657 
Eriander L  Wrange A-L  Havenhand JN   Simulated diurnal pH fluctuations radically increase variance in—but not the mean of—growth in the barnacle Balanus improvisus  ICES Journal of Marine Science 2015 73 596 603 
Falkenberg LJ  Tubb A   Economic effects of ocean acidification: Publication patterns and directions for future research Ambio 2017 46 543 553 28124238 
Franke A  Clemmesen C   Effect of ocean acidification on early life stages of Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus  L.) Biogeosciences 2011 8 3697 3707 
Fehsenfeld S  Kiko R  Appelhans Y  Towle DW  Zimmer M  Melzner F   Effects of elevated seawater pCO2  on gene expression patterns in the gills of the green crab, Carcinus maenas  BMC Genomics 2011 12 488 21978240 
Frommel AY  Schubert A  Piatkowski U  Clemmesen C   Egg and early larval stages of Baltic cod, Gadus morhua , are robust to high levels of ocean acidification Marine Biology 2013 160 1825 1834 
Frommel AY  Stiebens V  Clemmesen C  Havenhand JN   Effect of ocean acidification on marine fish sperm (Baltic cod: Gadus morhua ) Biogeosciences 2010 7 3915 3919 
Gamfeldt L  Lefcheck JS  Byrnes JE  Cardinale BJ  Duffy JE  Griffin JN   Marine biodiversity and ecosystem functioning: What’s known and what’s next? Oikos 2015 124 252 265 
Gao K  Zhang Y  Häder D-P   Individual and interactive effects of ocean acidification, global warming, and UV radiation on phytoplankton Journal of Applied Phycology 2018 30 743 759 
Gattuso J-P  Hansson L   Gattuso J-P  Hansson L   Ocean acidification: background and history Ocean acidification 2011 Oxford Oxford University Press 1 20 
Gattuso J-P  Magnan A  Billé R  Cheung WW  Howes EL  Joos F  Allemand D  Bopp L    Contrasting futures for ocean and society from different anthropogenic CO2  emissions scenarios Science 2015 349 aac4722 26138982 
Glippa O  Engstrom-Ost J  Kanerva M  Rein A  Vuori K   Oxidative stress and antioxidant defense responses in Acartia  copepods in relation to environmental factors PLoS ONE 2018 13 e195981 
Graiff A  Dankworth M  Wahl M  Karsten U  Bartsch I   Seasonal variations of Fucus vesiculosus  fertility under ocean acidification and warming in the western Baltic Sea Botanica Marina 2017 60 239 255 
Gräns A  Jutfelt F  Sandblom E  Jönsson E  Wiklander K  Seth H  Olsson C  Dupont S    Aerobic scope fails to explain the detrimental effects on growth resulting from warming and elevated CO2  in Atlantic halibut Journal of Experimental Biology 2014 217 711 717 24574386 
Gray JS  Wu RS-S  Or YY   Effects of hypoxia and organic enrichment on the coastal marine environment Marine Ecology Progress Series 2002 238 249 279 
Griffith GP  Fulton EA  Richardson AJ   Effects of fishing and acidification-related benthic mortality on the southeast Australian marine ecosystem Global Change Biology 2011 17 3058 3074 
Gunderson AR  Armstrong EJ  Stillman JH   Multiple stressors in a changing world: The need for an improved perspective on physiological responses to the dynamic marine environment Annual Review of Marine Science 2016 8 357 378 
Gustafsson BG  Schenk F  Blenckner T  Eilola K  Meier HM  Müller-Karulis B  Neumann T  Ruoho-Airola T    Reconstructing the development of Baltic Sea eutrophication 1850–2006 Ambio 2012 41 534 548 22926877 
Harley CDG  Hughes AR  Hultgren KM  Miner BG  Sorte CJB  Thornber CS  Rodriguez LF  Tomanek L    The impacts of climate change in coastal marine systems Ecology Letters 2006 9 228 241 16958887 
Harnik PG  Lotze HK  Anderson SC  Finkel ZV  Finnegan S  Lindberg DR  Liow LH  Lockwood R    Extinctions in ancient and modern seas Trends in Ecology and Evolution 2012 27 608 617 22889500 
Harvey BP  Gwynn-Jones D  Moore PJ   Meta-analysis reveals complex marine biological responses to the interactive effects of ocean acidification and warming Ecology and Evolution 2013 3 1016 1030 23610641 
Hattam C  Atkins JP  Beaumont N  Börger T  Böhnke-Henrichs A  Burdon D  de Groot R  Hoefnagel E    Marine ecosystem services: linking indicators to their classification Ecological Indicators 2015 49 61 75 
HAV. 2014. The balance between the fishing fleet and fishing opportunities. Swedish Agency for Marine and Water Management Report Dnr 1-14 (in Swedish).
Havenhand JN   How will ocean acidification affect Baltic Sea ecosystems? An assessment of plausible impacts on key functional groups Ambio 2012 41 637 644 22926885 
Havenhand JN  Schlegel P   Near-future levels of ocean acidification do not affect sperm motility and fertilization kinetics in the oyster Crassostrea gigas  Biogeosciences 2009 6 3009 3015 
Haynert K  Schonfeld J  Riebesell U  Polovodova I   Biometry and dissolution features of the benthic foraminifer Ammonia aomoriensis  at high pCO2  Marine Ecology Progress Series 2011 432 53 67 
Hernroth B  Baden S  Thorndyke M  Dupont S   Immune suppression of the echinoderm Asterias rubens  (L.) following long-term ocean acidification Aquatic Toxicology 2011 103 222 224 21473849 
Hernroth B  Krång AS  Baden S   Bacteriostatic suppression in Norway lobster (Nephrops norvegicus ) exposed to manganese or hypoxia under pressure of ocean acidification Aquatic Toxicology 2015 159 217 224 25553539 
Hernroth B  Sköld HN  Wiklander K  Jutfelt F  Baden S   Simulated climate change causes immune suppression and protein damage in the crustacean Nephrops norvegicus  Fish and Shellfish Immunology 2012 33 1095 1101 22974540 
Hiddink JG  Burrows MT  Molinos JG   Temperature tracking by North Sea benthic invertebrates in response to climate change Global Change Biology 2015 21 117 129 25179407 
Hiddink JG  Coleby C   What is the effect of climate change on marine fish biodiversity in an area of low connectivity, the Baltic Sea? Global Ecology and Biogeography 2012 21 637 646 
Hiebenthal C  Philipp EER  Eisenhauer A  Wahl M   Effects of seawater pCO2  and temperature on shell growth, shell stability, condition and cellular stress of Western Baltic Sea Mytilus edulis  (L.) and Arctica islandica  (L.) Marine Biology 2013 160 2073 2087 
Hilmi N  Allemand D  Dupont S  Safa A  Haraldsson G  Nunes PA  Moore C  Hattam C    Towards improved socio-economic assessments of ocean acidification’s impacts Marine Biology 2013 160 1773 1787 24391285 
Hjalmarsson S  Wesslander K  Anderson LG  Omstedt A  Perttilä M  Mintrop L   Distribution, long-term development and mass balance calculation of total alkalinity in the Baltic Sea Continental Shelf Research 2008 28 593 601 
Hofmann GE  Smith JE  Johnson KS  Send U  Levin LA  Micheli F  Paytan A  Price NN    High-frequency dynamics of ocean pH: A multi-ecosystem comparison PLoS ONE 2011 6 e28983 22205986 
Holtmann WC  Stumpp M  Gutowska MA  Syre S  Himmerkus N  Melzner F  Bleich M   Maintenance of coelomic fluid pH in sea urchins exposed to elevated CO2 : The role of body cavity epithelia and stereom dissolution Marine Biology 2013 160 2631 2645 
Horn HG  Sander N  Stuhr A  Alguero-Muniz M  Bach LT  Loder MGJ  Boersma M  Riebesell U    Low CO2  sensitivity of microzooplankton communities in the Gullmar Fjord, Skagerrak: Evidence from a long-term mesocosm study PLoS ONE 2016 11 24 
Hornick T  Bach LT  Crawfurd KJ  Spilling K  Achterberg EP  Woodhouse JN  Schulz KG  Brussaard CPD    Ocean acidification impacts bacteria-phytoplankton coupling at low-nutrient conditions Biogeosciences 2017 14 1 15 
Hönisch B  Hemming NG   Surface ocean pH response to variations in pCO2  through two full glacial cycles Earth and Planetary Science Letters 2005 236 305 314 
Hönisch B  Ridgwell A  Schmidt DN  Thomas E  Gibbs SJ  Sluijs A  Zeebe R  Kump L    The geological record of ocean acidification Science 2012 335 1058 1063 22383840 
Hu MY  Casties I  Stumpp M  Ortega-Martinez O  Dupont S   Energy metabolism and regeneration are impaired by seawater acidification in the infaunal brittlestar Amphiura filiformis  Journal of Experimental Biology 2014 217 2411 2421 24737772 
Hu MY  Michael K  Kreiss CM  Stumpp M  Dupont S  Tseng YC  Lucassen M   Temperature modulates the effects of ocean acidification on intestinal ion transport in Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua  Frontiers in Physiology 2016 7 18 26869936 
Hu MY  Lein E  Bleich M  Melzner F  Stumpp M   Trans-life cycle acclimation to experimental ocean acidification affects gastric pH homeostasis and larval recruitment in the sea star Asterias rubens  Acta Physiologica 2018 224 e13075 29660255 
Hüning A  Melzner F  Thomsen J  Gutowska MA  Kramer L  Frickenhaus S  Rosenstiel P  Portner HO    Impacts of seawater acidification on mantle gene expression patterns of the Baltic Sea blue mussel: implications for shell formation and energy metabolism Marine Biology 2013 160 1845 1861 
Jagers SC  Matti S  Crépin A-S  Langlet D  Havenhand JN  Troell M  Filipsson HL  Galaz VR    Societal causes of, and responses to, ocean acidification Ambio 2018 
Jakubowska M  Jerzak M  Normant M  Burska D  Drzazgowski J   Effect of carbon dioxide-induced water acidification on the physiological processes of the baltic isopod Saduria entomon  Journal of Shellfish Research 2013 32 825 834 
Jakubowska M  Normant M   Metabolic rate and activity of blue mussel Mytilus edulis trossulus  under short-term exposure to carbon dioxide-induced water acidification and oxygen deficiency Marine and Freshwater Behaviour and Physiology 2015 48 25 39 
Jakubowska M  Normant-Saremba M   The effect of CO2 -induced seawater acidification on the behaviour and metabolic rate of the Baltic clam Macoma balthica  Annales Zoologici Fennici 2015 52 353 367 
Jansson A  Lischka S  Boxhammer T  Schulz KG  Norkko J   Survival and settling of larval Macoma balthica  in a large-scale mesocosm experiment at different fCO2 levels Biogeosciences 2016 13 3377 3385 
Jansson A  Norkko J  Dupont S  Norkko A   Growth and survival in a changing environment: combined effects of moderate hypoxia and low pH on juvenile bivalve Macoma balthica  Journal of Sea Research 2015 102 41 47 
Jansson A  Norkko J  Norkko A   Effects of reduced pH on Macoma balthica  larvae from a system with naturally fluctuating pH-dynamics PLoS ONE 2013 8 e68198 23840833 
Johannesson K  Andre C   Life on the margin: Genetic isolation and diversity loss in a peripheral marine ecosystem, the Baltic Sea Molecular Ecology 2006 15 2013 2029 16780421 
Johannesson K  Smolarz K  Grahn M  Andre C   The future of Baltic Sea Populations: Local extinction or evolutionary rescue? Ambio 2011 40 179 190 21446396 
Jutfelt F  Hedgarde M   Atlantic cod actively avoid CO2  and predator odour, even after long-term CO2  exposure Frontiers in Zoology 2013 10 7 23421712 
Kaplan IC  Levin PS  Burden M  Fulton EA   Fishing catch shares in the face of global change: A framework for integrating cumulative impacts and single species management Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 2010 67 1968 1982 
Katsanevakis S  Wallentinus I  Zenetos A  Leppäkowski E  Oztürk B  Grabowski M  Golani D  Cardoso A   Impacts of invasive alien marine species on ecosystem services and biodiversity: A pan-European review Aquatic Invasions 2014 9 391 423 
Koenigstein S  Mark FC  Gößling-Reisemann S  Reuter H  Poertner HO   Modelling climate change impacts on marine fish populations: Process-based integration of ocean warming, acidification and other environmental drivers Fish and Fisheries 2016 17 972 1004 
Kremp A  Godhe A  Egardt J  Dupont S  Suikkanen S  Casabianca S  Penna A   Intraspecific variability in the response of bloom-forming marine microalgae to changed climate conditions Ecology and Evolution 2012 2 1195 1207 22833794 
Kroeker KJ  Kordas RL  Crim R  Hendriks IE  Ramajo L  Singh GS  Duarte CM  Gattuso JP   Impacts of ocean acidification on marine organisms: Quantifying sensitivities and interaction with warming Global Change Biology 2013 19 1884 1896 23505245 
Kroeker KJ  Kordas RL  Harley CD   Embracing interactions in ocean acidification research: Confronting multiple stressor scenarios and context dependence Biology Letters 2017 13 20160802 28356409 
Langer G  Nehrke G  Probert I  Ly J  Ziveri P   Strain-specific responses of Emiliania huxleyi  to changing seawater carbonate chemistry Biogeosciences 2009 6 2637 2646 
Langer JAF  Sharma R  Schmidt SI  Bahrdt S  Horn HG  Alguero-Muniz M  Nam B  Achterberg EP    Community barcoding reveals little effect of ocean acidification on the composition of coastal plankton communities: Evidence from a long-term mesocosm study in the Gullmar Fjord, Skagerrak Plos One 2017 12 20 
Lefcheck JS  Byrnes JE  Isbell F  Gamfeldt L  Griffin JN  Eisenhauer N  Hensel MJ  Hector A    Biodiversity enhances ecosystem multifunctionality across trophic levels and habitats Nature Communications 2015 6 6936 
Lemasson AJ  Fletcher S  Hall-Spencer JM  Knights AM   Linking the biological impacts of ocean acidification on oysters to changes in ecosystem services: A review Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 2017 492 49 62 
Lindegren M  Checkley DM  Ohman MD  Koslow JA  Goericke R   Resilience and stability of a pelagic marine ecosystem Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2016 283 9 
Lindh MV  Riemann L  Baltar F  Romero-Oliva C  Salomon PS  Graneli E  Pinhassi J   Consequences of increased temperature and acidification on bacterioplankton community composition during a mesocosm spring bloom in the Baltic Sea Environmental Microbiology Reports 2013 5 252 262 23584969 
Lischka S  Bach LT  Schulz K-G  Riebesell U   Ciliate and mesozooplankton community response to increasing CO2  levels in the Baltic Sea: Insights from a large-scale mesocosm experiment Biogeosciences 2017 14 447 466 
Lohbeck KT  Riebesell U  Reusch TBH   Adaptive evolution of a key phytoplankton species to ocean acidification Nature Geosciences 2012 5 346 351 
Loreau M  Mazancourt C   Biodiversity and ecosystem stability: A synthesis of underlying mechanisms Ecology Letters 2013 16 106 115 23346947 
Mammitzsch K  Jost G  Jurgens K   Impact of dissolved inorganic carbon concentrations and pH on growth of the chemolithoautotrophic epsilonproteobacterium Sulfurimonas gotlandica  GD1(T) Microbiology Open 2014 3 80 88 24376054 
Meier HEM  Andersson HC  Eilola K  Gustafsson BG  Kuznetsov I  Müller-Karulis B  Neumann T  Savchuk OP   Hypoxia in future climates: A model ensemble study for the Baltic Sea Geophysical Research Letters 2011 38 24 
Meier, M. 2015. Projected change: Marine physics. In Second assessment of climate change for the Baltic Sea basin, ed. BACC II Author Team, 243–252. Heidelberg: Springer.
Melzner F  Gobel S  Langenbuch M  Gutowska MA  Portner HO  Lucassen M   Swimming performance in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua ) following long-term (4–12 months) acclimation to elevated seawater P(CO2 ) Aquatic Toxicology 2009 92 30 37 19223084 
Melzner F  Stange P  Trubenbach K  Thomsen J  Casties I  Panknin U  Gorb SN  Gutowska MA   Food supply and seawater pCO2  impact calcification and internal shell dissolution in the blue mussel Mytilus edulis  PLoS ONE 2011 6 e24223 21949698 
Meyer J  Riebesell U   Responses of coccolithophores to ocean acidification: A meta-analysis Biogeosciences 2015 12 1671 1682 
Michael K  Kreiss CM  Hu MY  Koschnick N  Bickmeyer U  Dupont S  Portner HO  Lucassen M   Adjustments of molecular key components of branchial ion and pH regulation in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua ) in response to ocean acidification and warming Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology B-Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 2016 193 33 46 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment  Ecosystems and human well-being: Biodiversity synthesis 2005 Washington, DC Island Press 
Molinos JG  Halpern BS  Schoeman DS  Brown CJ  Kiessling W  Moore PJ  Pandolfi JM  Poloczanska ES    Climate velocity and the future global redistribution of marine biodiversity Nature Climate Change 2016 6 83 
Mostofa KM  Liu C-Q  Zhai W  Minella M  Vione D  Gao K  Minakata D  Arakaki T    Reviews and Syntheses: Ocean acidification and its potential impacts on marine ecosystems Biogeosciences 2016 13 1767 1786 
Müller JD  Schneider B  Rehder G   Long-term alkalinity trends in the Baltic Sea and their implications for CO2 -induced acidification Limnology and Oceanography 2016 61 1984 2002 
Ni S  Taubner I  Bohm F  Winde V  Bottcher ME   Effect of temperature rise and ocean acidification on growth of calcifying tubeworm shells (Spirorbis spirorbis ): An in situ benthocosm approach Biogeosciences 2018 15 1425 1445 
Niiranen S  Yletyinen J  Tomczak MT  Blenckner T  Hjerne O  MacKenzie BR  Müller-Karulis B  Neumann T    Combined effects of global climate change and regional ecosystem drivers on an exploited marine food web Global Change Biology 2013 19 3327 3342 23818413 
Näslund J  Lindström E  Lai F  Jutfelt F   Behavioural responses to simulated bird attacks in marine three-spined sticklebacks after exposure to high CO2  levels Marine and Freshwater Research 2015 66 877 885 
Norström AV  Balvanera P  Spierenburg MJ  Bouamrane M   Programme on ecosystem change and society: Knowledge for sustainable stewardship of social-ecological systems Ecology and Society 2017 22 47 
Oesterwind D  Rau A  Zaiko A   Drivers and pressures—untangling the terms commonly used in marine science and policy Journal of Environmental Management 2016 181 8 15 27294675 
Oliver TH  Heard MS  Isaac NJ  Roy DB  Procter D  Eigenbrod F  Freckleton R  Hector A    Biodiversity and resilience of ecosystem functions Trends in Ecology & Evolution 2015 30 673 684 26437633 
Olsson J  Bergström L  Gårdmark A   Abiotic drivers of coastal fish community change during four decades in the Baltic Sea ICES Journal of Marine Science 2012 69 961 970 
Olsson J  Tomczak MT  Ojaveer H  Gårdmark A  Põllumäe A  Müller-Karulis B  Ustups D  Dinesen GE    Temporal development of coastal ecosystems in the Baltic Sea over the past two decades ICES Journal of Marine Science 2015 72 2539 2548 
Omstedt A  Edman M  Claremar B  Frodin P  Gustafsson E  Humborg C  Hägg H  Mörth M    Future changes in the Baltic Sea acid-base (pH) and oxygen balances Tellus B 2012 64 19586 
Omstedt A  Edman M  Claremar B  Rutgersson A   Modelling the contributions to marine acidification from deposited SOx , NOx , and NHx  in the Baltic Sea: Past and present situations Continental Shelf Research 2015 111 234 249 
Omstedt A  Gustafsson E  Wesslander K   Modelling the uptake and release of carbon dioxide in the Baltic Sea surface water Continental Shelf Research 2009 29 870 885 
Österblom H  Crona BI  Folke C  Nyström M  Troell M   Marine ecosystem science on an intertwined planet Ecosystems 2017 20 54 61 
Österblom H  Hansson S  Larsson U  Hjerne O  Wulff F  Elmgren R  Folke C   Human-induced trophic cascades and ecological regime shifts in the Baltic sea Ecosystems 2007 10 877 889 
Pajusalu L  Martin G  Pollumae A   Results of laboratory and field experiments of the direct effect of increasing CO2  on net primary production of macroalgal species in brackish-water ecosystems Proceedings of the Estonian Academy of Sciences 2013 62 148 154 
Pansch C  Hattich GSI  Heinrichs ME  Pansch A  Zagrodzka Z  Havenhand JN   Long-term exposure to acidification disrupts reproduction in a marine invertebrate PLoS ONE 2018 13 17 
Pansch C  Nasrolahi A  Appelhans YS  Wahl M   Impacts of ocean warming and acidification on the larval development of the barnacle Amphibalanus improvisus  Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 2012 420 48 55 
Pansch C  Schlegel P  Havenhand J   Larval development of the barnacle Amphibalanus improvisus  responds variably but robustly to near-future ocean acidification ICES Journal of Marine Science 2013 70 805 811 
Pansch C  Schaub I  Havenhand J  Wahl M   Habitat traits and food availability determine the response of marine invertebrates to ocean acidification Global Change Biology 2014 20 765 777 24273082 
Paul AJ  Achterberg EP  Bach LT  Boxhammer T  Czerny J  Haunost M  Schulz KG  Stuhr A    No observed effect of ocean acidification on nitrogen biogeochemistry in a summer Baltic Sea plankton community Biogeosciences 2016 13 3901 3913 
Paul C  Sommer U  Garzke J  Moustaka-Gouni M  Paul A  Matthiessen B   Effects of increased CO2  concentration on nutrient limited coastal summer plankton depend on temperature Limnology and Oceanography 2016 61 853 868 
Pereyra RT  Bergström L  Kautsky L  Johannesson K   Rapid speciation in a newly opened postglacial marine environment, the Baltic Sea BMC Evolutionary Biology 2009 9 70 19335884 
Pinsky ML  Worm B  Fogarty MJ  Sarmiento JL  Levin SA   Marine taxa track local climate velocities Science 2013 341 1239 1242 24031017 
Polechová J  Barton NH   Limits to adaptation along environmental gradients Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 2015 112 6401 6406 25941385 
Pörtner HO  Farrell AP   Physiology and climate change Science 2008 322 690 692 18974339 
Raddatz S  Guy-Haim T  Rilov G  Wahl M   Future warming and acidification effects on anti-fouling and anti-herbivory traits of the brown alga Fucus vesiculosus  (Phaeophyceae) Journal of Phycology 2017 53 44 58 27711971 
Repolho T  Duarte B  Dionisio G  Paula JR  Lopes AR  Rosa IC  Grilo TF  Cacador I    Seagrass ecophysiological performance under ocean warming and acidification Scientific Reports 2017 7 41443 28145531 
Reusch TBH  Ehlers A  Hammerli A  Worm B   Ecosystem recovery after climatic extremes enhanced by genotypic diversity Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 2005 102 2826 2831 15710890 
Riebesell U  Gattuso J-P   Lessons learned from ocean acidification research Nature Climate Change 2015 5 12 14 
Rönnbäck P  Kautsky N  Pihl L  Troell M  Söderqvist T  Wennhage H   Ecosystem goods and services from Swedish coastal habitats: Identification, valuation, and implications of ecosystem shifts Ambio 2007 36 534 544 18074889 
Rossoll D  Bermúdez R  Hauss H  Schulz KG  Riebesell U  Sommer U  Winder M   Ocean acidification-induced food quality deterioration constrains trophic transfer PLoS ONE 2012 7 e34737 22509351 
Saderne V  Fietzek P  Herman PMJ   Extreme variations of pCO2  and pH in a macrophyte meadow of the Baltic Sea in summer: Evidence of the effect of photosynthesis and local upwelling PLoS ONE 2013 8 e62689 23626849 
Saderne V  Wahl M   Differential responses of calcifying and non-calcifying epibionts of a brown macroalga to present-day and future upwelling pCO2  PLoS ONE 2013 8 e70455 23894659 
SCB. 2017. Aquaculture in Sweden in 2016. Swedish Central Bureau of Statistics, Report JO 60 SM 1701, Stockholm, Sweden (in Swedish, English summary).
SCB. 2018. Recreational fishing in Sweden 2016. Swedish Central Bureau of Statistics, Report JO 57 SM 1801, Stockholm, Sweden (in Swedish, English summary).
Schade FM  Clemmesen C  Wegner KM   Within-and transgenerational effects of ocean acidification on life history of marine three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus ) Marine Biology 2014 161 1667 1676 
Scheffer M  Carpenter S  Foley JA  Folke C  Walker B   Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems Nature 2001 413 591 596 11595939 
Schneider, B., K. Eilola, K. Lukkari, B. Müller-Karulis. and T. Neumann. 2015. Environmental impacts— marine biogeochemistry. In Second assessment of climate change for the Baltic Sea basin, ed. BACC II Author Team, 337–362. Heidelberg: Springer.
Schulz KG  Bellerby R  Brussaard CP  Büdenbender J  Czerny J  Engel A  Fischer M  Koch-Klavsen S    Temporal biomass dynamics of an Arctic plankton bloom in response to increasing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide Biogeosciences 2013 10 161 180 
Serrao EA  Brawley SH  Hedman J  Kautsky L  Samuelson G   Reproductive success of Fucus vesiculosus  (Phaeophyceae) in the Baltic Sea Journal of Phycology 1999 35 254 269 
Sokolowski A  Brulinska D  Mirny Z  Burska D  Pryputniewicz-Flis D   Differing responses of the estuarine bivalve Limecola balthica  to lowered water pH caused by potential CO2  leaks from a sub-seabed storage site in the Baltic Sea: An experimental study Marine Pollution Bulletin 2018 127 761 773 28987450 
Sommer U  Paul C  Moustaka-Gouni M   Warming and ocean acidification effects on phytoplankton -from species shifts to size shifts within species in a mesocosm experiment PLoS ONE 2015 10 e125239 
Spilling K  Paul AJ  Virkkala N  Hastings T  Lischka S  Stuhr A  Bermúdez R  Czerny J    Ocean acidification decreases plankton respiration: Evidence from a mesocosm experiment Biogeosciences 2016 13 4707 4719 
Stapp LS  Thomsen J  Schade H  Bock C  Melzner F  Portner HO  Lannig G   Intra-population variability of ocean acidification impacts on the physiology of Baltic blue mussels (Mytilus edulis ): Integrating tissue and organism response Journal of Comparative Physiology B 2017 187 529 543 
Steffen W  Richardson K  Rockström J  Cornell SE  Fetzer I  Bennett EM  Biggs R  Carpenter SR    Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet Science 2015 347 1259855 25592418 
Stemmer K  Nehrke G  Brey T   Elevated CO2  levels do not affect the shell structure of the bivalve Arctica islandica  from the western Baltic PLoS ONE 2013 8 e70106 23922922 
Stiasny MH  Mittermayer FH  Sswat M  Voss R  Jutfelt F  Chierici M  Puvanendran V  Mortensen A    Ocean acidification effects on Atlantic cod larval survival and recruitment to the fished population PLoS ONE 2016 11 e0155448 27551924 
Stips, A., K. Bolding, D. Macias, J. Bruggeman, and C. Coughlan. 2016. Scoping report on the potential impact of on-board desulphurisation on water quality in SOx emission control areas. EUR 27886. 10.2788/336630.
Stumpp M  Dupont S  Thorndyke MC  Melzner F   CO2  induced seawater acidification impacts sea urchin larval development II: Gene expression patterns in pluteus larvae Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A-Molecular and Integrative Physiology 2011 160 320 330 
Stumpp M  Wren J  Melzner F  Thorndyke MC  Dupont ST   CO2  induced seawater acidification impacts sea urchin larval development I: Elevated metabolic rates decrease scope for growth and induce developmental delay Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A-Molecular and Integrative Physiology 2011 160 331 340 
Stumpp M  Hu M  Casties I  Saborowski R  Bleich M  Melzner F  Dupont S   Digestion in sea urchin larvae impaired under ocean acidification Nature Climate Change 2013 3 1044 1049 
Stumpp M  Trubenbach K  Brennecke D  Hu MY  Melzner F   Resource allocation and extracellular acid-base status in the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus droebachiensis  in response to CO2  induced seawater acidification Aquatic Toxicology 2012 110 194 207 22343465 
Suikkanen S  Pulina S  Engström-Öst J  Lehtiniemi M  Lehtinen S  Brutemark A   Climate change and eutrophication induced shifts in northern summer plankton communities PLoS ONE 2013 8 e66475 23776676 
Sundin J  Jutfelt F   9-28 d of exposure to elevated pCO2  reduces avoidance of predator odour but had no effect on behavioural lateralization or swimming activity in a temperate wrasse (Ctenolabrus rupestris ) ICES Journal of Marine Science 2016 73 620 632 
Takolander A  Cabeza M  Leskinen E   Climate change can cause complex responses in Baltic Sea macroalgae: A systematic review Journal of Sea Research 2017 123 16 29 
Taucher J  Haunost M  Boxhammer T  Bach LT  Alguero-Muniz M  Riebesell U   Influence of ocean acidification on plankton community structure during a winter-to-summer succession: An imaging approach indicates that copepods can benefit from elevated CO2  via indirect food web effects PLoS ONE 2017 12 23 
TEEB  The economics of ecosystems and biodiversity: Mainstreaming the economics of nature: A synthesis of the approach, conclusions and recommendations of TEEB 2010 Brussels UNEP-EU 
Thomsen J  Casties I  Pansch C  Kortzinger A  Melzner F   Food availability outweighs ocean acidification effects in juvenile Mytilus edulis : Laboratory and field experiments Global Change Biology 2013 19 1017 1027 23504880 
Thomsen J  Melzner F   Moderate seawater acidification does not elicit long-term metabolic depression in the blue mussel Mytilus edulis  Marine Biology 2010 157 2667 2676 
Thomsen J  Stapp LS  Haynert K  Schade H  Danelli M  Lannig G  Wegner KM  Melzner F   Naturally acidified habitat selects for ocean acidification-tolerant mussels Science Advances 2017 3 e1602411 28508039 
Thor P  Dupont S   Transgenerational effects alleviate severe fecundity loss during ocean acidification in a ubiquitous planktonic copepod Global Change Biology 2015 21 2261 2271 25430823 
Thor P  Oliva EO   Ocean acidification elicits different energetic responses in an Arctic and a boreal population of the copepod Pseudocalanus acuspes  Marine Biology 2015 162 799 807 
Todgham AE  Stillman JH   Physiological responses to shifts in multiple environmental stressors: Relevance in a changing world Integrative and Comparative Biology 2013 53 539 544 23892371 
Torda G  Donelson JM  Aranda M  Barshis DJ  Bay L  Berumen ML  Bourne DG  Cantin N    Rapid adaptive responses to climate change in corals Nature Climate Change 2017 7 627 
Turner DR  Edman M  Gallego-Urrea JA  Claremar B  Hassellov IM  Omstedt A  Rutgersson A   The potential future contribution of shipping to acidification of the Baltic Sea Ambio 2018 47 368 378 28983824 
Ulfsbo A  Hulth S  Anderson LG   pH and biogeochemical processes in the Gotland Basin of the Baltic Sea Marine Chemistry 2011 127 20 30 
van Vuuren DP  Edmonds J  Kainuma M  Riahi K  Thomson A  Hibbard K  Hurtt GC  Kram T    The representative concentration pathways: An overview Climatic Change 2011 109 5 
Van Colen C  Jansson A  Saunier A  Lacoue-Labathe T  Vincx M   Biogeographic vulnerability to ocean acidification and warming in a marine bivalve Marine Pollution Bulletin 2018 126 308 311 29421102 
Vehmaa A  Almén A-K  Brutemark A  Paul AJ  Riebesell U  Furuhagen S  Engström-Öst J   Ocean acidification challenges copepod reproductive plasticity Biogeosciences 2016 13 6171 6182 
Vehmaa A  Brutemark A  Engstrom-Ost J   Maternal effects may act as an adaptation mechanism for copepods facing pH and temperature changes PLoS ONE 2012 7 8 
Ventura A  Schulz S  Dupont S   Maintained larval growth in mussel larvae exposed to acidified under-saturated seawater Scientific Reports 2016 6 23728 27020613 
Viitasalo, M., T. Blenckner, A. Gårdmark, H. Kaartokallio, L. Kautsky, H. Kuosa, M. Lindegren, A. Norkko, et al. 2015. Environmental impacts—marine ecosystems. In Second assessment of climate change for the Baltic Sea basin, ed. BACC II Author Team, 363–380. Heidelberg: Springer.
Vuorinen I  Hänninen J  Rajasilta M  Laine P  Eklund J  Montesino-Pouzols F  Corona F  Junker K    Scenario simulations of future salinity and ecological consequences in the Baltic Sea and adjacent North Sea areas–implications for environmental monitoring Ecological Indicators 2015 50 196 205 25737660 
Wahl M  Schneider Covachã S  Saderne V  Hiebenthal C  Müller J  Pansch C  Sawall Y   Macroalgae may mitigate ocean acidification effects on mussel calcification by increasing pH and its fluctuations Limnology and Oceanography 2018 63 3 21 
Wallace RB  Baumann H  Grear JS  Aller RC  Gobler CJ   Coastal ocean acidification: The other eutrophication problem Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 2014 148 1 13 
Weigel B  Andersson HC  Meier HEM  Blenckner T  Snickars M  Bonsdorff E   Long-term progression and drivers of coastal zoobenthos in a changing system Marine Ecology Progress Series 2015 528 141 159 
Wernberg T  Smale DA  Thomsen MS   A decade of climate change experiments on marine organisms: Procedures, patterns and problems Global Change Biology 2012 18 1491 1498 
Werner FJ  Graiff A  Matthiessen B   Temperature effects on seaweed-sustaining top-down control vary with season Oecologia 2016 180 889 901 26566809 
Wikner J  Andersson A   Increased freshwater discharge shifts the trophic balance in the coastal zone of the northern Baltic Sea Global Change Biology 2012 18 2509 2519 
Winder M  Bouquet JM  Rafael Bermúdez J  Berger SA  Hansen T  Brandes J  Sazhin AF  Nejstgaard JC    Increased appendicularian zooplankton alter carbon cycling under warmer more acidified ocean conditions Limnology and Oceanography 2017 62 1541 1551 
Wood HL  Skold HN  Eriksson SP   Health and population-dependent effects of ocean acidification on the marine isopod Idotea balthica  Marine Biology 2014 161 2423 2431 
Wood HL  Sundell K  Almroth BC  Skold HN  Eriksson SP   Population-dependent effects of ocean acidification Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2016 283 7 
Worm B  Barbier EB  Beaumont N  Duffy JE  Folke C  Halpern BS  Jackson JBC  Lotze HK    Impacts of biodiversity loss on ocean ecosystem services Science 2006 314 787 790 17082450 
Wulff A  Karlberg M  Olofsson M  Torstensson A  Riemann L  Steinhoff FS  Mohlin M  Ekstrand N    Ocean acidification and desalination: Climate-driven change in a Baltic Sea summer microplanktonic community Marine Biology 2018 165 63 29563649 
Zeebe RE  Ridgwell A  Zachos JC   Anthropogenic carbon release rate unprecedented during the past 66 million years Nature Geosciences 2016 9 325 329 
Zhao L  Milano S  Walliser EO  Schone BR   Bivalve shell formation in a naturally CO2 -enriched habitat: Unraveling the resilience mechanisms from elemental signatures Chemosphere 2018 203 132 138 29614406

