
==== Front
BrainBrainbrainjbrainBrain0006-89501460-2156Oxford University Press 2699380010.1093/brain/aww039aww039Original Articles1000Editor's ChoiceNeuregulin-1 controls an endogenous repair mechanism after spinal cord
injury Bartus Katalin 1Galino Jorge 2*James Nicholas D. 1*Hernandez-Miranda Luis R. 3Dawes John M. 2Fricker Florence R. 2Garratt Alistair N. 34McMahon Stephen B. 1Ramer Matt S. 5Birchmeier Carmen 3Bennett David L. H. 2#Bradbury Elizabeth J. 1#1The Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Regeneration
Group, King’s College London, Guy’s Campus, London Bridge, London, UK2Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, West Wing,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK3Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany4Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Charitéplatz, Berlin, Germany5International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries, The
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada*,#These authors contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence to: Elizabeth J. Bradbury, King’s College
London, Regeneration Group, The Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Wolfson Wing,
Hodgkin Building, Guy’s Campus, London Bridge, London, SE1 1UL, UK E-mail:
elizabeth.bradbury@kcl.ac.ukCorrespondence may also be addressed to: David L. H. Bennett
University of Oxford, Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, West Wing John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK. E-mail:
david.bennett@ndcn.ox.ac.uk5 2016 17 3 2016 17 3 2016 139 5 1394 1416 20 7 2015 12 1 2016 24 1 2016 © The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of the Guarantors of Brain.2016This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.Spontaneous remyelination after spinal cord injury is mediated largely by Schwann cells
of unknown origin. Bartus et al. show that neuregulin-1 promotes
differentiation of spinal cord-resident precursor cells into PNS-like Schwann cells, which
remyelinate central axons and promote functional recovery. Targeting the neuregulin-1
system could enhance endogenous regenerative processes.


Spontaneous remyelination after spinal cord injury is mediated largely by Schwann
cells of unknown origin. Bartus et al. show that neuregulin-1
promotes differentiation of spinal cord-resident precursor cells into PNS-like
Schwann cells, which remyelinate central axons and promote functional recovery.
Targeting the neuregulin-1 system could enhance endogenous regenerative
processes.




Following traumatic spinal cord injury, acute demyelination of spinal axons is followed
by a period of spontaneous remyelination. However, this endogenous repair response is
suboptimal and may account for the persistently compromised function of surviving axons.
Spontaneous remyelination is largely mediated by Schwann cells, where demyelinated central
axons, particularly in the dorsal columns, become associated with peripheral myelin. The
molecular control, functional role and origin of these central remyelinating Schwann cells
is currently unknown. The growth factor neuregulin-1 (Nrg1, encoded by
NRG1) is a key signalling factor controlling myelination in the
peripheral nervous system, via signalling through ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors. Here we
examined whether Nrg1 is required for Schwann cell-mediated remyelination of central
dorsal column axons and whether Nrg1 ablation influences the degree of spontaneous
remyelination and functional recovery following spinal cord injury. In contused adult mice
with conditional ablation of Nrg1, we found an absence of Schwann cells within the spinal
cord and profound demyelination of dorsal column axons. There was no compensatory increase
in oligodendrocyte remyelination. Removal of peripheral input to the spinal cord and
proliferation studies demonstrated that the majority of remyelinating Schwann cells
originated within the injured spinal cord. We also examined the role of specific Nrg1
isoforms, using mutant mice in which only the immunoglobulin-containing isoforms of Nrg1
(types I and II) were conditionally ablated, leaving the type III Nrg1 intact. We found
that the immunoglobulin Nrg1 isoforms were dispensable for Schwann cell-mediated
remyelination of central axons after spinal cord injury. When functional effects were
examined, both global Nrg1 and immunoglobulin-specific Nrg1 mutants demonstrated reduced
spontaneous locomotor recovery compared to injured controls, although global Nrg1 mutants
were more impaired in tests requiring co-ordination, balance and proprioception.
Furthermore, electrophysiological assessments revealed severely impaired axonal conduction
in the dorsal columns of global Nrg1 mutants (where Schwann cell-mediated remyelination is
prevented), but not immunoglobulin-specific mutants (where Schwann cell-mediated
remyelination remains intact), providing robust evidence that the profound demyelinating
phenotype observed in the dorsal columns of Nrg1 mutant mice is related to conduction
failure. Our data provide novel mechanistic insight into endogenous regenerative processes
after spinal cord injury, demonstrating that Nrg1 signalling regulates central axon
remyelination and functional repair and drives the trans-differentiation of central
precursor cells into peripheral nervous system-like Schwann cells that remyelinate spinal
axons after injury. Manipulation of the Nrg1 system could therefore be exploited to
enhance spontaneous repair after spinal cord injury and other central nervous system
disorders with a demyelinating pathology.

spinal cord injuryaxon degenerationremyelinationdemyelinationtransgenic model
==== Body
Introduction
Spinal cord injury comprises many pathological events and leads to devastating deficits in
bodily functions. Apart from loss of motor function and paralysis, many patients also suffer
incontinence (Potter, 2006), chronic pain
(Ravenscroft et al., 2000)
and psychiatric disorders (Chevalier et
al., 2009). The financial burden of spinal cord injury is staggering,
with healthcare costs among the highest of any medical condition (Cannon, 2013) and improving neurological outcome after spinal cord
injury remains a major clinical challenge (Dietz and
Fouad, 2014; Ramer et al.,
2014).

The complex pathophysiology of spinal cord injury is biphasic, comprising primary trauma
followed by secondary injury progression. Initial tissue disruption, haemorrhaging and
oxidative stress are followed by inflammation, death of neurons and glia, axonal
demyelination and degeneration, extracellular matrix remodelling, glial scar formation, and
cavitation (Schwab and Bartholdi, 1996; Hagg and Oudega, 2006; Fitch and Silver, 2008; Gaudet and Popovich, 2014). Targeting any of these injury-induced reactive
changes, singularly or in combination, may contribute to improved neurological outcome after
spinal cord injury and lead to new therapeutic strategies (Oudega et al., 2012; Ramer et al., 2014). Despite the severe
neurological deficits, some degree of spontaneous, but incomplete, functional recovery is
observed in almost all cases (Fawcett et
al., 2007). In terms of underlying biology, it is apparent that a number
of spontaneous regenerative events occur after spinal cord injury, including neurogenesis,
plasticity and remyelination of spinal axons (Beattie
et al., 1997; Raineteau
and Schwab, 2001; Weidner and Tuszynski,
2002; Hagg and Oudega, 2006). It is
crucial to better understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying these
spontaneous repair events, which might provide a route to enhance them directly and to
design combinations of effective therapeutic interventions.

Sparing of some subpial axon-containing spinal tissue around the lesion core is a typical
feature of traumatic spinal cord injury (Crowe
et al., 1997; Norenberg
et al., 2004; Guest
et al., 2005). In the spared tissue, viable axons are observed
but these are unable to conduct under normal physiological conditions (Koles and Rasminsky, 1972; Nashmi and Fehlings, 2001; James et
al., 2011). This axonal impairment is associated with acute and profound
demyelination of spinal axons after traumatic contusion-type spinal cord injuries (Bunge et al., 1960; James et al., 2011; Plemel et al., 2014; Papastefanaki and Matsas, 2015), which are the
most common form of spinal cord injury suffered by humans (Norenberg et al., 2004). Apoptotic loss of
oligodendrocytes and gradual myelin degradation are among the major events that follow
primary damage in rodents and humans (Crowe
et al., 1997; Beattie
et al., 2002; Buss
et al., 2005). Remyelination of demyelinated axons within the
injury penumbra is an important regenerative process described in several animal models of
spinal cord injury (Bunge et al.,
1961; McDonald and Belegu, 2006;
James et al., 2011; Plemel et al., 2014; Papastefanaki and Matsas, 2015). However, this
endogenous repair is suboptimal and incomplete. Chronically demyelinated axons have been
reported in animal models (Blight and Decrescito,
1986; Waxman, 1989; James et al., 2011) and are
observed up to a decade after human spinal cord injury (Bunge et al., 1993; Guest et al., 2005). Myelin integrity is
essential for CNS physiology, allowing fine tuning of motor skills and sensory integration,
and there is evidence that remyelination restores efficient signal conduction and functional
outcome (Smith et al., 1979;
Duncan et al., 2009) and is
crucial for axonal protection and metabolic support (Franklin and Ffrench-Constant, 2008; Irvine
and Blakemore, 2008). Strategies to prevent demyelination at early stages and to
accelerate and enhance myelin repair at later stages are an important part of the wide
spectrum of promising therapies for spinal cord injury (Plemel et al., 2014; Ramer et al., 2014; Papastefanaki and Matsas, 2015).

An interesting phenomenon in the injured CNS is remyelination of central axons by Schwann
cells, which are normally excluded from the CNS and represent the primary myelinating cells
in the peripheral nervous system (PNS). This unexplained intrinsic myelin repair is also
observed in the chronically injured human spinal cord, where demyelinated axons become
associated with peripheral myelin, most noticeably in the dorsal columns (Bunge et al., 1993; Guest et al., 2005). Evidence
demonstrates that Schwann cells that myelinate CNS axons produce functional and stable
myelin that has normal properties (Blight and Young,
1989; Felts and Smith, 1992, 1996). In addition, in the remyelinated axons the
composition of the nodes of Ranvier is normal (Black
et al., 2006). Two distinct mechanisms might account for the
presence of ‘central’ Schwann cells: peripheral Schwann cells might enter the
spinal cord as a result of injury to the transition zone between PNS/CNS and/or they may be
derived from CNS-resident oligodendrocyte precursors by (trans)-differentiation (Sims et al., 1998; Jasmin et al., 2000; Zawadzka et al., 2010; Perlin et al., 2011). Independent
of the cellular mechanisms, molecular mechanisms that govern the Schwann cell-mediated
remyelination of injured spinal axons are unknown. Understanding the molecular events
involved in this process is important and could be exploited to enhance function of
surviving axons, or improve function of regenerating axons, in the injured spinal cord and
thus improve functional recovery. Such mechanisms might also promote repair in other CNS
disorders that involve a demyelinating pathology.

The growth factor neuregulin 1 (Nrg1, encoded by NRG1), which signals via
ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors, is crucial for Schwann cell development and function in the
PNS. Nrg1 stimulates survival of precursors, migration of Schwann cells, ensheathment,
myelination and remyelination of peripheral axons (Birchmeier and Nave, 2008; Fricker and
Bennett, 2011; Stassart et
al., 2013; Nave and Werner,
2014). There are over 30 different Nrg1 isoforms, all of which possess an epidermal
growth factor (EGF)-like signalling domain essential for receptor binding and biological
activity. Isoforms differ in their functional role and expression and can be classified
according to the structure of their N termini (Falls,
2003; Newbern and Birchmeier, 2010).
Isoforms containing an immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domain (types I and II) can be either
directly secreted or released as soluble proteins from the cell surface after proteolytic
cleavage. Isoforms possessing a cysteine-rich domain (type III isoforms) have two
transmembrane domains and require proteolytic cleavage by BACE1 (β-site APP-cleaving
enzyme 1) for full activity. In vivo these isoforms are thought to be
retained on the cell membrane and signal in a juxtacrine manner (Hu et al., 2006; Willem et al., 2006) although type III isoforms
can undergo dual cleavage by BACE1 and ADAM17 to release the EGF domain, which signals in a
paracrine fashion (Fleck et al.,
2013). We hypothesized that Nrg1 may be a key regulatory factor for spontaneous
remyelination of injured axons in the CNS by Schwann cells. Nrg1 is also known to modulate
oligodendrocyte function (Brinkmann et
al., 2008; Taveggia et
al., 2008; Makinodan et
al., 2012; Lundgaard et
al., 2013) and neural precursor cells in the spinal cord have been shown
to be responsive to Nrg1, as exogenous Nrg1 promotes oligodendrocyte production and repair
(Zhang et al., 2011; Gauthier et al., 2013). To
determine the mechanisms controlling remyelination of CNS axons by Schwann cells after
spinal cord injury and to avoid confounds of the developmental functions, we introduced Nrg1
mutation in adult mice using a tamoxifen inducible Cre (Meyer and Birchmeier, 1995; Fricker et al., 2013). To determine the importance of Nrg1 in
repair, we used a clinically relevant spinal cord contusion injury model (James et al., 2011), and compared
myelination in the injured spinal cord and functional outcome in the presence and absence of
Nrg1. To determine the importance of specific Nrg1 isoforms in Schwann cell-mediated
remyelination after traumatic spinal cord injury, we also examined this regenerative process
after ablating Ig-containing isoforms of Nrg1 (IgNrg1) only, which leaves the type III Nrg1
intact.

We demonstrate that Nrg1 is essential for remyelination of dorsal column axons by PNS-like
Schwann cells and that an absence of Nrg1 elicits a profound and persistent demyelinating
phenotype and axonal conduction failure after spinal cord injury. IgNrg1 isoforms are
dispensable for this process, implicating type III Nrg1 as the key isoform mediating this
process. We also provide evidence that the majority of centrally remyelinating Schwann cells
derive from newly generated precursor cells within the spinal cord. Interference with Nrg1
signalling also significantly impacts the degree of spontaneous locomotor recovery after
contusive spinal cord injury. These data reveal that Nrg1 signalling mediates an endogenous
regenerative event in which Schwann cells remyelinate denuded central axons after traumatic
spinal cord injury and that Nrg1 is an important mediator of spontaneous functional repair
after spinal cord injury.

Materials and methods
Animals
All animal work carried out conformed to UK Home Office legislation (Scientific
Procedures Act 1986). CAG-Cre-ERTM; Nrg1fl/fl mice, and
CAG-Cre-ERTM; IgNrg1fl/fl were bred by crossing
Nrg1fl/fl mice and IgNrg1fl/fl with CAG-Cre-ERTM mice
[JAX(r) mice 004682], respectively; as described previously (Cheret et al., 2013; Fricker et al., 2013). The generation and
genotyping of mutant mice with floxed alleles of Nrg1
(Nrg1fl/fl) mice has previously been described (Yang et al., 2001; Brinkmann et al., 2008; Fricker et al., 2013). These mice are null for
α-isoforms of Nrg1 in the absence of Cre recombination as they
carry a premature stop codon in exon 7, which encodes the α-EGF domain (Li et al., 2002). The loxP
sites flank exons 7–9, and exon 8 encodes the β-EGF domain. Cre recombination
therefore results in ablation of all remaining β isoforms. CAG-Cre-ERTM
construct detection and expression evaluation is described previously (Fricker et al., 2013). The
generation and genotyping of IgNrg1fl/fl has been described previously (Cheret et al., 2013); briefly,
mutant alleles have the exon 4 flanked by loxP sites, exons 3 and 4 of
Nrg1 encode the Ig-like domain, mutations specifically interfere with
the production of IgNrg1 forms (i.e. Nrg1 type I and Nrg1 type II), but not CRD-Nrg1
transcripts. In CAG-Cre-ERTM mice, a tamoxifen inducible form of Cre
recombinase is expressed ubiquitously driven by a chimeric promoter constructed from a
cytomegalovirus intermediate-early enhancer and a chicken β actin promoter/enhancer
(Hayashi and McMahon, 2002). Conditional
Nrg1 (conNrg1 mutant) and conIgNrg1 mice were generated by administering tamoxifen (Sigma
T5648, 0.25 mg/g body weight in corn oil) by oral gavage for five consecutive days to
10-week-old CAG-Cre-ERTM; Nrg1fl/fl and CAG-Cre-ERTM;
IgNrg1fl/fl mice respectively. Tamoxifen was administered 4 weeks prior to
surgery. We have previously assessed Nrg1 expression in conNrg1 mutant within spinal cord
at 4 weeks following this treatment regimen: conNrg1 demonstrate a 83% reduction in
the expression of the βEGF domain of Nrg1 (which is critical for biological activity
of all isoforms) relative to control (Fricker
et al., 2013) and on assessment of the most abundant Nrg1 type
III isoform protein there was a significant reduction in both the full length and the
cleaved C-terminal fragment. For experiments with CAG-Cre-ERTM;
Nrg1fl/fl two types of control animals were used for comparison: vehicle
controls, which were CAG-Cre-ERTM; Nrg1fl/fl littermates treated
with corn oil alone or tamoxifen control, which were tamoxifen treated
Nrg1fl/fl littermates. For experiments with CAG-Cre-ERTM;
IgNrg1fl/fl mice we used tamoxifen control littermates. Wherever possible, we
included equal numbers of animals of each gender in each experimental group.

Spinal contusion injury
Mice
Mice were anaesthetized with isoflurane, their backs were shaved and cleansed, and core
temperature was maintained close to 37 °C using a self-regulating heated blanket.
Single doses of 0.05 mg/kg buprenorphine and 5 mg/kg carprofen were administered
subcutaneously at the time of induction and the morning after surgery. Animals underwent
midthoracic laminectomy and received a moderate midline 50 kdyne spinal contusion injury
through the intact dura at spinal level T10/11 using an Infinite Horizon’s
impactor (Precision Systems Instrumentation). Overlying muscle and skin were sutured in
layers, subcutaneous saline was administered, and animals were left to recover from
anaesthesia in a 37 °C incubator. Saline and enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg) were given
subcutaneously daily for 3 and 7 days, respectively, after injury. Bladders were
manually expressed three to four times daily during the first 2 to 3 days after surgery
and twice daily thereafter until the end of the study period.

Rats
Adult female Sprague Dawley rats (150–200 g; Harlan Laboratories) were used,
housed under a 12-h light/dark cycle with ad libitum access to food and
water. Animals were anaesthetized using a mixture of ketamine (60 mg/kg) and
medetomidine 0.25 mg/kg, administered intraperitoneally. Following midthoracic
laminectomy to expose the spinal cord leaving the dura intact, animals received a
moderate midline 150 kdyne spinal contusion injury at spinal level T10/11 using an
Infinite Horizon’s impactor (Precision Systems Instrumentation) (James et al., 2011).
Postoperative care was performed as above with the exception that bladders were manually
expressed twice daily until reflexive emptying returned (typically 6 to 9 days after
injury).

Spinal contusion injury with dorsal root removal
Adult female Sprague Dawley rats (150–200 g; Harlan Laboratories) were used and
contusion surgeries and postoperative care were performed as described above. One cohort
of animals received moderate 150 kdyne T10/T11 contusions (n = 6)
only. A second cohort of animals received moderate 150 kdyne T10/T11 contusions followed
by bilateral dorsal root removal at thoracic levels T9 to T11/T12 (n =
8). To ascertain complete removal, roots were post-fixed overnight in 4%
paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer and whole mounts were prepared for
immunostaining for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) to label reactive astrocytes in
the region of the dorsal root entry zone (rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP, 1:2000,
DakoCytomation). This experiment was carried out in rats due to the complexity of the
surgery and low survival rate of mice (mainly caused by blood loss following lateral bone
removal that is necessary to sufficiently expose roots). However, electron microscopy data
and immunohistochemistry confirmed that the pattern and time course of Schwann
cell-mediated remyelination is the same in mice and rats (James et al., 2011; and see Figs 2 and 5).

Behavioural assessments
Basso Mouse Scale
The Basso Mouse Scale (BMS) (Basso et
al., 2006) was used to assess open field hindlimb locomotor function
(n = 7–9 per group). This involved placing the animal in
a circular open field (diameter ∼1 m) and assessing both hindlimbs during locomotion
(over a 4-min session). Scores were calculated according to the 10 point (0–9) BMS
scale. For further detailed assessments of differences between conNrg1 and conIgNrg1
null mice in additional cohorts of animals, mice were assessed with the 12 point
(0–11) BMS subscore scale, which further delineates recovery of specific locomotor
features that may not be apparent in the overall BMS score (such as quantifying
improvements in the areas of stepping frequency, coordination, paw position, trunk
stability, and tail position). Testing was performed by two experimenters blinded to the
treatment groups on Days 2, 5 and 7 after injury and once weekly thereafter for 8 weeks,
followed by sacrificing animals for immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analysis.
All BMS behavioural data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM)
values and statistical significance was accepted with P < 0.05 using
two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc tests (BMS score) or one-way
ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc tests (BMS subscore).

Inclined beam-walking test
For further detailed assessments of differences between conNrg1 and conIgNrg1 null
mice, animals were also assessed on the inclined beam walking test. Beam-walking
apparatus consisted of an inclined beam (100 cm) fixed to a black ‘goal
box’. The horizontal inclined beam consisted of a flat surface that gradually
narrowed (1.5 cm at the widest; 0.5 cm at the narrowest) and a small ledge underneath on
either side. Animals were trained for seven consecutive days before baseline readings
were obtained. Left and right hind limb scores were calculated based on number of weight
supported steps taken on the beam as well as lower scores for steps taken on the small
ledges. The beam was divided into quarters; one point was scored for a weight supported
step on the beam in the first broadest division. This score was doubled, tripled or
quadrupled in the second, third and fourth sections of the beam due to the increased
difficulty of the tapered beam. In all sections one point was scored for a step taken on
the small ledges. Data (n = 6–9 per group) are presented
as mean ± SEM values and statistical significance was accepted with P
< 0.05 using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc
tests.

Electrophysiology
To carry out electrophysiological assessment of dorsal column function, mice were deeply
anaesthetized with urethane [0.1 ml/10 g of 12.5% solution administered
intraperitoneally (i.p.)] and depth of anaesthesia was regularly assessed by monitoring
withdrawal reflexes and respiratory rate. Core temperature was maintained close to 37
°C using a self-regulating heating pad. A laminectomy was performed to expose spinal
tissue from 5 mm rostral to 5 mm caudal of the contusion injury site. The sural nerve of
the left hindlimb was exposed and freed from connective tissue, and all nervous tissue was
covered with mineral oil. Silver ball stimulating electrodes were then placed at 5 mm
rostral and 5 mm caudal of the injury site and a pair of silver wire recording electrodes
was hooked underneath the sural nerve with a separation of ∼3 mm between the wires. To
assess the extent of sensory conduction through the spinal contusion injury site,
recordings were made from the sural nerve (an almost exclusively sensory nerve) while
first stimulating the spinal cord caudal to the lesion and then repeating this procedure
whilst stimulating rostral to the lesion site. Stimulation was delivered in 250 µs
square wave pulses at a frequency of 0.5 Hz and at a supramaximal intensity (typically
600–800 µA). Amplitude analysis was carried out on traces averaged from 16
recordings taken following stimulation at each site (rostral or caudal to lesion). The
peak-to-peak amplitude of the averaged potential recorded whilst stimulating rostral to
the lesion site was then calculated as a percentage of the averaged potential recorded
whilst stimulating caudal to the lesion, thus estimating the percentage of sensory fibres
in the sural nerve projecting beyond the injury site that remain capable of conduction.
Although the stimulation technique used here is likely to have activated more than just
the fibres of the dorsal columns, the sural nerve is almost exclusively composed of
sensory fibres and therefore only the activity of long distance afferent fibres will be
recorded using this protocol. All recordings were made using a PowerLab unit (AD
Instruments) and amplitude analysis was carried out using LabChart 8 software (AD
Instruments). Data (n = 5–6 per group) are presented as mean
± SEM values and statistical significance was accepted with P <
0.05 using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test.

Tissue preparation and immunohistochemistry
Animals were deeply anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (Euthatal: 80 mg/kg, i.p) and
transcardially perfused with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (containing heparin) followed
by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer containing 1.5% picric
acid. Immediately after perfusion, lesion site tissue was dissected (∼10 mm with the
lesion epicentre located centrally). Tissue was post-fixed overnight at 4 °C,
cryoprotected in 20% sucrose for 48–72 h, then embedded and frozen in O.C.T.
before being cut into serial transverse (20 µm) sections. Sections were
immunostained using the following primary antibodies: rabbit polyclonal anti-glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) to label reactive astrocytes (1:2000, DakoCytomation),
chicken polyclonal anti-protein zero (P0) to label Schwann cell-associated myelin (1:500,
Abcam), chicken polyclonal anti-proteolipid protein (PLP) to label
oligodendrocyte-associated myelin (1:200, Millipore), rabbit polyclonal anti-neurofilament
200 (NF200) to label axons (1:200, Sigma), rabbit polyclonal anti-laminin to visualize
Schwann cell basal lamina (1:1000, Dako), and rabbit polyclonal anti-Olig2, a marker for
oligodendrocytes (1:500, Millipore). Complementary secondary antibodies were goat
anti-chicken biotin (1:400, Abcam), ExtrAvidin FITC conjugate (1:500, Sigma), goat
anti-chicken Alexa 488 (1:1000, Invitrogen), goat anti-rabbit Alexa 568 (1:1000,
Invitrogen) and goat anti-rabbit Alexa 488 (1:1000, Invitrogen). Briefly, after blocking
with 10% goat serum in PBS containing 0.2% Triton™ X-100 (PBST) for 1
h at room temperature, the sections were incubated in PBST containing primary antibodies
overnight at room temperature. After four washes of 5 min with PBS, sections were
incubated in PBST containing complementary secondary antibodies for 4 h at room
temperature. After four washes of 5 min in PBS, sections were coverslipped with
Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories). Images were acquired using Nikon A1R Si
Confocal Imaging system on an Eclipse Ti-E inverted microscope.

For haematoxylin and eosin staining, spinal sections were rinsed in tap water, stained
with haemalum for 5 min and then rinsed in running tap water until clear. Slides were then
dipped five times into 0.5% hydrochloric acid in 70% IMS (acid-alcohol) and
quickly returned to running tap water for 1 min, placed in eosin for 5 min, returned to
tap water, dehydrated and mounted using DPX. Using this technique, nuclei and any
basophilic components are labelled blue, while components such as cytoplasm and collagen
are labelled as shades of pink-orange.

Labelling of cellular DNA with EdU and EdU staining
Wild-type mice (n = 3) received spinal contusion injuries, as
above, followed by administration of 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine (EdU, Invitrogen)
(Salic and Mitchison, 2008; Zeng et al., 2010),
administered by intraperitoneal injection (200 µg per injection) for 10 consecutive
days beginning at 24 h post-injury. Control uninjured mice (n = 3)
received the equivalent EdU dosing paradigm. At 4 weeks post-injury mice were deeply
anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (Euthatal: 80 mg/kg, i.p) and transcardially
perfused with PBS (containing heparin) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M
phosphate buffer, and spinal cords were harvested and prepared for immunohistochemistry.
Tissue was post-fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS for 3 h at 4 °C,
cryoprotected for 24 h at 4 °C in 30% sucrose in PBS prior to embedding and
sectioned at 30-µm thickness. EdU staining was conducted using the
Click-iTTM EdU imaging kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol but adapted for immunohistochemical double-staining of spinal cord tissue. Slides
containing mounted frozen spinal cord sections were allowed to thaw, and then rehydrated
with PBS. After rehydration with PBS the sections were incubated in 10% normal
donkey serum permeabilization/blocking buffer made in PBS containing 0.3%
Triton™ X-100 for 15 min. This was followed by one PBS rinse and incubation with EdU
detection solution (Invitrogen) for 1 h at room temperature. Slides were then washed three
times with PBS before incubation with permeabilization/blocking buffer overnight at room
temperature. Subsequently, primary antibodies made in PBST to label either P0 or PLP were
incubated overnight for ∼24 h at room temperature. After four washes of 5 min with
PBS, sections were incubated in PBST containing complementary secondary antibodies for 4 h
at room temperature. After four washes of 5 min in PBS, sections were coverslipped with
Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories). Images were acquired using Nikon A1R Si
Confocal Imaging system on an Eclipse Ti-E inverted microscope.

Immunohistochemistry image analysis
Quantification of P0 and PLP in mouse spinal cords (n = 4–5
per group) was carried out by measuring the immunopositive areas in the dorsal column
(AxioVision LE software), which were then expressed as % of total dorsal column
area. Total dorsal column area was measured by taking the mean area of intact dorsal
column, measured rostral and caudal to the lesion site. Quantification of P0 in the lesion
epicentre in rat spinal cords with or without multiple dorsal root removal (n
= 4–5 per group) was carried out by measuring the immunopositive
P0 cluster in the dorsal column, which was then expressed as per cent of total dorsal
column area as above. Quantification of Olig2 (n = 3 per group)
was carried out by unbiased particle counts following background subtraction (ImageJ
software). Images were acquired sequentially, using the same exposure parameters. All
anatomical quantification was carried out by an experimenter blinded to the treatment
group and data are expressed as mean ± SEM values, using one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s post hoc tests.

Electron microscopy
Animals were terminally anaesthetized using sodium pentobarbital (Euthatal; 80 mg/kg,
i.p.) and transcardially perfused with 0.9% saline followed by 3%
glutaraldehyde and 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, a section of
thoracic spinal cord was removed (∼10 mm) with the lesion epicentre located centrally.
Two to three millimetre sections were taken from the lesion epicentre and from the rostral
and caudal lesion borders and postfixed in the same fixative buffer (3%
glutaraldehyde and 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer) for a minimum of
48 h at 4 °C and processed as previously described (James et al., 2011; Fricker et al., 2013). Semithin and ultrathin
sections were cut and stained by the Centre for Ultrastructural Imaging (King’s
College London, London, UK). Ultrathin sections were mounted on unsupported gilded copper
grids (150-square mesh) from TAAB and were visualized on a Hitachi H7600 transmission
electron microscope. For analysis, photomicrographs of the region containing the ascending
dorsal column projection from each animal were taken at ×8000 magnification, the
area of which totalled at least 50% of the total area of the cross-section of the
dorsal column. Full montages of grid squares were taken (∼100 pictures per mesh) and
randomly chosen images from a given grid square were analysed. The total number of axons,
total number of myelinated axons, Schwann cell-myelinated axons, and
oligodendrocyte-myelinated axons (using the criteria described in Supplementary Fig. 5) were counted from these montages of grid squares and
normalized to the dorsal column area. To calculate G-ratios, axon diameters and
non-myelinated axons with a diameter >1 µm from ∼30 individual pictures at
×8000 magnification were randomly chosen per animal; analysis was performed on all
of the axons within each picture and axon diameter and G-ratio (axon diameter/fibre
diameter) were calculated using AxioVision LE Rel. 4.2 Software. At least 750 axons were
measured per animal. The examiner was blind to the genotype. The one-way ANOVA using the
Tukey post hoc test was used for comparison of more than two groups.
Cumulative frequencies were compared statistically using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry
Uninjured (n = 3) and injured (4 weeks post-injury; n
= 3) wild-type mice were deeply anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbital
(Euthatal: 80 mg/kg, i.p) and transcardially perfused with DPEC-treated sterile PBS
followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, and spinal cords were
harvested and prepared for immunohistochemistry. Tissue was post-fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS for 3 h at 4 °C, cryoprotected for 24 h at 4 °C in
30% sucrose in diethyl pyrocarbonate-treated PBS prior to embedding and sectioned
at 30-µm thickness. Pan-Nrg1 in situ probes (Meyer et al., 1997) were transcribed in
vitro and labelled with digoxygenin (DIG) according to manufacturer’s
instructions (Roche). Following overnight hybridization at 65 °C, sections were
incubated with anti-DIG antibodies (Roche) and developed as previously described (Hopman et al., 1998). To
examine Nrg1 expression in different cell types, slides were then co-stained for P0, Olig2
and NeuN immunohistochemically, as described above.

Extraction of fresh tissue
Spinal cord (lesion epicentre) and L4 and 5 DRGs were extracted from animals at 1 and 4
weeks after injury, snap frozen on liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. The
same tissue from naïve animals was used as control. Tissue samples were then
homogenized and total RNA obtained using a ‘hybrid’ method of phenol
extraction (TriPure, Roche) and column purification (High Pure RNA tissue Kit, Roche)
according to manufacturer’s protocols. All samples were DNase treated to prevent
genomic contamination. RNA was subsequently synthesized into cDNA using Transcriptor
Reverse Transcriptase (Roche) following the manufacturer’s protocol.

Quantitative polymerase chain reaction
Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed using the LC 480 system. All primers used, shown in
Supplementary Table 1, had an efficiency of 100 ± 10% and were
designed using primer blast unless stated otherwise. Gene expression levels were measured
using the ΔΔCT method and normalized against the reference genes
Gadph and Hprt1. The relative mRNA expression is shown
as the amount of transcript in injured samples versus naive controls. The one-way ANOVA
using the Tukey’s post hoc test was used for comparison of more
than two groups. When the values are not normally distributed the one-way ANOVA on ranks
post hoc Dunn’s method was used.

Results
Ablation of Nrg1 prevents spontaneous remyelination of axons in the injured spinal
cord
The molecular control of Schwann cell-mediated axonal remyelination in the injured CNS is
unknown. We asked whether Nrg1 is required for Schwann cell-mediated remyelination of
dorsal column axons after spinal contusion injury, and whether Nrg1 ablation influences
the degree and nature of remyelination. We first confirmed that there were no differences
in the expression of global astrocyte and axonal markers (GFAP and NF200, respectively) or
in peripheral and central myelin expression (P0 and PLP, respectively) in uninjured
control mice and mice with conditional Nrg1 mutations (hereafter called conNrg1 mice)
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Immunoreactivity for P0 identifies Schwann
cell-derived peripheral myelin and is normally only expressed in the PNS. As expected, P0
was detected in the peripheral dorsal and ventral roots but was absent from the spinal
cord of all uninjured animals (Supplementary Fig. 1A and C). However, 10 weeks after contusive spinal cord
injury, P0 was present in the dorsal columns of the injured spinal cord in both vehicle-
and tamoxifen-treated control animals. P0 was most abundant at the lesion epicentre, where
∼60% of the dorsal column area expressed Schwann cell-associated myelin (Fig. 1A, B, D and Supplementary Fig. 2). Strikingly, there was no P0 immunoreactivity within
the injured spinal cord of conNrg1 mice. Thus, when all Nrg1 isoforms are ablated, Schwann
cell-associated myelin in the spinal dorsal columns is completely absent after injury
(Fig. 1C, D and Supplementary Fig. 2). Interestingly, the presence of Schwann cell myelin
within the spinal cord after injury was only observed in the dorsal column region of the
spinal cord and not in other white matter tracts or in the cellular and matrix filled
lesion core (Supplementary Figs 2 and 3). Figure 1 Ablation of Nrg1 prevents remyelination of spinal axons by Schwann cells
after spinal cord injury. (A–C) Co-staining of
astrocytes (GFAP, red) and Schwann cell-associated myelin (P0, green) in serial
sections of the spinal cord that span the rostrocaudal axis of the injury in vehicle
control (Vh control, A), tamoxifen control (Tx control, B)
and Nrg1-ablated (conNrg1, C) contused mouse spinal cords at 10 weeks
post-injury. In all animals, the peripheral myelin protein P0 is apparent outside
the spinal cord, in the peripheral dorsal and ventral roots, as expected. However,
10 weeks after contusion injury, Schwann cell-associated myelin (P0) is also
observed in the spinal dorsal columns of control animals, being particularly
abundant in the epicentre of the lesion (A and B).
Strikingly, P0 is absent in the spinal dorsal columns of injured mice lacking Nrg1
(conNrg1; C). (A’–C’) High
magnification of boxed areas indicated in A–C.
(D) Quantification of P0-positive area in the dorsal columns assessed
in sections that span the rostrocaudal axis of the injury site reveals undetectable
levels of P0 in conNrg1 mice, compared to control groups. Data are presented as mean
± SEM. (**P < 0.007, two-way ANOVA, post
hoc Bonferroni n = 4–5 animals/group).
Scale bars = 250 µm (C); 50 µm
(C’). Images not using the red/green colour scheme are
available in the Supplementary material.



To determine whether abrogation of Schwann cell-mediated remyelination may trigger
compensatory remyelination by oligodendrocytes, we examined the expression of PLP, the
major protein of oligodendrocyte-derived myelin which is expressed exclusively in the CNS
and absent from peripheral tissues (Supplementary Fig. 1B and D). PLP immunohistochemistry revealed that the
absence of Schwann cell-mediated remyelination in conNrg1 mutants did not evoke
compensatory myelination by oligodendrocytes, with a similar pattern of PLP expression
observed at 10 weeks after spinal cord injury in conNrg1, vehicle- or tamoxifen-treated
control animals (Supplementary Fig. 4). In particular, abundant PLP staining was observed in
white matter tracts of the spinal cord throughout the rostrocaudal axis which was
dramatically reduced in the dorsal columns at the injury epicentre (Supplementary Fig. 4D). Double labelling revealed that areas normally
associated with abundant P0 immunoreactivity in control injured animals (Fig. 1A’ and B’) were positive for the
axonal marker NF200 but devoid of central myelin (Supplementary Fig. 4A’ and B’), while in conNrg1 injured animals
these areas remained negative for both Schwann cell-derived (P0, Fig. 1C’) and oligodendrocyte-derived (PLP, Supplementary Fig. 4C’) myelin. To confirm that there was no change in
the number of oligodendrocytes, we also assessed the expression of the transcription
factor Olig2, which is an essential regulator of oligodendrocyte development. Consistent
with unchanged distribution of PLP, no differences in Olig2 expression were observed
between control and conNrg1 mice at 4 weeks after injury (Supplementary Fig. 5A–C). At this stage, remyelination by PNS-like
Schwann cells is normally evident (James et
al., 2011; Fig. 5C and F).
The profound interference with Schwann cell-mediated remyelination of dorsal column axons
suggests that Nrg1 is a key regulator of spontaneous myelin repair.

Ultrastructural analysis reveals profound demyelination in the injured spinal cord
after Nrg1 ablation
We used electron microscopy to analyse at the ultrastructural level myelination in the
dorsal columns of injured control and conNrg1 mice. We observed a dramatic reduction in
the number of myelinated axons in the dorsal column in conNrg1 mice at 10 weeks post
injury compared to control mice (Fig.
2A–C and D) and a corresponding increase in the percentage of large diameter
axons (diameter >1 µm) that were unmyelinated (Fig. 2A–C and E). There was no difference in axon diameter
between groups (Fig. 2H), excluding the
possibility of exacerbated axonal swelling in mice lacking Nrg1. We also assessed the
effects of Nrg1 ablation on remyelination by Schwann cells versus oligodendrocytes in the
dorsal columns using standard morphological criteria to differentiate these cell types
(Felts and Smith, 1996; Woodruff and Franklin, 1999) (Supplementary Fig. 6). Only a negligible number of axons were remyelinated
by Schwann cells in the dorsal column of conNrg1 mutant animals (Fig. 2A–C and F). The few remyelinated axons in injured
conNrg1 mice were predominantly remyelinated by oligodendrocytes, but a compensatory
increase in oligodendrocyte remyelination was not observed (Fig. 2C and I). Furthermore, those axons that were
remyelinated by oligodendrocytes in conNrg1 mutant animals had significantly thinner
myelin sheaths, quantitatively measured by an increased G-ratio (Fig. 2A–C and G). These changes were consistently observed
between different animals, demonstrating that this striking demyelination phenotype is
caused by the lack of Nrg1. Total axon counts did not differ between groups indicating
that disruption of Nrg1 signalling had no effect on axonal survival at 10 weeks after
spinal contusion injury (Fig. 2J). Figure 2 Ultrastructural analysis of Schwann cell-mediated remyelination of spinal
axons after injury and its dependence on Nrg1 signalling.
(A–C) Electron micrographs of transverse sections
of the dorsal column 10 weeks after spinal contusion injury in vehicle control (Vh
control; A), tamoxifen control (Tx control; B) and
conditional Nrg1 mutant (conNrg1; C) mice. In control animals, axons
are undergoing remyelination and Schwann cells (white asterisk) can be seen to
mediate remyelination; Schwann cells and their myelin are identified by the signet
ring-like appearance of Schwann cell myelin, thicker and more compact myelin, and
basal laminae around the Schwann cells. In conNrg1 mutant animals, many large
diameter unmyelinated axons are visible (black asterisk), Schwann cells were rarely
detected and the small degree of remyelination is mediated by oligodendrocytes that
produce a thin myelin sheath (arrows). Remyelinating oligodendrocytes do not have
nuclei directly apposed to the myelin or surrounding basal lamina and
oligodendrocyte-associated myelin is less dense than the myelin associated with
Schwann cells. (D) The number of myelinated axons in the dorsal column
was significantly decreased in conNrg1 mice compared with control (Vh control
= 998 ± 160, Tx control = 1132 ± 256 and conNrg1
= 134 ± 20). (E) The percentage of unmyelinated axons
with a diameter >1 µm was increased in conNrg1 animals versus control (Vh
control = 8% ± 2, Tx control = 5% ± 2 and
conNrg1 = 26% ± 8). (F) A dramatic reduction in
the number of Scwann cell-myelinated axons in conNrg1 mutant animals was observed
(Vh control = 522 ± 192, Tx control = 794 ± 227 and
conNrg1 = 17 ± 16). (G) A significant increase in the
G-ratio in the conNrg1 animals (Vh control = 0.72 ± 0.01, Tx control
= 0.71 ± 0.02 and conNrg1 = 0.81 ± 0.02) indicate very
thin myelin sheaths. Data shown in D–G are presented
as mean ± SEM. (*P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA,
post hoc Tukey’s n = 3–4
animals/group). No significant differences were observed between the two control
groups in any of the measures analysed. Scale bar = 2 µm.
(H) Scatter plot relating G-ratio and axon diameter of all the axons
analysed show a shift to higher G-ratios in conNrg1 animals (P <
0.001 Kolmogorov-Smirnov test) without significant changes in axon calibre.
(I) Comparison of counts of total myelinated axons and axons
myelinated by oligodendrocytes in vehicle control, tamoxifen control and conNrg1
animals. After ablation of Nrg1 the total number of myelinated axons is decreased
(data are presented as mean ± SEM, P < 0.05, one-way
ANOVA, post hoc Tukey’s, n =
3–4 animals/group) but the number of axons myelinated by
oligodendrocytes is not altered (Vh control = 475 ± 326, Tx control
= 338 ± 184 and conNrg1 = 117 ± 60). (J)
The total number of axons present in the dorsal column after spinal cord contusion
remains similar in all groups (data are presented as mean ± SEM, one-way
ANOVA, post hoc Tukey’s, n =
3–4 animals/group).



To verify that remyelinating cells in the injured spinal cord were indeed
‘classic’ peripheral Schwann cells rather than type IV oligodendrocytes (which
resemble peripheral Schwann cells but lack a basal lamina; Butt et al., 1995; Butt and Berry, 2000), we assessed the presence of laminin, a
key component of Schwann cell basal laminae. We observed prominent ring-like
laminin-positive structures in close association with P0-positive myelin rings, indicating
the presence of basal lamina around remyelinating PNS-like Schwann cells in the dorsal
column of injured control animals (Fig.
3A–C). Strikingly, the complete absence of P0-positive myelin rings in the
dorsal column of conNrg1 mice (Fig. 3D) was
accompanied by an absence of laminin-positive rings (Fig. 3E), with only diffuse and disorganized laminin apparent in this region
(Fig. 3D–F), which likely derives from
other laminin-producing, but not remyelinating, cells.

Taken together, our detailed ultrastructural analysis confirms that Nrg1 is absolutely
required for remyelination of dorsal column axons by PNS-like Schwann cells. Furthermore,
these data imply that Nrg1 determines not only the myelinating potential of these cells,
but also their occurrence in the injured spinal cord. Both electron microscopy data and
immunohistochemistry support the conclusion that the appearance of ‘classic’
PNS-like Schwann cells in the injured spinal cord and the efficient remyelination of
central axons occurs only in the presence of Nrg1. Figure 3 Nrg1-dependent central axon remyelination after spinal cord injury is
mediated by typical Schwann cells. (A–F)
Co-staining of basal lamina (laminin, red) and Schwann cell-associated myelin (P0,
green) in tamoxifen control (Tx control, A–C) and
Nrg1-ablated (conNrg1, D–F) mouse spinal cords 10
weeks after contusion injury reveals defined ring-like structures immunoreactive for
laminin. These ring-like structures represent the typical basal lamina associated
with Schwann cells, and are apparent in close proximity to P0-positive myelin rings
in injured control spinal cord. No Schwann cell-associated myelin and only sparse
and diffuse laminin staining is observed in spinal cords from conNrg1 mice. Scale
bar = 25 µm. Images not using the red/green colour scheme are available
in the Supplementary material.



Nrg1 expression in normal and injured spinal cord
To determine the expression pattern of Nrg1 before and after injury and the possible
cellular source of neuregulin, we performed fluorescence in situ
hybridization for Nrg1 using a pan-Nrg1 probe combined with double immunohistochemistry
for P0 and NeuN or Olig2 and NeuN (Fig. 4) in
uninjured wild-type mice (Fig. 4A–D) and
contused wild-type mice at 4 weeks post-injury (Fig.
4E–H). As predicted from the literature (Corfas et al., 1995; Meyer et al., 1997), the majority of Nrg1
expression in uninjured spinal cords was neuronal, with high co-localization of Nrg1 in
the cytoplasm of numerous NeuN-positive spinal neurons (Fig. 4A and B). Nrg1 was also apparent, although less abundant,
in spinal cord white matter; this was not co-localized with P0, either in uninjured spinal
cord where P0 was restricted to the peripheral dorsal roots (Fig. 4A and C), or injured spinal cord where P0 was also apparent
in the spinal cord dorsal column (Fig. 4E and
G). There was also little co-localization of Nrg1 with Olig 2 in the uninjured (Fig. 4B and D) or injured (Fig. 4F and H) spinal cord. Nrg1 is therefore unlikely to be
having autocrine actions in Schwann cells or oligodendrocytes within the spinal cord. The
majority of Nrg1 influencing Schwann cell remyelination is likely to be derived either
from spinal neurons or axons projecting through the dorsal column: large diameter
myelinated sensory neurons are known to express Nrg1 (particularly type III Nrg1) at a
high level in adulthood (Bermingham-McDonogh
et al., 1997; Fricker
et al., 2009). Figure 4 Expression of Nrg1 before and after spinal cord injury. Fluorescent
in situ hybridization using a pan-Nrg1 probe (red) co-stained
with markers for neurons (NeuN, blue), Schwann cell associated myelin (P0, green,
A, C, E, G) and
oligodendrocytes (Olig2, green, B, D, F and
H). In the uninjured spinal cord
(A–D) Nrg1 labelling can be seen within neurons. The
highest level of expression is seen in motor neurons within the ventral horn;
however Nrg1 is also expressed by neurons of the dorsal horn. In the uninjured state
there is no co-localization of Nrg with P0 (A and C) and
very few oligodendrocytes express Nrg1 (B and D). Four
weeks after spinal contusion injury, compact myelin, which is P0 immunoreactive, can
be seen within the dorsal column and there is little co-localization with Nrg1
(E and G). Similarly, few Olig2 immunoreactive profiles
express Nrg1 (F and H). Scale bars = 250 µm
(B); 100 µm (H). Images not using the red/green
colour scheme are available in the Supplementary material.



We also assessed mRNA expression of different Nrg1 isoforms and ErbB receptors, to
determine whether spinal contusion injury alters the expression of components of the
Nrg1-ErbB signalling pathway (Supplementary Fig. 7 and Supplementary Table 1), and determined how this correlates with
remyelination after spinal cord injury. In particular, we assessed expression of Nrg1
isoforms types I and II (containing Ig-like domains) and type III (containing a
cysteine-rich domain). Nrg1 type I expression within the spinal cord progressively
increased at Weeks 1 and 4 post-injury (Supplementary Fig. 7A). In contrast, Nrg1 type II and type III expression
had significantly decreased at 1 week post-injury, and recovered to ∼50% of the
naïve levels 4 weeks post-injury (Supplementary Fig. 7A). These changes in Nrg1 isoform expression after
injury were restricted to the spinal cord and not observed in peripheral dorsal root
ganglia, where Nrg1 types I and II were unchanged and type III showed only a small
transient decrease (Supplementary Fig. 8). Typically, Nrg1 exerts its effects via interaction
with ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors (Birchmeier and
Nave, 2008; Mei and Nave, 2014).
Expression of ErbB3 and ErbB4 in the spinal cord followed a similar pattern to that of
Nrg1 types II and III, and was significantly reduced at 1 week post-injury, with a
subsequent partial recovery (Supplementary Fig. 7B). ErbB2 expression was increased at 4 weeks
post-injury (Supplementary Fig. 7B). Thus, changes in expression of Nrg1 signalling
components after injury appear to be consistent with the timing of Schwann cell-mediated
remyelination in the spinal cord. Thus, when P0-positive Schwann cell-derived myelin is
abundant in the dorsal columns (at 4 weeks, but not 1 week, post-injury; Fig. 5A–F) the expression of type III Nrg1
and ErbB3/4 has recovered and the expression of type I Nrg1 and erbB2 has increased. Figure 5 Schwann cell-mediated remyelination in mouse and rat spinal cords follows the
same time course and is unhindered by avulsion of multiple dorsal roots at and
adjacent to the injury site. (A–C)
Co-staining of astrocytes (GFAP, red) and Schwann cell-associated myelin (P0,
green), shows the time course of the appearance of Schwann cell myelin the injured
mouse spinal course. Peripheral myelin (P0) is not apparent in uninjured mouse
spinal cord (A) or at 1 week post-injury (B), but is
present in the dorsal columns by 4 weeks after injury (C).
C’ shows a high magnification of the boxed area in panel
C. (D–F) Co-staining of astrocytes
(GFAP, red) and Schwann cell-associated myelin (P0, green), shows the time course of
the appearance of Schwann cell myelin the injured rat spinal course. Peripheral
myelin (P0) is not apparent in uninjured rat spinal cord (D) or at 1
week post-injury (E), but is present by 4 weeks after injury
(F). F’ shows high magnification of the boxed area
in panel F. (G and H) At 10 weeks post-injury
Schwann cell-mediated remyelination is apparent after spinal contusion injury
irrespective of presence (G) or absence (H) of dorsal
roots, one of the main possible peripheral sources of the Schwann cells.
G’ and H’ show high magnifications of boxed
areas in panels G and H. (H’’)
Example of an avulsed dorsal root, which encompasses the entire rootlet including
the dorsal root entry zone that is visualized by staining of the astroglial marker
GFAP. Scale bars = 250 µm (A and D); 50
µm (C’ and F’). Images not using the
red/green colour scheme are available in the Supplementary material.



The majority of Schwann cells that remyelinate injured spinal axons have a CNS
origin
The origin of remyelinating Schwann cells in CNS pathologies has been debated. To
investigate the origin of the remyelinating Schwann cells after spinal cord injury, we
removed peripheral input into the spinal cord with bilateral removal of multiple dorsal
roots directly adjacent and feeding into the injury site. We used rats, rather than mice
for these studies, due to the complexity of the surgery, after first determining that the
time course of Schwann cell-mediated remyelination in the dorsal columns was the same in
both species (Fig. 5A–F and James
et al., 2011). Efficient removal of the entire dorsal root and dorsal
root entry zone was confirmed by the presence of a GFAP-positive astrocytic
‘cap’ on the avulsed root (Fig.
5H’’). No matter whether the roots were intact or removed, Schwann
cell-derived myelin was apparent in the injured dorsal columns (Fig. 5G and H). Quantification revealed a small reduction in the
amount of P0 myelin in the dorsal columns after multiple root avulsion, although this did
not reach significance (Supplementary Fig. 9), indicating that the majority of the Schwann cell
myelin in the dorsal columns derives from a central source, but at least some of the
remyelinating Schwann cells may be peripherally derived. Alternatively, the amount of
Schwann cell-mediated central remyelination may have been altered by changes in
astrogliosis following multiple dorsal root removal, in line with recent findings (Monteiro de Castro et al.,
2015).

To further determine whether remyelinating Schwann cells originate from a central source,
we administered EdU to mice following spinal contusion and assessed for the presence of
newly dividing cells in the spinal cord at 4 weeks post-injury (a time point when
myelinating Schwann cells are present in the dorsal columns; Fig. 5C and F). Co-localization of EdU with P0 in spinal sections
from these animals (Fig. 6) revealed numerous
EdU-positive cells directly adjacent to P0-positive Schwann cell myelin rings (Fig. 6B and C), providing evidence that
myelinating Schwann cells were newly generated endogenous precursor cells. We observed a
striking comparison between the histological observations of EdU positive nuclei in close
apposition to P0-positive Schwann cell myelin (Fig
6C’) and the electron microscopy observations of a one-to-one relationship
of a Schwann cell remyelinating a central axon in the dorsal columns (Fig 6C’’). Co-localization of EdU with PLP revealed
far fewer oligodendrocyte-derived myelin rings in the injured dorsal columns (Fig. 6D). Figure 6 Centrally remyelinating Schwann cells are produced de novo
in the injured spinal cord. (A and B)
Immunohistochemical staining for Schwann cell myelin (P0, green), nuclear EdU (red)
and DAPI (blue) shows abundant P0-positive myelin rings in close apposition with
EdU-positive cell nuclei 4 weeks after contusion injury (B) but not in
control uninjured spinal cords (A). (C) High magnification
image showing the boxed area in B, demonstrating remyelinating
EdU-positive Schwann cells in association with P0-positive Schwann cell-derived
myelin. (D) High magnification image of dorsal column axons associated
with central PLP-positive myelin. (C’ and
C’’) High magnification image showing the boxed area in
C. Co-labelling clearly reveals direct apposition of a EdU-positive
Schwann cell with a P0-positive myelin ring (C’) alongside an
electron microscopic comparison of a Schwann cell in the dorsal columns that has
remyelinated a CNS axon (C’’). Scale bars = 100
µm (B); 20 µm (D); 2 µm
(C’). Images not using the red/green colour scheme are
available in the Supplementary material.



These data provide evidence that peripherally invading Schwann cells do not play a
significant role in remyelination of spinal axons after spinal cord injury. Rather, the
majority of these remyelinating Schwann cells derive from a CNS origin and are the major
contributor to this endogenous repair mechanism. Our results suggest that Nrg1 is the
molecular switch that drives precursor cells residing in the spinal cord to differentiate
into PNS-like Schwann cells and to remyelinate spinal axons.

Immunoglobulin-containing isoforms of Nrg1 are dispensable for Schwann cell
remyelination
Given the complex changes in Nrg1 isoform expression after spinal cord injury, we used
isoform-specific mutant mice to distinguish functions of particular Nrg1 isoforms in
spinal axon remyelination and recovery of locomotor function. To do this we used a strain
of mice in which Ig domain-containing Nrg1 isoforms (Nrg1 types I and II) are ablated
after tamoxifen treatment (conIgNrg1 mice), but the type III Nrg1 isoform remains intact
(Cheret et al., 2013). We
first confirmed that after tamoxifen treatment, levels of IgNrg1 transcripts in the
thoracic spinal cord and in dorsal root ganglia were significantly reduced when compared
to tamoxifen-treated control littermates not expressing Cre (Supplementary Fig. 10A and B). Expression of type III Nrg1 was unchanged
(Supplementary Fig. 10C and D). To analyse remyelination in these animals, we
assessed the expression of Schwann cell-derived myelin throughout the lesion site after
injury. P0 immunohistochemistry at 10 weeks after contusive spinal cord injury revealed
that Schwann cell-mediated axonal remyelination is indistinguishable between
tamoxifen-treated control and conIgNrg1 animals, with a similar rostrocaudal spread of P0
expression observed in the dorsal column (Fig.
7A–C). Schwann cell-associated myelin was most abundant at the lesion
epicentre where ∼60% of the dorsal column area expressed peripheral myelin
(Fig. 7C). This is therefore in stark
contrast to conNrg1 animals in which all Nrg1 isoforms are ablated and suggests that type
I and II isoforms (containing the Ig domain) are dispensable for central remyelination
after spinal cord injury. Thus, the presence of the type III Nrg1 isoform suffices to
trigger the remyelination process. Figure 7 Ablation of Ig-containing isoforms of Nrg1 (Nrg1 types 1 and 2) does not
interfere with Schwann cell-mediated remyelination after spinal contusion
injury. (A and B) Co-staining of astrocytes
(GFAP, red) and Schwann cell-associated myelin (P0, green) shows appearance of
Schwann cell myelin the injured mouse spinal cord of tamoxifen control (Tx control,
A) and IgNrg1-ablated mice (conIgNrg1, B). Ten weeks
after contusion injury, Schwann cell-associated myelin (P0) is abundant in the
dorsal column of spinal cords from both control animals and mice lacking the IgNrg1
isoforms, being particularly abundant in the lesion epicentre.
(A’ and B’) High magnification of boxed
areas in A and B. (C) Quantification of
P0-positive area in sections spanning the rostrocaudal axis of the injury site
reveals similar levels in conIgNrg1 and control mice
(nsP > 0.05, two-way ANOVA, post
hoc Bonferroni, n = 4 animals/group). Scale bars
= 250 µm (B); 50 µm (B’). Images
not using the red/green colour scheme are available in the Supplementary material.



Conditional ablation of Nrg1 has a significant impact on the level of spontaneous
locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury
To evaluate the functional consequences of Nrg1 ablation we first assessed gross
locomotor function in conNrg1 and conIgNrg1 mice using the BMS open field hindlimb
locomotor scale (Fig. 8A–D; BMS
behaviour displayed separately as these were separate studies). In the conNrg1 study
(Fig. 8A and B), no differences in baseline
BMS ratings were detected in uninjured animals, regardless of whether Nrg1 was present or
ablated. However, following spinal cord contusion Nrg1 ablation was associated with
significant long-term impaired locomotor recovery (Fig. 8A and Supplementary Videos 1 and 2). Furthermore, we observed impaired paw
rotation and forelimb-hindlimb coordination post-injury in conNrg1 mice compared to
control mice, i.e. processes that require proprioceptive control mediated by dorsal column
axons (Kanagal and Muir, 2008). However, it
should be noted that the impact of Nrg1 ablation on spontaneous locomotor recovery started
to emerge during the first 2 weeks after injury, a time where significant remyelination in
the dorsal columns is not yet apparent following spinal contusion injury (James et al., 2011). Therefore,
in addition to the deficient remyelination, other mechanisms might also contribute to the
changed locomotor recovery, such as deficient muscle spindle feedback, which has recently
been shown to be important for locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury (Takeoka et al., 2014). Indeed,
Nrg1 is an important signal for muscle spindle maintenance and muscle spindles atrophy
after Nrg1 ablation in the adult (Cheret et
al., 2013). We then assessed BMS scores in conIgNrg1 mice (Fig. 8C and D), where Schwann cell-mediated
remyelination remains intact. Interestingly, in spite of preserved spontaneous
remyelination, locomotor recovery was also impaired in conIgNrg1 mice compared to control
injured animals (Fig. 8C). In general, animals
showed impairments in coordination similar to, but not as extensive as, the animals
lacking all Nrg1 isoforms (cf. Fig.
8A and C). Figure 8 Ablation of Nrg1 leads to impaired spontaneous functional recovery after
spinal contusion injury. Functional recovery assessed by BMS open field
locomotion scores in conNrg1 (A) and conIgNrg1 (C) mice
show a similar initial deficit in all groups acutely after spinal contusion injury.
BMS scores gradually improve over the first few weeks and begin to plateau ∼3
weeks post-injury. Spontaneous functional recovery is significantly impaired in both
conNrg1 (A) and conIgNrg1 (C) mutant mice, compared to
vehicle and tamoxifen controls. Baseline BMS scores were not different between
groups. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
(***P < 0.001, two-way ANOVA,
post hoc Bonferroni, n = 9–11
animals/group). (B and D) Contusion impact data showing
the actual force applied to individual mice was within 10% of the intended
force of 50 kdyne and mean values for each group were not significantly different
(P > 0.05; one-way ANOVA), confirming that any group
differences were not due to differences in the impact force during surgery.
(E) BMS subscores reveal significantly reduced functional recovery
both in conNrg1 and conIgNrg1 animals compared to controls at 8 weeks post-injury.
However, conNrg1 mice were significantly more impaired than conIgNrg1 mice in areas
including stepping frequency, coordination, paw position, trunk stability, and tail
position. (F) Beam-walking scores reveal reduced beam-walking
performance both in conNrg1 and conIgNrg1 animals compared to controls at 8 weeks
post-injury. However, conNrg1 mice were significantly more impaired than conIgNrg1
mice. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (**P <
0.01, #P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA,
post hoc Tukey’s, n = 6–9
animals/group). *Significantly different to tamoxifen controls;
#significantly different to conIgNrg1. (G)
In vivo electrophysiological recordings assessing dorsal column
function. Example traces (each averaged from 16 raw traces) show conduction through
the lesion site in control, conNrg1 and conIgNrg1 animals (the representative
control trace is taken from a conNrg1 tamoxifen control mouse). In control and
conIgNrg1 injured animals stimulation artefacts, which have been cropped on the
x-axis to allow appropriate scaling, were followed by evoked
afferent activity at a latency of ∼1.5 ms, whereas little or no activity was
evoked in conNrg1 animals. All stimulation was supramaximal. Quantification of the
percentage of axons capable of conducting through the contusion site confirmed
significant levels of dorsal column function in injured controls and conIgNrg1 mice
at 10 weeks post-injury (when significant Schwann cell-mediated remyelination of the
dorsal columns is apparent), which was dramatically reduced in conNrg1 animals
(where Schwann cell-mediated remyelination is absent). Data are presented as mean
± SEM (**P < 0.01,
#P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA, post
hoc Tukey’s, n = 5–6 animals/group);
**significantly different to tamoxifen controls;
#significantly different to conIgNrg1.



To further elucidate the contribution of Nrg1 to functional repair after spinal cord
injury, we performed additional functional studies in new cohorts of conNrg1 and conIgNrg1
mice to enable side-by-side comparisons in a number of additional behavioural outcomes
(Fig. 8E and F). The 12-point BMS subscore
scale, which further delineates recovery of specific locomotor features that may not be
apparent in the overall BMS score (Basso et
al., 2006), revealed that while both cohorts were significantly
impaired in comparison to control injured mice, the conNrg1 mice were also significantly
worse than conIgNrg1mice at 8 weeks post-injury (#P < 0.05,
conNrg1 versus conIgNrg1; average score 0.4 ± 0.26 and 3 ± 0.65,
respectively; Fig. 8E) on aspects of behaviour
related to stepping frequency, coordination, paw position, trunk stability, and tail
position. Furthermore, functional performance was also assessed on the beam walking task,
which requires co-ordination, balance and proprioception (functions that are directly
related to dorsal column function; Kanagal and
Muir, 2008). Again, conNrg1 mice performed significantly worse than injured
conIgNrg1mice on the beam walking task (#P <
0.05, conNrg1 versus conIgNrg1; average score 14 ± 3.7 and 33 ±
1.5, respectively; Fig. 8F). These data
clearly demonstrate that there was significantly worse functional outcome in conNrg1 mice
(with the profound dorsal column demyelinating phenotype) than in conIgNrg1 mice (where
Schwann cell-mediated remyelination was not altered), particularly in tasks that require
dorsal column function.

Conditional ablation of Nrg1 leads to conduction failure in dorsal column axons after
spinal cord injury
Although behavioural differences suggest an association between the profound
demyelinating phenotype in conNrg1 mice and worse functional outcome, a more robust
measure for determining the functional importance of Schwann cell-mediated remyelination
after spinal cord injury and how this is compromised by Nrg1 ablation is to assess the
electrophysiological properties of dorsal column axons in control and Nrg1 mutant mice
following spinal contusion. In a protocol adapted from a previous method in rats (James et al., 2011), terminal
electrophysiological recordings taken from the sural nerve revealed a clear difference in
the ability of long distance sensory fibres travelling in the dorsal columns to conduct
through the T10 spinal contusion site (Fig.
8G). Sensory dorsal column fibres were activated antidromically by firstly
stimulating 5 mm caudal of the lesion site. Recordings taken from the sural nerve whilst
stimulating supramaximally therefore represented the function of the intact portion of
this pathway. Stimulation was then moved 5 mm rostral of the lesion site to determine what
extent of this function remained through the lesion site. Recordings taken when
stimulating at each site were averaged and the amplitude of the response in the sural
nerve when stimulating rostral to the lesion was calculated as a percentage of the
response evoked when stimulating caudally. In both of the tamoxifen control cohorts and
the con IgNrg1 cohort, all animals displayed obvious evoked activity in the sural nerve
when stimulating rostrally; in contrast to this, the majority of conNrg1 animals (four of
five) displayed no detectable evoked activity in the sural nerve, and in the single animal
which displayed some activity this was minimal (representative traces in Fig. 8G). Quantification revealed that this
difference in the conduction of dorsal column fibres was highly significant (graph in
Fig. 8G; **P <
0.01, #P < 0.05, one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s
post hoc), with the conNrg1 group having a mean conduction of only
5.05% ± 1.03 and all other groups having conduction of ∼25%
(conNrg1 tamoxifen control: 25.27% ±3.42; IgNrg1 tamoxifen control:
23.26% ± 3.96; conIgNrg1: 23.45% ± 3.77). These data provide
robust in vivo evidence firstly, that dorsal column axons remyelinated by Schwann cells
after spinal cord injury are functional and secondly, that the profound demyelinating
phenotype observed in the dorsal columns of conNrg1 knockout mice, and the associated
functional impairment, corresponds to axonal conduction failure.

Discussion
Our data show that Nrg1 is a key regulator of remyelination of CNS axons by PNS-like
Schwann cells after spinal cord injury. The majority of these centrally occurring Schwann
cells are derived from the CNS, and arise most likely through (trans)-differentiation of
precursor cells that reside in the spinal cord. Furthermore, we show that interference with
Nrg1 signalling significantly reduces the degree of spontaneous locomotor recovery after
injury. Using Nrg1 isoform-specific mutant mice, we found that IgNrg1 isoforms are
dispensable for Schwann cell myelination, indicating that type III (cysteine-rich domain
containing) isoforms have a critical role in this repair process. Although IgNrg1 isoforms
do not mediate Schwann cell remyelination, they contribute to recovery of locomotor
function. We assign this to the role of IgNrg1 in muscle spindle maintenance. The functional
impairment in those animals in which all Nrg1 isoforms are inactivated is greater than in
the IgNrg1 specific mutants, particularly in measures relating to dorsal column function
corresponding with profound conduction block observed on electrophysiological assessment of
sensory axons projecting through the injury site within the dorsal column. Our data
emphasize the distinct roles of Nrg1 isoforms in intrinsic repair processes after traumatic
spinal cord injury. Manipulating Nrg1 signalling might thus lead to novel therapeutic
strategies, or form part of a combinatorial therapy, for enhancing repair after spinal cord
injury.

The injured CNS has some intrinsic capacity to spontaneously repair. Understanding the
mechanisms that regulate or restrict these natural regenerative processes may lead to novel
clinical paradigms that enhance spontaneous recovery after spinal cord injury or augment the
efficacy of existing therapeutic approaches. Experimental contusive spinal cord injury
resembles many human spinal cord injuries (Bunge
et al., 1993; Kakulas,
1999; Norenberg et al.,
2004). An important feature of contusion-type injuries is the sparing of a
peripheral rim of tissue that contains viable axons. Demyelination is a key pathological
characteristic of surviving axons that limit their ability to function properly, as these
focally demyelinated axons are unable to efficiently conduct action potentials (Koles and Rasminsky, 1972; Nashmi and Fehlings, 2001). These surviving axons remain
non-functional but represent an important therapeutic target (James et al., 2011). Remyelination and restoration of conduction
may lead to detectable functional improvement (Smith
et al., 1979; Waxman
et al., 1994). Robust spontaneous myelin repair can occur, which
is mediated by both immature oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells (Harrison et al., 1975; McDonald, 1975). Schwann cell-mediated remyelination in the CNS
has been reported after spinal cord injury in many species including rodents (Beattie et al., 1997; James et al., 2011), cats (Bunge et al., 1961; Blight and Young, 1989), monkeys (Bresnahan, 1978) and humans (Bunge et al., 1993; Bruce et al., 2000; Guest et al., 2005). It has also been observed in
other central pathologies such as multiple sclerosis (Ghatak et al., 1973; Itoyama et al., 1985) and compressive spondylotic myelopathy
(Fehlings and Skaf, 1998). Moreover, central
axons that are remyelinated by Schwann cells can regain function (Blight and Young, 1989). Thus, the phenomenon of Schwann
cell-mediated remyelination of central axons is well known, but the molecular mechanism of
this spontaneous regenerative event has remained obscure. We now show for the first time
that a lack of Nrg1 entirely prevents remyelination of spinal axons by PNS-like Schwann
cells after spinal cord injury. We observed abundant peripheral myelin in the dorsal columns
of the injured spinal cord, which was completely absent when Nrg1 is lacking. This striking
phenotype was confirmed by detailed ultrastructural analysis, which demonstrated a complete
lack of PNS-like Schwann cells in the central dorsal columns accompanied by remyelination
failure. Oligodendrocytes, which myelinate different calibre axons in the mammalian CNS, are
heterogenous. Type IV oligodendrocytes morphologically resemble Schwann cells that myelinate
PNS axons but lack the characteristic basal laminae of Schwann cells (Cornbrooks et al., 1983; Butt et al., 1995). We observed clear laminin
immunoreactivity surrounding P0-positive myelin rings in the injured spinal cord,
demonstrating that the cells responsible for remyelination contain a basal lamina. Thus,
remyelinating cells are typical Schwann cells rather than type IV oligodendrocytes. This
ring-like association of laminin-positive basal lamina with Schwann cell derived P0-positive
myelin was entirely absent in mice lacking Nrg1, which is consistent with the absence of
Schwann cells. However, diffuse laminin staining was still observed in the injured spinal
cord from Nrg1-ablated animals, which is likely to be derived from other cells present at
the injury site such as fibroblasts or vascular components (Elkhal et al., 2004; Soderblom et al., 2013).

In a number of other CNS disorders (such as stroke), Nrg1 has been shown to have
neuroprotective effects (Croslan et
al., 2008; Iaci et
al., 2010). Therefore we performed axonal counts in the dorsal columns
to determine the effects of Nrg1 on axonal survival after spinal cord injury. Although we
observed no differences between injured controls and conNrg1 mice in the total number of
surviving axons 10 weeks after spinal cord injury, it is conceivable that axons that remain
persistently demyelinated in Nrg1-ablated animals would be more susceptible to axonal loss
and degeneration at later time points and this would likely exacerbate functional
impairment, as has been observed in other CNS pathologies (Bjartmar et al., 2000; Lovas et al., 2000; McGavern et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2012).

Despite significant spontaneous remyelination, some axons remain chronically demyelinated
after spinal cord injury (Blight and Decrescito,
1986; Waxman, 1989; Bunge et al., 1993; Crowe et al., 1997; Guest et al., 2005). Recent work
showed that the time course of demyelination and remyelination corresponded to functional
changes, and demonstrated that a population of chronically demyelinated axons retain the
potential to conduct (James et al.,
2011). Our data confirm that demyelinated axons persist into the chronic period
after contusive injury, but a large population of axons are robustly remyelinated by
PNS-like Schwann cells. The importance of such remyelination is emphasized by the profound
conduction failure in sensory axons projecting through the dorsal columns in conNrg1 mice.
Our findings also highlight the poor capacity of oligodendrocytes to mediate remyelination
after spinal cord injury. In the presence or absence of Nrg1, only a few axons were
surrounded by abnormally thin oligodendrocyte-produced myelin. The lack of compensatory
remyelination by oligodendrocytes in Nrg1-ablated mice was also evident by the unchanged
expression of PLP-positive central myelin and the oligodendrocyte-specific transcription
factor Olig2 at time points when axons are normally robustly remyelinated by Schwann cells
(Brinkmann et al., 2008;
Makinodan et al., 2012).
Nrg1 ablation might have potentially influenced oligodendrocyte-mediated remyelination.
However, our analysis presented here, as well as previous work, indicates that
oligodendrocyte-mediated myelination/remyelination is not absolutely dependent on Nrg1
(Brinkmann et al., 2008;
Lundgaard et al., 2013).
Schwann cell remyelination of central axons after injury appears to be limited to the dorsal
column region of the spinal cord, as we observed here, while other lateral and ventral white
matter tracts remain persistently demyelinated, or are remyelinated predominantly by
oligodendrocytes derived from precursor cells (Siegenthaler et al., 2007). Here we focused on the effects of
Nrg1 on demyelination and remyelination in the dorsal column. It remains to be seen whether
Nrg1 also affects remyelination in other white matter tracts, and whether increasing Nrg1
expression could increase remyelination in other regions of the spinal cord.

The cues that govern the occurrence of endogenous PNS-like Schwann cells in the injured CNS
are unknown. Schwann cells have been suggested to migrate from peripheral sources such as
the dorsal roots into the spinal cord after an injury (Sims et al., 1998; Jasmin et al., 2000; Perlin et al., 2011), or to originate from
endogenous oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the spinal cord (Zawadzka et al., 2010). The predominant
localization of remyelinating Schwann cells in the dorsal columns, close to the dorsal root
entry zone PNS/CNS interface, logically favours a peripheral source. However, here we
demonstrate for the first time that removing the peripheral source of Schwann cells by
multiple dorsal root removal had little impact on Schwann cell-mediated remyelination of
dorsal column axons. The small reduction in P0 following multiple root removal indicates
that a minor proportion of the remyelinating Schwann cells may derive from the periphery.
However, as the majority of P0 myelin expression still remained in the dorsal columns after
removal of peripheral input, this supports the notion that the majority of these
remyelinating Schwann cells derive from the spinal cord, possibly from spinal cord-
intrinsic progenitor populations. A potential mechanism is a spontaneous, injury induced
(trans)-differentiation of endogenous oligodendrocyte precursors into Schwann cells, which
is consistent with evidence obtained in models of focal demyelination, where fate mapping of
progenitor cells in the adult spinal cord revealed a previously unappreciated capacity of
CNS precursors to generate myelinating Schwann cells (Zawadzka et al., 2010). Our data demonstrate
that this phenomenon also occurs after traumatic spinal cord injury, with the observation of
EdU and P0 co-expression providing direct evidence that myelinating Schwann cells in the
contused spinal cord were newly generated cells. This is also in line with recent lineage
tracing studies, which used genetic reporters of endogenous precursor cells to demonstrate
that remyelinating Schwann cells after spinal contusion are primarily central in origin
(Assinck et al., 2015).
Together, these findings provide strong evidence for a central origin of remyelinating
Schwann cells following clinically relevant traumatic spinal contusion injury.

Concomitantly with the initiation of Schwann cell-mediated remyelination of dorsal column
axons, we noted complex changes in expression of Nrg1 isoforms and their receptors. Analysis
of isoform-specific mRNA expression showed parallels to the changes observed within
peripheral nerve following injury. In particular, type I Nrg1 was
upregulated (Cohen et al.,
1992; Carroll et al.,
1997; Stassart et al.,
2013) and the expression of type II and III Nrg1 isoforms were
reduced 1 week after injury, but expression began to recover towards naïve levels 4
weeks after injury. Lumbar dorsal root ganglia (containing the cell bodies of dorsal column
projecting axons) did not display major changes in Nrg1 isoform expression.
Erbb3 and Erbb4 receptor mRNA within the spinal cord was
reduced at Week 1 but largely recovered by Week 4 post-injury; Erbb2 showed
increased expression at Week 4 post-injury. Given that many cell types including neurons,
glia (Mei and Nave, 2014) and immune cells
(Calvo et al., 2010)
express these receptors, this dynamic pattern of expression is likely to reflect in addition
to altered expression in individual cells the changed cellular composition that is
influenced by cell death, acute inflammation and subsequent endogenous repair following
spinal cord injury. In general, by 4 weeks post-injury the expression of Nrg1 signalling
components is replenished or enhanced, and this coincides with progressive remyelination of
demyelinated axons by Schwann cells in the injured spinal cord. Our in situ
hybridization expression data indicated that the main source of Nrg1 influencing Schwann
cell remyelination after spinal cord injury is likely to be derived from spinal neurons or
axons projecting through the dorsal column, as Nrg1 was apparent in the dorsal columns but
did not co-localize with markers of Schwann cell myelin or oligodendrocytes. This is
consistent with previous work which has shown high levels of expression of Nrg1
(particularly type III Nrg1) in the large diameter myelinated sensory
neurons (Bermingham-McDonogh et al.,
1997; Fricker et al.,
2009), whose axons project in the dorsal column.

Nrg1 isoforms signal in distinct fashions: Types I and II (containing Ig domains) are
directly secreted or shed from the cell membrane while type III (containing a cysteine rich
domain) typically remains tethered to the cell membrane to signal in a juxtacrine fashion,
although further processing can release the EGF domain in certain contexts (Fleck et al., 2013). In the PNS,
type III Nrg1 is the key factor that regulates many aspects of Schwann cell development and
function, including myelination, which is absolutely dependent on type III Nrg1 (Garratt et al., 2000; Nave and Salzer, 2006; Mei and Nave, 2014). In contrast, although both type I and type
III Nrg1 isoforms have been shown to influence central myelination, oligodendrocytes (unlike
peripheral Schwann cells) have evolved a Nrg1-independent mechanism of myelination (Brinkmann et al., 2008; Nave and Werner, 2014). Interestingly after
peripheral nerve injury in adulthood there is evidence that both axonal (which is
principally type III Nrg1) (Fricker et
al., 2011) and Schwann cell-derived type I Nrg1 contribute to Schwann
cell remyelination (Stassart et al.,
2013). In contrast, we did not observe Nrg1 expression by Schwann cells within the
injured spinal cord. We have taken advantage of isoform-specific mutant mice to investigate
the relative contribution of the different isoforms in adulthood after CNS injury. Schwann
cell-mediated remyelination of the dorsal columns was absent in mice lacking all active Nrg1
isoforms, while the lack of only IgNrg1 isoforms did not interfere with Schwann
cell-mediated remyelination, emphasizing the role of type III Nrg1 in this repair process.
The fact that IgNrg1 is dispensable for Schwann cell remyelination in the spinal cord is
consistent with the previous finding that infusion of glial growth factor (Ig containing
type II Nrg1 isoform) did not improve Schwann cell-mediated remyelination after a gliotoxic
injury to the cerebellar peduncle (Penderis
et al., 2003). Unexpectedly, however, spontaneous locomotor
recovery was significantly compromised irrespective of the presence or absence of type III
Nrg1. This indicates that the functional deficits were not entirely due to the striking
demyelination phenotype observed in mice lacking all Nrg1 isoforms. The importance of
Ig-containing Nrg1 in the regulation of muscle spindle development and physiology has
previously been demonstrated (Hippenmeyer et
al., 2002; Cheret et
al., 2013). Thus, the behavioural phenotype observed in our study may
involve deficient muscle spindle-dependent sensory feedback to the spinal cord, which has
recently been shown to be critical for basic locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury
(Takeoka et al., 2014).
However, to elucidate further the contribution of dorsal column demyelination to the
locomotor deficits, we performed further detailed functional assessments in additional
cohorts of animals. We directly compared functional recovery in conNrg1 mice (in which all
Nrg1 isoforms are inactivated) and in conIgNrg1 animals in which there is selective
inactivation of Ig isoforms. Although both mutants showed functional deficits, these were
most marked in the conNrg1 compared to conIgNrg1, emphasizing the role of Schwann cell
remyelination within the dorsal column for optimal recovery. This was apparent both on the
BMS subscale and the inclined beam walking task, which requires co-ordination, balance and
proprioception—functions that relate to the dorsal column pathway, through which
myelinated proprioceptive sensory afferents transit. To directly localize this deficit to
the dorsal column we undertook electrophysiological assessment by antidromic stimulation of
sural afferents (which are principally sensory) within the dorsal column rostral and caudal
to the injury site. While afferents projecting through the injury site could be detected in
control animals (the evoked compound sensory action potential recorded in the sural nerve
following rostral stimulation was 25% of that following caudal stimulation) there was
a profound deficit in conduction in the conNrg1 mice (which in most cases showed no
conduction through the injury site). In contrast, the conIgNrg1 mice demonstrated impulse
conduction which was no different to controls, consistent with the fact that Schwann cell
remyelination was unchanged in these animals.

In summary, our data demonstrate that Nrg1 is absolutely essential for Schwann
cell-mediated spinal axon remyelination following spinal cord injury. We provide evidence
that these central Schwann cells derive from the injured spinal cord and are required for
action potential conduction in axons passing through the injury site. IgNrg1 isoforms are
dispensable for this process; however, compromised IgNrg1 signalling also significantly
impairs spontaneous locomotor recovery after spinal cord injury, likely a consequence of its
role in muscle spindle maintenance. However, mice in which all Nrg1 isoforms are inactivated
show greater functional deficits than IgNrg1 specific mutants, emphasizing the importance of
Schwann cell remyelination of dorsal column axons for optimal functional recovery following
spinal cord injury. Our data provide novel evidence for the molecular mechanisms that govern
a spontaneous endogenous regenerative event after traumatic spinal cord injury, which may
lead to the development of new therapeutic strategies. Enhancing levels of Nrg1 may
accelerate this remyelination process and/or prime the injury site to facilitate integration
of transplanted cells and/or enhance their remyelinating capacity. Schwann cell-mediated
remyelination of spinal axons is also observed in other pathologies such as multiple
sclerosis in humans (Ghatak et al.,
1973; Itoyama et al.,
1985); as such, these data may be exploited to improve or facilitate this
regenerative process following spinal cord injury or other pathologies where demyelination
occurs.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Fig. 5
 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Michaela Iberl and Ning Zhu for mouse breeding and
husbandry, Leanne Glover from the Centre for Ultrastructural Imaging at King’s College
London and Carl Hobbs for technical help.

Funding
This work was supported by Wings for Life
(WFL-GB-020/13 and WFL-GB-046/14 to E.J.B. and D.L.H.B.), the
International Spinal Research Trust and the
Henry Smith Charity (STR101 to
E.J.B.), the United Kingdom Medical Research Council (SNCF
award G1002055 to E.J.B.) and the Wellcome
Trust (SWCS award 095698z/11/z to D.L.H.B.).

Supplementary material
Supplementary material is available at Brain online.

Abbreviations
BMSBasso Mouse Scale

IgNrg1immunoglobulin-containing isoform of Nrg1

Nrg1neuregulin 1

PNSperipheral nervous system
==== Refs
References
Assinck PL Duncan G Plemel J Lee M Liu J Bergles D  ,  PDGFRα-positive progenitor cells form myelinating
oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells following contusion spinal cord injury. Society for
Neuroscience Abstract 2015, Program No. 338.03. Chicago;
2015 .
Basso DM Fisher LC Anderson AJ Jakeman LB McTigue DM Popovich PG  
Basso Mouse Scale for locomotion detects
differences in recovery after spinal cord injury in five common mouse
strains . J Neurotrauma 
2006 ; 23 : 635 –59 .
May;16689667 
Beattie MS Bresnahan JC Komon J Tovar CA Van Meter M Anderson DK  , 
Endogenous repair after spinal cord
contusion injuries in the rat . Exp Neurol 
1997 ; 148 :
453 –63 .;9417825 
Beattie MS Harrington AW Lee R Kim JY Boyce SL Longo FM  , 
ProNGF induces p75-mediated death of
oligodendrocytes following spinal cord injury . Neuron 
2002 ; 36 :
375 –86 .12408842 
Bermingham-McDonogh O Xu YT Marchionni MA Scherer SS  
Neuregulin expression in PNS neurons: isoforms
and regulation by target interactions . Mol Cell
Neurosci 
1997 ; 10 :
184 –95 .9532580 
Birchmeier C Nave KA  
Neuregulin-1, a key axonal signal that drives
Schwann cell growth and differentiation . Glia 
2008 ; 56 : 1491 –7 . Nov
1;18803318 
Bjartmar C Kidd G Mork S Rudick R Trapp BD  
Neurological disability correlates with spinal
cord axonal loss and reduced N-acetyl aspartate in chronic multiple sclerosis
patients . Ann Neurol 
2000 ; 48 :
893 –901 .11117546 
Black JA Waxman SG Smith KJ  
Remyelination of dorsal column axons by
endogenous Schwann cells restores the normal pattern of Nav1.6 and Kv1.2 at nodes of
Ranvier . Brain 
2006 ; 129 :
1319 –29 .16537565 
Blight AR Decrescito V  
Morphometric analysis of experimental spinal cord
injury in the cat: the relation of injury intensity to survival of myelinated
axons . Neuroscience 
1986 ; 19 : 321 –41 .
Sep;3785669 
Blight AR Young W  
Central axons in injured cat spinal cord recover
electrophysiological function following remyelination by Schwann cells .
J Neurol Sci 
1989 ; 91 : 15 –34 .
Jun;2746287 
Bresnahan JC  
An electron-microscopic analysis of axonal
alterations following blunt contusion of the spinal cord of the rhesus monkey (Macaca
mulatta) . J Neurol Sci 
1978 ; 37 : 59 –82 .
Jun;99494 
Brinkmann BG Agarwal A Sereda MW Garratt AN Muller T Wende H  , 
Neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling serves
distinct functions in myelination of the peripheral and central nervous
system . Neuron 
2008 ; 59 :
581 –95 .18760695 
Bruce JH Norenberg MD Kraydieh S Puckett W Marcillo A Dietrich D  
Schwannosis: role of gliosis and proteoglycan in
human spinal cord injury . J Neurotrauma 
2000 ; 17 : 781 –8 .
Sep;11011818 
Bunge MB Bunge RP Ris H  
Ultrastructural study of remyelination in an
experimental lesion in adult cat spinal cord . J Biophys Biochem
Cytol 
1961 ; 10 : 67 –94 .
May;13688845 
Bunge RP Bunge MB Rish H  
Electron microscopic study of demyelination in an
experimentally induced lesion in adult cat spinal cord . J
Biophys Biochem Cytol 
1960 ; 7 :
685 –96 .13805917 
Bunge RP Puckett WR Becerra JL Marcillo A Quencer RM  
Observations on the pathology of human spinal
cord injury: a review and classification of 22 new cases with details from a case of
chronic cord compression with extensive focal demyelination . Adv
Neurol 
1993 ; 59 :
75 –89 .8420126 
Buss A Pech K Merkler D Kakulas BA Martin D Schoenen J  , 
Sequential loss of myelin proteins
during Wallerian degeneration in the human spinal cord .
Brain 
2005 ; 128 : 356 –64 .
Feb;15634734 
Butt AM Berry M  
Oligodendrocytes and the control of myelination
in vivo: new insights from the rat anterior medullary velum . J
Neurosci Res 
2000 ; 59 :
477 –88 .10679786 
Butt AM Ibrahim M Ruge FM Berry M  
Biochemical subtypes of oligodendrocyte in the
anterior medullary velum of the rat as revealed by the monoclonal antibody
Rip . Glia 
1995 ; 14 :
185 –97 .7591030 
Calvo M Zhu N Tsantoulas C Ma Z Grist J Loeb JA  , 
Neuregulin-ErbB signaling promotes
microglial proliferation and chemotaxis contributing to microgliosis and pain after
peripheral nerve injury . J Neurosci 
2010 ; 30 :
5437 –50 .20392965 
Cannon B  
Sensation and loss .
Nature 
2013 ; 503 :
S2 –3 .24227004 
Carroll SL Miller ML Frohnert PW Kim SS Corbett JA  
Expression of neuregulins and their putative
receptors, ErbB2 and ErbB3, is induced during Wallerian degeneration .
J Neurosci 
1997 ; 17 :
1642 –59 .9030624 
Cheret C Willem M Fricker FR Wende H Wulf-Goldenberg A Tahirovic S  , 
Bace1 and Neuregulin-1 cooperate to
control formation and maintenance of muscle spindles . EMBO
J 
2013 ; 32 :
2015 –28 .23792428 
Chevalier Z Kennedy P Sherlock O  
Spinal cord injury, coping and psychological
adjustment: a literature review . Spinal Cord 
2009 ; 47 :
778 –82 .19506568 
Cohen JA Yachnis AT Arai M Davis JG Scherer SS  
Expression of the neu proto-oncogene by Schwann
cells during peripheral nerve development and Wallerian degeneration .
J Neurosci Res 
1992 ; 31 :
622 –34 .1374476 
Corfas G Rosen KM Aratake H Krauss R Fischbach GD  
Differential expression of ARIA isoforms in the
rat brain . Neuron 
1995 ; 14 :
103 –15 .7530017 
Cornbrooks CJ Carey DJ McDonald JA Timpl R Bunge RP  
In vivo and in vitro observations on laminin
production by Schwann cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
1983 ; 80 : 3850 –4 .
Jun;6344090 
Croslan DR Schoell MC Ford GD Pulliam JV Gates A Clement CM  , 
Neuroprotective effects of neuregulin-1
on B35 neuronal cells following ischemia . Brain Res 
2008 ; 1210 :
39 –47 .18410912 
Crowe MJ Bresnahan JC Shuman SL Masters JN Beattie MS  
Apoptosis and delayed degeneration after spinal
cord injury in rats and monkeys . Nat Med 
1997 ; 3 : 73 –6 .
Jan;8986744 
Dietz V Fouad K  
Restoration of sensorimotor functions after
spinal cord injury . Brain 
2014 ; 137 :
654 –67 .24103913 
Duncan ID Brower A Kondo Y Curlee JF JrSchultz RD  
Extensive remyelination of the CNS leads to
functional recovery . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2009 ; 106 :
6832 –6 .19342494 
Elkhal A Tunggal L Aumailley M  
Fibroblasts contribute to the deposition of
laminin 5 in the extracellular matrix . Exp Cell Res 
2004 ; 296 :
223 –30 .15149852 
Falls DL  
Neuregulins: functions, forms, and signaling
strategies . Exp Cell Res 
2003 ; 284 :
14 –30 .12648463 
Fawcett JW Curt A Steeves JD Coleman WP Tuszynski MH Lammertse D  , 
Guidelines for the conduct of clinical
trials for spinal cord injury as developed by the ICCP panel: spontaneous recovery after
spinal cord injury and statistical power needed for therapeutic clinical
trials . Spinal Cord 
2007 ; 45 :
190 –205 .17179973 
Fehlings MG Skaf G  
A review of the pathophysiology of cervical
spondylotic myelopathy with insights for potential novel mechanisms drawn from traumatic
spinal cord injury . Spine 
1998 ; 23 :
2730 –7 .9879098 
Felts PA Smith KJ  
Conduction properties of central nerve fibers
remyelinated by Schwann cells . Brain Res 
1992 ; 574 :
178 –92 .1638392 
Felts PA Smith KJ  
Blood-brain barrier permeability in
astrocyte-free regions of the central nervous system remyelinated by Schwann
cells . Neuroscience 
1996 ; 75 :
643 –55 .8931026 
Fitch MT Silver J  
CNS injury, glial scars, and inflammation:
Inhibitory extracellular matrices and regeneration failure . Exp
Neurol 
2008 ; 209 :
294 –301 .17617407 
Fleck D van Bebber F Colombo A Galante C Schwenk BM Rabe L  , 
Dual cleavage of neuregulin 1 type III
by BACE1 and ADAM17 liberates its EGF-like domain and allows paracrine
signaling . J Neurosci 
2013 ; 33 :
7856 –69 .23637177 
Franklin RJ Ffrench-Constant C  
Remyelination in the CNS: from biology to
therapy . Nat Rev Neurosci 
2008 ; 9 :
839 –55 .18931697 
Fricker FR Antunes-Martins A Galino J Paramsothy R La Russa F Perkins J  , 
Axonal neuregulin 1 is a rate limiting
but not essential factor for nerve remyelination . Brain 
2013 ; 136 :
2279 –97 .23801741 
Fricker FR Bennett DL  
The role of neuregulin-1 in the response to nerve
injury . Future Neurol 
2011 ; 6 :
809 –22 .22121335 
Fricker FR Lago N Balarajah S Tsantoulas C Tanna S Zhu N  , 
Axonally derived neuregulin-1 is
required for remyelination and regeneration after nerve injury in
adulthood . J Neurosci 
2011 ; 31 :
3225 –33 .21368034 
Fricker FR Zhu N Tsantoulas C Abrahamsen B Nassar MA Thakur M  , 
Sensory axon-derived neuregulin-1 is
required for axoglial signaling and normal sensory function but not for long-term axon
maintenance . J Neurosci 
2009 ; 29 : 7667 –78 . Jun
17;19535578 
Garratt AN Voiculescu O Topilko P Charnay P Birchmeier C  
A dual role of erbB2 in myelination and in
expansion of the schwann cell precursor pool . J Cell
Biol 
2000 ; 148 :
1035 –46 .10704452 
Gaudet AD Popovich PG  
Extracellular matrix regulation of inflammation
in the healthy and injured spinal cord . Exp Neurol 
2014 ; 258 :
24 –34 .25017885 
Gauthier MK Kosciuczyk K Tapley L Karimi-Abdolrezaee S  
Dysregulation of the neuregulin-1-ErbB network
modulates endogenous oligodendrocyte differentiation and preservation after spinal cord
injury . Eur J Neurosci 
2013 ; 38 :
2693 –715 .23758598 
Ghatak NR Hirano A Doron Y Zimmerman HM  
Remyelination in multiple sclerosis with
peripheral type myelin . Arch Neurol 
1973 ; 29 :
262 –7 .4728187 
Guest JD Hiester ED Bunge RP  
Demyelination and Schwann cell responses adjacent
to injury epicenter cavities following chronic human spinal cord injury .
Exp Neurol 
2005 ; 192 :
384 –93 .15755556 
Hagg T Oudega M  
Degenerative and spontaneous regenerative
processes after spinal cord injury . J Neurotrauma 
2006 ; 23 :
264 –80 .16629615 
Harrison BM Gledhill RF McDonald WJ  
Remyelination after transient compression of the
spinal cord . Proc Aust Assoc Neurol 
1975 ; 12 :
117 –22 .1215377 
Hayashi S McMahon AP  
Efficient recombination in diverse tissues by a
tamoxifen-inducible form of Cre: a tool for temporally regulated gene
activation/inactivation in the mouse . Dev Biol 
2002 ; 244 :
305 –18 .11944939 
Hippenmeyer S Shneider NA Birchmeier C Burden SJ Jessell TM Arber S  
A role for neuregulin1 signaling in muscle
spindle differentiation . Neuron 
2002 ; 36 :
1035 –49 .12495620 
Hopman AH Ramaekers FC Speel EJ  
Rapid synthesis of biotin-, digoxigenin-,
trinitrophenyl-, and fluorochrome-labeled tyramides and their application for In situ
hybridization using CARD amplification . J Histochem
Cytochem 
1998 ; 46 :
771 –7 .9603790 
Hu X Hicks CW He W Wong P Macklin WB Trapp BD  , 
Bace1 modulates myelination in the
central and peripheral nervous system . Nat Neurosci 
2006 ; 9 :
1520 –5 .17099708 
Iaci JF Ganguly A Finklestein SP Parry TJ Ren J Saha S  , 
Glial growth factor 2 promotes
functional recovery with treatment initiated up to 7 days after permanent focal ischemic
stroke . Neuropharmacology 
2010 ; 59 :
640 –9 .20691195 
Irvine KA Blakemore WF  
Remyelination protects axons from
demyelination-associated axon degeneration . Brain 
2008 ; 131 :
1464 –77 .18490361 
Itoyama Y Ohnishi A Tateishi J Kuroiwa Y Webster HD  
Spinal cord multiple sclerosis lesions in
Japanese patients: Schwann cell remyelination occurs in areas that lack glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP) . Acta Neuropathol 
1985 ; 65 :
217 –23 .2579518 
James ND Bartus K Grist J Bennett DL McMahon SB Bradbury EJ  
Conduction failure following spinal cord injury:
functional and anatomical changes from acute to chronic stages .
J Neurosci 
2011 ; 31 :
18543 –55 .22171053 
Jasmin L Janni G Moallem TM Lappi DA Ohara PT  
Schwann cells are removed from the spinal cord
after effecting recovery from paraplegia . J Neurosci 
2000 ; 20 :
9215 –23 .11124999 
Kakulas BA  
A review of the neuropathology of human spinal
cord injury with emphasis on special features . J Spinal Cord
Med 
1999 ; 22 :
119 –24 .10826269 
Kanagal SG Muir GD  
Effects of combined dorsolateral and dorsal
funicular lesions on sensorimotor behaviour in rats . Exp
Neurol 
2008 ; 214 :
229 –39 .18778707 
Koles ZJ Rasminsky M  
A computer simulation of conduction in
demyelinated nerve fibres . J Physiol 
1972 ; 227 :
351 –64 .4675037 
Lee Y Morrison BM Li Y Lengacher S Farah MH Hoffman PN  , 
Oligodendroglia metabolically support
axons and contribute to neurodegeneration . Nature 
2012 ; 487 :
443 –8 .22801498 
Li L Cleary S Mandarano MA Long W Birchmeier C Jones FE  
The breast proto-oncogene, HRGalpha regulates
epithelial proliferation and lobuloalveolar development in the mouse mammary
gland . Oncogene 
2002 ; 21 :
4900 –7 .12118369 
Lovas G Szilagyi N Majtenyi K Palkovits M Komoly S  
Axonal changes in chronic demyelinated cervical
spinal cord plaques . Brain 
2000 ; 123 :
308 –17 .10648438 
Lundgaard I Luzhynskaya A Stockley JH Wang Z Evans KA Swire M  , 
Neuregulin and BDNF induce a switch to
NMDA receptor-dependent myelination by oligodendrocytes . PLoS
Biol 
2013 ; 11 : e1001743 .24391468 
Makinodan M Rosen KM Ito S Corfas G  
A critical period for social experience-dependent
oligodendrocyte maturation and myelination . Science 
2012 ; 337 :
1357 –60 .22984073 
McDonald JW Belegu V  
Demyelination and remyelination after spinal cord
injury . J Neurotrauma 
2006 ; 23 :
345 –59 .16629621 
McDonald WI  
Mechanisms of functional loss and recovery in
spinal cord damage . Ciba Found Symp 
1975 ; 34 :
23 –33 .177252 
McGavern DB Murray PD Rivera-Quinones C Schmelzer JD Low PA Rodriguez M  
Axonal loss results in spinal cord atrophy,
electrophysiological abnormalities and neurological deficits following demyelination in
a chronic inflammatory model of multiple sclerosis .
Brain 
2000 ; 123 :
519 –31 .10686175 
Mei L Nave KA  
Neuregulin-ERBB signaling in the nervous system
and neuropsychiatric diseases . Neuron 
2014 ; 83 :
27 –49 .24991953 
Meyer D Birchmeier C  
Multiple essential functions of neuregulin in
development . Nature 
1995 ; 378 :
386 –90 .7477375 
Meyer D Yamaai T Garratt A Riethmacher-Sonnenberg E Kane D Theill LE  , 
Isoform-specific expression and function
of neuregulin . Development 
1997 ; 124 :
3575 –86 .9342050 
Monteiro de Castro G Deja NA Ma D Zhao C Franklin RJ  
Astrocyte activation via Stat3 signaling
determines the balance of oligodendrocyte versus schwann cell
remyelination . Am J Pathol 
2015 ; 185 : 2431 –40 .
Sep;26193667 
Nashmi R Fehlings MG  
Changes in axonal physiology and morphology after
chronic compressive injury of the rat thoracic spinal cord .
Neuroscience 
2001 ; 104 :
235 –51 .11311546 
Nave KA Salzer JL  
Axonal regulation of myelination by neuregulin
1 . Curr Opin Neurobiol 
2006 ; 16 :
492 –500 .16962312 
Nave KA Werner HB  
Myelination of the nervous system: mechanisms and
functions . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 
2014 ; 30 :
503 –33 .25288117 
Newbern J Birchmeier C  
Nrg1/ErbB signaling networks in Schwann cell
development and myelination . Semin Cell Dev Biol 
2010 ; 21 :
922 –8 .20832498 
Norenberg MD Smith J Marcillo A  
The pathology of human spinal cord injury:
defining the problems . J Neurotrauma 
2004 ; 21 :
429 –40 .15115592 
Oudega M Bradbury EJ Ramer MS  
Combination therapies .
Handb Clin Neurol 
2012 ; 109 :
617 –36 .23098740 
Papastefanaki F Matsas R  
From demyelination to remyelination: the road
toward therapies for spinal cord injury . Glia 
2015 ; 63 :
1101 –25 .25731941 
Penderis J Woodruff RH Lakatos A Li WW Dunning MD Zhao C  , 
Increasing local levels of neuregulin
(glial growth factor-2) by direct infusion into areas of demyelination does not alter
remyelination in the rat CNS . Eur J Neurosci 
2003 ; 18 :
2253 –64 .14622186 
Perlin JR Lush ME Stephens WZ Piotrowski T Talbot WS  
Neuronal Neuregulin 1 type III directs Schwann
cell migration . Development 
2011 ; 138 :
4639 –48 .21965611 
Plemel JR Keough MB Duncan GJ Sparling JS Yong VW Stys PK  , 
Remyelination after spinal cord injury:
is it a target for repair? 
Prog Neurobiol 
2014 ; 117 :
54 –72 .24582777 
Potter PJ  
Disordered control of the urinary bladder after
human spinal cord injury: what are the problems? 
Progr Brain Res 
2006 ; 152 :
51 –7 .
Raineteau O Schwab ME  
Plasticity of motor systems after incomplete
spinal cord injury . Nat Rev Neurosci 
2001 ; 2 :
263 –73 .11283749 
Ramer LM Ramer MS Bradbury EJ  
Restoring function after spinal cord injury:
towards clinical translation of experimental strategies . Lancet
Neurol 
2014 ; 13 :
1241 –56 .25453463 
Ravenscroft A Ahmed YS Burnside IG  
Chronic pain after SCI: a patient
survey . Spinal Cord 
2000 ; 38 :
611 –14 .11093322 
Salic A Mitchison TJ  
A chemical method for fast and sensitive
detection of DNA synthesis in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 
2008 ; 105 :
2415 –20 .18272492 
Schwab ME Bartholdi D  
Degeneration and regeneration of axons in the
lesioned spinal cord . Physiol Rev 
1996 ; 76 : 319 –70 .
Apr;8618960 
Siegenthaler MM Tu MK Keirstead HS  
The extent of myelin pathology differs following
contusion and transection spinal cord injury . J
Neurotrauma 
2007 ; 24 :
1631 –46 .17970626 
Sims TJ Durgun MB Gilmore SA  
Schwann cell invasion of ventral spinal cord: the
effect of irradiation on astrocyte barriers . J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 
1998 ; 57 :
866 –73 .9737550 
Smith KJ Blakemore WF McDonald WI  
Central remyelination restores secure
conduction . Nature 
1979 ; 280 :
395 –6 .460414 
Soderblom C Luo X Blumenthal E Bray E Lyapichev K Ramos J  , 
Perivascular fibroblasts form the
fibrotic scar after contusive spinal cord injury . J
Neurosci 
2013 ; 33 :
13882 –7 .23966707 
Stassart RM Fledrich R Velanac V Brinkmann BG Schwab MH Meijer D  , 
A role for Schwann cell-derived
neuregulin-1 in remyelination . Nat Neurosci 
2013 ; 16 :
48 –54 .23222914 
Takeoka A Vollenweider I Courtine G Arber S  
Muscle spindle feedback directs locomotor
recovery and circuit reorganization after spinal cord injury .
Cell 
2014 ; 159 :
1626 –39 .25525880 
Taveggia C Thaker P Petrylak A Caporaso GL Toews A Falls DL  , 
Type III neuregulin-1 promotes
oligodendrocyte myelination . Glia 
2008 ; 56 :
284 –93 .18080294 
Waxman SG  
Demyelination in spinal cord
injury . J Neurol Sci 
1989 ; 91 :
1 –14 .2664092 
Waxman SG Utzschneider DA Kocsis JD  
Enhancement of action potential conduction
following demyelination: experimental approaches to restoration of function in multiple
sclerosis and spinal cord injury . Prog Brain Res 
1994 ; 100 :
233 –43 .7938524 
Weidner N Tuszynski MH  
Spontaneous plasticity in the injured spinal
cord-implications for repair strategies . Mol Psychiatry 
2002 ; 7 :
9 –11 .11803438 
Willem M Garratt AN Novak B Citron M Kaufmann S Rittger A  , 
Control of peripheral nerve myelination
by the beta-secretase BACE1 . Science 
2006 ; 314 :
664 –6 .16990514 
Woodruff RH Franklin RJ  
Demyelination and remyelination of the caudal
cerebellar peduncle of adult rats following stereotaxic injections of lysolecithin,
ethidium bromide, and complement/anti-galactocerebroside: a comparative
study . Glia 
1999 ; 25 :
216 –28 .9932868 
Yang X Arber S William C Li L Tanabe Y Jessell TM  , 
Patterning of muscle acetylcholine
receptor gene expression in the absence of motor innervation .
Neuron 
2001 ; 30 :
399 –410 .11395002 
Zawadzka M Rivers LE Fancy SP Zhao C Tripathi R Jamen F  , 
CNS-resident glial progenitor/stem cells
produce Schwann cells as well as oligodendrocytes during repair of CNS
demyelination . Cell Stem Cell 
2010 ; 6 :
578 –90 .20569695 
Zeng C Pan F Jones LA Lim MM Griffin EA Sheline YI  , 
Evaluation of 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine
staining as a sensitive and reliable method for studying cell proliferation in the adult
nervous system . Brain Res 
2010 ; 1319 :
21 –32 .20064490 
Zhang JF Zhao FS Wu G Kong QF Sun B Cao J  , 
Therapeutic effect of co-transplantation
of neuregulin-1-transfected Schwann cells and bone marrow stromal cells on spinal cord
hemisection syndrome . Neurosci Lett 
2011 ; 497 :
128 –33 .21539896

