
==== Front
BrainBrainbrainjBrain0006-89501460-2156Oxford University Press 2905039010.1093/brain/awx179awx179Original ArticlesInvolvement of fast-spiking cells in ictal sequences during spontaneous
seizures in rats with chronic temporal lobe epilepsy Neumann Adam R 
*These authors contributed equally to this work.

1*Raedt Robrecht 
*These authors contributed equally to this work.

2*Steenland Hendrik W 1Sprengers Mathieu 2Bzymek Katarzyna 1Navratilova Zaneta 13Mesina Lilia 1Xie Jeanne 1Lapointe Valerie 1Kloosterman Fabian 345Vonck Kristl 2Boon Paul A J M 2Soltesz Ivan 6McNaughton Bruce L 17Luczak Artur 161 Department of Neuroscience, Canadian Centre for Behavioural
Neuroscience, University of Lethbridge, 4401 University Dr W, Lethbridge, AB, T1K 3M4,
Canada2 Department of Neurology, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium3 Neuro-Electronics Research Flanders, Leuven, Belgium4 VIB, Leuven, Belgium5 Brain and Cognition Research unit, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium6 Department of Neurosurgery, and Stanford Neurosciences Institute,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA7 Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California at
Irvine, Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, Irvine, CA, USACorrespondence to: Artur Luczak Department of Neuroscience,
Canadian Centre for Behavioural Neuroscience, the University of Lethbridge, 4401
University Dr W, Lethbridge, AB, T1K 3M4, Canada E-mail:
Luczak@uleth.caCorrespondence may also be addressed to: Bruce L. McNaughton
E-mail: Bruce.McNaughton@uleth.ca*Adam R. Neumann and Robrecht Raedt authors contributed equally to this
work. 


See Lenck-Santini (doi:10.1093/awx205) for a scientific commentary on this
article. 

9 2017 04 8 2017 04 8 2017 140 9 2355 2369 16 2 2017 25 5 2017 8 6 2017 © The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
the Guarantors of Brain.2017This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits
non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact
journals.permissions@oup.com
See Lenck-Santini (doi:10.1093/awx205) for a scientific commentary on this
article. 

Using population recordings in two rat models of chronic temporal lobe epilepsy, Neumann,
Raedt et al. show that ictal spikes are accompanied by characteristic
sequential patterns of neuronal activity. The neurons that are strongly activated during
ictal events are predominantly fast-spiking interneurons, and not excitatory principal
cells as previously thought.

Abstract

See Lenck-Santini (doi:10.1093/awx205) for a scientific commentary on this
article. 

Epileptic seizures represent altered neuronal network dynamics, but the temporal
evolution and cellular substrates of the neuronal activity patterns associated with
spontaneous seizures are not fully understood. We used simultaneous recordings from
multiple neurons in the hippocampus and neocortex of rats with chronic temporal lobe
epilepsy to demonstrate that subsets of cells discharge in a highly stereotypical
sequential pattern during ictal events, and that these stereotypical patterns were
reproducible across consecutive seizures. In contrast to the canonical view that principal
cell discharges dominate ictal events, the ictal sequences were predominantly composed of
fast-spiking, putative inhibitory neurons, which displayed unusually strong coupling to
local field potential even before seizures. The temporal evolution of activity was
characterized by unique dynamics where the most correlated neuronal pairs before seizure
onset displayed the largest increases in correlation strength during the seizures. These
results demonstrate the selective involvement of fast spiking interneurons in structured
temporal sequences during spontaneous ictal events in hippocampal and neocortical circuits
in experimental models of chronic temporal lobe epilepsy.

temporal lobe epilepsyneuronal population activity, GABAergic cellsNational Institutes of Health10.13039/100000002NS35915National Science Foundation10.13039/1000000011631465Research Foundation Flanders10.13039/501100003130FWO10.13039/501100003130BOF10.13039/501100007229Ghent University Hospital10.13039/501100003441
==== Body
Introduction
Epilepsy is one of the most prevalent neurological disorders affecting over 1% of the
general population (Thurman et al.,
2011). Among adult patients, temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common
subtype of epilepsy (Wiebe, 2000). The
treatment of TLE is often difficult, most likely due to complexity of molecular, cellular
and synaptic mechanisms causing microcircuit alterations at multiple levels. To better
understand the mechanisms responsible for TLE, several animal models of this disorder have
been developed (Kandratavicius et
al., 2014; Lévesque et
al., 2016a), which have provided a number of important
insights into TLE. Aided by technological advancements allowing continuous monitoring of the
activity of large sets of individual neurons in humans as well as in animals, our
understanding of complex neuronal dynamics involved in epileptic networks has significantly
improved. For example, application of multi-electrode single-unit recordings revealed that
ictal events have a rather heterogeneous pattern of activity (Truccolo et al., 2011, 2014; Bower et
al., 2012; Cymerblit-Sabba and
Schiller, 2012), instead of the seemingly homogeneous recurrent discharges
suggested by the synchronous EEG patterns during seizures. Further evidence of heterogeneous
ictal dynamics was also indicated by two-photon calcium imaging in hippocampal slices from
chronically epileptic animals exhibiting spontaneous seizures (Muldoon et al., 2013), revealing that epileptic
networks may be composed of multiple functional clusters of spatially localized neurons.
Interestingly, despite this heterogeneity of spiking patterns within seizures, neuronal
activity patterns were also found to be remarkably similar across consecutive seizures
(Truccolo et al., 2011).
Taken together, these results suggest that although neuronal dynamics during seizures is
likely to be complex, it may have consistent underlying mechanism.

Dynamics of neuronal patterns cannot be fully understood without considering the role of
inhibition. Indeed, GABAergic cells are not only implicated in keeping cellular and network
excitation in check, but are also critically involved in generating and coordinating
behaviourally relevant neuronal oscillations (e.g. hippocampal theta, gamma, and ripple
oscillations) across various temporal and spatial scales (Cardin et al., 2009; Varga et al., 2012; Stark et al., 2014). Given their functional
importance in the normal brain, it is not surprising that GABAergic neurons also play key,
albeit multifaceted, complex roles in epileptic networks. For example, GABAergic processes
are likely to at least partially keep the balance of excitation and inhibition in check even
in the epileptic brain (Prince, 1968; Velazquez and Carlen, 1999; Cohen et al., 2002). Moreover, inhibition
adjacent to an active focus was reported to exert a restraining role against the spread of
epileptiform discharges (Prince and Wilder,
1967) in both human epilepsy and in seizure models (Trevelyan et al., 2006; Sabolek et al., 2012; Schevon et al., 2012; Trevelyan and Schevon, 2013). On the other hand, multiple lines of
evidence suggest more complex roles for GABAergic processes beyond the dampening of
epileptic activity. For example, while some parameters of GABAergic transmission appear to
indicate a weakened state of inhibition, numerous other reports show a paradoxical
strengthening of GABAergic synaptic and cellular actions in case of epilepsy (Chen et al., 2001; Cossart et al., 2001; Marchionni and Maccaferri, 2009). A particularly
striking example of the latter scenario has come from a recent in vivo
cellular resolution imaging study that found GABAergic neurons, and not their glutamatergic
counterparts, to be preferentially recruited during spontaneous interictal activity in the
CA1 region of the epileptic mouse hippocampus in chronic experimental TLE (Muldoon et al., 2015).
Specifically, the latter in vivo two-photon calcium imaging study showed
that spontaneous interictal spikes in the CA1 network recruited subsets of GABAergic
neurons, which, in turn, appeared to synchronously inhibit the excitatory pyramidal cells,
reducing their firing rate. However, it has not been studied in depth if the
counterintuitively enhanced inhibitory activity reported to take place during interictal
spikes in an experimental model of TLE may also be present during ictal spikes.

We used population recordings in two rat models for chronic TLE to show that ictal spikes
were accompanied by characteristic, sequential patterns of neuronal activity, which were
highly conserved across seizures. Similar sequential relations between subsets of neurons
were also present before seizures. Moreover, during ictal spikes, characteristic neuronal
dynamics was observed, with close temporal coupling preferentially emerging among a subset
of neurons that already had the strongest correlated activity even before seizure.
Importantly, neurons that were strongly activated during ictal events were predominantly the
fast-spiking units, representing putative interneurons, and not excitatory principal cells
as previously thought. Taken together, the results reported in this study reveal repeating
patterns of neuronal activity during ictal events and, building on recent discoveries
concerning the strong involvement of interneurons in interictal spikes (Muldoon et al., 2015), also
demonstrate the strong involvement of hippocampal and neocortical non-principal cells during
chronic seizure events in experimental models of TLE.

Materials and methods
All experiments were carried out in accordance with protocols approved by the Animal
Welfare Committees of the University of Lethbridge and Ghent University.

Hyperdrive implantation
In our experiments, two different rat models of chronic TLE were used: the perforant path
stimulation (PP) model, and the intrahippocampal kainic acid (KA) model (see below for
details). Starting 4 weeks after electrical (PP) or chemical (KA) status epilepticus
induction, all animals were monitored for the presence of spontaneous seizures during 5
days of continuous video-EEG monitoring sessions. Four male Sprague-Dawley rats (three PP
and one KA), which had the highest number of behavioural seizures (stage 3 or higher on
the Racine Scale) (Racine, 1972; Raedt et al., 2009) were
selected for implantation of a multi-tetrode hyperdrive. Hyperdrives were similar in
design to those previously described (Gothard
et al., 1996; McNaughton, 1999). Tetrodes were made by twisting four 13 µm wires together
(Gray et al., 1995).
Tetrodes with short-circuited individual wires were used as a reference.

The rats were anaesthetized with isoflurane (1–1.5% and 1–2 l/min oxygen) and the dental
cement was removed from the region over the right hemisphere where the hyperdrive was to
be positioned. The exact location of the hyperdrive (3.8 mm posterior and 2 mm right to
bregma) was marked on the skull using a drill bit during the first implantation surgery
since bregma was no longer visible due to the presence of a dental acrylic head cap. A
craniotomy was made at the marker location, the dura mater was carefully removed and the
hyperdrive was positioned on the surface of the cortex. Immediately after affixing the
hyperdrive to the skull and the existing head-cap using dental cement, all tetrodes were
slowly lowered 1 mm below cortical surface. A 14-tetrode hyperdrive was implanted in one
epileptic PP rat, and a 21-tetrode hyperdrive was implanted in two PP rats and one KA
rat.

Epilepsy induction and monitoring
Perforant path stimulation model
Rats were anaesthetized with isoflurane (1–1.5% and 1–2 l/min oxygen), and bipolar
stimulation electrodes were implanted bilaterally in perforant path (8.1 mm posterior
and 4.4 mm lateral from bregma), and a bipolar local field potential (LFP) recording
electrode was implanted with 0.9 mm tip separation in dentate gyrus (3.8 mm posterior, 2
mm left of bregma). Recording and stimulation electrodes were made by twisting two
Teflon®-coated annealed stainless steel wires (Medwire 316SS3T). Depth of recording and
stimulation electrodes was optimized using electrophysiological control aiming at
maximal dentate gyrus evoked potentials in response to perforant path stimulation (McNaughton et al., 1978). Two
screw electrodes were used as ground and reference electrodes, respectively. The
reference and ground electrodes were placed epidurally over the frontal cortex. Seven
additional anchor screws were placed (two in the frontal bone, two in the temporal bone
and three in the occipital bone) to ensure fixation of the electrode assembly to the
skull using dental cement. At least 1 week after surgery, the animals were stimulated
for 3 h while awake, using a protocol consisting of 15–20 V paired-pulse stimuli
delivered at 2 Hz, with a 40-ms interpulse interval, plus 10-s long, 20 Hz stimulus
trains of single, 15–20 V stimuli delivered once per minute for 3 h (Bumanglag and Sloviter, 2008). Convulsive
status epilepticus was terminated by interaperitoneal injection of a combination of
diazepam (20 mg/kg) and ketamine (50 mg/kg) (Vermoesen et al., 2010).

Intrahippocampal kainic acid model
To determine the generalizability and model invariance of the key findings obtained
from the PP model, chronic seizures were also recorded from one rat in the KA model. The
KA rat was anaesthetized with isoflurane (1–1.5% and 1–2 l/min oxygen) and bilaterally
implanted with a bipolar recording electrode in the hippocampus (5.5 mm posterior and 4
mm lateral from bregma; 3.8 mm ventral from dura). An injection guide cannula was placed
above the left hippocampus (5.5 mm posterior and 4 mm left from bregma; 0.5 mm ventral
from dura). Two screw electrodes were used as ground and reference electrodes. The
reference and ground electrodes were placed epidurally over the frontal cortex. Seven
additional anchor screws were placed (two in the frontal bone, two in the temporal bone
and three in the occipital bone) to ensure fixation of the electrode assembly and
cannula to the skull using dental cement. At least 1 week after implantation surgery the
awake rat was injected with kainic acid (0.4 µg in 0.2 µl saline, 0.1 µl/min saline,
Sigma Aldrich) in the left hippocampus using a 1 µl Hamilton syringe. A 30-G needle,
attached to the Hamilton syringe, was lowered through the cannula until the needle tip
was positioned 5 mm below the cannula tip (5.5 mm ventral from dura). Hyperdrive
tetrodes were inserted contralateral to the KA injection site.

For both models the status epilepticus was convulsive.

Histology
All rats were kept on a 12-h light/dark schedule and provided food and water ad
libitum. To maximize stability of the recordings, tetrodes were left in place
unless they lost units during the recording. Tetrode location was verified using histology
(Supplementary Fig. 1).
Because some of the tetrodes were moved during the recording period, their position during
a specific recording epoch sometimes had to be estimated based on histology and the amount
of movement performed since the recording epoch.

When recording was finished, tetrode locations were marked by making small lesions at the
electrode tips with 10 μA of anodal current for 10 s. Rats were injected with Euthansol
(sodium pentobarbital, intraperitoneally) and were transcardially perfused with
phosphate-buffered solution (PBS) and paraformaldehyde (PFA). The brains were removed and
kept in PFA for 1–2 days and then placed in 30% sucrose with sodium azide. After a few
weeks, the brains were sectioned into 40-μm thick sections during block-face imaging on a
custom vibratome to determine the relevant part of the brain. All sections relevant to
electrode placement were triple immunostained with neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN),
vimentin, and anti-CD11b/c antibody (Ox-42) (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Electrophysiological recordings
Electrical signals from tetrodes were continuously recorded with a 128-channel Neuralynx
Cheetah Acquisition System. For unit recordings, signals were digitized at 32 kHz and
bandpass filtered between 600 Hz and 6 kHz. For LFP recordings, signals were digitized at
2 kHz and bandpass filtered between 1 and 1000 Hz. The reference tetrode was positioned in
superficial cortical areas. The remaining tetrodes were each turned in the morning, ∼50 μm
per day, keeping them as close to the same depth as possible. When tetrodes reached
cortical layers 5/6, about half of them were kept in place for recording of neuronal
activity in parietal cortex, and the remaining tetrodes were advanced to the CA1 pyramidal
cell layer—as noted by multiple, single units and polarity reversals of sharp waves (Buzsáki et al., 1990).
Individual recording sessions lasted ∼24 h. Animals were recorded 24/7, with a short break
every morning when tetrodes were adjusted and a new recording session was started.

Seizure detection
Seizures were identified on the LFP signal recorded from tetrodes located in the
hippocampus. A seizure was defined as a paroxysmal occurrence of high frequency and/or
high amplitude rhythmic discharges with a clear evolution of signal complexity and lasting
at least 10 s. Seizure onset was manually identified as the earliest appearance of a
persistent change in the signal that developed into clear seizure activity (Supplementary Fig. 2) (Bragin et al., 1999).
Frequently seizure onset was accompanied by a characteristic LFP deflection, such as an
initial slow wave (Supplementary Fig.
2B). Note that, for analyses of seizure long patterns (Fig. 1A–D), finding the exact time of seizure onset with
sub-second precision was not crucial, as neuronal activity was smoothed with a Gaussian
kernel with standard deviations (SD) = 10 s. Across eight analysed datasets, the mean
number of seizures within the 24-h period was 25.75 (min = 4, max = 56; KA rat had 10 and
56 seizures in the 2 days analysed, respectively) with average seizure duration of 77.25 s
(min = 23, max = 182 s). The median inter-seizure interval was 82.7 min (min = 2.8, max =
537 min). If the inter-seizure interval was <10 min, then those seizures were excluded
from analyses.

Figure 1 
Consistency of neuronal firing patterns on multiple time scales across
seizures. (A and B) Example of neuronal activity in
hippocampus (HP) and parietal cortex (Par Ctx) for two consecutive seizures in the PP
model. Neurons marked with the same colour were recorded on the same tetrode. On the
top is the LFP from the hippocampal electrode. The grey vertical
line indicates seizure start. (C) The same neuronal activity as in
A and B but smoothed with a 10-s Gaussian kernel, z-score
normalized and sorted by latency during seizure #1. Colour bar on the left shows which
tetrode the neuron was recorded according to colour scheme in A and
B. Right panel shows the same activity as the
middle panel but with neuron order shuffled. Grey lines show
position of sample neurons before and after shuffling. (D) Similarity of
seizure-long patterns across seizures for original and neuron order shuffled data.
Each line represents data from a single 24 h recording period (2 days were analysed
for each of the four rats). Data for the rat in the KA model of epilepsy are marked in
violet (Fig. 2). (E and
F) Sample 500 ms windows of activity from seizures 1 and 2. In both
plots, strongly entrained neurons are sorted by average latency to ictal spikes during
seizure 1. Colour coding corresponds to colours in A and B.
(G) Average ictal spike triggered neuronal activity for seizure 1 and
2. Neurons are sorted in the same order as in E. (H)
Similarity of ictal spike triggered patterns across seizures. Plot convention was the
same as in D. In D and H, higher values of
correlation for all original datasets, as compared to shuffled data, show that
seizure-long patterns as well as ictal-spike-triggered activity patterns are
consistent across seizures.

To detect peaks of ictal spikes, hippocampal LFP from the tetrode with the highest
amplitude of ictal spikes was chosen and bandpass filtered between 5 and 150 Hz. Peaks
were detected with the findpeaks MATLAB function. If more than one peak was detected
within a 30-ms window, then only the peak with the highest amplitude was kept. Peaks with
amplitudes <1 mV were removed. Changing this threshold to 0.5 or 1.5 mV gave
qualitatively similar results.

Spike sorting
Units were isolated by a semiautomatic algorithm (KlustaKwik-1.6, available at http://klustakwik.sourceforge.net) (Harris et al., 2000) followed by manual clustering (MClust 3.1;
Redish, 2002; Schjetnan and Luczak, 2011). Unit quality was evaluated using an
isolation distance measure (Harris et
al., 2000). For our analyses, we included putative single unit
clusters (isolation distance >20), as well as potential multiunit clusters (∼2–5
neurons) with low separation quality (isolation distance >5). We used the latter
approach because putative multiunit clusters still showed cluster-specific activity
patterns before and during seizures, therefore improving detection of population patterns.
Restricting analyses to only well isolated units (isolation distance >20), gave
qualitatively similar results. On average, we had 94.4 units (min = 21, max = 177) across
eight analysed datasets (two for each rat). Because spike sorting of 24-h datasets can
take weeks to finish, only datasets with the largest number of seizures and with the best
recording quality were analysed. Although hyperdrives can provide stable unit recordings
for periods longer than 24 h (Schwindel et
al., 2014), we restricted our analyses to quantify similarity of
spiking patterns only between consecutive pairs of seizures to minimize effect of
long-term ‘drift’ of units (see ‘Results’ section).

Although spike sorting during seizures can be especially challenging and even
problematic, there are multiple studies showing that it can be done successfully (Truccolo et al., 2011; Merricks et al., 2015). In
addition, in the current study, we provide additional evidence supporting the validity of
our spike sorting techniques. First, examination of spike waveforms before, during and
after seizures showed consistent spike shapes (Supplementary Figs 3 and 4). Similarly, spike features in principal component space were
consistent before and during seizure (Supplementary Fig. 3B). However, the strongest evidence for identifying the same
units before and during seizure is provided by our cross-correlogram analysis (see
‘Results’ section), showing consistent functional relations between pairs of neurons
before and during seizures, which would be unlikely to obtain without having the same
units in both time periods (see difference between original and neuron shuffled data in
Fig. 5C).

Figure 5 
Neuronal interactions before and during seizure are correlated.
(A) Example of pair-wise cross-correlograms between two neurons before
and during seizure. (B) Size of cross-correlogram peak before and during
seizure for an analysed sample neuron. Each dot corresponds to a pair of neurons: the
analysed neuron and one other neuron. Point labelled with (x1,y1) corresponds to peaks
shown in A. Dashed line represent regression lines (without offset term).
(C) Distribution of correlation coefficient values between
cross-correlogram peaks before and during seizure for a representative dataset
(original data: green bars; neuron-shuffled data: grey bars). (D) Average
correlation coefficient between cross-correlogram peaks before and during seizure for
all datasets. Plot convention the same as in Fig.
1D. (E) Spatial distribution of strong neuronal interactions
before (blue), and during seizure (red) in a representative dataset. Each black dot
represents a single neuron, with hippocampal (HP) neurons plotted on left side and
parietal neurons on right side (ParCtx). Lines denote which neuronal pairs had large
peak (>0.5) in cross-correlogram. Note that most neurons with strong interactions
before seizure were also highly correlated during seizure (marked by dashed lines).
(F) Size of peak in cross-correlograms between single neuron (SUA) and
multiunit activity (MUA) for representative dataset. (G) Correlation
coefficient between SUA–MUA cross-correlogram peaks before and during seizure for all
datasets. Plot convention the same as in Fig.
1D. In D and G, higher values of correlation for
all original datasets as compared to shuffled data, shows that ‘coupling’ between
neurons during seizures, consistently emerged between neurons, which already had
stronger correlations before the seizure.

Neuronal entrainment to local field potential and cross-correlogram
calculations
To quantify neuronal entrainment to LFP, for each neuron we calculated its
cross-correlogram with hippocampal LFP using the MATLAB xcorr(..‘coef’) function. This
normalizes the autocorrelations at zero lag to 1, which enables convenient expression of
values of correlogram as correlation coefficients. To account for the fact that neurons
can have different time lag to LFP modulation, we used the highest value of
cross-correlogram peak within −50 +50 ms as an entrainment value (Fig. 3B, inset). For those analyses, the LFP from the tetrode
with the highest amplitude of ictal spikes was chosen, but selecting different hippocampal
channels gave qualitatively similar results.

Figure 3 
Ictal spikes engage predominantly putative interneurons. (A)
Discrimination of putative interneurons from putative pyramidal cells based on spike
shape (half spike width and trough-to-peak distance). Hippocampal and parietal cortex
cells are marked in green and grey, respectively. Blue circles denote cells that had
in conjuncture three other typical features of interneurons (firing rate >15 Hz,
short latency inhibition to other cell, and most often inter-spike interval between 7
and 40 ms). Top left inset: Illustration or representative spike
waveforms from a putative interneuron (blue) and a pyramidal cell (olive). Top
right inset: Sample cross-correlogram between a putative interneuron and a
pyramidal cell indicating short latency (monosynaptic) inhibition. Star denotes
significantly lower coincidence of spikes as compared to baseline. Bottom
right inset: Representative auto-correlograms of putative interneurons
(blue) and pyramidal cells (olive). Peaks around zero are due to bursting activity
characteristic of pyramidal neurons. (B) Relation between cell spike
width and entrainment to ictal spikes (defined as height of cross-correlogram with
hippocampal LFP; inset). Note that negative correlation between spike
width and LFP entrainment shows that narrow spike cells are more strongly modulated by
ictal spikes than wide spike cells. (C) Relation between spike
trough-to-peak distance and entrainment to ictal spikes. For clarity, in
B and C only neurons with firing rate >5 Hz are
shown.

For cross-correlogram analyses between pairs of neurons, to account for differences in
firing rates, all cross-correlograms were normalized using the formula: xcorr × L / (N1 ×
N2); where xcorr is cross-correlogram, L is the number of time bins within the analysed
period, and N1 and N2 stand for the sum of spikes of neuron 1 and 2, respectively. After
this normalization, the cross-correlation value expected by chance is 1. To make our
cross-correlation plots more intuitively understandable, we subtracted 1 from all
normalized cross-correlograms, thus the level of cross-correlation expected by chance was
set to 0. For cross-correlogram analyses between single neuron and multi-unit activity the
same normalization formula was used.

For all presented results, we report mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM), unless
otherwise stated.

Discrimination of putative interneurons and putative pyramidal cells
Narrow-spike cells (putative fast spiking interneurons) and wide-spike cells (putative
pyramidal cells) can be characterized by distinct extracellular spike waveform features.
Although spike width cannot always unequivocally discriminate between interneurons and
pyramidal cells, it is generally accepted that for the vast majority of neurons it is a
valid and useful indicator of cell type (Fox and
Ranck, 1975; Mizumori et
al., 1989a; Markus et al., 1994). We used spike duration (measured as
trough-to-peak time in the spike waveform) and spike half amplitude duration to determine
the type of neuron as described previously (Barthó
et al., 2004; Luczak
and Barthó, 2012). The distribution of trough-to-peak durations was approximately
bimodal with a narrow border between clusters ∼0.23 ms (Fig. 3A and Supplementary Fig. 5). The discrimination based on spike width at half of its
maximum amplitude was less clear, although neurons with shortest half-width also had
shortest trough-to-peak durations.

For verification of the spike shape based classification, we computed cross-correlograms
(1 ms bin width) between all pairs of recorded neurons to identify putative inhibitory
connections. Significant troughs within 3 ms of the centre bin were considered as putative
monosynaptic inhibition. A trough in the cross-correlogram was defined as significant when
at least two neighbouring 1 ms bins were below 3 SD of the bin values in the control
period calculated between −30 to −10 ms and between +10 to +30 ms (Fig. 3A inset).

In addition, to further verify spike width-based classification, we also investigated
auto-correlograms of putative interneurons and putative pyramidal cells. Pyramidal cells
typically have a peak in the autocorrelogram either at ∼3–5 ms reflecting bursting
activity, or at much later time (>50 ms); in contrast, fast spiking interneurons tend
to have peak in the autocorrelogram between about 7–40 ms (Fig. 3A inset) (Mizumori
et al., 1989b; Barthó et al., 2004). Of 755 cells in our
dataset, 129 cells had auto-correlogram peak between 7 and 40 ms. Finally we also used
firing rate >15 Hz as an additional feature to identify fast spiking putative
interneurons (66 of 755 cells passed the latter firing rate criterion).

Results
To investigate neuronal firing dynamics in relation to spontaneous chronic seizures in the
chronic phase of epilepsy, neuronal population activity in hippocampus and parietal cortex
was continuously recorded in two distinct rat models of temporal lobe epilepsy (PP model:
three rats; KA model: one rat).

Reproducible patterns of neuronal activity during seizures
First, we examined the overall neuronal activity patterns during seizures. Spontaneous
seizures were associated with neuronal activity patterns, where some neurons were
consistently active at the start of the seizures, whereas other neurons showed increased
levels of discharges particularly during the later phases of the seizure (Fig. 1A). Such tens of seconds long neuronal
activity patterns were highly reproducible across seizures (PP model, Fig. 1A and B; KA model, Fig. 2). To quantify the similarity of spiking patterns across seizures, we
smoothed and normalized the activity of each neuron, and calculated the correlation
coefficient between neuronal patterns of consecutive seizures (Fig. 1C and Supplementary Fig. 6A). Correlations expected by chance were estimated by
repeating the same analysis after shuffling the order of neurons for each seizure
independently (Fig. 1C) (note that shuffling
the order of neurons is a more stringent test than spike-time shuffling; for example, if
the majority of neurons are active at seizure start, the neuron order shuffled patterns
will also have most neurons active at seizure start resulting in an above zero correlation
to the original pattern; therefore, shuffling the order of neurons makes it more difficult
to reject the null hypothesis as compared to spike-time shuffling; see Supplementary Fig. 7). The analysis
showed that the correlations between the original activity patterns were significantly
higher than correlations between neuron order shuffled patterns for all analysed datasets
(rorig = 0.56 ± 0.085, rshufl = 0.33 ± 0.081, P = 0.0011; paired
t-test; Fig. 1D). Thus,
consistent with results found in epileptic patients (Truccolo et al., 2011), we observed
seizure-long, reproducible patterns of neuronal activity conserved across seizures.

Figure 2 
Model invariance. Reproducibility of long and short spiking patterns
during seizures in the KA model. (A and B) Examples of long
neuronal activity patterns for two consecutive seizures. (C and
D) Sample 500 ms windows of activity form seizures in A
and B. Plots convention is the same as in Fig. 1A, B, E and F. Note that both PP and KA models show
clear long and short spiking patterns which are conserved across seizures.

Consistent sequential activity patterns during ictal spikes
Subsequently, we examined spiking patterns during seizures at much shorter time scales
(∼50–100 ms). We found that subsets of neurons were strongly entrained to ictal spikes,
forming sequential activity patterns even across brain areas (Fig. 1E, and F; see Fig.
2C, and D for the KA model). Consistency of ictal patterns was evaluated by
calculating ictal spike-triggered neuronal activity for each seizure (Fig. 1G) and computing the correlation coefficient between
patterns in two consecutive seizures, similarly as described above. Correlation values for
original data were significantly higher compared to neuron order shuffled data for all
datasets (rorig = 0.53 ± 0.074, rshufl = 0.24 ± 0.085,
P = 0.0007, t-test; Fig. 1H and Supplementary Fig. 6B). These results show that, similar to seizure-long
patterns that appeared on slower time scales of tens of seconds, ictal spike-associated
faster patterns were also strongly conserved across seizures.

In such ictal sequences, hippocampal neurons were usually active before neocortical
neurons [average lag from the ictal spike peak: hippocampal (HP) neurons: 5.3 ms; parietal
cortex (ParCtx) neurons: 10.5 ms; P = 0.022, t-test;
note that for the latter analysis, hippocampal LFP from the tetrode with the highest
amplitude ictal spikes was chosen]. In addition, the consistent sequential order was also
observed if analyses were done separately for hippocampal neurons and neocortical neurons
(rorigHP = 0.47 ± 0.07, rshuflHP = 0.24 ± 0.03; P
= 0.006; rorigParCtx = 0.25 ± 0.09, rshuflParCtx = 0.1 ± 0.05,
P = 0.035; t-test). Thus, consistent sequential
patterns during ictal spikes reflected both timing differences between brain structures
and sequential activity within a local area.

Ictal spikes preferentially entrain fast spiking cells
Next, we investigated the involvement of different cell types in ictal activity. Because
a key class of GABAergic interneurons, the fast spiking cells, are known to have spike
waveforms that are narrower than pyramidal cells (Barthó et al., 2004), we measured spike half-width and
trough-to-peak times for all recorded cells in order to distinguish interneurons (Fig. 3A). To provide additional support for the
spike duration-based classification, we also quantified other cell properties indicative
of cell class, including firing rate, shape of auto-correlogram and cross-correlogram
(Fig. 3A, insets). We found that the
majority of neurons that had a combination of high firing rate, cross-correlograms
indicative of monosynaptic inhibition and auto-correlograms with a peak between 7 and 40
ms, also had narrow spikes with short trough-to-peak times <0.23 ms (Fig. 3A). This consistency between different
measures indicated the validity of the cell type classification method.

Moreover, to determine the consistency of spike waveforms throughout the seizures for
each cell type, we analysed the spike amplitude for all neurons. The data showed that
during seizures, the average spike amplitude did not change significantly for the putative
interneurons, and it decreased by ∼2–5% for putative pyramidal cells (Supplementary Fig. 4). These
findings are consistent with previous observations from human focal epilepsy, where
similarly small spike amplitude reduction was observed (Truccolo et al., 2011). In
vitro and in vivo studies showed that decreases in spike
amplitude could be caused by depolarization block (Bragin et al., 1997; Bikson et al., 2003; Ziburkus et al., 2006); however, the decrease in spike
amplitude that we observed was considerably smaller than what would be expected from
depolarization block. Altogether, these data show that we could reliably record from both
types of neurons throughout the seizure and that depolarization block was unlikely to play
a key role in the activity of the recorded neurons.

Subsequently, we quantified the entrainment of each neuron to ictal spikes, by measuring
the peak value of normalized cross-correlograms between spiking activity and hippocampal
LFP (see ‘Materials and methods’ section for details). We found that putative interneurons
(spike half-width <0.14 ms) had significantly higher entrainment values than putative
pyramidal cells (spike half-width >0.14 ms) for both hippocampal and neocortical cells
(Fig. 3B; P < 0.001 for
both hippocampal and parietal cortex cells; Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; changing the
half-width discrimination criteria by ±0.02 ms gave similar results). Using trough-to-peak
time values as discriminator between putative pyramidal neurons and interneurons gave
similar results to the half-width measure [Fig.
3C; P < 0.001 for both hippocampal and parietal cortex cells;
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for putative interneurons (trough-to-peak time <0.23 ms) and
putative pyramidal cells (>0.23 ms); changing trough-to-peak distance criteria by ±0.02
ms gave similar results]. In addition, to avoid assigning specific threshold values for
discriminating putative interneurons and pyramidal cells, we repeated the above analyses
using a correlation coefficient measure. We found significant negative correlation between
entrainment to ictal spikes and half-width of spikes for both hippocampal and cortical
cells (hippocampal: r = −0.63, P < 0.001; cortical: r = 0.6,
P < 0.001). Similar negative correlation was found for entrainment
and trough-to-peak time as well (hippocampal: r = −0.58, P < 0.001;
parietal cortex: r = −0.64, P < 0.001). The preferential entrainment
of fast-spiking cells into ictal sequences was present both in the initial as in the late
phase of seizures but was most evident at the later phases of seizure (Supplementary Fig. 8). These results
showed that ictal spikes preferentially entrained fast spiking cells throughout the
seizure.

Preferential strengthening of the strongest neuronal couplings during seizure
Next, we investigated if neuronal activity before seizures could predict neuronal
entrainment to ictal spikes. The analysis showed that the strength of entrainment to ictal
spikes was indeed dependent on the strength of neuronal coupling to LFP before seizure.
Figure 4 illustrates that neuronal
entrainment to hippocampal LFP before seizures (−5 min to 0 min) and during seizures was
highly correlated for both hippocampal and parietal cells (hippocampal: r = 0.48,
P < 0.001; parietal cortex: r = 0.51, P <
0.001), with putative interneurons having higher entrainment values (Supplementary Fig. 5A). The
correlation between neuronal entrainment to LFP before and during the seizures was
significant both during the initial and late phase of the seizure (Supplementary Fig. 9B). For putative
pyramidal cells, we found no significant correlation between firing rate and LFP
entrainment, suggesting that values of neuronal entrainment to LFP could not be simply
explained by neuronal excitability (Supplementary Fig. 9C). In summary, these data indicate that neurons most
modulated by hippocampal LFP before seizures were also most entrained to ictal spikes.

Figure 4 
Relationship between the neuronal entrainment to hippocampal LFP before and
during seizures. Each dot represents a single cell. Hippocampal and parietal
cortex cells are marked in green and black, respectively. Blue circles denote cells
that had in conjuncture three other typical features of interneurons (firing rate
>15 Hz, short latency inhibition to other cell, and most often inter-spike interval
between 7 and 40 ms). Note that distributions of points along identity line shows that
neurons more entrained to LFP before seizure are more likely to participate in ictal
spikes.

To investigate further the relationship between preictal and ictal neuronal activity
patterns, we compared cross-correlograms for each pair of individual neurons between
preictal (5 min to 0 min before seizure onset) and ictal periods. All cross-correlograms
were normalized for firing rate and baseline subtracted, such that zero represented
cross-correlation expected by chance (Fig.
5A). The largest peaks in cross-correlograms were usually during seizure periods
(Fig. 5A). Interestingly, the peak height of
cross-correlogram during seizures correlated with peak height in the preictal period
(Fig. 5B). This shows that the
cross-correlogram peak during seizures depends on its magnitude before a seizure. Thus
strongly correlated neurons during seizures are already (strongly) correlated during the
preictal phase. The distribution of correlation coefficients was significantly different
from what would be expected by chance from shuffled data of the correlation coefficients
of the neuronal pairs [rorig = 0.22 ± 0.04, rshufl = 0.003 ± 0.007,
P < 0.0001; t-test; Fig. 5C and D; note that the shuffled data here designate the
correlation coefficients between neuronal pairs, which are different for preictal and
ictal periods, e.g. preictal cross-correlation peaks (n1-n2, n1-n3, n1-n4, …) and ictal
cross-correlation peaks (n1-n6, n1-n9, n1-n2, …), where n1-n2, etc denote the peak of
cross-correlogram between neurons 1 and 2; note also that similar results were obtained
when spike-time shuffled data were used as control]. Correlation between preictal and
ictal cross-correlogram peaks was even higher when calculated between a single neuron and
multi-unit activity [r = 0.74 ± 0.05, P < 0.0001;
t-test; mean slope = 2.6 ± 0.48, Fig. 5F and G; note that, for each cross-correlogram between a single neuron and
multi-unit activity, we calculated multi-unit activity as the summed activity of all other
simultaneously recorded cells, thus the multi-unit activity did not include the analysed
neuron (Luczak et al.,
2009; Bermudez Contreras et
al., 2013)]. Examining the pre-ictal period 5 min to 2.5 min before a
seizure (excluding 2.5 min of activity immediately before seizure) gave qualitatively
similar results. Therefore, a measure of neuronal coupling to multi-unit activity or to
LFP in the seizure-free period can provide a reliable estimate of which particular neurons
will be most entrained to ictal spikes.

Next, we further analysed similarities in temporal structure between pre-ictal and ictal
patterns. We again used pairwise cross-correlograms as in Fig. 5A, but each cross-correlogram was normalized between 0 and
1 to compare its overall shape. To reduce the effect of noise, only cross-correlograms
that had more than 300 spikes within −50 +50 ms window were analysed, and
cross-correlograms were smoothed with Gaussian kernel with 5 ms SD. Representative
examples of normalized pairwise cross-correlograms for pre-ictal and ictal periods are
shown in Fig. 6A and B, respectively. To
compare the structure of cross-correlograms, we used again the methodology described in
Supplementary Fig. 7. We found
that the correlations between pre-ictal and ictal cross-correlogram patterns were higher
as compared to order shuffled data for all analysed datasets (rorig = 0.29 ±
0.063, rshufl = 0.15 ± 0.049, P = 0.0018; paired
t-test, Fig. 6C and D).
Correlations between pre-ictal and ictal cross-correlogram patterns were consistent for
both the initial and the late phase of seizure (Supplementary Fig. 10). We also applied an alternative method to
quantify cross-correlogram similarities called ‘latency’ (Bermudez Contreras et al., 2013), which gave
qualitatively similar results (data not shown). Altogether, these results show that fine
scale temporal relations between neurons before and during seizures were similar.

Figure 6 
Temporal activity patterns before and during seizure are similar.
(A) Two thousand cross-correlograms between pairs of neurons calculated
during −5:0 min periods before seizures in a single experiment. (B)
Cross-correlograms between the same pairs of neurons as in A but during
seizures. Cross-correlograms in A and B are sorted in the
same order. Each cross-correlogram was smoothed with 5 ms Gaussian kernel and
normalized between 0 and 1. A and B represent average
cross-correlograms across all preseizure and seizure periods respectively, in a single
24 h recording. (C) Same as B but with shuffled order of
cross-correlograms. (D) Correlation coefficients between
cross-correlograms calculated before and during seizures. For all datasets, the
similarity between the original patterns was higher compared to the cross-correlogram
order shuffled data.

Discussion
Ictal sequences and fast spiking cells
The current study used tetrode recordings and rigorous analytical methods to examine the
functional organization of large numbers of neurons in two brain areas in two rat models
of chronic TLE. A major finding of the study is that neurons are often organized in
temporal sequences during chronic seizures, and that such ictal sequences of firing
involve a sizable population of fast spiking cells. While GABAergic interneurons are known
to play crucial roles in epilepsy, their exact contribution to various seizure phenomena
are still incompletely understood. For example, it is generally assumed that some form of
functional imbalance must take place between excitation and inhibition in seizures, but
precisely how such imbalance may be generated in mechanistic terms is unclear. Indeed,
while there is an abundance of evidence indicating various forms of compromised inhibitory
systems in hyperexcitable circuits, including GABAergic cell loss (Obenaus et al., 1993; Cossart et al., 2001; Santhakumar et al., 2001; Kobayashi and Buckmaster, 2003), the appearance of depolarizing
GABA responses during heightened levels of activity (Kaila et al., 2014; Staley, 2015), a possible depolarization block of interneurons
during ictal events (Ahmed et al.,
2014; Karlócai et al.,
2014), and that closed-loop optogenetic activation of fast spiking interneurons
can effectively curtail both electrographic and behavioural seizures in experimental TLE
(Krook-Magnuson et al.,
2013); however, increased inhibitory activity during seizure initiation has also
been reported, which indicates a more complex role for inhibition (Sessolo et al., 2015; Shiri et al., 2015; Lévesque et al., 2016b; Khoshkhoo et al., 2017).

Our data, demonstrating the presence of spontaneous ictal sequences with significant
participation by fast spiking cells, are in agreement with a recent study showing that
interictal spikes are dominated by GABAergic neuronal activity in chronic experimental TLE
(Muldoon et al., 2015).
Fast spikes in cortical networks are characteristic of parvalbumin-expressing interneurons
that powerfully regulate perisomatic and proximal dendritic inhibition in the normal brain
(Armstrong and Soltesz, 2012; Hu et al., 2014).
Interestingly, a key feature of such fast spiking interneurons is that they receive large
numbers of excitatory inputs both from local principal cells as well as from afferent
sources (Szabadics and Soltesz, 2009; Isaacson and Scanziani, 2011). Moreover, fast
spiking interneurons have lower spiking threshold, they are strongly entrained to
hippocampal theta (Fox and Ranck, 1975) and
to other hippocampal LFP rhythms (Varga et
al., 2012), and are readily activated by stimulation of afferents
(Mizumori et al.,
1989b), consistent with the notion that due to their broad
selectivity they can be preferentially activated by a variety of inputs. Therefore, it is
conceivable that the prominent presence of fast spiking unit activity in ictal sequences
observed in our recordings reflect the arrival of ictal wavefronts from areas adjacent to
the electrodes (Smith et al.,
2016). In addition, synapses between fast spiking interneurons (Freund and Buzsáki, 1996; Bartos et al., 2007), and interactions with
recurrently connected excitatory cells (Tsodyks
et al., 1997) may also play a role in shaping the temporal
sequence of unit firing in ictal events. Moreover, several studies have indicated the
involvement of some form of synchronized GABAergic activity in seizure generation (Avoli, 1996; Gnatkovsky et al., 2008; Fujiwara-Tsukamoto et al., 2010; Ellender et al., 2014; Uva et al., 2015; for review
see Curtis and Avoli, 2016), and increased
synchronization of interneurons with LFP has been reported to occur even minutes before
seizure onset (Grasse et al.,
2013). It should be noted that future studies will be needed to determine to what
extent the action potential discharges by the fast spiking, presumed GABAergic,
interneurons during ictal and interictal events translate to effective inhibition on
principal cell excitability and shape seizure characteristics such as duration and
termination.

Relationship between interictal and ictal sequences
Our results indicate that neurons that are highly coupled to population activity before
seizures are the ones that are preferentially involved in ictal events. Thus, measures of
neuronal coupling to multi-unit activity or to LFP in interictal periods may help to
identify and predict neurons most involved in ictal activity. Our data indicating that
correlation patterns between neurons are similar before and during a seizure provide
insights into the nature of pre-ictal and ictal activity patterns and show predominant
role of interneurons in seizure dynamics. Interestingly, subsets of neurons strongly
coupled to population activity were also reported in sensory cortex of non-epileptic
animals (Okun et al.,
2015), with the participating neurons being more strongly activated by a variety of
sensory stimuli, polysynaptic optogenetic stimulation, and top-down modulation. Most of
those neurons were putative interneurons, which is consistent with properties of GABAergic
cells described above and with our results presented here. This suggests that in epilepsy,
such strongly correlated neurons could form a strongly connected network, which may
facilitate propagation of epileptic activity.

Although similar correlations between neurons during non-ictal and ictal patterns in some
sense may not be entirely unexpected, it should be noted that each neuron receives input
from hundreds and even thousands of presynaptic neurons that, at least in principle, could
provide cortical circuits with the potential to generate a very large number of different
patterns, where small changes in inputs or behavioural state may lead to the emergence of
distinct activity patterns. Thus, it was rather surprising that studies in the normal
brain have revealed similarities between activity patterns across different conditions
(e.g. memory replay: Wilson and McNaughton,
1994; spontaneous and stimulus evoked patterns: Kenet et al., 2003; Luczak et al., 2015). Future experimental and
theoretical investigations will be needed to understand how normal neuronal sequences and
epilepsy-related patterns during non-ictal and ictal periods interrelate in mechanistic
terms.

Limitations
While the present study revealed novel insights into the existence of ictal sequences
with a strong participation by fast spiking units in spontaneous chronic seizures, the
experimental paradigm that was employed, naturally, also came with significant caveats
that should be taken into account. Among the major limitations of the approach is the fact
that, although high density neuronal recordings with hyperdrives allows recordings with
high spatial and temporal resolution, the overall sampling coverage is low. A closely
related question is whether we recorded from the seizure focus. Defining the seizure focus
is not always straightforward; indeed, to our knowledge, it has never been demonstrated
that a small group of neurons (the focus) reliably initiates focal seizures in
vivo. The latter hypothesis concerning the focus is especially difficult to
test with hyperdrive recordings, because the onset of seizures could in principle always
be far from the recording electrode. Indeed, seizures may be associated with specific
interactions between nodes of widespread brain networks (Nadler and Spencer, 2014; Kimchi and Cash, 2015) as seen in combined EEG and functional MRI recordings
(Federico et al., 2005)
and depth and cortical surface EEG recordings (Perucca et al., 2013; Khambhati et al., 2015), suggesting that the concept of focus
as the origin of a seizure may be more properly substituted by the concept of networks. In
addition, as seizures propagate through cerebral networks, microcircuits in distal nodes
can be engaged, and subsets of neurons in seemingly distal nodes, away from the de
facto seizure focus, can have surprisingly powerful control over the outcome of
the seizure (Krook-Magnuson et
al., 2014; Paz and Huguenard,
2015). Our recordings most likely did not take place from within the seizure
focus, since we mainly sampled from parietal cortex and dorsal hippocampus, and various
studies suggested that while seizures in the intraperitoneal pilocarpine and kainate
chemoconvulsant models of TLE typically do not have a single focus for every seizure, the
ictal events predominantly originate from the ventral hippocampus, subiculum, dentate
gyrus and entorhinal cortex (Bragin et
al., 2005; Boido et
al., 2012; Goldberg and
Coulter, 2013; Toyoda et
al., 2015). Another argument supporting the notion that we were
recording from outside the seizure focus is that we were able to reliably sort spikes
throughout the seizures, while such reliable sorting is reportedly extremely challenging
in the case of recordings from seizure foci due to hypersynchronous neuronal activation
and paroxysmal depolarization shifts (Merricks
et al., 2015). Indeed we did not observe hypersynchronous
firing of all neurons, despite clear ictal discharges on the LFP signal. This is in line
with other studies that recorded activity of individual neurons in relation to epileptic
seizures (Bower and Buckmaster, 2008; Truccolo et al., 2011; Bower et al., 2012; Ewell et al., 2015). Therefore,
our results most likely reflect neuronal activity patterns as invading ictal wavefronts
engage the local dorsal hippocampal and neocortical microcircuits.

A second major technical limitation concerns the relatively low number of animals from
which our dataset originates. Hyperdrive recordings are notoriously difficult and time
consuming; therefore, studies using this technique usually collect data from only two to
four animals [e.g. two rats (Euston et
al., 2007); three rats (Wang
et al., 2015); two rats in each of two groups (Steiner and Redish, 2014); three rats (Winter et al., 2015)]. We
obtained high quality recordings from three rats using the perforant path stimulation (PP)
model of chronic TLE, and from one rat in the kainic acid (KA) model. Although it is often
difficult to compare across experimental models, our data from the PP and KA models
indicate surprisingly consistent and reproducible results, which, together with the large
number of seizures recorded in both models, and the quantitative analytical approaches
supported by unbiased statistical methods, increase the confidence in the conclusions.

Third, it should be noted that, in experiments with extracellular tetrode recordings,
correct assignment of spikes to single neurons can be sometimes challenging, especially
during seizures. Although we have considerable experience with extracellular recordings
(McNaughton et al., 1983;
Luczak and Narayanan, 2005; Schjetnan and Luczak, 2011; Schwindel et al., 2014), and we
worked with well-isolated units with consistent waveforms throughout ictal and pre-ictal
periods (Supplementary Figs 3
and 4), we also likely had a
significant number of misclassified spikes. Importantly, however, our results are highly
unlikely to be due to problems with spike sorting. Errors in spike sorting would likely
reduce significance of our findings, rather than causing false-positive results. For
example, it is unlikely that narrow spike cell clusters would contain significant number
of spikes from principal cells, because adding principal cell spikes would result in
broadening (not thinning) of the average spike waveform. Moreover, the consistency of
cross-correlograms before and during seizures strongly suggests that we isolated the same
units in both periods. Indeed, errors in spike sorting would be expected to result in a
decreased probability of finding consistent temporal relations between neurons in
pre-ictal and ictal periods. A similar reasoning would also apply to the similarity of
patterns across seizures (Figs 1 and 2), where errors in assignments of spikes to
clusters would reduce, rather than enhance, the similarity of neuronal sequences across
seizures. Therefore, although errors in spike sorting are unavoidable, such errors were
unlikely to give rise to the correlations that were observed.

Outlook
In this study, we show similarities between ictal and pre-ictal patterns of neuronal
activity. Interestingly, the similarity of ictal and pre-ictal patterns indicate that it
may be possible to study ictal-like sequences even during periods between seizures.
Spontaneous seizures often occur quite rarely in both epileptic patients (Leidy et al., 1999) and animal
models of TLE (Gorter et al.,
2001; Raedt et al.,
2009; Ewell et al.,
2015). This relative infrequency of spontaneous seizures significantly limits the
amount of data that can be obtained to study epileptic networks in individual subjects
reliably. By showing that seizure-related patterns are also present in activity between
seizures, our results indicate a potential opportunity to gather significantly more data
to examine epileptic circuits in order to assist future individualized treatment
modalities. For example, one may speculate that by monitoring neurons most entrained to
LFP during spontaneous sequential patterns outside of ictal events, it may be one day
possible to reliably predict propagation patterns of ictal activity even if actual
seizures are not observed in the epilepsy monitoring unit. Although more research is
needed to make such a vision a reality, it is interesting to note that induced focal
seizures in the visual cortex have been observed to propagate along functional
connectivity that also underlies normal visual processing (Rossi et al., 2016). Thus, investigation of
network activity during non-ictal periods may one day provide clues about epileptic
networks in cases when ictal data are scarce.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data Click here for additional data file.

 Acknowledgements
We thank Sisay Yimenu and Cindy Hoang for technical assistance, and Majid Mohajerani for
helpful comments.

Funding
This research was supported by the Alberta Innovates Health Solutions Polaris Award and
National Science Foundation grant (1631465) to B.L.M., Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada Discovery Grant and Accelerator Supplement to A.L., BLM, BOF to
R.R. and K.V., FWO-aspirant grant from Research Foundation Flanders to M.S., and grants
from FWO, BOF and by the Clinical Epilepsy Grant from Ghent University Hospital to P.B.
and by the National Institutes of Health (NS35915) to I.S.

Supplementary material

Supplementary material is
available at Brain online.

Abbreviations
KAkainic acid injection model

LFPlocal field potential

PPperforant path stimulation model

TLEtemporal lobe epilepsy
==== Refs
References

Ahmed OJ , Kramer MA , Truccolo W , Naftulin JS , Potter NS , Eskandar EN  ,
Inhibitory single neuron control of seizures and epileptic
traveling waves in humans . BMC
Neurosci 2014 ; 15 :
F3 .

Armstrong C , Soltesz I  
Basket cell dichotomy in microcircuit function . J
Physiol 2012 ; 590 :
683 –94 .22199164 

Avoli M  
GABA-mediated synchronous potentials and seizure
generation . Epilepsia 1996 ;
37 : 1035 –42 .8917052 

Barthó P , Hirase H , Monconduit L , Zugaro M , Harris KD , Buzsáki G  
Characterization of neocortical principal cells and interneurons by
network interactions and extracellular features . J
Neurophysiol 2004 ; 92 :
600 –8 .15056678 

Bartos M , Vida I , Jonas P  
Synaptic mechanisms of synchronized gamma oscillations in inhibitory
interneuron networks . Nat Rev
Neurosci 2007 ; 8 :
45 –56 .17180162 

Bermudez Contreras EJ , Schjetnan AGP ,
Muhammad A , Bartho P , McNaughton BL ,
Kolb B  ,
Formation and reverberation of sequential neural activity patterns
evoked by sensory stimulation are enhanced during cortical
desynchronization . Neuron 2013 ;
79 : 555 –66 .23932001 

Bikson M , Hahn PJ , Fox JE , Jefferys JG  
Depolarization block of neurons during maintenance of electrographic
seizures . J Neurophysiol 2003 ;
90 : 2402 –8 .12801897 

Boido D , Jesuthasan N ,
de
Curtis M , Uva L  
Network dynamics during the progression of seizure-like events in the
hippocampal–parahippocampal regions . Cereb
Cortex 2012 ; 24 :
163 –73 .23048021 

Bower MR , Buckmaster PS  
Changes in granule cell firing rates precede locally recorded spontaneous
seizures by minutes in an animal model of temporal lobe epilepsy .
J Neurophysiol 2008 ; 99 :
2431 –42 .18322007 

Bower MR , Stead M , Meyer FB , Marsh WR , Worrell GA  
Spatiotemporal neuronal correlates of seizure generation in focal
epilepsy . Epilepsia 2012 ;
53 : 807 –16 .22352423 

Bragin A , Azizyan A , Almajano J , Wilson CL , Engel J  
Analysis of chronic seizure onsets after intrahippocampal kainic acid
injection in freely moving rats .
Epilepsia 2005 ; 46 :
1592 –8 .16190929 

Bragin A , Engel J , Wilson CL , Vizentin E , Mathern GW  
Electrophysiologic analysis of a chronic seizure model after unilateral
hippocampal KA injection . Epilepsia 1999 ;
40 : 1210 –21 .10487183 

Bragin A , Penttonen M ,
Buzsáki G  
Termination of epileptic afterdischarge in the
hippocampus . J Neurosci 1997 ;
17 : 2567 –79 .9065516 

Bumanglag AV , Sloviter RS  
Minimal latency to hippocampal epileptogenesis and clinical epilepsy
after perforant pathway stimulation-induced status epilepticus in awake
rats . J Comp Neurol 2008 ;
510 : 561 –80 .18697194 

Buzsáki G , Chen LS , Gage FH  
Chapter spatial organization of physiological activity in the hippocampal
region: relevance to memory formation . Prog Brain
Res 1990 ; 83 :
257 –68 .2203100 

Cardin JA , Carlén M , Meletis K , Knoblich U , Zhang F , Deisseroth K  ,
Driving fast-spiking cells induces gamma rhythm and controls
sensory responses . Nature 2009 ;
459 : 663 –7 .19396156 

Chen K , Aradi I , Thon N , Eghbal-Ahmadi M ,
Baram TZ , Soltesz I  
Persistently modified h-channels after complex febrile seizures convert
the seizure-induced enhancement of inhibition to hyperexcitability .
Nat Med 2001 ; 7 :
331 –7 .11231632 

Cohen I , Navarro V , Clemenceau S , Baulac M , Miles R  
On the origin of interictal activity in human temporal lobe epilepsy
in vitro . Science 2002 ;
298 : 1418 –21 .12434059 

Cossart R , Dinocourt C ,
Hirsch J , Merchan-Perez A ,
De
Felipe J , Ben-Ari Y  ,
Dendritic but not somatic GABAergic inhibition is decreased in
experimental epilepsy . Nat Neurosci 2001 ;
4 : 52 –62 .11135645 

Curtis M , Avoli M  
GABAergic networks jump-start focal seizures .
Epilepsia 2016 ; 57 :
679 –87 .27061793 

Cymerblit-Sabba A , Schiller Y  
Development of hypersynchrony in the cortical network during
chemoconvulsant-induced epileptic seizures in vivo .
J Neurophysiol 2012 ; 107 :
1718 –30 .22190619 

Ellender TJ , Raimondo JV ,
Irkle A , Lamsa KP , Akerman CJ  
Excitatory effects of parvalbumin-expressing interneurons maintain
hippocampal epileptiform activity via synchronous afterdischarges .
J Neurosci 2014 ; 34 :
15208 –22 .25392490 

Euston DR , Tatsuno M , McNaughton BL  
Fast-forward playback of recent memory sequences in prefrontal cortex
during sleep . Science 2007 ;
318 : 1147 –50 .18006749 

Ewell LA , Liang L , Armstrong C , Soltész I , Leutgeb S , Leutgeb JK  
Brain state is a major factor in preseizure hippocampal network activity
and influences success of seizure intervention . J
Neurosci 2015 ; 35 :
15635 –48 .26609157 

Federico P , Abbott DF , Briellmann RS ,
Harvey AS , Jackson GD  
Functional MRI of the pre-ictal state .
Brain 2005 ; 128 :
1811 –17 .15975948 

Fox SE , Ranck J  
Localization and anatomical identification of theta and complex spike
cells in dorsal hippocampal formation of rats . Exp
Neurol 1975 ; 49 :
299 –313 .1183529 

Freund TF , Buzsáki G  
Interneurons of the hippocampus .
Hippocampus 1996 ; 6 :
347 –470 .8915675 

Fujiwara-Tsukamoto Y , Isomura Y , Imanishi M , Ninomiya T , Tsukada M , Yanagawa Y  ,
Prototypic seizure activity driven by mature hippocampal
fast-spiking interneurons . J Neurosci 2010 ;
30 : 13679 –89 .20943908 

Gnatkovsky V , Librizzi L , Trombin F , de
Curtis M  
Fast activity at seizure onset is mediated by inhibitory circuits in the
entorhinal cortex in vitro . Ann
Neurol 2008 ; 64 :
674 –86 .19107991 

Goldberg EM , Coulter DA  
Mechanisms of epileptogenesis: a convergence on neural circuit
dysfunction . Nat Rev Neurosci 2013 ;
14 : 337 –49 .23595016 

Gorter J , Van
Vliet E , Aronica E , Da
Silva F  
Progression of spontaneous seizures after status epilepticus is
associated with mossy fibre sprouting and extensive bilateral loss of hilar parvalbumin
and somatostatin-immunoreactive neurons . Eur J
Neurosci 2001 ; 13 :
657 –69 .11207801 

Gothard KM , Skaggs WE , Moore KM , McNaughton BL  
Binding of hippocampal CA1 neural activity to multiple reference frames
in a landmark-based navigation task . J
Neurosci 1996 ; 16 :
823 –35 .8551362 

Grasse DW , Karunakaran S ,
Moxon KA  
Neuronal synchrony and the transition to spontaneous
seizures . Exp Neurol 2013 ;
248 : 72 –84 .23707218 

Gray CM , Maldonado PE ,
Wilson M , McNaughton B  
Tetrodes markedly improve the reliability and yield of multiple
single-unit isolation from multi-unit recordings in cat striate cortex .
J Neurosci Methods 1995 ; 63 :
43 –54 .8788047 

Harris KD , Henze DA , Csicsvari J , Hirase H , Buzsáki G  
Accuracy of tetrode spike separation as determined by simultaneous
intracellular and extracellular measurements . J
Neurophysiol 2000 ; 84 :
401 –14 .10899214 

Hu H , Gan J , Jonas P  
Fast-spiking, parvalbumin+ GABAergic interneurons: from cellular design
to microcircuit function . Science 2014 ;
345 : 1255263 .25082707 

Isaacson JS , Scanziani M  
How inhibition shapes cortical activity .
Neuron 2011 ; 72 :
231 –43 .22017986 

Kaila K , Ruusuvuori E ,
Seja P , Voipio J , Puskarjov M  
GABA actions and ionic plasticity in epilepsy .
Curr Opinion Neurobiol 2014 ; 26 :
34 –41 .

Kandratavicius L , Balista PA , Lopes-Aguiar C ,
Ruggiero RN ,
Umeoka EH , Garcia-Cairasco N  ,
Animal models of epilepsy: use and limitations .
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2014 ; 10 :
1693 .25228809 

Karlócai MR , Kohus Z , Káli S , Ulbert I , Szabó G , Máté Z  ,
Physiological sharp wave-ripples and interictal events in
vitro: what’s the
difference? Brain 2014 :
awt348 .

Kenet T , Bibitchkov D ,
Tsodyks M , Grinvald A , Arieli A  
Spontaneously emerging cortical representations of visual
attributes . Nature 2003 ;
425 : 954 –6 .14586468 

Khambhati AN , Davis KA , Oommen BS , Chen SH , Lucas TH , Litt B  ,
Dynamic network drivers of seizure generation, propagation and
termination in human neocortical epilepsy . PLoS Comput
Biol 2015 ; 11 :
e1004608 .26680762 

Khoshkhoo S , Vogt D , Sohal VS  
Dynamic, cell-type-specific roles for GABAergic interneurons in a mouse
model of optogenetically inducible seizures .
Neuron 2017 ; 93 :
291 –8 .28041880 

Kimchi EY , Cash SS  
Seizures at the scale of individual neurons .
Brain 2015 ; 138 :
2807 –8 .26408654 

Kobayashi M , Buckmaster PS  
Reduced inhibition of dentate granule cells in a model of temporal lobe
epilepsy . J Neurosci 2003 ;
23 : 2440 –52 .12657704 

Krook-Magnuson E , Armstrong C ,
Oijala M , Soltesz I  
On-demand optogenetic control of spontaneous seizures in temporal lobe
epilepsy . Nat Commun 2013 ;
4 : 1376 .23340416 

Krook-Magnuson E , Szabo GG , Armstrong C , Oijala M , Soltesz I  
Cerebellar directed optogenetic intervention inhibits spontaneous
hippocampal seizures in a mouse model of temporal lobe epilepsy .
eNeuro 2014 ; 1 : pii:
e.2014 .25599088 

Leidy N , Elixhauser A ,
Vickrey B , Means E , Willian M  
Seizure frequency and the health-related quality of life of adults with
epilepsy . Neurology 1999 ;
53 : 162 –6 .10408553 

Lévesque M , Avoli M , Bernard C  
Animal models of temporal lobe epilepsy following systemic
chemoconvulsant administration . J Neurosci
Methods 2016a ; 260 :
45 –52 .25769270 

Lévesque M , Herrington R ,
Hamidi S , Avoli M  
Interneurons spark seizure-like activity in the entorhinal
cortex . Neurobiol Dis 2016b ;
87 : 91 –101 .26721318 

Luczak A , Barthó P  
Consistent sequential activity across diverse forms of UP states under
ketamine anesthesia . Eur J Neurosci 2012 ;
36 : 2830 –8 .22759065 

Luczak A , Barthó P , Harris KD  
Spontaneous events outline the realm of possible sensory responses in
neocortical populations . Neuron 2009 ;
62 : 413 –25 .19447096 

Luczak A , McNaughton BL ,
Harris KD  
Packet-based communication in the cortex . Nature
Rev Neurosci 2015 ; 16 :
745 –55 .26507295 

Luczak A , Narayanan NS  
Spectral representation—analyzing single-unit activity in extracellularly
recorded neuronal data without spike sorting . J Neurosci
Methods 2005 ; 144 :
53 –61 .15848239 

Marchionni I , Maccaferri G  
Quantitative dynamics and spatial profile of perisomatic GABAergic input
during epileptiform synchronization in the CA1 hippocampus . J
Physiol 2009 ; 587 :
5691 –708 .19840998 

Markus EJ , Barnes CA , McNaughton BL ,
Gladden VL , Skaggs WE  
Spatial information content and reliability of hippocampal CA1 neurons:
effects of visual input . Hippocampus 1994 ;
4 : 410 –21 .7874233 

McNaughton BL  
Implantable multi-electrode microdrive
array . U.S. Patent No. 5,928,143. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office . 1999 .

McNaughton BL , Douglas R , Goddard GV  
Synaptic enhancement in fascia dentata: cooperativity among coactive
afferents . Brain Res 1978 ;
157 : 277 –93 .719524 

McNaughton BL , O'Keefe J , Barnes CA  
The stereotrode: a new technique for simultaneous isolation of several
single units in the central nervous system from multiple unit records .
J Neurosci Methods 1983 ; 8 :
391 –7 .6621101 

Merricks EM , Smith EH , McKhann GM , Goodman RR , Bateman LM , Emerson RG  ,
Single unit action potentials in humans and the effect of seizure
activity . Brain 2015 ; 138 (Pt
10) : 2891 –906 .26187332 

Mizumori S , Barnes CA , McNaughton B  
Reversible inactivation of the medial septum: selective effects on the
spontaneous unit activity of different hippocampal cell types .
Brain Res 1989a ; 500 :
99 –106 .2605512 

Mizumori S , Mcnaughton BL ,
Barnes CA  
A comparison of supramammillary and medial septal influences on
hippocampal field potentials and single-unit activity . J
Neurophysiol 1989b ; 61 :
15 –31 .2493075 

Muldoon SF , Soltesz I , Cossart R  
Spatially clustered neuronal assemblies comprise the microstructure of
synchrony in chronically epileptic networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2013 ; 110 :
3567 –72 .23401510 

Muldoon SF , Villette V , Tressard T , Malvache A , Reichinnek S , Bartolomei F  ,
GABAergic inhibition shapes interictal dynamics in awake epileptic
mice . Brain 2015 ; 138 :
2875 –90 .26280596 

Nadler JV , Spencer DD  
What is a seizure focus? Issues in clinical
epileptology: a view from the bench . The
Netherlands : Springer ;
2014  p. 55 –62 .

Obenaus A , Esclapez M , Houser C  
Loss of glutamate decarboxylase mRNA-containing neurons in the rat
dentate gyrus following pilocarpine-induced seizures . J
Neurosci 1993 ; 13 :
4470 –85 .8410199 

Okun M , Steinmetz NA ,
Cossell L , Iacaruso MF , Ko H ,
Barthó P  ,
Diverse coupling of neurons to populations in sensory
cortex . Nature 2015 ; 521 :
511 –15 .25849776 

Paz JT , Huguenard JR  
Microcircuits and their interactions in epilepsy: is the focus out of
focus? Nat Neurosci 2015 ;
18 : 351 –9 .25710837 

Perucca P , Dubeau F , Gotman J  
Widespread EEG changes precede focal seizures .
PLoS One 2013 ; 8 :
e80972 .24260523 

Prince DA  
Inhibition in “epileptic” neurons .
Exp Neurol 1968 ; 21 :
307 –21 .5673646 

Prince DA , Wilder BJ  
Control mechanisms in cortical epileptogenic foci*: surround
inhibition . Arch Neurol 1967 ;
16 : 194 –202 .6018049 

Racine RJ  
Modification of seizure activity by electrical
stimulation: II. Motor seizure . Electroencephalogr Clin
Neurophysiol 1972 ; 32 :
281 –94 .4110397 

Raedt R , Van
Dycke A , Van
Melkebeke D , De
Smedt T , Claeys P , Wyckhuys T  ,
Seizures in the intrahippocampal kainic acid epilepsy model:
characterization using long-term video-EEG monitoring in the rat .
Acta Neurol Scand 2009 ; 119 :
293 –303 .19388152 

Redish AD  
MClust Spike Sorting Toolbox . 2002 
Available from: http://wwwcbcumnedu/∼redish/mclust .

Rossi LF , Wykes RC , Kullman D , Carandini M  
Cortical seizure propagation respects functional connectivity underlying
sensory processing . bioRxiv 2016 :
080598 .

Sabolek HR , Swiercz WB , Lillis KP , Cash SS , Huberfeld G , Zhao G  ,
A candidate mechanism underlying the variance of interictal spike
propagation . J Neurosci 2012 ;
32 : 3009 –21 .22378874 

Santhakumar V , Ratzliff AD ,
Jeng J , Toth Z , Soltesz I  
Long-term hyperexcitability in the hippocampus after experimental head
trauma . Ann Neurol 2001 ;
50 : 708 –17 .11761468 

Schevon CA , Weiss SA , McKhann G Jr,
Goodman RR , Yuste R , Emerson RG  ,
Evidence of an inhibitory restraint of seizure activity in
humans . Nat Commun 2012 ;
3 : 1060 .22968706 

Schjetnan AG , Luczak A  
Recording large-scale neuronal ensembles with silicon probes in the
anesthetized rat . J Vis Exp 2011 ;
56 : 3282 .

Schwindel CD , Ali K , McNaughton BL ,
Tatsuno M  
Long-term recordings improve the detection of weak excitatory–excitatory
connections in rat prefrontal cortex . J
Neurosci 2014 ; 34 :
5454 –67 .24741036 

Sessolo M , Marcon I , Bovetti S , Losi G , Cammarota M , Ratto GM  ,
Parvalbumin-positive inhibitory interneurons oppose propagation
but favor generation of focal epileptiform activity . J
Neurosci 2015 ; 35 :
9544 –57 .26134638 

Shiri Z , Manseau F , Lévesque M , Williams S , Avoli M  
Interneuron activity leads to initiation of low-voltage fast-onset
seizures . Ann Neurol 2015 ;
77 : 541 –6 .25546300 

Smith EH , Liou JY , Davis TS , Merricks EM , Kellis SS , Weiss SA  ,
The ictal wavefront is the spatiotemporal source of discharges
during spontaneous human seizures . Nat
Commun 2016 ; 7 :
11098 .27020798 

Staley K  
Molecular mechanisms of epilepsy .
Nat Neurosci 2015 ; 18 :
367 –72 .25710839 

Stark E , Roux L , Eichler R , Senzai Y , Royer S , Buzsáki G  
Pyramidal cell-interneuron interactions underlie hippocampal ripple
oscillations . Neuron 2014 ;
83 : 467 –80 .25033186 

Steiner AP , Redish AD  
Behavioral and neurophysiological correlates of regret in rat
decision-making on a neuroeconomic task . Nat
Neurosci 2014 ; 17 :
995 –1002 .24908102 

Szabadics J , Soltesz I  
Functional specificity of mossy fiber innervation of GABAergic cells in
the hippocampus . J Neurosci 2009 ;
29 : 4239 –51 .19339618 

Thurman D , Beghi E , Begley C , Berg A , Buchhalter J , Ding D  
Standards for epidemiologic studies and surveillance of
epilepsy . Epilepsia 2011 ;
52  (Suppl 7): 2 –26 .21899536 

Toyoda I , Fujita S , Thamattoor AK ,
Buckmaster PS  
Unit activity of hippocampal interneurons before spontaneous seizures in
an animal model of temporal lobe epilepsy . J
Neurosci 2015 ; 35 :
6600 –18 .25904809 

Trevelyan AJ , Schevon CA  
How inhibition influences seizure propagation .
Neuropharmacology 2013 ; 69 :
45 –54 .22722026 

Trevelyan AJ , Sussillo D , Watson BO , Yuste R  
Modular propagation of epileptiform activity: evidence for an inhibitory
veto in neocortex . J Neurosci 2006 ;
26 : 12447 –55 .17135406 

Truccolo W , Ahmed OJ , Harrison MT , Eskandar EN , Cosgrove GR , Madsen JR  ,
Neuronal ensemble synchrony during human focal
seizures . J Neurosci 2014 ;
34 : 9927 –44 .25057195 

Truccolo W , Donoghue JA ,
Hochberg LR ,
Eskandar EN ,
Madsen JR , Anderson WS  ,
Single-neuron dynamics in human focal epilepsy .
Nat Neurosci 2011 ; 14 :
635 –41 .21441925 

Tsodyks MV , Skaggs WE , Sejnowski TJ , McNaughton BL  
Paradoxical effects of external modulation of inhibitory
interneurons . J Neurosci 1997 ;
17 : 4382 –8 .9151754 

Uva L , Breschi GL , Gnatkovsky V , Taverna S , de
Curtis M  
Synchronous inhibitory potentials precede seizure-like events in acute
models of focal limbic seizures . J
Neurosci 2015 ; 35 :
3048 –55 .25698742 

Varga C , Golshani P , Soltesz I  
Frequency-invariant temporal ordering of interneuronal discharges during
hippocampal oscillations in awake mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2012 ; 109 :
E2726 –34 .23010933 

Velazquez JLP , Carlen PL  
Synchronization of GABAergic interneuronal networks during seizure-like
activity in the rat horizontal hippocampal slice . Eur J
Neurosci 1999 ; 11 :
4110 –18 .10583499 

Vermoesen K , Smolders I , Massie A , Michotte Y , Clinckers R  
The control of kainic acid-induced status epilepticus .
Epilepsy Res 2010 ; 90 :
164 –6 .20434312 

Wang Y , Romani S , Lustig B , Leonardo A , Pastalkova E  
Theta sequences are essential for internally generated hippocampal firing
fields . Nat Neurosci 2015 ;
18 : 282 –8 .25531571 

Wiebe S  
Epidemiology of temporal lobe epilepsy .
Can J Neurol Sci 2000 ; 27 :
S6 –S10 .10830320 

Wilson MA , McNaughton BL  
Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble memories during
sleep . Science 1994 ; 265 :
676 –9 .8036517 

Winter SS , Clark BJ , Taube JS  
Disruption of the head direction cell network impairs the parahippocampal
grid cell signal . Science 2015 ;
347 : 870 –4 .25700518 

Ziburkus J , Cressman JR ,
Barreto E , Schiff SJ  
Interneuron and pyramidal cell interplay during in vitro
seizure-like events . J Neurophysiol 2006 ;
95 : 3948 –54 .16554499

