
==== Front
Brain
Brain
brain
brainj
brain
Brain
0006-8950 1460-2156 Oxford University Press 

3456817
109.2.325
10.1093/brain/109.2.325
Articles
VIRAL INFECTION IN PATIENTS WITH MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS AND HLA-DR MATCHED CONTROLS
COMPSTON D. A. S.  VAKARELIS B. N.  PAUL E.  McDONALD W. I.  BATCHELOR J. R.  MIMS C. A.  
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square
London WCIN 3BG
Department of Immunology, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith Hospital
London W12 0HS
Department of Microbiology, Guy's Hospital Medical School
London Bridge SE1 9RT

Correspondence to. Dr D. A S Compston, Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Wales, Heath Park, CardiffCF4 4XW
4 1986 
4 1986 
109 2 325 344
02 1 1985 23 7 1985 09 8 1985 © Oxford University Press1986This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic or until permissions are revoked in writing. Upon expiration of these permissions, PMC is granted a perpetual license to make this article available via PMC and Europe PMC, consistent with existing copyright protections.Abstract
Retrospective comparisons of the prevalence and age, where appropriate, of some childhood infectious illnesses and vaccinations, together with serological evidence for exposure to 16 viruses, many of which have previously been implicated in the aetiology of multiple sclerosis (MS) were made in 177 patients with acute optic neuritis, other recent isolated demyelinating episodes or established MS and 164 controls The expected high frequency of HLA-DR2 in patients with demyelinating disease was matched by preselection of normal controls with this antigen (DR2+), the remaining individuals were classified as HLA-DR2 negative/DR3 positive (DR3+) or HLA-DR2 and 3 negative (DR2/3-). Cases were compared with controls, collectively and in analyses restricted to each genetic group; these comparisons were repeated considering the three categories of patients with demyelination and two control populations separately All DR2+, DR3+ and DR2/3 individuals were compared in a single analysis to assess the effect of HLA type itself on the results

Patients with demyelinating disease had rubella and measles at a later age and reported mumps infection more frequently than controls. Age of typhoid vaccination and duration of exposure to domestic dogs was higher in all cases than controls. Age of measles and mumps, but not rubella, was higher in DR2 + cases than controls, but differences were not observed in the other genetic groups Higher rubella antibody titres were present in all cases than controls and in analyses confined to DR2+ individuals in whom higher Epstein Barr virus antibody titres were also present Measles haemagglutination inhibition and parainfluenza I antibody titres were increased and influenza A antibodies detected less frequently in all patients with optic neuntis and those with DR2 compared with appropnate controls; influenza B antibody titres were lower in all DR2+ cases than controls. Higher adenovirus and varicella zoster antibody titres were present in DR2/3 patients with demyelination and other neurological diseases compared with normal controls. Overall, older age of infection and higher antibody titres were observed more often in patients with optic neuritis, in particular DR2 + cases, than other individuals with demyelination or controls.

Our serological results are consistent with the presence of abnormal HLA mmunological reactivity in patients with MS but cannot be explained only by an effect of DR type itself; age at which susceptible individuals develop some common childhood infections may also influence the subsequent development of the disease.

