
==== Front
Biophys JBiophysical Journal0006-34951542-0086The Biophysical Society BPJ120510.1016/j.bpj.2009.10.056ProteinThe Interaction of αB-Crystallin with Mature
                        α-Synuclein Amyloid Fibrils Inhibits Their
                    Elongation Waudby Christopher A. †¶Knowles Tuomas P.J. ‡Devlin Glyn L. ‖Skepper Jeremy N. §Ecroyd Heath ††Carver John A. ††Welland Mark E. ‡Christodoulou John ¶Dobson Christopher M. †Meehan Sarah sm421@cam.ac.uk†∗† University Chemical Laboratory, University of
                Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom‡ Nanoscience Centre, University of Cambridge,
                Cambridge, United Kingdom§ Department of Physiology, Development and
                Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom¶ Department of Structural and Molecular Biology,
                University College London, London, United Kingdom‖ Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
                Monash University, Clayton, Australia†† School of Chemistry and Physics,
                University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia∗ Corresponding author
                        sm421@cam.ac.uk03 3 2010 98 5 843 851 
                3 8 2009 
                1 10 2009 
            © 2010 by the Biophysical
                    Society.2010Biophysical SocietyThis document may be redistributed and reused, subject to certain conditions.αB-Crystallin is a small heat-shock protein (sHsp) that is colocalized
                    with α-synuclein (αSyn) in
                    Lewy bodies—the pathological hallmarks of Parkinson's
                    disease—and is an inhibitor of αSyn amyloid
                    fibril formation in an ATP-independent manner in vitro. We have
                    investigated the mechanism underlying the inhibitory action of sHsps, and here
                    we establish, by means of a variety of biophysical techniques including
                    immunogold labeling and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, that
                        αB-crystallin interacts with
                        αSyn, binding along the length of mature amyloid
                    fibrils. By measurement of seeded fibril elongation kinetics, both in solution
                    and on a surface using a quartz crystal microbalance, this binding is shown to
                    strongly inhibit further growth of the fibrils. The binding is also demonstrated
                    to shift the monomer-fibril equilibrium in favor of dissociation. We believe
                    that this mechanism, by which a sHsp interacts with mature amyloid fibrils,
                    could represent an additional and potentially generic means by which at least
                    some chaperones protect against amyloid aggregation and limit the onset of
                    misfolding diseases.
==== Body
Introduction
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative movement disorder
                distinguished neuropathologically by the presence of Lewy bodies and Lewy
                neurites—proteinaceous cytoplasmic inclusions—in dopaminergic
                neurons of the substantia nigra (1). Electron microscopy shows these inclusions to be composed of
                amyloid-like fibrillar material, the major component of which is the 140-residue,
                intrinsically disordered protein α-synuclein
                    (αSyn) (2).
                Recombinant αSyn has been found to form aggregates
                in vitro with all the characteristics of amyloid fibrils associated with
                diseased states (3). Although most cases of
                PD are idiopathic, a small number of familial forms have been identified including
                the A53T variant, in which aggregation is significantly accelerated relative to the
                wild-type (WT) (4), thus implicating
                    αSyn aggregation in the etiology of PD. As
                    αSyn knockout mice do not exhibit PD-like symptoms, it
                can be concluded that PD results from a pathological gain of function (i.e.,
                aggregate toxicity) rather than the loss of normal αSyn
                function (5).

The aggregation mechanism itself, in common with other amyloid systems, is a
                nucleated process in which there is slow and initially unfavorable association of
                monomers into a structure competent to elongate into full-length fibrils (6). An important experimental consequence of
                such a nucleation-polymerization mechanism is the phenomenon of seeding, in which a
                substoichiometric quantity of preformed fibrils can greatly accelerate the
                aggregation reaction by bypassing the nucleation process. The aggregation kinetics
                of seeded reactions are therefore determined only by the elongation and
                fragmentation rates, and, in the initial rate approximation, by the elongation rate
                alone (7).

αSyn aggregation may be suppressed by the molecular
                chaperone Hsp70, and biophysical investigations have shown that this
                inhibition occurs via binding to prefibrillar species rather than monomeric
                    αSyn (8).
                Another molecular chaperone that inhibits αSyn aggregation
                is αB-crystallin, a 175-residue protein ubiquitous
                in mammalian tissue (9). Early work showed
                that αB-crystallin is a member of the family of small heat
                shock proteins (sHsps), and is upregulated in response to a range of stress stimuli
                and clinical disorders including Alzheimer's disease, transmissible spongiform
                encephalopathies, dementia with Lewy bodies, and Parkinson's disease (10). As a sHsp,
                αB-crystallin is a molecular chaperone and has been
                demonstrated to suppress thermally induced aggregation of
                β- and γ-crystallins, suggesting
                that it acts as a significant protective mechanism against cataract formation in the
                eye lens (11); the latter is associated
                with aggregation and has been shown in some cases to involve amyloid formation
                    (12).
                αB-Crystallin also inhibits the aggregation of several
                other proteins in vitro, including the amyloid-β
                peptides, β2-microglobulin, and insulin (13,14). There are, however, conflicting
                reports as to whether such inhibition is neuroprotective (15,16).

The sequence of αB-crystallin has amphipathic character, and
                contains a hydrophobic N-terminal domain, a central
                α-crystallin domain (common to all sHsps), and a
                hydrophilic and flexible 12-residue C-terminal extension (9). The amphipathic nature of the sequence is believed to
                be crucial to its chaperone function, enabling
                αB-crystallin to bind to exposed hydrophobic patches
                characteristic of misfolded states (17).
                The hydrophilic and highly flexible C-terminal extension, as characterized by
                solution state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (18), is also essential to efficient chaperone activity, with an
                important role in solubilizing complexes of the chaperone with misfolded and
                aggregated species (10). No crystal
                structure of αB-crystallin has yet been determined;
                comparison of the α-crystallin domain with
                structures of other sHsps, however, suggests that the central domain will adopt a
                    β-sandwich structure (19). A major barrier to structural characterization of
                    αB-crystallin, and certainly to its crystallization, is
                the self-association of monomers into large, polydispersed assemblies (typically
                24–33mers), with molecular masses varying from 300 kDa to >1 MDa
                    (20). Studies of the quaternary
                structure of the protein by cryo-electron microscopy reveal spherical assemblies
                between 8 and 18 nm in diameter with a central cavity (21), which undergo subunit exchange on a timescale of
                minutes (22). This exchange is inhibited by
                binding to large denatured or partially unfolded proteins, suggesting that subunit
                exchange may have an important role in the mechanism of chaperone action (10,22).

αB-Crystallin accumulates in neurons and glia of the central
                nervous system under pathological conditions (23), becoming colocalized with αSyn in Lewy
                bodies along with a host of other proteins including the sHsp Hsp27, and other
                chaperones such as clusterin, Hsp70, and Hsp90 (24). In vitro biophysical studies demonstrated complete
                inhibition of the nucleated assembly of αSyn into fibrils
                by 0.25 equivalents of αB-crystallin (25). Imaging studies of the aggregation products showed
                large amounts of amorphous material, which was interpreted as the binding of
                    αB-crystallin to monomeric or oligomeric intermediates,
                inhibiting the nucleation of fibrillar αSyn aggregates.
                Later studies additionally demonstrated that the addition of 0.5 equivalents of
                    αB-crystallin to aggregating samples of
                    αSyn is highly effective in inhibiting further growth,
                and this was also interpreted as a consequence of the stabilization of monomeric or
                prefibrillar αSyn, inhibiting its incorporation into the
                growing fibril (26).

Given the complex mechanisms of amyloid formation and the number of aggregated
                species involved—e.g., monomers, oligomers, protofibrils, fibrils, and
                amorphous assemblies—we were motivated to consider the interaction of
                    αB-crystallin with additional species along the
                aggregation pathway and, in particular, with the mature fibrils themselves, which
                hitherto have largely been regarded as inert reaction products. There is evidence,
                however, that this view might not be correct, as
                αB-crystallin has been reported to bind to
                    Aβ40 fibrils, and it has been suggested that this
                interaction may inhibit further aggregation (13), although the experimental data reported could not conclusively
                distinguish between the effects of the chaperone in solution or bound to the fibril.
                A separate study of insulin aggregation at low pH demonstrated that fibril
                elongation is inhibited after the incubation of the insulin fibrils with
                    αB-crystallin, where the detection of binding
                stimulated the proposal that the latter serves to limit further fibril growth (14). Here we investigate the hypothesis that
                    αB-crystallin might bind to
                αSyn fibrils, and use a variety of techniques including
                newly developed QCM and NMR methodologies to explore the range of effects that
                result from such chaperone-fibril interactions.

Materials and Methods
These are described in the Supporting
                Material.

Results
Characterization of αSyn interactions with
                        αB-crystallin
The cosedimentation of αB-crystallin and two control
                    proteins (green fluorescent protein, GFP, and ubiquitin hydrolase, UCH-L3) with
                    preformed A53T αSyn fibrils was assayed by SDS-PAGE
                        (Fig. 1
                    A). A53T αSyn was chosen for this
                    study because of its high aggregation propensity relative to the WT protein
                        (4), and it was found to pellet
                        αB-crystallin in a similar manner to that
                    previously observed for the WT (25).
                    The intensity of staining with Coomassie blue was used to estimate the amount of
                        αB-crystallin present in the pelleted fraction
                        (Fig. S1
                    A in the Supporting
                        Material), and an approximate binding ratio of 0.6:1
                        αB-crystallin:αSyn was
                    determined, where the latter refers to the concentration of the constituent
                    monomers within the fibrils and the observed staining intensity was normalized
                    by protein mass. The corresponding binding ratios for GFP and UCH-L3 were 0.1:1
                    and 0.01:1, respectively, both consistent with residual material expected from
                    the incomplete washing of the pellet, and indicating that the sedimentation of
                        αB-crystallin was not due to any generic affinity
                    of proteins for hydrophobic patches on the fibril surface, or rheological
                    effects from the fibril network during centrifugation.
                        αB-Crystallin alone was not observed to sediment
                    under these conditions (Fig. S1,
                        B and C).

The intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence of αB-crystallin
                    was used to estimate the concentration of the protein remaining in solution
                    after incubation with preformed A53T fibrils and centrifugation for 30 min at
                    16,000 × g (Fig. 1
                    B); these conditions were found sufficient to pellet
                        αSyn fibrils completely, and as
                        αSyn does not contain any tryptophan residues, it
                    exhibits little intrinsic fluorescence. Only a small (6%) though reproducible
                    enhancement of αB-crystallin fluorescence was detected
                    in the presence of monomeric αSyn (Fig. 1
                    B), with a concomitant blue-shift of 1 nm (343–342 nm)
                    indicative of the fluorophore being in a more hydrophobic environment,
                    and consistent with the existence of a weak interaction between
                        αB-crystallin and monomeric
                        αSyn (25).

To investigate its putative interaction with monomeric
                    αSyn further, αB-crystallin
                    was titrated into uniformly 15N-labeled
                    αSyn, and changes in the amide chemical shifts were
                    monitored by recording [1H,15N]-HSQC experiments (Fig. S2). Few significant changes
                    were observed, and the largest perturbation, at His50, can be
                    attributed to its high sensitivity to small changes in pH, an observation noted
                    previously in titrations of monomeric αSyn (8). A small, uniform increase in signal
                    intensity was observed, in contrast to previous reports of a uniform loss of
                    intensity (25). This finding suggests
                    that these changes are more probably attributable to the effect of slight pH
                    changes on amide exchange broadening than to the association of
                        αSyn and αB-crystallin.
                    Thus, whereas measurements of tryptophan fluorescence imply that some
                    interaction exists between the proteins, the NMR results reported both here and
                    previously (25) together suggest that
                    this is only transient and of low affinity, similar perhaps to that
                    characterized between αB-crystallin and the
                        amyloid-β peptide (27). For these reasons, these interactions have not
                    been explored further in this work.

The fluorescence assay was then used to measure the concentration of
                        αB-crystallin remaining in solution after
                    precipitation by the addition of αSyn fibrils at two
                    concentrations. A precise determination of the stoichiometry or affinity of the
                    interaction between the sHsp and fibrils is complicated by the effect of the
                    interaction of αSyn monomer with
                        αB-crystallin, as discussed above, and Rayleigh
                    scattering resulting from the small number of αSyn
                    fibrils that remain in solution after centrifugation. In addition, allowance had
                    to be made for the effect of αB-crystallin on the
                    monomer-fibril equilibrium (discussed later) and hence on the absolute fibril
                    concentration. For these reasons, an exact analysis has not been attempted, but
                    it was observed that binding is proportional to the fibril concentration, and an
                    approximate ratio of 0.23 ± 0.06 bound
                    αB-crystallin monomers per
                    αSyn monomer was calculated. This value is expected to
                    be a lower bound, with an absolute uncertainty greater than the quoted standard
                    deviation of the observations, because of the factors discussed above. It is,
                    however, of a comparable order of magnitude to that estimated by
                    densitometry (Fig. S1
                    A).

The binding ratios determined above may be restated in terms of the available
                    fibril surface area, using a toy model (described in Materials and Methods; see Supporting Material) in which the
                        αB-crystallin-fibril interaction is approximated as
                    hard spheres of αB-crystallin monomers packing onto a
                    cylindrical fibril surface. Although there is evidence that the active subunits
                    of αB-crystallin may be dimeric (28), provided that both monomers within any such
                    dimers interact with the fibril surface, we expect that this simple model of
                    monomeric binding will remain approximately applicable. Such an analysis
                    determines an approximate maximum binding ratio of 0.90 ± 0.29
                        αB-crystallin monomers per
                        αSyn monomer, hence the values determined by
                    fluorescence and densitometry correspond to surface coverages of approximately
                    26 ± 11% and 62 ± 20%, respectively. Such high values require
                    that the chaperone must bind to the overall surface of the
                        αSyn fibrils, and not just to the small number of
                    fibril ends.

Inhibition of fibril elongation observed by in situ ThT
                    fluorescence
Previous studies have examined the effect of
                    αB-crystallin on the sigmoidal kinetics characteristic
                    of nucleated polymerization (and fragmentation) reactions associated with the
                    conversion of αSyn into amyloid fibrils (25,26). Such reactions are
                    typically highly stochastic, however, and their quantitative interpretation in
                    terms of individual microscopic processes and rates is complex (7). To simplify the kinetic analysis in this work,
                    preformed fibrils were used to seed the aggregation reaction in order that the
                    elongation step alone could be examined. A series of seeded aggregation
                    experiments were performed in which the initial elongation velocities were
                    determined as a function of the concentration of
                    αB-crystallin (Fig. 2
                    A). These data show clearly that fibril growth was inhibited at
                    low micromolar concentrations of αB-crystallin. Fitting
                    to a sigmoidal dose-response curve determined the IC50 (the
                    concentration of αB-crystallin for half-maximal
                    inhibition) to be 335 ± 86 nM, although some dependence on the seed
                    concentration may also be discerned, which shall be discussed later in this
                    article.

To identify whether or not the inhibition observed above resulted from the
                    binding of chaperone to αSyn in fibrils or free in
                    solution, fibrils were preincubated with αB-crystallin
                    then pelleted, washed, resuspended, and used to seed solutions of monomeric
                        αSyn. Fig. 2
                    B plots the resultant kinetic profiles, and shows that
                    elongation of chaperone-bound fibrils was significantly inhibited
                    (∼70-fold) relative to untreated fibrils, by analysis of the initial
                    rates. The residual concentration of αB-crystallin
                    after pelleting and washing was estimated to be ≤35 nM. This is an
                    order-of-magnitude below the IC50 and therefore not by itself
                    sufficient to inhibit elongation, as indicated by the marker in Fig. 2
                    A. We therefore conclude that the observed inhibition of
                    elongation results from the specific interaction of
                    αB-crystallin with the αSyn
                    seed fibrils.

Inhibition of fibril elongation observed with a quartz crystal
                    microbalance
To verify the model of inhibition discussed above, an independent technique
                    utilizing a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) was employed. QCM is a technique
                    in which the mass deposited on the surface of a quartz crystal oscillator may be
                    determined directly via measurement of the frequency of oscillation, and
                    recently the method has been applied to the study of amyloid growth by measuring
                    the change in mass of growing fibrils attached to the surface (14). Importantly, this technique enables us to
                    examine the elongation phase of fibril growth in isolation to other processes
                    such as nucleation, and this has been used to determine the elongation kinetics
                    of insulin fibrils grown at low pH, demonstrating the inhibition of their
                    elongation by αB-crystallin (14). In contrast to insulin fibrils,
                        αSyn fibrils did not adsorb directly onto the
                    sensor surface, and instead were covalently attached via lysine side chains, as
                    described in Materials and Methods (see
                        Supporting Material). A surface
                    prepared in this manner is shown in Fig. 3
                    A, and the fibrils were observed to reproducibly elongate when
                    incubated with monomeric αSyn (Fig. 3
                    B). Elongation was readily determined to be proportional to the
                    monomer concentration (Fig. S3),
                    as previously observed by solution-state measurements (6), implying that the presence of the surface does
                    not significantly alter the elongation mechanism.

Fig. 3
                    C plots the change in deposited mass during a single QCM
                    experiment. This shows firstly the increase in mass that results from the
                    elongation of αSyn fibrils in the presence of
                        αSyn monomer (arrow 1). The
                    subsequent injection of αB-crystallin with
                        αSyn monomer (arrow 2) resulted in
                    a large increase in mass indicative of a binding interaction. After 10 min, the
                    reaction chamber was washed thoroughly with buffer to eliminate unbound
                    chaperone, yet upon the injection of fresh αSyn monomer
                        (arrow 3), further elongation was inhibited approximately
                    sevenfold. As no free αB-crystallin remained in
                    solution, inhibition must have resulted from the persistent binding of the
                    chaperone to fibrils, providing strong support for the solution-state inhibition
                    results presented previously in Fig. 2.

A second experiment (Fig. 3
                    D) confirmed this observation: on injection of
                        αSyn and αB-crystallin, a
                    large initial increase in mass loading was detected. In contrast to the previous
                    experiment, this binding was allowed to saturate, and after ∼30 min a
                    small but constant elongation rate was observed. It is perhaps noteworthy that
                    this timescale for association is of similar magnitude to that for the subunit
                    exchange of αB-crystallin (22), and may indicate that the
                        αB-crystallin subunits are the active chaperone
                    species. Again, the observed inhibition persisted when the reaction chamber was
                    flushed with fresh buffer. After overnight incubation of the crystallin-treated
                    fibrils in fresh buffer, however, the ability of the fibrils to elongate was
                    partially restored, thus demonstrating the reversibility of the
                    fibril-crystallin interaction. But the results also imply that dissociation of
                    the complex occurs only on a timescale of several hours, which is suggestive of
                    a tight binding interaction.

NMR investigations of the interaction of
                    αB-crystallin with αSyn
                    fibrils
Large species such as amyloid fibrils, with masses of approximately GDa, have
                    traditionally been assumed to be beyond the reach of solution-state NMR methods.
                    Recent investigations have demonstrated, however, that in some cases noncore
                    regions of fibrils have sufficient flexibility to allow us to detect sharp
                    resonances (29). Therefore, in a
                    one-dimensional 1H NMR spectrum of
                    αB-crystallin in the presence of
                        αSyn fibrils, there are four components that may
                    potentially be observed: fibrillar αSyn;
                    residual αSyn monomers; monomeric/oligomeric
                        αB-crystallin; and fibril-bound
                        αB-crystallin. Residual monomeric species are key
                    observables in the study of the thermodynamics of polymerization, and
                    measurements designed to estimate this concentration have been used to
                    characterize the energetics of elongation for several fibril-forming systems
                        (30). The 1H spectrum of
                        αB-crystallin has previously been characterized,
                    and reveals that in the native oligomeric complex, the final 12 residues in the
                    C-terminal extension have sufficient mobility to be observable by solution-state
                    NMR (18).

Before examination of the fibril-chaperone complex, the spectrum of
                        αSyn fibrils in solution was explored. Fig. 4
                    A shows a portion of the one-dimensional 1H NMR
                    spectrum of a solution of αSyn fibrils (green
                        line). The fibril spectrum appears almost identical to that of
                    monomeric αSyn (not shown), albeit with significantly
                    reduced intensity. Although this spectrum suggests that the bulk of the observed
                    signal arises from residual monomers in solution rather than the fibrils, a more
                    detailed study was nevertheless carried out using a series of pulsed-field
                    gradient (PFG) measurements to define the effective diffusion coefficient
                        Deff of the species giving rise to the
                    resonances. For monomeric proteins, Deff
                    is identical to the translational diffusion coefficient
                        Dtrans, and its value is independent of the
                    diffusion delay in the NMR experiment, Δ. By contrast, for very large
                    molecular assemblies such as amyloid fibrils, Deff
                    can include contributions from rotational diffusion such that
                        Deff >
                        Dtrans for small values of Δ (31). Deff is
                    shown in Fig. S4 as a function of
                    Δ for a solution containing αSyn fibrils, and
                    no such variation was detected. The mean value of
                        Deff was 8.6(± 1.7) ×
                        10−11 m2 s−1, which is
                    entirely consistent with that expected for a small monomeric protein (32). Thus, in contrast to other amyloid
                    systems such as the SH3 dimer, for which fibril resonances are observable (29), the NMR signal in Fig. 4
                    A may be attributed to residual αSyn
                    monomers alone.

Having examined the spectrum of isolated αSyn fibrils
                    (in equilibrium with residual monomer), it is then possible to analyze their
                    interaction with αB-crystallin. Fig. 4
                    A shows the methyl region of the one-dimensional 1H
                    NMR spectrum of the fibril-crystallin complex alongside spectra of each
                    component in isolation. Difference spectroscopy, normalized using the internal
                    DSS reference, reveals that the spectrum of chaperone-bound fibrils is
                    not the sum of the original components, but that there is additional signal in
                    the spectrum of the complex. The difference spectrum had, however, the same
                    appearance as monomeric αSyn (Fig. 4
                    A). A comparison of intensities in repeated experiments
                    using independent fibril samples determined that the mean
                        αSyn intensity in the presence of
                        αB-crystallin is ∼50% greater than that in
                    its absence.

To investigate these results further, PFG NMR spectra were recorded to
                    characterize the diffusion properties of the observed resonances. To limit the
                    contributions from rotational motion to the diffusion coefficients measured for
                    fibril-associated species, a long (500-ms) diffusion period Δ was
                    employed (31). The effective diffusion
                    coefficients Deff for each sample are plotted in
                        Fig. 4
                    B and these data show that the diffusion of
                        αB-crystallin is retarded in the presence of
                        αSyn fibrils, consistent with the formation
                    of a fibril-chaperone complex. The measured diffusion coefficients
                    correspond, according to the Stokes-Einstein relation, to approximate
                    hydrodynamic radii of 3.7 ± 0.4 nm and 8.6 ± 0.4 nm for free
                        αSyn and αB-crystallin,
                    respectively—in good agreement with previous observations (21,33). The effective diffusion
                    coefficient of αB-crystallin in the presence of
                        αSyn fibrils corresponds, when modeled as rotating
                    rigid rods (31), to a mean fibril
                    length of 260 ± 140 nm.

The simplest interpretation of these results is that the C-terminal extension of
                        αB-crystallin is not perturbed by fibril binding
                    and remains free to tumble in solution; hence, the one-dimensional NMR spectrum
                    is not altered in the presence of fibrils. However, diffusion is retarded, a
                    finding consistent with the binding of αB-crystallin to
                    the fibrils. The concentration of residual αSyn monomer
                    is also increased in the presence of αB-crystallin,
                    indicating that the monomer-fibril equilibrium is perturbed by interactions with
                    the chaperone. Although absolute concentrations of αSyn
                    monomer were not determined, the observed 50% increase in the monomer
                    concentration corresponds to a net destabilization of 0.3 ± 0.1 kcal
                        mol−1 in the free energy of fibril elongation, assuming a
                    simple polymerization model (30). It is
                    recognizable that the chaperone-monomer-fibril system comprises many coupled
                    equilibria, and that there are potentially multiple origins to the observed
                    increase in monomer concentration. It remains, however, a notable feature of
                    polymerization reactions that a relatively small change in the net elongation
                    energy may still result in a large change in the partition of monomers and
                    fibrils.

Imaging of the fibril-chaperone complex
To confirm the binding of αB-crystallin to
                        αSyn fibrils in a more direct manner,
                    immunoelectron microscopy was employed to visualize the fibril-crystallin
                    complex. αSyn fibrils are of sufficient size that their
                    twisted ultrastructure could be observed clearly in the electron microscope
                    after negative staining with uranyl acetate (Fig. 5
                    A). In contrast, the αB-crystallin
                    oligomers are more difficult to distinguish, particularly in a multicomponent
                    system. Samples were therefore incubated with an antibody directed against
                        αB-crystallin, which was in turn stained with a
                    secondary antibody conjugated to 10-nm gold nanoparticles. Fig. 5
                    B shows a sample of
                    αB-crystallin prepared in this manner and negatively
                    stained with uranyl acetate; electron dense gold nanoparticles are observed to
                    be colocalized with the native αB-crystallin
                    assemblies. The αSyn fibrils shown in Fig. 5
                    A were also stained with the primary and secondary antibodies
                    by an identical protocol; no significant nonspecific or background
                    immunolabeling was observed. An immunolabeled fibril-crystallin complex
                    containing 0.3 equivalents of αB-crystallin was then
                    imaged (Fig. 5
                    C), showing, very clearly, the interaction of
                        αB-crystallin along the length of the fibrils, with
                    gold nanoparticles observed on all faces of the fibril surface including
                    occasional binding at the fibril ends.

Discussion
The results of this article have enabled a novel mechanism to be proposed for the
                inhibition of αSyn aggregation by the small heat-shock
                protein αB-crystallin.
                αB-Crystallin has been demonstrated to bind along the
                lateral surface of αSyn amyloid fibrils, and this
                interaction has been demonstrated by a range of methods to inhibit elongation
                effectively, with half-maximal inhibition at an
                αB-crystallin concentration of 335 ± 86 nM.
                Although the binding epitopes of αB-crystallin and the
                fibrils are unknown, NMR investigations have determined that the C-terminal
                extension of αB-crystallin is able to fluctuate freely even
                in the bound state, a finding consistent with its purported role as a solubilizing
                domain (18). NMR measurements also
                indicated that the presence of the chaperone perturbed the monomer-fibril
                equilibrium, consistent with a net destabilization of the fibrils by ∼0.3
                kcal mol−1. This may indicate that binding of
                    αB-crystallin along αSyn
                fibrils weakens the interactions between adjacent αSyn
                molecules, similar to the effect of cofilin binding to actin filaments (34), but the additional effect of a weak
                interaction between αB-crystallin and monomeric
                    αSyn cannot be ruled out at this stage.

In this work, a novel methodology based on QCM measurements has been developed to
                monitor αSyn fibril elongation, in isolation from other
                processes such as nucleation, and without the need for added probe molecules. As has
                been demonstrated in studies of insulin aggregation (14), this technique offers significant promise for the
                quantitative investigation of the kinetics and mechanism of
                    αSyn fibril elongation. To apply this, however, methods
                were developed similar to those used in surface plasmon resonance to enable the gold
                surface to bind the fibrils. This approach is likely to be applicable to QCM
                measurements of other amyloid systems that do not contain accessible thiols or
                disulphides.

αB-Crystallin has previously been reported to inhibit
                    αSyn aggregation, when added even at the midpoint of
                sigmoidal assembly curves, and it was hypothesized that the chaperone acts by
                stabilizing monomeric or prefibrillar species (25,26). The mechanism put forward in this study, by which
                    αB-crystallin could inhibit fibril formation by binding
                to the fibrils and inhibiting their elongation, suggests that there may be multiple
                mechanisms of chaperone action. As binding is likely to occur at least in part to
                the hydrophobic clusters that may form in the fibrils, it is likely that
                    αB-crystallin will also interact strongly with the
                oligomeric precursor species, an important property given their cytotoxic nature
                    (2).

Two mechanisms can be envisaged to rationalize the inhibition of elongation that
                results from the interaction of αSyn fibrils with
                    αB-crystallin: one is a specific capping interaction of
                    αB-crystallin with the fibril ends, assuming that the
                binding here is tighter than that along the length of the fibril; and the second
                involves uniform binding of αB-crystallin along the length
                of the fibril, where inhibition results from the chance occlusion of the fibril
                ends. In this latter binding and occlusion model, inhibition is expected to be
                observed only in the presence of near equimolar ratios of
                αB-crystallin and αSyn fibrils,
                and the dependence of the IC50 upon the seed concentration noted in Fig. 2
                A would be consistent with such a mechanism. Further investigations
                of the stoichiometry and affinity of the fibril-chaperone interaction will, however,
                be required to differentiate these models with confidence.

A key question in the study of sHsps is whether the native oligomers act as
                chaperones directly, or whether dissociation into subunits occurs before their
                binding (35). The approximate binding
                ratios presented in this work would be consistent with either a relatively uniform
                binding of monomeric or dimeric αB-crystallin subunits
                along the fibril surfaces, or a rarer binding of the oligomers. The high
                surface coverage that would result from the subunit binding appears attractive as a
                means of explaining the efficacy of inhibition, particularly as this effect persists
                when the chaperone is removed from the solution after binding has occurred. Although
                this mechanism of inhibition has not been put forward previously, it is consistent
                with previous studies in which sHsp subunit exchange dynamics have been correlated
                to chaperone activity, in both αB-crystallin and its
                phosphorylated derivatives (22,36).

These findings present the suggestion that other sHsps may act by a similar
                mechanism. The Hsp20 from the bovine parasite Babesia bovis
                inhibits Aβ40 amyloid formation, and the chaperone
                was active only at low (10–100 nM) concentrations in which dimeric subunits
                were prevalent, whereas at higher chaperone concentrations, in which larger
                oligomers became populated, the inhibition of aggregation was no longer observed
                    (37). Additionally,
                    αB-crystallin may bind to components of the
                cytoskeleton including intermediate filaments and microtubules, although electron
                microscopy has demonstrated that such binding occurs via the oligomeric complex
                rather than isolated subunits (38). This
                suggests that different chaperone activities (e.g., suppressing amyloid formation,
                thermally induced amorphous aggregation, and cytoskeletal binding) correspond
                to a variety of phosphorylation or oligomerization states and binding modes.
                For example, lysozyme unfolding intermediates are bound by multimeric Hsp27 (39), and whereas
                αB-crystallin activity against
                αSyn amyloid formation increases with temperature
                (correlating with increased subunit exchange), little variation with temperature was
                observed against the thermally induced amorphous aggregation of alcohol
                dehydrogenase and citrate synthase (40).
                Phosphorylation-mimicking mutations have also been demonstrated to differentially
                regulate the chaperone activity of αB-crystallin against
                amyloid fibril formation and amorphous aggregation (36). Equally, however, some of this variation may result
                from a degree of specificity of individual members of the sHsp family (41).

αB-Crystallin has shown no evidence of ATPase or refolding
                activity (19). Instead, sHsps have been
                proposed to bind to misfolded states before interaction with other chaperone
                systems, which may facilitate refolding or degradation (41). Horwitz et al. (9) has suggested that
                αB-crystallin in the eye lens may act as an irreversible
                sink for unfolded or misfolded proteins, as there is no evidence of further
                chaperone systems within the lens, and active protein synthesis does not occur once
                the lens proteins are laid down. The binding of
                αB-crystallin to αSyn fibrils may
                therefore be a protective mechanism to stem the growth of amyloid deposits
                before clearance by further quality control mechanisms within the cell (41). This hypothesis is supported
                by a mouse model of PD expressing A53T αSyn, in
                which selective upregulation of αB-crystallin was observed
                in affected glial cells (42). Additionally,
                we suggest that binding of αB-crystallin to fibrils may
                reduce their cytotoxicity by camouflaging exposed hydrophobic surfaces. This
                hypothesis is supported by a tissue culture model of Lewy body disease in which
                colocalization of αB-crystallin with
                    αSyn deposits occurs without a reduction in the number
                of inclusions compared to cells not transfected with
                αB-crystallin, although there is a significant reduction in
                cytotoxicity (43). Finally, as exposed
                fibril surfaces have been proposed to act as sites of secondary fibril nucleation
                    (44), the coating of
                    αSyn fibrils by αB-crystallin
                could inhibit not just their elongation but further nucleation processes as well. It
                is also possible, however, that fibril binding by chaperones may have a deleterious
                role by sequestering them and reducing their efficacy in other physiological
                functions, e.g., interacting with misfolded monomers or oligomers, or, indeed,
                helping in regulation of the cytoskeleton (41). Certainly, these findings reveal novel activities of the cellular
                proteostasis network, which is of growing interest in the field of systems
                biology, and an increasing understanding of its behavior may contribute to
                the rational development of therapeutic proteostasis regulators (45).

This finding is also likely to have general relevance to other amyloid and chaperone
                systems. Indeed, recent work suggests that another chaperone, Hsp104, is capable of
                suppressing amyloid growth at many stages along the aggregation pathway, including
                the elongation of mature fibrils (46).
                Fibril binding and inhibition of elongation by
                αB-crystallin has previously been demonstrated for the
                    Aβ40 peptide, although no causal link was demonstrated
                    (13). Inhibition of
                    β2-microglobulin elongation by
                    αB-crystallin at low pH was also reported (13), and inhibition of insulin
                aggregation under similar conditions has also been observed (14). This work is therefore important in
                extending mechanistic studies of αB-crystallin to
                physiological conditions and, given apparent similarities in the behavior of
                    αSyn, Aβ40,
                    β2-microglobulin, and insulin, suggests a
                generic mechanism of αB-crystallin action.

Supporting Material

                Document S1. Materials and Methods and Six Figures
 
            

The authors thank Fredrik Andersson for the gift of UCH-L3. We thank
                the staff of and acknowledge the use of the Biomolecular NMR Facility,
                Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, and support from the Multi-Imaging
                Centre, University of Cambridge.

This work was supported by grants from Unilever and the Biotechnology and Biological
                Sciences Research Council (to C.A.W.); Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
                Council and Interdisciplinary Research Council in Nanotechnology (to T.P.J.K. and
                M.E.W.); National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, C.J. Martin
                Fellowship (G.L.D.); National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia,
                Peter Doherty Fellowship (to H.E.); Australian Research Council (to J.A.C.);
                Wellcome Trust and Leverhulme Trust (to J.C. and C.M.D.); and a Royal Society
                Dorothy Hodgkin Fellowship (to S.M.).

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
                    Commons-Attribution Noncommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/), which permits
                    unrestricted noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
                    provided the original work is properly cited.

Figure 1 Characterization of interactions between αB-crystallin
                    and αSyn. (A) SDS-PAGE assay of the
                    binding of αB-crystallin, GFP, and UCH-L3 (all 50
                        μM) to αSyn fibrils (70
                        μM), showing both soluble fractions,
                        S, and pelleted fractions, P, after
                    centrifugation for 30 min at 16,000 × g.
                        (B) Intrinsic fluorescence of solutions containing
                        αB-crystallin (35 μM)
                    and/or αSyn monomer (35 μM).
                    The spectrum of αSyn monomer alone has also been
                    subtracted from that of αB-crystallin +
                        αSyn to illustrate the 6% enhancement of
                        αB-crystallin fluorescence observed in the presence
                    of αSyn ([αB +
                        αS] – αS).
                    Additionally, a spectrum of αB-crystallin remaining in
                    solution after centrifugation with 0.5 equivalence of
                    αSyn fibrils is presented (αB
                    + αSFib).

Figure 2 Effect of αB-crystallin on αSyn
                    aggregation kinetics. (A) Determination of the effective
                        αB-crystallin concentration required for inhibition
                    of seeded fibril elongation in the presence of 35 μM
                        αSyn monomer, as a function of varying fibril mass,
                    given as the % seed. Data were globally fitted to a one-site binding model as
                    described in Materials and Methods (see
                        Supporting Material). Initial rates
                    have been normalized to αSyn elongation in the absence
                    of αB-crystallin. The marker (☆) indicates the
                    relative inhibition resulting from the preincubation of the fibril seed with
                        αB-crystallin, observed in Fig. 2B, given that the
                    estimated residual concentration of αB-crystallin was
                    <35 nM. (B) Seeded elongation kinetics, monitored by
                    in situ ThT fluorescence. Samples containing 70
                        μM αSyn fibrils and/or 70
                        μM αB-crystallin, as
                    indicated in the legend, were pelleted, washed, and resuspended, then used to
                    seed fresh αSyn monomer (35
                    μM, 5% w/w seed, 20 μM
                    ThT).

Figure 3 Measurement of fibril elongation by QCM. AFM imaging of the (A)
                    preparation and (B) growth of αSyn
                    fibrils on an activated gold surface. (C) The effect of
                        αB-crystallin on fibril elongation, studied by QCM.
                    Mass loading plot showing mass changes calculated from the (a)
                    third, (b) fifth, and (c) seventh harmonics of
                    the crystal. Arrows indicate injection of 1), 0.25 mg/mL A53T; 2), 0.25 mg/mL
                    A53T plus 0.18 mg/mL αB-crystallin; and 3), 0.25 mg/mL
                    A53T, showing approximately sevenfold inhibition of elongation.
                        (D) Elongation rates determined in a separate QCM
                    experiment, where αSyn monomer was injected at 0.1
                    mg/mL in the absence or presence of αB-crystallin at
                    0.5 mg/mL, as labeled on the x axis. The reaction chamber was
                    flushed with fresh buffer between measurements. As in Fig. 3C, on injection of
                        αB-crystallin and αSyn, a
                    large increase in mass loading occurred over ∼0.5 h, after which linear
                    growth was observed, and the elongation rate is plotted for this steady-state
                    condition. The final measurement of elongation was performed after overnight
                    incubation of the surface in fresh buffer.

Figure 4 Interaction of αB-crystallin with
                        αSyn fibrils observed by one-dimensional
                        1H NMR spectroscopy. (A) Methyl and DSS
                    (resonance at 0 ppm) regions of the one-dimensional 1H spectra of 70
                        μM A53T αSyn fibrils
                    complexed with 20 μM
                    αB-crystallin, and of the fibrils and chaperone
                    separately. (B) Effective diffusion coefficients determined for
                    these samples by PFG NMR experiments using a 500-ms diffusion delay.

Figure 5 Immunoelectron microscopy of
                        αB-crystallin-αSyn fibril
                    complexes. αB-Crystallin was labeled with 10-nm gold
                    nanoparticles (arrows) as described in Materials and Methods (see Supporting Material). (A)
                        αSyn fibrils alone; (B)
                        αB-crystallin alone; and (C)
                        αSyn fibrils plus 0.3 equivalence of
                        αB-crystallin. All scale bars are 500 nm.
==== Refs
References
1 
                        Goedert M.  
                     Alpha-synuclein and neurodegenerative diseases Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2 2001 492 501 11433374 
2 
                        Cookson M.R.  
                     The biochemistry of Parkinson's disease Annu. Rev. Biochem. 74 2005 29 52 15952880 
3 
                        Serpell L.C.  
                        Berriman J.  
                        Crowther R.A.  
                     Fiber diffraction of synthetic
                        α -synuclein filaments shows amyloid-like
                            cross-β  conformation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 2000 4897 4902 10781096 
4 
                        Conway K.A.  
                        Lee S.J.  
                        Lansbury P.T. Jr.  
                     Acceleration of oligomerization, not fibrilization, is a shared
                        property of both α -synuclein mutations linked to
                        early-onset Parkinson's disease: implications for pathogenesis and
                        therapy Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 2000 571 576 10639120 
5 
                        Abeliovich A.  
                        Schmitz Y.  
                        Rosenthal A.  
                     Mice lacking α -synuclein display
                        functional deficits in the nigrostriatal dopamine system Neuron 25 2000 239 252 10707987 
6 
                        Wood S.J.  
                        Wypych J.  
                        Biere A.L.  
                     Alpha-synuclein fibrillogenesis is nucleation-dependent.
                        Implications for the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease J. Biol. Chem. 274 1999 19509 19512 10391881 
7 
                        Ferrone F.  
                     Analysis of protein aggregation kinetics Methods Enzymol. 309 1999 256 274 10507029 
8 
                        Dedmon M.M.  
                        Christodoulou J.  
                        Dobson C.M.  
                     Heat shock protein 70 inhibits
                        α -synuclein fibril formation via preferential
                        binding to prefibrillar species J. Biol. Chem. 280 2005 14733 14740 15671022 
9 
                        Horwitz J.  
                     Alpha-crystallin Exp. Eye Res. 76 2003 145 153 12565801 
10 
                        Sun Y.  
                        MacRae T.H.  
                     Small heat shock proteins: molecular structure and chaperone
                        function Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 62 2005 2460 2476 16143830 
11 
                        Horwitz J.  
                     Alpha-crystallin can function as a molecular
                        chaperone Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89 1992 10449 10453 1438232 
12 
                        Sandilands A.  
                        Hutcheson A.M.  
                        Quinlan R.A.  
                     Altered aggregation properties of mutant
                            γ -crystallins cause inherited
                        cataract EMBO J. 21 2002 6005 6014 12426373 
13 
                        Raman B.  
                        Ban T.  
                        Rao ChM.  
                     α B-crystallin, a small heat-shock
                        protein, prevents the amyloid fibril growth of an amyloid
                            β  peptide and
                        β 2-microglobulin Biochem. J. 392 2005 573 581 16053447 
14 
                        Knowles T.P.J.  
                        Shu W.  
                        Welland M.E.  
                     Kinetics and thermodynamics of amyloid formation from direct
                        measurements of fluctuations in fibril mass Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104 2007 10016 10021 17540728 
15 
                        Stege G.J.  
                        Renkawek K.  
                        de Jong W.W.  
                     The molecular chaperone α B-crystallin
                        enhances amyloid-β  neurotoxicity Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 262 1999 152 156 10448084 
16 
                        Wilhelmus M.M.M.  
                        Boelens W.C.  
                        Verbeek M.M.  
                     Small heat shock proteins inhibit
                            amyloid-β  protein aggregation and
                        cerebrovascular amyloid-β  protein
                        toxicity Brain Res. 1089 2006 67 78 16635482 
17 
                        Reddy G.B.  
                        Kumar P.A.  
                        Kumar M.S.  
                     Chaperone-like activity and hydrophobicity of
                            α -crystallin IUBMB Life 58 2006 632 641 17085382 
18 
                        Carver J.A.  
                     Probing the structure and interactions of crystallin proteins by
                        NMR spectroscopy Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 18 1999 431 462 10217479 
19 
                        van Montfort R.L.  
                        Basha E.  
                        Vierling E.  
                     Crystal structure and assembly of a eukaryotic small heat shock
                        protein Nat. Struct. Biol. 8 2001 1025 1030 11702068 
20 
                        Aquilina J.A.  
                        Benesch J.L.P.  
                        Robinson C.V.  
                     Polydispersity of a mammalian chaperone: mass spectrometry
                        reveals the population of oligomers in
                        α B-crystallin Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 2003 10611 10616 12947045 
21 
                        Haley D.A.  
                        Horwitz J.  
                        Stewart P.L.  
                     The small heat-shock protein,
                        α B-crystallin, has a variable quaternary
                        structure J. Mol. Biol. 277 1998 27 35 9514758 
22 
                        Ahmad M.F.  
                        Raman B.  
                        Rao C.h. M.  
                     Effect of phosphorylation on
                        α B-crystallin: differences in stability, subunit
                        exchange and chaperone activity of homo and mixed oligomers of
                            α B-crystallin and its phosphorylation-mimicking
                        mutant J. Mol. Biol. 375 2008 1040 1051 18061612 
23 
                        Iwaki T.  
                        Wisniewski T.  
                        Goldman J.E.  
                     Accumulation of α B-crystallin in central
                        nervous system glia and neurons in pathologic conditions Am. J. Pathol. 140 1992 345 356 1739128 
24 
                        Wakabayashi K.  
                        Tanji K.  
                        Takahashi H.  
                     The Lewy body in Parkinson's disease: molecules
                        implicated in the formation and degradation of
                        α -synuclein aggregates Neuropathology 27 2007 494 506 18018486 
25 
                        Rekas A.  
                        Adda C.G.  
                        Carver J.A.  
                     Interaction of the molecular chaperone
                        α B-crystallin with
                        α -synuclein: effects on amyloid fibril formation
                        and chaperone activity J. Mol. Biol. 340 2004 1167 1183 15236975 
26 
                        Rekas A.  
                        Jankova L.  
                        Carver J.A.  
                     Monitoring the prevention of amyloid fibril formation by
                            α -crystallin. Temperature dependence
                        and the nature of the aggregating species FEBS J. 274 2007 6290 6304 18005258 
27 
                        Narayanan S.  
                        Kamps B.  
                        Reif B.  
                     α B-crystallin competes with Alzheimer's
                        disease β -amyloid peptide for peptide-peptide
                        interactions and induces oxidation of
                        Aβ Met35 FEBS Lett. 580 2006 5941 5946 17046756 
28 
                        Aquilina J.A.  
                        Benesch J.L.P.  
                        Robinson C.V.  
                     Phosphorylation of α B-crystallin alters
                        chaperone function through loss of dimeric substructure J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 28675 28680 15117944 
29 
                        Baldwin A.J.  
                        Bader R.  
                        Barker P.D.  
                     Cytochrome display on amyloid fibrils J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 2006 2162 2163 16478140 
30 
                        O'Nuallain B.  
                        Thakur A.K.  
                        Wetzel R.  
                     Kinetics and thermodynamics of amyloid assembly using a
                        high-performance liquid chromatography-based sedimentation
                        assay Methods Enzymol. 413 2006 34 74 17046390 
31 
                        Baldwin A.J.  
                        Christodoulou J.  
                        Lippens G.  
                     Contribution of rotational diffusion to pulsed field
                        gradient diffusion measurements J. Chem. Phys. 127 2007 114505 17887855 
32 
                        Wilkins D.K.  
                        Grimshaw S.B.  
                        Smith L.J.  
                     Hydrodynamic radii of native and denatured proteins measured by
                        pulse field gradient NMR techniques Biochemistry 38 1999 16424 16431 10600103 
33 
                        Weinreb P.H.  
                        Zhen W.  
                        Lansbury P.T. Jr.  
                     NACP, a protein implicated in Alzheimer's disease and learning,
                        is natively unfolded Biochemistry 35 1996 13709 13715 8901511 
34 
                        Du J.  
                        Frieden C.  
                     Kinetic studies on the effect of yeast cofilin on yeast actin
                        polymerization Biochemistry 37 1998 13276 13284 9748335 
35 
                        Carver J.A.  
                        Rekas A.  
                        Wilson M.R.  
                     Small heat-shock proteins and clusterin: intra- and extracellular
                        molecular chaperones with a common mechanism of action and
                        function? IUBMB Life 55 2003 661 668 14769002 
36 
                        Ecroyd H.  
                        Meehan S.  
                        Carver J.A.  
                     Mimicking phosphorylation of
                        α B-crystallin affects its chaperone
                        activity Biochem. J. 401 2007 129 141 16928191 
37 
                        Lee S.  
                        Carson K.  
                        Good T.  
                     Hsp20, a novel α -crystallin, prevents
                            Aβ  fibril formation and
                        toxicity Protein Sci. 14 2005 593 601 15722443 
38 
                        Fujita Y.  
                        Ohto E.  
                        Atomi Y.  
                     α B-Crystallin-coated MAP microtubule
                        resists nocodazole and calcium-induced disassembly J. Cell Sci. 117 2004 1719 1726 15075233 
39 
                        Shashidharamurthy R.  
                        Koteiche H.A.  
                        McHaourab H.S.  
                     Mechanism of chaperone function in small heat shock proteins:
                        dissociation of the Hsp27 oligomer is required for recognition and binding
                        of destabilized T4 lysozyme J. Biol. Chem. 280 2005 5281 5289 15542604 
40 
                        Reddy G.B.  
                        Das K.P.  
                        Surewicz W.K.  
                     Temperature-dependent chaperone activity and structural
                        properties of human α A- and
                            α B-crystallins J. Biol. Chem. 275 2000 4565 4570 10671481 
41 
                        Vos M.J.  
                        Hageman J.  
                        Kampinga H.H.  
                     Structural and functional diversities between members of the
                        human HSPB, HSPH, HSPA, and DNAJ chaperone families Biochemistry 47 2008 7001 7011 18557634 
42 
                        Wang J.  
                        Martin E.  
                        Lee M.K.  
                     Differential regulation of small heat shock proteins in
                        transgenic mouse models of neurodegenerative diseases Neurobiol. Aging. 29 2008 586 597 17316906 
43 
                        Outeiro T.F.  
                        Klucken J.  
                        McLean P.J.  
                     Small heat shock proteins protect against
                            α -synuclein-induced toxicity and
                        aggregation Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 351 2006 631 638 17081499 
44 
                        Ruschak A.M.  
                        Miranker A.D.  
                     Fiber-dependent amyloid formation as catalysis of an existing
                        reaction pathway Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104 2007 12341 12346 17640888 
45 
                        Balch W.E.  
                        Morimoto R.I.  
                        Kelly J.W.  
                     Adapting proteostasis for disease intervention Science 319 2008 916 919 18276881 
46 
                        Arimon M.  
                        Grimminger V.  
                        Lashuel H.A.  
                     Hsp104 targets multiple intermediates on the amyloid pathway and
                        suppresses the seeding capacity of Aβ  fibrils and
                        protofibrils J. Mol. Biol. 384 2008 1157 1173 18851977
