
==== Front
Biophys JBiophys. JBiophysical Journal0006-34951542-0086The Biophysical Society S0006-3495(16)34263-110.1016/j.bpj.2016.11.3194Systems BiophysicsOptimal Compartmentalization Strategies for Metabolic Microcompartments Hinzpeter Florian florian.hinzpeter@tum.de1∗Gerland Ulrich 1Tostevin Filipe 11 Department of Physics, Technische Universität München, Garching, Germany∗ Corresponding author florian.hinzpeter@tum.de28 2 2017 28 2 2017 112 4 767 779 21 4 2016 28 11 2016 © 2016 Biophysical Society.2017Biophysical SocietyThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Intracellular compartmentalization of cooperating enzymes is a strategy that is frequently used by cells. Segregation of enzymes that catalyze sequential reactions can alleviate challenges such as toxic pathway intermediates, competing metabolic reactions, and slow reaction rates. Inspired by nature, synthetic biologists also seek to encapsulate engineered metabolic pathways within vesicles or proteinaceous shells to enhance the yield of industrially and pharmaceutically useful products. Although enzymatic compartments have been extensively studied experimentally, a quantitative understanding of the underlying design principles is still lacking. Here, we study theoretically how the size and enzymatic composition of compartments should be chosen so as to maximize the productivity of a model metabolic pathway. We find that maximizing productivity requires compartments larger than a certain critical size. The enzyme density within each compartment should be tuned according to a power-law scaling in the compartment size. We explain these observations using an analytically solvable, well-mixed approximation. We also investigate the qualitatively different compartmentalization strategies that emerge in parameter regimes where this approximation breaks down. Our results suggest that the different sizes and enzyme packings of α- and β-carboxysomes each constitute an optimal compartmentalization strategy given the properties of their respective protein shells.

Editor: Zemer Gitai.
==== Body
Introduction
Metabolic processes in living organisms are highly regulated and in many cases also coordinated in space. For instance, collaborating enzymes are often organized into multi-enzyme complexes and compartments (1, 2, 3, 4). Such spatial organization is believed to have evolved as a strategy to overcome certain challenges inherent to intracellular metabolism. Intermediate products of a pathway can be toxic for the cell or poorly retained by the cell membrane, or they can cause undesired side reactions (5, 6). Furthermore, enzymes can be inefficient or have a low specificity for the desired reaction (7). Spatial confinement of reactants can alleviate both of these limitations.

Metabolic reactions can be organized in space through different mechanisms and on different scales, from individual molecules to populations of cells (8). On a molecular level, direct interactions between enzymes, or between enzymes and scaffold proteins, enables “metabolic channeling” of intermediate products from one enzyme to the next, eliminating the need for diffusive transport over long distances (9, 10). Additionally, quantitative modeling has shown that colocalizing enzymes in space can enhance the processing of pathway intermediates, even in the absence of direct enzyme-enzyme interactions (11, 12, 13). On the cellular scale, loss of intermediate products and unwanted side reactions can be reduced by encapsulating enzymatic pathways within subcellular compartments (14). At the level of populations of cells, microbial consortia can be structured such that each species is able to efficiently exploit the metabolic products of the others (8).

Here, we focus on metabolic reactions taking place within subcellular microcompartments. The segregation of metabolic processes into organelles is a hallmark of eukaryotic cells. A well-studied example of such an organelle is the peroxisome that encloses enzymes that produce and consume hydrogen peroxide, which can be highly toxic (15). The discovery of bacterial microcompartments (BMCs) demonstrated that compartmentalization is also used by prokaryotes (16, 17). In contrast to the lipid membranes that typically define eukaryotic organelles, BMCs have protein shells reminiscent of viral capsids. Small pores in the shell allow metabolites, but not enzymes, to pass into and out of the compartment (18).

The best-studied BMC, the carboxysome, is a key element of so-called “carbon-concentrating mechanisms” that are crucial for efficient carbon fixation by cyanobacteria (19). Carbon fixation in the Calvin cycle relies on the enzyme RuBisCO, which has a low turnover rate and, in addition to the fixation of carbon dioxide, also catalyzes the unproductive fixation of oxygen. RuBisCO is encapsulated within a protein shell together with carbonic anhydrase (CA). CA converts incoming bicarbonate (HCO3−) to CO2, which accumulates within the compartment, thereby enhancing the carbon fixation reaction of RuBisCO and reducing the futile reaction with oxygen. Carboxysomes in different organisms are subdivided into α- and β-carboxysomes on the basis of the type of RuBisCO (IA versus IB) present in the particular species (20). The two classes of carboxysome also differ in their shell proteins, size, and internal organization and are thought to be the result of convergent evolution (19).

In recent years, much effort has been made to engineer carbon-concentrating mechanisms in plants, with the goal of enhancing photosynthetic efficiency and thus increasing crop yields (21, 22, 23). To this end, the introduction of carboxisomal RuBisCO into tobacco plants supported autotrophic growth (24). More broadly, there is increasing interest in using synthetic enzyme compartments for efficient synthesis of industrial chemicals and biofuels (25, 26, 27). However, despite the ubiquity of metabolic compartmentalization and its potential applications in synthetic biology, a quantitative understanding of the design principles and functional trade-offs of such compartments is still lacking.

Here, we use mathematical modeling to study how the size and enzymatic composition of compartments affect an encapsulated metabolic pathway. In particular, we ask how compartments should be constructed so as to maximize the enzymatic productivity. In the parameter regime of α-carboxysomes, we find that the optimal compartmentalization strategy is to form multiple compartments, each with at least a certain critical size, and each with less than maximal enzyme occupancy. Interestingly, the same productivity can be achieved for any compartment larger than a critical size, provided the enzyme densities are chosen appropriately. The enzyme arrangement within the compartment plays little role over the biologically relevant range of compartment sizes. We explain these phenomena with the aid of an analytically solvable model in which metabolites are well mixed within the compartment. We also characterize the qualitatively different compartmentalization strategies that emerge outside the well-mixed regime. Our results suggest that the different sizes and packing densities of α- and β-carboxysomes each represent an optimal strategy given the structures of their corresponding shell proteins.

Materials and Methods
Model
We consider a subcellular compartment, shown schematically in Fig. 1
a, consisting of a selectively permeable shell that encapsulates enzymes of two types, E1 and E2. This shell may be composed of proteins, as in bacterial microcompartments, or a lipid bilayer, as is typical of eukaryotic organelles. Our model two-step pathway has the reaction scheme S→E1I→E2P. Substrate molecules S enter the compartment from the cytoplasm through the boundary shell, and are converted by enzyme E1 into intermediate product I, which is converted into final product P by enzyme E2. However, both S and I can also be lost from the compartment through the shell before reacting further. In principle, the intermediate product could also be unstable or consumed by side reactions within the compartment. In the Supporting Material, we discuss how this affects our results.Figure 1 Illustration of the pathway model and compartmentalization strategies. (a) Model two-step enzymatic pathway with enzymes contained within a microcompartment. The permeable compartment shell allows for the exchange of metabolites S and I with the cytoplasm. (b) A fixed number of enzymes could be distributed according to many different compartmentalization strategies, each characterized by a particular compartment size, enzyme density, and ratio of E1 to E2 enzymes. Each such strategy would lead to a different pathway flux, and therefore a different productivity. To this figure in color, go online.



The total rate at which substrate S is converted into product P will depend on the number and size of compartments, the densities of the two enzymes, and the spatial arrangement of enzymes within the compartment. We refer to a particular choice for this collection of properties as a “compartmentalization strategy” (Fig. 1
b). Which compartmentalization strategy is the optimal one? Clearly, the answer to this question must depend on the objective or “design goal” of the system, as well as potential additional constraints. The biological imperative to achieve a high production flux while limiting the expenditure of resources in enzyme production (28) suggests that maximal enzymatic productivity is the design goal, with productivity defined as the total rate of P production per enzyme. In our theoretical study, we assume that the choice of compartmentalization strategy is otherwise not constrained in any significant way.

Productivity
Suppose that a cell contains a total of NE=NE1+NE2 copies of the enzymes E1 and E2, distributed equally over a number, Nc, of identical compartments, such that each compartment contains Ec=NE/Nc enzymes. The total rate of production of P is given by JP=NcJc where Jc is the rate of production per compartment. Then, the total production can be written as (1) JP=NEJcEc≡NEP, where we define the productivity, P, as the flux of P production in one compartment divided by the total number of enzymes contained within the compartment. In steady-state, the productivity can also be written as P=Jinϵ/Ec, where Jin is the total influx of substrate S across the compartment boundary and the factor E, which we term the “conversion efficiency,” is the probability that an S molecule entering the compartment will be converted into product P, rather than leaving the compartment in the unreacted S or partially reacted I form.

The productivity allows us to quantify the performance of a given compartmentalization strategy, taking into account both the rate at which each compartment produces P and the necessary enzyme investment (how many such compartments can be constructed with the available enzymes). To isolate the effect of the compartmentalization strategy from processes happening at the scale of the cell as a whole, we will assume that the compartments do not affect one another via the cellular pools of metabolites S and I, which we will take to be fixed. Under this assumption, the strategy that maximizes the productivity of a single compartment will also maximize the total production of P in the cell for a fixed number of enzymes, NE.

Reaction-diffusion model
To evaluate the productivity, we must specify the dynamics of S and I inside the compartment. We model the reactions of S with E1 and I with E2 using Michaelis-Menten kinetics, with kcat(1) and KM(1) the catalytic rate and the Michaelis constant of E1, and similarly for E2. We denote the density of enzymes of type E1 and E2 at position r within the compartment by e1(r) and e2(r), respectively. Enzymes are taken to be fixed in position, and thus, the density distributions do not vary over time. However, to account for the finite size of the enzymes, we impose as a constraint a maximal packing density of enzymes, e1(r)+e2(r)≤emax. Within the compartment, S and I are assumed to move by diffusion, with equal diffusion constants. The concentrations of S and I, s(r,t) and i(r,t), respectively, therefore follow the coupled reaction-diffusion equations (2) ∂s(r,t)∂t=D∇2s(r,t)−kcat(1)e1(r)s(r,t)KM(1)+s(r,t)  (3) ∂i(r,t)∂t=D∇2i(r,t)+kcat(1)e1(r)s(r,t)KM(1)+s(r,t)−kcat(2)e2(r)i(r,t)KM(2)+i(r,t). The last term in Eq. 2 represents the conversion of S into I by E1, which appears as a local source of I in Eq. 3; the final term in Eq. 3 describes the conversion of I into P by E2. For simplicity, we consider compartments that are spherical, with radius R, and concentration profiles that are spherically symmetric.

We assume that through regulation of uptake and export rates, the cell maintains a homeostatic concentration, s0, of substrate in the cytoplasm. Additionally, we assume that the intermediates are poorly retained by the cell membrane or rapidly degraded in the cytosol, such that their concentration in the cytoplasm is negligible. For carboxysomes in cyanobacteria, this assumption is reasonable, since detailed models of carboxysomes (29, 30) predict that active conversion of CO2 to HCO3− in the cytoplasm results in a concentration of CO2 outside the compartment ∼1000-fold lower than inside. We describe exchange of metabolites across the compartment shell by the boundary conditions (4) D∂s(r,t)∂r|r=R=ps[s0−s(R,t)]  (5) D∂i(r,t)∂r|r=R=−pii(R,t), where ps and pi are the permeabilities of the shell to S and I.

In this model, a compartmentalization strategy consists of a particular choice for the radial enzyme concentration profiles, e1(r) and e2(r), and the compartment radius, R. For each such strategy, the steady-state productivity will be (6) P{e1(r),e2(r);R}=∫0R4πr2kcat(2)e2(r)i(r)KM(2)+i(r)dr∫0R4πr2[e1(r)+e2(r)]dr, where i(r) is the corresponding steady-state solution of Eqs. 2–5. In Eq. 6, the numerator is the total production flux of P per compartment, Jc, and the denominator is the total number of enzymes in one compartment, Ec (cf. Eq. 1). We will seek the compartmentalization strategy that optimizes P by maximizing Eq. 6 with respect to e1(r), e2(r), and R.

Results
Our aim is to investigate generic features of optimal compartmentalization strategies that apply to microcompartments under both biological and synthetic conditions. We first study in detail the behavior of the model for parameters representative of one of the best-studied biological microcompartments, the α-carboxysome of cyanobacteria. We subsequently return to the question of how optimal compartmentalization strategies change in different parameter regimes. Additionally, we focus first on the linear regime of the Michaelis-Menten kinetics. As we will see later, including the full non-linear kinetics does not qualitatively alter the results of our analysis. We denote the catalytic efficiencies of the two enzymes in the linear regime by κ1=kcat(1)/KM(1) and κ2=kcat(2)/KM(2).

Optimal compartmentalization strategies for α-carboxysome parameters
The catalytic efficiencies of the two carboxysome enzymes, CA and RuBisCO, have been measured to be κ1= 5 (μM s)–1 and κ2= 0.06 (μM s)–1, respectively (31, 32). Since we are unaware of direct measurements of permeability for the α-carboxysome shell, we estimated these parameters from the known structure of the shell proteins (33, 34) (ps= 90 μm s–1 and pi= 18 μm s–1; see the Supporting Material for details). We used a metabolite diffusion coefficient D= 1000 μm2s–1 and a maximal enzyme concentration of emax= 25 mM. For calculating the productivity, we take a reference substrate concentration of s0= 25 μM.

We initially consider a scenario where both types of enzyme are uniformly distributed throughout the compartment, e1(r)=e1 and e2(r)=e2. Such a distribution may represent the case where the enzymes are freely diffusing. Under this assumption, the steady state of Eqs. 2–5 can be solved exactly to find an analytical expression for the productivity, P(e1,e2;R) (see the Supporting Material). However, it is not possible to extract from this expression a closed form for the optimal values of e1, e2, and R. Instead, we optimized the productivity numerically. We visualized the results by plotting the optimal productivity, P∗, the optimal total enzyme concentration, eT∗=e1∗+e2∗, and the optimal ratio of enzymes, ϕ∗=e1∗/e2∗, for different values of R (see Fig. 2
a).Figure 2 Optimal compartmentalization strategies for α-carboxysome parameters. (a) Optimal productivity (top), total enzyme density, eT∗=e1∗+e2∗ (middle), and enzyme abundance ratio, ϕ∗=e1∗/e2∗ (bottom) for four different arrangements of enzymes: uniform distribution at optimal density (green circles); uniform distribution at maximal density, eT=emax (purple crosses); enzyme arrangement as observed in carboxysomes (Eq. 7; red diamonds); and optimized intracompartment enzyme arrangements (blue squares), as plotted in Fig. S1 in the Supporting Material. (b) Examples of the enzyme arrangements for the carboxysome configuration of Eq. 7 (with optimized e1 and e2 values) for different compartment sizes. To see this figure in color, go online.



Examining first the optimal productivity (Fig. 2
a, top, green circles), we see that P∗(R) increases with R up to a critical radius, Rc. Above Rc we see a broad plateau in the value of P∗(R), indicating that similar productivity can be achieved over a wide range of compartment sizes that encompasses the entire biologically relevant range (from ∼10 nm to ∼3 μm, comparable to the size of cyanobacterial cells). For extremely large compartments, the productivity decreases gradually with increasing R.

The plateau in productivity is associated with a qualitative change in the optimal enzyme concentrations (Fig. 2
a, middle and bottom). For small compartments, R<Rc, maximizing productivity requires that compartments are maximally packed with enzymes, eT∗=e1∗+e2∗=emax. In contrast, for R>Rc, productivity is largest when eT∗(R)<emax; the optimal density shows a power-law dependence eT∗(R)∼R−1. This tuning of the total enzyme density to the compartment size is crucial for generating the plateau in productivity observed in Fig. 2
a, top: if, instead, compartments are always maximally filled with enzymes, then the productivity shows a pronounced peak at R=Rc and rapidly decreases for R>Rc (Fig. 2
a, top, purple crosses). The optimal ratio of abundances of the two types of enzymes, ϕ∗(R)=e1∗(R)/e2∗(R), decreases with increasing R for R<Rc before taking a constant value, ϕc∗, for R>Rc.

The optimal compartmentalization strategy for α-carboxysome parameters is therefore to produce enzymes of type E1 and E2 in the ratio ϕc∗, and to assign these to compartments of size R>Rc such that the total enzyme density is eT∗(R)=emaxRc/R. For a compartment radius of R= 60 nm, the typical radius of an α-carboxysome (35), our analysis predicts that the optimal enzyme density is ≈30% of the maximal packing density, emax, resulting in a productivity that is ∼ 30% higher than similarly sized compartments that are maximally packed (Fig. 2
a, top). Interestingly, α-cyanobacteria indeed contain several α-carboxysomes (36), each with just a quarter of the compartment volume occupied by RuBisCO enzymes (35). Thus, these cyanobacteria may have evolved to form a surplus of α-carboxysomes that are not fully packed to optimally exploit the cooperative activity of the encapsulated CA and RuBisCO.

So far we have assumed that the enzymes are uniformly distributed throughout the compartment. However, in naturally occurring microcompartments, the enzymes are in general not uniformly distributed. For example, in carboxysomes, CA is located at the inner surface of the protein shell, whereas RuBisCO is distributed throughout the compartment interior (37). Similarly, the locations of enzymes in synthetic microcompartments are often constrained by the method of enzyme encapsulation. For example, enzymes may be incorporated into the microcompartment by tethering them to shell proteins (38). This naturally raises the question of how the enzyme arrangement inside the compartment affects the productivity.

Focusing first on the enzyme arrangement observed in carboxysomes, we examined how the optimal compartmentalization strategy changes when E1 is restricted to a layer of thickness δ= 2 nm (roughly the size of a small protein) at the compartment boundary while E2 is distributed throughout the remaining volume. We solved Eqs. 2–5 with (7) e1(r)={0r≤R−δe1r>R−δ,e2(r)={e2r≤R−δ0r>R−δ (see the Supporting Material) and again optimized the productivity with respect to e1 and e2, subject to the constraint e1,e2≤emax (Fig. 2
b).

For R>Rc, the optimal productivity and compartment-averaged enzyme densities, (eT∗(R)=V−1∫V[e1(r)+e2(r)]d3r,ϕ∗(R)=∫Ve1(r)d3r/∫Ve2(r)d3r), are almost identical to those found for uniformly distributed enzymes (Fig. 2
a, red diamonds). Thus, the optimal compartmentalization strategy is not changed when the enzyme distribution is of the form in Eq. 7. For R<Rc, eT∗(R) and ϕ∗(R) differ from the optimal uniform enzyme distribution, and a lower productivity is achieved. However, this deviation arises simply because for fixed δ it is impossible to maximally pack the compartment while simultaneously maintaining a specific ratio of E1 to E2 enzymes.

Next, we determined numerically the full enzyme distributions e1∗(r) and e2∗(r) that maximize the productivity, subject only to the constraint e1(r)+e2(r)≤emax (see the Supporting Material for details). The resulting optimal profiles change with the compartment radius, R, and differ substantially from a uniform enzyme distribution (see Fig. S1). Notably, though, the corresponding productivity is barely increased compared to that achieved by uniformly distributed enzymes (Fig. 2
a). Furthermore, the average densities of E1 and E2 over the entire compartment are the same as for uniform enzymes.

Together these results show that, for the chosen parameters, the precise arrangement of enzymes within the compartment does not significantly affect the productivity. What is most important is rather to ensure that the average density of enzymes within compartments is appropriately chosen according to their size.

Well-mixed approximation
Our observation that the intra-compartment enzyme arrangement has little impact on the productivity suggests that the spatial distribution of metabolites within the compartment is rather uniform. Indeed, we found that for R≲ 1 μm, where the productivities for different enzyme arrangements coincide, the densities s(r) and i(r) vary within the compartment by at most ∼10% and ∼1%, respectively. To understand for which parameter regimes such a uniform distribution of metabolites will apply, it is instructive to consider the various timescales that characterize the behavior of the system. Diffusive mixing of the metabolites throughout the compartment occurs on a timescale of τD∼R2/D. The reactions of metabolites with enzymes occur on the timescales τ1=1/(κ1e1) and τ2=1/(κ2e2). Finally, we identify two timescales associated with the exchange of metabolites across the compartment boundary, τs∼R/ps and τi∼R/pi. The R-dependence of these latter timescales can be understood by considering the rate of exchange across the boundary to consist of the intrinsic (R-independent) crossing rate for a molecule that is located at the boundary multiplied by the fraction of the compartment volume that can be considered close to the boundary, which decreases as R−1.

Metabolites within the compartment can be considered well mixed when the diffusive timescale is short compared to those of reaction and exchange, τD≪τ1,2,τs,i. In this limit, metabolites effectively sample the entire pool of enzymes before they leak through the boundary or react. It is then plausible that the pathway flux does not depend on the precise arrangement of enzymes within the compartment. From the R-dependence of the different timescales, we can see that τD will be smaller than the other timescales when R is sufficiently small. For the parameters and optimal enzyme concentrations of Fig. 2, we estimated that this will be the case for R≤ 1.4 μm, which is much larger than the typical size of BMCs and the critical radius, Rc. Hence, assuming that the contents of BMCs are well mixed appears to be a good approximation for biologically relevant compartment sizes.

To gain further insight into the optimal compartmentalization strategy, we therefore analyzed a simplified version of our model where the reactants S and I are well mixed within the compartment. Assuming that the reactants flowing across the boundary are rapidly distributed throughout the compartment, the steady-state equations for s and i become (8) 0=4πR2ps(s0−s)−43πR3κ1e1s  (9) 0=4πR2pi(−i)+43πR3(κ1e1s−κ2e2i), where the first term in each equation describes the net transport flux across the compartment boundary and the second term corresponds to the reaction flux. To compare with the results of Fig. 2, we solve Eqs. 8 and 9 for the productivity as a function of the total enzyme concentration, eT=e1+e2, and the ratio of enzyme densities, ϕ=e1/e2, (10) P(eT,ϕ,R)=3pss0eTR[ϕeTR3psκ1(1+ϕ)+ϕeTR][eTR3piκ2(1+ϕ)+eTR]︸ϵ(eT,ϕ,R). The total enzyme density, eT, and radius, R, appear in the productivity only as the product eTR, which immediately implies a scaling eT∗(R)∼R−1. From Eqs. 8–10, we see that this R-dependence originates in the need to balance metabolite transport across the compartment boundary, which depends on the surface area, js,i∝ps,iA∼R2, against the flux of enzymatic reactions, which occur throughout the compartment volume, j1,2∝κ1,2e1,2V∼e1,2R3. By choosing e1,2∼A/V∼R−1, the ratio of transport to reaction fluxes can be held fixed at the particular level that achieves maximal productivity. However, since the enzyme density eT cannot exceed emax, this scaling cannot be satisfied for all R. Optimizing the productivity with the constraint eT(R)≤emax, we obtain (11) eT,wm∗(R)=emax{1R≤Rc,wmRc,wm/RR>Rc,wm,ϕwm∗(R)={[1+R/λ21+R/λ1]1/2R≤Rc,wm[λ1λ2]1/3R>Rc,wm, where the critical radius Rc,wm=λ12/3λ21/3+λ22/3λ11/3 and the length scale parameters λ1=3ps/(κ1emax) and λ2=3pi/(κ2emax) correspond to the compartment radii at which the maximal turnover of substrate/intermediate via enzymatic reaction equals the rate of loss across the compartment boundary. The optimal productivity is then (12) Pwm∗(R)={γλ1λ2R(R+λ1+λ2)2[{1+R(R+λ1+λ2)λ1λ2}1/2−1]2R≤Rc,wmγ[λ11/3+λ21/3]3R>Rc,wm, with γ=3pss0/emax. Equations 11 and 12 are in excellent agreement with the numerical optimization of the full reaction-diffusion model (Fig. 3), except at the largest R values. Thus, the well-mixed model correctly describes the optimal compartmentalization strategy for α-carboxysome parameters.Figure 3 Results of well-mixed approximation. Shown are the optimal productivity (top), the enzyme density, eT∗ (middle), and the ratio of E1 to E2 enzymes, ϕ∗ (bottom). Data points show numerical optimization of the analytical expression for productivity for uniform enzymes, as in Fig. 2a. Blue and orange dashed lines are the corresponding optima in the well-mixed approximation (Eqs. 11 and 12). The dashed green line shows the leading-order correction to the optimal productivity (Eq. 13). To see this figure in color, go online.



We can now also understand the trends in eT∗(R) and ϕ∗(R) observed in Fig. 3 across the full range of compartment sizes. The densities of substrate and intermediate inside the compartment are determined by two effects: exchange across the boundary, and production and consumption in enzymatic reactions. In particular, reactions deplete the available pool of metabolites, reducing the efficiency with which enzymes can operate. In small compartments, R<Rc, exchange dominates over the effects of enzymatic reactions. Then the most productive strategy is to pack as many enzymes as possible into the compartment; the ratio of E1 to E2 enzymes should be chosen so as to balance the relative depletion of S and I, thereby maximizing the efficiency with which S is converted into P. As R increases toward Rc, the larger number of enzymes in the compartment increases the impact of enzymatic reactions on the metabolite concentrations, which in turn leads to diminishing returns in conversion efficiency (reflected in the saturation of E at large R). At the same time, the investment of enzymes needed to maintain fully packed compartments, represented by the prefactor (eTR)−1 in the productivity, continues to increase with R. The critical radius Rc,wm represents the compartment size at which the rate of increase of the product flux exactly matches the increasing cost of maintaining fully packed compartments. For R>Rc,wm, the productivity of maximally packed compartments becomes smaller than could be achieved by constructing a larger number of partially filled compartments.

Note that the ∼R−1 scaling of the optimal enzyme concentrations and the plateau in optimal productivity rely not only on the fast diffusive mixing but also on the loss of intermediate exclusively through the compartment boundary. If intermediates were also to decay within the compartment volume, the optimal compartmentalization strategy, including the optimal enzyme densities, would change (see the Supporting Material for further details).

Breakdown of the well-mixed approximation
For large compartment radii we see that the numerically-optimized productivity deviates from the prediction of the well-mixed model (Fig. 3 top, R≳ 10 μm). This is to be expected because the mixing timescale τD∼R2 increases more rapidly for large R than the other timescales in the system, which scale at most linearly with R. To examine systematically the deviation from the fast-diffusion regime, we performed a series expansion of P∗ in powers of D−1, obtaining (13) P∗(R)=Pwm∗[1+(pi−ps)R5(1+ϕwm∗)D+O(D−2)]. (See the Supporting Material for further details and the case pi≈ps.) The first-order correction to the productivity (see Fig. 3
top, green dashed line) is due to the appearance of spatial gradients of S and I. Changes in the optimal enzyme concentrations away from their well-mixed values enter only in higher-order terms.

From Eq. 13, we can identify the compartment size, Rx∼5D(1+ϕwm∗)/|pi−ps| (for the case ps=pi=p, Rx∼175/3(D/p); see the Supporting Material), at which the optimal productivity is expected to deviate significantly from the well-mixed result. Interestingly, P∗ can either increase or decrease relative to its well-mixed value depending on which of ps or pi is larger. This is because the explicit diffusion of metabolites has opposing effects on the efficiencies of the two reaction steps. The rate of S - E1 reactions is reduced in the center of the compartment, because fewer of the S molecules that are introduced at the boundary diffuse into the center. Conversely, those I molecules that are produced away from the compartment boundary have a significantly increased probability of reacting with E2 rather than escaping compared to the well-mixed scenario, leading to a higher probability of conversion of I to P. The relative values of D/ps and D/pi, which represent the length scales over which S and I molecules can be considered “close” to the boundary, determine which of these effects has a larger impact on the pathway flux. In most biological contexts, we would expect compartments to primarily confine intermediates, rather than limiting the influx of substrates, suggesting that ps>pi is the more natural condition. In this case, as in Fig. 3, the productivity decreases at large R.

If alternative biochemical processes that give rise to concentration gradients, such as the spontaneous decay of intermediates, were also to take place in the system, this may cause both greater deviation from the well-mixed approximation and also breakdown of the approximation at smaller values of R (see the Supporting Material).

Compartmentalization strategies for highly permeable shells
If the shell permeability is sufficiently high, the well-mixed approximation can break down at compartment sizes comparable to or even smaller than the compartment size at which the transition to sub-maximal packing would occur, Rx≲Rc,wm. In such cases, we should not necessarily expect a plateau in productivity as predicted by the well-mixed model. We therefore investigated how the optimal compartmentalization strategies change when one or both of the shell permeabilities is set to a value of p= 104
μm s–1, such that Rx lies in the range of physically realistic compartment sizes (R= 0.01–1 μm).

We again consider first the case of uniformly distributed enzymes. For this enzyme arrangement, we observe that some common features are shared between the optimal compartmentalization strategies in the different parameter regimes (Fig. 4, a–c, green circles). In all cases, we can again identify a critical radius, Rc, at which a distinct transition in the optimal enzyme density occurs. For R<Rc, the optimal compartment is maximally packed; for R>Rc, the optimal enzyme density, eT∗<emax, and the productivity again exceed those of maximally packed compartments of similar size (Fig. 4, purple crosses). However, the critical radii differ from those predicted by the well-mixed model (Fig. 4, a–c, blue lines), Rc,wm.Figure 4 Optimal compartmentalization strategies outside the well-mixed regime. (a–c) Optimal productivity and corresponding enzyme densities as a function of the compartment radius for boundary permeabilities ps=pi= 104μm s−1 (a); ps= 104μm s−1, pi= 10 μm s−1 (b); and ps= 10 μm s−1, pi= 104μm s−1 (c). Other parameters are fixed at κ1=κ2= 0.4 (μM s)−1, emax= 25 mM, s0= 250 μM, and D= 100 μm2 s−1. The limit ps,pi→∞ (see the Supporting Material) is shown as a green dashed line. (d–f) Optimal concentration profiles for the three cases above at a compartment radius of R= 100 nm. To see this figure in color, go online.



Beyond these similarities, we also observe qualitative differences between the optimal compartmentalization strategies. When both ps and pi are large (Fig. 4
a), we find a plateau in the productivity above Rc. We observe that the optimal enzyme density in compartments decreases as eT∗∼R−2, in contrast to the low-permeability regime, where we found eT∗∼R−1. Furthermore, examining the solution for the productivity in the limit ps,i→∞, we find that eT and R appear only as the product eTR2 (see the Supporting Material). This result allows us to identify the origin of the different scaling in the different processes governing exchange of reactants with the environment. In the low-p limit, the overall exchange rate is determined by the fraction of the compartment volume that is proximal to the boundary, which decreases as ∼R−1. On the other hand, in the high-p regime, exchange is limited by the time taken to diffuse to the boundary, which scales as τD∼R2. Yet, despite the different underlying dynamics, the optimal compartmentalization strategy resembles that in the low-permeability regime, consisting of compartments larger than Rc with the appropriately chosen eT∗(R) and ϕ∗.

In contrast, when only one of ps and pi is large, the optimal productivity does not exhibit a plateau for R>Rc. Rather, when ps is small and pi is large (Fig. 4
c), the optimal productivity steadily increases with the compartment size. Thus, large, sparsely occupied compartments are the most productive. Since in this parameter regime productivity is limited by the rapid escape of I across the boundary, compartments should contain more E2 than E1
(ϕ∗<1). Conversely, when ps is large and pi is small (Fig. 4
b), the productivity exhibits a pronounced maximum at a certain radius, R∗≈Rc. The optimal compartmentalization strategy here is to produce compartments of size R=R∗ that are maximally packed, eT∗(R∗)=emax. More enzymes of type E1 than of type E2 are required (ϕ∗>1) to exploit the S that diffuses rapidly across the compartment boundary, whereas the slow leakage of I means that this metabolite will accumulate inside the compartment.

In the well-mixed regime, changing the intra-compartment arrangement of enzymes has little effect on the productivity (Fig. 2
a), since metabolites explore the entire compartment before reacting. However, if the compartment is not well mixed, we expect that the specific choice of enzyme arrangement will significantly affect the reaction flux. We therefore investigated numerically the enzyme profiles e1(r) and e2(r) that maximized productivity. Examples of the resulting optimal enzyme profiles are shown in Fig. 4, d–f. The corresponding metabolite density profiles are shown in Fig. S2 in the Supporting Material.

Fig. 4, a–c (blue squares), confirms that by a suitable choice of e1(r) and e2(r) it is possible to achieve a higher productivity than with uniformly distributed enzymes. The advantage is more significant when only one of ps and pi is large, rather than when both permeabilities are high. We can understand how the increased productivity comes about by examining the main features of the optimal enzyme profiles (the fine-scale details of the enzyme distributions, in particular at small r values, are susceptible to discretization artifacts and do not significantly affect the value of P). When ps is large and pi is small (Fig. 4
e), enzymes of type E1 form a shell at the outer boundary of the compartment to maximize reactions with substrate S as it enters the compartment. Since the leakage of intermediate is slow, E2 enzymes can be localized to the interior side of this E1 band without seriously compromising the pathway flux. This enzyme arrangement requires more enzymes per compartment (larger eT∗ (Fig. 4
b, middle)) than the best uniform-enzyme strategy, meaning that fewer compartments with more enzymes yield a larger product formation rate. When ps is small and pi is large, enzymes of both types are concentrated in the center of the compartment (Fig. 4
f). Localizing E1 enzymes in this way ensures that I is produced far from the compartment boundary. E2 enzymes colocalize with E1 and also form a shell at the outer edge of the E1 domain to maximize the probability of capturing I molecules before they diffuse out of the compartment. By arranging enzymes in this way, each compartment can achieve a similar reaction with significantly fewer enzymes per compartment (smaller eT∗ (Fig. 4
c, middle)), such that a larger number of similar compartments can be constructed with the pool of available enzymes. Thus, the optimal compartmentalization strategies deviate qualitatively from those in the uniform-enzyme scenario.

Michaelis-Menten kinetics
So far, we have considered only the regime of low metabolite concentrations where the Michaelis-Menten reaction kinetics become linear in substrate concentration. However, this may not be the case in general. We therefore sought to understand how the full reaction kinetics alter the optimal compartmentalization strategies. We previously saw that the breakdown of the well-mixed approximation is due to the appearance of metabolite gradients. We therefore hypothesized that the inclusion of non-linear reaction kinetics would mitigate this breakdown through two effects. First, relative to linear kinetics with the same value of κ=kcat/KM, the effective reaction rate will be reduced by a factor of (1+s/KM(1))−1 or (1+i/KM(2))−1. This suppresses the consumption of metabolites in metabolic reactions and, therefore, the appearance of metabolite concentration gradients. Second, even if gradients of metabolites form, they would only lead to differences in reaction rate at different positions if the absolute concentration were also to drop below the KM value of the enzyme. For reactions that are in the zero-order regime, there will be no difference in reaction flux regardless of where in the compartment the enzymes are placed.

To test this hypothesis we calculated expressions for the densities of S and I and productivity, P(e1,e2,R), in a well-mixed model taking into account the Michaelis-Menten kinetics (see the Supporting Material), which we again optimized numerically with respect to eT(R) and ϕ(R). Additionally, we determined the optimal eT(R) and ϕ(R) for the full non-linear reaction-diffusion system, Eqs. 2 and 3, with uniform enzymes; since an analytic solution of the non-linear boundary-value problem is not possible, the steady-state metabolite concentrations were also calculated numerically in this case (see the Supporting Material). The extent of enzyme saturation was varied by changing the external substrate concentration, s0.

The qualitative characteristics of the optimal compartments are similar to the linear reaction regime (see Fig. 5). In particular, we again observe a plateau in P∗(R) above a critical radius, Re, accompanied by a decrease in the total enzyme density, eT∗(R)∼R−1. However, as the extent of saturation is increased, the maximal productivity increases sub-linearly with s0, and Rc also increases. As in the case of linear reactions, the transition to sub-maximally packed compartments occurs when depletion of metabolites by reactions, which increases with the number of enzymes in a compartment, reaches such an extent that the gain in product formation from maintaining fully packed compartments is less than the corresponding cost in terms of available enzymes. When the encapsulated enzymes are saturated, however, depletion of metabolites will have a negligible effect on the reaction flux. For there to be a significant impetus to reduce the enzyme density inside the compartment, the number of enzymes must become so large as to deplete the metabolite pool into the range where enzymes are no longer saturated. Thus, the transition to sub-maximally packed compartments occurs at larger compartment sizes as the supply of S is increased.Figure 5 Optimal compartmentalization strategies with Michaelis-Menten reaction kinetics. Optimal productivity (top) and total enzyme concentration (bottom) for different external substrate concentrations, s0, are shown. Data points show results of numerical optimization for the reaction-diffusion model (Eqs. 2 and 3) with a uniform distribution of enzymes. Solid lines show the corresponding optimization in the well-mixed approximation. Reaction parameters were chosen to resemble the activity of an “average” enzyme, kcat(1)=kcat(2)= 10 s−1 and KM(1)=KM(2)= 100 μM (55). Other parameters were D= 100 μm2 s−1 and ps=pi= 50 μm s−1. To see this figure in color, go online.



As expected, we find excellent agreement between the well-mixed approximation and the reaction-diffusion model under biologically realistic low-permeability conditions. We therefore conclude that the well-mixed approximation also provides an excellent model for compartmentalization in the non-linear regime. At large R> 1 μm, we observe some deviation in the productivity for unsaturated conditions, s0≲KM, in the same way as for the linear regime. However, for s0≫KM, the same radius falls in the range R<Rc, and the optimal compartmentalization strategy still appears to track the well-mixed result. In particular, a difference in the optimal enzyme densities is only observed for R>Rc, corresponding to the point at which the enzymes within the compartment first become less than fully saturated.

Discussion
We have investigated the design principles underlying enzyme compartmentalization for a simple model metabolic pathway. We found that the strategy of packing enzymes into compartments as densely as possible only provides the highest productivity if compartments are constrained to be very small. On the other hand, if compartments can exceed a critical size, the productivity is optimized by constructing large compartments, each of which is less than maximally packed with enzymes. In the parameter regime of low membrane permeabilities that includes α-carboxysomes, it is reasonable to assume that metabolites are well mixed throughout the compartment. Therefore, the precise arrangement of enzymes within the compartments is of little importance in determining the productivity. Furthermore, similar productivity can be achieved across a wide range of compartment sizes, provided that the enzyme concentration is appropriately chosen according to the compartment radius. These results provide a guide for the construction of efficient synthetic bioreactors.

We have focused on parameters that resemble α-carboxysome microcompartments, one of the best-studied metabolic microcompartments. Interestingly, β-carboxysome shells were found to have larger pores than those of α-carboxysomes (18, 33). We estimate that the shell permeability of β-carboxysomes is ∼12-fold higher than that of α-carboxysomes. This leads to a larger critical radius, Rc, at which the optimal strategy switches from maximal to partial packing of enzymes, but it also means that the well-mixed regime for β-carboxysomes is limited to smaller compartments (corresponding to a smaller Rx), resulting in a more pronounced maximum in the optimized productivity (Fig. 6). Notably, the typical size of β-carboxysomes, which is larger than that of α-carboxysomes (150 nm vs. 60 nm (39)), lies close to the radius at which our model predicts maximal productivity. The optimal strategy at this compartment size is maximal packing of enzymes. In contrast, α-carboxysomes fall in the regime R>Rc for which we predict the optimal strategy to be partial packing. Interestingly, the arrangement of RuBisCO within β-carboxysomes was described as densely packed or paracrystalline (40), in contrast to the less organized packing observed within α-carboxysomes (35, 41). Our analysis suggests that the observed differences in carboxysome properties may reflect the different optimal compartmentalization solutions that arise given the specific properties of each protein shell.Figure 6 Comparison of optimal compartmentalization strategies for α- and β-carboxysomes. The higher shell permeability of β-carboxysomes (blue line) (ps = 1080 μm s−1, pi = 215 μm s−1) shifts the optimal productivity curve toward larger compartment radii and leads to a more pronounced productivity maximum compared to α-carboxysomes (orange dashed line) (ps = 90 μm s−1, pi = 18 μm s−1). Typical size ranges for the two carboxysome types are denoted by the shaded regions. To see this figure in color, go online.



Our aim in this work has been to explore some of the generic properties of compartmentalization strategies. Our simplified reaction-diffusion model omits a number of biochemical details of metabolic reactions. For example, product inhibition will tend to reduce the efficiency of enzymes as the concentration of P becomes larger, thereby providing a further incentive to reduce the enzyme concentration within a compartment to reduce the rate of P production and hence also its concentration. This potentially leads to a shift of the critical radius to smaller radii and a change in the scaling of eT, but the qualitative transition from maximally packed to sparsely packed compartments will persist. We have furthermore neglected the discrete nature and spatial structure of enzyme molecules. Macromolecular crowding can have many effects, such as reducing metabolite diffusivity (42) and enhancing reaction kinetics (43, 44). We do not believe such effects will be significant in most biological microcompartments, since the metabolites involved are typically small molecules such as CO2 or H2O2, whose diffusion will be little affected by obstructions on the much larger scale of enzyme molecules. However, if metabolites were themselves large, then crowding may potentially increase the benefit of specific enzyme arrangements that promote trapping or channeling of reactants. The discreteness of enzymes means that there will inevitably be fluctuations in the number of enzymes between compartments. It has previously been shown that such variability can alter the optimal strategy for partitioning signaling proteins among different sub-domains (45). It remains to be seen whether a similar effect occurs in the context of metabolic reactions.

It is also possible for the reactions within compartments to become coupled through exchange of intermediates or depletion of substrate in the cytoplasm. It will be interesting to see under which conditions such inter-compartment interactions, which will be governed by the same physical processes of diffusion and exchange across compartment and cell boundaries as our intra-compartment model, alter the optimal compartmentalization strategies for the cell as a whole.

Although we have considered only the steady-state productivity of static compartment configurations, metabolism is a highly dynamic and tightly regulated collection of processes. In scenarios where maximizing productivity is not the principal design goal, our model nevertheless demonstrates that metabolic fluxes may be controlled by changing the number and size of organelles in which reactions take place. Multiple examples are known of systems in which such changes in sub-cellular organelles are induced in response to varying metabolic demands or environmental cues (46, 47, 48). That changing compartmentalization can alter metabolic flux has been demonstrated in the fungus Penicillium chrysogenum. Overproduction of a peroxisomal membrane protein resulted in a significant increase in the number of peroxisomes (49), which in turn led to a 2.5-fold increase in the level of penicillin in the culture medium. Interestingly, the amounts of peroxisomal enzymes involved in penicillin biosynthesis were unchanged compared to the control strain; rather, enzymes were distributed over a larger number of smaller organelles. It would be of interest to observe penicillin production if the peroxisomes are further divided into even smaller organelles. Our analysis predicts that at a certain organelle size, the production of penicillin would decrease again due to the increasing loss of intermediates.

In addition to changing compartment size and number, cells are also able to regulate the morphology of organelles. For example, studies have shown that mitochondria change their shape according to the energy demands of the cell (50, 51). This morphological change was suggested to be an active mechanism to increase bio-energetic efficiency (51). Proteinaceous microcompartments could also potentially be constructed with different morphologies depending on the abundance of different shell proteins (52). Our model predicts that for rapidly diffusing metabolites, productivity depends crucially on the surface area/volume ratio of compartments, whereas the specific geometry will be less important. Thus, adapting an organelle’s surface/volume ratio by altering its shape presents an alternative possibility for tuning metabolic fluxes without altering enzyme expression levels.

Author Contributions
All authors designed research. F.H. and F.T. performed research and analyzed data. All authors wrote the paper.

Supporting Citations
References (53, 54) appear in the Supporting Material.

Supporting Material
Document S1. Supporting Materials and Methods and Figs. S1–S3
 Document S2. Article plus Supporting Material
 

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the German Excellence Initiative via the program “Nanosystems Initiative Munich” and by the German Research Foundation via SFB1032, “Nanoagents for Spatiotemporal Control of Molecular and Cellular Reactions”. F.H. is supported by a Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft fellowship through the Graduate School of Quantitative Biosciences Munich (QBM). F.T. was supported by a research fellowship from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.

Supporting Materials and Methods and three figures are available at http://www.biophysj.org/biophysj/supplemental/S0006-3495(16)34263-1.
==== Refs
References
1 Reed L.J.   Multienzyme complexes Acc. Chem. Res. 7 1974 40 46 
2 Srere P.A.   Complexes of sequential metabolic enzymes Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56 1987 89 124 2441660 
3 An S.  Kumar R.  Benkovic S.J.   Reversible compartmentalization of de novo purine biosynthetic complexes in living cells Science 320 2008 103 106 18388293 
4 Campanella M.E.  Chu H.  Low P.S.   Assembly and regulation of a glycolytic enzyme complex on the human erythrocyte membrane Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 2005 2402 2407 15701694 
5 Sampson E.M.  Bobik T.A.   Microcompartments for B12 -dependent 1,2-propanediol degradation provide protection from DNA and cellular damage by a reactive metabolic intermediate J. Bacteriol. 190 2008 2966 2971 18296526 
6 Agapakis C.M.  Boyle P.M.  Silver P.A.   Natural strategies for the spatial optimization of metabolism in synthetic biology Nat. Chem. Biol. 8 2012 527 535 22596204 
7 Hult K.  Berglund P.   Enzyme promiscuity: mechanism and applications Trends Biotechnol. 25 2007 231 238 17379338 
8 Lee H.  DeLoache W.C.  Dueber J.E.   Spatial organization of enzymes for metabolic engineering Metab. Eng. 14 2012 242 251 21946160 
9 Spivey H.O.  Ovádi J.   Substrate channeling Methods 19 1999 306 321 10527733 
10 Wheeldon I.  Minteer S.D.  Sigman M.   Substrate channelling as an approach to cascade reactions Nat. Chem. 8 2016 299 309 27001725 
11 Buchner A.  Tostevin F.  Gerland U.   Clustering and optimal arrangement of enzymes in reaction-diffusion systems Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 2013 208104 25167456 
12 Buchner A.  Tostevin F.  Gerland U.   Optimization of collective enzyme activity via spatial localization J. Chem. Phys. 139 2013 135101 24116589 
13 Castellana M.  Wilson M.Z.  Wingreen N.S.   Enzyme clustering accelerates processing of intermediates through metabolic channeling Nat. Biotechnol. 32 2014 1011 1018 25262299 
14 Zecchin A.  Stapor P.C.  Carmeliet P.   Metabolic pathway compartmentalization: an underappreciated opportunity? Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 34 2015 73 81 25499800 
15 del Río L.A.  Sandalio L.M.  Corpas F.J.   Metabolism of oxygen radicals in peroxisomes and cellular implications Free Radic. Biol. Med. 13 1992 557 580 1334030 
16 Gantt E.  Conti S.F.   Ultrastructure of blue-green algae J. Bacteriol. 97 1969 1486 1493 5776533 
17 Shively J.M.  Decker G.L.  Greenawalt J.W.   Comparative ultrastructure of the thiobacilli J. Bacteriol. 101 1970 618 627 5413830 
18 Kerfeld C.A.  Sawaya M.R.  Yeates T.O.   Protein structures forming the shell of primitive bacterial organelles Science 309 2005 936 938 16081736 
19 Rae B.D.  Long B.M.  Price G.D.   Functions, compositions, and evolution of the two types of carboxysomes: polyhedral microcompartments that facilitate CO2  fixation in cyanobacteria and some proteobacteria Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 77 2013 357 379 24006469 
20 Badger M.  Hanson D.  Price G.D.   Evolution and diversity of CO2  concentrating mechanisms in cyanobacteria Funct. Plant Biol. 29 2002 161 173 
21 Ort D.R.  Merchant S.S.  Zhu X.G.   Redesigning photosynthesis to sustainably meet global food and bioenergy demand Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112 2015 8529 8536 26124102 
22 Zarzycki J.  Axen S.D.  Kerfeld C.A.   Cyanobacterial-based approaches to improving photosynthesis in plants J. Exp. Bot. 64 2013 787 798 23095996 
23 Price G.D.  Pengelly J.J.L.  Evans J.R.   The cyanobacterial CCM as a source of genes for improving photosynthetic CO2  fixation in crop species J. Exp. Bot. 64 2013 753 768 23028015 
24 Lin M.T.  Occhialini A.  Hanson M.R.   A faster Rubisco with potential to increase photosynthesis in crops Nature 513 2014 547 550 25231869 
25 Frank S.  Lawrence A.D.  Warren M.J.   Bacterial microcompartments moving into a synthetic biological world J. Biotechnol. 163 2013 273 279 22982517 
26 Chen A.H.  Silver P.A.   Designing biological compartmentalization Trends Cell Biol. 22 2012 662 670 22841504 
27 Avalos J.L.  Fink G.R.  Stephanopoulos G.   Compartmentalization of metabolic pathways in yeast mitochondria improves the production of branched-chain alcohols Nat. Biotechnol. 31 2013 335 341 23417095 
28 Kafri M.  Metzl-Raz E.  Barkai N.   The cost of protein production Cell Reports 14 2016 22 31 26725116 
29 Fridlyand L.  Kaplan A.  Reinhold L.   Quantitative evaluation of the role of a putative CO2 -scavenging entity in the cyanobacterial CO2 -concentrating mechanism Biosystems 37 1996 229 238 8924647 
30 Mangan N.M.  Brenner M.P.   Correction: Systems analysis of the CO2  concentrating mechanism in cyanobacteria eLife 4 2015 e02043 
31 Heinhorst S.  Williams E.B.  Cannon G.C.   Characterization of the carboxysomal carbonic anhydrase CsoSCA from Halothiobacillus neapolitanus  J. Bacteriol. 188 2006 8087 8094 17012396 
32 Mueller-Cajar O.  Whitney S.M.   Evolving improved Synechococcus Rubisco  functional expression in Escherichia coli  Biochem. J. 414 2008 205 214 18484948 
33 Tsai Y.  Sawaya M.R.  Yeates T.O.   Structural analysis of CsoS1A and the protein shell of the Halothiobacillus neapolitanus  carboxysome PLoS Biol. 5 2007 e144 17518518 
34 Shively J.M.  Ball F.L.  Kline B.W.   Electron microscopy of the carboxysomes (polyhedral bodies) of Thiobacillus neapolitanus  J. Bacteriol. 116 1973 1405 1411 4127632 
35 Iancu C.V.  Ding H.J.  Jensen G.J.   The structure of isolated Synechococcus  strain WH8102 carboxysomes as revealed by electron cryotomography J. Mol. Biol. 372 2007 764 773 17669419 
36 Shively J.M.  Ball F.  Saunders R.E.   Functional organelles in prokaryotes: polyhedral inclusions (carboxysomes) of Thiobacillus neapolitanus  Science 182 1973 584 586 4355679 
37 So A.K.-C.  Espie G.S.  Cannon G.C.   A novel evolutionary lineage of carbonic anhydrase (ε  class) is a component of the carboxysome shell J. Bacteriol. 186 2004 623 630 14729686 
38 Kim E.Y.  Tullman-Ercek D.   Engineering nanoscale protein compartments for synthetic organelles Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 24 2013 627 632 23273660 
39 Cai F.  Dou Z.  Kerfeld C.A.   Advances in understanding carboxysome assembly in Prochlorococcus  and Synechococcus  implicate CsoS2 as a critical component Life (Basel) 5 2015 1141 1171 25826651 
40 Kaneko Y.  Danev R.  Nakamoto H.   Intact carboxysomes in a cyanobacterial cell visualized by hilbert differential contrast transmission electron microscopy J. Bacteriol. 188 2006 805 808 16385071 
41 Iancu C.V.  Morris D.M.  Jensen G.J.   Organization, structure, and assembly of α -carboxysomes determined by electron cryotomography of intact cells J. Mol. Biol. 396 2010 105 117 19925807 
42 García-Pérez A.I.  López-Beltrán E.A.  Cerdán S.   Molecular crowding and viscosity as determinants of translational diffusion of metabolites in subcellular organelles Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 362 1999 329 338 9989943 
43 Vazquez A.   Optimal cytoplasmatic density and flux balance model under macromolecular crowding effects J. Theor. Biol. 264 2010 356 359 20171231 
44 Dill K.A.  Ghosh K.  Schmit J.D.   Physical limits of cells and proteomes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 2011 17876 17882 22006304 
45 Mugler A.  Tostevin F.  ten Wolde P.R.   Spatial partitioning improves the reliability of biochemical signaling Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110 2013 5927 5932 23530194 
46 Nunnari J.  Walter P.   Regulation of organelle biogenesis Cell 84 1996 389 394 8608592 
47 Smith J.J.  Brown T.W.  Rachubinski R.A.   Regulation of peroxisome size and number by fatty acid β  -oxidation in the yeast yarrowia lipolytica J. Biol. Chem. 275 2000 20168 20178 10787422 
48 Schrader M.  Bonekamp N.A.  Islinger M.   Fission and proliferation of peroxisomes Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1822 2012 1343 1357 22240198 
49 Kiel J.A.K.W.  van der Klei I.J.  Veenhuis M.   Overproduction of a single protein, Pc-Pex11p, results in 2-fold enhanced penicillin production by Penicillium chrysogenum  Fungal Genet. Biol. 42 2005 154 164 15670713 
50 Gomes L.C.  Di Benedetto G.  Scorrano L.   During autophagy mitochondria elongate, are spared from degradation and sustain cell viability Nat. Cell Biol. 13 2011 589 598 21478857 
51 Liesa M.  Shirihai O.S.   Mitochondrial dynamics in the regulation of nutrient utilization and energy expenditure Cell Metab. 17 2013 491 506 23562075 
52 Cameron J.C.  Wilson S.C.  Kerfeld C.A.   Biogenesis of a bacterial organelle: the carboxysome assembly pathway Cell 155 2013 1131 1140 24267892 
53 Bondi A.   van der Waals volumes and radii J. Phys. Chem. 68 1964 441 451 
54 Cheng S.  Liu Y.  Bobik T.A.   Bacterial microcompartments: their properties and paradoxes BioEssays 30 2008 1084 1095 18937343 
55 Bar-Even A.  Noor E.  Milo R.   The moderately efficient enzyme: evolutionary and physicochemical trends shaping enzyme parameters Biochemistry 50 2011 4402 4410 21506553

