
==== Front
Biophys J
Biophys. J
Biophysical Journal
0006-3495 1542-0086 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. 

S0006-3495(13)02978-0
10.1016/j.bpj.2013.11.1720
Article
The Conformational Flexibility of an Internal Fusion Peptide from Sars-Cov Spike Glycoprotein is Modulated by Lipid Membrane Composition
Basso Luis G.M. 1 Fernandes Tácio V.A. 2 Lima José F. 1 Crusca Edson Jr.1 Vicente Eduardo F. 3 Cilli Eduardo M. 3 Pascutti Pedro G. 2 Costa-Filho Antonio J. 4 1 Physics Institute, University of São Paulo, São Carlos, Brazil
2 Biophysics Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
3 Chemistry Institute, São Paulo State University, Araraquara, Brazil
4 Department of Physics, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil
28 1 2014 
28 1 2014 
28 1 2014 
106 2 295a 295a
Copyright © 2014 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc.2014Biophysical SocietySince January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.1506-Pos B236
==== Body
The S2 domain of the spike glycoprotein from SARS-CoV is responsible for driving viral and host cell membrane fusion. An internal fusion peptide (SARSIFP), located near the S2 domain N-terminus, plays a crucial role in the fusion process. Although much information has been obtained in recent years on membrane fusion, many aspects of the molecular mechanisms behind virus-host cell membrane fusion are not totally understood yet. Questions regarding structure, dynamics, and topology of fusion peptides in lipid membranes still remain and are addressed in this work by means of a variety of experimental and computational techniques. The minimum-energy conformation of the peptide was determined by GSA/MD simulations in different conditions. Cluster analysis and free-energy surfaces revealed a conformational promiscuity for SARSIFP, including α-helices, β-strands, and random coil conformations. The distance distribution between the N- and C-termini was also experimentally determined from four-pulse DEER experiments of a doubly labeled derivative. Different membrane mimetics modulated the average peptide end-to-end distance. Moreover, SARSIFP spontaneously adsorbed at the membrane-solvent interface in a random conformation and then forms a helix. Free-energy values and secondary structure content were modulated by the presence of negative membranes, in agreement with our CD and fluorescence data. MD and electron spin resonance (ESR) results indicated a water-exposed C-terminal and a membrane-inserted N-terminal. Spin-labeled lipids and ESR showed that SARSIFP increased lipid packing and head group ordering only in the presence of negatively charged lipids. To our knowledge, this is the first report that provides dynamics, structural and topological information of SARSIFP in model membranes at atomic resolution, which may shed light on the mechanism by which the peptide folds and inserts into membranes.

ACKNOLEDGEMENTS: FAPESP, CAPES, CNPq.

