
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000387corr1bmjopen-2011-000387corr1MiscellaneousCorrectionCorrection 2012 12 11 2012 2 6 e000387corr1Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to
use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2012
==== Body
Wand H, Iversen J, Wilson D et al. Developing and validating
a scoring tool for identifying people who inject drugs at increased risk of hepatitis C
virus infection. BMJ Open 2012;2: e000387.

The following references were omitted from the paper:

20. Kshirsagar AV, Bang H, Bomback AS et al. A simple algorithm to predict
incident kidney disease. Arch Intern Med
2008;168:2466–73.

25. Iversen J, Wand H, Gonnermann A, et al. Gender differences in
hepatitis C antibody prevalence and risk behaviours amongst people who inject drugs in
Australia 1998–2008. Int J Drug Policy
2010;21:471–76.

26. Bang H, Edwards AM, Bornback AS, et al. Development and validation of
a patient self-assessment score for diabetes risk. Ann Intern Med
2009;151:775–83.

27. Bang H, Vupputuri S, Shoham DA, et al. SCreening for Occult REnal
Disease (SCORED): a simple prediction model for chronic kidney disease. Arch Intern
Med 2007;167:374–81.

36. Trooskin SB, Navarro VJ, Winn RJ, et al. Hepatitis C risk assessment,
testing and referral for treatment in urban primary care: Role of race and ethnicity.
World J Gastroenterol 2007;13:1074–1078.

References in the manuscript should be re-numbered accordingly.

‘INTRODUCTION’, fourth paragraph should have read:

‘…in the development of the new prediction algorithm”: (1) the use of
routinely available and minimally intrusive variables and (2) estimation of the cumulative
effect of concurrent risk factors on the likelihood of”20 HCV prevalence.
“We are unaware of any studies”20 to date “that have
quantified the cumulative effect of concurrent risk factors on the”20
acquisition of…’

‘STUDY POPULATION’, second paragraph, should have read:

“A modified, third generation enzyme immunoassay (Abbott hepatitis C 3.0, Chicago,
IL, USA) was used to test for HCV antibody. A modified cutoff value for optical density was
calculated to capture greater than 95% of the seronegative population. Specimens
were considered positive for HCV antibody if the optical density to cutoff ratio was
greater than or equal to one on initial and subsequent testing”.25

‘STATISTICAL ANALYSES’, third paragraph, should have read:

‘We used descriptive statistics to characterize the groups according to antibody HCV
serostatus: mean and standard deviation (SD) “for continuous variables and
percentages for categorical variables”.26 Logistic regression was used to
create a predictive model based on the development data set. We used all non-missing
observations available in the relevant analyses as only a small proportion of observations
had any missing data (except for the variable “imprisonment
history”).’26

‘Derivation of a Screening Score’, first paragraph, should have read:

‘Using the development data set (n = 10 662), “we
included a comprehensive list of predictors known to be associated” with HCV
antibody seropositivity “in an initial model”.26
“Specifically, we included the main effects of all variables listed in Table
1”.26

‘“We first analyzed the univariate associations between the independent
variables and”27 HCV seropositivity. Backward elimination was used to
reach the final multivariate “model, in which factors with the largest P
value”’.20,27

‘We then “created a weighted scoring system by rounding all regression
coefficients”26 up to the nearest integer (ie, “the smallest
integer greater than”27 the estimate). “This method was based on
the β-coefficients (or log of the odds ratios) rather than odds ratios, which can be
excessively influenced by only a few factors”.27 Once the final model was
defined, we created integer weights for each variable. We calculated these weights
“by multiplying the model coefficients by 10. Using the rounded weights in the risk
function, we estimated the participant-specific”27 probabilities of HCV
seropositivity and characterized the “degrees of risk based on cut-off points of the
probability distribution”’.20,27

‘Cross-sectional internal validation’, second paragraph, should have
read:

‘We used the cross-sectional dataset to check the sensitivity and robustness of the
new screening score. We computed standard validation measures: the proportion of antibody
HCV seropositive specimens, sensitivity, specificity, positive likelihood and negative
likelihood ratio and the area “under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(AUC) as discrimination statistics. We also assessed the diagnostic characteristics of
different cut-points based on the total score in the development as well as
validation’.26

‘Prospective external validation’, first paragraph, should have read:

‘Using the Cox regression coefficients in the risk function, the
participant-specific probability of HIV seroconversion was estimated. A rule to
characterize different degrees of risk based on cut- off points of the probability
distribution was then established. We also assessed the diagnostic features and
characterized “different degrees of risk based on cut-off points of the probability
distribution”’.20

‘RESULTS’, second paragraph, should have read:

‘Table 2 presents the final multivariate logistic regression model derived from the
development data set by age groups’.26

‘…multiple categories “to capture the risk gradient, whereas other
risk factors were binary”’.26

‘DISCUSSION’, second paragraph, should have read:

‘…of current HCV diagnoses and not incident HCV in the future, strong
consistency in risk factors for the prediction incident events of HCV was shown in
prospective validation of the tool.26 Therefore, “we expect that the same
set of risk factors in our model plays an important role in the prediction of
future”26….’

‘DISCUSSION’, fifth paragraph, should have read:

‘Risk calculation approaches have been extensively “used in decision making
about public health and clinical care and have even been proposed as an alternative to
diagnosis for some diseases”.26,33 Our risk calculation was based on a
statistical method that yielded a systematic scoring system for carefully selected
predictors, guided not only by numerical and scientific evidence but also feasibility
perspectives.26 We “chose categorized variables”26
which highlighted the “important risk factors to motivate high-risk persons to be
screened or to modify behaviors. This combination of factors may explain the enhanced
properties of our”26 scoring tool’.

‘DISCUSSION’, sixth paragraph, should have read:

“Ideal risk assessment methods or prediction models should be derived from large
representative samples”.26

‘DISCUSSION’, seventh paragraph, should have read:

“Risk factor screening and identification allows for patients to be educated
regarding the risks of injection drug use and needle sharing. Appropriate testing and
diagnosis of HCV allows for the patient to be evaluated for treatment and receive
counseling regarding”36 HCV prevention. “In addition to physician
education, patient education campaigns must also be developed to increase patient
compliance with testing recommendations made by their physicians”.36
