
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Publishing Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2014-004806corr110.1136/bmjopen-2014-004806corr1CorrectionCorrection 2015 1 6 2015 5 6 e004806corr1Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2015
==== Body
Kähler P, Grevstad B, Almdal T, et al. Targeting intensive versus conventional glycaemic control for type 1 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review with meta-analyses and trial sequential analyses of randomised clinical trials. BMJ Open 2014;4:e004806. The list of authors should read:

Pernille Kähler,1 Berit Grevstad,1 Thomas Almdal,2 Christian Gluud,1
3 Jørn Wetterslev,1 Søren Søgaard Lund,4 Allan Vaag,5 Bianca Hemmingsen1

1Copenhagen Trial Unit, Centre for Clinical Intervention Research, Department 7812, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark

2Department of Medicine F, Gentofte Hospital, Gentofte, Denmark

3Cochrane Hepato-Biliary Group, Copenhagen Trial Unit, Centre for Clinical Intervention Research, Department 7812, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark

4Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany

5Department of Endocrinology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark

The Acknowledgements and Contributors sections should read:

The authors thank Sarah Klingenberg, the trials search co-ordinator of the Cochrane Hepato-Biliary Group, for her assistance in developing the search strategy. They also thank Victoria Franklin for answering our requests for information on trials.

Contributors: PK developed the protocol, was responsible for the searches, selected trials, extracted data, assessed risk of bias of trials, did the data analysis, and developed the final review. BH developed the protocol, was responsible for the searches, selected trials, extracted data, assessed risk of bias of trials, and developed the final review. BG developed the protocol, selected trials, extracted data, assessed risk of bias of trials, did the data analysis, and developed the final review. CG developed the protocol, selected trials, advised on statistical methods, and developed the final review. TA developed the initial idea for the review, developed the protocol, and developed the final review. AV developed the protocol, and developed the final review. JW developed the protocol, advised on statistical methods, and developed the final review. SSL contributed substantially to the interpretation of data and revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Competing interests: PK, AV, SSL and TA have reported equity in Novo Nordisk A/S. SSL owns shares in dynamically traded investment funds, which may own stocks from pharmaceutical companies. AV have received fees from Novo Nordisk A/S for speaking. SSL is an employee of Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany; his contribution was his alone and does not necessarily reflect the official position of Boehringer Ingelheim.
