
==== Front
BMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR 22080529bmjopen-2011-00035510.1136/bmjopen-2011-000355Drugs and MedicinesProtocol150617091704Management of patient adherence to medications: protocol for an online survey
of doctors, pharmacists and nurses in Europe Management of patient adherence to medicationsClyne Wendy 1Mshelia Comfort 1Hall Stephanie 2McLachlan Sarah 1Jones Peter 3Dobbels Fabienne 4Ruppar Todd 45Siebens Kaat 4Morrison Val 6De Geest Sabina 4Kardas Premyzlaw 71 NPC Plus, Keele University, Keele, UK2 Division of Applied Health Sciences, School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK3 School of Computing and Mathematics, Keele University, Keele,
UK4 Center for Health Services and Nursing Research, Katholieke
Universiteit, Leuven, Belgium5 Sinclair School of Nursing, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri, USA6 School of Psychology, Bangor University, Bangor, UK7 First Department of Family Medicine, Medical University of
Lodz, Lodz, PolandCorrespondence to Dr Wendy Clyne;
w.clyne@mema.keele.ac.uk2011 3 11 2011 3 11 2011 1 1 e00035526 8 2011 15 9 2011 © 2011, Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For
permission to use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.2011This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non commercial and
is otherwise in compliance with the license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Introduction
It is widely recognised that many patients do not take prescribed medicines as advised.
Research in this field has commonly focused on the role of the patient in non-adherence;
however, healthcare professionals can also have a major influence on patient behaviour
in taking medicines. This study examines the perceptions, beliefs and behaviours of
healthcare professionals—doctors, pharmacists and nurses—about patient
medication adherence.

Methods and analysis
This paper describes the study protocol and online questionnaire used in a
cross-sectional survey of healthcare professionals in Europe. The participating
countries include Austria, Belgium, France, Greece, The Netherlands, Germany, Poland,
Portugal, Switzerland, Hungary, Italy and England. The study population comprises
primary care and community-based doctors, pharmacists and nurses involved in the care of
adult patients taking prescribed medicines for chronic and acute illnesses.

Discussion
Knowledge of the nature, extent and variability of the practices of healthcare
professionals to support medication adherence could inform future service design,
healthcare professional education, policy and research.

Article summary
Article focus
A protocol for a cross-sectional survey of healthcare professionals in Europe to
examine the perceptions, beliefs and behaviours of healthcare
professionals—doctors, pharmacists and nurses—about patient medication
adherence.

The questionnaire used in the survey of healthcare professionals is described in
detail.

Key messages
There is an acute need for evidence regarding healthcare professionals'
beliefs, perceptions and behaviour with regard to patient non-adherence to
medicines.

This protocol describes a study to address this need.

The results of this study could guide healthcare professionals as they support
patients with taking medicine in their day-to-day clinical practice.

Strengths and limitations of this study
The survey is the largest cross-national survey of healthcare professionals'
approach to medication adherence.

Reliance on self-report data may raise concerns regarding the validity of the
findings.
==== Body
Introduction
Chronic diseases are a major source of disability and death worldwide.1 One way of managing chronic diseases is by taking medicines. In order
for these medicines to work in the way they are intended, they need to be taken in the way
they were prescribed. Taking prescribed medicines irregularly or not at all is often
referred to as non-adherence.2 It is widely recognised
that many patients do not take prescribed medication as advised, and the WHO2 reports that only around 50% of the general population
in developed countries are adherent to treatment for chronic diseases. Poor adherence can
have a negative impact on both the potential clinical benefits of treatment3 and the cost-effectiveness of medicines.4
5 From the patient's point of view,
non-adherence can also have positive consequences. For example, patients who fail to take
their medicines as prescribed avoid the potential unpleasant side effects of their
medicines. Patients may also benefit from a perception of autonomy and personal agency
through non-adherence. Healthcare professionals have a role to play in providing support to
patients in order to ensure that if the patient agrees to take the medicine, it is taken in
a way that will maximise its benefit.

Several studies6 report on the use and effectiveness
of various interventions to improve patient adherence to medicines. The effectiveness of
adherence interventions, however, needs to be looked at in a broader context which includes
the role of healthcare professionals. Improving the ability of healthcare professionals to
properly assess the risk of non-adherence and deliver interventions aimed at reducing
non-adherence may lead to more effective support offered to patients taking prescribed
medicines. In the past, the focus of research in the field of adherence has been largely on
the patient's role. In order to gain a fuller understanding of the problem and
address the gap in current knowledge, this study, which is taking place in several countries
across Europe, looks at the perceptions, beliefs and behaviours of healthcare
professionals—doctors, nurses and pharmacists—with regards to patient
medication adherence. Knowledge of the nature, extent and variability of the practices of
healthcare professionals to support medication adherence could inform future service design,
healthcare professional education, policy and research.

This study is part of a larger project on patient medication adherence funded by the
European Commission called the ‘ABC (Ascertaining Barriers for Compliance)
Project’ (http://www.abcproject.eu). The overall
goal of the ABC project is to produce evidence-based policy recommendations for improving
patient adherence and by so doing to promote safer, more effective and cost-effective
medicines use in Europe.

Methods and analysis
Design
This paper describes the protocol and questionnaire used in a cross-sectional survey of
healthcare professionals in Europe. A quantitative self-report questionnaire has been
designed specifically for this study. The questionnaire is administered online using the
survey tool provided by SurveyMonkey. SurveyMonkey has been successfully used in published
research involving surveys of health care professionals, and its use has been described in
detail by Dobrow and colleagues.7 For a survey such
as this with widespread geographical coverage, use of the internet should aid the
logistics of survey administration.

Aim
The aim of this study is to ascertain how healthcare professionals—doctors,
pharmacists and nurses—across Europe assess and support patient adherence to
prescribed medication for long-term conditions, with secondary aims of assessing national
and professional variations in adherence support behaviour.

Objectives
The objectives of this study are to examine healthcare professionals' perceptions
of the extent of non-adherence, to determine healthcare professionals' beliefs
about adherence and non-adherence as well as the behaviours of healthcare professionals to
support patients with taking medicines and their perceptions about the effectiveness of
those actions. The study will also consider perceived barriers to supporting adherence as
well as training received for managing non-adherence as reported by healthcare
professionals.

Study population
The study is being conducted in several countries across Europe including Austria,
Belgium, France, Greece, The Netherlands, Germany, Poland, Portugal, Switzerland, Hungary,
Italy and England. The survey is focused on primary care and community-based doctors,
pharmacists and nurses. These professional groups have been selected because of their
involvement in the care of adults who are prescribed medicines for chronic and acute
conditions.

Inclusion criteria
Healthcare professionals who satisfy the following criteria are eligible for inclusion in
the survey:

a. they are currently employed as medical doctors, nurses or pharmacists;

b. they work mainly with adults;

c. they work mainly in the community or primary care;

d. they work either in a private or public healthcare system (or both);

e. they are qualified and registered to practise;

f. they consent to take part in the survey.

Exclusion criteria
Healthcare professionals are not eligible to participate in the survey if:

a. they are student doctors, nurses or pharmacists;

b. they work only in paediatrics (ie, do not work with adults at all);

c. they work mainly in secondary care;

d. there is a lack of consent from the healthcare professional or they decide to quit
the study at any stage and for any reason.

Sample size
The sample size is based on the estimation of the proportion of those participants who
answer ‘never’ to the primary outcome: ‘I ask patients if they have
missed any doses of their medication’ in each country. Using the approach in
Cochran8 a sample size of 384 healthcare
professionals in each country (128 people in each professional group) would enable
estimation of this unknown proportion to within an absolute value of 5% with 95%
confidence interval, CI.

Recruitment of participants
A mixed-method approach will be used in order to recruit participants in each country. A
random sample of healthcare professionals will be sought by sampling from registers of
healthcare professional bodies or associations. The number of healthcare professionals
sampled and invited to participate in the survey will be based on reported9 response rates of healthcare professionals to online
surveys of this nature. Each healthcare professional that is selected from professional
registers will initially receive a letter inviting them to participate in the online
survey and a project information sheet. The invitation letter will contain information
about the survey as well as the web link which potential participants need in order to
gain access to the survey. Reminder letters will then be sent to the healthcare
professionals 3 weeks and again 5 weeks after the initial contact.

News articles to promote awareness of the survey will also be sent to healthcare
professional bodies and associations for circulation through the respective
organisations' websites and newsletters. The news article will also be distributed
to publications whose main audience is healthcare professionals. The news article will
contain information about the study as well as the web link which healthcare professionals
need in order to access the survey.

All potential participants will be given the same project information and gain access to
the survey via the same web link.

Data collection commenced at the beginning of July 2011. It is anticipated that data
collection in all countries will cease at the end of March 2012.

Questionnaire development
There are relatively few research studies examining healthcare professional behaviour
with regard to supporting patients with adherence to medication. Although it was not
possible to identify any validated scales of healthcare professional behaviour in this
domain, two unvalidated but published questionnaires which had been used to measure
adherence behaviour among hospital-based doctors10
and cardiovascular nurses11 were found. The ABC
healthcare professional adherence questionnaire was informed by a combination of these
scales,9
11 as well as recommendations for clinical practice
from published adherence guidelines.2
6
12
13

A subgroup of the ABC research team discussed, reviewed and edited potential items
considered for inclusion in the questionnaire. The themes covered are:

A. perceptions of the extent of non-adherence to medication in patients;

B. beliefs about adherence to prescribed medication;

C. use of adherence enhancing interventions;

D. barriers to use of adherence enhancing interventions;

E. questions about training on adherence and use of guidelines for adherence
management

Description of the questionnaire
The questionnaire is made up of 86 items in total and divided into five subsections.
Below is a brief description of each subsection in the instrument.

A. Perceptions of the extent of patient non-adherence: This section contains a
total of six questions split equally into two subsections. The first section asks
about healthcare professionals' perceptions of non-adherence in all
patients—for example: ‘what percentage of all patients with a chronic
condition/illness in your country do you think do not initiate prescribed medication
(ie, patients who do not take any of their prescribed medication)?’
The second section asks about their perceptions of non-adherence in their own
patients—for example: ‘what percentage of your patients with a chronic
condition/illness in your country do you think do not initiate prescribed medication
(ie., patients who do not take any of their prescribed
medication)?’

A five-point rating scale is provided for respondents to make their ratings, with
response options of ‘0–15%,’ ‘16–35%,’
‘36–65%,’ ‘66–85%’ and
‘86–100%.’

B. Beliefs about adherence to medicines: There are seven items in this section.
Participants are asked to indicate the extent to which they agree or disagree with
each statement about patient adherence. For example, ‘it is possible to
improve patient adherence to medication.’

A five-point rating scale is provided for participants to make their ratings, with
options ranging from ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly
agree’ with intermediate labels of ‘disagree,’ ‘neither
agree nor disagree’ and ‘agree.’ The response category
‘don't know’ is also available to respondents.

C. Adherence enhancing interventions used by doctors, nurses and pharmacists: This
section is made up of a total of 50 questions split into five subsections. These
are:

a. Assessment of adherence and its risk factors: There are eight items in this
subsection. An example of an item in this section is: ‘I use electronic
monitoring devices to assess patients' level of adherence.’ The
primary outcome is included in this subsection. The wording for the question is:
‘I ask patients if they have missed any doses of their
medication.’

b. Providing information for carers and patients: There are nine items in this
subsection. An example of an item from this section is: ‘I check that
patients understand the information that I have given them.’

c. Talking with patients about their medications: This subsection is made up of
a total of 18 items. An example of an item from this section is: ‘I ask
patients what level of involvement they would like in making decisions about
their treatment.’

d. Practical strategies to make medication taking easier: Eleven items make up
this subsection. An example of an item from this section is: ‘I help
patients to tailor their medication regimen to their own lifestyle.’

e. Involving others and services to support adherence. This subsection consists
of four items in total. An example of an item from this section is: ‘I
refer patients to peer mentor programmes to support medication
adherence.’

The response scale for the entire section on adherence enhancing interventions is
adapted from Berben et al's survey of adherence practices by
European cardiovascular nurses.10 The response
options here are split into two. Respondents are first asked to indicate how often they
use the intervention. A five-point rating scale is provided for participants to provide
their frequency of use with responses ranging from ‘never’ to ‘all
the time’ and intermediate ratings of ‘occasionally,’
‘sometimes’ and ‘frequently.’ The response category
‘not applicable’ is made available to participants who do not use any of
the interventions mentioned. Next, respondents are given the opportunity to indicate,
for every intervention they use, how effective they think that intervention is. A
three-point rating scale is provided; with responses ranging from ‘not at
all’ to ‘extremely,’ with an intermediate category
‘somewhat.’ The response category ‘not applicable’ is
provided for those who select the option ‘not applicable’ in column 1.

D. Barriers to the use of adherence management practices by healthcare
professionals: This section contains 13 questions. An example of an item from the
list is: ‘I have an excessive workload that prevents me from supporting
patients with medicine adherence.’ A four-point rating scale is provided for
participants to indicate the extent to which the items listed act as barriers to
their use of adherence promoting interventions. The options range from ‘not
at all’ to ‘very much’ with intermediate options of
‘slightly’ and ‘moderately.’ The response option
‘not applicable’ is provided for those who do not consider an item to
be relevant to their work setting.

E. A final set of three questions about previous training in medication adherence
and use of adherence guidelines completes the questionnaire. The questions ask
whether the healthcare professional has had any training in adherence management
during preregistration or postregistration training. Respondents are also asked if
they make use of any practitioner guidelines to manage patient adherence. The
response options are ‘yes’ or ‘no.’

Outcomes
Primary outcome
The primary outcome is the frequency of assessing the likelihood of non-adherence: This
will be based on the response to the question ‘I ask patients if they have missed
any doses of their medication.’

Secondary outcomes
The following secondary outcomes will be reported:

Perception of the extent of non-adherence: This measure is based on the
participants' responses to a series of six questions that ask about their
perceptions of the levels of non adherence in all patients versus their
patients.

Beliefs about adherence: This is based on an assessment of healthcare
professionals' beliefs about patient adherence.

Methods used to support patients with medication taking: This is a measure of
healthcare professionals' behaviour. Fifty items provide a measure of what
healthcare professionals do to support patients with medicine taking.

Barriers to the use of adherence enhancing practices: Participants are asked to
indicate the extent to which the 13 items listed act as barriers that limit their
use of interventions to improve adherence.

In addition, demographic information about the respondents will be collected,
including healthcare setting (eg, community setting, private or state-funded
healthcare system), number of years since registration as a healthcare professional,
gender, age and average length of consultations with patients about medicines.

Analysis
Analyses will be conducted by total sample, country and professional group. No interim
analysis is planned.

Analysis of primary outcome
For all countries, the number and proportion of participants with the primary outcome
will be reported overall and in each country, as will 95% CIs for the proportions.
Comparisons between countries and professions will be performed using multilevel random
models using the software MLwiN (http://www.cmm.bristol.ac.uk/MLwiN/) for both binary and ordered
categories. The software has the advantage of dealing with missing values by using all
available data on each individual and not by imputing missing values.

Point estimates of the proportion of healthcare professionals who assess adherence in
the entire sample (primary outcome) as well as in each country and each profession and
their associated 95% CIs will be obtained.

Analysis of secondary outcomes
For the entire sample and each group, the medians, modes, IQRs and frequency
distributions will be reported for each secondary outcome, and 95% CIs for the medians
will be reported. Comparisons between and within countries and professions will be
performed using multilevel models using all ordered categories and which will also
include demographic and other information on participants (see below). The following
comparisons of outcomes will be performed:

comparisons between the participating countries;

comparisons between each professional group;

comparisons by country and profession.

Description of samples
Characteristics of participants will be described for the sample as a whole, for each
country and for each profession. Participants will be described in terms of their
healthcare setting, type of healthcare system, number of years since licensed to
practise, average length of time consulting with patients about medicines, age, gender
and country.

Data-handling
Only the research team at Keele University will have access to the data during the
study. After the study is completed, Keele University will make available the relevant
data to ABC project partners for analysis, as appropriate.

Ethics and dissemination
Consent
Respondents who accept the invitation to take part in the study, and use the link
provided to access the survey web page, are taken to the survey introductory page. Here,
the participants are provided with information about the project, anonymity of the
survey findings, an outline of what participants are required to do and how long it will
take to complete the questions, an assurance that every attempt will be made to ensure
the confidentiality of the data and a statement indicating that participation is
voluntary and that withdrawal from the survey is possible at any stage. Potential
participants are asked to click on a link to confirm that they have read the participant
information before proceeding. The act of clicking on this link is considered consent to
participate in the study. Access to the survey is denied unless this link is
clicked.

Confidentiality
No personal information (such as names, addresses and professional licence numbers)
will be collected from participants. The survey is completely anonymous, and no IP
addresses will be stored or downloaded.

Quality assurance
During the preparation of the study, quality has been ensured through the process of
translation and back-translation of research questionnaires. The questionnaire and the
associated survey materials have been translated into the official language(s) for each
participating country. The work-flow and quality-management processes employed are
certified to meet ISO 9001 Quality Management Standards. Forward translations have been
performed by highly trained, approved and accredited translators who are native speakers
of the target languages and fluent in English. Back-translations have been performed by
persons who are native English speakers and fluent in each target language. A third
individual acts as a reviewer, highlights any discrepancies between the forward and back
translations, and resolves them by discussion with the translators. The respective
national coordinators and their teams for each participating country also proofread each
translated document and provide feedback on grammatical errors. They also provide
contextual interpretation of the translations to ensure that they reflect the
appropriate terminology used in each participating country. In addition to this, the
online survey is piloted by at least five people in each country in order to check its
technical functionality and also to check for comprehensibility and formatting
errors.

The ABC research team at Keele University will have overall responsibility for the
design, recruitment, management, analysis of data and interpretation of results as well
as writing the report. The ABC Project partners (First Department of Family Medicine,
Medical University of Lodz, Poland, Center for Health Services and Nursing Research,
Katholieke Universiteit, Belgium, Aardex Group, Switzerland, Bangor University, Wales)
participated in the design of the study. ABC partners will manage recruitment and data
collection in their respective countries and also contribute to the interpretation of
the results and their dissemination. The ABC project partners share all decisions about
research developments and outputs, determining decisions by vote if appropriate. The
funder of the research, the FP7 programme of the European Commission, is not involved in
the design or interpretation of the study.

Dissemination
The results will also be published in internal reports, in peer-reviewed scientific
journals as well as via conference presentations. The results of the study will also be
available to the public on the ABC project website (http://www.ABCproject.eu) and via press releases in each of the
participating countries.

Discussion
To our knowledge, this study is the largest survey of European healthcare
professionals' medication adherence perceptions, beliefs and behaviours. It is
expected that the results will inform our understanding of how healthcare professionals
perceive medication non-adherence. This study will also provide some insight into how
healthcare professionals respond to non-adherence to prescribed medication in their
patients. By gaining a deeper understanding of healthcare professionals' perceptions
and behaviour with regards to non-adherence in their patients, researchers will be able to
design educational interventions and training for healthcare professionals that are
evidence-based and targeted at the training needs of healthcare professionals.

This study will also provide information on the interventions most frequently used by
healthcare professionals and their perceptions of which interventions are most effective in
managing non-adherence. It is anticipated that this will provide evidence-based knowledge of
interventions which healthcare professionals have found to be effective at improving patient
adherence. Healthcare professionals could use this information as a guide when making a
decision about which interventions to make use of or to recommend to patients in order to
improve adherence. Information on those interventions which are reported to be less
effective could help to channel the efforts of researchers towards finding ways to improve
those interventions.

The Pan-European nature of this study will provide a comprehensive data set which will
enable analysis of variability observed in healthcare professionals' beliefs and
behaviours across 12 European nations. It is anticipated that this knowledge of the level of
variability between professions in adherence-supporting behaviour may provide a basis for
promoting routine and continuous efforts to educate and modify the behaviour of healthcare
professionals in order to enable them to fulfil their roles in supporting patients with
medicine taking.

Supplementary Material
Supporting Statement
 Author's manuscript
 We thank UD Patel and L Berben for their contribution to the development of the
questionnaire.

To cite: Clyne W, Mshelia C, Hall S, et al. Management of
patient adherence to medications: protocol for an online survey of doctors, pharmacists
and nurses in Europe. BMJ Open 2011;1:e000355. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000355

Funding:
This study, as part of the ABC project, is funded by the
European Commission Seventh Framework programme (FP7
Theme Health, 2007-3.1-5, grant agreement number 223477).

Competing interests: None.

Ethics approval: Ethics approval was provided by the NRES Committee North
West-Liverpool East (REC Reference 11/NW/0156).

Contributors: The principal investigator is WC. The ABC project coordinator
is PK. All authors took part in the development of the questionnaire. WC, CM, SH, SM and
PJ took part in the design and development of the protocol. All authors contributed to the
writing of the final manuscript. WC and CM revised the manuscript with input and advice
from all authors.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.

Data sharing statement: No additional data available.
==== Refs
References
1 Mathers C Boerma T Ma
Fat D  
The Global
Burden of Disease: 2004 Update . Geneva :
World Health Organization ,
2008 
2 Sabaté E  
Adherence to Long-Term Therapies—Evidence for Action .
Geneva : World Health
Organization , 2003 
3 Melnikow J Kiefe C  
Patient compliance and medical research: issues in
methodology . J Gen Intern Med 
1994 ;9 :96 –105 8164085 
4 Hughes DA  
Economic impact of poor compliance with pharmaceuticals .
Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 
2002 ;2 :327 –35 19807439 
5 Cleemput I Kesteloot K DeGeest S  
A review of the literature on the economics of noncompliance. Room for
methodological improvement . Health Policy 
2002 ;59 :65 –94 11786175 
6 Haynes RB Ackloo E Sahota N  
Interventions for enhancing medication adherence .
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2008 ;(2 ):CD000011 18425859 
7 Dobrow MJ Orchard MC Golden B  
Response audit of an internet survey of health care providers and
administrators: implications for determination of response rates .
J Med Internet Res 
2008 ;10 :e30 18926979 
8 Cochran WG  
Sampling Techniques . 3rd edn 
New
York : Wiley ,
1977 
9 Braithwaite D Emery J de
Lusignan S  
Using the Internet to conduct surveys of health professionals: a valid
alternative? 
Fam Pract 
2003 ;20 :545 –51 14507796 
10 Patel UD Davis MM  
Physicians' attitudes and practices regarding adherence to medical
regimens by patients with chronic illness . Clin Pediatr
(Phila) 
2006 ;45 :439 –45 16891277 
11 Berben L Bogert L Leventhal ME  
Which interventions are used by health care professionals to enhance
medication adherence in cardiovascular patients? A survey of current clinical
practice . Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 
2011 ;10 :14 –21 21095160 
12 Nunes V Neilson J O'Flynn N  
Clinical Guidelines and Evidence Review for Medicines Adherence: Involving
Patients in Decisions About Prescribed Medicines and Supporting Adherence .
London : National Collaborating Centre for
Primary Care and Royal College of General Practitioners ,
2009 
13 Horne R Weinman J Barber N  
Concordance, Adherence and Compliance in Medicine Taking .
London : National Co-ordinating Centre for
NHS Service Delivery and Organisation R & D ,
2005
