
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2011-00077410.1136/bmjopen-2011-000774AddictionResearch1506168117241712Quantifying the RR of harm to self and others from substance misuse:
results from a survey of clinical experts across Scotland The RR of harm to self and others from substance
misuseTaylor Mark 1Mackay Kirsty 2Murphy Jen 3McIntosh Andrew 4McIntosh Claire 5Anderson Seonaid 6Welch Killian 11 NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, UK2 NHS Lanarkshire, Hairmyres Hospital, Glasgow, UK3 Maori Mental Health, Otahuhu, Auckland, New Zealand4 Division of Psychiatry, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK5 NHS Forth Valley, Falkirk, UK6 NHS Grampian, Aberdeen, UKCorrespondence to  Mark Taylor; marktaylor2@nhs.net2012 7 8 2012 2 4 e00077416 12 2011 19 6 2012 Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to
use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2012This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use
is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Objective
To produce an expert consensus hierarchy of harm to self and others from legal and
illegal substance use.

Design
Structured questionnaire with nine scored categories of harm for 19 different
commonly used substances.

Setting/participants
292 clinical experts from across Scotland.

Results
There was no stepped categorical distinction in harm between the different legal
and illegal substances. Heroin was viewed as the most harmful, and cannabis the
least harmful of the substances studied. Alcohol was ranked as the fourth most
harmful substance, with alcohol, nicotine and volatile solvents being viewed as
more harmful than some class A drugs.

Conclusions
The harm rankings of 19 commonly used substances did not match the A, B, C
classification under the Misuse of Drugs Act. The legality of a substance of
misuse is not correlated with its perceived harm. These results could inform any
legal review of drug misuse and help shape public health policy and practice.

Article summary
Article focus
To produce an expert-based consensus on the relative harms posed by 19 commonly
used legal and illegal substances.

Key messages
The legality of a substance is not correlated with its perceived harm. There is
no stepped ‘A, B, C’ distinction in harm evident.

Strengths and limitations of this study
This is largest known addiction experts survey of substance-related harm.
Observer bias cannot be excluded The availability and cost of substances was
not taken into account.
==== Body
Introduction
Drug and alcohol misuse is a significant and growing problem in Scotland. The levels of
problematic drug misuse are double that of England, and alcohol dependency is a third
higher than other parts of the UK. Drug- and alcohol-related deaths are among the
highest in Europe and have doubled over the past 15 years.1 In 2007, it was estimated that the alcohol industry was worth
around £3.5 billion2 and that the largest
part of the informal Scottish economy was made up from the trade of illicit drugs. In
the UK, as a whole, the total cost burden of drug misuse is estimated to be between
£10 billion and £16 billion per year.3


The laws regulating drug use are complicated. The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 defines what
are termed ‘controlled drugs’, dividing illicit drugs into three
categories—A, B, and C—which were designed to reflect the harm caused to
both the individual and society generally by these drugs (see table 1). Drugs classified as causing the most severe harm are
designated class A and include heroin, cocaine and ecstasy. The law thus implies that
class A drugs are the most dangerous of all. Class B is thought to be less harmful than
class A, but more harmful than class C and contains amphetamines and barbiturates. Class
C includes cannabis and benzodiazepine tranquillisers. This categorical classification
system does not include two commonly used and powerful psychoactive drugs, tobacco and
alcohol, which are legal to use for those older than 18 years in the UK.

Table 1 Substances chosen for study and comparison

Substance	Class in Misuse of Drugs Act at time of data collection	
Alcohol	Not controlled if over 18 years	
Amphetamines	B	
Barbiturates	B	
Benzodiazepine	C	
Buprenorphine/Temgesic	C	
Cannabis	B	
Cocaine	A	
Crack cocaine	A	
Crystal meth	A	
Dihydrocodeine/codeine/Tramadol	Not controlled	
Ecstacy/MDTA	A	
Heroin	A	
Ketamine	C	
LSD	A	
Magic mushrooms	A	
Methadone	A	
Nicotine/tobacco	Not controlled if over 18 years	
Methylphenidate/Ritalin	B	
Inhaled solvents	Not controlled	
It has been argued over recent years that this classification has become outdated and
only modestly correlates with expert ratings of harm caused by the various substances.
In 2007, Nutt et al
4 attempted to reassess the system of drug
classification and produce a more contemporary hierarchy of harm. UK experts in
psychiatry, addictions and pharmacology were asked to rate drugs on three major
dimensions of harm: physical harm, potential for dependence and social harms. Under the
physical harm dimension, they were asked to score three different components: the acute
effects and harm to health, the chronic harm to health and the harm to physical health
caused by intravenous drug use. Under the dependence dimension, three further components
were rated, namely the intensity of pleasure produced by the drug, the psychological
dependence and the potential physical symptoms of dependence related to the specific
substance. In the final dimension of social harm, the components rated were harms to
others caused by intoxication; health costs directly resulting from the drug use,
including the costs to healthcare and social care systems; and finally, other social
harms, such as violent behaviour, neglect of children and financial problems caused by
drug use. The aim of this study was to obtain a comprehensive consensus from addiction
experts in Scotland on the relative harms of drug misuse, both legal and illegal using
the ranking system developed by Nutt et al.4


Methods
Nutt et al
4 designed a matrix that included three major
categories of harm with each category being subdivided into three groups, producing nine
parameters of risk. This nine-parameter scale was adapted (see appendix) to produce a questionnaire to assess physical and
psychological harm to self and others for 19 commonly used legal and illegal substances.
The nine parameters were (a) physical harm caused by acute, chronic and parenteral use;
(b) psychological harm; physical harm and intensity of pleasure linked to dependence and
(c) social harm from intoxication; other social harms and associated healthcare
costs.

The 19 substances chosen for assessment are shown in table 1, along with their status under the Misuse of Drugs Act at the time of
this study.

Addiction specialists and psychiatrists working with substance misuse across Scotland
were approached to complete the questionnaire, on the basis of their clinical experience
and expertise. This was mainly by face-to-face interviews, with personal interviews
being arranged via local regional addictions teams across the country (see the Results
section for more details). Approximately 300 individuals working in multidisciplinary
addiction teams across Scotland were approached to undertake face-to-face interviews,
for completion of the questionnaire, and were chosen via the authors' knowledge
of and contact with local addiction services. The Royal College of Psychiatrists in
Scotland database of psychiatrists who have a special interest in addictions
(approximately 200 individuals in total) was also used to elicit completed responses via
email. The number of experts approached was not prospectively determined beyond seeking
as large a sample size as possible—no a priori sample size was chosen.

Guidance notes on how to complete the questionnaire were also issued, and during the
face-to-face interviews, there was explicit guidance provided emphasising that the harm
rankings should be based on the experts' global clinical experience of the
population seen in addictions services (ie, not based on an understanding of
‘milder’ wider society use patterns). Participants were asked to score
each substance for each of the nine parameters, using a 4-point scale, with 0 being no
risk, 1 some risk, 2 moderate risk and 3 extreme risk.

Basic demographic information about the respondents was also recorded, including region
of Scotland where they worked, specialty area of work, job title and age. No financial
or other incentive was offered to respondents.

Analysis
Scores were averaged for each parameter. For some analyses, the scores for the three
parameters for each category were averaged to give a mean score for that category, that
is, an overall score for harm to self and overall score for harm to others. An overall
harm rating was obtained by taking the mean of all nine scores.

Results
Demographics of respondents
Two hundred and ninety-two completed responses were obtained from seven different
regions in Scotland. Fifty per cent of respondents worked in the Glasgow region, with
15% working in Tayside, 13% in Grampian, 11% in Forth Valley and 9% in Lothian and
Borders. One per cent worked in Lanarkshire, and 1% of responses had not recorded
their region. Fewer than 10 psychiatrists from the Royal College of Psychiatrists in
Scotland database submitted a completed response online. Over 90% of those directly
approached for face-to-face interviews agreed to participate, whereas the response
rate to email requests for questionnaire completion was <5%, perhaps
reflecting that on average 30 min was required to complete each
questionnaire.

Respondents were from a range of professional backgrounds in health and social work.
They worked across a variety of specialties with addictions being most represented
with 64% of respondents. 18.5% worked in the General Adult Psychiatry setting and
0.5% worked in Forensic Psychiatry. Sixteen per cent worked in other areas such as
General Practice, and 1% of respondents had not recorded their specialty (see table 2).

Table 2 Clinical experts' professional background

Job title	Frequency	Per cent	
Consultant psychiatrist	24	8.2	
Specialist registrar	15	5.1	
SHO/staff grade	23	7.9	
General practitioner	6	2.1	
Addiction community psychiatric nurse	133	45.5	
Addiction worker	39	13.4	
Social worker	52	17.8	
Total	292	100	
SHO, junior doctor.

The age of respondents ranged from 20 to older than 60 years. The largest
groups were the 31–40 years with 38.5% and the
41–50 years with 38%. Ten per cent of responses came from workers aged
20–30 years and 9% from those aged 51–60 years. Four per
cent of respondents were aged older than 60 years and 0.5 had not recorded
their age. Addiction community psychiatric nurses were easily the biggest single
professional discipline, reflecting the composition of a typical community addictions
team, and they on average had over 5 years clinical experience in the
field.

Harm rankings
The mean scores for the substances assessed are shown in table 3. Table 3 lists
the results for each of the three subcategories of harm. The scores in each category
were averaged across all scorers, and the substances are listed in rank order of harm
based on their overall score. Many of the drugs were consistent in their ranking
across the three categories.

Table 3 Assessment score tables

Substance	Personal harm score	Social harm score	Total/combined harm score	
Heroin	2.76	2.72	2.74	
Crack cocaine	2.74	2.60	2.69	
Crystal meth	2.69	2.54	2.63	
Alcohol	2.55	2.70	2.56	
Cocaine	2.54	2.33	2.46	
Inhaled solvents	2.38	2.18	2.31	
Nicotine	2.42	2.23	2.29	
Benzodiazepines	2.33	2.17	2.27	
Ketamine	2.24	1.97	2.13	
Barbiturates	2.25	1.91	2.12	
Amphetamine	2.24	1.89	2.11	
Methadone	2.19	1.96	2.10	
Dihydrocodeine/codeine/Tramadol	2.05	1.89	1.98	
Buprenorphine	2.04	1.83	1.96	
LSD	2.04	1.87	1.95	
Ecstasy/MDTA	2.07	1.74	1.92	
Methylphenidate/Ritalin	1.86	1.62	1.74	
Magic mushrooms	1.88	1.60	1.74	
Cannabis	1.86	1.61	1.73	
Heroin, crack cocaine, crystal meth, alcohol and cocaine were in the top five places
for all categories of harm.

LSD, ecstasy, methylphenidate, magic mushrooms and cannabis were in the bottom five
places for all categories of harm. Cannabis was rated as the least harmful drug.

Alcohol was the only drug that rated more highly on the social harm score than on
personal harm. Alcohol was rated fourth and nicotine was seventh across all
categories of harm ranking higher than some controlled drugs.


Figures 1–3 are the
diagrammatic representations of the scores for each drug across the harm categories.
The colour coding equates to the drug's status under the Misuse of Drugs Act
at the time of data collection.

Figure 1 Diagrammatic representation of the ranking of personal harm scores for each
drug.

Figure 2 Diagrammatic representation of the ranking of social harm scores for each
drug.

Figure 3 Diagrammatic representation of the ranking of combined scores for harm.

Discussion
The main outcome of this study is a ranking by Scottish addiction experts of 19
recreational drugs according to their mean harm score. The main result is that heroin,
crack cocaine, crystal meth, alcohol and cocaine were in the top five places for all
categories of harm, with LSD, ecstasy, methylphenidate, magic mushrooms and cannabis in
the bottom five places for all categories of harm. Notably, legal substances such as
alcohol, nicotine and volatile agents ranked as more harmful than some class A drugs,
although these drugs are more socially and culturally embedded in Scotland than the
prohibited ones. The hierarchy of harm when judged by the experts did not correlate with
the hierarchy used currently by the Misuse of Drugs Act. There is no indication of a
stepwise reduction in harm as would be supposed by the current A, B, C classification
and no clear delineation of scores to allow logical cut-off points for such a
categorisation. These results are similar to Nutt's original work and to a more
recent Dutch study,5 which used the same scoring
system but different methodology to this study. Nutt et al
4 confirmed that the sharp A, B or C division of
the current classification in the UK Misuse of Drugs Act did not correlate with the
rankings of harm by the experts, and the experts showed reasonable levels of agreement
in their rankings, leading to a proposal that their rating system could be developed by
regulatory bodies to provide an evidence-based approach to drug classification.

One of the strengths of this study is the large number of experts involved. Two hundred
and ninety-two addiction multidisciplinary experts across Scotland were involved making
it the largest national panel to be involved in this type of study. This large number of
multidisciplinary expert respondents might also help reduce any selection and observer
bias in the sample, although it is acknowledged that the expert clinician respondents
were chosen on an ad hoc rather than systematic basis. We obtained a
high response rate for this survey, but it is possible that addiction specialists from
geographic areas that were not approached (eg, NHS Fife) might have reported different
results, and thus response bias cannot be excluded despite the sample size. A recognised
weakness is that the scale used to obtain the harm scores is not ideal as it does not
examine all the conceivable ways in which a substance may cause harm and is limited to
nine criteria. Also although the physical harm of drugs tends to be well defined, that
is, acute and chronic toxicity and addictive potency, in contrast the spectrum of social
harm tends to be rather less so which may hamper the objective rating of the social
harms for drugs. Some of the social harms, which are applicable to one drug, may not
necessarily be transferrable to another drug, which has different properties, for
example, sedative versus stimulant. There is no method of applying a differential
weighting to each parameter of harm, and it is clear that some criteria are more
important expressions of harm than others. Nutt et al
6 attempted to address these issues using
multicriterion decision analysis, with 16 criteria for rating harm and a weighting score
out of 100 for each criterion. This approach increased the differentiation between the
most and least harmful drugs, and here alcohol rated as the most harmful with heroin
second and tobacco sixth. A problem with this format of harm ratings is that it does not
take account of availability of the substance in question, for example, that alcohol
might be highly ranked due to its low cost and widespread availability. It is also
recognised that caution must be taken in making comparisons between legal substances and
illegal ones as substances such as alcohol, nicotine and volatile agents are far more
widely available, arguably particularly affecting social harm. Another limitation of the
present study is that our scale measures only harm and does not look at perceived or
actual benefits to the user, which motivated the use in the first place.

The high rankings of alcohol and tobacco in this study reflect the common recognition
that chronic use of alcohol and tobacco cause illness and death, contributing to 90% of
drug-related deaths in the UK. Every year in the UK, tobacco smoking causes around
100 000 premature deaths, reducing average life expectancy in regular smokers by
10 years,7 with population-based studies
suggest that smoked tobacco is the most addictive commonly used drug. Alcohol is a
growing problem in Scotland where there is one of the fastest growing rates of liver
cirrhosis in the world, having doubled since 1990 and being twice that of England and
Wales.8 Alcohol misuse is also known to be a
risk factor for suicide, and the National Confidential Inquiry9 into suicides indicated that 58% of individuals dying by suicide in
Scotland had a history of alcohol misuse and in 17% alcohol dependence was the primary
diagnosis. The report also shows that there is a substantially higher rate of homicides
and suicides in Scotland compared with England and Wales, which can be largely
attributed to high levels of alcohol and drug misuse, both in the general population and
among people with mental health problems. Cause and effect cannot be attributed here
though, as the pathways to suicide and to homicide are complex and multiple. In this
study, alcohol was the only drug to rate higher on social harm than personal harm
reflecting the enormous burden to the healthcare system posed by alcohol and also the
negative effects on rates of crime, work place absences and on family life including
domestic violence.

Interestingly, cannabis was ranked as the least harmful drug by the Scottish addiction
experts. This differs from both Nutt's work and the Dutch study where it was
ranked as 11th and 12th, respectively. It is not clear why there would be such a
variation in scores for cannabis, although at the time of survey the use of high potency
cannabis was not yet widespread in Scotland. One reason may be the differences in the
panel of experts. Our study examined the views of clinicians and addiction workers,
whereas the other panels included toxicologists, pharmacists and experts from a legal
background who would have a different experience of working with cannabis. Other
explanations may be that despite cannabis being commonly used in Scotland, individuals
who misuse cannabis present less frequently requesting help to addiction services than
with other drugs of abuse and that addictions specialists do not usually see cannabis
addiction with comorbid psychotic illness and how can one exacerbate the other.

Alcohol and drug misuse is an immense and highly complex challenge for policymakers in
Scotland. Historically, illicit drug misuse has been linked with the criminal justice
system and the system of classification currently in use reflects this. This study
demonstrates, similar to both of Nutt's studies, that the legality of a substance
does not reflect its potential for harm. Just because a substance is legal, it does not
mean that it is safe to use. This has been highlighted recently with the
reclassification of some of the so-called ‘legal highs’. Recent work
looking a mephedrone in particular have shown that it has a considerable harm profile to
both physical10 and mental health11 and that making a substance illegal does not
necessarily reduce its usage and may only act to drive up the price.12 The burgeoning evidence of the harm caused by
tobacco and alcohol would also suggest that from a scientific perspective these drugs
are currently misclassified and that a new method for ranking drug harm, which could
guide policies and public health strategies, is required, with many in the scientific
and medical community feeling that this should be separated from the criminal justice
system and associated penalties. Any new system would also have to address the issue of
personal choice and responsibility in using substances and examine the context in which
they are being used. Increasing public awareness of the potential for harm of all the
drugs examined whether legal or illegal and finding ways of reducing the demand for
psychoactive substances should be the focus rather than imposing harsh penalties for
their use.

The authors thank all the addiction experts surveyed for volunteering their time.


To cite: Taylor M, Mackay K, Murphy J, et al.
Quantifying the RR of harm to self and others from substance misuse: results from a
survey of clinical experts across Scotland. BMJ Open
2012;2:e000774. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000774


Contributors: MT and JM conceived and designed the study. All authors except KM and AM collected
the data. AM helped analyse the results. All authors were involved in interpreting
the results, drafting the paper and approving the final manuscript. All authors had
full access to all data and can take responsibility for the accuracy and integrity of
the data. MT is the guarantor of the study.

Funding: The research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

Competing interests: All authors are employed by NHS Scotland except AM who is an employee of the
University of Edinburgh. These employers were not involved in the data collection or
interpretation of results.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Data sharing statement: The raw data are available on request from the corresponding author.

Appendix
==== Refs
References
1 
Drug and Alcohol Services in Scotland. A Report by Audit Scotland .
2009 
http://www.auditscotland.gov.uk (accessed Dec 2011).
2 
NHS National Services Scotland . Alcohol Statistics Scotland
2007 . 2007 
http://www.alcoholinformation.isdscotland.org (accessed Dec
2011).
3 
Foresight . Brain Science, Addiction and Drugs .
2005 
http://www.foresight.gov.uk/Brain_Science_Addiction_and
Drugs/index.html (accessed Nov 2011).
4 
Nutt D King LA Saulsbury W  
Development of a rational scale to assess the harm of
drugs of potential misuse . Lancet 
2007 ;369 :1047 –53 .17382831 
5 
van Amsterdam JG Opperhuizen A Koeter M  
Ranking the harm of alcohol, tobacco and illicit
drugs for the individual and the population . Eur Addict
Res 
2010 ;16 :202 –27 .20606445 
6 
Nutt D King LA Phillips L  
Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision
analysis . Lancet 
2010 ;376 :1158 –65 .
7 
Britton J McNeill A Arnott D  
Drugs and harm to society .
Lancet 
2011 ;377 :551 .21315937 
8 
Alcohol Summit . Scottish Government News Release
2009 . http://www.scotland.gov.uk/News/Releases/2009/06/22102738 (accessed
Nov 2011).
9 
The National Confidential Inquiry into Suicide and Homicide by People with
Mental Illness . University of
Manchester , 2008 .
10 
Wood DM Greene SL Dargan PI  
Clinical pattern of toxicity associated with the
novel synthetic cathinone mephedrone . Emerg Med J 
2011 ;28 :280 –2 .20581379 
11 
Mackay K Taylor M Bajaj N  
The adverse consequences of mephedrone use: a case
series . Psychiatrist 
2011 ;35 :203 –5 .
12 
Winstock L Mitcheson J Marsden C  
Mephedrone: still available and twice the
price . Lancet 
2010 ;376 :1537 .21056754
