
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2012-00097710.1136/bmjopen-2012-000977Public HealthResearch150617241703172316811699A chemical analysis examining the pharmacology of novel psychoactive
substances freely available over the internet and their impact on public (ill)health.
Legal highs or illegal highs? The pharmacology of novel psychoactive
substancesAyres Tammy C 12Bond John W 31 Department of Criminology, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK2 School of Psychology, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK3 Department of Chemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, UKCorrespondence to  Tammy Ayres; tca2@le.ac.uk2012 31 7 2012 2 4 e0009778 3 2012 18 6 2012 Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to
use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2012This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use
is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Objectives
Public Health England aims to improve the nation's health and acknowledges
that unhealthy lifestyles, which include drug use, undermine society's
health and well-being. Recreational drug use has changed to include a range of
substances sold as ‘research chemicals’ but known by users as
‘legal highs’ (legal alternatives to the most popular illicit
recreational drugs), which are of an unknown toxicity to humans and often include
prohibited substances controlled under the Misuse of Drugs Act (1971).
Consequently, the long-term effects on users' health and inconsistent,
often illegal ingredients, mean that this group of drugs presents a serious risk
to public health both now and in the future. Therefore, the aim of this study was
to ascertain what is in legal highs, their legality and safety, while considering
the potential impact, these synthetic substances might be having on public
health.

Design
A total of 22 products were purchased from five different internet sites,
18 months after the UK ban on substituted cathinones, like mephedrone, was
introduced in April 2010. Each substance was screened to determine its active
ingredients using accepted analytical techniques.

Setting
The research was conducted in Leicestershire but has implications for the
provision of primary and secondary healthcare throughout the UK.

Results
Two products, both sold as NRG-2 from different internet suppliers, were found to
contain the banned substituted cathinones 4-methylethcathinone (4-MEC) and
4-methylmethcathinone (4-MMC), the latter being present in much
smaller quantities. Although sold as research chemicals and labelled ‘not
for human consumption’, they are thinly disguised ‘legal
highs’, available online in quantities that vary from 1 g to
1 kg.

Conclusions
Despite amendments to legislation, prohibited class B substances are still readily
available in large quantities over the internet. The findings suggest that these
prohibited substances are being manufactured or imported into the UK on a large
scale, which has serious implications for public health and clinicians who are ill
equipped to deal with this newly emerging problem.

Article summary
Article focus
To analyse the chemical composition of substances bought over the internet,
including the legality of the active ingredients and if products differ between
retailers.

To consider the medical implications and adverse health risks associated with
legal highs bought over the internet.

Key messages
The most recent examination of the composition of ‘legal highs’,
conducted 6 months after the introduction of the ban, found no presence
of banned cathinones.

Our study shows that, 18 months after the introduction of the ban,
illegal cathinone substitutes are readily available for purchase in the UK in
large (1 kg) quantities with little known about their clinical
effects.

Strengths and limitations of this study
The small number of products tested (22 products) and the limited number of
retailers sampled are limitations of this study. However, this study does show
that despite being banned, illegal cathinones remain readily available over the
internet, despite their potential harmfulness.
==== Body
Introduction
Public health is inadvertently connected to wider society and the cultural nuances that
influence individual health and well-being, which include drug use. From the public
health implications arising from increased heroin use in the 1980s to the more recent
furore surrounding legal highs, pharmacological leisure has always impacted on public
health and medical practitioners. The noughties are no different, as the culture of
recreational drug use has changed to include a group of substances known by users as
‘legal highs’ but referred to in the literature as ‘novel
psychoactive substances’ (NPSs)1—a
range of chemical and herbal substitutes marketed as legal alternatives to the most
popular but illicit recreational drugs. Although herbal products (ie, Salvia Divinorum,
Damiana and Kratom) are widely available, this research will focus on synthetic
substances since their increased popularity has caused a furore in the media and
problems for the authorities who are unable to act quickly enough to monitor and
legislate on the vast array of new substances being created in this burgeoning market.
According to the International Narcotic Control Board, the growth in production and
distribution of these new designer drugs is ‘escalating out of
control’2 with their availability
growing at an unprecedented pace.3 Unlike
traditional recreational drugs, little is known about the chemical composition of these
new substances, their toxicity or the long-term effects associated with their use,
meaning they pose a serious challenge to public health agencies and has the potential to
undermine the objectives of Public Health England. Many first-generation legal highs
(eg, mephedrone, piperazines and spice) have been brought under the Misuse of Drugs Act
(1971), the most recent being mephedrone, which was banned in April 2010, when the
Misuse of Drugs Act, 1971 (Amendment) Order categorised mephedrone and other substituted
cathinones as a class B controlled drug. However, despite introducing legislative
controls over these drugs, there is some evidence to suggest little has changed and
banned substances are still being sold online under a new guise. Products are frequently
given new names and marketed as superior, but legal, alternatives to the banned
substances they purport to replace.4–7 It is not known how many of these new products contain newly
synthesised and legal chemicals and how many continue to contain illegal substances like
mephedrone, which has been linked to a number of deaths.1 In an effort to protect the public from the harmfulness of NPSs, a new
temporary class order has been introduced, which prohibits the manufacture and supply of
temporary class drugs for 12 months, while the Advisory Council on the Misuse of
Drugs assess it for permanent control under the Misuse of Drugs Act (1971) (eg,
methoxetamine was temporarily classified in March 2012).

Despite the rapid growth in the production and sale of these synthesised chemical
products, there is a dearth of research in this area. Excluding the recent research on
synthetic cannabinoids,6 only three studies have
analysed the chemical composition of legal highs: two5
7 within 6 weeks of the 2010 ban on
substituted cathinones and one conducted 6 months later.4 The research conducted immediately after cathinones was brought
under the Misuse of Drugs Act in April 2010 found prohibited cathinone derivatives,
including mephedrone in 62.5%5 and 83%7 of the legal highs tested. The same research also
found that 70% of the new generation of legal highs purporting to contain naphyrone (ie,
NRG-1 and NRG-2) and marketed as a legal alternative to mephedrone, actually contained a
mixture of banned cathinones, including mephedrone; the drug it was claiming to replace.
Only one of the NGR products tested contained naphyrone as advertised,5 illustrating that although marketed as legal
products, many of the substances sold were actually illegal. Although research conducted
immediately after the ban5
7 found cathinones in the products they tested, it
is possible that these findings merely reflect retailers' response to the ban and
their attempts to sell off surplus stock containing the prohibited cathinones,5 rather than their widespread availability.
Supporting this supposition and in contrast to the research conducted immediately after
the ban, research conducted 6 months later by Baron and colleagues4 found no cathinones in the NRG products tested.
Instead, the products contained piperazines (BZP: 1-benzylpiperazine and 3-TFMPP:
3-trifluoromethylphenylpiperazine), a substance banned in December 2009. Although this
provides erudite evidence that illegal substances continue to be mis-sold as legal
highs, it also demonstrates the inconsistent and varied ingredients found in these
products.8


Therefore, the purpose of this study is to develop previous research and ascertain
whether cathinones, such as mephedrone, are still being sold under the guise of newly
labelled legal highs 18 months after they were banned. By conducting the research
at this time, we overcome the caveats associated with earlier research, as the 2010
legislative controls prohibiting cathinones should have taken effect and any old stock
containing mephedrone should have been sold during this period. The emergence of 41 new
products in the last year3 and demands for
‘further characterisation of these products’5 also indicates a prerequisite for continually analysing these substances to
facilitate a better understanding of these products, particularly their chemical
composition and their potential impact on public health. Although health professionals
are aware of the problems associated with new drugs, the evidence suggests that they are
not equipped to deal with these largely unknown synthetic substances. However, before
considering the potential impact legal highs might be having on public health, our
discussion commences with an overview of the research methods and the chemical analyses
employed to ascertain the active ingredients present in each substance. Subsequently,
this is followed by a discussion of the results, before considering the medical
implications of mislabelling and selling unknown, often illegal substances. Although
these findings have implications for the criminal justice system and the prosecution of
users under the Misuse of Drugs Act (1971), this is beyond the remit of this paper,
which focuses on the medical implications and adverse health risks associated with legal
highs.

Methods
The research investigated a range of second- and third-generation legal highs (products
created after the chemical structure of banned substances were modified to bypass the
legislation), which are available to purchase online. A total of 22 products marketed as
research chemicals, plant food or bath salts were purchased from five different internet
sites. The five internet sites were randomly selected from an online list generated
using the terms ‘buying research chemicals’, ‘buying plant
food’ and ‘buying NRG-2′; the list was generated from the first 10
results on each page. A list of products available from more than two of the sites (to
facilitate comparisons) was generated, and eight products were randomly chosen for this
research. All the products were purchased 18 months after the April 2010 UK ban
on cathinone substitutes and 15 months after the July 2010 ban on naphyrone. The
products were handled and tested by an analyst with a Chief Officer of Police's
delegated authority to be in possession of controlled substances. The substances were
stored in the secure drug store of a local police force and retained by them for
destruction at the conclusion of the experiments.

Information concerning the marketing, packaging, ingredients, method of use, dosage and
warnings over use was noted. Each product was, in turn, analysed qualitatively using a
combination of the techniques outlined in box
1. Each product was analysed with Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy,
Raman Spectroscopy and Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). Additionally, where
there was an indication from the spectroscopy that a product contained an illegal
substance and that product was analysed with 13C NMR. For the Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy and Raman Spectroscopy, the products were analysed in
solid form. Those products supplied as a tablet were ground to a powder, while those
supplied as a capsule were emptied. For both NMR, 0.1 gm of the powder was
dissolved in 0.6 ml of deuterated chloroform (CDCl3) for analysis. All
instruments were calibrated using calibration sources and correction software supplied
by the manufacturers. No specific comparison with reference standards for the illegal
chemicals identified was undertaken.

Box 1 Analysis techniques
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy analyses the composition of a substance by
measuring how much infrared energy is absorbed by different molecules, thereby
enabling the molecules present to be determined.

Raman Spectroscopy
Raman Spectroscopy uses inelastic scattering of monochromatic light (usually a
laser) to excite vibrational modes of bonds in the sample that result in a
frequency shift of the emitted light, thereby enabling the composition of the
sample to be determined.

Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (1H NMR)
Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance uses the absorption of electromagnetic waves by
protons (H+ ions) in a magnetic field that results in a
frequency shift of the emitted electromagnetic waves to enable the composition of
the sample to be determined.

Carbon-13 NMR (13C NMR)
Carbon-13 NMR employs the same principle as proton NMR but uses resonance of the
C13 atom rather than the proton.

Results
The results of the analyses were compared with the information provided by the suppliers
and the legality of the active ingredients ascertained. This information is summarised
in table 1. Although methoxetamine was legal
when the research was conducted, it was classified as a temporary class drug in March
2012, making its supply illegal.

Table 1 Summary of the 22 legal highs purchased via the internet, including the compounds
detected, the accuracy of their description and their legal status


	Product	Compounds detected	As described	Status	
Supplier A	Benzofury	1-Benzofuran-6-ylpropan-2-amine (6-APB)	Yes	Legal	
Jolly Green Granules	Benzocaine	Did not specify contents	Legal	
MDAI	5,6-Methylenedioxy-2-aminoindane	Yes	Legal	
Methoxetamine	2-(3-Methoxyphenyl)-2-(ethylamino)cyclohexanone	Yes	Legal*
	
MPA	N-methyl-1-(thiophen-2-yl)propan-2-amine	Yes	Legal	
NRG-2	4-Methylethcathinone (4-MEC). Contaminant mephedrone	No	Illegal	
NRG-3	1-Benzofuran-6-ylpropan-2-amine (6-APB)	No	Legal	
5-IAI	5-Iodo-2-aminoindane	Yes	Legal	
Supplier B	Benzofury	1-Benzofuran-6-ylpropan-2-amine (6-APB)	Yes	Legal	
MDAI	Benzocaine	No	Legal	
5-IAI	5-Iodo-2-aminoindane	Yes	Legal	
Supplier C	Benzofury	1-Benzofuran-6-ylpropan-2-amine	Yes	Legal	
Methoxetamine	2-(3-Methoxyphenyl)-2-(ethylamino)cyclohexanone	Yes	Legal*
	
Supplier D	Jolly Green Granules	Benzocaine	Did not specify contents	Legal	
MDAI Gold	5,6-Methylenedioxy-2-aminoindane	Yes	Legal	
MPA	N-methyl-1-(thiophen-2-yl) propan-2-amine	Yes	Legal	
NRG-2	4-Methylethcathinone (4-MEC). Contaminant mephedrone	No	Illegal	
NRG-3	1-Benzofuran-6-ylpropan-2-amine (6-APB)	No	Legal	
5-IAI	5-Iodo-2-aminoindane	Yes	Legal	
Supplier E	Benzofury	1-Benzofuran-6-ylpropan-2-amine (6-APB)	Yes	Legal	
MDAI Gold	5,6-Methylenedioxy-2-aminoindane	Yes	Legal	
Methoxetamine	2-(3-Methoxyphenyl)-2-(ethylamino)cyclohexanone	Yes	Legal*
	
* Legal—methoxetamine was legal when this research was initially
conducted; however, it has since (March 2012) been classified as a temporary
class drug making its supply illegal.

Advertised active ingredients: consistency in what you get?
The majority of products purchased (91%) provided information pertaining to the
active ingredients present in each substance (either on the website or packaging, or
both), although products purchased from three of the suppliers (A, B and D) did not
adhere to the advertised ingredients. Out of the 22 products supplied and analysed,
9% did not list the active ingredients (Jolly Green Granules) and 23% did not contain
the active ingredients listed on the website or package. Instead of containing
17-alpha,21-Dihydroxy-16-alpha-methylpregna-1,4,9(11)-triene-3,20-dione-21-acetate,
both of the NRG-3 products contained benzofuran (1-benzofuran-6-ylpropan-2-amine).
This suggests that the benzofuran mixture is being sold as a number of different
products (benzofuran and NRG-3), thus supporting previous research.4 Benzofuran was found in 27% of the products, and
although it is chemically similar to amphetamines and MDMA, there is little
scientific information on its toxicity, its psychoactive properties or its effect on
humans and their health. Instead of the advertised ingredients, benzocaine was found
in three of the products (MDAI and both Jolly Green Granules). Benzocaine is a local
anaesthetic and a popular cutting agent for cocaine. In contrast to earlier
research,5 there were no traces of
mephedrone in either of the Jolly Green Granules. However, both NRG-2 products
contained 4-methylethcathinone (4-MEC) with a smaller, trace, amount of
4-methylmethcathinone (4-MMC) or mephedrone, possibly as an unwanted
contaminant, making them illegal. By measuring the integrated intensities of the
Proton NMR resonances,9 the relative
concentration of 4-MEC was approximately 35 times that of 4-MMC.
Consistent with the findings of Brandt et al,5 no other compounds were found in either NRG-2 samples.
Therefore, the product being sold is of a high purity and the amount of illegal
cathinone taken is simply the quantity of powder consumed.

Legal highs or illegal highs?
The majority of products (91%) were identified as containing either the active
ingredients stated on the packet or a chemical that is not controlled in the UK. Of
the four NRG products analysed further by 13C NMR to confirm their
contents, only two were found to contain the illegal compounds 4-methylethcathinone
and 4-methylmethcathinone (mephedrone). 4-Methylethcathinone (4-MEC) is classified as
a class B controlled substance in the UK. Even though it is not named specifically on
the class B drug list, it is a substituted cathinone and therefore subject to the
2010 Misuse of Drugs Act (Amendment) Order. 4-MEC is structurally derived from
cathinone by substitution in the phenyl ring with an alkyl substituent and by
substitution at the nitrogen atom with an alkyl group (see figures 1 and 2).

Figure 1 Structure of cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone).

Figure 2 Structure of the banned substituted cathinone 4-MEC (4-Methylethcathinone).

The contaminant 4-methylmethcathinone (mephedrone) in NRG-2 is also a substituted
cathinone and a class B controlled substance in the UK, subject to the 2010 Misuse of
Drugs Act (Amendment) Order (see figure
3).

Figure 3 Structure of the banned substituted cathinone 4-MMC or mephedrone
(4-methylmethcathinone).

These findings show illegal cathinones are still being sold online as legal
alternatives to illegal substances, which was also a marketing tool used by all the
suppliers in this research. Analogies were made between the substances for sale and
the recently banned cathinone, mephedrone or illegal drugs like amphetamine, ecstasy
(MDMA) or ketamine.

Variation between retailers
The chemical composition of the products purchased from supplier A and supplier D
were identical, as was the packaging, indicating that either two websites are
fronting the same company or that both companies purchase goods from the same source.
Specifically, the NRG-2 products tested from suppliers A and D and the relative
concentration of each chemical suggested that they originated from the same source.
If both suppliers A and D obtained NRG-2 from the same source, this suggests that,
given the large quantities available to purchase (up to 1 kg), the scale of
production or importation of these substances is alarming.

Suppliers varied on the information they provided in terms of contents, instructions
on use and whether the drug was labelled ‘not fit for human
consumption’. Of the 22 products purchased, 68% contained the warning
‘not fit for human consumption’ on the internet site but all contained
this warning on the packaging. Although 23% had information on how to use the
product, this was of little use if the user intended to ingest it, as it related to
feeding plants or conducting research (see table
1). The information provided included ‘doses of 0.05 g will
give your plants incredible growth … to be dissolved in water’ and
‘very small doses of this research chemical are required for legitimate
research, it is essential that your lab has access to scales that can weigh in
increments of ten milligrams (0.01 g)’. The majority of websites and
drug packets contained no safety information (77%) explaining how to use the
substance or the recommended dose, which is concerning since many of the substances
purchased could be bought in amounts that varied from 1 g to 1 kg.

Discussion
This study has shown that substituted cathinones continue to be freely available for
purchase over the internet, 18 months after being classified as a class B drug.
Two products, both sold as ‘NRG-2’ from different internet suppliers, were
found to contain the banned substituted cathinones 4-methylethcathinone (4-MEC) and
4-methylmethcathinone (4-MMC), the latter being present in trace
quantities. The physical appearance, packaging, labelling (not for human consumption)
and chemical analysis of these products suggest that they originated from the same
source, although neither product contained the ingredients listed. In contrast to
previous research,5
7 the majority (68%) of substances tested in this
study contained the stated active ingredients. Of the 22 products supplied and analysed,
9% did not list the ingredients and 23% did not contain the ingredients listed on the
website or package, which means consumers are putting their health at risk. The
inconsistent ingredients, varied chemical composition and unknown subsequent drug
interactions are potentially harmful to the user, particularly since these substances
are of a high purity and available to buy in large quantities (up to 1 kg).

Strengths and weaknesses of this study in the wider context
Our study employed a range of recognised analytical techniques to identify the active
ingredients in each of the products purchased. While the analysis carried out here is
not in itself a weakness, a limitation of this study is the relatively small sample
size. Our study purchased and analysed 22 random products from five internet
suppliers and, from the packaging and chemical analyses, two of these suppliers
appeared to be selling products from the same source. Thus, at best, we have analysed
products from four different sources and only found banned substances in two of the
products. However, this is the first analysis of the composition and legal
classification of substances, sold under the banner of research chemicals, to be
carried out within the past 12 months. Also, the number of products tested
here (22) is far in excess of the number tested in the previous most recent study
(seven),4 which failed to find cathinones in
any of their products. Our research also overcomes the caveats associated with the
previous work carried out within 6 weeks5
7 or 6 months4 of the 2010 amendment. Our findings show that research conducted
immediately after the 2010 ban, which found cathinones in a number of legal
highs,4
6 was not merely indicative of the
retailers' attempts to sell off surplus stockpiles of mephedrone. Instead,
this research indicates that despite being brought under the Misuse of Drugs Act
(1971), substituted cathinones are still being sold illegally over the internet.
Although the extent to which substituted cathinones are supplied is still unknown,
finding cathinones in the small sample of products tested here indicates that the
widespread distribution of cathinones over the internet is highly probable.

Implications for clinicians and policy makers
Despite the perception that ‘legal’ means ‘safe’ to some
users,10
11 NPSs appear to be more harmful than many of
their more traditional illegal counterparts. Even though drugs like benzofuran,
bromo-dragonFLY and MPA (N-methyl-1-(thiophen-2-yl)propan-2-amine) are legal to buy,
little is known about the safety of these substances, how they interact with other
drugs, their long-term effects (psychologically and behaviourally) on humans or their
toxicity. This also applies to the banned drugs naphyrone,12
13 synthetic cannabinoids14 and mephedrone.15–17 Users of substituted cathinones like mephedrone are
presenting to hospitals with tachycardia (rapid heart rate), hypertension, chest
pains, myoclonus (muscle contractions), hallucinations, paranoia, violence and
sympathomimetic syndrome.17 Although there is
emerging medical research documenting the harmfulness of NPSs,12–18 there is also evidence
pertaining to the emergent health risks associated with legal anaesthetics, like
benzocaine and lidocaine, which are being sold in their place.5 Allergic reactions to benzocaine are common and ingesting more
than the recommended amount can cause an overdose, particularly in susceptible
individuals because there is ‘no therapeutic window’ (between the doses
required to produce a therapeutic effect and those producing toxicity).19 Benzocaine has also been linked to a toxic
blood disorder methemoglobinaemia in adults who take small quantities
medicinally20 and unknown quantities
illicitly in adulterated cocaine.21 The
presence of benzocaine in legal highs is well documented.5
22 However, it is never listed as one of the
active ingredients meaning each product contains indefinite quantities, which is
disturbing since research estimates that benzocaine induced methemoglobinaemia only
requires a small amount to cause cyanosis19
23 (a bluish discolouration of the skin caused
by a deficiency of oxygen in the blood). Although there have been no known deaths
from benzocaine, the death of a teenager was attributed to cocaine containing four
times the toxic dose of lidocaine,24
illustrating the potential health risks arising from the varied composition of these
products.

The arbitrariness of the advertised ingredients and mislabelling of products
exacerbates the detrimental consequences for the health of the user. Products do not
always contain the advertised active ingredients,8 even those with the same name. The contents of the NRG products have
varied substantially from one type of cathinone, to a combination of cathinones, to
banned piperazines, and to inorganic material or benzocaine.4
5
7
25
26 Users are inadvertently being exposed to
unidentified drugs in unknown concentrations, which increase the risk of toxicity and
overdose. Those repeatedly buying the same product and expecting the same effects may
actually be taking a completely different and more potent substance. The user is also
exposed to the risks arising from the potentiating effect of any drug interactions
and their subsequent metabolites produced inside the body. However, any adverse
effects brought on by these drugs are unlikely to be identified by clinicians, as
drug screening does not identify these new and unique compounds,27 and despite recent publications examining specific toxicity
case studies,28 their toxicological detection
in biological specimens is challenging.29
Since only a small amount is need to elicit an effect and the minimum amount that can
be purchased is 1 g, users will continue to present themselves to A&E
departments across the country. Medical practitioners need to be made more aware of
these substances, their effects and potential health risks. The healthcare
professionals who are aware of the problems associated with NPSs are ill equipped to
deal with them due to the paucity of scientific and medical research in this area.
Since Public Health England recognises the ‘importance of having an effective,
highly trained and professionally skilled Public Health workforce’,30 this is an area that needs addressing.
Research and reliable medical data on NPSs are sparse, and despite requests, there is
no ‘centralised system … linking for instance toxicology and forensics
across the country to collate information’.31


The public health risks associated with these drugs are compounded by the lack of
safety guidance (ie, use and dosage information) provided by websites. All substances
are labelled as not fit for human consumption, with some advocating medical
assistance if swallowed. While this does not seem to deter use, it means that NPSs
can be sold having undergone no checks and adhering to no regulations, which means
that they could contain anything. Therefore, the growth in NPSs poses insurmountable
challenges to clinicians attempting to identify and diagnose the adverse health
effects arising from the ingestion of un-researched, unknown and unidentifiable
chemicals.

Unanswered questions and future research
The small sample (22 products) analysed in this study means the question of how many
sites are selling products containing banned substances, how widespread the purchase
of these substituted cathinones actually is and the extent to which they are being
taken by unsuspecting consumers remains unknown. Since there is an estimated 314
online shops,32 about 80 of which are based in
the UK, we sampled products from <2% of these online suppliers. Therefore,
future research should investigate a much wider range of internet suppliers and their
products to establish the chemical composition of these substances and to help
identify which products contain prohibited substances like mephedrone. Future
research could also usefully investigate low-level contaminants in these substances,
not least as a possible means of linking sites of manufacture. There is a need for
more medical research to be conducted in this area examining the potential impact
NPSs have on public health. This article illustrates more training for clinicians is
required and demonstrates the need for a centralised system, which collates and
stores information that medical practitioners can draw on when faced with a
suspicious case. Surprisingly, there has been no public health campaign highlighting
the risks associated with NPSs to raise awareness among the public or the medical
profession, despite the potential risks to health.

Conclusions
Illicit cathinones continue to be sold online under the guise of ‘legal
highs’. The imposition of legislative controls banning certain substances has had
little effect on the chemical composition of NPSs or their availability, indicating that
bringing in new laws on drugs as quickly as they emerge is not tackling the problem of
supply (or demand). Instead, it displaces the problem and invites chemists to modify the
molecular structure of chemicals to create legal alternatives to the newly banned
substances. The continual evolution of chemical compounds designed to evade the law is
potentially creating more dangerous and unknown synthetic substances than the ones
currently being legislated on. Although these substances are potentially more harmful
than their illegal counterparts, many remain legal to buy and consume, thus undermining
the scientific calculation of harm that underpins drug legislation, a calculation, which
has come under increasing criticism in recent years.33
34 It also poses an infinite challenge to
mainstream healthcare professionals dealing with the adverse health effects arising from
these substances.

Although new substances are constantly being created to evade the law, illegal ones are
also being sold openly on the internet, indicating that the police are unable to enforce
current legislation and prohibit supply. Unsuspecting buyers are breaking the law and
are buying substances that are potentially harmful. NPSs have the potential to cause
serious public health problems to a new generation of drug users who see them as a safer
alternative to their illicit counterparts.10
11 The public health costs of treating users in
the short- and long-term comes at a time of economic paucity and cut backs in the public
health sector. The medical profession are facing a new genre of NPS induced illnesses
and an increase in toxicity cases but lack the methodology required to detect these
drugs (and their metabolites) in biological samples or recognise the symptoms of
toxicity. Prohibition is intended to protect public health by limiting the availability
and use of drugs like substituted cathinones. However, legislation would appear to be
failing and is simply displacing drug use. Users continue to consume an array of unknown
synthetic compounds and can easily purchase large amounts (1 kg) of illegal
substances, despite—and perhaps entirely unaware of—the unpredictable
consequences it may have on their health.

The authors would like to thank Amy Miller for assisting JWB with the analysis in the
laboratory and Dr David Wood for the helpful advice he provided at the outset of this
research project; it was much appreciated. We would also like to thank Yvonne Jewkes for
reading and commenting on this paper. We would also like to thank the two reviewers for
their helpful comments.


To cite: Ayres TC, Bond JW. A chemical analysis examining the
pharmacology of novel psychoactive substances freely available over the internet and
their impact on public (ill)health. Legal highs or illegal highs? BMJ
Open 2012;2:e000977. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-000977


Contributors: TCA conceptualised the paper and applied for funding to conduct the research. JWB
conducted the chemical analysis of the substances. Both authors contributed to the
writing, argument and structure of the article including any revisions that have been
made.

Funding: This study was funded by the University of Leicester, College of Social Sciences
research grant. The funding source had no role in the study design, analysis or in
the writing up of the research.

Competing interests: None.

Ethics approval: This research received ethical approval (reference tca2-88995) from the Criminology
Department's ethics committee.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Data sharing statement: There are no additional data available.
==== Refs
References
1 
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs . Consideration of
the Novel Psychoactive Substances (Legal Highs) .
London : ACMD ,
2011 .
2 
International Narcotic Control Board . Annual
Report . New York :
United Nations , 2011 .
3 
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction .
Europol 2010 Annual Report on the Implementation of Council Decision
2005/387/JHA . Lisbon :
EMCDDA , 2011 .
4 
Baron M Eile M Eile L  
Analysis of legal highs—do they contain what
it says on the tin? 
Drug Test Anal 
2011 ;3 :576 –81 .21595051 
5 
Brandt SD Sumnall HR Measham F  
Analyses of second-generation ‘legal
highs’ in the UK: initial findings . Drug Test
Anal 
2010 ;2 :377 –82 .20687197 
6 
Dargan PI Hudson S Ramsey J  
The impact of changes in UK classification of the
synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists in ‘Spice’ .
Int J Drug Policy 
2011 ;22 :274 –7 .21482092 
7 
Ramsey J Dargan PI Smyllie M  
Buying legal recreational drugs does not mean that
you are not breaking the law . QJM 
2010 ;103 :777 –83 .20675395 
8 
Davies S Wood DM Smith G  
Purchasing legal highs on the internet—is
there consistency in what you get? 
QJM 
2010 ;103 :489 –93 .20413562 
9 
Pauli GF Jaki BU Lankin DC  
A routine experimental protocol for qHNMR illustrated
with Taxol . J Nat Prod 
2007 ;70 :589 –95 .17298095 
10 
Measham F Moore K Newcombe R  
Tweaking, bombing dabbing and stockpiling: The
emergence of mephedrone and the perversity of prohibition .
Drugs Alcohol Today 
2010 ;10 :14 –21 .
11 
Sheridan J Butler R  
They're legal so they're safe
right? 
Int J Drug Policy 
2010 ;21 :77 –81 .19321329 
12 
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs . Consideration of
the Naphthylpyrovalerone Analogues and Related Compounds .
London : ACMD ,
2010 .
13 
De Paoli G Maskell PD Pounder DJ  
Naphyrone: analytical profile of the new
“legal high” substitute for mephedrone . J
Forensic Leg Med 
2011 ;18 :93 .21315306 
14 
EMCDDA . Understanding the Spice Phenomenon .
Lisbon : EMCDDA ,
2009 .
15 
Gibbons S Zloh M  
An analysis of the legal high
mephedrone . Bioorg Med Chem Lett 
2010 ;20 :4135 –9 .20542690 
16 
Vardakou I Pistos C Spiliopoulou C  
Drugs for youth via Internet and the example of
mephedrone . Toxicol Lett 
2011 ;201 :191 –5 .21187132 
17 
Spiller HA Ryan ML Weston RG  
Clinical experience with and analytical confirmation
of “bath salts” and “legal highs” (synthetic
cathinones) in the United States . Clin Toxicol
(Phila) 
2011 ;49 :499 –505 .21824061 
18 
Wood DM Looker JJ Shaikh L  
Seizures associated with recreational use of
Bromo-dragonFLY . J Med Toxicol 
2009 ;5 :226 –9 .19876858 
19 
Guay J  
Methemoglobinemia related to local anaesthetics: a
summary of 242 episodes . Anesth Analg 
2009 ;108 :837 –45 .19224791 
20 
Osterweil N  
Topical Benzocaine associated with
methemoglobinemia . Medscape Today 
2011 .
21 
Hunter L Gordge L Dargan PI  
Methemoglobinemia associated with the use of cocaine
and volatile nitrates in recreational drugs: a review . Br
J Clin Pharmacol 
2011 ;72 :18 –26 .21352269 
22 
Power JD McGlynn P Clarke K  
The analysis of substituted cathinones. Part 1:
chemical analysis of 2-,3-and 4-methylmethcathinone .
Forensic Sci Int 
2011 ;212 :6 –12 .21601387 
23 
McKinney CD Postiglione KF Herold DA  
Benzocaine-adulterated street cocaine in association
with methemoglobinemia . Clin Chem 
1992 ;38 :596 –7 .1568334 
24 
SOCA . Drug Profits Take a Hammering as Benzocaine Haul is
Burned . London :
Stationary Office , 2010 
http://www.soca.gov.uk/news/260-drug-profits-take-a-hammering-as-benzocaine-haul-is-burned
(accessed 25 Sep 2011).
25 
Brandt SD Freeman S Sumnall HR  
Analysis of NRG ‘legal highs’ in the
UK: identification and formation of novel cathinones . Drug
Test Anal 
2011 ;3 :569 –75 .21960541 
26 
Brandt SD Sumnall HR Measham F  
Second generation mephedrone: the confusing case of
NRG-1 . BMJ 
2010 ;341 :3564 .
27 
Smith CPT Cardile AP Miller M  
Bath salts as a “legal
high” . Am J Med 
2011 ;124 :e7 –8 .21514917 
28 
Salmner EM Foley PL Lauder GD  
A harmless high? 
Lancet 
2010 ;376 :742 .20801405 
29 
Houston S  
Forensic Magazine. Detecting Bath Salts . 25 Oct
2011 
http://www.forensicmag.com/news/detecting-bath-salts

30 
Marshland A  
Public Health England: A Letter .
London :
Department of Health , 2011 
http://bhamcf.files.wordpress.com/2010/10/nhs-pblchlthltr-11-3.pdf
(accessed 20 Dec 2011).
31 
Boyce N  
Health warnings for people who use
heroin . Lancet 
2011 ;377 :193 –4 .21249751 
32 
EMCDDA . Annual Report 2011: The State of the Drugs Problem
in Europe . Lisbon :
EMCDDA , 2011 .
33 
Nutt D King L Phillips L  
Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision
analysis . Lancet 
2010 ;376 :1558 –65 .21036393 
34 
Rolles S Measham F  
Questioning the method and utility of ranking drug
harms in drug policy . Int J Drug Policy 
2011 ;22 :243 –6 .21652195
