
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2012-00145810.1136/bmjopen-2012-001458Reproductive Medicine, Obstetrics and GynaecologyProtocol150617291694Perineal resuturing versus expectant management following vaginal
delivery complicated by a dehisced wound (PREVIEW): protocol for a pilot and
feasibility randomised controlled trial PREVIEWDudley Lynn 12Kettle Christine 12Carter Pamela 3Thomas Peter 4Ismail Khaled M 51 The Maternity Centre, University Hospital of North Staffordshire,
Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, UK2 Faculty of Health, Staffordshire University, Blackheath Lane, Stafford,
UK3 Arthritis Research UK National Primary Care Centre, Primary Care
Services, Keele University, Staffordshire, UK4 Clinical Research Unit, School of Health and Social Care, Bournemouth
University, Bournemouth, Dorset, UK5 School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, College of Medical and
Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UKCorrespondence to  Professor Khaled M Ismail;
k.ismail@bham.ac.uk2012 24 7 2012 2 4 e0014589 5 2012 22 6 2012 Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to
use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2012This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use
is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Background
Each year, approximately 350 000 women in the UK experience perineal
suturing following childbirth. For those women whose perineal wound dehisces, the
management will vary according to individual practitioner's preferences.
For most women, the wound will be managed expectantly (healing by secondary
intention), whereas others may be offered resuturing. However, there is limited
scientific evidence and no clear guidelines to inform best practice. PREVIEW is a
two-part study aiming to identify the best management strategy for dehisced
perineal wounds, in terms of clinical effectiveness and women's
preferences.

Methods/design
The main part of this study is a pilot and feasibility randomised controlled trial
designed to provide preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of resuturing versus
expectant management for dehisced perineal wounds following childbirth and to feed
into the design and feasibility of a larger definitive trial. 144 participants
will be randomly allocated to either intervention. The primary outcome is the
proportion of women with a healed perineal wound at 6–8 weeks from
the trial entry. Secondary outcomes include perineal pain, breast feeding rates,
dyspareunia and women's satisfaction with the aesthetic results of the
wound healing at 6 weeks, 3 months and 6 months post randomisation. Information
will be collected using validated questionnaires. The second part of this study
will be to conduct semistructured interviews with 12 study participants, aiming to
capture information relating to their physical and psychological experiences
following perineal wound dehiscence, assess the acceptability of the research plan
and ensure that all outcomes relevant to women are included in the definitive
trial.

Dissemination
The results of this study will inform a definitive randomised controlled trial
that will provide conclusive evidence of what is the best management of perineal
wound dehiscence. This will potentially lead to significant improvements in
perineal care and will help to reduce the short- and long-term morbidity
experienced by women.

Clinical trials registration
PREVIEW is registered with the International Standard Research for Clinical Trials
(no: ISRCTN05754020) and adopted as a National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Reproductive Health and Childbirth specialty group portfolio study UKCRN ID
9098.

Article summary
Article focus
This article provides the rationale and protocol for a pilot and feasibility
randomised controlled trial, designed to provide preliminary evidence of the
effectiveness of resuturing of dehisced perineal wounds, versus healing by
expectancy (secondary intention) and to feed into the design and feasibility of
a larger definitive trial.

Key messages
This study addresses an area of clinical research that has been extremely
neglected and has the potential of making a significant impact on
women's health and well-being.

Strengths and limitations of this study
As both a pilot randomised controlled trial and a feasibility study, this
research will test out many of the procedures that will be used to inform the
design of a definitive trial.

As the definitive trial is likely to require many centres in order to meet
sample size requirements, we may use this pilot to identify additional sites
and also test out study procedures in those sites. Thus, the actual sample size
might be larger than described here.
==== Body
Introduction
Perineal trauma affects a vast amount of women both nationally and internationally with
more than 350 000 women in the UK per year needing stitches to facilitate healing
of a spontaneous tear or episiotomy.1 Given that
the postpartum management of perineal trauma including the prevention of wound infection
and assessing wound healing are core components of routine maternity care,2
3 there is limited research evidence available on
the management and consequences of wound dehiscence. Furthermore, the available evidence
is based on retrospective audit or case reviews and tends to include small numbers of
participants hence is subject to bias. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the number of
women reporting perineal infections and dehiscence in the community is increasing;
however, systems to track these complications following hospital discharge are lacking.
It is vital that a true estimate of the problem is established using standardised
definitions of wound infection and at the same time determine best practice when
treating dehisced perineal wounds. It is apparent that perineal wound dehiscence both
locally and worldwide has not been a high priority either in practice or in research,
and therefore, management is not based on robust evidence. Due to the lack of
evidence-based guidelines, clinical practice varies widely between individual
practitioners and institutions.

Perineal wound dehiscence, which is commonly reported to be associated with
infection,4
5 may lead to major physical, psychological and
social problems if left untreated. Although maternal mortality associated with perineal
trauma is extremely rare in developed countries, an infected perineal wound is a
potential route for systemic infection whereby sepsis and septic shock may ensue.6 Indeed sepsis has for the first time been
identified as the leading cause of maternal mortality in the UK. The Centre for Maternal
and Child Enquiries recently published their eighth Report on Confidential Enquiries
into Maternal Deaths.7 The report revealed that
during the 2006–2008 triennium, sepsis resulted in 26 direct maternal deaths with
three further deaths classified as ‘Late Direct Deaths’ (occurring more
than 6 weeks after delivery). Seven women died of sepsis following a vaginal
delivery, including one woman with an infected perineum following a second-degree tear.
The report clearly illustrates how healthy women with an uncomplicated pregnancy and
delivery can become critically ill and die in a very short time.7


Moreover, morbidity associated with perineal wound dehiscence can and does pose a
serious threat to the general well-being and quality of life of the new mother. Maternal
morbidity centres around persistent pain and discomfort at the perineal wound site,
urinary retention, defecation problems, dyspareunia and psychological and psychosexual
issues from embarrassment and altered body image.2
8 Furthermore, the relationship with her newborn
baby may become affected, and she may find difficulty in breast feeding due to the
distress caused by her perineal problems.9


Perineal wound infection and dehiscence is a burden on NHS resources, as quite often
women who suffer this consequence of childbirth, have to undergo corrective surgery,
perineal refashioning and excision of excessive scar tissue or other procedures
associated with the management of perineal dysfunction.10


Members of our collaborative team conducted double iteration Delphi surveys in the UK
and Brazil to identify childbirth-related perineal trauma outcomes deemed to be
important by women.11 These surveys consistently
demonstrated that the highest ranked outcome was fear of perineal wound infection and
delay in wound healing. Indeed, an outcome that appears to be prioritised by women
across different backgrounds and cultures.

Rationale for PREVIEW
This study addresses an area of clinical research that has been extremely neglected
and has the potential of making a significant impact on women's health and
well-being. For those who suffer from dehisced perineal wounds, it can take up to
16 weeks to heal if treated expectantly and can leave the new mother feeling
very traumatised. Some of these women may even request that the mode of delivery for
subsequent pregnancies will be via caesarean section to avoid further perineal
damage.

Currently, lack of established professionally agreed standards leave clinicians in
equipoise as to what is the best management for dehisced perineal wounds following
childbirth, hence supporting the need for a clinical trial to answer this question.
As both a pilot randomised controlled trial (RCT) and a feasibility study, this
research will test out many of the procedures that will be used to inform the design
of a definitive trial. Although this is a pilot trial, the sample size is reasonably
high (n=144), and in the absence of definitive trials, will contribute to the
development of evidence-based best practice guidelines by policymakers, clinicians,
patients and the public to develop, and to systematic reviews.

Methods/design
Study design
PREVIEW is a pilot and feasibility RCT comparing resuturing versus expectant
management for the treatment of dehisced perineal wounds following childbirth (figure 1).

Figure 1 PREVIEW flowchart.

The study will provide researchers with a unique opportunity to identify and prepare
for the challenges and uncertainties of evaluating the clinical interventions within
a larger RCT. Conducting this study will assess the acceptability of the study
interventions to women, test the study protocol and facilitate a formal sample size
calculation for the definitive study. Ultimately, it will enhance the scientific
rigour and value of the full-scale study.

Setting
The pilot and feasibility RCT will be conducted in several maternity centres in the
UK in order to assess likely recruitment rates and acceptability across different
sites.

Study population, eligibility criteria
Women, who had a primary repair of a second-degree perineal tear or episiotomy,
identified with a dehisced wound within 2 weeks following childbirth, in any
of the recruiting sites.

For the purpose of the study, wound dehiscence is defined as separation of both the
skin and muscle layers.

Exclusion criteria
No valid written consent to participate in the study

poor pregnancy outcome (women experiencing a pregnancy loss in current
pregnancy)

women younger than 16 years

women who are considered by the anaesthetist to have an unacceptable
anaesthetic, for example, complex cardiac anomalies

due to financial constraints in relation to translation services, women who do
not understand, read or write the English language will not be able to
participate. However, a record of the number of these potential participants
and their first language will be kept to help with project planning and
resource allocation for the definitive study.

Consent and randomisation
Women eligible for the study will be provided with the study information leaflet, by
their community midwife, hospital midwife or obstetrician and they will be allowed
time to ensure that they understand the information and clarify any queries they
have. Women who subsequently do not wish to participate in the PREVIEW study will be
managed in accordance with local hospital guidelines. Women will be enrolled into the
study by a midwife or doctor who is fully aware of Good Clinical Practice guidance. A
valid written consent will be obtained from women who wish to participate. The
PREVIEW Study integrated web- or telephone-based randomisation, and its treatment
allocation service was developed by the Bristol Randomisation Trials Collaboration.
The allocation ratio will be 1:1, and randomisation will be in blocks, stratified by
study centre. The study participants will be assigned to either resuturing of the
dehisced perineal wound preferably within 48 h of randomisation or expectant
management (allowing the wound to heal by secondary intention). With the
woman's agreement, a letter will be sent to her general practitioner
confirming trial entry.

Interventions
Secondary resuturing is being compared with expectancy (healing by secondary
intention). Both interventions will be undertaken following trial standardised
procedures (not submitted but available from the trial team).

To ensure the standardisation of secondary resuturing, the trial team have provided
recommendations for both the methods and materials to be used (table 1). These recommendations are based on clinical expertise
and knowledge and will be continually reviewed if new evidence becomes available.

Table 1 Methods and materials for resuturing

Methods	Standard surgical procedures for secondary suturing should be followed,
including wound debridement if needed	
Vaginal mucosa	Continuous technique	
Muscle	Interrupted sutures	
Skin	Depending on the length of the wound, the skin could be sutured by
interrupted or subcutaneous sutures or left unsutured if the edges are
approximated by suturing the underlying tissues	
Materials	To ensure standardisation of materials, the PREVIEW Study team recommend
that standard synthetic polyglactin 910 (gauge 2/0) suture material
should be used as the material of choice	
Due to the nature of the interventions, it will not be possible to blind outcome
assessors, care providers or participants themselves. Assessment of perineal wounds
following treatment allocation, at the agreed time periods, will be undertaken by
independent practitioners (ie, not part of the research team); however, it will not
be possible to blind participating women, operators and assessors due to the nature
of the intervention. Women allocated to the control arm will receive expectant
management (current standard intervention), with no additional concomitant care or
interventions.

Data collection
Standardised PREVIEW questionnaires are based on those used and tested by members of
the research team in other childbirth-related perineal trauma studies.12
13 Participating women for the RCT will be
reviewed at 2 and 6–8 weeks. The independent assessor will complete a
perineal assessment questionnaire at each visit. For the secondary outcomes, all
participating women in the RCT will be asked to complete a prepaid postal
questionnaire at 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months following trial entry,
respectively.

Data will be scanned into a bespoke database by the Market Research Group at
Bournemouth University. By anonymising records and changing treatment allocation to a
numeric code, the completed database will be supplied to the research team for
analysis, carried out under the supervision of the trial statistician. In this way,
analysis will be blinded.

In addition to the pilot RCT, a sample of women (n=12) who are participating
in the RCT will be selected to represent age, parity, ethnicity and intervention.
Indepth semistructured interviews will be conducted with written consent to capture
information relating to their physical and psychological experiences following
perineal wound dehiscence at 6–8 weeks following birth. The interviews
will be taped, with permission, and transcribed.

Study outcome measures
Primary outcomes
Proportion of women with a healed wound at 6–8 weeks following
trial entry.

Secondary outcomes
Pain at 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months following trial entry
(randomisation)

Dyspareunia at 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months following trial entry

rates of breast feeding at 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months following
trial entry

woman's satisfaction with the aesthetic results of the perineal wound
at 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months following trial entry.

Withdrawal from the PREVIEW Study
Participants may withdraw from the study at any time. Should they choose to withdraw,
they will continue to be followed up, in line with current practice within the
participating unit, but no further questionnaires will be sent. One reminder
questionnaire will be issued to non-responders before they are deemed to have
withdrawn. A record of the number of withdrawals will be kept and if applicable their
reason for withdrawal.

Statistical issues
Sample size for the RCT
The current literature does not support a robust formal sample size calculation
for the primary outcome of interest. One of the purposes of this pilot study is to
collect data to inform a sample size calculation for a full-scale RCT. Three
aspects of informing this calculation are to estimate (1) the recruitment rate,
(2) attrition rate and (3) the proportion of women whose wound had healed at
6–8 weeks (the primary outcome). Hence, in estimating the sample
size of this pilot study, we attempted to ensure a sufficient degree of precision
of these estimates (precision defined as twice the SE).

A retrospective study at the host research site has identified that there were 117
women referred to the perineal care clinic with a dehisced perineal wound during a
4-year period (30 women/year). Hence, we estimate that there will be around 45
eligible women for recruitment per participating centre. Assuming that 45 women
will be eligible per centre, with a take up rate of 80% and an attrition rate of
20% in four participating centres, we expect to recruit 144 women and 116 (58 in
each arm) of these to complete the pilot study. This would allow for the
recruitment rate in each site to be estimated with precision of ±12% (based
on n=45), and overall recruitment rate to be estimated with precision
±6% (based on n=180). Loss to follow-up would be estimated with
precision ±7% (based on n=144), and healing at
6–8 weeks (assumed to be around 50% from the retrospective study
mentioned above) would be estimated to ±13% in each trial arm (based on
n=58 per arm). Although the sample size is quite large for a pilot study,
we feel that this is necessary in order for recruitment to start bedding down in
each of multiple sites.

Estimating effect size is not a specific aim of this pilot, but nevertheless, it
is still worth considering precision and power issues given the sample size of
116. Assuming that healing in the secondary intention group will be 50% at
6–8 weeks and that realistic percentages in the secondary resuturing
group will be between 10% and 90%, the effect size for the primary outcome will be
estimated with a precision of between ±15% and ±18%. This will be
fed into deliberations regarding plausible effect sizes to be used for future
sample size calculations. It is worth noting that with this sample size, the study
will have 90% power to detect an increase in healing from 50% to 80% (assuming a
5% two-sided significance level).

As the definitive trial is likely to require many centres in order to meet sample
size requirements, we may use this pilot to identify additional sites and also
test out study procedures in those sites. Thus, the actual sample size might be
larger than described here.

Statistical analysis for the RCT
Recruitment and attrition rates (overall and at each site) and proportion with
healed wound at 6–8 weeks will be calculated, and precision of these
estimates expressed using 95% CIs. A series of sample size calculations for a
definitive RCT will be performed incorporating these interval estimates.

A statistical analysis plan for a full-scale RCT will be developed from and tested
upon the data from this pilot study. We will test out the practicalities of
ensuring that the person analysing the data is blinded to group allocation.

Primary analysis will be undertaken on an intention-to-treat basis to limit the
possibility of bias associated with women not receiving the intervention they were
allocated. Strategies will be developed to ensure that data on primary outcome are
as complete as possible (eg, reminder letters and phone calls).

Comparisons will be made between the interventions (secondary repair vs expectant
management). Baseline characteristics of the comparative groups will be summarised
using standard descriptive statistics. The primary outcome is the proportion of
wounds healed at 6–8 weeks; this will be compared between the two
groups using a logistic regression model that incorporates study site as a
variable (since randomisation was stratified by site). Precision of estimates of
effect size (ORs) will be summarised using 95% CIs. The analysis plan for other
outcomes will also be developed taking into account the type and distribution of
data (eg, logistic regression, multiple regression). If the amount of missing data
seems problematic (eg, over 20%), we will assess the robustness of the results by
data imputation in tandem with best- and worst-case sensitivity analyses. In
addition to looking at each time point separately, we will also test a repeated
measures approach to analysis to try and gain insight to whether effect sizes are
changing over the course of follow-up (ie, looking at the interaction between
intervention group and time). It is anticipated that this will be implemented
using a multilevel (mixed) model for binomial or continuous responses as
appropriate.14 These models have the
added advantage that they permit analysis of unbalanced repeated measures data,
thus avoiding exclusion of participants with incomplete data. No additional a
priori adjustment of covariates or subgroup analysis will be performed; these
issues will be explored further in supplementary analysis as part of the
development of the statistical analysis plan for the larger trial. No interim
analyses are planned.

Qualitative analysis
Thematic analysis will be conducted using appropriate software such as N-Vivo. A
sample of transcripts will be coded and analysed independently by two researchers
and the emerging themes discussed to ensure reliability. While providing the
researchers with an opportunity to research women's subjective experiences,
the interviews will also offer valuable qualitative insight to aid understanding
of the findings generated from the RCT.15
16 Additionally, this phase will provide a
window of opportunity to view women's unique experiences of an aspect of
childbirth, which would otherwise not be known and can facilitate improvement in
practice.17


In relation to the pilot RCT, capturing qualitative data on women's views
of the impact of perineal wound infection on their well-being, will help to ensure
that the definitive trial captures outcome areas that are relevant to women
themselves. Likewise, it may help us to understand any barriers to participation
before embarking on a full-scale evaluation.18


Patient involvement
Following guidance from INVOLVE,19 two patient
representatives have been recruited to assist with the design of study materials,
including the information sheet, trial questionnaires and the qualitative interview
schedule. They are also members of the trial steering committee (TSC).

Ethical considerations and safety committee
The PREVIEW protocol has been approved by the North Wales Research Ethics Committee
(Central and East), reference number: 10/WNo03/16.

The conduct of the trial at each recruiting site including confidentiality and
storage of all personal and research data will be in accordance with all applicable
research governance regulatory requirements.20–26 All recruiting maternity
units will be required to sign a clinical trial agreement document detailing their
commitment towards complying with the relevant laws, regulations, codes of practice
and obligations to publication.

Site-specific and Research and Development approval is required for each recruiting
unit and a Participant Identification Centre agreement is required from the Primary
Care Trusts within the recruiting localities. The NIHR Primary Care Trust Research
Network have also acknowledged their support for the study and have made a
significant contribution towards communicating the study to Primary Care Trusts via
individual Practice Managers within the locality of the recruiting sites.

A TSC will be convened to provide overall supervision of the PREVIEW Study and will
adhere to the MRC's Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice.24 Any deviations from the clinical trial
agreement will monitored by the TSC who will decide whether further action needs to
be considered.

An independent data monitoring ethics committee (DMEC) will be convened for the
PREVIEW Study by the sponsor and will act as an advisory committee to the TSC. The
DMEC will be the only body involved in the study that will have access to the
comparative data. The DMEC will consist of a minimum of three members and will
include a statistician and a clinician with expertise in the field of perineal care.
The role of the DMEC will be to monitor trial data and make recommendations to the
TSC on whether there are any safety reasons why the trial should not continue,
including monitoring evidence for treatment harm, for example, serious adverse events
(SAE).

The safety, rights and well-being of the trial participants are paramount. The DMEC
will consider whether any interim analysis is necessary, will consider data from any
analysis and considers requests for its release and will then advise the TSC.

A standardised operating procedure for the DMEC has been developed specifically for
the PREVIEW Study based on MRC guidance, the template produced by the DAMOCLES Study
Group and the ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline, for Good Clinical Practice.24–26


In accordance with NIHR Good Clinical Practice,27 safety reporting guidance for a non-clinical trial of an
investigational medicinal product including SAE has been made available for all
recruiting sites. The guidance includes definitions of SAE; who the SAE should be
reported to, when and how to report the SAE and what information will be need for the
Research Ethics Committee, a copy of the National Research Ethics Service (NRES) SAE
reporting form is also provided. Data regarding adverse events, other unintended
effects of the trial interventions or protocol violations will be conveyed to the
DMEC as and when necessary.

Discussion
This pilot RCT addresses an area of clinical research that has been extremely neglected
and has the potential of making a significant impact on women's health and
well-being. The evidence gained from the study will inform a definitive RCT that will
provide robust evidence of what is the best management of perineal wound dehiscence and
hence be used by policymakers, clinicians, patients and the public to develop
evidence-based best practice guidelines. This will potentially lead to significant
improvements in perineal care and will help to reduce the short- and long-term morbidity
experienced by women.

We thank Dr Roger Beech, Reader in Health Services Research/Director, Keele University
Hub, West Midlands NIHR Research Design Service (RDS) and the RDS team for their advice
and guidance towards formulating the research questions, the study design, methodology
and analytical strategies, both quantitative and qualitative. We also thank Dr Darren
Clement, R&D manager at the University Hospital of North Staffordshire, the host
organisation for PREVIEW and the research teams at all recruiting sites for their
support with the study.


To cite: Dudley L, Kettle C, Carter P, et al. Perineal
resuturing versus expectant management following vaginal delivery complicated by a
dehisced wound (PREVIEW): protocol for a pilot and feasibility randomised controlled
trial. BMJ Open 2012;2:e001458. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001458


Contributors: All authors contributed equally to this work. LD, CK and KMI conceived the idea for
the study. PT and LD will perform the statistical analysis for the study. LD is the
PREVIEW Study coordinator and the lead research midwife for the study. She is
registered as a PhD student at Staffordshire University, and the PREVIEW Study will
form part of her doctoral studies. All authors contributed to the design of the
study. PC provided qualitative advice and support. All authors helped to draft the
manuscript and all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding: PREVIEW is funded by research grant from the National Institute for Health Research,
Research for Patient Benefit (PB-PG-090920079) and sponsored by the University
Hospital of North Staffordshire. The trial coordinator (LD) has also received a
Doctoral Nursing Studentship award from the Smith and Nephew Foundation/Research into
Ageing (RIA) Age Concern (2008–2011). The sponsor organisation in
collaboration with the trial management group has overall responsibility for ensuring
that the PREVIEW Study is conducted in accordance with the Department of Health
Research Governance Framework for Health and Social Care.23 The sponsor organisation will guarantee that there are
appropriate arrangements in place: to initiate, manage and monitor the research; to
finance the study and to report the outcomes of the research. The Chief Investigator
(CI) and the trial steering committee have a contractual obligation to inform both
the NIHR and RIA of any publications, which result from the research study. This
relates to all publications generated from the research, including the scientific and
lay press, abstracts and conference proceedings. The award holders also have a
contractual obligation to submit an end of project report to the NIHR and RIA
outlining the outcomes of PREVIEW. The report will detail a comprehensive overview of
the work undertaken, summarise the research findings, any variation to the work
outlined in the proposal or the research team and describe the next steps to patient
benefit and the dissemination strategy. Additionally, the Research Investigators
under the conditions of NHS Participant Identification Centre Agreements have a
responsibility to share the learning from the research and provide the relevant
Clinical Research Networks, Research Management and Governance Consortiums with: (1)
the literature review from the research protocol, (2) interim findings from the
research, when available and (3) a final report or summary of the research.

Competing interests: CK and KMI run perineal repair workshops both nationally and internationally and have
developed an episiotomy and second-degree tear training model with Limbs &
Things, UK. They receive a small royalty fee that contributes towards women's
health research funds.

Ethics approval: Ethics approval was provided by the North Wales Research Ethics Committee.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
==== Refs
References
1 
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) .
Methods and Materials Used in Perineal Repair, Guideline No 23 .
London :
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Press Kettle C, O'Brien PMS ,
2004 .
2 
Steen M  
Perineal tears and episiotomy: how do wounds
heal? 
Br J Midwifery 
2007 ;15 :273 –80 .
3 
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) .
Postnatal Care: Routine Postnatal Care for Women and Their Babies,
Clinical Guideline . London :
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence ,
2006 .
4 
Tharpe N  
Post pregnancy genital tract and wound
infections . J Midwifery Womens Health 
2008 ;53 :236 –46 .18455098 
5 
Gould D  
Perineal tears and episiotomy .
Nurs Stand 
2007 ;21 :41 –6 .17902445 
6 
Confidential Enquiry into Maternal and Child Health: (CEMACH) .
Why Mothers Die. The Seventh Report of Confidential Enquiries into
Maternal Deaths in the United Kingdom 2003–2005 .
London :
Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Press ,
2007 .
7 
Cantwell R Clutton-Brock T Cooper G  ; Centre for Maternal and Child Enquiries (CMACE) .
Saving Mothers' Lives reviewing maternal deaths to make
motherhood safer: 2006-2008. The Eighth Report on Confidential Enquiries into
Maternal Deaths in the UK . BJOG 
2011 ;118 (Suppl
1 ):1 –203 .21356004 
8 
Williams MK Chames MC  
Risk factors for the breakdown of perineal laceration
repair after vaginal delivery . Am J Obstet
Gynecol 
2006 ;195 :755 –9 .16949409 
9 
Sleep J  
Perineal care: a series of five randomised controlled
trials . In: Robinson S Thompson AM  , eds. Midwives Research and Childbirth, Volume 2 .
London :
Chapman and Hall ,
1991 :199 –251 .
10 
Ganapathy R Bardis NS Lamont RF  
Secondary repair of the perineum following
childbirth . J Obstet Gynaecol 
2008 ;28 :608 –13 .19003656 
11 
Perkins E Tohill S Kettle C  
Women's views of important outcomes following
perineal repair . Proceedings of the International
Conference of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Montreal. BJOG 
2008 ;115 (Suppl 1 ):P1.179 ,
132.
12 
Bick DE Kettle C Macdonald S  
PErineal Assessment and Repair Longitudinal Study
(PEARLS): protocol for a matched pair cluster trial . BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 
2010 ;10 :10 .20184764 
13 
Kettle C Hills RK Jones P  
Continuous versus interrupted perineal repair with
standard or rapidly absorbed sutures after spontaneous vaginal birth: a randomised
controlled trial . Lancet 
2002 ;359 :2217 –23 .12103284 
14 
Rasbash J Steele F Browne WJ  
A Users Guide to MLwiN V2.10 .
Bristol :
Centre for multilevel modelling, University of Bristol ,
2009 .
15 
O'Cathain A Murphy E Nicholl J  
Why and how, mixed methods research is undertaken in
health services research in England: a mixed methods study .
BMC Health Serv Res 
2007 ;7 :85 .17570838 
16 
Parahoo K  
Nursing Research: Principles, Process and Issues .
2nd edn 
Hampshire :
Palgrave Macmillan , 2006 .
17 
Mapp T  
Understanding phenomenology: the lived
experience . Br J Midwifery 
2008 ;16 :308 –11 .
18 
Arain M Campbell MJ Cooper CL  
What is a pilot or feasibility study? A review
of current practice and editorial policy . BMC Med Res
Methodol 
2010 ;10 :67 .20637084 
19 
Hanley B Bradburn J Barnes M  
Involving the Public in NHS, Public Health and Social Care
Research: Briefing Notes for Researchers . 2nd edn 
Eastleigh :
INVOLVE , 2003 .
20 
Medical Research Council (MRC) . Personal Information in
Medical Research . London :
Medical Research Council ,
2000 .
21 
Medical Research Council . A Framework for the Development
and Evaluation of RCTS for Complex Interventions to Improve Health .
London :
Medical Research Council ,
2000 .
22 
Medical Research Council . Good Research Practice .
London :
Medical Research Council ,
2005 .
23 
Department of Health DOH Research Governance Framework for Health and Social
Care . 2nd edn 
London :
Department Of Health , 2005 .
24 
Medical Research Council . Guidelines for Good Clinical
Practice . Surrey :
Medical Research Council Publications Department ,
1998 .
25 
DAMOCLES Study Group, NHS Health Technology Assessment Programme .
A proposed charter for clinical trial data monitoring committees:
helping them to do their job well . Lancet 
2005 ;365 :711 –22 .15721478 
26 
International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Steering Committee .
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline for Good Clinical Practice .
London :
European Medicines Agency ,
1996 .
27 
National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Clinical Research Network (CRN)
Workforce Development . Enabling learning and Development in the
Clinical Research Network .
Good Clinical Practice (GCP) resources; a compilation of links to useful on-line GCP quality tools and resources, Leeds: NIHR ,
2010 .
