
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2011-00074410.1136/bmjopen-2011-000744Health Services ResearchResearch1506170416961724173016941722Covert checks by standardised patients of general practitioners'
delivery of new periodic health examinations: clustered cross-sectional study from a
consumer organisation Standardised patients check covertly general
practitioner's health examinationsPiribauer Franz 1Thaler Kylie 2Harris Mark F 31 International Screening Committee for Austria, Austrian Public Health
Association, Vienna, Austria2 Department for Clinical Epidemiology and Evidence-based Medicine, Danube
University Krems, Austria3 Centre for Primary Health Care and Equity, UNSW Sydney, AustraliaCorrespondence to  Dr Franz Piribauer; franz.p@zaeg.at2012 13 4 2012 2 4 e00074419 1 2012 2 7 2012 Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to
use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2012This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use
is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode.Objective
To assess if data collected by a consumer organisation are valid for a health
service research study on physicians' performance in preventive care. To
report first results of the analysis of physicians performance like consultation
time and guideline adherence in history taking.

Design
Secondary data analysis of a clustered cross-sectional direct observation
survey.

Setting
General practitioners (GPs) in Vienna, Austria, visited unannounced by mystery
shoppers (incognito standardised patients (ISPs)).

Participants
21 randomly selected GPs were visited by two different ISPs each. 40 observation
protocols were realised.

Main outcome measures
Robustness of sampling and data collection by the consumer organisation. GPs
consultation and waiting times, guideline adherence in history taking.

Results
The double stratified random sampling method was robust and representative for the
private and contracted GPs mix of Vienna. The clinical scenarios presented by the
ISPs were valid and believable, and no GP realised the ISPs were not genuine
patients. The average consultation time was 46 min (95% CI 37 to
54 min). Waiting times differed more than consultation times between
private and contracted GPs. No differences between private and contracted GPs in
terms of adherence to the evidence-based guidelines regarding history taking
including questions regarding alcohol use were found. According to the analysis,
20% of the GPs took a perfect history (95% CI 9% to 39%).

Conclusions
The analysis of secondary data collected by a consumer organisation was a valid
method for drawing conclusions about GPs preventive practice. Initial results,
like consultation times longer than anticipated, and the moderate quality of
history taking encourage continuing the analysis on available clinical data.

Article summary
Article focus
Can data from a consumer organisation be useful and valid for secondary
analysis in health services research?

Do GPs follow the guideline for preventive service history taking.

Was the well-recognised time barrier for delivering preventive services also
seen in this study in Vienna, Austria?

Key messages
Consumer organisation's assessment of GP performance was valid,
representative and precise.

Around one-fourth of GPs failed to achieve the standard for history taking in
the new periodic health examination.

Consultation time was longer than expected and sufficient: time-barrier problem
has been overcome.

Strengths and limitations of this study
Forty visits at 21 GPs are a small sample; however, this size is comparable to
similar mystery patient studies.

All ISPs went undetected, in contrast to many similar studies.

The random sample was found to be double stratified and well balanced.

Multilevel analysis was possible and indicated the role of GP practice
style.

Additional to direct observation data, copies of GPs' record notes may
provide further objective assessment.
==== Body
Background
For many eligible patients the provision of adequate preventive care is blocked by
well-known barriers, despite the existence of elaborate guidelines based on best
evidence.1–3 Lack of time and
inadequate reimbursement were the main barriers named by Canadian family physicians to
performing the periodic health examination (PHE) as recommended by the Canadian Task
force on the PHE.4
5


Our main research question was whether the secondary analysis of routine data from
consumer associations was feasible to observe quality aspects of the delivery of
preventive care. We have not identified any other studies using consumer organisation
data for secondary analysis in preventive healthcare performance assessment. As consumer
associations with long traditions exist in all industrialised nations, such as Consumer
Reports in the USA, similar data could well be available in many countries and could be
analysed by health service researchers in the way we propose in this paper.6


Studies of preventive service provision which rely on electronic medical record audit,
physician self-report, patient surveys and chart review are all prone to bias, as they
usually lack validation against observed practice. Studies with standardised patients
(SPs) have been used successfully to overcome these kinds of bias.1
7 An SP is a healthy subject who is trained to
assess the performance of doctors based on predefined criteria. Unannounced or incognito
standardised patients (ISPs) have been used unobtrusively to assess the routine practice
performance of doctors.8
“Unknown to the prospective provider of care, such a
‘patient’ arrives at the clinic and requests care. What happens is
gleaned from the records of care and also from the observations reported by the
pseudo patients, who have been trained to make the needed
observations.”
9


These ISPs are the healthcare version of the mystery shoppers used in other industries.
“Mystery shopper or visitor are a well known and widely used
standardized method in quality management for assessing service quality in the
retailing and tourism industry.”
10 Observing health service providers routine or
students practical performance by ISPs is a method established since decades in health
services and health education research.11–18 Collecting data by
observing performance enables researchers to judge if guidelines are followed, like it
has been demonstrated for community pharmacies recently.19–21 For instance, in the case of PHE delivered by
general practitioners (GPs), it could by observed if they ask their patients on their
smoking status, as recommended by the preventive service guideline.

In autumn 2008, the official consumer information association of Austria, ‘Verein
für Konsumenteninformation’ (VKI), published a test report on physicians
delivering the PHE. In the spring of 2008, two ISPs, members of the VKI tester team, had
visited unannounced a sample of randomly selected GPs in Vienna, Austria.22


In Austria since 1974, GPs have been reimbursed for annual PHEs from public funds,
currently at around US$100 (€75, current value) per patient. This service
is provided free of charge to patients. A reform of the content and new documentation
standards were introduced in 2005. Since then, the PHE is based on a published
evidence-based guideline. The evidence base is derived mostly from the USA, Canadian and
Australian preventive service guidelines with local adaptations. These guidelines
demonstrated by the use of best evidence the causal link of interventions and beneficial
medical outcomes for a long list of conditions.23–26 The interventions recommended in the local
Austrian guideline should yield beneficial medical outcomes when performed according to
the guideline by GPs. These beneficial screening interventions include, to name a few,
assessing smoking status, blood pressure, body mass index, cardiovascular risk
calculation and recommended follow-ups like brief smoking cessation advice, etc. Not
performing those during the PHE may harm the still healthy patient (client).27
28 Each year around 850 000 PHEs are
performed among the adult Austrian population of 6 million.22
29–31


Two types of insurance funding exist in Austria for GPs offering the PHE free of charge.
A GP may hold a comprehensive insurance contract plus a PHE contract or a PHE contract
only. In our study, we referred to GPs with the comprehensive plus PHE contract as
‘contracted GPs’ (in Austrian–German ‘§2
Kassenärzte’), and those with the PHE contract only as ‘private
GPs’ (in Austrian–German ‘Wahlärzte mit
Vorsorgeuntersuchungsvertrag’). Payment of ‘private Austrian GPs’
can involve out-of-pocket payments of patients to cover part or all the patient expenses
and refunding of a part by insurance. According to a previous study in Austria, the
reasons for choosing such a private GP (‘Wahlarzt’) include short waiting
and longer available consultation times.32 A
description of the Austrian health system with its mixed contracted and non-contracted
private GP primary care system is beyond the scope of this paper and can be found in an
English/German WHO country report.29 In this
study, all GPs had a PHE contract and thus no out-of-pocket payments for any PHE service
were necessary, even for ‘private GPs’.

The first research question for our secondary analysis was: Did Austrian GPs spend
sufficient time to conduct the preventive activities required? Furthermore, we
wanted to examine if there was a difference between ‘private’ and
‘contracted’ GPs in three quality aspects of care delivered: consultation
and waiting time and guideline adherence.

Methods
Our methods were structured in two step-like parts. In the first step, we critically
appraised the methods used by VKI: their sampling and data collection. In the second, we
performed our own analysis on the electronic data set provided by VKI.

Our study design was presented to the legally relevant public health ethics commission
of Vienna, which had no objections: the secondary use of these anonymous data on
physician performance did not infringe on rights of patients nor physicians.

The GPs' legal representative, the Vienna medical chamber, had agreed at the end
of 2007 that some randomly selected GPs may be tested for their PHE performance by ISP
from VKI in the upcoming weeks. All GPs of Vienna were informed by their legal
representative, about the possible random sample visits. There was no possibility for
GPs to opt out.

Appraisal of VKI sampling and data quality
Knowledge about the VKI methodology was gained through one personal and two phone
interviews at the end of 2008 and in first quarter of 2009 with the researcher at VKI
who managed the study.22 We further analysed
the note-taking forms used by the ISPs, the VKI's internal written
interpretation guide and a report on the VKI testing methodology published in
2008.33


We judged the quality of the sample by comparing it with the GP distribution in
Vienna and by repeating the VKI sampling procedure in a simulation of our own. We
assessed the quality of the data gathered by the ISPs against criteria for a good
quality ISP study provided by a recent systematic literature review in the
field.8 These criteria cover the use of
content checklists, note taking by the ISP, soundness of clinical cases and ISP
detection rates. The results of our appraisal are presented in our first set of
findings below.

Secondary analysis
Data preparation
VKI provided a de-identified electronic data set (42 records). In this data set,
GPs' names and office locations were deleted and GPs were sequentially
numbered by VKI. We transformed the VKI ratings into corresponding numerical
values (eg, the five Likert scale satisfaction scores ranging from
‘+ +’ (very good), through ‘o’ (average)
to ‘− −’ (not satisfactory) were re-coded by us into
the five integers from 4 to 0). Continuous variables, such as waiting times and
consultation times, were transferred unchanged into our final secondary data
set.

Additionally, we were provided with hard copy clinical results which had been
given to the ISPs by the GPs and which were not used by VKI in its own report (34
records—eight were missing). These 34 forms were copies of the double page
health summary sheets (HSS, ‘Befundblatt’), which the GPs should
provide in hard copy at the end of the PHE to their clients.34
35 One of us (KT) blinded to the medical
content of the ISP clinical cases, extracted and coded all clinical data from the
34 paper forms into a second electronic data set in December 2008. More than 90
variables were coded from these data. Free text remarks by the physicians were not
extracted (see additional file 1: scanned HSS coding template with data of GP No.
1).

Statistical analysis
We found a double stratified probabilistic sampling. GPs were drawn by VKI within
their two strata, private/contracted (stratum 1) and district blocks (stratum 2)
by a strictly random process.

The primary sampling unit for our data analysis was the GP (see figure 1). Each of 21 practitioners were
offered a visit by the two different ISPs. Two of the practice visits were
rejected by two GPs—one private and one contracted (because of an
administrative error and because laboratory results were not ordered by the GP).
Both GPs were visited by the other ISP. The visits resulted in a total of 40
observations on 21 GPs, belonging either to the ‘private’ or to the
‘contracted’ GP group. The clustering at the GP was accounted for in
our statistical analysis by survey/panel data methods and additionally by
multilevel data analysis.36 The reasons for
the multilevel analysis are explained below in the appraisal of sampling by
VKI.

Figure 1 Results of Verein für Konsumenteninformation (VKI) sampling compared
with our simulation sampling of private general practitioners (GPs). In
2008, 21 GPs were sampled by VKI, seven of them “private GPs”.
All seven were located in the richer part of Vienna. Among the
“contracted GPs”, four of 14 were located in the richer Vienna
districts. GP workforce data of 2002, published in a health report of the
city of Vienna administration, provided the most recent information on
distribution of private GPs among the Vienna city districts. As we were not
provided with data, beyond totals, on the two sampling population lists of
VKI. n.a., could not access the district distribution data; PHE, periodic
health examination.

We conducted our statistical analysis for this publication with Stata V.9.1 and
11.37 Descriptive statistics (eg, means,
proportions and CIs) were produced by the Stata survey/panel data methods with the
most conservative assumptions (eg, finite-population assumption, linearised
proportions and binomial Wald statistics for CI of proportions). For additional
modelling, we used mixed-effects restricted maximum likelihood estimation and
generalised linear models for continuous variables and random- or fixed-effects
logistic regression for binary dependent variables (multilevel data modelling).
All statistical tests performed and CIs reported are at the 95% level.

For performance assessment, we constructed appropriate indicator variables in
accordance with the published guidelines for the PHE based on the observations of
the ISPs.23 For example, only if the full
structured medical history proforma, the ‘health information sheet’
(HIS), was completed, including optimal alcohol screening according to guideline,
was the constructed binary (yes/no) indicator coded positively.

Results
Step 1: appraisal of VKI sampling and data quality
Sampling GPs
VKI reported to us that they used a double stratified random sampling method for
GPs in Vienna. One stratum was insurance contract status
(‘private/contracted’) and the other was the geographic distribution
of doctors among 23 districts in Vienna. Two independent numbered name lists, one
for ‘private GPs’ and another for ‘contracted GPs’,
were used. The lists were provided to VKI by the Central Association of Austrian
health insurances (‘Hauptverband der österreichischen
Sozialversicherungsträger’), which runs the central registry of all
PHE contracts but not to us. Each list was sorted for districts, showing the
office locations and the total number of GPs in each district. The sample
population in the lists was 1069 GPs, 211 (20%) of whom were
‘private’. VKI fixed the GP sample size at 21, seven of whom (33%)
being ‘private GPs’, thus creating deliberately an oversampling of
‘private GPs’ as they explained in the initial interview.

To determine the sample size per district block, the number of GPs to be sampled
for each district was calculated by VKI from the names lists sorted for districts.
For example, the seven ‘private GPs’ were sampled from a workforce
distributed over 23 districts. Each of the seven district sampling blocks formed
should comprise around 14% of the workforce. Thus, districts were lumped together
in the sorted list until a block held around 14% of the ‘private
GPs’ workforce, then the next block was created from the remaining
districts and so on. In this way, the number of GPs per district was fixed for all
23 districts in Vienna and for each of the two GP contract types separately.

Selection from a district block was done by drawing a random number within the
numbered name lists. The random number for each district block was generated by an
internet-based public domain software, AGITOS. The sampling base numbers used in
AGITOS for each block was determined by the total number of GPs in each district
block.38


After the GPs' names were determined, the ISPs arranged the visits. If an
appointment could not be arranged, the ISP called the VKI office and a replacement
GP was drawn there by the random number mechanism within the district block, as
described above. To visit seven ‘private GPs’, 14 replacements were
needed. This contrasted with three replacements needed for the 14
‘contracted GPs’.

The VKI methodology resulted in one GP being selected in 15 of 23 districts, two
GPs in three districts (Nos. 3, 18 and 19) and no GPs in five districts (Nos.
5–8 and 17) (see table 1). Six GPs
in the sample were from inner districts and 15 from outer districts. Eleven GPs
had their office in the more affluent part of Vienna and 10 in the less affluent.
The nine inner city districts (Nos. 1–9) in combination with three outer
districts (Nos. 13, 18 and 19) comprised the more affluent part of Vienna compared
with the rest, judged by purchasing power per head and housing prices (for details
classifying affluent versus less affluent districts, see additional file 3: GP
sample distribution in rich and poor parts of Vienna).

Table 1 Outcome of VKI sampling of GPs in Vienna by city district and GP insurance
contract

Vienna district, No.	VKI sample (number of GPs)	Of these	
Private*
	Contracted†
	
1	1	1	
	
2	1	
	1	
3	2	1	1	
4	1	1	
	
5	
	
	
	
6	
	
	
	
7	
	
	
	
8	
	
	
	
9	1	1	
	
10	1	
	1	
11	1	
	1	
12	1	
	1	
13	1	1	
	
14	1	
	1	
15	1	
	1	
16	1	
	1	
17	
	
	
	
18	2	1	1	
19	2	1	1	
20	1	
	1	
21	1	
	1	
22	1	
	1	
23	1	
	1	
Total GPs	21	7	14	
VKI published the names of the GPs sampled and their office locations in
its report October 2008.

* We assessed the contract status of each named GP through the public
internet search template of the Vienna Medical Chamber (http://www.praxisplan.at).

† ‘Contracted GPs’ have a full contract with the regional
general health insurance including a periodic health examination contract
(‘§2 Kassenärzte’).

GPs, general practitioners; VKI, Verein für
Konsumenteninformation.

The distribution of sampled GPs among the Viennese districts should resemble as
much as possible the distribution of the real GP workforce performing PHE among
the districts. The stratification aimed to improve the representativeness with
regard to two strata, geographic distribution and insurance contract status.
‘Contracted GPs’ per district should correlate with the district
population size, as ‘contracted GPs’ are placed by the Vienna
general social insurance agency to serve the population. Thus, highly populated
districts should also be represented well in this sample. Inner city districts
(Nos. 1–9) have a smaller population than most of the 13 outer ones (Nos.
10–23). The sample reflected this distribution, with a GP ratio of 6:15 for
inner versus outer districts. ‘Private GPs’, meanwhile, are free to
establish themselves wherever they like. We assumed that they would tend to open
their offices in the more affluent districts, as their income relies on
out-of-pocket payments for most of their services except the publicly financed
PHE.

To examine the quality of the random sample block procedure of VKI, we had to rely
on other data, as we were not given access to the two original VKI sampling
population GP lists. Only the totals of their two lists were reported to us,
namely 211 ‘private GPs’ and 858 ‘contracted GPs’. We
repeated and thus simulated the VKI procedure with the most recent and applicable
data we could find. These were published by the city administration of Vienna in
2002, reporting on the district distribution of 734 private GPs out of total of
1572 GPs.39
40 Data on PHE contracts of these private
GPs were not available. According to that data many of the private GPs (17%)
practised in the 19th (9%) and 13th (8%) districts. When repeating the
VKI's district block procedure with this other data, the first of the seven
GPs was drawn by us out of the first block composed of those two districts. The
next two (1st and 18th) did hold together 14%, so the next GP was drawn from this
second bloc and so on. In our simulation, the seventh ‘private GP’
was drawn from five districts at the end of the list, each with <3% of the
workforce (see also additional Excel file 4: sampling assessment including source
data and further 2007 city administration workforce data).

When comparing our simulation result with the sampling result of VKI, published in
its magazine with GP name and location, we found a nearly identical
distribution.22 In the VKI sample, all
seven ‘private GPs’ were from the rich part of Vienna, whereas in
our simulation, six of the seven were from that part. However, as only 211
‘private GPs’ held a PHE insurance contract in 2008, the district
distribution of 211 ‘private GPs’ in the VKI list might be different
from that of the 734 private GPs of our data of 2002. This could explain the small
deviation from our simulation result (see figure
1).

VKI sampling supports level analysis
VKI used a double stratified probabilistic sampling. One stratum was
‘private’ or ‘contracted’ GPs. The other strata were
the 23 district blocks as described above. By such an intensive stratification and
a strictly random selection out of these strata, VKI achieved in our opinion a
well-balanced and representative random sample of the GP workforce in Vienna,
despite the small sample size of 21 GPs.

After judging the sampling process robust enough, we sought for the most
appropriate type of analysis of these data. The two observations dealing with one
GP were not independent and thus were ‘clustered at the level of the
GP’.

We adjusted for this by two types of analysis: correcting for the clustering
effect and using multilevel modelling. By multilevel modelling, we could also
estimate intraclass effects at the GP level, as proposed in the literature.36
41


Validity of clinical cases
Two ISP clinical cases were constructed by VKI health experts on the basis of the
Austrian PHE guideline, available in print and internet download since 2005.23 The guideline was intended to be used by
health service administrators (such as screening programme managers at local and
regional levels) to organise the preventive service activities of GPs in their
area, similar to guidelines by other professional bodies.26
42 With the support of medical journalists,
the guideline was written to be understandable to a broader audience than GPs,
although it includes evidence-based references.43 The high amount of detail in the guideline allowed VKI experts to
develop the two clinical cases for the ISPs in such a manner as to elicit clearly
observable actions by the GPs during the PHE.

Both the male and the female ISPs were over 65 and presented complex clinical
screening cases. The predominant critical screening task of the male was the
detection of his high cardiovascular risk and of the female her clearly
problematic alcohol consumption. However, the task involved screening for nearly
all 15 target conditions of the Austrian PHE.

Apart from the clinical case history, the two ISPs presented the GP with
fabricated laboratory data, tailored to their cases. For example, the woman
reporting problematic alcohol consumption had elevated levels of serum liver
enzymes (Gamma GT: 65 U/l, GOT 44 U/l, GPT 35 U/l). Before the fieldwork, the ISPs
rehearsed with the help of the outpatient facility of the Vienna public social
insurance medical service, where also their laboratory details were fine tuned. A
more detailed description of the clinical case construction is included as
additional file (see additional file 2—‘ISP_Cases’).

Assessment of data collection by ISPs
The two ISPs each arranged visits with 21 GPs. At the GP's office, each ISP
completed the standardised evidence-based HIS, a questionnaire which all GPs
offering reimbursed PHE are obliged to provide.44 They also completed the AUDIT-GMAT, an Austrian version of the WHO
questionnaire ‘AUDIT’ for problematic alcohol consumption, when
offered.45 The ISP training had included
completion of the HIS and AUDIT-GMAT as well as presentation of their history
personally to the GP. At the end of the consultation, they each collected the
standardised HSS, which the doctor is also obliged to complete and provide in copy
to his/her client. More information about the standardised medical records set for
the Austrian PHE is detailed below in the results and has been published
elsewhere.46


Immediately after having left a GP's office, the ISPs noted their
experience using a standardised note form. At the VKI office, an independent
person extracted data for the calculation of scores. The data coding was
explicitly defined for the GP test in advance by specifically written instructions
called ‘Regeln für die Eingabe/Beurteilung in TestRev’ (rules
for data entry and assessment into TestRev). We were provided with these specific
coding rules. TestRev is the routine software and database VKI applies for
storing, analysing and reporting on the numerous tests they perform in all fields
of industry and services. For data handling, an in-house quality management
handbook exists, and this was also applied for the PHE test. VKI holds an official
state quality certificate for its testing procedure.33 After data entry, a second person compared the extracted
results in TestRev with the protocol notes of the ISP. In the case of
disagreement, a third independent senior person decided as to the correct
interpretation and coding.

In this way, VKI gathered in its electronic data set detailed and summary
statements such as the ISPs' subjective impressions (satisfaction), but
mostly VKI gathered more objective observations on activities the GPs performed or
omitted. These more objective ISP observations can be considered in the healthcare
quality field as ‘patient experience’, more amenable to effectively
improving quality of care than the more subjective ‘patient
satisfaction’.47–50 VKI condensed the ISP notes into 45 statements/judgements
per visit. This 45 items VKI data set was made available to us. We were not
provided with the notes taken by the ISPs. However, as the strict rule-based
coding system of VKI allows the condensed statements/judgements to be re-expand to
the detailed observations, we could interpret the performance of each GP to a
greater degree than the 45 items would suggest. For example, problematic alcohol
consumption should be screened for. VKI coded ‘+ +’
(very satisfactory) when the AUDIT-GMAT questionnaire was handed over to the ISP,
‘o’ (average) when the questionnaire was not used but the GP did
discuss alcohol consumption with the ISP and ‘− −’
(not satisfactory) when the topic was not even raised verbally.

We found the VKI method to be reliable in reporting on the ISPs' experience
of GP interventions, which should have been performed during the PHE. For this
first publication, we restricted ourselves to analysing data on waiting and
consultation time, and GP performance during the medical history taking phase,
compared with guideline recommendations.

Detection rate of ISP
Detection of ISP by the observed physician can be an important obstacle in ISP
studies,8 leading to bias and
confounding. We are confident that all ISP visits went undetected and physician
behaviour was not distorted by the idea that the client could be an expert
observer with a constructed clinical case. The age of both ISPs was the same as in
the presented clinical cases. Great care was taken to ensure that there was no
observable difference on signs. The responsible researcher at VKI stressed in the
first interview with us in October 2008 that none of the 40 ISP visits had been
detected. We asked her again in February 2009 to interview the two ISPs to
determine if they had any suspicion that any of the GPs could have detected them.
The response was again negative. One ISP even replied on that occasion that the
only GP who had seemed to be a little suspicious had just sent a personal
invitation letter to return for the next annual PHE.

Results of step 2: secondary analysis
In our secondary analysis, we focused primarily on observational experience data. The
satisfaction data have been published by VKI in its own magazine.22 We received data on 40 of 42 arranged ISP
visits, the same number as reported in the VKI test report publication in 2008. Two
ISP visits were rejected by two GPs, one ‘private’ and the other
‘contracted’. The reasons given by the two GPs for rejection were in
one case an administrative GP error (a misunderstanding of the use of the electronic
insurance patient access card) and in the other that the pre-prepared laboratory
results were not ordered by the GP herself. However, both GPs were visited by the
other ISP.

Service delivery time
For the completed visits, the average consultation time was 46 min (95% CI
37 to 54 min). For the male ISP, it was 38 min (95% CI 33 to 43) and
for the female ISP 54 min (95% CI 40 to 67). The difference of
16 min between the two ISP cases was not significant, when applying a
survey/panel data method adjusting for the clustering effect at GP level, but was
significant in the full-adjusted multilevel model (coefficient 15.6, 95% CI 4.9 to
26.3, see figure 2).

Figure 2 The full-adjusted multilevel model (generalised linear model, restricted
maximum likelihood).

Female GPs offered longer consultations, with an average of 47 min (95% CI
38 to 57) than males, with an average of 38 min (95% CI 19 to 58). The
observed difference of 11 min in our sample is not significant, when
applying the survey/panel method adjustment for multilevel modelling or the
full-adjusted model (see figure 2).

Using multilevel analysis, we estimated the proportion of variance explained by
the intraclass effect versus the difference between the GPs. If a high proportion
of variance is explained by one variable, then this variable has a strong effect
on the outcome of interest. Sixty-two per cent of the variance for waiting time
was determined by the GP intraclass effect compared with 30% for consultation
time. These variance estimates result from a conservative monovariate random
effect generalised least squares regression model with the GPs as explanatory
variable. Further adjusting for the two different ISP case types increased the
variance proportion for consultation time explained by the GP by one-third, to
45%. The same adjustment did not significantly change the variance proportion in
waiting time (slightly increased from 62% to 67%). As could be expected, the
intraclass and adjustment effects were even more pronounced in the fixed random
effect model (see table 2).

Table 2 Proportion of all variance explained by intraclass (GP) variation in
multilevel analysis on waiting and consultation time

Time	Random effect (conservative)	Fixed effect (strong assumption)	
Regressed on GP only	
 Waiting	0.621*
	0.686	
 Consultation	0.298	0.493	
Time	Random effect	Fixed effect	
Regressed on GP and ISP (adjusted for ISP case type)	
 Waiting	0.668	0.718	
 Consultation	0.445	0.562	
After adjustment for ISP case type, the intraclass effect of waiting time
did increase a little, whereas for consultation time, the effect
increased from 0.30 to 0.45 in the random effect model. The conservative
random effect model seems to us most appropriate for this kind of data,
especially due to our small sample size.

* rho: proportion of all variance explained by intraclass (GP)
variation.

GPs, general practitioners; ISP, incognito standardised patient.

We also found a difference of 22 min in average consultation time between
private and contracted GPs. The difference was significant. ‘Private
GPs’ provided 60 min (95% CI 50 to 71) and ‘contracted
GPs’ 38 min (95% CI 26 to 49) on average. The difference remained
significant using a fully adjusted multivariate model, which included the two ISP
case types, GP gender, GP insurance type and the clustering on the GP level
(generalised linear modelling statistics incorporated in Stata V.11.0) (see also
additional file 9: STATA-Commands (selected).txt)

Quality of service
For this publication, we compared observed GP history taking performance with the
evidence-based recommendations. According to the officially published guideline,
the PHE should include a structured general history taking supported by the HIS
and questions regarding alcohol use supported by the AUDIT-GMAT. We classified
five performance levels in respect to general history taking adherence to the
guideline before analysing the data. The five HIS scores ranged from
‘0’ (= below minimal) to ‘4’ (= perfect
history). The maximum general HIS score of 4 was achieved when the HIS was offered
and all medical domains were addressed during the consultation. Omission of one of
the eight medical domains was tolerated in our data interpretation as possible
measurement error on the part of VKI. A score of ‘3’ was achieved
when the HIS was offered but not all domains were touched on additionally
verbally. No HIS, but raising at least seven of the eight required domains
verbally scored ‘2’. A score of ‘1’ was given when
there was no HIS and two or three domains were missing. No HIS and four to eight
domains not addressed scored ‘0’. As the general PHE contract with
the GPs requires that the HIS proforma be completed, we considered HIS scores of
‘2’ or less below standard.51
52


Screening for problematic alcohol consumption should start with completion of the
AUDIT-GMAT questionnaire by the client. For this screening activity, we scored the
performance into two categories. Care according to guideline provided the
AUDIT-GMAT (we scored ‘1’), otherwise we scored
‘0’.

A HIS was offered in 53% (95% CI 34% to 71%) of all visits. Among the GPs offering
a HIS, a proportion outperformed the requirements of the guideline if they
additionally addressed nearly all the medical content of the HIS during the
consultation phase of the PHE (HIS score ‘4’). In 20% of all visits,
GPs scored ‘4’, indicating perfect general medical history taking
(95% CI 9% to 39%).

The AUDIT-GMAT was offered in 38% (95% CI 19% to 56%) of all visits. There was no
difference between ‘private’ and ‘contracted GPs’
(p=0.89) and no difference between the female and male ISPs
(p=0.73). All GPs who offered an AUDIT-GMAT had also offered a HIS (see
also additional file 5: HIS and AUDIT scores crosstable n=40 cases).

We considered the acceptable overall history taking service standard level to be a
HIS offered (HIS score ‘3’ or higher) plus the alcohol topic
addressed at least verbally. Thirty per cent (95% CI 12% to 48%) of all visits
were performed below this standard. The difference in proportion of
‘private GPs’ (21%) and ‘contracted GPs’ (35%) was not
significant in the full multilevel model (p>0.05).

We found a significant intraclass effect at the GP level: for a given GP, the OR
was 60% (95% CI 0.03% to 91%) that their consecutive next ISP would also get the
same level of medical history performance. This intraclass effect indicates that
GP practice style was a determinant of history taking performance.

Discussion
Our study is the first using direct observation via ISPs of routine preventive service
GP performance compared with standards in an evidence-based structured national PHE
programme. We have been unable to find any similar previous studies, which used
secondary data collected by mystery patients, ISPs, engaged by a consumer organisation.
The Austrian consumer organisation (VKI) evaluated GPs' performance in Vienna in
delivering preventive care, specifically the highly standardised Austrian PHE for which
a curtailed evidence-based guideline is published in German since 2005.23 The random sampling process for GPs appears to
have been sound and produced a representative sample. The clinical cases for the ISPs
fitted well to the physical appearance of the two ISPs, one male and one female around
65 of age. In none of the 40 completed visits was there any evidence that the ISP had
been detected by the GP. The 40 cases were clustered at the level of 21 GPs. The GP
sample had two strata. The first strata were ‘contracted GPs’ and
‘private GPs’. The ‘private GPs’ were slightly oversampled
(by three GPs) as their proportion was 33% in the sample and 20% in the sampling
population of 1069 GPs with PHE contract in 2008.

The second level, Vienna city districts, improved the sampling quality further, as the
random sampling procedure within the city district blocks was found to be robust.
Generalisation of the findings to the Viennese GP workforce delivering the PHE is
reasonable within the statistical limits of the small sample.

Limitations and strength
One limitation of our study is the small sample size of 40 completed ISP cases for 21
GPs in the VKI data set. In a recent systematic literature review of good quality SP
studies by Rethans,8 a median 39 GPs were
visited across the 20 studies reporting on GPs since 1985. There has been a trend to
smaller studies since 2000, with a median of 27 GPs. Our small sample size means that
the estimates have wide CIs, especially when considering subgroups, such as
‘private GPs’. Only when effect sizes are large, for example, in our
case, when expected values differ dramatically from observed ones, can we rule out
chance.

Measurement error on the part of the ISPs is an important potential threat to
validity. Rethans proposes that this can be overcome by thorough ISP training, case
preparation and robust documentation processes. In the VKI study, the two ISPs were
highly experienced, having worked more than 2 decades in consumer testing of
many service industries. The VKI tests run now in the thousands—the test of
the Viennese GPs on the PHE is just one of the assessments they have performed. More
than 80 tests are conducted each year, the organisation has existed for more than
3 decades and is internationally recognised among European consumer
organisations. It has an ISO quality certificate for its testing procedures and
constant internal quality checks. The data have to be well documented and robust, as
legal cases are common, with tested providers or producers often appealing to the
courts.33 In summary, our primary data
collection was embedded in a high-volume routine with sound quality assurance and
collected by highly trained professionals, and thus, the data are likely to be
reliable.

The data collectors themselves (ISPs) were blinded to our (implicit) study
hypotheses, such as expected duration of consultations being 5–10 min.
It could be argued that consumer associations may be especially critical of doctors
and that this might have affected the study design and data collection. In this case,
however, the Austrian VKI test report signalled satisfaction with GPs' PHE
performance (translated title: ‘PHE in good hands’)—in contrast
to their repeated critical reports of ISPs observing pharmacies.22


However, the satisfaction of VKI can only be a weak proxy for a real satisfaction
study, as a further limitation of ISP studies is that they cannot measure an
important component of quality outcomes: patient satisfaction. It can only be
assessed from real patients, for example, by surveys. In the case of PHE,
satisfaction will be important, as satisfied clients tend to return, and follow-up at
the recommended screening intervals. Several large surveys, although most probably
not representative due to a low response rate of around 30%, have been done by others
recently for the new Austrian PHE and signal a satisfaction level of 41% being very
satisfied with the quality.53
54 The measurement of satisfaction levels has
its own limitation in international comparability, when self-developed questionnaires
are applied locally, as observed satisfaction levels are highly depending on the
content and framing of the questions.55


Several other important aspects of quality of care, like communication skills of GPs
and knowledge of GPs on prevention have not been looked at by the ISP and cannot be
addressed in our study.56


A strength of our data, in contrast to many other ISP studies, is that all ISP visits
were undetected. Furthermore, our study was not distorted by a self-selection bias of
voluntarily participating GPs. In other studies, around 40% of physicians on average
decline to participate, leading to a severe self-selection bias among
physicians.1
8 We were able to completely avoid this bias by
using the anonymous data collected by VKI, as GPs were selected by a strict and
sophisticated random sampling procedure. The Viennese Chamber of Physicians agreed
collectively to participate, and single GPs could not exempt themselves from the
random VKI visits. The visits to few of around 1500 GPs were announced to all by
their Viennese medical chamber, without giving an exact date. However, the VKI never
asks permission at the individual service provider level.

‘Lack of time’ barrier
One of the main obstacles or barriers named by GPs worldwide to delivering preventive
care is the lack of time.5 Among others
factors, administrative arrangements including financial factors are important to
consider when routine GP practice needs to be changed.26
57 The average consultation time of
38 min among the ‘contracted GPs’ (§2 Kassenarzt) is much
longer than the 10–15 min we expected when the PHE reform was set in
motion by one of us (FP) in 2003. Austria has a kind of capped fee-for-service system
for ‘contracted GPs’, which results in high volumes of services and
high turnover of patients.29 We estimate the
average consultation time to be in the range of Germany with its 7.6 min,
found in the most recent comparative, but not representative, study in Europe.58 No study using representative data has been
published in a peer-reviewed journal on this issue for Austria.

The 60 min consultation time with ‘private GPs’ in this study is
extraordinary, especially as these consultations are available free of charge to the
eligible population. However, it was difficult for the ISPs to secure an appointment
with ‘private GPs’—they had to contact 21 to make appointments
with 7 (1:3 ratio). Thus, the PHE is a scarce commodity in private practice and its
widespread uptake would likely result in waiting lists.

The long average consultation time of 46 min may also be attributable to the
complex ISP cases, as increased severity of cases leads to longer consultation all
over the world.59 Less complicated cases,
especially among younger clients, would be more the norm and these may be handled in
a shorter time. The consultation duration for less complicated cases is unknown and
requires further research in Austria.

The Austrian model, developing guidelines accompanied by standardised report cards in
combination with a generous reimbursement system based on special contracts for
prevention (the PHE contracts), could obviously overcome the barrier of limited time
available in Vienna general practice.46


Service quality—times typical for GPs
In addition to the sufficient time spent on average to perform the PHE, we observed
intraclass effects at the individual GP level for consultation and waiting times. The
GP effect was stronger on waiting time than on consultation time. In other words,
each GP tended to have a typical waiting and less so consultation time, being
repeated with the second visitor. Such a typical behaviour, which we called in
accordance with the quality management literature ‘practice style’, is
thought to formed over longer times by various factors.60
61 These may be non-GP factors, like patient
load per day or usual severity of cases, depending on the area a GP works. We have
found ‘private GPs’ being highly concentrated in the richest districts
of Vienna, whereas ‘contracted GPs’ were distributed according to
population per district (see results on sampling above). From the positive
correlation of social class and health status in the population follows, that
‘contracted GP’ tend to have poorer, sicker, less educated patients, as
only the well-off can easily afford a ‘private GP’. The service of a
‘contracted GP’ is free, whereas the out-of-pocket payment at the
‘private GP’ is only refunded to a small part by the health insurances.
As all patients are insured in Austria, the richer ones can consume the
‘private GPs’ in addition to the ‘contracted GPs’. The
contracted GPs have usually fuller waiting rooms and much more patients per day to
serve. The main motive to visit a ‘private GP’ is to buy and get longer
consultation times according to a recent Austrian study.32


GP factors like age, training-level and guideline adherence should be typical for the
Vienna GP workforce and should not differ among our study subjects systematically, as
random sampling should even out those differences. However, the sample was
intentionally stratified on contract status of GPs, and ‘private GPs’
were oversampled by VKI, as the consumer organisation hypothesised a major difference
in the delivery of preventive care based on GP contract status.

Income is a further important contributing factor for physician behaviour.62
63 However, as all ‘private GPs’
in our sample lack only a general insurance contract, but hold a PHE contract, they
do not get any out-of-the-pocket payment for their PHE service. The PHE reimbursement
is the same at €75 (around US$100) for both GP contract types. Thus,
the observed tendency of ‘private GPs’ to counsel longer than
‘contracted GPs’ cannot be attributed to a direct financial incentive
for this service. It seems more to be the ‘habit’ or patient management
style of ‘private GPs’, which we short named ‘practice
style’ above, as a higher income per case allows ‘private GPs’
to spent more time per visit.32


The results that (1) waiting time was mainly influenced by the GP and (2)
consultation time was mainly influenced by the clinical case presented are also
congruent with knowledge from quality management on practice styles and results from
health services research.9
58


In summary, the practice style of GPs had a strong influence on waiting time and a
lesser influence on consultation time. Consultation time was dependent on the type of
ISP case, but waiting time was not. GPs reacted to the specific cases in adjusting
their consultation time.

Service quality—guideline adherence
Overall, history taking standards were missed by 21% of ‘private’
versus 34% of ‘contracted’ GPs. This difference was not significant.
Multilevel analysis revealed that performing below standard history taking was
consistent at the GP level between the two ISP visits. This finding is a further
indication of the existence of GP personal practice styles influencing service
quality and indicates an opportunity for improvement through training and
feedback.

The use of the standardised assessment of a history of problematic alcohol
consumption, the AUDIT-GMAT questionnaire, is highly recommended in the guideline for
the PHE.64 Yet in 2005, there was strong
opposition voiced against the routine use of this questionnaire by unionised doctors
(medical chamber). They considered the questionnaire to be too intrusive and were
concerned that it would discourage potential clients. When in 2003 one of us (FP) led
the development team for the new PHE, it was expected that only a minority of GPs
would apply the AUDIT-GMAT. However, in this study, it was used in nearly 40% of
visits, with no significant difference between ‘private’ and
‘contracted GPs’. Many GPs may consider screening for problematic
alcohol consumption to be important in a country like Austria with high alcohol
consumption.

Conclusion and outlook
Using ISPs is a well-established but complex method for health service research. Using
data not designed for research is also complex. However, the increase in complexity is
outweighed by the reduced bias from unannounced visits. Our study was the first to
report physicians' routine preventive performance under direct observation of
experienced ISPs applying standardised quality-assured documentation in a nationwide PHE
programme. This study mainly reports research methods and length and variation in
consultation times and guideline adherence in regard to alcohol screening and medical
history taking. Some better than expected results were found, such as the long
consultation times and the relatively high completion rate of the alcohol screening
questionnaires. ‘Private GPs’ and ‘contracted GPs’ did
differ more in waiting time than in consultation time and not in regard to alcohol
screening. This leads us to a new hypothesis that there is little relevant difference in
the medical quality of the service of ‘private’ and ‘contracted
GPs’. Further research on the clinical part of our secondary data should help to
clarify this issue. We hope that this paper will stimulate health service research on
the quality of service of annual PHEs provided to many of a national population each
year.

We thank Dr. Bärbel Klepp, health service specialist at VKI Vienna, for reading
drafts and her comments on the methods section of this paper. We further thank her and
the management of VKI for their availability for our interviews on the VKI methods and
the provision of the anonymised data used for secondary analysis in our study. We
further thank the members of the International Screening Committee for Austria, Reli
Mechtler, University of Linz, Austria, Gerald Gartlehner, Centre for Clinical
Epidemiology, Danube University Krems, Austria, Claudia Luciak-Donsberger, Medical
University of Vienna, who commented on draft versions. Ken Eaton helped us finding
titles for the series of our four papers planned. A special thanks goes to Sir Muir
Gray, NHS Knowledge Centre, UK, who gave valuable comments and motivated the authors as
a member of the International Screening Committee for Austria to continue their work.
This study was made possible by using the results of a cooperation project between the
Central Association of Austrian Social and Health Insurances (‘Hauptverband der
österreichischen Sozialversicherungsträger’) and VKI producing the
PHE test report in the VKI publication September 2008.


To cite: Piribauer F, Thaler K, Harris MF. Covert checks by standardised
patients of general practitioners' delivery of new periodic health
examinations: clustered cross-sectional study from a consumer organisation.
BMJ Open 2012;2:e000744. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000744


Contributors: FP conceived the study, performed the statistical analysis and drafted the
manuscript. KT extracted data, helped in the interpretation and finalisation of the
manuscript. MFH helped in the interpretation, internal review and finalisation. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding: This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in public,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

Competing interests: None.

Ethics approval: Ethics approval was provided by the Statutory Public Health Ethics Committee of the
City of Vienna.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Data sharing statement: The data of this study are owned by the Austrian Consumer Organisation (Verein
für Konsumenteninformation, VKI). On our written request in October 2008, VKI
provided us with the electronic data set (raw data: Excel file, 23 lines), and
hardcopies of the completed medical result sheets (34 sheets) for the sole purpose of
conducting health service research studies by us, the International Screening
Committee for Austria. We extracted data from the hardcopies and added it to our own
secondary data set. We encourage any researcher to ask permission and perhaps request
the data set also from VKI in Vienna, Austria (http:\\www.vki.at).
==== Refs
References
1 
Hutchison B Woodward CA Norman GR  
Provision of preventive care to unannounced
standardized patients . CMAJ 
1998 ;158 :185 –93 .9469139 
2 
Yarnall KS Pollak KI Ostbye T  
Primary care: is there enough time for
prevention? 
Am J Public Health 
2003 ;93 :635 –41 .12660210 
3 
Baker R Camosso SJ Gillies C  
Tailored interventions to overcome identified
barriers to change: effects on professional practice and health care
outcomes . Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2010 ;(3 ):CD005470. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD005470

4 
Fletcher SW Spitzer WO  
Approach of the Canadian Task Force to the Periodic
Health Examination . Ann Intern Med 
1980 ;92 :253 –4 .7352732 
5 
Hudon E Beaulieu MD Roberge D  
Integration of the recommendations of the Canadian
Task Force on Preventive Health Care: obstacles perceived by a group of family
physicians . Fam Pract 
2004 ;21 :11 –17 .14760037 
6 
Consumer Reports.Org . Consumer Reports Health.org .
2010 
http://www.consumerreports org/health/home.htm (accessed 7 Jan
2010).
7 
Beaulieu MD Rivard M Hudon E  
Using standardized patients to measure professional
performance of physicians . Int J Qual Health Care 
2003 ;15 :251 –9 .12803353 
8 
Rethans JJ Gorter S Bokken L  
Unannounced standardised patients in real practice: a
systematic literature review . Med Educ 
2007 ;41 :537 –49 .17518833 
9 
Donabedian A  
An Introduction to Quality Assurance in Health
Care . Oxford :
Oxford University Press ,
2003 .
10 
Fache W  
Methodologies for innovation and improvement of
services in tourism . Managing Service Quality 
2000 ;10 :346 –66 .
11 
Bokken L Linssen T Scherpbier A  
The longitudinal simulated patient program:
evaluations by teachers and students and feasibility . Med
Teach 
2008 ;1 –8 .
12 
Gorter S Rethans JJ Van der HD  
Reproducibility of clinical performance assessment in
practice using incognito standardized patients . Med
Educ 
2002 ;36 :827 –832 .12354245 
13 
Linssen T Bokken L Rethans JJ  
Return visits by simulated patients .
Med Educ 
2008 ;42 :536 .18412915 
14 
Rethans JJ Sturmans F Drop R  
Assessment of the performance of general
practitioners by the use of standardized (simulated) patients .
Br J Gen Pract 
1991 ;41 :97 –99 .2031767 
15 
Rethans JJ van-Leeuwen Y Drop R  
Competence and performance: two different concepts in
the assessment of quality of medical care . Fam
Pract 
1990 ;7 :168 –74 .2245885 
16 
Rethans JJ van Boven CP  
Simulated patients in general practice: a different
look at the consultation . Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 
1987 ;294 :809 –12 .
17 
Saebo L Rethans JJ Johannessen T  
[Standardized patients in general practice–a
new method for quality assurance in Noway] . Tidsskr Nor
Laegeforen 
1995 ;115 :3117 –19 .8539691 
18 
Bray BS Schwartz CR Odegard PS  
Assessment of human patient simulation-based
learning . Am J Pharm Educ 
2011 ;75 :208 .22345727 
19 
Watson MC Bond CM Grimshaw J Johnston M  
Factors predicting the guideline compliant supply (or
non-supply) of non-prescription medicines in the community pharmacy
setting . Qual Saf Health Care 
2006 ;15 :53 –7 .16456211 
20 
Watson MC Cleland J Inch J  
Theory-based communication skills training for
medicine counter assistants to improve consultations for non-prescription
medicines . Med Educ 
2007 ;41 :450 –9 .17470074 
21 
Lin K Travlos DV Wadelin JW Vlasses PH  
Simulation and introductory pharmacy practice
experiences . Am J Pharm Educ 
2011 ;75 :209 .22345728 
22 
Klepp B  
Vorsorgeuntersuchung im Test—In guten
Händen . Konsument 2008[9], 22-25. Wien,
Austria , 2008 .
23 
Piribauer F Schmid D Pueringer U  
Vorsorgeuntersuchung Neu - Wissenschaftliche
Grundlagen . In: Pueringer U Ehgartner B Smolek I  , eds. Graz, Austria :
Wissenschaftszentrum Gesundheitsförderung/Prävention der VAEB ,
2005 :1 –207 .
24 
USPSTF . Guide to Clinical Preventive Services .
2004 
http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/uspstfix.htm (accessed 5 Apr
2004).
25 
Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination . The
Canadian Guide to Clinical Preventive Health Care . 1
edn 
Ottawa :
Canadian Government Publishing ,
1994 .
26 
Litt J  
Putting Prevention into Practice. Guidelines for the
Implementation of Prevention in the General Practice Setting . 2
edn 
South Melbourne :
The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) ,
2006 .
27 
Gray JA Piribauer F  
Realising the potential benefit of screening. Comment
on the outcomes of the first Austrian Screening Guidelines Consensus
Conference . Wien Klin Wochenschr 
2001 ;113 :4 –6 .11233467 
28 
Raffle A Gray JA  
Screening—Evidence and Practice .
New York :
Oxford University Press ,
2007 .
29 
Hofmarcher MM Rack HM  
Gesundheitssysteme im Wandel - Österreich /
Health Sytems in Transition - Austria . In: Riesberg A  , ed. Kopenhagen :
Europäischen Observatorium für Gesundheitssysteme und Gesundheitspolitik im Auftrag des WHO Regionalbüro für Europa ,
2006 :1 –282 . Health in Transition
- country profiles. Figueras, J., Mossialos, E., McKee, M., and Saltman, R.
B.
30 
Kvas A Kvas G Langmann H  
Chapter 1.2.2: “TeilnehmerInnenbefragung zur
Servicequalität” .
2008 ;3 :6 –43 .
VAEB Graz, Wissenschaftszentrum. Report of the central association of social
insurances to the ministry of health according to §447h(4) ASVG.
31 
Ladurner J Gerger M Holland W  
Public Health in Austria . In:
London School of Economics and Political Science LH  , ed. Vienna :
Main Association of Austrian Social Security Institutions. Hauptverband der österr.Sozialversicherungsträger ,
2010 :1 –262 .
32 
Reisner C Dihlmann M  
Wahlärzte sichern Grundversorgung. Consilium 10,
22–23 . Wien :
Niederösterreichische Ärztekammer ,
2008 .
33 
Konsument . Ein Blick hinter die Kulissen - Bericht
Untersuchung. 2007, 8-13 . Wien : VKI,
Verein für Konsumenteninformation. Tätigkeitsbericht, 2008.
34 
Luciak-Donsberger C Piribauer F Taylor NC  
Enabling general physicians to perform periodontal
screening during nationwide periodic health examinations .
J Evid Based Dent Pract 
2008 ;2008 :186 –94 .18783766 
35 
Piribauer F  
Inhalte der neuen
Vorsorgeuntersuchung—Dokumentations-Formulare (Links) .
2009 
http://www.zaeg.at/screening
(accessed 15 Mar 2009).
36 
Rabe-Hesketh S Skrondal A  
Multilevel and Longitudinal Modeling Using Stata .
2 edn 
College Station, Texas :
StataCorp LP , 2008 .
37 
Stata Corporation . Stata Survey Data, Reference Manual,
Release 9. 9th . College Station, Texas :
Stata Press , 2005 .
38 
Sager F  
AGITOS Zufallsgenerator . 2010 
http://www.agitos.de/zufallsgenerator.php (accessed 9 Jan
2010).
39 
Bachinger E Csitkovics M Wais K  
Gesundheitsbericht Wien 2004 .Bachinger E  , ed. 1994, 1-478. Wien, Stadt Wien :
Gesundheitsbericht für Wien ,
2005 .
40 
MA 5. Tabelle 6.2.2 Niedergelassene Ärztinnen .
2008 
http://www.magwien.gv.at/statistik/daten/gesundheitundsoziales.html
(accessed 1 Feb 2009).
41 
Leyland AH Groenewegen PP  
Multilevel modelling and public health
policy . Scand J Public Health 
2003 ;31 :267 –74 .15099032 
42 
National Preventive and Community Medicine Committee .
Guidelines for Preventive Activities in General Practice .
5 edn 
Victoria ,
2002 .
43 
Temml C Piribauer F Schmid D  
Replacing illusions with explicit targets after 30
years of a nationwide Periodic Health Examination in Austria .
Eur J Public Health 
2005 ;15 (Suppl
1 ):151 .
44 
Deville W van der Bij S Groenewegen PP  
Periodic health examination by Austrian general
practitioners: Developing Patient Information Forms and Health Summary
Sheets . 1 edn 
Utrecht :
NIVEL , 2004 .
45 
Paton-Simpson G McCormick IR Powell A  
Problem drinking profiles of patients presenting to
general practitioners: analysis of Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
(AUDIT) scores for the Auckland area . N Z Med J 
2000 ;113 :74 –7 .10855582 
46 
Piribauer F Schmid D Klima G  
Overcoming barriers to change a 30 years lasting
annual medical check up practice in Austria . Eur J Public
Health 
2005 ;15 (Suppl 1 ):180 
http://www.pico.at/references/pico/eupha2005/eupha2005Posters-Contents.html

47 
Meterko M Rubin HR  
Patient judgments of hospital quality. A
taxonomy . Med Care 
1990 ;28 :S10 –14 .2214896 
48 
Delbanco TL  
Quality of care through the patient's
eyes . BMJ 
1996 ;313 :832 –3 .8870558 
49 
Delbanco TL Daley J  
Through the patient's eyes: strategies toward
more successful contraception . Obstet Gynecol 
1996 ;88 (3
Suppl ):41S –7S .8752227 
50 
Blendon RJ Schoen C DesRoches C  
Common concerns amid diverse systems: health care
experiences in five countries . Health Aff
(Millwood) 
2003 ;22 :106 –21 .12757276 
51 
Hauptverband der
österr .Sozialversicherungsträger. Gesamtvertrag
Vorsorgeuntersuchung. 343a ASVG, BGBl. Nr. 189/1955-Erlass des HVB .
2005 .
52 
Hauptverband der
österr .Sozialversicherungsträger. Gesamtvertrag
Vorsorgeuntersuchung inkl. Zusatzprotokoll (Gesamtvertragliche Vereinbarung).
ASVG-Erlass des HVB . 2008 .
53 
Tropper K  
TeilnehmerInnenzufriedenheit mit der Servicequalität
bei der VU. (Satisfaction among PHE participants with their service) PDF
presentation. 8-6-2010 . Vienna :
VU-Träger-WS, IFGP; Institute of Health Promotion and Prevention, Austrian Social Insurance for the Railways and Mining Industry ,
2012 .
54 
Langmann H Tropper K Reichenpfader U Kvas A Kvas G  
Aspects of Shared Decision Making and Risk Communication
during the Periodic Health Examination in Austria. 8-6-2008 .
Engelsberg, Schweiz :
IFGP; Institute of Health Promotion and Prevention, Austrian Social Insurance for the Railways and Mining Industry ,
2012 .
55 
McDowell I Newell C  
Measuring Health. A Guide to Rating Scales and
Questionnaires . 1 edn 
New
York : Oxford University Press ,
1987 .
56 
Palmer RH Donabedian A Povar GJ  
Striving for Quality in Health Care .
Ann Arbor, Michigan , 1991 .
57 
Grol R  
Personal paper. Beliefs and evidence in changing
clinical practice . BMJ 
1997 ;315 :418 –21 .9277610 
58 
Deveugele M Derese A van dB- M  
Consultation length in general practice: cross
sectional study in six European countries . BMJ 
2002 ;325 :472 .12202329 
59 
Lussier MT Richard C  
Doctor-patient communication. Time to
talk . Can Fam Physician 
2006 ;52 :1401 –2 .17279196 
60 
Donabedian A  
Evaluating the Quality of Medical
Care . Milbank Q 
2005 ;83 ;691 –729 .
27-6-201216279964 
61 
Tai-Seale M McGuire TG Zhang W  
Time allocation in primary care office
visits . Health Serv Res 
2007 ;42 :1871 –94 .17850524 
62 
van Dijk CE van den Berg B Verheij RA  
Moral hazard and supplier-induced demand: empirical
evidence in general practice . Health Econ .
Publlished Online First: 20 February 2012 . 10.1002/hec.2801

63 
Scott A Connelly LB  
Financial incentives and the health
workforce . Aust Health Rev 
2011 ;35 :273 –7 .21871186 
64 
Piribauer F  
What to do in routine primary
care?—isn't it screening? 
2005 
http://www.pico.at/Hivini.htm (accessed 17 Aug 2005).
