
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2012-00120310.1136/bmjopen-2012-001203Health PolicyResearch15061703172217041684Can patients really make an informed choice? An evaluation of the
availability of online information about consultant surgeons in the United
Kingdom Can patients really make an informed
choice?Radha Sarkhell Saadi 1Caplan Nick 2St Clair Gibson Alan 2Shenouda Michael 3Konan Sujith 3Kader Deiary 11 Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma, Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, Gateshead, UK2 School of Life Sciences, Northumbria University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, UK3 Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma, Chelsea and
Westminster Hospital, London, UKCorrespondence to  Dr Nick Caplan;
nick.caplan@northumbria.ac.uk2012 23 8 2012 2 4 e00120320 3 2012 20 7 2012 Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to
use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions2012This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non-commercial License, which permits use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use
is non commercial and is otherwise in compliance with the license. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/ and http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/legalcodeObjectives
The National Health Service (NHS) ‘Choose and Book’ online scheme,
which allows patients to select the location and time of hospital appointments,
has now been extended to include the option for patients to select a specific
consultant to carry out any necessary treatment. The aim of this study was to
determine whether there is sufficient online information about consultants or
consultant-led teams for patients to make an informed choice regarding a specific
consultant.

Design
A web-based analysis of the availability of information.

Setting
North of England.

Participants
Two hundred websites of orthopaedic surgeons.

Main outcome measures
The websites were analysed using a bespoke template that took into account
recommendations of the 2010 UK Government white paper. Each website was scored in
relation to the availability of specific content relating to each surgeon.

Results
The majority of websites detailed authorship information (73.2%), level of
professional qualification (98.5%) and area of general (73.7%) and
specialist (93.3%) interest. However, approximately 50% of websites
provided no information in relation to update cycle, involvement in teaching or
research and patient satisfaction. Only five (2.6%) of the websites
presented death rates, and none indicated morbidity rates.

Conclusions
For patients to be able to make informed choices about their healthcare, surgeons
need to ensure that sufficient information is available online, according to the
identified limitations of the websites investigated in this study.

Choose and Bookinformed choiceinformationweb-based analysisonlineinternet
==== Body
Article summary
Article focus
The National Health Service ‘Choose and Book’ scheme has been in
operation for nearly a decade.

The success of the ‘Choose and Book’ policy depends on an
adequate amount of online information being available to patients on individual
consultants and consultant-led teams.

The aim of this study was to investigate the availability of online information
relating to consultants and consultant-led teams.

Key messages
The majority of the websites examined included general information, such as
each surgeon's professional qualification and areas of interest.

Only half of the websites included more detailed information about involvement
in teaching or research, or patient satisfaction.

Strengths and limitations of this study
This study was the first to examine the availability of online information
relating to individual consultants in the UK.

The study focused on the websites of orthopaedic surgeons in the north of
England, and future studies should extend this analysis to other fields of
medicine, and across a wider geographic area. Future comparisons should also be
made to information pertaining to private providers.

Introduction
The Department of Health's publication ‘Better Information, Better
Choices, Better Health: Putting Information at the Centre of Health’ stressed the
need for high-quality information about National Health Service (NHS) organisations to
be available for patients. This includes accurate, comprehensive and understandable
information, along with provision for ease of accessibility.1 The quality of information available is also central to the overall
quality of patient experience within the NHS,2
suggesting the importance of healthcare providers presenting all the necessary
information appropriately, including accurate and relevant data and sources.

The electronic ‘Choose and Book’ referral system has been in operation
since 2004.3 This service was originally intended
to give patients in England a choice of place, date and time of their first outpatient
appointment. The government recently extended this service to include choosing between
individual consultant-led teams.3 In order for
patients to make such a choice, it is essential that they have high-quality,
comprehensive and easily accessible information about relevant consultants available to
them, thus making their choice appropriately informed.

A number of online information resources have been developed, which allow patients to
compare various aspects of different hospitals.4
However, patients have reported that they would find information about individual
specialties or surgeons more useful in choosing their healthcare provider for elective
surgery.5 Such information, including surgical
outcomes, has been available since 2004 in cardiac surgery.6 In other fields of medicine, where such information is not so
readily available, patients will have to rely on the information contained within the
websites of individual surgeons, either private or locally managed.

The 2008 national Omnibus survey reported that 65% of British households have
internet access compared to only 46% in 2002.7 Currently, both healthcare providers and patients use internet-based
sources regularly.8
9 Indeed, healthcare professionals have been
increasingly faced with challenging questions from patients based on information found
online, despite concerns about the quality of web-based information when it comes to
health issues.8
9 Despite the increasing proportion of the
population that use the internet, the use of online information for healthcare choices
is still relatively low.10 Interventions are
clearly needed to improve the ability of patients to retrieve, interpret and use
information about healthcare professionals.11 To
ensure that patients can continue to make informed choices as their use of online
information increases, it is necessary that this information is available consistently
across all surgical fields, not just cardiac surgery. Indeed, this information has
generally been criticised in recent years for not being timely, and having inadequate
content.12

To the best of our knowledge, no studies have identified what information patients use
in selecting the consultant they are referred to. Lim and Eldin13 reported that older people were more likely to choose a hospital
if they think a consultant is performing the surgery, suggesting the involvement of a
surgeon could be ‘a proxy for expertise and quality of the clinical
care’.4 Boyce et al5 found patients expressed that a key motivation for choice of
hospital was knowing details of expertise (specialist doctors) within the hospital,
suggesting the importance of the skills, experience and expertise of the individual
consultants. It has been suggested that websites should also help develop trust within
the patient by being provided by organisations that would not directly benefit from
advertising a particular consultant.14

Despite the importance of information being available online to patients to allow them
to make informed choices in terms of consultant-led teams, no research to date has
examined whether such information is available in a consistent way across a range of
consultants. The aim of this study was to evaluate the availability of
consultant-specific online information to allow patients make appropriately informed
choices.

Method
The names of 200 consultant orthopaedic surgeons across the north of England were
selected to be included in the evaluation of the availability of online information.
These names were obtained from representatives of the Royal College of Surgeons. In
order to be included in the study, the consultants had to currently be:

employed within an NHS hospital in the north of England;

practising as a qualified consultant orthopaedic surgeon; and

registered with the Royal College of Surgeons.

An internet search was performed between May and August 2011 using the strategy derived
by Biermann et al.15 Each
orthopaedic consultant's full name was entered into the seven most commonly used
English language search engines (applicable at the time of our search): AOL, Google,
Lycos, MSN (Bing), Netscape, Askjeeves and Yahoo. The first 30 relevant resultant links
were used for initial evaluation, as it has been previously suggested that subsequent
results are usually duplicates.16 We assumed
searches performed by the general population would be superficial approach searches as
performed by novice, rather than expert, users.17–19

Websites that were found not to contain any relevant information were excluded. The
relevant websites on each search engine were evaluated for suitability to be rated. From
the websites returned by each search engine, the web page with the most information for
each consultant, as per the assessment tool, was subsequently used for the study.

An assessment tool was developed and used in assessing website content and quality
(table 1). This comprised
two main parts. Part A was designed to answer questions on the websites themselves,
including each website's accessibility, update cycle, availability of authorship
information, type of author, target audience, and whether the website was used for any
kind of promotion or advertisement. Part B was designed to analyse the availability of
website content, focusing on information about individual surgeons. For part B, a
template was produced with a view to gather as much information as possible about
consultants, to include such items as are regularly used by medical staff for
self-promotion (eg, Curriculum Vitaes) as well as those items that have been reported in
the literature as being important to patients. An initial review of a selection of
websites was used to identify typical items of information that are typically presented.
These included their highest level of qualification, areas of general interest and/or
any specialist interests, whether they were involved in research projects and/or whether
they had published research, morbidity rates, death rates and levels of patient
satisfaction, and whether a photograph of the surgeon was available on the website. The
websites were also examined to determine whether surgeons were involved in teaching or
had any management experience. Prior to the main website analysis, the assessment
template was reviewed by clinical staff outside of the research team, including a
consultant surgeon, a research physiotherapist, academic researchers, junior and senior
medical doctors and nurses (n=18), to ensure that all relevant items had been
included.

Table 1 Assessment tool/template used to assess (A) the descriptive content of each
website and (B) the quality of information contained in each website that is
relevant to the surgeon

Item	Response categories	
Part A: Website description	
 Accessibility	Easy to open, page not found, no longer exists	
 Last date of update of information	Yes/no; if yes, how old?	
 Availability of authorship information	Yes/no	
 Type of author	Professional organisation, profit organisation, educational institution,
instrument company, club, others	
 Target audience information	Yes/no	
 Type of target audience	General public, healthcare providers, patients, insurers, targeted
workers	
Part B: Adequacy of content	
 Picture of surgeon	Yes/no	
 Highest qualification	Primary medical degree, MRCS, FRCS, others	
 Area(s) of general interest*	Yes/no	
 Area(s) of specialist interest(s)*	Yes/no	
 Mortality rate	Yes/no	
 Morbidity rate†	Yes/no	
 Research	Yes/no	
 Research publications	Yes/no	
 Teaching	Yes/no	
 Management and leadership skills	Yes/no	
 Patient satisfaction	Excellent, good, average, poor, not given	
*The area(s) of interest include(s) descriptions such as, for example,
lower-limb surgery, upper-limb surgery, spinal surgery, etc. The specialist
interest(s) include(s) descriptions such as sports injuries, soft tissue
surgery, arthroscopic surgery, trauma surgery, etc.

†Morbidity: complications related to orthopaedic procedure(s).

All data were entered into a spread sheet in Microsoft Excel. For each item illustrated
in table 1, frequencies for
each scoring category (eg, yes/no) were determined. These frequencies were also
expressed as a percentage of either the total sample, or a relevant smaller sample. For
those websites that reported patient satisfaction, associations between satisfaction
score (1=poor, 2=average, 3=good, 4=excellent) and
involvement in research, publication of research and involvement in teaching were
determined using χ2 analyses. All χ2 analyses were
performed in SPSS (V. 19, IBM). The required level for statistical significance was set
at p<0.05.

Results
Part A: analysis of description of website
Websites for the vast majority of surgeons (194, 97.0%) were easily
accessible. Six (3.0%) were not accessible, either because relevant web pages
were not found within the first five results in each of the search engines, or
because pages such as social media, dictionary or a completely different
person's profile were found.

In terms of the availability of authorship information, 142 (73.2%) websites
had authorship information described on the website. The authors of the websites were
variable and included professional organisations (21, 14.8%), instrument
companies (39, 27.5%), educational institutions (10, 7.0%), for-profit
organisations (7, 4.9%) and others such as advertisement companies (65,
45.8%).

Eighty-six (44.3%) websites did not state the last date of website update
(table 2). Of those that
did, most were updated between 13–18 months ago (40, 20.6%). One
hundred and eighty-three (94.3%) websites specified the target audience (table 3), the vast majority of
which were aimed at patients and the general public.

Table 2 Frequency (%) of websites that indicated last date of update

	Frequency	
Not stated	86 (44.3%)	
0–6 months	17 (8.8%)	
7–12 months	28 (14.4%)	
13–18 months	40 (20.6%)	
19–24 months	11 (5.7%)	
2–3 years	16 (8.2%)	
Table 3 Frequency (%) of websites that targeted specific types of audiences.

	Frequency	
Not stated	11 (5.7%)	
General public	139 (71.6%)	
Healthcare providers	98 (50.5%)	
Patients	126 (64.9%)	
Insurers	21 (10.8%)	
Target workers	9 (4.6%)	
Each row is not mutually exclusive as some websites targeted more than one
type of audience.

Part B analysis of website content
The second part of this study looked at the quality of information available on
individual surgeons. A photograph of the surgeon was not available in 15
(7.7%) websites. Almost all the websites studied provided some detail of
qualifications of the surgeons (191, 98.5%), with the majority (185,
95.4%) stating their highest level of qualification as Fellow of the Royal
College of Surgeons (FRCS). Two (1.0%) included primary medical qualifications
as the highest academic recognition received, with four (2.1%) stating other
academic qualifications.

None of the websites presented morbidity rates (defined as any postoperative
complication directly related to the procedure such as infection, neurovascular
damage, dislocation, stiffness, etc.); however, death rates from a few procedures
were mentioned on five (2.6%) websites.

Less than half of the websites (85, 43.8%) detailed involvement by the surgeon
in teaching or give any indication that might reflect on teaching skills, such as
teaching qualification(s) of the surgeon. The mean patient satisfaction score for
those involved in teaching was 2.5±0.5, and 2.1±0.3 for those not
involved in teaching. χ2 analysis showed a significant association
between involvement in teaching and patient satisfaction
(χ2(2)=17.837, p<0.001), suggesting that surgeons
involved in teaching received higher patient satisfaction scores than those not
involved in teaching. Sixty-three websites (32.5%) provided details of any
management and/or leadership skills relating to the surgeon.

Table 4 Frequency (%) of websites indicating involvement in research and/or
publishing of research

	Yes	No	
Involvement in research	96 (49.5%)	98 (50.5%)	
Publications	92 (47.2%)	102 (52.6%)	
Information in relation to general areas of interest was available on 143
(73.7%) websites, and a higher proportion of websites included details of
specialist areas of interest (181, 93.3%). Approximately half of all websites
provided details of whether surgeons were involved in research, or evidence of
involvement in publication of research (table 4). The mean patient satisfaction score
for those involved in research was 2.2±0.4, and 2.6±0.5 for those not
involved in research. χ2 analysis showed a significant association
between involvement in research and patient satisfaction
(χ2(2)=15.097, p<0.01). The mean patient satisfaction
score for those who publish research was 2.2±0.4, and 2.5±0.5 for those
not publishing research. χ2 analysis showed a significant
association between involvement in research and patient satisfaction
(χ2(2)=10.118, p<0.01). These findings suggest
that those involved in research or publishing research receive lower patient
satisfaction scores than those not involved in research.

Table 5 Frequency (%) of websites that stated level of patient satisfaction

	Frequency	
Excellent	0 (0%)	
Good	30 (15.5%)	
Average	65 (33.5%)	
Poor	1 (0.5%)	
Not given	98 (50.5%)	
Patient satisfaction was categorised as excellent, good, average, poor or not given.
Half of the websites gave no information on patient satisfaction (98, 50.1%).
Thirty (15.5%) websites provided good ratings for patient satisfaction, and 65
(33.5%) websites showed average ratings (table 5).

Table 6 Frequency (%) of websites that stated level of patient satisfaction

	Frequency	
Excellent	0 (0%)	
Good	30 (15.5%)	
Average	65 (33.5%)	
Poor	1 (0.5%)	
Not given	98 (50.5%)	
Discussion
Principal findings
The majority of websites studied were accessible; however, there are questions
regarding the authorship and availability of the last date of update. This is
particularly important as studies have found that patients prefer websites run by
recognisable healthcare organisations or professional groups.20
21 Several essential criteria have been
described for health websites, including disclosure of site owner, authors and update
cycle.22 Items such as documenting the
target audience have been regarded as an important aspect of successful online
resources and the website content should be tailored in a way such that the target
audience should always be emphasised.23 Nearly
half of the websites analysed targeted other sectors, not patients. This could create
confusion and reduce the specificity of websites to patient needs.

With regard to individual surgeons, having a photograph of the surgeon on the website
is important to allow patients to recognise whom they will be treated by. The
presence of profile pictures in websites has previously been linked to more accurate
estimation of personality traits.24
25 Hassin and Trope also found that
personality could be judged purely on the basis of a facial photograph.26 Physical features such as the size of a
person's eyes and the shape of their mouth can also influence perceptions of
personality.27 Nearly all websites provided
some information about the qualifications of the surgeon, with the majority stating
Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons as the highest level attained. Details of
a surgeon's qualifications might influence patient confidence and trust in
choosing an individual surgeon. Good qualities such as work ethic, reliability,
specific knowledge and skills have been linked to having qualifications.28

Only a small number of websites reported death rates and none reported morbidity
rates. Magee et al29 found
that the majority of patients do not find this information useful in making choices
about their healthcare as it was not seen as linking with clinical quality or was
suggested by the patients as being ‘frightening’. Conversely, Burge
et al30
31 report that patients do consider death
rates to be important for choice. Despite this finding, some independent websites
report death rates for individual hospitals.32
If such figures are to be published in the future for individual surgeons or
consultant-led teams, it could be useful for patients to also know the number of
surgical procedures performed by each consultant so that these rates can be presented
as a percentage of each consultant's total number of operations. Depending on
a consultant's area of specialism, it may be that they are referred specific
cases which are of higher risk. By presenting non-risk-adjusted death rates could
lead to some surgeons appearing to patients, through misinterpretation, as being
riskier. Reported death rates should be fully risk-adjusted to ensure that
appropriate comparisons can be made between different surgeons, and to avoid
higher-risk patients being declined surgery in an attempt to maintain low death
rates.6

Only about half of the websites analysed gave any indication of involvement of the
surgeon in teaching related activities. This attribute is a necessity based on
General Medical Council guidelines and indicates good medical practice.33 Improved outcomes following surgery have been
linked to preoperative patient education,34
suggesting the importance of developing teaching skills. Conversely, involvement in
teaching might suggest that surgical procedures are performed by more junior clinical
staff under consultant supervision. Older patients have reported as being more likely
to choose where they are referred based on whether a consultant will perform the
actual surgical procedure,13 and thus
involvement in teaching by the consultant might modify patient choice to avoid a
teaching institution. Our findings suggest that those surgeons who are involved in
teaching received higher patient satisfaction scores. This finding must be
interpreted with caution, however, as the statistical analysis could only be
performed on those websites which reported patient satisfaction, and it is not known
whether all surgeons who are involved in teaching actually reported this on their
websites. Clearly, this association should be examined in more detail in future
studies.

Only about half of the websites investigated provided details of engagement by the
surgeon in research or the publication of peer-reviewed articles. The field of
medicine is changing continuously and with the development of new techniques and
procedures, research has become fundamental to surgical practice. Research is vital
in providing the new knowledge needed to improve health outcomes and reduce
inequalities.3 Parboosingh35 suggested that there is strong public demand
for doctors to keep up-to-date, stressing the importance of continuing professional
development and even a need for periodic reassessment. Although many of these
consultants are likely to be involved in research activities, it is clear that this
is not adequately portrayed to patients. It is interesting to note that our data
suggest those surgeons involved in research or publishing research received slightly
lower patient satisfaction scores than those not reporting involvement in research.
As for the association between teaching and patient satisfaction, these associations
should be read with caution due to the uncertainty about whether every surgeon
involved in research or publishing actually reported it on their web page.

Almost half of the websites analysed did not publish any information on patient
satisfaction. The reputation of healthcare organisations for commitment to quality
patient care still stands as the main criteria for patients in choosing healthcare
providers.36
37 Measuring and incorporating patient
satisfaction to the culture of healthcare organisations should be a strategic goal
for all healthcare providers.36 Lee38 reported that 90% of hospitals
currently have some form of patient satisfaction survey and most of the results are
published in a national or regional database. If a trust fails to maintain good
patient satisfaction, it will risk rendering poor-quality care and loss of service
consumers.39 Contrary to this, Fenton
et al40 identified that
patients who were more satisfied had a 26% increased risk of mortality. They
cautioned against the use of patient satisfaction without further investigation.

Strengths and limitations of study
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to conduct a comprehensive
analysis of the availability of web-based information relating to individual
consultant surgeons in any field of medicine. The study looked at the profiles for
consultant orthopaedic surgeons only, and did not consider other surgical fields.

The assessment tool used in this study to rate each website was developed in line
with recommendations from the Government's white paper,3 and reviewed by a group of clinicians and academics. This tool
could be developed further for future studies through the involvement of patient
groups to determine which factors they consider to be important in accessing the
information about consultants in order to exercise choice.

Policy implications and future research
Our study has demonstrated a lack of available public information offered by
healthcare providers’ websites on consultant surgeons. Such information is
essential for patients to be able to make an informed choice.41 While information on waiting times and technical issues are
easy to obtain, other performance indicators such as quality of care and safety
issues are more difficult to obtain and interpret.42 Our findings are consistent with evidence from others, suggesting that
patients are insufficiently informed to be able to exercise choice effectively.43

Future research should examine differences in the availability of online information
in other fields of medicine and identify mechanisms that can be introduced to improve
consistency in information provision across the healthcare sector to help improve the
patient experience. Further research is also needed to evaluate not just the
availability of online information, but also the quality, accuracy and reliability of
this information, and consistency of information reporting across different trusts.
Comparisons should also be made between the information available on both public and
private providers.

Although there are a variety of different types of information available to patients
to help them make healthcare choices, it is not clear as to how each of these items
link to patient satisfaction and patient outcomes, and our analyses of the
associations between patient satisfaction and involvement in teaching, research or
publishing are limited by lack of consistency in reporting each item of information.
Further research is needed to determine how different items of information link to
patient satisfaction. For valid and generalisable results to be obtained, the
mechanisms of obtaining patient satisfaction in different trusts will need to be
standardised.

This study was an evaluation of the information availability in traditional web
pages. In recent years, use of social media has seen a rapid expansion with the
majority of people who surf the internet using social media (eg, blogs, social
networks, etc).44 Social media clearly,
therefore, has a potential role to play in shaping how future healthcare choices are
made.45 Future research should identify how
patients use social media in making choices relating to their healthcare.

Conclusions
Despite the government policy encouraging patients to make more choices in relation to
healthcare, our findings demonstrate that there is a paucity of data available to
patients through online media to allow them to make informed choices about which
consultant they wish to be referred to. This finding highlights the need for
standardisation across websites that provide information about consultants to patients,
or indeed, the need for a centralised online tool that can allow patients to access all
the required information about available consultants. The most notable areas that
websites should look to improve are in the reporting of website update cycle,
involvement in teaching, research and the publication of research, and patient
satisfaction, all of which were only reported by about half of all websites.

We would like to acknowledge Dr Katherine Sanderson for her support during the
study.

Contributors: SR, NC, DK, ASCG—contributed to the initial conception of the study, the
development of the protocol and the design of the design of the website assessment
template; SR—obtained ethical approval for the study, performed the website
analyses and completed all data entry; NC—completely analysed the data; SR,
NC, DK, ASCG, MS, SK—contributed to the interpretation of the data;
SR—wrote the first draft of the manuscript; NC, DK, ASCG, MS,
SK—critically reviewed the draft manuscript; NC—contributed additional
text in subsequent revisions of the manuscript; SR, NC, DK, ASCG, MS,
SK—approved the final version of the manuscript. NC and DK—are
guarantors for the study.

Funding: This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

Competing interests: All authors have completed the Unified Competing Interest form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from the
corresponding author) and declare that (1) no authors received funding from any
company for the submitted work; (2) no authors have any relationships with companies
that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous 3 years; (3)
their spouses, partners or children have no financial relationships that may be
relevant to the submitted work; and (4) no authors have any non-financial interests
that may be relevant to the submitted work.

Ethics approval: Ethical approval was obtained from the University of Teesside ethical committee.
Consultant names were used only to identify websites and gather information with
regard to their content. The names were not included in the template or in any other
part of the study. There was no mention of the names of the websites studied, and the
data were collected through a preprepared questionnaire examining the content of the
websites without the use of any quotations from the websites themselves. All
information evaluated was in the public domain. We therefore were not required to
seek consent specifically from the individual consultants or websites.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Data sharing statement: The Corresponding Author has the right to grant on behalf of all authors and does
grant on behalf of all authors, a worldwide licence to the Publishers and its
licensees in perpetuity, in all forms, formats and media (whether known now or
created in the future), to (i) publish, reproduce, distribute, display and store the
Contribution, (ii) translate the Contribution into other languages, create
adaptations, reprints, include within collections and create summaries, extracts
and/or abstracts of the Contribution, (iii) create any other derivative work(s) based
on the Contribution, (iv) exploit all subsidiary rights in the Contribution, (v) the
inclusion of electronic links from the Contribution to third-party material
where-ever it may be located; and (vi) licence any third party to do any or all of
the above.
==== Refs
References
1 Department of Health .
Choose and book: patient's choice of hospital and booked
appointment – policy framework for choice and booking at the point of
referral , 2004 
http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/documents/digitalasset/dh_4088352.pdf 
(accessed 13 Mar 2012 ).
2 Coulter A Entwistle V Gilbert D  
Sharing decisions with patients: is the information
good enough? 
BMJ 
1999 ;318 :318 .9924064 
3 Department of Health .
Equity and excellence: liberating the NHS ,
2010 
http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/@ps/documents/digitalasset/dh_117794.pdf 
(accessed 13 Mar 2012 ).
4 Dixon A Robertson R Bal R  
The experience of implementing choice at point of
referral: a comparison of the Netherlands and England .
Health Econ Policy Law 
2010 ;5 :295 –317 .20462469 
5 Boyce T Dixon A Fasolo B  
Choosing a high quality hospital: the role of nudges,
scorecard design and information . The Kings
Fund : London ,
2010 .
6 Bridgewater B Keogh B  
Surgical ‘league
tables ’. Heart 
2008 ;94 :936 –42 .18552229 
7 Office for National Statistics .
Internet access – households and
individuals , 2008 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/rdit2/internet-access–-households-and-individuals/2008/index.html 
(accessed 13 Mar 2012 ).
8 Crocco AG Villasis-Keever M Jadad AR  
Analysis of cases of harm associated with use of
health information on the internet . JAMA 
2002 ;287 :2869 –71 .12038937 
9 Helft PR Hlubocky F Daugherty CK  
American oncologists’ views of internet use by
cancer patients: a mail survey of American Society of Clinical Oncology
members . J Clin Oncol 
2003 ;21 :942 –7 .12610198 
10 Department of Health .
Report on the National Patient Choice
Survey . England ;
2010 
Feb , http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/documents/digitalasset/dh_117096.pdf 
(accessed 5 June 2012 ).
11 Passarani I  
What do patients want of performance
information? 
BMJ 
2010 ;341 :c6955 .21147733 
12 Edgman-Levitan S Cleary PD  
What information do consumers want and
need? 
Health Aff 
1996 ;15 :42 –56 .
13 Lim JNW Edlin R  
Preferences of older patients and choice of treatment
location in the UK: a binary choice experiment . Health
Pol 
2009 ;91 :252 –7 .
14 Marshall M McLoughlin V  
How do patients use information on
providers? 
BMJ 
2010 ;341 :1255 –7 .
15 Biermann JS Golladay GJ Greenfield ML  
Evaluation of cancer information on the
Internet . Cancer 
1999 ;86 :381 –90 .10430244 
16 Hargrave DR Hargrave UA Bouffet E  
Quality of health information on the Internet in
pediatric neuro-oncology . Neuro Oncol 
2006 ;8 :175 –82 .16533758 
17 Tsai MJ Tsai C  
Information searching strategies in web-based science
learning: the role of Internet self-efficacy . Innov Ed
Teach Int 
2003 ;40 :43 –50 .
18 Biggs J  
Approaches to learning: nature and measurement
of . In: Husen T Postlethwaite TN  , eds. The international encyclopedia of education .
2nd edn. 
Vol. 1. 
Oxford : Pergamon ,
1994 :319 –22 .
19 Marton F  
Beyond individual differences .
Educ Psychol 
1983 ;3 :289 –303 .
20 Eysenbach G Köhler C  
How do consumers search for and appraise health
information on the world wide web? Qualitative study using focus groups, usability
tests, and in-depth interviews . BMJ 
2002 ;324 :573 –7 .11884321 
21 Schwartz KL Roe T Northrup J  
Family medicine patients’ use of the internet
for health information . J Am Board Fam Med 
2007 ;19 :39 –45 .16492004 
22 Boyer C Selby M Scherrer JR  
The health on the net code of conduct for medical and
health websites . Comp Biol Med 
1998 ;28 :603 –10 .
23 MacCulloch R Nyhof-Young J Nicholas D  
Development of an online information and support
resource for adolescent idiopathic scoliosis patients considering surgery:
perspectives of health care providers . Scoliosis 
2010 ;13 :101 –4 .
24 Gosling SD Gaddis D Vazire S  
Personality impressions based on Facebook profiles.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media ; 26–28 
March 2007 , Boulder, Colorado, USA. 
http://www.icwsm.org/papers/3–Gosling-Gaddis-Vazire.pdf 
(accessed 14 Mar 2012 ).
25 Zebrowitz LA Collins MA  
Accurate social perception at zero acquaintance: the
affordances of a Gibsonian approach . Pers Soc Psychol
Rev 
1997 ;1 :204 –22 .15659350 
26 Hassin R Trope Y  
Facing faces: studies on the cognitive aspects of
physiognomy . J Pers Soc Psychol 
2000 ;78 :837 –52 .10821193 
27 Kahnman D  
A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping bounded
rationality .
Am Psychol 
2003 ;58 :697 –720 .14584987 
28 Keating J Nicholas T Polesel J  
Qualifications use for recruitment in the Australian labour
market . Adelaide :
National Centre for Vocational Education Research ,
2005 .
29 Magee H Davis LJ Coulter A  
Public views on healthcare performance indicators and
patient choice . J Royal Soc Med 
2003 ;96 :338 –42 .
30 Burge P Devlin N Appleby J  
London patient choice project evaluation .
RAND : London ,
2005 .
31 Burge P Devlin N Appleby J  
Understanding patient choices at the point of
referral . RAND :
London , 2006 .
32 Jacobson B Mindell J McKee M  
Hospital mortality league tables .
BMJ 
2003 ;326 :777 .12689953 
33 General Medical Council .
Good medical practice , 2009 
http://www.gmc-uk.org/guidance/good_medical_practice.asp 
(accessed 13 Mar 2012 ).
34 Jones S Alnaib M Kokkinakis M  
Pre-operative patient education reduces length of
stay after knee joint arthroplasty . Ann R Coll Surg
Engl 
2011 ;93 :71 –5 .21418755 
35 Parboosingh J  
Revalidation for doctors should reflect
doctors’ performance and continuing professional
development . BMJ 
1998 ;317 :1094 –5 .9784438 
36 Stavins CL  
Developing employee participation in the patient
satisfaction process . J Healthc Manag 
2004 ;49 :135 –9 .15074121 
37 Luft HS Garnick DW Mark DH  
Does quality influence choice of
hospital? 
JAMA 
1990 ;263 :2899 –906 .2110985 
38 Lee F  
If Disney ran your hospital: 9 1/2 things you would do
differently . Bozeman MT :
Second River Healthcare Press ,
2004 .
39 Press I  
Patient satisfaction: understanding and managing the
experience of care . 2nd edn. 
Chicago :
Health Administration Press ,
2006 .
40 Fenton JJ Jerant AF Bertakis KD  
The cost of satisfaction: a national study of patient
satisfaction, health care utilization, expenditures, and
mortality . Arch Intern Med 
2012 ;172:405–11 .
41 Appleby J Harrison A Devlin N  
What is the real cost of more patient choice? 
Kings Fund : London ,
2003 .
42 Coulter A Ellins J  
Effectiveness of strategies for informing, educating,
and involving patients . BMJ 
2007 ;335 :24 –7 .17615222 
43 Entwistle VA Sheldon TA Sowden A  
Evidence-informed patient choice .
Int J Tech Assess Health Care 
1998 ;14 :212 –25 .
44 Kaplan AM Haenlein M  
Users of the world, unite! The challenges and
opportunities of social media . Bus Horiz 
2010 ;53 :59 –68 .
45 Hawn C  
Take two aspirin and tweet me in the morning: how
Twitter, Facebook, and other social media are reshaping health
care . Health Aff 
2009 ;28 :361 –8 .
