
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Publishing Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2017-01998110.1136/bmjopen-2017-019981Diabetes and EndocrinologyProtocol15061843Study protocol for the SMART2D adaptive implementation trial: a cluster
randomised trial comparing facility-only care with integrated facility and community
care to improve type 2 diabetes outcomes in Uganda, South Africa and
Sweden Guwatudde David 1Absetz Pilvikki 2Delobelle Peter 34http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2888-9932Östenson Claes-Göran 5Olmen Van Josefien 6Alvesson Helle Molsted 7Mayega Roy William 1Ekirapa Kiracho Elizabeth 8Kiguli Juliet 9Sundberg Carl Johan 1011Sanders David 4Tomson Göran 712Puoane Thandi 4Peterson Stefan 713Daivadanam Meena 714for the SMART2D ConsortiumSMART2D groupKasujja Francis Xavier Kirunda Barbara Muyingo Anthony Naggayi Gloria Kusolo Ronald Ikona Edward Hassen Mariam Spires Mark Ndayi Kululwa Manuga Tshilidzi Tsolekile Lungiswa Aweko Juliet Al-Murani Furat Saulnier Dell Timm Linda Berggreen-Clausen Aravinda Sematimba Douglas Alvarez Jhon Rangel  
1 
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
School of Public Health, Makerere University College of
Health Sciences, Kampala,
Uganda

2 
Collaborative Care Systems Finland, Helsinki, Finland

3 
Chronic Disease Initiative for
Africa, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa

4 
School of Public Health,
University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa

5 
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Diabetes and Endocrine Unit, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden

6 
Department of Public Health,
Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium

7 
Department of Public Health
Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

8 
Department of Health Policy, Planning and
Management, School of Public Health, Makerere University
College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda

9 
Department of Community Health and Behavioral
Sciences, Makerere University School of Public
Health, Kampala,
Uganda

10 
Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden

11 
Department of Learning, Informatics, Management
and Ethics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden

12 
Swedish Institute for Global Health Transformation, SIGHT, Royal Swedish
Academy of Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden

13 
Department of Women’s and
Children’s Health, The International Maternal and
Child Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

14 
Department of Food, Nutrition and
Dietetics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Correspondence to  Dr David Guwatudde;
dguwatudde@musph.ac.ug2018 17 3 2018 8 3 e01998111 10 2017 12 1 2018 14 2 2018 © Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise
stated in the text of the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is
permitted unless otherwise expressly granted.2018This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative
Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their
derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited
and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/Introduction
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasingly contributing to the global burden of
disease. Health systems in most parts of the world are struggling to diagnose and
manage T2D, especially in low-income and middle-income countries, and among
disadvantaged populations in high-income countries. The aim of this study is to
determine the added benefit of community interventions onto health facility
interventions, towards glycaemic control among persons with diabetes, and towards
reduction in plasma glucose among persons with prediabetes.

Methods and analysis
An adaptive implementation cluster randomised trial is being implemented in two
rural districts in Uganda with three clusters per study arm, in an urban township
in South Africa with one cluster per study arm, and in socially disadvantaged
suburbs in Stockholm, Sweden with one cluster per study arm. Clusters are
communities within the catchment areas of participating primary healthcare
facilities. There are two study arms comprising a facility plus community
interventions arm and a facility-only interventions arm. Uganda has a third arm
comprising usual care. Intervention strategies focus on organisation of care,
linkage between health facility and the community, and strengthening patient role
in self-management, community mobilisation and a supportive environment. Among T2D
participants, the primary outcome is controlled plasma glucose; whereas among
prediabetes participants the primary outcome is reduction in plasma glucose.

Ethics and dissemination
The study has received approval in Uganda from the Higher Degrees, Research and
Ethics Committee of Makerere University School of Public Health and from the
Uganda National Council for Science and Technology; in South Africa from the
Biomedical Science Research Ethics Committee of the University of the Western
Cape; and in Sweden from the Regional Ethical Board in Stockholm. Findings will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and scientific meetings.

Trial registration number
ISRCTN11913581;
Pre-results.

type 2 diabetespre-diabetesadaptive implementation trialcluster samplingtheory of changechronic care modelSweden International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida)
capacity-building grant to Makerere University 2015-2010European Commission’s Horizon2020 Health Coordination
Activities, under call “HCO-05-2014: Global Alliance for Chronic
Diseases: prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetesspecial-featureunlocked
==== Body
Strengths and limitations of this study
The Self-Management and Reciprocal learning for the prevention and management of
Type 2 Diabetes adaptive implementation trial will evaluate the added benefit of
community intervention strategies on type 2 diabetes outcomes, beyond optimised
health facility strategies in Uganda, South Africa and Sweden, exemplifying a
low-income, middle-income and high-income setting (disadvantaged population),
respectively, all facing challenges in tackling the type 2 diabetes burden.

The intervention we are implementing and evaluating is built on evidence-based
strategies that have been contextualised based on formative research and
collaboration with local and subnational stakeholders, to ensure acceptability and
feasibility for scale up.

The study design will allow comparison and reciprocal learning on what works and
what does not across settings.

The adaptive trial design and the monitoring of the implementation process allow
for the intervention to be adapted to the contextual needs and to draw lessons for
the scale-up implementation in other contexts.

As the intervention will be implemented as a package of intervention elements, we
will be unable to evaluate the effectiveness of specific intervention
elements.

Introduction
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) and prediabetes are increasingly contributing to the global burden
of disease.1 The global burden of diabetes in
adults >18 years old is projected to increase from an estimated 415 million
(prevalence of 8.8%) in 2015 to 642 million (prevalence of 10.4%) by 2040. The
most dramatic change is expected to come from the projected increase in the number
individuals with T2D in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) from 14.2 million in 2015 to
34.2 million, an increase of more than 100%.2 Of all individuals with T2D worldwide, 80% live in low-income and
middle-income countries (LMICs). There are also major differences in the prevalence and
access to care between immigrants and the general population, especially in high-income
countries (HICs), due to difficulties in integrating migrant population into the
receiving healthcare system.3 For example, in
Canada, immigrants from South Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and SSA have a
2–3 times greater risk of developing diabetes than their counterparts in
the general population.4


Further, globally the proportion of undiagnosed diabetes is high, standing at 46.5%. In
high-income regions like Europe, of all persons with T2D, 39.3% are undiagnosed.2 Low-income countries in Africa have the highest
prevalence of undiagnosed diabetes, estimated at 66.7%.2 Health systems in most parts of the world are struggling to diagnose and
manage T2D effectively, especially in LMIC, and among disadvantaged populations in
high-income countries (d-HIC).

The economic burden of diabetes is very high too. Health spending due to diabetes in
2015 was estimated at US$5374 per person with diabetes in HICs, compared with US$ 401 in
LMIC. Compared with HICs, people living in LMIC pay a larger out-of-pocket share of
health expenditure because they have limited access to health insurance and
publicly available medical services.2


It is clear that T2D is a global burden affecting HICs and LMICs in different ways.
Whereas evidence for prevention and management is solid from efficacy and implementation
trials,5 6 efforts to contextualise such
evidence to LMIC or d-HIC are limited. There is a need to identify context relevant
interventions that can potentially work across different income settings, aimed at
improving the prevention and management of T2D. Further, effective management of T2D and
similar chronic conditions require a multidisciplinary approach beyond the biomedical. A
multidisciplinary approach focusing on the individual, his or her family, community and
environment and their interlinkages and interdependencies is more relevant,7 with added emphasis on self-management
support.8 The content of biomedical care and
self-management support for people with diabetes has been well-elaborated, including
guidelines for health systems operating in resource limited settings.9 Yet, the implementation of contextualised
strategies taking into account this multidisciplinary approach has been limited.

The project titled ‘A people-centred approach through Self-Management and
Reciprocal learning for the prevention and management of Type-2-Diabetes
(SMART2D)’ aims at contributing to the implementation gap highlighted above.
Given the global nature of the diabetes problem, the project is being implemented in
three settings comprising three population groups namely, a rural population in a LIC
(Uganda); an urban population in a MIC (South Africa); and an urban, socially
disadvantaged and mainly immigrant population in a HIC (Sweden). The aim of the SMART2D
trial is to contextualise integrated care comprising health facility plus community
intervention strategies for prevention and management of T2D, informed by an adapted
theory of change (ToC) and formative research; and to evaluate the feasibility and the
incremental cost of implementing the interventions in an adaptive implementation trial.
This paper describes the protocol of the implementation trial.

Methods and analysis
Study design
The study was designed as an adaptive implementation trial using cluster sampling,
with two study arms; an integrated care arm comprising optimal health facility plus
community intervention strategies versus facility only intervention strategies. A
cluster is the community within the catchment area of the participating health
facility. Prior to initiation of the trial, the clusters at each of the country sites
were assigned to the study arms of the trial. In Sweden and South Africa, where
primary care processes are already adequately established based on the respective
national guidelines for diabetes management, we are testing the added benefit of
integrated care, against facility only care. In Uganda where primary care processes
for T2D are not yet part of standard of care, the trial has three arms: integrated
care and facility only care as two intervention arms, and usual care (with no
intervention) as the control arm.

Context, targeted sites and populations
The trial is being conducted in three settings, reflecting three contexts in which
health systems are still struggling to diagnose and manage T2D effectively. In
Uganda, a low-income country, the trial is being conducted at nine primary healthcare
facilities (health centre level III and level IV), located in the two rural districts
of Iganga and Mayuge in the eastern part of the country. These are the primary
healthcare facilities at which persons with diabetes first interface with the
healthcare system for diabetes care. Health centre level III serves approximately
20 000 people at subcounty level, with health services including outpatient
services, normal deliveries, limited in-patient care and tuberculosis (TB)
treatment. It is headed by a clinical officer and has a laboratory that conducts
basic tests (malaria, urine, blood sugar and TB). Health centre level IV is a
mini-hospital serving approximately 100 000 people at county level. It is
headed by a medical doctor and has nursing officers with diverse skills.

In South Africa, the trial is being conducted at two community health centres (CHCs)
in the Khayelitsha township in Cape Town in the Western Cape. Both CHCs provide
primary healthcare, including chronic care services, and fall under the provincial
authority. The two facilities were purposively selected based on their
demographic similarity, catchment areas and exclusion from other trials.

In Sweden, the trial is being conducted in two urban districts within Stockholm
municipality representing d-HIC. These are socially disadvantaged suburbs and
comprise predominantly immigrant communities (approximately 56%) and together
have a total population of about 55 000. Each of the districts is catered to
by a state-run primary healthcare centre, participating in the study. Since the
suburbs chosen varied in terms of the composition of immigrant groups and the overall
socioeconomic status; and the participating health centres varied in terms of staff
capacity and services; the catchment area of each of the participating health centres
was divided into zones using postal codes. These zones were randomly allocated to
primary versus integrated care, while being careful to prevent contamination and
spillover.

Intervention
We developed a ToC to guide phased development of the interventions. To optimise
contextualisation and cross-context lessons, intervention development included four
phases: (1) literature review on diabetes and self-management to inform the
development of a generic ToC, (2) situation analysis/needs assessment with a
generic and contextualised topic guide for data collection, (3) synthesis of
situation analysis in each country to identify both local contextualised and common
needs across contexts and (4) finalisation and agreement on a common intervention
framework with generic strategies and key elements, with contextualised health
facility and community intervention strategies as the output. Online supplementary file s1
summarises the ToC process used.

10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019981.supp1Supplementary material 1 



 The primary care intervention comprise two key health facility strategies: (1)
organisation of care and (2) strengthening of the patient role in self-management,
each with a number of intervention elements. Intervention elements are only
implemented if they are currently lacking or in need of strengthening. For example,
Uganda lacks most of the elements for both strategies, while Sweden and South Africa
mainly need strengthening of the patient role. Key facility intervention elements
under each strategy were developed and contextualised for implementation across the
settings, as described in table 1.

Table 1 Facility strategies and elements, and their contextualisation across
settings

Facility strategies	Key elements	South Africa	Sweden	Uganda	
1. Organisation of care process	a. Available and functioning minimal
infrastructure adequate	Pre-existing but standardised for trial:Glucometers and strips

Automatic BP machines

Weighing scales

Stadiometers

Measuring tapes

	Pre-existing but standardised for trial:Glucometers and strips

Automatic BP machines

Weighing scales

Stadiometers

Measuring tapes

	By SMART2D:Glucometers and strips

HbA1c analyser and test kits

Automatic BP machines

Weighing scales

Stadiometers

Measuring tapes

Medicines to cover stockout

	
b. Guidelines and task identification	Pre-existing: 

PACK guidelines for health workers at primary care level

By SMART2D:Patient flow chart

	Pre-existing: 

Clinical guidelines for T2DM, overweight and obesity and healthy
lifestyle

By SMART2D:Screening algorithm

Patient flow chart

	By SMART2D:Clinical guideline including a task shifting guideline

Clinical algorithm posters with patient flow chart

	
d. Information system to follow-up
patients	Pre-existing:System for patient register with patient appointment cards

	Pre-existing:Digital registration

System to trace/follow-up defaulters via mail and telephone (max
three calls after one visit missed)

	By SMART2D:Manual patient register filled in daily by HCW, with appointment
diary, appointment cards and contact information forms

Patient tracking in two steps: (1) by phone and (2) via
care companion (after each missed visit)

	
2. Strengthen patient role in
self-management	a. Brief motivational, behavioural coaching
for behaviour change	Pre-existing: 

Individual lifestyle counselling by HCW and health education
delivered in groups by health promoters

By SMART2D:Skill-enhancement/standardisation of delivery of
motivational, behavioural coaching

	Pre-existing: 

Individual lifestyle counselling by HCW

By SMART2D:Skill-enhancement/standardisation of delivery of
motivational, behavioural coaching

	By SMART2D:Health education and motivational, behavioural coaching in
groups by HCW

	
b. Overview of care process and patient
role	By SMART2D:Patient flowchart

Brief patient info/health education material

	By SMART2D:Patient flow chart

Patient brochure and care companion role at visit 2 (or
enrolment) by SMART2d

	By SMART2D:Brief patient info/health education material at
enrolment

	
c. Access to measuring devices	No self-monitoring devices at facility

By SMART2D:Self-monitoring instructions in health education material

	By SMART2D:Pedometers at visit 2

Self-monitoring instructions in health education material

	No self-monitoring, devices provided at
facility 
By SMART2D:Self-monitoring instructions in health education material

	
BP, blood pressure; HbA1c, haemoglobin A1c; HCW, healthcare worker; PACK,
practical approach to care kit; SMART2D, self-management and reciprocal
learning for the prevention and management of type 2 diabetes; T2DM,
type 2 diabetes mellitus.

The integrated care interventions include the above described health facility
strategies and three key community strategies, that is: (1) community mobilisation,
(2) strengthen the supportive environment and (3) involving a community extension
(ie, linkage between facility and community). Similarly, community intervention
elements were developed and contextualised for implementation across the settings, as
described in table 2.

Table 2 Community strategies and elements, and their contextualisation across
settings

Community strategies	Key elements	South Africa	Sweden	Uganda	
1. Community mobilisation	a. Messages on lifestyle and diabetes for
community members/key stakeholders	Pre-existing:Diabetes SA leaflets distributed by SMART2D at community
awareness raising event(s)

	By SMART2D:Brochures on timely care seeking; risk monitoring and screening;
healthy lifestyle distributed at different places and events in
community

	By SMART2D:Oral information at household visits for screening purpose

	
2. Strengthen support from the
environment	a. Peer group programme	By SMART2D:Peer group facilitator topic guide and manual for nine sessions
of mixed groups with people with prediabetes and diabetes

	By SMART2D:Peer group facilitator topic guide and manual for nine sessions
of mixed groups with people with prediabetes and diabetes

	By SMART2D:Peer group facilitator topic guide and manual for nine sessions
of mixed groups with people with prediabetes and diabetes

	
b. CC/HLB involvement	CHWs will take on the role of CC/HLB

Pre-existing: 

PACK CHW guidelines

By SMART2D:Skill enhancement of motivational, behavioural coaching
to

	CC is a family member, relative,
friend and neighbour 
By SMART2D:Brochure describing CC role and tasks

Identification of CC at facility visit 2

Invitation to peer groups and activities

	CC is a family member, relative,
friend and neighbour 
By SMART2D:CC guideline for HCW to instruct patient on CC selection and
tasks

Identification at month 1(CC)/3 (HLB)

Invitation to health facility visits and peer group
meetings

	
c. Promoting supportive physical
environment	By SMART2D:Community walks±PhotoVoice as part of peer group
programme

	By SMART2D:Physical activity and healthy food-related activities as part of
peer group activities linking with community resources through
municipalities/NGOs

Community walks as part of peer-group activities

	By SMART2D:Community walks as an optional activity for peer group

	
3. Community extension	a. Community link team	By SMART2D:Support to CHWs to act as liaison between facility and
community

	Pre-existing: 

Citizen offices with prevention coordinators and citizen hosts
helping citizens and linking them with different public, private
and non-governmental organisations and services

By SMART2D:Utilisation of the existing networks of citizens offices and
bringing T2DM on their agenda

Mobilisation for recruitment through the network

Linkage of the network with peer groups

	By SMART2D:Formal introduction meeting between peer leader and facility
nurses

Peer leaders to remind peer group participants to go to visits,
contact with health facility if loss to follow-up/problems

HCW delivering health education remind participants to attend
peer group meetings

	
CC, care companion; CHW, community health worker; HbA1c, haemoglobin A1c;
HCW, healthcare worker; HLB, healthy lifestyle buddy; NGOs, non-government
organisations; PACK, practical approach to care kit; SMART2D,
self-management and reciprocal learning for the prevention and management of
type 2 diabetes; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Taken together, the integrated care strategies address the six pillars of the chronic
care edifice as specified by the chronic care model,10 that is, (1) community resources and policies, (2) healthcare
organisation, (3) self-management support, (4) delivery system design, (5) decision
support and (6) clinical information system. Figure
1 illustrates the implementation strategy and timing of community
interventions, as well as the health facility interventions.

Figure 1 Flow chart for the SMART2D facility (blue) and community (green) interventions.
CC, care companion or healthy lifestyle buddy; CLT, community link team;
FINDRISC, Finland Diabetes Risk; FPG, fasting plasma
glucose; PGM, peer group meeting;
SMART2D, Self-Management and Reciprocal learning for the prevention and
management of Type 2 Diabetes.

Participants
Participants are residents within the designated clusters at each country site.
Individuals are eligible for enrolment if they are: currently residing in, and have
resided in their respective communities for at least 6 months prior to
enrolment; aged between 30 and 75 years; have no plans of migrating out
of the study area over the next 12 months from the date of enrolment; able to provide
written informed consent; agree to home visits and follow-up contacts as part of
study participation; have not been previously diagnosed with diabetes for longer than
12 months; and have a positive confirmatory test of prediabetes or diabetes.
Pregnancy and serious mental disability are exclusion criteria.

Recruitment
A generic recruitment algorithm was developed and modified by each site to fit the
local context by focusing on locally relevant methods and tests. Each site uses
different strategies to mobilise communities; screen potential participants; and
recruit those who fulfil the criteria as described below.

Uganda
Within each cluster, trained Field Research Assistants (FRA) approach households
explaining the study to household members, and seeking consent for screening for
possible participation in the study. FRAs seek a written pre-eligibility screening
informed consent from adult members of the household and administer a short
screening form based on the inclusion criteria listed above to consenting adults.
An appointment is then made with potentially eligible household members to return
early morning on an agreed date, for a fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test. If the
first FPG test is at least 6.1 mmol/L, a second appointment is made for a
repeat FPG test. If the second FPG is also at least 6.1 mmol/L, the
household member is referred to the respective cluster health facility for further
screening to confirm eligibility. The household member is advised to report to the
health facility within 7 days after an overnight fast without exercise or
smoking. On presentation to the health facility, a third FPG test is conducted to
confirm eligibility. Eligible subjects are classified as having prediabetes if at
least two of their FPG test results are between 6.1 and 6.9 mmol/L, or as
having diabetes if at least two FPG test results are >6.9 mmol/L, as
illustrated in figure 2 for Uganda.

Figure 2 Recruitment algorithm. *FPG and HbA1c values based on WHO recommendation.
FINDRISC, Finland Diabetes Risk; FPG, fasting plasma
glucose; HbA1c, haemoglobin A1c; PoC,
point-of-care; T2D, type 2 diabetes.

South Africa
Study investigators conduct a community awareness raising campaign in partnership
with the local branch of a national non-government organisation (NGO) to drive
participant recruitment. The venue is a central location, which draws large
numbers of visitors, such as a shopping mall located in close proximity to the
study facilities. Awareness campaigners screen consenting adults to identify
potential trial participants and conduct a random plasma glucose (RPG) test. This
is followed by referral of eligible subjects to the health facility for an FPG, in
line with the diagnostic criteria of the practical approach to care kit (PACK)
guidelines for primary care. Subjects with a RPG ≥6.1 mmol/L are
given a referral note and advised to visit their health facility within a week,
after an overnight fast and they are advised to report with no exercise or
smoking.

Recruitment takes place at the two selected study facilities, when visiting the
facility for routine clinical care or on referral from the community as per the
above outlined protocol. Subjects are classified as having diabetes if two
consecutive FPG tests >6.9 mmol/L, or as having prediabetes if two
consecutive FPG tests are between 6.1 mmol/L and 6.9 mmol/L. A third
FPG test (tiebreaker) is conducted if the first two test results are not
consistent to classify a subject as either having diabetes or prediabetes as
illustrated in figure 2 for South Africa.
Persons meeting the above criteria are invited to participate in the trial.

Sweden
Participants are recruited into the trial through community screening and from the
participating health centres. The research team together with health centres and
municipalities have identified opportunities and spaces in the community to carry
out screening activities. Both research staff and outreach workers from the
municipalities are involved in mobilising community members and inviting them to
participate in the screening, by: (1) facilitating access to the target population
through local NGOs, immigrant associations, religious bodies, such as churches and
mosques and cafes or other ventures owned by immigrant groups and (2) identifying
and facilitating access to spaces to set up the screening activities such as
shopping malls, local library, municipality hall or other public spaces such as
swimming halls.

Community screening activities are carried out by the research team on weekdays
and weekends using a combination of Finland Diabetes Risk (FINDRISC),11 and haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) test (both
point-of-care and laboratory based) using a recruitment algorithm
summarised in figure 2 for Sweden. All
individuals with HbA1c values in the diabetes or prediabetes range are referred to
the health centres to be recruited and enrolled into the primary care only arm, or
the integrated care arm based on the postal code of their area of residence. In
addition, patients with T2D registered at the participating health centres who
fulfil the inclusion criteria are invited by the diabetes nurse (and the
implementation manager of the research team) through a phone call to participate
in the study.

Enrolment and baseline measurements
Once eligibility is confirmed, written informed consent is obtained, and subjects are
enrolled. Trained study staff administer a standardised baseline questionnaire to
obtain basic participant data comprising demographic and socioeconomic measures;
medical and medication history; behavioural measures (diet, tobacco use, alcohol use,
physical activity and foot care); and physical measures (weight, height, waist
circumference and blood pressure).

As the intervention strategies use the principles of self-determination theory
(SDT),12 the questionnaire also collects
data on components of the SDT including; level of social support the participant is
receiving, sources of such social support, self-efficacy, autonomy support,
self-regulation, psychological adjustment, quality of life, stress and diabetes
knowledge. Further, HbA1c test, FPG (Uganda and South Africa only) and clinical
examination are performed. For participants with diabetes, baseline data are
collected on out-of-pocket expenditure, including outpatient costs, hospitalisation
costs over the past 12 months, and household expenditure. At the end of these
procedures, participants are given a pedometer, which they are instructed to wear for
the next 7 days to record a 7 day number of footsteps. Participants
return the pedometer after the 7 days to record the number of steps made. Data
are collected in a staggered manner to minimise respondent burden. Details of the
data collection tools used in the study are provided in online supplementary file
s2. In addition, a process evaluation guide checklist has been
developed to measure the delivery of the intervention. It is inspired by
the Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation and Maintenance
(RE-AIM) framework13 and
implementation fidelity framework14 and has a
number of common elements for all sites, that are linked to the most important
intervention strategies in the facility and the community: a facility care checklist;
a monitoring tool for motivational coaching sessions and for peer support sessions.
In addition to this minimum set, sites will develop additional monitoring and process
evaluation tools based on their needs and resources. Each country team does regular
research site visits and intercountry site conference calls are held with the
implementation teams. The information from these calls and from the site visits are
recorded, to keep track of the challenges in implementation and adaptation to the
intervention. The first participant was enrolled in February, April and August 2017
in Uganda, Sweden and South Africa, respectively.

10.1136/bmjopen-2017-019981.supp2Supplementary material 2 



 Follow-up
Participants with T2D report back monthly (or on an ad hoc basis in South
Africa and Sweden), for clinical re-evaluations and management, and medication
refill. In cases where participants miss their study visit appointment, each country
site uses the participant defaulter tracing approach as outlined in table 1. Participants report back to the health
facility for follow-up evaluations at month 12, at which time corresponding end-line
measures to those described above are collected.

Study outcomes
Primary outcomes
Among participants with prediabetes, the primary outcome of interest is overall
reduction in plasma glucose between baseline and month 12. We hypothesise that
participants with prediabetes at facilities in the integrated care arm will on
average have a higher reduction in their HbA1c reading by the end of follow-up
compared with participants with prediabetes at facilities in the primary care arm
(or usual care arm in Uganda).

Among participants with T2D, the primary outcome of interest is controlled plasma
glucose levels. A participant will be classified as having had their plasma
glucose controlled if their HbA1c reading at month 12 is <7.0%, or at least
2.6% below baseline reading. We hypothesise that among participants with T2D, the
proportion with controlled plasma glucose in the facility plus community arm will
be higher by the end of follow-up, compared with participants with controlled
plasma glucose in the facility only arm (or usual care arm in Uganda).

Secondary outcomes
Secondary outcomes in this study include:incidence of diabetes among participants with pre-diabetes;

incidence of adverse events, including hospitalisations due to
hypoglycaemia- or hyperglycaemia, or complications of diabetes;

behavioural outcomes, including diet, physical activity, foot care,
tobacco and alcohol consumption;

difference in out-of-pocket expenditure between baseline and
end line and incremental (system level) cost of
implementing the intervention;

among participants with diabetes, participant satisfaction with the
diabetes treatment provided at the health facilities.




Sample size
Although the overall aim of the trial is to combine participants across the three
country sites, it is recognised that: (a) there will most likely be baseline
differences across the country sites reflecting the different population
characteristics between country sites and (b) site-specific analysis would be very
relevant from a policy and potential scaleup perspective. Thus, the sample size
was calculated such that differences between the trial arms can be detected with
combined data across all the three sites in regard to the primary outcomes, as
well as be detected at each study site separately. Sample size calculations were
determined based on the primary outcome measures only, and on the hypothesis that
by the end of follow-up, the integrated care arm will be superior to the primary
care arm, and to the usual care arm in Uganda, with respect to the primary
outcomes.

Sample size for participants with prediabetes
With the aim of being able to detect a mean difference of at least
3 mmol/mol HbA1c by month 12 between any two study arms, with a SD of
2.5 mmol/mol; the required sample size before adjusting for clustering at
an 80% power and 5% level of significance is 34 participants per arm. For this
first stage calculations, we used the formula as described in Hayes and
Bennett15 for a continuous outcome.

Given the fixed number of health facilities (clusters), to adjust for clustering
we used a formula for a fixed number of clusters and fixed number of participants
within clusters as described in Hemming et al.16 Because each country site is using
different numbers of clusters; different intercluster correlation coefficient
(ICC) values are expected. We were unable to find published literature
providing estimates for ICC for HbA1c among persons with prediabetes. We therefore
explored various values of ICC for each site, and used values that provided the
highest sample sizes to detect the desired effect size. For Uganda, we used an ICC
value of 0.200 to obtain a sample size of 112 participants, for South Africa we
used an ICC value of 0.044 to obtain a sample size of 129 and for Sweden an ICC
value of 0.040 to obtain a sample size of 102; all per study arm. Allowing for a
projected 10% loss to follow-up over the 12 months, the final sample size of
participants with prediabetes per study arm is 124 for Uganda, 142 for South
Africa and 113 for Sweden.

Sample size for participants with diabetes
Among participants with T2D, we aim at being able to detect a difference of at
least 2% in the proportion of participants with diabetes with controlled plasma
glucose by month 12 between the trial arms. The required sample size before
adjusting for clustering at 80% power and 5% level of significance is 58
participants per arm. Assuming that in the intervention arm we shall attain
reduction in plasma glucose per the criteria given above, in 30% of participants
with diabetes (P1=0.3). For this first stage calculations, we used the
formula as described in Hayes and Bennett15
for proportions. We found two publications of cluster randomised trials reporting
ICC estimates among patient with diabetes one by Littenberg and MacLean in
which they report an ICC for HbA1c among patients with diabetes of 0.05517; and another by Singh et
al in which they report an ICC of 0.091.18 We used these estimates as starting values to explore
various values of ICC for each country site, and used values that provided the
highest sample sizes to detect the desired effect size. For Uganda, we used an ICC
value of 0.0.091 to obtain a sample size of 128 participants, for South Africa we
used an ICC value of 0.020 to obtain a sample size of 136 and for Sweden an ICC
value of 0.018 to obtain a sample size of 120; all per study arm. Allowing for a
projected 10%; the final sample size of participants with diabetes per study arm
is 141 for Uganda, 150 for South Africa and 132 for Sweden.


Figure 3 describes the trial profile, which
also depicts the distribution of the sample size by country site, study arm and
diagnostic category of the participants (diabetes and prediabetes).

Figure 3 SMART2D trial profile. SMART2D, Self-Management and Reciprocal learning for
the prevention and management of Type-2-Diabetes.

Data management
At each country site, research data is managed by trained data managers, with regular
data cleaning, and data is uploaded quarterly into a RedCap software onto a server at
the Sweden site via secure links. The database is password protected at all levels,
with access only to authorised study staff.

Planned statistical analysis
Analyses for primary objectives
Since the unit of analysis for the primary outcome of interest is the individual
participants, to minimise the effect of within cluster correlations we will employ
generalised estimating equations,19 to
evaluate changes over time in HbA1c values as a continuous variable among
participants with prediabetes; and the proportion of participants with controlled
plasma glucose among participants with diabetes, in relation to assigned trial
arm. Thus, we will use multivariable linear regression mixed effects modelling
with a random intercept, unstructured correlation matrix and robust standard
errors, to evaluate changes over time in HbA1c, and logistic regression analysis
to compare the proportion of participants with stabilised plasma glucose among
participants with diabetes.

Analyses of secondary objectives
Appropriate statistical analysis techniques will be used to conduct analyses to
compare secondary outcomes listed earlier, between the study arms. We recognise
that since sample size calculations for this trial were not based on the secondary
outcomes, lack of significant differences in analysis of secondary outcomes might
either be true lack of differences in these outcomes, or due to the fact that the
trial was not sufficiently powered to detect differences in the secondary
outcomes. Thus interpretation of findings on secondary outcomes will be done with
caution.

Discussion
The rising burden of T2D and associated cost call for a multidisciplinary approach to
address prevention and management. The SMART2D trial we are implementing provides an
opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness of a set of context relevant interventions
across both community and health facility setting in three different income settings. We
believe that findings from this trial will contribute to the evidence currently needed
and being generated,20 regarding the
effectiveness of multifaceted approaches to the prevention and management of chronic
illnesses like T2D. The findings may also clarify as to how specific components of a
multifaceted intervention can be implemented in different contexts, the normalisation
process for these interventions, and the cross-lessons from their implementation in
low-income, middle-income and high-income settings.

Ethics and dissemination
Findings from this trial will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and
through local and international scientific meetings.

Supplementary Material
Reviewer comments
 Author's manuscript
 We acknowledge the institutional support of the country site institutions to the SMART2D
consortium, and to the Sida capacity-building grant to Makerere University in Uganda.
The SMART2D consortium includes the following six partner institutions: Karolinska
Institutet and Uppsala University, Sweden; Makerere University, School of Public Health,
Uganda; the University of Western Cape, School of Public Health, South Africa; Institute
of Tropical Medicine, Belgium; and Collaborative Care Systems, Finland. We also
acknowledge the contribution of the other SMART2D Study Group members: Francis Xavier
Kasujja, Barbara Kirunda, Anthony Muyingo, Gloria Naggayi, Ronald Kusolo, Edward Ikona,
Mariam Hassen, Mark Spires, Kululwa Ndayi, Tshilidzi Manuga, Lungiswa Tsolekile, Juliet
Aweko, Furat Al-Murani, Dell Saulnier, Linda Timm, Aravinda Berggreen-Clausen, Douglas
Sematimba and Jhon Rangel Alvarez. We also acknowledge the contribution of the
participating health centers and their staff in the three sites and the local
administration in the selected districts.

Contributors: DG, PA, C-GO, JOV, CJS, DS, GT, TP, SP and MD conceptualised the trial. DG, PA, PD,
C-GO, JOV, HMA, RWM, EEK, JK, DS, TP, MD and the SMART2D Group are implementing the
trial. DG had primary responsibility for final content. All authors participated in
writing, read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding: This study is part of the SMART2D project funded by the European Commission’s
Horizon2020 Health Coordination Activities (Grant agreement no 643692) under call
“HCO-05-2014: Global Alliance for Chronic Diseases: prevention and treatment
of type 2 diabetes”. The Uganda site is co-funded by the Sweden International
Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) capacity-building grant to Makerere University
2015-2010 Project #HS 343. The contents of this article are solely the responsibility
of the authors and do not reflect the views of the funders of the SMART2D
Project.

Competing interests: None declared.

Patient consent: Not required.

Ethics approval: Approval for conduct of this trial was obtained from the institutional review boards
(IRB) at the respective trial country sites. In Uganda from the Higher Degrees,
Research and Ethics Committee of Makerere University School of Public Health
(reference number 426), in South Africa from the Biomedical Science Research Ethics
Committee of the University of the Western Cape (BM/17/1/36), and in Sweden from the
Regional Ethical Board in Stockholm (2016/2521-31/1). In Uganda, further approval was
obtained from the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology (reference
number HS 2118).

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Collaborators: Francis Xavier Kasujja; Barbara Kirunda; Anthony Muyingo; Gloria Naggayi; Ronald
Kusolo; Edward Ikona; Mariam Hassen; Mark Spires; Kululwa Ndayi; Tshilidzi Manuga;
Lungiswa Tsolekile; Juliet Aweko; Furat Al-Murani; Dell Saulnier; Linda Timm;
Aravinda Berggreen-Clausen; Douglas Sematimba; Jhon Rangel Alvarez; the SMART2D
Group.
==== Refs
References
1. 
WHO . WHO | Global status report on noncommunicable
diseases . 2014 
http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd-status-report-2014/en/
(accessed 9 Dec 2015 ).
2. 
IDF . Internationl diabetes association: Deabetes
atlas . 7th Edition 
Brussels , 2015 
doi .
3. 
Testa R , Bonfigli AR , Genovese S , et al 
Focus on migrants with type 2 diabetes mellitus in
European Countries . Intern Emerg Med 
2016 ;11 :319 –26 .
doi:10.1007/s11739-015-1350-1
26688327 
4. 
Hyman I , Gucciardi E , Patychuk D , et al 
Self-management, health service use and information
seeking for diabetes care among Black Caribbean immigrants in
Toronto . Can J Diabetes 
2014 ;38 :32 –7 .
doi:10.1016/j.jcjd.2013.08.267
24485211 
5. 
Aziz Z , Absetz P , Oldroyd J , et al 
A systematic review of real-world diabetes prevention
programs: learnings from the last 15 years .
Implement Sci 
2015 ;10 :1 –17 .
doi:10.1186/s13012-015-0354-6
25567289 
6. 
Rawal LB , Tapp RJ , Williams ED , et al 
Prevention of Type 2 Diabetes and Its Complications
in Developing Countries . A Review 
2011 :121 –33 . doi:10.1007/s12529-011-9162-9

7. 
WHO . Innovative care for chronic conditions: building blocks
for action (Global Report) . Geniva ,
2002 .
8. 
Wagner EH , Austin BT , Von Korff M  
Organizing care for patients with chronic
illness . Milbank Q 
1996 ;74 :511 –44 .
doi:10.2307/3350391
8941260 
9. 
IDF . Global Guideline for Type 2 Diabetes.
International Diabetes Federation Guideline Development Group .
Vol 104. Brussels 
2014 .
10. 
Bodenheimer T , Wagner EH , Grumbach K  
Improving primary care for patients with chronic
illness . JAMA 
2002 ;288 :1775 –914 .
doi:10.1001/jama.288.14.1775
12365965 
11. 
Lindström J , Tuomilehto J  
The diabetes risk score: a practical tool to predict
type 2 diabetes risk . Diabetes Care 
2003 ;26 :725 –31 .
doi:10.2337/diacare.26.3.725
12610029 
12. 
Ryan RM  
Deci Unwersity EL, Rochestu / .
Overview of self-determination theory: an organismic dialectical
perspective
Handbok of self-determination ,
2014 :1 –33 .
13. 
Glasgow RE , Nelson CC , Strycker LA , et al 
Using RE-AIM metrics to evaluate diabetes
self-management support interventions . Am J Prev
Med 
2006 ;30 :67 –73 .
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2005.08.037
16414426 
14. 
Hasson H  
Systematic evaluation of implementation fidelity of
complex interventions in health and social care . Implement
Sci 
2010 ;5 :67 
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-5-67
20815872 
15. 
Hayes RJ , Bennett S  
Simple sample size calculation for cluster-randomized
trials . Int J Epidemiol 
1999 ;28 :319 –26 .
doi:10.1093/ije/28.2.319
10342698 
16. 
Hemming K , Girling AJ , Sitch AJ , et al 
Sample size calculations for cluster randomised
controlled trials with a fixed number of clusters . BMC Med
Res Methodol 
2011 ;11 :102 
doi:10.1186/1471-2288-11-102
21718530 
17. 
Littenberg B , MacLean CD  
Intra-cluster correlation coefficients in adults with
diabetes in primary care practices: the Vermont Diabetes Information System field
survey . BMC Med Res Methodol 
2006 ;6 :20 
doi:10.1186/1471-2288-6-20
16672056 
18. 
Singh J , Liddy C , Hogg W , et al 
Intracluster correlation coefficients for sample size
calculations related to cardiovascular disease prevention and management in
primary care practices . BMC Res Notes 
2015 ;8 :89 
doi:10.1186/s13104-015-1042-y
25888958 
19. 
Zeger SL , Liang KY  
Longitudinal data analysis for discrete and
continuous outcomes . Biometrics 
1986 ;42 :121 –30 .
doi:10.2307/2531248
3719049 
20. 
Renders CM , Valk GD , Griffin SJ , et al 
Interventions to improve the management of diabetes
in primary care, outpatient, and community settings: a systematic
review . Diabetes Care 
2001 ;24 :1821 –33 .
doi:10.2337/diacare.24.10.1821
11574449

