
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Publishing Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2018-02196510.1136/bmjopen-2018-021965Palliative CareProtocol150617201335Improving the management of pain from advanced cancer in the community:
study protocol for a pragmatic multicentre randomised controlled
trial Allsop Matthew J 1Wright-Hughes Alexandra 2Black Kath 13Hartley Suzanne 2Fletcher Marie 2Ziegler Lucy E 1Bewick Bridgette M 4Meads David 5Hughes Nicholas D 6Closs S José 6Hulme Claire 5Taylor Sally 1Flemming Kate 7Hackett Julia 1O’Dwyer John L 5Brown Julia M 2Bennett Michael I 1
1 
Academic Unit of Palliative Care, Leeds Institute
of Health Sciences, University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK

2 
Clinical Trials Research Unit, Leeds Institute of
Clinical Trials Research, University of
Leeds, Leeds,
UK

3 
Leeds Community Healthcare NHS Trust, Leeds, UK

4 
Division of Psychological and Social Medicine,
Leeds Institute of Health Sciences, University of
Leeds, Leeds,
UK

5 
Academic Unit of Health Economics, Leeds
Institute of Health Sciences, University of
Leeds, Leeds,
UK

6 
School of Healthcare, Baines Wing,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK

7 
Department of Health Sciences,
University of York, Heslington, UK
Correspondence to  Dr Matthew J Allsop;
m.j.allsop@leeds.ac.uk2018 22 3 2018 8 3 e02196529 1 2018 22 2 2018 28 2 2018 © Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise
stated in the text of the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is
permitted unless otherwise expressly granted.2018This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative
Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their
derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited
and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/Introduction
For patients with advanced cancer, research shows that pain is frequent,
burdensome and undertreated. Evidence-based approaches to support cancer pain
management have been developed but have not been implemented within the context of
the UK National Health Service. This protocol is for a pragmatic multicentre
randomised controlled trial (RCT) to assess feasibility, acceptability,
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness for a multicomponent intervention for pain
management in patients with advanced cancer.

Methods and analysis
This trial will assess the feasibility of implementation and uptake of
evidence-based interventions, developed and piloted as part of the Improving the
Management of Pain from Advanced Cancer in the Community Programme grant, into
routine clinical practice and determine whether there are potential differences
with respect to patient-rated pain, patient pain knowledge and experience,
healthcare use, quality of life and cost-effectiveness. 160 patients will receive
either the intervention (usual care plus supported self-management) delivered
within the oncology clinic and palliative care services by locally assigned
community palliative care nurses, consisting of a self-management educational
intervention and eHealth intervention for routine pain assessment and monitoring;
or usual care. The primary outcomes are to assess implementation and uptake of the
interventions, and differences in terms of pain severity. Secondary outcomes
include pain interference, participant pain knowledge and experience, and
cost-effectiveness. Outcome assessment will be blinded and patient-reported
outcome measures collected via post at 6 and 12 weeks following randomisation.

Ethics and dissemination
This RCT has the potential to significantly influence National Health Service
delivery to community-based patients with pain from advanced cancer. We aim to
provide definitive evidence of whether two simple interventions delivered by
community palliative care nurse in palliative care that support-self-management
are clinically effective and cost-effective additions to standard community
palliative care.

Trial registration number

ISRCTN18281271;
Pre-results.

cancer painself-managementeducation interventionroutine monitoringehealthpalliative carehttp://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100007602Programme Grants for Applied Researchspecial-featureunlocked
==== Body
Strengths and limitations of this study
This is the first randomised controlled trial to examine the effect of a
multicomponent complex intervention comprising evidence-based approaches to pain
management in patients with advanced cancer.

To optimise the generalisability of the findings, this multicentre trial will
include patients from palliative care services across the UK.

This trial includes objectives that assess changes in pain knowledge and
experience as well as pain intensity outcomes.

The pragmatic approach adopted by this trial will enable identification of issues
arising from the implementation of a complex intervention in palliative care
services at transitions between secondary and community care in the UK.

A limitation is that the pragmatic approach may have an impact on fidelity to the
interventions; steps have been taken to avoid and monitor contamination and
measure adherence to interventions.

Introduction
Each year in the UK, 163 000 people die from cancer.1 For patients with cancer, research shows that pain is frequent,
burdensome and undertreated.2–5
Over two-thirds (66.4%) of these patients will experience pain during advanced,
metastatic or terminal stages of their cancer.5
Many patients with cancer spend their last 6 months of life living in the community,
typically at home, though many are admitted as inpatients nearer to death.6 Barriers to good pain control include inadequate
support and patient education,7 poor assessment
and communication,8 and lack of access to an
adequate prescription and timely analgesia.9 A
range of approaches have been developed that seek to improve the management of pain in
patients with advanced cancer but have not been implemented within the context of the
National Health Service (NHS) in the UK. Three emerging approaches that address
key barriers to pain management for patients with advanced cancer are outlined,
including referral to specialist palliative care, self-management of pain and analgesia,
and routine monitoring of pain.

Specialist palliative care
Specialist palliative care aims to relieve suffering and improve quality of life for
people with advanced diseases, such as cancer, who are facing death. For patients
with advanced cancer, several randomised controlled trials (RCTs)10–14 have shown that
early access to palliative care can improve symptoms, reduce acute hospital
admissions, minimise aggressive cancer treatments and enable patients to make choices
about their end-of-life care, including exercising the choice to die at home.
Interventions in these trials varied, but common characteristics included assessment
and several follow-up consultations by specialist palliative care teams over a period
of 2–3 months. Where reported, patients were recruited and received these
interventions about 6 to 14 months before their death.10–14 Collectively, these data suggest
that a dose of three to four palliative care contacts applied about 6 months before
death is associated with better end-of-life care. The trials from which this evidence
is derived were based in North America, and the studies vary widely in their
definition of what constitutes palliative care services and who provides them. These
limitations have prevented direct translation and implementation of this evidence
within the context of the UK NHS.

Supporting self-management of pain and analgesia
Pain for patients with advanced cancer is a complex and dynamic experience.15 Poor knowledge and fearful attitudes within
patients towards cancer pain and analgesia are associated with reluctance to commence
opioids, reduced medication adherence and higher pain intensity.16 17 Providing information to patients with cancer pain and
addressing concerns regarding pain and analgesia are effective interventions that
support self-management and lead to improvements in pain outcomes.18–22 While evidence
supports the use of self-management approaches, there remains uncertainty on the
optimum dose and components of a self-management intervention, and how best to
implement these in routine practice.

Routine monitoring of pain
Assessing pain and presenting data to physicians prior to consultation, who then use
it within discussions, significantly improves pain outcomes and quality of life for
patients.23 Assessment alone without
ensuring that this is seen by prescribing clinicians does not lead to improvements in
pain,24 highlighting the need for
interventions to alert clinicians to patients’ symptoms. Two large RCTs, one
conducted in the USA25 and one in the
Netherlands,26 have demonstrated
improvements in cancer pain when combinations of interventions have been evaluated.
The first compared telephone self-management support from nurses combined with
automated symptom monitoring, with usual care. Significant reductions in pain scores
were demonstrated over a 12-month period.25
The second combined specialist pain consultation with nurse-led self-management
support and compared this with usual care.26
Over an 8-week follow-up period, significant benefits were experienced by
intervention patients in pain scores and reduction in interference in daily living
from pain. Similar to education self-management approaches, there is uncertainty
about the optimum dose, alongside a lack of evidence of implementation in the context
of the UK NHS.

Rationale
We have developed a complex intervention consisting of three distinct components: (1)
referral to community palliative care support, (2) a resource to support
self-management of pain and analgesia, and (3) an electronic pain monitoring
system. We hypothesise that within oncology (or related) services, screening and
referral of community-based patients with pain from advanced cancer to a cancer pain
pathway, combined with a package of routine pain assessment and monitoring using an
e-health tool, will reduce the extent of pain and psychological distress reported by
the patient.

We will undertake a multicentre RCT to assess the acceptability and feasibility of
implementation of the complex intervention, its potential cost-effectiveness and
impact on pain management.

Methods and analysis
This trial is the fourth and final project of a National Institute for Health Research
Programme Grant for Applied Research (NIHR PGfAR), which consists of interlinked studies
aiming to improve the management of pain from advanced cancer in the community:
Improving the Management of Pain
from Advanced Cancer in the CommuniTy
(IMPACCT).

The programme follows the Medical Research Council Framework guidance for the design and
evaluation of complex interventions27 and
consists of the following component projects:To design and test a cancer pain pathway that allows early intervention and
promotes self-management.

To demonstrate the feasibility of routine cancer pain monitoring within the
NHS.

To promote non-medical prescribing and develop the role of community
pharmacists.

To establish the feasibility of delivery of our intervention in routine care,
and potential effectiveness on patient outcomes and cost-effectiveness (which
this protocol relates to).




Aims
The trial aims to assess the feasibility of implementation and uptake of
evidence-based interventions, developed and piloted as part of the IMPACCT NIHR
PGfAR, into routine clinical practice and determine whether there are potential
differences with respect to (1) patient-rated pain, (2) patient pain knowledge and
experience, (3) healthcare use, (4) quality of life and (5)
cost-effectiveness.

Our intervention, combining usual care and supported self-management, including an
educational resource and pain monitoring, aims:To improve the management of cancer pain for palliative care patients who
are living at home.

To enable patients to more easily access support and advice, communicate
their pain, and obtain timely and effective medication.

To educate patients on tackling cancer pain through an educational
intervention.




Design
This is a pragmatic multicentre RCT to evaluate the feasibility of delivery and
implementation of a supported self-management intervention into routine clinical
practice in the UK for patients with cancer, which is active and incurable; and its
potential impact on pain management and cost-effectiveness (see figure 1 for a trial flow diagram). Qualitative and
cost-effectiveness components are embedded.

Figure 1 Trial flow diagram.

We will aim to recruit 160 participants at the point of identification for referral
into palliative care and follow-up at 6 and 12 weeks. Participants will be randomised
on a 1:1 basis to receive either usual care plus supported self-management, delivered
within the oncology clinic and palliative care services by locally assigned community
palliative care nurses, or usual care. As part of usual care, all participants will
be referred to their local palliative care team for pain management.

Objectives
Objectives relate to both the feasibility of delivery and implementation of
interventions into routine practice and an assessment of the effectiveness of the
intervention:Delivery and implementation of the intervention: The primary implementation
objective is to evaluate adherence in terms of the uptake and retention rate
of each intervention through process evaluation, including qualitative
study.

Potential effectiveness of the intervention: The primary effectiveness
objective is to assess the effectiveness of the intervention compared with
usual care as measured by pain severity on the Brief Pain
Inventory (BPI) 12 weeks after randomisation. Secondary objectives
will assess differences at 6 weeks, patient-rated pain on the 7-point global
rating of change in pain,28
healthcare use in each arm, patient’s pain knowledge and experience,
patient’s general and cancer-specific quality of life, and
cost-effectiveness of the interventions.




Recruitment, setting and participants
Participants will be identified and recruited in the oncology (or related) clinic by
the research nurse, in consultation with the patient’s
clinician/treating team. Prior to the start of recruitment into the trial,
research centres will be required to have obtained local ethical and management
approvals and undertaken training in the intervention and in the trial procedures
delivered by the central trial team.

To be included in the trial, participants are required to meet the eligibility
criteria described in table 1.

Table 1 Eligibility criteria

Eligibility criteria	Details	
Inclusion criteria	1. Male or female
aged ≥16 years 
2. Diagnosis of advanced
incurable cancer (locally advanced or metastatic) Experiencing
cancer-related pain (tumour or treatment related) with a pain score
of ≥4 on the ‘average pain’ item of
the Brief Pain Inventory 
3. Has the potential to benefit from
pain management 
4. Expected prognosis
of ≥12 weeks 
5. Living at home 
6.
The patient is living in the local catchment area for a participating
hospice 
7. The patient is able and willing to provide written
informed consent	
Exclusion criteria	1. Patients who are currently receiving or
have previously received community palliative care support 
2. The
patient has insufficient literacy, or proficiency in English to
contribute to the data collection required for the research 
3.
Patients will be excluded if they lack capacity to provide informed
consent to this trial 
4. Patients with dominant chronic pain that
is not cancer related (tumour or treatment)	
All patients presenting to clinics with a cancer diagnosis of advanced incurable
disease will be screened. Data will be recorded anonymously to document reasons for
ineligibility or decline in participation to monitor trial uptake and recruitment
progress, and representativeness of the trial population.

Patients meeting the eligibility criteria will be approached by the research nurse
while they attend the clinic for their standard follow-up care to confirm eligibility
and provide verbal and written details about the trial. Patients will be provided
with a Participant Information Sheet and given as long as they need to consider
participation in the trial, as well as the opportunity to discuss the trial with
their family and other healthcare professionals. Patients will then be asked whether
they would be willing to take part in the trial and informed consent, and baseline
assessments, will be obtained in a location convenient for the participant, at their
home or clinic.

Randomisation and blinding
Following confirmation of eligibility, written informed consent and completion of
baseline assessments, participants will be randomised into the trial by the research
nurse. Randomisation will be performed centrally via an automated system at the
Clinical Trials Research Unit at the University of Leeds. Participants will be
randomised on a 1:1 basis to receive either usual care plus supported self-management
or usual care, using a computer-generated minimisation programme, incorporating a
random element, to ensure treatment groups are well balanced for the following:
average pain at baseline on the BPI (4–6, 7–10) and recruiting site.
The recruiting team are not involved in subsequent intervention delivery.

Intervention
Both usual care, and the intervention, usual care plus supported self-management will
be delivered within the oncology clinic and palliative care services by locally
assigned community palliative care nurses. As part of usual care, all participants
will be referred to their local palliative care team for pain management. Supported
self-management will consist of an educational intervention ‘Tackling Cancer
Pain’ and an e-Health routine pain assessment and monitoring intervention
‘Pain Check’. Components of the trial intervention are detailed in
table 2.

Table 2 Overview of trial intervention components

Intervention components	Description	
Usual care (received by both groups)	Referral to community palliative
care: Screening of patients with pain from advanced cancer
will be implemented by optimising entry points to the care pathway via
oncology (or related) outpatient services and will facilitate the flow of
patients to appropriate pain support as and when required. Oncology
research nurses will refer trial participants to the local community
palliative care team at which point the locally assigned palliative are
nurse will endeavour to arrange an initial visit/appointment with
participant within 1 week of randomisation.

Appointment into palliative care: This will
take place by a locally assigned community palliative care nurse. Routine
practice will be followed, including an assessment of the
participants’ other palliative care needs. For those participants
allocated to receive usual care and supported self-management, the nurse
will be trained in the trial interventions and will introduce and deliver
the trial interventions described below, alongside their usual care.	
Patient self-management educational
intervention	Name: ‘Tackling Cancer
Pain—A toolkit for patients and families’

Why: ‘Tackling Cancer Pain—A
toolkit for patients and families’ is based on a review of current
evidence and on focus group interviews with patients, family caregivers
and health professionals working in specialist palliative care.36 37 Providing information to
patients with cancer pain and addressing concerns regarding pain and
analgesia are effective interventions that support self-management and
lead to improvements in pain outcomes.18–22

What: ‘Tackling Cancer Pain—A
toolkit for patients and families’ is formatted as a loose-leaf
ring binder with an accompanying DVD. It consists of five sections:
Understanding Cancer Pain; Using Drugs to Manage Pain; Additional
Approaches to Managing Pain; Talking About Pain; Getting More Help. Each
section contains information and self-directed learning activities along
with sources of further information. It is written in easily
understandable lay persons’ language. The booklet and DVD contain
essentially the same information but in different formats and are
structured so that they can be used independently by patients or family
members. Guidance is given in each chapter about how to use the
information presented. Step-by-step tuition is provided on
non-pharmacological pain relief measures such as relaxation and
visualisation, and on how to initiate and conduct conversations about
pain with health professionals. 
Who provides:
‘Tackling Cancer Pain—A toolkit for patients and
families’ will be introduced to participants by their trained
locally assigned community palliative care nurse within 1 week of
randomisation and subsequent participant questions on
the booklet and DVD can be addressed to this palliative care nurse.
Training on the content and use of ‘Tackling Cancer Pain—A
toolkit for patients and families’ will be provided by the trial
researchers. The training will include written instructions on how to
train participants in the interventions and a contact for any future
queries. 
How: ‘Tackling Cancer
Pain—A toolkit for patients and families’ is accessed by
the patient or their family by reviewing the information contained in the
loose-leaf ring binder and on the accompanying DVD.

Where: The expectation is that
‘Tackling Cancer Pain—A toolkit for patients and
families’ will be accessed by patients and their families while in
the community setting (ie, in their usual place of residence).

When and how much: Participants are not
provided with details of schedule, duration, intensity or dose for using
‘Tackling Cancer Pain—A toolkit for patients and
families’. Instead, participants are free to use the resource as
they would like. 
Modifications: On-going

How well (planned): Intervention data
collection (baseline) will identify that the patient received the
intervention. Semistructured end-of-trial interviews with patients and
health professionals will also inform how the intervention is used.

How well (actual): On-going	
e-Health intervention for routine pain
assessment and monitoring in patients with advanced cancer	Name:
‘PainCheck’ 
Why: The process of
assessing pain and presenting data to physicians prior to consultation,
who then use it within discussions, significantly improves pain outcomes
and quality of life for patients.23 PainCheck was developed to facilitate this communication by
enabling patients to routinely report and share pain data for health
professionals to access. Its development was informed by patient,
caregiver and health professional involvement.31–35

What: PainCheck allows patients to record their
pain and gives them access to personalised pain management advice.
Patients are asked to answer various questions about their pain including
providing a description of their pain, rating current pain intensity and
intensity in the last 12, pain control, interference and sleep. Items
were taken from the Brief Pain Inventory38 and Coping Strategies Questionnaire.39 Patients are asked about pain management
techniques, which of these were helpful and how likely they are to try
them in the future. Various question response options are used including
multiple choice, numerical (0–10 or 0–6) slider scales and
free text. After completion, patients are provided with a summary of
their results and suggestions of pain management techniques they may want
to try in the future. Health professionals can log in to PainCheck and
view all patients registered on PainCheck and see who have completed
reports. They are then able to select a patient and view responses to
individual questions. Health professionals are presented with a graph
that tracks patients’ current pain and pain in the last
12 hours over time. Patients are given a ‘red flag’
in the health professional system if they reach certain thresholds for
current pain and pain control. After reading the patient report, health
professionals can decide what action, if any, they would like to take as
a result. Health professionals have the option to contact patients
through PainCheck to provide information and advice. PainCheck was
developed using QTool. QTool is a secure online system, which can be
integrated in real time with the electronic patient records, enabling
collection of patient-reported information (such as symptoms, treatment
side effects, pre-clinic questions, satisfaction surveys). QTool
was developed by the collaborative efforts of multiple research groups
based at the University of Leeds pooling approximately
£400 000 of research funding. The current version of
PainCheck does not use linkage with existing electronic clinical record
systems; instead, PainCheck is currently run as a standalone
intervention. 
Who provides: PainCheck will be
introduced to participants by their locally assigned community palliative
care nurse within 1 week of randomisation. Training on using
PainCheck with patients will be provided by trial researchers to
community palliative care nurses. Training will include instructions for
training the participants in the interventions, which will include a
demonstration for the participant on how to log on and use the Routine
Pain Assessment and Monitoring system at the initial visit.

How: PainCheck will be introduced to patients
by their locally assigned community palliative care nurse. The
introduction will involve participants logging in to the system (using
unique login details that will be provided by the community palliative
care nurse) and working through an assessment using the instruction
leaflet as a guide. The palliative care nurse will oversee the
participant’s first access and use of PainCheck and will provide
additional support/guidance if necessary. At induction into the system,
participants will be made aware that PainCheck should not be used to
request urgent or emergency help; where urgent or emergency help is
required participants are told to contact the emergency services. On
visiting PainCheck, participants are reminded, by use of an on-screen
message, that should they need immediate medical attention they should
call the emergency services. If they require urgent medical advice, they
are advised to contact their doctor, nurse or pharmacist. This reminder
is provided near the beginning and at the end of each PainCheck session.
Following an introduction to PainCheck, participants (or a person
submitting responses on a participant’s behalf) will be expected
to complete pain assessments without the community palliative care nurse
present. Each pain assessment asks for clarification of who is entering
data (ie, a patient, or someone on their behalf), which is reflected in
reports when viewed by health professionals. Based on reports submitted
by participants, the PainCheck system can provide two types of email
alert to health professionals: high priority (generated immediately when
a patient submits a report indicating high pain and/or low levels of
control) and low priority (a weekly email sent when participants are
interacting with PainCheck but reporting very low levels of pain or no
pain). After reviewing reports submitted to PainCheck, a health
professional is asked to record in the system what action they took: (1)
no further action, (2) contact another health professional, (3) contact
the patient and (4) other. PainCheck can be accessed by patients
and health professionals using any device that enables access to the
internet (eg, using laptop, smartphone or tablet computers).

Where: The expectation is that PainCheck will
be accessed by patients or their families while in the community setting,
which could include usual place of residence or alternative chosen
location. 
When and how much: Following the
introduction of routine completion of PainCheck in the community,
participants will be encouraged to use the system at least once a day,
with additional entries being encouraged when/if pain events occur.
PainCheck will be available to participants until 14 days after
their 12-week follow-up assessment. Participants are notified in writing
that access to PainCheck will be ending.

Modifications: On-going 
How
well (planned): Intervention data collection (at baseline)
will confirm that a patient received details to access PainCheck. Data
captured by PainCheck will provide insight into the frequency of use by
patients, alongside identifying interaction between health professionals
and patients that occurs through PainCheck (ie, messages sent to patients
by health professionals). Semistructured end-of-trial interviews with
patients and health professionals will inform how the intervention is
used. 
How well (actual): On-going	
Intervention delivery
Training in the use of the interventions will be provided to the Community
Palliative Care Team prior to the participating centres opening to recruitment.
Training will be provided by the trial researchers based at the University of
Leeds and involved in the IMPACCT Programme Grant working closely with the lead
nurse at palliative care sites, recruiting sites and the administrative support
staff for the community team. As part of the training, the Community Palliative
Care Team will receive instructions for training the participants in the
interventions, which will include a demonstration for the participant on how to
log on and use PainCheck at the initial visit, and written instructions and a
contact for any future queries will be provided. The participants will receive the
educational intervention ‘Tackling Cancer Pain’ booklet and DVD from
the palliative care team and asked to use it as much and as often as they would
like.

Measuring adherence to the interventions
We will record steps taken to ensure consistency in the delivery of the
interventions—including training sessions with palliative care nurses such
as additional training on delivery of the routine pain assessment and monitoring
intervention for new staff. Monitoring adherence to the educational and routine
pain assessment and monitoring interventions will involve the participants, the
locally assigned community palliative care nurse and information directly from the
routine pain assessment and monitoring tool.

Contamination
The risk of contamination between the two trial arms will be minimal as the
educational intervention and routine pain monitoring will be made available only
to participants allocated to the supported self-management arm of the trial, and
there is little opportunity for participants in either trial arms to meet and
discuss treatment. The importance of contamination was included in site training,
so site teams are made aware not to share materials. We will record the number of
contacts in community palliative care and the staff involved in the care to
explore the potential for contamination. The number of Tackling Cancer Pain
booklets and accompanying DVDs provided to each hospice will be monitored against
the number of participants allocated to receive this intervention to ensure these
are not being used for other patients. The online pain monitoring system can only
be used by participants allocated to the intervention who are assigned a trial
specific username and password obtained from the research team. There is no risk
of contamination in the recruiting clinics as intervention delivery takes place in
the community palliative care setting; notification of trial referrals to the
palliative care team will clearly document the participants’ randomisation
allocation. We will monitor the timing at which patients are referred into
palliative care and documentation of previous palliative care discussions.

Assessments and data collection
Required data, assessment tools, collection time points and processes are
summarised in table 3 and detailed further in
online supplementary appendix
1.

10.1136/bmjopen-2018-021965.supp1Supplementary data 



 Table 3 Summary of assessment type, completers and timing

Assessment	Who to complete/action	Timeline (weeks post-randomisation)	
Screening	Baseline	Week 6	Week 12	
Baseline data (collected from case notes)	
 Demographic data, eligibility, written informed
consent	Research nurse	X				
 Background and medical history	Research nurse		X			
 Referral to local participating community
palliative care team	Research nurse		X			
 Schedule initial appointment within 1 week;
deliver usual care OR usual care and introduction of trial interventions
as determined by randomisation allocation	Palliative care team		X			
Clinical follow-up data (collected from case
notes or hospice system for example, SystmOne)	
 Use of Intervention and usual care details	Palliative care team				X	
 All-cause mortality	Palliative care team				X	
 Serious adverse event reporting	Palliative care team		Ongoing reporting	
Clinical follow-up data (collected from case
notes, hospital system for example, SystmOne and PPM database)	
 Healthcare use	Research nurse				X	
 Pain medication	Research nurse			X	X	
 Date of referral to community palliative care,
no and details of contacts	Research nurse				X	
 All-cause mortality	Research nurse				X	
 Serious adverse event reporting	Research nurse		Ongoing reporting	
Patient-completed questionnaires (completed in
clinic at baseline and at home/over telephone for follow-up
visits)	
 BPI assessment	Trial researcher		X	X	X	
 7-point global rating change of pain	Trial researcher			X	X	
 Healthcare use (Health Economics
questionnaire)	Trial researcher		X	X	X	
 Patient Pain Questionnaire40	Trial researcher		X	X	X	
 EQ-5D41	Trial researcher		X	X	X	
 EORTC QLQ-C3042	Trial researcher		X	X	X	
Clinical follow-up data (collected via GP
practice)	
 Date of referral to community palliative care	Trial researcher		Ongoing reporting	
 Survival status	Trial researcher/Leeds Institute of Clinical
Trials Research		Ongoing reporting	
Routine monitoring data	
 Uptake (patients and palliative care nurse) and
patient-reported pain diaries	Trial researcher*		Ongoing reporting	
 Qualitative participant interviews	Trial researcher*		~6 or 12 weeks
post-randomisation	
 Participant qualitative palliative care nurse end
of trial interviews	Trial researcher*		End of trial	
*Conducted through a different trial researcher involved in
patient-completed questionnaire follow-up and clinical follow-up.

BPI, Brief Pain Inventory; EORTC, European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer; GP, general practitioner.

Clinical data
Clinical follow-up data will be obtained directly from participant’s
hospital and palliative care records by the research nurse and palliative care
team up to 12 weeks post-randomisation. Data recorded will include healthcare use,
including referral and contacts with community palliative care, hospital
attendances and admissions, prescription medication use and use of pain relief,
and related unexpected serious adverse events. All-cause mortality will be
collected continuously throughout the trial up until the point of the final
participant’s 12-week follow-up assessment. Details of participants and
health professional’s use of PainCheck will be obtained directly from the
PainCheck system via an export into Microsoft Excel in comma separated values
(CSV) format.

Participant-completed data
Patient-reported outcome measures are collected via post at 6 and 12 weeks
following randomisation. Where required, the trial researcher will collect this
data by telephone.

Participant questionnaires are posted at weeks 5 and 11 for each follow-up time
point, following which the trial researcher will contact the participant by
telephone to check receipt and offer completion of the questionnaires over the
phone if the participant wishes to do so. If the questionnaire pack is not
completed over the phone, and questionnaires are not returned by post
1 week later, the trial researcher will telephone the participant again to
remind them. If contact cannot be made, the trial researcher will continue to
attempt to contact the participants up to weeks 8 and 14 for each follow-up time
point. If the trial researcher becomes unblinded to treatment allocation, this
will be recorded and the subsequent follow-up telephone call at 12 weeks will be
conducted by an alternative researcher.

Prior to contacting the participant for the follow-up visits or to post the
questionnaires, the participants’ survival status will be established by
the central research team via the general practitioner or the oncology
research nurse.

At the end of the 12-week follow-up period, participants will receive a thank you
letter through the post (along with their 12-week questionnaires).

Qualitative interviews
A subsample of 15 consenting usual care plus supported self-management arm
participants will be invited to take part in a semistructured interview at
approximately 6 or 12 weeks post-randomisation. The interview will explore what
participants felt about referral to community palliative care, how they used the
Tackling Cancer Pain booklet/DVD and PainCheck, and if they found the
interventions useful. A proportion of participants will be interviewed at 6 weeks
to ensure a representative sample considering loss to follow-up for illness or
death by 12 weeks. Participants will be selected based on their age, gender,
community palliative care team (hospice) and level of PainCheck use.

A sample of 15 palliative care nurses will be invited to take part in a
semistructured end-of-trial interview in order to explore their thoughts on the
interventions, if they found the interventions useful, how the interventions
impacted on pain management and their clinical practice, and potential
within-trial contamination. Nurses will be asked to sign a consent form before the
interview begins and will be selected based on their team (hospice), level of
PainCheck use and the number of trial participants they have seen.

Both interviews will be conducted by a different trial researcher to that involved
in other data collection, will last approximately 60 min and will be
audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim.

Health service delivery data
For all participating sites, the central research team will collect details of
current service provision to help understand the local services and standard care
pathways for the study population. This will include data collection to explore
who is responsible for identifying patients as requiring pain management support
and/or a referral to palliative care, who is responsible for performing referrals
and how closely the oncology (or related) clinic staff work with their hospital
and local community palliative care teams.

Sample size
To address the potential effectiveness of the intervention the power calculation is
based on the difference in mean pain severity (BPI) at 12 weeks. With 80% power and a
two-sided type I error rate of 0.05, we estimate that 128 patients (64 per group)
will be required to detect a moderate intervention effect size of 0.529 between the intervention and control arm. In
addition, a relative reduction of ≥30% in pain severity (BPI) is an
accepted threshold for clinically significant improvement in pain trials.30 Results from a previous study involving
automated symptom modelling found a 27% difference in such improvement rates at 12
weeks.25 Our estimated sample size will
therefore also provide 80% power to detect a similar difference in rate. As our
patient sample is drawn from a generally frail population, we have allowed for an
attrition rate of 20% and therefore aim to recruit 160 participants (80 per group).
The trial is expected to recruit from four to five participating centres that will be
selected due to their large oncology (or related) clinics.

Data analysis
There are no planned interim analyses; outcome data will be analysed once only. All
analyses will be conducted on the intent-to-treat population, in which all
participants will be included in the analysis according to allocation, regardless of
non-compliance with the intervention. An overall two-sided 5% significance level will
be used for all statistical endpoint comparisons. Details of all analysis are
provided in box 1.Box 1 Data analysis plan for primary and secondary outcomes, health economic
analysis and qualitative data
Analysis activities


Primary outcomes


To assess the primary implementation outcome, the proportion of
participants receiving each intervention, at least one intervention and
all interventions will be summarised overall and by recruiting site along
with 95% CIs.

To assess the primary effectiveness outcome, pain severity (Brief Pain
Inventory, BPI), we will fit a linear mixed-effects regression model with
repeated measures (6 and 12 weeks). The model will contain centre
random effect, and fixed effects for intervention group, research centre,
baseline score, time, and intervention group by time interaction.
Similarly, a logistic mixed-effects regression model will be used to
assess the proportion of participants
with ≥30% reduction in pain severity.

Secondary outcomes


The secondary outcomes BPI interference, participant’s pain
knowledge and experience, EQ-5D and European Organization for Research
and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) QLQ-C30 will be assessed using a linear
mixed-effects regression model with repeated measures as per the primary
outcome.

The 7-point global rating of change in pain, healthcare use and safety
data will be summarised.

Exploratory subgroup analysis will be conducted, differentiating
participants in the intervention arm who were engaged in the use of
PainCheck versus those who were not. Descriptive statistics will be used
to present the primary outcome at each time point for each subgroup.

Missing data


Reasons for attrition and missing data will be summarised along with
reason, following the classification set out in the MORECare
statement43: attrition due to
death, illness or at random; with additional reason due to participant
withdrawal.

The pattern of missing data according to participant characteristics will
be investigated to inform the multiple imputation approach and the
assumptions of Missing At Random and Missing Not At Random.

Regression analysis will handle missing data due to attrition by testing
results from different methods of imputation, including multiple
imputation44 in the primary
analysis, allowing all participants in the intention-to-treat population
to be included, and analysis to the availability of data in sensitivity
analysis. This will allow us to test the trial conclusions under
different assumptions and biases introduced through missing data.

Health economic analysis


The economic evaluation will follow the National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence reference case45
and hence will be a cost-utility analysis presenting cost per
incremental quality-adjusted life year (QALY) from the perspective
of the healthcare and personal social services provider. It will be
informed by earlier work of the research team.46


The evaluation will combine trial-based and model-based analyses. Trial
data will be analysed to yield within-trial cost-utility results.
Participants will complete the utility measures (EQ-5D and EORTC-8D, the
latter derived from the QLQ-C30)47
at baseline and follow-up along with a resource use questionnaire. The
EQ-5D values will be used in the primary analysis with supplementary
analyses presented based on the EORTC-8D and pain rating item from the
BPI. Survival data will be combined with utility data to calculate QALYs
and resource use costed using national resources (eg, National Health
Service reference costs, personal social services research unit costs).
The development and implementation of the interventions will be costed
following consultation with the trial researchers leading each Improving
the Management of Pain from Advanced Cancer in the Community programme
work stream. The within-trial analysis will present (where
appropriate) incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) for the
interventions versus usual care with ICERs below £20 000
usually indicative of cost-effectiveness. Non-parametric bootstrapping
and deterministic sensitivity analyses will be conducted to estimate the
level of uncertainty around the ICERs.

In parallel, a simple decision-analytic Markov model will be developed.
This will be developed according to best practice48 and yield cost per QALY estimates. The
model will allow the extrapolation of expected costs and benefits beyond
the trial period. It will also allow a more in-depth exploration of
uncertainty in the ICERs and a more flexible exploration of scenario
sensitivity analyses.

Process evaluation


Quantitative analysis will summarise delivery and implementation of the
intervention according to:

Palliative care nurse use of interventions, including the number of
participants seen by each palliative care nurse by trial arm to
explore the level of clustering and potential for contamination by
the nurse.

Training and supervision for intervention delivery.

Participant uptake, including a flow diagram to depict uptake and
usage according to the initial palliative care visit and subsequent
use of PainCheck.

Qualitative interview analysis: Interview transcripts will be analysed
using framework analysis49 to draw
out key themes from the data. The framework analysis process involves
five key stages: (1) Familiarisation—getting an overview of the
issues raised during the interviews; (2) Identifying a thematic
framework—making notes on the key issues discussed; (3)
Indexing—applying the thematic framework to the data; (4)
Charting—moving data from individual interviews and putting
sections into the framework; (5) Mapping and interpretation—the
researcher attempts to make sense of the data and interpret the key
themes and issues discussed.




Patient and public involvement
The IMPACCT research programme comprises four work streams. The first three work
streams, running in parallel, sought to understand and improve current cancer pain
management at the levels of the patient and their caregiver, health professional and
healthcare system. Across these three work streams, extensive user engagement with
patients, caregivers and health professionals occurred, informing an understanding of
their priorities, experience and preferences relating to cancer pain management. Part of
this work involved the development and piloting of interventions used in the trial,
including assessment of their acceptability, and informed the design of the trial, its
research question and outcome measures. The research programme also has a patient and
public involvement (PPI) group, comprising patients with cancer and caregivers of those
with cancer. PPI representatives are co-investigators on the research programme,
contributors at all quarterly programme management meetings and members of the trial
steering group. The latter enabled PPI representatives to inform the recruitment
processes and conduct of the trial. For example, it was decided that due to participants
having advanced disease, information sheets should provide contact details to enquire
about study findings rather than active dissemination by the research team. PPI
involvement has been central to all research programme activities, informing our
approach to patient, caregiver and health professional engagement prior to and during
the trial.

Discussion
This trial will conclude a 5-year programme of research funded by the NIHR PGfAR
Programme. The wider aim of the programme, IMPACCT, is to reduce distress from cancer
pain in palliative care patients and reduce the impact on the NHS of avoidable
admissions for cancer pain. We believe that our RCT has the potential to significantly
influence NHS service delivery to community-based patients with pain from advanced
cancer. We aim to provide definitive evidence of whether two simple interventions
delivered by community palliative care nurse in palliative care that
support self-management are clinically and cost-effective additions to standard
community palliative care. We are conducting a detailed process evaluation that will
inform an implementation strategy for the wider NHS if we find a benefit for
intervention. One of our interventions, ‘Tackling Cancer Pain—A toolkit
for patients and families’ addresses all the information recommendations in the
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidance on ‘Opioids in
Palliative Care’ and was runner-up in the British Medical Association Patient
Education awards 2016. Our electronic pain monitoring system ‘PainCheck’
is underpinned by significant development work,31–35 which explores engagement by patient
and healthcare professionals. PainCheck offers a potentially time-efficient and
cost-efficient way for busy community palliative care teams to monitor patients with
cancer pain and respond when needed.

Ethics and dissemination
A favourable ethical opinion was obtained from the NHS National Research Ethics
Service Committee Yorkshire & The Humber—Leeds East, reference number
15/YH/0235. The trial opened and recruited the first participant in October 2015.
Screening, recruitment and implementation were monitored on a monthly basis. After 6
months of recruitment and after 13 patients had been recruited, it was apparent that
the trial design needed to be changed to ensure the trial is embedded in existing NHS
care pathways. A substantial amendment was made to remove the concept of
‘early screening and referral’ to allow identification at point of
referral. The rationale for this was that patients were already being referred to
community palliative care services for pain management support when needed. The trial
is sponsored by the University of Leeds (Faculty Head of Research and Innovation
Support, Faculty of Medicine and Health Research Office, University of Leeds),
managed by the Clinical Trials Research Unit at the University of Leeds and supported
by a Trial Management Group (TMG) and Trial Steering Committee (TSC). The TMG is
composed of individuals responsible for the day-to-day management of the trial,
including the PI (MIB), statisticians, trial manager, research nurse and researchers.
The TSC includes external experts who will provide overall supervision for a trial on
behalf of the Trial Sponsor and Trial Funder.

The following organisations have given research governance approval for the trial:
Diana Princess of Wales Hospital, Grimsby; Care Plus Group, Grimsby; Nottingham City
Hospital, Nottingham; Nottingham Citycare, Nottingham; St James University Hospital,
Leeds; St Gemma’s Hospice, Leeds; Wheatfields Hospice, Leeds; Wakefield
Hospice, Wakefield; York Hospital, York; St Leonards Hospice, York; Bradford Royal
Infirmary, Bradford; Marie Curie Hospice, Bradford; Huddersfield Royal Infirmary,
Huddersfield; Kirkwood Hospice, Huddersfield; Churchill Hospital, Oxford; Sobell
House, Oxford; Scarborough General Hospital, Scarborough; St Catherine’s
Hospice, Scarborough.

Data will be collected and retained in accordance with the Data Protection Act 1998
(and successor legislation). Trial documents (paper and electronic) will be retained
in a secure location for 5 years after trial completion. To support dissemination of
our findings, we will work with local and national patient advocacy groups (linking
to public and patient involvement co-applicants on the wider programme) to explain
our work and encourage wider adoption of our findings. We will also disseminate
through academic papers and presentation at national and international clinical
meetings.

Supplementary Material
Reviewer comments
 Author's manuscript
 We thank our patient and public involvement representatives for their contribution
throughout all stages of the research programme. We also thank members of the trial
steering committee (Dr Barry Laird, Dr Wei Gao, Dr Sheila E Fisher) and the wider
programme management group (Professor Alison Blenkinsopp, Mary Godfrey, Professor Robbie
Foy, Professor Sue Pavitt, Dr Geoff Hall, Professor Richard Jones, Christine Allmark,
Peter Rainey, Zoe Edwards, and Karen Vinall-Collier).

MJA and AW-H contributed equally.

Contributors: MJA, AWH and MF drafted the initial manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript
prior to submission. All authors were involved in the critical revision of the
article for important intellectual content and provided final approval of its
content. The team comprises the primary investigator (MIB) and co-investigators (LEZ,
BMB, SJC, CH, KF, JMB) of the larger research programme. The team includes a trial
statistician (AWH), trial coordinator (MF), trial management lead (SH), health
economists (DM, JOD) and lead research nurse (KB). Members of the research team also
led the design, development and evaluation of the patient self-management educational
intervention (JH, NDH, KF) and the eHealth intervention for routine pain assessment
and monitoring in patients with advanced cancer (BMB, MJA, ST, JH).

Funding: This article presents independent research funded by the National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) Programme Grant (RP-PG-0610-10114).

Disclaimer: The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS,
the NIHR or the Department of Health. The sponsor and funders had no involvement in
the study design; collection, management, analysis and interpretation of data;
writing of the report; and the decision to submit the report for publication.

Competing interests: None declared.

Patient consent: Detail has been removed from this case description/these case descriptions to ensure
anonymity. The editors and reviewers have seen the detailed information available and
are satisfied that the information backs up the case the authors are making.

Ethics approval: Ethical approval was obtained from the Yorkshire & The Humber—Leeds East
Research Ethics Committee (reference: 15/YH/0235).

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; peer reviewed for ethical and funding approval prior to
submission.

Data sharing statement: No additional data available.

Author note: Trial registration number: ISRCTN18281271. The trial was added to the ISRCTN registry
on 30 September 2015.
==== Refs
References
1. 
Macmillan Cancer Support . Statistics fact sheet .
London : Macmillan Cancer
Support , 2017 
https://www.macmillan.org.uk/_images/cancer-statistics-factsheet_tcm9-260514.pdf

2. 
van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH , de Rijke JM , Kessels AG , et al 
Prevalence of pain in patients with cancer: a
systematic review of the past 40 years . Ann Oncol 
2007 ;18 :1437 –49 .
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdm056
17355955 
3. 
Deandrea S , Corli O , Consonni D , et al 
Prevalence of breakthrough cancer pain:
a systematic review and a pooled analysis of published
literature . J Pain Symptom Manage 
2014 ;47 :57 –76 .
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2013.02.015
23796584 
4. 
Greco MT , Roberto A , Corli O , et al 
Quality of cancer pain management: an update of a
systematic review of undertreatment of patients with cancer .
J Clin Oncol 
2014 ;32 :4149 –54 .
doi:10.1200/JCO.2014.56.0383
25403222 
5. 
van den Beuken-van Everdingen MH , Hochstenbach LM , Joosten EA , et al 
Update on prevalence of pain in patients with cancer:
systematic review and meta-analysis . J Pain Symptom
Manage 
2016 ;51 :1070 –90 .
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2015.12.340
27112310 
6. 
O’Leary MJ , O’Brien AC , Murphy M , et al 
Place of care: from referral to specialist palliative
care until death . BMJ Support Palliat Care 
2017 ;7 :53 –9 .
doi:10.1136/bmjspcare-2014-000696

7. 
Kwon JH  
Overcoming barriers in cancer pain
management . J Clin Oncol 
2014 ;32 :1727 –33 .
doi:10.1200/JCO.2013.52.4827
24799490 
8. 
Campbell V  
The challenges of cancer pain assessment and
management . Ulster Med J 
2011 ;80 :104 –6 .22347753 
9. 
British Medical Association . Improving analgesic use to
support pain management at the end of life .
London : British Medical
Association , 2017 .
10. 
Bakitas M , Lyons KD , Hegel MT , et al 
The project ENABLE II randomized controlled trial to
improve palliative care for rural patients with advanced cancer: baseline
findings, methodological challenges, and solutions .
Palliat Support Care 
2009 ;7 :75 –86 .
doi:10.1017/S1478951509000108
19619377 
11. 
Brumley R , Enguidanos S , Jamison P , et al 
Increased satisfaction with care and lower costs:
results of a randomized trial of in-home palliative care .
J Am Geriatr Soc 
2007 ;55 :993 –1000 .
doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01234.x
17608870 
12. 
Rabow MW , Dibble SL , Pantilat SZ , et al 
The comprehensive care team: a controlled trial of
outpatient palliative medicine consultation . Arch Intern
Med 
2004 ;164 :83 –91 .
doi:10.1001/archinte.164.1.83
14718327 
13. 
Temel JS , Greer JA , Muzikansky A , et al 
Early palliative care for patients with metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer . N Engl J Med 
2010 ;363 :733 –42 .
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1000678
20818875 
14. 
Zimmermann C , Swami N , Krzyzanowska M , et al 
Early palliative care for patients with advanced
cancer: a cluster-randomised controlled trial .
Lancet 
2014 ;383 :1721 –30 .
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62416-2
24559581 
15. 
Hackett J , Godfrey M , Bennett MI  
Patient and caregiver perspectives on managing pain
in advanced cancer: a qualitative longitudinal study .
Palliat Med 
2016 ;30 :711 –9 .
doi:10.1177/0269216316628407
26847524 
16. 
Valeberg BT , Miaskowski C , Hanestad BR , et al 
Demographic, clinical, and pain characteristics are
associated with average pain severity groups in a sample of oncology
outpatients . J Pain 
2008 ;9 :873 –82 .
doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2008.05.001
18571988 
17. 
Reid CM , Gooberman-Hill R , Hanks GW  
Opioid analgesics for cancer pain: symptom control
for the living or comfort for the dying? A qualitative study to investigate the
factors influencing the decision to accept morphine for pain caused by
cancer . Ann Oncol 
2008 ;19 :44 –8 .
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdm462
18073222 
18. 
Lovell MR , Luckett T , Boyle FM , et al 
Patient education, coaching, and self-management for
cancer pain . J Clin Oncol 
2014 ;32 :1712 –20 .
doi:10.1200/JCO.2013.52.4850
24799486 
19. 
Bennett MI , Bagnall AM , José Closs S  
How effective are patient-based educational
interventions in the management of cancer pain? Systematic review and
meta-analysis . Pain 
2009 ;143 :192 –9 .
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2009.01.016
19285376 
20. 
Cummings GG , Olivo SA , Biondo PD , et al 
Effectiveness of knowledge translation interventions
to improve cancer pain management . J Pain Symptom
Manage 
2011 ;41 :915 –39 .
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2010.07.017
21398088 
21. 
Sheinfeld Gorin S , Krebs P , Badr H , et al 
Meta-analysis of psychosocial interventions to reduce
pain in patients with cancer . J Clin Oncol 
2012 ;30 :539 –47 .
doi:10.1200/JCO.2011.37.0437
22253460 
22. 
Koller A , Miaskowski C , De Geest S , et al 
A systematic evaluation of content, structure, and
efficacy of interventions to improve patients' self-management of cancer
pain . J Pain Symptom Manage 
2012 ;44 :264 –84 .
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2011.08.015
22871509 
23. 
Trowbridge R , Dugan W , Jay SJ , et al 
Determining the effectiveness of a clinical-practice
intervention in improving the control of pain in outpatients with
cancer . Acad Med 
1997 ;72 :798 –800 .
doi:10.1097/00001888-199709000-00016
9311323 
24. 
Kravitz RL , Delafield JP , Hays RD , et al 
Bedside charting of pain levels in hospitalized
patients with cancer: a randomized controlled trial . J
Pain Symptom Manage 
1996 ;11 :81 –7 .
doi:10.1016/0885-3924(95)00155-7
8907138 
25. 
Kroenke K , Theobald D , Wu J , et al 
Effect of telecare management on pain and depression
in patients with cancer: a randomized trial . JAMA 
2010 ;304 :163 –71 .
doi:10.1001/jama.2010.944
20628129 
26. 
Oldenmenger WH , Sillevis Smitt PA , van Montfort CA , et al 
A combined pain consultation and pain education
program decreases average and current pain and decreases interference in daily
life by pain in oncology outpatients: a randomized controlled
trial . Pain 
2011 ;152 :2632 –9 .
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2011.08.009
21906879 
27. 
Craig P , Dieppe P , Macintyre S , et al 
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: the
new Medical Research Council guidance . Int J Nurs
Stud 
2013 ;50 :587 –92 .
doi:10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2012.09.010
23159157 
28. 
Kamper SJ , Maher CG , Mackay G  
Global rating of change scales: a review of strengths
and weaknesses and considerations for design . J Man Manip
Ther 
2009 ;17 :163 –70 .
doi:10.1179/jmt.2009.17.3.163
20046623 
29. 
Cohen J  
Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
sciences . 2nd Edn 
Hillsdale, New
Jersey : L Erlbaum ,
1988 .
30. 
Dworkin RH , Turk DC , Wyrwich KW , et al 
Interpreting the clinical importance of treatment
outcomes in chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations .
J Pain 
2008 ;9 :105 –21 .
doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2007.09.005
18055266 
31. 
Taylor S , Allsop MJ , Shaw J , et al 
The feasibility of collecting patient reported pain
data using a system delivered across four modes of technology .
Pain Med 
2015 ;16 :2212 –3 .
doi:10.1111/pme.12811
26114214 
32. 
Allsop MJ , Taylor S , Bennett MI , et al 
Understanding patient requirements for technology
systems that support pain management in palliative care services: a qualitative
study . Health Informatics J 
2017 :14 
doi:10.1177/1460458217740724
26635323 
33. 
Taylor S , Allsop MJ , Bennett MI , et al 
Usability testing of an electronic pain monitoring
system for palliative cancer patients: a think-aloud study .
Health Informatics J 
2017 :14 
doi:10.1177/1460458217741754
26635323 
34. 
Taylor S , Allsop MJ , Bekker HL , et al 
Identifying professionals' needs in integrating
electronic pain monitoring in community palliative care services: an interview
study . Palliat Med 
2017 ;31 :661 –70 .
doi:10.1177/0269216316677470
27836943 
35. 
Allsop MJ , Taylor S , Mulvey MR , et al 
Information and communication technology for managing
pain in palliative care: a review of the literature . BMJ
Support Palliat Care 
2015 ;5 :481 –9 .
doi:10.1136/bmjspcare-2013-000625

36. 
Hughes ND , Closs SJ , Flemming K , et al 
Supporting self-management of pain by patients with
advanced cancer: views of palliative care professionals .
Support Care Cancer 
2016 ;24 :5049 –57 .
doi:10.1007/s00520-016-3372-2
27557834 
37. 
Flemming K , Closs SJ , Hughes ND , et al 
Using qualitative research to overcome the
shortcomings of systematic reviews when designing of a self-management
intervention for advanced cancer pain . Int J Qual
Methods 
2016 ;15 :1 –11 .
doi:10.1177/1609406916670656

38. 
Cleeland CS , Ryan KM  
Pain assessment: global use of the brief pain
inventory . Ann Acad Med Singapore 
1994 ;23 :129 –38 .8080219 
39. 
Rosenstiel AK , Keefe FJ  
The use of coping strategies in chronic low back pain
patients: relationship to patient characteristics and current
adjustment . Pain 
1983 ;17 :33 –44 .
doi:10.1016/0304-3959(83)90125-2
6226916 
40. 
The City of Hope Pain & Palliative Care Resource Center .
The Patient Pain Questionnaire (PPQ). Measurement Instrument
Database for the Social Science . www.midss.ie

41. 
Brooks R  
EuroQol: the current state of play .
Health Policy 
1996 ;37 :53 –72 .
doi:10.1016/0168-8510(96)00822-6
10158943 
42. 
Aaronson NK , Ahmedzai S , Bergman B , et al 
The European Organization for Research and Treatment
of Cancer QLQ-C30: a quality-of-life instrument for use in international clinical
trials in oncology . J Natl Cancer Inst 
1993 ;85 :365 –76 .
doi:10.1093/jnci/85.5.365
8433390 
43. 
Higginson IJ , Evans CJ , Grande G , et al 
Evaluating complex interventions in end of life care:
the MORECare statement on good practice generated by a synthesis of transparent
expert consultations and systematic reviews . BMC
Med 
2013 ;11 :11 
doi:10.1186/1741-7015-11-111
23324495 
44. 
Rubin D  
Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys .
New York : John
Wiley , 1987 .
45. 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence .
Guide to the methods of technology appraisal 2013: process and
methods (PMG9) . 2013 
https://www.nice.org.uk/process/pmg9/chapter/foreword

46. 
Meads DM , O’Dwyer JL , Hulme CT , et al 
Patient preferences for pain management in advanced
cancer: results from a discrete choice experiment .
Patient 
2017 ;10 :643 –51 .
doi:10.1007/s40271-017-0236-x
28364385 
47. 
Rowen D , Brazier J , Young T , et al 
Deriving a preference-based measure for cancer using
the EORTC QLQ-C30 . Value Health 
2011 ;14 :721 –31 .
doi:10.1016/j.jval.2011.01.004
21839411 
48. 
Caro JJ , Briggs AH , Siebert U , et al 
Modeling good research practices—overview: a
report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good Research Practices Task
Force-1 . Med Decis Making 
2012 ;32 :667 –77 .
doi:10.1177/0272989X12454577
22990082 
49. 
Ritchie J , Spencer L  
Analysing qualitative data, in qualitative data analysis for
applied policy research . : Bryman A , Bryman A , Burgess RG  , London :
Routledge ,
1994 :173 –94 .

