
==== Front
BMJ OpenBMJ OpenbmjopenbmjopenBMJ Open2044-6055BMJ Publishing Group BMA House, Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9JR bmjopen-2017-01994410.1136/bmjopen-2017-019944Emergency MedicineProtocol15061691Randomised controlled trial of the sliding hip screw versus X-Bolt
Dynamic Hip Plating System for the fixation of trochanteric fractures of the hip in
adults: a protocol study for WHiTE 4 (WHiTE4) Griffin Xavier L 1Achten Juul 1Sones William 2Cook Jonathan 2Costa Matthew L 1
1 
OxfordTrauma, NDORMS, Kadoorie
Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

2 
NDORMS, University of
Oxford, Oxford,
UK
Correspondence to  Dr Xavier L Griffin;
xavier.griffin@ndorms.ox.ac.uk2018 26 1 2018 8 1 e01994404 10 2017 28 11 2017 30 11 2017 © Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise
stated in the text of the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is
permitted unless otherwise expressly granted.2018This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative
Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their
derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited
and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/Introduction
Sliding hip screw fixation is well established in the treatment of trochanteric
fractures of the hip. The X-Bolt Dynamic Hip Plating System builds on the
successful design features of the sliding hip screw but differs in the nature of
the fixation in the femoral head. A randomised pilot study suggested that the
X-bolt Dynamic Hip Plating System might provide similar health-related quality of
life while reducing the risk of revision surgery when compared with the sliding
hip screw. This is the protocol for a multicentre randomised trial of sliding hip
screw versus X-Bolt Dynamic Hip Plating System for patients 60 years and over
treated for a trochanteric fracture of the hip.

Methods and analysis
Multicentre, multisurgeon, parallel, two-arm, randomised controlled trial.
Patients aged 60 years and older with a trochanteric hip fracture are potentially
eligible. Participants will be randomly allocated on a 1:1 basis to either sliding
hip screw or X-Bolt Dynamic Hip Plating System. Otherwise, all care will be in
accordance with National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidance. A
minimum of 1128 patients will be recruited to obtain 90% power to detect a
0.075-point difference in EuroQol-5D health-related quality of life at 4 months
postrandomisation. Secondary outcomes include mortality, residential status,
revision surgery and radiographic measures. The treatment effect will be estimated
using a two-sided t-test adjusted for age, gender and cognitive impairment based
on an intention-to-treat analysis.

Ethics and dissemination
National Research Ethics Committee approved this study on 5 February 2016
(16/WM/0001). The study is sponsored by the University of Oxford and funded
through an investigator initiated grant by X-Bolt Orthopaedics. A manuscript for a
high-impact peer-reviewed journal will be prepared, and the results will be
disseminated to patients through local mechanisms at participating centres.

Trial registration number
ISRCTN92825709.

hipfracture fixationrandomised controlled trialsliding hip screwX-bolt Orthopaedicsspecial-featureunlocked
==== Body
Strengths and limitations of this study
Pragmatic, multicentre, multisurgeon randomised controlled trial.

Includes all participants over 60 years of age, including those with chronic
cognitive impairment.

Reports the UK core outcome set for hip fracture.

Powered to detect differences in health-related quality of life.

Not designed to detect differences in risk of failure of fixation.

Background
Due to an increasing incidence, hip fractures now place a very large burden on current
healthcare systems. Approximately 1.5% of the total healthcare budget in established
market economies is currently spent on the care of patients sustaining a hip
fracture.1 Research focusing on optimising
current treatment pathways and assessing new treatment options in this clinical area is
crucial.

Hip fractures can be subdivided into intracapsular and extracapsular fractures.
Approximately half of all hip fractures are extracapsular, and the great majority of
these are trochanteric fractures, that is, a fracture in the region between the greater
and lesser trochanter.2 The rationale for fixation
of these fractures relies on controlled collapse at the fracture site allowing bone ends
to compress and union to occur before potential metalwork failure.

Sliding hip screw (SHS) fixation is well established in the treatment of extracapsular
fractures, and in many fractures, SHS is effective at allowing controlled
collapse of the fracture with consequent mechanical stability leading to healing of the
fracture.3 However, in some hip fractures,
there is deficient bone to share load with the fixation device. Rather than controlled
collapse along the line of the screw, the screw may cut out from the head of the femur
leading to failure of the fixation and damage to the hip joint.4 Revision surgery, to either refix or replace the proximal femur, is
complex, and the outcomes are poor in this frail group of patients.4

The X-Bolt Dynamic Hip Plating System (XHS) builds on the successful design features of
the SHS by having a plate attached to the lateral femur and a single telescoping screw
in the femoral head but differs in the nature of the fixation in the head. Expanding
flanges are deployed to engage and compress the surrounding cancellous bone improving
fixation.5 Trochanteric fractures rely on the
quality of fixation in the femoral head to prevent cut out, and the poor bone quality
encountered in the patients sustaining these fractures is often a contributor to
failure. Our pilot work has demonstrated that there may be a reduced risk of revision
using the XHS compared with the SHS.6

This is the protocol for a multicentre, multisurgeon, parallel, two-arm, randomised
controlled trial. This trial protocol is based on the trial protocol for the pilot
trial.7 This trial will be embedded within the
World Hip Trauma Evaluation Comprehensive Cohort Study.8 The study will include a two-way superiority comparison between XHS and
SHS.

Objectives
The objectives of WHiTE 4 trial are to quantify and draw inferences on the observed
differences:in participants’ health status between the trial treatment groups at
4 months post surgery.

in the risk of all cause revision surgery within the first year
post surgery between the trial treatment groups.

in participants’ health and functional status between the trial
treatment groups at 12 months post surgery.



Method and analysis
Eligibility
Patients will be screened in seven large National Health Service (NHS) Trusts in the
UK against the following criteria:

Inclusion criteria
Patients presenting with trochanteric fracture of the hip who in the opinion of
the treating surgeon would benefit from SHS fixation.

Exclusion criteria
Patients younger than 60 years of age.

Patients with a subtrochanteric fracture.

Patients who are managed non-operatively.

Consent
Patients with a hip fracture are a clinical priority for urgent operative care. They
will undergo surgery on the next available trauma operating list. All patients with a
fracture of the hip are in pain and have received opiate analgesia. It is therefore
understandable that the majority of patients find the initial period of their
treatment in hospital confusing and disorienting. Similarly, patients’ next of
kin, carers and friends are often anxious at this time and may have difficulty in
weighing the large amounts of information that they are given about the injury and
plan for treatment. In this emergency situation, the focus is on obtaining consent
for surgery (where possible) and informing the patient and any next of kin about
immediate clinical care. It is often not possible for the patient or relative/carer
(consultee) to review trial documentation, weigh the information and communicate an
informed decision about whether they would wish to participate. The consent procedure
for this trial will reflect that of the surgery, with the clinical team assessing
capacity before taking consent for the surgical procedure, and this capacity
assessment then being used to decide on the proper approach to consenting to the
research. An appropriate method, in line with the mental capacity act and approved by
a National Research Ethics Committee, will then be used to gain either prospective or
retrospective consent from the patient or appropriate consultee by a Good Clinical
Practice (GCP)-trained, appropriately delegated member of the research team.

Randomisation and blinding
Allocation sequences will be generated at random by the trial statistician.
Allocation will be assigned using secure, online randomisation via a distant
computer generated system administered by Oxford Clinical Trials
Research Unit, University of Oxford. Participants will be enrolled by the
operating surgeon or trial research associates. Participants will be assigned to
their treatment allocation before surgery.

The treatment allocation will be stratified by trial centre. The surgery will be
performed under the care of any of the consultant surgeons in the collaborating
centres. The large number of surgeons—previous experience in similar trials
suggests over 200 surgeons will take part—and the wide skill mix should
eliminate any ‘surgeon effect’ such that stratification by surgeon is
not required. In order to negate bias in the self-reported health-related quality of
life (HRQoL) outcome measures (EuroQol-5D-5L (EQ-5D-5L)), participants will be
blinded to the treatment allocation. The operating surgeon cannot be blinded to the
allocation and will take no part in the assessment of the trial outcomes. Patients
will be kept blinded until the completion of the trial when the blind is broken.
There will be no formal analysis of the success of the blinding.

Treatments
Standardised treatment pathway
Participants will usually be assessed in the emergency department. Diagnosis of a
fracture of the proximal femur will be confirmed by a plain radiograph as per
routine clinical care. Supplementary imaging will be at the discretion of the
treating clinical team. Routine investigations, anaesthetic assessment, antibiotic
and venous thromboembolic prophylaxis will be used as per local policy.

A regional or general anaesthesia technique will be used for every participant.
Perioperative analgesia will be achieved by combining a local anaesthetic nerve
block (femoral and lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh, fascia iliaca or lumbar
plexus) using either a nerve stimulator or ultrasound-guided technique,
periarticular anaesthetic infiltration, intravenous paracetamol 1 g
intravenous infusion and opiate analgesia as clinically indicated.

All participants will have an attempted closed reduction of their fracture. The
lower limb will be supported on a fracture table. Internal fixation with either
device will be performed following the manufacturer’s guidelines.
Postoperative analgesia will be prescribed intraoperatively and reviewed by the
responsible clinical teams as appropriate. In the postoperative period, as per
standard of care, participants will undergo an initial physiotherapy and
occupational therapy trauma assessment. A full social, cognitive, premorbid
function and falls history will be obtained and documented. Participants will be
given the relevant NHS Trust Patient Information packs. An initial treatment plan
with objectives will be made, recorded and commenced. The aim of this plan will be
for participants to mobilise through early, active, full weight bearing.
Participants will be discharged from the acute orthopaedic trauma ward at the
earliest safe opportunity to the most appropriate discharge destination as
determined by the multidisciplinary clinical team.

Allocated treatments
Participants will be randomly allocated to one of two groups:SHS.

XHS.



Group 1: SHS
Fixation will involve a SHS with a plate as long as the surgeon feels necessary
to achieve adequate fixation in the femoral shaft. The use of supplementary
fixation such as wires, cables, lag screws and trochanteric stabilisation plate
attachments is permitted at the surgeon’s discretion.

Group 2: XHS
Fixation will involve an XHS used in accordance with the manufacturer’s
guidelines. Similar to the SHS group, the length of the plate will be at the
surgeon’s discretion. Supplementary fixation with wires, cables and lag
screws are also permitted at the surgeon’s discretion.

Outcomes
Personal data collected during the study will be handled and stored in accordance
with the 1998 Data Protection Act, which requires data to be anonymised as soon as it
is practical to do so.

The study databases will be set up by the computer programmer, and all specifications
agreed between the computer programmer, statistician and trial manager and other
relevant members of the trial team. The procedure for data entry will be documented
in the data management plan.

The data collected from participants will be entered in linked-anonymised form to the
trial database. Any paper copies of identifiable data, and corresponding
reidentifying links to the participant trial ID, will be stored separately, in a
locked cabinet in an access-restricted part of the University of Oxford. Names and
addresses will not be disclosed to anyone other than staff involved in running the
study. Direct access to source data/documentation may be required for study-related
monitoring or audit by the sponsor, regulatory authorities, NHS Trust R&D staff
or ethics committees.

As per routine clinical care, the existing National Hip Fracture Database dataset
will be collected via telephone interview or postal questionnaire. We propose to
augment this to include those outcomes reported from the UK consensus for a hip
fracture core outcome set.9 Additional data
recorded will be radiographic fracture pattern obtained from routinely collected
X-rays and EQ-5D-5L at baseline (retrospective prefracture), 4 and 12 months
postfracture. Four months represent a routine follow-up point for the National Hip
Fracture Database and the point at which recovery following hip fracture plateaus.
Parsons et al10 reported that
EQ-5D improved after surgery to around 4 months, with little evidence for subsequent
improvement after this time-point. However, complications and potential revisions
will need to be reviewed up to a minimum of 1 year postsurgery. In addition,
longer term follow-up to 12 months is recommended by the Medical Research Council for
investigations of all complex interventions.11
Copies of the participants’ routine ‘operation note’ and
‘discharge summary’ will be collected from their medical notes. The
discharge summary includes details of their treatment, perioperative complications
and discharge address.

Primary outcome measure
EQ-5D-5L is a validated measure of health-related quality of life, consisting of a
five-dimension health status classification system and a separate visual analogue
scale.12 An updated version of the EQ-5D
with five response levels, the EQ-5D-5L, has recently been developed to enhance
the responsiveness of the instrument to changes in patient health. The measurement
properties of the EQ-5D in this patient population have been extensively
investigated and is currently the best measurement tool available.10 13 This outcome will be obtained
through telephone interview with the participant or consultee.

Secondary outcome measures
These will include:mortality, which is obtained from patients’
medical notes;

functional status will be assessed in line with NHFD
requirements. This will include walking ability indoors and outdoors and
information regarding residential status; obtained through patient
interview/questionnaire;

revision surgery and cause, which is obtained from
patients’ medical notes';

complications, which is obtained from patients’
medical notes;

radiographic outcomes, including screw migration and cut
out, which is collected from any X-rays taken as part of
standard clinical follow-up during the first 12 months
post surgery.



Sample size
The best available evidence we have from data collected during the WHiT and WHITE
studies suggests that the SD for EQ-5D at 4 months postsurgery is approximately 0.3
points.9 The best available evidence for
what constitutes a minimal clinically important difference (MCID) for EQ-5D that is
worth detecting comes from a review of MCID estimates.14 After reviewing the literature, they estimated a median value of 0.08
for the MCID for EQ-5D-3L. Using a conservative estimate of the standard deviation
(SD=0.33), this suggests a standardised effect size of approximately 0.24, a
‘small to moderate effect’ based on Cohen’s criteria.15 Taking a conservative approach, we considered
three possible target different values of 0.07, 0.75 and 0.08.

Assuming that the EQ-5D-3L at 4 months postsurgery has an approximate normal
distribution, which Parsons et al10 suggests is reasonable, and a 1:1 allocation ratio, then if the true
difference between the experimental and control group EQ-5D means is in the range
0.07–0.08, we will need to recruit the below number of participants in each
group to be able to reject the null hypothesis that the population means are equal
with probability (power) 0.8 and 0.9 and type I error rate of 5%
(significance) table 1.

Table 1 Group sizes required following sample size calculation based on varying
assumptions.

Power (%)	MCID	
0.07	0.075	0.08	
80	290	253	222	
90	387	338	297	
Taking the intermediate MCID of 0.075, for 80% (90%) power, we would need to recruit
253 (338) patients in both the experimental arm and in the control arm, 506 (676) in
total. In this population, we expect considerable loss to follow-up due mainly to
patients declining consent to further follow-up and incapacity, so we have assumed
that only 60% of recruited study participants will be available at the definitive
endpoint at 4 months. This gives a total sample size of 844 for 80% power and 1128
for 90% power. Conservatively, we aim to recruit 1128 to ensure 90% power based on
these assumptions.

Statistical analysis
The principal analyses will be conducted on an ‘as allocated’ basis
irrespective of compliance. Two-sided 5% significance level will be adopted and
corresponding 95% CIs will be calculated whenever possible. The primary outcome
measure, EQ-5D-5L at 4 months post surgery, will be analysed by calculating
the adjusted treatment effect by using linear regression to compare the EQ-5D-5L
score at 4 months (with a zero value imputed for those who died by this time point)
between the treatment arms, adjusting for age, gender and cognitive impairment.

A sensitivity analysis of EQ-5D-5L score at 4 months with adjustment for the
retrospective baseline EQ-5D-5L score in addition to age, gender and cognitive
impairment will also be performed to enable the influence of this factor to be
evaluated. Additionally, a two-sided t-test for differences between SHS (control) and
XHS will also be used to calculate an unadjusted treatment effect both for EQ-5D with
and without zero for those who died. Some outcome data are likely not to be available
due to lack of completion of individual data items, declining consent for further
follow-up or general loss to follow-up. Where possible, the reasons for data
‘missingness’ will be ascertained and reported. The nature and pattern
of the ‘missingness’ will be carefully considered, including in
particular whether data can be treated as missing completely at random. Missing data
may be imputed in sensitivity analyses if considered beneficial to the interpretation
of the main findings. Any imputation methods used for scores and other derived
variables will be carefully considered and justified. Reasons for ineligibility,
non-compliance, withdrawal or other protocol violations will be stated and any
patterns summarised.

Secondary measures will be analysed using generalised linear models with adjustment
for centre, baseline EQ-5D-5L, age, gender and cognitive impairment as appropriate.
EQ-5Q-5L at 12 months will be analysed with the same sensitivity analyses as the
primary outcome. Data will be summarised with point estimates of mean and SD, 95%
CIs, or proportion and risk ratios. Differences between SHS and XHS will be analysed
using a two-sided significance level of 5%.

The number and temporal pattern of adverse events will be investigated to assess if
these differ between treatment groups.

Trial oversight
The day-to-day management of the trial will be the responsibility of the clinical
trial manager, based at Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and
Musculoskeletal Sciences and supported by the Oxford Clinical Trials Research Unit
(OCTRU) staff. This will be overseen by the Trial Management Group, who will meet
monthly to assess progress. It will also be the responsibility of the clinical trial
manager to undertake training of the research associates at each of the trial
centres. The trial statistician will be closely involved in setting up data capture
systems, design of databases and clinical reporting forms.

A Trial Steering Committee (TSC) and a Data & Safety Monitoring Committee
(DSMC) will be set up. The study DSMC will adopt a DAMOCLES charter, which defines
its terms of reference and operation in relation to oversight of the trial. They will
not be asked to perform any formal interim analyses of effectiveness. They will,
however, see copies of data accrued to date or summaries of that data by treatment
group, and they will assess the screening algorithm against the eligibility criteria.
They will also consider emerging evidence from other related trials or research and
review related SAEs that have been reported. They may advise the chair of the TSC at
any time if, in their view, the trial should be stopped for ethical reasons,
including concerns about participant safety. DSMC meetings will be held at least
annually during the recruitment phase of the study.

Quality control
The study may be monitored or audited in accordance with the current approved
protocol, relevant regulations and standard operating procedures by the host
organisation, sponsor or appropriate regulatory authorities. A monitoring plan will
be developed according to OCTRU standard operating procedures, which involve a risk
assessment. The monitoring activities are based on the outcome of the risk assessment
and may involve central monitoring and site monitoring.

Ethics and dissemination
A manuscript for a high-impact peer-reviewed journal will be prepared. Authorship
will be determined in accordance with the ICMJE guidelines, and other contributors
will be acknowledged. The results of this project will be disseminated to patients
through local mechanisms at all participating centres.

Supplementary Material
Reviewer comments
 Author's manuscript
 Contributors: XLG, MLC and JA developed the trial protocol and contributed to the writing of the
manuscript. XLG is the chief investigator. WS developed the statistical analysis plan
and is leading the statistical analysis for the study. JC developed the analysis plan
and contributed to the reporting plan for the study. He is providing statistical
oversight to the study.

Funding: This project was funded by X-Bolt Orthopaedics through an investigator-initiated
funding scheme and supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre.

Disclaimer: The views expressed are those of the authors.

Competing interests: None declared.

Patient consent: Obtained.

Ethics approval: National Research Ethics Committee – West Midlands.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
==== Refs
References
1. Johnell O ,
Kanis JA  
An
estimate of the worldwide prevalence, mortality and disability associated with hip
fracture . Osteoporos Int 
2004 ;15 :897 –902 .
doi:10.1007/s00198-004-1627-015490120 
2. Boulton CBV ,
Cromwell D ,
Johansen A , et al 
National Hip Fracture Database National Report ,
2013  (accessed 24 Oct 2014 ).
3. Lorich DG ,
Geller DS ,
Nielson JH  
Osteoporotic pertrochanteric hip fractures: management and current
controversies . Instr Course Lect 
2004 ;53 :441 –54 .15116633 
4. Kim WY ,
Han CH ,
Park JI , et al 
Failure of intertrochanteric fracture fixation with a dynamic hip
screw in relation to pre-operative fracture stability and
osteoporosis . Int Orthop 
2001 ;25 :360 –2 .11820441 
5. Gibson D ,
Keogh C ,
Morris S  
A
biomechanical study comparing the dynamic hip screw with an X-Bolt in an unstable
intertrochanteric fracture model of the proximal femur . J
of Bone & Joint Surgery, British Volume 
2012 ;94-B :164 –64 .
6. Griffin XL ,
Parsons N ,
McArthur J , et al 
The Warwick Hip Trauma Evaluation One: a randomised pilot trial
comparing the X-Bolt Dynamic Hip Plating System with sliding hip screw fixation in
complex extracapsular hip fractures: WHiTE (One) . Bone
Joint J 
2016 ;98-B :686 –9 .
doi:10.1302/0301-620X.98B5.3735027143742 
7. Griffin XL ,
McArthur J ,
Achten J , et al 
The Warwick Hip Trauma Evaluation One -an abridged protocol for the
WHiTE One Study: An embedded randomised trial comparing the X-bolt with slidinghip
screw fixation in extracapsular hip fractures . Bone Joint
Res 
2013 ;2 :206 –9 .
doi:10.1302/2046-3758.210.200018324089290 
8. Griffin XL ,
Achten J ,
Parsons N , et al 
The Warwick Hip Trauma Evaluation - an abridged protocol for the
WHiTE Study: A multiple embedded randomised controlled trial cohort
study . Bone Joint Res 
2012 ;1 :310 –4 .
doi:10.1302/2046-3758.111.200012723610662 
9. Haywood KL ,
Griffin XL ,
Achten J , et al 
Developing a core outcome set for hip fracture
trials . Bone Joint J 
2014 ;96-B :1016 –23 .
doi:10.1302/0301-620X.96B8.3376625086115 
10. Parsons N ,
Griffin XL ,
Achten J , et al 
Outcome assessment after hip fracture: is EQ-5D the
answer? 
Bone Joint Res 
2014 ;3 :69 –75 .
doi:10.1302/2046-3758.33.200025024648420 
11. Craig P ,
Dieppe P ,
Macintyre S , et al 
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical
Research Council guidance . BMJ 
2008 ;337 .
12. EuroQol Group . http://www.euroqol.org/ (last
accessed 1 May 2011 ).
13. Griffin XL ,
Parsons N ,
Achten J , et al 
Recovery of health-related quality of life in a United Kingdom hip
fracture population. The Warwick Hip Trauma Evaluation-a prospective cohort
study . The bone & joint journal 
2015 ;97-b :372 –82 .25737522 
14. Walters SJ ,
Brazier JE  
Comparison of the minimally important difference for two health
state utility measures: EQ-5D and SF-6D . Qual Life
Res 
2005 ;14 :1523 –32 .
doi:10.1007/s11136-004-7713-016110932 
15. Cohen J  
Statistical
power analysis for the behavioral sciences . Hillsdale,
N.J : L. Erlbaum Associates ,
1988 .

