
==== Front
Biochimie
Biochimie
Biochimie
0300-9084 1638-6183 Published by Elsevier Masson SAS 

S0300-9084(10)00176-8
10.1016/j.biochi.2010.04.026
Article
Metallo-aminopeptidase inhibitors
Mucha Artur artur.mucha@pwr.wroc.pla∗∗ Drag Marcin b Dalton John P. john.dalton@mcgill.cac∗ Kafarski Paweł a a Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Wrocław University of Technology, Wybrzeże Wyspiańskiego 27, 50-370 Wrocław, Poland
b Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Chemistry, Wrocław University of Technology, Wybrzeże Wyspiańskiego 27, 50-370 Wrocław, Poland
c Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, 21111 Lakeshore Road, Sainte Anne de Bellevue, QC H9X 3V9, Canada
∗ Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +1 514 398 8668. john.dalton@mcgill.ca∗∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +48 71 320 3446; fax: +48 71 328 4064. artur.mucha@pwr.wroc.pl
10 5 2010 
11 2010 
10 5 2010 
92 11 1509 1529
4 2 2010 29 4 2010 Crown copyright © 2010 Published by Elsevier Masson SAS All rights reserved.2010Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.Aminopeptidases are enzymes that selectively hydrolyze an amino acid residue from the N-terminus of proteins and peptides. They are important for the proper functioning of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, but very often are central players in the devastating human diseases like cancer, malaria and diabetes. The largest aminopeptidase group include enzymes containing metal ion(s) in their active centers, which often determines the type of inhibitors that are the most suitable for them. Effective ligands mostly bind in a non-covalent mode by forming complexes with the metal ion(s). Here, we present several approaches for the design of inhibitors for metallo-aminopeptidases. The optimized structures should be considered as potential leads in the drug discovery process against endogenous and infectious diseases.

Keywords
AminopeptidaseInhibitorNon-covalent ligandDrug designCancerMalariaDrugsDiseasesEnzymes
==== Body
1 Introduction
Amino-terminal modifications of nascent polypeptides are the most common processing events, occurring on nearly all proteins. Aminopeptidases are a class of enzymes that play a pivotal role in this processing. Aminopeptidases (EC 3.4.11 – hydrolases/peptidases/aminopeptidases, according to the classification of the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) are proteolytic enzymes that hydrolyze peptide bonds from the amino termini of polypeptide chains. They may hydrolyze the first peptide bond in a polypeptide chain with the release of a single amino acid residue (aminopeptidases in a strict sense) or may remove dipeptides or tripeptides (dipeptidyl- and tripeptidyl-peptidases) from polypeptide substrates. Regarding catalytic mechanism, most of the aminopeptidases are metallo-enzymes but cysteine and serine peptidases are also included in this group. This review focuses on the strict metallo-aminopeptidases because they constitute the largest and the most homogenous class of these enzymes and use one or two metal ions in their active sites to specifically release the N-terminal amino acid residues of polypeptides and proteins. Since 1990 over 5000 papers dealing with aminopeptidases have been published (Medline database).

Aminopeptidases are ubiquitous enzymes widely distributed throughout the biological kingdoms and are found in many subcellular organelles, in cytoplasm, and as membrane components where they perform essential cellular functions. Aminopeptidases act in concert with other peptidases to complete diverse proteolytic pathways. They play a vital role in a range of biological processes and disease situations. Processes as distinct as angiogenesis, antigen presentation, neuropeptide and hormone processing, pregnancy and reproduction, protein turnover, memory, inflammation, tumor growth, cancer and metastasis, blood pressure and hypertension all involve one or more critical aminopeptidases. These enzymes can efficiently retrieve amino acids from dietary proteins and endogenous proteins degraded during protein turnover, thereby also covering a nutritional role.

In addition to the book of Hooper and Lendeckel [1], which describes role of aminopeptidases in biology and medicine, several excellent reviews on various aspects of their biology and the application of their inhibitors have been published [2], [3], [4]. We therefore limit our review to selected recent achievements in this field, although we present this in a certain historical context.

2 Classification of metallo-aminopeptidases
The classification of aminopeptidases has often been based on mechanism of catalysis, the structure of the active site, substrate specificity (broad or narrow) and molecular properties. The nomenclature of many peptidases has been determined by their preferences or requirements for a particular N-terminal amino acid. The rapidly accumulating data covering new representatives of proteolytic enzymes required the development of an integrated source of information [5]. Such a role was fulfilled by the MEROPS database (http://merops.sanger.ac.uk/), which uses hierarchical, structure-based classification of these enzymes. This database relies on the fact that enzymes performing the same (or similar) chemical functions in different organisms generally turn out to have similar overall three-dimensional structures, and also show significant conservation of their amino acid sequences, polypeptide chain lengths and domain organization. In particular, in the regions of their active sites, a high degree of conservation of residue identities and structural positions is observed. In the MEROPS peptidase information database each protease is assigned to a certain family on the basis of statistically significant similarities in amino acid sequence, and families that are thought to be homologous are grouped together into clans. Clans consist of families of peptidases that are believed to share a single evolutionary origin, evidenced by similarities in their tertiary structures and/or their active site architectures.

Fifteen clans of metalloproteases have been identified, with metallo-aminopeptidases found in six which are designated as, MA (the largest one, containing over 35 families), MF, MG, MH, MN and MQ. The families in clan MA are united by the presence of an HEXXH motif in which the two His residues are zinc ligands and the Glu has a catalytic function. Clans MF (two zinc ions in the active site), MG (with the pita-bread fold and containing two cobalt or two manganese ions in their active centers) and MQ (typically with two zinc ions) consists of only one family of peptidases each (M17, M24 and M29, respectively). The MH clan forms the most heterogeneous group and contains a variety of zinc-dependent exopeptidases. Their structures show similar protein folds and are co-catalytic zinc peptidases containing two atoms of zinc per molecule, which have five amino acid ligands. ClanMN contains only one enzyme – d-amino acid-specific aminopeptidase from Bacillus subtilis.

Although metallo-aminopeptidases occur in all types of organisms, the mammalian enzymes were amongst the first proteases discovered in tissues and therefore they have been most intensively studied. Human enzymes are particularly increasing in interest since the alterations in their function and regulation underline many human diseases. For example, leucine aminopeptidases (LAPs, EC 3.4.11.1), belonging to M17 family, have been the most extensively studied because they play a key role in the metabolism of proteins and biologically active peptides. These enzymes, perhaps the first that were isolated, are cytosolic exopeptidases of broad substrate specificity that are ubiquitous in nature being present not only in animals, but also in plants and bacteria [6]. They have medical and biological importance because of their functions in the metabolism of hormones and neurotransmission, cell maturation, and turnover of proteins, including utilization of exogenous proteins as nutrient substances and elimination of nonfunctional proteins. Human LAP is important in processing of antigenic peptides and in determination of immunodominance of various peptides [7], [8], [9] as well as in development of human eye lens cataract [10]. The protease plays a vital role in progression of cancers [11]. It may also have an important function in early events of HIV infection and thus serum activity of this enzyme may be useful as a surrogate marker for HIV infection and response to chemotherapy [12].

Another example of medically important enzyme is microsomal aminopeptidase (belonging to M1 family), known also as aminopeptidase N, CD13 or alanyl aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.2) [13]. In biological systems, their primary peptide substrates include a wide variety of neuropeptides and hormones [14], [15]. It has been established as a myelomonocytic marker in leukemia typing [16], as a receptor for human coronavirus 229E and cytomegalovirus [17], [18], as a mediator of both inflammation and cell invasion [16], as a regulator of blood pressure and the pathogenesis of hypertension [19], and as a regulator of analgesia via metabolism of endorphins and enkephalins [20]. Furthermore, it also regulates IL-8 bioavailability in the endometrium and therefore may contribute to the process of angiogenesis [21]. It also plays key roles in physiological and pathological processes, such as embryogenesis, immune responses, angiogenesis, tumor cell invasion, and metastasis [22].

Methionine aminopeptidases (aminopeptidase M, MetAPs, EC 3.4.11.18), belonging to M24 family, are an example of peptidases that exhibit narrow specificity [23]. Generally they are responsible for the removal of methionine from the amino-terminus of newly synthesized proteins. They maintain stringent specificity for the N-terminal methionine and accept no other natural amino acid residues. They also have a strong preference for small and uncharged second residues in peptide chains. Since the mammalian enzymes play a critical role in the regulation of post-translational processing and protein synthesis they play an important role in the development and malignancy of different types of cancer [24], [25], [26], [27], [28]. Human aminopeptidase M is also involved in neurofibromatosis, one of the most common tumor predisposition syndromes [29].

Although scarce, there are also reports on aminopeptidase isolation and characterization from other vertebrate species, as exemplified by recent findings in fishes (carp and red sea bream) [30], [31] and birds (chicken) [32]. Far more information is known about insect aminopeptidase N, which is one of the membrane proteins identified as a receptor to Cry proteins in various species [33], [34], [35], [36]. Cry proteins produced by Bacillus thuringiensis are toxic to insects and thus this strain is exploited commercially as a bioinsecticide. Aminopeptidases involved in the degradation of insect neuropeptides have been also studied in some respects [37].

The other groups of metallo-aminopeptidases explored intensively are of bacterial origin. The first studies on these enzymes were carried out over 40 years ago, and since then a large number of aminopeptidases of microbial origin have been characterized. They may be localized in cytoplasm, on membranes associated with the cell envelope or secreted into the extracellular media [4]. The interest in these enzymes stems from their potential to act as targets to combat bacterial diseases. In this respect, a wide variety of structurally diverse aminopeptidases have been recently isolated and characterized from a range of bacterial species. These include: aminopeptidase P isolated from common strain of Escherichia coli
[38], aminopeptidase M from pathogenic Mycobacterium tuberculosis
[39] and leucine aminopeptidase from Helicobacter pylori
[40], cold-active aminopeptidase from psychrotropic Colwellia psychrerythraea
[41], a thermophilic enzyme from Geobacillus thermoleovorans
[42], an extracellular zinc metalloprotease and putative virulence factor involved in pathogenicity of the fish pathogen Vibrio anguillarum
[43], and a lysine-specific enzyme from unusually resistant, hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus
[44]. This clearly indicates that bacterial aminopeptidases are widely distributed and are of vital importance.

In recent years there has been a considerable interest in aminopeptidases of parasitic protozoans, which cause important diseases in humans, animals and birds. The alanine and leucine aminopeptidases from Plasmodium falciparum, a causative agent of malaria, the most significant parasitic disease of humans, are the most comprehensively studied [45], [46]. These aminopeptidases are promising targets for designing anti-malarial drugs (for a recent review see [47]). Another important enzyme of Plasmodium – aspartyl aminopeptidase is being considered as an additional target for drug design [48], [49]. Intensive studies on the role and biochemistry of aminopeptidases isolated from other parasitic organisms, including Legionella pneumophila (causative agent of Legionnaires’ disease) [50], Eimeria tenella (causes hemorrhagic cecal coccidiosis in young poultry) [51], Babesia gibsoni (parasite found in red blood cells and transmitted by ticks) [52] and Microsporidia (causing diseases in immunosuppressed patients) [53] are ongoing.

Diseases caused also by trematodes, commonly known as blood-flukes, affect hundreds of million people in impoverished areas of Africa, Central and South America and East Asia, with those caused by Schistosoma spp. are considered by the World Health Organization as second in importance only to malaria. Leucine aminopeptidase is thought to play a central role in hatching of the miracidium from the schistosome egg and therefore is intensively studied as candidate for drug design [54], [55]. Similar motivation has driven studies on the leucine aminopeptidase from Paragonimus westermani, a tissue-invading trematode that causes inflammatory lung disease as well as systemic infections including cerebral invasion in carnivorous mammals [56]. Specific parasite aminopeptidases might also be considered as targets for vaccine design as shown for Fasciola hepatica
[57], a vector of an important freshwater snail-borne helminthiasis that produces a chronic liver infection of cattle and sheep.

3 The catalytic mechanism of aminopeptidases
Understanding the mechanism of action for each family of metallo-aminopeptidases is of a key importance to rational design of more potent and more specific inhibitors of these enzymes and, consequently, to obtain drugs of improved properties. Therefore, a substantial effort has been made in studying the mode of binding of their substrates and transition state inhibitors in enzymatic binding sites, as well as in the elucidation of the three-dimensional structure of active sites and the detailed mechanisms of catalyzed reactions.

A feature common to all metallo-aminopeptidase active sites is that the metal ion (in most cases zinc) is surrounded by a shell of hydrophilic groups that is embedded within a larger environment of hydrophobic groups. In addition, amino acid side chains serving as ligands usually form hydrogen bond contacts with neighboring residues, perhaps to preorder the metal ion binding site and to decrease its entropic cost of binding. The structures of active sites suggest that a number of reaction paths are possible. Two catalytic roles of metal ions might be considered. First, they might stabilize a highly reactive hydroxide ion, thereby ensuring that an activated nucleophile is available for catalysis at physiological pH (mechanism A in Fig. 1
). Second, the positively charged metal ion may serve as an electrophilic catalyst complexing an oxygen atom of the scissile peptide bond and facilitating the nucleophilic attack of water molecule (mechanism B in Fig. 1).Fig. 1 Catalytic roles considered for the metal (zinc) ions in the mechanism of metallo-aminopeptidases action: stabilization of a highly reactive hydroxide ion (mechanism A), complexation of the oxygen atom of the scissile peptide bond to facilitate the nucleophilic attack of a water molecule (mechanism B).



There is also a possibility that the active site glutamate (especially in the case of M17 family of peptidases) acts as a nucleophile resulting in formation of a covalent enzyme–inhibitor complex followed by its fast hydrolysis by water (mechanism C in Fig. 2
). The glutamate assisted process is being considered as a less probable mechanism than A and B. In the case of the enzymes containing binuclear metal centers the substrate carbonyl oxygen is coordinated to one of them and a hydroxide ion bridging two metal ions acts as the nucleophilic agent (mechanism D in Fig. 2). This may explain the fact that several dinuclear metallopeptidases retain some catalytic activity when converted into mononuclear ones but typically exhibit faster rates with dinuclear active sites. Finally, in all cases the additional role of a metal ion is to stabilize developing negative charge(s) in the transition state of the catalytic mechanism.Fig. 2 Alternatives of catalytic mechanisms considered for metallo-aminopeptidases: glutamate acting as a nucleophile – formation of a covalent enzyme–inhibitor complex and its fast hydrolysis (mechanism C), bridging of a hydroxide ion in binuclear metal centers (mechanism D).



There is no single method for the elucidation of the mechanism of certain enzymatic reaction. Thus, a combination of several methods is required. Enzyme kinetics cannot prove which modes of catalysis are used by an enzyme. However, some kinetic data can suggest possibilities to be examined by other techniques. The evaluation of the role of metal ion is usually studied by metal exchange technique. In particular, the role of each metal ion in the dinuclear sites of aminopeptidases from the M17 family towards peptide hydrolysis was studied by kinetic and spectroscopic methods after replacement of one of active site zinc ions by Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Zn(II), and Cd(II) [58], [59], [60]. Important data about detailed mechanisms of action of aminopeptidases are also gained by production of altered enzymes by means of site-directed mutagenesis [61], [62], [63], [64], [65], [66]. Good examples are the studies on the role of active site glutamic acid in various aminopeptidases of M17 family [66], [67]. This was achieved by replacing glutamic acid either by structurally related aspartic acid (possessing an acidic side group), glutamine (lacking an acidic side group), or structurally different alanine, and studies of kinetic properties of the mutated enzyme.

The method that provides the most important insights into domains organization and architecture of active sites of aminopeptidases, and thus into mechanisms of their action, is crystallography. In that respect crystal structures of native enzymes and those complexed with small ligands are extremely useful (for representative recent examples see [68], [69], [70], [71], [72], [73]), especially those determined for enzymes bound with inhibitors being considered as transition state analogues [70], [72], [74], [75], [76].

There is also an emerging power in the application of computer-aided methods as a mean to study mechanisms of enzymatic reactions. The calculations enable the researcher to choose one of the several possible reaction pathways (and thus to determine reaction mechanism) and to establish the structures of transition states. These methods are based on the knowledge of enzyme three-dimensional structure available either by crystallographic methods or obtained by computations using homology approach techniques (for representative examples considering metallo-aminopeptidases see [77], [78], [79], [80]). Besides the elucidation of the functional roles of active-site residues, an estimation of the environment effects are also possible. In the case of metallo-aminopeptidases such popular techniques such as studies employing modified substrates [81], studies on isotopic effects [67] or construction of the chemical models of enzyme active sites [82] are quite scarce.

4 Inhibitors
Due to their association in several medical disorders, metallo-aminopeptidases are considered important targets for the design of inhibitors, which could potentially enter clinical trials as candidates for drugs. The presence of the metal ion(s) in the active center has determined a general strategy applied for the development of such synthetic ligands. These possess two fundamental structural features, a specific war-head portion dedicated to recognize the active site of the enzymes and specific functional groups that create appropriate complexes with the metal ions. A metal ligand fragment can be incorporated into a backbone containing optimized side chain(s) that are able to interact with the enzyme binding pocket(s). As the result, non-covalent inhibitors of the amino acid/peptide structure (natural substrate, transition state or product analogues) have appeared the most suitable for this purpose. Indeed, the majority of compounds designed to date have such characteristics. Bidentate tetrahedral phosphonates and aldehydes (hydrated in the gem-diolate form), bidentate planar carboxylates and hydroxamates, as well as monodentate thiols, are classical examples.

Recently, a variety of promising heteroaromatic or miscellaneous (heteroaromatic based sulfonamides/carboxylates/amides) inhibitors of metallo-aminopeptidases have being identified from random screening of compound libraries. Their structure usually involve a bidentate N,N, N,O or O,O donor system incorporated into a rigid hydrophobic environment, and thus such compounds also act in a non-covalent mode.

Finally, natural products are a also a source of the appropriate effectors of this group of peptidases, with bestatin being a prototypical representative. Its peptide-like framework offers a choice of heteroatom groups that get involved in an active site metal ion complexation. Other natural non-covalent heteroatom-rich systems are based on terpene or polyphenol scaffolds. Fumagillin and ovalicin are quite unique examples of very specific inhibitors that possess an electrophilic moiety (an epoxide) capable of reacting with the nucleophilic His side chain in the active site.

The proven medicinal importance of aminopeptidase N (APN, CD13), leucine aminopeptidase (LAP) and methionine aminopeptidases (MetAPs) has resulted in the focus on design of inhibitors primarily for these three enzymes and extensive thematic reviews have been recently published [6], [83], [84], [85], [86]. Here, we present a selection of several recent and historic approaches for design and optimization of the inhibitors of metallo-aminopeptidases, which could serve as lead compounds in the future studies of this group of proteases.

5 Phosphorus containing amino acid and peptide analogues
Among de novo constructed targeted molecules, organophosphorus compounds, namely α-aminoalkanephosphonates (general formula 1, Fig. 3
) and phosphorus containing pseudodipeptides (predominantly phosphinic, 2), have probably contributed the most to the inhibition studies on the neutral aminopeptidases: APN (alanyl M1) and LAP (leucine M17). Although the phosphonate/phosphinate group is a rather weak zinc complexing moiety, it offers other advantageous structural and electronic features. Similar to other amino acid and peptide mimetics used as protease inhibitors, this is the effect of the incorporation of a covalent or non-covalent binding group (here involved in coordination of a catalytic metal ion(s) in the enzyme active site) into a substrate structure. For the phosphorus modified compounds it is also uniquely combined with its tetrahedral shape that is considered to mimic the high energy transition state of the peptide bond hydrolysis. Additionally, the P1 side chain of the aminophosphonic acid analogues (or more effectively, both P1 and P1′ residues of the pseudopeptides phosphoryl moiety) gives further possibility of structural optimization of substituents interacting with the S1 and S1′ binding pockets of the enzyme (Fig. 3). Accordingly, α-aminophosphonates and their derivatives act as competitive inhibitors of numerous metallo-aminopeptidases, frequently displaying slow-binding kinetics. Among them, various amino acid analogues have been developed and tested for inhibition of mammalian (porcine kidney) LAP [87], [88], [89], [90], [91] and APN [89], [90], [91], [92].Fig. 3 The general structure of α-aminoalkanephosphonic acids (1) and phosphinic pseudodipeptides (2) applied for inhibition of neutral aminopeptidases.



Isosteres of natural hydrophobic aliphatic amino acids, such as valine and leucine (3 and 4, Fig. 4
), appeared to be efficient inhibitors of LAP with a K
i = 0.15 [90] and 0.23 μM [87] for the R (L) enantiomers. The D (S) antipodes were strongly discriminated, by 2–3 orders in magnitude for the given examples. Non-coded arylalkyl derivatives, exemplified by phosphonic homophenylalanine (5) and homotyrosine (6), were bound preferentially to an even slightly greater extent (K
i = 0.14 and 0.12 μM, respectively, for the racemic mixture, Fig. 4) [91]. Promising affinity (K
i ≤ 1.0 μM) was also found for extended linear homologues, namely 1-amino-n-hexanephosphonic [87] and 1-amino-n-octanephosphonic acid [91]. These results indicate that the S1 binding pocket of the leucine aminopeptidase can accommodate hydrophobic ligands even bulkier than indicated by its substrate preferences (the hydrolase cleaves substrates with the broad band specificity, however, those of the hydrophobic character at the N-termini, like leucine, methionine, isoleucine, valine, etc., are processed noticeably faster [79], [84]). Somewhat similar situation is observed for the alanyl aminopeptidase APN, both the mammalian one [91] and the orthologue from a lower organism, the protozoan P. falciparum
[93]. For example, phosphonic amino acid analogues of strong hydrophobic character, such as phenylalkyl or (cycloalkyl)alkyl (compounds 7 and 8, Fig. 4), inhibited the porcine kidney enzyme with the K
i values at low micromolar range [91]. An interesting attempt of mapping of the APN S1 binding pocket and rationalisation of these data in the context of the substrate-inhibitor structural relationship has been recently undertaken [94]. The specificity of APN was determined using an extensive collection of fluorogenic substrates bearing both natural and non-natural P1 residues. Then, the obtained kinetic parameters were correlated with the activity of the corresponding α-aminophosphonic inhibitors. Surprisingly, not the turnover velocity (expressed by the k
cat/
K
m) but only the strength of substrate binding (described by the K
m value) predicted the most reliably structural features responsible for the inhibitory potency. Thus, the appropriate P1 residue incorporated into the α-aminophosphonate core was proved to be indispensable for the tight binding of a ligand to APN.Fig. 4 Selected phosphonic amino acids analogues and their inhibition of the mammalian leucine and alanine aminopeptidases.



Because of the resemblance in the substrate specificity, the two aminopeptidases (LAP and APN) are frequently studied together to refer the selectivity of newly developed ligands [89], [90], [91]. In general, α-aminoalkanephosphinic acids are much more potent inhibitors of the leucine aminopeptidase. For example, hydrophobic aliphatic compounds, such as 3 and 4 (Fig. 4), expressed an affinity of more than two orders of magnitude higher for LAP compared to APN as indicated by the appropriate K
i values [90]. The reason for this observation seems to be the presence of the two zinc ions in the binding site of the cytosolic aminopeptidase (LAP contain two zinc ions while APN contains one). Involvement of the N–C–PO3 portion in interactions with both metal ions definitely results with a tighter binding. Contrarily, the leucine aminopeptidase does not readily accept P1 substituents containing a nitrogen atom. Thus, to achieve a high differentiating factor in favor of APN, bulky hydrophobic residues should be appropriately modified with a heteroatom. Compounds 9 and 10 (Fig. 4), bearing an additional amino moiety, was obtained by aziridinephosphonate ring opening with an amine and are low micromolar inhibitors of APN but do not effect LAP [90]. It is worth noting that among the phosphorus analogues of amino acids studied so far, N′-cyclhexyl-1,2-diaminoethanephosphonic acid (9) appeared the most active towards APN.

The availability of a broad collection of the applied α-aminophosphonates allowed a systematic structure–activity relationship in this context of the S1 binding pocket preferences and the specificity of LAP and APN. However, to achieve more significant inhibition these compounds needed to be extended to interact with the S1′ pocket as well. Three kinds of phosphonate elongation/modification were envisaged to provide such dipeptidic transition state mimetics. Formally, their structure is the result of the replacement of the scissile amide bond by the phosphonodepsi, phosphonamidate or phosphinate moiety. The potential of all three variations for aminopeptidase inhibition was evaluated in detail for the Leu-Leu mimetics and LAP as the target [87], [95]. The synthesis of the phosphonate analogue (compound 11, X = O, Fig. 5
) was described in the early work of Bartlett, however, the compound showed only moderate potency towards the enzyme studied [87]. Despite this, a systematic computer-aided approach was undertaken by Grembecka et al. to design new generations of more active inhibitors. The methodology was preliminary validated to rationalize the structure–activity relationship obtained for various phosphorus containing amino acid analogues [96], [97]. Then, when applied for pseudodipeptides, it positively confirmed the idea of addition of the P1′ portion, albeit only via P–N or P–C bonding [95]. Pseudodepsidipeptide bond (P–O) was found to be unfavourable because of entropic effects upon inhibitor binding and oxygen–oxygen electrostatic repulsions with the carbonyl of Ala113. The two other types of analogues (12, X = NH and 13, X = CH2, Fig. 5) were synthesized and evaluated [95]. Disappointedly, the fully deprotected phosphonamidate 12 appeared to be unstable at pH below 11. The hydrolysis of the P–N bond that occurred, which effected two component amino acids, was clearly correlated with the presence of free neighboring amino group (from the other side, crucial for the effective binding) [98]. Thus, despite being the most promising compounds according to the computed predictions (compound 12 was theoretically calculated to bind with the affinity of K
i = 5 nM), phosphonamidates were excluded for practical reasons. In turn, phosphinic pseudodipeptides exhibited perfect hydrolytic stability and inhibition constants in nanomolar range, and were ranked among the most effective ligands of LAP reported to date. The mixture of two diastereoisomers of the Leu-Leu analogue 13 showed K
i = 65 nM, similarly to the phosphinate hPhe-Phe and hPhe-Tyr mimetics, both containing arylalkyl P1 and P1′ residues (compounds 14 and 15, respectively, Fig. 5, tested as the mixture of four diastereoisomers) [95]. Chiral chromatography performed for compound 14 allowed separation and assignment of the activity of its individual stereoisomers. The final K
i value for R,S-14, counterpart of the L,L natural peptide configuration, was determined as 45 nM [99].Fig. 5 Phosphorus containing pseudodipeptides as inhibitors of the M17 leucine aminopeptidase.



Interestingly, compounds 14 and 15, particularly the latter one, appeared also effective inhibitors of APN (K
i = 276 nM and 36 nM, respectively, for the mixture of four diastereoisomers) [95]. Clear preference for the Tyr residue at the P1′ position indicated the significance of the terminal phenolic OH group. This observation was explained by formation of a very specific hydrogen bond (to the carboxylate of Glu 413 of APN) with the use of a model homologous to the leukotriene A4 hydrolase structure. Further exploration of the P1′ structure and its termini, in the context of LAP versus APN selectivity, was undertaken via a parallel N-alkylation strategy of appropriate amino acid building blocks. Unfortunately, the final products appeared only moderate and poorly selective inhibitors (K
i for both enzymes varied at 0.5–20 μM range) [100].

Importantly, phosphinic pseudodipeptides were found to be excellent inhibitors of parasite counterparts of LAP and APN and useful tools for their validation as potential targets in a novel treatment of malaria [47]. P. falciparum M1 and M17 aminopeptidases are responsible for the cleavage of the neutral residues in the terminal stages of the host haemoglobin degradation. Thus, being a limiting stage in generating amino acids essential to parasite growth and development, they represent an attractive target for the development of novel anti-malarial drugs. Compounds 14 and 15 inhibited recombinant M17 enzyme with the potency superior to that observed for the mammalian peptidase (K
i = 13.2 and 10.4 nM, respectively) [101]. The affinity of 14 measured for the PfM1 was also elevated (K
i = 78.4 nM) when compared to porcine APN (K
i = 276 nM). In addition, the phosphinates efficiently controlled the growth of P. falciparum in culture, including malaria cells lines that were resistant to the well-known anti-malarial chloroquine. Finally, in vivo studies using a non-lethal Plasmodium chabaudi murine malaria model demonstrated that treatment of mice with compound 14 reduced infection by 92% compared with controls [101]. Recently, this compound was co-crystallized with PfM1 [75] and PfM17 [76] to give an insight into the active site architecture and the mechanism of action of both aminopeptidases which will greatly facilitate the design of new optimized ligands with potential as anti-parasite agents.

Appropriate phosphinic pseudodipeptide building blocks can be further elongated by means of solution or solid-phase peptide synthesis to produce tripeptide analogues that possess an additional P2′ substituent. Such optimized compounds were reported to be the most potent organophosphorus inhibitors of the alanyl (APN) and glutamyl (aminopeptidase A, APA, EC 3.4.11.7) metallo-aminopeptidases reported to date. Chen et al. described a series of nanomolar ligands of mammalian APN, exemplified by the Ala-Phe-Phe analogue (16, Fig. 6
) [102]. They exhibited promising anti-nociceptive activity thanks to the dual action against APN and neprilysin which caused an analgesic response after administration in mice [103]. Compound 16 inhibited equipotently both the mammalian alanyl aminopeptidase as well as its bacterial orthologue. It also served as a ligand to resolve the three-dimensional structure of the latter enzyme [70]. Related phosphinate tripeptidic analogues were used for co-crystallization with the leukotriene A4 hydrolase/aminopeptidase, a prototypic M1 family member. As the result, substrate and transition state binding details together with a presumed catalytic mechanism, scarce data for the M1 enzymes, were reported [104].Fig. 6 Phosphinic pseudotripeptides as highly effective inhibitors of the alanyl and glutamyl metallo-aminopeptidases.



A phosphinic pseudotripeptide, the Glu-Leu-Ala analogue (17, Fig. 6, tested as mixture of four diastereoisomers), showed high affinity towards the zinc glutamyl aminopeptidase (mice recombinant) expressed by its K
i equal to 0.8 nM [105]. Within a series of compounds, N-terminal pseudoglutamyl residue was found to be crucial for the high potency and selectivity. For example, the differentiating factor between APA and APN (K
i = 31 μM) exceeded four orders of magnitude in favor of the APA. Modifications of the phosphinate metal binding group in order to increase the number of coordination to the ion present in the active site can represent another approach to improve the potency of aminopeptidases inhibitors. This effect can be achieved by the introduction of a neighboring group containing a heteroatom that is additionally involved in metal complexation. Four types of such modifications have been proposed and evaluated recently for the alanyl aminopeptidase APN [106], [107]. They involved the application of α-aminoalkane-α′-hydroxyalkanephosphinic acids (general formula 18, Fig. 7
), bis-α-aminoalkanephosphinic acids (19), carbamoylated and thiocarbamoylated α-aminoalkanephosphinic acids (20 and 21).Fig. 7 The general structures of phosphonic compounds α-functionalized with an additional heteroatom group to enhance the coordination of the catalytic zinc ion in the active site of the aminopeptidase.



The structural variant 18 was previously described by Bartlett for LAP but the inhibition achieved for the Leu-Leu analogue (R = i-Bu, R′ = CH(COOH)CH2CHMe2, K
i = 56 μM) was not satisfactory [87]. More interesting results were reported for APN. Combination of the hydrophobic residues P1 (R = i-Pr, i-Bu, n-Bu, Ph or (CH2)2Ph) and P1′ (R = Ph, (CH2)2Ph or CH2(p-OMe-C6H4)) allowed for regulation of the enzyme activity with the IC
50 value to 0.25 μM (this result corresponded to K
i = 143 nM) [106], [107]. Interestingly, all four structural variations 18–21 produced comparable, low micromolar or sub-micromolar IC
50 values of inhibition.

6 Bestatin and derivatives
Originally isolated from Streptomyces olivoreticuli (MD976-C7) more than 30 years ago by Umezawa and co-workers, bestatin ((2S,3R)-3-amino-2-hydroxy-4-phenylbutanoyl-l-leucine – UbenimexΔ, 22, Fig. 8
) was one of the first potent inhibitors of metallo-aminopeptidases with broad spectrum of action [108]. Bestatin has been extensively investigated in biological systems both in vitro and in vivo, which resulted in discovery of several interesting properties of this compound such as ability to induce apoptosis in cancer cells, anti-angiogenic, anti-malarial or immunomodulatory effects [109]. Presently, bestatin is on the market in Japan where it is applied for treatment of cancer and bacterial infections. Examples of successful inhibition of aminopeptidases by bestatin include aminopeptidase N (CD13), leucine aminopeptidase (LAP), aminopeptidase B (EC 3.4.11.6) or LTA4 hydrolase [110], [111], [112]. Bestatin can act as slow (LAP) or fast (APN) binding, competitive inhibitor of aminopeptidases [113]. It resembles a Phe-Leu dipeptide substrate, however its Phe residue is β-amino-α-hydroxy amino acid [114]. This α-hydroxy group together with the neighboring carbonyl group coordinate a zinc ion, which results in a competitive active site-directed inhibition. Bestatin is weaker inhibitor of aminopeptidases containing one metal ion in the active center (APN, APB) and much stronger of enzymes with two metal ions (LAP). This feature is explained by larger amount of interactions made by inhibitor with both enzyme metal ions in the active center along with additional contacts made by side chains of the inhibitor in S1 and S1′ pockets of the enzyme.Fig. 8 The structure of bestatin and its inhibition of selected mammalian aminopeptidases.



To date several stereoselective, synthetic methods leading to desired bestatin diastereomer have been described [115], [116], [117], [118], [119] (see recent reviews presenting available synthetic methods for bestatin and some modifications [120], [121]). Absolute configuration is a key issue responsible for good inhibitory effect and discrimination of the appropriate binding partners (substrates and inhibitors) for most of the proteases. Diastereomer of bestatin with inverse configuration at carbon atom with hydroxy group ((2R,3R)-3-amino-2-hydroxy-4-phenylbutanoyl-l-leucine) is known as epibestatin and is frequently used as negative control in biological experiments [122]. The structure of bestatin has also been a subject of several modifications in hope to improve its inhibitory and pharmacological properties. Examples of such derivatives are bestatin thioamide (compound 23, Fig. 9
) [123], para-hydroxybestatin (24) [124] or 2-thiolbestatin (25) [125]. The scaffold of bestatin was also used for the design of Activity Based Probes (ABPs) for detection of mammalian and malaria M1 aminopeptidase N [126]. These were obtained by solid-phase synthesis compounds (for example 26, Fig. 10
) and effectively labeled recombinant APN as well as metallo-aminopeptidases in sophisticated proteome system originated from P. falciparum cells. Success with bestatin resulted in more intense research of this group of compounds and isolation and characterization of several other compounds bearing a similar scaffold structure. Examples of such compounds of natural origin are phebestin ((2S,3R)-3-amino-2-hydroxy-4-phenylbutanoyl-l-valyl-l-phenylalanine, compound 27, Fig. 11
) [127], probestin ((2S,3R)-3-amino-2-hydroxy-4-phenylbutanoyl-l-valyl-l-prolyl-l-proline, 28) [128] and amastatin ((2S,3R)-3-amino-2-hydroxy-5-methylhexanoyl-l-valine-l-valine-l-aspartic acid, 29) [113], [129]. These compounds are tri- and tetrapeptides and are better inhibitors of aminopeptidase N when compared to bestatin. This is due to an increased amount of contacts made with S1, S1′, S2′ and S3′ pockets of the enzyme and side chains of the inhibitors, which in most cases have very hydrophobic character (Phe, Leu, Val).Fig. 9 Structure of bestatin derivatives and their inhibition of selected aminopeptidases.

Fig. 10 Structure of Activity Based Probe based on structure of bestatin for labeling of aminopeptidases.

Fig. 11 The structures of phebestin, probestin and amastatin and their activity towards aminopeptidase N.



7 Hydroxamic acids
Hydroxamic acids (N-hydroxyamides) can be considered as analogues of carboxylic acids and amides that uniquely combine the features of both of these groups. Simultaneously, the hydroxamate moiety is an effective planar bidentate O,O metal chelating system. This close structural similarity to the products/substrates of the peptide bond hydrolysis and metal-complexing properties make it an attractive war-head for constructions of inhibitors targeted towards metallo-dependent proteases. The synthesis is not problematic and usually involves a one-step transformation of an acid or an ester with the use of an appropriate hydroxylamine derivative. Accordingly, one-side optimized hydroxamate analogues of acids, amino acids and peptides have found biomedical relevance. The most promising applications have been associated with inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases as perspective targets for anti-cancer therapy. Matrix metalloproteinases, involved in normal and abnormal tissue remodeling, angiogenesis and tumor metastasis, have been potently regulated by hydroxamates (e.g. Batimastat, Marimastat) that reached advanced phases of the clinical trials. These finally failed because of side effects associated with cross interactions with other metal containing proteins [130], [131].

Fundamental work on the metallo-aminopeptidases inhibition by α-aminohydroxamates was performed by Chan et al. and concerned the leucine aminopeptidase [132]. The derivatives of hydrophobic amino acids (exemplified by l-Leu-NHOH, compound 30, Fig. 12
) regulated the enzyme activity with the K
i values of micromolar range. Other C-terminally modified compounds, such as the l-Leu amide, alcohol, or hydrazide, together with the amino acid alone, were much less potent, typically at least by a 100-fold ratio. These observations were consistent with a subsequent study by a series of phenylalanine derivatives targeted towards APN. Compound 31 (Fig. 12) appeared a moderate inhibitor of the enzyme [133]. Both l-Leu-NHOH and l-Phe-NHOH were overpowered by the corresponding thiols which indicated a much tighter individual sulfur–zinc interaction than the bidentate oxygen–zinc binding. Since then, a choice of hydroxamic acid inhibitors (not necessarily based on the amino acid skeleton) of different metallo-aminopeptidases have been reported in the literature. A representative selection from recent examples is presented in Fig. 13
. Compound 32, bearing a hydrophobic substituent, was identified by screening of a 3000 natural and synthetic compound library and appeared equipotent to bestatin for APN [134]. Compound 32 controlled the basic fibroblast growth-factor-induced invasion of endothelial cells at low micromolar range. The hydroxamate was highly selective as it exerted no action towards members of the matrix metalloprotease family.Fig. 12 Amino acid derived hydroxamate inhibitors of neutral aminopeptidases.

Fig. 13 A selection of hydroxamic acid inhibitors of aminopeptidase N and methionine aminopeptidases (recombinant human, h, and Escherichia coli, Ec).



Interesting hydroxamate based inhibitors were also developed for the methionine aminopeptidases from different organisms. Hu et al. described the synthesis of compounds possessing an additional substitution at the hydroxamate nitrogen atom [135]. These N-hydroxydipeptides, derivatives of Met-Gly (compound 33, Fig. 13), allowed for structural optimization of both sides of the molecule. The products inhibited the bacterial as well as both forms of human MetAP, with a slight preference to E. coli enzyme. A cooperative action of the N-terminal amino group and two hydroxamate oxygen atoms towards two catalytic metal ions in the active center was suggested as the binding pattern.

The bacterial form of MetAP1 served also as a model for comparison of the activity of 5-aryl-furane-2-carboxylic acids with other variants of the C-termini [136]. Such heteroaromatic hydroxamic acids (exemplified by 34, Fig. 13) were found to be superior inhibitors to corresponding acids, esters, amides, hydrazides, alcohols and nitriles towards distinct metalloforms of the EcMetAP1.

Certain metallo-aminopeptidases are promising targets in anti-cancer therapy in humans, but they can also be exploited in the development of antibacterial, antifungal and antiparasitic agents. The zinc P. falciparum M1 aminopeptidase is being actively explored in this context (as described in the section devoted to organophosphorus compounds). The dual function amide-hydroxamate template was also used to target the malaria enzyme [137]. The compounds developed consisted of three portions: hydroxamic acid termini dedicated for Zn(II) complexation, a hydrophobic α-substituent and the amide function that served for extensive structural diversification. The use of bulky hydrophobic amines for the amide formation (as exemplified by 35, Fig. 14
) yielded potent inhibitors of the parasite enzyme, with the IC
50 values in low nanomolar range [138]. Importantly, consecutive iterative optimization gave derivatives that were characterized by spectacular selectivity versus the mammalian orthologue. Compounds were active in parasite growth inhibition and displayed good pharmacokinetic properties [138].Fig. 14 An example of an amide-hydroxamic acid inhibitor of aminopeptidase N with the antiparasitic activity.



Tosedostat (CHR-2797, 36, Fig. 15
) [139] seems to be the most attractive novel pharmacologically active product among hydroxamic acid metallopeptidase inhibitors. This orally available cyclopentyl ester prodrug is converted in vivo into the intracellularly active acid metabolite. The latter is a potent inhibitor of a number of aminopeptidases, including leucine aminopeptidase, aminopeptidase N, puromycin sensitive aminopeptidase and leukotriene A4 hydrolase/aminopeptidase (with the IC
50 in nanomolar range) [140]. CHR-2797 exerted anti-proliferative effects against tumor cell lines in vitro and in vivo, and exhibited 300 times more potency than bestatin. The proposed mechanism of tumor cell killing involves depletion of amino acids by blocking protein processing/recycling [140]. CHR-2797 is well tolerated and can be safely administered at doses that result in the metabolite activity as evidenced in preclinical models [141]. Recently, Tosedostat demonstrated promising efficacy in patients with acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome in the phase II of clinical trials [142].Fig. 15 The chemical structure of Tosedostat, a hydroxamate prodrug of the acid inhibitor of intracellular aminopeptidases.



8 2-Aminothiols
2-Aminothiols are synthetic analogues of amino acids in which the carboxylate function has been replaced by a thiomethyl residue. The chemical transformations that are usually applied for their synthesis, involve a reduction of the ester group of an N-protected amino ester to the hydroxymethyl function, followed by an activation of the latter and its subsequent substitution with a sulfur containing nucleophile [143], [144], [145], [146]. Alternatively, the Mitsunobu reaction is utilized as the OH replacement procedure [145], [146]. As the optically active substrates are easily available and there is no risk of racemization, final products are obtained in the enantiomerically pure form. When the mode of binding to metallo-aminopeptidases is considered, 2-aminothiols are typical analogues of the N-terminal portion of the peptide substrates that act in reversible competitive manner. The thiol group is a termini designed to interact non-covalently with the catalytic metal ion(s). Except for the functional groups essential for the polar contacts, 2-aminothiols contain a side chain that occupies the S1 pocket. Despite a structural simplicity and low molecular weight, the potency of these compounds against metallo-aminopeptidases is very high. The reason for this is a strong affinity of the sulfur atom for divalent soft acid metal ions, such as Zn(II). Consequently, 2-aminothiols exhibit much higher activity than amino acid analogues of the corresponding complexity, but containing other metal chelating moieties, such as phosphonate or hydroxamate ones. Frequently, these compounds are discriminated with an affinity more than 1000-fold ratio lower in comparison to the analogous thiols. In general, 2-aminothiols are one-handed inhibitors directed specifically towards the S1 subsite part. The availability of extended ligands that possess an additional Pn′ portion is limited because of a complex synthesis and diastereomeric purity. Nevertheless, 2-aminothiols have found some fundamental and practical applications connected with metallo-aminopeptidase inhibition. The most spectacular achievements are associated with the regulation of action of aminopeptidases A and N, enzymes involved in the brain renin–angiotensin cascade that represent perspective targets in a hypertension therapy.

A series of representative 2-aminothiols, derived from the natural amino acids, is given in Fig. 16
. l-Lysine thiol (the absolute configuration S, compound 37) was shown to be an extremely potent inhibitor of arginyl aminopeptidase (aminopeptidase B, APB) with a subnanomolar K
i value [143]. l-Leucine thiol (compound 38) binds to the same target but with a lower activity. More interestingly, it exhibited a 700-fold ratio stereochemical preference towards the enzyme for the natural configuration (K
i = 980 μM for the D (R) enantiomer). Unexpectedly, compound 38 poorly inhibited leucine aminopeptidase (LAP), what was explained by the use of the zinc-magnesium hybrid enzyme in these experiments [143].Fig. 16 Potent 2-aminothiol inhibitors of the aminopeptidases B and N, the analogues of the natural amino acids.



According to an earlier study, l-leucine thiol (38) was shown to be a potent competitive inhibitor of the microsomal aminopeptidase from porcine kidney (APN, K
i = 22 nM) [144]. This compound was then used as a lead structure to optimize the size of a neutral hydrophobic P1 residue, in the context of construction of potentially analgesic dual inhibitors of neprilysin (NEP) and APN [133]. A broad series of inhibitors was synthesized that showed high equipotent efficacy for the aminopeptidase N (K
i = 11–50 nM). Among them, the methionine thiol (compound 39, Fig. 16) appeared the most active in vitro. 2-Aminothiols were at least four orders in magnitude more effective than carboxylates, phosphonates and hydroxamates of the corresponding structure [145]. Despite such potency, the use of selected compounds in intravenous administration did not induce anti-nociceptive responses in mice on the hot plate test, evidently because of difficulties to cross the blood–brain barrier. Indeed, the oxidation to the disulfide form to increase the lipophilicity made them efficient prodrugs. Much more significant response was stimulated by application of a mixed prodrug which structure was disulfide based combination of two thiol inhibitors, each directed towards a certain enzyme, either APN or NEP [147].

Elucidation of an intrinsic function in the brain and, therefore, the medical potential of selected aminopeptidases in the renin–angiotensin system stimulated continuation of studies on 2-aminothiols. These two metallo-aminopeptidases, namely APN and glutamyl aminopeptidase (aminopeptidase A, APA), are supposed to participate in metabolism of brain angiotensin II and III (AngII and AngIII). Glu-thiol (compound 40, Fig. 17
) [148] was described as first efficient inhibitor of APA, however it was equipotent to APN (K
i = 140 versus 120 nM, respectively). To study the physiological importance of these enzymes, specific agents, discriminating between the two targets to a high degree are indispensable. In a quest for a selective inhibition, a number of 2-aminothiol derivatives were synthesized and evaluated [145], [146]. It appeared to be a relatively simple task to identify the P1 residue responsible for high nanomolar potency of an APN ligand. An extended P1 hydrophobic portion, favorably terminated with a heteroatom group (as exemplified by compounds 41 and 42, Fig. 17), represented such an option. The affinity of these compounds towards APA was of 100-fold ratio lower. Anyway, according to recent data l-methionine thiol developed earlier [149] gave even more impressive differentiation (K
i = 8 nM for APN versus K
i = 17.2 μM for APA, respectively [149]).Fig. 17 Optimization of the lead Glu-thiol structure (40) to achieve selective inhibition of aminopeptidase N versus glutamyl aminopeptidase (compounds 40, 41 and 43 were tested as the S enantiomers, whereas compound 42 as the racemic mixture).



Such a convenient modification was not found for the opposite case. A compromise was achieved for short side chains with an acid function other than carboxyl at the terminus (such as 43, Fig. 17) [145], [146]. The affinity of the sulfonic acid 43 for APA was not elevated in comparison to the lead, but a drop in potency measured for APN was more significant and finally resulted in a 100-fold discrimination ratio. These parameters were furthermore improved by exploration of the Sn′ subsite of the aminopeptidase A. The synthesis of tripeptidomimetics that contained an optimum P1 substituent, attached as the 3-amino-2-mercaptocarboxyl to the N-termini of dipeptide libraries, allowed determination of the advantageous P1′ and P2′ side chains [150]. The S1′ binding pocket accommodated hydrophobic residues whereas the S2′ pocket preferred negatively charged residues. As a result, an exceptionally potent compound (44, Fig. 17) characterized by a striking 20,000-fold selectivity ratio, was identified. Interestingly, the most active diastereoisomer exhibited non-natural configuration R at the P1 portion which was explained by sterical constrains of the whole molecule [150]. Despite a remarkable activity (a first subnanomolar thiol inhibitor of APA), compound 44 was poorly bioavailable. A limited P1′ fragment optimization starting from the lead 43 gave a much simpler molecule: (3S,4S)-3-amino-4-mercapto-6-phenyl-hexane-1-sulfonic acid [151]. The substitution of the C3 atom with a hydrophobic arylalkyl fragment resulted with a satisfactory potent APA inhibition (K
i = 30 nM) (however, the kinetic data for APN were not reported).

Over-activity of the renin–angiotensin system in the brain has been implicated in the development and maintenance of hypertension. Using specific agents described above, it was demonstrated that APA and APN are involved in the metabolism of angiotensin II and III, respectively, within this system. AngIII (2–8) is generated from AngII by APA assisted cleavage of the N-terminal Asp-Arg bond, whereas APN functions in subsequent inactivation of AngIII. APA specific sulfonate 43 increased the half-life of AngII in mice, blocked the AngII to AngIII conversion which in turn controlled vasopressin release [152], [153]. The dose-dependent decrease of blood pressure was achieved only by intra-cerebroventricular injection. Contrarily, selective inhibitors of APN (39 and 41), administered by the same route, caused elevated blood pressure. Thus, the level of angiotensin II and III in the brain, in particular that controlled by the aminopeptidases, was suggested to be a potential target of hypertension treatment [153], [154]. To this end, the disulfide dimer of the lead 43 was reported as a first orally available candidate for the therapy based on aminopeptidase A inhibition [154], [155].

9 Epoxide (covalent) inhibitors
The majority of inhibitors discovered for metallo-aminopeptidases are compounds which interact with enzyme in a non-covalent way. However, for some enzymes covalent inhibitors have also been found. Fumagillin ((2Z,4E,6E,8E)-10-[[5-methoxy-4-[2-methyl-3-(3-methylbut-2-enyl)oxiran-2-yl]-1-oxaspiro[2.5]octan-6-yl]oxy]-10-oxodeca-2,4,6,8-tetraenoic acid, 45, Fig. 18
) and ovalicin ((1S,2R,3S,4R,5S)-7-hydroxy-8-methoxy-7-[2-methyl-3-(3-methylbut-2-enyl)oxiran-2-yl]-4-oxaspiro[2.5]octan-2-one, 46), which are fungal metabolites inhibit methionine aminopeptidase type 2 (MetAP2) by the formation of a covalent, irreversible bond between a reactive epoxide and His-79 present in the active center of the enzyme [156], [157]. These compounds are not effective towards other aminopeptidases. Selectivity towards MetAP2 and complete lack of selectivity towards MetAP1 is explained by difference in only one amino acid (Ala-202 in MetAP2 and threonine in MetAP1) around the active center of these enzymes as determined by comparison of crystal structures [158], [159]. This approach revealed also that tight binding of fumagillin and derivatives to MetAP2 is also a combination of several other interactions made by the inhibitor components with the surface around the active center of the enzyme. In biological studies fumagillin and ovalicin have been found as potent inhibitors of angiogenesis due to their inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation. This resulted in extensive SAR studies and synthesis of several derivatives of these compounds. Compound TNP-470 (47, Fig. 18) has entered clinical trials and was evaluated for application in anti-angiogenic therapy [156], [160].Fig. 18 The structures of MetAP2 covalent inhibitors – fumagillin, ovalicin and TNP-470.



10 Heteroatom scaffolds
Numerous competitive inhibitors of metallo-aminopeptidases that have been recently developed, frequently starting from leads identified by random screening (e.g. high throughput screening utilizing fluorogenic [161], [162] and chromogenic assays [163], [164] or virtual screening [165], [166]), are based on a heteroatom-rich fragment. Such an appropriate heteroaromatic (or rarely heterocyclic) scaffold contains a set of the nitrogen, oxygen and/or sulfur atoms involved in coordination of the catalytic metal ion(s). Structural rigidness and constraint of this portion of a ligand is often privileged for formation of hydrophobic interactions, specifically π–π stacking, with the neighboring residues of the active site. The synthetic procedures used for obtaining such compounds should allow the combination with reliable methods of the substituent(s) diversification. This can be performed prior to a ring formation/aromatization or by parallel decoration of the target scaffold with the use of a simple chemistry, such as the amide bond formation. An extensive structural optimization of certain scaffolds has led to very potent inhibition of selected aminopeptidases by surprisingly low molecular weight compounds (even below 200). Methionine aminopeptidases (particularly human MetAP2), are representative examples of successful application of this strategy.

1,2,4-Triazoles were originally described in the patent literature as potent reversible non-peptidic inhibitors of the methionine aminopeptidase type 2 [167], [168]. Variously substituted compounds bound to the cobalt form of MetAP2 with the affinity expressed by the IC
50 values in the range of 0.1 nM–100 μM. The optimized synthesis of an array of 3-anilino-5-benzylthio-1,2,4-triazoles (compounds 48–50, Fig. 19
) and their biological relevance was also subsequently presented [169]. Iterative refinement of the inhibitor lead structure allowed the identification of compounds with the potency against MetAP2 in the picomolar range. Systematic modifications of the key structural fragments revealed certain tendencies responsible for elevation or decrease in their activity. The 3′ and 4′ substitution of the aniline phenyl ring with small residues was the most favorable (compounds 49 and 50, Fig. 19). Contrarily, any changes in the optimal benzylthio S1 residue structure were found deleterious, similarly to methylation of any of the triazole nitrogen atoms (to a relatively smaller extent for the N4). Selected derivatives inhibited human endothelial cell proliferation and the growth of new blood vessels in a model of angiogenesis.Fig. 19 Selected potent inhibitors of the human MetAP2 based on the 1,2,3 and 1,2,4-triazole scaffolds. Compounds 53 inhibited the bacterial MetAP1 and allowed the elucidation of the triazoles binding mode to the enzyme catalytic site.



Low molecular weight 4-aryl substituted 1,2,3-triazoles were found to act as almost equipotent reversible inhibitors of the human MetAP2 [170] as described for 1,2,4 derivatives. Diversification of the position 4 was performed by the use of various aromatic aldehydes that were transformed into the appropriate alkyne substrates for the cycloaddition. Several effective ligands of the cobalt-activated MetAP2 were identified, showing the K
i,app values down to 1 nM. For example, K
i,app = 15 nM for 51 given in Fig. 19 corresponded to K
i = 4.2 nM and IC
50 = 10 nM in full kinetic analysis [170]. SAR studies performed for the phenyl ring excluded bulky 3′ and 4′ substitution showed that only small alkyl chains were tolerated whereas the halogens were favorable in these positions (see for example compound 52 in Fig. 19). Contrarily, a 2′ addition of a bulky residue, even a heteroaromatic one, was well accepted and indicated some additional room in the active site. Replacement of the whole phenyl ring by a substituted pyridyl was also profitable. The use of the pyrazole based scaffolds instead of the triazole one, revealed the key role of N1 and N2 atoms in high affinity. Regarding their biological activity, the compounds inhibited human and mouse endothelial cell growth.

Enzyme-ligand crystal structures accompanied studies on the triazoles [169], [170]. They revealed, among others, the significance of the P1 aromatic ring of a certain size (substituted or not, present in potent MetAP2 inhibitors) that should occupy the hydrophobic pocket formed by Phe219, His331, Tyr444 and His231, and form the appropriate π–π stacking. The size of the pocket (narrower for MetAP1) was postulated to be a discrimination factor between the two forms of the methionine aminopeptidase. The difference in the binding affinity is usually 3–4 orders in magnitude in favor for MetAP2 for the triazoles studied (for example, K
i,app = 0.5 nM versus 3900 nM for 48, IC
50 = 10 nM versus 7100 nM for 51, Fig. 19). The structural data provided a rationale for SAR discussion, but first of all confirmed the significance of the key interactions between N1 and N2 nitrogen atoms of the inhibitors and the cobalt ions. The molecular mechanism of triazole action was elucidated originally using the crystal structures of the Staphylococcus aureus orthologue of the MetAP1 enzyme complexed with 3,5-disubstituted-1,2,4-triazoles (such as compound 53, Fig. 19) [171]. According to these results, each of the triazole N1 and N2 nitrogen atoms interacts with one of the two cobalt ions such that the N–N bond is nearly co-linear with the Co to Co. The distances between the nitrogen and the coordinated cobalt are very similar to each other and tight (close to 2 Å) which indicates strong interactions [171]. The triazole ring forms a stacking contact with the hydrophobic face of the imidazole side chain of H76, a residue that is believed to be involved in the catalytic process. Somewhat surprisingly, the substituent of the substrate-like methionine structure of 53 docks to the S1′ subsite, and not to the S1 site. In turn, its natural position is occupied by the thiobenzyl residue as described above.

MetAP is believed to be a dinuclear cobalt dependent enzyme as Co(II) activates all its known forms, however, the identity of the metal cofactor is still ambiguous. Triazoles that inhibited exclusively the cobalt-activated human MetAP2 even with high nanomolar potency, although failed in cell proliferation assays, were used to shed light on this matter [172], [173]. Such metal dependent action indicates that other divalent ions must be considered as the relevant cofactors, particularly in respect to the fact that the architecture of the enzyme active site does not depend on the identity of the bound metal. In this context, manganese was postulated as the physiologically relevant metal [172]. Indeed, the triazoles investigated were not effective towards such activated MetAP form.

Contrary to triazoles, 1,3-thiazoles appeared selective inhibitors of the methionine aminopeptidase type 1 of both bacterial and human origin. The essential function of MetAP1 in bacteria suggested that the enzyme could be a promising target for the development of novel broad spectrum antibiotic agents. Accordingly, thiazole based active compounds were identified by screening of libraries towards the E. coli methionine aminopeptidase. It is worth noting that selected leads did not represent typical heteroaromatic scaffolds. These were not the central core of the molecule, but rather a proximity group linked with another hydrophobic portion (frequently heteroaromatic as well) by a carbon–carbon, amide or carbonyl based bonding. Thus, the complexing mode of the enzyme catalytic ion(s) was not as characteristic as for triazoles and usually involved participation of two neighboring heteroatom groups.

The random screening of 4500 compounds by Nan and co-workers led to the amide of pyridine-2-carboxylic acid and thiazol-2-ylamine (54, Fig. 20
) that inhibited the E. coli MetAP1 with the IC
50 = 5 μM and served as a perspective lead compound [174]. All primary chemical mutation in the basic structure, such as change in position of pyridine substitution or heteroatom replacement by an isosteric group, appeared deleterious for the potency [174], [175]. Most probably, the combination of three electronegative groups that are involved in the metal ions coordination, namely the aromatic nitrogen of the pyridine ring, the carbonyl moiety in position 2 and a heteroatom of the thiazole, forms a system essential for the tight binding. Nevertheless, substitution of the position 3 in pyridine with an amide or ester group appeared profitable in terms of optimization of interactions with the binding pocket. The affinity was elevated to nanomolar range, as for example for compound 55, Fig. 20
[174]. Importantly, introduction of a bulky cyclic or aromatic residue at the proximity of the amide allowed for efficient discrimination between the bacterial enzymes from different sources. For X = benzoyloamino or cyclohexanecarbamino, by substituting the structure 54 the selectivity factor between E. coli and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae exceeded 100-fold ratio (IC
50 = 0.89 and 0.87 μM for EcMetAP1, respectively and IC
50 > 100 μM for ScMetAP1 for both compounds). Wide optimization of the X moiety demonstrated that introduction of an additional heteroatom to the extended amide structure was also well tolerated (56, Fig. 20) [175], [176]. Finally, replacement of the whole pyridine ring by another thiazole system gave compound 58 (Fig. 20) with low nanomolar potency [177].Fig. 20 Inhibition of the cobalt dependent Escherichia coli methionine aminopeptidase type 1 by thiazole based compounds.



Interestingly, 3-substituted pyridine-2-carboxylic acid thiazol-2-ylamides selectively inhibited human MetAP1 versus MetAP2, as exemplified by a 200-fold differentiating factor for compound 57 (Fig. 20) [178]. Despite their moderate potency in vitro, the treatment of tumor cell lines with such specific agents suggested a role of MetAP1 in G2/M phase transition. Furthermore, this study confirmed the previously reported results on variations in the metal binding in the active site of the Co(II)-EcMetAP in the presence of the thiazole based ligands [165]. According to the appropriate crystal structures, these compounds seemed to be responsible for driving a third metal ion into the enzyme active site. The auxiliary cobalt atom was not present in the native enzyme, even when crystallized in the presence of high concentration of the metal salt. The additional cobalt interacts with a single histidine residue of the enzyme, three water molecules at the entrance of the active center and two nitrogen atoms of the ligand (those of the pyridine and the amide). Inhibitor binding is stabilized by several contacts, mostly of the hydrophobic character. Obviously, such an unusual situation must be taken into consideration when SAR of novel MetAP effectors is discussed and the in vitro versus in vivo experiments data are correlated (see below for another example).

Closely related thiazole inhibitors of the bacterial methionine aminopeptidase were discovered by the high throughput screening of a ten times larger library [161]. The main goal of the study was identification of potent but predominantly selective inhibitors that could distinguish between various metalloforms of E. coli MetAP. Indeed, thiazole based compounds exemplified by compound 59 (Fig. 20) strongly inhibited the cobalt dependent enzyme and only moderately the manganese, iron or nickel ones [161]. The opposite pattern of activity was found for other heteroaromatic compounds. 5-Arylfuran-2-carboxylic acids and their derivatives exhibited preferences towards Mn(II)-EcMetAP [136], [161], whereas the cathechol-containing thiazoles preferred Fe(II)-EcMetAP [179]. However, these two groups of compounds did not follow the mode of binding typical for heteroaromatic inhibitors of the cobalted form of MetAP. They did not employ the heteroatom(s) of the ring but instead binding involved the two proximity oxygen atoms, either of the carboxylate [161], [162] or the phenol moieties [179], respectively, for complexing to the metal ion(s).

Direct combinations of two heteroaromatic rings represent another approach to developing methionine aminopeptidase inhibitors. These compounds bind the driven active site auxiliary cobalt ion by employing nitrogen atoms from each of the rings that are placed in co-planar manner. Thiabendazoles (benzimidazoles substituted in position 2 with the thiazole ring) and their derivatives (compounds 60–62, Fig. 21
) regulated the Co(II)-EcMetAP activity with K
i value in sub-micromolar range, although they appeared ineffective in vivo
[166]. This was explained with the use of the MetAP-ligand crystal structures that revealed variations in the metal binding in the active site [165], [166] as described above for pyridine-2-carboxylic acid thiazol-2-ylamides.Fig. 21 Inhibition of the cobalt dependent Escherichia coli MetAP1 by selected thiabendazoles 60–62. 2-(2-Pipyridinyl)pyrimidine inhibitor (63) of human and Plasmodium falciparum methionine aminopeptidases.



A family of related 2-(2-pipyridinyl)pyrimidines was identified upon screening of a 175,000 member library for inhibitors of human and P. falciparum methionine aminopeptidases [164], [180]. Interestingly, the compounds were virtually equipotent towards both mammalian types of the enzyme (for example see 63, Fig. 21). Similarly as before, they complexed to the auxiliary Co(II) that is normally not involved in the catalytic process [164]. Nevertheless, they appeared to be novel potential anti-malarial agents. Three active isoforms of PfMetAP1 were obtained after cloning, expression and purification, and tested in vitro. The inhibitors were remarkably selective towards the 1b type, with the highest obtained potency with IC
50 = 112 nM. The most active compound 63 inhibited also the P. falciparum proliferation of both chloroquine sensitive and dependent erythrocyte cultures with IC
50 = 0.9 and 3.1 μM, respectively [180]. Consequently, this compound was used in murine malaria models and positively confirmed PfMetAP1b as a promising target for development of new anti-malarials.

11 Boronic acids
Boronic acids as inhibitors of aminopeptidases were described first by Baker et al. for Aeromonas aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.10) [181], [182]. In this report simple aliphatic derivatives were used as competitive, transition state analogues that bound to the active center of enzyme with good efficiency. Among five tested derivatives 1-butaneboronic acid (64, Fig. 22
) was the best inhibitor of the enzyme. In another approach, Shenvi described a series of α-aminoboronic acids as effective inhibitors of human enkephalin degrading aminopeptidase (HEDA), microsomal leucine aminopeptidase and cytosolic leucine aminopeptidase [183]. The advantage of these inhibitors over simple aliphatic derivatives was the presence of the free amine group at carbon α, a feature that is known to improve binding of the ligand to aminopeptidases. Detailed analysis of kinetic data for cytosolic leucine aminopeptidase revealed biphasic slow-binding inhibition mechanism of α-aminoboronic acids. This suggested that slow-binding step is responsible for formation of tetrahedral boronate molecule from trigonal boronic acid. The inhibitory activity of the tested derivatives (65–68) also strongly correlated with the side chain type used in the study (Fig. 23
).Fig. 22 The structure of 1-butaneboronic acid.

Fig. 23 Structures and activity of α-aminoboronic acids.



12 Aldehydes
Aldehyde derivatives of amino acids have been also described as inhibitors of aminopeptidases. Andersson et al. first reported this group of compounds as very effective transition states analogue inhibitors (upon hydratation they formed a gem-diolate involved in zinc complexation) of porcine cytosolic and microsomal leucine aminopeptidases [184]. The most effective inhibitor described in this report was l-leucinal (compound 70, Fig. 24
, K
i = 6 nM for LAP and K
i = 76 nM for APN). Importance of the aldehyde war-head was demonstrated in this report by comparison of the value of l-leucinal inhibitory constant with those found for simple amino acid l-leucine as well as its hydroxy derivative l-leucinol. These compounds were around 4–5 orders of magnitude less effective towards both aminopeptidases tested. Additionally, glycine aldehyde derivative (glycinal, compound 69, Fig. 24) investigated in this study was also much less effective (K
i = 0.68 mM for LAP). This result confirmed the importance of the side chain in binding efficiency of the designed inhibitors, but also proved that information from the substrate activity screening can be used for the design of the inhibitors. l-Leucine p-nitroanilide substrate is much more efficiently processed by LAP than analogous glycine derivative.Fig. 24 Structures of α-aminoaldehydes.



Another group of inhibitors for aminopeptidases with aldehyde scaffold were proposed by Tarnus et al., 3-amino-2-hydroxy-propionaldehyde and 3-amino-1-hydroxypropan-2-one derivatives (71 and 72, respectively, Fig. 25
) [185]. These compounds designed as general inhibitors of metallo-aminopeptidases were micromolar competitive inhibitors of LAP and APN. For some derivatives selective inhibition of APN over LAP was observed. Unfortunately, due to their susceptibility to oligomerization as well as very high reactivity aldehyde derivatives are not the best candidates for in vivo studies. However, they are an interesting alternative for design of inhibitors, which can be used for investigation of aminopeptidases in vitro.Fig. 25 Structure and activity of 3-amino-2-hydroxy-propionaldehyde and 3-amino-1-hydroxypropan-2-one phenylalanine derivatives.



13 Sulfonamides
Sulfonamides belong to a group of the most recognized compounds with biomedical relevance. Easily obtained in the reaction of appropriate sulfonyl chlorides with amines, they offer a great potential of structural variations of both substrates. Indeed, since the discovery of the antimicrobial properties, sulfonamides have found a vast number of other biological applications connected with regulation of enzymatic activity. In the context of proteases inhibition, a rationale for the sulfonamide moiety application is the isosteric and isoelectronic resemblance to the high energy tetrahedral transition state that is present in the amide bond hydrolysis (similarly to the phosphorus containing peptide analogues). Surprisingly, there are not many recent examples of the use of this strategy towards metallo-aminopeptidase targets. What is more significant, the mode of sulfonamides action in those rare cases is miscellaneous and does not follow the theoretically considered pattern of transition state interactions. The title functional group plays more of a role as a linker between hydrophobic portions of the inhibitor, with another metal binding entity incorporated into one of them. Alternatively, a cooperative action of two heteroatom-rich moieties (including the sulfonamide one) is observed.

The most advanced studies on this topic seemed to be performed in Abbott Laboratories and concerned anthranilic acid sulfonamides as inhibitors of the human recombinant methionine aminopeptidase type 2 (as a target for orally available drugs in an anti-cancer therapy) [186], [187], [188], [189]. A series of sulfonamide compounds, such as 73 (Fig. 26
), was identified using affinity selection by a mass spectroscopy screening method [186]. They exhibited micromolar activity for the manganese form of the human MetAP2 and were moderately potent in a cell proliferation assay. Thanks to promising pharmacokinetics and synthetic viability they were pointed out as novel attractive leads. Consecutive X-ray studies allowed for the rational design of a new generation of ligands and tracking of the efficiency of structural optimizations. First iteration enlargement of the aromatic portion of the anthranilic acid to a naphthalene or tetrahydronaphthalene system (compound 74, Fig. 26) allowed 1000-fold improvement in activity of the starting molecule [186]. As revealed by the crystal structure, tetrahydronaphthyl ring fitted tightly into a hydrophobic pocket of the active site. The carboxylate was an actual metal chelating group, whereas the sulfonamide moiety simply ensured the proper twist of the molecule to point the aromatic rings into a lipophilic environment. Unfortunately, these inhibitors exhibited a limited cellular activity and extensive binding to human serum albumin. A positively charged ortho substitution in the arylsulfonamide ring was predicted to obey these drawbacks, in particular to disrupt interactions with albumin [187]. A set of substituents to the structure based on complex amines and diamines was introduced at this position and positively validated the approach. The modified products (exemplified by 75, Fig. 26) showed potent activity for MetAP2, associated with high selectivity versus related aminopeptidases (3000-fold ratio less active for MetAP1, for example) [187]. Importantly, their efficiency in cell proliferation assays was improved by a greater than 100-fold gain in potency and ranked in low nanomolar range. Similar parameters were achieved for 5,6 disubstituted anthranilic acids containing and additional heteroatom group that was presumed to tighten interactions with manganese ions [188]. Since they exhibit strong anti-cancer activity, enhanced accessibility and oral available such sulfonamides could be considered as optimized for therapeutic use [189].Fig. 26 Optimization of the anthranilic sulfonamides structure as inhibitors of MetAP2 and potential anti-cancer agents.



A cooperative binding mode was observed for quinoline-based sulfonamides potent towards the E. coli MetAP1. These inhibitors were discovered by screening of a 100,000 member small organic compounds library [190]. Selected hits were screened for different metalloforms of the enzyme, with the highest affinity towards the cobalted form displayed by compound 76 (Fig. 27
). The sulfonamides behaved as typical competitive inhibitors; however, as disclosed by the X-ray structural studies, their mode of interactions was not typical. Consistent with data described for the heteroaromatic ligands, the enzyme active site was loaded with three metal ions. The inhibitor bound as a bidentate sulfonamide/quinoline N,N donor to the auxiliary manganese or cobalt atom [190]. Although the methanesufonate fragment was deeply buried, the molecule had no direct interactions with the catalytic metal ions.Fig. 27 A quinolinyl sulfonamide as inhibitor of EcMetAP1.



14 Tetralone derivatives
First described in 1994 by Schalk et al. derivatives of 3-amino-2-tetralone were found to be nanomolar inhibitors of porcine kidney aminopeptidase N [191]. These compounds (77 and 78, Fig. 28
) have non-peptidic character and are competitive inhibitors of the enzyme. The possible mechanism of their coordination with enzyme zinc ion is via carbonyl and amine groups located on the neighboring carbons in the cyclohexyl scaffold. Interestingly, these compounds were almost completely inactive towards aspartate and arginine aminopeptidases and only slightly active towards LAP.Fig. 28 3-Amino-2-tetralone derivatives and their activity towards APN.



In another approach Albrecht et al. synthesized various new derivatives of 3-amino-2-tetralone [192]. Several methyl ketone, substituted oximes or hydroxamic acids, phosphinic acids and hydrazides derivatives (exemplified by compounds 79–81, Fig. 29
) were obtained and tested towards leucine aminopeptidase, aminopeptidase N, Aeromonas proteolytica aminopeptidase, and leukotriene A4 hydrolase. Even if theoretically equipped with better zinc chelating groups, these compounds were rather weak (up to low micromolar K
i values) inhibitors of aminopeptidases with one active site zinc and very weak inhibitors of aminopeptidases with two zinc ions.Fig. 29 3-Amino-2-tetralone derivatives and activity towards APN, LAP and LTA4H.



15 Gallic acid derivatives
Inhibitors bearing gallic acid in the structure were designed based on the previously known biological properties of this compound as well as by assumption that methoxy (natural gallic acid has three free hydroxy groups) substituted hydrophobic ring of this compound will tightly bind in the S1 pocket of aminopeptidase N. Several amino acids derivatives of this compound like 4-amino-l-proline, l-iso-glutamine and cyclo-l-iso-glutamine have been obtained [193], [194], [195]. Among them gallolylamide derivatives based on proline scaffold (compounds 82 and 83, Fig. 30
) were extremely good inhibitors of aminopeptidase N. The best compounds had IC
50 values in low nanomolar range [194].Fig. 30 Structures of gallic derivatives with 4-amino-l-proline scaffold as inhibitors of aminopeptidase N.



In another study l-iso-glutamine and cyclo-l-iso-glutamine derivatives (compounds 84 and 85, Fig. 31
) have been synthesized. These compounds were not as good inhibitors as proline derivatives and had IC
50 values in middle micromolar range. Among them a couple of compounds were potent inhibitors of aminopeptidase N with IC
50 values similar to bestatin (IC
50 = 2.4 μM) [195].Fig. 31 Structures of gallic derivatives with l-iso-glutamine and cyclo-l-iso-glutamine scaffold as inhibitors of aminopeptidase N.



16 Betulinic acid
Betulinic acid (86, Fig. 32
) is a triterpene isolated from bark of several different plants (birch bark is rich source of this compound) [196]. This compound has been found to be potent inducer of apoptosis in cancer cells and is currently in clinical trials [197]. It is proposed that betulinic acid acts by increasing mitochondrial membrane permeability, which subsequently facilitates release of apoptosis stimulating proteins (cytochrome C). However, several others biological targets for this compound have been proposed and one of them is membrane aminopeptidase N (CD13). Melzig et al. determined the IC
50 for betulinic acid against aminopeptidase to be 7.3 μM [198].Fig. 32 Structure of betulinic acid.



17 Curcumin
Naturally occurring in plants polyphenol–curcumin (87, Fig. 33
) has been also described as inhibitor of aminopeptidase N. Curcumin is known as potent antitumor agent and currently its mechanism of action as well as biological targets are extensively investigated [199], [200]. This compound interacted with CD13 in irreversible and non-competitive mode and strongly inhibited APN-positive tumor cell invasion as well as induced angiogenesis by basic fibroblast growth factor [201]. Interestingly, curcumin did not influence invasion of APN-negative cells, what further strengthened hypothesis that anti-invasive activity of this compound is a result of CD13 inhibition.Fig. 33 Structure of curcumin and its activity towards APN.



18 Concluding remarks and perspectives
Aminopeptidases play pivotal roles in the turnover of proteins and the regulation of intracellular amino acids pools. They are essential to the metabolism, growth and development of all cells and tissues, and are part of the processes that regulate our immune and neurological systems. They also perform a broad spectrum of functions outside the cell, on the surface or even in the surrounding milieu (receptors, hormone processing and regulation etc). Their involvement in the cause or maintenance of certain pathological diseases, particularly cancer, has focused our attention on their structure and function in the hope of developing new treatments. More recently, we have learned that aminopeptidases are also central to the cellular physiology of many parasites, including malaria, which has opened new avenues for development of anti-infectious disease drugs. Crucial to the development of new drugs, however, is our detailed understanding of the mechanism of binding and interaction of inhibitory compounds to the active site of their targets. The present review highlights how this has been progressing well for several aminopeptidases, including leucine, alanine and methionine aminopeptidases, but also exposes our lack of information on a large number of aminopeptidase families. Clearly, these gaps will be filled in time due to the improvements in inhibitor discovery and design (e.g. screening of chemical libraries followed by medicinal chemistry) and in methods for three-dimensional structure determination. The challenge will be to discover inhibitors with selectivity not only for specific enzyme types so as to avoid off-target effects on other systems, but can be delivered to block specific functions or physiological roles of a particular aminopeptidase since each enzyme often performs a variety of defined and ancillary roles.

Acknowledgements
Marcin Drag is supported by Foundation for Polish Science. Artur Mucha is supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education (grant number N N302 159937). John P. Dalton is recipient of a Canada Research Chair (Tier 1) from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).
==== Refs
References
1 Hooper N.M.  Lendeckel U.   Aminopeptidases in Biology and Disease, Proteases in Biology and Disease vol. 2 2004 Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers New York 
2 Sanderink G.J.  Artur Y.  Siest G.   Human aminopeptidases: a review of the literature J. Clin. Chem. Clin. Biochem. 26 1988 795 807 3069949 
3 Sanz Y.   Aminopeptidases Polaina J.  MacCabe A.P.   Industrial Enzymes 2007 Springer 243 260 
4 Jankiewicz U.  Bielawski W.   The properties and functions of bacterial aminopeptidases Acta Microbiol. Pol. 52 2003 217 231 14743975 
5 Rawlings N.D.  Morton F.R.  Kok C.Y.  Kong J.  Barrett A.J.   MEROPS: the peptidase database Nucleic Acids Res. 36 2008 D320 D325 17991683 
6 Grembecka J.  Kafarski P.   Leucine aminopeptidase as a target for inhibitor design Mini Rev. Med. Chem. 1 2001 133 144 12369979 
7 York L.A.  Goldberg A.L.  Mo X.Y.  Rock K.L.   Proteolysis and class I major histocompatibility complex antigen presentation Immunol. Rev. 172 1999 49 66 10631936 
8 Towne C.F.  York I.A.  Neijssen J.  Karow M.L.  Murphy A.J.  Valenzuela D.M.  Yancopoulos G.D.  Neefjes J.J.  Rock K.L.   Leucine aminopeptidase is not essential for trimming peptides in the cytosol or generating epitopes for MHC class I antigen presentation J. Immunol. 175 2005 6605 6614 16272315 
9 Beninga J.  Rock K.L.  Goldberg A.L.   Interferon-gamma can stimulate post-proteasomal trimming of the N terminus of an antigenic peptide by inducing leucine aminopeptidase J. Biol. Chem. 273 1998 18734 18742 9668046 
10 Taylor A.  Daims M.  Lee J.  Surgenor T.   Identification and quantification of leucine aminopeptidase in aged normal and cataractous human lenses and ability of bovine lens LAP to cleave bovine crystallins Curr. Eye Res. 2 1982 47 56 6813027 
11 Kazeto H.  Nomura S.  Ito N.  Ito T.  Watanabe Y.  Kajiyama H.  Shibata K.  Ino K.  Tamakoshi K.  Hattori A.  Kikkawa F.  Nagasaka T.  Tsujimoto M.  Mizutani S.   Expression of adipocyte-derived leucine aminopeptidase in endometrial cancer. Association with tumor grade and CA-125 Tumour Biol. 24 2003 203 208 14654715 
12 Pulido-Cejudo G.  Conway B.  Proulx P.  Brown R.  Izaguirre C.A.   Bestatin-mediated inhibition of leucine aminopeptidase may hinder HIV infection Antivir. Res. 36 1997 167 177 9477117 
13 Mina-Osorio P.   The moonlighting enzyme CD13: old and new functions to target Trends Mol. Med. 14 2008 361 371 18603472 
14 Potolicchio I.  Carven G.J.  Xu X.  Stipp C.  Riese R.J.  Stern L.J.  Santambrogio L.   Proteomic analysis of microglia-derived exosomes: metabolic role of the aminopeptidase CD13 in neuropeptide catabolism J. Immunol. 175 2005 2237 2243 16081791 
15 Paul M.  Poyan Mehr A.  Kreutz R.   Physiology of local renin–angiotensin systems Physiol. Rev. 86 2006 747 803 16816138 
16 Riemann D.  Kehlen A.  Langner J.   CD13-not just a marker in leukemia typing Immunol. Today 20 1999 83 88 10098327 
17 Soderberg C.  Giugni T.D.  Zaia J.A.  Larsson S.  Wahlberg J.M.  Moller E.   CD13 (human aminopeptidase N) mediates human cytomegalovirus infection J. Virol. 67 1993 6576 6585 8105105 
18 Lassnig C.  Sanchez C.M.  Egerbacher M.  Walter I.  Majer S.  Kolbe T.  Pallares P.  Enjuanes L.  Muller M.   Development of a transgenic mouse model susceptible to human coronavirus 229E Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 2005 8275 8280 15919828 
19 Danziger R.S.   Aminopeptidase N in arterial hypertension Heart Fail. Rev. 13 2008 293 298 18008160 
20 Lucius R.  Sievers J.  Mentlein R.   Enkephalin metabolism by microglial aminopeptidase N (CD13) J. Neurochem. 64 1995 1841 1847 7534337 
21 Rangel R.  Sun Y.  Guzman-Rojas L.  Ozawa M.G.  Sun J.  Giordano R.J.  Van Pelt C.S.  Tinkey P.T.  Behringer R.R.  Sidman R.L.  Arap W.  Pasqualini R.   Impaired angiogenesis in aminopeptidase N-null mice Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 2007 4588 4593 17360568 
22 Mina-Osorio P.  Winnicka B.  O’Conor C.  Grant C.L.  Vogel L.K.  Rodriguez-Pinto D.  Holmes K.V.  Ortega E.  Shapiro L.H.   CD13 is a novel mediator of monocytic/endothelial cell adhesion J. Leukoc. Biol. 84 2008 448 459 18495788 
23 Datta B.   MAPs and POEP of the roads from prokaryotic to eukaryotic kingdoms Biochimie 82 2000 95 107 10727764 
24 Selvakumar P.  Lakshmikuttyamma A.  Dimmock J.R.  Sharma R.K.   Methionine aminopeptidase 2 and cancer Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1765 2006 148 154 16386852 
25 Priest R.C.  Spaull J.  Buckton J.  Grimley R.L.  Sims M.  Binks M.  Malhotra R.   Immunomodulatory activity of a methionine aminopeptidase-2 inhibitor on B cell differentiation Clin. Exp. Immunol. 155 2009 514 522 19068103 
26 Tucker L.A.  Zhang Q.  Sheppard G.S.  Lou P.  Jiang F.  McKeegan E.  Lesniewski R.  Davidsen S.K.  Bell R.L.  Wang J.   Ectopic expression of methionine aminopeptidase-2 causes cell transformation and stimulates proliferation Oncogene 27 2008 3967 3976 18264137 
27 Leszczyniecka M.  Bhatia U.  Cueto M.  Nirmala N.R.  Towbin H.  Vattay A.  Wang B.  Zabludoff S.  Phillips P.E.   MAP1D, a novel methionine aminopeptidase family member is overexpressed in colon cancer Oncogene 25 2006 3471 3478 16568094 
28 Datta B.   Roles of P67/MetAP2 as a tumor suppressor Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1796 2009 281 292 19716858 
29 Dasgupta B.  Yi Y.  Hegedus B.  Weber J.D.  Gutmann D.H.   Cerebrospinal fluid proteomic analysis reveals dysregulation of methionine aminopeptidase-2 expression in human and mouse neurofibromatosis 1-associated glioma Cancer Res. 65 2005 9843 9850 16267007 
30 Liu B.X.  Du X.L.  Zhou L.G.  Hara K.  Su W.J.  Cao M.J.   Purification and characterization of a leucine aminopeptidase from the skeletal muscle of common carp (Cyprinus carpio ) Food Chem. 108 2008 140 147 
31 Wu G.P.  Cao M.J.  Chen Y.  Liu B.X.  Su W.J.   Leucine aminopeptidase from red sea bream (Pagrus major ) skeletal muscle: purification, characterization, cellular location, and tissue distribution J. Agric. Food Chem. 56 2008 9653 9660 18800800 
32 Rhyu M.R.  Nishimura T.  Kato Y.  Okitani A.  Kato H.   Purification and properties of aminopeptidase H from chicken skeletal muscle Eur. J. Biochem. 208 1992 53 59 1511689 
33 Bozic N.  Ivanovic J.  Nenadovic V.  Bergstrom J.  Larsson T.  Vujcic Z.   Purification and properties of major midgut leucyl aminopeptidase of Morimus funereus  (Coleoptera, Cerambycidae) larvae Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B Biochem. Mol. Biol. 149 2008 454 462 18155948 
34 Kaur R.  Agrawal N.  Bhatnagar R.   Purification and characterization of aminopeptidase N from Spodoptera litura  expressed in Sf21 insect cells Protein Expr. Purif. 54 2007 267 274 17467291 
35 Zhang S.  Cheng H.  Gao Y.  Wang G.  Liang G.  Wu K.   Mutation of an aminopeptidase N gene is associated with Helicoverpa armigera  resistance to Bacillus thuringiensis  Cry1Ac toxin Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 39 2009 421 429 19376227 
36 Chen J.  Aimanova K.G.  Pan S.  Gill S.S.   Identification and characterization of Aedes aegypti  aminopeptidase N as a putative receptor of Bacillus thuringiensis  Cry11A toxin Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 39 2009 688 696 19698787 
37 Isaac R.E.  Bland N.D.  Shirras A.D.   Neuropeptidases and the metabolic inactivation of insect neuropeptides Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 162 2009 8 17 19135055 
38 Graham S.C.  Guss J.M.   Complexes of mutants of Escherichia coli  aminopeptidase P and the tripeptide substrate ValProLeu Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 469 2008 200 208 17983589 
39 Zhang X.  Chen S.  Hu Z.  Zhang L.  Wang H.   Expression and characterization of two functional methionine aminopeptidases from Mycobacterium tuberculosis  H37Rv Curr. Microbiol. 59 2009 520 525 19688379 
40 Dong L.  Cheng N.  Wang M.W.  Zhang J.  Shu C.  Zhu D.X.   The leucyl aminopeptidase from Helicobacter pylori  is an allosteric enzyme Microbiology 151 2005 2017 2023 15942008 
41 Bauvois C.  Jacquamet L.  Huston A.L.  Borel F.  Feller G.  Ferrer J.L.   Crystal structure of the cold-active aminopeptidase from Colwellia psychrerythraea , a close structural homologue of the human bifunctional leukotriene A4 hydrolase J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 23315 23325 18539590 
42 Deejing S.  Yoshimune K.  Lumyong S.  Moriguchi M.   Purification and characterization of hyperthermotolerant leucine aminopeptidase from Geobacillus thermoleovorans  47b J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 32 2005 269 276 15937698 
43 Yang H.  Chen J.  Yang G.  Zhang X.H.  Li Y.   Mutational analysis of the zinc metalloprotease EmpA of Vibrio anguillarum  FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 267 2007 56 63 17134473 
44 Story S.V.  Shah C.  Jenney F.E. Jr.  Adams M.W.   Characterization of a novel zinc-containing, lysine-specific aminopeptidase from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus  J. Bacteriol. 187 2005 2077 2083 15743956 
45 Stack C.M.  Lowther J.  Cunningham E.  Donnelly S.  Gardiner D.L.  Trenholme K.R.  Skinner-Adams T.S.  Teuscher F.  Grembecka J.  Mucha A.  Kafarski P.  Lua L.  Bell A.  Dalton J.P.   Characterization of the Plasmodium falciparum  M17 leucyl aminopeptidase. A protease involved in amino acid regulation with potential for antimalarial drug development J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 2069 2080 17107951 
46 Maric S.  Donnelly S.M.  Robinson M.W.  Skinner-Adams T.S.  Trenholme K.R.  Gardiner D.L.  Dalton J.P.  Stack C.M.  Lowther J.   The M17 leucine aminopeptidase of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum : importance of active site metal ions in the binding of substrates and inhibitors Biochemistry 48 2009 5435 5439 19408962 
47 Skinner-Adams T.S.  Stack C.M.  Trenholme K.R.  Brown C.L.  Grembecka J.  Lowther J.  Mucha A.  Drag M.  Kafarski P.  McGowan S.  Whisstock J.C.  Gardiner D.L.  Dalton J.P.   Plasmodium falciparum  neutral aminopeptidases: new targets for anti-malarials Trends Biochem. Sci. 35 2010 53 61 19796954 
48 Lauterbach S.B.  Coetzer T.L.   The M18 aspartyl aminopeptidase of Plasmodium falciparum  binds to human erythrocyte spectrin in vitro Malar. J. 7 2008 161 18721457 
49 Teuscher F.  Lowther J.  Skinner-Adams T.S.  Spielmann T.  Dixon M.W.  Stack C.M.  Donnelly S.  Mucha A.  Kafarski P.  Vassiliou S.  Gardiner D.L.  Dalton J.P.  Trenholme K.R.   The M18 aspartyl aminopeptidase of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum  J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 30817 30826 17720817 
50 Rossier O.  Dao J.  Cianciotto N.P.   The type II secretion system of Legionella pneumophila  elaborates two aminopeptidases, as well as a metalloprotease that contributes to differential infection among protozoan hosts Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74 2008 753 761 18083880 
51 Fetterer R.H.  Misk K.B.  Barfield R.C.   Partial purification and characterization of an aminopeptidase from Eimeria tenella  J. Parasitol. 91 2005 1280 1286 16539006 
52 Jia H.  Terkawi M.A.  Aboge G.O.  Goo Y.K.  Luo Y.  Li Y.  Yamagishi J.  Nishikawa Y.  Igarashi I.  Sugimoto C.  Fujisaki K.  Xuan X.   Characterization of a leucine aminopeptidase of Babesia gibsoni  Parasitology 136 2009 945 952 19549347 
53 Zhang H.  Huang H.  Cali A.  Takvorian P.M.  Feng X.  Zhou G.  Weiss L.M.   Investigations into microsporidian methionine aminopeptidase type 2: a therapeutic target for microsporidiosis Folia Parasitol. (Praha) 52 2005 182 192 16004378 
54 McCarthy E.  Stack C.N.  Donnelly S.M.  Doyle S.  Mann V.H.  Brindley P.J.  Stewart M.  Day T.A.  Maule A.G.  Dalton J.P.   Leucine aminopeptidases of the human blood flukes Schistosoma mansoni  and Schistosoma japonicum  Int. J. Parasitol. 34 2004 703 714 15111092 
55 Rinaldi G.  Morales M.E.  Alrefaei Y.N.  Cancela M.  Castillo E.  Dalton J.P.  Tort J.F.  Brindley P.J.   RNA interference targeting leucine aminopeptidase blocks hatching of Schistosoma mansoni  eggs Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 167 2009 118 126 19463860 
56 Song S.M.  Park J.H.  Kim J.  Kim S.I.  Hong Y.C.  Kong H.H.  Chung D.I.   Identification and characterization of Paragonimus westermani  leucine aminopeptidase Parasitol. Int. 57 2008 334 341 18394951 
57 Acosta D.  Cancela M.  Piacenza L.  Roche L.  Carmona C.  Tort J.F.   Fasciola hepatica  leucine aminopeptidase, a promising candidate for vaccination against ruminant fasciolosis Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 158 2008 52 64 18178266 
58 Ercan A.  Tay W.M.  Grossman S.H.  Ming L.J.   Mechanistic role of each metal ion in Streptomyces  dinuclear aminopeptidase: PEPTIDE hydrolysis and 7 × 10(10)-fold rate enhancement of phosphodiester hydrolysis J. Inorg. Biochem. 104 2010 19 29 19879003 
59 Cappiello M.  Alterio V.  Amodeo P.  Del Corso A.  Scaloni A.  Pedone C.  Moschini R.  De Donatis G.M.  De Simone G.  Mura U.   Metal ion substitution in the catalytic site greatly affects the binding of sulfhydryl-containing compounds to leucyl aminopeptidase Biochemistry 45 2006 3226 3234 16519517 
60 Mitra S.  Sheppard G.  Wang J.  Bennett B.  Holz R.C.   Analyzing the binding of Co(II)-specific inhibitors to the methionyl aminopeptidases from Escherichia coli  and Pyrococcus furiosus  J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 14 2009 573 585 19198897 
61 Chi M.C.  Ong P.L.  Hsu W.H.  Chen Y.H.  Huang H.B.  Lin L.L.   Role of the invariant Asn345 and Asn435 residues in a leucine aminopeptidase from Bacillus kaustophilus  as evaluated by site-directed mutagenesis Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 43 2008 481 487 18848841 
62 Kapoor D.  Singh B.  Karthikeyan S.  Guptasarma P.   A functional comparison of the TET aminopeptidases of P. furiosus  and B. subtilis  with a protein-engineered variant recombining the former’s structure with the latter’s active site Enzyme Microb. Technol. 46 2010 1 8 
63 Hwang G.Y.  Kuo L.Y.  Tsai M.R.  Yang S.L.  Lin L.L.   Histidines 345 and 378 of Bacillus stearothermophilus  leucine aminopeptidase II are essential for the catalytic activity of the enzyme Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 87 2005 355 359 15928987 
64 Mitra S.  Job K.M.  Meng L.  Bennett B.  Holz R.C.   Analyzing the catalytic role of Asp97 in the methionine aminopeptidase from Escherichia coli  FEBS J. 275 2008 6248 6259 19019076 
65 Watterson S.J.  Mitra S.  Swierczek S.I.  Bennett B.  Holz R.C.   Kinetic and spectroscopic analysis of the catalytic role of H79 in the methionine aminopeptidase from Escherichia coli  Biochemistry 47 2008 11885 11893 18855426 
66 Bzymek K.P.  Moulin A.  Swierczek S.I.  Ringe D.  Petsko G.A.  Bennett B.  Holz R.C.   Kinetic, spectroscopic, and X-ray crystallographic characterization of the functional E151H aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica  Biochemistry 44 2005 12030 12040 16142900 
67 Bzymek K.P.  Holz R.C.   The catalytic role of glutamate 151 in the leucine aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica  J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 31018 31025 15138277 
68 Alvarado J.J.  Nemkal A.  Sauder J.M.  Russell M.  Akiyoshi D.E.  Shi W.  Almo S.C.  Weiss L.M.   Structure of a microsporidian methionine aminopeptidase type 2 complexed with fumagillin and TNP-470 Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 168 2009 158 167 19660503 
69 Michalska K.  Brzezinski K.  Jaskolski M.   Crystal structure of isoaspartyl aminopeptidase in complex with l -aspartate J. Biol. Chem. 280 2005 28484 28491 15946951 
70 Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Poras H.  Roques B.P.  Nakajima Y.  Ito K.  Yoshimoto T.   Structure of aminopeptidase N from Escherichia coli  complexed with the transition-state analogue aminophosphinic inhibitor PL250 Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 65 2009 814 822 19622865 
71 Ye Q.Z.  Xie S.X.  Ma Z.Q.  Huang M.  Hanzlik R.P.   Structural basis of catalysis by monometalated methionine aminopeptidase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 2006 9470 9475 16769889 
72 Ataie N.J.  Hoang Q.Q.  Zahniser M.P.  Tu Y.  Milne A.  Petsko G.A.  Ringe D.   Zinc coordination geometry and ligand binding affinity: the structural and kinetic analysis of the second-shell serine 228 residue and the methionine 180 residue of the aminopeptidase from Vibrio proteolyticus  Biochemistry 47 2008 7673 7683 18576673 
73 Nocek B.  Mulligan R.  Bargassa M.  Collart F.  Joachimiak A.   Crystal structure of aminopeptidase N from human pathogen Neisseria meningitidis  Proteins 70 2008 273 279 17876832 
74 Douangamath A.  Dale G.E.  D’Arcy A.  Almstetter M.  Eckl R.  Frutos-Hoener A.  Henkel B.  Illgen K.  Nerdinger S.  Schulz H.  MacSweeney A.  Thormann M.  Treml A.  Pierau S.  Wadman S.  Oefner C.   Crystal structures of Staphylococcus aureus  methionine aminopeptidase complexed with keto heterocycle and aminoketone inhibitors reveal the formation of a tetrahedral intermediate J. Med. Chem. 47 2004 1325 1328 14998322 
75 McGowan S.  Porter C.J.  Lowther J.  Stack C.M.  Golding S.J.  Skinner-Adams T.S.  Trenholme K.R.  Teuscher F.  Donnelly S.M.  Grembecka J.  Mucha A.  Kafarski P.  Degori R.  Buckle A.M.  Gardiner D.L.  Whisstock J.C.  Dalton J.P.   Structural basis for the inhibition of the essential Plasmodium falciparum  M1 neutral aminopeptidase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 2009 2537 2542 19196988 
76 McGowan S.  Oellig C.A.  Birru W.A.  Caradoc-Davies T.T.  Stack C.M.  Lowther J.  Skinner-Adams T.S.  Mucha A.  Kafarski P.  Grembecka J.  Trenholme K.R.  Buckle A.M.  Gardiner D.L.  Dalton J.P.  Whisstock J.C.   Structure of the Plasmodium falciparum  M17 aminopeptidase and significance for the design of drugs targeting the neutral exopeptidases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 2010 2449 2454 20133789 
77 Chen S.L.  Marino T.  Fang W.H.  Russo N.  Himo F.   Peptide hydrolysis by the binuclear zinc enzyme aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica : a density functional theory study J. Phys. Chem. B 112 2008 2494 2500 18247603 
78 Schurer G.  Horn A.H.C.  Gedeck P.  Clark T.   The reaction mechanism of bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase J. Phys. Chem. B 106 2002 8815 8830 26313849 
79 Jaime E.  Kluge S.  Weston J.   On the origin of the broad-band selectivity of bovine-lens-leucine-aminopeptidase Arkivoc 2007 77 95 
80 Erhardt S.  Weston J.   Development of a working model of the active site in bovine lens leucine aminopeptidase: a density functional investigation Chembiochem 3 2002 101 104 17590960 
81 Bienvenue D.L.  Gilner D.  Holz R.C.   Hydrolysis of thionopeptides by the aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica : insight into substrate binding Biochemistry 41 2002 3712 3719 11888288 
82 Kodanko J.J.  Xu D.  Song D.T.  Lippard S.J.   Iron substitution for sodium in a carboxylate-bridged, heterodinuclear sodium–iron complex J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127 2005 16004 16005 16287269 
83 Zhang X.  Xu W.   Aminopeptidase N (APN/CD13) as a target for anti-cancer agent design Curr. Med. Chem. 15 2008 2850 2865 18991640 
84 Lowther W.T.  Matthews B.W.   Metalloaminopeptidases: common functional themes in disparate structural surroundings Chem. Rev. 102 2002 4581 4608 12475202 
85 Bauvois B.  Dauzonne D.   Aminopeptidase-N/CD13 (EC 3.4.11.2) inhibitors: chemistry, biological evaluations, and therapeutic prospects Med. Res. Rev. 26 2006 88 130 16216010 
86 Luan Y.  Xu W.   The structure and main functions of aminopeptidase N Curr. Med. Chem. 14 2007 639 647 17346152 
87 Giannousis P.P.  Bartlett P.A.   Phosphorus amino acid analogues as inhibitors of leucine aminopeptidase J. Med. Chem. 30 1987 1603 1609 3625708 
88 Lejczak B.  Kafarski P.   Biological activity of aminophosphonic acids and their short peptides Top. Heterocycl. Chem. 20 2009 31 63 
89 Lejczak B.  De Choszczak M.P.  Kafarski P.   Inhibition of aminopeptidases by phosphonic acid and phosphinic acid analogues of aspartic and glutamic acids J. Enzyme Inhib. 7 1993 97 103 7509873 
90 Lejczak B.  Kafarski P.  Zygmunt J.   Inhibition of aminopeptidases by aminophosphonates Biochemistry 28 1989 3549 3555 2568128 
91 Drag M.  Grembecka J.  Pawelczak M.  Kafarski P.   alpha-Aminoalkylphosphonates as a tool in experimental optimisation of P1 side chain shape of potential inhibitors in S1 pocket of leucine- and neutral aminopeptidases Eur. J. Med. Chem. 40 2005 764 771 16122579 
92 Drag M.  Pawelczak M.  Kafarski P.   Stereoselective synthesis of 1-aminoalkanephosphonic acids with two chiral centers and their activity towards leucine aminopeptidase Chirality 15 2003 S104 S107 12884381 
93 Cunningham E.  Drag M.  Kafarski P.  Bell A.   Chemical target validation studies of aminopeptidase in malaria parasites using alpha-aminoalkylphosphonate and phosphonopeptide inhibitors Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52 2008 3221 3228 18458130 
94 Drag M.  Bogyo M.  Ellman J.A.  Salvesen G.S.   Aminopeptidase fingerprints. An integrated approach for identification of good substrates and optimal inhibitors J. Biol. Chem. 285 2010 3310 3318 19948737 
95 Grembecka J.  Mucha A.  Cierpicki T.  Kafarski P.   The most potent organophosphorus inhibitors of leucine aminopeptidase. Structure-based design, chemistry, and activity J. Med. Chem. 46 2003 2641 2655 12801228 
96 Grembecka J.  Sokalski W.A.  Kafarski P.   Computer-aided design and activity prediction of leucine aminopeptidase inhibitors J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 14 2000 531 544 10921770 
97 Grembecka J.  Sokalski W.A.  Kafarski P.   Quantum chemical analysis of the interactions of transition state analogs with leucine aminopeptidase Inter. J. Quant. Chem. 84 2001 302 310 
98 Mucha A.  Grembecka J.  Cierpicki T.  Kafarski P.   Hydrolysis of the phosphonamidate bond in phosphono dipeptide analogues – the influence of the nature of the N-terminal functional group Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2003 4797 4803 
99 Mucha A.  Laemmerhofer M.  Lindner W.  Pawelczak M.  Kafarski P.   Individual stereoisomers of phosphinic dipeptide inhibitor of leucine aminopeptidase Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 18 2008 1550 1554 18262419 
100 Vassiliou S.  Xeilari M.  Yiotakis A.  Grembecka J.  Pawelczak M.  Kafarski P.  Mucha A.   A synthetic method for diversification of the P1′ substituent in phosphinic dipeptides as a tool for exploration of the specificity of the S1′ binding pockets of leucine aminopeptidases Bioorg. Med. Chem. 15 2007 3187 3200 17337192 
101 Skinner-Adams T.S.  Lowther J.  Teuscher F.  Stack C.M.  Grembecka J.  Mucha A.  Kafarski P.  Trenholme K.R.  Dalton J.P.  Gardiner D.L.   Identification of phosphinate dipeptide analog inhibitors directed against the Plasmodium falciparum  M17 leucine aminopeptidase as lead antimalarial compounds J. Med. Chem. 50 2007 6024 6031 17960925 
102 Chen H.X.  Roques B.P.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.   Design of the first highly potent and selective aminopeptidase N (EC 3.4.11.2) inhibitor Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 9 1999 1511 1516 10386926 
103 Chen H.X.  Noble F.  Mothe A.  Meudal H.  Coric P.  Danascimento S.  Roques B.P.  George P.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.   Phosphinic derivatives as new dual enkephalin-degrading enzyme inhibitors: synthesis, biological properties, and antinociceptive activities J. Med. Chem. 43 2000 1398 1408 10753476 
104 Tholander F.  Muroya A.  Roques B.P.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Thunnissen M.M.G.M.  Haeggstrom J.Z.   Structure-based dissection of the active site chemistry of leukotriene A4 hydrolase: implications for M1 aminopeptidases and inhibitor design Chem. Biol. 15 2008 920 929 18804029 
105 Georgiadis D.  Vazeux G.  Llorens-Cortes C.  Yiotakis A.  Dive V.   Potent and selective inhibition of zinc aminopeptidase A (EC 3.4.11.7, APA) by glutamyl aminophosphinic peptides: importance of glutamyl aminophosphinic residue in the P-1 position Biochemistry 39 2000 1152 1155 10653662 
106 Drag M.  Grzywa R.  Oleksyszyn J.   Novel hydroxamic acid-related phosphinates: inhibition of neutral aminopeptidase N (APN) Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 17 2007 1516 1519 17270439 
107 Grzywa R.  Oleksyszyn J.   First synthesis of alpha-aminoalkyl-(N-substituted)thiocarbamoyl-phosphinates: inhibitors of aminopeptidase N (APN/CD13) with the new zinc-binding group Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 18 2008 3734 3736 18524593 
108 Umezawa H.  Aoyagi T.  Suda H.  Hamada M.  Takeuchi T.   Bestatin, an inhibitor of aminopeptidase B, produced by actinomycetes J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 29 1976 97 99 931798 
109 Scornik O.A.  Botbol V.   Bestatin as an experimental tool in mammals Curr. Drug Metab. 2 2001 67 85 11465152 
110 Burley S.K.  David P.R.  Lipscomb W.N.   Leucine aminopeptidase: bestatin inhibition and a model for enzyme-catalyzed peptide hydrolysis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88 1991 6916 6920 1871107 
111 Orning L.  Krivi G.  Fitzpatrick F.A.   Leukotriene A4 hydrolase. Inhibition by bestatin and intrinsic aminopeptidase activity establish its functional resemblance to metallohydrolase enzymes J. Biol. Chem. 266 1991 1375 1378 1846352 
112 Leyhausen G.  Schuster D.K.  Vaith P.  Zahn R.K.  Umezawa H.  Falke D.  Muller W.E.   Identification and properties of the cell membrane bound leucine aminopeptidase interacting with the potential immunostimulant and chemotherapeutic agent bestatin Biochem. Pharmacol. 32 1983 1051 1057 6838651 
113 Rich D.H.  Moon B.J.  Harbeson S.   Inhibition of aminopeptidases by amastatin and bestatin derivatives. Effect of inhibitor structure on slow-binding processes J. Med. Chem. 27 1984 417 422 6142952 
114 Suda H.  Takita T.  Aoyagi T.  Umezawa H.   The structure of bestatin J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 29 1976 100 101 931786 
115 Norman B.H.  Morris M.L.   A stereospecific synthesis of (−)-Bestatin from l -malic acid Tetrahedron Lett. 33 1992 6803 6806 
116 Wasserman H.H.  Petersen A.K.  Xia M.D.   Application of acyl cyanophosphorane methodology to the synthesis of protease inhibitors: poststatin, eurystatin, phebestin, probestin and bestatin Tetrahedron 59 2003 6771 6784 
117 Bergmeier S.C.  Stanchina D.M.   Acylnitrene route to vicinal amino alcohols. Application to the synthesis of (−)-bestatin and analogues J. Org. Chem. 64 1999 2852 2859 11674356 
118 Nemoto H.  Ma R.J.  Suzuki I.  Shibuya M.   A new one-pot method for the synthesis of alpha-siloxyamides from aldehydes or ketones and its application to the synthesis of (−)-bestatin Org. Lett. 2 2000 4245 4247 11150210 
119 Righi G.  D’Achille C.  Pescatore G.  Bonini C.   New stereoselective synthesis of the peptidic aminopeptidase inhibitors bestatin, phebestin and probestin Tetrahedron Lett. 44 2003 6999 7002 
120 Feske B.D.   Bestatin: three decades of synthetic strategies Curr. Org. Chem. 11 2007 483 496 
121 Luan Y.P.  Mu J.J.  Xu W.F.   The review of the synthesis of bestatin, an effective inhibitor of aminopeptidase N Mini Rev. Org. Chem. 5 2008 134 140 
122 Evans J.F.  Kargman S.   Bestatin inhibits covalent coupling of [3H]LTA4 to human leukocyte LTA4 hydrolase FEBS Lett. 297 1992 139 142 1312948 
123 Gordon E.M.  Godfrey J.D.  Delaney N.G.  Asaad M.M.  Von Langen D.  Cushman D.W.   Design of novel inhibitors of aminopeptidases. Synthesis of peptide-derived diamino thiols and sulfur replacement analogues of bestatin J. Med. Chem. 31 1988 2199 2211 3184127 
124 Saino T.  Seya K.  Nishizawa R.  Takita T.  Aoyagi T.  Umezawa H.   Synthesis of p-hydroxyubenimex J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 40 1987 1165 1169 3680027 
125 Ocain T.D.  Rich D.H.   Synthesis of sulfur-containing analogues of bestatin. Inhibition of aminopeptidases by alpha-thiolbestatin analogues J. Med. Chem. 31 1988 2193 2199 3184126 
126 Harbut M.B.  Velmourougane G.  Reiss G.  Chandramohanadas R.  Greenbaum D.C.   Development of bestatin-based activity-based probes for metallo-aminopeptidases Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 18 2008 5932 5936 18823778 
127 Nagai M.  Kojima F.  Naganawa H.  Hamada M.  Aoyagi T.  Takeuchi T.   Phebestin, a new inhibitor of aminopeptidase N, produced by Streptomyces  sp. MJ716-m3 J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 50 1997 82 84 9066770 
128 Aoyagi T.  Yoshida S.  Nakamura Y.  Shigihara Y.  Hamada M.  Takeuchi T.   Probestin, a new inhibitor of aminopeptidase M, produced by Streptomyces azureus  MH663-2F6. I. Taxonomy, production, isolation, physico-chemical properties and biological activities J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 43 1990 143 148 1968900 
129 Matsas R.  Stephenson S.L.  Hryszko J.  Kenny A.J.  Turner A.J.   The metabolism of neuropeptides. Phase separation of synaptic membrane preparations with Triton X-114 reveals the presence of aminopeptidase N Biochem. J. 231 1985 445 449 2865952 
130 Coussens L.M.  Fingleton B.  Matrisian L.M.   Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors and cancer: trials and tribulations Science 295 2002 2387 2392 11923519 
131 Fingleton B.   Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors for cancer therapy: the current situation and future prospects Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 7 2003 385 397 12783574 
132 Chan W.W.  Dennis P.  Demmer W.  Brand K.   Inhibition of leucine aminopeptidase by amino acid hydroxamates J. Biol. Chem. 257 1982 7955 7957 7085655 
133 Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Coric P.  Turcaud S.  Bruetschy L.  Lucas E.  Noble F.  Roques B.P.   Potent and systemically active aminopeptidase N inhibitors designed from active-site investigation J. Med. Chem. 35 1992 1259 1266 1348542 
134 Lee J.  Shim J.S.  Jung S.A.  Lee S.T.  Kwon H.J.   N-hydroxy-2-(naphthalene-2-ylsulfanyl)-acetamide, a novel hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor of aminopeptidase N and its anti-angiogenic activity Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 15 2005 181 183 15582436 
135 Hu X.  Zhu J.  Srivathsan S.  Pei D.   Peptidyl hydroxamic acids as methionine aminopeptidase inhibitors Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 14 2004 77 79 14684302 
136 Huang Q.Q.  Huang M.  Nan F.J.  Ye Q.Z.   Metalloform-selective inhibition: synthesis and structure–activity analysis of Mn(II)-form-selective inhibitors of Escherichia coli  methionine aminopeptidase Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 15 2005 5386 5391 16219464 
137 Flipo M.  Florent I.  Grellier P.  Sergheraert C.  Deprez-Poulain R.   Design, synthesis and antimalarial activity of novel, quinoline-based, zinc metallo-aminopeptidase inhibitors Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 13 2003 2659 2662 12873488 
138 Flipo M.  Beghyn T.  Leroux V.  Florent I.  Deprez B.P.  Deprez-Poulain R.F.   Novel selective inhibitors of the zinc plasmodial aminopeptidase PfA-M1 as potential antimalarial agents J. Med. Chem. 50 2007 1322 1334 17326615 
139 L.A. Pearson, A.P. Ayscough, P. Huxley, A.H. Drummond, Cytostatic Agents, 2002 (US Patent 5452023).
140 Krige D.  Needham L.A.  Bawden L.J.  Flores N.  Farmer H.  Miles L.E.  Stone E.  Callaghan J.  Chandler S.  Clark V.L.  Kirwin-Jones P.  Legris V.  Owen J.  Patel T.  Wood S.  Box G.  Laber D.  Odedra R.  Wright A.  Wood L.M.  Eccles S.A.  Bone E.A.  Ayscough A.  Drummond A.H.   CHR-2797: an antiproliferative aminopeptidase inhibitor that leads to amino acid deprivation in human leukemic cells Cancer Res. 68 2008 6669 6679 18701491 
141 Reid A.H.  Protheroe A.  Attard G.  Hayward N.  Vidal L.  Spicer J.  Shaw H.M.  Bone E.A.  Carter J.  Hooftman L.  Harris A.  De Bono J.S.   A first-in-man phase I and pharmacokinetic study on CHR-2797 (Tosedostat), an inhibitor of M1 aminopeptidases, in patients with advanced solid tumors Clin. Cancer Res. 15 2009 4978 4985 19638462 
142 Owen R.T.  Castaner R.  Bolos J.   Tosedostat. Aminopeptidase inhibitor, oncolytic Drugs Fut. 2009 115 118 
143 Ocain T.D.  Rich D.H.   l -Lysinethiol: a subnanomolar inhibitor of aminopeptidase B Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 145 1987 1038 1042 3111463 
144 Chan W.W.   l -Leucinthiol – a potent inhibitor of leucine aminopeptidase Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 116 1983 297 302 6416254 
145 Chauvel E.N.  Coric P.  Llorens-Cortes C.  Wilk S.  Roques B.P.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.   Investigation of the active site of aminopeptidase A using a series of new thiol-containing inhibitors J. Med. Chem. 37 1994 1339 1346 7909847 
146 Chauvel E.N.  Llorens-Cortes C.  Coric P.  Wilk S.  Roques B.P.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.   Differential inhibition of aminopeptidase A and aminopeptidase N by new beta-amino thiols J. Med. Chem. 37 1994 2950 2957 7915326 
147 Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Coric P.  Turcaud S.  Lucas E.  Noble F.  Maldonado R.  Roques B.P.   “Mixed inhibitor-prodrug” as a new approach toward systemically active inhibitors of enkephalin-degrading enzymes J. Med. Chem. 35 1992 2473 2481 1352352 
148 Wilk S.  Thurston L.S.   Inhibition of angiotensin III formation by thiol derivatives of acidic amino acids Neuropeptides 16 1990 163 168 1982017 
149 Reaux A.  de Mota N.  Zini S.  Cadel S.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Roques B.P.  Corvol P.  Llorens-Cortes C.   PC18, a specific aminopeptidase N inhibitor, induces vasopressin release by increasing the half-life of brain angiotensin III Neuroendocrinology 69 1999 370 376 10343178 
150 David C.  Bischoff L.  Meudal H.  Mothe A.  De Mota N.  DaNascimento S.  Llorens-Cortes C.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Roques B.P.   Investigation of subsite preferences in aminopeptidase A (EC 3.4.11.7) led to the design of the first highly potent and selective inhibitors of this enzyme J. Med. Chem. 42 1999 5197 5211 10602705 
151 Inguimbert N.  Coric P.  Dhotel H.  Bonnard E.  Llorens-Cortes C.  Mota N.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Roques B.P.   Synthesis and in vitro activities of new non-peptidic APA inhibitors J. Pept. Res. 65 2005 175 188 15705162 
152 Zini S.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Chauvel E.  Roques B.P.  Corvol P.  Llorens-Cortes C.   Identification of metabolic pathways of brain angiotensin II and III using specific aminopeptidase inhibitors: predominant role of angiotensin III in the control of vasopressin release Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 1996 11968 11973 8876246 
153 Reaux A.  Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  David C.  Zini S.  Roques B.P.  Corvol P.  Llorens-Cortes C.   Aminopeptidase A inhibitors as potential central antihypertensive agents Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96 1999 13415 13420 10557335 
154 Fournie-Zaluski M.C.  Fassot C.  Valentin B.  Djordjijevic D.  Reaux-Le Goazigo A.  Corvol P.  Roques B.P.  Llorens-Cortes C.   Brain renin–angiotensin system blockade by systemically active aminopeptidase A inhibitors: a potential treatment of salt-dependent hypertension Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 2004 7775 7780 15136730 
155 Bodineau L.  Frugiere A.  Marc Y.  Inguimbert N.  Fassot C.  Balavoine F.  Roques B.P.  Llorens-Cortes C.   Orally active aminopeptidase A inhibitors reduce blood pressure: a new strategy for treating hypertension Hypertension 51 2008 1318 1325 18362226 
156 Griffith E.C.  Su Z.  Turk B.E.  Chen S.  Chang Y.H.  Wu Z.  Biemann K.  Liu J.O.   Methionine aminopeptidase (type 2) is the common target for angiogenesis inhibitors AGM-1470 and ovalicin Chem. Biol. 4 1997 461 471 9224570 
157 Sin N.  Meng L.  Wang M.Q.  Wen J.J.  Bornmann W.G.  Crews C.M.   The anti-angiogenic agent fumagillin covalently binds and inhibits the methionine aminopeptidase, MetAP-2 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 1997 6099 6103 9177176 
158 Lowther W.T.  McMillen D.A.  Orville A.M.  Matthews B.W.   The anti-angiogenic agent fumagillin covalently modifies a conserved active-site histidine in the Escherichia coli  methionine aminopeptidase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95 1998 12153 12157 9770455 
159 Liu S.  Widom J.  Kemp C.W.  Crews C.M.  Clardy J.   Structure of human methionine aminopeptidase-2 complexed with fumagillin Science 282 1998 1324 1327 9812898 
160 Turk B.E.  Su Z.  Liu J.O.   Synthetic analogues of TNP-470 and ovalicin reveal a common molecular basis for inhibition of angiogenesis and immunosuppression Bioorg. Med. Chem. 6 1998 1163 1169 9784858 
161 Ye Q.Z.  Xie S.X.  Huang M.  Huang W.J.  Lu J.P.  Ma Z.Q.   Metalloform-selective inhibitors of Escherichia coli  methionine aminopeptidase and X-ray structure of a Mn(II)-form enzyme complexed with an inhibitor J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126 2004 13940 13941 15506752 
162 Huang M.  Xie S.X.  Ma Z.Q.  Huang Q.Q.  Nan F.J.  Ye Q.Z.   Inhibition of monometalated methionine aminopeptidase: inhibitor discovery and crystallographic analysis J. Med. Chem. 50 2007 5735 5742 17948983 
163 Zhou Y.  Guo X.C.  Yi T.  Yoshimoto T.  Pei D.   Two continuous spectrophotometric assays for methionine aminopeptidase Anal. Biochem. 280 2000 159 165 10805534 
164 Hu X.  Addlagatta A.  Matthews B.W.  Liu J.O.   Identification of pyridinylpyrimidines as inhibitors of human methionine aminopeptidases Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 45 2006 3772 3775 16724298 
165 Schiffmann R.  Heine A.  Klebe G.  Klein C.D.   Metal ions as cofactors for the binding of inhibitors to methionine aminopeptidase: a critical view of the relevance of in vitro metalloenzyme assays Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 44 2005 3620 3623 15880695 
166 Schiffmann R.  Neugebauer A.  Klein C.D.   Metal-mediated inhibition of Escherichia coli  methionine aminopeptidase: structure–activity relationships and development of a novel scoring function for metal-ligand interactions J. Med. Chem. 49 2006 511 522 16420038 
167 J.P. Marino Jr., D.F. Thompson, D.F. Veber, Substituted 1,2,4-Triazole Methionine Aminopeptidase Type 2 Inhibitors, their Preparation, and their Therapeutic Use, 2002 (Patent WO 2002078696).
168 J.P. Marino Jr., S.K. Thompson, D.F. Veber, Substituted Triazole Methionine Aminopeptidase Type 2 Inhibitors, their Preparation, and their Therapeutic Use, 2002 (Patent WO 2002078697).
169 Marino J.P. Jr.  Fisher P.W.  Hofmann G.A.  Kirkpatrick R.B.  Janson C.A.  Johnson R.K.  Ma C.  Mattern M.  Meek T.D.  Ryan M.D.  Schulz C.  Smith W.W.  Tew D.G.  Tomazek T.A. Jr.  Veber D.F.  Xiong W.C.  Yamamoto Y.  Yamashita K.  Yang G.  Thompson S.K.   Highly potent inhibitors of methionine aminopeptidase-2 based on a 1,2,4-triazole pharmacophore J. Med. Chem. 50 2007 3777 3785 17636946 
170 Kallander L.S.  Lu Q.  Chen W.  Tomaszek T.  Yang G.  Tew D.  Meek T.D.  Hofmann G.A.  Schulz-Pritchard C.K.  Smith W.W.  Janson C.A.  Ryan M.D.  Zhang G.F.  Johanson K.O.  Kirkpatrick R.B.  Ho T.F.  Fisher P.W.  Mattern M.R.  Johnson R.K.  Hansbury M.J.  Winkler J.D.  Ward K.W.  Veber D.F.  Thompson S.K.   4-Aryl-1,2,3-triazole: a novel template for a reversible methionine aminopeptidase 2 inhibitor, optimized to inhibit angiogenesis in vivo J. Med. Chem. 48 2005 5644 5647 16134930 
171 Oefner C.  Douangamath A.  D’Arcy A.  Hafeli S.  Mareque D.  Mac Sweeney A.  Padilla J.  Pierau S.  Schulz H.  Thormann M.  Wadman S.  Dale G.E.   The 1.15A crystal structure of the Staphylococcus aureus  methionyl-aminopeptidase and complexes with triazole based inhibitors J. Mol. Biol. 332 2003 13 21 12946343 
172 Wang J.  Sheppard G.S.  Lou P.  Kawai M.  Park C.  Egan D.A.  Schneider A.  Bouska J.  Lesniewski R.  Henkin J.   Physiologically relevant metal cofactor for methionine aminopeptidase-2 is manganese Biochemistry 42 2003 5035 5042 12718546 
173 Garrabrant T.  Tuman R.W.  Ludovici D.  Tominovich R.  Simoneaux R.L.  Galemmo R.A. Jr.  Johnson D.L.   Small molecule inhibitors of methionine aminopeptidase type 2 (MetAP-2) Angiogenesis 7 2004 91 96 15516829 
174 Luo Q.L.  Li J.Y.  Liu Z.Y.  Chen L.L.  Li J.  Qian Z.  Shen Q.  Li Y.  Lushington G.H.  Ye Q.Z.  Nan F.J.   Discovery and structural modification of inhibitors of methionine aminopeptidases from Escherichia coli  and Saccharomyces cerevisiae  J. Med. Chem. 46 2003 2631 2640 12801227 
175 Luo Q.L.  Li J.Y.  Chen L.L.  Li J.  Ye Q.Z.  Nan F.J.   Inhibitors of type I MetAPs containing pyridine-2-carboxylic acid thiazol-2-ylamide. Part 2: SAR studies on the pyridine ring 3-substituent Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 15 2005 639 644 15664829 
176 Cui Y.M.  Huang Q.Q.  Xu J.  Chen L.L.  Li J.Y.  Ye Q.Z.  Li J.  Nan F.J.   Identification of potent type I MetAP inhibitors by simple bioisosteric replacement. Part 1: synthesis and preliminary SAR studies of thiazole-4-carboxylic acid thiazol-2-ylamide derivatives Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 15 2005 3732 3736 15993057 
177 Cui Y.M.  Huang Q.Q.  Xu J.  Chen L.L.  Li J.Y.  Ye Q.Z.  Li J.  Nan F.J.   Identification of potent type I MetAPs inhibitors by simple bioisosteric replacement. Part 2: SAR studies of 5-heteroalkyl substituted TCAT derivatives Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 15 2005 4130 4135 16005224 
178 Hu X.  Addlagatta A.  Lu J.  Matthews B.W.  Liu J.O.   Elucidation of the function of type 1 human methionine aminopeptidase during cell cycle progression Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 2006 18148 18153 17114291 
179 Wang W.L.  Chai S.C.  Huang M.  He H.Z.  Hurley T.D.  Ye Q.Z.   Discovery of inhibitors of Escherichia coli  methionine aminopeptidase with the Fe(II)-form selectivity and antibacterial activity J. Med. Chem. 51 2008 6110 6120 18785729 
180 Chen X.  Chong C.R.  Shi L.  Yoshimoto T.  Sullivan D.J. Jr.  Liu J.O.   Inhibitors of Plasmodium falciparum  methionine aminopeptidase 1b possess antimalarial activity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 2006 14548 14553 16983082 
181 Baker J.O.  Wilkes S.H.  Bayliss M.E.  Prescott J.M.   Hydroxamates and aliphatic boronic acids: marker inhibitors for aminopeptidase Biochemistry 22 1983 2098 2103 6860652 
182 Baker J.O.  Prescott J.M.   A transition-state-analog inhibitor influences zinc-binding by Aeromonas  aminopeptidase Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 130 1985 1154 1160 4026862 
183 Shenvi A.B.   alpha-Aminoboronic acid derivatives: effective inhibitors of aminopeptidases Biochemistry 25 1986 1286 1291 3516217 
184 Andersson L.  Isley T.C.  Wolfenden R.   alpha-Aminoaldehydes: transition state analogue inhibitors of leucine aminopeptidase Biochemistry 21 1982 4177 4180 7126535 
185 Tarnus C.  Remy J.M.  d’Orchymont H.   3-Amino-2-hydroxy-propionaldehyde and 3-amino-1-hydroxy-propan-2-one derivatives: new classes of aminopeptidase inhibitors Bioorg. Med. Chem. 4 1996 1287 1297 8879550 
186 Kawai M.  BaMaung N.Y.  Fidanze S.D.  Erickson S.A.  Tedrow J.S.  Sanders W.J.  Vasudevan A.  Park C.  Hutchins C.  Comess K.M.  Kalvin D.  Wang J.  Zhang Q.  Lou P.  Tucker-Garcia L.  Bouska J.  Bell R.L.  Lesniewski R.  Henkin J.  Sheppard G.S.   Development of sulfonamide compounds as potent methionine aminopeptidase type II inhibitors with antiproliferative properties Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 16 2006 3574 3577 16632353 
187 Sheppard G.S.  Wang J.  Kawai M.  Fidanze S.D.  BaMaung N.Y.  Erickson S.A.  Barnes D.M.  Tedrow J.S.  Kolaczkowski L.  Vasudevan A.  Park D.C.  Wang G.T.  Sanders W.J.  Mantei R.A.  Palazzo F.  Tucker-Garcia L.  Lou P.  Zhang Q.  Park C.H.  Kim K.H.  Petros A.  Olejniczak E.  Nettesheim D.  Hajduk P.  Henkin J.  Lesniewski R.  Davidsen S.K.  Bell R.L.   Discovery and optimization of anthranilic acid sulfonamides as inhibitors of methionine aminopeptidase-2: a structural basis for the reduction of albumin binding J. Med. Chem. 49 2006 3832 3849 16789740 
188 Wang G.T.  Mantei R.A.  Kawai M.  Tedrow J.S.  Barnes D.M.  Wang J.  Zhang Q.  Lou P.  Garcia L.A.  Bouska J.  Yates M.  Park C.  Judge R.A.  Lesniewski R.  Sheppard G.S.  Bell R.L.   Lead optimization of methionine aminopeptidase-2 (MetAP2) inhibitors containing sulfonamides of 5,6-disubstituted anthranilic acids Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 17 2007 2817 2822 17350258 
189 Wang J.  Tucker L.A.  Stavropoulos J.  Zhang Q.  Wang Y.C.  Bukofzer G.  Niquette A.  Meulbroek J.A.  Barnes D.M.  Shen J.  Bouska J.  Donawho C.  Sheppard G.S.  Bell R.L.   Correlation of tumor growth suppression and methionine aminopetidase-2 activity blockade using an orally active inhibitor Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 105 2008 1838 1843 18252827 
190 Huang M.  Xie S.X.  Ma Z.Q.  Hanzlik R.P.  Ye Q.Z.   Metal mediated inhibition of methionine aminopeptidase by quinolinyl sulfonamides Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 339 2006 506 513 16300729 
191 Schalk C.  d’Orchymont H.  Jauch M.F.  Tarnus C.   3-Amino-2-tetralone derivatives: novel potent and selective inhibitors of aminopeptidase-M (EC 3.4.11.2) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 311 1994 42 46 7910449 
192 Albrecht S.  Defoin A.  Salomon E.  Tarnus C.  Wetterholm A.  Haeggstrom J.Z.   Synthesis and structure activity relationships of novel non-peptidic metallo-aminopeptidase inhibitors Bioorg. Med. Chem. 14 2006 7241 7257 16844380 
193 Wang J.L.  Xu W.F.   The preparation of novel 1-iso-glutamine derivatives as potential antitumor agents J. Chem. Res. Synop. 12 2003 789 
194 W.F. Xu, Design, Synthesis and Antitumor Research of Peptidomimetic MMPIS, 226th ACS National Meeting, 2003, p. 7.
195 Li Q.  Fang H.  Xu W.   Novel 3-galloylamido-N′-substituted-2,6-piperidinedione-N-acetamide peptidomimetics as metalloproteinase inhibitors Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 17 2007 2935 2938 17433673 
196 Drag M.  Surowiak P.  Drag-Zalesinska M.  Dietel M.  Lage H.  Oleksyszyn J.   Comparison of the cytotoxic effects of birch bark extract, betulin and betulinic acid towards human gastric carcinoma and pancreatic carcinoma drug-sensitive and drug-resistant cell lines Molecules 14 2009 1639 1651 19396022 
197 Fulda S.  Scaffidi C.  Susin S.A.  Krammer P.H.  Kroemer G.  Peter M.E.  Debatin K.M.   Activation of mitochondria and release of mitochondrial apoptogenic factors by betulinic acid J. Biol. Chem. 273 1998 33942 33948 9852046 
198 Melzig M.F.  Bormann H.   Betulinic acid inhibits aminopeptidase N activity Planta Med. 64 1998 655 657 9810272 
199 Thangapazham R.L.  Sharma A.  Maheshwari R.K.   Multiple molecular targets in cancer chemoprevention by curcumin AAPS J. 8 2006 E443 E449 17025261 
200 Kuttan G.  Kumar K.B.  Guruvayoorappan C.  Kuttan R.   Antitumor, anti-invasion, and antimetastatic effects of curcumin Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 595 2007 173 184 17569210 
201 Shim J.S.  Kim J.H.  Cho H.Y.  Yum Y.N.  Kim S.H.  Park H.J.  Shim B.S.  Choi S.H.  Kwon H.J.   Irreversible inhibition of CD13/aminopeptidase N by the antiangiogenic agent curcumin Chem. Biol. 10 2003 695 704 12954328

