
==== Front
Brain InjBrain InjBIJBrain Injury0269-90521362-301XInforma UK Ltd. 10.3109/02699052.2014.946449Original ArticleRevisiting the neurofunctional approach: Conceptualizing the core components for the rehabilitation of everyday living skills Clark-Wilson Jo 1Giles Gordon Muir 23Baxter Doreen M. 41Managing Partner, Occupational Therapist and Case ManagerHead First, HawkhurstKentUK2Director of Neurobehavioral services, Crestwood Treatment CenterFremont, CAUSA3Professor, Department of Occupational Therapy, Samuel Merritt UniversityOakland, CAUSA4Consultant Clinical Neuropsychologist, Head FirstHawkhurst, KentUKCorrespondence: Gordon Muir Giles, PhDOTR/L, FAOTA, Crestwood Treatment Center2171 Mowry Avenue, Fremont, CAUSA. Email: jo.clarkwilson@head-first.org12 2014 28 8 2014 28 13-14 1646 1656 2 8 2013 8 2 2014 30 6 2014 © 2014 Informa UK Ltd. All rights reserved: reproduction in whole or part not permitted2014This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 3.0 License which permits users to download and share the article for non-commercial purposes, so long as the article is reproduced in the whole without changes, and provided the original source is credited.Background
Background: Introduced in the 1980s, the neurofunctional approach (NFA) is one of the few interventions designed primarily for clients with severe deficits following traumatic brain injury (TBI). Specifically the NFA was intended for those individuals who were limited in their ability to solve novel problems or generalize skills from one setting to another and whose lack of insight limited their engagement in the rehabilitative process.

Description of the approach
Description of the approach: The NFA is a client-centred, goal-driven approach that incorporates the principles of skill learning and promotes the development of routines and competencies in practical activities required for everyday living. Programmes based on the NFA are developed specifically to meet each client’s unique needs, using a range of evidence-based interventions.

Recent evidence
Recent evidence: Recently the NFA has been found to be more effective than cognitive-retraining for some individuals with moderate-to-severe TBI who have deficits in activities of daily living. This paper aims to define the core features of the NFA, outline the theoretical basis on which it is founded and consider implications of the findings for rehabilitation after TBI in general. The NFA is highly relevant for clients living in the community who require a case manager to direct an integrated, rehabilitation programme or provide structured input for the long-term maintenance of skills.

Brain injurycognitionlearningneurofunctional approach
==== Body
Introduction
Individuals with long-term disability from traumatic brain injury (TBI) are estimated to number between 3–5 million in the US [1, 2], with direct and indirect costs representing over 70 billion dollars. Over the past 40 years, a range of distinct rehabilitative models have been developed and refined [3]. A holistic neuropsychological rehabilitation approach (HNPR) has been identified as the gold-standard of therapy for persons with TBA [4–7]. HNPR generally incorporates a milieu-oriented, group-based approach and programmes designed to increase self-awareness and encourage the use of compensatory strategies for cognitive dysfunction [5, 8]. A number of HNPR programmes have been shown to be effective in increasing clients’ self-awareness, self-efficacy for symptom management, perceived quality-of-life and community integration [4, 5]. Positive outcomes have also been reported in a number of programmes, which integrate cognitive, interpersonal and functional interventions in both in- and out-patients settings and at various stages in the recovery process [9–11]. However, these programmes typically exclude clients with significant deficits in activities of daily living (ADL), aphasia or behavioural dysregulation (i.e. those with severe neurobehavioural deficits). Clients who lack insight have also been shown to have poor compliance and poorer rehabilitation outcomes with HNPR [12]. Many of these programmes focus on the use of global metacognitive strategies (‘global strategies’) to help clients overcome problems in everyday living.

Global strategies are designed to help clients develop a thinking routine, which enables them to find solutions to novel problems encountered in daily life (e.g. Cognitive Orientation to Daily Occupational Performance (CO-OP), incorporating goal/plan/do/check) [13]. The goal of global strategy-learning is to enable the client to use thinking routines independently in novel situations. There is some evidence to show global strategy-learning can be effective in helping clients manage situations for which they have not been trained [12, 14]. There is evidence that some types of cognitive interventions may be less effective with clients with more severe cognitive impairments after TBI [15, 16]. There are reasons to doubt that many ‘thinking routines’ requiring decisions can be effective for persons with severe lack of insight and neurobehavioural impairments [6, 17, 18]. To use these strategies, a client needs to be aware of limitations in their functioning, acknowledge the validity of such strategies [17] and have the cognitive capacity to learn the strategies [15]: these criteria exclude many severely impaired clients [19]. Similarly, the client needs to recognize the circumstances in which implementation of the strategy would be useful [20]. Although global strategies may become easier to implement with continued use, no matter how often they are practiced [21], they may never become routine or generalize automatically to a wide range of situations, as they continue to require active cognitive control.

Other approaches exist in which there may be a closer match between what is trained and what the person has to do in his or her everyday life, such as domain-specific strategies and function-embedded cognitive retraining [22]. These approaches can be conceptualized along a hierarchy of generalization or ‘transfer distances’ relating to the gap between the strategy or training task and the activity that has to be undertaken in everyday life (see Table I) [23]. An approach that involves the least amount of transfer in this hierarchy is the Neurofunctional Approach (NFA).
Table I. 
Classification of therapeutic interventions, according to ‘Transfer Distance’.

1. Global Metacognitive Strategy-Learning:	
 Therapy aims to improve awareness of the impaired cognitive processes and clients are taught to use ‘higher-order’ compensatory strategies, for instance using internal scripts intended to facilitate problem-solving, decision-making, executive functioning and reasoning. It is assumed that, with sufficient experience/training, clients will be able to generalize the application of these compensatory strategies to novel situations. The central focus of treatment is teaching the strategy and the actual tasks used in training are secondary [30,31].	
2. Domain-Specific Strategy-Training:	
 Domain-specific strategies aim to help the client compensate for a specific perceptual or cognitive dysfunction. The focus is on the strategy, rather than the task itself (e.g. developing a routine for scanning, using an electronic memory aid). The strategy is applied in as many substantially-different settings as possible (e.g. scanning training may be taught in reading and in street crossing).	
3. Function-Embedded Cognitive Retraining:	
 Cognitive retraining is focused on a cognitive deficit, but the strategy is taught within a contextual environment (e.g. driving simulators). Although the training is ‘context specific’, some authors propose that generalization of skills and improved performance in other tasks will occur [32], depending on the degree of overlap in processing operations between the training task and the new task, i.e. ‘near’ or ‘far’ transfer distance (the ‘transfer-appropriate’ processing hypothesis).	
4. Specific task-training:	
 A specific functional behaviour is taught and the therapist attempts to circumvent cognitive deficits that hamper performance by providing a routine [26,33,34]. No assumptions are made in respect to generalization across activities. Skills trained may or may not have secondary effects on other aspects of functioning.	
5. Environmental modifications & assistive technology:	
 Environmental modifications and simplifications are included in most of the approaches described above. Part of the process of intervention is to simplify task demands, so that skills can be practiced and cueing reduced as skills are learned. There are a number of technological aids that have been developed to facilitate task initiation, scheduling and to guide tasks in order to bypass memory impairments, e.g. smart phone applications, Neuropage or similar [35–37]. These cueing systems may be used permanently or as part of therapy and become redundant, as the client internalizes the routine.	



The NFA was designed for persons with severe functional deficits after TBI and similar approaches have been applied to persons with cerebrovascular accidents (CVA) and dementia [24, 25]. The NFA is occupation-based, focused on ‘learning by doing’ and occurs within the client’s natural environment or as close to this environment as possible. It involves the development of retraining programmes designed to foster the development of habitual routines and automatic functional competencies in areas identified as important by the client. The NFA emphasizes bottom-up training in specific functional, behavioural and social skills and assumes that learning is based on implicit knowledge structures, which may or may not become explicit with practice. Few, if any, assumptions are made about the spontaneous transfer of skills (generalization): transfer is addressed by training in situ and by providing sufficient experience in different settings, to increase the likelihood of the use of the skill in similar situations (i.e. ‘near’ transfer distance such as a road-safety skills transferring to different types of road intersections) [24, 26–28].

The NFA attempts to develop competencies of high relevance to the individual and incorporates these ‘islands’ of competency into routines and a life-structure, which allow individuals to feel their needs are being met. Therapists may need to be highly creative in developing realistic ways to meet client goals and a life-style, which the person with TBI perceives as acceptable and normal. When successful, the creation of this kind of structure may reduce the amount of community support required and concomitant care costs.

This paper revisits the NFA 20 years after its introduction [26, 29] and describes recent developments in the theory and evidence-base. This study offers a simplified presentation of the NFA as a sequential process in which eight elements are identified. Other authors, such as Rotenberg-Shpigelman et al. [24] and Parish and Oddy [30], have distilled the approach in other ways. This study proposes that the NFA is applicable across a wide range of settings throughout recovery [27], from acute to community. It is client-centred, non-aversive and particularly powerful for persons with limited self-awareness and those living in the community [31] for whom a cognitive approach produces limited or no behavioural change. Over the past few years there has been a preponderance of cognitive and strategy-training approaches in rehabilitation: this study attempts to redress the balance with the re-presentation of the NFA.

Elements of the NFA
The NFA is presented as a structured, multi-dimensional, eight-stage rehabilitation process. No single feature is unique to the approach: what is unique is the combination of these elements in the context of the application of learning principles [24]. The stages of the NFA are:Development of a positive therapeutic alliance, focused on the client’s perspective, their values and goals and what he or she wants to do (i.e. client-centred);

Gathering and assimilating relevant information in order to understand the clients’ current functioning in their natural environment and identifying their likely responses to intervention;

Observation of performance in everyday situations, with reference to the nature of the task, the client characteristics, environmental resources and constraints;

A case formulation of the client’s goals and a reconciliation of these with resources available and current constraints;

Operational performance goals that can be translated into retraining programmes (i.e. goals stated in behaviourally-explicit terms);

Creation of skill-retraining programmes (incorporating aids or environmental supports where appropriate), developed from an analysis of the person, activity and environment;

Development of automaticity, generalization and the maintenance of skills in the client’s everyday life; and

The provision of feedback, appropriate to the client, to encourage progress and engagement.




If goals are successfully met, the client’s experience of success may lead to improved self-efficacy and further engagement in the rehabilitation process [30]. If the client fails to show progress, each stage in the NFA needs to be reviewed. Objective measurement and recording systems, fundamental to the application of learning-based approaches, are used to facilitate this process. The client’s own views about their progress are central to maintaining a collaborative, client-centred approach.

The neurofunctional approach
Stage 1. Development of a positive therapeutic alliance, focused on the client’s perspective and goals (i.e. client-centred)
The quality of the therapeutic relationship, the working alliance and the client’s general experience of therapy are predictive of a positive outcome, irrespective of theoretical orientation [32–41]. The quality of the therapeutic alliance has been shown to predict TBI rehabilitation outcome [42], client self-awareness and treatment compliance [43].

The first step of the NFA is the creation of a positive therapeutic relationship in which clients feel psychologically safe. The therapist tries to see the ‘person’ behind the symptoms, ‘entering the patient’s world’ [44] through ‘respectful listening’, in an effort to appreciate the client’s perspective and goals, without making judgements. The therapist adopts an attitude of relentless kindness and accepts that the client’s view is one way of seeing his or her situation, taking into account the client’s pre- and post-accident cultural and social values. Confronting or overtly challenging the client’s position is avoided as this undermines the relationship and puts the client in a position of self-justification, creating further barriers to engagement in rehabilitation.

The client’s ability to maintain self-efficacy is an important condition for change [45, 46]. The therapist needs to understand what the client experiences as psychologically threatening in order to avoid conflicts in which the client withdraws from therapeutic engagement. Riley et al. [47] postulated that impaired self-awareness was a response to a perceived threat to self-identity, although impaired cognition and severity of injury also play a role in self-awareness [48]. Behaviours labelled as ‘denial’ or lack of insight may represent a way that clients cope with catastrophic changes in their lives. A high degree of personal awareness is required by the therapist to avoid negative attitudes being projected through verbal and non-verbal communication [49].

Motivational interviewing (MI) is a non-confrontational approach shown to be effective in a range of situations, where clients are ambivalent about engaging in the therapeutic process [50–52]. In the TBI population, motivational interviewing has been used to address substance abuse [53] and anxiety [15, 54, 55] and to promote recovery [56] and engagement in the rehabilitation process in individuals with impaired awareness [57, 58]. The principles of motivational interviewing incorporate concepts such as empathy, collaboration (‘drawing out’ rather than imposing ideas) and developing discrepancies. MI recognizes that the power of change rests within the client and supports self-efficacy. These principles are entirely consistent with the NFA at times when negotiation and engagement are required. MI facilitates acceptance of the changed self after injury, incorporating goal-setting and enhancing motivation [15, 54, 55, 59].

Stage 2. Gathering and assimilating relevant information in order to understand the client’s current functioning and likely responses to intervention
In order to design effective rehabilitation programmes, the therapist needs to consult key figures in the injured person’s life [60]. Family, friends and colleagues provide unique perspectives and allow a more complete picture of the person with TBI, both before and after the injury. Key people may also identify possible triggers to unhelpful behaviours and predict likely responses to different situations. Irrespective of the ‘accuracy’ of the various perspectives, the attitudes and cultural beliefs of the family and relevant others need to be taken into account, as their behaviour will significantly influence the rehabilitation outcome of the person with TBI [61–66]. The views of family members about the injured person and their needs are central to establishing a stable and viable life routine for the client, especially in the community [18]. Approximately 30–50% of adults who provide support to a person with TBI report clinically significant distress [18]. The need for caregiver support and the nature of the interaction patterns with caregivers and family members must be established in order to understand the functioning of the person with TBI in context.

During the rehabilitation process, numerous specialists undertake diagnostic tests. The immediate relevance of these tests to the client’s everyday functioning and the rehabilitation process may not be obvious and may need translating in a way that is meaningful to the client and family. Throughout the process of data collection, the therapist is sensitive to any potential mismatches between expectations and therapy goals, which will need to be considered in the Case Formulation (stage 4).

Stage 3. Observation of performance in everyday situations, with reference to the nature of the task, client characteristics, environmental resources and constraints
Central to the NFA is the exploration and analysis of the client’s performance in the ‘real world’ through direct observation, i.e. performance-based assessment. Having established a positive therapeutic relationship and agreed the purpose of observations, the therapist is more likely to be accepted as an observer and active enabler in treatment. At first, observations focus on the whole task or functional activity (macro-level) and preliminary observations determine what the client can do within a specific setting and context, without interference. Particular note is made of the client’s self-structured performance, how activity is initiated, the organizational sequence, preserved movement patterns and strategies used to overcome problems that arise (adaptive and maladaptive). During assessment, the grading of task difficulty should ensure the clients’ motivation is maintained and assessment activities chosen, that are relevant to the client’s lifestyle. Expectations are gradually increased to demonstrate the client’s proficiency in a particular skill or alternatively to highlight areas to be addressed in rehabilitation.

The therapist considers a wide range of variables that may influence performance, including aspects of the environment, features of the person and the nature of the task demands and the dynamic relationship between these three variables. Familiarity with the people involved, general layout of the environment, equipment, temperature, time of day and the duration of the activity are just some of the factors that may influence performance and require evaluation. Therapists need to be conscious of how their presence and interactional style may influence the client’s performance, through prompts, encouragement, physical assistance and other subtle signals.

As the therapist gains more understanding of factors and constraints underpinning the client’s performance, the focus changes to the micro-level and aspects of performance such as movement, scanning, attention, memory and behaviour. The task sub-components are analysed in detail in order to understand the physical, cognitive and behavioural skills required for a successful performance and how these map on to the client’s profile: detailed formal assessments from different disciplines may be particularly helpful at this stage. Task or environmental modifications are gradually introduced to explore how they might facilitate client performance. The therapist may explore variables such as style of communication, the content of the language and the need for encouragement, whilst monitoring client responses and environmental factors. The process is one of hypothesis-testing in situ, to define in detail the most effective forms of facilitation.

Observational baseline measures are identified which can evaluate rate of progress. For instance, in ADL, the duration of the overall task, the sub-tasks completed independently and those requiring facilitation by others will guide rehabilitation efforts and identify when modifications to the training programme are needed. The use of antecedent/behaviour/consequence (ABC) charts and frequency data will allow a more precise definition of any maladaptive behaviours and the circumstances in which they occur.

Stage 4. A case formulation of the client’s goals and a reconciliation of these with resources available and current constraints
Wilson et al. describes a formulation as ‘a map or guide to intervention that combines a model derived from established theories and best evidence with the client and family’s own personal views, experiences and stories’ ([3], pp. 53--54).

Information from professionals, family and friends, gathered from previous stages, is used to develop a case formulation [15, 54, 55], which defines the professional rehabilitation plan and is relevant and understandable to the client and family. The formulation includes a brief summary of the facts of the case, but integrates these into a higher level of abstraction, making inferences and identifying patterns to help understand the person, not just the ‘brain injury’. The case formulation constructs a story, which takes into account the everyday challenges encountered by the client, the constraints influencing performance and the client’s view of the world. The case formulation represents the shared understanding between professionals, family and client, which guides the rehabilitation process and forms the basis for rational treatment planning and the development of ecologically-valid programmes and operational goals.

Case formulations can be created at both a micro- and macro-level. For instance, if the client has reading difficulties, the micro-level might focus on the analysis of the reading task and the specific contributions of physical/sensory, cognitive or emotional/behavioural factors, which act as barriers to successful performance. Alternatively, at a macro-level, the client may consider reading to his child is central to a life-goal of ‘being a good father’.

Because of the complex nature of TBI rehabilitation and the number of professionals involved, it is advantageous if one person is assigned responsibility for integrating information and also liaising with the family. When there is a large gap between family and professionals’ expectations about prognosis, it is advisable to agree on the ‘next step’ in treatment rather than disagree about ultimate goals and get involved in confrontational attempts to get the family to be ‘more realistic’. It is important that the case formulation identify something in the life of the client that can improve: the sense of ‘hope’ is important to families and has been associated with better outcomes [67, 68].

Stage 5. Operational performance goals that can be translated into retraining programmes (i.e. goals stated in behaviourally-explicit terms)
Operational goals represent a sub-set of higher-order life goals and form the focus of rehabilitation. Vague or abstract client life-goals are broken down and translated into more concrete, functional activities and performance goals, that can be achieved within a specified time-frame. This process of negotiating goals can be difficult when a mismatch exists between client/family and professional goals, particularly for clients with more serious language, memory and insight problems. The therapeutic relationship and negotiation skills of the therapist are critical at this stage, to guide the client successfully through steps, linking operational and personal goals in a way that maintains commitment to the rehabilitation process. Motivational interviewing can be especially useful here to facilitate the engagement of the client to affect behaviour change.

Throughout the process of goal-negotiation and goal-setting, the therapist needs to confirm that the client feels that the work is collaborative. Faulty, ‘unhelpful’ beliefs and fears may act as barriers to rehabilitation. For instance, clients may believe that having breaks during the day impedes recovery, assuming that ‘more is better’: this view is counterproductive when fatigue management needs to be undertaken. Changing attitudes takes time and must be undertaken carefully, in a low-key manner, to avoid the client feeling threatened [57]. If goals are negotiated insensitively and the client does not understand their relevance, performance deteriorates and participation may be short-lived [69]. Client participation in goal-setting increases overall satisfaction with rehabilitation [70] and the process of information exchange and formulation of task strategies appear to increase feelings of self-efficacy [71, 72].

For clients with more serious cognitive impairments, re-establishing rapport and briefly repeating the significance of an activity or strategy may be required in every rehabilitation interaction to promote engagement. Written or auditory reminders, diagrams, pictures and photos may be needed to help the individual maintain the link between the rehabilitation task and the personal goal to keep the person on target. For clients who are able to anticipate barriers to the achievement of a specific activity, discussing specific coping strategies in advance can reduce fear and may increase feelings of self-efficacy.

Stage 6. Creation of skill-retraining programmes, developed from an analysis of the person, activity and environment
It is helpful to conceptualize any functional activity or skill as a series of multiple stimulus-response units, performed in sequence: this is irrespective of the complexity or nature of the task, whether social, cognitive or practical. The completion of one act serves as the stimulus for the initiation of the next step in the series or ‘chain’ [73]. After a significant TBI, the client’s responses to naturally-occurring cues or prompts are disrupted: everyday cues no longer serve to guide behaviour, which can become stimulus-bound and impulsive [74]. Thus, a busy intersection no longer triggers road-safety behaviour and the therapist may need to provide an additional cue in situ to elicit the required response.

The design of any skill-retraining programme (SRP) incorporates knowledge of the person (person analysis) and the cognitive, behavioural, sensory and motor requirements for the activity (activity analysis), in the context of the particular environment in which the activity is performed (environmental analysis). The target task is analysed into those separable steps required for the individual to successfully and consistently complete the task (task analysis). Observation of how the individual performs a task will allow the incorporation of spontaneously-occurring sequences into the SRP to reduce new learning. An analysis of the cause of performance breakdown will be particularly important in designing treatment programmes and identifying when prompts, modifications and aids are needed.

For a person with amnesia and intact motor skills, an SRP for personal hygiene may require as few as five steps, specifying the order of sub-tasks to be undertaken: a simple client check-list might be provided to encourage self-monitoring and ensure that sub-tasks are carried out in the same sequence. In contrast, the most physically-impaired clients may require over 100 steps in the SRP and each movement specified in relation to positioning and sequencing: a description of the manner in which staff can support the client to reduce spasticity and abnormal movements may also be needed. For the client with visual agnosia, staff may need to provide sufficient information to facilitate the recall of meaning for the objects used in the task. Altering the environment and establishing antecedent stimulus control may be required for individuals with challenging behaviour, when other approaches have failed [75, 76].

The therapist defines the sequence of sub-steps required for training, the nature of prompts, type of equipment and environmental modifications. The precise repetition of actions in areas of impairment is required to foster the development of automatic routines. The relevant steps and type of support can only be identified from direct observation and experimenting with cues and support (i.e. cue experimentation). Inconsistent response to a cue should alert the therapist to revise that step in the programme and provide alternate ways to facilitate consistent and accurate client performance. In clients with multiple and complex disabilities, the most effective SRPs are designed with input from a multidisciplinary team.

As learning takes place, cues can be gradually combined or delayed (faded) and the SRP revised: this process will be guided by the objective documentation of task performance, e.g. whether a step was achieved consistently without prompts. Even in the absence of awareness of previous learning trials, the most severely injured persons can re-learn effective habit-sequences, if their experience is appropriately structured and responses are managed to minimize errors, using procedures such as errorless learning [77–81]. Structuring the learning experience is particularly relevant to clients with amnesia and those with severe executive dysfunction (see [82] for a case study).

Although SRPs involve task breakdown, a whole task method is most often used in training, rather than practising parts of an activity. The whole task is generally more meaningful to the client, as it preserves the integrity of the functional goal and has been shown to be equivalent or superior to other chaining methods [83–85]. If a task leads to high levels of fatigue, forward or backward chaining may be indicated.

The SRP is recorded as a checklist, which guides and structures not only client responses, but those of staff. This checklist is used to record client performance on each sub-task on every occasion the SRP is undertaken and provides objective evidence of change over time.

Stage 7. Development of automaticity, generalization and the maintenance of skills in the person’s everyday life
For automaticity to develop, actions must be repeated in the same order to become linked or ‘chunked’ [86, 87]. Practice increases the availability of target responses, such that conscious decision-making, which places a heavy cognitive ‘load’ on compromised executive functions, is replaced by the implementation of automatic action sequences [88]. When a skill becomes automatic, it becomes the easiest behaviour to initiate from the array of possible behaviours, interference errors are reduced and the action is perceived as effortless.

The development of automaticity not only requires repetition and the linking of sequential, functional, behavioural units, but also the pairing of the same stimulus configuration to the same response. The latter is referred to as consistent mapping (CM) and is central to the concept of automaticity [89, 90]. In contrast, when a range of responses is required to one or more stimuli, this is referred to as varied mapping (VM). In the latter condition, tasks do not become automatic and performance shows little improvement after practice [89, 91].

There is increasing evidence that practicing tasks leads to cortical re-structuring [92–94]. Therapists and clients may under-estimate the amount of practice required for skill development [95, 96]. In a recent review of critical training variables, high treatment dosages (minimum of 6–30 or more practice sessions) were shown to be associated with successful outcomes, when training clients with memory disorders in multi-step tasks [95]. Tasks undertaken frequently, on a daily basis, are more likely to be self-maintaining once acquired (e.g. washing and dressing). Tasks that are engaged in less frequently will be learned more slowly, will be less stable and are more likely to extinguish [97, 98].

In the neurologically-impaired population, it is generally accepted that a skill should be practiced at least 100% past the number of trials required to reach mastery [99]. With extensive practice, the performance of individuals with severe TBI approximates that of controls [89, 91]. Once achieved, automaticity may be robust and enduring [100]. Different schedules of practice produce different effects: blocked practice facilitates acquisition and random practice promotes transfer of skills, once a certain level of skill has been acquired [101]. In the initial acquisition stages, it appears advantageous to reduce task demands, use blocked practice and provide relatively high feedback for each component, after which less frequent feedback and random practice is more effective [102]. In sports skills, the performer’s focus of attention and the type of feedback also appears to have a decisive influence on the learning. Directing the client’s attention to an external focus and to the outcome of movement rather than to the movement itself reduces attentional demands, encourages greater self-organization and facilitates the development of automaticity [103].

Once adequate performance has been reliably established, practice of the target skill in a range of different, everyday settings reduces the ‘hyperspecificity’ of learning [95]. For instance, good posture and appropriate breathing patterns needed to support speech should be encouraged throughout the day. Similarly, regular facilitation to prompt the use of memory aids will also be needed at every relevant opportunity. All staff and relevant family members will need to be trained in the appropriate techniques to facilitate automaticity and encourage the client to maintain a mental set, which promotes the continued use of rehabilitation methods. Providing ‘attitudinal support’ is particularly important on discharge, to promote those skills that require an element of conscious decision-making, such as the use of a memory aid.

Stage 8. The provision of feedback, appropriate to the client, to encourage progress
In the context of success, feedback, which is objective, specific and constructive, can facilitate progress and client engagement. A range of feedback formats can be used, depending on the individual’s preferences, for instance, diagrams, progress charts, graphs. Most importantly, as clients develop new competencies, the newly-acquired skills should increase meaningful choices and expand the individual’s natural lifestyle, a situation which is reinforcing in itself and can promote further engagement in rehabilitation [30, 96]. If goals are realistic and achievable, a self-perpetuating reinforcing cycle may be created.

For clients who are not achieving their goals, a review of the NFA steps and barriers to success should be undertaken: finding a small area of success and enjoyment is often central to continued engagement. Negative feedback and repeated failure will erode client self-confidence and trust in the therapeutic relationship and the rehabilitation process in general. Promoting an atmosphere of shared experiences and the idea that any difficulty provides an ‘opportunity for learning’ may reduce anxiety about failure. Creating a small, relevant, peer group can also be an influential way of changing attitudes, sharing experiences and promoting goals. The group setting provides an opportunity for a public statement of goals, a public acknowledgement of achievement by the group and an appreciation of the rewards of success [26].

Encouraging clients to voice their own reasons for change can be especially powerful and is a basic premise of motivational interviewing. Clients are also more likely to remember what they tell themselves than what others tell them. Within the NFA, therapists develop a framework in which the environment supports and rewards participation in rehabilitation in a natural and unobtrusive manner. Clients may also participate in developing motivation schemes which can help them focus on their goals [46]. Creating opportunities and choices for clients can provide them with a sense of hope for the future, whether this is in the form of achieving a particular task, developing a skill or relationship or participating in social events or community activities. A sense of progress and feeling of control is important for clients in order to maintain participation in the rehabilitation process.

Although the eight stages in the NFA are presented as if they occur in a linear fashion, the process is dynamic. New information or altered circumstances may lead to a change in perspectives and priorities, thereby necessitating a revaluation of each stage and a revision of the case formulation, client goals and skill-retraining programmes.

NFA evidence-base
Functionally-based neurobehavioural treatment approaches have been shown to improve day-to-day performance outcomes in individuals after TBI [9, 10, 104]. However, in the majority of randomized clinical trials (RCTs), interventions have been non-specific and poorly defined, e.g. ‘post-acute TBI rehabilitation’ and ‘holistic neuropsychological rehabilitation’ [4, 5, 104, 105]. The NFA has been evaluated in single-case and small group studies, supporting the view that the approach has wide applicability and leads to robust treatment effects [26, 30, 77, 106–108]. Models, which are conceptually similar to the NFA, have been developed recently by others, who may be unaware of the NFA, and suggest a confluence of evidence and opinion supporting this type of functional approach [109, 110].

Evidence for the effectiveness of the NFA in larger group studies is documented in two randomized controlled trials [24, 27]. Vanderploeg et al.’s [27, 111] research represents the largest randomized controlled trial (RCT) of interdisciplinary acute rehabilitation after TBI conducted to date. This large multi-centre trial included individuals aged between 18–65 years from four Veteran Administration acute inpatient centres (n = 360), if they had sustained a moderate-to-severe TBI within the preceding 6 months. Clients were randomly allocated to either ‘cognitive–didactic’ or ‘functional–experiential’ treatment, which constituted an additional 1.5–2.5 hours of treatment above the standard rehabilitation programme. The cognitive–didactic treatment was individually-based and followed the cognitive rehabilitation model of Sohlberg and Mateer [112, 113]. The functional–experiential treatment was based on the NFA, but was conducted in a group setting.

At 1-year follow-up, there was no difference between the two groups in primary outcome measures (i.e. return to full- or part-time competitive work; living independently with less than 3 hours of domestic help). However, the study did find significant differences in a pre-planned, sub-set, outcome analysis; younger participants (<30 years) and those with less education who participated in the cognitive–didactic intervention group had better work-related outcomes: older participants (>30 years) and those with more education who participated in the functional–experiential group (NFA) had better independent living outcomes than participants in the cognitive–didactic group.

As originally described by Giles and Clark-Wilson [26], the NFA was designed for persons who were severely cognitively impaired and compromised in their independent living skills. It was applied over a considerably longer period than the 20–60 days in the RCT study of Vanderploeg et al. [26, 27, 82, 111]. In addition, the application of the NFA was designed to be primarily individual rather than group-based, although it is entirely compatible with incorporating group components when appropriate. Given these protocol variations, the RCT study of Vanderploeg et al. [27, 111] provided a ‘hard test’ of the NFA. Vanderploeg et al. [27] provide too little detail of the way in which the NFA was implemented to evaluate whether all important elements of the NFA were included. There were no descriptions of how specific tasks were identified and analysed, how individual strengths were utilized in the development of SRPs and an absence of information in relation to individual goal-setting.

The NFA is targeted to improve only those activities that are similar to skills practiced in rehabilitation and does not expect generalization to other skills. Participants in the RCT study, who had superior outcomes in independent living skills, may well have achieved this success precisely because these were the activities they practiced: work-related activities were not practiced and therefore would not be expected to show improvements within the NFA. However, it is not entirely clear why younger persons would fail to show improvements in community living and ADL skills, after undertaking NFA training. It is possible that there were ceiling effects in the younger population or that work remained a higher priority for younger people and domestic independence a higher priority for older people. It is also possible that the demands of both domestic life and work are incompatible for individuals with limited capacity after a moderate-to-severe TBI. These ideas are, however, speculative.

Participants in the Vanderploeg et al. [27] study were described as having moderate-to-severe brain injury. The NFA was designed for persons with severe outcome and were usually individuals at the extreme end of the injury-severity spectrum. Indeed, the NFA has been described as the only functional approach to be effective in improving independence skills in clients over 10 years after a severe TBI [30, 77]. It is also one of the very few interventions effective in improving daily living skills amongst individuals living in the community after a CVA. The success in improved community and ADL skills evident from the study of Vanderploeg et al. [27] using the NFA in a more acute and less impaired population, as well as the effectiveness in a population with CVA, suggests a wider application of the NFA than was originally envisaged [24].

Conclusion
The NFA has been presented as a structured, multi-dimensional, eight-stage rehabilitation process, designed for people with severe impairments. It is especially applicable to individuals who lack awareness and are likely to require ongoing support [24]. There is an emphasis on the repetition and training of functional skills in situ, encouraging adaptive routines and habits, thereby avoiding problems associated with transfer and generalization.

A key concept of the NFA is training real-world skills, which are age-appropriate and important to clients in their social and cultural environment and are seen as advancing their personal goals. It is hoped that the successful acquisition of such skills will increase the individual’s feeling of efficacy, which in turn is reinforcing and fosters further engagement in the rehabilitation process. In this way, islands of competence can be created and integrated into a daily and weekly schedule of activities, which is meaningful and normalizing for the client and family.

The NFA highlights the importance of non-threatening communication, fostering a working alliance and shared purpose between therapist, client and family, a collaborative approach in which there is genuine respect for the experience and views of others. Families are generally the major long-term support system for persons with TBI and often have a critical role in influencing rehabilitation outcomes. The views of the client and family are incorporated into a case formulation, in order to identify relevant goals and avoid unnecessary confrontation. The case formulation is phrased in a language that is relevant to functional activities, understandable to the family and includes a sense of hope and of moving forward.

Inherent in the NFA is the recognition that an intervention is most effective when the client is ready to engage. In normal circumstances people do not learn things against their will or when highly anxious [114, 115]. Therapists may find themselves in a conflict between the demands of health services to get results as quickly as possible and the needs of the client to progress at a slower pace to avoid disengagement. For clients who lack awareness, a confrontational approach is likely to be counterproductive and motivational interviewing may be particularly helpful to facilitate treatment engagement [52].

Core features of the NFA include a positive therapeutic alliance, gathering information, performance-based assessment, case formulation, individualized goals, skill-retraining programmes, extensive practice in situ and positive feedback. Through structured repetition of everyday living skills, the skills become automatic and the behaviours that are most available to the individual, thereby reducing problem-solving and reasoning demands. In order to achieve positive outcomes, an appropriate management structure is required to facilitate good communication and collaboration between all relevant parties (client, family and the various disciplines involved), thereby promoting the consistency required to enhance learning.

There is nothing unique in any of the NFA interventions: it is the application of the techniques together that separates the NFA from other approaches. There is evidence for the effectiveness of separate elements of the NFA, although the relative contribution of each element is unknown. Further studies are required to determine which, if any, elements are especially effective. Most trials of the NFA conducted by groups, other than the current authors, have involved various sub-sets of the principles incorporated within the NFA, but not the complete set [24, 27, 30, 111]. This may be due partly to the demands of a RCT, but may also be due to the fact that the populations under study were more amenable to engagement in rehabilitation than the difficult-to-treat individuals that have been studied previously by Giles and colleagues [46, 82].

Recent evidence suggests that the NFA has a wider applicability than originally envisaged, is practical and can be taught relatively easily by therapists treating less difficult-to-manage clients [24]. In the authors’ experience, successful application of the approach to the more difficult client requires experience, a high degree of ‘psychological mindedness’ and ongoing clinical supervision. Despite accumulating evidence for the efficacy of the NFA, further research is required to define more precisely the optimal duration and intensity of rehabilitation and to identify which NFA elements are essential when treating specific sub-populations. More research is also required to identify how to best match individual clients to the most appropriate type of therapeutic intervention [9] and accurately distinguish those clients for whom global strategy-learning is more effective and those who respond best to the type of intensive, in situ skill-practice used in the NFA. It is the authors’ view that the NFA is more suitable for clients who are unable to solve novel problems and generalize skills, but this needs to be explored in future research.

Declaration of interest The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper.
==== Refs
References
1 Zaloshnja E  Miller T  Langlois JA  Selassie AW   Prevalence of long-term disability from traumatic brain injury in the civilian population of the United States, 2005 Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 2008 23 394 400 19033832 
2 Corrigan JD  Selassie AW  Orman JA   The epidemiology of traumatic brain injury Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 2010 25 72 80 20234226 
3 Wilson BA  Gracey F  Malley D  Bateman A  Evans JJ   The Oliver Zangwill Centre approach to neuropsychological rehabilitation Wilson BA  Gracey F, EJJ  Bateman A   Neuropsychological rehabilitation: Theory, models, therapy and outcome Cambridge Cambridge University Press 2009 47 67 
4 Cicerone KD  Langenbahn DM  Braden C  Malec JF  Kalmar K  Fraas M  Felicetti T  Laatsch L  Harley JP  Bergquist T  et al  Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: Updated review of the literature from 2003 through 2008 Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2011 92 519 530 21440699 
5 Cicerone KD  Mott T  Azulay J  Sharlow-Galella MA  Ellmo WJ  Paradise S  Friel JC   A randomized controlled trial of holistic neuropsychologic rehabilitation after traumatic brain injury Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2008 89 2239 2249 19061735 
6 Prigatano GP  Fordyce DJ  Zeiner HK  Roueche JR  Pepping M  Wood BC   Neuropsychological rehabilitation after closed head injury in young adults Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 1984 47 505 513 
7 Brasure M  Lamberty GJ  Sayer NA  Nelson NW  Mcdonald R  Ouellette J  Wilt JT   Participation after multidisciplinary rehabilitation for moderate to severe traumatic brain injury in adults: A systematic review Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2013 94 1398 1420 23348125 
8 Rohling ML  Faust ME  Beverley B  Demakis G   Effectiveness of cognitive rehabilitation following acquired brain injury: A meta-analytic re examination of Cicerone et al.’s (2000, 2005) systematic reviews Neuropsychology 2009 23 20 39 19210030 
9 Geurtsen GJ  van Heugten CM  Martina JD  Geurts ACH   Comprehensive rehabilitation programmes in the chronic phase after severe brain injury: A systematic review Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine 2010 42 97 110 20140404 
10 Turner-Stokes L   Evidence for the effectiveness of multi-disciplinary rehabilitation following aquired brain injury: A synthesis of two systematic approaches Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine 2008 40 691 701 18843419 
11 Turner-Stokes L, Nair A, Disler PB, Wade D. Multi-disciplinary rehabilitation for acquired brain injury in adults of working age. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2005;20:CD004170 
12 McEwen SE  Politajko HJ  Huijbregts M  Ryan JD   Exploring a cognitive-based treatment approach to improve motor-based skill performance in chronic stroke: Results of three single case experiments Brain Injury 2009 23 1041 1053 19909052 
13 Polatajko HJ  Mandich A   Cognitive oreintation to daily occupational performance Katz N   Cognition and occupation across the life span Bethesda, MD AOTA Press 2005 237 259 
14 Dawson DR, Gaya A, Hunt A, Levine B, Lemsky C, Polatajko HJ. Using the cognitive orientation to occupational performance (CO-OP) approach with adults with executive dysfunction. Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy 2009;76:115--127 
15 Hsieh MY  Ponsford J  Wong D  McKay A   Exploring variables associated with change in cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) for anxiety following traumatic brain injury Disability and Rehabilitation 2011 34 408 415 22087644 
16 Wade DT  King NS  Wenden FJ  Crawford S  Caldwell FE   Routine follow up after head injury: A second randomized controlled trial Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 1998 65 177 183 
17 Crosson B, Barco P, Velozo C, Bolesta M, Cooper PV, Werts D, Brobeck TC. Awareness and compensation in post acute head injury rehabilitation. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 1989;4:46--54 
18 Ergh TC  Rapport LJ  Coleman RD  Hanks RA   Predictors of caregiver and family functioning following traumatic brain injury: Social support moderated caregiver distress Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 2002 17 155 174 11909512 
19 Bach LJ  David AS   Self-awareness after acquired and traumatic brain injury Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2006 16 397 414 16864479 
20 Salomon G  Perkins DN   Rocky roads to transfer: Rethinking mechanisms of a neglected phenomenon Educational Psychologist 1989 24 113 142 
21 Anderson JR   Acquisition of cognitive skills Psychological Review 1982 89 369 406 
22 Park NW  Ingles JL   Effectiveness of attention rehabilitation after an acquired brain injury: A meta-analysis Neuropsychology 2001 15 199 210 11324863 
23 American Occupational Therapy Association. Cognition, cognitive rehabilitation and occupational performance. American Journal of Occupational Therapy 2013;67(Suppl):S9--S31 
24 Rotenberg-Shpigelman S  Erez AB  Nahaloni I  Maeir A   Neurofunctional treatment targeting participation among chronic stroke survivors: A pilot randomised controlled study Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2012 22 532 549 22432716 
25 Clare L, Linden DE, Woods RT, Whitaker R, Evans SJ, Parkinson CH, van Paasschen J, Nelis SM, Hoare Z, Yuen KS, Rugg MD. Goal-oriented cognitive rehabilitation for people with early-stage Alzheimer disease: A single-blind randomized controlled trial of clinical efficacy. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 2010;18:928--939 
26 Giles GM, Clark-Wilson J, editors. Brain injury rehabilitation: A neurofunctional approach. San Diego: Singular; 1993 
27 Vanderploeg RD, Schwab K, Walker WC, Fraser JA, Sigford BJ, Date ES, Scott SG, Curtiss G, Salazar AM, Warden LD, for the Defense and Veterans Brain Injury Study Group. Rehabilitation of traumatic brain injury in active duty military personnel and veterans: Defense and veterans brain injury center randomized controlled trial of two rehabilitation approaches. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2008;89:2227--2238 
28 Giles GM   A neurofunctional approach to rehabilitation following brain injury Katz N   Cognition, occupation and participation across the life span Bethesda, MD AOTA Press 2011 351 381 
29 Giles GM  Clark-Wilson J   The use of behavioral techniques in functional skills training after severe brain injury The American Journal of Occupational Therapy 1988 42 658 665 3202110 
30 Parish L  Oddy M   Efficacy of rehabilitation for functional skills more than 10 years after extremely severe brain injury Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2007 17 230 243 17454695 
31 Rothwell NA  LaVigna GW  Willis TJ   A non-aversive rehabilitation approach for people with severe behavior problems resulting from brain injury Brain Injury 1999 13 521 533 10462149 
32 Rogers C   The necessary and sufficient conditions for therapeutic personality change Journal of Consulting Psychology 1957 21 95 103 13416422 
33 Truax C  Carkhuff RR   Towards effective counseling and psychotherapy Chicago, IL Aldine Publishing Company 1967 
34 Carkhuff R  Berenson B   Beyond counseling and therapy 2nd New York Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc 1977 
35 Castonguay LG  Goldfried MR  Wiser S  Raue PJ  Hayes AM   Predicting the effect of cognitive therapy for depression: A study of unique and common factors Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 1996 64 497 504 8698942 
36 Follette WC  Naugle AE  Callaghan GM   A radical behavioral understanding of the therapeutic relationship in effecting change Behavior Therapy 1996 27 623 641 
37 Horvath AO  Symonds BD   Relationship between working alliance and outcome in psychotherapy: A meta-analysis Journal of Counseling Psychology 1991 38 139 149 
38 Luborsky L  McLellan AT  Woody GE  O’Brien CP  Auerbach A   Therapist success and its determinants Archives of General Psychiatry 1985 42 602 611 4004503 
39 Martin DJ  Garske JP  Davis MK   Relationship of the therapeutic alliance with outcome and other variables: A meta-analytic review Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 2000 68 438 450 10883561 
40 Miller WR  Rollnick S   Motivational interviewing 2nd Guilford (NY) Guilford Press 2002 
41 Woody SR  Adessky RS   Therapeutic alliance, group cohesion, and homework compliance during cognitive-behavioral group treatment of social phobia Behavior Therapy 2002 33 5 27 
42 Klonoff PS  Lamb DG  Henderson SW  Shepherd J   Outcome assessment after milieu-oriented rehabilitation: New considerations Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 1998 79 684 690 9630150 
43 Schonberger M  Hulme F  Teasdale TW   The development of the therapeutic working alliance, patients’ awareness and their compliance during the process of brain injury rehabilitation Brain Injury 2006 20 445 454 16716990 
44 Finfgeld-Connett D   Management of aggression among demented or brain-injured patients Clinical Nursing Research 2009 18 272 287 19439717 
45 Bandura A   Social learning theory New York Prentice Hall 1977 
46 Giles GM  Wager J  Fong L  Waraich BS   Twenty-month effectiveness of a non-aversive, long-term, low cost programme for persons with persisting neurobehavioural disability Brain Injury 2005 19 753 764 16175836 
47 Riley GA  Brennan AJ  Powell T   Threat appraisal and avoidance after traumatic brain injury: Why and how often are activities avoided Brain Injury 2004 18 871 888 15223740 
48 Prigatano GP  Altman IM   Impaired awareness of behavioural limitations after traumatic brain injury Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 1990 71 1058 1064 2256806 
49 Mehrabian A   Nonverbal communication New Jersey The State University 1972 
50 Prochaska JO  DiClemente CC  Norcross JC   In search of how people change: Applications to addictive behaviors American Psychologist 1992 47 1102 1114 1329589 
51 Giles GM  Manchester D   Two approaches to behavior disorder after traumatic brain injury Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 2006 21 168 178 16569990 
52 Medley AR  Powell T   Motivational interviewing to promote self-awareness and engagement in rehabilitation following acquired brain injury: A conceptual review Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2010 20 481 508 20182952 
53 Bombardier CH  Rimmele CT   Motivational interviewing to prevent alcohol abuse after traumatic brain injury: A case series Rehabilitation Psychology 1999 44 52 67 
54 Hsieh MY, Ponsford J, Wong D, Schonberger M, McKay A, Haines K. Development of a motivational interviewing programme as a prelude to CBT for anxiety following traumatic brain injury. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2012;22:563--584 
55 Hsieh MY, Ponsford J, Wong D, Schonberger M, Taffe J, McKay A. Motivational interviewing and cognitive behaviour therapy for anxiety following traumatic brain injury: A pilot randomised controlled trial. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2012;22:585--608 
56 Bell KR, Temkin NR, Esselman PC, Doctor JN, Bombardier CH, Fraser RT, Hoffman JM, Powell JM, Dikmen S. The effect of a scheduled telephone intervention on outcome after moderate to severe traumatic brain injury: A randomized trial. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2005;86:851--856 
57 Manchester D  Wood RL   Applying cognitive therapy in neurobehavioral rehabilitation Wood RL  McMillan TM   Neurobehavioral disability and social handicap following traumatic brain injury Hove, England Psychology Press 2001 157 174 
58 Trahan E  Pepin M  Hopps S   Impaired awareness of deficits and treatment adherence among people with traumatic brain injury or spinal cord injury Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 2006 21 226 235 16717500 
59 Holloway M   Motivational interviewing and acquired brain injury Social Care and Neurodisability 2012 3 122 130 
60 Rauch RJ  Ferry SM   Social networks as support interventions following traumatic brain injury NeuroRehabilitation 2001 16 11 16 11455099 
61 Sander AM, Davis LC, Struchen MA, Atchison T, Sherer M, Malec JF, Nakase-Richardson R. Relationship of race/ethnicity to caregivers, coping, appraisals, and distress after traumatic brain injury. Neurorehabilitation 2007;22:9--17 
62 Knight RG  Devereux R  Godfrey HPD   Caring for a family member with a traumatic brain injury Brain Injury 1998 12 467 481 9638324 
63 Nabors N  Seacat J  Rosenthal M   Predictors of family burden following traumatic brain injury Brain Injury 2002 16 1039 1050 12487718 
64 Hanks RA  Rapport LJ  Vangel S   Caregiving appraisal after traumatic brain injury: The effects of functional status, coping style, social support and family functioning NeuroRehabilitation 2007 22 43 52 17379947 
65 Kosciulek JF   Relationship of family coping with head injury to family adaptation Rehabilitation Psychology 1994 39 215 230 
66 Kosciulek JF  Pichette EF   Adaptation concerns of families of people with head injuries Journal of Applied Rehabilitation Counselling 1996 27 8 13 
67 Willer BS  Allen KM  Liss M  Zicht MS   Problems and coping strategies of individuals with traumatic brain injury and their spouses Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 1991 72 460 464 2059116 
68 Campbell CH   Needs of relatives and helpfulness of support groups in severe head injury Rehabilitation Nursing 1988 13 320 325 3205966 
69 Latham GP  Erez M  Locke E   Resolving scientific disputes by the joint design of crucial experiments by the antagonists: Application to the Erez-Latham dispute regarding participation in goal setting Journal of Applied Psychology 1988 73 753 772 
70 Holliday RC  Ballinger C  Playford ED   Goal setting in neurological rehabilitation: Patients’ perspectives Disability and Rehabilitation 2007 29 389 394 17364791 
71 Latham GP  Winters D  Locke E   Cognitive and motivational effects of participation: A mediator study Journal of Organizational Behavior 1994 15 49 63 
72 Locke EA, Alavi M, Wagner JA. Participation in decision making: An information exchange perspective. In: Ferris GR, editor. Research in personnel and human resources management. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press; 1997. p 293–331 
73 Kazdin A   Behavior modification in applied settings Pacific Grove, CA Brook/Cole 1994 
74 Schmitter-Edgecombe M  Nissley HM   Effects of divided attention on automatic and controlled componants of memory after severe closed-head injury Neuropsychology 2000 14 559 569 11055258 
75 Manchester D  Hodgkinson A  Casey T   Prolonged, severe behavioural disturbance following traumatic brain injury: What can be done? Brain Injury 1997 11 605 617 9251868 
76 Zencius AH  Wesolowski MD  Burke WH  McQuade P   Antecedent control in the treatment of brain injured clients Brain Injury 1989 3 199 205 2730977 
77 Giles GM  Ridley J  Dill A  Frye S   A consecutive series of brain injured adults treated with a washing and dressing retraining program American Journal of Occupational Therapy 1997 51 256 266 9085724 
78 Goverover Y  Chiaravalloti ND  DeLuca J   Pilot study to examine the use of self-generation to improve learning and memory in people with traumatic brain injury American Journal of Occupational Therapy 2010 64 540 546 20825124 
79 Schefft BK  Dulay MF  Fargo JD   The use of a self-generation memory encoding strategy to improve verbal memory and learning in patients with traumatic brain injury Applied Neuropsychology 2008 15 61 68 18443942 
80 Evans JJ   Basic concepts and principles of neuropsychological assessment Gurd JM  Kischka U  Marshall JC   The handbook of clinical neuropsychology Oxford, UK Oxford University Press 2010 15 27 
81 Wilson BA  Baddeley A  Evans JJ  Shiel A   Errorless learning in the rehabilitation of memory impaired people Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 1994 4 307 326 
82 Giles GM   A neurofunctional approach to rehabilitation following severe brain injury Katz N   Cognition and occupation across the life span: Models for intervention in occupational therapy Bethesda, MD AOTA Press 2005 139 165 
83 Martin GL  Koop S  Turner G  Hanel F   Backward chaining vs total task presentation to teach assembly tasks to severely retarded persons Behavior Research of Severe Developmental Disabilities 1981 2 117 136 
84 McDonnell J  Laughlin B   A comparison of backward and concurrent chaining strategies in teaching community skills Education and Training in Mental Retardation 1989 24 230 238 
85 Spooner F   Comparison of backward chaining and total task presentation in training severely handicapped persons Education and Training of the Mentally Retarded 1984 19 15 22 
86 Hayes-Roth B   Evolution of cognitive structures and processes Psychological Review 1977 84 260 278 
87 Newell A  Rosenbloom PS   Mechanisms of skill acquisition and the law of practice Anderson JR   Cognitive skills and their acquisition Hillsdale, NJ Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 1981 1 55 
88 Kramer AF  Strayer DL  Buckley J   Development and transfer or automatic processing Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 1990 16 505 522 
89 Schmitter-Edgecombe M  Rogers WA   Automatic process development following severe closed head injury Neuropsychology 1997 11 296 308 9110336 
90 Shiffrin RM  Dumais ST   The development of automatism Anderson JR   Cognitive skills and their acquisition Hillsdale, NJ Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 1981 111 140 
91 Schmitter-Edgecombe M   Implications of basic science research for brain injury rehabilitation: A focus on intact learning mechanisms Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 2006 21 131 141 16569987 
92 Draganski D, Gaser C, Busch V, Schuierer G, Bogdahn U, May A. Newly honed juggling skills show up as a transient feature on a brain-imaging scan. Nature 2004;427:311--312 
93 Nudo RJ   Postinfarct cortical plasticity and behavioral recovery Stroke 2007 38 840 845 17261749 
94 Lövdén M, Wenger E, Mårtensson J, Lindenberger U, Bäckman L. Structural brain plasticity in adult learning and development. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 2013;37:2296--2310 
95 Ehlhardt LA, Sohlberg MM, Kennedy M, Coelho C, Ylvisaker M, Turkstra L, Yorkston K. Evidence-based practice guidelines for instructing individuals with neurogenic memory impairments: What have we learned in the past 20 years? Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2008;18:300--342 
96 Sohlberg MM  Turkstra L   Optimizing cognitve rehabilitation: Effective instructional methods New York The Guilford Press 2011 
97 Goldenberg G  Hagman S   Therapy of activities of daily living in patients with apraxia Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 1998 8 123 141 
98 Goldenberg G  Daumuüller M  Hagmann S   Assessment and therapy of complex activities of daily living in apraxia Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2001 11 147 169 
99 Driskell JE  Willis RP  Copper C   Effect of overlearning on retention Journal of Applied Psychology 1992 77 615 622 
100 Lloyd LF  Cuvo AJ   Maintenance and generalization of behaviors after treatment of persons with traumatic brain injury Brain Injury 1994 8 529 540 7987289 
101 Giuffrida CG  Demery JA  Reyes LR  Lebowitz BK  Hanlon RE   Functional skill learning in men with traumatic brain injury American Journal of Occupational Therapy 2009 63 398 407 19708468 
102 Wulf G  Shea CH   Principles derived from the study of simple skills do not generalize to complex skills Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2002 9 185 211 12120783 
103 Wulf G. Attentional focus and motor learning: A review of 10 years of research. E-Journal Bewegung und Training 2013;6:77--104 
104 High WM  Roebuck-Spencer T  Sander AM  Struchen MA  Sherer M   Early vs later admission to postacute rehabilitation: Impact on functional outcome after traumatic brain injury Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2006 87 334 342 16500166 
105 van Heugten C  Geregorio GW  Wade D   Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation after acquired brain injury: A systematic review of content of treatment Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 2012 22 653 673 22537117 
106 Giles GM   Maximizing TBI rehabilitation outcomes with targeted interventions Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2009 90 530 19254624 
107 Giles GM   Cognitive vs functional approaches to rehabilitation after traumatic brain injury: Commentary on a randomized controlled trial American Journal of Occupational Therapy 2010 64 182 185 20131578 
108 Yuen HK   Neurofunctional approach to improve self-care skills in adults with brain damage Occupational Therapy in Mental Health 1994 12 31 45 
109 Martelli MF  Nicholson K  Zasler ND   Skill reacquisition after acquired brain injury: A holistic habit retraining model of neurorehabilitation Neurorehabilitation 2008 23 115 126 18525133 
110 Mastos M  Miller K  Eliasson AC  Imms C   Goal-directed training: Linking theories of treatment to clinical practice for improved functional activities in daily life Clinical rehabilitation 2007 21 47 55 17213241 
111 Vanderploeg RD, Collins RC, Sigford BJ, Date ES, Schwab K, Warden D, for the Defense and Veterans brain injury Center Veterans Health Administration study planning group. Practical and theoretical considerations in designing rehabilitation trials: The DVBIC cognitive-didactic versus functional-experiential treatment study experience. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation 2006;21:179--193 
112 Sohlberg MM  Mateer CA   Effectiveness of an attentional training program Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 1987 9 117 130 3558744 
113 Sohlberg MM  Mateer CA   APT: Attention process training manual Puyallup, WA Association for neuropsychological research and development 1987 
114 Cameron HA  Gould E   Adult neurogenesis is regulated by adrenal steroids in the dentate gyrus Neuroscience 1994 61 203 209 7969902 
115 Liao B  Craske MG   The impact of state anxiety on fear inhibition Journal of Experimental Psychopathology 2013 4 148 160
