
==== Front
Arch Virol
Arch. Virol
Archives of Virology
0304-8608 1432-8798 Springer Vienna Vienna 

24327094
1940
10.1007/s00705-013-1940-z
Brief Review
The molecular biology of nairoviruses, an emerging group of tick-borne arboviruses
Lasecka Lidia  Baron Michael D. +44-14-83231024+44-14-83232448michael.baron@pirbright.ac.uk  grid.63622.330000000403887540The Pirbright Institute, Ash Road, Pirbright, Surrey, GU24 0NF UK 
11 12 2013 
2014 
159 6 1249 1265
11 8 2013 30 10 2013 © Springer-Verlag Wien 2013This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.The nairoviruses are a rapidly emerging group of tick-borne bunyaviruses that includes pathogens of humans (Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus [CCHFV]) and livestock (Nairobi sheep disease virus [NSDV], also known as Ganjam virus), as well as a large number of viruses for which the normal vertebrate host has not been established. Studies on this group of viruses have been fairly limited, not least because CCHFV is a BSL4 human pathogen, restricting the number of labs able to study the live virus, while NSDV, although highly pathogenic in naive animals, is not seen as a threat in developed countries, making it a low priority. Nevertheless, recent years have seen significant progress in our understanding of the biology of these viruses, particularly that of CCHFV, and this article seeks to draw together our existing knowledge to generate an overall picture of their molecular biology, underlining areas of particular ignorance for future studies.

Keywords
Rift Valley Fever VirusHead DomainEquine Arteritis VirusLeucine Zipper MotifStalk Domainissue-copyright-statement© Springer-Verlag Wien 2014
==== Body
Introduction
New viral diseases appear with increasing frequency. Just in the last two years we have seen the appearance of a new livestock virus (Schmallenberg) and a new human pathogen (MERS coronavirus). In some cases these viruses appear to be completely new, in others they have ‘emerged’ into our awareness as human use of different habitats changes, leading to increased contact with carriers of disease, whether those carriers are “bush meat” or the many insect and tick species that can act as vectors of disease. One such group of viruses that is rapidly becoming more important is the genus Nairovirus in the family Bunyaviridae. This genus includes a number of human and livestock pathogens, as well as a collection of other viruses about which little is known, not even the host in which they naturally circulate. The nairoviruses show a number of unique features, and the purpose of this article is to summarise our current knowledge of the molecular biology of these viruses and highlight areas where it is to be expected that research will soon bear fruit.

A primary characteristic of the viruses of the genus Nairovirus, distinguishing them from most of the other members of the family Bunyaviridae, is that they are all transmitted by ticks [109]. Based on antibody cross-reactivity, nairoviruses are classified into seven serogroups (Table 1) [32, 39, 190], of which the most important are the Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) group, which includes the human pathogen Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), and the Nairobi sheep disease (NSD) group, to which belong Nairobi sheep disease virus (NSDV) Dugbe virus (DUGV) and Kupe virus (KUPV). KUPV [43] and Finch Creek virus [102] are the most recently discovered viruses of this genus. CCHFV is arguably the most important from a human perspective, causing haemorrhagic fever in humans, with mortality up to 30 % (reviewed in refs. [58] and [182]). After dengue virus, this is the second most widespread of the arboviruses that are pathogenic to humans; cases of CCHF have been reported in sub-Saharan Africa, the former Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Turkey, China, Pakistan, India, the Arabian Peninsula, northern Greece, Iraq and Iran [26, 53–55, 115, 121–123, 183]. Although CCHFV can infect several mammalian species, it appears to cause disease only in man [124, 158]. Because of its importance as a human pathogen, most of the available data on nairoviruses come from studies on this virus, though studies on other members of the group have also contributed, notably on NSDV, a virus first identified nearly a hundred years ago as a tick-borne virus that causes severe haemorrhagic gastroenteritis in sheep and goats, with mortality rates of up to 90 % in susceptible populations [113, 167, 181]. Interestingly, an Asian virus causing a similar disease, Ganjam virus (GV), was recently identified, based on genetic and serological studies, as being the same virus as that causing NSD in East Africa [47, 106, 187]. It is not possible to say yet whether GV is a variant of NSDV or vice versa, but it is clear that this virus also has a wide distribution.Table 1 Viruses of the genus Nairovirus: the serogroup to which they belong and any known association with disease

Serogroup	Viruses	Known association with disease	
Nairobi sheep disease group	Nairobi sheep disease virus (NSDV)=Ganjam virus (GV)	Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis in sheep and goats [106, 113]. Antibodies to NSDV/GV have been reported in humans, but otherwise only laboratory-acquired infections have been seen [13, 45, 133]	
Dugbe virus (DUGV)	Frequently isolated from ticks infesting livestock in which DUGV appears to be apathogenic [27, 46, 146]. While one case of human infection has been described [27], the link to DUGV was circumstantial	
Kupe virus (KUPV)		
Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever group	Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV)	Haemorrhagic fever in man [58, 179, 182]	
Hazara virus (HAZV)		
Khazan virus (KHAV)		
Hughes group	Farallon virus (FARV)	Humans bitten by infected ticks may experience pruritus (i.e. itching), fever and headache [41, 42, 76]	
Fraser Point virus (FPV)	
Great Saltee virus (GRSV)	
Hughes virus (HUGV)	
Puffin Island virus (PIV)	
Punta Salinas virus (PSV)	
Raza virus (RAZAV)	
Sapphire II virus (SAPV)	
Soldado virus (SOLV)	
Zirqa virus ZIRV)	
Dera Ghazi Khan group	Abu Hammad virus (AHV)		
Abu Mina virus (ABMV)	
Dera Ghazi Khan virus (DGKV)	
Kao Shuan virus (KSV)	
Pathum Thani virus (PTHV)	
Pretoria virus (PREV)	
Qalyub group	Bakel virus (BAKV)		
Bandia virus (BDAV)	
Omo virus (OMOV)	
Qalyub virus (QYBV)	
Sakhalin group [102]	Avalon virus (AVAV)

(=Paramushir virus)

		
Clo Mor virus	
Finch creek virus	
Kachemak Bay virus (KBV)	
Sakhalin virus (SAKV)	
Taggert virus (TAGV)	
Tillamook virus (TILLV)	
Thiafora group	Erve virus (ERVEV)	Erve virus may cause severe headache in man and neurological disorders [165, 184]. Mode of transmission into humans is currently unknown	
Thiafora virus (TFAV)	



Molecular characteristics of nairoviruses
Nairoviruses, like the members of the other genera of the family Bunyaviridae, are enveloped viruses that appear spherical in the electron microscope, with a diameter of approximately 100 nm [21, 46, 142]. As with all bunyaviruses, the genome consists of three segments of negative-sense RNA [39] (reviewed in refs. [109] and [175]). These are termed the small (S) segment, encoding the nucleocapsid (N) protein, which forms a complex with each RNA segment [24, 39]; the medium (M) segment, which encodes a polyprotein that is processed into two mature glycoproteins (Gn and Gc) as well as one or more non-structural proteins [3, 17, 39, 107, 144]; and the large (L) segment, which encodes the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) [85, 108].

Viral replication takes place in the cytoplasm, and viral budding occurs in the Golgi [57, 142] (Fig. 1). During viral replication, the genome segments are used as the template for synthesis of both mRNA (transcription) and complementary RNA (cRNA) (replication), where cRNAs are then used as the template for the synthesis of progeny genomic viral RNA (vRNA) [16]. The 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) of the S, M and L segments contain the minimum cis-acting elements necessary for transcription, replication and packaging [16, 67]. The terminal 5’ and 3’ non-coding regions of each segment are complementary to each other and highly conserved among different nairoviruses [37]. The first nine nucleotides are usually the same in different segments, which suggests that this sequence is recognised by the viral polymerase to initiate viral transcription/replication [107]. It is not clear whether the complementarity between 5’ and 3’ ends reflects an interaction between the ends of segments or the requirement for the same 3’ sequence in genome and anti-genome RNAs to act as the attachment site for the viral polymerase [14, 66] (reviewed in refs. [109] and [147]). As with other bunyaviruses, the nairoviruses utilise capped primers snatched from host mRNA for initiation of their mRNA transcription [90]. The initiation of cRNA and vRNA synthesis occurs by a different mechanism, which has not yet been fully worked out. The fact that polymerase slippage occurs during mRNA synthesis [90], coupled with the observation that the RNA segments of CCHFV, DUGV and NSDV contain a 5’-terminal pyrimidine [90, 144, 187], while viral RNA polymerases can initiate RNA synthesis only by attaching purines [12], suggests that initiation of RNA replication occurs in a prime-and-realign manner.Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the replication cycle of nairoviruses (family Bunyaviridae). (1) Virus attaches to an unknown cellular receptor (2), after which the virus is internalised into the host cell in an endocytosis-mediated manner. (3) Upon reaching the low-pH environment of the endosome, viral glycoproteins probably undergo a conformational change that releases ribonucleocapsids (RNPs) and viral polymerase (L) into the cytoplasm. (4a) vRNA is transcribed into mRNA, giving rise to synthesis of viral proteins; nucleoprotein (N) and L are synthesised on cytoplasmic ribosomes while (4b) the viral glycoproteins are synthesised as a single polyprotein on ER-associated ribosomes. (4c) Viral RNA (vRNA) is transcribed into complementary RNA (cRNA), which is used as the template for replication of vRNA. (5) The glycoprotein polyprotein is further processed in the ER and Golgi into mature glycoproteins. (6) Once viral proteins and vRNA are synthesised, new virions assemble at the Golgi. (7) The new virus buds into the Golgi and (8) exits the host cell, probably in Golgi-derived vesicles




Entry and exit
The two membrane glycoproteins (Gn and Gc) are believed to determine cell tropism and the ability of the viruses to infect susceptible cells via recognition and binding of one or more cellular receptors. The specific cellular receptor(s) used by nairoviruses are currently unknown, but the Gc protein is thought to be involved in virus attachment to the target cell receptor, as antibodies against Gc, but not Gn, appear to protect cells from CCHFV infection in plaque reduction neutralisation assays [1, 17]. The ectodomain of CCHFV Gc contains an epitope that is highly conserved among strains [1]. This fragment is probably exposed in the virus, as antibodies against this epitope are neutralising for different strains of CCHFV and protect mice from challenge with CCHFV [1]. Similarly, the Gc of DUGV was also demonstrated to be targeted by neutralising antibodies [107]. Antibodies to the Gn protein were found to be non-neutralising in vitro, though could still be protective in vivo [17].

Based on the finding that an independently folding section of this Gc protein bound to CCHFV-susceptible cells, and using this part of Gc as a probe [185], nucleolin has been suggested as a putative CCHFV receptor. Nucleolin is a cellular protein that is abundant in the nucleus but can also be expressed on the cell surface of several cell types [36, 83, 148, 149, 151], including mononuclear phagocytes, endothelial cells and hepatocytes which are known to be targets for CCHFV [28, 185]. Although nucleolin has also been suggested to act as a receptor for several other viruses, such as parainfluenza virus type 3 [22], human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [118], coxsackie B virus [49] and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) [162], further studies are required to determine whether nucleolin acts as the primary receptor for CCHFV; in particular, infection studies with wild-type (not cell-culture-adapted) viruses are required to confirm the biological relevance of any potential receptor candidates.

After binding to their receptor, viruses fuse with the plasma membrane or internalise through one of several endocytosis pathways to gain entry into the intracellular environment (reviewed in refs. [40] and [153]). CCHFV entry is dependent on the low pH of the endosomal compartment, which appears to be required in the first steps of the virus entry post-internalisation [74, 156], and the virus has been shown to use clathrin-dependent endocytosis, while caveolin-1 is dispensable for its entry [74, 156]. Studies using dominant negative Rab5 and Rab7 indicate that CCHFV fuses with early, but not late, endosomes to gain access to the cytoplasm [74]. Cholesterol also appears to be important for CCHFV replication, especially at early stages after binding and internalisation; it is possible that depletion of cholesterol from cells traps viral particles in endosomes [88] or interferes with clathrin-mediated endocytosis [140].

The internalisation of CCHFV virions was shown to be dependent on intact microtubules [155]. Further investigation of CCHFV infection showed that disruption of the cell microtubules inhibited viral RNA replication [155], and both intact actin and microtubules are essential for correct distribution of the N protein to the perinuclear area [5, 155]. As nairoviruses enter via endocytosis and bud in the Golgi compartment, the observation of a redistribution of viral proteins and suppression of CCHFV assembly/egress by microtubule modification (depolarisation and stabilisation) [155] is not surprising, and this might be caused by interference with the endogenous secretory pathway, which also occurs along microtubules [101] (reviewed in ref. [87]). Disruption of actin filaments in CCHFV-infected cells also drastically reduced replication of the virus [5]. While the N protein is often located in close proximity to the Golgi apparatus, where generation of new viral particles occurs [16], N does not interact directly with Golgi membranes [5, 134]. The N protein appears to interact with the L protein, even in the absence of viral RNA, as expressed N protein seems to redistribute most of the L protein into the perinuclear area containing N in transfected cells [16].

The N protein
The N protein of nairoviruses, at approximately 53 kDa, is almost twice of size of the N proteins of other bunyaviruses, with the exception of those of hantaviruses, which, at approx. 48 kDa, are similar in size [39, 110]. The N protein is the most abundant protein in the virion and encapsidates newly synthesised vRNA and cRNA; this process is necessary for completion of the replication cycle and packaging of the genome into virions [16, 65, 100]. Viruses of different genera in the family Bunyaviridae appear to adopt different mechanisms of RNA encapsidation, e.g. some bunyavirus N proteins recognise generic ssRNA, while others recognise specific structures in the vRNA [110, 120, 135, 137, 150]. There is a need to understand the mechanism by which nairoviruses encapsidate genomic and antigenomic RNA; inhibition of vRNA encapsidation could be a target for potential antiviral drugs, e.g., using an RNA decoy to bind the viral N protein, as has been suggested as an antiviral treatment for hepatitis B virus (HBV) [62], or selecting RNA-binding proteins that target specific packaging sequences in the viral genome [193].

The recently determined crystal structure of the N protein of CCHFV shows that it is built from two major domains: a globular head and an extended stalk [31, 77, 174]. The globular domain is the larger and is formed from both N-terminal and C-terminal helices, while the stalk domain is formed by a group of internal helices (the exact numbering of the helices varies between the several papers publishing the structure of this protein). Three potential RNA-binding regions were identified in the N protein structure. Two positively charged grooves are located in the globular domain: the smaller one is under the stalk domain, and the larger one is in the opposite site of the globular domain. The third positive groove is located in the stalk domain. The positively charged residues forming the RNA-binding site appear to be well conserved across the genus Nairovirus, and several residues were identified as crucial for RNA binding and virus replication, e.g., K132 and Q300 in the smaller groove and K411 and H456 in the larger groove of the head domain [31, 77].

The N protein of CCHFV was also crystallised as a linear oligomer, where three monomeric N subunits were organised in head-to-tail manner, with the stalk domain of one monomer interacting with an oligomeric groove located at the base of the head domain of an adjacent molecule [174]. In addition, the linear oligomers of N were predicted to interact in a dimeric manner to form an antiparallel double superhelix [31, 174]. Further predictions suggest that that there are nine N molecules per turn of the superhelix, which is 210 Å in diameter [174]. Additionally, a positively charged crevice located on the outside of the double superhelix is predicted to serve as an additional RNA binding cleft [174].

Studies performed by Guo and collaborators [77] suggest that the CCHFV N protein, when expressed without RNA, predominantly exists as a monomer, and the nairovirus N protein is only a weak binder of nonspecific RNA in this monomeric state [77, 80, 111, 135]. This suggests that nairovirus N binds RNA only in the oligomeric state and/or that the N recognises specific structures of viral RNA, as was shown for viruses of the genus Hantavirus [110, 120]. However the fact that the nairovirus N protein does not form oligomers without RNA suggests that its oligomerisation is RNA-stabilised, where monomeric N protein requires binding to RNA to form an oligomer, a mechanism that was previously suggested for influenza A virus [160, 161]. In a similar fashion, the N protein of Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) can form only a short oligomeric form in the absence of RNA [64].

Superimposing the structures obtained for the CCHFV N protein by two different groups, using two CCHFV isolates, revealed the head and stalk with very similar folds, but with a transposition of the stalk domain when comparing these two molecules; results which suggest a flexibility of the stalk domain and the possibility of different conformations of N for different functions or different states of the N-RNA complexes (e.g., transcription vs replication) [31]. Additionally, comparison of the crystal structure of the N protein in the monomeric and oligomeric forms suggests that the stalk domain changes its conformation upon oligomerisation, probably by binding to the oligomerisation groove on the head domain of the adjacent molecule [174]. Such flexibility of the stalk domain has also been shown for the N proteins of RVFV and LASV, which, during binding to an oligomerisation groove on an adjacent N molecule, undergo conformational changes exposing an RNA-binding groove [64, 80]. These structural data have led to suggestions of possible models for the initiation of transcription and replication. Transcription of viral mRNAs by nairoviruses utilises short capped RNA fragments (10-20 nt in length) derived from host mRNAs as primers [90]. Incubation of the CCHFV N protein with primer-length ssRNA resulted in a conformational change of the stalk domain, which resulted in disruption of the oligomeric interactions and release of the monomeric N protein from the antiparallel double superhelix [174]. As discussed by Wang et al., presentation of the capped primers to the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) may initiate conformational changes in the stalk domain, leading to the release of monomeric N and exposing vRNA to the primer and the viral polymerase. Given that head-to-stalk interactions between two adjacent N molecules have also been observed for RVFV, LASV, and Bunyamwera virus (BUNV) [9, 64, 80], it seems likely that the model proposed for CCHFV may be biologically valid.

The N protein of CCHFV has also been shown to have nuclease activity specific for dsDNA and ssDNA (but not for RNA); the importance of this DNase activity and its function in the virus life cycle are unknown [77]. The residues involved in the nuclease activity are located in the globular head domain of the N protein and are conserved in all nairoviruses [77]. In contrast, the N protein of LASV, the head domain of which exhibits high structural homology with that of CCHFV, has RNA-specific nuclease activity [79, 80, 130].

The N protein of nairoviruses also contains a conserved sequence signature specific for catalytic motif II (CMII) of N-6 adenine-specific DNA methylases (Lasecka and Baron, unpublished) (Fig. 2), where the conserved motif NPPW could be involved in substrate binding or in catalytic activity [97, 164]. The motif is located on an exposed loop of the stalk domain, and the function and potential importance of this motif still need to be determined. The methylation of DNA is used for regulation of gene expression, but so far there is no indication that the N protein of nairoviruses travels to the nucleus; the protein does not contain a classical nuclear localisation signal (NLS), nor does it accumulate in the nucleus of infected or transfected cells. N6 methylation is also used as a posttranscriptional modification of mRNA, and RNA methyltransferases appear to contain motifs very similar to the CMI and CMII motifs identified in DNA methyltransferases (reviewed in ref. [119]); further studies are required to determine if the nairovirus N protein can modify its own or host cell RNAs in this way.Fig. 2 Conserved CMII motif in the N protein of nairoviruses. N protein sequences, either available from NCBI (National Centre for Biotechnology Information) or as sequenced in our laboratory, were aligned using ClustalX2. Viruses and their strain/isolate designation are indicated on the left. CCHFV, Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus; NSDV, Nairobi sheep disease virus; GV, Ganjam virus; DUGV, Dugbe virus; KUPV, Kupe virus; HAZV, Hazara virus; ERVEV, Erve virus. The numbering at the top indicates the relative position in the alignment. The conserved NPPW motif is marked in red. Protein sequence accession numbers are as follows: CCHFV-66/08-Rodopi (ACF93431.2); CCHFV-Afg09-2990 (ADQ57288.1); CCHFV-AP92 (AAA50177.1); CCHFV-Gujrat-2011 (AFY97403.1); CCHFV-IbAr10200 (P89522.1); CCHFV-Sudan AB1-2009 (AEI70581.1); NSDV-708 (AAM33323.1); GV-40350 (AED88236.1); GV-62873 (AED88237.1); DUGV-NJT130 (ACL68470.2); KUPV-K611 (ABY82500.1); HAZV-JC280 (P27318.1); ERVEV (AFH89034.1)




Viral glycoproteins
Like those of members of the other genera of the family Bunyaviridae, the M segment of nairoviruses contains a single open reading frame (ORF) encoding a polyprotein that is co- and post-translationally cleaved into the mature viral glycoproteins [39]. The glycoproteins of most nairoviruses are still poorly characterised, and most of the available data come from studies on CCHFV, largely through studies on proteins expressed from plasmids. The processing of the CCHFV M polyprotein to generate the mature glycoproteins appears to be more complex than that of other bunyaviruses, as it involves first the generation of glycoprotein precursors through the action of the signal protease in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) followed by further cleavages to give rise to the full set of mature glycoproteins, a process that employs other cellular proteases [15, 144, 145, 172] (Fig. 3).Fig. 3 Schematic representation of CCHFV M polyprotein processing. A schematic model of the M-encoded polyprotein is shown with the glycoprotein precursors PreGn and PreGc labelled and the approximate positions of the mature proteins mucin-like domain, GP38, Gn, NSM and Gc indicated. The black bars represent transmembrane helices (TM0-TM5). The initial signal protease (SP) cleavage sites are indicated, and arrows indicate further cleavage sites during polyprotein processing. See text for the details of CCHFV M polyprotein processing. Schematic diagram not drawn to scale and adapted from refs. [4, 161, 162]




The virions of most of the nairoviruses contain two mature glycoproteins, Gn and Gc [15, 33, 38, 107, 144, 145, 172]; however, two nairoviruses, Hazara virus and Clo Mor virus, have been shown to contain three structural glycoproteins [68, 175]. The full nairovirus M-encoded polyprotein appears to have six hydrophobic regions (TM0-TM5), which could function as transmembrane helices [3, 144] and act either as classic secretory signal peptides (TM0), membrane anchors (TM1, 3 and 5), or a combination of both (TM2,4) (Fig. 3). Signal cleavage motifs are found after TM0 (releasing the amino terminus of the Gn precursor, PreGn) and TM4 (releasing the Gc precursor PreGc). Sequence inspection revealed a signal cleavage signal immediately after TM2, suggesting that there might be a separate protein released, consisting of the sequence between the distal ends of TM2 and TM4; such a protein has been shown to be produced by CCHFV and has been termed NSM [3]. Further non-structural glycoproteins have been identified in CCHFV-infected cells, referred to as the mucin-like domain (a highly O-glycosylated peptide), GP38, GP85 and GP160, all of which are released from infected cells; GP85 and GP160 contain both the GP38 protein and the mucin-like domain [145].

A model for the generation of the CCHFV glycoproteins is summarised in Figure 3 based on a number of studies [3, 144, 145, 172]. Co-translational cleavage in the ER by cellular signalase generates the 140-kDa PreGn (containing the mucin-like domain, GP38, and Gn), the predominantly cytoplasmically oriented NSM, and the 85-kDa PreGc. The PreGn is further cleaved, either in the ER or the Golgi compartment, to separate mucin-like domain/GP38 from Gn. This cleavage occurs at a conserved RRLL↓ motif and is effected by the host’s subtilisin kexin isozyme-1/site-1 protease (SKI-1/S1P) [145, 172]. This cleavage has been shown to be critical for virus replication and subsequent infectivity, and lack of the cleavage prevents incorporation of the glycoproteins into viral particles [15]. A similar tetrapeptide (RKPL) is found 41 amino acids downstream of the signalase cleavage site in PreGc, which, although it is not processed also by SKI-1/S1P, is predicted to be utilised by a related subtilisin-like protease in the ER/cisGolgi to generate the mature Gc (75 kDa) [144, 172]. The mature Gn interacts (directly or indirectly) with the Gc, and both are translocated to the virus-assembly sites in the Golgi [17, 59, 145]. The interaction of mature Gn with Gc is essential for the Gc to travel from ER to Golgi, as Gn, but not Gc, contains a Golgi localisation signal [17]. The ectodomains of Gn and Gc appear to be sufficient for heterodimer formation and transport to the Golgi, indicating that at least partial Golgi-targeting information is located in the Gn ectodomain [17].

The final processing of the glycoproteins takes place in the trans-Golgi, where the mucin-like domain and GP38 are separated from each other by a furin-like protein convertase at the RSKR↓ cleavage site [116, 145]. This cleavage is not required for CCHFV Gn maturation [145], and it appears that not the entire pool of mucin-like domain/GP38 polyprotein is being cleaved, as the non-structural proteins termed GP85 and GP160 contain both the mucin-like domain and GP38 and are resistant to resolution into smaller proteins by denaturation in SDS and urea [145]. Resistance to denaturation also suggests that GP160 is probably not a dimer of GP85 [145]. Interestingly, the mucin-like domain/GP38 and GP38 can fold independently of the rest of Gn and are secreted even when expressed on their own in transfected cells [145]. No specific biological function has been assigned to the mucin-like domain, GP38, GP85 or GP160. The mucin-like domain of the Ebola virus glycoprotein has been shown to play a major role in pathogenesis, including involvement in the observed increase of endothelium permeability [154, 188], and it will be important to see if this is also true of CCHFV, especially given the changes visible in the endothelial cells of CCHFV patients.

The NSM protein, when expressed in transfected cells on its own, is transported to the Golgi [3]. While the function(s) of the nairovirus NSM have still to be determined, the fact that Gn requires NSM for maturation may mean that NSM is necessary for virus replication [3].

Glycosylation is an important post-translational modification of secreted and membrane proteins that can influence protein folding, transport and function. N-linked glycosylation in particular is known to regulate protein folding, association with chaperones [112], transport, cellular localisation [81, 82], and even virus infectivity (reviewed in ref. [171]). The N-terminal part of the nairovirus M polyprotein, which contains the mucin-like domain, is heavily O-glycosylated, while the adjacent GP38 domain appears to have few O-glycosylation sites [144, 145]. Both domains are also N-glycosylated, the mucin-like domain containing five potential sites and GP38 two [145]. Of two predicted N-glycosylation sites in each of the mature Gn and Gc proteins, only one is functional in Gn (N557), while both sites in Gc (N1054 and N1563) are glycosylated [59]. However, only the glycosylation of the Gn is essential for Gn maturation, correct localisation, and transport of itself and other CCHFV glycoproteins [59]. Given that the Gn glycosylation sites are conserved among CCHFV strains [51], it is likely that correct glycosylation of the CCHFV Gn is critical for virus viability.

Recently, NMR has been used to determine a solution structure for the C-terminal (cytoplasmic) tail of CCHFV Gn, showing that this region contains a dual zinc-finger domain, the sequence of which is highly conserved among nairoviruses [60, 61]. Classical ββα-zinc finger domains have been shown to take part in protein-protein interactions (reviewed in ref. [71]), and it is possible that the dual zinc-finger domain in the C-terminus of the nairovirus Gn protein is involved in interaction with RNPs, which would help drive assembly/budding of the virus.

Analysis of the sequences of M segments of other nairoviruses suggests that the general model proposed for processing of the M polyprotein described above for CCHFV holds true for the other nairoviruses; M polyproteins show similar membrane topology, with six transmembrane regions and conserved signalase cleavage sites after the transmembrane domains TM0, TM2 and TM4 (Fig. 3). Glycoprotein maturation from precursor proteins has also been observed for DUGV, where PreGn is around 70 kDa and PreGc around 85 kDa [107]. An exception to this general similarity is Erve virus (ERVEV), which does not contain TM3 and TM4, its M polyprotein lacking the entire amino acid sequence between TM2 and the Gc ectodomain. This suggests that ERVEV lacks an NSM protein. Most of the nairoviruses for which we have sequence data appear to have a PreGn domain that is about 120 amino acids shorter than that seen in CCHFV, due to a much shorter mucin-like domain, as was previously described for DUGV [144]. Another difference is that other nairoviruses do not contain a furin-cleavage site (RSKR) following the O-glycosylated mucin-like domain. The SKI-1/S1P-like protease cleavage tetrapeptides in many nairoviruses appear to be different to those proposed for CCHFV; however, all appear to fit the consensus subtilisin cleavage sequence (R/K)X(hydrophobic)Z↓ (where X is any amino acid and Z is preferably F, K, L or T but not V, P, E, D, C) [56]. This may reflect differences in adaptation to specific tick or mammalian hosts, and further studies on the importance of these various stages in the maturation of the glycoproteins for different hosts are clearly required.

The L protein
The L segment of nairoviruses, which contains a single open reading frame (ORF) of approximately 12 kb, encoding a protein of approximately 450 kDa, is almost twice as long as the L proteins of most other bunyaviruses, with the exception of the tospoviruses, in which the L segment is approximately 9 kb in length [48, 85, 94, 108] (Fig. 4). Despite this difference in length and sequence, nairovirus L proteins still show the four conserved functional regions previously described for other bunyavirus L proteins [94, 108, 131, 139, 177]. The bunyavirus L proteins contain the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and the most conserved region of the L segment among nairoviruses is the region corresponding to the coding sequence for the core catalytic domains of the RdRp [8, 85, 108]. Within this polymerase module (also called region 3) can be distinguished six conserved motifs [94, 108] (Fig. 4). Motifs A through D are conserved among all RNA-dependent polymerases [50, 129]; motif pre-A, upstream of motif A, is present in all RNA-dependent RNA polymerases and reverse transcriptases, and motif E, which is downstream of motif D, is conserved in segmented negative-strand RNA viruses [114, 129, 186]. Motifs A, C and D are predicted to bind nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) and are therefore likely to be involved in the catalytic functions of the polymerase [50, 114], while motifs B and E are predicted to take part in template and/or primer positioning [114]. Motif pre-A is also predicted to be involved in template positioning [94, 114]. The fact that the inter-motif distances are more or less constant suggests that the polymerase module functions in a structurally dependent manner [94]. Upstream of the polymerase module are regions 1 and 2 (Fig. 4) which are conserved in bunyaviruses and arenaviruses [94, 114], while downstream of the polymerase module is region 4 (Fig. 4), which, although originally suggested to be specific for bunyaviruses [8], appears to be conserved in other segmented negative-strand RNA viruses [94]. Protein sequence analysis shows that the distances between regions appear to be conserved among bunyaviruses, with the exception of the interval between regions 2 and 3, where nairoviruses appear to have much longer amino acid sequences than other bunyaviruses (Fig. 4). Region 1, based on sequence similarity with other viruses, appears to be responsible for cap-snatching endonuclease activity [52, 136, 189]; however, this needs to be confirmed experimentally.Fig. 4 Schematic representation of the proteins encoded on the L RNA segments of viruses of the family Bunyaviridae. Diagrammatic representation of the L proteins of Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV), Bunyamwera virus (BUNV) and Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) in which all proteins were aligned to the polymerase module (i.e., region 3). All proteins contain four (1-4) conserved regions of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase domain (RdRp), and the conserved motifs (pre-A, A, B, C, D and E) in the polymerase module are also highlighted. However, only the nairovirus L contains the zinc-finger domain and leucine zipper motif. Additionally, the L protein of nairoviruses contains an OTU-like domain (OTU) located at the amino terminus, which contains a topoisomerase-like motif. The approximate size, expressed as the number of amino acids (aa), is indicated for each protein, and the diagram is drawn approximately to scale. See text for details of the various motifs. Adapted from ref. [91]




In the case of nairoviruses, the RdRp accounts for only one-third of the entire L protein (Fig. 4), with regions of unidentified function in both the amino (N) and carboxy (C) termini [94]. All bunyaviruses have a significant C-terminal section after the RdRp, although the function of this region is so far unknown in any of the viruses of this family, and there appear to be no cross-genera-conserved motifs [136]. N-terminal to the RdRp motifs, the L proteins of nairoviruses contain several additional domains that are unique to this genus, of which the ovarian-tumour (OTU)-like protease domain is the most studied [2, 29, 85, 89, 94]. This domain belongs to a larger papain-like cysteine protease family also found in other viruses (e.g., blueberry scorch virus (BlScV) of the genus Carlavirus, and equine arteritis virus (EAV) and porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome virus (PRRSV) of the genus Arterivirus), in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, in Drosophila melanogaster and in mammalian cells [11, 103]. Curiously, the region containing the OTU domain also contains a sequence resembling a topoisomerase-like domain, located at amino acids 85-9, and therefore lying between amino acids that form part of the of the OTU catalytic site – cysteine 40 and histidine 151 [85, 94]. The consensus topoisomerase motif (SKXXY) is not conserved across nairoviruses, being mostly SLXXY in CCHFV and NSDV/GV, but the active-site tyrosine is conserved across all nairoviruses so far sequenced. Given the structural similarities between topoisomerases and strand-specific recombinases [35], this motif may indicate a role for this region of L in RNA strand manipulation as well as its function as a protease. Alternatively, nairovirus L proteins may include their own topoisomerase activity, rather than having to recruit the host-cell topoisomerase I, as has been shown for at least one non-segmented RNA virus [159].

Downstream of the OTU domain, the L protein of nairoviruses contains a C2H2-type zinc finger domain and a leucine zipper motif [85, 94], both of which are highly conserved among nairoviruses, but the function of which in the viral replication cycle is still to be determined. Interestingly, the zinc-finger domain and leucine zipper motif are located in region 1 and region 2, respectively, of the nairoviral L proteins but do not appear to be present in these regions in the L proteins of other bunyaviruses.

The OTU-domain protease activity is dispensable for virus genome replication [16], and most recent studies have focussed on the effects of this enzymatic activity on host proteins. Mammalian OTU-domain proteins are primarily deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs), responsible for cleaving the modified peptide bond that links ubiquitin (Ub) to host-cell proteins or to other Ub molecules. Most mammalian DUBs are only able to deubiquitinate and usually have a limited set of targets that they de-conjugate in this way (reviewed in ref. [96]). The OTU domains of nairoviruses, in contrast, are capable of de-conjugating not only Ub but also other ubiquitin-like peptides, notably the interferon-stimulated gene 15 protein (ISG15), removing these peptides from a variety of protein targets [10, 69, 84]. It has been shown that amino acids 1 to 169 of the L proteins of CCHFV, NSDV or DUGV are sufficient for enzymatic activity, and conserved active site residues that are critical for its catalytic activity have been identified [10, 69, 84]. In the last few years, the crystal structures of the OTU domain with and without a ubiquitin molecule have been determined [2, 29, 89]. The CCHFV OTU showed an overall similar structure to yeast Otu1, but with an additional domain formed by two antiparallel β-strands that allow the viral OTUs to bind both Ub and ISG15 [2, 89].

Specific cleavage targets, other than host ubiquitinated or ISGylated proteins, for the viral OTU-like protease have not yet been described. As several potential cysteine-protease-like cleavage sites have been identified in the L protein sequence of nairoviruses [94] and some viral proteins containing an OTU-like protease domain have also been shown to undergo autoproteolytic cleavage to generate multiple mature proteins, e.g., the replicase of BlScV [98], it has been suggested that the L proteins of nairoviruses may also be autoproteolytically cleaved into an active RNA polymerase and protein(s) with additional function [85]. We have raised specific antibodies to the N- and C-termini of the NSDV L protein and shown that such cleavage does not occur in infected cells (Lasecka and Baron, unpublished).

Controlling host innate immune responses
Early studies on nairoviruses showed that, unlike other bunyaviruses, they do not shut off host protein synthesis [33, 176], so the viruses must have a different way of controlling the immediate host cell responses to infection, such as the innate immune response and apoptosis.

CCHFV infection in cultured cells induced apoptosis, albeit at late stages of infection [91, 141]. One of the ways in which nairoviruses might induce apoptosis has been suggested to be via the induction of ER stress [141]. Certainly CCHFV and DUGV have both been shown to induce ER stress [141], and we have observed the same in cells infected with NSDV (Lasecka, unpublished data). During replication, nairoviruses synthesise large amounts of their glycoproteins, which mature in the ER and Golgi [17, 21, 142] and are likely to overload the normal ER protein synthesis machinery. As long as the apoptosis occurs after the virus has completed the assembly and release of progeny virus, apoptosis is not a major problem, but it is unclear as yet whether nairoviruses take active steps to inhibit apoptotic pathways. There is the possibility that apoptosis may be delayed or inhibited in CCHFV infections by the presence of a highly conserved caspase-3 cleavage site (DEVD) in the N protein [31, 91], which may act as a decoy substrate for caspase-3. Although this motif has been suggested to be involved in control of apoptosis [31, 91], the cleavage of N protein by caspase-3 is not required for replication/transcription of a CCHFV minigenome [31]. In addition, this DEVD motif appears to be inaccessible to caspase-3 in the oligomeric form of CCHFV N, suggesting that only N monomers are caspase-3 sensitive [174]. CCHFV also appears to be the only nairovirus that contains the DEVD motif [174]; other nairoviruses, such as NSDV/GV, do not have the motif, yet are still highly pathogenic.

The innate immune response to viral infection has been described in a number of recent reviews [72, 105, 132, 143]. Cells detect viral pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) (e.g., double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) or DNA with unmethylated CpG motifs) using pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), of which the most well-known are the Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which scan extra-cytoplasmic spaces including the interior of endosomes and lysosomes, and the cytosolic proteins melanoma-associated differentiation gene-5 protein (MDA-5) and retinoic acid-inducible gene-I protein (RIG-I), which detect virus-associated PAMPS in the cytoplasm. Recognition of a PAMP leads to activation of the PRR, followed by an intracellular signalling cascade leading to the transcription of interferon β (IFNβ) mRNA. Secreted IFNβ works in an autocrine and paracrine manner by binding to the IFNα/β receptor of both infected and uninfected cells. This in turn activates a signalling pathway, which up-regulates interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), including IFNα, which increases the stimulus to other ISGs. Finally, the products of ISGs (directly or indirectly) lead to the cell entering the so-called antiviral state, in which many proteins are present that can inhibit different viruses. Interferon and its actions have strong inhibitory effects on the replication of nairoviruses. For instance, treatment of human endothelial cells with IFNα significantly reduced the yield of CCHFV [6], while the replication of CCHFV and DUGV is impaired in Vero cells stably expressing the human Mx (MxA) protein; MxA is the product of an ISG and appears to act through sequestration of the N protein of these viruses in a perinuclear region [4, 25].

However, as with other viruses, nairoviruses have developed mechanisms to evade this innate antiviral response. Some of these mechanisms appear to be unique to one virus; others appear to be common to all the viruses in the genus that have been studied. For example, CCHFV can delay IFNα/β production in infected cells; Andersson et al. showed that, in CCHFV-infected cells, an increase in IFNβ mRNA could only be detected 48 h after infection, which leaves the virus a replication window with no antiviral state [7]. This delay is related to a delay in translocation of the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) to the nucleus [7] and hence a delay in the induction of ISG56, one of the genes whose transcription is regulated by IRF-3. The ISG56 protein is a cytoplasmic protein (p56) that is involved in the global inhibition of translation in response to infection (reviewed in ref. [63]). The delay in ISG56 expression correlates with earlier findings that nairoviruses do not appear to shut off cellular protein synthesis [33, 176]. In contrast to the findings with CCHFV, IFNβ induction was seen in NSDV/GV-infected cells after about 16 hours; however, during those 16 hours, the virus actively blocked induction of IFNβ [84]. NSDV/GV infection also blocked the signalling pathways activated by external IFNα or IFNγ, blocking the activation of transcription from promoters normally activated by one or the other of these cytokines by directly inhibiting the phosphorylation of the transcription factors STAT1 and STAT2 [84].

Of the cytoplasmic PRRs, RIG-I is activated by RNAs with a 5’ triphosphate group, such as viral vRNAs and cRNAs, while MDA-5 is activated by binding dsRNAs [44, 86, 92, 128]. Like other negative-sense RNA viruses, nairoviruses do not produce detectable amounts of dsRNA during replication [178] and hence avoid activation of a number of dsRNA-sensitive PRRs (e.g., MDA-5, TLR3) and dsRNA-dependent enzymes (e.g., dsRNA-activated protein kinase R [PKR] and 2’5’-oligoadenylate synthetase [2’5’ OAS]). The newly synthesised vRNA and cRNA of nairoviruses, as for other bunyaviruses, is cotranscriptionally encapsidated by the N protein, minimising the exposure of vRNAs and preventing formation of dsRNA intermediates [127, 135, 173]. It is thought that the major sensor for bunyavirus infection is therefore RIG-I. 5’triphosphate groups are present on RNA molecules generated during viral replication but are absent on cellular RNAs, as cellular mRNA contains a cap structure at the 5’ end, and the transcription products of other cellular RNA polymerases (RNA polymerases I and III) contain a monophosphate at the 5’ end. By utilising capped, short nucleotide sequences snatched from host mRNA to initiate viral mRNA transcription [90], nairoviruses prevent recognition of viral mRNA by PRRs. CCHFV further avoids activation of RIG-I as its vRNA and cRNA have a monophosphate group rather than the triphosphate group found at the 5’ end of most viral RNAs [78], though the mechanism of 5’ monophosphate generation during replication of CCHFV remains unknown. Strategies to generate 5’monophosphates on viral RNA have been shown for other viruses: HTNV utilises a prime-and-realign mechanism to generate 5’ and 3’ complementary ends, where a viral endonuclease (which is probably also involved in cap-snatching) is proposed to remove 5’-terminal extensions, leading to a 5’ monophosphate on the final RNA [73]. Interestingly, this mechanism is not common to all bunyaviruses, as RVFV was shown to contain triphosphate groups at the 5’ ends of its vRNAs, which can activate IFNβ via the RIG-I pathway [78]. It will be interesting to see if other nairoviruses adopt the RNA processing seen for CCHFV. It is possible that bunyaviruses that have developed methods of blocking the RIG-I-activated pathway (e.g., by the activities of a non-structural protein such as the phlebovirus NSs protein) can have triphosphates at the 5’ end of their vRNAs while viruses that do not have an NSs activity must generate monophosphates to avoid activating the RIG-I pathway in the first place [18, 19, 23, 73].

Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like molecules play important roles in the initiation and maintenance of immune response. For example, they are essential for the action of cytokines such as IFNα/β and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) (reviewed in ref. [95]). Ubiquitination allows for the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) by targeting the inhibitor of NF-κB (I-κB) for degradation [163]. K63-linked ubiquitination activates several molecules of the IFNβ induction pathway, including RIG-I, mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein (MAVS), TANK-binding kinase-1 (TBK1), IκB kinase-ε (IKK-ε), tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) and TRAF6 [70, 125, 126, 166]. In addition to modulation of the innate immune signalling, ubiquitination also plays an important role in antigen presentation by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II proteins [152]. ISG15 is an IFN-induced 15-kDa ubiquitin-like molecule that is composed of two-ubiquitin-like domains [20, 117]. Although the precise role of ISG15 in modulation of protein function is unknown, conjugation by ISG15 is also known to modify hundreds of cellular proteins, including several of those involved in the antiviral response, e.g., PKR, MxA, STAT1, RIG-I, Janus kinase 1 (JAK1), and IRF-3 [75, 104, 138, 192].

Both Ub and ISG15 are synthesised as precursors, which are cleaved in order to expose the conjugation sequence (LRLRGG) by which they are attached to other proteins. The conjugation is mediated by a sequence involving activating enzymes (E1), conjugating enzymes (E2) and protein ligases (E3) [157, 180, 191] (reviewed in ref. [169]). Removal of these conjugated proteins is carried out by cellular deubiquitinating enzymes and deISGylating enzymes, which have roles, as expected, in negative feedback regulation of IFN induction and action [93, 99]. As described in the discussion of the nairovirus L protein, the N-terminus of these proteins contains an OTU protease-like domain [85] similar to that often found in mammalian DUBs, and experimental evidence showed that this protease domain in the viral protein indeed deconjugated Ub and ISG15. Global ubiquitination and ISGylation levels were greatly reduced in NSDV/GV-infected cells [84], and overexpression of the amino-terminal end of the L proteins of CCHFV, NSDV or DUGV in cell culture resulted in a similar reduction in ubiquitin- and ISG15-conjugated proteins [10, 30, 69, 84]. The L protein OTU domains of several nairoviruses have been shown to block IFNβ induction and the actions of type I and type II IFNs [10, 69, 84]. Interestingly, at high enough concentrations, even catalytically inactive OTUs are capable of blocking IFNα-induced transcription [10, 69]. This suggests that catalytically inactive OTU domain proteins are still capable of sequestering specific ubiquitinated or ISG15ylated targets by binding to them.

The nsp2 protein of EAV and PRRSV also contain OTU-like domains [69]. Recently, it was shown that both the nsp2 of EAV and the OTU domain of CCHFV L protein are able to deubiquitinate RIG-I and hence block RIG-I-mediated activation of IFNβ [168]. Interestingly, the RNA of neither CCHFV nor EAV appears to activate RIG-I [78, 168], so the fact that these viruses have evolved specific mechanisms to inhibit the RIG-I-mediated induction of IFNβ suggests that RIG-I still has a function in the antiviral response to these viruses. However, unlike CCHFV, the vRNA of NSDV/GV does activate transcription from the IFNβ promoter (Lasecka and Baron, unpublished observations). The ability to directly block the RIG-I pathway would therefore be particularly important for this virus.

Comparison of the OTU domains of different nairoviruses revealed some differences between their affinity for different types of poly-Ub and ISG15 [30]. For instance, CCHFV shows a higher affinity for K63-poly-Ub than K48-poly-Ub, and the CCHFV OTU was more active in the deubiquitination of host proteins than the OTUs of either NSDV or DUGV [10, 30, 84]. On the other hand, while the ERVEV OTU appears to bind any poly-Ub weakly (when compared to those of CCHFV and DUGV), it had higher affinity for ISG15 [30]. This may indicate that different nairoviruses have adopted slightly different ways of utilising their core deubiquitinating and deISGylating activities, which might reflect the wide range of pathogenicity caused by these viruses, or differences in the requirements imposed on these viruses by their arthropod hosts, about which we know very little. ISG15 is not as strongly conserved as ubiquitin among different species, even mammals, so there can be real effects of species preference in ISG15 binding/cleavage, e.g., the CCHFV OTU appears to show a preference for ISG15 of human origin over that of mouse origin, while ERVEV appears to recognise both human and mouse ISG15s equally [30]. The better binding of the murine ISG15 by the ERVEV OTU may be associated with the homology between the ISG15 of mouse and the white-toothed shrew from which ERVEV is commonly isolated [34, 184].

Final remarks
Nairoviruses share many of their features with other bunyaviruses, e.g., replication in the cytoplasm, budding in the Golgi, and their coding and RNA replication strategy. From phylogenetic studies, the members of the genus Nairovirus appear to be most closely related to those of the genus Phlebovirus of all bunyaviruses [108, 131, 139, 177]. However, nairoviruses possess many features not found in other bunyaviruses. Nairoviruses appear to have complex processing of their glycoproteins, which involves the actions of cellular proteases such as SKI-1/S1P-like proteases and furin. The proteins of nairoviruses also contain domains that have not been observed in other bunyaviruses, such as the L protein OTU domain. Nairoviruses express a secreted mucin-like domain, which may play an essential role in the pathogenicity of the virus [154, 188]. Structural similarity between the nairovirus N protein globular domain or the RdRp region of its L protein and equivalent proteins of arenaviruses has been taken to suggest that the nairoviruses are more closely related to arenaviruses than to members other genera of the family Bunyaviridae [31, 170], with some authors even suggesting that the current classification of the Nairoviridae might need re-evaluation in the future [31].

Several areas for future study stand out. Given that the nairoviruses are, in general, tick-borne, while most other bunyaviruses are insect-borne, it is to be expected that the interaction of these viruses with their arthropod hosts will be specific to the virus genus and need specific study. Fortunately, expertise with handling ixodid ticks and tick cell lines is rapidly increasing, and it is to be hoped that our understanding of the replication of these viruses in their tick hosts will catch up with our knowledge of what is happening in mammals. The nairoviruses have been more resistant to the development of successful reverse genetics than e.g. the orthobunyaviruses or the phleboviruses, and development of such a system for nairoviruses will be invaluable in helping us understand the roles of various nairovirus-specific domains such as the topoisomerase-like domain, C2H2-zinc finger domain, leucine zipper motif, and OTU domain of the L protein, or the NSM and mucin-like domain from the M segment, both in mammalian and arthropod hosts. The ability to create targeted mutations will also enable us to more rapidly develop stably attenuated viruses that could act as vaccines.

The laboratory of MDB receives funding from the UK Biotechnology and Biological Science Research Council (BBSRC). LL was the recipient of a BBSRC PhD studentship.
==== Refs
References
1. Ahmed AA  McFalls JM  Hoffmann C  Filone CM  Stewart SM  Paragas J  Khodjaev S  Shermukhamedova D  Schmaljohn CS  Doms RW  Bertolotti-Ciarlet A   Presence of broadly reactive and group-specific neutralizing epitopes on newly described isolates of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus J Gen Virol 2005 86 3327 3336 16298978 
2. Akutsu M  Ye Y  Virdee S  Chin JW  Komander D   Molecular basis for ubiquitin and ISG15 cross-reactivity in viral ovarian tumor domains Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 108 2228 2233 21266548 
3. Altamura LA  Bertolotti-Ciarlet A  Teigler J  Paragas J  Schmaljohn CS  Doms RW   Identification of a novel C-terminal cleavage of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus PreGN that leads to generation of an NSM protein J Virol 2007 81 6632 6642 17409136 
4. Andersson I  Bladh L  Mousavi-Jazi M  Magnusson KE  Lundkvist A  Haller O  Mirazimi A   Human MxA protein inhibits the replication of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus J Virol 2004 78 4323 4329 15047845 
5. Andersson I  Simon M  Lundkvist A  Nilsson M  Holmstrom A  Elgh F  Mirazimi A   Role of actin filaments in targeting of Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus nucleocapsid protein to perinuclear regions of mammalian cells J Med Virol 2004 72 83 93 14635015 
6. Andersson I  Lundkvist A  Haller O  Mirazimi A   Type I interferon inhibits Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus in human target cells J Med Virol 2006 78 216 222 16372299 
7. Andersson I  Karlberg H  Mousavi-Jazi M  Martinez-Sobrido L  Weber F  Mirazimi A   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus delays activation of the innate immune response J Med Virol 2008 80 1397 1404 18551619 
8. Aquino VH  Moreli ML  Moraes Figueiredo LT   Analysis of oropouche virus L protein amino acid sequence showed the presence of an additional conserved region that could harbour an important role for the polymerase activity Arch Virol 2003 148 19 28 12536293 
9. Ariza A  Tanner SJ  Walter CT  Dent KC  Shepherd DA  Wu W  Matthews SV  Hiscox JA  Green TJ  Luo M  Elliott RM  Fooks AR  Ashcroft AE  Stonehouse NJ  Ranson NA  Barr JN  Edwards TA   Nucleocapsid protein structures from orthobunyaviruses reveal insight into ribonucleoprotein architecture and RNA polymerization Nucleic Acids Res 2013 41 5912 5926 23595147 
10. Bakshi S  Holzer B  Bridgen A  McMullan G  Quinn DG  Baron MD   Dugbe virus ovarian tumour domain interferes with ubiquitin/ISG15-regulated innate immune cell signalling J Gen Virol 2013 94 298 307 23136361 
11. Balakirev MY  Tcherniuk SO  Jaquinod M  Chroboczek J   Otubains: a new family of cysteine proteases in the ubiquitin pathway EMBO Rep 2003 4 517 522 12704427 
12. Banerjee AK   5’-terminal cap structure in eucaryotic messenger ribonucleic acids Microbiol Rev 1980 44 175 205 6247631 
13. Banerjee K  Gupta NP  Goverdhan MK   Viral infections in laboratory personnel Indian J Med Res 1979 69 363 373 447375 
14. Barr JN  Wertz GW   Role of the conserved nucleotide mismatch within 3’- and 5’-terminal regions of Bunyamwera virus in signaling transcription J Virol 2005 79 3586 3594 15731253 
15. Bergeron E  Vincent MJ  Nichol ST   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus glycoprotein processing by the endoprotease SKI-1/S1P is critical for virus infectivity J Virol 2007 81 13271 13276 17898072 
16. Bergeron E  Albarino CG  Khristova ML  Nichol ST   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus-encoded ovarian tumor protease activity is dispensable for virus RNA polymerase function J Virol 2010 84 216 226 19864393 
17. Bertolotti-Ciarlet A  Smith J  Strecker K  Paragas J  Altamura LA  McFalls JM  Frias-Staheli N  Garcia-Sastre A  Schmaljohn CS  Doms RW   Cellular localization and antigenic characterization of crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever virus glycoproteins J Virol 2005 79 6152 6161 15858000 
18. Billecocq A  Spiegel M  Vialat P  Kohl A  Weber F  Bouloy M  Haller O   NSs protein of Rift Valley fever virus blocks interferon production by inhibiting host gene transcription J Virol 2004 78 9798 9806 15331713 
19. Blakqori G  Delhaye S  Habjan M  Blair CD  Sanchez-Vargas I  Olson KE  Attarzadeh-Yazdi G  Fragkoudis R  Kohl A  Kalinke U  Weiss S  Michiels T  Staeheli P  Weber F   La Crosse bunyavirus nonstructural protein NSs serves to suppress the type I interferon system of mammalian hosts J Virol 2007 81 4991 4999 17344298 
20. Blomstrom DC  Fahey D  Kutny R  Korant BD  Knight E Jr   Molecular characterization of the interferon-induced 15-kDa protein. Molecular cloning and nucleotide and amino acid sequence J Biol Chem 1986 261 8811 8816 3087979 
21. Booth TF  Gould EA  Nuttall PA   Structure and morphogenesis of Dugbe virus (Bunyaviridae, Nairovirus) studied by immunogold electron microscopy of ultrathin cryosections Virus Res 1991 21 199 212 1767584 
22. Bose S  Basu M  Banerjee AK   Role of nucleolin in human parainfluenza virus type 3 infection of human lung epithelial cells J Virol 2004 78 8146 8158 15254186 
23. Bouloy M  Janzen C  Vialat P  Khun H  Pavlovic J  Huerre M  Haller O   Genetic evidence for an interferon-antagonistic function of rift valley fever virus nonstructural protein NSs J Virol 2001 75 1371 1377 11152510 
24. Bridgen A  Dalrymple DA  Elliott RM   Dugbe nairovirus S segment: correction of published sequence and comparison of five isolates Virology 2002 294 364 371 12009878 
25. Bridgen A  Dalrymple DA  Weber F  Elliott RM   Inhibition of Dugbe nairovirus replication by human MxA protein Virus Res 2004 99 47 50 14687945 
26. Burney MI  Ghafoor A  Saleen M  Webb PA  Casals J   Nosocomial outbreak of viral hemorrhagic fever caused by Crimean Hemorrhagic fever-Congo virus in Pakistan, January 1976 Am J Trop Med Hyg 1980 29 941 947 7435795 
27. Burt FJ  Spencer DC  Leman PA  Patterson B  Swanepoel R   Investigation of tick-borne viruses as pathogens of humans in South Africa and evidence of Dugbe virus infection in a patient with prolonged thrombocytopenia Epidemiol Infect 1996 116 353 361 8666081 
28. Burt FJ  Swanepoel R  Shieh WJ  Smith JF  Leman PA  Greer PW  Coffield LM  Rollin PE  Ksiazek TG  Peters CJ  Zaki SR   Immunohistochemical and in situ localization of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus in human tissues and implications for CCHF pathogenesis Arch Pathol Lab Med 1997 121 839 846 9278612 
29. Capodagli GC  McKercher MA  Baker EA  Masters EM  Brunzelle JS  Pegan SD   Structural analysis of a viral ovarian tumor domain protease from the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus in complex with covalently bonded ubiquitin J Virol 2011 85 3621 3630 21228232 
30. Capodagli GC  Deaton MK  Baker EA  Lumpkin RJ  Pegan SD   Diversity of ubiquitin and ISG15 specificity among nairoviruses’ viral ovarian tumor domain proteases J Virol 2013 87 3815 3827 23345508 
31. Carter SD  Surtees R  Walter CT  Ariza A  Bergeron E  Nichol ST  Hiscox JA  Edwards TA  Barr JN   Structure, function, and evolution of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus nucleocapsid protein J Virol 2012 86 10914 10923 22875964 
32. Casals J  Tignor GH   The Nairovirus genus: serological relationships Intervirology 1980 14 144 147 7239854 
33. Cash P   Polypeptide synthesis of Dugbe virus, a member of the Nairovirus genus of the Bunyaviridae J Gen Virol 1985 66 Pt 1 141 148 3968534 
34. Chastel C  Main AJ  Richard P  Le Lay G  Legrand-Quillien MC  Beaucournu JC   Erve virus, a probable member of Bunyaviridae family isolated from shrews (Crocidura russula) in France Acta Virol 1989 33 270 280 2570514 
35. Cheng C  Kussie P  Pavletich N  Shuman S   Conservation of structure and mechanism between eukaryotic topoisomerase I and site-specific recombinases Cell 1998 92 841 850 9529259 
36. Christian S  Pilch J  Akerman ME  Porkka K  Laakkonen P  Ruoslahti E   Nucleolin expressed at the cell surface is a marker of endothelial cells in angiogenic blood vessels J Cell Biol 2003 163 871 878 14638862 
37. Clerex-van Haaster CM  Clerex JP  Ushijima H  Akashi H  Fuller F  Bishop DH   The 3’ terminal RNA sequences of bunyaviruses and nairoviruses (Bunyaviridae): evidence of end sequence generic differences within the virus family J Gen Virol 1982 61 289 293 7119754 
38. Clerx JP  Bishop DH   Qalyub virus, a member of the newly proposed Nairovirus genus (Bunyavividae) Virology 1981 108 361 372 7467125 
39. Clerx JP  Casals J  Bishop DH   Structural characteristics of nairoviruses (genus Nairovirus, Bunyaviridae) J Gen Virol 1981 55 165 178 7299367 
40. Connolly SA  Jackson JO  Jardetzky TS  Longnecker R   Fusing structure and function: a structural view of the herpesvirus entry machinery Nature Rev Microbiol 2011 9 369 381 21478902 
41. Converse JD  Hoogstraal H  Moussa MI  Casals J  Kaiser MN   Pretoria virus: a new African agent in the tickborne Dera Ghazi Khan (DGK) group and antigenic relationships within the DGK group J Med Entomol 1975 12 202 205 1159743 
42. Converse JD  Hoogstraal H  Moussa MI  Feare CJ  Kaiser MN   Soldado virus (Hughes group) from Ornithodoros (Alectorobius) capensis (Ixodoidea: Argasidae) infesting Sooty Tern colonies in the Seychelles, Indian Ocean Am J Trop Med Hyg 1975 24 1010 1018 1200252 
43. Crabtree MB  Sang R  Miller BR   Kupe virus, a new virus in the family bunyaviridae, genus nairovirus, kenya Emerg Infect Dis 2009 15 147 154 19193256 
44. Cui S  Eisenacher K  Kirchhofer A  Brzozka K  Lammens A  Lammens K  Fujita T  Conzelmann KK  Krug A  Hopfner KP   The C-terminal regulatory domain is the RNA 5’-triphosphate sensor of RIG-I Mol Cell 2008 29 169 179 18243112 
45. Dandawate CN  Work TH  Webb JK  Shah KV   Isolation of Ganjam virus from a human case of febrile illness: a report of a laboratory infection and serological survey of human sera from three different states of India Indian J Med Res 1969 57 975 982 5823182 
46. David-West TS  Porterfield JS   Dugbe virus: a tick-borne arbovirus from Nigeria J Gen Virol 1974 23 297 307 4365798 
47. Davies FG  Casals J  Jesset DM  Ochieng P   The serological relationships of Nairobi sheep disease virus J Comp Pathol 1978 88 519 523 101557 
48. de Haan P  Kormelink R  de Oliveira Resende R  van Poelwijk F  Peters D  Goldbach R   Tomato spotted wilt virus L RNA encodes a putative RNA polymerase J Gen Virol 1991 72 Pt 9 2207 2216 1895058 
49. de Verdugo UR  Selinka HC  Huber M  Kramer B  Kellermann J  Hofschneider PH  Kandolf R   Characterization of a 100-kilodalton binding protein for the six serotypes of coxsackie B viruses J Virol 1995 69 6751 6757 7474086 
50. Delarue M  Poch O  Tordo N  Moras D  Argos P   An attempt to unify the structure of polymerases Protein Eng 1990 3 461 467 2196557 
51. Deyde VM  Khristova ML  Rollin PE  Ksiazek TG  Nichol ST   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus genomics and global diversity J Virol 2006 80 8834 8842 16912331 
52. Dias A  Bouvier D  Crepin T  McCarthy AA  Hart DJ  Baudin F  Cusack S  Ruigrok RW   The cap-snatching endonuclease of influenza virus polymerase resides in the PA subunit Nature 2009 458 914 918 19194459 
53. Drosten C  Minnak D  Emmerich P  Schmitz H  Reinicke T   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever in Kosovo J Clin Microbiol 2002 40 1122 1123 11880460 
54. Dunster L  Dunster M  Ofula V  Beti D  Kazooba-Voskamp F  Burt F  Swanepoel R  DeCock KM   First documentation of human Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Kenya Emerg Infect Dis 2002 8 1005 1006 12194785 
55. el-Azazy OM  Scrimgeour EM   Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus infection in the western province of Saudi Arabia Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1997 91 275 278 9231193 
56. Elagoz A  Benjannet S  Mammarbassi A  Wickham L  Seidah NG   Biosynthesis and cellular trafficking of the convertase SKI-1/S1P: ectodomain shedding requires SKI-1 activity J Biol Chem 2002 277 11265 11275 11756446 
57. Ellis DS  Southee T  Lloyd G  Platt GS  Jones N  Stamford S  Bowen ET  Simpson DI   Congo/Crimean haemorrhagic fever virus from Iraq 1979: I. Morphology in BHK21 cells Arch Virol 1981 70 189 198 6798952 
58. Ergonul O   Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever Lancet Infect Dis 2006 6 203 214 16554245 
59. Erickson BR  Deyde V  Sanchez AJ  Vincent MJ  Nichol ST   N-linked glycosylation of Gn (but not Gc) is important for Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus glycoprotein localization and transport Virology 2007 361 348 355 17197010 
60. Estrada DF  Boudreaux DM  Zhong D  St Jeor SC  De Guzman RN   The Hantavirus Glycoprotein G1 Tail Contains Dual CCHC-type Classical Zinc Fingers J Biol Chem 2009 284 8654 8660 19179334 
61. Estrada DF  De Guzman RN   Structural characterization of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus Gn tail provides insight into virus assembly J Biol Chem 2011 286 21678 21686 21507948 
62. Feng H  Beck J  Nassal M  Hu KH   A SELEX-screened aptamer of human hepatitis B virus RNA encapsidation signal suppresses viral replication PLoS One 2011 6 e27862 22125633 
63. Fensterl V  Sen GC   The ISG56/IFIT1 gene family J Interferon Cytokine Res 2011 31 71 78 20950130 
64. Ferron F  Li Z  Danek EI  Luo D  Wong Y  Coutard B  Lantez V  Charrel R  Canard B  Walz T  Lescar J   The hexamer structure of Rift Valley fever virus nucleoprotein suggests a mechanism for its assembly into ribonucleoprotein complexes PLoS Pathog 2011 7 e1002030 21589902 
65. Flick R  Pettersson RF   Reverse genetics system for Uukuniemi virus (Bunyaviridae): RNA polymerase I-catalyzed expression of chimeric viral RNAs J Virol 2001 75 1643 1655 11160662 
66. Flick R  Elgh F  Pettersson RF   Mutational analysis of the Uukuniemi virus (Bunyaviridae family) promoter reveals two elements of functional importance J Virol 2002 76 10849 10860 12368328 
67. Flick R  Flick K  Feldmann H  Elgh F   Reverse genetics for crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever virus J Virol 2003 77 5997 6006 12719591 
68. Foulke RS  Rosato RR  French GR   Structural polypeptides of Hazara virus J Gen Virol 1981 53 169 172 7276913 
69. Frias-Staheli N  Giannakopoulos NV  Kikkert M  Taylor SL  Bridgen A  Paragas J  Richt JA  Rowland RR  Schmaljohn CS  Lenschow DJ  Snijder EJ  Garcia-Sastre A  Virgin HWt   Ovarian tumor domain-containing viral proteases evade ubiquitin- and ISG15-dependent innate immune responses Cell Host Microbe 2007 2 404 416 18078692 
70. Gack MU  Shin YC  Joo CH  Urano T  Liang C  Sun L  Takeuchi O  Akira S  Chen Z  Inoue S  Jung JU   TRIM25 RING-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase is essential for RIG-I-mediated antiviral activity Nature 2007 446 916 920 17392790 
71. Gamsjaeger R  Liew CK  Loughlin FE  Crossley M  Mackay JP   Sticky fingers: zinc-fingers as protein-recognition motifs Trends Biochem Sci 2007 32 63 70 17210253 
72. Garcia-Sastre A  Biron CA   Type 1 interferons and the virus-host relationship: a lesson in detente Science 2006 312 879 882 16690858 
73. Garcin D  Lezzi M  Dobbs M  Elliott RM  Schmaljohn C  Kang CY  Kolakofsky D   The 5’ ends of Hantaan virus (Bunyaviridae) RNAs suggest a prime-and-realign mechanism for the initiation of RNA synthesis J Virol 1995 69 5754 5762 7637020 
74. Garrison AR  Radoshitzky SR  Kota KP  Pegoraro G  Ruthel G  Kuhn JH  Altamura LA  Kwilas SA  Bavari S  Haucke V  Schmaljohn CS   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus utilizes a clathrin- and early endosome-dependent entry pathway Virology 2013 444 45 54 23791227 
75. Giannakopoulos NV  Luo JK  Papov V  Zou W  Lenschow DJ  Jacobs BS  Borden EC  Li J  Virgin HW  Zhang DE   Proteomic identification of proteins conjugated to ISG15 in mouse and human cells Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005 336 496 506 16139798 
76. Gould EA  Chanas AC  Buckley A  Varma MG   Immunofluorescence studies on the antigenic interrelationships of the Hughes virus serogroup (genus Nairovirus) and identification of a new strain J Gen Virol 1983 64 Pt 3 739 742 6338152 
77. Guo Y  Wang W  Ji W  Deng M  Sun Y  Zhou H  Yang C  Deng F  Wang H  Hu Z  Lou Z  Rao Z   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus nucleoprotein reveals endonuclease activity in bunyaviruses Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012 109 5046 5051 22421137 
78. Habjan M  Andersson I  Klingstrom J  Schumann M  Martin A  Zimmermann P  Wagner V  Pichlmair A  Schneider U  Muhlberger E  Mirazimi A  Weber F   Processing of genome 5’ termini as a strategy of negative-strand RNA viruses to avoid RIG-I-dependent interferon induction PLoS One 2008 3 e2032 18446221 
79. Hastie KM  Kimberlin CR  Zandonatti MA  MacRae IJ  Saphire EO   Structure of the Lassa virus nucleoprotein reveals a dsRNA-specific 3’ to 5’ exonuclease activity essential for immune suppression Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 108 2396 2401 21262835 
80. Hastie KM  Liu T  Li S  King LB  Ngo N  Zandonatti MA  Woods VL Jr  de la Torre JC  Saphire EO   Crystal structure of the Lassa virus nucleoprotein-RNA complex reveals a gating mechanism for RNA binding Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 108 19365 19370 22084115 
81. Hauri H  Appenzeller C  Kuhn F  Nufer O   Lectins and traffic in the secretory pathway FEBS Lett 2000 476 32 37 10878245 
82. Helenius A  Aebi M   Intracellular functions of N-linked glycans Science 2001 291 2364 2369 11269317 
83. Hirano K  Miki Y  Hirai Y  Sato R  Itoh T  Hayashi A  Yamanaka M  Eda S  Beppu M   A multifunctional shuttling protein nucleolin is a macrophage receptor for apoptotic cells J Biol Chem 2005 280 39284 39293 16135517 
84. Holzer B  Bakshi S  Bridgen A  Baron MD   Inhibition of interferon induction and action by the nairovirus Nairobi sheep disease virus/Ganjam virus PLoS One 2011 6 e28594 22163042 
85. Honig JE  Osborne JC  Nichol ST   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus genome L RNA segment and encoded protein Virology 2004 321 29 35 15033562 
86. Hornung V  Ellegast J  Kim S  Brzozka K  Jung A  Kato H  Poeck H  Akira S  Conzelmann KK  Schlee M  Endres S  Hartmann G   5’-Triphosphate RNA is the ligand for RIG-I Science 2006 314 994 997 17038590 
87. Hunt SD  Stephens DJ   The role of motor proteins in endosomal sorting Biochem Soc Trans 2011 39 1179 1184 21936785 
88. Imelli N  Meier O  Boucke K  Hemmi S  Greber UF   Cholesterol is required for endocytosis and endosomal escape of adenovirus type 2 J Virol 2004 78 3089 3098 14990728 
89. James TW  Frias-Staheli N  Bacik JP  Levingston Macleod JM  Khajehpour M  Garcia-Sastre A  Mark BL   Structural basis for the removal of ubiquitin and interferon-stimulated gene 15 by a viral ovarian tumor domain-containing protease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 108 2222 2227 21245344 
90. Jin H  Elliott RM   Non-viral sequences at the 5’ ends of Dugbe nairovirus S mRNAs J Gen Virol 1993 74 Pt 10 2293 2297 8409954 
91. Karlberg H  Tan YJ  Mirazimi A   Induction of caspase activation and cleavage of the viral nucleocapsid protein in different cell types during Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus infection J Biol Chem 2011 286 3227 3234 21123175 
92. Kato H  Takeuchi O  Sato S  Yoneyama M  Yamamoto M  Matsui K  Uematsu S  Jung A  Kawai T  Ishii KJ  Yamaguchi O  Otsu K  Tsujimura T  Koh CS  Reis e Sousa C  Matsuura Y  Fujita t  Akira S   Differential roles of MDA5 and RIG-I helicases in the recognition of RNA viruses Nature 2006 441 101 105 16625202 
93. Kayagaki N  Phung Q  Chan S  Chaudhari R  Quan C  O’Rourke KM  Eby M  Pietras E  Cheng G  Bazan JF  Zhang Z  Arnott D  Dixit VM   DUBA: a deubiquitinase that regulates type I interferon production Science 2007 318 1628 1632 17991829 
94. Kinsella E  Martin SG  Grolla A  Czub M  Feldmann H  Flick R   Sequence determination of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus L segment Virology 2004 321 23 28 15033561 
95. Kirkin V  Dikic I   Role of ubiquitin- and Ubl-binding proteins in cell signaling Curr Opin Cell Biol 2007 19 199 205 17303403 
96. Komander D  Clague MJ  Urbe S   Breaking the chains: structure and function of the deubiquitinases Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 10 550 563 19626045 
97. Labahn J  Granzin J  Schluckebier G  Robinson DP  Jack WE  Schildkraut I  Saenger W   Three-dimensional structure of the adenine-specific DNA methyltransferase M.Taq I in complex with the cofactor S-adenosylmethionine Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994 91 10957 10961 7971991 
98. Lawrence DM  Rozanov MN  Hillman BI   Autocatalytic processing of the 223-kDa protein of blueberry scorch carlavirus by a papain-like proteinase Virology 1995 207 127 135 7871721 
99. Li S  Zheng H  Mao AP  Zhong B  Li Y  Liu Y  Gao Y  Ran Y  Tien P  Shu HB   Regulation of virus-triggered signaling by OTUB1- and OTUB2-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF3 and TRAF6 J Biol Chem 2010 285 4291 4297 19996094 
100. Lopez N  Muller R  Prehaud C  Bouloy M   The L protein of Rift Valley fever virus can rescue viral ribonucleoproteins and transcribe synthetic genome-like RNA molecules J Virol 1995 69 3972 3979 7769655 
101. Luini A  Mironov AA  Polishchuk EV  Polishchuk RS   Morphogenesis of post-Golgi transport carriers Histochem Cell Biol 2008 129 153 161 18214517 
102. Major L  Linn ML  Slade RW  Schroder WA  Hyatt AD  Gardner J  Cowley J  Suhrbier A   Ticks associated with macquarie island penguins carry arboviruses from four genera PLoS ONE 2009 4 e4375 19194498 
103. Makarova KS  Aravind L  Koonin EV   A novel superfamily of predicted cysteine proteases from eukaryotes, viruses and Chlamydia pneumoniae Trends Biochem Sci 2000 25 50 52 10664582 
104. Malakhov MP  Kim KI  Malakhova OA  Jacobs BS  Borden EC  Zhang DE   High-throughput immunoblotting. Ubiquitiin-like protein ISG15 modifies key regulators of signal transduction J Biol Chem 2003 278 16608 16613 12582176 
105. Malmgaard L  Melchjorsen J  Bowie AG  Mogensen SC  Paludan SR   Viral activation of macrophages through TLR-dependent and -independent pathways J Immunol 2004 173 6890 6898 15557184 
106. Marczinke BI  Nichol ST   Nairobi sheep disease virus, an important tick-borne pathogen of sheep and goats in Africa, is also present in Asia Virology 2002 303 146 151 12482666 
107. Marriott AC  el-Ghorr AA  Nuttall PA   Dugbe Nairovirus M RNA: nucleotide sequence and coding strategy Virology 1992 190 606 615 1387749 
108. Marriott AC  Nuttall PA   Large RNA segment of Dugbe nairovirus encodes the putative RNA polymerase J Gen Virol 1996 77 Pt 8 1775 1780 8760425 
109. Marriott AC  Nuttall PA   Elliott EM   Molecular Biology of Nairoviruses The Bunyaviridae 1996 New York, London Plenum Press 91 104 
110. Mir MA  Brown B  Hjelle B  Duran WA  Panganiban AT   Hantavirus N protein exhibits genus-specific recognition of the viral RNA panhandle J Virol 2006 80 11283 11292 16971445 
111. Mohl BP  Barr JN   Investigating the specificity and stoichiometry of RNA binding by the nucleocapsid protein of Bunyamwera virus RNA 2009 15 391 399 19168749 
112. Molinari M  Helenius A   Chaperone selection during glycoprotein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum Science 2000 288 331 333 10764645 
113. Montgomery RE   On a tick-borne gastroenteritis of sheep and goats occurring in British East Africa J Comp Pathol 1917 30 28 57 
114. Muller R  Poch O  Delarue M  Bishop DH  Bouloy M   Rift Valley fever virus L segment: correction of the sequence and possible functional role of newly identified regions conserved in RNA-dependent polymerases J Gen Virol 1994 75 Pt 6 1345 1352 7515937 
115. Nabeth P  Thior M  Faye O  Simon F   Human Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Senegal Emerg Infect Dis 2004 10 1881 1882 15565746 
116. Nakayama K   Furin: a mammalian subtilisin/Kex2p-like endoprotease involved in processing of a wide variety of precursor proteins Biochem J 1997 327 Pt 3 625 635 9599222 
117. Narasimhan J  Wang M  Fu Z  Klein JM  Haas AL  Kim JJ   Crystal structure of the interferon-induced ubiquitin-like protein ISG15 J Biol Chem 2005 280 27356 27365 15917233 
118. Nisole S  Said EA  Mische C  Prevost MC  Krust B  Bouvet P  Bianco A  Briand JP  Hovanessian AG   The anti-HIV pentameric pseudopeptide HB-19 binds the C-terminal end of nucleolin and prevents anchorage of virus particles in the plasma membrane of target cells J Biol Chem 2002 277 20877 20886 11919179 
119. Niu Y  Zhao X  Wu YS  Li MM  Wang XJ  Yang YG   N6-methyl-adenosine (m6A) in RNA: an old modification with a novel epigenetic function Genomics Proteomics Bioinform 2013 11 8 17 
120. Osborne JC  Elliott RM   RNA binding properties of bunyamwera virus nucleocapsid protein and selective binding to an element in the 5’ terminus of the negative-sense S segment J Virol 2000 74 9946 9952 11024122 
121. Papa A  Ma B  Kouidou S  Tang Q  Hang C  Antoniadis A   Genetic characterization of the M RNA segment of Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus strains, China Emerg Infect Dis 2002 8 50 53 11749748 
122. Papa A  Christova I  Papadimitriou E  Antoniadis A   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever in Bulgaria Emerg Infect Dis 2004 10 1465 1467 15496250 
123. Papa A, Dalla V, Papadimitriou E, Kartalis GN, Antoniadis A (2009) Emergence of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in Greece. Clin Microbiol Infect (Epub ahead of print)
124. Papa A  Velo E  Papadimitriou E  Cahani G  Kota M  Bino S   Ecology of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever endemic area in Albania Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2009 9 713 716 19402760 
125. Parvatiyar K  Barber GN  Harhaj EW   TAX1BP1 and A20 inhibit antiviral signaling by targeting TBK1-IKKi kinases J Biol Chem 2010 285 14999 15009 20304918 
126. Paz S  Vilasco M  Arguello M  Sun Q  Lacoste J  Nguyen TL  Zhao T  Shestakova EA  Zaari S  Bibeau-Poirier A  Servant MJ  Lin R  Meurs EF  Hiscott J   Ubiquitin-regulated recruitment of IkappaB kinase epsilon to the MAVS interferon signaling adapter Mol Cell Biol 2009 29 3401 3412 19380491 
127. Pettersson RF  von Bonsdorff CH   Ribonucleoproteins of Uukuniemi virus are circular J Virol 1975 15 386 392 1167604 
128. Pichlmair A  Schulz O  Tan CP  Naslund TI  Liljestrom P  Weber F  Reis e Sousa C   RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses to single-stranded RNA bearing 5’-phosphates Science 2006 314 997 1001 17038589 
129. Poch O  Sauvaget I  Delarue M  Tordo N   Identification of four conserved motifs among the RNA-dependent polymerase encoding elements EMBO J 1989 8 3867 3874 2555175 
130. Qi X  Lan S  Wang W  Schelde LM  Dong H  Wallat GD  Ly H  Liang Y  Dong C   Cap binding and immune evasion revealed by Lassa nucleoprotein structure Nature 2010 468 779 783 21085117 
131. Quinan BR  de Brito Magalhaes CL  Novaes RF  Dos Santos JR  Kroon EG  Bonjardim CA  Ferreira PC   Sequence and phylogenetic analysis of the large (L) segment of the Tahyna virus genome Virus Genes 2008 36 435 437 18351450 
132. Randall RE  Goodbourn S   Interferons and viruses: an interplay between induction, signalling, antiviral responses and virus countermeasures J Gen Virol 2008 89 1 47 18089727 
133. Rao CV  Dandawate CN  Rodrigues JJ  Rao GL  Mandke VB  Ghalsasi GR  Pinto BD   Laboratory infections with Ganjam virus Indian J Med Res 1981 74 319 324 6797936 
134. Ravkov EV  Compans RW   Hantavirus nucleocapsid protein is expressed as a membrane-associated protein in the perinuclear region J Virol 2001 75 1808 1815 11160679 
135. Raymond DD  Piper ME  Gerrard SR  Smith JL   Structure of the Rift Valley fever virus nucleocapsid protein reveals another architecture for RNA encapsidation Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 107 11769 11774 20547879 
136. Reguera J  Weber F  Cusack S   Bunyaviridae RNA polymerases (L-protein) have an N-terminal, influenza-like endonuclease domain, essential for viral cap-dependent transcription PLoS Pathog 2010 6 e1001101 20862319 
137. Richmond KE  Chenault K  Sherwood JL  German TL   Characterization of the nucleic acid binding properties of tomato spotted wilt virus nucleocapsid protein Virology 1998 248 6 11 9705250 
138. Ritchie KJ  Zhang DE   ISG15: the immunological kin of ubiquitin Semin Cell Dev Biol 2004 15 237 246 15209384 
139. Roberts A  Rossier C  Kolakofsky D  Nathanson N  Gonzalez-Scarano F   Completion of the La Crosse virus genome sequence and genetic comparisons of the L proteins of the Bunyaviridae Virology 1995 206 742 745 7831835 
140. Rodal SK  Skretting G  Garred O  Vilhardt F  van Deurs B  Sandvig K   Extraction of cholesterol with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin-coated endocytic vesicles Mol Biol Cell 1999 10 961 974 10198050 
141. Rodrigues R  Paranhos-Baccala G  Vernet G  Peyrefitte CN   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus-infected hepatocytes induce ER-stress and apoptosis crosstalk PLoS One 2012 7 e29712 22238639 
142. Rwambo PM  Shaw MK  Rurangirwa FR  DeMartini JC   Ultrastructural studies on the replication and morphogenesis of Nairobi sheep disease virus, a Nairovirus Arch Virol 1996 141 1479 1492 8856028 
143. Samuel CE   Antiviral actions of interferons Clin Microbiol Rev 2001 14 778 809 11585785 
144. Sanchez AJ  Vincent MJ  Nichol ST   Characterization of the glycoproteins of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus J Virol 2002 76 7263 7275 12072526 
145. Sanchez AJ  Vincent MJ  Erickson BR  Nichol ST   Crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever virus glycoprotein precursor is cleaved by Furin-like and SKI-1 proteases to generate a novel 38-kilodalton glycoprotein J Virol 2006 80 514 525 16352575 
146. Sang R  Onyango C  Gachoya J  Mabinda E  Konongoi S  Ofula V  Dunster L  Okoth F  Coldren R  Tesh R  da Rossa AT  Finkbeiner S  Wang D  Crabtree M  Miller B   Tickborne arbovirus surveillance in market livestock, Nairobi, Kenya Emerg Infect Dis 2006 12 1074 1080 16836823 
147. Schmaljohn CS  Hooper JW   Knipe DM  Howley PM   Bunyaviridae: the viruses and their replication Fields virology 2001 Philadelphia Lippincot Williams and Wilkins 1447 1471 
148. Seddiki N  Nisole S  Krust B  Callebaut C  Guichard G  Muller S  Briand JP  Hovanessian AG   The V3 loop-mimicking pseudopeptide 5[Kpsi(CH2N)PR]-TASP inhibits HIV infection in primary macrophage cultures AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1999 15 381 390 10082122 
149. Semenkovich CF  Ostlund RE Jr  Olson MO  Yang JW   A protein partially expressed on the surface of HepG2 cells that binds lipoproteins specifically is nucleolin Biochemistry (Mosc) 1990 29 9708 9713 
150. Severson W  Xu X  Kuhn M  Senutovitch N  Thokala M  Ferron F  Longhi S  Canard B  Jonsson CB   Essential amino acids of the hantaan virus N protein in its interaction with RNA J Virol 2005 79 10032 10039 16014963 
151. Shi H  Huang Y  Zhou H  Song X  Yuan S  Fu Y  Luo Y   Nucleolin is a receptor that mediates antiangiogenic and antitumor activity of endostatin Blood 2007 110 2899 2906 17615292 
152. Shin JS  Ebersold M  Pypaert M  Delamarre L  Hartley A  Mellman I   Surface expression of MHC class II in dendritic cells is controlled by regulated ubiquitination Nature 2006 444 115 118 17051151 
153. Sieczkarski SB  Whittaker GR   Dissecting virus entry via endocytosis J Gen Virol 2002 83 1535 1545 12075072 
154. Simmons G  Wool-Lewis RJ  Baribaud F  Netter RC  Bates P   Ebola virus glycoproteins induce global surface protein down-modulation and loss of cell adherence J Virol 2002 76 2518 2528 11836430 
155. Simon M  Johansson C  Lundkvist A  Mirazimi A   Microtubule-dependent and microtubule-independent steps in Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus replication cycle Virology 2009 385 313 322 19150104 
156. Simon M  Johansson C  Mirazimi A   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus entry and replication is clathrin-, pH- and cholesterol-dependent J Gen Virol 2009 90 210 215 19088291 
157. Staub O (2004) Ubiquitylation and isgylation: overlapping enzymatic cascades do the job. Sci STKE 2004:pe43
158. Sun S  Dai X  Aishan M  Wang X  Meng W  Feng C  Zhang F  Hang C  Hu Z  Zhang Y   Epidemiology and phylogenetic analysis of crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever viruses in xinjiang, china J Clin Microbiol 2009 47 2536 2543 19553586 
159. Takahashi K  Halfmann P  Oyama M  Kozuka-Hata H  Noda T  Kawaoka Y   DNA Topoisomerase 1 Facilitates the Transcription and Replication of the Ebola Virus Genome J Virol 2013 87 8862 8869 23658456 
160. Tarus B  Bakowiez O  Chenavas S  Duchemin L  Estrozi LF  Bourdieu C  Lejal N  Bernard J  Moudjou M  Chevalier C  Delmas B  Ruigrok RW  Di Primo C  Slama-Schwok A   Oligomerization paths of the nucleoprotein of influenza A virus Biochimie 2012 94 776 785 22155087 
161. Tarus B  Chevalier C  Richard CA  Delmas B  Di Primo C  Slama-Schwok A   Molecular dynamics studies of the nucleoprotein of influenza A virus: role of the protein flexibility in RNA binding PLoS One 2012 7 e30038 22272272 
162. Tayyari F  Marchant D  Moraes TJ  Duan W  Mastrangelo P  Hegele RG   Identification of nucleolin as a cellular receptor for human respiratory syncytial virus Nat Med 2011 17 1132 1135 21841784 
163. Tergaonkar V   NFkappaB pathway: a good signaling paradigm and therapeutic target Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2006 38 1647 1653 16766221 
164. Timinskas A  Butkus V  Janulaitis A   Sequence motifs characteristic for DNA [cytosine-N4] and DNA [adenine-N6] methyltransferases. Classification of all DNA methyltransferases Gene 1995 157 3 11 7607512 
165. Treib J  Dobler G  Haass A  von Blohn W  Strittmatter M  Pindur G  Froesner G  Schimrigk K   Thunderclap headache caused by Erve virus? Neurology 1998 50 509 511 9484383 
166. Tseng PH  Matsuzawa A  Zhang W  Mino T  Vignali DA  Karin M   Different modes of ubiquitination of the adaptor TRAF3 selectively activate the expression of type I interferons and proinflammatory cytokines Nat Immunol 2010 11 70 75 19898473 
167. Uilenberg G   General review of tick-borne diseases of sheep and goats world-wide Parassitologia 1997 39 161 165 9530703 
168. van Kasteren PB  Beugeling C  Ninaber DK  Frias-Staheli N  van Boheemen S  Garcia-Sastre A  Snijder EJ  Kikkert M   Arterivirus and nairovirus ovarian tumor domain-containing Deubiquitinases target activated RIG-I to control innate immune signaling J Virol 2012 86 773 785 22072774 
169. Vertegaal AC   Uncovering ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like signaling networks Chem Rev 2011 111 7923 7940 22004258 
170. Vieth S  Torda AE  Asper M  Schmitz H  Gunther S   Sequence analysis of L RNA of Lassa virus Virology 2004 318 153 168 14972544 
171. Vigerust DJ  Shepherd VL   Virus glycosylation: role in virulence and immune interactions Trends Microbiol 2007 15 211 218 17398101 
172. Vincent MJ  Sanchez AJ  Erickson BR  Basak A  Chretien M  Seidah NG  Nichol ST   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus glycoprotein proteolytic processing by subtilase SKI-1 J Virol 2003 77 8640 8649 12885882 
173. von Bonsdorff CH  Saikku P  Oker-Blom N   The inner structure of Uukuniemi and two Bunyamwera supergroup arboviruses Virology 1969 39 342 344 5344294 
174. Wang Y  Dutta S  Karlberg H  Devignot S  Weber F  Hao Q  Tan YJ  Mirazimi A  Kotaka M   Structure of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus nucleoprotein: superhelical homo-oligomers and the role of caspase-3 cleavage J Virol 2012 86 12294 12303 22951837 
175. Watret GE  Elliott RM   The proteins and RNAs specified by Clo Mor virus, a Scottish Nairovirus J Gen Virol 1985 66 Pt 11 2513 2516 4056744 
176. Watret GE  Pringle CR  Elliott RM   Synthesis of bunyavirus-specific proteins in a continuous cell line (XTC-2) derived from Xenopus laevis J Gen Virol 1985 66 Pt 3 473 482 3973561 
177. Watts SL  Garcia-Maruniak A  Maruniak JE   Tensaw virus genome sequence and its relation to other Bunyaviridae Virus Genes 2009 39 309 318 19760176 
178. Weber F  Wagner V  Rasmussen SB  Hartmann R  Paludan SR   Double-stranded RNA is produced by positive-strand RNA viruses and DNA viruses but not in detectable amounts by negative-strand RNA viruses J Virol 2006 80 5059 5064 16641297 
179. Weber F  Mirazimi A   Interferon and cytokine responses to Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus; an emerging and neglected viral zonoosis Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2008 19 395 404 19027345 
180. Welchman RL  Gordon C  Mayer RJ   Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins as multifunctional signals Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 6 599 609 16064136 
181. White WR (2008) Nairobi Sheep Disease. In: 7th (ed) Foreign Animal Disease. Boca Publications Group, pp 335–342
182. Whitehouse CA   Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever Antiviral Res 2004 64 145 160 15550268 
183. Williams RJ  Al-Busaidy S  Mehta FR  Maupin GO  Wagoner KD  Al-Awaidy S  Suleiman AJ  Khan AS  Peters CJ  Ksiazek TG   Crimean-congo haemorrhagic fever: a seroepidemiological and tick survey in the Sultanate of Oman Trop Med Int Health 2000 5 99 106 10747269 
184. Woessner R  Grauer MT  Langenbach J  Dobler G  Kroeger J  Mielke HG  Mueller P  Haass A  Treib J   The Erve virus: possible mode of transmission and reservoir Infection 2000 28 164 166 10879642 
185. Xiao X  Feng Y  Zhu Z  Dimitrov DS   Identification of a putative Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus entry factor Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2011 411 253 258 21723257 
186. Xiong Y  Eickbush TH   Origin and evolution of retroelements based upon their reverse transcriptase sequences EMBO J 1990 9 3353 3362 1698615 
187. Yadav PD  Vincent MJ  Khristova M  Kale C  Nichol ST  Mishra AC  Mourya DT   Genomic analysis reveals Nairobi sheep disease virus to be highly diverse and present in both Africa, and in India in the form of the Ganjam virus variant Infect Genet Evol 2011 11 1111 1120 21511058 
188. Yang ZY  Duckers HJ  Sullivan NJ  Sanchez A  Nabel EG  Nabel GJ   Identification of the Ebola virus glycoprotein as the main viral determinant of vascular cell cytotoxicity and injury Nat Med 2000 6 886 889 10932225 
189. Yuan P  Bartlam M  Lou Z  Chen S  Zhou J  He X  Lv Z  Ge R  Li X  Deng T  Fodor E  Rao Z  Liu Y   Crystal structure of an avian influenza polymerase PA(N) reveals an endonuclease active site Nature 2009 458 909 913 19194458 
190. Zeller HG  Karabatsos N  Calisher CH  Digoutte JP  Cropp CB  Murphy FA  Shope RE   Electron microscopic and antigenic studies of uncharacterized viruses. II. Evidence suggesting the placement of viruses in the family Bunyaviridae Arch Virol 1989 108 211 227 2690776 
191. Zhao C  Beaudenon SL  Kelley ML  Waddell MB  Yuan W  Schulman BA  Huibregtse JM  Krug RM   The UbcH8 ubiquitin E2 enzyme is also the E2 enzyme for ISG15, an IFN-alpha/beta-induced ubiquitin-like protein Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004 101 7578 7582 15131269 
192. Zhao C  Denison C  Huibregtse JM  Gygi S  Krug RM   Human ISG15 conjugation targets both IFN-induced and constitutively expressed proteins functioning in diverse cellular pathways Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 102 10200 10205 16009940 
193. Zhu J  Gopinath K  Murali A  Yi G  Hayward SD  Zhu H  Kao C   RNA-binding proteins that inhibit RNA virus infection Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007 104 3129 3134 17360619

